' r
)
PR^BSTHAIN '& Co.' n5
Criftal Boj\'eI!--r^ :;S
4 1 Cr.-^al R !-zcII St,^eezlZ
,£O..V ^ y/ c ■-]:
Wnr n ir T I TT T I TTi T 1 iTTX II Til
/
\
\
RELIGIOUS SYSTEM
OF
CHINA.
/
EELIGIOUS SYSTEM
OF
CHINA
Irs AsciF.yr Fonms, Eioiirioy, Hisronr jxij Psesem' Aspect.
.l/yJ.V.VO'-, CcsTO.US JM> Soa.IL ] X^TITCTWSS lOySECTEJl TUEEEIfITJI
BY
J. J. M. DE GROOT, PH. D.
PUBLI^^lIEU WITH A SUBVENTION FROM THE DUTCH
COLONIAL GOVERNMENT
VOLUME V
BOOK II

ox THE SOUL AXD ANTESTKAL WORST

fart II, I3emonolo25y. — l*art 1X1, SSorcery.


ST [IP /??/■


Gt^


'YvPffQP, GEM£R/{'^


■A ' .


LIBKAIKIE ET IMPKIMERIE

E. J. ERTEE

LEIDE — 1907


I N D \


A»% .

r-. 4-7- /?// . „

> ! f - >7 /'<?-»* -


All rights reserved.


VRINTE1> BY E. J. BRILL, AT LEYDEN.


CONTENTS

OF

VOLUME V.


Pago

Book II. The Soul, iiiitl Ancestral Worship.

Part II. Demo.solugv 4G5.

ChcipUr 1, On tlio Omnipi-e>e!ice and Multitude of

Specties 470.

» 11. On Spectres of Mountains and Forests . . 495.

)) III, On Water-Demons ,521.

» it'. On Ground-Demon^ 535.

» T. On Animal-Demons 542.

1. Tiger-Demons 544,

2. Wolf-Demons 503.

3. Dog- Demons . . 571.

4. Fox-Demons 570.

5. V.inons Wild Mammal.s as Demons . . COO.

0. Domestic AnimaK in Demonologv . . . 009.

7. Reptile-Spectres 022.

8. Bird-Demons 034.

9. Piscine De\ils 044.

10. Insect" as Demons 048.

» VI. On Plant-Demons 052.

» VII. Lifeless Things a" Spectres 004.

» VIII. Demonisin in Pathology 075.

» IX. On Suicide-Spectre." 714,

>• X. Spectres with a Material Body. Vampirism. 723.
» XI. Anthropophagous and Necropha.aons Spectres 702.
V XII. On Ghosts and Spei'tres appearing at Deaths. 709.

» XIII. Bhich Calamities ~~i<,

•• XI F Additional Particulars 785.

>’ At. riie World of Spectres a Copy of that of Man 802.


VI


CONTENTS.


Page


Part III. Sorcery 813.

Chapter 1. Infliction of Evil by means of one’s own

Soul or that of a Quadruped ... .817.

» II. Sorcery by means of small Reptiles and Insects 826.

Remedies for Ku 861.

» 111. Infliction of Evil by means of Human Souls 870.

» IV. Sorcery by means of Souls of Objects . . 908.

B V. Other Forms of Sorcery 914.


PART IL

DEMONOLOGY.


At the comiuencement of this Part, devoted to a description of
the Chinese world of spectres, devils or demons, it is necessary
to repeat what has been said in Ch. XV of Part I on the funda-
mental conceptions about those beings. We saw there, that though
every shen and kwei may work both good and evil, yet the
special function of the kwei, in their quality of particles of the
Yin, or that Breath of the Universe which is identified with dark-
ness, cold, death and destruction, is to act as maleficent spirits,
and as rewarders of good and punishers of evil under the supreme
control of Heaven. We have further seen there, that many of them
are ghosts of the dead, and therefore possess human attributes, and
that they appear to the living under a great variety of circumstances,
keeping up friendly or unfriendly intercourse with them. Finally,
Chapter XVI of Part I has showed us, that such human spectres
exercise retributive justice on those who harmed them during their life.

We have now to sketch in a series of chapters the prominent
part which the demon-world plays in the mind and religion of
the Chinese people, and the widespread customs which have arisen
therefrom in their domestic and social life. In fulfilling this task,
we shall steadfastly pursue the same path we have hitherto
followed in this work, and treat the subject historically; that is to
say, we shall continually look into the past for light upon notions
and customs still extant or already obsolete, and thus trace out
their antiquity and development. This method will also have the
advantage of bringing out in strong relief the great fact, which
always forces itself prominently upon the notice of every serious
student of the Chinese nation: that its present in almost every
respect is its past, and its past its present.

Though we mostly find, from the earliest times, maleficent spirits

30


4G0


DEMONOLOGY.


denoted in literature by the character kwei, and occasionally
by ftl shen, still other written names for them exist; but they are
actuallv obsolete, or nearly so, and we do not find them used in
writings of the past and the present except as a pedantic display
of learning. As such we have or ki, only mentioned by
Liu Ngan, who wrote-. “The people of King have their kwei,
and those ot ATieh their ki”’. The Shwoh ii-en gives us the term
hu, attesting that it means “a destructive, evil spectre” %
and the Khanghi Dictionary has the following series: ^^sih;


ling; m sob; or


un; luh; Ifji, or


yiu; II kiang; j|§; wei; and furthermore, clTiao, a
slightly mischievous spectre; teng, a spectre in the air;
kuh, a headless spectre; ^ kih, a rain-spectre; and lei,
a thunder-spectre. Probably most of these rare characters are written


forms of local terms, either formerly in use, or still employed here


or there. ISone of them occurs in the Classics. Much oftener we


find in the books the terms mo, and ^ ya-cKa, as

transcriptions of the Indian terms Mara and Yaksha, imported by
Buddhism. They need not occupy us until we treat of this religion.
There exist a few special terras for certain classes of spectres, which
we shall duly mention in speaking of those classes.

Likewise, the influences which spectres exercise in the world of
men, or the effects thereof, are denoted by special terms. In the
first place we have one which means pernicious or baleful in general,
viz. |2<] hiung. We have seen on page 416 that Wang Ch'ung
used this word in this sense as earlv as the first centurv of our era.
It stands as the opposite of ^kih, felicity, which the shen or good
spirits and gods bestowy especially in requital of sacrifices offered to
them. Another common term expressive of the harmful influences
of spectres, is ^ yao, with which the reader has made acquaint-
ance on page 430. But no word of the same meaning is used with
so much frequency as ^ sie.

To understand this word, the reader has to recall to mind what
he learned in this work as the great fundamental tenet of China’s
Cosmology, Philosophy, Psychology and Theology, namely that the
shen constitute the Yang and the kwei the Yin, and that.


' #IAA.«A Hung Ueh kiai, ch. 18.
. Chapt. IX, 1.


TERMS DENOTING SPECTRES AND THEIR INFLUENCES.


467


whereas the Yana: and the Y i n constitute the T a o or Course of
Nature, the shen and the kwei are the forces by which the Tao
operates. Further we have to realize the doctrine that the Tao
represents all that is “correct, normal, or right” in the Universe,
that is to say, jE ching or twan, including all correct and
righteous dealings of men and spirits, which alone eminently, nay
exclusively, promote universal happiness and life. All other acts, as
they oppose the Tao, are p u h ching ^ or p u h twan ^
‘•abnormal, incorrect”, or, as it is specially expressed. ^ sie
or yin. Y^in essentially means overflowing as water, e.xcessive,
surpassing due limits, and therefore comprises also the sense of evil
in general; which is also the case with sic. Both words occur in
the Classics, and therefore are of a great age.

It is clear that both among men and spectres there may be such
anti-natural actions which are sic or vin. Thev are all detrimental

t' t/

to the good of the world, destroy the prosperity and peace which
are the highest good of man, and, as a consequence, all good,
beneficial government; they may thus endanger the world and the
Throne. If they proceed from men, they ought to be combated by
everybody, and eradicated; it is the natural duty of right-minded,
orthodox rulers and statesmen to persecute such heresies, and even
the thoughts and sayings which produce them, the more so as they
may be detrimental to virtue and morality, without which humanity
cannot possibly prosper, nor durably exist. And when such actions
proceed from spirits, a defensive war should be waged against them
by man, with or without the help of his good spirits and gods;
they should be combated, repulsed, driven away and exorcised, if
possible annihilated, by artful expedients. Man in the course of
time has contrived quite an abundance of these; properly speaking
that warfare never pauses, and is carried on quite systematically
every day throughout the empire. We shall have to devote the
fourth Part of this Book to its description.

The sie then are, as the Chinese themselves explain it, ^
abnormal, incorrect breaths or influences
“spectral influences”. They are, of course, also called puh tao
^ or “not tao”, that is to say, not in harmony with the
correct course or laws of Nature. We need h-ardly add, that whereas
the word sic always suggests spectres, it actually has got the
meaning of “spectre” or “spectral”.

The work of spirits is also called ^ sui. This character seems


468


DEMONOLOGY.


to mean what is produced or emitted ( Jij ) by spiritual manifestation
( indeed, the learned Yen Shi-ku attests this in his commentary
on tlie Books of the Early Han Dynasty, as he says ; “ That graphic
“ sign is composed of [fj and , the latter component indicating
“that sui means that by which the kwei and the shen manifest
“ themselves to man” h It is a character of respectable age, as it
occurs in the Tso ch^iren.

Finally we have to mention the terms sheng and ^ ts'ai,
which we may translate by calamities inflicted by nature. These too
are very old. They occur in the Canon of Shun, one of the oldest
parts of the Shn kiinj. There we find the phrase : “ he pardoned
“ (his officials) if calamities (not caused by them) occurred ; but if
“ they offended presumptuously and persistently, he punished them
“with the death of rebels” ^ In another section of the Shii Mmj,
which is a kind of instruction given to a prince on his investiture
with a feudal state, we read : “ If men are responsible for slight
“ evil which is not caused by calamities (sheng), but merely by
“ their persistent doings and their voluntary acts, unlawfully, pur-
“ posely — although that evil for which they are responsible be
“ small, you may not but put them to death. And when men have
“ to answer for great evil which is not caused by their persistent
“doings, but only by calamities (sheng and ts'ai), or accidentally,
“ if they make a complete confession of their guilt, you may not
“ put them to death” k

The same Classic also mentions sometimes “ heavenly calamities”
or calamities sent down (|^) by Heaven, which no doubt means
calamities inflicted by this supreme natural power through the
agency of its spectres. Ts'ai and sheng also occur in the Yih
king in the same sense, and ts%i, besides, in some other Classics®.


^ ^ ^ # bJ # ^ ^ ^ A

lung edition of the Books of the Early Han Dyn., ch. 45, 1. 15.

2


It


mis.


«<


m,

‘the Announcement of Khang”.

o S h e n g is also considered to have in classical and other pre-Christian literature
the nic.-ining of offences committed involuntarily or inadvertently.


TERMS DENOTING SPECTRES AND THEIR INFLUENCES.


469


We need, of course, hardly add that yet other terms expressing
misfortune are used to denote the work of spectres. Nor need we
state that the spectres and their baleful work are regularly con-
founded together and, as a consequence, most of the terms given
above virtually occur as denominations for the spectres themselves.
This is more particularly the case with yao, sic, sui, and sheng.
Imagination has even created a special category of spectres, called
hoh sheng or Black Calamities, of which we shall speak

in Chapter XIII.


CHAPTER I.


ON THE OMNIPRESENCE AND MULTITUDE OF SPECTRES.

Tlie dogma, prevailing in China from the earliest times, that the
Universe is tilled in all its parts with shen and kwei, naturally
implies that devils and demons must also swarm about the homes
of men in numbers inestimable. It is, in fact, an axiom which
constantly comes out in conversing with the people, that they haunt
every frequented and lonely spot, and that no place exists where man
is safe from them. Even the privy is not respected, and the numerous
narratives, transmitted by books and by word of mouth about
people frightened, maltreated and killed there, point explicitly to
a tendency of spectres to select preferably for their cruel and malign
exploits those malodorous spots, where man is so lonely and help-
less. Public roads are infested and haunted by them everywhere,
especially during the night, when the power of the yin part of
Nature, to which spectres belong especially, is strongest. Numerous,
in fact, are the tales of wretches who, having been accosted by
such natural foes of man, were found dead on the roadside without
the slightest wound or injury being visible : their souls had simply
been snatched out of them. Many victims of such encounters could
find their way home, but merely to die miserably there shortly
after. Others, hit by devilish arrows, got boils or tumors which
carried them off, or died even without any such visible marks of
the shots. And how many wayfarers have fallen in with whole
gangs of demons, with wdiom they engaged in pitched battles. They
might stand their ground most heroically, and ultimately wmrst
their assailants; yet, hardly at home, they succumbed to sickness
and death. And who could number the houses haunted by spectres
which brought disease and death on the inmates, and thus rendered
those houses virtually uninhabitable? ‘‘In Tung-lai (prov. of Shan-
“ tung) there was a dw'elling where the Ch"en clan lived, over a
“ hundred strong. One fine morning the (water in the) boiler on
“ which the food was being steamed, would not bubble. They lifted


Mi^


SPECTRES ATTACKING DWELLINGS OP MEN.


471


“ up the pot containing the food, and glanced into the boiler,
“ when lo ! a greybeard rose out of it. This event led them to
“ go to a diviner. ‘This is an important apparition’, this man said,
“‘which portends the destruction of a family; go home, make
“ weapons in great numbers, and have them placed against the
“ walls at the gate ; then fasten the gate firmly on the inside, and
“ should horsemen appear with banners and canopies and knock at
“the door — beware of answering them’.

“ With this advice they went home. All hands armed, and more
“ than a hundred weapons were procured, which they placed against
“ the rooms flanking the gate. Indeed, some men appeared ; but
“however loudly they shouted, no answer was given them. Their
“ leader, enraged by that silence, ordered them to scale the gate.
“ But no sooner had his men cast a glance behind it and seen those
“ hundred weapons of all sizes, than they retreated from the gate
“ to report to him. The news threw the leader into great conster-
“ nation. ‘Tell our men to come here immediately!’ he exclaimed
“to those that stood by, ‘if they do not forthwith come, not one
“will get away from here; how shall I then escape punishment!
“ Some eighty miles hence to the north, one hundred and thirty
“people live; let us take them instead’. Ten days afterwards this
“whole family had died out. It also belonged to the Ch'en clan”b
Not even the establishments of virtuous monasticism are exempt
from attacks of the malicious demon world. “In the Lung-ch'ing
“district* there was a Buddhist monastery, named Tung-ko, which

* ^ ^ - e 11 tti= ffi 6® h. h

, ft e IS « Pt , ffi S . ft « . « ® 1 P‘1

IS.

Am,

>J' 1i If ^ , tii P‘1 ii tt in ft. &li A Ifi'Wc In 4 5- ,

ftlUffWA + M^ — WHP. # +

0ft*JEt:ll5t.ft$#ttl» -y^ ■ Shell shen lii, ch. 17.

2 At present Ts'in-ngan . in Kansiili.


472


DEMONOLOGY.


“ exercised a mysterious attraction. From its lofty balconies the wide
“horizon could be contemplated, and its windows opening on the
“ celestial orb gave access to the wind. Tourists (visiting the place in
“crowds) caused it to look like a busy market.

“ One fine day there began to occur there ill-boding and strange things.
“ Pot-sherds were thrown down from the air, and dust was whirled
“ up, so that nobody dared to stand upright, and the resident monks
“ found no rest at night. Their garments and religious instruments
“ disappeared now and then, and were recovered afterwards. A Taoist
“doctor heard of it. ‘Whence have those ill-boding spirits the courage
“to do such things?’ he said; ‘I can expel them’. And the monks,
“ very glad to hear it, hastened to invite him to their home.

“ The doctor strode through the gate. He stepped the Y ii dance
“ in the great temple, and muttered the incantations of the celestial
“ p'e n g plant in a very harsh tone of voice. After a good while
“ he missed his bonnet, and the bystanders clearly saw it flung
“ through the air over the wall. When he had recovered it, and
“ fixed it on his head with a throat-band, he went on reciting
“ his incantations and striding round the place, but successively
“ his robe was taken oft him, his girdle was loosened, and his
“ trousers slipped off ; and when even his cowl in which he had
“ his written charms and other requirements for his arts, disappeared
“ in a moment, he slunk away like a wolf. Several days after this,
“ the cowl was found at the bottom of a hedge-row by a neighbouring
“ villager while digging in the ground b

a;


AN IMPERIAL HAREM HAUNTED BY A SPECTRE.


473


“ The prefect of the district, Tu Yen-fan, an upright and straight-
“ forward man, went in person to the spot to see what had hap-
“ pened. ‘How is it that such things come to pass here?’ he
“ exclaimed. He then sat down cross-legged, while the spectres flung
'• down from the air a disorderly mixture of written leaflets in
“ countless numbers, bearing foi* the mo.st part complete sentences
“ full of insults and malice. No sooner had the prefect deciphered
“ the contents of one or two and understood their meaning, than
“ he too hurried home. Still an inspector, Wang Chao-wei by name,
“ relied enough on his blood and breath (innate power) to resort
“ boldly to the spot and scold and revile (the spectres) ; but scarcely
“ had he arrived, when a big stone smote him in the loins, and
“sent him back” b

Ghosts of improperly buried dead, haunting dwellings with injurious
effect, and not laid until re-buried decently, are the subject of
many written tales. But these tales are of little interest ; hence we
confine ourselves to referring the reader to the one we gave on

page 445. Naughty demons and devils do not even respect the

deep recesses of Imperial harems. We read, for example, “that the
“ Forbidden City was haunted in the Silen hwo period (1119 — 1126)
“ by a being known as lai, a lumpish thing without head or

“ eyes. Its hands and feet were covered wdth hair shining as

“ varnish. When at midnight a thundering noise was heard b the
“people in the Forbidden City all cried: ‘The lai is coming!’

“ and they bolted the doors of all buildings. Sometimes the spectre
“lay down in the bed of a lady of the harem, which was
“ then felt to be warm ; and at daybreak it rolled out of the bed
“ and disappeared, nobody knowing where it had gone. And when
“ the ladies of the harem dreamed that they were sleeping with some-
“ body, that somebody was the lai”


^ # a , ^ 16 la it. tt 4 IE * — - .

*2. X s H I K * A it »|

KK, ch. 367.

2 The word lai in its written form :^|| shows a dog (^) and thunder.


474


DEMONOLOGY.


Being assimilated with the Yin or the dark half of the Universe,
ghosts are bound to confine their deeds of evil especially to the
night-time, more particularly to the deepest part of it, that is to
say, the third watch, which lasts from eleven to one. In defiance,
however, of this natural law, they go out for mischief very often
in broad daylight and under the brightest sun.

“ In Ch"ang-shan, an aged sire, Ngan by name, had a passion for
agricultural work. Once in autumn, when the buckwheat was ripe
“ and cut, and stood in stacks on the higher parts of the ground
“ and in the field-paths, he told his labourers to take advantage
'• of the moonlight and bring their loaded wains to the place where
the grain was to be piled up, corn-thieves being known to live in
“ the nearest village. And while the full wains were on their way
“ home, he remained on the spot, to guard the rest.

“ His head resting upon his lance, he lies down under the open
“ sky, and his eye-lids droop, when suddenly he hears the crackling
" noise of human feet on the dry buckwheat stubble. ‘Here the
“rude visitors are’, he thinks, quickly raising up his head; but
“a tall devil it is, upwards of one chang in height, with red
“ hair and tangled beard. It is already so near, that in his terror
“ time tails him to devise anything better than to jump up
“and stab at the monster. With a thundering shout the spectre
“ vanishes, and the old man, fearing its return, shoulders his lance
“ and walks home.

'• On the way he falls in with his labourers, to whom he relates
“his adventure, warning them not to go to the spot; but they do
“ not altogether believe him. Next day, as they are sunning grain
“ in the threshing-floor, they suddenly hear a noise in the air.
“ ‘There is the spectre again’, the old man cries, terror-stricken,
" and he takes to his heels, everybody following his example. The


Mi
^ .7:


Iff?


, a small collection of miscellanies relating to the Sung period, by Chao Tsin
Vlf ’ al>o Yuen-tsin -jq ^■, who was prefect of Kien-ning fu

in Fuhkien, in the Hien shun period (1265 — 1275). Extracted from the
TS, sect. ch. 163.


A SPECTRE HAUNTING IN BROAD DAYLIGHT.


475


“ next hour sees them back in the same place, and the old sire
“ orders them to put a great number of bows and cross-bows
handy against the spectre’s return. Next day it re-appears indeed.
“ Several arrows at once whistle through the air, which so scare
“ the spectre that it vanishes, to return no more for two or three
“ days. The corn is then in the granary, but the straw is lying
“ still scattered about. The old man gives orders to stack it. He
“ himself is on the stack to tread the straw down ; but ere it has
“ risen a few feet high, he suddenly scans the distance and exclaims
“affrighted; ‘The spectre is coming!’ Every one looks to his bow
“and his arrows, but the monster is already upon the aged sire;
“ he falls down, the demon snaps at his forehead, and vanishes.
“ The crowd hurries up to the stack to look at the old man. A piece
“ of his forehead-bone, as large as the palm of a hand, is quite
“ gone, and he lies insensible, recognizing nobody. They take him
“ to his house, where he dies. The spectre appeared no more, and it
“is unknown what apparition this was”b
The story of the clan in Tung-lai (p. 471), among which so terrible
a havoc was made by spectres, has taught us that they often band


chi i, ch. 13, jj^ pj4 .


476


DEMONOLOGY.


together in gangs and hordes, armed, equipped and led by chieftains
quite like terrestrial troops and armies. K w e i ping* or “ spectral
warriors”, and their feats, form in fact a main feature of China’s
Demonology.

Already on page 445 we saw them appear on the side of Shi
Wan-sui as his auxiliaries ag.iinst rebels and enemies, in reward
for his good treatment of the bones of their general. We read also
in the Books of the Tsin Dynasty; When Sun Ngen attacked
the Hwui-khi region, Wang Xing-chi was entreated by his
" fellow-oflBcers to take measures against him ; but instead of doing
so, he retired into a cell to pray. On coming forth from it,
“he said to his generals: ‘I have besought the Great Tao to
“allow spectral soldiers to help us; the enemy therefore will be
“defeated’. Thus neglecting all preparations, he was killed by
“ Sun Ngen” ^

Especially singular it is to read of such hosts of spectres setting
whole towns and countries in commotion, and demoralizing the
people so thoroughly as to compel the authorities to intervene.
“ Groundless rumours about spectre-soldiers were abroad in Tsin-
“ yang (in Shansi pr.) in the third year of the Ho ts'ing period
“ (A.D. 564). The people, to drive them away, beat emulously on
“ copper and iron implements h — And in the twenty-third ’ year
“of the Clung yuen period, in the sixth month, when the em-
“ peror was sojourning in the Eastern Capital, the people affrighted
“ each other with spectre-soldiers, and all fled, quite at a loss
“ where to stay, here and there thronging, beating, maiming and
“ wounding each other. At first the spectre-soldiers crossed at the
“ south of the Loh river, causing tumultuous hubbub in the wards
“ and markets, and by and by they arrived on the northern banks.


' an-

oil. 80, 1. 10.

\iX • Books of the Northern Dyn., ch. 7, 1. 4 ; also the Histories of

the North, ch. 8, 1. 4.

4 Ihis must be a misprint. The Ching yuen period embraced no more than
twenty years, from A.D. 785 — 804.


PANICS CAUSED BY ATTACKS OP SPECTRES.


477


“ When they crossed the stream, a rattling noise was heard in
“ the air as of thousands and myriads of chariots escorted by
“ soldiers and cavalry, and then suddenly the passage was finished.
“ Every night they thus crossed the river twice or thrice. The
“emperor was highly displeased at the matter; he ordered his
“ w u and his Invokers to subdue them by means of sacrifices, and
“ to set out every evening food and drink for them on the banks
“ of the Loh” \

“ In the second year of the Kien chung period of the T'ang
“dynasty (A.D. 781) false rumours circulated in the regions of
“ the Yang-tsze and the Hwai about spectres coming from Hunan.
“ Some called them hairy demons, while others declared them
“ to be hairy men. It was reported that various tales were told
“ of them, and nothing could be done with success against them
“ in their variable forms. People would have it that they were
“ bent on eating the hearts of men, but kidnapped young chil-
“ dren of both sexes entire. Frightened out of their wits, people
“ often crowded together in their houses, kept up flaming fires
“ at night, and lacked courage to sleep ; they armed themselves
“ with bows and swords, and each time when the devils entered
“ a house, all other families beat on wooden boards and copper
“ utensils, thus producing a noise which shook heaven and earth.

“ Some died of frantic terror. Such was the state of things every-
“ where. The mandarins interfered, but they were powerless to put
“ a stop to the matter


M * iS B# S Ip Sr ti; ^ S ® A « I® If ^ S .

i® # . ff « ® S H ,1 ^ ® M fiii *
® ® ® Jg- A il IS ifc A ■ ^ M ’ ‘

mation”, perhaps the work in ten chapters wliich was written in the ninth century by
Niu Suh and is mentioned in the New Books of the T\ang Dynasty, ch. 59, 1. 19.

It may be, however, the work in one chapter wliich is mentioned in the Ti en hicn
fumj khao, ch. 216, 1. 14. We quote from the K K, ch. 331.


478


DKMONOLOGY.


“A former Judge of Merit of Yen-cheu, Liu Ts'an by name,

“had been on duty in Hwai and Sze (in Nganhwui pr.), and

“ therefore dwelt in Kwang-ling with half a dozen sons, fellows
“all strong and brave. With them he kept watch by night, armed
“ with bows and arrows. For the protection of his many daughters
“ they barred the hall on the inside, and the young men were
“going their round.s, when after midnight tlie sky was darkened
“and alarming cries of ‘the spectres are here!’ were heard in the
“ hall. The lads are startled, but the door being barred, they cannot
“ enter to run to the rescue, and tliey must , content themselves
“ with keeping on the alert and peeping into the hall. They behold
“ a being like a couch ; it has hairs and prickles like a hedge-
“hog; it measures from three to four feet in height and has legs
“ on the four sides, on which it hurries around in the hall.

“ At its side another spectre moves, black-haired, naked, and with

“ claws and teeth like swords. It seizes the youngest daughter, and
“ puts her on the hairy couch ; then it grasps the other girl,
“ but at this critical moment the brave lads push down the wall
“ and enter. They shoot their arrows into the couch, and it runs
“away with the other spectre; in a moment the latter vanishes,
“ while the couch runs eastward. Now it is hit so truly by a hundred
“ and more arrowshots, that it cannot fly any further. One of the
“ men catches it, grasps the bristles, with all his might galops along
“with it, and immediately both tumble from the river-bridge. ‘I have
“my arms around the spectre!’ he cries, ‘it is brought to bay; be
“ quick ; to the rescue with light ! ’ And by the light they find him —
“ with his arms round a pillar of the bridge. Liu with his sons all
“have nail-wounds, and the youngest girl is lying on the road” h


r® 5E « . Ftf ffi Sn ft . W « . ^ al ,6. .

mmm.WcmpimmA


A HOST OF SPECTRES EXORCISED BY AX EMPEROR.


479


Even Emperors from the height of tlieir throne have interfered
with such spectre-plagues. In 1378, when the great founder of the
Ming dynasty had worn the crown for eleven years, Chu Liang-tsu,
feudal ruler of Yung-kia, a martial grandee who had acted a
prominent part in the establishment of his lord’s sway over China,
‘■'reported to the Throne that the open country in the tw'o districts
“ of Ngan-tung and Muh-yang (in Kiangsi, on the Hwang-ho) was
“so much infested by nocturnal kwei, that the population lived
“ in a state of alarm. The Emperor then composed a decree, by
“ which a commissioner was sent to that country to warn those
“spectres and offer sacrifices to them. That officer spoke to them
“ as follows ' :

“‘In this World of Light we have ceremonies and music, and
“the World of Darkness has its kwei and its shen. The sacri-
“ fices the Imperial House has to offer, serve for ruling the people;
“ but the sacrifices of the people extend not further than to their
“ancestors; all sacrifices which they might offer to other beings
“are not agreeable to the shen, on account of their being incon-
“ sistent with the Rites. The spirits of the principal mountains, the
“ seas and streams, and all other mountains and rivers which have
“ a place in the State Canon of Sacrificial Worship, have all without
“ exception to accept orders from the Supreme Emperor (of Heaven)

“ and from the God of Earth about the wmy in which they are
“ to exercise their power to bestow felicity on good men and to
“ visit the bad with misfortune. Hence, whenever felicity and mis-


7: a ^ ® ^ a ju

H A 2 . -B m ta « tt If . a ^ a jiv « . /F ic a

KSS- T^ung yin hi ^ perhaps the little work in one chapter of

Ch en Shao ^ QjJ , mentioned in ch. 59 of the Books of the T ang Dynasty,
1. 20. We quote from the K K, ch. 339.

Z.B.


480


DEMONOLOGY.


“fortune are distributed in an erroneous way, so that the people
“ feel dissatisfied, we have to report to Heaven the wrong they suffer.

“ On the 14th of the fourth month of this year, which is the
“eleventh of the Hung wu period, an emissary from the feudal
“ruler of Yung-kia brought to Us the message that in the
“ country of the districts of Ngan-tung and Muh-yang several hun-
“ dreds of beings at night appear with torches, sometimes in close
“ files, at other times spread abroad in all directions. When the
“ affrighted people try to drive them away, they become invisible,
“ and when they assail them, some seem to return the blows. As
“We could not believe him in every respect. We now send sacri-
“ficial victims and must, convoke the kwei and shen, and warn
“ and interrogate them in the following terms :

“'Since the Yuen dynasty has been dethroned, the people in
“ the Middle Kingdom, thrown into mud and upon burning coals
“ (smarting under alt sorts of calamity), have died in untold num-
“ bers. Among these victims there are many to v/hom the sacri-
“ flees have been discontinued because of the destruction of their
“ clan, and many also who, being separated in their lives from their
“ parents, wives and children, died before the time fixed by their
“natural destiny. You, torch-bearing spectres, are you. perchance of
“ those forlorn souls belonging to nobody, anxious to receive sacrifices
“from the living? Or are you beings separated for ever from your
“ parents, wives and children, and feeling exasperated because of
“that? Or have you been killed undeservedly, without vengeance
“ having been rendered for it ? Or do you feel irritated because the
“ government has been remiss in offering the regular annual sacri-
“ flees to you ? To one of those four categories you are sure to
“belong; so We place those four questions before you; tell Us now
“what is the cause of your behaviour? Ourselves since Our acces-
“ sion to the throne have sacrificed to the shen without falling
“ short in any of the statutory ritual rescripts ; but you have no
“ right to demand any sacrifices which We are not in duty bound
“ to offer. Torch-bearing spectres, bring mishap on all whosoever
“ deserve it, but confer felicity on those who deserve to be happy,
“ and do not do any evil to people inconsiderately, thereby bringing
“upon yourself the punishments of Heaven” \


PANICS CAUSED BY SPECTRES.


481


Nineteen years later, the same Son of Heaven had to wield his
exorcising sceptre anew on behalf of his harassed subjects in the
same region. “In the thirtieth year of his reign, the country out-
“ side the suburbs of Ngan-tung was haunted by k w e i wandering
“ about in broad daylight, and making noise in troops of hundreds,
“ nay thousands. The emperor Kao prepared a writing, and sacri-
“ ficed to them, and then the spectres ceased”*.

Such spectre-panics are also stated to have taken place in other
parts ot the empire. “ According to the General Memoirs relating to
“ Sze-chSven, kwei entered the bazaars of Wu-lung in the twenty-
“ third year of the Kia tsing period (A.D. 1544), and carried
“people on their shoulders”^. “And according to the General
“Memoirs bearing on Kwangsi province, there were yao and


31; ^ S » 1 Oj ;il 2 iiiii « ^ 1 ^

*)p8is

« s* . T' IS S , U » S M T S ^ .

+ -f-mB

Am

■tJ g W ft A ig: , 5E * 7' Bf H tl.

'An

gi^ AS- “■

From tlie KiniKi-tinn fumj chi
or General Memoirs concerning Kiang-nan ; T S, luc. cil.

. T S, cap. cil.


31


482


DEMONOLOGY.


“sheng (pp. 466 and 468) at work in Hung-cheu in the tenth
“ month of the thirty-sixth year of the same period. Before it
“ was made out what beings they were, it was reported that
“ they came from the north, and passing through Kiangsi reached
“ Kwangtung. Sometimes they penetrated into human dwellings
“in the night, and there indulged in obscenities. Some showed
“themselves in the shape of sing (a kind of ape), or as bats,
“ monkeys or dogs, or as black vapours apparently having tails
“and claws with which they could inflict wounds, so that adul-
“ terers who came into contact with them, suffered death. At night
“ the families crowded together to withstand their attacks by beating
“on gon^s and drums, and holding bamboo and willow sticks.

Those spectres used to come in compact masses, but when struck
“ at, they dispersed, and changed into sparks quickly conglomerating
“into balls, which disappeared on striking against the eaves. In the
“ second month of the ne.xt year they visited the department again,
“ and molested the villages as before, not ceasing until several months
“ had elapsed” '.

About the year 1886 we found it still fresh in the memory of
people at Amoy, that, eight years before, the country had generally
been thrown into commotion by spectres of a very malicious character,
which preyed on nothing less than the pigtails of inoffensive people.
During that time of panic, very respectable gentlemen, even the
highest notabilities, suddenly, in a most mysterious way, had found
themselves robbed of their queue, even in broad daylight, in noisy
streets, preferably while enjoying some public theatrical performance
in a square or bazaar, or when visiting a shop, or even in their own
houses, with securely barred doors. Such periods of “tail-cutting”*


‘M.- 0 />- <■( cap. cil.


9


TAIL-CUTTING PANICS.


483


occur frequently. Most absurd stories are then rife, and universally
believed by the populace, who, with their implicit belief in spectres
and magic arts, deem nothing incredible. To some it occurs that
the miscreants may be men, bad characters, bent on deriving
advantage somehow or other from the prevailing excitement. Thus
tumults arise, and the safety of unoffending people is placed in
actual peril. Unless it be admitted by general assent that the
mischief is done exclusively by invisible malignant spectres, the
officials interfere, and to re-assure the populace and still the tempest
of emotion, imprison persons upon whom suspicion falls, preferably
sending out their yamen-runners among members of secret religious
sects, severely persecuted by the Government as heretics, enemies
of the old and orthodox social order, evil-intentioned outlaws, the
corroding canker of humanity. In most cases their judicial exami-
nations corroborate their pre-conceived suspicion, for they admirably
understand the art of extorting by scourge and torture, even from
the most obdurate temperaments, any confessions, but especially such
as they beforehand have assumed to be true.

There are always, of course, during such panics clear-sighted
men and women reported to have caught a glimpse of tail-cutting
phantoms, and to have perceived they were tiny and of paper: an
idea engendered, no doubt, by the circumstance that the Chinese
are in the habit of sending paper people, servants, concubines and
slaves into the other world, to serve the dead as living beings.
Some authors have written on the subject. Mr. Holcombe, Acting
Minister of the United States in Peking, stated in an entertaining
book, published in 1895, that nearly every year in some section of
the empire a perfect whirlwind of excitement suddenly springs up
with no apparent cause, over what is commonly called “ tail cutting”.
It comes and goes unexpectedly, no one knows how it began, what
occasioned it, or how it may end. In such a fever, the entire mass
of the population, the most intelligent as well as the most ignorant,
goes wild with excitement and fear. The absurd est stories are cir-
culated and believed. Such and such a Chinaman is walking along
the street, when his queue suddenly drops off and vanishes, without
any human being being near him at the time. Another man puts
up his hand to coil his queue, and finds that he has none. Another
falls into conversation with a stranger in the street, who suddenly
vanishes, together with the man’s queue. Another glances at a child,
when the child gazes steadily at him, and his queue at once fades
out of sight, leaving only an odour of burnt hair. These are speci-


484


DEMONOLOGY.


mens of the stories told everywhere, and universally believed. It
would naturally be expected that, in such emotional disturbances,
the officials would concert measures to re-assure the populace. They
do nothing of the sort. In all matters of superstition or belief they
are hardly more enlightened than those whom they govern. “I have”
— the writer assures us — “seen at least a dozen proclamations,
“ issued by magistrates of Peking, in times of this sort of excite-
“ ment, and every one was directly calculated to increase rather
“ than lessen the disturbance of the public mind. They commonly
“ began by warning the people that these were days of danger,
“ when every person should stay closely at home and attend to his
“ own affairs. They advised all to avoid strangers, see that their
“ doors and windows were carefully closed at all hours, on no
“ account to be out after dark, and to look after their children.
“ Some of them concluded by furnishing a sovereign protection, a
“ sort of patent-medicine recipe for securing the queue from harm.
“ This recipe in most cases was very simple. In one proclamation
“ it merely directed that a red and yellow cord be braided in with
“the hair; in another it prescribed a medicine to be taken inter-
“ nally, and in another, which also prescribed a medicine, one half
“ was to be swallowed and the other half thrown upon a kitchen fire”*.

Tt should be added that, though in such “ tail-cutting” excitements
every man’s mouth is full of stories such as have been described,
the people being thus utterly demoralized and business brought to
a standstill, yet generally not the slightest tangible evidence is
forthcoming that a single Chinaman has suffered the loss of one
hair of his head. The basis of every one of the stories is hearsay,
and each such excitement is an unaccountable, but dangerous epidemic
of superstitious fear.

It is, of course, hard to admit that such panics have occurred only
in later times; but the introduction by the Manchu dynasty now
reigning, of the fashion of pig-tails, easy to cut, may have increased
their number. In Chapter V, 4, we shall make mention of one, caused
by malicious fox-elfs as early as the year 477, and of another
prevailing forty years later in the then Imperial capital. They have
often prevailed under the present dynasty, causing even the emperors
to intervene with edicts. So did Kao Tsung in 1768. On the 29th
day of the eighth month (9th Oct.) he decreed, that owing to
searches made for tail-cutters by the authorities, a Mahayana


i The Heul Chiiiuniun, pp. 182 — 183.


TAIL-CUTTING PANIC IN 1768.


485


sect^ and a Wu-wei sect^ had been discovered outside the walls of
Su-cheu, the famous city in southern Kiangsu; it had as many as
eleven chapels or meeting-places. The leaders and the principal
members of all these parishes had been captured, together with the
inmates and servants of the buildings, more than seventy in all.
The decree refers to a precedent. Sectarianism, it declares, throve
nowhere so much as in the department of Siien-hwa in the far
north-west of Chihli, notwithstanding frequent persecutions. On a
certain occasion, while searches were being made there for tail-
cutters, religious communities were discovered; the seditious among
the members were punished in accordance with the Law; those who
persisted in their heresy were banished to Sin-kiang (Turkestan),
and the apostates were castigated with long sticks and banished
within China proper, in this way to learn not to defy the laws
a second time. A like event is that which has now occurred in
the vice-royalty of Kiangnan ; so, to nip the evil in the bud, great
numbers of persons must be prosecuted, as a warning for the
future. As has been done in Siien-hwa, the seditious elements and
tail-cutters shall be searched for with the utmost diligence, thus to
get to the very bottom of the matter; the captives shall be examined
one by one as soon as possible, and condemned to punishments,
without the slightest indulgence or lenity being shown ■*.

And on the 21st day of the next month (31st Oct.) another
Imperial resolution announced the receipt of a report from the
provincial Governor of Honan respecting the arrest of sectaries in
three parts of that province, and it prescribed severe punishment
to be inflicted on those people and their accomplices. It has, so
that edict continues, not yet been pointed out that the tail-cutting
certainly proceeds from such seditious sectaries; the perpetrators of
that crime have not, like the latter, headmen or leaders, but are
seditious scoundrels, who, desirous of causing mischief, send out
bands to commit the crime under cover of darkness, in order to
keep whole districts and villages in a perpetual state of alarm and
agitation, and thus to bring about revolutionary movements. Now
this stamps their proceeding as the most heinous of crimes, viz.
rebellion. Generally speaking it does not emanate from Buddhist
or Taoist heresies, nor from people who have been led astray
by reading heretical writings, but thus far have kept quiet. But


4 Siting hiuif, edicts of Kao Tsung, chap. 255.


486


DEMONOLOGY.


when heretical sects have the courage to issue seditious and rebel-
lious writings and sow the seeds of seduction, their ways run
parallel with those of the revolutionary tail-cutters. The Governor
of Honan therefore must scrupulously examine each of his prisoners
on that point, in order to get hold of some clue which may lead
to the detection of the chief culprits of the tail-cutting; and as soon
as any certainty is obtained in this direction, he must send in a
circumstantial report to the Throne. Should he discover nothing of
the kind, he shall sentence his prisoners to the heaviest penalties
for the crimes for which they were prosecuted

Three days afterwards this decree was followed by another on
the same topic. It proclaimed that the panic had first broken out
in Kiangsu and Chehkiang, and not having been suppressed in
time by arrest of the culprits, had spread over all the provinces
of the empire. Then the emperor had felt compelled to issue edicts
ordering the official world to arrest unsparingly the miscreants
everywhere. But, as usual, they had done the work in a wrong
manner, arrested many innocent people, and sent up to Peking a
number of them, who for the most part proved guiltless, or at
least not to be the chief culprits. As a consequence, the emperor
ordered the arrests to be stopped; but now he commands again
that the high provincial authorities shall by no means be remiss in
diligently searching for disturbers of the peace.

On the fifth of the next month (I3th Nov.) this decree was again
followed by another. It declared that the panic had even spread
over Yunnan, Kweicheu, SzS-ch'^wen, and the two Kwang, and to
the north as far as Shingking and Kirin, and gave new instructions
to the Viceroys and Governors for the suppression of the evil. A
further edict, which appeared twelve days later, informs us of the
arrest by the authorities in the Kiangsu vice-royalty of two Buddhist
priests, who distributed charms and papers inscribed wdth red
characters purporting to counteract the evil, a practice which had
also been reported before from Hukwang. The emperor demands
prosecution of those priests, who, using the name of Chang, the
Celestial master, seriously misled the people; and whereas all that
tail-cutting probably is a crafty plot of scoundrels wishing by the
sale of charms to make money out of the consternation, the Viceroy
should diligently avail himself of the capture of those priests to
search for clues which may lead to discovery of the guilty.

i shuir/ hiuii: decrees of Kao Tsung, chap. 255.


TAIL-CUTTING PANICS IN 1768 AND 1821.


487


These edicts plainly show, that in that memorable year 1768 the
panic swept over nearly the whole empire, occupying the minds of
the authorities high and low, although they did not themselves
share the belief that it was the work of spectres. That this belief
was that of the people generally, the sale of charms proves. It is
worth notice that this craze is mentioned by a European then living
in China. Father Ventavon wrote in a letter reproduced in the
Lettres Edifiantes (vol. XXIII, p. 561); “Dans le milieu de I’annee
“1768 il s’etait repandu dans diverses provinces des bruits qui ne
“ laissaient pas d’inquieter le Gouvernement. Plusieurs se plaignaient
“ qu’on leur avait coupe furtivement leur queue; la coupure de
“ cette queue etait suivie, a ce qu’on disait, de defaillances, d’eva-
“ nouissements, et de la mort meme, si on n’y apportait un prompt
“remede; pour quelques-uns a qui cela pouvait etre arrive, on en
“ supposait des milliers, et le beau c’est que, malgre toute la dili-
“ gence possible et les recompenses promises par I’empereur, on n’a
“ pu attraper sur le fait aucun de ces coupeurs de queue, soit que,
“ pour mieux jouer leur role, les auteurs de cette forfanterie fussent
“ d’accord avec ceux meme qui se plaignaient d’avoir eu la queue
“ coupee, soit pour quelque raison qu’on n’est jamais venu a bout
“ de tirer au clair. Le soup9on assez generalement est retombe sur
“ les bonzes ou faux pretres des idoles, en sorte qu’il y a eu des
“ ordres de rechercher toutes les differentes sectes tolerees dans
“ I’empire, et, comrae il arrive ordinairement dans ces sortes de
“ perquisitions, quelques chretiens furent surpris et arretes dans une
“ des provinces” . . .

In a decree issued by the Throne in 1812, on the 21st of the
sixth month (29 July), we find it stated that, since that storm of
consternation, no complaint about tail-cutting had reached the throne,
but that shortly before, a Censor, Yung Ch'un ' by name, had
reported that the evil had showed itself in the Metropolis, and
required thorough investigation and prosecution. The emperor ordered,
however, that this high dignitary should be punished with degra-
dation, his statement having been found to be untrue ^ Then we
hear again of a tail-cutting panic in 1821, through an edict of the
25th day of the eighth month (20th Sept.), as follows: “According
“ to a report of the Censor Li Teh-lih, an epidemic is spreading in
“the province of Shantung, infecting every house. In the depart-


2 Shitty hiun\ edicts of Jen Tsung, chap. 11.


488


DEMONOLOGY.


rnent of Teh (in the north-west of that province) scoundrels seize
“ this opportunity to relate, that on the first or the second day ot
“ the seventh month spectres will knock at the house-doors, and
that those who answer will be sure to die. They thus cause the
'■ inhabitants, who transmit this lie to each other, to pass their
'• nights in dismay and fear. And in the Tung-ch'ang circuit the
“rumour is also spread abroad, that heretical villains clandestinely
“cut off tails and hair, and cut out the organs from young boys
“ and young girls ; carriers of vegetables and flour, w ho frequent
“ the roads there, take advantage of these tales to distribute (for
“ money ?) things like packets of medicine.

“ And further there is a swindler living in Tung-kwan, in the
“ Tsi-ning department, Hwang ’Rh by name, who has hitherto
“occupied himself with the painting of charms to cure the sick,
“and is called Hwang the Semi-immortal. About the 10th of the
“ seventh month he conceived the idea of taking advantage of the
“ prevailing disaster to swindle people out of their money. To this
“ end he devised the name ‘evil spectres of the Buddhist priests
“ with plaited hair’; and his comrades, a set of worthless scoundrels,

“ therewith confounded the ears of the people, and then, late in the
“evening, rushed into their premises and dwellings, saying they
“ were such evil spectres, and promiscuously stealing and robbing
“ in the vilest manner. As afterwards the band divided their spoil
“ unequally and therefore cruelly thrashed each other, that man
“ was delivered up by the chief of the ward to the magistrate ;

“ but this head of the department despatched nobody to make
“ enquiries, and released him.

“That in Shantung, while an epidemic of the season is spreading,
“ malicious rogues should venture to take advantage thereof and
" spread heretical sayings which cause the inhabitants to lead one
“another astray and fall into panic and terror, is a violation of the
" existing law. But that, moreover, malignant and depraved swindlers
•• should pretend to be evil spectres, intrude themselves into the
“ premises and dwellings of others, and promiscuously commit the
" vilest robberies — this is abominable in a still higher degree.
“ Wherefore Khi Shen (the Governor), and the Provincial Chief
“Judge Lo Han-chang shall depute officials to track and arrest the
“ chief culprits among the spreaders of that heretical talk, and they
•• shall rigorously bring them to justice. And that Governor shall
“ forthwith give orders to arrest Hwang ’Rh, and bring him before
“ his tribunal, and examine him with regard to his crew of accom-


TAIL-COTTING PANICS IN 1844 AND 1876.


489


“ plices ; and if he discovers that they really have committed such
“ villanous acts of theft and robbery, he shall forthwith punish
“ them according to the law, without the slightest indulgence”
Again we have found an edict, of the 29th of the seventh month
(1 2th Sept.) of the year 1844, informing us of tail-cutting practices
in T'ai-yuen, the provincial capital of Shansi, and in its environs,
as also in the districts of Yii-ts'ze ® and 'Pai-kuh situated to the
south of it. The emperor in that edict, of course, orders the officials
to make strict, but prudent inquiry for the dangerous culprits, who
always and ever vanish like spectres*. Probably we may admit, that
in those panics, as in all that have prevailed, the culprits were, as
a rule, not believed to cut the tails themselves, but to procure
spectres to do so. Thus their work was sorcery. Tn fact, in an edict
which the Viceroy of Nanking promulgated in Shanghai in 1876, the
following passages occurred, according to an official French translation:


ir PI it S R S * it M.

mm.

itesffsgii. B-=PS«.

= PI II

t /“*'-'/; decree;- of Suen Tsung, chap. 80.

4 Shing hiuif, decrees of Suen Tsung, chap. 86.


490


DEMONOLOGY.


* Aujourd’lmi j’apprends que les bruits qui circulent dans les
“endroits soumis a ma jurisdiction relativement aux bommes en
“ papier, aux tresses coupees, se tourneraient contre les Chretiens
“ qu’on accuse, et donneraient naissance a de mauvais projets contre
“ eux. Si je me reporte au temps passe, je vois que les membres
de la Societe du Nenuphar Wane ont employe ces moyens: hommes
“ en papier, tresses et plumes de poulets coupees, afin d’arriver en
troublant les esprits, a s’emparer des valeurs d’autrui.

“ Depuis quelque temps des gens sans aveu font circuler des bruits
“ sur les tresses et les cheveux coupes. Tout le monde en parle, mais
personne ne I’a vu de ses yeux ; personne ne s’est assure du fait.
“ D’un autre cote, tous ces bruits ridicules n’ont rien a faire avec
“ la religion chretienne. Vous devez done rester calmes, paisibles,
“ ne point preter attention aux histoires sans fondement, ne point
“ vous elFrayer, ne point vous exciter” \

As is shown in the foregoing pages, spectres in China manifest
their presence very often by sounds or noise. Thus, daily and hourly,
new sources of commotion, alarm and panic are developed, every
mysterious sound being readily ascribed to spectres in a country
where man is so exceedingly credulous. As early as the first century
of our era the author of the Shicoh wen attested the prevalence of
the belief in the crying of ghosts, by inserting in that vocabulary
the character , now pronounced j u , stating it “ to represent the
“noise made by kwei and mei, and, when pronounced twice, to
“mean incessantly”^; no doubt then, in those times the howling
of ghosts was deemed to be long and protracted. The belief that
the souls of the dead often give evidence of their presence by howls
and plaintive cries, was, as we saw on page 414, so general about
the time of Christ as to make Wang CWung it find worth to refute
it with ardour.

Chinese books abound with intimations that this belief flourished
throughout subsequent ages, and that spectral sounds, generally
denoted by the characters t s'^i u-t s'i u , meaning to hiss, to

buzz or to moan, always inspired the living with fright, on account
of their entailing famine and death, bloodshed, rebellion, war,

1 Coidier, “Histoire des Relations de la Chine avec les Puissances Occidentales”, II,
p. 104, Havret, in his “La Stele Chretienne de Si-ngan-fou”, II, p. 246, refers to this
panic, and Duhose in "Dragon, Image, and Demon”, p. 371.

2 M ^ ^ ^ It . Ch. 9, I.


THK HOWLING OF SPECTRES PORTENDS EVIL.


491


dispersion of the people, and all the horrors and misery connected
with it, nay, even the death of the Son of Heaven, or the total
dethronement and destruction of the reigning dynasty. To give a
few instances: “When Wei Khiiing had been defeated at Siang-
“ cheu in the second year of the Ta siang period of the Cheu
“ dynasty (A.D 581), several tens of thousands of his adherents
“ were buried alive in the Yiu-yii parks, and the howling voices of
“all those kwei were then frequently heard at night in that spot.
“The Traditions about the Five Elements of the Great Plan ^ say:
“ ‘ Howling by which the dead manifest their propinquity, is an
“ evil of nocturnal spectres ; spectres and howling in the dark
“ portend that death shall ensue’. And the Yih fei-heu, by the
“hand of King Fang®, has: ‘When kwei howl at night, the
“dynasty will be destroyed’. Next year the princes of the Cheu
“ family were killed, and its rule too was overthrown. — In the
“Jen sheu period (601 — 605) howling of kwei was heard over
“ and over again in the Jen-sheu palace and along the long wall,
“ whereupon the empress Hien and the emperor died successively
“in that palace, unexpectedly. And in the eighth year of the Ta
“yeh period (612), Yang Yuen-kan (B. I, p. 1406) revolted against
“ the Imperial authority in Tung-tu and the minister Fan Tsze-
“ kai buried his clan and his associates alive outside the Ch'ang-
“ hia gate, to a total of some myriads. In the last year of that
“period (616) the kwei were often heard howling in that place
“ in a plaintive, moaning tone, which foreboded like events as in
“the above cases; for afterwards T'ung, the prince of Yueh (son
“ of the emperor Yang), was put to death (by poison or the cord)
“in Loh-yang by Wang Shi-ch'ung”

1 Hung-fan wu king c/rweii. A work based on a section of the SJiu king

entitled Hung fan or The Great Plan, which we have mentioned on p. 955 of B. I.
It seems to have been held in great esteem in the sixth century as an expositor of
prognostics. It was then composed of eleven chapters, with a commentary by Liu
Hiang, so that it must have existed previous to our era (Books of the Sui Dyn.,
ch. 32, 1. II), It is often quoted in the Books of the Later Han Dynast)', especially
in the ^ or Memorials concerning the Five Elements, forming its chapters

23 — 29. I do not believe that it still exists.

2 A work evidently of the .same character as the preceding. Its author was a
grandee of the first century B. C., more skilled than any of his contemporaries in
occult arts (corap, B. I, p. 1001).

3 The then Imperial Metropolis, the present Ho-nan fu or Loh-yang, in Honan pr


492


DEMONOLOGY.


Of Chang VVen-li, a grandee of the tenth century, we read;
“ At night the k w e i howled about his house in the fields, and
the river changed into blood, so that all the fish died. Horror-
stricken, he caught the small-pox, and died” The reader has
seen on page 56 that Chu Hi referred in his writings to the
belief in evil spectres which howl about human dwellings, in
these words; “Those kwei and shen that groan and whistle
on the house tops and butt against our breasts, are evil beings
of darkness”. Coming down to still later times, we read in the
Memoirs concerning the Lu-ngan Department ^ which forms a part
of the province of Shansi; “In the sixteenth year of the Cheung
"ching period (1643), in winter, kwei howled by the south-east
“ corner of the chief city of the department, in the unoccupied fields
“ and the open country. A very plaintive howling it was, produced
“ by groups of thousands or hundreds, a mixture of short shrieks
“ and prolonged wailing, slowly receding in the distance and there
“ dying away. At night it increased in intensity. This lasted for
“ three months. Next year the insurgents under Ch^en * crossed the
“ Hwang-ho, and the city could not hold out against them”*.


H , 5? « 5E 1 2 * fi . « -Ifc . A iin ^ ^


7 -

¥


3^ ttf" ^ W 3^ Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 23, 1.13.

< » 4 * A « » >7

ii^fasscap History of the Five Uyna.sties, ch. 39, 1. 5.

2 Lu->,ga„ fu chi ^ .


3 That is to say, Li Tsze-chTng. who overthrew the Ming dynasty (B. I, p. 1234).
He was Prince of Ch'en, |i|j ^ .

‘ * * + *

«:)£:». Sn ® if H M «« W . SJ iS ^

TS, sect. ch. 102.


VOICES OF SPECTRES MAT PORTEND EVIL OR GOOD. 493

Even nowadays it must be obvious to every one who maintains
intercourse with the Chinese and studiously observes them, that
they much dread all mysterious sounds, and are always ready to
ascribe these to maleficent ghosts. In the south-east of Fuhkien,
people are remarkably quick to say, whenever they hear some strange
noise: kid ki-ki hcio^, “the kwei are peeping”. It is deemed espe-
cially ill-omened and dangerous for a man to hear a spectre call
him by his proper name. The soothsayer in such a case is applied
to immediately. He opens his vademecum — a thumbed little
book in print or manuscript, with explications of prognostics repu-
tedly given many centuries ago by sage men, and from it he studies
the event in connexion with the cyclical name of the day.
Should it be a day denoted by the character tsze (comp. Book I,
page 103), the event foretokens injury to the children and cattle of
the client; on a ch'eu day it announces the sudden, violent death
of an elder relation of his; on a yin day it proves that terror and
fright are going to affect his children at home. Occurring on a
mao day, it prognosticates that a great catastrophe, a conflagration
or inundation, is imminent; on a ch'en day, that some woman in
the family-way is going to die; and on a sze day, that the client’s
father or mother will depart this life. If the calling was heard
by him on a w u day, maledictions or curses will work their effect
on him; on a wei day, catastrophes will come down upon the
younger members of his family; on a shen day, the event pro-
phesies to him a case of death; on a yiu day, the demise of his
father or mother is imminent, and on a suh day, accidental death
of somebody; finally, on a hai day, scourges of war are to be
expected.

It would be an error to suppose that ghosts always make them-
selves heard with malign intent or evil consequences. Being occasionally
kindly disposed to man, their voices may sometimes announce good,
and many a tale stands in Chinese books to prove this. We read
e. g.\ “In the Yuen t'ung period (A. D. 1333 or 1334) one
“ Sung Kien-nah, a native of Yen-ts'ang, which belongs to Hang-
“ cheu, sojourned in the Metropolis in search of a chance to make
“ himself meritorious and famous (in the service of the State),
“but he was unsuccessful. His means were totally exhausted;
“ nevertheless he remained very careful of his conduct, and inca-
pable of any dishonest act. So he left the city by the Ts^i-hwa


' o o fL-


l5E-B5>EEiJ^


494


DEMONOLOGY.


“gate, to find a suitable place to die. He beheld a pond, and
“ was on the point of throwing himself into it, when he heard the
“voice of a kwei in the air. ‘Sung Kien-nah’, it said, ‘the life you
“ have to live in the world of light is not yet ended ; you may not
“ die’. He looked around, but perceived nothing at all, and silently
“ retraced his steps. He then picked up on the road a note on
“paper, and read; ‘Sung Kien-nah, go to the Board of Civil Office,
“ and employ yourself there in correspondence at the Registrar’s
“ So-and-So, under the Secretary So-and-So’. Next day he repaired
“ at haphazard to the spot, found the persons mentioned, was pre-
* ferred to an official post, and gained promotion” k


1


» * 1 . M 0 ife 2 , * # * A > * li « #

Ling luh; T.S, sect. ch. -163.


CHAPTER II.


ON SPECTRES OF MOUNTS AND FORESTS.

The Chinese having a world of demons enormously populous,
we can hardly expect them to have left it unclassified. Specifications
of spectres according to their idiosyncrasies, shapes or manners have,
indeed, arisen . in course of time, developing spontaneously with
superstition generally, without, as it appears, being proposed or
sanctioned by leading thinkers, philosophers, or prominent men of
intellect. Such worthies probably never troubled their heads to any
great extent with such things, but none withheld their approval from
a division of spectres into those living in mountains and forests, in
the water, and in the ground, which, according to tradition, had
been declared by the great Confucius to be correct.

It is related in the Kwoh yu, that Ki Hwan-tszS, a grandee of
the state of Lu, “caused a well to be dug, when they fetched up
“ something like an earthen pot with a goat in it. He had Chung-ni
“(Confucius) interrogated about it, in these words: ‘I dug a well,
“and got a dog; tell me what this is’. On which the Sage answered:
“‘According to what I have learned, it must be a goat; for I have
“heard that apparitions between trees and rocks are called khwei
“ and w a n g-1 i a n g , while those in the water are lung or dragons,
“and wang-siang, and those in the ground are called fen-yang’”b

That these lines give us a folk-conception older, perhaps much
older, than the time of Confucius, is self-evident. Those three classes
of spectres often recur in the books of subsequent times, with infor-
mation about their characteristics and activity, which we shall now
review for each of them separately.

The first class then comprises the khwei and the wang-liang.


»f -ft jKSg

0 « H » . ± ^ 'S 0 V


496


DEMONOLOGY.


In the first century of our era, the etymologist Hii Shen h author
of the Shwoh wen, wrote in that work, that “a khwei (j^) is
“ah ii (see p. 466) resembling a dragon with one leg represented by
“ the component ^ , and that the character represents the beast
"with horns, hands, and a human face”^ Immediately before, that
dictionary gives the same character, but without the horns
saying “it means a greedy quadruped, generally stated to be a
" she-monkey resembling a man ; it contains the component head
“ ^ , with gj , It and ■^, representing respectively the arms and
“the leg of the beast”®. Consequently, unless we reject these dis-
sections as trifling, the khwei were thought to be a class of one-
legged beasts or dragons with human countenances.

From very ancient times they seem to have inspired the Chinese
with awe and fear, for in one of the oldest sections of the Shu king
the character khwei occurs with the meaning of intimidating, awe-
inspiring, stern. That Classic states indeed, that a Minister of the great
Shun declared on a certain occasion, that his Imperial master, “on
“appearing before Ku-seu (his blind father), was khwei-khwei,
“and behaved in a composed and timid manner

Those one-legged dragons were in ancient China fancied to be
amphibious, and to cause wind and rain. In the Shan-hai king we
read: “ In the Eastern Seas is a Land of rolling Waves, extending sea-
“ ward over seven thousand miles. There certain animals live, shaped
“ as cows with blue bodies, but hornless, and one-legged. Whenever
“ they leave or enter the waters, winds are sure to blow, and rains to
“ fall. Their glare is that of the sun and the moon, their voice is that
“of thunder. They are named khwei. Hwang the emperor caught
“ some and made drums of their hides, which, when beaten with
“bones of the ‘thunder beast’, resounded over a distance of five
“ hundred miles, and thus struck the world under heaven with awe”

Z 2 .

-mnm. mx. ikm. aih^^

^ ^ • Sect. ^ Counsels of Til the Great.


ANCIENT SPECTRES, CALLED K H W E I.


497


In this description we immediately recognize the lung or Dragon,
China’s god of Water and Rain, of which we have spoken on many
pages of this work. The representation of the khwei as one-legged
dragons we may readily explain by consulting the Shu king and
the writings of Han Tei, which date from the third century B. C.
The first-named work tells us in the Canon of Shun, that a minister
of this emperor, his Director of Music, bore the name of Khwei,
and moreover that of Lung or Dragon. And Han Eei relates;

“The ruler Ngai of Lu asked Confucius, saying: ‘I have heai’d
“ that there has lived in ancient times a certain Khwei with one
“leg; may we really believe in his one-leggedness?’ Confucius
“answered: ‘No; he was no monopod; he was a choleric, perverse,
“ill-natured man, who raised much discontent; but he escaped
“ being by reason of this killed by the hand of man on account
“ of his trustworthiness, for everybody said ; this is the only man
“ of one piece and complete. Thus Khwei was not one-legged, but
“he was a man of a piece and complete’. The ruler Ngai now
“said: ‘Thus the fact is, that he was solid and complete’.

“ According to another reading, the ruler Ngai asked Confucius,
“saying: ‘I have heard that Khwei had one leg; does this deserve
“belief?’ The answer was: ‘Khwei was a man; why should he
“ have had no more than one leg? he had no other peculiarity
“but that he was versed in music. Yao said: ‘Khwei is of a
“ piece and complete!’ and he made him his Director of Music, and
“ therefore princely men have described him as a man of a piece and
“complete, but not with one leg”*. The legend then owes its origin

Cl..

— .E -tfe Ch. 12, or S 33.


32


498


DEMONOLOGY.


to the accidental circumstance that — • ^ has a double meaning,
namely “one leg”, and “of a piece and complete”.

As the ancients thus represented the khwei as spirits with
an animal shape, it becomes clear why in the extract from the
Kwoh yu; with which we began, their congeners or other selves, the
wang-liang, are represented by the characters in which

we see the radical “animal”. In some editions we find this

prefix replaced by kwei. Other works, as the Tso cliicen, give
the term with no radical at all. In the Historical Records, which
also relate the same episode of Confucius’ life (ch. 47, 1. 5), it has
the form ^ . Apparently none of those forms are ideographic :
tliey rather seem to be phonetic pictures of certain colloquial words
denoting demons or ghosts.

According to all Chinese authorities who have occupied themselves
with the wang-liang, they are identical with the fang-liang
which, according to a passage in the Cheu li translated by us on
page 162 of Book I, were expelled from graves at burials by certain
masked exorcists. This word fang-liang looks like a dialectic
variation or a corruption of wang-liang. The fact that those
spectres are mentioned in that book, to which the Chinese ascribe a
very early date, attests the antiquity of the belief in their existence.

That later ages did not alter the ideas in China respecting the
shape of the wang-liang or khwei, we may learn from the
commentary which Wei Chao ' wrote upon the Kwoft yii in the
third century of our era. In a note upon the Ki Hwan-tsze anec-
dote he stated: “Some say that the khwei have one leg. The
“people of Yueh (Chehkiang and northern Fuhkien) style them
“ (sao) of the hills, which character occurs also in the form

“ (siao). They exist in Fu-yang (about the present Hang-cheu),

“ have a human countenance and an ape-like body, and can speak.
“Some say that the one-legged wang-liang are spirits (tsing) of
“the hills, who by imitating human voices bewilder people”-.

Those terms sao and siao too are, we think, local expressions.
Authors of later times use them in their writings preferably to

’ Sffl-

^ . A HSR t .SI w.S 5-® .S « « Ul * A *


THE SAG OR SI AO, OR WANG-EIANG.


499


khwei, wang-liang and fang-liang; hence these old words
have become obsolete, and are hardly used but in classical writing.
Mostly we find the word sao or siao written or 1^. Another

designation for these spectres is shan-tsing \U “tsing or
vital spirits of hills or mountains”. All those terms are applied by
Chinese authors indifferently to whatever demons play tricks upon
man and disturb his peace, and which we may take to represent
for China the broad class of sprites, elves, fairies and hobgoblins,
with which mankind generally peoples forests, rocks and hills,
increasing their ranks daily with souls of the dead buried abroad.
The human mind, imbued from its first development with the belief
in a close relation between men and animals, readily identified in
China those spirits with beasts. Fancy never ceased from inventing
hybrid and grotesque forms for them even when man had changed
the nomadic state for a settled life in hamlets and villages; and so
the remote, unfrequented mountain-forests still are to the Chinese
people a kingdom full of mysterious spectral beings, strange and
wonderful.

Though invested with semi-animal shapes, yet the human character
of those mountain-elves was never lost from view, and the belief in
their descent from man was adhered to tenaciously. That this was
so in the beginning of our era, we may infer from the following
tradition, recorded by Wang Ch'ung; “The (books of) rites say,
“ that Chwen-siih” — a mythic emperor of the 26th century B.C. —
“ had three sons, who died at their birth, and on their departure
“ became k w e i causing contagious diseases. One lives in the water
“ of the rivers and is the k w e i that produces fever. Another dwells
“in Joh-shui and is the wang-liang demon. And the third lives
“in buildings and rooms, in nooks and corners, and in tumble-
“down storehouses, and his speciality lies in frightening babies” i.

The reader will observe that entire classes of spirits are here
identified each with a single human being of antiquity. This phe-


* 4if5 5E, -

AS'Stl8W’iE¥> IT ^


This passage occurs also in the Sheu shen ki, ch. 16, and in the Tuh twaii


thirty leaves of notes on dynastic rescripts, rites, customs, and
history up to the time of Ts'ai Yung ^ ^ , its author, a famous man of letters
and politician who lived from A. D. 133 — 192.


500


DEMONOLOGY.


noinenon points to a firm belief in the divisibility of souls (^Book II,
ch. 3), a belief which pervades the idolatry of the Chinese in all its
parts, and the knowledge of which is indispensable for the under-
standing of several usages and conceptions attending their Animism.

Books of ensuing centuries are replete with particulars about
the siao. Liberal in such data is the S/ieti i king. “Deep in
“the mountains of the West human beings exist, more than a
“ c h a n g * in size. They go naked, and catch frogs and crabs. They
“ are not shy of men, and when they see them halt to pass the
“ night, thev betake themselves to their fire, to roast their frogs
“and crabs. They also watch the moment on which the men are
“ absent, and steal their salt, to eat their frogs and erabs with. They
“are called hill-sao, because they cry out this sound themselves.
“ People have cast bamboo in their fires, which, on exploding therein,
“ leapt out of it and scared the s a o away altogether. When an attack
“ is made on them, they cause their assailants to catch fever.
“ Although these beings have a human shape, they take other forms,
“and thus belong also to the class of kwei and mei. Nowadays
“their abodes occur everywhere in the mountains”®.

We learn also much about the subject from Koh Hung’s pen.
“In all mountains”, he writes, “the big as well as the small, there
“are s h e n and ling. Big mountains house big s li e n , small
“ mountains small ones. If a man should enter the mountains
“ unarmed with expedients, he is certain to suffer injury or death.
“ He will, for example, be rendered ill, or he will be wounded or
“ stabbed, scared and disquieted, or he will see lights and shadows,
“ or smell strange odours. Sometimes those beings will cause big
“ trees to snap in the absence of any wind, or rocks to tumble down
“ with no palpable reason, men being thus hit and killed. Others
“ bewilder men, and cause them to run about, deprived of reason,
“ and to tumble down into abysses. Others again send tigers upon
“ them, or wolves, or veneinous snakes. Therefore nobody should

t Some editions have a ch'ih or foot, one tenth of a chang.

i "4. A * la tf g A ♦

Z-


THE SAO OR SI AO.


501


“ enter a mountain without valid reasons. You should make such
“ excursions in the third month of the year, or in the ninth, as it
“ is in these months that the mountains are accessible. Moreover, it
* is necessary to select from these months an auspicious day and
“a favourable hour; but should these preliminaries take too
“ much of your time, or should it be impossible to delay your
departure, so that you must depart in the current month, mere
selection of a lucky day and hour may suffice. But whoever enters
^ a mountain should fast beforehand and purify himself, and abstain
“ from passing over or by any sordid or dirty substances for seven

“ days

“ The spirits (tsing) that dwell in the hills have the

“ shape of a baby, with one single leg. When they run, they turn
“ their face backward. They take pleasure in doing harm. Should a
traveller in the mountains hear in the dark some one speak loudly
“ with a human voice, then he has to do with one of the name
‘•of khi; if he is acquainted with this name and shouts it out, it
“ dares not do him any harm. Let him call out at the same time
“the word jeh-juh, which is also a name of those beings. Further-
“ more there exist certain mountain-tsing like drums, of a carnation
“colour and with one leg, which are known by the name of hwui.
“ Others, named kin-lei, have human forms, are nine feet long,
“and wear fur coats and hats of bamboo. Others are the so-called
“fei-fei, resembling five-coloured dragons with red horns. No such
“ being has the courage to do any outrage when, as soon as it is seen,

“ its name is shouted at it ‘


1

-fc0^RW®.......... ..........

ilA. AAllJ.


502


DEMONOLOGY,


« And should you see on a hill a spectre come, crying

“ incessantly to you for food, then cast some white grass at it, and
“it will immediately die. Frequently also, the spectres in the
“mountains so much bewilder a man that he goes astray; but
“they die when stalks of water reed are thrown at them”*.

In this extract we perceive again some names the written forms
of which bear no positive marks of being ideographic. It seems
then reasonable to take them for representations of local or dialectic
words. For some other denominations of those demons we are
indebted to Twan Chdng-shih. In his No/i-Jcao ki a small treatise
incorporated with the Yiu-yang tsa/i tsu, we read, in the second part :

“The hill-siao are also called hill-sao. The 8hen i king writes
“their name as The Description of the Yung-kia principality
“calls them hill-mei. Still other names are-, hill-horses, dragons or
“gavials, ch oh-j uh, jeh-j uh, hwui, and flying dragons. They are
“ blue as doves. They are also named c h i-w u. Their nests are equal
“ in size to a bowl of five pecks. They adorn themselves with red and
“ white paint of clay. They always regard each other in the attitude
“of archers ready for defence. They employ tigers to kill men, and
“ they set fire to cottages and houses. The common people call
“them hill-siao”’.


zmr-w.it

uj# St' e, 0 9¥.X *

in A.

•8 S A

CoOooooooooooooooeooooooo


Pao P^oh-tsze, ch. 17, •


. The meaning of this title is ambiguous. The word Noh-kao ap-
pears in the writings of Koh Hung (Pao P^'oh-tsze, ch. 17, in a spell,

beginning with the words: “Noh-kao, T"ai-yin General” ^ ;

thus the term must be the name of a divinity who played a great part in China’s
ancient chronology, and of whom we .shall have more to say elsewhere.


THE SAO OR SI AO.


503


From the multitude of their names we may infer the probability
that the belief in these spectres prevails generally in China. The
authors who have deemed it worth while to write on them, for
the most part content themselves with transcribing the older state-
ments, of which the reader now has a synopsis before him; fresh
information is supplied by only a few. The Hu loei, the interesting
tiger-lore book of the sixteenth century, known to our readers,
relates :

“The hill-si a 0 occur everywhere south of the Sierra {i. e. in
“ Kwangtung). They have one leg with reversed heel, so that they
“ possess three limbs. Their females are fond of painting themselves
“ with red cosmetics and rice-flour. They make their nests in big
“ hollow trees, in which they have wooden wind-screens and cur-
“ tains. They have a great store and variety of food. When a
“ southerner is on travel in the mountains, he ipostly carries with
“ him some yellow cosmetics, as also lead paint, rice-powder, some
“ coins, etc. When then he falls in with a male, he calls him
“ mountain-chief, and a female he styles mountain -lady; she is
“ sure to ask for some cosmetics and rice-powder, and if he gives
“ these things, he may ensure her protection k

“In the T'ien pao period of the T'ang dynasty (742 — 755)

“ there was among the foreigners from the north a man travelling
“ through the hills south of the Sierra. Fearing an encounter with
“ tigers, he climbed a tree at evening to pass the night in it, but
“found therein a female hill-si a o. Our man was accustomed to
“ carry some slight presents with him. He descended from the tree,

“ made some bows to that being, and called her mountain-lady;

“ and on her asking him from the tree what things he had with
“ him, he gave her some cosmetics and powder. Delighted with
“ these, she said : ‘ Quietly lay yourself down to rest, and have no

tui*.


504


DEMONOLOGY.


“fear’; so the traveller slept under the tree. In the night two
“tigers came thither, but the hill-siao quitted the tree and pat-
“ ting the monsters on their head, said: ‘Stripes, here is a guest
“of mine, go away quickly!’ and the monsters withdrew. Next
“ morning, when he took leave of her, she overwhelmed him with
“warm thanks” h

Another work relates: “In the Khai yuen period (713 — 741),
“ the scholar Wei Chi-wei was invested with the post of prefect ot
“the Siao-shan district in Yueh (Chehkiang pr.). In that region
“many hill-siao lived, playing their tricks in a hundred ways, and
“ nobody had the courage to undertake anything against them ;
“ even the magistrates had to suffer from their attacks, though
“ they worshipped them now and then as gods. But Chi-wei came,
“ and examined where they had their cave-dwellings ; then he pre-
“ pared a large store of fire-wood, watched for the moment when
“ they were all assembled, piled up the fuel round about, and set
“ fire to it. Meanwhile the crowd stood ready with spears and
“swords, so that nearly all the siao were burned or killed. Thus
“ for several months every trace of them was effaced from that district.

“One day, in the early morning, a stranger appeared at the gate
* of the city of the district. His cart and horses were covered
“ with dust, and his servants and drivers looked weary and exhausted.
“ Straightway he made up to the prefecture, begged to see the
“ magistrate, and stated he came from Siao-tsao, in the Lan hills.
“ Chi-wei, without any suspicion, immediately invited him to walk
“ in. He sat down, chatted and gossipped with them, joked and
“jested, and every remark he made was so peerless that Chi-wei
“ bestowed on him the greatest attentions. He even offered him his
“mansion to stay in. The stranger then spoke: ‘The road took me
“ through a gorge, where I caught a young monkey, the wit and
“skill of which are most amusing; I beg respectfully to offer it to


THE SAO OR SI AO.


505


“you’. Producing a little box from his bosom, he opened it, and
“ it contained a monkey, not bigger than a chestnut. To and fro
“ it hopped, whirled round and round, and knew and understood
“ the ways of man ; and Chi-wei, struck with admiration, took it in-
“ doors, to boast in his house of this curious thing. But now the
“ monkey jumped upwards, and suddenly changed into a tiger.
“ They could not bolt the door in time ; arms were not at hand,
“ and as Chi-wei closed the gate, everybody was devoured, not one
“ remaining alive” k

On reading such stories, we feel tempted to believe that the
Chinese place in their great class of hill-spirits certain quadrumana,
besides actual human beings, mountaineers alien to Chinese culture,
perhaps a dying race of aborigines, who, occasionally making
raids upon their more refined neighbours, were chastised and
victimized by merciless mandarins. No doubt the Chinese rank
among them human monsters and mongrels which strike the
imagination by their oddity, such beings as parade on many
pages of the 8han-hai king as inhabitants of the regions real or
imaginary, which that work purports to describe. Still another
demon-tribe falls under this great category, viz. the so-called ch‘i-
or and mei.

These beings are mentioned already in the 2'so ch^wen. In the


a « ift*. fa « * * . a .

B ussie

m A.

>14 ft * » . « » JR = a « t 'j' A

mmm,


506


DEMONOLOGY.


time of the Hia dynasty, this book tells us, certain objects and
pictures were employed “to acquaint the people with the malicious
“tricks of shen, and so, whenever a man entered watery val-
“leys or elevated forests, he did not encounter any such adverse
“chSmei and wang-liang”k In another part of the same work
we are informed that Shun, on becoming Yao’s Minister, banished
some wicked individuals to four distant regions, “there to resist
the chd-raei” ^ From these passages later authors could hardly
draw any better inference but that the c h "i-m e i were spirits of the
wilderness, akin to the wang-liang, or even perfectly identical
with these; and, in fact, we see them in their writings adhere to
this conception very faithfully.

It is not impossible, of course, nor even improbable, that the
term c h'i-m e i originally, in some dialect or other, denoted spectres
in general. It deserves notice that in a section of the Tso diwen,
where that expulsion of those bad men under Shun’s ministry is
related a second time the term is written ^ , the first cha-
racter in which, sometimes pronounced 1 i , denotes, as we have seen on
page 1141 seq. of Book I, some dragon-like or saurian animal. Pos-
sibly it is this fact which occasioned Wang Ch'ung to write: “Those
“ who give their opinion on the chM, state that they are dragon-like
“ beings ; therefore, as the word m e i is copulated to (the name of)
“a dragon, the mei must be a congener of this animal”*. This
hypothesis is readily subscribed to by later authors, but data for
verifying its correctness are lacking.

In the Cheu li we find the character mei in the shape
“At the summer solstice”, this work declares, “the clan-officials
“of the several families make the spirits of the earth and the mei
“ of living beings come up, thus averting from the realm misfortune
“and dearth”^. Ching Khang-ch'ing assures us in his commentary


• feii a;ii

^ ^ • The third year of Suen’s reign.

2 . The eighteenth year of Wen’s reign.

3 The ninth year of Chao’s reign.

S SS ^ '"'”'7. ch- 22. ^ ]g .

% Ch. -27. 1. .-37.


MOTJNTAIN-SPECTEES .


507


upon this passage, that “we have to regard those mei as denoting
the shen of all living beings”*, and Hii Shen confirms this.
“The mei are the vital spirits (tsing) of old living beings”, he
wrote, “and the character is composed of kwei and which
represent the hairs of the kwei”^ Thus again we see the
mountain-ghosts identified with animals and men, for we can hardly
take those “living beings” in any other sense.

The mysterious hill-tribes, reminiscences of which survive in those
and similar traditions, were, of course, distinguished by a variety
of names. Some were cannibals. Says the ya-. “The fei-fei
“ (or, in some southern dialects, h w u i-h w u i) resemble men. They
“ wear their hair disorderly, are good runners, and anthropophagous” ^
We have much earlier mention of such beings in the Shan-haihiny.
“ In the Yuh-fah hills animals live, dog-shaped, with human coun-
“ tenances. They throw with dexterity. Whenever they see men,
“they laugh. They are named hill-hwui. They move as swiftly as
“ the wind, and when they appear, storms arise in the world” *.
The same work makes similar statements about these beings in its
notes on other unidentified southern countries Kwoh Poh, com-
menting upon the ’ Bh ya, wrote that the fei-fei “have long lips,
“a black hairy body, and their heels in front, and that they
“ live also in the mountains, from Kiao-chi (Tongking) and Kwang-
“ tung and Kwangsi, unto Nan-khang (in northern Kiangsi). The
“tallest are more than one chang. The people call them hill-
“tu”®. Kwoh Poh may have borrowed this information from the
Books from the grave in Kih, in which we read: “The fei-fei
“ of Cheu-mi have a human body, and walk on their toes. They
“ laugh spontaneously. When they laugh, they raise their lips


< W ife ^ 0 . Khienlung edition of the Cheu U, loc. cit.

. Shivoh wen, ch. 9, I.

^ A Sect. t8, ^

Ch- a, :((i 111

5 In ch. 10, ^ ^ , and ch. 18, ^ ^ .


cit.


508


DEMONOLOGY.


“over their eyes. They are cannibals. In the north they are styled
“Tu-leu (prattlers?)”*.

Contemporaneous and later authors, harping on those ancient
traditions, framed some new theories on this amalgam of apes,
men, and spectres. One of them wrote in the sixth century; “In
“ Nan-khang shen live, known by the name of hill-tu. They are
“ shaped like men, their size is upward of two c h a n g , their
“ colour is black, their eyes are red, and they have yellow hair.
“ In trees standing far away in the mountains they make their
“ nests, which are shaped like eggs, over three feet in height, well
“ lighted and adorned on the inside, hollow, and of light material.
* They make therein mattresses of bird’s feathers ; they are united
“ by pairs, that for the male above, and that for the female
“ under it. They can transform themselves and render themselves
“ invisible, so that their shapes are seldom seen. They are beings
“of the same sort as the tree-dwellers and the hill-si a o”
And Twan ClTing-shih stated: “He who drinks the blood of a
“fei-fei can become a ghost-seer. They are strong enough to carry
“weights of a thousand kin on their back. When they laugh,
“they raise their lip over their forehead. They are shaped as mi-
“ monkeys, and can express themselves as a man in a bird-like voice.
“ They foreknow births and deaths. Their blood is good for dyeing
“ textiles, and their hair may be used for tresses. Of old it was
■ related that they have their heels in front, and huntsmen say
“they have no knees”®. In the twelfth century, the author of the
' Rh-ya yih, resuming the old traditions, wrote : “ When the monster
“ catches a man, the first thing it does is to laugh for joy and to

''"'“ 9 d,, 7459,

HlllSi. »iPA. ,1

±ii, T«.

. Shull i hi: T S, sect ][j|p , ch. 315.

’ ft * jft, w a * A. « Y- If . ^ ±

tS S . » ® . W A W iP .ft S . it ^ 4 5E . JfiL

yang taah tsu, cli. IG,


MOUNTAIN-SPECTRES.


509


“ fold its upper lip over its forehead, and after a time it devours
him. For this reason men make bamboo tubes and put them
“ around their fore-arms ; and as soon as they are seized, they
draw their hands out of the tubes, and pierce its lip on its
“ forehead, thus catching it ; or, according to some, they nail the lip
“ upon its forehead, let it run away till it is dead, and then catch
“it. The Hwai-nan philosopher says: ‘The mountains produce hiao-
“yang (owls and goats?), the waters wang-siang, the trees pih-
“fang, and wells fen-yang’”'.

The learned Li Shi-chen, compiler of the Pen-t.fao kang muli,
devoted in this work (ch. 51,11) the following page to the hill-s i a o :

“ Tung Fang-shoh’s Sheu i king states that there are in the
“deep mountains of the western regions men over one chang
“ in size, going naked, and catching frogs and crabs, which they roast
“over the fires of men to eat. They are called hill-siao, a name
“ by which they style themselves. If a man attacks them, he is
“ smitten with fever. As they are k w e i and m e i , they are com-
“ raon also elsewhere. They only fear the crackling noise of bamboo
“ exploding in the fire. — Liu I-khing says in his Yiu ming luh
“ In the mountains of the district of Tung-ch'ang (Shantung pr.)
“ there live in the crags a class of beings resembling men of
“ four or five feet, who go naked and wear their hair dishevelled,
“ letting it grow to a length of five or six inches. They utter
“ screaming and whistling cries, and while keeping themselves un-
“ seen, fling stones from time to time out of the gorges. The frogs
“and crabs they catch they roast on fire before eating them. —
“The Description of Yung-kia (in Chehkiang) has: In the district of
“ Ngan-kwoh hill-kwei occur, shaped like men, single-legged beings,
“ hardly taller than one foot. They make a sport of stealing away
“ the salt of woodcutters, and eat their roasted rock-crabs with it.


Art.

mm ; TS, sect. 'i- A’ ch. 88. That passage quoted from Liu Ngan, the Hwai-
nan sage, occurs in his Hung Ueh kiai, ch. i3.

2 Supra, page 495.


510


DEMONOIiOGY.


“ People dare not attack them, for they would not only smite them
“ with disease, but also set fire to their houses. — In the Yuen
“ chung ki it is stated, that the spirits of the mountains look like
“ one-legged men of three or four feet, who feed on land-crabs,
“ come out at night, and hide themselves in the daytime ; toads
“ that are a thousand years old can devour them. — The philoso-
“pher Pao P'oh (Koh Hung) says; The mountain-spirits look like
“ young babes with one foot which has the heel in front, and like
“to injure men at night. They are named pah; when their name
“ is shouted out they lose their power to attack man. — According
“ to the Poh tseh fu h the spirits of the hills are shaped like a
“ drum, have a red colour, and one leg ; their name is k h w e i ,
“ and also h w u i-w e n ; by hooting at them they can be made to
“ catch tigers and leopards. — In the Hai luh sui ski ^ it is stated
“ that south of the Sierra one-legged beings live, with a heel in
“ front, three toes on their foot, and three fingers on each hand.
“ Their males are called mountain-chiefs, the females mountain-ladies.
“ They knock at the house-doors at night to ask for something.


\ Q ^ ^ or “Plan of the White Water (beast)”. This animal is stated by
the Shan-hai king to live on the Eastern Prospect Mount m\u , to be able
to speak, and to appear when princes spread virtues abroad (see Pei wen yun fu,
ch. 100, I, 1. 105). In the fifth century there existed a tradition, asserting “that
“the emperor Hwang making a tour of in.spection, reached the eastern shore, where
“the animal of that Water came out of it. It could speak, and thoroughly knew
“everything about the souls of the myriads of beings, so that it taught him how
“to avert periodical evils from his people. When the intellect of a wise ruler is
“profound and his virtue is far-reaching, the beast appears” * at 5S «= S

mm\n.

S @ a# ^ W . W # 19 ft S W Books of the Sung Dy-

nasty, ch. 29, 1. 40. According to the Yim kilt ts^ih ts^ien, “the emperor had those
“instructions written down in a plan or map, and in this form made known to the
“world” A’

and Pei wen yun fu, ch. 7, II, 1. 48. This curious production existed under the
Sui dynasty, being mentioned in the Catalogue in the Books of that house (ch. 34,
1. 28), with the remark that it consisted only of one chapter. Yii Pao quotes it
sometimes in the Sheu shen ki, and Twan ChTng-shih in the Yiu-yang Isah tsu',
and so does Li Shi-chen in his Pen-ts’^ao kang muh. I do not know whether it still
exists as a separate work.

“Desultory Matters from Writings about the Oceans”, a
kind of cyclopedia in twenty-two chapters, by Yeh Ting-kwei , also

named Sze-chung , a scholar and state-servant who flourished in the first

half of the twelfth century.


MOUNTAIN-SPECTRES.


511


“ According to the Shen i king there exist in the south certain
“pah, also styled mothers of drought. They are two or three
“ feet in size, have nothing on, and have their eye in the top of
“ their head. They move as quick as the wind, and when they
“ appear, great drought prevails. If he who falls in with one catches
“ it and throws it into a dung-pit, the drought is averted. — The
“ Wen-isze chi kwei^ says; The pah of drought are mountain-
“ spectres. Wherever they abide, no rain falls. If female pah enter
“ human dwellings, they can steal, but merely take their booty out
“ of doors ; and if the males enter, they can steal, but carry it home *.

“ Those statements brought Li Shi-chen to the conclusion that,

1 “Guide for the knowledge of, the simple and compound
Characters”, an etymological work by Ts'ao Hien , a renowned scholar under

the Sui dynasty and that of T'^ang, who reached the age of one hundred and five.

S If . A ffi 2 »J » « if . ^ a « ¥ »r ^ i .
aiAd-.

is # -f- 5- . ih

SHfa, a-£[6l#.«l-4EA.*=SHSt,f*
=SMT'tttEA a


51-2


DEMONOr.OGY.


“ though tliey disagree a little, they show that those beings in
“general are apparitions, namely those which in his time people
“ called spectres with one leg. They had hitherto lived everywhere.

“ Rendering themselves invisible, they entered human dwellings to
“ commit sexual excesses and disturb peace ; they visited people
“ with disease, committed arson and thefts, and were a great
“ nuisance in houses. Taoist contrivances for expelling them proved
“ futile, and medical treatment remained without effect on their
“ victims. They were called the five intellectual beings and the seven
“ lords, and their spirits were invoked, and sacrificed to”

It is in the main in this capacity of domestic nuisances that the
siao now live in the imagination of the people of southern Fuh-
kien. There the homes of rustic simplicity are not seldom thrown
into commotion by a mysterious disappearance of food, utensils and
articles of furniture, presumably stolen by such spectres, and many
matrons positively affirm they are known to ladle the rice out
of the basket in which it is being steamed, or out of the pot on
the fire, leaving nothing therein but clean water. They invade
human dwellings to compel the inmates to sing for them, being
bent on vocal music. They haunt under vague and hazy forms,
vanish as soon as seen, and thus bring many a house into bad repute,
so that no one dares hire it. Whether in such stormy family crises
dishonest servants are loudest of all in cursing the siao, we have
often asked, but we were never told.

Those devils have thus disturbed the people’s rest and happiness
for ages. “To the hill-siao class”, we read in a work over eight
hundred years old, “ the tree-dwellers belong. Fifteen miles north-
“ west of the city of the Kan district (in south-western Kiangsi)
there was an old dyke, named the Yii-kung dyke, bearing a big
“ Rottlera tree, about twenty spans in circumference. A hole in
“that old tree contained the nest of a hill-tu. In the first year
“of the Yuen kia period of the Sung dynasty (A.D. 424) two
“ brothers in that district, Tao-hiun and Tao-Iing-by name, felled that
“tree and took the nest home. But the hill-tu appeared. Abusing


MOUNTAIN-SPECTRES.


513


‘‘ them soundly, it cried: ‘h’or your iniquity 1 will have my revenge,
“ and burn your house to-day !’ And during the second night-
“ watch the roofs of their house within and without all at once
“caught fire, and the whole dwelling was totally destroyed” h
“ Teng Teh-ming’s Description of Nan-khang (a part of Kiangsi)
“ states : It is neither by their head or countenance, nor by their
“ speech, that the tree-dwellers are fully distinguished from man,
“ but their hands and feet have nails as sharp as hooks. They dwell
“ beyond the highest peaks and the furthest ridges, where they
“ cleave trees into planks, which they store by binding them up
“ in the trees, formerly, men going to them in order to obtain
“ planks, put down at these trees articles corresponding with their
“ value ; the other party took those articles away and, if they
“ liked them, delivered the planks without any theft or unfair
“action; but they never had face to face intercourse, or kept
“ any markets with them. Their dead are all coffined. Some men
“have gone to see their burials; they placed spirits, fish and raw
“ flesh into the grave, but did not expose themselves to view
“ when preparing food or drink for themselves ^ They are in
“ the habit of hiding their coffins often in trees growing on high
“ cliff's, and sometimes in caverns in the rocks. In Nan-khang,
“ soldiers of the navy of the third division tell that they have
“ gone to see their burials with their own eyes. The songs accom-
“ panying their danses differ from those of men, and sound like
“ fung-lin-fan (?), and the melody is much like that of our songs
“ accompanied by wind instruments. In the 1 hi period (405 — 419),
“ when Sii Tao-fuh was moving to the south and sent out some
“ of his men to cut planks for gunwales for his ships, the tree-
“ dwellers presented these to him; but he did not see them” I


^ , ± ^ , bT - + a . * #t S Ip ^

III » ^ * s « 7c a ^ a; ®i a; * n * -

A-tfefltfcW. K-AB.

— Bif jjE A . ^ ^ ‘I'- n-*

2 Thus, evidently, they .simulated a fasting for their dead.

z.m9r


33


514


DEMONOLOGY.


Ancient tradition having, as we have seen, described the siao
as giants of a chang of ten ch'^ih or feet, we see them appear
also in modern literature as house-disturbers of tremendous sta-
ture. “Sun T'ai-poh”, PAi Sung-ling recounts, “has told me the
“following story of his great-grandfather when he was studying for
“ the (religious) profession in the monastery of the Willow Canal,
on the southern mountains. Once after going to his village on
“ account of the wheat harvest, he returned to the monastery after
“ an absence of ten days, and on opening his cell, found the table
“ dusty and the window covered with cobwebs. He told his servant
“ to sweep the apartment clean, and it was evening ere he could
“ sit down refreshed and comfortable. He then dusted his couch
“ and settled his sleeping gear, bolted his door, and went to bed.
“The moon shone brightly through the window.

“ Hour after hour passed away, and the music of the count-
“ less flutes was hushed, when suddenly a blast of wind began
“ to bellow, and the gate on the hill-side creaked. ‘The monks
“must have bolted it badly’, my great-grandfather said to himself;
“ but no sooner had this thought flashed through his brain than
“ the bellowing wind drew nigh to the dwellings, and the door of
“ his cell flew open. Not knowing in the least what to think of
“ it, he had not yet arranged his ideas when the noise resounded in
“ his cell, and the tramp of boots approaching the inner gate
“ reached his ears. Now he began to feel uneasy, for the inner gate
“ flew open, and turning his eyes, he beheld a large demon pushing
“ through the doorway in stooping attitude. With a bound it stood
“before his bed. It reached almost to the ridge of the roof; its
“ face had the colour of an old pumpkin-skin, and with eyes flashing

a.

#itL. ***®:i*2fp.


MOUNTAIN-SPECTRES.


515


“ fire it strode round in the room, glancing from side to side. Its gaping
“ large mouth, rather a basin than a mouth, showed teeth wide apart,
“more than three ts"un long; its tongue moved (outside its mouth);
“ guttural ehattering cries echoed along the four walls.

“My great-grandsire’s terror was extreme. ‘With a few feet for
“room’, he said to himself, ‘it is impossible to elude that phantom;
“ the best course to pursue will be to accept the situation and fight
“it with the edged weapon’. Gently he drew forth his sword from
“ underneath his pillow, hastily unsheathed it, and aimed a blow
“ at the spectre ; he hit its belly, which gave a sound like an earthen
“ pot. The spectre flew into a passion. It stretched out its huge claws
“ to grasp my great-grandfather, but as he recoiled a little, it got
“ hold merely of the lapel of his gown. With the folds in its
“ claw it ran away furiously, so that my great-grandfather was
dragged forward, and fell to the ground, yelling and screaming.
“ The inmates of the building ran together with lights, and
“finding the door closed, pushed open the window and entered.
“ Their consternation on beholding the scene was great. They placed
“ him on his bed, and on his telling them what had happened,
“they conjointly examined the spot, and found the lapel squeezed
“ into the chink of the inner gate. They opened this, and inspecting
“it by the light of their torches, found it covered with marks of
“ claws, running over it like the texture of a sieve, and perforated
“ in every spot which the five fingers had touched b


uipi

^ M . PJM.Siri5;S


516


DEMONOLOGY.


“Ey that time it was daylight, and my great-grandfather, not
“ daring to stay any longer in that monastery, shouldered his wallet
“ and went home. Afterwards he interrogated the monks, who assured
'• him that nothing particular had happened since” h

This chapter has introduced us to a kind of spectres called pah,
explicitly assimilated by early authors with the great class of hill-
demons (see pp. 510 and 511), and charged with visiting mankind
with drought. We have now for some moments to give our attention
to these beings.

Droughts have always harrassed China as a chronic plague.
Books from the oldest times mention their prevalence, and special
ceremonies to avert them and bring down the rains have always
formed an integral part of the religious duties of princes, governors
and mandarins. In Book I (pp. 918 sqq) we were able to demon-
strate from original texts, that it always was a conviction in China,
traceable in its literature up to the seventh century before our era,
that such calamities were caused by the souls of unburied dead,
this circumstance rendering it of the utmost necessity to the people
and its rulers to give a decent interment to neglected bones and
skeletons. This fact becomes of increased interest when we collate it
with what the Chinese have to tell us of their pah.

Like by far the largest number of terms denoting demons and
spectres, pah is a word the origin and etymology of which lie hidden
in the darkness of the past. An analysis of the character with
which it is written (|^), gives the radical kwei with an element
that is apparently phonetic and teaches us nothing. As early as in
the SShi Ung that character occurs, preceded by the word , drought,
and ever since in the books of all periods we find this binomium
used as a standard name for these spectres. The place in question

#1 ^ ^ © tt tfc T « , it tt jfii fi*; 5: . pfi It # 5
. .a 5^: . # E )iv « . <a- j!.' tt . ft a # .

mAW‘X

ft* Liao-chai chi i, di. 13 .


DEVILS OF DROUGHT.


517


in the Shi king is a jeremiad against a prevailing drought, conven-
tionally admitted to have been uttered by the ruler Siien *, who
occupied the throne of Cheu in the ninth and the eighth centuries
before Christ. “Excessive”, he lamented, “is this drought; dried
“up are the mountain-rills ; the devils of drought wreak their atro-
“ cities, like flames, like scorching fire”*. Thus, if the Chinese are
right in ascribing that origin to this ode, the pah haunted their
ancestors already in the earliest times which their history records.

The pah are mentioned also in the Shan-hai king, in a curious
tradition which seems to be the base of later legends on those
beings. It runs as follows :

“In the vast desert human beings live, dressed in blue; they
“are named female pah of the emperor Hwang. When Ch'^i-yiu
“ (Book I, p. 1403) formed an array to fight Hwang, this sovereign
“ ordered Ying-lung to attack it in the wilds of Ki-cheu. This Ying-
“ lung withheld the waters, whereupon Ch4-yiu invoked the Lord
“ of Winds and the Rain Master with such effect that gales arose
“ and rains poured down. Now the emperor Hwang sent down a
“ celestial virgin, named Pah ; thus that rainfall was stopped, so
“ that they could slay Ch'i-yiu. Pah then was unable to re-ascend,
“ and wherever she was, rains would not fall. Shuh-kiun reported
“ this to the Throne, on which the emperor (Hwang) assigned to
“ that woman a place on the north of the Red W’’aters. Thus
“ Shuh-kiiin (by his intervention) became the Patriarch of Agricul-
“ ture, and Pah was banished for the time being. Those who wish
“to expel her utter this command: ‘Spirit, depart thou to the north’,
“ removing beforehand all obstructions from the aqueducts, and
“opening the canals and ditches” ".


= III ,

Section Aft , III, ode 4.


518


DEJIONOLOGY.


In ancient China the devils of drought do not seem to have been
particularly prominent in the demon-world, for no Classic except
the Shi king mentions them. The earliest source which acquaints
us with popirlar conceptions with regard to them, is the Shen i king.
" The southern regions”, says, this work ‘^are inhabited by human
beings two or three feet in height, naked, with their eyes on the
" top of their heads. They run as quick as the wind. Their name
" is Countries where they appear suffer of great parching.

“They are also named koh-tsze. They move much amidst the people
" in markets and at meetings, and should these men meet with one
“ and throw it into the privy-pit, it dies, and the drought will vanish.
“ There is an ode (in the Shi king) which runs : ‘The devils of drought
“ wreak their atrocities’. Some declare that if they are caught alive
“and murdered, misfortune passes away, and happiness ensues”*.

Li Wei-ching’, a high official, scholar and historian who lived
from circa 1547 to 1626, says in one of his writings: “ It is a
"positive fact that the pah have their eyes on the top of their
“ head, and the people opine that droughts are a consequence of
" a fear of Heaven that the falling drops may injure their eyes” \
Higher powers, as we have hinted on page 918 of Book 1, also
withhold the rains out of commiseration for the souls of unburied
dead. This means so much as that disembodied human souls may be
equally devils of drought; and the inference is ready that they may
become so also for other reasons than because their material remains
are exposed mercilessly to the inclemencies of the weather.

The actuality of this belief is attested by the following tale in the
Tsze puhgii (ch. 18); “In the twenty-sixth year of the Khien lung
"period (1761), when a great drought prevailed in the Metropolis,

i We siippo.se that this character phonetically represents some dialectic term.
The Khanghi Dictionary does not give its sound, this being, it says, unknown. Its
radical ^ denotes the order of the Rodentia; therefore the demons of drought
rniiy have some time been conceived to have an animal shape

* II a ik> aii, a 4!c^- vs,

"ert. ch. 315.


DEVILS WHICH CAUSE DROUGHT.


519


“ a courier, named Chang Kwei, had to carry an urgent dispatch
“ from a Banner General to Liang-hiang. He left the city when
the water-clock was sinking. When he was in a lonely place,
“ a black shower suddenly hurtled around him. It blew out his
'• torch, so that he had to take shelter from the rain in the pavilion
of a post-house. Here a woman with a lamp joined him. She was
“ about seventeen or eighteen years old, and very beautiful. She
beckoned him to her house and refreshed him with tea, and he
“ tied his horse to a post, hoping to pass the night with her. The
“ courier’s happiness e.xceeded his wildest expectations. He held her
“ in close embrace until the cock announced the first glimpse of
‘‘ day, causing the woman to throw on her clothes and rise. She
“ could not be prevailed upon to stay. The courier, exhausted, fell
“ again into a sweet doze, and became aware in the midst of his
“ dreams that his nose was being cooled by the dew, and his mouth
“ tickled by the points of the grass. And when it was a little clearer,
“ he found himself on a tomb in the open plain. Greatly affrighted
“be fetched his horse, which he found tied up to a tree h

“The dispatch he had to convey to its destination arrived there
“ fifty quarters of an hour too late, and the officer to whom it was
“ addressed sent a message to the General to ask for an explanation,
“ and to express his sorrow that matters had been managed in
“ a wrong way by reason of that delay. The General ordered his
“ adjutant to interrogate the courier sharply. The detailed account
“ which this man then gave of the causes, induced the General to
“ have that tomb investigated. It was found to be that of a young
“ woman of the Chang family, who had hung herself out of shame
“ at the discovery of the adultery which she had committed in her
“ unmarried state. From time to time her ghost had haunted way-
“ farers, and some took her for the p a h of the prevailing drought,
“ whereas spectres in the shape of n a o monkeys, with dishevelled

' + flit#®*®*

sTttiss.


520


DEMONOLOGY.


“hair and on one leg, are animal pah, while hanged persons whose
“undecayed corpses appear and bewilder men, are spectral pah.
“ In order to cause ram to fall, it suffices to catch and to burn
“ these. The case having been reported to the Throne, they opened
“ the coffin, and it contained in fact the undecayed corpse of a woman
“ with features like those of a living person, and covered all over with
“white hair. They burned it, and next day it rained heavily”'.

Cases of corpses exhumed, mutilated or destroyed on the charge
of causing a scarcity of rain, we must conclude to be far from rare
in China, seeing that its Code of Laws contains a special article
forbidding such practices. We gave a translation thereof on page 888
of Book I. Devils of drought having been men, or at any rate posses-
sing a human appearance, it is not surprising to learn from some
authors, that certain monstrous births become demons of this
character. The Kho ('an sM cKwen^, “Traditions good for discus-
sion”, a work which belongs, 1 believe, to the T'ang or the Sung
dynasty, mentions “ women who give birth to bemgs shaped like
“ demons. If such a mother cannot seize and despatch the monster,
“ it flies away, to come back at night and suck her breasts, thus
" often exhausting her strength. The people declare them to be devils
“ of drought. Of these demons there are specimens of either sex. The
“ females steal things in the houses and take them out of doors, while the
“ males steal things that stand out of doors, and carry them home” k
This last statement occurs also (see page 511) in other writings.

att.

A H Ail

^ nriiSi:#-

* a at * ft KI (tj , II ^ 0 g T s, jft

11^. ch. 90.


CHAPTER HI.


ON WATER-DEMONS.


The second great division of the demon-world according to Con-
fucius comprised, as we have seen on pagej 495, the water-ghosts,
distinguished as lung or dragons, and w a n g-s i a n g. The lung,
which ancient works class also with the khwei or land-demons (see
p. 496 seq.), may be passed unnoticed here, as they have not been
retained in China in their old position of demons, but have been
apotheosized at an early date as beneficent gods of clouds and rain.

Wang-siang looks much like wang-liang which denotes the
mountain-spectres of the ancients; but it would be preposterous to
infer from this resemblance the identity of the beings which the
two terms denote. If these terras were synonymous, we should
certainly not find them in one and the same strophe of the
which we quoted on page 495, denoting two different categories of
spectres. Nevertheless the one terra may be a dialectic variation or
a corruption of the other, and at any rate it is a fact that Chinese
authors generally do not take the trouble to distinguish between
them. To the etymology of the word wang-siang the characters
with which it is written do not give any clue, not being, as far
as we can discern, ideographic.

In his commentary upon the Kwoh yii, which we mentioned on
page 498, Wei Chao says; “Some pretend that the wang-siang
are anthropophagous. They are also called niuh-chung”k And
Yii Pao, when reproducing the story of the earth-goat of Ki Hvvan-
tsze, adds; “The Hia iinq chi or Record of Tripods of the Hia
“says, that a wang-siang looks like a child of three years,
“ has red eyes, a black colour, big ears, and long arms with red
“ claws. Even when fettered with ropes it can find its food” “.


. ill M W ''' “


2


5;32


DEMOXOLOGT.


Thus this class of spectres was, as well as the mountain-demons,
invested by popular belief with human forms; which coincides with
the fact, reported by Wang ClTung, the author of the Lun heng
(see p. 499), that they are of human descent, being the progeny of
the ancient sovereign Chwen-siih. That author informs us in the
same passage, that they were regarded as fever-causing agencies.
This peculiarity may have its origin in the observation that malaria
arises especially from quagmires and bogs, and in the mud of rivers.

References to water-devils are frequent in works of early date.
The imagination of the ancient Chinese, peopling, as it did, the
surface of the earth with an unlimited number of demons, had
every reason to do the same with the waters, seeing that these
too are an integral part of the earth. “The waters”, we read in
the writings attributed to Kwan Chung, who lived more than twentv-
five centuries ago, “are the lifeblood of the earth, which courses
“ througn it like arteries and pulses” k And he continues: “things
“which mankind sees sometimes, produce khing-ki, and things
"which remain sometimes unseen engender the kwei. When the
" bed ot a quagmire is not displaced for centuries, and its waters
"are not absent from it all that time, it produces khing-ki. These
“are shaped like men. Their height is four ts'un; they wear yellow
“ clothes with caps of the same colour, and carry yellow umbrellas.
" They ride on colts, and like to galop with great velocity. By
“ calling them by their names they may be made to bring in one
" day tidings from a place more than a thousand miles off. Such
"are the spirits (tsing) of muddy bogs. The tsing of shallow
“ brooks are produced by the kwei, that is to say, by beings with
“ one head and a double body, who are like snakes, eight feet long.
" By calling them by their names you may employ them for catching
“fish and turtles. Such are the tsing of dry brooks”".

^ Kimn-tszc,

cli. 14, or 39.

= St:

4'.i.

n ^ ^ . lH; jll ^ ^ . Oj.. .1 fuc. ciL


WATER-SPECTRES IN ANCIENT TIMES.


523


Those khing-ki must not be confounded with a high minister
of the same name who flourished under Hoh Lu, king of Wu, and
was killed in the second year of the reign of this prince (513 B.C.).
He too is represented in history as a great runner. “The king
“ said of him ; Notorious among mankind he is for his strength ;
“ his sinews and bones are so robust that ten thousand men cannot
“ stand their ground against him. He overtakes animals in full
“galop, and he seizes birds in their flight; his bones then soar
“ through the air, and his flesh flies; there are then distances of
“ several hundred miles between his knees. I have pursued him in
“ the Kiang region, but my galoping team of four did not overtake
“ him; I shot at him, but he, I know not how, caught my arrows in
“his hand and could not be hit” k Such stories may have grouped
themselves around this person owing to the similarity of his name
to that of Kwan Chung’s water-ghosts; or he may have been nick-
named a khing-ki on account of his swiftness.

The Wu Jueh cltun-ts^iu, to which we owe the above parti-
culars about that Khing-ki the Swift, teaches us also that in king
Hoh Lii’s time water-demons were by no means slighted as in-
offensive beings. It relates that Wu Tsze-sii said to that king:
“ Tsiao Khiu-yin was a superior man from Tung-hai. Travelling es
“ an envoy from the king of Ts'i to the state of Wu, he had
“ 10 pass a ferry on the Hwai river, and would let his horse
“drink at it, when the ferry-man said: ‘There is a god (shen) in
“ the water, which when it sees a horse, comes out to harm it ;
“ do not let yours drink there, sir’. ‘A sturdy warrior is proof
“against this danger’, his answer was; ‘what gods dare attack
“ me?’ and he told his men to let the horse drink at the ferry;
“ but the demon seized the animal and drowned it. Tsiao Khiu-yin,
“ enraged, stripped and seized his sword, and he entered the water
“ to seek the god and flght it. He re-appeared after several days
“with one eye blinded, and pursued his journey to Wu”*.


1 as AS

^ Bril’ . Wu Yui'h ch^un-ts^iu, book IV.

aft. ijj 0. .a


524


DEMONOLOGY.


In the time of the Tsin dynasty there was a tradition rife,
according to which the great Yii, the founder of the Hia dynasty,
“ while inspecting the Hwang-ho, had seen a giant with the body

of a fish, who, emerging from the water, said : ‘ I am the spirit
“of the Hwang-ho’. Fung-i from Tung-hiang in the Hwa-yin
"region (Shensi pr.) having obtained the Tao of the Immortals,
“ was transformed into a director of the Hwang-ho. This immortal
“ Fung-i rides on a dragon or a tiger, while the watergods ride fishes
“ and dragons. They move with mad haste, ten thousand miles being
"to them not more than the width of a house Thus Fung-i
was the chief and leader of the host of spirits which crowd China’s
biggest stream. We find an old reference to him in the writings
of Chwang-tsze, which state: “When Fung-i had obtained the Tao,
he availed himself of it to journey on the big streams” *. His
name occurs in the shape ^ in the Shan-hni king b We may
fairly confess that his origin is lost in the night of time. With
some more water-spirits he is generally classed among the benefi-
cent gods, who, far from causing ill, temper and repress the male-
ficent aquatic powers under their control, or make them work on
behalf of man. Thus we must treat them afterwards, in our mono-
grapliies of gods and goddesses.

The old superstion which ascribes accidents that befall those who
cross a stream, mere or lake, to water-demons, comes out in
numerous tales and legends of all times. To quote here one as an
instructive example : “ In the district of Puh-wei, in the principality
" of Yung-ch"ang (pr. of Yunnan), there was under the Han dynasty
“ a tabooed water, having a poisonous vapour. Only in the eleventh
" month and in the twelfth it might be crossed or waded, but
" from the first month till the tenth it might not, or it would


tif » « "F . ® * ft ,fi| , ;i|c JJt S ,5 ,

a H 7i tu . ift-* - a . * 2 "<

' SB 0,#

W * It if: » A ifc . # till -ft; ® w ta . till H * fl

* tT'ttte.sa in s

cli. VII.

^ ^ ^ ^ jll • kitig, ch. 3, ^ ^ .

3 In the twelfth ch.apter, M •


SOULS OF DROWNED PEOPLE AS WATER-GHOSTS.


525


“ smite with sudden sickness and death those who did so. There
“ were in that vapour evil beings which never showed themselves,
^ but seemed to produce sounds as if they were fighting therein.
“ If a tree was hit by them it snapped, and if a man, he was
“ killed, and the people spoke of their demonish bullets. Those
“ attacks caused all the criminals of that principality who were
“transported to the forbidden spot, to die before the tenth day”*.

Nowadays the belief in spirits inhabiting seas, fiords and creeks,
rivers, meres, marshes and wells, is general. VVe have seen its pre-
valence in the Amoy region strikingly illustrated by the custom
of appeasing and propitiating them by means of paper money
when people are passing over water with a coffin on the way to
the grave (Book I, p. 154), and also by throwing for the same
purpose money into wells from which they draw water to wash their
dead (Book I, p. 14). The common opinion in that part of China is,
that those tsui-ktd^ or “water-spectres” mostly are souls of the
drowned. Having spent some time in their wet abode in the bondage
of the watergods, tliey may be redeemed from this servitude by
substitution, and therefore they lie in ambush for victims to draw into
the water and make them take their place. Thus they are a constant
lurking danger for people on the waterside, fishers, boatmen and
washer-women. They blow hats into the water, or bleaching linen,
or other articles, and while the owner exerts himself to recover his
property, they treacherously keep the thing just outside his reach,
until he loses his equilibrium and falls into a watery grave. It is
told in a book, “that outside the gate of VVu-lin (near Hang-cheu,

“ in Chehkiang) a family, settled on the dyke of the western lake,

“ had an old servant, who fetched water after sunset and saw at
“ some distance a wine-jar floating past with the current. Thinking
“ it would be useful for holding things, he desired to get it, and
“ suddenly it floated towards him till it was just before him ; but


s/iL'n ki, ch. 12.

= * A-


536


demonology.


•• as he seized it, his fore-arm was against his will pulled into the
“ mouth, which closing around it, dragged him into the water. His
‘•cries of distress brought people to the rescue, who released him
"from his precarious position” h

Should a corpse be found on the silt, its arms or legs worked
deep into the mud, every one is sure to believe it a victim of a
water-ghost, drawn down by those limbs with irresistible force.
Cramps paralyzing a swimmer are likewise the clutches of a ghost.
When a man is suddenly missed and found dead in the water,
every one is ready to tell that a water-ghost decoyed him away
from his house by some artifice, and drowned him : “ a water-
spectre has called some one to take its place”; tsiii-kiii kib kao-
foe'^\ or “it has seized a substitute”; lidh kao-dbe^.

It has been asserted * that the natives are often unwilling to
help a drowning man or any one in absolute peril of life, fearing
that the spirit of the person who perished last before him and is
longing for relief by a substitution, will haunt the person whose
humanity has condemned it to a fresh term of dismal servitude.
We must, however, demur to the correctness of this statement, for
we could never discover in Fuhkien a trace of such unwillingness,
while, moreover, all the Chinese we interrogated on this head,
protested against their humanity being thus called in question. On
the great rivers there exist even life-saving societies, possessing boats
and implements for the rescue of the drowning.

The belief that ghosts of drowned men catch substitutes, is
by no means one of recent growth, but prevailed very long ago.
“ The Memoirs concerning the Sung-kiang Department (in south-
“ east Kiangsu) relate; In the Wan lih period (A..D. 1573 — 16’30)
“ there lived in the western suburb at the upper end of a creek
“ where boats were repaired, a fisherman. One night he heard a
"spectre say: ‘I have endured this miserable fate for a year, and


Sa a' . Ife # A . Sc A . S ® '''

4 Denny’S, The Folk-lore of China, ch. II, p. 22.


SOULS OF DROWNED MEN AS WATER-GHOSTS.


527


“ now I can get a substitute, but this is a woman in the family
“way, and I do not feel at liberty to destroy the two lives’. Next
“ morning a woman slipped into the water, but she was drawn
“ out safe and sound ; she was, indeed, in the seventh month of
“ pregnancy. Another year passed away, when the fisherman again
“heard the spectre say: ‘The man who is now to take my place
“ has scanty means, and heavy responsibilities rest on him; if he dies, his
“ whole family becomes homeless and will be dispersed ; I had better
“ wait yet a year’. And next morning a man fell from the bridge,
“ but he too escaped with his life. Then again that same evening
“the spectre applied to the fisherman for some food. ‘Twice’, it
* said, ‘I have had a noble thought, and the gods have apprised the
“ Supreme Emperor (of Heaven) of it, who thereupon has ordered
“ that I shall no more have to beg here for food’. The fisher said
“ he hoped so, and in the evening of the next day the spectre
“ returned to take leave of him, and announced to him its appoint-
“ ment as Manager of the soil in Mao-khiao” *.

Still older are the two following tales from a book of the tenth
century’*: “On the banks of the Yangtsze river and the Hwang-ho
“ there are many c h'a n g demons, who now and then call a
“ man by his surname and his name. If he answers, he is sure
“ to be drowned, it being the soul of a dead man that decoys


1

« M i . a « « - 5ft # ft « a «E .

a 0 A

2r , B iHp tt ai ± ^ Mli iR. 32-

2 Namely the Poll mu»g so yen = or Fragmentary Commu-

nications from my Dreams in the North, i. e. north of the Yangtsze, in King-cheu
^ , where the author resided. This work, in twenty chapters, is ascribed to
Sun Kwang-hien - also named Meng-wen ^ ^ , a high official under

the founder of the Sung dynasty. It deals mostly with officers and official life under
the Tang dr nasty and the Five dynasties, and is reputed among scholai-s to contain
much of genuine historical value.


528


BKMONOliOGY.


“ him (into the stream). One Li Tai-jen had moored his boat in a
“ bend of the shore in the Chi-kiang district (in south Hupeh, on
“ the Yangtszg) and saw in the bright moonlight a damsel with a
“ boy emerge from the water. She gazed around, and then whispering
‘•‘yonder is a living man’, she hurried off over the water as if on
“ solid ground, went ashore, and disappeared.

“ Su Jui, prefect of Tang-yang (north of Chi-kiang), once, when
‘‘ in Kiang-ling (King-cheu), was going home at night, and saw
" by the light of the moon a beautiful woman with dishevelled
•■ hair, with a robe and petticoat apparently wet. He asked her
“jokingly: ‘Are not you a river-ch^ang?’ This question infuriated
“the woman, and with the words: ‘You say I am a spectre?’, she
“ ran after him. He ran away with all speed, till he fell in with a
" patrol of watchmen, who saw the woman turn her back on them
“ and go by the same way she had come” b

We learn from these two tales, that souls of the drowned are styled
ch'ang ^ • This term indicates also the souls of victims of tigers, which
popular belief represents as urging these monsters to devour new
victims, in order that the spirits of these may take their place in the
bondage in which they are held by the tiger, and thus deliver them
therefrom. We shall meet these ch'ang anew on pp. 554 sqq.

As illustrations of the modern notions on water-spectres, we offer
the reader here a couple of tales from the Tsze puh yii. “ Chang
‘* Hung-yeh, my cousin by the mother’s side, lodged in Ts'in-hwai
“ in a house of the family P'an, built on the river. In a summer-
“ night he went to the privy. The water-clock had sunk to the
“ mark of the third watch and all human sounds were hushed,
“and, as the moon shone bright, he leaned for a moment over
“ the balustrade, charmed by its lovely light. There he heard a
“ rippling noise in the water, perceiving at the same time a


5E 5® * Bf ^ m ^ « fc # * # JB lill if

t z- .ft ^ 4 A . 51 a * ® ® Bo

A * Ab 1 « le « tt 5-, tl 1|5,
*A^. 0. A. •/»;$ jjiji®

If 352 .


DANGEROUS WATER-SPECTRES.


529


“ human head coming up to the surface. Astonished to see a
“ swimmer at this untimely hour, he looked at it attentively,
“ and saw that neither its eyes nor eyebiows were marked with
“ black. The creature reared itself straight up in the water, rigid,
“ with a neck as immovable as that of a wooden image. Chang
“ threw a stone at it, on which it sunk back into the water. Next
“ day in the afternoon a lad was drowned by that spot, and then
“ it was no longer doubtful that that apparition was a water-demon.

“ As he related this event to some fellow lodgers, a rice-dealer
“ amongst them told them, that water-ghosts are curious fellows
“ searching for human lives. In his early years, when a rice-dealer
“ in Kia-hing (Chehkiang pr.), he had to cross a yellow mud
“ canal, which he did on a buffalo, the mire being deep. When
‘• just in the middle of the pool, a black hand was protruded
“ from it to grasp his foot. But as he drew up his legs, the
“ hand seized that of the buffalo, preventing the animal from
“ stirring. Struck with fright, the rice-merchant called the passers-by
“to the rescue. All hands combined to pull the buffalo forward,
“but the beast did not move; they therefore singed its tail
“ with fire, on which, unable to endure the pain, it dragged
“ itself out of the mud by a sudden exertion of its whole strength.
“ An old broom was then found tied to its belly, so fast that it
“ could not be detached. It was even hardly possible to approach,
“ so rotten and so filthy it was. They struck it off with sticks, and
“ during this operation it made a moaning noise, while a liquid
“ trickled out of it — mere black blood. Having cut the thing off
“ with knives, they fetched fuel and burned it, but the stench was
“ not gone in a month. Since that time there were no more cases
“of suffocation in that yellow mud canal” k

nm A.

0 » A a? jfei: .'a

A 4^ ffi ifi. « ^ # ilt ^ S 1=- Hi tte ti . * J». Ji;


530


DEMONOLOGY.


— “In Hwui-ki, one Wang ’Rh, a dress-maker, passed after
“sunset along tlie Hen hills with some female garments in his
“ hands, when he saw two men in a state of nature, with black
“faces, jump forth from the water. They pulled him into the river,
“and he, unable to resist, followed them, when on a sudden, after
“a few steps, another being with pendent eyebrows and a tongue
“ protruding from its mouth, came flying down out of the pines
" on the hill. In its hands it held a long rope, which it slung
“around Wang ’Rh’s waist, to pull him ashore; but thus a contest
"arose with the black-faced spectres. ‘He is our substitute’, the
“latter cried, ‘why do you rob us of him?' Rut he with the rope
“retorted; ‘Wang’Rh is a master-tailor, and you are river-demons
“living with naked buttocks in the water; you wear no clothes at
“all, on what tasks then will you employ him? you had better
“give him to me’. And Wang’Rh perceived through his faintness
“that they pulled him to and fro between them. He was conscious
“a little, and said to himself; ‘If these woman’s clothes are lost,
“all my labours will not avail to pay their value’, and he hung
“them on a tree. Just then his uncle was going home by another
“ path. Astonished to see in the moonshine woman’s clothes, green
“ and red, on a tree, he came nearer to see, and the three spectres
“dispersed, leaving Wang’Rh with his mouth and ears stuffed with
blue mud. His uncle took him home, and thus in the nick of
“time saved him from death” k

» * . 1 r?3 itB. 0 T ^ ft K » T' )®

mm'& . amm z , mmmm . mT yi: . w m ^0.

A K 7J & 9-T m Z . M
S A II.

I y: a ± . II S; # . ,® 111 a # « PJ SI T — A.

mm. An, n-wxm,

# » ^ * a H . m ^ 555 es . ft # w *


STRANGE WATER-SPECTRES AND MERMANS.


531


Tales of water-demons possessed of more or less power to work
evil, have been recorded in Chinese literature in considerable num-
bers. Many are very wild and absurd. Thus, *the fisherman Li
“ Hoh-t‘ah, who always cast out his nets in the Yangtsze, hauled
“ up a child, some three feet in height. It made the water in the
“ net foam up wildly, and the whirls it caused were not calmed
* in ten days. A Taoist doctor witnessed it. ‘Pour out some molten
“iron there’, he said; the other did it, and the whirls came to a
“ standstill. It was observed that the child’s mouth, nose, eyebrows
“ and hairs all looked as if painted, and that it had no eyes ; its
“ mouth smelt of liquor. The crowd in their consternation threw
“ it back into the water” h

— “And one Yao, serving in the Tsing-hai army in Tung-
“cheu (?), was at the head of some of his footmen fishing in
“ the sea for a certain instalment of annual tribute, when it
“ grew dusk before they had caught more than a very small
“ quantity of fish. He was then on the point of despairing, when
“ suddenly they hauled up in their net a black man, covered all
“ over with long hair. As he stood before them with clasped
‘•hands, they asked him who he was; but he gave no answer.
“A sea-captain then spoke; ‘This is what we call a merman; when
“ he appears, misfortune is sure to occur; therefore pray kill him,
“to put a stop to his evil deeds’. But Yao retorted: ‘No, he
“ is a divine being, and mishap will on the contrary befall us if
“ we kill him’. He then disentangled him from the net, and invoked
“him, saying: ‘If you bring shoals of fish here for me, and thus
“ save me from punishment for falling short in the work imposed
“ on me by my office, I will believe you are a god ’. On these

inwa. I## ai«

». m:k±m m m r- mm . m ±,


532


DEMONOLOGY.


“ words the hairy man made some dozen steps back over the water
“ and sank out of sight. Next morning they caught a large haul of
fish, twice as much as they were wont to catch in other years” k
No doubt every part of China possesses special notions and
superstitions on water-devils, not always reduced to writing. We
have obtained some from the lips of seamen in coasting along the
Fuhkien shores. Sometimes in full sea a compact cloudy mass
suddenly darkens the horizon. It nears the ship with great rapidity,
to capsize her and drown her crew. It is no tornado, no water-
spout, no squall, but the spirit of a woman, once a sailor’s lovely
wife. Her husband, most unworthy of her, treated her ignominiously,
even cruelly, until, preferring death to such a life, she cast herself
into the vasty deep. Since then she rages at sea, a wrathful demon,
against every junk she sees, in the hope that her husband may be
amongst the crew and be sunk into her own watery grave. Happily
there are efficient means to combat her. first of all all the hatches
must be closed; indeed, she is so unmannerly as to pass on high
a flood of urine, which may fill the ship in a moment up to the
deck. Therefore Amoy sailors call her the ts'ou jio p6'\ the Pissing
Woman. But still more measures are to be taken. As soon as this
nymph appears, paper mock money must be burned on the deck,
in order to propitiate her and appease her wrath ; crackers and
blunderbusses must be fired to scare her away, and one of the
crew in the garb of nature has to climb the mast, his hair dis-
hevelled, with a club, axe, sword or spear. This weapon he brandishes
up there most awe-inspiringly, abusing the woman in every way and
sense, and exhausting his vocabulary of invectives to the last word;
no wonder that the fair Naiad, sure to see and hear her lovely
goodman of former days, takes fright and decamps. Meanwhile


it'.

Ilk » II « ® * s.# 0 .

Oi>. cit . ; K K, ihid.


THE PISSING WOMAN AND THE SEA-BONZE.


533


another sailor in a black gown with long, spacious sleeves has
taken up a position on the deck, and is pacing a kind of dance to
the sound of a gong beaten by a comrade. During these exorcising
movements he brandishes a stick, from the top of which some shreds
of red cloth flutter in the gale. By these efficacious and dignified
evolutions he greatly aids the prowess of his undressed comrade up
the mast. Success certainly crowns their efforts, for they do not
cease until the dangerous phantom withdraws and the shower clears
off. Snch ship-saving dancers the Amoy Chinese call bu iik khh k
There is one on each junk that plies, especially enrolled to exorcise
the Pissing Woman, but performing sailor’s work in good weather
times. The dances require special study and training, their effect
being nought unless performed with all the finesse of art. A bu tik
khb receives extra pay for all ship-saving work he does.

Another dreaded demon of the Amoy seamen is the hoi he-
or “sea-bonze”. This resembles a fish, but its head is like
that of a bald-shaved Buddhist priest. It may be a seal or dugong.
When the sea is rough, this monster seizes junks and capsizes
them, or drags them down into the deep, crew and all. Against
this demon also the bii tik khb is set to work with his stick, gown,
and dances; moreover, some handfulls of feathers are burned on
the deck, for the stench of these is bad enough to make even a
sea-devil turn tail. With a view to the visits of sea-bonzes, every
supercargo who combines belief with prudence, takes good care to
have one or two small bags of feathers in the ship. Cases are
known of dozens of small sea-monks having been caught in one
net, looking up to the* fishermen in the attitude of praying Buddhist
priests, as if imploring their mercy.

How great are the dangers with which sea-devils beset poor sea-
faring folk, the following tale will tell; — “A certain Chfing Chi-
“ chang of Hang-cheu was under sail from Ch'^ao-cheu and passed
Hwang-kang, when halfway the voyage a gale arose. A black
“ vapour came up of a sudden, and in the midst of it a man was
“ seen, painted black all over, but his eye-sockets and his lips were
“ as white as flour. He settled on the bow of the ship and blew
“ at the sailors. These, thirteen in number, turned at the same
“ moment as black in their faces as the spectre itself, and only
“ three of them were not thus coloured ; then in a few moments
the vapour dissipated, and the apparition vanished. The ship

1 ^ ‘-i


534


DEMONOLOGY.


'• proceeded on her voyage amid violent storm and heavy seas ; she
“capsized, and ten men were drowned, namely all those who had
“ changed colour. The three who had not suffered the change were
“the sole survivors” h

By far the greatest contingent to the class of water-devils is made
by aquatic animals. We find among them otters or beavers, tor-
toises, gavials or crocodiles, and fishes, occasionally in human shape
or in their own ; but a rational arrangement of our material com-
pels us to treat them in Chapter V, 5, 7 and 9.

' tt -t. # A -SB s K ^

# H A tfi Q , it' w M « gc , e # y; JL . * a

Ji:.' II, f. cli 2'’.


CHAPTER IV.


ON GROUND-DEMONS.


Finally we come to the last of the three categories into which
the ancient Chinese have divided their world of spectres, namely
those inhabiting the ground, which, as we have seen on page 495,
were called fen-yang in the time of Confucius and thought to
have a goat-like shape.

Of the story, related in the Kicoh yu, how Ki Hwan-tsze dis-
covered a fen-yang in the ground (page 495), a strange version
is stated to have been written two centuries before our era by
Han Ying ‘ in a collection of anecdotes from ancient times, embel-
lished and illustrated by odes which, side by side with other docu-
ments all now lost, have furnished material for the compilation of
the Shi liny under the Han dynasty. According to that book, now
printed in ten chapters and bearing the title of Hnn-shi wai chSoeii
Han’s extra Traditions concerning the Odes, ‘‘Ngai, the ruler ofLu,
“ ordered a well to be dug. In three months they had not yet reached
" the watersprings, but they found a living goat. The ruler ordered
" his Invokers to operate on it with drums and dances, in order to
" send it up (as a' sacrifice?) to heaven, but the goat could not
" be sent up. Confucius saw the animal l[and said ; ‘ The vital spirit
“(tsing) of water is jade stone, and that of earth is a goat; so
“this goat must have an earthen liver’. The ruler ordered the
“animal to be killed, and they found its liver to be of earth” ^

It appears strange that this gnome was represented as a goat.


il ® St ^ ± K A . ^ bE Jt . ?L Ji H .

* 2 5 . ± 2 . tt # » ± m. .S'® St

Biffin ± This tale does not occur in the copy we have on our
shelves. We quote it from the T S, sect. ch. 113.


DEJIONOI-OGY.


530

We find nothing in any book to account for it. Possibly the word
fen-yang may, fundamentally, not have meant goat, but being
written, as in the Kwok yii version, with the characters
signifying some goat or sheep because, as at present, the word
yang ^ denoted the genus Capra, the Chinese, deluded by appear-
ance, may have imagined a fen-yang to be a specimen thereof.
That, originally, fen-yang did not mean sheep, is suggested also
in some degree by its appearance in some works without the first
component having the prefix In a biography of Confucius

which occurs in the Historical Records \ it has the prefix -f. . earth,
which, without modifying its sound, gives it the meaning of a grave
(corap. p. 1073 of Book I), so that in this form (;^ ^) the bino-
mium is trandateable by “grave-goat”. The beast seems, indeed, to
have been connected with graves in subsequent times, for we find in
the third century goats or sheep play a part in the imagination ot
the people as devourers of the buried dead. We have stated this fact
already on page 468 of Book I. We there learned two other names
for those necrophagous demons, viz. ngao and wei which
may be local terms, the characters by which they are written not
being ideographic. Thus simple-minded people, having from days of
yore been bent on keeping the dead in their graves uncorrupted,
and yet finding them there regularly eaten away in a mysterious
manner, ascribed this phenomenon to the teeth of underground
beasts, unable, as they were, rationally to explain natural decom-
position.

P'ei Yin asserts in the commentary which he wrote in the fifth
century upon the Historical Records, that “according to T'ang Ku,
the fen-yang were beings with undeveloped sexuality” *. The
sexless or hermaphroditic beast was, as Wang Chhrng has taught
us {supra, p. 499), the progeny of an ancient emperor, haunting
houses and ruins, and afflicting babies with convulsions. Besides
this statement, Wang ChTing inserted in his valuable book the
following interesting notice on this class of spectres:

“If it is true that the spirits who inhabit the soil object to it
“ being disturbed and dug up, then it is proper for us to select
“ special good days for digging ditches and ploughing our fields.
“(But this is never done); it therefore follows that the spirits of

1 Chapter 47, 1. 6.

. K li i 0 n 1 u n g edition of the

Ili.-jtoric.U Record-, ch. 47, 1. 6.


THE SPIRITS OE THE GROUND.


537


“ the soil, even though really annoyed when it is disturbed, pass over
“ such an offence if man commits it without evil intent. As he commits
“ it merely to ensure his rest and comfort, the act cannot possibly excite
“ any anger against him in the perfect heart of those spirits; and this
“ being the case, they will not visit him with misfortune even if he
“ do not choose auspicious days for it. But if we believe that the earth-
“ spirits cannot excuse man on account of the object he pursues, and
“ detest him for annoying them by disturbing the ground, what ad-
“ vantage then can he derive from selecting proper days for doing so?” *

Thus we learn that in the first century of our era the earth-
spirits, except on certain selected days, did not tolerate any digging
in the ground, and exacted vengeance for so doing. We find this
superstition illustrated as follows: “The T^ai-jfinrj yii Ian has the
“ following quotation from the Sin yen of P'ei Yuen : Amidst the
“ people there are spirits, called lords of the earth, and they say
“that the soil may not be stirred. I, P^ei Yuen, possess a grand-
“ daughter, five years old, who suddenly became ill. 1 went to the
“ diviner in the bazaar, who told me that she had offended the
“ soil. Forthwith I applied to her the remedies usual in such cases,
“ which effected her total cure. Ever since I have been convinced
“that there exist ground-spirits in this world”*.

In these e.xtracts the gnomes appear under the names of ti shen
and t'u shen^, “spirits of the ground or the earth”. They are
generally so denoted in the books. We have seen on page 499


S 0 . ^ » ± g f# ^ M A * ^ s 1= -a

0 asst -

« 0-


. Tiling suit pien , “ Book on the Investigation of Customs”,

a cyclopaedia in thirty-eight chapter^ bearing the name Chen Tden-tu
foi' its author. Our edition is dated 1751.

3 itb f $ i fi| •


538


DEMONOLOGY.


that in Wang Ch'ung’s age they were deemed to reside also in
objects attached firmly to the ground, as in dwellings and ruinous
buildings, in corners and nooks. With all these characteristics they
survive in China to the present day.

In Amoy and the surrounding farming-districts the existence of
earth-spectres, locally called t'^usin^ or ‘‘earth-spirits”, is an implicit
article of the popular creed. The belief in them there bears, as
may be the case everywhere in China, the clearest marks of the
influence of the philosophical conception that the soil is the pro-
ductive part of the Universe, which, fecundated by the celestial
sphere, engenders everything that has life. In the Cosmos the soil
represents perfect stability, and for this propensity it is able to
bring forth vegetation. A natural conclusion is, that if the soil is
disturbed, the repose and growth of the embryo in the womb ol
women is, by the law of sympathy, disturbed too.

Therefore, still more often than by the term f6 stn, the Amoy
Chinese denote those spectres by that of t^ai sin “ spirits of the
womb or fruit”. Their baneful influence extends even to babies
already born, these just as well as vegetable products being dependent
for their growth on life-producing earth. It is the t^ai sin that cause
the convulsions, restlessness, and other ailments to which infants
are so subject, and everybody feels sure that, should a child fall
into the clutches of such a spirit, it will forthwith turn blue or
black. Especially, however, the tai sin are notorious for causing
the pains of pregnancy. These are usually called tang fai or fai
tang"^, “displacements or movements of the fruit”, and ascribed to
the shifting of some earth, some heavy object, or piece of furniture.

Such agitation of the foetus may assume serious proportions, and
entail miscarriage. The fear of such a result restrains a man from
many imprudent acts, should his wife or concubine be pregnant.
Especially perilous it is then to drive a nail into a wall, as it might
nail down the earth-spirit that resides in it, and cause the child
to be born with a limb stiff and lame, or blind of one eve; or it
might paralize the bowels of a child already born, and give it con-
stipation with fatal result. The dangers which threaten a pregnant
woman, increase as her pregnancy advances. In the end nothing
which is heavy may be displaced in the house, it being well known
that the earth-spirits are wont to settle preferably in things which,
owing to their weight, are seldom moved. But even the shifting


1 ±)Iif.


W) ^ Wi-


DEVILS AFFECTING CHILDBIRTH AND INFANCY.


539


of light objects is a source of danger. Instances are known of fathers
who had rolled up their bed-mat after it had long lain flat, being
frightened by the birth of a child with a rolled-up ear. One day I
saw a boy with a harelip, and was told by the father that his
wife, when pregnant of this child, had thoughtlessly made a scissure
in an old coat of his, while repairing it.

In a small obstetrical handbook circulating in Amoy under the
title of Kmang sheng pao Men \ “ Precious Mirror for the Further-
ance of Childbirth”, we find it explicitly stated, that a pregnant
woman “may not witness the beginning of any works connected
“ with the reparation or erection of buildings, nor any grubbing in
“the ground”*. On another page of that book we read; “A work
“ entitled Necessary Knowledge for the Furtherance of Childbirth
“ says : Among the matters which do not promote procreation of
“ offspring, the moving and displacing of objects certainly causes
“ calamities. Repairs performed at a neighbour’s house or at one’s
“ own, or the stirring of the ground, produce evil effects upon the
“ breath or soul of the unborn fruit, and are apt to destroy its
“ body and injure its life. But that infliction of injury with a
“sharp instrument should wound the foetus, or injury done to
“ the soil should close its apertures, or beating or kicking things
“ should render the foetus blue and black, or the binding together
“ of things should cause its limbs to be cramped or stiffened —
“ such sayings are groundless stories of doctors of (occult) science,
“and not one in a hundred having a good foundation, they must
“ not be believed. But what women in the family way must never
“ see, is the first commencement of any works or repairs, pounding
“ or battering, and the stirring of the ground ; it is advisable for
“them to absent themselves carefully from such works”’.

Thus the commotion created among the earth-spirits by repairs

T # 9i ± . W 0 Mm f'fi ^ .


540


DEMONOLOGY.


of edifices or by earth-labours seems especially perilous for pregnant
women at the beginning of the works. In fact, when at Amoy any
one undertakes something of the kind, the neighbours take good
care to seek lodgings elsewhere for their women who are expecting
confinement, not allowing them to return ere the works are fairly
advanced and the disturbed spirits have had time to re-settle
in their old seats. In default of a suitable place to shelter such a
woman, public opinion, I was assured, absolutely obliges the builder
to delay till after her confinement.

It is not only earth-ghosts that cause abortive pregnancy. Every
demon may do this, even by actually fecundating the woman and
rejoicing her heart with a pregnancy which, after long duration, results
in nothing. On this point we shall have more to say in Chapter XIV.

The gnomes of our western folklore, guardians of mysterious under-
ground treasures, are very slightly represented in China’s Demonology.
We may ascribe this to the fact that mining never was of great
significance there. All we have found concerning them amounts to
the following strange narrative:

“Celestial roes are no men, but belong to the class of kiang si
“ or corpse-demons (see Ch. X). Yunnan province has many mines
" from which five kinds of metal are extracted. If they collapse,
“ preventing the miners from getting out, then, if these men are fed
” tor ten years or even for a hundred by the breath of the earth
" and ot those metals, their bodies do not decay. Though they are
“ not dead, their material substance is dead.

“It being underground perpetual night for those who work
“ those mines, these men mostly carry a lamp on their forehead.
" When, while working their way into the ground, they fall in
with a celestial roe, this is entranced with joy. Complaining or
“cold, it asks them for some tobacco, which it smokes immediately;
“ then it prostrates itself upon the ground, entreating the men to
"take it out of the mine. In reply the miners say: ‘We have
“ come here for gold and silver, and we have not yet discovered
" any veins troin which to procure some ; do you know where the
“gold grows?’ And the celestial stag guides them to a mine where
they can reap a rich harvest. But on leaving the mine, they
delude the spectre, saying: ‘We must get out first, and then
we shall take you out of the shaft with the lift’. And by the
rope tastened to the bamboo lift they haul the creature up, but
halfway they cut the rope, letting it fall down and die.

It has occurred that the men in charge of the mine-sheds


GNOMES IN ORE-MINES.


541


“ were more benevolent and compassionate, and hauled up some
“ seven or eight of those beings. But as soon as these felt the
“ wind, their clothes, flesh and bones changed into a liquid giving
“ out a rancid, putrid stench, which smote with contagious disease
“ all those whose olfactory nerves it affected, so that they died.
“ This is the reason why, ever since, those who haul up celestial
“ stags cut the rope, lest they have to endure again that stench
“ and lose their lives. Should they refuse to haul them up, they
‘‘ risk being molested by them incessantly. It is also said, that when
“ a small number of celestial stags are overpowered by a great

* number of men, tied, placed against an earthen wall, and immured
“ firmly on the four sides with walls of clay, a sort of terrace with
“ a lamp being built overhead, they will do no further harm. But
“ if men are outnumbered by stags, they are tormented to death
“ by these, and not allowed to escape” '.

# «! M A a g; SJi -T- . «/i -f- S » . (6| A iS «

le . « ^ « et » ic ft , ft * # A if tti = t® « 0 .

*«BS5E.

’7' ^ % Wi ^ ^ ^ ^ Mi ■/“’ Continuation, ch. IV.


CHAPTER V.


ON ANIMAL-DEMONS.

The three preceding chapters have demonstrated, that from the
earliest times to which the written products of China enable us to
ascend, spectres have often been represented in that country in
animal forms. We have, in fact, found dragons and goats among
them, apes or monkeys, and stags, and we may then reasonably
expect to find a very large contingent contributed to China’s demon-
world in all times and ages by the animal kingdom in general.

To comprehend adequately the rationality of this phenomenon
we only have to realize another, already brought out in this Book
in strong relief, to wit, that spectres generally are represented
in the shape of man and with his characteristics and attributes,
while at the same time animals are not in Chinese mind and
thought essentially different from men. If a man can be a spectre,
why then cannot an animal be a spectre as well? Philosophy
implicitly decreed since olden times that beasts have the same
natural constitution as man, both being built up, body and soul,
of the same yang and yin substances of which the Universe itself
consists.

But while identification of spectres with men remained the pre-
vailing conception, the investment of animal-spectres with human
attributes was the result. Men, as well during their lives as after,
may assume animal forms with malicious intent; but, conversely,
animals may transform themselves into men with no more kindly
object. Such metamorphoses may be bodily, but hardly ever seem
to come about but for the co-operation of the soul. Such animal-
spectres do not differ from the ordinary were-beasts we have described
in our chapter on Zoanthropy (pp. \^^sqq.), except in the possession
of a large dose of manifest malignity, which seems, indeed, the only
feature entitling them to a place in the world of demons.

The belief in animals haunting as spectres w'ould hardly seem


VISIBLE GHOSTS OF ANIMALS.


543


possible if there were no conviction that their souls may show them-
selves outside their bodies in the same shape as these. Numerous
places in Chinese books attest that such a conviction prevails, but
the two following tales may suffice to prove it:

“Sun Hiu of the Wu dynasty* having a patient, sought an exorcist
“(hih) and seer. Having found one, and wishing to put him to
“ the test, he killed a goose, buried it in the open plain, constructed
“ a little shed over the spot, and placed a couch therein, with female
“ shoes and clothing upon it. Then he told the man to examine
“ that spot. ‘If you can tell me the shape of the woman who abides
“as a ghost in yonder grave’, he said, ‘I will bestow a rich reward
“on you, and believe in your capacities immediately’. But the man
“ uttered no word in the course of that day. The emperor then
“ repeated his question with more emphasis. ‘To speak truly’, came
“ the answer, ‘ I see no ghost ; a white goose standing on the tomb
“ is all T see. I did not tell this immediately, for it might be a
“kwei or shen that took this form, and I had to wait until its
“ true shape should re-establish itself ; but as, for some reason un-
“ known to me, it does not re-assume its other shape, I now dare
“tell Your Majesty the truth

“ When the Minister of Agriculture Yang Mai was young, he
“ was fond of hunting. He himself tells us, that when hawking in
“ the fields during his stay at Ch'ang-ngan, he saw a hare hop
“ about in the shrubs at some distance from him. His falcon
“ too perceived the animal, and immediately flew to the spot to
“ catch it, but when it came there, there was nothing at all. Yang
“ Mai took the bird on his cuff, and having proceeded several paces,
“ looked behind him at the same spot, and again he saw the hare
“ run there. As before, the hawk swooped upon it, but likewise


1 The emperor King he reigned from A.D. 258 — 263.

ft -A. St if

* ± , 0f « m a ^ ® * A I# g -fl: f t ft # . ®

Shcu slicH ch. 2.


544


DEMOSOI,OGY.


“without catching it; and the same thing taking place a third time,
“ Yang Mai ordered his men to cut the herbage away and seek
“ for the hare. They then found its skeleton, so that they had
“ had to do with a hare’s ghost” h
The literature of China is rich in tales of animal-devils in all
forms and shapes. Mammals, birds, fishes and insects are represented
as transporting their souls into men, thus infecting these with
disease or making them mad; they also emit their souls from their
bodies to disquiet villages and dwellings. Koh Hung was convinced
that especially old animals might become devils in a human
shape, and he gave expression to this opinion in a passage we have
translated on page 162. We shall see that his view was generally
shared, and is set forth frequently in the legends and traditions
which have served us for the composition of this Chapter. Since
there are hardly any animals in China which play a part of some
importance in human life without doing this also as demons under
some aspect or other, a large amount of material illustrative of
Demonism is supplied to the student who explores the written
zoological mythology of that part of the earth.


1. Tiger-demons.

The royal tiger we find foremost in China on the list of animal-
demons. He is, indeed, its most ferocious brute, distributed over
almost its whole area, the terror of its people, often throwing vil-
lages into general commotion and panic, or compelling country-
people to remove to safer spots The reader knows from page 160
that early Chinese literature mentioned man-tigers as ravening
demons. Tales preserved in the books of every age prove that
the belief in such spectres has always prevailed. And that this
belief is not extinct at present, is sufficiently attested by the fact
that such tiger-lore is continually reprinted, read, and transmitted
by mouth; moreover, a somewhat intimate acquaintance with

in tlie K K. ch. 443.


MAN-TIGER DEMONS.


545


Chinese soon convinces us, that tiger-tales are generally taken for actual
events, as, in truth, is the case with everything which is transmitted
by the writings of by-gone days. Many such tales reveal new and
interesting points in tiger-lore. Hence the small collection inserted
in the following pages will be found useful also as a supple-
ment to the dissertation on Tigroanthropy, which we have written
pp. 163 sqq. of this Book.

Folk-lore represents tiger-demons as metamorphosed men ravening
over large areas. ‘‘ Ch^en Tsung, a native of Tan-yang”, T'^ao-lVien
relates, “exercised the profession of diviner near the chief city of
“that district. In the T hi period (A.D. 405 — 410), when Tan Heu,
“ a general of the left division, who was very fond of the chase
“ and occupied himself much with tiger-hunting, was governor of
“ Ku-shuh \ it happened that a rider wearing fur breeches, followed
“ by another in similar dress, came to that soothsayer with some
“ ten coins wrapped in paper. ‘ Must we go westward to find some-
“ thing to eat’, they asked, ‘or is the easterly direction the best?’
“ Tsung laid out a combination of divining-stalks, thereupon con-
“ suited it, and declared the easterly direction to be auspicious, but
*• the other (where the formidable Nimrod lived) unprofitable. Still
“ the men asked him for some drink, and put their mouths inside
“ the cups after the manner of cows that drink ; then they left the
“ diviner’s house and went on in the easterly direction, but no
“ sooner were they some hundred paces off than the follower and
“ his horse both changed into tigers. And since then tigers ravened
“ in the country with extraordinary fierceness” -.

Who shall count the hapless men who, suspected of being
tigers in disguise, have fallen victims to fear and exasperation ?


1 Kii-shuh and Tan-yang were parts of the present TMi-ping department ( *

) on the Yangtszr, in Ngranhwui province. The city of T%i-p ing i,- tlie first
on the river above Nanking.

2 U » hS*.

« A 2 . 3C |S1 . a |S| *J . H at ^ ft ,


35


546


DEMONOLOGY.


And how many times has this vulgar credulity been aroused against
objects of hatred, in order to get them lynched? A man-tiger
despatched by tlie mob was Wang Yung, whose story we gave on
page 177. Another victim was the poor heroine of the following tale ;
“About the end of the rule of the Liang dynasty (circa A.D. 556),
Hwang Khien, a Shi-hing man (in the north of Kwangtung), had
“ a younger sister, named Siao-chu or Little Pearl, affianced to a
“ native of the same district, who answered to the name of Li Siao.
“ Little Pearl accompanied her brother’s wife into the mountains to
“ gather tree-seeds. They passed by a temple, where Little Pearl felt
“ so great an attraction exercised upon her, that she refused to go
“ home. And when on the way home, she ran away alone up the
“ road to the temple, hurrying into the shrubs at the sight of people.

“ Hwang Khien’s wife apprised Li Siao of the incident, who con-
“ eluded from it that the girl must have some ulterior object. One
“ night he was returning with a comrade from the district magistrate,
“ by whom he was summoned, when the two men were surprised
“ l)y a shower of rain, and perceiving a fire in an apartment of the
“ temple, resorted thither to dry their clothes. They discovered some
“ w'orn clothes on the raised platform which bore the image of the
god, and after a moment heard the sound of footsteps outside.
“ Affrighted, they concealed themselves behind the platform and the
“ screen, and instantly beheld a tiger, moving with waving tail and
“ rapid bounds straight towards the fire. There the monster divested
•• itself of its teeth and claws, rolled up its skin, and placed every-
“ thing on the platform of the god ; then it put on the clothes, and
“squatted down by the fire.

“ Now Li Siao saw that there was his Little Pearl. He straightway
“ embraced her and spoke to her, but not one word passed her
“ lips. At daybreak he took her home and deposited her at Hwang
“ Khien’s house. Here they confined her in an outhouse, and cast raw
“flesh before her, which she accepted and devoured ; and her mother,
“ w'ho watched her constantly, perceived that she did nothing else
“ but gaze at the pig. A few days later she changed again into a
“ tiger. The villagers now armed themselves with bows, ascended the
“ roof of the house, and thence shot their arrows into the outhouse,
“ thus killing her. In the next year a tiger ravened so frightfully
that the people had to shut their houses even in the daytime,
“ and the prefect Hiung Ki-piao reported the matter to the Throne” h


WERE-TIGERS RUT TO DEATH BT THE AUTHORITIES.


547


We also read of were- tigers delivered by the people up to the
magistrates, and formally put to death by their orders. Thus, in
“ the first year of the T'a i y u e n period of the Tsin dynasty
“ (A.D. 370) there lived in the district of Ngan-luh, which forms
“ a part of the Kiang-hia department (province of Hupeh), a certain
“ Shi Tao-suen, twenty-two years old, who, before his youth had
“ entirely passed, became mad and changed into a tiger. The number
“ of those whom he thereupon devoured cannot be given. A girl
‘‘ who plucked mulberries under the trees, he carried oft, and when
“ he had devoured her, he concealed her bracelets and hairpins
between the rocks, whence he fetched them up afterwards, when
“ he had re-assumed human shape and remembered his deed. One
“■ year after, he returned home and lived there again as a man ;
“ subsequently he distinguished himself in the service of the
“ Government and became a dignitary within the Palace

“One night he was chatting with some people, when the subject
“ of metamorphoses and strange apparitions in the Universe was
“touched upon. ‘There was a time’, Tao-siien said, ‘when 1 was


S , Ji. I# # ± iK S . dt- SB M ^ - A It

ojj a

'XaxmM..«A

-> it'*! T 91^ lA. :tA^Br*E.


54S


DEMO.VOLOGY.


" SO ill that I became deranged in mind, changed into a tiger,
“and devoured men’; and he mentioned the names of his victims.
•• But there were persons among those seated around whose fathers,
" sons or brothers he had devoured. With loud cries and howling
“ they seized him, and delivered him to the magistrates ; and he
"died of hunger in the prison of Kien-khang” ', i. e. the present
Nanking, then the Imperial capital.

“ — A certain man in Sung-yang entered the mountain to gather
■■ fuel. Overtaken by the dark, he was pursued by twm tigers. As
“ quickly as he could he climbed a tree, which was, however, not
“ very high, so that the tigers sprang up against it, but without
“reaching him. Suddenly they said to one another: ‘If we can find
“ Chu Tu'shi, we are sure to get this man’. One tiger then remained
“ to keep watch at the tree, while the other went away, and on a
“ sudden there appeared another tiger, leaner and longer, and con-
sequently peculiarly fitted to catch prey. The moon was shining
“ brightly that night, so that our hero distinctly discerned how the
“ small tiger frequently stretched out its paws at his coat ; but his
“fuel-axe was still at his waist, and just when the brute grabbed
“ at him again, he dealt it a blow and hacked off its fore-claw.
“ With loud roars the tigers ran off one after the other, and not
“ until the morning the man went home.

“The assembled villagers asked him what had happened, and when
"he had related his adventure, one of them said: ‘There lives one
“Chu Tu-shi in the east of this district; let us go and visit him,
“to see whether it is he or not’. Some men went and asked about
"him; ‘last night’, they were told, ‘he went out for some moments
“and wounded his hand; hence he is now in bed’. Having thus
“ attested that he was the tiger, they denounced him to the prefect
“ of the district. This grandee ordered his underlings to arm them-
“ selves with swords, to besiege his dwelling, and set fire to it.
“ Chu Tu-shi suddenly rose from his bed, ran about, changed into a
" tiger, and charging upon the men escaped ; and it is unknown
“ whither he went”

^ ^ ^ ^ 4* • ^ K, ch. 42G.


2


ANTHROPOMORPHOUS WOLP-DEMONS.


549


This anecdote demands oiir attention. It strikes us, that a wound
inflicted on a were-beast is believed in China to be visible also on
the corresponding part of its body when it has re-assumed the
human shape. This is also a trait of our own lykanthropy. Olaus
Magnus ^ relates, that a few years before he wrote, the wife of
a nobleman expressed to her slave her disbelief in the possibility
of the metamorphosis of men into wolves; whereupon the slave, to
prove that she was in the wrong, himself assumed such a shape.
Over the country the weve-wolf ran, hotly pursued by the dogs,
which tore out one of his eyes, and next day the slave re-appeared
before his mistress, blind of one eye. In the same century it is
stated by Majolus ", that duke Albrecht of Prussia had a peasant
brought before him at Konigsberg, who had devoured his neigh-
bour’s cattle and bore large wounds in his face, which he had

received from the teeth of dogs whilst he had been in the form of

a wolf. Bodin Angevin wrote that the Royal Procurator-General
Bourdin had assured him he had had to pass sentence in the case
of a wolf whom some one had wounded with an arrow in the thigh,
which arrow had been found some hours later in the thigh of a
man in bed. And Collin de Plancy relates'*; “L’an 1588, en un

“ village dans les montagnes d’Auvergne, un gentilhorame, etant

“ sur le soir a sa fenetre, aper^ut un chasseur de sa connaissance,

±St.

f'Jrm

A«#«.

te, KK,

ch 342.

1 Historia fie Oentibus Septentrionalibus (15.55): last chapter of book XVIII.

2 Baring Gould, The Book of Werewolves, p. 58. Andree, “ Ethnographische Pa-
rallelen und Vergleiche”, p. 78.

3 “La Dernonomanie des Sorciers’’, edition of 1598, p. 257.

4 “ Dictionnaire Infernal”, page 313.


550


DEilONObOGY.


“ et le pria de lui rapporter cle sa chasse. Le chasseur en fit pro-
'• messe, et, s’etant avance dans la plaine, il vit devant lui un gros
“ loup qui venait a sa rencontre. Le loup I’attaqua fort vivement,

" mais I’autre, en se defendant, lui ayant coupe la patte droite avec
“ son couteau de chasse, le loup estropie s’enfuit et ne revint plus.

Le chasseur gagna la maison de son ami, et tira de sa gibeciere
“ la patte qu’il avait coupe au loup, mais il fut bien etonne de
“ voir cette patte convertie en main de femme, et a I’un des doigts
" un anneau d’or que le gentilhomme reconnut etre celui de son
epouse. Il alia aussitot la trouver ; elle etait aupres du feu, et
“cachait son bras droit sous son tablier. Comme elle refusait de
“Ten tirer, il lui montra la main que le chasseur avait rapportee;
“cette malheureuse eperdue avoua que c’etait elle en effet qu’on
“ avait poursuivie sous la figure d’un loup-garou ; ce qui se verifia
“ encore en confrontant la main avec le bras dont elle faisait partie.

“ Le mari courrouce livra sa femme ii la justice ; elle fut briilee.

“ On ne sait trop que penser d’une telle histoire, qui est rapportee
“par Boquet \ comme etant de son temps”.

The most horrid specimens of the tiger-demon class, which Chinese
fancy has created, are those who assume a woman’s shape with
malicious intent, and then tempting men to marry them, devour
them in the end, and all the children in the mean time produced.
A victim of such monstrous perfidy was “IVui T'ao, a man of
“ P^u-cheu. Whilst travelling to Ch'u-cheu (in Nganhwui) he reached
“ Lih-yang, situated to the south, and started for Ch'u-cheu at day-
“ break, then halting at an inn for travelling officers, called Bene-
“ volence and Rectitude, to pass the night. ‘This inn is under evil
“influence’, the inn-keeper said, ‘I pray you, do not lodge here’. But
“ TAo would not heed this advice, and with his satchel on his back
“ went up to the main apartment, while the inn-keeper provided
“ him with a lamp and a candle.

“ At the second watch T'ao spread out his blankets, and was
“just going to rest, when he saw at the gate a big paw like
" that of a quadruped. On a sudden the gate was flung open, and
" he saw a tiger walk in. In his fright he hurried into an
obscure corner, and there concealed, observed the beast put off its
animal skin in the middle of the courtyard and become a girl of
extraordinary beauty, well dressed and ornamented, who walked


1 “Discours des Sorciers”, Lyon?, 1608; page 341.


ANTHROPOMORPHOUS TIGER-DEMONS.


551


“ up the steps into the main apartment, and laid herself down on
“ his blankets.

“Now T'ao appeared. ‘Why do you lie down in my blankets?’
“he asked; ‘just now T saw you enter in the guise of a beast,
“what was that for?’ The girl rose and said: ‘I hope you will
“ dismiss all your surprise. My father and my elder brother are
“ professional huntsmen, and my family is so poor that all their
“ attempts to find a fashionable match for me have failed. I became
“ aware of this and secretly wrapped myself in a tiger-skin at
“ night, for, well knowing that there lodge high class people here,
“ I had resolved to give myself to one of them for sprinkling and
“ sweeping his floor b But all guests and travellers successively have
“ dismissed me for very fear, and this night only I have the good
“ fortune to find a man with intelligence, whom I may hope will
“pay attention to my feelings’. ‘If all this is really the truth’,
“ T‘ao replied, ‘I desire no better myself than to accept a life with
“you of joyful concord’. Next day he took the girl with him, having
“first thrown the tiger-skin dress into a dry well behind the halP.

“Afterwards he took a degree on account of his studies of
“ the Classics, and became (military?) prefect of Siien-chfing. While
“journeying thither with his wife and boys, they after a month or


1 That is to say, to perform for him the household duties of a wife.

IS a), ffi ^ 0 , ft ft ^ ^ « .EllcS it A * ,

ftft.


552


BEMONOLOUY.


" SO again stayed for a night in the inn of Benevolence and Recti-
"tude. 'It is here that I met with you for the first time’, said
“T'ao laughingly, and at once he went to the well to look into
"it; and verily, there the skin-dress still lay. This caused him to
" burst again into a laughter. ‘The dress you had on at that time
‘•is there still’, he called to his wife. ‘Have it fetched up’, she
“said. And when she saw it in his hands, she continued, still
“laughing: ‘let me try it on again’. He gave his consent; the
“woman descended from the steps and put on the skin-dress; but
“ no sooner had she done so than she changed into a tiger, which
" moved up the steps of the main apartment with roars and bounds,
“devoured the boys and T"ao into the bargain, and ran away”'.

The Hu wei, from which we draw this tale, gives us yet another
of a ravening tiger-demon who made himself a tiger or a man at
pleasure by putting a tiger-skin on or off. “ In the K i e n yen
‘•period (1127 — 1130) there were so many tigers in King-nan
“ (King-clieu, in Hupeh pr.) that a great part of the population
“ living without the walls removed into the city to escape their
“ attacks. One Chang Sze had not yet removed, when a tiger came.
“ He hastily hid himself among the beams of the roof. The brute
“ walked up the steps of the main apartment of the house, put
“off its skin, and changed into a man, wlio departed through the

“ gate to look for him. Chang forthwith descended and grasped the

“ skin ; but no sooner had he placed it on the beam than the tiger
■• came back. Missing his skin, he showed great consternation, then
“drew a sealed commission out of his bosom, unfolded it on the
“ground, and said: ‘Heaven gave me this commission to take away
“ the members of the Joh and other clans, but 1 have erased their
'• names from it, except those of the Joh ; give me back my skin, and

"I will leave the Joh people unmolested’. But Chang said: ‘I will

“not give it unless you blot out my name too’; and when the


Si# X


WEHE-TIGERS ARE NECROPHAGOUS.


553


tiger took a writing-brush out of his clothes and erased his name,
“ Chang cast the skin down. The tiger put it on, re-assumed his
former shape, and roared and bounded so tremendously that Chang
“ shivered for fright, and was about to tumble down from his place
“ when olf ran the beast. Next day the tiger was killed by a flash
of lightning, more than sixty miles from that place” h
Like our were-wolf®), the man-tiger of China is represented some-
times as a necrophagous brute. “ Under the reign of the emperor
‘‘ Hiao Wu of the Tsin dynasty”, an old tale runs, “it happened
“in the fifth year of the T‘'ai yuen period (A.U. 380) in the
“ district of Tsfiao, in the department of the same name, that one
“ Yuen Siang, a poor fellow, while going home in the twilight fell
“ in on the road with a girl of fifteen or sixteen, whose charms
“ and beauties were perfect in every respect. She gave herself to
“him to be his wife, and in five or six years they attained
“ very flourishing pecuniary circumstances. She gave birth to two
“ sons, and when these boys were ten years old, the family had
“ grown very wealthy. But then there occurred a fresh case of
“ death in their village. After the burial the woman hurried to
“ the grave, there put off her clothes and hair-pins, hung them on
“ a tree, changed into a tiger, opened the grave, dragged the coffin
“ out of it, seized the corpse, and devoured it. When satiated, she
“ returned to the human shape. But some one had seen it, and
“secretly apprised her husband of it; ‘your wife is no human being’,
“he said, ‘she will commit some outrage upon yourself’. Siang did
“not believe it; but when after a time another case of death
“ occurred and the woman behaved in the same way, that man


ra « » * • iffi {t M . f; » , I; fl- ^ S .


AT,

{l*. BJ H A + Mi’I'Saifig.


2 “On conn.ilt en Basse Norraanilie line sorte d’esprils appelles les Lubins. Ils se
“deguisent en loups et \(int ruder la nuit, chercliant a entrer dans les cinietieres,
“sans doute pour s’y repatti'e d'une liideuse proie”. Amelie Boscpiet, La Normandie
Romanesque, p. 138.


554


DEMONOLOGY.


“ took him to the spot to observe her. Thus he learned the truth.
“ She thereupon scoured the district and its hills, devouring corpses
“again and again”

As in other countries where royal tigers live, so in China excep-
tional specimens are known to prey preferably on men. But instead
of ascribing this idiosyncrasy to their having experienced how easy
a prey man generally is, or to their steady predilection for human flesh
after having once tasted it, the Chinese aver that the man-eater is
incited by the ghost of every last victim to a new murder. Thus fancy
has created a class of injurious devils which have no animal shape,
and are no animals transformed into demons, but human spectres in
the service of an animal, or sometimes thought to inhabit it.

The human soul under the impulse or guidance of which a man-
eater ravens, is called ch'ang kwei®. This term we may probably
translate by “the ghost of him who lies flat upon the ground”, that
is to say, of the victim. Often this ghost is denoted by the word
ch'ang alone. “When a man has been slain by a tiger”, Li Shi-
chen wrote, “he becomes a ch'ang kwei, which leads the monster
as a guide” ^ In the Khanghi dictionary we find the same belief
expressed in the following words : “ When a tiger bites a man in
“ such a way that death ensues, his soul (h w u n) has not the
“ courage to go elsewhere, but regularly serves it as a slave, and
“is called a ch'ang”’. At the very time when it kills its victim.


mm.

^ ^ S # , a :ft 5E A- “6


Pen-ts^ao kang muh,

cli. 51, I, 1, 2.


&>SS^ES IN THE BONDAGE OF TIGERS. 555

the beast avails itself of this remarkable fascinating power in order
to compel the soul to re-enter the corpse and revive it, so that
it may properly undress before being eaten, and thus no clothes
or threads may bother the monster at its bloody meal (comp.
B. I, p. 44). “When a tiger slays a man”, said Twan Ch'^ing-shih,
“it has the power to make his corpse rise and doff its clothes,
“after which it devours it”h The two following tales illustrate this
curiotis folk-conception :

“A literary graduate of the second rank, bearing the surname of
“ Li, but whose name I have not found, lodged in the mounts of
“ Siien-cheu (now Ning-kwoh ^ in Nganhwui pr.). He had a slave
“ in constant attendance on him, a man so lazy that he had to
“ lash and cane him frequently, and who entertained for this
“ reason a deep grudge against his master. It was in the ninth
“year of the Yuen hwo period of the T'ang dynasty (A.D. 814),
“ that Li had two friends with him in an outhouse of his dwel-
“ ling, and called the slave. But he was asleep. This aroused Li’s
“ anger to such a pitch that he inflicted on him several times
“ ten lashes. With hatred and rancour in his heart the slave left
“the room. ‘This is a year with an intercalary month’, said he to
“his comrades, ‘and thus, as men declare, there must be many
“tigers; why then do not they devour me?’ With these words, he
“left the gate, and then suddenly his shrieks were heard. The
“ other slaves rushed out to seek him, and as they failed to discover
“ him, they followed the track of a tiger over a distance of more
“ than ten miles. There they found him half devoured, by the river-
“ side. His clothes with his kerchief and boots were neatly folded
“ up and placed in a pile on the grass ; for tigers can keep their
“ victims in employ as servants, and these are the souls of those
“ victims”


tsu, cli. 10.


556


UEMONOLOCiY.


— “In Siien-cheu, one Chang Tsun was the guest of Yuen T"an-
“ chwang, the prefect of the district of Lih-shui. His wife was
“carried off by a tiger, and Tsun swore that he would avenge
“himself. Armed with arrows, he entered the mountains, climbed
“ a big tree close by the tiger’s den, and watched the beast. He
“ there perceived that his wife was dead, and was watched by the
“ tigress, until the corpse rose of its own accord, made obeisance
“ to the brute, doffed her clothes, and in this naked state fell down
“ again upon the ground. Then the tigress led four cubs out of the
“ den, each of the size of a wild cat. Wagging her tail and hopping
‘•joyfully, she licked the dead body, till the cubs came and gnawed
“at it eraulously; but Tsun killed the brute with some arrows, cut
“ off its head, and having slain the four cubs too, took their heads
“home, with his wife on his back”*.

The principal advantage a man-eater draws from his chwang
kwei consists in that it brings him on the track of new human
prey; indeed, every such spectre in turn desires no better than to
deliver itself from its servility by getting a substitute. Thus con-
tinuously driving tigers to homicide, those spectres belong to the
most dangerous class in China. On account of their aversion from
the bondage they are in, they sometimes decoy their striped master,
and rid themselves of his tyranny by leading him into traps and
pitfalls prepared by his enemies. Thus did the cli'ang kwei of
which the following lines give us the story:

“In the last year of the T'ien pao period (A.D. 755) there
“ lived in Siien-cheu a young lad close to a mountain. Whenever
“ he grazed the cattle, he saw a spectre with a tiger behind it,

m.

S {I St S ® . I® )5ir ®

' #*#!>** was*

»r « , « * fE *1 . ^ A lii . a iS g

Dt , It; g « s « . « fi.i* X « 41 ?l ra

Ir. , T S, .sect. , ch. 63. Another version, drawn from

the Yuen hwri /;i, is given in the K K, ch. 433.


SPECTRES IN EMPLOY OF TIGERS.


557


“ and when this had occurred more than ten times, the lad spoke
“thus to his parents: ‘As that spectre brings a tiger along with it,
“ I am sure to be killed. People say, that the souls of those whom tigers
“devour become their clPang kwei; thus shall 1 certainly have
“ to become such a spectre on my death. When then I find myself
“ under the orders of the tiger, I will lead it to the village, where
“ you may then catch it with a pitfall you must prepare in the
“main street’. Some days afterwards the boy was actually killed
“ by the tiger, and later on appeared^' in a dream before his father,
“saying: ‘I am a ch'ang kwei now; to-morrow I shall take the
“tiger thither; be quick to prepare a pitfall on the west side’.
“ The father and his fellow villagers followed this hint, and when
“the pitfall was ready, they caught a tiger in it on the same day”b
Instead, however, of leading their tyrants to their doom, thus to
obtain their own redemption without causing the destruction of other
human lives, the ch'ang kwei protect their tigers, accompanying
them everywhere to remove dangers out of their path. “In Sin-
“ yang (now Kiu-kiang, in Kiangsi) a huntsman earned a living by
“ capturing tigers. He set out a cross-bow on the roadside and
“ in5pected the spot every day; and regularly he found the
“prints of a tiger close by and the arrow loosed, without the beast
“ being hit. On account of the old assertion that a man whom a
“tiger devours becomes its clPang kwei, he lurked in a tree
“ beside the spot, in order to watch it, and perceived after the
“ second watch a little sprite in blue garments, with hair growing
“ to a level with its eyebrows. Cautiously it walked to the bow,
“ let the arrow fly, and withdrew, and after a moment a tiger
“ came, trod against the bow, and passed on. Now the hunter knew
“all about it; he put another arrow into the bow and retired,
“ but there the sprite was again to act as before. A second time

5151 ffi A 5- S iS »r :> * A S


558


DEMONOLOGY.


“ the man hurried down from his tree and adjusted an arrow in
“ the same place, climbing into the tree again to spy. And in a
“few moments the tiger came and trod against the bow; the arrow
“ went off and pierced its flanks, so that it expired. After a good
“ while the spectre re-appeared. Finding the tiger dead, it hopped
“about with gesticulations of excitement, and vanished” b

Thus may dangerous ch^ang kwei, as other spectres, be
outwitted by men. Another proof that their intellect and perspicacy
are not above those of man, is afforded by the following tale; “In
“ Sin-cheu (now Kwang-sin in Kiangsi pr.) a certain Liu Lao
“ exercised on behalf of the lay world functions as an abbot (in a
“ monastery") between the mountain-brooks. A man who possessed some
“ two hundred geese (wished to obtain religious merit and) requested
“ Liu Lao to keep those birds for him until they died a natural
* death, and he came regularly himself to that place to see and

“feed them. A few months later not a day passed without some

“of the geese being stolen by a tiger, and more than thirty were
“ thus destroyed, when its behaviour began to displease the villagers.
“ They set pitfalls around the place where the birds were kept, but
“ from that moment no tiger came there any more.

“Some days passed thus, w'hen Liu Lao received an unexpected
“ visit of an old gentleman with a large head and a long beard,

“ who asked him how it was that the geese had diminished so

“considerably. The answer was that a tiger had stolen them. ‘Why
“then do not you catch the beast?’ the old man asked. ‘We have
“set out traps, but it has not come back’, replied Liu Lao.
“‘Then it is its cli‘ang kwei that warns it’, the other retorted;


# 0 * ^ . Ji So a a s . *-t # i

ai T * fli) « _h

. Yuen hwa ki ; K K, ch. 433.


SPECTRES DOMINEERING OVER TIGERS.


559


“ 'first arrange matters with that sprite, and then you will get
“ the tiger’. On being asked how then the capture were to be
“effected, the old man said; ‘The spirit is very fond of sour things;
“ so you must lay black and white plums on the highroad, and
“ arbutus fruits ; it will eat them up without heeding anything else,
“and meanwhile you will catch the tiger’. On these words the
“ greybeard vanished. That same night they followed his advice and
“ strewed such fruits on the road ; and after the fourth watch-drum
“ had resounded they heard a tiger fall into a trap. From that
“time there was no further disappearance of geese”*.

Man-eaters then being dependent on their ch'^ang kwei for
their safety and life, we cannot be surprised to find the two beings
represented as having completely reversed their respective positions
of master and slave. Indeed, not seldom the spectre completely
domineers over the tiger; nay, we see it turn harmless men into
tigers with no other purpose, evidently, than to gratify on them its
passion for despotism. This trait renders the ch'ang kwei doubly
dangerous, as the following legend may show:

“ In King-cheu (probably the present Teng-cheu ^ in Honan) a
“ certain man passing over a mountain, fell in with a c h'a n g
“kwei, which cast a tiger-skin over him, and thus transformed
“ him into a tiger. For some three or four years he was under the
“ domination of the sprite, seizing and devouring all that time an
“ untold number of men and cattle, and wild animals too. But


as - w tt « . ^ aij » * , a g » It # B
s )* w w . a = + » a . # A ,f . ^ « g i@ #

. Kwang i ki; KK, ch.431.

2


560


DEMONOLOGY.


“ though he had the body of a tiger, he did so maugre himself,
“and merely because he could not help it.

“Once upon a time, as the spectre was conducting the tiger past
“ the gate of a Buddhist monastery, the beast availed himself of
“ this opportunity and fled into the store-room, where he concealed
“ himself under the bed of the monk in charge of that place. The
“ scared brethren hurried to the abbot to apprise him of the event,
“ and a Dhyana-master ‘ just then abiding in the monastery, who
“ possessed the capacity of taming intractable beasts, appeared at
“the place where the tiger lay. ‘My dear disciple’, he asked,
“laying his crosier upon him, what do you want here? is it to
“devour us, or are you merely disguised as a beast?’ On this the
“ tiger lowered his ears and shed tears. The Dhyana-master slung
“ his towel around the monster’s neck and took him to his own
“ cell, where he fed him regularly on ordinary food for men and
“ animals, and other good things.

“After half a year the tiger shed his hair, returned to human
“ shape, and recounted in detail the beginning of this tale, for
“ two years he did not venture out of the monastery, but after
“ that period he walked out of the gate now and then, and on one of
“such occasions he suddenly met the ch'ang. Again this cast a skin
“over him, and he immediately leapt back into the monastery; but
“ the skin had touched his limbs below the waist, which thus
“ re-assumed tigrine forms. He then set himself to recite fervently
“ holy books for longer than a year, and then regained his old
“ shape ; but from then he dared no more pass through the gate of
“ the monastery, and finally died there” *.


1 A monk who seeks salvation by means of dbyana, i. e. by fixing his thoughts
steadfastly upon the state of bliss.

8 AdiR. A.

ikm


SPECTRES IN THE BONDAGE OP TIGERS.


561


The conceptions prevailing in China about the ch'^ang kwei,
we find for the most part amply illustrated in a curious legend
reprinted in the Hu wei, which relates how such a spectre entered
the body of its mother, and recounted through her mouth its
adventures as a tiger’s slave. That legend reads as follows;

“The Buddhist monk Tsing-yuen relates:

“Below the Kin mounts in Hu-cheu (Chehkiang pr.) a family
“ in the village So-and-so had a child, named So-and-so, fifteen or
“ sixteen years old, whom a tiger devoured. His mother, unable to

“ bear this grief, fell ill, very ill indeed ; but one day towards

“ nightfall she suddenly sat up, and in the tone of the child’s voice
“incessantly uttered a series of cries of woe. 'Mother!’ she exclaimed
“in the end, ‘be not so excessively sorry; it was my natural pre-
“ destination’, 'Who are you?’ exclaimed the affrighted father.

“'Father, why do not you recognize your child?’ was the laughing

“answer. ‘But where are the proofs that you are my child?’ he
“ asked again. Now the mother behaved as under demonial in-
“fluence, and answered: ‘I lacked courage to ponder any longer on
“ my mother’s uncessant sorrow about me, and the great So-and-so
“ having departed, 1 found time to go home and give her con-
“ solation. Great So-and-so is the term by which the c h'^a n g in
“ general denote the tigers, as they dare not roundly pronounce the
“ word tiger’

“ Now the father entreated the child to give some account of
“ its past adventures. ‘ When the first wounds were inflicted on
“me’, it replied, ‘and I felt intolerable pains, then forthwith a

.a. «*.Si6

A'lunnj i ft.; K K, ch. 431.


36


562


DEMONOI^OGY.


“second servant appeared’. ‘What servant?’ interrupted the father.
“‘Every new ch'ang that arrives is ordered to carry with the
“first ch'ang a large net, and then it sets this clEang free;
“hence, whenever an old cli'ang sees a new one come, it is
"overjoyed. The net is very heavy’. ‘And what do they do with
"it?’ the father asked. ‘We catch men with it, who are thereafter
" eaten. None of those in this country who were devoured, escaped
“it; they have all been in the bondage of tigers. When the
“ tigers set out for another region, we escort them to the frontier,
“ and on their return we meet to receive them, and then the
“clTang kwei again enjoy neither rest nor leisure. No coffins
" must be used for those who are wounded by a tiger, but they

“ ought to be burned, for else they desire to carry the coffin with

“ them, which, added to the net they bear, increases their woe.
“The mountaineers forbid to use coffins for them. And now’, the
“ woman concluded, ‘So-and-so and So-and-so are here with me,

“ anxious to see their folk ; you will oblige me, father, if you

"call them hither’.

“The father took a torch, and went round the whole village;
“ and the kinsmen of all who had been devoured since the
“Kia tsing period, over fifty in number, gave ear to him and
“ assembled to the spot. The mother spoke in the voice of each of
“ those victims, and the discourses were accompanied by tears.

“ They lasted as long as the day itself, the woman not being

“ restored to her senses ere night had come. But from that very

“ moment she recovered ; no evil consequences befell her, and still

“ to this day she is living there. This event occurred in the spring
“of the year wu-suh of the W’an lih period (A.D. 1598)” b


-(fi

# 0 ii # J: . * M # re ^ ,
ti . * ^ ^ It ® . X a*: # * . a « . ft


SPECTRES IN THE SERVICE OP TIGERS.


568


The above tales show that clTang kwei are not considered by
the Chinese as inhabiting their tigers, but leading an existence apart,
merely accompanying them. Tnere is, however, indication in the fol-
lowing tale that they are sometimes deemed to nestle in the monster;

“In the last year of the Khai yuen period (A.D. 741) a tiger
“ravened frequently in Yii-cheu (in Sze-ch'wen pr.). They set out
“ a trap with a spring, but without surprizing the beast. Once at
“ new-moon time a man ascended a tree to observe the trap, and
“ perceived a c h"a n g kwei in the shape of a child of seven or
“eight years; it was unclothed, moved nimbly, and its whole body
“had the colour of jade. It released the spring and passed on; but
“ our hero descended from the tree, re-adjusted the spring, and
“ after a while a tiger which was passing was caught by it and
“ expired. A good while after, the child returned wailing, and
“ entered into the tiger’s mouth. When the day broke, the man
“ opened this, and saw a piece of jade as large as a fowl’s egg in
“ the throat” h

In passing from this subject we have to remind the reader, that
the souls of the drowned, who, anxious to liberate themselves from
their watery grave, drown others to make their souls take their
place, are called likewise clTang or clTang kwei (see page 52S).

2. Wolf-demons.

Though, as we have seen on page 18.2, were-wolves are mentioned
in Chinese literature antecedent to the ’Fang dynasty, tales about

J&-«a*n-bA*4e,4!E
s.iiiT. a# Si®. AATet

a«9StBSE.0A{tB.aiiWil.^#i5A*n


564


DEMONOLOGY.


ravening anthropomorphous wolves do not crop up until the reign
of that house. Books then refer to them with sufficient frequency
to justify the conclusion, that the belief in the existence of such
demons in animal guise must have been far from sporadic; and
this fact in its turn authorizes us to surmise, that that belief
was then already old. A few tales devoted to them have been
preserved by the T^ai-ping Iwang li (ch. 442). Two of these, pro-
fessedly borrowed from the Kwang i ki, deserve our special atten-
tion, as the one calls to mind in most distinct forms our own
were-wolf superstition referred to on page 549, that wounds inflicted
on the beast remain visible when it has returned to the human
form, and the other shows, that Chinese lykanthropy, like that in
Europe, is a form of insanity, and may be produced by hallucination.

“ At the end of the Yung Ta i period of the T'^ang dynasty
“ (A.D. 765) there lived in the Hung-cheu department, in a village
“ of the Ching-p4ng district, an old man, who having been ailing
“ during several months, for more than ten days refused to take
“ any food ; he then suddenly disappeared in the evening, and
“ nobody could guess the reason of it. Another evening, a villager
“who had gone out to gather mulberry leaves, was pursued
“ by a he-wolf. He narrowly escaped up a tree, but the tree
“ was not high enough to prevent the wolf from rearing itself
“ up against it and flxing its teeth in the tail of his coat. Under
“ pressure of the danger, the villager hacked at the beast with
“ his mulberry axe, hitting it exactly in its forehead. The wolf

“ then crouched down, but remained on the spot so long that

“ it was broad daylight before our hero could leave the tree. He
“ followed the track of the wolf, which took him to that old
“ man’s house. He entered the main apartment, called the sons,
“ and communicated to them the whole aflair from beginning to
“ end ; and the sons, on inspecting their father’s forehead, dis-
“ covered on it the trace of a wound inflicted with an axe.

“ Lest he might attack people again, they throttled him, and saw

“ him turn into an old wolf. They went to the district magistrate
“to justify themselves, who let them go unpunished” L


MAN-EATING WERE-WOI,F DEMONS.


565


— “In the same year there was in another village of the same
“ department a lad of some twenty years, who after a disease quite
“ lost his vital soul (t s i n g s h e n), as he sent it away to change
“ into a wolf This monster secretly devoured a great number of
“ the village boys. Those who missed their sons did not guess the
“ reason, and sought for them in vain.

“As a rule the lad was employed by the villagers for sundry
“jobs. One day as he was passing the dwelling of a family
“ that also were missing a boy, he heard the bereaved father
“call him, with the words: ‘Come to-morrow to work with us,
“and we will prepare a full meal for you’. But he burst into
“ a loud laugh. ‘ What sort of man should I be if I went to
“your house a second time to work?’ he exclaimed, ‘do you think
“that there was the slightest particular flavour about your son?’
“ This language surprised the father of the lost boy, and he inter-

“ rogated him. ‘Nature orders me to devour men’, he answ'ered,

“ ‘ and yesterday I ate a boy of five or six years ; his flesh was

“ most delicious’. The father perceived some stale blood in the

“ corners of his mouth, and rained on him a shower of frantic blows,
“ which made him turn into a wolf and expire” h

A tale of the same epoch intimates, that the Hunnish, Turkish
or Mongol tribes living to the north and west of China, then were
especially credited with ability to become wolves at pleasure. “ Wang


mi*


566


DEMONOLOGY.


“ Han of T'ai-yuen was general of Chen-wu (the north of actual
“ Shensi). His mother, madam Kin, was of Hunnish origin, excelling
‘•in the use of the bow and in horsemanship, and notorious for
“ her ruthless energy. Riding a strong horse, a bow at her arm,
“ and arrows at her waist, she penetrated into the depth of the
“ mountains in search of bears, stags, foxes and hares, which she
“ killed and took with her in very great numbers. No wonder that
“ her power was feared throughout the north, and that a general
interest was taken in her.

“But when she had passed her seventieth year, she began to
“ labour under the infirmities of old age. She then retired into a
“ room, sent away her private slave-women, and did not allow her
“ attendants to approach her unexpectedly. Sometimes, when she
“ had barred the door at sunset and lay down to sleep, she had
“ fits of fury, and soundly caned the inmates of the house. One
“ night she had barred her door as usual, when suddenly they
“ heard a rasping, creaking sound. They rushed out to see what
“ was the matter, and saw a wolf open the door from the inside
“ and leave the room. Before daybreak the brute came back, entered
“ the room, and barred the door.

“The inmates were greatly affrighted, and at dawn they reported
“ the matter to Wang Han. That same evening he watched her
“ through a crevice, and thus saw that they had told him the truth.
“ It tilled him with dismay and horror, and he felt very uncom-
“ tortable. At daybreak his mother called him, to tell him to buy
“ a roe for her immediately. He cooked the animal and took it to
“her, but she said: ‘I want it raw’. A raw roe was then placed
“before her, which she devoured in a moment, thus increasing
•• Wang Han’s fright. Some of the family spoke of the matter in
"private; she heard it, and appeared very ashamed; and that same
“ evening, after she had locked the door, and while the servants
“ stood watching what she would do, a wolf burst out of the door,
“never to return”'.


A * , » q .i * , 0 * # M ^ ^ E? , gS


MAN-EATING WERE-WOLF DEMONS.


567


Since the T"ang dynasty, the belief in ravenous were-wolves has,
no doubt, never languished in China. In the fourteenth century it
certainly held sway also over cultivated minds, whereas we find it
reported in all good faith in the Standard Annals of he Yuen
dynasty, that “in the tenth year of the Chi ching period (A.D.
“ 1350) the Chang-teh region (in the north of Honan) suffered
“ much from wolves that broke into the dwellings at night in
“ human disguise, and with howls made for the men, from whose
“arms they snatched babies, in order to devour them” h Almost
three hundred years later it was recorded in the local Memoirs
concerning the Khiih-wuh district, in the southern part of Shansi,
that the following episode had occurred within its confines:

“In the years of the Ch'ung ching period (A.D. 1628 — 1644)
“ of the Ming dynasty so terrible a famine prevailed, that the
“ people devoured each other. Then there lived in the hamlet of
“ Kih-pih, situated twenty miles east of the chief city of the
“ district, a herdsman, named IVang, whose surname has not been
“ rescued from oblivion. Every morning he went out, and returned
“ not before it was quite dark. His wife | asked him whence he
“ got food during that time, and he answered that he devoured
“men. ‘Is it lawful to do so?’ she asked. ‘To-morrow’, he replied,
“ ‘at noon, I will devour you’; and on her asking him why, he
“said: ‘Some time ago I pas.sed a temple of a local tutelary divinity


. Stten-sliih c}ii- K K, ch. 442.


568


DEMONOLOGY.


and saw there a wolf-skin ; 1 placed myself upon it, and suddenly
“ profound sleep overcame me. When T awoke, 1 was a wolf, and
“ not conscious of the change went out and devoured a man. In
“ the evening I returned to the temple, and the skin dropping off,
“ I re-assumed the human form, but likewise without being aware
*• of the metamorphosis. In a bewildered state of mind and uncon-
sciously I did the same thing every day, and to-morrow at noon it
is your turn to be eaten. I fear you cannot escape that fate,
“ nevertheless I am unwilling to attack you. Therefore make a straw
“ image of yourself to-morrow, and stuff it with the intestines of
“a pig, then, I assure you, nothing bad will befall you’. Thus
" he spoke, and departed.

“The wife was so frightened, that she ran to the women in the
“neighbourhood to tell them. They wavered between belief and
“doubt, but her brother advised her to do what she had been told,
“and she obeyed him, to safeguard herself against eventualities.
“ When the next day had come, she bolted the window and
“ peeped through it at her husband’s movements, and no sooner
“ was the sun at its height than a wolf bounded over the wall into
“ the premises. Several times he flung himself head foremost against
“ the window, but finding it impossible to enter through it, he fell
“ back upon the straw woman, seized and devoured it. This done,
“ he jumped over the wall again and left the place. On the loud
“cries of the woman the neighbours flocked togetlier to the spot,
“and the bolder among them pursued the beast, our heroine in
“the rear. In this way they came to the temple, just in time to
“ see the wolf crouched on the ground. From the hands of his wife
“he received a severe thrashing; his tail was severed from his body,
“but the brute made his escape. Never did he come to the house
“again. Whenever after that the villagers saw a bobtail wolf, they
“called out his name, which made him shake his head and go the
“other way, without looking at them ‘ and without devouring
“ them. To this day old people still talk about that wolf” *.

1 Compare what is stated on page 165 on the same trait of European lykanthropy.

± /iig jit - ffi . e * ± , « a . gt ^ ® .


CRAFTY AND BLOODTHIRSTY VYOLF-DEMONS.


569


The attacks of were-wolves upon men are by no means always
represented in China as sudden and impetuous, artless and clumsy.
Isegrim, not to risk his skin and tail too much, sometimes assumes
the shape of an innocent, charming maid, and in this disguise
demurely enters into human society, to await patiently the right
moment for devouring unsuspecting victims. “The wolf”, says a
work which existed in the seventh century, “ when a hundred
“ years old, changes into a woman, called woman of knowledge.
“ She looks like a beauty, and seated by the roadside, accosts male
“persons with these words: ‘no parents have I, no brothers;
“sir, take me to your house and make me your wife’; and
“ she devours men in the third year. If her name is called out,
“she runs away”'. This trait links the wolf to the fox, his con-
gener, who, as we have seen already on pp. 188 sqq. and shall
see more clearly from the fourth section of this chapter, holds in
China the position of deceitful were-spectre par excellence, though
without devouring the victims of his treachery.

It must, however, be admitted that the occurrence of the wolf
in this character is not sufficiently frequent in Chinese folk-lore

A.

» A # A JI « .1 * BB . ♦$ a * . 7 ; « ,

iTAii/i-HJK/i hieii chi [g] ^

)B TS, «cl. ^ ch. 70.

< SSillfcSAA, ^

# i® A . ja * =S Pf MiJ a 4- ~ '»'• ts, mi

. ch. 315.


570


DEMONOLOGY.


to allow us to infer, that he has ever been generally regarded in
the Far East as an artful diable d qiiatre. Only one tale in which
he appears in this role we can set before our readers. “Under the
“'Uang dynasty, a Governor of Ki-cheu (in the present Pehchihli)
“had a son, whose family-name and personal name I have for-
“ gotten. Being sent by his father to the Metropolis to solicit
“ another post, he saw, ere yet he had crossed the frontier, the
“ house of a notable man, crowded with visitors and followers.
“ They had with them a girl of a countenance and form so charming,
“ that our hero took a fancy to her and asked her in marriage.
“This called forth a general commotion in the house. ‘Who
“are you’, angrily exclaimed an old slave woman, ‘who sur-
“ prises us with such foolish nonsense?’ she is a daughter of our
“Governor Lu of Yiu-cheu; this our lord will soon return to
“ the Metropolis ; and you are not even so much as a petty
“ otticial in a department or a district ; why shall we question
“this buffoon any further?’ But he answered them that his
“ father held office in Ki-cheu, and that he would ask him for his
“consent. This answei' much surprised them, and their consent was
“ gradually obtained ; they lived together as man and wife for some
days, and then the young couple were received on the road by
•• the bridegroom’s family, and conducted home.

“ Too fond were the Governor and his consort of their son to
“ importune him with questions; besides, the answers which the bride
“ gave them were so rational as to arouse scarce any suspicion,
“ and so many men and horses had come with her, that everybody
“in the house was elated. But after some thirty days had passed,
“ it happened one evening that the horses of the newly married
“ lady began to stampede. Slaves and others were repeatedly sent
“ to see what was the matter, but she shut the door on them,
“ and w'hen at dawn the Governor’s men came to the son’s room,
“ they found there none of her male or female slaves ; and no
" horses were to be seen in the stable. Filled with suspicion, they
“ reported all this to the Governor. This grandee went with his
" wife to the room and called the son, but he stave no answer.
“ They ordered the window-shutters to be broken, wffien through the
"opening thus made a large hoary wolf rushed out upon the men,
"and ran away. Their son they found almost entirely eaten up”*.

« , Y- » A a. "t*


DOGS AS SPECTRAL, HARBINGERS OF ILE.


571


3. Dog-demons.

As dogs do not devour men, they do not occur in China in the
character of bloodthirsty demons. We have seen a dog-shaped devil
represented by the Books of the Han Dynasty as employed by a
human soul as its instrument of revenge to cause the death of an
empress in the second century before our era (see p. 437). Almost
exclusively, however, dogs appear, on a par with the fox, as spectral
harbingers or bringers of evil, as crafty impostors, and abusers of
women. A few tales may depict them in this role.

“ Under the Sung dynasty, Wang Chung-wen was receiver in Honan,
“ dwelling to the north of the city of the Keu-shi district. After his
“ retirement from service, he was out for an airing in the evening
“ between the lakes, and saw a white dog following behind his carriage.
“ He took a fancy to it and would catch it, but on a sudden it
“ transformed itself into a man resembling a Rescuer of the Country
‘•(Book I, pp. 161 sqq.). Red as fire were its eyes; its tusks were
whetted, and its tongue hung out of its mouth ; indeed, a very
“ horrid apparition it was. Chung-wen and his slave, greatly scared,
“ attacked it, but they could not master it, and fled. Before they
“reached their house, they fell to the ground and died”’.

'It *«*■(§.*

*ij.

*. ** A.IIR.IR,

X ^ .®. *0, K 2 * e *ii * . « * A

. Kwamj i ki; KK, ch.442.

Att,'© AIBoS A.ax. Kt


572


DEMONOLOGY.


A similar ill-boding or evil-producing demon was “the house-dog
“ of the official IVai Ch'ao, which visited him in the guise of a
“ spectre. Squatted in the hall and using clapping-boards for beating
“ measure, it chanted songs in a piteous tone of voice, and one
“ morning he sought in vain for his kerchief, which the dog had
“ put on, sitting in this attire upon the stove. In that same month
“ Ch"ao met with a violent death” h

With the same devilish deliberation for which the wolf is noto-
rious, dogs wickedly assume human shape, with the purpose of
gratifying their sexual lusts on modest maids and wives. “ In Poh-
“ pfing one Tfien Yen was in mourning for his mother, and regularly
“ lived in the mourning-shed ; but one day about nightfall he
“ entered his wife’s private room. She received him with silent
“astonishment. ‘Sir’, she said, ‘may you visit me in this place of
“abstinence?’ but he did not listen to this remark, and nature
“had free course®. Afterwards (the real) Yen entered for a moment,
“ but he did not speak one word to his wife, and she, astonished
“ at his silence, reprimanded him for what he had done the other
“ day. This taught the husband that there must have been demonry
“ in play. The evening came; he was not yet asleep, and his mourning-
“ clothes hung in the shed, when suddenly he saw a white dog
“ scratch at the shed. Taking the mourning-clothes between its jaws,
“ the beast changed into a man, put on the clothes, and entered
“ (the female apartment) ; Yen hurried after him, and found the dog
“ ready to get into his wife’s bed. He beat him to death, and his
“ wife died for shame” h


. Shell shell heu ki, ch. 7.

S « ^5 . X - H t, « (t ^ A . It « « ± ^ J

^ . The Chi kwai luh of Luh Hiun (see p. 252).

2 Sexual intercourse is forbidden in time of mourning: Book I, pp. 608 sqq.

arfi-g-.

a ^ A- a fftaa . #rg » 0 ® ® A . * Bn A .


WERE-DOG DEMONS.


573


— “In the Hung chi period (A.D. 1488 — 1506) there lived in
“ the district of Yii-fai, which forms a part of the Yen region
“ (in Shantung), a family of commoners, keeping a well-trained
“ white dog, which always followed its master abroad. So also it
“ once accompanied him when he set out to a far region for trading
“ purposes. But unexpectedly it returned after thirteen days, in the
“ shape of its master. The wife asked him what he came back for,
“and he told her he had fallen in with highwaymen, who had
“ relieved him of everything he had with him, but fortunately he
“ had escaped with his life. The woman did not doubt the veracity
“ of his words. A year later the real husband came home. The
“ two men resemided one another perfectly in shape, and while
“ they were quarrelling about the question who was the true hus-
“ band and who the false one, the wife and the neighbours informed
“ the magistrate, who ordered them to be put in jail. A policeman
“ then related the matter to his wife. ‘The one that came home
“first’, she said, ‘is the spirit of the dog, and this can be proved
“ by discovering whether the breast of the woman bears marks of
“its paws’. The policeman told this the magistrate; this summoned
“ the woman before him, and on her asking wherefore she was called,
“he stript her, thus discovering that there were indeed prints of
“ paws on her breast. He then gave secret orders to suppress (that
“ demonry) by means of blood, and the pseudo husband changed
“into a dog, which they instantly beat to death” h
There are also early instances on record of house-dogs which

t?ii 5E Shell shen ki, ch. 18.

e®. ■a<i>

a work as yet unknown to me, quoted in T S, sect. ch. 118.


574


DEMONOI-OGY.


with astounding impudence have assumed the shape of dead men,
with the object of devouring the food and drink devoutly sacri-
ficed to their shades. Thus, according to a book of the second
century of our era, “the corpse of the minister of works Lai Ki-teh,
‘•a native of Nan-yang, was still unburied in his house, when sud-
“ denly he sat down upon the sacrificial table. His countenance,
“ clothes and voice were thoroughly his own. He told his grand-
“ sons, sons, wife and daughters to serve him in turn, and he
“ whipped the slaves of both sexes, all of whom he found to
blame. And when he had satiated himself with food and drunk
‘•his fill, he took his leave and went away. The family thus
“ were in a great sorrow, and as this event was repeated three
“or four times, they felt more and more depressed and miserable.
“ But then it happened that he drank (of the sacrificial spirits)
“till he was tipsy; his (human) shape collapsed, and — they
“ found nothing but an old dog. They beat this to death, and
“ on making inquiry, discovered it was the house-dog of the liquor-
“ vendor of the village” k

We must not dismiss the dog in its character of demon without
saying a few words about the so-called t'ien keu ” or “heavenly
dog”, a mysterious devil, mentioned frequently enough in books
to convince us that it has fascinated superstition for a long series
of centuries. It appears as early as the sixth century in the
Standard Histories: “in the thirteenth year of the T'ien kien
“period (A.D. 514), in the sixth month, there were stories abroad
“in the Capital (the present Nanking) that c h"e n g-c ITe n g (?)
“ stole the livers of men, as also their blood, to feed the celestial
“ dog therewith. The people were in great consternation for twenty
“ days k And in the fifth year of the T a Tu n g period (A 1). 539)


* » fs « S a ft a * K

mn. mmMm.

A ft = H, P.

» « . ta # 1 1. ie ^ * ra M a « « S ts •

Fung-siih fvnrj i, ch. 9.


THE CELESTIAL DOG.


575


“ the story was circulated in the Capital that the Son of Heaven took
“ livers out of men for food for the celestial dog. Old and young
“ thus affrighted each other so much, that after sunset thev shut
^ their doors and armed themselves with clubs; this panic ceased
“ after several months” h

The origin of the belief in that bloodthirsty anthropophagous
monster we are not able to trace. Evidently, as its name indicates,
it is related to the sky. We read indeed that in the second year
of the Hwang kien period (A.D. 561) a celestial dog came down,
and ceremonies were performed to counteract the ill resulting
therefrom, on which occasion the emperor fell from his horse which
was scared by a hare, and expired soon after '. Looking into Chinese
uranographical works, we find mention made of a luminary, called
the heavenly dog, placed somewhere about Cancer. Sze-ma Tsden
has the following notice concerning it : ‘•It has the shape of a
“ large moving star, and produces a noise. When it descends and
“reaches the earth, it resembles a dog. Whatever it falls upon
“ becomes a flaming fire ; it looks like a fiery light, like flames
“ flaring up to heaven. Its base is round and covers a field of
“several acres; its upper part is pointed and spreads a yellow
“colour over a thousand miles; it may defeat armies and kill
“the commanders” ^ Evidently the great historian here describes
an enormous dog-shaped meteor, which some time had come down
somewhere and was confounded with a comet in the sky. Perhaps
it is to this same thing that the Shan-hni king refers, which states:
“ Midway in the large plain or desert there is a red dog, called the
“celestial dog. Wherever it descends, armed violence will prevail” k


History of

tlie South, ch. 6, 1. 27.

AAtSS. 0 op.dt.,»h.7,

1 . - 10 .

2 History of the North, ch. 7, 1. 30; and Books of tlie Northern Ts‘i Dynasty,
ch. 6, 1. 7.

. Historical

Records, ch. 27, 1. 31. See also the Books of the Early Han Dynasty, ch. 20 1 16

" A « ^ W A- A , 0 A A . * It T ^ ^ ^ :

<=" A® B8-


576


DEMONOLOGY.


There is, however, nothing in these extracts which accounts for
the investment of the ominous comet with attributes of a devil
craving for human blood and livers. We further learn that it has
announced its advent by a thundering noise : “ In the second

“year of the Chung hwo period (A.D. 882), in the tenth month,
“ thunder resounded in the north-west in a cloudless sky, and this
“ was called a descent of the celestial dog ' . And in the third year
“of the T'ung kwang period (A.D. 925), in the ninth month,
“on the day ting-wei, when dark clouds covered the sky every-
“ where at night, a noise as of thunder was heard in the north,
“ and the wild pheasants screamed. This was what people call a
“descent of the celestial dog”®.

Probably the heavenly dog lives everywhere in China in imagi-
nation as a dreadful demon. According to some of my Japanese
friends, this is also the case in their country. In many Chinese
almanacks we find that dog mentioned as a demon prowling (^)
in different points of the compass according to the seasons, the
solstices and the equinoxes, the knowledge of which fact is highly
useful to all who then have any business in those directions, and
wish to avoid its pernicious influences. The monster thus plays a
significant part in Chinese Chronomancy, and we shall therefore
again have to give our attention to it when, in another Book, we
treat of that important branch of the Taoist system.


4. Fox-demons.

Already in ancient China the fox was in bad repute as portending
or causing evil, for we read in the Shi king-. “ Nothing here is
“red but evil foxes, nothing black but evil crows”®. Chu Hi com-
ments upon this verse in these words; “The fox was an ill-boding
“ animal which men disliked to see. The fact that there was


Uld Looks of the T"ang Dynasty, ch. 19, II, 1. 25

Old History of the five

Dynasties, ch. 33, 1. 5.


I . Section


ode 16.


THE FOX AS A DEMON OP DISEASE.


577


“ nothing to see there except those animals, proved that the king-
“ dom was about to be imperilled and thrown into confusion ”b
In the third century before our era it was Chwang-tsze who
gave evidence of the prevalence of the belief in ill-boding foxes.
“In a hillock of not more than a pu or a jen in size ”, he wrote,
“ no large beasts conceal themselves, but evil foxes there give
“their omens”'. And that the fox was associated with evil spirits
under the Han dynasty, we may infer from these two lines, which
Hwang Hien who lived in the second century of our era, inserted
in a literary composition which he devoted to the fox :

“Its prints wind ov^er the regions inhabited by ch‘i-mei,
“And are traceable in the wilds where wang-liang abide”*.
But by what did Reynard show his dangerous character? This is
revealed to us somewhat later by Chinese writers. The Standard
Histories of the third and the fourth centuries of our era frequently
refer to him as the cause of insanity, disease, and even of death.
We read e. g. in the biography of Han Yiu % a famous diviner
who died in A.D. 313:

“The daughter of Liu Shi-tseh had been visited with disease
“ by a demon for quite a number of years. W u’s had fought,
“invoked and attacked it, and captured in empty graves as
“ well as in the old citv-walls several dozen foxes and lizards ;
“ but still the patient recovered not. Then Han Yiu consulted
“ the divining-stalks on this matter, and ordered a linen bag to be
“ made, which, when the woman had an attack, he hung out at the
“ window. He then closed the door and blew from his mouth as if
“ he drove out something, and shortly after, tlie bag was seen to
“swell as if blown up: but the air made it burst, and the woman
“ had another violent attack. Now Yiu made two bags of leather,
“which he hung out together in the same w'ay as the other bag;
“ again they swelled up to their full volume. Quickly he tied up


jjip. Nan hwa chen kiny, VIII, § 23.

3


37


578


DEMONOLOGY.


“ their opening with a rope, and suspended them from a tree, where
“ they began to shrink gradually for some twenty and odd days.
“ On being opened they were found to contain two pounds of fox-

hair. The woman recovered” b

And of another magician and diviner, named Ku Hwan \ who
died A.U. 493, history relates: “In the village of Poh-shih on the
“ north of the mountains, much disease was caused by demonry.
“ The villagers informed Ku Hwan of this, and implored his com-
“ passion. He repaired to the village, delivered a sermon about
“ Lao-tszg (?), and traced a prison on the ground. Instantly foxes
“ appeared, and turtles and lizards, which entered the prison of
“ their own accord in great numbers. He ordered them to be
“ killed, and all the patients recovered”

Much light is shed upon the Chinese ideas respecting the fox
as author of disease by tales such as the following, which represents
him as entering into men so as to change them into raving lunatics.
“In the seventh year of the T'ai hwo period (A.D. 483) there
“lived in the Buddhist monastery of the Blue Dragon in Shang-tu
“ a monk, named Khi-tsung, whose lay family dwelt in Fan-chw'en.
“ His elder brother fan-king fell ill of a burning fever, which made
“him utter insane talk, and laugh stupidly. The monk kept
“ him in restraint with all the vigour his soul could muster, and
“ tried to exorcise the disease by burning incense, when suddenly
“the patient began to revile and scold. ‘You monk’, he cried,
“‘get back to your monastery and your abbot; why do you


+ . H. A M 2 ^ ft Tfi R .

:smp,

. Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 95, 1. 10.

■t* . ® a * Y- . * jft # * . 7^^ ii ^ * a m g A

History of the South,

ch. 75, I. 18. r., « PH


THE FOX AS CAUSE OF RAVING MADNESS.


579


“thwart my business? I am dwelling in Nan-ko, and I am in
“ love with you ; but the grain grows thick and the harvesters are
“ abroad so numerously that 1 can come to you for a short time only’.
“ These words made the monk suspect that he was possessed by a
“ fox-demon. Again he held the (exorcising) peach tree branch over
“ his brother and beat him with it, but the patient merely laughed
“and said; 'you beat your elder brother: this is against the rules
“ of submissiveness ; the gods v/ill kill you for it ; beat harder ; go
“ on’. Khi-tsung now conceived that there was no help in this
“ way, and abandoned the task.

“Thereupon the patient rose impetuously. He dragged his mother
“ about with so much violence that evil (death) smote her ; in
“ the same manner he treated his wife, who perished likewise,
“ and then he maltreated his younger brother ; and when his
“ wife came home, she (so suffered at his hands that she)_^ lost her
“ eyesight. When the day had passed, the patient was quite in his
“old condition. ‘As you do not go’, he said to Khi-tsung, ‘I shall
“convoke my family’. No sooner had he spoken these words than
“the squeaking of several hundreds of rats was heard; they were
“ bigger than ordinary rats, showed a bold front, and could not
“ be expelled. They disappeared indeed on the next day but had
“ greatly increased Khi-tsung’s fears


1 This appearance of rats during a temporary abatement of the delirium of our
madman, that is, according to the Chinese idea, while the fox, the author of the illness, was
absent for the time being, i.s no doubt an allusion to the circumstance that the fox
is a great destroyer of rats, so that these animals only venture to swarm out when
it has gone. At the same time we have here a reference to the supremacy of the
fox over rats and mice, enabling it to call upon those creatures when it wants
their help, as in this case asainst the monk.

, Tie,.


mmm. Timm


580


DEMONOLOGY.


“'Spare your voice and breath’, his brother now exclaimed;
“'I do not fear you, for my great brother himself now comes.
“Cool moon, Cool moon, come here!’ cried he with a prolonged
“ scream, and at the third summons there sprang a beast from the
“ feet of the patient, a beast of the size of a fox and as red as
“ fire. iMoving over the coverlet, it crouched upon his belly; light
“ sparkled from its eyes all around, but Khi-tsung seized his sword
“ and aimed a blow at it, which struck one of its paws. It then
“ ran out of the door, but the monk followed the bloody print by
“ the light of a torch, and thus came to a house, where he saw

“ the beast take shelter in an earthen jar. Taking a large dish, he

“ placed it over the mouth of the jar, and closed the crevice with

“ clay ; and opening it after three days, he saw that the beast had

“ become as (stiff as) iron and could not move. Khi-tsung killed it
“ by frying it in oil, during which operation the stench extended

“ for several miles. His brother then recovered, but one month later

“ a family in that village lost by death its father with six or seven
“sons, and everybody opined that this was caused by pot-vermin
“sorcery which had been set up”

Apart from its functions as author of disease and delirium,
odium attached to the fox in those times as a harbinger of disaster
in general; which quality in the homes of ignorant simplicity
meant much the same thing as to be the causation thereof. In a

biography of the renowned diviner Sliun-yii Chi *, murdered in

A.D. 396, we read; “Hia-heu Tsao of the Ts'iao region had a


)i±, umnnmwz-.

* tH ;S . fi * A « S * * if ^ ^ 4i .

^ ^ tsah tin, supplement, ch. 2.


2


THE FOX AS HARBINGER OF DISASTERS.


581


“ mother, who was very ill. Therefore he went to Shun-yii Chi, in
“order to consult the oracle about her; but just then a fox at
“ his door set up a howling against him. Much terrified he hastened
“ to Chi, who said : ‘ the misfortune which this case portends is
“ very imminent ; hurry home, and howl and wail with your hands on
“ your breast on the very spot where the fox did so, so that all your
“ family, old and young, rush out in fright and amazement; go on
“ howling as long as there is one person in-doors, and they will be saved
“ from that misfortune’. Tsao went home and followed the advice.
“ His mother too, in spite of her illness, rushed out, and no sooner
“ were the members of the family gathered in the main apartment
“ than five side-rooms of the house fell in with a thundering noise” h

The superstitious fear of foxes, entertained in those ages, was
shared by emperors and courtiers. “In the second year of the
“Ching ming period (A.D. 588)”, w'e read in the chronicles
of the reign of Heu-chu of the Ch^en dynasty, “this sovereign
“ dreamed that a fox crept under his couch, and on being seized
“ became invisible. The emperor, considering that this apparition
“ would cause evil, in order to avert the same sold himself as a
“ slave to a Buddhist monastery, and built a seven-storied pagoda
“ in the great imperial Buddhist mona.stery within the city-walls.
“ But ere this was finished, a conflagration burst out within it, and
“ devoured everything down to the stones with such rapidity that
“ a very great number of people perished in the flames” h

tti. - A ifi ta Ik. mm.

iflj ^ . Books of the Tsin Dynast}', ch. 95, 1. 12.

2 Selling themselves as slaves to the Buddhist clergy as a token of the utmost
devotion to Buddha and his Church, vva.s no uncommon practice for Sons of Heaven
in those halcyon days of Shakya’s religion. As they had themselves forthwith
ledeemed with large sums drawn from their treasury, the deed virtually became a
rich donation bestowed on the Sansha : which doubled its merit.

s mm Pi A

History of the South, ch. 10, II. 12 — 13.


582


DEMONOLOGY.


Dangerous demonish propensities were especially attributed after
the Han dynasty to foxes under human disguise, contributing a
class of were-beasts with which we have acquainted our readers
on pp. 188 sqq., promising to dwell upon them again here. They
play their part in Chinese demonism mostly under the names of
hu mei’, hu tsing^ or hu kwai’: “fox-spectres” or “appari-
tions of foxes”. Tales about them occur in the literature of the Han
dynasty. In the Histories of that epoch we read concerning Fei
Ch'ang-fang *, one of the greatest magicians that ever trod the Chinese
soil, who ruled demons and ghosts at pleasure : “ While out for a
“ stroll with a companion, he saw a student wearing a yellow ker-
“ chief and a fur coat, alight from an unsaddled horse and salute
“ him by knocking his head against the ground. ‘If }'ou restore this
“horse to him’, said Fei Ch'ang-fang, ‘I will exempt you from the
“penalty of death’. On his companion asking him what these words
“meant, he replied; ‘he is a fox, and has stolen the horse from
“a local tutelary spirit’”®.

In subsequent centuries, legends of fox-demons in human shape
must have been current in great numbers, if we may conclude
so from the fact that so very many have been preserved in writing
to this day. They show that in all times the dangerousness of
those beings was deemed to consist in the first place in that,
like spectres of all classes, they caused disease and madness, some-
times acting in a spirit of revenge, but mostly from mere unprovoked
malignity. Besides increasing our knowledge of Chinese demonism,
the tales which place the were-fox before us in the character
of a demon of illness, acquaint us with interesting notions on
pathology and medical art. When Khii-tsih, the prince of the house
of Han, who, as we saw on pages 289 and 397 of Book I, grati-
fied his curiosity, and probably his rapacity also, by ransacking
ancient graves, opened that of one Lwan-shu “the coffin and
“ the utensils for the use of the shade had been destroyed or had
“ rotted away, to such an extent that nothing remained. There was

2*^. 3*g.

Book'or

the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 112 II, 1. 14.


FOXES AS DEMONS OF DISEASE AND IMPOSTORS.


583


“ a hoar fox in the grave, which, affrighted at seeing men, fled.
“ The prince’s attendants pursued it, but they could not catch it,
“ and only wounded its left paw with a javelin. Next night the
“ prince dreamt that a man came to him with beard and eyebrows
“entirely white, and with the words: ‘wherefore did you wound
“my left leg?’ touched his left foot with his staff. On this the
“prince awoke with a swollen leg, and immediately an ulcer appeared
“thereon, which remained incurable till his death”

The book, in which this tale occurs for the first time, is stated
to have been written in the fourth century, but this fact does
not, of course, exclude the possibility of the tale having become
current at the date at which its author placed it. In ensuing cen-
turies, were-foxes continue to appear in myth as beings smiting
men and children with illness. Not to spin out this subject to an
extravagant length, we will here pass on immediately to the T'ang
dynasty, and translate an amusing legend of that time, which sheds
some stronger light on the character of the fox as an agent of
disease, and at the same time places him before us in the capacity
of unparalleled impostor.

“In the Oiling yuen period of the Tang dynasty (A.D. 785 —
“ 805), Mr. P'ei of Kiang-ling (in the south of Hupeh pr.), a sub-
“ intendant of the palace, whose personal name is lost, had a son
“over ten years of age, very clever and intelligent, studious,
“ brisk, and accomplished both in manners and appearance, whom
“ he therefore deeply loved. This boy was attacked by a disease,
“ which grew worse and worse for ten days. Medicines took
“ no effect, and P'ei was on the point of fetching a doctor of
“ Taoist arts who might reprimand and thwart (the demon of the
“ disease), in the hope of effecting a cure, when a man knocked
“ at his door, announcing himself as one of the surname Kao,
“ whose profession was to work 'with charms. P'ei forthwith invited
“ him to walk in and look at his son. ‘This boy suffers only from
“a sickness which is caused bj a demonish fox’, said the doctor; ‘I
“possess an art of curing this’. The father thanked him and im-


ch. 15. This legend also occurs in the Si-ldmj tsah ki, ch. 6.


584


DEilONOLOGY.


“ plored Ills help ; the other set to work to interrogate and call
“ (the demon) by means of his charms, and in the next moment
‘•the boy suddenly rose with the words: ‘I am cured’. The delighted
father called Kao a real and true master of arts , and having
“ regaled him with food and drink, paid him a liberal reward in
“ money and silk, and thankfully saw him off at the door. The
‘•doctor departed with the words: 'henceforth I will call every day’.

'• But though the boy was cured of that disease, still he lacked
‘•a sufficient quantity of soul (shen-hwun), wherefore he uttered
‘•every now and then insane talk, and had fits of laughter and
“wailing, which they could not suppress. At each call of Kao,

“ P'ei requested him to attend to this matter too, but the other
“said; ‘This boy’s vital spirits are kept bound by a spectre, and
“are as yet not restored to him; but in less than ten days he
“ will become quite calm ; there is, I am happy to say, no reason
“ to feel concerned about him’. And P'ei believed it.

“A few days later, a doctor bearing the surname Wang called
“ on P'ei, announcing himself as an owner of charms with divine
“ power, and able to reprimand, thwart and expel therewith diseases
“caused by demons. While discoursing with P'ei, he said: 'I have
“ been told that your darling son has been rendered ill, and
“is not yet cured; I should much like to see him’. P'ei let
“him see the boy, when the doctor exclaimed with terror: ‘the
•‘young gentleman has a fox-disease; if he be not forthwith placed
“ under treatment, his condition will become grave’. P'ei then told
“ him of the doctor Kao, on which the other smiled and said :

“ ‘ how do you know this gentleman is no fox ?’ They sat down,
“and had just arranged a meal and begun the work of reprimanding
“ and thwarting (the demon), when colleague Kao dropped in.

“ No sooner had he entered than he loudly upbraided P'ei ;
“‘how is that! this boy is cured, and you take a fox into his
“room? it is just this animal that caused his sickness!’ Wang in
“his turn, on seeing Kao, cried out: ‘Verily, here we have the
“ vvicked fox ; of a surety, here he is ; how could his arts serve to
“reprimand and summon the spectre!’ In this way the two men
“ went on reviling each other confusedly, and P'ei’s family stood
“ stupefied with fright and amazement, when unexpectedly a Taoist
"doctor appeared at the gate. ‘I hear’, said he to the domestic,
“‘that Mr. P'ei has a son suffering of fox-disease; I am a ghost-
“seer; tell this to your master, and beg permission for me to
“enter and interview him’. The servant hastened with this message


FOXES AS DEMONS OF DISEASE AND IMPOSTORS.


585


“ to P'ei, who came forth and told the Taoist what was going on.
“With the words; ‘this matter is easy to arrange’ he entered, in
“ order to see the two ; but at once they cried out against him :
“ ‘ this too is a fox ; how has he managed to delude people here
“ under the guise of a Taoist doctor?’ He however returned their
“abuse: ‘you foxes, go back to the graves in the wilds beyond the
“town’, he shouted, ‘why do you harry these people?’ With that
“ he shut the door, and the trio continued for some moments to
“ quarrel and fight, the fright of P'ei still increasing and his servants
“ being too perturbed to devise a good means to get rid of them.
“ But at nightfall all noise ceased. They then opened the door, and
“ saw three ' foxes stretched on the ground, panting and motionless.
“ P"ei scourged them soundly till they were dead, and in the next
“ ten days the boy recovered” ‘.

ssmmm

-Bitaxwia:*', gw^i»«. miamm

IS® 4, ilSB.


586


DEMONOLOGY.


It can hardly be questioned, that for an explanation of the
character of the fox as an impostor, always ready to torment man
with antic tricks, we need not look further than the fact that
it possesses a cunning and shrewd disposition, disguised under a
gentle, innocent look. We have shown (p. 582) by translation of a
legend, that it already bore that character under the Han dynasty.
We have also seen from one of Yii Pao’s tales (p. 189), that in the
time in which this author lived, foxes were believed to change
themselves into charming maids, with the object of tempting men
to sexual intercourse. It is especially in this character of seducer
that in all ages, down to the present day, Reynard has afforded to
the Chinese mind a favourite topic for the exercise of its myth-
making ingenuity. The fact that a work extant in Yii Pao’s time
identified such bewitching were-vixens with a woman of loose
morals who lived in very ancient times (see page 189), intimates
a belief in the existence of such devils in times anterior to the
fourth century.

The Hlien chung ki, w^hich existed before the sixth century, for-
mulated the popular ideas on dangerous fox-elves in the following
terms; “When the fox is fifty years old, it can transform itself
“ into a woman ; when a hundred years old, it becomes a beautiful
‘•female, or a wu possessed by a spirit (shen), or a grown-up
“ man who has sexual intercourse with women. Such beings are
“• able to know things occurring at more than a thousand miles
“ distant ; they can poison men by sorcery, or possess them, and
“ bewilder them, so that they lose their memory and knowledge. And


11 « tt 0 . M ^ ^ -T « « . # # II, . ft IS ^

^ It . A - A . - A A le . 0 . IH; # ^

. Sili'H-shUi chi.


BEWITCHING WERE- FOXES AND WERE -VIXENS.


587


“ when a fox is a thousand years old, it penetrates to heaven, and
“ becomes a celestial fox” h

The continuation of Yii Pao’s book of marvels, written not much
later than this, teaches us, that in the fourth century women of
easy virtue were represented as formally enlisted by the fox-world
for purposes of harlotry. Thus we read in one of its pages: “One
“ Ku Chen of Wu was hunting, and came to a hill, where he
“heard a human voice say: “tut-tut, matters go badly this year”.
“ He searched upon the hill with his companions, and discovered
“in a pit, which was an ancient tomb, a hoary fox, squatted
“ behind a written scroll, over which it bent its fingers and made
“ an addition. They set the hounds upon it, which killed it with
“ a loud barking. He then picked up the scroll, and found that
“ it contained nothing but a list of lewd women, and that those
“who had already submitted to illicit intercourse were marked
“ with a red circlet. There were more than one hundred names,
“ and that of Chen’s daughter stood in the list”

The belief in bewitching were-vixens, or, as we find them generally
denoted in the books, hu mei’, “vulpine enchantresses”, was spe-
cially prominent during the T'ang dynasty. A great number of tales
devoted to them, still current nowadays, may be traced back to
that period. The Kwang i ki, probably the principal book of mar-
vels of that epoch, devoted much space to tales relating to such
demons in the drama of human life. An idea of the ingenuity
of fablers of that time, and of the tenor of their products, may be
gathered from the following legend:

“A son of the family Wei in Tu-ling dwelt in Han-ch^ing (in


!i,® A A ^ il « 3c a® A IK . KK, ch.447.

,®s3Aii#5-. Bamiii.

yiMA.

. Shell shell heu ki, ch. 9.

3 UM-


588


DEMONOLOGY.


'• Shensi) and was the owner of a country-house, some ten miles
“north of that town. In the first year of the Khai chdng period
“(A.D. 836) he left the town for it in the autumnal season,
-and saw at nightfall a woman in plain dress coming from the
"north with a calabash. ‘For a year I have dwelt in a village
“ north of the town ’, said she ; ‘ my family is very poor ; I suffer
“ ignominious treatment from a village tax-collector, and am now
“ on the way to denounce that man to the magistrates ; I shall
“ be much obliged if you will write down the case on paper
“ and let me have the document, that I may take it to the town,
“ and thus wash away the shame that is brought upon me by
“ that man’. Wei consented to do this, and the woman bowing
“ to him politely, they sat down on the turf. Taking a wine-goblet
“ from her clothes, the woman said, ‘I have wine in my cala-
“bash: let us empty it together, and be drunken’; and filling the
“ cup, she drank to his health. Wei in his turn raised the goblet,
“ but just then a huntsman on horseback came by from the west
“ Yith a pack of hounds. On perceiving them, the woman instantly
“ ran off eastwards, and she had not taken more than ten paces at
“ the most, when she was transformed into a fox. Wei’s fright was
“ great on seeing that the cup he held was a human skull, and that
“ the wine was something like cow-piss. He had an attack of fever,
“ which subsided however in a month” b
The following poetic formulation of the principal ideas entertained
by the Chinese of the T'ang period concerning the bewitching
influences of were-vixens on the minds and passions of men, we


mz. m Ammn.. 4EB».s>fUi-a.60.

?i liA.SAs AW

sht/i chi.


MAN-BEWITCHING WERE-VIXENS.


589


owe to the writing-brush of Poh Kii-yih a statesman of renown,
who lived from 771 — 847, at the same time a prolific prose-writer
and poet :

“ When a fox-spectre of an old grave is growing old,

“ It changes into a woman of lovely features ;

“ Its head changes into a female coiffure, its face into a painted
countenance ;

“ The big tail it trails behind becomes a long red petticoat.

“ Slowly she strides along the paths between the rustic hamlets,

“ And where at sunset no human sounds are heard
“ She sings, she dances, and alternately laments and wails,

“ Without raising her eyebrows velvety as the kingfisher, but bowing
her pretty face.

“ She bursts into a fit of laughter, a thousand, a myriad of joys,
“Eight or nine out of ten who behold her, are beguiled;

“ If false beauties may fascinate man in such a manner,

“ The attraction exercised by genuine beauties cannot fail to surpass it.
“ Such false and such genuine beauties both can bewilder a man,
“But the human mind dislikes what is false, and prefers what is real,
“ Hence a fox disguised as a female devil can do but little harm,
“Nor can beguile a man’s eyes for longer than a day or a night;
“ But a woman acting like a vidpine enchantress is the cause of
absolute ruin,

“ For man’s mind she makes boil for a length of days and a series
of months”*.


^ S ^ •

^ tr mu Am

n&mAm»&.M&mAmmiit.

0 AAi'.Ts,..ci.®|i

ch. 315.


590


DEMOXOLOfiY.


It is unnecessary for us to review at length the numerous
adventures of men with bewitching were-foxes, that have been
invented by Chinese fablers and committed to writing, or trans-
mitted by oral tradition*. It is sufficient for our purpose to trans-
late only such legends and extracts as give us the main features
of the subject; all the rest we may consider as mere repetition,
and therefore quietly pass over. Among those which demand our
attention, there are some which depict Reynard as an impostor
so enormous that, far from contented with the simulation of human
forms, he assumes the garb of religious holiness, nay, the shape ot
the Buddhas themselves, to insinuate himselt into the favour of men,
and even to obtain access to such awe-inspiring places as imperial
palaces. Invested with this characteristic he appears especially in
the tales of the T%ng dynasty.

“In the Yung hwui period of the reign of that House”,
thus the UvAing i hi relates, “there lived in T'ai-yuen (Shansi pr.)
“ a man calling himself the Buddha Maitreya (the Messiah of the
“ tuture). Those who went up to pay him their respects saw his
“stature so great that it reached to the skies; then after a while
“ he gradually shrank unto the size of five or six feet ; his body
“was like a red lotusflower amidst its leaves. ‘Do you know’,
“spake he to the people, ‘that the Buddha has three bodies? (tri-
“ kaya)P The greatest is his real body; worship it, prostrate your-
“ self before it respectfully’. But Euh-li, a monk in the city, deeply
“versed in the esoteric doctrine, heaved a sigh and said: ‘After
“ this Dharma (i. e. state) of reality, that of ideas will begin, and
“ beyond this still lies a final Dharma (viz. a final state of perfect
“intelligence); and from this final Dharma till the state of ideas
“ in Nirvana still lie several thousand years. After the extinction
“ of Shakya s doctrines our Great Kalpa will be destroyed, and
“ after this event Maitreya will descend from the Tuchita heaven
“unto the Djambudwipa; bat Shakya’s doctrines have not yet
“ vanished ; hence I do not understand why Maitreya descends at
“ so early a date ; all that fervent and devout reverence then seems


1 Some have been translated or parai)hraseJ by European authors, and contribute
usetiil material to our knowledge of oriental animal lore. See e. g. the paper of
liirch in the Chinese and Japanese Repository for 1863, p. 91 ; that of Watters in
the .lournal of the N. Ch. Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, VIII, and that of
Mayers in the Notes and Queries on China and Japan, I, p. 20. Some fox-myths
mav he lound in Giles’ Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, which are fiibles
selected from the Liao-chai chi i.


FOXES IN THE GUISE OF BUDDHIST SAINTS.


591


“to be merely paid to a counterfeit of him’. Suddenly he perceived
“ from the sole of the saint’s foot that he was an old fox, as also
“ that his pennons, flowers, yak-tail and canopy were mock paper
“money from a grave. 'Is Maitreya something like this?’ exclaimed
“ Fuh-li, rubbing his hands; and no sooner had he uttered these
“ words than the fox returned to its true form. Down from its
“ seat it came, and off it ran. They gave chase, but could not
“ overtake it”

The same work relates :

“When the empress Tseh-tden of the T^ang dynasty was seated
“on the throne (684 — 706), there was a woman who called herself
“ a holy Bodhisatwa. Everything which men fixed their thoughts
“ upon, she knew. The empress summoned her to Court, where
“ all she said proved to be so reliable that she w'as surrounded
“ with devotion for some months, and praised as a genuine Bodhi-
“ satwa. Then the monk Ta-ngan entered the Palace, and w'as asked
“ by the empress whether he had seen the female Bodhisatwa.
“‘Where is she?’ he replied; ‘I long to see her’; and the empress
“ gave orders to let them have an interview


”Fi¥>

K K, ch. 447.

A ^ . A e ^ A a , # # »f W ^ , a tti *

. m-MZ.

m^MZiSM.


59.2


DEMONOLOGY.


“The volatile soul of the monk (his thoughts) now soared away
“for a while, and then he asked; 'you can see thoughts; well,
“try to see where mine have been’. 'Between the bells at the
“ round disks on the top of the pagoda’, she answered. Immediately
“ he repeated his question, and the answer was ; ‘ In the palace of
“ Maitreya in the Tuchita heaven, listening to the preaching of the
“Law’. And then he questioned her a third time, and she said
“ his thoughts were in the highest heaven where even no uncon-
“ sciousness exists ; and those three answers all were correct.

“The empress was delighted; but Ta-ngan fixed his thoughts
“ upon the fourth fruit of sanctity, viz. on Arhatship, and this time
“the saint could not find it out. Now Ta-ngan exclaimed; ‘you
“ cannot discover it when 1 fix my thoughts upon Arhatship ;
“ how then can you do so when I fix them upon the (still higher)
“state of Bodhisatwas and Buddhas?’ The woman confessed herself
“beaten; she changed into a vixen, ran down the steps, and hurried
“ off, and nobody knew whither she ran” h

— “Under the T'ang dynasty there lived among the people of
“ Tai-cheu (prov. of Shansi) a girl, whose brother was not at home,
“ but in a distant garrison. While thus the girl lived alone with her
“ mother, they unexpectedly saw a Bodhisatwa come, riding on a
“cloud. ‘Highly virtuous is your house’, quoth he to the mother,
“‘I desire to abide in it; hasten to put it into good condition, as
“I will then visit it frequently’. The villagers emulously went
“there to put the matter in order, and no sooner were they ready
“ than the Bodhisatwa descended into the house on a five-coloured
“ cloud. Numerous were the villagers who resorted to the spot
“with sacrifices; but the saint ordered to make no stir about the
“ matter, lest believers should flock incessantly to and fro from all
“ sides. They accordingly admonished each other to hold their

* tf It . a a 1 « H S w S )i Jft . M

^ a 4b 1 ^ ^ ^ ■ Op. et cap. cit.


BEWITCHING WERE-FOXES ARE POSSESSED OF A PEARL.


593


“ tongues, and the Bodhisatwa had intercourse with the girl, so
“ that she became pregnant. A year passed by, and the brother
“came home; but the Bodhisatwa declared that he did not desire
“ to see any male creatures, and prevailed upon the mother to
“ drive her son out. The latter thus being unable to approach the
“ saint, used his money for securing the help of a Taoist doctor,
“ and finally found one who applied his arts on his behalf. They
“ thus discovered that the Bodhisatwa was an old fox; sword in hand,
“ he rushed into the house, and despatched the brute”

Popular superstition seems to have sometimes ascribed the
bewitching faculties of were-foxes to the fact that they are possessed
of a mysterious pearl, probably representing nothing else than their
soul. Indeed, as we have seen on pp. 330 seq., pearls are deemed
to be particularly animated, and hence the idea that souls of living
beings may have the shape of pearls is perfectly natural. “Liu
“Ts^uen-poh of the T'ang dynasty”, runs a tale, “relates that
“ Chung-ngai (lit. Every one’s Love), the son of his foster-mother,
“ used to amuse himself in his youth by placing a net across the
“ road in the night, in order to catch some wild pig, fox or other
“ animal. TsTien-poh’s hamlet lay at the foot of a hill. One evening
“ Chung-ngai set his net some miles to the west of the hamlet,
“ hiding himself by it to observe what would come. There he heard
“ in the dark the sound of steps, and saw a beast in crouching
“attitude, which, perceiving the net, reared itself up, and changed
“ into a woman wearing a red petticoat. Evading the net, she
“ walked to a car that stood before Chung-ngai, there caught a rat,
“ and devoured it. Chung-ngai drove her into the net by his cries,
“and cudgelled her to death; but as she did not change her shape
“ under the blows, he fell a prey to doubt and fear ; and thinking

#!?*«

^ ^ ^ ^ 7J ^ ^ ^ The same work, ch. 450.


38


594


DEMONOLOGY.


“she might after all he a human being, he cast her, net and all,
“ into a tank used for the soaking of hemp.

“ It was night when he returned home. He consulted his parents,
“ and at daybreak the family would flee, but Chung-ngai said
“to himself; ‘do women devour living rats? this one must be a
“fox’. He returned to the tank, and seeing that the woman had
“ revived, he struck at the small of her back with a large axe,
“• and lo, she turned into a hoary fox. Chung-ngai, elated, took the
“ beast to the village, where an old Buddhist monk, seeing that it
“was not yet dead, advised him to keep it alive. ‘The mouth of
“the fox contains a bewitching pearl’, said he; ‘if you get it, you
“ will become a favourite of the whole world’. He placed the brute
“ with tied paws under a large hamper, and when after some days
“ it could take food, the monk buried a jug with a narrow mouth
“ in such a manner that the mouth was on a level with the ground.
“ Then he put two slices of fried pork into it, and the fox, craving
“for the roast, but unable to reach it, placed its jaws over the jug;
“and when the roast was cold, another couple of slices were put
“into the jug, with the result that the mouth of the animal began
“ to water. They went on in this wise till the jug was full, when
“ the fox vomited out a pearl and died. This pearl was shaped like
“ a draughtsman, perfectly round, and of the purest water. Chung-
“ ngai frequently wore it in his girdle, with the result that he
“ was greatly esteemed by his people” h

s A A 4 a . lit 'i;> « ft » ab II ^ . .a


FOX-DEMONS IN THE SHAPE OF MEN.


595


If the capacity of foxes to change into men is also ascribed to
their alleged contact with human bodies in old graves (comp. p. 192),
it is reasonable that they should often be represented as appearing
in the form which men assume after death, that is, as human
spectres. Yii Pao describes for us a goblin of this sort in the
following tale : “ In the western suburb of Nan-yang stood a pavilion,
“ where nobody could sojourn without incurring harm. But one
“Sung Ta-hien, a man of that town, imperturbable on account of
“his having walked in the correct Path (Tao), has succeeded in
“passing a night in the storey of the pavilion, seated in the dark and
“playing on a lute, without any weapon or stick about him. At
“ midnight a spectre appeared ; up the ladder it climbed and accosted
“Ta-hien. It had a staring look, whetted teeth, and repulsive form
“and features. As he went on strumming on the lute, the spectre
“departed to fetch a dead man’s head out of the street, with which
“it returned. ‘Will not you take a nap?’ it said to Ta-hien, flinging
“the head before his feet. ‘Very good’, retorted the other, ‘I have
“no pillow to lay my head on this night; this is just the thing I
“ want’. Again the spectre departed, to come back after a while. ‘Shall
“we now have some boxing?’ it said. ‘Very good’, replied Ta-hien,
“and ere these words were out of his mouth the spectre stood before
“him, but was grasped so tightly about the loins that it only could
“ cry in distress : ‘I am dying!’ Ta-hien despatched it, and when the day
“ broke he saw that it was an old fox. Since that time there have
“no more been any apparitions of spectres in that pavilion” *.


. The same work, ch. 451.


596


DKM0N01.0GY.


Although his double capacity of originator of disease, and of im-
postor under human guise amply suffices to assign to the fox a
prominent place among the most dangerous demons that keep China
in constant fear, there are yet other black stains in his character
which add to the popular odium that attaches to him. Thus he
lies under constant suspicion of arson. Conjecture seems useless to
establish a reason for this, unless we attribute it to the old idea,
mentioned on page 194 in an extract from the Yiu-yang tsah tsu,
that he produces fire by beating his tail.

The fox appears as an incendiary as early as the traditions about
the remarkable exploits of Kwan Loh, the peerless magician and
soothsayer of the third century, of whom the reader has heard on
page 1000 of Book I. “ When Kwan Loh was lodging in a country-
“ house, he visited a distant neighbour, who was harassed by frequent
“ outbreaks of fire. Kwan Loh consulted the tortoise-shell about the
‘‘ matter, and ordered him to go the next morning to the end ot
“ the road towards the south, and wait there for a gentleman
“ wearing a single-pointed kerchief and driving in an old car w'ith
‘•a black ox; this man he was to take to his house, to detain,
and to treat well as a guest, for it was he who could remedy the
“ evil. The other obeyed these orders, and though the gentleman
“ was in a great hurry and begged leave to pursue his journey, he
“ was not allowed to do so, and was detained.

When he retired to rest, a very uneasy feeling came over him.
He took counsel with himself, and when his host had finally
“ lelt his room, he grasped a sword and left the house. Between
“two piles of fuel he stood leaning, and feigned to doze, when
“ suddenly a little animal passed right in front of him, resembling
“ a quadruped and holding fire in its paw, which it fanned with
“ its breath. The affrighted stranger raised his sword, struck the
“ beast right through the loins, and then saw that it was a fox.
“ Henceforth the host suffered no more from fire-disasters” b


. shen ki, ch. 18 .


A FOX-UEMON INDUCING SONS TO COMMIT PARRICIDE. 597


Those among the Chinese, who wish to realize what an enormous
evil fox-demons are, can hardly do better than acquaint themselves
with the following sad tale in Yii Pao’s collection: “Under the
“reign of the Tsin dynasty there was in Wu-hing (in Chehkiang pr.)
“ a man with two sons. These were harvesting in the field, when
“ they saw their father appear and pursue them with invectives and
“ even with blows. They complained of this treatment to their mother,
“ who asked the father why he had done so. He was greatly startled
“ by these words, and arrived at the conclusion that this must be
“ a trick played by a spectre. So he told the sons to slay it with
“ their axes, but the spectre kept quiet, and did not go there again.
“ The father, fearing that it might harry his boys somehow or other,
“went to look after them, on which the sons, crying out ‘here is
“the spectre!’ killed him, and buried his body in the ground. There-
“ upon the spectre hurried to the house, assumed the shape of the
“ father, and told the inmates that the boys had killed jthe spectre.
“ In the evening they came home, and were congratulated cordially
“ by every one h

“The actual truth remained a secret to them for several years,
“ until a priest passed their house. ‘Your father’, said he to the
“ two sons, ‘exercises a very unpropitious influence’. They reported
“ this saying to their father, who burst into such a rage that the
“sons hurried out of the door to advise the priest to beat a hasty
“retreat; but as the latter entered with a noise, the father, turning


jfi. at©.

TJttI

iFriEililS. S ft ± A ^

of the Thiee Kingdoms; Memoirs of Wei, ch. 29, !. 27.

fiiiai-s, iign. ffissssa

z. flam

ass,


598


DEMONOLOGY.


“ into a big old fox, crept under the bed, where he was seized
“and killed. The man they formerly slew was their real father.
“ They re-interred him in another grave and observed mourning
“ for him ; but subsequently one of the sons committed suicide,
“ while the other died of remorse” h

Far from being always so dangerous, the tricks played by foxes
on men are sometimes of a rather humorous sort, though no
less terrifying to the simple-minded people. Thus it was deemed
an event worthy of record in the dynastic annals of the Wei
dynasty, that “in the first year of the T'ai hwo period (A.D. 477)
fo.x-elves cut off the people’s hair”, diverting themselves with the
same play forty years later, “in the second year of the Hi p^ing
“ period, in the imperial capital, from the spring of that year onwards,
“ keeping the population in fright and terror. The ern press-dowager
“Ling decreed in the sixth month, that all such cutters of hair should
“ be whipped without the gate of the Thousand Autumns by the
“ good care of Liu T'eng, the chief of the guards of the Ch'ung-
“ hiun palace” ^

We find some particulars about this strange panic in the interesting
“ Description of Buddhist Convents at Loh-yang”, of which we made
mention on page 344 of Book I. “To the north of the bazaar were
“ two wards, named Ts'z6-hiao and Fung-chung, where the people
“ sold coffins and grave-vaults , and hired out funeral carriages.
“ There dwelt there a singer of dirges, named Sun Yen, who had
“ been married for three years without his wife having ever slept
“ undressed. This in the end aroused his curiosity to such a degree
“ that he watched a moment when she was asleep, and undressing
“ her discovered three hairs, three feet in length, resembling the tail
“ of a wild fox. Out of fear he divorced her, and when the wife


. shen ki, ch. 18.

6rli^!teacA«, A#t®.

46 # # ® * * Ift gf gil « « ^ ^ « n • “ «2,

I, 1. 25.


FOX-DEMONS DEPRIVING MEN OF THEIR HAIR.


599


‘■departed she took a knife, cut ofif his hair, and away she ran.
“As the neighbours ran after her, she changed into a fox, which
“ could not be caught.

“After this event, more than a hundred and thirty people in
“ the capital were relieved of their hair. At first the fox moved
“on the roads in the shape of a woman, dressed, adorned and
“ painted, who charmed everybody that saw her ; but those who
“approached her had their hair cut off. Thus it was that women
“ in gaudy dress were pointed at with the finger by every one as
“fox -elves. These things occurred in the fourth month of the second
“year of the Hi pfing period, and they did not end until the
“autumn of that year” h

The possibility of fox-demons depriving men of their hair
being thus established by history, fabulists have often framed tales
thereon. We need not, however, here pay any more attention to
their work, as the numerous fox-tales contained in Chinese books
posterior to the T"ang dynasty shed no new light on our theme.
They may all be said to move within the orbit of the ideas which
we have passed in review ; which fact renders fox-literature rather
tedious, monotonous, and often insipid. But this does not imply that
much of it will not amply reward translation. It may considerably
increase our knowledge of Asiatic zoological myth, enlarge our
insight into the inventiveness and genius of the Chinese, acquaint
us with all sorts of tricks which their fancy has contrived and
ascribes to animals in general and to Reynard in particular. It
may also show us the ways in which tricks of malicious foxes may
be frustrated and they themselves unmasked. Apart from wounding
or killing were-foxes or setting dogs upon them, which, as we


*#Maai(**-ws + ®A.%;gSA.

a*®#

= T 0 M ft « 7J It . Chapter IV.


600


DEMON OLOGT.


know, are sure means to force them to re-assume the vulpine form,
they may be unmasked by clever bookmen, priests, monks, and
ghost-seers. They may be conjured back into their animal state by
incantation, or should they ha\e set themselves up as scholars or
saints, by being outwitted or checkmated in discussion. The same
result, according to some tales, may be obtained by giving them
poisonous food, or by employing written charms against them. A
good device for unmasking them is to investigate whether they have
a complete tail or something like a caudal appendage, and then to
cut it off, when they will be seen immediately take to flight on
all fours.

It is not surprising after all this, that fox-literature leads to the
conclusion that Reynard has always been an object of hot persecution.
To unearth him and his progeny, and doom them all to a death
by fire, was ever a commonplace sport in the Empire of the Midst,
and the fact that the Code of Laws of the Ming dynasty and the
present reigning house contains special provisions against damaging
graves by smoking foxes thereout (see B. I, p. 872), certainly points
to the frequency of such work of destruction.

Besides by means of human skulls and bones (comp. pp. 192 sqq^,
the fox, like the tiger, often brings about his metamorphosis into
a man by swallowing written charms or pronouncing spells. He
may possess still other expedients for effecting the same end, but
we do not find them mentioned in Chinese works.


5. Various wild Mammals as Demons.


Whereas every animal, according to the Chinese, possesses a soul,
and, as Chapter X of Part I has shown, may assume the human
shape, it is quite rational that they also admit that every animal
may be a spectre capable of inflicting evil upon man.

As early as the fourth century Koh Hung warned mankind
against quite a series of animals, especially against a dozen in
connexion with the twelve Branches which each denote a day in every
dozen (comp, page 987 of Book I), these animals thus exercising
an influence each in its turn on the human fate during one day.
“If on a yin day there is a being in the mountains calling
himself a forester, he is a tiger; if he calls himself a prince
on the road, he is a wolf; and he is an old fox if he declares
himself to be a chief. Should he appear on a mao day and


ANIMAL-DEMONS CONNECTED WITH THE DAYS.


601


“ style himself a senior, he is a hare ; but if he says he is the
“ royal father of the east, he is a deer, and he is a stag should
“ he say he is the royal mother of the west. On a c h^e n day,
“he is a dragon if he styles himself rain-master, a fish if he
“ says he is a river-chief, and a lobster if he says he is a bowelless
“gentleman. He who on a sze day calls himself a widow, is a
“ snake living in the villages, or a tortoise if he says he is the
“ lord of time. On a w u day, he is either a horse or an old tree,
“ according as he says he is one of the three ministers, or an im-
“ mortal. And on a w e i day, such a being is a goat if he says
“ he is a host, and a roe if he says he is an official. On a shen
“ day, he is either a monkey or a gibbon, according as he says he
“ is a prince or one of the nine ministers. On a y i u day, he is
“ a cock should he say he is a general, or a pheasant if he says
“he is a catcher of insurgents. Should he say on a s u h day
“ he bears a human surname and cognomen, he is a dog, but
“ if he states on such a day he is a lord of the accomplished
“Yang, he is a fox. On hai days, those that call themselves
“ ladies are gold or jade, and those that say they are divine princes
“are pigs. Those that on a tszS day declare themselves to be
“ tutelary divinities of the soil, are rats, and those that say they
“ are divine men are bats ; and finally, such beings as assert on a
“ c h‘e u day that they are scholars, are oxen. If you only know
“ these their animal names, they can do you no harm ” h


Hass#*

*0«±A#

«A#4rSlfe, * I#

. Chapt. IV, sect.


603


DEMONOI.OGY.


The stag being neither dangerous nor malicious, save in certain
exceptional cases, we should hardly expect it to occupy a place in
Chinese folklore as a demon. Yet we find it in this role in the
following old tale; “Sie Kwun of the Ch^en province had resigned
'• his office on account of ill-health, and was living in retirement
“ in Yii-chang. There while making an excursion, he spent the night
“ in an empty pavilion. Before that time, human lives had frequently
“ been lost there. At the fourth watch, a man in yellow clothes
“called Kwun by his cognomen, saying: ‘Yiu-yu, open the door’,
“ but, perfectly imperturbable and without any symptoms of fear,
“ he bade the other to put his arm through the window. The man
*• indeed offered his wrist to Kwun, who pulling at it with all
“ his might, tore the arm right off the body. The owner beat a
“ retreat, and the next morning Kwun saw that it was the foreleg
“ of a stag. Tracing up the bloody prints, he caught the beast, and
“the pavilion was no longer haunted” b

The hare too occasionally becomes a dangerous spectre, especially
if it is old, and (see p. 163) thereby apt to assume other shapes.
“In the Hwang clTu period of the Wei dynasty (A.D. 220 — 337)
“ a man of the Tun-khiu region was travelling on horseback in the
“ dark, and saw in his path a beast of the size of a hare, with
“ eyes like mirrors. Hopping before his horse, it prevented this
“ from proceeding, affrighting the rider so much that he tumbled off.
“ The spectre then approached, and seized him so that fright killed
“ him, and it was a long time before he revived. By that time the
“ spectre had gone, he knew not whither.

“Our hero remounted his horse, and after travelling a few miles
“ fell in with a man, whom, after having exchanged the custo-
“ mary questions, he informed of his recent adventure, declaring
“how glad he was now to find a companion. ‘I too am quite
“alone’, replied the other, ‘and I cannot tell you how relieved I feel
“ to have your company; your horse moves faster than I ; if you


lit ♦ if ft 'li . Shell shell hi, ch. 18 ,


HARES AND MONKEYS AS DEMONS.


603


“ride on ahead, I will walk behind’. While journeying together in
“this fashion, the wayfarer asked: ‘how did that beast look, that
“just now affrighted you so?’ ‘Its body was like a hare’, was the
“answer, ‘its eyes resembled mirrors; its shape was most repulsive’.
“‘Then look at me’, said the other; so he did, and there he saw
“ that same spectre again. It leapt on the horse, the rider fell off
“ lifeless with fright. His family, astonished to see the horse come
“ home alone, immediately ran out to seek him, and found him
“ by the roadside. During that night he awoke, and told them the
“ incident as we have here related it” h

The few tales of monkey-demons, which we have been able to
unearth from the literature of China, differ too little, in so far as
their general character is concerned, from those about other animal-
devils to deserve translation. Only two of the oldest are of some
interest, seeing that they show us the monkey in the role of the
fox, the wolf and the dog, that is, as a lewd fornicator of wives and
maids, and as a seduceress, in beautiful female forms, of adults and
inexperienced youths, whose senses it bewitches at the detriment of
their health.

“In the T'ai yuen period (376 — 396) of the Tsin dynasty they
“ kept a monkey in the back palace of Tih Chao, prince of Ting-
“ ling, in front of the chambers of his concubines. These women
“ once upon a time simultaneously got in the family way, and each of
“ them gave birth to three children that danced and hopped while

A®.

a ?|5 . » 0 . * *• in m ® . #

.B| > A ^ ffl 5E . ^ A 'li l| ® @ . in ft It ^ ,

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Z ^ W ^ ^ M ^ - S'*®'* *''*■'*


ch. 17.


604


DEMONOLOGY.


“ discharging from the bowels. Chao thus being convinced that the
“ monkey was the culprit, killed the beast and the children ; which
“ made the women burst out all at once into wailing. He inter-
“ rogated them, and they avowed they had seen a young man
dressed with a yellow silk robe and a white gauze cap, a most
“lovely personage, jesting and chatting quite like a man” k
— “In the last year of the T^ai yuen period (A D. 396)
“ Sii Tsih-chi, while out for a stroll in the open country, saw
“ a girl with a water-lily, who held up her hand and beckoned him
“ to approach. Tsih-chi was charmed, and she invited him to share
“ her dwelling. From that time they had intercourse as old friends,
“ but he began to suffer from wasting, talking sometimes of visions
“ of beautiful rooms and deep halls with odorous divans and
“ broad mats. After he had indulged with that woman in feasting
“ and revelling for several years, the attention of his brother Sui-chi
“ was attracted to a conversation of several people in the house.
“ He stole near to investigate the matter, and saw a number of
“ girls leave the house by the back door, while only one stayed
“ and concealed herself in a basket. He entered, and then his
“ brother angrily assailed him with the words : ‘ sve were just so
“ merry together, why do you surprise us so unmannerly ? There is
“one in that basket’, he immediately continued; Sui-chi opened it,
“and saw a she-monkey, which he killed. Thereupon his brother
“ became quite well again” *.

« its M ^ . 5- W - # rJ-' , g m 5S a #

Wi Z ^ Wi W" ‘


THE RAT IN DEMON-LORE.


605


The position of the rat in Chinese demon-lore is rather signifi-
cant. Like the fox and the monkey, it is, as we have showed by
two tales on page 202, notorious for assuming the human shape to
commit adultery with men, and for embracing Buddhist religious
life with purposes not always deceitful. Should it wish to bewitch
women for immoral purposes, it may do so without assuming human
shape, as the following legend shows:

“In recent times there lived a man, who brought up a girl over
“ten years old. One morning she was missed. A year elapsed
“ without any trace of her being discovered, when they heard from
“time to time in a room of the house underground wailing of a
“ baby. They turned up the ground and discovered a hole, gradually
“increasing in depth and width, and more than a chang in
“ length and breadth ; here they found the girl sitting with a baby
“in her arms, and a bald rat as large as a bushel beside her. She
“saw them enter without recognizing her superiors, from which the
“parents concluded that she was under the demonish influence of
“ that rat. They slew the beast, whereupon the girl burst into bitter
“weeping; ‘he is my husband!’ she cried, ‘why do they murder
“him!’ As they killed the child also, her lamentations were un-
“ ceasing, and ere they could cure her she died”*.

Folklore also allows whole packs of rats, either in other animal
forms, or as men, to haunt human dwellings and settlements, or swarm
out of cracks and apertures and withdraw thither; and it represents
such apparitions as omens of evil. Tales on this topic are numerous,
a fact which we may, no doubt, readily assign to the frequent
occurrence of rats in human dwellings, where daily they disturb
the sleep and dreams of man. The following tale may characterize
their position as harbingers or causes of evil. “In the last year of the
“Then pao period (A.D. 755) the Censor Pih Hang was Governor
“of Wei-cheu, when this region felt into the power of the insurgent


SIE » , * « » If * H T ^ S If « . « ^

. Kwany i ki ; K K, ch. 440,


606


OEMONOIX)Gy.


“Ngan Luh-shan. He was just contriving the necessary stratagems
“ to reduce him to submission, and had not yet marched out, when
“ some days later he saw to his surprise several hundred pigmies,
five to six inches in size, loiter and gambol in his courtyard. He
“ and his family beat them to death. Next morning quite a troop ol
“• such dwarfs, all in white mourning dress, with lamentations took
“ away the corpses in funeral cars and coffins, with quite as much
“care as is observed at funerals of the gentry; they then made a
“grave in the courtyard, and after the burial disappeared into a
“ hole in the southern wall. In great fear and wonder, Pih Hang
“ opened the grave, and found an old rat in it. He boiled water
“ and poured it into the hole, and on digging it up after a while,
“ found several hundred dead rats. Some ten days afterwards his
“ whole family was killed, because he had not been victorious” b
Of rats infesting the public roads as well armed highwaymen we
hear in the following legend: “In the first year of the Wan sui
“ period (A.D. 695) the roads to Ch‘ang-ngan were infested by a
“ gang of robbers, who concealed themselves in the daytime, and
“ operated during the night. Every now and again itinerant strangers
“ were murdered without a trace of the perpetrators being discovered
“next day; which disheartened the people so much that they dared
“ not set out in the morning, even though inns might be reached
“ in the evening.

“ When the matter reached the ears of a certain Taoist doctor
“ who lodged there in an inn, he said to the crowd : ‘to be sure,
“these are no men; they must be spectres’. In the dead of night
“ he provided himself with an antique looking-glass, and took his
“ post by the roadside to look out for them. On a sudden a troop
“of young men appeared, fully armed and accoutred. ‘Who stands
“ there by the road ?’ they shouted with one voice at the Taoist,

l®Kj»

0 A^e»ta5?. -

^ ^ — PI MW - ‘ KK, ch. 440.


THE RAT IN DEMON-IX)RE.


607


“‘do not you care for your life?’ but the doctor let his mirror
“ shine upon them, with the result that they flung down weapons
“ and shields, and ran oflF. For some five or seven miles the doctor
“pursued them with spells and formulas, until they all ran into
“ a big hole. He kept watch over it till the morning came, and then
“ returning to the inn summoned the people to dig up the hole. It
“ was found to contain over a hundred big rats, which as they swarmed
“out were slain to the last. The evil was thereby ended” h
Rats may also haunt human dwellings in the shape of other
animals. “Li Lin-fu”, a high magnate of the eiglith century, “was
“ unwell. In the morning he rose, washed and apparelled himself,
“ and intending to repair to the Court ordered his men to bring

“ the letter-bag he was wont to use. Feeling it was heavier than

“ usual, he opened it, and out sprang two rats, which on reaching
“ the floor changed immediately into grey dogs. With ferocious

“ eyes and showing their teeth these beasts regarded him ; he

“ seized his bow and shot at them, on which they vanished ; but
“ Lin-fu was so deeply impressed with this incident that he died
“ere a month had passed”*.


. Siao siang luh.

T S, sect. ^ , ch. 83. The T S mentions the TsUi i chi or

Record of Collected Marvels as the work from which it has borrowed this tale.


608


DEMONOLOGY.


Among the many animals notorious in China for assuming the
human shape with the object of enjoying sexual intercourse with
men or women, we also find the otter. “In the Wu region”, thus
runs one of Yii Pao’s tales, “there existed at Wu-sih (in the south
“of Kiangsu) the great dike of the upper-lake, the warden of
“which. Ting Ch'u by name, made his rounds over the dams at
“every heavy rainfall. Onee when there was abundance of spring
“ rains, he went out for a tour on the dikes, and was returning
“in the evening, when he discovered that he was being followed
“by a woman wearing blue upper and nether garments, and
“carrying an umbrella of the same colour. ‘Officer ClPu, wait for
“ me !’ she cried, and at first he felt attracted to her and was
“minded to w'ait; but he bethought himself that he had never
“seen this being at that place, and that the unexpected woman
“in the dark in such rainy weather could not possibly be anything
“else than a spectre. He quickened his pace, but on looking
“ behind him saw that the woman came trotting after him with
“ a like speed. So he actually took to flight, and on turning round
“again, saw her in the distance dive with a plump into the
“ waves. Away flew her clothes and umbrella, and thus he saw
“ that she was a big grey otter, and that her dress and umbrella
“ were mere water-lily leaves. Such anthropomorphoses of that otter
“took place frequently with intent to seduce youths” '.


This is a little book attributed to the same Luh Hiiin who wrote the Chi kwai luh
(see p. 252). But in the copy we have of it, we do not find the tale among the
eighty-two notes and tales on marvellous mattei's and events I'rora the Han dynasty
to that of T‘ang, which it contains. This work occurs also under the title of
Tsih i ki ^ ; so it must not be confounded with the synonymous pro-

duction we mentioned on page 243.

W It hr
41:.

ch. 18.


OTTERS AS DEMONS.


(509


I'


— “ In Ho-tung, Shang Ch'eu-nu with a young lad collected rushes
“ on the borders of the lake, and usually spent his nights in a
“cottage in a waste field. Once at sundown he saw a young girl
“of very beautiful figure and countenance pass by there in a small
“boat loaded with rushes. She came up to his cottage for a lodging,
“and as he slept with her, he perceived she had a rank smell.
“ When the woman had enjoyed sexual pleasure, she asked per-
“ mission to go out, and when out of doors changed into an otter”

— “According to the FiLh-kien fang chi or General Memoirs

“concerning Fuh-kieu, there were false rumours abroad in the
“35th year of the Kia tsing period (A.D. 1556) about spirits
“(tsing) of water-otters shaped like fire-flies, which, if they settled
“on the coat of a man, were sure to cause his death. In the
“ houses in the cities gongs and drums were beaten as if in

“defence against gangs of robbers; at night people did not

“even prepare their beds, and several Taoist doctors were selling
“charms against the evil. The magistrates suspected them of

“having invented the matter, and they were on the point of

“ chastising them, when they escaped, and the apparitions too
“occurred no more”-.


6. Domestic Animals in Demonology,

Notwithstanding the general prevalence in China of the domesti-
cated cat, tales about cat-demons are scarce there in literature, so
that it is tolerably evident that this class of evil beings has never
occupied a pre-eminent place in its superstition. Very interesting

* sews

ch. 79.

E? e S . it 7 W ® > It * ± * II 2 ^ g ®

il a: ± W ® Ife , Sisa*. 'IS?!;*. TS,

sect. ItF , ch. 162.


39


610


DEMONOLOGY.


anti instructive, however, is an episode of high court-life in the year
59S, described in the Standard Annals, and teaching us that China
at that time had her witches believed to employ cat-demons for
works of iniquity. It is in the following words that the historian
relates it ;

“Tuh-hu T"o’s character had a tendency towards heresy. Madam Kao,
“ his maternal grandmother, served a cat-spectre and had therewith
■‘killed her brother-in-law Kwoh Sha-lo, and from her this practice
“had entered his dwelling. The emperor had been secretly apprised
“of it, but did not believe it.

“It then happened that the empress Hien, and madam Ching,
“the consort of Yang Su (see Book I, p. 1406 seq.), fell ill simul-
“ taneously. The physicians, called in to see the patients, declared
“ unanimously that this was caused by a cat-demon. The emperor,
“ taking into consideration that Tuh-hu TA was a younger brother
“ of that empress by a different mother, and that his wife was a
“younger sister of Yang Su by an other mother, concluded that
“it must be his work. He gave secret orders to his elder brother
“ ^luh to display his (fraternal) affection and admonish him, and having
“sent away his officers in attendance, warned him himself, but T'o
“denied everything, and the emperor, displeased with this, reduced
his rank to that of prefect of Ts‘ien-cheu ; and as he expressed
“discontent, he appointed Kao Kung, Su Wei, Hwang-fu Hiao-sii,
“and Yang Yuen in commission to bring TA to justice.

“A female slave of 'Fo, named Sir 0-ni, made the following
“confession: The practice came from the house of T"o’s mother,
“who regularly served cat-spectres ; she sacrificed to them at night
“on every tsze day, because, as she said, tsze corresponds with
“the Rath and whenever a cat-spectre had killed somebody,
“ the possessions of the victim secretly came into the house where
“ the beast was kept. Once 'Fo had asked his family for some
“liquor, and on his wife answering that she lacked money to

“buy it, he had said to 0-ni: ‘tell the cat-devil to go to the

‘■house of Mr. Yueh and procure us money enough’, on which
“ 0-ni had uttered her spells. A few days after that, the cat-spectre
“had gone to Yang Su’s house. And finally, on the emperor’s
“return from Ping-cheu, TA had said to her in the park: ‘tell
‘ the cat-spectre to go to the abode of the empress and make

“her give me more’; on which she had pronounced her spells

\ See for the explanation on page 987 of Book I.


CAT-SPECTRES IN THE SERVICE OP SORCERERS.


611


“as before and the spectre had entered the palace. Now Yang Yuen
“in the outer office at the gate sent 0-ni away to call the cat-
“ spectre. That same evening she set out a bowl of fragrant rice-
“ gruel, and drumming against it with the spoon, exclaimed; ‘come
“pussy, do not remain in the palace now’. After some time her
“countenance turned quite blue, and she moved as if she were trailed
“by somebody, and she exclaimed: ‘here is the cat-spectre’.

“The emperor now put the matter into the hands of his
“ Ministers of State. The advice of Niu Hung, lord of Khi-chang,
“was: ‘when spectral evil is produced by men, its effects may be
“stopped by killing those men’. So the emperor gave orders to place
“T'o and his wife on an ox-car, and was on the point of ordering
“them to commit suicide at home, when Tffi’s younger brother
“ Clung, a Chamberlain for the judgment of merits, appeared in
“ the palace and implored his mercy. The result was that Tffi was
“granted his life, but he was divested of all his dignities, and his
“ wife, madam Yang, was made a Buddhist nun. Before that time
“a man had lodged a complaint that his mother had been murdered
“by the cat-spectre of someliody, but the emperor had considered
“this to be ghost-tale nonsense, and sent him away with indigna-
“ tion ; now, however, he ordered the families accused of setting such
“spectres to work to be exterminated. T'o died not long after” b


» Wit',®.

z.


G13


DEMONOLOGY.


This is a valuable illustration, indeed, of the astounding credulity
which in those times swayed even crowned head and ministers.
The Standard Annals teach us, that in the following century
imperial consorts implicitly believed also in the possibility of persons
changing themselves after death into cats, to take revenge upon those
who were their persecutors during life. Thus they relate how Siao
Liang-ti a favourite court-lady of Kao Tsung and of his consort
Wang, was disgraced together with this empress, in consequence
of the calumnies and intrigues of Chao-i who supplanted the
latter in the imperial favours and became the famous empress Wu
or Tseh-Tien (comp. p. 5t)l). The two women being accused by
her of sorcery, “ the emperor decreed that they should be degraded
“ to the rank of commoners and imprisoned in the palace, and that
“ the empress’ mother and brothers with Liang-ti’s whole clan should be
•• banished to the south of the Sierra (to Kwangtung and Kwangsi).
“ On this, Hil King-tsung came forward with a memorial to
demonstrate that Jen-yiu (the late father of the deposed empress)
* had no extra merits, so that his whole clan ought to be exter-
“ minated and his coffin hacked in pieces because of that offence
“ now committed against the Court. A resolution then was issued
“ to the effect that Jen-yiu was divested of all his (former) offices and
dignities; the empress and Liang-ti were killed by the empress Wu.
'■ Before this, the emperor’s thoughts had reverted to his former
•• consort and he had proceeded to the place of her confinement.

Atm

5E. i?=s,

ch. 01. 11. 10 sc(i. See also the Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 79, II. 4 seq.


WOMEN BECOMING CATS AFTER DEATH.


G13


Here he was accosted by her; ‘Your Majesty’, said she, ‘is so
“kind as to remember our former happy days; when I die,
“ and revive to behold the sun and the moon again, then, I
“ pray, make here (in the palace) an abode for me, to which my
“heart may revert’. ‘1 will do so immediately’, was the imperial
“ answer, but no sooner did the empress W u know of it than
“ slie compelled him to order the two women to receive a hundred
“ lashes and to have their hands and feet chopped off; these she
“ tied together, and cast them into a wine-jar, saying she wanted
“ to make the two ladies tipsy to their very bones. After some days
“ they were dead, and then their corpses were mutilated. When
“ the emperor’s order reached them, Liang-ti cursed their enemy,
“ saying : ‘ the vulpine tricks of VVu even here hover over us, but I
“ shall become a cat, and Wu shall be changed by me into a rat,
“ and then I will throttle her in vengeance for the wrong she has
“done me’. The empress was informed of this threat, and forbade
“any cats to be kept in her six palace-buildings” b
A demon of a non-descript hazy shape, turning out to be a kind
of horse, is represented to us in a tradition recorded in the Memoirs
concerning the District of VVu-chTng, which forms a part of the
province of Chehkiang. Its hero is a fomous warrior who played
a leading part in the bloody troubles connected with the downfall
of the Ts'in dynasty in the third century before our era. “ When
“ Hiang Yii beat a retreat before his enemies in the Wu region,
“ he crossed a broad stream in which a strange beast lived, that


?!i . la S' tS IP a: ^ t it JS if tt . m fi * t

®tt».

m . New Hooks of the T ang Dynasty, ch. 70, 11. C xq.


614


DEMONOLOGY.


“ every morning and every evening intercepted some people with
“ its tail and devoured them. He placed himself astride of this
“ brute, grasped its neck with one hand and threw the other
“ around a tree, several big stems being thus uprooted in succession.

" When daylight broke, they saw that it was a horse, covered all
‘•over with the figures of a black dragon” h

The following tale furnishes a good illustration of the belief
that donkeys are apt to haunt mankind in indistinct forms: —
‘•In the first year of the Then pao period (A.D. 742) there lived
“in Clfiang-ngan, in the village of Yen-sheu, one Wang Hiun.
“ One night some three persons had assembled in his dwelling
“ to have a meal. They had just finished it, when on a sudden
“ a big arm appeared under the candle-light. Hiun and his
“friends were startled, yet they inspected the thing together,
“ and saw that it was black and very hairy. After a while
“a voice was heard beyond the light: ‘sir, you have guests,
“but may I call on you for one moment? I want some meat,
“put some into my hand’. Hiun, unable to discern from whom
“ these words came, forthwith gave some ; On which the arm was
“ withdrawn.

“Shortly after it was stretched out again. ‘I was so pleased,
“sir, that you gave me some meat’, said the voice; ‘it is almost
“finished now, give me some more’; and again Hiun put some meat
“ into that hand, and again it vanished. Now the men after some
“ deliberation concluded that it must be of a spectre, and that
“ they should on its return hack off the arm. Some moments
“passed, and there it was again; they grasped their swords, and
“ they hewed it off. As it fell to the ground, the body of the
“ spectre made away; and the men stooping down to look at the
“ arm, perceived that it was the leg of a donkey, and that quite
“ a stream of blood stained the soil.

“Next morning they followed the bloody print, in order to find
“ the brute. It had run straight into a house in the hamlet. The
“ inmates whom they interrogated, told them that they had had
“ in their house an ass for more than twenty years, which had

« A « iR S . A fS il 2 ,f| * , |g if

ch^-u,g hk-n cJii IP quoted in the T S, sect, ^ , ch. 98,


DONKEYS AND GOATS AS SPECTRES.


615


“lost a leg that night, apparently by a sword-blow, and that this
“ case had just caused them much consternation. Hiun told them
“ circumstantially what had befallen him, on which they killed the
“ beast and ate it” h

Thus again we see that the wounding of a beast in human shape
entails a similar mutilation of the corresponding part of its animal
body (comp, page 549). To pass now to other domestic animals.

The ancient Chinese, as we have seen on page 536, gave a goat-
form to the spectres inhabiting the ground, probably because they
took the written form of the name fen-yang of those beings for
ideographic characters. In the literature of later ages those ground-
demons no longer occur in a goat’s shape, and the role of the
goat merely amounts to that of other animals, that is to say, under
human or indistinct ghostly forms it plays antics and dangerous
tricks, the effects of which may, however, be frustrated by human
sagacity, wisdom and intrepidity.

Yii Pao relates:

“ When Sung Ting-poh of Nan-yang (Honan pr.) was young, he,
“ while walking in the dark, met with a spectre. He interrogated it,
“and it said: ‘I am a spectre, but who are you, sir?’ ‘I am also
“a spectre’, said Ting-poh, to deceive it. ‘And where are you going?’
“the ghost asked again. ‘To the market of Yuen’, was the reply.


« m B ® T . St * u ts . # I? s 2

kiiten-s/iili chi.


616


DKMONOLOGY.


“ ‘I am likewise going there’, rejoined the other; and they walked
“a few miles together, when the spectre remarked: ‘we go too slow;

what do you think of carrying each other on our shoulders in
‘•turn?’ ‘Very good!’ retorted Ting-poh.

“The ghost was the first to carry him. After a few miles it
“said; ‘you are too heavy to be taken for a spectre, sir’. ‘I did
‘•not become a spectre till quite recently, hence I am still heavy’,

“ and with this answer he shouldered the spectre, which weighed
“ almost nothing. Both had had their turn two or three times,
“when Ting-poh observed: ‘being a new spectre, I do not know
“what we have to shun and to fear’. ‘There is nothing we dislike
“ so much as human spittle’, was the reply.

“Thus again they proceeded, till they come to some water,

“ Ting-poh bade the spectre to wade it first, and listened sharply,

“ but he heard no noise at all. He himself, however, while wading
“caused the water to gurgle, which led the spectre to say: ‘what
“is that noise caused by?’ ‘By the fact that one who has died
“only a short time ago is not versed in the crossing of streams;
“ do not feel astonished about me’.

“ When close to the market of Yuen, Ting-poh, who just then had
“ the spectre on his shoulders, suddenly grasped it. Heedless of its
“ loud piercing shrieks, he bound it with a rope, and without paying
“' any further attention to its words straightway took it to that market.
“ Here on being put down it changed into a goat. He spat on the
“ animal, lest it should re-assume its other shape, sold it for fifteen
“ hundred coins, and passed on” h

* . A M . ft « si . ® -fa sa 2 w . It a = ig. ra .

4b . ® -fS 0 , # .

SM AW. Art.
ffitaw. asfA.tttaiF.^'faHmsA. A
B&«B.4Bifl;H.$'(aaw.i6ffA.Y:»w

a#, ffiraassii#*. a«w. nmifs.


SPECTRES IN THE SHAPE OF GOATS.


617


In this tale it is the clever, bold man who outwits the spectre.
In the following, however, the roles are reversed, and spectres
under the shape of goats delude the man:

“Chu Hwa, a Loh-yang man, used to make a living by trading
“in goats. In the first year of the Ching yuen period of the
“ T'ang dynasty (A.D. 785) he had travelled westward as far as
“ Pin-niiig, to exchange his goats for others, when a man saw him
“ and said : ‘you try to enrich yourself by dealing in goats . . .
“ well, if you change yours for bigger ones, you will get a smaller
“ number, and if you exchange them for smaller ones, you get more
“ of them ; in the latter case your gains will be great’. Hwa agreed
“to this opinion, and said: ‘if you know somebody who has little
“kids, I will exchange all my goats against them’*.

“After a few days, that same man introduced to him an owner
“ of goats, to whom he parted with his own for one hundred and
“ ten young kids. With his animals big and small in one flock,
“ he returned to Loh-yang, but at the Pass-gate the kids he had
“ obtained by tliat transaction one evening changed into spectres all
“ at once, and ran away. Terribly scared, and not understanding what
“ might be the cause of that phenomenon, Chu Hwa returned
“ the next morning to Pin-ning to see the aforesaid owner of
“ those kids. In the heat of his indignation he was about to
“ arrest him and take him before the magistrates, when the man
“asked: ‘what wrong did 1 do?’ — ‘You gave me those kids in
“ exchange for mine ; I drove them to the Pass-gate, and they all
“changed there into spectres; must not this be black art on your
“part?’ — ‘And you’, rejoined the man, ‘you traffic in goats by


ffi-fSH.


Ji.


^ 3E. W . ^ ■S'* !^hcu shot l;i, cliap. 16 .


^ .'I' ¥ > ® ® ^ 2 .


618


DEMONOLOGY.


“ whole droves, thus destroying lives for the purpose of gain ; do
“ not you know or remember that this is the acme of all crimes
“against Universal Heaven? you entirely overlook your own deeds,
'• and against mine you turn your anger; I am a spectre ; I shall
set those goats to catch and murder you’. With these words he
“ vanished, and Hwa was so terror-struck that he by his own hand
“ died at Pin-ning” h

To appropriate surreptitiously the worship and sacrifices destined
by people for their patron divinities, is a trick played not by
foxes only, but also by goats or bucks. Yu Pao tells us, that under
“ the Han dynasty there lived a man in the Tsfi region, named
“ Liang Wen, so devoted to Taoism that he had set ajrart in his
“ house a room w'ith three or four compartments for sacrificing
“ to a god. A black curtain hung there above its throne, and for
“ more than ten years it had always resided behind it. Once when
a sacrifice was being offered to it, a human voice was heard
“behind the curtain; H am the prince of the high hills’, it said;
“‘I am able to consume great quantities of food and liquor, and
“in curing diseases I work with good results; Wen, you have
“served me for a series of years with the utmost reverence, so
“you may come behind this curtain now"; the god is drunken’.
“ Wen begged permission to respectfully view the fiice of the god.
“‘Give me your hand’, was the answer; he stretched it out, and

+ P. A ^I ' .

- ^ 2 # a flsfi A fffi ^ . -(fc A «

A.

A#®#, aSMlT.

a. awa*. s witts

> til A ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Record of Strange Matters, quoted in the T S, sect. ^ cli. H4. Probably it
is the work mentioned in the Catalogue of the New Looks of the T ang Dynasty
(ch. 59, 1. 20) as Ta T^ctmj kid s}u ki Writings on Strange

Matters of the Great T^ang Dynasty, in ten chapters, written by Li Yin
in the Hien Lung period (860—874).


CRAFTY GOAT-DEMONS AND PIG-DEMONS.


619


“caught hold of the beard on the god’s chin. It was a very long
“ beard ; gently he twisted it around his hand, and then suddenly
“ gave a tug, and — - the bleat of a buck was heard from the
“ throne of the god. The affrighted bystanders sprang up and
“ helped Wen to pull, and behold, it was a goat of Yuen Kung-lu,
“ which had been lost seven or eight years ago, and was never
“traced. Now they put an end to its tricks by killing it”

The pig occurs in Chinese demonology with much the same
attributes as the fox and the dog, inasmuch as shrewd specimens
of its kind may assume the forms of women, to bewitch the other
sex by their charms and indulge their passions. We learn this from
the following tales:

“Li Fen was a man of the Shang-yii district in Y^ueh-cheu. He was
“ fond of country scenery, and therefore dwelt on mount Sze-ming.
“ Here below stood the farm of the commoner Chang Lao, whose
“ family was very rich, and was interested in breeding pigs, which
“for several years they set at liberty, instead of butchering them.
“In the last year of the Yung hwo period (A.D. 356), on the
“ day of the full moon in the middle month of autumn, Li Fen
“ was pacing up and down his inner courtyard in the moonshine,
“diverting himself with playing on the lute, when suddenly he
“ heard some one without the gate heave sighs of admii’ation,
“ alternated by exclamations and laughter. Unable to guess from
“ whom these sounds proceeded, he asked : ‘ who is there so late
“in the night at this country-house?’ ‘I am charmed by the
“nice voice of a talented man’, replied a smiling woman. He
“ opened the gate, and his eyes fell on a regular beauty, quite
“ peerless, but who, as he perceived, had a deep black colour about
“her mouth. ‘Are you not a ghost, or an immortal?’ he asked.
“‘No’, she replied; ‘I am the daughter of Chang, who dwells here

AM.


620


DEMONOLOGY.


“in the hills; this night my parents are attending a feast in the
“ village to the east, and in the mean time I am coming here

“ furtively to pay you a visit , . . . .

“ They drew the curtains, and did no more pay any attention to the
“ lamp ; and the lute was dumb.

“ On a sudden the morning cock announced daybreak. The
•• woman rose and took her leave, but Fen, quite in love and un-

“ willing to part with her, stole one of her blue felt shoes, and

“ concealed it in his clothes’ basket. Then, quite drowsy, he fell
“ asleep. The woman caressed him, and sought her shoe, wailing
“and weeping. 'Please do not keep it; I will come back here this
“ evening ; if you keep it I am sure to die ; respectfully I entreat
“you to be so kind as to restore it to me’. But Fen refused to

“ give it up, and fell fast asleep ; so the woman went away with

“ lamentations and in tears.

“Fen awoke with a shudder; the woman was not there, but he
“ saw the floor before his bed stained all over with fresh blood.
“ In his astonishment he opened the basket, and saw that the
“shoe had changed into the hard scale of a pig’s toe. His fears
were unbounded. He followed the bloody track downhill, and it
“ led him straightway into the sty of Mr. Chang, where the pig, on
“ seeing him come, grunted at him with an angry glare. He told
“ the whole matter to Chang with all the details, and this gentle-
“ man, affrighted and astonished, boiled the beast. Fen gave up
“this country-house for another place to ramble in” b


m. A>§Mzm. sws

SH. -1^ AS AMftULil®.
lit


sows AND COWS AS SPECTRES.


621


Yii Pao further relates; “A ineniber of the gentry under the Tsin
“dynasty, bearing the surname Wang, lived in the Wu region.
“ Journeying home, he came to a bend (in the river), where, as it
“ was growing dusk, the crew pulled up the boat against a large
“ dam. Here he beheld a maid of seventeen or eighteen, whom
“ he called, and spent the night with her. At daybreak he untied a
“ metal jingle and festened it to her arm ; then he told his men to
“ follow her, and when they came to her house they found no
“ maid, but on passing the pig-sty saw a sow with that jingle on
“ its ankle” h

Let us finally quote an interesting tale showing that buried
domestic animals, if their carcasses do not decay, may haunt
people as spectres-. “A villager of Tung-tsing, situated in Kiang-
“ ning, had kept a cow for more than ten years, in which time
“ it had given birth to twenty-eight calves, thus yielding much
“ profit to its owner. It was now too old to draw the plough,
“ and all the butchers asked him to sell it, but the owner could
“ not make up his mind to thus dispose of the animal. He
“ entrusted it to a boy, to take devout care of it till it should
“ die a natural death, and after its death he buried it in the
“ground. The ne.xt night a tapping was heard by him outside his
“ house-gate. This occurred for several nights in succession, without
“ it occurring to him that the cow was the cause ; but when after a


lit. 4

^ ^ . is- TJ il IH; U j K , «ij S

Shell shell /J, the edition in eiglit chapters; ch. 7.

' W-^-±A,


shen ki, ch. 18.


622


DEMONOLOGY.


“ month the haunting became still worse, even lowing being heard
^ and the sound of hoofs, the villagers all conceived they had to
do with apparitions of that cow. They disinterred it, and found
‘‘the carcass undecayed. Its eyes glared as when it lived, and
“ in its hoofs rice-ears were sticking, so that it evidently had
broken out of the ground that night. The enraged owner seized
“ a sword and hacked off its four feet ; then he slit up its belly
“ and poured out dung and filth over it ; and the beast thereafter
“ remained quiet. They opened the ground again, and found the
“ cow in a state of decay ” '.


7. Reptile-spectres.

Tei Clfiang-fang, the matchless wonderworker, who, as we saw
on page 582, could discern horse-riding foxes through their human
disguise, is also stated in the Standard History of his time to have
unmasked and utterly baffled a horrid tortoise-spectre. “In .lii-nan
“ there appeared year by year a spectre, which, assuming the
“ attire of the Governor, haunted the drummers at the gate of the
“ mansion of this grandee, much to the distress of the inhabi-
“ tants of that region. Once the spectre fell in with Ch'ang-fang,
“ who just then called on the Governor. Horror and fear nailed it
“ to the spot ; then advancing, it put off” its official dress and cap,
“ knocked its head against the ground, and begged for its life.
“ Ch‘ang-fang reprimanded it; ‘and now’, he concluded, ‘forth-
“ with resume your old shape here in the central courtyard’.
“ Immediately it turned into an old tortoise as large as a car-wheel,

+ A p, ±

^ . Tazc puh yi'i, ch. 14.


DEMON-TORTOISES.


623


“ with a neck a c h a n g long. He ordered the monster to go to
the Governor and avow its crimes, and he handed a letter to it,
containing some order to the king of the Koh dyke. Knocking
“ its head against the ground, the spectre with a flood of tears
“ accepted the letter, stuck it in the ground beside that dyke, wound
“•its neck around it, and expired ”h
— “In the Khai hwang period (A.D. 5S1 — 601) the apartments
“ and courts of the Palace were haunted every night by a man who
“ teased and provoked the waiters. The intendants reported it to
“the emperor, who said: ‘the watch kept at the gates is so strict;
“ I do not understand where anybody could possibly pass and
“enter; it must be an evil spirit. Should you meet with it’, he
“told the waiters, ‘then cut it down’. Thus, when a being like
“ a man appeared in the night and mounted their couch, they
“ drew their swords and struck. It was as if the blows fell upon
“dry bones; the thing tumbled from the couch and ran away, the
“ servants after it, and it plunged into a pond. Next day the
“ emperor ordered this pond to be drained, and then a tortoise
“ was found in it, over a foot in diameter, with sword-cuts on its
“ back. They killed it, and the matter was herewith finished” ^
With sundry other animals, tortoises have been the bugbears of
East Asia as authors of dangerous diseases. “In days of yore”,
Thio Tsflen relates, “a man was smitten with disease in his

< 8c lift Pitt

25-, fi]E8cte». izim

mmm,

eimmzmn- Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 112. II, 1. 13.

tgjse'Aa.

■§■ A tt iff ^

— ’SI. 7/^.

Sui Dynasty, ch. 22, 1. 15.


624


DEMONOLOGY.


“ abdomen, together with a slave of his. All attempts to cure them
“ were vain. When the slave was dead, they cut open his belly
" and examined it, and found a white tortoise in it with very
“ bright red eyes. They jmured (extracts of) poisonous herbs over
“ the beast and put such herbs into its beak ; but nothing could
“ harm or even affect it, and they tied it to the leg of a couch.

‘•Unexpectedly a visitor arrived to see the patient. He rode a
“ white horse, the urine of which bespattered the tortoise. The
“ reptile took fright and sought to escape quickly from the urine,
“ but being tied up, it could not get away. It retracted its head,
“ neck and feet into its shell, and the sick man, who saw it, said
“ to his son : ‘ perhaps my disease may be cured with such urine’.
“ They poured some urine of a white horse over the tortoise by
“ way of experiment, and forthwith dissolved some in several pints
“ of water ; and the patient taking in this way more than a pint
“of urine by potions, was cured thoroughly” '.

Tortoises may be extremely dangerous also when hidden in the
ground, and people have been suddenly smitten with disease and
other evil by passing overhead. “Li Tsung was Governor of ClTu,
“ when within his territory a Buddhist nun, who made her round
“ in the market, suddenly sank to the ground, sat down, and could
“ not be made to move. For many days there occurred cases then
“ of people who could not eat or speak, so that the officials informed
“ Li Tsung of it. He ordered the military to carry the nun away
“ and dig on the spot, and they found there a huge tortoise, some
“feet in length. When they had taken the beast into the water,
“the nun recovered”®.


/(t'K Ai, ch. 3.


GAVIALS ACTING AS DEMONS.


625


The t^o, a species of gavial or alligator stated by some native
authors to attain a considerable length, is another beast with the
doubtful reputation of changing itself sometimes into a woman to
seduce lewd men, and acting as a devil of sickness. “Chang Fuh,
“a Yung-yang man, while travelling home by boat, one evening
“ saw by the river-bank in a waste part of the country a maid with
“ very beautiful features, who moved towards him in a small
“canoe and said; ‘it is dark, 1 am afraid of tigers; I dare not
“travel by night’. ‘Where are you going’, asked Fuh, ‘that you
“ travel in such a thoughtless way without a rain-hat on? be quick,
“get into my boat; here you will not get wet from the rain’.
“After some friendly discourse, the woman entered Fuh’s sleeping-
“ berth, tying her canoe to his boat. After the third watch the rain
“ cleared off, and by the moonlight Fuh perceived that the woman
“was a big gavial, which was using his arm for a sleeping-pillow.
“He sprang to his feet with fright, and was about to seize the
“ beast, but it quickly ran away, plunged into the water, and swam
“to the canoe, which was a rotten stump of a tree, over a chang
“ in length” k

— “A prefect of the Kiai district had a daughter, who was
“ under the influence of demonry. The doctors tried their arts
“ upon her, with no result. Then the father applied to one Tung Fung
“to cure her, promising that if he managed to restore her health
“she should become his wife. Fung accepted this proposal, and
“ called forth a white gavial, several chang long. It crawled
“over the ground to the door of the sick girl, where Fung
“told the attendants to kill it with their swords. Immediately the


. Ki shen liih ; K K, 472.

. Sheu shen ki, ch. 19.


40


626


BEirONOLOGY.


“girl’s health was restored, and he accepted her as his wife”'.

— “The Buddhist monk Chuh-yao had obtained a spell posses-
“sing divine power, which enabled him to completely overpower
“demonry. The unmarried daughter of the prince of Kwang-ling
“fell sick under the influence of demonry, and Yao entered the house
“to cure her. With closed eyes he upbraided the spectre; 'thou old
“devil’, he exclaimed, ‘why dost thou forget to behave in accordance
“with the Tao and dost attack men?’ Upon these words the girl
“loudly wailed; ‘they are murdering my husband!’ she cried, while
“the spectre beside her exclaimed: ‘my last hour has now come’.
“Then in an outburst of sobs and sighs it said: ‘against such
“godly power I cannot tight’, and changed into an old gavial,
“ which ran out into the courtyard. Here Yao ordered it to be beaten
“to death” b

The bites of some Ophidians being virulent or mortal, it is
rather natural that we should find the snake in China among the
many animals with whose forms evil spectres occasionally invest
themselves. Tales ot snake-demons are remarkably numerous there.
They tell of victims to the wrath of snakes, incurring death, ill-
ness or misfortune, either themselves alone, or with their families;
in some legends we hear of such catastrophes brought about without
any provocation whatever. But impartiality compels us to avow,
that according to at least as many stories, apparitions of vipers
and serpents have proved to be propitious.

Like spectres in general, snake-demons appear in Chinese myth
as instruments of punishment. Thus, towards the close of the reign
of the Tsin dynasty such a being foreboded and prepared the ruin


# - S 1: . i: pt o im li ^ ^ PI , $ ^ ^ ff

. SltL‘/( ^lett chapter VI.


PI ft « fH# pa . * yg » . S (g J ^ *

* w . S ai 6 1 . sS 4 « ^ -tfc . Chi kwai luh ; K K, ch. 468.


SNAKE-DEMONS.


627


of Chu-koh Ch%ng-min \ a bold warrior who had routed many an
army, but indulged in such insatiable rapacity in his territory,
that his discontented subjects murdered him along with the
principal members of his family. “After having become wealthy
“and famous”, so runs the Standard History of his time, “he
“ was always frightened out of his sleep some ten niglits in one
“ month, and then skipped about as if fighting with somebody.
“ Mao Siu-chi once passing the night with him, saw him in such
“ a panic, and asked him what was the matter. ‘1 see a beast,
“ quite black and hairy, but 1 cannot discern any legs of it ;
“ its uncommon strength is more than mine, I cannot prevail over it’.
“ After this it returned several times, and everywhere in the house
“ the head of a snake appeared on the pillars and in the rafters
“ of the roof. Ch'ang-niin told his men to hang up swords there
“(to frighten it), and to strike at the monster; but it regularly
“ recoiled before those weapons, to re-appear as soon as they were
“ withdrawn. They beat it also with washing-mallets. It spoke
“ with the inmates as if it were a man, but nobody could under-
“ stand it. A huge hand some seven or eight feet long was then
“ seen on the wall with a wrist several spans thick, but it vanished
“ entirely when he gave orders to strike at it. Not long after this,
“ Ch"ang-min was murdered ” ^

But not only the wicked wei’e in old China persecuted by demon-
iacal serpents. The T'ai-pHng kicang hi gives us a legend about
such a monster having haunted no less a worthy than Confucius.
“ Yen Hwui and TszS-lu were seated at the gate of the sage,
“ when a spectre came and tried to call on him. Its eyes beamed
“ like suns, and at that moment it looked so awesome that


s


mm ^ A HIT] M

XtISfr. watig-iu

. Books of the Tsin Dy-
nasty, ch. 85, ]. 10.


628


DEMONOLOGY.


“ Tsze-lu lost his .senses ; his lips stiffened, and he could not utter
“a sound, but Yen Yuen (Yen Hvvui) took his shoes, his club and
“ his sword, stepped to the front, and seized the spectre by its hips.
“ On this it changed into a snake, which he slew immediately
“ with his sword. The Master came out to see what happened,
‘•and said with a sigh: ‘the bold man has no fear, and wisdom
is not misled ; the wise man is not bold, and the bold does not
“always possess wisdom’”'.

A ghastly tale of a huge serpent deceiving under a human shape
a whole family with the object of gratifying its lusts on an inno-
cent girl, is recounted by T'ao TVien. “In the T'ai yuen period
“ of the Tsin dynasty, a member of the gentry married a girl in a
“ neighbouring village. The time fixed for the nuptials having come,
“ the family of the bridegroom sent out their men to fetch the
“ bride, and the relations of the latter let her go, but sent her
“ foster-mother to accompany her. The procession reached a double
“ gate and a series of halls, as if it were the mansion of a prince.
“ Torches flared before the pillars, and a slave maiden, gorgeously
“ apparelled, kept watch beside them. And the back apartment,
“ was furnished with curtains and tapestry of great beauty.

“The night came, and the maid embraced her nurse, weeping
“ silently. Then stealthily the matron passed her ;hand over her
“ behind the curtains, and felt a snake as thick as a pillar of
“ several spans, coiled around the bride from head to feet. Horror-
“ struck she ran out of the house, and saw that the slave maid
“ charged with the torches at the pillars was a smaller serpent, and
“ that the torch-lights were snake-eyes”


Chapter 4.^G.

iiA*a!, 2. its


SNAKES AS DEMONS OF DISEASE.


629


We find the snake as a devil of disease as early as the writings
of the Han dynasty. These relate, that “in the time of the emperor
“ Chang (A.D. 76 — 89) there lived one Sheu Kwang-heu, who could
“prosecute and punish ail kwei and mei, ordering them to fetter
“ themselves and to render their forms visible. A fellow villager of
“his had a wife, smitten with sickness by a mei. Kwang-heu
“ arraigned this being, and found a large snake of several c h a n g,
“dead outside the gate” h Variations on this theme are not unfre-
quent in books of earlier and later time.

Old and numerous also are the tales of men and women who,
having fallen ill, vomited snakes or vipers. And no wonder, for
rustic simplicity, by stretch of fancy, would at all times have readily
exaggerated intestine worms of all sorts to the bulk of snakes.
In the Liel sien ch^wen, which may have been written under
the Han dynasty or shortly after it, it is related of Yuen Suh *,
a famous seller of drugs and nodules with universal curative
power, “that the prince of Ho-kien, who had constipation, bought
“ drugs of him and took them, with the effect that he excreted
“ more than ten snakes” ^ This maleficent vermin does not in
China always glide into the human body in a gentle way or
imperceptibly; they sometimes make their entrance with rough
violence, raging and gnawing inside with ferocity. Peculiarly in-
structive on this head is the case of “one Tsdn Chen, a villager
“ of P'eng-hwang in Khuh-o, into whose brains a serpent-like beast
“worked its way. When it came, he scented a foul stench; there-
“ upon it bored through his nose and coiled itself up in his head ;
“ he perceived a buzzing sound, and distinctly heard a crunching,
“ as if something were gnawing at his brains. Some days afterwards
“ the thing left his head, but suddenly it came back : Ts"in Chen
“ this time tied his handkerchief before his nose and his mouth,

* . 5E . l5ooks of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 112, II, 1.1 7.

2 Tt


630


DEMONOLOGY.


* thus preventing it from getting into those apertures, and for
“ several years nothing ailed him, except a pressure in his head
There are also instances on record of snakes having caused
illness by sending their souls into the bodies of their victims.
“ In the district of P'i, a commoner caught on the bank of a ditch
“ at the south wall of the city, a little snake, somewhat more than
“ a foot long. He cut out its five intestines, then coiled it up, put
an awl through it, and dried it ov'er a fire. After some days,
“ a son of the family, a few years old, suddenly became red
“ with vesicular eruptions over his whole body ; his skin cracked as
“ if it were roasted, and he exclaimed : ‘you have murdered me
“ without any charge of guilt having been brought against me ;

then you have cut the intestines out ot my belly and put
“me over a fire; this is why I make your child smart under
“those sufferings’. The family on hearing these words were terror-
“ struck and filled with amazement. They took the snake, extracted
“the bamboo awl, and moistened it with water; then they burned
“ incense, prayed to it, and took it back to the place where it had
“ been found. After some time it wriggled away, and the child
“ was restored to health ” *.

Some books make mention of ophidian reptiles acting as devils
of disease under the name of “celestial snakes” h We are unable


<«


> mm B ...

. Shell shell ki , ch. 17.

a S.K ^ M ^ W tt 4- a ti- * H 2 >

« # fr it > i* ? « . K A !» ifli * . a # ¥ i!

. K K, ch. 459; from the Luh i ki, or Writings on Recoi ded

Wonders, eight chapters on fabulous matter, by Tii Kwang-t ing
a Taoi'-t priest wlio lived in the latter part of the ninth century.

^ ^ it-


I I


SO-CALLED CELESTIAL SNAKES.


631


to discover what the Chinese understand by these beings. There
exists an asterism of the same name, somewhere by Pegasus,
but whether there is a connection between it and the demon in
question, we cannot say. Perhaps we have here to do with a
mere invention of quack doctors, magicians and exorcists. The only
Chinese in whose writings we have found any mention of the matter
is the author of the Mung khi pik fan. “In the T'ai p"ing period
“(circa A.D. 976), when Yun Kwan-khi was in government function
“ in the circuit of Kwang-nan and Kwang-si (eastern Yunnan), a
“lower official was poisoned by some animal; his body was covered
“ all over with gatherings, and a physician who declared himself
“ able to cure him, was called in and bidden to examine the patient.
“'He is stung by a celestial snake’, said this man, ‘and as the
“ disease in now deep in his body, nothing can be done against it’.
“ By applying some drugs to the ulcers and thrusting needles into
“ the swollen spots, he caught more than ten snake-like beasts,
“ and the disease did not recur. — And close to my grandfather’s
“ tomb at Si-khi in Ts'ien-t'ang, a farmer was attacked by leprosy.
“ His body was covered with running ulcers, and he cried and
“ shrieked as if his last hour had |come. A Buddhist monk of Si-khi,
“who understood the case, declared: ‘here we have a case of poisoning
“by a celestial snake; it is no leprosy’. He fetched some bark of a
“ tree, decocted it, and gave the patient over a pint of the juice
“ to drink, prescribing him large doses of it ; next day the disease
“ w'as reduced to one half of its virulence, and after two or three
“ days it was cured. I have found out that that bark was from the
“ hazelnut.

“But after all I know not what a heavenly serpent is. Some say
“ it is a yellow flower spider, living in the shrubs, and that when
“ a man is stung by it and moreover moistened by the dew, he gets
“ this disease. Thus let those who walk in the dew be careful” h


632


DEMONOLOGY.


We thus learn that the diseases ascribed to that celestial reptile
are certain forms of leprosy or ulcerous affections caused by its
bites or stings. Even snake-like shadows may be very dangerous
should they by any means enter a man’s body. This need not, of
course, astonish us greatly, since we know quite well that the
shadows of beings are identified with their souls. Ying Shao related
the following anecdote in the second century of our era:

“ When my grandfather Ch^en was prefect of Kih, he went to
“ see the general tax-collector Tu Siien on the day of the summer-
“ solstice, and offered him some liquor. Just then there hung a red
“ bow on the wall at the north side of the apartment, which cast
“ a snake-like shadow into the cup. This intimidated Siien and filled
“ him with aversion against the liquor, but he dared not refuse to
“drink, and from that day he had cutting pains in his breast and
“ belly. His power to digest food and drink was impaired; he became
very weak and lean, and though his disease was combatted and
“ treated in a myriad of ways, no cure was effected.

“Ch'en then went to the dwelling of Siien, having some busi-
“ ness there, and saw him. He asked him how it was that this
change had come over him, and the answer was, that he was
“ filled with fear of that snake, this beast having entered his belly.
“ Ch'en now returned to his judgment seat and pondered on the
“ matter a good while, when his eyes fell on the suspended bow.
“ Convinced that this object must have been the cause of all the
trouble, he told one of his writers at the gate of his mansion
“ to fetch Suen in a sedan-chair ; then he set out spirits on the
same spot, and again the snake actually appeared in the cup.
‘It was the shadow of the bow there on the wall’, he said to
“Siien, ‘and no spectre’. On these words the other cheered up and
“ felt quite comfortable, and he regained his health from this very
“ moment. He rose in official service to the rank of a Minister,
“ and became Governor of four regions successively, in high repute
“ as a man of commanding presence” h

. Chapter 25.


TOAD-DEMONS AS AUTHORS OF DISEASE.


633


We will conclude with a tale of a toad-demon, related in a work
ot the T'ang dynasty. “The revisor Ch'en Khing states, that there
“ was in his country a petty officer, whose daughter was ill by
“reason of demonry. She ate and drank irregularly; sometimes
“ she sang, then she burst into wailing, and ran about in the
“ garb of nature, tearing her face with her nails. A w u was called
“ in to treat her, who put up a sacrificial altar, had drums and
“ clarinets played, and operated on her with spells.

“Just then a man in a passenger-boat, which happened to be
“ moored in the river at the end of the quay, laid himself down
“ by the gangway to sleep, and saw in a concealed ditch a toad as
“ big as a bowl, with red eyes and hairy legs, dancing at the sound
“ of the drums. He took a bamboo pole, hauled up the beast, and
“ tied it to an oar. At the same moment he heard the girl exclaim :
“‘why do you bind my husband?’ On this he knocked at the
“house, and said to the owner; ‘I can cure diseases like this’. The
“ other, rejoiced in his inmost heart, asked how much pay he
“desired. ‘Not more than a few thousand coins’, was the answer.
“‘I love my daughter above everything, and the attempts to cure
“ her have relieved me up to this time of so many hundred strings
“ of coins, that I do not care about a few thousand coins more
“ if her health can be bought for them ; I will give you twice that
“sum’. The passenger now simmered the toad in oil, and next
“day the girl was hale and healthy” k


irs . Ilffe A « t|i . #|t a » ♦ . -S ti m m a « .

Sit#. . Fioiii-tiuh rtiiir/ I, cli. 9. A similar

anecdote we find in the Books of the Tsin Dynasty (ch. 43, 1. 22) related of a guest
of the mandarin Yoh Kwang ^ , the mischievous shadow being in this case
that of a horn decorated with a painted snake.


634


DEMONOI,OGy.


8. Bird-demons,

Cases of human souls changed into bipeds are, as we saw in
our treatise on Were-birds (p. 220), mentioned frequently enough
in Chinese literature to suggest the idea that there must also exist
tales about bird-shaped demons, being for instance wrathful souls
of men who suffered death by violence or injustice. This pre-
sumption is largely confirmed by the facts.

“ In the reign of the emperor Hwui, in the second year of the
"Yung hi period (A.D. 291)”, we read in a book of the fourth
century, “a ‘wounded soul bird’ was presented to that monarch

* from the principality of Shang-shan. Its shape was that of a fowl,
“ but its feathers were coloured like a pheasant. The emperor refused
“ to accept it, because he abhorred its name, but on the other hand

* he liked it for its feathers. Then a man with much knowledge
“of animals spoke: ‘When the emperor Hwang had put to death
“ Ch'i-yiu (see Book I, p. 1403), an ounce attacked a woman with
“ its teeth, mistaking her for another person, but she was still
“ breathing on the seventh day, and the emperor out of pity buried
“ her in a double coffin in a vault of stone. Then a bird soared
“over the grave, screaming out that it was the wounded soul; it
“ was indeed the soul of that woman. Thenceforth, whenever people
“ died without the ordinance of fate that so it must be, such birds
“ gathered in that kingdom in the fields and forests. So it was
“ under the dynasty of Han, at the close of the reign of Ngai and
“ P'ing, when (the usurper) Wang Mang destroyed so many wise
“ and good men ; the bird then appeared so often with piteous


>***??, IS a,

tk ft . ± a * . M * );;f , * . » # » - SH

• ± H . «« ft 2 # B ® B »

. The Chi kwai luh of Luh lliun.


HUMAN SPECTRES IN THE SHAPE OF BIRDS.


635


“ screaming, that mankind loathed its name. Orders were then
“ sent to Shang-shan to drive away the birds with arrows, but it
“ was not until the rise of the present Tsin dynasty, when shields
and spears were laid aside and the world between the four seas
“ was subdued far and wide, that the birds only from time to time
“ appeared in the wilds. Out of the dread which their name aroused,
‘“this was changed from siang hwun (wounded soul) into siang
“hung. Sun Hao (the last sovereign of the house of Wu, dethroned
“ by that of Tsin) then was invested with the dignity of feudal
“ ruler of Kwei-raing (to prevent his soul from becoming revengeful
“ and changing into such a bird), and the meaning of the term
“siang hung (generous treatment) was consonant to this measure.

“ At the close of the Yung pT n g period (291) there prevailed again
“ much bloodshed and trouble. Sighs then resounded at the gates,
“ and wailing in the streets, and Shang-shan came forth again with
“its tribute; but the birds were let loose and chased away”h

Notwithstanding that every bird, as indeed any sort of animal,
may turn into a spectre, yet a rather limited number of species of
the feathered tribe appear in Chinese demonology. Among them
w“e find the cock. “ Within the Tai-kiiin principality”, a fabulist
of the fifth century relates, “ stood a pavilion haunted by spectres,
“ to whose tricks it was impossible to put an end. One evening, some
“ students, men strong and bold, went thither, wishing to pass the
“ night in it. The keeper of the building told them not to do so,

-bB Am

A * ft * * * H H # ^ 'f .S

mmiAS. aji!fi!8i$i.ft.ft.it*=s.

^ ^ ^


636


demonology.


“but with the words; ‘we can by our nature dispel those spectres’,
“ they put up in it. On taking supper, a hand playing a flute with five
“ holes came forth in front of the place where they sat. This sight made
“ them burst into laughter. ‘How can you handle a flute over its whole
“length with the one hand you have?’ they said to the spectre, ‘we
“will play it for you’. But the spectre rejoined: ‘do you think that
“I have not fingers enough?’ and it put forth another hand with
“ several times ten fingers on it. Now the graduates conceived that
“the right moment to deal their blows had come; they drew their
“swords and hacked at the hand, and they found an old cock”’.

In the year 614 of our era, one Wang Tsih, the happy possessor
of a very miraculous mirror, “departed for Pien, in the land of
“ Sung (Honan pr.). A certain Chang Khi, who was his host there,
“ had a daughter at home, vexed by some complaint, which at the
“ beginning of every night made her utter cries of woe, which were
“ really too pitiful to bear. Tsih asked what was the matter with
“ her, and was told that she had now been ill for more than a
“ year, and that, while during daytime she felt fairly comfortable,
“ every night she fell into that sorry state. Tsih stayed there for a
“ night, and no sooner had he heard the shrieks of the girl than he
“ brought forth his mirror and let it flash upon her. ‘ He with the comb
“ is murdered ’, she exclaimed ; and under her bed there lay a large
“ cock, ([uite dead, the host’s old cock of seven or eight years ’


lias.

Yin muir/ tiilf. K K, ch. 461.

A-t

TVn>i ;7 Ta hy king ki ^ The antique Mirror of Wang Tu,

Wang Tsih’s brother, who lived under the Sui dynasty. The copy which I possess
consists of only ten leaves.


A DEMONIACAL WERE-GOOSE.


637


— “A certain Yang, a Ts^g-yuen man (Shansi pr.), was a vice-
“ commander of the garrison of that province. There was a plot

“ of open ground by the western wall. Once when he had hurried

“ to the office in the early morning and had not yet returned, his

“ family were having their meal, when suddenly they saw a goose

“ with some paper mockmoney on its back pass through the house-
“ gate, straight into a room looking on to the western wall. ‘Does
“ this goose come out of the temple of the god ?’ the family
“exclaimed, and they told the slaves to drive it away; but these
“ men, on entering the room, saw nothing but an old man with
“ two tufts of hair on his head, and white whiskers. All the family
“ without exception; ran away in a panic. Yang then came home,
“ and hearing of the incident seized a stick and attacked the
“ spectre, but it appeared and disappeared in the four corners with
“ so quick a succession of metamorphoses that the stick could not
“in any way hit it. With increased rage he exclaimed; ‘I shall
“ come back after dinner to beat it to death’; on which the spectre

“stepped forward with a bow, and said; ‘be it so’.

“Yang had two daughters. The elder one went to the kitchen
“ to cut meat and prepare his dinner, but when she placed the
“ meat on the cutting-stone, it suddenly vanished. With the knife
“ in her hand she told this to her father, when from under the
“ stone a big, black feathered hand appeared, and a voice said :
“‘cut it, please’. The girl ran away till she was out of breath,

“ and became ill from the effects. The other daughter took some

“ salt out of a great pot, when a big monkey burst forth from it
“ and climbed on her back ; she ran away, and not till she was in
“ the hall did she get rid of the beast. She too became ill k

BIB.

* 2 , a ffi ra iffi , ® Ik « a- . tt * 06 (f . « a ife

■i". 0ira6fr.

A ^ g ^ ^ . H BB , A A it A # a . W


638


DEMONOLOGY.


“A w u was then called ; he erected an altar to cure the girls,
“ but the spectre put up an altar also, and performed (counter-)rites
“ in a still more effectual way. No other w u proved able to con-
“ quer the spectre; each of them was seized with fright, and fled.
“ Shortly after, the two daughters and the wife died. Then a man
“ versed in the methods of dealing with demons, named Ming Kiao,
‘‘was invited to recite holy books; and in the first night the spectre
“ went away, after having spit at Yang and scolded him. Thus
“these visitations ceased; but Yang too died in that same year” h
Spectral animals in particular are crows or ravens, and owls.
The voice and the presence of these birds are not merely ill-boding,
but decidedly productive of evil, and that this was the case with
the crow in very ancient times, is intimated by the verse of the
Shi ling, of which we gave the translation on page 576. “The
“white-necked crow”, says the commentator of the Classic of Birds",
“ is called by the people in the southwest the spectral sparrow,
“and its cawing means misfortune and evil” k “Its knowledge”,
writes another author, “is great enough to give it an insight
“into good and bad fortune; therefore wherever the bird lives,
“ people are afraid of it, and in the south-western regions they
“look upon crows as spectres able to foreknow things”’. The


w m M , m m z - ic M 9 ^ ^ ^

T S, sect. ||p ch. 319

2 Khin kiiv./ , a small collection of short notes on hinls, in one chapter.

Fiorn quotations in some eaily works it appears that a book of this name existed
under the Han dynasty, but many of those quotations not being found in the work
now extant with this title, this may be a spurious production of posterior date,
pel haps, as the editors of the great Imperial Catalogue surmise (ch. 11.5, 1. CO), of
the thirteenth centuiy. It is published with a commentary ascribed to Chang Hwa,
the learned minister of the third century of whom we spoke on page 189.

" -ft 2 a ^ a ® A 2 A « , RS M M
‘ X ^ ta It nS * , liiS: )i/r ® RiJ A a ^ , t?5 a ®

'Rh-ya yih, in its .section

on the crow.


THE REVENGEFUL SOUL OF A CROW.


639


souls of slain crows may persecute their murderers with a shrewd-
ness. that souls of dead men could hardly improve upon. Thus a
work on the T^ang dynasty tells us: “When P'ei Chung-ling was
“ Governor of Kiang-ling, he sent his military commanders T'an
“ Hung-sheu and W'^ang Chih to the south of the Sierra (extending
“ along the north of Kwangtung and Kwangsi). Having carried
“ out their mission there, these men while travelling home came

“ at a lodging-house in Kwei-lin, where they were croaked at by a

“ flight of crows. W^'ang Chih flung a stone at them, and dashed
“ out the brains of one, so that it dropt down dead into a bamboo
“ grove. His companion T"an Hung-sheu then suddenly got so severe
“ a headache that he could not proceed with the journey. He told
“ Wang Chih to travel on before him, and await him somewhere,

“ or to inform his family of his condition, that they might send

“people to go and fetch him.

“ Suddenly P"ei Chung-ling dreamt that T'an Hung-sheu told him
“ he had been murdered on the way by Wang Chih, and that this man,
“ after appropriating his money and other effects, had left his corpse
“ in a bamboo copse. Before two days had elapsed, Wang Chih arrived
“ and asked him for new orders, but the Governor summoned him
“ to court, and as soon as he appeared before him delivered him over
“ to the officers, who bauiboo-ed him and subjected him to all the
“ rigours of the law. Ten days later Tan Hung-sheu came back,
“ and the Governor then learned how the stone had been thrown
“ at the crow, and how the spectre of this bird had avenged itself” h


-aasi®

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

^ H History of the T'ang Dynasty amended; three chapters of

notes and tales on the eighth century and the first quarter of the ninth, ascribed
to Li Chao a high officer. A copy in our possession does not contain the

above narration. We borrow it fi om the T S, sect, ^ , ch. 23.


640


DEMONOLOGY.


We have also tales of manslayers haunted mercilessly by the
souls of their victims in the shape of crows. “Li Chhng-sze was a
“ man of Ngoh-cheu in the time of the T'ang dynasty. His family
“ was rich, counting its wealth by myriads of coins, but he had
“ an ugly wife, and a son of ten years old, both diseased in their
“ loins and lower limbs. He had always hated them, and married
“four concubines, with whom he spent his days in pleasure.

“ Once these concubines , when tipsy , advised him to divorce
“ the ugly one with a hundred thousand coins. But the latter’s
“resolution to bring the matter before the authorities withheld him.
“ So he and the concubines contrived another plot. That night they
“ gave the poor woman liquor to drink, and then poisoned her,
“ together w'ith her son. But from the tenth day after the burial
“ they saw two crows appear at every noontide to peck Ch^ing-
“sze’s heart, causing him intolerable sufferings. It was impossible
“ to drive them away ; senseless with despair he sank to the
“ ground, and it was long ere he recovered consciousness. This went
“ on for a year, a myriad of expedients to which recourse was had,
“ proving ineffective to help him.

“It chanced that one Lo Kung-yuen, a Taoist doctor of Ts'ing-
“ch'ing, was wandering between the Hwai and Sze rivers. Him
“ Ch'ing-sze entreated to visit his house, and asked if he had any
“magical art to avert the evil and help him. ‘Wronged souls are
“at work here’, the doctor replied; ‘they have laid an accusation
“ before the Emperor of Heaven, and have been authorised by Heaven
“ to wreak vengeance upon men ; in such cases no magic can stop
“them; the only way to obtain absolution from the sins com-
“ mitted is to put up a Taoist altar adorned with yellow charms,
“and there to appeal to Heaven with reverence’. Ch'^ing-sze did so
* for the space of three days and three nights. After the second day
“ the black birds ceased their visits, and then his wife and his son
“appeared to him in a dream. ‘Unjustly you destroyed by poison
“the lives of us both, mother and ‘son’, they said; ‘we denounced
you for it to the Emperor of Heaven, and He has allowed us to
take revenge; but on account of the virtuous work performed with
the j-ellow charms, the Most High has sent down an order, to the
elfect that we shall be reborn in Heaven, there to be rewarded
with bliss; we therefore loosen for ever the ties of revenge that
“bind us to you”h


THE OWL A SPECTRAL BIRD. 64i

As to the owl, of which several varieties are found in China, its
nocturnal life and screeching no doubt are the principal reasons for
its general investment with demoniacal attributes. It is deemed to
be extremely ill-boding, especially the tufted species, called keu-kohh
or denoted by various other names. Ch'^en Tsang-khi wrote in the
first half of the eighth century; “When it enters a city, the city
“ will be depopulated, and the same fate will befall the house
“ into which it flies ; but it is harmless when it steadfastly remains
“ in the same spot. When any one hears it emit a cry like a laugh,
“ he should hurry away. In the northern countries there exist
“ two varieties of this kind, called h i u n and h u , resembling each
“other, and yet being distinct species; they are named so from the
“ sounds h i u n and h u which they utter, have eyes like kittens, and
“are of the size of the khii-yuh; should these birds emit a cry
“like a laugh, somebody is sure to die. Further we have the
“hiu-liu, also belonging to this kind, but smaller, and yellow;
“ it enters houses at night, and there gathers finger-nails, becoming


*. * SC « W K 2 , 0 ft ^ ® ® * I? * S

M ^ ^ ^ o

- 0^#,^ .ft **15^18

WSitti;. 4ElKat?!i A±l¥»:

ts'icn-, T S, sect. ch. 23.


64:3


DEMONOLOGY.


“acquainted (therefrom?) with the good and bad fortunes of the
“ inmates. When it is caught, nails are found in its crop ; hence
“those who clip their nails bury them within the house” ‘.

“The ku-hwoh can fetch away the dual soul of man. According
“ to the Hvon clning hi, this is a bird-spectre, a kind of spirit,
“ which, when it dresses itself with feathers, is a flying bird, and
“ when it puts the feathers off, becomes a woman ; this is said to
" be a woman transformed after having died in childbed, and there-
“fore has two nipples on her breast, and is bent on snatching
“ away the sons of others, to bring them up as her own. No
“ family with young infants should leave the clothes of the latter
“ in the open night-air, for if the bird, while flying around at night,
“ marks them with spots of blood, the child will suddenly get
“ convulsions from terror and also suffer from a kind of atrophy,
“ named atrophy of the guiltless. This bird is abundant in King-cheu,
“and there too is called the spectre-bird”^.

In the ninth century, Twan ClTing-shih deemed this ornitholo-
gical lore good enough for a place in his writings. He added that
this nocturnal wanderer was called Daughter of the Emperor
of Heaven ^ and tiao-sing*, which may be the name of a
star. He acquaints us with an owl, called “the spectral chariot”,
notorious as a devil devoting itself to the theft of human souls:


«i, A5E. a

iitfi . Pca-tyno shill i, quoted in the Pen-ts^ao hang muh, cli. 49.


A^m.i.<p mi. -am Ml M. mm


ft W g ii S )H S . 11 2 * S ttf tfc . tSI ^ ^

^ ^ si ^ ft fi'-


THE CRANE AS A SPECTRE-BIRD.


643


“ The bird called the spectral chariot formerly had, according
“ to tradition, ten heads, and could ravish human souls, but one
“ of its heads was devoured by dogs. In the Ts"in region, when
“ the sky is dark, that bird sometimes produces a noise like of
“ swords and chariots, but, according to some, this noise is caused
“ by water-fowls passing through the air” *. Before Twan Ch"ing-shih
committed these notes to paper, Ch'en Tsang-khi had written some-
thing about this dreaded soul-robber: “The spectral chariot flies
“ about in the dark, crying, and sneaks into human dwellings, there
“ to gather the souls and breath of men. Time was, according to
“ tradition, when this bird had ten heads ; one was then devoured
“ by dogs, and nine remained. Out of the place of that one head
“ blood trickles continually, and should this come down upon a
“house, misfortune will befall it. When the inhabitants of King
“ and Ch'u (Hunan and Hupeh) hear the bird fly and cry in the
“ night, they extinguish their lamps, and in order to prevail over it
“ drum on the doors and twitch the ears of their dogs, for, they
“say, it is afraid of dogs (which once bit olf its head)”®. We read,
indeed, in a “ Calendar of Customs in the King and Ch'u regions” *,
which was written in the sixth century: “In the first month of the
“ year many spectre-birds migrate during the night. In every house
“ the inmates hammer on the beds, and beat against the doors,
“ pinch and twist the ears of the dogs, and extinguish lamps and
“ candles, in order to ward them off”

The stately crane, so highly esteemed and so generally appre-
ciated in China as an emblem of longevity, there dishonours and


weicsisam- Hiu-yamj tsah tsu, ch. 16.

tT PI IR a ® 2 . W * ® Ife . Pen-tb^uo shill i, quoted

in the I’cii-ls'ao hang muh, ch. 49.

3 King Ch'u sui-shi hi


644


DEMONOLOGY.


debases itself now and then like a fox, by playing the devil of
lewdness in human disguise. Thus, “in the reign of the emperor
“Hwai of the Tsin dynasty, in the Yung kia period (A.D. 307—
“SIS), one Sil Shih was out for a stroll, and in the field perceived
“ a young maid of nice complexion, fresh and white. She approached
“ him, they exchanged some words of endearment, and the girl
“ sang this verse :

“ Your good repute reached my ears a long time ago,

“ And my heart has since waited for you for days and months ;

“ How could I meet you, excellent man ?

“ I longed for you, but owing to the distance no attachment could
be formed.

“ As soon as Shih’s love was in harmony with hers, she, in delight,
“ invited him to a house, and there placed food and drink before
“ him, with much fish. As he did not come home next day, his
“ brothers tracked him, and found him sitting on the bank of the
“ lake, face to face with the lady. They attacked her with their
“ rattan canes, but she changed immediately into a white crane,
“ which flew high up into the sky. Shih was quite bewildered, and
“it was more than a year ere he recovered” b


9, Piscine Devils.

Confucius, whose holiness, as we saw on page 628, did not safe-
guard him from attacks of serpent-demons in human shape, is
stated by early authors to have had also a visit from a most dia-
bolic man-fish. “In a fit of melancholy he was seated in a lodging-
“ house at the ordered strings (of his lute), and was singing, when
“ in the night a man appeared, over nine feet high, in a blackish
“ dress and with a high cap. His harsh voice set all the attendants
“in commotion. Tsze-kung stepped forward and asked: ‘who are

A> tfm***. mmum,

I !/>'cn, quoted in the KK, ch. 460.


THE DEVILISH FISH OF CONFUCIUS.


645


“ you ? ’ but the intruder seized him and gripped him under his
“ arm. Then Tszg-lu came forth with a drawn bow, and fought the
“ stranger in the courtyard. When after some moments the latter
“ still stood unconquered, Confucius scanned him, and perceived
“ that the pivots at the joints of his coat-of-mail opened now and
“then like the palm of a hand. ‘Why do not you test those joints?’
“he exclaimed, ‘shoot him there, and run up the steps!’ TszS-lu
“ did so, and thus stretched the stranger flat on the ground, where
“he became a big t'i fish of over nine feet. Then Confucius said:

“‘Wherefore did this beast come here? I have heard, that
“ when animals become old, all vital spirits (t s i n g) may possess
“ them, and that then they appear where there is adversity. It
“must be this which brought this beast here; would not its
“ coming have some connexion or other with my fit of melancholy
“and distaste for food, or with diseases of those who follow
“me? Yes, the six domestic animals, as also tortoises, snakes, fish,
“ turtles, shrubs, trees, and so on, all become possessed in the long
“ run by s h e n , and then they can haunt mankind as spectres,
“which I call the five yiu, that is to say, the five regions (points
“ of the compass) corresponding with the five elements, as all those
“ regions contain such beings. Y i u means old, as such beings
“ haunt when they are old. But their activity ceases when they
“are killed; what evil then can impend now over me? This
“ incident may even be created by Heaven’s undiiuinished goodness
“ to bind my fate (with firmer ties); wherefore else should that
“beast have come here? Accordingly I need not desist from my
“lute-playing and my songs’. Tsze-lu cooked the fish, which had
“ a fine flavor ; and the ailing followers rose from their beds, so
“that next day the party could pursue its voyage”'.


646


DEMONOLOGY.


In a specially bad repute as a demon of disease is a fish designated
by the name of shang. We read of it as follows:

“The shang resembles the tench, and has red spots; the largest
“specimens are over a chTh long. It occurs in Yii-chang, where
“it lives mostly in dirty and muddy ponds, sometimes by hundreds.
“These fishes can become tsu spectres, evil apparitions bewitching
“and bewildering men, and also eapable of possessing them. The
“ owners of fields and grounds in the neighbourhood of such pools dare
“not injure them, but they invoke them sometimes and present sacri-
“fices to them, in order to improve their harvests, and thus they
“ make their fields yield double crops. But the owners have to
“ conceal their names, and to desert their fields after having culti-
“ vated them for three years, this being the sure way to escape the
“ misfortune which those fishes cause.

“The ill they may bring upon men consists in this, that they
“turn the posture of their faces, hands and feet; the way to
“ be delivered from this evil is to pray and sue out a pardon.
“ At night they can move over land, where they mark their path
“by muddy prints; and on the spots they visit a sound like seu-
“seu is heard. The general-in-chief of the twenty-fifth division of
“ the Emperor of the North has a charm which may conquer those
“tsu of the waters. Written on bricks or stones, it may be thrown
“ into their pools ; or, written on boards, it may be nailed on the edge
“of waters, and the fish then are sure to remove in consequence
“of a storm of wind and rain, or a thunderbolt. Those who
“understand this magic should apply it” *.


I* § S « . S 13 . i| ^ 3 l B , 3l S ^ 3l «
Sija.

f-ss

' St« !t*4n«.|.

Ail'S

A. HJ

**©A,i.%alfeA®i> Wim


FISHES AND CRABS AS EVIL SPIRITS.


647


To act as a devil of sickness, a fish needs by no means
belong to a special kind. “Under the T^ang dynasty”, a story
runs, “one Liu I of Ho-tung sojourned in Loh-yang, and availing
“ himself of the vernal weather was angling in the I, and caught
“ a big fish, which he took home and placed in a basin with
“ water. He had a child, not more than six or seven years old,
“ which he dreamed that same night was bitten in the breast by
“a fish. With a shudder he awoke, just in time to hear the child
“cry. ‘1 dreamt that a big fish was biting its breast’, said he; ‘it is
“crying because it cannot endure the pain’. As this tallied with his
“ dream, he, in surprise, inspected the child’s breast, and his fright
“ was great when he found on it pustules and blood. At daybreak
“ he flung his fish into the stream ; then he ordered some Buddhist
“clergymen to recite sutras before painted images of the saints;
“ and in a little more than ten days the child’s pustules were
“cured. He never angled again”*.

The cold blood peculiar to the fisli tribe has not prevented
Chinese authors from recording tales of fishes that, like so many
other animal-demons, have cheated men and women by tempting,
seducing or marrying them in human forms. Such stories are
even told of crabs. “In Kin-ling, where crabs abound, there is an
“ old tradition abroad of a crab the back of which measured five
“ feet, and the legs of which had twice that length ; it appeared
“ regularly in the dead of night to bite people. At that time there


iiS»> +

. Lull i hi; KK, ch. 467.


* . Hiicn-ihih <7(i; K K, ch. 467.


648


DEMONOLOGY.


“ was in the country a chaste woman, still unmarried, though thirty
years old. One night her house was assailed by robbers and she ran
“ out of it, but found the giant crab across her path. On a sudden it
“■ stood before her as a beautiful youth, who seduced her. With deep
“indignation this immaculate virgin exclaimed : ‘what spectre are you
“ that dares dishonour me? when I am dead I shall transform myself
“into a poisonous fog and therewith kill you’; and with these words
“ she dashed her head against a rock with so much vehemence that
“she died. Next morning people found the crab dead on the road in
“ a dense fog, and wayfarers were then no longer molested. And
“ to this day many crabs lie torpid when fog is thick” h


10. Insects as Demons.

Even insects are not too insignificant in China for a place among
animal-demons. “In the 1 hi period of the Tsin dynasty”, we
learn from T‘ao IVien, “one Koh Hwui-fu of Wu-shang was passing
“ a night at the house of his wife’s family, when after the third
“ watch two men with torches appeared in front of the steps.
“ Apprehending that they were there with evil intent, he went to
“ give them a thrashing and was on the point of laying his stick
“about them, when they changed into butterflies, which flew about
“in confusion and dashed against Hwui-fu’s flank; he tumbled to
“ the ground, and was dead in a short time”

ssi&aai. a. # si •? . w

^ fS ^ * bhwofi lin ^ , a work I have not seen,

and about which I find nowhere any particiilars ; the tale is given in the T S,
sect. ^ A ch. 162.

W * Bfi If 4 « « iti A ® H . S Jl #

. bheu hen Li^ ch. 8,


sS|4f


WOMEN-SEDUCING CICADAS.


649


Cicadas in human disguise are no less prone than sundry mam-
mals and reptiles to seduce women. “In the reign of Sun Hao of
“the Wu dynasty (third cent.), Chu Tan of Hwai-nan, prefect
“ of the capital, whose cognomen was Yung-ch‘ang, was Governor
“ of Kien-ngan. One of the delegates in his service had a wife,
“ labouring under demonish disease, but her husband suspected her
“ of illicit sexual intercourse. Afterwards he started on a journey,
“ but spied upon her through a cleft in the wall, and presently saw
“ her seated within her loom to weave, looking at something in a
“ distant mulberry tree, and then approaching this, speaking and
“jesting. And the delegate discovered a lad in the tree, fourteen or
“ fifteen years old, wearing a blue quilt with sleeves, and a headband
“ of the same colour. Supposing that this was the true gallant, the
“ delegate drew his bow and shot at him ; but the knave turned into
“ a chirping cicada as large as a refuse-basket, and fluttered away.
“The wife, affrighted by the hissing of the shot, exclaimed : ‘beware!
“ they are shooting at you’, rather to her good man’s astonishment.

“Erelong the delegate saw two lads in the street, holding the
‘•following discourse: — ‘Why did not T see you again?’ ‘Well’,
“replied the other, v/ho was the lad in the tree, ‘I was so unfor-
“ tunate as to be ill with a wound for a long time, having been
“shot at’. ‘And how do you feel now?’ ‘1 cured myself with an
“ointment standing on the rafter of Governor Chu’. Now the
“ delegate said to Chu Tan : ‘do you know that your unguent has been
“stolen?’ ‘I have had it upon the rafter for a long time’, was
“the reply, ‘how could it be stolen thence?’ ‘You are wrong’,
“mylord; examine it’. Tan did not believe a word of it, but he
“ examined the unguent, and found it wrapped up as before and
“ with its old label. ‘Thou villain, thou best wilfully and knowingly’,
“he exclaimed, ‘the ointment is, of course, quite in the same con-
“ dition as it was’; but the delegate retorted: ‘open it’, and in
“ fact, one half of the contents was gone, and the remainder bore
“ clear marks of having been scraped off with a finger. Great now
“ was Tan s fright. He interrogated the man minutely, who told
“him everything from beginning to end”*.


— nT + ra


650


DEMONOLOGY.


Spiders too have shown themselves very dangerous to man’s
morals. “To the south of the city of Kiang-hia (Hupeh pr.) there
“ is in the convent of the Iron Buddha a spider-well. According
“ to popular tradition, there existed there in the time of the T'ang
*■ dynasty a red and a white spider, which adopted the shape ot
“charming women to bewitch men; hence the Iron Buddha was
“ cast to subdue them ” \ In their role of maleficent ghosts, spiders
appear in Amoy especially as authors of nightmare. People there
hold the bdi-kfd or “ i5«7-spectre”, a large, harmless domestic octopod,
in great abhorrence, on the ground that it places itself on the
ceiling right over sleeping persons, oppressing their chests if they
happen to lie on their backs, until they change their posture and
turn their breasts away from the monster. This is said to be
distinguishable from ordinary spiders by a missing leg. Unmistake-
able marks of its grasps are the blue and red wales, sometimes
visible on parts of the body which have been subjected to pressure
during sleep.

To conclude with a tale that acquaints us with a centipede
as harbinger and cause of evil; — “In the fifth year of the
“Yuen kia period (A.U. 438), on an evening of the autumnal


I . « W lA W « 0 ® « S « A * . #

nmm. ■Hlii

Al!»rlt.iilg«ii#=#a0.41sr*i.

a»0. a^s*

iH0.^]'A4it$W.'SSiBiK.I&ei
0. S'lff*#, S4fSija^at». BfH

'kW, .yi Z ^ >'•" "•

Kia,iij-liin clii concerning Kiang-hia: T S, sect.

ch. 177.


CENTIPEDES CAUSING EVIL.


651


“ season, it happened in Yii-eliang to one Hu Cheung, that a large
“centipede, two feet long, fell down before his wife and his sister;
“ they told a slave maid to pick it up and throw it away, but no
“ sooner was the slave out of doors than they saw an old hag
“ with stinking and ragged clothes and without eye-balls. In the
“ third month of the next year, while his door was closed, they
“ died one after another” h

Insects, as also vipers, toads, and perhaps yet other small reptiles,
in one word, various crawling vermin really poisonous or thought
to be so, are especially dangerous to men if they or their souls are
sent out against them on purpose by malicious people, in order to
poison them or otherwise destroy their health and lives. Such arti-
ficial animal-demonism is sorcery, of a kind which the reader will
find treated in the next Part of this Book.


. S * m M . ffl a # *1 . ^ M P ‘1 « ,t.


CHAPTER VI.

ON PLANT-DEMONS.

As set forth in our chapter on Plant-spirits (p. 272), trees, shrubs
and herbs are admitted in China by philosophy and folklore
to possess souls, as much as men and animals. That chapter has
also shown the correctness of the obvious inference, that there
must be among plants a considerable number bent on inflicting evil
on man, and thus fully entitled to be ranked in the demon class.

And in the third place, that chapter has taught us, that ani-
mated plants are distinguished into two categories, viz. those which
contain amorphous shen substance, and those which are possessed
of spirits in human or animal shape. The former, we have also seen,
exercise a salutary power upon man, curing him of mental and
bodily infirmity and disease, prolonging his life, and even making
him live for ever. We may then expect to find plant-devils exclu-
sively in the other category; and this is confirmed implicitly by
the evidence set before us in Chinese books.

On page 2S6 we gave a tale which shows, that, like foxes, wolves
and other beasts, anthropomorphous plant-devils waylay married or
unmarried women, seducing them for the satisfaction of their vile
lusts. Prom numerous tales vve may learn how they bewdlder such
victims and make them mad or ill, how they allure them to
their haunts by shrewd tricks, and abduct them or their souls. Thus,
*• under the Tsin dynasty, a member of the gentry purchased a
“ fresh-looking slave woman who answered to the name of Hwai-
shun, and was told by her that the daughter of her paternal aunt
‘•had been possessed by a red hien plant. Having seen a lad with
- a nice, fresh complexion, in a red dress, who told her that his
“ dwelling stood to the north side of the privy, the girl had been
“ carolling continuously with marks of great satisfaction ; every
“ evening she suddenly stopped working, and went behind the


TR£E-SP1RITS ABDUCTING WOMEN.


653


“ house, and her family who watched her, saw nothing but the
“ h i e n with the girl’s bracelets and fingerrings hanging on it.
“ They cut down the plant, on which the girl, having wailed and
“wept the whole night through, breathed her last”*.

— “In the first year of the Ching kwan period (627) the
“ darling daughter of Li Tsih died. She was buried in Poh-mang,
“ and he ordered a house-slave to dwell beside her grave. One day
“the girl came to this man with the following words: ‘In reality
“ I am not dead, but I have been kidnapped by the shen of a
“ big tree ; he happens to be away now for an audience with the
“ god of the Western mountain, which gave me a chance to escape,
“ and knowing you are here, I come to you, for the disgrace I have
“ suffered since I left my parents prevents me from going home ;
“ I hope you will conceal me somewhere ; I shall reward you for it
“by making you a wealthy man’.

‘■The slave stood aghast for a long while, but he promised to
“ do it, and constructed a separate dwelling for her. Sometimes the
“ woman left it in the morning, to return at the end of the day,
“ but it happened also that she went away in the evening, to
“ come back at daybreak. She walked with the lightness of the
“ wind. When a month had passed, she brought with her ten
“ pounds of gold and gave it to the slave, who accepted it and
“ sold a few ounces. But then some one among the people, whose
“ gold had disappeared, seized him and lodged a complaint against
“ him before the Loh-yang authorities, who enquired whence he had
“ got the gold. On being informed by the slave of all the details of
“ the event, they tried to catch the woman, but she had disappeared.
“The rest of the gold transformed itself entirely into yellow stone”


1 yucn\ K K, ch. 416.

Si']. - 0


654


DEMONOLOGY.


We read in a work of the highest class:

“ When Chang Ping had been promoted to the third literary
“ degiee in the eighth year of the Chlng hwa period (1472), he
“ was invested with the prefectural dignity of the Yen-shan district
(in Kiangsi), There a girl had been given in marriage, but on
“ the arrival (of the bridal procession) at the housedoor of the son-
“ in-law she had vanished. Wherefore both families had lodged
“ complaints before the magistrate, who, however, had found it
“ impossible to give a verdict. Then Chang Ping made an excursion
“ through the demesnes of the city, and seeing a big tree which
" prevented the ground on the spot from being cultivated, would fell
“it; but the people said that there were shen nestled in its top.
“ Ping did not heed their words, and at the head of the crowd went
“ thither to fell it, whereupon three men, dressed and capped after
“ the fashion of ceremonial attire, on the left side of the road made
“ reverences to him ; but he scolded them, and they disappeared of a
“ sudden. His men then set to the work of felling, and a stream of
“ blood gushed out of the tree. At this sight Ping flew into a passion ;
“ he swung the axe with his own hands, and brought down the tree,
“ and out of the nest two women tumbled, who declared that a gale
“ had blown them somewhere to an upper story. One of them was
“ that woman who had been given in marriage”


^sdm-s. ***

at lit * . » si w tt; * . B * , * ft # -ffc s » 5

. Sun siamj luh , a work unknown to me; K K, ch. 328.

a I?.

M T' , 3p ^ a H A ^ a; * > ^ lit ^ .

® 7' . jt tfe ft) . lit * ai a Ba . ^ ^ 2 ^

ttSfti.itka-SA.wsapkMiti.*-

. History of the Ming Dyna.sty, cli. 161, 1. 18.


TREE-DEMONS SHAPED LIKE SNAKES.


655


But let us lay aside the instances of crafty abduction and seduc-
tion perpetrated by tree-devils, and turn to those which speak of
mischief of a more serious description. Koh Hung stated, that in
the time of an immortal, named Liu P^ing *, who was quite youth-
ful in spite of the three centuries which had passed over his head,
“ there existed an old temple with a tree, over which there conti-
“nually hung a glare of light, while many cases of violent death
“occurred among people stopping under its foliage. No bird ven-
“tured to build its nest in it. P'ing arraigned and punished it,
“wdth the result that, though it was the height of summer, it
“withered and died, while a big snake of seven or eight chang
“ was found hanging in it, and died. After that, the tree did no
“more harm”®. A similar story was related of Sheu Kwang-heu,
the wonderworker of whom we spoke on page 629. “There was a
“ tree possessed by a spirit, at which whosoever stopped imme-
“diately died, and birds flying overhead always fell down. Heu
“arraigned it, on which the tree witliered, though it was mid-
“ summer, and fell down; and a big serpent of seven chang by
“eight was seen hanging in it, dying” ^

Accordingly, by felling trees in which demons house, the latter
may be disabled and killed. Conversely, attacking trees may be
very dangerous work, as it may anger the indwelling spirit and
unchain its wrath. Yii Pao relates, “that in Yang-cheu the sister
“of one Ku Khiu of Pieh-kia had been ill from her tenth year,
“and that he asked Kwoh Poh, when she had already passed her
“fiftieth, to give an oracle about her condition. This sage obtained
“the kwa called shing, meaning a serious offence, and the
“appended verse of explanation ran thus: ‘The meaning of the kwa
“‘serious offence’ is not favourable; a withered willow growing on
“a tomb is not clothed with bloom; a busy wandering soul beholds


1


SI


cJfivcn, ch. 5.


Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. I'lS, II, 1. 17.


656


DEMONOLOGY.


“a dragon’s] chariot; a person being involved seriously, a child is
"afflicted with a devil; this is caused by the felling of a tree, and
"the killing of a snake possessed of spiritual power; but these are
"not offences of his own, but of his ancestors’. Khiu then searched
“the history of his family; and discovered that certain of the last
"generation had felled a big tree, and killed a large snake which
“they found in it; from that moment the woman had sickened,
“and when she was ill, thousands of birds had soared round about
"over the roof, which had astonished all, as nobody could give
"a reason for it; and a farmer of that district, passing by the
“house and looking up at them, had seen a dragon drawing a
“chariot, and a dazzling five-coloured glare of light, which most
"extraordinary sight had disappeared after a while” ‘.

And Sui Yuen relates:

“When Yin Wen-twan was Governor General of Shensi, he
"received a missive from the prefect of the district of Hwa-yin, to
"the following effect:

“‘Herewith I detail the particulars of my collision with an evil
"spirit, and report my death. In front of my third hall stood an
“old Hwai tree (Sophora), making the rooms very dark; I wished
“to fell it, but the petty officers in the city all said: ‘there is a
"spirit in this tree; it may not be felled’. I did not believe them,
"and felled it; moreover 1 had the roots dug up, and when these
“had been removed I saw fresh flesh, and under it a painted
“ paper showing a naked girl in a reclining attitude. With great
“detestation I burned the picture and gave the flesh to the dog to
"eat, and that same night 1 felt that my soul was uneasy; I was
"not ill, but dejected, and this has become worse every day;
“alarming sounds are drumming in my ears; my eyes see nothing,
“but my ears hear; I feel that I shall live no longer in this world.


JK . sji 7} gt W * ^ . A tft -t A « . # A *


DOG-SHAPED TREE-DEMONS.


657


“Therefore I beg Your Excellency to send another functionary hither’.

“Yin put this missive in his sleeve, and then gave it his private
“secretary to read, who asked: ‘what reply shall we send to this?’
“ He had not finished these words when another missive arrived,
“ announcing the death of the prefect of Hwa-yin in consequence
“ of his illness” b

Plant-spirits being sometimes, as we saw on page 282, dog-
shaped, they may harry mankind in such a form. “Towards the
“ end of the Liang dynasty, an empty house in Pu-sih-kia, in Ts'ai-
“ cheu was declared by those who had successively dwelled in it
“ to be unlucky and not habitable. A man named Wei Fuh-To
“ entered that house with a light, and stopping in the front hall
“ saw in the twilight a being with a human face and a dog’s
“ body without a tail, running and jumping in the apartments.
“ Our hero put an arrow into that beast, and this one shot
“ sufficed to make it vanish. Next day they opened the house,
“ and saw the arrow buried up to its feathers in a rotten tree-
“ stump over a c h'i h in length, with some coagulated blood under
“ it. Thenceforth apparitions occurred there no more” *.


« fa. was

ch. 7.

ch. 415.


42


658


DEMONOLOGY.


Tree-demons may appear as monsters in black giant forms. “ In
“the T'ai hwo period (S27 — 836) there lived one Kiang Hia,
“ a secondary officer, in whose official mansion mysterious and
“ strange things occurred. Every night they saw a giant, totally
“black and very shining; all who beheld him were forthwith
“seized with fright, fell ill, and died. Afterwards there was there
“ one Hii Yuen-chhing, an able devil-seer, who, when the officer
“ had ordered him to arraign the spectre with his written magical
“ charms, sat down one evening under the western balcony of
“ the hall. On a sudden the giant came; A^uen-ch'ang drew forth
“ a charm and let fly at the monster ; it struck its arm with a
“ sound as if it were cut through, and the arm fell to the ground.
“ Off ran the giant, and Yuen-ch'ang perceived that the arm which
“ had dropped off was a dry branch of a tree. Next morning a slave
* of the house said to him : 'your charm is sticking to the dead
“tree by the north-east corner of the hall’; they immediately went
“ to see, and perceived a branch severed from the tree : in fact
“ the arm cut off froin the giant. Forthwith they felled the tree
“ and burned it, and from that moment there were no more appa-
“ritions in that house” b

Thus we learn, wdien a tree-spirit in human shape is wounded,
the wound shows itself in the corresponding part of the tree. So,
also, as we have seen on page 549, when men transformed into
animals are wounded, the wound is visible on the same limb of
their human body, and their dangerous character is thus disguised.
Here is another illustration of that trait of tree-spirit lore:

“ To the north-w'est of Lin-lai a Buddhist convent stood, where
“ a monk, named Chi-t'ung, regularly sank into dhyana-abstraction


. Siwn-nhih chi ; KK, ch.4t5.


^


A TREE-SFECTRE OUTWITTED AND DESTROYED. 659

“ with the Saddharma-pundarika Sutra in his hands, every evening
“ sitting down thus in some quiet spot in the cool forest, whither
“ hardly any one came. When .several years had elapsed, it hap-
“ pened one night that a man strolled around the convent ,
“ calling out the monk’s name, till daylight broke. He did so again
“ till the third night, when his voice penetrated the door, so
“that Chi T'ung could not help asking: 'wherefore do you call
“me? come in and tell me’. It was a being of more than six
“chlh, wearing a black robe, with a blue face, wide-opened eyes,
“ and big lips. On seeing the monk it also joined its hands
“ together, and Chi-thing having regarded it sharply for a while,
“said; ‘are you cold? come here by the fire’. The being sat down,
“ while Chi-t‘ung went on reciting his holy book.

“Towards the fifth watch, the creature, sleepy under the influence
“of the fire, snored loudly by the stove with closed eyes and gaping
“ mouth. Seeing it in this condition, Chi-f ung took his incense-spoon
“ and put some hot ashes into its mouth. With a loud shriek
“ it jumped up, ran off to the sill of the gate, and there was a
“ sound in the hill behind the convent as if it stumbled. Chi-Tung
“searched that spot next morning, and found a piece of bark.
“Then, in search of the creature, he ascended the hill, and saw,
“ some miles off", a large green Sterculia, the branches of which
“ were quite fresh, but a dent in the root looked as if freshly
“ chipped. He placed the piece of bark upon that spot, and
“ found that it fitted the dent perfectly, leaving no trace of a
“ chip. Halfway up the trunk a woodcutter had cut out a step in
“ the tree, over six t s'u n in depth ; this was the mouth of the
“ spectre, for it was full of ashes and fire still glimmering and
“ sparkling. Chi-t'ung set fire to the tree therewith, and from that
“ moment the spectre ceased to appear”

ii 7 B a H , iir a . IT A * f ft .


660


DEMONOLOGY.


The dangerous character of tree-devils manifests itself in nothing
so much as in their being very frequently the causes of disease and
death. Their position as demons of illness has been illustrated
already by a tale on page 655; here are two to the same effect,
from a book of the ninth century of our era: — “Some ten miles
“ south of the district city of Kiao-chTng there were always nocturnal
“ apparitions, producing much consternation and illness among the
“ people, and even cases of death. The villagers had been afflicted
“ thereby a long time, when one of them, walking in the dark with a
“ bow and arrows, saw south of the city a monster like a giant in
“ human form, dressed in red, with a black kerchief over its head.
“ It approached him at a slow pace in a stooping attitude, like a
“ very drunken man ; whereupon the villager in his consternation
“ drew his bow to its full strength and let fly an arrow, which
“ hit the spectre. It made away, and the other, as soon as his
“ fright had subsided a little, took to bis heels in a northerly
“ direction, and reached an inn, where he related his adventure.
“ Next morning he saw by the city, to the west of the moat, a red
“ Cassia with an arrow sticking in it, which he recognized for his
“ own. He pulled it out to take it home, and found much blood
“ adhering to the point. The district magistrate, being informed of
“ the matter, ordered the tree to be burnt ; and from that moment
“ no further evil occurred southward of the city” b

R ® a ja 2 ‘li i

^iii-yaiig tsali tm, supplement, ch. i.

A Wc,

* * * -f . S # tfi) * , fl*: 11 a if # , M A ti

® Kg Ji IB 2


A DANGEROUS WILLOW-SPECTRE.


661


— “On the eastern Loh river (near Loh-yang) stood an old
“ house, the hall and main room of which, decorated with windows of
“ perforated masonry and steps, were particularly spacious. The people
“ dwelling there had met with violent deaths so often, that it stood
“ empty, firmly bolted. For a long time it had been in this con-
“ dition, when the Minister in constant attendance on the Throne,
“ Lu Khien from Fan-yang, became a Censor in the Ching yuen
“ period (A.D. 785 — 804), and was appointed to the censorship in
“ the east (i. e. in Loh-yang). Desiring to purchase that house,
“he lodged in it. Some one said to him: ‘this house is haunted
“and not habitable’; but he retorted: ‘I can by my nature put
“ an end to that’.

“Then one night he laid himself to sleep in the hall, accom-
“ panied by an underling, and told his servants to abide quite outside
“ the gate. A brave man that underling was, an excellent archer ;
“ he sat down with his bow and arrows under the window
“ in front b

“In the dead of night somebody was heard knocking at the gate.
“ The underling at once asked what was the matter, and the
“ answ'er came; ‘here is a messenger with a letter from the com-
“ mander Yang (or Willow, a family-name) to the censor Lu’. Then,
“as Khien answered no further, the letter was thrown through the
“ perforated brickwork. Khien ordered the underling to read it ; it
“ ran as follows : ‘ I have dwelt here for a year ; this hall and main
“room with the perforated brickwork and steps are my d\velling;
“the spirits of this gate and these doors are my subordinates; is
“it then just and right of you, sir, to intrude into my house? If
“you had a house and I entered it, would you approve of that?


. Suen-shih chi-, T S, ^ect. , ch. 244.


662


DEMONOLOGY.


“ you do not fear me, but should not you rather cherish some
“ sense of shame ? be quick, get away from here, sir, lest you call
“down upon you the disgrace of being destroyed’.

“No sooner was this letter read than it dispersed in all directions
“ as if carried away by the air, just like flying ashes. And on a
“sudden another voice rang out: ‘the commander Willow desires
“ to call on the censor Lu’ ; and there he was, a tall spectre
“ several tens of fathoms high, standing erect in the courtyard,

“ with a gourd in his hand. But the underling had already bent
“ his bow with all his strength ; the arrow whirred, but hit the
“ gourd. And the spectres made off, leaving his gourd behind.

“After a while it came back, and with its hands on the brick-
“ work stooped down to peep through it, showing a face of
“ very singular description. The underling shot again, and sent the
“ arrow into its breast. The spectre started and, seized with fright,
“ ran away in an easterly direction. Next morning Khien ordered
“ his men to track its footprints. These led them to an empty plot
“ of ground on the east of the house. Here they found a willow
“ over a hundred feet high, with an arrow sticking in it. This was
“ the so-called commander VVillow. Khien had the tree chopped
“ for fuel, and from that moment no more evil befell the inmates
“ of that house.

“ After another year the hall and rooms were being repaired,
“when they found under its roof-tiles a gourd, over a chang in
“ size, with an arrow sticking in its handle. This was the gourd
“which the commander had carried in his hand”k


AVERSION FROM TREE-PLANTING.


663


Writers on tree-devils follow the lines of the preceding narratives
as a rule. It would in consequence become tedious to quote more
of their tales. Let us conclude with the statement, that to this day
the belief in tree-spirits dangerous to man is obviously strong. In
southern Fuhkien it deters people from felling any large trees or
chopping off heavy branches, for fear the indwelling spirit may
become irritated and visit the aggressor or his neighbours with
disease and calamity. Especially respected are the evergreen banyan or
diing the biggest trees to the found in that part of China. In
Amoy some people even show a strong aversion from planting trees,
the planters, as soon as the stems have become as thick as their
necks, being sure to be throttled by the indwelling spirits. No ex-
planation of this curious superstition was ever given us. It may
account to some extent for the almost total neglect of forestry in that
part of China, so that hardly any except spontaneous trees grow there.


aft

* % e « « .« .

Mmmmmm-km, Mm


CHAPTER VII.


LIFELESS THINGS AS SPECTRES.

The animation of what we call lifeless things or dead matter
passes in China for undisputable reality. We also know from
Chapter XIII of the first Part of this Book, that the soul of a
thing is able to appear and work outside the same as a man or
animal, or that it may make that thing a living and working being,
especially if the thing is an image. Such conceptions or doctrines
lead directly to the belief that lifeless things may exercise baneful
demoniacal influences, or, in plain terms, may haunt, and harass
mankind.

We find such “object-spectres”, like animal -spectres, mentioned
in books as tsing or vital spirits (see p. 10), and their visitations
as tsing kwai, “apparitions of tsing” (comp. p. 439), In this
class of demons a large category consists of the ground-spectres
already treated of in Chapter IV, which, nestling in heavy things
seldom moved, may be irritated by shifting these, and vent their
wrath by attacking pregnant wmmen and babies. The general belief
in the existence of these spectres does not, however, imply that
every indwelling ghost of an object is a ground-demon.

Spirits of lifeless things manifest their pernicious existence very
often by announcing untoward events, which therefore, according to
illogical simple minds, they actually prepare and cause. Very often
we read in books of cases of death, conflagrations, or calamities of
any kind having occurred as a consequence of things tumbling
over without any apparent cause, or after the apparition of strange
objects in indistinct hazy forms, as clots of blood, extraordinary
colours or coloured things in the air, clouds or vapours within
dwellings iind abroad. In many cases all doubts concerning the
animation of such things were removed by their emission of a glare,
or, much more often, by their showing themselves for some moments
in a shape which, as we know from Chapter XIII of Part I, souls
of objects mostly possess, viz. that of a man or a beast. Koh Hung


BROOMS, WHEKL-SPOKES ETC. AS SPECTRES.


665


(see p. 601) mentioned ill-boding, evil-brewing spectres of gold
and jade in the forms of women, infesting mountains and forests.
We read of miniature men or animals of stone or iron, appearing
and vanishing as living spectres; and according to an old work,
“ it has occurred in Kiang-hwai that a woman, who, being lewd,
“ cherished thoughts which she could not dismiss, and which always
“infatuated her day and night, saw, on rising in the morning,
“ two young lads behind her house, very fresh and clean, resembling
“court pages; she was just going to clasp them in her arms, when
“ on a sudden they became brooms, which she thereupon burned '.
Thus hysterical hallucinations are seriously taken for women-seducing
ghosts. Still worse may lifeless things behave. “Tsiang Wei-yoh
“ feared neither devils, nor spirits. Once sleeping alone under a
“window, he heard human voices outside. ‘Are you wronged
“spectres?’ he exclaimed with a curse, ‘if so, walk in and see
“ me; but if you are spectres without any business here, then it
“is unseemly to frighten me’. On these words the spectres burst
“in the door, and were about to step on his bed, when they
“ saw Wei-yoh’s intrepid attitude, and retired to the wall of the
“ apartment. They were seven strong. He asked them wherefore

“ they stood there, and receiving no answer, attacked them with

“ his pillow. Then they ran away alltogether through the door,

“ and he ran after them, only to see them disappear in the court-

“yard. Next day he turned up the ground, and found seven broken
“ wheel-spokes”

— “And in the Khai ch'ing period (836 — 841) it occurred
“ that the family of Shih Tsung-wu, the Assistant Commander of
“ Kwei-lin, a good bowman from his youth, were visited by a


M * a # - , a » « . sn §• xMi # , a

Yiu ming luh ; KK, ch. 368.

Kivaiig i kij K K, ch. 369.


666


demonology.


“ contagious malignant disease, which left scarce any of the elder
^ and younger people among them hale and sound. Daily, in the
“ dead of night, they saw a man come from outside, enveloped by
*• a glare of light, whose arrival was a signal for the sufferers to
“cry and to moan more bitterly. As no physician could effect a
“ cure, Tsung-wu one evening took his bow, and watched the
“ door, in wait for the spectre. Suddenly it arrived ; Tsung-wu
“ took aim, and the first shot took effect, scattering the demon’s
" flaming light into sparks. He then called for a torch to inspect, and
“ they found a candlestick of camphor wood, in use among the family
“ for a long time, knocked over. They chopped it into fragments,
“which they burned, strewing the ashes into the river; whereupon
“the patients entirely regained their health”^.

The mountain-devils treated in Chapter II, so notorious in China
for the dangerous tricks they play on men, have been known for
centuries to change themselves into objects for evil purposes. “In
“the first year of the Yuen kia period of the Sung dynasty
“(A.D. 424), a Fuh-yang man of the Wang clan had made a
“ crub-weir in a dry canal, and going to look at it in the morning,
“found a block of wood in it, some two ch'ih in size, and a gap
“ through which the crabs had all escaped. He repaired the weir
“ and cast the log upon the bank ; but next morning it was again
“ in the weir, and the latter was broken as before. A second time
“ he mended it, and threw out the block ; and next morning there
“ was the same tale to tell. No wonder that he took the thing
“ for a spectre. He put it into his crab-basket, fastened the cover
“ on the latter, and thus carried it home, saying he would chop
“ it there in pieces and burn them. When still two or three miles
“ from his dwelling, he heard in the basket a confused movement.
“ He turned his head to look, and — the wood had become a


^ ^ ^ iB ’

ot Land and Cll^tollls in Kwei-lin, in Kwangsi province: quoted in K K, ch. 370.


HIIJ.-SPECTRES IN THE FORM OF LOGS OF WOOD.


667


“ being with a human face and a body like a monkey, with one
“hand and one foot. ‘I am instinctively fond of crabs’, it said to
“ Wang, ‘so I entered the water to-day, broke into your weir, and
“ate the crabs; I have committed an offence against you, but
“ please pardon me, sir ; open the basket and let me out ; I am a
“ hill-spirit ; 1 will help you and cause you to catch in your weir the
“biggest crabs’. ‘You molest and worry us here’, Wang replied;
“ ‘this is not the only crime you have committed in course of
“time; this shall cost you your life, for certain’. In divers terms
“ the being begged to be let free, but Wang simply looked into
“its face without answering. Then it said: ‘which is your family-
“ name and your name, sir? I want to know them’, and it asked
“ this question over and over again ; but Wang gave no answer.
“ On nearing the house, the being muttered : ‘he does not let me
“ free, nor does he give me his names, what then can I contrive
“to do? if he only answers, he is a dead man’. On reaching
“ home, Wang kindled a fire and burned the thing, whereupon it
“ was permanently laid, and never again uttered a sound. According
“to the country-people, it was a hill-sao; they say, that if such a
“ being knows a man’s names, it can strike and wound him, and
“ hence it was that it asked so urgently for Wang’s, intending to
“ harm the man, and thus liberate itself” h


.mm.

(fi # If a . # ffl « il . * I6l *t H # . A ffi

m». - miB .m’amm.ntBKA

10. ftlIt*A. S*5E. Iltifea

mmmzM. *0. a


668


DEMONOI,OGY.


Tales of a nature similar to the few quoted above occur in
Chinese books in considerable numbers, also in those of modern
date. Sui Yuen e.g. relates:

“ When passenger-ships in the Poh-yang lake were surprised by
a gale, there always appeared a black cable resembling a dragon,
“• to beat them, and they invariably incurred damage. It was called
“ the Cable-general. For a series of years sacrifices had been offered
“to it, when in the tenth of the Yung ching period (1733),
“ during a long drought, in a spot where the lake stood dry, a
“ rotten rope was found lying across the sand. A farmer chopped
“ it to pieces and burned them, so that all the liquid it contained
“disappeared and the blood gushed out; and from that time the
“ Cable-general no more caused any spectral evil, and the crews
“accordingly no more presented any offerings to him” h

We read of whole gangs of anthropomorphous spectres of large
or small dimensions, spreading consternation and fear, and being
later on found to be leaves blown about by the wind. We read
of people overhearing conversations in the dead of night, which at
daybreak were discovered to have been held by utensils or other
things, and were no more heard after the things had been burned
or utterly destroyed. For reasons which we need not explain,
ming khi (page 6) or vessels and other articles placed with
the dead in their graves, are often described as doing harm in
the shape of spectres, and returning to their real shape when
beaten or hacked, stabbed or shot. Lids of coffins have shot through
the air, wounding people or crushing them to death, and they
could not be laid but by burning the coffins and their contents.
A great number of such flying object-spectres emitted a nauseous
smell of decaying human or animal matter, and when touched
were found to be soft and slippery. Objects which were in the


■ Shell shell heu ki, ch. 7.

# * « II St It » * . ^ # a « . H IE + # * # ,

s A fr fs 'Ji ^

Tsze puh yii, ch. 18.


WOOD AND BROOMS AS INCENDIARY SPECTRES. 669

possession of ancestors, may recall the remembrance of these to
superstitious minds, that is to say, haunt them. “Liu Hiien, who
“ lived in the city of Yueh, was surprised to see after sunset a
“ being come, with black breeches and coat. He took a torch, and saw
“ that its face and head lacked the seven apertures, so that it
“ ran blindly against everything. He asked a soothsayer to consult
“ the divining stalks about this event, who said : ‘ this is a thing
“ coeval with your forefathers ; if it exists any longer, it will become
“ a spectre and murder men, but having no eyes yet, you may still
“ ward it off in time’. Liu caught it and tied it with a rope, and
“ dealt it several blows with a sword, whereupon it changed into a
“ pillow, which was discovered to date from his grandfather’s time” k

Rotten wood and old brooms may haunt houses in China as
incendiary spectres. “In the year ting-mao, Liu Wei, Governor
“ of Lii-cheu, was removed to Kiangsi to administer the govern-
“ ment there. After his departure great conflagrations broke out in
“ that province, and certain beings from time to time wandered
“ about at night with torches. As it was found impossible to arrest
“ them, some were killed with arrowshots, and thereupon seen to
“ be coffin-boards, rotten wood, old brooms, and such like things,
“This discovery still more disheartened the people of that province,
“ and it was not until several months afterwards, when Chang Tsung
“became Governor of Lii-cheu, that the conflagrations ceased”®.

We need not remind our readers, that objects are assimilated
in China with real men and beasts especially vividly when they
represent these by their shape. As a consequence, images are
firmly believed to be capable of haunting; Chinese books contain
many tales which show that this conclusion is correct. “There was


B -f « -b 7L RS # tt «s . Bl W « ^ . M 0 . ft *

TJttRT. at

TJ * ffl it B# tt * . Tsih i kij K K, ch. 368.

. Ki shen luh]

KK, ch. 373.


670


DEMONOLOGY.


“in the house of Lu Tsan-shen a porcelain figure of a bride.
“ When it had been there for some years, his wife jokingly told it
“ to become her husband’s concubine, and from that moment Lu
“ was agitated, and always saw a woman lying within his bed-
“ curtains. When this had frequently taken place , it oecurred
“ to him that the porcelain statue might be haunting him ; hence
“ he sent it to a monastery, to be worshipped there with sacrifices.
“ Next morning, the servant in employ there swept the temple-hall
“ and saw a woman, and asking her where she came from, she said
“ she was the concubine of Lu Tsan-shen, sent hither because
“the principal wife was jealous of her’. And then seeing there
“ one of Lu’s family, that servant told him about the concubine,
“ which induced Lu Tsan-shen to interrogate him on every point ;
“ thus he learned that the man had seen her in the same dress
“ and with the same countenance as those of the image. He then
“ ordered this to be smashed to pieces, and — at its heart there
“ was a spot containing blood, as large as a fowl’s egg” h
— “At the north gate of Kia-hwo (Hunan pr.) there was a
“ Children’s bridge, so called because at the four corners the
“ balustrades ended in images of children, cut in the stone. The
“ date of its erection is unknown, but when that year was long
“ passed, it gave forth spectral apparitions. This sometimes occurred
“ in the night ; they knocked at the doors and asked for food, or
“in the moonshine strolled and gambolled in the bazaar, where
“ people often saw them. Once some brave and hardy fellows
“ secretly watched them at nightfall, and actually saw the second
“and the third stone child slowly descend from the bridge. With
“ loud cries of spectres ! spectres ! they hurried after them with
“ their swords, till they reached the statues and hacked away their
“heads; and from that time the visitations ceased”*.


. Kwang i /:i ; K K, ch. 368.


©as*


AN IMAGE ACTING AS A DISEASE-SPECTRE.


671


— “A military judge of Yueh-cheu, Liu Ch'^ung by name, was
“ suddenly smitten with ulcers in his head, which caused him to
“ moan and sigh in a manner intolerably piteous. He called a
“ doctor of arts. This man contemplated him in the night, and
“said; ‘there is a woman, dressed in a green petticoat; she does
“ not answer my questions ; she is under your window ; have her
“ removed without delay’. Ch'ung searched the place under his window,
“ but saw nothing except a porcelain singing-girl accurately modelled,
“ the ornaments of which were of green porcelain. They pounded
“ it in an iron mortar and burned the powder, on which the ulcers
“ healed ”

— “During the reign of the T'ang dynasty it chanced in

“ the capital of the empire, that one Wei Hiun spent a holiday
“ at home in Lis study reading the Wradja Sutra, when he saw
“ outside the gate a woman, three c h a n g in size, wearing a
“ purple petticoat. She scaled the wall and straightway entered the
“ house. She seized that gentleman by his hair, pulled him to the
“ground and pushed him with her hands, but he firmly clasped
“ the Sutra in his arms, and thus, though trembling all over with
“ fright, managed to extricate himself. While thus being dragged,

“ all the inmates of the house were running after him, crying at

“ the spectre, thus causing it to take refuge in a large dung-heap.

“ The gentleman was by this time quite blue all over, and

“his tongue was hanging out of his mouth more than a foot;

“ the inmates of the house bore him into his closet, and it w'as
“ long before he recovered his senses. Hereupon they had the dung-
“ heap turned up by the villagers to a depth of some feet, and

« Hi . up A PI # # . * T .g « « *6 tU , A #

TS, sect. ch. 319.

^ «f ± . ® ^ 5- , ^ A S |g . M ^ ^ .

S*T. ic^i. MUBT.

. Chao ye ts^ien tsai.


672


DEMONOLOGY.


“found a figure of a bride in it, made of patches of cloth, with a
“red petticoat on and a white coat. They burned it in a place
“where five roads met, and thus put an end to its visitations”^.

Among the images which sometimes haunt mankind, we find
also mentioned the large paper Rescuers of the Country, which,
as we remember (see pp. 160 sqq. of Book I), are carried in front
of funeral processions to drive away spectres. It seems strange that
these images, instead of honestly doing what they are made for,
should on the contrary themselves act as devils; but the impres-
sion which their hideous appearance makes on simple minds, is
strong enough to create the conviction that they may prowl about
as living demons. “Hwan Yen-fan, prince of Fu-yang*, went out
“ with some guests to take part in a drinking bout among the lakes.
“ At sunset his guests dispersed, but he and a few others were
“ so dead drunken that they had to sleep among the lakes. After
“ the second watch there suddenly appeared a being upward of
“a chang in size and more than ten spans in circumference,
“ with a halberd in his hand. With furious looks and loud cries it
“ made up straight to Fan and his comrades, all of whom kept
“ themselves hidden and did not stir. But Fan possessed courage
“ and strength. He sprang to his feet, yelling and shouting, and
“ with his fists up advanced, thus causing that being to turn
“ tail and run away. Chancing to see a big willow, be broke
“off a branch and fell on the spectre, dealing it blows which
“sounded as if they fell on a hollow object; but he had to give
“it a good number of them before it fied on all fours. With
“ increased vigour Fan pursued it, till it sank into an old grave-


« ® * <i -f- . » R I a « , # 'li * * s ■

K K, ch. 368.

2 k biography of this famous grandee of the eighth century occurs in ch. 120
ot the New Books of the 'Fang dynasty, and in ch. 91 of the Old Books.


DEVIL-EXPELLING IMAGES ACTING AS DEVILS.


673


“ pit. When the day dawned our heroes approached, and saw that
‘• they had to do ivith a broken Rescuer”

And a tale of an incident assigned to the middle of the eighth
century, runs as follows:

“Ten Puh-i was Vice-president or Chancellor of a Board, and
“ being about to ask leave to retire on account of old age, returned
“ home. His home was in T'ai-yuen (Shansi pr.), where his house
“ stood by the north wall, in the Yang-khiih district. He was a
“ bold man, brave and strong. Some miles north-east from T"ai-yuen
“ city the land was incessantly haunted by a road-spectre, two
“chang in height, usually appearing when the atmosphere had
“ been obscured by thick rain. People who saw it sometimes died
“ of fright. Young people had promised more than five thousand
“ coins to him who dared go and shoot it, but no one responded
* to this call, except Puh-i, who offered to go. Just before dark he
“set out. The crowd said: ‘this man will hide himself somewhere
“ when outside the city, and then cheat us with the tale that he
“shot it; must we then believe it?’ And they secretly followed him

“ Puh-i reached the haunted place just when the spectre came
“ out. He pursued it, and shot an arrow into its body% and the
“ spectre feeling itself hit, ran away. But Puh-i ran alter it, and


ft. A*


674


DEMONOLOGY.


“liit it twice more, whereupon it threw itself into a ravine. Puh-i
“ returned, and was met by the crowd with merry laughter ; they
gave him the money, and Puh-i spent it on a drinking-bout.
The next day they set out to seek the being he had shot, and
in the ravine they found a Rescuer of king twigs, with the
“ three arrows buried in its flanks. Since this incident the road-
“ spectre had disappeared” h

In the ne.xt Part of this Book, devoted to Sorcery, the reader
will hear again of images and other objects working as spectres in
the employ of people desiring to do harm to others by their
intermediacy.


ch. 371.


CHAPTER Yin.


DEMONISM IN PATHOLOGY.

A perusal of the foregoing chapters will have convinced the
reader that spectres, naturally performing in the Universe the
leading part in the distribution of evil, in particular visit mankind
with disease. We have so often seen them represented by Chinese
authors as doing so, that it seems superfluous to devote any further
attention to this point, were it not that they are also acknowledged
as authors of illness by the Chinese system of pathology and
medical art, so that this opinion of China’s leading men in these
branches of knowledge demands our attention.

The belief in spectres as authors of disease is of long standing
in China. Chwang-tszg by a curious tale proves that it prevailed
in his age, and was then shared even by men of the highest
rank. “The ruler Hvvan (of Ts'^i, 683 — 642 B. C.) was hunting
“ beside a marsh, with Kwan Chung driving his carriage, and saw'
“a spectre. Grasping Kwan Chung’s arm, he said: ‘do you see it,
“father Chung?’ ‘Your servant sees nothing’, was the reply. The
* ruler then returned, giggling and smitten with sickness, so that
“ he did not go out for several days. Among the officers of Ts‘i
“there was one Hwang-tszg Kao-ngao, who said: ‘Your Grace is

“injuring yourself — how could a ghost injure you! The

“ruler Hvvan then said: ‘yes, but do there exist spectres?’ The
“officer replied: ‘yes; in the mud there are li, about furnaces
“hi eh, and in the dust-heap inside the door the lei-Ting dwell;
“in low places in the north-east the pei-o and the wa-lung
“hop about, and in low places in the north-west the yih-yang
“dwell; in the waters the wang-siang live (see p. 521), in the
“hills the chen, in the mountains the khwei (see p. 496), in
“the fields the fang-hwang‘, about the marshes the wei snakes’.

1 A commentator of the surname Sze-ma W M’ evidently a great authority
in matters relating to ghosts, says that wa-lnng have the shape of a child of one
foot and four inche-', with black clothes, a red turban, a sword, and a spear; a


676


DEMONOLOGY.


‘•‘Let me ask your what is the appearance of a wei snake’, said
'■ the ruler. ‘ It is as thick as the nave of a wheel, and is the

'■ length of the shaft ; it wears a purple robe and a red cap ; it

is a being which dislikes the noise of the rolling thunder, and
“ when it hears this it puts both its hands to its head and stands

“ up ; he who sees it is likely to become a chief among the

‘■feudatories’. The ruler smiled, laughed, and said: ‘this was what
“ I saw’. On this he duly arranged his robe and cap and made
“ Hwang-tsze sit with him. Before the end of the day his illness
'• had insensibly passed away” h

The antiquity of the belief in demons of disease is illustrated
also by the fact, noticed on page 499, that traditions, preserved
by authors contemporary with the Han dynasty, assigned special
health-destroying functions to three deceased sons of a mythic em-
peror of the twenty-sixth century before our era, describing them
as distributers of fever and plagues, which by their frequency and
destructiveness must always have deeply impressed the Chinese
mind. In the sixth chapter of the writings of Lieh-tsze we find a
description of visits of three doctors to a sick friend of Yang Chu
(see Book 1, p. 684), two of whom declared his disease not to be


yih-yang has the head of a leopard or a dog, and the tail of a horse; a chen
or sin ^ is a dog with horns and a striped, five-coloured body, and a f a n g-li w a n g
is a snake with two heads and five-coloured stripes. Other descriptive information
about those spirits we have not so far discovered.

. H . # « ft .a . ftl 0 . K « » A . fi

0 ^. -a

T # ift s#. ffi sg 2

^ ^ , fB ^ ^ , ih ^ ^ w ti , if jS'

St®. ;&0-lfiMSt®i»ftiH.af-0.Stfe

M M Z ^ ^ ^ H

ch. 7, sect. 19.


ANCIENT NOTIONS ON DISEASE-SPECTRES.


677


caused by spectres. Still it may be noted that in the SMh ming,
which dates from the second century of our era, it stands written,
that “yih (which means epidemic, plague or contagious disease)
“is the same word as yih (which means to employ); that is to
“say, there are kwei that set plagues to work”*.

Wang Ch'^ung, though so generally sceptical about superstitions
of his time, was quite unable to rise above those notions. “ One
“ opinion ”, he writes, “ is, that kwei which are visible to man are
“ breaths (k h i) which may render him ill. Breaths not congenial
“ to his nature may strike him, and when they do so they become
“kwei, assume human forms, and become visible. When an illness
“ is in its worst stage, those breaths are in the plenitude of their
“ intensity; in that condition they come to the patient in a human
“shape, and on reaching him he may see them. Should he have
“ incurred his disease in a hill-forest, the kwei he sees is a forest-
“ spirit; one who is ill in Yueh will see in his disease men of this
“ region sit beside him. From this we see, that the apparitions of
“ Kwan Fu and Teu Ying (see p. 437) were probably breaths of

“ the prevailing season, assuming visible forms And still

“ another opinion is that spectres take their origin from men, and
“ become diseases when they collide with men”

Attribution of disease to spectres has never ceased to predominate
in China’s popular lore and pathology. FYoni the Han dynasty
onward the books of every age abound with instances of their
inflicting sickness and death in various ways. They are described
as announcing their arrival and presence overtly by cold, icy winds,
for they belong to the Yin, which is cold ; or by a noisome
stench; or by tapping on doors and windows, throwing stones
and other missiles, and producing mysterious sounds, preferably on
house-roofs; or by calling their victims by their names; or by


Jft*. Sma A^ Jtfi). iitkfiZmiiVmZ
^ ^ ^ ^ u. -B a. A,

trj&a-


678


DEMONOLOGY.


holding dialogues clearly overheard; and such events were always
readily taken by the people as the causes of the ensuing ill. The
common conception, and the most natural, is that spectres occupy
the bodies of those they afflict with sickness; it prevailed already
in pre-Christian times, as the following anecdote of b.C. 580, nar-
rated by the Tso chio^en, shows:

“The ruler (King) of Tsin dreamt of a tall demon with dishe-
“ veiled hair reaching to the ground, which beat its breast and
“stamped the ground, saying: ‘you have killed my grandsons
“ unjustly, but T have had my request granted by the Emperor
“ (of Heaven)’. It then broke down the great gate, reached the
“inner gate, and entered; the started ruler fled into the back
“chamber, the door of which it also broke. The ruler then awoke
“ and called for the w u of Sang-f ien, who told him everything
“which he had dreamt. ‘What does it signify?’ asked the ruler.
“‘You will not taste the new wheat’, she replied.

“And the ruler became ill. He asked Tsdn for a doctor, and
“the ruler of this kingdom sent the physician Hwan to treat
“ him. Before this man arrived, the ruler dreamt that his illness was
“caused by two boys, who said: ‘he is a skilful physician; I fear
‘•he will hurt us; shall we run away?’ Then one of them said:
“‘if we nestle above his diaphragm and below the place which lies
•‘above his heart, what can he do to us?’ The physician arrived,
•‘and said: ‘nothing can be done for this disease, for it is settled
•‘above his diaphragm and under the place which lies above his
“heart; I cannot assail it there; (my needles or caustics?) cannot
“penetrate so far; my medicines cannot reach that spot; nothing
“can be done for it’. The ruler said: ‘you are a skilful doctor’;
•‘ he gave him large gifts and sent him home.

“ In the si.vth month the ruler of Tsin wished to eat new wheat,
“ and made the superintendent of his fields bring him some. The cook
•‘ prepared it, and the ruler ordered the w u of Sang-t'ien to come,
•‘ showed her the wheat, and put her to death. About to eat of it,
“he had a tension of the bowels; he went to the privy, fell into it,
“ and so died. An official of lower rank had dreamt that morning that
‘•he carried the ruler on his back up to heaven; at noon he bore
•‘him out of the privy, and was thereupon buried with him”


DISEASE-SPECTRES ARE EXPELLED BY MEDICINES.


679


That diseases are considered to be demoniacal possession is also
clearly showed by the following narrative from a book of the fourth
or fifth century of our era: “Li Tsze-yii, though still young, was
‘an able medical expert, whose perspicacy and spirit his contem-
“ poraries extolled. Hii Yung was Governor of Yii-cheu, and resided
“at Lih-yang when his younger brother fell ill; his heart and his
“ belly ached severely for more than ten years, and he was
“ almost dead, when one evening he overheard a spectre from
“ behind the screen accosting the demon within his belly. ‘ Why
“do not you kill him immediately?’ it said; ‘if you do not, Li
“ Tsze-yii when passing along here will strike you with something
“hitherto unused, and this will cost you your life’. On which the
“spectre in the belly said: ‘I do not fear him’. Next morning
“Hii Yung sent somebody for Tsze-yii; he came, and no sooner did
“ he pass through the gate than the patient heard within himself
“a plaintive voice. The doctor entered, saw the sufferer, and said:
“‘this is a demoniacal disease’. Taking a red ball, compounded of
“ eight poisonous substances, out of his linen box, he gave it the
“sick man to swallow, and through his belly immediately rolled a
“ thundering noise ; several times he had a copious discharge of
“diarrhoea, and then he was quite well. That medicine was the
“eight-poisons ball, used to this day” k


j^mmz.

7i B IK

The tenth year of the reign of Ch‘ing.


680


DEMuXOLOGT.


Demons which are souls of dead men may inflict disease by
means of things which their relations have placed with them in
their graves. We read e.g. the following of Kwan Loh, the peerless
soothsayer ; '• In his time the wife and the daughters of the prefect
‘•of Sin-tu lived in a state of fright, and they fell iU successively.
“ He told Kwan Loh to divine their condition, who said ; ‘ My lord,
“on the west side of this hall two dead men lie, one with a spear,
“and the other with a bow and an arrow; their heads lie inside
•‘the wall, and their feet outside; that with the spear pierces
“the heads of your family, and this is it why their heads ache so
“ much that they cannot even raise them ; the other aims at their
“breasts, whereby their hearts feel so anxious and pained that
“they cannot eat or drink; in the daytime those beings soar about,
“ but at night they come and make people ill, striking them with
“fright and anxiety’. On this they grubbed up the skeletons and
“removed them elsewhere, and everybody in the house recovered”'.

The exercise of demoniacal influence upon a man, either by pos-
session or in any other way, is expressed in Chinese books by the
same word mei which, as our readers know (see pp. 505 — 507),
denotes mountain or forest spectres, and also spirits in general,
especially of old beings; and indeed, many pages of the three
preceding chapters have taught us that it is a very common thing


SAFIS# a Ba

. Shell shell hen hi, ch. VI.

. Memoirs concerning

tlie Three Kingdoms, ch. 29, 1. 15.


DISEASE IS DEMONISH POSSESSION OR OPERATION.


681


for spirits of animals, plants, and even objects to possess and afflict
men. Mei then is, besides a noun, a verb, translatable by “to
bedevil”, e. g. in ^ “kwei bedevil man”, or in AS

“men are bedevilled by kwei”; etc. Other terms with
the same meaning, likewise of frequent use, are i ^ and p"ing
the primitive meaning of which is “to lean upon”; besides we have
fnlt, “to attach one’s self to”; t^o ^ p£ or 1 a i ^ , “ to rest on
for support”; jan “to infect”, etc.

It is especially when acting as avengers of wrongs inflicted on
them by men that spectres appear as authors of disease. We have
already demonstrated by a special chapter (pp. 436 sqq) that such
vengeance mostly causes the victim to labour under delirium or
frenzy, and kills him in the end; how, in truth, could it occur to
the mind of the simple that the random, incoherent talk of a
raving patient is other than an expression of what he really sees
and feels, or that the spasmodic movements of his limbs are aught
but a frantic wrestling with unseen tormentors, or symptoms of
pain suffered from invisible, merciless hands? Such torturers are
represented in many a tale as having told the bystanders through
the mouth of the victims themselves the reason of their presence
in the body; and in such cases exorcisms and medicines proved as
a rule totally ineffectual.

The identity of disease with the operation of demons may have
been invented in primaeval times, but it has held its place in China
as a fundamental principle of pathology to this day. Pathologists,
who in every age have enriched China’s literature with numerous
and voluminous treatises, are wont to denote therein such demon-
iacal work by the word sic which our readers know (see p. 466),
and which, in the narrower sense of disease-inflicting, we find in
the Su 10671 and the Ncui king, the oldest compilations of Chinese
medical lore we have. The word s u i , likewise familiar to the reader
(p. 467), has ever been the special medical term denoting the effects
of the sie, and is found with this meaning in the Tso cluoen,
where we read that in the year 540 B.C. the ruler of Tsin was
ill, and the diviners declared the cause to be that the spirits of
“Shih-ch'^en and T'ai-t'ai produced sui”h Also the term sie sui,
“sui of sie”, though pleonastic, is very common in medical and
other works.


1


. First year of Chao’s reicn.


682


DEMONOLOGY.


There have, however, been some authors who denied explicitly
that diseases are caused by spectres, pretending with peculiar em-
phasis that the sie are the culprits. But if their* contention proves
anything, it is merely this, that the word sie has gained its position
as a technical term denoting certain mysterious, uncongenial, un-
wholesome influences, the true character and operation of which
every Chinaman, even the most learned, ignores, but which un-
schooled people bluntly identify with spectres, just as their ancestors
always used to do.

Pathologists and other medical men divide the sie into several
sorts. In particular they babble about extraneous and internal sie^
which work respectively on man from without, or within him;
accordingly they conceive the s i e as capable of dwelling in men, and
as the sie are practically identified with the spectres that produce
them, disease thus virtually amounts to demoniacal possession.

Clear distinction is also made between yang sie, and sie which
are yin. The former injure man’s health by thwarting and neu-
tralizing the yin influences which ought to work upon and within
him, while the latter effect the same end by opposing his yang
influences. The yang sie attack man especially in the daytime;
the yin sie during the night. Particular stress is laid upon the
existence of wind-sie"; indeed, winds disturb the weather, change
the temperature, and therefore are main sources of disease, the
more so as the venerable medical bible of Hwangti has decreed,
once for all, that “winds are the originators of the hundred diseases
that exist”’. Further we have sie of heat’, which work especially
in the hot season; sie of cold’, authors of catarrhs and rheumatism ;
sie of humidity and vapours®, and of drought’^. Fire-si e® dry up
the blood and humors, or coagulate them, and suppress perspiration;
and those of the element Wood® manifest their unwholesome pre-
sence especially in spring, which is the season associated with Wood; —
and so forth.

The theories about the ways in w'hich those different sie operate,
are many and various, but they agree on this point that all sie
produce within man health-destroying tuh khi “poisonous


' #!■ -US ft 35 ■ ^

. Hwang-ti su ive», ch. III.

-MM-


SPECTRAL INFLUENCES WHICH CAUSE HISEASE.


683


breaths or influences”, or simply tuh, “poisons”. If sie thus
kill him, they are shah sie' or “murdering sie”, and their
poisons shah khi" or “murderous breaths”. Authors generally
admit, that should the influences of the blood, which constitute
the shen, leave the body, dwindle or faint, the sie are always
ready at hand to take their place; in other words, when the
ching khi or “correct, normal breaths” (see page 467) retire,
the sie khi, their opposites, thrust themselves into the vacant
place; and as if to prove the reality of this process, the patient
labours under abnormal functions and delirium, indulges in insane
talk and acts. From this it follows that a man has little to fear
from sie as long as the normality of his constitution is shing ^
or “full, abundant”, and strong enough to keep off the sie; not until
his constitution is disturbed by one or more of the many causes of
disease excogitated by Chinese brains, do the sie gain a hold upon
it, and proceed to destroy him. Thus there are hardly any processes of
disease in which the sie do not do their work; they seldom work
therein from the outset, but play the most active and decisive part.

Spectres assailing men whom they observe to be ill, are indicated
in medical works by the term shi, f* or which means a
corpse, but in this case has to be translated by corpse-making
agencies, agencies of death, mortality. Wang CliTing, as we have
seen on page 416, already mentioned them, saying that people
with an unlucky fate sometimes see “flying shi” /^) or
“running hiung or evil” (;^ |2l|), or human forms, altogether
kwei. Elsewhere in his writings he mentions the flying shi
simultaneously with “flowing hiring” 1^)^ and he speaks of
“ flying hiung” (^ |2i| ) and “flowing shi” ( ^ ) gathering
in the dwellings of man All these terms evidently denoted in his
time one and the same thing, viz. spectres causing mortal disease.

We obtain more theory about the shi from a medical work
in eight chapters, ascribed to Koh Hung, but professedly enlarged
and completed by T"ao Hung-king, viz. the C/ieu lieu, pi kik fang
“Ready and Quick Medicaments for behind the Elbow” (to be kept
handy). There (ch. I, §6) ive find the shi divided into five species,
which all attack men suddenly:

3 Lull henrj, ch. 23, § ^ ^ .


4 Id., ch. 24, §


^ '


684


DEMONOLOGY.


‘•1. flying shi, which run through the skin and penetrate into the
“viscera and mansions; whenever they work, piercing pains are felt
“in changeable forms without constancy h

“2. hidden shi, which attach ; themselves to the bones, enter the
“flesh, and attack and pierce the blood-vessels. When they occur,
“ one should not approach a corpse or make mourning visits. When
“wailing and lamentation are heard they set to work^.

“3. wind-shi, which wildly jump about on the four limbs of the
“patient, so that the point at which they penetrate cannot be de-
“termined. When they manifest themselves, the patient is dull and
“ troubled. They work when there is wind or snow h
“4. immerging (penetrating) shi, which coil themselves around the
“ viscera and the mansions, and assail the heart and the flanks, causing
“at every action cramp in the former, and a cutting pain in the latter.
“ They work when it is cold h

“5. corpse-maladies; the whole body is paralyzed, the vital spirits
“ work abnormally and confusedly, the patient always feels dull and
“weak. If the character of this disease changes at every fortnightly
“period, it will suddenly bring the great evil (death)”®.

The symptoms of the attacks of these five shi do not differ much,
and therefore the same means and cures, or nearly the same, may
prove effective against them all. “Those symptoms are: a swollen
“ abdomen with heavy pains, very difficult breathing, attacks upwards
“against the heart and breast, and sidewards against the flanks”®.


^

SB-


MORTAL AND CONTAGIOUS DEMONIACAL DISEASE.


685


We cannot doubt that Koh Hung, or medical philosophers
preceding him, arrived at the discovery of five shi simply through
the fact that, as we may see on page 26, the cipher five plays an
important part in the system of the Universe, in the natural ethics,
and the internal construction of the human body. It is at any rate
a fact that, ever since, medical authors often teach that each shi
corresponds with one of the five principal colours, and with one
of the five viscera and mansions in which it settles preferably.
Thanks to this wise arrangement, good physicians, guided by
good books, are able to ascertain at every diagnosis which of the
five categories of drugs which heal the viscera they have to order
from the apothecary’s shop.

Again the same standard work on medicine states: “Demonish
“ maladies are, according to Koh Hung, the corpse-maladies which
“have their place among the five shi, and they embrace also all
“injury caused by kwei and sie. There are from thirty-six to
“ ninety-nine forms of them. In general they make man alternately
“ cold and hot (feverish), cause secretion of fluid matter, dejection
“ and speechlessness, so that it is impossible to ascertain from
“ him what makes him suffer, even though there is not one spot
“ on his body which does not ache. During the lapse of years and
“ months he is wasted away and his functions cease, and death is
“ the end of this. And after his death the disease passes over to
“ people about him, with the result that his whole family may be
“ destroyed” b

Beside these complaints, against which, as we may expect, Chinese
doctors and their arts stand powerless, there is mentioned one,
evidently contagious, called c hSv e n s h i ^ , " transmissible or
inheritable shi”. “This malady”, says an old work, “consists in


xvim

A*ft#SW.ta IKS.

This passus is copied in tlie standard work of Sun Sze-moh ^ one

of the most celebrated physicians China h.as possessed, also deeply versed in Taoism.
He is believed to have lived from A.D. 581—082. His work is entitled Pi kill ta^ien
kin yao fany ^ ^ ^ • '•Ready and quick urgent Medicines a

thousand gold coins worth” ; it contains 93 chapters.


§ 7


686


DEMONOLOGY.


“ that the blood and breath of a man deteriorate and weaken, and
“ his viscera and mansions are emaciated and empty. When he is
“hit by the influence of spectres and these set their sie to work,
“ they produce this disease” b Evidently then consumptive diseases
belong to this class of complaints.

But, principally, spectres are the authors of sudden diseases, which
therefore are appropriately called kwei kih “spectre-blows”

or “spectral attacks”. The work of Koh Hung gives the following
diagnosis of them : “ screwing pain within the breast, rigorous pains
“ in the flanks, cutting pains in the belly, which cannot be kept
“ under ; sometimes the patient vomits blood immediately, or has
“ nose-bleedings, or passes blood. Such diseases are also named
“kwei pai, “spectre pushes”*. Pien-ts'ioh (of the sixth century b.C.
“see page 71) said that to be struck by evil (chung wuh) is ana-
“logous with sudden death (tsuh sze) and a spectre-blow” Sun
Sze-moh put down these same statements to the letter in his own
work, and added: “Those who become ill from a blow of a
“ spectre never die a slow death ; it comes down upon a man like
“a dagger stab b Sudden attack (tsuh w u) is the same thing as
“ to be struck by evil, and of the same kind as sudden death and
“a devil’s stroke”®.

Such chung wuh Pfl ^ or “strokes of evil”, or, unabbre-
viatedly, tsuh chung wuh k h i ^ pfi ^ ^ tsuh chung
k«-ei khi “sudden strokes of evil or of spectral

influences” may, come down upon a man at any moment, but
especially during the night, if he has to expose himself to spectres
by going out. Therefore he acts wisely if he protects himself against


Chung ts^ang king 1^ , a me-

dical treatise a.scribed to Ihva T'o mit . an ever famous leech of the second and
the third century of our era. T S, sect. ch. 323.

Cheu heupi kih fang, ch. 1, §4.

^ ^ ^ ® if ^ ^ A ^ 7J ^ ^

ts icn kin yno fang, sect. .

5 ^ 'HP KP ^ -tfc , M ^ ^ ^ ^ p. W.,sect. ^ i|^.


STROKES OF EVIL OE SPECTRE-BLOWS.


687


them by carrying a lantern on such occasions, or, better still, a
flaming torch. Nocturnal excursions are hardly ever undertaken
except in case of need, for instance to go to the public privy.
While there, one may on a sudden feel cramp in the breast and
bowels, and sink to the ground, suffocated, cold, and with spasmodic
contractions of the arms and fingers; blood may even flow from the
mouth and nose. In this state of suspended animation or apparent
death the patient should be succoured immediately, else he will
not revive. It would be dangerous to remove him from the spot
before his revival; the people gathering around should forthwith
set to drumming and gong-beating, and kindle thyme with incense
of any kind, and spit in his face, until he comes round.

Sudden torpor, coma, trance, catalepsy, epilepsy, lethargy, con-
vulsion, and whatever more forms spectre-blows may have, are com-
prised by the Chinese under the general term kiieh and

considered to be a suspended animation consequent upon the spectre
having snatched away the soul. We have noted this point already
on pp. 243 seq. of Book I, giving there also the names of two
classes of such soul-thieves, and the simplest expedients resorted to
to bring the soul back into their victims. In Koh Hung’s book of
medicine we find these complaints called shi kiieh or ‘•corpse-
kiieh”, and the word kiieh written meaning to rob or draw
off“, which we think can hardly be accidental or a mistake.
“Shi kiieh disease”, he states, “is tsuh sze or sudden death,
“ but the pulse still moves, and the patient hears within his ears a
“hissing or whistling sound, and his thighs areAvarm” h Koh Hung
thus placed those diseases in the class of spectre-blows, these being,
as we have seen, identical with sudden death; and all medical men
after him have done the same thing. It may, however, be remarked
here in passing, that, as is plainly shown by Chapter VII of Part I
of this Book, it is generally admitted that absence of the soul from
a person by no means necessarily shows itself by vehement symp-
toms. The following tale is a proof of it:

“Under the Southern Ts'i dynasty, Ma Tao-yiu, Chancellor at
“ Court, was seated in the palace in the first year of the Yung m i n g
“ period (A.D. 483), when suddenly he saw the place in front of him
“ crowded with spectres, which, however, his attendants did not


^ ffn ^ ^ ch. -j, § 2.


1


688


DEMOXOLOGY.


“ perceive. In another moment a couple of demons entered his ears,
“and pushed his soul (liAA'un) out of him, so that it fell down
“ upon his shoes. He pointed to it with his finger, asking the
“ attendants whether they saw it, but none of them did. On their
“asking him what shape his soul had, he answered: ‘it is just
“like a frog. ‘Surelv’, he continued, ‘I have no longer any vital
“matter in myself, and the spectres are still in my ears’. They
“ looked at his ears, and saw that they were quite swollen. On the
“next day he was dead”*.

Chu Chen-hing (see p. 301), who lived under the Yuen dynasty,
wrote : “ Corpse-k u e h , flying s h i , and sudden k ii e h are symptoms
“ of a stroke of evil. If some abnormal (puh ching) influence is
“ offended, the hands and legs suddenly become paralyzed and cold,
“ the epidermis granulous, the face blue and black, and the vital
“ spirits do not maintain themselves in the body. The patient makes
“ mistakes in speaking, or utters random talk, or gets lock-jaw, or
“ is absent-minded and recognizes nobody, or becomes dizzy, whirls
“round, and tumbles. Such are the symptoms of sudden kiieh,
“attacks of extraneous influence (koh wu), flying shi, and spectre-
“ blows. These complaints often result from visits of condolence and
“ to temples or graveyards”* — thus from contact with places where
spirits abide. Chang Kiai-pin “ of the fifteenth century also says :
“ Corpse-k ii e h is in every respect the symptom of a sudden stroke
“of evil inflicted by extraneous sie, such as abnormal (puh ching)
“ influences of the four seasons, or mountain-demons, or murderous


. K K, ch. 327, professedly from the Sliiih i Id.

i&sm. AMSi

. iiin fall or Laws of the Heart; sect. m^-


, alias Hwui-khing .


STROKES OF EVIL.


689


“influences of the soil, or the five shi, nightmare-spectres, and
“ the like” \

Strokes of evil, representing the worst of demonish maladies,
may show themselves under various forms. Leu Ying states, that
we should rank among them belly-ache, constipation or colic,
asthma, distortion of the back and the hips, and so on; moreover
he says ;

“ When a patient suddenly suffers from a dilated heart or a
“ swollen abdomen, without diarrhoea and vomiting, then he is
“ what people call 'struck by evil’. This arises from the fact
“ that his vital soul is incomplete and his heart and will are
“ constantly terror-stricken, so that he is struck by evil spirits.
“Some thus possessed are dejected and silent; others utter inco-
“ herent and delirious talk, or slander and revile, or divulge
“ secrets of others, not even abstaining from deriding those whom
“ they are bound to respect; or they give utterance to predictions
“ of misfortune and felicity, but when the time of fulfilment
“arrives, not one hair is lost I They climb heights and cross abysses
“as if they are level ground; some wail and weep, or moan and sigh,
“ and avoid the society of men, behaving as if drunken or crazy.
“ The disease shows itself in ten thousand ways, each of which is to be
“examined and treated in accordance with the local customs” ^

It is in such terms that medical men in China explicitly
express their belief that patients who are delirious or have fits of


< p IS

shu , Com[ilete Works from the King Mountains, wliere the

author lived in seclusion ; a voluminous medical work in sixty-four chapters. Sect-

i Thus, evidently, ravings of a delirious madman are occasionally received in
China as predictions.

t& . i A silt :?■ i . -O * ^ ® ^ ts w a .

SwiiS-, Hit

4 S * A. S PW P# 4p a ¥ ^ ffi yS; pit sf .

SC .ft A , tin e 4b ffi . * K IS a > -IB II * « # .11

^ ■ I hioli kunij muh; T S, sect. > ‘^1'- 348.


44


690


DEMONOLOGY.


insanity, are struck with evil, that is to say, possessed or attacked
by demons. They include among such devils’ strokes fever ' or fever
delirium ; indeed, there is no illness of which they have formed
correct notions. We have already seen on page 499 that, in
accordance with an ancient tradition, fever is identified with the
ghost of a son of a mythic emperor of the twenty-sixth century
before our era ; and here let us add, that no leading medical
authorities ever have disputed its deraonisli origin or nature.
Intermittent or typic fever, they declare, is devils or their sie
entering and leaving the patient’s body repeatedly, thus causing hot
or yang fevers, also called "male fevers”^, and cold or yin fits
or “female fevers” h Violent attacks during which the patient raves,
especially if they occur at night, are explicitly styled “ devil-fevers” h
By this name many doctors denote also the febrile or malarious
epidemics which may prevail in connexion with the seasons, periodical
winds or monsoons, damp and sultry weather ; some, however, call
devil-fevers those which rise at night, that is the time when spectres
roam, and it needs no saying that uneducated people in partieular
adhere this theory. There exist very subtle classifications of fevers,
as e. [/. those caused by yang sie nestled within the yin soul or
the yang soul of the patient, or by yin sie occupying one oi
these souls; but such overlearned gossip falls beyond the sphere ot
our interest.

from folklore still better than from scholarly theories we may
learn the reality of demoury in febrile disease. “ The prefect of
“ Shang-yuen (in Kiangsu pr.), Ch'^en Ts'i-tung, once, when still
“ young, dwmlled with one Chang in the temple of Kwanti in
“ T‘ai-phng, and Chang got fever there. Ch'en, who occupied one
“ room with him, felt tired at noon and took a nap on a couch
“ opposite him, and saw outside the door a pale boy with pale clothes,
“ and a hat, shoes and stockings of a deep blue colour. This boy put
“ his head through the door and looked at Chang, and Ch^en, thinking
“ that he was somebody connected with the temple, did not inter-
“ rogate him ; on a sudden Chang’s fever rose, and when the boy
“ went away, the fever left him. The ne.xt day ClTen was sleeping
“ again, and suddenly heard Chang cry deliriously, while he vomited
“ spittle like a bubbling spring. Ch'^en, startled from his sleep, saw the


t N i 0 h


, ki a i


, or s li e n


FEVER-SPECTRES.


691


boy standing before Chang’s bed, making dancing gestures with his
“ hands and feet and merrily laughing, and casting looks upon him
“ as if to say that he did it on purpose, Ch^en now understood
“ that it was the fever-spectre. He hurried towards him to give him
“ a thrashing, and where his fists touched him he was untolerably
cold. The boy ran out of the room with a noise like a blast, and
*• Ch'en ran after him as far as the central courtyard, where he vanished.
“ Chang became better, but Ch'en's hands had a blackish colour as
“ if they were smoked, which he could not remove until some days
“ had elapsed” h

At Amoy the fear of fever-spectres is deeply ingrafted in the
popular mind, and manifests itself also by a general aversion to
pronouncing the name of the disease, which is kucV'-jiH “ cold-
and-heat”; indeed, the best means to bring a devil upon one’s self
is to mention him. People prefer denoting fever by the term khit-
tsidh d pV’9^, “beggar’s disease”, hoping thereby to make its spectres
think that they perfectly despise it, so that they may just as well
leave off worrying them with it. The name of the disease, and
therewith the disease itself, are also cleverly shelved, and thus
avoided, by not asking fever-patients about their complaint, but
merely about the general state of their health ; a line of conduct
followed also with regard to diseases generally. So e. g. it is a
mark of bad breeding to use in correspondence the words disease
or spectres of disease ; for these should always be substituted “ babies
producing vicissitudes (in life)” h

As well as febrile delirium, insanity is naturally ascril)ed by
the Chinese to evil spirits. The famous classic of the healing art

mm.

a.® s Bs » a *1 « * a . » 0 is

Ti’ze puh yli, ch. 7.


693


DEMONOLOGY.


classifies its causes under five heads: “The following are the five
“derangements caused by sie: — when they enter the yang
“of an individual, he turns mad; when they enter his yin, he
becomes paralyzed. Should they seize firm hold of his yang, he
"will have epileptic fits, and if they hold fast his yin, he becomes
“dumb. If yang sie enter his yin, he becomes quiet, and
“when yin sie leave his yang, he turns furious. These are the
“so-called five derangements”'.

The sie in destroying a patient’s reason may lead him through
a series of ailments. A medical work by Chang Ki®, a high officer
who flourished in the;second and the third century, states: “When
“sie disturb by their howling the tranquility of a man’s hwun or
“p"oh, his blood and breath decrease; this decrease imparts itself
“to his heart, and whereas his heart-breath thus becomes void,
“ the patient becomes timorous. Then, when he shuts his eyes to
“ sleep, he dreams that he roams far away, for his vital spirits
“are dispersing, his hwun and his p"oh wander about erratically,
“the deterioration of his yin makes him epileptic, and the decline
“of his yang deranges his reason” ’.

Harping throughout on this string, medical authors declare, that
if a madman under demoniacal influence sees and tells of strange,
unknown things and spectres and ghosts, having lost even the
slightest control of his eyes, his tongue, ears and gestures, this is
a proof that the “vacuity of his breath and blood” ’ is at its very
highest pitch, and that his shen lacks lucidity. It is not, however,
always quite certain that superabundant secretion of mucus, com-


' mu. # A *5 » M e . w a k it m » .

at 2 » Bi| ® . ft il i it Hwimti-li si< wen, ch. 23.


Ktn kivei 1 / 1 ( 1 ) hull ^ K ^ sg- , a \olumino(i6 iiiedital work in 24
chapters, held in the liighest esteem by practitioners ol the healing art to this day.
T S, sect liltf , cb. 313.


SPECTRES OF INSANITY.


693


bined with insane restlessness, is proof that spectres or sie are
at work in him ; such things are often to be explained by
catarrh, infection, etc. If a woman dreams of spectres having sexual
commerce with her, or if she utters insane talk after a confinement
or during excessive menstruation, it may be vacuity of her blood,
consequent on the effluence of her shen, that causes it. Medical
men are also almost unanimous on the point that lunacy and frenzy
is a consequence of sie possessing the heart of the patient, which
is the central seat of his soul.

These ideas of medical sages in regard to derangement of intel-
lect tally with those of the common people. In Amoy these say that
madmen all alike are under the influence of sido Mi ', “demons
of insanity”. Should a man suffer from raving fits in the genial
days of early spring, he is in the power of “peach-blossom devils”,
fo-hoe I'ui so called from the peach-trees just then in their
vernal garb ; hence a man may be maddened by striking him
with a peach-twig. It is especially for the tenacity with which they
keep hold of their victims, that the sido ha are dreaded. Against
them the most powerful exorcisms ever invented by human genius
prove inefficacious, and if such a spectre has maddened a man,
nothing remains for the family but to wait with resignation till
it is pleased to depart.

The fact that insanity is thus positively and generally ascribed to
malevolent ghosts, fully explains why hallucinations of delirious patients,
presenting to them imaginary beings and beasts, are taken by the
healthy for nothing less than real apparitions of spectres. And it is
striking to note how frequently medical works, in enumerating
symptoms of maladies, mention “insane, random talk”® in imme-
diate connexion with the “seeing of spectres”’; indeed, as the
Chinese, while hale and hearty, always have spectres before their
minds, it is no wonder that this is the case also when they are
ill and delirious. Closely akin to the demons of insanity, but not so
malicious, not so tenacious, are those causing transient or constant
abstraction or vacancy of mind, which the Amoy Chinese know as
6e him hid^, “spectres bewildering or confusing the hwun”; they
call them also nio sin d “spectres causing absence of the

shen”. Their operation consists in removing the hwun or the


1 ?


2

^ ^ ■


on ■


694


DEMOXOLOGY.


shen, which constitutes the intellect, or a part of it, out of men,
thus causing profound listlessness and absence of mind. Placid
distraction, temporary mental aberration, madness without violence
or frenzy, are ascribed to these spectres, and so are idiotcy and
imbecility, in short, harmless alienation of any kind.

The people assert, that it often occurs in the dead of night that
a person, leaving his house to go to a public privy in the street,
is bereft of his soul by some spectre. Drowsy, silly, he wanders about
between the malodorous pits, unable to find his way out of the
labyrinth of partition-walls. Should then another come with a torch
or lantern, the soul in most cases forthwith re-settles in the noct-
ambulist, the spectre that holds it in its grasp being, like all
spectres, afraid of light, and having to run for its life at the sight
of it. This photophobia of the devil race explains why, as the people
assert, such })rivy accidents never occur in the daytime. But there
is more, and worse; — many a man or woman is known to have
wandered from home for no obvious reason whatever, to be found
after many days in the hills, bewildered and starved. Consciousness
is restored to such victims by calling out their names so loud and
long that the absent soul, hearing and obeying this summons, returns
to the body. That Koh Hung wrote of spirits of this kind we
have already seen on page 503.

Young children, being tender and weak, and their organism
devoid of power of resistance, are exposed to demonish influence
much more than grown-up people. Every sudden fright, producing
wailing and obstinate crying fits, is believed to be the work of
sie. ‘•Fits of wailing caused by fright”, states a book, “are sic
*• influences settled upon the heart, and should be cured with
“ soul-calming pills ” b Convulsions and spasms brilliantly prove
the correctness of these theories; let us summarise what authors
have to tell about these complaints. They manifest themselves in
consequence of terror affecting the heart and the kidneys, and then


^ ^ ± Z

l/olt rliiiii/ dull kiich /J-» ^ Art of Medication in

Infantile Disease, perliapb tlie oldest .surviMn" special work on diseases of children,


all those mentioned in older catalogues being Io^t. Its author Tsden Yih
stjled Chung-vang ^l|j , w-as a court physician in the second half of the eleventh


century. See T S, sect. ^ ^ , ch. 427,


SPECTRAL DISEASES OF CHILDREN.


695


harm the soul. They may have several causes. The principal and
worst among these is koh wu’ or ‘■collision with strange or extra-
neous influence”, a matter discussed already in the medical book
ascribed to Koh Hung. This authority for all time stated, “ that
“koh wu belongs to the class of strokes of evil, and causes cramps
“ in the heart and a swollen abdomen, with shocks at the heart and
“ in the breast. W u means a collision, that is to say, a collision
'• with extraneous influence” This influence may be emitted also
by men, and therefore convulsions are medically distinguished as
c h u n g k w e i-w u ’ and c h u n g j e n-w u H “ collisions with spectres,
or with men”; nay, many clever authors divide them into several
sorts, according to the kind of man or woman who affrighted the
child, or even according to the kind of animal that did it, and in
connexion therewith they prescribe various medicines. The k o h w u
counteract the normal or ching influences which constitute the
health of the child; they are sie transmitted unwittingly by men
approaching the child, or by beasts or winds; a child may at any
time catch such infection, even at the moment of its birth, also
from women unclean by menstruation. On account of the resem-
blance which convulsions bear to catalepsy, as well in cause as in
aspect and in consequences, they, like this disease, are often styled
“strokes of spectres or evil”. As in other demoniacal maladies, the
ingress of spectres and their sie is rendered possible or facilitated
by antecedent irregularities of the health or indispositions of the
organs, to particularize which would lead us too far.

Spectres attacking babies take a particular delight in seizing their
souls. “The influence of the shen of a baby is tender and weak,
“the soundness of its vital spirits delicate and feeble; hence when
“its shen or h w u n is seized by a demon, this fact shows itself in
“ its being unexpectedly smitten with unusually severe disease : it
“ directly becomes paralyzed and yellow ; it cries often and loud,
“and its breath all that time has a foul smell” We have noticed


1

SIS . 1T # IE til , il ^ « IE, & . Cheit hcu pi kill fimg, ch. 1 , § 3.


696


DEMONOLOGY.


already on page 243 of Book T, that in Amoy people try to cure
such sufferers of convulsions by re-calling their souls by the sound
of a gong, and bring it back into the patient by means of a garment.

A special class of baby-haunting demons is the k i \ fruits of super-
stitious fancy haunting China from early times. The Shwoh weti
“Ki means the dress of a spectre; it is also said to signify a baby-
“ devil. The character is composed of spectre and the phonetic ki”®.
It seems not improbable that these baby-demons were allied or identical
with the ancient infant-frightening spectres, children of Chwen-siih,
dwelling in ruinous buildings, which we mentioned on page 499.

The first author who gives us some information concerning the ki
and their doings, is Sun Sze-raoh. “As a rule”, he writes, “a baby
“ will get the ki disease if, when its mother becomes pregnant anew, a
“ bad spirit incites this fetus in her womb to make that baby ill out
“ of jealousy. K i spectres therefore are tiny sprites. The complaint
“ shows itself occasionally also when a pregnant woman has not called
“the ki away to the last. When this spirit produces disease, it
“ preferably causes slight diarrhoea and fever, sometimes appearing
“ as a hairy, hideous, disagreeable being with long eyebrows; such are
“the symptoms. Patients should take broth of dragon’s gall. When a
“ woman, who has a child that cannot yet walk, becomes pregnant
“again, and still suckles that child, the fetus also will become a ki
“giving it a yellow colour; the symptoms then are emaciation, protru-
*• sion of the bones through the skin, loss of hair, and excessive heat” b


^ "tl^ ■ cliun ttliini/ > Reliable Clue for Diagnoses

and Cures, in 120 chapters, written in the fir.st half of the sixteenth century by
Wang Kheng-thing ^ ^ .

1 Mt-

^ ns A-

^ ^ ip A^ ^ ^ ^ o A- ^ .

^ ^ A ^ a ^ ^ itb M ^
¥ tii a T lij ft . ^ A- ^ ^ 1 ^ 'It X

. Pi kill tb'ieii kin yao fang ; T S,


DE MONISH DISEASE OF SUCKLINGS.


697


Later authors ascribe yet other complaints of babies to the ki,
prescribing sundry efficacious medicines; but it is of no use to
particularize all this. Unanimously they admonish pregnant mothers
to lyean their sucklings as soon as they observe in them a decline
of health, an advice probably seldom followed in a country where
women may be seen very often with boys and girls of four and
five at their breasts. It needs no saying, that medical works em-
phatically dissuade parents from having their babies suckled by
nurses in the fiimily way. Generally they taboo milk of pregnant
women as poisonous. “Such milk”, says Li Shi-chen, “I call for-
“ bidden milk ; if a baby sucks of it, it vomits and gets diarrhoea,
“atrophy, and the ki disease, for it is so e.xtremely poisonous” h

Thus, according to Sun Sze-moh and others, a ki is the soul
of a fetus which harms its older brothers and sisters; but some
authors declare, that the k i-disease is so called from the emaciation
of the child who is attacked, causing it to look lean and weak like
a ki. In Amoy the spectres are quite well known by the people,
and it is not improbable that in the expression Jii-ki hoo, which,
as we said on page 493, is in vogue there to denote mysterious
chirping sounds in houses and corners, ki-ki means these baby-
devils. Foreigners are often mockingly called there d-ki.

Since China’s pathology, like her science generally, consists merely
in distilling, by pure reasoning, verisimilar conclusions from super-
ficial and inaccurate observation of facts, it is by no means able to
sharply distinguish trance, catalepsy, and other forms of insensibility
from death. Indeed, in either case the body is motionless, mute,
and retains any given position; mental faculties are gone, as is
all voluntarily movement, and from either state revival is possible.
No wonder then that we find in the medical works of China sundry
hints how to cure the dead, that is to say, how to restore them
to life, and that authors make the freest use of the word death
(M) where only transient death is meant. No wonder also that
we find death as well as other states of insensibility represented
as the work of evil spirits striking their victims with their baleful
influence, or snatching their souls out of them.

To show how explicit these popular notions are, the following


< ^ ^ 2 ii 2 a a ft 2

. Poi-h'ao hanij mull. ch. 52, 1. 22.


698


DEMONOLOGY.


tale may serve : “ In the last year of the S h i n g ph n g period ot
‘■the Tsin dynasty (A.D. 361) an old man in the district of Ku-
chang had a daughter, with whom he lived far away in the hills.
“ One Chao Kwang of Yii-hang asked her in marriage, but he was
“ refused. On this the old man sickened and died. The maid went
“ to the district-city to buy a coffin, and fell in on the road with
“Kwang, to whom she told what had happened. ‘I am’, she added,
‘so busy now; if you go to my house and guard my father’s
“ body till I return, I will become your house-wife’. This proposal
“was accepted. ‘In our sty’, the girl went on to say, ‘you will
“find a pig; kill it, that we may prepare a (sacrificial) meal of it’.

“ On reaching the girl’s house, a noise reached Kwang’s ears of a
“clapping of hands accompanied by laughter and dancing. He lifted
“ up the mat suspended before the doorway, and beheld a crowd of
“ spectres in the main apartment tossing the corpse about. At this
“ sight he seized a stick, and with loud screams burst into the room,
" whereupon all the spectres without exception decamped. Kwang
“ watched the corpse, fetched the pig, and slaughtered it.

“At nightfall he saw an old demon beside the corpse. It held
out its hand, begging for some of the flesh, but Kwang grasped
it with so much force that its owner could not get away. Firmly
“ keeping hold of it, he heard the spectres outside the door cry of
“ one voice : ‘ that old slave, that glutton, has put his foot in it, hurrah !’
“‘Old devil!’ Kwang exclaimed, ‘for certain, it is you that murdered
“this old sire; bring back his vital spirits immediately, and I will let
“you go, else never!’ ‘It was my children that amused themselves
“ with killing him ’, the old demon cried, and it told the young
“ spectres to bring back the soul. The old man now revived ; the
old spectre was allowed to go, and when the girl came home
“ with the coffin and saw her father, she stood aghast and burst
“into wailing. Kwang married her”'.


* S * « fi H # # » (t>; » ^ s . * « « .


MAN-KILLING SPECTRES.


699


Spectres are also readily believed to kilt their victims sometimes by
creeping into their food, and thereby making their way into their
bellies. “The Yii-ctiang people”, thus relates the Ki shen Ink, “are
“fond of mushrooms, but above all they esteem the ‘yellow dame’
“ mushroom for its fine flavour. A certain man, while repairing his
“ dwelling, cooked such mushrooms for the workmen. One of these,
“ while on the roof of the kitchen to lay the tiles, looked down
“ and saw nobody, but around the caldron with its boiling contents
“covered with a dish a tiny, naked spectre ran and suddenly jumped
“ into it. The house-owner served up the mushrooms, and the said
“ workman was the only one who abstained from eating them,
“ without telling why; and that same evening all who had eaten
“of the mushrooms were dead” k

The belief in disease-causing demons being engrafted firmly in
the popular mind for all time, few things were better suited to
uphold and confirm it than nightmare. Indeed, a sleeper labouring
under this sensation seems crushed down under the weight of a
demon riding on his chest; his panting is due to the demon’s suf-
focating grasp; the sudden movements which interrupt his sleep
are desperate attempts to throw the demon off. Quite appropriately,
in fact, nightmare is written ^ , composed of a spectre and a com-


Mm.

. 5ii( niiiKj luh- TS, sect. ^ , cli. 90.

m.z±Am

^ . T S, sect. ^ ^ , ch. 52.


700


DEMONOLOGY.


ponent meaning pressure. This character does not occur in the
Classics, but this is no proof that the idea that nightmare is caused
by spectres did not prevail in ancient times. We have said on
page 650 that such spectres may be spiders. And, as if to bring
out still more clearly that the authors of nightmare are spectres,
medical writers very regularly call it “demoniacal nightmare” h
They assure us, that those spectres are apt to totally suffocate a
man : an easy way to account for sudden cases of death in bed by
apoplexy or other causes. These cases are, they say, “abrupt night-
mare” -, or “demonish nightmare without awaking”^, or “a violent
end in sleep by nightmare”*, not actually distinguished from strokes
of devils or evil, and also caused by spectres who tear the soul
out of the patient. In the work of Koh Hung we read; “In case
“ of nightmare, wdien the patient does not awake from his sleep,
“his hwun and p'oli wander about outside his body, being seized
“by sie or inscribed in the lists (of the dead); these souls wish to
“ return, but as long as they are unable to do so, they shun light,
“for if light shines they cannot re-enter the body”k

It is then quite natural that Koh Hung advises that such patients
should be brought round by calling back their souls. This remedial
method should, according to him, be connected with a certain
amount of hocus: “Tie the patient’s feet with hemp, ask him why
“ he is in that condition, and promise him that orders shall be
•• given to untie him ; then let a man sit down to watch his head,
“ and another call out his surname and name within the house,
“and the sitting man answer: ‘yes, I am here’; then revival will
“ follow®. If a sleeping person does not awake, no light may be allowed
“ to shine on him, for this may kill him ; but if painful bites be
“ inflicted on his heels and his big toes at the roots of the nails, and


' A1-

S * # . filf ,B US


4 ® ^ ^ Ig.

® I® * * t * . © W fi « . ^

. Clicv lieu pi kih fang ,


^ Bmmm. A

^ 4 ^ • Op. et loc. cit.


SPECTRES OF NIGHTMARE.


701


“ his face be repeatedly spat upon, he will revive b Blow breath
“(i.e. shen) into the ears of the patient with a hollow reed, and
“ introduce into his nose twenty-seven hairs of his own, made up
“ as a thread”

Other authors write in other terms, but in the same sense. “Five
“causes by which life is cut short are: hanging, falling dead, night-
“ mare, drowning, and smothering. In such mortal casualities the
“ five viscera are not yet dead, because they are deaths by violence
“ caused by some external disaster ; the h w u n and p'^o h still keep
“ watch beside the corpse, and thus, being not far away, they mav,
“ if called back in accordance with animistic magic, re-settle in or on
“the body and make it revive” b — “If a person harassed by night-
“ mare in his sleep does not awake, his hwun and p'oh wander
“about outside his body and are held fast by sie; vou ought then
“ call him in the dark, and beware of letting light shine on him,
“else his shen or hwun will not enter into him, and he will
“ expire under the light itself. Xightraare spectres come forth from
“ light, and therefore are not shy of light. The patient must not
“ be called to near by or impatiently, for such things too might
“cause the loss of his shen and hwun”b


Lumbago, gout, and kindred rheumatic affections are ascribed in


a » a t#* IS ffi ^ * is in iS oj' "

. op. ct luc. cit.

« il It il iB W 4 ft - i fung ^ Compen-
dium of ancient and modern Medicine, by Su Ch'un-fn cl. Ju-ynen

, of the Ming dynasty. T S, sect. . ch. 349.

R 1 7 * I- * . S « »f ft . ® Bt ^ . ,B,

H A JS Si| ^ A . M 5E ® 1 # $ Eh

SIteli sheng yao luh Record of what is required to gather Vi-
tality, a work quoted in the T S, sect. , ch. 109.


702


DEMONOLOGY.


Araov to the grasps of certain devilish pigmies, denoted by bookmen
by the character ^ hvvoh. These dangerous beings there busy
themselves with arousing sudden gusts of wind and draughts of air
whirling up the dust in narrow cross-streets and alleys; hence these
phenomena are styled in the local tongue h'd-d hong “ devil-
winds”. Apart from causing the above ailments, the hwoh often
amuse themselves by wrenching people’s faces awry with so much
force that the features can never again resume their former correct
position. They stiffen limbs, and lame men for the whole of their
lives — in short, they are the authors of all complaints comprised
in the term “strokes of murderous influences (shah) of winds’’^.
The belief in the evil wrought by these spectres is in Amoy so
deeply rooted and so general, that it is a very usual thing to hear
people there vent their anger by this curse : hhit lui-d hong p^ah
tioh^, “may a demon-wind strike you”.

The origin of these devils of rheumatic aflections can be traced
to China's early days, that is, if, relying on the great Khanghi
Dictionary, we may admit that their written name ^ is merely
another form of ^ y u h , which, as its radical indicates, denotes
an insect or an amphibious animal. In the ancient Shi king we find
these yuh associated with spectres, as this Classic mentions them
in juxtaposition with kwei in this line-. “Were you a kwei or
a yuh, you could not be got at” C Liu Hiang, the philosopher
of the first century before our era, “opined that the yuh occurred
“in southern Yueh (Kwangtung), a country with a surplus of women
“ where the two sexes used to bathe in the same streams, the
“ women taking the precedence, wherefrom a spirit of lasciviousness
“ arose. Hence it was that the holy ancients styled those animals
on account of the affinity of this character with tempt-
“ ation ; indeed, those animals could shoot at men from the river-
“ side, being cognate with shooting spectres in general ; the com-
“ mandments of Heaven severely and justly forbid men to place them-
“ selves on a footing of equality with women, and therefore It created
“ these mischievous things which kill with their shots those who are
“ tempted to lasciviousness ”

^ ^ ^ S'J ^ i'ect. yj, yj, ^ odes, 5.


SPECTRES CAUSING RHEUMATIC AFFECTIONS.


703


Later authors, not so much affected by holy indignation of the
sinful bains mixtes of those southerners, give us some information
about the y u li which is better than such flashes of fancy. The
Shtcoh wen says “it is a twan-hu”b The written form of this
term is translatable into “short bow”, but probably is merely a
phonetic transcription, for we also find it in the form the

translation of which gives “short fox” and is apparent nonsense.
Nevertheless native authors may be right who maintain, that
twan-hu is to be taken in the sense of a short bow, the beast
being, as we shall see presently, described as shooting maliciously
a poisonous breath, water or sand. This circumstance may have
created the word; yet we feel just as much inclined to think
that the word has created the belief in the shooting-capacities of
the animal.

“It resembles a tortoise”, the SIncoh icen goes on to say, “and
“it possesses three legs; it squirts its breath at men, thus destroying
“their lives”®. Chang Hwa, who lived from A.D. 232 — -300, wrote;
“ In the hills of Kiang-nan or the regions south of the Yang-tszg
“ there live in the becks certain archer-animals of the scaled class.
“ Their size is one or two t s‘u n. They have something in their
“ mouths which looks like a bow, and they squirt their breath at the
“shadows of men; ulcers then break out in the places hit, which,
“ unless attended to properly, are mortal. Nowadays when a k h ii-
“seu urinates upon a human shadow, the spots thus defiled like-
“ wise become ulcerous”’. These khii-seu, which we have already
met on page S4, are in general described as small lizards, but
need not occupy us for the present.

A contemporary of Chang Hwa, Luh Ki by name (A.D. 260 — 303),
further said about the yuh; “On the banks of the Yangtsze and the
“ Hwai they occur everywhere. When the shadow of a man on the

. Sect. 13, I, ]. 58.

— q-.

chi, ch. 3, ^ ,


704


DEMONOLOGY.


“bank appears in the water, the beast by throwing itself upon it
" kills the man ; it is on this account named the shadow-archer.
“ When a southerner has to go into the water, he previously flings
“ some sherds and stones into it to render it turbid. Some say,
“ that if the animal takes fine gravel in its mouth and squirts it at
“men, it fixes in his flesh and produces ulcers like leprosy”

The first author who represents the yuh to us with their present
attribute of causes of paralysis, painful stiffness, and head-complaints
is Yii Pao. “Under the reign of Kwang Wu of the Han dynasty
“(A.D. 25 — 5S) there lived in P ing (in Sze-chw'^en P) certain animals
“in the river, named yuh or twan-hu, which could take sand
“ in their mouths and squirt it at men. Those hit felt the tendons
“and nerves of their body stiffen; they got head-ache and burning

“ fever, and in the worst cases they died. The people on the

“river who repressed them with magical arts, found sand and
“gravel in their flesh. The meaning of the passage in the Shi king:
“‘were you a kwei or a yuh’, escapes me. The people now call
“ them river-poison” U

Koh Hung also dilated on this beast in his own peculiar manner,
apparently seasoning his remarks with inventions of his prolific

brain. “In Wu and in ChTi (Chehkiang, Kiangsu and Kiangsi)

“there exist in the country so-called twan-hu, yuh, archers, or
“ shadow-shooters. In fact they are aquatic animals, shaped like the
“ chirping cicada, and as large as a cup holding three double
“ handfuls ; they possess wings and can fly, and have no eyes, but
“acute ears. In their jaws they have something jutting out cross-
“ wise, which is a bow with tips, and when the animal hears a man.


s/. ^


A A BJl . * f i| 4b . Mao ski ts (10 muh niao shoii clt^ung yii sJiti,
second part, ^ $0 4^.


0 te K . ^ a-'lt A = 0r tf) * B) # f • » f; . a «

5 J • i# Pit II fi 55. S H BJ ^ bT iSij tfe . 4 « ii i

shcn ki, ch. 12.


SPECTRES CAUSING PESTILENCE.


705


“ it puts a string into this instrument as between the tips of a bow,

and using its breath as an arrow, squirts it out of the water at
“him. If it hits him, boils break out on the spot; if it hits his
“ shadow, disease also ensues, the ulcers not appearing, however,
“ immediately, but killing him all the same if they are not soon
“ attended to. The symptoms of this disease resemble those of a bad
“ catarrh ; both complaints entail death within ten days ” k

The reader will remember (see page S3), that the conception
that a man may be harmed by harm being done to his shadow,
is an old one, connected with certain ideas about the affinity of
his shadow and his soul. After all, it seems tolerably clear that
the yuh must be something like a water-beetle, crab, or amphi-
bious creature, which our zoological science will not fail one day
to define and strip of its fabulous garb.

The disastrous influence of demons is never so much felt and
feared as in times of epidemics, when myriads of wen-yih kwei,
“ demons of epidemic or pestilence ” k hover over the country, slaying
victims by hundreds in every direction. A roaring trade is driven
in charms, amulets, and demon-dispelling medicines; the people
flock to the temples and have recourse to religious ceremonies and
processions, of which we shall have much to say in Part IV of
this Book, and still later on.

That the belief in such demons is an old one, is proved by the
tradition we mentioned on page 499, according to which a son of
Chwen-siih became a devil of pestilence. Medical works of all times
are unanimous in declaring, that plagues are produced by certain
categories of sie doing their work in connexion with the vicissi-
tudes of the seasons, each of these having its peculiar prevailing
maladies. Hence their name: “sie of the movement of heaven ”k


A. 't'A^'^twa*.

5E . Pao P'oh-tsze, ch. 4, 17, ^ ^ •

45


DEMONOLOGY.


70(j

No doubt devds of epidemics have in all times lived in popular
imaginatimi in various parts of China under various local names,
and occupied themselves with other malignant works besides
spreading disease. A work of the sixth century is stated to have
related, that “in the city of Ilw'ang-cheu (in Hupeh?) hwang-fu
" spectres existed, who workeil evil whenever they appeared. Their
“ clothes and coats were all yellow. If they came to a human
“ dwelling, laughing with gaping mouths, pestilential disease was
" sure to break out there. Their size was not invariable, but varied
•• with the height to which the mat hanging before the doorway
“ w’as drawn up. As they had not showed themselves for ten or
“ more years, the gentry and the people lived under constant
" fears (that they were about to come). A man in Lii-ling,
“ Kw'oh Khing-chi by name, had a female slave, born in his own
“house; her name was Tshai-wei; she was young and beautiful. In
“the Hiao kien period of the Sung dynasty (A. U. 454 — 457)
"there appeared a man, calling himself a hill-spirit; he resembled
“a human being, but was in the garb of nature, and over one
“chang tall; his arms and his breast were yellow, but his skin
“ and his face were perfectly fresh and clean ; his speech w'as cor-
“ rect in every respect. The people took him for a Imvang-fu
“spectre. He came for sexual intercourse with the slave, who sub-
“ mitted to his will, as if he were a man. He then visited her
many times, always keeping his bodily shape concealed, but
“ from time to time it becatne visible, showing constantly varying
"forms. Now and then he was tall, at other times small; some-
“ times he looked like smoke or vapour; on other occasions he was
“as a stone, intant, or woman, or like a bird or quadruped; but
“his footprints were as those of a man and two chTh in length,
" except on some occasions, when they resembled those of a goose.
■■ The palms of his hands were as large as a bowl. He opened the
“ doors and shut the windows, entering in a spirit-like manner, and
“jested with the slave as a man would do” h

SmT. + anAlii


SPECTRES OP PESTILENCE.


707


Those hwang-fu demons are believed to have played their
part as spirits of pestilence as early as the period of the Han
dynasty, for the commentary upon the official history of the later
part of that house, written under the T"ang dynasty, narrates how
Yoh Pa \ Governor of Yii-chang in the first half of the second
century of our era, renowned for his great capacities as an exorcist,
“ found that province in constant distress on account of evil brought
“upon the people by hwang-fu spectres; but on his arrival these
“ beings all disappeared, and from that time no more cases of pesti-
“ fence occurred in that province”’. Devils are also engenderers of
cattle-plagues. “In the sixth year of the Shao hing period (AD.
“113(1), while the Chang family in the village of Yii-kan were
“ asleep, their cowboy in the stable heard somebody knock on the
“ door. He rose instantly, and saw several hundred robust men,
“ all clad in armour adorned with five flowers and with red hel-
“ mets on, rush into the stable and vanish there. At daybreak all
“the cows, fifty head strong, lay dead. Those men were plague-
“ demons” '.

The doctrine that the Universe is composed of five Elements the
influences of which work in all the phenomena of Nature, neces-
sarily leads to the inference that those Elements influence also the


^ ^ A. ^ ic . ^ ^

. KK, cli. 3:25: prol'esseJly from

the Shull i ki, in which, however, I cannot find it.

. The Khienliing edition of the Books of the

Later Ilan Dynasty, ch, 87, I. 3.

hinnj lidt] T S, ;?ect.


DEMONOLOGY.


7 1 IS


several diseases which harass man. Accordingly the spectres which
cause illness are of five different classes corresponding to the
Elements. We read as follows in a standard work of divination ;
"When kwei of Metal arise and flourish, the teeth and the
“ head are affected, and when they co-operate with the White
“Tiger', blood and pus flow. When spectres of the element Wood
“ set to work, complaints caused by Wind (rheumatism, etc.) arise,
“ and head-aches and dimness of the eyes pass away after a time.
“ Water-spectres cause alternatingly cold and heat, generally pro-
ducing fever in this way ; diarrhoea and catarrh then are diflicult
“ to cure. Spectres of Eire cause consumption combined with lan-
guor; which produces pains in the eyes. And the demons of Earth
“■ cause voidness of the spleen and the stomach, as also yellow
“ulcers; when they are at work in the body, they are bound to
“ produce disease in the thorax ”

Of these five classes three play a pre-eminent part in Demon-
lore, and have been treated by us in special chapters, viz those of
Wood, including those which dwell in trees, plants, and wooden
objects; those of Water, and those of Earth or the ground. The
latter in particular are believed to create much disease, none being
liable to so much collision with man, not only the soil he walks
on, but even his house and every object he handles being under
their direct influence, or inhabited by them.

Fire-devils are the will-o’the-wisps, which, as the reader has
seen on page SO, were declared by the ancients to be in the
main products of bloodshed. In the writings of Lieh-tsze' too it is
proclaimed that “ blood of horses becomes whirling fatiu, in the
same way as that of men becomes field-lights” b Those lights never
figure in China as good spirits. They are stigmatized as extremely
bad, intent on bringing sickness on people and making serious


i Metal and the White Tiger are correlative, as both belong to the West; see
Hook I. page 988.


. Pult-tilii Is^mn shu j-* or Complete Books on Divination, in

tinirteen chapters, by Chao Tsi-lung of the Ming dynasty; ch. XIV.


FIRK-SPKCTRES OR WILL-O THE-WISPS.


709


havoc in corn-fields. “ When, after the ears of corn have sprouted,
“ spectral lights flit about in the dark and singe it, it is a sixth
“ catastrophe. Those lights are emitted from the interior of de-
“ caying wood, so that wood is their mother, and the lights
“ are her children. As long as children are within their mother’s
womb, her body does not decay, for it is the nature of chil-
“ dren not to destroy their mother even should they abide in her
“for a thousand autumns; but whenever the year is rainy, so
“ that in the graves in the lonely plains — sapped and ruined by
“ foxes as so often they are — the cottins are soaked and in an
“ extremely rotten condition, then their wood, which I have called
“ mother-matter, decays, and the lights having no longer anything
“ to adhere to, detach from it and fly about. Being lights pro-
“ duced by Yin, they endure no yang light, and await the
“ twilight after sunset to burst forth from their crevices ; lacking
“ force to rise into the air, they move about irregularly over
" distances of a few feet only ; and when ears and blades of the
“ corn come in contact with them, these are cut otf immediately,
“ singed or burned. iMen who chase away those lights, whenever
“ they see roots of trees emit them, fall upon them as upon spectres,
“ with a hail of blows. I do not know whence the statement comes
“ that there are spectres produced by decayed wood. When spectre-
“ lights see lamp-light, they vanish of themselves” '.

Unbiassed minds may recognize in those harvest-destroying luminous
devils, born from rotting vegetable and animal matter, a species of
fire-fly, voracious, or placing its destructive eggs and larvae in


± » . a a £ ft M fs rt , A * s * a 2 ±

Q-fk ^ . T S, sect. 1$-:^ , ch. 26; trom the T'ict) iimxf

khai v:\ili


710


DEMONOIiOGY.


cornfields. We read as early as in the Li ki (ch. 23, 1. 3), that
“ decaying herbs become fire-flies in the last month of summer
Sundry authors explicitly call those insects which is, as we
saw on page SI, the usual old name for will-o’the-wisps ; so,
e. fj. did Ts'ui Pao in his Ku kin cJiu, in a paragraph treating of
fishes and insects; we niav then ask whether the fact that that
character contains the elements ^ fire, % rice, and unto-
ward, is merely accidental. In some tales we find fire-flies, just like
will-o’the-wisps, described as products of human blood. “Under the
"emperor Hwai of the Tsin dynasty it occurred in the Yung kia
“period (A. U. 307 — 313) that one Ting Tu, a Tsdao-kwoh man,
“ cro.'sed the Yangtsze, and reaching the frontier of Yin-ling when
" it was dark and foggy, saw a being like a man, northward from
“ his path. This creature fell down, and then as it reared itself up
“ blood flowed out of both its eyes, from its head to the ground,
“ where it formed two pools of more than one pint each. Tu and
“ his cousin cried out at that apparation with one voice, with the
“ result that it faded away. And on the spot where it had stood
“ the blood changed entirely into several thousands of fire-flies, flying
“ away in all directions” b

Fire-flies appear in China in the hottest times of the year. In
Fuhkien they swarm especially in the seventh month, when the
whole population is busily engaged in feeding the souls of the
dead, temporarily released for the purpose from hell by Buddhist
sacerdotal art. This coincidence tends, of course, to corroborate every
year the popular belief that those insects are human ghosts. Fortu-
nately, as the Amoy Chinese say, they generally keep aloof from
human habitations, and seldom enter. “ The lasses roving about at
“night”, an author writes, “are lights of fire-flies. They are the
"vital spirits (tsing) of corpses lying on the ground. Burning
“incense turns them away. They bring happiness if they enter a


. Sect. , IV. See also a like state-

ment in tlie Kill cininii Cheu shu, ch. 6, § 52.

5^ hwai luh\ TS, sect. ch. 171.


SPECTRES APPEARING AS LIGHTS AND FIRES. 711

“ human dwelling blue coloured, but calamity if they are then red” b
For the rest, tales connecting evil spirits with wandering lights
and fires are numerous. To give two instances:

“ In the Hwui-ki department there appeared regularly a tall
“ demon of many chang, with loins several dozen spans in circum-
“ference. A high cap it wore, and black clothes. Sic Tao-hin, coming
“ to a pond across a graveyard, saw in the evening shades at
“ that pond a pair of torches. Forthwith they entered the water,
“ where they spread over a surface of several dozen chang, with
“ a bright silkwhite colour which faded gradually into a bloodred
“ hue, and broke up finally into several hundred torches that
“ pursued his vehicle. And in the midst of those lights he perceived
“ distinctly the huge ghost, with a head as big as a basket for
“ five stones of rice. This being behaved as if dead drunk, and
was supported on either side by tiny spectres. In that same year
“ the rebellion of Sun Ngen broke out (towards the end of the
'• fourth century), which nobody in Hwui-ki neglected to join and
“succour; and it was opined at that time that Tao-hin’s vision
“was the forboding of it”"*.

— “Li Chen was on officer in Hu-cheu, whose farm stood in
“ Fu-keu. In the spring of the second year of the Yung t'ai
* period (A. D. 499) he went home for the celebration of the
“ T s H n g m i n g festival, and, when about to reach the Poh-liang
“ river came by a spot which formerly was a shrubless grave,

•• twenty paces from the roadside, where the herdboys were wont


® A A St , S W "n . 11 ^ ^ I® gli ’■ “V

from the Ta^iutj sUukj isaJi At , Miscellanies from the lilue Bov,

a work in ten chapters by \Vu C'h u-heu , al. Poli-kii tea.

who attained the highest literai-y degree in 10o3.

l:ivai lull, K K. ch. 3‘i:!


71-2


DEMONOLOGY.


'• to play and gambol ; but this evening he saw there a grotto as
“ large as a dish, with a glare of light in it. This aroused his curiosity;

lie alighted, went to the grave, and saw five lasses in beautiful
“ dress, seated in the order of the five cardinal points, stitching and
“ sewing with untiring zeal, stooping over candle-lights. Cheu made
some noise, on which the five lights all went out, and the five
'• maids vanished out of sight. Uneasy feelings sent him back to
his saddle; he galopped off, but still ere he was on the road, five
“ torches rushed forth from the grave and gave chase to him. He
“ tied at his courser’s ful'est speed, unable, however, to outrun his
pursuers. He brandished his whip, but it was singed by the
lights, which did not vanish until he had covered some ten miles
* which separated him from the Poh-liang river, where he came
“ upon dogs. At daybreak he perceived that the tail of his horse
“ was burned off, and that its rump and its legs were singed.
“ Thenceforth the grave was called that of the five lasses. It still
“exists to tliis day'’h

Spectres associated with the element Metal we have seldom found
specially mentioned. But since the four other elements have their
spirits, regularity requires that Metal should follow suit; more-
over, all who have heard the tinkling of the bells of scholastic
philosophy, must needs believe in the existence of spectres of all
the elements, since these correspond with the four cardinal points


lie#

+ II am MM

1 Poh i chi Ample Record of strange Things, ten

tales about spirits, ascribed to one Ching Hwan-ku ^ under

the T'ang dynasty. The above tale is not in my copy; I quote it from the K K,
ch. 337.


SPECTRES OF THE ELEMENT METAL.


713


and the centre, all equally crowded with spectres. In medical works
we have come across the doctrine that the devils of Metal preferably
affect the lungs, which (see the Table on page 26) philosophy con-
nects with that element. It is hardly necessary to add, that evil
spirits dwelling in objects of metal are naturally ranked in this
class. A higher conception associates the devils of Metal with the
planet Venus, called by the Chinese the star of Metal ha murderous,
disease-producing celestial power representing the autumn, the season
of mortality and decay of Nature. In this capacity it comes to the
foreground almost e.xchisively in astrological divination, and hence
we shall find it again in our Book on Taoism.


CHAPTER IX.


ON SUICIDE-SPECTRES.

The ghost of every drowned person and of every victim of a
tiger, as we have seen on page 5,'25 and page 554, does not rest
until it has caused a person to lose his life in the same way as he
lost his. Such also is the behaviour of self-murderers; they are
always in search of so-called “substitutes”: t‘i or kao-tT’, tai or
kao-tui Hence in a house whore some one has killed himself,
suicides are likely to occur at shorter or longer intervals, and this
conviction prevails so strongly that houses infected with this evil are
difficult to let, and even stigmatized as totally uninhabitable.

It is not by the shen of the self-murderer that the substitute
is sought, for, soaring on high, to blend with the supreme Yang
from which it sprang, it is not its nature to do harm ; but it is
sought by his p'oh or kwei, returning to the earth on the very
spot where the suicide was perjietrated. We learn this from Li Shi-
chen, who says : “ The p"oh of a man is something lying under a
“hanged person and resembling carbonized wheat-bran; if dug away
“ immediately, it may be destroyed, but if this precaution is delayed,
“ it sinks deep into the ground, and unless eradicated, a repetition

of the ii.cident is sure to occur. Indeed, man is gifted with a
■•yang breath and a yin breath, which constitute his body, his
"liwun and his p‘oh; as long as these breaths dwell in him
“conjointly, he lives, but when they separate he dies, his hwun
“then rising to heaven, and his p'oh descending into the earth.
“As this p"oh belongs to the Yin, the tsing of it is absorbed by
“the earth, wherein it changes into the above-mentioned substance” ^


W ® fl M . a ») ■» A ^ S BiJ iE' S sa ^ .


SPECTRES WHICH SEDUCE MEN TO SUICIDE.


7J5


Self-destruction is perpetrated in China mostly by means of the
rope; hence suicidal spectres are denoted in Amoy by the term
tiao “hanging-spectres”. Every one in that town, from the

most learned man down to coolies and beggars, firmly believes
in their existence, and numerous tales are in circulation to prove
that they are fully entitled to do so. Two of these may be
retold here : —

Not so very many years have passed away since a boatman
ferried over an unknown man from the main land to the town.
A small rafter which this stranger carried with him, aroused his
suspicion, for who w'as ever so odd as to fetch from beyond the
broad bay a thing like tliat, so easy to buy anywhere in the town?
Quietly rowing on, he entered into conversation with him, and
thus learnt from him where lie w’as going. He landed him at
the jetty, and was paid his fare, but no sooner was the stranger
out of sicjht than the coins transformed themselves in the hand
of the ferry-man into just so many sheets of paper currency for
the world of ghosts. He at once fathomed the mystery to the
very bottom, hurried to the house which his passenger had men-
tioned, and arrived just in time to save the life of the housewife,
who was busily engaged with hanging herself at a rafter of the
roof, in her wrath at a thrashing just received from the partner of
her joys and sorrows.

The following case had a less satisfactory issue for its hero. He
happened to pass by a grave in the shades of evening, when he
perceived a man doing his best to push a rafter over a wall of a
neighbouring house. Thinking that this signified burglary, he stole to a
side-door and warned the inmates, who searched the house thoroughly
for thieves, but found nothing suspicious, except a woman of the
family just trying to hang herself from a roof-beam. The devil’s
murderous intent being thus frustrated, the discoverer of it, elated
with pride and self-satisfaction, and loaded with the cordial thanks
of the family, went home and immediately told his wife of it.
But she was an inquisitive character, not contented with bare tale,
and wanted an actual exhibition of the hanging-scene. The obedient
goodman mounted upon a chair, slung a cord across one of the rafters.


im It S lit ft 'I'-

' ffl A-


716


DEMONOLOGY.


and laid a running noose around his neck, when suddenly an
unseen hand capsized the chair and swung him into eternity with
a broken neck. Thus the rancorous spectre had its victim, and its
vengeance in addition.

The generality of the belief in such suicide-spectres working to
the peril of mankind, may be admitted from the existence of various
written tales, of which they and their mischief are the topics.

" ChTn Kung-ping lived on terms of friendship with his fellow
” sillager Li Fu. One evening, in autumn, he strolled in the moon-
•• light to the house' of this man] to have a chat. ■'! am just wishing
"to take some wine with mv wife’, said Li to him, ‘but I find
*■ that 1 have none; sit down for a moment, I will go and buy some,
"and then enjoy the moonlight with you’. Ch'en sat down with
“ a piece of poetry in his hand, to await his friend’s return.

‘■Then outside the gate a w'oman appeared, in a blue dress and
“ with dishevelled liair. She opened the door and entered, but
on seeing ChTn she immediately retired. ClTen supposed that she
“ was one of Li’s family, who thought it better not to enter because
‘•she wished to avoid the stranger; therefore he shifted a little
“ sideways, to give room to her. She took something out of her
“ sleeve, hid it under the railing of the gate, and hurried into the
“ house, and Ch'en, curious to know what she had hidden there,
•• went to the railing, and saw a cord emitting a bad smell and
stained with blood. It now occurred to him that she might be
“the ghost of a hanged person; he hid the cord in his boot, and
“ sat down again.

“After a short while, the woman with the dishevelled hair came
“ out of the house and groped in the spot where she had put the
“cord. Missing this, she flew into a passion and made straight for
"Ch’en. ‘Give me back my thing!’ she cried. ‘What thing?’ asked
“ he, but the woman did not give an answer. Drawing herself
up to her full height, and opening her mouth as wide as she
“• could, she blew out a cold wind over him, which froze his
“hair and made his teeth chatter; the lamplight sputtered and
“became green, as if about to be extinguished. ‘The spectre has
“breath’, ClTen thought, ‘have I none?’ — and he too blew at
“ the woman ; and lo, the spot where his breath hit her grew
“ hollow. First her belly was bored right through, then followed
“ her breast, and in the end her head disappeared; a moment had
“ sufficed to turn her into a light vapour, which dissolved and
“ vanished, and did not re-appear.


SPECTRES WHICH TEMPT PEOPLE TO SUICIDE.


717


“ After some moments Li entered with the wine, and loudly cried
“ that his wife had hung herself from their bed. But Ch‘'en smiled ;
•“she cannot be hurt’, said he, ‘for 1 have still the rope of the
“spectre in my boot’; and while he related what had come to pass,
“ they entered and untied the woman. They poured ginger-water
“ into her mouth, and seeing her come round, asked her why she
“ had desired death. She replied : ^

“Although we are very poor, my husband is always so bent
“on guests; the only hairpin I still have he has drawn out to
“ buy wine with, and however deeply this grieved me, 1 could
“ not cry, because of the visitor on the premises — when sud-
“ denly a woman with dishevelled hair stood beside me, saying she
“was a neighbour living to the left; my husband, she told me,
“ had not drawn out my hairpin on behalf of the guest, but to go
“ with it to the gambling-house. These words increased my sorrow
“and indignation; the thought crossed my brain that if my
“ husband did not come home because it was late at night, the
“ visitor would not go, there being nobody to tell him to do so.


A.m

AlAifeiR, S P‘1 ST. B'G'fi-fil*,

T a a -f <i Hi a. A* . ^ it # » # .

« . S S ® S Bo m ^ . li Si) « ^ .


^ >- olin M ni> c<


718


DEJ10N0I.0(JY.


“ and — the woman with dishevelled hair with her own hands
•• made a noose. ‘Through this vou may pass into the boundless
"delights of Buddha's realm’, she said; 1 put my head into
•• the noose, but her hands could not draw it tii^ht ; it slackened
‘repeatedly. Then with the words; ‘I shall fetch my own Buddha-
“ cord, this will make a Buddha of you’, she hurried out of the
“ door to fetch it, but was absent for a long time, during which
"I was dozy and dreaming; and then you came to save me’. They
*• made inquiiies, and indeed, some months ago a village woman
“in the neighbourhood had hanged herself”’.

We learn from this tale, that the cord with which a suicide has
strangled himself is an appendage of his ghost while in search
of a substitute, and that this instrument, having once done its
fatal work successfully, is particularly suited to perform it a second
time, and even many more times in succession. “In Hang-cheu
“ (Chehkiang pr.), a storeyed house inhabited by the Hii family
“ and standing by the Wang-sien bridge, was said to be inhabited
" by the ghost of a hanged person. A butcher, Chu Shih-’rh by
'• name, contident of his courage, took the knife with which he
“ used to kill pigs, mounted to the upper storey with a candle, and
“ slept there. After the third watch-drum had sounded, the flame
‘ of the candle turned blue, and an old hag with dishevelled
•• hair climbed the ladder, with a rope in her hand. Chu struck
“ at her with his knife, and as she tried to catch him with the
"rope, he hacked this through; the ends however rejoined and the
“ rope whirled around the knife, but the knife passed through it
“ as easily as if it were a hempcutter’s knife. Thus the struggle
" went on for some time, the strength of the old woman gradu-


If. ^7:*, «


PEOPI.E SEDUCED BY SPECTRES TO SUICIDE.


719


"ally failing. ‘Chu Shih-’rh!’ she cried with a curse, I am not
“ at all afraid of you, but there is still due to your good fortune
“a sum of 15000 copper coins which you have not yet received;
“it is on account of this circumstance that I will pardon you
“ now, but no sooner will you have receis'ed that money than you
“ will experience the dexterity of the hands of me, Mrs. Kin Lao-
“ts'in’. With these words she departed, diagging the rope after
“ her. Chu descended from the storey and told the crowd what
“ had happened, showing them his knife, stained with red blood
“ and stinking. A year later he sold his house for 15000 coins, and
" died the same evenintf"’ h

Thus we see that ghosts of suicides by the cord sometimes attack
brave people by brute force. The following tale confirms this:

“A detective in Kii-yung (Nganhwui pr.), Yin Khien by name,
“ was a famous thief-catcher, who every night used to lie on the
“ look-out in obscure, unfrec^uented spots. Once he was on the way to
“ a village, when a man with a cord, running with blind haste,
“dashed against his back. ‘This must be a thief’, said Yin to
“himself, and he followed him till he came to a house and scaled
“ the wall. Yin thought it better not to catch him yet, but to
“ watch him first, for if he delivered an innocent man to the
“ magistrate, he would probably not receive any reward, while
“by waiting till the man should leave the house and then rob-
“ bing him of his loot, he would be sure to get much more. But
“suddenly the suppressed wailing of a woman reached his ears.

“ He was now all suspicion, scaled the wall, and saw a married
“ woman dressing her hair before a mirror, while a being in the
“ roofbeam with dishevelled hair tried to catch her with a cord.


^ ^ ^ fill It if Mi ti is # ^ ^ , MP

^ ^ . # i'J' # # ^ ^ M ^ H , W ^

^ ^ ^ M M # fi ^ + S. ^ ^ Tszc puh y„


ch. 8.


720


DEMONOI-OOr.


“ Yin now conceived that it was the ghost of a hanged person
“ seeking for a substitute. Shouting loudly, he broke through the
“window; the neighbours ran together in consternation, while Yin
“ explained his behaviour, and indeed they saw the woman hanging
“from the beam. They lifted her up and thus saved her, and her
“ parents-in-Iaw came to tender their thanks, and brought wine to
“refresh them.

“ After they had dispersed, our hero went home by the same
“ road. The day had not yet broken. Hearing a ticking sound
“ behind him, he looked back, and saw the spectre with the rope.
“‘What did it matter to you that I was catching that woman?’
“said it with a curse; ‘why did you infringe our customary laws?’
“and it gave him blows with both its hands. But Yin, brave and
“ strong, paid it back its blows, and the spots where his fists lighted
“ were cold and rank. Daylight by and by broke, and the force
“ of the spectre with the cord waned in proportion, while Yin’s
“agility and strength inereased; lie grasped the ghost tightly in
“ his arms, and a passer-by saw him embracing a piece of rotten
“ wood and furiously uttering vehement curses. Approaching to
“ investigate the matter, that man found Yin apparently dreaming,
“ but he came round, and the rotten wood dropped to the ground.
“‘The spectre clings to this wood’, he angrily exclaimed, ‘but I do
“not pardon the wood’; and he took a nail, and nailed it up
“ against the pillar in his courtyard.

“ There they heard it wail and weep every night as if labouring
“ under untolerable pain and grief. After some nights had thus
“ elapsed, moaning, childlike voices were heard speaking with that
“ being, and soothing it, and imploring mercy on its behalf, but
“ Yin did not attend to them. Among those voices was one of a
“ spectre which said : ‘ Be glad that the house-owner has merely
“ nailed you up ; had he tied you with a rope, your sulfering
“would be much worse’. ‘Hold your tongue!’, the other spectres
“ whispered at once. On the next day Yin replaced the nail by a
“ rope. That evening he no more heard the spectre weep, and the
“next morning he saw that the rotten wood had disappeared”*.

mm


SUICIDE-SPECTRES.


721


As ghosts of hanged persons are always in search of victims
to follow their example, they are, of course, present immediately
wherever intent to self-murder arises. In the Standard History of
the Kin dynasty we read of a loyal officer, P^u-ch‘ah Khi ', also
named Jen-khing living in the first half of the thirteenth century,
who put an end to his life to avoid ignominy: “ When he came home,
“ his mother was just having a nap, and awoke with a shudder.
“‘Mother’, asked Khi, ‘what is the matter with you?’ ‘I was just
“dreaming’, she replied, ‘of three men hidden in the roof-beams;
“this frightened me out of my sleep’. Jen-khing knelt down and
“said: ‘Those men in the beams are ghosts; 1, your child, intend
“ to hang myself from the beams, and you have foreseen this in
“your dream’. The family burst into tears, and dissuaded him
“with the words: ‘do not you think of your old mother?’ But


M-.mm z A . M, - m

IS.

B , Am it A ,

ffl pf # , ft •£ ® # . Pft P# . S 4n K , U ^

m & M =s ^ . m A ’mb , 9 , 9 . ^ B ^ m

M H avftS. SJ 0 ifftft * *a *•

Ttize puh i/ii, ch 6.


2


4G


722


DEMONOLOGY.


“she stopped them, saying; ‘do not interfere with my child; his
“resolve is correct’. And he did hang himself”*.

That spectres not seldom impel men to selfmurder at the state-
examinations for literary degrees, we have already seen (pp. 461 sqq.).
Suicidal intent may arise by the mere apparition or presence of a
suicide-spectre, as the following tale shows : “ In the first year of
“the Yung shun period (A.D. 682) the mother of Yuen Shui,
“ in T'ung-cheu, was seated by broad daylight in the main
“ apartment of her house, when she saw on the other side of the
“ screen a dwarf riding on a pony into the house. It was two
“ or three feet in size, and the dimensions of the pony were in
“ proportion. It was in ornate dress and armour, which glistered
“ as sunlight. It swiftly rode round the walls of the courtyard for
“ a good while ; then it faded away, and on this the woman con-
“ tinuously sought to put an end to her life, so that the whole
“ family guarded her. After a year or so her passion for suicide
“abated a little; but one night, on having retired to rest, she put
“ her clothes under the blankets instead of herself, and escaped
“ through the gate. Her guardians perceived it and sought her, but
“ she threw herself into the well, and while they were drawing her
“out she expired”^.

ft ' »

el,, 361,

winch quoted the tale from the Kwanq kii-kin wii hinrj rhi

or Elaborated Account of Phenomena produced by the five Elements in Times Ancient
and Modern, a work on wonders of all sorts, mentioned in the Catalogue of the
New Books of the Thing Dyn.isty^ (ch. 59, 1. tiS) as written by one Ten Wei-wuh
K consisting of tliirty chapters. It still existed under the Sung dynasty,

but It seems to be now lost.


CHAPTER X.

SPECTRES WITH A MATERIAL BODY. VAMPIRISM.

It will not have escaped the attention of the reader in perusing
various chapters of this Book, that the Chinese by no means always
imagine their ghosts with a volatile, etherial shape, but rather
manifest a tendency to think them more or less solid and substantial,
if not material. This phenomenon has given birth to terrible devils
of great strength, of which we must now treat at some length;
first, however, its reality may further be instanced by a couple of
authentic tales.

“In the Khai yuen period (713 — 742) the Governor of the
“ province of Liang (now ivansuh), Kwoh Chi-yun by name, while
“ on a tour of inspection, was smitten by death at a post-house one
“ hundred miles from the provincial chief city. His soul then left
“ the room, ordering the headman of the post-house to shut it
“and open it no more, and returned to the city, while his menials
“ who travelled with him had no idea that he was dead. Having
“ arranged his public and private business in his mansion in some
“forty days, he ordered some men to go and fetch his remains
“ from the post-house. On their return he himself directed the
“dressing and coffining; subsequently he took leave of his family,
“ and entered into the corpse and the coffin. After this he appeared
“ no more” b

The following strange story teaches us not less strikingly how a soul
may be a perfect duplicate, visible and tangible, of its body; “In

[aw.


724


DEMONOLOGY.


“the first year of the Ching y uen period (A.D. 785), Li Tsih from
“ Ho-nan, Sub-intendant of the Palace, breathed his last. Before they
‘‘ laid him in his coffin, a man in red appeared at the house to
“ offer his condolences, telling the family that he was one Su,

“ Chancellor of a Board. He entered, and his wailing and lamen-
“ tation had reached the highest pitch of intensity, when suddenly
“the corpse drew itself up and exchanged blovvs with him. The
“ members of the family ran out of the hall in consternation. The
“two men closed the door, and fought until eventide; and when
“ the mourning sons thereupon ventured into the room, they saw
“ two corpses side by side on the couch. Their dimensions, shapes
“ and features, their beards and their clothes did not show the slightest
“ difference. The clanspeople were called together, but none could
“ distinguish the one from the other ; so they buried them together
“in one coffin”'.

The idea that souls may move about in solid forms hardly
different from corporeality, cannot appear unnatural when w^e
consider that ghosts of the dead can scarcely rise before the mind
of man otherwise than in the material shape in which he knew
them while they were alive. Ghosts dwell, as our readers know,
according to the Chinese, in their graves, implicated in the
corpse, or even in single portions of it ; as a natural conse-
quence we see them rise before their imagination very often as
dry carcasses, or even as bones or skidls. Corpses or bones are
deemed to sustain, strengthen and solidify the souls to which
they belong; — accordingly, a ghost which still has its corpse or
bones at its disposal, either in or outside the grave, must, when
breeding evil, naturally be a demon of special power. It is no feeble
ghost, easily frustrated in its bad designs by clever men, and there-
fore having to recur to sly, covert artifices if it wishes to do harm;
but, having substantiality to rely on, it is apt to attack men straight-
forwardly, with brute force and clumsy violence.


* S *11 1 , g H S 15 "f - it A :r til A * . -fit ®

Mite,

. Tiih i chi: KK, ch. 339.


SOULS OF CORPSES AND SKELETONS.


725


For instance : — “In the first year of the Yung Fa i period
“ (A.D. 765) one Wang lived in Yang-cheu, to the north of the
“ Hiao-kan monastery. In a summer month he got drunk, and his
“ arm hung down from his bed. His wife, fearing that he might
“ catch rheumatism, would lift it up, when suddenly a large hand
“ appeared before the bed, and pulled Wang down from it by his
“ arm, his body thereupon slowly sinking into the ground. His
“ wife and his female slaves together pulled him back, but they
“ could not stop him, for it was as if the ground burst asunder.
“ The clothes and girdle which he had laid aside disappeared also.
“ Then the family with all their might grubbed him up, and at a
“depth of more than two cliang found a dry skeleton, apparently
“ some centuries old. I have never known what spectre this was” b
Such notions about e.xtraordinary power of ghosts which retain
possession of their body or parts of it, are further corroborated by
the conception, so vividly impressed in all ages upon the Chinese
mind, about the possibility of bodily revival. There is then sufficient
ground for a thriving belief in what we may call corpse-spectres or
haunting corpses, a belief which, as books teach us, has frequently
induced people to e.xhume and <’.,;stroy corpses on account of appa-
ritions ascribed to these. “Outside the south gate of Tan-yang”,
we read for instance, “a member of the Lit tribe possessed a
“ garden of beans, from which he drew very considerable profits.

“ Always when the fruits were ripening, Lii and his sons kept
“ watch there against thieves. One night the moon was shining
“ brightly, and the father was squatting on a boulder with his
“ eyes on his plants, when he saw among them a being, with hair
“ hanging down disorderly, emerge from the ground. His eyes
“ grew dim with fear ; he called his sons, and going to catch
“ that being, they saw a young woman in red dress draw herself
“up with a bound; the father fell to the earth in terror, and
“ the sons ran back home like madmen, with the woman at their


SI * S 2 ^ Si- ii; rS ® # 7 : .ft .

Yiii-yan;/ l.iah Istt, ch. 13.


^ >- bt- )^C ES )^c ^


726


DE3IONOLOGY.


“ heels. At the main gate of the house she gave up the chase and
stood quite rigid and motionless, one leg outside the gate, and
“ the other within. The shrieks of the sons summoned the members
“ of the family with their swords and sticks, but none ventured
“ near the woman, lest her cold breath might strike them. Thus
“ she quietly resumed her advance, stooped, and disappeared under
“■ a bed.

"Having revived their unconscious father with some ginger-water,
the sons took him home, and convoked the neighbours. They all
“set to work to dig up the ground under the bed, and they found
“a red coffin with the corpse of a woman in red, resembling that
'• of the previous night. From that time the father and the sons
“ lacked courage to watch their garden and its trees. Three days
“ passed away, when a man was found lying under the beans. Lii
“ and his sons brought him to his senses with a liquor, and asked
■'•him whence he came. ‘I am a neighbour of yours from the west
“side’, he said; ‘seeing so many beans of you quite unguarded,
“ I came to steal them, but suddenly saw under the plants a
“headless man beckoning to me; I fell to the ground in terror
•‘at the sight’. Again the sons fetched men to dig up the spot,
“ and this time they found a black cotfin with a headless corpse.
“The two bodies, quite rigid and undecayed, they placed side by
" side and ljurned them ; and henceforth there occurred no more
“ visitations” h


' 5111. JR *)*:*:.«

m ^ s z . m M M

m ^ ^ & s. z ^

SHI' Jtb . it ^ e # 71. g . it :2. M PI 1M


CORPSES AND SKULLS HAUNTING AS SPECTRES.


727


Such radical measures against corpses so dangerous seem to have
been adopted in all times and ages. As noted on page 1406 of
Book I, some two thousand years ago the Imperial consort Chao-sin
disinterred and burned five of her husband’s concubines and slaves
whom she had murdered, because their speetres disturbed her rest.
In the fifth century, “antecedent to his demise, Tsz6-hiun, prince
“ of Tsin-ngan, was advised by a w u to open the mausoleum of
“ the empress-dowager Chao (the consort of the emperor Wen),
“ and to destroy her coffin, in order to suppress the evil it might
“work” h Inspired by the same notions no doubt was the grandee
of whom w'e have heard on page 424, when he destroyed by fire
the corpse of his wife, to prevent it from emerging anew from her
coffin for adulterous intercourse with another mandarin of that region.

Not a few corpse-spectres have visited mankind in the shape of
skulls. They did so at least so early as the fourth century, for we
read in the collection of T'ao Tsheii: “In Sin-ye the mother of one
“ Yii Kin was ill. He and his two brothers were all at home to
“ nurse her, and even in broad daylight burne<l fires (to scare
“ away spectres). Once on a sudden they saw the hangings for
“ tying up the curtains roll themselves up and down several times,
“ and heard for a moment a dog before the bed howl strangely. All
“ the inmates of the house came to see what was the matter, and
“ saw no dog, but a dead man’s head lying on the floor, with the
“ hair still on it ; its two eyes rolled in their sockets — a most
“ dreadful sight, scaring the family out of their wits. The thing
“ then moved out of the house through the gate without being
“ touched, and they buried it behind in a field ; but ne.xt morning
“ going to look, they found that it had worked itself out of the
“ ground, and that its eyes were still rolling as before. Again they
“buried it, and again it appeared next day above the ground; on
“ which they interred it with tiles over it, so that it came forth
“ no more. Next day their mother breathed her last” *.

1 ^ ’i" 1 Pt ^ Histoiy uf the South, cli. 11, 1. 7; aluo the

Book.s i)f the Snnfc Dvn.tsty, cli. 41. 1. 16,

2 ffi - |ii M # S . Jl ^ = A S ^ . a 0 ®


728


DEMONOLOGY.


Another work relates, that in the village of Lai-thng in Shang-tu
Mrs Li was sitting in the hall of her house in broad daylight,
“ when suddenly she beheld her husband’s deceased sister in white
“ dress, with a linen kerchief over her head. The phantom approached
“ and pursued her, and she tried to escape by running round the
“ bed, but the ghost did not give up the chase. She then ran away
“ through the door. At full speed they tore across hills and rocks,
“ and nobody had the courage to help her, but happily some
“ cavalry at the north gate felt upon the ghost with their whips ;
“ under their blows it shrunk away, until nothing remained of it
“ on the ground but the kerchief, covering something which they
“ found to be a skull” k

“Sun Kiun-sheu of Shang-shuh was an atrociously bad character,
“bent on insulting the shen and maltreating the kwei. Once he
“ was strolling in the hills with some others, and had reason to
“ retire. For fun he squatted over a dry skull by a neglected grave,
“and made it swallow his faeces, saying: ‘eat this, is it not deli-
“cious?’ on which the skull, its jaws wide open, spoke: ‘yes it is’.
“ Horrified at this, Kiun-sheu ran away as fast as his legs could
“ bear him, with the skull rolling behind him over the ground like
“ a car-wheel, till he reached a bridge, up which it could not
“ manage to raise itself. From an eminence he saw the skull roll
“ back to its old place. Ashy pale as a corpse he came home, and
“ fell ill. Constantly he brought his excrements to his mouth with


^ 8R fsi ii.a bt tt * tt
^ ^ a 2 , ^ Y- « aj . « 0 St # ffi tr ■ »"“

Jieii hi, ch. 8.

At*.

asia^it. 7} [a PS. se in nt iiiB ^ a* .

A'toaw/ i lu; KK, ch. .300.


ANIMATED SKCLES CHASING MEN.


729


“his hand, and swallowed them, saying to himself: ‘eat this, is it
“ not nice ?’ — then he voided them anew, and devoured them
“again, going on in this wise for three whole days, when he died” ^

This story seems an embellished version of the following: “In
“the year ping or ting of the Chi yuen period (1336 or 1337),
•• Yin Kang-lo and some other men of Lii-ling were out in the
“ evening for a stroll to the Sih-kia lake. They were eating salted
“ plums, and put the stones into the mouth of a skull lying on
“the roadside, with the words: ‘do you find them salt?’ They
“ then passed on and came to a long trench. Here they saw in the
“ bright moonlight a black ball coming rolling on behind them,
“crying: ‘they are salt, salt’. In the greatest fright they ran more
“ than ten miles, till they got across some water at the village of Yung,
“and heard the voice no more”®.

Skulls may haunt even without being so bitterly provoked. “The
“ country of Ch'u-cheu (in Chehkiang pr.) is very mountainous.
“ There, in the district of Li-shui, situated south of the peak of
“ the Residence of the immortal Genii, farmers ploughing and
“ sowing often break up waste ground, even as far as halfway up
“ the mountains. In those mountains spectres abound, and people
“ all begin and finish their work early, not venturing abroad in dark.
“Once in the latter part of autumn, a land-owner, Li by name,
“ came to the village to cut his rice, and put up alone in a farm-
“ house. One night when the moon was shining splendidly, he was


II ip (I fSM .# . fiS T' # #

5 E R , . 0 « * ffR ^ ^ . S 0 , gf # -S

mm

.ect, Jill cl,. 46: Horn tl. 1

wen tsunij lull.


730


DEMOXOLOGY.


“ takin": a stroll on the lull in front, when suddenly he saw a white
“ thing hopping towards him. This strange sight quickly scared
“ him back to his dwelling, which he reached with the thing close
“ on his heels. Happily the entrance of the hut had a kind of
'• railing, which could be slid forward, and which the spectre could
" not get over. He succeeded in pushing it to, and regaining
•• his courage distinctly saw in the bright moonlight through the

openings of the railing that a skull was biting the latter and
“butting against it; the fetid stench was intolerable. After a few
“ moments the cock crew, and he saw the thing drop to the ground
“ as a mere heap of white bone; and when it was light, he saw
“ no more of it.

“He asked for information about that apparition, and a hus-
“ bandman said; ‘You may congratulate yourself that you have had
‘•to do with a white bone ghost; this circumstance has saved you
“from disaster; — had it been the hoary old wife, feigning to
“ keep a shop, she wouhl of a certainty have offered you some of
“ her tobacco to smoke, and those who smoke it generally lose
“ their vitality. That spectre always appears to do its evil work
■ in nights with bright moonshine and pure breeze, and it can be
“knocked down with nothing else but a broom’. 1 have never
“learned what spectre this is”*.

Even fragments of skulls may become haunting spectres. “The

ui >ti ^ g . a ^ i?- ft ^
ft . a# ft « fr ffl ± ^ K ^'1 » >«j

I. - a ft » Si iffi * . !Uc * g . 0 a la s . *
fteast;tiTis.#iE»P'i^##«fti, nmm
ifi. g ± A««. ^ fe* Bj), «

« » a iBi «■ zj ft - B ti isi ti « PI .

@ . it' ® ii til . a ft jd! . j® a # - . 3c flj

# a 7' A .

wsr.iAa.tftTsafl-s.

n itffl

« # Br ja # #1 2 7 ^ fr g I'"* »"• '''■ ”


CORPSES HAUNTING IN THE PORJI OF SPECTRES.


731


“ medical Buddhist priest Hing-jii related the following adventure
‘‘ of a colleague of his in Fuh-cheu, named Hung-tsi, a man of
“ high order, living a pure life of severe abstinence. Having found
a piece of a skull on the sand at the riverside, he placed it in
“ his clothes-basket, and took it to his convent. Here, a few days
“ later, while asleep, a being bit his ear and pulled at it, on
“ which there followed a noise as of a falling object several pecks
“ in size. He thought that it was the bone, but next morning he
“ found himself on the floor before his couch. He then broke the
“ bone into six pieces, and placed them in the gutter of the eaves,
“and at midnight a series of lights as big as fowl’s eggs moved
“ from there and disappeared under the tiles. He took a torch to the
“spot and admonished the bone, saying: ‘you cannot help a living
“ man, for which of His designs would Heaven employ you, a
“decayed bone?’ Herewith the phenomenon ceased” h

A much greater number of spectre-tales have for their topic
corpses prowling about materially in their horrid entirety. We saw
on page 41(1, that according to the Tso cl/^wen, Tsze-ch‘an stated
as early as the sixth century before Christ, that a dead man might
become a devil of an especially bad sort if his soul or souls
did not leave his corpse. Numerous narratives point to the pre-
valence of that belief in all ages, up to this day. As early as the
second century of our era an author wrote:

“The pavilion at the west gate of Jii-yang, a place in Jii-nan
“ (in Honan), was inhabited by a spectre. Visitors who lodged there
“ had lost their lives, or if they resisted the spectre, some hair or
“some of their vitality; and when one made inquiries after all
“ that, he was told of strange beings haunting that place from days
“ of yore. Later on. Clung Khi of I-luh, the literary officer of that
“ province, arrived there. While yet six or seven miles from the
“ spot, a very beautiful woman asked him for a seat in his car-


TT


tt mi IH ^ ft , ± A . *


(f So

B

* li # fir :® m Alt

Afro*# ART. *S

Z. ®»t0.

Yiii-ijiiiuj tmh l>u, cli. to.


732


DEMONOI<OGr.


“ riage. At first he objected, but finally she mounted, and drove
“ with him into the pavilion to the bottom of the stairs. Here
“ the custodians had posted up a warning that the storey should
" not be ascended, but he answered that he did not feel any
“aversion to doing so; and as it grew dark then, he mounted
“ the stairs, and put up there for the night in the company of
" that woman.

“ Before daybreak he departed. A custodian went upstairs to sweep,
“ and found the corpse of a woman. Horrified he ran to the super-
intendent of the pavilion, who beat the drum to call together the
“ officials from their apartments, and hurried with them to the
" spot to inspect the corpse. They discovered her to be the wife of
“ one Wu, who lived eight miles off to the north-west. She had just
“ then died, and on her being coffined that same evening the light
“had gone out; and when another light was l)rought, she had dis-
“ appeared. Her family now took the corpse home immediately. As
“to Clung Khi, he had hardly travelled a few miles when he was
“seized with belly-ache; this became worse at the Li-yang pavilion
“ in Sin-tun, and there he breathed this last. After that event nobody
“ventured to that storey”'.

Yii Pao, in whose book the same narrative occurs (ch. 10), adds
another to the following effect;

"In Yung-ch'vven, one Chung Yiu, alias Yuen-shang, had not
“ attended the official meetings for several months, and his ideas
“ and character took so singular a turn, that somebody asked him
“ what was the matter with him. He then avowed that he received


Aa^fes. iff.

Fuiif/suli funrj i, ch 9.


CORPSES HAUNTING IN THE FORM OF SPECTRES.


733


“frequent visits from a lovely woman, an extraordinary beauty. ‘To
“be sure, she is a spectre’, the other said, ‘slay her!’ Next time
“ when the woman went to him, she did not immediately advance,
“but lingered outside the door. He asked her for the reason; ‘you
“wish to kill me’, she replied. ‘No’, said Yiu, and he called her
“ urgently; so she entered, and Yiu, though unwilling, struck at
“her and wounded her in the hip. Immediately the woman ran out
“ of the house, wiping off the blood with a piece of new cloth all
“ the way down the road. Next day Yiu had her footprints traced.
“ They led to a large grave, in the coffin of which a lovely woman
“ lay, with a body and limbs like those of a living person ; she
“ wore a dress of white silk, and trousers of red embroidery, and
“ her left hip showed a wound, from which the blood had been
“ wiped off with some cotton hidden within her trousers” h

— “The local notable Clung Pin-yii”, we read in a work of the
eighth century, “relates, that when he sojourned somewhere in
“ Ho-poh, the wife of the village-headman had just died and was
“ still unburied, when after sunset her daughters suddenly heard
“ music which slowly approached. On its arrival in the courtyard,
“ the corpse moved ; when it had entered the room and apparently
“ sounded between the beams and rafters of the roof, the corpse
“raised itself up for a dance; the music then left the house,
“ and the dead woman, after some stumbling, left the dwelling to
“ follow it. This struck the family with terror. The moon being
“ in its dark phase, they dared not go out to look for the corpse,
“ but in the first watch of the night the village-headman came
“ home. Apprised of the event, he broke a branch as thick as his
“arm from a mulberry tree, and nerved by some liquor set out in
“ search, uttering deep maledictions. Penetrating into the brushwood
“ which was full of graves, he marched five or six miles, when he heard


tr a w .« ± if. K ft a « A . S/ii’u shcn A’(, ch.t6.


734


DEMONOLOGY.


“the music in the trees of a cypress grove; he drew near, and saw
“ the woman dancing under the trees in the glare of lights. The head-
-man raised his stick and knocked her down; the music stopped,
“and he carried the corpse home on his back” h

Thus also in China the dead are known to dance about occa-
sionally at the sound of music, but I do not find them represented
as gathering together purposely for nocturnal danses macabres. It
is self-evident that, as two of the above tales bring out, bodily
spectres must as a rule be corpses still fresh and undecayed,
and indeed we find in the tales, that they rise especially before
burial has hampered their movements by an envelope of solid
wood and clay. Even tender women may then rage most fearfully,
as the following story, much read, told, and re-told to this day,
may testify ;

“A certain old man of Yang-sin (in Shantung) lived in Ts'ai-
“ tien, a place in that district. Ilis village lay five or six miles

“ from the walls of the district-city. He and his sons kept a road-

“ side inn to lodge travelling traders, and several carters and itinerant
“ pedlars used to put up under their roof. One day as it was
“ getting dark, four men appeared. Perceiving the house, they went
“ thither with the intention of staying, but the sleeping-rooms
destined for visitors were all occupied. Considering that there
“ was no other place to put up, the four men urgently entreated
“ the landlord to take them in somehow, on which he hin’d, and
“ said he thought a place might be found for them, though it
“ would not suit their taste. The strangers replied that all they
“ desired was a single mat to sleep on, and a shelter, and that they
“ could not be at all particular. The fact was, that a daughter-

“ in-law of the old man had just died, her body still lay uncof-


±


H E.

, te tK II # S iH * . S * S fi . .g S #


^ IE $ S # ft S iH ® .

\i\i-yaiiij tmh (su, ch. 13.


LIVING CORPSES CHASING MEN.


735


“ fined in her house, and the son had gone to fetch a coffin and
“ had not yet returned. The old man took the strangers down
“ the street into the lonely house where the corpse lay. They entered
“the apartment, where a lamp shed a dim light over a table;
“ behind this a curtain hung, and the deceased woman lay there
“ under paper shrouds. They saw also a sleeping-place in a screened-off
“ section, with four beds placed against each other in a row. Fatigued
“ by their journey, the strangers had no sooner thrown themselves on
“ their pillows than they were snoring loudly.

“ One of them was not quite off, when suddenly he heard a
“ creaking sound on the couch of the corpse. Immediately he opened
“his eyes, and saw distinctly by the light of the lamp standing
“ before the corpse, that it had raised the shroud and risen. In a
“ moment it was on the floor, and slowly entered the sleeping-room.
“ Her face had a wet gold hue, and she wiped her forehead with
“ a coarse gauze cloth. In a stooping attitude she approached the
“beds and blew thrice on the three sleeping travellers; the fourth,
“ terror-struck, fearing that he too might be hit, gently drew the
“ blanket over his face and lield his breath to listen. Forthwith
“she breathed on him as she had done on the others; then he
“ perceived that she left the room, and hearing the rustling sound
“ of the paper shrouds, he put out his head to take a peep, and
“ saw her lying rigid as before b


tt . M- M- 'M

@ , M # # A ffi ibI tt 7 A r* B ® ^ ^ ®


736


DEMONOLOGY.


“The traveller, extremely frightened, lacked courage to raise the
“ alarm. Stealthily stretching forth his foot, he kicked his comrades,
“ but they did not stir in the least, and thus he conceived there
“ was no other alternative for him but to put on his clothes and
“ slink away. No sooner, however, did he rise and move his coat
“ than again there was that creaking noise, which caused him to
“ hide himself anew, terror-stricken, with his head under the blanket.
“ He perceived that the woman came again and breathed over him
“ repeatedly, doing this over and over again before she retired.
“ After a short pause, he knew by the noise on the death-bed that
“ she had lain down as before. Now he put his hand very slowly
“ out of the blanket, seized his trousers, quickly got into them, and
“ ran out of the house, bare-footed. The corpse too jumped up as
“ if to give him chase ; but by the time it came forth from behind
“ the curtain the traveller had drawn the bolt and was off.

“ With the corpse at his heels he rushed forth with loud shrieks,
“ which alarmed everybody in the hamlet. He would have thumped
“ the door of the inn, but for his fear that it would make him
“ lose time and bring him within reach of the demon ; so, seeing
“ the road to the district-city before him, he ran up it with all his
“ might, till he reached the eastern suburb. Here he saw a Buddhist
“ convent, and hearing the wooden fish \ nervously beat on the
“ outer gate. But the monks, astonished at such an unusual tumult,
“ hesitated to let him in ; and as he turned round, he saw the corpse
“ quite near him, hardly one foot off. In these straits he sought
“ shelter behind a white willow four or five feet thick, standing
“ outside the convent-gate. As the corpse dodged to the right, he
“ dodged to the left, and so on, which enraged the corpse more
“ and more, and exhausted them both. On a sudden the corpse
“ stood still. The traveller, soaked with perspiration and with
“ panting chest, sheltered himself behind the tree ; the corpse raised
“ itself fiercely and threw both its arms around it to grab him.
“ At that moment he sank to the ground in fright, and the corpse
“ thus missing its victim, remained rigid embracing the tree. For
“ a good while longer the monks stood listening, and hearing nothing

S I* ^ . g:;;*; fE » R B 51 » a -f ,

91 aj-f®® , JiUBt i|i«l

1 A hollow, fish-^haped block beaten with a clapper while reciting sacred books
and liturgies.


/


CORPSES CHASING MEN.


737


“ more, they came forth circumspectly, to find the traveller flat on
“the ground. By the light of their torches they perceived, that
“ though he was apparently dead, there was still a slight palpitation
“ under his heart. They bore him into the convent, but the night
“ passed away before he came round. Having refreshed him with
“ some broth, they interrogated him, and he related to them the
“ whole story. By that time the morning-bell sounded, and in the
“ early dawn, still dimmed by mist and fog, the monks examining
“the tree discovered the woman upon it in a rigid condition*.

“In great consternation they reported the incident to the magis-
“ trate of the district. This grandee appeared in person on the
“ spot to hold an inquest, and ordered his men to pull off the
“ arms of the woman ; but so firmly were they fixed in the tree
“ that it was impossible to unclasp them. They found, in fact, on
“ a closer inspection, that the four fingers of either hand were bent
“ like hooks, and sunk into the wood so deeply that the nails were
“ buried in it. A fresh batch of men was set to work to pull with


® X « ft .81 # ^ t >

a * s » is * . /!' Bi M a # It # . .

^ ^ g It . p tffi ^ . tfi « Bs IS . i: A ^ e a

« S ^ * A , *? a ts »= ft H » * ffl a 2 .

±. *.EfI A.


47


If


738


DEMONOLOGY.


“ all their might ; and as they tore her off, the holes made by the
“fingers were found to look as if made with a chisel or auger.

“Now the mandarin dispatched a messenger to the old man, who
“gave him a confused mixture of truth and untruth about the
“ disappearance of the corpse and the death of the travellers. The
“ matter being explained to him, he followed the messenger and
“ took the corpse home. The traveller, bursting into tears, said to
“the magistrate: ‘I left my home with three men, and now I must
“ return alone ; what shall I do to make my fellow-villagers believe
“my words?’ So the mandarin gave him a certificate, and sent
“him home with some presents”^.

Not less instructive on our subject is the following tale; “In
“ Shao-hing (in Chehkiang pr.), a scholar, named Wang So-and-so,
“ had enjoyed a government allowance of rice (for his literary
“ attainments) for a year, when a wealthy family in a village
“ engaged him as a teacher. Their house was too small to lodge
“ him, but fortunately there was a new house about one mile off,
“for which the owners sought a buyer. The family purchased it,
“and lodged the teacher in it.

“Having inspected its interior, Wang returning to the gate pro-
“ ceeded to walk up and down and lean on it. By that time night
“ had fallen, and by the bright moonlight he saw on the hill a
“ brilliant glare. He hastened thither, and perceived that it beamed
“forth from a coffin of unpainted wood. ‘Were this a ghost-light
“ (will-o’the-wisp)’, said Wang to himself, ‘it would be white, with
“ flames slightly tinged red ; is it perchance the spirit of gold or
“silver?’ It now flashed across him that it was recorded in the
“ ‘Bag of Knowledge’, that a number of Turks and Huns in mourning-
“ clothes had loaded some coffins on cars and buried them outside
“ the town, and that their pursuers, on tracing those coffins, had
“ found them full of yellow and white metal ; would not this coffin


■ Liao-chai chi i, chapter 13.


CORPSES CHASING MEN.


739


“be something similar? What luck that nobody but he was there
“ to appropriate it ! ^

“He picked up a stone, hammered the nails out, and forced up
“ the lid at the head ; but how great was his horror on seeing a
“ corpse with a livid face and a swollen belly ! It wore a cap of
“ hempen stuff and sandals of straw, it being customary in the
“ Yueh region to bury with such articles all parents who have
“ survived their sons. Wang recoiled in terror, but every receding
“ movement was a signal for the corpse to rise a little more, and
“ when he made a few more steps backward, the corpse of a sudden
“ rose upright. Wang ran away like a madman at the top of his
“ speed, the corpse at his heels. Right through the door he tore
“ and up to the garret of the house, closed the door, and bolted it.
“ Now for the first time he got a little breath. Supposing the corpse
“ to have gone, he opened the window to take a peep, but at the same
“ moment it raised its head, and with gestures of delight rushed
“ in with a bound and thumped the door repeatedly, but finding
“ it impossible to enter, suddenly gave vent to a loud piteous
“ cry. At the third shriek the doors flew open, as if by an unseen
“ hand ; the corpse climbed the stairs up to the garret, and Wang
“ had no other alternative but to take his club and confront it. No
“ sooner did it reach the landing than the club came down on its
“ shoulder, scattering over the floor several ingots of silver paper
“ hanging thereon; the corpse stooped to pick them up; Wang took
“ this chance, and gave it a push with all his might, so that it
“rolled from the top of the stairs. Just at this juncture he heard
“ the cock crow, and from that moment the corpse remained
“ motionless and silent. On examining it by the daylight, he found
“it lying across the ground, its thigh-bone wounded by the tumble


740


DKMONOLOGY.


“ it had suffered. He summoned the people, and as they cai’ried the
“ corpse away to burn it, he heaved a sigh, saying : ‘ It was my
“covetousness that called the corpse upstairs, and it is the cove-
“ tousness of the corpse that now causes it to be destroyed by fire ;
“ thus, if demons should not be covetous, how much more ought
“men not to be so!’”b

Corpse-demons do not always content themselves with homicide;
many indulge also in theft or robbery. “Two men of Kin-ling
“(Nanking), Chang Yii-kuh and Li So-and-so, connected by ties of
“ friendship, had a trading business together in Kwangtung. Chang,
“ returning for some reason from the south homewards, was entrusted
“ by Li with a letter for his family, which as soon as he came home
“ he went to deliver at its address. On this occasion he saw a coffin
“ in the hall, and learned that Li’s father had in the mean time
“ died. Wherefore he set out a sacrifice for the soul on the spot,
“and performed the customary worship; which the Li family ap-
“ predated highly. The widow appeared, and seeing this charming
“ and elegant youth, not much more than twenty years old, she
“ placed dainties before him and regaled him well ; and as it was
“ already dark, she offered him lodgings for the night.

“Between his sleeping- place and the coffin was nothing but an
“ open courtyard. At the second night-drum he saw by the bright


Hi MsSEia. W

81 A . il P ‘1 . 7 : # A ® A # "f . = pf tin ^ P ‘1

ti"P. qmz .

. Tsri; puh yjV, ch. 13.


CORPSES CHASING MEN.


741


“ moonlight Li’s widov/ come out of the female apartments and
“ peep through the crevice of his window. He started, and deeming
“feminine decency inconsistent with such behaviour, resolved to
“ repel her forthwith should she open the door and enter. At
“ this juncture it struck him that the woman, with an incense-
“ stick in her hand, turned to her husband’s soul-altar and mut-
“ tered something there as if she expostulated, upon which she
“ returned to Chang’s room, put off her waistband, bound the
“ upper iron rings of the door with it, and retired at a slow pace.
“ Chang’s fright and suspicion were increased so much by all this
“ that he lacked courage to go to bed. Suddenly he heard from
“ the place where the coffin stood a creaking noise ; off fell the lid,
“ and up sat a man with a pitch-black face. He had sunken eyes
“ with green pupils emitting flashes of light ; he was of an extra-
“ ordinary ferocity and hideousness. With long strides he ran out of
“ the apartment, straightway for Chang’s room. There he uttered
“ a shrill spectral whistling, on which a cold blast of wind got up
“ at the four sides, and the waistband on the door snapped into
“fragments. With all his might Chang pushed back the door, but
“ he was overpowered, and the corpse jumped in h

ai ..ft a - + ® >48 * ff ji .1* « ® ^ «

^ 58 ^ ^

m mm fur it

« . S ff tg ^ filr is !?!s ^ « . »J tg M g *

p-mmA.


742


DEMONOI.OGY.


“Fortunately there stooil beside the door a large wooden cup-
“ board ; Chang pushed it against the corpse, so that it capsized
“ and the corpse fell underneath it, but at the same moment Chang
“ swooned away. The incident had not escaped the attention of Li’s
“wife. She and the family ran in with torches and lights, and
“ poured some ginger-water into Chang’s mouth to restore him to
“his senses, and then she spoke to him: ‘This is my husband;
“ his life having been far from correct, he has become a corpse-
“ demon, breaking out now to work evil. He was much bent on
“ wealth. Last night he appeared to me in a dream, and announced
“to me the arrival of one Chang with a letter; ‘this man’, he
“said, ‘has two hundred coins in his girdle; I will kill him, take
“ half the amount in ray coffin, and give you the rest for the
“ household’. I took this all for a bad dream and put no belief in
“it, but there! you did indeed arrive and put up here for the
“ night. So I burned incense before the corpse, praying, conjuring,
“ and exhorting it not to give rein to its wicked purpose ; yet
“ fearing that it might push open the door and kill you, 1 tied
“ the rings of the door with my waistband, having no idea that
“he would exert such tremendous force’. They bore the corpse
“ back into the coffin, and Chang advised the woman to burn
“ it, the sooner the better, so as to cut short its evil w'orks once
“for all. ‘I have long been thinking to do so’, the woman
“ replied, ‘ but as he is my husband, I could not find it in my
“ heart; now, how'ever, I cannot help complying with the prevailing
“custom’. Chang assisted her in defraying the expenses of an
“ altar, to which they called some Buddhist priests of repute to
“ bring about his translation into a better condition ; and they
“cremated his corpse; and not till then did the family live in
“ peace and quiet” h


A MAN CHASED BY A CORPSE AND SAVED BY A GOD. 743

These tales amply suffice to teach us how extremely ferocious
corpse-spectres are. Even powerful gods do not always come oft
uninjured when they interfere between those demons and their
victims. “In Suh-cheu”, for example, “one Li Kin, who earned a
“ living as an itinerant cloth-merchant, crossed the Hoh mountains,
“ where the approaching night and the crowded inns compelled
“ him to put up in a Buddhist temple. The waterclock had sunk
“ to the second drum-watch (il P. M.), and he was in a sound sleep,
“ when he saw in his dream the god Wei-Po ', who smote him on
“the back, exclaiming: ‘rise, rise! be quick, be quick, a great
“ danger is near ; take shelter behind me and save yourself’. Li
“awoke with a shudder, and leaping to his feet, perceived that a
“ coffin, stored away behind his couch, was giving forth creaking
“ sounds. And out came a corpse, covered all over with white hairs,
“ as if it wore a robe of silvery rat-skins inside out. Its face too
“ was overgrown with such hairs; its eyes were deep and black,
“ and had green eye-balls emitting glaring rays. Straightway this
“ monster made for Li, in order to attack him ; but he rushed up
“ the shrine containing the Buddhist images, and cowered down
“ behind Wei-t'o’s back. The corpse threw its arms around this idol,
“and set its teeth into it so fiercely that it cracked; Li shouted
“ for help at the top of his voice, and all the monks hurried out
“ of their beds to the rescue with clubs and flaming torches ; the
“ corpse fled, and ran into its coffin, which they found thereupon
“ close as before. Next morning they examined whether Wei-t'o
“ had suffered damage from the corpse-spectre, and they found his
“ club in three pieces, thus showing how great the force and the
“ ferocity of that being were. The monks sent the news to the
“magistrate, who burned the coffin; and Li, filled with gratitude

p Am. mm

is

TszS pull yit, hdipplernent, ch. 6.

1 A warlike defender of the Buddhist Church. His image, clad in armour, stands
in praying attitude, armed with a club, in the court of almost every Buddhist temple
or convent, behind the main entrance, right opposite the central chapel containing
the principal Buddhas to whom the edifice is dedicated. His image is also to be seen
very often on the altar of these saints, on their left side.


744


DEMONOLOGY.


“towards Wei-fo for his help, caused a new image to be made for
“him, neatly gilded” h

The name under which corpse-spectres mostly appear in books, is
kiang shi^, “corpses lying flat or rigid”. A very common term
is also shi kwai^ “apparitions of corpses” or “corpse-spectres”.
We have seen (Book I, pp. 106 seq.) that they greatly occupy
credulous and superstitious minds in Amoy; we may recollect that
there and in the surrounding country they are deemed to be
produced by the sun or the moon’ shining on encoflBned human
remains still unburied. This idea involves nothing strange when we
remember that the light and warmth of the universe constitute uni-
versal vitality. We have stated also (Book I, page 127) that the dead
are especially prone to become kiang shi when a long postpone-
ment of their burial inspires them with bitter rancour: a powerful
warning to the living to not unduly delay burials. The fact that,
nevertheless, the empire is actually studded with unburied human
remains, on the other hand greatly nourishes the inveterate belief in
those spectres.

There seem to be parts of China where, merely for fear of
kiang shi, the natural decay of corpses is accelerated on purpose
by exposing them in the open air. We infer this from the following
note of Sui Yuen: “West from Fung-siang (in Shensi pr.), common
“ people who die are not buried immediately, but in many cases
“exposed in the open air until the blood and flesh have entirely


tt a Iji . fB p ^ ns 9 . ^ A “P > ■ ft ^

^ !/<S ch. 22.


ANTHROPOPHAGOUS CORPSE-SPECTRES.


745


“ decayed ; after this process is finished, they perform the burial,
“otherwise, it is said, the dead will give rise to evil (hiung). If
“ burial takes place before decomposition, and the corpse obtains
“ breath from the earth, it will after three months be overgrown
“ entirely with hairs ; if these are white, it is called a white evil,
“ and if they are black, a black evil. It then enters houses to cause
“ calamity” ’.

We have now to pay attention to yet another point, also touched
upon already in this work (Book I, p. 106): kiang shi are anthro-
pophagous and prey on human blood. They are therefore eorrelated
with east-European vampires, or living corpses which break forth
from their tombs and attack the living to satiate their cravings for
human flesh and blood. Tales about blood-sucking kiang shi
have not been found by us in Chinese literature anterior to the

eighteenth century, the TszS puh yn being for the present the only
work we know that has them

“ When Tsiang, Governor of Ying-cheu, resided in Ngan-cheu, in
“ the province of Pehchihli, he met with a man who nervously
“ moved both his arms continuously as if he swung bells. On being
“ asked why he did so, he told the following tale :

“My family lives in the village So-and-so, which consists of not
“ more than a few dozen houses. There a kiang shi came from
“ the hills soaring through the air, to devour the infants of the
“ people. Though daily at sunset the people exhorted each other
“ to shut their doors and conceal their children, nevertheless it

“ occurred from time to time that some were kidnapped by the

“ monster. The villagers sounded its grave, but they could not find

“ the bottom of it, so that nobody ventured to take any measures
“ against it.

“At that time we heard that there was living in the town a
“ Taoist doctor So-and-so, proficient in magic arts. We collected money

rrfp„;,9,-.,eh.2.

2 Is this coincident with the vampire-panic (the first known in Europe?) which
infested Poland and Polish Russia in the last years of the seventeenth century,
spreading rapidly over Bulgaria and Servia, and occupying the minds of scholars
and theologians of Europe in the first quarter of the next?


746


DEMONOLOGY.


“ and presents for him, and went to ask him to arrest that spectre.
“ He assented, and appeared in our village on an auspicious day.
“ He put up an altar for the performance of his magic, and said
“ to the people : ‘ My magic enables me to spread a net over the
“ sky and a net over the earth, preventing that demon from flying
“ away, but you must help me with your weapons ; besides I want
‘•a man of much courage to enter that grave’. Nobody in the
“ crowd ventured to present himself for this task, except myself,
“ who stepped to the front, and asked for what he would employ
“ me. ‘Corpse-spectres’, the magician replied, ‘generally fear very
“ much the sound of jingles and hand-gongs ; when the night comes,
“ you must watch the moment when the spectre flies out, and
“ forthwith enter the grave with two big bells ; but do not stop
“ ringing them, for a short pause will suffice for the corpse to
“ enter the grave, and you will then be the sufferer’.

“The waterclock just began to sink, when the doctor mounted
“ his altar to perform his magic. And 1, with two bells, watched
“ the moment when the corpse flew out. Then with all their might
* and main my arras waved up and down in a quick succession
“ like rain-drops, and I dared not pause for one short moment, as
“ the, spectre was at the entrance of the grave. Horribly ferocious
“ it looked ; its furious glances never turned away from me while
“ the sound of the bells kept it running about the spot without
“ courage to enter. Beset by the crowd everywhere in front, there
“was no way of escape for it; so with impetuous movements of its
“ hands and with outstretched arms it fought the villagers, until
“ the first blush of dawn cast it flat on the ground. Our men then

“ took it up and burned it. Meanwhile I remained in the grave,

“ ignorant of the issue, swinging the bells incessantly, as I lacked

“ courage to stop them. It was towards noon when the crowd

“ came and called me out with loud cries ; both my arms then
“ remained in constant motion, and they have been diseased like this
“to this day” b


VAMPIRES.


747


— “Liu N.N., a literary graduate of the lowest degree in Wu-kiang
“ (in Kiangsu), was in charge of some pupils belonging to the Tsiang
“family in the Yuen-hwo district. In the season of Pure Brightness
“ (B. L p. 968) he returned home, some holidays being granted him
“ to sweep his ancestral tombs. This duty performed, he would return
“to his post, and said to his wife: ‘to morrow 1 must go; cook
“some food for me at an early hour’. The woman said she would
“do so, and rose for the purpose at cock-crow. Their village lay
“on the hill behind their dwelling, facing a brook. The wife washed
“some rice at that brook, picked some vegetables in the garden,
“and had everything ready, but when it was light her husband
“ did not rise. She went into his room to wake him up, but how-
“ever often she called, he gave no answer. So she opened the
“curtains, and found him lying across the bed, headless, and not
“a trace of blood to be seen b


fi. 0 sttfp.ia'otats'.iiiaA

* S « iS Bi , W lir it it . ft IS H . A a «

. Tsze puhyn, ch.12.

* sija#

# a w ui ffi w. <§ itff * (ir .ttiE M ■ . ♦ * ®


748


DEMONOLOGY.


“Terror-stricken she called the neighbours. All of them suspected
“her of adultery with a lover and murder, and they warned the
“ magistrate. This grandee came and held a preliminary inquest ;
“ he ordered the corpse to be coffined for the time being, had the
“ woman put into fetters and examined her, but this brought no
“ evidence against her ; so he put her in gaol, and many months passed
“away without sentence being pronounced. Then a neighbour going
“ up-hill for some fuel, saw a neglected grave with a coffin laid bare;
“it was quite a sound coffin, strong and solid, and yet the lid
“ was raised a little ; so he naturally suspected that it had been
“ opened by thieves. He summoned the people ; they lifted the lid
“ off, and saw a corpse with features like a living person and a
“ body covered with white hair. Between its arms it held the head
“of a man, which they recognized as that of Liu, the graduate.
“They reported the case to the magistrate; the coroners ordered
“ the head to be taken away, but it was so firmly grasped in the
“arms of the corpse that the combined efforts of a number of
“ men proved insufficient to draw it out. So the mandarin told
“them to chop off the arms of the kiang shi. Fresh blood gushed
“out of the wounds, but in Liu’s head there was not one drop
“ left, it having been sucked dry by the monster. By magisterial
“order the corpse was burned, and the case ended with the release
“of the woman from gaol” h

It may be noticed, that in Europe too it was a prevalent opinion
that the best means to deal with vampires was to destroy them
by fire. But the Chinese have yet other means of disabling those
monsters. They argue, that if the lid of the coffin be removed as


A a .# mas ^ ® .K. ® ^ w -f ,

• Tsze -puh yii, supplement, ch. 2.


AN AMORETTE BETWEEN CORPSE-SPECTRES.


749


soon as the devil is out, its evil works will be over for good; in
truth, as the air will then enter freely into the coffin, its con-
tents will immediately decay, and thus lose their strength. “A
“certain gentleman, strong and robust, sojourning in Hukwang,
“lodged there quite alone in an old Buddhist temple. One night he
“ was strolling by very fine moonlight outside the gate, and saw
“in the grove a being with hazy form, wearing a kerchief after the
“T'ang fashion, and moving so lightly towards him that he could
“ not but take it for a ghost. As it turned to the darkest part of
“a pine-copse and there entered an old grave, he was fully con-
“ vinced that it was a kiang shi.

“ He had heard that such a demon can do no evil when it misses
“ the lid of its coffin. So next night he concealed himself in the
“grove, to watch its departure and take the lid away. The second
“watch ended (after 11 P.M.), the corpse came forth indeed, as if
“for an assignation. He followed it to the gate of a large house,
“in the garret of which a woman in red had thrown out a white
“rope from the window, wherewith to draw him up; the spectre
“seized it and climbed up it, and they engaged in a long con-
“ versation without making any peculiar noise .

“Our hero’s first act now was to retrace his steps and steal the
“ lid from the coffin. Having concealed it well, he hid himself again
“in the deepest part of the pine-grove. Night was about to depart,

“ when the corpse returned hurriedly. Seeing the lid gone, it showed
“great consternation. It searched for it everywhere, and then ran
“off by the same road by which it had come. Again our hero
“followed it. At the storeyed building he witnessed the bounds
“and leaps of the corpse, and how it gave vent to chattering cries,


® 11 r* .

ft 5£ » A n T pmw:m

T.


750


DEMONOLOGY.


“ answered by the chattering of the woman ia the garret. She
“just motioned him off with her hand, as if to signal to him to
“ come back no more, when on a sudden the crowing of the cock
“was heard, and the corpse fell down flat on the roadside. In the
“ early morning-hour the passers-by gathered to the spot, and all
“ without exception were greatly frightened. They hurried to the
“ storeyed building to satisfy their curiosity : this was the ancestral
“ temple of the Cheu family, where a coffin was kept unburied
“in the garret, and outside that coffin a female kiang shi was
“ lying. The facts convinced everybody that they had to do with
“a curious case of irregular commerce between such demons; where-
“ fore they laid them side by side, and burnt them ”

Another effectful and very easy expedient for getting rid of
visitations from corpses, is to watch any suspected coffin until the
corpse has quitted it, and then strew rice, red peas, and bits of
iron around it. The corpse on returning will find it impossible to
pass over those things, and will soon be found stiff and dead on
the ground; it may then be burned without any danger, even, if
desirable, together with the coffin. The only difficulty is to find a
man brave enough for the dangerous part of the enterprise.

It is, according to the Chinese, by no means a rare thing in
their country for corpses to sit up on their death-bed and strike
terror and fright into the hearts of their mourning kinsfolk. We
touched on this point already on page 43 of Book I, adding that a
pole, a piece of furniture, or some household utensil, especially a
broom, is then required to restore the corpse to its recumbent
position, white care must be taken to prevent cats from touching
it. It is related, that “Liu I-hien was an able portrait-painter in
“ Hang-cheu. For neighbours he had a father with his son, living
“ in the same house. The father died, and the son, going out to

» » M * ® fli. u « T SSfl'l. K ip- « A a S ,

‘ ^ an ^ <^> 1 . 12 .


^ M


OORPSE-SPECTRES DEFEATED BT BROOMS.


751


“ buy a coffin, asked T-hien through another neighbour to make
“ in the mean time a portrait of the father. The painter went to
“ the house, where to his great regret he found nobody ^ and sup-
“ posing the corpse to be lying upstairs, he walked up the ladder,
“ sat down at the bedside, and drew forth his brushes.

“On a sudden the corpse rose with a start. It flashed through
“ I-hien that he might have to do with a ‘running corpse’, and he
“ remained therefore quietly seated, motionless. The corpse too did
“ not stir, but with its eyes closed opened and shut its jaws con-
“ tinuously, only wrinkling its brows at each such movement. If I
“ run away, said the painter to himself, the corpse is sure to pursue
“ me ; the best thing will be to quietly do my work to the end.
“ And he took his brushes, laid out his paper, and made a sketch
“ of the corpse, during which it aped every movement of his arms
“ and fingers. Meanwhile he cried aloud at the top of his voice, but
“ nobody answered. Suddenly the son came up the ladder. Seeing
“ his father in a sitting posture, he fell to the floor in terror, and
“ a neighbour who arrived after him was so horrified at the resurrected
“corpse, that he tumbled off* the landing. I-hien, in the greatest
“consternation, had to screw up all his courage to remain where
“ he was, until the porters arrived with the coffin. Remembering
“that corpses, when in a running state, are afraid of brooms,
“he cried: ‘bring a broom!’ and the coffin-bearers understood from
“ these words that they had to do with a ‘running corpse’. They
“ seized a broom, mounted the stairs, and broomed the corpse into
“ its former position ; they also brought the man on the floor back
“ to consciousness by pouring an essence of ginger down his throat,
“and coffined the corpse” h


m. 'B.m u m mm a.

jaRAi^.ifA


8S


752


DEMONOLOGY.


Even when one is already in a kiang shi’s murderous embrace,
there are effectual means to release him. “Ere Yiu Ming-fu, named
“ Pei-lien, entered the Government service, he lodged somewhere in

Honan. There, according to him, coffins were kept in sheds outside
" the towns in numbers so great, that seizures of men by kiang shi
" were of common occurrence. But the rural population had an
“ expedient against them, not so very curious : when some one
" was clasped by a corpse in its arms and held by it in a most
" firm embrace, so that even when the arms were cut off, the claws
“ still stuck in the flesh and could not be extracted, then they
“ drove seven jujube stones into the backbone of the corpse, with
" the result that its arms relaxed their hold. They applied this
" method on several occasions, always finding it efficacious. A corpse
“running about shortly after death they called a running shadow;
“it thus wanders under the impulse of yang breath. If a man
“ is embraced by such a demon, this is to be treated in the above-
“ mentioned way” h

Chinese, theorizing on the subject of corpse-spectres, admit that
in general these are under the dominion of their p'oh or that one
of the two souls which is identified with the earth, to which it
returns with the corpse (cf. page 5). Now as the p'oh is the
grosser, the unintellectual soul, those spectres and their doings are
not ruled by intelligence, virtue or propriety, but they rage madly
without self-control, even against those who never did them any
wrong. Nevertheless their actions may be regulated in some degree
by their good genius, their hwun, because it is this soul which


AtB Tsze puh yi(, ch.


A A*,


. rs:v puh yip supplement, cli. 8.


ANIMISTIC THEORIES ABOUT CORPSE-SPECTRES.


753


brings about their revival; on this ground they may behave as
friendly spectres, however without their dangerous character being
entirely suppressed, for the p'^oh may at any moment resume its
paramount influence. The following tale illustrates these theories :

“ In the Nan-ch^ang district, in the province of Kiangsi, two gent-
“ lemen, the one of middle age and the other young, were stu-
“ dying in the convent of the Northern Orchid, and lived on terms
“ of the closest friendship. The older one went home, and died there
“ suddenly, while the other, ignorant of this calamity, quietly con-
“ tinned his studies in the convent. One day, as it grew dark, he
“ was slumbering, and saw his friend open the gate and enter.
“ Seating himself on the couch, he patted him on his back, saying:
“‘Hardly ten days after I took my leave of you, I died suddenly,
“ and now I am a ghost, which, unable to banish its feelings of
“friendship, comes to bid you farewell’. The young man made an
“effort to cry for lielp, but he could not utter a word; on which
“the other soothed him. ‘Should I harbour any desire to harm you’,
“he said, ‘I should, indeed, not speak so unaffectedly; do not be
“ afraid ; I have come to entrust to you some of my affairs after my
“death’. Thus re-assured a little, the young man asked him what
“these were. ‘In the first place’, was the reply, ‘I have an old
“ mother, now upwards of seventy years, and a wife who is not
“ yet thirty ; a few bushels of rice will suffice to feed them ; I hope
“ you will take care of them in every way. Further I possess
“an unedited manuscript; please have it printed, lest the little
“ repute I have gained should perish. And in the third place, I
“ have an undischarged debt of a few thousand coins to the mer-
“ chant of wTiting-brushes; pay this off’. The young one promised
“ to fulfil ''those wishes. Then the dead man rose, and with the
“words: ‘having thus given you those charges, I can depart’ he
“ w'as about to go, when the young man, whose fears had all
“ vanished on hearing him speak so exactly in the tone and the
“ w’ay of an ordinary man, and seeing his features so like those he
“had while alive, detained him with tears, ‘We are going to separate
“for so long a time’, he said, ‘why do not you stay a little longer,

“ why do you go so soon ?’ and the dead too burst into tears, and
“sat down on the bed again. For a while they indulged in con-
“ versation about the concerns of life, till he rose a second time,
“with the words: ‘now I am going away’.

“He stood up, but did not go. He gazed hard at him, and became
“ so hideous that the young man, whose fears returned, motioned to


48


754


DEMONOLOGY.


“ him to go; ‘now you have had your say, go !’ said he ; but the corpse
“ remained, and did not even depart when the other, thumping on
“ the couch, set up a loud cry. In a bold erect attitude the corpse
remained where it was, and fright overcame the young student
so thoroughly that he jumped up and took to his heels. The
“ corpse pursued him ; faster he ran, but just as close the corpse
" followed him, till after a number of miles he scaled a wall, and
“ fell flat to the ground on the other side. This obstacle the corpse
“could not surmount; it stretched out its neck over it, and froth
“ and saliva dribbled down from its mouth on the young man’s
“ face. In the morning-light wayfarers came by and gave the young
“man some ginger-essence to drink; and just as he was coming
“ round the owners of the corpse arrived to seek it. So nothing
“ being told them of the incident, they took it home, and com-
“ pleted the coffining.

"Experts in such matters then declared: The hwun of man is
“ good and is his spiritual power and wisdom (ling), but his p‘oh
“ is bad and stupidly inconsiderate. W hen this corpse appeared (at
“ the bedside), the spiritual wisdom had not yet vanished from it,
“but the p'oh accompanied the hwun on this e.xcursion, and no
“sooner had the hwun departed than the affection (cherished
“ towards the student) was finished. The hwun totally dispersed,
“and the p'oh remained in the corpse; as long as the hwun
“ was present in the corpse, this was the very man himself, but as
“ soon as it was gone, the corpse was the man no more. Corpses
“wandering about in this world, and ‘running shadows’ are all
“produced by the p'oh; only men who possess the Tao can
“ dominate this soul” k


» A ^ y: a w . # *


CORPSE-SPECTRES SOMETIMES ARE KIND AND HELPFUL.


755


A corpse-spectre is described to us by the following tale actually
helping a man out of a dreadful emergency: “Tso, a literary
“ graduate of the lowest degree in T'ung-ch'ing, lived in the greatest
“harmony of conjugal fidelity with his wife, a woman of the
“ Chang tribe. She fell sick and died, and Tso, unable to part
“ with her remains, lay beside the coffin for whole days. On the
“ 15th of the seventh month his family organized an Ulamba
“ meeting (for the feeding of the souls and their redemption from
“ hell). Every one was abroad arranging the mass in honour of the
“Buddhas, and the graduate sat quite by himself by his wife’s
“ coffin over a book, when with a sudden blast of cold wind the
“ghost of a hanged man appeared, its hair dishevelled, blood
“ trickling from its body, and the cord trailing behind it. Straight-
“ way it made for the graduate to attack him. In his terror he
“thumped hastily at the coffin, exclaiming: ‘to the rescue, dear
“wife!’ and on a sudden the woman pushed up the lid and lifted


« . 4p ¥ ^ « tili E , ^ a e ^ . 0 . * # ft

i; ffi PB BE. BS a . » at * . iP * ti ffi ^ >

I®. *§#(•.

ii#0. AesfeSifijift;®..

♦ gt * . - ia ffS S.® ® , 5® IE M * A * . * w

A S ®l i® *■


756


DEMONOLOGY.


“herself up. ‘Thou bad devil’, she thundered forth, ‘dost thou
“thus attack my goodman without any respect!’ and brandishing
“her arms, she dealt it such sound blows that it hobbled away
“out of the house. Now she turned to the graduate; ‘You idiot,
“you have incurred all this by our ardent conjugal love, but your
“felicity is so slight that evil spirits do not shrink from harming
“you; come along to my home; shuffle off your mortal coil, and
“let us plan again a life of concord, to last until our old age’.
“The graduate assented, on which the w'oman returned into the
“coffin. He called his femily, who found the rows of nails all snap-
“ ped, and half a breadth of the woman’s petticoat caught under
“the lid. Ere that year had passed away, the graduate also died”
Corpses may have yet other reasons for rising from their
death-beds and haunting the living. Cases are mentioned, and
believed by everybody, of murdered persons thus temporarily
returning to life in order to denounce their murderers and cause
them to be punished, superstition thus being here a good deterrent
of homicidal crime. “In Si-hiang, in Shang-cheu (Kiangsu prov.),
“lived a man of the Ku tribe, who being out in the suburb at
“sunset asked for a lodging in an old temple. The priest of the
“temple said: ‘To-night I have to perform a funeral service for
“a family; my disciples have all gone thither, and there will be
“nobody in the temple; take care of it for me’. Ku assented;
“ he closed the temple-door, blew out the lamp, and laid himself
“ down to sleep.

ttatfSM. * 411 ^ 7t. ^ Tj- 'It i: tt tg , I# 0 .

« 4E a SR # » tr a , a j® a tK = * ii

ttw. ??7l-Kf*A

. Tsze pith yii, ch. 16.


CORPSES RISING TO AVENGE THEMSELVES. 757

“ At the third watch a man knocked at the door very boisterously.

Ku cried : ‘ who are you ?’ and a voice outside answered : ‘ I am
“ Ch'en Ting-lan’. Ch'en Ting-lan was a comrade of Ku in former
“ days, who died more than ten years before. Greatly affrighted he
“ refused to open the door, but the man outside cried : ‘do not fear
“ me, I have some secret to confide to you ; if you do not open
“ without loss of time, I shall become a spectre, and do you think
“ that I should then be unable to push in the door by myself alone
“ and enter ?’ So Ku could not help opening ; and the lock gave a
“ dull noise, as if there fell a man down to the ground h

“ With hands trembling nervously and eye-lids quivering, Ku
“ was going to take up a candle, when suddenly there sounded
“a loud voice from the ground. ‘I am not Ch'en Ting-lan’, said
“it, ‘I am N.N., the man who has just died in the house to the
“east, poisoned by my principal wife, who is an adulteress; I
“ told you I was Ch'en Ting-lan because I desire to ask you to
“redress the wrong which has been done to me’. ‘But I am no
“mandarin’, said Ku, ‘how then shall I redress it?’ On which the
“ spectre answered : ‘ the very damage inflicted on my corpse bears
“witness to it’. ‘Where is your corpse?’ asked Ku. ‘Come here
“ with the lamp and see it, but when I see the lamp I shall
“become unable to speak’. At this exciting moment the voices of
“ a crowd knocking at the gate were heard. Ku went to let them
“ in ; it was the priests returning to the temple, everybody in con-
“ sternation, for, said they, ‘just as we were reciting our holy

“ scripts for the burial of the corpse, it mysteriously disappeared,

“so that we had to stop and go home’. Now Ku told them what

“ was the reason of it ; they threw light on the corpse with their


A*. « ^tAi4 0. »«»,

lift.


758


DEMONOLOGY.


“ torches, and saw blood flowing out of the seven openings of its
face all around over the ground. The next day they reported the
‘•incident to the authorities, who avenged the victim” h
The ideas about corpse-spectres, unfolded in the above pages,
being expressed in writing are no doubt those of the intellectual
generally, just as well as of the vulgar class. Authors also display
their firm belief in such spectres by applying to them some
abstruse Yin-and-Yang philosophy, for, in fact, those beings, like every-
thing in the Universe, are created by these two powers; but we
need not follow them in this nonsense. According to the author
of the Tsze puh yii, we have to distinguish sharply corpse-spectres
from three other sorts of corpses. “ There are in the ground wandering
corpses, hidden corpses, and unchanging bones, altogether coffin-
“ less and without outer garments. The first-named change place in
“ the ground according to the (twenty-four) seasons, by lunar influence.
“ The hidden corpses liave always lain hidden in the ground un-
“ decayed for a thousand years. And unchanging bones are those
“ of a part of the body which was specially imbued with vitality
“during life; when the bones are buried, the coffin with the
“ clothes will decay, and the body with the skeleton become
“ clay, but only the bones of that part will not change. They
“are as black as sonorous jet; when long under the influence of
“ the vitality of the sun or the moon, they also acquire the
“ capacity of working evil. Of dead rice-porters the shoulder-blades
“ will rot away last of all, and of dead car-men the thigh-bones,
“ for by the strength they exerted during their lives vitality
“ gathered in those bones, so that the latter are not liable to
“ an easy decay in the ground. So also it is with the hidden


m0mm

Tsze fiiili i/K, ch. 2.


CHINESE THEORIES ABOUT CORPSE-SPECTRES.


759


“corpses; a hidden corpse which after a long time receives vitality,
“ becomes a wandering corpse, and after a still longer time a flying
“ Yaksha (p. 466)”^.

“Kiang shi after a long time become able to fly, and do not
“conceal themselves in their coffins any longer. They are then
“covered all over with white hairs a foot long, and even longer,
“ which hang down disorderly, and they give light when they come
“ out or retire. After a second period of time they become Yakshas
“soaring through the sky, which do not die unless thunder strikes
“ them. The only weapons which can kill them are rifles. The
“ mountaineers in Fuhkien every now and then have to do with
“them, and then call huntsmen to attack them in several places from
“ the branches of the trees. These beings are very strong, as strong
“ as bears. They come forth in the night, then grasping men and
“injuring field-crops” ^ “Mr. Yii Ts^ang-shih (or Shih Yii-ts'ang)
“says: A kiang shi appearing at night to catch men generally
“ looks fleshy not unlike living man, but when we open its coffin
“in the daytime, it looks as dry and lean as a mummy. Some,
“while being burned, make a piping noise” \

*1 a # it # 5E .1 fl- « ^ 5E .

Tsze puh yii, supplement, ch. 5.

H ^ H « * , m A W * . X A M ^ « X .

ft . W » a * u- 2 . lit A ffi .

s m s A “ "p-

ffiti

^ ^ ft ^ ^ pp'


760


DEMONOLOGY.


“ The lions and elephants on which the Buddhas ride, says
•‘Tsiang Ming-fu of Shang-cheu, are well known to man, but the
“ wolves (or jackals) which they bestride are unknown. Such wolves
“are metamorphosed kiang shi. A certain man walking at night
“saw a corpse open its coffin and step out. Conceiving he had
‘•to do with a kiang shi, he waited till it had left the coffin,
“which then he filled up with potsherds and stones, retiring
“thereupon into the garret of a farm to espy the issue. Towards
“ the fourth watch (one o’clock A. M.) the corpse returned, striding
“with long steps, apparently with' something in its arms. Coming
“to the coffin and finding it impossible to enter it, it cast wrathful
“looks all around, its eyes wide open and emitting a flashing
“ light. Thus it perceived there was somebody in the garret, and
“hurried thither to seek him, but its legs being as stiff as
“ dead wood, unsuited for ascending a ladder, it removed this
“furiously. Our affrighted hero finding it impossible to descend by
“ the ladder, grasped the branches of a tree, and let himself down
“by it, but the kiang shi perceived him and was at his heels. Oft
“ ran the terror-stricken man with all the speed he could muster.
‘•Happily he could swim. It flashed through him that such a corpse
“might be unable to enter water; he made his way through the
“stream to the other shore, and left the corpse running to and fro
“ hesitatingly for a while, with spectral cries and piteous howling.
“Then with three leaps into the air it transformed itself into a
“quadruped, and galopped off. It left something behind on the
“ ground, which was found to be the corpse of a baby, half gnawed
“away and sucked quite dry. Some say that corpses at their
“first transformation become devils of drought, and that the next
“change makes wolves of them. These beasts possess spiritual intel-
“ligence, belch forth smoke and fire, and can fight dragons; hence
“it is that the Buddhas ride them to keep them under”'.


SS # H ^ »f « t# 2 . PI « # # A . Sft

s -tS a . * A: mils . ± ^ A m * » # . » JS

SB 14 * :7: a # . ^ tfri * # . * li


CORPSE-SPFCTRES AS DEVILS OF DROUGHT.


761


Thus in China too vampirism is connected with lycanthropy. If
now we recall to our minds the belief, mentioned on page 518,
that dead men may become devils of drought, it follows that the
latter may appear in a threefold shape, or that there exist three
sorts of them. The author of the Tsze puli yu says indeed: “There
“are three species of drought-causing pah. One are like quadrupeds;
“an other kind are transformations ofkiang shi, and both these
“ species are able to produce drought and stop wind and rain. But
“ the principal, superior drought-demons, called k o h \ cause still
“more damage; they resemble men, but are taller, and have one
“ eye on the top of the head. They devour dragons, and the Rain-
“ lords all fear them much, for when they see clouds arise, they
“ raise their heads and disperse them in all directions by blowing,
“ the sun thus increasing in intensity. No man can conquer them.
“ Some say, that when it is Heaven’s will that there shall be a
“ drought, the vapours of the becks condense and become these
“ demons. When the latter suddenly vanish, it will rain”

As animals, corporally and mentally, are organisms similar to
men, it is clear that they too, when undecayed, may become
dangerous corpse-spectres. We have seen this belief illustrated by
Sui Yuen’s tale on pp. 621 seq.

a, o ® HsIS.

pull yu, supplement, ch. 3.

1 Or koh-tsze, see p. 518.

AiBfi, mmwnz.M.

* B A® ¥ W 111 til ^ SS ^ A m

. Supplement, ch. 3.


CHAPTER XI.


ANTHROPOPHAGOUS AND NECROPHAGOUS SPECTRES.

Apparently the belief in anthropophagous spectres must be old
in China, and firmly rooted in the popular mind. Knowing from
pp. 364 sqq. that the eating of human flesh under certain circum-
stances has been at all times a rather commonplace thing in that
country, it would be, indeed, remarkable if spectres, being generally
represented as cruel and ferocious, were thought entirely exempt
from such savage tendencies.

We have at the outset to place among the cannibal spectres the
living corpses to which we have devoted the preceding chapter, so
notorious also for a craving for blood. We have also to mention
the man-eating tiger and wolf demons, described in Chapter V. An
old reference to anthropophagous spirits we gave on page 521 in
an extract from Wei Chao’s writings, according to which wang-
siang were deemed in his time to be cannibals. We have men-
tioned on page 574 the “celestial dogs”, preying on human livers and
blood in the sixth century of our era. In the writings of Twan
Ch'ing-shih we read: “In the Ta lih period (766 — 780), a member
“of the gentry, dwelling in a village in Wei-nan (Shensi prov.),
“ fell sick and died in the Metropolis. His wife, a woman of the
“ Liu clan, then remained established in that village with her son,
“ eleven or twelve years old. On a summer-night this boy was
“ attacked by fits of fear and sleeplessness. When the third watch
“ had set in (at 11 P.M.), she saw an old man in white, with a
“ pair of tusks protruding from his jaws. He gazed fixedly upon
“ her for a time, then he stepped slowly to her couch, in front of
“ which a female slave lay in a sound sleep, and grasped this woman
“ by her throat. A gnawing sound was heard : her clothes were
“ torn off from her by his hands, and he grasped her, and devoured
“ her in a moment to the bare skeleton, which he finally lifted up
“ to suck out the five viscera. The woman saw that the old man’s
“ mouth was as big as a sieve. Just then the boy began to cry.


ANTHROPOPHAGOUS SPECTRES.


763


“ SO that the apparition totally vanished, but the slave was reduced
“ to mere bones. Several months afterwards elapsed without any-
“ thing particular coming to pass” h

The following tale is stated to have been derived from the
writings of the same author:

“In the Ching yuen period (785 — 805) there lived west of
“ the Wang-yuen post-house one Wang Shen. With his own hands
“ he had planted a copse of elms, and put up there some straw
“ sheds, to distribute rice-water gratuitously to travellers in the
“ summer-months. He had a son of thirteen years, whom he often
“ charged with ministering to the visitors.

“ One day, the boy told his father that there was a young woman
“ on the road, who asked for some water. He ordered the boy to
“ call her in. She was young, and wore a robe of bluish stuff and
“ a white cap. Her house, she said, stood some ten miles oS to the
“south; her husband had died childless, and she was wearing
“ already the dress of the last period of mourning ; now she was
“ going to Ma-wei, to see whether her family still had so much
“ affection to her that she might apply to them for clothing and food.
* She talked so clearly and so cleverly, and behaved so charmingly,
“ that Wang Shen made her stay in his house and gave her food ;
“ his wife too loved her more and more *.


BIE . = S # ® ^ A , e * . « ? ffi i® :S(|' . it


764


DEMONOLOGY.


“They then said to her in the course of conversation: ‘Sister, you
“ have no nearest kinsfolk, cannot you become here a bride of our
“son?’ Smilingly she answered: ‘As I have nobody to depend
“ upon, I desire to do your coarse work and attend to your well
“and kitchen’. So Wang Shen procured the wedding clothes and
“ presents, and she became his son’s wife.

“It was hot that night; ‘there are many thieves just now’, said
“she to her husband, ‘do not leave the door open’. At midnight
“ Wang Shen’s wife dreamt that her son with disordered hair told
“ her that he was being devoured almost entirely. The affrighted woman
“desired to go and look at her son, but Wang Shen became angry,
“ and she laid herself down again to sleep. But a second time she
“ had the same dream. Now both took torches and called the son
“ and his bride, but no answer was given. They tried to open the
“ door, but it remained fast as if it were bolted, so that they had
“ to batter it down. When it flew open, a being with round eyes,
“ tusks and a bluish body rushed out of it and disappeared. Nothing
“was left of their son but some brains, bones, and hair”*.

That entire hosts of anthropophagous spectres, preying especially
upon babies and hearts of men, have in A.D. 781 set whole regions
into commotion and panic, we have had occasion to note on page 477.
We read, moreover, in the Standard Histories of the Sung dynasty,
that “there suddenly appeared in the Siien hwo period (1119 —
“ 1126), in the demesnes of Loh-yang-fu, certain beings resembling
“ men, squatting down sometimes like dogs. They were of a deep
“ black colour, and their eyebrows and eyes were not clearly visible.
“ In the beginning they seized babies at night and devoured them.


. Supplementary Yiii-


yanrj tsah tsK, quoted in the TS, sect. ^ . ch. 318.


NECROPHAGOUS SPECTRES.


765


“ and later on they invaded the dwellings by broad daylight, to
“ work mischief. Wherever they appeared, cries and clamour arose,
“and quiet was destroyed. They were called ‘black folks’. Strong
“ men armed themselves at night with spears and clubs for
“self-defence; some made use of the panic for mischievous pur-
“ poses, and two years elapsed ere it came to an end ” h

The existence of cannibals in the demon-world being thus placed
beyond all doubt by authoritative books, we cannot but infer that
tales about such beings must circulate in great numbers through-
out the Empire. Traditions mention e. g. so-called land-monks
counterparts, probably, of the sea-monks of which we have spoken
on page 533 ; they emerge from time to time from rivers and creeks,
especially during inundations, to attack the lonely and the weak
and devour their brains. But still more debased than any an-
thropophagi in the world of spectres are those which push their
craving for human flesh to the extent of preying on corpses. The
belief in such disgusting demons is evidently old, for we saw (p. 536)
that in traditions written down not long after the commencement
of the Christian era, goat-shaped ground-demons were represented
as devouring the dead in their graves.

Evidence for the prevalence, in times long past, of the belief in necro-
phagous demons is brought before us by the following text : “ In
“ the Nan-khang district, one Khu King-chi, established in a military
“station, was travelling in the first year of the Yuen kia period
“of the Sung dynasty (A.D. 424), in the company of his son, in a
“ canoe from the district city up the stream to one of its remote
“ sources. The banks were dreary and wild, and extremely steep, and
“ no human foot had ever been planted there. In the evening father
“ and son landed and put up in a shed, where King-chi was
“ ‘struck by evil’, and died suddenly. His son lit a fire and watched
“the corpse. Suddenly he heard in the distance cries of ‘uncle!’
“ uttered in a wailing tone. The filial son started, and was asking

A. S.

S. ^ S i (W. It H -ft « « , Sr

— '■ *=•

2


766


DEMONOLOGY.


“ himself what this' might be, when in a twinkling quicker than
“a nod the being that wailed appeared on the spot. It had the
“ size ot a man, and its hair hung down to its feet, covering also
the greater part of its face, so that its seven apertures could not
“ be seen. It mentioned its names to the son and condoled with
“ him, but he remained nervous and affrighted, attended to the
“• fuel, and kept the fire flaming well. The being, speaking of the
“ past and the future, condoled with the dead, asserting that he
“ had nothing to fear ; and in a moment as the son was attending
“ to the fire, it seated itself beside the head of the corpse, and
'■ wailed. By the light of the fire the mourning son watched all
“ its movements, and saw that the monster, bending over the
“ dead man’s face, set immediately to tearing off the skin, laying
“ the bones quite bare. Terror-stricken, he decided to attack it,
“ but he had no weapons, and next moment there remained of
his father’s corpse no more than a white skeleton, stripped of
“ skin and flesh. It was never discovered to what sort or class this
“kwei or shen belonged” k

Seeing that spirits are believed by the Chinese to feed on sacrificial
food without this changing in the least or diminishing in quantity,
we cannot reasonably feel astonished that they are deemed able also
to devour corpses without these bearing thereafter the traces of it.
“ When Chang Han was young, he was a man of resolution and
“ spirit, conversant in Ch'ang-ngan with brave, straightforward people.
He had a beloved concubine. Han always made her happy, but


tt. AW'

ASi> a it #) S fl- . #^tl

1^1 Hif. KK, ch. 324, professedly

from the Shuh i ki, in which, however, 1 do not find this narrative.


NECROPHAGOUS SPECTRES.


767


“too soon a case of death called him away to one of the districts
“ adjoining the city. Several months elapsed before he could return,
“just to find her carried off by disease.

“Deeply he bewailed her loss. The sun meanwhile set, so that he
“ had to lodge in her dwelling for that night. She was not yet buried,
“ but her encoffined corpse had been put away behind in the hall.
“ There was no other apartment, but, asked he, can death cause a
“separation as long as love cherished in life exists? — and he laid
“himself down under a muslin curtain.

“After midnight the moon shone brightly in the courtyard,
“while Han lay sleepless, sobbing and sighing. Suddenly he
“ discovered a being between the gate and the screen in front of
“ it. Putting out its head from behind the screen it peeped round ;
“ then it came forth and shrank back again, subsequently moving
“ around the screen, and appearing midway in the courtyard. It
“ was upward of one c h a n g in size, with trousers of leopard’s
“skin, teeth like a saw, and hair flowing down disorderly. Three
“ other spectres appeared successively, hopping about in the moon-
“ shine, with red cords trailing behind. ‘What about that honourable
“man there on the couch?’ they asked. ‘He is asleep’, they said,
“ and with these words they ascended the steps, and entered the
“place where the coffin stood. Breaking away the things placed
“ around and over it, they bore it into the moonshine, broke it open,
“ and seized the corpse, which they dismembered, cut into pieces,
“ and sitting down in a circle, devoured. The blood streamed in the
“courtyard, and the clothes of the corpse lay ’disorderly on the floor'.


It « ^ , e « « ® iKJi a 14.^ , X s

^ B 5E.

mm.

« ^ ® A m ?;f . # g # « >ti . « ffi ®c


768


DEMON01.0GY.


“The horrified Han was pained at the sight. Just now, he said
“ to himself, they called me a honourable man ; so if I attack them,
“ nothing bad, to be sure, will befall on me. A bamboo pole, which
“ he saw outside the curtain, he seized silently, and he rushed out
“ against the demons from the dark, showering blows upon them
“ with loud yells. In a deadly fright the devils took to their heels, on
“ which Han, taking advantage of his success, pursued them closely,
“ till they disappeared over the wall at the north-west corner.

“ One of the demons, however, slower than the rest, was unable
“ to scale that obstacle, and did not make its escape before receiving
“ a blow which drew blood from its body. Alarmed by the tumult,
“the inmates of the house leapt from their beds to the rescue. Han
“ related to them everything, and they determined to re-coffin the
“ remains of the skeleton ; but when they reached the place in the
“ hall where the coffin had been put away, they found there everything
“ in its old condition, nor did they see anything in the spot where
“ the repast was held. Han in his confusion was inclined to regard
“ it all as a bad dream, but for the blood they saw on the wall,
“ and the footprints on the top of it, which nobody remembered
“ to have observed there before. A few years afterwards, Han obtained
“ a position in the service of the state” h


riJK*


m


ffi*.

« « S f; >t> . It * B A ^ . J: ^ at > a ^ 551 *

. Kwei tuna. ch. '1.


0


CHAPTER XII.


APPARITIONS AT DEATH.

Again we must remind our readers for a moment of the belief,
held generally by the Chinese people from the earliest times, in the
possibility of the revival of the dead, which is the principal source
of so vast a mass of ideas and usages connected with the disposal
of the dead, as we have tried to depict in our First Book.

This belief naturally causes everybody to admit, that the re-ani-
mation of the body by the soul’s return will take place soon after
the demise, ere decomposition shows that the soul has abandoned the
corpse and the house. And ever living in constant fear of spectres,
the Chinese must await that retui’n with anxiety, for what guarantee
is there that the departed soul has not in the mean time become
a malicious ghost, as so many spirits are?

Thus we may admit the prevalence of a dread of re-animation
of the dead among the Chinese race from its early prime. However,
we find no mention made of it in books older than the sixth

century. Yen Chi-fui then wrote in his Domestic Instructions:

“ Books not standing on a par (with the classical) make mention

“of shah returning to the house after death. Sons and grand-
“ sons then flee and hide themselves, and all refuse to stay at
“ home, and they decorate the tiles with written charms, per-

“ forming sundry practices to suppress the evil. And on the day
“ on which the funeral train sets out, they make a fire before the
“ gate, placing also glowing coals outside the doors, in order to
“exorcise and avert that domestic ghost”'.

That word shah or denoting such new ghosts, means
“murderous, killing” (corap. page 083), which sufficiently attests


49


770


DEIIONOLOGY.


their dangerous character. A book of the ninth century of our era
describes them as bird-shaped. “It is a popular tradition that some
“days after the death of a man, a bird or so-called shah must
“come out of his coffin. In the Y uen hvvo period (806 — 820) one
“ Ching was catching animals in the plains of Sih-cheu (Shansi pr.),
“in company with some officers of that department, and caught in
“ a net a large bird of a blue colour, over five feet high. Scarcely
“ had he given orders to take it out of the net and show it to him,
“when it disappeared from sight. Affrighted, he immediately inquired
“of the people of the handet, and he got this answer from one of
“them; ‘In our village a man has died some days ago, and the
“diviner has said that his shah would depart to-day; his family
“ have kept watch to see it, and a big blue bird has flown out
“of the coffin; can this be the bird you have caught?’ In the
“Then pao period (742 — 756), Ts“ui Kwang-yuen, the Governor of
“the Metropolis, while hunting, fell in with a spectral bird, and
“the same thing happened as sketched above” h
— “A tsin-shi graduate of Ching-cheu (in Honan pr.), named
“ Ts'ui Szg-fuh, spent a night in the Dharma-hall of a Buddhist
“temple, and was just falling asleep, when on a sudden a voice
“cried to him. In terror he rose, and saw that it was that of a beast
“like a crane, bluish black, with eyes glaring like lamps; it flapped
“ its wings, and loudly cried with a shrill voice. Sze-fuh was so
“ frightened that he fled into the side-gallery, whereupon it stopped
“ crying. The next day he spoke with the priests about the incident,
“ who said -. ‘ There have never been here any apparitions of the
“ kind, but ten days ago a number of coffins with corpses were
“deposited in the hall; it may have come thence’. Sze-fuh, coming
“ to the capital, related the incident to a Buddhist priest, named
“ Khai-pao. ‘The matter is mentioned in the Sutras of the Pitaka’,

B5 11, ^ » A . 4 S m K tp S W. . s ^

A^Uli 0 . hAw405Klr

“a" ® ^ ^ ® itk ^ • Suen-sliih chi; K R, ch. 366.


APPARITIONS AT DEATH.


771


“said this man; that bird was a metamorphosis of the breath
“of the corpse of somebody who had recently died; we call it a
“ Mara of the Yin’”

In a work the preface of which is dated 1250 we find the following
interesting lines, which show that the fear of the soul’s return to the
house of death was connected in the age of the Sung dynasty with
various superstitious ideas and usages: —

“According to Chao Tung-shan from Yueh (Chehkiang), Hi Fen
“lost his father, the Governor of Hwui-ki, in the year keng-suh
“of the Shun yiu period (A. D. 1250). Three memorable things
“ took place at the funeral : they did not run away on account of the
“shah; they employed no Buddhist or Taoist clergymen; they did
“not credit the Yin and Yang (fung-shui). It is unknown to me
“when mention is for the first time made of such running away
“from the shah. On the hundredth day after the demise of Lii
“Ts'ai (see Book I, p. 1006), a doctor in the Court of Sacrificial
“Worship under the T"ang dynasty, as also at the end of one year,
“his shah wrought harm. Such shah do so in this manner: —
“say a case of death occurs on a sze day, then, if the shah is
“a male one, it returns on the forty-seventh day to kill a girl
“ of thirteen or fourteen ; and if it is a female shah, this comes
“from the south and kills a pale boy in the third house. Among
“members of the tribes named Ching, Pan, Sun, and Ch'en, the
“shah comes twice to the house of death, to wit, on the tvventy-
“ fourth day and on the twenty-ninth; for which reason those
“people warn each other to run away in time. From inns the
“dead are carried out for burial on the very day of their demise,
“for then whither will their shah return? In the Metropolis too
“the things are upset in the house, and the inmates run out of it.
“Chao Tung-shan says; ‘But how is it possible that there should
“ be people who, when engaged on the mourning rites for their


11 - 2 ,

» - ft W 2 . ft 0 , « « H 2 , ft ff 5E * « Fir * ,

luh\ T S, sect. WM , ch. 320.


772


DEMONOLOGY.


“parents, are at the same time anxious to preserve their bodies
“safe and sound from danger, and for that purpose leave the coffin
“alone, shut '.vithin an empty house? And is it admissible that any
“father should then harm his children, whereas we see, that while
“ they are sleeping quite alone (in the mourning shed) on straw or
“matting with a clod of earth for a pillow, they are undisturbed
“whole nights, without any evil befalling them?’”

Chao Yii too has devoted his attention to the matter. “Hung
Yung-chai” ", thus he wrote in his valuable collection of historical
dissertations on a great variety of subjects, “relates in the ] lien chi,
“that when Tung Ch'ing, a grandee of the ’rh-lang rank, was
“dead and coffined, his family, in compliance with popular custom,
“sifted some ashes on the ground before the fire-place, in order
“ to find out iu what being the dead was reborn ; and they
“ discovered therein two footprints of a goose, so that they all sur-
“ mised that the dead man had been degraded to some animal


' « A a m uj # iit; j* T s

- + A0SAiaS«.

M\iiB

H a i M ^ S A « tsi s * «

M \ « St some sixty leaves of de.sultory notices and critical disquisitions

on matters and events of all times, moderately esteemed by scholars. The author is
Til Wen-pao , also named Wen-wei , of whom nothing is

known. It is probably a fragment of a larger work.

2 That is to say, Hung Mai. The second name ( ) of this productive author,


,'JM


jg . Yung-chai ^ 7^


■ , or Spacious


who lived from 1123 to 1203, was King-lu J',

Closet, is, I think, an epithet derived from his study, or from the place where he
lived. We find this epithet in the title of another work from his hand, from which
we have sometimes borrowed material, viz. the Yuwj-chni pih or Pro-

ductions of Yung-chai’s Writing-brush, consisting of five collections of critical notes
on a gieat variety of literary and historical subjects.


APPARITIONS AT DEATH.


773


“ species. Heu Tien mentions the following incident in his Si tsHao
ye My fellow-villager Ku Kang having died, his shah came
back to the house. This occurred in the night. Incense, paper
“ money, meat and dainties had been placed by his wife on the
“table of the soul; they had hung the apartment with ornamental
“ curtains and closed the door, and concealed themselves in the
“ adjacent houses, with the exception of one old woman, whom they
“ left behind alone to guard the dwelling. This woman then saw
“ a beast in the shape of a monkey and of the size of a dog,
“ leaning overj the table to devour the meat. On perceiving her it
“ dealt her a hail of blows, until her cries and yells brought the
“ family to her rescue, who, however, saw nothing at all.

“ In his treatise on living shah of the male and female gender,
“ ClTu Yung^ says: When some one dies on such-and-such a day,
“he undergoes the shah influences of such-and-such an other day.
“According to the books on Yin and Yang philosophy, there
“ exist female and male s h a h , which either leave the corpse, or
“ do not leave it ; but such talk seems to deserve no credit. If the
“ female s h a h does not quit the corpse, the right foot turns
“ towards the left, and if the male shah does not go out of it,
" the left foot moves towards the right side ; when none of these
“shah quit the corpse, the feet will move towards each other,
“and when both the shah leave it, they do not bend, but take
“an outward direction” k


1 ® tiif iE> Writings from the Fields at the Western Tower, four chapters
of tales from the Ming dj-nasty.

2 ft , also named Wen-khing li\ing in the age of Sung.

gt It 5E ^ fjf iS ,

. s ii - a ^ ^ ja .a - * , * sp tfii A Sb A .
fsif«ir:SA4it*.Aia#0JEaiiSK02

mm.


774


DEMONOLOGY.


The belief that the souls of the dead may haunt their own
homes as dangerous shah, is, of course, hard to reconcile with
another belief which pervades the Chinese mind at . least as
thoroughly, namely that those souls are not the enemies of their
kinspeople, but their natural protectors, their domestic patron divi-
nities. We have seen that a Chinese author has expressed surprise
at this inconsistency. That dread may be old, for it may have been
the cause of the ancient custom that rulers should provide themselves
with an escort of exorcists armed with evil-dispelling instruments
(Book I, pp. 86 and 41). It is, no doubt, the same fear which makes
the people in Amoy to this day firmly believe that dangerous influences
infect all who visit houses of death (Book I, pp. 32 and 108) or
meet with a burial procession (Book I, p. 206), [so that they should
have recourse to certain cleansing-ceremonies as mentioned on pp.
32, 33, 137 and 231.

The dangers from a return of the dead are enhanced considerably
by the circumstance, that very often they appear in the company
of devils in whose power they are. On several pages of our description
of customs connected with deaths we have had to mention a belief
that man, on departing from this world, falls into the hands of
malicious demons'; and very natural it is that such a belief should
exist: for how could man, after a life beset by spectres on all sides,
possibly expect to be free from their insidious attacks when he has
divested himself of his material body and, therewith, of most of
his physical strength?

“In Hwai-ngan”, runs a tale, “a man bearing the surname of
“ Li lived with his wife A.B. in a harmony sweeter than that of lutes
“ and harps. When upward of thirty years old he fell ill, and
“ expired. On his being coffined, his wife could not find it in her
“ heart to have the lid nailed down ; daily she wept from morning
“ to evening, and then lifted up the lid, to gaze on him. Of old,
“when any one among the people died, his shah was expected
“ on the seventh day. All, even the nearest relations, fled, except
“ the wife, who would not ; she concealed her children in another


- 7 ^ • Kai yii W^ung khao, ch. 32, art. .

1 See the Index of Book I, Spirits.


APPARITIONS AT DEATH.


775


“ room, and sat down within the bed-curtains of the deceased, to
“ await him.

“At the second watch-drum a blast of cold wind rose; the lamp-
“ lights became green, and she saw a devil with red hair and cir-
“ cular eyes. Its height was upward of a c h a n g ; in its hands it
“ held an iron fork, and with a rope it hauled the husband

“ through the window into the room. But as soon as it saw the
“ sacrificial wine and the dainties arranged before the coffin, it

“ dropped the trident and the rope, and sat down by the food to

“ devour it by large mouthfuls, a clicking noise sounding in its

“ belly at each bite. Meanwhile the husband walked round, touching
“ and stroking his chairs and tables with signs of great distress and
“ deep sighs, finally running to the bed and raising the curtain.
“ His wife burst into wailing and clasped him in her arms, but she
“ became cold, as if a condensed chilly cloud followed him and
“ enveloped her. The red-haired demon tried to drag him away
“ from her by the rope, which made her cry so loudly that her sons
“ and daughters ran to the rescue. The red-haired devil ran away,
“ and with the help of her children she placed the soul, clinging
“ around her, in the coffin, with the result that the corpse began
“ to breathe. Then she clasped her goodman in her arms, placed
“ him on the bed, and gave him rice-gruel to drink ; he came
“ round at daybreak. The iron trident which the spectre had left
“ behind, was of paper, as those which the people are wont to
“ burn for spirits h


® a . * S t . 1 f- * T 9J S . B tr ♦ «


^Z.


776


DEMONOLOGY.


“Again they lived as a married couple for more than twenty
‘■'years. The wife, who was then sixty, was once praying in the
“ temple of the God of the Walls and Moats, and vaguely saw
“two bowmen carrying a criminal with a cangue round his neck.
“On looking more closely, she recognized in the cangue-wearer the
“red-haired devil. With a curse it exclaimed: ‘It was my gluttony
‘•that allowed you to play that trick on me which caused me
“ to be punished with the cangue for twenty years ; shall I now
“that I fall in with you let you escape?’ The woman went home,
“and died” \

Another tale in the same work informs us, that the demons
accompanying returning shah are believed to be lictors or menials
of the governors and chiefs of the world of spirits, who administer
justice there. “ Everywhere among the people, when anybody dies,
“ they place in the fourteenth evening the clothes and coverlets of
“the dead beside the coffin, and the whole family hide themselves,
“pretending that the soul then comes to rejoin the corpse. They
“call it the returning shah”h The hero of the tale awaits the
ghost, which is that of his wife, and asks her: “I have heard
“ people say, that when any one dies, spectres performing the
“functions of lictors arrest him and bind him, so that the returning
“shah is accompanied by shah spirits; how have you managed
“to come back alone?’ On which P'eng, the ghost, answers: ‘Such
“shah spirits are spectres acting as lictors charged with such arrests;
“ guilty people are drawn along by them with a rope round their
“necks; but the chief of the nether world declared me guiltless;
‘•and as I had not broken the old ties that connect me with you,
“he allowed me to return home alone” ^


ifn ^ * )i'r a « X « »r St X * .

ri > 'bt « tf Ji - T # - # tE, s . s# i > ?;r «

Tsze puli yu, eh. I.


APPARITIONS AT CASES OF DEATH IN PEKING.


777


In the Journal of the Peking Oriental Society for 1898 (vol. IV,
p. 89), Professor Grube gives us some notes about these super-
stitions as he found them in Peking. The shah k h i , says he,
‘• the murderous breath or soul”, may have one of the five colours.
It destroys the happiness of those who meet it. It always escapes
from the corpse at night, on the first, second or third day after
death, or even later; expert soothsayers inform the family of the
exact date. The family then hide themselves, after having set out
a sacrifice of spirits and eatables in the room, to which in the
case of a woman a comb and a mirror are added. The departure
of the shah betrays itself by a slight noise hardly perceptible;
after it has taken place, the family re-appear from their hiding-
places. The author then gives us the tale of a thief, who wanted
to take advantage of this absence of a family in order to rob them,
and, dressed with a sheepskin to look like a hairy devil, with dis-
hevelled hair and his face painted red, stole into the house. But
one of the inmates had stayed in the room to look to the lamps.
On beholding the spectre, he concealed himself under the coffin,
and seeing it break open everything and make off with the loot,
drew his white mourning gown over his head, and sprang at
it from under the coffin. The trick was a perfect success: the
horrified burglar, believing that he saw the real shah, sank to
the ground unconscious.


CHAPTER Xm.


B1.ACK CALAMITIES.

Catastrophes in general, caused by spectres, are, as we have
remarked before (pp. 46S seq.), denoted by the word s h e n g *,
and a special class of them are so-called hob sheng^ or “black
calamities”.

In the Books of the Early Han Dynasty we read; “The colour
“ of Wood is blue ; therefore there exist blue s h e n g , and blue
“siang”^ or felicities. We know that the element Wood and the
colour blue are assimilated with the east and the spring; accord-
ingly, proceeding with this line of reasoning, there are sheng and
siang distinguished by the five principal colours, and assimilated
with the elements, the cardinal points, and the seasons, in the sense
indicated on page 317 of Book I.

Sheng and siang, thus distinguished into five sorts, are, in fact,
mentioned in the Books of the Han Dynasty in the same chapter
from which we have quoted the above passage, and also in the
literature of subsequent periods. They are stated in some Official
Histories to have shown themselves in different ways and shapes,
but mostly as vapours or clouds of certain degrees of density, which
later on proved to have been prognostics of happy events or great
catastrophes for the dynasty or the people. The black sheng have
especially occupied attention as spectres of a very nefarious and
terrible character; which is rational, whereas black is the colour of
darkness or the Yin, to which spectres belong. We find them
mentioned e. g. in the Standard Histories of the Sung dynasty:
“In the last year of the Yuen fung period fA.D. 1085) there
“ used to be a being as large as a mat, which appeared at night
“ in the halls at the back (of the Palace), and thereupon the


^ ^ f ^ • Ch. 27, II, 1. 2.


BliACK CALAMITIES.


779


“emperor Shen Tsung died. In the last year of the Yuen fu
“period (A.D. 1100) it again appeared several times, after which
“ Cheh Tsung departed this life. Then until the Ta kwan period
“ it was now and then seen in the daytime, but in the first
“year of the Ching hwo period (A.D. 1111) and thereafter it
“ appeared with more frequency. It came forth whenever it heard
“ men speak, preceded by a noise as if a row of houses were being
“ pushed down. It was nearly one c h a n g in height, resembled a
“ tortoise with eyes of gold, and made a grating noise when it moved.
“ A black vapour envelopped it, which descended over everybody,
“ and whatever it touched was sprinkled all over with rancid
“ blood. Neither weapons nor swords could be used against it.
“ Sometimes it changed into a man, sometimes it was a donkey. It
“ appeared day and night, from the spring throughout the summer,
“ and was met with at all times, but during that winter it was
“ seldom seen. It was mostly in the side-courts, where the palace-
“ servants dwelled, but it also came to the inner halls; afterwards
“ they got accustomed to it and considered it as an everyday matter,
“ so that it no longer inspired much fear. Thereupon, in the last
“year of the Siien hwo period (A.D. 1125), it kept quiet and
“ rarely appeared, but then the rebellion broke out” ^ — which
put an end to the dominion of the house of Sung in the north.

“And in the third year of the Ching hwo period (A.D. 1113),
“ at the summer solstice, the Minister Ho Tsih-chung offered the
“ Imperial sacrifice (to the Earth) in the northern suburb, when a
“ black vapour, several c h a n g in length, issued from the fasting-
“ apartment, and having moved forward for about a mile, entered
“ the walled altar-ground, and whirled around the sacrificial place.
“ Then, quite close to the men, it passed between the lights and


HiB. xs#a*.

1 . 15 .


780


DEMONOLOGY.


“torches, but on a sudden it neared the altar a second time, and
“disappeared when the ceremonies drew to an end” h

The dog-shaped black devils, which, as we have seen on page 764,
raged between the years 1119 and 1126 in and about Loh-yang,
even devouring babies, evidently were Black Calamities. Also under
the Ming dynasty these spectres manifested themselves with frequency ;
some thirty cases are recorded in two folios specially devoted to
the subject in the Official Histories of that house. Those folios
teach us, that they appeared as black or grey vapours, or as rains
of sand, ink, or black peas. Never, it seems, did they rage so tre-
mendously as in 1476: “In the twelfth year of the Ch'ing hwa
“period, in the seventh month, on the day keng-suh, Black
“ Calamities appeared in the western city or ward of the Metropolis.
“ They came forth at night and wounded men. The Inspecting
“ Censor of that ward reported it to the emperor, who commanded
“ that measures should be taken to catch them, and warned the
“ people not to communicate their apprehensions to others (and
“ thereby create panics). The Grand Secretary of State, Shang Loh,
“ because of these apparitions of Black Calamities drew up eight
“ points by which to appease them, and the emperor accepted these
“ with satisfaction. Those eight points, discussed by Shang Loh,
"were the following: the master of the realm ot the libetan
“ priesthood (Dalai-Lama) should not be given a patent a second
“ time. Except the customary tribute from the four quarters of
“ the world, no valuables should be accepted by the Throne.
“ People of every class and rank should be allowed to report the
“ truth personally to the authorities. Emissaries from the Boards
“ should be sent out to examine the cases of prisoners, in order
“ that justice might be done to the wronged and oppressed. Building-
“ works should be suspended or delayed. The provisioning of the
“ armies on the three frontiers should be completed. The passes on
“ the frontiers should be put in a state of defence. A special
“Governor should be appointed for Yunnan province


. Ibid.

2 # -b M..


IMPERIAL SPECTROPHOBT AND ITS CONSEaUENCES.


781


This episode, for the historical truth of which the Official Histories
of the Ming dynasty are a guarantee is interesting, because it
shows how spectrophoby may in China impose upon emperors the
introduction of important political measures and improvements of
the system of government. But we should bear in mind, that in
China spectres are retributive agents of Heaven. How deeply that
panic affected the nerves of the official world in Peking, may be
seen from the fact, likewise duly recorded in the Official Histories,
that “when on the day keng-suh, in the seventh month, the
“Black Calamities had appeared, the emperor on the day yih-ch^eu
“ (fifteen days later) personally offered prayers to Heaven and Earth
“ within the Forbidden Palace, confessing himself guilty of the four
“ following sins : his measures were not moderate ; the services im-
“ posed upon his subjects for government works weighed too heavily
“upon them; the faithful and loyal were not listened to; no
“benevolent government was administered. On the day wu-ch'en
“ (three days later) he sent out envoys to examine the cases of
“ prisoners throughout the empire” *. We are not told whether
these measures, this self-humiliation and self-imputation induced the
Universe to call its spectres back, but still the Standard Histories
give us the following particulars:

“If men and women among the people slept uncovered (because
“ of the heat), a being with gold eyeballs and a long tail, shaped
“ like a dog or a fox, with a black vapour on its back, entered
“ the windows, and straightway proceeded to the private rooms.


w ia. 0. 0,1?

. hiltij la chiiifi ki ’ Chronicle of important

Government Measures of the Ming Dynasty, quoted in tlie TS, sect. f|^,ch.tG2.
1 Shang Loh’s Biosraphv, in ch. 176, I. 18.

- f^'story of the Ming Dynasty,

ch. 14, 1 1.


782


DEMONOI,OGY.


“ When it came, uproar arose among the people, and the ward
* all around fell into a panic and alarm. They drew their swords,
“set out lights, beat on gongs and drums, and chased it without
“ succeeding in catching it. Once while the emperor held his
“ audience at the Fung-tden gate, his body-guards perceived it
“and began to cry; the emperor then would rise with benevolent
“ intent, but it grasped his gown for a moment, and then kept
“ quiet” h

Another author writes, that in such nocturnal attacks on sleeping
people, “these incurred wounds in their hands and feet, cheeks,

“ bellies or backs, from which a yellow fluid matter came forth

“ They became aware of those wounds when they awoke, for the
“ wounds did not ache very much .... The spectres began their
“ work in the north-west of the ward, and nobody ventured to
“ make report of it, until each ward had its wounded victims, and
“ everybody lodged complaints with the police magistrates. The
“ inspecting Censor of the ward arrested and examined people, found
“ reliable proofs, and reported to the Throne ; they declared that
“ they did not know by what beings their wounds were inflicted ;
“ many who had seen them, had told him they were black and
“ had small, gold eyeballs, long tails, and the shape of a dog or
“ fox : there had been no less than twenty specimens. They did not
“stop their work until another ten days had elapsed”

Black Calamities inflicting wounds and even killing men are


mi}.

PI . # ^ 2 Bn ^ . •t ,1 , ■t S , ® 2 75


. The same work, ch. 28, 1. 33.


— Mi, ,3 chco Ui tie,, ^

M , quoted in T S, sect , ch. 162.


BLACK CALAMITIES ISSUE FROM GRAVES.


783


stated to have appeared in the year 1512 in Shun-teh* and Ho-kien*,
which are parts of Chihli province; they varied in size and shape
between a cat and a dog, and soon appeared in Peking, red and
black, as also in Fung-khiu in Honan province *. Some particu-
lars about their appearance in 1557 in Hung-cheu we have given
on page 482. In 1572 they showed themselves in Hang-cheu in
the province of Chehkiang, in a black fog, as serpentine beings
rolling like car-wheels, with eyes like lightning, and were followed
by frost and hail ®. Prom many other references we only note that
they sometimes threw tiles and stones; in 1558, in Heng-yang^,
in Hunan, “they placed themselves as nightmare spectres upon
“ women, so that blood streamed out of their mouths immediately,
“with fatal consequences”®; in Shansi, in the district of P"u®,
there appeared one in 1600 in the shape of a large hairy barrel,
which came down from a willow tree and disappeared

With all these written data before us, we cannot wonder that
the belief in Black Calamities flourishes in China at the present
day. Some popular ideas about them are sketched by Sui Yuen.
“ People in Chu-ch'ing (in Shantung pr.) say, that in their country
“ there are in a village of the Yin family, outside the city, many
“ old graves, in which, according to old tradition, a spectre dwelled,
“ whose shape was that of a man, and whose face did not consist
“ of solid substance, but was a condensation of blackish vapour.
“It was more than a chang in height, and frequently come forth
“ at night, hiding itself during the day. When that being was
“ out and met a man on the road, then, when at the distance of
“ a bowshot, it suddenly whistled like a lightning flash, so that the
“ man felt his heart palpitate and his courage drop ; but he who
“ saw and beared it did not know what it was, for as soon as it had
“ whistled it placed a black vapour between itself and that man,
“ and when its rank and filthy stench struck his olfactory nerves,
“ that vapour vanished. The villagers were wont to warn each other

> niii-

4 History of the Ming Dynasty, ch. 28, I. 33.

6 History of the Ming D}'nasty, ch. 28, I. 33.

8 ^ ^ :A ^ P cm, quoted in

TS, sect. ^ ch. 102.


10 Shansi t'uag chi: T 8, luc. cit.


784


DEMONOLOGY.


“ against that road, which they thought ought to be shunned, and
“therefore was unfrequented as long as darkness lasted.

“A salt-peddler X, dealing in salt there, a greedy wine-bibber,
“ had in his drunkenness forgotten the warning, and by mistake
“ turned down that road. The moon had already been above the
“ horizon for two watch-drums, when in front of him the spectre
“ suddenly sprang forth and obstructed the road, loudly whistling.
“ X beat it with his carrying-pole, but this seemed not to hit or
“hurt anything; his fright then became intense; not knowing how
“ otherwise to help himself, he hastily grasped some of his salt
“ and threw it at the spectre, and lo, this moved round about him
“ for a time, recoiled and shrank, and sank into the ground. The
“ saltman then threw all the salt he had in his baskets over the
“spot where it had disappeared, and went away. When it was light,
“ he retraced his steps, and saw that the salt which he had thrown
“ out in one heap on the ground had become quite red, and emitted
“ a rancid and filthy stench hardly bearable, and that there were blood-
“ drops beside it on the ground. After this event the apparition
“occurred no more”’. Evidently then such tremendous spectres
are destroyed by salt, dissolved by it like snails; and salt may
therefore be deemed by many in China a mighty means of defence
against spectres.


' Aw.

* « « 'li #) . »iRA. W*K. 1111^ —

A « « * ® . It

mmKxmmmA. mrnm

B:;®, A«.

T'^nSlt.

ft. EBiiH. » ifit IS JR « . at # '13

pun yu, supplement, ch, 8.


CHAPTER XIV.

ADDITIONAL PARTICULARS.

There have undoubtedly existed in China classes of spectres
occupying a large place in popular superstition, but the remem-
brance of which has passed away. There may also exist to this
day many kinds haunting only certain parts of the realm, so that
particulars about them can only be gathered orally on the spot, and
cannot be found in books. There may, in short, remain much to tell of
spectres of which we know as yet nothing, not even the denominations,
or nothing more than the names. This is the case with the lai
and the ch'eng-ch'eng, mentioned respectively on page 473 and
page 574. Indefinable spectres are frequently mentioned in books
as invisible openers of doors and windows, as makers of mysterious
noises, as throwers of tiles and various missiles, and as beings
responsible for naughty tricks and mischief not assigned to human
agency. Such spectres have been invented by imagination in infinite
numbers at all times, keeping men’s minds in continual an.xiety,
until new generations created new kinds eclipsing the old. Many,
saved from oblivion by the pens of authors, to this day cause
Chinese blood to run cold, and their deeds being read, told, and
retold, maintain or steadily develop superstitious spectrophoby.

To these spectres belong the specimens of which the following
tales are related:

“The Buddhist monk Fah-ch'ang, of a convent at Lung-men, in
“Honan, was a man from Yuen-wu in the Ching department. In
“the Pao lih period (825 or 826) he returned from Lung-men
“ to Yuen-wu. His family possessed there some acres of ground,
“ where the corn stood ripe, but still uncut. One evening he rode
“ into the fields, when on a sudden his horse stood stock still and
“ refused to advance ; he applied the whip, but the animal did not
“ move for all that, and stared eastward as if it perceived some-

50


786


DEMONOLOGY.


“thing there. In the bright moonlight the monk then saw in that
“ direction, some hundred paces off, a being resembling a rotten
“ tree, which approached resolutely. He was seized by fright, im-
“ mediately turned his horse, and the animal galopped away from
“ the road for some dozens of paces, whence he watched the being
“ slowly approach, six or seven feet high, emitting a stench extremely
“rancid and filthy, worse than a salt-fish shop. With a soft panting
“ noise it moved on in a westerly direction ; Pah-ch^ang gave his
“horse the whip and rode on behind, keeping at a distance of some
“ dozens of paces.

“ When they had thus gone about one mile, they came to the
“ house of the villager Wang, into which the being slunk. Fah-
“ ch'ang halted his horse and watched. After a while he heard some
“ one in the house exclaim ; ‘ the cow in the mill-house is dying,
“come and see!’; and after a further interval he heard a cry-, ‘the
“donkey in the out-house is sinking to the ground, quite helpless’;
“ then again he heard wails of fright, and seeing somebody rush
“ out of the house, asked what the matter was. ‘The son of the
“ house-owner, about ten years old, is suddenly dying’, said this
“ man, and no sooner were these words from his lips than
“Fah-ch'ang heard the lamentations again, with a series of
“exclamations of terror; and this went on till after midnight,
“ when the sounds diminished, until at dawn they entirely died
“ away. Fah-ch'ang, frightened and astonished, immediately warned
“ the neighbours. Together they came up to Wang’s dwelling and
“ inspected it closely ; the deepest silence reigned there and no
“sound was heard; they opened the door, and found all the inmates,
“more than ten in number, dead; even of the fowls and dogs not
“ one was alive” b


STRANGE TRICK OF A SPECTRE.


787


— “In the Siien hwo period (1119 — 1126), a military officer
“ of Shensi became an inspector in a part of the province of
“ King-tung. More than a year after he had assumed office he
“ suddenly saw behind the partition a big, blue-faced spectre, whose
“ head, though its owner was squatting down, still reached as high
“ as a roof on pillars. The man of the sword, brave, bold, fearless,
“took his bow and shot an arrow into its belly; the spectre
“laughingly said: ‘got it!’ and on a second shot it exclaimed:
“‘good shot!’ Twenty arrows thus successively were discharged,
“ sticking into its body like porcupine-quills, and then the spectre
“ lay dead and motionless b

“At this juncture, two small spectres carried the mother of the
“ inspector out of the room. Lest he might hurt or kill her, he
“ threw his bow and arrows aside, and, to deliver her, called his
“ sons, slaves and concubines to the rescue, but not one of them
“ gave an answer. Therefore he went back to look into the house,
“ and saw all the inmates dead, their bodies in a heap on the
“ ground, and in each body one of the arrows he had shot. Of
“ twenty persons, young and old, only he and his mother were left.
“ As soon as his fright and sorrow were somewhat abated, his under-
“ lings hurried to the prefect to report the news, and this magistrate
“ sent his deputies to see what had happened ; and they all
“ stood aghast, and could devise nothing better than to buy coffins
“and put the bodies into these. The night passed away and he


^ 0 « .® M * ^ I>f H , # T 5» 5E , bT fa^ *

. Snen-shih chi, quoted in the K K, ch. 3G4.


788


DEMONOLOGY.


“ was about to carry the coffins away for burial, when he hap-
“ pened to open a side-room to fetch something, and — saw
“ there the whole family seated, not dead at all, but as if in
“ a dreamy doze. He told them the whole incident, but they
“ understood nothing of it. Then he opened the coffins, and found
“therein ordure-baskets, brooms, barrels, ladles, and the like.
“They quickly removed to another place, and left that dwelling
“ unoccupied” b

Indeed, the malignity and effrontery of demons are boundless,
so as even to impel them beyond the limits of decency with respect
to the fair. “Dreams of intercourse with spectres”* are, in fact,
mentioned regularly in medical works among the symptoms of
female diseases, thus pointing to a great frequency and a generality
of such visions, which, as all dreams of spirits, pass for actual
apparitions.

Authors discoursing with the usual Chinese subtlety on such
female hallucination, generally ascribe it, like most forms of mental
derangement, to a diffusion of the influences of the blood. The
blood being identified with the shen, the diffusion of its influences
must needs cause the shen to loosen its hold on the body, the
viscera, and the other principal internal organs, and to leave them
partly or entirely, thus affording ample opportunity to the sie to
nestle in those organs in its stead. The patient indulges then in
obstinate taciturnity or soliloquy; she has hysterical laughing and
wailing fits with alternate acceleration and abatement of her pulses
— altogether sjmptoms of sui or demonry.

€ ® « tl lU « . S - ?t SIlii « . ® m .

« »f ifi « ii JB Tsing i ki or Expositor of the Strange,

a booklet with nine tales by Heu Kiun-su of the Sung dynasty.


SEXUAL COMMERCE OP SPECTRES WITH HUMAN BEINGS. 789


Another symptom of such hysterical derangement is fear of men.
It victimizes especially widows and nuns, and no doubt also affects
old maids, but these are rather rarities in the Empire. In many cases
the matter results in “demoniacal pregnancy” a real bugbear of
superstitious petticoats. A gynecologist of the thirteenth century
of our era wrote : * If a lady’s viscera and chief vitals are in har-
“ mony mutually, the influences of her blood are abundant and
“ compact, and her vital spirits are so solid and flourishing that
“neither the sie of winds, nor evil spirits can hurt her. But if the
“ influences of her blood are void and impaired, her vital spirits
“ will suffer of debility and weakness, and spectres of whatever kind
“ will occupy her person. If they enter her viscera, the woman seems
“ to be in the family way, which 'is a] condition called demoniacal
“ pregnancy” ^

Not all authors, however, are so 'convinced of demonish fecun-
dation in cases of apparent pregnancy. In an authoritative work of
the sixteenth century we read the following lines:

“The question is put sometimes what demoniacal pregnancy is.
“The answer is as follows: Things thought of in the daytime
“ become visions in the night, and so it is a rule that, if men and
“ women be of lewd disposition, idle, and unoccupied, the fire in
“ their liver and their kidneys flames up at any moment, with the
“ result that, if they are timorous, they dream frequently of inter-
“ course with spectres. So demoniacal pregnancy is unreal preg-
“ nancy, by no means a pregnancy produced by actual fecundation
“by spectres. An ancient recipe says: Where lewd thoughts are
“ boundless, wishes (for children) remain unfulfilled. It is white fluid
“ of lewdness and white foul liquid which, flowing in the uterus,
“curdle therein and make such pregnancy; it is the blood of the
“ woman herself and her semen which curdle and form a lump


^ ^ ■

Fii-jen ta ts'^uen Hang fang Large and Complete Col-
lection of efficacious Recipes for married Women, art. . This work was

written by Ch"en Tsze-ming R g 19 , also named Liang-fu ' who

finished it about the year "1237. It contains 24 chaptei-s with more than 260 articles
distributed under eight sections, besides a large number of recipes.


790


DEMONOLOGY.


“ that puffs up her breast and her abdomen, and filling these,
“ makes her look as if she were in the family way.

“But if it proves to be no unreal pregnancy, what then have
“we to think of it? Well, in Hwah Poh-jen’s work, entitled The
“ Efficacy of Medicines, I have found the following lines : In the
“ temple of Benevolence and Filial Respect the only daughter of
“ the Invoker attached to the building, named Yang Tfien-chTng,
“ strolled through the side-gallery in the dim shadows of evening,
“ and saw a spirit in yellow dress. She experienced an agitation of
“ feeling, and that same night she dreamed that she had sexual
“ commerce with that spirit. Her abdomen distended, and she had
“ all the symptoms of being in the family way, when Poh-jen was
“asked to treat her. He examined her, and said: ‘this is a case of
“ demoniacal pregnancy ’, and her mother having related to him all
“ about the cause of it, he cured her by causing her to evacuate
“ by means of blood-breaking and abortive drugs more than two
“ pints of tadpoles, porwiggles, and fish-eyes. Had she not had any
“real sexual commerce with that spirit? Such commerce may have
“ taken place indeed, but there are no reasons to admit that it
“ actually did, for how would it be possible for an image made
“ of wood and clay to indulge in coition with a human person,
“and to possess semen which may produce fecundation? Ah, no
“ ghost seduced by a woman was in question here, but a woman
“ bewildered by a ghost. My opinion is, that that girl, advanced in
“ years and yet without a mate, was one of those of whom we
“ might say ; where lewd thoughts have no bounds, wishes (for
“ children) remain unfulfilled. Scholars imbued wdth correct principles,
“beware of believing in the errors of such heterodox stories!”*


PREGNANCY CAUSED BY SPECTRES. 791

Thus Yii Poh, who wrote those lines, seems to ascribe demoniacal
pregnancy to an abnormal stagnation of menstruation. Medical authors
may often subscribe to this opinion, yet we regularly find in their
long lists of recipes against the evil certain mysterious ‘spectre-
beheading medicine” ^ — a strong evidence that leechcraft in China
is still very far from having disentangled itself from the old and
common belief that demons cause such pregnancies, and that means
to expel them or to scare them away from women they have
fecundated, may prove efficacious.

Thus far for the wisdom displayed on the subject by China’s
medical men. Naturally the unlearned show still less readiness to
disbelieve the reality of clandestine intercourse of spectres with
men. That animal-demons and plant-devils often commit such sins,
we have seen from many instances in our chapters on those beings;
we have also seen (pp. 603 and 605) that women copulating with
animal-demons have produced children. Many stories relating to
such commerce are abroad, and traceable in books. Thus we read,
that “one T'^an Sheng of the Han dynasty was forty years old,
“ and always nervous, having no wife. Engaged in reading the
“ Shi king, he sat up till past midnight, when a girl of fifteen
“or sixteen, with a countenance so attractive and clothes so
“ nice, that the world had never seen her match, approached,
“and spoke with him as if they were a married couple. ‘1 am
“not like others’, she said; ‘you must not let any light shine on
“ me until after three years’. They became husband and wife, and


. I liioh ching ch'^wen , Correct Traditions on Medicine,

art. A® Tiiis is a work in eight chapters, based especially on the doctrines
of the school of Chu Chen-heng, Sun Sze-moh, Chang Ki. and others. It was finished
in 1515 by Yu Poh also named TTen-rain


1


792


DEMONOLOGY.


“ she bore him a child, but when two years had passed away, the
“goodman could not repress his curiosity any longer. The night
“ came, and waiting till she was asleep, he stole to her with a light,
“ and saw that everything above her waist was flesh like a human
“ being, but that her lower parts were mere dry bones. At this
“ moment the woman awoke from her sleep. ‘You had no regard
“for me’, she said; ‘1 had descended into life; why, instead ol
“ suppressing your impatience for one year more, did you throw
“ light upon me ?’ Sheng apologized with a flood of tears, which
“he could not restrain, while she went on to say: ‘We have lived
“ together so long with the strictest observance of duty, but now
“ we must separate for ever. Our baby occupies my mind ; were
“ you to become poor, it would not be able to live ; come with
“me for some moments, I have something for you’. And he
“ accompanied her into a decorated hall, with rooms and apartments
“ the furniture of which was not that of this life. Here she handed
“to him a gown stitched with pearls, with the words; ‘it may
“ serve you for your sustenance’; then tearing a lapel from his robe,
“ she left him alone, and vanished.

“ Afterwards Sheng took the gown to the bazaar, where one of the
“ family of the prince of Tsii-yang bought it from him for ten
“million coins. The prince recognized it; ‘this is my daughter’s
“gown’, he said, ‘how could it be found in the bazaar? to be sure,
“that man has exhumed her body’. And he arrested and tortured
“ Sheng, who told him the whole truth ; still the Prince disbelieved
“ him. He went to the grave, and found it in its former good con-
“ dition ; he opened it, and saw a lapel of a robe under the coffin lid ;
“ he called the child, and saw that it bore a close resemblance
“ to his daughter. Now he believed everything. He called T'^an Sheng,
“ gave him back the gown, and adopted him as his son-in-law,
“ bestowing upon the child the title of Intendant of his Gate
“ and Doors” b


4^ SB A. ® #


WOMEN GIVING BIRTH TO DEVILS.


793


After all, we cannot help feeling astonished at having found
nothing in Chinese books which points to an ascription of monstrous
births to impregnation of the mothers by spectres. It seems however
a fact, that monsters are called spectres; we have seen an instance
hereof on page 520. It is recounted in the Tsze puh yii, that
“ Ching Joh-shi, a lowest rank literary graduate in Shao-hing, was
“ presented by his wife, a woman of the Wei family, with a
“yaks ha, blue over its whole body, with a wide mouth gaping
“ upward ; its eyes were round, its nose contracted, its mouth
“ pointed, and its hair red ; moreover it had cock-spurs and horse-
“ hoofs. On falling out of the vagina it bit the midwife in her
“ finger. The graduate was so affrighted that he seized a knife
“ to kill it, and the y a k s h a made gestures to defend itself for
“ some time before it expired. Its blood was quite blue. The
“ mother died with fright” '.

Spectres do not visit men exclusively to satisfy their sexual lust,
but also because of their appetite for food. Indeed, no spirits,
including the ghosts of the dead, can subsist without eating and
drinking, or without clothing and money; they therefore are always


iK . » * ^ . ie g T * # * « . * a m «
I A.

. Shell shell hi, ch. 16.

Tsze puh yii, ch. 23.


794


DEMONOLOGY.


abroad in search of food and drink, generally hungry and thirsty,
or even in a state of semi-starvation. We might expect to find
them simply represented as satiating themselves furtively and quietly
with the food of men, even without the latter perceiving it, since
ghosts merely consume invisible ethereal parts of food; yet the
common opinion is, that they do not touch any eatables or dainties,
unless formally set aside for them by way of sacrifice.

Man in his own interest and safety frequently presents them
with such offerings. He knows well that he can never do this often
enough, spectres being unlimited in number; however liberally he
spends in their behalf the good things he has, there always remain
not a few perverse enough to spy out opportunities to harm him
for no other purpose than to extort such gifts. Needless to say,
such spectres are the miscreants among their class, transgressors of
the great law that they are not entitled to harry mankind unless
Heaven has affixed its consent or approval (see page 432). Hence,
should they push this evil work too far and display too much
impudence, they run the great risk that man, in his anxiety and
despair, should hurry to the temple of the God of Walls and Moats,
charged by Heaven with ruling the spectral world in that depart-
ment or district, and that this god should have them caught,
arraigned before his tribunal, flogged, or otherwise tortured, and
even executed. Many tales describe this divine jurisprudence, and
food-extorting spectres themselves have likewise been a frequent
topic for fabulists. The following tale is drawn from a book of the
fifth century;

“A ghost of a recently deceased man, lean and weak, happened
“ to see that of a friend who had died twenty years ago, and
“which was fat and strong. ‘What is the matter with you?’ the
“latter asked, after mutual compliments. ‘1 am so hungry that
“ I can hardly bear it ; if you know any help for it, it is your

“duty to tell me’. The friendly ghost then said: ‘this is very

“easy: haunt men; they will get afraid and give you to eat’. The
“spectre went, and found a house. There was there a white dog;

“ he took it up and made it move through the air, and the family

“ saw this with great fright, and exclaimed that such a miracle had
“ never occurred. The oracle declared : ‘A strange spectre begs for
“ food ; kill the dog, sacrifice it to the spectre in the courtyard,
“ together with some sweet fruits, spirits and rice, and nothing else will
“ happen’. The family followed the advice of the diviner, and the
“ spectre really got great quantities of food to eat. Since that time


SPECTRES WHICH EXTORT OFFERINGS FROM MEN.


795


“ it regularly haunted the people, as the other spectre had advised
“ it to do” K

To give now some tales of modern date:

“Yin Yueh-heng, living in Hang-cheu outside the north-east gate,
“returned home from the Sand-river rapid with half a pound of
“ water-chestnuts in his bosom. The road took him past the lake
“ of the Alms-bowl through a sparsely populated, uncultivated place
“ with graveyards free to the public, containing numerous tumuli.
“ Here he felt that the contents of his bosom lost their weight
“ and the parcel got loose ; he felt for his chestnuts, and found
“ they were gone. He returned to seek them, and found them in
“ the cemetery, peeled and broken to pieces, on the top of a grave.
“ He picked them up, put them in his bosom, and hurried home.

“However ere he had eaten them to the last he became ill,
“and loudly exclaimed: ‘We had not tasted any water-chestnuts
“ for a long time and wanted yours to satisfy our constant desire
“ for them, but you took them all away again ; why were you
“ so stingy ? there we are in your own house ; we shall not
“ leave it until we have eaten our full’. The family was greatly
“ affrighted, and immediately set out food, to redeem the guilt of
“ their headman *.


SH:. fits

* Yiu ming luh, quoted iti K K, ch. 321.

#If.


796


DEMONOLOGY.


“It is a custom among the people in Hang-cheu, whenever they
“ see spectres out, for one person to walk ahead of them out of
“ the gate, while another comes behind and shuts the gate. This
“ family too followed this rule, but closed the door too hastily, and
“at this moment Yin Yueh-heng loudly cried; ‘When you have
“ guests, you must treat them with respect ; now you shut the

“ door so hurriedly before we have got outside, that my leg is

“ pinched in it ; I cannot stand the pain ; if you do not prepare
“ another great meal and invite me to it, I will never leave your
“house’. So the family had to exorcise them again by means
“ of prayers and sacrifices, on which Yin somewhat recovered. Then
“ sometimes he was better, while at other times his disease recur-
“ red, but he did not escape them, and finally died of the con-
“ sequences” h

— “A thief of the Ts'ih tribe did his business with the greatest
“ refinement, but had in the end stolen so often that he feared he

“ had everybody on his track ; therefore he settled in a tumble-

“ down house, beside a burial ground free to the public. Here
“quite a number of spectres haunted him in a dream. ‘If you
“properly sacrifice to us’, they said, ‘we shall make you rich’; and
“ Ts'^ih promised in that dream that he would do so. But on waking
“ he considered that it was nonsense to keep that promise, and
“ did nothing.

“Then again the spectres appeared before him in a dream. ‘You
“ must sacrifice to us in three days’, they said, ‘or we shall snatch
“ away from you in broad daylight what you have stolen at night’.
“ Ts^ih could not help giving in, but again on waking he sacrificed
“nothing. But then after three days he became severely ill. He


a ^ et # ?l « . ft IK W 0 . ® » ft . 4
A # # .

likt Tsze puh yil, ch. 6


FOOD-EXTORTING SPECTRES.


797


“told his wife to see after his things, whether the spectres did
“ what they had threatened to do, and lo, with the sun in the
“ zenith those things suddenly moved from their place, as if trans-
“ ported by mysterious hands. Ts'ih would rise from his sickbed
“ and catch them, but his hands and feet were as if fettered, and
“ not until the things were all gone did his bonds relax, and he
“ recovered from his illness. His mind was now cleared up entirely,
“ and smilingly he said : ‘I have burned sorrow-incense (?) to stupify
“ others, but now it is 1 whom spectres stupify ; these here are the
“ broad daylight spectres which people talk of’. From that moment
“he altered his conduct, and became an honest man”'.

A good trick of a spectre to obtain worship and sacrificial food
is related in the following tale: “An officer of the Imperial Guards,
“ fond of racing and shooting, while pursuing a hare at the eastern gate
“ of the city pushed an old man, who was stooping down to draw
“ water, into the well by his horse, which he could not stop in its
“ rapid course. In great consternation he rode home, in all haste.
“ That night he saw the old man push open the gate and enter.
“‘You did not kill me intentionally’, he said with a curse,
“ ‘ but if you had called people to the rescue when you saw me
“ fall into the well, my life might have been saved ; why did it
“ occur to you to hurry away to your house !’ The officer had nothing
“ to say ; so the old man set to smashing his China ware, destroying
“ his doors, and doing other bad work incessantly. The whole family
“ prayed to him on their knees and set out offerings, and even
“celebrated sacrificial masses, but the spectre said: ‘All those things
“ are of no use ; if you want to keep me quiet, you should carve


St**

. T^ze puh yu, ch. 23.


798


DEMONOLOGY.


“ a soul-tablet of wood for me, write my name and surname upon
“ it, and sacrifice every day pigs’ feet to me ; treat me as if I were
“an ancestor of yours, and I shall forgive you’. They did so, and
“ the result was that the spectral work ceased.

“From that time, whenever he had to pass by the eastern
“ gate of the city, he took a circuitous road, in order to avoid
“ that well. Once passing by it while in the cortege of the
“ emperor, he would have absconded in the former wise, but for
“his general, who said: ‘If the emperor asks where you are,
“ what shall we say ? besides, what have you to fear of spectres
“ under the blue heaven in broad daylight, in the presence of a
“thousand cars and a myriad of horsemen?’ And the officer could
“ not help passing by the well. There he saw the old man in the
“ same shape standing beside it, who rushed forward, grasped his
“ coat, and said with a curse : ‘ Aha, to-day I find you here ; some
“ years ago you ran against me with your horse, and did not help
“me; how could you find that in your heart!’ He reviled him,
“ and even beat him, and the officer, in fear and agitation, meaningly
“supplicated, saying; ‘How shall 1 excuse myself? but you have
“ accepted sacrifices in my house for years, and in your own person
“ promised to pardon me ; why do you now use such different
“language?’ These words increased the fury of the old man; ‘I was
“not yet dead’, said he, ‘why then did you sacrifice to me? I was
“ pushed into the well by your horse, but a passer-by hearing
“my cries for help immediately hauled me up; how then can you
“take me for a ghost?’ Now in the utmost fright, the officer took
“ the old man to his house, and there they saw that the inscription
“ on the soul-tablet was not his name. The old man tucked up his
“ sleeves ; ejaculating a curse, he flung the tablet down and scat-
“ tered the sacrificial articles on the ground ; and while the whole
“ family stood aghast, quite at a loss what to think of it, a loud
“ laughter was heard in mid air, and passed out of the house” b


STORY OF A PLAGUE-SPECTRE.


799


— “Su Tan-lao in Hang-cheu was a glib-tongued fellow, a mocker,
“ generally hated. On New year’s day they painted the spirit of plague
“ on a piece of paper and affixed this to his door. Opening the door
“ at sunrise, he saw the picture, and with loud laughter took it into
“ his house ; he invited it to take a seat, drank some spirits in
“ company with it, and burned it. In that year there was a violent
“ outbreak of plague. The sick among his neighbours on all sides
“ rivalled one another in sacrificing to the spirit of the plague, and
“ some among them, made ill (possessed) by it, spoke in the voice
“of the demon: ‘On New year’s day I have received worship from
“ Su Tan-lao, and to my shame I have found no opportunity yet
“ of requiting him ; those who wish to avert me must invite him
“to keep company with me, and then I shall depart’. Now those
“ who sacrificed to the spectre of the plague vied with each other
“ in inviting Su, who w'as thus every day busily eating and drinking
“ as much as he could. Not one in his family, which consisted of
“more than ten persons of various ages, caught the plague”'. Thus


SiltiamitPliii'IFitflSSft#.

3® * it PI . t?) gs iff a; ^ . * * tt 2 H . « ±

# .i « a tffi y: iS . s. « W.R S R ES 2 *

mmmB,


> -t Bits: a,

iw,

puh yu. ch. 2.


mm-m. w**® w pi. a. b


800


DEMONOLOGY.


spectres extort food not only for themselves, but also for their friends
among men.

The tricks used by spectres to obtain food then vary in cha-
racter and in the amount of shrewdness which they display; yet
other tales state, that it is not unusual for spectres to tell by
the mouths of patients whom they possess, what sort of food they
desire, what kind and what quantity of mock money, and in what
place they wish these things handed over to them. These demands
having been fulfilled by the family, the sufferer either recovers, or he
utters new demands, his delirious talk, incomprehensible to common
ears, being interpreted by experts of either sex. Not seldom the
spectre declaies itself to be a soul from some neglected grave in the
neighbourhood, where then the family set down the offerings. Truth
requires us to say, that spectres do not always prove ungrateful
for the food which they extort. We have even read of some who,
out of mere gratitude, rendered women pregnant of sons by placing
into their wombs souls purchased somewhere with the paper money
which those women had burned for them.

In our systematization of the world of spectres we might have
introduced an important special article on mischievous ghosts
of the dead. But we have already treated of these spectres in
various chapters, as ghosts of the drowned (pp. 525 sqq.), as
victims of tigers (pp. 554 sqq.) and of self-murderers (ch. IX), as
living corpses and vampires (ch. X), as ghosts appearing at death
(ch. XII), as avengers of wrong done to them while alive or after
death (Part I, ch. XVI), or as devils of drought (Book I, pp. 918 sqq.).
As the dead contribute so large a contingent to the spectre-legions,
it is natural that in China graves and cemeteries in particular are
places where apparitions occur, and which on this account are
dangerous for the living, especially when the sun has set. A tale
may show what awful things may befall men there:

“In the district of Yen-shi in Honan, a woman of the tribe Sih,
“ wife of the villager Chang Yuen, returned home from a visit to

« s pg a . a A * • g iE s A, if » .

^ . Tsze puh yit, ch. 2.


STRANGE TRICKS OF GHOSTS WHICH DWELL IN GRAVES. 801


“ her mother. Her husband’s brother came to meet her on the
“ road. The road led them past an old grave with a shadowy tree.
“ Here the woman desired to relieve herself ; she gave her brother-
“ in-law her donkey to hold, hung her red linen petticoat on the tree,
“and returned to this garment when she had finished, but it was
“ gone. Then at home she passed the night in bed with her
“husband. The morning came and they did not rise; the family
“ tapped at the door and entered, and though the windows were
“ in their proper state, the bodies of man and wife were there, but
“ without their heads.

“The magistrate, informed of the case, found it impossible
“ to give a verdict. He arrested the brother of the husband and
“ examined him, and as this man related the loss of the petti-
“ coat on the day before, the mandarin repaired to the grave. He
“ discovered a cave beside it, with a smooth path showing that
“ some being was wont to go in and out, and on careful inspection
“ he saw a red linen petticoat outside the cave, the same which
“ had belonged to that sister-in-law. On digging up the grave, they
“ found the two heads in it, but no coffin, the cave being very
“ narrow, not larger than an arm. The mandarin could not possibly
“pass any sentence” b

^ n W' * ® a, <: (B s )?f it ii IS ^ tat.
AtiP‘tA,)gliia«sfHAiS5fr#*'t.

0AIS

S fe « IS ® w ft. « -f *

■ ffa ' Thzc pull yii. cli. 2.


CHAPTER XV.


THE WORLD OF SPECTRES A COPY OF THAT OF MEN.

The chapters which we have devoted to spectres and ghosts, and
to the ways in which they work upon the fate of man, have brought
out on many a page the fact that they lead an existence remark-
ably analogous to that of man. They appear and haunt in shapes
almost, or quite, as material as his. They speak as man, cherish
human affections and grudges, have human appetites and lusts, and
indulge in sexual intercourse as well with men as among them-
selves. They fight like men, using weapons; they combine into
gangs and troops, even forming well equipped armies, and may
be fought and warded off with human spears, swords and arrows.
They use money, live on human food and drink, and dress as men
do; in short, man in China has modelled his spectres in almost
every respect after his own likeness and image.

Is it surprising then that popular imagination ascribes to spectres
also a social life hardly different from the human? As early as the
sixth century before our era, as the lines show which we have
extracted from the Tso ch^wen on page 411, the power and inffuence
of a spectre were deemed, just as in China’s human society, to bo
proportional to the numbers and might of the clan to which it
had belonged on this earth and of which it remained a member
after death ; which also points to belief in the continuity of family-
life and clan-life beyond the present. The homes of those clans were
situated in special “regions of kwei, spectres or ghosts”^, the real
sites of which were, of course, never determined. In the Yih king
we read, that a line of a kwa called signifies: “Kao Tsung

attacking the spectre-regions, and defeating them in three years” ",
and that the kwa named ^ has a line suggesting the idea of

“ Chapter 8.


• SPECTRE-COUNTKl ES.


803


“ a movement to attack a spectre-region, producing beneficial effects
on the Great Realm in three years” *. These passages refer profes-
sedly to an old tradition according to which Kao Tsung or Wu Ting,
a monarch believed to have reigned in the fourteenth century b. C.
(see Book I, p. 4S0), led his troops against some remote barbarian
country. This tradition is preserved in the Annals of the Bamboo
Book, in these words; *In the 32nd year of his reign he attacked
“the spectre-regions and camped in King, and in the 34th year
“ the royal armies conquered those countries” It is worth observing
in this connection, that to this day the Chinese show remarkable
fondness for styling foreigners kwei. In the Shi king too mention
is made of regions of kwei in an ode which makes king Wen,
the founder of the Cheu dynasty, say of the dethroned last sovereign
of the house of Shang; “Indignation is rife in the Middle King-
dom, which extends even over the spectre-regions” ^ A spectre-
realm*, inhabited by one-eyed beings with human faces, is mentioned
in the S/ian-hoi king, which places it among the northern countries
between the seas, its notices on which form the twelfth chapter,
the North being indeed the region of the Y i n or cold and dark-
ness with which spectres are assimilated.

Ma Twan-lin devoted some lines to a realm of that name, which
he described among the countries in the extreme nortli. “It lies
“ sixty days' travelling from the kingdom of Kiao-ma. Its inhabitants
“ roam about in the night, but hide themselves during the day.

“ They dress in dirty pieces (?) of deerskin. Their eyes, noses and ears
“ are like those of the people in the jMiddle Kingdom, but they
“ have their mouths on the top of their heads. They eat from
“ earthenware dishes. There is no rice in their country, and they
“live upon deerskin and horses of the country (or earth-horses?).

“ Thirty days travelling from the south of that realm takes one
“to that of the Tuh-kueh”“.


^ ^ ■
4 ^ g.


804


DEMONOLOGY.


In those mysterious countries, never obliterated from people’s
fancy and memory, spectres and ghosts carried on regular trading
business, even having for the purpose special markets or bazaars.
This idea may have easily arisen from the existence of markets
among tribes of mountaineers whom Chinese fancy converted into
spectres. The official Histories of the T^ang dynasty inform us, that
“ there are, at the Western Sea, markets where traders, without
“ seeing each othei’, put down beside the merchandise the price
“which they offer; those places are called spectre-markets”*. And
a work of later date says: “On the sea-coasts spectre-markets
“ are kept, where people congregate at midnight, to separate at
“ cock-crow ; men often obtain thence curious articles” 'h It may be
observed that rolling thunder in distant, dark clouds is to the
present day often called a demon-market.

It is from that region that, under the cover of night, hosts of
devils swarm out regularly through imaginary gates, dubbed spectre-
gates \ Thus we read, “in the daytime those gates are not open, but
“ at sunset human voices sound there, and a colour as of blue fire
“ then beams forth from them” \ Mention is made of a spectre-gate
in the south, in a spot forming at one time the farthest confine
of the empire in that direction : “ Thirty miles in a southerly direction
“ from the district city of Poh-liu (in the south-eastern part or
“ Kwangsi) two rocks stand opposite one another at a distance of thirty
“ paces. The people call them the spectre-gate pass. The way of the
“ general Ma Yuen of the Han dynasty, the Queller of the Waves,
“on his expedition against the Man of Lin-yih, lay through it;
“ he erected there a stone tablet (commemorative of this event),


llVn liicn run;/ kitno, ch. .S48, 1. '18.

New Books of the T^ina: Dynasty, ch. 221. II, 1. 18.

• Di shu iunn clkao Desnltnry AVritings during

a Smamer Retreat, a little book which I have not .seen, probably written in the
AA'an lih jieriod (1573 — 1020) by T'an Siu ■ We quote from the Pei wen

yen fn, ch. 34, I, 1. 140.

» a PI-

i lit III/.


THE MOTHER OF SPECTRES.


805


“ of which the (pedestal in the shape of a) stone tortoise still exists.
“ In times gone by, travellers to Kiao-chi (Cochin-China) all used to
“ pass through this gate. Southward from it malaria is so prevalent
“ that those who depart hence seldom return alive. It is a common
“ saying that nine men out of ten never return through the spectre-
* gate pass ” h

It seems that this pass owed its lugubrious name merely to a
play on words or to a mistake, it being not, in fact, called gate
of the kwei or spectres, but gate of the kwei ;j^, or Cassia
tree. And these old names have been superseded a long time ago
by one of good omen. “According to the Yii-fi hi siting, the pass
“ of the k w e i-tree gate was in the beginning incorrectly called
“ that of the spectre-gate. In the first year of the Hung w u
“ period of the Ming dynasty (1368) its name was changed into
“ k w e i-tree pass, which was replaced again in the S ii e n t e h
“period (1426 — 1436) by that of pass of the gate of Heaven”®.

In the remote spectre-countries, according to an old tradition,
the inhabitants were engendered by a mysterious being, called
Kwei mu the JMother of Spectres. “In the South sea regions a
“ mother of spectres lives in the Lesser Yii mountains. She gives
“birth to all the kwei that live in heaven and on earth. At every
“ litter she brings forth ten, which, born in the morning, she
“devours in the evening. She is the shen who, under the name
“ of Spectre-lady, exists in Ts'ang-wu (/. e. the region about the
“ spectre-gate pass). She has a tiger’s head, feet like a dragon.


***#»«.*»¥ #43. PI S +


is ■ Kooks of the T'anar Dynasty, cti. 41, I. 70.

That pass seem- to be fieqiiently confounded with a spectre-gate pass

across the Annam frontier, to tiie south of Lang.son city, wliere a temple
to Ma Yuen stands, or formerly stood. Conip. Deveria, “La Frontiere Sino-Annamite”,
pp. 19 and 77.


TS, ..Cl,

ch. 1434 and 1431.


!>


806


DEMONOLOGY.


“eyes of a python snake, and eyebrows of a kiao dragon. In Wu
“and Yueh (Kiangsu, Chehkiang and Fuhkien) her image of clay
“ or wood is placed in the temples erected as a security against
“ tempests ; it has a dragon’s head, a cow’s ears, and connected
“ eye-brows, placed over one single eye” \

This mother of spectres seems, however, to be an exotic invention,
imported at an early date, and playing a part in China’s Buddhist
religion. We shall therefore have to pay attention to her in some
later volume.

Apart from those and some other legends, spectre-tales in general
prove decisively that the demon-world in China has been thought
at all times to exist in conjunction with that of men. It has its
kwei wang* or “spectre-kings”, and in Fuhkien it is a general
custom among the people in accosting spectres, to cajolingly style
them hux 6ng, which is -the local form of k w e i w a n g. In particular,
however, spectres and ghosts are, somewhat later than the beginning
of our era, placed by popular imagination under the sway of a divinity
residing in Shantung, in the Tai-shan ^ or Great Mountain, also
styled Tung-yoh ^ or Eastern Mountain. He exercises justice especi-
ally over the ghosts of the dead, arraigning them for the purpose
before his tribunal, and torturing and punishing them, his court
being in consequence actually a hell. Or they may be haled before
his coadjutors, the Ch'ing-hwang shen® or Gods of Walls and
Moats. These divinities officiate in the walled towns of the empire,
on a par with the mandarins who serve the Son of Heaven there.
Each such town possesses a temple where the god is deemed to
hold court and to wield the sceptre over the spirits within the
same jurisdiction where the highest local officer residing in the
town exercises terrestrial sway. The God of the Eastern Mountain
likewise has a temple in most cities. These buildings are resorts
for all who desire protection against evil spirits, and the gods
residing therein accordingly are local patron-divinities with a para-


4


SPECTRES HAVE THEIR ARMIES AND THEIR FIGHTS.


807


mount place in China’s religious life. We are not concerned with
them as yet; it is sufficient to state here that a number of spectres
are thought to be devils in their service, sent out to arrest souls
and hale them before their tribunals for examination, cruel torture,
and bloody punishment (cf. 776).

The comparison of the Chinese world of spectres with that of men
may be drawn out still farther. We know already (see page 476)
that spectres possess armies which occasionally attack man, in order
to destroy his welfare ; but apart from this, their society has its regular
internal strifes, wars and battles. We read on this head, that “ seventy
“miles northward from Ping-cheu, an old grave was besieged every
“evening in the first year of the Ching kwan period (A.D. 6:37)
“ by more than ten thousand spectral soldiers with banners and
“ standards, fresh and clean. Then that grave poured forth instantly
“ several thousand ghostly infantry and cavalry, joining with the
“ besiegers in a hot battle beside the grave, and not until it was
“ night did the two parties withdraw. This had gone on for about
“ a month, when one evening there appeared yet another army
“ from the north, upward of ten thousand spectres strong. They
“ had just arrayed their ranks a few miles from the grave, when
“ a farmer saw them, and took to his heels in consternation. A com-
“ mander of the spectres ordered some ten of his men to catch him, and
“ on his being brought before him, addressed him in these terms :
“‘Have no fear; I am a shen of the Gobi desert, robbed by an
“ subordinate commander of my favourite concubine, with whom he
“ has eloped into this grave, and the lord Chang, whose burial place
“ this is, employs soldiery to fight us” k

Thus spirits also have consorts of their own kind; which, in
fact, the reader knows from many of our tales. It is in truth an
established tenet, brought into prominence by our chapter on

^ W ^ A Sf ‘^ 2 .


808


DEMONOLOGY.


Sutteeism (Book I, p. 735), that the ties uniting husbands and
wives in this world are not broken by death. Now as marriage
in China under whatever form purports the production of offspring,
we cannot but infer that ghosts and spectres also procreate their
race, and that their society is not recruited solely from that of
dying men.

And where sexual life exists, jealousy is rife; hence, naturally,
spectres in China are not exempt from this hateful passion,
“ Outside the south gate of Kii-yung”, thus runs a tale, “ there are
“ the graves of nine husbands. Current tradition asserts, that once
“ upon a time there lived a most handsome wife, whose husband
“ died when she had by him not more than one baby boy. Her
“ family estate was very large ; therefore she took to herself another

husband, but this one too died after having begotten one son
“•by her; he was buried beside the first one. Now she took a
“ third goodman, who died in the same circumstances, and in this
“ way tilings went on, till she had had nine husbands, and
“ possessed nine sons. The nine graves lay in a circle, and when
“ she died, she was buried in the midst. Then at every sunset
“ there rose a cold wind on the spot, and in the night crying,
“ whistling and quarrelling voices were heard, as if those husbands
“ were jealously snatching the wife out of each other’s hands. In
“ the end wayfarers no longer ventured by the spot, and the neigh-
“ bouring villagers became so uneasy about the matter, that they
“ lodged a complaint with the prefect Chao Then-tsioh. This grandee
“ went with them to the graves. He there held a judicial session, and
“ ordered his underlings to deal thirty heavy blows with their long
“ sticks on the top of each grave ; and since that time the deepest
“ silence has reigned on the spot” b


ttJf

Ztti.

^ # 41 * lit 4f # . « SS « iS , » # S

'l6zc jjuli tja, ch. 7.


BURIAI, PI, ACES OF SPECTRES.


8oy

Apart from the graves which the living provide for the dead,
spirits have burial places of their own making. “In Ch^en-cheu”,
a work of the T%ng dynasty asserts, “forty miles west of the prin-
“ cipal city of the Sii-p'u district (in Hunan), a mountain lies,
“ where spectres bury their dead. Hwang Min’s description of Yuen-
“ cheu says: ‘There, on the central cliff, coffins stand, which, seen
“from the distance, seem to be more than ten chang in size.
“ It is called the graveyard of the spectres. Old people say, that
“ when the spectres were making those coffins, for seven days and
“ nights nothing was heard but the clicking of axes and chisels ;
“ tools, knives and axes disappeared from the houses in a mysterious
“ way, and were all restored to the owners on the seventh day
“ when the spectres were ready, those tools then all having a greasy
“ appearance and a smell of rancid flesh. The coffins stood by that
“ time in the same position they have at present, athwart on the
“ brink of the cliff” h

Ideas about spectre-regions being firmly fixed in the minds of
the Chinese, tales about men who have visited them have, of
course, been made in considerable numbers. As an instance the
following one may be translated here; “When the Chu family or
“ Liang dynasty reigned, a trader of Ts'ing-cheu (in Shantung) was
“ out at sea, and blown by a gale to a place where he saw in the
“distance land with a walled city. The sea-captain said: ‘Never
“ has anybody been blown hither by the wind ; I have heard that
“ the realm of spectres must be here; could it be this?’ The ship soon
“ reached the shore ; they landed, and went to the city. The houses
“ and fields they passed did not differ from those in the Middle King-
“ dorn. They saluted all whom they saw, but nobody saw them.
“At the city-gate there was a watch; they bowed, but the watchmen
“ did not return their courtesy. They entered the city, and found
“ houses, men and animals in great numbers. Then they came to the
“ palace, where a great feast was just being given by the king to the


. i/i'a/i wen Li; K K, cli. 351.


810


DE3IONOI,OGy.


“ ministers, and several dozen boon-companions attended on him.

Ceremonial clothes, caps, implements, and decorations in silk and
“ bamboo were almost in every respect of the same kind as those
“ used in China.

“ The foreigners went up the steps into the palace-hall, and
“ as they crowded around the king’s seat, in order to look at him,
“ he on a sudden became ill. His attendants carried him home,
‘•and hastily called a wu to examine him, who said: ‘People from
‘■a yang country have come hither ; y a n g influences have thronged
‘‘ into this place ; this is it why the king has fallen ill ; those men
“ have come here accidentally and cause this spectral evil uninten-
“ tionally ; we therefore can ask them to go away, by means of
“ food and drink, carts and horses’. Immediately they prepared
“ spirits and eatables and set out seats in a side-room, and the
“ ministers came with the w u to offer those things to them and
“ pray to them, and the foreigners ate and drank at the tables.
‘•Suddenly slaves appeared with horses; the foreigners mounted,
“• and returned to the place whence they had come. At the seashore
*• they went on board, and even to this last moment the people of
“ that realm did not see them. As there blew' again a fair wind,
“they could sail home”'.

Thus spectres treat men as men treat spectres; men are dangerous


» # Si A ft I S . * A (S * ® « ft

B . =9 a 111 a #


REALMS OF SPECTRES VISITED BY MEN.


811


to spectres as spectres are to men, by their natural contrary influence,
and they are mutually exorcised by means of sacrifices. Another abode
of spectres is sketched by the following tale, paraphrased and abridged
by us:

In Sze-chVen, in the district of Fung-tu ^ on the Yangtsze, men
and spectres have intercourse. There is in that place a well, into
which every year paper money is thrown in great quantities, and
near which very much paper is burned as a tribute to the rulers
of the nether world; those who refuse to do so are punished
with plagues and diseases. At the beginning of the present dynasty,
Liu Kang^ entered upon his functions as prefect of the district,
and heard of those practices. He forbade them, and people who
blamed him for so doing he caused to be arrested, but they proved
obstinate, and told him that there were spectres in the well, and
that nobody yet had ventured himself to the bottom of it. This
tempted the mandarin and another brave man, one Li Sien to have
themselves lowered into it with a rope to a depth of some fifty
feet. First it was dark, but then they entered a spot as clear as
daylight, where they saw a city with walls, palaces and houses,
just as in the world of men, but where people walked in the air
and had no shadows. Being a mandarin, he was received by every-
body with great politeness, and conducted before one lord Pao \
alias Yama, a man of about seventy, enthroned in a splendid palace,
with a crown on his head. A seat having been politely offered to
the mandarin, he requested that the people should be relieved of
that annual tax of paper on account of their poverty; on which
Pao smilingly said that Taoist and Buddhist priests always deluded
the people with ghost-tales, causing them to lay out large sums
on sacrifices and masses, so that mandarins should take measures
to restrain them and their doings.

Just then the Great Mara-subduing Emperor^ arrived, that is to
say, Kwan-ti, the God of War; out of the air he came, in a cloud
of red light. He asked our mandarin about various things relating
to the human world, and Li Sien was so bold to ask him where
his residence was. The god did not answer, but immediately took
his leave and departed, evidently in wrath. Lord Pao told Li Sien
that this impudent question might cost him his life, and he probably


4


O


3


8J2


DEMONOLOGY.


would be smashed by thunder, but his body might escape destruction
by fire if he died before that disaster came; to this end he marked
his back with a great seal. Then both men had themselves hauled
up out of the well, and ere they had reached the south gate of
the city, Li Sien caught cold and died. Soon after this a thunder-
storm set fire to his coffin and burned it, as also his clothes, but his
body remained undamaged because of the impression of the seal k

Besides such fanciful spectre-realms, the Chinese, especially owing
to Buddhist influence, have infernal regions inhabited by myriads
of spectres. It is not, however, these infernal beings who visit them
with evil and disease, nor are these the powers against whom man
is for ever waging the war for his protection. They rather are
objects of his pious care, miserable victims of their own sins, to
be charitably delivered from their abodes of distress by the help
of religion. The methods invented and practised to this end, as also
those places of woe, will be subjects for description in other parts
of this work.

1 7’sr<“ pull yii, ch. 1.


PART III.

SORCERY.


As is the case with all pagan peoples which exist or have
existed on this earth, so also the race which lives on Chinese soil
has probably at all times produced men and women who were
popularly credited with a power, surpassing that of ordinary mortals,
of influencing spirits, either for good or ill. By means of such magic
they might actually set in motion good and evil spirits, a fact which
suggests of itself an express or tacit agreement with those beings,
or the possession of a dominion over them, which imposes obedience
more or less implicit. To use the common Chinese expressions,
they could “evoke or call kwei and shen” ^ and then “employ
them”

Such animistic magic then may be divided into two distinct
kinds. That which aims at producing human felicity, especially by
working upon good spirits or gods by means of rites, invocations,
and other practices, may be called religious magic, white magic;
this constitutes the principal part of the functions of priesthood,
and will occupy us much in other parts of this work. The other,
which employs spirits to do harm to men, is animistic sorcery,
black magic, withcraft, and will be treated of in the following
pages.

This inferior sort of magic works, of course, in the dark. Since
it keeps the credulous hearts of the whole nation in constant
anxiety and fright, as does the whole host of evil spirits, general
odium attaches to all who practise it, exposing them at any moment
to public vengeance and to severe prosecution by magistrates, who
as a rule are not much less credulous than the mob. Nevertheless


1


2 if •■■sja.iii.


814


SORCfiRY.


sorcery is mentioned sufficiently often in writings to force on us
the conclusion that it has always thriven in China, not less luxu-
riantly perhaps than in our own Europe in ancient and mediaeval
times. And we have not found in books a single expression indi-
cating disbelief in its reality or in the reality of its effects. China
therefore appears before us as a living testimony to the fact, that
where belief in evil spirits prevails, black art, which calls such beings
into action, cannot fail to flourish.

The secrecy with which black art envelops itself, renders the
study of its details extremely difficult. Wizards and witches can
hardly be expected to incriminate themselves and risk their .safety
and lives by betraying their secrets; illiterate men generally profess
to know little of it, and probably they speak the truth ; and literati
have no more to tell than what they have read in some books
which we may ourselves consult as well as they. Hence the reader
of these pages must content himself with desultory information
gleaned from Chinese books, besides some scanty hearsay evidence
jotted down in our note-books while living in China for the pur-
pose of studying the people.

Sorcery in China is not a special profession. Since the belief
in spectres is universal there and profound, and those beings
are within the reach of everybody, the world being crowded
with them, every one may practise that art who possesses the
will, and sufficient knowledge of the methods. But, as a matter
of course , the extensive class of people who profess to exert
influence upon the fate of men by means of the powers that work
in the Universe and constitute its Tao or Order, that is, priests,
soothsayers and diviners, geomancers, wu, in short, occult scien-
tists in the widest sense, are openly suspected above all others
of occupying themselves with sorcery; and ever since the Han
dynasty books testify that they have been at all times objects of
such suspicion.

Sorcery is generally denominated in Chinese books yao tao,
yao shuh or yao fahb or sie tao, sic shuh or sie fah*,
all which terms equally mean “methods of demonry”, whereas
yao and sic denote (see p. 466) the baneful influences of spectres.
Since, however, the word sie has a wider sense, embracing every-
thing which is contrary to the Tao or Order of Nature, thus hete-


' »!;.*;«.«'■ a-


2 wa;.


GENERAL REMARKS ON MAGIC AND SORCERY.


815


rodoxy (see p. 467), the words sie tao, sie shuli and sie fah
denote also heterodox magic, religious or other, performed without
any intent to do harm to men, or even with benevolent purpose;
also innocent juggling, and weird tricks of legerdemain or applica-
tions of mysterious, unknown natural laws, have been included
under those terms by ignorant, distrustful minds, and those who
practised them have, no doubt, at all times often been punished
even with death as corrupters of good manners, agents of disturb-
ance and confusion, and enemies of morality and social order. We
have then sharply to distinguish between heterodox magic and
sorcery, for, though sorcery is heterodox magic, heterodox magic
is far from always being sorcery. No doubt various parts of the
Chinese empire have special vernacular terms to denote sorcery,
which have not passed into the written language, and may have
their origin in the night of time. Such is the word khio, which
we find in Amoy. Such expressions should not, of course, be con-
founded with co-existing vernacular words denoting white magic.

One term of frequent use, denoting animistic sorcery, deserves
special notice, because it seems to be the only one which is classical,

o*" niethod to make a false or wrong use
of kwei and shen”. It is borrowed from the Li ki (ch. 18,1. 38),
from a passage which we may regard as the oldest Chinese
written law against disturbance of public peace, and corruption
of morals and customs by heterodox doctrines, magic or withcraft
of any kind: “With death are punished those who, by splitting
“ language (criticism ?) minish the power of the law, and by casting
“ doubt on what is authoritative try to cause revolution, or by
“ employing aberrant Tao throw government into disorder. The
“ penalty of death is also inflicted on makers of heterodox (s i e)
“ music, official garments different from those prescribed, strange
“ingenious contrivances, and strange implements, thus causing per-
“ plexity to arise among the multitude. Those who are guilty of
“unnatural conduct and persist therein; those who indulge in
“heterodox speech and therewith dispute; those who apply them-
“ selves to evil and become versed therein ; those who follow what
“ is wrong and become imbued therewith — they all shall, if they
“cause perplexity to arise among the multitude, be put to death.
“This shall be the punishment also for those who create doubts
“ among the people by making a wrongful use of kwei and shen, of
“(lucky or unlucky) seasons or days, or of divination by means
“ of tortoise-shells or stalks. The execution of offenders of these


816


SOBCERY.


“ four classes may take place even without their being heard in
“ their own defence” h

In the second century of our era, Ching Khang-ch‘ing explicitly
stated in his commentary on these lines, that among that “aberrant
Tao” he reckoned wu ku, the worst and principal form of black
magic prevailing in his time, of which the reader will hear in
Chapter IT. We readily admit that the term allows

of other translations than “wrongful use of kwei and shen”,
which we propose” ^ Nevertheless it must as readily be agreed,
that, considering the fact that later authors have attached the
signification of animistic sorcery to it, it is not irrational to conclude
that in the unknown time when the above passage was written, it
actually referred to such sorcery — a capital offence.


IM.i'

2 Legge translates: “to give false reports .about api>earances of spirits”; and
Couvreur; “dire des faussetes concernant les manifestations des esprits”.


n m


CHAPTER I.


INFLICTION OF EVIL BY MEANS OF ONE’s OWN SOUL
OR THAT OF A QUADRUPED.

That a man may project his soul out of his body at pleasure is
in China a prevailing belief, which we have illustrated, by quo-
tations from books, on pp. 103 sgq. It is then simply a matter
of course that the Chinese should be convinced that sorcerers may
cause their own soul to haunt and inflict evil on their enemies
or victims.

“In Hang-cheu, one Chao Ts'ing-yao was so fond of chess that
“ he could not hear chess-men being set up without placing him-
“ self at the chess-board. Once when out for a stroll to the temple
“ of the Two Saints, he found there a Taoist with vulgar features,
“just engaging in a game with a visitor, and showing himself so
“ poor a player, though he called himself an accomplished master,
“ that Chao felt disgusted, and without deigning to address a word
“ to him took his departure k

“Ne.xt night, on going to bed, he perceived two spectre-lights
“ (will-o’the-wisps) moving round and round his bed-curtains. He
“ did not deem it worth while to bestir himself at this sight, but
“on a sudden a spectre with a blue face and with teeth like
“ a saw drew back the curtains, and stood before him, sword in
“ hand. Chao addressed some angry words to it, with the result
“ that it vanished. The following night a humming noise sounded
“ in his bed, as if of a number of boys reciting their lessons.
“ At first the noise was not very distinct, but on listening more
“attentively he could distinguish these words: ‘Is it any business


52


818


SORCERY.


“ of yours that I am a poor player and yet call myself an accom-
“ plished master? why did you presume to treat me disrespectfully
for that?’ It was now quite clear to Chao that that Taoist doctor
“ was trying to bring evil upon him, but this discovery merely
“ stimulated his boldness. He heard the voice whisper thus : ‘ A
very bold fellow you are, one who fears no knives, nor swords ;
“ but I will draw your life out of you by the method of hooking
“the hwun out of men’. And on this he distinguished the following
“incantation; ‘Heaven’s spiritual power (ling), work powerfully;
“spiritual power of Earth, work powerfully; a needle in your
“fontanel, and one under your heart’. On these words Chao felt his
“ whole body shiver, as if overwhelmed by fear ; but he kept
“control of his nerves and did not stir in the slightest. Stopping
“ his ears with his hands he slumbered on, and though the spell
“ went on ringing from his pillow, he endured it with firmness.

“ A month passed away, when suddenly the Taoist doctor knelt
“down before his bed, his eyes wet with tears. ‘I have’, he said,
“‘in a fit of anger set my arts to work against you, in order to
“ intimidate you, hoping thereby to compel you to come to an
“ understanding with me, and to get from you some money and
“ silk, but I was mistaken, for you were not affected in the least.
“ I now vainly deplore what I have done, for when my magic
“remains ineffectual upon my victims, it brings misfortune on
“ myself. So I died yesterday, and my soul having no refuge, I
“ am anxious to offer you my humble services as a patron divinity
“ of your camphor trees and your willows, thus to atone for my
“ iniquity’ . Chao gave no answer, but sent a man next morning to
“ the temple of the two Saints, who found that the Taoist had cut
“ his own throat. Since that time Chao knew everything one day
“ before it occurred, and it was said that the Taoist doctor was his
“ servitor” b


OLD WITCHES WITH CATS.


819


— “In the Metropolis, when young babies regularly take to
“ crying, the people are wont to ascribe this to what they call
“‘petty night-stars’. There lived there a wu, who could catch
“ these beings by means of a bow of mulberry wood and arrows
“ of peachwood. In the home of a Vice-president of a Board the
“ great-grandfather had left a concubine, now upwards of ninety
“ years old. This Old Aunt , as the family was wont to call
“ her, used to sit on a warmed brick bed the whole day long,
“ and never did a word pass her lips, nor a smile appear on
“ her face. She kept a darling cat, who was her inseparable com-
“ panion

“The Vice-president had a baby, still carried pickaback. It spent
“ its nights crying incessantly, wherefore he ordered the night-star
“ hunting w u to cure it ; and this man came with his small bow,
“ and an arrow to the shaft of which he had tied a white silk
“thread, several chang in length, wound around his fourth finger.
“ Thus armed, he sat down quietly till midnight, when the moon-
“ light began to shine upon the window, enabling him to see
“ hazily on the paper pane a shadow, rapidly gliding over it forward
“ and backward : a woman of seven or eight feet high, on horseback,

“ with a long spear in her hand. Our w u stretched out his arm,
“and whispering ‘there the night-star is’, drew his bow, and


AS T - # . a H 2 . ft » ft) a as Sr ,
M . M 5E * ai T tt; . a M s .

0. aja-±

$ A ^ ^ A ^ :zr i ^ M ^ w'"'’


820


SORCERY.


“ let fly his arrow into the spectre. A moaning sound was heard ;
“ the ghost threw down its spear and took to its heels, while
“ the w u , pushing through the window pane, got the thread
“ clear. Then at the head of the crowd he followed the thread,
“ thereby being guided to the back chamber of the house, where
it was found to pass through the crack of the door. The crow'd
“ called to the Old Aunt, but as she gave no answer, they lighted
‘‘torches and entered to see. A slave girl exclaimed; ‘the Old Aunt
“is hit by an arrow’, and in truth, when they stood round her
“ they saw the arrow sticking in her shoulder. She groaned and
“ bled, with the cat still between her thighs, and the spear she had
“ carried was a thin bamboo slip. The family beat the cat to death,
“ and deprived the Aunt of all food and drink, so that she died
“not long after. The child never cried again”

This tale, which reminds us vividly of our European witches with
their cats serving them to ride on, leaves it beyond doubt that the
soul of that hag had gone out as a demon to torment the child,
and that her cat’s soul served her as a spectral horse for her noc-
turnal trips. Professors of black art are even described as projecting
themselves into corpses, in order to employ these as kiang si with
all the atrocious, murderous propensities for which those demons
are so notorious. “Two T^ung-ch'ing men, Chang and Sii, connected
“ by ties of friendship, were trading in the province of Kiangsi, and
“ they had travelled as far as Kwang-sin, when Sii died in the upper
“ chamber of an inn. Chang then went to the bazaar to buy a
“ coffin for him. The undertaker asked him two thousand coins for


-SAft-fcAK.

^ « a 2: M M R A P'S PI . ^ .

fin ^ ^ 2 5|e ^ . a ^ iW ■


W"' ^ •rl ^


CORPSE-SPECTRES EMPLOYED FOR SORCERY.


821


“ one, and the bargain was closed, when an old man seated beside
“ the counter interposed, and told him not to let it go under four
“ thousand. On which Chang lost his temper and returned to his
“ inn. That evening, when he was upstairs, the corpse reared itself
“ up and gave him a thrashing, driving him in manifold terror to
“ seek shelter downstairs. Next day, in the clear morning light, he
“ went out again to fetch the coffin, and offered a thousand coins
“ more for it. The owner of the coffin-shop said nothing, but
“ there was again the old man of the counter who had made
“objections, who said with a curse: ‘I am not the master here,
“but they all know me as the crouching hill-tiger; if you do not
“ give me two thousand coins, that is to say, the same sum as
“the shopkeeper wants for the coffin, you shall not have it’.
“ Chang being but a poor man, could by no means afford that
“ sum, and had no other alternative but to betake himself to the
“ country and there stroll about b

“Here he encountered a kindly smiling man with a white beard,
“dressed in a blue gown. ‘Are you the man who bought a coffin?’
“he asked. ‘Yes, I am’, was the answer. ‘And did you incur the
“wrath of the crouching hill-tiger?’ Again he received an aflSrmative
“answer, whereupon he handed a whip to Chang, saying: ‘This is
“ the whip with which Wu Tsze-sii belaboured the corpse of king
“ P'ing of Ch'u (B. I, p. 349); should the corpse rear itself up
“ again this night and attack you, then use this whip, and you
“ will get the cofBn and be delivered from the trouble you
“ are in’. With these words the man disappeared. Chang went
“ to the inn and ascended the ladder ; and no sooner did the
“ corpse jump up than he belaboured it as he had been told to do,


833


SORCERY.


“ SO soundly that it fell to the ground under the blows. On his
“ visiting the shop next day for the coffin, the shopkeeper said ;
“ ‘The crouching hill- tiger of last night is dead, and our country
“ all around is thus rid of a nuisance ; now carry off the coffin
‘‘for the original price of two thousand’. Of course Chang asked
“him for further explanation. ‘That old fellow’, the shopkeeper said,
“ ‘is one of the Hung tribe; he was in possession of sorcerous arts,
“ could employ spectres, and was also in the habit of employing
“ corpses to attack men. Whenever any one died and a coffin had
“ to be bought, he was to be found in my shop to extort an extra
“ share for himself, consisting of half the price paid ; he has done
“ so for several years, and many have incurred the evil consequences
“ of his deeds. Last night he died on a sudden, without it being
“known what ailed him’. Then Chang told him of the whip which
“ the whiteboard gave him -. the two men hastened to the old
“ fellow, and found on his corpse the stripes of the whip. Some
“ say that whiteboard in blue was the local god of the Soil” b
The Chinese statements and narratives about men changing them-
selves into animals, of which we have composed our chapter on
Zoanthropy (pp. 156 «§'§'.) and that on Animal-spectres (pp. ^^'2 sqq.),
leave no room for doubt that such metamorphoses are in many
cases, if not in most, regarded by the Chinese as intentional. This
appears especially conspicuously in the tale about Cheu Chen,
who changed himself into a tiger by means of a charm and a

-if B

ft a 2, ^A/'±»^ll#.

Tsze piih yi'i, ch. 10.


SORCEROKS CHANGING THEMSELVES INTO ANIiIAI,S.


823


painted picture of the beast (page 169); tigroanthropy quite or
partly wilful probably was that of Ch^en Shih-shan (page 179);
Chu Tu-shi (p. 548) certainly was a bloodthirsty tiger by his own
will; persons changing themselves into wolves at pleasure were the
lad in the tale on page 565, the Hunnish woman Kin (page 566),
and the herdsman Ts'ang (page 567). If such self-transformed were-
animals inflict evil on men, this is animistic sorcery, inasmuch as
the soul of the man or the animal may be deemed to have an actual
share in the transformation (cf. page 156).

Such four-footed agents of black art may, like all animal-devils,
inflict disease. “In the twentieth year of the Khien lung period
“ (A.D. 1755) a family in the Metropolis had a young baby which
“ frequently was paralized by fright (convulsions), and died before
“ it had lived for a full year. During such fits a black thing
“ like an owl fluttered around the lamp, and the quicker it flew,
“ the more the child panted, and when it had entirely ceased to
“ breathe the beast disappeared. Not long afterwards another child
“ of that family had convulsions. But then a Mr. Ngoh, oflBcer of
“the Imperial Guard, an intrepid man, heard of it; flying into a
“ passion, he stationed himself on the spot with a bow and arrows,
“ to shoot the black brute as soon as he would see it come. He
“ touched the string ; off the arrow flew ; a cry of pain was heard,
“ and blood trickled down on the ground. He followed this track
“ across a double wall, lost it at the fire-place in the house of
“ Li, the President of the Board of War, and took post there
“ with his arrows b

“ Mr. Li, astonished, appeared, and asked him what he wanted, and
“ Ngoh, who was a relation of his, told him what the matter was.
“ Now the President gave orders to look about the furnace, and
“ they found in an apartment beside it a hag with green eyes, with
“ an arrow sticking in her waist, from which the blood trickled


824


SORCERY.


“ down ; she had the shape of a mi monkey, being a Miao-tsze
woman whom the President had brought home from Yunnan
“ province, where he had been a mandarin. She was extremely old,
^ and pretended not to know her own age. Thus suspected of sorcery,
she was manacled and interrogated, on which she owned to the
“ possession of certain spells, by merely reciting which she could
change herself bodily into strange birds. When thus changed, she
“ waited for the second watch to fly out and devour the brains of
“ babies, more than several hundreds of which she had thus harmed.
“ Mr. Li, enraged, fettered her, made a pile of fuel, and burned
“ her alive ; and from that moment a long tranquillity reigned, and
“ there were no more convulsions among babies”

Instead of their own souls in an animal shape, sorcerers and
sorceresses project those of animals for their evil purpose, or per-
haps the animals themselves. The reader has already made acquaint-
ance with this form of black art in our dissertation on cat-spectres
(p. 610), where we have related from standard history a case of
sorcerous use of cats by grandees at the Imperial court of the
Sui dynasty in A.D. 598; it has taught us that the main principles
of this form of black art consisted in this, that its practitioners
imposed their will upon the animal by means of sacrifices, spells
and incantations, thus inducing it to make people ill or kill them,
and steal their possessions. It is interesting to learn from that event,
that in those times even an emperor sacrificed to his belief in such
sorcery his brother-in-law and his wife; we may infer from this
the credulity of the rest. It was , according to the historian ,
principally the personal intervention of the empress which saved
the culprit: ‘• When 'Fo, the brother of the empress by another
“ mother , was condemned to death for having employed cat-
“ spectres against her, with w u-ist k u , spells and incantations, she


ft®*,

# ffi /J' a JS .»r « « ^ "F IR w ^ ^ .

^ Tszc piih yii, cb. 5.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF CATS.


825


“ did not eat for three days, and interceded for his life in these
“terms: ‘If he had inflicted any damage on the government or
“ the people, I would not venture to say one word ; but as he
“ has merely committed an offence against my person, I have the
“ courage to intercede for his life’. On this, T'o’s penalty of death
“ was diminished by one degree” h

Much more significant of the strength of the belief in the
reality of cat-sorcery were that emperor’s orders to persecute and
destroy all families accused of it. In the chronological list of the
events of his reign we read; “In the eighteenth year of the Khai-
“hwang period (598), in the fifth month, he decreed that families
“ keeping cat-spectres, breeding k u poison, holding spectres in
“ subjection, or practising any such savage or barbarous methods
“ whatever, should be banished to the farthest frontier-regions at
“ the four cardinal points” We have not found in Chinese books
of any period any further reference to cat-spectre sorcery; which
may mean, either that the case of the Sui dynasty stands alone,
or that the crime of which it relates merely existed in the ima-
gination of the emperor and his courtiers. Let us notice, that his
brother-in-law was accused of having occupied himself also with
“wu-ist ku”, and that the cruel crusade was ordered against
breeders of “ku poison” and people “ keeping spectres in subjection”.
We have here to do with two methods of animistic sorcery, which
we find in books of all times mentioned more often than any other,
and to which we shall now first of all give our attention.


1

. Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 30, I. 3; History of the North, cli. 14, 1. 17.

Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 2, 1. 13: History of tiie

N’oi'th, ch. 11, I. 20.


CHAPTER 11.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF SMALL REPTILES AND INSECTS.

From early ages, sorcerers and sorceresses in China have used
poisonous reptiles and insects for the exercise of their black art.
The cauldron in which Gallic, Germanic and Scandanavian hags
brewed their deleterious plants or drugs, has had there from
ancient times its counterpart in a pot with insects and reptiles,
which, as authors constantly assert, were left to devour each other,
the last surviving creature, after having swallowed all the others
and thus appropriated their venomous qualities, then being employed
as the instrument of evil. This pot we find denoted by the special
character ^ , now pronounced k u , formed by the hieroglyph JOj. ,
a pot or vessel, and ^ , reptiles or insects.

Thus, from the very outset, we see sorcery associated with poison.
The antiquity of the habit of keeping such pots is obvious from
the fact that mention is made of it in the Cheu Ji. This work says,
that a certain official, entitled Chii shi (decocter?), “was charged
“ with the duty of exterminating poisonous k u , attacking this with
“ spells and thus exorcising it, as also with the duty of attacking
“ it with efficacious herbs ; all persons able to fight k u he was
“to employ according to their capacities” '. It is certainly to be
regretted that that work is absolutely silent about the particulars
of the manner in which those anti-sorcery officials exercised their
vocation. Another intimation that such black art is very ancient,
occurs in the writings of Sze-ma Ts'ien, in which we read, that
“ the Ruler Teh of the state of Ts'in in the second year of his
“reign (675 b. C.) suppressed ku at the commencement of the
“ hottest summer-period by means of dogs” According to com-


'2 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ . Historical Recoi’ds, ch. V, 1. 9.


ANCIENT SORCERY WITH INSECTS AND REPTILES.


827


mentators, these animals were for the purpose butchered and affixed
to the four gates of the capital. VVe must notice, hovrever, that the
word k u may refer in this passage to insects in general, it having,
as we shall see presently, acquired this signification as well.

We learn something of interest about the breeding of ku from
the Tso diicen “ The Ruler of Tsin asked that of Ts'in for a phy-
‘‘ sician, and the latter sent one Hwo to see him, who said : ‘ This
“ disease cannot be cured ; it is what we call a sickness caused by
“ approaching the women’s chambers, and its symptoms are like
“those of ku; it is not caused by spectres, nor by (bad) food, but
“ the patient’s mind is disordered, so that his firmness of will is
“lost’ .... Chao Meng then asked the physician what he meant by
“ku. ‘It is’, he said, ‘a thing which produces excessive indul-
“ gence in debauchery, as also disorders by confusion of the mind ;
“in its written form it contains the components ‘pot’ and ‘reptiles
“or insects’, constituting the character ku; the flying insects in
“corn also are ku, and in the C/teu yih (the Yih Ung) a girl con-
“ founding a man, and the wind blowing down from the mountains
“ are said to be due to k u ; — all these matters are of the
“ same kind” k

Thus the term ku also included the use of philtre-maggots by
women desirous of exciting the lusts of men and attracting them
into debauchery. And, evidently, ku was also used to destroy crops
or food-stores, or, as the learned physician expressed it, to make the
corn fly away, perhaps in the form of winged insects born therein ;
indeed, the character for k u is regularly used in literature to denote
devastating grubs and insects, including internal parasites of the
human body, which exercise a destructive influence like poison.
“Ku means insects in the belly”, says the Shicoh -wen-, “the spectre
“ of a dead man whose head is exposed on a stake, also is ku”®.


. 0.

Tlie yenr o f the luler

Chao’s reign. One of the Uwa. treated in the Yili kinff, tiz. — = tlie eigh-
teenth, bears the name ot ; see the Chcii ijih clieh cliuwj ^ it* >

ch. 3, I. 11: ch, 9, 1. '20; cli. 11, 1. 29.


■ Ch.13, II, I. 5 and 6.


828


SORCERY.


This last stateuient seems to reveal to us a belief that such a soul,
roaming restlessly about because of its corpse being mutilated, must
be avenging itself on the living by settling in their intestines in
the shape of the same maggots and grubs which gnav? away its
decaying head.

The fact that ku sorcery is mentioned in China’s early literature,
inclines us to the belief that it may have been practised in
that country from primeval times. The role it played under the
Han dynasty must have been very considerable, if we may estimate
its dimensions from the cruelty, nay ferocity, of the measures
which were then adopted against those who indulged in it; and
these measures testify better than anything to the fact that such
malefactors constantly tortured the souls of even the most powerful
potentates with dread and terror. The Standard Histories of that
House tell of empresses, princely magnates, grandees and courtiers,
disgraced, degraded, imprisoned, and put to death on the charge
of such crime, even of a bloody rebellion entailed by such a
crusade. Generally those authoritative works call that sorcery w u k u
3^^ or ‘‘wu-ist ku”, which evidently indicates that it was deemed
to be practised in particular by w u or professional priests and
priestesses, animistic magicians, exorcists, whom the reader has so
often met in this work, and to whom we shall specially devote
Part V of this Book.

We read that the emperor Wu “in the fifth year of the Yuen
“kwang period (130 b.C.), in the seventh month, arrested the
“ makers of w u k u , and that their heads were all exposed on
“ stakes” No particulars are given of this bloody chase. But under
that same emperor there occurred another crusade, of which many
details have been preserved in different chapters of the Books of the
Early Han Dynasty. One chapter relates as follows:

“The son of Kung-sun Ho, King-shing, succeeded his father as
“ director of the Court of the Imperial Stud and Stables, so that
“ father and son both belonged to the highest dignitaries. King-shing
“ was the son of a sister of the empress, and therefore indulged in
“extravagant pomp and lawless conduct. In the Ching hwo period
“ (b.C. 92 — 89), he arbitrarily spent nineteen hundred myriads of coins
“ belonging to the army of the North ; this was discovered, and he
“ was imprisoned. At that time an imperial order was issued to arrest

the Early llan Dynasty, ch. G, 1. 6.


Books of


SORCERY CABAL IN THE IMPERIAL FAMILY.


8:29


“ one Clm Ngan-shi of Yang-ling, but this man could not be found.
“ The emperor insisted urgently upon search being made for him,
“ on which Kung-sun Ho offered to track and catch him, if he might
“ thereby redeem the guilt of his son. The emperor accepted his
“ offer, and Kung-sun Ho succeeded in catching the man. This
“ Chu Ngan-shi was one of the most influential persons in the
“ Metropolis. Hearing that Ho used him to ransom his son from
“punishment, he laughed; ‘the misfortune of that minister shall
“now involve his whole tribe!’ he said, ‘there will not be bamboo
“ enough in the southern mountains to write the accusations on,
“ which I shall bring, nor will the Yie valley supply wood enough
“for the handcuffs 1 shall cause to be made’. And from his gaol
“ he wrote letters to the emperor, in which he accused King-shing
“ of sexual intercourse with the imperial princess Yang-shih, and of
“ having by some w u offered sacrifices (to evil spirits) and impre-
“ cated evil upon the emperor. Besides he calumniously declared,
“ that when the emperor went up to Kan-ts'iien, they had buried
“ human images in the high road, using imprecations and spells.
“ Hereupon the emperor ordered some ministers to examine Ho
“judicially, and to take drastic measures against his mischief; and
“ father and son were put to death in their prisons. The calamity
“which wu-ist ku thus brought down on their family and clan was
“ set in motion by Chu Ngan-shi ; it was completed by Kiang Ch'ung,
“ so that the princesses, the empress, and the heir-apparent altogether
“ perished” b

r. Ji-ttassnaiafs A«i

K <2^- ± M 6 A f - ^ It


830


SORCERY.


This statement means that Ho’s family and clan were extermi-
nated; indeed, Sze-ma IVien’s biographical notice about Ho ends
with these words ; “ He was punished for the sexual intercourse
“ of his son King-shing with the princess Yang-shih and for having
“ made w u-ist k u , with extermination of his clan, so that he left
“no posterity” h We have now to see in what way Kiang Ch'ung
“ completed the calamity

This man was in command of the Hunnish troops, a bold,
gigantic, martial figure, a high favourite of the emperor, who pro-
bably relied much on him for his personal safety. His biographer
relates as follows; “It happened at that time, that Chu Ngan-shi
“ of Yang-ling accused the minister Kung-sun Ho and his son the
“ director of the Imperial Stud and Stables, of w u k u ; this intrigue
“ involved the princesses Yang-shih and Chu-yih, and entailed the
“ execution of Ho and his son. Later on, the emperor travelled
“ to Kan-ts^iien, and there fell ill. Kiang CHung seeing his great
“age, and feeling convinced that, should he die, the heir-apparent
“ would put him to death, with felonious intent informed the
“ emperor that the source of the devilry which caused the disease
“from which he was suffering, was wu ku. And His Majesty com-
“ missioned him to take measures against that w u k u. Now Kiang
“ Ch'ung had the ground dug up by his Hunnish wu, to seek for
“ human images; those men seized breeders of ku and nocturnal
“ sacrificers ; they saw the spectres ; they defiled the ground (with
“ sacrificial spirits) so as to make suspicious places. They continuously
“ arrested people, examined them, belaboured them with hot iron
“ tongs, and roasted them to extort confessions ; and those people
“ consequently falsely accused each other of using w u k u ; officials
“ were continually incriminated with rebellion ; those who fled or
“ were condemned and put to death amounted, from the beginning
“ to the end of that period, to tens of thousands.

“All that time, the aged emperor was suspecting his whole
“ entourage of k u practices, imprecations and spells. Nobody, either
“ among the guilty or the innocent, ventured to complain to him
“ about the wrongs inflicted. And Kiang Cheung, well acquainted
“ with the emperor’s mania, told him that there also prevailed
“ influences of k u within the Palace. First he proceeded against
“ the harem, where the ladies who enjoyed the highest imperial

Historical Records, ch. Ill, 1. 16,


SORCERY CABAL IN THE IMPERIAL FAMILY.


831


“ favour all had their turn, even the empress. Then digging for k u
“ in the mansion of the heir-apparent, he found in the ground an
‘•image of t'ung wood. The prince, fearing that he would now
“ be unable to clear himself of guilt , arrested Kiang Ch'ung ,
“ and beheaded him with his own hand, exclaiming reproachfully ;
“ ‘Slave from Chao h is it not enough that you have once before
“ created discord between your Sovereign and his son ? would you
“ do so once more!’

“How the prince was then worsted is related in the Traditions
“concerning him. Afterwards Wu was informed that Kiang ChTing
“had deceived him, and exterminated his three clans’’^ — that of
himself, of his mother, and his wife.

The heir-apparent, named Li ", had already been appointed as
successor to the throne in 122 b.C., when seven years old. Those
Traditions concerning him contain the following lines ;


1 Kiang Ch'ung was from Han-tan WW in the Chao principality, now
in Chihli province.

S S S . li, A . It if ^ S . il <14 ft Sk . © ^

■f-g. flSAA. AT-tl a «JI. <14*. a SS

tt . ^ * HH ®l' '«'■ " << “'I'

" M-


832


SOllCERY.


“In the last years of Wu’s reign the empress Wei lost the imperial
“ favour. Kiang Ch'ung intrigued against her, for there was a breach
“ between them, and also between him and the heir-apparent,
“ so that he had to fear that after the death of the emperor he
“ would be put to death by the prince. Hence, when the w u k u
“ incident occurred, Ch'ung availed hinaself of it for his felonious
“ work. At that time the emperor was of great age, and, spon-
“ taneously inclined to imagine evil, suspected the whole of his
“ immediate entourage of working with k u , imprecations and spells.
“ Drastic measures were taken ; the minister Kung-sun Ho and his
“ son, the imperial princesses Yang-shih and Chu-yih, the empress
“and her younger brother’s son Wei Khang, vassal of Ch^ang-phing,
“ were all found guilty and put to death. This is recorded in the
“ Traditions about Kung-sun Ho and Kiang CKung.

“ While taking his measures in that w u k u affair, Kiang Ch'ung,
“ well acquainted with the emperor’s suspicions, told him that there
“ prevailed an influence of k u within the Palace. He invaded the
“ Palace, penetrated even into the imperial halls, demolished the
“ throne, and dug up the ground beneath it. And the emperor
“ordered Han Yueh, vassal of Ngan-tao, as also the co-minister
“Chang Kan, and the Yellow Gate officer Su Wen, to assist Ch'ung
“ in his work. Ch'ung also went to the mansion of the heir-apparent,
“dug there for ku, and found a doll of t'ung wood in the
“ ground. The emperor being ill, had retired from the heat into
“ the Kan-ts'iien palace, and nobody was in the capital except the
“ empress and the heir-apparent. The prince then called Shih Teh,
“ his second Instructor. This grandee, being the tutor of the heir-
“ apparent, felt himself also in danger of life, and therefore gave
“the prince the following advice: ‘The late minister and his son,
“the two princesses, and Her Majesty Wei have been punished
“ with death for this affair, and now the w u and the retainers
“ have found a damning piece of evidence in the ground ; we do
“ not known whether they themselves have hidden it therein, or
“ whether it really was there, and you will have no means of
“ explaining the matter ; therefore avail yourself of your warrant :
“ arrest Ch'ung and his crew, put them in prison, and take drastic
“ measures against their felony and fraud. The emperor is ill
“ and in Kan-ts'ilen ; the empress and her officials have applied
“ to him for orders, and have not received any answer, so that
“ we do not even know whether he is alive or dead, and felonious
“ ministers are availing themselves of this occasion. Crown-prince,


BLOODY SORCERY INCIDENT IN THE CAPITAL.


833


“have you forgotten the incident of Fu-su^ of the Tsdn dynasty?’^.

“ Without any hesitation the heir-apparent followed this advice,
“and in the second year of the Ching hwo period (b.C. 91), in
“the seventh month, on the day jen-wu, he despatched some of his
“ guests as his delegates, with orders to arrest Ch'ung and the
“others. The vassal of Ngan-tao, Han Yueh, thought that those
“ delegates were deceiving him, and refused to surrender to the
“ order of the prince, wherefore they slew him. The co-minister
“ Chang Kan was wounded, but escaped with his life, and sought
“ refuge in Kan-ts'iien. That same night the crown-prince sent his
“ chamberlain Wu Tsii with a warrant into the Wei-ying palace,
“ and there, at the Ch'ang-tsdu gate, by the agency of the chief
“ attendant I-hwa, that delegate told the empress to remove the chariots
“from her stables and man them with archers, and to march out
“ the soldiers of the military arsenals, as also the guards of the
“ Ch'ang-loh palace. Further the prince issued the following order to


1 The heir-apparent of Shi Hwang, killed on his father’s death by coromand of
the famous chief minister Li SzS

±.^9.01. MS-

». if

MM,


53


834


SORCERY.


tlie body of officers: ‘Kiang Ch'ung has revolted; I have decapitated
‘•him, and scorched with fire his Hunnish wu in Shang-Iin’. His
“ adherents and guests placed themselves at the head of his parti-
“ sans, and fought the minister Liu Khiih-li in Ch^ang-ngan ; — this
“ revolt is known as that of the crown-prince. As the populace would
“ not side with him, his troops were worsted, but he escaped.

‘•The rage of the emperor was so great that all his subordinates
“ were in anxiety and fear, not knowing how to escape it . . . The
“ prince fled eastward to Hu (in the present Honan pr.), and con-
'• cealed himself in the Ts'iien-kiu hamlet. The man who sheltered
“ him was poor, and for the time being provided for the wants of
“ the prince by the sale of shoes. The prince had an old friend
“ living in Hu, and hearing that he was well-to-do, sent somebody
“ to call him, but this led to his discovery. Officials besieged
“ the house in order to arrest him, and the prince, seeing that
“ escape was impossible, entered his room, closed the door, and
“ hanged himself. A young soldier of Shan-yang, Chang Fu-ch‘ang by
“ name, kicked the door open, and one Li Sheu, secretary of the
“ prefect of Sin-ngan, quickly clasped the prince in his arms and
'• loosed him, while the owner of the house was killed in the struggle,
“ and the two imperial grandsons also met with a violent end.

“The emperor felt sorrow for the crown-prince... He rewarded
“ Li Sheu with the dignity of vassal of Yii, and Chang Fu-ch"ang
“with that of T'd. After some time, the wu kii affair was no more
“ believed in by most people, and the emperor realised that the
“crown-prince had acted under no other impulse but fear; and
“ when Ch‘e Ts'ien-tsTu had again lodged his accusations concerning
“ the wrong done to the prince, the emperor raised that man to the
“ dignity of minister, exterminated the whole family of Kiang Ch'ung,
“ and burned Su Wen on the Hung bridge”


BLOODY SORCERY INCIDENT IN THE CAPITAL.


835


The chronological list of events of Wu’s reign states, that “the
“wu ku affair commenced in the first year of the Ching hwo
“period (92 b.C.) on the eleventh day of the eleventh month;
“ the minister Kung-sun Ho was imprisoned and executed in the
“ first month of the next year, and the princesses Chu-yih and
“ Yang-shih were executed for practising w u k u in the next inter-
“ calary month. In that summer the emperor sojourned in Kan-ts'iien,
“ and it was in autumn, in the seventh month, that the men of
“ Han Yueh with Kiang Chbing dug for k u in the palace of the
“prince. On the day jen-wu of that month the prince and the
“ empress resolved to decapitate Kiang CKung, and by his authority
“ troops were brought out, which fought so fiercely in Ch'ang-ngan
“ with the minister Liu Khiih-li, that some tens of thousands of
“ people perished. It was on the day ken g-y i n (the eighth after
“jen-wu) that the heir-apparent escaped and the empress killed
“herself, and on the day sin-hai of the eighth month (the
“twenty-first after keng-yin) that the prince committed suicide
“ in Hu” b


^ A. W ^ MW

... SBli®

ffi ® ^ * lii IS ± Ch. 63, II. i

— M -i — — #jEB

S5E.


836


SORCERY.


Accordingly, no less than nine long months of bloody terrorism,
ending in a tremendous slaughter, cost some tens of thousands
their lives! This cipher certainly is large, but we do not find
one letter in history which entitles us to call it e.xaggerated. About
those bloody days, which saw the prince totally worsted and sealed
his doom, that of his mother, his sisters, and his two sons, we further
read the following particulars in the biography of the victorious
minister Liu Khlih-li, the emperor’s brother by another mother :

“In the autumn of that year, the heir-apparent Li was falsely
“ accused by Kiang Clfiung. The prince killed Kiang Cheung, raised
“ troops, and invaded the mansion of the minister, who fled with
“ the loss of his seals. The emperor was at that time in retirement
“ in the Kan-ts'iien palace, owing to the heat. The chief secretary
“ of the minister rode thither post-haste, to inform him of the state
“ of matters. On the emperor asking him what the minister had
“done, the officer said: ‘he has hidden himself, and has not yet
“presumed to bring out troops’. The emperor furiously exclaimed:
“‘What do you say? has he hidden himself, while such a turmoil
“is rife? that minister utterly lacks the character of the ruler of
“ Cheu, for did not the latter slay Kwan and Ts'ai?’ ’ He then gave him
“a sealed order for the minister, running thus: ‘For the catching
“ and beheading of rebels there are, of course, rewards as well as
“punishments; build armoured turrets on ox-cars, and do not engage
“ hand to hand with swords, lest many soldiers be killed or wounded;
“ shut fast the city-gates, lest any rebels escape’.

“No sooner had the crown-prince slain Kiang Ch'ung than he
“ raised soldiers and issued a manifesto, in which he stated that
“ the emperor was lying extremely ill in Kan-tsTlen, and depraved
“ ministers apparently were plotting rebellion. The emperor then
“ travelled from Kan-ts^iien to the Kien-chang palace, to the west
“ of the city, and called to arras the troops in San-fu (the Metropolis
“ and its environs) and the nearest districts, as also the ministers
“ and commanders in the province who enjoyed a salary up to two
“ thousand stones of rice. But the prince also commissioned men
“ for the execution of his orders, and awarded an amnesty to all


ch. a, 1. 32.

"1 Kwan and Ts‘ai were sons of king Wen, the founder of the Cheu dynasty
they rose in rebellion in 1115 b.C., but were put down by Wen’s brother, the prince
of Cheu.


BLOODY REBELLION OF A CROWN-PRINCE.


837


“the government prisoners and exiles in Ch^'ang-ngan ; he raised
“ the soldiery of the arsenals, and told his second Preceptor Shih Teh,
“ his guests, Chang Kwang etc. to divide the command among
“ themselves. And he sent Jii Hen, who was imprisoned in Ch'ang-
“ ngan, with a warrant to Ch'^ang-sui and the Siien-khiih (palace)
“to raise the Hunnisli cavalry there; but when these horsemen
“ were all equipped and assembled, Mang Thing, the Intendant of
“ the Gates and Doors, who was sent from ChAng-ngan in pursuit
“ of him, seized Jii Heu, and telling the Huns that the warrant
“ was forged and that they should not obey it, beheaded Jii Heu,
“ and marched those horsemen into Ch‘ang-ngan. The soldiers of
“ the river squadron were also called to arms, and placed under
“ the command of Shang-khiu Chhng, the chief of the State
“ Ceremonial. The warrants of the house of Han were red, but
“ as the prince was using warrants thus coloured, others with
“ a yellow yaktail upon it were now used instead, to distinguish
“them from his*.

' MU. AA

■M^WcWiC. «W. «

E II,. h *###«*#« a It#

S'.

ft

ffift

m. rnwumm. X»I4«


838


SORCEKY.


‘• The heir-apparent ordered Jen Ngan, Inspector of the army of the
“North, to march out this army; but this grandee received the war-
“ rant, closed the gate of his camp, and refused obedience to the
“ prince. Thereupon the prince led on his troops, and drove on the
“ people of the four wards by many tens of thousands. At ClTang-loh,
“at the western barrier-gate, they met with the army of the minister
“Liu Khiih-li. The hand-to-hand struggle lasted five days; tens of
“thousands were slain, and the blood flowed down into the moats,
“ but as the minister steadily received re-inforcements, the crown-
“ prince was defeated.

“He fled southward to the Fuh-ang gate of the city, and
“ managed to escape through it, for TTen Jen, offlcer for the Mainte-
“ nance of Order, whose duty it was to keep the gate closed,
“ allowed him to pass under cover of the night. The minister
“ was about to behead him for that crime ; but the co-minister
“ Pao Shing-chi said; ‘An officer of this rank, with a salary of two
“ thousand stones of rice, may not be put to death without imperial
“permission having first been asked; dare you arbitrarily behead
“him?’ The minister spared him. When the emperor was informed
“ of those things, he grew hot with anger, and sent delegates to
“ punish the culprits. They interrogated the co-minister, saying :
“‘The officer for the Maintenance of Order has allowed a rebel to
“ escape, and the law obliged the minister to behead him for it ;
“why have you on your own authority interfered with him?’ The
“co-minister, seized with fright, committed suicide. Jen Ngan of the
“ northern army was declared guilty by them for having accepted the
“ warrant of the prince and thereby proved himself a double-faced
“ traitor, and Tden Jen was declared guilty for having allowed the
“prince to pass; and they were cut asunder through the middle”'.

5E # It S A . A * A # It a # - * ?

Sit.

ai*S't.±MB5A^->TIS».P^fiSJAAA0.


BLOODY REBELLION OF A CROVYN-PRINCE.


839


Sze-ma lYien tells us, that ‘■the tribe of T"ien Jen was exter-
minated in Hing city” The historian Ch'u- also gives an account
of the fate of the two men, and says that Jen Ngan, on receiving
the warrant of the prince, did not march out his troops to take
the side of the emperor, because he preferred to await the result
of the struggle and then side with the victorious party 'k
The biography of Liu Khilh-li further contains the following
notices concerning the fate of some of the chief heroes and victims
of that terrible drama; “The emperor declared that Mang Thing,
the Intendant of the Gates and Doors who had arrested the rebel
“chief Jii Heu, as also King Kien, a young man in Ch"ang-ngan
“ who, together with Mang Tmng, had caught Shih Teh, the second
“ Instructor of the prince, had done deeds of first rate merit, and
“ that the chief of the State Ceremonial Shang-khiu ClTing had
“ bravely fought to catch the rebel commander Chang Kwang. He
“ therefore invested them with the dignity of vassals, respectively of
“ Chung-hioh, Teh, and Tu. The guests of the prince, who had passed
“through the palace-gates, were put to death; those who had in
“ the service of the prince levied troops for the rebellion were
“ punished, in accordance with the laws, with extermination of their
“ tribes, and all officials and warriors who had been pressed into the
“ service of the prince were banished to the Tun-hwang province k


fli It « S # . * * ff ^ « 0 a It ^ .

Jen Ngan from his pi'ison wrote a letter to Sze-ma Tsien, who was Ihs Iriend, to
implore his intercession, A translation of the latter's answer is given by prof. Cha-
vannes in his ‘•Jlemoires Ilistorinnes de Se-raa Tshen”, Introduction, pp. 2215 sipj.

. Historical Records, ch. 104, 1. 4,

2 Generally called Master Ch u .perhaps named CiCu Shao-sun

. By his hand many intei polations have been inserted in the Historical Records.

3 Hbtorical Records, ch. 104, I. 7.


840


SORCERY.


‘■In the next year, when Li Kwang-li, the generalissimo of
“ ’Rli-slii (Nisa), marched out at the head of an army against the
“ Huns, the minister offered him a parting meal, and accompanied
“ him to the bridge across the Wei river. Here he took leave of
^ Kwang-li, who said: ‘I hope, my lord, that you will as soon as
“ possible persuade the emperor to appoint the prince of Ch'ang-yih
“to the dignity of heir-apparent; should he become our emperor,
“would you, my lord, regret it?’ Liu Khiih-li promised that he
“ would do so. The prince of Chbing-yih was the son of the harem
“ lady Li, the generalissimo’s younger sister ; and the daughter
“ of the generalissimo was the wife of Liu Khiih-li’s son ; both
“ therefore had good reasons for desiring that appointment. At
“ that time the courtiers were so much afflicted by the proceedings
“ with regard to w u k u , that they caused a false accusation to
“ be lodged against the minister and his consort by Kwoh Jang,
“ to the effect that he had frequently dispatched w u to sacri-
“ fice to the earth-gods and to utter spells and incantations
“against their imperial lord, as also that, in concert with the
“generalissimo of ’Rh-shi, he had prayed and sacrificed, in order
“ that the prince of Ch'ang-yih might become emperor. Officers
“ proposed that the emperor should have the matter investigated.
“ Liu Khiih-li was found guilty of high-treason and violation of
“the Tao; he was by imperial command placed in a cage on a
“ cart and driven round, and thereafter cut asunder through the
“ middle in the eastern market. The heads of his wife and sons
“ were exposed on stakes in the Hwa-yang street. The generalis-
“ simo’s wife and sons were also seized. On his receiving this
“ news, he surrendered to the Huns, whereupon his tribe was
“ exterminated”


V /


FURTHER PARTICUUARS OF THE SORCERY INCIDENT.


841


The carnage in Ch^ang-ngan, then, had hy no means put an end
to the hunt for breeders of w u k u : indeed , the execution of
Liu Khiih-li with his wife and sons took place in the sixth month
of the year 90, that is, about ten months later h And that the
pursuit even then went on with unrelenting cruelty is proved by
the fact that Ch"e Ts'ien-ts'iu (see p. 834), who had been appointed
minister in the place of Liu Ivhilh-li, '•on commencing his govern-
“ mental career, became aware that the executions of the two last
“ years on account of the proceedings against the heir-apparent conti-
“ nued with increasing severity, so that all subjects lived in terror.
“ VVishing to cure the emperor of his mania and thus bring rest and
“ consolation to the people, he and his co-ministers who drew a salary
“ of two thousand stones of rice, presented to him a wish for his long
“ life, with an eulogv of his virtues and excellence, and advice to show

“benevolence and out of compassion to remit the punishments

* But the emperor gave the following answer : •

“ It is in consequence of my lack of virtue that, because the prime
“ minister and the generalissimo of ’Rh-shi plotted rebellion, the
“ w u k u calamity has spread in every direction amidst officers
“ and grandees . . . When Kiang Ch'ung had taken his measures
“ in the Kan-ts'iien palace, his men penetrated as far as the pep-
“ per rooms ^ of the VVei-ying palace, thus discovering the plot of
“ Kung-sun King-shing, and that Li Yii with his partisans intended
“to join the Huns; my ministers had revealed nothing of those
“ things to me. And now you yourself, my minister, have found k u
“ in the ground in the Orchid-terrace ; the proofs then are clear
“ and evident enough. Of the rest of those w u a considerable
“ number are still at liberty and do not cease their work ; secret
“ rebels assail my person ; k u is bred far and near ; this depresses


i liiioks of the Early Han Dynasty, cii. C, I. 33.

^ ^ ® T ti o .S ^ M ± ^ , it ^ ^

TfiJ ^ o „ „ ± 0 .

3 Tlie private apartments of the empress were so called because the plaster
ot the walls was mixed with pepper to make them warm and fragrant.


842


SORCERY.


me ; can a Iona: life be in store for me under siicli circumstances? . . .
“ Do not again make such propositions to me !’ More than a year
‘‘ after, the emperor fell ill, and appointed his son by the lady of
'• the Keu-yih abode as crown-prince” b

As this appointment occurred in the second month of the year
87 b.C. we see that the emperor still refused to stop the per-
secution of sorcerers when two years and some months had elapsed
since the rising in Ch'ang-ngan. Probably it was not even dis-
continued until his death, which took place two days after the
appointment of his successor. History further contains many pages
which depict in sober terms the hellish cruelty with which the
persecution was carried on. One chapter e. g. relates:

“The heir-apparent had married the lady Shi, who had borne
“him an imperial grandson; this prince married the lady Wang,
“ who gave birth to the (future) emperor Siien. This boy was only
“ a few months old when the w u k u incident occurred. The heir-
“ apparent with his consort, and the imperial grandson with his
“ consort Wang all lost their lives thereby, and the great-grandson,
“ though in swaddling clothes, was nevertheless to be punished, and
“ confined in the prison connected with the provincial building.
“ But Ping Kih, an officer to the Chief Justice of the Court, when
“ the measures against w a k u were also l)eing applied within that
“ building, took compassion on the innocence of the great-grandson,
“ and ordered two female exiles whose punishments had been remit-
“ ted, namely Chao Ching-khing of Hwai-yang, and Hu Tsii of the
“ city of Wei, to feed him in turn with their milk. And secretly
“he gave him clothing and food, and visited him, and showed him
“ much kindness.

“ The affair of the wu ku had lasted two years, and was not


US***®.

St 'it- iK. A A

cli. GO, II. G sefy.

2 Ch. 6, 1. 34.


rUETHEK PAETICULARS OF THE SORCERY INCIDENT.


843


“yet settled, when, in the second year of the Heu yuen period
“(87 b.C.), the emperor fell ill, and alternately resided in the
“ Ch'^ang-yang and the Wu-tsoh palaces. A seer of influences then
“ stated, that there prevailed in the prisons of Ch^ang-ngan an
“influence which might produce a Son of Heaven. The emperor
“ sent his delegates to repair to the various government gaols in the
“ capital, and all the prisoners, whether they were there for slight
“ offences or for heavy crimes, were put to death. Kwoh Jang, chief
“ member of the Board of Revenue (?), came that night to the prison
“ of the provincial building, but Ping Kih closed it, so that this
“ delegate could not enter. The great-grandson was thus saved by
“ Ping Kih, because a general amnesty was proclaimed ; on which
“ Ping Kih conveyed the great-grandson to the house of his grand-
“ mother and the lady Shi” h

And thus was saved the life of a child destined to mount the
throne in 73 b.C., after the death of Wu’s successor. From a
biography of Ping Kih in the Books of the Early Han Dynasty
we learn, that Kwoh Jang entered a complaint about his conduct;
but the emperor saw the finger of heaven in what he had done,
and promulgated a general amnesty. And thus “the inmates of
that prison owed their lives to Ping Kih only”h

After all it can hardly appear unnatural that in those bloody
years the capital actually swarmed with spies and police, specially


HaA».


. The s.Tine work, ch. 8, 11. 1 seq.

2


8 .


844


SORCERY.


appointed to hunt down sorcerous conspirators. The Standard History
states, “that chiefs of underlings and judges were appointed by
“ Wu in the fourth year of the Ching hwo period (b.C. 89),
“ who were bearers of warrants, and attached to the offices of
“ the capital. Their followers were twelve hundred in number ;
“ they arrested people engaged in w u k u , and searched for
“rebellious and seditious folks. Afterwards they were abolished”'.
W u k u cabals seem to have thereupon been of frequent oc-
currence. We read that even the son of that same Han Yueh
who assisted Kiang Cheung and was slain by the friends of the
crown-prince (page 832), was implicated in such sorcery, and
that his tribe then had a narrow escape from extermination :
“Han Yueh found ku in the ground in the palace of the heir-
“ apparent, and was slain by this prince. His son Hing , who
“ inherited his dignity, was found guilty of w u k u and was put
“ to death ; but the emperor decided, that whereas (his father) the
“ Yiu-kih general had lost his life in the imperial service, nobody
“ should be condemned along with this culprit” *, that is to say,
his family or clan should not be exterminated.

A terrible court-cabal of the same kind occurred under the Later
Han dynasty. “Yin, the consort of the emperor Hwo, was promoted
“to the dignity of empress in the eighth year of the Yung yuen
“ period (A. D. 96). Her maternal grandmother Teng Chu had
“access to the Palace apartments. In the summer of the fourteenth
“ year of that period it was reported to the Throne that the em-
“ press with Teng Chu were engaged in w u k u sorcery. The matter
“ thus being betrayed, the emperor commissioned his palace adjutant
“ Chang Shen and the chancellor Ch'en Pao to examine them by
“ various means of torture in the prisons of the Palace, and pass sentence
“ on them. The depositions of Teng Chu, her two sons Pung and
“ I, and three younger brothers of the empress, named Yih, Fu,
“ and ClPang, were collated, and they were admitted to have sacri-

of the E;irly Ilan Dynasty, eh. 19 I, 1. 13.

if. ±0. «i.ne "o.k.


ch. 33, 1. 10.


ANOTHER SORCERY INCIDENT AT COURT.


845


“ ficed with imprecations and spells, and therefore to be guilty ot
“ high-treason and heterodoxy.

“Fung, I, and Fu died in gaol under the torture inflicted on
“ them to extort confession. The empress was transported to the
“Tung palace, where she died of sorrow; her father committed
“ suicide, and Yih and Ch^ang, together with Teng Chu’s whole
“ family, were banished to Jih-nan, in the Pi-king district. And
“ her clansfolk and brothers living within and without (the capital)
“ were dismissed from office, and sent back to their villages. But
“in the fourth year of the Yung ch'u period (A.U. 110) the
“ empress-dowagev Teng promulgated an edict allowing the exiles
“ of Yin’s family to return to their old home, and prescribing
“ restitution of their property to an amount of over five millions of
“ coins *.


Under the Han dynasty there existed special laws imposing the
penalties of death and mutilation on those who caused such immi-
nent peril to the safety of the emperor and his house. In his com-
mentary upon the passage which we have quoted from the Cheu li
on page 826, Ching Khang-ch'ing, who lived in the second century,
states, that in his time “the law against rebellion prescribed that
“ those venturing to employ k u against others, or inducing people
“to do so, were to be put to death and mutilated in the market”*.
No doubt the crime was combined with theft or robbery, for,


mms..

B»«k' »f tl» Lal.n

Han Dynasty, ch. 10, I, I. 10.

. Khienliing edition

of the Cheu U, ch. 37, I. 35.


846


SORCERY.


as Yii Pao of the fourth century teaches us, ku was a source of
wealth for its breeders. “In the Yung-yang principality (in the
“ present province of Honan) there lived a family of the Liao tribe,
“ which had become wealthy by engaging for many generations in the
“breeding of ku. Afterwards one of its members married a bride,
“ whom they did not tell about those practices. Once when they
“ had all gone out, leaving her alone to take care of the house,
“ her eyes fell upon a large vase in one of the rooms. She raised
“ the cover, and seeing a big snake in the vase, boiled some water,
“ which she poured into it to kill the beast. On the return of
“ the family she told them what she had done, thereby throwing
“ them into fright and sorrow. Not long after this they all died to
“ a man of a contagious disease” *.

Thus, according to this tale, the k u turns itself against its breeders
should they harm it, or neglect to protect it properly. Yii Pao also
teaches us, that its reptiles or insects may do their work in the
shape of quite other animals, as e. (j. dogs; which cannot surprise
us, knowing that metamorphoses of animals into others are, in the
opinion of the Chinese, most common phenomena : “ In P'o-yang
“ (in the north of the present Kiangsi pr.) one Chao Sheu kept
“canine ku. Once, when he was called on by Ch'en Ch'en, six or
“ seven big yellow dogs rushed out at this man, all at once barking
“ at him. And when my paternal uncle, on coming home, had a
“ meal with Chao Sheu’s wife, he spit blood, and was saved from
“ death in the nick of time by a drink prepared from minced stalks
“ of an orange-tree. K u contains spectral beings or spectres, which
“ change their spectral shapes into those of beings of various kinds,
“ such as dogs or swine, insects or snakes, their victims thus never
“ being able to know what are their real forms. When they are
“ put into operation against people, those whom they hit or touch
“all perish”*.


AS.


PAKTICULARS ABOUT KD SORCERY.


847


“Tsiang Shi, the husband of my wife’s sister, had a hired work-
“ man in employ, who fell sick and passed blood. The physician
“opined that he was stricken by ku, and secretly, without informing
“him of it, strew’ed some jang-ho root under his sleeping-mat.
“The patient then madly exclaimed: ‘The ku which devours
“me is ceasing to spread’; and then he cried: ‘it vanishes little
“by little’. The present generations often make use of jang-ho
“ root to conquer k u , and now and then it has a good effect.
“Some think it is ‘ the efficacious herb’” k mentioned in the Cheiili
(see page S 26 ).

Ch'en Tsang-khi, the distinguished authority on Materia Medica in
the eighth century, whose writings we have already quoted many
times, was no stranger to the secrets of ku sorcery. “It was”, he
says, “a stupid characteristic of the aneients to make ku. People
“ bent on the acquisition of wealth put all sorts of insects or reptiles
“ into a jar, and when a year had passed away they opened it, to
“ find only one insect or reptile which had devoured the others to
“ the last. This one they called k u. It could render itself as invisible
“ as spectres or spirits, and when it inflicted injury on any one,
“ he died. When such an insect or reptile has killed a man by its
“ bites, it happens that it comes forth from the apertures of his
“body; and if it is then watched and caught, and dried in the
“sun, it becomes a source of evil”*.

In an interesting work on men and things of the southern
provinces in the twelfth century we find the following lines :


/P 1 5- . 4tH:3*

S iS. ffl « lit « , « ft !f« . « « 11 *

mit/i, rh. 42, 1. 31.


5^ aS P #


848


SORCERY.


“ In Kvvangsi there are two kinds of k u poison, respectively
“ killing quickly or slowly, that is to say, in a few moments
or in half a [year. If any one has incurred the dislike of some-
body, the latter treats him with respect before the eyes of the
'■ world, but secretly tries to harm him (with k u). In the years

“keng-ch'^en of the Khien tao period (A.D. 1170 — 1172) there
lived to the east of the chief city of Khin-cheu a seller of rice-gruel,
“ who bred k u poison. The secret was discovered and he confessed
“ his crime, relating that, when they made that venom at home,
“ his wife, having stripped herself quite naked and untied her
“ hair, sacrificed at night ; they then prepared a Irowl of rice-gruel,
“ upon which grasshoppers, butterflies and hundreds of insects came
“ down from above the house to eat, the things they left behind or
“ dropped being used by them as poison. Should any one wish to assure
“ himself whether a house contains k u poison, he has only to enter,
“ and if he finds no dust in it neither above nor below, it is

“iSuch a house. Whenever Li-t‘ung or Khi-f ung people set out wine
“ to regale guests, it is customary for the host to taste of it first,
“to show them that they need not have any suspicions”’.

Another author of the Sung dynasty wrote;

“ Of the k u poison mentioned in classical writings several varieties
“ exist. In Kwangtung and Kwangsi the mountaineers make it of
“ various insects and vipers, which they put into a pot or bowl to
“ devour each other till only one survives, which they then call
“ the k u. They use the poison of this animal to harm men, putting
“ it for this purpose into their wine or food. When any one is
“ affected by such poison, it produces in him cramps at his heart

“ and in his belly, and a feeling as if some beast were gnawing

“thereat; he both vomits and passes a bloody liquid resembling
“ rotten meat, and unless he places himself under medical treatment

Atr W

« . - ffi . A « « W Jfe S S J: * .

ASiS*^.

' ^ ^ la ^ M ifei- Lutij wai tai tah, ch. 10.


POISONING BY MEANS OF K U.


849


* without delay, his five viscera are devoured, and he dies. There
“ are slow and quick diseases of this kind ; the latter are acute
“and entail death in some ten days; the others may last a year,
“ during which the poison circulates through the patient’s whole
“ belly. Respiration stops, strength wanes, the bones become heavy
“ and the joints stiffen ; and no sooner does the disease manifest its
“ presence than the heart and the belly perform their functions with
“ undue haste, while all the food which the patient takes changes
“ into k u , which, slowly corroding his principal vitals and his
“ viscera, causes his death. And when he is dead, the disease
“spreads its contagion to others, thus forming a source of ku.
“ The way to ascertain its presence is to let the patient spit in
“ water, for he suffers of k u or not according as the spittle sinks
“ or floats. Or he may take a big pea in his mouth, and see whether
“ it swells up and its skin becomes loose, in which case he is a
“ victim of k u ; but he is not so if the pea does not become soft,
“ nor sheds its skin. Another method is, to place the skin of a
“ k u h bird under the patient’s sleeping-place without letting him

* know it, for k u is at work or not, according as the disease then
“ increases in intensity or not” k

Authors of the Ming dynasty, in writing of ku, generally copy
the statements of earlier authors, so that, evidently, in their time
these black art practices in the main continued in the old ways.


» 18 m ft . a ;ti * ® . # f is * . fi m * ® ®

B5^ ABif


850


SORCERY.


A few new particulars are given us by Leu Ying: “In the hilly
“regions of Kwangtung and Kwangsi the people keep in one pot
“snakes and vipers, centipedes, millipedes, frogs, and all sorts of
“insects and reptiles, to make them devour each other; the one
“that conquers all the rest is, they think, possessed of spiritual
“power (ling), and they therefore sacrifice to it. They put its
“poison into vegetables, fruits, or other food and drink, with which
“they then do harm to others, thus recklessly trying to establish
“ their own happiness and to become rich and honoured. If a man
“is hit by such sorcery, the symptoms manifest themselves in ten
“ thousand forms, and it happens that in one year many people
“ perish by it. There are families who offer incense and sacrifices
“(to that vermin) in the same way as they do to their domestic
“ ancestors. It is also called k u. The sickness caused by it the
“ world calls k u disease ; this may vary, in connexion with the clan-
“ names, according to the five musical notes, so that five varieties
“of ku are mentioned. All such things are common in depraved
“and vicious border countries, but in the capital I have seldom
“ heard of them” k

Li Shi-chen says, that “there exists in the southern regions ku
“of lizards, of beetles which lay their eggs in dung-balls which
“they roll up, and of crickets, of gold caterpillars, and of herbs,
“ as also k u which draws out life, and yet other poisons, and
“ that every region has so many remedies against them that it
“is impossible to put down all these in writing. According to
“ Ts'ai T'ao’s Tiung Jura gold caterpillars first existed in the
“ Shull region (Sze-ch'wen), and only in recent times did they


* # «i 0 » * ft A ^ « ja * A . s ,t ® « ja 0

a » * « 2 ^ ^ iH; ♦ , as RiJ m M -tfe ■

muh, sect.

2 That is to say, tlie T'ieh-wci shan tb^iing fan, probably written in the first
half of the twelfth century, for which see infra, page 808. The quotation occurs in
its si.xth chapter.


KU SORCERY IN THE SOUTHERN PROVINCES.


851


find their way into Hukwang (i. e. Hupeh and Hunan), Fuhkien,
“ Kwangtung , and Kwangsi , gradually becoming very general
“ there” h

Our knowledge of the matter is also increased by the following
notice concerning the Kwang-cheu region ; “ The Tung people (?)
“ breed poison in the following way ; on the fifth day of the fifth
“ moon (the theoretical apogee of summer heat) they collect all
“ sorts of reptiles and insects, none bigger than snakes or smaller
“than lice, and place them in a pot, to devour each other; and
“ the last that remains they keep, and let it loose against men to
“kill them. If it is a snake that remains, they speak of snake-ku;
“ if it is a louse, they call it louse-ku; it devours the five intestines
“ of the victims, who all die of the consequences. They also have
“ flying poisons, the one called ‘that which draws out life’, and
“the other ‘the gold caterpillar’; these are men-poisoning spectres.
“ Those who employ them soon become rich. The flying poison
“ of these spectres enters into food and drink, and when such cooked
“ things then enter a belly, the spectre revives therein and inflates
“the victim till he bursts, thus causing” his death. It is also called
“‘that which severs the vitals’, and when such vegetable food
“ has entered the mouth, death follows immediately. Accordingly,
“ when rich people, who occupy themselves with such practices, behave
“ as spendthrifts, then indeed severe measures may be taken against
“ them, and whereas the crime in question flourishes in every way
“and is practised very commonly, good governors and rulers are to
“ take prompt measures against it” *,


1

• Pen-ib^ao kang muh, ch. 42, I. 31.

A . 4h *e SiJ H ft , a tF M 0 a § > A at Ji .


852


SORCERY.


The animals or animal-spectres let loose by sorcerers upon their
victims are far from attacking these always in mysterious, covert
ways. *• When the scholar Chu I-jen was a clerk in Khing-yuen
'• in the province of Kwangsi, the prefect Ch^en Hi-fang engaged
“ him as his private secretary. Now it came to pass in the hottest
“ time of the year that the prefect gave a drinking-feast to his
“ colleagues and friends. On going to table, they put olf their caps
“ (on account of the heat), and saw a big frog squatting on the top
“ of Chu’s head. They knocked the beast off, which vanished as soon
“ as it came down to the ground. They drank till midnight, and
“ then the frog crawled up again on to Chu’s head without his
“ perceiving it ; they knocked it off as before, and as it fell on the
“ table, the dainties and nuts all fell to pieces, while the beast dis-
“ appeared. When Chu retired into his room, he felt an ulcer come
“ up on his head. Next day all the hair on his crown had fallen

“ out, and on the spot a swelling like a wen with a red skin

“ had appeared ; suddenly it broke, and a frog peeped out of it, its
“ two fore-legs resting on the crown of the head, and its hind legs
“ remaining hidden in the skin. They pricked it with a needle, but
“it did not die; they pulled at it, but this gave the patient into-
“ lerable suffering, and the physicians had to desist. Then an old

“gate-keeper said: ‘this is a case of ku; the beast must die if

“you prick it with a hair-pin of gold’. They tried it, and with
“ success. The frog was extracted from the head, and Chu suffered
“ nothing more ; but in his skull-bone a sunken place remained,
“ resembling a bowl with its opening upwards” h

^ ff tfi. - fS. I® if. 'll' '308-

, 48 « X S * If . tS ^ ^ . W A X ®

^ W ii , W ^ nI ^ * pa S H . ft fi & .


SOKCERY WITH SO-CALLED GOl D CATERPILLARS.


85a


Evidently there is no reason for surprise that snakes, grubs,
and such-like vermin are especially selected by the Chinese to be
let loose against people in order to poison them, or to corrode
their vitals and intestines: indeed, destructive worms and tetters,
which so frequently exist in man, must be easily identified by
simple ignorance with gnawing vermin of similar shape living outside
his body. This explains why grubs living in the ground, in trees
and in wood, as also maggots which destroy food and other things,
are often denoted by the character ^ ku. We have seen on page 827
that the physician of Tsfin declared that corn-destroying insects
were called k u. And we read in the Shuh i H, that “ towards the
“ end of the reign of the Tsin dynasty, King-cheu was visited by
“ prolonged rains, so that the paddy changed into k u , and k u
“thus harmed the people” h Finally we may remind the reader,
that snakes are prominent among the devils which infest and kill
men by feeding on their intestines (page 629).

We have seen that printed evidence concurs in pointing in
particular to the southern provinces of China as breeding-places
of ku. Now what are the gold caterpillars of which (see pp.850 — S51)
Li Shi-chen speaks in terms which show that these insects in his
time played a prominent part in this branch of sorcery?

Statements about them, wliich we have found in books, by no
means satisfy our curiosity. Our attempts to procure a specimen
in China have all been vain, our male and female acquaintances
always declaring it impossible to get one; evidently they regarded
our request to find one for us as evidence of a suspicion that
sorcery was practised by them. I had to content myself with the
information, scanty but unanimous, that a gold caterpillar is a very
venomous little snake or viper, worm, or larva of a bright yellow
colour, perhaps luminiferous or phosphorescent.

The insect is mentioned by an author as early as the eighth
century: “Ch^en Ts"ang-khi says, that ashes of old flowered silk are
“ a cure for poison of k u of insects or reptiles which eat such silk.
“ His commentator adds, that those insects are coiled up like a finger-
“ ring, and eat old red silk and flowered silk, just as caterpillars
“ eat leaves ; hence, considered in the light of the present day, those


* « . 1i Tl ■§• T 1 * •»

. Second part.


854


SORCERY.


“ insects are gold caterpillars” Thus wrote Li Shi-chen in his
great standard work on Materia Medica.

An author of the Sung dynasty asserts, “that a gold caterpillar
“ is a caterpillar with a gold colour, which is fed with silk from
“ Shull (Sze-chSven). Its ordure, put in food or drink, poisons those
“ who take it, causing certain death. It can draw towards a man the
“ possessions of such victims, and thus make him enormously rich.
“ It is extremely difficult to get rid of it, for even water, fire, weapons
“ or swords can do it no harm. Usually the owner for this purpose
“ puts some gold or silver into a basket, places the caterpillar also
“ therein, and throws the basket away in a corner of the street, where
“ some one may pick it up and take it with him. He is then said
“to have given his gold caterpillar in marriage”*.

The great object connected with the keeping of such an insect,
viz. the appropriation of the possessions of its victims, therefore
is no other than that pursued by the grandees and ladies at Court
under the Sui dynasty, who occupied themselves with scorcery by
means of cats. This is brought out also by the following tale from
a work of the Sung dynasty, which moreover, supplies us with
some more particulars on the subject: —

“Tseu Lang, a literary graduate of the highest rank at Ch'i-cheu
“ (in the present Nganhwui), was indigent, but careful about his
“ conduct. One day intending to go to the outer borough, he
“ opened his door in the cool morning hour, when his eyes fell
“ upon a small basket of bamboo, which stood outside the gate.
“ As it was not sealed or locked, he opened it, and saw several
“ dozen silver wine-cups, weighing about a hundred ounces. The
“ silence of early morning still lay upon the street, so that there
“ was nobody to follow him or lay hands on him ; so he took the
“basket home, and said to his wife: ‘these things have come hither

Ilk s ip & B rfii Pen-h'^ao kang muh, ch. 42, 1. 31.

. Kwak ic}d\ quoted

in TS, sect. ch. 191.


SORCERY WITH SO-CALLED GOLD CATERPILLARS.


855


“ without being brought by a man ; can they be a present bestowed
“on us by Heaven?’ No sooner had he pronounced these words
“ than he felt a crawling insect upon his left thigh, and saw
“there something glittering like bright gold. It was a caterpillar;
“ he plucked it off and flung it away, but in less time than it
“ took him to draw back his hand it was again on the same spot.
“ He crushed it under his foot, but though thus reduced to atoms,
“it re-appeared on his breast and belly; he flung it into the water,
“he cast it into a fire, he cut it with a knife and hacked it with
“an axe, but it could be harmed in no way whatever, and was
“everywhere, on the mats and coverlets of his bed, in his food
“and drink.

“Lang, whom the matter extremely annoyed, consulted a friend
“of his, a man of knowledge. ‘My son’, this person said, ‘you
“ have been sold ; this is what we call a gold caterpillar ; thus
“even our own village is visited by this evil! When the thing is
“still small, it can bring calamity, but when full-sized, it enters
“ into the belly and there gnaws away the intestines and the
“stomach’. This explanation enhanced Lang’s fears so much that
“he confessed he had picked up the basket. ‘I know all about the
“matter’, replied the friend; ‘if you employ the insect, you will
“become enormously rich; every day it devours four inches of
“flowered silk from Shuh, and if you gather its ordure and dry
“and pulverize it, a little quantity of the powder, placed in food
“or drink, is sure to kill him who takes it; the insect can then
“appropriate whatever it likes, and, to reward you, will bring to
“you every day the possessions of the victims’. But Lang smiled;
“‘to think that I should ever do such things!’ said he. ‘I know that


^ SB « 0f 7 tt .


856


SORCERY.


“you will not’, the friend replied, ‘but what else is to be done?’
“‘I shall put it in the basket again, with the other things that
“were therein, and throw it away, then it will do no harm’.
“‘But’, retorted the friend, ‘when some one has kept this insect and
“ been enriched thereby, he is obliged, in order to send it away, to add
“ to the things he found on it twice as much by way of interest ; he
“ is then said to give his gold caterpillar in marriage, and the insect
“departs; but should he cast it away with nothing more than the
“things he found with it, he cannot get rid of it at all. And, poor
“as you are, how would you find that interest? Verily, I pity you’.

“Upon these words Ijang lifted up his eyes to Heaven. Sighing
“and panting he said: ‘In all my life I have cultivated purity of
“ conduct ; never, I swear it, have 1 lost my purity, and yet I am
“so unhappy that such a thing should befall me!’ He went home,
“and said to his wife; ‘I must employ it, there being no way
“to get rid of it, but this I cannot do, and therefore my only resort
“is death; matters of this sort are better remitted to the life here-
“ after’. With these words he grasped the insect, threw it into his
“mouth, and swallowed it. The whole family ran to the rescue, but
“they came too late. His wife and children wailed most bitterly,
“exclaiming that he was sure to die; but some days elapsed, and
“no evil befell him. He ate and drank as usual, and a month
“later nothing had happened. Finally he died at a great age”*.


1

aaskw.wmti'SZM^^tummz.mzm


GOLD CATERPIUiARS IN POPULAR LORE. 857

Our knowledge of the natural history of the gold caterpillar is
enlarged a little by an author who assures us that it may also be
found within precious stones. “ A man in Tan-yang, on recovering an
“inscribed stone tablet from under a pile of stones, found a round
“pebble. He ground and polished it, thus discovering that it
“consisted of two layers, one fitting upon the other. Grinding
“it off to the size of a fist, he split it up, and out came an insect
“resembling a grub, able to wriggle. As nobody could distinctly
“make out what kind of thing it was, he threw it away; but
“afterwards he was told, that men, if greedy of wealth, can do no
“ better than get a gold caterpillar out of a stone and breed it up,
“precious things then coming to him spontaneously”*.

So much for written information about gold caterpillars. It is
far from satisfying our curiosity. It will not be superfluous therefore
to subjoin some notions prevailing on the subject among the people
at the present day, collected especially from the lips of women and
matrons in Amoy and the surrounding districts.

A gold caterpillar is a true Jack-of-all-trades. It can spin, weave
and sew, plough, sow and reap, in a word, it turns its hand to
work of whatever kind with a most wonderful display of de.xterity.
In the house where it is kept, women merely have to stretch a
few warp threads on a loom, to find the whole web finished to
perfection before the next morning dawns. If its master is a farmer,


». SB Ba

Sn4!t, gK#*? ¥

mmmm , a work from the Sung dynasty, in ten chapters, by Pih Chung-
siiin ^ .

>h. mm mm.

^ ■> Wl sell sie.n or “Threads of five Colours”,

two chapters of jottings and tales from an unknown author who probably lived
under the Sung dynasty. T S, sect. ch. 191.


858


SORCERY.


he has to thrust his spade into the ground only once or twice, to
find in less than no time the whole field ploughed, sown and
harrowed. Thus the man or woman, who has a caterpillar at com-
mand, soon becomes wealthy. But the owner must feed and regale
the insect carefully, and constantly pour scoldings and abuse upon
it, lest it turn lazy and impudent, and in the end renounce obe-
dience and submission altogether; or, to put it in words of our
own, to compel it to an implicit obedience it must be intimidated
by means of spells, fascination, and songs of sorcery.

Such assertions are believed generally by men and women of the
lower class, to whom nothing wonderful is incredible. Superstition
enforces also an implicit belief in the general tale that the
insect from time to time demands a human victim to prey on,
and is formally allowed by its keeper to attack one. It then slowly
devours that victim to the bones and skin, nay, there are rumours
, broad of its having left nothing more than the hard skeleton.
'\Vomen tell how an owner of a gold caterpillar occasionally decoys a
victim into his house and into the room where the insect is kept,
there to let him be a prey to its murderous attacks, and how many
a child or adult thus disappears mysteriously; no very rare occur-
rence, in fact, in a country where trade in female slaves is in a
thriving state.

But, like so many crimes, these murders are often punished by
august Heaven, should the soul of the victim denounce the per-
petrator before its throne. Breeders of k u and caterpillars may
therefore expect never to beget any male descendants, or, if they
have any, to see them die. This severest of all celestial punishments
may be accelerated by a flash of lightning from a serene, cloudless
sky, destroying the sinner, his family and house, together with his
caterpillar or vermin-pot.

Public opinion further argues, that fear of such vindicatory inter-
vention on the part of the highest power in the Universe over-
balances in the end the sorcerer’s passion for wealth, rendering
him anxious to rid himself of the caterpillar. We have seen that
he can do so by placing it somewhere in the street, hidden under
such things of value as may entice another to take it to his home.
Many keep a caterpillar in an invisible shape-, it is, in fact, possible
to lodge its spirit in an incense-burner filled with ashes of incense-
sticks which the owner puts in from time to time as a sacrifice to
the beast. When a censer is seen abandoned in a street, in some
obscure corner, in a field, or between boulders, or in any other


SORCERY PUNISHED BY LAW.


859


unfrequented spot, people are immediately ready to conclude that
it has been put there by some sorcerer or sorceress, anxious to be
rid of a caterpillar.

In south-east Fuhkien few spectres are known so well by the
people and believed in so generally as the gold caterpillars. In
Amoy and its surroundings it is called /1 /m and heard of by

old and young, and it is probable that it would be difficult to
find a woman there who does not deem the whole male and female
world, except herself and a few others, capable of practising witchcraft
with it, should it suit their purpose. There is accordingly always
some danger in putting up in a little frequented inn. Should cir-
cumstances bring any one there, prudence warns him to smear some
mud off his feet on the wall, and see whether it disappears, the
presence of a gold caterpillar being in this case indubitable; the
spectre indeed is bent on cleanliness, and wipes away all coarse
dirt it sees, thus readily betraying its presence. In this way it is
explained why in so many inns the walls look as muddy as even the
floor, but we think that the general uncleanliness of the people
may better account for this fact.

The Code of Laws mentions a sentence, passed by the Throne
on appeal in 1792 against “a commoner of the Yung-fuh district
“ (in Kwangsi), named Hu Kien-fang, who, giving ear to the
“ instigations of one Ch'en 'Ling-chang, had lodged a false accusation
“ against Liao Chung-hang, stating that this man had induced
“ Loh Fah-ts^iien and others to let loose k u upon his mother,
“ madam Hii, born of the Liu family, which lady had thereupon
hung herself with fatal result” k The Code devotes two special
titles to the subject of sorcery, thus proving that the high govern-
ment of China is to the present hour not less a slave to the belief
in its reality and dreadful consequences than the humblest among
its subjects. Like the laws of the Han dynasty (see p. 845), it
threatens with punishments of great severity those who venture to
rear such noxious breed or have it in their houses. “ Whoever
“ (procures or) makes, (hides) or keeps k u poison which may serve
“ for destruction of human life, as also he who instructs or tells
“ others to do so, shall be decapitated, (even though he has not yet
“ actually used it to kill). The property of the maker or breeder

Ch. 16, the sixth title.


860


SORCERY.


“ shall be forfeited to the magistrates ; his wife, children, and all
'• those living in his house, even though ignorant of the matter,
“ shall be banished for life to the distance of two thousand miles
*■ to remain there for ever. If the k u poison has poisoned a person
“ living in the same house, the parents and wife of the victim, his
“ concubines, sons and grandsons, if ignorant of the preparation of
“the ku. are not liable to be sent into exile; (those among them
“who knew of it shall be banished, even if they were injured bv
“ the poison).

“And each chief of the ward or village, when privy to the crime
“ and failing to give information of it to the authorities, shall
“ receive one hundred blows with the long stick, but he shall not
“ be punished if he was ignorant thereof. He who informs against
“ and arrests the culprit shall be rewarded by the authorities with
“ twenty ounces of silver”

These laws can boast of a respectable age, as we find them in
the Code of the Ming dynasty * in exactly the same terms, save
for the bracketed interpolations. The laws of the Yuen dynasty
prescribed the condemnation of k u breeders in these emphatic
words: “those who make ku poison and injure men with it shall
be put to death” h It is worth notice that the Code of the present
dynasty and that of Ming place the quoted articles immediately
before that which threatens with decapitation the poisoning of men
with vegetable or mineral substances; evidently then legislators ot


1 The reasoning is. of course, that those relations ouaht to have known of the
matter and checked it. Thus the Law compels every one to be constantly watchful
within his own domestic circle against such abominable practices.


^ ffi] ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ = ^

H # W In 'K ^ ’• xS: ^ ^

% “on homicide by keeping ku and making ku poison”.

3 See also in chapter 129 of the Ta Ming hwui Hen.

^ iS: # # . History ofthe Yuen Dynasty, ch. 104, 1.7.


REMEDIES AGAINST K C.


861


both dynasties considered k u to be the most common and typical
mode of poisoning.

Among the notes inserted in that same title of the Code of Laws
for instruction of the mandarins when administering justice we
find one which sheds a few rays of new light upon our subject.
“ The writings studied by us mention numerous species of k u
“ poison, but, generally speaking, compounders of poisonous k u have
“ k u of snakes, of geese, of babies, of gold caterpillars, and other
“matter. When a man is poisoned with ku, he is sure to die
“ within a fixed time, but his time may also come after some years.
“ More poisonous than any other is k u of gold caterpillars ; it inevit-
“ ably kills those who are injured by it. It occurs in Fuhkien,
“ Kwang-tung and Kwangsi, Sze-chVen and Kweicheu” h

Such ku “of babies” may perhaps be the sorcery with which
the next chapter will occupy us. About ku “of geese” we know
nothing; we have never found any reference to it in a book, nor
ever caught a word concerning it from the lips of the people.
May we venture to suggest that geese, which greedily devour vipers,
M'orras and grubs, are fed on such reptiles and insects, and their
souls then are induced by means of spells or other expedients to
poison enemies or otherwise to afflict and kill them?


Remedies for ku.

The terror, with which ku sorcery has filled the hearts of the
Chinese of all ages, has caused them to invent many quack medi-
cines and prophylactics to annul its effects. All the leading thera-
pists declare these effects to be merely infection with “poison” *,
against which antidotes of any kind may be efficacious. The long
list of antidotes which the Chinese possess cannot, however, be
reviewed here, but only the remedies which are used against ku
poison in particular may occupy our attention.

Ku or wu ku being very ancient in China, medical authors

li^rast


2 Tuh


862


SORCERY.


at an early date occupied themselves with the art of curing its effects.
In the medical book ascribed to Koh Hung we read these lines:

“•A patient hurt by ku gets cutting pains at his heart and belly
“ as if some living thing is gnawing there ; sometimes he has a
“ discharge of blood through the mouth or the anus. If he is not
“ forthwith medically treated, it devours his five viscera, which
“ entails his death. To discover whether it is k u or not, let the
“ patient spit into water ; if the spittle sinks, it is k u ; if it floats,
“ it is not.

“The recipe for discovering the name of the owner of the ku
“ poison is as follows : take the skin of a drum, burn it, a small
“ piece at a time, pulverize the ashes, and let the patient drink
“them with water; he will then forthwith mention the name;
“then bid this owner forthwith to remove the ku, and the patient
“will recover immediately. Again place some jang-ho leaves secretly
“under the mattress of the patient; he will then of his own accord
“immediately mention the name of the owner of the ku”b

After this introductory wisdom, Koh Hung mentions a series of
general antidotes to cure sufferers of ku and other poison, also by
making them vomit. His magical method for discovering the evil-
doer is recommended also in nearly the same words by Sun Sze-moh.
This author moreover says: “There are people who mix the ku
“ ingredients with snake-saliva, and then put them into the food
“ or drink of others, thus giving them belly-disease ; this is a method
“ which causes death after several years. Medicines for curing its effects
“ exist for each special case. That method is practised among the
“mountaineers in Kiang-nan; this fact cannot be doubted” ^


. Pi kill fs'ten km yao fang, ch. 74, § 4.


THE CENTIPEDE A DESTROYER OP SNAKES.


863


Having stated that a man can be poisoned in a thousand different
ways, our learned doctor goes on to say: “This is the reason why
“he who leaves his house should always carry about him ‘male
“yellow’, musk, and ‘animated cinnabar’, which are the chief me-
“ dicines for averting evil ; neither the hundreds of kinds of k u ,
“ nor any cat-spectres, nor any fox-devils or spirits of old men and
“ beasts will then ever presume to touch him. To people who would
“ nourish their vital spirits it is of great moment to bear these
“things in mind”*.

In a list of recipes following on these pieces of sage advice, there
are two ingredients which attract attention, viz. centipedes, and so
many m ei - or portions of spotted or striped cats These animals have
to the present hour held their place in the Pharmacopoea as destroyers
of poison and k u.

The centipede (4||1 tsih-tsii, or ^ ^ wu-kung) simply
owes the above attribute to an old belief that it is a destroyer of snakes.
There may be truth in this belief, seeing that snakes may be small
and Chinese centipedes large, especially in the south, where I have
seen specimens almost two feet in length. There are there fabulous
centipedes of enormous length. The belief in the snake-destroying
virtue of the insect may, however, simply come from a passage in
the waitings of Liu Ngan, which is to this eflPect : “ The moon
“ illumines the whole world under heaven, and yet it is eclipsed
“ by a toad (believed to dwell in it); — a snake ascending to
“ the sky and coursing through the fogs yet is endangered by a
“ tsih-tsii” b A tsih-tsii may have meant some other animal in
the time when Liu Ngan wrote, but posterity has simply accepted
it as a centipede.

The writings of Koh Hung teach us that in his time the belief
that centipedes were snake-killers had given them a position in
Chinese life as charms against snakes. “People in the southern
“countries always when they enter the hills carry a bamboo tube


Hung lieh kiai, ch. 17.


864


SORCERY.


“ with living centipedes, for when these feel themselves in the neigh-
“ bourhood of snakes, they forthwith stir in the tube ; and if the
“ traveller then looks attentively into the shrubs, he is sure to see
‘•a snake. Even a snake of a chang in length and more than a
“ span thick may, if perceived by a centipede and kept in restraint
“ by its breath or influence, die immediately. If a snake perceives
“ a centipede in a cliff, it will, even if it is the larger, flee to the
“ deep bottom of the brook in the ravine, where the centipede will
“ keep it in restraint by merely remaining afloat on the surface ;
“ and if then we see something which is quite blue and as large
“as the flat top of a ceremonial cap dive right out into the water
“ towards the snake, this will immediately come to the surface and
“ die. Hence it is that the southerners pulverize centipedes and
“treat snake-bites therewith, which then are forthwith cured” b
The belief in centipedes as destroyers of snakes may be further
illustrated by the following tale from a book of the eleventh century:
“ My grand-uncle has seen somewhere in the country a centipede
“ chasing a big snake with great velocity. The snake shot across a
“ brook, but the centipede followed it, and the snake, knowing
“ itself inferior in strength and unable to escape, turned round,
“and with wide-opened jaws awaited its pursuer. The centipede at
“ once ran into its mouth, and in a moment the snake was dead ;
“ the centipede then bored its way through the belly, and came
“ out through the flank. They cut open the snake, and found its
“ bowels gone”

# -ft R >!> . tiB tk M H ml, A

A tni ^ . it T A * M tt g . * aj SB 5E .

® A 0 1ft: Jfe ^ 42- ^ a# i! ifc ■

tsze, ch. 4, or sect. 17, •

ttftSBUJ. . Mill khoh hwui si


THE CENTIPEDE A DESTROTEll OF KU POISON.


S65


As a destroyer of k u , we see the centipede appear in writings
as early as the fourth or fifth century, at least if the following tale,
occurring in the collection of T"ao Tsfien, is not an interpolation
of a later period : “ T"an-yiu was a man who walked in the path
of salvation, a Qramana of a pure, ascetic mode of life. There
“was in the district of Yen a family which employed ku, so that
“ none of those who partook of their food or drink escaped without
“ vomiting blood and dying. T"an-yiu called on them, and the master
“ of the house placed food before him ; but T'an-yiu had recourse
“ to his usual spells and vows, and — a pair of centipedes more
“ than a foot in length jumped out of the dish and ran off. He ate
“ his fill, and went home, quite comfortable and without any ill
“ consequences” h

As a pharmaceutical ingredient, the centipede mostly occurs in
apothecary’s shops in a dried state. Its segments are grated to
powder and drunk with water, together with other medical matter;
sometimes they are roasted before being pulverized. The legs are
removed as useless. If the poLson produces boils and ulcers, the
application of such powder in ointment of hogs’ lard is recom-
mended, and so are ablutions with water or oil in which a centipede
has been steeped for several days.

Ingredients obtained from other snake-killing or snake-devouring
animals are, as we might have anticipated, likewise valued as medi-
cines against ku. So e. g. musk, because, as Koh Hung says, “the
musk-deer as well as the wild pig devours snakes” h Musk is
used internally in a large number of antidotes, and is, moreover,
strongly recommended as an ingredient for amulets and medicines
for various demoniacal diseases. Cats, too, prey on snakes, toads
and frogs; no wonder then that (see p. 803) Sun Sze-moh recom-
mended, as a remedy against ku, small pieces of spotted or striped


, a work in ten cliapters by P'^eng Shing of the eleventh

century. T.S, sect. , ch. 182 and 184,

2

3 P'uh-tszc, ch. 4, or sect. 17.


55


866


SORCERY


cats. Pharmacologists have quite a series of recipes into the com-
position of which everything that can be got from cats may enter
as chief operative ingredient. The Wei sheng i 1-ien fang Easy
and simplified Recipes for the Protection of Life, says: “As a
“ preservative against k u poison, flesh of cats must be eaten from
“an early age; then ku cannot do any harm”*. “Are we”, asks
Li Shi-chen on mentioning this passage “ to think here of k u

“ mentioned by the Books of the Sui Dynasty as a barbarous cat-

“ spectre practice?”^ (see p. 610). This famous medical man evidently
suspected here an application of some simiHa similihus method.
Further he wrote: “Bone from a cat’s head cures demoniacal

malady, ku poison, and pains in the heart and belly”

The reptiles and insects used in k u sorcery devour each other ;
consequently, ku poison too is destroyed by those creatures. Ch'^en
Tsang-khi wrote : “ In general reptiles and insects, which are used
“to make ku, are cures for ku; therefore, if we know what ku
“ is at work, we may remedy its effects. Against k u of snakes
“that of centipedes should be used, against ku of centipedes that
“of frogs, against ku of frogs that of snakes, and so on. Those
“ varieties of k u , having the power of subduing each other, may also
“ have a curative effect”*. The reader sees that this theory is simple;
but it seems not so simple to discover which or what animal has
caused the poisoning. Medical men do not tell us how to do that.
The conviction that Heaven in his righteous wrath sometimes
strikes sorcerers and their ku with his thunder, has created the
belief that powder of so called “thunderbolt stones”® or “thunder-
nodules”^ may remove the effects of ku through the natural pas-


. Its author, Hu Yung flourished as an officer

in the first half of the fifteenth century. See hi.s biograpliy in the History of the
Ming Dynasty, ch. 160.

^ mull.

ch. 51, 1, 1. 53.

^ ^ Me ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ '/p ■ Pen-ls'^ao kancj muh, ch. 42, 1.31.


REMEDIES FOR KU POISOK.


867


sages. Those stones were stated by Ch'en Tsang-khi to be obtained
from Lei-cheu the “Thunder Department”, which is the most
southerly projecting peninsula of Kwangtung province, opposite
Hainan island, as also from some vallies in Ho-tung ^ or the present
province of Shansi, where they lie at a depth of three feet in grounds
which lightning has struck. They possess various shapes, but mostly
resemble axes and knives, the latter with two holes. Their colour
is a veined blue or black. Some opine that they are products of
human art. According to some writers, there exist also “thunder-
hammers”^, weighing several pounds, “thunder-awls” and “thunder-
axes” supposed to have been used by the God of Thunder to split
up things; further there are “thunder-rings” lost by that god,
and “ thunder-pearls” ®, which dragons have dropped from their
mouths, and which may thoroughly illuminate a whole house
during the night; etc. Perhaps those objects may be the relics
of an age of stone.

A good medicine for ku poison is leek-juice mixed with spirits,
which will make the patient vomit some ophidian creature. The
vermin may also be expelled by means of efficacious magic spells,
purporting to bully and intimidate it; a great number have been
invented to this end, and we have seen that they were already
used under the ancient Chen dynasty (p. 826). A good means to
protect one’s self against k u , professedly practised by people in
Fuhkien, Kwangtung and Kwangsi when putting up in an inn, is
to tap the inn-keeper on his back or shoulder, and ask him whether
he has ku in his house; this done, the thing will not be set to
work, as it is tolerably certain that whoever knows about ku will
also know the means to defeat it.

We have already stated (p. 849), that ku poisoning may be dis-
covered by means of the spittle of the patient, and by peas placed
in his mouth, or by an egg of a kuh put in his bed. Victims
may be recognized by a glare on their heads, which, when
touched by another, emit sparks. The diagnosis may also be made
by the patient himself by application of roots or leaves of a ginger-
like herb, called jang-ho, which if hidden in his bed without
his knowing it, will make him mention the name of the sorcerer.


' Stti' 2 fsr:K-


7 Pcii-fyao kang muh, ch. 10, 1. 44.


.a

0


868


SORCERY.


who then can be asked or compelled to stop his odious work
That plant is generally surmised to be the “ efficacious herb” by
means of which certain officers of the Cheu dynasty were directed to
combat the dangers of ku (cf. p. 847).

Although gold-caterpillar sorcery does not seem to be actually
distinguished from k u , some special preventives of its effects are
prescribed. One of these is the dried skin of a hedgehog, which,
as I have been assured in China, is kept for the purpose in many
houses. An author of the twelfth century relates, “that the prefect
“ of Yiih-lin told him that he had witnessed in the district of
" Fuh-ts'ing (in Fuhkien) a process in a case of poisoning with a
“ gold caterpillar. The sub-prefect of that district had been unable
“ to find any trace of guilt until some one had advised him to
“ introduce a pair of hedgehogs into that house, as then the insect
“ would certainly be caught, because it is afraid of hedgehogs. These
“ beasts had entered, and the caterpillar did not stir; yet though
“ it lay concealed in a fissure of the wall under a bed, it was
“drawn by the two animals out of its shelter” F

ClFen Shi-toh also named Yuen-kung ^ in the later years of
the seventeenth century compiled a work in six chapters on the
healing art, in which he laid down much wisdom professedly
borrowed from the most ancient medical sages, and wrote therein :
“Take a weight of three ts'ien of thunder-pills, powder them, and
“ mix the powder with a little quantity of white alum ; then, when
“ a gold caterpillar appears, drop a little of the powder upon it,
“ and it will change forthwith into a red, bloody fluid. When the
“Shell tao (the Tao or Universal Order represented by the shen)
“ flies into a passion and is going to cause misfortune, then,
“ when it is heard in the sky, forthwith drop some of that powder
“ while looking up towards the place whence the noise is heard ;
“the Shen tao will undoubtedly give vent to a great curse, but


If 41 A**.


shun tan


lUi


pj^’


work in six chapters treating of matters


between the years 903 and d 130, in which period the author, Ts^ai T'ao-


lived.


PROTECTION AGAINST K U AFFORDED BT FOWLS.


869


“ will calmly pass away, and never return. When any one obtains
“ the insect, he is sure to amass riches ; it comes from the air and
“ he feels exhilarated, sacrifices to it in a cupboard or a drawer,
“ worships it, and prays to it the whole day; but in the long run
“his face assumes the same gold colour which the caterpillar has;
“ he takes medicines, but in vain ; later on his belly swells up, as
“ if he were attacked by dropsy. Such practices flourish especially
“ in Shull (Sze-ch'wen). hie who gets a caterpillar does not as a
“ rule live for five years, and even after his death the caterpillar
“ does not go away, but passes over to his sons and grandsons,
“sometimes causing the destruction of his family” b

Protection against k u is also given by domestic fowls, because
they betray its presence. It is, indeed, averred that those birds show
a remarkable tendency to fly away wherever k u is kept. This peculiarity
was known as early as the ninth century to Twan Clbing-shih,
who wrote; “If fowls fly away without evident reason, there is
“ku in the house, and when they do not come down from the
“ trees in the daytime, the wife or the concubines have incestuous
“schemes”^. The cock, as we shall see in Chapter V of Part IV,
is feared by spectres; therefore piotection against ku is afforded by
its head, affixed over the house-door. This conception may, however,
also be due to the circumstance that fowls prey on grubs, insects,
and small reptiles.


I# 1; * as * .«! It s >t> ^

5E . iB a * It, , X IS f- » . ft tt « PI 2

J|jj^ . S/lih shift iitih lull ap. T S, sect. , ch. 347.

• Yiu-yaiig tsah Istt, ch. "16.


CHAPTER III.


INFLICTION OF EVIL BY MEANS OF HUMAN SOULS.

It is not only by means of their own souls and the souls of
animals that sorcerers practice their cruel art; they can further
do so by means of the souls of other men. We have already seen
the Code of Laws refer to ^ or “ku of babies” (seep. 861),

coincidently with ku by means of snakes and gold caterpillars, and
may infer herefrom that the former is a practice of the same nature,
that is to say, it consists in letting loose human souls or human
soul-substance upon victims.

The Code having thus directed our attention to this form of
sorcery, we are naturally drawn to further search in its pages,
to obtain yet more information on the subject. In fact we find
in it, immediately before the title on k u , another, bearing on
'‘plucking out vitality, and chopping or cutting men” which,
according to an explanatory note, “ means to steal the ears, eyes,
viscera, internal organs, etc. from a living person, and chop or
cut off his limbs and other parts. These crimes are of the same
“ nature as simple dismemberment, but the perpetrator of dis-
“ memberment has no ulterior object beyond murder, and the other
“ crime is murder followed by sorcery for the purpose of decoying
“ others, so that it is considered to be peculiarly serious” *.

Another official comment says:

“Those who occupy themselves with sorcery either steal away
“ men’s ears or eyes, or chop off their hands or feet ; they then
“ take a human image made of wood or modelled in clay, and


The seventh title of chapter 26.

M icm ^ It AiiaB.it


HUMAN SOULS IN EMPLOY OF SORCERERS.


871


“ after laying all these things on the ground, perform over them
“ such sorcerous magic as will cause them to perform functions.
“ Others obtain the year, month and hour of the nativity of a
“ living man, and (with the aid thereof) decoy him into a mountain-
“ forest, there to rob him of his vital breath and catch his two
“souls (his hwun and his p^oh), in order to make these their
“ spectral servant. In times gone by such practices prevailed in
“Yunnan, Kweicheu, Kwangtung and Kwangsi. And still more
“ frequently it occurs that a man’s viscera or chief internal organs
“ are cut out, or a pregnant woman’s fruit, or the virginal red
“ matter of some unmarried maid, or some other thing of the
“ kind, in order to have ingredients for sorcery. All such things
“fall under ‘plucking out vitality and chopping or cutting’” i.

In these lines we have practically all that is required for the
comprehension of this form of sorcery. The instrument of the sorcerer
is a human soul, or some portion of it, obtained by appropriating
certain parts of the body of a living person, but especially such
organs as are deemed to be more especially impregnated with his
mental or vital power. An image is then provided for his soul to
settle in, and the latter totally subdued byj the sorcerer to his
will by charms and spells, formulae of enchantment, and actual ill-
treatment of the image, in consequence of which it is obliged
obediently to do all the mischief he ordains. Female sexual organs
or secretions are selected for such sorcery since they are con-
nected with procreation, and consequently with life and vitality
assimilated with the soul.

Another part of the running commentary of the Code reads
as follows :

“ To pluck out life or chop and cut a man means to cause death
“ to a living person and take away the openings of his senses, in
“ order to perform black magic therewith. It happens that by means
“ of magic and black art the hour, year and month of a man’s


TtiLzm,


872


SORCERY.


“ birth are obtained, in order to decoy him by means thereof unto

some unfrequented spot deep in the mountains, there to murder
“ him and cut off pieces from his body, or to cut out his five
‘•internal organs and his vitality, or to draw the souls (the hwun
“and the p'oh) out of him, in order to turn them into a spectral
“servant. The ‘spectre- vines’, for sale nowadays in Kwangtung
“ and Kwangsi , Honan, Fuhkien and other regions , consist of
“ such things” b

As all such crimes constitute homicide followed by sorcery, they
are punished by the Law more severely than simple murder.
“ Whosoever plucks the life out of a man, or mutilates and cuts
“ him, (whether the victim be killed thereby or merely wounded)",
“ shall (if he is the principal culprit) be slowly carved to death
“ with knives. His possessions shall be allotted judicially to the
“ family of the murdered person, and his wife, children, and the
“ inmates of his house, even though they knew nothing of the
“ matter, shall be banished for life to a country two thousand miles
“ off, without permission to return when an amnesty is proclaimed.
“ His accomplices (having contributed to the perpetration of the crime)
“ shall be beheaded, (but if they did not actually do so, they shall
“ be sentenced according to the law with regard to conspiracy to
*■ murder, remission of punishment being allowed).

“Should the culprits have begun to carry the crime into effect,
“ but not yet have inflicted any wounds, the (principal) offender
'• shall be beheaded, and his wife and children banished for life to
“ the distance of two thousand miles, while the accomplices (who
“ have actually co-operated) shall receive a hundred blows with the
“long stick, and be sent into perpetual exile to the distance of three
“ thousand miles.

“And if the chiefs of the ward or village have known about the
“ crime and have not revealed it, they shall be beaten with one
“ hundred blows with the long stick ; but if they have been ignorant
“ of it, they shall not be liable to any punishment. And those who


nmm.

Sin*.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF HUMAN BODIES.


873


“ have given information of the matter, or laid hands on the perpe-
“ trators, shall be rewarded by the authorities with twenty ounces
“ of silver”

A by-law runs; “If any person who committed the crime of
“ plucking out life and chopping or cutting, has cognates or agnates
“ who confessed or denounced the crime, or placed the perpetrator
“ under arrest and delivered him to the magistrates, then, if the
“ crime was begun and the chief perpetrator is not acquitted, his
“ wife, children and inmates who would have to be punished
“ together with him, shall be exempted from punishment according
“to the Law if they took a part in the denunciation”®.

The presence of such laws in the Code clearly attests the general
prevalence in China of this crudest of all forms of sorcery during
the reign of the two dynasties under which this Code was in force.
The Mongol house of Yuen, which preceded them, also had a law
providing against it; “Whosoever plucks life out of a man or
“ dismembers him, with intent to procure a spectre to sacrifice to,
"shall be slowly carved to death with knives; his family possessions
“ shall be forfeited, and all the inmates of his house, although
“ ignorant of the crime, shall be banished to distant regions. If the
“ crime was begun, however, without murder of the victim, the
“ case shall be treated as one of robbery with violence ; and should
“ no wounds have been inflicted, and nothing of value appropriated,
“ the punishment shall amount to 107 blows with a long stick
“ and banishment for three years. And if the crime was merely


’ A# B«W. -t] it

» B flf Bd * « A # , [ f i ^ ^

. See the same article, save the parts within brackets,
in the Code of the Mine: dynasty; cf. Ta Mini/ hivui lien, ch 129.

2 H » 4 W ffl 9 A in ^ a B -t S , * It iS Ji|
i


874


SORCERY.


“ plotted and not yet begun, the number of blows shall be 97,
“ and the banishment be for a term of two years and a half. The
“ man who was to be assassinated, and accomplices who denounced
“ the crime or arrested the culprits, shall receive the family posses-
“sions of the culprits; and if the arrest has been made by one to
“ whose duty it belonged, he shall receive one half thereof” *.

In order to convey to the reader some more knowledge about
this branch of sorcery, we think we can not do better than bring
to his notice the following long story :

“ Wang Pih, also named Liang-fu, a man of Ts'in-cheu, had
“ been appointed Governor of Lung-sha, after having travelled for
‘‘ the purpose of study through north Yen-ngan. Having resigned his
“ office, he retired into private life and practised medicine.

“In the second year of the Chi ching period (A.D. 1342), a
“crafty wu, named Wang Wan-li, practised divination and sooth-
“ saying with his brother’s son Shang-hien in the bazaar of Lung-sha.
“ In the winter of that year, in the eleventh month, Wang Pih
“visited him, and, discontented with the verdict of the oracle given
“ by that man, made the mistake of reprimanding and insulting
“ him severely. This greatly roused W’an-li’s anger, and he incited
“ on a spectre against Pih to disquiet him.

“That night Pih was sitting down studying the chapter on the
“ Metal-bound Coffer (of the Shu king'), when suddenly he heard
“ outside the window a dreary whistling voice. He opened the door
“ to see who was there, but though the moon shone brightly in the
“ empty courtyard, he perceived nobody. The next day in broad
“ daylight a wailing voice sounded at the gate, accompanied by
“complaints of having suffered wrong. Pih called a spectre-seer to
“ lay the ghost, but this man could not master it.

“Pih now spoke: ‘How can it possibly be that my medicines
“ have killed you ! therefore it is not I who have to redress the
“wrong under which you suffer’. Upon which the spectre said:


. Sect. A . See also the History of the Yuen

Dynasty, ch. 104, 1. 7.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF HUMAN BODIES.


875


“ ‘I have convinced myself that of the many men there are, only
“ you, sir, can be relied on ; should you be really willing to redress
“ the wrongs under which I suffer, you must call together some
“ ten elders to attend as witnesses’. Pih promised to do so, and
“ when they had assembled, the spectre told its story in the fol-
“ lowing terms : —

“ ‘I am a girl of the Cheu family in Blackbrook, in the Eung-cheu
“ department. My father’s name is Hwo-khing, and the surname
“ of my mother is Chang. At my birth the moon stood W. S W.
“ by W., for which reason my name is Moon-in-the west. When I
“ had reached my sixteenth year, my mother fell sick ; my father
“ called in Wang Wan-li to divine her condition, and thus I became
“ acquainted with that man. One hundred and five days after my
‘•mother’s death, on the day ping-ch'en of the ninth month of
“the third year of the Chi yuen period (1337), when my father,
“ being drunk, was lying down to sleep and my brother was out
“ collecting firewood, that man, while 1 was walking up and down
“ in the shade of the wall, wrought upon the hour and day of my
“ birth with bewitching spells in such wise that I became totally
“ absent-minded and stood with staring eyes, unable to utter a
“ word. In this condition Wan-li took me upon his back to a
“willow-grove, and tied me with my back against a tree; he un-
“ fastened his hair, wound a coloured cord around it, and made a
“ hole in my breast in order to cut my heart out, which in a few
“ hours he pulverized, together with my eyes, my tongue, my ears,
“ nose, nails, and fingers, and having kneaded the mass into balls,

SjE — hSIi*'

z, MB Rmx..


876


SORCERY.


“ he put these into a gourd. Subsequently he made a human image
“ of paper, and violently compelled me by means of spells to become
his slave. Whenever 1 was a little lazy, he pricked the image
“ with a needle ; my eyebrows then contracted with pain, and my
mouth uttered long cries of woe. Yesterday, sir, he was insulted
" by you, and sent me to you to avenge him, but 1 cannot find
it in my heart to do so. Sir, please pity me ; let me no longer

* endure that wrong in this nether world ; 1 swear to you I will bind
“ myself to you as a child to its father. But the elders here seated
“must not speak of it, lest misfortune befall them’.

“And on these words the spectre wailed still more piteously.
“ Pih, too, shed tears, and so did the ten gentlemen. They put
“ down the depositions of Moon-in-the-west in black and white,
“ subscribed their names, and secretly informed the prefect of the
“ district. This officer surprised Wan-li and his nephew, and sharply
“questioned them. At first they repelled the accusation, but Moon-in-
“ the-west being confronted with them, refuted and contradicted
“ all their depositions very bitterly, and demanded that the contents
“ of his travelling-bag should be inventoried. Various things were
“ produced from it, such as written charms and formulae, seal-
“ impresses, needles long and short; so Wan-li fell flat on the

* ground, and made a clean breast in the following terms :

“ He was a man from Lii-ling. While busy collecting a store of
“ magical arts, he came to Hing-yuen, where he met with one Liu,
“ an alchemist, who instructed him in the art of plucking life,
“answering in the main to what Moon-in-the-west had told. But
“ he did not believe in the reality of it ; therefore Liu took out of
“ his bag a five-coloured cloth in which he had hairs in pellets,
“and pointing his finger at them, said: ‘This is Li Yen-nii
“ of Hien-ning, obtained by me in the second month of the spring
“ of the second year of the Then 1 i h period ; for seventy-five strings
“ of coins I will order him to bind himself to you as a follower
“ and attendant’. On the other assenting to this bargain with
“delight, Liu made the Yii paces', and burned charms to conjure
“Yen-nii, whose voice was thereupon heard in the air, saying:
“‘Master, whither do you want me to go?’ ‘Follow Mr. W^ang on
“his peregrinations; he is a good man with whom you will not
“at all fare ill’. Wan-li paid the money, thus entering into

i Pace.^ in certain fixed forms, or slow dances, are often made in China to bring
down .spirits and gods, and to perform magic.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF HUMAN BODIES.


877


the Ml possession of that magic. After this, on passing through
“ Fang-cheu, he fell in with a master Kwang, from wliom, after
“ some agreeable conversation, he obtained one Keng Wan-Fung
“ from Fung-yuen, whom likewise he made his slave for the same
“sum he had paid to Liu, so that, including Moon-in-the-west, he
“ possessed three. Liu had advised him to abstain from beef for his
“ whole life, but lately he had forgotten this hint and consumed
“some roasted cow’s heart, whereupon things had gone amiss.
“ Therefore he had nothing more to say '.

He 'I'

i . fi K S H ^ A SSI S'l 8# s sa # # # rn.

wit 55 i! SB. + «*a®,

m^mm-b + 3im


878


SORCERY.


“The prefect wrote to his colleague in Fung-cheu to trace Hwo-
“ khing and obtain from him some evidence in corroboration. This
“ man’s suspicions were aroused ; but when he was placed amidst a
“great number of people, and Pih asked: 'who is your father?’

“ and Moon-in-the-west answered through a crack in the vvall :
“'the man with the black dress and the rush hat’, he was deeply
“ agitated, and his daughter not less than he. When their emotion
“ had subsided, she asked him about their family, soothing him as
“ she was wont to do during her life. The prefect considered the
“ examination satisfactory and placed the case in the hands of his
“ superior, the prefect of the department. Wan-li fell ill in the gaol
“and died, and Shang-hien wms set free in the end for a ransom”^.

This story, which we seem tolerably justified in regarding as an
embellished account of a real preceding by superstitious mandarins
against some hapless victim of a crafty ventriloquist, is of some use
in contributing to our knowledge of the principles and details ot
this gruesome “life-plucking”. This crime is, in fact, a double crime,
being committed just as much against the person whose soul is
wanted as an instrument of sorcery, as against the individual on
whom this soul is to operate. But we may also learn from Wan-li’s
confessions that there exist less bloody forms of this doubly black
art, since he obtained a soul by merely becoming possessor of human
hair. No doubt sorcerers treat such hair in much the same way as
they treat the parts and organs obtained with destruction of life.
The story teaches us furthermore that sorcerers do not always
give their orders to their spectral servants verbally, but also in
written forms, by burning paper charms. In fact the sending of
written orders and prayers, as well as paper valuables, into the
spirit-world through fire and smoke is such an everyday practice
among the Chinese that we need not feel any surprise at finding


S ^ . * aa « . © « .


>■ ii} M ^


SORCERY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF HUMAN BODIES. 879

that sorcerers too resort to it. Such charms may express or mention
whatever the writer desires to be done to his victim.

Efficacious instruments of sorcery are unborn children torn out
of the womb. A fetus contains a double soul: its own, and its
mother’s. “Mr. Hii in King-shan (pr. of Hupeh), whose family had
“ lived for many generations in 3ang-hu-pan, married a wife. This
“ woman’s toilet-boxes looked so well furnished that they aroused
“ the covetousness of Yang Shan, a thief. After a year, when this
“ man knew that her husband was taking his son to the Metropolis,
“and that the wife in the family way had not more than two
“female slaves for company, he sneaked into the house at night, and
“concealed himself in a dark spot to watch for his opportunity.

“After the third watch-drum he saw by the light of the lamp
“a man with sunken eyes and a curly beard climb through the
“window, with a yellow linen bag on his back. ‘I never came
“across that fellow before’, said Yang to himself, and he held his
“ breath, carefully watching his doings. Drawing an incense-stick
“out of his sleeve, the man lighted it at the lamp, and placed it
“near the slaves; then he turned to the bed of the wife and mut-
“tered a spell, on which she suddenly jumped up and, turning
“ towards him, threw herself on her knees before him, quite naked.
“ He opened his bag, took a knife out of it, and ripped up her
“belly; then he tore the fetus out, and putting it into an urn
“ of porcelain, slung this over his back and left the house, leaving
“the corpse of the woman on the floor before the bed ’.

“Yang, terror-stricken, also left the house and followed that man.
“At an inn by the village-gate he flung his arms around him.


1

A**,

mz.

ms HM. MM

^ as A, milt A.w&mz.

A mi tB # - « . ^ T I® . S - » 0r . II i6l «

it li ?£.««. SI*.

ffl#. It - 'h 7j , ^ mm m > M 'hmm ’t’ . #

astt.mPIl'TittT.


880


SORCHRY.


“crying: ‘Innkeeper, quick, come here, I have caught a sorcerer!’
“ The neighbours all ran to the spot, and finding the fetus in his

“ bag, dripping with blood, flew into a rage and belaboured him

“with their shovels and hoes; but he burst into loud laughter,
“ and did not incur the slightest wound. And not until they had

“ cast dung over him did he lose his power to move. Next morning

“ they delivered him to the magistrate, who questioned him under
“ torture, thus extorting the confession that he was a member of
“the White Lotus society, and had very many comrades. It was
“ thus discovered that a pregnant woman, whose corpse had been
“ found in Han-siang, also was a victim of the same practice. After
“ his trial the malefactor was slowly carved to death, and the thief
“ was rewarded with fifty ounces of silver” '.

To prove the conviction of the Chinese in the reality of such
murderous sorcery, we may also refer to modern imperial edicts
which make it clear that we must not regard the laws, which we
have quoted, as dead letters. We have already read on page 488
in a decree, that in 1821 a Censor made a report to the Throne
about miscreants in Shantung “ who cut out the organs from boys
and girls”®. But the following edict, issued twenty-five years later,
speaks volumes:

“On the day ki-szS of the sixth month of the twenty-sixth
“year of the Tao kwang period (6 Aug. 1846) the emperor
“ issued the following decree to the Council of State, to be for-
“ warded to Ki Ying, Governor-General of the two Kwang, to
“ Na’rh-king-ko, Governor-General of Chihli, to Pih Ch'ang, Governor-
“ General of the two Kiang, to Yii TAi, Governor-Geneial of Hu-
“ kwang, to Liu Yun-kho, Governor-General of Fuhkien and Cheh-
“ kiang, to Ch'ung Ngen, Governor of Shantung, and to Wu Wen-
“ yung. Governor of Kiangsi, relating to a report of the Censor

— «SSs.)iS.

X M.MK. MW0. A

Tazc ljuh yii, ch. 15.

2 f'J M ^


SORCEllY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF BABIES.


881


“ Su Hioli-kien, to whose knowledge it had come that lawless vil-
“ lains were decoying young boys by means of magic, and that
“ this practice was assuming serious proportions. According to his
“ report, those villains everywhere from Chehkiang to Kiangsu place
“ eatables along the roads or sell them in fruit-stalls and con-
“ fectioners’ shops, renewing them under cover of night; children
“ who eat of them die immediately, and are then robbed of their
“brains, kidneys, hearts, and livers. Some have been caught
“ and arrested, delivered to the magistrates, sharply examined, and
“ punished, but this has not frightened them at all ; and as
“ not the slightest clue has as yet been discovered, the evil is
“ spreading in all directions and gradually assuming serious pro-
“ portions

“If the state of things really is as the aforesaid Censor represents,
“ the evil which those villains inflict on the country is of no
“small consequence; hence Ki Ying and the other grandees men-
“ tinned above must each, with respect to the matter to which
“ attention is directed by that (censorial) report, cause strict and
“ secret investigations to be made by commissioners appointed by them,
“ in order that culprits be positively arrested, and reliable information
“ be obtained from them as to the men from whom that magic has
“issued and their motives; they must then punish them according
“ to the laws, in order that their evil practices may be swept away,
“ and the lives of the people saved. This is an order of the greatest
“ importance” K


i + M Q B ±

r S K


K 5 E #

mu

* B a * T » /I S ^ ® R SS J: # 1

Mm mm m PiU ^ m m mm .'1^ ^

mta mwAmm, w

« # » tf ft gir ts It ® iB » M #


m


IX .


55


882


SOdCEllY.


In the great collection of edicts from which we have drawn this
one, another, issued twenty-four days later, follows, in which the
emperor, referring to the arrest of suspected individuals in Peking,
specially insists upon great severity to be used by the Board of
Punishments in examining and trying them. Another ediet of the
same seventh month tells us of another complaint lodged by a
Censor about the same work of poisoning prevalent also in the
district of Siao-shan * in Chehkiang, which had entailed the arrest
of several Buddhist priests who had with them medicine-cakes, which,
however, proved to be harmless; this case likewise occasioned the
emperor to insist upon thorough measures being taken by his man-
darins. Finally a fourth resolution, passed in the eighth month on
account of reports, received from the provinces, that arrests of
suspected criminals had not led to the discovery of the evil, exhorts
the high authorities to observe prudence, care, and secrecy in their
work of investigation.

It is now possible for us to realize the capital dangers to which
medical missionaries expose themselves by performing operations or
amputations. Accusations of robbery of eyes and other organs, even
of kidnapping children for sorcerous purposes, have, as is well known,
been frequently raised against them, and have even become sources
of troubles, nay of luurderous attacks.

Sorcery by means of human souls may be a complicated appli-
cation of various animistic notions. To give an example. We
know that a grave, if placed under good fung-shui or natural
influences, ensures ha{)piness to the soul of the dead who rests in
it, and, as a consequence, to his relations too, since that soul, being
contented and pleased, protects them well and blesses them. This
dogma engenders the belief, that any envious person may put a
stop to such a happy state of things, and appropriate all the blessings
for himself by burying a part of the body of a member of his own
family, and therewith his soul, in that grave. But after all we have
learned about the complications of the Chinese science of gtave-
making and sepulture, it is clear that only experts in geomancy
can successfully apply this trick; so that it is quite natural that
such professors should generally be living under suspicion of sorcery.

s,

s ja Bs « E ffi ie R 4 .* s s ® •

Shing hiun, edicts of Suen Tsniig, ch. 87.

' iflii-


SOllCERY BY MEANS OF PARTS OF HUMAN BODIES. SS3

It is Sui Yuen’s useful book of tales that acquaints us with tliis

curious grave-sorcery : —

“ The grave of the gentleman of Ngan-khi lies on a mountain in
“ Fuhkien. A Taoist doctor of the tribe Ki, wishing to draw profits
“from the fung-shui of it, said to his daughter, who was very
“ ill and in danger of death : ‘You are born for my use, and it
“is not likely that you will be cured; 1 shall take a portion of
“ your body andnnrich us by means of it. For some time I have desired
“to appropriate that fung-shui of the Li family, but it cannot
“ yield any benefits to us unless a bone of my own daughter
“is buried in it; your death is imminent; those who survive
“you may now derive advantage from it’. And ere she could give
“ an answer, he cut olF her finger with a knife, put it into the

“ horn of a ram, and secretly buried it somewhere by the grave

“ of the Li people. From that time, whenever there died a graduate
“ among that family, a member of the clan of the Taoist succeeded
“ in taking his degree, and whenever in the fields of the Li the harvest
“ decreased by ten bushels, those of the Taoist yielded ten bushels
“ more : the matter raised suspicion, but remained a mystery h

“Once in the TsTng ming period, the villagers carried the
“ image of the Great Emperor Chang to a meeting for presenta-
“ tion of thank-olferings to the gods. Their beautiful procession
“ with its ornamental flags in the van and in the rear came to the
“grave of Li, when the image suddenly stopped, and though several
“ dozens of men carried it, it could not possibly be moved. One
“among' them, a lad’, suddenly exclaimed; ‘Quick, back to the
“ temple !’ — the bearers followed him to that building, where the lad


* a * . * * « « ff . a: ± Si 0 . ft s a »r ^ .

bI ^ ffi . 1# ft * 5E 2 Aa^ M ft * »
^±01071 «l Wise’S-.

2 In whose body the god had .settled.


8S4


SORCERY.


“ placed himself on the throne of the god. ‘I am the Great Em-
*• peror’, he said, ' there is sorcery in the grave of Li ; go and catch
“ the culprit, and punish him ’. And he told this one of the crowd
“to fetch a shovel, and that one to take a hoe, and A.B. to fetch
“ ropes ; and when a gang of men had thus been procured, he
“exclaimed: ‘go on now, quick, to the grave of Li!’ the crowd
“ obeyed, and the image was moved forth as quick as the wind. Those
“ with the shovels and the hoes at his command searched by the grave
“for a while, and found a gilded ram’s horn with a red viper in it,
“ wriggling with quick movements, and on one side of the horn the
“ names of all the members of the clan of the aforesaid Taoist were
“ written. Now the lad ordered the men with the ropes to go to the
“ Taoist and bind him ; then he cried that they should go to the
“ mandarin; and the mandarin examined that man (under toiture),
“convicted him, and punished him according to the law. From that
“ moment the Li people prospered again, and worshipped the Great
“Emperor with peculiar devotion”*.

Since sorcerers, like all the Chinese people, are convinced that
bones of the dead are imbued with soul-substance, we need not
be surprised to see them sometimes using skulls, the head in particular
being deemed to contain a great quantity of vigorous soul-
substance (page 77). “In Hang-chcu there lived one Ch'en I-khwei,
“versed in the ‘transportation-methods of the five spectres’. A friend
“of his, belonging to the Sun clan, once lodged in his house, and
* saw at midnight a hoary old man jump out from under his


Ml ffl W f P tt A SB « tS » » # . »«
y: nf a . - il Y- A >4 0 , ii g * . ii @ SI , «

46 K » « , * ft ^ ^ a A A =

^ t# a « * # a i: ± . na ^ .B-.iK # * 'M- . a

ch. 10.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF HUMAN BONES.


885


“bed. This man kneeled down before him, saying: ‘I pray you
“ to prevail upon Ch'^en to give me back my skull, so that my corpse
“ may become complete again’. Sun started, and rose immediately;
“ and looking by the light of his lamp under the bed, saw there
“a dead man’s head. He inferred from this, that Ch'^en, who occu-
“ pied himself with the e.xpulsion and employment of spectres,
“ whenever he did so took heaven-bestowed souls out of decayed
“coffins; they came to him because he applied charms and used
“ spells. The first thing now for Sun to do was to reprimand his
"friend; Clfen, however, denied the matter, but the other reduced
“ him to silence l)y taking the skull from under the bed and showing
“ it him. They then brought it back to the place whence it was
“ taken ; yet Clf en was erelong assailed by a troop of spectres ; his
“body was studded all over with violet boils, and he expired”'.

Bones of the dead may be used for such evil work with great
refinement. Archdeacon Gray relates, that in the district of Sun-teh,
and at Si-chu-shan, a portion of the district of Nan-hai, in ivwang-
tung, there are women called mi-fu-kow-, who profess by incan-
tations and other mysterious means to be able to effect the death
of their fellow-creatures They are consulted by married women
who, owing to ill-treatment or for other reasons, are anxious secretly
to kill their husbands. The witches gather the .bones of infants
from the public cemeteries, and invoke the soul of the infants to
accompany them to their dwelling-houses. The bones are reduced
to a fine powder, and sold in this form. Mixed in tea, wine, or
any other beverage, the powder is daily given to her husband by
the murderous wife. At the same time the witch daily calls upon
the spirit of the infant, whose bones have been used, to effect the
death of the object of the woman’s hate. Sometimes, in addition


« If ^ « II If . « J* T # # ^ » TJ * w =

m S M IS . ^ M M m & PJf ^ B ^ W MM-

'J'szr ini/t i/I', cli, 18,

2 cliarnii^.


SSG


SORCERY.


to his horrible daily draught, a portion of the bone of an infant
is carefully secreted under his bed. Attempts have been made, I
believe, not without success, to destroy these witches. In the public
hall at Kaiig-hi, near to Si-chu-shan, some of these women were
summoned into the presence of the gentry, and made to answer
certain grave charges of this nature, which had been preferred
against them by their neighbours. Upon being convicted, they were
put to death by poison. As lately as the year 1865, several women
of this class were put to death in this manner

Taking their life or soul out of men for sorcerous purposes is
sometimes mentioned in the books by the term tTao sheng^,
“to draw out or lift out life”. There may be a difference between
this term and “plucking out life”; perhaps it may denote extraction
of the soul without “ plucking” at the same time any organs or parts
out of or from the body. T'iao sheng may, according to an
author of the twelfth century, be effected by killing the victim by
means of some animal sent into his body, thus coupling it with
something of the nature of ku sorcery. “In Kwangsi”, says he,
“homicide is committed by drawing out life; they will entertain a
“ visitor with fish, and, while sitting opposite him, set to work practices
“ which bend it to their will, in consequence of which it can revive
“ in his belly and cause his death. And it is stated that he is then
“ secretly employed in that family as a slave.

“ There is living in that province a famous member of the
“ gentry, who, when he was a judge in Lei-cheu (the southern
“ peninsula of Kwangtung, opposite Hainan island), had to try
“ a cause of ‘lifting out life’. He put some flesh underneath a
“ dish, and the prisoner performed his arts over it to prove his
“ magical capacities ; and when after a while they lifted up the
“ dish to see what had taken place under it, the flesh, it is really
“ true, was overgrown with hair. What a vicious spectre must be
“ that which can do such things !

“ It is, however, quite easy to destroy the effects of such things.
“ As soon as any one becomes aware that he has something in
“ his breast or immediately below it, he merely has to swallow
“quickly some shing-ma, and thus to voraif it up; or when it
“ is felt in his belly, he must void it in the natural way by taking


1 China, vol. II, p. 24.

2 M ^


LETTING SPHCTliES LOOSE UPON VICTIMS.


8S7


“without delay some yuh-kin (an aromatic root). These recipes,
“ which are carved in Lei-cheu on printing-blocks and published
“ there, were obtained from the aforesaid prisoner”

• We have seen (pp. 871 and 876) that human souls, obtained by
the cruel method of ‘plucking out life’, may be kept by sorcerers
in images, and by spells, harsh words, and ill-treatment of the same
be compelled to work evil. Spirits may, however, be settled into
such images without plucking of life; they may for example be
obtained from graves or cemeteries by enchantment, mostly con-
nected with a sacrifice of food, dainties, mock money, and incense,
or from soul-tablets stolen for the purpose from public repositories
(Book I, p. 1058); probably they may be obtained also in a great
many other ways of which I have not heard or read. But sorcerers
or sorceresses, however wicked they may be, certainly are never so
depraved or daring as to employ for black magic the souls of their
own deceased relations.

Spirits thus in the power of sorcerers are called yen-shin g
kwei-mei* or, alibreviated, yen-mei’, “spectres in subjection”.
The character yen ^ is no doubt a later modification of |^,
“to suppress, or to reduce to subjection”; we have, of course, to
beware of confounding it with the spirits of nightmare, which
(see p. 669) it represents also. The term yen-shing is old; old
therefore also is the form of sorcery which it denotes. We read
in the Standard History of the house of Plan, that prince Khiug *,
eldest son of the emperor Chang who reigned from A.U. 76 to 88,
was, together with his mother, a prey to the envious hatred of
the empress Teu =, who was sonless. She calumniated her rival by


fllSlBlS^JtAtt't’tfijAJaJE. ##tl,A5E

. Liluj wai lai tah, ch. tO.


4


5


SS8


SORCERY.


every means, “and having intercepted at the gate of the palace-
" prison a letter of hers, reading: ‘I am so ill, and longing for fresh
“t'u, tell my family to fetch some for me’, she falsely accused
her of intent to make k u and pronounce imprecations and spells,
“and that she would perform yen-shing magic by means of
“that plant” h She attained her object: her rival fell into com-
plete disgrace and killed herself, and the prince was deposed from
his dignity of heir-apparent. It seems then that certain plants
might serve to impose obedience on spectres; but all details on this
point are lacking.

Undoubtedly this sort of black magic has, as well as ku, been
often practised in court-life. We read for instance in one of the
Standard Histories, that under Heu Tsu, the last emperor of the
Ch'en dynasty, who reigned from A.l). 583 to 589, “the harem
“indulged in yen-mei magic and in methods of misusing spectres,
“in order to confound the emperor; they set out heterodox sacrifices
“ in the palace, assembled there sorcerous w u , making them drum
“ and dance, and in this way discovered occurrences outside the
“palace; no word was spoken by men, no act they did, which the
“ concubine (Chang) did not know sooner than everybody else and
“brought to Heu Tsu’s knovvletlge”

Seeing that the whole Chinese race is enslaved by an unbounded
dread of the machinations of evil spirits, it is naturally possessed
by a no less overwhelming horror of the occult arts which profess
to set to work such dangerous agents. These may attack the victim
with the utmost impetuosity, fury and ferocity; hear what the
renowned author of the Liao-chai chi i has to say on this head:

"Yu was a young gentleman of energy and courage, fond of
“boxing and sport, who could, with two pots in his hands, jump up
“ in the air whirling round like a whirlwind.

“In the Ch^ung-ching period (1628 — 1644) he was in the Capital


rSiioks of the Later Han Dynast}’, ch. 85, 1. 2.

ot the Llren Dynasty, ch. 7, I. b.


Books


J.ETT1NG LOOSE SPECTRES UPON MEN.


889


“ for the purpose of submitting to the Palace examinations (for the
“ highest literary degree), when his servant was laid up with illness,
“ and could not rise. This was a great trouble to him. At that
“ time there was in the bazaar an able fortune-teller, who could even
“ discover whether a man was going to live or die ; this man he
“ desired to consult about his servant, but ere he spoke a word to
“him, the fortune-teller said: ‘Is it not about the illness of your
“servant, sir, that you desire to consult me?’ Startled at these
“ words, Yii replied in the affirmative, whereupon the other conti-
“ nued : ‘It is not the patient w’ho will come to grief, but it
“might be you yourself, sir, who are in peril’.

“ Yii now drew lots for himself. The fortune-teller laid them
“out into a kwa, and in alarm exclaimed; ‘Sir, you are fated to
“die in three days’. Mr. Yii was affrighted for a while, when the
“soothsayer calmly said: ‘I, your humble servant, possess some
“insignificant magic; for ten gold coins 1 will avert this calamity
“from you’. But the other reflected that the time which a man has
“ to live is pre-destined by fate, and he did not see how magic
“could alter it. So he rose without answering, and was just leaving
“ the house, when the soothsayer said: ‘you will save this trifling outlay,
“ I hope you will not repent it, I hope you will not repent it!’ ^

“All Mr. Yu’s friends were concerned for him, and advised him
“ rather to empty his purse and arouse the soothsayer’s compassion
“by means of its contents,- but he would not hear of it. The third
“ day came soon, and he sat down upright in his inn, to wait
“ calmly for what was going to happen. No evil befell him all
“day; then the night came, and he shut the door, trimmed the


JB. W .

rtJ^#

KM*#, h*

s pt s A . I' # § 0 > a A ^

® ttl . ^ B 'h 9 . ioM.


890


SORCERY.


lamp, and sat down, leaning on his sword, to brave the danger.

“The water-clock had almost rim out for the first time, and still
“there came nothing to cause his death. He was then thinking
“of going to bed, when suddenly he heard a rustling sound in
“ the crack of the window. He forthwith turned his eyes to that
“side, and saw a little tiny man enter through it with a spear
“on his shoulder, who, on reaching the ground, shot up to a man’s
“height. Mr. Yii seized his sword, got up, and at once struck a
“blow at that being; but he merely cut the air, and hit nothing.
“ The spectre forthwith grew small and re-sought the crack, in
“order to escape through it; but Yii struck at it so quickly,
“that it forthwith fell to the ground. Then throwing a light upon
“it, he found a paper man, cut right through the middle.

“Mr. Yii did not venture to go to sleep. He sat down as before,
‘Ho await whatever might befall, and after an hour another being
“worked itself through the window into the room. It looked strange
“and hideous, like a spectre. No sooner had it reached the ground
“ than he struck at it, cutting it right in two, and as the pieces
“ kept on wriggling about, he went on dealing blow after blow,
“lest they might get up again. Every blow told, and sounded as
“ though it fell on something hard, and on examining the spot
“he saw a clay image, entirely reduced to fragments.

“Now placing his seat below the window, he kept his eye
“fixed on the crack. After a long while he heard a noise outside
“ the window like the bellowing of a bull, something pushing
“at the same time against the window-frame with such force as
“ to make the walls of the room shake and tremble as if tbey
“ threatened to fall. Fearing they might come down and crush him,
“Mr. Yii thought that he could not do better than go outside and^
“fight the spectre there. He drew back the bolt with a tearing
“noise, rushed out, and beheld a gigantic devil, as tall as the
“ eaves of the house. By the dim moonlight he saw that its face
“was as black as charcoal; from its eyes shot a bright yellow
“glare; the upper part of its body was bare, and it wore no shoes;
“in its hand it held a bow, and it had arrows at its belt. Yii
“stood terror-stricken. The spectre placed an arrow on its bow, but
“he knocked it off with his sword, so that it fell to the ground;
“ then he prepared to strike, but again the devil had an arrow
“ready, which Yii evaded by a quick jump sideways. With a
“ grating sound the arrow quivered in the wall, which enhanced
“the fury of the spectre. It drew its sword, made it whistle through


SORCERY' SPECTRES IN PUPPETS.


891


“ the air, and looking straight into Yii’s face aimed a violent blow
“ at him ; but Yii ducked forward, so that the sword came down
“upon a stone in the. pavement of the courtyard, splitting it right
“ in two. Now Yii ran out from between the legs of the spectre
“ and cut at its ankles, which gave a sound as of hard metal.
“ This again increased the devil’s fury ; with a roar like thunder it
“ turned round to get another blow at Yii. Again, however, Yii
“ stooped down and made a forward movement, so that the sword
“ coming down merely cut off a piece from his skirt. But now Yii
“was close to the flanks of his assailant; wildly he struck at them,
“ the blows this time also resounding as on hard metal, and the
“ result was that the devil came tumbling down flat. He then went
“ on belabouring it wildly with his sword, the blows giving a ratt-
“ ling noise like that produced by wooden clappers. Throwing a
“ light upon it with a candle, he saw that it was a wooden image
“of the size of a man. The bow and arrows were still at its belt;
“ its features, carved and painted, were repulsive and horrid, and
“ where his sword had hit it, it showed bloody spots b

W 2 . IIS * 4' . 1 * ffi

A, aeni^.

. tr >r B .


692


SORCERY.


“ With a torch in his hand Mr. Yii awaited daybreak, when it
“ occurred to him that those spectres must have been sent by that
“ fortune-teller, in order to prove the spiritual power of his art by
“ bringing a man into the clutches of death. Next day he told
“ the event far and wide, and went with some people to the
“fortune-teller’s. On seeing Mr. Yil in the distance, this man
“rendered himself invisible, but one of the company said: ‘we have
“ here to do with shape-concealing magic, which may be baffled
“ by the blood of a dog’. Yii gave heed to this suggestion, and
“ told his men to go and fetch some blood ; and on the man
“ concealing himself as before, he immediately threw the blood on
“ the spot where he stood, with the result that they saw the
“ man’s head and face re-appear, all stained with the blood. He
“stood upright before them like a devil with glaring eyes; they
“ seized him at once, and handed him over to the magistrate, by
“ whom he was put to death” ‘.

Sorcery as described in this tale becomes doubly murderous and
criminal when — as is believed to be often the case — the spirit,
let loose in the form of a puppet upon the victim, is the soul of a
living man; for should the puppet incur injury by reason of the
heroism or cleverness of the victim, that soul may be maimed along
with it, even to such an extent as to become no longer fit to


5 . S * W. iS- * * flS SB . tii a >t> S' . « ^ s.

& , <9Liin m , » » ^ m . <& x-m S' A , 7} m

m&m. a

^ lit.


w. b A-^AA._w^n M, MB ,
A AW <&4b W jSti ffift , I'AXEiP#.#:
B A AAA I& . 1S. M b AMS , -WlSA iktMPH,


SORCERY SPECTRES IN PUPPETS.


893


animate the man to which it belongs, in consequence of which he
is doomed to death, or becomes sick or idiotic for life. Such ultra
black practices are believed to exist. “In Hunan”, thus we read,
“ one Chang Khi-shen understood how to get possession of the
“hwun of others by means of magic. Very numerous were they
“ who regarded him with awe on that account, and Wu, a man

“ of letters from Kiang-ling, was the only one who refused to believe

“ in his power. Once he disparaged him before a crowd of people.
* Convinced that some spectral evil would be done to him in return
“ on that very night, he armed himself with a cojry of the Yih Mng,
“ and sat down by the lamp. Presently he heard on the roof a noise
“ like a blast of wind. A spirit in metal armour pushed open the
“ door and entered. With a spear if made up to our scholar to

“ stab him, but he flung the Yih Mng at it, thus throwing it to

“ the ground, where it changed into a paper puppet. The scholar
“ picked this up, and placed it between the leaves of his Yih king-,
“ but thereupon two other spectres appeared simultaneously, with
“ blue feces, and axes in their hands. They too were struck to the
“ground with the Yih kmg, and also received a place between the
“leaves of that book'.

“At midnight the wife of the magician knocked at the door,
“wailing and weeping. ‘Chang, my husband’, she sdd, ‘yesterday
“ sent out my two sons to haunt you, not expecting that you
“ would catch them both by some spiritual magic which we did
“ not know was in your possession ; pray let them go, that they may
“return to life’. ‘Those who came here’, replied Wu, ‘were three
“men of paper, and not your sons at all’ — ‘My husband and
“ my two sons’, was the reply, ‘entered into paper puppets, and
“under that form they came here; at this moment I have three
“ corpses in my house, which will revive no more after the cock
“has crowed’ — and piteously she repeated her request over and


‘ ^ . VI.

min


894


SORCERY.


“over again, until Wu said: ‘You have done harm to not a few
“ men, and you deserve such punishment ; but I pity you and will
“ eive vou back one son’. And the woman, bathed in tears, went
“ away with one puppet. Next day the scholar received the news
“ that Chang Khi-shen and his eldest son had died, and that only
“ the younger was alive ”

Many centuries ago wild tales were already current of ghosts
having been let loose upon mankind en masse by means of sorcery
with puppets; and such things are stated in the books to have
been freely indulged in with the object of causing general com-
motion and thus furthering the w'ork of insurgents. Such statements
may be thoroughly legendary, or perhaps we ought to make large
allow’ance for exaggeration, yet the fact that they were made and,
moreover, transmitted by authors to this day as' actual events,
testifies to the intensity of the belief in the reality of sorcery on
such a large scale. One of the most interesting among those stories,
which takes us back to the second half of the ninth century, runs
as follows: —

“ When under the T’ang dynasty the rebellion of (Hwang) Ch'ao
“ was on the point of breaking out, there lived in the hill of
“ Meritorious Works in Pien, in the Chung-yuen region (in Honan)
“ sorcerous Buddhist monks, to whom the clergy far and near
“ resorted. Even the scholars and the people were their humble
“ adherents. They drew spirit-rebels on paper, and let them go
“ into the dwellings of men to cause misfortune, and by this magic
“ they sowed so much confusion among the inmates, that none
“ could enjoy a quiet sleep from night till morning. When they
“ thus brought sickness and misery, and the people then engaged
* monks of the hill of Meritorious Works for a good pay to employ


7- tt ^ m * 4 B>f tt < * » * ft » « . -a

it tt ^ H . * # H IR A . « # ifr ^ . S B .

^ Ilk » . 4 iJc a iJt - ^ ft 4f tS

TszS pull yu, cli. 8.


SOUCfiRY SPECTRES IN PUPPETS.


S95


“ their religious magic against the evil, the latter put a stop to it
“ immediately.

“But there was more: the monks painted armoured soldiers on
“ paper, and then night after night neighing sounds were heard
“ through streets and wards, and trampling of hoofs over the city-
“ walls; but at daybreak everything vanished. Often also they painted
“ dogs, which they burned and conjured with spells, and then at
“ night dogs howled and barked in the streets and bit each other,
“preventing the people from sleeping; and in these cases too, when
“ the people engaged the monks for money, these apparitions dis-
“ appeared without leaving a shadow or sound. In Hwah-cheu also
“ there was a Buddhist monk deeply versed in sorcery, whose
“ modus operandi was exactly the same as that of the monks of the
“hill of Meritorious Works; and public persons as well as private
“ people were greatly annoyed by it

“At that time the member of the Chancery and State Council
“ Wang Toh became governor of Hwah and 'Fai, and proclaimed
“ that that region of southern Yen had fallen a prey to calamities,
“ which should be averted. To this end altar grounds were laid
“ out in his head quarters and throughout all his army corps,
“ and several thousand monks were called upon to olRciate. But
“ their numbers were insufficient; therefore the entire host of disciples
“ in the hill of Meritorious Works in Pien-cheu were consecrated
“and repaired to the altars. With their banners and ornaments,
“ their conches and cymbals they proceeded to the head quarters,
“ and on the evening on which they were to go to the several
“ altars, those among the monks who possessed the highest reputa-


< )f t|i M * ?!i 1i m » ft .

^ M WJ * Jl. X ^ * A . ^ WJ Hi K

* pX Ig f# « , K A^ffS^BR.

« 15 « = X it ttl # ^ - f# . * # is {iff . ffi ® lij


896


SOECKRY.


“ tion for virtue were picked out for admittance into the head
quarters, while the remainder were ordered to distribute themselves
among the various army divisions for the performance of rites
“and the recital of liturgies. When all were within the camps,
“ the gates were firmly closed, and the monks buried alive in
“ the ground. The wearers of square priestly robes who thus met
“ their death were several thousands in number. At the head quarters
“ the chiefs of the hill of Meritorious Works and their inferiors
“ were examined (under torture), and confessed that they were
“ commanders of clubs of Hwang Ch'^ao’s insurgents, who wanted
“ to rise in concert with him in the two departments. They were
“ordered to be exterminated to a man” h
Spectres properly subdued and controlled can, of course, be
employed for every sort of evil work which imaginative and super-
stitious minds may conceive. The wildest absurdities on this head
are printed and reprinted, told and retold ; indeed, the powers ot
sorcerous wizards and witches in a country where neither culture
nor religion has ever set limits to credulity, are simply as bound-
less as credulity itself. Everything we have read in this volume
concerning evil inflicted by invisible spectral hands, and of course
much more, may be work of sorcerers; thus they may e. g. send
forth their spectres to create panics among men by cutting off their
hair, or to possess them and make them ill, idiotic or mad, or to
induce them to commit suicide, or to kill them, or to render their
lives in their own houses intolerable by throwing stones and other
things, even taking off the tiles for missiles; etc. etc. Sui Yuen
relates the following story:

“ Wang Kung-nan, my sister’s husband, is living in Hang-cheu
“ upon the Hung-ho bridge. One morning on going out he found a


K Iv, ch. 2S7.


SENDING OUT SPECTRES TO HARM MEN.


S97


“Taoist doctor at his gate, who said with folded hands; ‘Sir, give
“me a fish if you please’; but Kung-nan angrily retorted: ‘fish
“you want, yon, an ascetic and a vegetarian!’ ‘I mean a wooden
“ fish ’ ’, the other replied ; but Kung-nan refused again ; on which
“the Taoist proceeded on his way, saying: ‘Sir, you are stingy
“now, but you will regret it later on’.

“ On the following night Kung-nan heard the noise of falling
“ tiles, and at daybreak he saw them all lying in his inner courtyard.
“ And on the next night his clothes all flew into the privy-pit. He
“ asked the family of Chang Yiu-khien, a literary graduate, for a
“charm, and this man said; ‘I have two charms, a cheap one and
“a dear one; by means of the former, Chang Chi-kho will rule
“those spectres by day and night; by the latter, Chang Chi-hien’s
“divine power (shen) will catch the apparitions’. Kung-nan took
“ the cheap one, and suspended it in the central apartment of his
“house; and his rest was not disturbed that night.

“ But when the third day had elapsed, an old Taoist doctor of
“ an antique and singular appearance came and knocked at his
“ gate. As Kung-nan happened to be out, his second son Heu-wen
“went out to see the man, who said: ‘Your house has been bothered
“the other day by that Taoist doctor; he is my disciple; you have
“ tried to help yourself by means of charms, but you had better seek
“ help from me; — tell your father to come to-morrow to the pavilion
“ of the Cool Springs by the West Lake, and to cry there aloud
“three times ‘iron hood’; 1 shall then come; if your father does
“ not do so, the charm will be stolen by spectres ’ *.

•1 See page 736.

57


898


SORCERY.


“ When Kung-nan came home, his son informed him of that
“ visit. At daybreak Kung-nan repaired to the pavilion, and cried
“ ‘iron hood’ several hundred times, but he remained alone, and no
“answer came. Just then the prefect of IVien-t^ang, Wang Kia,
“ passed ; Kung-nan caught hold of the pole of his sedan-chair and
“ revealed to him his troubles, but the magistrate thought he was
“ crazy, and all he got was a shower of curses and insults. That
“ night he assembled several brave and strong men of his family
“ to protect that charm, but at the fifth watch a tearing noise was
“ heard, and lo, the charm was gone, and in the morning they
“ saw a giant’s footprint over a foot in size on a chair. From that
“ time there was a crowd of spectres every night at his gate, who
“ tapped and threw crockery about. Kung-nan lived in a great
“ fright ; for fifty gold-pieces he purchased charms from Chang, and
“ when these were put up in his house the spectres kept quiet.

“ Then one day he was angry with his eldest son Heu-ts^eng, and
“ was just going to cane him, but he ran away. On the third day
“ he had not come back; my sister wept incessantly, and Kiang-nan
“ went in person to seek the runaway, whom he found wandering
“ beside the river, on the point of drowning himself. Forthwith
“ they put him in a sedan-chair, and found him twice as heavy as
“ usual h Arriving at home, he stared vacantly and jabbered unin-
“ telligibly, and lying on his sleeping-mat he suddenly exclaimed
“in a fit of terror -. ‘ they are going to investigate the case ; 1 am
“going!’ ‘Where will you go, my child?’ asked his father, ‘I shall
“ go with you’. And Heu-ts'eng rose, put on his ceremonial robe
“ and cap, and knelt down below the spot where the charms were
“ affixed; Kung-nan remained at his side, but saw nothing. Heu-ts'eng
“ now saw a god seat himself on a chair, with a third eye between
“ his eyebrows, a golden face, and a red beard ; prostrate beside
“him was a crowd of elegant young men. And the god addressed
“ him thus ; ‘ Wang, your existence in the world of light was not
“yet near its end; why were you seized with such fright that you
“ were tempted to seek death ?, And further he added : ‘And you,
“ underlings of the five parts of the Universe, you have made


* » =8= . * A M a 2 ^ m , St « iS T ^

"f « s H in s ^ , 5 M « n ® ^ 4- .

1 A spectre had settled in his body.


SENDING OUT SPECTRES TO HARM MEN.


b99


“yourselves the slaves of sorcerous Taoists, without any order or
“authorisation from the Supreme Purity (Heaven)!’ Everybody
“ confessed himself guilty ; the god administered thirty blows with
“ sticks to the spectres, which shrieked for mercy, while Heu-ts'eng
“ saw their buttocks change colour under the blows and become
“ like grey mud. The session ended, the god gave each of them
“ a kick with his booted foot. Heu-ch^eng then awoke as if from
“ a dream ; perspiration flowed down his back, but from that time
“ the family enjoyed rest and peace” '.

This tale is far from relating the worst certain witches have
made their spectral slaves produce food wherewith to change un-
suspecting and innocent travellers into beasts of burden : —

“ Under the T"ang dynasty there was to the west of Pien-cheu (now
“ Khai-fung) an inn by a plank-bridge, the hostess of which was one
“ Miss Three; nobody could tell whence she came. She had lived there


aiI2> AK-mRK.

mmAm. B3 l+
^ mmnm m . MU mmm .

KWSftIr

M. « IS BBS S , 4rWtri!, »

■A AWMi

IP, ii|iT-M:s + , ftpftpttt;*.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ '/<h ch. 2.


900


SORCERr.


“a spinster for more than thirty years, without having any children
“ or any other relations. There were in the house several rooms.

She earned a living by selling ready cooked food, was very
‘‘ well-to-do, and kept a great herd of donkeys. W henever it came
to pass that official or private travellers by car or on horseback
‘‘ were short of money, she regularly lowered her charges to help
“ them. Thus she gained a reputation with all men for her virtue,

“ and travellers from far and near put up at her inn.

“Now it happened in the Yuen hw'O period (A. l>. 806 — 8:21)

“ that a stranger from Hii-cheu, named Chao Ki-hwo, who was
“ passing that way on a journey to Tung-tu (the present Ho-nan),

“ lodged there for a night. Some six or seven guests had arrived
“ before him, and each occupied a bed, so that Ki-hwo, as the
“ last comer, could only get a couch in a deep corner, close to
“ the wall of the hostess’ room. Miss Tliree provided her guests
“ with food on a very liberal scale, and when it was quite dark
“she brought wine, and very cheerfully kept the visitors company
“over their drink; and Ki-hwo, though not in the habit of taking
“ wine, also enjoyed her jesting. In this wise the second watch
“ passed, and the guests, intoxicated and weary, lay down to sleep,
“ while Miss Three retired into the house, closed the door, and blew
“ out the candles.

“ Everybody was soon in a sound sleep, and Ki-hwo alone tossed
“ on his couch sleepless, when he heard through the wall Miss
“ Three make a rustling noise, as if she were shifting things from
“ their places. Through a crack his eyes fell upon her, and he saw
“how she took from underneath an up-turned dish a candle, which
“ she trimmed and lighted, producing thereupon from a linen box
“ a set of ploughing-implements, with a wooden cow and a wooden
“puppet, each six or seven ts'un in size. Placing those things in
“ front of the furnace, she squirted a mouthful of water over them,
“ on which the two beings began to walk and run. The wooden
“ man harnessed the cow to the plough, and ploughed up the ground
“ before the bed where the mat covered it, making several furrows
“ to and fro ; on which she fetched from the same box a parcel
“ containing buckwheat, which she gave to the wooden man to sow.
“ In a moment it shot up, flowered, and w’as ripe. She told the
“ man to reap it, and when he had. trodden out the ears, she got
“ seven or eight pints, which he ground to flour in a small mill
“ set on the floor for the purpose. Finally she put away the wooden
“ man into the box, and made warm cakes of the flour.


CHANGING MEN INTO ASSES BY SORCEROUS FOOD.


901


“ At that moment the cocks crew, and the visitors prepared
“ themselves to depart. Miss Three was up first of all to light the
“ lamp, and placed the fresh hot cakes on the table as a collation
“ for the guests. Ki-hwo, nervous as he was, bade her a hasty
“farewell, opened the door, and departed; but from outside he
“ watched the house, and saw the visitors around the table eat
“ heartily of the cakes ; and lo, ere these had all gone down their
“ throats, the men simultaneously began to crawl on the floor and
“ to bray, and changed immediately into asses. Miss Three drove
“ them into the inn, and took possession of their money and effects '.


muB.

iS ^ ® a !« 1 A S .

(s «s I®: 1 5* e . ai A s <i -f-
* # - * + - A fS A . =8- A A -b -t . M T « # <

AJ|4fiJ. ttKnrff-bAft.

SJt4P<K:A AA^"*A.

P1B5*.


902


SOKCERT.


“ Ki-hwo told nobody a word of his adventure, for he would
“fain get that magic for himself. A month had passed away, when
“ he returned from Tung-tu. When about to arrive at the inn
“ by the plank-bridge, he made some warm buckwheat cakes of
“ the same dimensions .as those of the other day, and then put up
“in the inn again for the night. Miss Three behaved merrily and
“ cheerfully as of old, and as there came no travellers beside himself
“ that night, she lavished so much the more attention upon him,
“ still asking him late at night whether he desired anything. He
“ answered that he would be obliged to have some breakfast served
“ up early in the morning at his departure. The lady assured him
“ that he might be perfectly at ease on this point, and might
“ sleep soundly. After midnight, Ki-hwo perceived she did the
“ same things as the other day. At daybreak she prepared a dish
“ with food for him, putting also several warm cakes into it; and
“ when she was gone to fetch something else, he availed himself
“ of her absence to run downstairs and exchange one of the cakes
“ he had brought with him for one of hers, without the lady perceiving
“it. When on the point of starting and going to eat, Ki-hwo said:
“ 'pray, hostess, taste a warm cake of mine and he picked out
“ the one he had exchanged, and gave it her. No sooner had it
“ entered her mouth than she stooped to the ground braying, and was
“ transformed immediately into a shapely, robust donkey. Forthwith
“ Ki-hwo mounted it, and departed. The wooden puppet, the wooden
“ cow, and the other things he took along with him, but the magic
“ itself did not become his, for all his attempts to exercise it
“ proved vain.

“ On the ass thus created by his trick Ki-hwo travelled about
“ elsewhere, never hindered by any obstacles, and making a hundred
“ miles a day on it. Four years elapsed in this way, when he
'• rode through the barriers, and arrived at a spot five or six
" miles east of a temple of the god of the Hw'a mountain. Here
“he saw an old man clap his hands with loud laughter; ‘Miss
“ Three of the plank-bridge’ he cried, ‘ whence have you got this
“ body and these bones?’ and laying hold of the ass, he said to
“ Ki-hwo : ‘Indeed, she is guilty, but it is punishment enough
“ for her to have come in conflict with you ; have compassion ; please


CHANGING MEN INTO ASSES BY SORCEROUS FOOD.


903


“allow me to deliver her from this shape’. So the old man with
“ both his hands tore asunder the mouth of the ass, and lo, Miss Three
“ sprang out of the skin in her former shape. Then, after making
“ some courtesies to the old man, she ran off, and it was never
“ found out whither she had gone” h

In complete harmony with the general conviction that it is hardly
possible to overrate the evil which sorcerers may cause by means
of their spectres, legislators in China have for many ages judged
that the laws against them can hardly be severe enough. The laws
of the Sung dynasty, which are stated in the Standard History to
have been modelled upon those of the house of T'^ang^, put “ye n-m e i ,
“ the use of spells, and the fabrication of sorcerous writings and
“formulae, as also the transmission of such black arts to others”’.


1 B

m = stm

+ it

*#|MA 0

M. #H=¥*AM.

|S|*A»

^ Record ol magical

Wonders, ascribed to one Sun Wei "ho must have lived in the ninth

century. The copy we possess contains fifteen longer and shorter tales of little interest.

2 See the History of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 199, 1, 2.

3 >• > 5 -


904


SOUCERY.


among the most grave crimes. In the code of the Mongol dynasty we
read: “He who uses yen- me i against a high officer shall be put
" to death, A son who uses them against his father, shall, even though
-a general amnesty take place, live in banishment for life in a
“ remote region ; and a wife, who uses them against her husband, has
“ to submit to his will should he sell her to another husband h

The Ming dynasty had in its code of laws, in the same title
which treats of ku sorcery, an article against yen-mei, which we
also find in the same place, copied to the very letter, in the code
of the now-reigning house; in fact both codes in their entirety are
actually the same. In that of the present dynasty the article contains,
however, some interpolations, which in the following translation we
shall place between brackets:

“ If y e n - m e i have been made, or written charms and spells,
“ with the intent to kill somebody, then each culprit (the children
“ and grandchildren, slaves of both sexes, hired labourers, superiors,
“ and seniors, inferiors and juniors of his family) shall be punished
“ as in the case of intent to murder (with a beginning of execution,
“ yet without any infliction of wounds) Should any person have
“ been killed by means of such proceedings, each culprit shall be
“ punished, in accordance with that same law, as if the murder was
“ actually carried into effect ’. Should the crime have been committed
“ merely to produce disease or suffering in any person, the punish-
•• inents shall be by two degrees less than those mentioned above,
“ except in the case of children and grandchildren against their
“ parents or paternal grandparents, or slaves of either sex or hired
“ labourers against their masters” b


g . History of


3c . w A ^ . -T- r

tlie Yuen Dynasty, ch, 104, 1. 7.

2 That is to sav, they sliall receive one hu tidied blows with long sticks, and be
banislied for tliree years. C'f. ch. 20, fii^t title.

3 Thev shall he decapitateil ; see ihuJ.

1$*, 5Eia,a^(a^A*-[ll AT-


5£^


iiS-#. Ail

Ta T^^inrj lull li, the eighth title of ch. 26; and. save
tlie bracketed parts, the Ta Ming luh It.


CHARMS AND SPELLS USED IN SORCERY.


905


“ Y e n - m e i”, says the paraphrase of this cruel article, “means
“ the performance of magic by means of spectres in subjection, for
“example, the painting or carving of human images and piercing
“ their hearts, or driving nails into their eyes, or fettering their
“ hands and feet. Those ‘ written charms’ refer to the writing of
“charms or archaic characters for sorcerous use, and to burial
“ of inscribed papers, in order to evoke spectral evil ; furthermore
“ they refer to the burning of such things so as to give in this
“ way orders to spectres to perform their evil work ; — and those
‘“spells’ refer to such things as the practice of writing down the
“year, month and day of the birth of a man whom one desires
“ to kill, and pronouncing spells over the writing” b

Also on pages 8.24, 858, 871, 876 and 885 we have seen, that it
is by means of charms, spells, formulae of enchantment or witchery,
or by whatever names we choose to call those things, that sorcerers
bend the spectres, instrumental to the infliction of evil, to their
will, or make them their “slaves”; and on page 876 we have learned
that charms are burned for the purpose. It is then evident enough
that charms actually are written orders sent into the world of
spirits; in this quality they mostly bear, as is the case with terres-
trial official orders, the impress of a seal. They are called fu -; also
fu-shub “charm-writings”, or fu-changb “charm-formulae”.
Spells, called cheu^ or cliu®, or chuh’, “imprecations”, no doubt
bear likewise the character of orders; they may be recited or chanted,
or exclaimed with vehemence, according as they are deemed to be
incantatiims or bullying phrases. Charms and spells thus may be
explicitly said to be the very main spring of sorcery, as but for
* them spectres would not perform their evil work.

A very common method of sorcery also consists in tempting
spectres by means of sacrifices to do harm to men. We have read
of sacrifices connected with sorcery in the first century of our era


Mum-Zm-


Jti •


6


7


‘


906


SORCERY.


(pp. 844—845); we have learned that the incantations by which
cat-spectres were launched against “objects”, were accompanied by
offerings (p. 610); and we have read of sacrifices offered to ku
(p. 850) and gold caterpillars (p. 858). In Amoy, and no doubt
elsewhere equally, sacrifices with sorcerous purpose are especially
offered on tombs, and before owmerless soul-tablets or fragments
thereof. As a rule the sorcerer will at the same time vow that,
as soon as his victim is realty smarting under the evil destined
for him, he will reward the spectre by burning for it mock
money and other things, to an amount stipulated to a farthing.
Such sorcery connected with sacrificial bribery is styled in Amoy
he tsoa tsbe khi'o'^, “sorcery with a promise of paper”. Inferior
spirits in the service of the god of Walls and Moats or the god
of the Eastern Mountain, and having their images in the temples
of these divinities, are preferably tempted in this way to evil; but
nobody would find it in his heart to approach with such proposals
these divinities themselves, or any others of rank and dignity, except
in case of serious outrage, when the hand of divine justice is wanted
to secure vengeance. Under such circumstances it may even happen
that spirits and deities of whatever rank and order are invoked
publicly by victims of wrong-doing. This is the ultimate resource
for defence, a desperate cry for help to the whole world of spirits
and men, and therefore not looked upon as sorcery, not even as a
thing bad or unfair, but applauded by public sympathy as a check
upon cruel abuse of power.

In Amoy it is no rare occurrence to see helpless people, pressed
hard by merciless creditors or enemies, make use of these means.
With hair dishevelled, blackened face, a sheet of mock money
behind each ear, the wretched man or woman strides through streets
and lanes for a whole day, or even for several days in succession, cursing
the foe with all the vehemence at his disposal, pouring out quite
a vocabulary of revilings, and calling upon all spirits of heaven and
earth by their names and titles to send down upon the guilty head
whatever ills they have in store for the wicked. The strange accou-
trement of the imprecator associates him with devils and demons
who are expected to come and avenge him. In one hand he holds
a round flat tray of wickerwork, otherwise used for winnowing rice
by throwing it up in the wind; round the border this object is decorated
with fluttering sheets of mock money, and he beats it with a steel-


1 if IK it O.


SORCEROUS INVOCATION OF AVENGING GODS.


907


yard; hence the local name of this sorcery-, //a// poa-ki k6', “to
beat a tray-drum”.

As a mark of his misery and grief, the wretch wears sackcloth,
as if he were mourning the loss of his father or mother. His back
displays on a piece of linen or paper the name and address of the
author of his woes, with a short account of his wicked deeds.
One visit at least is paid to the temple of the Eastern Mountain
god, and one to that of the god of Wails and Moats, where,
prostrate before the images of these two supreme administrators
of divine justice, the tray-drummer cries aloud his complaints. The
priests in charge of those buildings feel themselves in duty bound
to keep him out with gentle, pacifying words, but they stand power-
less because of the mob, which with merry inquisitiveness throngs
around the oppressed innocent. The height of effect is obtained when
the latter gets to the big temple-drum and beats it to arouse the
attention of the god, or if, by ringing the great temple-bell, he
convokes all divinities and spirits within hearing distance. But still
worse should the victim affix to the bell a shred of paper bearing
the oppressor’s name, this being then dinned into the ears of the
just gods of vengeance at every peal.

I once saw in Amoy three matrons, honest slave-brokers in part-
nership, conjointly “beating the tray-drum” against some unknown
individual who had abducted out of their house a girl consigned
to them for sale, and against this maid herself, whose elopement
placed the stainless reputation of the firm under suspicion of defrauding
consigners of human merchandize.

We cannot, possibly doubt that there must exist a great many
more forms of animistic sorcery, which would fall within the com-
pass of this chapter. We may instance the base attempt to bring down
a malicious ghost upon a victim by smearing him with “corpse-oil”
(Book I, p. 23), if it may be allowed that such oil contains soul-
substance of the dead man beside whose corpse it was burning.


1


CHAPTER IV.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF SOUI,S OF OBJECTS.

The principle that things which we call lifeless are, according to
the Chinese, actually animated, especially if they have a human or
somewhat human shape, has been treated by us in Chapter XIII
of Part I (pp. 325 sqq.). Naturally, as we have pointed out in
Chapter Vll of Part II (p. 664), this dogma has led to the inference
that such things may be spectres, and may render dangerous all spots
where they lie or where they are hidden.

These notions, being firmly fixed in the Chinese mind, reduce
sorcery to an art so simple that everybody may practise it in a
hundred ways. It merely requires concealment of some image, or
anything whatever, in the house of the victim, or in something
which is next to his person, or which otherwise comes in close
contact with him, so that the indwelling soul may do its fatal work.
Such instruments of sorcery belong, of course, to, the class of yen-
mei or “spectres in subjection” to which we have paid attention in
the preceding chapter, and they are actually, denoted by this name.

Such sorcerous things may have been the images which, in the
blood-stained last period of the reign and life of Wu of the Han
dynasty, were buried in the roads by which he travelled (p. 829),
and in the palace of his heir-apparent (pp. 831 and 832). They
may, however, have been images of that sovereign, made for
purposes of which we shall treat in the next chapter. The practice
of hiding images with malicious intent is mentioned in books clearly
and often enough to remove all doubts of its actual prevalence in
times past and present. An author of the fourteenth century, for
instance, wrote the following lines:

“ The people, being so ignorant, are often beguiled by sorcerous
‘■wu. The authorities severely interdict their practices, but nothing
“■ can check them. There lived a well-to-do family on the seashore,

“ not accustomed to believe in male and female w u ; therefore,

“ when once they had a house built, a w u told the carpenter to


SORCERY BY MEANS OF ANIMATED OBJECTS.


909


“ make a human image of wood and put it within a pillar ; and
“ when the members of the family, after having suffered for some
“years from sickness, consulted that wu, he declared that there
“must be some ‘thing in subjection’ hidden in the pillar; they
“ made an opening in it, and actually found the thing. But on their
“ making enquiries of the carpenter, the latter confessed what the
“ w u had ordered him to do. The family informed the magistrates,
“ and the w u was punished. This event was the origin ot the
“general prohibition which Ho Tsze-ching, the prefect of that
“ district, issued at that time against heterodox sacrifices and male
“ and female w u” h

The 2'sze puh yii also relates such sorcerous tricks. “In Tsze>
“ chSven (in Shantung), the great-grandson of the Secretary to the
“Board Kao Nien-tung, a siu-ts^ai of the highest class, has himself
“ told me, that in his youth, when he had emptied the marriage-
“ goblet, he got a head-ache and suddenly sank down to the ground
“ in a swoon, unconscious of men and things around him. Some
“ days afterwards he frequently heard a voice by his ears, uttering
“ sounds like 1 e h - 1 e h, and when another period of days had passed
“ away, he saw an apparition like a baby, a little more than one
“ foot high. From that day he grew weak and emaciated, finally
“ being unable to rise from his bed. Convinced that he was under
“ the influence of sorcery, his family called a magician, but the
“ attempts of this man to expel the spectre were of no avail. They
“ now secretly concealed a sword at the head of his bed, and from
“ that moment, whenever he awoke, he saw the child flee hastily
“ from there, and disappear under a wmoden bench. They placed a
“ copper basin with water under the latter ; and one day at noon
“ the patient, on waking up from his slumber and seeing the child
“ come, brandished the sword so well that it tumbled into the water


A # Jllll R ^ W i ft ® ,,i Inm ^ aj ^

a -work of the fourteenth century, in two chapters, by an unknown hand;
T S, sect,


910


SORCERY.


“ with a grating noise. The family now found a wooden image of
“ a child in the basin, in red clothes, with a red cord around its
“ neck, at which it pulled with both its hand as if to strangle itself.
“ They destroyed this image by fire, and thus put an end to that
“ sorcery. Subsequently they were told that a workman in the village
“ had died on the same day. The truth was, that when the graduate
“ married and settled in the house of his wife’s family as an adopted
“ son-in-law, his wife’s father had the roof repaired, on which occasion
“ that workman, because something which he demanded was refused
“him, had performed that yen-mei sorcery; but as soon as it was
“ battled, he himself lost his life”

It is therefore a strict necessity for any one who has a house
built to keep himself on good terms with his masons and carpenters,
and to offer them a bounteous meal from time to time; for should
any of them insert a little puppet of wood or lime somewhere into
a wall, or under the floor, or in the ridge-beam, apparitions will
become frequent, and crowds of spectres of all sorts, vanishing as
soon as seen, will keep the inmates in constant alarm by their
moaning and whistling. Such black magic becomes more effectual
should the perpetrator use a fragment of a human bone for the
purpose: indeed, few things are animated so thoroughly as the'
remains of a human body. A soul-tablet operates very efficaciously
also, or a fragment of it, easily snatched out of some public repo-
sitory for such animated things (Book I, p. 1058). But souls of


• ig;ii

.E a * « # s e * A T a Mo * 0 a ® a *
HAT. - 0Ti*At.

Supplementary Tdze pith yi't, ch. 7.


SORCERY BY MEANS OF IMAGES.


911 .


animals too can become spectres, and therefore a bone of a cat,
dog, goose or fowl may serve the purpose equally well.

Thus wives and concubines may by means of objects of sorcery
always agreeably break the monotony of their dreary backroom
lives, and at the same time satisfy their mutual animosity and
jealousy. “Su P‘ei of VVu-kung was prefect of Chhi-khiu in the
“TTen pao period (A.D. 742 — 756). His daughter was married
“ to a member of the Li clan, who, lavishing his favours on a
“ female slave, did not live on the best terms of love and affection
“ with Su P'ei’s daughter. Then that slave asked a sorcerer to exer-
“ cise upon this woman his black arts by means of souls in sub-
“ jection. They buried a charm in the dung-hill of Li’s dwelling,
“ and knitted seven multicoloured puppets, somewhat more than
“one chTh in size, which they concealed in a hole of the eastern
“ wall, covering the opening with clay, so that nobody knew it.
“ Thus some years passed away, when that slave woman of Li died,
“so that Su P'ei’s daughter remained alone in the dwelling; but
“ when four or five years more had elapsed, the sorcery worked, and
“ the multicoloured women came forth and haunted the dwelling, in
“ consequence of which the lady Su fell sick and became extremely
“ ill. Nobody could guess the cause, Li’s slave being dead h

“ Another year passed, in the course of which magicians were
“ invited over and over again to come and stop the evil by means
“ of spells; they came with everything necessary, but could not
“ master it. So they watched for the re-appearance of those spirits
“ and assailed them with several dozen men on all sides, to seize
“ them. They caught one, which they found to be possessed of a
“ complete body with eyebrows and eyes. It wringled incessantly
“ in their hands, and on being belaboured with their swords its
“ blood flowed on the ground. They then burned if on a ' pile
“ of firewood. The other spirits appeared in the burning-place.


xmmmAm


912


SORCERY.


“ wailing and crying, either in the air or on the ground. And when
■ “ the incineration was completed, they carved in the house a like-
“ ness of a person, and appeared next day in white dress to howl
for several days.

“ In half a year the inmates cauglit successively six puppets
*• more, and burned them. One on being caught escaped, and as
they pursued it, it suddenly entered the dung-hill. Su then with
“ more than a hundred men excavated the dung-hill to a depth ot
“seven or eight cli^ih; and they found a charm of peach-wood
“bearing an inscription in red, still legible; ‘Li’s slave’, thus it
“ran, ‘in order to bewitch the daughter of the Su family with
“spectres in subjection, makes seven human images; they are on
“ the east, above a pencil, in an earth basket; after nine years they
“must do their work’. Following this hint, they broke down the
“ wall and discovered a last puppet, on which Su P'ei’s daughter
“ suffered no farther harm”

Such simple sorcery is a constant lurking danger, against which every
honest man has always to be on the alert. Wise parents, who marry
a son and want a new quilt for his nuptial bed, can hardly dispense
with the precaution of inviting the maker of it a few times to
dinner and paying him on additional fee, for should this man
conceal two paper puppets of very diminutive size within the cotton,
or twist two bits of flock into something like human forms, discord
is certain to arise between the young couple from the very first
moment they share the bed. Great harm may also be inflicted by


, « « * 2 ■g’ 3f: * » St p? . S « S .

5lit B Y- a.

-b A M . # tt # . # ± * * « W li 5- . ^ J£

A-b+4>


. Kwang i ki-^ K K, ch. .%9.


GRAVE-SORCEIlY.


913


putting objects, or characters and signs expressing evil, into an
enemy’s family-grave; indeed, the felicity of the soul which dwells
therein being thus destroyed, it will no longer protect and bless
its offspring, and may even henceforth injure their prosperity. That
the legislator takes this view, is evident from the fact that he has
inserted the following lines among the commentaries on the article
which treats of sorcery by means of yen-mei, charms, and spells
(p. 904) : “ Whoever, cherishing a grudge, clandestinely puts a stake
“ of peach-wood into the ancestral grave of another, with intent to
“ frustrate the fung-shui of the same, shall be 'punished as if he
“ had used spectres in subjection, written charms, or spells, with intent
“ to render others ill or miserable, that is to say, two degrees less
“ severely than the law would demand if he had planned a murder and
“ begun to execute the crime, yet without inflicting any wounds —
“ viz. with banishment for two years. Sentence passed in Chehkiang,
“in the 23nd year of the Kia khing period (A. D. 1817)”*.
Such malpractices are by no means modern, for we have given
our readers on page 1030 of Book 1 an excerpt from one of the
Standard Histories, telling of the grave of an imperial concubine in
the sixth century of our era, in which a waxen goose and other
things were secretly buried, in order to further her own son’s in-
terests to the detriment of those of the emperor.


i


58


CHAPTER V.


OTHER FORMS OP SORCERT.

If it is possible to harm a person by means of souls and spirits, it
may be possible also to harm him by means of his own soul, that
is to say, by removing it from his body.

We have, indeed, read in the Code of Laws (see p. 871) ot
miscreants stealing the vital breath or soul out of men, in order to
employ these in evil-doing; but no details of such soul-thefts are
given there. There need not, however, be any mystery about the
consequences of such thefts, since we have described in a special
chapter (pp. 96 sqq.) the ills which the absence of his soul causes
to a living man. That chapter has given us two stories of men
who, without any intent to do harm, extracted souls out of women
by means of evocation, connected with the use of magical charms.
And on page 818 we have read of a Taoist, trying with the aid of
a spell and a hook to draw the soul and life out of an enemy, this
criminal work being frustrated merely by the circumstance that his
victim possessed perfect command of his nervous system. The con-
clusion may then be drawn, that China possesses soul-thieves pur-
suing an object other than that of the sorcerers treated in Chapter HI,
who want “souls in subjection” as instruments. It can hardly be
doubted that those thieves too do their work mainly by means of
charms and spells. To this conclusion we are led by the following
narrative :

“In Kwangsi people trust and respect ‘spectre-masters’. There
“ were two men there, members of the tribes Ch'en and Lai, who
“could catch lives, to put them in the place of those of dying men.
“ Families with patients frequently engaged them. When one came,
“ he covered a cup of water with paper, and suspended it upside
“down over the bed of the patient; on the next day he came
“ back to see him, and if no water had trickled out all that time,
“ he declared that help was possible. Or he took a cock, stuck a
“ clean knife seven or eight inches long into its throat, and held


SORCEROUS THEFT OP HUMAN SOULS.


915


“ the bird before the patient, suppressing his own respiration and
“reciting spells; and if after the spells no blood had trickled out
“ of’ the bill o"f the cock, he likewise declared that help might be
“afforded; he then drew the knife out of the cock, and threw it
“ upon the ground, and the bird ffew away as before. But if a drop
“ of the water or the blood had trickled down, he took his departure,
“ unable to help.

“ If a cure was po.ssible, he put up an altar, and suspended there
“some dozens of painted portraits of shen and kwei; then the
“spectre-master, dressed like a woman, stepped a kang dance and
“ uttered spells to the sound of a gong and a drum. And when
“ the night had come, he made a lantern of oiled paper, and in the
“open country called a soul (hwun) with an indistinct voice. Then
“ the soul of a soundly sleeping neighbour obeyed his call and came ;
“ the spectre-master compelled it to take the lantern in hand and
“ go away, and if then he congratulated the family, the patient
“ recovered, while the man who had taken the lantern in hand died.
“ There was, however, a way to neutralize the effects of such work,
“ consisting in this, that whosoever heard his gong and drum in
“ the night, placed himself with both his feet on the ground ; no
“ harm then occurred to him. In this way Ch'en and Lai became
“ rich. The hall in their house was gradually converted into a
“ pitch-dark place, where they sacrificed to a very large number of
“ images of kwei and s h e n h


5 §


SI - * . W a 7J -t A + A H « |6| S A t >
mm%. 5E*siR

* 4b T » * » » A # » ± ^ If! .

* W f! # K - jf , » a K +• ts . a M -ft 4i

A«#stf 5E, s.

(t w . ® It s . a


916


SORCERY.


“ The wife of my father’s younger brother fell ill, and invited the
“ spectre-master Lai to see her. With a sword in his hand he tried
“ to seize the spectre, and in the room a beast like a large bat crept
‘•under her bed. Lai there attacked it with the character ‘thunder’
“ written in his palm, but the fire flashed out of his hand in the
“ wrong direction and scorched his beard. He flew into a passion,
“ordered t'ung oil to be boiled in a pan, and wrote a charm, which
“ he burned ; and after he had stirred the oil in the pan with his
“ hand, the spectre was heard under the bed suing for pardon with
“ a chirping voice. After a while it became silent, and the woman
“ was restored to health.

“ One day, when spectre-master Ch'en was calling upon a soul
“on behalf of a family, he saw a girl in blue clothes slowly ap-
“ proach. Looking at her attentively, he recognized his own daughter,
“ who came to take the lantern in hand. Greatly startled he flung
“ the light to the ground, slapped her on the back, and hurried
“ home to look at his daughter, who just awoke from her sleep
“with a shudder, saying: ‘T came because I dreamt you were calling
“me’. And the blue linen gown she wore bore the greasy marks
“ of his hand.

“ In Kwei-lin, the prefect Wei had a daughter lying dangerously
“ ill. His wife invited Ch'en to come and see her, and Ch'en

“ demanded a hundred coins; but the prefect, a severe man, had

“him arrested, flogged with sticks, and sent to gaol; yet the

“spectre-master smiled, and said: ‘beware of remorse for the

“ blows inflicted on me ’. While they flogged the spectre-master, the
“daughter suddenly cried from her bed: ‘ClTen orders two spectres
“to flog my buttocks with sticks; they are putting me in gaol’.
“The affrighted wife forthwith demanded that he should be set free;
“ she promised him double pay, but Ch^en said : ‘ While at work
“I have been scared by evil spirits; my best efforts will now be
“powerless’. And the girl died”*.


« ffi '« « « . ffi A ^ 4 M - « fi yffi . * #


BLACK MAGIC BY MEANS OF CHARMS AND SPELLS.


917


Yet other means are mentioned in China of depriving a living
man of his soul. We have seen on pp. 108 seq. that a soul, while
outside a man when he is sleeping, may be sorcerously prevented
from returning into him by means of sacrificial articles placed beside
his bed; thinking this is a funeral offering, the soul will then
believe the man to be dead, and go elsewhere, thus causing death
actually to follow. The same effect may, according to many, be reached
by painting or blackening a sleeping man’s face, whereby the wandering
soul will fiiil to recognize him on returning.

Our chapters cannot, of course, make any pretence to depict
the whole field of Chinese sorcery. The domain of Animism indeed
is extensive enough to allow of the invention of sorcerous tricks
and practices in indefinite numbers. There also exists sorcery in
which no animistic element appears visibly, so that it is doubtful
whether it falls within the compass of our work. Such is for
instance black magic exerted directly upon the victim, his image,
name, or horoscope, either by means of charms or spells, or by
ill-treatment of any kind.

The reader knows that charms and spells used for letting loose
malicious spectres upon men, are commands, formulae imposing
obedience. Their use consequently implies an implicit belief in the
power and efficacy of words written or spoken. Felicitations, curses,
and words in general arouse thoughts of realities, and thoughts
may be strong enough to convince simple minds that the realities
are present. Words therefore effectuate what they express; they do
not merely represent realities, but are the realities themselves. This
principle has been illustrated in this work by various customs and


« pf iSS: * . w

# A ^ (I . A H "■


918


SORCERY.


usages * ; it is a princi 2 Jal factor in Chinese exorcising and religious
magic, and will as such come to the foreground in particular in
Chapter XII of the next Part of this Book, and regularly later on.

Hence it necessarily follows, that spells and charms which express
evil amply suffice for the performance of sorcery, and no auxiliary
or intermediary spectres are wanted. Charms and spells were, in
fact, (see pp. 829 and 83:2) used against Wu of the Han dynasty,
and it therefore seems admissible that they were instruments of
sorcery in much earlier times, considering also that we find them
in use among peoples in very low stages of civilisation. That the
penal laws of China have for many centuries attached to their use
the same punishments as to the use of “spectres in subjection”, we
have seen from the article translated on page 904.

Charms and spells for purposes of sorcery, whether they convey
orders to the spectres, or express the harm which is to be inflicted,
generally do so in occult forms or terms, into the particulars of
which, owing to the want of data, we cannot enter. They may,
however, have the simplest form imaginable; a shred of paper,
for , instance, inscribed with the character ^ or ^ “to kill”, and
hidden in the clothes of somebody, even in those which he does
not wear, may suffice to kill him and all his family. Characters
expressing disease or any evil whatever, may be concealed in an
enemy’s house, nay, even a scrawl of strokes and dots may harm
him and his family, because perchance something resembling a letter
may be formed therein. A character representing a spectre may render
a man’s house a prey to any devil desired, especially if the sorcerer
enhances its operation by means of spells. The written name of
an insect may make his dwelling the haunt of vermin, or‘at every
meal ruin the appetite of the family by suddenly producing in the
bowls and dishes cockroaches, centipedes, or lice. In short, sorcery
here has the widest scope; everything imaginable may find a place
in it. We have seen in this work so many symbolic represen-
tations of felicity actually producing felicity in the opinion of the

Chinese, that we cannot but allow that representations of evil,
however faint or fantastic they be, ought to be believed by them to
produce evil; and all such representations may be classed by us in
the long list of sorcerous Charms.

Charms and spells may also serve rogues to benumb the senses

of others, so as to cause them to fail into traps and snares. So


1 See the Index of Book I, Characters and Words.


SORCERY BY MEANS OP THE VICTIM’S HOROSCOPE. 919

firmly do the Chinese believe in the reality of such dangers that the
Code of Laws contains a notice, to this effect : “ There exists a
“ murderous, detestable rabble who use charms and spells, herbs
“ or food to decoy boys and girls, in order to dismember them, or
“to roast or rob. their brains and marrow. Such people must be
“ traced and arrested by the district magistrates, arraigned, and
“ punished. Should any of these authorities fall short in discovering
“ them, they shall be degraded two steps (in the record of merits
“ in the Board of Civil Office)” *.

It is interesting to read also in Chinese books, that harm may be
wrought upon a victim by pronouncing evil over characters expressing
the year, month, day, and hour of his birth, and that this cir-
cumstance is made use of by sorcerers to fascinate' those whose
life they want to “pluck out”, or whose soul they want to rob
(see pp. 872, 875, 905). Those characters are eight in number,
forming four binomiums from the sexagenary cycles (Book 1, p. 103)
used for counting years, days, months and hours, 'fhey constitute
the horoscope of the man, which determines his fate for ever;
therefore to injure this horoscope is to injure his fate. To write them
down and inscribe imprecations across, or pronounce curses and
spells on them, or harm them in any other way, is to apply
cruelly the ethnic law of association and identification of represen-
tations with their realities. In Amoy a common trick also is to
paste a shred of paper, bearing those birth-dates as well as the name
of the victim, upon the bell of some temple, because every peal
when the bell is rung will then shake and stir his person and
fortunes most tremendously.

Fortunately there are many people against whom sorcery in
whatever form, and in this form in particular, is powerless. These
are they whose four natal binomiums are, according to almanacks
or soothsayers, or even in spite of those books and men, all of first-
rate quality ; of these children of fortune the eight characters are
“heavy” thus forming a natural destiny which is as good as an
impregnable stronghold defying all attacks. But woe to those whose
eight characters are “light” these are they whom sorcerers victimize.

S ♦ 5 A § B A-


920


SORCERY.


Persons who become silly or idiots are commonly looked upon as
victims of sorcerous attacks made upon their horoscopes.

Everybody in Amoy occasionally has to place his horoscope in
the hands of soothsayers, chronomancers and geomancers for the
purpose of allowing them to derive predictions from it with
regard to its owner’s fate, fortunes, and chances of success in his
enterprises. No wonder therefore that those professors of occult arts
lie under constant suspicion of sorcery, or at least of betraying for
money horoscopes to those who want them tor works of iniquity.
No wonder also that every man of cunning and prudence seeks
protection by a most careful concealment of the two characters
which denote the hour of his birth; the other six define his birth
with less precision, and therefore are not so dangerous to his fate
in malicious hands. The objection to divulging natal hours is so
great, that in written prayers addressed to gods and ancestors at
sacrifices, in which the offerers, in order to obey established custom,
are wont to describe themselves with some precision, they only •
inscribe the year, month and day of their birth, replacing the
horary characters by the neutral term “auspicious hour” b

Charms and spells may also inflict every sort of harm on a
victim if they are made to work upon something representing his
body. The reader remembers that we have demonstrated (pp. 339
sgg.) how closely the Chinese are wont to associate beings with
their likenesses. They then are perfectly aware that it is possible to
harm a man by maltreating or cursing an image of his; he will
then suffer everything which the image suffers, especially if the
identity between both is intensified by writing on the image the
name and horoscope of the man. This method, according to my
native informants, is extensively practised. Tn Amoy the images used
for the purpose are mostly very roughly made of two bamboo splinters
fastened together crosswise, on one side of which is pasted some
paper supposed to represent a human body. They are not larger
than a hand, and those of men are distinguished from those of
women by two shreds of paper, said to be boots. They are called
i^be sin “substitutes or surrogates of a person”, and may be had,
for a cash or so a piece, in every shop where paper articles are
made and sold for sacrifice to the dead and the gods, for they are
also burnt as slaves for the dead in the other world. In particular
they are used for exorcising practices and religious magic, to be


SORCERY BY MEANS OF THE VICTIm’s IMAGE. 921

described by us afterwards. Even a few straws, bound together
crosswise, suffice for sorcerous ends, the identity of a person with
his surrogate being not nearly so much established by its form
as by his name and horoscope, attached to it on paper

Menfolk generally assert that this form of black art is especially
practised by the fair sex. Hatred of tyrannous husbands; mutual
jealousy of wives and concubines, aroused by a partial distribution
of sexual and other favours by the common husband ; domestic
quarrels and animosities of all sorts, from which no home in China
is exempt, are things which easily convert female apartments into
nurseries of occult iniquity. Besmearing the “substitute” of a rival
with faeces, or throwing it into the privy, in order to infect herself
with a foul smell which may turn the husband’s affection into
aversion, is there the order of the day, and so is burial of substi-
tutes, or thrashing them amidst loud curses and maledictions, female
slaves showing special ingenuity in sueh refined malpractices.

The use of “surrogates” also has the advantage of enabling sorce-
rers and sorceresses to hurt their victims in whatever parts of their
bodies they desire. If the puppet’s eyes are pierced with a naif,
pin or needle, and at the same time the proper spell or curse is
pronounced, the victim may become blind, especially if the pricking
object is not removed; a pin in the belly may produce colic; in
the heart it may entail death; the more pricks, and the louder the
spells, the more certain is the effect. In this way poor Moon-in-
the-west was treated (p. 876). Surrogates are often thrown away
in busy streets, in order that the crowd may trample them; but he
whose eyes fall upon one is sure to turn aside, and will spit upon
it to annul its effects. In all cases, such sorcery is more effectual
if the connexion of the surrogate with the “object” is intensified
by passing it beforehand over him, or hiding it in his clothes for
a time, or under his chair or bed.

In Amoy it is said to be far from unusual to bring “objects”
by means of puppets of sorcery within the grip of spirits of low
rank in the service of the God of Walls and Moats or of the
Eastern Mountain; indeed, these gods are the judges of human souls,
who often order their underlings to extract souls out of living men
and draw them before their tribunals. When a man deems himself


1 It is clear that the use of puppets of sorcery thus inscribed re^ts on tlie
same principle which underlies the use of soul-tablets for the dead, these being
likewise assimilated with individuals because they bear their names, dates of birth
and death, and other particulars descriptive of their persons.


923


sorcery.


wronged by another, he may successfully hide a paper substitute
of him close by the image of a lictor in the temple of one of those
gods, at the saine time enjoining on that being by means of im-
precation with a sacrifice of some food or dainties, to arrest the
soul of the wrong-doer, in order that this may suffer before the divine
judge just the same terrible torture which terrestrial mandarins
are wont to inflict on men whom they arraign. In the temple of
the Eastern Mountain is a large cylinder of wood, which, revolving
perpendicularly on an axis, lifts the souls of women who died in
the state of contamination by childbirth, out of a tank of blood
in which they abide in hell to expiate that state. Women do not
shrink from throwing substitutes of members of their sex under
this instrument of salvation, in order that these women may die
in childbed and be plunged into that tank.

The method of causing injury by means of images apparently
is old. We have read of puppets in the account of the great ku
incident of the Han dynasty, which may have been “ spectres
in subjection”, though the possibility is not excluded that they
were “substitutes” of Wu’s own august person buried in the
ground, either to 'cause sympathetically his death and burial, or in
order to receive his soul-substance on his passing by, and thus
become fit for being operated on successfully. It is a fact that in
the historical account of a similar event in A.D. 453, upon which
we have touched on page 1408 of Book I, it is explicitly stated
that the puppets used were images of the emperor. That account
is of sufficient interest to be related in its entirety :

“There was a female wu. Yen Tao-yuh by name, who pretended
“to have communication with spiritual influences and beings (ling),
“ and to possess the faculty of having in her employ spectral beings” h
Being introduced to an imperial princess by her slave woman
Wang Ying-wu she gained the favour of Shao the crown-prince,
and of Siiin \ the second prince, “who respectfully employed her
“ and called her Celestial Master; and after her directions they made
“ wu-ist ku, and made an image of the emperor, consisting of a
“ puppet of jade, which they buried in front of the Han-chang hall”

' g was.

«0^6is. jasA


A SORCERY CABAL ENTAILING INTERNAL WAR.


933


Those princes indeed were conscious of many offences^ which they
feared their father might discover and punish. Wang Ying-wu was
their accomplice, together with Ch'^en 'Fien-hing a male slave of
the princess, brought up by Wang Ying-wu and used by her for the
satisfaction of her sexual appetites. Yet a fourth in the sorcery plot
was the eunuch Khing Kwoh The princess happened to die, and
Wang Ying-wu was thereupon given by the crown-prince as a
concubine to one of his officers, named Ch^en Hwai-yuen who
discovered her secret relation with Ch^en Fien-hing. On his request
the crown-prince put this slave to death. This execution filled Khing
Kwoh with fears, it being well known that he too was one of
Wang Ying-wu’s intimate friends; hence, to save himself, he revealed
the sorcery to the emperor. This occurred in the seventh month
of the year 452.

t/

The Son of Heaven had Ying-wu arrested. Her dwelling was
searched, and this led to the discovery of a great many papers
from Shao and Siiin, all relating to spells and w u-ist k u ; also the
buried image was found. Tao-yuh managed to escape, and was
sought in vain, even in the provinces. The two princes did not
even try to purge themselves of their guilt, and at once made open
confession. The younger one took the missing woman with him to
the river-port of the capital, and from there into the northern
army, under disguise of a Buddhist nun, and he even ventured to
return with her to the capital in the second month of next year.

But all this iniquity was betrayed to the emperor by two female
slaves. He divested Shao of his dignity of heir-apparent, and ordered
Siiin to commit suicide. These sentences were a signal for these
princes to try a coup d'etat. In the early morning , while the
guards were still sleeping, Shao made an onset on the Palace, and
his partisan Chang Ch'ao-chi ^ killed the emperor, cutting off his
five fingers. Several grandees jvere slain; Shao placed himself on
the throne, and adopted the style of reign T^ai ch^u® or “the
very first beginning”, suggested to him by Tao-yuh.

But the third imperial prince, lawful successor in consequence
of the deposition of the eldest and the condemnation of the
second, raised a large power in the provinces. After a short campaign
and a naval struggle on the Yang-tsze, his troops conquered the


‘‘mMZ- Kiscwi-


924


SORCERY.


capital, which was pacified by means of twenty-two days of great
bloodshed. Shao, found in a well in the arsenal, was decapitated;
Siiin escaped on horseback from the city, but had to surrender
to the general of the victorious army, who beheaded him. Their
wives, concubines and children were put to death or compelled to
commit suicide. The heads of the princes were exposed on stakes,
and afterwards thrown into the Yang-tszS together with their bodies.
Their faction was exterminated; Chang Ch%o-chi’s body was partly
devoured by the soldiers, partly burned (see p. 369). Shao, com-
pelled to betray the place where he had hidden the imperial seals,
said they were in the abode of Yen Tao-yuh. This entailed new
searches for her and for VYang Ying-wu; they were discovered, and
publicly flogged to death; their corpses were burned, and the ashes
strewed in the Yang-tsze

The principle that images are physically connected with that which
they represent is stated without reservation in the practice of sor-
cery. People have told me with the utmost seriousness that shipowners
and merchants are not seldom ruined by enemies furtively drawing
the faint outlines of a junk somewhere at the entrance of their
houses with the bow pointing to the street; their ships then sail
out, but do not return. In one of the celebrated tales of P‘u Bung-
ling we read:

“ A man in Shansi, whose names I have forgotten, a member of
“ the White Lotus sect and a disciple of Sii Hung-ju *, misled the
“ masses by heterodox doctrines, and many who wished to learn
“ his magic worshipped him as their master. One day having to
“ depart, he placed a basin in the main apartment of his house,
“ and covered it with another basin, telling his disciple to sit down
“ by it and watch it, without, however, lifting up the cover to
“ see. But after his departure the disciple did what had been for-
“ bidden him, and saw that there was clean water in the basin
“ and a ship of plaited straw floating on it, fully rigged with sails
“ and masts. His curiosity induced him to take it up with his
“fingers, but it was capsized thereby; he set it up in its former
“ position, and put the cover over it, when suddenly his master
“came back. ‘Why have you disobeyed me?’ he angrily exclaimed.
“ The disciple retorted he had done nothing, but the master said :

1 Books of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 99; Histoi'y of tlio South, ch. 14.

2 A rebellious leader of the Lotus-sect who assumed imiierial dignity in Shantung
in the period of the downfall of the Ming dynasty. See my Sectarianism and Religious
Peisecution in China, pp. 1C7 scq.


CONJUGAL AFFECTION DESTROYED BY SORCERY'.


925


“‘Do you think you can deceive me? My ship has just now
“ capsized at sea’” h

There is standard history to prove that the Chinese even deem
it possible to destroy conjugal affection by operating on emblems
thereof painted or drawn. In the History of the Kin Dynasty we
read the following incident, which occurred in A.D. 1209; “The
“ late emperor (Chang Tsung *“) had had his special favourites, of
“ whom the lady Li (his principal concubine) was jealous. She told
“a female wu, named Li Ting-nii, to make a human image of paper
“ and wood, and a charm representing a couple of mandarin ducks
“ (which are in China symbols of conjugal attachment, see Book 1,
“ p. 471), and to direct “spectres in subjection” to use these,
“ in order to cut short the line of the imperial progeny with those
“ things. As nobody could fully explain what evil she had done,
“ the emperor, as soon as the matter had transpired, ordered a
“ high officer to submit her to an interrogation, and on her
“ confessing everything, commissioned high ministers to examine
“ her; and as these grandees obtained no other results, the judges
“ pronounced her worthy of death in accordance with the laws,
“demanding, however, that she should be reprieved on account of
“ her having for so long a time liestowed care on the late sovereign.
“ But now imperial princes and officers came forward with a
“ memorial demanding that the emperor should definitely order her
“ to put an end to herself” Her mother, crazed with age, was


ire#*. 6rs0.

c/ii i, ch. 5,

2

US.


926


SORCERY.


put to death; her two brothers, high grandees, were divested of all
their dignities and banished, and some accomplices of high rank
were rigorously punished or executed.

Not only likenesses, names and horoscopes may serve for inflicting
sorcery, but also parts of the body and clothing of the “object”.
This shows that either the connexion between such things and the
individual himself is not deemed to be broken, or a portion of the
latter is identified or associated with him, since, like his image, name
or horoscope, it calls up thoughts of him, or such a portion is deemed
to contain a part of his soul. We know that fragments of a dead
man contain substance of his soul; why then should this .not be
the case with fragments of a living man?

Hairs, nail-clippings, even droppings, are efficient instruments of
sorcery, as well as old shoes and garments, queue-threads, buttons,
etc.; caning or burning, imprecating or chanting spells over such
things may render the former owner ill or unhappy, or may even kill
him. Hence it passes for prudence not to give cast-off garments to
paupers or beggars. Such sorcery is no doubt performed in China
on a extensive scale. ClTen Tsang-khi in the eighth century advised
that “hair af a runaway person should be taken and laid out
“crosswise on the woof of a loom; he will then get so confused
“ that he will not know where to go” h By application of the same
principle, injury may be inflicted upon cattle, dogs and cats of an
enemy, and may make these ill, stubborn or mad, nay even his
lifeless possessions may in this way be spoiled or destroyed. We
read of “a wu in the district of Teng-chhng, which forms a
“ part of Siang-yang (Hupeh pr.), who could spoil the brew ot
“spirit-distillers by sorcery, and therefore was feared 'and respected
“ by all wineshop-keepers. In every spring and autumn he visited
“ their shops to collect gifts, and they gave him 20,000 coins
“ in each of the dozen shops which were there, and for this
“ pay they enjoyed peace the whole year round. Once he was
“ short of money for some reason, and applied to a well-to-do
“ distiller for some additional pay, but was put off with a scornful
“ refusal. Therefore, on leaving the shop, he bought a pint of


R i ^ «. '■ «

591 »f a Pen-ts^ao kang muh, ch. 52, 1. 2.


SORCERY AMONG THE NATIVES OP HAINAN.


927


“ liquor, put it into a small vase, and stirred some dung into
“it; subsequently he repaired to a copse to pace a Yii dance and
“ mutter spells, and having walked there several times around the
“ mixture, he buried it in the ground, and went away. On a sudden
“ the whole row of jars in the distillery emitted a stench of dung.
“ A Taoist doctor said; T possess a magical art which may remedy
“ this evil, but the liquor already spoiled it is too late to save’.
“ Burning incense, he applied his art, with the result that after
“ half a day the stench had disappeared”

Our chapters on Chinese sorcery, though very deficient, have
mentioned much which has been found to occur also among other
peoples of the earth, including not a few at a low stage of civili-
sation. We learn from Sui Yuen that Chinese sorcery also has traits
in common with sorcery of non-Chinese people living in Hainan
island. “In Yai-cheu, which belongs to Kwangtung, one half of
“ the inhabitants are Li natives, divided into barbarous Li and
“ civilised Li. Among the fair sex of this people there are women
“ who keep spectres in subjection, and are able to bewitch men by
“ means of spells so well that they die. They perform their sorcery by
“ getting possession of some hair from the beard or the head of the
“ man who is to be belaboured with spells, or a bit of a penang
“nut which he has spat out; having put this in a bamboo case, the
“ sorceress lies down in the night on the top of a hill in a state
“ of nature, her face upwards, working upon it under the stars and
“ the moon with charms and spells, with the result that the man
“dies on the seventh day. Not the slightest injury is then to be
“discovered on his body, which is as supple as cotton. Those
“hags can bewitch none but Li people; Chinese are beyond their
“ reach. If those injured by their attacks arrest one and take her


MS##*, WMlt

ch. 810 .


928


SORCERY.


to the magistrate, they are sure to pass the rope, which they
sling round her neck in order to drag her thither, through a long
bamboo, lest she may get near them and bewitch them. These
“ hags pretend that, if the period (of seven days) should elapse
“ without the sorcery taking effect, they themselves must die. Some
“ among them perform such practices when still young , even
“ before their marriage. The art has been transmitted to them by
“ their ancestors. Their spells are very occult. Such witches may
“be beaten to death without betraying each other. Only sorceresses
“ of this kind exist, and no sorcerers, the art being delivered by
“ the women exclusively to their own sex” h


ft. *5EStt

Ts 7? pith yi't, ch. 21.


INDEX

of the Chinese liooks used in the preparation of this
Volume, or mentioned in it, apart from those
mentioned in Book I pp. xviir Hqq. and
pp. 1427 sqq. and in the Index at
the end of Volnnn* IV.


Till* liniiiL-s ijiven rol'i'i to the page where paiticuluis about the work mai be found
or its title m Obioesc cbaracteis.


C.

Chou lictt pi kill fang, OSd.
Citing chi ohnn siting, (V.tri.

Choii kinti lith wui tsih. 775.
Chung t.s'ntig king, rtbO

F.

Fu-jeu ta Cshien iiang fang, "S'J.

H.

Hai lull sui shi, 510.

Han shi wai clt^ven, 555.

Ilia tiitg chi, 52J

Hung-fan wn hing oh weii, 491.

Hwau i chi, 903.

I.

I hioh citing ch'weu, 791.

I kien chi, 77‘2.

H.

Kiti bhi Inlt, GIS.

Khin king, 038.

Kite Cait shi ch ivett, 520.
Kittth-wtth hicn chi, 509.

Ki wen, 477.

Kiang-hia chi, 050.

Kiang-nan lung chi, 481.

Kill kwei yao lioh, 092
King Clru sui-shi ki, 043.


King yoh tshten shit, CS9.

Kii kin i t ting, 70l.

Kn king ki, 030.

Kwang kn kin wn hing chi. 722
Kwang sheng p.ao kicn, 539.

Kweilin fling I'll ki, 000.

li.

Ln ngan fn chi, 492.

Lull i ki, 030.

,W.

.Mill khoh hwiti .si, 804 — SOo.

.Ming ta citing ki, 7S1.

Moll fit yen hicn lull, 857.

X.

Xaii khaiig hi, 513.

Noh-kao ki, 502.

Nung-Cien yii liwa. 909

P.

Pi kill fang, s Chen hen pi kih fang.
Pi kih tb‘ion kin yan fang, 085
Pi slin man cli .in, 804.

Poll i chi, 712

Poll mnng so yen, 527.

Poll tsrti I, n, 310.

Puli-slii ts nen-slin, 70S.


Shell sheng yao lull, 701.

Shill shill mill lull, SOO.

Si Ishao ye ki, 773.

Siao ’rh ynh chiiig chili kiieh. 69i
Sin fall, GS8.

Sill yen, 537.

Sun siang lull, C5i.

T.

Ta T'ang khi shi ki, CIS.

Thing kwoh shi jiii, G39
T'ieh-wei shan ts'iing tan, SG8.

Tien kung khai wiih, 7(l9.

Ts'ien kin yao fang, .s. Pi kill tsTen kiii
yao fang.

Taih i chi. G07.

Tsih i ki, COS.

Tsing i ki 788.


j TVing siang tsah ki, 711.

Tull Iwan, 499.

Tung siih pien, 537.

Tung yin ki, 479.

W.

Wang Tn kii king ki, s. Kii king ki.
j Wei sheng i kien fang, 866.

Wei yuen, 573.

Wcn-tsze chi kwci, 511,

Wu-ch'^iug liien chi, 614.

Wii sell sien, 857.

V.

Yang n man ihh. 474.

I Yii-Pi ki .shing, 805.

Yuen ch'i shuoh lin, 648.

Yuug-cliai pill, 772.
