GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
ARCHyEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
ARCHEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
ACCESSION NO. MJjiA
CALL No.
RELIGIOUS SYSTEM
OE
CHINA
TPIE
RELIGIOUS SYSTEM
OF
CHINA
/t5 A\( rrxT JuTnV' U/'KiJir ami PrJ>i:xi A'J'LCT
J/,;.\.\7/i'v C'l'idM' AMi Smiii. J.\'n 1 1 I ininrjuTU
^ D d *5'’
J. J. M. DE GROOT, PH. D.
I‘l'PL(>UrL) WITH \ >Ul;\ ENTION 1 RoM TllK DGTCU
COf.oNIAL r.U\ EUNMFNT
Oy THE SOHL AXD ANCESTRAL WORSHIP
ftirt I, The Soul in l^hilosophy und F’olli-Conceptioa
299-5;
Qtq
LIBRAIRIE ET IMPRl.MERIB
t'l-ile' ant
PA J.
LEIDE — 1!»01
Gr-o


f


\


0


i


* f


fctBB-


All rights reserved.


IMl'KIMEBIE ci-devaut E. J. BRILL, LEIDE.


CONTENTS

OF

VOLUME IV.


P.ige

Book 11. The Soxil and Ancestral Worship.

INTRODUCTION vn.

Part I. The Soul in Philosophy and Folk-Conception,

Chapter I. Psychological Philosophy I .

» If. Cosrao-psychological Philosophy, and Taoism. 00,

» HI. On the Multiplicity ot Divisibility of the

Souls of Man 70,

1 ’ ZT. On the Parts of the Body in which the

Soul specially dwells 70.

r r. Animistic Ideas as suggested by Shadow^. 83.

’> VI. On Disease of the Soul, its Debility and

Derangements 89.

'> Vll. On Absence of the .Soul from living Man. 96.

» VIII. On Re-animation after Death.

1. Resuscitation of the Dead by their own

Souls 123.

2. Resuscitation of the Dead by the Souls

of Others 134.

» IX. On the Re-incarnation of Souls through

P.irth 143.

» A', On Zoanthropy 150.

1. Tigroanthropy 103.

2. Lv'canthropv 182.

3. Cynanthropy 184.

4. Were-fove.s 188.

5. Man-F>ears 190.

0. Were-Stags 197.

7. Were-Monkeys 200.

8. Were-Rats 202.


iT]


VI


Contents,


Chapter X (roiilinne/l). Page

0. Domestic Animals as Were- 1 leasts . . ‘204.

40. Were-Rpptiles 212.

44. Were-llirds 220.

42. Man-I'ishes 2H7.

43. Were-Insects 243.

» XI. On the De.scent of Men from Animals . . 253.

'> Xlf. On Plaiit-.Spirits 272.

4. On Antliropomnrphous and Zoomoi'phons

Plant-Spirits 273.

2. On Amorphous Plant-Spii'its .... 29 i.

" Xllf. On the Animation of Lifeless Matter . . .325,

>' -VVr. On Food and Medicine.s pi epared from Animals

and Men 357.

'> -VF. On Apiuiritions, and their Influence upon

the Fate of Man 407.

" XVf. On Retributive Justice exercised by Sjiirits 430.


BOOK 11.


ON THE SOUL AND ANCESTRAL WORSHIP.


IXTIJuDLTTloX.


As we set forth in the (ieneral Preface to this work tp, xiii),
the Second Hook will be devoted to the Soul, that is to say, to
the ideas of the nature and characteri?tics of souls, the ways in
which they are thought to manifest themselves or their influence,
and to work on human life and society, as also to the main j)ai't of
the practices and usages bom from the belief in their existence and
power. It will, in other words. Ire a Book on Animism, comprising
Spirit-lore and Demonology, Exorcism and Divination, treating also of
Spiritism iUid Eetichisni, as they manifest theni.selves by the worship
of deceased parents and ancestors in the family-circle, on their
graves, and in temirles. It will at the same time become an intro-
duction to the principles and chief features of Taoism, this system
having evolved in the main from the general ideas concerning souls.

Pursuing the method adopted in our Eirst Book, we shall build up
our Second as much as possible troni Chinese texts, thus letting, so
to say, the Chinese thcmseives compose it. This method is, we think,
in general the best for ethnographical research among any nation that
})ossesses a literature, as it may ensure the highest attainable degree
of correctness in tracing its ideas and the motives of its doings, it
being in his writings that man expresses spontaneously his thoughts
and beliefs. Besides, the writings of a people art' the oidy anthentic
sources from which its culture mav he studied throui'di its historical

t. O

phases, and thus pages may l)e collected for the general history
of the civilisation of iii inkind, which to write is, we dare say, the


VI 11


INTKODL'C l ION.


liigheat aim ami object of ^cientitic btlinojrapliy. Ethnography is
liardlv anvtliiim it not historical.

4. r O

Since the publication of our E’lrst Hook some scholars have
openlv scorned our historical lucthod. They have declared that it
embroils the different phases through which East-Asian culture has
moved in the cour'C of time, gi\iug the medley as an image of the
actual state of things. To the.--e olijections we must respond that
we cannot see how there can possibly lie any question of an
embroilment of times and phases where, as in our work, at
every (piotation the source drawn from is honestly mentioned,
and the lime when this s mrce was written rendered traceable
through an a[)p(mded list of tiic works ipioted. Hut still, those
ceiisurers fail to si'c that our ('hiiU'se material showing the pre-
\alence of the present ideas and (uistoins in earlier times, and olten
also their oriiiin, teaclu's iis at everv moment that in China s civili-
zation there cannot even be much (picstion ot jihascs, the manners
and customs, religious and social iiistitutimis of the past being tlmre,
so far as may lie ascertained by means of books, s'' inueh like those
of more modern times and the present day, as to almost enlorce
the conclusion that they have hardly ever undergone any change
at all. Things may have dcvidoped in China, but nothing there has
changed; this fact the present Hook will make true again by a
great numlier of instances.

Indeed, more perfectlv than anywhere else in this world, are
Religion, Superstition and Custom in China pii'tiires of the past.
Her literature may be regarded as tiie chief creator ot this
phenomenon. Inse[)arabty combineil, as everywhere in the heathen
parts (;f the world they arc, Religion, Supm'stition and Custom have,
in truth, beim delivered in China from age to ;ige by tradition ;
but this tradition was alwavs guided bv books in wdiieh it wms
written down, and the oldest of which wau'e always the most
esteemed. It was the books that, merely ilescribing them, in fact
petrified them, keeping them also remarkably free from novelty,
which, in Chine.se civilized opinion, always is corruption. Hence
it is that, in describing China’s Religion, Superstition and Custom
in their history and present aspect, those same books are necessarily
to be our guides; hence also they are to lead us in reviewing the ideas
relating to souls, spirits and devils, which form the dominant element
in the wide field of Animism. Autopsy and hearsay here become matters
of secondary importance.

Studying Animism, and in particular the ideas and conceptions


TNTRUDUCTIOX.


1\


it includes, natui’idly conies in the niiiin to a studv of luvtli
and fable about spirits and the spirit-world. While working in
China, we collected a great number of gho?.t-tales from the lips of
the people; but finding them afterwards by little and little in print,
in versions certainly more reliable and enabling us somewhat to
make out in how fir they existed in past times, we have had to con-
sign most of that hearsay evidence to the paper-basket. IVom such
written myth and marvel the reader will find this Book for the
greater part composed; but that material is no myth and marvel in
Chinese eyes. Not being advanced enough in science and culture
to distinguish between the possible and the impossible, almost everv-
tliing which the books have to tell, the Chinese take for truth and
true c\ent, as reliable as any. This fact renders their books of the
highest value fir us as sources of knowledge of ideas and thoughts,
even apart from the consideration that they are always reflections of
prevailing opinion and of the train of thought of the time in which
they were written, even though, occasionally, their authors may ha\e
drawn wittingly and knowingly from their imagination. And it is
those opinions, that train of thought, which we want in the first
place to know.

Thus our treatises in the field of Animism will acipiaint the
reader with a broad class of literary products, called, since the Han
dynasty, siao shwoh yjv or ‘'minor informations'' — communi-
cations, according to the Chinese, of a lower order, comprising also
novels and fictitious tales, in a great number of which intere.sting
ethnographical and historical material lies hidden. The epoch of
the T'ang dynasty seems to have been particularly prolific in writings
of this class; but \vc have also some of earlier date, and a great
number of the Sung time, besides nianv written under the .Ming
dynasty and the now reigning House. Though produced in ages so
wide apart, the whole class shows a striking uniformity of character.
Not the slightest change or progress in the animistic notions have
we been able to trace in it, which corroborates our statement that
China on the whole has always bi'en as she was. Owing, no doubt,
to the prevailing decadence of literary study and culture, we have
not succeeded in finding complete cojiies of more than a few’ works
in this class. Large collections of siao shwoh, printed in uniform
type and size, are, in fact, sold collectively, and are probably much
read. Hut as a rule they give us the works only in a fragmentary
slate, their contents not coming up by far to wdiat, according to
the bibliogi'aphie.i and catalogues, they ought to contain. Happily.


X


iN'riioDi criDS,


China's worhl-fanicil A.V km I n sJm hik clnnfj ' nrakcs np this
deticieiicy to a good extent. Hundreds of tales^ nut found in the
books in which they are .stated to ladong, are di.'tril)uted in this
fjiant thesaurus over its >everal sections, witli careful mention of
the sources from whicli they were drawn. we shall very often
have to quote from it, and then mark our extracts l)y the characters
T S, the abbreviated word T u >sku.

In no smaller measure are we indebted for material to another
C(jllection almost unknown, and well-nigh entirely neglect(‘d by
sinohjgists, viz. the 7 >//-// /ye/ kiiyiiifi ki ^ or ‘-Ample

Writings of the Tai pbng period”, containing five hundred chapters
of siao shwoh and iniscelUneous notes, extracted from some three
hundred works and -arranated sVstcmaticallv \inder various titles.
The T'ai phng p(>riod, ext(*nding from .V.I). U7(i to was a

part of the reign of 'Cai 'I’sung ^ of the Siuig dynasty, who
had the work compiled by a committee of thirteen learned grandees
under prcsichmcy of the statesman Li Fang fl/; . It is the
richest mine extant for knowledg(' of (thincsi' myth and legend,
and but for it, many, if not most of the wenks from which it
was built up, would have l)cen entirely lost; now a great number,
in the fragmentary state in which we have them, are expressly
stated to be reconstructions from <piotations preserved in the
Kwnng ki. This work see.ms to hava; ha<l no wide circulation
until about lotiG, when it was re-published lyv the care of the
Censor Thin Khai ^ ‘[‘g . ft is a.sserted to be a portion of a much
larger manuscript produced by the Imperial committee, and to consist
merely of such parts of it as were ejected by 'Lai 'I'sung, who reviewed
the whole manuscript in person; and what the empei'or reserved
for direct publication became the voluminous cyclopedia known
as yii Ian “the Work of Imperial Autopsy

of the 'Tai phng period”, likewise preserved to this day-. In
quoting trom the Kwruig ki, we shall denote this by the initials K K.


1 See Hook I, XXI.

'■I See Tan Khai's preface ti> tlie K)iy(mi /,/. am] alx) tli(‘ S'zr /J(H h iir}i
(MUKJ- hlif/l. oil. \ I. 32.


Lkipex, August 11)01.


PART 1.

THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


CHAPTER I.

PSYCHOLOGICAL PHILOSOPHY.

The reader who has waded through the three volumes that form
the First Book of this work, will have found that the way in which
the Chinese dispose of the dead forms a rich mine of information
respecting their ideas on the human soul, such as they virtually
prevail among the people, and that it illustrates how vast the
influence is, which those ideas have exercised upon Chinese social
life in all its phases, since the earliest times known. It is now
manifest also that, whereas the ideas about the Soul are the
fundamental and leading ideas of China’s Religion, as, in fact, they
are probably of all religions on this earth, so the Disposal of
the Dead is an integral part of that Religion, and a description
of it may not be omitted in this attempt to depict the latter.
But our First Book is far from giving in all their details the
conceptions and usages respecting souls. It therefore becomes now
our duty to describe them further, and thus to execute the second
part of our programme, as set forth on page XIII of the General
Preface.

Pursuing, as we have hitherto done, the historico-cthnographical
method also in this part of our task, we find ourselves, for the
knowledge of the most ancient animistic ideas of the Chinese,
confined in the main to a study of those ideas as they were
proper to the intelligent part of the people, it being not, of
course, the lowest classes whose conceptions were laid down in the
Classics and other works of the pre-Christian epoch. The Chinese
mind at that time was, as we have had occasion specially to show
in our dissertation on Fun g-s h u i , in a stage of culture high


1


2 THE son, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

enough to invent a system of Cosmogony intended to explain,
though by theories devoid of even the most primary scientific
elements, the construction of the whole Universe and all its pheno-
mena and mysteries. It used that very same web of speculative
wisdom to explain also the mysteries of the creation and constitution
of Man. And no wonder; for was not Man an intrinsic part of the
Cosmos? was not he even one of the three principal parts of it,
immediately ranking in importance after Heaven and Earth, and
living between these powers? Indeed, in the Yili king we find
it stated explicitly; “Anciently, the Holy Men made the yih [i.e.
“ permutations and combinations of lines) with the object of con-
“ forming, liy means thereof, Man to the laws of Heaven, which
“ confers the endowments that constitute his nature. To this end
“those Saints stated what the nature (Tao) of Heaven is, saying
“ it consists of (the operation of) the Y i n and the Y" a n g ; sub-
“ sequently they made out what the nature of the Earth consists
“ in, declaring it to be composed of soft and strong substances ; and
“ finally they made out all about the nature of hlan, declaring it to
“ consist of benevolence and righteousness. They combined (the lines
“representing) those three Powers (ts'ai), repeated them, and by
“arranging tliose six lines in ditferent permutations, obtained tlic
“kwa”'. — “The Yik king is a book of wide comprehension and
“embracing everything. It deals with the Tao of Heaven, the Tao
“of Man and the Tao of Earth. It combines (tlie lines representing)
“ those three Powers, and it doubles them, so that they amount to
“six. What those six lines show is nothing else than the Tao of
“ the three Powers”

Our readers will have no difficulty in understanding these quotations
in all their parts, if he be acquainted with what we have stated on
pp. 9G0 sqq. of Book I about the Y i n and the Yang, and about
the kwa or lineal figures the ancients used to graphically represent


il' ■ Ril'#-

^ZM.^ . Sect.


II.


DUALITY OF THE HUMAN SOUL.


;3

the chief phenomena of Nature created bv the operation of these
two great “Regulators”. Those pages, giving the outlines of the
ancient Chinese system of Cosmogony, will also enable the reader
to understand the ancient theories about the human soul, which we
are now going to develop with the aid of ancient excerpts.

The Yang and the Y i n being deemed to produce, liy the
power of their co-operation, all that exists, so IMan, too, was judged
by the ancient Chinese to be a product of the union of those powers.
And, likewise as a matter of course, they considered him to be
shaped out of the same material and immaterial substance which
they believed to constitute the Universe or, in other words, Heaven
and Earth, containing the five Elements. These doctrines we find laid
down in overt terms in the Li ki (eh. 3d, 1. 1), “Thus is it that
“ Man consists of the beneficial substances that compose the Heavens
“and the Earth, of the co-operation of the Yin and the Yang,
“and of the union of a kwei with a shen; ho consists of the
“finest breath contained in the five Elements"’. Thus ancient
philosophy deemed Man to be a compound of two substances, viz.
a kwei and a shen, respectively related, as the contexture of
the passage of itself suggests, with the Yin and the Yang, and
also related with terrestrial matter and immaterial cele.^tial sidistance,
with which, as our readers have long known, the Vin and the
Yang are respectively identified.

The same ancient Li ki which ha.^ to the present day narrowly
confined Chinese tliought and min<l within the limits of its doctrines,
we do not search in vain for furtlier theories tending to define the
nature of the kwei and the shen, and their place in Cosmogony.
We read in it (ch. 61, 1. T) that “Tsai Ngo spoke: ‘I have heard
“the terms kwei and shen, but I do not know what they
“mean’; on which Confucius said to him: ‘The khi (breath') is
“the full manifestation of the .^hen, and the p‘oh is the full
“manifestation of the kwei; the union of the kwei with the
“shen is the highest among all tenets. laving beings are all
“sure to die, and as they certainly return (kwei) to the Earth
“ after their death, the soul (which accompanies them thither) is
“called kwei. But while the bones and flesh moulder in the ground
“and mysteriously become earth of the fields, the khi issues


S-ft Z^Si.& *1 >S-


4


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“forth and manifests itself on high as a shining ming (light)”
This passage is the whole fundamental theory about the human
soul in a nut-shell. To make it perfectly clear in ail its details, we
have only to put it into a wording of our own, at the same time
considering it in connection with the above-mentioned association
of the s h e n with the Yang and Heaven, and of the k w e i with
the Yin and the Earth. Thus, Confucius means to say, the shen
manifests itself in its full development in man by his khi or
“breath”; indeed, only animated man breathes and lives". After
his death, this shen departs to higher regions, there to live on as
ming or “lucid matter”, in other words, it returns to the source
from which it sprang, the source of light, that is to say, to the
heavenly sphere, the chief department of the Yang. And his kwei,
the soul or spirit produced by the Y i n and thus partaking of
the nature of the Earth, the gross, material part of the Universe,
passes through an analogous process of migration. Under the name
of p'oh, its energy or active operation manifests itself in man,
and on his death it returns to the Earth, from which it once
emanated. Considering that the Chinese allot masculine attributes
to Heaven, as this is the fructifying power of the Universe, while
they ascribe a feminine character to Earth, which receives Heaven’s
fructification, we may call the shen the male soul or the animus,
and the kwei the female soul or anima.

The energy of the slien, operating in the living human body,
was denoted in ancient China, except by the word k h i or breath,
by the special term h w u n It is the Li lei again which teaches
us this. We read in that work (ch. 14, 1. 16) that, according to
Confucius, the grandee Ki-tsze, styled Yen-ling from the principality
of Yen-ling in which he lived, on burying his eldest son in the


it 2 S ft . « 4 'iJ' 5E . 5E g ± . at il a . # fel

2 It is hardly necessary to remind the reader, that an association of the soul
with the breath is common araona: sundry peoples in various stages of culture. We
may mention here also Pliny’s doctrine (llistoriae Naturalis, lih. H, cap. 53), that
breath is the only part of man which survives him, sola ex omnibus superfiitum.


THE DUAL SOUL OF MAN.


0


praiseworthy simple way we have made mention of on page 063
of Book I, “ bared the left side of his body when the mound was
“ finished, and moving to the right, walked round it, howling three
“ times, and then he exclaimed : ‘ That the bones and flesh should
“ return to the Earth is ordained by fate ; but the h w u n or k h i
“ can then go everywhere, it can go everywhere ; and with this he
“ went on his way” h In another section of the same work (ch. 38,
1. 27) we read: “The hwun or khi returns to heaven; the body
and the p"oh return to the Earth”

Recapulating, we now know of the two souls, attributed to Man
by ancient Chinese philosophy, that —

the s h e n )jj^ or immaterial soul emanates from the ethereal
celestial part of the Cosmos, and consists of yang substance. When
operating actively in the living human body, it is called khi ^
or “breath”, and hwun when separated from it after death,

it lives forth as a refulgent spirit, styled m i n g 1^ ;

and the k w e i , the material, substantial soul, emanates
from the terrestrial part of the Universe, and is formed of yin
substance. In living man it operates under the name of p'oh
and on his death it returns to the Earth.

It can hardly be doubted, that there exists some connection
between the theory that the last-named part of the human spirit,
which partakes of the nature of the earth, at death returns to the
Earth, and the general conviction that the soul abides with the
body in the grave, which conviction, as we have seen, dominates
throughout the whole range of customs we have passed in review
in Book I. It may, however, be suggested that this conviction is
much older than that theory, so that it has by no means been
created by the latter. Indeed, though true it is that written relics
of olden times are silent here, yet the fact remains that every-
where on the globe philosophic theorizing is certainly younger than
primitive animistic notions, and that a large number of the Chinese
customs described by us, that are founded on a belief in the
cohabitation of the soul and the body in the grave, bear clear


^ ^ . Sect. ^ ^ , II, .3.

2 snutt.m


6


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


evidence in themselves of having originated in a time when the
people were not advanced enough to indulge in any abstract reasoning
about a Heaven and an Earth receiving the souls of man on his
death.

Thus, according to the genuine ancient theory, it must be the
k w e i that abides with the buried man in his grave. Nevertheless,
the s h e n , too , is continuously represented by the customs
relating to the disposal of the dead, as residing there, or, more
correctly speaking, as dwelling about the spot, particularly in
the inscribed grave-stone (comp. B. ], p. 11U4). We have shown,
that the pavilion which shelteis this animated stone in every
Imperial tomb of the iMing dynasty and of the present reigning
House, was and is denoted officially as ming leu\ “tower of the
uiing ’. Moreover, numerous excerpts from Chinese works, inserted
by Us in Book I, show that the things buried in tombs for the
use of the manes, were in ancient China, and ever since, called
ming khi", “implements for the ming”, translated by us simply
as “implements for the manes” k We may also see on page 707
of Book 1 that Confucius is stated by the Li hi to have declared
that “those implements were thus called because they were assigned
for the use of the ming of the shen”’, while Tseng-tszg thought
“they were destined for the kwei”^. Einally, the clothes worn by
the dead in their graves are called by the / li ming i-shang®,
“coats and petticoats for the ming” (see p. 332), or simply
ming i^ “coats for the ming” (p. 335, note 2).

The same Li ki which thus acquaints us with the oldest theories
that have been framed in China in respect of the human soul, also
teaches us that there existed in the semi-historical or, perhaps,
even the legendary period, a sacrificial worship systematically
addressed to either part of the soul separately. “The hwun or
“khi”, it says (ch. 38, 1. 27), “returns to Heaven, and the body
“ and the p " o h return to the Earth, and hence the custom exists
“ of seeking the soul, in sacrificing, as well in the y i n part of the
“Universe as in its yang part. Under the Yin dynasty they first


‘ ntJ «■ ”J) If-

:! See e. ,/. pp. ana. :m, 402 , 690, too. 7u8.


ANCIENT SACRIFICES TO THE DEAI, SOUL.


7


“sought for it in the Yang; under the Cheu dynasty they first
“sought it in the Yin”h And in another place (ch. Gl, 1. 10)
of the same work we read, that Confucius said in the discourse
about the human soul, which he held with Tsai Ngo, and of which
we translated a part on page 3: “After it was established that
“there are two constituent parts of the soul, gratitude was shown
“ them by means of two ceremonies. They instituted the morning
“service, when, to show gratitude to the khi, a burnt offering
“ was presented to it and the fragrance of the flesh was rendered
“ visible by means of lightening aromatic wood, every one in this
“ way being taught to turn his mind back towards his original
“ancestors. And in order to show gratitude to the p"oh, millet
“ and panicled millet were presented, together with dainties, livers,
“ lungs, heads and hearts, amidst which were seen two earthen
“ jars of spirits, to which aromatized spirits were added ; this
“ sacrifice taught the people to love one another. Such manifestations
“ of affection for the manes on high and below were the most
“ important of rites” k It is interesting to see from this excerpt,
that in those ancient times sacrificial articles were sent on high to
the shen or khi by means of the very same substance of which
it was itself composed; fire, heat and light being indeed, as the
reader knows, likewise emanations from the great universal Yang.
It also was, we think, for the same philosophic consideration, that
the place of worship was illuminated by means of burning wood,
and that the ceremony was celebrated at the break of day. On tlie
other hand, the articles destined for the p'^oh were not consigned
to the flames, this part of the soul being of a material comjiosition,
which rendered volatilization of the food and drink unnecessarv,
if not undesirable.

Sinologists may, in studying ancient Chine&e works, easily convince
themselves that the human soul, composed, as it is, of a kwei


!tt. Ill-


8


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


and a shen, is most often denoted therein by the binomial kwei-
shen, and very seldom by that ot shen-kwei. In the Shu king,
for instance, we count the fii'st-named term three times, against
that of shen-kwei only once^; in the Chung yu7ig and the Lun
yii kwei-shen occurs six times, and the other term not at all.
This fact is significant, as it suggests that the kwei was prior to
the shen in Chinese Animism and Soul-worship. There is nothing
here to feel astonished at, if we merely keep in view that in the
oldest works we have, the kwei is represented to be that part of
the soul which returns with the corpse to the Earth, and that the
belief that the soul abides there with the body after death must
have prevailed long before civilisation could possibly bring the people
to the invention of profound theories about a dualistic character
of the soul. In short, time was when the Chinese knew no other
souls than kwei, whole and undivided. Much solidity is given
to this supposition by the fact that the graphic sign J^, which
represents the word kwei, is a hieroglyph, holding position in the
written language as a radical ®, while the characters for shen
( f ^ ) and that for k h i ( ^ ) are composites and, consequently,
formed in a later period of the written language. Those representing
the terms h w u n and p"o h , viz. and ^ , are likewise of more
recent date, being mere derivatives from the character kwei,
formed by means of the phonetic prefixes yun and ^ poh.
We are, in consequence, led to consider the kwei to be the very
first kernel of Chinese Animism, and the seed out of which China’s
system of Ancestral Worship, and even its whole native Religion,
has grown up.

The fact that, many centuries before our era, the ideas concerning
the constitution of the human soul in connection with those con-
cerning the Cosmos, had reached in China the high state of


1 In the section

2 Accoi’ding to the Shwuh wen (ninth section, 1) ‘‘it I'epresents a man A with

.‘the liead of a spectre ffl , combined with the sign selfish, because the yin

“breath, of which the kwei consists, can cause injury”:

ill® uMWiKKA . We see here that attempts to explain characters
by dissecting them may lead to very tempting results; and it is no wonder
that such dissections have in all times been very popular among Chinese scholars.
But foreign students should never be rash in adopting their conclusions, Chinese
achievements in this field being for the most part idle play, rather apt to mislead
etymology than to further it.


THE SOULS OF THE DEAD HAVE CONSCIOUSNESS.


9


development we have sketched in the foregoing pages, certainly
attests the high mental culture then possessed by tlie inhabitants
of that country. We may therefore expect, that in the same early
epoch there were questions started about the properties of the k w e i
and the shen, and that it was asked in the first place whether
they paid attention to the sacrifices and worship of the living. The
passages translated by us on pp. 707 and 7:39 of Book I show,

that serious doubts were entertained on this head by a part of the

nation. We read, moreover, in the Li li (ch. 13, 1. 36); “In per-
“ forming the rites of sacrifice the principal mourner does all he
“ can, and yet, how can he know how far the shen enjoys his
“ offerings ? Nevertheless, feelings manifested by his abstinence and
“ reverence perform a part at those rites” It is evident, however,
that disbelief in the consciousness of disembodied souls could by
no means have the upper hand, as, otherwise, the ancient works
would not, as in reality they do, teem with references to sacrifices

presented to the dead, neither would they, as also is the case,

abound with rules and rescripts as to how to perform such sacrifices
in the proper way, time and place. Confucius, according to the
Li hi (ch. 30, 1. 20), preached explicitly that disembodied human
souls do possess consciousness, as he declared that, on the burial,
“the corporeal p'oh goes downward, and the conscious khi is
“ on high” ^

There is very little in the writings of pre-Christian times which
entitles us to conclude, that the then inhabitants of the Middle
Kingdom were a meditating people, often lost in speculation about
the soul and its two constituent parts. The Tso ch'wen represents
the p"oh as working in man more particularly as an animal soul
manifesting itself already immediately on his birth, while the hwun
is his intellectual spirit, showing its existence at a later period,
when, by the usual habits and business of life, it has, side by side
with the p'^oh, gradually grown stronger in the same proportions
as the vital energy (tsing), reaching in the end, as a shen or
m i n g , its full development. “ When (Confucius’ disciple) Tsze-
“ cffan”, thus we read in that work, “ went to the kingdom of
“ Tsin, he was interviewed by Chao King-tsze. ‘Was it’, said this


# K ± A ^ te '

2 fit BD l¥ , 531 * ® ±- ^ iS' >•


S.


10


THE SOEL IN PHII-OSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“man, ‘possible for Poli-yiu to become a kwei?’ ‘Yes’, replied
“ Tsze-cli"an. ‘When a man is born, the first thing that develops
“in him is what we call his p^oh; after the p^o h is produced,
“we denote the yang substance (that is in him) by the name of
“hwun. Things of all sorts and kinds being subsequently used and
“handled by him, his tsing increases, his hwun and p'oh being
“ thereby strengthened ; and as a consequence he obtains a tsing
“perfectly sound and vigorous, and, in the end, a shen or niing” b
This passage is important also because it acquaints us with another
element that plays a part in ancient and modern Chinese psychology,
viz. the tsing From a series of passages, collated with the

object of ascertaining the meaning which Chinese philosophers attach
to this word, we arrive at the conclusion that it must signify a
certain force or fluid that dwells in man, constituting the working
energy of his soul, its effective power. Souls devoid of it cannot
manifest their existence; the tsing is, accordingly, the vital
spirit, so that of every individual from whom it disappears,
death is imminent. These ideas we find clearly set forth in the
Tso c/uce/i. This work relates, that in B.C. 516, when the Ruler
of the state of Sung banqueted Sliuh-Min Chao-tsze ^ , an envoy
from another kingdom, and both men were merry and mellow,
they began to shed tears as they talked togetlier, on which one
Yoh-khi ^ said: “Now both our Ruler and Shuh-sun shall die, for
“ I have heard that joy in the midst of grief and grief in the midst
“ of joy announce that the heart i.s waning. The soundness and
“vigour of the tsing, that are settled in the heart, is what we
“ call the h w u n and the p'^o h , and when the h w u n and the ph) h
“leave him, how can the individual long continue?” b This passage
intimates also that the ancient Chinese considered the heart
to be the seat of the vital spirits, and that these spirits, in their


' s Y- s a # .a a f- Ki a. 0 ,16 ^ s a

El ^I s iS M iDi BJJ . Th.

se\entli vein' of Chao’s reign.

- ^ iiS ^ ^ iiS ■

1 ""lit) -littli year of Chao’s reign.


PSYCHOLOGICAL TERMIXOLOGY.


11


opinion, could not work in a man independently of his hwun
and p"oh.

The terms given in the above pages as playing a part in
China’s psychological doctrines, are often combined into dissyllabic
terms, without, however, any new ideas being expressed by
the latter. Thus we have kwei-shen and hwun-p‘oh, which
are combinations of nouns, simply denoting the soul in its two
component parts. In the compound shen ming, which is com-
monly used to denote the disembodied soul after death, the
first component has an adjective sense, so that the term means
literally the ming or lucid spirit evolved from the shen on the
death of the individual. Also in shen hwun the first syllable
stands for an adjective, the term being a very common appellation
denoting the hwun, composed, as it is, of shen substance derived
from the great yang principle of the Universe. Tsing khi
and tsing shen are compounds the literal signification of which
is khi or shen possessed of tsing or operative energy, and
both are much used, as well in books as in common parlance, as
synonyms of tsing, that is to say, in the sense of vital spirits.
The following passage, professedly written in the fir.'>t century of
our era, clearly instances their use as such : “That by which a man
“lives is his tsing khi; it is extinguished at his death. For it is
“his blood-pulses that form his tsing khi, and whereas these
“pulses stop on his death, the tsing khi is then quenched. . . .
“ When a man dies, his tsing shen ascends to Heaven .... The
“tsing shen is hidden in the body like paddy or rice in a bag,
“ and when the individual is dead, his body rots and his tsing
“khi disperses, just the same as rice drops out of a bag in which
“ there are holes because it is rotting” By the way it may be
remarked, that this passage teaches us that the ancient Chinese
sometimes connected the vital spirits of man with the movements
and throbs of his arteries, evidently from the fact that sta'mation
of the pulses coincides with extinction of life.


*i^JBl»*,A5Eini»48rfi)«Sa...A5E.*l

**241*. JESS* fi 15. tsaa

51 * * HI * ■ i"" ife M ■


12


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Passing in silence over some other combinations of less frequent
use, we must draw the attention of our readers to a psychological
terra prevailing, we dare say, oftener than any other in ancient and
modern writings, viz. ling ^ , signifying the eftective operation
of the tsing, its actual, observable manifestation, its agency.
Ling khi, ling hwun, and ling s h e n are expressions of very
common use, denoting the intelligent yang soul manifesting
effectual power and influence, either while abiding in a man, or
in a disembodied state. As, accordingly, the ling is the very
manifestation of the soul, it is natural to find that the Chinese use
the word constantly for the soul itself. So, for example, we have
seen on page 70S of Book I, that the quasi-animated figures of
straw, buried in ancient China in the graves of the dead, were

styled “ling of straw”. We may translate the word by

spirituousness.

We now know that Man, as being an intiinsic part of the
Universe, was represented by ancient Chinese philosophers to be
composed like the Cosmos itself; that is to say, of a material part

consisting of the same substance as the Earth, and animated, like

the Earth itself, by the great breath Yin; and of a less material
part, composed of the same substance of which Heaven consists,
and, like Heaven, animated by the breath Yang. But, in thus
making of Man a raicrocosmos in the true sense of this word,

those sages extended the parallel still farther. Considering the
Yang and the Yin to be the two souls of the Universe, they
ascribed to them, as they did to the two corresponding souls of
man, a tsing or operative energy, the ling or effective power
of which creates all living beings; indeed, we find it stated positively
in the books, that “those souls or breaths (.khi), possessed of tsing,
produce the living beings” \ and that Tseng-tszg said: “The breath
“possessed of tsing, which composes the Yang, we call shen,
“ and the breath possessed of tsing, which constitutes the Yin,
“we call ling, and it is that shen and that ling which are the
“ origin of all classes of living beings” b Keeping now in view that


Ta Tui h U ^ ^ gg, “Book of Rites of the Senior Ttu”>


cli. 5 58). This work, in thirteen chaptei's, compiled by Tai Teh


about


CREATION AND THE NATURAL PHENOMENA.


18


the principal seat of the Yang is Heaven, and that the Earth is
the chief depository of the Yin, it follows from Tseng-tsze’s words
that it is the shen of Heaven and the ling of Earth which,
co-operating, are the creative powers of the Universe. The reader
will now completely understand why, as we said on page 953
of Book 1, geomancers consider the different parts of the surface
of the Earth capable of manifesting ling, or, as they call it, shan
ling, i. e. “effective creative operation of high grounds”, at the
absence of which Fung shui is dead ; and it becomes now also
perfectly clear why at burials, wlien the soul tablet is dotted, the
wish is expressed “that the Earth may manifest ling” (seep. 315)
or, in other words, may operate efficaciously upon the felicity of
the dead man’s offspring.

The animistic theories unfolded in the foregoing pages show us
that the ancient Chinese considered the creation of living beings to
consist in a never stopping effusion by the universal Yang and
Yin of doses of their own substance, paired with a continual
re-absorption of those doses. The Yang was, in their opinion,
a compound of myriads of shen, sharing the supremacy in the
Universe with an infinity of kwei constituting the Yin. The
Yang and the Yin are the great Regulators of the Cosmos
which cause the phenomena of creation, evolution and destruction,
but their all-pervading active influence is in reality exercised by
the shen and the kwei, simply on account of their being
the constituents of those two powers. In fact, they were raised
by the ancients to the rank of agents of the Yang and the

Yin, filling the Universe in all its parts. “The Yin and the

“Yang in their entirety”, says the Yi/i ling, “are what we call
“the Course (Tao) of the Universe .... The shen do not dwell
“in special places”, that is, they move about everywhere; "they
“ form the unfathomable force of the Y i n and the Yang ....
“These two breaths, possessed of operative energy, produce
“the living beings, and the transmigrating hwun are the

“ causes of the evolutions and phenomena of Nature, and it is
“ from the latter that we learn to understand the characteristics of
“ the kwei and the s h e n h And Confucius spoke : ‘Does the


the beginning of our era, is now recognizeil as a ritual of higli authority. One of
its sections is the Hia sino chin;/, a jirecious old calendar of tlie Hia dynasty,
mentioned by us on p. 968 of Book I.


^iia;


T- »J Z


14


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ man who comprehends the ways in which such evolutions and
“involutions take place, understand the works of the shen?’” h
The animistic doctrines, thus laid down in ancient Chinese works,
are at the base of all psychological philosophy which the people
and its sages have ever indulged in through all ages, down to this
hour. Doctrines based on other principles we find nowhere in their
books; which, moreover, perfectly tallies with the well known fact,
that the Chinese have built up no philosophic systems but on what
the ancients taught and wrote. Yang Wang-sun, who lived nearly
one century before our era, did not follow another train of thought
when he declared, as we .saw on page 308 of Book T, that the
corporal part (^) of man is a part of the Earth, and his vital
spirits are a part of the Heaven, and that each of these two parts
returns at death to the original substance (chen out of which
it came forth. It must now be noted, that already at an early
date Chinese sages began to rack their brains to establish the
connection between the Cosmos and the soul of man on one side,
and man’s character, passions, senses, mind and mental faculties
on the other, but that all their writings in this field are nothing
better than monstrous products of j)hilosophic miscarriages, valuable
only from an ethnographical point of view, as (.'xaraplcs of the curious
ways on which the human mind may stray when merely seeking
wisdom in speculative reasonings untutored by e.xperimental science.

Even Confucius is stated to have groped here like a blind man
for the wall, for we read somewhere that “his disciple Tsze-kung
“said: ‘The orations of the Master concerning the innate natural
“ character of man in connection with the Course or Path (Tao)
“ of Heaven, were unintelligible” He seems to have altogether
ascribed the best faculties of man to the vigorous operation of his
soul born from the yang part of the Universe, it being recorded
that he said of the holy emperor Hwang: “The shen of Hien
“Yuen (/. e. Hwang) displayed effectual power (ling) from his
“ very birth. In his infancy he could speak ; in his early youth he


iii'i ...

section, II.


LIU NGAN’s theory on the cosmos and 5[AN.


15


“ was quick-witted and clever ; when grown up he was respectful
“ and considerate, aud when he had reached the age of manhood,
“ he was intelligent and wise” k

Liu Ngan, who lived some three or four centuries after Confucius,
dilated on the congruity between the Cosmos, the soul and bodily
constitution of man, his senses and his passions, in the following
terms : “Anciently, before Heaven and Earth existed, there was
“substance, but it was formless. There then existed also two
“shen, which, intermixing their existence, framed the Heaven
“ and built up the Earth ; thereupon separating, they became the
“Yin and the Yang, and dispersing, they formed the eight
“ regions of the Universe. In eouseipience of the full development of
“ the hard and soft influences of those Powers, all matter endowed
“with life received a form. Their breath' (k hi) mixing together,
“ created the animals ; their breath possessed of operative energy
“(tsing khi) ])roduced man, and thus it is that man’s shen
“possessed of such operative energy (tsing shen) belongs to
“ Heaven, and his bones to Earth. When (at our death) this
“tsing shen retires into the gate (out of which it came forth),
“ and also our bones go liack to their origin, what, then, does there
“remain of us? On account of all this, a wise man guides his
“passions by conforming them to Heaven

“Thus, man receives his tsing slicn from Heaven, and his
“ material body from the Earth. By the full development of that
“ body his five viscera are formed, and that in such a way that
“ his lungs have the mastery over his eyes, his kidneys govern his
“ nose, his gall bladder his mouth, his liver his ears. Consequently,
“ (just the same as Hcavmi and Earth) the body has organs that
“ manifest themselves outwardly and work internally, and which
“ open and close, expand and contract according to established
“ rules. Hence also, (the soul and the body being borrowed from
“ Heaven and Earth), tlie round shape of the human head represents
“ Heaven, and the S(|uare form of the feet the Earth. Heaven has
“ his four seasons, five Pdements, nine sections - and .366 days, as
“ man has four limbs, five viscera, nine apertures, and 366 joints.
“ Further, Heaven has wind, rain, cold and heat, while man, too.


^ rfii ^ rfii

2 Probably the eight principal points of the conijiass, with the centre of the
Universe.


16 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“takes and gives, and has his joys and anger. His gall-bladder
“ being assimilated with the clouds, his lungs with the atmosphere,
“ his liver with the winds, his kidneys with rain, and his spleen
“ with thunder, man is also in these respects assimilated with
“ the Universe ; his heart governs all the other organs. And so
“ it is that his eyes and ears represent the sun and the moon,
“ his blood and breath respectively the rains and the winds ....
“ so blood and breath are the best parts of a man, and the five
“viscera are the effective operation of his soul (viz. his tsing)...
“The openings of the body are the doors and windows through
“ which the tsing sheu manifests itself . . . The heart is the
“ principal organ of the body, and the s h e n is the heart’s most
“ precious element” k

In ensuing centuries, philosophers, by mere art of reasoning, spun
out to a still greater length those associations between the Cosmos
and the bodily and mental constitution of man. A very curious
fruit from this field of speculation was laid down in the first century
of our era in a book already known to our readers (see p. 277),
viz. in the Poll hu t'ung i, professedly by the hand of Pan Ku, the


swA+AW. A^'^ans

MSS, WISH.

a...

lich kiai, ch. VII,


THE NATURAL CHARACTER AND THE PASSIONS.


17


author of the Books of the Early Han Dynasty. That specimen of
ancient oriental wisdom derives peculiar importance from the fact
that it has hitherto held an authoritative position among all writings
on psychology]; it deserves our attention also because it shows how
the sagest Chinese of those times were wont to indulge with the
greatest earnestness in the idle art of paronomasia, taking homonyms
or quasi homonyms for synonyms, and thus explaining the one word
by the other. “What are”, thus the author asks, “the passions
“(tsdng *1^), and what is the innate natural character (sing
“ The latter is an endowment bestowed by the Yang; the passions
“ are evolutions from the Yin; and whereas man is produced by
“ receiving breath from the Yang and from the Yin, he harbours
“in himself a quinary character and six passions. Tshng means
“stillness (p^, likewise pronounced tsTng or tsing); and natural
“character signifies birth (^, pronounced sing or sheng),
“ because it consists of six breaths which man receives at his
“ birth. The Keu ming kiieh ' says indeed, that the passions have
“their origin in the Yin. We will now for a time meditate on
“ this subject

“ That the natural character has its origin in the Yang, is
“ quite rational. For, the yang breath being benevolent, and the
“yin breath covetous, we find among the passions a desire for
“ gain and profit, while the character possesses benevolence. What
“do we understand by the five Constant Matters? They are
“ benevolence, righteousness, ceremony and rites, knowledge, and


•1 In the Catalogue of Literature, inserted in the Books of the Sui Dynast)', a
work ot this name is mentioned, bearing upon tlie Hiao king or “Classic of Filial
Submission and Piety’’ of wliich we spoke on p. 307 of Book I, the full title being
given as with the addition “that it consisted of si.x chapters,

commented by Sung Kiun” : ^ ^ ^ ^ (ch. 32, 1. 31) who lived

in the fir.st century. On the same page that Catalogue gives a similar title of a
work in one chapter, extant under the Liang dynasty, but lost when the Catalogue
was composed: tj; this title infers

that the book had reference to the five Emperors of legendary antiquity. We cannot
tell which of the two is here referred to by Pan Ru. Both evidently belonged, as
the titles show, to the class of works on fortune-telling.


2


IS


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ trustworthiness. Now then, whereas man at his birth consists of
“ a body which corresponds with the things represented by the
“ eight trigrams h he then acquires also five breaths out of which
“ he forms the Constant Matters. And what do we mean, when we
* speak of the six passions? We then mean joy, anger, sorrow,
“ merriment, like, and dislike ; they are six passions that contribute
“ to the formation of the quinary natural character. Why does
“ this character consist of five parts, and why are the passions six
“in number? It is because man exists by absorbing breath from
“the six musical accords and from the five Elements; hence,
“ also, he has within himself five viscera and six mansions, from
“ which the passions and the character issue, and into which they
“retire. The Yoh liDig bhi/ig says; The government of a State,
“ too, is divided into six manMons, and man has his five viscera.
“ What are these five viscera? They are the liver, the heart, the
“ lungs, the kidneys, and the spleen. The liver represents benevolence,
“ the lungs righteousness, the heart ceremony and rites, the kidneys
“ knowledge, and the stomach trustworthiness. Why does the liver
“represent benevolence? Because it consists of the operative energy
“(tsing) of the element Wood; for indeed, benevolence is the love
“of living creatures, and the East (identified with Wood and the
“spring, s. pp. 907 and 9sS of Book 1) is yang, and is the
“ region in which all that is endowed with life has its origin
“ (s. page 901). Thus, because the liver symbolizes Wood, it has
“a blue colour (like the spring, s. page 317), and also leaves
“and branches. Why are the eyes its apertures? Because the eyes
“can emit tears, but cannot give admittance to anything; for Wood,
“ too, is able to send forth things, viz. branches and leaves, and
“ cannot give admittance to anything from without h

1 That 1 .S to .say, a body [(roJaced by Heaven, Eartli, and ttie natural [ihenomena;
com;iare p. 900 of Book I.

2 This work we do not find in the Catalogue contained in the Books of the
Early Han Dynasty, nor in that of the Piooks of the Dynasty of Siii. The title .seems
to mean - ‘-o,, [ 1 ,^, Signification of the Sounds produred when Music is (ilaved’’.

=>tt4KI#Kiatil.


THE NATURAL CHARACTER AND THE VISCERA. 19

“ And why are the lungs identic H’ith righteousness ? Tt is
“ because they consist of the operative energy of the element Metal ;
“righteousness decides the fate of western regions*, and Metal
“ (being identified with the West and, consequently, with the autumn,
“ s. pp. 967 and 98S) brings everything to maturity. Because the
“lungs symbolize Metal, their colour is white (like that of the autumn,
“s. page 317). How is it that the nose is its aperture? Because
“ the nose likewise inhales and exhales the air, and because it has
“an elevated position, and because it has holes; indeed, the elevated
“ parts of the ground are also composed of accumulations of metal
“ and stone, and have holes and caves which, exhaling the clouds
“ and distributing rains, fertilize the earth, after which the clouds
“ dissolve (being as it were inhaled by the caves); it is the nose
“ that similarly exhales the air and inhales it

“Why is the heart considered to be ceremony and rites? It is
“ so because this organ consists of the operative energy of the
“ element Fire. In the South (the region assimilated with Fire) the
“estimable Yang has the upper hand, while the less estimable
“Yin underlies there, and in ceremonial and rites, likewise, difference
“ is kept in view between those of high rank and those in low rank.
“ Because the heart thus represents Fire, its colour is red. It is
“pointed; for, indeed, man entertains veneration for the Way of
“ Nature (the T a o), and so his heart is pointed beneath because
“ (broad) Heaven is above him. Why are the ears the apertures of


fr -tfe. . il IT 'G' * » » Ife , S » W . Hit -1 . * fit .

til . W Tl K t # -w . ST * i m . -t

a it Hi ^ I® si

I Because, when righteousness pre\ails in China, the barbarian tribes of the
West are altogether deeply impressed and awed into reverent submission.

a:, aj#«s0!M3tT, *iiai


2


20


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“the heart? They are so because they thoroughly connect the
“ interior body with the outward world, thus distinguishing sounds
“and words. It is still to be observed that Fire, whereas it shines
“clear and bright, resembles ceremony and rites inasmuch as the
“latter make a clear distinction between superiors and inferiors'.

“Why are the kidneys identified with knowledge? Because they
“consist of the operative energy of Water. A man that possesses
“ knowledge, whether he acts or does nothing, is never indecisive
“ or in doubt, just the same as water, which, too, never wavers
“about the direction to follow when in a forward motion.
“ The North being assimilated with Water, the kidneys have
“ the black colour (of the North). Why are the two passages
“its apertures? Because they expel water, and may also void fluid
“ excrements*.

“And why is the spleen identified with trustworthiness? Because
“ it consists of the operative energy of the element Earth, which
“ latter applies itself to nourishing all that exists representing
“in this way absence of selfishness in producing living beings; and
“ this is trustfulness in the highest degree. As the spleen represents
“Earth, it has the yellow colour (of this element). Why is the
“mouth its opening? Because the mouth can swallow food and
“ taste it, and because the tongue can distinguish tastes ; and also
“ because the mouth can vomit ^ sounds and fluid secretions


3 The spleen is, indeed, considered to be the principal organ ol' digestion.

4 A play, probably, upon the homonynnous ■words t^u pi “to vomit”, and tHi
-f- “Earth”.


THE VISCERA AND THE APERTURES OF THE BODY.


21


“It is for those reasons that the Ynen mhig pao ' says :
“‘The eyes are the agents of the liver; the liver consists of the
“operative energy of Wood, and it is the seat of the Blue Dragon
“ (the Celestial Animal assimilated with the spring, s. Book I,
“p. 317). The nose is the agent of the lungs; the lungs are
“ composed of the operative energy of Metal, so that they sever
“ immediately when cut into. The ears are the openings of the
“heart; this organ consists of the operative energy of the element
“ Fire ; and corresponds on high with the asterisms Chang and


i I have not seen any work of this name, and do not know wliether it still
exists. In the Books of the Later Han Dynasty (ch. 12, 1. 10) we read, that in
A.D. 123 some forty Ministers proposed that the Yuen mimj pao should be
abolished, which misty passage apparently refers to the repudiation of some chro-
nological dates, the correctness of which was seriously combated. In ch. 89 of the
same work we encounter, on leaf 12, the title again, viz. in the biography of Chang
Heng Imperial historiographer and a.stronomer who died in A.D. 139,

but with the characters mn prefixed, showing that the work bore upon the


Ch'un-is'ni, or upon the period of which this famous ancient book recounts the events.
Accordingly we may admit that it existed in early Christian times. Bretschneider
says in the Journal of the North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol.
XVI, p. 144, on the authority of the Shi ijcn yao yucn . an ency-

clopedia published in 1018, that it was a section of the Ch vn U in iiri shu

, “Books forming the Woof of the Ch'un-tyiii Period", published in the first
century before our era, which may be the same work which the Catalogue in the
Books of the Sui Dynasty (ch. 32, 1. 31) says was lost at the time, but was extant
still under the Liang dynasty in 30 chapters, with a commentary by Sung Kiun

century of the Christian era. Extracts trom the Ch ini-tyin yucn mtug pao are
sometimes found in the TS, as e. y. the tollowing: “The bladder is the mansion of
“the lungs, and it is the lungs that decide the (functions of the) bladder, the latter
“likewise having the power to distend constantly, hence it is the bladder which
“produces decisions in difficult matters... The situation of the spleen against the
“other organs may be said to bo that of a coiled dragon and a tiger coucliant
“ lying against each other . . . The stomach is the mansion that governs the spleen,
“ and the latter derives its breath from the stomach, as this is the organ entrusted
“with the grain (i. e. food)” ^ Wt ^ M ^ ^ ^ Mi ^

mM. W ^^Z^. jjgS: A The

Catalogue in the Books of the Sui Dynasty (ch. 32, 1. 31), among some lost
works still extant under the Liang dynasty, also mentions a Hiao-Kuiy yucn mmy
pao in one chapter, ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ , which may be the work referred

to bv Pan Ku.


2:2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ Sing \ The Yin is the image of the kidneys; the kidneys
“ consist of the operative energy of Water, and correspond with the
“ constellations Hii and Wei in the firmament The mouth is the
“ door of the spleen ; this organ consists of the operative energy of
“ the element Earth, and therefore it corresponds in the sky with
“ the Northern Bushel, which presides over the metamorphoses and
“phenomena of Nature^. Some say that the mouth is the aperture of
“ the heart, and that the ears are those of the kidneys ; others hold that
“ the liver is connected with the eyes, the lungs with the nose, the
“ heart with the mouth, the spleen with the tongue, and the kidneys
“ with the ears “

“ And what now do we call the six Mansions ? They are : the
“ large intestines, the small intestines, the stomach, the bladder, the
“ triple organ of digestion, and the gall-bladder. These mansions
“ are the dwelling-places of the viscera, and hence it is that the
“ Li yun represents the six passions as contributing to the formation
“ of the quinary character ®. The stomach is the mansion of the
“ spleen, the bladder that of the kidneys, the triple organ of digestion


t See B. I, p. 972. The.se constellations liaving nearly the same longitude as
Lion and Cancer, they were, some twenty or thirty centuries ago, nearest the sun
in the middle of the hot season.

2 Indeed, those constellations, answering to Aquarius (s. B, I, p 971) and
standing light opposite Chang and Sing, were anciently traversed by the sun in
the middle of winter, the season identified by cosniogonists with the element Water.

3 The reader will find this connection between the Earth and the Greater Bear
perfectly intelligible, if he remembers the important jiart this astorism plays, according
to Chinese ideas, in production and creation on Earth by regulating the rotation of
the seasons (B. 1, pp. 317 sc<y.).

■4 Liu Ngan, as we saw on page 15, had contrived still other combinations.


»

« 2 ft til . a. * * ^ , Bili . a »') ± is ,

If « -O <: « , -O * ;>c ^ . J; ® . It # ff ^


6 In the section of the Li ki entitled Li yun (II) it is stated in fact that there
are seven passions, which ought to be regulated by means of a cultivation of three
of the constant matters, viz. righteousness, trustworthiness, and ceremony and rites.
A translation of the whole passage, which is evidently the one Pan Ku here refers
to, we will give on page 39.


THF PASSIONS AND THE CARDINAIi POINTS.


23


“that of the pericardium, the gall-bladder that of the liver; the
“ small intestines are the mansion of the lungs, and the great
“ intestines that of the heart, and as such they predominate over
“ceremonial and rites, and righteousness. Joy resides in the
“ West, anger in the East, like in the North, dislike in the South,
“sorrow in the Nadir, and merriment in the Zenith; and why is this
“so? The West is the region in which everything endowed with
“ life attains to maturity and completion ; hence it is joy. The
“ East is the region where everything that has life is born, and
“ therefore it is anger. In the North the breath of the Yang begins
“to distribute itself; hence it is like. In the South the breath of the
“Yin arises, and therefore it is dislike. And much merriment prevails
“above us, while much sorrow prevails below

“ What now do we call the hwun and the p'oh? Hwun (^)
“means the same thing as to circulate the

“hwun move incessantly about outside the bodies. It dominates the
“passions. The p'oh is the soul which prompts (^) the

“ man (in whom it dwells) in such a way as to make him manifest
“himself. It has the mastery of the natural character. Hwun also
“means the yun herb (^) because the passions remove unclean
“things"; and p‘oh signifies manifestation (^, pronounced poh),
“ because it governs the interior of man by means of his natural
“ character” ^


' iM-kS . a'®. W =

It*. ilia B. 7*5 'IS

»f lit flic ii ft Hi .

» * Sili » til . ± ill * . * IE ffi itr , m itf . »

ite^fllc. M if Z ik M . it if ^ M
a mif^Miliis. lAB. ±^*.T
0 - « Ik

2 The yiin being a fi'agant lierb. it is considered to destroy filtliy smells.

=> 2® # -S il . 5® Ji 1£ tr Hi . ft Ti *!• Ik . ±

A. iJtttlk. ?!t«sik . If

ja»t«.»*aik,«0® ft Chapter III.


24


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Thus the final alinea of this nonsensical or semi-nonsensical gibberish
teaches us, that it was admitted bj the ancients that the hwun
or yang soul governs the passions of the person in whom it
dwells, and that his p^oh or yin soul governs his heaven-born
natural character. This theory is quite congruent with the one set
forth by Pan Ku at the very outset of his treatise, viz. that the
passions appertain to the Yin, that is to say, to the part of the
Universe which is naturally checked and counterpoised by the Yang,
and that man’s natural character emanates from the Yang,
the operation of which is constantly counteracted and bridled by
the Yin. We accordingly see that the soul of man was by no
means identified with his instinct or character ; nor was it considered
as the origin, the author thereof. But not all ancient writers were
unanimous on this point, and Siiin Yueh for example, who lived
from A.D. 148 to 209, altogether assimilated the yang soul with
the natural character. “What is acquired by man at his birth”, thus
he wrote in a little work on moral philosophy, “we call his natural
character, that is, the shen which inhabits his material body”*.

It is quite superfluous to draw the attention of our readers to
the fact that Pan Ku’s treatise has many traits in common with
the curious speculative theories of our own ancient and mediaeval
physicians and psychologists. It is interspersed lavishly with still
other speculations on the congruity between the several internal
organs of man and his passions and virtues. But they are
drawn from such a depth as to render it hardly possible to
follow the author’s train of thought; and as, moreover, we feel sure
our readers do not want much of such idle vagaries, we have
simply skipped them. In a country where Nature and Man were
never studied in a rational experimental way, and where the human
mind was, accordingly, never tutored by any correct notions about
the material constitution and laws of the Cosmos, nor by any solid
knowledge of the human body and the functions of its several organs
— in such a country philosophers and physiologists could merely
grope at the mysteries of Nature and the human existence, and not
possibly produce any better than a veri-similar system pretending to
explain them all. Nevertheless, this system represented Wisdom itself in


, Shen kien , “The Work

sent to the Emperor for Approbation’', ch. V.


MODERN PSYCHOLOGY IS THE ANCIENT SYSTEM.


25


its very perfection, whereas the constituting elements of the
Cosmos and Man, created by fancy, could be forced therein con-
gruously by mere reasoning, like the several pieces in mosaic work.
Not the slightest progress being made by the Chinese in the
course of ages in the field of exact science, the wisest men of all
times always steadfastly hallowed that system as a monument of
the deepest sagacity and intelligence of their venerated ancestry,
transmitting it carefully as a most sacred heirloom down to the
present day.

That all-embracing, all-explaining system thus having prevailed
supreme in Chinese psychology throughout all ages, we shall, for
the explanation of Chinese customs and ideas, often have to refer
to it. It will therefore be useful to frame a synopsis of its congruent
factors and elements:


Dislike South


“C

d

c.


ON THE GOOD OR EVIL CHARACTER OF HUMAN NATURE.


27


The fact that Pan Ku quotes some opinions expressed in
works now lost, shows that he was the mouth-piece of a school,
or that his ideas represent those of the ancients in general. The
innate character or instinct of man , his passions and soul in
connection with the Cosmos, thus keeping in those times the
minds of the learned so busy, it is rather natural that the question
whether that character, tutored by the p'oh or yin soul, is
originally good or bad, was greatly agitated. Confucius, to judge
from the records we have of his sayings, did not pronounce a decisive
opinion on this point, thus leaving it open to debate; and so it is
that we see great diversity about the question prevailing among his
followers. Shi Seh an adept of his seventy disciples, argued in a
treatise, entitled Yanfj s/tu ^ that the human natural character is
a mixture of good and evil, either of which may preponderate in
the individual according to whether his education has been good
or bad, that character and the passions, he said, being nurtured
as well by goodness coming forth from the Yang, as by evil
produced by the Y i n. The school of Mih TszS-tsien ’ and Tshh-tiao
Khai ^ disciples of Confucius, and that of Kung-sun Ni a
follower of the seventy, though disagreeing with Shi Shell on some
lesser points, gave their adhesion to his great principle that the
natural character is a mixture of good and evil “. Mencius taught
the character is intrinsically good, and that it becomes bad in a
later period of life, owing to its being undermined by the influence
of examples and circumstances; while Siiin Khing or Sun Khing
who lived not much posterior to Mencius, started from a principle
directly opposite, preaching categorically “that man’s innate character
“ is depraved, and that the good which is in him is merely factitious” ®.


0 See Lttn Iwikj, III, . The works of Shi Slieh, Mih Tsze-tsieii or

Mih Puh-tsT , and Kniig-siin Ni ai'e mentioned in the Catalogue of the

Han dyna&tv, for which see the Book.s nf the Early Han D\ nasty, ch. 30, 1. 17.

8 ^ ^ ^ ^ • Tl't-' works of this speculatist, who is

known also as Siun Hwang . are not lost. They are now current in 20

chapters or 32 sections, under the title of Siim-l.-izr The Philosopher Siun.

Of the 23rd. section, which deals with the e\il nature of man. Dr. Legge gives a translation
as an appendi.x to his translation of the Works of Mencius, Prolegomena pp. 82 iqq.


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


In the controversy those questions raised, an influential word
was spoken also by Khung Kih k better known by the name of
TszS-sze a grandson of Confucius, and reputed author of the
Chung gung, one of the Confucian standard books. In this work he
starts from the principle that man has received his natural character
from Heaven ; — “ What Heaven has ordained or bestowed”, says
he, “is called the sing, and so, following the sing is conforming
“to the Way or Course (Tao) of the Universe; and following this
“Course is effected by what we call instruction”'*. Thus Tsze-szS
made the chief principle of Taoism, of which we spoke on page 936
of Hook I, the substratum of ethics, and his motto amounted to
this, that the human character, being an endowment of Heaven, is
intrinsically good, and that virtue consists in following it intuitively
under certain moral and mental discipline. Such discipline or
“ instruction” it is what the Chung yung pretends to contain ; but we
find much more wild reasoning in this book than sound logic ‘.

Tszg-sze was not, however, the sole inventor of that doctrine.
For also in the lih king, most parts of which are undoubtedly
older than the Chung gang, we find it propounded in the following
terms: “It is the Way of Heaven, in bringing forth universal
“ evolution and involution, to regulate for every one in particular
“ its endowments that constitute his character Anciently, when
“ the Sages had made the permutations and combinations of lines
“(the yih), they thereby scrutinized thoroughly the laws of Heaven,
“ thus becoming able to fulfil Heaven's will without laying any
“ restrictions whatever upon their character”

A sage of the name of Kao Puh-hai known only through
some of his discussions with Mencius, which are laid down in the
works of this philosopher in a special section, entitled : “Chapters


' JL-USt-

2 See Book I, pp. 390 and C48.

4 We mav here refer the reader to Legge's masterl 3 ' treatise on tlie scope and
value of the Chumj fivmj, contained in the first volume of his Chinese Classics,
second edition, pp. 44 srpj.

5 ^ ^ ^ # jE # ^ Section ^ , I

^ Sect.


ON THE GOOD OR EVIE CHARACTER OP HUMAN NATURE.


29


and Sentences on Master Kao” taught that the natural character
of man is neither good, nor bad, but may be conducted into
both channels by circumstances and education. “The character”,
he said, “is like a willow; righteousness is like a cup or bowl;
“ and the fashioning benevolence and righteousness out of a man’s

“ character is like making cups and bowls of willow wood

“ The character is like a rushing waterstream ; open a passage for
“ it to the east, and it will flow to the east ; open a passage for
“ it to the west, and it will flow westward ; the human character
“ is just as indifferent to good and evil as the water is indifferent
“ to east or west . . . There is (originally) no good, nor evil in
“ the character, but some say, it may be rendered good as well
“ as bad” \

Also during the Han dynasty the inherent goodness or badness
of the human character agitated the minds of thinkers and specu-
latists. Tung Chung-shu ^ a celebrated scholar and politician of
the second century before our era, who left numerous elucidating
notes on the classical and other writings *, “in reviewing the works
“of Siiin Khing and Mencius, said in a disquisition about the
“ passions and the character ; ‘ The great Regulators of the heavens
“are the Yin and the Yang, and the great Regulators of man
“are his passions and his character, respectively born of the Yin
“ and the Yang. The influences of the Y i n being evil, and those
“of the Yang benevolent, we have in whatever is called virtue
“in the character, to see a product of the Yang, and in whatever
“is called vicious, a product of the Yin’”’'. Liu Hiang or Liu


1 ^ .

s t » ja tE » w « . . . tt « a * * . St *


3 ^ . 4 See the Books of the Early Han Dynasty, ch. 56, 1. 22.

- Quoted in tlie Lun hen*/^ ch. Ill, .


30


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Tsze-ching \ the statesman living in the century immediately
preceding the Christian era whom we mentioned many times in
Book I, flatly rejected the inherent badness of man’s character,
exclaiming; “Should that theory be correct, then we are forced to
“ admit that Heaven has no influence. And should good and evil not
“ be correlated with the Yang and the Yin, where then does the
“good come from that man performs?” k His motto was, that “the
“ character and the passions are correlatives, and that the former is
“ not exclusively good, nor the latter are exclusively bad” k And
Yang Hiung *, wlio lived in the time of Christ, likewise was an
adherent of the doctrine that the character is a mixture of both
good and evil, for we read in his works, still extant under the
title of Ff//i yen'-', “Disquisitions on the Regulation (of the conduct?)”:
“ Man’s character is a mixture of good and evil. If its good side be
“ cultivated, he will make a good man, but if the vicious side is
“ fostered, he will become a bad man” ®.

None of the conclusions arrived at by the ancients in this field
of speculations could entirely satisfy the Chinese nation, and the
question remained as wide open to debate as it was in the Con-
fucian period. It is, however, highly probable that the thesis that
the human natural character is intrinsically good, but corrupted in
the course of life by outward influences, so that it is to be carefully
guided by instruction and education, has been received more generally
than the other theories; for a fact it is that Mencius, its advocate,
has in authority as a moralist always been second only to Confucius
himself, and that the Chung gang has never ceased to be highly
thought of in China as the profoundest and sublimest of all treatises
on moral philosophy, the world possesses. During the reign of the
House of T"ang a famous scholar and statesman arose, who, dis-
satisfied with the conflicting conclusions of the ancients, tried to


1

*1 1ft M ^ « a It. . e » » 7- « S W A ^

Quoted in the Lun henr/, loc. cit.

^ +0 ^ ^ > 'Ira ^ ^ ^

4 See Book I, p. 1 073.

ch. II,


ON THE GOOD OR EVIE CHARACTER OF HUMAN NATURE.


31


reconcile them by a new theory of his own. His name was Han
Yu’; but he is more generally known by his cognomen Tmi-chi
and by his posthumous honorary title of Wen-kung b He lived from
768 to 824. He started from the principle that “the natural character
“ is born with the individual, and that the passions are produced
“by his contact with other beings and things”’; the character
consists of the five constant matters, and the passions are the
seven enumerated in the Li ki (ch. 31, 1. 33), viz. joy, anger,
sorrow, fear, like, dislike, and desire Agreeing thus far with
the ancients, he, different from them, taught that men are born
into this world with characters morally different, and he divided
them, according to their characters, into three classes, the superior,
the middle, and the inferior ®. The superior grade is innately
good, and good only ; the middle grade is capable of being guided,
and may rise to the superior, or sink down to the inferior; but
the inferior grade is innately bad, and bad only. Men endowed
with the superior character possess the first of the five constant
matters, viz. benevolence, in its highest perfection, and practice
the other four; those endowed with the middle character do
possess benevolence, but with a little tendency to its opposite,
while the other four constant matters are in a disorderly state;
and the inferior characters are inclined to op{ ose the five constant
matters altogether. In regard to the seven passions the same classi-
fication exists. In superior characters these seven are all active, and
each is in its due place; in middle characters some of the passions
are in excess and some in defect, but there is an endeavour to
give them their proper place and degree; in inferior characters
some of the passions are likewise in excess and others in defect,
but they ruthlessly go the way in which the passions drive them.

Accordingly, when Mencius tells us that the natural character
is good at first, but subsequently becomes bad; when Siun Khing
holds that it is bad at first and may afterwards become good;
when Yang Hiung teaches that in a man’s character good and
bad are blended together, so that this time good may preponderate,
and at other times evil — they all, says Han Yu, merely take into

" # ® )S ® S *1 ®

'• tt ^ fp ^ ± >t> T s.


33


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


their account the middle grade, and neglect the other two ; they
are right about one grade, and wrong about two. The question
now presents itself — and herewith his discourse ends — whether
the superior and inferior characters can be modified. Indeed, the
former can become more enlightened and attain a higher state of
intelligence by education and study, while men endowed with the
inferior grade may be made to have few faults by being kept in
awe and restrained b

This novel theory was largely accepted, especially on account of
the light it was deemed to shed on the true nature of the superior
and inferior kinds of men ^ whom Confucius spoke of so often in
his discourses with his disciples. Two or three centuries afterwards
it was supplanted by the theories of the philosophers of the
Sung dynasty. Without setting forth any fundamental position of
their own invention, these schoolmen racked their wits, even more
than others had ever done before, over the cosmo-psychological
sayings of the ancients. Spinning out those sayings to an infinite
length, they showed in every respect a most slavish submission to
the infallible ancestral sages a la mode, hardly displaying any trace
of originality of thought; and the writings they produced may
accordingly be contracted into three syllables: Words, words, words.
Placing no authority so high as that of the Confucian school, they
all implicitly accepted to the very letter the thesis of Tszg-szd and
the Yih king, according to which (see p. 28) the human character
is an endowment of Heaven; and, as a natural consequence, they
subscribed also to the tenet of Mencius respecting the inherent
goodness of man, as, indeed, nothing that comes from Heaven can
be bad. They furthermore accepted unanimously the identity of the
human character with the constant matters, laying, however, stress
only upon the first four of them, Mencius having said; “These four
“principles naturally belong to a man just as well as his four
“limbs .... Since we have them in ourselves, let us know
“ how to give them all their full development and completion


i See chapter XI of the commented edition of Han Yu’s writings, published in
forty chapters under the title of ‘‘Complete Collection of the works of Han, the Master
of Ch'ang-li” Ch'ang-li was his native place.

^ S' Y- "■ # A ■ d' A ■


THE PHILOSOPHERS OF THE SUNG DYNASTY.


33


“ Benevolence, righteousness, ceremony and rites, and knowledge are
“not infused from without; we positively have them in ourselves’ h

The four constant matters thus constituting man’s Heaven-bestowed
character, the Sung schoolmen thought it logical to link them to
the character of Heaven itself, which is likewise fourfold, the Yih
king having declared in its first line that tlie trigram khien,
which represents Heaven (see B. 1, p. 960), “is great, all-pervading,
beneficient, and immutably correct" k “If some greatness is im-
planted in us as an endowment of Heaven", thus Ch'en Shun k a
Fuhkiencse disciple of Chu Hi, who lived from A.D. 1153 — 1217,
wrote explicitly, “it is what we call benevolence; if some penetration,
“ beneficence or immutable correctness is implanted in us as an
“endowment of Heaven, we call it ceremoniousness, righteousness,
“or wisdom" k The constant matters thus are mere instincts, such
as even manifest themselves in birds and animals, for without being
taught thev make their nests and raise their voung; the cow shows
docility, the dog barks at thieves, the cock crows at sunrise, bees
and ants know the relations between king and subject, etc. And it
is quite logical that it should be sO; for. Heaven and Earth having
produced every being and every thing without e.xception, even plants
and trees, metals and >tones must have their peculiar sing or
characteristics, such as fragility, hardness, ductility, etc.

T’he field for such idle discussion was considerably enlarged by
the excogitation of two more elements in the natural character,
respectively denoted by the School as khi breatli or immaterial,
etherial substance, and chili material, grosser substance. These
two factors may be di.stinguished by the word.s .soft and hanl, quick


I.

^ f ii p. ■


'■> 1*^ j ly . alsM by ill' I u”ii.'iiieii Xy.iii-kliiica

® ^ 0 ® Z^^ ‘ *'"■ '' ^ ^ ^ 1

’'Coiiu'lote I]llll!^^ ul ii.itiii'.i] Vl'.ii'iil IMiilis.'iijiiiv .i \o|i;iiiitiiius work in 70 chajiteis
eiiilii'.icin;: llis wiitniy.., nl innii' t'l.in l‘JO pliilo'iiplieis of tlif Sunjr scliuul. or copiou.s
e.xtract.' tlieielroni. It «.i' bi'iuiyOit out niulor Iniporial patron. ige in lilo bv a
coininittee of 42 .'rliol.irs. anil lia.s held its {losition .is ,i standanl woik in tins cl.i.ss
ot litei.itui'e to tlii' d.iy.


3


34


THE SOVTi IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


and slow, strong and weak, briglit and dull, etc. ; they are, like
everything, born by the union of the Y a n g and the Yin, or, which
comes to much the same thing, by the co-operation of Ideaven
and Earth. Should, says Chu Hi, a man possess spontaneous wisdom
and intelligence, he proves to have a character in which the k h i
is very pure ('^) and unmixed; inferior degrees of wisdom and
intellect are all determined by the degree in which the khi is
rendered impure (y§|) by the chih. Such purity is to be identified
with the Yang, the impurity with the Yin. The two factors are
mixed in the “fundamental cliaracter” ( ) vvhich man has

obtained from Heaven and which forms the substratum of his morals;
they are mixed therein like soy and sell with pure water form a
seasoned gravy; or we may say, the funilamental heaven-bestowed
character is like water which remains jiure and limpid when
poured into a clean bowl, but which becomes foul or turbid

when the bowl is unclean or dirtv. It is also like the waters

•/

of the Ilwang-ho, which, limpid as they are at their sources
close by the sky, become turliid on their downward course by
flowing through clayey ground, remaining so over the whole
length of the stream. VVii ClYing ', also known as Yiu-ts'ing “,
a scholar who, though he lived from 1249 — 1333, after the
downfall of the Sung dynasty *, is generally reckoned among the
preponderant figures of the Sung school, taught that the child
before birth receives the k h i from its father, either in a pure or
an impure condition, and the chih from its mother. If, said
he, the khi is extremely pure and the chih excellent, they will
endow the man in whom they are implanted, with the highest
degree of wisdom (± ^ ); but the man whose khi is extremely
impure and whose chih is thoroughly bad, is the very personification
of dullness and the lowest ignorance ( T /SO ’•

The inventors of the ingenious doctrine about the khi and the
chih were, according to Chu Hi, Chang Tsai y also named Tsze-
heu who lived from 1020 — 1007, and his contemporaries, the
brothers Ch ing, with one of whom, namely I-clrwen or Hi, we


3 See tlie Historv of the Yuen Dynasty, c)i. 17']. 1. 8.

4 A compilation of those ami other speculations on the khi and the chih the
reader will find in ch, 30 and 31 of the Siiin-h to. h nun shu.


THE DOCTRINES ABOUT THE PASSIONS.


35


accjuaiiited the reader in Book I; the other bore the name of Hao
and his cognomen was Poh-shun h “They are”, said Chu Hi,
“ considered by me to have by their invention deserved much from
“ the School of the Holy Sages, and to have stimulated the studies
“ of the future. Those who study their theory cannot fail to be
■■ deeply impressed by it. Previous to tliem nobody ever reasoned so
“ far. Philosophers taught that the natural character is bad, or that
“it is a mixture of good and evil ; but had the theory of Chang
“ and the Clring appeared earlier, those numerous reasonings would,
* of course, have not needed to thus embroil the question. By their
“ theory the sayings of those philosophers are annulled” h

In thus following China’s philosophers in their disquisitions about
the Heaven-bestowed character of man and its })roperties, we have
been distracted from the passions, which thinkers of pre-Christian
times associated with the Cosmos, as they associated the character
with it. We saw, indeed (page 20), that Pan Ku gave his entire
adhesion to the theory that, while the character is born of the
Yang, the passions are produced by the \in, and correspond
with the six cardinal points.

The principal author on this subject, whose works the now living
posterity is in possession of, is the same Tung Chung-shu of the
second century B.C. of whom we spoke on page 21). “There are”,
he wrote, “in the human body a natural character and a set of
“ passions, as surely as there are a V i n and a Yang in the
“ heavens. To speak of the material nature (c h i h) of man and
“ abnegate his passions, is like acknowledging the existence of the
“Yang of Heaven, and denying the existence of Heaven's Yin” \


^ ^ Is ^ ^ HI . m ^ Hi 0

^ m m z K ± m m 7- m m ^

ci/.. cli. 30.

‘ WAZM

ira * * 'in « W A 2 It iff) * * r# Ife “ *

^ chapters contains

abundant notices and elucidation.s on inatter.s recorded in the ancient bonks, especially
in the Chmi-fi III . The title is ambiguous. It signifies perhaps ; Uioad Exposition of the
Ch un-lb I ti.


36


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Harping, in concert with Liu Ngan (s. page 15 seq.), on the topic
of his age that man, being a product of the Cosmos, his whole
person, both bodily and mentally, is a miration of the same, a
Cosmos in miniature, he wrote: “It is not possible to become a
“man by birth alone; to lie a man it is necessary to be produced
“ by Heaven. The great origin of human existence lies in Heaven,
“ and Heaven is the great-grandfother of man ; hence man is,
“ above all, an image of Heaven. His material body comes to de-
“ veloprnent through a process of evolution from the operative heavenly
“numbers; his blood and breath move because they are metamor-
“ phoses of the will of Heaven ; his virtuous conduct is guided by
“ righteousness becau.se it is an evolution of the laws of Heaven.
“ Man’s likes and dislikes evolve from the warmth of Heaven
“and from its fre,shness, his joy and anger from its cold and

“ heat, the fate, bestowed on him, from Heaven’s four seasons.

“The joy, anger, sorrow and merriment, which are innate in
“ man, answer to spring, autumn, winter and summer, viz. his
“joy to spring, his anger to autumn, his merriment to summer,
“ and his sorrow to winter. The integrant parts of Heaven
“ thus existing within man, his passions and his character, too,
‘ he must have from Heaven .... Outbursts of joy, anger,
“ sorrow and merriment are, as a matter of fact, correlative with
“ freshness, warmth, cold and heat. The breath of joy is warmth,
“and corresponds therefore with the spring; that of anger is
“freshness, and thus corresponds with the autumn; that of

“merriment is the Major Yang (see B. 1, p. U61), so that it

“ corresponds with the summer ; and the breath of sorrow being
“the Major Yin, it corresponds with the winter season. These four
breaths being the eommunal projjerty of Heaven and man, men
“ need not cultivate them ; hence, also, he may regulate them, but
“ he can never entirely bridle them ; regulate them, and they will
“ become docile and tractable, but bridle them entirely, and they
“become rebellious”’.

A # A 2: -t ifl. ic Ife.tt A 2 0f Bl 7} ± * A Ifc.A


DOCTRINES OF THE LI KI CONCERNING THE FASSIONS.


37


This strange theory can certainly not boast of much solidity,
since its author himself is guilty of gross self-contradiction as
to the correlation between the passions and the temperatures of
the seasons, and, moreover, his statements are quite incongruent
with those of Pan Ku, who, as we saw (p. 26), identified joy,
anger, liking and disliking respectively with the West, East, North
and South, that is, with autumn, spring, winter and summer. No
wonder therefore that the theories of both sages have been entirely
superseded in the estimation of later philosophers by quite another,
likewise invented by the ancients and bearing, moreover, the appro-
bation of the Li Id-, it teaches that the passions are not directly
implanted in man by the yin part of the Universe, but simply
originate in the natural character, of which they are intrinsic
parts and manifestations. "At his birth”, the Li Id says (eh. 50,
11. 21 sqq. and 20), “immobility jirevails in man, and this is his
“ heaven-born character. Put as he is affected Ijy the things around
“ him, something becomes active in him, to wit, the desires of his
“ character. Things come more and more in contact with him,
“ so that his knowledge of them gradually increases, like and
“dislike thus assuming a shape; and if these two passions are not
•• regulated within him, and his knowledge of the things leads him
“ astray without, he cannot come back to his own self, and the
“ celestial principle is e.xtinguishcd in him.

“The things that act on a man are unlimited in number; and,
“ when his likes and his dfflikes are not regulated, he adapts
“ himself to the things he comes in contact with, in consequence
•• of which those things destroy in him the cele&tial principle, and
“ make him give the utmost indulgence to his human desires. He


s .4! a * ^

# 16 .. 4 .

..A#

BS ® . .4, # ® if tSi S « . # « © A I# S a .

R'l^^g-AKAJ'/rlal^Ife,.

It -2 ffS II- © A A nil- I# ®
ft*-


.S8


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHl AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ then has a perverse and recalcitrant heart, false and deceitful,
“ and possesses properties such as licentiousness and rebelliousness.
“ If he is strong, he oppresses the weak ; if there are many of his
“ sort, they cruelly oppress the few ; if he is clever, he cheats the
“dull; if bold, he makes it bitter for the timid; the sick are not
“ nursed, the old and the young, orphans and the lonely do
“ not obtain their due. This is the way by which the greatest
“ disorders come to us. It is for these reasons that the ancient
“ Rulers instituted ceremonies and rites, and music, intending
“thereby to restrain the passions of man.... In their institution
“of ceremonies and music they did not seek how they could fully
“ satisfy the desires of the mouth, the belly, the ears and the
“eyes; but their aim was to thus teacli the people to moderate
“ their likes and dislikes, and thereby bring them back into the
“straight path mankind has to walk in” k

Our readers will be glad to find here in the end some germs
of sound philosophy; indeed, it is undeniably true that the
human desires may create strongly marked likes and dislikes,
love and hatred, and that these passions, if not properly bridled,
may become scourges. The doctrine that those passions should be
regulated by means of ceremonies and rites, after the example
of imaginary ancient princes, will not appear strange at all, if we
take the word li which we have thus translated, in the broad
sense it virtually has in Chinese, a sense which nobody who wishes
to properly understand China’s social and religious life may lose
out of sight : it denotes all (jood and proper acts bp trJnclt man


It . rlHS S . » ® * IP ft ,

ffii A tl: * li . A tf; ft III A a iB * A .

A'^Zti ...

BmRAM.ZiE^ « IE . ■


THE PASSIONS REGULATED BY LT AND RIGHTEOUSNESS.


3d


heeps up his intercourse with other beings of everg class or sort,
including the dead and the gods. Tlie li thus embraces the active
practice of the live constant matters, and ethical phiiosophers thus
quite judicially placed it in the midst of them. Armed with this
knowledge, the reader will not have any ditticulty in understanding
also the train of thought of the unknown ethical author who
propounded the following theory about the regulation of the
passions by means of those 1 i , a theory which we find in the
Li I'i (ch. 31, 1. 33);

“What do we call the human passions? They are joy, anger,
“ sorrow, fear, liking, disliking, and desire. These seven exercise
" their power in man without his learning them. What do we call
“human righteousness? It is atfection on the part of the fother,
“submission and devotion (hiao) on that of the son; it is gentleness
“on the part of the elder brother, brotherly submission on that of
“the younger; it is righteousness on the part of the husband, and
“ obedience on that of the wife ; it is kindness on the part of seniors,
“and subjection on that of juniors; it is benevolence on the part
“of the Ruler, and loyalty on that of Ministers; these then are the
“ things which constitute what is called human righteousness. To
“ preach trustworthiness and cultivate harmony is to be called
“ promoting the happiness ot mankind, but quarrels, plundering and
“ murder we call things disastrous to man. Hence, the perfect Sage
“governs the seven passions of men by the cultivation of the ten
“things which constitute righteousness, by preaching tiustfulness,
“ by cultivating harmony, by showing respect to atfection and
“ complaisant courtesy, and liv doing away with cpiarrels and
“plundering. If, however, he disregards the li, wherewith then
“shall he rule the passions?” ‘.

Nor is it difficult to discern the reason why the ancient Rulers
thought to govern the passions by means of music. Music accom-
panies ceremonies and rites, softening the heart, rendering man


A


fff. ^


■tij im %

STfe

FI


# 1 -b * » -9* ffij m
W i“ A S S . -T ^ H ft . ^ it! .
fi S , 4* * S t= , E ^ A 1 , l» t

m mz A M , '# 3? tt ® ig 2 A .ffi . ft ^ A 2
ja/SA-btSIt + S, igfir,

^ ^ iH'H 0.'la Z *§ ii- "


40


THE SOUI* IX PHII.OSOPHY AND FOLK-COXCEPTIOX.


lenient towards others ; it may regulate liis joys and sorrows, excite and
subdue his anger. Much has been written on this topic liy Chinese
authors ancient and modern, but we need not follow them now.

It may be noted by the bye, that the doctrine of the Li ki
that the desires and the passions originate in the natural character
was also adhered to liy Siiln Khing, the ancient sage whom we
spoke of on page .27. “The innate character”, he wrote, “is a
“ creation of Heaven, and the passions are the grosser substances
“of the character; desires are the consequences of the passions” b
The Li Id having, ever since the Han dynasty was seated on the
throne, been recognized by the nation as a classical standard work
of the highest authority, its theses about the passions have been
humbly received by all orthodox minds as imlisputably correct.
Wang Chhing the author of the Liin heng, who was farther than
any Chinaman that ever lived from blind admiration of what the
ancient sages deemed good to preach, wrote in the first century
of our era: “The passions with the natural character form the
“ basis of everything by which man is ruled and regulated ; (hence)
“they are the producers of ceremony and rites and ot music, ft
“ is with the object of bringing the original passions and character
“ to their highest perfection, that ceremony and rites are used as
“ means to restrain them, and music to keep them within bounds,
“in this sense that, whereas the character contains humility, modesty,
“complaisance and compliance, rites and ceremony have been
“instituted to guide it in the proper way, and, whereas the pa.ssions
“ comprise liking and disliking, joy and anger, sorrow and mer-
“ riment, music has been invented, with the purpose of making

“ reverence and respect prevail throughout. Thus, the objects with

“ a view to which rites and ceremony have been organized and
“ music instituted, are the passions and the character” b Liu Hieh,

' glill . M ^iS

ch. lU. beini: --ect. 2 '’!

2 . We lier'e ,i|i'>|.i^i/e lei- li.i'.in:^, bv ini^t.ike, ::i\eii ttie name of this

man on [Ope UST of IJooK I Wanp T nnir, ,

3 tit tt A /B' ^ . fi « Fir * ft tb . i»: !S 'HI

j® Ki e * a . til w » s s & s ft « « !i

* * *1 )>lT )H M . # lilr S ft ftl « tt m ' J~:,,

cli in, sect, .


RELATION BETWEEN THE CHARACTER AND THE PASSIONS.


41


a scholar and statesman who lived in the fifth and the sixth century
(see Book I, p. 1155), wrote;

“ In the breath borrowed by man (from the Cosmos), surely his
•• character and his passions are comprised. What the character is
“ affected by is the passions, and what the passions are satisfied
“ by is the desires. The passions are produced by the character
“and they counteract it; the desires come forth from the passions,
“ and injure the same.

“ The passions do harm to the character, and the latter on its
“ part restrains them, just as smoke works upon fire, and ice upon
“ water. Indeed, smoke is produced by fire, and yet smothers it,
“and ice is produced by water and stops it in its course; when
“ there is little smoke the fire blazes, and when the ice melts, the
“ water can flow freely. So, if the character of a man is correct,
“ his passions melt away, but when his passions flame up, they
“ destroy his character.

“ Again, as no dust cleaves to a pearl as long as it is bright
“ and shines, so the passions and lusts do not defile a character
“ which is clean and pure. But, as the character of a forest, which
“is silence, is disturbed when the winds shake it; as the character
“ of a water-stream, which is limpidity, is defiled when mud renders
“it turbid; so the character of man, which is correctness, is cor-
rupted by being darkened by desires and lusts. The lusts play
“ the same part in the body as grubs in a tree , indeed, by nourishing
“ such insects in its core the tree is corroded, and by cherishing
"desires man injures himself; if the grubs grow plentiful the tree
“breaks down, and if the desires flame up the body must perish

“ The poison of a wasp’s 'ting in the finger may vex a man for
“an entire day; ii, musiputo bite in his flesh may disturb his sleep
“ for a whole night. The.se insects do him little harm, and pain in
" his finger or his flesh is merely an external pain ; and vet, man
“ in the open country evades the stings of wu'ps, and when at home
“he drives the musquitoes away — and why? because they do
“ harm to his body. But when apjietites and lusts conquer his very
“ heart, so that his correct character is entirely subverted, the
“ great damage thus caused by those appetites and lusts, the internal
“disease thus caused In the conipiest of his heart, is ot much more
“ import than his finger or hi' flesh ; and yet, though such outward
“ pain is lighter than a g(jssamer, m;in ha^ learned to evade it,
“ but the inward evil, heavier than mount Tni, nobody avoids.
“ This is like casting otf a slight inconvenience to take up a heavy


4-2


THE SOUIi IN PHILOSOPHY AND I’OLK-CONCEPTION .


“injurious burden; is not this the reverse order of things?”'.

The schoolmen of the Sung dynasty, orthodox as they were to
the very core, could not but receive unconditionally the Li hi
doctrine respecting the passions. Starting from it in their speculations
on the subject, they found themselves obliged to take into account
another element, viz. the heart, sin Indeed, they could not
reasonably disregard the fact that up to their time, ancients and
moderns alike had been wont to represent passions, feelings and
affections of all kinds as allied with the heart, nor that almost all
the graphic signs denoting such emotions contain a hieroglyphic
picture of the heart, adjoined as a prefix or suffix. It is even the
only character among all those representing internal organs, which
has a place in the written language as a fundamental character or
hieroglyphic radical, so that the conclusion is, that in the very
oldest times, when the Chinese began to depict ideas, the heart
was deemed to be the principal internal organ, nay, that it was


!ti K- tt ifii a tt . 1i flS

eitstc Alt. a

4 A iffi « A > i’K Hi it * tff) J’X ® a a

flS .'A ifep

* 0 1* S: »i a y: * » . tt m 01

® ® g W.ife 01 * it 01 1 1:

A ifcf 1 « It 01 ^ 0 s ta . K a pB It 01 a t
ititifts. A Aai0m!i^a,
A S 01 !S S g , -R ^ , 0 * * , It ® ji Al' .

IE # f® fl , I# A W . Jfe ft S A It It * 0
^ife. K^»‘&Z . ^ ^ZW

^ Discourses”, an interesting pliilosophical and

ethical work in 10 chapters; ch. I, section •


THE HEART AS THE SEAT OF THE CHARACTER AND THE PASSIONS. 43

then the only one which thitherto had been an object of their
thoughts. But there was more: the infallible Mencius had cate-
gorically declared the heart to be the seat or root of those constant
matters of whichj as we saw, the natural character is composed.
“ The sensation of the heart at the jiain and distress of others”,
he said, “is the fundamental principle of benevolence; its feeling
“ of shame and dislike is the principle of righteousness, its sentiment
“ of compliance and complaisance the principle of rites and ceremony,
“ and its feeling of what is right or wrong the principle of knowledge.
“ Men have these four principles in them as naturally as they
“ have their four limbs’’ '. A similar doctrine had been taught in a
work which claimed for itself a higher antiquity than the writings
concerning Mencius, namely the Ktran Yin-ts^e^, “The Sage Yin of
Kwan” k Its motto was, that “the passions are produced by the
“ heart, and the heart by the character, the passions being as


1

I


3 According to tniilition, the author of tins little work bore the personal name
of Hi ^ and he wa-s an officer in Kwan. whom f.ao-ts/.e. the reputed founder of
Taoism, met \\ith on pas.sing thr.uigh that kingdom: i-uh' Historical Records, ch. C3,
1. 2, and the Gouks ot the Early Han Dynasty, ch. 30, 1. 20. It is a fact that a
treatise in nine chaptens, bearing his name, is mentioned in the Catalogue of
Literature contained in the Books cd’ the Han Dynasty; but .sub-equentlv there
is no evidence of its eai-tence for many age.s, no meiitiou being made of it in
the Catalogue of the Sui dyiia.sty. nor in that occurring in the Docks of that of
Tang, ft re-appeared in the reign of the bung dynasty; but literati of judgment
reject its authenticity, chielly because of its being full of matters of evident modern
origin, which even have a strong scent of Buddhism about them, and also on account
of the discrepancy between its style and that of the iire-Chnstian literature. See
hereon ch, 1 iO of the ilescriptive c.italogue of the Imperial library of the pre.sent
dynast}', completed in 17S2 by a commission of princes and high officers a[ipouited
for the purpose by the Emperor. This aduurahle specimen of oriental bibliography,
containing not fewer than 2li0 chapters, bears the title of .'•'re /./m It, acn shu tsinui
mv h PI tip * » * g , ■•tleneral Catalogue ot all the Books of the four


Treasuries”. These Treasuries ai'c the departments into which the Imperial library was
divided, designated King pu or De|)artment of Classics, Shi pu

or that of History, Tsze pu or that of I’hilosophers. ami Tsih pu

that ot Belles-Lettres.


44


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOIiK-CONCEPTION.


“ the waves, the heart as the current, and the character as the
“ water” *.

Coming now to the Sung schoolmen, we find that Chdng I-ch'wen
taught “that the embodiment of the natural character is called
“ the heart, and that the motions produced by the character
“ are the passions .... The passions are the motions of the natural
“ character h The heart is compared to a corn-seed, in which all
“the principles of the existence (of the plant) are lodged”’. Chang
Tsai preached “that it is the heart which governs the human
“character and passions”^; and Chu Hi said: “The natural character
“ is the principle of the heart, the passions are the motions of the
“ character, and so the heart is the ruler of the character and the
“ passions What we call heart is that which governs the character
“and the passions; this means to say that, when the heart is
“ quiet and unmoved, the principles of benevolence, righteousness,
“ ceremony, and knowledge together are present in it, but the
“ parts of it which arc moved form the passions”

The speculations of the Sung schoolmen are the highest point
Chinese philosophy has reached, and above which it has never been
able to soar. Their views have been almost universally received for
at least five centuries, and under the reign of tlie present dynasty
the authority of Chu Hi has been exclusively paramount. Building
up their theories on no other themes than those prepared by
the ancients, they have for an unknown future length of time
secured to themselves the authority over a nation to which
originality is next to nothing, and which admires nothing so much


1 ‘Ib ^ ^ . '1'^ ^ # tK

. Section

M o o „ M ^ ii . 1(1 «(•// '•■/(K, cli. 29, 1. 5, and cli, .dd, 1, I.

h lien (ihli '•Clin Hi’s Comjilele Works”, section .

. Si)i;i-h ta toKcn slm, ch. 33, I. 1.

5 # ^ it il . ‘1^ ^ ^ ii ife. . ^ ^

. ft crtfi. fit., 1. 2.

^ « tfn t= * ill « ^ a

The Complete Works ot Clin III, sect.


CONNECTION OF THE SOULS WITH THE PASSIONS ETC.


45


as antidulivian wisdom. Even in working out those themes they
plundered earlier authors for ideas, metaphorical expressions, tropes
and rhetorical figures, thus decorating their writings in all parts
with borrowed plumes. In following them in their ideas about
the character, the passions and the heart of man we could not,
of course, enter into the recesses of their tedious reasonings. Nor
will we now lose ourselves in their discussions about what they
called “settling or fixing the natural character” that is to say,
the art to regulate the pa&sions. More than any authors of previous
ages they devoted their attention to the human talents, ts'ai^
which they deemed to be produced by the khi and the chih of
the character, and to be good or bad according to whether the
khi is pure or turbid. They have discoursed also on sze-li ^
or “thoughts and longings”, on chi’ or "aspirations”, on teh ®
or intrinsic virtues, on the five constant matters etc. But all
these matters we must pass over, because tliey are in reality
alien from our original subject, all those authors having failed
to develop any plausible ideas on the ties that connect them with
the Soul.

Indeed, it appears to have been too much for the mental faculties
of the Chinese race to fathom the mysteries of those ties. The
ancients did not express themselves clearly on so abstruse a point,
silently contenting themselves with admitting that the ties do
exist. Siiin Khing, the advocate of the innate badness of man,
of whom we spoke on page : 27 , held that the yang soul stands
entirely under the influence of the heart, just as the other con-
stituents of man; “the heart”, thus we read in the writings
that bear his name, “is the chief governor of the body and also
“the master of the shen-ming; the orders it issues are obeyed
“ by all parts of the body without e.xception” And Pan Ku, as
we saw on page :2fl, declared four centime? later that the yang
soul governs the passions, and the yin soul the character; while
again a couple of centuiies later Siiin Yueh roundly identified the
character with the yang soul (see p. :24).


^ ‘.Sit.-

” M-

cti. 'ITi. ^ect. .


46


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-GONCEPTION.


A little treatise in two chapters, entitled Tszc-lura fszc\ “The
Philosopher Tsze-hwa”, which originally existed with the name of
Ch'^ing Pen ^ of the Tsin dynasty as its author, but, after being
lost for a time, re-appeared, probably as a spurious reproduction,
is, so far as we know, the first work which enlarged on the con-
nection of the soul with the operations of the mind and its faculties.
“When the five viscera are completed, the shen breath settles
“in the heart, the hwun breath then assuming a well-finished
“form, and the individual thus becoming an accomplished man.
“Thus the five viscera and the six mansions are each under the
“influence of a shen. The tsing or operative energy of the soul
“is borrowed from the elements Metal and Fire; the breath is
“ mixed harmoniously with influences of Water and Wood, and
“by the union of the tsing and the breath ten things are produced,
“to wit: the tsing, the shen, the hwun, the p'oh, the heart,
“the will, the aspirations, the thoughts or thinking faculties,
“knowledge, and longings. That from which life comes forth
“is the tsing, and that which manifests itself when two tsing
“come into active mutual contact is the shen; that which
“inseparably accompanies the shen hither and thither is the
“hwun, and that which accompanies the tsing in all its motions
“in and out is the p^oh. That wliich causes things to be understood
“is the heart; the calculations of the heart constitute the will;
“the results of the will are the aspirations; the product of the
“aspirations is thought, and what thoughts are directed upon
“is the things longed after; but in anxious longing there is an

“ element which decides and distinguishes, viz. knowledge

“ Thus if the tsing supersedes the shen, it stifles it ; a stifled
“shen suppresses the hwun; a fettered hwun smothers the
“p'oh; a straying p^oh wastes the heart; a wicked heart leads the
“aspirations astray; wild aspirations entrap the will; a captivated
“ will entangles the thoughts ; obstructed thoughts endanger the
“longings; exhausted longings dim the knowledge; and when the
“ knowledge is obstructed, the individual becomes stupid ....

“The heart is the chief of the five viscera and the six mansions;
“it is the lodging-place of the shen imbued with operative energy.
“Its own tsing or operative energy is Fire; its breath is the
“ trigram 1 i ; it has a red colour ; its shape is that of a lotus turned


1


THE SOULS IN CONNECTION WITH THE VISCERA.


47


“upside down; its slien is the Red Bird, and its apertures conimu-
“nicate upward with the tongue”. In this tune our speculatist harps
forth a while in respect of the four other viscera, combining them
with the Elements, the colours, and the openings of the body in
the same way as Ban Ku did (see p. :2G), but improving on the
latter in so far as he lets, as we saw, the heart communicate with
the tongue, and the kidneys with the ears! Instead of identifying
the liver, the lungs, the heart and the kidneys directly with the
four cardinal points, he assimilates them with the kwa and the
Celestial Animals that represent those points (comp. B. 1, pp. 963
and 949), finally assimilating the spleen with the Earth or centre
of the Universe by stating its breatli to lie in the cyclical signs w u
and ki (comp. B. I, p. 966). “The will”, he then goes on to
say, “being hidden in the spleen, the tsing in the kidneys, the
“shen in the heart, the hwun in the liver, and the p'^oh in the
“lungs, those five forces (tsing) are under the supremaev of the
“five Elements” '.

In the writings bearing the name of the sage Yin of Kwan,
with which we have already acquainted the reader, the imaginary
influence exercised by the five Elements over those tsing or
forces, is spun out liy bringing into play the creating, neutralizing


it

Hilp


^ + til P His tt * g 4; -B. «

m . ^ » g ^ ID » ii i jit , II


fiStt 11 i g . ,1 Z ;jif ff il Z -t. , * 2
St ii 2 -B , .B rni » « S IB 2 * . it. tS fjf
tl II 2 « . . * « « ± B) i® i* . tt »J It I® .


-±:


A

z

z


K'J U Ki] U ^ ‘I'k W\ M r
m m . i2l Mij ^ it. . ^ KIJ m . 0 MIJ „


^ ^ M ^ ^ ^ Tlic M ^ iTiiP ^

A

H-t^.Ts. sect.


ch, 21.


48


THE SOUL I\ THILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


and destroying influences which, as our readers know from Book I,
the Elements are supposed to exercise upon each othei', some
discoveries being thus made as to the relations between those
forces mutually. “The tsing is Water, the p'^oh Metal, the shen
“Fire, and the hwun Wood. Thus, as the tsina; belongs to
“Water, and the p'oh to Metal, and Metal is an element which
“ produces Water (see B. T, p. 057), we have the reason at hand
“why the tsing is hidden in the pmh (/. e. like Water in Metal).
“And as the shen belongs to Fire, and the hwun to Wood, and
“ Wood is the element by which Fire is jiroduced, it follows that
“the shen must lie hidden in the hwun (that is, like Fire in
“ Wood). Fire as a material substance can melt Metal and transform
“it into a fluid mass; it can ignite Wood and burn it ; consequently
“the shen (vvhicli corresponds to Fire) can eclipse the hwun and
“the p'oh” ' . . . And so forth.

Taking into consideration that, according to Chinese ideas, the
five Elements are the constituents of the Cosmos, it follows here
that Tsze-hwa and Yin followed the ancients in their deeming
man to be a molecule of the Universe, animated by the same forces
as the Universe itself; a microcosm in the full sense of the
word. This conception is pronounced more positively still by Yin
when he says: “In the heaven." the tsing forms cold, on the

“earth it corresponds with water, and in man it is his tsing.
“The shen is heat in the sphere, tire on the earth, and a

“shen in man. The p'oh represents drought in heaven, metal on

“earth, and in man his p'oh. The hwun is wind in heaven,

“wood on earth, and a hwun in man. Thus the several tsing
“which dwell in us form one single tsing with those of heaven
“and earth and all that exists, just as ten thousand waters
“can merge into one single vast expanse. The several sh(!n
“of our human race are blended w'ith those of the Universe
“and the whole creation like ten thousand fires may unite into
“ one single fire. Our p'o h are fused with those of the Cosmos

^

mn-


MAN IS ANIMATED LIKE THE UNIVERSE.


49


“ and all that is produced therein, as metals, considered as material
“substances, can be mixed with other metals and fused up
“therewith into a single mass. And our hwun are conglomerated
“ with those of heaven, earth and the whole creation, just as wood,
“as a material substance, can be ingrafted upon wood of another
“ sort, and grow up with it into a single tree. As thus the whole
“Cosmos with everything that exists in it is our tsing, our
“shen, our p'oh, our hwun, what is death? what is life?” h
Prom the above pages, which form an epitome of all the prin-
cipal speculations on the human soul which are known to have
existed in China in print down to the Sung dynasty, the reader
may fairly judge for himself that only poor harvests are to be
reaped in the oriental field of psychological and physiological
wisdom, and that attempts to sift some wheat out of this mount
of chaff are of no earthly use. The numerous philosophers of
the Sung dynasty give us nothing original, the quintessence of
what these humble slaves of the dictions of the ancients have
to tell us on the subject being hardly anything but a repetition
of the passages from the Li li, the Jih king and other old
works, which we have reviewed methodically in the first pages
of this chapter. Their tedious disquisitions consequently cannot any
longer inspire us with interest, except for some extra ideas and
conceptions they acquaint us with, likewise closely allied with the
ancient philosophical notions, and apparently entertained by the
Chinese nation since all times known, their prevalence being
betrayed spontaneously by its literature of every age. We think
here to serve our readers best by sifting out of those writings


a A©®. A.®

ASife.

@ . ft ^ 5E > 'H' ^ 4 - n'


4


50


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


the principal theses and theories, and arranging them in a logical
sequence. Thus, considering that the Sung school has exercised an
all-commanding intiuence over the Chinese mind down to this day,
a standard catechism of doctrines about the human soul may be
obtained, with which every student of Animism and Ancestral
Worship who wishes for more than a very superficial knowledge
of this main section of the Chinese Religious System, has to render
himself familiar.

As a first article of their creed, the Sung schoolmen unreservedly
adopted the fundamental theories about the human soul, which are
to be found in the ancient Classics, and wliich were contracted in
a few lines on page 5. Every one reasoned of them in his own
way, but none did so with such laconic precision as the scholarly
statesman Wei Liao-weng \ who lived in the first half of the
thirteenth century : “Those parts of the universal breaths (Yang
“and Yin) which, having attained the highest development, expand
pronounced shen), form slien; but those which revert and
“retreat (^, pron. kwei) form kwei. VVhen implanted in a man,
“ they are his h w u n , composed of yang substance, which forms
“his shen; and his p'oh, consisting of yin substance and
“forming his kwei. When these two universal lireaths mix (in
“ his body), the h w u n agglomerates and the p'o h const)lidates,
“and thus they produce his life. But when they leave his body,
“the hwun ascends and (again) becomes a shen, while tl>e p'^oh
“descends to become a kwei”b Accordingly, as Chen Teh-siu
Wei Liao-weng’s contemporary, expresses it: “the breaths that
“animate Heaven and Earth are the breaths of the human body,
“and the breaths of the human body are the same as those of
“ Heaven and Earth” *.

Thus accepting the ancient theory about the eternal migration


1 , cogrnomen : Hwa-fu


® A 1 Ml
ffo ^


ill tis'iicn sliii, ch. 28.

3 S 1 cognomen ; King-yuen


A


Op. ct loc. cil.


ALL THAT EXISTS IS ANIMATED.


ol


of s h e n and k vv e i out of the Yang and the Y i n into beings^
and from the beings back into this dual universal power, the Sung
schoolmen could not but subscribe also the ancient doctrine, given
by us on page 13, according to which the Universe is filled up in
all its parts with legions of s h e n and k w e i. Consequent of the
omnipresence of these invisible powers, every being, thus they taught,
and every thing that exists is animated either by a shen, or by a
kwei, or by a shen and a kwei together. ‘‘As there is no thing
“or being in Heaven or on Earth”, says Chu Hi’s disciple ChYn
Shun, “which does not consist of yin substance and yang
“matter, and the Yin and Yang are omnipresent, so k\vei and
“shen likewise exist in all places wheresoever” k “The kwei and
“the shen”, Lu Ta-chung adds, “float about everywhere in the
“ heavens and on the earth ; there is no place where there are
“none. Though they may be quiet and inactive, yet they have
“ communion with us if wc influence them ; and even when
“shapeless and voiceless, they possess what we call luminous
“ manifestation, being on this account not to be disregarded” k
“ Winds, thunder, and other phenomena of tlie heavens, moun-
“ tains, streams and other parts of the earth, everything, in short,
“which is fit to receive breath,” says Chang Chfih a contempo-
rary of Chu Hi, “is a shen. And the ancestors to whom we otter
“sacrifices in their temples, are kwei. When we speak of shen
“and kwei with reference to men and beings in general, we
“ mean those substances which, confining in them and thus causing
“them to live, form their shen, and those which, dispersing and
“thereby causing their death, form their kwei; and when we
“speak of the kwei and the shen dwelling in a single body, we
“mean the immaterial hwun substance that forms its shen, and
“the material pYli which constitutes its kwei”®.

iTil ^ Fjf ^ ^

2 S Am . cognomen: Tsin-poh il-te-

» a » ^ a ft ^ *ll! ^ PJj , « W T' ffi . SI S « 7:

^ ^ 1 ’-

4 ^ , cognomen : King-fn ^ ^ .

n\ zm

A U -


52


THF, SOL'Tj IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The ancients having, as we likewise saw on page 13, taught
it is the infinite myriads of shen and kwei that, in the capacity
of constituents of the Yang and the Yin, play a prominent part
in the Cosmos as being tlie causation of all the phenomena of
creation, metamorphosis and destruction, the Sung schoolmen also
made this thesis a prominent article in their animistic catechism.
“Those who cause the metamorphoses and evolutions in Heaven
“ and Earth to manifest themselves, and prompt and accelerate
“them”, says Chang Tsai, “are the kwei and the shen” And
Chen Teh-sui adds: “The kwei and the shen which cause
“creation and evolution to take place, are those of lands and
“meres, water and fire, thunder and wind; those of the sun
“ and lightning belong to fire, and tliose of the moon and the
“ rains to water. When we speak of tliose several spirits unitedly,
“ we consider them to signify merely the two universal breaths
“Yang and Yin; and the Yang and the Yin in their capacity
“of breaths that flow about between the heavens and the earth,
“causing everything that exists to be created and accomplished,
“we call kwei and shen. The people at present only consider
“moulded images and painted portraits to be kwei and shen,
“as also the invisible beings that abide in the World of Darkness;
“and they hardly comprehend that mounts and hills, rivers and
“streams, sunshine, rain-fall, thunder-clajis, and the working ot
“winds bear clear evidences in themselves as being observable kwei
“and shen” h

The influence thus exercised by the kwei and the shen


s?iiS4©

if . ffii ^ @ SL , X — S' ffi W ^ it S lilt >

® ■ "P- " "'!>■

nmg’xm,

P4 #1 * K 4 ^ Kt * .Ilk in »r il a » Ifc .
4 A R H ^ » a * ® a ri*.® H « St w a *
® a iiit.5* 7 : » oi III# III * 0 ns w iffl a « aa 7#
w itr at 3: a P


THE THEORY OE DILATATION AND RECESSION.


53


throughout the Universe is subject to a law', according to which
the one category alternately has the upper hand over the other,
a law which we might appropriately call that of Dilatation
and Contraction, or of Deployment and Recession. “The meaning
“generally attached to the word shen”, says Ch'^en Shun, “is
“ dilatation likewise pronounced shen), that is to say, ex-

“pansion of the Universal Breaths; and the meaning attached to
“the word kwei is recession (^, likewise pron. kvvei), to wit,
“ the retirement of those Breaths. As to the heavens and the earth,
“the former belong to the Yang, and therefore consist of shen,
“and the latter is identic with the Yin, and thus consists of kwei.
“As to the four seasons, the dilatation of the Universal Breaths
“in spring and summer j)ertains to the shen, but their retreat

“in autumn and winter pertains to the kw'ci. So also, daylight

“and the sun arc subject to the shen, while the night and the
“moon depend on the kwei. When the atmosphere is stirred
“ by roaring thunder, or moistened by winds and rains, there
“ prevails a distension of the Breaths, and so tliose phenomena are

“under the direction of the shen; but when, after the harvest,

“ calm reigns in the skies, and the said phenomena have disappeared
“ without leaving a trace, we have a retirement of the Breaths, which
“is subject to the kwei. Applying the same law to the daytime,
“ we find that the fore-noon belongs to the shen, because the sun
“is then ascending; but the afternoon, during which it retrogrades,
“belongs to the kwei. Applying it to a monthly period; — from
“ the third day, when the moon waxes, it is under the supremacy
“of the shell; but after the fifteenth it belongs to the kwei.
“Similarly, plants and trees are under the sway of the shen or
“the kwei according to whether they produce branches and foliage,
“or fade and shed their leaves; the rising Hood-tide belongs to the
“shen, and the retiring ebb to the kwei. In short, every dilatation
“of the Breaths of the Universe is Yang, and stands under the
“influence of shen, while every regre.ssion of those Breaths is Yin,
“and is subject to the kwei; — this is the sum and substance
“of all the discourses of the ancients on the kwei and the shen” h


54


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHV AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


This interpretation of the words s h e n and k \v e i by means of
two homonyms expressing dilatation and recession had been ad-
mitted as perfectly correct by Chinese scholars already many ages
before the Sung school existed; and though it is, of course, merely
a worthless off-shoot from the frivolous system of paronomastic
etymology of which we gave already many instances in Book I,
it forms, as we now see, an important factor in the system of
Chinese Animism. It induces us to contemplate the symbol
with somewhat more attention than hitherto we have bestowed
on it. L’ndoubtedly it is very old, for it occurs in tlie most ancient
books. It is composed of two parts, and ^ . The first of
these components is the most important, as being the radical, by
which term Sinologists are wont to indicate the 214 most prominent
components of all the characters the Chinese possess, and among
which are grouped the most ancient among the latter. It can hardly
be called in question that it is a hieroglyph, though its primitive
shape is lost in the night of early times. It may have been a rude
picture of a ghost or spirit, being, indeed, the radical of a few
characters representing spirits and divinities, and of several dozen
meaning religious matters and performances in which such beings
play a part. Nevertheless, as a sejiarate character, , does not actually
occur in the language with the meaning of soul or ghost, but especially
signifies “to manifest, reveal, show, announce”, etc., meanings which
may have been derived from its primitive >ignitication, inasmuch as,
according to the Chinese of all times, souls and spirits effectually
manifest their existence and influence.

As to the second part of the character |j(p; considering that it
has the sound s h e n , we may suppose it was originally used to


m MWZ.W} M MW.

# ^ o ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ® f I . 0# .

^ Hi ^ Z ^ ^ \ M ^

P A ^ itfc . Ibul.


ANALYSIS OF THE CHARACTERS FOR SHEN AND KWEI. 55

represent the idea of “soul” simply because of its sound, and that,
to define it sharper, the radical was prefixed to it afterwards.
But we have just now seen that the scholars of the Sung epoch
entertained another opinion ; indeed, they regarded the component
^ as really imparting a ineanbig to the compound jj]^, namely,
that of dilatation, expansion, deployment, ideas more generally
expressed by its derivative which likewise has the sound shen.
This play upon words was no novel invention of their own, the
author of the S/iicoh wen having stated already in the first century
of our era, “that the shen of Heaven produce everything by their
distension” h And Wang Chhing had written about the same time ;
“Shen signifies dilatation (shen). This dilatation repeats itself
“ endlessly, for when it is finished it begins anew”

Of a similar natui’e is the identification of the k w e i soul with
the idea of recession ; in fact, it merely rests on the accidental
circumstance that the Chinese language has a homonymous word,
written which has the meaning of “to return, to retreat”. No
lesser authority than the great Confucius preached the cognation
of the two homonyms, for according to a passage translated by
us on page 3, he said to his disciple Tsai Ngo, that the soul is
called kwei because it returns (kwei) to the earth. Like every-
thing which bears the stamp of Confucian origin, this philological
diction from the sage’s lips has been submissively accepted by
subsequent scholars, and even grammarians adopted it as perfectly
correct, the author of the ’Rh ya, for instance, writing that “the
meaning of the word kwei is to retuim (kwei)”h Also in the
Shwoh weu we read ; “That part of man which returns, is his
kwei”*; and Wang Chhmg declared: “It is called kwei, or to
return, because the bony remains of man return to the earth” ^
Thus nothing better than paronomastical play is the groundwork
for the theory of the Sung school about the })henomena of Reces-

2 iii$ ^ ^ ^ Q » ^ rfii ^

sect. ^ ^ .

^ w ^ iH sect, mm-

- -C


56


THE SOUL IN Pini-OSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEP'TION.


sion which manifest themselves in Nature. The leading men of
that school generally express them by the character ^ , the funda-
mental meaning of which is “reduction within smaller dimensions”.

After all, the substance of that babbling about the part which
the shen and the kwei perform in the Universe is that the
former cause growth, production and life, and, as such, are assi-
milated with light and warmth, while the kwei are the agents in
decline, destruction and death, and, in this capacity, are identified
with darkness and cold. “The day and life”, says Chu Hi, “are
“assimilated with the shen; the night and death with the kwei;
“is not there, accordingly, a sharp line of demarcation between
“these two categories of beings? One of his disciples asked him:
“‘I have heard you say that the day is the time of the shen,
“and the night that of the kwei, so that the latter appear
“especially during the night; how is that?’ — ‘Some do so indeed’,
“was the answer, ‘but we must not here generalize. The fact is,
“that the night belongs to the Yin, and as birds of bad omen do,
“which belong all to the Yin, so souls cry during the night-time.
“Rains, winds, dew, thunder, the sun, the moon, the day and the
“night are altogether the effects of the operation of the kwei
“ and the shen, that is to say, of such among them as manifest
“ themselves in broad daylight and are just and ecjuitable, straight-
“ forward and artless. But those which are reported to groan or
“ whistle on the tops of house-roofs, and to butt against our breasts,
“are, I say, unstraiglitforward evil-bringing powers of darkness,
“which are sometimes present, at other times absent; they come
“and they go, either seeking each other’s company, or avoiding it.
“ Finally there exist beings which are stated to hear our prayers,
“so that we may get what we ask them for; and these beings are
“likewise of the same nature as the kwei and the shen’” '.

B Mm,

« ii ^ Ift T * T W . ft Wi 0T ii ^ IE « « , rtc
ifS !i . if tB ® . ft W 11 H |l|i Bl — a Ifc-

Ui lytieii *7ik, ch. 28.


THE I'UNCTIONS OF THE SOULS IN LIVING MAN.


57


It now remains for us to complete our review of the animistic
catechism of the Sung philosophers by giving a synopsis of their
principal views regarding the part the dual soul plays while still
residing in the living human body. Considering, as all Chinese
thinkers did and do, that the heavenly sphere, which infuses shen
or h w u n into beings, is in perpetual motion, and that the earth,
which produces k w e i and p^o h , is an inert mass, Chu Hi taught,
“that the hwun is the element of motion or action, and the p'oh
“that of immobility and inaction; in other words, the hwun
“in general produces a man’s acts and deeds, and tlie p'oh lacks
“ the power to do so” k And consequent of the belief that the
Yang and the Yin pervade the whole Cosmos, and their dilatation
and contraction call forth all phenomena, the Yang and the Yin
were admitted to rule also every part of tlie bodies of beings, and
all their acts and functions. “As man exists and lives because he
“is endowed with yin breath and yang breath, there is”, says
Ch'en Shun, “no part in or about his person which is not either
“yin or yang. His breath, for example, his pulses or arteries,
“his head and upper limbs are yang, but his blood, trunk, feet
“and lower limbs are yink When his mouth speaks or is silent,
“ when his eyes are awake or asleep, when his nose inhales or
“ exhales breath, or his arms and legs extend or retract, he has in
“all those cases to do with actions belonging respectively to the
“Yang or the Yin. Not only this is so with regard to man, but
“ also with regard to every being and thing that exists .... And
“as there is no being or thing extant in the Universe which
“is not full enough of Yang and Yin, so neither does there
“ exist any being or thing which does not consist of a k w e i and

“a shen Action and inaction, advance and recession, motion

“and immobility, all these things are caused respectively by the
“Yang and the Yin; and when they proceed from the Yang,
“they appertain to the hwun or the shen, while those which
“proceed from the Yin are caused by the pki h or kwei. Prom
“ his childhood until he is grown-up, the breaths in a man dilate,
“and therefore this period of his life is under the supremacy of
“his shen; but after middle age, when he deteriorates and grows

^ M ^ it Ifit

2 Compare herewith the iJea.s of Liu Xgaii uhout the identity of ttie dilferent
parts of tlie human body with Heaven and E.irth. as exposed by us on page 15.


58


THE SOUI, IN PllILUSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“old, the breaths are in their period of contraction, and stand
“accordingly under the influence of his kwei. As to life and
“ death : the former is an e.xpansion of the breaths, and death their
“recession. After death the hwun ascends, to live on as a shen,
“while the p"oli descends, to continue its existence as a kwei,
“and this is so because the hwun breath took its origin from the
“heavens, and the p'oh from the earth”'.

Under the influence of the psychological theory anciently pro-
nounced by Tsze-chbin (see p. 10), Chu Hi preached that “beings
“first possess a p"oh, and acquire a shen at a later period of
“ their life, so that the pU h constantly has the upper hand in a
“ person, and operates in him as a fundamental force” Likewise
biased by the old tradition that the yang soul is identic with
the breath, the same philosopher taught, that “the respiration through
“the mouth and the nose is produced by the hwun. The hearing
“and the sight he represented to be manifestations of the p'oh,
“it being by the active use of this soul that a man, through his
“ eyes and ears, gets a clear understanding of things and matters” b
His son-in-law Ifwang Kan *, a deserving servant of the State and

» .AP# ,» P# r# .± jfg® ® .T ti

A i ®

MZJS.,

' 2 A, fife iffi # s® , ft » ® S ± S ft

^ vognoinen is Chih-kbin<jr I'ostliumous honorary


THE FUNCTIONS OF THE SOULS IN LIVING MAN.


59


a Fuhkienese by birtli, wrote: “The power by which the ears are
“enabled to hear, and the eyes to see, is produced by the p'oh,
“ and that which causes the heart to think and to ponder is
“produced by the hwun”'. And in Ch"en Shim’s writings we
read: “The inhalations and exhalations through the mouth and the
“ nose are manifestations of the elfectual power of the breath, and
“consequently they are dominated by the hwun; but the hearing
“and the sight, being manifestations of the intelligence of the

“corporeal body, are under the dominion of the p^oh . . . . Con-

“sciousness is affiliated with the hwun”®. Chen Teh-siu likewise
harped to the same tune when he wrote: “The power by which
the eyes see and the ears hear, is produced by the tsing”^ —
the schoolmen of that time generally understanding by this term

the operative energy of the p'o h , and even the p^o h itself.

Some savants, not reckoned among the philosophers of the Sung
school, have likewise speculated on the relation of the two souls
to certain organs and functions of the body, thereby coming to
remarkable discoveries. They have found that tlie shen is the
observable manifestation (ling) of the heart, the p'oh that of the

gall b the h w u n that of the spleen, and the t s i n g tliat of the

arteries or pulses'. However admirable these fruits of their brains
may be, we must leave it to the reader to judge whether we have
not to feel still more admiration for their discovery that the shen
of the heart manifests itself in the eyes, thus enabling the owner
of that viscus to see, while the p’^oh of the gall is the cause

of speech, the h w u n of the spleen that of the smell, and the

tsing of the pulses that of hearing. But let it be remarked that
other authors, likewise very sage, and even more ancient, have
combined the eyes, not with the heart, but with the liver, and the
nose with the lungs, as we see at a glance from the table on
page 26. We opine therefore that we had better not s([uander
more of our time and space on such imbecile shuffling of psycho-

M « B » A 3: »


60


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEP'l ION.


logical terms, however great the admiration may be which Chinese
scholars and savants entertain for it.

A proper insight into the conceptions of the Sung school about
the part which the dual soul plays in the body of the person
whom it animates, will render it most easy to comprehend also
their ideas about debility of the senses and vital spirits in conse-
quence of disease, advanced age or other causes, as also those
about death. We have stated already (pp. 57 seq^ that Ch^en Shun
ascribed the debility which produces itself in a person whom age
undermines, to a growing preponderance of his p'oh or kwei,
combined with a proportional decline of his h w u n or s h e n ,
death being — as the ancients taught — an ultimate separation
of the hwun and the p'^oh from each other, each of these souls
then receding into the universal hwun and p^ih represented
respectively by Heaven and Earth. “As long as the hwun
“and the p'oh keep together”, Chen Teh-siu says, “life exists;
“but death ensues when they separate from each other”'. Cases
of persons suddenly falling ill or breathing their last having
always taught the Chinese every day that such separation is a
constant lurking danger, it cannot much astonish us to read in
the writings of Chu Hi “that most people think with anxiety of
“the possibility of their hwun separating itself completely from
“their kwei, knowing that, when the former is no longer in them,
“the latter cannot maintain itself.... When the hwun departs,

“the p'oh becomes powerless What causes weakness and debility,

“disease and death is dissolution of the breaths in the individual;
“and when these vanish completely, he is dead”*.

These theories about disease and death following, as they do,
logically from the ideas which the ancients entertained about the
human soul, we may suppose them to have prevailed long before the
Sung school. In fact, we read in Koh Hung’s writings, which date
from the fourth century of our era ; “ Men, the wise as well as
“the stupid, all know that they have a hwun and a p'oh in
“ their bodies, and that, when these two souls leave them partly,
“illness must ensue, while, if they vanish entirely, death must be

' 5 ® 6A M 4 . IS M

2 * ife »i » @ . 4 A ^ t. ® S s®

7 ... 5 ®


SURVIVAL OF THE SOULS AFTER DEaI'H.


61


“the consequence. Thus it is that the adepts of mystic arts possess
“ certain means for detaining separating souls, and that the Canons
“ of Rites contain ceremonies for the calling back of souls entirely
“departed”

The question whether the soul lives forth as an entity after the
death or annihilation of the body, or whether it is then absorbed
by the Universe, being a question decisive for the to-be or not-to-be
of the worship of ancestors, it cannot be expected to have been
entirely neglected by China’s psychologists. But the ancients having
admitted its continuance quite tacitly as an axiom, or even preached
it roundly, opposite opinions might crop up, but could not possibly
thrive in a country where the national mind was always dominated
thoroughly by the old writings, so that authors professing such hetero-
doxy publicly could not appear but phenomenally. Perhaps their
writings have been esteemed too little to survive.

A prominent figure among such abnegators is Pan Chen who
lived under the Liang dynasty. lie composed a discourse of some
nineteen hundred characters, in questions and answers, entitled Shen
mieh lun'^ or “Discourse on the Annihilation ot the Shen’’, a
piece of Chinese philosophi(;al tattle with the narrow orbit of the
sayings of the ancients for starting-point, and idle metaphors, and
banal comparisons or allegories for arguments. His thesis was, that
the soul and the body are one and identic, so that when the one is
dead, the other cannot exist. A contemporary of his, the statesman
Shen Yoh immortal as author of the Books of the Sung Dynasty
and a great part of those of the House of Tsin, felt himself in
duty bound to controvert his reasonings, which he did in three
treatises, all surviving to this day as literary curiosities and monu-
ments of style. But on reading those papers, we soon see that they
contain nothing worth knowing, nor does it appear that they have
exercised any influence on popular ideas or on practical religious
life. Of other authors working on the same line we have not heard
or read.

Little also have Chinese thinkers sharpened their wits on the
question at which moment of his existence the souls are implanted


ft * w Si « of i • j'™ it « ■


VBi •


3


6-2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


in a man. We sav\' on page 10 that Tsze-ch"an, in the year 534
before our era, spoke of this mystery pedantically enough to make
his hearers believe he sounded it thoroughly; and his position as
a disciple of the infallible Confucius has always withheld China’s
intellectual world from demurring to the correctness of his statement.
Chu Hi, as we saw (p. 5S), re-echoed this briefly in these words :
“ Beings first possess a p'^o h , and acquire their s h e n in a later
period of their life”. Some leeches and Taoists have dissented from
that tenet, teaching that both souls enter man when he is still
a foetus. “When his parents have sexual intercourse, man receives
“the beginning of his life. Jn the first month it forms the tsing
“of the placenta, which is a coagulation of blood. In the second
“ month it forms his first shape, that is to say, the complete foetus.
“In the third, shen >ubstance of the Yang forms his triple
“hwun, which moves to make him live. In the fourth month
“the spiritual manifestations (ling) of the Yin produce his septeni-
“ partite p'oh, which, remaining motionless, dominates his body.
“ And in the fifth month the five Elements are distributed over his
“viscera, to settle the shen that dwell therein”’. Often also we
have found in medical works the tenet, stated to be of old date,
that in the seventh month after conception the h w u n begins to
circulate through the foetus, enabling it to move the left hand,

< -M's.mm. Am

A. ~ M S 13® KISS?®, a

J® Bl ^ K Ife . \ei ku'iiii ft Ills or "Classic on the Contem-

plation of one's own Intel lor”. a little work in one chapter of twenty-two para-
graphs. in which Lao-tsze laid down his wisdom on the soul of the foetus and on
the nomenclature of the several souks of man, with sage admonitions as to the care
to be taken of one’s body and heart, lest they become defiled and unable to main-
tain their existence. It existed in the 12th. century, being then mentioned by Ch ao
Kung-wu M , alias Tsze-chi ^It , a high official, in his renowned

bibliography entitled Kiiui chat fuh shti c/ti ai or “Record of

the Books read by me in my Study in the Province”, i. e. in Yung , in Sze-
clrwen, where the library had in the main been collected. To thi.s work, w'hich
contains four chapters and a supplement of two, Ma Twan-lin was indebted much
for the bibliographical chapters (174 — 249) of his Wen hien t'tintj khim.

Having no copy of the Nci kwan ktnu on our shelves, we borrow the above
extract from the T S, sect. theory of the vi.scera being in-

habited by various shen, and of the two souls consisting of several parts, we review
in Chapter III.


PRACTICAL INFLUENCE OF PSYCHICAL PHILOSOPHY. 68

while in the eighth month the p"oh does tlie same, rendering the
right hand movable.

Alter all, the question arises whether this web of philosophism,
rooted, as we saw it is, in the most ancient times into which
China’s literature introduces us, merely holds a place in the history
of her mental culture as a curiosity, adhered to and admired by
only a limited class of thinkers and bookmen; or whether it is, so
to say, general national property, broadly influencing social life
and habits. The answer can hardly be undecisive, since in every
part of this world philosophical sy&tems never command a very
vast sphere of influence. Nevertheless it is a fact, that in searching
China’s animistic and religious usages, conceptions and lore, we
fall in with the outlines of the system so often, that it becomes
impossible to deny that those outlines are common property of the
people, and woven firmly into their ideas and observances in regard
to disembodied souls. Facts attesting the correctness of this statement
will occur regularly in the following chapters of this Book ; but it
is worth while forthwith to make it true by a retrospection of
some practices and observances, ancient and modern, regarding the
dead, which are described in Volume I.

We have stated, for e.xample, that the inhabitants of Amoy
consider fainting fits, insensibility and atropy to be caused liy
the departure of the shen or tsing siren, which terms they have
in the local forms of si/i and so/; and that they endeavour
to cure sutferers of those complaints by bringing that soul Irack
into them (sec pp. 248 scg.). We further saw (pp. 245 5^-^.) that
death, too, they ascribe to a departure of the soul, and that,
congruously to this idea, the relations, in imitation of the ancients,
try to bring it back into the corpse by calling to it and by shouting
and howling. That, while doing so, they consider the soul concerned
to be the shen or hwun, is manifest from the term “to call to
the hwun” ( m IS »'■ by which such attempts to revive

the dead have been denoted in the books ever since the Han
dynasty.

So, also, it is because the departed spirit is the hwun, the
soul produced by the Yang or lu/ziinous part of the Universe,
that the relations endeavour to invigorate it and guide it back to the
corpse by means of torches, lamps or candles, placed at the death-
bed (pp, 21 seq.). For the use of that same disembodied h/'m, as
they call it in their own tongue, the Amoy Chinese prepare a
temporary body in the shape of a tablet, which they call hioi pel/.


64


THE SOUL IN' PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“silk cloth for the hwun” (pp. 70 seq.); and afterwards they
use this object as a means to convey that soul solemnly to
the grave in the suite of the corpse (p. 17:2), under guidance of
invigorating torches (p. 179), occasionally employing at the same
time and to the same end an image of the deceased, which they
call /iihi sin or “body for the hwun”, and also a banner (p. 173).
And when the coffin is placed in the grave, together with that tablet
and that banner (pp. 212 seg.), the hwun takes up its abode in
a permanent tablet (pp. 211 seq., 216 seq.), which is then carried
home, likewise under guidance of invigorating lights (p. 22S), to be
lodged thenceforth in the family dwelling as a powerful shen
(sin), a faithful protector of the house, its inmates, and their
descendants. We may see, in truth, from the text of the prayer
addressed to the defunct on the brink of his grave (p. 226) that
the soul which the relations summon twice to return with them
to their home, is the hwun.

At the beginning of that same prayer, and also in that pronounced
at the departure of the funeral procession from the mortuary house
(p. 147), the soul is accosted as ling, as may be seen from the
original texts of those documents. The fundamental meaning of that
term being (see p. 12 of this volume) the power and influence
manifested by souls, we have here two instances of its being used
tropically for the words hwun and p‘oh. The Buddhist priest,
called in soon after the demise to effect the redemption of the
soul from the pangs of hell and to enable it to resort to the place
of sacrifice, where food and drink are set out for it, likewise calls
it in his prayers the ling (pp. 72^ — 74), evidently attaching to
this word the sense of hwun, as in one of his invocations (p. 73)
lie asks explicitly “that the messengers of hell may guide the hwun
to the place of sacrifice”. So, also, it is the hwun that is piloted
into the Paradise of the West by means of the solemn Amitabha
march described on pp. 124 sqq., the soul being denoted by this
term in the inscription displayed by the curious streamer which
plays a prominent part in that ceremony.

All those peeps into actual life proving that it is the hwun
which departs as a shen to the other world at death, or settles
in a tablet on the house-altar, it seems to follow that it must be
the other part of the dual soul, viz. the kwei or p'oh, that resides
in the grave, the more so as this soul in particular is assimilated
with the Yin or terrestrial part of the Universe. Sundry persuasive
facts, however, to which we alluded on page 6 of this volume.


THE SOUL THAT DWELLS IN THE GRAVE.


G5


refute this conclusion altogether, showing that the shen or ming
is just as well believed to dwell in the earthly resting-place of the
corpse. The mandarin of whom we spoke on page 134 of Book T,
certainly entertained no other opinion when he wrote in his edict
against the bad custom of delaying burials, that “leaving a coffin
unburied a day means the same as depriving a hwun a day of
anything to take refuge in”. The woi’ship at the graves, which forms
so important a factor in Chinese religious life, is in reality, as we
shall afterwards have occasion to see, a worship of the hwun or
shen, and the k w e i or p'o h hardly ever comes to the foreground
in it.


CHAPT RR II.


(JOS.MO-PSYCIIOLOGICAL PH I I.OSOPil V, AND TAOISM.

It may have astonished our readers a little to see us spin out
the preceding chapter to a greater length than was strictly required
for a sketch of China’s philosophy on man’s spiritual nature. We
had, however, our good reasons for doing so, and for dilating also
on the human body, passions and character. Indeed, the ideas about
man’s material and immaterial being, as they are traceable in
China’s ancient books and consolidated by her philosophy, place us
immediately before the foundation and the main pillars of a great
system, known among hluropeans as Taoism. It is now our duty
to point this out.

Elsewhere, in describing the fung-shui system, we made cursory
mention of the great principle on which that Taoism rests (B. I,
pp. 935 — 936). It is now in place to state more explicitly, once
for all, what we have to understand by the word, lest the reader
should have difficulty in following u.' whenever — as will be hence-
forth the case very often — we shall have to refer to it conceptions
and practices we have taken upon ourselves to describe as integrate
parts of the Chinese Religious System.

Taoism, as the word indicates, is the Religion of the Tao (^),
a term meaning Path or Way, but denoting in this peculiar case
the way, course or movement of the Universe, her processes and
methods. In other words, Taoism is the Religion of Heaven and Earth,
of the Cosmos, of the World or Nature in the broadest sense of
these words. Hence we may call it Naturism.

It can hardly be doubted that man’s primitive feeling of complete
dependence on the Universe and the powers that work therein,
was the mother of it. Prom the budding of his reason, the East-
Asiatic seems to have mused on Nature’s overawing power, his
meditations leading him gradually to the invention of measures to
propitiate its beneficial operations and avert its detrimental influences.
Those practices, making his Religion from his earliest childhood, we
find the clearest traces of in his oldest books.


TAOIST COSMOGONY AND PSYCHOLOGY.


67


It testifies, indeed, of the high antiquity and early development
of Taoism in China, that its fundamental doctrines are found
in so old a work as the Yih king is. They are the theories on the
constitution and operation of the Cosmos, which we reviewed in
Book I (pp. 960 sqqk). We did not, however, give more there than
their outlines. Volumes of philosophical speculation they gave birth
to in all times and ages. But we can safely leave most of them
unread, they being of no utility for a sketch of Taoism in its origin
and development; and a sketch of that system is, of course, all
we can give. Besides, time compels me to practise self-restraint, as
the progress of this work hardly keeps pace with the advance of
my years.

Taoism being fundamentally a religion of the Cosmos and its
subdivisions, old Chinese Cosmogony is its Theogony. It conceives
the Universe as one large organism of powers and influences, a
living machine, the core of which is the Great Ultimate Principle
or T'ai Kih, comprising the two cosmic Breaths or Souls, known
as the Yang and the Yin, of which, respectively. Heaven and
Earth are the chief depositories. These two souls produce the four
seasons, and the phenomena of Nature represented by the lineal
figures called kwa. It is they also that produce and animate the
five Elements, which are the constituents of the material and
immaterial world. Such are the outlines of that Cosmogony. They
are the first main pillar of the Taoistic system. Now let us draw
attention to the second, that is, the position of Man in Nature.

The chapter preceding the present one places before us the main
doctrines on this head. It teaches us (pp. 1.3 sqq.) that Man, like
all that has life, is in every respect a component of the Cosmos,
both bodily and mentally. The consideration alone that he receives
his souls from the Yang and the Yin or Heaven and Earth,
and hk body from the Elements, and that he may lose his body
and souls at any moment for re-absorption into those cosmic powers,
amply sufficed to keep him ever-conscious of his dependent connection
with the World, or, as the Chinese put it, with its movements, its
Tao or Course, its active power effecting such creation and destruction.
We have seen how anxiously Chinese philosophers try to finish the
picture of Man’s intimate relations with the Universe (pp. 1.5 sqqk).
They talk of an affinity of his five viscera, the apertures of his
body, and the five constant qualities of his natural character, with
the five Elements, the quadrants of the sphere, and the sub-
divisions of the Universe as denoted by the cardinal points. The


68


THE SOUL TN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Taoist Liu Ngan found out the connection between the construction
of man’s material body and the constitution of Heaven and Earth,
discovering also a relation of the parts of the body to the seasons
and days of the year, clouds, winds, rain, thunder, and the atmo-
sphere (pp. 15 seq.). In particular, as we saw, identification of man’s
character, passions and virtue with the Yang and the Yin, with
the heavens and their phenomena and seasons, was a topic of
philosophy. This topic we now point to with emphasis, as being
the foundation of a third pillar in the Taoist religion, viz. of its Ethics,
or principles on the cultivation of the character and the passions.
Thus it taught that goodness, virtue, morality were all to be sought
in Nature, that is, in the imitation of its Tao, or in the con-
formation with it. That foundation we now know. The pillar, raised
on it, we shall have to describe in due time and place.

A perusal of the preceding chapter thus necessarily leads to the
conclusion that Chinese Cosmogony and Psychology, inclusive of the
expansions given them by the Sung school, are Taoistic to the very
marrow. Nevertheless they pretend to be thoroughly Confucian. In
truth, Confucian philosophy could have here no other base, since
sacred antiquity, which to revive and to practice was always of
Confucianism the sole and ultimate end, had given nothing else to
build on. So, also, its system of Ethics is fundamentally Taoistic,
as it made the Classics its sole standard bibles for morality and
for individual and social perfection, and those Classics preach
overtly (see p. 2S) that cultivation of the natural character consists
in following the Tao, nay, that the character is created by this
supreme power. But still there is another principle, likewise un-
veiled by the preceding chapter, in point of which, for quite the
same reasons, Confucianism must necessarily meet Taoism fraternally.
It is this, that the Universe is filled up in all its parts with shen
or yang spirits, which animate every thing that exists, and
regulate the Tao of Nature and its phenomena or revolutions (comp,
p. 13), thus ruling also man and his fate. In other words, its
veneration of the Classics, its greatest principle, forbids the Con-
fucian school to decry the Taoist Pantheon, "which contains such
shen innumerable as objects of worship; and in fact it has never
done so. To that Pantheon we shall still have to devote many a
chapter, it being a main pillar in the Religious System of China,
as gods and saints are in every religion.

This exposition of the cosmological and psychological basis of
Taoism shows us the Yih king as the oldest book in which that


THE YIH KING IS THE BIBLE OF TAOISM.


69


basis is laid down. Thus, naturally, this work always held a place
among Taoists as their Book far excellence, their very Bible con-
taining the principles of their faith. VVe state this fact here with
emphasis against the opinion, generally current, that the principal
Taoist Bible is the Tao tcJi king.


CHAPTER III.


ON THE MULTIPLICITY OK DIVISIBILITY OE THE SOULS OE MAN.

The quotation we made on page 02 from a Taoist book, has
acquainted us with a new psychological tenet: the two souls
of man are multipartite. His hwun consists of three parts, and his
p'oh of seven, or — which comes to the same thing — he has
throe hwun and seven p'^oh. He possesses also five shen, each
inhabiting one of his five viscera.

These two theories are not based on any teachings of the ancients.
Nor has, in consequence, the authoritative orthodo.x school of phi-
losophy made them a topic for speculation. Seldom do they come
to the foreground in religious usages; and in the range of those
we have thus far reviewed, the tripartite hwun and the septeni-
partite p'oh play a part only once, viz. in the construction of the
soul-banners used in obsequies (H. I, page 126). Koh Hung seems
to be the first author who mentions them. Thus wrote this
strange prophet of mystic art: — “if a man divides his body, he
“himself may see the tripartite hwun and the septempartite p'oh
“ that dwell therein” No satisfactory e.xplanation of the theorem
have we been able to obtain from the native literature; and Chu
Hi makes us not a smattering wiser when we hear him say: “The
“hwun belongs to the element Wood, and the p'^oh to Metal
“ (comp. p. 48), and the theory of a hwun of three parts and
“a p^oh of seven is based on the circumstance, that these ciphers
“are those of Wood and Metal”*.

The theory that every viscus of a human being contains a shen,
can be traced to much earlier times. We saw on page 46 that
it was held by the philosopher Tsze-hwa; yet it occurs in an older

^ P"o Puh-L.:c, ch. IV,

^ect. .

^ ^ ^ M ^ M ^ Z

1^ to (•< nen ch. 28.


PI. I


The Souls of the Six Viscera


EVERY VISCUS HAS ITS OWN SOUR.


71


writing, entitled Nun khuj ‘ or “Canon of difficult Points”, a work
in two chapters treating of eighty-one obscure medical questions,
ascribed to Pien-tsdoh ^ a celebrated leech of the sixth century
before our era, and now current with a running commentary by
Hwah Shell or Hwah Poh-jen 5, who lived in the fourteenth century.
“The five viscera contain seven shen. Which of these does each of
“them contain? Tsang (viscus, i. e. ^ flesh, and to hide)
“ means that which houses and hides the shen and the breath
“ of an individual. So the liver conceals the h w ii n , the lungs
“hide the pffih, the heart the shen, the spleen the will and
“knowledge, and the kidneys the tsing and the aspirations”*.
Thus, for the sake of this theory, its maker simply denies the fact
that the shen and the h w u n are identical things. Strange it is
to see Chinese fancy depict the souls of the viscera as distinct
individuals with animal forms. Their portraits, as we find them
in the San ts'^ai t'n hwui the reader may see on a reduced
scale on Plate I. “The shen of the lungs”, thus we read over
the original woodcuts, “bears the name of Ilao-hwa or White
“Flower, and the cognomen Ilu-clring or Totality of Emptiness;
“the lungs have the shape of a Tiger, and they are the chief organ
“that contains the p'oh. The shen of the spleen is called Shang-
“tsai, the Always Present, and its cognomen is Hwun-Ting or
“Courtyard of the hwun; the spleen resembles in form a spiritual
“phoenix, and its main function is to contain the hwun. The
“shen of the heart goes by the name of Tan-yuen or A^ermilion

“Original, and his cognomen is Sheii-ling, Protector of the ling;

“the heart has the form of a red liird, and it is the principal

“store of the shen. The shen of the kidneys is known as Hiien-
“ ming or the Black Dark, and his cognomen is Yuh-\ ing, the Baby

1 2 /apv,, 113.

^ 'ft ^6 •

4 s. IM W -b nitpo # Pir ^ A Z inflJ M

^ H ife* o UTIl > )]i1i ^ ^ H ^

|a ^ , W Ii fra ^

5 HtT®# , “Collection of Drawings concerning the Three Powers” (comp,

p. 2), a large illustrated cyclopedia in fourteen sections, containing together 100 chapters.
It was composed by Wang Khi ''O naine*! \uen-lian 7t a high

officer of the second half of the sixteenth century, renowned especially as author
of the St'h wen hien t uni/ hhntj.


7:2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“Nurse; their shape is that of a double-headed, dark coloured
“ stag, and they are the chief depository of the will. The s h e n of
“ the gall-bladder is styled Lung-yao or the Dragon’s Brightness,
“and its other name is VV'^ei-niing, Imposing Splendor; the gall
“resembles in shape a tortoise and a snake that blend their forms
“together. And the shen of the liver passes under the name of
“ Lung-yen or Dragon’s Smoke, and its cognomen is Ilan-ming, Who
“holds Light in his Jaws; the shape of the liver is that of a
“dragon, and it is the chief store of the hwun"

Of this piece of psycho-physiological wisdom a few points
become intelligible by collation with the synoptical tabh; we gave
on page 26. We then understand that the shen of the lungs is
named White Flower sim])ly from the lungs corresponding with
whiteness; and as this colour represents the celestial Tiger (see B. 1,
p. 317), the lungs must have the sliape of this monster. In the
same way we discover that the heart must be shaped like the
Red Bird; and Tszc-hwa, as we saw on page 47, really identified
it with this celestial biped. The kidneys are named the Black Dark
from their corresponding in the table with blackness. And finally,
the shen of the liver rejoices in the name of Dragon’s Smoke and
Light-swallower, and this viscus has dragon forms, all because, as
the table shows, the constellation with which it corresponds is the
Dragon, a monster supposed to bear a pearl between its jaws, which
represents probably the solar disk. Of the rest of the gibberish, the
leading ideas we fail to understand.

Though fancy or learnedness thus ascribes to the souls of the
viscera shapes of animals, real or imaginary, those souls are positively
stated to have appeared at times in visible human shapes outside
the body to which they belonged. “When Clung Tsfi-ying was
“ Vice-President of the Board of Civil Office in the K h a i y u e n
“period (A.D. 713 — 741), and deputy to Honan for degradation
“and promotion of officers, he, while travelling back from that

1 flffj 1$ ^ H ^ JS JiJc . ^ :Ji4 ± li

^ ^ ^ ^ M Ola' ^ tUc ^ ^ i M #0 1$

Sect, ^n.cb.i

and i.


THE SOULS or THE VISCERA HAVE HUMAN EORMS.


73


“ province, lodged in Hwa-cheu. Here he saw five men, dressed in
“ the colours of the five cardinal points (with which the viscera
‘'are identified, see the table on page : 26 ). They came up the steps
“ into the hall, with a series of bows. On his asking them whence
“they came, they replied: ‘We are the shen of your five viscera,
“high Deputy’. ‘If so, you ought to be within me’, said Tsfi-
“ying; ‘what do you visit me for?’ On which they replied: ‘We,
“shen, serve to guard your vital breath (khi), and this breath
“being exhausted, we must disperse’. ‘Then I am to die, am I not?’
“ Tsfi-ying re-asked. ‘Yes, you are’, was the answer. The alarmed
“ state-servant asked for a delay of one day to write his official
“report and testamentary dispositions; on which the spirits spoke:
“ ‘ We grant it, provided you then come here in the back part
“ of the Yamen’. Tsd-ying there set out liquor and dainties for the
“ spirits, who accepted them with courteous bows ; then he wrote
“his reports, washed his hair and his body, put on a new suit,
“ and laid himself down at the western wall, where he expired at
“the appointed hour” \


m ^ .ft $ A . ?< E ?< Jg s « .

W 0 J#


48 ®


.SC® S t # * W .a S Bfo

Ktf flSSTr*.

T . M B# HR ^ "


^ i.il


^ ® ^ ^ Hff' tffl ^ . KU'iin<i I

the Writings on extraoi'iluuu'\ iMatters". Tlii' is .i collocuoii of tale.';, lioin xvliich we
quoted one on ji. SIO ot B. I. It fonns one of the most valuable soui'ces for tlie
stuJv' ot Chinese folklore, and we sh.ill aftei-wurds, borrow from it very often. It is
.ascribed to one Yoh Sin a st.itesinan and prolilic .luthor, also known by

his other name Tszr-ching ^iE , who presented the manuscript to the F.miieior
in A. D. '.J8G. together with sundrv nthei woiks of hi- h.ind. It then was entitled
Siih chuh i Li ^ '."'o,.,/ cin.l, , l.i ^ g2,

"The Writings on extraorilinaiv Things ol lar and wide, continued anil enlarged”,
being an enlai'gement ef a work then ext.rnt in one chapter, entitled Cliolt i Li,


professedly written by one Ch eii Han


■ . Ch en Xeao


I , or Ch en Biang


in the first half of the ninth centurv. Yoh Shi seems to have brought


out his work in three chapters, which he increased .iftorwards to twenty. See
the History of the Sung Dynasty, ch. dOn. 1. 19. and ch. 'iUO, 11. 4 and 7; and


74


TilE SOUL IN PHILOSOPIII' AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


On the whole, it would be inaccumte to say that the plurality
or divisibility of the human souls has in China set many pens in
motion. When we see that at the present day it is very usual to
make more than one soul-tablet for one dead man or woman,
all of which are believed to be occupied by the soul, and that
there are no reasons to admit that this custom did not prevail in
the past also; — when, moreover, we remember that, apart from all
those tablets, the grave too is deemed to be inhabited by the soul, —
then, certainly, the conclusion seems justifiable that practical religious
life has never had any doubt about the matter, and that general
opinion has always subscribed to it. Afterwards we shall see this
confirmed on many a page, from various usages and ideas.

Among the futilities of Chinese philosophy we may rank the
ascription of a special shen to every organ of the senses and to
other significant parts of the body. Twan Ch'ing-shih was even so
learned as to publish the proper names of some of those shen,
translations of which we dare not give but with the greatest
reservation. “The names of the shen of the body are different
“from those of shen in general. That of the brains is named
‘.‘Kioh-yuen or Origin of Perception, and that of the hair is Hiien-
“hwa or Black Bloom. The shen of the eyes, the nose and the
“tongue are called respectively Ilu-kien or Seer of the Void,
“ ClTung-lung-wang or Flying Dragon King, and Shi-liang” h The
Yun kill liih tiien a digest of Taoism, philosophy, alchemy etc.


the H'J: Uni la uen i/tii hun</ iniilt, ch. 57, 1. 25. Wo have never been able to
procure a complete copy of the work. Hence many of our quotations from it are
second-hand, and gleaned from sundry sections of the T S and the K K. The above
tale is from the first-named work, section A* , ch. 23.


jafiiUHftTC


iiiilli B jfe


*

#, B iji B 1 ® , it »i|i B iit» H I , H III

Chapter 11 of the 1 tsrih Isn , “Variety of Dishes from

the Southside of the A'iu hills’’, thus called from the place where its author Twan
Cfring-shih , named also Ko-ku lir . a liigli officer flourishing in


the middlemost part of the ninth century, had his library of rare and curious books.
The work contains twenty chapters of tales and notices on sundry .subjects, tinged
deeply with Buddhism, for the most part highly useful for our knowledge of
Chinese customs, ideas, and folklore. The author added a supplement, in ten chapter
of a similar character, which may be considered to form six different works.


in 122 chajiters, by the high officer Chang Kiun-fang


AN INDEFINITE NUMBER OF SOULS DWELL IN A MAN.


75


compiled in the last years of the tenth century or in the first of
the eleventh, goes much further, giving us the surnames, names
and cognomen of some three dozen shen of sundry parts of the
body, enriching our knowledge also with short particulars about
their size, stature, dress, and hats h

There are medical authors who ascribe to man an indefinite number
of souls or soul-parts, or, as they express it, a hundred shen.
Those souls, they say, shift in the body according to the age of
the owner; so, e. g., when he is 25, 31, 68, or 74 and older, they
house in his forehead, so that it is then very dangerous to have
boils or ulcers there, because effusion of blood would entail death.
At other times of life they nestle under the feet or in other parts and
limbs, and only in the 21rst., 38th., first, and 50th. year of life
they are distributed equally through the body, so that open
abscesses, wherever they appear, do not heal then at all Such
pathologic nonsense regulates, of course, medical practice to a high
degree; but even this is no reason for us to occupy ourselves here
with it any longer.

1 See the T S, sect. )[j[j} ch. 40.

2 See on this subject i'. g. the / liiuh Unng ntuli ^ , ’‘Synoiisis

of Medical Study”, a work in forty chapters by Leu Yinp of the Min"

dynasty, also named Ts uon-sien ^ . lie was .i native of Siao-shan jjj

in Chehkiang province. TS, sect. , ch. fi8'2.


CHAPTER IV.


ON THE PARTS OF THE BODY IN WHICH THE SOUL SPECIALLY DWELLS.


The speculations, sold for wisdom, with which the preceding
chapter has acquainted us, though ratiier tit to move us to laughter
than to awake our interest, occiqiy a place of more significance in
the field of Chinese thought than appears at first sight. Teaching
us, as they do, that every viscus, as also the hair, the brains, the
eyes, the nose, the tongue etc. have each a separate shen, or
are animated by a special part of the one shen the individual
possesses, they give us to understand that the soul or its substance
is not conceived by the Chinese as something pervading all parts
of the body in equal proportions ; and this theorem is of no inferior
interest in the Chinese compound of psychological notions.

No doubt it is a theorem of old standing. We see it appear
already in works of early date, as the Htrang-li m iren \ “Questions
usually put by the Emperor Hwang”, a series of discourses on
therapeutics and physiology, held between this mythic monarch
of the 27th. century before Christ, and some six of his chief courtiers.
It is a celebrated production, certainly not so old as the title indicates,
but mentioned in writings of the third century, so that we may
admit that it contains much of the knowledge of physiology and
medicine handed down from the most remote times. Its eighty
chapters with an appendix form a voluminous work, considerably
enlarged by the elaborate commentaries of one Wang Ping ^ a
renowned physician of the eighth century, and of Ma Shi ’ of the
Ming dynasty, and Chang Chi-ts'ung h “The head is the mansion
“of the tsing raing”, thus it speaks, that is to say, of the yang
soul possessed of operative energy. “When the head droops and the
“eye-sight fails, the shen with its energy (tsing shen) will be
“snatched away ... In the first two months of the year the breath


if<§ li^’ niuned Chiin.^-hwa atnl Yuen-t ai


THE SOUL DWELLS IN THE VISCERA AND IN THE HEAD.


77


“(khi) of a man abides in liis liver. In the two next months it resides
‘‘ in his spleen. In the fifth and in the sixth, when the breath of

“ heaven is full and that of the earth is at its highest elevation, it

“ dwells in his head. In the seventh month and the eighth it stays
“in his lungs; in the next two months it is settled in his heart,

“and in the two last months of the year it is in his kidneys” ‘.

The key to the understanding of these reasonings we find in the
simple circumstance that the liver, the lungs and the kidneys are
identified respectively with spring, autumn and winter, because
(see the table on page 26) they correspond with the East, the
West and the North, which points of the compass appertain in
the same order to those three seasons. And of the idea that in
the height of the summer season, when the breath or soul of
lieaven is full and that of the earth ascends, the soul or breath
of a man resides in his head, we have the explanation in the
Ch'uH-ts'^iu yuen ming pao, when it asserts that “the head is the
“place wherein the shen dwells, as by the roundness of its top it
“represents heaven, which is the abode of the breath of Nature h
“A man’s tsing”, it says in addition, “dwells in his brains”"'. It
is easy to see that all this sophistry bears a strong tinge of
Taoism. Since, as this system teaches, man is a miniature copy of
the Universe, a part of whose material and immaterial substance
forms his body and his soul, his yang soul necessarily has to
follow the Tao or Course of that Universe, and thus to dwell in
the heaven of his body, especially in the time of the year when the
male soul itself of the Universe concentrates in the celestial sphere.

It is probably from the strong belief in a special animation of
the head, in conjunction with the conceptions about divisibility
of the soul, that ideas came forth about heads able to detach them-
selves for a time from the body, without any of them ceasing


M =.M

w Chapt. 17 and chapt. 10.

»- W ^ i# I9r « . ±
^ A ^


A . TS.sm. X


78


THE sour, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


to live. ‘‘Under the reign of tlie Tsdn dynasty”, thus we read in
Yii Pao’s Sheu shea ki ‘-there lived somewhere in the South a
“ people that could let their heads fall off. And these could then fly.
“In the time of the Wu dynasty, the general Chu Hwan (A.D.
“177 — 238) obtained from there a female slave, whose head flew
“away regularly every night when she was asleep. It then found
“ egress and ingress either through a hole for the dogs, or through
“a sky-light, using its ears for wings. At early dawn it returned.
“When it had done so several times, some one resting near her felt
“a little inquisitive and looked at lier in the night by a light,
“and he discovered the headless trunk. Tliis had become rather
“cold, and the respiration was slow and weak. So he covered it
“with a blanket; but the head, on coming back against daybreak,
“was thus prevented by the blanket from finding rest. Two or
“ three times it tumbled to the ground, whining and grumbling


IIi$ bE ■ '^*'*'* "Ofk we quoted already in Book I (p. 470). It was written
in the first tens of the fourtli century. The title means a.s ranch as "Recoi'd of
Researches after the Spirits”. It is a curious collection of niaiaels and lepemis,
relating tno.stly to souls or ghost.s — a precious .source for the knowledge of
early Chinese animism and spirit-lore. Its value as such is un.surj)assed. We shall
have to draw from it very often. Its authoi is said to be one Yii Pao ,

or, according to others, Kan Pao ^ , who rose to tlie dignity of Q ^
or dynastic historiographer, and composed a great part of the Books of the Tsin
Dynasty, giving also commentaries upon the 'r>o clfuvH, the Yih him/ and the
Chev li. He is known also by his other name Ling-shing . Compare page 126.

There are now current two different editions of the S/teu s/wn hi, both bearing
the name of Yu Pao as the author. Both are monuments of style, which
probably accounts still more than the contents do for tlie popularity the work
enjoyed before and under the Tang dynasty, a popularity manifest from the
frequency with which it is quoted even in high class works. At present the two
editions are highly esteemed, and have a wide circulation. One is in twenty chapters ;
the other contains no more than eight. In the catalogues of books, contained in
the Books of the Siii dynasty (ch. 33, I. 20) and in those of the House of T ang
(Old Books, ch. 46, 1. 38, and New Books, ch. 59, 1. 19) the work is stated to
contain thirty chapters; but according to the catalogue in the History of the Sung
Dynasty (ch. 2UG, 1. 1) it contained only ten. All this renders it doubtful whether
the two present edition.s are entirely authentic and free from spurious interpolations.
Unless we expressly state the contrary, the edition we quote from is that in twenty
chapters.

A third work bearing the name of Sheu sheu ki, likewise ascribed to Y’ti Pao,
was quoted by us on p. 161 of B. I. It is entirely different in character from
the two other, being a collection of monographies of gods and goddesses, con-
tributing much to our knowledge of religious mythology. This production too wo
shall have to quote from often in a later part of this work.


HEADS SEPARATING THEMSELVES FROM THE BODY.


79


“ most dolefully, while the trunk panted as if it were going to die.
“The man now drawing the blanket off, the head rose up and
“fixed itself on to the neck, so that in the next moment the slave
“ was quite well. Great were Hwan’s amazement and fright. He
“lacked the courage to keep the slave any longer, and sent her
“away. But on making further inquiry, he no longer ignored that
“ he had to do with a natural idiosyncrasy of that woman. Every
“ now and then, military commanders, when on expeditions against
“the South, had obtained such beings; and cases had also occurred
“ of their having placed a copper vessel over the trunk, so that
“the head could not get to it, and death was the end” h

Still in the twelfth century this tradition was re-echoed by Li
Shill in a collection of notes published unter the title of Suh poh
iruh chi or “Supplementary Poh wuh chi'’ , of which work of
marvel, written in the third century (see B. I, p. 4:22), it professed
to be an extension. “Southward from the Sierra (which extends
“ along the north of Kwmngtung and Kwangsi), and in Khi-tung (in
“ Kweicheu prov.) there are now and then persons ivith heads that
“ fly. Hence the nick-name : a Lao-tsze with a flying head. When a head
“is going to soar, there appears the day before a mark round its neck
“like a red cord; and, in spite of the vigilance of wife and children,
“ it gets wings in the night, and away it flies, to return at daybreak” b


^ s at A , 0 © a.tf tt « a. It a in lit .ft

# ^ tt sj a s s

» e . At St il i , gt Bii II 2 ^ 3? ft m ® ffi

zm.. ««*- 0 «S^«IM« 4 n|rjg, mi-


80


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Another part of the body, in which the soul substance is deemed
to be concentrated in particular, is the heart. This organ is, indeed,
the very core of the liody, always bearing, liy its throbbing, witness
to the body’s vitality, until the moment of death, that is, when
the soul departs. Already long before the commencement of our
era, as we saw on page 10, the heart was declared by wise men
to be an actual seat of the vital >pirit?. The S/( ire/i states expli-
citly that “it is the heart which contain.' the shen”', and this
tenet we find repeated afterwards in all medical works we know.
In later times. Philosophy gave the heart the central place among
the five viscera, a place corresponding with the South or the region
of warmth and life (see tlie table on p. 'Ifi), degrading it, however,
from its special position as abode of the 'oul by allotting a shen
also to each of the other viscera (pp. 70 sqq.).

In the early years of our era, VVhnig Ch ung declared in his
Lun heng that the t s i n g k h i of a man, that is to say, his breath
or yang soul possessed of vital energy, is formed by his “blood
pulses”, and that these pulses ceasing to throt) at his death, prove
that his tsing khi is then extinguished (see p. 11). This identi-
fication of the soul with the blood we can hardly believe to be a
special creation of Wang Chhing’s mind, fur it must occui’ naturally
and generally with all peoples who, ascribing death to a departure
of the soul, see man die when blood gushes out of him. It is,
moreover, evidently older than Wang Chhing, being traceable in
books of the second century before Christ. Liu Ngan then wrote :
“Old hwui trees produce light or fire, and old blood forms
ignes tatui, which fact does not amaze man” ^ That this author
understood these two sorts of mysterious lights equally to be souls,
is manifest enough from these hwui trees being written jj^, that
is to say, “kwei trees while hardly two centuries later

another scholar wrote-. “The blood of those slain bv steel is said

1/

“by the people to be converted into will-o’-the-wisps, that blood
“having constituted their tsing khi while they lived” b And
about the same time, the composer of the Shicoh wen taught :
“ Ignes fatui are the blood of men killed by weapons, and of horses

^ ^ f f • Chapter 62.

IS.. cl,. 13.


THE SOUL IS IDENTIITED WITH BLOOD AND IGNES FATCI.


81


“ and cows. They arc soul-flames, and the character denoting
“them (^) is composed of flames, and pp untoward”^ —
thus intimating that Jack-o’-lanterns were considered of old to be
evil sprites.

The above statements appear and re-appear in books of later
times. The Po/i tcuh chi says: “In places where fights are fought
“ and people are slain, the blood of men and liorses changes after
“ a series of years into will-o’-the wisps. These lights stick to the
“ "round and to shrubs and trees like dew. As a rule thev are

O

“invisible, but wayfarers come in contact witli them sometimes;
“they then cling to their bodies and become luminous, and, when
“ wiped away with the hand, divide into innumerable other lights
“ which cause a soft crackling noise as of peas licing roasted.
“ If the man stands still a good while, they disappear, but he

“will then suddenly lose his reason {hit. his hwun), and not

“ recover before the next day. At present it occurs that, while

“combing the head, or wliilc dressing or undressing, s\ich a light

“follows the comb, or appears at the buttons on untying them,
“ likewise with a crackling sound’’

The philosophers of the Sung dynasty had no other opinions.
Hwang Kan roundly declared “the blood to be the tsing”’,
and Chen Teh-siu wrote: “The tsing is the bloody substances;
“ they belong to the Yin, because they moisten and feed the whole
“body”* — like water, which is yin, does the earth. “Some time
“ ago”, thus Chang Clflih relates, “I was in the country up the Hwai
“river, and passed tlie night in a little Buddhist convent. I then
“ heard in the dead of night a peeping noise, as of several times ten
“ thousand chickens. I rose to see what it was, and looking round.


Sect, to, I.


3 iSl # ts tfe . Sin<j-U In li iifii sliii, cli. 2S.


0


8:2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ I saw the grouad studded with lights. The monks whom I inter-
•‘rogated, answered that this was an old battle-field, and that this
•‘phenomenon recurred whenever it was dark weather” Tinally
we may note that medical authors in general are wont to declare in
their writings that the blood is “the mansion of the shen”*, or
even the shen itself.

Thus, gradually, our topic has carried us away from philosophy
into the field of popular conceptions and lore. We have now seen
that folk-lore, too, may instruct us on Chinese psychological belief.
Its vast field the thinkers of the nation never e.xplored; at best
they strewed in it some grains of their intellect. In many respects
it is a better mirror of China’s mind and thought than her philosophy
is. Both agree on several points. Their main features show no
great discrepancy, nor did philosophers refuse a broad place in
their system to much they found in popular lore. Indeed, the
simple fact that philosophy and folk-conceptions have grown up
equally out of the same Chinese mind, ensures that they will
complete each other rather than confute. Philosophy is very
far from giving us a finished picture of China’s psychology and
animism. So folklore becomes the source we have to turn to for a
fuller satiation of our thirst for knowledge on the subject. Prom
it alone we can learn fully what the Soul — taking this word in
the broadest sense — is able to do and to become, and only for such
questions as what sort of thing a soul is, or wliat its relations with the
Pniverse are, we have, as we saw% to seek tlie answers in philosophy.
Folk-lore also acquaints us much better with tin; hosts of demons
and popular gods : — altogether k w e i and shen around whom
most of religious ideas and practices converge, and who thus
constitute the core and nerval system of China’s Religion. Folklore,
myth and legend will therefore be the warp and woof of many
chapters of this Volume and the ne.xt.

« ® « It . a ^ s It M * ft


CHAPTER V.


ANIMISTIC IDEAS AS SUGGESTED BY SHADOWS.

On entering the vast field of animistic notions, which Chinese
popular lore unrolls, we cannot expect to find therein the most
primitive ideas respecting the Soul. China’s primeval culture lies,
in fact, so far behind us, and is superseded by so many ages of
progress of mind and thought, that attempts to discover such ideas in
her pre.sent psychology must a priori seem to promise no success.
China’s sons have totally outgrown their primitive state of mind. All
we can do is to give things as they are depicted by the existing
literature, leaving it to the reader himself to make out what m'C
may take for vestiges or survivals of primeval ages.

Often enough ethnologists have directed attention to the fact that
peoples in a low state of culture generally consider the shadow of
a being as his soul. Spencer has even made this phenomenon one
of the foundations of his theory on the origin of the belief in souls h
The question thus suggests itself whether such identification will
appear also in the animistic lore of China.

It does not even seem venturesome to take this for certain. In
fact, as the Chinese are even to this day without ideas of the
physical causation of shadows, and unable to formulate that
light only proceeds in straight lines, they must needs see in a
shadow somethin": more than a nen:ation of li"ht. It must he to

o O O

them a duplicate belonging to the person casting it, intangible,
and yet a reality, nothing else, accordingly, than a part of his
immaterial substance, or that substance itself.

However rational such reasoning may appear, the facts do not
quite seem to confirm it. We find nothing in the books of China
which points positively to an identification of shadows and souls.
Philosophical theories on the subject, based on ideas of the
popular brain, we have looked round for in vain ; nor have we
found in those parts of China where we studied actual life, particular


1 The Pi'iiicijiles of t-ociolopy, ch. 8, § oO.


84


THE SODL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


attention paid to shadows. All we could discover is some faint
hints in the books, indicating that a shadow was often considered
to have a separate existence, though not independent from the
being that casts it, and that it is positively a part of that being,
exercising great influence upon his fate.

In the writings of Chwang-tsze a human shadow is represented
as a living entity. This Taoist, in fact, lets it discourse freely with
wang-liang spectres on a subject indifferent to us; but nothing
forbids us to believe he expressly personified here a shadow to
have a proper subject for an allegory b Of greater significance it
is to hear that sage relate how one Shi Ch'ing-khi, on seeing
Lao-tsze, “walked on behind him, to avoid his shadow”*. Such an
act of deference could have no sense, unless we admit that the
shadow was considered to be an integral part of the owner’s
immaterial part, a duplicate of him, which to harm was much the
same as to harm his person. We also read that “Kao Clbai, since
“ he had seen Confucius, whenever he passed by him in going or
“coming, did not place his foot on his shadow”®.

The identity of a shadow with the spirit of its owner appears
more clearly in the following lines, which we find in the Yiu-yang
tsah fsu: — “In the Pao lih period (A. 1). 825 — 820) there
“ was a Wang-shan man, who could take hold of the original
“ fate of others. In the fifth watch (3 — 5 A. AI.) he set out some
“lamps and examined human shadows by their light, in order to
“ascertain whether the fate of the owners was good or bad. A
“ man’s shadow, he said, ought to be deep, for, if so, he will
“ attain honourable positions, and a great age. Shadows are averse
“ to being reflected in water, or in wells, or in washing-basins.
“ It was on such grounds that the ancients avoided shadows, and
“that in old days khii-seu, twan-hu’, and other shadow-treading


1 Nicii hwii I'heti Lin</, ch. I, §


± ^ M tr ^

’ ^ ^ ^ Mt ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

l.iri yii. ch. Ill, % ^ ^ fj .

4 See Infra, in Part II, our chapter on Demons of Disease. The two names
ilenoto mysterious animals deemed to harm men hy attacking their shadows. In an
edition of the Puh wuh chi, which makes mention of tho-e beasts (ch. Ill), we
find the following interpolation, the date of which we cannot fix; “The Book to
“use the whole Day says: All beings exercise influence upon each other. I have
“heard th.at. if the shadow of a bird is hit with a piece of wood that was


THE SHADOWS AND SOULS OF A MAN ARE MULTIFOLD.


85


“ vermin caused injury by hitting the shadows of men. In recent
“times there have been men versed in the art of curing disease
“by cauterizing the shadows of their patients” Indeed, if a man’s
soul, represented by his shadow, is strong and vigorous, it will
naturally enable him to work himself up to a glorious position,
and to live long. And if it is harmed by beasts or by men, the
effect will fall back on his body, while, similarly, if his soul is
cured by medical means, his body will be healed also.

Like his souls, a man’s shadows are multifold. In the same
Yiu~yung tsah tsu we read : “ According to a statement given by
“Kwoh Tshai-chen, a Taoist doctor, the number of human shadows
“can amount to nine. Twan Ch^ing-shih (the author of the
“ Yiu-yang tsah tsu) often e.vperimented in this direction, but
“ could not discover more than six or seven shadows, those above
“ this number being too vague and confused to be discerned.
“ Kwoh Tshu-chen asserted they might be discerned by gradually
“increasing the torches in number. He also stated that the nine
“shadows have each a special name. One of the shadow-shen is
“ called the Emperor of the Left ; the second is the wan g-1 i a n g
“spectre; the third is Sieh-tsieh-chTi; the fourth is Chhh-fu; the
“ fifth bears the name of Soh-kwan, the sixth that of slave of the
“p'oh; the seventh is the Tsao-yao. Long ago 1 transcribed the
“ nine names, but two characters below on the hemp-paper were
“devoured by silver-moths, so that I could not copy them. The
“ eighth shadow is named Hai-ling-Tai, and the ninth name was
eaten away entirely by the moths, and indiscernible”


‘•sti'iick by tliunJev. tlie bird falls lo the arounJ iiniuediati-ly. I ne\er tiiud it, but
“uii account of tlie matter stated above I consider tbe thiny certain'


ii Hi = SI


B


^ Bs. mm mm


A


A -t ifi) a , #HL E P . IB W ■» S « M bT SI) . X


86


THE SOIL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The larger number of these names are perfectly unintelligible to
US; but there are two amongst them which point manifestly to an
attiliation of shadows and souls, viz. wang-liang spectre, and slave
of the p^oh. Significant also is the term shadow-shen, used by
our Taoist.

Probably, identification of shadows and souls has also to do with
a reference, found in the writings of Sihn Khing, to a man who
was afraid of his own shadow. “South of the spot where the Hia
“discharges its waters (into the Hwangho, that is, somewhere in
“south-west Shansi, or in the adjacent parts of Shensi or Honan)
“ there lived a man, named Khen Shidi-!iang. Stupid he was, and
“timorous besides When walking at night in the bright moonshine,
“ he looked down and saw his shadow, and he thought it was a
“crawling kwei; then he lifted up his eyes, and beholding his own
“hair (as a shadow cast on some standing object?), imagined that
“ it was an erect m i-spectre. He then ran back home, and when
“about to reach his house, he expired from loss of breath. Who
“ would not ()ity him ! It is a general thing for men, w henever there
“appears a spectre in their midst, to think in tlieir emotion that
“they will correct the effects of its visit by hiding themselves. But
“ here we have to do with one who thought a reality (viz. the
“shadow) not t(j exist, and a non-reality (the spectre) to exist, and
“ wlio had nothing else but these errors to correct the matter”
Are we to take this stupid faint-heart for a sporadic phenomenon?
Or was he a type, not so very rare? The Benin negroes are
stated to regard men’s shadows as their souls, and the Wanika are
afraid of their own shadows, possibly thinking, as some other


9 & . m M m 9 fr MM BSik .ip m
2 lit E ft A ^ m # ffi ^ i a# ft fiS a

jaiE* . di. 15, sect. 21,


OLDEST REFERENCE TO SHOAVS OF TRANSPARENCIES.


S7


negroes do, that their shadows watch all their actions and bear
witness against them b

An early instance of identification of shadows with the souls of
the dead we have in the following interesting lines of Sze-ma Tsien’s
Historical Records: “Next year (121 B.C.), a man of the lYi region
“ (in the present Shantung), named Shao-weng, visited the emperor,
“to show him his attainments with regard to kwei and shen.
“The [emperor had a favourite consort, born of the Wang tribe;
“ this woman had died, and Shao-weng setting his arts at work, made
“the countenance of the lady Wang appear, together with that of
“ the spirit of the furnace ; and the Son of Heaven saw them within
“a curtain. He honoured Shao-weng with the title of General of
“ Perfection of Learnedness, and bestowed on him a great many
“ presents, treating him with the ceremonial instituted for official
“ guests” Of this tale Yil Pao gives us a version which shows
still more explicitly, that the soul the wizard evoked, was the shadow
of the empress; - — “The emperor Wu of the Han dynasty once
“ placed his affections on the lady Li ; she departed this life, and
“ his thoughts were with her incessantly. Then a native of Tsi,
“ versed in occult arts, named Li Shao-weng, told him he could make
“her shen appear. That night he stretched a curtain across the
“ room, lighted lamps and torches, and told the emperor to sit down
“ by another curtain, and look from some distance. And within the
“ curtain a beauty appeared, whose form was that of the lady Li.
“ The emperor neared the curtain, sat down, and walked to and fro,
“ but without succeeding in getting near enough to see her. This event
“ increased his sorrow and emotions, and he gave vent to his sentiments
“in the following verse:

“Was it she, or not?

“ Standing up, I saw her in the distance ;

“Was not she all elegance and grace?

“ How imperceptibly slie came near !


1 Spencer, The Principles of Sociology, ch. VlII, 50.

2 * BJJ fp g A dc « 0 II » m ± .

3iAA.

S * SS «■ S . K ^ . ja I® iiii ^ s™

also the Books of the E.ii’ly Han Dynasty, ch. ti5. 1, 1. -1.


88


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY A\D FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘■And he ordered the musicians of his department of music to sing
“it with accompaniment of strings”

Chinese authors assert that we have here the oldest reference
known to the shows of transparencies performed with puppets
casting shadows on a screen, which, though still an occasional
enjoyment in some parts of the Empire, does not seem to have ever
been very popular. It exists, we believe, with no other peoples but
that of Java and of a few other islands and countries of south-east
Asia, where the Javanese imported it in mediaeval times. It is
remarkable that in Java, where this so-called irai/ang is purely
indigenous, it bears a character strongly religious, portending, just
as Li Shao-weng’s performance before las Imperial lord did, that the
souls ot deceased personages would be brought down in the shape
of shadows.

That the Chinese of this day are still fully alive to the identity
of a man s shadow and his soul, we may infer from their aversion,
referred to by us on pp. 94 and 210 of Hook 1, to having their
shadows enclosed in a coflin or grave. The belief that such a thing
might injure their health, or would even entail their death, agi’ecs
perfectly with the theory that disease and death may result from
separation of the soul from the body. In conclusion we may state
it is a matter of pulilic opinion in Cluna that ghosts, when showing
themselves in a human shape, have no sliadows. In truth, they are
bodiless and mere shadows or souls themselves, and a shadow of
a shadow is something hardly imaginable.

1 A . ^ A ^ ± „

life M . ^ 0 > ^ rffj M ^ ^ @15

ch. II.


CHAPTER VI.


ON DISEASE OF THE SOUL, ITS DEBILITY AND DERANGEMENTS.

Lacking, as she does, correct pathological science, we cannot but
expect to be sumptuously regaled by China’s medical authors with
the grossest nonsense when we search their writings for explanations
of mental diseases.

Intelligence and wit, vivacity and brightness being, as we have seen
in Chapter I, connected by them with certain conditions of the
s h e n , they do not stray from their line of logic when they reason
that insanity must be caused by special affections of the soul. But
they fall short most lamentably in defining those affections.

When we peruse the lengthy chapters on insanity, which are not
absent in leading medical works of which China’s literature contains
a considerable number, we find that, in imitation of the ancient
Nan king they all divide that disease into two kinds. The one,
styled k h w a n g ^ manifests itself by sleeplessness, lack of appetite,
megalomania, idiotic laughing and singing, running about restlessly,
etc. The symptoms of the other kind, called t i e n are depression
of the mind, stupor, and epileptic fits or falling-sickness. It need
not be said that lioth kinds, as well as their names, are often
confounded. Practically, khwang comprises constant and raging
madness, and tien insanity by fits, quiet lunacy, and idiocy.

The Ricang-ti su wen, the renowned bible of pathology and
medecine from whicli professors of leechcraft have in all ages derived
their wisdom in very first instance, asserts that the Minister Khi-
poh ^ told his Imperial Lord, that “ when an individual neglects
“ binding up his clothes and coverings decently, and utters a mixture
“ of proper and improper talk, heeding his nearest relations as
“ little as those more remote, that then we have to do with a


1 The fifty-ninth difficult point.

2 3 m-


bo .


90 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“troubled state of his shen ming” h On another occasion the same
randee was asked by his sovereign for some information regarding
.jsanity manifesting itself from birth. “In this case , thus the answer
was, “the disease is stated to exist already in the womb. It is
“ incurred by the unborn child when the mother is scared seriously
“by something; her breath (khi) then ascends without descending
“again, and the operative energy ot her soul (viz. her tsing) and
“ her breath both remain in her own body, thus causing the child
“to get the tien disease”'. In other terms: a human being may
be mad from lack of khi and tsing, having received nothing of
these substances, or an insufficient quantity of them, from his mother
before his birth.

But there exist other explanations of lunacy. From the synoptical
table on page 20 we know that the western part of the L inverse
corresponds with the lungs and with joy, t>o that the Chinese cannot
but conclude that the lungs are the organ or tlie seat of joy. Now
we read in the Ling diu king another standard work on medecine
and pathology, ascribed, like the Su tr.en, to the emperor Hwang
and commented upon by the same persons and a few others : “When
“the lungs are unduly exhilirated they wound the p'oh, and the
“p'oh being wounded, the individual becomes mad” Derange-
ment of mind may, according to the same work, be also a conse-
quence of injury done to the hwun; “When the liver is dejected
“and in emotion, it wounds the hwun, and such wounding of
“the hwun entails khwang”’’.

Of course, Chinese medical men admit the existence of quite a
variety of causes of mental malady manifesting itself by madness.
Wind and cold, the authors of most diseases, they place first in


S . # ± tffi ^ T . « # « . ^ S

^ . Ch. 47.

^ M IP. M ■ U contains eiglity-one chapters. Though not known to have
existed earlier than tlie tenth century, this work, like the .S'k iven, undoubtedly is
a suniinary of the oldest traditional knowledge of pathology and medicine.

Mi M- ^ M ^ Wl M ^ ^ M'J ■ Cliapter 8.


CAUSES OF INSANITY AND CONVULSIONS.


91


the list, besides evil spirits, as we will explain in detail in Part II,
in a special chapter on demons of disease; — other causes ti
would take us too long to enumerate, apart from the fact that
they would not shed any interesting light on our subject. The
Nan king states, that “a man may become khwang or tien
according to whether his Yang or his Yin is too heavy”', but
on the reasons of these souls losing occasionally their proportional
weight the venerable old book observes a learned silence. Sundry
authors ascribe insanity to the fact that “the shen neglects to
occupy or guard its proper abode” -, that is to say, to a displace-
ment of that soul within the body in consequence of fright or other
sudden emotions. Or, also, they state the complaint to be simply
“a disturbance of the shen ming”’, while others say that it
“ consists in loss of the heart” \ this organ being the central viscus
and, as such, the chief seat of the soul (see p. 80).

Perfectly consonant with all such nice theories are numerous
medical prescriptions against madness, in which we find it stated
that they purport to settle ( ^ ) the h w u n or the shen, or to
suppress (^) the p'oh, the shen or the ling, or to set those
souls at rest (^), or to lead the shen back into its abode
^1 jji^ It would be too large an extension of our task if

we were to analyze those prescriptions or remedies and their sub-
stratum of superstition and philosophy, however abundant a harvest
of interesting lore such work seems to promise. We may, perhaps,
touch upon the subject occasionally later on in this Avork.

Convulsions and spasms, or so-called hien’, also named king-
hien® or “fright-convulsions”, which harrass babies especially, are,
as to their causations and the ways to cure them, placed by medical
authors on the same footing with tien. They are wont to distinguish
them in horse, cow, pig, goat, and fowl convulsions, accortling
to the animal the patient mimics by mouth or gesture; and Yen
Yung-hwo^, who lived under the Sung dynasty, was lucid enough
to see that these five sorts correspond respectively with the heart.


1

"1

a


If ^ ^ ^ •
If


" iiii-


. The twenty-lirst ilinicult [loiiit.


' M ^


9:2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


the lungs, the spleen, the kidneys, and the stomach h That popular
conception in Amoy attributes convulsions to a temporary absence
of the soul, and attempts are made there to cure them by calling
the soul back, we saw on page 243 of Book 1. Medical works
too state that they are connected sometimes with loss of tsing
shen®, caused in many cases, as we shall see in Part II in our
chapter on demons of disease, by spectres snatching the soul out
of the patient.

That convulsions trouble young infants more often than grown
persons, is generally ascribed to their souls being still tender and
weak, devoid of resistance, and highly impressionable. ‘‘The influence
“of the shell in a baby”, thus we read in a medical work, “is
“ faint and weak. So, when extraordinary things or unknown persons
“ are abruptly seen by it, or it hears a cock crow or a dog bark,
“ or when it perceives a cow, a horse, a bird, or a quadruped,
“or some jest or play frightens it, or when it hears a loud human
“ voice, a thunderbolt, gunshots or crackers, then, if it was never
“ affected by tright before, such sights and noises may produce
“ contrary influences ot strange men or things, and fright-convul-
“ sions. lor, whereas it is the heart which houses the shen, the
“shen is injured when that organ is frightened; and as it is the
“ kidneys that house the will, the will is lost when the kidneys are
“ scared, ihis is the case with all grown-up people, but especially
“ with children” h

So medical works unanimously declare it highly salutary that


1 Tf.i sheivj fioig m^ij , “Reiiieilies for succoiiiiiig tlie Living”, a work
in eight cliapteivs, ot the author ol wliicii nothing is known hut the name. Article
“hisquisition.s on tlie symptoms of hien di.sease”.


- S rt ■

A , S HI 11 Ri A 1!^ . S .H, ^ gS . J® it # ,

^ ivi A t of m m 1 9 .
ft.

Vi'/' y"'y

kill p, ^ “Domestic Mysteries regarding the Hearing of Children”, a

work by Wan Tsuen alias Mih-chai ^ a native of Lo-t ien ^

(5 m the extreme east of Hupeh, wlio lived under the Ming dynasty. Article


MALADIES AND DERANGEMENTS OF THE SOLL.


93


parents should slightly frighten their darlings now and then, in
order to gradually strengthen their heart, their blood, and their
soul. Weakness of these most important constituents of the body
is a term always on the lips of practitioners explaining what their
patients ail, and it is a general adage, referred to also in medical
writings on children, that “it is less difficult to cure ten men than
one woman, and easier to cure ten women than one babe” h on
account, as we may expect, of the approportionate weakness or
incompleteness of the breath or soul, or of the blood or pulses identified
with the soul.

Sudden dumbness may be a consequence of the soul being
abruptly frightened. According to the Ling ch" u I'ing, “alarm and
“fear, as well as anxious thoughts, wound the shcn, and when
“the shen is wounded, its owner bceomes afraid and timorous”*.
Lassitude, languor, and paralysis of the limbs are altogether affections
of the soul, and it is sometimes dangerous to indulge in excessive
merriment or great anger, for, as the Su a-en teaches, “merriment
“ and anger injure the breath, as cold and heat injure the body.
“ Furious anger injures the yin, and wild joy the yang
“ substance” ’. There are hardly any bodily diseases described in
Chinese medical works as disconnected from indisposition of one
of the souls, or from indisposition of the yang and the yin
contained in the individual, or from infirmity of his tsing or his
khi; and in most cases the mental malady is represented as a
consecpience of that of the body, and seldom as its causation.
Of course we cannot waste our time in wading through the pile
of medical books at our disposal, in order to illustrate these
statements with quotations. Lack of time and space compels us
to confine ourselves to a few desultory notes. Fright, anxiety, and
sleeplessness are represented as consequences of agitation or emotion *
of the shen, or of restlessness^ of the hwun or the shen, or
of these souls being unsettled ^ or in distress ’ — all which
things accrue from a great variety of bodily indispositions. The


1


3 iK
Ch. 5, I.

4 Wt.


A. +


. Cliaptei' 8.


5


i


*


94


THf: SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


same complaints may be connected with prolonged absence of the
soul from the body. Characteristic is the following diagnosis of
such a case, to be found in a medical work eight centuries old :

“In the year kwei-ch'eu of the Shao hing period (A.D. 1133)
“ I sojourned for a short time in Sze-ming. In that place one
“Mr. Tung lived, who suffered from restlessness of his shen and
“ his k h i. He could never lay himself down to sleep without
“his hwun flickering and dying about, and when he awoke, he
“ found his body in bed, while his s li e n h w u n was away from
“ him. He lived in fright and terror, and laboured much under
“nightmare; whole nights through he could not sleep, and medicines
“ were of no avail, however frequently they were taken. 1 examined
“that patient, and asked him what complaint had been worked
“on by the physicians; on which he answered that all had
“declared it to be a heart-disease. 1 then said: ‘It must be
“ treated as a case in wliich tlie arteries are concerned. Your liver
“ suffers from demonial influences ; there is no question of heart-
“ disease. The k h i of your liver is empty, and therefore demoniacal
“influences have taken its place; it is tlie liver which houses the
“hwun, and a wandering hwun may cause phenomena of trans-
“ formation the liver of a healthy person does not admit spectral
“influences, and when he lies down to sleep, his hwun enters his
“liver, and then his shen is quiet, and able to rest. But your
“ liver contains demoniacal influences, so that your hwun cannot
“ return into it ; hence, when you lie down to sleep, your hwun
“ flies about, as if outside your body. And as the liver governs
“ anger, your condition grows very serious whenever you become
“ a little angry” No wonder that, after this wise diagnosis, our

1 Comp, page L‘L

‘‘ ^ ^ f# # : y:

Lei chiuij ji'ii tsi jicn slti fan'i y|\' > “Clever Recipes for


THE HEART AS A FACTOR IN SOUE-IHSEASE.


95


doctor cured the patient thoroughly by a sagacious application of
mysterious drugs.

The heart is generally stated in medical writings to be an im-
portant factor in soul-disease. Uneasiness or restlessness of that
organ, thus they say, may cause the thoughts to wound the shen,
which wounding may then call forth so much fright and fear within
the patient, that evil influences and spectres get free scope to
injure his viscera. Others say, that when the heart labours under
sorrow and melancholy, the hwun and the p^oh are sickened,
which phenomenon in its turn entails malady in the viscera — the
heart thus being the organ which domineers the souls and the
material organism. From this doctrine it follows logically, that the
art of keeping the body in good health consists in preventing the soul-
substance from being sickened by sorrow or spite ; so that it becomes
advisable never to allow such affections to gain the upper hand.


General Succour, tested in several Wavs”; a work in ten cliapters by IIil Sliuli-
vvei , also named Cln-klio ^ Pf , who lived in tlte twelftli century.

TS, sect, g ch. 3/1O.


CHAPTER VII.


ON ABSENCE OF THE SOUL FROM LIVING MAN.

The tale of Clung Ts^i-ying, the souls of whose five viscera left
him and announced his death to liim (p. 73), has acquainted us with
the conception that the soul or the souls of a man may separate
themselves from Ids body without their departure causing his
immediate death. Stories pointing to the prevalence of a strong
belief in this doctrine arc to be found in Chinese literature in
considerable numbers, and they teach us that an excarnated
soul may show itself to human eyes in a shape quite like that
of the body which it left, nay, as a likeness of it so perfect as to
make unsuspecting man take it for the living individual.

So, T'ao IVien \ an author who lived from A.U. 365 to 427,
wrote in a collection of marvels, current under the title of Sheu
shen heu “Posterior Record of Researclies on Spirits”:

“ Under the Sung dynasty there lived a man, whose name has
“ now sunk into oblivion. After a night in bed, at the side of his

“ wife, the hitter rose at sunrise and left the house, and her husband

“ did the same soon after her. Then the woman re-entered, and

“ saw her goodman asleep in the blankets. At the same moment

“ her slave came in, and told her that her husband asked for a
“ looking-glass. Thinking that the slave was deceiving her, the
“ woman pointed her finger to the man on the bed ; and then, with
“the words: ‘And 1 have just come from him’, the slave hurried
“back, to tell him what she had seen. The man startled; he
“ entered immediately, to see as his wife did his own person in the
“ blankets in a sound sleep, his head on the raised pillow. It was

"1 , also named Yuen-lian" -j^ or Yuen-ining .

^ IPtP ^ indicates, we have here a similar work as Yu

Pao’s (comp. p. 78), and a continuation of it. Its autlienticity suffers somewhat
from the fact that it contains a few references to events which occurred some years
after the author’s death. Of this book, too, there exist two different editions, the
one in ten chapters, and the other in two, Onr quotations are always from tlie
former, unless we state the contrary explicitly.


BODIES CAN LIVE WITHOUT A SOUL.


97


“ exactly his own likeness, without one point of ditference. Convinced
“ that it must be his soul, they dared not frighten or shake it ; but
“ with their hands they gently stroked and tapped the bed, with this
“ effect that the soul gradually disappeared into the mat of the bed.
“ There was no end to their fright and fear. After a few hours
“ the husband suddenly became ill ; he was awkward and bewildered,
“and he never recovered” h

“ Liu Shao-yiu was an able diviner, celebrated throughout the
“Capital. In the Then pao period (A. D. 742 — 755) a stranger
“ visited him, and brought him a piece of silk lustring. Shao-yiu
“ took him into his house and asked what he came for. The answer
“ was that he desired to know how many years he had still to live.
“Shao-yiu made a kwa, and no sooner had he it ready than he
“said, with a melancholy sigh; ‘This kwa of yours is not felicitous ;
“it corresponds with expiration, and with the evening of this day’.
“ The visitor in his turn heaved sighs of dismay for a good while,
“ and then asked for some gruel. A member of the family brought
“ him some water, and saw two Shao-yiu, so that he did not know
“ which of the two the visitor was. Shao-yiu pointed at the ghost
“ as the stranger, telling the person who brought the water to
“ give it to him ; on which the stranger bade them farewell
“ and departed. A servant saw turn out of the gate. Scarcely
“ had they gone a few paces, when the servant saw the other
“ vanish, and heard a most piteous wailing in the air. Then he
“returned to Shao-yiu, and asked him: ‘Do you know this man,
“ Sir? he spoke to me of all your former concerns’. Thus Shao-yiu
“ became aware that the visitor was his own soul. He told the
“ servant to go and have a look at the silk ; and as this man
“found it to be entirely of paper, Shao-yiu sighed and said: ‘My


mm nm.

ttsaaTEig.

3 .


THE SOUI, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


9S

“soul lias left me; I must die’. And he did expire in the evening
“ of that day” h

“ One Clung Sheng travels to the Metropolis in the last year of
“the Tuen pao period (A. D. 755), having to present himself
“ there as a candidate for the state service. On hi.s arrival at the

“ western suburb of Ching-si, the sun has set, so that he sees

“ himselt compelled to apply to an inn-keeper for a lodging. This
“man asks him his clan-name; and as Clung gives it him, a slave-
“ girl is told by some one in the housc to exclaim, out of doors:
“‘Miss, join your maternal grandmother!' An old matron then
“ forthwith comes down out of the hall of the house. Clung
“salutes her; they sit down for a chat, and after a while he begins
“to ask her about her matrimonial concerns. ‘I have here at home
“a daughter of my daughter’, she says; ‘her surname is Liu, and
“ her father is now in otiice as a prefect of the llwai-yin district,

“ leaving it to me to level the grountl in front of her house (to

“facilitate her departure witli a bridegroom). I will give her in
“marriage to you; what do you think of it?' Clung is not bold
“enough to refuse; and that same evening the nuptials are per-
“ formed and the sexual pleasures enjoyed in the highest degree.

“ He remains in that house for several months, wlum the matron
“tells him to go with his wife to lau’s. Clung accordingly takes
“his wife to Hwai-yin. There he announces his arrival beforehand
“to the family, thus causing among them a general commotion.
“The mandarin’s consort is just suspecting her goodman of having
“some daughter by a wife somewhere abroad, and, her heart full
“of jealousy, she feels very curious how she will look, and what


' W » b « eit . ^ ^t#

Hit#, 0®.

* A « » A 2 . 0 3ft * A t# * 36 . .a Pi iP ,itt .

0®:^^* ' 1:1 1 TS, sect.


THE BODY AND THE SOEL MAY LIVE SEPARATED.


99


“she will have to say. A short time after, the woman in question
“enters; she goes to see her, and — ■ she beholds a woman
“ different in no respect from the daughter of the house. She is
“carried through the gate, alights from her vehicle, and slowly
“ strides up and down the courtyard. The daughter hears of it,
“and smilingly comes also to have a look; but no sooner does she
reach the woman in the courtyard than they suddenly coalesce
“ and become one single body. Tlie prefect immediately investigates
“ the matter, and discovers that his mother-in-law, who died some
“ time before, has simply given her granddaughter’s soul in mar-
“ riage. Sheng tries to trace her dwelling, but it is not at all to
“ be found on the spot”

Thus, according to these tales, the soul may exist outside the
body as an entity in the fullest enjoyment of senses of perception,
and as a duplicate of the body having its form as well as its solid
consistency, llesides, as the last narrative tells us, the soul may be
extracted from its owner’s body by artificial means, especially by
evocation. The prevalence of such a belief in China can no longer
amaze us since we know from other pages of this work ^ that the


lit , W R . * it Jl ■(£ * It » ^ , S f 1 jft * ,
4 ® Sif BE t- T- , K S An.lli 7' « ^ »I ,
fi Ait^«.

* # ^ It . * s » . » * * . w

WAPITIi. ff#lT

m<¥.

® * )!lf ^


l.wrti

TAng

2


lull ’ ‘’Record of Curiositie.*; about Soulb”, a collection of the

dynasty, by one Niu Kiao
Book I, pp. 243 sqij.


100


THE SOUI. IN PHILOSOPHY AMI POLK-COXCEPTION.


people there have always felt convinced of the possibility of calling
back souls into the bodies they left behind in a state of trance
or lethargy, or even death ; indeed, between calling a soul into a
body or out of it there is no essential difference.

Extracting souls from human beings is generally admitted bv the
Chinese to be a kind of black art, not always connected, however,
in their country with murderous intent or with a desire to work
evil. “At the end of the TAen pao period (7')5)”, for instance, it
is related “there lived in Clhang-ngan one i\Ia ’Rh-niang, versed in
“ the art of evocation. The Governor of Yen-cheu, named Su Shen,
“ who lived with him on terms of friendship, wished to have a wife
tor his son Lai from amongst the Lu family, and said to Ma :
“‘Having not more than one son, I must have a wife for him
“ who combines loveliness with capacities. The Lu family possess
“three daughters; and as I do not know which is the best of
“ them, T shall feel much obliged if you will bring them here,
“that the young man’s mother may have a good look at them’.
“ Upon these words, Ma erected an altar in the hall of the Buddhas,
“lie performed his evocations at it, and in a moment the souls of
“ the three girls came to the spot, so that Lai’s mother could see
“them with her own eyes. ‘The eldest’, .Ma said, ‘is not devoid of
“excellent qualities, but less good than the next, who is to become
“(according to fate) a Governor's wife’. Accordingly, Su took the
“latter as a wife (for his son). .\t the end of the TGen pao
“ period Lai was promoted to the dignity of prefect of Vung-ning,
“ and perished in the turmoil caused i)y (Ngan) Luh-shan. From this
“his family inferred that Ma had given false predictions; but after
“ the capture of the secondary Capital, Lai was endowed by Imperial
“ resolution with the (titulary) Governorship of Hwai-cheu” h

si K 0 , S # W — ■T' . S S W S ®

❖ . zm.

, Kwnmj i hi\ K K, cli. 358.


THE SOUL MAY BE EXTRACTED FROM A LIVING MAN.


101


“T'ang Pao-heng had met somewhere with Ling ^ of the Han
“ dynasty, who gave him some charms by means of which he
“ might catch souls and subdue them to his will. One day he said
“to a friend of his : ‘On going past some carts westward from
“ here, I discovered a small hou&e, at the door of which stood
“ harnassed horses, and several women who had just alighted. None
“ of them wearing any veil over their head, I could see that one
“ of them, who w'as the second to leave her car, was somewhat more
“ than twenty years old, and by no means destitute of charms. 1
‘■think she must be the wife of the liiHi officer newlv arrived

O i'

“ in the Capital from the provinces. I will go this evening to
“your fore-house, and while enjoying some spirits, summon that
“woman to the spot, to see how she looks’. ‘IMay you take
“ the liberty to wantonly call a woman of a respectable family?’,
“retorted the friend; ‘if you do so, you will involve me in the
“ conse(piences’. But Pao-heng said: ‘I will not call her person; 1
“ will only catch her living soul for a joke ; but we cannot do so
“ before the night, when she is asleep. And when she then comes
“ here in a dream, we must look at her from some distance, and
“carefully abstain from approaching; else her soul will not be able
“ to return into her bodv, and she must die’.

“The evening came, and he went with his friend to the latter’s
“house. Having waited there a little while, they heard at the gate
“ a female voice. Pao-heng, well aware that it was the woman
“ he had seen, held his breath, and tied a coloured thread around
“ his middle finger. Then he strode into the study of his friend,
“ ordered the servant to bring the spirits, had some with his friend,
“and told his attendants to go to bed. When the night had come
“ he rose, opened the gate, and in stepped the woman, the same
“ he had seen. She had quite a human shape, but she looked
“ rather hazy, as a being from the expanse above. Her voice was like
“a child’s. On seeing Pao-heng, she curtesied to him; and on his
“ asking her who she was, she gave him Iier clan-name, and stated
“ that her husband had come from the provinces to the Metropolis,
“ having retired from otticial life. She in her turn asked : What
“‘place is this? I remember I went to bed, and it is not of my
“own free will that I am here; am 1 dreaming? do 1 distinguish
‘•things clearly in my dream? I think I died; this is not the

1 Clianp: Tao-liiig leiiowiieil pati larch of TuoiMii, to whom we

.shall have lo pay much attention elsewhere.


10:2


THE SOUI, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


~ Nether-woi'lcl, is it?’ — ‘Here we are in a human abode’, replied
“Pao-heng; ‘this time you will be allowed to return home; feel not
“ concerned about yourself, as your fate rests solidly upon your
‘‘ behaviour in a former existence’. Thus they went on speaking together
“till the fifth watch, when he dismissed her” h

A A & M « e® ^ gs 4 A la ? #

* lasst^F.

# a , * A * 5E ^ .

ai li A » S tK PI iS * ^ . ti^ A' ® H P'S ft* «
SA«.«ii*»7}Si:;rmSA.iP!R*S.ia

A a *!■ S , p/r Ji » K tip A >13 11 «s *

iSR. Ai:KR,sAsia^t.ll®s«B®.«
SaffiftB. ttlarpAlfc.iiSBBStii.T'.tSllt.

#tlt»iIP.«aiB.tt#AP.a:T>4fii^®.®

A'iV/i hen liiJi ‘-Tlie later Record of \\liat I liearj and saw”, a

work of the twelfth century, in thirty chapters, by the hand of Shao Poh -j-^
or Sliao Kunpr-ts i ^ As the title shows, it is a continuation of another

work, known as ITc/f Idea (■-> ien Inh > ‘’The earlier Record ofwiiat

I heard and saw”, written by Shao Poll’s father Shao Poh-wen , also named

Tsze-wen who finished it in A.U. 1 13’2. This product has twenty chapters,

■sixteen of xvhich treat of events since the acce.Sbion of the Sung dynasty; the other
contain miscellaneous matters and, especially, the sayings and doing.s of the author’s
father, the renowned philosopher Shao Yung (A.D. lOH — 1077), of whom we spoke
on page 715 of Book I.


MAN MAY SEND HIS SOUD OUT OP HIMSELP.


103


Fortunately, the wizard who played that lady so strange a trick,
was no malicious evil-doer. His declaration that she would have
died if they had come too near her, implies, however, that he
could have harmed and killed her, had it been his wish; he might
also have kept her soul, called out of her, in his power long
enough to convert her body into an idiot or a corpse. Where a
belief in the reality of such arts prevails, we may be sure to find
also a belief in the existence of special malicious soul-robbers; and
the facts confirm this inference. But it is not here the place to
speak of that class of sorcerers. We will do so later on, in Part IIT.

Temporary departure of a man’s soul from his body does not
always take place independently from his own will. Frequently we
find in the books mention of persons sending their soul out of them-
selves on purpose, especially with the aim to see hidden things.
So, "one Mr. Fan Wen-ching had an eldest son, named Kien-pu
“and Shun-yiu. This man had been drilled and instructed trom
“ his youth so well, that he was cleverer and brisker than any
“ one. He was sure to foreknow his father’s thoughts, besides being
“able to emit his own shen. When Wen-ching was at the frontiers
“ on the west, he foreknew most things regartling Lu Tshng, and
“ that in spite of the great distance that lay between them — all
“ because his son sent out his soul to the courtyard of that man,
“there to obtain information. Every victorious strategem of the father
“was regarded as a work of the gods; but it was Kien-pu’s power
“ that was the cause of all. On a certain occasion, the latter was
“frightened by somebody, just on having sent away his soul. From
“ that moment he lost much of his seeing faculty, and died not
“ long after, still very young” *.


1

A . jE ?jf W • :5t » 2 . # ® ®

i!t & # a # W 8S: »# * . SJ * ^ -tfc . 0 tu SHI

® A » « . a ft p ® /S . A * BB t . B# a -tfc .


See T S, sect. Am ch ‘>3 whicli tVoin the nwn hih

ni- ‘'Di\ers Writiiiys truni the Ink Cott.ige” — the name of the author’s


dwellins. Thi.s is a work in ten chapters on niiscellaneons siihject^, intersper'-eJ witli
some incredible stories. Tlie author, Chanc I’ane-ki mnm , also named Tsze-


hieii


li\ed in the first h.ilf of the twellth century.


104


THE SOUE IN PIIILOSOPIIV AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“When Liu Poli-wen was young and a student, there lived in a
“ cell of a Buddhist convent a singular man, who sent his s h e n
“ away out of his own body now and then, and locked the door.

It once came to pass that, a month or a fortnight after he had done
“ so, an envoy arrived from the north, and put up in the building.
“There was no ceil for him to pass the night in. Then he perceived
“the empty one, and with the words; ‘This man is dead, forthwith
“cremate him’, he thumped the door open, adding: ‘1 will put
“up here’. The monks could not interfere; his men burned the
“ body, but that very night the soul came back, to find its body
“reduced to ashes, and its own self unable to revive. Then every
“ night it cried aloud : ‘ Where shall 1 settle ?’ Those who knew
“ him then opened their windows, saying : ‘ Here 1 am’ — and
“forthwith the soul then united itself with their body, to the effect
“ that their cleverness was greatly multiplied” k

The L(iii(j~hiien ki relates of a Buddhist monk, who sent his soul
from time to time into Paradise, with the object of guiding thither
those of others who wished to walk there. “The monk Ting-shi
“ disposed of a curious art. Sitting dowm with some one in a quiet
“cell, he seized his soul and strolled with it through the regions
“ of rest, where, generally speaking, they found things as they are
“described in the Amitabha Sutra. When the soul of that person
“ had thus wandered thither two or three times, the visions of his
“dreams began to tally sometimes with his adventures there; and
“ when he had made the e.KCursion several times in a dream, his
“soul went, of course, nowhere else at his death. There is no doubt
“that region was the Paradise of the West”®.


(Sill 4- « PI . « - H # /4 ffl ^ « B- nr

2 mj « .

A ct' A'i 1^ , a work unknown to me, quoted in tlie T S. Inc. cit.


it


THE BODY MAY r,IVE WHEN THE SOUT, HAS LEFT IT.


105


In this tale, we see dhyana, the Buddhist art of transplacing
one’s self into imaginary regions of bliss by force of imagination,
interpreted as an emission of the soul into those regions. And the
visions or dreams of the men whose souls were taken by that monk
into Paradise, are represented roundly as actual peregrinations of
those souls. Such identification of dreams with excursions of the
souls of the dreamers is general in China. We shall see it recur
in many a tale, and will pay ample attention to the matter on pp.
1 1 1 s^g., as also in Part V, in a chapter on Oneiromancy. But still
more may be learned from the series of tales reproduced in the
above pages. While the fate of the monk so untimely sent to the
pyre, teaches us that a soul passed out of the body of a living
man may leave this body behind in a state of lethargy, all the
other tales contain not the slightest indication that the soul’s absence
is necessarily combined with suspension of the bodily or mental
functions of the individual concerned, nor even with a modification
thereof. But for this, unconsciousness in its various forms is, as
a rule, ascribed to a temporary absence of the soul. On pp. 243 seg.
of Book I we mentioned this fact in some annotations on the actual
ideas the Amoy Chinese entertain on the point, and on the way
in which they try to recover sufferers from stupor, catelepsy or
swoon, by calling the soul back into them.

Especially curious is the following modern story of a man who
took his soul out of his own body, to render chastisements inflicted
on the latter, and even capital punishment, totally effectless. “When
“Pci Yuendung resided in Khien (Kwei-cheu), there lived a bad
“character there, the sentences against whom formed a pile as high
“ as a hill. The mandarins had flogged him to death with sticks,
“and they had flung his corpse into the river, but three days after-
“ wards he got his soul back again, and on the fifth day his evil
“deeds recommenced. This occurred and recurred several times,
“ until the matter was reported to the Governor of the province.
“This grandee flew into a great passion, and proposed to the
“ Governor-General to let him cut off' that man’s head. Ilis body


^ MiJ ^ I? S © M MU . di' ^ '^7 M ^ ^ ' ''•

The Linni-liiii’ii Li i.s a collectiou of tale-, .iml le^emls. in three cliapter.s,

ascribed to one I Slii-clien wlio li\eil under tlie Ynen dynastv. Lanp-

hnen, the T..inil ofBlis;-. iliS Ml! , \v.i>, .recording to tlie iireface of tliework,

.1 region to winch Chang Ilwa w.r.- once taken h\ ^nine nnsterioii> innnortal bein".


106


THE SOUL IX PHIEOSOPHY AXH FOl.K-COXCEPTIOX.


“and his head were thus separated from each other, but in tliree
“days he was alive again, his trunk and his head liaving re-united,
“leaving no other mark of his decapitation than an almost invisible
“red thread on his neck.

“Now a new series of crimes commenced. He even beat his
“ mother, who brought the matter before the magistrate. She carried
“with her a vase. Hn this vase’, thus she spoke, ‘my refractory
“son has hidden his liwun. Whenever he was conscious of having
“committed a serious crime, or a misdeed of the most heinous kind,
“he remained at home, took his soul out of his body, purified it,
“and put it in the vase. Then the authorities only punished or
“executed his body of flesh and blood, and not his soul. With
“ his soul, refined by a long process, he fhen cured his freshly
“mutilated bodv, which thus became able in three davs to
“recommence in the old way. Now, however, his crimes have reached
“a climax, for ho has beaten me, an old woman, and I cannot
“forbear this. 1 pray you, smash this vase, and scatter his soul
“by fanning it away with a windwheel; and if then you castigate
“ his body anew, it is probable that bad son ot mine will really
“die’. The mandarin followed her advice. He had him cudgelled to
“death; and on e.xamining his body, he found that decay had set
“in within ten days” ’.

' if 7c gi s St B# ^ S e * . * 4 r Uj % .

^ . e w. H a ii . * a #• ® . *r * =& it

# r® 4n ID . # E2 * # . # * e W -41 0

a in

BS Is # ^ S, M ^ '''

Tills is u \aluable collection of 7:18 tales and notes on inaiaelous subject.s, especialh"
bearinfr upon spirits and ghost-s. Its compiler ,Sui Vnen (or Sui Yuen-lii

second half of the 18th. century. . The work is di\ided


THE CAUSES OF TRA\CE, COMA, CATELEPSY.


1U7


Authors on the healing art, and practitioners, whose wisdom is
in general borrowed from those authors, are in the habit of ascribing
trance, coma, or cataleptic fits of whatever kind they may be, to a
great variety of causes. They denote them all by the word kiieh
Such affections, they write and say, are owing to scantiness of blood
or a superabundance of blood, or immoderate perspiration ; they
may occur also when the yang matter ascends in the body, instead
of descending, the yin and the yang substances then being pre-
vented from circulating properly in the individual; intestinal worms
may produce them, etc. And those disturbances of the constitution
in their turn are caused either by wind and cold — the authors,
according to Chinese views, of most complaints that harrass man —
or by disturbance of the five Elements within his body, or by per-
turbation of his five viscera or six mansions.

Apart from this and other gibberish by which China’s patholo-
gists, with the boldest confusion of causes and consequences, try to
explain the diseases in question, those sages are far from rejecting
the popular ideas concerning their causation. To attest the truth of
this assertion it is sufficient to point to the fact that among the
remedies against k ii e h in its sundry forms, with winch therapeutic
works abound, we find as very effacacious certain “charms to get
back the h w u n” **, besides mixtures from the vegetable and mineral
kingdoms denoted as “drugs for the return of the hwun”= and
“warm water solutions to bring it back” C respectively to be
swallowed by the patient, or to be sprinkled or poured over him.

Absence of the soul may entail also madness and idiocy. This
agrees with the philosophical doctrine ancient and modern, that the


into '24 chapters, ami h.i.- a .supplement of ten, conl.iining 277 t.iles uml notes. It
has a ■wide circulation in China, anil is inC'intestahlv a most valuable source lor
knowlejiie of modern Chinese folklore. The title means- "What Corifncius did nut
speak of”, it hemp: stated in the Lun yn (VII, '20) that "the subjects on which the
Master did not talk, were -traniro things, feats of strength, anarchy, and .spii-its'’

. The book hears also the title of-S'i/i i /lioi

or "the Modern T' i /ooi”, that is to say, a renovation ot .i record of marvels
mentioned in the older Cataloprr.es under the title of Vs i /iioi /,i bB '

Suna Tuna-vana


1^, lost at an early date, and of which only a small
supplement, entitled tfu/i h- i \dai i,i hE ' remained, asciihed to

Wu Kiun, who flourished in the fust h.ilf of the sixth century.

> Ii-


108


THE SOU]. IN PHILOSOPHY AND I’Ol.K-CONCEPTION


hwun or shen is the source of intellect. To prove the existence
of that conception it suffices to refer to a pretty story in the
seventh chapter of the Liao-chai chi i entitled The Cricket It
acquaints us with a villager named Chdng, who, having with
many others to provide his prefect with fighting-crickets for the
Court, incurs much bam booing for not bringing any. By the help
of a soothsayer, who shows a good place for cricket-catching, he
succeeds in finding a beautiful specimen, which he fosters with
the tenderest care; but, unfortuniitely, it is killed by his little son.
The affrighted boy runs away from home, and is found dead in a
well; and as they are burying him, he comes round, but is deprived
of reason. Then another cricket appears at Chfing’s house, which
being caught, proves to be a most skilful fighter, endowed with
much intelligence. The prefect, on receiving it, gives Chhng a
liberal reward, which is still superseded by valuable bounties from
the Governor when the insect, delivered to him, has become the
glory of His Majesty’s collection. After a year or so, the boy’s
shen-tsing returns. He recovers his reason, and relates that he has
been a cricket of great agility, skilful in fighting.

The reader has now reasons for asking whether sleep, which is
a suspension of mental operation, is also considered by the Chinese
as a temporary absence of the soul. To this we must say, that
we do not know any authors expressing themselves explicitly on
this point ; nor have we ever come across any philosophizing for
an explanation of sleep. The author of the Shih ming declared
in this vocabulary in the second century of our era, “sleep to be
“a transformation during which the tsing and the khi are trans-
“ formed, and not in the same condition as when their owner is
“ awake” k Here, too, we have to refer to folklore for information.
It shows that the Chinese really think that sleep may be a condition
in which the soul wanders away.

“When Chao Shi”, thus runs a tale, “a sub-prefect’s intendant
“ of liquors, still lived in a college-building, it occurred that a
“ student in one of the cells fell into a sound sleep. He with
“ his comrades, wishing to have a little fun, set out a sacrifice
“ before that young man’s bed, consisting of incense, candles, flowers,
“fruit, mock money, and so forth, and then silently watched, to


1 See our note on tliis work on page 138. 2 •

II, s 9.


IN SLEEP THE SOUL DEPARTS FROM THE BODY.


109


“see what would happen. The sleeper awoke; his eyes fell upon
“ those things, and with the words : ‘ Am I dead already ?’, he began
“ to snore and pant incessantly, falling asleep again after a while.
“ As he did not rise for a long time, they went to look at him,
“ and found him really dead. They then removed the sacrificial
“ articles, and mutually agreed to keeji ttieir deed secret. Could
“ it be that the soul of this man, when he awoke and saw those
“things, was dissolved by fright, so that it did not return into him?
“ In evil art there exist incomorehensible thimis” h

“ A literary graduate of the lowest rank at Kien-ngan , Li
“ Ming-chung by name, lived in the country. Having been to a
“ remote village to a meeting, he returned home in the darkness
“ of the night, intoxicated, without any of his servants or folloivers.
“ Midway he was thrust by a mountain spectre, down the slope
“ of an abyss, where, disabled as he was by his inebriety, he fell
“into a sound sleep, during which his shen went straightway

“ to his house. There it found his mother and his wife, seated

“ together by the light of the lamp. Before the mother the soul
“ made a respectful noise, but she gave no answer. It touched the
“ wife with its elbow, but she did not feel it; on which it suddenly
“ beheld an old grevbeard coming forth from the central eaves.
“With a polite bow he spoke to Ming-chung: ‘Your body. Sir,
“is being maltreated by a mountain spectre; if you do not go to
“ the spot immediately, it will die in reality’. Then grasping Ming-
“ chung’s hand, he led him out of the house, and after a march of
“ some ten miles they found Ming-chung’s inanimated body, lying
“ on the slope. With all his power the old man pushed it up

“ in the back, shouting out Ming-chung’s surname and name ; on

“ which the latter suddenly had the sensation of awaking from
“ sleep. He sat up, gazed around with fright, and seeing the


* . .»f A M «: Ji Itt S

i?x


101 .


wiitten pre.'.iim.itjly in


the i.Uli. century : T .S, sect.


110


THE SOUL IN PIULOSOrHY AND I'OLK-CONCEPTION.


“ moon shine very bright, walked the rest of the road to hi»
“ house. Not before the third drum was beaten did he reach it,
“ and then he duly explained to his mother and wife why he was
“ so late. When the morning sun had risen, he and his family
“ together prepared spirits and must for that divinity, as an expression
of their respectful gratitude” h

The old man, who thus kindly brought Ming-chung's soul back
into him, evidently was one of his penates, the “central eaves” ^
he came forth from, lieing the usual place assigned for the domestic
worship of those divinities. The fact that his kindness purported
to save the sleeper’s life, brings us to the conclusion that the
Chinese think death may be caused by the soul wandering away
too far or too long from the body ; in other terms, death is a
departure of the soul for good.

In a country where such ideas on sleep thrive, giving rise
to tales such as the above, we may e.xpect to see dreams also
explained as wanderings of the conscious immaterial duplicate.
Philosophers may at any times have come somehow or other to
reasoning away such reality of dreams; — untaught man, however,
not having the remotest correct notion of wluit a dream is, simply
recalls with great distinctness his adventures while asleep, and takes
the facts as they occur, liverybody is there to tell him that his


tt « , II . it s ui a tt )i;ii w . » T' 16

*A® A a

tt « . nj # .® S .

“Information recorded in the Vernal Island”, ten chapters of miscellanies
written by Ho Wei IfrS- who lived in the eleventh century. Ap. T S, sect. ,

ch. 99.

" 4 a-


N- ; : •! ' -


:: 2


\ \ i- ■,'■■'!= i


I . / V 1


■v;;--M/ ■ ■ ' hf


"Aj

iv-'-

K'Afio- sV > w-!k. < »,1l


(/y


,;^ 'yyjjwm,


mim>


I


- ■' .


*.*• •* i /


A r
/Ay

'T^


y


yy mM ry'


.'\\J !,.ll


‘ -'‘^ >*,


ChiiiL’se KopiosL'iitaliiiiis uf a Man I 'reaming.


IDEAS ON DREAMS.


Ill


body did not leave the place where he lies; thus no other course
remains to him than that of believing that he has two individua-
lities, and that, while one remained, its duplicate was away.

The interpretation of a dream as an actual e.vperience of the
wandering double evidently was so general in his time, that Wang
Gliding, the bold castigator of the conceptions and misconceptions
of the first century of our era, whose writings are so rich a source
of knowledge of the then prevailing popular ideas, judged it necessary
to turn his sarcasm against it. “The explanations given of dreaming
“ are uncertain and confounding. It is said that, in dreaming, the
“actively operating soul (tsing shen) remains in the body, and is
“then an object for divination about good or evil; while others assert
“ that the soul then wanders about, and has intercourse with men
“ and beasts .... Let us verify the theory that the soul roams about
“ among men, by a dream of murder. If a man who dreams he
“ kills another, dreams he is murdered himself, we may search his
“ body all over next day, and ho may examine his limbs himself ;
“ but no indication at all will be found on it that he has been
“ cut or wounded by a sharp weapon. Should a dreamer set his
“ soul at work, this soul would be the soul of a dead {i. e. an
“inanimate) man; and as even the soul of a dreamer can do no
“ harm to others, how then would it be possible for the soul of a
“ dead man to do any harm ? ‘

“ When some one has a dream” — thus our critic continues in
another chapter, “diviners say this is a peregrination of his liwuu,
“ and so, if he dreams that he appears before the Emperor (of
“Heaven), it must be his hwun that ascends to heaven. Now, on
“ journeying to the spheres, we go in the same direction as when
“ we journey up a mountain. If some one climbs a mountain in
“ his dream, he has to do it by means of his legs, and with his
“hands taking hold of the trees; but for a triji to heaven there is
“ nothing at all he can gras[) ; how then would he perforin it, and


Ui 2 # . ^ W ts » n K A « H . . . 4 * » ft

A»SA»f«^*, m 0 *

I# . tl Si# 5E ^ tS i# It . ^ 5; tl ^ 06 W A . 5E ^
S S# S' 2"' s iS 5E ■


112


THE SOUL IN PHtliOSOPHY AND FOEK-t'DNCEPTION.


“ that while the distance between heaven and man must be
“estimated by ten thousands of miles? If a man moves at the rate
“of a hundred miles a day, his hwun, accomj)anying his body,
“cannot go quicker than that; will it then move with more
“velocity when it is alone? And if we admit that the soul may
“ travel just as quickly as the body can, then Kien-tszS, stated to ha\e
“ made the journey to heaven and back, could not possibly have
“woke up from his sleep' before several years had elapsed^; and
“ yet he did so in seven days, \^"hat a speed then his sold must
“ have had during that time !

“ The h w u n is breath (k li i) possessed of operative energy (t s i n g),
“ and movements of breath are like those of clouds or smoke. And
“neither cloud>, nor smoke are quick in moving; we may admit that
“a hwun moves as quickiv as a Hying bird, but a greater velocity it
“ cannot have. Now, if, when a man dreams he flies, it is really
“ his soul which he uses for such locomotion, even then his speed
“ cannot lie greater than a bird’s.

“ But (we may object), when the air between heaven and earth
“ moves with more rapidity, it may become a hurricane. But a
“hurricane lasts no longer than a day; and thus, admitting that
“a soul moves as quickly as a stormwind, it cannot keep up this
“speed any longer than one day — which is quite insutHcient to
“ bring it up to heaven. And a dreamer’s e.vcursion to heaven lasts
“no longer than one doze! Nay, on awaking, he still finds himself
“ in heaven and not yet descended to the earth ; or when he
“ dreams he has travelled to Loh-yang, and awakes by some sensation
“ he has in that city, with how great a speed his soul must then
“fly or galop back! If this speed e.xists, it certainly does not
“ exist in reality, and if it is no reality, neither is a journey to
“heaven a reality” ^


t See [jage 114.

±Alfe. ±AlB±|lHfe..S'_hlll,JESllJ,^^?l

i? « is gi ^ . m bs


THE CELEBRATED DREAM OF K(EN-TSZe.


113


Wang Ch'ung’s motive to turn this criticism against the belief
of his time in the reality of dreams, was a dream of Kien-tszg
a ruler of the princif ality of Chao who in 49S B.C., waking
from a trance, said he had been in heaven and received there from
the Supreme Lord valuable hints about great things to come. The
record of this episode as given by Sze-ma 'iVien characterizes so
sharply the old Chinese ideas about dreams, that it is well worth
being read in its entirety. “ Kien-tsze was ill, and till the fifth day
“ he recognized nobody, much to the consternation of all the grandees.
“ They called Pien-tshoh, who came to see the patient. When he
“ left the room, Tung Ngan-yu asked him about the latter’s health.
“ ‘ His pulses throb regularly ’, the doctor replied, ‘ why then should
“we feel amazed at his condition? In bygone times, the ruler Muh
“of Ts'in (GoS — 620 B.C.) was in a similar state; he awoke on
“ the seventh day, and said to Kung-sun Chi and Tsze-yii : ‘ I went
“ to the residence of the Emperor (of heaven), and greatly enjoyed
“ myself. I have been absent so long because 1 had to learn
“ something there. The state of Tsin, thus said tlie Emperor to
“ me, will suffer great turmoils ; five reigns in succession will be
“ disturbed ; subsequently a usurper will appear, but he shall die before
“ he is old, and then his son will reign, and no distinction will
“ be made between the two sexes. Kung-sun Chi wrote those
“ revelations down, and deposited them in the archives of Tshn.
“ On this occurred the insurrections under the ruler Hien, the
“usurpation of the ruler Wen, the victory of prince Siang over the
“army of Tshn at Hiao, and the debauchery and lewdness that followed.
“ These all are things vou know. The disease of the king, our Lord,
“is of the same nature; ere three days have passed away there will
“be an intermission, during which he will be sure to speak’.

- 0 . 0

AP-hA — St-SSlir

© tS ^ S ffi , ii{' # * ® . iii'
# * « Wl * ± A # » * m s ffii/-;-


8


114 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“In two clays and a half Kien-tszc awoke. ‘I went to the residence
“of the Emperor’, said he to his Ministers, ‘where I much enjoyed
“myself. With the host of shen I wandered about in the all-ruling
“ heaven. The music in nine tunes, resounding for and wide with
“ accompaniment of ten thousand dances, was other music than that
“ of the three dynasties'; its tunes moved my heart. A bear came up,
“ and was going to grasp me, when the Emperor told me to shoot it ;
“ I hit it, and it was dead. But then there came a spotted bear. This
“ beast too I shot down on the spot. Then the Emperor, exhilarated,
“ presented me with two baskets, each containing a set of things.
“ At his side I saw a child. The Emperor assigned to me a dog
“ from Thh (the north of the present Shensi province), wdth the
“words: ‘I give it you for the bravest of your sons’. And then
“he spoke: ‘The realm of Tsin will see its glory decline more and
“ more under every new ruler, and it will come to an end after
“ seven reigns. The Ying clan (the reigning family of Chao) will
“ totally defeat that of Cheu westward from Fan-khwei, but it will
“ not be able to take possession (of its throne)’. Tung Ngan-yii
“ wrote these communications down as he received them, and
“ deposited them in the archives. And he told Kien-tsze what the
“ physician had said ; on which this ruler endowed the latter with
“forty thousand acres of ground” '.


M'S Vi


THE CELEBRATED DREAM OF KIEN-TSZe.


115


Complete proof that his excursion to the celestial regions was
perfect reality, was given Kien-tsze soon after by the fact that —
not in a dream this time, and with his whole escort around him to
witness it — he met wuth the same vouno; man he had seen at
the throne of the celestial Emperor, and received from him full
information as to what his experiences there had portended. It is
likewise Sze-ma Ts'ien who relates this event. ‘-On another day,
“Kien-tsze went out, and found a man in his way. His escort
“ pushed that man aside, but he did not go away, and the
“ followers, indignant, were going to slay him, when he exclaimed :

desire an interview with our liege, the king’. The followers
* reported this to Kien-tsze, who called the man, and said;
“‘Hem, here I have Tsze-cheh, whom I saw somewhere before’.
“‘Tell your suite to stand off’, the man said, ‘for 1 want to
“ speak with you’. Kien-tsze did so, whereupon the man on the
“road spoke; ‘While you were ill, my lord and king, I stood
“at the Emperor’s side’. ‘That is so’, said Kien-tsze, ‘but what
“did 1 do when you saw me there?’ ‘The Emperor ordered you to
“ shoot two bears, one of them spotted, and you killed them both’. —
“‘What did this portend?’ asked Kien-tsze. ‘The state of Tsin
“will be involved in great difficulties; it is you, my king, who
“ will play the chief part therein, and the Emperor ordains that you
“ shall exterminate (the families of) its two Ministers-in-chief, of
“ whom two bears were the ancestors’. And, thus Kien-tsze went on
“to say, ‘the Emperor gave me two hampers, each with a set of
“articles; what did this mean?’ ‘Your sous will subdue two realms
“ in Till, the names of which will then become their surnames’. —
“ ‘ And when I saw you at the Emperor’s side, the latter assigned
“ to me a Tih dog, saying he gave it me for the most glorious of
“ sons ; what do you think of that present ?’ — ‘By those sons he
‘' meant your sons, my lord, and a Tih dog was the ancestor of the
“people of Tai; so this region your sons shall come in possession
“of, and your posterity shall rule over it; the Tatars shall submit

zm. mmmz.

Records, ch. 105, 11. 2 sny. Also in ch, 43, 1. 7.


IIG THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANJ) FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ to their supremacy, thus aggrandizing Tuh with two other realms’.
“ The Ruler then asked the man to mention his clan-name, and
“he invited him to accept an otticial dignity; but with the words:
“‘I am a mere rustic delivering the commands of the Emperor’,
“ he vanished from view. Kien-tsze committed this event to writing,
“ and deposited it in the archives” '.

We need hardly assert that a further perusal of Sze-nia TsUen’s
history of that princely family shows, that all those predictions
were fultilled to the very letter. Ever since, this nice specimen of
early historiography has passed in Cliina for a standard proof of the
reality of dreams, and the gods, ghosts and spirits of Kien-tsze’s
vision have always been lielieved as actually met by Ids roving soul ;
in fact, “if a dreamer thinks his own actions real, he cannot but
ascribe reality to whatever he sees — place, thing, or living being” ®.
And Wang Ch'ung with his sceptic criticisms remained alone, a
vox clamantiis m detscrio. But there is more to prove th:it dreams
have always [lassed for excursions of the ethcrial duplicate, with
encounter of spirits. In all ages, the books, not excluding such
highest class works as the Standard Histories, regularly record


‘ « B ffl ^ tH . « A ® itt . rt 2 . ^ * . # *

ffl ^ ^ 2 . 0 II , ft Fr A I»f * . S at * 0 . #

E « fid f- 0 . w 2 . ^ ^ A a , a isr s .
® i; # 0 , ^ ± a- St « fi , -t 5E . ffli ^ 0 ,

%$.=■%. z

•T- tf je = B R a

#« . # M a - a A . 0 Kiiti ^ ^ ft a * 2 . A

a'(srii)a®aA.®a;*0>a±g'<:^Hi>«

. The same work, cli. 43, 1. 8.

2 Spencer, The Principles of Sociology, cli. X, § 71.


DREAMS ARE RAMBLES OE THE SOUL.


117


cases of shen appearing as beautiful lads or venerable grey-
beards in red, white or yellow dresses, to give sleepers warning,
advice or instruction in w'ord or pantoinine. And numerous dreams,
accounted valuable as remarkable or usefid revelations of spirits or
spiritual agencies, were inserted in the books of every epoch, and
their long list acquaints us with a wide-spread system of oneiro-
mancy, established in the Empire in the oldest times we know of.
It is not the place here to review that system. We will do it later
on, in Part V, in one of our chapters on the various ways in which
the East-Asiatic consults his spirits, to ensure success in his under-
takings, and felicity and prosperity for himself and others.

Nor is that all. Ear from rare are the recorded instances of
miscreants, haunted in their sleep by the souls of their murdered
victims or of dead men and women they formerly wronged and
molested, or plunged into sorrow and misery, such unwelcome
visits to their wandering duplicates being intended to thoroughly
disturb their rest and health, nay, to render them mad, or to
kill them. Instances of such apparitions will be laid before the
reader in chapter XVI, which treats of retributive justice done by
spirits. Einally, in this connection mention must be made of a
number of instances of human souls appearing in dream to generous
individuals whose help or protection they want, or to whom they
wish to otter thanks or rewards after such help or protection has
been mven them. Three cases of this kind we have already

O »/

given (Eook 1, pp. 856, S62 and 915); here are two more: “Under
‘■the reign of the emperor Wu of the Tsin dynasty it came to
“pass in the second year of the Ilien ning period (A.D. 275)
“ that one Yen Ki, a Laug-ye man, sickened and died. He had
“been encotfined a long time, when the family all at once
“dreamed that he said to them; ‘1 must return to life; be quick
“ and open the coffin’. They let him out, and gradually he regained
“ power to drink and eat” h — When Hi Khang was still a young
“man, he one day took a siesta, and dreamed of a man more than
“a chang in length, who said he was a musician of the emperor
“ Hwang, and that his skeleton, dug out of his grave, lay in the


o ^ % 'lif Books of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 34, 1. 2G;

also in tlie Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 29, I. 39.


118


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“thicket, three miles eastward from the house. He entreated him
“ to bury it, promising he would reward him liberally. Khang went
- to the spot indicated, and found there some white bones, with
■•a shin-bone three feet in length. He collected them and com-
“mitted them to the earth; and next night he saw in his
“dream the giant come again and give him a Kwang-ling song. -
“ On awaking he played it on his lute, and so pure and fine the
“melody was, that it was never lost”

Among the hundreds of dreams, inserted in the books of all
times, we find some of which it is stated explicitly that the soul
of the dreamer passed out of his body; but in the majority of cases
its departure simply is tacitly supposed. Not seldom do we read of
a shen leading the soul of a dreamer away, to roam about with
it for a time and show it Paradise, or other curious places
and things. So did the shen of the Buddhist monk we spoke of
on page 104, who gave to the dreamers entrusting themselves
to his guidance so intense a habit of travelling thither, that in
the end they made the voyage by themselves over and over again,
finally swerving away into Paradise for good. When thus out of his
body, the soul of a dreamer may travel in a short time over
enormous distances. Notorious for this is an aerial journey made
in the sixth century of our era by a king of Kan-t'o-li a region
situated at the time somewhere in Cochin-China. “In the first year
“of the Then kien period of the Liang dynasty (A.D. 502), on
“ the eighth day of the fourth month, that Kii-t'an-siu-poh-to-lo
“had a dream of a Buddhist monk, who said to him: ‘The
“ jNIiddle Kingdom now possesses so holy a ruler that after ten
“years the doctrines of Buddha shall thoroughly thrive there. If
“you send envoys to him with tribute, to pay him homage.

Copse of Wonilers”, a work on spirits and marvel in ten chapters, ascribed to Liu
King-shuli SI**. a high officer who died in the period T^ai shi (A.D.
405 — 471), The work was not drawn up from existing fragments until the Ming
dynasty. T S, sect. JtlF ch. 146.

2 "f H^IJ.


DREAMS ARE PEREGRINATIONS t)F THE SOUL.


119


“your territory shall prosper, happiness shall reign in it, and its
“ traders shall increase to a hundred times their present number ;
“ but if you do not believe me, this country will be unable to
“ maintain its own order and peace’. The king at first placed no
“ belief in the matter, but then he dreamed again of that monk.
“‘As you do not believe me’, he spoke, ‘I shall have to let you
“ go there yourself to see him’. And away the king travelled in
“ his dream to the Middle Kingdom, and respectfully he appeared
“ there before Heaven’s Son ; and when ho awoke, he felt very
“astonished in his heart. Being himself a painter, he took a sketch
“of Wu’s features as he had seen them in his dream, retouching
“them with red and blue colours. And he sent an envoy with a
“ painter thither, to present a letter and offer jade dishes and
“ other things, ordering the artist to paint a portrait of His Majesty’s
“person on the spot, and bring it home. And just like that it
“was which the king himself had made” '.

A country where the doctrine that dreams are adventures of the
wandering duplicate in regions otherwise unseen, was received by
every one as a matter of course — such a country alone, we
think, could produce authors selecting such visionary adventures as
topics for narratives and novelettes. Their writings, though pro-
ductions of fiction, claim our interest as authentic portraits of the
nation’s genius and inventiveness. They show us, however, that
the Chinese are remarkably deficient in imagination. Indeed, even
in a field like this, which allows unlimited play to the most
speculative among speculative brains, China’s literary productions
give us hardly anything to read than things actually existing in


cb. 78, 1. 13.


1:20


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


the realm of the awake. A standard work in this class is the Alung
giu “Record of Perambulations in Dreams”, which appeared

under the T"ang dynasty. Such narratives occur also in considerable
numbers in general books of marvel and fiction, as the Liao-chai
chi i and others.

The general prevalence of such conceptions about dreams as are
sketched in the above pages, does not exclude the fact that there
have been speculative minds who indulged in other theories regarding
their causation. These are, however, as far as we know them, too silly
to deserve attention. To in.-itance this from the writings of the sage
Yin of Kwan : “He who likes Benevolence has often dreams of pines,
“ cypresses, peach trees and plum trees ; but he who loves Right-
“ eousness dreams mostly of soldiers, sharp weapons, metal and iron.
“ The man fond of Ceremony and Rites will in general dream ot
“ sacrificial wickers, vessels and platters, baskets and pots ; while
“ admirers of Knowledge dream as a rule of rivers, lakes, streams
“ and marshes. Finally, those who like Trustworthiness are in the
“ habit of dreaming of mountains, hills, and plains” b


If a man can live without his soul being in him, can not he
then live also when a part of his soul is absent? No Chinese can
possilily doubt it.

But, enjoying good health when thus partly inanimate, seems
to be thought impossible. Physicians consulted about patients, are
often heard to declare that their s li e n , h w u n or p'o h is “ in-
sufficient” \ “ incomplete or deficient” \ they thus showing, like
the great majority of their countrymen, that they consider human
souls to be composed of etherial fluid divisible into lots in every
proportion, and even breakable into molecules. We seem, indeed, fully
entitled to speak of greater or smaller quantities of soul-substance,
composing souls of various completeness and perfection.

Thus Su Tung-p’^o, the renowned poet (1036 — 1101), wrote: “Chao
“ P in-tsze said to a certain man : ‘Your shen is incomplete’. But the


t . by one Jen Fan , oi- ^ .

Kimu Yin-h:r.


ON INCOMPLETENESS OE THE HUMAN SOUL.


1:21


“ other would not assent, and said : ‘My comrades and friends are
“ so numerous that they could fill ten thousand vehicles ; and my
“ mole-crickets and ants (subjects and followers) would make three
“ armies ; and my riches are as abundant as chaff and husks. At
“ night I am lifeless, and in the daytime I live ; why then do you
“declare my shen to be incomplete?’ ‘All those things’, Chao
“ Pin-tsze answered with a sneer, ‘are upheld by the breath (temper)
“ of your blood ; it is your fame and your righteousness that keep
“them up, but they are not the work of your shen’”b —
“ Clfien Wu-khi”, we read in another book, “ states that the nation
“ think there are nine hundred kinds of mental derangement, which
“ they take for incompletenesses of the operating soul (t s i n g
“shen). But why not do they make a thousand of it, to have a
“round sum?”^

Such ideas on occasional incompleteness of the two souls or of
one soul are evidently affiliated with certain notions of the Sung
school of philosophy, referred to on pages 57 se^. and GO, according
to which there may exist a disproportion of one of the souls to the
other. Prominent figures in that school, as we saw on those pages,
taught that if a man’s shen or hwun declines and, consecpiently,
his p'oh or kwei gains a preponderance over it, he will undergo
bodily deterioration, entailing debility. The philosopher Yin of Kwan


-far SB


B9 P


ill! . # jif i

of Reminiscences”. ii\e chapters of annotations by Su Tunji-p o or Su Shih .

TS, sect. ch. 23.

2 It A

n# , a work in fne cli.ipters, giring a great number of historical matters
of interest. The author is thought to have borne the surname of Yeh , and to
have lived about the end of the reign of the House of Sung; his personal names aie
unknown. The work has been saved from destruction by the compilers of the Yini'/-
luh to tien # A the “Great Thesaurus of the Yung loh peiioil”, a

cyclopedia in more than twenty thousand chapters, drawn up by Imperial order in
the fir.'t decade of the fifteenth century. The present edition i-j in the main a com-
pilation of extracts preserved in that gigantic work. The above quotation is Irom
the TS, sect. ^ , ch. 23.


122


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK- CONCEPTION.


also calls attention to the fact that “ mankind think, that when
“ the p'o h has a hold upon the h vv u n , there exists a super-
“ abundance of metal in the system and, in consequence, a want
“ of wood, while, according to the sages, the contrary is the case
“when the hwuu directs the p’^oh”’. Metal and wood are, indeed,
as we saw on page 48, according to the same sage, the elements
constituting in particular the hwun and the p^oh.


CHAPTER VIII.


ON RE-ANIMATION Al'TER DEATH.

1. Hesuscitation of the dead by their own souls.

From the ideas, sketched in the last chapter, on the possibility
of temporary separation of the soul from the body, we come to a
derivative conception of no small importance in animistic lore.
Man witnesses excarnations of souls in sundry forms, manifesting
themselves in sleep and dreams, and, occasionally, in trance and
coma, whereas all these conditions are insensibility various in
their degrees and lengths. But they are always followed by a
return of the soul, that is, by a renewal of life and consciousness.
May not we then expect East-Asian men to have the same thoughts
also in regard to death, which, too, is insensibility?

This point we paid much attention to in the First Book. The
whole Second Part of it we devoted to the ideas on rescuscitation
from death, and to a description of a long series of customs which
all tend to place it beyond doubt that the Chinese, from the
most remote times, have considered death itself as a temporary
insensibility, which may be followed by a return of the soul, to
re-occupy the corpse and revive it. This conception created a derivative
tenet of no less significance, which ive emphasized in ch. VI of the
Second Part of Book I: — the soul abides with the corpse in the
grave. A paramount influence this belief has always exercised on
Chinese life, being the foundation of the whole compound of ideas
and usages to the description of which the Third Part of Book I was
devoted by us. We learned therein, that the expected resurrection
is not confined to any time, and that it may take place after
months and years.

Tales innumerable of the resurrection of men and women who
had been dead for days, nay, who had rested in their graves for
years, are current among the people. No doubt the majority thereof
are traceable to cases recorded in the books. In the T''ai-pHng


1-24


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


hwaiig ki alone (ch. 375 to 3S6) I tind one hundred and twenty-
scA^en cases, gleaned from sundry earlier works, and this thesaurus
goes up only to the tenth century of our era. With these facts
before them, evangelists in China must hardly feel astonished at
finding that the Lord’s resurrection, which they preach, makes little
impression on the reading class, in the eyes of whom that miracle
must appear a very commonplace event.

Cases of revival from death are even chronicled in such high
class works as the Standard Histories are. The two oldest instances
we have found therein, are the following: “In the ChTi pdng
••period (A.D. 190 — 193), falling under the reign of the emperor
‘•Hien, a person named Hwan, living in Clrang-sha, had died,
“ and had been more than a month in his cotfin, when his mother
“ heard some noise in it. They opened it, and he revived. The oracle
“explained the case in this way, that when the highest degree of
“yin (death) becomes yang (life), it forebodes that one of low birth
“ shall become the highmost. And indeed, afterwards a Ts'ao Tsfiio
“ arose from amongst the common soldiery” and he fought his
way up to the Tmperial dignity. — “Li Ngo, the daughter of a
“ district’s prefect in Wu-ling, died in the second month of the
“fourth year of the Kien ngan period (A.D. 199), at the age
“of more than sixty. She was buried in a cotfin of san wood
“ provided by her family, at several miles from the city-walls. A
“ fortnight after, a passer-by heard some noise from the grave ;
“ and on his informing the family of it, they made for the spot,
“ and heard the noise themselves. They dug the woman out, and
“ saw her revive” h

Still more extravagant are some narratives of that kind, which
we find in the Books of the Tsin and the Sung dynasty. “ In the
“reign of the emperor Ming (of the Wei dynasty), in the third


* e # ¥ tp « a-' A . s R . 5E tt fit H ft ,

A®±.*#tA&iil!sF±*' Books of the Later Han Dynasty,
ch. 27, I. 0.

ft#:. B +

# . (S # tH . ^ '/S *'


RE\'1VAL OF THE DEAD FROM THEIR GRAVES.


1:25


“year of the T'ai hwo period (A.D. 2:29), some persons had opened
“ a grave, built in the time when the Chen family reigned, and
“ found a girl in it, who had been buried with the corpse. After
“ some days she began to breathe, and in a few months she
“ regained the faculty of speech. The empress-dowager Kwoh took
“ a fancy to her, and provided for her. — And some people in
“ TAi-yuen having opened a grave and broken the coffin, found a
“ living woman in it, who, on being asked about her origin, said
“ she knew nothing about it. The trees on that grave were nearly
“ thirty years old. — Under the reign of Hwui (of the Tsin dynasty),
“ when Tu Sih was committed to the earth, his slave-maid, by a
“ mistake, could not get out of the grave. After ten years, when
“ they opened the grave to bury another corpse in it, they found
“ her alive. At first she was as if blind, Imt after a time she
“ gradually regained consciousness, and then she related that she
“ had slept repeatedly beside her master. She had been buried at
“ the age of fifteen or sixteen, and was just as old when she revived
“on the grave being opened. She married afterwards, and gave birth
“ to some sons” '.

In addition, the same jiages of these two historical works give us
the following tale: “Likewise under tlie reign of the emperor liwui
“ of the Tsin dynasty, a girl in the kingdom of Liang was affianced,
“ and the betrothal money had been accepted by her tamily, when
“ unexpectedly her bridegroom was enlisted for the army in Clfiang-
“ ngan. A year elapsed, but he did not return. The family then
“married the maid to another man; she refused to follow him, but
“ her parents comptdled her, so that she hud to submit to their
“ will and leave them. But then she got ill, and died. On this,
“ the first bridegroom returned. He asked where the girl was, and
“ on being informed by the family of everything that had happened


1 njj ^ * 5fa s ^ IS) H i: a . # ?») 8 * ^ . it

*. li * a * nr H +• . * 'S- lit t± ig t: » ffi <i$

+ iSp Bi) « « 8 fsi 4$ fS} rfe . 4 b DB

ifi) * ft , M 2 ; . g il ff rs n: . « « # + 5.

A, Ik PI Bo,ksortlie

Tsin Dynast}-, ch. 2'J, 11. 39 and 41. Books of the Sung Dyn., di. 34, 11. 24 and 27.


1:26


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ in the mean time, he went right to the grave, and, unable to
“ suppress the impulse of his sorrow and love, opened it, and the
“ coffin also. On which the girl revived, and returned with him to
“ her house. Now the second son-in-law, wlio heard of it, applied
“ to the magistrate, to dispute the other’s possession of the woman.
“ This grandee found himself unable to decide with whom she
“ought to live; but Wang Tao, the Keeper of the Secret Archives,
“pronounced the following sentence: ‘This case is of an extra-
“ ordinary character, and cannot be settled according to the ordinary
“principles. Let her go home with the first husband’. This judgment
“ was approved by the Imperial Court” ‘.

In its fifteenth chapter, the Sheii alien ki gives us that tale in
a more romantic garb, stating that it occurred in the reign of
Shi Hwang, the potentate of the Tsrin dynasty. From a biography
of Yil Pao, the author of that work, which occurs in the Books of
the Tsin Dynasty, we learn that he was induced by a similar case
of revival after a long burial, to write his book. “ His father was
“ owner of a favourite slave-maid, of whom his mother was so
“jealous, that at his father’s death she pushed her alive into his
“grave. At that time Pao and his brothers were young, and thus
“ remained ignorant of this event until more than ten years after,
“when the mother died in her turn, and the grave being opened for
“her, the slave was found lying over the coffin. She seemed to be
“alive, and when carried home, she awoke on the next day, relating
“ how the father had provided her regularly with food and drink,
“ bestowing favours and affection upon her as he had been wont
“ to do before his death. In the house she foretold now and then
“happy and unhappy events, and those predictions were all fulfilled.
“ She had by no means felt uncomfortable in the ground. She was
“ married, and gave birth to sons. And one of Pao’s brothers sickened
“ and breathed liis last, and his body was not cold for several days.


* ^ ft ^ T' S = * S M ja e A . * ^ .


^ illln # K n


REVIVAL OF THE DEAD FROM THEIR GRAVES. 137

“In the end he awoke, and said he had witnessed all sorts of
“ things relating to k w e i and s h e n in the heavens and on
“ earth, wdth the sensation of being in a dreaming state, and
“ by no means dead. It was on account of these events that Pao
“ made a collection of narratives, ancient and modern, about
“ spiritual wonders wrought by s h e n and divinities, and about
“ metamorphoses of men and beasts, to which work he gave the
“ title of Record of Researches after Spirits. It contained twenty
“ chapters”

The following case of wonderful revival of a long-buried corpse,
stated to have taken place in the fifth century, may interest the
reader for the details connected with it; —

“ The Bodhi convent, erected by Mongols from western regions,
“ is situated close to the village of Mu-i. The Qramana Tah-to there
“ broke open a grave for the bricks, and discovered a man in it,
“ whom he sent to Court. The empress-dowager, who resided at that
“time in the chief Hwa-lin hall with the emperor Ming (who reigned
“ from 465 to 473), considered the matter as a rare (miracle, and
“ asked Sii Hoh, the Chamberlain of the Yellow Gates, whether such
“things had often occurred from the oldest times onward. The answer
“was: ‘Formerly, when the Wei dynasty possessed the throne,
“ some graves were broken open, when they found in one of them
“a slave of Pan Ming-yiu, Hwoh Kwang’s son-in-law. The infor-
“ mation he gave about the downfall of the Han dynasty tallied
“ perfectly with the books of history. So the present case is not
“much to be amazed at’^ The empress now ordered Sii Hoh to


+


Ch. 82, ]. 13. The same statements we find in the S/wu sJim lieu ki,


ch. IV, 1. 1.

2 This case is related in the Poh wuh chi, ch. VII, and in some other records
of marvels. Hwoh Kwang was a Minister, mentioned frequently in our First Book.


128


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“interrogate that slave about liis names, the number of years
“ elapsed since his death, and the kinds of food and drink he had
“taken. And he said; ‘My name is Tsmi Hung, and my cognomen
“is Tsze-han. I am a native of Niran-nhiiLf in Poh-liim; mv father
“is named ChAng, and my mother’s clan-name is W ei. Our
“ dwelling stood in the village of Chun-tshu, to the we.-<t of the
“city. 1 died at fifteen, and now I am twenty-seven, so that I
“ have been under the ground for twelve years. 1 always felt there
“as if I were tipsy or drowsy, and ate nothing, but from time to time
“ I roamed about, and then I found occa.sionally something to eat.
“Everything was to me like phantasims, hazy and indistinct’.

“ The empress forthwith sent her private secretary Chang Siii-hi
“to that villagi*, to in({uire after the parents of the man. And he
“ found there indeed one TVui Clrang, and Ids wife was of the
“Wei clan. ‘Had you a child who is now d('ad?' he asked them.
“‘We had a descendant whose cognomen was Tsz^-han’, they
“replied, 'but he died at fifteen’. ‘He has been dug up from his
“grave’, said the envoy; ‘he is now alive and (juite well in Hwa-lin
“park; my mistress has sent me hither for information’.

“x\.t these words Cldang was seized witli fright. ‘He cannot
“possibly be that child’, he e.xclaimed, ‘1 told you !i lie’. Siu-hi
“returned to the Palace, and made a circumstantial and true report
“about the matter. And back he was sent by the eniprcss with
“Tsze-han, to take him to his family. Cldang, who heard them
“come, kindled a tire before the door. With a sword, and his wife
“with a branch of a peach tree, he cried: ‘Stand off! 1 am not
“ your father, nor are you my son ; quick, get away, lest something
“ bad happen to you’. Thus rejected, Tszg-han went away, and
“ began to lead a wandering life in the streets of the capital, always
“passing his nights within some office-gate. The prince of Jii-nan
“ bestowed a yellow suit of clothes on him. He shunned sunlight,
“and dared not look up at it. VV‘ater, fire, and weapons of whatever
“ description he feared, and he ran regularly down the streets until
“ he was quite exhausted. Never did he walk slowly, and the people
“continued to take him for a spectre.

“North of the main street in Loh-yang, in the Eung-chung ward,
“lived the funeral furnishers and coffin-merchants. Tsze-han advised
“ them to make coffins of cypress timber without lids (?) of mulberry
“ wood, and when asked for the reason, he spoke : ‘ While under the
“ground, I saw some men enlisting soldiers among the spectres.
“A spectre said to them: ‘I must be exempted from enlistment.


MEN RETURNING FROM DEAFII TO LIFE.


i-:9

“ for I belong to a cypress coffin’. But the chieftain retorted ;
“‘Your coffin is in fact of cypress wood, but the lid is of imilberry
“timber’ — and he was not exempted’. When this story became
“ known in the capital, the price of cypress wood suddenly rose ,
“ so that some bei^an to suorgest that the dealers in that wood had
“bribed Tsze-han to tell such stories”


fi ^ . B W ^ a IW * tt =8 . M ^ . -ft Bfi- «

A. 5E#0,

A . « IS . # » iS , $ tt S® ® ■* Mt M . 5E B# ir

mj-

a ai * FI T s» 11 « at a # .

ts 0 , ^ ^ f® . ^ + i liii 5b'= jf ti 0 .

Ap;f». 40livSffill#H<t<,±Aite«a3R

tBM-

HMStiii. 0. lai^-pw. 55tia,

A.^^t#7J, aBtEtttt'S.il 0 .8c 515.®#

*,#K««,®?itS^PaT.8cWIWS«-*=

^jta®.«wit.^^tTi!i.8#AiasiSA
•»»A7ttl;#»a.aft2AP(ill5EA2=H
S « tl ffl . a ffl 0 IP # * t® . * A ® H . A

W*iK.tt0.®®it6TilA»aB,^-j|.9F


]30


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


As late even as the T'ang dynasty we find incredible stories o
revival duly recorded as historical events in the Standard Annals.
“'In the first year of the Kwang khi period (A.D. SSb) a case of
death occurred in a family among the people of Wen-tsbien in
“ Sih-clieu, and the corpse had been buried for a fortnight and more,
“ when a passer-by heard cries in the ground. The family dug him
out, and he revived, but after somewhat more than a year he
“died"’*. Books of that period, devoted to the marvellous, likewise
continue recording instances of temporary death, especially of persons
who, on reviving, gave circumstantial accounts of their adventures
in the other world, and their sufferings experienced there. Such tales,
of which we find a profusion also in earlier works, bear nearly all
a deep Buddhist tinge. They form valuable contril)utions to our
knowledge of the Chinese ideas on the world beyond the grave
and on infernal retribution, and as sucli they will have to be dealt
with by us afterwards. Buddhism in those ages passed through a
period of vigorous expansion. Its doctrines about post-mortem
rewards and punishments were propagated energetically as means
of conversion. No wonder then that the resurrection of the dead,
of the possil)ility of which nobody felt a shadow of doubt, was
explored dexteriously by its propagandists as a means to prove the
reality of purgatory.

Prevailing belief in the possibility of revival even long after
deatli implies almost necessarily that the body is thought to
remain uncorrupted in the interval, or, at least, in a condition good
enough tor the soul to re-settle in it. Besides, we cannot reasonably
disconnect this idea from the numerous old and modern usages,
described by us in the First Book, which tend to keep corpses
in an uncorrupted state in their graves, with the manifest object
of letting them remain for their souls indispensiblc supports,
preserving and invigorating envelopes, but for which the annihilation
or absorption of the souls in the universal Yang and Yin must
follow unavoidably. And those usages all pointing, as they do, to
a deep conviction of the nation that the souls naturally abide in

@ itfc tJ Ifet ■ ch. in.

n . New Books, di. 36. 1. 22.


CORPSES REMAIXINR UNDECAYED TN THEIR GRAVES.


131


the graves, we cannot come to any other conclusion than that it was
always deemed to be the souls that kept there the corp.ses uncorrupted,
either by never leaving them, or by visiting them often enough
to prevent decomposition from setting in. Which of these two ideas
preponderates, we cannot tell, and we may, in truth, be tolerably
indifferent to this question. But that the connexion between the
body remaining undecayed, and the presence ot the soul, really exists
in the popular ideas, is more than manifest. Let us read, for instance,
the following lines in the Standard Annals of the fifth century :

“ When Wang Hiien-siang, a nephew of Wang Huen-mu, held
“ the post of prefect of Hia-p'ei, he took a pleasure in opening
“ graves, so that no grave-vault in that region remained entire.
“ There was then somewhere among the population, in an immured
“ spot, a small grave, the tumulus of which was nearly flat on
“the top; and every morning, at dawn, a girl was seen upon that
“grave in erect attitude, but when regarded from a shorter distance,
“ she vanished. Somebody communicated this to Hiien-siang, who
“ ordered the grave to be opened. It contained a coffin, still in sound
“ condition, and more than a hundred gold caterpillars and brass
“ images of men. When they split open the coffin, they beheld a
“ girl of about twenty years, of beautiful form, apparently alive.
“T am a daughter of the family of the prince of Tung-hai’, she
“said dozinglv; T deliver to you the treasures I possessed in
“ray life, but I beg for the favour not to be injured’. As she wore
“ a bracelet of jade, the men who had broken open the grave cut
“ off her arm to steal it, on which she died again. Wang Hiien-mu,
“ who was Governor of Sil-cheu at that time, reported the event to
“ the emperor, who punished Hiien-siang by dismissing him from
“his post as prefect”


+ RrinWH.

ch, l(i, 1. 15.


13-2


THE sour, IN PHII,OSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Of corpses preserved wonderfally in their graves, books afford
numerous instances. Among these there are many that show, that
only under certain conditions the souls could work such miracles,
viz. if they were possessed of paramount vitality and strength,
endowing their owners during their life with extraordinary energy,
courage, virtue, and other firculties generally ascribed to yang
souls. Such an exceptional soul was that of Liu Ngan-shi ', an
Imperial Censor of the Sung dynasty, whose reckless boldness
in rebuking the emperor Cheh Tsung ^ on his throne, in the very
face of all his courtiers perspiring from fear, gave him the title of
the tiger of the audience-hall C “When disinterred by the Kin
“Tatars in 1127, two years after his death and burial, they found
“ his features in the same condition they were in during his life.
“Terrified, they closed the cottin and took to their heels, exclaiming :
“‘That is a wonderful man!’”^ Such extremely animated corpses
often became objects of worship. Thus, for example, in T‘ai-hu,
“in the Wu region, there was in the Tung-fing mounts, in the
“• temple of the Holy Dame, a cottin of the same name. Tradition
“asserted that the features of this woman, who died in those
“ mountains, were several centuries afterwards like those of a living
“ person. The people from far and near Hocked to the spot to
“ pray to her and to thank her, and every year there was no end
“to the offerings of suits of clothes, Hnery and face-powder”®.
Thus the host of deified men, whose worshij), side by side with
that of family-ancestors, is the kernel of the Chinese Religion, has
been rc-inforced incessantly with contingents from amongst the non-
decaying dead. We read of Lu To-sun, a high statesman who died

M Aril.® . History of the Sunp- Dynasty, ch. 34.'), 1. 4.

r,V,i i d.i ^ ^ - ‘Ueconi of Criticol

Remarks on doubtful Matter.s” (?), a work in three chapters, stateii in tlie Catalopne
of the New Books of the Tang Dynasty (ch. 59. 1. 20) to have been written by
Lull Ch ang-yuen . This was a high state-officei’, slain and devoured

towards the end of the eigtith century by his own soldiers; see the Old Books of
the Tang Dynasty, ch. 145, 1. 8, and the New Books, ch. 151, I. (>. I do not know
whether the work still e-xi.sts. The above extract is quoted from the Pei wen yun fit,
ch. 14, 1. 178.


CORPSES REMAINING UNDECAYED.


183


in A. D. 985: “After his death penuission was granted to carry
“ his corpse home for burial. His son Ch'ah, director of the funeral
“ rites, had deposited it temporarily in a Buddhist convent in Siang-
“yang, and now wishing to replace his coffin by a larger one, he
“ opened it, and found the corpse undecayed and unchanged, as if
“ it were still alive. From time to time they renewed its dress,
“and in the Siang fu period (A.D. 1008 — 1016) it was still in
“ the same condition, for the man had been born on the fifth day
“ of the fifth month ‘. The Buddhists discovered the matter and
“ greatly magnified it, representing it as what nowadays they call
“a Buddha of unlimited age” — “On mount Hwa (in Shensi)
“there lies in the Chang-ch'ao vale under a projecting rock a
“ stiffened corpse, with teeth and hair in a state of perfect preser-
“ vation. In spring, walkers frequently pour out sacrificial spirits in the
“ entrance to that cave. The corpse is called the dormant immortal man,
“ and benevolent people have constructed a wooden couch by the spot,
“dedicating it to him. In the Kia yiu period (A.D. 1056— 1UG4)
“a stone, more than ten chang square, came down, and completely
“ shut the entrance of that grotto. Was it detached by the immortal
“ man himself? Or was it the spiritual power (ling) of the mountain,

“ that thus protected him, not desiring him to be any longer insulted
‘■and abused by men?”^


1 The theoretical middle of the summer, when the Yang is par.imount. Men
horn on that day necessarily have a yang soul ot peculiar intensity, able to
preserve their body well after ileath.


%


. Hicn ijilt ■ a woi k unknown to me, cjuoteJ in the T S, sect. ,

ch. 94.

* JiJiSi* D ih nffSet fill.

mnz. +

HP " 'en-cli'iiitij ls(i/i lull ^ , a work in seven chapters on various topics,

by Pding Yuon-ymg , alias Meu-iiien 1^ ^ . an officer in the second half

of the eleventh century. We quote the extract from the T S. sect.


134


THE SOUL IS PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


2. Besuscitation of the dead by souls of others.


If it is a commonplace thing in China, a matter of almost daily
occurrence, that corpses are resuscitated by their own soul> returning
into them, may not then the souls of the dead just as well pass
into corpses of others, and revive them ?

Here, too, the answer given liy the Chinese people in a number
of tales and traditions, is strongly affirmative. The reader may
judge for himself from the small selection we now give.

•• Between the Clren and the Ts'ai clans, a private person, known
•• by the name of Chuh Ki-tsing, had been dead for more than ten
'• years, when a fellow-villager of his, yamcil Chao Tsze-hwo, departed
this lite, and alter some days, awaking on a sudden, sprang up,
“ and hurried out of the door. His affrighted wife and children hastened
towards him, and asked him what he was going to do ; on which
“he exclaimed in a voice which was not Tsze-hwo’s: ‘I am Chuh
“Ki-tsing; I do not know who you are; I am going home’. The
“ wife and children followed him to Ki-tsing’s house, where the
“ inmates, thinking they had to do with a madman, drove him
“away with harsh words. ‘I am Chuh Ki-tsing’, he cried, ‘1 died
“eleven years ago, and now I have come home; why do you repudiate
“ me?’ Hearing that the tone of his voice really was Ki-tsing’s, they
" paid more attention to the matter, and concluded that he was
“ really the man he said he was. His wife and children, terrified and
“ astonished, interrogated him further ; and he told them his ad-
“ ventures in the following words :

“‘After leaving this earth about a dozen years ago, I stayed
“ in the Nether-world, longing for home, to provide there for
“ my wife and children, from whom I could not distract my
“ thoughts one single day. In yonder regions, once in thirty years,
“ a dead man may return to life, to inform mankind of the
“ punishments or blessings that await them ; and yesterday it was
“ 1 who asked the Recorder to nominate me tor such a revival.
“ He informed the Governor of Hades that I was the man who
“ wished to live a second time. ‘ But’, thus said the Governor to
“me, ‘your dwelling went to ruin long ago; how then are we to
“arrange this matter?’ ‘ Ki-tsing’s fellow-villager, one Chao Tsze-hwo’,


CORPSES RESUSCITATED BY THE SOULS OP OTHERS.


135


“said the Recorder, ‘died a tew days ago; I wish to lend his
“ corpse to Ki-tsing’s soul’. The Governor assented to this arrange-
“ nient, and ordered a messenger to guide me to Tsze-hvvo’s house.
“ Thus I came home, and by relating now the experience I had
“ in that lapse of time, I hope to succeed in being listened to’.
“ The wife and children now believed him thoroughly, and received
“ him with open arms. From that time he abstained from spirits
“ and meat, wore short garments of coarse material, and wandered
“about begging for food among the ClFen, IVai, .lit and Ching
“ clans ; and his money and clothes he gave away to the poor and
“ the hungry, quite out of devotion for Buddha. He still lives to
“ this day” h


mz. 7 -mB .

Z ^ ^ ^ 0 ...

a i* AH: it 4 n - IE . .s a

- 0 S . -R R3 # H + ® CT - ifi # ff
W IP 8s . Bt * © « =S M K ^

lSflAfe#.Btri5aKI§a0

K ^ ^ . a St » s» , a K ¥ If * ® t;s w li . «


"j^ chi ‘•Rtcord:, of the Maiiit’c^to .Apartineiit”,

oi'k on spirits and nianyl in ten cliapters, written by Chanp Tub i

also named Slun;r-p eng or Slnng-ynng igffl , a hinli literary graduate


and officer in tlie ninth century. The title is an .illudon to a room in the palace of
W'en (179 — 15G B.C.), where tin.'' monarch, according to the Historical Hecords
(ch. <S4. 1. 1 i). had an interview with the learned Kia I, to he inlormed of sundry
matters relating to spirit' and ghosts. Xot lindiiig the .ihove t.ile in a copy we have


of the .S'ocn-.'/ii/i tht. we quote it from the T S. .'oct.


A


ch. 91S.


136


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


— “ Under the Sung dynasty, there lived to the east of the
“ market-town of Ln-siao, in the Yuen-cheu department, a silversmith,
“ whose clan-name was Kwoh. Thongli upward of thirty years old,
“ he still lived by himself as a bachelor. And to the west of the
“ same place lived an old damsel, who, carrying on a trade,
“frequently visited Kwoh, to buy or sell hairpins, rings, and other
“ things of this kind. One evening, her daughter, a girl of fifteen
“ or sixteen, tied to Kwoh. ‘1 want to become your wife’, she said, and
“seeing Kwoh startle, she went on to say: ‘1 have yearned for
“you for a long time, but I have not had a chance till now to elope ;
“do not waver’. And on his asking her for further explanations,
“she said: ‘I died yesterday, and my mother put me in a coffin;
“but I opened it, crept out, and shut it again. My mother has
“thus buried an empty cottin, and no inquiry will be made after
“me at all’. Kwoh now placed her in an unfrequented apartment,
“and kept her there.

“Some eight months after that, the mother happened to pay
“a visit to Kwoh. As he w'as out, she peeped into the room,
“and perceived the red shoes in which she had encotfined her
“daughter. She pushed open the door, seized them, and cried out
“among the neighbours that Kwoh hud pilfered her daughter’s
“grave. When Kwoh came home and the neighiiours apprised him
“of it, lie was seized with consternation. ‘My mother came so
“unawares’, said the girl, ‘that I had to be off in the greatest
“haste, and thus 1 forget to put away my shoes; we must now
“get out of her reach, but you will never feel sorry for it’. With these
“ words she dep.arted, and Kwoh fled also, going in the direction
“ of T'an-cheu.

“ Ere he had gone some ten miles, the girl overtook him,
“ and together they reached T'an-cheu. Their purses were soon
“empty, but, thus spoke the girl, ‘1 can sing, and among the
“songs in the note kung there must be some that pay’. So
•• they opened a music-hall at the end of the Phng-li ward, where
“ her songs brought the clouds to a stand-still, and attracted the
“people in crowds as compact as walls. Every day hundreds of
“notable tamilies vied with each other in engaging her, and on
“ the days they made her come, they threw away to her gold
“ hairpins and similar things. Thus in a year they laid by many ten
“ thousand coins.

“One day, a Taoist with pointed coiffure, a giant of nine feet,
“tapped Kwoh on the back, and said: ‘Thousands and ten


COKPSES REVIVED BY OTBER SOULS.


137


“times thousands of people thus gaze at that ghost-doll!’ These
“ words opened Kwoh’s eyes. He drew the man aside, and humbly
“entreated him to help him out of his dilemma. The Taoist
“advised him to otter up prayers in the temple of the Eastern
“Mountain. There he went to worship the deity; and in the
“second watch he saw a yamen-runner garrot the girl and take
“her to the back hall of the temple, where she suddenly sank
“ to the ground and became a corpse. Thus it became quite clear
“to him it was a kwei that took possession ot the corpse ot the
“girl. Immediately he ottered a sum of money to have the temple
“ repaired, in order to atone in this way for the sins the girl might
“ have committed, and he buried her corpse with much ceremony
“ and many burnt-offerings. In that same night he dreamed that she
“came to him to express her thankfulness, and bid him farewell,
“ her eyes wet with tears” '.


ISIS'S®.

wtts.

II5M iWS. tu
A Jl Klli. tr,

tt®. mpMZ. Sli « iiS BU * «

z Mnz .s,

^ « -I- IR M * # 51 M . 1^ M IH . ^ ^ S ® .


L38


THE sorii IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


In conclusion, we offer to the reader a tale from the Liao-cltai chi i
or “ Marvels recorded in my private Closet”, a most popular col-
lection of 430 narratives of ghosts and spirits, mentioned already
on page 148 of Book I, constantly read throughout the Empire by
literary people ‘ ;

“ A Buddhist monk in Chhing-tshng (in Shantung), named So-
“ and-So, had reached a high and pure stage in the way to per-
“ fection, so that, although he was over eighty years old, he had
“ still a strong constitution. One day he sank to the ground. As
“ he did not rise, the monks of the convent ran out to help him
“ up ; but he was dead. He remained unconscious of his death,
“ and his soul (h w u n) soared away towards the Honan frontiers.

“ Here, at that time, there lived a nobleman of old descent. At
* the head of some ten riders he was hunting for hares with tamed
“falcons, when his horse stumbled; he fell to the ground, and
“ expired. The soul of the monk, happening to be just then on the
“ spot, united itself so firmly to the body of the nobleman, that it
“ gradually revived. The servants ran to their master to ask him
“ how he felt ; but he gazed at them with staring eyes, and asked :
“‘How did I come here?’ Then they helped him home. At the
“ gate, the women with powdered faces and eyebrows painted green,
“ flocked round to see him, and asked how he was. But, greatly
“alarmed, he said; ‘I am a Buddhist monk; why do you come
“here?’ The family thought that he was talking nonsense, and
“ conjointly grasped his ears to wake him ; and the monk, unable
“ to explain the matter even to himself, merely closed his eyes and
“ could not say a word.

“ They gave him rice to eat, and he took it, but spirits and


^ “ A m >4 3i| iffl 4- JII5S1 S # '

Detjci'iptiun of strange Tilings”, a work probably written uniler the Yuen or the
Ming dynasty. I do not know at present any particulars about it. We quote
the above tale from the T S, sect. )|jjp . ch, 22.

1 It was written in the reign of the first or second emperor of the present
dynasty by Pu Sung-liiig ^ ;jv^ , a native of T.sze-ch wen jlj , in Shan-
tung. It has run through more editions probably than any work of this kind could
over boast of. Its reputation rests especially on the style, unparallelled in China’s
literature for conciseness and [luritj'. Our tale is the sixth in the book.


CORPSES RE-ANIMATED BY OTHER SOULS.


139


“ meat he refused. And at night he slept quite alone, without
“ accepting the services of his wife and concubines. When some
“ days had passed, it occurred to him to take a walk. Everybody
“ was glad of this ; he passed through the gate, and halted a little
"while; and there the servants were, rushing forth in a disorderly
“ mass with their cash-books and grain-accounts, entreating him,
“ all at once, to settle their accounts. But the nobleman roundly
“ excused himself because of his illness and fatigue, and asked
“ whether they knew the Ch'ang-tshng district in Shantung. They
“conjointly answer they do. ‘I feel so concerned about those I left
“ there unprotected’, he goes on to say, ‘ 1 want to go and see
“ them ; forthwith prepare my luggage’. They object witli one voice
“ that newly recovered patients ought not travel so far; but he docs
“ not heed their advice, and next day they set out.

“ At Ch'ang-ts'ing he finds everything as it was before ; so he
“ has not to trouble himself with asking the way. They reach
“ the convent. The brethren seeing so noble a visitor come, come
“ up with humlile bows and with marks of great respect. He asks
“them whether the old monk is gone. ‘Our Teacher has lately
“ departed this life’, they say. He asks where Ids tomb is, and they
“ all take him to the spot — an insulated tumulus of three feet ot
“ earth, which the weeds have not yet had time to overgrow. None
“ of the monks understands what he wants there. On ordering his
men to bring out the horses to start for home, he speaks to
“ the monks in these terms : ‘ Your Teacher was a monk living in
“accordance with the commandments; you must preserve carefully
“the wet touches of his hands which he has left behind’ (his
“ personal effects), and not let them be damaged or lost'. They all
“ exclaim aye, aye ; and he departs.

“ On coming home, he sits down motionless and as straight as
" a tree, with a heart ot ashes h Not in the least does he care for
“ his domestic concerns. A few months thus pass by, and then he
“ leaves the house, runs away, and travels straight to his old
“convent. ‘I am your Teacher’, he says to the brethren; but they
“ think he is telling stories and, looking at one another, burst
“ out into laughter. But as he relates to them ivhence the soul
“ came that re-animated his present body, and also what he did in
“ his life, they believe him, finding everything consonant with the


1 .\n allusion to the passable in the Lt which we ea\e on p. of Book I.

2 A inind the lice of which is extmpriiisheil.


140


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ facts. They let him occupy his former bed, and served him as they
“ used to do before. On this, the family of the nobleman frecjuently
“ came with carriages and horses, to implore him wailingly to go
“with them; but he did not even deign to look at them. And
“ when, after more than a year, his consort despatched her servants
“ with multifarious presents, he refused to take any metal or silk,
“accepting nothing but a linen gown. Sometimes his friends visited
“his residence to pay him their respects; but as soon as he saw
“them he sank into silence and earnest devotion. He was then just
“ thirty years old *, but he could tell of things that had occurred
“ more than eighty years before”


1 Lit. in the year.s in which he stooil lirni. Confuciub said: “At ttiirty I stood
lirm” — + r?n jjL^ Lun >ji', ch. II.

-ft. ^ ^ ft # « , a B S ® ^ i » ?E .

a ® IIS . A 0 , a « tfe . s. lit . « A H s s ,

» la K SI Bl . vB iSi BIJ « . S S S * *
*.140

•f J1 # ^ s .tie IS tt ® 8

» ft a * It , M a ijif . » * H ft . ai) H .H a *fi . )K


CORPSES REVIVED BY OTHER SOULS.


141


The above three tales contain no intimation that corpses, bv
receiving another soul, are modified in outward appearance. There
are, however, narratives which state positively that an entire change
in the corpse takes place in consequence of that process, its new
forms being, of course, that of the body which the second soul
occupied before. To give an instance :

“ When Wang Yen-Ting was prefect of the Ling-pih district (in
“ north-eastern Nganhwui), there lived in a village a farmer’s wife,
“ born of the clan of Li. She was more than thirty years old, and
“not only ugly and blind, but having suffered from dropsy for more
“ than ten years, she had a belly like a sow. One day she died.
“ Her husband went to the city to buy a coffin for her, but when
“ it arrived, and they were going to place her in it, she revived.
“Her eyesight was perfectly clear; her abdomen had become
“(juite flat, and her husband, enjoying the metamorphosis, ap-
“ proaclied her. But she repelled him boldly, and said, her eyes
“wet with tears: 'I am miss Wang of the village So-and-So; my
“ marriage has not yet been consummated ; how then is it that 1
“find myself here? Where are my parents, and my sisters?' The
“ goodman’s joy now turned into terror. Forthwith he sent the
“ news to that village, where they found the whole family in mourning
“ for their youngest daughter, whose corpse they had committed to
“the earth. In crazy haste her parents ran to the house where
“ she was, and no sooner did she catch a glimpse of them than
“ she burst into tears and rushed into their arms. She entered with
them into conversation on the events of her life ; and whatever
“she said agreed perfectly with the facts. The family into which
“ she was going to be married, also came to see her ; on
“ which a blush of bashfulness and timidity coloured her cheeks.

“ Now the two families began to quarrel for her, and brought the
“ matter before the authorities. Wang Yen-tbng reconciled them


i a .it « « B 4- .a 91 ft M. « « *

.ft* #ttiiS


143 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

‘■by deciding that she should return to her own village. This
•‘case occurred in the 31rst. year of the Khien lung period
“(A.D. 1756)” 1.


0 a»Ji.

» « * , * 49 « , I? Hi M lit , ^ ^ it # tt «

.Mmnz

IF 'n' , ISt @ S . ® Pi: — + — ip # ■ !'«>• :/”• «i>- '■


111


CHAPTER IX.


ON THE RE-INCARNATION OF SOUI,S THROUGH GIRTH.

The reader now knows that, according to Chinese views, a
departed human soul may pass into the body of an other deceased
person, and thus resuscitate it. Side by side witli this conception
the belief prevails, that any excarnated soul may obtain a new
body by being reborn through a mother. This process is generally
known by the term Ten fai h “to make one’s way into a uterus’'.

It needs no saying that this belief opens a vast field for myth-
making ingenuity. The large number of tales it has produced are
not, however, looked upon as mere stories. Being transmitted by
the venerated art of writing, they are taken for genuine events,
as almost all tales are, on any subject whatever. Possibly, pains-
taking research may discover traces of the belief in such re-incar-
nations in very ea.rly writings; we, however, have not found
any reference to it before the age in which the Tsin dynasty
reigned. A learned man of that epoch, “Pao Tsing by name, when
“ five years old, said to his parents that he had been the child of
“a certain Li family in Khuh-yang, and that he had perished
“ there in a well at the age of nine. His parents then searched
“ for that family, and discovering it, their imjuiries confirmed the
matter” h And of the martial Yang Hu, from whose biography
we extracted an interesting episode on page lOOo of Book 1, we read :
“ When he was five years old, he asked his nurse to give him a
“metal ring he used to play with. The woman said: 'You never
“ had one’, on which words Hu forthwith went to the mulberry
“ trees at the eastern wall of his neighbour Li, and there pulled
“out a rinc: ‘This rinc: was lost bv mv dead child’, exclaimed the
“owner of the tree in great fright; ‘I say, why do you take it away ?’


of the Tsin D^'nast}', ch. 95, 1. 10.


144


THE son, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“The nurse informed him of whut had preceded, and her words
“ cast deep sorrow into Li’s hart. People at that time were greatly
“astonished at the event, and maintained that Li’s son was a
“ previous existence of Hu” h

Thus, as we learn from these tales, people reborn by the inter-
vention of a second mother may have clear reminiscences of their
former existence. In a great many narratives on this subject it is,
indeed, revelations of the individual himself about his previous life,
or about things he concealed in it, which led to the discovery
of that life not being a product of his fancy. There are also cases
recorded of previous lives detected by certain spots or marks on
the body. So, “in the district of Fu-yang, in Siang-cheu, there was
“a Puddhist monk, Yuen-kao by name, who lived in the Chi-leh
“ monastery, and whose lay-surname was Chao. The son of his
“ elder brother had a previous existence as a child of the Ma family,
“ which lived with him in the same village. This child died in the
“last year of the Clung kwan period (A.l). 049). When on the
“point of breathing its last, it looked around, and said to its mother ;
“‘I, your child, have connections with Chao Tsung’s family;
“ I shall become his grandson after my death’. That Chao Tsung
“ lived with them in the same village. The mother, discrediting
“the words she had heard, made a black spot on the child’s right
“elbow. And the wife of Chao dreamed of that child coining
“to her with the words; H must become your descendant’; on
“ which she became pregnant. Her vision closely resembled that
“son of the Ma fiimily, and on her giving birth to him, the black
“ spot was found on his body in the same place. When three
“years old, he went to the house of Ma, without anybody showing
“him the way thither; and there he declared that it was his
“former dwelling”’.


* # tt w $ R a . at A ft 2 , ir^ ^ K -7- M

Urn S' ik . The same work, ch. 34, I. 12.

m vs » « ;(i # ft Tc K . « lEt a R . ft A
r««ii#0, 5E#i-|a


SOULS OF THE DEAD, REBORN INTO OTHER BODIES. 145

This tale reveals an animistic notion worthy of our attention : —
in cases of re-birth there exists a relation between the new body
and the old. Or, perhaps, we may put it thus, that the characteristics
of the first body imprint themselves on the soul, and that the soul
in its turn impresses them on its second material envelope. Of
course there are also tales relating that the first existence was
discovered from natural peculiarities possessed by the two bodies
in common; but we think we may pass them over in silence.
Another belief, revealed also by the last tale, may interest us,
namely, that an individual who will be reborn after his death,
may foreknow this himself, and point out his future family. Nay,
the tales go further, teaching that man may die on purpose,
in order to gain another existence ensuring him better earthly
conditions.

“ Wang Lien, also named Yuen-ming, was a Lang-ye man.
“ Under the (first) Sung dynasty he was a Court-Chamberlain. His
“father, named Min and styled Ki-yen, was Chief of the Inner
“ Court Archives of the House of Tsin. Among his acquaintances,
“ the latter had a foreign ())ramana, who, whenever he thought
“ of the magnitude of Min’s fame and influence, was filled with
“ so much respect and admiration, that he said to his fellow-
“ students: ‘If I may become the son of that man in my next
“existence, ray wishes of this life are fulfilled’. Min heard of it; —
“‘Well, Dharnia Master’, he said jokingly, ‘so correct are your
“ talents and your conduct that I assent to your becoming my
“ disciple’. On this, the sickened and died, and somewhat

“ more than a year after his death Lien was born. No sooner could
“he speak than he understood foreign languages; he gave the names
“of all curiosities and things of value in the whole realm, and of
“bronze objects, pearls and cowries he had never seen or heard of;
“ and he could tell also from where they came. And he showed a
“natural affection for the western foreigners who came to China. As
“ everybody regarded that Qramana as his former existence, Min


= «A*?i7irgiai,si

Fri/i yiien cJiv lin ; op. K K, ch. 387.


10


146


THE son. IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“gave him the cognomen of 0-lien (the Selected?), which became
“ his proper name” h

The fancy of sorrowing mothers, musing of their departed darlings
while transposing their affections on later-born ones, has furnished
its due contingent to the tales of second incarnations. We read,
in fact, of many children who died, and returned to their families
by being reborn in their own mothers’ wombs. Thus, Hiang Tsing,
“also known by his cognomen of Fung-jen, a native of Ho-nei,
“had, while a resident of the VVu-hing region, a daughter, who

“died when a few years old. At the beginning of her illness

“she played with a knife, and when her mother tried to take

“ it away from her, she would not give it, and wounded her

“ mother’s hand. One year after her death, her mother gave birth
“to another daughter. This girl, when at the age of four, spoke to
“her: ‘Where is the knife 1 had?’ — ‘You had none’, was the
“reply; on which the girl retorted; ‘We quarrelled over it at the
“time, and I wounded your hand with it; is it here no more?’ Very
“ frightened and astonished, the mother related the case to Tsing,
“who asked her: ‘Is that knife still here?’ — ‘It was a doleful
“reminiscence of my late child; I have not destroyed it’, was the
“reply. ‘Fetch it with some other knives’, said Tsing, ‘and lay
“ them out together, and let the girl find hers out from the number’.
“The girl looked at the knives and, delighted, immediately picked
“ out her own”


w ^ .E . * H * =g . en tfii i , Hi * s ffl . X e «

U'SmmMMm-. a ts ii pi » * * # .

^ ^ 0 W © A :S i# IB "O'st'ipti"

ot the Felicities in the World of Darkness”. A book with tliis title, in ten chapters,
is mentioned in the C.atalogue of books in the Books of the Sui Dynasty
(ch. 33 1 20), with the name of Wang Yen for its author. I do not

knowwhether it still exists. The above extract is quoted from the KK, ch. 387.


RE-BIRTH WITH CHANGE OR SEX.


147


Re-birth may be connected with change of sex. Whether this
means that the sex of the soul is changeable, or that souls are
sexless, the reader must make out himself; we do not know
whether the Chinese have settled this point. “ Under the emperor
Suh Tsung (A.D. 756 — 708), one Clung Tai was Governor of
“Jun-cheu. His brother Khan, older than he, had a wife, whose
“ clan-name was Chang, and a daughter of sixteen, named Tshai-
“ niang, a decent and prudent maid of perfect conduct. In the
“ seventh night of the seventh month the latter set out incense and
‘•eatables, and prayed to the Weaving-Girl (the goddess of Lyra, the
“patroness of female industry); and she dreamed that night that this
“ deity’s train of cloudy cars and feathery canopies darkened the sky.
“Her carriage halted, and she spoke: ‘I am the Weaving-Girl; what
“blessings do you invoke?’ ‘I pray for dexterity in my work’, was
“the answer. On this, the goddess gave her a gold needle, over one
“tshin in length, stuck on a sheet of paper, to put into the girdle
“of her skirt; if she kept her adventure secret for three days, she
“ would acquire admirable dexterity, and if she did not hold her
“ tongue so long, she would change her sex for that of a boy.
“Already on the second day she told her mother what hud happened.
“ Astonished, this Woman looked at the needle, but she saw nothing
“ than an empty paper with the pricks of the needle in it.

“All the daughters Mrs. Chang had given birth to, had died.
“ Now Ts'ai-niang too fell ill, and at the same time the mother
“became pregnant. ‘My five children have all died’, thus she
“lamented with bitterness, ‘what L the good then of being pregnant
•‘again? I will take abortive drugs’. The drugs came, and she was
“on the point of swallowing them, when Tshii-niang’s voice sud-
“ denly cried from the dark corner where she lay: ‘murderess 1’ Her
“mother, affrighted, asked her what the matter was. ‘My body is
“dying’, she answered, ‘and I must become a boy, the same you


» * BB t: , * m 7? -5^ . tt « « T> » , «

:5t 71 « IE * 0 , « ± , ft ^ «

ilimj siinvi Li: K K, ch. B87.


14S


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ are now pregnant with. I heard that the drugs had come, and
“ thus, the danger being imminent, 1 uttered the cries you heard’.
“The astonished mother did not take the drugs, and in a short
“time Ts"ai-niang expired.

“After the burial, the mother, whose sorrowful thoughts did not
“ turn away from the child, collected the things the latter was
“ wont to play with, and put them away. Before the usual months
“ of pregnancy had elapsed, she gave birth to a son. Whenever any
“one touched the concealed playthings, this child began to cry,
“and it wailed also whenever the mother bemoaned her daughter,
“not stopping until the mother stopped. And when he could speak,
“he always wanted to have the toys. Being a second existence of
“ Ts'ai-niang, they gave him the name of the nephew-son. In the
“ service of the State he worked himself up to the rank of Registrar
“at the Pillars” ', that is to say, a Minister charged with recording


15 , -

^ . M S ^ # at IS

0, M*

R » # tt. .t , 15 ‘K « )9f « ^ tfij B * jfi .g
* . s a ar- pf 9? . s in It . » w t «c ®E » 2 .

ts-yny t an ^ -‘Collected Conversations of the Cassia Park”, a little

work in one chapter, on spectres and ghosts, historical matters and miscellanies. It
is mentioned in the Catalogue in the New Books of the T ang Dynasty (ch. 59, 1. 20)
as written by some one called Fung-yih-tszS ^ or Tsze-hiu ^ , whose

family-name is thought to have been Yen ,


A man’s birth may entail another’s death.


149


in the Imperial presence all wrong and faulty acts to be wit-
nessed there.

Another book relates:

“ In Hung-cheu, the learned doctor of medicine Ma Sze-tao became
“ dangerously ill. Suddenly he exclaimed, sobbing and sighing :
‘•‘I have done nothing bad in my life; why then am I to become
“a woman? I am given for re-birth to the wdfe of Chu, in the
“T'iao-tsze ward’. His son, wishing to try the truth of what he
“said, sought for that man; and his wife v/as indeed with child.
“ When Sze-tao died, Mrs. Chu gave birth to a child, which was
“ a girl” ’.

These tales shed some light on the question we touched upon
on page 62, at w'hat time of his life the soul of a man is believed
in China to be implanted in him : — they teach us that this
occurs decidedly previous to his birth. Moreover, they show that
the soul may be transposed from a person into some foetus

little by little, for, indeed, they relate that the bodies in which

the souls lived first, sickened and languished for a time before

dying, thus having a slow death by gradual loss of soul-substance.
Re-births may thus be causations of slow or sudden deaths.
Whenever an individual is to be born, another may weaken or
sicken in consequence of decrease of his soul-substance, and
ultimately die. These ideas come out clearly in the following tale :

“ Chang Khoh-khin, while a candidate for one of the literary
“ degrees for Classics, takes a concubine. But for all his love and
“ affection, she remains childless. His family was long accustomed
“ to sacrifice to the God of Mount Hvva, and their prayers to this
“ divinity were often answered. So Khoh-khin’s mother now also

“prays him to grant her son a son; on which one is born to him.
“ They name him Tsui-lin, and a very intelligent boy he is.

“Five years pass away, and Khoh-khin, having gained his degree,
“ marries a house-wife. She, too, remains childless for the first year.


' W ti ± .® S a: * ® g it 0 > a ¥-

K 4 ^ * T- it « ^ ^ 4i IS Si - * ® a

Bii R 4 , W A T' ft “ ti nif

quiries about Spirits”, in six chapters, written by Su Huen , also named

Ting-ch'en . a high officer in the first halt nt the tenth century. Quoted

from the K K, ch. 388.


150


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHI' AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ Again the mother prays, and the result is that the wife gives birth
“ to a son. But in the meantime T&ui-lin has lost flesh and vigour daily.
“ Then the matron invokes the goil again for help ; and that same
“ night she sees a man, holding a document with gilt characters
“and a red seal affixed to it. ‘Children have been alloted to you’,
“said he; ‘it is I who brought the first child, but they caused the
“wife also to have a son, and thus the first one had necessarily to
“become incomplete. My influence is impotent against it’. Then
“he thanks her for the sacrifices she has offered him, and passes on.

“And 'Tsui-lin dies. They mark his right upper arm with
“red, and over his eyebrows tliey make a black mark, and thus
“they bury him. Next year Klioh-khin is invested with the dignity
“of prefect of Kia-ming in Li-cheu. There he serves his time, and
“then settles in that part. Once he sees in the house of a certain
“ Wei Fu, a secretary in military .service, a girl approach him
“ with polite curtesies. It strikes him how closely she resembles
“Tsui-lin. He goes home, and informs his mother of it. She has
“ the girl fetched to .see her, ant! forthwith the latter, exhilarated,
“says to her kinsfolk; ‘These people here are my family’. Then
“they look for the painted marks, and find them all just as they
“ have been made. The familv of the girl send their men to fetcli
“her back; but the att'ection she has taken to lier former kinsmen
“is so intense that she cannot forbear to leave them”’.

* s ttt n ft »# .

0 .«

Us**. A»


MEN BURYING THEIR OWN BODY.


151


There are instances of re-incarnation of souls having enabled
men to bury their own corpse. So, ’‘one Wang Yang-ming made
“a trip to a Buddhist convent, and perceived a cell, locked and
“sealed very securely. He wanted to open and see it, but the
“ monks would not allow him, saying that there was a monk in
“it in a state of quietism, who had closed the door more than
“fifty years ago. Yang-ming nevertheless opened it, and looking
“round, saw a monk seated in a tabernacle. He looked just as it
“he were alive, and most closely he resembled him, Yang-ming,
“both in shape and features. ‘Is not this my own former body?’ he
“ exclaimed. Then his eyes fell on a verse, written on the wall :

“ Wang Sheu-jen, the man of fifty years ago,

“ Who now opens this door, is the same who closed it.

“ His soul bumps in the door, and comes back,

“To believe for the first time in his life that a Dhyanist’s body

“does not decay.

“‘This certainly is my former body’, e.xclaimed the Master.
“ After a good while of exhilaration, he erected a pagoda to bury
“it under, and departed”'.

The ideas of transition of souls from one individual into another,
as depicted by a series of tales a small selection of which the
reader has now before him, show a remarkable deviation from older
philosophical conceptions regarding birth and death. Souls, thus
the ancients taught, are implanted in men by the Universe itself, and
taken back by the Universe at their death; — in the epocli of the
Tsin dynasty, however, tales crop up which represent souls as trans-
planted from dying men into children in the womb. Buddhism
here shows its influence. In the age of ’J’sin, this exotic religion
had just gained firm footing on China, having made its way into


BB — I# .

. TS, sect. ^ ch. 100.


152


THE SOOIi IN' PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK.-CONCEPriON.


it under the Han dynasty. Its doctrines on re-incarnation of souls
into beings of an order higher or lower, according to their merits
or demerits, had, no doubt, then imbued the popular mind sufficiently
to work the change in question. Yet it is not impossible, nor even
improbable, that ideas about direct transposition of souls from one
individual into another prevailed in China in pre-Buddhistic times. I
have not, however, found proofs for it in literary relics. Be this as
it may, it remains at any rate worth notice, that among the tales on the
subject, those in which the persons reborn are Buddhist monks, are
conspicuously great. Still clearer is the Buddhist underground seen
in the fact, that re-birth is represented very often as taking place
by the will and order of the infernal powers, which are a foreign
invention, imported by Buddhism.

Let us give one instance more of this phenomenon from a book
of the eighth century. “Ku Hwang lost his only son, seventeen
“years old. The boy’s soul hovered about, dull and drowsy, as if
“in a dreaming condition, without leaving the house. Ku’s sorrow
“did not subside. He made a verse, and hummed it in his larnen-
“tations; ‘The old man has lost his son; still in the evening
“of his days he has to weep blood; but the old man is now
“seventy; he will not have to wait long for his departure from
“life’. The son, thus hearing him, was deeply moved. He swore a
“solemn oath, and spoke on a sudden, with a human voice: ‘I
“shall become anew a son in the house of Ku’. Next day it seemed
“to him as if a man seized him, taking him to a district official
“in some place or other, who decided that he should be given for
“re-birth to the Ku family. He then became perfectly insensible,
“and subsequently felt his mind awake. Opening his eyes, he
“recognized his dwelling, his brothers, his other relations,
“ thronging around him ; but he could not mention anything of
“ his previous life, ami still later on he seemed to have no recol-
“ lection of it. At the age of seven, however, when his elder brother
“jokingly gave him a slap, he exclaimed: ‘I am your elder brother ;
“ what do you beat me for?’ thus throwing the whole family into
“consternation and astonishment. He then related all about his
“former life, point by point, without any mistake’’'.


8t * « . « a. « T' a , 0 ft # B4- ^ H 5? . H 5- . *


RE-INCARNATION OF SOCLS OF ANIMALS INTO MEN.


153


In the Buddhist system, souls of men may be re-incarnated also
as beasts, as a punishment for their demerits in life, while, reversely,
souls of animals may pass into men as a reward for their virtuous
life and conduct. This explains why we find tales of men bearing
with them reminiscences of a previous animal life. Such, for example,
was the case with “a house-slave of Sun Mien, Governor of
“ the Khiih-wuh district. Till his sixth year he could not speak
“intelligibly; but when Mien’s mother on a certain occasion
“descended the steps of the house, and sat down, he suddenly fixed
“ his eyes intently upon her. Astonished, she asked him what the
“matter was; on which he smiled, and said: ‘Mistress, when you
“ still wore hairtufts (i. e. when a young girl), you had a yellow
“ petticoat on, and a white and red robe, and you kept then a
“wild fox; do you remember?’ The mother had not forgotten it.
“‘That fox’, the slave went on to relate, ‘was my body. I ran
“away, and concealed myself in a brick sewer. On hearing you cry
“and whine, I stole into the eastern fields under cover of night,
“and there buried myself in an old grave. In this shelter I lived
“ for two years, when a huntsman beat the life out of me. Then,
“as is the rule, I saw Yama (the Buddhist lord of the Nether-
“ world), who said : ‘ You are sinless ; take a human body’; and I
“ was re-born as the son of a beggar in Hai-cheu. In this capacity
“ I suffered misery, hunger and cold my whole life long, and I
“died at twenty. Again I appeared before the same king. ‘I will
“let you be the house-slave of a notable man’, he said; ‘the name
“of slave is, in truth, not so nice, but you will .not have to labour
“ under sorrow and cares’. Thus I came here. A third existence I
“am now passing through, while you aie still in your first. I feel
“no sorrow, and I am happy; is not it strange?” '


le.

iiknm

iaa/t ti,iu ch. 13

# Eg 1^ * . tz # e W 2 * fit ^ i ® f-


154


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Man’s soul being the bearer of his mental capacities and,
accordingly, of his ingenuity, briskness and wit, we find sages and
celebrities often put down in the books as re-incarnations of former
men of talent. Quite a list of names we might here give, could it
shed any light on our subject. Even at the present day it may
strike any one in China having intercourse with the literati, to hear
them so often coax fellow-scholars by calling them by the names
of literary celebrities of former ages. No doubt this insipid custom
implies more than insipid cajolery.

In finishing this chapter, we may not pass silently over the belief,
that it is by no means necessary for a child which is a re-incarnation
of somebody, to receive the latter’s soul at its very birth, or while
in the womb. It may remain destitute of that soul for years, but
it has to live for the time being in bad health, or in an
unsound state of mind. “In T"ung-cheu”, thus runs a tale,
“there was one Wang Kii-shi , versed in Taoist arts. The
“Governor of Ilwui-clCang, Clung Kiiin, had a young daughter,
“of whom he was very fond. From her childhood she had
“often been unwell, as if her shen-hwun were incomplete.
“Thus he consulted that man, who said: ‘She is not ill, but no
“ lite-producing hwun has settled as yet in her body’. Clung asked
“him to explain himself better. ‘So-and-So’, thus was the answer,
“‘prefect ot the district So-and-So, is the body preceding that of
“your girl. This man had to die several years ago; but he was
“doing so much good in this life that the Nether-world intervened
“ on his behalf, so that the day of his death was postponed. Tie is
“ now over ninety years old ; when he dies, the girl shall regain
“ her health on the same day’. Ching quickly despatched a man to


4«tt.

4 . « « K it . M « f- 5? a * , M » T A «


0I1« IH, @

#A».

XJII.


Kwawj i ki: K K., ch. 388.


SOXJIiS OF MEN STILL KESIDIN6 IN OLDER MEN.


155


“ the place mentioned, to obtain information there, and he found
“indeed that the prefect was more than ninety. Ne.xt month the
“daughter suddenly had a sensation as if awaking from a state of
“inebriety; and her illness was all over. Ching Kiiin then sent
“ the man again for information ; and indeed, without any previous
“illness, the prefect had died on the very day on which the girl
“ was restored to health” b


a-*.

■g itj . 4 ip S ^ ^ 0 iH; * S ii. il5 #


M: i
M-i

0


7lH »


Sttun-sltih chi.


CHAPTER X.


ON ZOANTHROPY.

The conviction that the ethereal human double is able to pass
into other human bodies, and thus may impart to them its properties
and character, co-exists in China with a belief, occupying a much
more prominent place in her animistic lore, namely that it may
settle just as well in animals. Men may thus he transformed into
quadrupeds, birds, fishes and insects, or animals into men, both
before and after their death.

Still, the writings, great in number, which relate such meta-
morphoses, seldom mention the soul as having an actual part
in the change. There are even many which contain unmistakable
evidence in themselves, that Jtheir authors conceived the transforma-
tions to be purely corporal. But, of course, these facts by no
means prove that the transposition of souls was foreign from the
genesis and first growth of the belief in such metamorphoses; and
the possibility remains that the belief in bodily transformations,
quite independent from souls, arose in a later period.

The ([uestion whether the belief in changes of men into beasts,
and in anthropomorphosis of animals, originated in China from
animistic conceptions, we must dismiss as still insolvable. For
there can be no doubt that it was born in the darkest night of
time, in ages so far back from the invention of writing, that no
positive evidence concerning its birth can have been possibly left.
Zoanthropy is, in fact, well known to form a topic of the thoughts
of tribes in the lowest stages of culture in several parts of the
globe. But whatever may have been the original form of the belief
in such changes, a firct it is that, throughout Chinese thought and
culture, as they are imprinted on their written products, the soul
comes to the foreground very frequently as the spring of them, as
their actual working-power. Thus we cannot help giving close attention
to the subject in these chapters, devoted, as they are, to Chinese
psychology and animism in all its aspects.


ZOANTHROPOLOGICAL LITERATURE,


157


Chinese philosophy has never occupied itself seriously with the
matter. Quite satisfied with its all-explaining theory of the migration
of souls in the Universe, which we reviewed in the First Chapter,
it has simply referred to the popular ideas on zoanthropy as
plain matters of fact, at best seasoning them here and there with
some sauce of its own concoction. But we may admit unreservedly,
that its doctrine that the Universe is one compound of an infinite
number of kwei and shen, continuously effused into men and
animals equally, has always much helped to uphold the belief in
a transition of souls from men into beasts and from beasts into
men, as that doctrine, on account if its being a production of the
mind of the infallible ancients, never lacked absolute authority.

Philosophers not having systematically discussed the subject, we
had, as in the foregoing chapters, to glean our materials for a
treatment of it almost e.xclusively from tales distributed in great
numbers over various works on myth and miscellaneous themes.
This was a labour of patience, requiring much reading and loss
of time. But it recommends itself unconditionally, as a way to
make the Chinese of all ages speak for themselves, safeguarding
against observing their thoughts and mind through spectacles darkened
or coloured by pre-conceived ideas and opinions of our own.
The tales and legends, a number of which we were thus enabled
to gather for our readers, constitute a rich mine of knowledge
of oriental animal-lore. They show that, while Europe has only
known were-wolves and a very few other were-aniraals, Eastena
Asia has had throughout all times were-beasts of every sort, even
insects and vermin changing into men. Chinese written sources thus
afford a broader view of the subject than our own traditions on
zoological myth can possibly do. They prove that were-animals
appear in China in much the same aspect as they did amongst
us. Last, but not least, they allow us many an unhampered peep
through more than one side of the stupendous structure of China’s
superstition, and the low state of her mental culture.

The belief in changes of men into animals and of animals into
men cannot be doubted to have been always furthered greatly by
the observation that animals behave, think and understand as men
do; that they show much the same passions and feelings as men;
that they have analogous wants of life, sutfer similar ailments
and infirmities, and are subject to the same law's of decay and
death. Chinese authors have roundly avowed themselves altogether
unable to discover any real difference between men and animals.


15S


THE SOU’H iN PHIHOSOPIIY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“In what", thus asked in the tenth century tlie Taoist 'FanlViao',
“ do birds and quadrupeds differ from men ? They all have their mode of
“dwelling in nests or caves (comp. B. I, p. 37’2), their copulation of
“males with females, their affections between father and son, their
“ death and their life. The crow proves that it has humanity, for
“ it disgorges its food to feed its young. The falcon displays right-
“eousness by sparing pregnant animals. Wasps and bees have their
“princes and, consequently, they possess forms of decorum. The goat
“ manifests wisdom by kneeling down while sucking. The pheasant
“ has trustworthiness, for it takes no second female, fn whatever
“sense we investigate their habits, we find that among the ten
“ thousand species of living beings not one of the five Constant
“ Virtues is missing, nor any of the hundred rules of conduct. They
“give instruction to each other in making nets and snares, and they
“ make their young apply themselves to hunting and fishing” . . . . ^.
fn short, what wonder in the eyes of man thoroughly uninstructed
in sound science of nature, can there be in the transmutation of a
beast into a man, or of a man into a beast, by siinjile change of
soul, or even without such a change?

Admitting that the belief in the possibility of such metamorphoses
must date from the oldest times, we may reasonably e.vpect China’s
ancient works to contain instances of them. In fact, among the
oldest Chinese traditions we possess, there is one, according to which
the soul of Kwiin, Yao’s Minister, disgraced for having drained
off the inundating waters in an incorrect manner (see Book I,
p. 95Gj, changed into a beast. 'Fze-ch^an thus the Tso ch^icen
relates, having travelled in 534 B.C. as an envoy from the kingdom
of Ching ’ to that of Tsin there found the Ruler ill, who, thus he


\ named King-shing ■

♦ tffl » . * & . t* ^ s , ijim . # s/e la , » 7'
rn^ZMms-, fXZmvirM. *'■" ft#.

or Book on Changes, in six sections, discour.sing in a Taoistic wav respectuely on
change by the Tao, by arts, , by virtue, , bv benevolence,

. by food, and by frugality or abstinence.


OLDEST REFERENCES TO ZOANTHROPY. 159

was told, had seen in his dreams a yellow bear enter his chamber.
They also asked him what sort of evil spectre that might be, and
he said : “ Anciently, when Yao had im{)risoned Kwun for life on
“mount Yii, his shen changed into a yellow bear, and under this
“form entered into the abyss of Yii” The same work relates
also, that when Hwan the Ruler of Lu visited the adjacent
state of Tsh ^ in 693 before our era, he was slain there by PYng-
sheng, a member of the royal family; on which those of this
kingdom put that man to death, to give satisfaction to Lu After
that, Siang ", “ the Ruler of Tsd, made an excursion to Ku-fen
“ and was hunting there at PYi-khiu, when a large boar appeared.
“‘It is prince P"eng-sheng’, cried his attendants. The Ruler flew
“ into a passion. ‘ Does he presume to show himself. P’ he exclaimed,
“and shot at the beast, on which it reared itself up like a man,
“ howling so tremendously that the frightened Ruler fell down
“ from his carriage, wounded his foot, and lost his shoe. On coming
“ home, he told Pei, one of his footmen, to go and seek the shoe,
“ but as the man could not find it, he had him whipped till the
“ blood flowed. Out of the palace ran Pei, and fell in at the gate
“with a gang of murderers, who caught and garrotted him. ‘Should
“I oppose you?’ he said, baring his body to show them his
“back; on which they trusted him. He then requested leave to go
“ in before them ; and he concealed the Ruler, came out again, and
“fought them till he was killed at the gate. Shih-chi-fen-ju was
“slain at the foot of the stairs. The murderers rushed in and
“killed IMeng Yang in the bed (of the Ruler, in which he had
“laid himself to mislead them); but ‘this man is not the Ruler’, they
“cried, ‘he is not like him’. Tlien perceiving the foot of the Ruler
“under the door, they murdered him, and placed Wu-chi on the
“ throne” .


year of the reign of Chao.

5 Eighteenth year of Hwan’s reign. 6 .


160


THE SOUL IX PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTIOX.


Those two tales show that the belief in changes of men or their
souls into animals flourished in ancient China. In the writings of
Chwang-tsze we have proof that it was then believed also that souls
of animals might have the shape of men, or assume it temporarily.
“Yuen, the king of Sung (.530 — 516 B.C.), dreamed at midnight
“ that a man with dishevelled hair peeped through a side door,
“saying: ‘I come [from the waters of Tsai-lu; T am a messenger
“from the Limpid River, attached to the River God; a fisherman,
“ named Yii Tsii, has caught me’. The prince awoke, and ordered
“somebody to divine his dream. ‘This is a tortoise possessed of a
“shen’, said this man. ‘Is there one Yii Tsii among the fishermen?’
“asked the prince. ‘There is’, replied the attendants. ‘Tell him then
“ to join the morning audience’, said the ruler ; and next morning
“ the man was present.

“‘Fisherman’, said the prince, ‘what have you caught?’

“‘Tsii has netted a white tortoise, as oval shaped as a basket,
“and five feet broad’ ....’’ '.

In the second century before our era, Liu Ngan formally
recorded in his writings, that in his time “one Kung-niu Ngai,
“ on having got through the crisis of an illness, had changed
“into a tiger on the seventh day. His brother had closed the
“ door, but on entering to look at him, he was seized by the
“ brute and killed. Thus spots and marks had made a beast
“ of him ; his nails and teeth had been replaced by others ; his
“inclinations and his mind had undergone transformation, and
“ his soul was altered conjointly with his body. Thus we are
“never sure that a being who is a tiger now, was not a man


« H . a ® ff Sj . * fs * ^ w , -g ^ « IS * A .
ft A ifS m 1 5E T n ft* . 5 FE T ® T . m

T , * a 2 fln it * » Eighth year of Chwang’s reign.

K ^ a . s i» » f e i p;r . ^ H # .

WS-H . Nan hwa chen king, ch. 9, sect.


WANG CH'uNg’s opinions OF ZOANTHROPY.


lOl

“before, nor whether a man is not also a tiger” An annotation,
professedly by the hand of Kao Yiu h who lived towards the
end of the Han dynasty, adds hereto; “In the Middle Kingdom,
“patients in delirium suffer from periodical attacks of their disease;
“and when such a patient turns into a tiger, he comes back to
“devour men. Havinir done so, he becomes a real tif>'er, but if he
“devours nobody, he may return to the human form” h

These extracts place it beyond all doubt, that during the Ilan
dynasty the belief in transmutations of men into beasts was by no
means rejected by men of letters, and that it was not a superstition
of the uneducated class alone. Even Wang Chhing, the great
sceptic of that time, subscribed to it, though somewhat conditionally.
“ A man who is dead”, thus he argued, “ cannot possibly appear
“ in the shape of a living man, just as impossilrlc as it is for a
“living man to disappear by means of the soul of a dead person.
“ The six domestic animals may undergo metamorphosis, and show
“ themselves as a human body ; but if they do so, this body is
“alive, and the breath composing its vital energy is still in it.
“ Should it be dead, and a prey of corruption, no strength of
“ a rhinoceros, nor a tiger’s ferocity, could make it undergo any
“ metamorphosis. The fact that Kung-niu Ngai of Lu changed into
“a tiger when he was ill, is likewise ascribable to his being then
“ not yet dead. In this world it does occur that living bodies are
“metamorphosed into other living beings; but it has never come
“ to pass that a dead body was transformed into a living shape” h

# w#. ffl . P M » ft . it S rll


^ A ■

a*#, ® A'=ts«ftsja*'ja*


11


162


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The same author is the only one we know, who tried to define
precisely some prevalent ideas of his time in regard to such trans-
formations of men and beasts. - It is generally said”, thus he wrote,
“ that spectres (k w e i) are the t s i n g of old living animals. But
“though the tsing of an old animal may transform into a man,
“ there are animals which by their nature can turn into men without
“ being old. Should a man have received a breath which possesses
“the same tsing as some animal, the latter is allied with him;
“and if he then falls ill, and his breath, which contains his tsing,
“ deteriorates anti weakens, then that animal may haunt him and
“ do him harm” h

The strange idea that a beast, to be transformable into a man,
must preferably be old, comes to the foreground repeatedly in the
tales about such metamorphoses, and so the reader will often come
across it in the present chapter. Koh Hung, too, recorded it in
his writings. “The tsing of such among the myriads of animals
“as have reached a great age, may, without e.vception, assume a
“ human shape, svith the object of bewildering and beguiling the
“ minds of men, and tempting them continuously. But they cannot
“ change their true shape in a mirror. Therefore, all the Taoist
“ doctors in ancient times who entered the mountains, were in the
“habit of hanging on their back a bright mirror upward of nine
“inches in length, and the effect was that old ghosts did not presume
“ to approach them. Bor, any one who came up to the man to
“tempt him, was obliged to look into the mirror; and then he
“would see himself therein in the shape of a man if he were an
“immortal genius or a good mountain ghost, but in his true shape
“if he were the evil spirit of a bird or quadruped”®.


'(t ^ ^ ik ^ ■

^ ^ 22, sect. IJ ^ .


CHINA S PRINCIPAL WERE-ANIMALS.


168


Although, as we have said, all animals in China, even the
smallest, may be were-animals, a pre-eminent place among the
latter is occupied by the tiger, the wolf, and the fox. It is
preferably from the life and habits of this triplet that authors have
drawn material for zoological myth-making; but in particular the
tiger and the wolf, the most ferocious beasts that live on Chinese
soil, claim our interest, whereas the tales and legends devoted
to them tend to prove they are the true Asiatic representatives
of the European werewolf, which throughout ancient and mediaeval,
and even in modern times, bewildered the minds of our own
ancestors, held in commotion fancy and fears of rustic simplicity,
and entailed numerous trials and executions on pitiable victims
of dysaesthesia. The analogy between Chinese lycanthropy and
our own is interesting enough to entitle us to bring out in the
next section its most salient points by means of short references
to our own literature.


1. Tigroanthropy.

Were-tigers we may well suppose to live in popular imagination
throughout the length and breadth of the Middle Kingdom, whereas
the royal tiger occurs in almost all the provinces, and in tlie Manchurian
dependencies. Native authors mention only a few regions wliere it
does not live, for instance Shantung, having perhaps been exterminated
there in course of time, or died out.

The first man-tiger of which Chinese books speak, is Kuug-niu
Ngai, with whom we acquainted the reader on page 160. What
Liu Ngan relates of this being, as well as Kao Yin's additional
note, claim our interest, inasmuch as thobc authors prove that
already in those early ages there were Chinese who, like Euro-
pean physiologists did in all times, connected lycanthropy with
virulent disease, delirium, and insanity. There has, in fact, existed
in all times lunacy manifesting itself in bloodthirstiness and a
craving for human flesh, and numerous murders and cruelties.


s 7: JR a A . s ti * ut A • sra- ® *1 it tt" , *

S9-


1(34


THE sour- IN PIirmoOPlIY and fdi.k-conception.


committed in all ages, are traceable to this mystic phenomenon in
the nature of man h Now suppose a sufferer of such a malady
possesses a cruel character. There is then nothing to prevent him
from imagining he has turned into the most ferocious monster he
knows, especially if, as is so often the case with fever patients, he
has a sensation as if his limbs have become longer or shorter,
heavier or lighter than usually, or that they have disappeared
entirely or partly. Such lunacy is discernible, for instance, in the
conduct and confessions of .lean Grenier, the werewolf thirteen
years old, put on trial in 1003 at Bordeaux. The same thing may
be said of Gilles Gaimier, the werewolf of St. Bonnot, rendered
harndess at the stake in 1573 at Dole, in Jffanche-Comte. Blood-
thirsty lunatics were, no doubt, the two brothers Gandillon, hanged
and burned in the .Jura in 1508, and several other lycanthropes,
the accounts of whose trials have been preserved. In Bengal, tigro-
anthropy bears the character of lunacy. “ Among the Garrows”,
thus Coleman writes -, “ a madness exists which they call trans-
“ formation into a tiger, from the person who is afflicted with this

“ malady, walking about like that animal, and shunning all society.

“ It is said that on their being first seized with this complaint, they
“ tear their hair and rings from their ears with such force as to
“break the lobe. It is supposed to be occasioned by a medicine
“applied to the forehead... The malady goes off in the course of
“a week, or a fortnight”. This chapter will show the reader several
Chinese tales in which bodily or mental disease appears as the chief
cause of therianthropy.

Kung-niu Ngai is not the only were-tiger of the Ilan dynasty,
of which Chinese books relate. The S/m/i i ki inform us, “ that in
“ the same epoch, a prefect of Suen-clring named Fung Shao,

“ one day turned into a tiger, and devoured the people of his

“jurisdiction. They cried out to him ‘Lord-Envoy Fung’, and then
“ the brute ran off, to return no more. At that time there circulated
“a saying among the people, running thus: ‘That nobody imitate
“ the Lord-Envoy Fung, the man whose government of the people
“ was bad all his life, and who devoured them even after his
“death. Thus it is with virtueless men: when old, they become
“tigers. But real tigers devour no men; it is men transformed into


1 Baring Gould, The Book of Werewolves, pp. 142 sijq.

2 llindu-Mj'tliology, p. 321.

3 The present Ning-kwoh h:


in Nganhwui province.


WERE-BEASTS DISEMPOWERED BY TIIEIR NAME.


1G5


“tigers who do so, for they are ashamed of their own race, and
“ hate it’” h

Thus the people in that region sought to defend themselves against
that man-tiger by calling out his name. The reason of this is easily
understood. Study of peoples and tribes in a low stage of culture
has brought to light how utterly incapable they generally are of
sharply distinguishing realities from the things that represent them,
and that they are, in consequence, always ready also to identify
persons with the names by which they are indicated. To theiu,
therefore, it is an axiom, that he who knows a man’s name may
easily harm that man himself by working upon his name with
spell and sorcery. This creates a general tendency to hide one’s
own name, and those of all one has to manage or to honour, a
tendency easily observable also among the Chinese, as we shall
have occasion elsewhere to point out. Hence it is a conception
prevailing among that people, that men or man-beasts can do
no harm to him that, knowing their name, is to be feared

as a possessor of power over them. Here we may remark, that
in Europe the idea has existed that a werewolf, when accosted
by his baptismal name, would return immediately to his human
form, and thus lose his dangerous character '. This comes out

clearly from this Hessian legend, communicated by Jacob Grimm n
“ Ein Ehpaar lebte in Armut; zur Verwunderung des Hannes wusste
“ die Frau dennoch bei jeder Mahlzeit Fleisch aufzutragen, lange
“ verheimlichend wie sie dazu gelangte; endlich aber versprach sie
“ ihm die Entdeckung, nur diirfe er dabei ihren Namen nicht
“nennen. Nun gingen sie rait einander aufs Feld, wo eine Heerde
“Schafe weidete, zu welcher die Frau ihren Schritt lenkte; imd als

# , 5E S . A A * ® rH # W S Jg .

^ ^ A , A -ft B) * A . ^ W* ** ffi ® Ti.e

first ch.ipter. The Shuh i ki consists of two chapters of annotations on

marvellous events and subjects, of high value for our knowledge of superstition of
the time in which it was written. It is ascribed to Jen Fang named

Yen-shing , an officer of the Liang dynasty in the lirst half of the sixth

century : but the fact that it mentions some events of later times, renders this
somewhat doubtful.

2 The Book of Werewolves, p. -111. Hertz, ‘’Der Werwolf” p. 61.

3 “Deutsche Mythologie”, 4th. edition, p. 917.


166


THE SOUL rN PHILOSOPHY AMD FOLK-COMCEPTION.


“sie ihr nahe gekommen waren warf sie einen Ring iiher sich,
“ wurcle augenhlicklich zum Werwolf, der in die Heerde fiel, eins
“ der Scliafe gritf und damit entfioh. Der Mann stand wie versteinert;
“als er aber Hirt und Hiinde dem Werwolf nachrennen und die
“Gefahr seines Weibes sah, vergass er sein Versprechen und rief
“ ‘acli Margareit !’ Da verscliwand der Wolf, und die I'Vau stand
“ nackend auf dem Feld”.

The Voli icuh chi, a work of the third century, devoted to the
marvellous, tells us tliat there lived in Kiang-ling (now King-

‘•cheu-fuh in Hupeh) a ferocious class of people that could trans-
form themselves into tigers. The people there pretended that tigers,
“metamorphosed into men, preferably wore dresses of red Dolichos
“cloth, and that they had human feet without heels’’^. There are
still otlier peculiarities by which such dangerous creatures are
recognizable. It is stated in a work of the twelfth century, that
“ when a tiger transforms into a man, its tail alone does not
“ undergo any change, and that, to enable it to become a man in
“ every respect, its tail must be burned off” This curious folk-
conception is the reason why, many centuries afterwards, it was
customary in certain parts of China to denote the celebration of
a man’s investiture with a state office, or his promotion to a
higher dignity, by the term “ burning his tail”, expressive, of course,
of the general opinion that now, by the happy event, he was raised
to the dignity of a man in every sense and respect. “ When a young
“scholar”, thus we read in a Chinese book, “makes his first steps
“ in the path to glory, or when an officer, being removed to
“another post, is dismissed from the one he held, his friends and
“ colleagues, wishing to congratulate him and to condole with
“ him, do not fail to procure a complete set of choice delicacies
“and spirits, and set them out as a banquet, illustrated by song and
“music. This they call ‘burning his tail’. For it is said- there are
“tigers that change into men without the tail undergoing the


^ m ;^N •

^ ^ ^ A ^ M

■Appendix to the ’Wi ya", a broad elaboration of this old dictionary,


m


by the hand of Lo A'uen _

71 >

century. Section .


who flourished in the latter half of the twelfth


MARKS BY WHICH WERE-TIGERS MAY BE KNOWN.


167


“ metamorphosis, so that, to make them become real men, it
“is necessary to burn it away; and whereas a man newly favoured
“ with an official dignity is, as it were, a tiger that has assumed
“ the human state in principle, but to which the tail still sticks,
“ this appendage is, on this occasion, burned off, that he may
“get rid entirely of his old body. Hence the expression ‘to burn
“ off his tail’ ” '.

Also in other East-Asiatic countries where the belief in were-
tigers prevails, we find the conception that they may be recognized
as such, when in their human shape, by certain peculiar marks.
In Java, and in many parts of Sumatra they are thought to lack
heels and the perpendicular gully of the upper lip ^ It is well
known that lycanthropists in Europe were considered discoverable
from the meeting of their eyel)rows above the nose, and from their
appearing in certain hours of the night as three-legged dogs \

In our above extract from the Poh wuh chi there is stil! a point
which claims our attention. It teaches us, that already in early
times certain classes of persons in particular were credited with the
power to become tigers at pleasure. Undoubtedly, the extract refers to
the so-called M a n , the old aborigines of Hupeh, and of other provinces
west and south of it, of whom we had occasion to speak on page
1065 of our First Book; for also from other sources we learn that
these autochthones were described of old by the Chinese proper as
man-tigers. First of all, it is the Standard History of the Han dynasty
which relates, that in an unknown age far remote, those living
in a region corresponding with the present Hupeh and Sze-chSven,
set up a king for the first time, named Lin-kii'in, and that “when
“this worthy died, his dual soul (his hwun and his pmh) became
“a white tiger for ever. Hence the tribes named Pa, taking into


VD


S'* RIM Its. m

“ M .6 aB , "Record of what I heard and saw”,

ten cliapters of miscellanies by Fung Yen , an officer ot the second half of

the eighth century, of whom little is known.

2 ‘•Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Yolkenkunde”, XLI, pp. 576 scq.
and XXVI, page 304. Van Hasselt, “Midden-Suniatra”, I, page 75.

3 Grimm, "Deutsche Mythologie”, p. 918. The Book of Werewolves, p. 110.


163


THE SOUH IN PHILOSOPHY' AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘■consideration that tigers drink human blood, sacrificed human
“beings to him from that time”'. This curious ancestor transmitted
his tigerahip to his posterity. “In the regions along the Yang-tsze,
“and along the Han (its chief tributary in Hupeh)”, thus relates
Yii Fao, -‘live tiger-men, who, being descendants from a progenitor
“named Lin-kiiin, are alile to transform themselves into tigers. In
“ the east of the M a n districts belonging to Clrang-sha (in Hunan),
“ some people living high up the inoantains had made a trap for
“ tigers. Its spring went off, and they hurried altogether to the spot
“the next morning to kill the beast; but they found a pavilion-
“ guardian with a large red cap on, sitting in the trap. On being
“asked how he had got there, he said, flushed with rage: ‘The
“prefect of this district sent for me yesterday; but I had to skulk
“somewhere in the dark against the rain, and thus inadvertently
“got into this trap; be quick and let me out’. ‘But’, the bystanders
“asked, ‘if you were sent for by the prefect, must not you then have
“his letter with you?’ And in fact he produced such a document
“out of his bosom. Immediately they let him out; but no sooner
“ had they seen him than he changed into a tiger, that ran away
“ up-hill” K

And Tho Ts'ien relates: “Under the Wei dynasty (third century),
“the Man living in the mountains north of the Sin-yang district
“ (northern Kiangsi) possessed certain arts to transform men into
“ tigers, with hair, colours, claws and teeth altogether like real tigers.
“ A villager there, named Cheu Chen, had a slave, whom he sent
“one day to the hills to hack wood for the fire. His wife and
“younger sister accompanied him. No sooner had they reached the
“hills than the slave said to the women: ‘Climb a high tree and
“see what I will do’. They obeyed, and he retired into the thicket;

BA /[fill 1 ^’ of Later Han DY'nasty, cli. 116, 1. 11.

SI 2 a W IE A . S It * ^ la . fil -ft

MM. e

8 , 93 B

fjUia, B,

s''“ 12.


TJGROANTHROPY ASCRIBED TO SPECIAL TRIBES. 169

“and immediately they sav? a big tiger rush forth, yellow-striped,
“ with frightful roars and impetuous movements. The two women
“ were tremendously frightened. After some time, the monster with-
“drew once more into the thicket, to become in a few moments
“a man again. ‘You must not tell anything about it at home’,
“ he said to the women. Still they blabbed it out to their
“fellow slaves, through whom Cheu Chen heard of it. He then
“inebriated the slave thoroughly with spirituous liquor, and had
“him stripped naked. But however closely they examined every
“ part of his body, nothing particular was to be seen on it. In his
“hair, however, they found a piece of paper with a large tiger
“painted on it, and a charm beside the beast. Cheu Chen took it
“and copied (?) it, and when the slave had got sober, he called him
“and interrogated him. The man seeing his secret discovered, roundly
“ avowed everything. Having wandered among the Man with rice for
“ sale, he said, one of their wizards had told him that he was in pos-
“ session of the art in question, and he had got it from him for three
“feet of linen, some pecks of rice, a red cock, and a pint of liquor” '.

Beyond the confines of the Chinese Empire, the power to take
the forms of savage beasts we find ascribed likewise to special
tribes or classes of men. It is reported that in Java there is, on
mount Lamongan, a village of man-tigers or matjan gadungan.
Natives of the environs take care not to iiass the night there, nay,

®aiij

« if . As: « « » # « m « . It M Oj . fi R - A

2r.tA:-0.±igiW.ii!l.SI)SIf:S.An*w.B;i?r)A^.

■It. nAA®. A.R

» ft A I® . a ^ ^ Alt a li W

— A' Ai j# . ~ A SS K" # lit ft


170


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


the villagers themselves duly refuse all strangers any night-lodgings,
as better than anybody they know their dangerous power, though
not the times at which their changes may take place Else-
where in that island, too, places notorious for were-tigers exist In
Sumatra, the power of transforming into tigers is alleged of the people
in a large village on the Dempu, a vulcano in Palembang. Often, it
is said, they come down-hill in human disguise to frequent neigh-
bouring markets, and many are known to have married girls of other
villages ^ In the same Eland, the population assert that there is in
or about the country of Korinchi a negari, which they call Banye-
balingka, consisting of two villages inhabited by so-called urang
chindaku. Those of one village can assume human as well as
tigrine forms; in the other tliey turn themselves from time to time
into pigs, and then return to their human shape. There are certain
times in every year when, as royal tigers, they haunt the forests
far and wide, and depredate the habitations of men. Wherever on
their excursions it suits their purpose, they assume the human shape,
then being unrecognizable but from the absence of a gully in the
upper lip. They enter human dwellings to ask for night-lodgings,
and when everybody is asleep, they atiack the inmates and devour
their hearts. They prey especially on cattle. The pig-chin da ku
are not so dangerous, as they only devastate the crops \

Of the Lava in Birma, Bastian writes ; “ Ein Birmane wagt es nie,
“ ein von Lava bewohntes Dorf zu betreten, da er unfehlbar von Wehr-
“ wdlfen Oder Mann-Baren gebEsen und sterben wilrde. An Wehr-
“ wolfgeschichten fiber Lao sowohl als fiber Lava ist Siam ebenso
“ wie Kambodia reich, die Rolle auf den Tiger iibertragend”
Elsewhere we read: “To this day, Hindus settled in Chota-Nagpur
“and Singbhum firmly believe that the Alundas have power of
“ witchcraft, whereby they can transform themselves into tigers and
“other beasts of prey to devour their enemies, and can witch away
“ the lives of men and beasts ; it is to the wdldest and most savage
“ of the tribe that such powers are generally ascribed” We need
hardly recall here the world-known fact that Herodotus told much


1 “Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde”, XXVI, p. 307.

2 “Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nedorlandsch Indie”, 1899,
p. 689—690.

3 Mohnike, ‘‘Bangka und Palembang”, p. 16.5.

4 Van Hasselt, “Midden-Sumatra”, I, p. 75.

5 “Die Vulker des Oestlichen Asien”, I, page 119.

6 Dultan, The Kols; quoted by Tylor, Primitive Culture, I, page 314.


WILLFUL CHANGE OF MEN INTO BEASTS.


171


the same thing of the Neuri,’ the early inhabitants of Lithuania
and Volhynia. Those men, he wrote, seem to be wizards, as the
Scythians and the Greeks established in Scythia assert that every one
of them changes himself once a year into a wolf, and retains this
shape for some days, then to return to the human form; not that
I believe it, but they assert that it is so, and they are ready to
confirm the truth of it by oath b The same statements we have
also from other authors, as Solinus, and Pomponius Mela (lib. 11).
Of the Arcadians, Evanthes and Pausanias state, that certain indivi-
duals amon^j them unclothed themselves sometimes and crossed a
water, to play the wolf for nine years. And Nathaniel Pierce,
who resided in Abyssinia from ISIO to 1S19, wrote that the caste
of blacksmiths there were reputed to change themselves into hyenas
and other savage beasts. Those so-called Budas or Tebbibs wore gold
earrings, and Coffin declared he had often found hyenas with such
rings in their ears, even among those he had shot or speared
himself b

The tale of Cheu Chen’s slave shows a new feature in Chinese
tiger-lore, which, like so many others, we find also in therianthropy
elsewhere in Asia and in Europe, namely, that the change into a
beast may be brought about artificially and wilfully by means of
charms, spells, and other instruments of witchcraft. The Garrows,
we saw on page 164, are stated to transform themselves into
tigers by applying medecine on the forehead. The Javanese have
their ngelmu gadungan, lit. their science or spells by which
men may turn themselves into tigers b Of the Siamese we read,
“ durch Hersprechen gewisser Zauberformeln kbnnen sich Menschen
“in Tiger verwandlen, und gleich den Wehrwolfen Nachts umher-
“ treiben um Beute zu suchen” b Formulas of witchcraft held a
prominent place also in Europe in the recipes to become a werewolf,
side by side with certain unguents, wolfskins, and mysterious rings
or girdles.

Some of the were-tiger legends that we have thus far placed
before our readers, decidedly put forth the human soul as having a
prominent share in the metamorphosis. We saw Liu Ngan declare


1 Liber IV, cap. 105.

2 Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pierce, I, p. 280, quoted by Baring Gould,
p. 119, Tylor, p. 113, and Hertz, p. 30.

3 Roorda’s Javanese-Dutch Dictionary. ‘•Tijdschrift voor Indisclie Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde”, XLI, pp. 569 and 579.

4 Bastian, “Reisen in Siam”, p. 261.


17:2


THE SOUL IN PHIL030PH1' AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


explicitly, that when Kung-niu Ngai became a tiger, his soul was
altered conjointly with his body (p. 160); further, we saw that the
primeval ancestor of the Man did not change bodily into a tiger,
but that it was his two souls that turned into the monster after
his death (p. 167); and finally, governor Fung Shao devoured, in the
shape of a tiger, his people after his death (p. 164). None of those
tales, however, speak of, nor even allude to a transition of the
soul of its hero into the brute. On the other hand, the other
tales we have given represent the metamorphosis into the beast,
and back into the man, as purely corporeal, and not the slightest
trace of an idea do we find in them that a transposition of a
soul was its working power. Thus we have to distinguish in
China between two kinds of metamorphoses; and it is to this
duplex that we can reduce all tales of were-animals, which the
reader will find still in this chapter. Accordingly, the theory of ethno-
logists, generally admitted as correct, that the belief in changes
of men into animals and of animals into men, wherever we find it,
is nothing else than a logical consequence of a belief in metem-
psychosis, appears quite untenable when viewed from the standpoint
of Chinese myth.

Those able to write books in good style being in China, in all
times, picked men of education and learning, the extracts from
Chinese books, which we inserted in the above pages, necessarily
lead to the conclusion, that the belief in were-tigers was, throughout
those ages, fully shared in that realm by the most civilized class.
No wonder then, that changes of men into tigers are recorded
formally in such high-class works as the Standard Histories of
the T'ang dynasty. One we will place here before the reader, to
show also , again , that the Chinese avow a connection between
lycanthropy and disease. “In the second year of the Shen kung
“ period (A.D. 69S), the assistant-recorder in Ch'en-cheu (in the
“south of Hunan), while ill, changed into a tiger, and was
“going to devour his brothers’ wife, when he was caught, and
“ became a man again” h Even the great Ch'ing, one of the brother-
pair whose attainments, as on page 34 we saw, were such as to
enable them to invent a novel theory about the constitution of the
human soul, unreservedly believed in were-tigers. “ Being asked by


. Books of the T ang Dynasty, ch. 36, 1. 2t.


CHINESE WORKS ON TIGER-LORE.


173


“ some one whether the metamorphoses of men into tigers, of which
“ the traditions of ages speak, may be reasonably credited as real,
“he said: ‘They may. When 1 sojourned in Feu-ts^un, I saw a
“ man in a pumpkin-field, getting gradually covered with hair like
“ that of a tiger, and his body spotted and striped all over.
“In the course of the night he opened the bolted courtyard of a
“ house and, like a tiger, devoured a hog in the stable. Thus,
“ though his metamorphosis was still incomplete, he was affected in
“ such a measure by the influences of the tiger kind, that its nature
“ thoroughly imbued him” h

This sage diction of one of the greatest men of his century is
transmitted in a curious work on tiger-lore, in six chapters, written
in the 16th. century by one Clren Ki-jii ^ a native of Sung-kiang^
in southern Kiangsn, who, drawing attention by his learning, stead-
fastly refused all offers of the Crown to enter into the service of
the State. Its title, ILu wei' or “Luxuriant Herbage (Collectanea)
on the Tiger”, bears evidence in itself of having been chosen by
the author as a variation upon the synonymous title of another
work of the same kind, extant in his time, namely the Hu yuen'%
professedly by one Wang Chi-teng a learned minister of the same
century. ClTen Ki-ju’s book holds a place in China as a standard
work on tiger-lore ; but many of its tales are too frivolous to inspire
us with interest. A very great part of its contents, if not the greatest
part, was borrowed from earlier writings, and may be traced to books
written before and under the Thing dynasty.

Chfing’s man in the pumpkin-field is a remarkable specimen of
the were-tiger class, inasmuch as he represents a partial change
of a man into a tiger. Slow and fragmentary metamorphoses of
men into beasts are often mentioned in Chinese books; and we
have to lay particular stress upon this fact, as it confirms our sug-
gestion, that metamorphosis into an animal is not necessarily con-
nected in Chinese thought with a transition of the soul of the latter


' ST-0, ^

^a,.h.63.


174


THE SOUL IN PHir,OSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


into the man ; if otherwise, the changes of form would undoubtedly
be represented almost always as sudden and total. Here is another
tale, showing that the transfiguration may be a process slow and
long, and may manifest itself by a gradual change of the nature and
character of the person undergoing it;

“ When the House of Tsin reigned, one Yih Pah, an official to
“the Governor of Yii-chang, departed in his turn for his native
“place in the I hi period. But he retired to a remote spot, and
“ did not go home. The Governor sent some men to fetch him,
“ with whom Pah spoke and discoursed as usually, regaling them
“with food; but when they urged him to dress himself, he said:
“‘Look into my face’. And they saw that his eyes were distended
“at the corners, and that there were yellow striped colours on
“ his body. He then reared himself on one leg, and straightway left
“ the house through the door. At first he dwelled on the slope
“for a time, but then he went to the forest and changed into a
“ large three-legged tiger. The one leg on which he had reared himself
“ then became his tail” b

Many traditions about transformation of men into tigers, found
in books, forfeit their right to our interest, as bearing the clearest
marks of having been hatched by fancy in its wildest form. In this
category occurs the following, the most extravagant we have seen,
which we insert for this reason as a curiosity :

“Under the Tsin dynasty, the child of a villager in the district
“of Fuh-yang always pastured a cow, by which it was licked one
“ day, the spots touched by the tongue turning quite white. The
“ child then died suddenly. When the family buried the corpse,
“ they slaughtered the cow to regale the visitors, with the result
“that of those who eat of the flesh, more than twenty of both
“ sexes changed altogether into tigers” *.

?s«

Jim . I yiien: K K, ch. 426.


TIGEOANTHROPY IS SOMETIMES A PUNISHMENT.


175


In Europe, lycanthropy was often inflicted upon men as a punish-
ment. We need only mention here Vereticus, king of Wales, trans-
formed in the fourth or fifth century by St. Patrick into a wolf;
and St. Natalis, who cursed an illustrious Irish family, with the
result that all its members assumed the shape of wolves for seven
years, living and howling in the forests, and devouring sheep. In
Normandy, the people believe that transformation into a 1 o up-
gar ou is sometimes inflicted on a damned person, who, tortured in
his grave, tears his way out of it. In Prance the belief was general
that the devil frequently punished men by changing them into
wolves; and among the Russians the conception is not less strong
that the wawkalak are beings who have incurred the wrath of
Satan '. In Armenia, according to Von Haxthausen -, “gibt es
“ Weiber, die in Polge schwerer Silnde von Gott gestraft sind,
“dass sie sieben Jahre lang in Wolfe verwandelt werden”.

The same phenomenon we observe in China. There, too, the reasons
for which men may be transformed into tigers by way of punish-
ment are, of course, manifold. “In the time when the Tsbn dynasty
“reigned”, thus we read in a work of the fifth century, “there stood
“ten miles from Suh-hien (in the present Ngan-hwui province)
“ a look-out pavilion, with a sacrificial temple dedicated to the
“ River-god. Many miracles occurred there, proving the animation
“of that divinity. Passers-by who neglected to pay their respects,

“ were sure to go mad and run ofi" into the mountains, to change
“there into tigers”’, “And in the T'ai khang period of the
“Tsin dynasty, Ching Sih, a native of Yung-yang, ivas Governor
“of Kwang-ling (the present Yang-cheu department \ in Kiangsu),
“ when the equerry of his house suddenly began to behave as
“ a madman % and disappeared. A month after he was found.


K K, ch. 420.

1 Baring GoulJ. pp. 58, 107, 115.

2 Transkaukasia. I, p. .822

3 ^ + „ mm

r- ^ ^ A lU ^ TS,

sect , ch. 05. Obberve that we have here another instance of lycanthropy

combined with derangement of mind.


5 Here again we have lycanthropy combined with mental derangement.


176


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“naked, crying and yelling, his blood dripping from his skin.

“ On bein!^ asked what was the cause of it, he related that the
“God of the Ground had ordered that he should become a tiger,
“and had covered him with a spotted skin, thereupon giving
“orders to his men to seize and whip him. Under this castigation
“he could not help roaring and jumping, and thereby he so enraged
“ his divine Majesty, that he ordered him to be skinned. This
“ mutilating operation made him suffer horribly, as the skin had
“adhered firmly to his flesh. In ten days he recovered”'.

Another work relates:

“In the Ching yuen period (7.85 — 805) there lived in the
“district of Wu-clring, which is a subdivision of Kwoh-cheu, in the
“Black Fish valley, a man of the people, named Wang Yung, wdio
“ earned a living by making charcoal in the valley. There was there
“a sheet of water, some pu in circumference, in which that man
“often saw two black fishes swim to the surface, more than a foot
“in length. Once, hungrv with wmod-cutting, he ate one of the
“fishes. At this his scared younger brother exclaimed: ‘Perhaps it
“was an animated animal of this valley; how could you presume
“to take its life?’

“ Some time after, his wife comes to bring him his food. But
“ Yung goes on brandishing his axle, and he is long in turning
“ his face to her. She then perceives something strange in his attitude
“and countenance, and calls his younger brother to come and look.
“ On a sudden he stands quite naked before them, and changes
“into a tiger, with loud roars and bounds. Then straightway
“ he runs into the mountains. Here he kills a roe or stag from
“ time to time, and deposes it at night in the courtyard of the
“ dwelling.

“ Having gone on with this for a year or two, he knocks at the
“door one day, after sunset. ‘I am Yung’, he says; but his brother
“replies: ‘My brother became a tiger more than three years ago;
“what demon here misuses his name?’ Upon which the other retorts :


' S** >t< HTS®

imam. ttlfe

» . w * te =• . iji A > * It . ja la & * g: .

B ^ M f S««»;TS. sect, If cl., 316.


TIGROANTHROPV INFLICTED AS A PUNISHMENT.


177


“ ‘ In that year, the Nether- world doomed me to become a tiger for
“ having killed the black fish, and an official there had a hundred
“ blows inflicted on me because I murdered a man. They have now
“ set me at liberty, and I have wounds caused by the sticks all
“over my body; look at me, brother, and give up your mistrust’.
“ Elated, the brother opens the door immediately, and beholds a
“ man with a tiger’s head. He is so frightened bv the sight that
he dies, and the whole family flee on all sides, screaming and
“yelling; and the end of the story is, that the villagers despatch
“ the monster. Then examining the body, they discover a black
“spot on it, which proves it to be Wang Yung’s, and his head
“alone has remained unchanged. In the Yuen hwo period, the
“ local scholar Chao Tsfi-yoh, who often frequented that glen, still
“found this tale current among the villagers” '.

This tale is not in every respect so wild and fanciful as it
appears at first sight. Evidently it places before us a man who, by
eating some venomous aquatic animal, incurred a disease with such
symptoms as a swollen, deformed head, and delirious fever driving
him mad into the forest. All the rest we put to the account of
the fancy of rural simplicity, dominated by lycanthropic superstition.

We must now return for a moment to the story of Clung Sill’s


^ i * .a 31 ® fi

® 0 . a it it s ¥ ^ e w A tt . X

B S ifi PjI P‘1 . H, - A . a « * t . 0 If 5E . ® #

# S > K S # A iS 2; . X S' ^ . "fi

>t> . .B. It A la Yiu-ycnig tsah Uu, supplement, ch. 2.


12


178


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


equerry (page 175). There is a point in it which cannot have failed
to strike the reader who is acquainted somewhat with the main features
of European lycanthropy, namely, that that man became a tiger
by the wearing of a tiger-skin. In Europe also men became were-
wolves in a corresponding way. Jean Grenier avowed that he wore
sometimes a wolf-skin, given him by an individual whom he called
Monsieur de la Forest, together with an unguent to besmear him-
self with h In Normandy, people aver that those who are doomed to
become loups garous must clothe themselves every evening with
a h ii r e or wolf-hide, which is a loan from the devil -. The w u k o d 1 a k
in Servia, during the meetings they hold in winter, hang their
skins on the trees, and if any one manages to seize and burn one,
the were-wolf to whom it belongs is thenceforth disenchanted
An Esthonian saga acquaints us with a she-wolf, who, whenever
she was alone, placed her skin on a rock to suckle her child ; and
her husband, who had perceived this, ordered the rock to be heated,
that the skin might be burned and his consort restored to him
And the old Norse Volsunga Saga speaks in the same strain when
it acquaints us, in its eighth chapter, with two princes who
were men only once in every five days, and on all other days
roved about as wolves, dressing themselves to this end in skins of
those animals. Sigmund and Sinfiotle took away those hides, slung
them around their bodies, and ran through the forests as wolves;
and when the time came that they could put them otf, they burned
them, lest they should cause further evil. In Armenia, thus we
learn from Von Haxthausen “ gibt es Weiber, die in Folge
“ schwerer Siinde von Gott gestraft sind, dass sie sieben Jahre lang
“ in Wolfe verwandelt werden. Es tritt dann in einer Nacht ein
“ Geist zu einem solchen Weibe mit einem Wolfsfelle, und befiehlt
“ihm es anzuziehen. Sowie es dies gethan, entstehen in ihm ent-
“ setzlichc Wolfsgeliiste. Anfangs kiimpft die menschliche Natur mit
“ diesen, aber bald gewimien jene die Oberhand, und nun frisst das
“ Weib zuerst die eigenen Kinder auf, dann die Kinder der Ver-
“ wandten nach der Niilie des Grades, zuletzt fremde Kinder. Es
“ wiithet nur des Nachts ; sowie der Morgen nahet wire! es wieder
“ zum Weibe, wirft das Fell ab, und versteckt dies sorgfiiltig.


1 Baring Gould, pp. 88, 92, 94.

2 Ibid., p. 107.

3 Ibid., p. 115.

4 De Gubernati.s, Zoological Mythology, II, p. 144.

5 Transkaukasia, I, p. 322.


TRANSFORMATION INTO A BEAST BT MEANS OF ITS SKIN. 179

“ Einst sah ein Mann einen Wolf, der ein Kind ergriffen, fort-
“springen. Er verfolgt ihn eilig, kann ihn aber nicht erreichen.
“ Endlich gegen Morgen findet er auf einer Stelle die Hiinde und
“ Fiisse eines Kindes und die Blutspiiren ; er entdeckt eine nahe
“ Hohle und findet in derselben ein Wolfsfell. Er nimmt es, raaclit
“ rasch ein Feuer an und wirft es hinein ; da erscheint plotzlich
“ ein Weib und jamniert und heult ganz entsetzlich und springt
“ um das Feuer, und will das schon brennende Fell herausziehen.
“Aber der Mann verhindert es; kaum ist aber das Fell verbrannt,
“ so ist auch das Weib im Rauche verschwunden”.

According to prevailing belief in Europe, certain girdles also
could produce the metamorphosis. “ The were-wolves”, thus Richard
Verstegan wrote, “ use oyntment, and a girdle inchaunted, and to
“ their own thinking are wolves as long as they wear the said
“girdle” h “Nach illtesten einheimischen Begrifie”, says Grimm®,
“ hiingt Annahme der Wolfsgestalt ab von dem Ueberwerfen eines
“ Wolfgiirtels oder Wolfhemds. Jeder das Wolfhemd anlegende und
“der damit Bezauberte erfiihrt Umwandlung, und bleibt neuntage-
“lang Wolf; nach anderen Sagen muss er drei, sieben oder neun
“ Jahre in dem Wolfsleib beharren. Mit dem Aussehen nimmt er
“zugleich Wildheit und Heulen des Wolfs an; Walder durch-
“streifend zerfleischt er Alles was ihm vorkommt”.

Stories of men transformed into tigers by wearing a skin of
the monster, are abundant in China. One, bringing out more
clearly than any other this trait of lycanthropy, we select for
insertion here. “ In Ning-p'o (in Chehkiang), Cli'en Shih-san, an
“ old man, has laboured under fever for longer than a year, without
“ recovering, when some one advises him to subdue his illness by
“ procuring a tiger-skin. Thenceforth he sits and sleeps upon such
“a skin for more than ten years, but he remains as ill as ever he
“was. After that, he suddenly wraps the skin around his body,
“ leaves the house in the dark of night, and changes into a
“ tiger. Devouring animals, he frequently brings house-pigs to the
“dwelling, and the inmates thus being profited, never ask whence
“ he got them.

“ One day he appears with the thigh of a man on his back.
“‘That old bandit’, exclaims his affrighted sister-in-law, ‘he plays
“the demon!’ - — and at once she grasps a flail; but the other


1 Restitution of Decayed Intelligence in Antiquities, 1628.

2 “Deutsche Mythologie”, p. 916.


ISO


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ crouches down outside the door, and before the eyes of the woman,
“ clothes himself in the skin, in order to assume the other shape.
“ The woman however, hurrying forth immediately, gives him a
“ thrashing before one of his hands has undergone metamorphosis.
“ With a bound he escapes, to come back no more.

“Thenceforth, those who pass through the mountains see a tiger
“now and then, with a fore-paw like a human hand. Those who
“know what has happened exclaim; ‘Ch'^en Shih-san, old man, lam
“your neighbour, harm me not’; and then the brute droops the
“tips of his ears, and with his tail hanging down, withdraws:
“but all those who do not know him, the monster devours. Thus
“ several years pass on, till one night a tiger is killed by a violent
“thunderstorm. All run out to see the beast, and find an old man
“with a human hand” b

Remarking, in passing, that this tale furnishes a new illustration
of the belief that were-tigers are harmless to those who show
them that they know their name (comp, page 165 ), we must
here draw peculiar attention to its bringing us on the track of
another trait which Chinese tiger-lore has in common with our
own lycanthropy, namely, that were-beasts are by no means always
viciously disposed towards those with whom they are related by
kinship or other ties. They may even be kind enough to provide
them with cattle and venison. Such a kind were-tiger also was
VVang Yung, whose story wc gave on page 176 . VVere-tigresses,


^ ^ A *1 * FIf ^ ffl *=

- 0 i it M - A ® a . * it® H . * M -tt g

» # »i # 0 . » + s * A, f-m. # -ft IS

Hu


WCl.


WERE-ANIMALS ARE NOT ALWAYS DANGEROUS. 181

too, are described sometimes as amiably disposed, especially towards
those who excite their love or sexual passion. “Thus it happened
“under the Tsin dynasty, in the last year of the Tmi yuen period
“ (A.D. 396), that one Si'i Hwan, on leaving his dwelling, perceived
“ in vague form a maid, who fascinated him by a ditty, and
“ wanted him to go between the shrubs He follows her, enchanted
“ by her charms ; but on a sudden she changes into a tigress,
“ takes Hwan on her back, and runs off with him straightway into
“ the deepest of the hills. His neighbours seek him everywhere,
“ but discover nothing but the track of the brute. Ten days after,
“ the tigress brings him back, and deposes him at the gate of his
“ house” *.

Europe, too, had her good-natured and virtuous lycanthropes. The
Hessian myth, given on page 165, acquaints us with a dutiful house-
wife, turning herself into a wolf out of mere affection for her
famishing husband and children, whom she is anxious to provide
with animal food from the forests, meadows, stables and pens. In
Russia, wawkalak whom the devil has punished with this meta-
morphosis, are generally recognised by their fiimily and well fed;
they do them no harm at all, and even lick their hands ^ A were-
wolf noble by birth and character was knight Bisclaveret, saved from
oblivion by Marie de France, who panegyrized him about the year
1200 in a poem ; still nobler a part he plays as knight Biclarel
in the “ Roman du Renard Contrefait”, composed in the first half
of the fourteenth century. To the same kind-hearted, helpful type
belonged the hero of the Lai de Melion of the thirteenth century,
a knight of king Artus, doomed to wander about as a werewolf
for a long time in consequence of a shameless trick of his wife h
But the most generous and noble werewolf of all times and
countries was the royal scion wdio helped Guillaume de Palerne, the
infant son of Bbron, king of Pouille, across the Straits of Messina to a
forest about Rome, where he brought him up, to save him a second
time from starvation when, a grown youth, he fled, after a


* W .fii Stl A m = * 6 IS* .AT- «

•E . * .a , -ft B £ ii e . T P’1 *1- '

2 Baring Gould, page IIG. Hertz, page 120.

3 Karl Warnke, ‘‘Die Lais der Marie de Fi’ance”, 1885, pp. LXXIV S(iq.


18:2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


series of adventures, into the woods with his beloved Melior, the
daughter of the emperor of Rome b

But the vveretiger and the werewolf show themselves in China
in bv far most cases from a very bad side. The cruel, bloodthirsty
character of the brutes must, of course, in general preponderate
and turn them into real man-eaters and cattle-destroyers. On this
account they decidedly claim a place among the broad class of demons
and devils. So we shall have to give our attention to them again
in chapter V of the next Part of this Book, in the first and the
second section, which the reader may accordingly consider as direct
continuations of the present one and the next.


2. Lycanthropy.

Although, as the foregoing pages show with abundance of evidence,
the part of the werewolf is fully played in China by the royal tiger,
China possesses also the real werewolf, in every respect the counter-
part of our wawkalak or loup-garou. He is not referred
to in the native literature so often as the man-tiger; which is, no
doubt, owing in the first place to the circumstance, that the area
over which the wolf is distributed is not by far so vast as that
where the tiger lives. He was, in fact, stated already by authors
under the T'ang dynasty not to exist south of the Yang-t&ze” b

In the fourth century, all wolves were stated categorically by
Koh Hung to be transmutable into men, provided they had passed
their five-hundredth year of age. “ Poxes and wolves”, thus he
wrote, “may all attain an age of eight hundred years, and when
“ more than five hundred years old, they are able to metamorphose
“ themselves into beings shaped like men” The Standard Histories
of the same period also testify to the prevalence of the belief
in Isegrim as a turncoat, and that in such wording as leaves
no room for doubting that belief was general. “Wang 1”, thus
we read, “whose cognomen was Chung-teh, was seventeen years
“old, when Pu Kien was defeated. Pie and his brother Jui

1 Michelant, ‘■Guillaume de Palerne”, 1876, published by the “Societe des Anciens
Textes Francais".

2 yiii-yft/iff tboh Isu: T S, sect. ch. 70.

^ « 11 it II ^ * A W SI . « S W « »J * gli

P'oh-tsze, ch. 1, sect. 3.


GOOD-NATURED WEREWOLVES.


183


“then raised a division of volunteers, whom they led to battle
“ against Mu-yung Ch'ui ; but they were worsted, and Chung-teh,
“ wounded severely, had to take to flight, and went astray with his
“family. After crossing a vast sheet of water, they were unable to
“ proceed any further, and quite exhausted, they laid themselves down
“in the thicket, when suddenly a youth appeared in blue clothes,
“ riding on a cow. Perceiving Chung-teh, he asks him whether he had
“something to eat; and the latter avowing how hungry he is, the
“youth goes away, and returns after a while with some food, which
“he gives him. His hunger being thus appeased, Chung-teh is
“anxious to proceed; but just then the stream is swelling tremen-
“ dously, so that all are at a loss where to save themselves. But
“now a white wolf appears before them. Lifting its eyes up to the
“ sky, it howls, takes Chung-teh’s robe between its jaws, and helps
“him across the water; and Chung-teh is thus saved, and rejoins
“ his brother ....

“ When he ruled for the third time over the Sii-cheu region (North-
“ western Kiangsu), displaying there his awe-inspiring virtues in the
“ city of P^eng, he built a Buddhist convent with a pagoda, in
“ which he placed an image of the white wolf-youth whom he had
“ met at that time in Ho-poh ; and in the thirteenth year he conferred
“on him the title of General subduing the North. He departed this
“life in the fifteenth year (of the Yuen kia period, A.D. 438),
“ and then in his soul-temple too an altar was erected in honour
“ of the white wolf-youth ; and when offerings were presented in
“ the edifice, they never neglected to sacrifice on that altar” h


# * . « A ^ ^ it * . ffl EH # t ^ « a

M , ^ )!)f Sw . W — S M # . fp A BB # , 9 Bt

...

« ;sr ft )?f a * , + =

Books of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 40, 11. 2 and 5. See ako the
History of the South, ch. 25, 11. 1 ami ,'t.


184


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


This narrative shows as the Chinese werewolf from his good side,
as a deus ex machinu, well-disposed to men, as so many of his
confreres in Europe. It is, however, especially in his other character
that he fascinates popular imagination, that is to say, as a ravening
man-eater, a true demon, almost equalling the tiger in ferocity and
dangerousness. As such the reader will find him described in a few
special pages of our chapter on Animal-demons, the fifth of the
next Part of this Book.


3. Cynanthropy.

Transformations of men into dogs, or of dogs into men, do not,
as far as we know, appear in Chinese literature earlier than the
first century B. C. In that epoch it occurred, according to the

Standard History of the Han dynasty, “ under the reign of the
“emperor Ch'ing, in the first year of the Ho pHng period

“ (28 B.C.), that two men in Chhmg-ngan, named Shih Liang and
“ Liu Yin, who lived in the same dwelling, found in their room
“ a being in a human shape, whom they belaboured with blows
“so soundly that he turned into a dog, and ran out of the

“ house. Thereupon several men in coat of mail, armed with spears
“and bows, marched up to Liang’s house; but the owner and his
“ people received them so heroically with blows and strokes, that
“ they were killed or wounded, and then all changed into dogs.
“ Their attacks lasted from the second month till the sixth” h

Tao Tsden wrote in his collection of tales and marvels:

“In Lin-lil (in Honan) there stood at the foot of a mountain a
“ pavilion, where people, when they passed the night in it, frequently
“ incurred disease and death. It was then generally taken for a
“ meeting-place for a mixed company of ten or more human beings
“ of both sexes, who, sometimes in black, at other times in yellow
“clothes, amused themselves there with playing at cards. A certain
“ Chih Poh-i once passed the night there, reciting the classics by the
“light of a torch, when towards midnight over ten people appeared

4 -.# M

^ ^ U ^ A A it ■ Books of file Early flan

Dynasty, di. 27, II, 1. 32.


ON MAN-DOGS.


1S5


“ sat down at his side, and played a rubber. Poh-i stealthily lighted
“ them with the torch, and recognized them as a pack of dogs. He
“brandished the torch to make it flame up, and by mistake singed
“their clothes, which then spread a stench like burning hair. Having
“a knife in his bosom, he seized one of the men, and stabbed him.
“ He uttered a human cry, but, on dying, |turned into a dog.
“All the rest ran away” k

“ b nder the T ang dynasty”, thus another author relates, “ there
“existed in the Ching yuen period (A.D. 7S5 — 804) one Mr. Han,
“ Secretary to the Court of Revision. He resided temporarily in
“ the south of the Si-ho region, and there possessed a horse, a
“most noble and mettlesome creature. One fine morning this animal
“stands in the stable with stooped head, sweating and panting as
“ if exhausted by a long ride. The astonished groom reports the
“matter to his master, who turns his anger against him, saying;
“ ‘ Whose fault is it that horse-thieves ride out in the night on my
“steed and exhaust it?’ He then orders him to be cudgeled, and
“ the groom having no arguments to defend himself with, has to
“submit patiently to this treatment.

“ Next morning he finds the horse sweating and panting again.
“ Struck with silent astonishment stands the groom, and nobody
“ can suggest an explanation of the matter. So he lays himself
“ down that night at the closed stable door, to watch the horse

“ through the crevice. Suddenly he sees the black dog which

“ Mr. Plan keeps, enter the stable, barking and leaping, and it
“changes into a man with a deep black dress on, and a hat

“ of the same colour. That man saddles the horse, mounts it,

“ and galops ofi. At tlie gate of the house, which is very high,
“ as is also the surrounding wall, the black man gives the horse
“ the whip, thus making it leap the gate with a bound. Then


+ fHfl wae -f&mm

S . t-t fiS % SUg 77 - A #i| t ft A .

. S/tcu ■''hen heu Li. ch. 0.


186


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ off he rides ; and on coming back he alights, unsaddles the animal,
“and barking and jumping as before, re-assumes his dog’s form.
•• Much scared and astonished is the groom at all this, but he
“lacks the courage to say a word about it.

“Thus time goes on, until one evening the dog rides off again,
“and returns at daybreak. Just then the weather clears up after
“some showers, and the track of the horse being visible on
“ the ground over the whole way it has made, the groom follows
“it, and is thus led in a southern direction to the premises of an
“old grave, over ten miles off. The prints being lost here, the
“groom builds a small shed of grass on the spot, and next evening
“conceals himself in it to watch. Towards midnight the black man
“appears on horseback. He alights, tics the horse to a wild tree,
“and enters the grave, where he has a most merry conversation
“ with several other individuals. The groom, crouched in the shed,
“overhears all they say, but he dares not stir ere the man in
“black announces towards daybreak that he is going, and is seen
“ out of the grave by several persons.

“ No sooner is that man in the open, than a person in a grey
“ hairy dress asks him : ‘ Where is the list of names of the
“Han family?’ ‘1 have concealed it under the mortar stone’, is
“the answer, ‘do not be anxious about it’. He with the hairy
“coat then replies: ‘Beware of losing it, lest my relations remain
“incomplete’, upon which the other retorts: ‘I will attend to
“your hint’. ‘But’, thus asks the man with the hairy dress again,
“‘has Han’s youngest son been already given a name?’ ‘Not yet’,
“ is the answer, ‘ hut as soon as he gets one I will not forget to
“inscribe it immediately in the list’. ‘Come back here to-morrow
“ night for a merry chat’, adds the hairy-coated man, and on these
“ words the black one spurs his horse, and is off.

“At sunrise the groom returns home, and reveals the matter to his
“ master. Forthwith Han orders some meat to be brought, allures
“the dog with it, and ties it up; then passing to the other point
“revealed to hijn, he examines the mortar stone, and discovers an
“ inscribed scroll under it, bearing the names of Han and all his
“ brothers, his wife, children and servants, not one excepted. It was
“the list of names of the Han family, of which Grey Coat had
“spoken; and the only one not yet inscribed in it was the son
“ born one month before, who could not be any other than the
“said youngest son to whom no name had as yet been given, and
“whom the two men had been speaking about. Greatly surprised.


ON 3IAN-DOGS.


187


“ Han ordered the dog to be taken to the conrtvard. They there
“ whipped it to death, cooked its flesh and regaled the servants
“with it; then with more than ten strong men of the neighbourhood,
“armed with bows, arrows, spears and clubs, they repaired to that
“ old grave in the south. Opening it, they found it occupied by
“ several beings with dog’s hair. Under general surprise they destroyed
“them to the last, and returned home” h


^ — . 61 . B * S . # — 0 !h M.® ® # T 1 S.

Amiam.mrn tt.

n-fkU'^t'VLZ.

A. Asm.

*1 B ^ * S * A 0 » * ,® , S ifii a . .*1 A *
mMWcT' M mwi . X A %<'$m
iiffcSA.aASfS.TJiStS^^A.

# - * A X s .s tfi) * .a K A B.a A a *
A*. B

^sl?^.»AA*S.ira
*. T.S. »TlSfttt.*AA#.«lt}|S#WS
it.

4^tt. S5EA0.®Q'l4ffiti*5T,#^*
A A 0 . It S it.S A « 0 . ® W 4 4. H

A * , W tS ^ 4 a IS 4 « » 4 * . « A 0 .

BJ Xff A® At«*=


188


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


4. Were-foxes,


Though the belief in foxes turning themselves into men, or thus
metamorphosed by the agency of some human soul, is undoubtedly
very ancient, its prevalence cannot be traced in Chinese literature
before the early centuries of our era. On page IS’2 we saw that
in the fourth century Koh Hung declared the fox, and the wolf, his
congener, to be transmutable into men, provided they were not
younger than live hundred years. Contemporary fabulists mention
sundry cases of transformations from and into foxes as having taken
place many years before that. Yii Pao, for example, wrote:

“In the Kien ngan period of the Later Han dynasty (A. I).
“ 196 — 2.20), when one Ch'en Sien, a native of the P'ei-kwoh
“ region, was governor of Si-hai (the districts about Koko-nor ?),
“it happened that his subordinate Wang Ling-hiao ran away for
“ no reason at all. Sien intended to punish him with death therc-
“fore, when again, after a short time, he deserted. As he did not
“see him appear, Sien imprisoned his wife; but when this woman
“ had told him the truth about all he asked her, he exclaimed :
“‘To be sure, it is some demon that has carried that man away;
“ let us seek him’. And at the head of several dozen footmen
“and riders he ransacks the environs all around the city with
“ hunting-hounds, and finds Ling-hiao in an empty grave. The
“ hubbub of the men and the hounds amazes him, and he flees, but
“ Sien orders him to be seized and taken home. His shape is
" quite that of a fox, and docs not in any respect correspond to
“ the human form, and no other sounds does he utter but 0-tsze
“ O-tsze (Red), which is a name for foxes. After ten days or so he
“ gradually recovers consciousness, and then he relates the following :


g . S«ea-.I,U,


chi.


WERE-VIXKN ARE WOMEN OF LOW MORALS.


189


“‘When the fox came to me for the first time, it assumed

“ the shape of a lovely woman in a fowl-house standing in a

“ hidden corner of my dwelling. She told me she bore the name

“of 0-tsze, and called me; and when she had done so more than

“once, I followed her, and she became my wife. At night I
“frequently accompanied her to her dwelling, without being
“perceived by the dogs we met; the pleasures I enjoyed with her
“ were incomparably delightful'. A Taoist doctor declared that vixen
“to be a mountain-devil. The Description of Famous ^Mountains
“says, that the fox is a lewd wife, who lived in remotest times and
“bore the name of 0-tsze; she adopted the fox shape, and hence
“it is that such spooks often call themselves 0-tsze” b

The writings of the same author contain sundry other tales
which show clearly that the belief in were-foxes and their tricks
was most general in his time; and they acquaint us with some
other superstitions worthy of attention. “On the tomb of King
“ Hwui of the realm of Yen (who reigned from .277 to 270 B.C.)
“foxes lived, over a thousand years old. Peerless metamorphosed
“spiritual beings they were, such as seldom exist in this world.
“ When they heard of Chang Hwa, the Minister of Works of the
“Tsin dynasty (Hook 1, p. 422), an accomplished scholar, licli
“in talents, they transformed themselves into two youthful students
“with extraordinary capacities and fine features, mounted on


-t ^ 7' A , 0 * S , S 0 W St . IS 0 . «

^ , Ift .ft # T S » . M A ^ S * .

^ y ^ ^

# iS * I# . K £ tt # B9 tt ® . g «
H . tS ® . 4n Ilk tt — . .S ® d M i < in H S
WS ^ il * « .a « 7 1 5- * tk tfe.a. ± ,

cli. 18 .


190


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ horseback, and rode out. Before the grave, they pass along the
“ spirit of the glorification-tree, who asks them : ‘ Where are you
“going?’ ‘We have heard of Chang Hwa, the Minister of Tsin;
“so scholarly, so talented he is that we are setting out for his
“dwelling, to discourse with him’. On which the spirit of the
“tree retorts: ‘He is so incomparably clever that, if you go,
“you will be sure to forfeit your bodies, and I also shall incur
“ evil for it. Disregard my advice, and a day of repentance will
“ come’. But the foxes answer not ; they pass on, and holding
“ the thornbridles, they call on Hwa, who introduces them into
“ his house.

“Three days long they discourse with him, and they are not
“checkmated. Thus Hwa begins to entertain serious suspicions, and
“feels sure they are spooks. He has a sleeping-place swept clean
“for them, and invites them to stay; and when they have entered,
“he stations a watch on the soot. Just then one Lei Khiins-
“ chang calls on him. As Hwa tells him of the two scholars,
“and of his conviction that they are spooks, this man has an
“outburst of laughter. ‘You’, he exclaims, ‘you, who are the chiet
“ pillar and the main beam of the State ; you, who vomit out or
“ eat (reject or accept) all scholars appointed for official employ,
“ placing the clever in active service, and dismissing the worth-
“less — how can you feel any animosity against the capacities
“and attainments of others? He who decries others as spooks
“on account of his own lack of talents, makes himself an object
“ of derision for all the world. If you suspect them, well, call the
“ hounds and try what they are’.

“Hwa now orders out the hounds; but during all the time the
“ experiment lasts, the two men do not show the slightest fear.
“This enhances Hwa’s rage. ‘To be sure’, he exclaims, ‘spectres
“of the true sort they are. If a hundred years old, they must
“change their shape in the sight of hounds; if they are spooks of
“a thousand years, they must change when fire produced by an
“animated tree of the same old age shines on them’. ‘Where to
“find such a tree?’ Khung-chang asks. ‘People say’, thus is the
“answer, ‘there is a glorification-tree before the tomb of Hwui,
“the king of Yen, which has that age’. And they send some servants
“thither to fetch it.

“\Yhen these men come to the tree, a young child in blue
“garments is sitting in a cavity of it. It asks them what they come
“for. ‘Chang, the Minister’, they reply, ‘has two young men with


[NTKLLIGENCE AND LEARNEDNESS OF WERE-FOXES.


191


“him, so intelligent, and discussing so cleverly, that he suspects
“them to be spooks; so he has ordered us to fetch this glorifi-
“ cation-tree, to shine upon them’. ‘So those old foxes have
“disregarded my advice, ignoramuses that they are!’ exclaims he
“with the blue clothes, ‘and the evil created thereby extends to
“me already to-day; how then will they possibly escape it!’ Crying
“ and weeping, he vanishes from view. The servants fell the tree,
“ and blood gushes out of it. They take it home, where it is
“ kindled, and the spectres accordingly change their shape, Ilwa
“then cooks them”


m 0 .f- ® ft ZM 0 .a Bfl ® B) S

?l A.

AlWfL 0

Zit‘jS-'»m. AM. 0 . & S

mzm^.

AZ»M.

in lit @ A T M 2 • ft 7 ' "t* A W

— WSW'%.5KWffi0.#
ft**.ffi0.*sis,str-

.a

*aw.4 0 issa

A * g . !S


19:2


THR SOUR IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The fact, which comes out from the two above legends, that
foxes habitually live in old caved-in graves, explains why anthro-
pomorphosis is connected particularly in China with these animals.
In those haunts, Reynard borrows the human form from the
buried corpse by bringing himself in close contact with it, thus
instilling into himself the soul-substance contained in those remains.
Yii Pao brings out by one of his tales that this was indeed
the prevailing idea of his time. ’‘In times of yore, the Buddhist
“ monk Chi-hiien, a native of Ho-shoh, led a life of purity and
“obedience to the Commandments. He wore no silk, but linen;
“he tramped from town to town, never lodging in convents within
“ the cities, but always in mountain-forests abroad. Once he passes
“ the night in a grave-copse, ten miles east of the city of Kiang-
“cheu (in Shansi). By the light of the moon, which shines as
“bright as if it were daytime, he sees a wild fox in the copse,
“ which places withered bones and a skull upon its head, and
“then shakes in such a way that the bones are flung on all
“sides; and it does this three or four times consecutively, until
“the movements of the head no longer make them fall. Then
“ the fox accoutres its body with grass and leaves, and walking
“round the spot, adopts the forms of a woman with eyebrows and
“eyes as lovely as if they were painted; never did this world see
“ her like. Plain and unadorned is her dress. She places herself in
“ the road, behaving as if she feels uneasy, when suddenly the trampling
“of a horses hoofs resounds from the north-west. This makes the
“ woman set up a wailing and weeping so piteous, that it is im-
“ possible to hear it without emotion. A man on horseback appears,
“and seeing her thus cry and in tears, he alights. ‘Lady’, says he,
“‘what brings you here in the dead of night? What do you
“want? May 1 hear it?’ And the woman restrains her tears,
“and says:

“‘I lived in Yih-cheu. There I was married by my parents, two
“years ago, to one of the Chang family, living here by the north
“ gate ; but my fate as a young wife was by no means happy.
“ My husband died an untimely death last year, and thus ruined,
“ thus left without any support, I set out for the far country of
“ my paternal home. But I do not know the road thither, and this
“makes me so sad; indeed, whom shall I ask to tell it me?’ ‘You


/. I, the edition in eight

ciiaptei's, ch. 4.


FOXES BECOMING MEN BY MEANS OF IIIMAN BONES.


193


■'want to return to your native place’, says the other, 'u'ell, there
“ is nothing so simple as that. I am a Yih-oheu official, and was
“despatched from there the other day with a message; I am now
“ on the road back, and if you do not object against the rather
“rough work of horse-driving, I will give up my horse to you. Be so
“ kind as to mount, and take the road there before us’. The woman
“withholds her tears, and says gratefully: ‘If 1 may accept the
“ favour you show me, I shall never forget it’. He invites her to
“ place herself in the saddle, but at that moment Cdii-hiien steps
“ torth from the grave-copse. ‘This is no human being’, he shouts
“ to the military message-bearer, ‘she is a metamorphosed wicked
“ lox. If you do not believe me, then please stav a little while;
“I will re-transform her before your eyes’. He makes a mystic
“ sign (raudra) with his fingers, utters a genuine formula (dharani),

“ brandishes his crosier, and exclaims at the top of his \oice; ‘Why
“ do not you forthwith return to your original form ?’ The ivoman
“ faints miserably, falls down, changes into an old vixen, and expires.

“ Her flesh and blood flow away as one fluid, and all that remains
“ on the body of the fox is the dry bones with the skull, the
grass and the leaves. On seeing these things, the military man is
“ no longer sceptic. He salutes the monk several times by kneeling
“ down and [knocking his heatl against the ground, and passes on
“ with sighs of astonishment and admiration” '.


’

+ Mm

Sn « . .ft - » « # T , » tt ■t #S ^ « ± .

H ^ * *11 .tw itt = H S ^ «

^ s -fif ® ft . t. in -t? . -01 ® ® ^ . A ^ ts a

mmB.

^ a S :HI, M ^ ti ^k B m tr S


13


THE SOUH IX PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


1!J4

The superstition that foxes may transform themselves into men
by the aid of soul-containing human bones, especially by means
of the skull, which is the principal part of the r>keleton, was
formulated bv an author of the ein'lith centurv in the following:
words: “ft is an old saying that the wild fox liears the name of
“ Tsze, Red. At night he strikes tire out of his tail. When he
desires to appear as a s))ook, he puts a human skull on his head
“ and salutes the Great Bear constellation, and the transformation
“ is then effected as soon as the skull ceases to fall” h ft would
be wrong to suppose that Master Reynard, wh.en taking human
forms, does so only for a time relatively short. Fox-mythology
furnishes manv instances of his havim; lived a full lifetime as a
man, and remaining unmasked till after his death, "llu Tao-hiah”,
thus e. (j. we read in tin; 1 tjncu, “ pretended to be a native of
“ Kwang-ling. He was addicted to chant and music, and to the
'• exercise of the medical art. rank smell he had about him,
“ against the dangerous conseiiuences of which he sought to protect
“ himself by using renowned aromatics, for he feared nothing like
“ fieree dogs. Having calculated his own death-day, he said to his
“pupils: ‘When 1 draw my last breath, you must prepare my
“ body for the grave without allowing iiny dog to see it’. He
“died at the south side of the mounts, and having colHned him,
“they felt that the cotfin was empty. Immediately they opened it,


ift , « * ^ y; * SS H tf. tR . e -fsr W

« . ® W ± .i a * e . * ^ 75 JtevB .!» 0 *1

lit * « * . W It In ^

2 * 7' e ¥ ft B# . S K §■ ili, g ± £

^ ra a ro fl . -ft S * K ffii 5E . S j& . ti fl- #g

mmM

¥ ^ . 1^ i?" ns A" . Shell s/ien Li. the edition in eight chapters: cli. 7.

K ft , HI It 4 . ® b1 3f: H Hi| tS A ^ . Yill-j/ll lilj l.S'l/l Isli,
ch. 13.


THE TRIBAL NAME OF WERE-FOXF.S.


195


" and saw no corpse. Everybody then proclaimed him to have
“ been a fox” \

Even without collating them with other legends refi.-rriug to the
fox, easily accessible in Chinese literature, the above pages give the
reader all the main features of China’s early were-fox lore. They do
not represent were-foxes as creatures ])ositively wicked and eneinical
to man, for, in tact, Reynard as a beast is not ferocious or dan-
gerous. But many tales in the same domain, perhaps their majority,
depict him as a malicious being, holding rank with the tiger, the
wolf and other animals among the evil demons. It is in this aspect
especially that he lives in Chinese thought and tradition, so that we
shall have to occupy ourselves with him again in a chapter on
Animal demons, inserted in Part 11 of this Book.

Just now, in the tale of Hu Tao-hiah, we saw the fox as a man
bearing the tribal name of Hu ■^ . This brings us on the track
of one of Reynard’s many tricks. Often, in fact, as authors assure
us, he intrudes himself into human society as a bearer of that
surname, or of the personal name of 0-hu , thus cleverly

disguising his real name Fox which is pronounced likewise
hu. In most cases this trick is efficacious, the family-name Hu
being borne in China by too many people to arouse suspicion.
But only people of small intellect are deceived by it, and clever
men are generally watchful against all members of the Hu tribe
they come in contact with.

That foxish artifice to dissimulate his identity under a pseudonym,
without lying, was known already in Yil Pao’s time. He tells us
that “there lived in the Wu region a man of letters, a hoary-
“ headed sire, named Hu the Doctor. He occupied himself with
“ giving instruction to students. Suddenly he was seen no more.

■'* Then on the ninth day of the ninth month the scholars together
“ climbed the hills for a stroll. There a noise as if some one were
“ explaining a book, reached their ears. They told their servants to
“ see where it came from, and these men saw in an empty grave
“ a pack of foxes, drawn up in files. On seeing people come, they


If" El # g l?5^ .ti ,S. S S # 5E 0
• « tg S . W ^ T* ii . 0# A S « * • >- K

cli. 447.


196


THE sour, ]N PHILOSOPHY AND FOI,K-CONCEPTION.


“immediately ran off, and an old fox was the only one which
“did not decamp. In him they recognized the hoary-headed book-
“ man”


5. Man-bears.

That the belief in man-bears is very old, we saw on page 1 59,
where we stated that the soul of a dead man, haunting the
bedroom of the ailing prince of Tsin in the shape of a bear,
forms the topic of an episode recorded in the Tso ch'^icen among
the events of the year 534 befoi-e onr era. Tsze-ch"an, who, as we
saw in the same place, was consulted rdrout this spook by Han
Siien-tsze ', declared it to lie the soul of a progenitor of the Hia
dynasty, banished more than seventeen hundred years previously
for mis-nianagement of works against terrible floods harrassing
the Empire at that time (comp. B. 1, p. 956). “Anciently”, he
said, “when Yao imprisoned (or killed?) Kwun on mount Yii,
“his soul (shen) changed into a yellow bear, and in this shape
“entered into the abyss of Yii. In the reign of the House of Hia
“he was actually an object of sacrificial worship in the suburbs,
“and the three dynasties (of Hia, Shang and Cheu) all have
“ sacrificed there to him ; the kingdom of Tsin is now at the head
“of a confederation; perhaps it has not fulfilled that duty as yet?’
“ Han Sfien-tszc thereupon presented the Hia sacrifice in the suburb,
“on which the Ruler became a little better”’.

In spite of the oldness of the belief in were-bears. Bruin as a
versipellis never played a part of importance in Chinese life and
thought, and tales referring to him in that character are scarce in
the books. This is, of course, not so much ascribable to lack or


-

a. » IS 1 5iii . H ti; ill 2 . w ® a ± , it « * * ^

. Seventh year of tlie ruler

Cliao’s reign.


WERE-BEARS AND WERE-STAGS.


197


superstition as to lack of bears, these animals having apparently
always been pretty rare in historical China, or not having existed
at all in many parts. The I ijuen relates of ‘•a man, named
“ Hwang Siu, of Kao-p'ing in Shao-ling (Hunan province}, who
“entered the mountains in the third year of the Yuen kia period
“(A.D. 4.26), and did not come back for a month. His son Ken-
“sheng, in search of him, found him cowered down in a hollow
“tree, covered from head to waist with hair in colour like that of
“ a bear. On his asking him how he got in that condition, he said :
“‘It is a punishment inflicted on me by heaven; you will have
“to go from here alone’. Sheng burst into piteous wailing, and went
“ home. After a year, the woodcutters saw that his form had become
“ in every respect that of a bear” k


6. Were-stags.

References to anthropomorphous stags or to stag-shaped men
we have not found in Chinese literature prior to the fourth
century. Koh Hung is the first to mention them. He tells us of
“one Chang Kai-tah and one Ngeu Kao-chdng, two men giving
“ themselves up to the refining of their thoughts and reflections in
“a grotto in the Yiin-t'ai mounts, before Mhom unawares a man
“ appeared, dressed in a single robe of yellow silk and a headkerchief
“of Uolichos cloth. ‘Excuse me, Taoist doctors’, said he, ‘this
“is a hard and bitter life of seclusion’; but the two men looked
“into a mirror, and discovered therein that they had to do with
“a stag. ‘You are an old mountain-deer’, they said, ' how' dare
“you assume human forms?’ and before they had spoken the:^e
“ words, the visitor turned into a stag and careered oft”


KK. cli 442.

S ^ - A ® rfi ft * *. 0 .


198


THE SOUJ. IX PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


It was Koh Hung’s firm opinion that stags, to be able to thus
undergo transformation, had to be extremely old. “ Tigers”, he
wrote, “ and stags and hares, can all live a thousand years, and
of those which have reached the full age of five hundred, the
“ hair turns white. If they can attain the last-named age, they are
“ also able to be metamorphosed”

An old legend of a man changed into a stag we have in the
I yuen. “One P'eng Shi, from Loh-ngan in the P'o-yang region
“(in Kiangsi province), a hunter by occupation, lives in the Hien
“khang period (A.D. 335 — 343), and is accompanied by his son
“ whenever he goes up country. Once he stumbles, falls down, and
“changes into a stag, which jumps about and galops off. His son
“gives up hunting for the whole of his life, but his grandson takes
“ up the business anew. Once he shoots a white stag with a Taoist
“ charm of the seven stars (the Greater Bear) between its antlers,
“and his grandfather’s names and abode, as also his year and
“ month (of birth). This sight arouses in him remorse to such a
“degree that he gives up hunting for ever”®.

Koh Hung’s legend of the two Taoist hermits with the stag sug-
gests that the stag is in China suspected of sometimes seeking inter-
course with men with objects not quite innocent, and intended to
distur!) their religious zeal. On the other hand we have tales that
represent it as having resorted to men in perfect good faith, in order
to embrace their life of religious ascetism, and thus walk by their
help in the path of salvation. “ In mount Sung”, thus we read,
“an aged Buddhist monk had constructed a straw hut, where,
“lietween shrubs and creepers, he led a life of obedience to the


ft )« Ji , a PI ^ B . ft * lU tp * IB . -f? « ® A

section

# A W S S tfc '■ Sit ® •

Ul « T Bii « . -ft: IS - 1* , gt !1 tfij

^ M S lit XK ii St It K K, ck. 413 .


STAGS EMBRACING BGBmiST RELIGIOUS LIFE.


199


“Coiiimandtnents, without ever going out. Unexpectedly he beholds
“;i young lad, who greets him, and entreats him to make him
“his disciple. But the anchorite goes on reciting his holy books
“ without looking up. So the boy stands there from morn till
“eve, and then the monk asks him: ‘My son, what have you
“come to these high mountains for, where human footprints are
“scarcely ever seen? Why do you desire to become mv disciple?’
“‘I have been living on this hill’, he answers; my parents are
“dead, so that I am without any protectors and am so young.
“I feel sure I deserve this fate for not having cultivated virtue
“in my previous existences; therefore I have vowed to abjure
“wordliness and to seek a Master; verily, 1 long to cultivate
“ the blissful state of the world to come’. ‘ But are you able to
“do it?’ asks the monk. ‘Should my words not be consonant
“with my heart’, is the answer, ‘then may not only you, INIastcr,
“ but also Emperor Heaven and Empress Earth withhold from me
“ their pardon’.

“The monk finds him clever and intelligent, and secs in him
“ a person with much disposition for good. He gives him the
“ tonsure, and so energetic and industrious does he prove as a
“ disciple, that his likes are but seldom found. When he trains other
“monks in the Law, they are unable to contradict him, and when
“ he asks the brethren for instruction in the doctrines, they never
“checkmate him. No wonder that the old monk appreciates him
“ highly, nay, he regards him as a saint and a sage.

“ Thus many years go on, till in a frosty autumn the leaves of
“ the trees are falling. A cold breeze is drearily blowing, and in
“ the glens it is all bright freezing weather, when suddenly the
“young monk scans the four points of the compass and screams
“out in a distinct voice: ‘In the depth of the mountains I grew
“up to old age; why ditl I leave them for that one and only
“Church? I waver as to whether I shall betake myself to my
“ companions of old, and give up tormenting my soul any longer
“from morn till eve’. Then again he sends forth a protracted scream,
“and after a while a troop of stags appears, and runs past the
“spot. Then the young man begins to hop; he throws off his
“religious garb, changes into a stag, joins the troop with a bound,

“ and is off’’

®. ji - 4' a . « # SI . s # IS . tt ti li ^


30U


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


7. Were-monkeys.

Nor is the monkey, resembling man, as it does, more than any
other animal in outward appearance and intelligence, looked for in
vain in the Chinese list of turncoats. In the Annals of the King-
doms of \Vu and Yueh, which were written in the first century
of our era, we are told that Keu Tsien ', who ruled Yueh in the
fifth century before Christ, on being told by his Minister of a


ft A » » « . ^1' a H « s , X a -far # ® flfs -T- . 'i'
w . « ® * tt a 0 , 4h ft a 0 .

ft # S « « fil/l . ¥ W » # . « iji? ft T ft > ft ^

»*.


^ S ft > r# ® S
SMmm

HW A*ft-P'^
^ if it :


. RU "ft 0 . « * ft 4 '3? Ul ft .

, St S IS # tin i ■ B

nientioneil in the Catalogue of the OW Hooks of the TAng D^-nasty
(ch. 39. 1. 20) as a work in ten cha|iters, hy one Liu Siang W jjj!^ : but Ch en
Chen-sun ass- ali.is Chih-chai 7^ , of the Sung dyn.isty. says in liis
bihliography known as ChiJi rhai sliv lull l;un t i 7^ , “An-

notated Catalogue of Chih-chai", in twentv-two chapters, that a certain Li A'in
is the author of it: see 11 c/t tiien t'lniij khao, ch. 215, I. 13. From
several date.s given in the woik, we conclude that it must have been written towards
the close of the reign of the Tang dynasty. It is one of the .sources from which
the compilers of the KK have copiously drawn: the above tale is from ch. 443 of
this compendium.


OLD MONKEYS IN PARTICULAR MAY BECOME MEN.


■20 i

certain lady versed in the noble art of fencing and fighting, “sent
“a messenger to her, with orders to bring her to Court, to be
“ interrogated there about the use of swords and spears. The
“ lady set out for the north to appear before His Majesty, and fell
“ in on the way thither with an old man, who told her he was a
“ Mr. Yuen. ‘I have heard’, said he, ‘of your dexterity in the use
“of the sword; please show me one single proof of it’. On which
“the dame answered: ‘I am not so bold as to conceal my
“capacities; put me to the test. Sir’. At these words Mr. Yuen
“grasped a lin-yfi bamboo stem and swung about on a twig
“ of it, which, coming down, was seized immediately by the woman,
“ so that Mr. Yuen was hurled into a tree and changed into a
* white monkey. Then the lady took leave of him, and pursued
“ her journey ” b

To judge from this legend, as also from some others given in
books, superstition and tradition ascribed the capacity of trans-
formation into men especially to old monkeys, preferably as old
as Methuselah, the product t)f the metamorphosis then being a
greybeard hoary with age. The author of the Shuh i li, who
lived in the sixth century, was evidently imbued with these ideas
when he asserted “ that monkeys, when five hundred years old,
“change into kioh (certain large gibbons), which become old men
“when they attain the age of a thousand years’’^. It is worthy
of consideration that the monkey-man of the Wu and Yueh
Annals called himself a member of the Yuen tribe. This name
(^) has the same pronunciation as a word denoting a certain
monkey or gibbon species, and its written form occurs, moreover,
as principal component in the written name of that animal (^^).
In subsequent ages it continues a feature of monkey- myth to
represent were-monkeys as persons bearing that trilial name, just
as man-foxes were, as we saw on page 195, often believed to be
members of the IIu tribe.

.fil I ®

Yueh chuoi-ts iu. ch. V, second [lart.


2U2


TUE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND TOLK-CONCEPTION.


As well as the fox and the stag, the monkey is notorious in
Chinese mythology for embracing sometimes, in a human shape,
-Buddhist religious life and ascetism. In this virtuous character we
find him e. g. in the Siien-s/n/t chi, in a tale too long and tedious
to insert and furnishing no particulars of interest for oriental
folklore or animism. Furthermore, both in his own shape and in
that of man, the monkev often acts as a dangerous devil, in wdiich
character we shall meet him anew in our chapter on Animal
Demons, in Part II.


8. Were-rats.

“ The slave-maid of Wei Kicn-tsu of Shang-yu, named Pu-nah,
“ was a beauty. One Sii Alih was enamored of her; which induced
“ a rat to assume her shape and visit him in bed. But doubts
'• arose in him as to her identity. So he stroked her four limbs,
“ and felt they contracted under his hand, till she was a rat again,
“ which ran away”

“ The family of one Chu Jen had lived as farmers at the foot
“ of mount Sung for a series of generations. Suddenly he missed his
“ first-born boy of five. He sought for him for more than ten years,
“ but he could not find out whether he was alive or dead.

“ One day, a Buddhist monk wandeis past, and stops at his door,
“ accompanied by a disciple whose appearance and features are
“strikingly like those of the lost child. Jen asks the monk to wudk

“in; he places a meal before him, and after a w'hile he says;

“‘Teacher, both in manners and features your disciple is like my
“ first-born son whom I lost ten years ago’. The monk is amazed,
“and rising to his feet, says: ‘Thirty years long I have lived

“ in the wild jungle of mount Sung, and ten years have gone


' ± mm Am,

n. Hftsiatfij*' >'« mojiM’

a wui'k iiientioneil in Die Catalogue of Die lluok.s of the Sui Dvna^tv (eh HU. I gO)

. a prince

of the House of Sung living from 408 to 444, whose hingr.iphy is contained
in chapter 51 ol the Hooks ol thut dynasty. I do nut know whether it still
exists. It is quoted very often in the K K. and the above extract is from ch. 440
of this Work


as consisting of twenty clia|)ters, ascribed to Liu I-kliing m


WERE-RAT TALES.


:203


“ by since this disciple came to me, weeping and crying. I asked
him what was the matter with him, but he showed nil the
“ bewilderment of tender youth, and could not well explain from
“ where he came. I brought him up, I gave him the tonsure, and
“ he is now so clever and bright that nobody equals him ; 1 have
“ always deemed him to be a sage. If he is your son, then try to
“ find it out by thoroughly examining him yourself’.

“Jen and his family now set to work to interrogate and examine

“their child. ‘He had a black mark on his back’, the mother says,

“ and on searching his body all over, they find that mark, which
“ convinces them that he really is their child. Father, mother, and
“ alt the family burst into wailing, and the monk departs, leaving
“ the boy with his parents.

“ The parents keep him at home, and educate him in the same
“ way as they do their other sons ; but whenever the night comes he
“ disappears, to return at daybreak. This having gone on so for two
“ or three years, the parents begin to suspect him of playing the
“ thief ; they watch him, and perceive that he changes every night

“ into a rat, which runs away from home and comes back in the

“ morning. Their interrogations do not lead to any confessions, but
“alter a long lapse of time he says: ‘I am no son of yours, I am
“ a king of the rats under mount Sung. The rats there, my subjects,
“ have seen me, and so I can come back here no more’. His
“parents think him in a fit of mental derangement; but that same
“evening he turns into a rat, and runs away”'.

t! t; ^ ^ t ^ ® ft . K « « , R

m ^ t. . M m MM .4- s & - m

A -tfe . # ^ > w s s SI s 0


204


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTTON.


9. Domestic Animals as Were-beasts.

The antiquity of the belief in were-horses may be concluded
from the fact that in the Bamboo Annals, a collection of ancient
documents which, as stated on page 416 of Book 1, were discovered
in the grave of a king in A.U. 279, we find it recorded “that in
“the thirty-second year of the reign of king Suen (B.C. 795) a horse
“changed into a man” h This event is hardly more astounding
than that of a steed which, according to the same work, “changed
five years after into a fox” Were-horses of an origin somewhat
different were, a thousand years later, the two babies that, according
to the Standard Annals of that time, ‘‘were born of horses in the
“ Ho-poh region and in Ch^ing-ngan, respectively in the second
“year of the Khien fu period (A.D. S75) and in the first year
“of that styled Chung hwo (A.D. 881)” k The belief in the
possibility of such wonderful births was evidently by no means new
at the time when those Annals were written, as, according to a
passage inserted therein. King Fang, the wise diviner of the first
century before our era “wrote in his Yih cYiven, ‘Traditions about
“the Coudiinations and Permutations of Divining Stalks’: When
“ feudal princes stand in arms against each other, and a spectral
“ horse of theirs gives birth to a luunan being, then tlie day is
“nearing when their people will be swept away” h

cli. 440.

tt # IE

Part [I,

liooks of the Tang Dynasty, ch. 30, 1. ‘2(1.


M ^ HI' H


WERE-HOKSES.


205


Of a horse transformed into a woman the Sic/o siang Ink gives
the following curious account;

“ Mr. Chang Tshien, Governor of Yih-cheii, kept a noble steed,
“of which he took great care, and of which he was very fond.
“One day it was found in the stable, changed into a woman of
“the highest beauty. The attendants hurry to their lord to inform
“him of the matter, and' as he is going to the stable to behold the
“ miracle with his own eyes, the woman advances and salutes him
“with polite bows, saying: ‘I am a woman from the Yen region.
“ Being very fond of noble steeds, 1 was wont, whenever I saw
“one, to e.xalt its briskness to the skies, with this result that after
“ some years I suddenly fell down, as if under the influence of
“ drink, and changed into a mettlesome horse. Then I galoped
“away from home, taking my own way in a southerly direction for
“about a thousand miles, when 1 was caught, and thus got into
“your stable. Thanks to the care and affection you have bestowed
“ upon me, I have now the good fortune to return to my own
“ condition. My brutish state so filled me with dismay that my
“ tears flowed and, imbibing the soil, were brought before tlie
“ Emperor (of Heaven) by the tutelary divinity of the Earth, in
“ consecjiience of which it was ordained I should return to my old state.
“The past is now to me like an awakening from a dream’. Chang
“stands aghast. He keeps the woman quietly in his house; but when
“some ten years have elapsed, she une.xpectedly asks his permission
“to return to her native place. He has not yet given it, when she
“lifts her eyes up to heaven; crying and screaming she beats her
“own body, and on a sudden changes into a stately horse, which
“galops away. And nobody ever knew anything of her whereabouts” b


A^t: J.oc. cit. I (Ktese.'s a copy of tlie Yih clrwoi. in three cliapter^. but
I cannot find this pa.ssus in it. To jiiilge from earlier catalo.irnes and bibhoprapliies, tlie
book Ls only a fragment of a inncli larger original. There exist.-, another work ot the
same sort and title, in ele\en paragraphs, ascribed to Kwan Lang ^ a versed

diviner of the latter half of the fifth century, also known by his cognomen Ts/ie-
ming -y* ^ .

^ ^ A o Ej X ^ ^ ^ ^


206


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-COXCEPTION.


The ass, closely resembling in China the pony in shape and
habits, and being, moreover, its congener, with which it may
copulate and produce hybrids of a constitution strong and sound,
naturally appears in Chinese myth as a were-beast side by side
with the horse. “In a Buddhist convent, named The Universal
“Light, situated eastward from Wii-clring (in Shantung, against
“ the Pehchihli frontier), there was under the Sung dynasty a monk,
“ named Yuen-liwui, who, given to the abuse of liquor, fell ill and
“ was laid up, quite broken down. Suddenly he raises his head,
“ sends forth a protracted bray, and tails down in a prostrate
“ attitude. On being asked what is the matter with him, he com-
“ plains ot an untolerable jiain in his tail-bone below the spine ;
“ and as they examine that part of his body, they see an ass’s tail
“ peep forth from under the skin. JNext day it is already more than
“a foot long; his body is covered all over with hair, and his head
“ and face are like a donkey’s ; a few days more, and he is in the
“ possession of hoofs and mane, and brays and howls so miserably
“that his family resolve to put an end to his life. But the monks
“ prevent it, as he is a living admonition of Heaven to observe the
“ commandments (which forbid the use of intoxicating drinks). Ten
“ years after he expires” k

Thus again we have here a case of zoomorphosis connected with
insanity. The following donkey-tale is an example of the belief in
post-mortem transformations of men into beasts ;


f K'l’. a®.


Aff A.


//u


14. a « # .,® ip -tt ® s ,ii ,®i

K K, ch 430.

' * se « * # 3 t: ^ It 7 C Hi St iB # « H » .

9t. -fB-tSi. It 0 ef I?l

St. fii , ^ A ® ft A ^ bT > itt A 0 ip jS. +

. ^}irtn-Ufn>j Vifmj c]ti\ T S, sect. , ch. 104.


MAN-DONKEYS.


207


“In the first year of the Kien yen period (A.D. 1127), when
“ warfare raged (against the Kin Tatars) in Kwan-chung and Shen-
“ cheu (eastern Shensi and western Honan), the Governor of the
“ circuit embracing the regions south and west of the Metropolis
“ (Khai-fung) proclaimed in all departments under his orders, that
“ every family possessing a store of victuals sufficient for more than
“ three years, should deliver it up to the authorities, and that
“ everybody who should disobey this command should be prosecuted
“ for bringing the troops into distress. There was then in the Shih-
“ tsTien district, in Kin-cheu, a commoner, named Yamir Kwang;,
“ whose fortune amounted to ten thousand hard coins, besides a
“provision of rice that would have lasted for thirty years; no
“ wonder then that the order issued by the (iovernor dejected him
“so much that he fell ill. His condition became extremely serious;
“ he was greatly disgusted to see people, and even his wife and
“ children got no access to him, and had to content themselves
“ with peeping at him through a crevice. They then perceived that
“ he plunged his hands from time to time into a pile of rice straw,
“ and devoured it. He consumed several cubic feet of it in a series
“ of days, and died.

“ After the coffining there suddenly arose a noise in the coffin,
“ like hammering or kicking. Quickly the carpenter was called to
“open it, who said; ‘This is no case of revival, but a ghost; do
“ not open it !’ But the son does not find it in his heart to follow
“this advice; he opens it, and out jumps an ass with a loud bray.

“ Clothes and liat the corpse iuid cast otf, as a cicada does its skin.

“ The family tie him up in the room with the crevice.

“ One fine day, when the son’s wife brings him some grass to
“ eat, he springs up impetuously, and snaps at her arm so fiercely
“ that the blood gushes out. She, being a crude woman of a
“ violent temper, flies into a passion, grasps her grass-knife, and stabs
“ the beast, so that it falls down dead on the spot. Yang Kwang’s
“ wife then lodges a complaint against her with the district prefect
“ for the murder of her father-in-law. This magistrate dispatches the
“ military officer \Yang Chih-ch'en to the place to investigate the
“ matter, which is thus brought to light with all the details” h


208


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHV AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


In another work we find a similar tale, but with a cow for its
subject. “In the Kia tsing period (A.D. 1522 — 1566) a commoner
“ of Ye-chSven in Kao-pdng (in the south-east of Shansi), named

Li Kwan-su, is no example of virtue, but improves his life, and
“ then dies, the villagers judging unanimously that he had just slipped
“ through the net (of infernal justice). He lies at home unburied
“ for two days, when his sons hear cries in the night. Supposing it is
“their father, who is returning to life, they go and see, and find him
“ transformed into a cow. His head, arms and leijs all are like the
“ corresponding limlis of a cow, and only the parts above his waist
“ and his belly have retained human forms. Quickly they shut him
“ up in the coffin, in which he still blusters and cries for some
“ days, till all noise ceases” h

Fur a correct knowledge of the Chinese ideas respecting souls as
working powers in anthropomorphoses of animals, is the following
legend, which acquaints us with a cow adopting something of
the human body and mind because of a human soul settling in
it. “The Buddhist priest Yih-yang, whose secular surname was

i A. I 0

ffi . E B , ft # e rS . ^ ^ g . ^ ;f; s

^ S’t’,

- 0 s-f-sw m

a* <:,*?£. ***»«.*

tsii/} li)/i. ascribed to one Lien Siien

^ , ch. 320.

' M if m m w- ^ in ^ M t n .

0 ffiilt* ■^'"'"-'1 ('"‘y ehi: T S,

^ S' 'I'- 1“'


WE RE-COWS.


209


“Ho, was wandering in the Hung wu period (136S — 1399) to
“ beg for food, when he came to the dwelling of one Han Khien,
“ the chief of a station-house, who received him very hospitably.
“ There he fell ill, and his host did all he could to save and cure
“him, till his death in the night of the 15th. of the seventh
“ month. Khien then procures a coffin, and buries him in the
“grounds about the western hill. All his neighbours laugh at him
“ because he lavishes so much attention on a stranger; but, says he,
“ the 480 coins the matter costs are not worth troubling about.

“ In the same night of the next year he dreams that Yih-yang,
“ in a yellow robe, stands in the cow-shed, with a finger of one hand
“ up, and that of the other down. Next morning he finds that the
“ cow in the shed has had a calf, its hair adorned with white
“ spots and stripes, like a kashaya. His heart tells him what he has
“ to think of it, especially later on, when the calf gets horns standing
“respectively up and downward, as did the fingers of the monk;
“ indeed, it is not doubtful now that he has to do with a posthumous
“incarnation of Yih-yang. He sets a boy to feed the heifer well
“ with grass, and never does he put it to the plough. But he makes
“a saddle to ride on it, and finds it has more speed than a horse.

“One day, as Khien is riding it on the seashore, he is pursued
“ by a gang of Japanese pirates. Affrighted, he says to the cow ;
“‘You are Yih-yang, are you not? well, help me out of this danger’;
“and off runs the cow with extraordinary speed, and they escape.
“Afterwards the cow is butchered clandestinely by the family of one
“Sie Fen-leu. Khien arrests this man and demands an indemnifi-
“ cation. Sie then says: ‘Thirteen of our people have divided and
“eaten the cow; each of them is willing to pay sixty coins for your
“loss, provided no complaint be lodged with the magistrate’. Khien
“calculates that this will make a total just amounting to what he
“spent for the burial. This discovery extorts a deep sigh from his
“chest, and induces him to hush up the matter. He keeps the
“ Buddhist commandments for the whole of his life, and so do his
“ descendants, who to this day never eat any beef ‘.

s.«5E. *ff Jt tia » #5 B «


11


210


THE SOL’L IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


We have found also reference to a camel whose soul appeared
in the shape of a man. “ When Wang Chu retired on account of
“ the summer heat into a temple, he saw a humpbacked old man,
“ with white spots on his ribs. Next day he saw that being as a
“camel. Was not the apparition of the day before the soul (tsing)
“ of this animal ?” ‘

A were-buck most celebrated in China’s history, was the magician
Tso Ts'ze who lived in the second and the third century of our era.
It is related of him in the Standard Annals that, having incurred
the ill-will of Ts'ao TsAo, the i-enowned founder of the Wei dynasty
which succeeded that of Han, he escaped seizure in the market-
place by causing all people in the crowd to resemble him in every
respect. Once more he was seen in the country, “but he ran


^ ^ ii: «t . -ft Sf ^ ^ .

. Ktvang-tunrj f iini/

^ General Memoirs concerning Kwangtung; TS, sect.


ch. 109."


g . 1 H a 2 * it ft . Bt 0T .ft a * *1 BA TS.


sect, ch. 103: from the Ktvuh i chi ^ ;^or Bundle of Strange

Matters, in ten chapters, by Chang Shi-ching 5Se® jE , also named Puh-i
. an officer of the second lialf of the eleventh century. The original col-
lection, according to ClTao Kung-wu’s Catalogue, contained 250 tales and notes on
marvellous tojiics. There is another work with the same title, bearing the name of
Lii Adng-lung jfp for its author. This must date from the Sung dynasty,
or from that ot Ming, but we have not seen it, and we only know its existence
from extracts occurring in some other works.


2 7 ^


WERE-BUCKS AND WERE-SVVINE. 211

“into a drove of goats, and Ts'ao Ts'^ao, realizing the impossibility
“ to catch him, ordered his men to go amidst the flock and exclaim ;
“ ‘ You shall not be killed ; we only want to try how far your arts
“can go’. On this, an old he-goat suddenly bent his fore-legs,
“reared himself like a man, and exclaimed; ‘Prove to me that
“you will keep your word’. Up ran the men to him at the
“top of their speed; but all the goats of the herd, several hundred
“ head in number, changed into bucks, and likewise bending down
“their fore-legs and rising up like men, bleated; ‘Prove to me that
“you will keep your wmrd’. So, again, they were at a loss which
“ to seize”

A singular folk-conception prevalent in the provinces of Kwang-
tung and Kwangsi many centuries ago, attests that the belief in
the possibility of changes of men into swine was m that part of
China general. “ It is there a tradition among the people , thus
we read in a book on those regions, produced in the twelftli century,
“ that the transformation which women indolent in weaving undergo,
“ is into wild pigs of diminutive size, which delight in devouring
“ the growing rice. Therefore the farmers suspend in their fields a
“ loom or some other implement used in weaving, which prevents
“ the pigs from coming back. This custom prevails in Ngan-phng
“ (the extreme south-west of Kwangsi), in the country of the Seven
“ Streams, and in still other districts”

The following tale of a man-pig maintaining order and discipline
among a herd of swine, savours of the influence of Buddhist
ideas of salvation and metempsychosis. It occurs in a work of the
Sung period ;

“ Pien-tshing, a Buddhist monk, had itinerated into Wu-tai (in
“ Shansi). When about to return to the Metropolis, an old monk
“of the convent entrusts a letter to him, bearing this address;


0 , ^ ^ PH

Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 112, II, 1. IG.

2 IH: ■» 'a 4i « « « W -ft S* tw UJ It flii 'h .
tS ® . EB A Ja t* tt 2 |g tt D3 B>r . M T' ® a .

Ling icai tai tnh, cli. 9.


212


THE son. IN PHTEOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ ‘ This is to be delivered to Puh-ho, at the Metropolis, north of
“ the walls’. The monk stealthily opens the envelope, and reads : ‘ When
“ you have finished your work for the salvation of the Sangha,
“ then be quick and come here, for should you be constrained to
remain where you are, it is to be feared that you will indulge in
wordly business’. He re-closes the letter, and at the Metropolis
“ seeks for the addressee, but without finding him.

“ One fine day he sees a boy on the banks of the Wu-chang
“ stream, driving a fat swine, which he calls Puh-ho. The monk
interrogates the boy, who says ; ‘ It is a hog of Chao the butcher ;
“ it is the leader of 'a whole herd of swine, which it keeps from
“ disorder and indolence, and as it is very fond of p o h-h o leaves,
“we denote it by that name’. The clergyman now calls out the
“ name, to see whether it listens to it, and throws the letter before
“ the animal ; it devours it, stands up like a man, and dies.
“Straightway the monk travels back to Wu-Pai, and there asks
“for the old monk; but he, too, has in the mean time departed
“ this life” '.


10. Were-reptiles.


As shown on page ICO, the oldness of the belief in anthropo-
morphosis of tortoises and in the possibility of men turning into
those animals, is attested by the writings of Chwang-tsze. More
authentic evidence of its prevalence in the early centuries of
our era we have in the Standard Annals of those times. They


TS, sect. ch. 121; from the Tunr/ wci chi ^ or

Record of discovered Mysteries, ten chapters of marvellous things which occurred


during ami after the T ang dynasty, by Ts ien Hi-poh


WERE-TOBTOISES.


213


relate, that “under the reign of the emperor Ling (A.D. 168 — 189)
“ the mother of one Hwang, an inhabitant of Kiang-hia (in Hupeh),
“ while taking her bathe, changed into a giant tortoise and plunged
“ into a deep pool, out of which she came forth from time to
“ time, the silver hairpin she had worn while bathing then being
“seen on her head” And the Books of the House of Sung state,
“that in the first year of the HAvang ch'u period (A.D. 220) the
“ mother of Sung Shi-tsung in Tshng-ho changed into a tortoise,
“ and cast herself into the water” *. Moreover, the Books of the
Tsin dynasty relate:

“Under the reign of Sun Hao it occurred in Tan-yang (in
“ Kiangsu), in the first year of the Pao ting period (A.D. 266),
“ that the mother of one Siien Khien, an octogenary woman, while
“ taking a bath, changed into a giant tortoise. He and his brothers
“ shut the door and kept watch at it ; then they dug a spacious basin
“ in the upper part of the hall, and filled it with water for the
“ tortoise to divert itself in. On the first day and the next the
“ animal continuously put its neck out of the water to look round,
“ and then seeing the door ajar, it turned round, escaped, and
“ jumped into a distant pond, from which it re-appeared no more” ^

The idea, expressed in these tales, that it is a special idiosyn-
crasy of aged women to change into tortoises, preferably when in
the bath, is, no doubt, not alien from the consideration that the
tortoise, being an aquatic animal, belongs, just the same as water
itself and all women, to the yin or female part of the Universe.
But for this there are also a good number of tales in books of
marvel which relate of tortoises as human beings of the other
sex. To give two instances only :

“ Yen T'ai, while journeying on the Yangtszg, fell in with a
“ fishing-boat, the crew of which told him they had fifty turtles


1 AT'*

Books of tlie Later Han Dynasty, ch. 27, I. 6.

2 A*.ci.. 34 , 1.24.


214


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ with them. He bought them for five thousand hard coins, and
“ set them free. No sooner was he some dozen steps off, when the
“fishing-boat capsized. When the evening came, fifty men appeared
“ at his house. ‘ Your excellent son’, they said to his parents, ‘ had
“ five thousand coins with him ; here they are, take them’. The
“ money was all wet. Greatly astonished the parents were, until
“ T"ai came home, and told them his curious adventure with the
“ turtles he had redeemed” *.

“ Fall-chi, a monk of mount T^ai, had itinerated as far as
“ Hwai-yiu, when he saw a fisherman, who received him with
“ much politeness. He followed him to his straw hut, and had some
“ food placed before him most carefully. Astonished at so good a
“ reception, the monk asks ; ‘ My disciple, you make a living by
“ fishing, and so you are a sinner ; how is it then that, on seeing a
“monk, you treat him with so much respect and courtesy?’ ‘Time
“ was’, the other replies, ‘when I made acquaintance in the Hwui-ki
mounts with one Yiin-yuen, a superior man, who preached the
“ Dharma to the multitude. I, a man addicted to the pleasures of
“ life, awoke by his sermons to the Holy Doctrine, and ever since
“ when 1 see a monk, I feel a boundless joy’. With astonishment
“ undiminished the monk admonishes him to change his calling
“But the fisherman says: ‘Though I received instruction in the
“ doctrine of virtue, I am still entangled in the nets of sin ; but the
“ same is the case with such monks as you are, who possess this dignity
“ without being able to apply themselves to the commandments; our
“sinfulness is equally great; what difference is there between us?’
“ Bashful and ashamed, the monk absents himself. Then looking
“ behind, he sees that the fisherman has become a big tortoise,
“ which plunges into the Hwai, while the straw hut fades away” \


zm . Kiuah i chi\ T S, sect. , ch. 153.

2


WE RE-SERPENTS.


•215


Conceptions about the existence of snakes with human or partly
human form prevailed in China probably in the darkest night of
time, mention being made of such monsters in so old a work as
the Shan-kai Jcing^. “In Yang-shan”, thus we read in that curious
book, “are many metamorphosed snakes. As to their shape, they
“have a human face, a wolf’s body, and the wings of a bird, but
“they move about like snakes \ And the Siang-liu family ha\e
“nine heads with human faces, bodies as serpents, and a blue
“ color” ^ It was, no doubt, under the influence of the general
belief in such semi-human animals that still in the eighth century
the learned Sze-ma Ching, attempting to construe a kind of history
out of written and oral traditions about China’s oldest times, wrote
that “P"ao Hi (/. e. Fuh Hi, see Book I, p. 963) had the body of
“a snake and a human head, and Nii Kwa (Book I, p. 418) a
“ serpent’s body with a man’s head”

Traditions about changes of men into snakes and of snakes into
men are, no doubt, likewise very old in China. It is related e.g.-.
“ When Chang Khwan became Governor of Yang-cheu under the
“emperor Wu of the Han dynasty (B.C. 140 — SC), two old men
“had been there before the magistrate with a litigation about the


* ft , W -t II # . ft tS « ft , « * .K, (t S'i » S

A tt > A '(<6 . # ® ^ ™'

1 , “the Land and Water Classic” an interesting relic of ancient

China, mentioned already by Sze-ma Ts'ien in the Historical Records (ch. 122, at
the end), who writes that it refers to the time of Yu, the founder of the Iha
dynasty, and that he refuses to reproduce its statements about strange and singular
beings. It abounds, indeed, with zoological and botanical wonders, existing all over
the then known and unknown world which it pretends to describe, and it
mentions numerous countries which a thorough study of Chinese geography might
make realities. The Shaii-hd kimj circulates mostly in 18 chapters, commented by
Kwoh Poh.

ffiKIr vb. V, ill«-

sfSW^A'tABteS'tfii’S «'■ f* #1- It ® ■

Historical Records, 1. 1.


216 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ limits of a disputed plot somewhere in the mountains. For several
“years the decision had been adjourned, but Chang Khwan took
“ up the case again, so that the two men re-appeared in court.
“ He then discovered from their shape and demeanour that they
“ were not men, and ordered his lictors to arm themselves with
“clubs and spears. When they entered, he asked the two men:
“‘Tell me what sort of spirits you are’. Away the old sires ran,
“and Khwan, hooting and crying, attacked them; on which they
“ changed into snakes” '.

Elsewhere we read :

‘‘ Mrs. Chao, the wife of Wang Chen, prefect of the district of
“ Hwa-yin, was the daughter af a wealthy man in Yen. She was a
“ woman with nice features, and had married Wang Chen at an
“early age; (no wonder then that) about six months after she had
“ followed him to his post, a young man turned up, always availing
“ himself of the moment when Chen went out, to visit her
“ regularly in her bedroom. After a series of such visits he seduced
“ her. One fine day Wang entered, and found the galant with
“ Mrs. Chao on the same dining-mat, drinking together, and
“ laughing merrily. With a loud cry of fright the lady fainted, and
“ while she sank to the ground, Cjuite breathless, the young man
“ changed into a big snake and decamped. Chen then told the
“ slave-maids in attendance to lift their mistress up under her
“ arms, but lo, she, too, turned into a snake, and escaped with
“ the other one. Wang Chen ran after her, but only to see how
“ she followed the serpent that was ahead into mount Hwa, where
“ they ultimately vanished”


il. # 1 wf ^ . It ® *'■

H ^ ^ ^ . Ill IM ^ li ^ ^ ^

- 0 S* a^l-A.


SNAKE-WOMEN.


217


We are wont to call a peevish or violent, brawling woman a
dragon. The Chinese go further than that, and believe in changes
of shrews into serpents and snakes as dreadful realities. So,
“ ]Mr. Wei, a Censor, had a sister, with a temperament both
“ harsh and cruel, virulent and wicked. Her female slaves and her
“ servants she whipped and flogged so cruelly, that death often
“ ensued. Suddenly she got the fever. For a week or so she refused
“ to see anybody, remaining all the time secluded in her room, and
“ venting her fury by ejecting invectives against all who ventured
“ to approach. When ten days had thus elapsed, a rustling sound
“ was heard in the room. They stole near to see, and on their
“ way up the hall smelled a poisonous stench of tainted meat ;
“ then opening the window, they saw that the woman was changing
“into a huge snake longer than a chang, assuming a red
“ spotted colour. Her clothes, nails and hair lay scattered all
“ over the mattress. With furious looks the beast dashed out
“ against the men, casting terror into the hearts of the whole
“ family, who jointly let it escape into the open country. It was
“ the violence and cruelty of her character, that brought about
“ this metamorphosis” h

In the class of man-snakes we must place also certain monsters
reported to have been born in snake-forms from women, to live
without shuffling off their ophidian shape. They existed already in
the imagination of the people in the second century of our era,
for we read in the Standard Annals of that time, in a biography


siang luh.

s5§ts#*i!!H®n»r^..iS+»0ia.Ha
* a .tt « s - A it . ft 5t 8 . -ft # ft g . s * )iv

I think, in the beginning of the Sung dynasty, or shortly before. It is quoted
frequently in the K K. Its author was a member of the Hwang-fu tribe,

whose name seems to be unknown. K K, ch. 450.


31 S THE SOUIi IN PHIEOSOPHY AND FOJ.K-CONCEPTION.

of the high grandee Ten Wu^: “When his mother gave birth to
“ him, she brought forth at the same time a snake, which they set
“ free in the forest. Afterwards she died, and they were on the point
“ of burying her, when, before they let her down into the grave,

“ there came a large snake out of the jungle. Straightway creeping
“to the grave, it knocked its head against the coffin; with bloody
“ tears it waved its head up and down, coiled itself up, and acted
“as if it were moaning and weeping; and when after a while it
“ withdrew, all the people felt convinced that the event foreboded
“ felicity to the Teu family” Thus, in spite of its shape, the
animal possessed a perfect human character, manifesting itself in
highly dutiful, filial conduct.

“In the Yung ch'ang period (A.D. 323) of the reign of the
“emperor Yuen”, thus Yii Pao relates, “a Ki-yang woman, named
•• Jen Kuh, while ploughing a field, took a nap under a tree, when
“ a man dressed in feathery clothes neared her and had sexual
“ intercourse with her. His abode she remained ignorant of, and
“ when after a pregnancy of several months she was to be confined,
“ the feathery-clothed man turned up again and stuck a knife into
“ her vagina, which thereupon brought forth a little viper. The man
“ then departed, and Jen Kuh afterwards got access to the Imperial
“ residence as a dignitary of the Crown, even changing service in
“Ch"en-liu (the Metropolis) for that in the interior of the Palace” \

Side by side with stories of men turning bodily into snakes,
there exist some which show that the souls of the dead may
assume the serpent-shape, quite independently from their former
mortal coil. The following legend may serve as an instance of


' W it-

iS*. ^ Rooks of the Later Han Dynasty,
ch. 99, 1. 6.

- e # II . i » ® *4 s It* •

.S'/it'if shen Id, cli. 14.


MAN-LTZAKDS AND MAN-FROGS.


319


this; it occurred in a work which existed probably under the
Han dynasty, viz. the Cften-liu fung-mh diicen ^ or Traditions about
Manners and Customs in Ch^en-liu, which is the Khai-fung region,
forming a part of the present Honan province. “ The district of
“ Siao-hwang is Hwang-hiang, in the Sung region. There the Prince
“ of P'ei, having raised an army to wage war in the provinces, lost
“ his august mother. When the realm was reduced to peace, he
“ sent a messenger thither with a coffin, to evoke her soul in the
“ deep wilds ; and during this ceremony a red snake appeared, which
“ bathed in the water, and entered the coffin. And on the spot where
“it bathed hairs were found”".

In conclusion, we have to attest the belief in man-lizards and
man-frogs.

The Lang liien H tells of “a man wounded by a snake, and
“ smarting bitterly under the bite. On the point of expiring, he

“sees a little child approach. ‘Take two knives’, it says, ‘rub them

“against each other in some water; drink the water, and the
“ effect will be salutary’. On these words it changes into a green
“ lizard, and disappears in a hole of the wall. The man follows the
“ advice, and is cured immediately. It is on account of this event
“ that the green lizard is called the snake(-bite) curer. He is the
“ so-called house-watch (i. e. the house-lizard)” \

“ One Yang Tsien of Chung-kwei made a large tank behind the
“ hall of his house, enclosing it with a series of rooms, bolted and
“ locked securely on all sides. At every bath he had there, he placed

“ the bath things, basins etc. on the brink of the tank, then


^ ^ work is mentione<l in tlie Catalogue of the Old

Books of the Ttang Dynasty (ch. 46, 1. 45), with the addition that the author is
unknown; but some catalogues state that he was a certain Kiang Wei
I doubt whether the book still exists.

2 4' « * * at K a tfc . iili is- a sf a . ft a.

^ ^ ^ ^ . K K, ch. 456.

® . SB ^ g'tfe . TS, seel. ^ ch. 183.


220


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHl AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ locked out every one, and jumped into the tank ; and the bath
“ finished, he crawled out of the water after an hour or so. Nobody
“ could get a peep at him, and he merely told others that it was
“ his nature to be so fond of tank-bathing.

“ One fine day he lies asleep alone in the hall, when a thief
“ enters. Suddenly this man sees a frog in the bed, a beast almost
“ as large as the whole bed itself. Its eyes glisten like gold and
“ shoot brilliant beams, and the thief, scared at the sight, falls
“ headlong to the ground. The frog then adopts the human shape
“ and becomes Tsien, who rising up and grasping his sword, asks ;
“ ‘ Who are you ?’ The thief mentions his names, on which Tsien
“casts a silver incense-ball towards him, saying: ‘I give you this
“because of your pinching poverty; but do not under any pretext
“ whatever tell others what you have seen. The thief lacks courage
“ to accept the present, and gets away with polite bows. Being
“ afterwards imprisoned in Khai-fung for some other reason, he lets
“ the matter out” k


11. Were-birds.

As in the mythology of unwinged animals, so we find in that
of the feathered tribe a series of tales illustrating the belief in
bodily conversion of beasts into men and of men into beasts, side


mm.

mm.

ngifn pih hi ^ , ‘'Pencil-annotations from my study-cottage in

my old days”, a collection of notices on miscellaneous subjects, in ten chapters, by
Luh Yiu named Wu-kwan ^ tiigh officer who lived from

H25 to 1209. Apud T S, sect. ^ , ch. 186.


VERT OI-D BIRDS MAY ASSUME THE HUMAN FORM. 221

by side with stories that place us before human souls changing into
animals after death. Both categories are to be reviewed in the
following pages, to prove that in the domain of Chinese Animism
bird-lore shows itself in the same aspect as quadruped-lore.

According to Koh Hung, anthropomorphosis becomes an idio-
syncrasy with birds especially on their reaching a very great age,
just as, as we saw, is the case with foxes and other quadrupeds.
“ Birds when a' thousand or ten thousand years old”, thus he wrote,
“all have a human face, with the body of a bird” \ This may
have been a personal conviction of our author, or it may have
been a doctrine received universally in his time; but a fact it is,
that among the tales of metamorphoses of birds, which we possess,
by far the largest number contain not the slightest hint that
those birds were conceived as to have been old.

Of all man-bird tales none is entitled to our attention so
much as the following, related by Yii Pao, variations of it having
been discovered in several parts of Europe and Asia ^ “ In the
“district of Sin-yii in Yii-chang (prov. of Kiangsi) a young man
“ saw in a field six or seven women, each in a feather dress.
“ Not knowing they were birds, he crept towards them, and got
“ hold of a feather dress taken off by one of the women. He
“ snatched it up and concealed it, and neared the birds, and
“ they all flew away, except one which could not. The youth made
“ her his wife, and she gave birth to three daughters. Their mother
“ afterwards induced these girls to pump their father, and thus she
“ learned that the dress was hidden by him under a heap of pady.

“ There she found it, put it on, and flew away. Afterwards she
“came back to fetch her three daughters, and these too flew away”

ch. I, sect. ^ ^ .

2 Tawney, Tlie Ratlia Sarit Sahara, II, 452 — 453. and the various ver.sioiis of
the legend mentioned there in the foot-note; also pp. 576 — 577.

Dr. Muller in the T'uumi Pno, vol. VI, p. 60.

^ ^ "i"-


223


THE SOHE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The fowl, which lived domesticated in China already at the
dawn of historical times, was represented at an early date as the
descendant of a human ancestor who had changed himself into
the bird. “ The people”, thus says a book of the second century,
“aver that fowls have their origin in a certain personage named
■■ Chu, who became a fowl by metamorphosis, and that this is
“ the reason why at present fowls are called together by the
“ cry chu . . chu . .” h The fact that a man so learned as Ying
Shao, the author of that work, gave this tradition a place in his
writings without expressing doubts as to the truth of it, seems to
intimate that cultivated minds in his time did not much demur
to the possibility of that metamorphosis. Nor can we admit that
the belief in it had lost much of its actuality in the tenth century,
seeing that then a critic of significance earnestly protested against
it. “ The combination of the two series of twelve terms which
“ appertain to each other”, thus wrote that man *, and accordingly
also that of the twelve animals among which we find the fowl
(comp. p. 937 of Book I), “ was known already in the age of Hien-yuen
“ (27th. cent. B.C.), and is it made out that the tribal name Chu
“existed at an earlier date? Moreover, ducks are called with the
“ cry yii . . yii, and of whom are they a metamorphosis, that people
“ do that?” ^

“ Under the T'ang dynasty, Kao I, a very rich man in Puh-hai,
“ calmly dies. Next day he comes to life again, and relates that there
“ was a one-eyed man in white, with a protocol in his hand, with the
“ murder of whose wife and children the Governor of Hades charged
“ him, but on his denying all acquaintance with that man, the
“Governor allowed him to return to the earth, saying: ‘Your lifetime
“ is not yet elapsed. Sir’. It then occurs to his mind that that man
“ in white must have been his old, one-eyed, hemp-coloured house-
“cock. He has it shot, and that puts an end to its diabolic work ” b

I'utig-sult t'ltng i, quoted in tlie T S, sect. , ch. 30.

2 Khiu Kwang-fing Kien ming shu or Book

of additional Elucidations, a critical work on the Classics and other writings.

^ It BII ■


A STORY OF A GRATEFUL WERE-FOWL.


2:23


“A commoner of Khii-cheu, named Li Sii, comes somewhere to
“collect the rent of his grounds. The people there are so poor that
“ they have nothing else to offer him to eat than a hatching hen.
“ They resolve to cook it, on which Li Sii indistinctly sees under a
“ mulberry tree a young woman in yellow garments, who approaches
“him with bows, and begs for her life. ‘Lor myself I do not mind
“dying’, says she, ‘but I cannot bear the idea that my children
“ will never behold the light of the sun’. Upon which Li Sii says ;
“‘1 will go to the people there and remonstrate with them, and
“ then none of them will catch, kill or wound you’. With tears in
“her eyes the woman runs away, leaving Li Sii quite stupefied and
“discountenanced. Returning to the house, he sees a hen sitting
“ on several eggs, and the family on the point of tying it. His
“ words make them waver, and he forbids them to kill the bird.
“Thereupon he departs.

“Coming back on another day, he finds the hen with a brood
“of chickens. The bird no sooner sees him than it rushes forth,
“hopping and jumping as if agitated by something or other; then
“leaving the chickens alone, it follows him. Li Sii has hardly gone
“a few hundred paces when he falls in with a tiger. With leaps
“ and bounds the monster nears, but on a sudden a hen flies
“up and beats its eyes with so much impetuosity, that Li Sii
“ has time to run away and make his escape. It is nearly dark
“ when he finds himself again in that house, which he has reached
“ by another path. He misses the hen, and asks where it is. The
“answer is, it flew away this morning in a westward direction,
“and that they have sought for it in vain. Struck with amaze-
“ ment, Li Sii recounts his adventure with the tiger; and as


a

Cliao ye Is^ien tsai ^ ^ ^ , “Record of all Matters relating to the Court

and abroad”, a collection of miscellaneous notes, in six chapters, the poor remains
of a work in thirty, ascribed to one Chang Shoh ^ who lived probably in
the first half of the eighth centuiw. As the work now current under this title
mentions occurrences of the ninth century and of the Sung dynasty, it is perhaps
an appendix, bearing originally the title Ts'ien isai pn i ^ , “Ad-
dition of forgotten Matters to the {Chao ye) U'icit written very likely under

the reign of the last-named House. K K, ch. -401.


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


: 2:24

“they are going to the spot to seek for the bird, they find it dead
“in the shrubs, and its feathers scattered about”

“In the first year of the Shao hing period (A.D. 1131) Honan
“fell into the power of rebels. They recognized Liu Yii as their
“ potentate, but our district (Ch'en-cheu) remained a stronghold of
“ the Throne. Fung Ch'ang-ning, a Hwui-ki man, was its prefect.
“Liu Yii attacked him, and finding it impossible to subdue him,
“sent for Wang Kwa-kioh, a troublesome insurgent in Shantung.
“This man having raised re-inforcements among the people in Suh
“and Poh (the north of Nganhwui), both generals marched to the
“attack with combined forces, and the city surrendered in a year,
“its provisions being totally e.vhausted.

“ Wang Kwa-kioh tlien raised three pennons in the centre of the
“town, where several thoroughfares met, and ordered his men
“from the two districts aforesaid to arrange themselves under the
“ red one if they were willing to remain in the army ; those desirous
“ to become civil mandarins were to place themselves under the
“ yellow pennon, and those who would rather go home he sum-
“ moned to select the black one. Anxious for their lives, all
“ people flocked to the red colours, and only two gentlemen from


mm


aAitssa, a

-SlPiRT-. T'W®.

mi.

il . a » *t a , ;g. - H tt! . « * E SR . M -» 0 w

sect. cIj. .36; from the Liitr/ yinff lufi , ascribed to Fu Liang,

, known also by his cognomen Ki-yiu , being probably the learned

statesman li\ing from 374 to 426, a biography of -whom occurs in ch. 4.3 of the
Books of the Sung Dynasty and in ch. 15 of the History of the South.


ascribed to Fu Liang,


STRANGE STORY OF A MAN-COCK.


2 -2 5

“Poh, respectively named Wang and Wei, betook themselves to
“the black standard, reasoning thus: for a civil office we are too
“old, and remaining in the army means dying, while placing
“ ourselves under the black colours is certain death too, as we then
“ thwart the will of our chieftain. The whole army stood aghast,
“ but Kwa-kioh, deeming it a grave matter to violate his promise,
“courteously dismissed them, so that they could return home.

“ W ang then visited the city of Ch'en to fetch some treasures
“he had buried there; but he was never seen again, nor was any
“news of him received from that time, or any trace of him found.
“ As to Wei, in some ten years the fortune he made out of his
“profession became great. Once he had no more than two fowls
“in his house, when the Governor of the town happened to travel
“through his village. Wei then caught the hen, cooked it, and
“ served it up to the grandee, and next day, when the latter
“returned home, he was going to kill the cock; but the bird
“perceived it, and sneaked off through the millet. Then he begins
“ a chase with a bamboo pole, and is on the point of catching the
“ bird, when suddenly it accosts him in a human voice. Raising
“its head, it exclaims: ‘Alas, what cruel evil must befall me here!
“ is there no longer in you any particle of our old affection ?’
“Wei starts back, with the words: ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am
“Wang’, replies the bird; do not you remember the incident at
“ Yuen-khiu, when we were in the army?’ ‘You lodged me then’,
“says Wei, ‘whither did you go, and where did you die?’ ‘When
“we were comrades’, is the reply, ‘I enriched myself with your
“ money, secretly concealing it somewhere till more peaceful times
“ should come. Afterwards I entered the city to fetch it, and with
“ two bags on my back put up at a country-inn to pass the night,
“where I opened them before the lamp; but ere 1 had counted
“ over the contents, the inn-keeper espied me. He gave me spirits
“to drink to make me tipsy, and then 1 was murdered. Notwitli-
“ standing my hidden store of precious metal, my orbate soul
“ was left to its own fate, without any supporters. i\Iy thoughts
“ then turned to my fellow villagers and kinsfolk, and tinding none
“of them but you alive, I resolved to join you. When T had
“ settled in your house, four daughters of your neighbour Kia also
“arrived there, betaking themselves together to the womb of your
“house-hen when it was about to hatch, and thus becoming hens;

“ they are the hens which you killed before. It now you wish to
“ destroy me too, 1 am ready to submit to my fate’.


15


•2:26 THE SOUL in philosoyhv and folk-conception.

“The Governor has overheard all this discourse. Comprehending
“ the matter at once, he goes home, and reports it to the prefect.
“This dignitary summons Wei and the cock before him. Both
“ appear, and the erowd behind them gives the streets the aspect
“ of a busy market. The cock repeats its statements before the
“magistrate, ending with the words; ‘And now, as I, a domestic
“ bird, have divulged matters of the World of Darkness without
“ authorisation, I must die’. It stretches out its neck, conceals it
“ under its wings, and breathes its last. The prefect, sighing and
“ astonished, orders the cock to be committed to the earth behind
“ the temple of Lao-tsze, and erects an inscription over the spot,
“which ran thus; Tomb of the man-cock” *.


1 « TD W pg 2 fig M . H *1 ill » . SB « s

1 S 0 # fi i.!S ft ^ PI #1 . » jfc 2 ^ T .

sss # « tt< s fis » .

ii , gc S ± » lii . at if » ^ * ,1 « . R ft 5E

tt « Ib M « T . IK tf . JR * A « « it ^ .
M ft ft SS .

#*.gS

#e*S-«6.-0 aitig

V:mikm.mzB^.iti)m.m. m&n a9. #

TPi*. ± Ap.if€. itaiitiHea

® .1 . ts # ^ ^ . a I® * -ft . ,1; » a, . y: — . s


sours Ob’ THE DEAD MAY CHANGE INTO BIRDS. :227

“ Chu Wen-sill and Ijo Tsze-chung were befriended. They both
“ held state-offices in Liang (Khai-fung, in Honan province). The
“former died, and the other bewailed him, thereupon breathing his
“ own last also that same night. Seven miles south of Liang stands
“ the Fowl mount, where they buried Wen-siu ; his friend they
“ interred in the Pheasant vale, nine miles to the north of the town.
“ Wen-siu’s soul changed into a cock, and that of Tsze-chung
“became a pheasant; and the melancholy tones of their shrill voices
“resound there to and fro continually”'.

Intimacy kept up after death in bird’s shape by affectionate souls
and enamored couples, is in China the topic of many a tale. So,
“a daughter of the Ruler of Wei, being married to the heir-apparent
“ of Ts'i, heard, while on the way to his home, that he had died.
“She asked her bridal matron what she was now to do. ‘You
“must go there, and mourn for him’, was the answer. When she
“ had finished her mourning, she refused to return to her own
“family, and followed her consort into the other life. The afflicted
“ matron grasped the lute which the maid was wont to play, and
“ drummed it on her tomb. Suddenly two pheasants came forth
“out of it. With the words: ‘My girl, have you really become a
“pheasant?" she caressed the hen; but before she could finish that
“ phrase the two birds flew up, and suddenly vanished. Deeply
“ moved, the matron took the lute and played a ballad, called


BiJ H H ® Y- Ife . ^ S 3^ S * fi .

as®*®.

a ^ « It * s 5E . §1 a tt a T BB n . ei

A® 2 S'

Clten-cheu chi ^ o'' Memoirs concerning ClVen-cheu ; T S, .-ect. ,

ch. 30.

# 5® isi -fl; IS it . iS Rft la # f± It Y- ^

ch. 138.


223 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“on account of that: The Pheasants fly up in the Morning”'.

Of all animals in China none are so celebrated for attachment
between the male and the female as the mandarin duck. Instances
are recorded of the male bird being caught, plucked, and boiled
piecemeal in a cauldron, and her mate wildly flying out of the
air into the bubbling water, thus showing a conjugal fidelity on a
par with that of the suttee jumping into the flaming pyre which
devours the corpse of her husband or bridegroom. It is quite
rational therefore that literature should afford instances of loving
souls having changed into those ducks after death. One is that of
Han Pflng and his wife, which we have put into English on page
470 of Book I. In the following tale, apparently of much later
date, it is not the sonls of the lovers that change into the ducks,
but their bodies :

“ In the time of the Sung dynasty there lived in Ch‘ao-cheu
“ (the Swatow region) a rich man. Taking a walk on the riverside,
“ he saw two children with beautiful features, who told him they
“ were a twin brother and sister who, having lost their parents
“ at an early date, were then brought up in the family of their
“ maternal unde. But the wife of this man could not stand them,
“ so that they had to spend their young lives begging for food.
^ They were now thirteen years old. The rich man took them with
“ him to his house. The brother showed himself a good fisher,
“whom neither wind nor storm could detain from this business;
•• the fish he got, which he did not give to his master, was shared
“ by him with his sister, and eaten. And the latter occupied herself
“ exclusively with making a most perfect sort of embroidery of
“ feathers of mandarin ducks, displaying at this work the utmost
“ dexterity.

“Three years passed on, and the girl was grown. Then the rich
“ man wished to deflour her; but she regularly declined his offers,

It ^ 4 13 ^ ^ '“ '"3 ^ ^ 33 P"*"® beauties


LOVING COOPIiES, BEING MANDARIN DUCKS.


329


“ pleading unfitness for forcible defloration on account of her youth.
“ She then wrote the following verse on his coat :

“ Your find appears to you to be a beautiful maid

“ That might rest on your opulent bed every day ;

“ But pollution, albeit buried under flowers, has no charms for her,

“ For nothing else is she than an embroidering duck.

“‘Men’, thus her brother spoke, ‘are so hard to rely ou; we
“ had better leave them’. Thus the girl inscribed a verse on the
* wall, reading :

“ The whole day long I made duck-feather embroidery,

“ Being too lazy to handle the broom in the crescent moon ;

“ We now return to our watery, cloudy home,

“ There to grow older together for a hundred years.

“ They then changed into a couple of mandarin ducks, and
“ flew away” k

Of an old were-duck we hear in the following tale: “One Cheu
“ Fang, who lived under the Tsin dynasty, was travelling in the
“ prime of his life on the Yang-tszS in the company of some
“ merchants, who, one evening, when they put up in a storied
“ temple, discussed under the storey which of them would venture
“ to pass the night therein. Fang, a bold character, said he would,
“and ascended into the temple, to do so. Late in the night, just


- 4** 4l!l .#■ A tt It .» K i «= i # T- § .

Jg H ^ * ft . m A ® ill ^ . W it . # 4 * T' isr ®. .


"ffc ^ ^ ^ 'S' ■ ^’airati\os ami

Reports from Kiangsi and Kiangnan, Hupeh and Hunan: T S, sect. ^,cli.47.


230


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ as day broke, he saw in the building an old man with hoary
“ hair, who, as he seized him, changed into a drake. Fang caught
“ this bird, and returned to the boat to cook it ; but it flew away
“without any change of shape” b

The forms which herons are reputed to select when they assume
anthropornorphosis, are generally those of pretty girls. T^ao Ts'ien
tells us of “ a man of Ts"ien-t^ang (in Chehkiang), bearing the sur-
name of Tu, who, while travelling by boat, saw on the bank,
“ during a thick fall of snow, a girl appear in the evening dusk,
dressed in plain white garments. ‘ Why do not you come on
“ board ?’ Tu asked, and dallying with her, neared the bank and
“ took her on board ; but she turned into a white egret and flew
“ off. This incident impressed Tu so disagreeably that he sickened
“ and died” b

Crows or ravens, too, are not seldom metamorphosed souls of
the dead. “ One Mr. Lii of Tung-pb'ng, a man of the principality
“ of Lu, lived in Clung. He had a wife whose maiden name was
“ Hwang. Tliis woman fell ill, and when on the point of dying
“said to her husband’s mother: ‘I am deadly ill; I have heard
“ that men become ghosts after their death, and it has always
“ displeased me that, if men and ghosts have no intercourse,
“ the grief of the surviving is increased. My mother-in-law, you
“love me so dearly; when I am dead I will speak with you
“ in your dreams’. And after her demise, the mother-in-law really
“ has a dream in which Mrs. Hwang appears to her. ‘Though
“I have done nothing culpable all my life’, she complains,
“bathed in tears, ‘I live now as a being of another class in the
“jungle in the eastern wilds of Ching. A being I am with black
“and glossy wings and a doleful voice; after seven days I will visit
“you, and I hope you will then remember our good old times.


# ft M-fl: . From the Shuh i ki: K K, ch. 462.

sRwL.ttB.trT' A*,

. Sheu shell heu ki, ch. 9.


MEN AND WOMEN AS RAVENS, ROOKS, AND CROWS.


:23L


“ without thinking yourself tlnvarted because I belong to another
“class of beings’. With these words she is gone. The seven days
“ elapse, and a crow comes from the east down upon Lii’s house.
“ Perching on a tree in the courtyard, it croaks for some time so
“mournfully that the mother-in-law bursts into tears; — ‘you are
“ the being I dreamed of’, she says, ‘and you come right down on
“ our house because earthly life is not effaced from your memory'.
“ And forthwith the bird flies into the hall, there hopping about
“ with fluttering wings and doleful cawing. After some moments
“it flies away in an easterly direction” ’.

Tates of men and women having changed into corvine birds
must be extremely old in China, as we have one in the Shan-hai
king. “ On mount Pah-kiu a bird is found, which has the shape of
“ a crow. It has a spotted head, a white bill, and red claws. Its
“name is tsing-wei; its voice sounds as tszc-hiao. That bird
“is a young daughter of the emperor Yen (/. e. Shen Nung,
“ 28 th. cent. B.C.), named Nii-wa. This maid being drowned on a
“ voyage on the eastern sea, she did not come home, ljut became
“a tsing-wei, which always canded wood and stones in its bill
“ from the western mountains, to fill up the sea with” x Of this
yarn we find slightly varied readings in books of later date,

5E . -S' 0 « R 5E ,as H A 5E » ® t- «

Mentis it

ifnW0>

AM.

““i*- Ui «■


26-2 THE sour, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

but we may skip them, as of no interest. Another daughter of the
same mythic sovereign is standard evidence of the possibility ot
transformation of men into magpies. “ The daughter of Yen, the
“emperor of the South”, thus a work of the tenth century
relates, “ studied the ways of salvation, and became an immortal
“being (sien). She resided in a mulberry tree on a steep hill in
“ Kao-yang (in the present prov. of Pehchihli). On Nevvyear’s day
“ she picked up wood with her mouth and made a nest of it.
“Sometimes she became a white magpie; at other times she had
“ the shape of a woman, and as this aroused the compassion of the
“ Red Emperor (Yen), who had perceived her, he tried to persuade her
“ (to give up this mode of life), but his attempts were vain. So he
“ burned down the nest with tire, w’hereupon the girl ascended
“immediately into the sky. Thus the Mulberry of the Emperor’s
“ Daughter became a celebrated object. Here we have, more-
“ over, the origin of the cu.stom of burning magpie-nests till the
“ fifteenth day (of the first month of the year), and of making
“ solutions of the ashes thus obtained, in order to wash the silk-
“ worm eggs with ; while for the rest we see here how it is that
“■ the magpie is called Spirit-girl” h

The crane is celebrated throughout China for living hundreds,
nay, thousands of years. Authors describe it as a bird accom-
panying especially the sien who obtained bodily immortality, and
serving tliern for vehicles; and very often we are informed of
such sien changing into the bird, and of cranes in their retinue
taking human forms. Rut the place which the crane holds in
Chinese animism and in ideas on metamorphosis, does not differ in
any respect from that of other birds, as a few tales may illustrate:

“Ting Ling-wei”, thus 'Fao Tshen relates, “originally aLiao-tung
“ man, studied the ways of salvation on mount Ling-hu. He then
“ changed into a crane, returned to Liao, and there placed himself on a
“ honorific column at the city-gate. A young man raised his bow to
“ shoot him, but he fiew away and soaring about in the air, exclaimed :

je .g - 0 ft * -d; 1 . s li: e ^ . s -f't * A . jT. *

^ 21 ; from the

Kivang i hi.


MAN-CRANES.


233


“ This bird here, this bird here, is Ting Ling-vvei,

“ Who was away from home for a thousand years, and now returns
“ To find the population of this city as bad as ever it was.

“Why do not they study the way to become immortals !)y masses?
“ With these words he flew up into the sky. At present the
“Ting tribe in Liao-tung pretend that a member of their former
“generations has ascended as an immortal being; but neither his
“name, nor his cognomen have been saved from oblivion ” '.

And Yii Pao recounts: “More than a hundred miles south of
“ the Yung-yang district stands mount Lan-yen, a lofty top rising
“a thousand chang up into the air. A couple of cranes with white
“ down, glossy and clean, fly thither to roost whenever the eventide
“ casts its shades. Tradition asserts, that in days of yore there lived
“ in that mountain a man and wife in seclusion for several centuries.
“ They then changed into a pair of cranes, flying to and fro inces-
“ santly, until, one fine morning, one of them was killed by a
“ man. Then year by year the other bird uttered there its plaintive
“ cries, and to this day its voice affects the peaks and valleys,
“ Nobody can tell the year of this incident”

Koh Hung knew of a whole army that had turned into cranes,
monkeys and insects in the tenth century before our era. “ When”,
thus he wrote, “ king Muh of the Cheu dynasty sent out an
“expedition to subjugate the South, his whole army changed
“ into monkeys and cranes, while the inferiors became insects and


S . * « n « tt . at tr 4' # ® 8*: It ^ , a ^
*.?jM0Sft>raws.

ta 591 w . Shell shea hcii hi, cli. 1.

i'KBmm. « mi,


234 THE SOUL IX PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“sand”i. Often we find the crane confounded in myth with the
kuh^ a web-footed bird not belonging to the wading family,
likewise reputed to live many thousand years. We have it under
human disguise in the following old story, which relates of three
such birds that were the actual cause of Sun Khuen a martial
hero in the epoch of the downfall of the Han dynasty and the
synchronous rise of the Three Kingdoms, being able to cut out for
himself the realm of Wu and establish himself as monarch there.

Sun Chung, a Fu-ch'un man, was the father of Kien (who was
“ K'^iien’s father). He lived with his mother; extremely filial was his
“ conduct, and his character was honest and sincere. He earned a
“ living by raising gourds. Once it happened that three young men
“ of nice appearance and grandly dressed, visited him, and asked
“ for a gourd. He set some food before them, fetched a gourd, and
“ was so active and zealous in paying them honors that the triad,
“when on the point of starting, said: ‘We are the Directors of
“Fate; moved by the liberality with which you have received
“ us, it is our wish that either the dignity of feudal prince
“ shall be held by your family during a series of generations, or
“that of Son of Heaven for a few’. ‘The Sonship of Heaven for
“a few generations’, replied Chung, ‘would pleaseme much’. They
“ then assigned a piece of ground for him to be buried in, left the
“house, and changed all into white kuh”k
The following legend of the T'ang dynasty relates of a woman’s
corpse changing into a live parrot. “ Liu Ts'ien, a commoner of
“ Lung-yiu, was a member of a very wealthy family. He possessed
“ not more than one daughter, whose hair was just done up (in


'^1?. Pfio F^oh-ls:c; see T S, sect. ^ , ch. 86.

2 ® # Sf-

Kit -til.

A il.® ^ H # iP . # » ff M ,11 « jR.a

IfcJt BitI- I >/uen, quoted in the TS, sect. ^ , ch. 10. The reader
knows from our dissertation on Fung-shui (Look I, p. 935) that graves regulate
the destiny of the descendants of those bulled therein.


A GIRL WHO WAS A PARROT.


:335

“ token of her being marriageable); a beauty she was, gracious and
“clever. No wonder that lovers came continually to ask her in
“ marriage, but her father still withheld his assent. The family
“ kept a parrot, which could speak as no other bird could. Every
“ day the maid tattled with it, and in the end she got the bird
“ to recite a whole chapter of a Buddhist Sutra, correcting its
“ mistakes; and she kindled incense whenever the bird muttered this
“ holy book.

“ One day the parrot says to the maid : ‘ Open my cage and get
“into it yourself; I must be off’. ‘What do these words mean?’ the
“girl asks, astonished. ‘Originally you had the same shape as I
“have’, is the reply, ‘and you obtained your present form here in
“ Liu Tshen’s house. You must return now to your own tribe ; be
“not astonished at my telling you such things; men do not know
“you, but I do’. The scared girl apprises her parents of the event.
“ They open the cage and let the bird out, and they watch over
“ the girl day and night ; but for all that she dies in three days
“ from no direct cause. The parents, affrighted as they are, weep
“ incessantly. They are on the point of burying her, when the
“ corpse suddenly becomes a white parrot, which flies away to
“regions unknown” h

Even the small specimen of the feathered tribe, as kingfishers,
sparrows and swallows, may be were-birds in China. “Chang K'ioh
“strayed far up the Chah river, when he saw at a brook with


Ik. g|i«±.

i ^ ^ H A iK' fl ^ . W lit ® ^

* . * g Rii ffl ^ lit W li . SI iii 0 . « * » a

A T- aw, a @ n w. ** s a * it it # *

or Strange Matters during the Tang Dynasty, a work in ten
chapters by Li Yin, the author of the Siao siamj luh (see page 200).


236


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOI.K-CONCEPTXON.


“ white p"i n plants two girls in a dress as blue as jade, who took
“ him along with them by his hands, greeting him with a chant.
“ He followed them, on which they turned into blue king-
“ fishers and flew off” “ And in fimes gone by, a swallow

“flew into a human dwelling and changed into a tiny girl, hardly
“three inches high, who said that she was a woman from heaven,
“able to foretell good and evil. Hence it is that swallows are to
“this day called Celestial Women”*.

“ Yang Pao of Hung-nung was a compassionate and amiable
“man. When nine years old, he saw in mount Hwa-yin a yellow
“ finch seized by an owl and cast out of a tree, wounded and torn
“in many places, thereupon falling a prey to the torments ol
“ crickets and ants. He puts the bird into his bosom, takes it
“ home, and places it on the roof-beam. Hearing it cry piteously
“in the night, he takes a light and looks at it; and finding it
“ attacked by mosquitoes, he puts it in a linen box, and feeds it
“ on yellow flowers. In about ten days the feathers have so grown
“that the bird can use its wings. Every morning it flies out, to
“come back in the evening and pass the night in the box; and
“ this it does for several years, when suddenly it appears with
“quite a flight of finches, which fly round the hall for several days
“ with doleful cries, and then depart.

* That same night, in the third watch, Pao is absorbed in the
“study of the Shu king, when a lad in yellow dress accosts him.
“‘I was an envoy of Wang-ina (the Queen of the Immortals)’, he
“says, ‘commissioned to P'eng-lai, when an owl grasped me and
“your generosity saved my life. Now accept a reward, got from
“ the Southern Ocean’. And taking leave, the lad gives him four
“rings of jade, saying: ‘These rings will keep your sons and grand-
“sons clean and pure; they represent the dignities of three Prime


a collection of tales mentioned in the Catalogue of the New Books of the T ang
Dynasty (ch, 59, 1. 20), with the statement that it consisted of one chapter. Ma
Twan-lin (tVcn hien I khij khao, ch. 215, 1. 15) attests that in his time the author
was unknown. We quote from the T S, sect. , ch. 46.

^ ii * A A « . fk S - * f- . ft fli = d- .

huen ki ; T S, sect. ^ , ch. 25.


AN ANCIKNT MINISTEK WHO BECAME A FISH.


■237


“ Ministers, which they will attain to’. Pao’s filial piety became
“ celebrated all over the world. His reputation and position increased
•‘in glory day by day. His son Chen begot Ping, and Ping begot
“Pill, and the four men all became renowned Prime Ministers.
“ When Chen was buried, a large bird flew down (to fetch his
“ soul). Everybody declared that all those good things had been
“gained by his genuine filial devotion ”b


12. Man-flshes.


The peculiar shape and habits which distinguish the piscine class
so sharply from all other animals, has not prevented the Chinese
from framing numerous myths on the transformation of fishes
from and into reptiles, birds, mammals, and even men. So it has
been, and still is the opinion of many, that Kwun, Yao’s Minister
who failed to master the great inundation which, now some forty
centuries ago, distressed the Empire, did not, as some pretend
(see page 196), change into a bear, but into a fish. “When
Yao”, thus wrote Wang Kia in the fourth century of our era,
“ ordered Kwun of the Hia family to restrain the waters, and this
“ work was not achieved in nine years, Kwun plunged into the
“abyss of Yii, and changed into a black fish”’. Obviously this


iH;


=55?


» 4 * .* 4* -0 tt "S «
A IS R # tS Ife
mm. SI


0


2 % ^


238


THE SOU], IN PHir-OSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


reading of the myth owes its existence to a play upon the name
Kwun, the written form of which (j^) contains, according to Wang
Kia himself, probably the sign ^ (or ): black, at the side of that
for fish

The idea expressed by this old yarn, that the drowned may
change into fish, recurs in the literature of later times. So, Luh
Ki ® wrote in the third century of our era in his “ Explanatory
Notes on the Plants, Trees, Birds, Quadrupeds, Insects and Fishes
mentioned in Mao’s SAi king” “that those drowned in the sea
change into wei”'*, which is probably a kind of sturgeon. Associated
with this superstition is another, according to which eels are meta-
morphosed hairs of the dead. Perhaps this idea may have its
foundation in the observation that these fishes use to shoal in great
numbers about floating or submerged carrion. “In the fifth year
“of the I hi period of the Tsin dynasty (409)”, thus we read, “ when
“ Lu Siiin came from Kwang-cheu and dropped anchor in Kiangsi,
“a great number of people there had fallen victims to an epidemic;
“and when the commotion caused by this catastrophe had subsided,
“ people who travelled to Ts'ai-cheu (in Honan) observed that the
“ hair of the dead had changed into eels. In our days, the General
“ Shang Chen-si and the Marshall Chang Shi saw a coffin on
“ the banks of the Hvvangho, and a shoal of eels at the head
“of it. They ordered it to be lifted up, and perceived that they
“ were all hairs, some of which had not yet undergone trans-
“ formation. It is generally averred that if a man washes his head
“ with gruel of glutinous rice in his life, his hair will change
“into eels on his death. And formerly there was a man who could
“not do without eels at his meals; after his death they replaced
“ his coffin by another, and found it full of those fishes ”


3 That is to sa}'. the text of the hhi king as it has been saved from oblivion
bv the pen of Mao Ch'ang ^ . a scholar of the second century T!.C.

. Mao shi ts^ao muh niao sheu cirung
y>' second part, at


This work was once lost, and the edition now current was lecon-structed from
fragments other authors had extracted from it.


INDOLENT WOMEN TRANSFORMED INTO FISH.


239


Once changed into a fish, nothing, of course, can prevent a
drowned person from becoming the ancestor or ancestress of quite
a new finny species. Thus, for example, existence was given to
the so-called sea-swine ', a large viviparous marine animal, also
found in large rivers, which is caught especially for its oil. Ch en
Tsang-khi states, that just as they did the wild pig in Kwangtung
province (p. 211), “the people in his time took those sea-swine
for transformations of lazy housewives” The author of the
Shuh i ki says; “Tn Kiangnan there exists a lazy-wife fish, which
“the people say is a transformation of the wife of one Yang,
“drowned by her mother-in-law. Its oil may be burned in lamps
“ and used as candles, which, when lighted for lute-players and chess-
“ players, emit a brilliant light, but do not shine clear at a spin-
“ ning-wheel” h Thus the lazy nature of those water-pigs still shows
itself from the unwillingness of the oil, extracted from their car-
casses, to light industrious women at the performance of their
household duties.

A book, confessedly a hundred and odd years older than the
Shuh i ki, relates of fishes changing into men regularly every night.
“In the wilds of the North there is a rock -lake, a thousand miles
“square, and over five chang deep at its banks. It is always
“ frozen over, except in the fifty or sixty days before and after the
“summer-solstice. That lake is inhabited by hung-kung fish,
“seven or eight feet in length, shaped like carp, but of a red
“ colour. In the daytime they remain in the water, but at night
“they change into men. Sharp weapons cannot be thrust into their
“ bodies, and when cooked they do not die, unless wlien two
“ black plums are subjoined” *. Among the many tales of man-fishes


m M'J # A

hI ^ li . ^ ^ tt . ii ^ .

ch. 142.

Pcn-Wao kaw! mull, ch. 44.

#.


240


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPIIV AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


we possess, there are a good number the topic of which is a fish,
or a lot of fish, caught and doomed to death, and then assuming
human forms to beg for their lives. These stories are not sufficiently
interesting to claim reproduction. Better reading is afforded by the
following tale, recorded as an historical event in the Standard
History of the Sui Dynasty:

“In the seventeenth year of the Khai hwang period (A.D. 597)
“a Buddhist congregation met in the village of Yuen, four miles
“south-westward from the city of Ta-hing (in the present Shensi
“ prov.). An aged, hoary-headed sire, dressed in a white skirt and
“a long robe, came there and ate, and then went his way. None
“ of the crowd knew him. They followed him with curiosity, but
“about two miles farther on he disappeared on a spot where
“there was nothing but a pond with a white fish over one chang
“ in length, with a countless number of smaller fishes in its rear.
“The people all tried to shoot the fish, but of some the bows
“snapped, and of others the bow-strings broke; yet they succeeded
“in the end in hitting it. They cut open its belly, and finding
“ cooked rice in it, they knew that the fish was the old man they
“ had just seen. A certain number of days elapsed, and the canal
“ then deluged its banks with impetuosity, drowning all those who
“had shot at the fish” '.

A similar legend, placed between the years 670 and 674 of our
era, relates of a fisherman who caught a large fish, and found in
its stomach the same food which had a short time before been
given by his village-elders to a Buddhist mendicant monk^. Finally,
the General jMemoirs concerning Shensi relate:

“ The grave of the carp is situated at ten miles westward from


AH.

^ A . # 2 T' 5E . « .6 tl - # 2 M 5E *'■ ' '-'"j-

IS.

Ib.#K0)ili*S.S+A^jg5E “■ ’

12 See the C7iiiu ye Ibioi in the K K, ch. 4('.9.


MERMEN AND MERMAIDS.


241


“ the chief city of the district of Si-hiang, which lies in the Han-
" chung department. The citizens there were diking the Shui-ma
“ river, when two Taoist doctors asked them for food. Thev "ave
“them some rice, on which the doctors spoke: ‘In a few moments
“ two dragons will be here ; do not kill them, else the river will forth-
“ with wash away the dike, and render it impossible to tinish it’.
“ In a little while two carps appeared, playing on the surface.
“ The dike-workers caught them, cut open their bellies, and saw
“ rice come out. And the dike was washed away. They buried the
“fishes on a hill, and raised two tumuli over the spot”’.

Also in China mermen and mermaids were known at an early
date. “Their houses”, thus we read in the S//u/i i ki, “lie in the
“ South-Sea. They live in the water like fish, and ply the loom
“incessantly. Their eyes can shed tears, and thus produce pearls”^.
“The marine man-fish”, another author says, “occurs in the Eastern
“ Sea. It attains a size of five to six feet. Its shape is that of a
“ man ; its eye-brows and eyes, mouth and nose, hands, fingers and
“ head altogether are those of a beautiful maid, and accomplished
“ in every respect. White as jade are its skin and its flesh ; it has
“ no scales, but downy hair in five colours, light and soft, one or
“ two inches long. Its mane resembles a horses-tail. being five by
“ six feet in length, and its sexual parts do not difier from those
“ of a man or a woman. At sea it lives in a lonely state. They
“ are often caught, and when kept in a tank they copulate in a
“ manner not different from that of men. They are quite harmless” b


‘ ® fl + bA#*

^ - fi iS , « W W A Slifi . ^ ^ . S

i ® i! it lat ± . *s I ti # 2 . sij * * . a * flR
in H. St. II ® lii -t . ®

sect. , ch. 139.

'm . . M'J ttj #


16


242


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Though the seals or dugongs described in these lines are not
explicitly placed before us as human beings, yet they are invested
too distinctly with human attributes to pass them unnoticed in this
treatise of were-animals.

Also of shell-fishes changing into men Chinese books contain
entertaining stories. So, “one Wu Khan in I-hing (pr. of Cheh-
“ kiang), a petty district official whose house stood near the King
“ brook, found a big univalvular shell-fish, which turned into a
“maid, called thenceforth the Shell-fish Woman. The prefect of
“the district heard of it, and asked for her; but Khan refused,
“ on which the prefect vexed him bitterly by giving him all sorts
“ of jobs to do. For instance, he told him to bring him some frog’s
“ hair and arms of a spectre, threatening him with punishment
“should he fail to obtain them. Khan told this to the Shell-fish
“Woman, and she procured him the things desired; but then the
“ prefect was so unreasonable as to say : ‘ And now I want a mis-
“ fortune-bushel’. Again Khan informed the woman of it. ‘A mis-
“ fortune-bushel is a beast’, she said, and in a few moments she
“brought one, an animal like a dog, which when given fire to
“eat, voided it. The prefect, to try this, gave it some, and lo, sud-
“denly it voided its excrements and thus set fire to the prefect’s
“ mansion, so that the dignitary perished in the flames with his
“whole family”*.

Some more stories of women transformed from conches and shells
might be inserted here, did space permit. The following one may
suffice to content our readers:

“Teng Yuen-tso, a Ying-ch"wen man travelling for study in the


A Hiah wen hi ^ ^ “Record of Collected Information”,

three chapters of antiquities of sundry parts of the Empire, by Ching Shang
of the T ang dynasty. K K, ch. 464.


Ynen hiva hi-, TS, sect. , ch. 463.


a 5? w « IS iffl iK « I


WOMEN TRANSFORMED PROM CONCHES. 243

“Wu region, visits the high magistrate of Ch'ang-chhng, who
“invites him to a sumptuous repast. On parting with this grandee
“ to go to Ku-su, he goes astray on a steep and tortuous path,
“ where he sees no human dwellings for many miles, and nothing
“ else than jungle. As it grows dark, he stretches out his neck
“ to scan the environs, and perceives a lamp-light. Thinking that
“ there might be a human dwelling there, he makes for that
“ direction, and sees a conch-like shed, with nothing in it but a
“young maid of over twenty. He puts up there, and the maid, fit
“ to attract the admiration of the whole country, spreads out some
“ sott straw on a couch ; and when he is seated, she brings him
“ some food. Yueu-tso, hungry as he is, consumes it, and finds it
“ very delicious. Then the girl sleeps by his side, but suddenly he
“awakes at daybreak, to find himself lying in a field, with a
“ conch beside him of the size of a pint. Bethinking himself of the
“ things he has eaten the previous night, he feels very uncomfortable,
“ disgorges them, and sees they are nothing else than blue mud'’ h


13. Were-insects.


The belief in the possibility of transformation of men into insects
is brought out in strong relief by a tradition, evidently of long


TC-fe

ra iS. « . * # R ffi EB .ft ^ > A in tt T-.

W , ch. 103. Tlie Tliet^aunis state.s it lias this

from the Tsili i ki ^ Collection of strange Events’’,

a small series of tales from the Sui and the Tang time, ascribed to one Sieh Yiing-
joh mmm , also named Chung-shing pjl ^ officer of the ninth

century. The work contains si.vteen tales, which number agrees with that given in
the older bibliographies, but I possess also a copy with four more. I do not find
the above tale in either.


:244


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


standing, according to which the precious silkworm owes its origin
to such a metamorphosis. We find that tradition in the following
form in the Chung-lica I'u kin dm “Commentaries on the Ancient
and Modern Times of the Flowery Middle Kingdom”, a work of
the tenth century ;

“ Silkworms are a transformation of an asterism called the
Heavenly Team of Four; but why are they called Maidens? To
this I answer;

“In times far remote, there was a man serving in the army
“in a distant region. At home he had a daughter and a horse.
“The girl, whose thoughts were with her father, said to the horse,
“jestingly; ‘If you can fetch my father home for me, I will marry
“you’. At these words the horse broke the halter and ran to her
“father, who, apprehending that something at home must be wrong,
“ mounted it, and returned to his house.

“ From that moment, whenever the steed saw the girl, it turned
“angry and excited, so that her father had to tie it up. Its
“ demeanour astonished him so much that he pumped the daughter,
“ who told him everything as it was. Then the father killed
“the horse with a bowshot, and as he dried its skin in the
“courtyard, the girl trampled it under her feet, saying; ‘You, a
“ horse, wanted a human being for your wife ; therefore we have
“killed and skinned you; how do you like it?’ No sooner had
“she finished these words than the skin moved suddenly upward,
“enveloped the girl, and ran off with her. When the father came
“ home he missed his daughter, and discovered her in a big tree,
‘■where she entirely changed into a caterpillar, fixed to the tree by
“ means of threads. Her cocoon being thicker and larger than that
“ of ordinary caterpillars, the female neighbours took it away and
“cultivated her, thus making twice as much silk as before. That the
“ present generation call silkworms Girls, rests on this old tradition”


ife" ^ it ’ “ collection of sliort notes on a variety of subjects, by

the band of Ma Kao , a high officer of the tenth century of our era. It

is a reprint, amplified and amended, of a work likewise entitled Ku kin chu,
ascribed to one Tsdii Pao ^ ^ of the fourth century: but it is thought that

this was lost under the Sung dynasty, and replaced by a spurious compilation drawn
up from Ma Kao’.‘ work.

— E. A.@. it


THE HUMAN ANCESTRESS OF SILKWORMS.


245


There exist other versions of this legend. The oldest book in
which we have found one, is the Sheu shen ki, which gives it, in
its fourteenth chapter, in a form that shows that the above version
of Ma Kao is merel} copied from it with less verbosity. The legend
bears some marks of an astrological origin, to which we shall have
to refer again, when regarding its heroine in her position of patron-
divinity of silk culture.

In far remote Chinese times, ladies of position changed into silk-
worm moths. “In the time of Chwang of the kingdom of Chhi”,
thus states a work of the sixth century, “the harem ladies one fine
“morning changed into wild silkworm moths, and flew away”'.
Changes of men into butterflies, and of butterflies into men are
likewise recorded frequently. So it was opined by many that Han
P'ing and his wife, whose story we related on page 471 of Book I,
were transformed on their tragic death into butterflies. The possi-
bility of such change may easily rise in the mind of men who
represent to themselves souls as volatile things, and it is well
known that the belief in it has been common in Europe It
recurs also in the following Chinese tale, found in a work of the
fourteenth century : “ Yang Hao, whose cognomen was Ming-chi,
“had married a wife in the Kiang family, young and beautiful.
“ After some years she had a son, and when Ming-chi died abroad,
“ a butterfly as big as the palm of a hand fluttered next day around
“ Mrs. Kiang, and did not leave her as long as the day lasted.
“On her communicating the matter to her clansfolk, convoked
“ for the purpose, she burst into waiting, and there the butterfly
“ was again, flying around her, and it never left her in eating or

® .i ji*

2 B0 # . 75 M -ft; s * . « *5 ft) . a a S A IS H .

2 For which see e. <j. Grimm, “Deutsche Mythologie”, pp. G93 amt 005.


246 the soui. in philosophy and folk-conception.

“ drinking, moving or resting. It was Ming-chi, who thus assumed
“ the shape of a butterfly to visit his home, impossible as it was to
“him to cease loving his young wife and his baby son '.

The cicada, which attains in China the size of a finger, appears
there only in the hottest summer months, and attracts general
attention "by its shrill chirping voice, distinctly audible at a distance
of some hundred yards. The angry tone of it may account for the
origin of an old legend, proving the early belief in transformations
of'^the insect from men; “The consort of the king of Ts'i died
“from anger. Her corpse then changed into a cicada, which flew
“into a tree in the courtyard, and there sat chirping out its shrill
“tones, which filled the king’s heart with remorse and spite. This
“is the reason why the people call the cicada the IVi woman *.

The chief place among the insects which appear in Chinese folk-
lore under a human shape, or with distinct human attributes, is
taken by the ant, whose intellect and social liabits in many respects
call to mind those of men, even among superficial observers. “Tung
Chao-chi”, thus Yil Pao relates, “a man of the Fuh-yang district,
“in the VVu region, was ferrying over to Ts'ien-t'ang, and saw in
“ the middle of the river a big ant running up and down a short
“rush stalk, in great anguish and exeitement. ‘This creature is in
“fear of death’, said he, and he was going to take it into the
“boat, when the crew exclaimed in harsh terms; ‘That poisonous
“stinging beast! do not let it live, but tread on it!’ But, full of
“ commiseration for the insect, Chao-chi tied the rush to the boat,
“so that on her touching the land the ant could save itself out
“ of the water.

^ ^ T S, sect. , ch.t69; from the Kxvci-sin Uahshih

^ ^ ^ ^ or Miscellaneous Knowledge from the Kwei-sin Street, where the
author lived. This was Cheu Mih also named Kung-kin who

flourished in the thirteenth century. The work is divided into four parts, containing
in all six chapters.

3E W tK o 1^ tH: ^ ^ 0 ^

the end.


ANTS WITH HUMAN FORM AND ATTRIBUTES. 347

“Next night he dreamed that a man in a black coat, accom-
“panied by over a hundred^ others, came to thank him. ‘I am
“an ant-king’, he said; ‘I tumbled into the river by my own
“imprudence, and feel ashamed for having had to be saved by
“you. Whenever you get into trouble, then come and tell it me’.
“ More than ten years after this event, the place where Chao-chi
“lived fell a prey to pillagers, and he, unjustly put on the list as
“a brigand chief, was imprisoned at Yii-hang. Then he suddenly
“remembered the ant-king had told him in his dream to inform
“him, should he get into difficulty; but whither was he to send
“a message now? While putting his thoughts together to solve
“this problem, he was asked by one of his fellow prisoners (why
“he was so deep in thought), and Chao-chi told him the reason.
“‘W^ell, take two or three ants upon your hand’, said that man,
“‘and explain to them what you want’. Chao-chi did so, and
“indeed, that night he dreamed that the man in the black dress
“said to him: ‘Betake yourself quickly to the Yu-hang mounts;
“ the empire is up in arras, but erelong there will be an amnesty’.
“ At the same time he perceived that ants had gnawed his wooden
“ manacles entirely away, so that he could escape out of the jail.
“He crossed the Yangtsz^, retired into the Yu-hang mounts, and
“ soon an amnesty was proclaimed, which saved him” k


' % W


® - « aa « IS) - a tt 'li a = M


tf PH


: tt, . iB ^ ® I S i: ® S- . -W
AS.


24S


THE SOLTL IN PHILOSOPHY ANH POLK-CONCEPTION.


In this tale, were-ants and their king appear to its hero merely
in his visions; but we must not lose sight of the fact that, as we
have expounded elsewhere (p. 116), dreams are to the Chinese
phenomena of perfect reality. There are more such curious tales on
record of ants appearing as human beings to men in their dreams,
even their nests appearing as cities with palaces and houses, in
which the dreamers spend delightful hours. Especially popular
is a narrative of the last quarter of the eighth century or the
first of the ninth, in which a certain Shun-yii Fen ‘ is introduced
by some men into the capital of their country, called the Realm
of Rest at the big Sophora tree’. Received there most courteously
by the reigning king and entertained sumptuously, he finds every-
thing as in the world of men, including Euddhist convents and
Taoist monasteries. The king appoints him his vassal of a province
named Nan-ko or Southern Branch where he bears sway for
twenty years, making himself most respected by the people,
suppressing revolts, and going through all the adventures of a vassal’s
career. But the end is that he awakes, and inspecting with his
servants a hole at the root of a Sophora close to which he has
slept, finds an ants’ nest in it, with a king, and a gallery leading
right up to a branch on the south side of the tree, as also sundry
other things corresponding to what he saw in his dream. This
story, containing 3230 characters, was written by one Li Kung-tso’,
and is entitled Nan ko ki'' or Story of the South Branch.

But, also, men fully awake have had their encounters with man-
ants. They have seen them as regular files of soldiers, equipped for
war, in glistering armour. Thus, ‘‘Hwan Khien, whose cognomen
“ was King-tsu, saw in the T'ai y u en period (A.D. 376 — 396) a troop
“ of men, all somewhat over an inch, with coats-of-mail on, carrying
‘‘large spears, and riding horses fully equipped. They swarmed
“ out of an opening in the ground, and ran about in the bright
“ sunlight over the roof of his house in groups ot several hundred,
“ the commanders of the various divisions beating and pricking them ;
“and when the horses slackened, the men whipped and spurred
“ them to greater speed. Across a bench they found their way up
“ the furnace in search of food and drink, and as some discovered
“ minced meat, they assembled the others around it, those stronger


3


STORIES OF HUMAN ANTS.


249


“ than the rest taking it up on their spears, and straightway into

“ the hole. A Taoist doctor of the Tsiang mounts, named Chu

“Ying-tsze, told Hwan Khien to make boiling water and pour it
out on the spot where they had withdrawn ; then they turned
“ up the ground there, and got more than a bushel of big ants,
“which lay dead in the hole. Hwan Khien’s posterity was afterwards
“murdered and exterminated” k

The oddest man-ant story we have seen, is the following ; “ The

“ Governor of Tung-yang, Chu Ya-chi, had a visit from an old

“man in the Yuen hing period (A.D. 402), who appeared from
“underneath the bed of his concubine Tung. He wore a yellow
“ petticoat and a quilt, and had a hat on. The hole he came forth
“ from was slippery and wet, and emitted a bad smell. Erelong
“he is on the best terms with the concubine, and whenever
“ there is something good or evil to be expected, he forthwith
“ informs her of it. Once Ya-chi’s child is attacked by a burning
“ fever. ‘The testicles of a tiger must be fetched for this patient’, the old
“ man says, and grasping a spear he enters the mountain, obtaining
“there in fact the genitals of such a monster. They are still
“lukewarm; he orders the child to consume them in a roasted
“ condition, and the fever subsides entirely. And regularly the
“old man tells the concubine to comb his hair, which looks like
“that of a wild boar. Afterwards, as Ya-chi goes somewhere to

“ sacrifice spirituous liquor, he sends a report of the matter to the

“authorities, but then every trace of that individual is gone. He
“ now makes hot water, pours it into the hole, and unearths several
“bushels of big ants. Without telling his fellow villagers a word
“ of it, he grasps a sword and strolls through the fields. Here
“he falls in with a man, who, at the sight of the sword, pulls
“ forth a cake of gold and asks him to take it tor that weapon ;

“and no sooner has he given it him than he vanishes from view.


± . K W S ■ , « W ts # H te tl fl . .1 ^ fe 'ft


250


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ He now examines that gold more closely, and sees that it is mere
“ cowdung. 1 think that this being was a Yaksha ”

The reasons which led to the invention of stories about intimate
intercourse and affiliation of men with ants in human shape, were,
of course, quite appropriate also for creating similar tales with
respect to bees and wasps. So we read “ that there existed in Lii-
“ling a man, who, travelling to pass the examination for the
‘■second literary degree, was overtaken by darkness, and repaired
“ to a country cottage, to ask for a lodging. An old man came
out, and seeing the stranger, said : ‘ My cottage offers but little
“room and its inmates are numerous, but there is place for one
“ bed more’. Thus the guest put up in that house, which contained
“ over a hundred rooms, all extremely narrow and small.

“After a while he confesses his hunger. With the words: ‘The
“family are poor, and they live exclusively on wild plants’, the
old man sets some such food before him, which the guest finds
“quite different from ordinary food. Then he goes to bed, and
“hears nothing but a humming noise. At daybreak he awakes,
“and finds himself lying in the open field at the side of a nest
“ of big wasps. Hitherto he had suffered from rheumatism, but this
“adventure cured him, in consequence of his eating the remains of
“ the food of the wasps” “.


T tB , g M S it « «■ m ^ ig it S >fr ft .

« a ^ 01 ® ® » s «R# >

71 Sf n . « - 5t A . 71 ft K 4: - « . # ja ^ 71 .

a-7J«A*A0r«.a«|6|^.^* + *. I+Ilfc

I yuen ; K K, ch. 474.

A 2 © »l . # 0 . « « « . BIf > in ja


LOCUSTS AND BUGS AS HUMAN BEINGS.


251


It seems to have been observed in China that locusts swarm
especially in times of war, probably because the depopulated plains,
upturned no more by the plough, nor inundated for the cultivation
of rice, offer a fertile soil for their eggs and larvae to develop. We
see, in fact, the idea prevail that those dreaded voracious insects
are the revengeful souls of men perished in war or from its
immediate consequences. “ Locust plagues”, thus wrote an author
in the twelfth century, “always occur after great wars, and there-
“ fore those insects are sometimes considered transformations of the
“grieved souls of the slain. Though this is not so certain, those
“ who expel the insects join in troops from time to time, hooting
“and shouting; and if this fails to make them move elsewhere,
“ metal gongs and drums intimidate the insects, and make them
“obey. Should the locusts swarm in rows or files, they are
“ deemed to be transformations of the mingled breaths (k h i) of
“ the killed and wounded, which conception is perhaps not quite
“ irrational” *.

Even the most despised domestic vermin is represented as assuming
sometimes a human form or human demeanour. “In Yii-chang”, thus
relates Yii Pao, “a slave woman stood at a furnace, when suddenly
“ there appeared at it a man, some inches in height. Unintentionally
“she crushed him under her shoed foot, thus destroying a human
“ life. In a moment several hundred men appeared, in hempen
“ mourning-clothes. They brought a coffin with them, fetched the
“ corpse, performed the funeral ceremonies quite correctly, and carried
“ the coffin through the gate on the east side into the garden, where
“ they put it under an upturned boat. Approaching to see what
“ they did, the slave saw they were sow-bugs or v/ood-lice, which


Biffi , t R B «•*.*. 0 »


sitcn hih: K K, ch. 479.

»f -ft . » * 'it' tf # tt ft » "f « ^ ©


2 'ft . 38 S ^ Ifii «»'■ »“'• #1 # 36 # .

“Jade Dew from the Heron-forest”, sixteen chapters of literary compositions and
disquisitions by one Lo Ta-king , alias King-lun , of xvhom

very little is known. He lived probably in the twelfth century, T S. sect. ,

ch. 176.


252


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ she killed by pouring hot water on them, thus exterminating them”
“And one Su Yin of Yang-cheu was asleep at night, when
“ he heard under his quilt several persons recite conjointly the
“ ballad of the 0-fang Palace ^ in a quick, but loiv tone of voice.
“Hastily he turned up the quilt to see what was there, and found
“no transformed beings, but only ten or more bedbugs, as large as
“peas. He killed them, and then heard the sound no more”’.


BBScifa ^ A= *36^ « W A ,

mm-

^livu hi, cli. 10.

2 A magnificent mansion built by Slii Wang, tbo great monarch of the Ts'in
dynasty. Some hundred thou.sand.s of men were employed in forced labour in the
construction of it.


M!ST^iiA«±,Wfia

i« . * s ifrj /h , ^ ra a la i , « ft * i» # a + .

^ A E. 2 gn ifc 1'^. th 188; li™ u» ai

kivoi luh or Record of remembered Wonders. I find in the Catalogues

three woih.s of this name. One is by a certain Tsu TAi-chi jfil ^ z , also
named Yuen-clfen 7tm . a high official of the Tsin dynasty, for whom .see the
Books of this House, ch. 75. 1. 17. Another is by Luh Hiun ^} ' under

the T'ang dynasty: and the third, in fi\e chapters, is by Chuh Yiin-ining »Jt it m
of the Ming dynasty, see the .S:c Lhu Is hen sh\i tsiing »iii/i, ch. 144, 1. 10. Perhaps
the above extract i.s not e\en from one of these three, but from another work
bearing the same name.


CHAPTER XI.


ON THE DESCENT OF MEN FROM ANIMALS.

Is there, according to the Chinese, any essential difference between
men and animals ? This question will, no doubt, be brought spontane-
ously to the lips of the reader by a perusal of our long dissertation
on Zoanthropy.

The tales of changes of men into animals and animals into men,
discussed therein, are numerous. And still they form only a small
portion of what Chinese books enable us to gather in this field.
Besides, we have to take for granted that many tales have been
lost with the books in which they were found, and that still greater
numbers were never committed to writing. In short, the total of
those that Chinese brains have hatched, must amount to a figure
really astounding. Seeing this, how can we possibly arrive at any
other conclusion than that animals, even the smallest, were always
looked upon in China as beings essentially identical with men ?

Certainly there is in China’s animal lore overmuch to show, that
man and beast were always separated there at best by a line of
demarcation so faint, that we might ask whether it ever existed at
all. This tendency to identify those two classes of beings is not a
trait peculiar to the Chinese. It is found elsewhere on the globe
with tribes in low stages of culture. In China, however, it is given
relief to by philosophy. Indeed, the national Taoistic ideas about the
universality of Nature have, as we expounded in the Pirst Chapter,
allotted there in all times to every living thing a soul and a body
imparted to it by the Cosmos, the sole Creator and Animator extant.
Men and beasts thus alike are, both bodily and mentally, com-
pounds of yang and yin substance. Hence, though their outward
appearance may differ, their constitution is intrinsically homogeneous,
and their shapes must, accordingly, be convertible into others.

No wonder, therefore, that Chinese books of every period teem
also with notices on men and animals changing their sex, and on


254 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK -CONCEPTION.

beasts becoming beasts of quite other classes or species. They tell
us of mammals evolving instantaneously from other mammals, from
birds, fishes, or insects; of the smallest animals turned with the
greatest ease into the biggest quadrupeds. Ancient authors are per-
fectly serious when they proclaim that mice change into birds or
fish, tortoises and pheasants into snakes, snakes into frogs, frogs
into quails, that cranes become musk-deer, swallows sea-clams and
mussels, and birds other birds, according to the seasons ; and modem
writers slavishly re-echo their statements, as if to emphasize the fact
that the belief in such transmutations has never been on the wane
in China. It had reached its full development long before the
Christian era, as Chwang-tsze then wrote :

“Germs are multitudinous. When they come into contact with
“ water, they enter into a continuity of conditions ; when they reach
“ water and earth, they become the envelopes of frogs and oysters,
“and if they germinate on hills and in fields, they become hill-si h.
“ This herb, when in contact with a yuh-si (a sort of insect), forms
“crows’ feet, the root of which plant may become grubs, and the
“ leaves butterflies. Butterflies are s ii ; by metamorphosis they may
“ become insects living under furnaces, which have the shape of
“shed skins, and are called khii-toh. These insects after a thousand
“days become birds known by the name of kan-yii-kuh, the
“spittle of which produces sze-mi insects; these in their turn
“become insects that prey on pickles, and from which i-koh are
“produced. The hwang-cheu is produced from the kiu-yiu, and
“the meu-flies from rotten flesh insects. So, also, the yang-hi
“ plant, when growing close to an old bamboo which sends out no
“shoots, produces the ts'ing-ning, which produces the leopard,
“ wliich produces the horse, which brings forth man. Man in length
“ of time enters into the great Machine (of evolution), from which
“all living beings come forth, to enter it (at death)”'.


FRUITS OF SEXUAL INTERCOURSE OF MEN WITH BEASTS. 255

No doubt it would be going too far to charge such wild, un-
muzzled notions on transmutation and procreation to mere crude
observation, by untutored minds, of metamorphoses of insects and
frogs; for this could hardly account for a belief in such births as
of men from horses. It is only the absence of a sharp distinction
between animated beings of different sort or class, which accounts
for the matter satisfactorily. The identification of all animals
forbids us also to see anything strange in the fact that Chinese
works of all times, including the Dynastic Histories, often make
mention of copulations of animals of quite different classes, and of
the birth of hybrids resembling only one of their parents, or neither.
Nor is there, from a Chinese point of view, anything very strange
in the numerous cases, likewise recorded even in the best books
on history, of animals producing young of quite other species or
classes, altogether independent from previous copulation. Often
such events passed for prognostics of the fate of the Crown or the
people, and it was only in such cases that they were put on record.
Hence we shall have to touch on them in treating of prognostication
and of consultation of spirits.

After all, we cannot but deem it also a matter of course that
there is found in Chinese literature much reference to sexual inter-
course of men with beasts, and of the consequent birth either of
animals, or of mongrels or men that gave existence in some cases
to whole families, tribes and nations. We may not pass this phe-
nomenon over in silence, as, otherwise, our sketch of Zoanthropy
could hardly make a pretence to being complete. “In Tsin cheu”,
thus we read in a work of the tenth century, “ in the district of
“Shen-shan, there lived a commoner, Chang IMeu by name, whose
“ wife dreamed that a person with a yellowish hairy coat and
“ a very slender waist, forced her, and withdrew after two
“ copulations. She became pregnant, craved for raw flesh, and
“ could never get enough. Regularly she had fits of rage, in which
“ her lips became dirty and she gnashed with her teeth, and more and
“ more her temper shewed wolfish perversities, till six months after
“ she gave birth to two little wmlves. No sooner had they left her
“ womb than they ran away, but her father quickly knocked them
“ down. The wife now became deranged in mind, but alter a


A. A AM I


256


THE SOUL IN PHJLOSOPHlf AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘•'year she recovered. The villagers dubbed her the wolves’ mother” '.

“Til Siii-ki, a man of the Chao department (in Pehchihli),
“was an able physician. His wife, the daughter of Sieh Yun, a
“rich man living in the same department, was of a licentious and
•‘dissolute character. The family kept a white dog, of which she
‘•was very fond and which thus she fed regularly on costly food.
“Once, when Siu-ki was out, the dog sneaked into the female
“chamber and snapped at Siu-ki’s wife, at the same time behaving
“as if it wanted to gratify it lusts. Astonished, she said: ‘Do you
“want to know me? well, do not bite me then’, and immediately
“the dog wagged its tail and jumped into bed. Out of mere fear
“she gave herself to the beast, which did its work in a way hardly
‘- different from that of a man. Thenceforth, whenever Siu-ki was
•‘out, the two were sure to indulge in sexual familiarities without
“any self-restraint.

“ One day they were just in the room and in bed, when Siu-ki
“entered and surprised them. He was going to kill the dog, but
“ it escaped out of the house, on which he vented his indignation
“on his wife by divorcing her. She returned to Sieh Yun’s house,
“ where, ere half a year had elapsed, the dog rushed in, seized her
“coiffure with its teeth, and ran off with her on its back. The

“ family rushed out after them, but did not catch them, and from that

“time nobody knew their whereabouts. Straightway the beast took
“ the woman into the Heng mounts, where it concealed her, going
“downhill every night to steal food for her, but watching over
“her in the daytime.

“ After a year she was pregnant, and gave birth to a boy. He had
“a human form and a human countenance, but he was overgrown
“ with white hairs. Madam Sieh’s only care in those mountains
“was to bring him up, and when after an other year the dog
“suddenly died, she wandered out of the mount, with the boy in
“her arms, to Ki-cheu, there to beg. She fell in with a man

“ who knew what had happened, and he went to Sieh Yun, to

lu/t; K K, ch. 44'Z.


A MAN BORN OF A WOMAN AND A DOG.


257


“tell him where she was; on which the latter had her fetched back
“ to his house by a member of his family.

“ When her son was seventeen years old, his appearance became
“ ugly and coarse, his disposition savage and bad. From time to
“ time he ran away to commit theft and robbery, not returning
“for ten days or so. This grieved Sieh Yun so deeply that he
“ resolved to kill him, but the mother secretly warned her child.
“"You’, she said, 'you are the fruit of a white dog’s seed; I refused
“to kill you when you were a baby; what makes you behave more
“ recklessly than ever now, while here with the Sieh family ? If you
“ go away from home again of your own accord, to play the thief,
“ they are sure to murder you. I fear indeed you will have to
“ smart for your crimes. Improve !’. The boy now burst into cries
“and tears. ‘As I am the product of a dog’s breath’, he exclaimed,
“‘it is quite a matter of course that I should possess no human
“ heart, but that I should be disposed to murder and robbery ;
“why then do they tind this so bad? If Sieh Yun tolerates me in
“his house, he has to tolerate such things too; and if he cannot
“keep me here, he ought to tell it me roundly; why then is he
“going to murder me? Henceforth, mother, you will have to provide
“for yourself; I had better go far away and not return’. In vain
“the woman tried to detain him. ‘I allow you to go’, she said in
“the end, ‘but come back from time to time to see how I am,
“for I, who am your mother, cannot bear the idea of never seeing
“you again’. These words occasioned another outburst of wailing on
“ the part of the son. ‘After three years I shall be back here’, he
“said; and with these words he grasped his sword, saluted his
“ mother, and was off.

“ After the lapse of three years he appeared indeed at the gate,
“ at the head of over a thousand banditti, whose commandant he
“ said he was. He entered, paid homage to his mother, and ordered
“the gang to murder Sieh Yun with the whole family, except her;
“ then setting fire to the house, they marched off, cai'rying the
“mother along with them”'.


25S


THE SOUl- IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLfC-OONCEPTION.


Two dignitaries with bears for their forefathers were, as we saw
on page 115, mentioned bv Sze-uia IVien in his account of the
famous dream of prince Kien-tsze. But tales of whole classes of
men, nay, of entire peoples, generated from the union of men with
beasts, were much in circulation before the Thing dynasty. We
read, for instance, in Yii Pao’s work:

“ In the south-western parts of the Shuh region (the present


.®- 0 A « S ft M tt ,f# B g A A 2 ,®

A .A ^ an .It Q tS aj .

a # i ^ )>lr ^ . A ti ® it A ft Uj is

# + -b«, mmmm.

,1 .B¥ R 7 } #. * it .« * - a A ^ a ^ .

4* m a g « » . 4- b

0^* A*®*. »®wi»

W.Sf&i.S-Y-AItvit .a»A^SiB


■

.531


.Its*#.

^ , ch. 118 .


A##.#^*S&SSS

^ [ffj . Ai’ao siancf lith, T S, sect.


PEOPLE BORN OF MONKEYS AND WOMEN.


359


“ province of Szg-chAven) there live, high up iii the mountains,
“ beings of the monkey tribe, seven feet in height. They can assume
“ a human shape and, being excellent runners, chase men. They
“are known as the people of the realm of kia animals, and also
“as ma-hwa (horses’ metamorphoses?), or, in some cases, as
“kioli-yuen: apes and gibbons. They waylay female wayfarers and
“ kidnap the beauties from amongst them, running otf with them
“ without the men becoming aware of it ; and when such way-
“ farers pass near them, tliey drag them along uitli long cords,
“ which is another reason why they make no escape. Those beings
“ can distinguish the sexes by the smell, and they lay hands
“ upon women only, and not upon males. When one has caught a
“ woman, he builds a house for her. Should she not bear him a
“ son, she does not return home for the whole of her life, and in ten
“ years her shape becomes quite like her kidnapper’s ; her mind is
“ then bewildered so much that she longs for home no longer. But
“ if she gives birth to a child, she is sent back immediately with
“ it to her family. The child has always a human shape. Should
“the mother not bring it up, she dies as a rule; hence, for mere
“ fear of such a fate, nobody has the courage not to do so. And
“ when grown up, the children do not differ from ordinary men in
“ any respect. They all adopt the surname of Yang ; hence it is
“that this tribal name is so common in the south-west of Shuh.

“ Those who bear it are altogether offspring from that kingdom
“of kia animals or those ma-hwa” '.

Of a similar character is the following tradition, inscribed under


0 « « . fs) i; ff S * . ^ -W » * . A ^

. iilwu shell hi. ch. li.


260


THE SOUL fN PHILOSOPHY AKD FOLK-COJiCEPTION.


the House of T’ang in a small work of fiction ; “ INfr. Kieh, discoursing
“ with the savants on sundry countries, told them that there exists
“in the north-west of the world a kingdom of women, taking
“serpents for husbands. Their sons are serpents, which do not
“ bite, and which dwell in caverns. The daughters, however, become
“concubines of ministers, as also magistrates and chiefs, living in
“palaces and mansions”'.

“In the last year of the Tshng Tai period (A.U. 9-35)”, thus
runs a tale in a work of the tenth century, “ Sii Thin, a graduate
“of the second degree aspiring to the highest, peregrinated south-
“ ward from one lodging-place to another, and on arriving in Hiah-
“cheu, (south-western Hupeh and north-western Hunan) looked
“round for an inn of good old reputation. He found one at the
“foot of the Fu-tui hill. That night he just laid aside his lute and
“ his books, when he perceived a woodcutter, lean and shrivelled,
“ with all the demeanour of a man bent under grief and cares.
“T'an asked him from where he came, and, his eyes blinded
“with tears, the man said: ‘I live in this mount here; my tribal
“name is Li, and my personal name is Ku-chuh. My wife suffered
“from disease for several years, without recovering. Not long
“ago I entered the jungle for some fire-wood and jiassed there a
“few nights, and in my absence her body suddenly underwent
“a transformation. Not liking to frighten others, she said to a
“matron next-doors : ‘My body has now another shape; please
“go and tell my husband of it’. (On receiving this message) 1
“ran home, and she said: ‘1 could not stand ray sufferings any
“longer; this is only my carcass, please ask the neighbours to
“ kindly take it to the mountain-pass, and depose it there’. 1 did


^ fin ^ ^ ^ - ^ (51 gg - writings con-


cerning the four Gentlemen of the Liang Dynast)-”, a single chapter of strange
matters professedly written by Chang Yueli a Minister, painter and poet

wlio lived from 067 to 730. The Catalogue in the Old Books of the T‘ang Dynasty
(ch. 58, 1. 19) says, however, the author is one Lu Sien (a misprint for

^ ?). adding in a note that one source calls him Liang Tsai-yen ^ ,

who lived in the eighth century. The four Gentlemen were, according to
the work itself, mystic personages who visited the emperor Wu in the Tden
kien period (502 — 520). The piece is reprinted in the T S, sect. )[jjp . ch. 311.


HUMAN OFFSPRING OF A SNAKE.


261


“so, and they carried her to the spot. While strolling about
“ there, our ears were suddenly struck by a noise like a lowing
“storm and pattering rain. We all stood panic-struck. ‘My time
“has come’, my wife exclaimed, ‘hurry home, but beware of
“looking behind’. I was just telling her how sorry 1 was at
“ having to part with her, when I beheld on the hills around a
“ countless number of big snakes, emulously squirming down upon
“ my wife. She left her couch, stretched herself out, coiled herself
“ up, and changed into a big python, which had sexual intercourse
“ with the serpents, and squirmed off’. Then tlie man battered his
“ head upon a big stone, and sank to the ground, his head cracked
“ and broken.

“To this day there lives in that locality a family Li, who are
“the progeny of that snake” b

According to tirst-class historical works of the sixth century, there
existed a curious country, where women, by marrying semi-human
dogs, produced boys with their father’s shape and temper, but
girls like themselves. “Tn the sixth year of the Then kien period

« A.

2 . s ® . i 5 0 , a a li tt ft . « ^ « s . M # w

Bt . a ® ^ ft « . ^ it ft , ta A # uj

•ft®-!#. laatetBftfffii.'WttAsft#*

£ M SS-

“Gossip from the Jade Hall”, three chapters of tales ascribed in the Catalogue of
the Sung dynast}- (History, ch. 206, 1. 3j to Wang Jen-yu , a high

statesman who lived from 880 to 050, famous as prose- writer and poet. Not possessing
the work, we quote the above tale from the K K, ch. 459.


563


THE SOUL IN rHIl.OSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘'(ii.l,). SO?)”, thus the Standard Annals of the Liang dynasty relate,
some men from Tsin-ngan (in Fuhkien) crossed the ocean, and
“ were cast by the wind upon an island, which they found inhabited.
“The women were like those of the Middle Empire, but their speech
“ was incomprehensible. The men had human bodies with dogs’
“ heads, and their speech was something like the barking of dogs.
“They lived on small peas; their clothes were of a stuff like linen;
“ they constructed walls of clay of a round shape, with gates like
“burrows” In another form we find the same story related
some centuries later in the Standard Annals of the five short-lived
dynasties which e.\isted between those of Thing and Sung, viz. by
one Hu Kiao an officer who, after a stay of seven years among
the barbarians in the north, came home in 953; “Further onward
“to the north we have the Kinmlom of Doors. Its inhabitants have
“ human bodies with dogs’ heads ; their hair is long, they go naked,
“and catch wild beasts with their hands. Their language is barking.
“Their wives are perfect human beings, and understan-.l Chinese.
“ The boys they give birth to are dogs, but their daughters
“are women. They intermarry, and are troglodytes. They feed on
“raw flesh, but their wives and daughters eat human food. It
“ has occurred that a native of the Middle Kingdom, who came
“there, was advised by a married woman, who pitied him, to
“flee quickh' home, giving him at the same time some ten
“chopsticks, one of which, she said, he had to drop every ten and
“odd miles. The canine husband pursued him, but whenever he
“saw a household utensil of his, he took it home in his jaws,
“so that he could not overtake the man” Certainly we have


M A tfS « W . * S in lA - * H . * S

* , ^ ± @ e . S » B . # tS * 5- Ch. 54. ). 28.

k. iI0 49^.AS.:ft4.ifS#AAA:zr.#

^ ft iE' "I|) M It . W Y- Ht 11 ’3, I. 8.


THE CANINE ORIGIN OF THE SOUTHERN AUTOCHTHONES.


263


to look upon those narratives as nothing else than wild and
embellished rumours about countries where the male inhabitants
had repellent, ugly features and hairy skins, while the women
answered better to the Chinese esthetical standard. But for all that,
the fact that they occupy a place in works such as the Standard
Annals, is significant, as it proves that the belief in sexual con-
nection of men and beasts, with procreation of progeny, was in China
a dogmatic belief even with learned and educated men of letters.

With still greater lucidity this phenomenon is brought out by
traditions, likewise recorded in the Standard Histories as genuine
truth, on a canine or wolfish origin of some foreign nations,
including the aborigines of the present southern and south-eastern
provinces, already mentioned by us now and then as Man.
Not contented with ascribing to the latter a special capacity to
change themselves into tigers (see page 167), public opinion also
described them as the progeny of an ancient dog, since a treatise on
them in the Books of the Later Han Dynasty, the oldest we possess,
had stated that they were really so. It relates the following :

“ In olden limes, the reign of Kao-sin (26th. cent. B.C.) was
“troubled by raids of the Dog Jung (living at the west of the
“empire). The emperor deplored the cruelties committed in their
“ invasions, and marched an army against them, but they could
“ not be defeated. So he summoned all men in the empire who
“ could bring him the head of General Wu, the chief of those bar-
“ barians. A thousand gold pieces would be the price paid, besides
“a domain inhabited by ten thousand families; and the emperor’s
“ youngest daughter would be given him as a wife.

“ At that time His Majesty possessed a dog with five-coloured
“hair, which answered to the name of Pan-hu: ‘Dish-gourd’ After
“ the order had been given, this animal appeared at the gate with
“ a man’s head in his jaws. The amazed courtiers examined it, and

1 This was not an ordinary dog, but the j)roduct of a curious metamorphosis. “In
“Kao-sin’s time, thus the Records of Wei state, there lived in the royal mansion
“an old woman. Once she had a sore ear; she picked it, and a thing came out
“ of it, as large as a silkworm cocoon This she put in a calabash, which she covered
“with a dish; and on a sudden it changed into a dog with five-coloured spots. Hence

“this animal was named Dish-gourd” SI4H, MM .

« 3E S , # IF 5^ , # 2 7} # 4U in H , S A a ft

Commentary of the T'ang dynasty.


364


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHV AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“found it to be in fact that of the General. Great was the
“emperor’s delight. But he could not marry Dish-gourd to his
“daughter, nor was there a way to enfeoff a dog. He resolved to
“ reward the animal, but he did not know how to do it, when
“ the girl heard of the matter, and declared that the emperor,
“ having issued the order, could not now violate his pledge. She
“requested him to let her go, and so the emperor could not help
“ marrying her to Dish-gourd.

“ The dog received the girl, placed her on his back, and ran
“off to the southern mountains, into a cavern situated in a
“ dangerous, far distant place, where no human foot-print ever
“appeared"). In three years she gave birth to a dozen children,
“ six boys and six girls, who, when Dish-gourd was dead, inter-
“ married. They wove clothes of rind, which they dyed with
“ shrubs and seeds, and they were especially fond of five-coloured
“ clothes, all cut out with a tail. Afteiwvards the mother returned
“ to her old home and related her adventures to tlu! emperor, who
“ordered her sons to be brought to Court. Their clothes were
“striped like orchids, their talk sounded like the word chu-li;
“they had a passion for wandering on hills and in glens, and disliked
“level plains. In compliance with these idiosyncrasies, the emperor
“assigned to them some vast valleys in the renowned mountains,
“where their descendants ramified into tribes, called Man liar-
“ barians. Though outwardly stupid, they were inwardly crafty” h


t According' to the Commentary of the T'ang dynasty, this lair was “somewhere
“to the west of the Lu-khi district in Ch'en-cheii (in Hnnan), in mount Wu. A
“description of this mountain, written by Hwang Min, states it is about ten
“ thousand feet high. Halfway up is the grotto of Dish-gourd, with room for some
“ myriads of people. It contains a stone couch and the foot-prints of Dish-gourd.
“There are still in front of a cavern in the Table mount some sheep and other
“animals of stone, besides many other old relics and curiosities, and still more
“look-out rocks. This cavern i.s spacious, and has the appearance of a chamber
“with three compai tments. In the distance a rock is \isible with a shape
“ reminding one of a dog. Tradition among the Man people asserts this is


mtiB. ihKBrsw.ih^hTr

- 5 . . a « # # 5- * tfe.


A WOLF IS THE PROGENITOR OF THE TURKS AND UIGURS. 265


With not less emphasis do the Standard Histories assert that
the Turks are descended from a quadruped. “It is stated”, thus say
the Books of the Sui Dynasty, “that the realm of their ancestors,
“situated above the Western Sea (Issik-kul?), was destroyed once
“ upon a time by an adjacent state, which, sparing neither sex,
“ nor age, exterminated all the inhabitants, e.xcept one boy, whom
“ they had not the heart to kill. But they chopped off his feet
“ and arms, and cast him into a vast marsh. Here a she-wolf
“regularly brought him flesh, so that he could eat it and thus
“escaped death. Afterwards lie had sexual intercourse with that
“ wolf, and fecundated her. Then that realm sent again some people
“ to murder the boy, and they were going to kill the wolf also
“that was with him, when, as if by the help of a god, she was
“ transported rapidly to the east side of the sea. Here she came
“down upon a mountain, situated in the north-west of Kao-
“ ch'^ang (Turfan). She retired into a grotto at its foot, and found
“ there fertile plains, clad in green, over two hundred square miles.
“ Afterwards she gave birth to ten boys, the first of whom adopted
“ the surname of Oshina and, being the cleverest, became their
“ chief. They placed standards with a wolf’s head at the entrance


It « ss a s # . X « (a a' * ,

« A ffl SS 'F . * E 13 i?i5 ^ ^ #
¥ -f * . # A * . ro ft « fji bt * ^ ja A . X «

^6 . A ii 7- — A . A A A .


366


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


“of their encampment, as a mark that they did not forget their origin”*.

A wolf was also believed to be the progenitor of the principal
stock of the Uigurs. “The people”, thus two other Standard
Histories relate, “assert that a slien-yii of the Hiung-nu had two
“ daughters, so beautiful in form and face that they passed in the
“ whole realm for goddesses. ‘It is all very good and nice to possess
“such daughters’, he said, ‘but how to find suitable husbands for
“them? I shall have to give them to Heaven’. So he erected a
“ high terrace in an uninhabited region in the north of his realm,
“and placed the two maids upon it, saying: ‘1 entreat Heaven
“to accept them’. Three years passed away, and the mother wanted
“to fetch them home, but the shen-yii forbade it, for, said he, the
“ time to take them away had not yet come. Another year elapsed,
“after which an old wolf guarded the terrace night and day,
“howling and groaning, and dug a lair below it. When the year
“was ended and it was still there, the youngest girl spoke: ‘Father
“ placed us here as a gift to Heaven, and now this wolf has come ;
“methinks he is a divine being sent from Heaven’. She prepared
“ to leave the terrace and go to him, without listening to her sister,
“'who, greatly frightened, said: ‘He is a beast, bring no shame upon
“our parents’. She descended, and became the wolf’s wife; and she
“ had a son, from whom a numerous progeny issued, that founded
“a realm. The people there for this reason speak in a protracted tone
“ of voice, and sing long chants resembling <i wolf’s howl” '■*.


- flj, • Cli 84, I. 1. See also a version of thi.s legend in the Books of the Chen
dynasty, ch. 30, I. 1. It was discussed by lloworth in his History of the Mongols,
I, pa 2 e 'id, and earlier bv Klajiroth in the ‘‘Journal Asiatique” tor 1823. II, p. ‘209.

2 e*. A, H A®


NON-ClllNESE TRIBES INDICATED BY ANIMAL NAMES.


267


It has not escaped the reader’s attention that, in particular, the
two biggest representatives of the canine race are handed down
by tradition as progenitors of tribes and nations. No doubt there
is some connexion between this fact and the plienomenon that, in
all history, a large number of frontier tribes are denoted in China
by characters which signify varieties of dogs or allied quadrupeds,
as shown by the element ^ dog, which those characters contain
as a radical. So, a large branch of the offspring of Dish-gourd, the
canine ancestor of the Man, is described in the Books of the Wei
Dynasty ' and in those of the House of Cheu ^ under the name of
Liao, while the Books of the Sui Dynasty^ state that they
were also called Jang. Furthermore we find some of their
tribes denoted as Khih-liao and Khih-lao,

which terms are still current as appellations of their scanty remains,
now living in Kweicheu province and other parts, known to Euro-
peans as Lao or Miao-tsze. During many centuries also, four Man
tribes inhabiting the Khi-tung ' region in the present Chen-yuen
a department of Kweicheu, were distinguished in the books by
the names of Khih, Liao, Ling, and Miao.

We read, moreover, of a Cliwang tribe in Kw'ei-lin “ (in

Kwangsi), and of tribes styled Nao, ^ Yao, ^ Kwo-
lo, and Li, all names of quadrupeds. The Kwo-lo or Lo-lo ^
especially occur in Yiinnan, while the Clnvang, often named
also Lang or Wolves, live in Kwangsi and Kwangtung both.
Still we find in Yiinnan such names as Chung people If A.


« A a a s # * # a ^ ,m T 0 .T- ni' .

H . * A §1 S ft S: X fe “S


ch 98, 1. 24, and tlie Dookii of tlie Wei Uynaaty, cli. 103. 1. 20.

1 Ch. 101. 11. 2.1 aijq. 2 Cl). 49, II. 8 w/'/- t.'*'-


mm-


82, 1. 1.
ifif ■


,5


368


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Lih-suh^^ etc. \ It is significant also that the character ^
Man, the generic name of all those barbarians, occurring already in the
Shu king in a book relating to the 33rd. century before our era
likewise signifies some animal, as is indicated by its radical ^ ,
now denoting ophidians, insects and some sauria, but, originally,
animals in general.

Among the ancient Chinese terms denoting the peoples beyond the
northern frontiers, the commonest is m T ih, which has likewise
the sign dog for it^ principal element. It is probably older than
the oldest Chinese written documents we possess, as ti book of the
Shu king, referring to the accession of the founder of the Shaug
dynasty in the IStli. century before the birth of Chiast, makes this
monarch speak of the ^ or northern Tihk The great voca-
bulary of the first century of our era roundly declared them “ to
be the offspring of dogs” k In the Cheu li mention is made of six
classes or tribes of Till ( ), which, together with other frontier

peoples and the natives of the empire proper, were to be attended
to by certain Chiefs of a topographical and statistical Department ";
and one of those groups, c;dled the nine Moh were,

according to the same work (ch. 37, 1. 13), employed at Court,
under the name of M o h-menials ", for the taming and guarding
of animals and for other minor offices, on a like footing with
other barbarian.^. Now that name too points to an affiliation with
animals, for, as the radical ^ indicates, it denotes some beast;
Chinese authors generally describe it as akin to the fox, and fit
for domestication. Avowedly the Moh were the same people who
are mentioned in a piece of the Shu king, relating to the founder
of the Cheu dynasty, under the animal name of

But this is not all. The Chinese Father of History teaches us,
that in his time, the barbarians living west of China were known

1 Comp. Deveria, “La Frontieie Sino-Annamite”, second part.

2 Section ^ , the Canon of Shun.

3 Sect. =^, tlie Announcement of Chung-hwui.

. Shwoh wen, ch. 10, 1. 33.

S Ch. 33, 1. 1.

« mm-


7 Section the Completion of the War.


NON-CHINESE TRIBES INDICATED BY ANIMAL NAMES.


269


as or “Dog Jung”*, and we saw on page 263 that the

Books of the Later Han Dynasty also denote them by this term.
But the name is much older, for it occurs already in the S/ian-hai
icing. This work in fact roundly gives us their bestial pedigree:
“The emperor Hwang begot Miao-lung; iMiao-lung begot
“ Y u n g-w u , who begot L u n g-m i n g , who produced white dogs
“that, being of two sexes, became the tribe of the Dog Jung,
“who accordingly are carnivorous”**. When we peruse the Shi hmg,
we come across some ancient poems ’ in praise of the victories of
Chinese arms over certain foreign tribes indicated by the term
Hien-yun, which Sze-ma IVien \ and other
authors after him, identify, either correctly or incorrectly, with the
Hiung-nii ; now those characters, too, betray their meaning of canine
species by their radical. Again, the same radical appears in the name
^ ^ , H i u n-y u h , some Hiung-nii tribe mentioned by Mencius ®
as attended to by TAi W'ang®, the progenitor of the house of
Cheu in the seventeenth century before our era. In this term the
first character is sometimes replaced by which means a wild
dog with human face, mentioned in the Shan-hai king. Sze-ma
Tshen writes the name as Sf « ^ and ^ which likewise are
evidently defective transcriptions of some exotic name, the correct
pronunciation of which has not yet been discovered. Finally, the
same people, or one or more tribes among them, are sometimes styled
or Hieh, which the dictionaries generally say means an


animal of the canine race.

This series of instances, which a thorough inquiry of Chinese
sources could easily enlarge, is rather too long to allow us to see
in those animal names merely invectives, invented by haughty
Chinese to debase despised barbarian neighbours, and afterwards
giving birth to tales about real bestial descent. And admitting


1 Historical Records, ch. 4, 1. 5.


3 In the section , I, odes 7 and 8; III, odes 3 and 4.

4 Historical Records, ch. 110, 1. 1.

5 ^ II, 3.

7 Historical Records, ch. 1, 1. 5, and ch. 110, 1. 1.

8 Oj). cit., ch. 4, 1. 3.


270


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


that all, or most of them, are transcriptions of foreign terms, which
is highly probable, Ave do not solve thereby the riddle why the
Chinese liave so doggedly preferred to use here animal names.
The supposition is perhaps not venturesome that those tribes them-
selves believed animals to have been their ancestors, and that the
Chinese, not less enslaved than they to the belief in the perfect
possibility of animals producing human beings, fully trusted their
assertions, and gave expression to their credulity in this respect in
their own annals by using the terms in question.

Some accessional details tend to confirm this view. The reader
saw on page 2G5 tliat the Turks were not at all ashamed of
their descent from a wolf, openly decorating, as they did, their
standards with wolves’ heads in commemoration of it. “They were”,
thus we read, “ in the habit of placing a metal wolf’s head on the
“ top of their standards, and their warriors of the guards were called
“fu-li, which in the Hia language means wolves, the ancient
“ reminiscence of their descent from a wolf being not elFaced from
“ their memory” '. In the Books of the Sui Dynasty Ave have a
few notes on a Avestern tribe, named Tang-hiang^, in which Ave
read: “The Tang-ch'ang and White Wolves are found among them,
who all call themselves the progeny of mi apes” k On the other
hand, a bestial extraction is even at present not quite so repulsive a
thing to the Chinese mind as we might be inclined to suppose.
This fact was emphatically impressed on us by the folloAving tale,
which we found widely circulating among the Amoy Chinese. A
graduate of high rank AA'as celebrating a Buddhist mass for the
redemption of his deceased father, when one of the officiating priests,
a ghost-seer, informed him that every now and then something like
a dog turned up to eat of the sacrificial food. The scared graduate
told this his mother, avIio immediately made a clean breast, con-
fessing that she had sexual intercourse with the house-dog before
his birth. Displeased at this news, he overturned the sacrificial
table and stopped the mass at once ; but he fared badly for this
unfilial act, for next day Heaven sent down a flash of lightning
upon him, and thus killed him on the spot.


W id' Is Hi , ^ ® T' . Books of the Clieu Dynasty,

ch. 50, 1. 4.

M&m.w nmmm


. Ch. 83, 1. 5.


ABSENCE OF TOTEMISM.


271


A strong belief in animal progenitors of men, families and tribes
may, in any country where the worship of ancestors is prevalent,
readily lead to methodic veneration of such beasts. Considering,
however, that, as far as we can learn from books, a descent from
beasts has never been positively claimed l)y the inhabitants oi
what we may call ancient China proper, the existence of ancestor
worship in such a garb must be dismissed at once for the provinces
north of the Yangtsze. If we peruse the long list of Chinese tribal
names, we find half a dozen names of animals, viz. Bear ,
Dragon f|. Horse , Cow^, Crow and Swallow but,
to judge frona the researches of native authors, they do not point to
any alleged descent of the tribes they denote, from an animal ancestor.
The two first, which are very rare, are stated to have been at the
outset individual names, adopted as family-names by the descendants
of the bearers. The Horse tribe, which has a much larger number
of members, derives this name from the first letter of the cognomen
of one of its ancestors. Cow, likewise a rare surname, marks descent
from an individual whose cognomen it was; while Crow or Raven
denoted the office or office-badge of some ancestor. And Swallow is
only apparently an animal name, representing in reality the name
of an ancient country in the present Pehchihli. Words denoting
wolves or dogs were never in China actual tribal names.

And South-China, the old country of the Man, wliose mythic
pedigree has its root in the dog Dish-gourd? Never have our studies
of books brought us across anything intimating that the dog is there
more especially an object of worship than other animals, or a
respected do-daim whose flesh does not appear in the popular bill-
of-fare. Zoolatry, tis we shall show afterwards, is a prominent feature
of China’s Religion. But the statement must here be made that, as
yet, we have found no trace in China of animals being worshipped
in their capacity of tribal progenitors, so that we entertain serious
doubts whether any so-called Totemisni exists in East-Asia as a
religious phenomenon.


CHAPTER XII.


ON PI, ANT-SPIRITS.

The old conception, prevailing in China, that there exists a
universal Tang pervading the whole world, effusions from which
create and animate beings, causing them to live until their borrowed
soul-substance returns to its origin, naturally infers the existence
of a belief that plants, which live, grow, and die like men and
animals, are likewise thus animated. Such a belief is traceable
to old writings; but we may safely admit it to be much older
than that philosophical theory about the general cosmic origin of
souls, it being, as is well known, far from alien to tribes living
elsewhere on the globe in a very low stage of mental culture. The
way in which, in times so old, attribution of souls to plants
arose in China, we cannot attempt to trace, data that might shed
light on it being altogether wanting. And mere theorizing on this
point is not our task. The matter may remain perhaps for ever an
open problem, insolvable, as are so many phenomena in the life
and thought of primeval man.

The ancient sages having once for all established in China the
doctrine that creation of life consists in an effusion of souls by the
Cosmos into beings, orthodox philosophy cannot possibly be expected
to have ever dropped the belief in the animation of plants. The
Sung school sanctioned it unconditionally, and Chu Hi, its chief
figure, taught: “Living plants and trees have a shen of them-
selves, or else they would, of course, not be able to live” h

The belief in plant-spirits is characterized in China by a peculiar
feature, which calls for our attention from the outset. While the soul
of a human being is generally conceived as possessing the shape
and characteristics of a human being, and occasionally those of an
animal; while, as likewise we have seen, the conceived shape of


TWO DISTINCT CATEGOttlES OF PLANT-SPIRITS.


373


the spirit of an animal is the shape of this animal or of some being
with human attributes and speech — plant spirits are never con-
ceived as plant-shaped, nor to have plant-characters. They are,
whenever forms are given them, mostly represented as a man, a
woman, or a child, and often also as an animal, dwelling in or near
the plant, and emerging from it at times to do harm, or to dispense
blessings. Such plant-souls are thus resident spirits, and the fact
that they are given equally human or animal forms, may have to be
put to the account of the dominating ideas on easy transformation
of men into animals, and conversely.

So, in plant-animism, sentiments and ideas respecting human souls
are preponderant. Whether we must conclude from this that con-
ceptions on the animation of plants have never developed in Chinese
thought and worship before ideas about human ghosts, and veneration
for the same, had become predominant in mind and custom, we
cannot say; but the matter seems probable.

Alongside with plant-spirits in anthropomorphous and zoomor-
phous shapes, plant-spirits have played a very important part in
Chinese life of all times without any definite forms being given
them. In this character they are conceived as certain doses of shen
substance, infused into the plants by the Cosmos from its own
yang soul, and conferring on them a certain amount of ling or
soul-power, the quality and quantity of which manifests itself by the
invigoration, or increase of soul-substance, the plants impart to those
who eat them, thus curing them from debility or disease, and pro-
longing their lives. The two categories of animated plants have equally
exercised a mighty influence on Chinese superstition and Religion,
and they do so still. We will treat them under separate headings.


1. On Anthropomorphous and Zoomorphous Plant-spirits.

The identification of plant-spirits with men or animals appears
from the oldest legend we have of those spirits, which reads as follows -.

“ When Chang Liao of Kiang-hia, Governor of Kwei-yang, known
“ also by the name of Shuh-kao, had retired into T en (in Honan),
“ he had there some fields purchased by his family, in which a tree
“ stood of so large dimensions that it took ten persons to encompass
“ it with their arms. It covered several acres, in which no sown corn
“would grow. So he sent off some men to fell it; but blood
“gushed out of it and sent the men back to him in great conster-

18


274


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ nation, to bring him the news. In great anger, the grandee exclaimed :
“‘It was nothing else than the sap of that old tree; what blood
“could such blood be!’ and taking up the matter himself seriously,
“he hewed the tree a second time, likewise with the effect that
“a broad stream of blood flowed out. Then he told the men to
“cut off the branches first. A hole was thus laid bare, from
“which an old greyhead, four by five chdh high, emerged
“on a sudden, marching up to Shuh-kao; but he beat him off,
“ and then killed four more of such men, during which feat all
“the bystanders lay flat on the ground from fright. He himself,
“however, looked quite unhurt. He then inspected those beings more
“closely, and found that they were neither quite men, nor quite
“ animals. They now felled the tree, and in that same year he
“ became a Minister, and a Censor of the Emperor’s conduct, as also
“ Governor of Yen-cheu with an income of two thousand stoneweight
“of corn. His misfortune remained dormant?” '

An old fox-yarn, in which a tree a millennium old appears as the
abode of a shen represented as a man, and losing blood likewise
under axe-blows inflicted on it, we rendered on pp. 189 ^qq.
Sanguiferous trees uttering cries of woe, pain or indignation when
hacked at or burned down, we come across in books very often,
even in the Standard Histories. Alongside with such talcs, we find
cases recorded of trees and plants speaking, chanting and humming
with a human voice ; and all such reports bear in themselves
unmistakably the marks of having been written down under the
impression that it was their souls that performed such extraordinarily
wonderful feats.

Of the tales of anthropomorphous plant-spirits, which we have


«. /K cfiiaiUi , *

. If ti! , lit fr ^ Jii . 0 a ® « « flf
A:*;**. *K®*W*«. ±fr —

IniiUJ-SUh ( cll. 9,


SOUr.S OF MEN’, CHANGED INTO TREES.


•275


read, some atford an interesting insight into the animistic lore of
East-Asian man. “ Under the T'ang dynasty there lived in King-nan
“a rich man, named Ts'^ui Tao. His family was very poor, but he,
“having planted more than a thousand orange trees, drew large
“ profits from them every year. One day, one of those trees changed
“into a man over one chang in height, who asked to see Tsdd Tao.
“‘In my prior existence’, thus he spoke, ‘I owed you a million
“coins, and I died before having paid them otf, on which, more-
“over, my family swindled you of that money. Then you informed
“ Heaven of the matter, who ordered my whole family to become
“orange trees and serve you in that capacity, to thus clear off the
“debt. Bijt now the Supreme Emperor has willed that commi-
“seration shall be shown to my clan; our original shapes shall be
“ restituted, and I am to make a second stay in this world, with full
“ consciousness of the past. Most happy shall I be if you will erect
“for me a humble cottage, that I may finish this existence by
“ploughing and digging. And then. Sir, fell your orange trees to
“the last, and remain correct in conduct, observing the ‘constant
“matters’; then you will save yourself from evil. If you do not
“ behave so. Heaven will send mishap down upon you. As to that
“ million of coins, they have been paid back now to the last !’ Tao
“ was greatly affrighted. Following the advice of that being, he
“ built a hut for him, and felled the trees altogether. Five years
“afterwards he died, and his family then became quite poor
“again. It was then unknown where that man lived”'.


ws. ^7i± mm

A . * « a ^ P‘1 « « at « K ft , fit IE i« 3T . 4

1ft; 4 . # T) S SS i ffi W . , B) S

Si((u tiiani/ hih: K K, ch. 415.


276


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘‘ When Hiung Chhing of the Ming dynasty was a student, he
“ studied at the southern altar of the district-city. One evening he
“ saw there a maid of the greatest beauty, standing in a tree.
“ His companions, eighteen in number, were all bewildered and
“ stood horror-stricken, but our hero did not share their coin-
“ motion. In a few moments the maid disappeared, on which Hiung
“ Cheung took a knife, and carved in big letters these sentences in
“the bark of the tree: ‘This evil apparition may wind and thunder
“split; its material shape may axe and saw reduce to pieces’. Next
“ midnight a thunderbolt shattered the tree” h

We abstain from quoting further instances, having to insert half
a dozen more in chapter VI of Part 11, which will treat of the
devils among plant-spirits. Ideas on the animation of plants by

souls of men may easily pass into a belief that a plant may

receive an indwelling human spirit with especial facility when in
close contact with a corpse, corpses being deemed to be animated,
as they were before death. It is, we think, ascribable to nothing
else than to such belief that tales have come into existence such
as the following : “ There lived in the Yuen h w o period one
“ Ch'en P'oh in the northern street of the Ch'ung-hien village.
“Outside the main entrance of his dwelling a big Sophora stood,
“against which Pmh was wont to lean a little every evening in

“ the twilight, to have a look-out. Once he saw there something

“ like a woman with a fox, a dog, an old raven or the like, that
“flew into the tree. He felled this to examine it, dividing the tree
“ into three parts. In the first he found a hole ; in the next he
“discovered 120 single chestnuts, and in the third a dead infant,
“not bigger than a chflh, in swaddling clothes” h


KvKI.H(J-chcU chi ‘‘Memoirs concerning Kwang-clien”, a department

of Honan province. T S, sect. , ch. 8.


GKAVE-TllEES IIAKBOUR THE SOULS OF THE HEAD.


277


This topic takes us straightway to the trees which, as we saw
elsewhere (B. I, pp. 462 sqq.), it has been customary in China
from times immemorial to plant on graves. We have stated the
substratum of this custom to be a desire to strengthen the soul of
the buried person, thus to save his body from corruption, for which
reason trees such as pines and cypresses, deemed to be bearers of
great vitality for being possessed of more shen than other trees,
were used preferably for such purposes. From the belief that trees
may have such effects, lively ideas, as vve liave also demonstrated,
have sprung up that they are connected most closely with the soul
abiding in the grave on which they stand, nay, that they are
identical therewith.

Two myths of respectable age, telling of trees shading the tombs
respectively of a wife and her husband, which intertwined as if in
a living embrace, have served us already to point out that identi-
fication (Book t, pp. 470 aqq.). They have reminded the reader of
our own old yarns of plants shooting up from graves in which
lay the soul of the buried dead; of trees and flowers growing out
of the tombs of hapless lovers, and uniting into knots of tender
affection. They have shown us that the affectionate souls may
roost in the branches as ducks or swans. This trait appears in a
clearer light after what this chapter has stated, and will still state,
of the tendency of Chinese myth-makers to give plant-spirits
animal forms.

Here is another story of a grave-tree harbouring the soul of the
person buried under its shade. “ In days of old, in the time of the
“Contending States (in the latter ages of the Cheu dynasty), when
“the kingdom of Wei suffered much from the evil inllicted on it
“by the state of Tsdn, a certain man followed its people in the
“ war operations on the Tsdn frontiers. In his long absence, his wife,
“whose thoughts did not turn away from him, died. When she
“ was buried, a tree shot up from her grave, the branches and foliage
“of which all grew out in the direction of the land where her
“husband was. They called it the tree of remembrance k


mn


^ .


•27S


THE SOUE IN PlllI,OSOPHV AND FOEK-DONCEPTION.


The identification of sepulchral trees with the soul of the occu-
pant of the grave, has become a source of superstition in many
other respects. The good qualities the dead man displayed during
his life, in so far as it was his soul that engendered them, pass
over into the tree, and from this into the persons who look at it.
‘•Li Ching, known also by the name of Hung-khing, applied him-
“self to the acquisition of the Tao, visited the Royal Father of the
“ East (a king of immortals), and received instruction from him during
“ seventeen years. Then lie died, and his family buried him in
“Wu-ling. A flowering tree there shot up from his tomb to a
“ height of seven c h'i h. All men who happened to see its flowers
" became clever and intelligent, and acquired capacity for literary
“work in the highest deorrec” '. It is also the identification of

O O

souls of the dead with plants, that explains the rise of traditions
of mysterious flowers having appeared on graves under certain
circumstances. “ In ChTi, a harem-lady herb grows, resembling the
“gold teng, full of genial breath, and with flowers red and blue.
“The people relate that in the time of king Ling of Ch"u (B.C.
“539 — 5'27) several dozen harem-dames frequently showed a spirit
“of ill-will and a tendency to neglect their duties. Those who were
“ imprisoned for that in the Palace and expired in jail, were buried,
and their graves entirely decked themselves with those flowers” k

We come now to the identification of plant-spirits with animals,
a prominent feature of Chinese plant-animism of all times, as well
as their identification with men is. Already Liu Ngan declared
“that trees produce pih-fang”k which, according to Kao Yiu,
the commentator of his writings, “are the tsing of trees” k and
of which the Skmi-hcd king, the oldest work that mentions them,
says: “In the Chang-ngo mounts live birds, crane-shaped and one-
“ legged. They have red stripes, blue bodies, and white bills. Their


U . w A tl ft ?£ ® « BJ) ** S kk. d., 3S9.

Hnnii Ut'h Lilli, cli. 13. 4


BULL-SHAPED TREE-SPIKH'S.


:279


“name is pih-fang. By their cries they call each other. When they
“appear, disastrous conflagrations burst out in the town”*.

At an early date, tree-spirits were identified also with bulls. In
the Historical Records we have a passage which, to judge from
what commentators add to it, refers to such an identification. It
reads thus, that “in the twenty-seventh year of his reign the Ruler
“ Wen of IVin (704 — 714 B.C.) felled a large Rottlera tree on
“ the Southern Mounts, the big bull of the Rung” h To this, PAi
Yin-’ adds “that Su Kwang * wrote; Nowadays there is in Wu-tu,
“ on the old highroad, a sacrificial place, dedicated to the furious
“ bull, with a large bull painted on it. Over it grows a tree, out
“of which one day a bull emerged, which appeared afterwards in
“ the waters of the Rung” And Chang Sheu-tsieh ” subjoins the
following tradition : “According to the /T/ra/i ti chi, the big Rottlera
“ tree stood ten miles south of the district-city of Ch'en-ts'ang in
“ Khi cheu (in the present Shensi prov.), on the Ts'ang mount.
“The Lull i clncen savs; In the time of Wen of the House of
“Ts'in, there stood in the mountains south of Yung a big Rottlera.
“ Whenever the Ruler attacked it with axes, a violent gale arose,
“accompanied Ijy showers of rain, the tree then closing again, so
“that it could not be felled. Then there was a man who, being
“ill, went to that mountain in the dark, and heard a spectre say
“to the tree-spirit: ‘If TVin sends a man with disheveled hair to


' * # ^ 111 ^ 1 , * » a . — /S . St . W

« . m 0 B m . M. &
^ 1 $ i a ill

2 * X - + -b tt iS iB :A; #, a

, .V comiueiitatur of the IILturi.il necot'il.-;, wlio tluiii'islieil in the tilth
century. His writings, entitled S/n A' /si/i /.("i or Collecti\e Exiili-

ciitions of the Historic.il Records, comprise eighty chapters.

4 A commentator of the same work, who died in i'25. His writings, entitled .S'/i i
/.■(■ i/in i or Sounds and Meanings of the Historical Recoi'ds, are

known only from the ininierous quotations which Pei Yin made Iroin them in his
own conimentarv.

0 ^ ^ ^ commentator of the Historical Records, whose writings,

published in 737, are entitled .S/ii Li chuvi i Correct Meaning

of the Historical Records.


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY ANU POLK-CONCEPTION.


2SU

“ wind a red silk thread round the tree, and then sets the axes at
“ work upon you, will you remain then unmolested ?’ On which the
“ tree-spirit had nothing to say. Next morning the sick man reported
•‘this to the Ruler, who, trusting to his relation, felled the tree,
“and lo, a blue bull rushed out of it, and fled into the waters
“of the Fung, from which it emerged afterwards. Horsemen
“were sent to attack it, but they could not conquer it. On this
“ occasion, one of them tumbled from his horse and, on remounting,
“had his hair in disorder. This sight intimidated the beast, and it
“plunged into the water, to come out no more. Hence they put up
“a long-haired head on the spot, and under the Han, the Wei and
“ the Tsin dynasty this custom was maintained. The sacrificial place
“of the enraged bull, erected in the Wu-tu region, is dedicated to the
“ bull-spirit of that big Rottlera. Here we have also the explanation
“of the present custom to have walls daubed with blue bulls”'.

In the Sheu shen ki we find that tradition moulded a little
differently, but pointing nevertheless to the prevalence of quite
similar conceptions. “In the time of king Wu (12th. cent. B.C.)
“ there grew south of the walls of Yung-cheu a big tree, inhabited
“by a shen. It was almost ten chang high, and it cast its shades
“a mile around. The population of the locality all worshipped
“it, driving goats to the spot for the purpose in the four seasons
“and at the eight divisions of the year, and taking wine thither;
“and such sacrifices they brought uninterruptedly. One day, king
“ Wu left the city. Seeing the crowd worship the tree with sacrifices,
“ he spoke ; ‘ Who is that tree-spirit ? it is sure to inflict evil on
“ my people’; and he had it surrounded by his troops, in order to


a#^r-A

m. iiSi)SA#4-»i|i


BULI,-SHAPED TKEE-SPIKITS.


:2S1


“fell it. Flying gravel and running rocks, rolling thunder and
“flashing lightning were now produced by the power of the spirit,
“so that the soldiery and the crowd around broke asunder as pots
“ split into sherds, and fire into sparks. No orders could bring
“ them back to the tree. One of the men, wounded in Ids leg, fell
“down at a hundred paces from the tree, and could not get away.
“ Towards nightfall he saw a rider in red dress, who spoke to
“the tree-spirit: ‘Had king Wu’s attack on you this morning any
“bad results?’ ‘I am the lord of thunder’, was the answer, ‘and
“ my flying sand and soaring stones inflicted so much harm on
“ his soldiery, that the sight atone sutticed to scatter them as
“sparks, and kept them at a respectable distance; so intimidating
“is my power’. On which he in red retorted angrily: ‘I will tell
“his warriors to paint their faces red, to let their hair flow in
“ disorder, to put red clothes on, and to wind a red thread round
“the tree; if then they strew a hundred rings of ashes on the
“ road and attack the tree with their axes, will they then not
“manage to inflict damage on you?’ The tree-spirit had no answer
“ to give, and the man in red giving the reins to his horse, was off.

“Against daybreak the soldier communicated his adventure to
“ his village elders, who reported the matter to the king. Taking
“ advantage of the hints thus received, the king took the said measures
“ and attacked the tree anew with axes, and no phenomenon whatever
“ occurred. But when the trunk was about to come down, the blood
“that gushed out of it changed into a bull, which escaped into the
“country and plunged into the Fung. Thus we see that the tsing
“of a tree changes into a blue bull (once) in a hundred years.
“ Posterity being thus informed, availed themselves of ashes and red
“colours (against this evil)” '.

' ^ St im JS ttl 48 s » ta . ft ,

et fii 0 , gs * « I -tt ^ ^ « 11 H . a a


28:2


THE SOHL IN PHILOSOPHY ANU FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Literature gives us also traditions representing tree-spirits as dog-
shaped. “ When the Wu dynasty had got possession of the throne
“ (circfi A.D. 222), one Lull King-shuh, Governor of Kien-ngan,
“ sent off some men to fell a big camphor tree. After some axe-strokes,
“ blood gushed forth from the gaps, and when it came down, a being
“ with a human countenance and a dog’s body rushed out of the
“tree. King-shuh declared this monster to be a so-called p'^eng-
“heu; he cooked it and ate it, and it had the taste of dog-
“ meat. The Po/t tseh fit says, that tree-tsing bear the name of
“p"eng-heu, and that they look like a tailless black dog, edible
“ if cooked” h

And a stag-shaped tree-spirit we have in the following tale:
“ Under the reign of the Wu dynasty (222 — 280), one Nieh Yiu
“ lived, known also by his cognomen Wen-ti ; he was a man from
“Sin-kin in Yii-chang. In his youth he was poor, and took much
“ pleasure in hunting. Once he perceived in the shades of the
“evening a white stag. He sent an arrow into it, and looked up
“ its footprints at dawn, but the blood had disappeared, and he
“ could not discover the animal. Hungry and tired, he laid himself
“ down under a Rottlera tree, and looking up, saw an arrow sticking
“ in one of the branches. He climbed the tree to look at it, and
“found that it was the arrow he had shot off the day before.
“Astonished at this discovery, he returned home, procured some


m. M ^ « fi# .ft as 7: tt .

W ¥ -ft It # A ® 2 tH S ”

eivht cliajiters. cli. 3. See also the other eJition, ch. 18.

m = T » # . ®. ^ li (K . « rss ^ * A w IS S' # m

#e*4nlS,


. Shell shell hi. ch. 18.


TREE-SPIRITS AS STAGS AND SNAKES.


:2S3

“ provisions, and with his brothers, armed with axes, felled the tree.
“ It lost some blood ; they cut a couple of planks out of it, which
“ they trailed into a pond. There they alwavs sank, coming to
the surface only from time to time ; in which cases regularly
‘‘something happy befell the family” k

Much oftener, however, than with any other animals, plant-spirits
are identified with snakes. The Standard Histories of the Tsin
dynasty relate, that “Mu-yung Hi (Book I, pag. 053) once strolled
“southward of the city and stopped under a big willow, where it
“appeared to him that a man called out: ‘Stand back, great
“ Prince !’ He shuddered, and having had the tree felled, a snake over
“a chang in length emerged from it”^. — “The capital of the
‘’ Lu-shan district in Jil-chcu bore the name of Si-kwang-cheu under
“the Wei dynasty. There is now to the south-east of that city
“ a sacrificial place, dedicated to the Miraculous Spirit, with a
“ courtyard in front, several hundred p u in length and in breadth.
‘' Old people state, it was in former days a vast bowling-ground.
“ The main entrance is fianked on either side by a Sophora
“ tree, so thick that twenty men are required to encircle it ; its
“ branches cover a vast area of ground. In the first year of the
“Chung hwo period (A.U. 8S1), Yin Shao allowed a General to
“ have trees felled for palisades in the districts under his rule.
“ They were then going to fell the two Sophoras, but that
“evening a huge serpent wound itself through their tops, with
“a voice like thunder, and eyes like comets. The commander Li
“ Fan, a warrior who superintended the work, heard of it, and
“took the reptile for a miraculous apparition. He led his followers


ffi T . » Ji St ir

tt! . g g- *-

2 S ^ !?S T « « . It A » « T , A nf

ttl iti SB liJ • lit '■ I'*


2S4


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ to the spot, and attacked the trees with his own hands. Where the
“axeblows fell, blood issued from the trees and spattered about
“ as rain, while a rancid smell of flesh thinned the files of his men,
“and affected himself so much that he gave up his task. To this
“ day those trees stand on that spot” b

Of tales illustrating the connection of tree-souls with snakes,
Chinese literature affords a great number; but we need not give
here any more, as we shall have to insert some in chapter the
sixth of the next Part of this Book, devoted to plant-devils. It
hardly admits, ive tliink, of any doubt, it is the identification of
plant-souls with snakes that has led also to the belief in the capacity
of plants to become snakes. ‘‘In the Thai yuen period (376 — 397)”,
thus we read, “a man in Jii-nan entered the hills to cut bamboo,
‘‘ and saw a stem the inner part of which had entirely assumed
“ the shape of a snake, while the outer still had its twigs and
“leaves. And in the Wu region, a man of Siang-li, who cut
“ bamboo stems which others had left standing, found one evening
“ that one of them had a pheasant’s head, the neck of which
formed a whole with its body, so that the transformation was not
“ yet accomplished. This too was an instance of bamboo becoming
“ a snake *. — And in the seventh year of the K h a i h w a n g
“period of the Sui dynasty (5S6), tliere stood in Siang-clieu a mul-
“ berry tree which changed into a snake, tlie tail of which, coiled
“round the tree, was two chang in length b — The Governor

iji, IMMM

A . # # ifii It. 1! % a 4 1^1 KK, d' «■

-ATC'f’ft^^AAiaA —

I l/i/cii. K K, cli. 45(3.


PLANTS CHANGING INTO ANIMALS AND MEN.


•2S5


“ Hi Kien, when in command of Tan-yang, was out hunting in
“ the second month of the year. The ferns were then just in
“ growth. One of his wariors broke off a sprout , and ate it,
“ and immediately he felt a sinking sensation at his heart, and
“ wanted to be sick. So he went home, where his heart and
“ stomach ached for more than half a year. Then on a sudden he
“ became very sick, and vomited a red snake, over one c hh h in
“ length, still moving and wringling. They hung it up before the
“ eaves, where it dried by degrees ; and next day they saw it was a
“fern sprout, just like that the man had eaten. His illness was
“ then over”

If the idea that plant-spirits may have animal forms has engendered
the belief that plants may change bodily into animals, and these
animals may re-assurae plant-forms, there is no reason why man,
whose forms are also attributed very generally to plant-souls, should
not likewise be transformable into plants. It was an old yarn,
committed to writing by Yii Pao, that “the daughter of an emperor
of the Sheh-to mount” — a mystic personage in a still more mystic
locality — “changed on her death into a wondrous plant with luxu-
“ riant foliage, yellow flowers, and fruit like those of dodder.
“ Consequently, those who ate that marvellous plant were always
“ greater beauties than others” *. Transformations of this sort we find,
however, recorded too seldom to admit of their ever having played
an important part in China’s lore and superstition.

Among the products of the identification of snakes with plants
we must, no doubt, place also the conception, likewise given ex-
pression to in tales, of fruits being found to contain a snake when
cut up. We have, in conclusion, to mention the belief that any tree-


Meiijoii's concernin'r the Chans-teh


Chaiiy-tch fu chi ^

Dejjartment, in Honan province; quoted in the TS. sect. , ch. 182.

K K, ch. 416: profe.ssedly from the Shcn shrn hen hi.

shell hi, ch. 14.


.2^36 THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-rONCEPTiON.

spirit may assume both the human form and that of an animal.
“ Chu Kin, alias Ch^eu-ts'ai, was an itinerant hero. Travelling in
“Jii-nan, he lodged at an inn, the owner of which, one Teng Ts^iien-
“ pin, had a daughter, very handsome in countenance and form.
“She was bedeviled continuously by the tricks of a demon, and
‘‘no medical means could effect a cure. At that time. Kin came
“ from a feast at a friend’s, back to the inn late in the evening,
“and went to rest in the courtyard. Towards the second watch
“ (nine P.M.) he saw a man in a white dress, very fresh and clean,
“enter the daughter’s room. Kin walked around it, and heard them
“speak and laugh in the room very merrily. Instead of falling
“asleep, he watched for that person in a dark spot with his bow
“and arrows.

“ He lurked till the cock crew, when he saw the damsel let a
“ young man out. Kin sent an arrow into his body, and off the
“ gallant ran, but Kin gave him a second shot, and then lost sight
“ of him. At daybreak he reported the event to Ts'iien-pin, who
“joined him in seeking for the bloody traces. Some five miles off
“ the house, the trace was lost in a hole of a big dead tree. They
“ told their people to fell it, and they found a snow-white serpent
“upward of a chang in length, lying dead, with two arrows in
“ its body. From that time the maid was as healthy as ever.
“Ts'iien-pin gave her Kin in marriage”’.

A peculiar feature of Chinese plant-animism, which has already


« M » Ji A iS - # iS at = ® ^ t ffi)

Ait. tti ^ "TAM B

^5 ch. t83. The Thesaurus states it has this tale from the Tsih i ki: but I
Jo not find it in the ttvo copies I possess of this worlt.


OLD TREES ESPECIALLY ARE ANIMATED. 28 7

appeared from some of the legends quoted in these pages, is that
in particular old, big trees are considered as animated. The longe-
vity of such giants could, in truth, hardly fail to convey the idea
of their being endowed with much vital force; and vitality is
animation. Koh Hung wrote: “Among the big trees that grow in
“the mountains there are some that c.an speak; but it is not the
“trees themselves that possess this faculty. Their tsing is named
“‘clouds yang’ (that is, yang of the heavens, shen), and he
“ who calls out this name becomes happy .... The deepest roots
“of cypresses a thousand years old have the shape of puppets in
“a sitting posture, seven inches high. When incisions are made
“therein, they lose blood, which, when smeared on one’s foot-soles,
“ enables him to walk over ivater without sinking. And he on whose
“nose it is smeared will, on stepping into the water, see this open
“before him, so that by that expedient he can abide at the bottom
“of the deep. Smear it on your body, and this will become invisible,
“ to return to the visible state when it is wiped off. Moreover, such
“a puppet cures diseases. To this end, scrape otf a little from it,
“inside its belly, and swallow as much of this powder as can lie on
“ the point of a knife. And external swelling-pain of the abdomen is
“cured immediately on such spots ot the belly as are rubbed by the
“hand with the same quantity of scrapings from the corresponding
“part of the mannikin. Slioukl your left leg be bad, you must

“scrape a little from the left leg of the puppet, or spurt at it.

“Again, some scrapings mixed into a torch with other ingredients
“of great power, can light the soil all around in the dark, and
“then, if there is gold in the soil, or jade, or any other precious
“ things, the light will turn blue and bend downward, so that you
“ have only to dig on the spot thus indicated to find them.

“ And if you pound a puppet, and swallow ten pounds of the

“powder, you wdl live a thousand years. Branches of firs, iihen
“ three thousand years old, have in their bark accumulations of
“ resin possessing the form of a dragon, named nodular chi flying
“at the sun (?), the biggest of which weigh ten pounds. If you
“consume fully ten pounds of them in a powdered condition, you
“ wall enjoy a lifetime of five hundred years .... According to the
“ Yuli-tieh I'i, firs of a thousand years contain a being resembling
“a blue bull, or a goat, dog or man ot the same colour; and in
“ such a case the tree is always a thousand years old '.


288


THE SOUL I\ PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


In the Yuen chung it was annotated “that the tsing of
“ millennial trees are blue goats, and that those of trees ten times
“ as old, are blue cows. Those souls often quit the trees to move
“ among men. And the sap of centennial trees is like blood”

“ According to the 8huh i ki, “there existed in the South certain
“ Liquidambar spectres, being anthropomorphous things produced by
“ the old among Liquidambar trees which are known for Liquidambars
“ displaying ling or sonl-power . . . And the tsing of trees a thousand
“years old is a blue bullock” •k “In the Thatch-grass mount”, thus
runs a tale, “there lived a rustic, who perceived an envoy in strange
“ costume, leading a white goat. He asked this man where he lived.


H


. P„o


•17.


OCCB = 30CCOO


A*As^rii,BrK(jhtt-si®m.0st»Mi

BMW

4pW A._-g#^*s’.

' 7C 't’ IE This work is frequently quoted in books from the fifth or .sixth


century onw.nrd, but I have never seen it. It is ascribed to an author bearing the
.surname of Kwoh • "hose personal name is unknown.


AM.Wa^tSSvtlwifil . T S, sect. )Ii$ ^ , ch. 315, and sect.
■ cii. 8.


M The second part W 4- . The first part. Compare

Sampson s account of the Liquidambar in Notes and Queries on China and Japan, III, p. 4.


CRANES, AS SOULS OF OLD TREES.


289


“and the answer was; ‘Tn the mount of the Drooping Roof’; on
“ which he disappeared into an old pine, the shape of which
“ reminded one indeed of a drooping roof. The envoy was the
“tsing of that pine, and the goat its fuh-ling [infrit p. 299)”’.

Apart from all those shapes of men and animals, which tree-
souls may assume, these souls show themselves frequently as living
birds. Those of old firs are represented sometimes as cranes, which,
as so many animals, may be transformed men. “In the south of
“the Yung-yang region”, thus we read, “stands a grotto, and
“behind it a solitary pine, ten chang in height. Uninterruptedly
“ this is visited by a couple of cranes, which are sure to conjoin
“ their pinions at every sunrise, and to blend their forms in the
“ evening. Tradition assei'ts, that in days of yore a married couple
“ lived hidden in that grotto, who changed into a couple of cranes
“ after a lapse of several ages” “ It was also stated in a Description
“ of Customs in Yoh-yang (a part of the prov. of Shansi), that white
“cranes are the tsing of old pines and other trees of great age” b

Such association of old firs with cranes seems to be very ancient,
as it is stated in a book of the Han dynasty “ that there was at
“ the Lung-hing convent of the Eastern Metropolis (Loh-yang) an
“ old pine, to which tradition ascribed an age of more than a
“ thousand years, and into which white cranes flew continuously” b


l.wh hi PfiiililB- ten cli.Tpters of miscellanies of lioubtfiil authenticity,
ascribed to one Funp Chi of whom nothing is Known hut the name.

He may have written it in the first year.s of the tenth century. JFore prohahly,
perhaps, the author was the learned Wang Chili ^ , also named Sing-chi

, who flourished in the middle part of the twelfth century. Comp, the
Uhu tb uen ahu hint'i muh. ch. tdO, 1. 20.


o ves


H ^ i

1 itB ^ r ^

from the Shen kimj l:i j]j[j
a work unknown to me.


y ff^


. T S, sect. cli. 202; quoted


or Description of the Regions of the Spirits.


3 & » a ± IE e a * A tb- vs.

S HfSft * PJ- ti. V. TS, .«t. ^ cli, 201.


19


•290


THE SODL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The association is rather natural, as the tree as well as the bird
have been from times remote the principal emblems of longevity
on account of the capacity, ascribed to both, to live extremely
long, the tree, moreover, exhibiting great tenacity of life by its
evergreen foliage. As such emblems, they regularly recur conjointly
in pictures and other products of Chinese decorative art, as those
who occupy themselves therewith will often observe.

The long extract we translated on page 287, shows that the
bizarre nodular forms which roots and other parts of plants assume,
must have much promoted in China the belief in the animation
of such plants. We may even suppose that such deformations,
whereas they evoked in simple minds thoughts of real men and
animals, may have been the very authors of the assimilation ot
plant-spirits with men and animals. Be this as it may, it is a fact
that instances of trees, branches and roots having assumed human
shapes or animal forms, are far from rare in books; and their
having attracted attention enough to procure them a place in the
records, certainly points to something else than mere observation ot
accidental capricious growth, namely, to a belief in some indwelling
spirit, occasionally showing its presence by preternatural swellings
or excrescences.

In conclusion, let us give two quotations more, to bring out in
strong relief the connection between the animation of plants and
their outward human or animal forms. “It was under the reign
“of Hiao Wu of the Tsin dynasty, in the twelfth year of the
“ T'ai yuen period (A.D. 3S7), that one Sheu Pan of the Wu
“ region, also named Tao-chi, settled on the bank of a river. There,
“ on a wash, a double thing shot up suddenly, like a green reed
“ without any twigs or leaves. In a few days they were bending
“ over with their full weight, and he was going to cut them down,
“when immediately blood appeared, and a sound was heard in the
“ hollow inside, like the cry of a gander. Two such cries answered
“each other; and inside the plant he found an egg like a duck’s,
“while its roots showed the countenance and eyes of a snake” i. —

fia, SffS't’iniigl

H 0R- TS, «cl (ft tl.. 188.


ANTHROPOMORPHOUS AND ANIMATED PLANTS.


291


“To the west of Tsin-yaiig, a certain convent, named the Youn
“ Man’s, stood beyond the suburbal pasture-grounds. In the Chin
“yuen period (785 — -805) one Teng Kwei sojourned in it. In the
“ autumn of that year he had there some friends lodging with
“ him, and they had closed the door, when an arm appeared through
“ the window, yellow and very lean. All, except Kwei, startled at

“ the sight of it ; he opened the window and heard a chattering,

“shrill voice. Not astonished in the least, he asked: ‘Who are you?’
“ And the answer was : ‘ I have lived in a glen of these hills for
•• more than a year; T had this evening a little walk in the breeze

“ and the moonshine, and hearing you here, I come and see you.

“I am unworthy of a place at your table; all I desire is a seat
“ under this window, to listen to your conversation with your guests’.
“ Kwei gave him permission to sit down, and the visitor being
“ seated, he chatted and jested with his guests most merrily, till after
“ a rather long while the stranger said it was his time to go. While
“going away, he said to Kwei: ‘To-morrow night I shall be back
“ here ; I hope I shall not then be shown the door. Sir’.

“When he was gone, Kwei said to his guests: ‘This certainly is
“a spectre; we must trace it, or it will do mischief’. He twisted
“ a string of silk, several hundred fathoms long, with the object
“ of binding that devil on its return. It re-appeared next night, and
“ put its arm through the window, and Kwei forthwnth tied the
“ cord around this limb so firmly that it could not extricate itself.
“They then heard it ask, outside the window: ‘What harm have
“I done you that you thus bind me?’ and with these Avords it
“ Avas off, trailing the string along with it. Next morning KAvei
“ traced its track Avith his friends, and it took them to a vine Avith
“ a very luxuriant foliage, standing over a hundred p u from the
“ convent, to the north. The string was wound round a branch
“ of it, a leaf on Avhich resembled a luiman hand of the same
“ shape, indeed, they had seen at the windoAV. They had the root
“ dug up and burned ” h


A, SR

it 2 m ■!* > s It « Ftf ti . s ra * Ji > ^ »s e


bD bo


29.2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The legend of IVui Tao’s orange trees which were the souls
of a family that had swindled him (p. 275), as also that of the
daughter of the mysterious king of mount Sheh-to (p. 2S5), have
shown us that plant-spirits may be souls of definite persons, pro-
fessedly known by name and origin. This category, however, counts
almost for nothing against another of which Chinese writings tell,
in which all are anonymous, without any special history.

Among the plant-spirits of whom the Chinese pretend to know
precisely the origin and names, none stands so prominent in their
religion, from very old times, as that of the millet or tsih
(Milium Vulgare or Panicum Miliaceuni L.), known in different parts
of the Empire by half a dozen synonyms ', or perhaps more. No
doubt the word tsih denotes the same plant as the liang ^
or Sorghum (Setaria Italica), or means a variety of it.

In studying Chinese plant-animism, it soon strikes our attention
that of all cultivated food-plants, such as corn, beans and potherbs,
the millet alone comes to the foreground as animated. It is not
difficult to suggest an explanation of this phenomenon. The frequent
mention made of this grain in China’s most ancient works, as also
the fact that it is still to this day the common food in the Empire
wherever rice does not grow or is not grown abundantly, are good
grounds for the supposition that time was when it was its principal,
if not its only cultivated food-plant of significance, and was esteemed
on this account so much as to become an animated object of adoration.


z. m ^
mi. mm

KK, cli. 417.

1 Puch as shii tszt' tsi ni i and kien


MILLET, animated, DEIFIED AND WORSHIPPED.


293


Other edible plants not playing a part in life by far so important,
there never was room for them beside the millet for any worship
sufficiently significant to maintain itself. Thus it is that, to judge
from what we know from books, the millet is in China the only
cereal worshipped. Two passages in old works concur to justify
somewhat our theory. The Shtcoh wen says : ^ The millet is the
principal among the five cereals” and in the Poh hu t'ung i we
read : “ Man has no food but cereals ; but of the five cereals there
“ are so many varieties that he never could sacrifice to each of them
“ in particular. So the principal among them, viz. millet, was assigned
“for worship, and sacrificed to”*.

The soul by which, from the oldest times known, millet was
deemed to be animated, was that of a certain personage of high
rank, named Tsih, after the plant itself. It is stated in the Tso-
cPwen that one Ts"ai Mih^ said to Hien-tsze of WeC* ; “Tsih was
“ a Director of Aoriculture. There was a son of the lord of Lieh-

O

“ slum (/. e. of Shen Nung, the mystic emperor of the 28th. century
“ B.C. who introduced agriculture), bearing the name of Chu. He
“ became T s i h , and was sacrificed to under the Hia dynasty and
“previously. But Khi of Cheu also became Tsih; he was sacrificed
“ to during the Sliang dynasty, and has been so to this day”


1 ^ . Seventh section, I.

$ 8 ^ ft . i!i!t W' S ffii S ^ Ifi, “ ■' '''■ >' ”• ml

5^. This work we h.td already to quote l.iraely fVoni on pp, Ui sqq. We re.rd in
the Books of the Later Han Dyna>ty (cti. 70 II, II. \ 1 M'q.) that in one of tlie years
of the Kien ch u period which corresponds with A.D. 70 — 84, the emperor Chang
ordered a number of scholars to meet and give their opinions on carious matters
contained in the Classics; and they brought out the Thorough Discussinns on Virtue
from the White Tiger, winch the emperor ordered Pan Ku

to collect and edit. These cvritings were named so Iroui a White Tiger Chamber
, where the scholars used to meet; they are gener.illy admitted to be
the origin of the Poh hu t'uuij i or the Tliorough Explications from the White Tiger,
now' extant in four chapieis, dicided into 44 sections, treating sundry principles of
government, ceremonies and rites. This book has always been much esteemed by
scholars, and is indeed a rich mine of information about ancient ideas, doctrines and
customs. Pan Ku its author, is the famous compiler ol the Book^ of the

Early Han Dynasty.


29i


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The Li ¥i (ch. 59, 1. 28) relates the same things in the following
words ; “ When the lord of Li-shan (/. e. Lieh-shan) possessed the
“ world, his son Nung (lit. the Cultivator) knew how to cultivate
“ all the cereals ; and when the Hia dynasty had gone to ruin,
“ Khi of Cheu pursued his work. Thus it is that they were sacrificed
“ to as Tsih” k To the present day these sacrifices are maintained
in China in the State Religion, and they will be attended to in
this work in due time and place.


2. On amorphous Plant-Spirits.

We come now to the other category of plant-spirits, those
conceived as shapeless doses of shen substance infused into plants
from the universal Yang, the male soul of the Cosmos. They
constitute, beside the life or tsing of plants, their ling or soul-
power, which, if strong enough, may cure the weak and the sick
who eat the plants, that is to say, may invigorate their souls or
vital forces, thus prolonging their lives considerably or indefinitely.

The belief in plants possessing such shen or ling has exercised
in China a mighty intiuencc upon the formation of the medical art.
No doubt, man ransacked there the forests and plains for curative
plants from an early date, discovering in this way many of good
therapeutical etfect. As his mental faculties developed, he coupled
reasoning with his searches, they thus bringing him on the track
of plants the spirit or vital force of which, he thought, could not
miss curing his patients and rendering the healthy healthier, by cor-
roborating their souls. Throughout all times we find China’s phar-
macopaeia richly furnished with such life-conferring medicinal plants.

We can only muster the principal of these, and shall have to
leave a great number unnoticed, because they shed no special light
on this side of China’s therapeutic art. But we may not allow
ourselves to pass over the whole subject in silence. Tor, indeed, the
animation of the veifetable kingdom dominates the whole of China’s
botanical mythology and plant-worship. Besides, the belief in it has


. The 29th. year

of Chao’s reign.


IJFE-CONFERRING AND HEALTH-RESTORING PLANTS.


295


createdj and continuously recruited, a large class of men seeking
prolongation of life, nay total immunity from death, by swallowing
animated vegetable products, occasionally with other animated things
which will be reviewed in the next chapter; and these men, by
attaining their ideal aim, have peopled China’s Parnassus with an
infinity of divinities. They are known by the name of sien
or ), that is to say, men ( 'f ) living in the mountains ( (Jj ) as
hermits or anchorites. We have already occasionally referred to them ;
but an opportunity to make a more intimate acquaintance with
them, the present ehapter and the next will afford.

The subject carries us anew right into the field of Taoism. The
human soul being a part of the soul or vital force of Nature, wise
man, seeking happiness in conformation to the Tao or Course of
the Universe, eould not but conclude that, by imbibing extra doses
of the shell of the Universe, he necessarily invigorated his own.
Life being produced in man by infusion of a shen into him, and
his death being a departure of that shen to the boundless
Universe, (pp. 13 se^.), he might escape decay if he could con-
stantly derive new shen matter from the world surrounding
him. This process might put off his death, and virtually make him
live as long as Heaven and Earth themselves. Tlie vegetable
kingdom having so often shown capable to infuse new life into
the sick, such plants as were assigned by human reason to be
specially endowed with shen or ling, naturally became the drugs

of iminortalitv. Thus the art to discover and use them was of old

%/

an art eminently Taoistic; tlie art of acquiring immortality and
that of curing the sick naturally coalesced.

Prom times of yore, that double art was known by the term
yangsheng “ the feeding of life or of the existence”. It

meant “ feeding, or corroborating and restoring” ' the shen, the
hwun, or the tsing, but especially the shen of the five viscera,
or that of the heart, the central viscus. Vegetable products subservient
to the purpose were styled ling yoh ^ “drugs possessing
ling”; or shen yoh jjiljl^: “drugs containing shen matter”;
or s i e n y o h : “drugs used by the sien or immortals” or

“sien-making drugs”. And preparations of such plants, as also of
life-instilling substances not belonging to the vegetable kingdom,
were styled fang ij or “expedients”, with the same adjectives.


:296


THE SOU]. IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


while the trees or herbs yielding such preparations were indicated
in a corresponding manner.

Heading the list of those plants, we find the pine or fir,
sung ;|^, Pinus Sinensis, beside the cypress, poh Thuya

Orientalis, which, of old, Chinese authors were fond of calling the
chiefs of trees h

The reasons why their animation is thought to be so strong,
need not occupy us here long, for already on pp. 295 sqq. ot
Book I we had to expatiate on this point, in demonstrating that both
trees were selected of old as material for coffins and grave-vaults
on account of their great vital force, which was thus practically
applied to strengthen the soul in the grave. We there mentioned
that it was their evergreen foliage, able to resist the most rigorous
winter colds, and the stupendous age they occasionally reach, which
convinced man in China, that nothing but a strong animation and
vital force could work such wonders. We there showed further-
more, that at an early date, Taoist seekers of immortality trans-
planted that animation into themselves by consuming the resin of
those trees, which, apparently, they looked upon as coagulated soul-
substance, the counterjiart of the blood in men and animals. They
called it chi or juice, kao ^ or grease, and kiao glue
or gum. To this day, these substances, of which there are a great
variety, different in virtues and qualities, occupy a very important
place in the Pharmacopaeia. Especially esteemed by doctors and
apothecaries is a kind called hu-p'oh amber, of which

they know several species, distinguished by different names according
to their colours. In the Books of the Early Han Dynasty (ch. 9(5
I, 1. 11) it is mentioned, as a product of the realm of Ki-pin
Cophine, by the homonymous term which means the p'^oli

or yin soul of a tiger. This circumstance may be the reason why
“ Li Shi-chen wrote, that the p'o h of a tiger, possessed of vital
“ energy (t s i n g), sinks on the death of the monster into the soil
“ and changes into stone, and that the substance in question is
“called a tiger’s p'oh because of the outward resemblance it bears
“ to that stone” k This ex^ilication is far from generally received ;


' " ii*-

fl 2 . & ii iS. fii-


HUMAN LIFE PROLONGED BY PINES AND FIRS.


297


and authors mostly subscribe to the opinion of Koh Hung, who
said: “The sap of millennial pines changes into hu p^oh” ' — when
it has been for a time in the ground.

A reputable genius indebted for his immortality to pine-resin,
was Kill Sheng ^ who lived under 'Hang, the founder of the Shang
dynasty, in the ISth. century before our era. “After having held
“ the office of Intendant of Trees to that sovereign for longer than
“ thirty years, he was more than ever in his prime and vigour, so
“ that everybody knew him for a longevous man, and revered
“ him as a master. His people said he always ate pine-resin” \
Another consumer of the same stuff was Chao Khii, whose story
we gave on page 297 of Book I; it cured him of a loathsome
disease, and conferred on him 170 years of life. One version of
that story asserts, that this glorious result was the effect of his
eating, moreover, resin of cypresses and pine-seeds h Indeed,
seeds are, like the semen of men and animals, wonderful compact
concentrations of the life of new individuals, and, consequently,
strong condensations of vitality. 'I’heir power to confer immor-
tality was sagaciously availed of “ by genius Wuh-ts‘nen, who,
“ being fond of pine-seeds, got his body overgrown with hair of
“seven tshin; his eyes assumed a quadrangular form; he walked
“ as if borne on wings, and he could overtake horses in full galoj).
“ He sent such seeds to Yao, but this sovereign had no time to
“ eat them ; and those who got them from him and swallowed them
“ all lived three centuries long” ^ “ It is”, says Li Shi-chen, “ in


' H: S MA4-

111 , ^ ‘■•''I'

or Traditions on the Files of the Sien, a .senes nf notices on soino


seventy fabiilons and semi-fabulous Immortals, ascribed to Liu Hiang, tlio statesman
and scholar of the first century IfC . often mentioned m tins work. Some bibliographers,
however, dispute him the author.'hip on account of the dfscrepancy between the
st 3 de and that of his time, believing the work to be some centuries v'ounger. It is
a standard hagiography of Taoism.

4 See ch. 3 of the S/icn MCn rh ici-n -jjl] : ‘•Traditions on Spirits and
Sien, or on Sien posses.siiig shen animation”, another Taoist hagiography with
some ninety biosrraphies, generallv ascribed to Koh Hung.


fil ft Si ^ .S . ja # f - a * . H Ts SR » >
# # # ^ S W ffi ■ S''"' I.


298


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ my opinion, no idle gossip of the LieJi sien chic en, that Chhh-
“ sung-tsze, who ate cypress-seeds, obtained new teeth when his
“ old , ones had fallen out, and could then overtake a galopping
horse” This wonderful man was a genius of Shen Nung’s time,
finally we mention the immortal Tuh-tsze of the Han dynasty,
“ who plucked fir-seeds in the Black Hills when still a youth, as
“ also f Li h-1 i n g , and consumed both, with the effect that for
“ several centuries he was alternately in full vigour of life and old,
“beautiful and ugly; which proves he was a genius”^.

The leaves of the fir also confer vitality, longevity and immor-
tality. To attest this, authors refer unanimously to Koh Hung.
“ In the time of Chhng, an emperor of the Han dynasty (B.C. 32 — 6),
“ some huntsmen saw in the Tsung-nan mounts a naked human
“ being, with black hairs on its body. They were going to pursue
“ it, but across glens and vales it fled, as if carried by wings, and
“ it could not be reached. So they secretly watched where the abode
“ of that being was ; they besieged it there, and caught it, and
“ then discovered that it was a woman. On their interrogating her,
“ she related as follows : ‘ I was a harem dame of the Tshn dynasty.
“ Hearing that the Kwan-tung rebels were coming, and that the
“ king, on marching his troops against them, was forced into sub-
“ mission, as also that they had set fire to the palace-building, fear
“ made me flee into the hills. I was hungry, but found nothing to
“ eat ; and when on the point of dying, an old man told me to eat
“ pine-leaves and pine-seeds. I found them bitter and acrid, but I
“ got accustomed to that taste, and they caused me to feel no
“ hunger or thirst, neither any cold in winter, nor any heat in summer’.
“ Admitting this woman was a harem lady of a prince of the Tshn
dynasty, I calculate that in Chdng’s reign she must have been
“ over three hundred years old. They took her home, and gave her
“cereal food to eat; but she vomited when she smelled corn, and
“ it took her several days to overcome her aversion for it. She
“ lived then on such food for more than two years, in which time


' # 5- T A # * « ^ M 4 . « » ^

. Pen-t-<au kang muh, ch. 34.

sie/i c/ihvf/i.


ON rXJH-LING.


299


“ she cast the hairs that covered her body, became old, and died” b
It is not only mystic men of mystic antiquity who attained
results so remarkable. One Wang Hi-i, born about the year 637
of our era, and young and strong enough in his ninety-sixth year
to be offered by the Son of Heaven an official appointment, is
reported “to have consumed pine and cypress leaves and sundry
“ flowers, with the effect that, when he had passed his seventieth,
“ his tendons were still strong, flexible and powerful” We might
quote many more similar instances from modern works, but they
would not throw any new light on this subject. Let it merely be
noted, that in the fifth century the author of the Minq i pieh luh,
T'ao Hung-king , confirmed plainly and briefly the wonderful
capacities of pine-leaves in these words: “They cause man never to
feel hungry, and they lengthen his life” b

No product of the pine or fir can compete with fuh-ling
¥ in life-lengthening, curative virtue. This stuff seems to be a
modified state of the root of that tree, caused by the presence
ot a fungus, or the fungus itself. It may be Pachyma Cocos,
which occurs also in Japan and in North America. It forms under-
ground nodular masses as large as a fist, which sometimes weigh
several pounds b Thio Hung-king described its virtue in the following
words: “Pervading the shen (of the person who consumes it), it


< A-A.

F4 M « « s I UJ » .a s ti* .s * Alii .01

Pao P'uh-lszc, ch. II, sect, _

Bouks of tlie T ang Dvnastv. ch. 19G, 1. 7. Also the Old Books, ch. i'J2, 1. G.

Pen-tsao Lniui mtili. ch. 3.i, 1. 10.

4 Bretschneider, Botanicon Sinicum, 111, 3.50.


300


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“brings active soul-strength (ling) into him. It brings harmony into
“his hwun and refines his poh; it e.xerciscs a beneficient influence
“ upon the openings of his body, and' increases the activity of his
“arteries; it gives substantiality to his bowels, and opens his heart.
“It is a sien-making drug of first-rate quality, enabling man to
“ abstain fur good from cereal food without ever feeling hungry” b
And according to the Shen Nung pen-ts'uo king “ it has, when
“eaten for a long time, the fiiculty of setting the hwun at rest
“and of nourishing the shen, then causing man to have no longer
“any sensations of hunger, and lengthening his life” b The long
list of diseases which fuh-Iing is stated to cure, we leave untouched,
as of no interest.

The oldest reference to fuh-ling we have in the writings of
Liu Ngan. “ Under firs of a thousand years”, thus this philosopher
asserts, “there is fuh-ling, above which there is dodder”*. In
the Historical Records occurs a treatise, additional to the 128th.
chapter and composed by Ch‘u Siao-sun in the first century B.C.,
which gives the name of the drug in the written form
translatable by “hidden ling or soul-power”, evidently in reference
to the drug being a depository of the vital force or soul of the
tree in the roots of which it grows. Perhaps those characters represent
the original meaning of the name. That treatise declares that “it
“ is the root of a millennial pine, which, when eaten, causes
“one not to die; it has the shape of a flying bird” b Chang Hwa

* at ii »# fiS t

* K its (ilj 'Cl\ ± a fill ^ ill , # ffi H I? y: 01

h:in(j i/iith. cli. 37, I. 3.

- j]itp ^ or HerLal Classic of Slien \iin;r, a work presumably ot

very l]ir;li antiquity, as renieilies foumi out bv' tlie emperor Shen Nung, the

mythic lather of ilusbamlrv ami Medicine. There is exidence of its exi.stence in the
sixth century, .\ccording to tradition, it contained three chapters, giving 305 medi-
cines dnideil into tliree kimls, according to their ta.stes. It no longer exists as a
•separate work, and is cniy known from quotations in later treatises. The compiler
of tlie Pi’ii-h\(u kmiii iHiih gi\e.s numerou-s extracts from it, thus reproducing per-
liaps all its contents. See ch. 1 of that work, I, I. 1, and ch. 104 ot the S:e khu
h'uoi ch, lO-i, II, 51 -scq.

^ HE ^ St V ^ II V ^ il V ^

di, 37, 1. i.

. Leaves i and 3.


ON FXJH-LING.


301


considered fuh-ling to be transformed resin of firs or cypresses;
“ when the resin of these trees sinks into the ground”, he said,
“ it changes after a thousand years into fuh-ling, which in its
“ turn changes into hu-p'^oh” h And according to Chu Chen-heng ",
“ it is formed by absorbing the superfluity of the breath of pines” ^
“Of late”, thus a work of the thirteenth century relates, “the rural
“ population select the smaller lumps, and tie them within big
“ pine-roots, which they break into pieces for the purpose. Those
“ pieces being bound tightly together, the resin (of the root) may
“filter into (the fuh-ling); they select watered spots, and bury
“ them there in a pit ; and when, after three years, they take
“them out, the lumps have become big fuh-ling lumps” b This
method of cultivation is described by Father Havret on page 88
of his dissertation on the Ngan-hwui province he states that the
lumps may reach the size of a human head.

The Pen-tiao kang mu/i mentions the fuh-ling also under the
name of f u h-s hen f,^, “ hidden shen”. “The Historical
“Records”, thus the compiler of that work wrote, “call it hidden
“ling (see above). It is, indeed, the breath or influence of the
“ling of the shen of the fir, which harbours in it, and forms
“it by a process of consolidation ; and so those Records calls it
“hidden ling, which is identical with hidden shen” b Some


1 feta ®

Poll wuh chi, ch. 4.

2 also known by tlic name of Yen-&iu ^ , oi’ as the Old

Sire of Tan-klii ^ ^ or ^ He "as a native of I-wn ^

in Cliehkiang. and lived from I'iSl to la.iS. He is one of the greatest physicians
China lias produced. Half a dozen medical treatise.-; are ascribed to him. and also a
work on Fung-shui. A large treati-e on himself and liLs phy.siologiral and medn al
philosophy occurs in the T S, sect , ch. 529.

d iSr lIvA ^ Ffii fili' • Pcii-h iiij Ami'/ iiiiih, ch. 37, 1. 3.

tsah shih; ap. T S, sect. , ch. 202.

5 The second volume of the “Varietes Sinologiques’’, 1893.

li ^ V /‘“''S' ch. 37, 1. 1.


;302


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


medical authors tnake nice distinctions between f u h-1 i n g and f u h-
shen, ascribing to either special curative virtues; but we need not
follow them in these subtilities.

It will not have escaped the attention of the reader that plants,
famous for the possession of an amorphous soul highly beneficial
to man, may also harbour a spirit, either good or bad, shaped as
a man or an animal. Striking instances of such double animation
were indeed, furnished in this chapter by the pine and its fuh-
ling. It might be asked whether the Chinese take such a double
soul for two conditions of one soul only. Not knowing, however,
any native authors who have bothered their brains with this
question, we must plead incompetency to solve it. Still we may
attest the prevalence of a belief in a double animation by reproducing
the following tale, referring evidently to a piece of fuh-ling, or
a similar difformity of some root:

“North-west of Shen-cheu there was, on the White Path ridge, a
“ village, named Lo, one of the inhabitants of which, belonging to the
“Then clan, occupied himself with digging wells. Once he found a
“root in the ground, as large as an arm, having a joint in the middle
“and a coarse bark. It looked like fuh-ling, but it smelled of shuh
“(s. page 313). The family being Buddhists, they had several dozen
“ images in their house, before which they now placed their find ;
“and Then’s daughter, whose name was Ting-liang, a real beauty
“of si.vteen or seventeen, was as a rule appointed by her father to
“ sacrifice incense to it.

“One year thus passed away, when the girl began to see every
“ now and then a young man in white, with shoes on, passing in and
“out the apartment of the images. She indulged in sexual famili-
“ arity with him, in consequence of which her soul had sensations
“ different from usual, whenever she moved or rested. And every
“year, in spring, the root bore sprouts. As the maid became
“ pregnant, she related her adventure to her mother, who did not
“ much credit the miraculous part of it. So the family called in a
“ Buddhist monk, who was in the habit of passing by there, and
“gave him a meal; but when this man entered the apartment
“ where the Buddhas stood, he was regularly thrust back by some
“ being. On another day, when the maid was out with her mother,
“the monk entered that hall; but no sooner did he open the
“door than a dove flew up against him, and disappeared. That
“ evening the girl did not perceive any apparition, but she saw
“the root suddenly become a rotten, worm-eaten substance. In the


VARIOUS LIFE-PROLONGING TREES.


303


“ seventh month of her pregnancy she gave birth to a thing with
“ three joints, shaped like the root in front of the images. Then
“burned it, all strange apparition thereupon remaining away for
“good” b

Trees occupying, on account of their animation, a position in Chinese
superstition and lore as life-lengthening agencies, are numerous. We
almost dare say that all trees bearing useful fruit, or producing
aromatic and edible matter of importance, belong to them. Mostly it
is the fruits or kernels of such so-called s i e n-trees - that confer
life, strength, health, longevity, and immortality. Abstaining from
giving particulars on this head, which would be monotonous and
tedious, we only mention the Plum the Pear and the

Jujube (Zizyphus) as also the Nai a still unidentified

tree. Seeds of the Cassia the Chinese Cinnamon tree, gave

immortality to P eng-tsu b ^ Methuselah seven hundred years
old in the twelfth century before our era ^ , as also to Pan
Li a renowned Minister of the kingdom of P ueh in the fifth
century B.C. By no means, however, did each s])ecimen of those
species possess life-conferring capacities. It always was trom a very
exceptional few that the sien plucked immortalizing fruits or seeds,
either eating them tlieniselves, or giving them to their favourites


« « ^ ^ tti A « s >1’ , a s St ® .

PI a ® ^ ^ * W ft fHi.

'li . il * « « « ft A fS ® -t tl ® * = If . *


yang tsah isii, supplement, ch. II.

2 fill or fill IM-

4 See the Shcii shcn hi, ch. 1.


^ M M 0 .-


m


304


THE SOUL IN PHTEOSOPHY AND E01>K-C0NCEPTI0N.


among men. Tradition relates also of life-conferring trees planted
by such Genii expressly for mankind, or o vying their wonderful
quality to the fact of their having been sowed by such immortal
hands. Such trees were always extremely rare and, moreover, diffi-
cult to get at, standing, as a rule, in remote mountain recesses, or
on inaccessible heights, where Genii were wont to retire from mortal
life. Nevertheless, favourites of fortune did occasionally find them,
and thus could eternize themselves. The fruits were distinguishable
from the common ones by their extraordinary size. The best of all
sien-trees grew in the parks and groves of Si Wang-mu h a
mystic Queen of the sicn living in a Paradise in the mysterious
West, on which we shall have to expatiate afterwards in due time
and place; and many specimen, growing within human reach, were
reputedly produced from seeds obtained from that region of bliss.
These are the Si Wang-mu trees, frequently mentioned, with great
monotony, in botanical myth and fable.

Of traditional fame are certain peaches, which that fairy Queen
deemed worth bringing in her own high person to one of the most
glorious Sons of Heaven China has ever possessed, viz. Wu® of the
Han dynasty (140 — 80 B.C.). “In the fourth month, this monarch
“ suddenly saw a maid in blue, an extraordinary beauty, who said
“to him: ‘On the seventh day of the seventh month Wang-mu
“ will come here for a few moments’. That day having come, the
“ Emperor, donned in full ceremonial dress, awaited her, standing
“ at the foot of tlie steps. After the second night-watch something
“like a white cloud suddenly arose in the south-west; music of
“ pipes and drums resounded through the clouds, mingling with the
“noise of men and horse, and in a moment Wang-mu was on the
“ spot. She entered the hall, and sat down (on the west side), her
“face turned to the east. And with her own hands she set out a
“ celestial repast, consisting of things really most exquisite and of
“ extraordinary kind, with an abundance of precious fruit of first-
“rate quality, fragrant flowers in hundreds of varieties, as red
“chi, vvei-jui etc., such as do not grow on this earth. Then she
“ told one of her handmaids to get her some peaches. In a moment
“a dish of jade with seven s i e n-peaclies as large as duck’s eggs,
“ round and blue, was tendered to her. E’our of the peaches she
“gave the Emperor, and three she ate herself; and the Son of


2


PEACHES CONFER LONGEVITY.


305


“ Heaven having eaten his, put aivay the stones, saying he intended
“to sow them. But Wang-mu said: ‘Those peach trees bear fruit
“only once in three thousand years; the soil in China is too barren
“for them to grow’” ^ .

Of the sien who owed their immortality to peaches, we mention
“ Tung Tszg-yang, who, familiar from his youth with the ways
“conducive to prolongation of life, lived in seclusion in the Poh-loh
“ mounts for more than ninety years, on no other food than peaches,
“ and water issuing from the rocks And Kao Khiu-kung became
“a sien by eating peach-gum” b As to the reasoins of the peach
occupying so high a place in the list of life-prolonging plants, we
can tell the reader nothing, for Chinese books leave us here com-
pletely in the dark. Perhaps we have to explain the matter from
the circumstance that the tree is sometimes identified with the
East, which is the region of life because the life of Nature, incor-
porated with the sun, proceeds from it. “In the East”, thus we read
in an old work, “there is a tree, fifty chang high, with leaves of
“eight chdh. Its name is peach. Its stones are three ch'ih and


M-bN-b a

»,

KM3E#. HSt

i fKJte * ® . S # B . it » = =¥ — 4

Han Wu-ti nci c)t ay'n, or Home Tia-
ditions concerning the Emperor Wu of tlie Han Dyna.sty. We mentioned tins -nork
already on page 56 of Hook I. It consists of only a few leaves, ascribed to Pan
Ku, but there is no evidence this scholar was their author. They record hardly
anything else than Wang-mu’s visit to the emperor, inclusive of a lengthy Taoistic
philosophical discourse she held on that occasion. A brief account of that visit occurs
also in the Poh wuh chi. ch. 8.

2 ^ ft 4 2 a; . 1 « M Ih A + »

3 m M W ^ ^ i\h ’T*'® ^'ccording to the T S,

sect. ^ ^ . ch. 219.


20


306


THE SOl'L IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“two inches in diameter. If broth mixed with kernels of those
“stones is eaten, it confers longevity” ‘.

Before taking leave of the sien-trees, we must still mention the
fu-sang Chinese botanists give short descriptions of this

tree; yet it is probably altogether fabulous. It gave its name to a
country, the reality or non-reality of which has been a subject of
much speculation and controversy among sinologists. The Chinese
place that region far away in the eastern Ocean, and always deemed it
inhabited by sien. Perhaps it is a product of the imagination of a
single author, Tung Pang-shoh who made it the eastern counter-
part of Si VVang-mu’s paradise of sien. “That country”, thus we
read in the S/n/i cheu hi, a work thought to owe its existence to
his prolific fancy, “possesses many forest-trees, with leaves resembling
“in every respect those of the mulberry. Besides, there are there
“mulberry trees, the big among which are several dozen chang high,
“ with a circumference of more than twenty double arm-lengths ;
“and these trees grow in pairs on the same root, and every pair
“lean against one another; hence their name fu-sang: ‘leaning
“mulberries’. The sien eat the berries, the effect being that their
“ bodies emit from all their parts a golden glare, and that they
“can soar through the air. The trees bear fruit only once in nine
“ thousand years”

Beside trees conferring vitality and prolonging life, Chinese lore
knows a series of animated shrubs and herbs producing in man
similar beneficial effects. Prominent among them stands the chi
Chinese botanists apply this name to various mushrooms, which
they distinguish in six sorts, according to their colours; one sort


8 = 1? — +. ' '■"‘•■I Si#

or Canon of strange Tilings connected with Souls or Gods; some fifteen
leaves of notes on marvellous matters, ascribed of old to Tung Fang-shoh ^

a favourite of Wu of the Han dynasty, credited by posterit}’ with supernatural
wisdom and power. Criticism, however, refuses to give that work an age beyond
the fourth or the fifth century.

2 See note 1.


fill A *

A + H —


sii fch’s expedition to the island of tsu. 307

especially seems to be denoted by them as ling chi, that is, “chi
possessed of soul-power”, and is sold still nowadays in drug-shops.
Bretschneider ‘ thinks it may be a branched Fungus or Agaricus.

The Shicoh icen says: “The chi is chi possessed of shen”*.
Clear reference to the ancient belief in its life-conferring properties
we find for the first time in the SM/i clieu la. “The isle of Tsu
“ is situated close by, in the Eastern Sea. There grows a never-
“ dying plant, shaped like water-grass, with blades three chhh by
“four in length. A man who has been dead three days, revives
“immediately on this plant being laid upon him. When it is eaten,
“ it prolongs life. In the time of Shi Hwang of the Tsln dynasty,
“ when murdered people lay broadcast in the wide plains and
“ across the roads, birds resembling crows or ravens appeared
“ with this plant in their bills, and placed it on the faces of those
“ corpses, with the effect that they sat up immediately, and revived.
“The officers reported this to the Emperor. On this, Shi Hwang
“ sent out an envoy to find this herb for him ; and he interrogated
“ the doctor of the Spectre Valley \ who lived near the north wall.
“‘This herb’, thus spoke this sage, ‘is the herb of immortality of
“the Tsu island in the Eastern Ocean, where it grows in a red
“marble field. Some call it chi which feeds the shen. Its leaves
“resemble those of water grass; its stalks grow^ luxuriantly, and
“ one stalk suffices to give life to a man’. On these words Shi
“Hwang showed some agitation, and spoke: ‘Can it be fetched
“from there?’ And he sent an envoy to the island, one Sii Full,
“ with five hundred young people of both sexes, with command of
“ a ship with decks. They put to sea to seek the island, but they
“never came back”’.


1 Botanicon Sinicum, III, page 419; anJ II, page 40.

2 ^ fl# S -ffil S“‘- 2

. A Taoist ascetic philosopher, named Wang Hu ,

.said to have given instruction to some discijiles. He may he quite fabulous.


308


THE SOE'L IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION


The same little book mentions four other mystic islands producing
such wonderful chi. In one, named Yuen*, in the north sea, five
varieties grew, “prolonging the life of those taking them, or causing
“them not to die-; and in the island of Fang-chang, in the centre
“of the eastern sea, many myriads of families of immortals were
“engaged in working fields for the cultivation of chi” That still
other mystic islands were told to be inhabited by such sien owing
their immortality to the plant, need hardly be said.

It seems admissible tliat such tales were not merely productions
of the imagination of the author who wrote them, but that they
were rather instilled into his writing-brush by prevailing tradition
and superstition in regard of chi. That they were the chief agents
by which this plant maintained itself in the esteem of the people
and its quack doctors as a wonderful life-bestowing herb, we may
take for granted. Other books on the marvellous contain statements
of countries inhabited by sien planting chi in their gardens for
food; but they teach us nothing worth mentioning respecting the
peculiar ideas entertained about the plant. For particulars about
these we have to search the writings of Koh Hung. This great
doctor of occultism distinguishes between five sorts of chi, each
of which is subdivided into more than a hundred varieties. One
sort comprises “the rock-chi or stone elephant-chi, which grows
“ in famous mountains at the corners of the sea, and on accuniidated
“ rocks or stones in deep and low places in islands. That shaped as a
“fleshy elephant with a head, a tail, and four feet, is the best, as
“it resembles a living being”’. There exist chi-varieties which
emit light, strong enough to sec it when three hundred paces off.


wH.

W A . ^ e * * V . A » ^ a I , * Si .

’ A A (1 a m 'f> *> . fill « iR + s ffl a

dili • P oh-t.izc, th. II, sect. .


^ liH ^


CHI, A PLANT WITH LIPE-PROLONGING VIRTUES. 309

Some varieties are very large and heavy. Only those who fast
for a long time with great earnestness, and then arm themselves
with powerful charms, are able to find chi. “He who discovers
“ the plant must cover it with a charm which is able to dispel evil
“ when the mountains become accessible, for it is thus that he will
“ prevent the plant from concealing itself again and dissolving. Then,
“without any precipitation, he must select a wang-siang day
“ for offering to the plant a formal sacrifice, consisting of spirits and
“meat; and when taking it away after having said a prayer, he
“ must perform Y ii paces in the direction of the setting sun, and
“ march otf with suppressed respiration. He who finds petrimorphous
“chi and pounds it with 36,000 pestle-strokes, and takes it by
“ spoons of a square inch to a quantity of one pound a day, will
“reach an age of a thousand years; and should he thus daily
“ consume ten pounds, he will live a myriad years.

“And chi of jade-grease grows on mountains which contain
“jade. It always stands there in steep, overhanging spots. When
“grease of the jade has emerged there for more than ten thousand
“years, it coagulates and forms chi, sometimes shaped as birds or
“ quadrupeds. If you triturate such a specimen, and mi.v the powder
“with sap of the wu-sin plant, it liquifies immediately; and if you
“drink one pint of this fluid, you will become a thousand years old”

Especially animated, and consequently of hightly wonderful effect
in medicine, were, as Koh Hung teaches us, certain chi varieties
growing at the roots of animated pine trees, thus deriving vitality
from them. “As to tree-chi”, thus he wrote, “when gum or resin
“ of pines trickles into the ground, it changes in a thousand years
“into fuh-ling, over which, a myriad years later, little trees


+if


310


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ shoot lip, resembling lotus flowers, which are known by the name
“of muh-wei-hi chi. This stutf emits light when it is dark.
“In the hand it feels very smooth; when kindled, it does not
“flame; when carried about the loins, it wards otf weapons. If
“plucked on the life-gate side (the east), and dried for a hundred
“days in a shady place on the six kiah days, then one spoon of
"a square inch of the powder, taken three times a day, confers a
“ life of three thousand years. And the branches of pines of three
“ thousand years contain under their bark accumulations of resin
“shaped like dragons, called jeh-fei-tsieh chi, the biggest lumps
“of which have a weight of ten pounds. If you pulverize these,
“and consume ten pounds of the powder, you will become five
“hundred years old”*.

“ Cowhorn-c h i has the shape of a cowhorn ; it is three by four
“ch'ih in size, and has a blue colour. If taken in a powdered
“form in one inch spoonfuls, three times a day, and continued
“in this way for a hundred days, it will make you live a thousand
“years. And lung-sien chi is shaped like dragons ascending
“ into the air and bearing one another on their back, the leaves
“ being their scales. Its root resembles a coiled-up dragon. One
“ twig of it will make him who eats it, live a thousand years” **.
In this tune our author musters other varieties of chi, without
adding, however, any more novelties. But we have now heard quite
enough from him to understand, that the several species of chi
were deemed to be so eminently animated principally because of
their reminding so often, by their forms and fleshy constitution.


*%***#« IS "fa

0 A«a+If.


CHI, A PLANT WITH LIFE-LENGTHENING VIRTUES 311

of birds, quadrupeds, dragons, and even men; furthermore, many
proved their animation by emitting light; finally, by growing on or
by animated firs of great age, they derived from these special ani-
mation and vitality. It is, after all this, no longer a mystery why
Koh Hung mentions some sorts of chi by the names of ‘Hoads
ten thousand years old” \ “millenarian bats” “ millenarian ani-
mated tortoises” ^ and “ swallows of a thousand years of age” b

Chang Hwa asserts, “that the best sorts of chi are shaped like
“cars and horses, the middle sorts like men, and the inferior like
“the six domestic animals” b In sundry works we find all this
information over and over again in varied forms, and from the
Han dynasty onward, chi remains a favourite topic for adulation
with poets and prose-writers. It is really striking how numerous the
instances are, which the Standard Histories and other works,
down to the Sung dynasty, have to mention of chi found
growing in rooms, gardens, palaces, and, everywhere throughout
the Empire, in mountains and fields, and sent to the Court as a
present or tribute portending bliss and good; and none of those
communications leave any room for doubting, that the reasons why
such discoveries were considered and treated as good omens, are
likewise to be sought in the plants being believed to be animated
by superior shen substance, borrowed from heaven. This is con-
firmed at the same time by the fact, that it is so often called in
those communications ling chi: “animated chi”.

As a matter of course, written stories abound of men, old and
decrepid, who found themselves young again after eating chi acci-
dentally, then seeing their bald pates overgrown with young hair,
and their lost teeth replaced by new ones. Most popular, and told
and re-told iu Taoist works, is the story of one Siao Tsing-chi
a mere M'reck, who underwent total restoration by means of a
piece of chi shaped like a fleshy arm, which he found in the
ground, and cooked and devoured. The medicinal virtues of chi are
generally summed up thus in jiharmaceutic works; it tranquilizes


cl,i, cl,. I, § ig .

mmz-


6


312


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


the hwun, the seat of vitality'; it strengthens the khi or breath*,
that is to say, the yang soul. When taken for a long time, it
renders the body light k It lengthens life ^ ; it causes man not to
grow old = ; it makes him an animated sienk

From the resemblance they bear to chi, and their being thus
easily confounded therewith, ordinary edible mushrooms or kiiln
, more popularly called tree-ears , are highly appreciated

in China as drugs, and represented sometimes in fable as life-pro-
longing. Like tree-souls, souls of mushrooms may show themselves in
human forms, as Koh Hung clearly attests: “When you see in the
“ mountains a dwarf in a car or on horseback, who is seven by
“eight inches in height, he is a fleshy chi. Catch him and eat
“ him, and you will become an immortal man” And Twan
Ch'ing-shih relates: “In the Siien-phng ward of the Metropolis
“ there lived a mandarin, who, while on his way home in the dark,
“ met, in a crooked lane, an oil-vendor with a broad hat on, driving
“ a donkey, laden with two barrels. As this fellow did not go aside,
“ the retinue dealt blows at him, with the result that his head
“ tumbled from his shoulders. Off the oilman galoped through the
“gate of a large house, much to the astonishment of the mandarin,
“ who, following at his heels, saw him disappear at the foot of a
“ big Sophora tree. The inmates, warned by the grandee, dug up
“the spot immediately, to find at a depth of several ch'ih, under
“ a decayed part of the roots, a big frog in a position as if it were
“ loaded on either side with a little pencil-point protector of metal,
“ which the sap of the tree had filled ; farther there was there a
“large white mushroom, looking like a rotten pin from the gate
“ of the mansion, from which the head had fallen off. The toad
“ was the donkey, the pencil-point protectors were- the oil-barrels,
“ and the mushroom was the oil-man. Those in the village who had
“ bought of his oil for more than a month, had wondered at its
“being so good and cheap; but now, after the spook was unmasked,
“all those who had partaken of it became sick and vomited it”*.


2 11 ^. 3 ^^.

^ ^ in fill ^ . Pau P'oh-txzc, ap. K K, cli. 413.


MEDICINAL PltOPERTIES OF S II U H.


313


Another plant highly appreciated in superstition and medicine,
is the shuh Atractylis (?). It is valued especially for its root,
which has a bitter or acrid taste. In the beginning of the fourth
century, an author wrote: “Among the medicinal plants we have
“khih-lih-kia, which is shuh. It grows in the sea-districts. One
“ root weighs sometimes several pounds. Liu Kiien-tsze simmered
“ the roots, and taught people to make pills of the substance thus
“obtained, which, when taken, lengthened life” b

The reasons why this plant was of old consumed with
much avidity by Taoists in search of immortality, thus gaining a
foremost place in the Pharmacopaeia, are given in an old work,
entitled TFan pih shuh b ascribed to Liu Ngan, tlie prince and
philosopher of Hwai-nan. “Shuh is the vital energy (tsing)
“of high grounds. It concretes in itself the vital breath (tsing-
“khi) of the Yin and the Yang. Therefore, when eaten, it
“lengthens life, enables one to abstain from cereal food, and makes
“ him a s i e n full of s h e n. Hence it is that the Medicinal Classic
“of Shen Nung says: ‘If you desire to prolong your life, you must


fang Is'ao-nmJt chwang , “.Account of the Flora in the South”,

an interesting collection of notes on some eiahty southern jilants, ascribed to Hi Han
, al. Kiun-tao , a grandee murdered in 300 or 307 at the age of

forty- four. It is the earliest exclusively botanical work now extant.

^ ■ f And this hook among the works on divination in


the Catalogues in the Books of the T ang Dynasty^ (New Books, ch. 59, 1. 28; Old
Books, ch. 47, 1. 10), with the addition that it consisted of one chapter, and was
written by- Liu Ngan. It seems, however, to have existed earlier than the T ang
dvnastv, for it is probably the work mentioned as Ilwai-nan %v(tn pih king
in the Sui Catalogue (Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 34,
1. 27), among some other books extant under the Liang dynasty.


314


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“take highland tsing; and if you wish to become light and
“volatile, take hill-ginger” k

The wonderful capacity of s h u h to strengthen and prolong
human life, is advocated with ardour by Koh Hung. “One Mr. Wen
“of Nan-yang,” thus he wrote, “relates that one of his ancestors
“ had to flee into the mountains during the great troubles at the
“ end of the Han dynasty. About to die from want and exhaustion,
“a man appeared, who told him to eat shuh, on which he felt
“ no hunger for several dozen years. He returned to his native
“ place, in possession of a countenance more youthful than it was
“ when he fled, his breath and vigour being now in much better
“ condition than they were of old. He related himself how, during
“ his stay in those hills, his body was so light that, when climbing
“ up-hill along steep paths, he could do so for many days consecu-
“ lively without feeling tired, and that, when crossing ice and snow,

“he did not feel the slightest cold A name of the shuh is hill-

“tsing, and it is of it that the ‘Classic of Drugs imbued with
“shen Substance’ says: ‘If it is your serious wish to live a long
“life, well, consume hill-tsing for some long time”*.

By far the most renowned of all medicinal roots is that
which Europeans know as ginseng, that is to say, jen-sen, the
original, correctly written form of which word, as the S/iwoh wen
gives it, is Afl- This vocabulary says, “it is a medicinal herb
produced in Shang-tang” *, which is the present Lu-ngan \ in south-
east Shansi. About the time when the author of the Shwoh wen
lived, it may have been customary to write the term also with the
characters A it i'^ this form in the Tiien fu lim.


» * . . . 7|£ - Oj « . iK jjiili ^ * 0 , iiJ' SS: ft 4 . ft

. Pao P'oh-Uzc, ch. II, sect, ,

3 m ± ^ . First Section, II. ^ 4


ON GINSENG.


315


in the following passage; “To cure disease, we must have jen-
sen”'. Ever since, the word occurs in the latter shape, while
the other form remains obsolete. In none of the Classics is the drug
mentioned, and we know no book of pre-Christian times in which
its name occurs.

The fact that ginseng is often called in medical works t'u-tsing
i ^ or ti-tsing ^ “tsing or vital energy of the soil”,
testifies decisively that, just as is the case with shuh, it owes
its supposed curative virtue to an animation borrowed from the
earth. The first of those names occurs already in the I yuen, thus
being at least as old as the fifth century. Another reason for he
plant being believed to be animated, is its possessing a forked root,
which reminds one of human forms. Li Shi-chen says, “ that whereas
“ its root resembles a man in shape and thus possesses a s h e n , it is
“called jen-sen”®, that is to say, man-sen. So, like man,
the plant has a dual soul, the one borrowed from the earth, and
the other, as all shen are, from heaven. More than a thousand
years before Li Shi-chen lived, the author of the I yuen wrote :
“Jen-sen is named also tsing of the soil. The Shang-tang kind
“ is the best, as the human shape it possesses there is complete in
“ every respect. It wails there like a child. In bygone times, some
“ people digging for the plant had just thrust their hoes into the
“ ground, when they heard a plaintive wailing inside it. They dug
“on the spot where the sound came from, and found in fact gin-
“seng”k It is even recorded in the Standard History of the Sui
dynasty, “that in Kao Tsu’s reign (589 — 005) there was in Shang-
“tang a house, behind which every night a man was heard calling.
“ The inmates sought for him, but they found nobody. They dis-
“ covered, however, at one mile from the house, a ginseng-root
“ with big twigs and luxuriant foliage, which they unearthed, to find
“ that the root was more than five feet long, and shaped in every
“respect like a man. On this the cries were heard no more”k


^ ’/p ^ ^ # A # ^ ^ _

. Pen-tado Lung i/iif/i, ch. 12, 1.


316


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


The statement that ginseng-roots, having a human shape, possess
shen, occurs in various writings, without these, as tar as we know,
giving any other positive reasons for the animation of the plant
and for the high reputation it has always enjoyed. Thus, its
salutary properties simply tend to invigorate the soul of him who
consumes it. “It strengthens the five viscera, it sets at rest the
“vital shen, and gives stability to the hwun and the p^oh.
“ It puts an end to timorousness, removes noxious influences,
“ and sharpens the eye-sight, opening the heart, and increasing
“ knowledge and wisdom. And if consumed for some length of
“ time, it renders the body light and prolongs life ” h In short,
ginseng is a universal medicine, and therefore it is superfluous to
muster the long list of diseases it is assured by medical works to cure.
As may be expected, the root is especially recommended for “diseases
caused by separation of the hwun from the body”*, as when the
soul, having passed out of the body during sleep, cannot return
into it on account of one or more viscera having been in the mean
time occupied by obnoxious influences. And promoting, as it does,
vitality, ginseng is considered a powerful stimulant of the sexual
organs, much taken therefore by men and women anxious to increase
their progeny and combat impotence.

After all, there is little doubt that we have in ginseng the Chinese
representative of the rnandragora or mandrake of our own ancient
and medicEval Europe, which played its highly important part in
therapeutics and superstition likewise on account of its passing for
a homunculus because of the human form of its root. This “anthro-
pomorphon”, too, was asserted to cry piteously, especially when being
extirpated. There may have existed still one reason why, in China,
ginseng was considered animated. Its plants were of old believed
there to be fragments of a bright star, and, consequently, of the
luminous shen of the celestial sphere itself. The Cliun-tsiu icei
sJm stated, in fact; “The star named Swinging Brightness forms
“ ginseng by breaking into atoms. When a Ruler of mankind neglects


tl * 2 « I H ii A Wf. If * * «

iihen Ntmg pen-ts^ao king,

quoted in the Pf>i-t>>'ao kang nivh, ch. 12, 1.


ON GINSENG.


317


“ to derive advantage from hills and streams, that luminary does not
“shine bright, nor does there grow any ginseng then”'. That star
belongs to the Great Bear group. Reasons why it should be the
creator of ginseng, we have nowhere found, so that we are unable
to give our readers any.

Ginseng-roots have a sweet taste. They are on sale in China
everywhere in apothecary shops. Much was written on them in
Europe already in 1718 and 1719, and our physicians have often
made experiments with them, without, however, finding them to possess
any important curative properties. The plant has palmate leaves,
and red, berry-like fruit. Our botanists call it Panax Ginseng. It
grows wild in all the northern provinces of the Empire. It is
abundant also in Manchuria and Corea, from where large quantities
of roots are exported to China. Perhaps it is cultivated, as it is in
Japan. Chinese herbalists know several sorts of different qualities
and virtues, commanding various prices. Thousands of piculs are
exported annually to the South. There too the plant grows,
producing, however, roots of very inferior quality Because of their
high commercial value, all wild ginseng-roots, or at least the best
kinds, are laid hands upon by the Imperial Government as its
exclusive property, and monopolized on behalf of the fisc. A so-called
Administrative Yii-heng Court’, a sub-department of the Board
of Works, is mentioned in the Ta IVinff hwiii Hen (ch. 73) as
storing them up and administering the monopoly, at the same time
with that of pearls and sable-skins, obtained from Tsitsihar and
other dependencies. Under this dynasty, it was always severely
forbidden, and even punished as a capital crime, to encroach
upon the monopoly and seek ginseng for one’s own profit. In
particular it is forbidden to dig for it in Imperial mausoleum-
grounds and their immediate surroundings. The long article of the
Law, enacted for this purpose, we have translated on page 911
of Book I.

Much appreciated for its health-restoring and life-lengthening
qualities, and inferior to nothing but ginseng in popular esteem as


a store of vitality and soul-substance, is hwang-tsing


' ^ * a It tiii ® A A # ® UJ M ^ fl M ^

W > A # ^ 4 TS, seel. ch. 125.

2 For more botanical particulars, see liretsclineider, llotanicon Sinicuni, III, It.

* ® ai-


31S


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


a herb with leaves resembling those of the bamboo. This and other
names by which it is known, represent very likely different varieties
of Polygonatuni, growing wild both in the North and the South,
and also cultivated. The root has very large joints, and its being
probably a rhizoma ever growing forth, may be the basis for the
reputation of the plant as a producer of immortality. On account
of its being valued as such as highly almost as chi, it is
often called in books h w a n g-c h i ^ ^ , yellow chi; and Su
Sung a learned scholar of the eleventh century, who published a
renowned T^u king pen-ts'^no'^ or Illustrated Classical Flora, wrote
therein, that “under the Sui dynasty one Mr. Yang said in his
“‘Method to take h wang-tsin g’, that this plant is the vital
“ soul of the chi, and is named also the remainder of the fare of
“ the sien” h

The prevalent ideas about the animation of hwang-tsing are
expressed by its very name. Li Shi-chen wrote on this head: “The
“sien consider this plant to be a variety of the chi, calling it
“hwang-tsing {i. e. yellow vital energy) because it appropriates
“the pure substance of the vital force of the earth”; in fact,
yellow is the colour ascribed to the earth, and has, as such, the
meaning of terrestrial. “It is in this sense”, thus Li goes on, “that
“we have to understand the Wu fu king, which says thathwang-
“tsing appropriates the pure, genuine vital force of heaven and
“ earth” h The origin of those conceptions about a connection
of the plant with the soul of the Universe and that of the earth
in particular, we find mentioned by no author. Nor do we find it
explained why it passed of old for a representative of the major
Yang or the sun, the warmth of Nature (comp, page 96 1 of Book I),
which an author of the third century asserted it was. “The emperor
“ Hwang”, thus he relates, “asked Tfien-lao : ' Are there among the
“ things created by heaven and earth any which, if eaten, can


1 mm-

~ H twenty-one books.

3


. Pen-ts^ao kanri dihIi, ch. 12, I.


pi ^ ^


ON HWANG-TSING.


319


“prevent a man from dying?’ On which Tden-lao replied: ‘The
“ plant of the major Yang is the so-called h w a n g-t s i n g ; by
“eating it, it may tend to lengthen life. The plant of the major
“Yin is called k e u-w e n ; it is not edible, and when it enters
“ one’s mouth, it kills him immediately. That this plant possesses
“ such deadly power is readily credited ; but that the other confers
“increase of years, they do not believe; is not this an error?” b
Thus, just as plants animated by the yang soul of the Universe
prolong life, so, reversely, those which contain the universal yin
soul possess, like the Yin itself, a life-destroying power.

Of the s i e n reported to have eternized their existence by swal-
lowing h wan g-t sing, we mention Luh T^ung, alias Ngan-yii *,
who flourished under the ruler Chao of the kingdom of Ch'^u ’,
and in the time of Confucius. Accompanied by his dear wife, “he
“wandered over the famous mountains, feeding on h wan g-t sing
“ seeds, retiring finally into mount Ngo-mei in Shuh (Szg-chSven),
“ where they still lived several centuries. Popular tradition considers
“ them to be sien” b Besides this couple, we have “Wang Lieh, also
“named Ch'ang-hiu, who never gave up consuming h wan g-t sing
“ and lead, and, when three hundred and thirty -eight years old,
“ possessed the features of a lad and could climb mounts and walk
“ up steep and rugged mountain-paths, striding along as if he
“were winged’’ And Yin Kwei, also named Kung-tu, swallowed


¥ . Poh wiili chi, ch. 5.


« la IS ® . Kiio sill cli WCil . Traditions about eminent

Worthies, ascribed to H\vang-fu Mih, the statesman already mentioned a few times
in Book I, who died in A.D. 282. The work contains annotations on ninety
pei'sonages of olden times, sages, Taoists. hermits, immortals, etc., diviiled over
three chapters.


ch^iuen, ch. 6.


3:20 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ regularly h w a n g-t s i n g flowers, three double handfuls a day ; and
“ he counted his age by centuries, finally departing as a s i e n on
“ mount T'ai-hwo” b

As of almost all strongly animated plants, medical and botanical
works assert of h wan g-t sing that it enables those who eat it, to
live without any food, and yet to feel no hunger. Such plants do
not, of course, owe this admirable property to any natural nutri-
tiveness, but to their strong animation alone; indeed, animation
means the possession of vital force, and this force, infixed in a
man by his eating the plants, is powerful enough to keep him
alive and satiated without food. Furthermore, the wonderful herbs
render him who eats tliem volatile, and enable him to soar through
the air. A mere wish to go somewhere suffices to send him thither,
body and all, as if it consisted of soul-substance alone, his soul
being so much paramount over his material substance as to reduce
or annihilate his corporal weight. All the sien of the Taoist
Religion possessed the twofold quality more or less complete,
alongside with immortality. Such airy individuals cannot be seized
or harmed by men. If they indulge in ordinary mundane food, they
gradually lose their preternatural capacities, and become mortal again.

Among the plants the roots of which have engendered by their
curious forms a belief in their animation, we have still to place
the khi or keu-khi Lycium, a non-arborescent shrub.

The Chinese say that its roots resemble a dog, and tales have found
their way into books of their having set all the dogs in the environs
barking, and being heard themselves to bark in night-veiled hills
and copses. Their position in medicine is quite analogous with that
of ginseng, fuh-ling and hwang-tsing. It is related that Chu
Jii-tsze, who lived in the third century, “ once saw on a bank
“two flowered puppies, which, on being pursued by him, dis-
“ appeared immediately under the foliage of a lycium plant. lie
“dug it out, and found two lycium roots, shaped like the two
“ dogs. He cooked and ate them, and suddenly he flew up, and
“ perched on a hill-peak in front of him” *.


IJFE-PROLONGING SWEETFLAG.


321


Exalted highly by medical authors, leeches, and apothecaries
for its curative, invigorating and immortalizing power, is p'u
or sweetflag, Acorus Calamus, also called ch^ang-p'^u ^ As
to the reason for its being so much esteemed, we find nothing
annotated, but we may guess it. The name ch%ng is homonymous
with a word which means etfulgent sunlight, and the written form
of which is ^ , a double sun, which, moreover, enters into the
composition of the name of the plant as the principal element. Thus
its name itself may have caused the plant to be assimilated by popular
fancy with the sun in its most powerful effect upon the world and
man ; thus did it cause that plant to be looked upon as a depository
of the universal vivifying energy centralized in the chief luminary.
In this connection, it deserves notice that one of the names given
to the sweetflag by medical authors, is ch'ang yang ^
“resplendent Yang or sunlight”. Liu Ngan already used it, writing
it, however, ^

We read in a work of the third or the fourth century, “that
“ there grew in Ean-yii (Kwangtung), in a glen to the east, sweet-
“ flag with roots of 1,9 inch, which Ngan Khi-sheng gathered
“and ate, with the effect that he departed as a sien”^ This
man, thus wonderfully apotheosized, is stated to have lived in the
time of the emperor Shi Hwang as a being a thousand years
old. Another old book tries to make us believe, that when the
emperor Wu (140 — 86 B.C.) was sojourning on mount Sung, in
the present Honan province, a sien appeared to him, and told
him that on a rock in the vicinity ch'ang-pAi grew, likewise with
roots of 1,9 inch, advising him to eat of it, in order to prolong
his life. The emperor sent his men thither to fetch that wondrous
plant, and his courtiers ate of it; yet they saw their lives cut short
in due course of time. “Then one Wang King heard of the advice
“which that sien had given to the Son of Heaven. He plucked


^ ^ i ± ^ fill # '

Continuatioa of the Traditions about Sien; three chapters with notes on thirty-
six immortals, written by Shen Fen or official under the

TTing dynasty.

1 Hung Uch kiai, chapters 17 and 20.

2 # ^ m 4 1i « g - + A » . ^ M

San fang haao-tnuh cliwamj, ch. I.


21


322


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ the plant and consumed it uncessantly, thus acquiring longevity” h
Finally, the kith a species comprising the chrysanthemum
or aster, pyrethrura, daisy, marigold and other syngenesia, was
placed of old among the life-conferring plants; and the Ming i
pie// luh ■ calls it therefore f u-y e n-n i e n “ which gives

prolongation of years”. The reason may be this, that the shape
of the flower reminds one of the. radiant golden sun-disk, and, in
fact, an old name of the plant is jeh-tsing Q “soul-energy
of the sun”. According to the Sink i Id, “ a realm, called Pei-ming,
“sent tribute in the first year of the Ti tsieh period (69 B.C.)
“ in the reign of the emperor Siien, consisting of local products,
“ am(jng which there was (besides a long series of life-lengthening
“things) red kiih, which they called jeh-tsing. One stalk or
■■ sprout of it could grow out lu.vuriantly enough to cover in the
“end several acres of ground; its taste was sweet, and those who
“ate it never felt any hunger or thirst untd the end of their days” h
According to the Si-king tsah ki, it was customary at the Imperial
Court during the Han dynasty, “ to wear dogwood (?) on the body
“ on the ninth day of the ninth month, and to eat p'e n g-plant
“cakes, and drink spirits of kiih-flowers, all which things conferred
“ longevity. In the season when the k (I h-dowers opened, they
“ plucked the stalks and leaves, mixed them in millet and rice, and
“fermented this; and on the ninth day of the ninth month of the
“next year the brew was ready, and they drank it as k ii h-spirits” b


. Slien sien ch ujrn^ cli. 3.

, “Another Account of renowned Medicines ’, thus called
from its bein;^ an extension of the Herbal of Slien Nung (see p. 300). It w.as
written by T'ao Hnng-king ^ ^ ^ . al.so named Tding-ming , xvho

li\ed A.D. 4.5d — .130. It contained seven chapters Now, I believe, it is known merely
from extracts in other work.s, e.speciallv in the PeH-f-sdo kanr; mtih.


^ M ^ a'* ^ • Vh.'[>tei 0.

'• iiM % B

Mm.

AJIA H Chapter 3.


LIFE-LENGTHENING CHRYSANTHEMUMS.


323


Of this bibbing-custom mention is made elsewhere in ancient
literature. And Koh Hung said, “ there was in Nan-yang, in the hills
“ of the Li district (in Honan), a sweet brook which got this taste
“ from sweet chrysanthemums growing at its sources, on both banks ;
“ indeed, the flowers having dropped into it for a long series of
~ generations, had changed its taste. The people in the valley by
“ the spot where the brook entered it, had no wells, but they all
“ drank that sweet brook-water, so that they all reached a great age,
“varying between 145 years and 80 or 90; premature death was
“ an unknown thing to them. They obtained these blessings from
“ the power of those chrysanthemums” h

Of the immortals of Taoism, some are reported to have acquired
eternization from a use of the flowers, leaves, or stalks of kiih,
as e. g. Chu Jii-tsze, whom we mentioned on page 320. We
read also:

“One Ts^ao Hao, also named T'ai-hii, u'as a Wu-lin man who
“ devoted all his attention both to occult matters and to those that
“are clear, and was therefore called Hiien-liang, the man of darkness
“ and light. He was bent on planting chrysanthemums, and all
“ species known he had when autumn came. One day he rose early
“ in the morning, and saw in the core of a big yellow flower a
“ red seed appear, which, gradually swelling, looked like a cherry
“ on the third day. Nobody knew what it was. Then one Cheu
“ Shao-fu, a neighbour’s daughter of sixteen, pretty and very decent,
“ came in the cool moonshine with some female companions to see
“ the flowers. She plucked that seed, swallowed it, and suddenly
“ flew away, borne by the wind. The aflrighted Hao called her
“ family, and her parents and sisters sent up their wails and cries
“ to heaven. But she did not look at them, and vanished in the
“ blue firmament, her head disappearing first, and her legs last.
“ They then saw an old man before the chrysanthemums, wringing
“his hands, sighing and sobbing. ‘There is no luck for me’, said
“he, ‘why do I come just too late’. They asked him what he


^ I' A ii

Pao P^oli-lszr^ cli.ll, sect, -j^


324


THE SOL'L IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


„ wanted, on which he changed immediately into an old fox, and
“ quickly decamped. Some days after, the chrysanthemums were all
‘‘ dead, and no such flowers would grow for three years in the
“ country a hundred miles around. Not until then did it become
“ clear to Hao that that thing was what the immortals were wont
‘‘ to call a chrysanthemum-seed” '.


’ ws. stttAife,

A. H H

I.riHij-liiK’ii 1 , 1 -. T S, feet. . ch. 9'2.


CHAPTER XIII.


ON THE ANIMATION OF LIFELESS MATTER.

When we say, that dead animal or vegetable matter, and all matter
for which there is no place within the animal and vegetable kingdom,
is inanimate, we are in flagrant contradiction with Chinese con-
ceptions. To East-Asian man, in fact, everything devoid of spontane-
ous movement, will or growth, is animated, if not constantly, at
least occasionally.

Necessarily and directly, this conception follows from the old,
classical doctrine of the general animation of the Universe. This
possesses, indeed, one supreme shen or hwun, called Yang, and
one vast kwei or p'oh, called Yin, together pervading it in all
its parts; and there is, in consequence, no reason imaginable why
what we call lifeless matter, should stand beyond the animating
induence of this sovereign dual soul. Admitting the contrary would
be placing that matter beyond the Cosmos, outside the pales of an
animated World which has no pales.

Heaven in the first place has and is a shen, the highest, the
most powerful that exists. Shen are also the sun, the moon, the
stars. Creating, as they do, the celestial phenomena, thus exercising
a mighty influence upon the fate of the earth and of man, those
shen are his gods. For the last-named reason, one of man’s chief
gods is the shen pervading the Earth as a single entity ; and those
which dwell in its several parts, its mountains, hills, rivers, meres,
rocks and stones, are likewise his divinities. Man’s gods are also
the shen of certain men that people the earth, especially of those
that shuffled oft' their mortal coil, besides those dwelling in animals,
in plants, and in lifeless things.

It is not, however, cosmologic psychology alone, which compels
man in China to believe in the animation of lifeless things. This
belief follows, rationally and logically, from that in the animation
of men, animals, and plants. Indeed, a human corpse, and even dry
bones — we have seen it so often — possess the animation they


326 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

possessed when the individual was alive, and the belief in their
animation was always so strong that, from age to age, it could be
the artery of the broad range of customs relating to burial and the
grave; — and yet, what else are corpses and bones than mere
lifeless objects, showing not more growth or will than a piece of
wood or a stone? A similar continuity of animation is believed to
exist in regard to the vegetable kingdom. DitFormities of the roots
of pines and firs, resin or other vegetable matter coagulating into
lumps capriciously shaped — such things pass, as the preceding
chapter has shown, for concentrations of the soul of the tree that
produced them, even when severed from the same; and this is so,
again, notwithstanding their showing no life or growth. Animated,
also, boards cut from animated trees remain, as the legend of Nieh
Yiu (p. 2S3) has shown us; we learned from it that their animation
may even be so strong as to make them, w'hen placed in the water,
foretell good or bad luck by their floating or sinking. Still more
wonderful signs of power and will, however, they may display.
‘Whenever their owner received guests”, thus we read in the same
‘‘legend, ‘‘these were conveyed on them across the water ; but one day
“ they sank away midway in the stream,- to the great consternation
“ of the people they bore. Yiu then bullied the boards with such
“good effect that they re-appeared at the surface. In the service of
“ the Throne he rose to whatever dignity he coveted. So, also, he
•‘ became prefect of Tan-yang. Having been there in office for a year,
“ the boards suddenly followed him thither, placing themselves on
“ the opposite side of some rocks. His officials came to tell him
“that the boards had left the stream, and lay between the stones,
“ on which Yiu became very dejected. ‘1 feel sure’, said he, ‘they
“ have some object in coming here’. So he laid down his post, to
“return to his homestead; and on embarking, the door of his
“ cabin was no .sooner shut behind him than the two boards escorted
“ him, floating along on either side of his vessel. Thus arriving in
“lii-chang on the same day as he, they predicted some evil by
“ coming to the surface and sinking away, and — he found his
" family in great distress and difficulty” h


DEAD WOOD MAY BE ANIMATED.


327


If, since the early dawn of time, the East- Asian has tirnily believed
that dry bones of men remain animated; — if, besides, his country
could produce in the tenth century a man named II li Kicm, “in
“possession of arts so wonderful that, when he cast fish he had
“cooked, into a pond of the Thii-hii convent, they changed in a
“ moment into living fish, and swam away” ‘, — then, in fact,
there remains no reason why he should lujt believe just as firmly
that wood, which likewise possessed a soul and life before, continues
to be animated when reduced to stumps, logs, or boards. “The
“ Memoirs relating to the District of Teh-tshng mention a dry
“ cypress, standing within a sacrificial place dedicated to the Earth,
“ at the hill of Crows and Kites. There were there two such trees,
“ the one dead, the other fresh and green ; and a tale aven ed that
“ the dead one was possessed by a spirit, so that it never rotted in
“ the long series of years that passed over it. Those who damaged
“ it were all struck with some disaster, and there were cases of
“travellers on horseback, who, coming into collision with the spirit,
“incurred death. As a consequence, people kept each other aloof
“from the spot” b In the Standard Histories of the Sung Dynasty
we find it stated, very likely on account of some official report,
“that in the summer of the first year of the Khing yuen
“period (A.D. 1195), peoj)le living near a wooden pillar in Kien-
“ch'^ang heard this low as a cow for three days” b In this story
so wild, and yet recorded by Coiut-chronielers with earnestness, we

ttj ® ^ ^ li

> ilF M W H Jt ilii . M ^ ^ ’/l!i

+ IS ^

Aimuary of the ten D\ii.i'Ue>. ,i r.itlier ;i|Micrvi>iiK'.il lii-toi-y .•! ten e|iliciiit-i.il
I'e.ilnis exi^tin;: between the Tan:: anil the bnn-jc Tyna-ly The anthoi'. \Vu Jen-chen
^ tloui'i:-heT in tlie hitter liall nt the 17th century. T .S. ,-ect ,

- il M 1 1'i ^ H Ui ± ^ 1

— U — i® +A iti ^ flip

' S TC TC # a iE i 5t R S tt tr * in ^

^ . EE B A Jt i'll. li.-.. I. ir..


328


THE SOUIi IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


discern an echo of the ancient belief in bull-shaped tree-spirits of
which we spoke on page 279. Conspicuously numerous for the rest
are reports, disseminated in books of all sorts, including the Standard
Histories, of trees quite withered and dry, or pieces of timber used
in constructions or house-furniture, suddenly reviving and producing
fresh twigs and leaves; and we have no alternative but to take
such stories as mere fruits of the strong belief in animation of
wooden matter.

Not all dead matter is animated in an equal measure. As among
plants, so among dead things a few exist, gifted by Nature with a
larger and stronger quantum of shen, tsing, or ling than the
rest possess. They have not escaped the keen eye of ancient wisdom,
nor have sages neglected to dictate to posterity that, like strongly
animated plants, it is possible to render them subservient to pro-
longation of man’s life by curing his diseases and giving stability to
his hwun and his p'oh. They are, in the main, jade, gold, and
pearls, that is to say, China’s principal valuables; besides, some are
mentioned, of too slight importance to engage our attention.

Gold, jade, and pearls”, exclaims Koh Hung, enthusiastically,
“are the tsing of Heaven and Earth; hence it is that he who
“consumes them, shall terminate his existence simultaneously with
“Heaven and Earth” h In another writing he says: “The four
“Classics of Shen Nuiig® inform us, that drugs of the very best
“ kind have this effect upon man, that they give quiet to his body
“and lengthen his e.xistence; they make him ascend on high to

become a celestial shen, and to roam about there, and here below,
“with supremacy over the myriads of spiritual powers (ling). His
“ body becomes hairy, and all winged creatures come to him im-
“ mediately. According to that same book, the five sorts of chi
“ (see p. 308) may be taken with an additional dosis of cinnaber,
“jade-water, double-blue, or male or female yellow, or with mother-
“of-pearl, or remainders of the food of the Great One or of Yii h and


C/r’j! ehiing shy or “the Hook in the Pillow (?)”, a treatise of some

ten pages on Taoist cosmogony and on the genesis, functions etc. of chief Taoist
divinities. It is ascribed to Koli Hung.

2 No doubt the Shen yung pcn-tshio king is meant: see p. 300,

3 Remains of the food of Yu, ^ , the famous founder of the Hia

dynasty, also called ^ 5 ^ or white remains of food, are described as a white

gravel resembling flour, found between rocks and stones in different parts of the


ANIMATED MEDICINES.


329


“each of them may be consumed also separately; and they all
“ make man move as if borne by wings, and prolong his life.
“ Still those writings say : Drugs of the middle quality nourish the
“character; the inferior kinds remove disease, and prevent venomous
“insects from increasing, and they prevent also savage brutes
“from doing harm to us, and evil breath from doing their work,

“ warding off also all demonial influences The very best drug

“of the sien is cinnaber, the next in quality is gold, the next is
“silver, and then come the various sorts of chi, the five varieties
“of jade, mother-of-pearl, shining pearls, male yellow, the remains

“of the food of the Great One and ofYii” and so forth, several

undefinable stones being enumerated, alongside with animated plants
mentioned by us in the preceding chapter. “ Of mother-of-pearl, five
“ kinds exist, which men are, however, generally unable to distin-
“guish .... Genuine pearls upward of one inch in diameter may be
“swallowed, and thus serve for prolongation of the existence” h


empire, or obtained t'rom ponds and mei'es. Some autliors write of larger lumps
resembling eggs of ducks or geese, iiaving a shell, and a blue or yellow core. The
substance is much used as a medicine, in sundry forms. Chang Hwa pretended
it to be the seeds of some marine plant: “On the sea a herb grows, called
“shi, the seeds of which, when eaten, taste like barley. They ripen in the seventh
“month. They are called s|iontaneou.s corn, or sometimes, remains of the fare of Yu”


« 0 a ® > Sc H S a « -P,;, M, cl. III.


Remains of the fare of the T'ai Yih, ^ similar kind of

gravel, which no author distinguishes clearly from the preceding. The T’ai Yih,
the Great One or Grand First, is an ancient God of Time, of high significance in
the Taoist reliaion, of whom we shall have much to tell later on.

X0.

ff . i» St m m z ± ^ fs-3' .

AWai. A

M##. AM MSk. AM*L

« c . . # # ^ a « . tfii A ^ Y- Fit M -Ifc „ c * a

— Vf 0 T. Bf SR . 2 W 0 A P‘" chapier II,


330


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


And still more preparations of lifeless matter our occultist gives,
which, says he, “when swallowed, can enable one to abstain from
all cereal food, keep death aloof from him, and prolong his life”
but with more of this quack-doctors’ gibberish we may not tire our
readers.

The belief in animation of certain parts of the mineral king-
dom, and their consequent medical and life-prolonging value, thus
actually keeps us within the same field of Taoism in which we
moved in our disquisition concerning amorphous plant-spirits (pp.
294 sqq.). The subject occupied us already elsewhere. In Book
I (p. 271) we stated, that for a long series of ages, peculiar
animation and life-conferring capacities were attributed to jade and
gold, on account of their mystic relation with heaven, which is
the chief seat of the Universal Shen, and that those capacities
were availed of by wise men, not only to prolong their own lives,
but also to prevent decomposition of the dead, in whose mouths
they placed for the purpose jade, gold and pearls. We have also
seen (p. 277) that Chinese authors dilate much on pearls and jade
with light-emitting capacities, ascribing these evidently to an in-
dwelling shen, or yang soul, identitied with light and fire. And
finally, we stated (p. 277) that pearls are deemed to bring back
life into those who have swooned, and that they may revive the
moribond.

Medical works declare jade-grease ( 3E Ss ^ jade-

juice (3S ij^) to operate very efficaciously in curing women from
sterility. In fact, as those substances may instil life into such creatures,
they cannot fail to intensify also their life-producing power. They
lengthen, of course, the life of whomsoever takes them. They pass
for mystic products of mounts which contain jade. The belief in
their reality rests merely on some hazy passages, such as that from
Koh Hung’s writings, which we translated on page 273 of Book I.
What modern apothecaries and quacks have to tell about them, we
do not know. Much more in use in medical art is jade-brookwater
( 36 that is to say, water from jade-containing rocks, especially
from those forming grottos or caverns once inhabited by sien, on
whom ii conferred immortality. Being difficult to get, it is made
artificially by mixing water with some jade-powder (5^), of
which the water is drunk alone, or together with the powder, the


JADE, GOLD, AND PEARLS AS MEDICINES. 331

potion being in the latter case called jade-broth (3E It needs
no saying that jade-powder enters also as principal ingredient into the
composition of ointments, pills, etc., together with grease, vegetable
saps, and similar substances. Various stones, distinguished by special
names, the Chinese comprise under the generic term yuh ^ or
jade, but we must abstain from giving attention to them. Nor can
we dilate on sundry preparations or natural transformations thereof,
used in life-prolonging and medical art.

Gold, called in special Taoist terminology f a i c h e n ^ m :
“the most genuine matter”, is used medically mostly as gold-dust
gold-leaf (^^), in ointments and mixtures. Very
often also it is taken in the shape of gold-juice which is

water in which some gold trinket or gold has lain for some time, to
impart its soul substance to it. Sometimes, before being used,
the precious metal is refined in salted grease of a camel, donkey,
or horse. Pearls seem to be used principally as pearl-powder (®

^). Potions of this stuff in water have a highly salutary effect
upon women labouring under difficult childbirth, as they facilitate
expulsion. This idea follows directly from the pre-conception that
pearls are life-conferring, and that this quality may pass over into
the body of those who partake of them. Therefore, as we stated on
page 277 of Book I, they are also supposed to further conception,
while, moreover, they bring back life into the moribond, and into
those who have swooned (Book I, p. 217).

Clear reasons for pearls being considered as depositories and
distributors of vital force, we have found in no book, nor have we
ever received any by word of mouth from Chinese acquaintances.
Perhaps the matter must be put to the account of notliing else than
Koh Hung’s inventive genius (p. 328 se^) ; it may be, however, we
have to ascribe it to ideas about a mystic connection of pearls with
the sun, the high depository and distributor of life, which dragons
are so often depicted as swallowing, the circular thing these animals
hold in their mouth, or seem to pursue, being generally declared
by the Chinese to be a pearl (comp. Book 1, pp. 53, 54, 181). Be
this as it may, we must plead incompetency to solve this question.

Generally, Taoist and medical authors assert that, whosoever eats
jade, gold or pearls in some form or other, does not only prolong
his life, but ensures also the existence of his body after death,
saving it from putrefaction. This doctrine, by its mere existence,
intimates that sien who acquired immortality by eating such and


332


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOYHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


other substances, were conceived to continue using their body after
their earthly carreer, and removed to the regions of the immortals
also corporally. A new light is thus shed on the custom of ancients
and moderns to keep away corruption from the dead by placing
the three precious things in their mouth or in other apertures: it
was an attempt to make sien of them. The corporeality of immortal
Genii tallies well with the general ideas of the Chinese on the
cohabitation of the soul with the body after death. We mention it
here only cursorily ; but we will give more attention to it somewhere
afterwards, in speaking of the future life.

Not only souls of plants, but also those of lifeless things, are ■ —
unless they are thought shapeless — almost always represented as
possessing a human form, or that of some animal. Metals and ores,
for example, when still hidden in the ground, possess a shen
thus shaped, which authors leave us at liberty to take for the
mineral itself, or for a spirit dwelling in or near it, and guarding it.
In the S/tuh i ki we read, “there was in the Kwei-yang region a
“ silver-mine, which the workers were deepening continuously. In
“ the reign of the Han dynasty, a villager, named Tsiao Sien, saw
“ there on the road three old men, of a silveiy colour all over their
“body, who spoke to him: ‘They are driving us out of it, and it
“is getting too hot for us there; we must remove’. Perceiving they
“ were spooks, Tsiao Sien fell upon them with his sword ; but the
“ three men arrested his blows with their staves, and suddenly
“ vanished. He then saw that their smashed staves were of silver.
“From that moment the mine yielded no more silver h — And on
“ the Tung-Ting mounts there is a hill with an altar dedicated to
“ the Emperor of Heaven, as also a Gold Cow cavern. In the time
“of Sun Kliiien of the Wei dynasty (222 — 229) the people were
“ordered to dig there for gold, but the gold assumed the shape
“of a cow, which escaped up-hill; and from its tracks, which exist
“there to this day, the cavern has its name”-.

Second j)avt.


TRANSFORMATION OF DEAD AIATTER INTO LIVING BEINGS.


333


‘*When the army-couimander of Lu-cheu, Ts^ai Yen-khing, was
“ military governor of Che-kao, he was seated one warm night
“ outside the gate of the fortress, enjoying the cool air, when
“suddenly he saw on the south of the road, in a mulberry grove,
“ a woman in white, performing a dance quite alone. As he ap-
“ proached, she disappeared. Next day, towards evening, he went to
“ the spot a little earlier, armed with a club, and concealed him-
“ self between the shrubs. After a good while the woman re-appeared
“and began to dance; but he knocked her down immediately with
“ the club, and discovered a silver cake. He dug up the soil on the
“ spot, and found there several thousand ounces of silver, which
“made him a rich and wealthy man”'.

From those tales some useful inferences may be drawn. The
white colour of the silver-gnomes; the absence of the ore when
they were gone; their transformation, on being knocked down,
into precious metal — tliese points altogether indicate a close
identity between the gnomes and the metal, or to their easy trans-
formation into the latter, and conversely. In other words, lifeless
matter may show itself as a living man or woman, and also, as
the second tale intimates, as an animal; and such living beings may
become dead matter shaped quite differently. Such transformations
are believed in most firmly in China, and her books contain instances
of them in great profusion. Thus, that which holds good of men,
animals and plants, which may, as we know, change indiscriminately
into each other, holds good of living and lifeless things mutually.

A small series of traditions is wanted in support of this statement.
It is an old yarn that “king Hwui of the state of Tshn (B. C.
“ 399 — 386) offered to the king of Shuh five beautiful maids. Five men,
“ dispatched to fetch them, saw a large snake creep into a mountain
“cavern. They dragged the beast out of it, on which the mount
“ fell in over them ; then the five maids walked up-hill and changed


same work ; first part.

« m iffi s , ii * i a « jft.s


334


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“into rocks — In the Yang-sien district, a petty mandftrin,
“named Wu Hoh-lung, lived on the south bank of a river. One
“day ferrying over in a boat with a hollow bow, he saw a five-
“ coloured stone box floating. He drew it up, took it home, and
“ put it at the head of his couch, where, when the night came, it
“ changed into a girl. Towards daybreak it was again a stone, which
“ he threw back into the river”

Much also we read of animals changed into stone. An ancient
description of the Siang river countries, dating from the reign of
the Tsin dynasty, relates that in south-east Hunan, “in the Ling-
“ ling region, stone swallows exist, which, whenever it is stormy
“ and rainy, fly and soar about as real swallows, to return to the
“ petrified state when the shower is over. They are found then
“ lying on the river-banks, on the sands, and at the rapids. They
“ look like bivalve shells, but they are not so large, and their
“contents are of stone. They are said to live in mountain-caverns,
“ from which they fly out when it thunders and rains, then to fall
“ down upon the sands and change there into stone. People use
“ them to facilitate childbirth, to which end they let pregnant
“ women hold one in cither hand. This expedient operates very
“ efficaciously” k


'flu ^ somewhat diffei'ent version ol’ this story occurs in

the third cljapter of the Hwri-i/fiii<i kivoh chi ^ or Memoirs con-
cerning Hwa-yang, a dozen historical chapters by .Shang Kim named

Tao-tsiang a high officer of the fimrth century. They deal especially with

Shuh, the present Szd-ch''wen, then known as the Hwa-j'ang region, and with some
notable and illustrious personage.s.

^ « - a MIS

Itwass. ?i#ikil±^2.»«ilittif5d'. *

» 5 tfc . * 5- dt Ih « . 0 It ts B'l * * . a T" fck


LIVING ANIMALS CHANGED INTO DEAD MATTER.


335


“In Sheh-cheu (or Hih-cheii? in Nganhwui) a large brook flows
“past tbe Red Hills. There is there a tradition abroad of a man,
“ who, in times of yore, made a fishing-dam straight across the
“stream, so that the fish were prevented from swimming down-
“ward; but then they flew straight across the range at midnight.
“ On this, the man set out his nets upon the ridge, to catch them.
“A part of the fish flew over the nets; another part could not, and
“changed into stones” '.

“ In Khien-yang (in Shensi) a temple stands, dedicated to Chang
“Nii-lang. In the Shang yuen period (760 — 762) a young man
“of the Wei tribe sojourned on the Khien-yang roadside, and
“ arriving at that temple, unsaddled his horse, to take rest. Suddenly
“ he saw on the floor a pair of slippers of braided straw, very
“ nicely ornamented, white in colour, and of a most excellent make.
“ He took them up, put them in his satchel, and departed. Arriving
“ in the chief city, the prefect there gave him lodgings in the
“ pavilion for strangers. That evening he had the slippers placed
“ before him, and went to sleep ; but next morning they were gone,
“ without anybody knowing where they were. After a little time
“ they were discovered on the roof of the pavilion. The affrighted
“servant who brought him this news, he ordered to climb the
“ roof, and this man placed them again before him ; but next
“ morning they were gone again, and were found to lie on the
“roof as before. As this occurred even a third time, the young
“man whispered to this servant: ‘Is not this a miracle? Sit up
“ and watch them’. And the servant watched them that night
“ through a crevice, thus discovering that towards midnight they
“ were suddenly transformed into white birds, which flew on to


rjl pi'obably tlie work mentioned in

the Wen hicn tung khao (cli. 200, 1. 2) as Sinng cluing simn-shui ki
LUiciE- Description of Land and Water within the Siang river Countries, in
three cliaptei's, by Lo Han 1 also named Kiun-chang who lived

under the Tsin dynasty. Ma Twan-lin states, it contains some interpolations relating
to posterior times, even to the T ang dynastv.

king ^^:the Hook on Sheh-chen, with

Maps, quoted in the K K, ch. 466.


336


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPIir AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


“ the roof. On this, the youth ordered the slippers to be thrown
“into the fire; but they flew away” b

Where a belief in transformations of things into living beings,
and of such beings into lifeless things, is thus firmly rooted in the
minds and thrives, the most impossible metamorphoses are deemed
possible and generally credited; and we cannot wonder at finding
foolish things on this head recorded bv serious authors with the
deepest earnestness. “In the Metropolis, the Buddhist monk T"ai-
“ khifing was an able preacher of the Sutra of the Benevolent Ruler.
“In the first year of the Khai y uen period (A. D. 713 ) he delivered
“ sermons in the village of King-yao in the Fung-hwa district, and
“then put up in the convent of that place for two summers. Once
“he went up to the main hall with his alms-bowl, when, at the
“ closed gate, something came down from the eaves. It was then
“just beginning to get liglit, and on nearing, he could distinguish
“ a new-born baby in bran new swathing-clothes. Affrighted and
“ astonished, he put it into his sleeve, and doing his begging-
“ tour among the villagers over a distance of five or six miles, per-
“ ceived that it lost its weight. He took it out, and it was an old
“ rotten broom” *.


yff » . M * Si , ® 0 e . J!, n ^ =

mBxx

0 , lit * g ¥ . nr » IS ^ * # 7} * H tfi

. Suoi-shih chi; K K, I'h. 463,


IDENTIFICATION OF THINGS WITH LIVING BEINGS. 337

“And in the Yuen hwo period (A.D. 806 — 821), one Cheu Yih,
“a student in. the Imperial Academy, devoted himself every evening
“ to his work. Once he saw a little spectre, with hair over two
“ c hd h in length, hanging down disorderly from a head studded
“ all over with sparks like gleaming stars. Horrid it looked ; it
“ played with his lamp and his ink-stone, producing incessantly a
“ confused hammering noise. But the student was no coward. By
“ bullying the spook, he made it shrink back a little ; but it neared
“ again his writing-desk, and, to see what he was doing, stole so
“ near, that Cheu Yih could seize it. Sinking to the ground, it
“ begged for mercy in a sitting attitude, in terms of great anguish,
“ and by the first dawn of day the student heard a noise as if
“ something were breaking. Turning his eyes that way, he saw
“ that he had to do with an old wooden ladle, with some hundred
“ rice-grains sticking to it” '.

“In the Khai chhng period (836 — 841) there lived in the Ho-
“ tung region an official, who regularly made nocturnal rounds to
“ warn the inhabitants of the streets for dangers. One serene moon-
“ lit night, he came to the King-fuh convent, and saw a man,
“ squatted down in a stooped attitude, his arms placed crosswise
“ over his knees. His whole body was black, and he did not stir.
“ The official got frightened, and shouted at the being, but it did
“ not look up ; so he shouted again and again, tapping it at last
“ on its head. But then it sprang to its feet, showing a most strange
“face; it was several feet in length, pale and lean, very frightful
“ to behold. The first thing the official did, was to tumble over
“from fear; but after a while he regained sufficient strength to
“ get up, and saw that the apparition was gone. With increasing
“fear he ran home, and related his adventure in all its details.
“ Afterwards, the gate of the King-fuh convent having to be renewed.


Yiu-ijdiKj tsali tail, Supplement, cli. 2.


22


338


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ they dug up the ground, and found a varnished barrel, some feet
“ deep, with some white clay on the top of it — the very thing
“ the street-otticer had seen” *.

We liave also found a story of a man who, seeking joyful com-
pany with a wine-grocer, got drunk at his costs with incredible
fpiantities of liquor, but then, unfortunately colliding with a stone,
showed his real form ; an old, cracked wine-jar Narratives of men
who, moving about in human company, acted in every respect as
men, but changed on a sudden into some object, are, in fact,
numerous in Chinese literature, too numerous to be mentioned. As
a rule, the thing was on such occasions wisely burned or otherwise
destroyed, to cut short its re-apparitions for good. Animals, too,
change from things, and return to the condition of things. “Under
“ the reign of the House of Sui, one Shu Th-kia of the Hia district
“ in Kiang'cheu, had built a new house, and was on the point ot
“ removing to it, when suddenly a countless number of snakes
“ emerged from it, and swarmed through the gate, covering the soil
“ in all directions as densely as silkworms do their spinning-frame.
“A traveller then spoke: ‘ Dissipating-charms may suppress this evil’.
“ He took four peach-branches, wrote spells upon them, walked
“ round about the house, and nailed them on the four walls, and lo, the
“snakes gradually retired; the charms were taken down, and carried
“ behind the vermin, which then withdrew to the central part
“ of the hall. Here was a hole of the size of a dish. The snakes
“ retired into it altogether, and the wayfarer ordered a hundred
“ pails of hot water to be poured into it. And when the night
“ had passed, they turned up the ground with their hoes to a depth
“ of several c hh h , and found two million brass coins, strung on


' m w * fii w ® ® IS * » — iS'

fisl. SStl Hilt Aft

® 7 « ,nt K A tt * -t.SS .fa* ffi IS® ^ .
ft 14 A. a** lirffi. ss g ti' K nfc .

. Siie/)-!>lii/i chi; K K, ch. 370.

2 Siau siang lull, quoted in the K K, ch. 370.


IDENTIFICATION OF BEINGS WITH THEIR EMAGES.


339


“ cords. They unstrung them, and re-uielted them into new money,
“which made the family very rich. The snakes were the tsing of
“ that old brass” h

A conspicuous feature of the belief in changes of lifeless things
into living beings, and conversely, is that they are suggested especi-
ally under the impression of some outward likeness between those
things and those beings. That round-headed ladle, haunting in the
shape of a child; that barrel with a clod of earth on the top, which
wandered about in human forms; those strings of coins that were
snakes, all alike point to this phenomenon.

We have now to say something more about it.

It is a well known characteristic of simple minds to associate,
more or less intensively, representations with the beings these call
to mind. The thought of a living personality, which a representation
arouses, is strong enough to keep out the idea that the latter is
mere lifeless matter. In particular this must be so in China, where
all lifeless matter passes for animated and, besides, no established
knowledge exists of law and cause, so that no distinction between
possible and impossible can be made.

Thus it is, as our preceding chapter has shown, that when a
Chinese sees a plant or a part of a plant, reminding him, by its
shape, of a man or some animal, such as a ginseng-root, a Lycium-
root, a lump of resin or fuh-ling, he is influenced immediately
by an association between it and that being. This being becomes to
him the soul of the plant, anthropomorphous, or shaped as a beast.
That which holds good of such vegetable matter, holds good, of
course, of any object indiscriminately, which reminds one by its
forms of a man or an animal. It may have been a man or an
animal before, or it may become one at any moment; or it contains
a soul that may haunt as a man or a beast.


^ H B ^ it ® ® a ^ . tt A .

ms®.

I/ic/i tsai-, K K, ch. 437.


340


THE SOIL IN PHILOSOPHY AN'D FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Thus, association of images with beings actually becomes identi-
fication, both materially and psychically. An image, especially if
pictorial or sculptured, and thus approaching close to the reality,
is an alter ego of the living reality, an abode of its soul, nay, it is
that reality itself. By myriads are such images made of the dead,
expressly to enable mankind to keep the latter in their immediate
presence, as protectors and advisers. We find them everywhere in
houses and temples, where, by continuously arousing the thought
of the dead, they keep alive the conviction that these are present.
Such intense association is, in fact, the very backbone of China’s
inveterate idolatry and fetish-worship, and, accordingly, a phenomenon
of paramount importance in her Religious System.

Is such association there so remarkably strong indeed? Chinese
authors themselves place this beyond all doubt. They do not, in fact,
dilate on the subject by special treatises, nor by categorical statements,
but they tell us more than enough of it in narrations, disseminated
in their writings almost at haphazard. Let us place here a few in a
methodical order, and muster them.

Traditions, to the effect that rocks and stones, in which the
people around imagined they saw human outlines, were some-
time living human beings, exist in China, and may probably be
admitted to occur everywhere between her confines. “In the Chung-
“suh district”, thus Thio Tshen relates, “there is a Chaste Maid
“gorge, westward from which a rock stands on the water-edge,
“ with a human shape reminding one of a girl. This is called the
“Chaste Maid. Old men there know traditionally, that in the time
“ of the House of Ts'in, some girls were picking up oysters there, when,
“ in a storm of wind and rain, which darkened the day, one of
“ them changed into that rock” ‘. And according to Jen Fang, “there
“ were in the Tan-rh region, on mount Ming, two anthropomorphous
“ rocks, reputed to be transformations from two brothers, who, in times
“ of yore, went to the seashore to fish. On this account they are
“ named the Brothers”


hev ki. ch. 1.

« If SK BJ Hi Zi 5 SB A » , i H - A

. Shuh i second half.


LIVING TORTOISES OF STONE.


341


From the belief that things formed as living beings, may be
transformations from such beings, one step leads to the conviction
that they may assume sometime the living state. Tales of images
of men and animals having become the living beings they represent,
in point of fact abound, and they show us also in all its intensity
the belief in the animation of images. The huge stone tortoises,
erected in China for a long series of ages in great numbers on
graves and mausolea, and bearing flat stones engraved with epigraphs
or biographical notices (Book I, pp. 1140 sqq^, seem to have played
in that respect upon the imagination already in early times. “On a
“ sea-dam at the north-eastern hill”, thus the SIiuIl i ki relates, “a
“ huge stone tortoise stands, which the people think to have been
“ made by Pan of Lu (Book 1, p. 115r2). W hen it is summer, it enters
“ the sea, but in winter it returns to the hill. One of Luh Ki’s
“poems runs: ‘As the stone tortoise cherishes in its heart a love
“for the sea, so I prefer dying in my old homestead’ h And in
“ the Lin-yih district, to the north, lies the tomb of Mr. Hwa. Its
“ inscribed stone slab has disappeared, but the tortoise forming its
“pedestal has remained. When the realm of Chao existed under the
“Shih family (comp. Book I, p. 612), that tortoise was in the habit
“of carrying the slab every night into the water, from where it
“ returned at dawn, so that it always had duckweed on its back.
“ A man who watched it, seeing it on the point of entering the water,
“ shouted at it and made the animal hurry away, throwing otf the
“ stone, which was thus smashed” *.

“ In the Yii-yao district, the seals fastened over the doors of
“ the Government granaries remained unliroken, and yet, on their
“ being opened, the contents were found damaged and considerably
“ diminished. Watch being then kept, it transpired that it was a
“couple of stone tortoises of the mausoleum of king Hwan in the
“ Fuh-yang district , that preyed upon the grain. Orders were


Ai»,4-aii;tta4±. m*#*.

® ¥ tr 45:


Yiii-i/ang tdcflt tsu, ch. 10.


34:3 THE SOUL in philosophy and polk-conception.

“given in secret to destroy the mouths of those beasts, and then

“no further havoc was made in the stores” b Such corn-stealing

tendencies are ascribed also to stone horses. “In the village of Liu-

“ lin, a horse devoured the corn in the fields. The people surrounded

“ these, but without succeeding in catching the animal, on which

“ thev resolved to iittack it with arrows. The horse was wounded
1/

“ and lost much blood, but it escaped. The crowd followed its track,
•• and thus they came to a stone horse on the tomb of a prince ot
“the Cheu dynasty, which they found bearing the traces of wounds,
“ so that they were convinced that the devourer of their corn was
“ a stone horse”

Likewise, an image of a dead man may become this man him-
self, so completely even that he can fecundate his living widow.
“ In I-shui, a man of the Ma clan had married a wife, whose
“surname was Wang. They lived together as harmoniously as a lute
“and a harp. Ma died soon, and Wang’s parents were anxious to
“rob her of her widow’s chastity; but she swore an oath that she
“ would never give herself to another. Even her mother-in-law, with
“a view to her youth, advised her to re-marry, but her, too, she
“refused to listen to. Then her mother spoke: ‘Nice and noble, in
“ truth, is your resolve, Iiut you are still too young for it. IMore-
“ over, you have not yet given birth to a son, and how often is it
“seen that those who start with such rigid determinations bring
“ shame on themselves in the end b You had better get married
“ the sooner the better, and thus do what is always done’. But
“ Wang held out firmly, and as she swore she would rather die
“ than consent, her mother let her have her own way.

“ The wife then ordered a modeller to make a clay image of her
“ husband, and whenever she took a meal, she offered something to


n


n . TS, se,L 133.

Am mm

.ill)


CIcang-p iiui-chfU chi , Menioii’i-

Department: T S, sect. , ch. 102.


3 Comp. Book I, page 758.


concerning tlie CliAng-pang


LIVING HUMAN IMAGES OE CLAY.


343


“it, as she had done when he lived. One night she was going to
“bed, when suddenly she saw the clay image yawn and stretch,
“and step down from the table. Horror-struck, she gazed at it with
“great consternation, and saw it become as strong and tall as a
“ man, her goodman in his own person. In her fear she called her
“ mother, but the spectre stopped her, saying ; ‘Do not do that. I
“am so much impressed by your love; and the Netherworld is so
“ bitter and disagreeable. One family that shows fidelity and chastity,
“ gives a halo of glory to several generations of its ancestry. When
“ my father lived, he sinned against virtue, and it was decided that
“ he should remain childless for that ; so my life was cut short in
“ its very prime. Rut the judge in the Netherworld then thought
“of your bitter life of chastity, and ordained that I should return
“ to you, to let you have a son for the continuation of the line of
“your offspring’. Dropping tears bedewed the lapel of the woman’s
“ dress, and she gave him the same peaceful love they had cherished
“for one another before his demise; and when the cock crew, he
“ left the bed, and went av/ay.

“In this way they lived upward of a month, when she felt some
“life in her womb. This was a sign for the ghost to burst into
“ tears, and say ; ‘ The time allowed mo to spend with you is now
“up; from this moment I must live separated from you for ever’;
“and he broke off intercourse with her for good. The woman told
“ nobody anything of it ; but by-and-by her abdomen distended, and
“she could no longer conceal the secret. She entrusted it first to
“her mother, who suspected her of telling stories; but as she
“ watched her daughter without finding any man concerned, she
“ was greatly distracted between belief and disbelief, and at a loss
“ how to solve the riddle. In the tenth month of pregnancy the
“ woman gave birth to a son, and this being rumoured abroad, caused
“all who heard of it to laugh in their sleeve. xVs the woman had
“ nothing by which to explain the case, a village-elder, who had
“ an old grudge against Ma, informed the magistrate of the matter.
“ This grandee ordered the woman to be arrested ; but as the neigh-
“ hours had nothing extraordinary to say about her, the magistrate
“said: ‘I have heard that children of ghosts are shadowless, and
“ that those that have shadows are not genuine’. So he took the
“ child into the sunshine, and lo, its shadow was as faint as a light
“ smoke. Then he pricked blood out of the finger of the infant, and
“ put it on the clay image, and it soaked in immediately, without
“leaving a trace. They smeared also some of its blood on another


344


THE SOUL PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“image, but they could wipe it off at once h On account of these
‘‘ experiments, the magistrate believed the woman. When the child
“ was some years old, its mouth and nose, speech and gestures
“resembled those of Ma in every respect so closely, that the last
“ traces of suspicion vanished”

That which holds good of the carved image of a human being,
holds good of his painted picture, which, too, may produce the
original, as well in a material as an immaterial shape, behaving
and acting as a living man or woman. “The only daughter of a
“ departmental Inspector of Wen-cheu never left her room until
“ her betrothmeut. A beauty with a kind character she was.


1 Comp. Book I, pp. 1 370 S'lq.

an

«3t.

. HRftanTS*.

m. + 71:1®-^. n

A « ja a # . w M IE ft fi .!i tsi5 , -S' ^ a ^ .
®#®ib.tea a Ip

«jfiLlW±fS±.AA««.JSIi(PS^:<:.-tt«

mmiiim . Lino-clicn chi I, cb. 15, ±fS-


PORTRAITS BECOMING LIVING BEINGS.


345


“ the special darling of her parents. She fell ill and died, and they
“ had a portrait made of her by a painter, before which they set
“ out sacrificial dishes and cups on set annual occasions, taking
“ them away in ordinary times. On the Inspector having finished
“his time of service, he forgot to take the portrait with him; and
“ when his successor had put up in the same mansion, the following
“reflection occurred to the mind of this man’s unmarried son: —
“‘If I may marry a wife like this one, the best desires of my life
“ are altogether fulfilled’. He hung the portrait in his sleeping
“ apartment, and one night he saw her come forth from the frame.
“ She approached his bedside, and talked to him with much
“ interest and kindness, ultimately indulging with him in the sexual
“pleasures. From that time, she joined him every night, and half
“ a year thus passed away, during which the lad grew weak and
“ was much extenuated. His parents interrogated him, and advised
“ him to take care of himself, on which he told them the whole
“ truth ; she was, said he, wont to come in the dark of night and
“ to depart at the fifth drum-watch ; and she gave him from time
“to time exquisite fruit to eat, steadfastly refusing, however, to
“ take any of the cakes and bits he offered her in return. His
“ parents told him to press her next time with more urgency to
“eat, for, if she ate, she would not be able to get away; and the
“ result was, that she really ate a little, and could not retire at
“daybreak. She had then become quite a human being, except that
“ she could not speak ; and they were thereupon actually united in
“ marriage. The complaint of the young husband did not harm him
“anymore” h


* ^ ^ * ,s«i # 1 ® fi a.ii; # « * .K * .

^ ifi) * # It . S HH bI . ^ 99 * T' hT * . a


346


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Where the belief in the possibility of transformation of images
into living beings is so strong as the above tales show, the con-
viction can hardly be absent that such changes may be brought
about by art. To do so, the only requirement is to arouse the
indwelling soul from its inert state, which may be done by words
or spells, and other expedients; or, also, the likeness to the living
may be made so close as to suggest the presence of the original.
A number of stories bearing on this braucli of witchcraft, circulate
in China by word of mouth, and a great many occur in her literature.
It was already related of a sien in very old times, Koh Yiu ' by
name, “that in the days of king Ch'^ing of the Cheu dynasty
“ (B.C. 1115 — 1078) he was fond of carving wooden goats and selling
“ them ; and one fine morning, he rode on such a goat into the
“ Shuh region” Another wizard enriching himself by such artifices,
was a fabricator of living horses, and of him the following story
is told:

“A rich man in King-loh, named Wang Wu, was an inconsiderate
“ individual and, moreover, a wheedler, currying the favour of people
“ of high position and influence. Once he heard that some one had
“ a high-mettled steed for sale. Forthwith he sent a messenger
“to that man with much money and silk, to outbid every offer,
“and thus he succeeded in becoming the owner of the animal. As
“he intended to present it to the General-in-Chief, Mr. Sih, he
“adorned it splendidly with a gilt saddle and jade bridles, and with
“pearls and kingfisher’s feathers, and he was just looking round
“for an opportunity to send it him, when the horse in the stable,
“ suddenly neighed loud, and changed into a clay model of a standing
“ horse. Wang Wu stood aghast, and destroyed the clay horse by
“ burning it” h


^ ^ : Record of Pauses botweeti rural Oc-

cupations, thirty chapters of tale.s collected among husbandmen while resting from
their labours ; by T ao Tsung-i , alias Kiu-clring . The work

was published in 13G0. T S, sect, jjj^ ch. 40.

1 ^ ^ .

p|:| . Shcu tihen l:i; ch. I.

3


PAPER HORSES BECOMING REAL HORSES.


347


‘‘Mr. Ts "eng Chih of San-shan had lodged in the house of the
“ Ch'en lamily seven years long, without any news from home
“ reaching him. One summer month he sat alone in a room, when
“a Taoist from mount AVu said to him: ‘You ponder so much
“over your homestead, well, why do not you go there for a short
“ time ?" ‘The distance by water and land is three thousand miles’,
“ was the reply, how long will it take me to travel so far ?’ On
“ this the Taoist cut a horse out of a sheet of paper, and ordered
“him to mount it with closed eyes; then he spurted out some
“ water upon it, thus giving it a speed like that of the wind ; and
“he conjured it, saying: ‘Go home now, but do not stay there
“too long’. And in a moment Ts'^eng Chih was at home; the door
“ looked as of old, and his wife told him to walk in and wash himself,
“and to put on a new suit of clothes. Then he mounted the horse
“again, and was off; but the steed broke its leg, and he awoke
“ thereby with a shudder. He then found himself back in his study,
“with new-made clothes on; but the Taoist had vanished”'.

“ Lang, a Buddhist monk under the Tsin dynasty, dwelled in
“ the Golden Elm hills. On his death, the donkey which he had


A « - S . # tk « - ® ^ S A a . fit A « » .

^ TS, sect. tjj , ch. 102.

^ ^ 4b a . « H . ft g Bf A @ ft PI .

P1 13 4b « . * ^ A ^ » 56 Jf ® ± .® ro « . 0r

ii#56»§»

M A ‘ S A # ^ .1, ■ ' I'.i W IS M

or liiindle of str.rnge Matter.s from the closed Window, the woi'k we mentioned on page
210. It is a small collection of marvellous tales, mostly from the T'ang time and that of
the Five Dynasties. The author, Lu Ymg-lung ^|| , was a native of Cheh-

kiang, living about the middle of the thirteenth century. TS, sect. Jjj^ . ch. 307.
and sect. ch. 102.


348


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ used to ride on, ran away up-hill and was lost ; but some
“ then saw it, and discovered that it was of metal. Thenceforth,
“ woodcutters every now and then heard it bray. The people in
“ that locality say, that if that metal ass brays once, there will
“ prevail general peace in this world” h Twan Ch'ing-shih relates ;
“In the Yuen hwo period (806 — ^831), a master of arts in Kiang-
“ hwai, named Wang Khiiing, visited the house of Twan Kiiin-
“ siu. He was told to sit down, and took a roof-tile, which he
“ painted as a tortoise-shell, and put into his bosom. A few
“ moments later he drew it out of it as a real tortoise. This
“ animal was let loose in the courtyard, and moved about there
“along the walls till the night had passed, when it became a tile
“again” ^

We have read stories of riders, asking wayside people to warm
some glue for them, to mend their horses with, stating these to
be of wood; which was found to be true on the glue being
applied, as then the mended animals pranced off at full speed
with their riders. Many tales mention persons making living butter-
flies, snakes, and other animals out of paper. We read also of one
“Liao Kwang-t'u, an intimate comrade of a Taoist doctor named
“ Yin Yung-ch^ang of I-yoh, whose mother was ill and longed for
“some fish-hash, which he could not provide, the stream being
“tremendously swollen. In this emergency, Yung-ch'ang put his
“ hand into his bosom and produced a wooden otter, three inches
“in size, over which he pronounced an incantation a few times,
“thereupon flinging it into the river; and lo, in a moment the
“waves whirled up and foamed, and the beast re-appeared with
“a big fish. They made hash of it, and therewith cured the
“ mother” h Still better known are in China the wonderful paper


Yiii-yang imH tsu, Supplement, ch. 8.

M . M M Jm ^ tr . ^ The same

woi'k, ch. 5.


ANIMALS OF PAPER AND WOOD MAY BECOME LIVING.


349


kites of Kien Wen, the second emperor of the Liang dynasty.
“Under the reign of the emperor Wu of that House, in the third
“ year of the T"a i t s4 n g period (549), Hen King besieged T'^ai-
“ cKing so closely, that no communication could be kept up with
“ any place at a distance. Kien Wen then made paper kites, which
“ flew up into the air, to make known abroad the perils he was
“ in. Heu King consulted his Ministers on the matter, and Wang
“Wei spoke: ‘Where those paper kites come, they bring information
“ about him’. Orders were now given to some able archers among
“ the bystanders to shoot them, but, on coming down, all changed
“ into birds, which flew up into the clouds, leaving the men at
“ a loss whither they went”

Works of later times, too, make mention of ingenious transforma-
tion of images into living beings. The Tsze puh yii, for instance,
relates :

“ Mr. Yeh Wen-lin states, that during his stay in the Metropolis
“ he visited a gentleman, attached to the service of one of the
“ Boards. No sooner had he knocked at his door than a vicious dog
“ with a lion’s mane rushed at him, roaring and barking, as if it
“ were going to bite him. It filled Yeh with fright and fear, but
“ the houselord came out and called the dog, which crouched down
“immediately, and did not stir anymore. With incessant laughter
“ the gentleman regarded the visitor, and on the latter asking him
“ what he laughed for, he replied : ‘It is a wooden dog ; outside it
“ is covered with a lion’s mane, and inside it is a wooden door-bolt,
“ and yet the thing barks and runs’. Yeh did not believe him ; on


')\i S Memoirs concerning Nine Di'nasties, a history of some realms existing

between the T'ang and the Sung dynasty. I have not seen this work, nor have I
anywhere found particulars about it. We quote from the TS, sect. ^,ch. 137.

^ > K a ^ -fts * A # tp . T' » »f ft -

^ collection of old yarns, in three chapters, ascribed to one Li Yiu

^ X or Li Khang ^ }h of the T‘ang dynasty, of whom nothing is known.
KK, ch. 463.


nil -.<111, IN I’llll.D'iil'IM \M> rol.k-i 1 INI I I' III IN


.i.'lll


■• \V i||i ll

!,


I'i't'li )ui III*

'luii

t .1 r*)«

k W |l ii V 1 111 IW Ir,

itlii’i -

ami

•■ a I’l ll r


Ill),

ivliirii alillnillli'r

1 thi- ll

iu n

with -fii'ti'hi-i

l-Diu ni'i'k,

■• lint, 111


It- t

'itliil'- Ill'll

" 1)1

III a-iil

ll

wa- -I'l'ii liv

him t

1 . hr

■• ilkru m

(

it w.

.1111" '.


1 111' ll

t

lit I

laiu'iii., im

l^U''

iiitii in

1M4

lll'llID- III.IV 1)

• I'M Ti l-i'(l

■il'ii li\

'1

11 It-

I'ltiu'r till

tin

II livvil

pn

'tit, III' 111 Ill'll,

It' lit

III* It

N.irr.ili'.i'


lllll-

tiafiiu' tin-

.III

t.il IlDlIl -1 -

I'l'i . hi I'l 1- Dill' . ‘‘ \\ Ill'll

•• Kan 1 '

1114 '*

tin' Siin_;

liv II

-tv W'.l

S -tl

1 I’l 1 111 r 1 it K h.

I'.-', i'l

■ \V,i-

■• 111 till'

1

aiiiU

'i| till' kii

1 I’.l

t.il- till'

1 tiiiii , until till’

(’ll III |i

1141 !^

••ll! till'

1

' ^ ! n

k ii .1 n _'

|li'I !■

I'l IIJ

It

ith ml liiiii .1

rliall

a I'l

-1 -I'.iii,'

1

Im ill

^ - 111' il'.V .III

1. Ill

-.M|.,,i

*1. *

\h.iil>tril anil w r.il \ ,

at a

" rrlll|il-'

ll

.h.

till t.i tli.'

( ii iV 1

'lli.il' 1-

in,

-1 ill II 'w hi I'l ■ in

till’ ill

-Ti let

•'ll! 1 111!

4

Ill

I|. || ; llU r-f

Ki.iiu'-u ,

mi

1 1 1 1 .11111 '1 1 t lii'i'i

111 ' a

niau

•• iir^nu"

him ti

til 1', -,'i\ nu'

• i;

-1 .11-*

put

-uiiu' 'iiliiii rv

rr 111 arm.:;

•• U'l' flu

-

h' •! "

rill |inni 1-

au't ik*

with .1 -iiii'lilir.

ami t

iiiml

•• null I'll

.1


1 ' it l.n ,'ii

1'- In Dll' 1

, iV

If I'.ii'ii' li l.iin

iiiDri'

th.iii

•• 'i'\i n 1

llllilrr

1 inili ' I'ti

'll.

n h'lvin

4 ft

1 1--I 1 1 till’ 1 1 w

ll. hr

:avi'

•• It thi


U\\K

I'Ut 1' ii|<l

n.it

-'ir.

Il'l

li'iuDiinf m_'. !

r - i w

that

"If a '

a


hni'i-. rini- i

' I'.nl'l

tl'i

1 m.'i 1 il'iu'it

' V\ , 1 -

that

' ■ ^(1(1 \N i 1 1 1

i,t'i|

U'l ill'll, f'

' 1 ■' *

ti' .'•iii_

rhi'

1 .’I'liiu ''l■'n .

t fiii'

n i:n

"lit t':i


iM4

ilx n.i-'\ •


T'.i ^1

•I

. . ..

t ' i!' - :.i'

!!.

. ,!■ 111.

* {a*

!"!' _'ii.U_'' ]i

iir

iliiatr

.:.,u'!\ I

n

'"U '


.'.n!

!■ •' it . ;

14 '

It 1- I'V

iiD nii'iin-

iii'i 1 " 1 1 \

;

• ’ I* ’

Vi _ ■ ll i^'


- lii'l.

■ -i.

) I ; 1 ill II 1 . 1 ; 1 1 I'l ’

^rlilii.

am t ^


' m Sc - ifj ('U f’'i Si

L '‘S fm [II , Wk K r,- iVi A ttf! .r.Am

tli ^ PA m r, K nli Ih > HU ^

, n , iiMn /; tk . n- w c , pJ?: nt

1!^ /i . 1 Si f,‘i , r- A «» III - 1«1 T'r ki . ‘M tli

Bjl . Hi: t Hi'i ^ . Si' A iVi' :)S ' '■ ■■ -
^ f] .■.■?;■ :; ■ n '.ft T . ri A, .1^ . 'ft ^ 31 fl 1^1
# , ;^J (1.1 A ^ ti’ 'fj Kii! 't^ . v- Sf A Cil ^ . B

4y *U; . ifJ Ak T'. a . J, -Hi/ ■ !•: 'l/i . fl -Hi; /!': IH'l
-% ^ I! fi S: n f'f: 'i' . Hi U ^ f ®/ , fi fu'i H'l
<"M tk }j iH; . rfi A r’.f P4 'BL l: ir|

'' -.. i , 1 I - : i , ■ ^ili.

t.-- 1' j


I'il I (III


il \N'1M\I.' \l\l HlcoMI \MM\I.'


u| Will Ml,

, cla\

( 1

r


ni.t\

•'ll IlH <

!u!

p-nj.

' ‘ -r

. .Ilhi U < t. ..(

III U1/,.U'I

K III

akin.;

t \ 1 I \

t|,i\

W "1 k.

tn<l


!;\i li'ii.iiil, ii\


li.ti 1

|)in

'

ttlf'l

juinnui-T \'

I iMill

.lll'i 'll i


, ' 1 1 1 1 ki m 111!

r,i r-riii:;'

mill

!in

. Ill

III'*

1 1-

A- til.

it.ti I

1* . . » ■ M


.1 ill -',1 1\\

even |ilr

till III

1 '

ill

1 '1 litat 1 ' 111 -

tfii_:! ■

i».i:

■ ■ * \ »M

i {

" ' I'.'l" '

111 iWr\ rr


rln


tn III

.it «r 1

tilt ^ t •

• \

*1'! ‘‘


»,ea

tank'll ill*

ti^iii

O''

ill

1 tie

\ .

t •« » 1

•i t r

» * 1 !


" .c ,e

actual hi

•iii_''.

W

III'

il |.|-

- Hi’

' ■ ' 0 r.

*M\ .1'!

!'■:! ’il


' !'■ ■

tliiTcm, :

Hill II

ia\

w ,

ill'l' 1

Mitt .

-! !!i. r,,

1 ..

n u '1 !

■

... 1 : ■

ami a'lic

|iam!'

ll

|lll till!

' 1 «

’■ .111 II

' i ! it i<

~ •■llci

I\,

I'l , ■ .

'tatnl, “

\\ 111 1

\\\

1 .1

uml.

1 tiit

I T 11.


mi't. \\


1 II a ' 1,1 1 ' 1 ■

“ pamti 1 '.

One

. ^

I'l

III.;' Ill

.1 .1

,t

•Mo lit

I a je ■-

Ml

1 fa ! I - Il 1 1 a

“ u itli a

1 1 1 a 1 '


‘i

1 am!

.1 f'

1 . ■

• ' i

U i a- ,1 .

\ <

1 1 ii'M n a

“ he a'ki-

.1 ■!

ill;

I a


-i

lel".


t ' ' ' '» •


' ' 1 v n ' • i 1 ' )


‘\VuU l■,ul pilir t : M‘ h":' - .. W' I I. ji' •. 1 ,v _•! .

'■ nir Dill' All'l K •> l I i; ; ' ; ‘ .

••jiliillfi'. iii\' li"' : .S "I! _ 'i_' " u.’ t •' ■,

■ ■ w 1 1 ij - 1 1 u ’ I 1 1 i i ! : 1 1 w : • i 1 .1 i ■ ' \ 'll j ■ ' ^ 'I \ . :

•• kmilllr->, ^11, I ■.\W r .1 ! i, 'i'li''!


1 tilUM

eti’il With ;r -■ iii

1 1 i 1 V

1 m ! . ■ .

.! •- ;

' • i ■

1 .1'


>' M 1 .» ’

‘tiiii. fii n -A I'.i \-

i| wit'

■ \. V

’ ‘ r M : ! 1 j

. 1 ’

, j n -

M‘

tiic 1

a 1 1 n n I w 1 ’ 1 1 ' I

'el. 'll

!'• :

i

.M ! ,

• 1, '

^ 1

lUikm

iWII 'Ami' ia . •

• in ",

II .;i

. *. 1 ♦ .
r • ‘

. t ‘

Cel

1 i


•• tr' • 'I'l' c.: ir

I':.' t r ;ii •

tr iii'ii.r’i i*. '1 ■ ' j' ' ' ' •


W .


.s , ' r A ■


' % n >;*r .i’l 'Vi v: ^ .'m u ■ a. ^ ^

/< tnj iiij r-i u ^ fi. iit M i-i iv tii . m

(I W k'y • vi- .V ^ 'a H W 111 ,

U K ini M (\ 7= It 111 'dM .'h t

:*r '/]■ u w »> »ii II a k i ik ri /£ . >.« jr

tm Ml ^ ]lr i!4


352


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


another narrative illustrating this conception, likewise bearing upon
that famous horse-painter:

“In the first year of the Kien chung period (780), a man
“with a horse applied to a farrier, telling him it had a sore leg,
“and that he wanted it to be cured by him for the price of twenty
“hwan. The animal had a mane, colour, bones and marks such
“as that horse-leech did not see every day; so he spoke with a
“ smile : ‘Your horse. Sir, is very mueh like a product of Han Kan’s
“pencil; to be sure, of specimens like this there are none among
“ real horses’. He told the owner to take it once round the gate
“of the market, while he would walk on behind; and while doing
“this, they fell in with Han Kan. This artist too started. ‘Verily’,
“he exclaimed, ‘this is the one I painted; now I know for a
“certainty that productions of my fancy may be semblances which
“ have mysterious duplicates’. He rubbed the horse with his hand all
“over, and discovered an injury on its foreleg, as if it had stiim-
“ bled. Then, in dumb astonishment, he went to his studio, and
“ contemplating a horse he had painted, found on the corre-
“ spending leg a spot, forming a black defect. Thus he was convinced
“that his picture was imbued thoroughly with soul-power (ling).
“ The money the horse-leech got for his work, passed through several
“hands, and then changed into coins of clay” '.

In this tale, the picture producing a reality remains as it is. It
may occur, however, that its lines and colours disappear, and only the
paper remains. “One Li Sze-hiun painted a fish, and had it ready,
“ except the water-plants around it, wdien a visitor knocked at the
“gate. He went to see who was there, and on re-entering missed
“ the picture. The servant, whom he told to look for it, found
“it in the pond, into which the wind had blown it. They fished


rtP'l-ffi, 0. «

n m a . m.

■is

Yiu-ijamj isah tsu, Supplement,

chapter 2.


ANIMATED OBJECTS AND LIVING IMAGES.


353


“it up, and saw it had become a blank sheet; and from that moment,
“ the painter now and then saw in the pond a fish like that of
“his picture. Once he amused himself with painting several fishes
“and throwing them into the pond, and they did not disappear
“ therefrom before a whole day and night had elapsed”

After all that this chapter has described about the animation ot
things, images and pictures, and their assimilation with living
beings, nothing strange related in China on this head by books
and word of mouth, can any longer appear strange to us. It will
not astonish us to hear of lifeless things of all sorts behaving and
moving as men or beasts; of tomb-stones of Yii the Great, prowling
about as luminous, voracious giant-beasts, to attack men and swallow
serpents ". Pots, pans and other things speak and chat, and make
noise. Lumps of stone are kept in temples and other places as
curiosities and objects of worship, for having once shown animation
and life by crimpling or swelling considerably, or by decreasing or
increasing in weight, or by moving about spontaneously. With
special frequency mention is made of carved images shaking and
trembling, moving their arms and feet, speaking and gesticulating,
nay, some have grown beards, as, for instance, “an image of a
“Spirit of the Ground on the mountain of Autumnal Millet, in
“A.D. 1613” b Not seldom images have been found sweating, not
so, of course, by a condensation of vapours on their cool surface,
but by the powerful exertion of strength of an indwelling soul.
Still more, however, they can do: they have been taken in the
very act of gambling. “In front of the Government house of Lei-
“ cheu — the southern peninsula of Kwangtung, north of Hainan —
“ twelve stone men stood arrayed on both sides, holding aloft scal-
“ loped banners. One night, some warriors who kept night-watch
“ there, heard a tumult of quarrelling gamblers. They hurried to


1 ill 1 - « . W ^ * SS « ^ ^ ^ PU

PI.

Aft* #.B fill®

- fi 4n Plf a ff « a » fi « ft ft . « B «

■ Lang-huen /.i; T S, sect. ch 137.

2 Read the first tale in the tentli chapter of the Tszc puh gii.

chi-, TS, sect. ch. 1G2.


23


354 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“the spot, and saw that it came from the stone men, who had
“ left on the ground several thousands of coins. Next morning they
“ reported the matter to the prefect, who found the treasuries locked
“as before, but missed a sum of money corresponding exactly with
“the amount found near the statues. The prefect then had the
“images placed partly before the temple of the God of Walls and
“Moats, and partly before that of the God of the Eastern Mount;
“a good measure, which put an end to their haunting” '.

All such events, which we would readily rank among marvels and
miracles, do not pass in China for very marvellous or miraculous
at all. In that country of idols and idolatry they were always taken
for perfect possibilities and rather commonplace matters; and when
special attention was bestowed on them, or report was made of
them to the Imperial Court for insertion in the chronicles, thiswas
usually done merely on account of their being judged to be useful
material for prognostication, or because it was afterwards discovered
they had foreboded something or other of importance. The belief in the
animation of things, and the assimilation of representations of realities
with the realities themselves and their souls, cast the fullest light
on some important religious practices we have treated in our Book
the First. In the first place, it accounts in every respect for the
reason of being of the burning of a variety of paper and painted
things, men and animals, for the dead in tlie other world. That
such semblances are extremely rude, and often very small, shows
how slight a degree of likeness suffices to suggest an animated
reality. It is, furthermore, assimilation of semblances with realities,
which fully justifies the Chinese when they send their dead to the
tomb with paper clothes on; and when they smash and break the
effects that served their deceased parents for everyday use, they
undoubtedly act under the suggestion that those things are animated,
and that their souls, thus set free, may depart for the spirit-world
as duplicate realities. Again, it is those same phenomena which
created, and maintained to this day, the custom of placing stone


mmmz.

Ts:l’ puh yu, Supplement, ch. 4.


IMAGES IDENTIFIED WITH THEIR LIVING REALITIES.


355


statues of men and animals on the tombs, giving moreover, birth
to the analogous usage of burying with the dead vehicles of clay,
puppets of wood, and “souls” of straw.

The conviction that those grave-puppets and straw “souls” are
living beings, or may become so at any moment, comes out from
certain narrations which make them appear in human shape, riding
horses likewise real, but suddenly re-assuming, together with their
riders, their forms of wood and straw. So, “there stood in the village
“ of Chun-ts'ai a Buddhist convent, named Khai-shen, which first
“ was the house of one Wei Ying, a citizen of the Metropolis. This
“ man died early, on which his wife, Liang by name, performed
“no mourning-duties, but married another husband, one Hiang
“Tsze-tsih of Ho-nei. Though pretending to be married into another
“family, she in point of fact remained settled in Wei Ying’s house.
“ No sooner had the latter heard of his wife’s second marriage, than
“ he returned home in broad daylight, on horseback, accompanied
“by several men. Before the courtyard he exclaimed: ‘Liang, you
“ have forgotten me !’ which words started Hiang Tsze-tsih so much
“that he drew his bow and sent an arrow into the rider. The shot
“dismounted him, changing him at once into a puppet of peach-
“ wood, his horse into a straw horse, and his followers into puppets
“of rush. The wife was impressed so deeply by this adventure, that
“she gave the house away, to be converted into a convent”’.

But there is more. The above pages also shed light upon a •
subject to which we gave our attention already, viz. the identification
of shadows with souls (pp. 83 sqq.)-^ indeed, are not shadows
rough pictures of the beings or things that cast them, and, in con-
sequence, their real duplicates, their souls? It is very general for
the Chinese to denote shadows and pictures by the same word,
ying and we saw an instance hereof in the term sidu 'mg

Amoy vernacular, meaning the small-sized portraits

ISA. fi ^ B

A. *


336


THE SOUI, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


we mentioned on page 114 of Book I. — Finally, this review of
the Chinese belief in the identity of pictures or images with the
beings they represent, is useful for affording us an introductory
knowledge of a main branch of Chinese witchcraft, called hwan
shuh magic art”, or khwai shuh or i shuh

^ : “strange art”, consisting in the main in the infusion of a
soul, life and activity into likenesses of beings, to thus render them
fit to work in some direction desired. We learned from the quoted
tales that this infusion is effected by blowing or breathing, or
spurting water over the likeness; indeed, breath or khi, or water
from the mouth imbued with breath, is identic with yang sub-
stance or life, on which account, also, as we saw on page 217 of
Book I, persons that have swooned are revived by blowing them
into their nostrils. Thus rendered animate, the image is to be put
in action. To this end, it is conjured with spells, which, on close
examination, are generally found to be mere orders, occasionally
connected with threats and bullying; but the magician may also
cut, beat or prick the image, or maltreat it in any way, to bend
it to his will. Thus being simply a use of the power of a spirit
assimilated with an image, magic or witchcraft is Fetichism, plain
and clear. It does not pass in China for hocus, but is taken as
genuine ability, highly admired by all classes, in all times and
ages. It may be quite harmless and innocent, as when e. g. the
magician goes no farther than making puppets and things move
and jumb, fight and collide, or when he causes stones to be flung
without any visible propelling force being in play, or when he
changes things into living beings, and so on. But there is other
withcraft, employing the souls of images for mischievous ends. This is
plain sorcery, terribly dreaded, generally decried, and threatened by
Law with heavy punishment. We will devote the third Part of this
Book to it. In the last, but principal place, magic with the aid of
images may be exercised for the good of man, and become highly
beneficial to him. It is that which moves idols and gods to give
blessings, to produce rainfall and other phenomena for man’s good,
to expel and disarm evil demons, and work similar wonders. In
this form it is religious magic, inseparable from Fetichism and
Idolatry, to which, on this account, ample attention will have to
be paid in many chapters of this work.


CHAPTER XIV.


ON FOOD AND MEDICINES PUEFARED FROM ANIMAI-S AND MEN.

The fact that, throughout all ages, the Chinese have eaten certain
animated plants and minerals, to invigorate their own soul, improve
their health, and increase their vitality, naturally brings the question
on our ItfS whether there exists evidence of their having eaten also,
and still continuing to eat to the same ends, flesh or other parts of
animals, and even men. Indeed, men and animals, which show
freedom of will and intelligence, have certainly always been
considered by them to be animated more strongly than plants and
motionless matter.

The natural history of mankind in general seems to forbid us
to admit, that man has passed through a time in which flesh-eating
was much enhanced by such motives. From times so old that only
fancy can penetrate into their mysteries, primeval man certainly ate
animals of all kinds without much selection or predilection, merely to
satiate his hunger; and we cannot reasonably surmise that, on his
emerging from his crudest state, his carnivorous tendencies, already
developed to their highest pitch by customs of thousands of years,
could still undergo any development by dint of philosophic reasoning.
The Chinese, too, feed at the present day on quadrupeds, bipeds,
and fish of all kinds, as every past generation of them learned to
do from its forefathers, without even a thought of the part which
the souls of the animals may play in the eating-process. Only
some exceptional men and women of knowledge, and of a pensive
turn of mind, realize that, by eating flesh or fish, the soul-substance
of the animal passes into their body, and strengthens its vital force.
In the eyes of a learned few, nutrition is eminently an animistic
process, sustaining in the main the blood and the breath, that is
to say, the two matters identified especially with the soul. The
substantial parts of the food pass through the passages, and only
its immaterial essence, its s h e n , k h i , or t s i n g , remains in the
body, to increase and renew its animation, while the flesh, sinews
and bones of the eater are built up from the five Elements, working


358


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


on his five viscera in the sense in which they are combined therewith
according to the table on page 26. The Great Plan \ an important
chapter of the SAu king, states on unsaid grounds, very profound and
therefore highly wise, that the nature of Wood is sour, that of Metal
acrid, and that of Fire, Water and Earth respectively bitter, salt and
sweet The medical conclusion is, that sour things feed the liver, as this
viscus is assimilated with Wood; that acrid things feed the lungs, and
so on ; which enables leeches to regulate methodically diet and nutrition.
Be this all as it may, the nutritiveness of products from the animal and
vegetable kingdom is thought to show itself from the greater or smaller
degree in which they restore or strengthen ( ) the soul, or its tsing
or vital force, corporal health and vigour being considered to consist
principally in health and vigour of the soul. «

Such quasi-scientific notions dominate entirely China’s medical
art. All plants and animals being animated, any plant or animal
that ever drew attention, received a place in the drug-shops on the
commendation of some ancient or modern leech or sophist. Study
of the animal and the vegetable kingdom, and also of minerals,
was prompted chiefly by the art to prolong life and cure the sick;
and to this day we find those branches of knowledge almost entirely
confined to medicine.

Though thus there is a place in the Chinese Pharmacopaeia for
every animal of whatever nature or size, a limited number only are
generally acknowledged to exceed the rest in medical utility. And
still among these picked few, not more than a small minority can
claim our interest for the philosophical reasonings that have assigned
to them a strong animation. We cannot wonder to find among them
the crane, which we have met with frequently in this work as an
emblem of immortality, owing to the high age it reputedly reaches.
Liu Ngan wrote, “that the crane becomes a thousand years old in
order to travel as far as possible”’. And Ts'ui Pao taught: “When
“ the crane is a thousand years old, it becomes blue ; when it lives
“then a second millennium, it becomes black, and it is then a so-
“ called dark-coloured crane” Its far travels, combined with its


1 Corap. Book I, p. 955.

2 That is, respectively, ^ ^ ^ ^ .


LIFE-LENGTHENING EGGS OF THE CRANE AND THE KUH. 359


capacity to live long, have made it in mythology the special con-
veyance of the immortal sien, who are often represented as riding
on it to and from their paradises, or having their cars drawn by the
bird. “In one flight”, thus the author of the ’Bh-ya yih assures,
“it may travel a thousand miles; and anciently it was termed the
“ sien-bird, on account of its reaching a higher age than any being”

It is, no doubt, because of its strong animation and consequent
enormous length of life, that its eggs, in which it has deposited its
vitality in a form marvellously concentrated, so that quite new
individuals may be born from them, play a part in the art to
prolong life. Koh Hung states, “that the recipe of Khang Fung-
“tszS consisted of eggs of goat-birds and cranes, and sparrows’ blood,
“ all mixed with a few boxes of sap of heavenly male substance, and
“ made into pills. These pills he put into an egg of a k u h bird,
“ which he varnished and placed in mother-of-pearl water for a
“ hundred days, on which this water became red, and lengthened
“ the life of whomsoever drank a double handful of it, by ten
“years, while a whole pint of it prolonged it to a thousand
“years”*. Thus, also, the eggs of the kuh, a bird which, as we
saw on page 234, is likewise a symbol of immortality, much con-
founded with the crane, were made use of at an early date by
Taoists in seeking immortality; but its blood, the seat of its soul,
served them likewise to increase their soul-substance or breath.
We may infer this from a curious little work, known as Muh fieti-
tsze cli'wen ^ or “Traditions about the Emperor Muh”, which
existed in the reign of the Tsin dynasty, and reputedly belongs to
the find of books in the grave in Kih, of which we spoke on
page 416 of Book 1. Describing the travels and adventures of Muh
of the Cheu dynasty, who is believed to have reigned from 1001
to 946 B.C., especially his journey to the West to visit Si Wang-mu,
the Queen of Immortals (s. page 304), it states, that “on arriving
“ among the Kii-sheu people, a slave of somebody offered him the blood


Pvh-tszc, ch. 1, §

3


0


360


THE SOUli IN PHILOSOPHY AND rOI,K-CONC’EPT10N.


“of a white kuh to drink”, such blood, as iCoh Hung remarks in
his commentary on that old writing, “being drunk to increase the
vigour of the human breath” And pursuing his journey south-
ward, “he galopped at full speed a thousand miles, and entered
“Tsung-cheu, where the officials brought kuh-blood for him to
“drink and to wash his feet with, while Tsao-fu (his coachman)
“ prepared goat’s blood for his team of four” b

A similar position in nutrition, life-prolonging art and thera-
peutics, is held by the eggs, flesh and blood of the common house-
fowl. It is an adage that its flesh “increases the power of the
breath” ^ or the yang soul, for the cock is full of yang substance
or vitality on account of its being an emblem of the sun, the chief
agent of the Yang. We stated this fact already on page 200 of
Book I, annotating there also, that the Chinese use cocks to strengthen
the souls of the dead on their way to the grave. Further we described
(page 204 seq.) how, in compliance with the same train of thought,
soul-tablets of the dead are given animation to at burials by marking
them with some blood from the crest of a cock, this excrescence
(p. 217) being looked upon as the focus of the yang substance
laid down in the bird, whereas it is the fiery or bloody part of the
main part of its body. Li Shi-chen wrote: “Use crest-blood of cocks
“that are three years old, for then you have the superabundance
“of its yang breath”^. Finally we have annotated (p. 217), that
new life is instilled into persons lying in a swoon, or when mori-
bund, by means of the blood from a cock’s caruncle. After all this, it
becomes almost a matter of course to find, so to speak, every part
of the bird used for medication, as its flesh and bones, viscera and
intestines, its head, brains, blood and excrements. Distinctions are
made between such ingredients from a brown, a white or a black
bird, and from a cock or a hen; they operate also differently upon
men, women, and children.

' Aliift it ^

^ H It ifiiS AM Jl ’’’“i’"'' ■*

0 .1 2 * — »“'■

3 ^ ^ ^ .

tb'uu kang niuh, ch. 48.


life-prolonging and medical virtues of eggs.


361


Fowls’ eggs, too, even to their hard shell and the subjacent
pellicle, perform a part in medical practice and life-prolonging art.
They do not only pass for deposits of the life or soul-substance of
the bird, but philosophical reasoning has made of them miniature
representations of the Universe, as the yolk with the embryo reminds
us of the yellow genial earth, and the bluish white with the
scale resemble the atmosphere with the firmament enveloping that
productive power. “The white of an egg”, says Li Sze-chen, repre-
“sents the sky; hence its influence is pure, and its nature slightly
“cool. And the yolk represents the earth, so that its influence is
“ turbid, and its nature warm. Thus, when the white and the
“ yellow parts of an egg arc used conjointly, its operation is quieting.
“Should a man not possess vital force (tsing) enough, he may
“ increase it by means of the influence of an egg ; the white parts
“ will then purify his vital breath and (Iiy its coolness) cure
“ inflammation of his eyes, red and sore throat, and other such
“complaints. And if he is in lack of corporal matter, he may
“supply it by the taste (nutritive (piality?) of eggs, as their yolk
“restores the blood and cures diarrhaea, as also diseases of pregnancy
“ and those connected with childbirth. It is because eggs regulate
“ both the breath and the blood, that they cure the diseases summed
“ up above” b

The list of complaints cured by eggs, is still considerably
longer, too long for us to review. Probably it is the considerations
set forth above, which also induced the ancient Chinese to swallow
a fowl’s egg on New-year’s day, thus imbuing themselves for a
whole year with the enlivening soul-substance of Heaven and Barth.
We are indebted for the knowledge of this custom to an inter-
esting little “Calendar of Annual I'sages in King and Chhi” : Xi'nj/
Cliu sui-shi ki two regions corresponding somewhat with the
present provinces of Hupeh and Hunan; the man said to have


iii. «


T « . as s « s . ^ip H'l * a « jft. . ± »


362


THE SOHIi IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


written it, is one Tsung Lin a high dignitary flourishing in the
middle part of the sixth century. “On the first day of the first
month”, it says, “everybody, young or old, ate a hen’s egg”-; but,
unfortunately, nothing is added, neither by the author, nor by the
commentators, about the why and wherefore of this custom, so that
we have only our own theory to account for it.

The tortoise growing slowly, and reaching very large dimensions,
it cannot but have made the Chinese believe it to be very longevous
“When it has lived three hundred years”, says Wang Cheung,
“ it is not bigger than a coin, and may still walk on a lotus leaf ;
“ when three thousand years old, its colour is blue with green rims,
“and it is then only one chfih two ts^un in size” ^ And Jen
Fang stated : “A millennial tortoise becomes hairy. When it has
“lived five thousand years, it is called a tortoise possessed of s h e n,
“and when it is double that age, it is a tortoise with soul-power
“(ling)”b These two denominations being used throughout liter-
ature to denote the animal, they attest clearly how generally and
closely the idea of animation is connected with old tortoises. No
wonder that the medicaments in which ingredients from the animal
are the principal components, are at least as numerous as those
prepared from hens and cocks, and that the number of diseases
they cure, is certainly not smaller. Especially turtles are in high
demand. Ashes of their carapace are deemed of great efficacy, and
roundly declared to form “sien-making recipes” if scorched ofl:
from living tortoises, that is to say, which are in full possession
of their soul. Koh Hung wrote: “'Among millennial tortoises which
“ possess soul-power, the five colours are represented altogether, and
“ the males have over their forehead two bones protruding like
“ horns. If a goat’s blood is poured out over such a tortoise, and the
“carapace is thereupon cut off, burned and triturated, then one
“spoonful of a square inch, taken three times a day until the
“ whole carapace is consumed, confers longevity for a thousand


ZOOPHAGY AND ANTHROPOPHAGY.


363


“ years” ^ And T'^ao Hung-king declares “that tortoise-soup and turtle-
“ soup render the lean corpulent, are highly invigorating, and increase
“ the shen”

Animals possessed of an extraordinary amount of vitality may
be made in China artificially. Jen Fang gives us a curious recipe
for that : “Take a still unfeathered young bird, and give it a mixture
“ of red cinnaber with beef to swallow, so that its wings and
“ feathers are red when it is grown ; then kill it, dry it in a shady
“place, powder and consume it; you will then live five hundred
“ years” The great difficulty here will be to make the poor thing
hold out long enough on such curious fare.

The list of animals used medically on account of their strong
animation, is herewith exhausted. Its shortness is concordant with
the fact, that there is scarcely anything on record of old or modern
sien having eternized themselves by zoophagy. Much more thera-
peutic use was, however, always made in China of parts of the
human body; and this fact undoubtedly suggests the prevalence
of the idea that the soul-substance, contained in a man, strengthens
that of the person who eats him.

But, cannibalism has widely prevailed there for still other motives,
which, to place its animistic side in a correct light, we must also
devote some attention to. They deserve our interest especially for
the fact, that hardly anything has as yet been brought to light
about East-Asian man-eating but some scanty hearsay evidence, and
random statements of residents and travellers *, without the subject
having ever been studied from the native sources.

One chief inducement to cannibalism we may leave untouched.


rr. ^ ^ ^ ^ M - ch. 2, fllj

2 a ^ 1^ # it ^ rfil ^ . Pen-ls%o A'fOi;/ ch. 45.


sect. ^ , ch. 4.

4 In a special elaborate study of Antliropophagj- (Leipzig, 1887) Richard Andree
had no more information about China to give than eight lines! And Yule, in the
Book of Ser Marco Polo (I, p. 275) had to state the prevalence of cannibalism in
China from Arab travellers of the ninth century, and from one or two semi-reliable
reports of eye-witnesses.


364


THE SOUL fN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


viz. starvation. Over and over again we find in Chinese books
mention of dearths and famines harassing various parts of the
realm as recurrent scourges; and often the statement is adjoined
that the starved devoured each other. Likewise we mav discard
cannibalism based on certain superstitious grounds which it is not
well possible to sound, such as that it confers invisibility. We
read, for example, that when Li Kwoh, a high grandee in the ninth
century, “resided in Yung-cheu (as Governor), he captured seven
“ Bright Light banditti, who, whenever they murdered, ate the flesh
“ of their victims. When their sentence was pronounced, Kwoh asked
“ them for the reasons of their cannibalism ; on which their head-man
“said: ‘1 was informed by a famous bandit that those who have
“ eaten human flesh become invisible on entering human dwellings in
“ the night, and so, as suppressive measures are taken sometimes
“(by the inmates) against untoward events, we could not do without
“ eating such flesh”

Cannibalism has prevailed in China from time immemorial. We
saw on page 079 of Book I that Mih-tszS knew of its existence
there, as the realm of Khai-muh, where first-born sons were devoured,
may have been situated within her present confines. To Hwan, who
ruled over the kingdom of TsT from 683 to 641 liefore our era,
strong antliropophagous tendencies are imputed. “Leaning against a
“ column, he sighed, and spoke : ‘There arc extraordinarily precious
“dainties in this world, easy to get; but human flesh I have not
“yet eaten’. On this, Yih-ya went home, cut off the hands of his
“ son, and gave them his royal lord to eat” ^ Chinese sources give


Yiii-ijang tsnii Isu, cli. 9.

AlSl^.

yiu t'lrnij fu chu “Coinmentatory on Pan Ku’sYiu-

t ung Poem”, quoted in the T S, sect. A* , ch. 18. I have not seen this do-
cument, which is stated to have been composed by the famous author of the Books


of the Early Han Dynasty, in the prime of his life. Two commentaries in one
chapter existed under the T\mg dynasty, written respectively by one Tb‘ao Ta-kia


and one


Hang Tai


see the New Books of the T‘ang Dynasty,


ch. 60, 1. 21.


HUMAN FHESH EATEN FOR ITS TASTE.


36 .)


positive historical evidence of cannibalism among the Lao or Liao
(see page 267), who once constituted a large portion of the aboriginal
population of the southerly and middle provinces. We find, indeed, in
the Books of the Wei Dynasty, that “when tliose people fought
their feuds, they were sure to devour the slain” h The southern
border-countries, too, were in the early years of our era inhabited
by cannibals, for we read in the Books of the Later Han Dynasty :
“ To the west of Kiao-chi (Tongking) there was a realm of man-
“ eaters, where the first-born son was, as a rule, chopped into pieces
“and eaten, and his younger brothers were nevertheless regarded
“ to have fulfilled their fraternal duties towards him. And if he
“proved to be appetizing food, they sent some of his fiesh to their
“ chieftains, who, exhilirated, gave the father a reward. Those people
“are the actual inhabitants of Wu-fu”-. In his standard commentary
upon those Books, prince Hien of Chang-hwai b heir-apparent of
Kao Tsung of the T"ang dynasty, annotates, that “according to Wan
“Chen’s Record of Curious Beings and Things in the South, Wu-fu
“ was the name of a country south of Kwang-cheu and north of
“ Kiao-chi. People often go out there to waylay travellers, upon whom
“ they rush out to attack. If they succeed in catching one, they
“ devour him, not so much because they covet his money and mer-
“ chandise, as because they consider his flesh a delicacy. They also
“take the skull, which they split, in order to drink spirits out of
“it; and the palms and soles of the feet they consider to be extra-
“ ordinarily toothsome, therefore giving them their old people to eat” h
Unhesitatingly we may infer from those extracts, that one of the
motives of man-eating in East-Asia was gastronomy pure and simple.


1 ^ ^ ^ '■ 24 -

^ m ^ ^ M m

Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 1-16, 1. .5.

^ ^ W I-

. The Khienlung edition of the same work, loc cit.


366


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


human flesh being enjoyed for its taste. Quite at a loss, however,
we are how to explain that eating of first-born sons by their own nearest
kinsfolk, absolutely inconsistent as it is with a primary law of tribal
life in general, which imperiously demands that the tribe should
make itself strong in male cognates, but not indulge in self-destruction
by killing its natural defenders. We feel therefore strongly inclined
to believe the statement fabulous. We can also only guess at the
motives of many cases of cannibalism, mentioned so dryly in Chinese
books without even the slightest explicative details, that it is
quite useless to reproduce them here. Only the following one we
give, on account of the curious sophistic reasoning it gave rise
to. “Under the emperor Ling, it occurred in the spring of the third
“year of the Kien ning period (A.D. 170), that a woman in
“ Ho-nei devoured her husband, and a man in Honan his wife”
Yii Pao, reproducing this statement from the Books of the Later
Han Dynasty, adds: “Man and wife represent the deepest love
“between the two Regulators Yin and Yang, and still the one
“devoured the other; would not this encroachment of the Regulators
“ upon one another have signified explicitly some calamity of the
“ sun and the moon ? In truth, on the death of the Emperor Ling,
“a great insurrection broke out over his whole realm. Rulers then
“indulged in the atrocities of reckless homicide; their subjects rose to
“ rob and to kill ; their soldiery destroyed one another ; people of
“ the same bones and flesh were at constant feud ; in a word, the
“ misfortunes of the people were at their height” h

Not unfrequently we find it mentioned in Chinese books of
every age as a quite commonplace matter, that in time of rebellion
and warfare soldiery ate the slain ; but we are always left to our-
selves to guess whether it were hunger, gastronomy or passion that
prompted them. Cannibalism on account of the savoury taste of
human flesh appears in the following tradition : “The grave of
“ Chang Hiao and Chang Li is in the north-west of the Ch'^ang-
“p'ing department (north of Peking). Under the reign of the Later


The same work, ch. 27, 1. 4.


ANTHROPOPHAGY AS A PASSION.


367


“Han dynasty, it came to pass that those brothers, wandering
“about that spot, came across a gang of robbers, who wanted to
“kill and eat them. The elder then said: 'My brother is leaner
“than I’; but the other retorted: ‘No, he is leaner’, and so, each
“of them trying to put himself in the place of the other, they were
“both killed. Those who heard of the event trumpeted out their
“praise, and buried their remains. Their epitaph carved in stone
“ still exists there” h

Lunacy evinced by bloodthirstiness and a craving for biting,
lacerating and eating human flesh, has prevailed probably in all times
and among all peoples on the earth, accounting much for murder
connected with beastly atrocity. China evidently makes no exception
here, as the following extract from her Code of Laws may show:

“In the sixteenth year of the Kia khing period ( 1811 ) an
“Imperial edict was issued, stating that Ts'ien Khiai had requested
“ the Throne to give decision in the case of Chang Liang-pih,
“convicted of having taken life out of somebody, and of homicide,
“ proposing in a separate memorial, that the prefect of the district and
“ that of the department, having taken no judicial measures against
“ his crime, should be dismissed, and their conduct severely examined
“ anew. He states the case to be as follows : — Chang Liang-
“pih sucked out marrow from infant girls, sixteen in all, eleven
“of whom died from the consequences, and one was altogether
“crippled; these crimes constituted decidedly the worst kind of all
“ homocide, committed by a being in human shape, with the
“ character of a beast .... He who murders more than three
“ members of one family, is to be put to death by the lingering
“ process of the knives ; would therefore a criminal such as this,
“ murderer of more than ten infants, expiate his crime by mere loss
“of his head by the sword? It is just and equitable that this Chang
“Liang-pih should die by the lingering process. He is seventy
“years old; if disease takes him off, or fear of the punishment
“ that awaits him makes him put an end to himself, he will


Bilim*

^ o ^ ^ ^ ^ if General Memoirs

concerning the Imperial Demesnes ; sect, on the Shun-tien department. T S, sect,
j-ljl H, Ch. 134.


368 THE SOUL IN PHIIXISOPHr AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ unfortunately escape laceration in public. Therefore an edict ought
“ to be promulgated four hundred miles round, to the effect that,
“ as soon as our resolve reaches Ts'ien Khiai, he shall forthwith have
“ that criminal executed by the slow process, thus giving satisfaction
“ to the law and warning to the people. Further, we ordain that
“all the relations of those sixteen victims shall stand round the
“place of execution as witnesses, in order to rejoice the hearts of
“ men and allay the exasperation of the public ; and the possessions
“of his family shall be registered and confiscated, and divided
“before the magistracy among the members of the sixteen injured
“ families”

In the Code of the Yuen dynasty an article occurred, to the
effect that “dismembering a man and cooking him for food was
“to be pronounced a crime against nature, even if perpetrated from
“starvation. In either case, money to defray the cremation or the
“ burial of the victim had to be exacted (from the perpetrator),
“ and to be given to the injured party”

Especially numerous are the reeorded instances of cannibalism
out of savagery aroused by carnage or exasperation. We find them
in the books of all times and ages. Wang Ch'ung already wrote in
a demonstration that the dead do not harm the living, “that those


Am ±.m

Ta Ts^iwj luh

li, ch. 26, ^ ; title ^ ^ij ^ commentary.

History of the Yuen Dynasty, ch. 104, 1. 7.


CANNIBALISM AND NECROPHAGY FROM EXASPERATION. 369

“ who devoured one another in times of devastation and rebellion, might
“ be reasonably supposed capable of harming the living, if their souls
“ had knowledge” b During the bloody turmoil among the Imperial
Sung family, of which we spoke on page 1408 of Book I, one of
the victims was the grandee “Chang Ch^ao-chi, whom the rebellious
“soldiery slew. His bowels they ripped up, his heart they cut into
“pieces, his flesh they chopped and sliced, and the commanders
“devoured it raw, the head and the skeleton being thereupon
“thrown into the flames®. — In the Khien fu period (874 — 880),
“Li Tdng-tsieh was commander of the city of Kiah, when Wang
“Sien-chi attacked Jii-cheu. Tung-tsieh fell into his power, and
“the rebel, seeing what a beauty IVui (his wife) was, wanted to
“marry her; but she said, scornfully: ‘I am an officer’s wife, and
“ as such I bear, even in death, a title of honour conferred on
“ me by the Emperor ; how then can I accept defilement from an
“insurgent?!’ On these words the rebel flew into a passion, ripped
“ up her heart, and devoured it”

Wrath and bitter resentment may even lead to deliberate necro-
phagy. “Wang Pan, also named King-yen, on hearing that his
“father had been put to death by the emperor Wu of the Ch'en
“dynasty (557 — 560), burst into piteous wailing and fainted away.
“After some time he revived, and then there was no end to his
“ wailing, and he grew so thin, that his bones protruded from his
“ skin. And when the mourning-period had elapsed, he continued
“ wearing linen, eating mere potherbs, and sleeping on a straw mat.
“The emperor Ming of the Cheu dynasty admired his conduct so
“ much, that he called him to Court and conferred on him the dignity
“of commander of his right flank troops, giving him repeatedly
“ the administration of the Han-cluing region.

“When the Ch'en dynasty had been overthrown (589), Pan secretly


1 M il ^ A 40 ^ S )ij^ 7^ ^ , It ^

A . Lun heng, ch. 20, ife

Looks of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 99, 1. 18;
also the Histories of the South, ch. 14, I. 11.

5E t ^ ^ ft # Jtt-if . * S . ^1 i ft 2 N.W

Books of the T ang Dynasty, ch. 205, 1. 13.


24


370


THE SOTJL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ convoked around him more than a thousand warriors of his
“ father’s time, placed himself before them, and burst into tears.
“ One of the warriors said : ‘The dishonour inflicted upon you,
“ my lord, is blotted out already, and yet your sorrow does not
“ subside ; is this because Pa-sien {i. e. the emperor W u) has
“ died too soon for you to put him to the sword with your own
“hands? If so, I propose to dig up his grave-mound, to smash his
“ coffin, and burn his bones ; in this way, too, you can show
“ filial feelings’. Pan thanked the speaker reiteratedly for this speech
“ by bumping his head against the ground with so much vehemence
“ that blood gushed out. ‘But the mausoleum they have made for
“him, is so large’, he answered; ‘one night’s digging will not suffice
“ to get at the corpse, and daybreak will betray the matter’. But
“ the men asked his permission to get hoes and spades ; and they
“ dug up the mound that night, split up the coffin, and saw that
“ the emperor’s beard had not at all fallen out, but that its roots
“ were still growing from the bone. Pan now burned his remains.
“ He mixed the ashes with water and drank them up, and with
“ a rope round his limbs olfered himself up for punishment to
“ the prince of Tsin. This grandee referred the case to the Throne,
“on which the emperor Wen (of the Sui dynasty) spoke: ‘It was
“Our duty to overthrow the Ch'en dynasty, and Wang Pan’s deed
“is in keeping with the duties of filial conduct; how then can I
“ find it in my heart to punish him for it’. He was set free, and
“no further investigation was made”'.


m Am

* t lii a fl - Wc


CANNIBALISM FROM EXASPERATION.


371


Heu King (see p. 349), the famous rebel who brought the
Liang dynasty to the verge of ruin, was devoured by the mob as
a retaliation for the evil he had done. Being defeated in A.D. 553,
captured, “and put to death, Wang Seng-pien cut off his hands
“ and sent them to Wen Suen, the emperor of the House of Ts"i ;
“ his head he forwarded to Kiang-ling, and stuffing his body with
“ five pecks of salt, he sent it to Kien-khang (Nanking). There it
“ was exposed in the market, where the populace vied with one another
“ in cutting pieces from it, which they cooked and ate to the very
“ last. The lord of Lih-yang was devoured before him on the same
“ occasion. They then burned the skeletons and dispersed the ashes
“ to the winds ; and those who had suffered from fhe evil they had
“ caused, mixed some of the ashes in spirits and drank them. On
“the arrival of the head in Kiang-ling, the emperor Yuen ordained
“ that it should be exposed publicly in the market-place for three
“ days, after which he had it boiled clean and varnished, and
“ deposited in the military arsenal” h
Thus devouring in common hated tyrants, oppressors or insur-
gents, seems to have been rather in vogue in those times, whereas
the historiographer, from whom we have the above episode, states
“ that it was customary for those acquainted with Heu King, to
“ say of him : His voice is like a wolf’s, and therefore he devours
“ men ; but he himself shall be devoured by them’’ *. Still, canni-
balism in times of carnage must have had other grounds besides
mere savagery, seeing that special parts of the slain were selected


Bn gUgPWi.

History of the North, ch. 84, 11. 9 seq. Also in the Books of the Sui Dynasty,
ch. 72, 1. 5.

HAW- History of the South, ch. 80, I. 20. Books of the Liang Dynasty,
ch. 56, 1. 29.

Aljlf* . History of the South, ch. 80, 1. 24.


37:3


THE SOIL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


for eating, which unmistakably points to certain reasonings exercising
an influence here. The liver was preferred to all other parts. This
was already the case in the days of Chwang-tsz8, who wrote in a
vivid description “ of a visit paid by Confucius to a certain robber
“Chih, that the latter was then just giving some rest to his followers
“ somewhere on the south of mount T ai, and minced human
“ livers, which he gave them to eat And soundly scolding the
sage as a deluder, a twattler, an idler, who did nothing but
mislead rulers and scholars and curry their favour, the robber
advised him “to run liome as quickly as possible, or else he would
“ take his liver out of him and add it to the meat of their food
“ for that day” ^

“ When Ts'iao Teng ivas in charge of the government of Yin-
“ p'ing (the present Sze-ch'wen), his comtnandery ivas occupied by
“insurgents of the faction of Li T'eh (about A.D. 303). On this
“occasion, his father was put to death l)y Ma Wan, governor ot
“ Pa-si for Li Hiung (Li 'Feh’s son). Teng tlicn assembled around
“ him two thousand stray soldiers of the Pa and the Shuh region,
“beheaded Ma Wan, and devoured his liver’. — Ma Khiien s
“ elder brother, a military chief in Liang (the present Kansuh),

“ was killed by Khi-mu Ilii, on which Khiien slew the latter, and
“ ate his liver” b About the year 396 of our era, a high dignitary
of the Tsin dynasty, named Sie Yen % was retreating before a
hostile force, “when the commandor-in-chief Chang Mung, belonging
“ to his private staff, gave a blow with his sword to the hind parts

' a '!# i» He a * Uj 2 K .St A

W iffiff 2 Aon him chon Linij, IX, § 20.

A.«K. . Si-ch wen heu hicn Inh m }\\ # W

“Memoirs concerning later Sages in Si-ch' wen”, in Sze-chVen province; quoted

in TS, sect. ^ ch. 21.

W' Poh-Uamt liih or Records of North Liang; quoted in T S,

sect. ^ ^ , ch. 21,


EATING HUMAN LIVEKS AND HEARTS.


373


“ of his horse, thus bringing him to the ground. He was then
“ killed, along with his two sons, Chao and Siiin. Afterwards, at
“ Liu Yii’s victory at Tso-li, Chang Mung was caught alive and
“ delivered up to Kwun, Sie Yen’s youngest son, who cut out his
“liver, and ate it raw”

But how to explain this preference for the liver to other parts
of the body? Nowhere do we find any explicit reasons given in
Chinese books, and yet they are not difficult to trace. No doubt,
sophistry made the liver the main seat of vitality, ancient philo-
sophers, as may be seen from the table on page 26, having placed
it at the head ot the five viscera, identifying it, moreover, with the
East, the region of the vernal season, which, producing all vegetation,
especially represents life. And, as we may further see from that
table, the East is assimilated with anger, the source, according to
the Chinese, of courage and audacity, qualities which, more than
any, are products of vital strength and animation. Thus, by eating
the liver of a fellow creature, man may increase his vital force and,
along with it, his intrepidity.

This reasoning is in perfect keeping with the philosophy of Tsze-
hwa, who, as we saw on page 47, placed the hwun in the liver.
The Nan king likewise did so (see p. 71); besides, this work says:
“ The liver is the East and Wood (i. e. vegetation), and Wood is
“the spring, in which all beings begin to live’’*. Yin of Kwan,
too, as we saw on page 48, identified the hwun with Wood and,
accordingly, with the East and the spring. And quite common it
is to find in medical works the liver styled “ the abode of the
hwun”®, or “the origin of the blood”*, and we know that blood
is identified with the soul ; finally, correlatively with these sophisms,
the liver is not seldom declared to be “the ruler of the p'^oli”®.

It is, no doubt, in the light of analogous sophistry with regard
to the heart, that we have to view the number of instances, related
in Chinese books, of this viscus being extracted from murdered or
executed persons and eaten. Indeed, according to the table on page


Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 79, 1. 11.

41rst.


“difficult point”.

3


5 mz"^-


^ k.Z^-


374


THE SOUIi IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


26, the heart is connected with the South, in which the life of
Nature is always in its apogee. The heart, says Tsze-hwa (s. page
46), is the principal of all the internal organs, the abode of
the shen and of its vital force or tsing; and other thinkers
had no other opinion (see p. 80). Kwan of Yin and the schoolmen
of the Sung dynasty took the heart as the author of the passions (s.
pp. 43 seq.) and, consequently, as that of anger, boldness and courage ;
and Siiin Khing declared it to be the master of the shen-m in g (p.
45). In short, the heart and the liver are two centra of animation and
vitality. Hence, people whose liver and heart do not decay after death,
may return to life after an indefinite lapse of time. According to
the Poh wuh chi, “ the people without calves were cave-dwellers and
“ geophagi. They had no sexes, but after their death and burial their
“hearts did not decay, and they became men again after a hundred
“ years. And in the realm of dwarfs the livers did not decay, and
“changed after a hundred years into men. Those nations were
“ troglodytes, and the two countries were of one and the same kind” *.

For similar animistic, life-strengthening purposes, human gall is
eaten. The gall is, as the table on page 26 may evince, connected
by philosophy with the liver, in the close vicinity of which China’s
physiologists place it; moreover, some consider it to be a special
manifestation of the p'oh (s. page 59). Like the liver, near which
it lies, it is the seat of courage; but its dignity as such is laid
much more stress upon, boldness and recklessness, both in a good
and in a bad sense, being called in many dialects, and also very
generally in the written language, by expressions such as a big
gall, or a good galP. A hero passes for a man with galP, a
dastard for a man with no or little gall’, or with an empty gall
bladder^; etc. Loss of gall® means loss of courage; rupture of the
gall or of its bladder’ signifies a fit of terrible fright; letting
loose the gall® denotes a sudden display of bravery; and so forth.

That the amount of individual courage possessed by a man depends


i’ A B ^ - H ^ « Ifc

s^SliA-

“ 'hiSZA-


GALL IS VITALITY AND COURAGE.


375


upon the size of his gall, is an idea at least fourteen centuries old.
We read that Heu King, whose tragic fate we mentioned on pag.
371, “showed great cruelty in the infliction of punishments, and
“ atrociously indulged in injustice. Li Chen, a man from the Tung-
“yang region, raised troops against him, but was captured by the
“insurgents, who sent him up to the Metropolis. There Heu King
“ brought him out into the market, chopped off his hands and his
“feet, ripped up his heart and belly, and cut out his vitals, the
“victim, however, continuing to jest with his features undistorted
“and his countenance unchanged, with perfect self-command. His
“gall-bladder was then seen to have the capacity of a pint”*.

In 1645, when the armies of the dynasty now on the Throne
overran the Empire, one Wu Han-ch^ao made head against them
in south-eastern Nganhvvui. “ Next year they invested Ning-kwoh.
“ At the southern wall the soldiers escaladed the town, and under
“the cover of night spread over it to catch the ringleaders. Wu
“ Han-ch'ao escaped, but remembering that his mother was still
“in the city, and fearing to involve his family, he re-entered,
“and presented himself (before the commanders), saying: ‘I am the
“ ringleader’. They ripped up his belly, and his gall had a length
“of three ts'un. His wife and her family then perished by pre-
“cipitating themselves from a high building”®.

It is only from the prevalence of a belief in the life-restoring
capacities of human gall, that we can explain the existence in China
of the following wild story, which, though it does not give us
evidently any other truth than that its author was a victim of
mystification, yet has its value for illustrating the ideas that gave rise
to it. According to the Description of the Customs and Country of
Cambodja ^ “it was there, in bygone times, customary to collect

S « )s;f ^ « Wo * * HI ^ >)T . is * ^ .

History of the South, ch. 80, 1. 18.

" Bj# IE

A.E0. Si +

Sas*T5E- History of the Ming Dynasty, ch. 277, 1. 10.


876


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


“gall in the eighth month, as the kings of Champa tried every
“year to get a pot full of it, for which over ten thousand or
“over a thousand bladders were required. In many parts, men were
“employed to this end under the cover of night in out-of-the-
“ way places in towns and villages; they captured nocturnal travellers
“with lassoes, their headmen then cut out the gall with a knife
“ below the right ribs, and when they had a required number,
“they sent them up to the king of Champa. Gall of Chinese was
“the only one they did not take; for one such bladder had been
“ mi.xed in a certain year among the others, and made the whole
“ pot rot and stink, and unfit for use. This collecting of gall has
“been abolished of late; but still some members of the official
“class, appointed for this work, dwell within the north gale”

The author of the Tszc puk yii professed to know what was
done with that bilious matter. “The royal house of Champa took
“gall out of living men, to put it into spirits, which they gave
“their family to drink and to wash themselves with, saying that
“ their bodies were thus imbued thoroughly with gall. Every now
“and then men were laid in ambush along the roads, who rushed
“ out upon those unaware of their purpose, to kill them and steal
“their gall, and went off therewith. If the frightened victim guessed
“ their intent, his gall-bladder burst and became useless. All the
“gall was put together in one pot, in which they carefully placed
“ that of the Chinese on the top” '.


an attache to an embassy from the Chinese Court, which visited that kingdom in
the yeans i29') — 1297. It consists of forty short sections on different subjects, of
wliich our extract is the tldrtv-fifth. Abel Remusat gave a translation of the whole
treatise in the “Nouveaux Melanges Asiatiques”, \ol. I, 1829.


- « « « 1*. ii « M ^ 4 A K « d> K # ®

Azm, . mm

StStWWJglbP'l^#-
.?( 4 A 0 t A iS. R ^ A ft ,n. la .


2 A «
0


a*. **AS


BLOOD ETC. OF EXECUTED CRIMINALS, USED IN MEDICINE. 377

From all these quotations, to which, did space permit it, we might
add many more, the reader sees we may fully trust the travellers
and residents in China, who state in their writings, that insurgents,
notorious robbers and objects of public animosity are sometimes
butchered and devoured. Realizing how intensely the Chinese are
concerned about a good conservation of their bodies after death,
with a view to saving their souls from distress and annihilation,
we can hardly help taking such man-eating as an aggravated pain
of death, inflicted deliberately by an exasperated mob. We may
therefore place it on a par with incineration and dissipation of the
ashes, which process, as we saw on pp. 1404 sqq. of Book I, was
also often inflicted on the bodies of objects of wrath. It is, however,
but fair to say, that we have found nowhere in Chinese books any
statements pointing directly to a confirmation of this supposition.
In view also of the fact, that there are no reasons to admit a
rising of China’s civilisation to a higher point than that which
it had reached in mediaeval times, we may, furthermore, freely
credit the rumours, occasionally circulated, about criminals legally
executed having been devoured entirely or partly with a medical
object. The Chinese themselves are always found remarkably ready
to avow that the heart, the liver, the gall and the blood of
such corpses are used for life-strengthening purposes. Pellets of
vegetable pith steeped in the blood of decapitated criminals, have
been placed before me in Amoy on the counter of an apothecary’s
shop. And Dr. Rennie, in a vivid description of an execution he
witnessed in Thientsin in 1803, wrote: “The executioner produced
“ a chaplet formed of five pith balls, each about the size of an
“orange. These he saturated in the blood as it continued to spout
“ in successive jets from the severed vessels of the neck. These balls
“are hung up and dried in the sun, and sold in small portions
“as a medicine, which is employed as a last resource in a disease
“ which, I suspect, is pulmonary consumption. It is only to the
“ blood of decapitated criminals that any revivifying power is
“attributed. On our way down the main street we overtook the
“executioners returning home. The head man was carrying the
“ bloody sword in the most open manner, and the executioner his
“pith chaplet. They turned down a narrow lane to a sort of guard-
“ house, on a nail on the outside of which the chaplet was hung up” i.

Sundry ingredients obtained from the human body are inscribed


1 Peking and the Pekingese, II, p. 243 — 244.


378


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND POLK-CONCEPTION.


also in leading medical works as life-instilling, health-restoring
medicines. The Pen-tiao long muJi, in which Li Shi-chen wrote
down probably everything of importance he found in medical works
extant in his time, may be consulted on the subject with more
advantage than any other book. We have therefore laid it under heavy
contribution for a sketch of cannibalism in the healing-art, to which
we will now devote a few pages.

The chief reason for the high value of human blood as a medi-
cine, is its identification with the soul, to which we directed the
reader’s attention on pp. 80 sqq. Another reason may be the doctrine
that it shares the animation of the liver, it being a general tenet
of Chinese physiologists that “the blood is stored up in the liver”
Ch'en Tsang-khi wrote: “In the case of patients suffering from
“atrophy, whose skin and flesh dry up, and on whom scabs appear
“ resembling bran, as also when somebody is bitten by a rabid dog
“and fever arises — blood should be pricked out, and drunk warm
“and fresh”®. This tapping blood to give others to drink, Li Shi-
chen condemns imperatively. “Among murdering rebels”, thus
he writes, “it occurs that they drink human blood mixed with
“spirits. But their victims are people that Heaven slew and thus
“ received punishment for their acts, so that eating them is not
“decidedly blamable. The recipes in which blood enters as an
“ ingredient, which may be used without the correct principles being
“ violated, I have collected, and I subjoin them here by way ol
“ appendix. As a cure against reiterated hemoptysis, take the ejected
“lumps, roast them till they are black, and take them then as a
“powder in doses of three fen ... . Against obstinate hemorrhage
“from the nose, the Shing hi hung luh (twelfth cent.) prescribes
“the use of a sheet of white paper, to catch up the blood till it
“is saturated; then this paper should be burned over a candle,
“and the ashes be taken in one dose, with water drawn fresh from
“a well; but the patient must not know what he takes. The work
“ entitled : ‘ How the Learned Class serve their Parents’ ’ recommends


. Pen-ts'ao hang muh, ch. 52, 1. 26.

3 Jn-mcn shi h in in fifteen chapters, by Chang Ts'^ung-ching

also known by his other name Tsze-hwo , who lived under


HUMAN HEARTS USED IN MEDICINE.


379


“ to dip a fumbled piece of white paper in the patient’s own nose-blood,
“and put it into eyes, namely in the right one if the nose bleeds
“from the left nostril, and in the left when the right nostril is
“ bleeding. That method works very salutarily. For wounds inflicted
“ with metal and filling with matter, take blood from the wound,
“ and drink it mixed with water. When at childbirth the mother’s milk
“is bloody, then take some vinegar, mix with it a lump of the
“blood of a woman in delivery, of the size of a fruit of the jujube
“ tree, and let her take it” ^ ; etc.

In instances of human flesh and human viscera having been
used to cure the sick, Chinese books abound. A work of the T’ang
dynasty ® lively suggests the prevalence of the belief in their healing
power in a relation of a well-to-do charitable denizen of Hwui-ki,
who fell ill in 758. A renowned leech declared “that the shen
“ of his heart had quitted his body, and that nothing could repair
“ this loss but eating the heart of a living man” His son, at a
loss how and where to get such a thing, went about the hills, and
found a foreign Buddhist anchorite, who told him he was a man
of the Yuen (^) clan, who, on account of his caring nothing
for his mundane existence, had retired to that spot. The other
replied, that being the case, he would certainly not object in the
least to sacrificing his life for a fellow creature and to give
his heart to the moribund father; and the recluse assented at once.


tlie Kin dynasty. The title of this work refers to the doctrine that every man of
good Confucian principles and learning is in duty bound to understand medicine, to
be at all times able to help his sick parents (comp. Book I, p. 938).

IIF< ft . ^ ^ , lit ^ A ^ ^ ii

^ ^ ^)x ^ m z . 5 ^

2 Khiu sin luh quoted in the T S, sect. , ch. 21.


380


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


stipulating, however, that the son should first give him a good
meal to eat. And the pious hermit swallowed the food with
wonderful speed and appetite; then, with great agility, he climbed
a tree, chanting from the branches this passage from the Wradja
Sutra: “The hearts of the past cannot be got, neither those of the
“present, nor those of the future; — you, Danapati, want to get
“ mine, but you will never have it” And with loud shrieks and some
mighty bounds he changed into a monkey of the y uen (^) species,
and was off.

Evidently on account of its assimilation with the eyes (s. table
on p. 26), human liver is considered a good medicine fur blindness.
The History of the Sung dynasty relates of “ one Lit Shing, who,
“ when his father had lost his eye-sight, ripped up his own abdomen
“and tore his liver out of it, to cure his father’s complaint with,
“ the result being that his father could see again, without the son
“ dying of the consequences of his deed” It is far from incredible
that the use of human flesh for curative purposes should have
occasionally given the patients a passionate craving for it, turning
them into bloodthirsty cannibals. In a little work, written probably
in the latter half of the twelfth century, we have an instance ot
that: “In the winter of the year wu-yin of the Kia ting period
“(1218), the magistrates of Kwangsi reported to the Throne a case
“ of anthropophagy perpetrated by one Lim IVien-chi, a man in
“ Khin-cheu. Having incurred a disease which brought him nearly
“ to his end, a Taoist told him that one’s bones and tendons could
“ be strengthened by boys’ and girls’ flesh ; and they kidnapped
“ in the district boys and girls of twelve or thirteen, dried their flesh,
“and ate it under the names of earth-fowl and earth-duck. Young
“ female slaves and concubines of the low class were thus devoured
“ in very great numbers. With large sums they bribed lictors to
“ kidnap men for them, and inhabitants of hamlets and market-
“ places, who learned something of it, concealed themselves and
“closed their houses, not venturing out of doors. In the end, those
“ monsters feeling their lives no longer safe, fled to the neighbouring


li. tH # Y" 5E Chapt, 45C, 1. 3.


AN ATROCIOUS CANNIBAL IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY. 381

“ Hiing-cheu, where they concealed themselves in the wilderness,
“ and eaught passers-by. The people there called them the Redcoats,
“ and took them for robbers. The matter was reported to the prefect
“ of that district, who arrested them ; and they confessed everything.
“ The Governor apprised the Imperial Court of the matter, but even a
“ long judicial investigation could not lead to a verdict. On this,
“one Sun King, a judge at the Grand Court of Revision, was
“ delegated to Khin-cheu to examine the case in order to settle it ;
“ but he wavered for more than a year, after which Lim Tshen-
“chi was prosecuted with no more severity than was usual in slight
“cases. The judicial rolls were annihilated, and he merely banished
“that man to a detention-city in Kih-yang. The critics of this
“ sentence declared King guilty, and he was dismissed from his
“dignity” '.

Our readers will hardly believe this atrocious cannibal to have
been anything else than a victim of senseless rumours, which
everybody credited, except the cleverer Sun King. The case is highly
remarkable as an instance that, in China, imputation with the
grossest, most impossible monstrosities could find believers enough
to set a whole region in general commotion, inclusive of the class
above the all-believing mob; besides, it shows that anthropophagy
in its very crudest forms was, seven centuries ago, anything but
relegated by public opinion to the old past or the domain of myth.

It hardly needs saying, that homicide for the purpose of procuring


A*.

A®#. tfiiA2.il

2 il itfc fl .

R I>f to « A , * * »l a *1*.

an*- Ch. II of the Kwei tiinff , a work in five chapters containing

narratives of extraordinary events, relating for the mo-.tt part to ghosts. The author
is not known, but he is supposed to have lived in the latter half of the twelfth
century.


382


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK -CONCEPTION.


medicine is punished by the present Code as wilful murder. The
following extracts from it may acquaint the reader with its spirit
on this head:

“ In the district of Hiang-shan in Kwangtung, one Liu Kung-yoh
“ was attacked by leprosy. A doctor having said there that disease
“can be cured with grains of human gall, the patient spoke ot
“ that with one Liu Shui-ching, who thereupon formed a plan to
“swindle him, and, pretending he had some gall-grains, asked him
“ how much he would pay for them. The other, guessing the swindle,
“said he would give him 120 taels of silver, should they prove
“ efficacious. This offer tempted Liu Shui-ching enough to make him
“resolve to try and get such gall. He cut up the abdomen of one
“ Yuen 0-chu, in order to pluck out his gall, but he did not find
“it, and the victim died the next day. Liu Shui-ching is to be
“ punished with lingering death by the knives, in accordance with
“the law against ripping up a man to pluck his life out of him ; and
“Liu Kung-yoh shall be banished” '. This Imperial Resolution is
from the twelfth year of the Khien lung period, or A. D. 1747.

In the same title of the Code the following series of notices
occur: “Some kidnap young boys, and roast the five ruling parts
“(viscera) of their bodies, or their bones, and mix them with
“drugs, such sh en-containing medicines being then used as excel-
“lent cures for every organ of the senses or aperture of the body.
“ Others entice, by means of drugs, pregnant women far into the
“ hills, and draw the foetus out of their womb, in order to make
“ sundry life-conferring medecines of it ^


mmm.- Ta Ts^in/j luh li, ch. 26, title m^vrmA-


o o o


MEDICINAL ANTHROPOPHAGY PUNISHED BY LAW.


383


“ Should there live in any locality any individuals who decoy
“away boys or girls with charms and spells, and then cut off their
“ limbs, or roast and take out their marrow or brains, etc., then
“ the local magistrates who neglect to arrest them rigorously and
“to bring them to justice, shall be lowered two degrees in the
“ registers of official merit h

“ In Sze-ch^wen cases occur of men being wantonly killed, to make
“ pills of them. Should it come to pass that a living man is burned
“to death for such a purpose, the case shall be treated as one of
“hacking and cutting somebody, in order to take his life out of
“him. This is an Imperial Resolution taken in the I5th. year of
“the Khien lung period (1750), on a proposal of the Governor-
“ General of Sze-chSven

“ In the fourteenth year of that same period, the Board (of Punish-
“ ments) revised the following sentence, given in Kiangsu. One P'^an
“ Ming-hiao had dug up the eorpse of an infant, and given it to
“ Ku King-wen, who burned and brewed it with drugs ; and the
“latter was thereupon revered as a master, and those who applied
“to him for his medical capacities received medicines from him
“prepared from that child, and he tried to get more corpses of
“ infants, to prepare them for sale. These were cases of hacking and
“cutting to take away life, perpetrated by that Ku King- wen. This
“ man committed such practices in all their perfection, without,
“ however, using for the purpose any living men, unless any such
“acts have remained undiscovered. The Provincial Governor condemned
“ him to strangulation, according to the law against the propagation
“ and practice of black arts, a law mild enough for a crime so great.
“And one Li Yuen-fang, knowing that Ku King-wen was desirous
“ to mix living children in medicines, charged him (P'an Ming-hiao)
“with procuring him some; and this man decoyed and kidnapped
“the son of one Sii Wei-hing, whom he delivered to Li Yuen-fang
“with his own hands, thus causing him to be cooked and roasted
“alive. That this child thus perished, was, in fact, the work of this
“criminal, and so his crime was greater than that of lending a
“ helping hand in the boiling and roasting. He was sentenced to


384


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ banishment for having taken part in a plot of murder without
“participating in the execution of the plot; but this would be too
“ mild a punishment. The sentence is therefore amended in this
“ wise : P'an Ming-hiao and Li Yuen-fang shall be punished
“according to the law on hacking and cutting somebody in order
“to take away his life, and that as accomplices who took an
“ active part in the perpetration ; that is to say, they shall be
“beheaded, without their sentence having to be subjected to any
“ revision” h

Considering that references to medical cannibalism are remarkably
numerous in books of all times, we become almost entitled to admit
that every leading work on the healing art must have contained
recipes with parts of the human body for chief ingredients. Li Shi-
chen wrote in his standard-work ; “ Chang Kao says in his I shwoh
“ that in the K h a i y u e n period the Fuhkien man Ch'en Tsang-khi
“ wrote in his Pen-ts^ao shih i, that human flesh is a remedy for
“ atrophy and debility, and that it was no rare occurrence in villages
“ to cut pieces of flesh from the thigh on behalf of sufferers of
“ such complaints. So, cutting one’s own thigh or liver occurred
“ already antecedent to ClFen, and this author is to be censured
“ for having written about the matter in his work without advocating
“ the erroneousness of it. In this my Pen-tiao 1 confine myself to
“merely touching upon the matter. Oh, our body and limbs, hair
“and skin, we got them altogether from our parents, and so


it

iw ?!i # ®f * Si-

2 ^ ^ , “ Medical Treatises”, in ten chapters, by Chang Kao ,

also known as Ki-ming , who lived under the Sung dynasty.


HUMAN FLESH AND GALL AS MEDICINES.


385


“ we have no right to maim or wound them. And could any parents,
“ even if dangerously ill, possibly desire their offspring to mutilate
“ their limbs, and make them eat their bones and flesh ? We have
“ here to do with ideas of stupid people. It is stated in Ho Meng-
“ ch^un’s ^ Yu tang lull, that Kiang Poh-’rh, when his mother was
“ill, cut flesh from his ribs and gave it her to eat, and yet no
“cure ensued. Then he prayed to the gods on her behalf, pro-
“ raising them to immolate his son as a thank-offering , and as
“ she regained her health, he killed his son, three years old. The
“ matter was reported to the Emperor T"ai Tsu (founder of the
“ Ming dynasty), who, indignant at his thus cutting short his pedigree
“and destroying thereby the natural laws, had him belaboured
“ with sticks and banished .... The Choh king luh of T^ao Kiu-
“ chhng says, that in times old and modern, soldiers on the war-
“ path have eaten human flesh, calling it flesh of thought or,
“occasionally, mutton of bipeds. But such things are unnatural
“ practices of insurgents, which cannot be quite eradicated” h

“Soldiers from the North often collect human gall on the battle-
“ fields, and apply it to wounds inflicted by metal, saying that
“it works most efficaciously; but no decoctions of drugs must be
“ used thereafter, as else inflammation is produced. And if other
“ medicaments have been applied to the wounds before, such gall
“ must not be used. Gall thus collected on battle-fields for help in

1 A statesman of the fifteenth and the sixteenth century, bearing also the name
of Tszg-yuen dP-TC

te a # « »i B a ja 11 . T' i! . » T f 91 . at ^ m

W ^ « A . 4 ^ - =2. 11. 38


25


.3S6 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ emergenies, may be used also in a dried state without the laws of
“ rectitude being violated thereby. On such occasions of destruction
“ of life, when warriors are allowed to kill, they take the gall of
“ the slain and drink it in spirits, thinking it to have a strengthening
‘•etlect. But such deceptive practices may be in vogue in the army
“ ever so much, yet a man of noble principles does not indulge in
'• them” k The Pea-tino kung muh declares fresh human gall to be
a salutary medicine for stubborn fevers that have troubled patients
for years, as also for serious disturbances of digestion, in which
cases it should be mixed with uncooked glutinous rice and some
musk L “ Alternate fevers of a stubborn character, caused by spectres,
“ are cured immediately if a mixture of human gall, cinnaber, male
“yellow, deer-musk, and still other ingredients is placed in the
“left nostril of a male patient, and in the right of a female one;
“ and two patients are curable with one such pill” k

Trom the fact that the cutting off Hesh fnmi the body to cure
parents with, is, as we saw on page 384, mentioned by Ch"en
Tsang-khi, we have to infer that this practice occurred prior to the
eighth century. It must, however, have been then rather rare than
general. Indeed, we have read through some twenty notices about
filial persons of lioth sexes living before the Christian era ; through
some sixty bearing upon the two centuries during which the
Later Han dynasty occupied the throne, and through upward of
two hundred in the period which lies between the reign of this
House and that of T'ang ; — and in none have we found the matter
in question mentioned or even touched upon. Those ciphers show
clearly, that it was the time of the Later Han dynasty in which the
cultivation of hi ao or filial piety was carried to the high pitch it has
maintained ever since, but that then four centuries still had to elapse
ere the degeneration of that national virtue into fanatic self-mutilation


2 Chiipter 52, 1. 38.

5A#. mm.


PEOPLE CURING THEIR PARENTS WITH THEIR FLESH.


387


became an accomplished social evil. Instances of its being perpetrated
on behalf of parents or paternal grandparents dangerously ill, and by
women tor their husband’s parents, crop up in the literature of the
T%ng dynasty, in particular in the local chi, or special works on
the several subdivisions of the Empire; but we find them also in
considerable numbers in the Standard Histories,

Such filial “ thigh-cutting” \ as the practice is generally named,
is stated to have been rewarded in many cases officially with public
marks of distinction, consisting of honorary inscriptions over the
house-door or the village-gate. Under subsequent dynasties, especially
under that of Ming, instances of such rewards are recorded with
overwhelming frequency. They may be gleaned from the chi and
the Histories by hundreds, nay thousands; and yet they surely are
a dwindling minimum against those that were never committed to
writing, or fell into eternal oblivion by the books, in which they were
recorded, being lost. The flesh was cut mostly off the thigh or the
posterior, but also off a fore-arm or upper arm, from the fingers, breast
or ribs. We find cases of blood having been tapped for the same
purpose, and livers cut out. In by far most instances it remains
unmentioned how the flesh was prepared; but it is sometimes
stated that porridge or broth ' was made of it, or that it was mixed
with medicine. We read of filial sons, daughters and daughters-in-
law taking out their own brains, or cutting out a bone for its marrow ;
but we think such reports to be fruits of mere fancy and absurd
exaggeration.

There exist, of course, no reasons whatever to doubt that it
was in the first place the ascription of therapeutic virtues to parts
of the human body, that prompted such filial self-mutilation. The
fact that books frequently make the surgeons declare the patients
incurable unless with human flesh, here clears away the last shadow
of doubt. It must not be overlooked however, that often also we
read of thigh-cutters invoking Heaven beforehand, solemnly asking
this highest power to accept their own bodies as a substitution for
the patients’ lives they wanted to save; their mutilation thus assuming
the character of self-immolation. Now and then we learn, that
such paragons of filial virtue afterwards had apparitions of divine
messengers, informing them that Heaven, moved by their filial


;388


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


conduct, granted them a prolongation of life. Heaven thus bestowing
favours upon such worthies, it is no wonder that its Sons followed
its example. They have in fact, rewarded them throughout all
centuries, granting them eulogistic sentences to suspend over their
doors, as also honorary gates, and places in otScial temples specially
erected for worship of the filial; but, as we saw on page 751
of Book I, the present reigning dynasty has, in its Constitution,
abolished such official encouragements in the case of sons. It could
freely do so without abjuring its own principle of upholding by
all possible means the cultivation of hiao, thigh-cutting being no
institution of the ancients, and thus perfectly liable to proscription as
heterodox.

After all, it is hardly saying too much that, in point of their
animistic medical art, the Chinese are thoroughly anthropophagous.
With undiminished prodigality the chi supply us with instances
of filial cures with human flesh, which occurred under the reigning
dynasty. Honourable mention is often made in the Peking Gazette
of such cases, and in May 1874 a memorial in that state-paper
records how the Deputy Governor of Honan petitioned in reference
to a dutiful daughter, who cut a piece of flesh from her arm, in
order to cure her father of his sickness. In the present Holy
“ Dynasty filial piety rules the Empire, and this doctrine originates
“in the female sex. In the district of Chin-yang there lived a daughter
“remarkable for her filial piety, whose name after her marriage
“was Mrs. Wang. In the fifth year of the Hien fung period
“(1855) this young lady’s father became dangerously ill, and his
“filial daughter, lighting incense sticks, announced (to Heaven) her
“ desire to sacrifice her own body for her father’s sake. After this
“ announcement, her father’s illness increasing, and his physicians
“ being unable to cure him, this filial daughter secretly cut off a
“piece of flesh from her arm, and putting it into the medicine
“prescribed, gave it to her father, who, on eating it, immediately
“recovered. Some time afterwards the daughter’s female attendants,
“ perceiving the mark on her arm, questioned her as to the cause,

“and learned from her the facts alreadv stated. There was not a

1/

“ single individual of all those who heard the narrative who was

“not struck with amazement”. The young lady in question was

shortly afterwards married, but her father dying some ten years

afterwards, she “pined away and died of grief”. The petition from
which the above quotation is made, prays the Emperor to order
that a Triumphal Arch be erected to her memory, as was usual


MEDICAL VIRTUES OF HUMAN HAIR.


3S9


in cases when extreme filial piety had been displayed; and the
petition was granted

As a curiosity in Chinese therapeutical anthi’opophagy, we may
mention that newly castrated eunuchs are advised to eat their
own cut-off member for a speedy close of the wound. Li Shi-chen
writes : “ The penis is no medicine, but 'Fao Kiu-chTng wrote in
“ his CJioh king lull, that in Hang-cheu a certain Shen committed
“ adultery, and as the matter transpired, drew a knife and cut off
“ his male organ. A month passed away, and still the open wound
“ continued bleeding, till some one had the penis sought for ; he
“ triturated it, and the patient having taken the powder in alcohol,
“ was healed in a few days. With a view to that event, those who
“ descend into the silkworm-rooms (the harems) must not be ignorant
“ of this method. So I adjoin it here”

If the Chinese, acting on the principle that parts of the human
body contain vitality and animation, consider them highly useful
in therapeutics and in their prophylactic art, it is only natural
they should ascribe medical virtues also to such parts as can be
obtained without infliction of wounds, and to secretions and excretions.
Hair, nails and teeth were admitted in the list of medicines with
so much the more readiness as they manifest life and animation
by their growth. According to the Pen-ts'ao king of Shen Nung,
human hair in general brings back into the individual the operation
of his shenh Han Pao-shing * connects this theory with the idea,
traceable to the extract from the I guen which we gave on page
238, that human hair may become eels, as also with a statement
of Clren Tsang-khi, according to which hairs of living men, if hung
about in the trees, scare away birds from the fruits. Moreover, as
Li Shi-chen remarks, “ hairs are the rests of the blood”, that is,
of the fluid especially identified with the soul. “ When buried in

1 Dennys, The Folk-lore of China, pace 09.

2 Alts#®**.

* IDf »') » . If » ie DR . T' «; 0 iSj%iliH;WT

ch. 52, 1. 37.

renowned physician of the tenth century, li\ing in Sze-chaven.
He wrote a Herbarium of that country, the Shuh pcn-h'ao , in twenty hooks.


390


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ the ground”, thus he goes on to saj, “ hairs do not rot in a thousand
“ years, and when eaten by mistake, they may change in the belly
“ into insects that cause vesicles” h All those ideas make it certain
enough that hairs are considered to live and to be animated, and we
cannot, accordingly, be far away from the truth when we ascribe
their alleged medical virtue to that belief.

“ When Li Tseh”, a high statesman who lived from 584 — 669,

“ was attacked by a virulent disease, the doctor asserted that some
“beard-ashes might cure him. The emperor himself cut off some
“ of his own beard, which, mixed with medical herbs, effected the
“ cure And a grandee of the Sung dynasty, Lii I-kien, being
“ ill, the emperor Jen Tsung said : ‘ According to the ancients, whisker-
“ hair has health-restoring virtues. I will cut off some of mine and
“ give it him to mix in his medicines, as a testimony of the
“ warm feelings I cherish for him ’ ”

Authors, regularly copying each other’s dictions, agree that hair
cures costiveness, obstructions in the urinal canal, and convulsions
of babies. Nose-bleeding is stopped immediately by snuffing up some
hair-ashes. Hiccough, and wounds and tumors of all sorts are cured
by hair, and so are, according to Li Shi-chen, diseases of the blood,
on account of hair being remains of the blood. “Liu Kiiin-ngan
“ took his own hair with its dandruff, and burned these ingredients
“ separately, so that their natural qualities remained (in the ashes),
“ of which he then took doses of three pills a little larger than
“peas, calling them 'medicine making the tsing return’. Thus did
“ he prevent his head from turning grey” \ This extract removes
the last doubt that strengthening of the soul or its tsing is at the
bottom of the use of hair in the therapeutical art. Dandruff, too, heals
sundry complaints ; and T'ao Hung-king wrote “ that in his time,
“ they used that of contented and corpulent persons, their dandruff

^ ■ Pen-ts~ao kang mith, ch. 52, 1. 2.

Books of the T ang D 3 ’nasty, ch. 93, 1. 9.

Si ^ 411 . Pen-tn'ao hang )nuh, ch, 52, 1. 3i.

4m a' fill# , 4 « IF tt , # » s


HUMAN TKETH AND NAILS USED AS MEDICINES.


391


“ in particular being good for pills *. Among the people”, thus
he states further, “ mothers simmer for their babies hens’eggs, mixing
“ hairs combed from the father’s head with the yolk, which they then
“boil for a long time, thus obtaining a juice for their babies
“ curing phlegm, hot fever, and all sorts of complaints” b Li Shi-chen
gives some seventy recipes in which hair, hair-ashes, or dandruff
enter as principal ingredients — a respectable number, indeed.

Ashes of human teeth, mixed with some musk and alcohol, are
used internally by sufferers from small-pox and other complaints;
and calcined teeth of foxes, swine, dogs etc., in syrup, pass for
first-rate health-preservers. The therapeutic value of nails of the
fingers and the toes seems to be referable to the belief that, as
Li Shi-chen says, “ they are the remains or appendices of the tendons
“and the external organs of the gall; moreover, the Ling cJi^u king
“says that the liver corresponds with the nails b According to Kheu
“ Tsung-shih \ “ fine scrapings from the nails, if snuffed up, imme-
“ diately stop nose-bleeding, and nails of whomsoever are good for
“ the purpose” And Li Shi-chen teaches, that “ they accelerate
“ childbirth and expel the placenta ; they act salutarily upon urine,
“cure blood-urine and diseases caused by the Yin and the Yang
“ taking each other’s place, as also internal catarrh ; and they remove
“ cataract from the eyes” b And Ch^en Tsang-khi says : “ Take nail-
“ powder of a pregnant woman, and put a little in your eyes; it
“ will then remove therefrom the cataract-film”


e 4 " « # ® 4 a It » -T- « . ffl * « w a

Ibid., 1. 3,

JS IE - '■


4 , an J-'sculapius who flourished in the first quarter of the
twelfth century, uuthor of the Pcn-tbao yen i 1^. 'iffj or Ample Ex-
plication of the Vegetable Kingdom, in thiee chapters.

5 # ift ^ . i: X A ^

ntuli, ch. 52, 1. 8.

Mg ^ X T SS ^ f ij ^ ^ I# # ^ .


392 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

Li Shi-chen gives us fifty recipes based on all that quack
wisdom. Remarkable is the following one: “Always cut yourfinger-
“ nails on a k e n g-c h'^e n day, and those of your toes on a k i a h-
“wu day, and calcine the cuttings every year on the 16th. day
“of the seventh moon; mix the ashes with water, and drink them
“ up, for thus the three death-causing influences and the nine sorts
“ of vermin shall be destroyed in you. This method is called : the
“decapitation of the three death-causing influences. It is also said
“ that those influences move through the two hands on k i a h-y i n
“ days, so that it is on these that the finger-nails ought to be cut ;
“ and as they move about the feet on k i a h-w u days, the nails ot
“ the toes should be then cut”

Still more disgusting is the practice of treating the sick and
the wounded with human secretions. Not all these are allotted a
place in the Chinese Pharniacopoeia. Tears are declared poisonous,
being apt to give a child cataract, should they drop on its eyes
out of the mother’s. Sweat, too, is venemous, and may produce
boils or ulcers; as well as the blood, it is produced by the
heart, so that one who cannot sweat has no blood, and a bloodless
person does not perspire. Wax from the ears is recommended in
sundry cases, but exclusively for external use. Mixed with excrements
of earth-worms, it is rubbed on bites of snakes and insects. Wounds
are healed with ear-wax of the patient himself, mixed with scrapings
of his nails; it is deemed good also for hot water blisters and boils, and
more particularly for ear-complaints. For external use are also prepara-
tions from phlegm and spittle. The reputed medical value of these secre-
tions is evinced by the nice names given them by leeches and phar-
maceutics, viz. “ling fluid”, and , “ s h e n water”>

they being, as Li Shi-chen says, “modifications of the khi possessed
of t s i n g” This learned author recommends washing one’s eyes
every morning with one’s own saliva, and rubbing them continuously
with the fingers and thumbs after having licked the nails, this


♦ 0 flV (P

Note that the word kiah, a term in the denary cycle u&ed for the division of time
Book I, p. 103), has al-o the meaning of nail.

2 ® 75^ A ^ ^ ^ ^


HUMAN PHLEGM, SALIVA, AND MILK AS MEDICINES.


393


being a good expedient to sharpen the eye-sight. Persons in coma or
swoon are resuscitated by some one spitting vehemently into their
face and biting their heels and the nails of their fingers and
thumbs, gently calling to them all the while. The Pen-ts'ao hang
muh gives four recipes for boils or wens and snake-bites, in which
the patient’s own saliva, or that of others, is the main substance.

Life-lengthening and curing power is ascribed also to human milk.
“ Medical men”, says Li Shi-chen, “conceal its true name, and
“call it sien-wine. It may enter into the composition of medicines
“ only when it is that of a woman at the birth of her first-born son,
“ or that of a healthy woman” h It cures inflamed eyes, atrophy,
debility of the viscera, etc., softening also the skin and making it
white. x\s a medicament, it is mixed sometimes with the excrements
of sparrows. “ T"ao Hung-king relates of one Chang Ts^ang of the
“ Han dynasty, who, though old and toothless, kept a hundred
“ wives and concubines, and always fed on human milk, with this
“ result that he lived upward of a hundred years, blessed with
“ a body as corpulent as a pumpkin” Ho Shang-chi, a dignitary
who flourished in the first half of the fifth century, “ had consumption,
“ and drank women’s milk for several years, thus restoring his health” h
“ Li Shi-chen says, that the History of the South contains, moreover,
“ an instance of an old man in Jang-chdng, who reached the age
“ ot two hundred and forty by nothing else than drinking the milk
“ of the wives of his great-grandsons” *.

The reasons why milk is deemed to be health-preserving and
health-restoring, are to be sought for in its supposed identity with
the blood. “ What are, thus says Kheu Tsung-shih, the reasons why
“human milk has so many virtues as a remedy for the eyes?
“ Well, a man’s heart produces blood; when his liver contains
“ blood and his spleen receives blood, he is able to see, and when


B A ''Si

History of the Soutli, cli. 30, I. 2'. Books of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 60, 1. 5.

‘ a## 0, W

. Pen-ts'au kumj muh, ch. 52, 1. 23.


394


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY A\D FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ water enters into the female menses, the blood in the latter is
“ formed. That which forms milk above, forms the menses beneath,
“ which proves that milk is blood. Why then should milk have
“no proper elFect when dropped into the eyes?”^ We hope the
reader may be clever enough to decipher for himself this piece of
learnedness, for we are at a loss how to explain it.

Having seen in chapter XII, 2, that the seeds of certain plants are
highy valued in leechcraft and life-prolonging art as special seats of the
vitality of those plants, we might expect that the same train of
thought would lead the Chinese to ascribe restorative virtue to
human seed. “Li Shi-chen writes-. The bran of the khi, which
“ builds up the body, changes into semen, which accumulates in
“ the gate of life, the latter being the mansion of the semen and
“ of the blood. Without blood no semen is formed, and when there
“is no khi, the semen is not nourished. Hence, when the blood
“is abundant, the semen flourishes, and when the khi accumulates,
“ the semen is present to its full amount” It is perhaps owing
to their thus considering it to be a product of the blood and of
the khi or soul, that the Chinese denote semen by the same
word tsing which, as the reader knows, signifies the vital force of
the soul, without which the soul cannot act. But it will rather
astonish us to hear, that semen occupies no place of significance
in therapeutics. Mixed with the excrements of hawks or eagles, it
is used to heal skin-scars and pimples on the face, and as a balsam
for wounds, hot water blisters and sundry eruptions; but this is
nearly all the use that is made of it. Nevertheless, the conviction
that semen possesses life-lengthening virtues was not wanting in
Li Shi-chen’s time, for in mentioning that the semen of men and
women was then used on a large scale for sorcerous purposes, he
declares “ the eating of such sordid dregs, in order to prolong the


STSjfe. Wolfit.

l&. i!* » ift i-t S'l JfiL

ifc . ja » « a 7; # fi- “

Ifei . Uc M. ^ M ^ M \ M ‘


THE PIACENTA, AND ITS MEDICAL VIRTUES. 395

“ natural duration of life, to be the greatest nonsense and stupidity”
Much more medical effect is ascribed to the placenta. “Wu Khiu
“ said, that in the old recipes of the purple river car (a name for
“ the placenta among medical sages) no distinction was made between
“ that of a male and a female child, but that recent generations

“ had begun using the former for male patients, and the latter for

“ female ; others, however, opined that they ought to be used in
“ a reversed sense. The best are those produced at a first delivery;
“ the next in quality, also good for use, are those from strong and
“ robust, healthy women. The placenta ought to be washed in
“ clean rice-water ; then, placed in a bamboo basket, it must be
“ immersed in a constant stream of water, till the fibres of the
“ film are washed away ; and next, after one washing with milk
“ and odorous spirits, it must be placed in a hamper of wicker,
“ dried in the sun, and pulverized. Some roast this powder on
“ porcelain ; others cook the placenta in alcohol, and then knead

“ it into a soft mass ; or they steam it in an alembic, knead it

“and sun it, and those treated in this way are considered the best.
* According to Tung Ping the prevailing method of cooking the
“ placenta in alcohol and roasting it on fire, or removing the fibres of
“ the film, is a great mistake, for if the after-birth is roasted or boiled,
“ the child in most cases cannot be brought up. Hence, steaming
“ and kneading it, and mixing it thereon with medicine, is the best
“method; and as the fibers and the film are the first genuine khi
“ in a coagulated form, they must not be severed from it” ^


2 if iw' a physician in tlie first half of tlie twelfth century; author of a
Ts'iVi yen fang , or Collection of tested Recipes.

^ MiJ ^ ® ^ ^ A ^ Wo

^ W M'J A- -& • > 1- 34.


396


THE SOUL IN PH'LOSOPHr AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Ch^en Tsang-klii says, “ that in cases of atrophy settled in the
“khi of the blood, or when a woman has consumption or a
“ wrinkled blackish face, or a disease in the abdomen or the flesh,
“ connected with slow atrophy, the placenta must then be worked,
“in a quite clean condition, into dainties of any sort by way of
“ dumplings, and thus given the patient to eat, but without the
“woman knowing it” k Wu Khiu also says: “it cures all kinds of
“ consumption in men or women, as also quiet mental derangement
“ and epilepsy, convulsions and spasms, loss of memory and idiocy.
“ It gives rest to the heart, nourishes the blood, increases the breath,
“and strengthens the tsing”®.

“ The placenta, thus adds Li Shi-chen, is mentioned by Ch^en
“Tsang-khi in his Pea-tiao s/tih i\ but only few people before
“ him made use of it. In recent days it has come into vogue
“since i\lr. Chu of Tan-khi discussed its merits; and since Kwah
“ Ts'ang and \V u Khiu began to make a medicament of it, known
“ as very generant pills (see infra), it has made its way through
“ the world on a still more extensive scale. It is stated in the Books
“ of the Sui Dynasty that the women in Liu-kiu, on giving birth
“ to a child, always devour the placenta ’ ; and Chang Shi-ching
“ says in the Riien yiu luh, that the Liao in the eiglit Kwei regions,
“ when a male child is born, roast the placenta in a mixture of
“ sundry dainties, then convoking the nearest kindred to eat it.
“ But such practices remind one of animals that eat their placenta
“ on littering, and they do not belong to the human race. In the
“ Sino ’r/i fang or Medicaments for Babies, by the hand of IVui
“ Hing-kung k it is said: ‘The placenta should be stored away in a
“ felicitous spot under the salutary influences of the sky or the
“ moon, deep in the ground, and with earth piled up over it care-
“ fully, in order that the child may be ensured a long life. If it is
“ devoured by a swine or dog, the child loses its intellect ; if
“insects or ants eat it, the child becomes scrofulous; if crows


^ # jfil ^ M ^

3 Compare ch. 81 of that work, I. 12.

4 A high officer, who died in 074.


THE PLACENTA AND MENSES AS MEDICINES. 397

“ or magpies swallow it, the child will have an abrupt or violent
“ death ; if it is cast into the fire, the child incurs running sores.
“ It is also forbidden to defile with it any wells in the vicinity of
“ a temple dedicated to the tutelary divinity of the soil, or any
“ furnaces, streets or lanes” h

From a list of placenta-recipes, gleaned by Li Shi-chen from
earlier works, we see that certain famous “river car pills” cure
debility and atrophy of women, phthisis, etc. The “ very generant
pills”, mentioned above, further the birth of boys, increase deliveries,
and are of good avail at ditficult childbirth, or at irregular men-
struation. They bring back life into people on the point of dying,
and they are highly salutary for the sexual organs, sharpening also
the ears and eyes, and prolonging life. It is for that great generant
power that they bear their name. Medicines with the placenta as
main ingredient are good also for lunacy, convulsions, epilepsy, etc.

Still, water found after seven or eight years in a pot in which
a placenta was buried, is useful for making precious mixtures for fever
and stomach-disease, such water being deemed to be a transformation
of the placenta. The Southerners hide placentas in the ground for
this purpose, placing, moreover, sundry other ingredients in the pot,
to increase the medical power. The umbilical cord, too, is highly
valued as a febrifuge, and as a prophylactic against small-pox.

Seeing the loathsome excretions of childbirth in so high esteem
with China’s medical world of the past and the present, it can
no more astonish us that curing and healing powers are ascribed
also to female menses. “Nowadays”, says Li Shi-chen, “sorcerous
“ arts are practised by some doctors of medicine, who befool the


398


THE SOUJ. IX PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION


“ simple-minded with roll of drums. Their arts come to this, that
“ they take the first menses of virgins and swallow them, calling
“ that stuff precursory natural red minium. Simple minds credit
“ them, and swallow such sordid stuff as an occult medicine, thus
“ incurring occasionally scarlet fever. In every respect such horrid
“ things are to be sighed at” '. In spite of this poignant fulmination
hurled in the face of quack-doctors, our respectable, most highly
learned medical ignoramus does not himself refrain from giving in
his standard work a dozen prescriptions prepared from the menses
of girls, and from the fibres to be found therein. Those prescriptions
teach us, that the ashes of menses are especially good for fever,
convulsions of children, and wounds inflicted with poisoned arrows,
or by tigers and wolves. Ointments prepared from menses are
rubbed on boils and ulcers, or on wounds incurred while skinning
a horse; and so on.

Dirt scraped from the teeth is recommended for snake-bites and
stings of insects, and for splinters that cannot be extracted, as it
prevents the formation of ulcers No excretions are made a more
extensive use of than faeces and urine. “The people close to
“city-markets”, says T%o Hung-king, “take empty j.'irs, close them,
“ and place them in the dung, thus obtaining after a series of
“years a very black and bitter fluid (filtered through the pores?),
“ which they call yellow dragon-soup. This is good for pestilential
“ disease, and cures the moribund. Ta Ming ^ says: Cut wet bamboo
“ in the twelfth month, draw off the green bark, and gather juice
“ by soaking the tubes in dung; this juice will cure natural fever and
“ empoisonment, and it is called purity of dung. If black pods are
“thus soaked, or sugar-cane, they cure natural fevers, and are
“ called human internal yellow. According to Chu Chen-heng ,
“ internal yellow is to be made in the following way : — Take a


IbiJ., 1. 25.

2 Ibid., 1. 29.


known also by the name of Jih-hwa Q 3 ^ . a learned physician,
flourishing when the Sung dynasty ascended the throne. He wrote a medical work
in twenty chapters, entitled Jih-hwa dm kia pcn-ts^ao 0
Jeh-hwa’s Herbal for Families.


FAECES AND URINE AS MEDICINES.


399


“ bamboo tube, put some powder of sweet herb (sugar-cane ?) into
“ it, and plug the open ends with bamboo wood ; then sink it into
“ a dung-jar in the winter months, and take it out of it in the
“ beginning of the spring, to hang it up in an airy spot and leave
“ it there in the shade to dry, on which you may open the bamboo,
“ take the herb out, and dry it for use. And Wang Ki ^ says :
“ Take braided leaves, such as are used to wrap dumplings in, or
“ some cotton paper ; lay out some yellow clay upon it, and sprinkle
“ dung-sap over it, which, filtering through the clay, may be caught
“ up as a clear juice in a new jar. This jar, eovered with a dish,
“ is to be buried firmly in the ground for a year, and when taken
“ out, the contents will be found as limpid as well-water, and
“ devoid of the slightest bad odour. The older this water is, the
“better its qualities are; at any rate it is much superior to that
“ which is obtained by soaking bamboo tubes” This esthetical
brew is drunk against fever-delirium, fits of insanity, virulent
eruptions of the epidermis, pulmonary consumption, hemorrhage, etc.

Ashes of faeces, and faeces and urine fermented with some boiled
rice for a long time, are prescribed for phthisis and dryness of the
bones (?). Burned excrements, used internally, stop nose-bleeding, and
dried excrements are highly commended for stomach-complaints and
all sorts of eruptions, including small-pox ; the sap of excrements
is an antidote, etc. Fresh faeces are applied to the bites of rabid dogs.


1 V3E , also known as Sheng-clii , an .Escnlapins in the first half

of the sixteenth century. Author of the Pcn-ts’ao hwui jiien
or Collective Chapter-! on Botanv, in twenty chapter.', and of several other writings.

# . # ft tt M ifS S . =8 ® M Si ® » 5E *

AM H

'M-ASBss. ±mm

iS. « IS , ± a « ± . ii * tt » ± ± . iS, i» it

kang muh, ch. 52, 11. 10 seq.


400


THE SOUE IN PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Urine, especially of young boys, is used for the same categories
of complaints. Head-ache, according to T"ao Hung-king, may be
cured by drinking several cups of it, and Kheu Tsung-shih says
that a cupful of tepid urine of a boy should be given to women
after delivery, to expel the blood accompanying the after-birth
Cliu Chen-heng relates the following incident: “I often saw an
“ old woman over eighty, looking, however, not older than forty.
“ I asked how it was she looked so young; and I was then apprised
“ that she had suffered under a virulent disease, in which somebody
“advised her to drink human urine; and having done so for more
“ than forty years, she was still strong and vigorous in spite of
“ her great age, and exempt from all disease” ^ According to Li
Shi-chen, “ urine being the same matter as blood, it has a salt
“ taste, accelerates the circulation of the blood, and cures blood-
“ diseases” h Besides for head-ache, it is deemed good for sore
throat and fever, for worms, hemorrhage and constipation. The
recipes make a clear distinction between the operation of the urine
of others and that of the patient himself; and male persons ought
to use that of females, but the fair sex that of men and boys.

The list of urinary recipes is long. In the event of a devil possessing
a person and making him ill, he is to drink old urine in a far
state of decay, from which the loathsome stench has been expelled
a little by boiling. The contents of jars used as common urinals,
are given to patients labouring under unquenchable thirst, but
without their being told what they take, else the effect is naught.
Sunstroke is cured by placing around the navel of the patient a
ring of clay and urinating in it, so that the temperature of the
fluid may get through the navel into the belly. So, also, it is a very
old rescript to urinate swooned persons upon their face, to make
them come round. Wounds and bruises, and bites of snakes and
dogs are washed with boys’ urine or with that of the patient
himself, who is also to drink it in order to stop the effusion ot


l Ibid , 1. "14.

^ • Ibid.

^ ■ Ibid.


URINE-SEDIMENT AND UREA IN MEDICINE.


401


blood and heal the w'ound. For bites of snakes and insects, women’s
urine is preferred, and if old and putrid, it is considered to be
better than fresh. To cure deafness, urine is trickled into the ears.
Inflamed eyes are washed with it. When a fetus dies in the womb,
it is expulsed by giving the mother the boiled urine of her husband
to drink; and labouring women drink urine to alleviate their pains
and accelerate their delivery.

White sediment of urine, called “ internal white of men”
is scooped out from the large jars well known to the noses of
travellers in China, which all classes keep in the house-rooms for the
use of the family, and the putrid contents of which they sell
for dung. This stuff is dried in the sun or in the wind, and used
for much the same ends as urine itself. Urea, called autumn-stone
or autumn-ice ^ from its being fabricated, on certain superstitious
grounds, exclusively in autumn, is likewise a substitute for urine.

People of later times”, says Li Shi-chen, “ prepare by means of
“ fire a white substance from internal white of men, which they
“call autumn-stone, saying it is produced from the remains of
“the khi of the semen” h In this passage, the animistic basis of
the belief in the medical virtue of urea and urine is obvious.
Urea is much used by sensualists to stir up their sexual lusts, it
being considered to be imbued with yang matter on account of
the affinity, stated above, of urine with blood or the soul. It is
fabricated by the coction of urine, and by boiling the dregs thus
formed, reiteratedly with clean water, till a snow-white sediment is
obtained. “This, if taken for a long time, is a medicine for diseases
“ of all sorts. It strengthens the marrow of the bones, restores the
“vital force (tsing) and the blood, opens the heart, increases
“ energy, and restores the temperature of the body, giving a
“ downward course to the sexual passions. He who swallows it long
“ enough, will always have under the navel a fiery or warm sensation
“ curing all cold diseases” h It is taken mostly as a powder, or in


' Alt' a-

' ' 8 -

‘ -IS.

® , T 7t 'IS iS A M K T ® tn A ® K ®

^ ii- 1. 19-


26


40-2


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


pills. Tt is declared to prolong life and keep the individual
young, especially when mixed beforehand with some milk of male
persons.

Whereas parts of the human body owe their important place among
medicines and prophylactics to the animation and vital power they
are deemed to contain, it follows almost necessarily that such a place
should be allotted also to the bones of the dead, for we need not
repeat here again the inveterate belief of the Chinese in the animation
of such human remains.

The head especially being believed to be animated, and mereover,
identified with Heaven (see pp. 76 seq), the skull naturally passes
for a seat of the soul which Heaven has infused into the being.
Hence it is termed in medical science : “ the covercle of the celestial
ling” Its animation is thought to be particularly strong at the
sagittal suture, through which the heavenly soul enters the individual
before or at his birth, when it is still an open fontanel. Li Shi-chen
declares this spot to be “the place where the soul-powers accumulate”*.
On the authority of earlier authors, he enumerates several diseases
that may be cured with preparations from skull-bones. Against
consumption, for instance, he recommends the following prescription
from a renowned medical work of the T'ang dynasty ^ :

“Take three ounces of roasted human skull-bone, and ten
“ounces of musk ot the musk-deer; pound this mixture with a
“ thousand pestle-strokes, and make pills of it as big as t'u n g
“ tree seeds ; swallow seven such pills at once with some beverage
“ frequently every day ; then, if a blue artery protrudes on your
“ breast, it should be pricked with a needle, and if the colour
“ of the blood is not black, you will be cured in seven days” *.
“ Ch'en Tsang-khi says : The best bones are those that are


2 Ch- -2, 1. 32.

3 Namely from the .Via’ sin pi hilt fong ^ “Ready and quick

Medicaments to have always with you”, by Chang Wen-chung ^ ^ » t'ourt-

physician of the empress Wu, originally in three chapters. See the Old Books of the
Tang Dynasty, ch. 191, 1. 13.

ttj ^ Jlii #1* ^ , jfiL ^ ^ M ^ 0 ^


HUMAN BONES AS MEDICINES.


403


“ thoroughly rotten. A fragment of three fingers’ breadth should
“be toasted over a dull, smothered fire for a night, till the
“rancid, filthy stench is entirely expelled; with some boy’s urine it
“must then be cooked in an earthen pot for some time, and the
“urine be poured off; subsequently, this bone is to be kept for a
“time under the house in a pit of one ch'^ih, and the hwun,
“contained in the medicine then made of it, will have the best
“ effect in bringing back the s h e n into patients. For a male
“person female bone must be taken, and for a female person male
“ bone” b

Other bones may, of course, have quite as well a salutary effect
upon the constitution of man. “Calcine bones of the dead, pulverize
“them, and drink three ts'^ien of the powder in alcohol when
“your stomach is empty; then, if you receive a bastonade, your
“ skin will not blister, nor any tumors be produced by the blows.
“ And if you take the powder for a long time, your epidermis
“will thicken b Fragments of bones of the dead, burned and rubbed
“into mixtures, are a s hen-containing medicine for eruptions
“on the shins in the regions where longevity reigns” b Though
allotting to these and other dictions of former doctors places in
his renowned standard work, Li Shi-chen declares himself no zealous
partisan for medical necrophagy. “The ancients”, thus he argues,
“ considered interment of uncovered bones to be a work of philanthropy
“ and virtue, and still such bones are gathered for medicaments
“ for the sake of gain ! Is this a humane application of our art ?
“ Dogs eat no dogs’ bones ; may then men eat the bones of his


^^1 “Collection of important Things from the Forest of Meditine'’, by Wang Si

, perhaps a grandee who died in 1488 and whose biography occurs in ch. 174
of the History of the Ming Dynasty.

3 'Ji ® A ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ f $


404


THE SOUL I>i PHILOSOPHY ANH FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘•fellow men?”^ To emphasize the viciousness of such practices, he
appeals to the following episode, recounted by Twan Ch'ing-shih :
“ A person in King-cheu, named Chang TsTli-cliing, was an able
“curer of wounds and cuts. A military man with an injured shin-
“bone applied to him, to be cured. He gave him some medicinal
“ spirits to drink, and then ripping up his flesh, removed a piece
“of broken bone, two fingers long; then he closed the wound
“ with some ointment, and in a few days everything was in its
“ former good condition. Then two years passed away, on which
“the pain in the shin suddenly returned, and sent the patient
“ back to his surgeon to ask his advice. ‘ Whenever the bone I'
“extracted suffers from cold’, thus spoke the latter, ‘you must
“feel pain; look it up immediately’. It was found under the
“bed; and he ordered it to be washed with warm water and
“ to be put into some cotton, on which the pain vanished So
“great a spiritual sympathy”, thus Li Shi-chen exclaims, “was
“ displayed here ; who will now pretend that dry bones have no
“knowledge? This event must open the eyes of all who possess
“ humane feelings” h

Earth or dust from a cremation-place, being mixed with particles
of the ashes of the corpse, is deemed good to re-animate persons
lying in a trance or in a swoon, or labouring under any un-
consciousness ascribed to a departure of their soul. “ In cases of
“catalepsy, when the patient seems to be dead and recognizes
“nobody, two or three ts'ien of earth from a cremation-place
“should be triturated, and a hot water extract of it be poured


. Ibid.. I. 31.

wm.mw.

a a T.4 H ® a .» « 'll « sn ®! «"-

yoKj tsah tsu, ch. 5.

. Pen-ts'au kang inuh, ch. 52, 1. 32.


COFFIN-WOOD AND GRAVE-PLANTS AS MEDICINES.


405


“into his mouth, on which he wll come round immediately” h

It is probably owing to the general aversion, prevalent in ordinary
times and circumstances, to mutilation of the dead, that we read so
seldom of medicines made from undecayed corpses. Only one instance
of it has come under our notice, namely in the I yuen, which states
“ that the corpse of King Fang”, the great adept of occultism in
the first century before Christ, “ was still undecayed and complete
“in the I hi period (405 — 41S), and in every respect an undecayed,
“rigid body, so that, human flesh being good for medicine, the
“ soldiery cut him into pieces”

Before concluding this chapter, we may still call to mind that
most closely connected with medical anthropophagy on animistic
grounds, certain ideas and practices are which we mentioned in
our First Book, in the first place (see pp. 3:27 seq), that parts of
a coffin possess therapeutic virtue, and chips from it are used
as a soul-restoring medicine. We annotated also in that same place
of our work, and on some other pages {e.g. 381), that the cause
of that phenomenon is this, that a coffin or grave is deemed to
be thoroughly imbued with the shen of the corpse hidden in it,
and to form with that corpse one homogenous animated substance,
manifesting occasionally ling or soul-power. The reader further knows
that plants growing on graves are likewise deemed inhabited by
the souls of the buried. It is, in consequence, logical that to such
plants, too, medical virtues should be ascribed. “ Ch'en Tsang-khi
“states about herbs from the grave of a woman who died in childbed,
“ that they should be plucked for the sore ulcers of her baby ; without
“looking behind, a decoction should be made of them to wash the
“child with, which will be healed after being thus treated not more
“ than three times” h But we must remark here that the circum-
stance, known to our readers (see p. G5), that the soul in the grave
is considered to be the shen or yang soul, has caused leeches


^ ± ^ f'J • T S, sect. ch. 140.

^ 'M ^ ^ 'M ch.2i,

1 , 12 .


406 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

and pathologists to base the medical vdrtue of things derived from
a cottin or a grave, particularly on the reasoning that yang substance
neutralizes and destroys yin spirits or k w e i , and may therefore
easily expel these also from patients whom they possess or harass.
Such medicines therefore take us into the field of Exorcism, to
which we will devote Part IV of this Book.


CHAPTER XV.


ON APPARITIONS, AND THEIR INFLUENCE UPON THE FATE OF MAN.

Our readers will, no doubt, remember that it is an old belief
in China that the Universe is filled in all its parts with shen
and kwei, constituents, respectively, of the Yang and the Yin
or the two chief powers of the Cosmos, the dual operation of which
is the Tao or Course of the Universe, by which all creation, evolution
and destruction are produced (page 13). This great fundamental
tenet of Animistic Philosophy naturally implies that those shen
and kwei are the distributors of all good and evil, good and
evil being, indeed, direct emanations from the Yang and the Yin,
as well as everything that exists in the Universe. In other terms,
the shen and the kwei were of old the authors and regulators
of the good and the bad fate of everybody and everything.

The oldest direct reference to this belief occurs in the Yih king.
This Classic says: “Great men assimilate their happiness and mis-
fortunes with the kwei and the shen”^. One of the great
doctrines of cosmogonic Philosophy, viz. that the Yang embraces
more particularly the beneficient half of the Universe, and the Yin
the non-beneficient half, would enforce the inference upon us that
the shen, which are the yang spirits, are conceived to be exclu-
sively beneficial, the kwei or yin spirits, on the other hand,
to be evil ghosts. Por such immutable logic, however, the ancient
Chinese seem to have felt not much, for a fact it is that we
find both good and evil ascribed by them to the two categories
of spirits equally.

To prove that, in ancient China, the shen actually held a
position as evil spirits, we need only refer to the evidence of a
few old works. In the first place we may mention here the Chen li,
which acquaints us with a functionary denoted as “ the Court-


1 ^ A A # M ^ ^ 'lO, ^ ^


40S


THE SOUJi IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“yard Officer, whose task it was to shoot down the birds of bad
“omen to the royal residence, and who, when he had to do with
“a shen, had to shoot at it with a bow generally used for shooting
“at the moon during an eclipse, as also with wang arrows”'
which served for shooting at the eclipsed sun. The Khienlung
editors of that work are of opinion that the latter half of this passage
was interpolated by Liu Hin ^ a scholar of repute living about
the beginning of our era, the son of Liu Hiang. But still in this
case the fact remains, that shen deemed to be evil spirits and,
consequently, deserving to be shot at, were believed in in Liu
Hin’s time.

The curious Shan-hai hng, teeming with notes on all sorts
of marvellous, phantastic beings in countries near and distant,
a work for which scholars generally claim a very high age, also
makes mention of mischief-working shen. “In the mountains ot
“ Hwai-kiang celestial shen reside, which have the shape of a
“ bull or cow, eight legs, two heads, and a tail like that of a
“ horse. Wherever they appear, the region falls a prey to soldiery b
“The nine mountains between the Shi-hu mount and the Wu-
“ kao mount cover a distance of 6900 miles; their shen have
“forms human in every respect, but they possess goats’ horns.
“ Whenever they appear, wind, rain and water cause damage
“Shen named keng-fu move about constantly at a limpid, cool
“pond which emits light whenever they enter or quit it; and
“ when they appear, the realm or the dynasty is overthrown” '.

The Tso c/i^icen, in its turn, represents the shen as capable of
working evil as well as doing good, teaching us at the same time


* lE ft xt B ^ ^ .ft , ^10^ 01

Chapter 37, II. 43 seq.

~

Chapter II

M . s p HJc A :t fM # :io ^ . Mm ^ ;!lc

^ ■ Chapter IV.

MM Cliapter V.


THE S H E N MAY DO GOOD AS WELL AS HARM.


409


that they do so to punish crime and corruption, and to reward
virtue. “ In autumn, in the seventh month of the 3:2nd. year of
“ Ch Wang’s reign (b. C. 661)”, thus that work relates, “a shen
“descended in Shen (,a place in the state of Kwoh). Hwui, the
“ king, asked Kwo, the historiographer, what it came for, and he
“ replied ; ‘ When a state is going to flourish, luminous shen
“ (m i n g-s h e n) descend to see to the blessings bestowed on it,
“and when a state is tottering to its fall, the shen likewise
“ descend, to see to the evil inflicted on it. Thus it may occur that
“states flourish by apparitions of shen, or that they perish thereby,
“ and cases of both sorts have come to pass in all the reigns of the
“royal families of Yii, Hia, Shang and Chen’. The king now asked
“Kwo what he advised him to do. And the answer was-. ‘Present
“ to it its own proper offerings, which are those suited to the days
“on which it comes’. And the king did so.

“ After the historiographer was gone, he heard that the king of
“ Kwoh had asked that spirit for investiture (with new territory).
“So he returned, and spoke: ‘Kwoh will soon perish, for this realm
“consults the shen about people-oppressing measures’. The shen
“ had been in Shen for six months, when the Ruler of Kwoh
“ ordered the sacrificer Ying, the superintendent of the ancestral
“temple Khii, and the historiographer Yin to present a sacrifice
“to it, on which the shen promised to endow him with new
“territory. Yin, the historiographer, then said; ‘Oh, Kwoh must
“ perish ! I have heard that, when a state is to flourish, its Ruler
“ listens to his people, and when it is to perish, he listens to the
“shen. The shen are intelligent, correct and impartial, and they
“ adjust their acts to the conduct of men ; and therefore, how
“ could any new territory be obtained by Kwoh, a state so greatly
“lacking in virtue?” '


= + SIM

z-n. it0.


410


THE SOVL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


But for that all, if we admit that spectrophoby is as old as mankind,
and that the ancient Chinese had kwei long before they invented
shen (s. page 8), it logically follows that the part of malevolent
spirits must have been always acted amongst them especially by
kwei. The Tso cli'icen alone would quite suffice to prove this fact.
We read in it, for instance, in the record of events in the year
534 b.C. : “Tsze-ch'an of the state of Ching was delegated to Tsin,
“and found the Ruler of this kingdom in bad health. Han Siien-
“tsze received the visitor, and said to him, privately: ‘Our Ruler
“ has been lying ill now for three months ; we have been all run-
“ ning about to the several places of sacrifice, but his condition has
“got worse instead of better. Now he has dreamed that a yellow
“bear entered the door of his chamber; what evil kwei can
“that be?’”'. It seems that Tsze-ch%n was taken in his time
for a special expert in ghosts and spirits, for we read of him in
the same section of the Tso ch^u-en: “When he went to Tsin, Chao
“King-tsze asked him: ‘Can Poh-yiu have had the power to
“become a kwei (on his death)?’ ‘Yes’, was the reply. ‘When a
“ man is born, the first thing that develops in him is what we
“call the p'oh; after his p‘’oh has been produced, we denote the
“yang substance (that is in him) by the name of hwun. Things
“and matters of all sorts being thereupon used and handled by
“him, the tsing or energy of his soul increases, so that his
“hwun and his p'oh become strong, in consequence of which he
“comes into the possession of tsing quite sound and vigorous,
“acquiring in this way a shen or ming. When an ordinary
“ man or woman dies a violent death, the h w u n and the p'o h
“can continue to hang on that person, and thus they may form
“ a licentious evil being ; how much more may we expect something
“like that to have been the case with Liang Siao, who was even a
“descendant of our former monarch, the Ruler Muh, and a grandson
“of Tsze-liang, and a son of Tsze-’rh — all magnates of our realm

year of the rulei' Chao’.s reign.


KWEI AND SHEN MAY BE EVIL SPIRITS.


411


“successively engaged in its government for three generations ! Ching
“is, in fact, not rich and great; it is even called an insignificant
“state; yet a family which has held there the reins of government
“ for three generations, must have used and handled a vast number
“of things and matters, and have thereby acquired a great deal
“of soul-energy (tsing). His clan, moreover, was a large one, so
“ that he had plenty of help and support. Is it not quite reasonable
“ then that, on having died a violent death, he should be capable
“of acting as a kwei?” *

It was, no doubt, his firm belief in the dangerous influence
which kwei as well as shen may exercise at any time, which made
Confucius, “on being asked by his disciple Fan-ch'i about wisdom,
“ declare, that it might be called wise to worship the kwei and
“the shen, but to keep them also at a distance”®. All the above
extracts combined, hardly give us more than a few chief traits of
ancient Chinese lore about the influence of ghosts upon the fate
of men, and other native books of pre-Christian time likewise are
so destitute of passages that might increase our knowledge on the
point, that it is not worth while to quote from them. Happily,
Wang ClFung, the excentric sceptic of the first century of our era,
devoted his pen to the subject, and making it a mark for his
sarcastic criticisms, has preserved for us the knowledge of many
notions of his time in regard of spirits. His writings place their
author in a remarkable light for his bold denial of disembodied
human souls being able to act as mischievous kwei, and he has
conquered thereby a place in our esteem above other Chinese sages


St.

ifei ^ M ® , 4 0 ^ ill M iji BJ , EC

AES®.

^ ^ X A . »r ^ . Bn ®. 5E St S A ^ #

Loc. cil.


2 m :

XV .

Lun yu, VI, 20


f-B.


413


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND I'OLK-CONCEPTION.


of all epochs, not one of whom has shown independence of mind
enough to go so far.

“ Mankind”, thus he wrote, “ says, that a dead man becomes
“a kwei which, possessing intelligence, can injure others. But
“ when we put this tenet to the test by considering living beings
“ in general, we arrive at the conclusion that a dead man cannot
“become a kwei, and that, through lack of consciousness, he cannot
“ possibly cause any damage .... A man is a living being, and so
“is an animal; an animal does not become a kwei at its death,
“and why then should this be the case with man only?”*. Now
.setting forth that the vital spirits of a man no longer exist on
his death, just as little as the throbbing of his arteries, with which
they are identic (comp. p. 11), his body, moreover, becoming then
mere dust, Wang Ch'ung concludes that there can be no question
of his forming a kwei. Indeed, thus he argues, a living man
without ears and eyes possesses no more consciousness than
there is in a plant or a tree; how then could he possibly have
more of it when even his vital spirits have left him ? So, when a
kwei or a shen appears, it cannot possibly be the ghost of a
human being. And when we see a kwei in human shape, it follows
from this shape itself that it cannot be the soul of a dead man,
it being absolutely impossible for a soul to appear in the shape of
a body which is annihilated by the process of decay, even to the
hair and the skin. No, thus our author concludes, “just as impos-
“sible is it for a dead man to appear visibly by using the shape
“of a living man, as it is for a living man to render himself
“invisible by means of the soul (hwun) of a dead man”’.

Were men really to change into kwei by their death, how
then is it that kwei are only occasionally seen by one or two
at a time, instead of appearing at any moment and everywhere
by whole legions, the world having in fact, since the separation
of the primary chaos, been inhabited by myriads and myriads of


' ffiilJE ASS .

JEAY-SS, *?si^BtWA ... A**.

.li. '20, ^ ^ ,


HUMAN SOUUS AS EVIL SPIRITS.


413


men? Will-o’-the-wisps are, according to prevalent opinion, the blood
of men who perished by steel in the battle-fields, and blood is the
vital breath (tsing khi) of the living (comp. p. 80 ); — now then,
never have such spectral flames been seen in human shape, for the
blood producing them having no such form. All which facts tend
to prove that a human ghost cannot have a human shape after
death, so that kwei which occasionally appear in such a form,
cannot be disembodied kwei of men.

Heaven and earth produce fire, but by no means can they make
ashes of a burned-out fire flame up anew. How then could we,
miserable creatures as we are, and not less unable to make ashes
blaze, cause our own beings to re-appear when our lives are extinct ?
And admitting that it is the vital soul (tsing s h e n) which becomes
a visible kwei when the body is annihilated, how then are we to
explain the fact that kwei are seen in general with dresses and
girdles on, although, to be sure, clothes and belts never possessed
a vital soul? This mystery does not in the least lose its mysteri-
ousness by taking into consideration that a man’s vital soul is
identic with the blood that sustains his body, for clothes and belts
were never sustained by any blood.

On this, Wang Cheung passes to his second argument, viz. that
disembodied human souls, did they really exist, would in no case
have any knowledge or consciousness. Man’s soul, says be, emerges
at his birth from the Primeval Breath ^ in which it existed up
to that moment in a state of perfect unconsciousness. There is, in
consequence, no reason to believe its condition to be another when
it is re-absorped by that Breath on his death. Besides, intelligence
or knowledge are connected directly with the five Constant Matters
which exist in a man because of their intensive relation with his
five viscera (comp, page 26 ); indeed, his intelligence flares or
fades according to whether his viscera are in a sound condition
or unsound. Hence, no intelligence can possibly exist in a being
whose viscera have rotted away along with his whole body.

But there is more. The condition a man is in when he dreams,
does not diifer from that in which a dead man is, as, in fact,
dreaming occurs in a state of insensibility which, should there be
no awakening from it, is death. From this fact we must infer, that
just as little as a man, while dreaming, has recollection of what


414


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


he did when he was awake, a dead man can recall to his mind
events of his life. We may speak and act beside a sleeping man,
without his perceiving anything of it, and that notwithstanding
his whole body and soul are present; so, a fortiori, we cannot
possibly expect that, if we open the coffin of a dead man whose
body and soul are gone, that man will observe the good and bad
things we do. Had the dead really consciousness, then it would
be the order of the day to see spirits of murdered people appear
before terrestrial judges to betray their slayers; then, also, those
whose bodies are lost would regularly appear to their kinspeople
to tell them where to look for them.

Again, intelligence and consciousness exist in a living man on
account of his vital soul (tsing shen) being composed and settled;
and they fade and become confused in him under the slightest
illness which disturbs that soul. Consequently, that same intelligence
and consciousness cannot but wane totally when death, which is
an ultimate stage of disease, dissolves the patient’s soul entirely.
Indeed, a man whose vital fire is extinguished, cannot by any
means manifest intelligence, just as impossible as it is for an extinct
fire to emit light. A clear proof that the dead are devoid of know-
ledge, we have in the fact that many widows and widowers freely
re-niarry, without their jealous first consorts showing any discontent
at it, or inflicting any evil on them for it, and that though men
and women are not, as a rule, much in the habit of leaving their
consorts undisturbed during life, should they venture to indulge
in familiarities or incest with others.

In support of the assertion that the dead have knowledge, it is
often averred that from fields and plains where human bones lie
unburied, plaintive sounds arise, which, when heard in the night,
are taken for the voices of the dead. But this assumption cannot
possibly be correct, the dead being incapable of emitting any sounds,
as their throats are rotten, their tongues stiffened. Is it possible
to produce musical notes through rotten flutes and pipes? Very
likely the voices in question are natural sounds produced by the
autumn, as “the breath or influence of that season can transform
into plaintive and mournful sounds” b Were they really voices of

' « it S 4 m 2 The autumn is, indeed, the season of sorrow,

dejertion and melancholy, as life then vanishes from Nature, and decay and death
set in. The character , coinpo.sed of heart or feelings (;(^) and autumn (^),
is one of tlie commonest graphic signs expressive of sorrow, and has the samo
pronunciation as the character for autumn, viz. tsiu.


MAY HUMAN SOULS BECOME EVIL SPIRITS?


415


the dead, we should hear them at every step, the earth having
been in course of time covered broadcast all over with thousands
and myriads of unburied bodies. Living persons who could never
speak, we may teach to speak; but never has it been possible to
make a dead man utter a sound, and that notwithstanding he
could speak before. Nor may we overlook the fact that our speech
is produced by the vigour of our breath, and that our breath is
a product of the food we take, so that, whereas a dead man cannot
eat, it is also impossible for him to speak. But, thus some
say, they feed themselves by inhaling the etherial parts (khi) of
food. Thus argumenting, they do not take into account that the
souls of the living intrinsically are the same as those of the dead,
so that, as the former would subsist on etherial substances of food
hardly any longer than a day or three, the same must be the case
with the latter.

Finally we come to Wang Ch'ung’s third tenet, viz. that disembodied
souls of men, admitting there exist any, are totally incapable to
inflict harm on the living. Nobody, thus he discourses, can do evil
unless he has strength combined with a good deal of passion or
indignation; and of these two factors we may eliminate forthwith

the second, as it is of no account where strength is lacking. And

now, need it still proof that a dead man possesses no strength
whatever, since he has no muscles, no arms that blow, no legs
that kick, no teeth that bite? An infant, in fact, is more harmful
than he, as it possesses such limbs and such teeth. Nor can we
reasonably admit a dead man to be able to fly into a passion,
seeing that insensibility of insult or injury prevailed in him already
while ill, that is to say, still before life was extinct in him. No,
thus our critic concludes, those spectres, those dreaded beings,
cannot possibly be disembodied souls of men, but they are

mere products of Action; they are phantasms hatched by human
brains, especially by those of the sick. A laid-up man naturally

labours under fear and anxiety, and so, under the influence of his
sufferings, he fancies he sees kwei cudgel or fetter him, with
increased ferocity as his illness increases. When those fears affect
his eyes, he sees the spectres; when they work on his ears, he
hears them; when they act upon his mouth, he talks of them. He
sees them in the daytime, and he hears them in the night, just as
the man who, finding himself in some solitary place, perceives spectres
merely because of his anxiety and fright.

Thus roundly and categorically Wang ChTing denied the survival


416


THE son, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


of the human soul as a ghost or spectre after death, and least of all
did he avow its survival as an entity possessed of consciousness
or power for evil. Yet he did not pretend there exist no ghosts.
“It is said”, thus he wrote, “that kwei are living beings not
“ different from men, and that such beings exist in the Universe
“generally beyond the frontiers to the four cardinal points, acting
“as a nefarious class only when they frequent our Middle Kingdom
“ to move among men, on which occasions the sick and the mori-
“ bund see them. Among the beings living in the Universe we find
“men shaped as birds or quadrupeds; so, also, there exist among
“ the evil beings which Heaven and Earth produce, bipeds and
“ quadrupeds with something like human forms. Hence it is that
“ people with an unlucky fate sometimes see flying corpses, or
“running evil, or human forms — three sorts of things which are
“kwei, also called sometimes hiung (evil), mei or ch'i. These
“are living realities, by no means to be relegated to the realm of
“chimeras and the shapeless. What to prove this from? W'ell, families
“ among the working class, thwarted by adversities, have seen flashes
“ of light confine in their dwellings, which, though seen by some like
“ birds, were not stated to resemble birds or beasts on having flown
“down into the hall or room. Thus, such beings possess a shape and,
“ consequently, they can take food ; and being able to feed themselves,
“ they do exist, hale and sound, and therefore can give evidence
“ of their existence. In short, their bodies possess reality” b

Thus, in Wang ClTung’s time, we see the shen and kwei


ASH, ft g.

^mzm.


MOST GHOSTS ARE SOULS OF MEN.


417


divided positively into two broad classes, one having dwelled for a
time in human bodies, and the other having never gone through
a human existence. The ardmrr with which our critic combats the
existence of the former category, removes all our doubt that the
belief in it was very general; nay, we feel strongly tempted to
admit, that this belief almost entirely eclipsed that in the other class,
man living in a low sphere of thought being inclined to connect
his thoughts of spirits principally with those of individuals he knew
best, that is to say, his fellow-men. We have to lay special stress
on this phenomenon, because it characterizes also the ideas of the
Chinese people in subsequent ages and at the present day, in
consequence of which its practices and observances with regard to
ghosts, spirits and divinities have, in the main, always constituted
a religion of disembodied human souls.

In perfect concord with the belief of his lime that ghosts are
for the most part souls of men, is the information, given us by
Wang Ch'ung, that it was the rule then to represent them as
appearing in a shape either entirely human, or partly so. “It is
generally said”, he writes, “that, just as good or bad prognostics
“ manifest themselves respectively when a man is to obtain hap-
“ piness or to incur misfortune, so apparitions in great variety are
“seen when he is to die; and as kwei are the constituents of
“ such apparitions, they manifest themselves in human shape. It
“ occurs, moreover, that they announce coming events by imitating
“ human voices, so that in this respect, too, their manifestations
“ do not take place without some human form. Evil apparitions in
“ the Universe are not altogether uniform. There can be evil-announcin'^-
“ words, sounds or letters, and it may also occur that an evil breath
“ or vapour assumes a human shape, or that a man becomes an
“evil spook by inhaling such breath. So far for the kwei that
“haunt in human forms” '.

The books produced in times subsequent to Wang Ch'ung’s teach


M- AZmm^

Luc, cit.


27


418


THE son, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


US on many a page, that apparitions in human form passed in
many, if not in most cases, for forebodings of evil. And it is
by no means works of an inferior sort, or devoted specially to
the fabulous and marvellous, that supply us here with instances.
Even historical books of the highest order abound therewith, thus
affording unmistakable evidence that the belief in anthropomorphous
evil spectres was always professed in China even by highly cultivated
minds. We will give here three examples from those standard
works. Of one Siao Hwui-ming b a grandee flourishing under
the Sung dynasty, we read: “In the first year of the Tai shi
“period (A. D. 465) he was prefect of Wu-hing (prov. of Cheh-
“ kiang). On the frontiers of that region, at the foot of mount Pien,
“ stood a temple, dedicated to Hang Yii On entering upon his
“functions, Hwui-ming was apprised that this being often put
“ up in the hall where the judicial sessions of the prefecture used
“ to be held, and that, on this account, the prefects had now and
“ then lacked the courage to enter it. But he said : ‘ It is stated in
“the records that, since Khung Ki-kuug administered this prefecture,
“ no calamity is known to have befallen it’ ; and he set out a
“ sumptuous repast, and received guests to partake of it. After some
“days, a human being appeared, upward of a chang in length,
“ with a drawn bow and an arrow. Having pointed this at Hwui-
“ ming, it disappeared from his view and then shot him in his back,
“from the effects of which he died in some ten days” ’.

About the year 475, Tao Tun ’ was Governor of the distant
southern provinces. “ Some members of his family, living in the
“ Imperial Capital, once came home from the country in the dark,
“ and perceived two or three men, who were whitewashing their


2 A warlike grandee of the third century before our era, famous as one of the
destroyers of the Ts'in dynasty. He always was an ob|ect of very extensive worsliip.

3 Ih,

^ a . « 5- . ^ ^ Jg illi « * . * # * m ± .

S BJ ii , « « 0 . ?L ^ * tS iH SB * H M

History of the

South, ch. 'IS, 1. 0.

‘Mil.


GHOSTS POSSESS HUMAN ATTRIBUTES.


419


“ house-door and vanished at the same moment. Next day Tao
“ Tun was dead” h

Of Yang Shen-king^, one of the highest dignitaries under the
Yang dynasty, we read; “When he was in Wen-fang, it came
“to pass that, while at table, he saw a spectre, more than a chang
“in length, with a white coat and a cap on, standing behind the
“ door. Shen-king hooted at it for a long time, but it did not
“ disappear ; nor did it vanish until he had thrown some hot soup
“at it. He died in a prison, in which he was confined without
“ having committed any crime” k

That the shape attributed to ghosts and spirits, to the good as
well as the bad, was in China throughout all times mostly that
of man, the reader will still see come out so often in this work,
especially in its next Part, that it is perfectly superfluous to state
it here in advance by documentary evidence. At the same time,
evidence will be adduced in profusion from tradition and narrative,
that a ghost in general is deemed to retain, together with its
former human shape, the peculiarities of the body it used to dwell
in, its features, dress, demeanour, gait, and speech. So, also, if the
body was maimed or deprived of a limb, the ghost wanders about
with the same mutilation. Popular imagination in China seems to
be haunted rather much by headless souls of decapitated men, a
class of spectres of which we said already a few words on page
355 of Book I. Pictures and plates almost always represent ghosts
as anthropomorphous (s. the Frontispiece). The evil-doing are given
ugly, hideous countenances, dishevelled hair, and a deep colour;
the benevolent and good ghosts, however, are depicted with forms
and features hardly different from the ordinary human being.

The countless apparitions of which Chinese books relate, were
not altogether causes or forebodings of evil. A great number of
tales tell of spirits visiting men with a most benevolent intent, as to


^ 0 ifii >1 5E ■‘’i'-

01(1 Hook-, of the Tang Dynasty,

ch. 105, 1. 13.


420


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


give them useful advice in their emergencies, or to present them
with medicines, otherwise unobtainable, for their sick people, or to
foretell them certain events ; or to reveal to them how to escape
misfortune and ensure their felicity. It is in particular its own
family a spectre pays such visits to, for family-ties death does
not tear. We read touching stories of children suffering intolerable
ill-treatment from their step-mother, and resorting to their own
mother’s tomb to give vent to their despair; they were caressed
and soothed there by her ghost, and received from it a verse so
perfectly heart-rending, as to tame the atrocious woman at home
immediately and for good. Other deceased mothers have appeared
before their children’s step-mother to tell her categorically to stop
her cruel conduct; else, they said, they would send down upon
her the punishments of the Nether-world. One of those tales
makes the mother put up for a considerable time in her old home
in a visible shape ; she is regaled there sumptuously by the step-
mother and her husband, and seen off in the end by the whole
family and a crowd of spectators, before whose eyes she strides to
her grave and sinks down into it.

There is still a third class of apparitions, which cause neither
good, nor evil. To the three classes the learned Han Yii referred
in the following terms : “ When man opposes Heaven, or thwarts
“ the interests of the people, or when he wrongs living beings, or
“acts contrary to the duties imposed by the human relations, or
“under the dominion of his anger — in such cases the kwei
“avail themselves of shapes and voices, in order to do retributive
“justice and send down disasters and misfortunes upon him. So,
“such evils are produced by man himself.... This explains why
“it is that the intercourse kept up by spirits with the people by
“ means of apparitions, is not a continuous intercourse, and that,
“ when they move among the people, they may either distribute
“happiness, or cause misfortune, or do neither” *.


Hrni sicn-sheny

ts^uen tsih, ch. 11. .


ON VISITS PAID BY THE DEAD TO THE LIVING.


421


Wanderings of spirits among the living to do them neither good,
nor evil, are not always purposeless. We read of men who, having
died in some distant region, visited their relations to inform them
of this, and even transported them to their funeral. “ Under the
“ Sung dynasty (fifth cent.) there was a student studying in some
“distant place. His parents (at home) had lighted their lamp and
“ begun to do their evening work, when their son appeared before
“ them, sobbing and sighing. ‘ I merely am a ghost’, he said, ‘ and
“ no reborn man’. On their asking him to explain himself, he
“ replied : ‘ In the first days of this month I fell ill, and I died
“ to-day at so much o’clock. My son, who holds office in Lang-ye,
“ has a grave ready for me, and is going to bury me to-morrow,
and here I am to take you thither. Outside the door stands
“a car for you; mount it, and it will convey you to the spot
“ spontaneously’. The parents got into it with their son, and
“suddenly felt as in a doze; and when the cock crew, they found
“ themselves in the place designed. Here they became aware that
“ the vehicle was a soul-car, and that the horses were of wood.
“They visited the director of the mourning-rites, and attended
“ the death-howl of the children ; and then inquiring about the
“ illness of the deceased, they learned that everything had taken
“place as the latter himself had related to them” '.

Visits are paid by the dead to the living to bid them farewell
and discourse with them about their domestic concerns; to enjoy
the sexual pleasures of married life; to satiate the curiosity of their
kinsfolk by telling them about their adventures, fate and prospects
in the other world; to tell them what measures they ought to
take to alleviate their misery and improve their condition there.
Not seldom they appear just when sacrifices are set out for them,
attracting them by their savour to the ancestral home. We read


n&m.'M H a,


422


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


of apparitions the ghostly character of which was betrayed afterwards
by a paper comb, a shoe, or some other object of the same material
being left behind by the spectre, or by the metamorphosis of
gold or silver bestowed by it upon the person visited, into clay
or into paper counterfeit money. Presents, on the other hand,
given to such spectres, were found again in their tombs. In short,
the spectre-tales, in their infinite variety, show unmistakably that
whatever adventures of ghosts with men, and of men with ghosts,
imagination in China may contrive, general opinion accepts as
realities and perfect possibilities. We do not even go too far when
we admit, that it is not dreams and dysaesthesia alone which in
China evoke spirits, but that every thought of a dead man or a
ghost is there an actual apparition to the individual whose brains
it crosses.

Among the countless tales of apparitions, we find many which
relate of dead men or women returning to their home for amical
intercourse with relations and friends, thus to continue to some
extent their former life. So we read of “ one Ching Tsung, a
“ literary graduate of the highest rank, who refused to depart from
“ home for an official preferment on account of the illness of his
“ concubine. This woman, however, said ; ‘ You are not entitled to
“ decline preferment on account of one woman’, and she insisted
“ so urgently on his going, that he gave in and entered the Capital.
“ Next spring, an inferior graduate travelling eastward for home,
“ visited his house, and found the concubine dead and buried. Ten
“ months passed away, and Tsung went to bed in the dead of night,
“ when he heard human footsteps outside the apartment. He opened
“ the door, and lo, there was the deceased woman. He told her
“ to walk in and sit down, and asked her what she wanted. Nothing
“ she asked for but some tea of good quality, which Tsung
“himself made for her; and when she had drunk some, he wanted
“ to call their sleeping infant-daughter and show it her ; but she told
“ him not to do so, the child being so young and so easily frightened.
“ With these words she bade him farewell, and no sooner was she
“ out of the door than she vanished from view” h


— — 11 *


1


VISITS PAID BY THE DEAD TO THEIR WIVES.


423


Still pithier is the following tale. “ In the K i e n y u e n period
“(A. D. 479 — 483), one Yil ChAing was drowned in Kiang-cheii.
“ That same day he went straightway to his house, remaining there
“ visible in quite the same shape he had when he lived, and
“ much frequenting the chamber of his wife, a Mrs. Yoh. This
“ woman at first dreaded his visits so much, that she always called
“her maids to keep her company; but by-and-by this precaution
“ slackened, and once, when he came, he stormed furiously, exclaiming:
“ ‘ I crave for sexual intercourse with the living, and am suspected
“ of malignity ; is this the way to encourage my love for home ?’
“ And up in the air the maids in the inner apartment saw their
“ spinning-wheels fly; somebody pulled their things into disorder and
“ threw the women on the floor, so that, panic-struck, they sought
“ shelter outside. After this feat, the ghost’s visits became more
“ frequent. They had a son, just three years old. Once this child
“ asked his mother for something to eat, but the woman said : ‘ I
“have no money; where shall I get food from?’ These words
“ afflicted the ghost. Stroking the head of the child, he said :
“ ‘ Unfortunately I had to leave you so untimely in misery and
“ poverty ’; and suddenly he re-appeared with two hundred coins,
“ which he placed before his wife, saying ; ‘ Here is money to buy
“ food with for our child’. In this way he went on for more than
“ a year, when the woman became reduced to such dire poverty
“ that she could not help herself any longer. Then the ghost spoke :
“ ‘In spite of your preserving the purity of your widowhood so
“ well, you remain so poor, so miserable ; I have better take you
“ with me’. And not long after, the woman sickened and died,
“ and the spectre was then heard of no more” h


w s . -fi # ^ a s * ^ ® It a

e. * i>f « # A . ^ H ^ W . IS # iP s m ^ .

oii ^ m ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ “Recom

le strange Tliing.s I heard of”, written, according to the Wo>/ Idcn tumj
khao (cli. 215, 1. 13), towards the close of the T ang dynasty bv some unknown
author. A copy which I pos.sess, states it was compiled by one Vii T ih ; it

contains forty-four tales and notes, but the above tale is not among them. We borrow
it from the K K, ch. 352.


4:24 THE SOUL in philosophy and folk-conception.

It is not only the male sex among spectres who thus visit the
living for gratification of their lusts. The fair indulge in such
irregularities as well. “ The wife of a prefect of the Sin-fan district
“ having died, his young daughter was still busily engaged in
“ making mourning-clothes, when a woman appeared, all elegance
“ and beauty. The prefect was much charmed with her, and he
“ kept her with him, overwhelming her with favours and love ; but
“ when some months had passed away, she, one fine morning, bade
“ him farewell in a stammering voice, with sorrowful mien. The
“ prefect, astonished, asked her what was the matter. ‘ My husband’,
“ she said, ‘is coming, and so I am to travel far away from you; it is
“ that which makes me so sorry’. Impossible it was to prevail upon
“ her to stay. Leaving behind a silver wine-cup, she took leave,
“ with the words : ‘You will make me very happy by thinking
“ often of me ; take this in remembrance’. And she started with
“ ten pieces of silk, which the prefect gave her. Since that moment,
“ the prefect’s thoughts always dwelled on that woman. Her silver
“ cup was never out of his hands, and whenever he went to his
“ Yamen-hall, he placed it there on the table.

“The military commander in that same district had finished his
“functions and returned to his native place; but having left his
“ wife’s encoffined corpse in Sin-fan, he now made the long voyage
“ back to fetch it. On this occasion he sent in his card to the
“ prefect, who received him very hospitably. The silver cup drew
“ his attention. He looked askance at it over and over again, and on
“ being asked by the prefect what he did so for, he said : ‘ This is
“ a thing from my wife’s coffin ; I do not understand how it gets
“ here’. The prefect sighed for some moments, and then told him
“ the story from the beginning to the end, adding some details


=

it. ***#S-t.


iiiiiKj L//(; K K, ch. 322.


THE DEAD MAHRYING THE LIVING.


425


“ about that woman’s shape and features, her voice and gesture, and
“informing him that, on her leaving behind that cup, he had
“ presented her with some silk fabrics. These revelations made the
“ commandant’s blood boil for the whole day. He opened the coffin,
“ and seeing the woman lying in it with the silk in her arms, his
“anger rose to such a pitch that he had a pile of fuel made, and
“ burned her on it” >.

Other enamoured female ghosts showed themselves more decent and
more correct in conduct, acting remarkably fashionably in ensuring free
course to their love by having themselves formally united by their
family in marriage with their beloved one. “In the first year of the
“T'ien pao period (A.D. 742), an archivist in Hwui-khi, Ki Yiu
“ by name, possessed two daughters and had adopted in his house
“an orphan daughter of his sister. Officials came to marry them,
“and Ki Yiu first gave them his own daughters; but then there
“ were no more suitors for the sister’s child, who felt so much
“aggrieved at it that she died of a broken heart.

“ Her coffin was stored away in the eastern suburb. Several
“ months elapsed, when a mandarin’s clerk employed in the street
“in which the Archivist lived, a young member of the strong
“Yang clan, of a very rich family and, moreover, a handsome
“ fellow, was suddenly missed. Search gave no result, and as it was


sii. n-^B. +

s ± .

St*.

tt , ® S A tfi a tfn . St *. » . « ij * 2

i Ai. quoted in the K K, ch. 333. Tliis tale occurs also ui the Kivai ch. ‘i.


426


THE SOOT, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘'surmised that some mei-spectre had enticed him away, he was
“sought for in the burial grounds. There, on the snow which
“ had fallen thickly, the lapel of a coat was visible from the
“ shed in which the girl’s coffin stood. The family of the young
“ man pulled at it, and heard his voice in the shed, and yet
“ the building was in a perfectly sound condition, so that no
“ opening was to be seen through which he could have entered.
“ Hastily they apprised the Archivist of their discovery, who
“had the coffin opened; and lo, they found the girl in it
“asleep with the clerk. Her features looked as if she lived. The
“family drew the clerk away, and restored the shed to its former
“ condition.

“ When he came out of the coffin, the clerk behaved like an
“ idiot, but in a few days he recovered. Then the girl addressed
“the Archivist in terms somewhat like the following: ‘I bear
“a grudge against you because you did not give me a hus-
“ band ; while you cared for nothing but the marriage of your
“own daughters, you forgot me, so that I died of intense grief.
“But it is now decreed by the Tao directed by the shen, that I
“ shall marry the clerk of our street. I have already once drawn
“ him to me and lain with him under one bed-cover, and as
“ the whole town knows this, propriety demands our being married.
“Consummate our marriage on the first of next month, and let
“ not the clerk select an auspicious day, for this would be contrary
“to the Tao directed by the shen. Propose to him to make me
“his wife; then announce our marriage to the family, receive his
“ betrothal money, and treat him with the ceremonial due to a
“son-in-law. And prepare drink and food on the first of the
“ month, for I will receive him as my husband on that day. I hope
“ he will accept your proposal’.

“The affrighted Archivist heaved a sigh. He called the clerk,
“and asked him what he thought of it; and the family of the
“ latter having paid for him some ten thousand coins for betrothal
“ money, the respective parents had an interview together. And
“Ki Yiu had clothes and bed-curtains made for his sister’s
“daughter, and on the first of the month he prepared dainties,
“and arranged another great meeting with the Yang family; and
“then her ghost spoke to him: ‘It is by your goodness that I can
“marry him; I am quite overjoyed at this day enabling me to
“meet my Yang’. No sooner were these words uttered than the
“clerk suddenly expired. They then performed the ceremonies of


A GHOST PROVIDING HIS LIVING FRIEND WITH A WIFE. 4.27


* a wedlock in the Nether- world \ and having provided a coffin and
“ the other funeral requisites in a liberal way, they interred the two
“ corpses in one grave in the eastern suburb” h

In their intercourse with the living, the spirits of the dead
occasionally perform astounding feats. “ Ma Chung-shiih and Wang
“• Chi-tu, two Liao-tung men, having made acquaintance with each
“other, became extremely intimate. Chung-shuh died first. Next year
“ he appeared to his friend and said : ‘ Unfortunately I died early,
“and my thoughts dwell on you constantly; and when I ponder over
“ your bachelorhood, I come to the conclusion that I must get you
“ a wife. On the 20th. of the eleventh month 1 will send one to
“ your house. Sweep everything there clean and neat, make a bed
“ with a sleeping-mat ready for her, and wait’.

“ That day came, and Ghi-tu secretly swept, and put the things
“ in order, when suddenly a gale arose, covering the sun and
“ darkening the day. Towards sunset the wind abated, and on a
“sudden a red curtain suspended itselfspontaneously in the bedroom.
“ Chi-tu lifted it up, and looking behind it, saw a woman in bed,

1 Comp. Book 1, pp. 802

atA.

tiS * ^ ?K lg tti .

ii4S. 7^»#«A.ii-s-±«.

tti

K « ss .ft M BB s I# i; . if,


428 THE SOUL IN PHILOSOTHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

“ pretty and charming, and dressed beautifully. She was sleeping,
“ and her palpitation could just be discerned. Every one, both
“ in-doors and abroad, was in great consternation, and nobody
“ventured to approach her, except Chi-tu. At that juncture
“the woman awoke, and sat up. ‘Who are you?’ asked Chi-tu.
“‘I am from Honan’, she answered, ‘where my father is prefect
“of Ts'ing-ho. I was going to be married, but find myself suddenly
“ here, without knowing how or why’. Chi-tu told her what he
“ thought of it, on which the woman replied : ‘ So it is Heaven’s
“ will that I shall be your wife’. And they became a married
“ couple, and they visited her family, who, quite delighted to
“ see her again, likewise judged that it must be Heaven that
“ united them. She afterwards had a son, who became prefect of
“ Nan-kiiin” h

Sceptic readers may discern in this tale a case of elopement or
abduction, cunningly put down to a spirit. But it is certainly not
from such a stand-point that the Chinese view it, and we have to


stm. 0

K ^ j® ^ tm tg # ^ -a- * * sP

±mmm, ‘snmnm. n =■ + &&

® , # ja s A # K M ^ 4- II . « ® ® SP

Yin iiiinij hih: K K, di. 322.


INTERCOURSE OF THE LIVING WITH THE DEAD IN GRAVES. 429

take the tale as a proof of the implicit trust they place in the
possibility of such things. Here is, in conclusion, another queer
little story of wonderful intervention of a kindly-minded ghost:

“ In the Tung-yang region, one Chu Tsze-chi kept a spectre
“ who regularly frequented his house. Once when his child suf-
“ fered from a pain at the heart, that spectre said to it: ‘I will

“ get you a medicine, namely the warm testicles of a tiger ; they

“ will cure you when you take them with some beverage. Get me a
“ big lance, and I will go and fetch them’. The family gave him such
“ a weapon, and he went off with it. After a little time he was
“ back again, and placing the lance in the courtyard, threw the
“testicles on the ground; and they were still warm” '.

Souls of the dead having always been believed in China to dwell
preferably in graves, it is quite natural that authors of spirit-tales

should often make the living and the dead meet there in joyful

company. A favourite topic to them is, in fact, people going
astray or overtaken by the shades of night, having to put up in
some shed or cabin that chances to stand by the roadside, to find
there liberal hosts or hostesses and, occasionally, further good
company, with whom they indulge in agreeable conversation on
human and spiritual topics, passing the time in eating, drinking,
sleeping and sexual intercourse, to awake suddenly to reality and
see themselves on or in a tomb, or to find later on, on returning
to the spot, a grave without a trace of a human dwelling. Some ten
of such tales we have before us; but as they shed no new light
on our subject, we abstain from doing more than mentioning their
existence.

The common term used in books to denote apparitions, is kwai
a word meaning in general all that is strange and queer, or
diverting from the ordinary course of things. There exist shen kwai
or apparitions of shen, tsing kwai or apparitions of tsing,
and k w e i kwai or apparitions of k w e i. The act of haunting is
expressed generally by the term tsoh kwai fp or w e i kwai


^‘50 iiii xiri. i\ i’iiii,()soi'ii\ \vi) r()[,K-c()N(;F,i'Tii)N’

[inxlucc or iiiiiko .■i|)[)arition.>”. To dciioto that a kwai
lhMr> .1 inali‘\olt tit character, the word y a o , meaning ominous,
ill-boding or e\ il-prodiicing, i-> often prefixed to it, but this word
■ done i^ U'ed iil^o Mil)-tantiveiy for s[)ooks, I'lic apparition of a
gho>t Is \ciy generally expressed aUo In- tin- term “to seen”

or “ to become \ isible", or '»>■ il “f" show sha[)i’”.

From nothing does it appear that the schoolmen of the ?ung
dynasty, so deeply \ersed as they were in the art of explaining
by tloods of words the profonmlcst myst(n-if's about the human
soul, e\er doubted the possibility of its living forth among men.
(dm Hi dispelled for good all scepticism on this point by one Hash
of his bright intelligetiee. Tlum ■ are that Masters own wise words;
“'File breath khi of the kwei of a human being mav dissohe
"either slowly or (piiekly. Slmuhl it oecnr that a man is not
" overpowt'red by his death, tlnm that breath may retnain nn-
“ dissolved after his death, and form a yao or a k w ii i (that is to
“ say, if may haunt). Non-dissolution is frequent in cases of
“demise under unhappy l•ireumstane<'' or by some disaster, or at the
* dt'ath of lluddhist or 'laoist clergymen, these people doiiyg their
"best to nourish their vgid soul tsing shen m such a maimer
“that If eomhiisrs. but does not diss,.l\e'.. . (dnee our Sage was
“asked: ' \ia'ordmg to the ) /.( X'/'g/, s. page l.'l the wamh-ring
“ hw uti prodik-e evolution', how then i' it that the e\ il-doing among
“ them do not dis.solve by that wandering-|)roei''s On this he
"answered- ‘That word w.mdering mU't be t:iken in the sen'O of
“a slow and geiith’ dissolution. Sueli evil-doing hwun for the most
" ji-irf are those of' mdi\iduals who did md die gdisolutely'', and
“ whose bfi-ath' ilid not dissolve, so that thev be<‘ame evil-doing
“through the jiroeess ot i-omhnis.ition'

Nor did Clin 111 ri'c :ibove the superstitions of the simplest
mind' bv calling into doubt the domineering mtluence of shen

' A t M It ffi til ti A ii <: R A di -P
M K , w m ta ^ iffi lit irt T' la . fi tit; J3 ti, tiB A
^ at s (tt lit , ra ^ t- la 1 ftt a t* ii k »# , tPr

in inf H , it 'd: a * ji'it la . ti- a is v

fi 5 tt- T> f.} Jl: W . It a * ta . iB; «5 fet r«

- - ' ■ -s, ;; 1 ; e, i |il


’III! \( I' <»l I'.IIDsl-- \HI ( ( iM'Ui II I.Mi in \ IlH.lliH I'dUli; I'il


;mil kwri lAi'i' till' huiiuin latr. Ili- iihI hn ~i limil ii.iild tidi.
ill truth, pid'ililv alinc:,Mt(' tliat intlmiiii'. -inn tin intaliilili )/!,
Luk; hail llld-t ||ii'lti\rl\ -tatril it- i'M-Ii III'I li\ ilnhillllLt lllal '‘thr
pnrat a-'llllilati tlicir lultUllr- and liil-tnl I Ulli - Wltil tin' kwri and
till' -lirn' !' pau'i' lakiui'C did < ’i,n 111 iiiiiain in pi rti rl

.l^|■l)^dan^^ with tin' (■> aii i pt inii- "t tin ain n nt- !i\ pia ai hin_: that
thr power lit' pdlint- over man’- late I- e, ill' I ■ !nl nlld ^'iiid'd li\ a
-till hn,dier power “''nt'h iliin^'- a- unlelieiton- la ti la itoii- inllm in ■ -
“exerei-eil liv kwei and -hen, li\ wliieh iiii'l'aiilin oi li!iMt\
“ i- hroii^ht torth tliii- he pralileil ■•eannot in- -uiijiitnl to

‘•a thoroii^di ili-eu--iun unle— wn \irw tin ni in tlnii loniin'ion
••with the law- 111 jil 111 ! Iple- ll' ti,at i h an I lia I e the 1 |ii\i|-e
‘•.Man live- under the -wav o! lln'-i prilti'iple- ]u-l ,1- the kwi 1


and tin

vh

1 n 1

do,

hay

. lU't

a •

- I|.

a\ f 11

i ..n

d ha 1 til

. at

,d n-

there i-

lit t

thinj in tin

..-e pi

: in>

■ip'.i -

U !i

itT

1- 11"!


-..od

aiid

lieiii tieia

1 , anv 1

• lir

who

-e ll.i

d-

af

in

At 1 1 II

.lain •


.i-ii

t'n 111

inu-t h.i

i\r ;

'1 ill

ppv

t It.

1 . w in

de

a in

all-

tat-

nai-’

1)'

illiiiappv

‘when 111

■ hi'liavi

■*. (

. aiirarv 'o

tl

II th

Tin

- !< a

- -niii.:

1

lold-

1

al-i) of

telli

lt\ .iiid

iiii'f

' ‘t t iillt

1 i 1 1 V 1

f inj

: « rn.

lUat l< III-

oI a

1

or a hail

1 tat

e . 1

1 ' t w

t lien 1 an

\Vf

"llppo-..

ti.at

Ileav.

n

.iiiii

Haiti,

on their

-111

e, and

tilt

K W 1 1

an

I'l fn

e -1,

> t n

oil tin

II ■

- < \

el lie'

ot their

1 iw n

acc'

'1(1

in -t

ntlin.:

.1.

>wn

1' liel

tv .'iiel ine

• III

'tun

t '

‘‘ I'ilO-'

ide.

IN W

t ’

nt'i

t xjtrt '

^.-1

m

t lie


/. • < >;

. 11.1 III the

) ?/; A I H i:

' ; -

‘ It

1"

tla

* OUf'-t

' ‘1

r W.i

iV 1

1 a ( I

■It 11.


t n T'

' -'IVt

lellelty 1

1 ' !

f ■ _r,

lO.i

an*!

to iiriti_'

nil-:

. a’ a

lU <1

V 1 1 t in


i'l.i ,

, tilU-

'1_\- till

til -

■•n itin d

■A «>

;k '

.lie

1 -lit

■ ■• :

I (

'a " a


\ -

‘ I'f.'

k W e 1 and till •

■ In-

n ii

il'n t

! . 1

'

.1 1

:i'i :

« Ii'lt I

T

‘ ' n

1 kI,

halipv' ■

'I’l.'

e p|,

. id

'it r-

af- ■

'ho-

' w : .

.. op


* r. ' ’-»■

! I

. .11'

i w i a 1


r,!_v

ill' 111 1

i; tof

lt.

A M.I

I t',.

!l.' I

1 , ,


f 11-

‘ 'A ! 1 1 1

i-‘T in ;

1- < ■ T

d ,'n


1 ' I i

1

I'ni

' »

n . rt

1 . :\t


- -;n

!■ :

l\ !■< ‘J


• It


. 1 . i

1 - •in


.. r-r*

f a 1


. t!

1'*

tU. 1|

»;■ ' tl!

Tie r -i t

1 ,ir<

111


1

'la.

irn.o

n\


r ;t

i, ! .1

V\ • .ill


!it u

jaiiaUi

prevail th.it

thi

N ’A

1 1

01.1 t

111


n '■

Il'l

I' H n

1'

iu it’.

. .‘.nil

uii't* 1 ! fun* ‘

if

' ir

• u :i

a< ■ ' ‘f'

i '


' ' ' ■ nt*i

^ ik t

n ^' 1 1 'liJ ta , lit ll iji w w “i,--

nt . A m A lit - . rfn Uij M U .


432


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


The reader will see at a glance, that these reasonings move
perfectly within the orbit of the fundamental principle of ancient
and modern Taoism, formulated by us on pp. 935 and 936 of
Book I, according to which the fate of the world and mankind
depends entirely on the principles or laws (li) that govern the
Cosmos or constitute its Tao or Course, so that the wise and the
happy exclusively are those who live therewith in perfect harmony.
We thus see Chu Hi take the kwei and the shen, in their
capacity of distributors of misfortune and felicity, for agents oi
the universal li, thus suscribing at once to another classical thesis
accepted by his school as standard truth, according to which those
beings constitute the Yang and the Yin, that is to say, the
regulators of the Tao (see page 13). But the Tao is in the first
place the power that rules heaven, the earth being an unmovable,
inert mass. So, the tenet is mostly and rationally formulated thus,
that the kwei and the shen distribute no good or evil unless
with the knowledge and explicit permission of the Tao of heaven,
the T'ien Tao‘, or — what is much the same thing — the
animated Heaven.

Leaving aside for the present moment the question what this
supreme Power is conceived to be, we must here lay stress upon
the fact that the above tenet forms one of the principal articles
of China’s ancient and modern spirit-lore. Clear illustrations of her
belief in the infliction of punishments by spirits thus acting with
direct authorisation of Heaven, we have already in the Tso cliwen.
“ The Ruler of Tsin (Hwui having transferred the body of the
“ Crown-prince Kung ’ to another grave (in b. C. 650), it happened
“ that Hu-tuh, while travelling to the minor capital in the autumn


A M'j ^ ^ ^ M'J 1^0 ^ I® Is ^ > itfc M

.a ^ . A ^ ins # ^ . nil W M ffii

Is e . H ^ M ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Jit . ^ Z 28 - ’■ '*8

^ ^ M-

3 Ilis elder brother, named Shen-sheng t)3 4 , who, being excluded from the
■succession to the throne, had committed suicide.


SPIRITS PUNISH MEN WITH HEAVEN’s AUTHORISATION. 433

“ of that year, met with that prince, who told him to get up in
“his carriage and take the reins, and then said to him: ‘ I-wu
“ (i. e. Hwui) has violated (in regard to me) the ceremonial rescripts ;
“ therefore I have had my request granted by the Supreme Emperor
“(of Heaven), and am now going to deliver Tsin into the power
“of the state of Tshn, which will properly sacritice to me’. On this,
“Hu-tuh replied: ‘I have heard that the shen of the dead do not
“ enjoy any sacrifices but those presented by their own kindred,
“and that, on the other hand, the people never sacrifice but to
“(deceased) members of their own clan; will not therefore the
“sacrifices (you expect from Ts'in) be in the end given up altogether?
“Besides, what crime has this people committed? Consider well,
“ your Highness, that you are going to inflict undeserved punishment,
“and to put an end to (the sacrifices presented to you by) your
“offspring’. On this the other said: ‘I grant you are right; I must
“ make another request (to Heaven). In seven days there will be a
“ medium (w u) at the west side of the new city-wall, through whom
“you may have another interview with me’. Hu-tuh promised to go
“there, and the ghost vanished. At the appointed time, he repaired
“to that spot, and there the medium said to him: ‘The Emperor
“of Heaven allows me to punish the guilty one only; he shall
“ be defeated in Han’ ’’

Seventy years later, “ the ruler (King *) of the same kingdom
“dreamed of a tall demon with dishevelled hair hanging down to
“ the ground, which beat its breast and stamped the ground, saying :
“You have slain my descendants unjustly, but I have had my
“request granted by the Supreme Emperor’. It then broke down the
“great gate and the inner gate, and entered. The prince started and


» H » nfi * . 0 . E M 2 * T-SJ: #

« a IB 34 # BB a IS. W i 7 Ji. »

ft Tenth jee,

of Hi's reign. See al^o the Historical Records, cli. 39, 1. 12.

2 ^


28


434


THE .SOLE IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“fled into the back chamber, but of this, too, the spectre thrust
“in the door. At this juncture, the ruler awoke. . . In the sixth
“ month, when about to take his meal, he felt it necessary to go
“ to the closet. He tumbled into it, and perished” h

It is quite feasible to trace the conception that ghosts encroach
upon human life and fate with the consent of Heaven, through
the literature of successive ages, works of all periods giving instances
of it. To quote here one from a little, but interesting book, entitled
Hican yuen ki On Requital of Wrong, professedly by the hand
of Yen Chi-t'ui, the moralist known already to our readers as the
author of the Ye/i-shi Ida liiun or Yen’s Domestic Instructions.
A high official of the third century, “ Hia-heu Yuen, also named
“ Thi-clhu, was a talented man with brilliant prospects. The prince
“ of King, Coinmander-in-Chief of the army, feared him for that, and
“ had him decapitated. His clan then set out a sacrificial meal for
“ his manes, and saw him approach the seat placed on the spot
“for his soul, where he took his head from his shoulders, put it
“down beside him, and passed all the fruits, eatables, spirits and
“ meat through his throat. Having finished, he sat down, and spoke :
“‘I have denounced the matter to the Supreme Emperor; that
“ General’s son shall die young, and he shall remain without
“ offspring’. Not long after, the prince died and thereupon lost
“ his son. His younger brother, prince of Wen, then appointed his
“own second son to become his adoptive heir, and this young man
“ succeeded his uncle on his son’s untimely death ; but he too was
“put to death. During the insurrections of the Yung kia period
“(3U7 — 3T2), a wu saw the apparition of that younger brother, who
“ said to him -. ‘ Our House has been overthrown because of the com-
“ plaints lodged by Ts‘'ao Shwangand Ilia-heu Yuen for the wrong done
“ them ; that was the way in which they worked their revenge”


« ATS, A.

I® . Tenth year ol' L'hUnpr’s reign.

.g. fflj ^ .


is


SPIRITS MAY PUNISH OR BLESS KINGDOMS.


433


Spirits acting as avengers and rewarders with orders or approval
from the Tao or Heaven, may punish or bless whole kingdoms
for the conduct of their rulers, for we saw on page 409 that,
according to a book of high authority, a grandee twenty-six centuries
ago explicitly asserted that spirits descend into a state to make it
flourish if its rulers are virtuous, or to make it decline if they are
wicked. The part which the spirit-world, returning evil for evil and
good for good in various M’ays and respects, acts in popular ima-
gination, has in all times exercised a mighty influence upon Chinese
conduct and morals, and is therefore worthy of closer consideration,
to which we will subject it in the following chapter.


g ^ . w B . © # » T ± IS' ^ . SI .1 . # sa ife .


CHAPTER XVI.


ON RETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE EXERCISED BY SPIRITS.

Vindictiveness and gratitude survive in the life after this; and
man retaining there his former human passions, his manes must
be expected to send down punishments or rewards principally or
exclusively for evil or good done to himself, or to individuals
dear to him.

Thus, Shen-sheng punished his brother Hwui for his shortcomings
with respect to his manes (p. 433); and King fell a victim to the
revenge of a spirit whose descendants he had slain (p. 433). So
also, as we saw on page 724 of Book I, commander Kho disarmed
in 593 b. C. a formidable herculean foe by the help of a ghost,
whose daughter he had refused to immolate to his father’s manes.
To these instances we may add the following statement concerning
Siien, a king of the Cheu dynasty, whose reign is placed between
the years 826 and 780 before our era: “According to Mih-tszd,
“ this king had killed Tu-poh, without having to impute any crime
“ to him, and afterwards, while hunting in Fu, that man appeared
“ with a bow and arrows, and shot him, on which the king fell
“down dead under the effects of (the arrows from) his bow-case” b
And finally we refer to P'eng-sheng in the seventh century b. C.,
who, as we related on page 159, attacked the ruler Shang, the
causer of his death, in the shape of a wild boar.

Analogical accounts of revengeful ghosts are disseminated through
the literature of the Han period. We read that the empress Kao,
who occupied the throne for a time in the second century before

' 5-. 1 s i « tt le .

sin hi soh yin “Elucidations of the Historical Records”, quoted

in tile Khienlung edition of Sze-ma Ts'^ien’s work, ch. 28, 1. 13. This tradition
occurs also in the Sheii sheti In. the edition in eight chapters, ch. 3.


SPIRITS OF THE DEAD RETURNING EVIL FOR EVIL.


437


our era, “saw a being shaped like a blue dog, that clung to her
“ side and thereupon vanished on a sudden. The tortoise-shell was
'• consulted, and it pointed out that it was Jil-i, the prince of Chao,
“ who thus haunted. The empress sickened, and died of a wound
“ in her side. Some time before, she had poisoned the said prince,
“ dismembered the ladies of his mother’s family, and put out their
“eyes, as if they were mere swine in human shape” '. Teu Ying
a second cousin of the consort of the emperor Wen ^ who succeeded
that cruel empress in 179 before our era, as also another grandee,
named Kwan Fu, fell victims to the wicked machinations of Then
Fen’, a younger brother of the chief consort of King % Wen’s son
and successor, and were put to death atrociously. But vindicatory
punishment was not long in coming. “Next spring”, thus it is
chronicled, “ Then Fen sickened, and felt severe pains over his
“whole body, as if he were being flogged. ‘I submit to the punish-
“ ment and I thank you for it’, yelled he. The Emperor ordered a
“ghost-seer to observe him, who said; ‘The prince of Wei-khi
“(?. e. Teu Ying) and Kwan Fu watch him; they seem to cudgel
“ him to death’. And in the end the patient breathed his last” h
We may still refer to page 1406 of Book 1, which informs us that
the violent death of a prince of Kwang-chhven and his concubine
was represented by historiographers as the work of three secondary
consorts of this grandee, murdered l)y that woman, whose corpses
she had burned, to rid herself of their apparitions.


*I * s m . as « tg « iSi B . * * W S it in * .


mu Jban


ffl !l!^


o

5 -S'


o *■ llistoi'icul Records, cli. 107. 1.12.

Wanp Ch uiig’s sharp criticism does not spare this story. Thousands of murderers
ol' innocent people, says he, were never harasseil or killed by their victims; ■ — the
apparition in que-tion was called forth simply by T ien Feu’s delirium and remorse,
and the ghost-seer knew quite well that the patient was the author of Teu Ying’s
and Kwan Fu’s ruin. Lun hemj, ch. 21, nmm-


13S


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Subsequent centuries go on relating stories of human spirits
returning evil for evil and good for good. “ When Sun lYeh — a
“grandee at the end of the second century — contemplated cross-
“ing the Yang-tsze, Sih Hu and Kan Kih accompanied his troops.
“ By that time the weather was dry and the region all round
“ scorched. Continuously prompting the chiefs of his troops to ferrying
“over the boats with more speed, he sometimes appeared on the
“ spot in his own person early in the morning, to take the lead of
“the work, and once he found mo^t of his officers round Kan Kih^
“and Sill Hii. This made him foam with rage. ‘I am of not so
“ much account as this Kan Kih is, am I ?’ he exclaimed, and
“ with these words he forthwith hurried towards them, had Kan
“ Kih arrested, fettered, and exposed on the spot to the burning
“ sun, telling him to pray for rain ; should he prevail upon the sky
“to send down water at noon, he would be pardoned, or else put
“to death. Suddenly cloudy va[)ours arose, and conglomerated into
“ one unbroken veil, from which at noontide dense showers fell.
“ Everybody went up to Kan Kih to congratulate him and cheer
“ him up, but yet Sun IVch put him to death. The chieftains, filled
“ with commiseration, concealed his corpse, and on their going next
“day to SCO it, could not find it again.

“After Kan Kill’s execution. Sun lYeh perceived him among his
“attendants in a misty shape whenever he was sitting alone. Some
“ wounds he had received were just curing, and he took a mirror
“ to see how he looked — and lo, there was Kan Kill’s image in
“it, though, on looking round, he saw nobody. Three times this
“ phenomenon repeated itself. Then with a loud yell he bumped
■•against the mirror; his wounds burst, and lie breathed his last
“ in a few instants” \

1 Ills name is often written Yu Kiti ^ ^ .

w . fis a pfi 2 A *1 1 ± * 2 .

+ rkliBttiAHS.iStt

®a. Mmmi. is Httn.

^ » fit ?E .


SPIRITS RETURNING EVIL FOR EVIL.


439


“ When Jan Min”, a bold warrior who, after taking a prominent
part in the political troubles of the fourth century, assumed the
Imperial dignity in A. D. 350, “ had been beheaded by Mu-yung
“Tsun on mount Ngoh-hing, the vegetation all round there entirely
“ withered over a distance of seven miles. Great swarms of locusts
“ came forth, and it did not rain for five months, until the twelfth,
“ when Mu-yung Tsun commissioned an emissary, with order to
“sacrifice to the manes of his victim, bestowing upon him at the
“same time the posthumous dignity of Imperial Prince Wu-tao.
“ Snow fell thick on that same day. The year in which this happened
“was the eighth of the Yung hwo period (A. D. 35:2) h And
“when Tao Wu”, the first emperor of the Wei dynasty (A. D.
3S6 — 408), “ had exterminated the family of (the high grandee)
“PIwo Poh, (formerly his favorite), it happened that (his grandson)
“ the emperor 'Fai W u, while hunting in the Clrai Mountains,
“ suddenly saw himself envelojied on all sides by a dense fog. (Juite
“astonished, he asked what to ascribe this to, upon which his
“subordinates declared unanimously that the phenomenon might
“ probably be caused by Hwo Poh, who had dwelled in this region
“ for several generations, and whose soul-temple and tomb still
“ existed there. The Emperor then sent Kii-pih, the prince of Kien-
“hing, to the spot to offer two sacrificial animals, on which the
“fog cleared away. Since that time, T'ai Wu, whenever he went
“out on a hunting expedition, despatched an envoy thither on
“ that day, to sacrifice” h


M K « fi # I* * M tE Tfe

« fiS ? I i« a , .ft ^ ® tS 4 . ® Bn # = ill *

ff iS A "4.# ® B H .Si rra 5E '-.‘'' i
' S ^ I« #f ft Fi) T ii PS Oj . Ill * -b M « *

Hooks ot' the Tsiii Dynasty, ch. 407, I. 40.

. lli.story of tlie North,

ch. 20, !. 28. See also the Books of the Wei Dyn.isty, ch. 28, 1. 2.


440


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


In the year of our Lord 385, Fu Kien, a grandee exercising
royal sway over an extensive dominion in the west of China under
the dynastic title of Ts'in was defeated by Yao Ch'ang, who,
capturing his capital ClFang-ngan, there proclaimed himself emperor,
and strangled his rival in a Buddhist monastery. After some time,
“ Yao Ch'ang sickened, and saw Fu Kien in his dreams storm his
“camp at the head of envoys from the agencies of Heaven and
“several hundreds of spectral soldiers. Terror-stricken, he sought
“refuge in the back palace, in the arms of his courtiers, who
“attacked those spectres and lanced them, but by mistake they
•■'hit their lord in his genitals. The ghosts then said: ^He is just
“hit in a vital spot’; and on the lance being extracted, more
“ than a stoneweight of blood gushed out. At this juncture, Yao
“Clrang awoke from his dream, horror-stricken, and had a tumor
“ on his genitals. The surgeon pricked it, and just as much
“ blood as he had dreamed flowed out of it. He then began to
“utter delirious talk; ‘they say that 1, your slave, did it’, he
“ e.xclaimed, ‘ that I, Ch'ang, did it ; but the man who murdered
“Your Highness is my brother Siang; I, your slave, am innocent;
“pray, commit no unjustice against me’. With these words he gave
“up his ghost” ^

The best proof we have for the generality of the belief in vindi-
catory justice of spirits in the sixth century of our era, is the fact
that Yen Chi-thii, the ethologist, then deemed it advisable for the
maintenance of public morality to collect many instances of it
into a little book, now extant under the title of Hwcm yuen hi
or Writings on the Requital of Wrong. We acquainted our readers
with it on page 434. In its present shape, it contains thirty-two
talcs, the first of which is that concerning Siang, the Ruler of the
kingdom of IVi, given already on page 159. It further relates that


E . * 5E' Books of tl)e Wei Dynasty, ch. 95, 11. 43 scq. Also the Books of the
Tsiii Dynasty, ch. Ilfi, 11. 14 scq.


SPIRITS AVENGING THE EVIL DONE TO THEM.


441


Ho Ch^uig Governor of Kiao-chi ~ or Tongking, travelled in the
first century of our era through Kao-yao ^ in Kwangtung, and while
passing the night there in a watching-pavilion, saw an apparition
of a woman. “I was murdered here some time ago, she said,
together with my servant; our murderer is the headman of the
pavilion, who coveted the precious silks with which I was travelling
round to sell” ; and she informed him of the details of the crime,
telling him also he would find the corpses buried on the very spot,
undecayed, in a white dress with blue silk shoes, and the remains
of the car and the bones of the ox close by in a well. Of course
Ho Chhing had the ground dug up and the well searched, and
thus finding all proof and evidence wanting, he imprisoned the
murderer with his whole family. They were all decapitated with
special Imperial authorisation.

Further, Yen Chi-t'^ui makes us acquainted with the tales of Kan
Kih, Hia-heu Yuen, and Fu Kien, ot whicli we have given the
versions as they occur in other works (see pp. 438, 434 and 440).
Then we find again some instances of murdered persons betraying
their assassins, who, seeing themselves so mysteriously detected,
made a clean breast at once, and avowed everything. In one case,
the ghost prevents the culprit from escaping, by nailing him by his
hair to a wall before betraying him. We arc also told of victims
of judicial error, chastising their unworthy judges with disease and
death. A child murdered by its step-mother, haunts her home so
ferociously as to bring death over her and her offspring. An in-
nocent wealthy man in Kwangtung, put to death by a rapacious
prefect merely to confiscate his j)ossessions, regularly appears in that
grandee’s premises, stubbornly beating the great drum placed there
for all who apply for redress of wrong, until the prefect sickens
for anxiety, and dies. Especially numerous in the books are the
instances of persons haunted by the souls of their victims on their
death-bed, where, in most cases, the ghosts themselves state expressly
that they are avenging themselves with the special authorisation of
Heaven, at the foot of whose throne they lodged their complaints.

A rather singular tale is that of one Kin Yuen ’, a famous gladiator,
condemned about the year 3:25 of our era to perish by the sword.
He promised his executioner a reward should he succeed in getting
with one stroke through the hard muscular neck ; but the swords-
man belaboured the neck most piteously. Then he suddenly beheld

2^1511:.


443


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


Kin Yuen in a red dress and a red cap, shooting a red arrow
at him from a red bow. “ He is carrying me oft'”, cried the poor
man, and he expired. Some special interest attaches to the following
tale, as it acquaints us with some ideas prevalent in earlier days
about certain powers in tlie unseen world of shades, co-operating
with wrathful spectres;

“ Wang Fan, prefect of the district of Fu-yang under the Tsin
“ dynasty, possessed a concubine, named Tmo-ying. This woman was
‘•a voluptuous beauty, who indulged in familiarities with two other
“ husband’s subalterns, Tinar Funjc and Shi llwa-khi. Once, when he
“ was away from home and did not return for some time. Sun
“Yuen-pih, the general intcndant of his liarem, heard the tinkling
“of girdle ornaments in Ting Fung’s chamber, and saw Thio-ying
“there with liim under one coverlet. Tapping on the door, he
“rebuked her, on which the woman rose, put on lier petticoat,
“ arranged her coiffure, put on her shoes, and returned to her own
“inner apartment. Sun Yuen-pih perceived also that Shi Hwa-khi
“ wore Tao-ying’s musk among the appendages of his girdle. Lest
“Sun Yuen-pih should denounce them, the two men impeached
“him with sexual intercourse witli T'ao-ying; and Wang Fan did
“not investigate the matter properly, but put him to death. It was
“ especially a certain Ch’en Ch^ao, a man in office at that time,
“ who prevailed upon Wang Fan to consider him as guilty of the
“crime imputed to him.

“Afterwards, a colleague being appointed in his place, Wang
“ Fan returned to his homestead, and Cli'en ClFao then travelled
“away from the Capital, to pay him a visit. At the foot of the
“ Red Pavilion hill he was overtaken at sundown by thunder and
“rain. Suddenly a man appeared, who lifted him up by his flank
“ and leg, to carry him off into the thicket. Py a flash of lightning
“he saw he had to do with a kwei, whose face was of a deep-
“ bluish black, with eyes without pupils. ‘1 am Sun Yuen-pih’,
“it cried; I have laid down before the Imperial Heaven a complaint
“ of the wrong suffered by me, who will not be long in manifesting
“his justice. How often have 1 lain in wait for you! but now our
“ paths cross’. Ch"ao wept bloody tears and bumped his head against
“the ground, on which the spectre spoke: ‘Indeed, the chief culprit
“is Wang Fan; I have to kill him first. And according to the registers
“which Kia King-poh and Sun Wen-tu keep under the halls of
“darkness on mount T"ai of births and deaths of mankind, T^ao-
“ying’s souls are to be confined in the blue pavilion for females.


SPIRITS RETURNING EVIL EOR EVIL. 443

that is to say, in the third hell below the yellow springs, where
“ only female k w e i are dealt with’. At this moment the dawn
“broke, and the spectre vanished.

“Thus ChTn Chhio arrived in Yang-tii and called on Wang Pan;
“ but ere he had gathered courage to tell him his adventure, he
“ saw the spectre approach the house and straightway enter Wang
“Pan’s bed. That same night the latter was just asleep, when he
“had a violent attack of nightmare. Without regaining consciousness,
“ he yelled incessantly. His relations made a bluish cow look down
“ upon the patient, and they tied a mannikin of peach- wood to
“his left side; but for all that it dawned ere he came round a little.
“ In some ten days he expired, and his concubine likewise had an
“abrupt death.

“ ClPen Clkao sought a refuge in the Clrang-kan convent, and
“ adopted another surname and name, namely Ho Kwei. On the
“ third day of the third month in the fifth year, he repaired to the
“waterside to tipple a little, saying to himself: ‘1 must no more
“fear that ghost now’; but as he looked down, he beheld its shape
“ in the water. It grasped his nose, from which a flow of blood
‘ • gushed forth, more perhaps than a full pint ; and he was dead
“in a few days” k


IS «:|ll

t* B IS jfij . A; ® n|) ® nr ^ @n * ,

# . A 7t ® e , 7J * ® 7C 95 » « ^ ^ .

TC 555 P .

SMBS.


444


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND EOLK-CONCEPTION.


Thus far for Yen Chi-Tui’s interesting book. Works of older and
of younger date contain tales to the same purport. So the I yuen
relates of “one Yuen Khih, a Wu-hing man, whose wife, when on
“the point of dying, grasped his hand and asked him: ‘Will you
“take another wife when I am dead?’ — ‘1 shall not find it in
“ my heart to do it’ was the answer. Nevertheless he did remarry,
“ but then, in broad daylight, his deceased wife appeared before
“him, with the words: ‘You took your oath on it, why have
“you broken your promise?’; and she cut off his sexual organs
“ with a knife” b

Less numerous, though very numerous yet, are the tales of
spirits under obligation for clemency, rewarding their benefactors.
“ Ch"en Fei was prefect of Tsiu-ts'^iien (in the north of Shensi or
“ Kansuh). A soothsayer had said to him ; ‘ Send away from you
“the Hen, and let Poh-khiu free; follow this advice, and no evil
“ shall befall you’. On his arrival in the said prefecture, he found
“there, as physicians in ordinary, one Chang Heu, one Wang Heu,

and others, all of whom he dismissed. At midnight he was haunted
“ by a being placing itself on his coverlet. His attendants heard
“it, seized torches and were going to kill it, but the spectre
“ said : ‘ If you can forgive me, 1 will requite your clemency. My
“cognomen is Poh-khiu ; whenever you get into difficulties, then
“ merely call out my cognomen, and they shall be got rid of. —
“‘This it is what that ‘let Poh-khiu free’ meant’. Wen gladly said.


Amm.

si 0 ^ 1 ^ ^ ^ Ur .

-fl-w.in: 0 mm.-

^ 5-. a 5ES Hit®.

Ea)a7Jf0itKK.d.. 320.


HAUNTING GHOSTS OF THE BADLY BURIED DEAD.


445


“and he let the spectre go. And he received his rewards for it” h

Shi Wan-sui, a celebrated commander in the service of the house
of Sui, owed his brilliant military career much to the grateful
manes of a minister. of the founder of the Han dynasty, who, in
virtue of his former high dignity, was a powerful personage in the
world of shades. “The dwelling of Shi AV an-sui, Commander-in-chief
“ of the army in the North, stands in Ch‘'ang-ngan, in the Tai-hien
“ ward. Ere he lived there, it was constantly haunted by k w e i,
“ so that the inmates often died ; but Wan-sui would not believe
“ it, and he put up in it immediately. One night he saw a human
“ being, dressed and capped in a dignified style. As it approached
“ him, he asked what it came for, and the answer was : ‘ I am
“ General Fan Khwai. My grave is so close to the closet of your
“ house that the stench always bothers me ; if you will oblige me
“ and remove it to another spot, I will reward you liberally’. Wan-
“ sui promised to do so ; but at the same time he asked the spirit
“ why it had punished so many people in the dwelling with death,
“ On which the spectre retorted : ‘ They all died from fear ; I never
“ killed one’. Wan-sui dug up the ground, and found the coffin
“ with the skeleton ; and he buried it elsewhere.

“ Next night the ghost re-appeared to thank him. ‘ You shall
“ become a General’, it said, ‘ and I will then lend you a helping
“ hand’. And when he had become commander of the forces of the
“ Sui dynasty, he perceived at every encounter with the enemy that
“ spectral soldiers helped him, so that a glorious victory was the
“ issue” ^

. ShcK alieti hcu f;i, the edition

in two parts, II.


44G


THE SOUL IS PHILOSOPHY AM) FOLK-CONCEPTION.


Such tales of human spirits rewarding those who bestowed care
upon their unburied or badly buried corporeal remains, occur
in Chinese literature in numbers obviously great. We gave a few
on pp. 860 sqq. of Book I, stating there that they certainly tend
much to maintain and promote this branch of social benevolence,
at the same time keeping the (lovernment in the beaten track of earlier
dynasties, which, as we sketched also (pp. 866 sqq.), had all a great
share in such work of charity by enacting laws and taking active
measures for the protection of the dead. Souls are also frequently
represented as appearing in order to prevail upon the living to
convey their buried or unburied bones to their native place,
and afterwards rewarding them for it. Of the same tenor are
numerous tales of spectres haunting the living and harassing them
in sundry ways, until some ghost-seer discovers somewhere unburied
bones, or even a single bone or cranium, and the population decently
buries it. It has often occurred that spirits whose sufferings were
thus alleviated, told their benefactors to evoke them whenever they
should find themselves in trouble or distress, as then they would
immediately come and help them; and, of course, they kept their word.

On the other hand, we have tales of men who, having found
bones and thrown them aside, were ordered by the soul to
collect and Imry them ; and on their neglecting this warning,
they went mad, their soul being taken out of them by the authorities
of the Netherworld for punishment, in consequence of the wronged
soul having impeached them before their tribunal. But, especially,
people laying sacrilegious hands upon tombs incurred the revenge
of the injured souls. “The grave of Li Khoh-yung”, thus we read,
“ who was a prince of Tsin, is situated at eight miles from Tai-cheu,


kinij Li oj- Description of the two Capitals, quoted in the K K, ch. 327.

This work is probably the Liom/ kinr/ sin ki or New Description


of the two Capitals, in five chapters, hy Wei Shuh ^7t£ i )) very learned high
statesman and prolific historian of the eighth century; see the Olil Hooks of the
Tang Dynasty, ch. 102, 1. 23. The book is now lost, except some fragments incor-
porated in other works. The two Capitals were Ch'ang-ngan or fhe present Si-ngan-fu
in Shensi, and Loh-yang, in Honan.


' N- 4" Iffl 51


SOULS BETRAYING THE PILFERERS OF THEIR GRAVES. 447

•‘west, near the convent of the Cypress Forest. In the first year
“of the Then kiien period (A.D. 1138) lawless people dug up
“ that tomb. The monks intrusted with the care of it informed
“ the authorities of the matter, on which the prefect dreamed that
“the prince spoke to him; ‘The pilferers who drank of some liquor
“I had in my grave, got their lips and teeth quite black;
“this will show you whom you have to catch’. Thus informed, he
“laid hands on the robbers next day, one half of whose number
“ were monks of the convent” '.

Of this narrative we possess a reading of earlier date. “The
“official records concerning Tun-hwang relate: When Wang Fan
“ had died, his tomb was opened by robbers, who found him
“ playing at cards with some other persons. He offered them
“liquor, of which they drank in their confusion, perceiving at the
“same time a man leading a copper horse out of the tomb. That
“ same evening a ghostly person presented himself at the city-gate.
“‘I am a messenger from Wang Fan’, said he; ‘to-day robbers
“ have opened his tomb, but he has blackened their lips with
“ spirits. They will be here after sunrise ; you can then recognize
“ them and apprehend them’. And when the robbers entered
“ the gate, the men stationed there garrotted them ; and on their
“being questioned, matters were found to have occurred just as
“the ghost had said”*.

“In the first year of the Khai yuen period (A.D. 713)”, thus
again we read, “ the Imperial secondary consort Hwa enjoyed the
“ favours of the Emperor, and thus gave birth to Ts'ung, prince of


I0.©»

0 fm.j clii a| jg Oenoral

Memoirs concerning Sliansi, sect, on the Tai-yuen department; T S, sect.

cllciptGF

. ^ gt A « , SS PI * ® :2: . Sb mi PIr W ■


448


THE sour, IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


‘•Khing. She then died, and was buried in Ch'ang-ngan. In the
“twenty-eighth year of that period, a gang of banditti made up
“ their minds to open her grave. At a hundred p u from it

“they threw up a high tumulus, under pretext of having to

“ bury somebody in it, and they constructed therein a tunnel
“leading straightway to her mausoleum. They then split up her
“coffin, and finding her with a countenance like that of a living
“ woman, and with four limbs that could bend and stretch, they

“ gave the reins to their lusts, and ravished her. This done, they

“cut off her arms for the gold bracelets, and cut out her tongue,
“ lest she sliould betray the matter to others in their dreams. And
“setting up her corpse in an erect posture, they stuck a torch in
“ her vagina, and carried all the precious things, of which they
“ found great numbers, out of the place where they were stored
“ up, into the quasi-grave. Subsequently they brought an empty
“ coffin on a hearse out of the city, and, as if surprized by the
“ dusk, passed the night at the grave, availing themselves of
“ this time to bring their booty into the soul-cars and the other
“ vehicles of the funeral train. This done, they returned to the city,
“everything in the cars well covered from view.

“ But, before this burial took place, the prince of Khing dreamed
“that the concubine, her hair dishevelled, came to him, quite
“naked, wailing and weeping. ‘Robbers have opened my grave’,
“she said; ‘they have cut me and ravished me; I liave no words
“to tell you the wrong they have thus inflicted upon my poor
“ orbate soul in the dark world. But I am sure to see them come to
“ grief at the Ch'un-ming gate’. Then giving him further details, she
“disappeared. The prince was a pure character, extremely filial; so he
“ rose, terror-stricken, and burst into tears. No sooner did the
“ morning dawn than he gave a report of the matter to the Em-
“peror, who sent forthwith for Wan Nien, the Governor of the
“ Capital, and ordered him to take quick measures suitable to the
“ circumstances. Thus, as the robbers appeared in the Ch'un-ming
“ gate, on their way home with the cars, the officials there told
“them to halt. They ransacked the cars, and finding them full of
“ precious objects, seized everything, and garrotted the whole gang,
“ who confessed immediately. Several dozen men were ultimately
“ arrested, all members of notable families. They were not questioned,
“but the prince requested that five ringleaders should be delivered
“ up to him for private vengeance. The Emperor acceded to this ; and
“ out of all of them he drew the five viscera, which he cooked, and


SPIRITS APPEAR TO MEN IN THEIR DREAMS.


449


“ sacrificed (to the manes of the concubine); the other criminals were
“ all bambooed to death outside the gate of the Capital, He finally
“ re-buried the consort, and mourned for her in his heart for three
“years”

In this series of narratives placed before the reader, there are
some which represent spirits as availing themselves of dreams to
work their vengeance or promise rewards. They thus supply us with
as much confirmation as we could desire of our former statement
(page 116) that, according to prevailing conception, dreams are
often encounters of the soul of the dreamer with ghosts. So certain,
in fact, was the concubine of the prince of Kwang-chSven that the
apparitions of her two victims were reality, that, to defend herself
against them, she exhumed their corpses and burned them to ashes
(Book I, page 1406). Similar radical measures in like circumstances
others took. So, Mu-yung Tsun, whom we spoke of on page 439
(A.D. 319 — 360), one of the rulers of the state of Yen “dreamed


is-aifn*.

BBW. ^tfSt+A.

. Kwan'i i l;i ; K K, ch. 330 .

2


29


450


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ at night that Shih Ki-hing”, — emperor from A. D. 335 till
his death in 350, of a contemporaneous state, named Chao^ — “bit
“ his arm. He awoke and, flushed with anger, ordered his grave
“ to be dug up, his coffin to be broken and the corpse dragged
“ out. Kicking it with his foot and bullying it, he exclaimed : ‘You, a
“ dead barbarian, you presume to make me, a living Son of Heaven,
“dream!’ And the Censor Yoh Yang, who reprimanded him for such
“ cruel mutilation of a corpse, he told to get away, and after
“ having him whipped, he threw him into the Chang stream” ^
The tales of retaliating and rewarding spirits, which occur in
profusion also in modern books, are of no other character than
those ot earlier date, and therefore afford no new points ot
view. This fact justifies the inference, that the belief in such spirits
and their doings prevails unchanged and unshaken to this day.
In conversing with the Chinese, we find that this belief is, in
fact, inveterate in all classes, continuously revived as it is in every-
body by hundreds of tales handed down from good old times, and
considered all as authentic on account of the simple fact that they
occur in books. Ghosts may interfere at any moment with human
business and fate, either favorably or unfavorably. This doctrine
indubitably exercises a mighty and salutary influence upon morals.
It enforces respect for human life and a charitable treatment of
the infirm, the aged and the sick, especially if they stand on
the brink of the grave. Benevolence and humanity, thus based
on fears and selfishness, may have little ethical value in our
eye; but tor all that, their existence in a country where culture
has not yet taught man to cultivate good for the sake of good
alone, may be greeted as a blessing. Those virtues are even extended
to animals, for, in fact, these too have souls which may work
vengeance or bring reward. But the firm belief in ghosts and their
retributive justice has still other effects. It deters from grievous
and provoking injustice, because the wronged party, thoroughly sure
of the avenging power of his own spirit when disembodied, will
not always shrink from converting himself into a wrathful ghost


. Book.s of the T.«in Dynasty, ch. IIO, 1. 11.


^ ^ it


SEVERAL FORMS OF VENGEANCE OF GHOSTS.


451


by committing suicide. It is still fresh in our memory how such
a course was followed in 1886 by a shopkeeper in Amoy, pressed
hard by a usurer, who had brought him to the verge of ruin.
To extort payment, this man ran off with the shutters of his shop, thus
giving its contents a prey to burglars; but in that same night the
wretch hanged himself against his persecutor’s doorpost, the sight
of his corpse setting the whole ward in commotion at daybreak, and
bringing all the family he had storming to the spot. The usurer,
frightened out of his wits, had no alternative but to pay them a
considerable indemnification, with an additional sum for the burial
expenses, on which they pledged their promise to abstain from
bringing him up before the magistrate. Pending those noisy nego-
tiations, the corpse remained untouched where it hung. Thus the
usurer had a hairbreadth escape from jail, flagellation and other
judicial woes, but whether he slipped also through the hands of
his etherized victim, we were never told. It impressed us on that
occasion to hear from the Chinese, that occurrences of this kind
were very far from rare, and they told us a good many, then fresh
in everybody’s memory.

As unavoidably as the spirit’s retaliation must reach assassins and
causers of suicide, it must come down upon any persecutor whose
victim dies of grief or despair. Whatever the deed may be it
is rendered for, such spiritual vengeance may manifest itself in
different ways. The ghost may enter the body of his enemy and
make him blab out, under the influence of a glass too much or
in a fit of mental derangement, his crime with all its particulars,
so that earthly justice becomes able to lay its hands on him. It may
take possession of his body to render him ill or mad ; it may even
cause his death after long and painful suffering, or drive him to
suicide. “ A certain man”, thus the author of the Liao-chai chi i
tells us, “ had a paternal uncle, not blessed with male offspring.
“ Coveting the property of this relation, he volunteered to become
“ his adopted son, and thus, on his uncle’s death, inherited the
“ whole estate. But then he broke his pledge, for he had still a
“ younger paternal uncle, also very well-to-do, sonless like the other,
“ whom he now made his father (by adoption). On him too he
“ turned his back when he had died, accumulating in this wise the
“ possessions of three families in his own hands, and becoming
“ richer than the whole village. Unexpectedly he fell severely ill,
“ and began to rave like a madman. ‘ You wish to enjoy wealth,
“and also to produce an offspring, do you?’ he spoke to himself;


452


THE SOUT. IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“ and seizing a sharp knife, he began to cut away his own flesh,
“strewing the slices on the floor. He then said: ‘You cut off the
“ posterity of others, and yet wish to have posterity for yourself,
“do you?’ — and he ripped open his belly, so that his bowels came
“ out. Thus he expired. A little afterwards his sons died, so that
“ his property fell into the hands of others. A retaliation so eflectual
“ as that, is not it dreadful?” '

Prevalent opinion, continuously inspired anew by literature of all
times and ages, admitting that spiritual vengeance may descend in
all imaginable forms, it admits also that it may come down
upon the culprits’ offspring in the form of disease or death. This
tenet, so revolting to our own feelings of justice, tallies perfectly
with the Chinese conception that the severest punishment which may
be inflicted on one, both in his present life and the next, is decline
or extermination of his male issue, leaving nobody to support him
in his old age, nobody to protect him after his death from misery
and hunger by caring for his corpse and grave, and sacrificing
to his manes. A dissolute son squandering the possessions of his
family and disgracing it by a licentious and criminal life, is often
taken for a man who, being wronged by the father or by some
ancestor, had himself reborn as that son, to thus have his cruel
vengeance. Conversely, an excellent child which is the glory of its
family, generally passes for a re-incarnation of some grateful spirit.

Expression to these conceptions is given by Phi Sung-ling in the
following short tale : “ When Ho Khiiing-khing, a Phng-yin man,
“ was for the first time prefect of TVin (in Kansuh pr.), he had
“ an oil-vendor, who had committed a slight offence and gave him
“ some silly answers which aroused his anger, cudgelled to death.
“ Then he became an officer on the Civil Office Board, and thereby
“ rich enough to have a storied house built. When the ridge-pole

sij®, *)®. aiK.


VENGEANCE TAKEN BY SPIRITS.


453


“ was put in its place his relations and some guests drank that day
“ to his health and congratulated him, when suddenly he saw the
“ oil-man walk in. And as he stood silently aghast, not knowing
“ what to think of this apparition, the news was brought him that
“ his secondary wife had borne him a son. Quite downcast, he
“ said : ‘ This house is not yet finished, and its demolisher already
“ comes’. The bystanders said he was jesting, for they did not know
“ that what he had seen was perfect reality. In course of time his
“ son grew up to manhood, and proved very stupid ; he quite
“ ruined his family, and had to go out as a servant. Then, when-
“ ever he had earned a few coins, he bought some fragrant oil, and
“ swallowed it” h

Thus we learn also that mandarins, however great their power may
be, are not beyond the reach of spiritual wrath, should they indulge
in torturing or executing the innocent. Let the following page from
a modern book of to-day actuality confirm this:

“ In T'ang-shan, Ts'iien-ku of the tea-house lived a life of purity.
“ A delicate girl she was, nineteen years old. A neighbouring
“ student of the Ch'en family, a handsome lad, had secret sexual
“ intercourse with her, and was laid hands upon for that by some
“scoundrels; but, being of a well-to-do family, he could buy their
“ silence for a hundred coins.

“ This nev/s reached the ears of some lictors in the service of
“ the district magistrate. Eager to get also their share in the
* booty, they came together and dragged the lad by his pig-tail
“ to the prefecture. And the magistrate, a man vaunting attainments
“ in jurisprudence, sentenced Ch'en to forty blows with the long
“ stick. The girl burst into vehement wailing and, wet with tears,
“ thrust herself over Ch'^en’s posterior to catch the blows instead


1 Tliis i.s dune on an auspicious day, selected lor the jmrpo.se with great solicitude,
as the late ol' the house and its inmate.? wdl depend on it for ever.

. Liao-c/iai chi i, ch. 14, A-


454


THE SOUL IN PIIIIiOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


of him ; but the prefect took this for indecency and, in a fit of
“ increased anger, condemned her to the same number of blows.

“ Two lictors kept her down upon the ground, their hearts filled
‘•with compassion; and seeing that her whole body was so tender,

•‘ so delicate as if there were no bones in it, and having, moreover,
“received some money from Ch'en, they let the blows come
•‘down lightly, and even beside her on the floor. Still the man-
“ darin’s fury had not abated. He cut off her hair, unshoed her
‘‘ feet, and placed those things upon his bench, to have them passed
“round and seen as a warning to the whole district; and finally
“ he put them away in his magazine, and sold the girl to the
“ profit of the mandarinate.

“ Herewith the affair would have been finished, but for Ch'^en
“ himself, whose thoughts did not turn away from the lass. He
“ bribed somebody to buy her, and married her himself. Before
“ a month had passed, the lictors came again tumultuously, to
“e.xtort money from him. They made such an uproar in the
“ street that the prefect heard it, and flying into a passion, had
“ the two creatures arrested a second time for trial. The poor maid,
“ foreseeing that this time she would not get off so well, hid some
“refuse cotton, straw and paper within her trousers to protect
“herself; but the mandarin scanned her, and asked: ‘What is
“this that you have stuffed inside?’ Then leaving his seat, he
“ drew everything out of her trousers, and had her flagellated
“ on her naked body right under his own eyes. Ch'en protested
“ with hand-gesture and mouth, and after having received several
‘' hundred blows, he was assigned anew this full number. Then
•‘he was sent home, where he died a month after. And the
“ woman was sold to a certain young gentleman, who made her
“ his concubine.

“Now one Liu Hiao-kien, a man of the higher class and of
“ considerable moral courage, walked straightway into the Yamen
“ to lecture the mandarin. ‘ Yesterday', thus he spoke, ‘ I arrived
“ here in the district-city and heard you order in a loud voice to
“inflict severe beatings. Expecting to find you busy with robbers
“and a gang of thieves, II approached the steps to see, and I beheld
“ what 1 did not expect to see : a tender girl with her red silk
“ trousers off, being Jieaten with sticks ! The part of her body
“ exposed, so fleshy, was like a white snowball melting away miser-
“ ably in the' heat of the sun, and you inylord, you rained down
•‘ upon it the maximum of blows, though already on the first blow


MANDARINS PUNISHED BY THEIR VICTIM’S GHOST. 455

“ it got the colour of a rotten peach. Her adultery was only a slight
“offence; why then did you treat her in that way?’ — ‘IViien-ku
“is a beauty’, answered the mandarin; ‘hence the people would
“ have accused me of voluptuousness had I not beaten her. And
“ Ch"en is rich ; so they would have accused me of being bribed
“ by him if I had not beaten him’ — ‘ But’, thus retorted the
“other, ‘is it then allowed a magistrate, that is to say, a father

“ and mother to the people, to lacerate the skin and flesh ot others

“to increase his own reputation? A^our conduct shall have the
“ reward it deserves’. And with these words he siiook his clothes
“ and strode away, breaking olf all lurther intercourse with that
“ prefect.

“Nearly ten years then passed away when that magistrate was
“ removed to Sung-kiang in his capacity as prefect. In that place
“ he was once sitting in his mansion at his noontide dinner,
“ when his servants saw a young man enter through the window
“and tap him three times on his back. At the same moment,

“ the mandarin complained of pain on that part touched, and

“ before he had flnished his meal, a swelling ap])eared on his back
“ upward of one foot in size, midway through which a scam
“ ran, giving it the aspect of a human posterior. They called the
“ surgeon, who, on having seen the spot, e.xclaimed : ‘It is incurable,
“ for its colour is that of a rotten peach’. On hearing these words,
“ the mandarin heartily e.xecrated that man ; hut in less than ten
“ days he was dead” b


!B ® 2 . -B ^ * iltf , # « #5 . ta SS JB . « ^ K


456


THE SOUL IN PHlIiOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


According to the Amoy people, the vengeance of spirits may
in many a case be very long in reaching its object. For thus
they reason : — every individual lives under the dominion of his
kh'i un or “ destiny created by the Breaths”, that is to say,
by the Yang and the Yin which animate the Universe and
constitute its Course or Tao; and if that natural destiny is
felicitous, firm and solid on account of merits gained by the indi-
vidual himself in his present life or in a previous existence, or by
his ancestors, the world of ghosts is perfectly powerless against him,
whereas, as we saw on page 432, these have altogether to comply
with Heaven’s will or Tao. But as soon as his store of merit
is outbalanced by an adequate amount of demerits, his account
with Heaven being thus squared, the rancorous spirits regain full


Z, yli — M

lA Si .

)<ir tn si * a . -w iit *i ft.

18,2. »0,

+ a ¥ Tszc puh >/ii, cli. 10.

- MM-


REVENGEFUL SOULS OF MURDERED INFANTS.


457


liberty to attack his tottering destiny; and whatever expedients
human genius may now set at work to ward off evil from him,
they remain effectless altogether.

This simple complex of tenets lays disrespect for human lives
under great restraint. Most salutarily also they work upon female
infanticide, a monstrous custom practised extensively among the
poor in Amoy and the surrounding farming-districts, as in many
other parts of the Empire. The fear that the souls of the murdered
little ones may bring misfortune, induces many a father or mother to
lay the girls they are unwilling to bring up, in the street for adoption
into some family, or into a foundling-hospital. At least one such
institution is to be found in many populous towns. It is called a
yuh ying t'ang ‘ or “hall for infant-nursing”, or pao ying Tang®:
“hall for the protection of babies”, or tsih ying Tang’: “hall
where infants are brought together”, etc. Such hospitals are founded
and maintained by the authorities in concert with the wealthy
and fashionable citizens. Alongside with such practical virtuous
work, these worthies increase their stock of merit by distributing
from time to time gratuitous tracts against infanticide. Such docu-
ments for the most part afford curious reading. They give us wise
exhortations from the lips of gods and saints, side by side with
terrifying instances of punishments inflicted by unseen powers on
parents and midwives guilty of child-murder. In general they bear
a strong Buddhistic tinge, being bound up with warnings against
the killing of men and animals, and with accounts of torture inflicted
on delinquents in the Buddhist hell.

Many of these tracts are shaped like a book, in which every case
related is illustrated by a woodcut print. They thus stimulate much
the curiosity of the fair sex and others who cannot read, prompting
them to have the text duly read and explained to them by experts
in the noble reading-art. Perusing a small stock of such books in
our possession, we find some instances of a mother who, having
destroyed a new-born daughter, fell ill, and seeing the victim appear
before her in the company of a hideous spectre with iron fetters,
gave up the ghost, exclaiming; “The wronged soul is coming to
fetch me”. — We read of a mother whose murdered daughters
arose before her eyes with frightful threats, telling her she would
not escape punishment unless by wandering about to beg her food


458


THE SOUL US PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


and tell everybody this adventure of hers; and she did wander
about in the wide world till the end of her days, as a warning
example against infanticide. — Of another mother the husband was
just busy digging under her bed a grave for their drowned child,
when she saw a huge snake emerging from the tub in which,
in accordance with Chinese custom, the child had dropped when
delivered; and this monster bit her so ferociously, that she died

the next day. Still more frightfully punished was a murderous

mother, who became pregnant with a snake with a human head,
recoiling into her womb after having just shown itself; horror-
stricken, she died of a severe pain in her abdomen, fully convinced
that the monstrous reptile was a re-incarnation of two daughters
she had murdered before. — One mother was attacked by the
bloody mutilated bodies of her daughters, and by some bloody clods
representing the children she had destroyed by abortion ; all these
monsters angrily gnawed her flesh with so much ferocity, that she
died of a virulent epidermic scurf.

A farmer finds on the road a basket with an infant girl in it.
It contains also some money, and a written request to the finder
to bring up the child. He pockets the money, and flings the

child into the river; but erelong a flash of lightning strikes him. —
A mother who has drowned three daughters, is pregnant for

three years, and on a sudden six hands protrude from her womb.
She yells tremendously from fright for seven days, and expires.
Many more slayers of their own progeny were thus visited with
a pregnancy of dreadful duration, the fetus not daring to appear
for fear that a like fate should befall it; and the end was the
mother’s death, or a favourable deliverance in consequence of a
solemn oath that the expected child should suffer no injury whatever
at her hands. — A disappointed butcher, enraged at the birth of
a daughter, as he had expected a son, quarters it, and afterwards
begets a son frightfully maimed. This event shocks him so much
that he sickens and dies, leaving his crippled son alone in this
world, to make his way through it as a miserable beggar. — A
man who buried alive many of his new-born children, is attacked
one day by them all while lying ill; he sees his four limbs
change into a cow’s legs, and weeping he turns round on his
bed for three days, when an unseen hand cuts off his head; and
ultimately all his sons perish likewise by an executioner’s sword. —
Mothers and fathers are represented dying prematurely for having
drowned their daughters, and thereupon returning to life to tell of


PUNISHMENTS INFLICTED FOR INFANTICIDE.


459


horrid tortures inflicted in hell on themselves and their accom-
plices by Yama and his underlings. Others reveal their infernal
fate to members of their family in their dreams. — We read
how midwives who smothered the daughters of their clients, or
caused abortion and miscarriage, were crushed under the roofs
of their own houses, or were driven mad by the souls of their
victims, lacerating their flesh with their teeth. It has also occurred
that such guilty women ran about in delirium for many days,
loudly swearing that they would for ever beware of committing
such crimes again, and then stabbed themselves in despair. Finally
we may mention a father who, while engaged in drowning his
second daughter, heard a voice from the water-tub, exclaiming
in a thundering tone: “This is the second time you drown me;
but now it is my turn to destroy you and your sons”. Anxious
to escape this fate, he gets divorced from his wife; nevertheless he
dies for anguish, and ere a month has passed, his two sons are killed
by a catastrophe.

To prove the fact that even simple abortion may provoke
retaliation on the part of the soul of the fetus, Chinese men of
letters are always ready to call attention to the mother of the
celebrated scholar Shao Khang-tsieh, of whom we spoke on page
715 of Book I. This worthy woman had a narrow escape from
such prosecution, even though she had committed the feticide
unwillingly. “Madam Chang”, thus we read, “the great-grand-
“ mother of Shao Poh-wen (Khang-tsieh’s son), could not come
“across his grandmother. Madam Li, without using her with the
“ utmost harshness. Unable to endure this any longer, the latter
“ resolved one evening to put an end to herself. But then she
“dreamed of a shen, who made her drink some broth from a
“jade-veined cup, and said: 'Do not commit suicide, for now you
“ shall give birth to an excellent son’. She believed that being (and
“ desisted). Afterwards she became ill and weak. The doctors gave
“ her their drugs to swallow, on which she had another dream,
“this time of two quinces lying on the right and the left side of
“ the door separating her bedroom from the hall, one of which, viz.
“that on the right (or inferior) side, was rotten. She told it her
“ father-in-law, who lost no time in fetching more medicine, and
“ made her take it. The time of confinement came, and she gave
“ birth to Khang-tsieh and simultaneously to a dead female fetus.
“ More than ten years now elapsed, when, laid up in the hall, she
“ saw in the moonlight a girl in the courtyard, curtesying to her.


460


THE SOUL IN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.


“‘Mother’, she cried, bathed in tears, ‘you were so careless in
“taking medicine, and so you poisoned me; for shame. — ‘It was
“fate that caused it’, replied the mother. ‘But’, the girl rejoined,
“ ‘if that is so, why then was my brother alone permitted to live?’ —
“‘It was fate that determined that you should die and that he
“should live’, was the answer; and on these words the girl burst
“ into tears and passed on” h

Such narratives of prolicide, though they bear all the marks of
fancy, perfectly answer their ethical purpose, deeply impressing,
as they do, the simple-minded, especially because they generally
give with remarkable preciseness the names of the heroes and
heroines, the places and dates. Anti-prolicide literature also affords, as
may be expected, sundry examples of people reaping rewards for
having virtuously abstained from the monstrous practice, or for
having tried to deter others from it. We read of honest fathers
that never killed one daughter, who became very wealthy, or
gained glorious laurels at the examinations of the State by the
active help of the patron-divinities of literature and other gods,
who, far from keeping their intervention a secret, revealed it to
them in their dreams. Other such fathers received their reward in
the shape of a numerous male offspring; some had a brilliant
and glorious career, or enjoyed a life of exceptional length, and such
blessings were bestowed also on the compassionate who brought up
foundlings, gave money to the poor for the first nursing-expenses
of their progeny, saved children from the drowning-tub, erected
foundling-hospitals, etc. etc.


a#, as

T. AA0.

AB.ftJE

^ Wen-kien ts^ien Ink ; T S,

sect. , ch. 150.


REVENGE OF SPIRITS AT THE STATE-EXAMINATIONS.


461


The highest ambition of every Chinese being admission into
the mandarin-class, it becomes almost a matter of course to find
success at the world-famed competitive examinations which open
access to official posts, foremost among the rewards bestowed by
grateful spirits. Numerous instances of their having helped candi-
dates to obtain their degree occur in the books of the present and
the past, and that which we gave on page 862 of Book I is by no
means a solitary one. On the other hand, being plucked often
passes for a proof that no grateful spirits interfered, or that
some rancorous spirit prevented the candidate from producing a
superexcellent essay. It has been written often enough in books
on China, that there always are among the host of candidates
some that become ill in their cell, or deranged in mind, or

even die in consequence of over-excitement, nervousness or fatigue.
But never has it been stated with full emphasis that the

Chinese are so ready to ascribe such events to revengeful spectres.
Father Etienne Zi of Zikawei, author of an exemplary exposition
of the examination-system, entitled: “Pratique des Examens Lit-
teraires en Chine”, writes therein with reference to the second

session for the examinations for the k ii-j e n rank (page 1 42) : “ Le

“nombre des candidats est ordinairement moindre D’autres

“ sont tombes malades, ou meme sont morts au cours de la pre-
“ miere epreuve. Rien a cela d’etonnant: I’etroite reclusion que
“subit une telle multitude, I’insalubrite du local dans lequel elle
“ se trouve parquee, I’infection de I’air qu’on y respire, jointes a

“ la surexcitation intellectuelle des candidats, ne peuvent manquer
“ de faire un nombre relativement considerable de victimes. Les
“ paiens considffi'ent comme certain que, si un lettre mene une vie
“ immorale, s’il a des habitudes honteuses ou s’il recherche injuste-
“ ment la richesse, il ne manquera pas de recevoir le chatiraent du
“ciel a cet examen. Si done il arrive qu’un candidat se pende
“ dans sa cellule, ou se donne la mort de quelque autre maniere,
“ si, dans un moment d’egarement, il macule ou dechire son cahier,
“ etc., ces malheurs seront mis sur le compte de la ‘retribution’,
“ pao-ing

In conversation with the Chinese, we have often been told that
such catastrophes seldom occur at the examinations for the siu-
ts'ai degree, the possession of which is requisite for admission to


462 THE SO0L rN PHILOSOPHY AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

the k ii-j e n examinations. Por, they say, it is the second or k u-
i e n deoree that gives access to the mandarinate which, in virtue
of its height and might, is almost beyond the power of spirits and
ghosts ; and so implacable spirits especially attack their enemies with
energy when they are trying to pass this important examination.

When all the candidates have assembled, ready to betake them-
selves to the cells, and the gates of the vast arena are about to
be closed, the high committee of examiners have a curious ceremony
performed. One of them placing himself before a table bearing some
sacrificial eatables and two candles, takes burning incense-sticks
in his hands, and solemnly summons the unseen spirits into the
place. “You that have enjoyed favours”, he exclaims, “requite them
now” then throwing the incense up in the air, he salutes the
spirits with bows, and retires. Formerly, it is said, the invoker
was in the habit of exclaiming also: “And you that have suffered
wrong, repay it now” *. But in those times so many cells and
their occupants were struck by the hand of unseen beings, that a
sentiment of humanity prompted in the end the examiners to
give up this custom. Nevertheless, to this day many vindictive
ghosts freely swarm in together with the grateful; and not seldom
do they storm the gate in crowds so dense that the keepers,
to bolt it, have to push the doors with all their might. Thus
sagaciously does the Government avail itself of the spirit-world to
recruit the official class exclusively from the virtuous and the honest ;
indeed, every man with an over-burdened conscience is sure to keep
aloof from a place where he is delivered with so much refinement
to the wrath of his victims. Were the wrathful spirits not thus
officially invited to walk in, they would not presume to encroach
upon that sacred ground; for they, just as well as all mankind,
are the Emperor’s subjects, and therefore have to keep away
respectfully from whatever is set aside for Imperial use or special
Imperial property.

Having made their way through the gate, the spectres begin
their gloomy work immediately. Curious tales circulate as to
how they behave. Some candidates they bereave of consciousness;
others they render ill, mad or delirious, and of a greater number
they stifle the memories, making them sit silly over their writing-
paper, unable to put down even one sentence or character. Some


1


GRATEFDL SPIRITS AT THE STATE-EXAMINATIONS.


463


are kept in constant alarm by soft or shrill chirping voices on the
roof of their cell. Others are haunted by the souls of their
murdered infants, nay, it occurs that under the pressure of some
revengeful ghost, candidates write down a circumstantial confes-
sion of their crimes, in lieu of an essay on the theme given. There
are also those who, on leaving their cells, blab out their sins aloud
before the whole crowd of candidates, or are found dead in their
cells, having opened an artery of their throat with a sherd of their
tea-pot or tea-cup, in default of cutting instruments.

With respect to virtuous candidates the spirits behave quite
otherwise. They clear up their brains, arousing in them many a
bright idea which, converted into writing, evinces deepness of
learning, wisdom and intellect. It is said and believed that com-
positions laid aside by the examiners as worth nothing, are some-
times placed before them again by an invisible hand, and on closer
inspection found to be really the best among the best. As a rule,
the successful candidates themselves do not know who the spirits
are that thus kindly interfered on their behalf. In general they
simply take them for ghosts lying under some obligation or other
for favours received from ancestors of theirs, or having lived some
time in an animal treated with kindness by some forefather or
by themselves. Under these circumstances, candidates may chance
to be attacked by spirits and at the same time protected by
some. In such a case, it is affirmed, the power of the grateful ones
is always paramount to that of the others and therefore perfectly
neutralizes this, so that no harm of any significance can ever befall
a man whom a benevolent ghost stands by.

It follows from those considerations that many a candidate with
very bad personal precedents may pass through the examination-
ordeal with impunity on account of the merits of his ancestors, nay,
even scoundrels and criminals may carry off the highest laurels. This
does not prevent those that come out victorious from being generally
e.xalted as the cream of the virtuous, for just as it is an a.xiom in
China that merits of children surround their forefathers with a
glorious halo, so the merit of the ancestry washes the offspring
clean. The kii-jen degree once obtained, places the happy possessor
for ever beyond the reach of most evil ghosts, as well as all
people in the midst of whom he moves about as a peacock
among fowls. Indeed, he enjoys that mighty, special protection
which the patron-divinities of Literature award to all graduates of
ranks so high as his. Thus do virtue and merit shed their salutary


464 THE SOUL IN PHrr.OSOPIIT AND FOLK-CONCEPTION.

influence far around; but in the same measure punishment inflicted
on a man by a rancorous spirit may work disastrously on those
near him. Hence many a plucked candidate comes home with the
news that his bad fortune would have it that something frightful
befell a candidate in a celt not far from his, so that he had to
write his essay within a sphere wherefrom the gods of Literature
had withdrawn their protecting hands and in which accordingly no
success could possibly be hoped for.

The series of authentic evidences of Chinese mind and thought
which we have drawn up for a systematical survey in this Part of
our work and in the two last chapters in particular, attest decidedly
the existence of a point of importance, which we have now, in
conclusion, to emphasize as a main stone in the basis of China’s
Religion : — it is an inveterate conviction of the Chinese people, a
doctrine, an axiom, that spirits exist, keeping up with the living
a most lively intercourse, as intimate almost as that among men.
There exists, in fact, a line of separation between spirits and
men, or, which means much the same, between the dead and the
living, but it is a very faint line, scarcely discernible. In every
respect their intercourse bears an active character. It brings blessing,
and evil as well, the spirits thus effectually ruling mankind’s fate.
From them man has to hope everything, but equally much to fear.
As a natural consequence, it is around the ghosts and spirits that
he groups his religious acts, with this sole intent to avert their
wrath and the evil it brings, and to insure their good-will and
help. The acts, manners and methods by which he tries to realize
this dual object, are numerous; they will be the chief topic of this
work. They are the fruits of the inventive genius of the whole of
China through a long series of centuries; they are the reflection
of her ivit and intellect, both old and modern, which, conversely,
nothing could illustrate so well as her Animistic Religion.


INDEX

of the Chinese books used in the preparation of this
Volume, or mentioned in it. Apart from those
mentioned in Book I pp. xvni sqq., and
in its Index on page 1427.


The figures given refer to the page where particulars about the work may be found,
or its title in Chinese characters.


C.

Cliang-teh fu chi, 285.
Ch'ang-p'ing cheu chi, 3i2.
Chao ye ts'ien tsai, 223.

Chen chung sha, 328.

Chen-lah fung-t'u ki, 375.
Ch'en-cheu chi, 227.

Ch'en-liu fung-suh ch'wen, 219,
Chi kwai lull, 252.

Chih-chai shu luh kiai t'i, 200.
Choh i ki, 73.

Choh king luh, 346.

Chu kia pen-ts'ao, 398.

Chu-tszo ts'uen shu, 44.

Chuh shu ki nien, 204.
Ch'un-chu ki wen, 110.
Ch'un-ts'iu fan lu, 35.
Ch'un-ts'iu wei shu, 21,
Ch'un-ts'iu yuon ming pao, 21.
Chimg-hwa ku kin chu, 244.

F.


I Hoh lin yuh lu, 251.

' Hu wei, 173.

Hu yuen, 173.

Hwa shu, 158.

Hwa-yang kwoh chi, 334.
Hwai-nan wan pih shuh, 313.
Hwan yuon ki, 434, 440.
Hwang-ti su wen, 76.

I.

I hioh kang muh, 75.

I lin Isih yao, 403.

I shwoh, 384.

1 wen tsung luh, 138.

1 yuon, 118.

Jih-hwa chu kia pen-ts'ao, 398.
; Ju men shi ts'in, 378.

K.


I’ah yen, 30.

Hung-hien chi, 350.

H.

Han Ch'ang-li sien-sheng ts'uen tsih,
Han IVu-ti nei ch'wen, 305.

Hia siao ching, 13.

Hiah wen ki, 242.

Hiao-king keu ming kueh, 17.
Hiao-king yuen ming pao, 21.

Hien ch'wang kwah i chi, 347.

Hien yih, 133.


j K K or Kwang ki, X.

Kao shi ch'wen, 319.

Keu ming kueh, 17.

Khin ts'ing ying, 228.
i Khiu sin luh, 379.

32. : Ki-fu t’ung chi, 367.

I Ki shen luh, 149.

I Kiang hing tsah luh, 109.
i Kiang Hu ki wen, 229.

‘ Kien ming shu, 222.

I King Ch'u sui-shi ki, 361.

I Kiu kwoh chi, 349.

I Kiun chai tuh shu chi, 62.


Ku kin chiij 2ii.

Kuen yiu lull, 390.

Kwali i chi, 210, 3-17.

Kwah t'l chi, 279.

Kwan-yin-tsze, 13,

Kwang-chcu chi, 270.

Kwaiig i ki, 73.

Kwang-tiing t'ung chi, 210,

Kwci bin Isah shih, 240.

Xwei lung, 3S1.

Kwci yuen ts'ung t'an, 118

L,.

Lang-hucn ki, 105.

Lao hioh-ngan pih ki, 220.

Lei clung p'u tsi pen shi fang, 91.

Liang king fsin) ki, 110.

Liang szii kiing ki, 200.

Liao-chai chi i, 121.

Lich bicn clrwcn, 397.

Ling oh'u king, 90.

Ling kwai luh, 99.

Ling ying luh, 221.

Luh i ch'wen, 279.

Lung hing tb'zc ki, 101.

3f.

ilao-shi t.b'iio niuh niao sheu eh'ung yii
shu, 238.

Mili'Chwang man luh, 103.

Ming i picTi luh, 322.

Ming siang ki, ] 10.

Muh I'icn-tiizc ch’utn, 350.

Mung yiu luh, 120.

Man fang th'ao-nuih chwaiig, 313.

M^an king, 71.

Man ko ki, 21S.

Mci kwan king, 02

Mgai jili chai ts'ung ch'ao, 121

P.

Pan Ku yiu fung fu chu, 361.

Pen shi fang, s. Lei ching p'u tsi pen
shi fang.

Pen-ts'ao hwiu picn, 399.

Pcn-ts'ao king, s. bhen Mung pcn-ts'ao
king.

Pcn-ts'ao yen i, 391.


Picn i chi, 132.

Poh hu t'ung i, 293.
Poh liang luh, 372.


! 'Rh-ya yih, 106.

S.

, San ts'ai t'u hwui, 71.

1 Shan hat king, 215.

! Shch-cheu t'u king, 335.

I Shen i king, 300.

Shen kien, 21.

Sben king ki, 289.

Shen niich lun, 01.

Shen Mung pcn-ls'ao king, 300.
j Shen sicn ch'wen, 297.
i Sheu shen heu ki, 96.

Sheu shen ki, 78.

Shi ki ching i, 279.

Shi ki sob yin, 136.

Shi ki tsih kini, 279.

■' Shi ki yin i, 279.

Shi yen yao yuen, 21.

! Shih kwoh ch'nn-ts'iu, 327.

I

! Shing tsi tsung liih, 378.

; Shu huen luh, 236.

I Shuh i ki, 165.
i Shuh pen-ls'ao, 389.

Si-ch'wen heu hicn luh, 372.

1 Siang chung (shan-shui) ki, 335.

: Siao 'rh fang, 396.

I °

I Siao siang luh, 200

I Sin lun, 42.

1 Sin ts'i liiai ki, 107.

! Sing-li ta ts'uen shu, 33.
j Siun-tszc, 27.

; Su wen, s. Hwang-ti su wen.

; Siien shih chi, 135.

\ Suh kwang choh i ki, 73.

Suh poh wuh chi, 79.

I Suh sien ch'wen, 321.
i Suh ts'i hiai ki, 107.

Sui .sin pi kih fang, 102,

Sze khu ts'uen shu tsung muh, 13,

T.

TS or T'u shu, X.

I Ta Tai li ki, 12.

1 Ta T'ang khi shi 235.

I T'ai-p'ing kwang ki, X.

1 T'ai-p'ing yu Ian, X


Tao teh king, 69.

Tsi sheng fang, 92.

Ts'i hiai ki, 107.

Ts'ien tsai pu i, 223.
Tsih i ki, 243.

Tsih yen fang, 395.
Ts'ing tsun luh, 208.
Tsze-hwa tsze, 46.

Tsze puh yii, 106.

T'u king pen-ts'ao, 318.
Tub i chi, 349.

Tiing-p'o chi lin, 121.
Tung wei chi, 212.


Wen kicn ki, 167.

Wen kien ts'ien luh, 102.

Yang shu, 27.

Yih ch'wen, 204.

Yin ming luh, 202.

Yin t'ung fu chu, 364.
Yin-yang tsah tsu, 74.
Y'oh tung shing i, 18.

Yii tung luh, 385.

Yuen chung ki, 288.

Yuen hwa ki, 217.

Yuen ming pao, 21.

Yuh ying kia pi, 92.

Yuh t'ang hien hwa, 261.
Yun kih ts'ih ts'ien, 74.
Y’un sicn tsah ki, 289.
Yung-loh ta tien, 121.


W.

Wan pih shuh, s. Hwai-nan wan pih shuh.
Wen-ch'ang tsah luh, 133.

Wen khi luh, 423.

Wen kien heu luh, 102.


•tWr^-'-^JP::^


i'y^,'L- -'i-


.^■V'


I'fr'Wr .


i


KEW DPI^.


^'^r.


', Flenae he^ iiff 'to Ice^ w bocfi^
clean and moving.


|i(||ft«i git»tttUifc-
