GOVERNMENT OP INDIA
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OP INDIA
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
ACCESSION NO.
D.(i.A. 79
S XXXXXXXX yUXIXXl-XXXX ZJI
P'^C
Or.. .
’.I
^T'rlAi \ & Cc.
■ Boo cl I' r H5
H Ra--ri] StreotiZ
"» 5 n XT 7 xrt m XT irn x3
f
TFIE
RELIGIOUS SYSTEM
OF
CHINA.
THE
KELIGIOUS SYSTEM
CHINA
Its Ancient Forms, F volition. History and Present Aspect
Manners, Customs and Social I ^stitutions connected there jyith.
r c
X V
J. J. M. DE GROOT, PH. D.
PUBLISHED WITH A SUBVENTION FROM THE DUTCH
COLONIAL GOVERNMENT


VOLUME VI


2 ^ 9-51

Qro


BOOK II

ON THE SOUL AND ANCESTRAL WORSHIP

I*art IV, Th,e War against Spectres.

I*art V, The F^riesthood of A.mmism. ^ ^

lL „ "' AX

— — &lit!rarylieg iio ig -:

V ■ '


Late E. J. BRILL
PUBIilSHEaS AND PRINTERS
LEYDEN. — 1910.


Ifi 0 i


OaB.


ikfi

L,.1 t')^' ,'/f.


All rights reserved.


FklNTED BY E. J. BRILL, AT LEYDEN.


CONTENTS


OF

VOLUME YL

Page

Book II. The Soul and Ancestral Worship.

Part VI. The War against Spectres.

Chapter L Tlie place of Demonocracy and Exorcism

m tlie Taoist System 929

» 11. Antiquity of Exorcism. Terminology . 934

» 111. Light and Fire, Fireworks, and Noise. 941

" IV. Shen-t Li and Yuh-lei, Peaches, Tigers,

Ropes 9o3

') T". Tlie Cock 9G5

» VI. Twigs and Brooms 971

VII. Exorcising Processions 973

» VI 11. Weapons

IX. Mirrors 1000

'> X. Dogs and Blood 1000

XL Classical and other Writings . . . . 1011

'> XIL Spells and Charms

Xlll. The War against Animal -Demons . . 1002

" XIV. Exorcising Therapeutics and Medical

Charms 1071

'> XV. Sepulchral Medicines and Amulets . . 1090

" XVI. Evil averted or exorcised by means of

Substitutes or Surrogates .... 1098

" XVII. Domonolatry 1107

« XVlfl. Miscellaneous Practices against Sjjectral

Evil 1118

A'LV. U^e and Disu.^e of Narne'^ 1125

» AV. Man an Exorci.'^t by Nature, and on

account of his Learning, Position,

and Virtue 1143

" A'A7. S[iectre-seers 1160

" XXI 1. Historical and mythical Specialists in

Exorcism 1170


VI


CONTENTS.


Part. V. The Priesthood of Animism.

Chapter L Wu-ism before and during the Han Period.
» II. Wu-ism after the Han Period

1. The Wu as Seers of Spirits and as

Soothsayers

2. The W u as Exorcising Physicians .

3. Wu'isni employed and pei'secuted by the

State

» III. The Sacrificing and Exorcising W u of the

present Time

The Religious Dress of the Wu-ist Priests.
» IV. Possessed Mediums, Exorcists and Seers. .

» V. Spirit-Wi’iting and other Oi’acular Work .

» VI. Female Wu-ism of the Present ....


Page


1187

1212

1214

1226

1233

1243

1264

4269

1295

1323


PART IV.

THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


CHAPTER I.

THE PLACE OP DEMONOCRACY AND EXORCISM IN THE TAOIST SYSTEM.

I now arrive at an important point in the extensive task which I
have imposed upon myself. Having given in the preceding volumes
a picture of the basis of the Religious System of China, definable
as animistic, I have now to undertake the description of the
structure which in course of ages has arisen on that basis. Animism
evidently was actually the Religion of China in the dawn of her
history; it still is the fundamental and principal part of her
Religion at present.

The supply of material, from which Chinese writings have allowed
us to build up the preceding volumes, enables us to define clearly
the principles and main features of that animistic religion. Without
any reservation we must call it universalistic. Its starting-point is
an animated Universe, not created, but spontaneously creating by
the operation of its Tao, composed of two souls, the Yang and
the Yin; the Yang represents light, warmth, production, and life,
as also the celestial sphere from which all these blessings emanate;
the Yin is darkness, cold, death, and the earth, which, unless
animated by the Yang or heaven, is dark, cold, dead. The Yang and
the Yin are divided into an infinite number of spirits respectively
good and bad, called s h e n and k w e i ; every man and every living
being contains a shen and a kwei, infused at birth, and
departing at death, to return to the Yang and the Yin. Thus man
with his dualistic soul is a microcosmos, born from the Macrocosmos
spontaneously. Even every object is animated, as well as the Universe
of which it is a part.


69


930


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


A shen, being a part of the beneficent half of the Universe,
is naturally considered to be a good spirit, a god; a kwei,
belonging to the opposite half, is a spirit of evil, a spectre, a
demon. It is then evident that there can be nothing good in the
world but that which comes from the shen, and no evil but which
the kwei cause or inflict.

The Universe being in all its parts animated by such gods and
spectres, the system of Universalistic Animism necessarily and
naturally is thoroughly yolytheistic and polydemonistic. Gods or shen
are e. g. heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, wind, rain, clouds,
thunder, fire; the earth under the influence of heaven; seas, rivers,
mountains, rocks, stones, animals, plants, objects; in particular also
the souls of men. And devils swarm everywhere, in numbers incal-
culable.

The operation of the Yang and the Yin is the cosmic alternations
of warmth and cold, light and darkness, that is to say, the annual
and daily rotation of Nature, always regular, never deviating from
its invariable course. It is the Tao, Way or Course, the Order
of the Universe. And the shen and kwei, being the components
of the Yang and Yin, perform in this Universal Order the leading
part in the distribution of good and evil. Their influence on human
fate is as dominant as that of Nature itself. But Yang is above
Yin, just as heaven is above earth. Heaven, the greatest yang
power, then is the chief shen or god, who controls all spectres
and their doings, and it is one of the great dogmata of China’s
theology that no spectres are entitled to harm man but by the
authorisation of Heaven or its silent consent. Nevertheless there
are myriads who wantonly, of their own accord, without regard to
that li 5^ or law of the Tao (cf. page 431) do distress the world
with their evil deeds. But spectres decidedly should be, and mostly
are, the sole and general agents of Heaven for the dispensing
of evil among men, and also in like manner are agents of the gods
who, under Heaven’s sway, administer the world. Demonomy or
Demonocracy, limited by Heaven and the gods, then is an indis-
pensable chief element in the Chinese system of Religion.

All shen or gods, being parts of the Yang, are the natural
enemies of the kwei, because these are the constituents of the
Yin; indeed, the Yang and the Yin are engaged in an eternal
struggle, manifested by alternation of day and night, warmth and
cold, summer and winter. The worship and propitiation of the gods,
which is the main part of China’s Religion, has no higher purpose


UNIVERSALISM ; POLYTHEISM; POLYDEMONISM. 931

than that of inducing the gods to protect man against the world
* of evil, or, by descending among men, to drive spectres away
by their intimidating presence. This cult implies invocation of
happiness; but as happiness merely means absence of misfortune-
which the spectres cause, such a cult is tantamount to the disarming
of spectres by means of tlie gods.

Thus it is that the belief in spectres is not in China, as among
us, banished to the domain of superstition or even nursery tales.
It is a corner-stone of China’s universalistic religion, as true as the
existence of the Yin, as true then as the existence of the Tao or
Order of the World. But for this doctrine and its consequences,
China’s cult of gods would be rather useless and meaningless, and
certainly would show itself in forms quite different from those which
it possesses. We have demonstrated (pp. 436 sqq.) that the demonistic
dogma also is a main basis of morality. Indeed, the Order of the
■ Universe, unchangeable, never deviating from its right path, creating
and protecting all men equally, cannot but deal with them with
like impartiality and justice, punishing the bad, who depart from
the line of natural rectitude, by means of the k w e i , with never
failing certainty. This dogma acts as a deterrent to vice; and thus
Demonism, Demonomy or Demonocracy, the lowest element in religion,
has, as a source of ethics, fulfilled an important mission to many
thousands of millions whom Providence has appointed to live and
die on Eastern Asiatic soil. Certainly this may be regarded as a
phenomenon worthy the attention of students of religions.

Now we have taken our rapid survey of what may be said to
be the frameVvork of China’s system of Religion. We may call it
Taoistic, since it consists of the doctrine that the world is ruled by
shen and kwei evolved from the Yang and the Yin, the vicissi-
tudes of whose operations constitute the Tao or Order of the World.
The religion built up around that frame we must consequently
likewise call Taoistic — or Taoism.

We have stated that the main function of this religion consists
in muzzling the kwei, also by stimulating the operation of the
shen. Taoism may then actually be defined as Exorcising Polytheism,
a cult of the gods with which Eastern Asiatic imagination has filled
the Universe, connected with a highly developed system of magic,
consisting for a great part in Exorcism. This cult and magic is,
of course, principally in the hands of priests. But, besides, the lay
world, enslaved to the intense belief in the perilous omnipresence
of spectres, is engaged every day in a restless defensive and offensive


932


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


war against those beings. That war, which we now have to describe,
is guided by a strategy invented by the thinking faculties of the
people, by its sophistry passing for philosophy; by tactics which
its ancestors have declared in writing to be useful and effective. In
all ages this war has had its leaders: men of wit, magicians,
priests, possessing shuh or “arts, magic”, or wise and occult
fang or fa “expedients, methods” of defence or attack,

self-invented, or inherited from older generations, by means of which
spectres might be paralyzed, put to flight, or even destroyed or
killed. A study of those means and methods, of that exorcising
magic, is a study in national philosophy and popular intellect, and
at the same time a study in the boundless sway which superstition
exercises over all minds in China, from the most unlearned man
in the street up to ministers and emperors.

Spectres being the chief causation of disease and plague, their
ejection or expulsion was ever a prominent element in the healing
art. This art may have grown out in other directions or branches,
but the great demonistic element re-appears in it everywhere to
this day. This volume will therefore also conduct the reader into
the field of medicine and promotion of public health.

Here the reader may be disposed to ask whether the war against
spectres is consistent with the dogma that spectres are punishing
agents of Heaven ; for is man’s exorcising capacity so powerful
that it may thwart Heaven’s will? Paganism is logical, and its logic
does not belie itself when it gives its answer to this question.
Exorcism, it says, is of little or no avail against spectres who do
their injurious work with the authorisation or command of Heaven,
or of any god who, like that of Walls and Moats or that of the
Eastern Mountain, exercises justice over man under Heaven’s super-
intendence. Such spectres are ching or twan (cf. page 467),
existing and working under the auspices of the Tao or Universal
Order ; their attacks are therefore to be borne with resignation
as yun or ming fate or destiny, and the only means of
defence are redemption of guilt by acts of merit, or conciliation
of the Tao of Heaven by self-humiliation, reverence, sacrifices, or
other religious acts performed either with or without sacerdotal help.
But there are also countless unruly spectres, defined as sie or yin
(cf. page 467), which harm men illegally with wanton malignity,
or for the purpose of extorting food from them by intimidation
(pp. 793 sgg.). These as a rule are timorous and shy, not being


WHICH SPECTRES CAN BE EOUGHT WITH SUCCESS? 933

backed by Heaven and its Tao, and therefore not proof against
good exorcising objects and methods, which should be freely used
against them by every sagacious man.

The exorcising arts of the Chinese, their origin and history, will
be described by us principally from their own books. It will there-
fore often be uncertain whether those arts actually prevail still, or
have become obsolete. But undoubtedly we may admit, that in
general popular practices and customs described by native authors
survive in some part or other of the immense empire, the bigoted
conservatism, for which the Chinese are so notorious, warranting
imitation of almost every act which is ascribed to ancestors.


CHAPTER II.

ANTIQUITY or EXORCISM. TERMINOLOGY.

Exorcising magic is, no doubt, very old in China, and probably
born not much later than her belief in spectres; which is almost
equivalent to saying that it is as old as her people. There exists,
however, but very little documentary evidence for the ways in which
they were expelled there before the Christian era. In the Li ki we
have evidence of exorcism on a large scale in the time of Confucius,
which we shall discuss in Chapter VII. We have already mentioned
(Book I, pp. 36, 41, 42) certain Invokers and w u , armed with peach-
branches and reeds when accompanying rulers on their visits of
condolence, in order to protect Ithem from spectral evil. In the
Cheu li we read of “ male w u , who in winter sent away (?) from the
“ halls in all imaginable directions, in numbers countless and incal-
“ culable” k which statement is generally accepted as referring to evil
or evil spirits; further, that work speaks of “female wu charged
with the performance of exorcism at fixed times annually” *, as
also of persons driving fang-1 iang spectres out of graves at funerals
(Book I, p. 162).

In writings of the Han dynasty or relating to this epoch we
find quite an abundance of detail on the subject. We even have
a short contemporary dissertation flatly refuting the necessity or use
of exorcism, and furnishing proof that this art was then systematic-
ally indulged in on a large scale. It was made by Wang Ch'ung,
from whose -writings, which are a most valuable ancient ethno-
graphical source, the reader has already found many extracts in
this work. The document also draws a good picture of certain
general notions of that time respecting the spirit world: —

“The world places confidence in sacrifices, saying that they who


1 M ^ Si Ch. 25, 1. 39.

2 ^ M ^ ^ ^ JOit Ch. 25, 1. 40.


AN AUTHOR OF THE FIRST CENTURY ON EXORCISM.


935


“ offer them may be sure to become happy ; and likewise it gives
“its approbation to exorcisms, pretending that these remove evil.
“ The first ceremony performed at exorcising is the setting out of a
“ sacrifice, which we may compare with an entertainment of guests
“ among living men ; and after the savoury food has been set out
“ hospitably for their entertainment and they have eaten of it, they are
“ chased away with swprds and sticks ! If these spirits have knowledge
“ of such treatment, they surely will stand their ground, accept the
“ fight, and refuse to go ; and if they are susceptible to indignation,
“ they would merely cause misfortune ; and if they have no knowledge,
“ they cannot possibly cause any evil. Accordingly exorcising is lost
“ labour, and no harm is caused by its omission.

“Besides it is disputed whether spirits have a material form.
“ Admitting that they have form, it must be that T)f a living man,
“ and as a living man is susceptible to indignation, ,they certainly
“ will (if exorcised) do harm to man. But if they have no material
“ shape, driving them away is like driving out vapour and clouds :
“ clouds and vapour cannot be expelled.

“ And since it cannot even be ascertained whether they have a
“ shape, we are not in a position to guess their feelings. For what’
“ purpose do spirits gather in human dwellings ? If disposed to murder,
“ they will, when exorcised, simply abscond and hide themselves, but
“ return as soon as the chase is over. And if they occupy our homes
“ without murderous purposes, they will not be injurious, even though
“ not expelled


< 11 « iSE iK' ^ a . xmmm. mm

R ^ ^ ^ 4^

A # « ^ . :Sfc :)§ * K » , B * H ia M: . A

A. A.

in ^ A . S as ^ 2 ^ S A S B .


936


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ When a man of high position is going out, and the crowd
“ flocks to the spot to see him, filling up the street, then, when
“ those who thronged to the front are driven away by his lictors,
“ they will hurry back, but as soon as the lictors retire, they will
“ return to the place where they stood ; the lictors cannot keep
“ them off except by keeping watch for the whole day. What then
“ is our conclusion? If those who, eager to be among the spectators,
“ come back unless driven away for good, so also spirits — if
“ they are like men — will, if they desire to occupy a house, act
“just as such inquisitive spectators. The lookers-on do not retire
“ unless the lictors, after driving them away, keep watch for a long
“ time ; likewise, if exorcists do not do their work the whole year
“round, spectres do not go. They are cast put after they have finished
“ their meal ; but if those ejected spectres thereupon come back, how
“ shall we repulse them ?

“ When grain is being dried in the yard, and fowls and sparrows
“ pick it up, they decamp as soon as the owner chases them or
“ throws anything at them, but no sooner does he leave them alone
“ than they come back ; they will not be kept in check unless he
“ keeps watch the whole day. If spectres have spiritual power, they
“ will neither be expelled by exorcism, nor hindered ; and should
“ they have no such power, they, like fowls and sparrows, will not
“ be kept in check unless driven away incessantly.

“Should a tiger or wolf break into the capital, archers will sur-
“ round the beast ; they may kill it, but cannot do away with the
“ evil which caused the beast to come. And when rebels or robbers
“ assail a city and are attacked by government troops, these may
“ repel them, but cannot possibly annul the ill which caused their
“ coming. Tigers and wolves come because government is neglectful
“ of its duties ; rebels and robbers appear when sedition is rife
“ among the people ; and spirits crowd together because the lives
“ of men are drawing to a close. Now the most complete system
“ of exorcism and expulsion of spirits can no more ensure banish-
“ ment of misfortune and prolongation of lives than the killing of
“ tigers or wolves can undo the effects of misgovernment, or the
“ repulse of rebels can produce good rule among the people.

“When a man is extremely ill and sees spectres approach, if of a
“ courageous disposition he will brandish a sword or grasp a stick
“ and fight them ; — but after one or two engagements he drops
“ his hands and submits to his fate, realizing that otherwise he will
“ have to struggle ceaselessly. The spectres driven away by exorcism


AN AUTHOR OF THE FIRST CENTURY ON EXORCISM.


937


“ do not differ from those which sick people see, nor do exorcisms
“differ from fights; consequently, just as a sick man fights and
“yet the spectres do not go, so house-owners may expel spectres,
“but, beyond all doubt, they do not leave. We may then ask: of
“what practical use is it to cleanse a house of spectres?*.

“And even admitting that misfortune is removed by it, exorcism
“ is of no use, for indeed, the beings whidi we exorcise are spectres
“ abiding in our homes as guests. The household gods are twelve


a Hm.

# z.

iktkm. m'^m.z. s&z

iiJiASi.

m Amn AAZs.,

jt*.


938


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“in number; the Blue Dragon, the White Tiger, and ten more. That
“ Dragon, Tiger and other valiant gods are celestial spirits fitting
“ in the Universal Order, so that (where they are) neither flying
“shi, nor flowing hiung (see page 683) venture wantonly to
“ gather, any more than evil-disposed lodgers pluck up courage _to
“ plot against their host if he is brave and strong. When the twelve
“ gods allow spectres to dwell in a house, and the owner casts these
“ out, 1 say that he chases away the guests of the twelve gods
“and irritates the latter: is this a way to ensure happiness? If the
“ twelve gods are not present, it is because there are no flying shi
“ and no flowing hiung; against what then, in the absence of gods
“ and of evil, is the aid of exorcism used P what then is thereby expelled P
“Exorcism is a ceremonial institution transmitted from ancient
“ times for the purpose of expelling pestilence. Chwen- siih had three
“ sons, who died at their birth ; one took up his abode in the
“ waters of the Kiang (Yangtsze) and became the fever-demon ;
“ one dwelled in Joh-shui and became the w a n g-1 i a n g demon,
“ and the third settled in nooks and corners for the dissemination
“ of pestilence among men (cf. p. 499). This is the reason why
“ at the end of the year, when mankind kept holiday, the spectres
“ of pestilence were driven out (of the houses) and happiness was
“ imported by sending away the old and bringing in the new. This
“ has been imitated by every generation, and called exorcism into
“ existence ; but even that expulsion of pestilence is quite out of
“ place as a ceremonial institution. Indeed, the virtues of Yao and
“ Shun must be cultivated, then the world under heaven will enjoy
“ general peace and rest, and all calamities whatsoever will be dis-
“ sipated and annihilated ; then, even though plague be not driven
“ away, plague-spectres will not stay. But if rulers behave like a
“ Kieh and a Cheu (pp. 116 and 679), the world between the seas
“ will be disturbed by rebellions, and hundreds of misfortunes will
“spring up all at once; and then we may drive away pestilence every
“day, yet the spectres which cause it will nevertheless make their
“ appearance. It is decaying generations which cherish a belief
“ in spectres ; it is a foolish humanity which is bent on seeking
“ happiness (by exorcism). The last generations of the Cheu dynasty
“ believed in spectres, and ottered sacrifices in order to find happiness
“ and help ; their foolish rulers, whose minds were misled, did
“ not take heed to their own behaviour, and as their good acts
“ grew more infrequent, the more unstable became their thrones.
“The conclusion is, that man has his own happiness in his own


TERMS DENOTING EXORCISING PRACTICES.


939


“ hands, and that it is not in the hands of spectres, being deter-
“ mined by his virtues, not by his sacrifices”^.


As the war against spectres is so old, a variety of terms denoting
it have arisen. The following nearly all occur in writings of the
Han dynasty or previous to it:

^ j a ng , to drive olf, repel, or fling back. It occurs in the sense
of exorcism im the writings of Lii Puh-wei. In books of the Han
dynasty and ever since it mostly has the form , which may denote
sacrifices or other religious ceremonies for averting evil.
m fuh, occurring in the C/ieu li followed by ^ (see p. 934, note 2).

It IS sometimes written 1^-
^ ch'u, to remove.

^ kiai, to dispel or dissolve.

san, to dissipate, disperse, scatter.


irnm +

(f . iBSIsf 4-.

mm. Am^z&t^mzA-&,'nmmzm.A

TAB.'S turn

mznm^msL.'smM^.mB &

* . g fU: ff © a . ji A » # is . « ^ ^ IH: •« A #


940


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


^ [^] khii, ip ori§fl khioh, ^ chuh, to expel, repel, or
drive off.

or )j^ k h ii , and p'i h , to drive away,
sung, and ^ k h i e n , to send away,
chi, chi, to rule or govern,
y ii , to repulse, to resist, to defend against,
kin, to frustrate or place obstacles in the way of.
fuh, and ^ fuh, to subdue.

chen, to hold in subjection, to reduce to obedience,
chen, to war.
ch'ih, to command.

^hoh, to prosecute and punish; to arraign.

[ffi] ysn, to repress or suppress, to put down ; often, though
incorrectly, written , spectral pressure, or nightmare.

^ y e n-s h i n g , to suppress and conquer. This term also denotes
sorcery, if the power exercised on the spectres is used for evil
ends (see p. 887).

Such terms may, of course, be followed by words denoting spectres
or their influences and the ills which they cause, for which we may
refer to pp. 466 — 468, and 683.


CHAPTER III.


. LIGHT AND i’lRE, FIREWORKS, AND NOISE.

The great war which the whole of China has, throughout all
ages, waged against the demon-world, was especially conducted on
the great principle that spectres belong to the Yin or the dark half
of the Universe, so that the most efficacious arms that may be used
against them are those which are derived from the Yang or the
luminous half. The Yang, in fact, in the daily and annual course
of Nature entirely conquers the Yin with never failing certainty.
It therefore was always the task of thinkers, sages, and intelligent
men to find things which might be deemed to be such arms, and
to teach man the use . thereof. They have pushed their researches
in that direction extremely far, with never relaxing zeal and astounding
success, be this success merely theoretical in our cynical eyes.

Attention could not fail to be directed first and foremost to light
and tire. Light and fire, being iptegral parts of the Yang, have,
indeed, necessarily to be considered as no less destructive to the
demon-world than the Yang is to the Yin ; they are then dangers to
spectres decreed by the Tao or Order of the Universe, by Nature
itself. This theory raises the sun, the very source of universal light
and tire, to the dignity of chief expeller and destroyer of demons.
On the other hand it causes the night, especially its middlemost
part, to be considered as the time in which the demon-world is
dominant, and spectres freely prowl about. It teaches that the dawn
is the moment which forces them to betake themselves to a headlong
and general flight, or which paralyzes their power. These ideas, the
existence of which has come to the foreground in some of our
folklore specimens (e. g. pp. 620, 730, 750), are naturally and con-
stantly nourished by the uneasiness which darkness provokes in feeble
minds, and which converts itself into fears nourished by every
mysterious noise, but dissipated by the breaking day.

But also if kindled by man, light and fire have the same effect,
though to a less extent. The tale on pages 791 — 792 has showed


942


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


US, that this was a prevailing conviction in the first centuries of
our era. We have seen on page 190 that in those times fire was
deemed able to compel old fox-devils, disguised as men, to show
their real forms and thus render themselves defenceless, especially
if that fire was burning wood of trees old like themselves and
animated by shen or Yang substance. Again, in a tale of the fifth
century (pp. 127 — 129) we have seen a man repelling his son, whom
he deemed to be a spectre, by means of a fire kindled before his
house-door, and learned that this ambiguous man-ghost was 'shy of
sunlight and fire. In the spectre-panic of A. D. 781 people kept
up flaming fires at night (p. 477); etc.

The conviction that light and fire are effective arms against spec-
tres shows itself in the China of our own time by a general aversion
from going out in the dark without a burning torch or lighted
lantern of paper, especially if grave or graveyards have to be passed
(cf. p. 687). On leaving a house of death after a visit of condolence,
people are in the habit of stepping across a fire (Book I, p. 32),
evidently to be purged from the sie connected with the death,
which may be the shah of which we have treated on pp. 769
stating that they were averted by fire at funerals as early as the
sixth century. Finally we have stated (B. I, p. 137) that mandarins
who attend a coroner’s inquest are wont to pass through a straw-
fire, and repeat this exorcism on re-entering their Yamen, and more-
over that they do the same thing after super-intending an execution,
lest the headless ghost may injure them (B. I, p. 355).

The commencement of the year in China, the beginning of spring,
is the revival of light and warmth, which then are setting to work
energetically to purify the Universe from the influences of the Yin
or cold, darkness and death, to which the spectral world belongs.
It is then the duty of man, who, according to the great Taoist
principle, has to live and behave in conformity with Nature, to^
lend Nature a helping hand, that is to say, to devote himself to
exorcism. And he accomplishes this task, as Nature itself, by means
of light and fire. The Calendar of Customs in King and Ch'u,
which (see p. 362) was writtten in the sixth century, says : “ In the
“ first month of the year, on the w e i days, torches of reed are used
“ at night to light the inside of wells and privy-pits, whereupon
“hundreds of spectres run away” k It is, indeed, in such places in

Ch\i siii-shi ki.


BAMBOO AND FIRE-CRACKERS.


943


particular, into which the sun cannot pour its rays, that man ought
to do the purifying work artificially.

Much more was done in that month to the same end. In that
Calendar we still read: “On the first day of the first month
“ people rise at cock-crow, and the first thing they do is to explode

“ bamboo in the courtyard by means of fire, in order to drive away

“the hill-sao and other spirits of evil”'. This evidently means that
fire was kindled and bamboo thrown into it to heighten the terri-
fying effect of the flames by the crackling noise and the explosions
caused by the pressure of the heated air inside. This custom is also
mentioned in the Shen i king, as we have seen on page 500.

In a voluminous book, entitled Yueh ling kwang i “ Ampli-
fication of the Monthly Rescripts”, P"ing Ying-king^ a learned
officer who took his tsin-shi degree in 1592, wrote: “In the
“ last night of the year bamboo is exploded in fires throughout the
“night until morning, in order to shake and arouse the Yang of

“the spring and thus to remove and dissipate the evil work of

“the si e. Men in our days make a sport of it, and waste their
“ money in attempts to outvie each other therein, so that the funda-
“ mental meaning of the matter is nearly lost”

It is the undisputed opinion among the Chinese that this p'ao-
choh® or “bamboo exploded in fire”, generally thus denominated
by the people and authors, has for many ages denoted a kind of
squib of very thick paper, in which some gunpowder is enclosed,
and exploded by means of a fuse passing through the wad.
Hundreds, even thousands of such crackers, fastened close together
by their fuses to a single long match, may, by igniting the latter,
be exploded in rapid succession, producing a loud popping noise.
The question at what time the transition from empty bamboo tubes
to these fireworks took place is probably the same as the question
in which age we should place the introduction of the knowledge
of gunpowder into China. It must for the present remain unsolved ;


second name Kho-ta ^ .

5


944


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


but that the Chinese were the inventors of that explosive compound
is an unsupported conjecture ' .

The firing of crackers on the last day and night of the year is
general in China. Every family, even the poorest which can afford
to spend a few coins for smoke and noise, indulges in this ear-
splitting work, so that the rattling at that time in populous quarters
is a real torment to non-Chinese nerves. Long strings hanging from
balconies and eaves down to the pavement crackle for half an hour
or longer, but most people content themselves with strings of mote
modest dimensions, fired from the end of a stick. This noise is
continued, though less extravagantly, for some days, when ceremonies
and sacrifices are celebrated which custom requires to be attended by it.

If we peruse what the several special works on provinces, depart-
ments and districts (see Book I, p. 746) have to tell about manners
and customs observed in the last day and night of the year, we
find that they mention with striking unanimity not only the firing
of crackers, but also large bonfires and torches in premises and
courtyards. They denote such exorcism by various names, as “to
burn evil influences”®; “to burn or illuminate the year”®; “to
burn a pine-basin” ^ i. e. a circle of pine-logs ; etc. Mention is
made of incense and other odoriferous disinfectants thrown into
those fires. Further we learn from those works, that the felicity
evoked by all those expedients is enhanced by mutual congratulations
and good wishes, and by exclamations uttered by many voices at a
time, such as “ no sorrow through the front door, no sorrow through
the side doors; purification and pacification of this world, and no
afflictions for the people” People sit up all the night around the
fire, spending the time in music, chess-playing, eating and drinking ;
they call this “ to sit around the fire-stove” or “ to guard the year”
or “to see the new year in”*. Finally we read of exorcising noise
made with copper trumpets, gongs, conches, drums, and so forth.

Indeed, if the Chinese increase the exorcising power of fire by
causing it to produce noise, it is clear that they must consider
all noise to be a defence against demonry, provided it be harsh

1 This question has been amply investigated by Mayers in the Journal of the
North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1869 — 70, page 73, in a treatise
entitled: On the Introduction and Use of Gunpowder and Fire-arms among the Chinese.

•‘MM- 3#ta“!is*-

“ Hil- ’ * iOi®-


Gong, cymbals, trumpet, drum.


EXORCISING NOISE-MAKING.


945


and loud; the more so, as what frightens man must frighten spectres
equally well. 'We have seen on pp. 476 and 477 that in spectre-
panics of the years 564 and 781 people vehemently beat on metal
objects and wooden boards; and on pp. 482 and 782 we have read that
in the panics of 1557 and 1476 they used gongs and drums. We
have also stated (p. 532) that Amoy sailors at sea drive away the
terrible Pissing Woman by the firing of crackers and blunderbus-
ses, and (p. 746) that corpse-spectres are greatly afraid of the noise
of brass instruments.

The chief instrument for the production of exorcising noise is
the gong b This well known circular plate of brass (see PL IX) is
actually a characteristic feature of China, resounding throughout the
empire every day, especially in summer, when a rise in the death
rate induces an increase in devil-expelling activity. Clashing of cymbals
of brass, and rattling of drums of wood and leather (PL IX) intensify
its useful effects. Very often small groups of men and even women are
beating on gongs, cymbals and drums for a succession of hours.
No protest is heard from their neighbours, no complaint that they
disturb their night’s rest ; such savage music then must either sound
agreeable to Chinese ears, or be heard with gratitude as a meritorious
work, gratuitously performed by benevolent folks who have at heart
the private and public weal and health.

Drums have existed in China in very ancient times; which cannot
seem strange, seeing that so many savage tribes possess them. They
are mentioned in almost all the Classics, and the fact that they are
denoted by a character * which to] this day is admitted to be a
radical or primitive hieroglyph, is a proof of their great antiquity.
From the Clieu li we learn, that they were used at sacrifices to the
gods and spirits, and in armies, and for the stimulation or direction
of menials and workmen; further at eclipses of the sun or moon,
etc.; they had various forms, denoted by various names. Nowhere
in that book, nor in the Classics are they expressly mentioned as
implements for expulsion of demons, but this does not, of course,
exclude the possibility of their having been used for such. a purpose
from the night of time. Under the Han Dynasty they we.^'e carried
by singers of exorcising formulae at devil-expelling ceremonies (see
page 976).

Cymbals ^ are only mentioned in books of later times. They are
confessedly borrow^ed from western barbarians, or from the Man


60


946


THE WAR AGATNST SPECTRES.


or aborigines of south China, now almost extinct. This may also
be the case with the gong, which at any rate cannot make pretence
to a classical origin any more than the long devil-dispelling trumpets
of brass (PL IX), used in funeral processions (Book I, p. 155) and,
as we shall see on page 9S2, in processions portending to expel
spectres of disease.

In China generally and in South Fuhkien in particular it is an
established custom to let off crackers throughout the year at every
sacrifice to the gods. It is, in fact, deemed salutary and even
necessary to exorcise on such occasions the spirits of the dark, lest
they counteract, or possibly destroy, the good effects which the
ceremony derives from the beatific presence of the gods. Especially
when, in the hot season, cholera or other epidemic is rife, the orgy
of cracker-firing breaks forth, preferably raging between sundown
and midnight. At such times, processions long or short are moving
through the streets with torch-light and lanterns to expel the devils
of the pestilence, as also with soldiers blowing on long trumpets, or
firing muskets at intervals; for if fire-crackers compel spectres to
make themselves scarce, how great then will be the panic created
amongst them by volleys of fire-locks, even though the cartridges
be blank!

We can hardly doubt that fire has been a sovereign remedy
against spectres of disease and other evil from very remote antiquity;
yet we seek in vain for documentary evidence on this head. Only
one passage in pre-Christian literature seems to point to it : “ The
^officer charged with kindling fire”, thus we read in the Clieu li,
"is directed to promulgate the ordinances respecting fire. In the four
" seasons he changes the fires in the kingdom, in order to afford
"help against the diseases of the seasons” L Chinese scholars always
have manifested uncertainty in determinating this official custom,
but they generally admit that those fires were of different kinds of
wood; which is not of much interest to us.

We may attach more interest to the question whether medical
art in China has taken advantage of the devil-expelling properties
of fire. Cauterizing the sick is, in fact, recommended in the Su toeyi^
the oldest book on medicine, in close connection with acupuncture
by means of needles hot or cold. That art is denoted by the
characters and which mean roasting or burning.

Ch. 30, 1. 17.


CAUTERISATION WITH MUG WORT.


947


It is mostly performed with ngai\ artemisia, moxa, mugwort,
a practice evidently extending over many ages, for in the Calendar
of King and Ch^u we read: “On the fifth day of the fifth month
“ the four classes of the people pluck artemisia, and make images
“ thereof in human form, which they hang above the doors, to drive
“ away poisonous air. Tsung Ts"ih, also named Wen-tu, while gathering
“artemisia on the fifth of the fifth month before the crowing of
“the cock, saw such a plant in human shape; he grasped it, and
“took it with him, and used it with good effect for cauterizing”^.
Notice that the plant owed its efficacy to the time when it was
plucked: a day denoting the midsummer festival, when light and
fire of the Universe are in their apogee.

At present, as probably in all previous ages, cauterizing is per-
formed by means of short, dry stalks of moxa wood, steeped in
hemp-oil, which are glued on boils previously wetted, or on other
parts affected by disease or demoniacal influence, and ignited, so
that they burn away into the skin. We cannot feel surprised that fire
which is borrowed directly from the sun is to be preferred for the
purpose; indeed in Li Shi-chen’s standard work on medicine we
read as follows: “The fire used in cauterizing with mugwort ought
“ to be fire really obtained from the sun by means of a sun-mirror
“or fire-pearl (lens?) exposed to the sun. Next in efficacy ds fire
“ obtained by boring into h w a i wood, and only in cases of emergency,

“ or when it is difficult to procure such fire, it may be taken from
“a lamp of pure hempseed oil, or from a wax taper”

Cauterisation is, of course, applied in the first place in demoniacal
diseases with which the reader has been acquainted on pp. 683 sqq.
In the old medical work ascribed to Koh Hung it is stated, that
the five shi or corpse-maladies (p. 684) should be cured “by fourteen
“ cauteries applied three inches behind the nipples, with a male patient
“on the left side, and a female on the right; if the cauteries are


1 3t-

KS. J! S. H IIARgfttJR

A## 0

)Kvfl ® S Sis A' “'>• O' '■


948


THE WAK AGAINST SPECTRES.


^ constantly renewed and increased, a change in the condition
“of the patient will set in”h Cauteries should also be applied,
according to the same book, below the heart and on the fingers,
and the patient should be scratched under his heart and given
albumen to swallow. And with regard to epilepsy, trance or swoon,
which the Chinese are wont to define as spectre-blows or strokes
of evil, Koh Hung says: “Patients struck by a spectre must be
burned with three cauteries one inch below the navel’’ Later
medical authorities of the highest order prescribe fifty cauteries on
the stomach when the patient has been struck by evil; three under
every finger-nail or a hundred on the shoulder in case of sudden
attacks; one or more on the loins or three above the navel at a
devil's stroke. Cauterisation ought to be performed in any case
of the five corpse-diseases, either to the right or left of the nipples,
from' two to seven caustics to be applied on each thumb, or ten
below the heart; 'etc.

Medical art then adopts no half-hearted measures against the
spectres which cause all those complaints. Even babies in convul-
sions are treated in this cruel way. Surgeons at the same time have
recourse to pricking such little sufferers with needles. They tie a
red cord around their elbows, pass it over their back with some
mysterious windings, and allow the glowing bits of moxa charcoal
to do their work within the nostrils or under the heart, or on the
forehead, but especially under the chin and the jaws, as also on
the cheeks, to prevent lock-jaw. Caustics are further applied on the
big toes of the patient, at the roots of his nails, nay even in his
navel, while bystanders scratch him. The number of spots pricked
or cauterized is increased according to the age of the patient.

Here again are some words of Koh Hung, the great medical
sage, transmitted to this day by his own standard work : “ My recipe
“ for curing sudden madness connected with utterance of spectre-
“ language, is this : prick the patient with a needle under the nails
“of his big toes. Here is another recipe: tie his hands firmly
“ together with the rope of the cooking-pot, and while holding fast
“ his elbows, apply cauteries on his right and left flank, seven in

Chen hen pi kih ch. 1, § 6.

STS, sect, g , ch. 348.


CASTING OUT SPECTRES BY CAUTERISATION.


949


^all; he then will immediately call out in spectral language the
“ surname and name of the spectre, and beg to have the cauteries
“ removed ; now prudently interrogate him (/. e. the spectre), and

untie his hands. As long as the patient sometimes wails, weeps,
“moans and pants, he is afflicted by demons; as soon as he has
“ no more fits ^ of madness, he should be treated according to the
“recipes against sie” And Sun Sze-raoh, a no less famous medical
prophet, wrote: “When a patient in a fit of madness wants to run
“away, or if he thinks himself in a high position or learned, or
“ calls himself a god or a saint — in all those cases cauterisation
“is to be applied, and he will be cured for ever”

Koh Hung also instructed posterity that victims of nightmare
in its very worst form should be cured in the same wise. “In cases
“ of sudden nightmare, should the patient not awake, twenty-one
“ cauteries are to be applied under his feet at his big toes, and
“ between his hairs'’ ^ It seems at first sight illogical to hear
at the same time this great man strictly forbid such victims to be
approached with light (see page 700); but we should bear in mind
that “sudden nightmare" means absence of the soul in consequence
of abduction by a demon, so that attempts to bring the soul back
into the body should not be frustrated by scaring it, as by a sudden
glare of light.

The reader will remember, that spectres are bent on rendering
women insane and giving them hallucinations in which they see
the spectres and have sexual intercourse with them (pp. 788 sqq,).
The best means of exorcising such demons is cauterisation. The
woman’s thumbs are to this end tied firmly together, so that the
tips of the fingers of the two hands touch each other, and then
cauterisation is performed at the place where the tips touch. This


' ^ ff W & M tp T . X

75 » 4- « tt. -a 4 '■4' * itfc @ w « , # e i

Cht'u Jicu i.i kih ch. 3, § i7.

hen pi kih fancj^ ch. 1, § 5.


960


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


place is called “the den where the spectre howls” because during
the cauterisation the spectre howls for mercy through the mouth
of the patient. If it does so, and promises to go away without doing
any further harm, this is regarded as unquestionable proof of the
woman’s possession. It may be found necessary to apply seven
caustics, and even twice this number. They may also be placed
on the big toes; medical men call them “spectres’ eyes for the
feet” Simultaneous incision in the tendons and muscles may prove
effectual, or at least salutary.

Koh Hung also recommends smoking the patient with fire the
power of which has been increased by means of ingredients
which of themselves are exorcising, such as incense or vegetable
resin, tigers’ claws, etc. “To cure women who, having intercourse
“ with spectral beings, speak and laugh when alone, or are seized
“ with melancholy or stupor, one ounce of powdered realgar should
“ be stirred with two ounces of pine-gum and a tiger’s claw ; the
“ mixture should be kneaded into pills or balls, and these balls
“burned in a fire-basket at night, and the woman made to
“ clandestinely sit upon this, carefully veiled, her head alone
“ protruding. If one time does not cure her, three mixtures at the
“most will suffice, after which she will break off her connection
“with the spectre”^.

If babies cry and cannot be quieted, parents often ascribe this
to their being teased by spectres, or to their seeing spectres which
frighten them. It is usual in such a case to take some burning
paper or charcoal in a pan, and keep it close to the eyes and face
of the patient, repeating the cure a few times, if necessary.

Philanthropists or clever exploiters of public ignorance and cre-
dulity seem to have sometimes distributed or sold wonderful fire
for medical purposes. History relates the following episode among
the events of the year 493 of our era: “Before that time there
“ had been a song circulating in the territory of the house of Wei,
“of this tenor: ‘Red fire is spreading southward, destroying the

ch. 3, § 17.


MEDICAL USE OE FIRE-FLIES.


951


“southern states’. Now in this year there came a Shaman from the
“ north, dispensing such fire, and he arrived (in the capital of Ts'i,
“ or the present Nanking). Its colour was more red than ordinary
“ fire and it was also more ethereal. As he pretended to cure the
“ sick with it, the higher class as well as the common people vied

“ with each other in obtaining it from him, and in most cases its

“ effect was salutary. In more than twenty days the whole capital
“ was full of it, and every one spoke of the holy fire ; the emperor
“ forbade its use, but could not put a stop to it. Patients were

“ cured by the application of seven caustic sticks. Khiu Kwoh-pin
“ of Wu-hing secretly took it to his home, and a native of his

“ district, Yang Tao-khing by name, who had suffered from con-
“ sumption for more than twenty years, was methodically cauterized
“with it, and immediately cured” b
The ideas about the exorcising capacities of fire may explain the
medical use of fire-flies*, also called “night-lights”® and “night-
torches”*. Li Shi-chen says: “According to the Slien-sien I'an ying

pien, the fire-fly balls of Wu Ch'ing® cure or expel disease, evil
“ influences, all spectres, tigers and wolves, snakes, serpents, wasps and
“ other venomous animals, life-destroying disasters caused by the five
“ kinds of weapons, by bare swords, rebels and robbers. Under the
“ Han dynasty, Liu Tszg-nan, general of the helmet-army and governor
“ of Wu-wei, received the said medicine from the Taoist Yin-kung.
“In the twelfth year of the Yung p^ing period (A.D. 69) he was
“ defeated in the northern border land by barbarians ; his troops were
“ annihilated, he himself was surrounded, and a rain of arrows then
“ fell on him, but at a few feet from his horse they suddenly dropped.

“ The barbarians therefore considered him to be a god, and drew off.

“ He revealed the whole secret of the medicine to his juniors, and
“nobody of these in his capacity of army-commander incurred any

^isMX^ ik . X^S.-bikili) .

. History of the South, ch. 4, 1. 27. A rather different
version of this story is given in the Books of the Southern TsS Dynasty, ch. 19, 1. 12.

5 A fabulous Taoist of the time of Yao.

r ^


952


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ wounds. At the close of the Han dynasty the Blue ox Taoist obtained
“ it and delivered it to Hwang-fu Lung of Ngan-ting, who gave it to
“the emperor Wu of the Wei dynasty, after whom various people
“ from time to time obtained it. Hence it is that the pills are called
“pills of the helmet-commander, and also Wu-wei pills” h
In conclusion we have to mention the custom of making circles
of ashes when the activity of spectres is apprehended. We have
seen on page 281 in an old tale the strewing about of ashes
mentioned among the means of desti’oying the power of a mighty
tree-spirit, and must infer from it that dread of fire is so intense
among spectres that even a thought of fire roused by harmless ashes
suffices to paralyze them. In the writings of Koh Hung the world
is instructed, “ that in cases of sudden death (see p. 687) the patient
“ should have his face rubbed with a cock’s bloody comb, and a
“ circle of ashes must be made all around him, as he will then rise
“immediately”^. A recipe to the same effect occurs, as we have
seen on page 217 of Book 1, in the work of Li Shi-chen. On exactly
the same principle Koh Hung has framed the rescript, that “if a
“ man is liable to nightmare and has bad dreams, dead ashes of fire
“ should be put into his shoes and the shoes placed against his
“ pillow”


M'S &

A»z.

. Pen-ts^ao hang muh^ ch. 41, 1. 21.

hen pi kih fang, ch. 1, § 1.

* A * s s s ^ ?E Fe * a -a- tt Oi' -«■.

ch. 1, § 5.


CHAPTER IV.


shen-t"u and yuh-i,ei, peach trees, tigers, ropes.

Clearing houses of demoniacal influences at the change of the
year by means of Are does not alford an absolute safety, for
indeed, at any moment the expelled spectres may return. Powerful
preventive charms are to be affixed to gates and doors, in order
to ward them off for the whole year.

Generations of extreme antiquity have transmitted such valuable
charms to their posterity, and posterity have with great care used
them to this day. We hear of them for the first time in Wang Cffiung’s
work, written in the first century of our era. Discussing the use of
wooden dragons for rainmaking purposes, which was customary in
his time, our sophist wrote;

“ Among mankind of most remote antiquity there were Shen-Pu
^ and Yuh-lei, two brothers, endowed by nature with the power
“ of capturing spectres. They dwelt in the mountain or land of
“ Tu-shoh, in the eastern sea. Standing under a peach tree, they
“ examined hundreds of spectres, and those which, without regard
“to the li or laws and principles of the Tao (cf. p. 930), wantonly
“ had inflicted misfortune on men, were bound with cords of
“ reeds or rushes by (Shen-)Pu and Yuh-lei, and thrown as food
“ to a tiger. Hence it is that district magistrates cut peach wood
“ into human images, and place them beside their doors, and that
“they paint tigers and affix them to the central gateposts”’.


■ < ± * s mmm

FI ® i"" '»»». 'I'- ii H M ■


954


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


In another chapter Wang Ch'ung wrote:

“ The 8han-hai king ^ says : Tn the vast ocean the mountain or
“ land of Tu-shoh lies. A large peach tree stands in it, the foliage
“ of which extends three thousand miles. The north-eastern side ot
“ its branches is called the Gate of Spectres, because it is there that
“ myriads of spectres go in and out. There were in that island two
“ divine men, Shen-Tu and Yuh-lei by name, who directed the
“ examination and management of the hosts of spectres. Spectres
“ which caused evil and damage they fettered with ropes of reed
“ or rushes, to give them as food to a tiger. Thereupon the emperor
“Hwang (27th cent. b. C.) instituted the ceremonial usage of driving
“ off spectres at the proper season ; that is to say, he set up large
“ images of peach wood, painted Shen-Tu and Yuh-lei on gates and
“ doors, and, together with a tiger, suspended there cords of reed,
“in order to repulse them”®.

Conventionally then this tradition, and the customs which it created,
are of very old standing, dating from mythical times. But we cannot
fail to observe that the tale has a naturalistic tinge. It places the
scene of the destruction of spectres in the farthest east, the region
of the rising of the almighty destroyer of the powers of darkness.
It places the gate, through which those beings are led to their doom,
on the north-east, which, since the north represents winter and the
east the spring, means the time when those two seasons meet, cor-
responding to the last day or days of the old year and the first of
the new, when, as we have seen in the preceding chapter, the sun,
helped by man, purges the Universe of the influences of the Yin
and its spectres.

Hence we are tempted to examine whether there is any solar or
astrological element in the two devil-destroyers. But we are unsuc-
cessful here. Shen-fu may be translated into “godly TV’, and Cu
denotes a plant, also called the “bitter herb” which survives in

1 I have not found a trace of that passage in the work now current under this name.

»raJAlfe. -H«#,

S,.


THE TIGER A DESTROYER OF SPECTRES.


955


winter; but no Chinese author tells us whether it has any solar
attributes. The name Yuh-lei is translatable into “accumulation of
luxuriant growth”, and may allude to the yearly effects of the solar
warmth ; but it is certainly questionable whether this term actually
had this meaning in ancient times. Yuh is also the name of a plant,
but this fact also tells us nothing.

We are more successful if we look for a naturalistic reason whv
the two brothers kept a tiger to devour the spectres arraigned
by them. It would be easy, but not satisfactory, simply to let the
murderous character of that most ferocious of Asiatic brutes account
for this selection. It seems more adequate to regard that tiger as
representing the universal demon-destroyer himself, the Yang or sun,
which in the beginning of spring commences the process of puri-
fication of the world. Indeed, one or two thousand years before
our era, the sun at that period of the year, half a season previous
to the equinox, entered Pisces, subsequently traversing Aries and
Taurus, and these signs embrace seven Chinese constellations, from
Khwei to Ts'an (cf. B. I, page 971), which compose the quadrant
of the sphere called to this day the White Tiger. It will then have
been this celestial tiger, representing the vernal career of the sun,
which destroyed the spectral world predominant in winter.

Solar attributes were, in connexion with the legend of Shen-Pu
and Yuh-lei, actually ascribed to the tiger by Ying Shao, the author
of the second century who composed the Fung-suh fung i. Giving
in this book the legend of the two godly men in much the same
wording as Wang Ch'ung, he says : “ The tiger is an animal of the
“Yang, the principal among the hundreds of species of quadrupeds.

“ It can grasp spectres, tear asunder and devour them. People
“ nowadays, if they suddenly meet with ill, burn or roast some
“ tiger’s skin, and consume it with water; a claw or nail of the beast,

“ if bound to the body, may also avert evil, and is very efficient”

We have still to see whether the enormous peach tree covering
that execution-ground is in any way connected with the spring.
It certainly does not seem preposterous to consider the peach as a
symbol of the vernal sun, under the influence of which it is clothed
with blossom more luxuriantly than any other tree even before a


^ . lit » “ 8 .


956


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


single leaf unfolds on its twigs. It may then be, besides a demon-
expeller, a symbol of vitality; hence its fruits or kernels, in which
that vitality, in the form of generative energy, dwells, are the

selected life-conferring food of the sien or long-lived and immortal
men of Taoism, as] we have seen in Book 1 on p. 56, and in Book II on

pp. 304 seq,, stating that such attributes have been assigned by

the Shen i king especially to a gigantic peach tree in the east, which
probably was no other than that of Shen-t^u and Yuh-lei.

But whether it be a symbol of the vernal sun, or merely owing
to its position in the legend of the two devil-judges, the fact is
certain that the peach tree has remained a principal exorcising means
to this day. We have documentary evidence that it was so before
the Christian era; indeed, as stated on pp. 40 sqq, of Book I,

according to the Li ki, the wu, while escorting rulers on their visits
of condolence, were armed with a peach rod, in order to keep away
obnoxious influences from them ; and according to the 7^so ch^ioen,
such a fact occurred in the year 543 before Christ. And we have
seen in the same part of our work, that Ching Khang-ch'^ing in
the second century of our era emphatically declared that usage to
have been based on the belief that spectres fear the peach tree.

In the same century, Ying Shao, as we have stated on page 955,
recorded the legend of Shen-f'u and Yuh-lei in his Fung-suh fung i.
And he added: “Thenceforth, district magistrates on the sacrifice
“ of the last day of the year always have decorated their gates with
“ images of peach wood ; they have suspended there cords of reed or
“ rushes , and painted a tiger , altogether in remembrance and
“ imitation of that past event, expecting in this way to afford
“protection against evil” i. We find this, custom mentioned, also
in a book of the same period, entitled Tuft iwan (see p. 499), in
these words: “T^u and Lei were therefore painted or drawn' on
“ gates and doors, and cords of reed or rushes were suspended
“there, to resist evil” The custom was an official one under the
Han dynasty, for in the Standard History of that house we read
in the section devoted to Ritual, that after the so-called no, the
exorcising ceremony of the twelfth month, “keng^ of peach wood,


1 ^

2

3


Chap. 8.


; this word may simply mean a branch, or a piece of a branch ; yet it is


VARIOUS CHARMS FOR DOORS.


957


“ Yuh-lei, and cords of reed were put up by the official class”
Those customs being so deeply rooted in social life already in
early times, -we cannot be surprised to find them faithfully observed
in later ages. In a description of the official ritual of the house
of Tsin we read: “On New Year’s morning cords of rush were always
“ put ap at the gate of the Palace and of all official buildings, as
“also keng of peach wood, and a cock, in order to exorcise evil
“ influences” ^ In King and Ch"u people followed those customs in
the sixth century*, together with yet others of the same purport:
“ On New Year’s day people young and old drink peach soup.

“ Every one makes planks of peach wood to fix on the 'doors,

“ calling them wood of the immortals ... As the peach possesses
“more vitality (tsing) than any of the five (principal) trees, it
“suppresses and subdues sie influences, and keeps the legions of
“ spectres in check . . . And they paste a painted cock above the
“door, suspend there cords of reed or rush, and put up fiao fu or

“ peach charms beside it, because the legions of spectres are afraid

“ of those things. Tung Hiun, Intendant of the Gates under the
“Wei dynasty, has said: They make smoking fires before the
“ doors in the morning of the New Year’s sacrificial day, and fasten
“ gods of peach wood, twisted cords, pines and cypresses, and a
“ slaughtered cock on gates and doors ; these are the ceremonies
“ purporting to expel pestilential influences. The Kwah ti fu or
“ Geographical Atlas says : In the mountain or land of the Peach
“ capital is a big peach tree with a foliage extending over three
“ thousand miles. A gold cock is perched upon it, and crows at dawn.

“ Below it are two gods, the one called Yuh, the other Lei
“ both lie perdu with cords of reed for spectres of evil, which
“they kill as soon as caught”*.

said to express the idea of “change or alternation” (keng ), with reference to the
seasons. The same chapter of the Books of the Later Han Dynasty, I. 5, says, that "‘people
“under the Cheu dynasty made keng of peach wood, denoting that the'breaths

“(the Yang and Yin) alternate”

W W ® ^ 'fcaa ^ ^ ‘ Books of the Later Han Dynasty,

ch. 15, 1. 10.

mm K » w ^ ^ n .

• Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 19, 1. 23.

3 There was then evident uncertainty about the names of the tw’o spectre-killers


958


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


There can be no doubt that the decoctions of peaches, mentioned in
this extract, were drunk with a view to the expulsion of spectres from
the body, that is, as life-preservers and life-prolongers. The fruit still
plays this part to this day. In medical literature a powerful curative
property is ascribed to peaches which have dried on the tree without
dropping, as also to the skin and the kernels, and the short twigs
by which the fruits hang from the tree, especially those which did not
fall off in winter and were gathered in the first month of the year.
Dried blossoms are recommended for such demoniacal diseases as
convulsions, spasm, lethargy; and so are the bark, gum, chips
of the wood, and the twigs. Reprinting in his great work what old
books have to say on the subject, Li Shi-chen concludes with these
words: “We may infer from those various statements, that branches
“ of the peach, its leaves, roots, kernels, and twigs by which the
“ fruits are fastened to the tree, as also stalks of peach wood, all
“ occupy a place in botanical Materia Medica because of the fact
“that they avert spectral evil and disease-causing collision”^.

Exorcising and healing power being conferred upon the peach by
the sun, such power must abide in particular in its branches which
grow eastward or southward, that is to say, towards the regions
which contain the sun in its rise and culmination. The reader has
found on page 328 of Book I a recipe published in the eighth
•century by Ch'en Tsang-khi for people tormented by spectres, in
the composition of which, beside old coffin-wood, should enter a
peach twig taken from the east side of the tree. A common prescrip-
tion in times of epidemic to this day is to wash the body at every
full moon with warm water in which such a peach twig has
been soaked. Under the Sung dynasty, one Tai Tsu* declared, that

ft * * I. * 2: s , » « 515 Si . a w a ifc ...

gsi;,

^ PeH’ts^ao kang mxih^ ch. 29, 1. 27.


BED CHARMS FIXED TO DOORS.


959


“ Hia-heu Wen-kwei of Ts'iao re-appeared after his death, and
“returned home. On passing by the peach in front of the court-
“yard, he said: ‘I have sowed this tree; its fruits must be excel-
“lenf. His wife said to him: ‘They say that the dead fear peach
“trees; is not this the case with you?’ The answer was: ‘It is
“ the branches on the east and the south, two feet eight inches in
“ length, on the sunny side, which they fear, but some do not fear
“even these’” b

If now we turn our attention once more to the excerpt which we
have made from the King and Ch'u Calendar on page 957, we
shall see that in the sixth century, when that book was written,
planks of peach wood were fixed to the doors, and t'ao f u ® or
“peach charms” were fastened beside the same. As charms generally
consist of writing, these peach charms may have been objects of
peach wood bearing an inscription, but nothing on this head can
be stated with certainty. Yet it is perfectly admissible, and, indeed,
generally admitted by the Chinese, that those planks and those
charms were the prototypes of the t'ao fu of the present day,
that is to say, of the quadrangular sheets of red paper displaying the
names of the brothers, pasted on the folding doors, or of the red
squares painted on such doors and bearing their names in black
paint; as also of the long strips of paper of the same red colour,
inscribed with antithetical sentences deprecating evil and supplicating
for good, affixed to the right and left of the entrance.

Those sheets, which -strike the attention of everybody who visits
China, are indeed denoted by that old name of t'ao fu. The
name which the material of which they are made bears in Amoy,
viz. fo-dng tsod\ “peach-red paper”, is a further reminder of their
origin, and so also is the fact that the people renew them at the
end of the year. New sheets are then everywhere exposed for sale,
and in Amoy many poor penmen may be seen in the streets, or
in corners of shopfronts hired for the purpose, offering selections,
written by themselves, to the public for a few coppers. Educated


Examination .of Strange Matters. The copy which I possess contains five short tales


960


THE WAE' against SPECTRES.


householders of course are accustomed themselves to write those
which they want for their own use.

As we might expect, parts of the peach tree are used for exorcising
purposes all the year round at any time. In a narrative professedly
dating from the fifth centi^ry (see p. 128), a woman repels with a
peach branch a being who calls himself her son, but whom she
believes to be a spectre. In another tale of about the same time
(p. 579) a Buddhist priest with such a branch beats his brother,
possessed by a fox-demon. And a work of the sixth century
represents a man whom spectres rendered ill and mad, as relieved
by means of a human image of peach wood (p. 443). It is generally
admitted in Amoy that persons who have swooned should be cured
by beating them with a rod of peach wood, or by brandishing the
rod energetically over them, preferably uttering spells, threats and
invectives the while. Men and women wear miniature swords of
peach wood on their breasts as amulets, or hang them at their
doors, especially in times of epidemic. Whenever spectres are believed
to be lurking near by, peach rods appear, to' be kept at home or
frequently swung and brandished; and I have seen men and women
sprinkling water in their rooms and premises by means of a green
peach twig, with no other but exorcising purpose.

The power exercised by the peach on spectres explains why water
in which its fruits have been soaked is looked upon as the proper
stuff for the treatment of spectres in human disguise. We have
indeed found in a book the following wild tale, dated from the
T'ang dynasty:

“In the Khai yuen period (71*3 — -742) Li Chung-Tung was
“ district prefect in Yen-ling (in Honan), when his female slave died
“ and was buried there. Three years afterwards he was removed to
“ the district of Ph, in Shuh (Sze-ch'wen). His principal servant
“ there was sweeping the ground," when he saw some hair grow
“ out of it. He swept with more vigour, but the hair could not be
“removed; he pulled at it with his hands, and lo — the slave ot
“ Yen-ling arose, helpless as| if intoxicated. The family asked her
“ how she had come thither, and she said that she was just now
“ awaking from sleep. Chung-Pung deemed her to be a spectre ; he
“ poured peach water over her , and treated her with written
“ charms, but this did not at all inspire her with fear, and she
“ laughed as merrily as ever. She was confined in an outhouse and
“ fed with cakes, which she ate in the ordinary way. When the
“ month had passed, she was let out of that apartment and


PEACH CHARMS USED AS MEDICINES.


961


^ given work as usual; then she married a slave, by whom she had
“a boy and two girls. Seventeen years later she died’' b

The wooden or paper peach charms, intended to prevent intrusion
of spectres into human dwellings, may also be converted into salutary
exorcising medicines. Meng Shen ^ a physician of high repute who
lived from 621—713, composed a work in seventeen books, entitled
Shih liao pen-tiao b Plants to eat for Medicine, and wrote therein
this passage: “ When one is struck by evil or under sie influences
“ of spirits and spectres, a decoction of peach charms in water should
‘‘ be consumed” \ Certain stakes or of peach wood arc,
according to Li Shi-chen, “often stuck into the ground to defend
houses and yards” and about these objects tlie famous Ch^en
Tsang-khi has this notice: “They cure sudden pain in the heart,
“ belly-ache, spectral diseases, and bleeding, and expel sie or
“ evil influences. If you have a swollen abdomen, decoctions from
“ such stakes will be drunk with the same good effect as peach
“ charms”

Even the colour of peach blossoms is, as we have seen, a powerful
charm. Therefore red things in general counteract evil and avert
misfortune. Many mourning and funeral custdms, mentioned in this


IS. g H ^ ^ K A » . )i« aj ± .

a®:?:*. 0 W +

— A. Ji + 'b#tB$: Kutfj lull Recoi-J otTliinj^s

frightful to hear, quoted in T S, sect. A# , cli. 97- ]. 9.

2 ^ Books of t!ie Tang Dynasty, ch. 19G, and Old Books, ch. 191 .

muh^ ch. 29, I. 27.

« ¥ tt * a « Jfil Sf W s iE . SI iiS Et }f *

. op, ctt.^ ch 38, I. 10.


61


962


The war against spectres.


work, are based upon this conception *. We may also refer to page 281,
where a tale of the fourth century I’elates how a dangerous and
mighty tree-spirit was deprived of all its power because the men
attacking it had their faces painted red, wore red clothes, and had
wound a red cord around the tree. The fact that red is also the
colour of fire and light no doubt tends to strengtheii the conception.
And whereas red destroys misfortune, it also insures felicity. Red
is, in fact, the favourite gaudy colour of the Chinese, displayed
everywhere on occasions of festivity or rejoicing, such as marriage;
therefore, as we have seen (Book I, p. 2S), it is laid aside during
mourning. Politeness forbids the giving of presents unless they are
wrapped in peach-red paper, or decorated with a small slip of this
material, and this rule is observed so faithfully in Amoy, that the
term dng pao^, “red parcel”, is there the standard expression for a
present or fee. Oranges are much used as presents because of their
colour. Visiting-cards, sent to other people’s houses, are always red,
and so are many letters of congratulation and invitation. Red cords
are braided in pigtails especially of boys and girls, to promote their
health and growth ; and shreds of red cloth are much worn in pockets.

It is not improbable that cords, representing those with which
Shen-t'u and Yuh-lei fettered the spectres, have retained their position
in the system of exorcism. We have never seen them at doors; yet
some local works on provinces, departments or districts explicitly
mention them as being hung out on the day before New Year.
Koh Hung wrote in the fourth century, that white grass thrown
at spectres may kill them immediately (see p. 502); it seems then
that even the material of which those famous ropes were made was
in his time deemed to effect the destruction of spectres.

The tiger has to this day maintained its position as a door charm
more firmly. The ancient custom of fixing its picture to entrances
is not observed about New Year only, but very often the monster,
either winged or not, or its head only, roughly painted on paper
or a thin board, is seen over lintels of dwellings or of temples
where religious ceremonies and sacrifices are. being celebrated’. The
beast still plays its role of destroyer and expeller of spectres in
sundry other ways. As we shall learn elsewhere, a tiger appears in

1 See the pages indicated under the word Red in Index III of Book I.

3 A cat of burnt clay or porcelain, in a sitting posture, with staring eyes, is
frequently placed on the roof as a charm against evil, no doubt on account of its
resemblance to a tiger.


THE TIGER IN THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


963


a prominent position in a celestial army of gods, which wages an
implacable war of destruction against the legions of darkness. In
Amoy and the surrounding districts ‘it is a very usual practice to
make images of divinities sit on a tiger’s skin or a fragment of it,
in order to increase their devil dispelling power; and many idols
are painted with a skirt of such skin. On page 179 we have read
of a man who tried to cure his spectral fever by sitting and sleeping
on a tiger’s skin, though with the unhappy result that he changed
into a tiger. Koh Hung’s medical book states, that in cases of
sudden nightmare, “the best remedy is a pillow made of a tiger’s
head, or resembling it” b In Amoy, many mothers, anxious to preserve
the health of their infants, give them a so-called h6 bo * or “ tiger
hat” to wear, which represents the head of the monster, or is
adorned with it.

Images of the tiger, carved in wood or metal, are much worn
as amulets against demons of disease. And it was not only in the
second century of our era that, as Ying Shao tells us (see p. 955), its
claws were worn on the body, but, set in silver, they are thus used
as amulets to this hour. Precious charms and amulets also are the
small bones of a tiger’s foot, which in cases of convulsion and
disease are e. g. tied to the pulse of babies. And last, but not
least, parts of the tiger’s body are in great repute as exorcising
medicines. As early as Ying Shao’s time, tiger’s skin, on account of
the havoc which the monster makes among spectres, used to be
burned or roasted, mixed with water, and consumed by the sick^
(see p. 955). Medical works to this day give a variety of analogous
recipes. Tiger’s bones are, like bones of dead men, considered to
harbour soul substance or vital fluid, and therefore are highly valued,
in' particular if taken from the head. They are pounded and roasted
in order to destroy the marrow, and the ashes, prepared with spirits
or vinegar, are mixed in all sorts of medicaments which afford
protection against devils of nightmare, bad dreams and fever, and,
if placed on lintels, against demonry in general. Decoctions of tiger’s
bones cure demoniacal disease and other complaints. Tiger’s ffesh
is recommended for debility of the spleen or the stomach. A man
may cure his stomach by means of small doses of tiger’s grease,
dissolved in oil. Pills prepared from a tiger’s eyeball cure con-


C/tev hcu kih pnxj, cli. 1, § 5.


964


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES


vulsions, but patients are advised to beware of the numerous imita-
tions of this precious stuff. Equally the blood, spleen and gall of
the beast occupy a place of- honour in drugshops, as well as the
foeces, mixed with urine of a horse, dried, and burned to ashes.

The devil dispelling power of the tiger being so great, learned
men have advised sufferers from obstinate fever to cure thegaselves
by reading treatises on tigers. As slated on page 173, Ch'en Ki-jii
in the sixteenth century wrote the Hu loei, a book on tiger lore,
after the example of Wang Chi-teng’s Hu yuan. In his preface he
relates, that while he was harassed by fever for a whole year,
“ Mr. Wang Poh-kuh (Wang Chi-teng) came to inquire about my
“ health in the Pao-yen hall, and gave me a copy of the
“ Hu yuan, as this might avert my fever. I read it, yet the demon
“• continued its work. This proved that this compilation was far from
“ complete. Therefore I ransacked the writings of hermits, and
“ searched for old traditions current in mountains and forests, and
“ beside lakes and waters, and I compiled everything in a book, to
“ which 1 gave the title of Hu loei” b

«. « 2 ffi K Jg. *nSii: . * * Ijtf fi; ^ » W ^


CHAPTER V.


THE COCK.

The Calendar of King and Ch"a, and 4he writings which its
author quotes, have taught us (p. 957), that in the sixth century a
place among the exorcising methods suitable to the beginning of the
year was occupied by the cock, dead specimens and pictures of which
were then fixed by the people at their doors, because a cock of
gold had been perched in the peach tree of Shen-t'u and Yuh-lei,
to announce sunrise by its crowing.

We have not found this statement in any older books. But in
the same sixth century it was set forth by a studious prince of the
house of Liang, who had adopted the fancy name of Kin Leu-tszg \
Philosopher of the Gold or Gilded Storey. “In the south-east is the
“ mountain or land of the Peach-capital, where a large peach tree
“ stands, with a celestial cock perched therein. When the first rays
“ of the rising sun fall on that peach tree, the aforesaid celestial
“ cock immediately crows, and all cocks in the world, thus excited,
“also crow. And below that tree are two spirits facing it, with
“ ropes of reed in their hands, who catch mischief-making spectres
“and devour them. Nowadays people, to imitate this, make^pairs
“of peachwood men on New Year’s morning, with ropes, and place
“ a cock between them ”

1 . He was the seventh son of Wii, the founder of the Liang dynasty,

and is known in history as emperor Hiao Yuen , having reigned from 552

to 554 or 555. His writings, current to this day under the title of Kiti Leii-ts:c^
consist of sixteen sections, and contain jottings on pre-hibtoi ic and historical emperors
and rulers, on imperial consorts, on lessons given by great men, and on his librai'y; —
further they give short biographies of various worthies, miscellaneous notes on strange
and other matters, and autobiographical notes. Probably we have the work only in
a fragmentary state.

2 B « >fr » Si lii . ui ^ ^ . -h 35 a . H «

4 AjE

a S « A K ^ 1 if » . tt ¥ ft -tfe


966


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES,


Of course fabulists connected the cock with Shen-t'u and Yuh-lei
in its capacity of solar bird, whose crowing, coinciding with the
first dawn, frightens away spectres It was a cock of gold,
representing the golden rays of the using God of Light. We have
already devoted a few notes to the relation between the cock and
the sun on page 200 of Book I, and have seen on pp. 519, 620,
739 and 750 how spectres abscond at cockcrow, and corpse spectres
are paralyzed by it.

The exposure of cocks at gates and doors about New Year’s time
is accounted for by yet another legend, which Wang Kia in the
fifth century wrote down in his Shih i ki, and which likewise
pretends to a high antiquity. “ When Yao had been on the throne
“ for seventy years (23rd century b.C.), phoenix chickens crowded
‘* together every year, and unicorns roamed about lakes and meres,
“ while owls (birds of bad omen) fled to the remotest deserts. There was
“ at that tinie a realm of Chi-chi, which presented to the said emperor
“ birds with a- double eyesight, called ‘two eyeballs’, because they
“ had two pupils in each eye. They resembled cocks in shape, but
“ they crowed like male phoenixes. Even when moulting they flew
“ with the fleshy stumps of their wings. They gave chase to wild
“ beasts, tigers and wolves, preventing disastrous events and all
“possible evil from doing any harm. They fed on grease of kiung
“jade. In some years there came many of them, and then for a series
“ of years not one appeared. All people in the realm swept and
“ watered the ground before their gates and doors, hoping that the
“ double-eyed birds might gather there ; and in anticipation they
“ carved images of them in wood, or cast them in metal, and placed
“these at the entrances, so that chA and mei spectres with all
“ their hideous brood retired or submitted. The fact that nowadays
“ on every New* Year’s day people carve cocks in wood, or cast them
“ of metal, or paint them above their windows, is a survival thereof” ’.


1 Bernardo: It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

Horatio: And then it started, like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons, I have heard,

The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn.
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the God of day; and, at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

The extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine


2 ^


Shakespeare’s Hamlet.

m ^ ^ ^


THE COCK W THE MEDICAL AND EXORCISING ART.


967


The position of the cock as detnon-expeller naturally explains
why, many centuries ago, custom in China forbade the killing of
cocks on the first days of the year, that is to say, when the great
annual campaign against the spectral host set in. In the Calendar
of King and Ch'^u we read: ^According to Tung Hiun’s Queries
“concerning Rites and Customs, the first day of the first month is
“ the day of the cock ... In the morning] of that day they paint
“ a cock at the door ... At present they do] not kill any cocks on
“ the first . . . Anciently they slaughtered cocks, but nowadays they
“ do not . . . Formerly people abstained from eating fowls from the
“first day of the year to the seventh” h

We feel tempted to believe, that the role of the cock as a solar
exorcising agent must be much older than that Calendar of customs.
We find it indeed alluded to in the Fung-suh fu7i(j ^. “According
“to the Shanghai hng'\ says this work of the second century,
“ cocks were always used as sacrificial articles for spirits and gods.
“In the suburban sacrifices of the kingdom of Lu they always
“ sacrificed a red cock to the sun, because its voice in the morning
“and its red feathers drove evil from the rulers of that state. At
“ present, when one is stabbed by a spectre, so that he gets a boil
“ or ulcer, then, as soon as he perceives it, he kills a cock, and
“ applies it over his heart. And when any one has a pernicious
“ epilepsy, they prepare medicines from a cock. The head of a cock,
“ which has been affixed to a gate or door on the east, may subdue
“ku sorcery (cf. p. 869). Consequently we may say, that the cock


pzm, 4 AW^A; 0

chapter 1.


9GS


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“is the principal means of restraining mortality and averting evil”'.

The belief that demoniacal diseases may be cured by dead cocks
is also inculcated upon the Chinese people by the S/ieu slien ki :
“ Hia-heu Hung saw in Kiang-ling a tall spectre with a lance, and
“ several tiny spectres behind it. He was seized with fright and
“jumped from the road sideways, but when the tall one had passed
“ by, he seized a small one, and asked it what sort of being that
“tall one was. "He murders men; whoever is struck by him with
“ that lance in his heart or belly is sure to die”. Hung then asked
“ whether there were any remedies against the disease thus inflicted
“by hiiu; on which the spectre said: ‘Rub them with black cocks;
“this will immediately cure the patients’. ‘And where is that spectre
“going now?’ asked Hung. ‘To King-cheu and Yang-cheu’, the
“ answer was. After he had marched for about one day more, people
“ who were smitten with disease in heart or belly all died ; but then
“ Hung told the people to kill black cocks and rub the patients
“ therewith, and this did not fail to produce its effect in eight or nine
“cases out of every ten. The present method of rubbing with black
“cocks those who are struck by evil, dates from Hia-heu Hung”*.

Thus, on a par with the peach, the cock dispels disease on
account of its solar propensities, and moreover confers on man the
vitality bestowed by the universal source of life, of which it is the
symbol. Its position in the exorcising medical art is not less pre-


• 9 Bn-

a. Att9zm±inmn

Cl' 8.

Mm^MZ. A.

■if S: # . ^ tfc ■ ch


THE COCK IN THE EXORCISING MEDICAL ART.


969


ponderant than that of the peach. We have already noted a few
points on this head on pp. 201 and 217 of Book I, and on pp.
360 — 362 of Book II. In Koh Hang’s old medical work we read,
that in case of ^sudden death” (see p. 687), blood obtained from
" an incision in the comb of a red cock is to be squirted by means
“of a tube into the patient’s nose” h Another recipe (see p. 952) is,
to take a cock’s comb with the blood, and rub his face with it;
and “if anybody is hit by a spectre’s blow, blood should be drawn
“ from the comb with a knife, and dropped into the mouth of the
“patient, so that he swallows it; and that same cock must be cut
“ up, and the two halves folded over his breast below his heart,
“and when they have become cold, they must be thrown away on
“ the roadside. If a black cock can be procured, the effect will be
“ the better” For nightmare, likewise a spectral attack (p. 699),
the same author gives, among other recipes, this one : “ Cut into
“ the comb of a cock, and squirt the blood of it with a tube into
“the ihroat of the patient; this will have the best effect” ^ All
these prescriptions were transcribed by Li Shi-chen in his great work,
and thus transmitted to practitioners to this day. Moreover this
great authority writes : “ Heads of cocks kill spectres. The best are
“ those of cocks that have stood above doors on the east. They are
“a cure for ku sorcery, dispel evil, and avert pestilence*. If any-
“ body dies suddenly, being struck by a spectre, blood of a cock
“ smeared below his heart may immediately revive him Flesh of
“ a red cock kills poison, and averts inauspicious influences. , . .

“ It diverts and wards off pestilential disease. Take a red cock on
“ the day of the winter solstice, dry its flesh, cook it on the day
“ of the beginning of spring (see B. I, p. 968), and eat it entirely,
“ without giving any part of it to others” We have seen recipes


• ^ 5E f 'J « Id S A « efc ft # 4' , CJieu hen pi kihfang,

ch. i, 1.

Ch. 1, § 4.

3 H ® J&. S PI ± « ft, S#. a®

tbcw hang muh^ ch. 48, 1. 7.

« ^ H ^1# . . . WW gS. =?■


970


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


for victims of blows of spectres, in the composition of which the
white parts of cock’s dung figureJ as chief ingredient, cooked in
spirits together with flowers of hemp.

The old custom of fixing a cock to the house as a demon-
expelling agent is observed in China to this day. Usually, painted
on paper, it is pasted above the lintel; earthenware figures of cocks
may be seen on many housetops, and no doubt the custom occurs
in yet other forms. We then may, after all, draw from this chapter
and the preceding this conclusion, that whatever recalls in the most
general way an exorcising object, even its colour, or simply represents
it by one of its parts, by its ashes or decoctions, has the same good
effect as that object itself. We shall, of jcourse, see this principle
prevail in many other exorcising practices.


ilH \ . mi, I. 2.


CHAPTER VI.


TWIGS AND BROOMS.

Exorcising instruments of special repute are bundles of reeds or
twigs,' because their use against evil is mentioned in the Classics.
Indeed, as our readers know (Book I, p. 41), according to the
Li hi, wu and Conjurers or Invokers, while escorting princes and
grandees on calls of condolence, carried reeds or twigs, with the
object of keeping off from them influences or spectres connected
with the death. The fact that this custom is, moreover, mentioned
in the semi-classical I li and the Tso clrwefi (B. I, pp. 36 and 42)
enhances its respectability. Those reeds or twigs (lieh ^) probably
were tied together as a broom, if, as learned China generally does,
we may adopt the opinion of Clung Khang-ch"ing, who said in his
commentary on the passage in the Li hi referred to above, that
" with brooms obnoxious things might be swept away’’ (B. I, p. 41).

Owing to its classical character, this exorcising custom has main-
tained its place in the imperial ritual of condolence for a long series
of ages. In that of the T^ang dynasty we read : “ The emperor,
arriving at the hall (of the house of death), ascends to it by the
" eastern steps, and proceeds to the place of wailing. One w u and
“one Invoker ascend in advance; the former with the peachrod
“ places himself on the south-east, and the Invoker with the twigs
“ on the south-west, and four lancers ascend with the emperor,
“preceding and following him”h And in the ritual of the Sung
dynasty v\e find the matter mentioned in these words: “When
“the imperial carriage leaves the inner Palace, four commanders
“of the ts^'ien-niu swords (body-guards), carrying lances, one


New Books of the Tling D} nasty, ch. 20, 1. 2.


972


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ bearing a peachrod and one the twigs, march at the head of
“ the cortege” h

I have not heard or read of the use of twigs or brooms at visits
of condolence in later times ; but the hanging out of brooms at doors
about New Year’s time is mentioned frequently in books. Many families
are in the habit of performing a kind of pretence sweeping with a
broom on the last day of the year, rather intending the removal
of evil than that of filth. A broom with a basket to receive the
sweepings is sometimes fastened to the top of a bamboo pole on
the roof of a house, on account of geomantic advice that the house
may become a prey to sie because the normal or correct influences
of nature do not sufficiently converge on it. In times of epidemic,
processions for the expulsion of demons of disease are, as we shall see
on page 9S6, headed by broom bearers. Small brooms are often
suspended liy careful mothers to the bedcurtains of their babies.
And the reader is acquainted with the fact that brooms are pre-
ferably handled and brandished to lay corpse spectres (B. I, p. 43;
B. II, p. 751). I have seen in South Fuhkien people who had
swooned being beaten with brooms to expel the devil that held
the soul in his grip. Archbishop Gray writes, that in Canton, “to
“ restore the health of a child suffering from fever and ague, it is
“ customary for the mother to place three burning incense sticks in
“ its hand. The child is then quickly carried out of the house by
“ a servant. The mother follows them with a broom in her hand,
“ pretending to sweep, and crying aloud : Begone ! Begone ! ! Begone ! ! !
“ The evil spirit which is regarded as the cause of the child’s sick-
“ ness is supposed to be driven away for ever by this ceremony”*.


History of the Sung Dynasty, ch. i24, 1 7.

2 China, II, p. 30.


CHAPTER VII.


. EXORCISING PROCESSIONS.


We know now that the purification of human dwellings at the
end of the year is an ancient usage, traceable in books as far back
as the beginning of our era, and that the myths accounting for it
are an argument for its prevalence in much older time. Apart from
those myths, there is in classical books evidence for such higher
antiquity.

In the Lun yii it is explicitly stated, that Confucius, “when his
“fellow citizens celebrated the no, put on his court robes, and
“stood on the eastern steps’’^; and in the Li ¥i (ch. 36, 1. 40) it
is said, that “when his fellow citizens performed the yang, he put
“ on his court robes and took position on the eastern steps, in order
“to shield his household gods”®. Evidently then that no|||or
yang was disquieting to the domestic spirits because of its
noise. According to Lii Puh-wei, it was performed three times a
year. In his directions to be observed in the several months of the
year, he says : “ In the last month of spring the people of the capital
“perform the no; they cut victims in pieces at the nine gates, in
“ order to suppress evil, and thereby they finish the influence of
“ the spring In the month of mid-autumn the Son of Heaven
“ perforins the no to give succour against disease, and in this
“ wise he causes the influence of autumn to pervade everything ^

“ And in the last month of winter the Son of Heaven orders the


^ ^ Section ^

Am.

cH'un-tsiu^ ch. 3, first section,
first section.


974


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ officers to celebrate the great or principal n o , and to cut victims
“ in pieces on all sides”

Lii Puh-wei’s monthly directions have been bound up with the
Li hi as a special book, entitled Directions for the Months *. Hence
this Classic mentions the no or yang in two of its books, and
since, as we have seen, they are moreover mentioned in the Lunyii,
they are thoroughly classical. The passages quoted entitle us to say,
that they had for their object the averting of disease; also that
this was achieved by sacrificing to disease-demons at the city-gates
certain victims cut in pieces; further that they were celebrated with
peculiar ardour by the official world in the last month of the year,
and were then called the great no; and that Sons of Heaven perso-
nally occupied themselves with at least two of the three, which no
doubt implies that they were performed in their palace. And the
attitude of Confucius indicates, that the performers invaded his
premises and those of notables or official persons like himself, or
that they acted under the control or auspices of such worthies, and
that the ceremony was connected with noise enough to frighten and
disturb even ancestral souls and other divinities worshipped in
the houses. »

The performers were indeed quite a crowd. This is, as we have
seen on page 162 of Book I, emphatically stated in an instructive
passage of the Cheu li, which tells of fang-siangshih “inspectors
or rescuers of the country to "the four quarters” (?), who, their
heads covered with a bearskin mask with four eyes of gold, wearing
a black coat and a red skirt, and armed with a lance and a shield,
busily occupied themselves at those n o]] with searching the houses
at the head of a hundred followers, in order to expel contagious
diseases. These men were, moreover, employed at princely funerals
to drive spectres out of the grave, to which end they jumped into
it, and gesticulated with their lances. Apparently there were in
employ four of them, since another page of the Cheu li says, that
“they were four; wild and raving men”\

The great n o of the last month of the year undoubtedly coincided
with the same annual cleansing with which Chapters HI, IV and
V have acquainted us, when the Yang undertakes its always suc-

^ ^.Ch. 12, mst section.

^ ^ a ^ pg A 28 , 1 . 18 .


Astrological origin of exorcising processions.


. 975


cessful campaign against the Yin and its spectres. Ching Khang-
ch%g suggested that the three no had an astrological background.
In his age, the second century of our era, the sun in the last month
of spring traversed the constellation Mao ^ (see Book I, p. 972),
which stands under the influence of two adjacent asterisms, called
Tading ^ or Great Burial Mound, and Tseh-shi ^ or Accumulated
Corpses, by whose operation the sun then might produce spectres
and demons, the powers of death \ This dangerous moment recurred
again in the month of mid-autumn, when the sun was in opposition
with those constellations^. And in the last month of winter the sun
traversed the constellations Hii ^ and Wei ^ (see Book I, p. 971),
which, being under the influence of the adjacent Fen-mu^ or Graves,
and SzS-szg ® or Four Directors, are ruled by evil spirits compelling
the Yin to harm man This explanation of the raison d'etre of the
three no is no doubt worthy of our attention, and perhaps quite
correct; at any rate it seems difficult to dispute its correctness.

Substantial particulars about the manner in which the great no
was celebrated in the imperial residence during the Han dynasty,
are supplied by writings of that time. Kao Yiu (see p. 161) wrote
in the second century, that “the great no was the same drumming
“away of epidemics in which the people of the present indulge on
“ the day before the sacrifice of the end of the year, and which
“ they call expulsion"’*. And in the Books of the Later Han Dynasty
we find in the chapter describing the official ritual of that house
the following interesting lines:

“One day before the sacrifice of the end of the year the great
“ no is celebrated, called expulsion of epidemical disease. The ritual
“ of it is the following : — From among the apprentices of the
“ inner Yellow Gate of the Palace, one hundred and twenty of ten.


3 Khienlung edition of tlie Li ki^ cli. 21, I, 45.

4 IbiO., ch. 24, 1. 11. 5 i#


6 0^. According to the Shnj king ^ or Canon of Stars, the oldest

Chinese uranographical book written under the Han dynasty, those Four Directors are :
that of evil, nw ; that of danger, ; that of royal favour, ; and

that of life or fate, . Each contains two stars.

7 Khienlung edition of the Li Ai, ch. 25, 1. 46.


icm4-A


- 0


* . Khienlung edition of the Li Ai, ch. 25, 1. 40.


976


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“eleven or twelve years are selected to act as ‘lads’; they are dressed
“ with red bonnets and black coats, and] they carry large hand-
“ drams. The fang-siang shi with four eyes of gold and masked
“ with bearskins, wearing black coats and red skirts, grasp their
“ lances and wield their shields. There are also twelve animals
“ with feathers or hairs, and with horns. These people start their
“ work at the inner Yellow Gate, under command of a Chamberlain
“ in general employ, to expel maleficent spectres from the Forbidden
“ Palace.

“ When the waterclock of the night is at its highest level (towards
“ sunset), the court officials assemble : Chamberlains, Chancellors,
“Co-ministers, members of the Board of Revenue, commanders and
“ officials of the Body Guard, everybody with a red cap. The guards
“ of the throne repair to the front hall with the imperial palan-
“ keen. Then the Commander of the Yellow Gate harangues the
“emperor in these terms: ‘The lads are ready; I beseech that
“the expulsion of contagious disease may be performed’. On this a
“ chant is commenced at the inner Yellow Gate, with which the
“ boys chime in. It runs as follows :

“‘iCiah-tso devours calamities; Fei-wei devours tigers; Hiung-poh
“devours mei spectres; T'eng-kien eats mischief-making things, and
“ Kiao-chu adversity; Poh-khi eats dreams; Kiang-liang and Tsu-ming
“together devour the dead whose bodies were mutilated, and
“ Khi-sheng-wei-sui swallows what he sees; Ts'o-tvvan gulps down a
“ myriad, and Kiung-khi with T^eng-ken together devour k u. These
“ twelve divinities are herewith ordered to chase away evil and
“ misfortune, to scorch your bodies, seize your bones and joints,
“ cut your flesh in pieces, tear out your lungs and bowels. If you
“ do not get quickly away, the stragglers among you will become
“ their food ’.

“Now the fang-siang are set to work. Together with those
“ twelve animals (representing these twelve demon-devourers) they
“jump about screaming, making three tours round about the inner
“ Palace buildings in front and behind, and with their torches they
“ escort the pestilential disease out of the front gate. Outside this
“ gate, swift horsemen take over the torches and leave the Palace
“ through the Marshal’s Gate, on the outside of which they transfer
“ them to horsemen of the fifth army-corps, who thereupon drive
“ the spectres into the Loh river.

“In every mansion of the official world, men with wooden masks
“and lepresenting animals may act as leaders of the performers


EXORCISING PROCESSIONS UNDER THE HAN DTNASTT. 977

“of the no. When the ceremony is finished, keng of peachwood
“ (see p. 956) are put up, with Yuh-lei and ropes of reed, after which
“ the performers and the officers in attendance on the throne stop
“ their work. Ropes of reed, lances, and sticks of peach wood are
“presented by the emperor to the highest ministers, commanders,
“and special and general feudal rulers” k

We further learn a few particulars about these no from the
Tuh twan\ “Then it was ordered that fang-siang shi with four
“ eyes of gold, masked with bearskins, and wearing black coats with
“ red skirts, bearing lances and brandishing shields, should always
“ perform at the end of the year in the twelfth month the n o of the
“ season, in the rear of hundreds of official servants and boys, and
“ search the interior of the Palace, in order to expel the demons
“ of plague. With bows of peach wood and arrows of the thorny
“jujube they shoot at the spectres, and with porcelain drums they


& « ^ S .ft * ® M. + - » » PI
ft S . % IS « 2 . 0 a 1 A T « ;

¥ -fp ft . » i A ® . St ffl ^ .

H H . J? + - » -S Bi Pp )i S # # = ii .

^ t# ft ^ '01 - B


62


978


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“drum at them; moreover they throw red balls and cereals at them,
“in order to remove disease and calamity” h
"A description of the no of those times, as they were celebrated
in Loh-yang, the imperial capital, occurs also in a poetical com-
position ascribed to Chang Heng (see p. 21) of the second century,
entitled Tung-hing fu ^ or Lay of the Eastern Capital. “ At the end
“ of the year the great n o takes place for the purpose of driving
“off all spectres. The fang-siang carry their spears, wu and hih
“ hold their bundles of reed. Ten thousand lads with red heads
“ and black clothes, with bows of peach wood and arrows of thorny
“jujube shoot at random all around. Showers of potsherds and
“ pebbles come down like rain, infallibly killing strong spectres as
“ well as the weak. Flaming torches run after these beings, so that
“a sparkling and streaming glare chases the red plague to all sides;
“ thereupon they destroy them in the imperial moats and break
“ down the suspension bridges (to prevent their return). In this way
“they attack chT and mei, strike at wild and ferocious beings,
“cleave sinuous snakes, beat out the brains of fang-liang,
“imprison keng-fu in the clear and chilly waters, and drown
“ n ii-p a h ’ in the waters animated by gods. They cut asunder the
“khwei (p. 496) and the hii (p. 466), as also the wang-siaiig;
“they mutilate the yo-chung, and exterminate the yiu-kwang*.
“The eight spirits (cardinal points of the Universe) thereby quiver ;
“ how much more must this be the case with the k i (p. 696), the
“yuh (p. 702) and the pih-fang. The land of Tu-shoh (p. 953),
“ affords protection - by peach branches, the effects of which are
“enhanced by Yuh-lei and Shen-tu, who on the other side, with
“ ropes of rush in their hands, by means of their sharp eyesight
“ spy out the darkest corners, in order to cateh the spectres which
“ still remain after the chase. The houses in the capital thus being

2 ^ It is reprinted in the T S, sect. ch. 440, and there

contains 3800 characters.

3 According to a commentary, keng-fu and nti-pah are devils of drought
which fear water, and are destroyed when thrown into it.

4 Commentator’s note: ye-chung and yiu-kwang are eight brothers who
haunt and harm mankind continuously.


EXORCISING PROCESSIONS IN THE SIXTH CENTURY.


979


“ purged to their most secluded parts, and delivered from every-
“ thing undesirable, the Yin and the Yang may unite harmoniously,
“ and all beings and things thus be produced in due time”

This is all the information that the writings of the Han dynasty
contain about the official celebration of the great no; but I think
it is nearly everything worth knowing. Dynasties of later ages no
doubt celebrated it in much the same fashion. Standard history
teaches us that the house of Ts"i caused it to be performed on
the last day of the year by two groups, each of 120 lads, and
twelve animals headed by drums and wind instruments. The gates
of the wards and of the city walls were flung open, and the emperor
in everyday attire contemplated the n o from his throne, in the midst
of his officers. With rolling drums the procession entered the Palace
through the western gate, passed through all parts of it in two
divisions, even mounting the storeys and towers; the fang-siang
and the twelve animals hopped, jumped, and cried, and having
passed through the south gate, they spread in six directions till they
reached the city-walls.

And under the Sui dynasty a buck and a cock were cut in pieces
at the gate of the Palace and the four city gates on the last day
of the spring, in order to exorcise the influences of the Yin; they
did the same thing on the day before the autumn equinox, in order
to exorcise the influences of the Yang, and repeated the act in the
last month of winter. There were men with leather whips in the
cortege, which for the rest was composed as under the Ts^i dynasty.
The tumultuous work was flnished before sunrise. As soon as the
procession had left the Palace, it broke up into several parts, and
approached the city gates, where the slaughtering of the victims


ffls®. sffise. mmm.


980


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


then took place immediately by Conjurers and other officiating
worthies, who also sacrificed spirits, and buried these and the
victims on the spot, in a pit dug for the purpose

The rescripts for the celebration of the n o under the T^ang dynasty
were of exactly the same tenor as the above; but they demanded
that the lads should be between twelve and sixteen years old, masked,
and arranged in four groups' of six, and that, besides the whip-
bearers, drummers and trumpeters, there should be two w u in the
procession. The exorcising song was to the very letter that of the
Han dynasty ^ The Khai yuen Ritual gave rules for the celebra-
tion of the no in the provinces: — four fang-siang were to be
used, with four precentors and by chiefs of first class govern-
ments sixty lads besides; chiefs of governments of the second or
the third order might employ forty lads, and in the districts no
more than twenty lads might be employed, with one fang-siang
and one precentor; besides there might be four drummers and four
whip-bearers. Such purification of official mansions and cities was to
be accompanied by a sacrifice at the gates to the yin spirits, and
concluded by burial of the sacrificial flesh and wine.

Those exorcising processions, instituted by the pious men of un-
known antiquity and transmitted for many ages as a part of the
State-religion, contained in themselves all the elements needed for
conversion into popular exorcising processions, noisy, and even
amusing, agreeably breaking the monotony of daily life. We find
indeed in literature of all times notices telling of boys coming out
on the last day of the year with “spectre-masks”*; of people old
and young, masked in a hundred ways as gods and spirits, under
the guidance of so-called “fathers and mothers of the no”®; of
processions, in which also the weaker sex freely acted side by side
with the male. We read of men in embroidered, highly coloured
dresses, armed with spears and banners, representing the “door-gods” *
Shen-t'u and Yuh-lei, or accoutred as “judges”^ of hell, suitably
to terrify spectres; or as Chung-khwei®, an eminent devil-murdering
spirit (see Frontispiece). We read of male and female wu possessed


1 Books of the Sui Dynasty, ch. 8, 11. 19 seq.

2 New Books of the Tang Dynasty, ch. 16, 1. 12.


7


' EXORCISING PROCESSIONS NOWADAYS.


981


by a divinity, dancing about with drums and cymbals. But while thus
maintaining their existence among the people, the no disappeared
from the ritual of the State after the T'ang dynasty, and it seems
that they have not been celebrated again officially in the last eight
or nine centuries.

Such popular no, celebrated without any official initiative or
sanction, are by no means peculiarly connected with the end of the
year. In south Fuhkien, and, as we may suppose, in China generally,
they mostly take place in the hot season, when mortality is greatest,
and people are often decimated by the cholera demons, the endemic
summer plague of the south.

They are organized by committees which administer the temples
dedicated to tutelary divinities of wards and villages. Very often
two or more such parish temples, adjacent to each other, combine
for the purpose. The animation displayed and the outlays made
are proportionate to the cruelty with which the plague devils do
their work. The money required is collected among the parishioners
by means of subscription lists, at the head of which the local
mandarins inscribe their names for goodly sums. In Amoy and the
adjacent country it is customary for the god of the temple himself to
give orders by the mouth of a medium, into whom his spirit has
descended, on which night his image is to be carried in procession
through the parish, or even the whole town, and is thus to be
enabled to purify it by his intimidating presence, for, as we know
(p. 930), shen or Yang spirits destrCy the kwei or spirits of the
Yin. Often also the deity appoints in the same fashion the spot
from which the procession shall start, and the streets through which
it shall pass, giving, moreover, useful hints with regard to the
quality and quantity of the sacrificial articles to be offered to the
generals of the Celestial Army (see p. 963) which is expected to
escort him.

The procession is preceded by two men bearing a pair of the
largest paper lanterns which the temple possesses, inscribed with
the name of the building and of the god residing in it. They are
followed by a man with a square black banner suspended from
a pole and displaying a large charm in white paint, which by
affrighting the host of darkness by the brightness of its colour and
its terrifying import, dissipates thqm, as the wind blows away the
dust. Next comes a train of some hundred notable men and fathers
of families, well dressed, each with a smoking incense-stick in his
hand, so as to fill with sweet scent the road which the god is


982


THE WAY AGAINST SPECTRES.


taking. They all, or a great many, mutter a most famous poem
of great exorcising power, entitled Chimj khi ho, which we shall set
before the reader on pp. 1014 sqq. The next division consists of
soldiers or civilians in military uniforms, with long, spectre-dispelling
trumpets (p. 946), followed by the gods whose images are worshipped
in the temple, with their immediate escort. Those of inferior rank
precede ; the chief god follows. Each is seated in an open palankeen,
allowing a free look-out on every side, so that no demon can
escape their attention, nor remain undismayed by failing to see the
gods. From time to time the bearers of the palankeens, in order
to frighten the demon-world, utter long drawn cries of iu . .. iu . ..
The rules of respect and etiquette require that gods, when taken
out, should be escorted by a retinue as described on page 164 of
Book I, that is to say, by bearers of gongs, a canopy and fan ot
state, square boards displaying their divine names and titles, or a
warning to the public “to be respectful and silent”, and “to turn
away and retire”, further by lictors with whips and twisted rattan
staves to drive wayfarers aside, and bamboo laths or flogging-sticks
used in the tribunals. This rule is followed in devil-expelling pro-
cessions, but the canopy, the fan and the boards are often left
behind in the temple, being better replaced by an extra number
of much more awe-inspiring whips, rattans, and laths.

The committee of administrators, in ceremonial dress with tas-
selled hat (Book 1, p. 49), follow behind the gods. They distribute
paper charms among the people, which may act as prophylactics
for the prevailing disease, and as medicines for those attacked by
it. Then comes a second train of pious laymen with incense-sticks,
reciting the above-mentioned Ching khi ko. I have once seen all
of them carrying small triangular flags of black stuff) affixed to
little staves of spectre-expelling willow wood, and bearing in white
paint the phrase: “we pray f«r rest and peace for this whole
region” *, for by mouth of his medium the temple-god had actually
ordered them to do so, and to affix them to their housedoors after
the procession. It needs no saying that the procession contains a
great number of torchbearers, whose business it is to affright the
spirits of darkness with light and fire.

Unless the plague abates considerably, such ts'd id^ or “nocturnal
rounds”, as the Amoy Chinese call them, are repeated every night


2 4 ®-


PL X.


Nail-i;liair, whip, and sword of exorcist.


EXORCISING PROCESSIONS NOWADAYS.


983


for some weeks, or even longer. As it is the gods who prescribe
the programme, or at least considerable items of it, the processions
not seldom differ considerably. I have seen one winding through
streets and lanes quite silently, while at the same time elsewhere
in the town another was moving with noisy trumpets and gongs, and
volleys from rusty muskets. I have also seen processions drawn out
very much beyond the average length by hundreds of men, each
bearing a paper lantern at the top of a pole, the god having ordered
that every family should cause itself to be represented in the train
by such an object. As is usual when gods appear in public on
festive occasions, many a devout parishioner has a censer at his door
upon a table, with incense burning in it, and there, when the gods
pass, he courteously salutes them with bows, while holding incense-
sticks between his fingers. And hardly any family will forget to
enrich them and their suite by burning some counterfeit paper
money on the premises, and help them in their work of purification
by firing one or more strings of crackers.

A temple-god of repute and popularity, a powerful protector of
the parish, generally has a medium, into whom he preferably des-
cends, in order to give through his mouth orders and good advice
to his beloved people *. In this way he may have ordered that this
man shall appear in the procession. He then parades therein in a
state of delirium which proves that the god is in him. He is naked
to the waist, his hair flowing down dishevelled at his back. Long
daggers stand implanted deep in his cheeks and upper arms, so that
the blood drips out. With a double-edged sword (PI. X) he cleaves
the air in his assaults on beings which nobody sees but he. At times
he looks unconscious; then suddenly he hops, runs, spins round, and
rolls from side to side, inflicting bloody wounds on his back with
his sword, or with a ball studded with sharp iron points, which he
bears by a cord. Such a ch^'i km'^ or “prick-ball” is of wood or ot
compact straw, through which pass many thin iron spikes about
eight inches long, sharply pointed at both ends. There may be seen
also such mediums of other gods who reside in the temple or in
other temples of the ward or town, behaving in much the same
way. Some, should the gods in whose employ they are have so
ordered it, are carried round each in an arm-chair resting by means
of shafts on the shoulders of four bearers, the seat, back and arms


1 We shall devote our attention to those men in Part V,

2


984


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


of which, even the place on which the feet rest, are armed with
long nails pointing upward, and sticking deep into the flesh of the
occupant. Not less bloodletting than these tinfj kid or ian kio
“nail litters” (PI. X) are the ting cling ’ or “nail beds”, on each of
which a medium lies stretched at full length upon protruding nail
points; or the to kio^ or “sword litters”, chairs like the “nail litters”,
but the seat, back, arms, and foot-rest of which are rows of parallel
swords, on the edges of which the body rests’ or leans. The bleeding
men are carried round in these vehicles for hours. Occasionally there
may be seen a woman among them, subjecting herself to the same
disgusting torment.

To increase the exorcising power of such an uneasy chair with
its bleeding occupant, there is attached to the back of it a small
flagstaff with a black flag, bearing in bright white paint the
T'^ai-kih surrounded by the eight kwa, and, beside this figure,
the Great Bear, and the character Peck, which is the name
of this constellation. This flag is deemed to maintain rule among
the spectres, for they are subject to the Tao or Order of the
Universe (cf. Chapter I), which the flag displays; — indeed, the
T'ai-kih is the Yang and the Yin, which constitute the Tao; the
kwa are the natural phenomena which their influences call forth
(B. I, p. 960), and the Great Bear is the constellation which, ruling
the seasons or time, which is the Course or Order of the Universe,
actually rules this Order (B. I, p. 317).

Nor is it uncommon to see in the procession a medium with a
thick needle thrust through his tongue. His bloody spittle he drops
on sheets of paper, for which the crowd eagerly scrambles, knowing
that, with the blood, the devil-dispelling power of the god dwelling
in the medium has passed into them. Such a mighty charm therefore
affords complete protection to every family to whose lintel, walls, beds
or bodies it is fastened.

Should the plague not abate, or even become more virulent, the
vigour of the procession must be intensified. The bearers of the
palankeens which contain the gods cry and scream more loudly ;
they now and then actually galop, and energetically swing their
holy loads. W u-ist or Taoist priests (sai kong), in full ceremonial
dress, trot up and down in the train, expelling the spectres with
jingling handbells, and buffalo-horns on which they blow at inter-


3


7)


2 #r*-


EXORCISING PROCESSIONS NOWADAYS.


985


vals, while ejaculating exorcising formulae. Or they furiously assail
the spectres by brandishing their swords, or even axes, if swords have
too long proved insufficiently effective. Clanging of gongs, popping
of crackers, and volleys from matchlocks reach a climax of intensity,
and blunderbusses detonate before temples and official mansions.

As the reader will remember, an important role was assigned at.
the no ceremonies of the Han dynasty to a number of lads intoning
exorcising chants under a director or leader. Nowadays we still find
such boys of between, say, eleven and fifteen years in the anti-epide-
mical processions at Amoy. It is incumbent on them in the first
place to exercise influence upon the thirty six generals of the
Celestial Army by chanting. They do this first in the temple before
the procession sets out, thereby inducing them to descend ; and they
repeat their chant over and over again when the procession is
perambulating the streets, in order to stimulate the valour and
prowess of the generals. Such lads are placed at the disposal of the
directors of the temple by fathers of the indigent class, anxious to do
something useful. They wear a special dress. Their name is /o iefi se,
the litteral meaning of which escapes me. Their director, a boat
or “chief of magic”, marching ahead of them, brandishes a sword.
They accompany their chants by the soft rattling of so-called
pa le\ hollow rings of brass, about one decimeter in diameter,
the outer circumference of which is slit, and which contain some
small pieces of iron. Each boy bears one ring in his hand, under a
coloured cloth. A few carry long whips of braided cords with short
handles, called boat soh^ or “magical ropes” (PI. X), wherewith they
flog the spectres away. Five boys bear banners of the five principal
colours, representing the divisions of the Celestial Army, viz. those
of the northern, southern, eastern, western, and central parts of the
Universe, therewith to lead on the mighty host of invisible gods
against the common foe. They are escorted by gongmen and
drummers, inciting the divine warriors by their noise. Close by,
some men having their faces painted black, red, green, or otherwise,
with dishevelled hair, whips, swords, or bells, on horseback or
afoot, bear live snakes around their necks. They represent the generals
of the Celestial Army, or are incarnations of these divinities for the
time being, as the mediums are of the temple gods. Finally we
notice an image of Chung-khwei in a palankeen, or a man with


986


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


the upper part of his body enclosed in a hollow figure representing
this divine devil-expeller.

Should all these intimidations with their terror-striking accom-
paniments have been employed for some nights without visible
effect, leaders, notables and priests confess themselves unable to help
the people unless they set in action divinities of the State-religion,
whose power in the unseen world stands on a par with that of
the almost omnipotent mandarinate in the world of man. But only in
walled cities or forts such gods dwell, viz. the god of the Walls and
Moats, and Kwan-ti the famous god of War and Military Affairs,
respectively patron divinities of the civil and military authorities. Here
then the people in despair may apply to their mandarins, and request
them to set these gods in action against the catastrophe.

It is a leading principle of Chinese officialdom never to bestir
itself on behalf of the people if it can be avoided. Hence also in

times of plague the mandarins do not intervene until requests to

this effect reach them. These duly read and considered, they repair
with their usual suite to the two temples of the aforesaid gods, in
order to revere them with prostrations and incense, and inform

them of the people’s distress by means of a written address in

dignified style, read aloud before their altars and then burned. They
repeat this formal visit on the next day, and even a third time,
and meanwhile issue a proclamation, announcing that they allow
the people on such-and-such nights to carry the gods in procession
through the streets. And at the appointed time, when darkness has
succeeded twilight, the gods are fetched from their temples, and the
procession is duly started.

A few men with brooms precede it. They cleanse the road for
the gods, but without much display of energy, it being taken
for granted that all the people have done this work previously
before their own doors; moreover, according to many, the sweeping
merely purports removal of the plague, and of the spectres which
cause it (cf. p. 972). The sweepers are followed by a set of large
lanterns of paper or linen on the top of poles, the broad square
fronts of which announce the aim of the procession: “the banish-
ment of the sie and expulsion of the plague” and consequently
have the effect which these words express. There follow three men,
hidden to their knees within hollow puppets of bamboo, paper and


EXORCISING PROCESSIONS NOWADAYS.


987


pasteboard, brightly coloured. They represent Chung-khwei, and a
pair of spirits in the service of the God of Walls and Moats,
charged with haling criminal souls before his tribunal. They look
most hideous and terrific. One of the pair is tall and lean, the
other short and broad. If anything is capable of causing a same
qui pent among spectres, it is certainly these beings.

Next, by order of the military authorities, comes a division ot
soldiery. They fire blank cartridges incessantly, wisely preserving
the bullets for occasional use against more substantial victims. It
stands to reason that there also are in these processions a profusion
of trumpets, gongs, cymbals, torches, and lanterns. To scent and
purify the air, and at the same time drive away the spectres, censers
containing smoking sandal wood are carried along on biers or litters.
At last the two gods appear, with the ordinary escort of constables,
yamen servants, etc. Civil power having precedence over the military,
Kwan-ti comes first, with his divine adjutants Kwan P"ing * and
Cheu Ts^ang *, in order to clear the road for the God of Walls and
Moats. It is an act of courtesy and devotion on the part of the
mandarins should they charge their own palankeen-bearers witli the
work of carrying these gods. Here also the vehicles of the gods are
open (cf. p. 982), so as to enable them to see all spectres, and to
be seen by all.

A long row of devotees, either in ceremonial attire or in their
best clothes, bearing incense-sticks and chanting the Chimj khi ko,
closes the procession. Householders have duly suspended paper
lanterns in their premises, and placed a table there with a censer,
in order to worship the two gods with fragrant smoke, bows and
prostrations, when they pass; paper mock money is burned, and
crackers are fired by them. Midnight passes ere the procession has
finished the lengthy route prescribed. The next night finds it in another
ward, until, sometimes after a series of days, each part of the town
has had its turn. I never saw a possessed medium in these pro-
cessions, for, as the people rightly or wrongly assert, gods who have
a place in the Pantheon of the State seldom deign to descend into
human beings.

Mandarins no doubt often encourage the celebration of exorcising
processions. Yet it seems that they do not take much interest in
them, since the no, their prototypes, have been expunged from the


* IT-


2


988


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


ritual of the State. We may even admit that the intellectualists
among them will rather be inclined to despise them, seeing that
Wu Yung-kwang, a Governor of Hunan, afterwards Governor-
General of Hunan and Hupeh, some seventy years ago sharply
criticized them in his handbook for the use of the mandarinate.
He wrote therein the following lines, important also for the many
particulars concerning those processions:

“A God of Walls and Moats actually is the chief of the govern-
“ ment in a region (province, department, or district), assigning in
“ this capacity such felicity to the good and such misfortune to
“ the wicked as the order of nature has in store. But the ignorant,
“ stupid populace does not rest content with such decisions of natural
“ equity, and bging incapable of selfrestraint, avers that misfortune
“ can be averted and happiness attracted ; to this end it sacrifices
“ on fixed annual days, moreover celebrating so-called birthdays of
“ the God of Walls and Moats. On these occasions they fetch the
“ god out of his temple, carry him in procession through streets and
“lanes, with noise of metal instruments and drums, and ear-
“ splitting fire-crackers ; and all to cajole the god in the hope of
“ securing happiness. Very wrong and superstitious though this
“ custom is, yet not a single one among the district magistrates has
“ forbidden it. The time of such processions always coincides with
“the midsurhmer month, when the genial air of spring has become
“ dense and no longer can disperse, so that damp heat and evapo-
“ ration may transform into pestilential illness. It is especially dif-
“ ficult for the said air to disperse in densely populated places; but the
“ diseases of the season may be successfully expelled there by noise of
“metal instruments, drums, and crackers; and that this is done, is
“a survival of the no of the villages, mentioned in the Clieu li.
“ But owing to the employment on those occasions of men with four
“ gold eyes, lances and shields, our ancestors declared the n o to
“ be hardly better than a comedy ; and nowadays it is by means
“ of such comedies that the gods are revered !

“But there is more, and worse; while such processions are cele-
“ brated, there are censers, pavilions, banners and canopies in it, in
“ every respect of the utmost beauty and elegance. Stages are raised,
“ on which a variety of theatricals are performed ; masquerades are
“ cleverly organized, in which some exhibit their antique curiosities
“ and trinkets, in order to make a show of their wealth, or adorn
“ their faces, in order to draw others into lasciviousness. Pure songs are
“chanted dozens of times; troops of performers by turns appear on


PHILIPPIC AGAINST EXORCISING PROCESSIONS.


989 .


the stages ; the possessions of a hundred families are wasted on
“ merely a single day of' such display. Such things in fact eat
* away like a cancer the substance of the people b

“Besides there are people who by means of lamps with burning
“grease seek absolution from guilt; others who mask themselves as
“ infernal judges, in order to render themselves important, or who
“ bind stilts to their legs, or paint their faces with various colours,
“ and by hundreds or tens form groups of souls of departed people
“ or bereaved spirits, with absolutely no sense of shame or decency.
“This is not honouring the gods, but actually treating them dis-
“ respectfully. Furthermore there are people who disguise their children,
' “ under pretence that they have sinned against the god ; in the
“ slightest case they handcuff them, in the worst they confine them
“ in cages, and in this way, they say, they ensure prolongation of
“ their lives, and their protection by divine power. Such people do
“ not understand that the proper way to bring up ignorant children
“ consists in teaching them correct, orthodox principles, and in pointing
“ out to them what they are bound to respect and what to give
“ heed to, lest they remain stupid. By dressing them in the tan-
“ coloured clothes (of convicts) while they still wear the youthful
“lock of hair, they render them unhappy; and besides, if they


^ a a ts ^ S' » ^ ^ ^ > ti I® w a

« . sa in a . ja » ft # . li I® re , a sg If .

M » ® S * . * » * ^ H "I . ^ IS ;gf #


990


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“compel them to appear handcuffed in the street in their juvenile
“ days, will they then possess any sense of shame when they are
“grown up? They are not by this means saved from a premature
“ death ; and could their parents set any value on the possession
“of sons indifferent about good and evil? And further they are
“ weakened by the burning sunshine and thus made ill; this is
“ murder of one’s own progeny . . .

^ . W « 5. Sft , S i# ® IS, W + fit » . T' W W-

*11 i**.

H ® « M « * ^.a e * IB . M w la «

i*d'' 0 amzMMmm. nmrn


CHAPTER VIII.


WEAPONS.

In our chapters on Demonology we have read mueh about weapons
which do excellent service for the Chinese in their perpetual war
against unseen evil. We have also seen in the preceding chapter that
in the no processions there were devil-expellers armed with lances,
bows, and arrows, and that at the conclusion of these ceremonies
the emperors of the Han dynasty distributed lances and staves of
peach wood to the grandees, as weapons of defence against the
spectral world. Our second chapter on Demonology has shown, that
it always was especially during attacks of spectres, and in panics
caused by their apparitions, that the people had recourse to sharp
weapons; and we cannot doubt that such things would always have
occurred oftener and on a much greater scale but for a government
which for its own safety discouraged the possessions of arras.

The very best reputation as a demon-destroying weapon is pos-
sessed by the kien *, a dagger or two-edged sword. It was used
as a charm as early as the first century of our era, if credit may
be given to the following tale or tradition reported by an author
who lived five centuries later: “When the emperor Chang, whose
“ name was Tah, had occupied the throne for thirteen years (A.D. 88),
“ he ordered that a metal sword, cast in the eighth year of the
“Kien ch'u period (A.D. 83), should be thrown into the I stream,
“in order to suppress the ‘human knee’ apparitions. The Canon
“of Waters, written by Hung King-ngan, says: There live beings
“in the I stream resembling the knee of a man; they have claws;
“people while bathing there often sink to rise no more”*.

’ ®J'

+ = mmtji

AiSW,S:p=ttiJ-


992


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


With peculiar energy swords were brandished by exorcists under
the T'ang dynasty. “ Yeh, a Taoist doctor of the Ling-khung con-
“ vent, was wont to recite spells over his sabre, and thereupon strike
“ therewith with all his might at the navel of his patient, across
“ whose belly he had placed a* branch of peach or willow. This branch
“ was thus cut' right asunder without any infliction of wounds on
“ the flesh. He once struck with his double-edged sword at a woman
“ so truly that she fell in two pieces. Blood flowed all around over
“the floor, and the family shrieked loudly'; but he placed the two
“ halves against each other, spurted water from his mouth on them,
“ and uttered a spell ; and in a moment she was quite restored to
“ her former condition” h

Even in modern times we read of sword-brandishing doctors per-
forming with equal violence. An Imperial decree, issued to the
Chancery on the 18 th of the ninth month of the year 1808 , referred
to three men in Mukden, who, while treating patients with gun-
shots and straw-cutters, had caused the death of one. The Board
of Punishments had condemned them to death by strangulation,
on account of the practice of medicine by heterodox arts. The
decree ordered, that whereas such things were frequent in the three
eastern provinces, the Military Governor in Mukden should forbid
them by means of proclamations, and at the same time should
open the eyes of medical men to the folly of treating disease with
fire-arms and metal swords, and to the |punishment in store for them
should they cause the death of their patients *.

The effect of swords when used in assailing spectres is greatly
increased by terrifying spells pronounced simultaneously. Such spells
are especially powerful if oral or written tradition ascribes their
invention or origin to divine men or rulers of antiquity, whose
irresistible power and virtue naturally tended to paralyze spectres.

Tao kien luh Timm , Record of Sabres and Swords; a collection of some seventy
notes on such arms from the oldest times. It is ascribed to Thao Hung-king, the
famous physician with whom our readers are acquainted. The genuineness of the
work seems undisputed.

WK)t±. «WDiifi)lSlT'«.

. From the Chao ye ch^ien /sai;

K K, ch. 285.

2 Shing hiun^ edicts of Jen Tsung, ch. li.


THE EXORCISING POWER OF SWORDS. 993

Undoubtedly the best of these spells is that which Fuh Hi, the first of
five mythical sovereigns who established the Order of the Universe
among the human race(see p. 1058), used while working with his sword :
" This emperor of the North first gnashed his teeth thirty six times,
"and then uttered this spell: H wield the large axe of Heaven to
"cut down spectres in their five shapes; one stroke of this divine
"blade disperses a myriad of those beings’” b Such spells exist by
hundreds. It is also customary to write them on the blade.

If properly influenced by such mighty formulae , swords can
even do their work without being handled. "When I was young”,
we read in a book, "I heard of a Taoist doctor who possessed a
"magical method for cutting down spectres. Whenever he desired
" to practise it, he placed his sword in an empty room, spurted
" water upon it from his mouth, and in threatening tones ordered
" it to cut down the spectres. He then kept the room closed to
" everybody, not opening it till the"*^next day, and — flowing blood
" then stained the floor everywhere \

"Many years afterwards I lodged in his dwelling and had the
"good fortune to witness the feat with my own eyes. Being
" besought to show his magical art, he represented it as a matter
"of great value and mystery, but in the end he assented. He left
" the house, sought the fruit of a shrub, and having mysteriously
"rubbed the sword therewith, spurted much water all around the
" spot ; that evening we went to investigate, and — the water all
" had got the colour of blood. But no sooner had I beheld all this
"than I saw through it. A man consists of yang breath, and has
"a kwei of yin breath; from the former he has received his body
“and thus become a man, and the other breath becomes his kwei
" after separation from his body. His blood is produced by his
"body; whence then should a bodiless thing (a kwei) get blood?

" never, indeed, has there been anywhere under the sky a shapeless
" being with blood. A man of higher order may be cheated by


1 =

3t ® , ili$ — T* S A @ 'I' 1,12,

ff A-


63


994


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


" magic, but not so easy is it to entrap him so completely that he
^ becomes a backslider from true doctrine. The man who thoroughly

understands the orthodox rules of life will never be a victim of
“the trumperies of heterodoxy” h ,

Not everybody indiscriminately can wield the sword against spectres
successfully. In the hand of a non-expert it may miss all its eiBPect,
and even be turned against him by the spectre which he has assailed.
“ In the last year of the reign of the emperor Muh (A.D. 361),
“ Hwan Wen, the Military Councillor, was sitting in his chair at
“ night, when his eyes fell on a spectre lying on the beam of the
“ roof. It gazed at him with wide open eyes, grinding its teeth.
“As it approached him he struck at it with his sword, and
“ apparently hit it truly, but in fact he wounded his own knee, so
“ that blood gushed out. Again he drove his sword at the spectre,
“ but the blow was reversed as before, so that he wounded himself.
“ As good luck would have ft, the sword was not so sharp that
“he died”

The power which may be exercised with swords, daggers or
knives against spectres is well instanced by the following curious
old recipes from Koh Hung’s medical book, to be applied in cases
of “abrupt nightmare”, which means apoplexy or swoon while asleep
(cf. p. 700); they are, no doubt, like most medical directions of
unforgotten sages of the past, practised to this day. “Place the
“ patient on the ground, and draw a line thereon round about his


# 2 . 7} m 5^ — ® ® ^ ^

Am. its

^ MiliS ^ ^ i fi S IS .

“Discourses on Dissipation of Doubt”, a work apparently devoted to the unmasking
and refutation of superstition and magic; quoted in T S, sect. |[j^ . ch. 305.

Yin ming hih.


THE EXORCISING POWER OF SWORDS.


995


" face with a sharp sword, starting from the left shoulder in the
^ case of a man, and from the right if the patient is of the other
^ sex. Then scratch his nose with the point of that sword, and
" insert one tenth of an inch of it into his nose, taking care to
^ hold him fast, so that he cannot move. He will then cry for
" mercy in spectral language, and if then the spectre is asked :
""who are you, and what do you want here?’ he will beg to be
" allowed to go. At this juncture, some inches of the line marked
"on the ground must be erased near the shoulder with the finger,
" to allow the spectre to escape through it. It is absolutely necessary
" to put the questions with the greatest precision” ^

Swords also are of peculiar virtue if they have been in the pos-
session of famous generals, or warriors who slew unsparingly, or
eminent casters-out of devils; the awe which such men inspired
still clings to the arms which they used. Men armed with such
formidable instruments, ^according to many a tale, did not fear to
sit quite alone in haunted houses throughout the night, and have
brandished them with the completest success against apparitions ot
the most terrible description. Nowadays the two-edged sword is the
indispensable vade mecum of wu-ist exorcists, also, as we have seen
on page 985, in anti-epidemical processions. They often increase its
effect by twining red cloth on the hilt and the guard. It is some-
times replaced by an one-edged sabre or t a o a weapon of
great antiquity, which Wang Ch'ung (see page 935) mentions as
a devil-expelling weapon used in his time. Both kinds as a rule
are of iron, but very often of peachwood. Especially efficacious
are those of wood of a tree which has been struck by lightning —
a flash of the destructive, devil-killing light and fire of heaven. Even
counterfeits in miniature suffice to drive or keep spectres away. In
Amoy it is a common usage to wear these on the breast or at the
girdle, preferably of willowwood cut on the fifth day of the fifth
month, when, as we know (see p. 947), the sun, the supreme expeller


4 > ^ W ^ ^ ^ m2* Cheu hev pi liih fany^ ch. 1, § 5.


996


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


of (lemons, is in its theoretical apogee. Sui Yuen states, that in
Shang-shan in Chehkiang, the idea prevails that hill-si a o take
fright at the sight of swords of mulberrywood, because they are
doomed to die immediately on being struck at with a sabre made
from an old tree of this kind, and that they are therefore success-
fully repelled by such swords suspended at doors ^

Evidently we have to rank in this category of amulets certain
miniature swords of brass, to which is welded a round coin with a
square hole in the centre. These curious objects may owe their
origin to the tradition, generally admitted by Chinese as a matter
of fact, that in ancient times small swords or sword-shaped coins
were used as money. But it seems not unreasonable that the


resemblance of a coin to the guard of a sword may more
rationally explain the matter. Such charms are cast occasionally
when temples are being erected or restored, for distribution among
the inhabitants of the ward or parish, to avert the ills provoked
by the building-works, especially by the disturbance of the spirits
of the soil. They bear on the coin the title of the divinity to
whom the temple is dedicated, |lp( ^ “Holy Mother,
obedient to Heaven’', who is the goddess of the Seas and patro-
ness of sailors; the reverse shows the date, as
“the year yih-mao of the Hien fung period” (1855). The blade
may bear on one side ft W W S B ® ™ '’**'*''

iEe±#M. forming the phrase : “ on the occasion of the
rebuilding of the temple from which she protects her babies, for use
when the ridge-pole of the principal hall is put up”

If sword-shaped coins possess the power to cast out devils, there
is no reason why swords composed of coins should not possess that
power just as well. Such swords (see PI. XT) are in the possession of
many Chinese, and for sale in shops. Their length usually averages
between four and six decimeters. An iron rod constitutes the found-
ation of the sword. By means of a double cord of a red, devil-expelling
colour, which runs through the holes of the coins, some twenty or
twenty five of these are affixed to the rod on either side, in such a
manner that each partly covers the next one. The two rows of coins
thus represent the two faces of the blade. The hilt is made either in


2 Supplementary Tsze puh ya^ ch. 5.

3 Doolittle, Social Life of the Chinese, ch. 31. When houses or temples are being
built, the ridge-pole of the roof is fust of all put in its place by means of a tem-
porary scaffolding which supports it.


COIN-SWORDS, BOWS AND ARROWS, STICKS.


997


the same way, or by simply stringing a pile of coins through their
holes on the remaining part of the rod. The guard and the knob
also consist of coins fastened on by means of red cords in two
parallel sets. Many swords are decorated with small pendant tassels
and coloured silk threads. A good coin-sword must contain no coins
but those made in the reign of one emperor, for, since everything
imperial has great exorcising power, the title of reign borne by
each coin, and thus so frequently repeated in the sword, enhances
the power of the latter enormously. No wonder that coin-swords are
formidable weapons, never brandished in vain against evil, and
peculiarly effectual when placed upon the sick, or upon mothers in
childbed, or within the curtains of bridal beds.

Archers appeared, as we have seen, in the n o processions of the
Han dynasty. And not a few narratives in our chapters on Demo-
nology have emphasized the prevailing conviction that spectres are
not proof against bows and arrows. In Chinese books we also read
of these weapons painted on doors and walls on New Year’s day,
beside shields and spears, on a freshly whitewashed background,
since white, the opposite of black or the colour of the spectral
world, keeps off spectres. Doolittle mentions the following charms
for use on roofs; “Three arrows placed in an earthen tube, and
“ laid on the side of a roof, the tube pointing towards, some distant
“ object, the arrows being fastened in their place by clay ....
“ A representation of a lad sitting on a three-legged nondescript
“animal, with a bow in his hands, as if in the act of shooting
“ an arrow” \

Even such vulgar and primitive weapons as sticks or clubs have
done excellent service against the world of demons since the days
of Wang Cheung (cf. page 935). They are especially efficacious if
made of wood of the peach, which spectres fear so much. But even
when of simple willowwood they are effective, and likewise when
of bamboo; in the panic of 1557 the people of Plung-cheu bravely
brandished therewith (see page 482). A work of the sixth century
states, that “on New Year’s day willow branches were fetched and
“fixed above the doors, so that no spectres entered the dwellings”^.


1 Social Life of the Chinese, cli. 31.

2 iE .g 0. tip ^ ±. . W ^ A ^ - -- y-0

shuh , The important Ait of ordering! the People: an agricultural,

industrial, and even medical woik of the sixtii century, or perhaps somewhat later.


998


THE WAR AGAIXST SPECTRES.


In the southern parts of Fuhkien it has been customary, and per-
haps is so to this day, to hang sticks of peach and willow at the doors
when exploits of spectres are feared, and to thrash therewith people
who have swooned owing to obsession or possession, until they come
round ; indeed we read the following lines in the Memoirs concerning
the Chang-cheu Department;

“In the 36th year of the Kia tsing period (1557), in winter,
“ there were in the district of Lung-yen false rumours abroad about
“horse-spirits, during whose visits comets (or Mars ?) were seen falling
“ to the ground. Women who came across them suddenly became
“drowsy, fell down unconscious, and had to be carried out and
“ thrashed with branches of peach and willow, to make them revive.
“ And in that district people hung out branches of peach and willow at
“ the doors, and crowded together at night, the women sitting in the
“ open air with the men around them for their protection, beating
“ on- gongs and drums until the morning came.

“Just then an itinerant Buddhist priest was engaged in selling
“ charms. T"ang Siang, the prefect of the district, said : ‘ It must
“ be he who causes that spectral evil’. He arrested and examined
“ him, and thus found out, that to ensure an abundant sale of
“ charms, he had been speaking of devouring fires colouring the
“ sky entirely red. The ominous phenomenon thus had been produced
“ by a man ! He was flogged and imprisoned, upon which the spectral
“ evil ceased.

“In tho 29th year of the Wan lih period (1601) and'in the
“ 1 5th of that of Ch'ung ching (1642) the ominous phenomenon
“ occurred again, produced by the same magic. But old people knew
“by that precedent that it was mere roguery; they caught all the
“charm-vendors and killed them outright, on which the spectral
“evil ceased”*.

It is probably only a fragment of the original, with additions and alterations of later
times. 01 the author, Kia Sze-hieh , nothing is known but that he was

Governor ot Kao-p'ing , in the present Shansi province.


THE WILLOW A TREE OF THE SUN IN MID-SPRING.


999


Devil-expelling power is ascribed to the willow probably because
the written names of this tree, yang and liufp, point to its
relation with the universal light and the spring. Indeed, yang
means the tree (yj\;) of the Yang or |^), and liu means

the tree of mao m or the second of the three cyclical characters
which denote the East (B. I, p. 988) or the spring; that is to say,
it is the tree of the midmost month of spring, which contains the
equinoctial victory of light over darkness.


* Chang -cheu- fa c/ii, quoted in T S, sect. , ch. 172,


CHAPTER IX.


MIRRORS.

Among the objects which for many centuries have done good
service for the Chinese people in its war against spectres, metal
mirrors or king^ are mentioned with special enthusiasm. We have
seen (pp. 163 and 197) that in the -fourth century of our era
Koh Hung praised their usefulness, and we have no reason to doubt
that posterity in all ages has conformed to the high opinion which
that great master in magic and occultism cherished about those
instruments. He asserted, that in ancient days travelling Taoist doctors
used to protect themselves by mirrors fastened on their backs; and
he taught that man may discover in a mirror the true shapes of
animal-spectres which assume human form, and that he thus may
compel them to take to their heels.

Koh Hung was not, however, the first discoverer of the spectre-
conquering qualities of mirrors. We read in the T^ung ming ki
a little book ascribed to the first half of the first century of our
era, that "on the Pavilion for contemplation of the toad (or the
" moon, deemed to be inhabited by such a reptile), which was a
"building a dozen chang high, was a metal mirror, four ch^'ih
" broad, which had been presented to the emperor in the Yuen fung
"period (110 — 104 b.C.) by the state of Chi. If ch^'i and raei were
" visibly reflected therein, they could no more assume the shapes
"under which they disguised themselves’’ \ And the Si-king tsahki


2 in four chapters, asci ibed to Kwoh Ilien ^ ^ magician

whose biography occurs in ch. 112, II, of the Books of the Later Han Dynasty, 1. 4.
The title, which means Penetration into Obscurity, is derived from the first page,
which mentions ii w'onderful hei'b which dispels darkness.


a


0 n. 7C # d’ ^


THE MIRACULOUS MIRROR OF WANG TU.


1001


relates, that ^ the emperor Siien during his confinement in the
^ provincial prison (being involved in the famous sorcery cabal, as
“we have related on page 842), wore on his body a precious mirror,
“ which came from the kingdom of Sindh and was as large as a coin
“of eight chu in weight. According to an old tradition, evil mei
“ were visible in this mirror, so that he who wore it was blessed
“ with celestial happiness. Therefore, when he was released from his
“ precarious position and had ascended the throne, he regularly
“held it in his hand” \

The peerless virtue of mirrors for unmasking spectres in animal
shape has been elaborately expounded to mankind for all future ages
by one Wang Tii of the Sui dynasty, in a booklet entitled Ku king ii,
Record of his antique Mirror, which we have already mentioned
on page 636. It relates how he received the precious object from
one Heu Sheng a scholar of extraordinary talents. “ Wherever you
bear it in your hands”, declared this savant, “hundreds of sie will
run away from men” ^ A most beautiful mirror it was; decorated
with an unicorn and the animals of the four quarters of the Universe,
as also with the eight k w a , the characters of the duodenary cycle,
and those representing the twenty four “ breaths” or seasons; in other
words, it was a representation of the Universe with the natural
phenomena and the divisions of time, thus an image of the Tao or Order
of the World, and therefore entirely destructive to all beings who
disturb that Order by wantonly attacking men. And further the wise
donor said: “Whenever the sun shines on this mirror, the ink of
those inscriptions permeates the images which it reflects, so that
they cannot possibly show any false shapes”.

In the second year of the Ta yeh period (A. D. 606) Wang Tu
set out on a journey to the Ch^ang-ngan country with his
precious acquisition. And forthwith he found there an opportunity
to test its miraculous value. While he was lodging in an inn in
Ch’^ang-loh, the inn-keeper complained to him of a slave-maiden
answering to the name of Mrs. Parrot, a damsel of great beauty,
whom a lodger of his had abandoned in the inn because she was
ill. Forthwith it occurred to Wang Tu’s mind that she might be

SlfiTS. itt: ^


1003


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


a mei. He fetched his mirror, and — “do not kill me”, she
yelled at once, showing herself in her spectral shape. Wang Tu
put away the mirror, and the damsel prostrated herself before
him, confessing that she was a vixen a thousand years old, who lived
by a large willow in front of the temple of a .mountain-god.
For some crime which she committed, this god wanted to arraign
her, but she escaped and was adopted as a daughter by a
certain person, who married her to one Mr. Parrot; it was this
man with whom, after some years travelling, she had arrived in
the inn. Now being discovered and deserving to die, she begged
for permission to do so in a state of drunkenness; and Wang Tu
called for wine, and invited the whole neighbourhood to come
and see. In a short time the woman was so intoxicated that
she began to dance and sing, and after changing into a vixen,
she died.

This spectre-dispelling mirror regularly emitted so brilliant a
light in the dark, that a glare was visible over every house where
it was. In elui-ch'^ing, in the present province of Shansi, Wang Tu
was told of a gigantic jujube tree growing in front of the pre-
fect s mansion. It was several centuries old, and all people sacrificed
to it, as else they might be sure to incur misfortune. Wang Tu,
who felt suspicious, surreptitiously attached his mirror to the tree,
and next night a thunderbolt resounded; rain and clouds shrouded
the tree, and at daybreak a huge snake lay dead at its foot, as if
pierced by lances. It had red scales, a vermilion tail, white horns,
and the mark 3E on its forehead. Wang Tu told the magistrate to
have the beast dragged to the suburb and burned; and on digging
by the tree a cave was found, showing marks of the coils of a
large snake.

Again in that same year, Wang Tu, who held the post of
Censor with Jui-ch"ing for his residence, became Governor of the
province of Ho-peh, A plague broke out there in consequence of a
dearth. This was a good opportunity for the mirror to widen the
sphere of its activity. Its first feat was the restoration to health
of the whole family of an underling of the tnandarinate by simply
shining on them when it was dark ; a mere glance of those people
into the mirror sufficed to make them take fright and jump up,
and to feel their burning fever immediately allayed by the damp
and cool moon to which the shining mirror bore a resemblance.
Numerous other people were thereupon cured by it in the same
way. The mirror was now lent by Wang Tu to his younger


THE MIRACULOUS MIRROR OF WANG TU.


1003


brother Tsih because this man too had to undertake a journey.

Tsih returned after a three years’ absence and gave an account
of his adventures. Once upon a time, when sheltering in a large
cavern, he found himself with two men, who entered into a con-
versation with him on literary topics. But they strayed so strangely
from the subject of discussion now and then, that suspicion told him
to use his mirror; he took it out of his box, and forthwith both
men were struck dumb, and showed themselves respectively as a
tortoise and a monkey. And as Wang Tsih suspended the mirror
in the cavern, the two horrid creatures lay quite dead on the
ground at daybreak ; the tortoise had green hair, the monkey a
hoary skin. On another occasion the mirror cured a girl of an
illness caused by an old cock; but we have related this event on
page 636.

Once also, while he was being ferried across the Yangtsze,
his shining mirror had calmed the waves which a furious gale
swept up. And with no less success he had treated with it three
maids possessed by demons, and therefore labouring under consti-
pation and suicidal mania. No sooner had the mirror shed its light
upon them than they exclaimed: “my husband is murdered”. The
mirror was then sagaciously hung up near the spot till daybreak,
when two old rats were seen with heads like wolves, long tails,
bald, toothless and quite dead, besides a highly coloured lizard or
chameleon as large as a hand- and with two horns.

As is the case with everything in this world of change, there
came an end to the miracles of this mirror. It was, of course,
animated, and its spirit even had revealed itself to somebody in a
dream; and, as Wang Tsih was told by a sage, divine beings never
abide long in the world of men. In short, erelong he dreamed that
the mirror announced to him its intention to depart. Then one fine
day a piteous wailing resounded in the box; it grew louder and
louder, in the end becoming like the scream of a dragon and a
tiger’s roar. When it became silent, he opened the box and found
it empty. Never did the mirror return.

This tale, a fair survey of the notions entertained by the Chinese
on the head of mirrors, teaches us that the magic power exercised
by mirrors over spectres is in reality the power of the indwelling
spirit, which, like yang spirits generally, may emit light. To people
who know no better, reflected light is emitted light.


1004


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Twan Ch'ing-shih too has a tale on anti-spectral mirrors. “In the
“Tsi-nan fief (in Shantung pr.) stands the Fang mountain, where,
•according to tradition, Hwan-sheng became an immortal genius.
“To the south of that mountain is the clifi ‘of the shining mir-
“ror’, three chang square. The ch‘i and the mei, either when
“ busy or lying perdu, were quite visible in that mirror, until in
“the time of the southern Yen dynasty (398 — 410) a coating of
“varnish was laid over it. People pretend that it was the mountain-
“ spirits that varnished it, because they disliked its reflections”^.
To the time of that author also belongs the tale, which we have
given on page 606, of the Taoist doctor who by means of a looking-
glass expelled rat-spectres which infested the public road in the
guise of armed highwaymen.

We need not detain the reader on such miraculous Chinese mir-
rors as reflected the internal organs of men, thus showing malady-
demons lurking therein. Suffice it to state the fact that antique
mirrors are valued as preventives and medicines. Ch'en Tsang-khi
wrote: “For convulsions caused by fright, for sie influences and all
“ ills from which babies suffer, a decoction from an antique mirror
“ mixed with medical potions is to be taken. The older the characters
“ on the mirror are, the more salutary is the operation of the me-
“dicine”^. And Ta Ming (see page 398) said: Such mirrors “keep
“ away all sie and mei spectres whatsoever, and spectres which take
“ liberties with women, as also flying s h i , and k u poison ; they
“facilitate childbirth, and cure violent heart-ache. They may also
“ be warmed in the fire and plunged into spirits, and the latter
“ be drunk. If vermin of any kind has entered the ears or nose,
“ then rub these organs with such a mirror, and the vermin will come
“forth immediately” 3. Li Shi-chen adds these remarkable lines:


Yiu~yang Isah tsu^ ch. 10.


' ^ ^ ^ m E # H- ^

. Pen-ts^ao hang muh, ch. 8, 1. 27.


ANTiaUE MIRRORS PROTECT FROM SPECTRES.


1005


“A mirror is the vital spirits (tsing) of the elements Metal and
“ Water, luminous within, and dark without. Antique mirrors as
“well as antique swords work like the presence of gods (shen-
“ m i n g), and therefore drive away s i e and m e i spectres and
“ evil caused by encounters with them (see p. 695). All people should
“ hang up in their dwellings large mirrors, as these drive away
“sie and mei” h


9! . « li 'IT ® . R A $ a g * « .

Op. el loc. cli.


CHAPTER X.


DOGS AND BLOOD.

There is documentary evidence that dogs were slaughtered for
exorcising purposes in China’s classical age. In the chronicles of
the ancient state of Ts'in preserved by Sze-ma Ts'ien, we read
“that the ruler Teh in the second year of his reign (676 B.C.) for
“ the first time celebrated the f u h ( ) ceremony, and by means
“of dogs averted ku” *. And in another portion of his writings the
same historian repeats this statement in these terms : “ He performed
* the f u h sacrifice and had dogs slaughtered or cut asunder at the
“ four gates of the city, as a means of defence against the damage
“caused by ku”®.

Native authors show themselves incompetent to account properly
for these ceremonies. As these are mentioned nowhere else in ancient
writings, there is room for the hypothesis that they had an exotic
origin, like the house of Ts^in itself. Some authors suggest, that
the ku which the ceremony professed to repel, denoted the
deleterious influences of the hot season; indeed, as early as the
Han dynasty, the first, second and third day after the summer
solstice, or according to others, the third, the fourth, and the fifth after
that solstice which were denoted by the character keng of the
denary cycle, were called full jih 0 , “days of withdrawal or
submission”, because at that time of the year the Yang was with-
drawing before the growing Yin, or gradually submitting to it.
Other authorities have connected the f u h sacrifice with the cutting
asunder of victims, a rite which, as we have seen (pp. 973 seq.), took
place at the city gates at the celebration of the exorcising no
ceremonies. Be all this as it may, the fact remains that it is


^ — ‘ ^ ^ ’fit , W ■ Historical Records, ch. 5, 1. 9.

=> ft tfi « . « *1 a ra PI ( ja ^ s S’- 28, 1. 4.


DOGS SLAUGHTERED AND FIXED TO GATES.


1007


unexplained, and cannot even be guessed, why dogs in particular
were designated for slaughter to avert evil.

The belief in the exorcising virtue of slaughtered dogs seems to
have been at an early date firmly rooted in Chinese mind and
life, for we read in a book of the second century: “According to
“ the writings of the Chief Astrologer (Sze-ma Ts'ien), the ruler
“ Teh of Ts^in was the first who killed dogs and cut them asunder
“ at the four city gates, in order to ward off calamities caused b_y
“ k u. At present the people still act upon this precedent when
“ they kill white dogs and mark the gates and doors with the blood,
“ or avert misfortune in the first month of the year with blood ot
“ white dogs” These means of defence *were in that time also
occasionally resorted to in order to ward off dog-devils, for in the
same book, after the narrative of the haunting dog which we have
reproduced on page 574, we read the following lines: “In this
“ world, dogs often assume other shapes and act as spectres; they
“ are then promptly killed and the gates and doors are daubed with
* their blood, in order to signify to them that all of them may
“ incur the same unhappy fate” ^

Sze-ma Ts'ien’s tradition about the slaughtering of dogs under
the Ts'in dynasty may indicate that carcasses or pieces of those
animals were exposed at the gates in Older to neutralize devastating
insects which (cf. p. 827) were designated by the word ku. In
fact, carrion attracts swarms of insects. This consideration would
render it intelligible why it is written that Hwa T"o, the celebrated
leech of the third century (p. 686), has extracted a viper from a
patient by means of a dog. “When Liu Hiun of Lang-ye was
“ Governor of Ho-nei, he had a daughter of twenty years with an
“ ulcer on her left knee, which was painless and healed, but then
“ re-appeared regularly after several dozens of days. This went on
“ for seven or eight years, until he asked Hwa T'o to visit the
“patient. ‘This patient is easy to cure’, he'said, ‘get me a dog of
“the yellow colour of rice-chaff, and two good horses’. He used
“ one horse to drag the dog abroad in a galop by a rope tied to

Fuug-suh lung f, ch. 8.


1008


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ its neck, and when this horse was weary it was replaced by the
“ other one, so that when the horses had run more than thirty
“ miles the dog could move no more ; yet still he had it dragged
“ abroad by men on foot for another fifty miles. On this he
gave the woman a medicine to drink, so that she lay totally
“unconscious; then he cut open the belly of the dog with a large
“ knife in front of the hind legs, and placed the opening at a
“ distance of two or three inches from the open ulcer, and lo —
“ soon something like a snake crept out of this. Forthwith he
“struck a nail sideways through its head with an iron hammer;
“ the beast for some time still wriggled within the skin, but then
“ lay quiet. He now drew it out — a complete viper more
“ than three feet in length, with orbits but no eyeballs, and a scaly
“skin. Some unguent then cured the ulcer in seven days”

At an early date, dog’s blood found its way also into exorcising
medical practice. Koh Hung indeed gave this recipe for spectre-
blows : “ Decapitate a white dog, tand give such patients one pint
of the hot blood to drink”*. This great patriarch of the faculty
having thus spoken, Li Shi-chen wrote in his standard work, that
besides some other diseases, “ blood of a dog cures catarrh, fever,
“ mental insanity, visions of spectres and spectre-blows, averting
“ all demonry. Magicians consider dogs suitable for suppressing


0 of the Three Kingdoms, Memoirs of Wei, ch. 29, 1. 5. Also Books

of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. -112, II, 1. 7.

a e A - ® . B( !» A Ji, - ?!• ft 2 . Chen heu kih
fang^ ch. 1, § 4.


DOGS AND BLOOD IN EXORCISING MEDICINE.


1009


“ground-demons, and capable of averting any evil spectres what-
“ soever and sorcery” Yet other ingredients obtained from dogs
are recommended by this great author for demoniacal and other
diseases, and declared to be of various excellence according as the
dogs are yellow, black, or white; and we need not doubt that his
advice is often followed to this day.

The jirotection of gates and doors by means of slaughtered dogs
being not mentioned in the Classics, it is doubtful whether the
Han dynasty and subsequent imperial houses have practised it. Its
exotic origin seems to be evidenced also by the fact that it re-appears
in the Standard Histories as a practice of the Kitan Tatars. When
Teh-kwang ® or 'Pai Tsung ^ the imperator of this people, in the first
month of the year 946 conquered Pien * or the present Khai-fung,
the capital of the house of Tsin, “ he established himself in the
“palace of this dynasty, and had the gates occupied by Kitan men;
“and everywhere at the gates and side-buildings, the halls and
“ courts, dogs were cut asunder and their skins hung up, in order
“to subdue evil”®.

It may be suggested that the exorcising virtue of dog’s blood
explains also its use for disarming black magicians, whose power,
as we know, consists in the main in that of spectres which they
employ. On page 892 we have told of such a malefactor, who,
having rendered himself invisible, was compelled by the application
of such blood to show his material shape. We have also read on
page 573 that animals, changed into men, may be unmasked by
means of blood, and thus deprived of their power. And no doubt
it was on account of alleged magical power, enabling him to stand
torture, that father Perboyre, martyred in Hupeh in 1840, was
forced by his judges to drink dog’s blood

Kmm. mm ^ —

Ch. 50, I, 1. 25.

4 ^.

History of the Five Dynasties, ch. 72, 1. 14.

G Hue, Christianity in China, IV, p. 335.


64


CHAPTER XI.


CLASSICAL AND OTHER WRITINGS.

Our readers remember the principle, that the spectres exorcisable
by man are those which are sie or yin, or, in other terras, not
existing or working under the auspices of the Tao or Universal
Order (cf. p. 932). This dogma involves another: — whatever is
ching or twan, that is to say, whatever responds to the Tao
(cf. page 467), naturally expels and even destroys such spectres.
Accordingly the Classics are excellent exorcising instruments.

Indeed, since the Han dynasty those books have ever been
stamped by the most eminent and most learned of the nation as
the sole guides of man for the cultivation of conduct in accordance
with the Tao. They are, in other terms, the gospel of the Tao of
man. It is they that teach the doctrines, principles, and works of
the first and holiest ancestors, who better than any human creature
knew th^ Tao, seeing that they lived while this was being established
among the human race; nay it was they themselves who helped
to establish it on this earth. The simple rules of logic and common
sense therefore command that those books shall be slavishly followed
as bibles for individual, domestic and social life ; else mankind, which
absolutely depends upon the Universal Order, and whose fate is
determined by the manner and measure in which in all its doings
it complies therewith, must go to wreck and ruin throi^h the
agency of the kwei. It is then the Classics, and a life and govern-
ment fraihed thereon, which afford the very best protection against
these beings; but for those books the kwei would certainly destroy
the human race.

Hence it is that the scholar, imbued with classical doctrine and
learning, and doing his very best to comport himself accordingly,
actually stands beyond the reach of the power of evil. This is even
the case with simple students, especially those who, as most of them
do, believe themselves actual or future prodigies of scholarship.
And mandarins, theoretically recruited from among the best of such


THE CLASSICS A PROTECTION FROM SPECTRES,


1011


prodigies, and moreover actual parts of the machine of govern-
ment which is entirely composed of classical principles, rules and
rescripts, are of all mortal men farthest beyond the reach of
de”monry, unless, by neglect- of duty or virtue, they wander away
from the Way or Tao, and Heaven accordingly allows its spectres
to attack and punish them. From all such scholars and would-be
scholars a powerful anti-spectral influence emanates, putting the
worst demons to flight, even maltreating them and bringing upon
them death and destruction ; and in particular this is the case with
mandarins, to whom the Son of Heaven, the lord and master of
all spirits in heaven and earth, has delegated his power. We shall
have more to say on this subject in Chapter XX.

A copy, fragment or leaf of a classical work is a mighty charm
which may, be placed with advantage on sickbeds. Especially pro-
tective is the Shu king, in the main because of its section entitled
Hung fan \ the Great or Vast Plan (see p. 955), which among the
classical rescripts for the government of the world stands first as
the oldest collection, given to the Great Yii by Heaven itself in the
23rd century B.C. It points out which are the main subdivisions
of the political system or the principal objects of governmental care,
viz. food or agriculture; goods or industry; sacrifices; chief ministerial
departments; reception of foreign envoys; military affairs; regulation
of the business of the government and the people by means of chrono-
logy and chronomancy, astronomy and astrology; divination ; perfection
of Imperial virtue and duty; etc.

Wonderfully exorcising also is the Yih king. Should a lettered
man feel unwell, or want to cure relations who are ailing, raving
or delirious, or who have fainted, he will recite entire chapters of this
Classic. Indeed, it contains the Tao itself in a nutshell, that is to
say, a few dozen characters unfolding what the Tao is: the Yang
and the Yin, producing the eight kwa or phenomena and com-
ponents of the Universe represented by trigrams (cf. Bk. I, pp. 960 seqi).
Therefore also, these lineal figures, preferably arranged in an octa-
gonal (Bk. I, page 963) around the figure representing the T‘ai Kih
or the Yang and the Yin (Bk. I, p. 1042), are one of the best charms
imaginable. It may be seen on sheets of paper or wooden planks
affixed to walls, and many houses bear it above the main entrance,
on the front of a square log of wood projecting a little out of
the brickwork. Very generally also that same figure is worn as an


1012


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


amulet, engraved on a small slab of metal, tortoise-shell or other
material.

We are justified then in suggesting, that the position of the Classics
as expellers of demons is as old as their character of principal guides
of mankind in the Tao, which they assumed under the Han dynasty.
Documentally this suggestion is confirmed by the following narrative in
a work of the second century : “ When the emperor Wu (140 — 86 b.C.)
“lay under the baneful influence of kwei and shen, and there-
“ fore placed the greatest confidence in wu from the Yueh region,
“ Tung Chung-shu (a celebrated Confucian scholar) frequently remon-
“ strated. The emperor, wishing to put the Tao of this man to the
“ test, told a w u to conjure evil upon him ; but he put on his
“ court dress and, facing the south, recited a classical treatise, in
“ consequence of which no evil could be done to him ; but the w u
“himself suddenly died”*.

Of Ku Hwan, the man of the fifth century of whose magical
power the reader has heard on page 578, the following anecdote
is related: “A person who had a patient suffering from a sie
“illness, consulted him. ‘What books have you at home?’ he asked.
“ ‘ None but the Hiao king', was the answer. On which Hwan
“replied: ‘Take Confucius, place it beside the pillow of the patient,
“and respectfully pay worship to it (or him?); he will then be
“cured’. And the sufferer did recover. Then somebody asked Hwan
“what were his grounds for this advice. And he aswered: ‘Virtue
“expels vice, and ching conquers sie; it is this principle which
“cured that patient” \

In the first half of the sixth century, a learned Confucian, named
“ Khiien Hwui or Ching-li, one night left the city by the east gate,
“ quite alone on a donkey, and perceived that he was joined by
“ two men, one of whom led the donkey by its head, while the


J A*#.

. Fulig-suh fung i, ch. 9.

. History of the

South, ch. 75, 1. 18.


THE CLASSICS ARB POWERFUL CHARMS.


1013


“other followed behind, behaving as if they wished to help him *
“ to get home. They moved and walked with a degree of nimble-
“ness which was not that of living men, and he was led
“further and further from his path, until, totally mistrusting the
“ matter, he recited the first chapter of the -first section of the
“ Yih hing. Ere he had finished it, the men in front and behind
“ him faded away. Unconscious he slipped from his donkey and
“ fainted, not coming round until daybreak. He then perceived that
“the place where he had fallen down was outside the wall, several
“ miles from his house” k

Written evidence of the conviction that the Yih hing disables
spectres has also been given us on page 893 by the Tsze puh gii
a man of letters by throwing some spectres, which a sorcerer had set
loose on him, to the ground with a copy of that holy book,
worsted them totally by putting the paper puppets, in which they
had come to his house, between its- leaves.

The Classics being the most powerful among charms, extracts
from them must be so too. This inference stimulates the general
love for classical inscriptions or antithetical phrases, written on
scrolls for decoration of walls in halls and rooms, or inscribed on
the fronts of houses on the charms of red paper of which we
have spoken on page 959. True the use of such scrolls practically
is to many members of the class of the learned dictated by a
desire to signify to the admiring world their literary and cali-
graphic talents, mostly properly undersigned with their names and
titles or impressions of their seals. True also it is that such inscriptions
are objects of peculiar pride to the owners, who vaunt thereby their
friendship or relationship with the illustrious worthies who made
them. But this two-sided vanity does not do away with the funda-
mental motive of their use. No wonder that such mighty charms
against spectral evil and promotors of happiness are highly valued
in Chinese life as presents.

asif

History of the North, ch. 81, 1.29. See also the
Books of the Northern Ts'i Dynasty, ch. 44, 1. 13.


1014


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


But also writings and sayings of all kinds, provided they be
ching or respond to the Tao and classicism, are destructive to
spectres and evil. Nothing in this field is so highly esteemed as
a celebrated poem, known as the Ching Ichi ^ ^ or Song

of the Breaths of Rectitude, which extols the almighty influence
which the Tao, composed of the two Breaths or the Yang and the
Yin, exercises upon man, creating his highest virtues, among which
fidelity to the Son of Heaven is the principal. The poem displays
a series of historical instances of such fidelity, subsequently praising
the influence exercised by the Tao on the poet himself, who, though
suffering agony in a dungeon, was kept by it in the same path
of undeviating loyalty. He, the celebrated minister and patriot
Wen T'ien-siang had heroically defended to the bitter end the
hopeless cause of the house of Sung and its last youthful heir
against the^ victorious Mongols, and at the final destruction of its
armies fell into their hands. Conveyed to Peking, he composed the
poem in his dungeon, and was executed by Kublai’s order, because,
as he declared, he could not possibly be a servant to two imperial
houses. Here is a translation of that famous production:

“ In Heaven and Earth or Universe the Breaths of Rectitude exist ;
“ Which, commingled, are lodged in all beings and flow through them;
“Below they form rivers and mounts,

“ On high they compose the sun and the stars. *

“On mankind they work as a vast fluid,

“The immensity whereof filleth up both the blue empyrean and
the realm of darkness;

“ The conduct of the Emperor borroweth from them its .purity and
firmness ;

“The harmony of them produceth enlightenment and equity,

“ Which shineth out in perilous days from deeds of faithfulness,
“ Set down one by one in red and blue ink. *


St

± M S B M


* ^ A


2


3


THE FAMOUS SONG OF THE BREATHS OF RECTITUDE. 1015
“ In Ts^ were the writing-tablets of its chief recorders, ^

In 547 B.C. Ts^^ui Chu caused Ghwang the ruler of Ts*^!, to be

murdered. The historiographer recorded the deed, and Ts'^ui Chu killed him for it. Then the
historian's younger bi*other recorded it again, and he too ^as put to death, whereupon
a third brother did so, but was spared by Ts'^ui Chu. Historical Records, ch. 23, 1. 18.

* In Tsin was the writing-pencil of Tung Hu, ^

In 605 B.C. the ruler of Tsin sent murderers to kill his minister Chao Tun
• ’ who, however, fled, while his brother slew the ruler. Chao Tun was thus

enabled to return, and did not punish his brother for his deed. Therefore Tung Hiu
the chief historiographer of the state, recorded and published his name as that of
the murderer of his piince, and Chao Tun, though in the summit of power, took
no vengeance on him. Historical Records, ch. 39, 11. 28 seg.

“ In Ts'in was the club of Chang Liang, ®

This great champion of the cause of the founder of the Han dynasty against
the realm of Ts'^in is renowned for having in his youth made a daring attack on
Shi Hwang, the imperator of this realm, in revenge for the destruction of the state
of Han . his fatherland, with the noblest of its families. At the head of a band
of braves, in collecting which he had spent all his possessions, he made an onset
on the said potentate with an iron club of 120 pounds weight, but he smashed the
wrong carriage. Hist. Rec., ch. 55, 1. 1; Books of the Early Han Dynasty, ch. 40, 1. 1.
“ In the days of the house of Han was the faithfulness of Su Wu.

An envoy of the emperor yVu to the khan of the Hiung-nu in the second century
B.C., who, though kept by the latter prince in custody for twenty years, could not
be prevailed upon to own allegiance to him. His biography occurs in ch. 54 of the
Books of the Early Han Dynasty.

“ The head of the general Yen testifietb to their influence, *

Yen Yen , taken prisoner by Chang Fei in the wars of the

Three Kingdoms, was decapitated for scorning to abjure allegiance to his emperor,

“ Moreover the blood of the Chamberlain Hi, ®

That is to say, Hi Shao who in A.D. 304 quite alone defended his emperor

Hwai , whose body-guard had fled *, he fell under a shower of arrows, and his
blood besprinkled his lord. Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 89, 1. 4.

“ And the teeth of Chang in Sui-yang, ^

In the eighth century, Chang Siiin heroically defended Sui-yang against

the rebel Ngan Luh-shan but the city fell by famine, and he was put

to death, refusing abeyance to the victor. His captom then perceived that his teeth
had split in consequence of the vehement curses which he had uttered against the
enemy during the siege. Old Books of the T'^ang Dynasty, ch. 187 II, 1. 15,

“ And the tongue of Yen at Shang-shan. *


!>


1016


TAB WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Yen Kao-khing mMMi in the same campaign defended Shang-shan. After

the fall of the town he w'as slowly carved to death by Ngan Luh-shan for refusing

allegiance; his tongue was cut out, and still he continued to curse the rebel till death
closed his mouth. Old Books, ch. 187 II, I, 11; and New Books, cb. 192, 1. 3.

“Of them was the man in Liao-tung with the hat, whose purity

was like unto deep water and unto snow ; ’

Kwan King whose name of manhood was Yiu-ngan , lived in

the second and third centuries of our era. He was a man of perfect virtue, who
retired into far Liao-tung, refusing to accept high offices offered to him. He used to
wear a plain black hat and linen clothes. His biography occurs in ch. 11 of the
Memoirs of the Three Kingdoms.

Forth from them came professions at the setting out of armies,
such as moved spirits and gods to tears by reason of the heroism
and ardent devotion which they breathed ; ^

Such a profession was sent to his emperor by the general Chu-koh Liang
third century.

“ Of them was the man with the oar, who as he crossed the stream,
craved that he might swallow barbarians ; ^ *

In the fourth century the heroic Tsu 'Fih assembled an array to fight

rebellious barbarians, and ferrying the Yangtsze beat the waves with an oar, ex-
claiming; “If I return without having purged the Middle Kingdom of their presence,
and cross this stream again, may my body then float down with this river”. He
came back victorious. Books of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 62, 1. 17.

“ And they brought it to pass that a tablet which hangeth from the
girdle smote an insurgent, and cleft his hard contumacious skull. *
Twan Siu-shih a high minister of the T'^ang dynasty, was in 783

summoned by Chu Ts'^ze an insurgent, and invited to take his side; but

though quite at the mercy of this man, the 65 year old hero drew the ivory tablet
out of the girdle of an officer in attendance, and made an attempt to beat out the
rebeLs brains, at the same time spitting in his face and reviling him. He merely
inflicted a wound, and was forthwith slain. Old Books of the T^ang Dynasty, ch. 128,
1. 5; New Books, ch. 153, I. 6.

“So hugely vast is the sphere filled by those Breaths,

“Their cold and heat will exist for countless ages,

“ Even as the sun and the moon will have their being ;

“How could man discuss their birth and death?®


1

2

3

4


M I* it K S!l


A


THE SONG OF THE BREATHS OF RECTITUDE.


1017


“ By them do the cords of the earth keep it in its place,

“ By them do the pillars of the empyrean hold it in its most
glorious position ;

“ The three bonds of life are inextricably united with their decrees,

These bonds are; ruler — subject, father — son, husband — wife.

“ And of the Way (of man) and Righteousness they are the root. ^

“ Alas, I live in a ninth period numbered with an odd number,
That is to say, in an age of calamity.

“ As a state-servant whose power is as naught ;

“So, like the prisoner from Ch'u, fettered,, wearing his cap,

“ I was transported in a car to the extreme north. ’

The poet here compares his fate with that of one Chung-i from southern

Ch'^u, imprisoned in Tsin, fetteied and wearing his national headgear, who was
sent in 597 B.C. by the ruler of Tsin as a messenger of peace to Ch'u. Tso c/i'^wenj
ninth year of the reign of Ch'^ing.

“Sweet as sugar were the contents of the cauldron;

“ 1 asked for them, but got them not.

Kublai did' not comply wdth his request to be put to death.

“ This dark cell is so lonely with nothing but will-o’the-wisps,

“ This vernal court is so dreary with its dark sky. ^

This line is evidently borrowed from Tu Fu’s eulogy on the ^ ^ ^
monastery of the Great Clouds, in which we read ; “a black sky

screens off the vernal court”.

“ With cows and horses I share a stable.

He was imprisoned in the cavalry head quarters, with soldiery to watch him;
see his biography in the History of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 418, 1. 25.

“ As it were a phoenix fed in a fowl-pen ;

“ Whenever a day hath passed in fog and frost,

“ There, when the fog scattereth, am I, a thing of living bones
lying in a ditch.


=mwm^


2

-wmmm


4


1018


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“Such hath been my fate now for two summers and winters,

“ Unnumbered inclemencies of seasons have passed over me ;

“ O, this marsh, this swampy ground

“ Nathless hath been for me a realm of rest and of delight ;

“ For could there be any error in this surety of mine
“ That the Yin and the Yang cannot hold me as an enemy? '

“ When I bethink me of the lives of such virtuous and loyal men,
“ I lift up mine eyes to the white floating clouds,

“ And the sorrow of my mind dissolveth in that void :

“ Hath that blue empyrean any bounds ? ^

“ Long since have passed away the days of those heroes and worthies,
“ In the past lie their feats and bloody deaths,

“ But as I unfold my scrolls beneath the windy eaves and read,

“ The Way of Rectitude of old shineth so brightly in my face. ^


Confidence in the Tao of the Universe and of Man must have
been unbounded indeed in that old, long suffering martyr, who on
the verge of death composed this poem. All men of letters ever
since have admired it as a master-piece. As it is so thoroughly
instinct with Tao, as thoroughly as its composer himself, nothing
better could be selected for recitation in spectre-expelling processions
by many mouths at a time (see p. 982). No wonder also that
learned men, when staying in a solitary place or being abroad at
night, feel themselves doubly courageous if they recite it. It does
excellent service as a lullaby, should babies be restless because of
the presence of spectres. Many learned and unlearned people know
it by heart, or at least the first lines of it, for recitation whenever
and wherever they believe themselves in danger.

The prominent position of the Classics as charms helps us to
understand the deep respect manifested by the Chinese for their


iniltlf **
siMAaiuM


® A H ait


REVERENCE FOR LETTERED PAPER.


1019


written characters of all sorts. Characters indeed it is which compose
the devil- and evil-destroying Classics; it is therefore they which
are the very spring and soul of human happiness ; it is then a deed
of sheer madness to treat such precious protectors ill, or even care-
lessly. Even tho^e who never received any instruction in the noble
arts of reading and writing anxiously gather all scraps, printed,
written or stamped, with a view to deposit them in baskets or
boxes .which schoolmasters and other scholars, zealots and shop-
keepers suspend before their houses, and label with a red sheet
of paper inscribed with the characters misrm. “ respect
written paper and treat it with care”. Whoever perceives a scrap
on the floor or in the street will pick it up and put it in these
receptacles, after having respectfully removed mud and filth with
his hand or sleeve. The baskets are from time to time, after a second
purifying manipulation of their contents, emptied into large brick
furnaces bearing the same four characters, which are bui^t up from
the ground at street-corners, in alleys and temple-courts, and some-
times decorated with gaudy .colours on a white ground. They have
a chimney which is often gourd-shaped, and in front an opening
for throwing the paper in (PI. XII). They are called “furnaces or
pavilions for lettered paper” or “pavilions for showing respect to
paper” *, etc. Many small furnaces form parts of the walls of
buildings. Occasionally the paper amassed in the furnace is set
alight ; and when it has been reduced to a mass of ashes, these are,
collected in earthen jars, to be preserved in a temple or elsewhere
until there are many jars and the time has come to throw the
ashes into a river or the sea. They are then for this purpose emptied
into small bags or bamboo baskets, which are painted red, or decorated
on the outside with red paper sheets.

All this is the work of so-called “lettered paper associations” *,
presided over by literary graduates of the ward. On an auspicious
day, carefully selected by a fortune-teller and published by means
of a proclamation, the members of the association assemble in a
temple dedicated to the Gods of Literature, or, if the ward has
none, in that of some other deity, where for this occasion a temporary
altar is erected, bearing a tablet (see PI. XIII) in which this inscrip-
tion is carved ; “ Seat of the souls of the holy emperors Ts'ang-hieh and
Tsii-sung”, the inventors of the art of writing in the night of time.


1


1020


THE WAR AGATNST SPECTRES.


Many notables attend this meeting. They wear a ceremonial attire, or,
if graduates, the official dress appertaining to their degree. With
observance of the usual ritual they present a sacrifice to those gods,
one of the committee informing the latter, by recital of a written
statement, of the meritorious work which they are going to do. This
document is burned, and the tablet is placed in a sedan-chair or
in a portable pavilion (cf. Book I, page 164), to be carried in pro-
cession to the seashore or riverbank. The pavilion and the coats
of its bearers are of the imperial yellow colour, public opinion
being wont to a'scribe imperial dignity to the two inventors. The
bags with the ashes are rather heavy, because they contain also
lettered potsherds respeetfully collected within the ward for many
years. Each bag is sealed up by means of two slips of paper, fixed
crosswise on the outside. Coolies who carry them head the pro-
cession. A band of musicians follows; next comes the tablet, preceded
by a cortege of policemen and Yainen servants, and finally come
the graduates, the committee, and the notables, each with an incense
stick between his fingers. Some banners and lanterns fixed to poles
decorate the procession, which is long and pompous or short and
plain according to wealth, devotion, and circumstances.

At the waterside the bags are placed in a boat, and, while the
music plays, they are thrown overboard at some distance where
the water is deep and limpid. Meanwhile the procession patiently
waits on the shore till this holy work is finished. Then they carry
the tablet back to the temple, and every one is 'thoroughly con-
vinced that the saints who reside in the tablet, having witnessed in
person the holy work, must be highly gratified, and feel bound
to bless the ward with clever men attaining to literary and offieial
ranks, thus rendering its members glorious and prosperous. The
leaders in particular cherish satisfaction, for is it not in the first
place on them that such blessings will descend? And their offspring,
in order to secure this salutary effect to itself through the Fung-
shui of their graves, takes good care to carve on their tombstones
the same four famous characters “he respected let-

tered paper and bestowed care on it”.

In large towns such associations are numerous. Some have even
a hundred members, each of whom pays a small contribution
periodically. They erect and repair the furnaces, and gratuitously


EESPECTFPL CARE OF LETTERED PAPER.


1021


distribute waste paper baskets among shopkeepers, or suspend them
by the roads and streets, labelling them also with the name of the
society. Some employ men to empty the baskets regularly into the
furnaces, and to collect all scraps lying in the streets or adhering
loosely to walls, or proclamations detached by rain and wind. They
buy old account-books, unsold printed matter etc., and finally it is
they who perform the ceremonial consignment of the ashes to the
deep. In many cases, the committee of administration of a large
temple is charged by the association with all this work within the
parish, or even performs it on its own account, defraying the cost
out of the funds of the temple.

But the sphere of action of “lettered paper societies” is much
wider. They are wont to save writing from profane use and dese-
cration by posting up in streets and squares the same four cha-
racters, and also by having written and printed, for gratuitous
distribution, tracts and booklets dilating on the evils which are
bound to befall the profane, and on the blessings which the
gods are sure to bestow on those who show respect to writing.
Such productions frighten sinners with the prospect that they will
be born blind or become blind in a future existence; that they will
have to suffer dreadfully in hell; that even in this life they will
see their own fortunes decay and the ruin of those of their offspring,
nay the destruction of the offspring itself. On the other hand, they
who save paper from profane use or abuse are promised peculiar
length of life , prosperity and glory for themselves and their
descendants, and an offspring innumerable. But as paper may be
treated well or ill in different degrees, the tracts express the
merits or demerits in ciphers. The highest cipher is assigned to the
writing and printing of exhortatory tracts at one’s own cost, a very
high cipher of demerit to throwing lettered paper away in an unclean
place or defiling it with dirt. In drawing up such ready reckoners
the authors pose as prophets, borrowing their ciphers from their
imagination; or they copy them at random from other tracts ot
the kind.

Mandarins, even Provincial Governors and Governors-General, not
seldom exhort the people by proclamation to treat lettered paper
with due reverence, reminding them of the blessings which they
may derive therefrom, and the evil which they may thereby avert.

Is it to be wondered at, that in the fabulous time w'heu Tsii-sung
and Ts'ang-hieh invented the precious art of writing, the spectral
world howled for despair? It is Liu Ngan who assures us that it


1023


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


did; _ “anciently when Ts'ang-hieh invented writing, and Heaven
sent down showers of rice, the spectres wailed at night” * — for,
says the commentator Kao Yin, “they apprehended that they would
be persecuted by means of written characters” It has been pro-
posed to read this statement in the light of the fact that spectres
sometimes assume the shape of rabbits and hares, and writing-
brushes are made of the hair of these animals, so that it must have
been the prospect of losing their hair which made them wail *.
But the author of the ' Rh-y a yih * has judiciously remarked that
Hii Shuh the man who suggested this explanation, overlooked the
fact that writing-brushes were not used until the Ts^in dynasty,
thousands of years after Ts'ang-hieh’s time.

A very high rank among exorcising books is assigned in China
to the almanack. This actually is a classical book, since the prin-
ciples on which it is framed are believed to be as ancient as culture
itself; moreover there is evidence that almanacks in some form or
other existed in classical days. But apart from all this, the alma-
nack points out to the nation which days are fit or unfit for im-
portant actions, thus teaching man how to behavn in accordance
with the annual revolution of time, which is the Tao or Course
of the Universe. Thus being, just like the Classics, a compass-
needle showing man how to move in the line of the Tao, the
almanack is an exorcising instrument of the highest order. For
the special purpose of keeping their people in the path of the
Tao, it has from very early times been published by the emperors
themselves, and whatever emanates from a Son of Heaven overawes
spectres and keeps them in complete subjection (cf. page lOU).

Chinese of all classes thus have the very best reasons to allow
that the almanack expels demons. No dwelling may lack a copy,
or its title-page in miniature, printed on purpose with one leaf
attached, and sold as charms in accordance with the pars pro toto
principle, for one coin by vendors of sham paper money, booksellers


Hung Ueh kiai,

ch. 8, 1. 5. See also Lun heng^ ch. 22, I. 18.

3 This ingenious suggestion may rest on the supposition that in Liu Ngan’s
statement the character “spectre” must be read m “rabbit or hare”.


THE EXORCISING POWER OF AUIANACKS.


1023


or stationers. This charm is hidden in beds, corners, cupboards and
such like, or worn in the clothes. No bride passing from her paternal
home into that of her bridegroom may omit it among the exorcising
and auspicious objects with which her pocket is filled; there are
then also printed on it some felicitous phrases bearing upon her
married life. When the year has passed and the new almanack is
out, the old copies are useful as exorcising medicine. “In cases of
“fever caused by spectres”, wrote Hu Yung in his Wei eheng i
Men fang (see p. 866), “take a complete almanack of a past year,
“ burn it to ashes at the midday hour of the summer solstice, and
“ make pills of the ashes with Eloeococca seeds ; fifty pills to be taken
“ with w u-k 8 n (?) water in the early morning when the fever has
“ been at its height” h

The belief in the power of writings over the demon world is
fully shared by Buddhists in regard to their own sacred books.
Their train of thought, however, here moves in a somewhat different
line. Buddhist sutras professedly are sermons of Buddha, and in
Mahayanism, which prevails in the empire, Buddha represents the
Universal Light, and his preaching the shining of it, which dispels
darkness, and its spectres or Maras. We shall, of course, find those
holy books again in this role in our Book on Buddhism.


1 wsais

ch. 38, 1. 15.


CHAPTER XII.


SPELLS AND CHARMS,

The reader knows (cf. p. 905), that among the instruments, used
by sorcerers for diabolical purposes, charms, verbal or written, com-
manding or inciting spirits to work evil, occupy a prominent place.
This means that man may force spectres into obedience by explicit
orders. As a consequence, it must be possible also to drive them
away by the same m^ans, especially if the orders are enhanced
by alarming threats. The fact actually is that spells and charms
play the predominant part in the Chinese system of exorcising magic.

The power attributed in China to spells and charms is really so
great that we may call it unlimited. This fact is inseparably con-
nected with the phenomenon, on which we had to lay peculiar
emphasis on page 917, that words are no idle sounds, nor characters
or pictures are merely ink or paint, but that they altogether
constitute or produce the reality which they express or represent.
And as any desired magical effect may be expressed in words or
writing, it follows as a matter of course that by means of charms
and spells every imaginable thing may be effected.

This legitimate inference from a principle which, though senseless,
naturally dominates childish minds which always are ready to accept
impressions as facts, has become a factor of great moment in China’s
religion. It has given to Taoism in its early phase of growth a
complete system of religious magic, styled pi fah flji^^or Occult-
ism. By means of spells and charms its priests to this day exercise
an unlimited influence upon the s h e n and k w e i , and consequently
on the Yang and Yin or the Universal Order which, as we know
(cf. p. 9.29), those beings constitute, A broad exposition of the Taoist
system in 268 chapters, entitled Tao fah hwui yuen » or Collected

In the great Tao tsang ^ or Taoist Canon, printed
by Imperial order of the seven tli month of the year 1598, it forms the cases 400
to 427 (from ^ to j^).


MAGIC OF WHATEVER KIND PERFORMED WITH CHARMS. 1025

Fundamentals of Taoism, categorically sets forth in its very first
chapter, that spells and charms are the principal expedients -for
commanding the shen, for expelling and killing kwei, and for
exercising influence upon Heaven and Earth. Indeed, by means of
charms and spells Taoist priests in all ages to this day have called
down gods to receive sacrifices and bestow felicity; by means of
charms and spells they have made thunder,- rain and snow, or
stopped rainfall and produced fair weather, either with or without
the intervention of gods; they have in the same way turned away
or annihilated swarms of locusts, prevented onsets of tigers, banditti
or insurgents, warded off conflagrations, delivered souls of the dead
from misery and distress, and raised them to a better condition; etc.
The construction and use of spells and charms is inseparable from
Taoist Ritualism ; they are the occult science which enables China’s
religion to achieve its ultimate aim, promotion of human happi-
ness as welt in this life as in the future. We shall therefore have
to pay much attention to the subject in our Book on Taoism.

But, besides, high class miracles are wrought in China, and have
been wrought in all ages, with charms and spells in non-Taoistic
circles. Men have - used them for the purpose of changing them-
selves into tigers (see p. 169); they are their weapons for combating
dangerous or noisome animals, commonly identified with spectres.
Charms and spells expel mosquitoes, prevent moths and rats from
gnawing at clothes, insects from destroying harvests; and good
specimens, which can effect such wonders, may be copied by any
one from handbooks of good advice in daily life. Such useful charms
and spells are far from modern. We read in the Standard History
of the Tsin dynasty, “that at Kao-pfing (in Shansi) Liu Jeu, while
“asleep at night, was bitten at the middle finger of his left hand
“ by a rat. He consulted Shun-yii Chi (see p. oSO), who said; ‘This
“ beast wanted to kill you, but could not succeed ; I shall now
“ kill it in revenge’. And having drawn round his pulse a red
“ line, and three inches from it the character , one inch and
“ two tenths square, he ordered him to leave this hand uncovered
“while asleep; and next morning a big rat lay dead close by it”^.

® S ^ 0. ^ it 5E ^ 95, 1, 12.

66


1026


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


And Hil Mai, a Taoist recluse and magician of the same fourth
century \ ^ was troubled by rats gnawing at his clothes. He made
^a charm which summoned them to the inner courtyard of his
“house, where he harangued them in these terras: 'Those that
“ have gnawed at my clothes must stay here, but those among you
“ that did not so must begone !’ On this all the rats ran away,

“ except one which remained in the courtyard flat on the ground,
“not venturing to move”

To this day, charms are written and sold in great numbers in
order to be put up at home for destruction and expulsion of rats
and mice without the help of cats. Others afford protection against

grubs, worms or gnats; others again (Fig. 1)
keep off burglars and thieves; some are
mentioned which, being burned at home
in the stove, brought back thieves together
with their spoil. The palm of perfection
seems almost carried off by the spell which
effected the following wonderful feat which
Twan ChHng-shih records ; “ The priest
“ Pien of the monastery of Longevity related
“ how at a time when he was in Heng-shan
“ (in Hunan pr.), a villager was bitten by
“ a poisonous snake and died immediately;
“ his hair fell out, and a tumour more
“ than a foot high came up. His son said:
“ 'We should have nothing to fear if we
“had the old Tsan here’. This man was
“ sent for; he strewed a circle of ashes round
“ the body, and made four openings in
Charm to keep off thieves. “that circle, stating however beforehand

“ that he could not save him should the
“ snake enter it close by the feet. He then paced out special figures,
“and manipulated the victim for a long time, but no snake came.
“ Tsan now flew into a passion. He took some pints of cooked rice.


Fia, i.


1 See his biography in the Rooks of the Tsin Dynasty, ch. 80.

Pei wen yun fu^ ch. 7, I, I. 125; drawn from the Shayi fang sze
khao jjj ^ ^ ^ a work which I have not yet seen.


CHARMS PRODUCINC LIVING ANIMALS.


1037


kneaded them into the shape of a snake, and pronounced a spell
" over this, and lo, suddenly it wriggled and moved out of the
“ door. After a few moments this snake of rice led another snake
" into the circle close by the head of the corpse; this animal directly
“ set to sucking the tumor, and the corpse began to move its
" head; and while the snake became covered with blisters, shrivelled
“ and died, the villager revived”

Indeed, since they create the reality which they represent or
express, spells and charms can produce living beings. Yii Pao relates,
“ that Sie Kiu, while entertaining guests at his table, cast a charm
" written in red characters into the well, and — a pair of carp
“jumped out of it. He gave orders to make a hash of them, and
“ there was enough of this dish to let each one of the company
“ have a portion” — In the time of the reign of the pretenders
“ of the realm of Shuh (903 — 925), the Taoist doctor Hwang VVan-hu
“ of the Kao-Tang monastery in the W u mountains studied the magic
“of 'the seven metamorphoses of the White Tiger’. The Governor
“of Jung-cheu, Wen Sze-lu, also had a playful magic, which con-
“ sisted in cutting fishes out of paper with scissors, and throwing
“ them into a dish, whereupon they became alive. Wan-hu threw a
“ charm into the dish, and this charm changed into an otter which
“ devoured the fishes” ^

“Yen T^ing-chi became Governor of Wei-cheu, and had just
“ entered on his duties, when, while he was sitting in his court

. Poh ')nung 50 yen^

quoted in T S, sect, jjj^ , ch. 284.


1028


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“of justice, a small snake entered through the gate, crept to
“ the bench, and placed its head upon it. Thng-chi, who did not

“ know what to think of this, quickly seized his ivory sceptre

“ and crushed the head of the beast, which fell to the ground,

“ raised itself straight up quite stiff, and quick as thought

“ changed into a charm. Thng-chi suspected a magician, and forth-
“ with had him sought for; but as he failed to catch him, nothing
“else happened”^.

Is it, after all, strange that Chinese books tell of clever magicians
who by means of charms and spells converted w'ater into wine,
stone into metal, or any substance whatever into another? Most
wonderful charms are mentioned by Koh Hung. The Taoist Koh Yuen *,
thus he wrote, could live without food, see spectres, and rule and
kill them; he could place himself in a fire without the slightest
harm to his body or even his clothes, and sleep out a drunken
fit on the bed of a turbulent stream. This wmnderful man came
to a river with his disciple, and there resolved to display the power
of the charms which he possessed. One, thrown by him into the
current, moved up against it; another, likewise thrown out, did not
float away, but finally the two charms approached and touched each
other. Then perceiving a laundress on the bank, he threw a charm
into the water with intent to make her run away; and indeed she
did so at full speed. “Now I shall stop her”, said the wizard, and
she actually stood still as soon as he had thrown another charm
into the water. The woman being then asked what made her run
aw’ay, she said she did not know

Much greater, according to the same author, was the power of
the celebrated charm of Kiai Siang *, another Taoist magician, who,
while displaying his feats before the king of Wu, hooked and
landed a splendid sea-fish out of a small pit just dug, and filled
with water for the purpose. While it was being prepared in the


FI A s t fir

from the Kivang i ki.

2 M jc-

3 Shen sien cJi'wen^ ch. 7.


MEN KILLED AND REVIVED BY CHARMS.


1029


kitchen for the king’s table, His Majesty complained that he had
no ginger from Shuh (Sz^-chVen) to eat with the fish. On which
Kiai Siang forthwith wrote a charm, put it into a green bamboo
reed, and told a servant of the king to ride thereon with closed
eyes to that distant region, buy ginger there, close his eyes again,
and ride back on the reed to the court. In a moment the man
reached Ch^ing-tu, the chief city of that region. There in the market
an envoy from Wu recognized him, and gave him a letter to carry
to his family at home. The servant acquitted himself of this charge
and rode back to the Palace, where he arrived ere the fish was yet
ready. All this was the work of that charm b

And hardly less miraculous were the charms used by a great
magician of the T'ang dynasty, whose name was Ming Ch'ung-yen b
One of the Standard Histories of that house relates “ that the
“ emperor Kao Tsung, in order to try what that man could do, had
“ a cave made, and ordered some palace servants to make music
“ therein. He then called Ch"ung-yen, and asked him what good or
“ evil this music portended, and whether he could stop it for
“ him. Ch'ung-yen then wrote two charms on peachwood, fixed
“ them in the ground over the cave, and immediately the music
“ceased. The musicians then declared that they had seen a strange
“ dragon, which frightened them so much that they could not
“ continue”

This anecdote, owing to its place in Standard History, represents
in China sterling truth; yet it was evidently no better than an old
yarn in a new dress. It is indeed recorded in the Standard
History of the Later Han dynasty, that Sheu Kwang-heu, who, as
we have related on pp. 629 and 655, delivered a sick woman from
a snake which had bewitched her, and by his magical power killed
a tree in which dwelt a snake-demon, performed a similar feat.
“The emperor Chang (A.D. 76 — 89) on hearing of those wonders,
“summoned him to court. ‘Under my palace’, said he, in order to
“ put his magic to the test, ‘there always flit about at midnight
“ some persons in red dress and with dishevelled hair, moving in a row


i Shen sien cJfwen^ ch. 9.

= mmm-

. New Books, ch. 204, 1. 9.


1030


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ and bearing lights in their hands ; I wonder whether you can
‘‘restrain them’. ‘Such apparitions of so little moment’, said Heu,
‘‘ ‘are so easy to dissolve’; and the emperor ordered three men to
“ simulate them ; but as Heu did his work, they all fell to the
'• ground immediately and ceased to breathe. The emperor was
“stricken with fright; ‘they are no spectres’, cried he, ‘I merely
“ wanted to see .what you can do’. On this the other dissolved the
“enchantment, so that they revived”^.

Yii Pao, recording this story, states that it was related of Liu P'^ing,
an immortal Taoist whom we have mentioned on page 655. “ It is
“said that there were apparitions under the Palace in the time
“ of the emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, and that beings in red
“dress and with flowing hair were always seen running in a row,
“ with lights in their hands. The emperor interrogated Liu Pdng,
“saying: ‘Can you do away with those beings?’ The answer was
“ in the affirmative ; he took a blue charm and flung it away, and
“ several spectres became visible and tumbled down. The emperor
“took fright and exclaimed: ‘I wanted to put your power to the
“test’. Liu Phng therefore broke the enchantment, and thus revived
“ them”

Ming ChTing-yen by means of charms called dragons from the
sky on yet other occasions. “ When the wife of Liu Tsing, prefect
“ of the district of Shuh under the T"ang dynasty, was ill, the
“Censor Ming Ch'ung-yen examined her and said; ‘We must get
“the- liver of a living dragon for her to eat; it is sure to cure
“ her’. And as Liu Tsing retorted that such a liver was not obtainable,
“Yen wrote a charm and caused it to fly up in the sky with the
“ wind. Instantly a dragon descended into a jar of water. He cut


. Ch. 112, II, 1. 18.

® It iin il a s 0 . w B? iH; S. S H

mzmm . Shell shcn A’i, ch. 2.


SPELLS AND CHARMS FOR THE DISCOVERT OF THIEVES. 1031


“ the liver out of it, and gave it the patient to eat, who thereupon
“ recovered” h

Charms and spells may even endow people with dainoyance.
Among the notes disseminated numerously throughout the Code
of Laws as instances illustrative of the proper distribution of justice,
we find the following:

“Sun Yen-sheng worked with yuen-kwang charms and spells.
“ If anybody missed anything, the said man hung up a sheet of white
“ paper, muttered spells, burned charms, and told a boy to fix his
“eyes upon the paper; and the said boy then beheld the face and
“ clothes of the thief. As he did not use any portraits or images, nor
“ caused any crowds to gather, his punishment shall be the same as-
“ that which the Law demands for those who stir up and mislead
“ people with false doctrine and heterodoxy, but merely as accom-
“ plices ; that is to say, it shall be the maximum grade of perpetual
“ banishment. This sentence was given in Chehkiang, in the twelfth
“year of the Khien lung period (A.D. 1747)” *.

One final illustration of the enormous power which the Chinese
people ascribe to spells, we will give in the following lines from
Sui Yuen’s work :

“In Yunnan and Kweicheu the use of sorcerous charms for pur-
“ poses of black art flourishes more than anywhere. In the last-named
“ province, the Chief Justice Eei Yuen-lung was on a journey to
“ Yunnan, when his slave, a man of the Chang tribe, suddenly
“cried aloud from the horse which he rode, and fell off with his
“ left leg gone. His master, convinced that a sorcerer had done this,
“ proclaimed that any one who could restore the leg should be
“ rewarded with a certain sum. Thereupon an old man appeared,
“and said: ‘It is N.N. who did it; Chang, relying on his master’s


Chao ye kien T S, sect. > ch. 306.

Ta Ts^ing luh U, ch. 16,

the sixth title.


103-2


THE WAK AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ power and prosperity while in the province, perpetrated a very
“ wicked deed, in return for which that man has played that scurvy
‘• trick upon him’. Chang in despair begged for his help; and the old
man took a leg as small as a frog’s out of a parcel which he had
“ on his shoulder, breathed upon it, and pronounced a spell ; then
“ he threw the leg towards Chang, with the result that the latter
“ found himself again in possession of two legs. The old man then
“went away with the reward”*.

Since charms may produce whatever condition they express, the
Chinese people have always been wise and clever enough to fabri-
cate a large number expressing felicity of various kinds, in order
to use them by way of decoration on embroideries, crockery, and
all sorts of objects. In particular, characters expressive of blessing
are used to this end, as ^ or longevity, and jjjg or felicity; these
are even written out or printed on scrolls, or embroidered on silk,
in a hundred and even more different forms, archaic or fanciful
(see PI. XIV), and suspended in houses and rooms. There we
may also see on the walls paintings or embroidered silks, showing
a great number of boys hopping about with all sorts of playthings,
or graduates and mandarins, or P‘eng-tsu (see p. 303), the Methuselah
of China, extremely old, but strong, with a forehead of peculiar
height. Symbolical representations of felicities are extensively used
to the same end. Many we have already mentioned in this work,
as dragons producing rain and fertility; stags bestowing merriment
and old age; ducks and phenixes promoting conjugal felicity and
love; cranes which lengthen life and give happiness; tortoises which
endow man with longevity, and bats furthering his felicity; further-
more, unicorns blessing man with sage and excellent rulers, and
his family with official dignitaries; coins and pears producing wealth
and pecuniary profits; rice, peas and wheat securing numerous
offspring. This list might be drawn out to a great length and


* ® ± ® . II .f| , ± e * ^ . S »

ASiKUsies. tu-

^ ^ ^ J/'k ch-


The character ^ repeated a hundred times. chaiactei |[jg lepeated a hundred times.


ANCIENT TERMS DENOTING SPELLS.


1033


thus shed still more light on the decorative art of China;
but such work has already been satisfactorily and elaborately done
by others k


The unlimited and many-sided ^lower of spells and charms natur-
ally implies an enormous use of those things, at present as well as
in times gone by. In the first place this must be true in regard to
those which serve for the expulsion of spectres; indeed, almost as
long as man has had notions about these beings, he will have
handled such plain weapons against them. We have seen on page
826 that the book of official institutions of the Cheu dynasty expli-
citly states, that the use of certain spells, styled k u n g and
shwoh was prescribed to certain official expellers and destroyers
of k u spectres.

In that same Chen li, as also in the Shu king and the Li hi, a
character chuh occurs, with the meaning of invocation of spirits.
Probably it signified at the same time the use of exorcising for-
mulae, these, as well as invocations, being modes of addressing
spirits. In the literature of the Han dynasty appears a modified
form of that character, in which the radical p “mouth” or ^
“to speak” takes the place of the radical TJS “religious objects and
matters”; and this form, pronounced cheu (cf. p. 905),

has remained to this day the common graphic sign for “spell”,
without, however, the older and classical form having fallen into
disuse. Very often is written 5E •

In the Taoist religion, spells are often and preferably denoted by
the term kiieh “valedictory words”. This character does not
occur in the Classics. In the writings of Lieh-tszS it is used to
denote the vmrds by which a certain dying man transmitted to his
son a magical formula; and for this reason Taoists, to whom Lieh-tsze
is an author of authority, have named such formulae “ valedictory
words”. “A man in Wei”, thus wrote that sage, “ possessed a salutary
“ formula, which at his death in his valediction he communi-
“ cated to his son. The son committed the words to memory, but
“ as he lacked the capacity to apply them, he divulged them to
“ another who asked him about them. This man used them for the


1 Especially by Chavannes in the “Journal Asiatique” of 1901; ‘'De I’Expres-
sion des Voeux dans I’Art populaire chinois’’.


1034


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


practice of magic with no less useful result than they had secured
^ for the father” \

As speech is older than writing, the use of spells must be older
than the use of written charms. I do not believe that the Classics
mention the latter. In the writings of Mencius, in the Cheu li,
and in writings from the Han dynasty a character ^ fu occurs,
composed of ^ or bamboo, and “to hand or transfer”, and having
the meaning of a commission, patent, credential, bond or contract
written on a tablet of bamboo or other material, which, broken or
cut into two pieces which might be rejoined, could at any time attest
by their perfectly fitting together the authenticity and genuineness
of the document. It is that character which we find to this day
denoting charms of any form on paper, linen, wood, metal, etc.,
written or engraved. They are also called fu-chang, fu-shu etc.
(see page 905). Not so often, yet very frequently, written charms are
called ^ luh, showing the radical bamboo and “to inscribe or
record”. This character too appears in literature as early as the
Han dynasty in the sense of script or drawing; but its signification
of charm is evidently of posterior date.

To rigorous Confucian orthodoxy nothing is really holy unless
mentioned or prescribed by the Classics, and the use of written
charms therefore must, theoretically, appear open to condemnation.
The official world in China indeed is often active against those who
presume by these means to protect their fellow men from illness
and other spectral evil, and it denounces and punishes them as
swindlers and imposters : we may refer here to the instance mentioned
on page 609. And nevertheless such magic flourishes in China
above everything, even among the learned and educated.

It did so as early as the Han dynasty. Standard History of that
epoch mentions a mysterious old man who was acquainted with
Fei Ch^'ang-fang and “made a charm for him, saying: "dominate
“herewith all spectres and spirits which exist on earth’. There-
“ upon Ch'^ang-fang was able to cure all diseases, to flog and cane
“ spectres by hundreds, and to drive away and employ local earth-
“ spirits. Sometimes he was in his seat venting his anger quite alone,
“and when asked for the reason, he said: "I am passing sentence on

_ • 1 ® A » li « , 5E K I®? * ^ * T *. *


CHARMS AND SPELLS IN EARLY TIMES.


1035


"kwei and mei which violate the laws’". He unmasked a fox-
spectre and a tortoise-spectre, as we have related on pp. 582 and
622 ; but “ later on having lost the charm, he was killed by the host
“ of spectres” ^ ^ And in Honan there lived one Khiih Shing-khing,

“ an expert in charms in cinnabar writing, who therewith arraigned,
"subdued and killed kwei and shen, and imposed his orders
"upon them”^.

In the description of the no processions celebrated in that same
historical epoch, we have read (see page 976) that verbal spells, used
on those occasions against spectres, formed a kind of chant implying
intimidating threats and expressive commands to go away. Spells
have been threats and commands to this day, and are indeed called
ch=ih|^ or “ orders ”, while the term ch'^ih kwei ^ “to com-
mand spectres”, occurs in literature ever since the Han dynasty
as a standard expression for exorcism. No other character occurs
in written charms with more frequency. It is especially to be seen
therein at the top (e. g. Fig. 11 on page 1043), and sometimes
disguised under fantastic or cabalistic forms, even in the shape
^ , representing the character ^ , a homonym ot it, which moreover
means a rule, thus preventing spectres from behaving unruly.
United with ^ into a binomium, or replacing it, we often find in
written charms the characters ling or ming, which equally
mean “to command”.

If the writings of Koh Hung are genuine, the use of written
charms must have been thoroughly in vogue in the fourth century,
when he lived. In the 17th section of his Pao P^oh-tsze he specially
insists upon their being worn as amulets by people travelling in
mountainous country, stating that they should be preferably written
with red cinnabar paint {^) on planks of peach wood, for reasons
which we need not explain again; in this wise, says he, wayfarers
may not only protect themselves against the spectres which haunt
hills and forests in a great variety of shapes and manners, but

Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. L12II, 11. 13 seq.

ffii ® ^ '■ ”


1036


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


may also ward olf wolves, tigers and stags, snakes and stinging
insects. Similar excellent service, he adds, may be rendered against
animals or animal-spectres by charms when affixed to doors, in
corners, on pillars and beams, at important spots on the road-
side, by pig-styes, etc. He distinguishes charms by a variety of names,
thus showing that, as early as his time, there existed quite a nomen-
clature for them. He mentions, for instance. ^ ^ . “charms to
reduce to subjection”, which is noteworthy, as to this day we see
the character ^ so often inscribed in charms. He also mentions
^celestial water charms”, always worn, says he, as
amulets by Taoist doctors, probably on account of the circumstance
that the best gift of Heaven to an agricultural people is the best
preservative against drought, famine and other evils inflicted by
powers of darkness. He furthermore speaks of ^ ^ ^ ^ ,

“bamboo commissions from the Supreme Emperor”, that is to say
from Heaven ; indeed, the emperors of the Han dynasty on sundry
occasions conferred on their subjects commissions inscribed on bam-
boo, which, according to Ying Shao, had the shape of five arrows
carved with seal characters h We thus learn that there existed in
Koh Hung’s time charms given to the world by gods, even the
highest. Also Lao-tsze bestowed them, for Koh Hung describes the
use of certain or “charms of universal peace”, received

from that high prophet of Taoism, and moreover Jie writes, that the
charms, which he so strongly recommends for mountaineers and their
dwellings and for people who are travelling, had been given by that
worthy.

The same section of his work contains drawings of nineteen charms
which, unless they be spurious, probably are the oldest which
exist. They might on this account deserve peculiar attention, but
for the fact that hardly anything can be distinguished therein
except unintelligible dots and lines straight and curved, reminding
one of archaic Chinese writing, but more probably being conven-
tional signs, such as at all times have been in vogue for the com-
position of Taoistic charms; we refer here e. g, to Eig. 2, as also
to Fig. 3, a charm the main part of which is a spiral denoting the
rolling of thunder from which issues a flash of lightning. Not a
few conventional writing systems have been invented by leading
laoists and printed in their books. We may on this account readily
consider charms to be arbitrary scrawls, even in spite of the Chinese


1 Historical Records, ch. 10, 1. 10.


CONVENTIONAL CHARM-WRITING.


1037


Fig. 2. Fig. 3.


Charms of the foarth century of our era.


pretension that they represent writing of a higher order, having
been made by godly men imbued with divine miraculous power,
(ling or shen ling). Here are a few specimens of conventional
charm-characters, extracted from Taoist works;


is , to go away. is ^ , to come.


dragon.


f means to rise
into the air, as a
dragon.


^ means f^,
^ to descend.


I


denotes the
five Elements.


Such magical writing bears, of course, rather pretentious names,
such as ^ ^ “celestial writing”, “thunder chwen

writing” (see Bk I, pp. 1109 and 1220); etc.


1038


THE WAR against SPECTRES.


Some of Koh Hung’s charms contain black spots, either connected
or not by straight lines, representing stars and constellations {e. g.

Fig. 2). Such astronomical factors
are very common in charms to
this day (see Fig. 4 and Fig. 5),
since celestial luminaries, being
shen or gods of significance,
are leading spectre-destroyers
and dispensers of felicity. Thus
at an early date, by means of
charms, man employed his gods
as allies and instruments in his
struggle with the spectral world.

Tales, purporting to state
what miraculous effects against
spectres man in all ages has
attained in China with spells and
charms, have been written in
great numbers, and show that
they were especially handled by
Taoists. We can, of course, only
give our attention to a few spe-
cimens of those tales, and shall
condense into general statements what the rest tell us.

“ Under Shi Tsu of the Ts'^i dynasty there was in the tenth year
“of the Yung ming period (A. D. 49:2) in the house of the com-
“ moner Mao Ch ung-khiu in the Tan-yang principality every night
a noise of human voices and laughter in the kitchen, and raore-
“ over, when daylight broke or the lamp was burning, a noise like
“ a feast or dinner party. If they opened the door and looked into
the kitchen, they perceived nothing, but no sooner had they closed
“ the door than they heard the noise again. This had been going
on for several decades of days, when a Taoist doctor called upon
Ch ung-khiu. ‘Your house, sir, is haunted at night by spectres’,
“said he, ‘is it not?’ Receiving an affirmative answer, the Taoist
“ drew a charm out of his bosom and gave it him ; ‘nail this up
“ over the fire-place and against the northern wall, and see to-morrow
^ morning what has happened’, said he, and vanished. Ch'ung-khiu
gladly used the charm in the way he was told, and looking into
“the kitchen the next morning, he saw five or six big rats, two
“ feet in length, without hair and of a vermilion colour, lying quite


Pis. 4.


Fis. 5,


O-


Charnis containing stars or constellations.


CHARMS WHICH PRODUCE THUNDER AND LIGHTNINH. 1039

“ dead at the northern wall. The visitations were herewith finished
“'for ever” ^

Especially noteworthy and of great moment in Taoist religious
magic is the conviction that charms and spells may produce thunder
and lightning to smite spectres. It is expressed in the tale translated
on page 276, which tells of a tree which contained a spectre, both
destroyed by the same lightning fiash called down by a spell carved
in the bark. It is suggested also by the lines on page 916, telling
of an exorcist who destroyed a spectre by means of lightning pro-
duced by a charm inscribed in the palm of his hand. We read
that “one Li Yuen-chen, a native of Chu-ki (in Chehkiang province),
“ having studied Taoist magic, could dispel thunder and lightning.
“In the Suen teh period (1426 — 1435) he travelled past -the
“ village of Ta-pu, and spent the night in a farm. There was no
“ fire there, and yet red-hot gravel and stones hailed down from
“ the sky ; but no sooner Yuen-tsin had written a charm and burned
“ it than a violent thunderbolt smote a fox” Here again we have
the fox in its devilish character of incendiary (cf. p. 596).

To operate with such tremendous effect, the charm or spell must
mention thunder or lightning. The fact is that ||r and , which
denote these phenomena, appear in written charms with obvious
frequency, mostly in abridged or conventional shape. In the charm


4r-a;±ii^ei5. w 0. *g|5

0 , a; ± S 4" - It M ^ , ii # S|5 0 . fl #r

^ ^ ■ Khiilng kivai Ink Exam in a tor of strange Events : written

in the sixth century or under the T"ang dynasty. My copy only contains three tales,
but probably is a fragment: it bears no date or author's name.

. Cheh’kiang fung chi

, General Memoirs concerning Chehkiang; T S, sect. , ch. 309.


1040


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


represented by Fig. 6 a fivefold accumulation of thunder sends
out a spiral lightning flash. The characters ^ and ^ contain the com-
ponent ^ , rain, but as thunder and lightning without rainfall may


I'ig. 6.

W V


smite spectres just as well,
that component is very
often omitted, so that
gg and ^ remain. We
have seen on page 1025
that Shun-yii Chi in the
fourth century of our era
killed a rat by writing
^ in the hand of a man
who was bitten by that
beast. This character is a
modification of a spiral
line, which is the old
hieroglyph for rolling
thunder; hence it is that
such a line also occurs in
many charms(^.^. Fig. 3).
In the sign ^ , expres-
sing lightning, the pro-
jecting stroke signifies the


Fig. 7.


Thunder and lightning charm.


Exorcising
lightning charm.


flash; therefore its effect
as a charm is indefinitely
increased by lengthening that stroke so that it looks like a spiral
which at the same time represents the rolling of thunder, as e. g,

• An increase of effect is also obtained
writing two flashes, as in Fig. 7,
which apparently represents this rebus: fire
(^) and light (^) of a double flash of lightning shooting from
the stars and forcing spectres (J^) to hide themselves.

The use of thunder and lightning charms is especially an essential
part of the magic of the Taoist religion. The exercise of influence
upon Nature by means of thunder-gods, of whom a great variety
ave been invented, forms indeed one of the main parts of the
ritualism of that religion, and is principally effected by means of

such charms. We shall therefore hear of them again in our Book
on iaoism.


The list of wonders wrought by spells and charms is, of course,


MIRACLES WROUGHT BY EXORCISING CHARMS, 1041

endless, as endless as the power ascribed to them. We have read
(p. 193) that foxes which had assumed human forms in order to
ha^unt men to their injury, have been reduced to their real shape,
and thus rendered harmless, by magic words, and by mystic signs
made by the fingers. Narratives about these and other animal-
spectres, fought victoriously by means of spells and charms, are
numerous. They teach us that, by merely exhibiting a charm or
attaching it to something, the metamorphosis will infallibly be pro-
duced, so that the beast may be forthwith killed, or will run away
if possessed of speed. Such charms, made and sold by experts,
are used by people who believe demons to lodge in their sick
relations, and, when placed on the beds or bodies of the patients,
will produce, either immediately or after some time, a snake, lizard,
rat or other beast, or even a fox, lying dead in or near the bed,
or outside the house; and the patient, thus happily delivered, is at
the same time cured. Some charms only produce
such effects if set to work on the spectres by being
burned.

The reader will now be aware, that the principles
of charm-writing are father simple, and can only
appear mysterious to those to whom Chinese writing
itself is a mystery, in the first place therefore to
nine tenths at least of the Chinese people itself.

Nevertheless, even to Chinese who understand
reading and writing, the ready interpretation of
charms is as a rule difficult work, seeing that
they may contain archaic writing, some know-
ledge of which is confined to a very few, or even
conventional writing, which none but charm-
writers by profession know, or also fragments of
characters, or characters in abbreviated form, as
in Fig. 8, or in current handwriting which is
perplexing to many readers; not to mention arbi-
trary omissions, additions, or modifications of lines
and strokes. As early as the time of Koh Hung
it must have been the rule that charms were very
illegible, for this sage explicitly mentions it as a
matter of significance that the wonderful Kiai
Siang, of whom we have heard on page 1028,

" could read charm-writing as easily as common
* writing, without any mistakes. A man who refused to believe it


I'ig. 8.


-< y r
AAA


Charm contaiDing
fragmentary characters.


66


1042


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ showed to Siang a variety of charms, taking away the explana-
“tions; but he analyzed them all, one by one” h
Charms must present an’ indefinite variety of forms for the simple
feet that the characters, which enter into their composition, are
indefinite in number, and may be fantastically written and mutilated
in an indefinite number of ways. In those intended for expulsion
and destruction of spectres some special factors recur with conspi-
cuous regularity, some of which wm have already noted on page 1035,
and a few of which remain to be mentioned here.

A bow ^ , the weapon especially feared by spectres and frequently
drawn against them, is very often exhibited in charms by lines like these
p 7 lengthened at liberty to multiply their effect. Characters
cj 3 ’ denoting felicity and therefore producing it, likewise appear
very often in exorcising charms, because they frustrate evil which
spectres are prone to cause; so Figure 9 evidently shows us this

Fig. 9 . Fig. 10 . retius: happiness ( jjjg) by shooting down

with bows from both sides the host of
spectres represented by an archaic form
of kwei thrice repeated. Likewise
prominent in charm-wrifing stands )j^,
which also denotes happiness, as also
^ or longevity, or universal

peace, and or felicity bestowed by
spirits or gods. We see this last-named
sign for instance in Fig. 10 on the top
of another, beneath which stand bows
and three stars, suppressing spectres
and their j)^ hiung or pernicious in-
fluences (see p. 466); this charm thus
means double felicity shooting spectral
evil with the aid of stargods. As a rule
the state of felicity expected from a charm
is inscribed at the top. The evil to be
destroyed may be expressed by the

Charms producing happiness by t ^ eL

destruction of spectres. characters hiung, sie, ^ SUl
and tsai (pp. 466—468). or misfortune, ^ or evil, etc.

' tfr # X bI #

9IJ2-

Shen sien driven ^ ch. 9.


CHARACTERS WHICH FREaUENTHY RECUR IN CHARMS. 1043

We may, of course, expect to find often in exorcising charms
characters belonging to the list of exorcising terms which we have
given on pp. 939 seq. Very often the destruction of spectres is
expressed emphatically by ^ or shah, “to murder” (seep. 769),
or by “to kill with a sword”, or by both. In Fig. 11 we see
these characters above the sign or spectre, between the legs of

which we read ic cind ^ Welter Rdid fire spectres ^ l^esides

“as quick as fire”, denoting that the destruction should
be brought about with the velocity of lightning. In warfare against
people who disturb the Tao or Universal Order by rising in rebel-
lion, it is an established custom for the loyalists to send baskets,
bags and barrels, filled with ears of the slain insurgents, as trophies
to the Imperial throne. It is therefore quite reasonable
that the character which has been employed to
denote this practice since venerable classical antiquity,
should appear in a great many charms, in order to inti-
midate the spectral enemies of Universal Order.

A very powerful character for charm-writing, Rnd
accordingly of frequent use, is ching, the famous
term denoting the rectitude of the Tao or Order
of Universe, before which whatever is sie must
necessarily recede or disappear (cf. p. 467). Very often
it is followed by '^j^i “orderly”, the charm thus im-
posing upon spectres a behaviour in accordance with
that Order (see Fig. 11). Not less powerful and frequent
in charms are Q , the sun, and^ ,the moon, often com-
bined into , light, three universal devil-destroying
powers; besides, much use is made of which also
means light, and of which means light and fire.

And for analogous universalistic reasons we find a
very prominent position in charm-writing held by
ting, that is to say, the character which, among the
ten k an, represents the south (Bk I, p. 966), and accord-
ingly the devil-destroying element Fire. In the course

of the Universe or of Time, which is represented by the ^''1; a*

sexagenary cycle formed by combination of these kan beheaded and’
with the twelve Branches (Bk I, p. 103), ting recurs six I'l'ied.
times performing its exorcising functions; hence it is that we often
see it in charms six times repeated, or in the form XT, “ the


Fig. 11.


1044


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Fiff. 12.


six or sixfold ting’\ Similar is the part played in charms by ^kiah,
the first of the kan, also often repeated six times, or with the cha-
racter six placed before it; for it is
assimilated with the east (cf. Bk I, p.
965), where the devil-destroying sun
rises (see Fig. 12). Seeing that the two
characters represent destruction of evil
by the course of Time or of Universe,
it is quite clear why they are prefera-
bly inscribed in charms which purport
destruction of the unhealthiness or
epidemics produced by the seasons.

Sun, moon, and stars are shen or
gods, and so are the six ting and
the six kiah, thunder and lightning,
light and fire. They then are instances
of divine power set to work by means
of charms inscribed with its name.
But as the whole Universe is filled
wdth shen, hundreds of which are
worshipped by man as his benefactors
and protectors, it stands to reason that he may advantageously inscribe
in his charms the names and titles of any of them. This has always
been sagaciously done, especially by Taoist priests. Instead of such
divine names and titles, rough drawings pretending to* be portraits
of gods have been used on a large scale, or even fragmentary
portraits, nay single heads, arms or legs, the effect being similar,
or occasionally admitted to be even stronger. By properly burning
such divine charms while celebrating religious rites, demons are
most successfully caught, fettered, and imprisoned, tortured, burned,
roasted, killed and drowned. For such useful work, gods are espe-
cially chosen from among the commanders of the Celestial Army;
but a charm-god of great power also is Chung-khwei, and further-
more Chang Tao-ling, the renowned founder of the Taoist Church
in the second century of our era, whose important life and career
we shall have to describe in our Book on Taoism. Often the
title of the latter, viz. ^ or Celestial Master, or his surname
Chang, is inscribed in charms (see Fig. 13); which is very
practical, since the same are in this way imbued also with the power
of his chief lineal descendant who lives in his ancestral seat in the
Kwang-sin department in, the province of Kiangsi , and likewise


CHARACTERS FREQUENTLY USED IN CHARM-WRITING. 1045


bears that title and surname. This man is the head
of the Taoist magical Church and its demon-
destroyer in chief, being the heir of the enormous
exorcising power of Chang Tao-ling.

Sentences on small strips of paper, in ordinary
writing ordering gods or deified men to station
themselves on the spot and kill evil, may be daily and
everywhere seen in China put up in places where
defence against spectres is needed. Here are three
specimens :


^ lit "" is ordered
that general Li Kwang shall shoot his arrows here”.
This man was a hero of the second century
before our era, who rendered himself famous by
victorious campaigns against the Huns.

WJ ^ “This is an

order to the Primordial Women of the Nine Hea-
vens to suppress murderous influences”.

mmmmnti. ‘^Deified prince ruling the
years (the planet Jupiter), take station here”.
Charms may, however, harbour and exercise
spiritual power though no names of gods appear therein, provided
they contain the character she n, or ^ ling; indeed, both to
men and spectres alike the name and nature of the god from
whom proceeds the exorcising power may well be a matter of
most perfect indifference. Exorcising power may be conferred also
on charms by inscribing them with the character ^ hiao or wao,
which means vociferation by many mouths, for wherever human
beings crowd together, their souls represent a considerable amount
of shen or yang matter which intimidates spectres, particularly
if that crowd enhances its dangerous aspect by unfriendly cries. The
said character, frequent in charm-writing, is especially frightening
to water-demons. According to Sui Yuen, ^ Chao I-kih said : "Spectres
"of persons who perished in water have a rancid smell of goats about
" them, and those of people who died on shore smell like ashes of
" paper. Whenever a man’s olfactory nerves are affected by such odours,
" he has better get away. River-spectres are extremely afraid of the
"character hence when any one in a boat smells goatish odour,
"he may escape injury by quickly writing that character”*.


Charm of
Chans Tao-lins


1046


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Powerful also, and generally used for many ages, is the charm
^ tsih, sometimes written ^ ts'ien. The Khanghi Dictionary
comments it in the following terms : “ When a man dies, he becomes
“ a kwei which, 'when perceived by men, frightens them. And
“when a kwei dies, it becomes a tsih which terrifies the kwei
“which see it. If therefore this character in chwen writing is
“ pasted above a door, the effects of the work of all kwei which
“ exist are removed a thousand miles from the spot. People call it
“ the sie-removing charm” It is thus positively stated that spectres
are mortal creatures. This idea is gften worked out in books of
fiction ; I have even read therein of spectres celebrating Buddhist
requiem masses for their deceased congeners. It certainly is not
unnatural that a people, wont to invest spirits with human attri-
butes, should admit also that they can die. It may be asked whether
such a kwei in the second stage may die in its turn and become
a kwei in the third; but I have not found this question discussed
or solved.

It may then be taken for granted that spectres are not merely
put to flight in the war which man wages against them, but may
be actually killed. Certain also it seems that they are in terror of
dying, seeing that they even fear the character tsih, which denotes
their death. It might appear that the binomium ^ ^ , which
that character contains as principal component and which means
“to cut off ears with a sabre”, has any connexion with which
also has that meaning, and (see p. 1043) is likewise very often used as a
charm. But the Khanghi Dictionary, on the authority of the Siien-shih
chi which was written in the ninth century, states, that tsih is a
contraction of ^ meaning “Tsien, assuredly”. “This Tsien, whose
“ surname was P'^ei, lived in retirement in the sources of the I river
“(in Honan). Li Kiiin, a Taoist doctor, having said: ‘among the
“ exorcists of our days there is none better than Tsien, assuredly’.


ja • Ts;S jwh ch. 9.

' AMU t.. An A.AmZ.

is-


CHARMS IMITATIONS 01' IMPERIAL, ORDERS.


1047


“the Court and the official world wrote the character tsih over
“gates and doors”

But Twan Ch'ing-shih in that same ninth century gave another
explanation of this charm. “The people like to paint heads of
“tigers above gates and doors, and to write there tsih characters
“ which denote spectres in the nether world, and thus an end is
“ made of malarious and febrile disease. In the Han kiu i or Old
“Ritual of the Han dynasty (Bk I, p. 405) I have read about no
“ ceremonies by means of which spectres of pestilence were expelled,
“ and also that men of peachwood were put up, with ropes of reed
“and with ^ and tigers; tsih then is a contraction of these two
“characters” This explanation may be plausible, but scarcely
satisfactory, since we are not told what that binomium means. It
may be the plant which botanical and me'dical works describe
under the name stating that is has been imported from

western countries, but saying not a word about alleged exorcising
functions.

Charms in plain ordinary writing, presenting little difficulties in
deciphering, are pasted up everywhere in China and worn as
amulets by tens of thousands in an endless variety. Almost always
they are written on sheets of paper not larger than a hand, or even
so small as a finger.

Charms are orders, mandates, injunctions. The most powerful
mandates imaginable, obeyed by all men and spirits whom the
celestial orb envelopes, are issued by the Son of Heaven, who is
the lord of gods and men equally. It is then a proof of the saga-
city of man, that to enhance the power of his charms he preferably
writes them on paper of the imperial yellow colour. But he pro-
ceeds still further in this line of wisdom. At least since Koh Hung’s
time, as we have seen on page 1035, man has painted or written them
with the carnation colour of cinnabar or tan n> this substance
having always been used by emperors and their proxies or manda-

P‘l± . I cannot find these lines in

my own copy of the Suen-shih chi.

Supplementary Yiu-yang

tsah tsii^ ch. 4,


1048


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


rins to mark their decisions and dispositions as authentic. And
even these official marks men are wont to insert in their charms in
the form of ticks or dots, mostly at the top, either replacing or
accompanying the characters ^ and “order” (see page 1041
Fig. 8, and p. 1043 Pig. 11). The acme of efficacy is reached if the
charms are written with a genuine cinnabar pencil obtained from a
mandarin’s desk. These notions and customs are, of course, to be
viewed also in the light of the fact, noted on page JOll, that the
power of emperors and mandarins is eminently anti-spectral, since
their rule means maintenance on this earth of the sway of the Tao,
the supreme controller of spectres.

The effect of a charm, as well as that of any other decree or
command, depends in particular on the power of him who has
issued it. No wonder then that the Taoist world in China is so rich in
charms imparted in times both early and recent by powerful
gods. They are preferably traced to Hwang-ti and Lao-tszg, these
worthies being greatest among the founders of the Tao among
mankind. Koh Hung imparted some which had been obtained from
the God of Heaven and from Lao-tszg (cf. page 1036). Many are
reputed to come from Chang Tao-ling and Koh Hung; many were
professedly issued by famous exorcists about whom history may speak
or not. Very effective charms have been invented or written every
day and hour by all sorts of men of higher order, sages and priests,
whose shen or spirituality stood on a par of excellence with
that of gods ; indeed, such divine men or godmen (shen j e n
^). when they invented charms, naturally and spontaneously
imparted to them the actual magical power or ling which was
inherent in their shen. And shen or gods themselves by means
of mediums scribble charms with branches and rods every day to
this hour, in sand, bran, or ashes, as we shall describe in one of
the chapters of Part V.

Written orders, even from the most powerful potentates, cannot
in China claim obedience, in fact are mere white paper, unless they
bear the impress of the seal of the authorities who issued them.
Taoists are indeed wont to say, and to write in their books, that a
charm without a seal is an army without a commander. The use
of seals in charm-magic must be old, for we read explicitly that
sealed house-charms were used under the Han dynasty : “ In the month
“ of midsummer they placed at the gates and doors seals on peach-

wood, six inches in length and three in breadth, inscribed

in five colours with; ‘let the law be obeyed’ . . . People of the


THE EXORCISING POWER OF SEALS.


1049


" Cheu dynasty made keng of peachwood (cf. p. 957), denoting
"that the Breaths (the Yang and Yin) alternate (keng); the Han
"dynasty also used them, and made ornaments for gates and doors in
“ the shape of red cords and seals in five colours on the fifth day
"of the fifth month, in order to frustrate baleful influences” ^

And in Koh Hung’s writings we find the following lines;

"The ancients whenever they entered the mountains wore a yueh-
"chang seal of the Yellow God (Hwang-ti), four inches in breadth
" and bearing 120 characters, with which they made impressions in the
" clay, in consequence of which, wherever they halted, neither tigers nor
" wolves ventured to approach on any side nearer than a hundred paces.
" If while travelling they saw a fresh print and impressed the seal
" there in the same direction in which the beast moved, they
" made the tiger proceed, and if they did so in the reverse direction,
"they made it return; therefore whoever had such a seal at
" his belt might travel through mountains and forests without
" any fear of tigers or wolves. But that seal kept off not only tigers
" and wolves. Gods of mountains and rivers or in temples of the
" earth, who received bloody sacrifices, and bad spirits, the authors
" of happiness or unhappiness, if their road was obstructed by
" means of such an impression in the clay, could manifest their
"spiritual power (shen) no longer. In former days there was in the
" Rocky River a large tortoise, which always abode in a deep abyss
" which people called the abyss of the tortoise ; this beast visited
" men like a spectre, and spread disease among them. But a Taoist
"doctor in Wu, named Tai Ping, who happened to witness this
"fact, made some hundreds of yueh-chang impressions in clay,
"went aboard a ship, and strewed that clay broadcast into the abyss;
• on which after a while a huge tortoise rose to the surface, more than
"ten feet in diameter; it did not venture to move, and when it
" was slain, the sick all recovered. And at the same time small
" tortoises appeared on the surface, to die successively in very great
" number on the shore”


Books of the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 15, 1. 5.


1050


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


The seals used to this day by the priesthood of the Taoist
religion are mostly engraved with ^ " Supreme Lao-kiiin"’,

the honorary name of Lao-tsze; many bear the name or title of
Chang Tao-ling (see p. 1044). There are, however, many other divine
seals in use, each god to whom a temple is dedicated having there,
like a terrestrial authority in his official mansion, a box with seals
on his altar for the use of laymen and priests.

Charms are as a rule believed to be rather powerless unless written
with new pencils, and with ink rubbed in water of exquisite purity,
i'or some charms, however, even such precautions may be readily
dispensed with. We read e, of “one Ku Yuen-pen, to whom a
“ singular person,' whom he met, imparted charms and spells of the
“ five sorts of thunder, Avhich he tried at home and found very
“ efficacious. At that time there prevailed in the Kia prefecture a
“great drought. The prefect Sie ordered somebody to call Yuen-pen,
“ that he might pray for rain. He was at that moment eating dog’s
“ flesh, and wrote out a charm with some of the gravy on a tile,
“ which he handed to the messenger to take home and deliver to
“ his master. The prefect furiously flung the tile downstairs, and
“ out of the noise it made as it was smashed a thunderclap burst
“ forth, and streams of rain came down.

“Ku Yuen-pin did not always use pencils to write his charms.
“ One day going to the privy, he drew with his hand this sentence :
“ ' Divine General, as soon as you are here, you shall take away
“ my dirty toilet paper’. And no sooner did he rise from the privy


»m\ii iwit

. Pao P^oh-tsze, ch. 4,

or sect. 17.


THE MEDICAL POWER OF EXORCISING CHARMS.


1051


* than a thunderbolt smote him, burning up his charm at the
“ same time” b

It is also highly desirable that, while charms are being written,
their power should be increased by pronouncing vigorous spells
over them. One of the best to this end is the following: “Heart
“ of Heaven, eyes of Heaven, ears of Heaven, core of Heaven’s
“light, defeat the spiritually powerful light of the earth®; sun and
“ moon, produce your light ; quick, quick, let the law and the
“command of the Five Emperors be obeyed”®. This formula should
be pronounced seven times, and subsequently its power instilled still
more deeply into the charm by blowing on the latter. Charm-writers,
while doing their work, may also vigorously concentrate their atten-
tion upon some mighty deity, preferably upon a god of thunder,
and thus, together with their own intelligence or soul, instil the
ling of that god into their charms.

The aforesaid expression “ let the law be obeyed”, appeared in
former ages at the end of decrees as an usual formula. To this day,
preceded by “quick, quick,” it is used in spells and charms on an
extensive scale, especially by Taoists. We have seen on page 1048
that this was the case also under the Han dynasty.

We may, of course, expect to find, that charms and spells are
used in China on a large scale as exorcising prophylactics and
medicines. They are to this end worn as amulets, folded in the
pocket or in a satchel at the girdle, hidden in the hair or cap, and
placed in or beside sickbeds, or in any spot whatever. Exorcists by
profession, doctors and laymen cure patients suffering from possession
by inscribing exorcising characters, such as ching, ^ or fire, 7 }
or sword, on their breasts or hearts, but also on the palms of their

^ ® 7C SS ^ A ^ ^ ^ A ^ ^ @

A 4b

fu c/ii; T S, sect. , ch. 288.

2 This seems to mean so much as: “Yang, defeat the Yin!”

3 A-Cl' A a Alt 0A

IS A .i: t: 4 b # ^ A


1052


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


hands or other parts of their bodies; it is best to do this with
cinnabar ink, and with a pencil of a mandarin. In Amoy, sufferers
from fever or other demoniacal diseases eat cakes of flour on which
schoolmasters or other men of letters have written exorcising cha-
racters; their effect is peculiarly salutary if one half is eaten and
the other half thrown away.

A still more effective medicine for such patients is water in
which a charm has been steeped or boiled, or which is mixed
Avith ashes of a burnt charm. This solution of magical power
thoroughly pervades the patient who drinks it, thus necessarily
destroying the disease-demon in each part of his body. Such fu
shui^ or "charm-water’’ is universally used, side by side with
cheu shui^ or " spell-water ” which is water over which spells have
been pronounced. W u , physicians, Taoist and Buddhist priests derive
a considerable part of their income from tlie fabrication of these two
sorts. Such water is also sprinkled on beds of patients and through
their rooms, preferably with a small twig of peach or willow, these
trees being feared by spectres. Experts also pronounce or cry out
spells directly over sufferers, to the same salutary effect.

Such are the principal ways in which vain or successful attempts
at performing magical exorcising cures with charms and spells are
made in China every day by hundreds. The method may be as old as
the use of charms and spells itself. In the Books of the Later
Han Dynasty we read that Chang Fei ^ a prominent figure in a great
religious movement from which Taoism arose as a Church, obtained
countless disciples and partisans " by curing the sick with charm-water
and spells” \ In the medical work of Koh Hung a prescription for
patients who have swooned from nightmare is given, viz. to burn
a paper charm containing six times the character "spectre”, thus:


— • the ashes are to be mixed with water, and the water
^ ^ |)oured into the mouth of the sufferer, while at the same
^ ^ time a mirror is to be held before his ears and tapped,
^ and his name called ; he then revives in half a day
Fancy six demons burned at a time to mere ashes! could anything


be more appalling to even the boldest spectral beings?


^ 5 #*-

5 Chen heu pi ki/i fang, ch. I, § 5.


DEVIL-EXPELLING SPELLS.


1053


Also under the T%ng dynasty this curative method was in vogue.
There then lived, according to the Kivang i ki, a woman who
dreamt that a godman gave her two written charms with a spell
for curing a sufferer from obstinate fever. Without loss of time
she pronounced the spell while holding the charms in her hands,
and the patient was forthwith better. We can hardly doubt that
this spell has done long and excellent service among feverrquacks
and priests; it is not consigned to oblivion even now any more
than the tradition about its divine origin. “Intractable fever’', it
runs, “intractable fever, the gods of the four mountains send me
“hither to fetter you. The envoys of the six ting (seep. 1043) and
“ the generals of the five roads ^ will take away your vital breath
“ and catch your souls. Hurry off, hurry off, lest you meet with
“ those persons. Quick, quick, let the law be obeyed” Great
numbers of such spells might be collected from writings . of all
times, but such a task would not repay the trouble, A few only
may be given here as examples.

One is mentioned in the Lang It Hen ki, dating from the Yuen
dynasty. This work relates a story of a man who was troubled by
fever and under medical treatment and incantation for a very long
time without being cured. Then a Taoist appeared, who placed a
jujube date on his lips, and three times recited the following
spell : “ I came from the east and found a pond on the road ;
“in its water lived a venerable dragon with nine heads and eighteen
“tails. I asked what it fed on; it ate nothing but fever-demons.
“Supreme and holy Lao-kiiin, quick, let the laws and orders be
“obeyed!”'^. The patient then swallowed the date, and was imme-
diately better, while the Taoist vanished unbidden.

Here is a rhyming spell or charm, likewise calculated to utterly
rout or pulverize spectres:

“In Universe kindly and vast, limitless, boundless, death departeth,
“life corneth; what prevaileth in place of this law? Of a surety.


1 See Book I, page 72.

A. KK.d,. 278.


1054


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“if those that are desired to fly immediately fly, can then anything
“else than comfort and ease prevail?” ‘

Not less powerful is the following specimen:

“You are what I shall be after my death; I am what you have
“ been before you died ; if you do me no hurt , I will not
“afflict you”. ^

Celebrated, however, beyond anything of the kind is the poetic
febrifuge which the ever renowned scholar and statesman Han Yii
composed; indeed, the ling or magical power of this poem must be
enormous, seeing that its author was a powerful mandarin, and,
besides, one of the loftiest intellects which China has produced:

“Correct in behaviour, o Emperor of the Waters®, is thy soul,
“But broken down art thou, naught remaineth of thy glory,

“For why doth thy son, utterly unlike to thyself,

“ Still as demon of fever spread abroad terrors P ’

“Autumn he handleth, that he may produce thereby fever;

“The aged sires and dames therefore rail upon him;

“ The sufferer asketh for food, but it is vomited forth or floweth out,
“ Yet naught recketh thy son of the stench and the foulness. *

“Poisons in numbers do the masters of medicine apply,

“Perfumes, essences in endless ways,

“ Masters of cauterisation apply wicks of mugwort,

“ Cruel as hunters who ring the game with fire. ®


3 Chwen-suh, whose son, dying at his birth, settled in rivers and became the
demon of fever; see page 499.

^

"

® ® ss w # ,


THK ANTI-FEBRILE POEM OF HAN YU.


1055


“ Masters of spells (wu), their lips and teeth charged with venom,
“Jet forth flying lightning -flashes with their tongues,

“ Masters of charms, brandishing sword and pencil,

“ Scrawl their scripts with ink of cinnabar. ^

“Thus they hunt thy offspring from their dwelling;

“Doth this bring honour to thy family-home?*

“Thy forefather Hien-yuen (Hwang-ti), and they sire Chwen-siih
“Never besmirched its ancient fame and honour,

“But not as they did dost thou:

“Baseness and meanness such as thine are rare. ^


“Dost thou not shame thus they forefathers? .

“For this cause art thou ashamed to return to thy father’s home?
“Clear and limpid is the deep deep river,

“ Depart thou, there abide and tend they spouse. *

“Clothed be thou by those limpid waves,

“Be the barren rocks thy portals and dominions,

“There in the bright moonlight draw thy breath,

“ There bear in thy hands ensigns of water lilies. “

„ Thither sink down, the obedient servant of all the nine songs ®,
“There quaff flavours and eat fragrant herbs;

“Thus in kind terms do I admonish thee,

“ Calling to thee : begone ! be not stiff-necked ! ” '


w^mm-


6 Composed by Khuh Yuen an.- disgraced minister in the fourth century
B.C., for the purpose of bidding gods and spirits to come and go.


1056


THE WAR AOAINST SPECTRES.


This vivid picture of a sickbed more than eleven centuries ago,
surrounded by exorcists and specialists of both sexes, clamorously
scolding and abusing the devil, cauterizing, operating with swords,
charms and pencils, is not without interest; and the more so
because at present things are done beside sickbeds in much the
same curious way. And spells must have been highly appreciated
in those days, seeing that a scholar and statesman of the highest
order lent his talents and pen to their composition. It is therefore
no longer surprising to read in standard history of the T'ang
dynasty ', among the rules laid down for the organisation of the
High Medical College® at Court, that this contained four classes
of Masters, attached to its two High Medical Chiefs ’ and their
substitutes \ to wit ; Masters of Medicine ^ ; of Acupuncture ® ; of
Manipulation’, that is to say, moderation and regulation of respiration *,
and two Masters for frustration by means of spells®. For assistants
they had two “workers with such spells” and eighteen disciples.

Charms, though applied to the sick in various ways and manners,
may often remain totally inefficient. To remedy this failure, their
influence should be engrafted on the patients more deeply and firmly,
and this is done by tattooing or incising them on their skin. We
know of this practice through the Code of Laws. This contains
the following notice in the title which treats of heresy and its
promulgators: “Yang Wen-siang, having observed that the treatment of
“patients according to Kiang Ta-tsioh’s book on charms had good
“ results, studied that book in order to try the matter, and learned
“from it the magic of charms incised with a knife. He took a
“knife, painted a charm, and ordered Chang Khin to incise it on
“him; but the said man thereby wounded Yang Wen-siang’s belly
“so seriously that he died. Thereupon Chang Khin, in accordance
“ with the penal law of unintentional homicide, was condemned
“ to strangulation. And in accordance with the law touching seditious
“ftjlons who teach black magic such as enables a man to avoid
“corportal punishments, Kiang Ta-tsioh, as chief instructor, was
“condemmed to strangulation with a decrease of one degree of
“ punishment, that is to say, to the severest degree of banishment


i Old Rooks, ch. 44, I. 15.

3 ^^^. 4^. Siggip.


8


CHARMS FOR THE SICK AND TO PROTECT HOUSES. 1057

‘^for. life. This sentence was passed in Hupeh in the twelfth year
“of the Khien lung period (1747)’' \

Exorcising charms are much worn as amulets by pregnant women
for the protection of their wombs against spectres, especially while
attending funeral rites. And when a woman is labouring in slow
childbirth, the spectral influences which are the cause of it are
expelled from her body by giving her charm- or spell-water to
drink. But apart from their use as amulets and medicines, written
charms are employed in China in delivering houses and premises
from the dangerous presence of spectres. Inn-keepers post them on
beds and walls, in order to prevent visitors and strangers from falling
sick and dying in their houses. We must, of course, class among
such house-charms the names and portraits of Shen-tTi and Yuh-lei,
the painted tigers heads, cocks etc. which are treated of in
Chs. IV and V. To this day, charms are affixed to doors or houses
on various occasions, but especially during epidemics, and in different
seasons, because in each of these there are special spectres which
render it dangerous.

The use of charms for protection of houses is an integral part of
the Pung-shui system. It pertains, indeed, to the functions of the pro-
fessors of this occult science to discover whether buildings are exposed
to spectres because they stand beyond the beneficent normal (ching)
influences of the Universe, and, this evil stated, to suppress it by
proper charms, put up in suitable spots. It is the rule that these
learned men themselves supply the charms. These are written or
painted preferably on thin planks, which, theoretically, represent
peachwood. Books afibrd abundance of specimens; a great many
are known by simple tradition, or are the fruits of the professor’s own
ingenuity. They are also used at the erection or repair of buildings,
and especially if the times are not propitious for such undertakings,
so that spectres, those of the soil in particular (cf. pp. 536 sgq.),
are active, and therefore should be pacified. Should any one become ill


• i* e , Ji ^ 7J »ij# «.H W 7 ; ❖ 5#f|

Ta Tiring luh /t, ch. 16, the sixth title.

67


1058


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


during the operations, or a woman in the family way be seized
with pangs, a charm forthwith should appear in a proper spot. A
set of twelve is specially in vogue, each invariably for the same
year in every cycle of twelve. Experts in charms possess and sell
another set of twelve, to be posted up at the twelve points of the
compass before the operations begin, after which precaution all
murderous spectres whatsoever may ,be disturbed or offended without
the slightest danger. There is also a set of eight charms for the
eight cardinal points, and one set of five, respectively for the
north, south, east, west, and the centre.

The Chinese are solicitous not to underrate the good effects of
such building-charms. Properly posted up beside houses in construction
as long as the works last, those mystic figures implant therein
felicity for ever by preventing spectres from coming near and sowing
evil which might bear bitter fruit as long as the building stands.
The exorcising efficacy of those charms is due to the fact that they
represent the Tao, which is the supreme destroyer of sie; indeed,
they are inscribed with the cyclical characters which, as we know
(Bk I, pp. 965 seq), denote the points of the compass or components
of the Universe, as well as the divisions of time, which are the course of
the Universe. Their efficiency is increased by inscribing in them
the characters shen and ling, which represent the divine power of
those elements. Especially powerful is the set of five, because they
represent the authority of the deified rulers of the five parts of the
Universe, who, moreover, were the most ancient of sovereigns
who introduced the universal Tao among men, thus imparting
social order, law, and civilisation. The names of those rulers are
Euh-hi, Shen-nung, Hwang-ti, Shao-hao (Book I, page 934), and
Chwen-SLih {supra, page 1054); they are also called the Black, the
Blue, the Yellow, the White, and the Red Emperor respectively,
because the cardinal points correspond with these five colours.
These charms, written on yellow or imperial paper, bear the T%i
Kih surrounded by the eight kwa, which is, as we know (p. 1011),
a representation of the Universe and its Order; and under this
mighty figure stands the impression, in red cinnabar ink, of the
seal of the corresponding emperor, thus: ^ ^ ^ "seal of the
Black Emperor’’, ^ ^ ^ “seal of the Blue Emperor”, etc.
Moreover, in black ink, to the right and left of the seal, are inscribed
large cyclical characters, denoting the cardinal point to which the charm
belongs, with the name of the corresponding animal (Bk I, p. 317).
Thus the spiritual energy itself of the five -chief gods of the Tao


MULTICOLOURED THINGS ARE CHARMS.


1059


is present on the site where the charms are exhibited, so that it is
not surprising that, when they are put up, a Taoist priest, or even
a Buddhist, is directed to offer a sacrifice to propitiate them.

It is now quite clear why papers in five colours are deemed to
be exorcising charms, and are used as such on a large scale. Many
centuries ago, multicoloured things were worn on the body about
midsummer, which, being the acme of heat, is also that of the
increase of disease. “On the fifth dav of the fifth month”, states
the Calendar of the King and Ch'u region, “silk stuffs and silk
“threads in five colours are bound to the pulse; they are called
“ averters of weapons, and are the means by which people avoid
“disease or plague. And people present each other with bands
“ woven of (life-)prolonging silk, and with various other things.
“In the middle of summer the moths evacuate their silk-
“ cocoons, and the women dye and boil the silk, so that they are
“ busily engaged. They embroider suns, moons, stars, birds, and
“quadrupeds, stitching these with gold thread, and offering them
“ to the superiors ot their families, under the name of life-lengthening
“threads, or tissue which averts the danger of weapons, or five-
“ coloured threads, or red cords, and I think that there are a great
“many other names. The blue, red, white and black colours are
“deemed to represent the four cardinal points, and the yellow
“colours the centre of the Universe” ’.

Where belief in spectres has no bounds, and therefore the use
of charms flourishes and gives rise to a profitable trade, there
occasionally, in 6rder to prevent this trade from languishing,
alarming tales about dangerous spectres will be circulated. We
have instanced this phenomenon on pp. 488, 609 and 998, showing
that vendors of charms received no gentle treatment at the hands
of the people and mandarins. Among such terrifying spectres of
fancy we may undoubtedly rank certain ^ ^ ^ or “three
murderous nefarious spirits”, as also so-called “six deadly


S Sja S ffl :tr . “■


1U60


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


influences'', and ^ |2il or ^four evils", which man at any time is apt
unwittingly to offend and irritate,* especially by digging, and building
or repairing houses, and thereupon take their revenge by rendering
the inmates of his dwelling ill, or by wounding or harming them.
Fig. 14 . Whenever these beings are engaged in their danger-
ous revenge, soothsayers have to put up their charms,
varving according to the year, in the spot where
the offence took place. It is advisable in such cases
to wash one’s self with a decoction of artemisia,
which plant (seep. 1079) has the power of dispelling
spirits. Instead of fixing these charms visibly on
the house, they may be buried in the ground,
probably to set them in operation against earth-
spectres.

Recourse is had to exorcising charms when dogs
often bark for no apparent reason, thus proving
that there are spectres abroad. They are aflSxed to
doors and windows which betray by obstinate creaking
the presence of spectres, as also to styes, pens
and stables, when, owing to spectres, swine, cattle
and fowls die or frequently run away. They are used to annul the
consequences of sorcery and bad dreams, which are generally deemed
to be the work of spectres (Fig. 14). It is curious to learn, that
discord between parents and sons, husbands and wives,
brothers etc. can be remedied by wearing devil-expel-
ling amulets; indeed, discord between natural relations
is anti-natural, contrary to the Tao, that is to say,
not ching, but sie, the work of spectres. And after
having protected himself with charms to the end of
his life, the good son of China after his death carries
them with him for his protection in the nether world.
Fig. 15, a specimen destined to be burned by his
careful relations in his grave, shows the phrase
^ dissolution and destruction of mountain-
spectres". We may mention in conclusion that also
thousands of universal charms, for the purpose of averting
every possible sort of mischief at any given time, are
everywhere and every day made and sold.


Chaim

to anaul had dreams.


Fig. 15.


ij


Charm

for protectioa
in the grave.


The mighty influence of Buddhism has considerably affected the
use of charms and spells in China. Importing its own system or


BUDDHIST CHARMS AND SPEI,DS.


1061


Yoga, which had its Dharani or words and formulae for removing
Mara and their evil and insuring good to mankind, it naturally
caused the number and variety of charms and spells to increase
greatly. It modified their contents by the introduction of new
factors, such as the name of Buddha, Fuh, who is the Light
of the World and therefore the universal expeller of demons;
further the terms om and hum or ahum I^Pf. which
are the first and the last word of the magic phrase Om mani padme
hum. In general, the Dharani in China have the position which they
held of old in the Buddhist Church, that is to say, they are spells
by which, besides religious sanctity, felicity of all living beings is
insured and promoted, so that their purpose is not essentially different
from that of the spells in the Taoist system. We shall say more
of them in our Book on Buddhism.


CHAPTER XIII.


THE AVAR AGAINST ANIMAL-DEMONS.

Our treatise on Animal-demons in Volume V has mentioned
a great variety of expedients which the Chinese have used at all
times to render harmless ‘those dangerous beings, which have always
played so great a part in their life and thought. A short recapitulation
thereof Avill not be out of place, and may at the same time afford
an opportunity for supplying some more information on the subject.

If a man acts as a demon in the guise of a wolf or tiger, there
is nothing so suitable for laying him for ever as throttling or
otherwise killing him as soon as he has re-assumed his human
shape (pp. 564 and 565). Or he may be delivered to the mandarins
and be starved in prison, or attacked and killed by armed crowds
(page 548). A Avere-tiger loses its dangerous character if, as soon as
it returns to the human shape, men rob it of the tiger’s skin which
it Avanted for its metamorphosis (pp. 551 and 552; also page 179).
Such a monster may, of course, be successfully killed also when
in its animal shape (page 546); or it may then be unmasked by
Avounding it, since the wound will shoAv itself on the corres-
ponding part of its human body (pp. 548 and 564). Conversely,
Avere-animals, if Avounded while appearing under human disguise,
may be recognized from Avounds on the corresponding limbs of
their animal body, and then be easily killed (pp. 602 and 614). In
general, a good number of bloAvs etc. will suffice to despatch dog-
demons in human form, foxes, monkeys or rats which indulge in
intercourse Avith women (pp. 574, 587, 604 Acy.). Cicadas which change
themselves for the same shameless purpose into young gallants,
may be reduced to their insect shape by w'ell-directed arrowshots
(page 649); and authors prove by their writings that she-mon-
keys, sows and cranes in the shape of beautiful women who aim
at beAvitching the other sex, have been successfully killed (p. 604),
boiled (page 620), or driven away by blows Avith sticks (p. 644).
LikcAvise, fishes which haunt men as anthropomorphous devils have


THE AVAYS TO VANQUISH ANIMAL-SPECTRES.


1063


been restored to their piscine forms and killed outright by means of
arrows, *and this expedient even enjoys the high privilege of having
been recommended by Confucius (p. 645). Under his own eyes and
with his complete approval, a disciple of his belaboured a snake-
devil, in spite of its great physical strength (page 628). A stick,
properly brandished, suffices to reduce butterflies in human disguise
to their genuine shape, and to put them to flight (page 648), and
sword-strokes may unmask and kill anthropomorphous old cocks
(page 636). Ruffian rats who infest the roads in the guise of gangs
of highwaymen, may merely by the application of a mirror be
dispersed in a panic and subsequently slain (page 607); and such
beasts may under all circumstances be beaten to death, or be
destroyed in their holes by means of hot water (page 606).

Tortoises which, in human guise, disturb the guards of the
imperial palace, may be driven with sword-strokes into a pond, the
pond be drained, and the beasts killed (page 623). Another recipe
is, to compel such devils to return to their watery home and
die there by order of po\^erful exorcists (page 623). And when a
tortoise lies hidden in the ground and pulls down nuns who pass
overhead, and spoils the digestion of all around, and stiffens their
tongues — then let the beast be dug out by -bold warriors, and
thrown into the water (page 624).

Even when unarmed, people may by mere exertion of physical
strength kill anthropomorphous spectres, causing them to change
into foxes at the moment of expiring (page 595). Foxes in human
shape, which have, by the vilest imposture imaginable, seduced
sons into parricide, may by the mere presence of a Buddhist
priest be compelled to re-assume their real shape, and thereupon be
killed (p. 598). The identity of such monsters may also be established
by rather enigmatic expedients. "Under the T"ang dynasty there
“lived two women of the Yang tribe, married to two husbands of
“the Hu family \ The younger of these husbands was the darling
“of his mother-in-law; therefore the other said to a female slave : 'He
“is a wild fox; mother does not like me, but is fond of the fox’.
“The slave betrayed this to her; on which she asked: 'How can
“ we find out whether it is true ?’ — ' Take a magpie’s head ’, said
“the slave, 'and hang it above the door; then, when the younger
“man comes, tell his wife to exclaim 'he asks for cooked meat’;

“ he is sure to run away as soon as she has uttered those words


1 Always under suspicion of being foxes: see page 195.


1064


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“twice or thrice’. The woman Yang cried out the words, and
“indeed her husband took to his heels. Hence there is to this day
“a tradition abroad among the people, according to which the words
“‘he asks for cooked meat’ ward off fox-demonry very efficiently” k
And when foxes commit the enormity of assuming the form
and voice of saints or buddhas, in order to divert to themselves
the worship and sacrifices due by humanity to those holy ones,
even venturing for the purpose within the precincts of the imperial
palace , then they have been reduced to their animal shape and put to
flight by clergymen who raised shrewd suspicions of their identity, or
confounded them by means of checkmating questions (pp. 590 — 592).
Bucks, guilty of similar sacrilege, have betrayed themselves while
under the influence of the sacrificial spirits, and have thereupon
been killed outright (pp. 618 seq.)- and dogs who assumed the
disguise of dead men for the same gastronomical purpose, have,
likewise when drunk, incurred the same well-deserved fate (p. 574).
But also by external use alcohol may work as a mighty defensive
against beast-spectres. It is, in fact, a tradition of very old standing
that “the emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, while on a journey
“to the east and not yet beyond the Han-kuh pass, came upon
“a being who obstructed the road. It was some chang in length,
“and had the shape of an elephant or ox with blue eyes and
“ gleaming eye-balls ; its four feet were sunk into the ground, and
“yet they moved without the being itself shifting from its place. The
“officers stood aghast; but Tung Pang-shoh (see p. 306) reverently
“proposed to pour out spirituous liquor over it; and when some
“dozen pints had thus been spilled, the beast dwindled away.
“The emperor asked him to explain the matter. ‘This beast’, he
“answered, ‘is called Sorrow-maker; sadness is produced by it, and
“ we may be sure that here is a spot where under the TVin
“dynasty a prison stood, or that it was an abode of criminals or


If . 15 ig s * 0 . 15 7} » « w # 75

Kwang i lu; quoted in the K K, ch. 450,


'V


HOW TO VANQUISH ANIMAL-SPECTRES. 1065

“deported workmen. Spirituous liquors dispel sorrow; hence it is
“that they have caused that being to dwindle away”

We have seen how a dog, which impertinently assumed the shape
of his absent master in order to indulge in sexual intercourse' with
his wife, was turned into its true shape by means of blood, and
could as a consequence be killed (p. 573). Cows which were able to
make use of their undecayed carcasses which had been buried in the
ground, and thus to play pranks as ghosts, have been defeated by
the simple unearthing and destruction of those carcasses (p. 622).
And crows, while acting as avengers of souls of murdered men, have
been stopped in their terrible work by means of sacrifices presented
to those wronged souls (page 640). The long list thus finally leads
to the conclusion, that the war against the wide class of animal-devils
may always be waged victoriously, provided the proper weapons be
used with sufficient display of courage, intelligence, and presence
of mind.

More particularly, literature in China teaches men the ways and
methods by which their forefathers at all times used to deal with
animal-demons which caused possession, illness, and derangement
of mind — the most dangerous that exist. Foxes stand at the head
of this class. They have always been killed in large numbers in old
graves and city-moats, along with lizards and other demons of
disease (page 577). They have been blown out of patients by able
exorcists, and while making their escape through the window,
caught in bags (pp. 577 seg.). Patients possessed by foxes have been
beaten with peach branches (page 579), and the beasts, on making
their appearance, belaboured with edged weapons, or they were caught,
killed, or fried in oil (page 580). And if they assumed the shape of
physicians under pretence of curing the very patients whom they had
afflicted, they have been set to biting each other beside the sickbed
out of sheer jealousy, until total exhaustion threw them back into
their animal state, so that they could be killed conveniently and


« ra . ■S' M * « 0 . lit « S S , S « 2 /jif

. Shell ^hen ki^ ch. 11.

/


1066


THE WAE AGAINST SPECTRES.


the patient cured thereby (pp. 584 se^.). Vulpine demonry may
be averted by the burning of magpie’s nests, perhaps foR the same
inexplicable reason that heads of those birds, if placed above
doors, unmask were-toxes (see page 1063); we read, indeed, in Twan
Chdng-shih’s writings, “that in the third year of the Ching
“yuen period (A. D. 787) magpies built nests of earth in the
“ Sterculia trees of the Imperial Council of State *, and that vulpine
“ demonry could be averted by burning such nests” *.

It is easier to understand why fox-disease may be cured by the
swallowing of ashes of a burned fox, either with or without water.
Such homoeopathic medicine can, in fact, have none but a most
salutary effect, since every vulpine soul or influence lodging in a
patient must feel highly uncomfortable and alarmed on coming
in that abode upon something which, rudely and cruelly, reminds
it of the horrid death which is kept in store for it. “ Wang Yen
“had married a woman of the Ts'ui tribe. In the T^ien pao
“period (A. D. 742 — 756) of the T'ang dynasty his father-in-law
“ Shi-t'ung became Governor of Mien-cheu, and Yen accompanied
“ him to Kiang-hia, where he was bewitched by a fox, and refused
“ to be ferried across the Yangtszd river. In a fit of mental derangement
“ he cried aloud, and continually tried to jump into the stream, so
“ that his wife’s kinsmen in great consternation tied him to the rest
“ which supported the sail. When the ship was midway, he burst into
“ merry laughter, and on reaching the shore he said, in a state of
“great elation: ‘People of my father-in-law, I told you I would
“ not cross the river with you, but what more shall I have to suffer
“ now on the walls of the city ?

“No sooner had Shi-Pung entered on his functions there than
“he sought for a magician; and his attendants having directed
“his attention to an able fox-shooter among the city-people, he
“called this man to his mansion. The magician directed that beds
“ with sleeping-mats should be placed in the hall, and that Yen
“ should lie there in the corner to the north-west, while watch in
“turns should be kept by some dozens of the inmates. For himself
“a couch was placed outside the hall, and he lay on it with his
“bow and arrows, watching for the fox.


1 This ornithological incident is recorded also in the New Books of the T^ang
Dynasty, ch. 34, 1. 15.

^ ^ M tnu, ch. IG.


VARIOUS WAYS OP VANQUISHING ANIMAL-SPECTRES. 1067


“ In the third watch of the night he suddenly exclaimed : ‘ You
“have eaten and are now sleeping, is it not so? T have just hit
“the fox; pick it up to-morrow’; but they all thought that he talked
“nonsense, and they did not believe a word of it. But next morning
“they discovered some blood by the window; they followed the
“bloody track, and were thus led into a large ravine, where they
“found a dying vixen under the shrubs, with an arrow in its body.
“ Yen’s wife burned the monster to ashes, and no sooner had he
“swallowed these to the last than he was better”

Disease caused by toads may likewise manifest itself by nervous
insanity, and be cured by catching and destroying the beast (p. 633),
It has also been demonstrated experimentally that the soul of a snake,
which after being killed plagues a child of its murderer with
disease, may be exorcised by restoring the lacerated and dried
remains to life (p. 630). Male gavials have been ejected from virgin
princesses by Buddhist priests merely by means of their divinity
sustained by threats, and beaten to death while running for
their lives (p. 6:26). And during the prevalence of disease, exorcists
have drawn circles on the ground, and driven into these “prisons”
foxes, lizards, and tortoises* (p. 578). The feats of such wizards are
really astounding. “ In the time of the reign of Kao Tsu, in the
“Yung ch'u period (A. D. 420 — 423), when Chang CKun was pre-
“ feet in W u-ch%ng, a certain man was giving his daughter in marriage,

1 if

fl #■ tt . ® W a M . s ^ * S 0 . * il » * 15 *

IR II it * . A A a If < T H ® # 5B .

T i ti,

quoted in K K, ch. 451.


1068


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ but when it was time for her to step into the bridal chair, she
“failed to appear, having run out of the door, dealing blows on
“ all sides, and exclaiming that she did not want to marry a cora-
“ mon man. A wu declared that a demon had bewitched her. He
“ took her to the confluence of the rivers, and there amid the sound
“ of his drums treated her with magic and spells ; and Chang
“ Ch'^un, who thought that it was all imposture practised upon the
“ people, fixed a term within which he was to catch the devil.

“On the next day a blue snake approached the wu, who forth-
“ with thrust a big nail through its head. Then about noontime a
“ huge tortoise emerged from the river, and crouched down before
“ the w u ; with red cinnabar ink he wrote a charm on its carapace
“ and sent it back into the water. And while the sun was setting,
“ a large white gavial showed itself in the river, alternately diving
“ and floating, and behind it the tortoise to push it forward. The
“ gavial took its leave of the maid, who complained with emotion
“that its matrimonial affections were going to be lost to her; but
“ thereupon she became better.

“ The w u was then asked how it was that, though the deraonrv
“ was the work of one beast only, he had caught three. The answer
“ was, that the snake had been the messenger between the two
“ parties, the tortoise the match-maker, and the gavial the husband.
“ The three beasts were shown to Chang Ch'^un, who, thus expe-
“ riencing for the first time in his life the actuality of spiritual
“power (ling), had all the beasts killed”. '


Hi . Am

*6 ft A

. I yuen ; quoted in T S, sect,
chs. 183 and 132, and in sect. , ch. 317.


ANIMAL-SPECTRES EXPELLED BY ACUPUNCTURE.


1069


Animal-demons may also be expelled from patients by acupunct-
ure. “In the eighteenth year of the Yuen kia period (A. D. 441)
“ a man in the district of Hia-shi in Kwang-ling, named Chang
“ Fang, and his daughter Tao-hiang had conducted their son-in-law
“ and husband for some distance on a journey to the north, and
“ passed the night in the porch of a temple. That night, an
“ animal in the shape of the son-in-law came to the woman
“and said; ‘Separated from your love, 1 find it is so hard to see
“you go home; I cannot possibly leave you just now’; — and
“ Tao-hiang suddenly was benumbed and confused, and no longer
“ behaved in her accustomed manner. At that time, Tswan, the
“ king of Hai-ling, could cure demonry. As her father supposed that
“she was under possession, he requested the said grandee to cure
“ her, and no sooner had the latter thrust the first needle into her
“ than an otter ran away from under the coverlets, right into the
“harbour in front. And Tao-hiang forthwith was as well as ever” *.

Mirrors are powerful exorcising instruments, which may always
cure patients by expelling or killing the animal-demons by which
they are possessed (pp. 1000 sqq). Virulent pustules, caused by bites
of devilish and revengeful fish, readily disappear when these animals
are restored to liberty and holy books are recited by Buddhist
priests (p. 647). And if fishes cause harm to men from their watery
element, they ought to be checked by means of magical charms,
or should be worshipped and invoked, and brought to terms by
means of sacrifices (page 646).

In an ode of the Shi king ® occurs the character composed
of ^ or rat, and the radical ^ which denotes illness. It seems to
mean despondency or melancholy, as it stands in that ode in con-
nection with the character which has that meaning; but some
scholars, among whom we find Chu Hi, declare it to mean hidden
like a rat in its hole, unknown by men. These scholars may be

*5-. Wlfilst. a;#-®#**®.

a$ ^ 1 © » ffi « W ^ .

yuen ; T S, sect. , ch. 79.

2 Sect. , ode 8.


1070


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


right or wrong, yet a fact it is that certain complaints or mental
aberrations combined with dejection are to this day identified by
pathologists with a mysterious disease ascribed to rats or their
spirits. As early as the second century before our era, Liu Ngan
wrote that “ the head of a fox (or wild cat) is a cure for (complaints
“caused by) rats, and the head of a cock causes the running of
“ wounds or abscesses to cease ” ^ ; hence, considering the Chinese
rules of parallelism in composition, complaints caused by rats may
have meant in his time wounds or abscesses. This explains why
Li Shi-chen wrote this notice : “ Time was when every one consi-
“ dered ulcerous scabs to be caused by the poison of saliva of rats ;
“ hence it is that the philosopher of Hwai-nan {i. e. Liu Ngan)
“ stated that heads of foxes cure rat-disease and ulcers inflicted
“ on men by the bites of rats ” It is natural to surmise that the
statement of Liu Ngan was based on the observation that foxes and
wild cats are diligent destroyers of rats; but we might ask whether
rats, glad to see their destroyer beheaded, would not rather fall
upon men with renewed eagerness, the evil thus being increased
by the cure. Be this as it may, the fact is that the saying of the
ancient sage plays a part in Chinese therapy to this day, as we
shall see on page 1072.

si M ® ^ ^ A muh, ch. 51, I.


CHAPTER XIV.


EXORCISING THERAPEUTICS AND MEDICAL CHARMS.

The preceding chapters have taught us implicitly in many ways
that the practices of medicine and exorcism hardly exist separately
in China, but are exercised conjointly, in particular in cases of
illness which pathology explicitly brands as demoniacal. We have,
indeed, read about therapeutic exorcism by means of tire (pp. 946
sqq.), ashes (page 952), and fire-flies (p. 951); of exorcising medicines
made of mirrors (page 1004), charms and spells (pp. 1051 sy^.), or
obtained from peach trees (pp. 958, 961), tigers (p. 963), and cocks
(pp. 967 sqq.). We have also learned, that the healing virtue of those
ingredients consists in the main in their animation by the Yang,
that is to say, in the fact that they contain parts of the Universal
S h e n or Divinity, which also constitute the power or ling of
gods who in the Universal Order stand diametrically opposed to
the kwei or yin beings. Logically and necessarily then, the yang
or shen medicines, obtained from the vegetable, the animal, and
the mineral kingdoms, to which we have devoted many of our pages
(294 — 332; 357 — 406), are also applied by China’s medico-philosoph-
ical world because of their exorcising virtue. All such medicines contain
a double curative quality, for they also possess the faeulty of
increasing and strengthening the patient’s soul or shen, his vital
spirits or tsing-shen, thus prolonging his life. This happy coin-
cidence raises their supreme excellence to the rank of an axiom,
and they indeed stand conspicuous in the countless recipes which
China’s medical literature affords for diseases of all kinds. They also
are much worn on the body in small satchels, or preserved or
suspended in houses and rooms as charms.

But they are far from I'epresenting all that grows in the field of
China’s exorcising therapeutics. Animistic thought and belief have
planted therein very much* more, so that our limited knowledge can


1072


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


offer in this chapter no more than a few desultory gleanings from
the books in which medical men have stored up what they and
their ancestors have harvested in that field.

These books teach emphatically that no exorcism which is prac-
tised on the sick can be efficient, unless internal medicines are at
the same time taken by them. Indeed, as we have stated on page
683, spectres or sie can lodge in no other bodies than those of
which the ching khi or normal natural influences are in a waning
or weakened state; and therefore, when the sie are being expelled
from such a body by exorcism, its ching khi must be simulta-
neously restored to plenitude and soundness by means of medicines
which are particularly s h e n or ling. Or, according to some, while
the medicines compel sie to withdraw (^) or crowd them out,
their retreat must be hastened by exorcisms. This doctrine naturally
awards the palm of excellence to medicines composed of things
which spectres fear.

Hence it is that, in days of yore, Liu Ngan declared (see p. 1070)
diseases caused by rats or rat-demons curable by means of heads
of foxes or wild cats. Developing his dictum, sanctified by its anti-
quity, China’s leading medical authors declare everything obtained
from foxes to have a salutary effect upon demoniacal diseases, as
well as upon pustules or abscesses, professedly produced by rats.
Su Sung wrote in the eleventh century : “ Make soup of a fox
“ which has not been disembowelled, and eat it, and it will eure
“sores and scabs which for a long time have proved incurable*.
“ And when anyone suddenly expires by (demoniacal) violence ,
“ then forthwith take the gall of a male fox, grate it in some tepid
“water, and pour this into the throat of the patient; he will then
“revive, but if the current hour has elapsed, the cure will not
“ succeed ” *.

And Meng Shen ^ wrote, “ that flesh of a fox should be boiled
“ or roasted and eaten as a tonic by sufferers from consumption and

. Pcn-ts'ao kanrj muh^ ch. 51,

11 , 1 . 1 .

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ . Ibid., 1 . 2 .

, a high literary graduate and mandarin who lived from 62i to 713,
He is known as an author on Rites and of some medical books. See the biograph-
ical notes in the Old Books of the T^ang Dynasty, ch. 191, 1. 14, and in the New
Books, ch. 196, 1, 0.


THE MEDICAL VALUE OF FOXES AND CATS. 1073

“sie influences which dwell in the five viscera, and that it should be

“ eaten many times by sufterers from k u poison and fever Broth

"or soup of it cures women who see spectres’’ h And according to the
Ming i pieh lah of T%o Hung-king, it must be applied against
"ku poison, fevers, and infantile convulsions ” I Ta Ming states,
" that it strengthens sufferers from consumption and heals virulent
" sores and scabs, and that, when eaten raw, it is a cure for vul-
" pine possession or demonry. . . . The tail, if burned to ashes, expels
" evil, and ashes of the head and the tail may cure cattle-plague,
" to which end water mixed therewith must be poured over the
"sick animals” ^ Li Shi-chen states, "that the head of a fox, when
"burned, expels sie, and, reduced to ashes, is to be applied to
" swellings and scabs, together with the head of a wild cat (or

"fox?) The snout of a fox, together with that of an ounce, must

" be cooked and eaten by sufferers from vulpine demonry .... Fox-
" skin too puts a stop to demonicial possession ” \

These extracts are far from sketching in its entirety the use of
the fox as a medico-exorcising animal. Mixtures and balls contain-
ing some part of its liver, gall or calcined bowels, are recommended
for internal use against demoniacal and malarious fevers, plagues,
"strokes of evil”, and sundry other complaints; and so are even its
droppings, but those of a vixen should never be used. Such mixt-
ures and balls also work very efficiently if worn as amulets. It is
positively determined in which months of the year foxes, to be good
for medical application, ought to be killed, or in which months
the excrements must have been voided.

The same high therapeutical position is awarded to the rat-
destroying domestic cat, and the statements of authorities in regard
of its medical use are of no other character and tenor. Therefore
we pass over those statements in silence, except the following lines
from the writings of Li Shi-chen: "Bone of a cat’s head heals


^ ^ ^ A - '* ^ 2.

2 # # # ./h "I Ihid; 1. 2.

3 i: # . ’7 p ^ ^ 4 '/p M ^ 'ii M ^

'!• 2 and 3.


68


1074 .


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ demoniacal malady, k u poison, and pains in the heart and belly ;
^it kills insects, and cures atrophy and small-pox, black swellings
“and scabs, plague-abscesses, and malignant sores” h In Fuhkien
a great number of domestic cats are regularly victimized on account
of such quackery. For many an ailment, declared by the physician
to be rat-disease, and for obdurate scrofula, boils, and even leprCsy,
this man selects a cat, pieferably from a litter of kittens, paying
careful attention to the colour. The animal is strangled, and without
being opened or disembowelled it is boiled, hair, skin, and all,
in a pan till it is quite soft, and this stinking soup having been
passed through a sieve to remove the hair, is drunk by the patient,
or used to wash him. The same kitten may be boiled down more
than once, and is finally given to some beggar as food.

For the expulsion of tortoise-spectres from the belly, internal use
of urine of white horses is prescribed in watery potions, for, as we
have related on page 624, a devil of this kind many centuries ago
manifested a great aversion from such urine, Tf snakes, including
so-called celestial snakes (see pp. 630 sqq,), are the causes of boils,
ulcers, scabs or other skin-complaints, it is useful to treat these
with smoke of a burning centipede, because (cf. p. 863) centipedes
are notorious destrovers of snakes. Ointments of hogs’ lard, mixed
with some powder of centipedes, may be used to the same end, or
a little oil in which a centipede has lain for a number of days.
Since a great number of complaints are ascribed to poison emanat-
ing from animalculse represented as frogs, scorpions, spectres, hairy
dwarfs, and other strange shapes or to reptiles and insects used
in ku sorcery, the long list of antidotes of the Chinese is in the
main a list of spectre-expelling medicines.

Since weapons in general, and arrows and lances in particular, are
exorcising objects, virtue against demoniacal malady is positively
ascribed to a curious plant, called wei-raeu^, “guard’s halberd
or lance”, or shen-tsien \ “arrow of the gods”, or kwei-tsien®,
“spectre-arrow”, on account of its pointed, thorn-like twigs, and
certain appendages which stand out on the bark somewhat like


7rb.


A , vs »


'M ch. 51 I, 1. 53.

2 See c. g, the instructive tenth chapter of the Kih hiii sien fang ^ ^ fllj »
Recipes of the Immoitals which afford quick relief”, a medical work in eleven
chapters, inserted in the great Taoist Canon under the 372th. character ij^lj ,

‘ilW.


MEDICAL USE OF EXORCISING PLANTS.


1075


feathers on an arrow, or on account of the leaves, the position of
which suggests halberd-blades. Curative power reposes in those
feathers in particular. They are converted into drugs, and when
mixed with various ingredients, are taken to cure fever and other
demoniacal complaints, especially by \^omen in childbed on whom
devilish influence is so prone to light. The wood of the plant works
salutarily in cases of insanity, and people sometimes burn it in
their houses to smoke out demonry.

Bamboo roots which have been for some time rotting under the
ground, pass under the name of kwei-ch'^i^ ^spectre- teeth”, or
kwei-chen^ "spectre-pins”, and are the terror of robbers and
thieves; but spectres also fear them. Ch^en Tsang-khi prescribes
decoctions of those roots for internal use by patients " struck by
evil” or labouring under convulsions, or feeling pains in the heart
and belly. Against such demonish attacks and complaints, as also
against difficult childbirth, the same author recommends wood of
old privies, to be burned under the bed, so that the heat and the
smoke may work on the patient ^

In a work professedly written in the fourth century of our era,
we read as follows about a tree, evidentlv exotic:

"Ch‘'ing Ya asked about the name 'Sorrowless’, given to the
"shih-lu tree. Anciently there was a wu, named Pao (or Shih)-
" mao, who possessed divine power (shen), so that he could punish
" all spectres by means of charms. Whenever he caught spectres,
" he made a club of that tree and beat them to death. The people
" of that time communicated this fact to posterity, which has ever
“ since acknowledged that such wood is an object of terror to the
" demon-world, so that people vie with each other to obtain it, in
" order to make things wherewith to expel spectres and suppress
"demonry. It is accordingly called wu-hwan or Sorrowless”

The same story was recorded by Twan Ch^ing-shih with the
following addition : " When wood of the Sorrowless is burned, the
" smell is extremely fragrant and expels bad odours (or influences


1 2
3 Pen-ts^ao kang mith^ ch. 37, 1. 26.

»» SR A.tt MBits* , Tb^ui Pao’s Ku kinchu \ section If.


1076


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


"of evil, cf. page 1081). It is also named kin-leu and hwan^'k
This note suggests, that the tree owes its exorcising virtue to the
odoriferousness of its wood. It is said to attain stately proportions
in high mountains. Another name is muh-hwan^, owing perhaps
to an erroneous understanding of the word wu-hwan, and it is
also called hwan l A popular name is kwei kien ts^'eu^, "the
sorrow suffered by spectres’’. Amulets are made of the wood, and
the fruits are used by Buddhists for rosary beads, especially those
which have a red devil-expelling colour.

From ancient times it was customary in China to swallow
special exorcising medicines at special moments of the year, or to
use them then as charms, or to wear them as amulets. New Year’s
day in particular was assigned for such usages, because, as we
know, it is the great moment in Chinese life for devil-expelling
work. We have seen for instance (p. 957) that soup of peaches was
drunk on that day by people of every age; but much more was
done, for we have in the old calendar of annual customs in King
and Ch\i the following statements :

"On the first day of the first month old and young people
"swallow spectre-expelling pills, and every one consumes a fowl’s
"egg.... Liu Tsze-khing of Kiang-hia (i.e. Wu-ch^'ang, in Hupeh)
" visited the bazaar on New Year’s day, and saw that a student
" who entered it was evaded by all the spectres. ‘ By what magic
“do you effect this?’ he asked the man. And the answer was:

possessed no magic at all until the day when, as I went out,
" my tutor put a medicine-ball into a red satchel, and told me to
"tie this to my pulse as a preventive against influences of evil’.
" Liu borrowed the medicine from the said student, and from that
" moment, whenever he came to a place where spectres were visible,
" they ran away one and all. This is the reason why it is in general
"use among the people. In the preparation of it ‘male yellow’ (see
" page 328) from Wu-tu should enter, and* two ounces of powdered
" cinnabar with sufficient wax to make a ball, which on New Year’s
" morning male persons ought to wear on the left side, and women
" on the right.

Supplementary Yiu-yamj tsah Uu, ch. 10.

^ ^ M ■ 3 ^ , evidently a centiaction of .


EXORCISING MEDICINES FOR NEW YEAR’s DAY.


1077


“ And Cheu Ch'^u’s Description of Local Manners says, that when
“ the first morning of the year dawns, people swallow a fowl’s egg,
" saying that they thereby refine their bodies. 'Teeth-cementers’ in
“ this wise cause the teeth to stand firmly and immovably. At
present the northerners observe the same custom, roast hemp-seeds
“ and big peas, and pulverize them with sugar. The Book on Im-
^ provenient by Refinement says, that by swallowing a fowl’s egg
“and seven red peas in the morning of New Year’s day people
“remove pestilence. And the Cheu heu pi Jcili fanrj has this rescript:
“ Swallow fourteen hemp-seeds and fourteen small peas from the
“ first day to the seventh, in order to dispel disease and plague.
“ And Chang Chung, also named King-fang, says, that the year has
“ bad influences which may strike man, and may kill him imrae-
“ diately if he is so unfortunate as to be hit; in such cases,
“ fourteen big peas, a fowl’s egg, and white hempseeds must be
“swallowed with some spirits” h

The reasons why the ingredients, mentioned in this extract, should
protect from evil, escape us, except for the eggs, which (cf. p. 361)
do so because they contain a concentration of the shen or vitality
of the fowls that laid them, as also the productive power of a
cock, the notorious yang bird which, since early times, has been


1 a 0 IE M M TtJ > tU.

a***. a-

. Kdkj Ch^ii sui-sJii ki.


1078


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


one of the principal exorcising agencies for New Year’s day. But it
Seems extravagant to expect a philosophical background to lie behind
every substance to which the Chinese ascribe healing power. In
fact every assertion of a sage in quackery, whether based on some
successful cure or not, especially if perchance it has been published
in a book, suffices to give any product of the mineral, vegetable
or animal kingdom a place in their Pharraacopcea.

The sweetflag or Acorus, known to our readers as a plant imbued
with the vitality which the sun effuses upon this earth (p. 321), on
account of this quality frightens spectres, and consequently expels
diseases and epidemics. It is stated categorically in medical works,
that, if used internally, it removes spectral influences through the
bowels h As an exorcising substance for external use it comes to the
foreground at the summer solstice. Owing to the lunar division of
the year, that solstice does not, as with us, invariably coincide in
China with a fixed date in the calendar. Nevertheless it is regularly
celebrated on the fifth day of the fifth month, which date therefore
bears the name of twan wu^ “the strict wu or south” (cf. Bk I,
p. 965), denoting the sun in its annual highest position in the
south; it is also called twan yang^ “the strict Yang”, because
this universal principle of light and warmth then prevails supremely.
Now as disease and mortality increase during that acme of heat,
the theoretical midsummer day is particularly devoted to exorcism.
On this date the people in Amoy decorate their doors and windows
with some sweetflag, to which they add some leek and mugwort;
or they place these plants on the roofs, averring that their strong
scent will avert from the house spectres and their works or influen-
ces. But apart from its smell, the sweetflag possesses exorcising
virtue because, as we have noted on page 321, its name ch^'ang
represents the sunlight; moreover, its leaves are shaped like daggers
or swords, which spectres fear so much.

Not unfrequently, the sweetflag, leek and mugwort are bound up
together into the shape of a tiger, or that of a doll which is
deemed to represent Chang Ling, the Taoist patriarch of exorcism.
Sometimes such dolls are made of loam or clay, and have a beard
of mugwort, and a head and fists which consist of leek or garlic
bulbs. Books show, that such usages have prevailed for centuries
in various parts of the empire. On that same midsummer festival,
many persons of either sex and every age in Amoy wipe their

TA«- 348^.


1


EXORCISING MIDSUMMER MEDICINES AND CHARMS.


1079


bodies with towels dipped in decoctions of those herbs. Such exor-
cising washings may be very old, for' there is a passage in the
Cheu li, running thus ; “ The female w u are directed to perform
“^at fixed moments of the year exorcising practices, as also ablu-
“ tions with aromatic matters” b

It is also customary in Amoy to wear some ngai^ or mugwort
in miniature satchels, or bound up in the shape of a tiger, or
to stick that plant in the headgear, for, as people are wont to say,
ts^ah liia^9 oe tng mia^s ; tiah hicM oe k/iin “by implanting

“ mugwort, life may be prolonged and agility with a strong constitu-
“ tion acquired”. It may be added that the fifth day of the fifth month
is also specially designated for taking prophylactics, of which medi-
cal books recommend a great many, and, in particular, spirits in
which sweetflag is steeped. Medicines and drugs, derived from the
vegetable kingdom, are especially efficient if gathered on that day;
and above all they are of the highest order if plucked then at the
hour of noon, which corresponds to our 11 A. M. till 1 P. M.,
for in this case they possess the greatest amount of shen which
the course of Time or order of the Universe can possibly implant
in them. Such medicines are especially good for fever. Quite on a
par with them stands shen shui^ or “shen water”, which heaven
very exceptionally is so good as to send down in that same remark-
able hour. If it happens to fall, every one enthusiastically catches
it in whatever receptacle may be handy; indeed, it is an universal
remedy for every sort of disease, and, moreover, a supremely excel-
lent tonic for the soul.

The use of mugwort, moxa or artemisia for exorcising purposes
in the midsummer season certainly is old, being mentioned in the
Calendar of King and Ch’u ; “ On the 5th day of the fifth month
“ the four classes of the people gambol in the herbage, and have
“ competitive games with plants of all kinds. They pluck mugwort
“and make dolls of it, which they suspend over their gates
“ and doors, in order to expel poisonous airs or influences” The
efficacy of this plant as an exorcising medicine is also advertised

1 M ^ ^ ^ ^ 1: Ch. 25 , 1 . 40 .

^ II ;!K-


lOSO


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


in the Suh poh wuh chi, in which we read that “vegetable drugs
“ made of young sprouts of mugwort have a wonderful effect. Cakes
“ made thereof, eaten to the number of three or five if the stomach
“ be subsequently stuffed with cooked rice , work excellently. They
“ cure spectral influences of all kinds ” h We do not believe there
can be much doubt that the exorcising virtues of the moxa plant
are the principal reason why it is selected for cauterisation of
patients affected by spectral complaints (cf. p. 947).

It is professedly in the main because of their strong flavour that
exorcising virtue is ascribed to the afore-mentioned plants. For no
other reason, no doubt, visitors to mortuary houses hide some garlic
roots in their garments (Bk I, p. 32). And no wonder now that all
over China protection from evil is sought by wearing objects of
fragrant wood, leaves, roots and fruits, or miniature satchels and
bottles containing smelling substances. The elegant world of China
possesses a great variety of such protective amulets, owing also to
the fact that they may be made in the' shape of e. (j. stags, tortoises,
bats, cranes, and peaches, which, as we know, are symbols of hap-
piness and longevity, and therefore may create these blessings; or
they may have the form of a child, thus furthering procreation, or
of a fan of state, to bring promotion to official dignity. Some are
shaped like mushrooms representing the chi of immortality (pp.
306 sqq), or, above all, like tigers, cocks, swords, or other spectre-
scaring things. Such scented objects are often ornamented with
characters or phrases expressing happiness and expulsion of evil,
and among the bottles of porcelain and enamelled bronze I have
seen many admirable specimens of art. It is now self-evident
that they are often bestowed as presents, even by emperors upon
meritorious ministers and generals. Scented amulets of any kind are
deemed especially useful when pestilence is rife, and are indeed
preferably worn in the hottest season, and sniffed incessantly.

It is also undoubtedly owing to its powerful fragrance that
exorcising and healing virtue is ascribed to the lan^ or orchid.
Li Shi-chen states, “ that as this is a scented plant, it is able to
“ avert misfortune, so that, as Luh Ki’s Explanatory Notes on the

Shi king * say, it was a popular custom in Clung (now Khai-fung)

’ 2 H-

3 See page 238. We cannot, however, find any passage to this effect in our
copy of this book.


EXORCISING AND MEDICAL PLANTS AND RESINS.


108J


" for both sexes in the third month of the year to pluck orchids
“ at the confluences of streams, in order to avert mishap from
"themselves’’^. Their delicious smell is, moreover, sure to attract
beneficent spirits and gods, whose cherished presence always exerts an
exorcising influence in an eminent degree. Li Shi-chen wrote indeed,
that "according to the Si-king hah ki"^, ponds and gardens during
"the Han dynasty were planted with orchids, in order to cause the
"shen to descend” \

It is now perfectly clear why in the hot pestilential part of the
year particular recourse is had to smoke of hiang* or incense.
Just like strongly scented plants, such smoke renders bad odours
imperceptible, which, according to simple minds, is equivalent to
saying that it destroys them; and wuh khi "bad odours’’^

also means "influences of evil”. On page 33 of Book I we have
noticed the customary purification of the body by stepping over
burning incense-powder after visits to mortuary houses. Treatment
with incense smoke is prescribed when some one is hit by
nocturnal "spectre-strokes”, and it is a most usual thing to
burn odorous wood or resin beside sickbeds. The trade in these
ingredients thrives most in times of cholera or other plagues,
when they are thrown by handfulls into bonfires kindled in streets
and squares, in order that gods shall descend to enjoy the smell,
and by their presence dispel spectres. And young and old in such
seasons of woe wear ashes of aromatic wood in satchels on their
breasts, in their girdles or their clothes, and many are careful
never to lay aside such precious amulets.

Apart from their smell, aromatic resins owe exorcising virtue to
the consideration that they are coagulated blood of living plants
(cf. page 296), that is to say, conglomerations of shen or vitality;
thus, by corroborating the shen of those who swallow them, they
destroy within them evil caused by kwei. Resinous matter accord-
ingly is amongst the very best of medicines. Many varieties, either
aromatic or not, bearing difterent names and obtained from sundry

^ ^ S ch. 14,

1. 75.

2 I cannot discover this pas'^ap^e in my copy.

3 ® M H bE ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ fl$ Pai-ti^rw honcj

mw/i, ch. 14, ]. 76.

4


1082


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


inland and exotic trees, are used by the sick, either in solutions
or dry; but all are not prized equally highly. One of the most
precious sorts is ‘^incense of An-sih’' ^ or Parthia, which, if we
may believe Twan Chhng-shih, ® was obtained from trees imported
from Persia and called there p^ih sie^ or “ expellers of spectral
evih’; yet we find that this resin came from Annam, Sumatra,
and other regions just as well. It is an excellent medicine for con-
sumption, for women who dream of intercourse with spectres, for
''devils’ strokes”, and for babies suffering from convulsions; it has
also the best effect against contagious spectral disease, insanity, and
pestilence. Like virtues are ascribed to so-called " incense of Su-
hoh”*, which is also imported from various other countries. And
very highly prized is the “ incense which brings back souls ”
imported from the west even before the Christian era. As its name
indicates, it can resuscitate the dead; no wonder therefore that it
is to this day burned in cases of coma, swoon, and all sorts ot
disease caused by soul-thieving devils. The odorous smoke of resins
must be the more powerful since it contains also fire and warmth,
the very elements which compose the Yang or Shen of Uni-
verse. Doubly powerful also must be essence extracted from resin
by distillation or other processes ; and such oil is indeed most highly
esteemed for amulets and as a component of medicines.

Great medical and exorcising virtue is ascribed to musk, in fact
the strongest odour in China. It is called she-ts^i hiang®,
"perfume from the navel of the musk-deer”, or she hiang^,
" musk-deer perfume”. As early as the fourth century of our era
it was recommended by Koh Hung for victims of nightmare spec-
tres, ® and he advised that it should also be worn on the body or
in the hair by sufferers from sundry complaints. " In the twentieth
year of the Yuen kia period (A. D. 443)”, thus runs an
old tale, " Wang Hwai-chi lost his mother. Her burial was just
" completed, when suddenly he saw above a tree an old woman
“ with a large coiffure and a white muslin petticoat, who without
" resting her feet on the branches stood right up in the air. Coming
" home, he told the inmates about the matter, whereupon his

2 \iu-yan(} tsah tsu, ch. 18.

8 Chen heu pi kih fnng^ ch. 1, § 5.


MUSK AN EXORCISING MEDICINE.


1083


“ daughter got the hot and virulent disease (fever) and her face on
“a sudden became like that of the spectre on the tree But some
“ musk was given her to swallow, and forthwith she was again in
“ her usual condition. It is a popular conviction that the odour of
“musk expels evil; and this incident proves that this is true”®.

An indication that the use of musk as a defence against demoni-
acal attacks is old is found in the fact that Li Shi-chen quoted
the following statement from the Pen-ts^ao king ^ or Botanical
Classic, a work no longer extant as a separate book, but believed
to have been written in the pre-Christian epoch, nay, even by the
emperor Shen-nung : “ It averts evil influences, kills spectral beings,
“ wards off the three classes of animals, k u poison, plague, fever,
“and swoon of terror”.^ No wonder that the great 'Fao Hung-
king wrote, that * if worn on the body or swallowed, and placed
“ in the pillow, it averts bad dreams, as also mortal disease and
“ demoniacal influence ” Other authors give currency to these same
opinions. They advise that a small dose of musk, grated in milk,
be put into the mouth of babies labouring under convulsions or
struck by evil, and consequently in a state of suffocation; and
children suffering from fever may be cured by inscribing on their
foreheads, with ink in which some musk has been grated, the
characters ^ ^ ^ remove sie, and avert devils (Mara)”.

Musk is frequently replaced by civet, obtained from the south, to
the strong scent of which medical men cannot, of course, refuse
a like amount of curative properties. Fever-patients in Amoy are
often given tails of goats to eat, confessedly on account of the rank
smell of this food.


There is in the annual revolution of the Universe yet a third


1 This points, of course, to possession by that spectre.


dtssufi. Shell shell hcu ki; T S, sect. ch. 317.

Pen-tbao kang muh^ ch. 51, I, 1. 49.

5 « » R 1 tt KB .JBf 58 a


Op el loc


!. cit.


1084


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


period which the Chinese devote to the use of exorcising medicines
and charms. We have seen that on the midsummer festival the
struggle of the Yang against the Yin and its spectres results in
complete victory. But then the picture is reversed : the Yin with its
spectres regains its ground, steadily reducing the Yang to its mini-
mum of power. A great day in this process is deemed to be the
ninth of the ninth month, which from early times has borne the
significant name of chung yang,^ “the Yang in the second
power'’. This term may in fact express nothing more than “three
times three”; but, whereas three, like all odd numbers, is consi-
dered to be yang, the number nine means the Yang in the second
power, and the ninth day of the ninth month the day affected by
the Yang in a multiple degree. This philosophical play affords to
man an exquisite opportunity of gathering from nature efficacious
medicines, wherewith to purify himself from spectral influences and
increase his resistance by strengthening his soul. For many ages
these medicines have principally been asters or chrysanthemums,
and dogwood (cornel).

The aster bears indeed the significant name of jih tsing^,
“vital-spirits of the sun” (cf. p. 322). Its flowers resemble the
radiant disk of the sun, and unfold themselves in their greatest
beauty in the ninth month; it is therefore certain that on the great
yang day of that month they are saturated with Yang, so that
nature itself appoints that day for making extracts of them in
spirits, for use as a healthy beverage. This custom wss observed as
early as the Han dynasty, as we have stated on page 322, and is
the subject of the following tradition dating from that period :

“ Hwang King of Jii-nan had followed Fei Ch^ang-fang (pp. 582
“ 622, 1034) for several years on his journeys in search of wisdom,
“when the latter said to him: 'On the 9th of the ninth month some
“fatal accident will occur in your dwelling; go home immediately,
“ and tell the inmates to make red satchels containing dogwood
“ and tie these on their pulses ; this done, they must climb an
“ eminence and there drink spirits of asters, in this way to avert
“ that fatality’. King did so, and all his family ascended a hill; and
“ returning in the evening they found that the fowls, dogs, cows
“ and sheep had all at the same moment perished by violence.
“When Cffang-fang was informed of it, he said; 'This is the way
“to employ substitutes’. This is the origin of our popular custom of


ASTERS AND DOGWOOD.


1085


^ ascending heights on that ninth day and drinking spirits, as also
^ of the custom, observed by married women, of wearing on their
^ loins satchels containing dogwood

This tale is at the same time the oldest reference to the use, on that
special day, of so-called chu yli^ or dogwood against spectral evil.
Its seeds, which have an acrid or peppery taste and a strong
flavour, have long been highly esteemed for spicing food, but also
for driving spectres out of the body. They are especially good if
gathered on the 9th of the ninth month, their flavour and taste then
being professedly highest. Simply deposited or suspended in houses,
they are excellent spectre-bogies. It is an old prescription to plant
dogwood trees over wells, as the leaves will drop into the water
and keep those who drink it free from contagion and plague. In
many parts of the empire, spirits in which the seeds have been
steeped are drunk on the 9th of the ninth month, and the seeds
are worn in the hair.


China’s therapeutists are in the habit of administering medicines
in mixtures, in which each ingredient has curative or tonic virtues
of its own, and is expected to stimulate and assist the others
inside the patient. While some components drive out the disease-
spectres and their sie, the others increase the vital spirits, in order
that these may immediately fill up the space which the spectres
evacuate. It is his skill in making good compounds which promotes
the practician to the higher order, and makes him at the same time
a man of wealth and repute. The mixture is often kneeded by means
of glutinous substance into pills, called hwan^, tan^ or tan
hwan, or also yoh hwan% medicine pills”; and to keep them
in a good condition for a long time, free from moisture and mould,
they are inclosed within globular coatings of wax, called lah hwan®.


^ MM tS''-


5


1086


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


wax-balls’’. Their medical name or the name of the maker or
seller is imprinted on the outside. They are offered for sale in
labelled paper boxes, which contain also a printed advertisement
with information regarding the numerous complaints for which the
contents of the balls are useful, and the ingredients and drugs
which, in each of these cases, should be added to the extract or
decoction; the sale of the balls thus tending to extend the market
for medicines in general. The advertisement also insists upon a
frequent use of the contents by way of prophylactics; it warns
people against counterfeits sold by rivals whose ignorance is as extensive
as their impudence, and minutely describes the place where the
seller of the genuine article has his shop. Some general wise medi-
cal remarks are supplied into the bargain.

Such medical merchandise is for sale almost everywhere in
pharmaceutical and other shops, even in realms and countries adjacent
to China, which, together with her culture, have adopted her thera-
peutic art. They are also exported to transmarine colonies. No doubt
every day new kinds appear in the medicine market. Many, espe-
cially if fabricated for exorcising purposes, are denoted by such
special names as “balls or pellets for the expulsion of spectres”^,
“spectre-killing balls’’^, “spectre-shooting balls’’^, or others, bor-
rowed from the dictionary of the great exorcising war. That their
use is old may be learned from the Hai luh sui shi (page 510),
according to which “spectre-repelling balls were bestowed by Wu
of the Liang dynasty on his ministers on New Year’s day”^ as
also from the writings of Koh Hung, which mention “spectre-
shooting balls used by Immortals against infection by plagues ” ®.
And we have seen on page 679 that Yii Pao wrote in the third
century of an inventor of balls containing eight poisonous substan-
ces, which with a thunderous discharge of diarrhoea ejected spectres
from sufferers who had been possessed for many years.

As a sample of such wax balls let us analyse “ those prepared
“for curing five kinds of sie, viz, madness caused by sie, demon-
“iacal delirium, madly running about, stupor, and a state in which
“the patient recognises nobody. All these complaints being encoun-

3 A-

‘ *se'«‘7c a . Pei iven yen fu, ch. H5, 1.12

^ i ^ M ^ Op


MIXTURES OF EXORCISING MEDICINES.


1087


“ ters with spectres, it is necessary to obtain spectre-killing pills ”
These contain the following nine ingredients:

1. “Red cinnabar’ ’ a famous life-prolonging medicine; see

pp. 339 8eq.

2. “ Male yellow” or operment; see ibid.

3. “ Dragon’s bones ” ^ , certain fossil bones, to be found in

the shops of leading apothecaries.

4 . n

5. “Spectre-arrow”; see page 1072.

6. “ Spectre-pestle ” Q ?

7. Small red peas, grated to powder.

8. A yuen ts'ing or beetle which lives on the yuen

plant or Daphne (?); see Williams’ Dictionary,

9. Some kernels of peaches, roasted without the skin, and pounded.
These ingredients, before being put into the wax coating, are

pounded together, passed through a sieve, and mixed with other
drugs. A dose is as much as three balls contain; three doses should
be_ taken every day, while the patient rigorously abstains from
onions, leek, and other acrid plants, as also from animal food. The
balls should also be worn in a red satchel over the right pulse by
women, and over the left by men, or be tied to the heads of babies.
No married woman, fowl or dog may witness their preparation
Medical substances or mixtures thereof are suspended in doorways
in times of epidemic, or worn on the breast, and they are burned on
floors and in the courtyards of houses. Various maladies may be
cured by letting their smoke pass over the patients. Quack tales
have been invented to prove their excellence and further the sale.
We- have given one, at least fourteen hundred years old, on page
1076; the following evidently is another version thereof:

“In the second year of the Kien yen period of the Sung
“dynasty (1129), when the great year was in yiu, pestilence was
“ rife everywhere, and its victims died in very large numbers. At
“ that time, a student. Ting Ki-hwui by name, travelled from the
“ Tshng-ch''ing mountains in Shuh (Sze-chVen) eastward to Nan-
“yang, and entered this place through the gate of the western


A.

2 TS, section © ^ , ch. 444.


loss


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ bazaar. Beholding a large number of sufferers from the plague,
“ he took drugs out of his bag, and benevolently gave every one
“ a pellet ; and this animated medicine on touching their lips cured
“ them without a single exception because the plague-spectres in
“the market, many hundreds in number, seeing that student
“ distribute those medicines, all ran away in consternation. Their
“ king went to the student, to interrogate him about his Taoist
“ magical art, but the student said he had none at all, and showed
him the contents of his bag. On seeing the medicines, the king
was seized with fright ; with his head on the ground he sued for
“his life and ran away. This medicine, carried in the sash in the
“mountains, drives away tigers, wolves, snakes, and vermin, and,
“ when in the water, it removes water-spectres and crocodiles” h There
follows an enumeration of the components of this medicine.

Yet one more quack tale of more modern date may be quoted.
“In the year ping-tsze (1756) of the Khien lung period, Sii
“ Yih-shen of Hu-cheu (in Chehkiang pr., on the banks of the Great
“ Lake) perceived that air was blov^ing into his room through
“ the window, so that the duster of fowls’ feathers lying on the
“ table was turned about incessantly. He rose and touched it with
“ his hands, and felt that it was wet and soft like a woman’s
“ unbound hair, while it emitted so offensive a smell that he could
“ not approach. Though the cold of it passed through his hands
“and arms into his shoulders, he stoutly withstood this sensation
“ and held the hair fast. Then in the corner of the wall a voice
“was heard as if out of a jar; H am Wu Chung’, it said, 'from
“the vast lake”; affrighted by a thunder-storm I have sought
“shelter here; merciful sir, please allow me to go home’. 'A


1|^ .g. TS, .ect- ^ ch, 320,

2 Spectres of plagues dwell in waters; cf. p. 499.


MIXTURES OF EXORCISING MEDICINES.


1089


"violent plague is now raging at the gates of Wu’, said Sii; ‘are
"you perchance the spectre of it?’ ‘Yes I am’ was the answer.
"‘Just one reason the more why 1 should not let you go’, said
"Sii, ‘lest you inflict evil on men. ‘1 have a recipe by which the
"plague may be escaped’, said the spectre, ‘which I will give you
"in return for mercy". Sii bade the spectre mention the medicines,
" and he wrote them down, on which the stench and the chill in
" his arm became so intolerable that he was about to let it go.
" But fearing that it would commit still further outrages, his
"domestics, who were near by, brought vases and bade him to put
"the duster into one of these, and to close and seal it; he did so,
"and they threw the closed vase into the Great Lake. The recipe
" which he had written out contained four ounces of thunder-pills,
" thirty sheets of gold leaf, three mace of cinnabar, one ounce
"of crystalized alum, and four ounces of ‘great yellow’ (?), made
" into pills or balls by means of water, and to be taken in doses
" of three mace. The prefect of Su-cheu, Chao Wen-shan, asked Sii
" for the recipe , in order to bring relief to his people ; and
" all men saved their lives by means of it. ” *


fS#- Taze puh yii, ch. 7.


C9


CHAPTER XV.


SEPULCHRAL MEDICINES AND AMULETS.

The principle that articles which are imbued with shen substance
may possess exorcising power has led the Chinese' to employ things
obtained from coffins and graves as medicines and amulets. We have
mentioned (Bk 1, page ’328) decoctions of the wood of old and new
coffins, which, as the famous Ch"en Tsang-khi in the eighth century
of our era emphatically declared, work with special efficacy upon
patients who labour under the influence of spectres. We have stated
(Bk. II, p. 405) that therapeutic value was ascribed by that same
great man to plants which grow on graves; that (Bk, I, pp. 328 seq)
decoctions of earth taken from graves are drunk as medicine, and
that armlets of the dead and old coffin-nails are worn as amulets.

Sepulchral medicines and amulets were recommended in times .
antecedent to Ch'en Tsang-khi. In a biography of Sii Sze-poh a
Taoist specialist in water-therapy of the fifth century of our era,
we read ^ that there lived a matron who had been troubled with
“ uncurable constipation for many years, and that SzS-poh, making
“a diagnosis, said: ^This is a case of corpse-malady (see page 684,
^no. 5); fetch a pillow from under a corpse, seethe it, and let her
“consume it, and she will be cured’. On this they went to an old
“ grave, took a pillow out of it, one side of which was rotten, and
.“the patient having consumed it was forthwith better.

“ Later on there was in Mo-ling (Nanking) one Chang King, who
“ had a swollen abdomen and a yellow complexion from his fifteenth
“year. The united attempts of physicians being unable to cure him,
“Sze-poh was consulted. 'Here we have a case of stony worms’,
“said he, 'extremely difficult to cure; we must seethe a pillow of
“ a corpse . Following his advice, they decocted such a pillow, and

. According to the Books of the Southern Ts'i Dynasty, ch. 23,

1. 8, his name was Su Sz® ^


ILLNESS CURED BY PILLOWS OBTAINED FROM COFFINS. 1091


“gave the soup to the patient, who with a copious discharge of
“ diarrhoea excreted five pints of worms with heads as hard as
“ stones, and then was better.

“ Afterwards he was consulted by Ch'en Sang-yih, who suffered
“ from pains in his eyes, and often saw spectres. ‘ S i e influences
“ have intruded into your liver ’, said Sze-poh ; ' try to get the
“ pillow of a dead man, seethe it and consume the extract, and
“then bury the pillow again in its former place’. The patient did
“ so, and he too was cured.

“Now he was interviewed by Wang Yen. ‘The three diseases
“ were of different characters ’, said this man, ‘ and yet you cured
“ them all in the same way with pillows from corpses ; how was
“that?’ And the answer was: ‘Corpse-malady is spectral influences
“ in a suppressed and latent state, causing the patient to labour
“ under constipation ; if then he gets a coffin-pillow and con-
“sumes it, the hwun and breath of the dead man fly over into
“ him, so that those spectral influences can adhere to his body no
“ longer; it is in this wise that corpse-malady is cured. The petrified
“ worms were worms of long standing, which, as the medicines
“ had stiffened within the patient, had become so hard that nothing
“in this world could expel them; therefore something spectral was
“needed to chase them and thus render it possible to dispel them;
“and to this end 1 ordered those people to boil for him a pillow
“ taken from a coffin. And when s i e influences enter the liver,
“ they cause pains in the eyes ^ so that the patient sees m a n g-
“liang spectres. Something sie is then required to hook those
“influences; and as such I used a coffin-pillow, which I thereupon
“ ordered them to re-inter, because those influences would then be
“ removed along with it ”. ^


1 The liver is connected with the eyes; see the synoptical table on page 26.

# » A 5» ft # + s. tt se H « . IR ® y: IS Sr .
0 M B la . ® IS 0 . tfc ^ « it @ a A tfc

in 5 5. fl- . ^ m ii .

# iA (t a ,f . SR « . X # a #1 . a ra « la . B


1093


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Ch'en Tsang-klii and Li Shi-chen carefully recorded this disgusting
medical method in their standard works. The first-named authority
moreover wrote, “ that since pillows and mats placed under corpses
“ also cure boils, these can be made to disappear by rubbing them
“ fourteen times therewith, so that they come to a head ” And
Li Shi-chen adds : “ They cure spontaneous perspiration. Steal the
* border of the mat of a man who died in perspiration, burn it
“ to ashes, boil these, w’ash the patient with the water, and he will
“ become better. According to the Shan fan fang ^ of Sie Shi-tsfin,
“ they cure corpse-malady. If you have seen a corpse or heard cries
of mourning, take some ravelings of a coffin-mat or some other
“ things which have lain in a coffin and were thrown away in the
“ road, and seethe them in three pints of water with a tiger’s claw
“three inches in length, until one pint remains; then consume this
“water, and good effect will follow immediately”.^

Water obtained from old graves has been recommended for sundry
diseases for many ages. “ By the Loh river, to the west ”, says Koh


tt ft g . Sn * W > X i! .

1 # H 2.0.S * ^ Pil tS) 5E A tt ifS -Rii.

ft & . ^ 0 , H # 1. S ft BB * * , ft ^ A M .

W .5 « » A !fe)t Ifc .S a? gtJ# >p » .tit H

JEAttfe. AWgA)ffftffillBS.*tf5J,«®. Ji
aW!|»)a«^.ftS!5EAtt*.SHt!E4-.ft-0-

® ft R ffl Ife- Histoi'y of the South, ch. 82, 11. 17 seq.

^ * Pen-ts^ao kang muh^ ch, 38, 1. 12.

2 HfllJ ^ “The numerous Medical Prescriptions amended”; mentioned in

the Catalogue of the Books of the Sui Dynasty (ch. 34, 1. 32) as a work of thirteen
chapters.

= * i if ?E A ® ft . * if . a- . i

i!.

+ , ic = fl- # — , fli jt Sd •


CURATIVE POWER OF WATER OBTAINED FROM GRAVES.


1093


Hung, “is an ancient tomb, the ruinous pit of which contains much
“ water. There also is much gravel in it, and the water which rises
“ from this cures boils and abscesses. In summer, some wayfarers
“ with boils and ulcers, tortured by heat, perceived this water in
“ the grave, so limpid and so good; they bathed therein, and saw
“ their ulcers healed. All sick people who heard the news flocked
“ to the spot to wash themselves, and some drank of it, to cure
“ intestinal diseases. The people living near by erected a temple
“ by the grave and sold the water there, and the buyers continu-
“ously sacrified wine and meat in that temple; but they appeared
“ in numbers so large that the water gave out, and the sellers
“ under cover of night clandestinely carried other water into the
“ grave. People unable to come themselves because of the distance,
“ sent messengers with pots and letters to buy water. No wonder
“ that the sellers became very rich. It was then rumoured that the
“water had no longer any divine power (shen); the mandarins
“ therefore interfered, filled up the pit, and thus put an end to
“ the business’*. ^

Ch^en Tsang'khi also paid his attention to sepulchral water. “ Water
“ in old graves contains poison which may cause death. Boils and
“ ulcers of all sorts are cured if washed with it. Water in provi-
“ sion pots, that is to say, in pots with eatables that were placed
“ in old graves, has a salutary effect , provided it be pure and
“limpid, and has been standing therein for a long time. If its
“ taste is bitter, it is always somewhat poisonous. Spectral influ-
“ ence, strokes of evil, encounters with disease, and pains in the
“ heart and belly may be cured with it, as well as evil dreams of


1094


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ spectres and spirits ; and it kills intestinal worms. No larger
“ potions than the two hands together can hold may be taken,
“ otherwise melancholy will be produced. I have not yet tried its
“ effects upon eyes which see spectres.

‘•Choking in the throat is immediately cured by simply drinking
“ water from pitchers or pots which have been found in old graves.
* Such water has a divine effect of the highest order”

As a matter of course, the exorcising and curative power of
graves differs in degree according to the shen or spiritual, divine
power of the dead who is buried in it. We read for instance “that
“ Li Yii-khing, doctor in the Academy of Learning, ruled Shang-cheu
“ with so strong a hand, and so completely removed nefarious charac-
“ ters from service, that miscreants and worthless officers feared and
“ respected him as a shen. . . He now rests in his tomb in the Heng
“ mountains, where to this day he is feared and respected so
“ much that all who pass by dismount, and sufferers from disease
“ and fever take earth from his grave and lay it on the ndat of
“ their couch, health being regularly restored in this way. So great
“ are the respect and awe which he inspired ” ^

According to Ch'en Tsang-khi, “earth from the top of a grave
“cures plagues or contagious disease. Take such earth thence on
the first day of the fifth month, or a brick or stone, put it into
“ a pot, and bury this outside the gate below the steps ; it will then
“ preserve the whole family from influences of the seasons. Or take
“ away a brick from an old grave on New Year’s day, pronounce
“a spell over it, and suspend it over the main gate; then plagues

' . . aS't'

Si , Pen-h^ao hang mxih^ ch. 5, 1. 17.

^ Rig: ».

Mung khi pih fan, ch. 10.


EARTH AND BRICKS FROM GRAVES, AND ASHES OF CORPSES. 1095


“ will not visit you the whole year round ” And Sun SzS-moh
wrote in the Ts^ien Jcin yao fang “ that if any one has an abscess
“ in the bowels, let him make some mud of earth which lay on a
“ dead man’s grave, and rub the abscess with it, and the effect
“ will be excellent” ^

Bricks obtained from graves, thus recommended by Ch'en Tsang^
khi, are frequently used to this day as charms when houses are
built or repaired in a year in which, according to geomancers and
chronomancers, building is un propitious, and, as a consequence,
pecuniary losses, disease or death afflict the inmates. One such
brick is placed under each bed-post, and grave-earth, mixed with
water and some mud from a busy crossway, is daubed on the wall
above the gate or door; at the same time appropriate exorcising
scripts are worn in the clothes, or fixed to the walls.

The doctrine that the earth of a grave contains demon-expelling
soul-substance of the person who is buried in it, implies that this
must be the case also with earth over which a corpse has been
burned, so that the ashes have been mingled with it. No wonder
that Li Shi-chen categorically wrote " that ashes from such a place
‘^cure fever caused by sie, and that black earth, taken thence and
^ worn in the sash, or grated with onions into pills, and in this
" form put into the ears of the patient, or bound on his shoulders,

“ will put a stop to his fever if they are fastened to the left shoul-
“ der when the patient is of the male sex, on on her right shoulder
"in the case of females”^. He also gives the following recipes,
borrowed from great authorities :

" If a person is liable to nightmare and frequent dreaming, some
" ashes of a man who has been cremated, placed in his pillow or on his
" belly, will put a stop to the complaint. In cases of death-swoon or
" sudden death (see p. 687), when the patient recognises nobody, two
" or three mace of earth from a place where a person has been burned
“ should be powdered, seethed in water, and poured out on the

. Pcn-tii^ao kanrj muh^

ch. 7, 11. 8 seq.

.*RW±,8P jt>;S ' s


1096


THK WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“patient, who will then forthwith be restored to life. Should such
“earth be unobtainable, it may be replaced by dust from inside the
“ kitchen-furnace. And if babies cry at night, some ashes from a place
“ where a person has been burned must be placed beside their pillows” h
The belief in the power of sepulchral charms must certainly be
admitted to have been strong in former ages, seeing that instances
are recorded of violation of graves with the purpose of obtaining such
objects. “Under the southern T'ang dynasty (A. D. 937 — 975),
“Li Phng-shang said to P'^an Yiu: ‘In the tombs of the six dynasties
“ (which have reigned between the House of Han and that of
“T'ang) there must be many precious swords and mirrors; such
“ things, if worn on the body, might expel spectres ’. Chang Tsze
“ too was charmed by this suggestion, and the three men bought
“a plot of ground containing ancient graves, situated in the Khi-
“ lung hills. They went thither to bathe, but prepared baskets and ,
“ hoes, opened the graves, and for a long time found antique objects
“and trinkets of former generations. It is said that they opened
“ an unknown number of graves ”

Among the things useful as exorcising charms and medicines
because they have been in contact with corpses, we may further
rank ropes which have served for strangulation. Ch'en Tsang-khi
wrote “that in cases of sudden fits of insanity, the cord -wherewith
“some one has hung himself should be burned, and the ashes,

“ grated and mixed with water, be consumed k According to the
“ Ming tao chi of Chang Lei ’, a well-to-do gentleman in Khi-shui


is . ill M . K # ± ft 2 . K S I'f . IS n #
± ® tt

UA. p‘‘«i

^ unknown to me; quoted in T S, sect, cli. 138.

. Pen-tb^ao hang nmh,

ch. 38, 1. 11.

4 A great scholar and statesmen ^\*ho lived in the eleventh century and the
tweilth. See his biography in the Hibtory of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 444.


STRANGLING-CORDS AS MEDICINES.


1097


“ (in Hupeh pr.) wandered into a brothel, and was so frightened
“ that, on running away, he tumbled flat upon a man who had
“been put to death. He went mad from fright, but the intelligent
“ physician P"ang Ngan-shang ‘ fetched a rope wherewith a prisoner
“had been strangled, burned it to ashes, mixed these with drugs,
“and gave them to him to consume; whereupon he recovered”.^


1 Also named Ngati-shi ; this miracle of medical art lived in the eleventh

century. See his biography in ch. 4G2 of the History of the Sung Dynasty.

cb. 38, 1. 12.


CHAPTER XVI.


EVIL AVERTED OR EXORCISED BY MEANS OF
StBSTITDTES OR SURROGATES.

An effective means of ridding a man of his illness or of spectral evil
of any . kind is to make it pass from him into or upon a beast or
thing. China has indeed its scape-goats in various forms, and her
people has used them since very early days.

Standard History records their use as early as the fourth century
of our era. “The mother of the military governor Chang Shao was
“ill and dying. Shun-yii Chi (see page 581), having consulted the
“ divining-stalks about her, told him to go out in a westerly direc-
“ tion and buy a large monkey, then to tie this animal to his
“ mother’s arm and have it beaten by the bystanders to make
“ it cry incessantly, and let it go on the third day. Shao followed
“ his advice ; the monkey ran out of the door, but was immediately
“ worried to death by the dogs, and his mother’s health was thereupon
“ restored *

Another wise man of that time advised people to help themselves
in somewhat the same way. “Yen Khing from Hwui-ki was an able
“ diviner by means of tortoises and stalks. His fellow townsman,
“Wei Shu by name, wanted to make a journey to the east, and
“ as he knew that there were many robbers abroad in consequence
“of the bad harvest, he told Yen Khing to consult the stalks. The
“ man did so, and said : ‘ Do not travel that way, sir, for you will
“fall in with violent injurious influences, though not with rob-
“bers’. And seeing that Wei Shu did not believe it. Yen Khing
“said: ‘If you cannot possibly put off the journey, then at least
“ avert that evil ; try to get a white male dog from the family of

Tsin Dynasty, ch. 95, 1. 12


EVIL MAY BE TRANSFERRED TO DOGS, FOWI.S, AND PEBBLES. 1099

“Tuh Mu who live outside the western wall of the city, and fasten
“it to the bow of your boat’. Wei Shu obtained a spotted dog
“ from those people, instead of a white one. ‘Yet this too will do’,
“said Khing; ‘but as, to my great regret, its colour is not pure,
“ some evil of less significance will remain, which, however, will
“ fall upon the domestic animals only ; be no longer concerned
“about anything else’. And Wei Shu departed. When halfway, the
“ dog suddenly began to howl most piteously, as if it were being
“ beaten. He went to see what was the matter, and found the
“ dog dead, having vomited more than a gallon of black blood. On
“ that same night several white geese upon Shu’s outhouse died
“without any apparent cause; but no harm befell his family ”k
And in the writings of Twan Ch‘ing-shih we read, that “ there
“lived in Shuh one Fei, a ‘fowl-master’, whose red eyes had no
“black pupils, a man from Puh. In the first year of the Ch‘ang
“khing period (A. D. 821), when Twan Chfing-shih saw him, he
“ had already passed his seventieth year. He sometimes averted
“ calamity from others, always using a fowl for the purpose. On
“ such occasions a sacrifice was set out in the courtyard ; he
“ fetched a pebble as large as a fowl’s egg out of the river, and told
“ the patient to hold it in his hand ; he then paced about, blew,
“ and cried aloud into the air, on which the fowl whirled round
“ and died, and the pebble broke into four pieces ” *.


1 jK®#® A*,# h
a * w ^ a .rra # .ff y; ^ -B .in 0

« a . ft . # SS ® » i: . in ^ A tr

^ . it ffi B iE . Bt M jfc 4 » . * ^ )T e ± e «

R sR a S 5E . SB ^ S a '

^ if M ^ Isa/I !s»,

ch. 5.


1100


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Literature contains instances of persons who, out of mere devotion,
took the ills of others upon themselves, even sacrificing their lives
thereby. Under the Ming dynasty, "" Mrs. Sii was the wife of Kao
Kin. One day, when her father was ill and dying, a spirit de-
" gcended and said: ‘Somebody must be found, to be his substitute .

“ Sii, on hearing these words, washed herself and put on other clothes ;

^ then she twisted the lapels of her coat into a rope, and strangled
“herself with it. At that moment her father exclaimed: ‘I am rid
“of it’; and they found her body already stiff”.*

Spectres which are prone to injure and torture men, will as a
rule settle within or upon them. Therefore nothing better can be
used for scape-goats than things which bear resemblance to the
victims. As soon as the spectres or their sie have entered such an
object, it is cast away, or destroyed by fire, or preserved, in
order to imprison the spectres for a time, or even beaten or other-
wise maltreated; in fact, such a substitute delivers the evil to the
mercy of the exorcist. But only those persons who posses a special
capacity of imposing their will on spectres can do such dangerous
work without imperilling themselves too much.

Such a man was Ts"uen-ts''ing, mentioned in a work of the ninth
century. “This Buddhist monk from Yueh followed the coramand-
“ ments in a most precise manner, and was versed in the sorcery of
“ five schools by means of spirits, subdued and employed by means
“of written charms. In his time there was a tradesman of the*
“ Wang tribe, whose daughter-in-law was infected by sie influences,

“ so that she laughed and wept the whole day, and sometimes
“ madly yelled the whole night. She had been in that condition
“ for several years, when he called in Ts'iien-tsfing to treat her.

“ The monk made a puppet of twisted straw more than a foot in
“length, dressed it in multicoloured stuff, put up an altar, and
“placed the puppet upon it; and having belaboured it for a time
“ with spells, it began to sue for its life with a hiccoughing voice.

“ Ts^'uen-ts^'ing asked it what spectre it was, and whence it came,

“ adding that it ought to answer clearly and distinctly, for, if it told

MS. K i

Sung-yang him chi

^ Memoirs concerning the Sung-yang District, in Cliehkiang;

quoted in T S, sect. ^ ch. 36.


SPECTRES MAY BE DRIVEN INTO PUPPETS AND IMPRISONED. 1101

“ an untruth, he would beat it to dust. On this the spectre made
“ the following confession:

“‘I am a siao spectre (see page 498); some years ago, in spring,
“ 1 perceived this lady before the temple of the emperor Yii, and
“ settled upon her, so that whenever she moved or rested she
“ tumbled, her souls being perturbed. If you let the puppet go, I must
“ pass beyond the borders and never again venture near any spot
“where smoke of the fires of men is seen’. But Ts'iien-tsfing said:
“‘This is all spectres’ talk; it is not good to set it free’. And he
“ laid down an earthen jar beside the straw man, and whipped the
“latter so that it crept into the jar, crying iu iu; he then folded
“ a strip of paper over the mouth of the jar, wrote a charm and
“ a seal in vermilion ink on the strip, and closed the mouth with
“ cement of six ingredients ’ ; and finally he buried it in a mulberry
“ grove, telling the inmates of the house to leave it untouched. On
“ the same day the woman recovered.

“ Five years after this event the infantry and cavalry of Liu
“ Han-hung marched through that region, putting the whole po-
“ pulation to flight. The soldiery then perceived the spot with the
“ buried jar, and surmising there might be something hidden in it,

“ they unearthed it and knocked it to pieces ; but all they saw was
“ a pheasant which burst out of it and took shelter among the
“ branches of the mulberries. Flapping its wings, it cried with a
“ human voice ; ‘ Imprisoned by that Buddhist monk, I now be-
“ hold the sunlight’. At that time Tsiien-tsfing had already departed
“ to the next world ”. ^


1 A magical mixture, containing one dose from six ingredients of different taste,
besides some other things.

2 This may, I think, have occurred some time between A. D. 879 and 886.


1102


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Should the spirit of evil be the disembodied soul of a man, a
portrait of this man may be belaboured most effectually with the same
object. “The daughter of Chang, prefect of Shang-teh, was engaged
“ to be married to a son of the Cheu family, but illness brought
“ her to the grave when she was no more than seventeen. This
“ Cheu then espoused a daughter of one Wang, who was about
“ the same age. The marriage was arranged, but before the date
“ of the consummation was selected, Wang’s daughter was struck
“ by evil. Beating her forehead with her hands, she exclaimed :
“ ‘ I am the fourth of the Chang sisters, and who are you that robs me
“of my bridegroom?’ Young Cheu was apprised of the matter, and
“ informed the prefect. The consort of this grandee, wont to main-
“ tain strict order in her home, was informed also, and, flushed
“ with anger, suspended the painted portrait of her deceased daughter
“on the wall, and proceeded to rebuke it in these terms: ‘You were
“ engaged to be married to Cheu, but you died before the consum-
“mation; it was then quite in harmony with the established rules
“ of life that Cheu should contract another marriage ; why then do
“you visit Wang’s daughter and inflict evil on her? what impudence
“ is this ! ’ And this severe rebuke finished, she broke a branch
“ from a peachtree and soundly thrashed the portrait ; but ere she
“ had dealt it many blows, young Cheu appeared outside the gate
“ running in haste, to sue for mercy. Asked to explain himself, he
“said: ‘Wang’s daughter says, that the fourth of the sisters Chang
“ has left her body, yelling for pain, and she bade me to go to
“her mother and tell it; here I am, to do so’. The daughter of
“ Wang completely recovered’’. *


A s >t> 1 . « ^ « B . a 58 pg m . ft w A


EVIL MAT BE DEVOLVED FROM MEN ON PUPPETS.


1103


The “surrogates” or “substitutes” which the people in Amoy
preferably use for this mode of pxorcism, are the small foe sin of
bamboo splint and paper, of which we spoke on page 920, stating
that they are also used in sorcery. They are actually objets of daily
use, therefore always at hand for sale in the same shops where
counterfeit paper money and other articles for the dead and gods
are made and sold. The fair sex in particular makes lavish use of.
them. Whenever any member of the family is ailing or has suffered
any ill, or is believed to be under some impending danger, in short,
when hfe is under any sie influences, such a puppet is sent for
and passed all over him, while an appropriate spell causes it to
absorb the sie; and thereupon it is burned, in order to destroy
or dispel the evil. As an instance we may mention the case of
any one who has fallen into the water and has been drawn out
in time, so that the influenc6s of the water-spectres, which had
him in their clutches, have to be removed, and thus a repetition of the
accident prevented. Or it may be a case of a child who has tumbled
into an open privy-pit for common use in the street. The spell
recited while moving the puppet is generally of the following tenor:
kao tsing .effing ing, kao ao tsidh kao lao hlo lao ; kao tso ni-ni
ho, kao iu thg he-siu; ho un Idi, p^di Un foe ’ : “ This contact (of
the substitute) with the front of the body brings purity and
prosperity, and the contact with the back gives power to eat
(i. e. to live) till an old, old, old age; the contact with the left side
establishes well-being for years and years, and the contact with the
right side bestows longevity ; happy fate, come ! ill fate, be transferred
to the substitute!” The substitute is then burned, preferably near
the spot where the accident occurred; and if great carefulness is


a « . » ft: 5E . ja ® i 0

Tsze puh yu^ ch. 23.


1104


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


observed, a pail of water is fetched to wash the ashes away.
Moreover, in the case of a child, the barber is told to shave its
head quite clean ; and in the case of an adult a small piece of the
scalp is laid bare with the razor, to provide an outlet for the sie.

We have already noted elsewhere (Bk I, p. 100), that evil influen-
ces emanating from a deceased person whose body is interred on
a day which is not declared by the almanac as suited for a burial,
are transferred to cockroaches, bugs or other insects, placed in the
grave for that purpose. In many such cases, wooden or paper images
of men are used instead of such vermin, being, according to many,
decidedly more effectual. If in a family there are frequent cases of
illness, or prosperity wanes, or pigs and fowls languish, all because,
as experts in geomancy and soothsaying declare, the house stands
under evil influence or in wrong geomantic conditions, or was
built or repaired in an unsuitable time — then it is warmly recom-
mended to make somewhere close by, in a spot carefully calculated
by a geomancer or diviner, a pit of a well-chosen depth, and
put therein one or more foe sin-, over these the water must be
poured with which the members of the family have washed them-
selves; and the demoniacal influences, by which the family was
infected, having thus been transferred to the substitutes, the pit
must be filled with earth, after a preventive charm has been put
into it. Experts assert, that it is in many cases preferable to use
rats or mice as substitutes, or to suspend these animals on the
house-wall or anywhere close by.

It stands to reason, that where the belief in the usefulness of
substitutes is strong, all kinds of substitutional things may be used
with excellent effect. It is e. g. an old rescript, occurring as early
as the writings of the great Sun Sze-moh, that when a child has
convulsions in consequence of “collision with extraneous influences”
(see p. 695), besides cauterizing it in some places, a ball of flour,
made according to a certain method, should be spat upon, and the
evil be charmed into it by means of this spell : “ I rub the father
“ of the house, 1 rub the mother of the family, I rub the child of
“ this home ; extraneous influences which might afflict this child,
“ follow me ! Pien-tshoh, the first of physicians, was excellent, but
“not so excellent as good spittle”*. While these words are being pro-


1


EVIL MAT BE TllANSPERRED TO SLABS OF STONE.


1105


nounced, the ball is rubbed on the arms and legs of the baby, its
breast and its navel, and thrown away on the road. This treatment is,
of course, to be repeated again and again, until the patient is better.

Substitutes may do excellent service even for the protection of
whole houses. A stone slab, not uncommonly of a large size, on
which are carved the characters , “ the stone dares to bear

or withstand”, is often seen in China opposite the entrance of a
street or alley which opens into another, standing there for the
protection of the house which is situated behind it, against the
sie or shah which at all times may emerge from that street or
alley, especially if this is long or straight, thus allowing the evil
to come out of it unhindered and impetuously. Such a stone is
also generally erected by direction of geomancers, in whatever spots
dangers are to be averted and dangerous situations corrected.
Its power is in some cases considerably enhanced by a spectre-
devouring tiger’s head or some other exorcising figure, carved upon
it. Not uncommonly the characters ^ |J[|, “Mount T^ai”, are to
the same purpose prefixed to the inscription, this famous peak in
Shantung being one of the main divine protectors of this earth ;
the inscription in this case means, “this rock of Mount T'ai dares
to take this upon itself”.

The use of these stones may be old. Some scholars whom I
consulted connected them readily with a passage in the writing of
Mencius, who is stated to have said to a prince, that a man who
brandishes his sword with hashing eyes and exclaims ^ ^ ^
fast. “who of those people there dares withstand me?” ^
only shows the valour of an ordinary man; — indeed, those six
characters may equally well signify “ it is I by whom that evil will
be borne”. The stones then may represent men brandishing spectre-
dispelling swords; and indeed we read of an author by whom the
following lines were written: conclude that the people in Wu,

“ who always erect sione men where streets and lanes open straight
“ opposite their houses, or set up there slabs of stone inscribed with
“"this stone dares to bear’, by way of entrusting to them the execu-
“ tion of their will to avert evil, have good reasons for so doing”


1 Section ^ , II.

yun fuy ch. 22 II, 1. 152.


70


1106


THE WAR AUAINST SPECTRES.


There are, however, authors who derive the origin of such stones
from another club-brandishing hero, whose name was Shih Kan-tang
^ ^ , which exactly corresponds to the inscription on those

stones. “According to the Hien yih, Kan-tang, whose tribal name
“ was Shih, was a man who lived during the period of the Five
“ Dynasties. Liu Chi-yuen, Governor of the head quarters of Kao
“ Tsu of the house of Tsin (936 — 943), ordered the brave warrior
“ Shih Kan-tang to hide an iron club within his sleeve and escort
“ the said emperor ; and while the latter was engaged in an inter-
“ view with (his brother-in-law) the emperor Min (of the later T^ang
“ dynasty), Kan-tang sacrificed his life in a fight in which he killed
“ Min’s attendants. Hence those stones, erected by the people
“ nowadays outside house doors ” That interview' took place on
the road after Min had been put to flight by a rebellious adoptive
brother; it entailed his capture, and the slaughter of between fifty
and a hundred of his followers. This incident is related in the
New History of the Five Dynasties (ch. 8, 1. 2), and in the Old
(ch. 45, 1. 9); but no Shih Kan-tang is mentioned there.


^ , si ± 5 * ® I* « tt # » ffl . « ®s 16- a • .
tiSlJE. 4- A ^ P'1 ^ 5

. T S, section , ch. 46.


CHAPTER XVII.


DEMONOLATRY.

As we have demonstrated principally in Chapter XV of Part I
of this Book, kwei or spectres may occasionally be favourably
disposed towards man, and, when in this condition, exercise a
beneficent influence upon his fate, thus actually working as shen
or good spirits. There is then sufficient reason to conciliate, appease
and propitiate, by worship and sacrifices, the kwei as well as the
shen. Demonolatry must be specially natural to the Chinese, seeing
that this people has ever been wont to worship and honour the
souls of the dead, very many of whom occasionally indulge in
vengefulness and mischief. No doubt, besides sacrifices, it always
consisted in humble invocations or prayers, which, dictated by fear
or self-interest and devoid of piety, were nothing better than
polite spells, differing from ordinary exorcising spells in tenor and
tune, but not in fundamental meaning.

We have a faint indication of the existence of Demonolatry in
the days of Confucius in the saying of this sage, that it is wise to

worship the kwei and the shen, all the while keeping them at

a distance (see p. 411). At the no processions, celebrated in ancient
China for the expulsion of spectres, victims were, as we have seen

on page 973, cut into pieces at the city gates. Kao Yiu in the

second or third century wrote, “ that such dissections of dogs and
“ sheep served to suppress evil, in order that the influence of Wood
“(the Element specially affected by the spring) might pervade
“everything”^. The practice may therefore have been a sacrifice to
the spectres just then driven out; yet the possibility is not excluded
that it was presented to certain unmentioned shen. A quite posit-
ive testimony of the presentation of sacrifices to evil spirits under
the Han dynasty is afforded by Wang Ch'ung, who in his refuta-

edition of the Li hi, ch. ^1, 1. 46.


1108


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


tion of exorcism asserts that it was usual in his days to combine
exorcism with sacrifices (see page 935). We may also point here
to the following lines in a biography of Lwan Pa Governor of
Yii-chang in the second century of our era : “ In that dominion
“ were many apparitions of spectres of hills and streams, and the
“ common people wasted their possessions in invoking them and
“ praying to them. Pa, who possessed Taoist magic wherewith to
“ dominate spectres and spirits, demolished the sacrificial buildings,

“ and arrested and arraigned the wicked deceivers (of the people) ;

“ and the result was that those apparitions disappeared. The people
“ were at first in great fear, but in the end they were contented. ” *

The reader has found in our work a few instances which suggest
that Demonolatry must have been steadily a constituent part of
religious life. At the end of the eighth century or the beginning
of the ninth, food and drink were sacrificed on several nights by ’
linperial order to spectres which provoked a great panic among the
people (Bk II, p. 477). In 1378, the founder of the Ming dynasty
sent a delegate to present in his august name sacrifices to spectres
which infested a part of Kiangsi, and to order them kindly to
stop their iniquities (page 479); and the same monarch repeated
the process nineteen years later, when a spectre-panic was rife in
the same region (page 481). To this day, mock-money is burned for
spectres in cases of death when the coffin is fetched from the shop
(Bk I, page 88), and mock-money is scattered among them during
funeral processions. We may then be pretty sure that the people
will be always ready to offer paper and eatables to spectres whenever
they believe them to infest their homes’ and premises.

They do so especially when spectres are causing illness. In cases
of fever, against which China, for lack of proper medicines, is so
helpless, and even totally desperate should it be intermittent, sacri-
fices are offered according to certain methods, a knowledge of which
is conveyed by cheap handbooks in various editions, compilations
from which illiterate men and women may derive some element-
ary schooling, beside useful hints on matters of religion, divination.


1 ^ Q.

the Later Han Dynasty, ch. 87, 1. 3.


SPECTRES OF ILLNESS FOR EACH DAY OF THE MONTH. 1109


Fig. 16.


exorcism, etc. Fuhkien editions give a series of thirty prescriptions,
each for one and the same day in every month. Every prescription
states, that if on the day for which it is written
any one catches fever combined with head-ache,
vomiting, diarrhoea, debility, loss of appetite, or
other such symptoms ; or if he cries and talks
incessantly and incoherently; or if a baby, apart
from such complaints, should labour under con-
vulsions, it is certain that a spirit of a stated
class or kind, having been ofiFended and irritated,
is the cause of it, or has sent a spectre to cause
the illness. Hence, the prescription goes on to say,
that spirit should be conciliated by means of some
mock-money, which is to be burned at the door,
or at so many paces from the house, or in such
and such a direction; on some days it is even
necessary to set down in the same spot some cooked
rice, with spirituous liquor and even three sorts
of meat. Together with the mock-money a paper
“substitute’’ (see p. 1103) must be burned, as also
a charm on yellow paper, a model for which is
attached to each prescription; this charm must be
inscribed with the name of the god who rules the day to which the
prescription applies, which name is to this end carefully stated in
the latter. Finally, as an integral part of the cure, the patient
should wear on his body the powerful universal
charm depicted in Fig. 16.

It is self-evident that the “substitute” must have
been laid on the patient beforehand, and rubbed and
passed over him while a spell was pronounced, so
that ' the influences of the spectre were absorbed by
it, and its annihilation by fire may dispel or destroy
them (cf. page 1103). It is clear also that the
charm which is burned expresses an explicit order
of the god who rules that day, for the destruction
of the spectre. As a month has twenty-nine or
thirty days, there are thirty charms; all bear the
character m or “order” (see p. 1035) above some
combinations of lines or strokes denoting in the main destruction
of spectres. Fig. 17 is one of the series.

The malignant spirits which are mentioned in the thirty pre-


Universal charm.


Yig. 17.


1110


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


scriptions, form a curious list which is apparently a tissue of arbi-
trary inventions. This explains also the fact that in the various
editions the names are differently distributed over the prescriptions,
and some editions give names not mentioned in the others. We
have found principally the following ;

1- domestic shen of the earth or the ground.

shen of the earth which wander in the streets.
3. staff-bearing ladies of the earth or the ground,

murderous influences of the earth.

5. ^ celestial star-spirits on galopping horses (Bk I,
p. 244).

6. shen of wood or vegetation.

7. shen of metal.

8. shen of fire.

9. shen of water.

10. shen of the Loh river.

11. shen of wells.

12. family-spirits upon whom nobody bestows care.

13. , kwei of family-relations by blood.

14. boys who died young.

15. k wei of women unjustly killed.

16. A ^ 5|c M ^ ^ w e i of persons unburied for many years.

f7. kwei of old women.

18 k wei led on by a family-spirit.

19. spectral soldiers.

20. ^ ^ > ladies who roam about at theatricals.

21. wandering wet nurses.

22. wet nurses for the palace.

23. , matrons who arouse burning fevers.

24. matrons of cholera.

§jB.> matrons of conflagrations.

^ ^ moving pearls matrons (?)
breathless matrons.


SACRIFICES OFFERED TO SPECTRES OF THE GROUND. 1111


28. ^ ^ matrons of the blue capital.

29- pomegranate kwei.

30. yellow-headed kwei.

It is evident from this list that, as well as kwei, many mem-
bers of the class of shen are prone to encroach upon human
felicity, so that we have here a proof of the faintness of the line
of demarcation between spectres and gods. We cannot feel surprised
to find in the list the spectres of disease which are assimilated
with the five Elements (see pp. .707 s§’^), and among them the
irritable, dangerous demons of the soil or earth (pp. 536 In
Amoy, mothers as a rule readily believe their children, who are
ailing or cry inordinately, to be under the influence of such earth-
spirits, and therefore lose no time in promising sacrifices to the
same, to be offered on the second and sixteenth days of every
month, either for a stipulated time, or until the children are restored
to health. Such conciliation was in fashion in the first century
of our era, for we read in Wang Ch'ung’s writings, “when
“ among the people a house or dwelling is repaired, or the earth
“ is dug up, then, on the works being finished, they reconcile the
“ spirits of the soil and sue for pardon, calling this ‘ reconciliation
“of the earth’. They make dolls of clay representing spectres, and
“ order a wu-chuh to entertain the same and conciliate in this
“ way the spirits of the soil ; and when this sacrifice is finished,
“ they feel relieved and merry, saying that now, as the spirits are
“ reconciled and pardon has been sued for, misfortune is averted ”. ^

The importance attached in early Chinese times to sacrifices to
spirits of the ground is evidenced by the following curious notice,
relating to the emperor Ming * of the Sung dynasty, who lived
from A. D. 439 to 472. “In the last year of his reign he gave
“ so much heed to spectres and gods, that he avoided many terms
“ in speaking and writing. Expressions which denoted misfortune,
“ruin or mourning, or which merely seemed to do so and were
“ therefore better avoided, were several hundreds and thousands in
“ number, and persons who sinned by using them might be sure

^ ^ . L,m has, 2b, ^ ^ a . 2 .


1112


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ to incur punishment and even the penalty of death. The compo-
“nent on the side of ^ was changed into because that

“character resembled |jg, misfortune. The Siien-yang §ate was
“generally called among the people the White gate, but as the
“ emperor considered this term to be infelicitous it was strictly
“ tabooed. His Chancellor Kiang Mih once by mistake violated this
“ taboo ; the emperor changed colour and exclaimed ‘ You shall
“now whitewash the gate of your own house’; and though Kiang
“ Mih, his forehead on the ground, sued for pardon, a long time
“ elapsed before the punishment was remitted. Within and without
“ the capital everybody lived in constant fear of coming into collision
“ (with something tabooed), and nobody felt himself safe. Within
“ the Palace the taboo was severer than anywhere else ; no couch
“ or bed might be shifted there from its place, no wall attended
“ to, without a sacrifice being offered previously to the spirits
“ of the earth, for which ceremony scholars had to compose sacri-
“ ficial prayers just as at official sacrifices of the highest class”. *

It is especially the members of the fair sex who, on behalf of
themselves, their children, and other relations, practice the demono-
latrous medical method which we have described. Untaught, as
they generally are, they cannot decipher the thirty prescriptions;
but merely going to the paper money shop, they will find the
shopkeeper there ready at any moment to open the handbook and read
for them the prescription of the day, and then sell to them the pre-
scribed quantity of paper money with the ‘substitute’. Returning home,
the woman offers a burning incense-stick to her house-gods, informs
them of the case, and invokes their aid ; and having rubbed or
passed the substitute over the patient, she goes out to execute the


1 No doubt because white denotes the west or the region of setting sunlight,
as also autumn, the season of dying nature.

Books of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 8, 1. 19.


SACRIFICES TO SPECTRES WHICH CAUSE' ILLNESS.


1113


prescription. On the spot assigned by the latter, she sets down the
sacrificial articles, and with incense-sticks in her hands prays the spectre
to accept the paper -and food and no longer molest the patient;
and in many cases she adds the promise to offer it a further amount
after his restoration to health. Should no recovery follow, it is
evident that the spectre is an unruly being, disobedient to the Tao
or course of Time which is so neatly expressed by the thirty days
for which the prescriptions are assigned ; and it becomes then neces-
sary that the shen who rules the day in question, be prevailed
upon to compel that being to obedience or catch it. This is easily
done by means of a good magical charm, bought from a priest, and
burned while going through the whole ceremony a second time.

In some handbooks I have found this demonolatrous medical
treatment in a more elaborate form, in so far that there are given
sixty prescriptions, each of which is assigned for one day in every
sexagenary cycle of days, and that the number of disease-spirits
is increased in proportion. The method bears a Taoist character,
being adapted to the course of Time, which actually is the Tao
or course of the Universe. Its invention is generally ascribed to
Chang Tao-ling, whose portrait, in fact, the publishers of the hand-
books are wont to depict at the head of the series of prescriptions.
The connection of that illustrious Taoist name with the method
may, however, be a pious fraud. Yet it seems to be quite true
that the cure of patients by sacrificing to demons which make them
ill is as old as the T'^ang dynasty, as otherwise the following nar-
rative would certainly not be found in a book of that epoch :

“In the first year of the T'ai h wo period of the 'Fang dynasty
“ (A.D. 827), the Board-chancellor Poh Hing-kien was very drunk,
“ and dreamt that two men took him through the Off un-ming
“gate to a new grave; and then, as the morning dawned, they
“ returned home, and by the city gate came to a shop where steamed
“ cakes and pastry were made. He had a very good appetite, and
“ was just saying so to his two companions, when the shopkeeper’s
“ wife appeared with a baby in her arms. The two men gave
“ him a small pellet of clay, telling him to throw it at the baby ;
“ he did so, and the baby was seized with fright and began to cry
“ most bitterly and pitifully. ‘ My child is struck by evil ’, the
“ shopwoman said, and she sent somebody for a female w u. This
“ priestess burned incense, strummed her lute, called her spirit, and
“said: ‘Nothing is the matter, except that some small wang-liang
“ have injured it; the baby has encountered three persons, one


1114


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ of whom is the soul of a living man ^ in search of wine and food ;
“ if you want them to do no harm, you must forthwith make some
“ pastry, fetch liquor, and set it out hereabouts The w u then
“ made some polite bows and invited those beings ; the two men
“ with Hing-kien were seated, and when they had eaten their fill
“ and rose, the baby was as calm as before. When Hing-kien awoke,
“he was so horrified that after ten days he died”. ^

Since the line of demarcation between shen and kwei is so
faint in China, Demonolatry may be said to embrace there also
the invocation and sacrificial worship of hundreds, nay thousands
of images standing in temples as servants and retainers, underlings
and lictors of the gods and goddesses to whom those buildings are
dedicated. They are particularly numerous in the temples of Walls
and Moats and in those of the Eastern Mountain, where, as we
have seen on page 906, they are also often, by means of sacrifice,
bribed by victims of wrong to inflict injury.

Moreover, since the world of spectres is composed to a large
extent of souls of the dead, Demonolatry also is congruent with
the widespread custom of feeding and conciliating enormous hosts of
ghosts which, having no descendants of their own to take care of
them, prowl about hungry, cold and destitute, and therefore are
very apt to become dangerous food-extorting spectres such as those
to which we have devoted some attention on pp. 794 sqq. Festive
sacrifices are celebrated on behalt of these orphan souls, and even
have a place in the State Religion.


1 Note that, while dreaming, Poll Hing-kien’s soul was outside his body,

- Itiiif ^ — A?l ttl

^ ft tt # . « ffl ® . :)if -e- - . A « .ft JS

a . tf ffl 4p * t li 2 , a « @ p* ra * . jifi « 0 .
iS|0. « t. iP = A. —

, Strange Cases of Spiritual Power, a work unknown to me quoted in

K K, ch. 283.


WORSHIP PAID TO SPECTRES OP HTSTERICS.


1115


The prevalence of Demonolatry is evidenced also by the fact that
fabulists of modern times often mention it. Sui Yuen tells of a
spectre in Hang-cheu, which from the top of a honorary gate, where
it nestled, used to tickle the heads of passers-by with a long string
of paper money, with the result that, on coming home, they were
laid up with illness and had to be cured by means of prayers, and
by sacrifices presented in the open field. Thus that spectre could
often joyfully drink and eat its fill. One day, a man who passed
underneath with a string of copper coins across his shoulder, was
thus touched ; the contact caused the spectre’s string of paper money
to catch fire and burn up without the man perceiving it, and the
spectre tumbled down from its high seat and, converted into black
vapour, disappeared for ever k

The same author asserts, that Demonolatry is much indulged in
in Kwangsi province to avert the spirit of a devilish beau which
causes female hysterics. “ In the villages of the Nan-ning department
“ in Kwangsi they are wont to worship the spirit of Vice-President
“ Six. This being inflicts evil on all who speak of it or come into
“ collision with it. Tt makes a speciality of bewitching girls, the
“ beauties among whom are often possessed by it. Those whom it
“ molests sacrifice a parcel of paper money to it at noon or at night,
“ and a dish of rice, while two or three musicians play; in this
“ way it is dismissed into the open, so that it departs and goes
“ elsewhere. No evening passes without people thus dismissing that
“Vice-President Six” After these preliminary statements, Sui Yuen
tells a story of a maid who was visited by the bewitching beau
in her bedroom; he would not even leave this place to partake
of the food sacrificed to him by her parents. Some time after,
another Vice-President Six entered the room, and began with the
first one so lively a quarrel for the lady that the presentation of
another sacrifice was necessary to pacify him too. The spectral Don
Juan is, according to prevailing opinion, one Chang Ch^ang-tsung k


i Tsze puh yii, ch. 8.

puh i/M, ch. 19.


1116


THK WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


a favourite of the empress Wu of the T%ng dynasty, who endowed
him with the high dignity of Vice-President of a Board ^ and
invested him with the vassalage of Yeh His father Chang Hing-
ch^'ing ^ was a reputed Minister, of State, and many of his bro-
thers, among whom he was the sixth, were in high favour with
the empress. With a great number of other grandees he was slain
and beheaded at the court revolution of A.D, 705, by which Wu
Jost her throne and Chung Tsung ^ ascended it. ^

If spectres are sacrificed to and worshipped on a large scale, they
actually are placed on a par with shen or gods. They may even
be formally promoted to divine rank, for any spirit may be invested
by higher gods and, in the highest instance, by the God of Heaven
with a post or function in the administration of the Universe. A case
of such promotion, conveyed to the knowledge of mankind by means
of dreams, we have seen mentioned by an author on page 527.

No doubt the number of demons worshipped as gods is large in
China. A noteworthy instance are the so-called Wu T^^ung®’ or
Five Intelligences, ranked (see page 512) by Li Shi-chen with the
mountain-spectres. They are also known as the Wu T^ung shen^.
Five Intelligent Gods, or the Wu T^ung sien®. Five Intelligent
Immortals, and as the Wu Shing^ the Five Saints. Their worship
prevails in particular in Kiangsu, Chehkiang and Fuhkien, where
their images receive worship and sacrifice in many temples of
other gods, or in special chapels and shrines erected for them. Not
seldom such an image has that of a consort at its right side. Those
gods not infrequently misconduct themselves like sly animal-demons,
for they are prone to intrude into human dwellings in the shape
of seductive voun^ men, in order to entice female beauties into sexual
liberties. They are so powerful that the inmates have not the courage
to fight and exorcise them ; yet there are tales of their having been
shot with arrows, and leaving on the spot a dead ass or pig. They
appear with beautiful youths or pages in their suites. Like moun-
tain-spectres, they steal things from houses which they visit, and
commit arson and other mischief.

Their worship is mentioned in books of the Sung dynasty, but
its origin is clouded in mystery. It has been sought, but perhaps


> #15 2 1^, in the present Honan. 3

5 Old Books of the T'^ang Dynasty, chapter 78, Ih 14 seq. New Books, ch. 104,
11. 12 seq.

0 5 :®. 7


8


9


THE FIVE SO-CALLED INTELLIGENT GODS.


1117


without good reasons, in the five or six intelligences which Buddhism
ascribes to saints who are advanced as far as the gates of Nirvana.
Sui Yuen devotes the following tale to them, from which we may
learn something of their worship :

“The son of one Ch'en Yao-fen of Kiang-ning (Nanking) was a
“ naughty fellov/. Taking a stroll to the buddhist P'u-tsi monastery,
“ he saw that the seats of the Five Intelligent Gods, worshipped
“ in that building, were placed above that of Kwan-ti. Irritated at
“ this lack of politeness with regard to the latter, he called the
“ monks, rebuked them, and bade them place the Intelligences
“ in the inferior position ; and the visitors and witnesses unanimously
“ declared that he . was right. Ch'en, proud and satisfied of what
“ he had done, came home that evening, and found the five spirits
“ standing at his door. They threw him to the ground and
“ wildly cried : ‘We the Five Intelligences are high kings who
“ enjoyed among men bloody food for a long time, and now our
“fate has taken so bad a turn. We have been in collision with
“ Lao-t'ang, the provincial Governor of Kiangsu, and with Siao-yin,
“ the Governor General of the two Kiang, who have punished us
“ and driven us away (by destroying our temples and images) ; but
“ these two were men of high position, and besides they were
“ching, so that we could not help tolerating it; but you, a com-
“ mon fellow, presume to behave as if you too were a powerful
“child of fortune; we cannot pardon this!’ Yao-fen’s family prostrat-
“ ed themselves around the spot, prepared a sacrifice of three kinds
“ of meat and paper money, and engaged Buddhist priests to pray
“and sacrifice; but nothing could save him; he expired”.^


T^ze puh j/H, ch. 8.


CHAPTER XVIII.


MISCELLANEPUS PRACTICES AGAINST SPECTRAL EVIL.

Our exposition of the Chinese system of Exorcising Magic has
pointed out that this system is erected on the principle that innu-
merable legions* of spectres, prone to evil, live in the machine of
the World, and that their existence is even an universal law, those
legions being the Yin itself, which is one of the two great powers
of which the Tao or Order of the World consists. This premise
necessarily leads to the conclusion that spectres are naturally frustrat-
ed or destroyed by the other power, the Yang, and its constituent
or shen. But this great standard dogma affords no key to the
explanation of exorcism of all sorts which Chinese intellect has

invented, people having always been guided also by childish wit,

rarely or never asking for reason or logic, and consequently led
into charlatanism transmitted from age to age, even by books, and
revealing little more or little better than gross credulity, from

the web of which even the educated class has never extricated
itself.

This is equivalent to saying, that there is within the domain

of Exorcising Magic much, very much, which defies explanation.
How, for instance, to account for the fact that, according to the
narrative quoted on page 784 and the customs mentioned in Book I
on pp. 107 seq. and page 643, salt is devil-expelling? The wu-ist
priesthood, as we shall see in Part V, for this reason use it very
often, mostly in a mixture with rice. A great healing power, too,
is ascribed to salt, so that it enters into the composition of a great
many medical prescriptions, some of which we find especially
designed for so-called spectre-blows, strokes with evil, corpse-disease,
and other complaints ascribed to evil spirits.

It seems impossible also to explain why, as we have read on
page 443, the presence of a bluish or grey cow may cure patients
who are harrassed by violent nightmare, or raving and unconscious


VARIOUS PRACTICES AGAINST SPECTRES. 1119

under the influence of possession. This idea may have connection
with a prescription of Koh Hung to this effect; “In cases of sudden
“nightmare, when the sufferer does not awake, take the hoof of a
“cow or a horse, and let it pass downward over him. Sudden death
“(unconsciousness) may also be cured in this way. A grey cow (or
“its hoof?) is especially efficacious”.^

And the question why a man, when out in the dark, should
ward off spectres by grasping his own hand with the other, or, in
order to kill them, should grind his teeth, we must likewise leave
in its own obscurity. Nor can we guess why spectres can be caught
by burning an owl of a certain species. “The cat’s head hawk is
“a kind of hawk with a head like that of a cat. Its flesh is very
“greasy; if it is burned, spectres will come near, and therefore
“magicians use it to catch spectres” ^ Thus wrote a notable author
in the sixteenth century in a large cyclopaedia of considerable renown.

No doubt the list of unexplainable exorcising expedients may be
drawn out to a very great length. A long list certainly might be
made also of exorcising practices and things the explanation of which
is easy. That old bronzes, and probably also other things of great
age and value, are generally appreciated as devil-expelling, is un-
doubtedly to be ascribed to the circumstance that they have been
in the possession of ancestors, and therefore are imbued with their
shen (cf. p. 1004). And that devils which cause drought may be
rendered harmless by smothering them in dung-pits or privies (pp.
511 and 518) seems so natural that explanation is not wanted.
Quite natural also is the custom of destroying the corpses of per-
sons who are suspected to be such devils (p. 520), since we know
that souls of the dead owe their strength in particular to the bodies
in which they have dwelt, as also to the graves in which those
bodies rest. Hence, of course, the practice of laying vampires or
corpse-spectres by burning their material remains; hence, finally, the
historical instances of people who destroyed corpses in order to rid
themselves of apparitions (cf. p. 449). This method has even been
applied to the carcasses of buried animals suspected of visiting
men in the guise of spectres (p. 622).

o W . Cheu hell pi kih fang, ch. 1, § 5.

RIJ d: ISl ^ ^


1120


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Since spectres can be frightened, it is a natural and common
practice to cure sick people by alarming their indwelling demon. In
many an apothecary’s shop in Amoy I have seen a flat box with
a glass cover, containing a large dried lizard, fastened to the bottom,
or a flying tree-lizard with outspread wings, to be hired by custom-
ers who want to cure sufferers from fever or other complaints,
or women in difficult confinement, by suddenly holding up the box
with the monster before their staring eyes. Some families possess
sueh boxes for the use of themselves and their friends. Big lizards
and flying lizards being scarce in that part of China or perhaps
not living there at all, the boxes are imported from the Philippines,
Indo-China, and other southern countries. In connection with ,this
custom, we may quote the following lines from a book of the
eleventh century : “ In Kwan-chung (now Si-ngan, the capital of
“ Shensi) are no crabs. In the Yuen fung period (A.D. 1078 — 1086)
“ I was in Shensi, and was told that some one in Ts'in-cheu had
“ got a dried crab, which startled the country people because it
“ looked so monstrous. Whenever any member of a famNy was seized
“ with fever, the crab was borrowed and hung above the door,
“ whereupon the patient sometimes recovered. The inference is that
“that animal was not only unknown to men, but also to spectres”. ‘
The brains of geo manners are prolific in exorcising charlatanism.
They, like specialists in general, seek cures for human woe pre-
ferably within the sphere of their own specialty, and consequently
they are always busy removing bad influences from dwellings by
correcting their Fung-shui. We have already stated (p. 1057) that
they use to this end powerful charms, written or painted; but their
activity is by no means confined to this. Should for instance a
mandarin be overburdened with useless work because of an excess
of false accusations lodged by the people, or should he be distressed
at the slowness of his promotion, or by sickness in his family, then
undoubtedly there are revengeful souls at work, belonging to men
who in former days were tortured, condemned and punished
unjustly in that tribunal. To correct this evil, some spirits, distilled
from rice, must be mixed with a prescribed quantity of earth from

Mung khi pih ch. 25.


HOROSCOPES AND HUMAN FATE.


1121


underneath the tribunal and its gate, and this mud be smeared on
the walls of the main hall of the Yamen; and the remainder must
be sprinkled about in the other apartments. And from a block of
granite of a hundred pounds weight four corners must be chipped,
and the pieces buried at the four sides of the building towards
the cardinal- points; and an ounce of a tiger’s bone and cinnamon
must be buried with certain other ingredients under the seat of
the mandarin ; and a mace of cloves, yellow incense and other things
must be burned, and water mixed with the ashes sprinkled abroad.
Temples too may be protected by similar expedients if they are
exposed to evil influences or so-called arrows, shot from roads or
paths which lead to them.

It is, as our readers know, the Tao or Order of the Universe
which affords immunity from evil. That Order is the Course of
Time; and as Time is represented by the sexagenary cycle which
is used by man for counting the years, months, days, and hours,
it actually is these characters which bestow such immunity. Strong
therefore against all attacks of spectral beings stands the man whose
birth, or entry into the Course of the Universe, occurred in a year,
day, month and hour which stood under the beneficent influence of
the Universe, that is, according to the Chinese, which were deno-
minated by four double cyclical characters which were particularly
influenced by the Yang, so that they were “ heavy ”. Such a feli-
citous horoscope, as we have explained on page 919, is the best
safeguard also against spectres of sorcery. A life of virtue in accord-
ance with the Tao tends, of course, to improve and strengthen
the horoscope, while a vicious life is sure to weaken and spoil it.
Men and women of a frail constitution, nervous, timid, liable to
■visions of spectres and strange or monstrous beings, are sure to
possess a “ light ” horoscope, as every doctor, every soothsayer, and
even every intelligent man will forthwith tell; and so are persons
who are frequently ill, sufferers from incurable complaints, and
whatever diseases are especially ascribed to spectres.

Since thus his horoscope actually constitutes any individual’s
natural fate, being a part of the immutable course of Universal
Order, it can by no means be amended if it is “light”. But much
harm can be averted from such an unfortunate by surrounding him
with exorcising objects, by giving him proper amulets to wear and
proper medicines to swallow; and especially- by a more than ordi-
nary care in the selection of auspicious days and hours for the
performance of all his acts of importance. He has, in other terms,

71


1122


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES,


more than any one else to consult and to pay the numerous class
of physicians, exorcists, professors of chronornancy etc. who devote
their lives and intellects to the protection and improvement of
human fate.

Children and babies which are saddled by the Tao with an
unlucky horoscope, and consequently are weak or constantly ailing,
may be protected from worse, and even be cured, in yet another
way. Either of their own initiative, or after sage advice from
members of the family or physicians and soothsayers, the parents
will waste no time in looking out for an opportunity to transfer
the child to a family which lives in a high state of felicity under
the strong protective hand of its household gods and ancestors ; for in
that sphere of blessing their darling is sure to thrive, also because
the spectres, seeing it in the possession of people against whom
they bear no grudge, have no longer any reason for molesting it.
The matter having been properly agreed to on both sides, the child
is taken to the house of the pseudo adoptive parents, or carried in
the arms, should it be too young or too weak to walk. There, be-
fore the domestic altar on the table of which some sacrificial dainties
and a few cups of tea have been placed, it pays homage to the
household gods by kneeling down before their images and knocking its
head on the ground a few times, or, if still in arms, it is moved
as if bowing reverently, and made to join its hands. After this it
repeats the same ceremony before the ancestral tablets. Thus having
humbly put itself under the protection and authority of those
divinities, it places itself in the same reverential way under the
guardianship and tutelage of its new parents. The finishing touch
is given to the matter by a festive meal, the ingredients for which
have been delivered by the real parents.

In most cases the child is now stealthily carried back to its old
home. Henceforth at every new moon and full moon the patronizing
parents send the child some food, to show the spectres that their
parentage is reality; and to the same end the child will for its
whole life repair to their home on their birthdays, to congratulate
them reverently with prostrations and offer them some presents, as
if they were the real authors of its beings.

Should this adoption not have the effect expected, the parents
will try in the same way another family, even repeating the
measure several times. Thus it is that many a person in China
has quite a number of guardian-parents. On the other hand, many
parents are the patrons of more than one child. In Amoy they are


CHILDREN UNDER PATRONAGE OF MEN OR GODS.


1123


called hhoe pe-hu^^ ^tutelar parents”, and such children khbehiw^Q^^
“children in tutelage”. But even repeated adoptions may prove a
failure; In this case, the parents will have recourse to fosterage,
that is to say, they will actually give the child away for a time,
and even for good, even with payment of money for its sustenance.

This radical measure is seldom resorted to unless every other of a
simpler nature has been tried in vain. Much good effect is as a
rule expected in Amoy from dedication of the child to some
divinity whose image is worshipped in a temple or Buddhist
convent, preferably to Buddha, or, much oftener still, to Kwanyin
or Avalokitegvara, the goddess of Mercy, most popular among
mothers as protectress of children. It is the mother or the father,
or both together, who one fine day perform the dedication. This
consists in a sacrificial offering, connected with an invocation to
the effect that his godship will kindly allow the child to live
in a flourishing condition under his protective hand; and it is fol-
lowed by a vow that their child will henceforth, up to a certain
age, sacrifice on the same spot on fixed annual dates or even as
long as life is granted to it, and that it will, moreover, take a
leading part in the celebration of his festivals, and in defraying the

cost of such. From this moment the child is deemed to be a kJioe

kid^9 of the deity. Should this protectorate after a time not answer
expectations, the vow is renewed, and even renewed over and over
again, each time sacrificial articles in greater number or of higher
value being promised. Or the child is dedicated to other temple-
gods who likewise are reputed as possessors of much ling or
divine power.

And yet it is a sad truth that restoration to health may even
then be delayed. This being the case, a new thorough study of
the horoscope may soon lead a soothsayer or physician to the disco-
very that the child has a cli^'ut he e mta^9 ^ or “ destiny to leave its

home”, that is to say, that it must become a Buddhist monk, or

if of the other sex, a nun. It is also frequently the case that such
a revelation is received by mouth of a medium whose body has
been taken possession of by a god, or that it is written down by
him with a rod in sand or bran in the way which we shall describe

1 . Khbe seems to mean temporary ownership, lease, tenancy or

mortgage, obliging the holder of the property to keep the property in the best
possible state.


1124


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


in Part V; or it may be evolved in the brain of some nun who
enjoys the mother’s confidence and friendship. The vow now pledged
before Buddha or Kwanyin is to the effect that the child will
forthwith devote itself to the life of holiness in the Church of which
they are the high patron saints. The spectres, thus intimidated more
than ever, cannot help keeping a respectful distance now. The child’s
head is shaved totally bald like that of a real monk or nun, and
it is made to wear the grey gown which is the everyday clerical
attire, so that it always appears quite a monk or nun in miniature.

This vow seems to imply a promise that the child will at the
proper time be delivered to the priesthood, in order to be adopted
and educated for the clerical profession by one of its members.
But this point is never thought of. No punishment can be incurred
for that, for how could a merciful Buddha and Kwanyin possibly
conceive a grudge against the man who simply pledged his vow
for the sake of thwarting spectres by means of godly power, which
indeed exists in the Universal System for no other purpose but to be
wisely taken advantage of? Besides, deities are very busy and therefore
liable to forget vows which are pledged to them and, from their point
of view, are of no great value. Prudent parents, however, prefer to
make quite sure, and therefore will clearly state in their vow that
the boy will be a priest till his sixteenth year, this age being the
limit beyond which, according to the laws of the empire, nobody
may embrace the ecclesiastical state. When then he has reached his
sixteenth year, his parents repair with him to the image of the saint, to
inform it that the vow has elapsed. ^ Thankfully they set out a
sacrifice before it, which the son presents by making prostrations
and knocking his forehead against the groufid; and in conclusion
he lays aside the clerical dress, and henceforth allows his hair to
grow like that of every layman.


CHAPTER XIX.


USE AND DISUSE OF NAMES.

On page 165 we have translated a tale, professedly handed down
from the Han dynasty, which tells of a famous were-tiger who
turned tail and ran off whenever his name was pronounced. We
have also, on pp. 180 and 568, mentioned a man-tiger and a
were-wolf of a later time, driven away by the same expedient. And
on pp. 501 and 601 we have seen that Koh Hung in the fourth
century of our era implicitly recommended to travellers the pro-
nunciation of the names of hill-spectres as a sovereign protection
against their attacks and tricks, and, moreover, taught how to
discover from the pseudonyms under which those spectres were
prone to conceal themselves, to which species of animals of the
duodecimal cycle they belonged, and that this knowledge might
afford protection against them. But this celebrated Taoist did more
useful work in this direction. “Thb next thing of importance”, he
wrote, “is writings about spectres. Should you know the names of
“the spectres which live under the sky, and the Poh tseh fu and
“ the Kiu ting hi, then the spectral hordes will all retire spontane-
“ ously. ” ^ And felicity being the natural consequence of removal of
evil, he declared; “If you see a messenger on the land or the water,
“his name is Sze-kih; by calling aloud this name, felicity is pro-
“ duced. And if you perceive on the land a large snake wearing
“a crown or cap, its name is Shing-hiang; call this aloud, and
“happiness will be the result.”*

We thus learn that there existed in Koh Hung’s time writings


i® . Pao P^oh-tsze^ sect. 17, ^ W' ■

el loc. cit.


1126


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


which acquainted man with spectres and their names, with the
object of affording protection from those beings. About the Poh
iseh fu we ‘have said a few words on page 510. The Kiu ting hi
or Description of the Nine Tripods apparently likewise was a
book on spectres, for we read in the Tso cPicen that “Wang Sun-
“man', being sent with presents to the prince of Ch'u, was asked
“ by him about the size and weight of the tripods, and replied :

“ ‘Anciently, when the Hia dynasty was in the possession of virtue,
“the far-away countries made pictures of beings and sent. metal as
“tribute, and the nine Governors cast tripods of that metal with por-
“ traits of those beings thereon. The hundreds of beings being completely
“depicted in this way, the people were acquainted with the shen
“and with evil beings; consequently, when they moved among
“ the rivers and meres, hills and forests, they did not fall in with
“any injurious things; no ch'i, no mei, no wang-liang whal-
“ever could light on them” h That Kiu ting hi may be perhaps
the Hia ting chi or Record of the Tripods of the Hia Dynasty,
from which we have made a second hand quotation, also bearing
upon spectres, on page 521 ; but we cannot warrant this.

There is no mystery surrounding the source from which the
authors of such writings derived their acquaintance with the names
of spectres: they simply drew them from their own imagination
or from that of others, or from tradition and hearsay, or from revela-
tions imparted by dreams or in other ways by spirits and gods.
The fact then is, that the Chinese of ancient times were dominated
by the notion that beings are intimately associated with their names,
so that a man’s knowledge of the name of a spectre might enable
him to exert power over the latter and bend it to his will. It
is thus clear why we read in Kwan Chung’s writings, reputed
to be over two thousand years old, that by calling their names,
certain khing-ki, man-shaped water-spectres, could be employed
as messengers of extreme swiftness, or as catchers of fish and turtles
(see page 522).

In fact then a name and its owner are identical; it represents his


Suen’s reign, or 606 B.C.


NAMES OF SPECTRES ARE USED TO EXORCISE THEM. 1127

body, his life, soul and energy, just as well as his image and his
horoscope do, considering the extreme consequence, sketched by us
on pp. 339 sqq., to which such assimilation leads and of which
black art is the principal (cf page 921). We may here recall the
fact that the name of a dead man, inscribed on his ancestral tablet
or on his tombstone, actually represents his soul (cf. Bk 1, p. 1104),
so that, if it is effaced from the latter, the grave is no longer inha-
bited by his soul, but a powerless thing, devoid of shen or ling,
useless as an object of worship and sacrifice. Knowing the names
of spectres, man may pronounce them in his spells with emphasis
and maledictions, and thus enhance the efficacy of the latter; he
may to the same end inscribe them in his exorcising charms.
Exorcists and priests therefore owe much of their power and influence
among the people to their knowledge of the names of spectres;
and this knowledge is in many cases the result of their capacity to
see spectres.

We know from pp. 1109 6’^$', that, for many ages, Taoist sages, in
order to succour sufferers from fever, have supplied the world with
a list of names of fever-producing spectres, each doing its work
on a fixed day in every duodecimal or decimal cycle of days.
Thanks be to those sages for that unspeakable gift; for ever since
man has been able to pronounce every day in his spells and
inscribe in his charms an execrable name, in order to bring relief to
patients. But, moreover, to this day he may write that name with
cinnabar ink on a slip of yellow paper, and paste this successfully
on the back of his feverish patient as the latter stands facing the sun ;
for, since a spectre and its name are identical, that which possesses
the patient cannot but settle in the slip, the more readily as the
sunshine drives it to the dark side of his body. The only thing
which now remains to be done is to burn the paper. This curative
method may show no result. But such a case can only prove that
there is something wrong with the spectre, that is to say, this
must be an intractable character, unruly, disobedient even to the
Tao and the exorcising method which is a fruit of it; nay, more
than that, it must be a being quite mad and wild, as the delirious
or raving condition of the patient proves.

If man may fight and even vanquish spectres by knowing their
names, it is evident that, conversely, the world of darkness may
injure and murder men by knowing theirs. We have seen on page
667 this conviction expressed in a book of the fourth century so
emphatically that it seems superfluous to adduce any more evidence ;


1128


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


no wonder that we have read on page 646 of country-people hiding
their names in order to protect themselves from fish-devils. To this
day the Chinese assert, that it is by no means rare for people of
either sex to hear their names pronounced in the air and to incur
a serious disease, and even death, not long after.

It is then clear that the Chinese must feel and manifest an
aversion from pronouncing names, especially their own and those
of persons whom they are bound to esteem, to respect and to love.
But the use of names of some sort cannot possibly be banished
from daily life and conversation. It is therefore wise and sage to
use as personal names such terms as denote in the ears of the
uninitiated spectre-world quite other things, preferably despicable
things which are not worth attending to; in other terms, naming men
must be overt depreciation, or even scolding. Indeed, spectres will,
on hearing such names, believe at once that the bearers are despised
by every one, and they will turn their refined maliciousness against
persons of more importance.

The Chinese are unanimous in their opinion that such names avert
disease and mortality from children, and remarkably reduce the
difficulties connected with their fosterage. Babies in particular can-
not dispense with them, their strength being so small, their vitality
so weak, their bodies so frail and so liable to injury by evil spi-
rits. And, owing to the inherent malignity of these beings, this is
especially the case with pet babies, for is it not a striking fact
that, if nourished with the utmost concern, stuffed with dainties
and anxiously kept in-doors, far from influences of evil abroad, they
often fall ill and languish, while others, not at all so carefully
nursed, grow and thrive remarkably? It is then no wonder that,
in Amoy, the list of names openly borne by all classes is rather a
curious one, full of unpleasing and ugly specimens. Here are a few,
picked up at random: Bat sat^ or Bedbug; Boncj cBi"^ or Slovenly
reared; Gong kdo^. Stupid dog; Han tsu*, Sweet potatoe, the
meanest and cheapest food in that part of China; Kao sdi^ or Dog’s
droppings; K/iiep si « or Ugly; IVLtUi’’, Will not have you; Bun so®.
Sweepings; Ti dzio’^. Swine-piss ; Soa^° or Sand. Such so-called
sio mid”!! ** or “inferior names” remain in use among the family and

6 0 #. ^ mu-

10 IjI?.


3 mm-


11 /jvig.


DEBASING NAMES ARE A PROTECTION FROM EVIL.


1129


ts good friends till the death of the bearers, so that it is every-
day matter to hear grown-up people accost and call by such names
as friend or brother Ngat, brother Flea, brother Cat-piss, etc. etc.

It is especially boys that receive such debasing names; indeed
girls are not so valuable, on account of the fact that they do not
strengthen and perpetuate the family, since, in obedience to the
social law of exogamy, they are to go from home to marry in other
tribes. And it is weak, unhealthy and only sons in particular who are
thus dubbed; many who require no extraordinary attention and care
because they grow and thrive well, are exempted from such mani-
festation of affection. It is much in vogue in Amoy to depreciate
darling baby sons by giving them the name Tsa bo. Female, and
to complete the delusion by fixing in one of the lobes of their ears,
or in both, a small copper ring, which in a great many cases is never
taken out, whatever age the wearer may reach. By no means rare
are the names Kbit d Little beggar, and Ka tsii *, Beggar’s
wallet, the protective power of which is in many cases enhanced
by making their bearers wear somewhere on their clothes a wallet
in miniature, or a button received from a beggar, or to tie such a
button with a red "^threat to his pulse. Nor is it rare to find boys,
men and greybeards who answer to the name He siu"s Buddhist
monk, or even Li bo*, Buddhist nun. The reason is, that those
names suggest to spectres that the bearers are not valuable, as else
their parents would not allow them to abandon their homes and
embrace the clerical state, while, moreover, they make these beings
believe the bearers to be under the protection of Buddha and
Avalokitegvara, whose mighty hands cannot be braved (cf. page 1123).

Names expressing the female sect have been borne by male per-
sons in all ages, and even in very ancient times. The prince who
ruled the state of Lu from 721 tot 710 before our era and is
known in history by the posthumous name Yin bore the name
the second character of which means a paternal aunt or
mother-in-law. — The writings of Mencius ® mention one mm,
a famous tiger-hunter, whose personal name ^ means Married
wife. — Wu-lai, the hazy personage of the twelfth century B. C.
whom we have mentioned on page 283 of Bk I, had a grandson,
named the first character of which means a woman. —


' -tif, 4

5 ^ . 6 Section ^ . 7 Historical Records, ch. 5, II. 3 and 4.


1130


THE WAK AGAINST SPECTRES.


We must, however, state, that the characters by which those names
have been transmitted, may merely convey sounds, and no meanings.
The Books of the Later Han Dynasty * mention an immortal being
by the name of in which we see the character

or female. In the Books of the Liang Dynasty we find a biography
of Ma Sien-pi fllj a loyal servant of his prince, ^ whose per-
"sonal name when he was young was ^ Sien-pi or Female slave
“of the Immortals; but when grown up, he considered this name
“to-be unclassical, and substituted in it ^ for

Li Kiiin-sien ^ was a brave military grandee. “ In the first year
“of the Ching kwan period (A. D. 627) the planet Venus was
“repeatedly visible in the daytime. The Astrologer in Chief drew
“prognostics from this phenomenon, and found that it predicted
“that a female Ruler would shine in glory. Moreover there was a
“song abroad, foretelling that there would come a female and warlike
“(^ wu) Ruler.

“ It then came to pass at a banquet at Court, when the wine had
“been served, that the emperor wanted everybody to say what
“inferior name he bore. Li Kiiin-sien said that his was Wu-niang-
“tszg or Fifth damseP. The emperor was surprised

“and remarked laughingly; ‘What sort of damsel would such a-
“ sturdy man as this make!’ The fact that the name of the district
“where Kiiin-sien had exercised government (viz. Wu-lien
“and that w^here his home was (viz. Wu-ngan ) contained

“the word wu or ‘warlike’, was another reason for the emperor to
“suspect and fear him. After a little time he was sent away from the
“Court and became Governor of Hwa-cheu. Then a Censor brought a
“charge against him before the Throne, to the effect that he had, in
“company with certain villains, uttered seditious language and was
“plotting rebellion; and the emperor ordained his execution. In
“the THen sheu period (690) his family resorted to the Palace
“to complain of the wrong which had been done to him; on which
“the empress Wu the Warlike, who had usurped the throne

1 Chapter 112, 11, 1. 11.

. Ch. 17, 1. 4. See also the History of the South, ch. 20, 1. 21

4 Note that this wu or fifth has the same sound as “warlike”, and that
his name therefore sounded like “warlike damsel”.


FEMALE NAMES BORNE BT MEN.


1131


“a few years before), who wished also to exalt herself (by means of
“the said prognostications), restored to him his official titles, so
“ that he could be re-buried with observance of the ceremonial
“prescribed by the ritual of the State”. ^

According to the Standard History of the Kin dynasty, a valiant
general of this House bore the name of ^ ^ ^ > Hwan-yen

Living woman ^ It would be easy to lengthen this list of instances,
but it seems long enough.

History affords many instances of men who bore so-called choh
ming^ “mean names” or “names expressing meanness”. CKing \
the ruler of the state of Tsin ^ who died in 599 B. C., was named


Black rump ®. — His successor King who died in 580,


bore the name of Angry dog or Mad dog*; and a person bear-


ing the same name we find mentioned in the record of events
for the year 631 B. C. * — A prince who played a martial role in
580 B. C. was named ^ • Black back Shaved

blockhead, was the name of the crown-prince of the state of
Ching who died in 565 B. C. and was also borne by a prince


New Books of the TSmg Dynasty, ch, 94, I. 12.

Also the Old Books, ch. 09, 1. 17.

2 Chapter 72, 1. 5.

M:- 5 W-

6 Cffiin tb'iu, ninth year of Siien’s reign, and Tso cfi^wen^ second year of Siien ;
also the Historical Records, chapter 39, 1. 29. It is, however^ stated in WiQ Kwohyii
(ch. 3) that when Ch'ing was born, his mother dreamed that a god marked his.
rump with ink, on account of which they called him Black rump.

8 Cii'xin USu^ tenth year of diving’s reign.

9 Tso ch^wc/i^ twenty-eighth year of the ruler Hi.

10 Ch'-un ts^iu^ tenth year of the reign of Ch'^ing.

n iK.


12 Ch^un tsHii^ seventh year of Siang s reign.


1J32


THK WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


of the same state who was raised to the throne in B. C. 580
In the list of princes of the state of Khi * we find one who

reigned in the sixth century B. C., whose personal name was ^ ,

which then, as nowadays, may have meant Beggar’. This name
was also that of one R minister of the state of Ts'i ’ who

murdered his king in 488 B. C.;« and a member of his family
was ^ ^ , T’^ien the Recalcitrant ®.

The name Wu or Wuh, meaning vicious, evil, hated, filth,
seems to have been borne anciently by many people. It was for
instance that of ^ high officer in the kingdom of Wei’;

further it was borne by Siang ’, the ruler of the same state from

538 to 535 B. C. and by a son of Wen of Lu killed in

609 B. C. — In 300 B. C. a prince of the name ^ , Ant-louse
became a candidate for the throne in the state of Han — And in
the first part of the second century B. C. there lived a grandee,
whose name was Li Scabby or Scrophulous There lived

also then the famous scholarly minister Sze-ma Siang-jii ”, whose
parents gave him the name of Puppy '*> foL says Yen

Sze-ku of the T'ang dynasty, “his parents loved him so well that
“ they would not pronounce his name, and therefore invented this
“name for him”


1 Tso cifxven^ tenth year of the reign of Chhng.

2

3 Historical Records, chapter 36, I. 8.


5 Cii^un the sixth yeai’ of the reign of Ngai. The TbO ch^wen calls him

Sze-ma Ts'^ien (ch. 32, II. 20 sqq) ^ .

6 Historical Records, chapter 32, II. 22 seq.

7 Chhin tnHii, twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth year of Siang, or 545 B. C.

9 C}fun ts^iu^ seventh year of Chao’s reign; also the Historical Records, ch. 37, 1. 7.
10 11 ^ .


12 Historical Records, chapter 33, 1. 14.

13 . Historical Records, chapter 45, 1. 6. ^

14 Historical Records, ch. 97, 11. 5 seq. Books of the Early Han Dynasty, ch. 43, 1. 5.


^ tS

16 Historical Records, chapter 117, 1. 1 .
Early Han Dynasty, chapter 57, I, 1. 1.


DEBASING NAMES VEERE BORNE IN ALL AGES.


1133


On page 411 of Book I we have read of the grandee Liang
Shang, father-in-law of an emperor in the second century of our
era, and of his son Ki, likewise a high grandee. The latter had a
son, who bore the inelegant name of Hunnish dog. ^ — The

History "of the South has a biography of a renowned grandee
Chang King-rh % whose father was called Ugly, Detestable.
^ His mother, while asleep in a field, had dreamt that a horned
puppy licked her; and having as a consequence become pregnant,
“ she gave birth to King-rh, whose first name therefore was
“Keu-rh, Puppy. And when she had another son, she dubbed
“him, on account of Puppy, with the name Piglet. But the emperor
“Ming of the house of Sung found Puppy too vile a name, and
“changed it into King-rh, Estimable child; and consequently they
“altered Piglet’s name into Kung-rh, Honourable child”.’

The famous general “ Ts'ao Hu first bore the name Tiger’s

“head; but Shi Tsu (who reigned from 483 to 494) found it too
“mean for him, and ordered him to adopt another” *. — Yen Chi-Tui
wrote, that in his time “ there were in the northern countries many
“ people who gave their children such names as Young Ass, Colt,
“ Sow, by which the bearers were to call themselves and to be
“ called by their brothers ” ». — In the History of the Kin Dynasty
we come across the name ^ ^ , Li Crippled ass, belonging

to a Provincial Governor®. We find there also those of the Generals
H ^ ^ T'ang-kwah Puppy ^ ^ ^ Hwan-yen

Piglet, killed in battle in 1233®; Tu-tan Ugly fellow*;


i Books of the Later Han Dynasty, chapter 64, i. 16.

« a . * BJi « 16) a ic > « ® « a . iK

a- Chapter 45, 1. 13.

ffiKEt{|®=SSIi. St*

Books of the Southern Ts^i Dynasty, chapter 30, 11. 8 and 9.

Yen-bhi kia hiun^ chapter 6,

6 For instance in chapter 15, II. 14 and 20.

7 Chapter 15, 1. .22. 8 Chapter 18, 1. 3, and chapter 130, 1. 6.

9 Chapter 134, I. 8.


1134


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


^ ® IE’ Hwan-yen Puppy Hoh-shih-lieh

Hog-dog Ye-luh-yih Puppy etc. The bearers

of such names evidently were for the most part foreigners who
settled on Chinese soil with invaders whom they served, so that we
must conclude that the custom of having “mean names” extended
across the borders of China proper. In the History of the Yuen
dynasty of Jingis we also find names as mmm- Kwoh Dog of
dogs, belonging to a paragon of filial devotion ^ ^ :
Shih-moh Dog of dogs, a bold Khitan warrior “ ; Ning Pig-

dog®; etc. It may be added in conclusion of the list, that we have
met in history such names as ^ Bought slave; Vile

slave; Little ape; ^ , Dog; Crying owl; even

Robber or Thief; etc. etc.

It is now manifest that the “mean names” perfectly satisfy the
conditions to which names in Chinese life have to answer, that is
to say, they allow every one to pronounce them at any time and
place, without any risk being run by the bearer or his felicity. No
wonder therefore that most people of the common class want no
other names, and actually have no others. In this respect they differ
from the better classes, who are educated enough to know that
well chosen names may greatly improve the destiny of the bearers,
since whatever is spoken or written may constitute or produce the
reality of what it expresses. Every boy who is born in a fashionable
family is therefore carefully endowed not long after with a so-called
ming ming’ or “fate-name”, which, in order to be pronounced
as seldom as possible, is accompanied by a “mean name” for
daily use.

It stands to reason that that name, as it constitutes or improves
the destiny of the bearer, is his, name par excellence. It is indeed
called the ta ming** or “chief name”. It may consist of any
character or characters whatever which express something good or
felicitous. Before and during the Tsin dynasty names of one cha-
racter were the rule, and those of two characters exceptional, but
after that we see names of two characters slowly increase, till during


1 Chapter -134, 11. S— 10.
3 Chapter 75, 1. 1.

5 Chapter 166, 1. 15.


2 Chapter 134, 1. 10.
4 Chapter 197, 1. 4.
6 Chapter 197, 1. 5.


NAMES WHICH EXPRESS FELICITY OR VIRTUE.


1135


the Ming dynasty, as at present, their number manifestly exceeds
that of the others.

This system of nomenclature, so totally different from ours, is
. best illustrated by the names themselves, of which there exist, of
course, an unlimited variety. Here are a few specimens : ^ ,

Increase of longevity; -Mm’ Increase of happiness ; — ^ ^ ,
Progress in wealth; — ^ Acquired talents; — Posterity

with state-ofBces ; — Obedience and dutifulness;


Exaltation of filial devotion; — ^ Love of antiquity ; —
Manifestation of loyalty; — ^ ^ j Literary perspicacity; — ^ ^ ,
Benevolent modesty; — Calling in younger brothers, that

is to say, entailing the birth of more boys; — ^ Heron in the
Clouds, the symbol of longevity; etc. etc. Monosyllabic names
are in some parts of China, for instance Canton, preceded with
obvious frequency by the word ^ oi* A or O, which, being


apparently meaningless, is often omitted in writing.

A great many names at first sight betray no felicitous significa-
tion, as Blue; Ship; ^ Thousand miles; I or We;
etc. Yet even these may have been the results of careful selection
and owe their existence to perfectly valid reasons. Many a name
contains cyclical characters which occur in the horoscope of its
bearer, that is to say, among the eight which denote the hour,
day, month and year of his birth, and therefore constitute his fate
(see page 919); but it stands to reason that they are never placed
in a name unless they are auspicious.

A name may also be given to a child or man in order to correct
his horoscope. A good soothsayer is consulted on the matter. This
man declares that a horoscope cannot be good unless it contains a
properly adequate portion of each of the five Elements of the Universe,
but for which condition the Universal Order would not work smoothly
and thoroughly upon it, to the detriment, of course, of the owner,
who might then fall a victim to spectral machinations. He furthermore
sets forth that the characters of the denary and the duodenary cycles,
which constitute horoscopes, are, in the way expounded on pp. 965
seq. of Book I, connected with the five cardinal points of the
Universe, and, in consequence of this fact, also with the Elements
(cf. Bk I, page 983), Time and Universe thus being fused together
in accordance with the following table:


1136


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Zs

M

E

T

1

a I


East, and Wood.


South, and Eire.


Centre, and Earth.


¥


West, and Metal.


*


North, and Water.


With these conjunctions before his eyes, the soothsayer can easily
do his work. Should he find, for instance, among the characters of
the horoscope too many which belong to Wood, he may remedy
this evil by the name ^ Metal, because Metal conquers Wood; or
should this character work too strongly, he may select another in
which metal merely stands as a component; or he may select one
with Earth in it, because Earth produces Metal. In similar
manner all the other Elements may be probed and corrected by
prudent application of the old, venerable doctrine on mutual crea-
tion and destruction of the Elements, which we have described on
page 957 of Book I. Thus, as we see, the fundamentals of China’s
Universalism are not only thoroughly wise, but, if properly handled,
also of the greatest usefulness in practical life, highly salutary to
man and his fate.

Fate and health may also be improved by such names as ^
Iron, ^ Hammer, Club, ^ Rock or Stone, ^ Strength, etc.;
or by those in which metal, stone, or strength occur as a radical.
If, in spite of all this care, the owner of the name be unhealthy
or ailing, or fortune be slow to visit him, the remedy is sought
in “change or correction of the name” '. This expedient has the


NAMES ARE CHANGED ON MANX OCCASIONS. 1]37

advantage that the spectres will take him for a different sort of
man, and therefore will leave him unmolested. In many cases names
are changed at the suggestion of a divinity, imparted by the mouth
of a possessed medium, or by some other oracular method.

Improving the fortune by changing the name is an old custom.
About sixteen hundred years ago Koh Hung wrote ; “ Lao-tszS has
“ often changed the names which he bore in his childhood and
“ maturity, and Tan was not the only name he had. The following was
“ the reason why he did so : the Canon of the Nine Divisions of

“ the World and of the Numbers Three and Five, as also the

“ Yuen cK'en king, say that there are in every human life conjunc-
“ tions of dangers ; and when these conjunctions occur, life may be
“ prolonged and dangers overcome by changing the names of childhood
“and maturity, and thus remaining in concordance with the Uni-

“ versal Breath. Even at the present day many persons who have

“ the Tao act in this wise. ” * Thus Taoism embodied the system
of promoting felicity by means of names in its own Universalistic
mysticism. Yet, no doubt, most people will have corrected their
names without much regard to such philosophy. We may refer
here to the lines of the sixth century, quoted on page 443, which
tell of a man who, knowing himself persecuted by a rancorous
spectre, adopted another personal name and even another tribe-
name, besides hiding himself in a convent. Emperors and their
relations have in all ages changed their names just as the common
people. Many Sons of Heaven changed theirs at their appointment
to the dignity of heir-apparent or at their accession, and Suh
Tsung * of the T'ang dynasty did so five times before he mounted
the throne.

Names by which happy or glorious careers were produced have
been benevolently imparted by gods or spirits to their favourites.
“ When Chang Ch^en was about to receive a fate-name, it was
“dreamt that a god-man wrote down a large character Ch'^en (vast,
“great), saying, ‘Give him this name’. His father, now convinced
“ that the case was an extraordinary one, encouraged his studies as

. ^hen sien cJfvoen^ cli. 1 .

2 M


72


1138


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ well as he could, and even ere he had been capped for marriage he
“ left his home and took his degree in the capital. And in the sixth year
“of the Siien hwo period (1124) he was promoted to the tsin-
“shi degree”. ^ He closed his brilliant career as a Minister of State.
We may then confidently assert that name-giving has always been
considered in China a matter of high importance. That this was
the fact as early as classical times, is sho*wn by the ceremonious
ritual with which it was then connected, and which is described
in the . Li hi in the following terms : “ At the end of the child’s
“third month, on an (auspicious) day selected for this purpose, they
“ cut off its hair with the exception of tufts .... On that day, the

“wife shows the child to its father Her husband enters the

“gate, mounts the steps on the eastern side, and stands at the top
“of them with his face to the west; and the wife with the child
“leaves her room, and stands beside the door-post with her face to
“the east. The nurse goes forward, and speaking for the mother,
“says, ‘The mother So-and-so ventures reverently to present to you
“the child on this day’. Whereupon the father answers, ‘May it
“respect its superiors!’, takes hold of the right hand of the child,
“makes it laugh, and gives it a name, while the mother says,
“‘I shall not forget what you have said, and will do my best that
“your words may be fulfilled’. Turning to the left, she hands the
“ baby to its governess, who, observing their order of rank, informs
“the wives and mothers of the name, subsequently proceeding to
“ the inner chamber. And the husband tells the name to the steward
“of the house, who, likewise observing their order of rank, informs
“ the male relations of it. ” ^


History of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 381, 1. IV.

. . . A A PI . i Ms PI . ± lit! . s » . * « ^


^ . Section


ft , chapter 2.


*

VARIOUS NAMES WHICH A MAN BEARS.


1139


The ming or ming tszS* is the name proper, the first which
a man receives when still at his mother’s breast, for which reason
it is also called the jii ming or nai ming*, “milk-name”. It
is, as we have seen, his “fate-name”; yet as a rule it is rather
freely used by his parents and other seniors of the family, and
later on by himself in correspondence and on name-cards; his friends
too may use it in intimate conversation. This seems to imply, that
the necessity of keeping that name secret is no longer imperative;
inferiors and juniors, however, are obliged to abstain from pro-
nouncing it, especially if the bearer is a person of position and
dignity, for whom regard should be had.

When a boy first goes to school, his milk-name is practically
replaced by a shu ming orch'^eh ming’, “book-name”, also
called hioh ming*, “study-name or school-name”, which the
teacher selects. It may be replaced by a khao ming® or “examin-
ation-name” later on, when he subjects himself to state-examina-
tions for literary degrees; and this name becomes his pang ming®
or “board-name” if it enjoys the honour of appearing on the
“boards” or lists of the successful candidates, which are posted up
in the examination-hall. This name, which has thus proved to be
very felicitous, is for this reason retained by the owner when he
is promoted to a state-office, and then becomes his kwan ming^
or “official name”, used by himself and others in official corres-
pondence.

But it is at marriage in particular that a man adopts a new name^
called his tsze or tsze ming®, “designation”. We might call this
his name of manhood or maturity. It is, like all the names we have
mentioned, except the “ mean name”, chosen with such care as ensures
or promotes the felicity of the bearer, or increases and improves
his talents or virtues. People of the lower class, workmen, farmers
and so on generally have no tszg, so that its possession always
indicates more or less distinction. Although this name, and all
others which might be taken or obtained afterwards, serve to replace,
conceal and secrete the fate-name, this latter, owing to the fact
that it constitutes the bearer’s felicity, is by no means dropped or
forgotten.

'■#= 8 -


1 ^ or

3 Srgoo JJrg.


1140


THE WAE AGAINST SPECTRES.


No name serves the purpose of secreting the fate-name so well
as the tsze. Marriage indeed is the great event of life which,
signifying maturity, manhood and paternity, entitles a man to have
his name henceforth respected, especially by his children, the birth
of whom is expected as a matter of course^. The use of tsze is
traceable to China’s ancient time. In the Li ki we read, that “after
the ceremony of capping (or adorning the bridegroom with the
“bonnet of virility, which immediately preceded the marriage) the
“tszS was given to him”*. “A son was capped at twenty, and
“then received his tsze; a daughter when promised in marriage
“assumed the hair-pin and received her tszg”^ And that this
new name was virtually intended to be the means by which to avoid
the use of the fate-name, is evinced by these passages in the same
holy book : “ The giving of the tsze at the capping ceremony caused
“his ming to be respected ^ An ordinary oflficer, when speaking
“ in the presence of his Ruler, denotes a Great-officer who was dead,
“ either by his posthumous honorary name, or (if he had none) by his
“tszS; but an ordinary officer (whom he need not respect as a
“superior) he denoted by his ming. And when speaking with a
“Great-officer he likewise mentioned ordinary officers by their ming,
“but Great-officers by their tszS.

It is a common opinion among Chinese authors that ancient
books generally mention princes and sages by their tszS, and
rarely by their ming. Ku Yen-wu says emphatically, “ The ancients,
“ on account of respect for their names, are not mentioned by any-
“body except by their tsze”®. This is not, however, the entire
truth, for they are often mentioned by an honorary name also,

1 Might this explain the composition of the character tsze which seems
to represent children -y* under a roof

3 -f- - + S i® ^ ^ jffi ^ , S.CI. ,

I, chapter 3.

. Sect. j III. See also the I tiy

in the section specially describing the capping as anciently celebrated among ordi-
nary officers; ch. II, 1. 44 of the Palace edition of the Khien lung period.

^ AMM ^ Wl chi luh, ch. 23,


THE NAMES WHICH ARE AVOIDED.


1141


given them after their death. The terms

and ^ , by which authors denote respectively Hwang-ti, Yao,

Shun, and Yii, are deemed to represent their tsze, indicative
perhaps of their place of origin, while ^ M

^ ^ are considered by SzS-ma Ts'ien and later authors to be
their ming, rarely mentioned in books. The list of rulers of the
Shang dynasty, as Sze-ma Ts'ien gives it in the third chapter of
the Historical Records, is apparently composed of their tsze; the
ming of each is specially added to his tsze in the Annals of the
Bamboo Books. Confucius is hardly ever mentioned by his ming,
which is^ Khiu, but extremely often by his tsze, which is ^
Chung-ni; and it is significant that we see him accosted as Khiu
by Lao Tan or Lao-tsze, a much older man whom he himself
considered to be superior to him in virtue and talents '. Since the
Han dynasty, however, ministers and worthies are generally mentioned
in the books by their ming, a license which must be ascribed to
a tenet of the Li ki, according to which “ there is no avoiding of
“ names in poetry and writing, nor in literary composition there
“ is no such avoidance in teaching and studying, nor in literary
“ composition ” This classical rescript explains also why, as we
have stated on page 1138, even nowadays the ming are freely used
among men of letters in correspondence and on name-cards.

If we properly realize the reasons why the ancient Chinese avoided
the use of fate-names, we cannot but find it quite natural to read
in the works of Mencius this passage: “ We avoid ming, but not
“tribe-names, because a tribe-name comprises many individuals,
“and a ming only a single one”^. Indeed, any name which defines
thousands, nay tens of thousands of individuals at a time, actually
defines none, and evil wrought upon it cannot do any hurt, so
that there is no necessity whatever to keep it secret.

China’s history shows convincingly in all its books that it has
always been obligatory for its people to abstain strictly from men-
tioning the fate-names of parents, emperors, and certain other
superiors, as well before as after their death. A really curious part


1 See the narrative of tlie encounter of the two sages in Legge’s translation of
the Li kiy vol. I, p. 339; and in Couvreur’s translation, vol. I, p. 458.

s it ^ Kg ’■


1143


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


has been played thereby in domestic and social life. Governmental
measures, which in our eyes must appear extremely strange, have
resulted from it, changes in geographical names and in names
of offices, temporary or lasting modifications in writing; and all
that to an extent which, of course, is much larger than Chinese
books depict. The fundamental idea out of which that obligation
has grown up, namely protection from evil spirits, evidently fell
into oblivion at an early date; but the obligation itself remained,
surviving generations, ages, dynasties, as a worthy manifestation of
filial piety and loyalty. No doubt it owed its tenacity of existence
principally to the fact that from the very first it had its roots
within the domain of worship of the dead. In the Chinese portion
of the globe, where that veneration reigns supreme, sacred names
never lost their sacredness by the departure of their owners; on
the contrary it increased thereby, and the obligation to taboo them bas
extended beyond the grave for all ages to this very day and hour.
Thus being mainly a manifestation of reverence for the dead,
the fulfilment of that duty in the long course of time cannot
reasonably be a topic for description in these pages, which are
especially devoted to exorcising practices. It will be attended to in
Part VI, the special subject of which is Ancestor Worship.


CHAPTER XX.


MAN AN EXORCIST BY NATURE,

AND ON ACCOUNT OF HIS LEARNING, POSITION, AND VIRTUE.

A study of tlie perpetual war of the Chinese against spectres
must readily lead to the conclusion that man, though a principal
object of attacks of the spectral world, is at the same time an
eminent exorcist. In fact it is a main doctrine in Chinese Demon-
ology that he can expel and destroy spectres not only by means
of his wit and intelligence, but also by his very nature. And no
wonder, for since the fundamental principle of exorcism is the
natural desti:jaction of the Yin by the Yang, a man’s yang soul,
called hwun or shen, must by its mere presence in his body
endow him with exorcising capacities, especially if that soul is well
developed and manifests itself by vitality, strength, courage, energy,
intellect, and spiritual or even magical power, in short, by qualities
comprised in the term ling (page 12). It is even a classical dogma
that, on this account, man stands prominent above all devil-expellers
whatsoever, for in the Shu king we read, that Wu, the royal pa-
ragon, on opening a campaign against the tyrant Cheu of the Yin
dynasty, whom Heaven had directed him to destroy, delivered a
speech to his wariors which began with these remarkable words:
“ Heaven is the father of the myriads of beings and things, and
“ Earth is their mother ; and among the myriads of beings man
“ more than any other is endowed with ling”. ‘

The conviction that man by his nature itself is a dispeller of
spectres, plays its part in Chinese life in many ways. When attacks
of those beings are apprehended, people crowd together (cf. pp.
477, 482, 998), evidently on the principle “more men, more ling”;
they also intimidate their invisible assailants by means of noisy
instruments, which may make them think that they have to do


1144


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


with more people than in reality there are. The character
which means boisterousness of a crowd, has for many centuries
been one of the best among devil-expelling charms (p. 1045). Many
a tale teaches, that if a person, while alone, is attacked by spectres,
other people, on hearing his cries, will generally save him by run-
ning to the spot with loud yells, or that even the accidental approach
of a single person will suffice to ensure the flight of those beings.
Such belief has naturally induced men at all times to join in pro-
cessions, should they have to expel devils en masse.

The shen or hwun, to which man owes his exorcising power,
is identical with his breath or khi (see page 5). On this account he
may drive away and even destroy spectres by blowing at them.
This conception is well illustrated by the tale of which we have
given the translation on page 716. Conversely, as this tale and others
{e. g. pp. 735 seq^ show, the cold, chilling breath of spectres,
which is, of course, yin like the spectres themselves, is very
dangerous to the vitality of man, and may even strike him with
fatal effect. Anti-spectral also is human spittle, this liquid being,
according to the Chinese (see p. 392), produced in the mouth by
the vital breath, and therefore called ling fluid or hen water.
We have seen on page 616, that in the fourth century of our era
Yii Pao represented demons as hating to be spit at, and com-
pletely mastered by means of saliva. It is to this day an old and
common practice, even highly commended by professional medical
men and in medical books, to spit at people who lie in a swoon
or otherwise suffer from demoniacal disease {e.g, p. 687), the prac-
tice having, moreover, the advantage of bringing new shen sub-
stance into them. Purification of rooms, houses, streets and altars by
spurting water from the mouth, thus making breath and spittle
work in combination, is an established rite of the Taoist and Bud-
dhist clergy. In particular such simultaneous blowing and spit-
ting is practised with exorcising intent by Wu-ist priests, and by
medical men when they try to cure madmen and other sufferers
from demoniacal possession.

But, as we have stated, the degree of influence exercised by man
upon the demon world is essentially determined by the degree or
state of his ling, that is to say, by his intellect and courage, or,
as it may be put also, his cleverness and impudence. The effect of
cleverness upon spectres and their tricks, illustrated in this work
by many narratives, is vast and varied, and the range of exorcising
expedients invented in China is in the main even a product of this


SPECTRES ARE VANQUISHED BY SHOW OF COURAGE. 1145

quality. But, as we have also seen in many tales, boldness and
bluster render powerful aid in the same direction; and indeed it
is a Chinese tenet that man, when his audacity quits him, loses
shen substance, opportunity being thus afforded to spectres to take
its place and dominate him. Hence also the conclusion that spectres
never venture to approach a man of courage; which, according to
our views, may mean that such a man is not the victim of his
own spectre-raising suggestions.

“Lii, a man of Reality”, that is to say, who had attained the
Tao, lived in the old time of Hwang- ti, and “advised mankind
“to have no fear when seeing spectres, but in all cases to blow
“at them, and thus fight immaterial things with something imma-
“terial. Spectres fear nothing so much as breath, and breath can
“ vanquish even swords or clubs. And the master Chang Khi-shih said :
“‘Whenever you see a spectre, remain fearless and fight it, for
“ this is sure to bring you into a better condition if you are victorious,
“ while, should you be worsted, your condition will merely remain
“as it was”.*

Sui Yuen, our modern authority on spectre-lore who wrote these
lines, also states by means of some pithy tales the feet, that in the
war with spectres the palm falls to the lot of the bold. “ Wang
“ Khi-ming of Wu-yuen (in Nganhwui pr.) removed to the house of a
“tsin-shi graduate in Shang-ho, which had been inhabited long
“before by the tsin-shi Wang Po, a clansman of his. In the
“year kiah-wu of the Khien lung period (A. D. 1774), on the
“first day of the fourth month, he dreamt at night of a nightmare
“spectre, and when he awoke, he saw a spectre in erect posture
“quite near the bed-curtains. It was as tall as the house was high.
“ Wang, a brave fellow, sprang up promptly and dealt the spectre
“some blows, which thereupon forced itself through the door in
“haste and made off, but by mistake ran against a wall. It then
“appeared greatly perplexed; indeed, Wang was now able to overtake
“it and clasped both his arms around its waist. But suddenly a
“chilly draught blew out the lamp. The face of the spectre thus
“became invisible, but Wang felt that its arms were extremely


1146


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“cold, and that its middle was as bulky as an earthen jar. He
“would have called the inmates of the house, but his voice stuck
“in his throat, and no sound issued; and some time elapsed ere he
“managed to cry aloud' at the top of his voice. The inmates responded
“to his cries; the spectre shrunk to the size of a baby, and when
“ they reached the spot with torches, Wang had nothing in his
“arms but a ball of refuse silk floss. But outside the window a
“shower of tiles and potsherds was wildly thrown about; the
“ inmates, seized with panic, cried out that he should let the
“ spectre go ; but our hero laughed - and said : ‘ It is in vain that
“ those hordes of spectres try to terrify me ; what can they do now ?
“if I let this one here escape, it will help the rest in their evil
“work; I had better kill it, as a warning to all’. And grasping
“the spectre firmly with his left hand and the torch of an inmate
“ with his right, he roasted the being ; it crackled, and fresh blood
“gushed out of it, which emitted so intolerable a stench that at
“sunrise, when the neighbours from all sides flocked to the spot in
“ consternation, they had to hold their noses with their fingers because
“of the stench. Blood then lay on the ground more than an inch
“thick, rank, greasy, sticky. What spectre this was has always
“ remained a mystery. ” ‘

— “One Yeh Lao-t'oh, a man from a place unknown to me.


z. 1 ®*®.

# If * flS , SitR

« ft «i w . K A ^ » ir » ^ . vl H . JS. m a:

a. K(«wA.

« i Js *,« ifca# w M.ii lira


SPECTRES CANNOT ATTACK THE INTREPID. 1147

“ travelled about with his hair tied up in a knot^ barefooted, in the
‘^same gown of linen in summer as in winter, and carrying about
“a bamboo sleeping-mat. In this guise he came to an inn in Wei-
Finding the guest-room there rather noisy, he looked round
“for better quarters, whereupon the inn-keeper showed him a room,
“saying: ‘None is so quiet as this, but ttiere are spectres in it;
“you had better not put up there’. But Yeh replied: ‘That is
“nothing’, and having swept the room clean, he spread out his
“mat on the ground, whereon to pass the night.

“At the third watch-drum (11 P. M.) the door flew open, and
“he beheld a woman with a rope around her neck; her eyes
“were hanging outside the sockets down upon her cheeks, and a
“tongue some feet in length protruded from her mouth. In she
“came with a headless spectre which carried two heads in its
“ hands. And just behind her another spectre came in, its body
“quite black, and its ears, eyes, mouth and nose hardly visible,
“as also a spectre whose four limbs were covered with yeUow
“ulcers and whose belly was even bigger than a pumpkin of
“five stones’ weight. ‘There is the smell of a living man here’,
“they said to each other, ‘we will catch him’; and they groped
“about as if to lay hold of him, yet without being able to get
“near to Yeh. ‘Yet he must be here’, said the spectre, ‘that is
“clear enough; how strange that we do not seize him’. Upon
“which the yellow big-bellied one said: ‘As a rule we catch men
“because they are so afraid that their hwun leaves them; this
“one here must be a doctor who possesses the Tao, and therefore
“ has so little fear that his soul does not quit him ; this is why
“ he is so indistinct and so hard to catch ’. And while the spectres
“were moving about, looking for him in every direction, Yeh rose
“on his mat, pointed at himself with his finger, and said- ‘Here
“I am’. »


It » . St ff ^ s . H . lit * ®


1148


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ Now all the spectres started ; they knelt down and bowed, and
“ Yeh asked them one by one who they were. The woman pointed
at the three others, saying, ‘This one has lost his life in water;
this one has died in a fire, and this one was beheaded for
“robbery and murder; and I have strangled myself in this room\
“‘Do you submit to me’? said Yeh. ‘We do’, they exclaimed.
“‘If so, then become again incarnate and human, and haunt this
“place no more’. Each one in his turn now did obeisance and
“ disappeared. At daybreak he related the incident to the inn-
“keeper, and ever since that apartment has been undisturbed”.^
— “ Kiai, Vice-President of a Board, had a clan-brother, very plucky
“ and bold, who would not hear of spectres and spirits, and pre-
“ ferably settled in dwellings which were in bad repute as inauspi-
“ cious. In Shantung he came to an inn, a room on the west side
“of which was said to be haunted. Kiai, rejoiced to hear it,
“ opened the door of that apartment, and immediately occupied it.
“At the third watch-drum (11 P. M.) a tile came down from the
“roof-beam. ‘You spectres’, cried he with a curse, ‘I shall not
“ be afraid of you unless you throw down something which is not
“lying on my roof’; and lo, a mill-stone came down. Again Kiai
“gave utterance to a curse; ‘evil spirits’, he cried, ‘I shall not
“fear you until you smash my table’; and a big stone actually
“ came down, crushing to atoms one half of that piece of furniture.
“ Now Kiai flew into a passion ; ‘ spectres, dogs, slaves ! have the

' — mz.mA^ =

0 «S:0 g e

rs:e puh yii, ch. 2.


SPECTRES RESPECT THE COURAGEOUS.


1149


“courage to smash my head, and 1 will confess myself beaten’;
“ and with these words he rose, flung his cap to the ground and
“waited, holding his head erect. But silence prevailed; not a sound
“ was heard, and the visitations of spectres were for ever ended there ” h

— “ 0-chen, a slave of Tsiang King-wu, bold and strong, was a
“ tippler. He dwelt with his master at the Si-chih gate, in a place
“ which harboured so many spectres that nobody ventured to live
“ there. 0-chen was just established there when a spectre with flowing
“ hair appeared in the night. He had just then had a glass too
“ much and felt himself brave ; and as the spectre put out a tongue
“of about ten feet in length, in order to frighten him, he sprang
“ up, grasped it, and tore it out — a chilly tongue, as soft as floss.
“ Off the spectre ran with loud shrieks. Our hero placed the tongue
“ under his sleeping-mat, and next morning he saw that it was a
“ rope of plaited straw. Since that event all work of spectres has
“ ceased there”. *

The fear which intrepid men inspire may be so great that
even their portraits or images act as powerful charms, likenesses
being indeed as we know (pp. 342 sqq.), assimilated with their
originals, and deemed to be animated. In the second half of the
fifth century of our era there lived a terrible warrior, who answered
to the name of Hwan Khang. “In villages and towns through


JB « # * * M ^ if ^ Bo Jg ^ ® ll4 * - iK je A

SSTJifc, Mtmm. iilkSM#

Supplementary Tsze puh yu, ch. 4.


1150


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“ which he passed, he committed most cruel acts of violence, so that
“ the people in Kiang-nan feared him so much that they intimidated
“their babies by means of his name, and painted pictures of him
“ in the temples. Sufferers from fever were all forthwith cured without
“ exception if they pasted such portraits on their beds or walls. ” *
Men of courage and self-reliance may even vanquish and lay
spectres of illness which nestle within their own persons. As Twan
Ch'ing-shih relates, “ there lived in the district of Fung-ffien, in a
“village named Kwoh-shing, a commoner of the Liu tribe, who
“ laboured under madness and, whenever he had an attack, ran
“ about impetuously, heeding neither wells nor ditches. His family
“ therefore fetched one Heu Kung-min, who could restrain spectres
“ by means of spells, in order to treat the patient. No sooner had
“that man come than Liu jumped up and said: ‘I shall absent
“myself, for I have no need of your treatment’. Grasping a shoulder-
“ pole used for carrying firewood, he went to the open field,
“ bared his breast and shoulders, and brandished the pole as if he
“ were beating something ; and after a while he came back home
“and said laughingly; ‘My illness is gone, for I have just now
“knocked the head off a spectre and buried it in the field’. His
“ brothers and the conjurer, though they did not trust him and still
“ believed him to be mad, went with him to see ; and Liu dug
“ up the ground and fetched up a skull with some ten reddish
“hairs upon it. He was now totally cured. This event occurred in
“the fifth year of the Hwui ch'^ang period (A. D. 844 ).”*

It follows from all this as a matter of course, that men of mighty
stature, and therefore apt to display courage and energy, must


History of the South, ch. 46, 1. 4.

Sts. asm.

* « H e . ^ M w tt # s . in s Hi - IS

ssofi^kao hi; Supplementary Yiu-yang tsah tsu^ ch. 1.


ACCOUTREMENTS FOR INTIMIDATION OF SPECTRES.


1151


stand farther beyond the reach of demoniacal illness than the
small and the weak. A robust constitution moreover implies a
strong shen or ling. It is then very natural to read in Chinese
books statements like this : “ Fever-spectres are too tiny to render
“ tall persons ill, and therefore it is said that robust men catch no
“fever. In Tsin (Shansi) people say, that men of superior order
“catch no fever; and in Shuh (Sze-ch'wen) they consider intermit-
“ tent fever to be fever of male and female slaves. ” ^

A courageous man while boldly fighting or trying to terrify by
aggressive gestures, easily gets his hair disordered. Therefore flowing
hair intimates intrepidity, and cannot fail to inspire the spectr^
world with fear. We have learned on pp. 280 seq. that this idea
has not only formed the text of old traditions, but as early as the
Han dynasty had created the custom of setting up long-haired
heads, in order to drive away spectres. No wonder that to this day
long-haired exorcists assuming this terrifying aspect and enhancing
it by weapons brandished with vigour, are everyday appearances,
also in spectre-expelling processions (cf. 983).

Accoutrements have been worn with the same object since early
times. Before the Christian era, the fang-siang, while purifying
grave-pits, houses and streets, were dressed with bearskins and
masked with grotesque caps (Bk I, page 162); and under the Han
dynasty persons, masked as animals, feathered, haired, and horned,
accompanied them in exorcising processions, jumping about and
screaming, (Bk II, p. 976). Probably such exorcists have appeared
in all ages at funerals. Even to this day, as we have observed
on page 160 of Bk I, fang-siang are seen therein in the shape of
effigies. At the beginning of our era, “ there were ugly heads * for
driving away epidemical disease” ^ The use of these masks was ex-
plicitly prescribed in the official Ritual of the Sui dynasty : “ Offi-
“ cers from the fourth degree to the highest may use fang-siang,
“ and those of the three lowest degrees ugly heads ” In the Ritual

, Suhpohwuh

chi^ ch. 10.

2 . The character m is stated by the Shwoh wen to mean

“ugly’' or “detestable”. In books of later time we often find it written

. Shwoh wen^ ch, 9, I, 1. 14.

iS» Books of the

Sui Dynasty, ch. 8, 1. 7.


1152


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


of the K h a i y u e n period we read, that in funeral trains, “ behind
“ the carriage in which the soul-tablet was conveyed, came the
“carriage of the fang-siang, which, however, was to be replaced
“by a carriage with an ugly head at funerals of officers of any
“grade below the fifth”. ‘ And under the Sung dynasty, according
to its Official Ritual, “ the officers of the four highest degrees might
“have one fang-siang, and those below in rank to the seventh
“ degree an ugly head. ” ^ And the same Ritual refers to those
customs in a statement to this effect: “With respect to the funeral
“rites of officers and common people, it was decreed in the third
“year of the Khai pao period (A. D. 970) that in the department
“of Khai-fung (containing the Metropolis) it was forbidden to all
“families who had a burial to perform, to occupy themselves with
“Taoist and Buddhist observances, or to employ a van of men
“masked as strange men or animals”.* Finally, under the house
of Ming, “fang-siang with four eyes were allowed for funerals
“of officers of the highest degree to the fourth, and with two eyes
“for those of officers from the fifth degree to the seventh; but for
“officers of the eighth or any lower rank there might not be used
“any fang-siang”*.

Noteworthy, but ambiguous, are the following lines on the subject,
written in the eighth century by Twan Cffiing-shih: “ Ugly heads serve
“to protect the spirits of the dead. They are called su i pei su®,
“in which term su means likeness; and they are called khwang
“tsu, ‘ravening obstacles ’ (?), or also ch'uh khwang, ‘grave
“ as3ailers’(?). If they have four eyes, they are called fang-siang;
“if they have two, they are named khi or ‘dancers’ (?). Seeing
“that Fei Chang-fang (see p. 1170) was acquainted with medicine
“balls of Li Ngo, which he called fang-siang brains, it may
“be that the fang-siang were spectral beings, and that the officers


History

of the Sung Dynasty, ch. 124, 1. 13.

The same work, ch. 125, 1. 1.

. History of the Ming Dynasty, ch. 60, 1. 15.

5 Is there an exotic word concealed in this term, as also in the following?


SPECTRES FEAR SCHOLARS, EMPERORS, aND MANDARINS. 1153

“(denoted by this name), who were employed by the former sages
“ (of the Cheu dynasty), were the representatives thereof/’ *

But, as we have stated, as well as the intrepid man and the man
who inspires awe by shape, accoutrement and gesture, the intelli-
gent man, likewise owing to his abundance of shen and ling,
naturally possesses a special degree of resistance and power against
the spectral world. This power is the common advantage of the whole
intellectual class. Every scholar, even all students, nay schoolboys,
possess it in a measure adequate to their ability and literary attain-
ments; but in particular it is imparted to them in proportion to
the height of the degree which they obtain in the state-examinations.
There is, however, for this conception a second ground, which was
set forth by us on page 1010: a learned man means a man imbued
with the classical doctrine which keeps mankind in the path of
the normality, correctness or rectitude (ching or twan) of the
Tao or Universal Order, so that he cannot but exercise a contrary
and destructive influence upon everything which is sie or abnorm-
al, incorrect, and bad. It follows then that a scholar, should he
venture to indulge in non-classical or heterodox study, loses his
invulnerability and power, and falls a prey to the demon world, to
see accordingly his fortunes wane more and more as he sinks deeper
into his abnormalities.

Still higher than scholars in the ranks of natural exorcists stand
members of the ruling class. Indeed, these are, theoretically, the
cream of the intellectuals; moreover they derive exorcising power
from the Son of Heaven, the bearers of whose power they are in
administering a government which rests on the Classics and the
Tao, and from whom therefore, proportionately to their rank and
dignity, they borrow the authority which that highest being on
•this earth wields over all spirits that be. All shen, be they gods
or human souls, are, as we know, in the system of the World of
a homogeneous constitution, being altogether parts of the one Uni-
versal Yang; consequently, superior among them must be the soul
or spirit of the reigning emperor, who is no less than the son of

Yiu-yang tsah tsu, ch. 13.


73


1154


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Heaven, being thus a magnitude second only to this power which governs
the Universe and above which there is none. It is then a first and
natural article of China’s political and religious creed that the
emperor, like Heaven itself, is the lord and ruler of the gods or
spirits ; how powerless then must the k w e i , those miserable yin
beings, which in the Order of the World are always a prey to the
influences of the Yang and its shen, dwindle before him, who is
the male or yang child of Heaven, and the very embodiment of
the Yang on this earth.

This great dogma does not, however, imply that the emperor
and his government, his magnates and dignitaries, are under all
circumstances beyond the power of the demon world. Heaven, which
reigns supreme in the Universe over all things that be, may allow
spectres to harm even his own son and his proxies, should they,
instead of maintaining the Tao among the human race by a clas-
sically orthodox, virtuous rule, sin against the Tao by misrule or
private misconduct. This logic is fully in accordance with the fact,
that history tells on every page of mandarins who fell ill or became
victims to such fatalities as are common to all men, and that
Heaven, by withdrawing its protecting hand from worthless and
sinful imperial rulers, has often caused their thrones to totter and
fall, themselves together with their satellites to incur ignominy and
even death, mostly by the hand of insurgents aided by spectral
legions.

These doctrines have their root in the Classics. According to the
S/tu Mng, I-yin \ a most virtuous statesman who had an influential
hand in the overthrow of the Hia dynasty and .the accession of the
celebrated "Uang who founded a new house known by the name
ot Shang, uttered the following words in the year 1753 before our
era, addressing ’Fai-kiah T'ang’s grandson and successor :

“Alas! it is so diflicult to rely on Heaven, and its appoint-,
“ ments (to imperial dignity) are so precarious, if the emperor’s
“ virtues are stable and constant. Heaven protects his throne ; but
“if his virtues are unstable, he loses his nine possessions (or great
“ provinces constituting the empire). The ruler of the Hia dynasty
“ was not able to practice any virtue ; he offended the gods, he
“oppressed his people. So the Imperial Heaven protected him not,
“and its eye wandered over the myriads of regions to see if there


1 pp-.


THE EMPEROR iS THE RULER OF ALL GODS AND SPIRITS. 1155


*were any one to whom the imperial appointment could be given;
“with a look of affection it sought an all-virtuous man to make
“him lord of the 8 hen. Only myself and T^ang were possessed of
“perfect virtue and could thereby enjoy Heaven’s affectionate favour;
“so it was he who received the glorious appointment (to the imperial
“dignity), and thus became the master of the people in the nine
“ provinces.” ^

The supremacy of good rulers over all the shen is also stated
in the tihi king, in a verse which relates to the illustrious Wu, the
founder of the Cheu dynasty : “ He contained in himself the hundreds
of shen, and bent them to his will”*. And that perfect rulers
keep all evil spirits at a distance is stated by the Tso ch^wen in the
following lines, which relate to the year 534 B. C. :

“Tsze-ch'^an of Ching went on a visit to Tsin. The feudal ruler
“ of this state at that time was ill, and Han Siien-tsze, who went

“to meet the visitor, said to him privately, 'Our ruler has been

“ill in bed for three months; we have all been running about,
“sacrificing to the hills and streams, but his illness has become
“worse instead of better; and now he has dreamt that a yellow
“bear has entered the inner gate of his courtyard; what evil ghost
“may this be?’ — 'With a prince so intelligent as yours’, replied
“ Tsze-ch'^an, 'and with you at the head of the government, what
“evil spirits can there be?’”^

No wonder then that in literature of every age mandarins, and

especially the military, are represented as acute, audacious, and

successful fighters of spectres. The renowned statesman Tih Jen-


a

if ± . ti ^ *3 a ^ ^ - n > . s ^ w

, The Books of Shang, section

“both possessed perfect virtue’*.

2 ^ W P . Section ^ , Odes of Chen, VIII.

^ 0 , B

^ Z ^ A M Z^ ' se'enti, ye.ar of Cliao's

reign.


1156


'rHE WAR AGAINST SPElCTRES.


kieh, of whom we have spoken on page 466 of Book I, by his
eminence and intrepidity was even able to put a stop to the opera-
tions of a human spectre which had by its mere visits killed quite
a series of high officers. “ In the reign of the empress Tseh-t^ien
"(A. D. 684 — 705) he became Governor of Ning-cheu. The official
‘‘mansion of that place had always been a scene of misfortunes,
“and more than ten of his predecessors had died in it. No sooner
“had he arrived than his underlini^s warned him that the building
“had suffered for a long time from evil, and everybody had
“ lacked courage to live in it ; shrubs, weeds and thorny brambles
“had converted it into ruins, so that, as it was completely uninha-
“ bitable, they entreated him to lodge somewhere else. But he
“said, ‘Shall a Governor not dwell in his own mansion, but lodge
“in another?’ And he told them to unseal and unlock the doors,
“and to put the mansion in a state of repair; after which he
“ settled there.

“In accordance with his expectations there then occurred appa-
“ritions and strange things for several nights, and so often that
“they cannot be recorded. In the end he burst into anger and
“exclaimed, G am the Governor, and this here is my dwelling;
“you are treacherous, I am honest; how is it that you do not
“understand that difference, but put your sie against my ching?
“If you are shen, then forthwith obey the laws of light; but if
“you are kwei or mei, whence then have you such boldness as
“to thwart me? I do not choose to fear you, and it is therefore
“of no use to you to assume a thousand, even ten thousand shapes;
“if you have a reasonable desire to see me, why then do not you
“come forth respectfully and politely?

“Hereupon a man appeared, wearing a complete official dress
“and an official cap; he planted himself in front of him, and
“said, G was an officer of the Imperial House So-and-so, and have
“been buried under the tree at the west of the steps of this hall;
“my material soul (p^oh) is pierced by the roots, which thus make
“ me suffer intolerably. I appeared before quite a series of Governors
“ to inform them of it, but all died at the very moment, so that
“ the way of communication from the lower world has remained
“closed to me to this day. If you are able piously to bury me
“somewhere else, my lord, why then should you hesitate?’ With
“these words the spectre vanished.

“Next day Jen-kieh ordered his men to dig in the ground at
“ the spot indicated, and discovered that the spectre had told the


MANDARINS ARE FEARED BY SPECTRES.


1157


truth. He buried its remains somewhere else, and since that time
“there have been no more apparitions.”^

A similar story is told of a famous general of modern time, who
under Shi Tsu of the now reigning House reconquered the so-called
Three Feodalities viz. Sze-chSven, Kwangtung and Fuhkien, after
the great rising in 1674, which is commonly styled the insurrection
of Wu San-kwei feudal ruler of Szg-ch^wen. “When the supreme
“Commander Chao Liang-tung had reduced the Three Feodalities
“ to subjection, his way led him through Ch^ing-tu in Sze-ch^ven.
“Here the Governor of the province received him, and assigned a
“private house to him; but as he found this too small, he preferred
“to lodge in the Yamen of the Provincial Judge, situated westward
“from the city. But the Governor said, H am told that that Yamen
“has been locked up for more than a hundred years, being haunted
“by spectres on an extensive scale, so that I cannot permit
“myself to make it ready for you'. On which the Commander
“laughed and answered, Hn reducing the rebels to subjection, 1 have
“slain people in such countless numbers that even spectres, if they
“have ling, must fear me’. And having sent his domestics thither


S 75 H » tt I . ft » ft » , iS « BJ ii: , *- * a « .
ft » # i= . ® «E ti ft 2 , a S ^ » S -fl: ^ . ii!'

SIWiSffiT, ft

4 -.

^ . K K, ch. 329.


1158


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“to sweep, he lodged his family in the inner chambers, while he
“occupied the main apartment and laid himself down there to
“sleep, his head resting on the long halberd which he was wont
“to use on the battle-field.

“It was the hour of the second watch drum when the hooks
“of his bed-curtain clinked, and a tall being with a white shirt
“and a big swag belly filled up the whole space before the bed.
“ The light of the candles at the same time became bluish and weak.
“The General sat up, and his voice of thunder sent the spectre
“three paces backward; the light of the candle thereby flared
“up and became a steady glare, so that the general could see that
“the spectre’s head and face were like those of a fang-siang
“spirit, as people generally portray it. He seized his halberd and
“stabbed at the spectre, but it fled up the roof beam; here too,
“ however, the halberd reached it, and again the spectre had to
“flee, chased into a side alley, where it vanished.

“Now returning to his room, the General perceived that somebody
“followed him. He turned round and looked, and saw that the
“same spectre came on smilingly quite close behind him. This
“irritated the General so much that he exclaimed with a curse,
“‘Where in the world have I come across so leathern-faced (brazen-
“ faced) a spectre as this?’ All the domestics now awoke and came
“on the scene with their weapons; but the spectre retired and ran
“through the side alley into an empty room. And while sand and
“dust were whirled up, and a clattering noise indicated that the
“whole hideous crew had flocked together to fight them, the spectre
“ran forward into the central apartment, and there turned on them
“deliberately like (a tiger) in a recess of a hill h The servants all
“ regarded each other and lacked courage to fall on ; so the General,
“whose rage was thereby redoubled, thrust his halberd with his
“own hand into the spectre’s belly. A noise was heard as if an
“ inflated body had been pierced ; the spectre became invisible, and
“nothing remained but two glistering eyes on the wall, as large
“as bronze platters, which emitted a blinding light. The domestics
“ at once fell on them with their swords, belabouring them so
“well that they scattered into sparks which filled the- appartment
“and, gradually diminishing in size, finally disappeared. It has
“ never been understood what spectre this was. ” ®

1 An expression borrowed IVom Mencius, sect. ^ ^ 11^ § 23.

5 ssigpijii^as. ;ii


EMPERORS AS NATURAL EXORCISTS.


1159


Emperors no doubt have often actually played their role of na-
tural exorcists. We have related on pp. 477, 479 and 481 some
instances of their interference to rescue their people who were
suffering from spectre-panics. It may be suggested that they did
not proffer their aid before the mandarins in authority in the
harrassed districts had exhausted their own best attempts to lay the
spectres, and, more or less after the fashion which we have sketched
on page 473, had duly engaged the gods in the defensive warfare.

We have noted before, that the superstitious confidence, repo-
sed in the exorcising capacities of mandarins, is extended by the
people even to characters and signs written with their carnation
jnk pencils (see pp. 1048 and 1052). It is extended also to these
pencils themselves. In Amoy these things are placed upon the sick
to cure them, or fastened to the bedside, or above the door. Black
ink pencils with the same origin are also considered useful, though


» SB ^ . S It T S #5 > » m « * Pa . S St IS ss a

:tr#***. a?*

sW-SA®. ffi SIS # n it s K e ft .

SAa. IB A. n'h. jaMAM.

Taze puh ?/«, chapter 1.


1160


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


in a lesser degree Servants and underlings of mandarins draw some
income from the sale of both kinds, either directly from the people,
or through shopkeepers. Name-cards of mandarins, impresses of their
seals, and waste letter-covers which bear such impresses, in parti-
cular those of Viceroys and other first rank dignitaries, and of
Provincial Chief Judges, are likewise highly prized for use in the
said manners, and are, moreover, burned to ashes for patients to
drink with water. One seal-impress is considered indispensable by
many at every marriage to ensure felicity to the couple for all their
lives, and then should be carried by the bride in her pocket or dress
while being transported to the home of the bridegroom. Poor people
who cannot afford to buy such genuine refuse from a Yamen,
content themselves with that of teachers or other less distinguished
members of the learned class. These men are also often requested
to draw circles of cinnabar ink round pustules and ulcers, where-
with in unclean China people, and children in particular, are com-
monly troubled. And finally people make much use in similar ways
and for similar ends of pencils and bits of manuscript of school-
boys, and red circles made by them, in the comfortable conviction
that specties are intimidated as much by prospective graduates and
mandarins as by complete dignitaries.

Indeed, that the spectral world, in fearing and avoiding men,
virtually anticipates their future greatness, thereby showing a power
of foresight, is taught by books on many a page. We read for
instance in the Standard History of the Sung dynasty the following
lines about Wang Tan b who obtained the tsin-shi degree in
9S0, and later on became a Minister of State; " W^hen he became
“prefect of the district of P^ing-kiang, the mansion there had been
“for a long time haunted by spectres which possessed and worried
“the inmates, so that rest and peace were frequently disturbed.
“But in the evening before Tan’s arrival the guard heard the
“spectres whistle and exclaim, 'A Minister is coming, we must be
“off’. And from that moment the trouble ceased. We have read
on pp. 767 seq., in a narrative from a book of the twelfth century,
of a man whose future greatness in official service was anticipated


^ S M

S*.i*l*. History ot the Sung Dynasty, ch. 282, 1. 7.


SPECTRES FEAR PROSPECTIVE GRANDEES.


1161


by the ugly denizens of the spectral world, and who consequently
assailed them with surprising success. And further we may quote
from the writings of Sui Yuen the following tale, which is to the
same effect ;

“In the last }ear of the reign of the Ming dynasty (1644), the
“ son of one Chang in the Hwang-kang department of Hukwang
“ was very ill, and his mind was disturbed by spectres. No sooner
“ did one spectre come near him than the whole mob of them hurried to
“ the spot, begging for food and paper money at the housedoor in
“disorderly crowds. Once it chanced that Liu Koh-yiu, the Master,
“opened the gate and walked in. All the spectres were seized with
“fright; 'there is the chung-yuen’ (highest among the tsin-shi
“graduates), they cried with one voice, 'we must get out of his
“way’; but an old spectre which fled with the rest, having turned
“its head, cried in derision, 'A chung-yuen without a hat of
“gauze; why need we fear him?’ At the same moment the patient
“ became better. Nobody at that time understood the meaning of
“that exclamation; and not until Liu took the chung-yuen
“degree under the dynasty which now occupies the throne, did
“ that mocking remark of the old spectre became thoroughly intel-
“ligible”k That is to say, hats of gauze belonged to the costume
of hi^h literary graduates under the Ming dynasty, but were
abolished by the present House, which dethroned it.

As we may expect, persons pre-destined by the Tao to found
a dynasty have been respected and feared by spectres more than
any. When Kao Tsu, the founder of the short-lived house of Han
in the tenth century, “ was still commander of the Body Guard,
“one Wu, living next-door to his official residence, had a beautiful
“daughter, who was wont to wear blue garments and was under the
“influence of a hill-si a o. This spectre could speak the human tongue,
“and used to throw tiles and stones about, so that the soldiers
“lacked courage to pass Wu’s house; but the (future) emperor did

« SJ iff * 4 « P"! Hi A . » H S 0 , « 7C * T >

HAtc.

. Supplementary Taze piih

chapter 4.


1162


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“so, and — the spectres did nothing, only however to recommence
“their operations as soon as the emperor was gone. When this
“occurred a second time, some one said to the spectre, ‘Spirit, why
“did you keep quiet just now when that stranger appeared?’ And
“the spectre said, ‘he is a grandee’. From that moment he was
“regarded in the army as a prodigy.”*

It may be considered a matter of course that the conviction
that mandarins and scholars derive from their dignity exorcising
power and immunity from spectral evil endows them with an
amount of self-reliance and boldness which is calculated to increase
their anti-spectral propensities. Their underlings and the common
people, too, when under their protection, may face and brave spectres
with impunity, and, if armed with their special order or authori-
sation, may even attack those beings, and at any rate do many a
thing which under other circumstances they would prefer not to
attempt. Here we have another principal reason, in addition to
those which we have given on page 866 of Book I, why people
will not presume to touch neglected graves of others even with the
benevolent intention of repairing them, except with explicit official
consent.

But in order to enjoy immunity from spectral evil and even
prevail over spectres, it is amply sufficient to walk in the path of
orthodox virtue, that is to say, in the Tao or W ay of Man, which
is the ethics preached by the Order of the Universe by means of
the Classics. He who does so is just as normal, right, and correct
(ching or twan) as those holy books themselves, and therefore
just as capable of expelling demons; as an exorcist he is on a par
with students and scholars. He is a man of “ righteousness” or
chih jg, a term synonymous with ching, which means moving
in the course or path of undeviating rectitude. Thus it was that the
prefect Tu Yen-fan, a man explicitly declared to be ching and
chih, could, with exorcising intent, seat himself with impunity


# te * . S 111 ® js;r » . A bI A W ffi « R 5 . » ffi
« ^ ft 2 ^ # .IS- a 2 a

the Five Dynasties, ch. 110, 1. 3. See also the Ch’eh fu yuen kwci, ch 21, 1. 25.


SPECTRES FEAR MEN OF TAOIST AND CLASSICAL VIRTUE. 1 J 63

cross-legged amidst a horde of assailing spectres (see p. 473). And
Sung Ta-hien, “a man who had been walking in the correct or
normal Tao” (see p. 595), likewise owed 4;o this fact his supremacy
over spectres. And, as a third example, we may here refer to the
worthy man whom self-cultivated virtue allowed to swallow a terrible
“gold caterpillar'’, without any inconvenience (p. 856). The famous
Poem of the Breaths of Rectitude (p. 1014), according to established
opinion, owes its anti-spectral power principally to the many names
of men imbued with natural virtue, who are mentioned in it. No
wonder that Chinese to-day are always ready to believe and assert
that there is living in the empire many a worthy so thoroughly
saturated with standard virtue that no spectres dare show them-
selves within a compass of several miles round his august person,
in consequence of which the family, village or town which enjoys
the possession of such a paragon is bound to flourish miraculously.

•Such highly endowed ‘'scare spectres” have lived in China from
very early, times. As we read in the Standard History of the Tsin
dynasty, “there were spectres in the house of Kao Li, discussions
“ and noise of voices being heard there, and missiles thrown, without
“ human shape being seen anywhere within or without. Sometimes
“utensils and things moved spontaneously; fire broke out repeatedly;
“and though Wu-ist priests tried to restrain the evil by repress-
“ive measures, they were utterly unable to put an end to it. It
“chanced at that time that Hing Ling wished to go thither. When
“still at the end of the street with the house in the distance, he
“said to Kao Li, ‘Is that yours?’ and being answered that it was,
“he said, ‘1 know enough of it’. Kao Li bade him enter with so
“ much insistance that Ling was constrained to walk to the door,
“where, observing the numerous charms and cords, he said to Kao:
“‘S.ie must be stopped by means of tsing’, and told him to
“burn those things. He then sat down for a short while against
“the lattice window, and thereupon went away; and that night
“ the operations of the spectres ceased. ” '


^ ^ 01 ^ *15 > O ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ft ^


1164


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


A high place among the favoured beings, who individually possess
and exercise special pOvver over the spectral world, has, of course,
been occupied in all ages by an extensive class of men who have
been striving all their lives to obtain, by means of bodily and
mental discipline, longevity and immortality by absorption in the Tao.
Such Taoists by profession, called tao jen^ or ‘^raen of the Tao”,
or tao shi^, “doctors of the Tao”, occur indeed, as our readers
may have observed on many pages, with remarkable frequency in
Chinese writings as exorcising magicians, and as specialists in the know-
ledge of the mysteries of the spectral world \ Under their sacerdotal
leadership, the Taoist religion has, as we have cursorily noted on
page 931, become a system devoted almost in the main to exor-
cism, practised principally by means of the s h e n or gods of light,

which in the system of the Universe constitute the powers diametric-
ally opposed to the kwei. It goes without saying that the priestly
magic of these men, by means of which those gods are set to work
against the spectres, naturally enhances the fear and respect which
spectres entertain for them. In their hands, exorcism is actually a
part of the white magic practised by Taoism for the good of man.

With obvious frequency also we have seen in this work that the

exorcising profession is exercised by the class of w u. The existence
of these animistic priests may be traced in China’s records to a
much higher antiquity than that of “Taoist men” and “Taoist
doctors”. They are indebted for their exorcising propensities funda-
mentally to the circumstance that they are occasionally possessed
by shen, in which state they are gods or spirits themselves; but
the reader will tind the particulars hereof in the next Part of
this Book.

And along with the wii and the Taoists, the Buddhist priesthood
stands prominent in matters of exorcism. Indeed, devotees of Buddhist
salvation also move by religious discipline in a Tao or Way up to
a state of perfection comparable with absorption into the great
Universe, a state which they call Nirvana and conceive to be Uni-
versal Nothingness. And, like their Taoist colleagues, by means of

Books of tlie Tbin Dynasty, ch. 95, 1. 18. As this Standard History
was compiled in the epoch of T^ing, this tale was probably borrowed from T'ao
Ts'^ien’s ^heu shen heu hi, ch. 2; or from its edition in two chapters, II.

^ ^ A • ^ ^ i-

3 See f. y. pp. 472, 583 scq, 593, 595, 606, 640, C55, 227, H47.


SPEC'fllES PEAll PRIESTS AND PHYSICIANS.


1165


invocation, worship, sacrifice and magic they employ their gods of
light, whom they call Buddhas, in the struggle against the world
of Maras or spectres. Their power over spectres we have already
seen illustrated by Chinese authors on pp. 578 seq., 590, 591 »eq.,
and it will, of course, be an object of frequent attention in our
Book on Buddhism.

The close connection which, as we have learned, exists in China
between disease and demoniacal possession or obsession, actually
blending the exorcising and the medical art into one branch of
magic, explains why Taoist doctors and w u are so generally describ-
ed as physicians and dispensers of medicines, amulets, and charms.
Conversely, the virtue of leeches in expelling spectres may be so
great, that spectres lodging within the sick take fright at their
mere approach (cf. p. 678). We have then here in this Chapter to
rank the practitioners of the medical profession on a par with
mandarins, scholars, priests. The excellence of their medicines has
sometimes been attested by panics, called forth among spectres by
their presence. We have seen this instanced on pp. 1076 and 1088,
and may, moreover, refer to the following case mentioned in a book
of the 'Pang dynasty: “One Hoh Kung-king had been out in
“ Mount 'Fai to gather drugs, and afterwards passed a spectre-seer
“ in the bazaar, who felt astonished at the fact that all spectres
“ took to flight on perceiving Kung-king. This revelation induced
“ him to make mixtures of those drugs in the form of spectre-
“ killing balls, which cured all patients who consumed them.’’^


Chao ye kien tsai, quoted in K K, ch. 218.


CHAPTER XXL


SPECTRE-SEERS.

Since the possession of a strong, exquisite s h e n not only imparts
power over spectres, but also is identical with acuteness of mind
and intelligence, and with high development of the senses of per-
ception, spectre-expellers of great attainments have a sight of extra-
ordinary sharpness, a second sight, enabling them to see spectres*
which ordinary people cannot see.

We find indeed that medical exorcists of a high order are
described as seers of this kind. Such was the case with Hwan and
Li Tsze-yii (pp. 678 and 679), as also with Sii Chi-ts'^ai of the sixth
century, a most famous leech of whom the following incident is
related: man was suffering from a painful swelling in his

“ heels, and no physician could explain the case, until Sii Chi-ts^ai
“declared it to be a disease caused by oyster-spirits, the patient
“having had his legs dangling in the water from a ship while
“putting to sea. The patient avowed that this had indeed occurred;
“Chi-ts'^ai therefore cut open his heels, and found two oysters
“ therein, of the size o^ elm-seeds. ” *

The ability to see spectres is-an attribute of exorcists in general;
we may here refer to Fei Ch"ang-fang (see p. 582) and other heroes
of narratives inserted in this Volume and the preceding. It therefore
stands to reason that to see spectres means to conquer them ; and so,
as our Chapter IX, which treats the exorcising power of mirrors,
has shown in particular, the danger of being discovered is to spectres
a powerful inducement to flee. Besides mirrors, some other things
may render them visible; but, unhappily, these are no longer alto-


North, ch. 90, 1. 5; also Books of the Northern Ts^i Dynasty, ch. 33, 1. 6.


HERBS AND OTHER THINGS AFFORDING SECOND SIGHT. 1167

gether within human reach. The T^ung ming Id, the book of the
beginning of our era, to which we owe also the oldest information
about spectre-detecting mirrors (cf. page 1000), says, that in the
year 99 before our era the emperor Wu convoked a meeting of
magicians and learned men, at which Tung Fang-soh spoke as
follows: “1 made a journey to the north pole, and came to a
“ mountain planted with fire, which neither the sun, nor the moon
“ever illumines, but which is lighted to its uttermost bounds by a
“blue dragon by means of a torch which it holds in its jaws.
“ I found in that mountain gardens, fields, and parks with ponds, all
“studded with strange trees and curious plants, and with shrubs
“which had luminiferous stalks, seeming at night to be lamps of
“gold. These stalks could be broken off and used as torches, in the
“light of w'hich the spectres were visible. Ning-fung, the immortal,
“had always eaten this plant, the consequence being that in the
“darkness ot the night there beamed light out of his belly. It is
“called the herb which pierces darkness.’ The emperor ordered this
“ herb to be chopped up, and a plaster to be made of it, and the
“Yun-ming building to be daubed therewith; and when sitting
“ there at night, he could actually dispense with lamps or torches.
“It was also called the spectre-lighting plant. Shoes made of plaits
“of it were impervious to water.” ^

Koh Hung, the great Taoist patriarch, knew an even better
raetliod, quite within human reach, of discovering spectres and
thereby scaring them away. The Taoists of his time, he says, did
not confine themselves to the use of “ celestial water charms ” and
“bamboo commissions from the Supreme Emperor” (see p. 1036),
nor to writings from which the names of spectres might be learnt
(see page 1125); but they also swallowed “ medicine balls prepared of
red stones obtained from quail’s eggs” and “ pills made of onion


111! A®

. Chapter 3.

2


1168


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


seeds and crow’s eyes”', and yet other minced substances, “all
which enabled men to see spectres, so that these feared them”
Crow’s eyes in particular seem to have been deemed useful. Ch'en
Tsang-khi states, “that when swallowed, they confer the capacity to
“see mei, and if the eyes be moistened with a solution of the
“ powder in water, they are enabled to see spectres at night. ” ’
Undoubtedly China’s magicians and exorcists have in all ages pos-
sessed many more things which afford second sight. According to
Twan Ch'ing-shih, a man may become a ghost-seer by drinking^
the blood of a fei-fei (see page 508). Medical and other works
mention numerous plants which, when eaten, impart that same
faculty; and, of course, we find among these plants many which
are strongly animated, therefore capable of reinforcing the soul or
the senses.

Spectre-seers, so useful in China as discoverers of the real cha-
racter of diseases, are also able to see hidden things from which
dangers and misfortunes emanate. These things are endlessly various,
nothing in the Universe being inanimate and consequently unable
to cause ill; they may, as we know, be corpses or bones of animals,
or plants, images, etc., and be hidden on purpose by sorcerers (cf. pp.
908 sqq.). Narratives about discoveries of such things are numerous.
“One Wang Teh-jiu, who dwelt in Yih-tu in Tsbng-cheu (in Shan-
“ tung pr.), had built a house by the north wall of the city, and
“when it was finished, hundreds of spectres came forth all at
“once, appearing and disappearing in broad daylight in smoke and
“vapours and in the herbage, in the shape of spirits with bird-
“ like faces.

“ He called in Taoist magicians to perform their magic, but the
“attempts of these men to catch the spectres or bring them to
“ reason were ineffective. Then a dog-butcher, who answered to the
“name of Fan Wu, went to the house quite alone, and passed the
“night there. At midnight a person jumped out of the ground in
“the side-gallery on the west, a dwarf with a short neck, clad in a
“red dress, corpulent, plump and round. Clasping his hands, he sang


* E SR A-

ch. 4, sect. 47,

Pen-t^ao hang mu/i, ch. 49, K 11.


SPECTRE-SEEKS.


1169


“and gesticulated in the courtyard; but Fan Wu ran after him, sword
“in hand, into the south-eastern corner, where the being vanished.
“Fan Wu marked the spot, dug up the ground there next morning,
“and found a dry crab. He threw this beast into the water, and
“ from that time the house was in the best condition .” *

The making of such discoveries is to this hour professional work
of possessed mediums, whom we will depict engaged in such business
in Chapter IV of the next Part of this Book.


Memoil's concerning tlie Department of Tb^ing-cheu ; quoted in T S, sect.


CHAPTER XXII.


HISTORICAL AND MYTHICAL SPECIALISTS IN EXORCISM.


Millions of exorcists have in the long course of ages lived and
died on Chinese soil, but only a few have survived in literature
or tradition as paragons outvieing all the rest in capacity and
power. Their feats, embellished and exaggerated, and rarely disbe-
lieved, have occupied the minds of every generation, and are well
known to this day.

Among those whom men of erudition know best as exorcists
and spectre-seers of extraordinary attainments, is Pei ClPang-fang \
a Taoist of the Han dynasty, whose powers and achievements are
perpetuated by Standard History of his time. Plis feats, as men-
tioned therein, we have reproduced on pp. 582 and 622. And we
have stated on page 1034 that he owed his endowments to a
charm which an unknown worthy of great age gave him, and that,
as he had the misfortune to lose this treasure, the spectres seized
their opportunity and killed him. Thus it is evident to all China
that even those whom spectres dread most are not uncondition-
nally beyond their power.

Another famous exorcist in the age of Han, likewise honoured
with a place in Standard History, was Sheu Kwang-heu ^ of whom
we have mentioned on pp. 629, 655 and 1029 everything which
that source has to tell. Immortalized by Standard History also is
Ming Chhmg-yen of the seventh century, who, as we have seen
on page 1030, by means of a charm ordered a dragon to descend
from the sky and deliver up its own liver as a medicine for a
patient. This magician has in the same manner called down a dragon
which by its mere appearance put a stop to the music made by an
invisible underground band (see page 1029). He learned the art of
employing evoked kwei and shen”^ from a yamen servant


SOLAR EXORCISTS.


1171


of his father, who was a district prefect. Ming Ch‘'ung-yen was a
great favourite of the emperor Kao Tsiing, to whom he revealed
all sorts of secrets relating to the administration of the state, and
who therefore created him a Censor. He was murdered in 679,
either by the spectres whom he had so often persecuted and deeply
offended, or by order of a crown-prince whom his influence and
machinations had caused the emperor to exclude from succession to
the throne. *

But these three renowned exorcists with the other exorcising w u
and Taoist doctors whom China has produced, are altogether
of less interest than a few whose power and feats have given
birth to lasting and important exorcising customs and usages. We
allude here in the first place to the mythical brothers Shen-t^i and
Yuh-lei, the solar myth concerning whom, and the part which they
play to this day in Chinese life we have described in Chapter IV.
We may mention here the existence of another solar myth bearing
upon the destruction of spectres, though we are not aware of any
customs and practices created by it; it may likewise be of ancient
date, though we have not found it in any work older than the
S/ie?i i king^ ascribed to the fourth or the fifth century of our era.
“In the east and the south there is a person who perambulates
“throughout the world under heaven. He is seven chang in size,
“and the volume of his belly is equal to his length. On his head
“he bears the father of fowls and an 'ugly mask’. lie wears a red
“dress with a girdle of white silk. A red snake, the tail of which
“is connected with its head, is curled round his forehead. He does
“not drink, he does not eat, but swallows three thousand evil
“spectres in the morning, and three hundred of those beings in
“the evening; spectres are the food of this man, and dew is the
“broth which he drinks. His name is Ch"ih-kwoh; another name
“is Si e-eater, for, according to the Taoists, he swallows sie spec-
“tres. One of his names is Red Hwang-fu. Nowadays there exist
“hwang-fu spectres.” ^

1 Old Books of the T^ing Dynasty, cli. 191, 1. 10: New Books, ch. 204, 1. 9.

A H s© 0 H


117:2


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Evideutly, this red spectrophagous being who is just as broad as
tall, and travels through the world from the east and the south,
where the sun rises and ascends, and bears a cock or solar bird
uj)on its disk, is the god of day himself who absorbs the morning
dew, and devours spectres of darkness in numbers especially large
when he rises, but in more modest quantities in the evening when
his light decays. It is characteristical to see him described as a
bearer of an ''ugly mask”, which, as we have seen on page 1152 ,
was part of exorcising costume. But by far the most curious solar
exorcist is an object of jade, which rulers in ancient China used in
sun-worship, and afterwards was transformed into a man known as
Chung-khwei, whose name, as we have seen on page 1044 , is to
tins day a very powerful element in written charms. His origin
has greatly puzzled Chinese savants, and yet they have solved its
mystery sagaciously and in a manner apparently correct. We find
it in the tliirty-second chapter of the great collection of treatises
of general scientific interest, known as Jih chi lah, composed by
Ku Yen-wu in the seventeenth century. The honour of having found
the solution may, however, belong to earlier writers whose names
we have not been able as yet to discover.

In a description of the functions of certain ^Comptrollers of signets
or badges of jade h contained in the Cheu li, we read, that “ the
“ Sovereign, while worshipping the sun in the morning (at the equinox
of spring), wore in his girdle a large kwei, and had in his hands
a kwei of dominion ’ ^ This large kwei, according to the
Khienlung edition of that ancient book \ was a piece of jade

shaped like this figure |

for it is stated in another part of the Cheu //, which refers to certain
'‘Keepers of the articles of jade”b that "the large kwei was
"three ch 4 h in length, and had a chung-khwei head above
the place where it tapered away ’’ \

It is to this head of that badge, which the most powerful man


. Chapter 20, 1. 34.

3 Chapter 45, 1. 47,

3E A-

. Chapter 43, 1. i8.


THE ORIGIN OF CHUNG-KHVVEI.


1173


and exorcist of the State used to carry while worshipping the universal
devil-destroying god of light on the actual equinox when this god
defeats darkness and its powers, that our Chung-khwei owes his
origin. According to Ching Khang-clring, “a chung-khwei means
a hammer’' \ and Kia Kung-yen states “ that the term was the
vernacular expression denoting a hammer among the people of IVi” ^
This theory does not explain why the name of the god has assum-
ed in writing the form but we observe, that in the second

character of this binoiniuin the component"^ or "head” occurs,
representing perhaps the ^ ^ ^ or ^chung-khwei head”,
mentioned by the C/ieu //. Certainly it is not inadmissible tliat, as such
hammers were borne in sun-worship, they have been carried also by
people among other arms, nay in preference to all others, in their
war against demons of darkness, for instance in the old no pro-
cessions. It also is comprehensible that many a child should have
been endowed by its parents with the name Chung-khwei, in order
that spectres might keep aloof. We find indeed, that in the two
or three centuries antecedent to the T'^ang dynasty several bearers
of that name are mentioned in literature. Ku Yen-wu draws atten-
tion to no less than eight whose names w^ere written ^ and
two cases in which it was^j^;3 and we thus see here before
us a transition from the old form of khwei to the modern. That
author also draws attention to the fact, that in the Tso clhcen^ in the
record of events of the fourth year of the reign of Ting (50b b. C.),
one i^ mentioned; which might point to a high antiquity of

that choice in name-giving. All doubt whether those persons were
really named after the devil-expelling hammer or the spirit then
already personifying that instrument seems to vanish before the
historical statement that one of them bore, besides the name Chung-
khwei, that of P7h-sie ^ or "Expulsion of spectral Evil”.

That person was one Yao Hiien % a strategist and military com-
mander in the service of the AVei dynasty, able and brave, a favourite
of his sovereign until his death in 495. His short biographies in
the History of the North ® and in the Books of the Wei Dynasty ^


, Kliienlung edition, ibid.

a Tliey are also mentioned by Chao Yili in a ti-eatijrC uii the same subject, inserted
in the K<ti yd Ibdoiy kfuw^ chaj)ter 35, 11. 22

^ Hi-

6 Chapter 27, 1. 25. 7 Chapter 42, 1. 14.


1174


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


do not contain, however, the slightest reference to exorcising capa-
cities which he may have possessed, nor to any exorcising work
performed by him ; and yet, evidently on account of nothing but
his name, tradition has identified him with our famous exorcist
It may be suggested that dramatic art was the main cause of this;
indeed, to this day Chung-khwei plays a part of importance on the
stage. Yao Htlen then may be the man who, by reason of the
name he bore, has transformed the jade badge of sun-worship into
a devil-expelling human soul.

Tradition also states, that Chiing-khwei was a human being who
lived more than a hundred years after Yao Hiien, It expresses
itself in the following tale, which we have not found in any writings
earlier than those of Ch^en Kwah, which are of the eleventh
century and which we mentioned on page 981 of Book I:

“In the forbidden Imperial Palace there was a portrait of Chung-
“khwei, painted by Wu Tao-tsze. This painted scroll bore in the
“ upper margin an inscription by the hand of a man who lived
“under the Tang dynasty, which read as follows: 'In the Kliai
“yuen period (713 — 742) the emperor Ming had been to Li-shan,
“to impart instructions about military matters; and when he with
“his blue state umbrellas had returned to the Palace, he felt unwell.
“He suffered from fever for more than a month, and wu and
“phys^icians exhausted all their arts upon him without bringing him
“any relief. Then one evening he dreamed of two spectres, a tall
“one and a tiny one. The latter was dressed in red clothes, had
“a snout like a calf, one foot shod, and the other bare; the other
“shoe hung down from its body, and in its girdle it had stuck a
“large fan of bamboo paper. It snatched away a gold-embroidered
“red smelling satchel and the emperor’s flute of jade, and ran about
“ with those things through the hall. The tall spectre wore a hat,
“and a skirt or petticoat of a deep blue or green colour; it had
“ one arm naked, and had boots on both its legs; it seized the small
“ spectre, plucked out its eyes, tore it to pieces, and devoured it.
“•'Who are you?’ asked the emperor. And its answer was: 'I am
“your servant Chung-khwei, a warrior who did not succeed in
“obtaining a military rank; I have pledged an oath to avert from
“Your Majesty all spectral evil which exists in this world’.

“The emperor awoke from his dream; his fever was gone, and
“he felt his strength return. He called the painter Wu Tao-tsze,
‘‘related the dream he had had, and said, 'Try to paint that being
“for me as I have dreamt it’. On this imperial order Wu Tao-tsze


CHUNG-KHVVEl AND THE EMPEROR MING.


1175


"^conjured up the being in his mind and immediately sketched it,
“and when he had the portrait ready, he took it to his lord. The
“emperor contemplated it for a while, tapped on the table, and
“said, ‘You must ha\e had the same dream as myself, how else
“could the likeness be so excellent!’ Feeling so satisfied, he rewarded
“him with a hundred gold coins, and he wrote, ‘The powerful
“spirit who has by a dream completely cured my illness, the loyal
“ warrior who has removed that spectral evil from me, certainly
“deserves praise and reward. His pictures represent him ditferentlv;
“therefore let this one be exhibited to the officers, in order that it
“ may be known all around, when evil is to be driven away at the
“end ot the year, as a means by which tlie sie and rnei may be
“expelled and spectral influences laid. Be it moreover proclaimed
“throughout the empire that everybody shall impart the knowledge
of this to others’.” ^

A somewhat different reading of this tale is given by Chao Yih,
with the statement that he has borrowed it from another source:
“The emperor Ming, while suffering from fever, was sleeping in
“ the daytime, and dreamed that a tiny spectre snatched his gold-
“ embroidered smelling satchel and his flute of jade. The emperor


' SAi

beh.bjs. Piiy

0 ® a K


R BB # . * # -St i|i| , —

« > ^ tE * >J' « . « * @ > «if « « rffi "il

. e ¥ « # BS fli S S 1: . ^ i® I ^ it f- ,


^ Jim , m stia US., -c ^ m JL

19 1? K 0 » ft ® . ± A 'I® , ^ 2 W ^ .


PXl


^ ^ W- , M


tt0 ,
0


1176


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


“asked it who it was. ‘I am Hi-hao’, it said; 'I can ruin people,
“and convert their pleasures, into sorrow’. The emperor flew into
“a passion and was on the point of calling his warriors, Avhen his
“eye fell upon a large spectre with a hat, a deep blue gown,
“a girdle, and court-boots, which seized- the spectre, plucked out
“its eyes, tore it to pieces, and devoured it. ‘Who are you?’ asked
“the emperor; and the answer was; ‘I am a literary graduate ot
“the highest rank from Tsung-nan, named Chung-khwei; in the
"Wu teh period (618—627) 1 w'as not promoted to the rank
“which I deserved, and therefore committed suicide by knocking
“my head against the stone steps; 1 then received from the emperor
“a green gown to wear in the grave, and therefore in gratitude
“swore that I would thenceforth remove from the emperors illness
“and evil caused by Hi-hao’. On these words the emperor awoke
“from his dream, and his disease was cured. He then ordered Wu
“Tao-tsze to paint a portrait of that being. Wu Tao-tszS by burying
“ himself in reflection called the said being up before his mind,

“ made the portrait, and presented it to the emperor. No sooner
“had the emperor seen' it than he said, ‘You must have had the
“same dream as myself’.” *

The assurance with which an author of distinction such as Ch^en
Kwah noted down this anecdote as an event of historical reality,
almost forbids us to deny its historical basis. And taking into con-
sideration how utterly enslaved to the belief in spectres and spirits
the Chinese nation and its rulers have always been, and that Ming
is depicted by historiographers as not the least superstitious among
emperors, there remains no sufficient reason for rejecting the fact
that he had such a dream, and really took his measures as a con-
sequence of it. Be this as it may, the tale is at any rate instructive

3sfi.±rti!92.*0. mm A ^

sih.

WW-ier A. 0.

rfn 5E . # » isa m a . ji .1 » #

■ ^ 0 ^ ^ ^ l^hcw, chapter 35, 1. 23.


THE HISTORY OP CHUNG-KHWEI.


1177


to US on various heads. Without going so far as to believe that
the picture made liy Wu Tao-tszfc has been the prototype of all
the portraits of Chung-khvvei which have been made in ensuing
ages, the tale explains why nowadays they generally represent him
with a gown of a deep blue or green colour, a girdle, boots, and
a hat like those which were confessedlv worn bv crraduates or

•J o

luandarins in the age of T"ang, Besides, the tale entitles us to take
for granted that Chung-khwei’s position as devil-destroying spirit
was firmly fixed in the Chinese sphere of thought and custom as
early as the T"ang dynasty, even among the Imperial family and
the highest dignitaries. And in the third place we may now admit
that pictures of the demon-destroyer were in that same epoch used
for exorcising purposes at the beginning of the year, which, as we
know, is the principal moment in Chinese life for the expulsion
of evil.

It may be taken for granted that in the eleventh century they
were to that end affixed to doors and gates, seeing that Ch'^en
Kwah then wrote, that '‘it was unknown from what date the
“custom of painting Chung-khwei on gates and doors at the be-
“ ginning of the year has prevailed’’ h He also states, that “in the
“fifth year of the Hi ning period (1072) the emperor ordered
“that painters should take rubbings from a board engraved with
“the portrait, and he presented these to the liighest ministers of
“the two departments, one copy to each; and in the last night of
“ that same year he commissioned his Court officer Liang Khiai to
“ the two departments of the east and west, to give them on behalf
“of His Majesty images of Chung-khwei.”^

This bestowal ot imperial bounty was no original creation of the
House of Sung, for we find the statement “that it was a custom
“in the age of Tung, on the last day of the year, for the emperor
“ to give the ministers the new almanack together with a picture
“of Chung-khwei” k We note here that almanacks are devil-


1 'i' H PI /tb g B#. Minifj Uii pit Van,

cliaptei* 24, I. 8.

. mmj^m


cliapler S-2.


3


. r S, section


1178


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


expelling things (see page 102.2). We may farther quote here the
following historical incident of the tenth century. In the state of
Wu and Yueh h which then extended over Cliehkiang, Fuhkien
and Kiangsu, Ts'ien Tsung ^ reigned for some months in the year
947. He had a general, named Hu Tsin-sze “On the last day of
“ that year, when the painter had offered to the Court the paintings
“representing Chung-khwei in the act of knocking down spectres,
“Tshen Tsung wrote a verse upon one of the copies, which, when
“Hu Tsin-sze read it, made it thoroughly clear to him that Ts'^ien
“Tsung cherished the idea of killing him. Therefore in that same
“night he assembled the soldiers of the guard, deposed TVien Tsung,
“confined him in the Hi-and-Hwo institute, fetched Shuh (Tsden
“Tsung’s brother), and placed him on the throne.”*

We are unable to say in what degree the pictures of Chung-
khwei, made at present, resemble the famous model which Wu
Tao-tsze sketched. Very often painters represent him with a long
beard of a fire-red colour, in allusion, we think, to his solar origin.
This origin is still more clearly manifested from a custom, general
in Fuhkien, of making rough portraits of him with red paint, and
of doing so especially on the fifth day of the fifth month, which
is the theoretical midsummer day or apex of universal spectre-
killing warmth and light (cf. page 1078); these portraits, of which
Plate VHI (the frontispiece of this Volume) and Plate XV are
reduced specimens, are on the same date put up in houses and
rooms as a protection against the disease-demons of the summer.
Many people, to whom expense is no hindrance and who desire to
make sure that the picture is painted on that important date, engage
painters to come and do the work in their houses, preferably during
the noon or wu hour, 11 a. ni. to 1 p. m.; or they go to the
painter’s dwelling to sec him do the painting at that hour, or, at
least, to convince themselves that he then gives the picture the
finishing touch. Not seldom , in order to assimilate the portrait
thoroughly with the sun, the paint is mixed with a drop of blood
drawn from an incision in the comb of a cock, such blood being.


‘ I e II H , If. K s s H Ji . «

a. Its, 0

- History of the Five Dynasties, chapter 67, 1. 8.


PORTRAITS OP CHUNG-KUWET AND THEIR USE.


1179


as we know (Bk I, page 217), the most efficient of the exorcising
ingredients obtainable from the solar bird. Some people also take
a pencil and therewith dot such blood on the eyes of the portrait,
knowing that the exorcising effect of his terrible look must thereby
be enormously enhanced. People generally, and women in particu-
lar, if they have such a picture at home, are in the habit of faith-
fully burning candles and incense to it, thus worshipping it in
the same way as portraits, tablets and images of saints and gods
in general.

Chung-khwei plays no other part in Chinese religious life of the
present day except that of a demon-expeller. I never saw a temple
or chapel dedicated to his worship, though it is not rare to find
his image in some inferior place in temples of other gods. His
hollow image of paper and other light material, in which a man
is hidden, striding along with awe-inspiring demeanour, may be
seen in devil-expelling processions (pp. 9S0 and 985), His portraits,
preferably made at the summer solstice, are suspended in rooms of
fever-patients, who in China so often give utterance to delirious
ravings about spectres, thus proving themselves to be tortured by
those beings; or they are laid out on their beds. It is a very com-
mon practice to improve the effect of the portraits by painting beside
them one or more bats which are flying downward, for as these
animals are called fuh they represent by the sound and writ-
ten form of their name the idea fuh fg, “happiness”, while their
downward movement expresses jpg or “descent of happiness”.

In his treatise on Chung-khwei, Clden Kwah further states “that
“in the Hwang yiu period (1049—1054) a grave was opened
“in the district of Shang-yuen, belonging to the Kin-ling depart-
“ment (now Nanking), and that there was therein a necrology
“carved in stone (see Bk I, p. 1109), mentioning that it was the
“grave of a lady Clung, mother of Tsung Kioh, general for the
“subjection of the west under the Sung dynasty; that lady was
“the daughter of Ching Chung, minister of Agriculture when the
“ House of Han occupied the throne, and Tsung Kioh had a
“younger sister, named Chung-khwei” \ This Tsung Kioh is described


tfe . it . ® M-


ilSO


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


in history ^ as a high officer who died in A. D. 465, so that it is
impossible that his maternal grandfather should have lived as early
as under the Han dynasty. The accidental circumstance that there
lived a woman who bore the name of the devil-destroyer, and
that tliis woman had an elder brother, seems to have been for
ages a sufficient reason for painters to make pictures of this
destroyer Avhich represent him on horseback accompanying his
younger sister in her bridal procession on the way to her husband’s
home, in accordance with the custom, prevailing among wealthy
people, of having brides at this point in the marriage ceremony
escorted by their elder brothers. In such pictures, which are made
to this day, the bridal sedan-chair is submissively carried by spec-
tres as a nice illustration of the greatness of Chang-khwei’s power,
which can compel spectres to make themselves the slaves of brides
even at a moment when, in general, they arc peculiarly prone
to attack these, in the hope of destroying their conjugal felicity for
the whole of their lives.

No doubt Chung-khwei owes much of his reputation and popu-
larity to the fact that the emperor Ming, one of the most fomous
sovereigns the nation has possessed, has recommended him and his
spectre-expelling power to the mandariiiate and the people with
emphasis and ardour. The greatness of his fame is displayed by
the fact that it has found its way into Japan, where to this day
he has, under the corrupted name of Shoki, held a position in life
and custom which perhaps exceeds in importance his role in China
itself. In both countries equally he is a prominent character in
novels, on the stage, in painting and sculpture. In Japan his images
are far from having lo^t in all respects the features of the Chinese
prototype; they represent him, indeed, as kicking spectres with his
foot, sabring them, dragging them by their hair, throttling or devour-
ing them (see PI. XVI and Pig. 18), or dealing with them in yet
other cruel and pitiless fadiions such as imagination may suggest.

Health-restoring properties being ascribed in China to everything
which is destructive to spectres, pictures of Chung-khwei are recom-
mended there as effective medicines. In Li Shi-chen’s standard work
we read indeed, ^that Chung-khwei expels sic and stoj/s fever,
^and women labouring under difficult childbirth should take in some
“ water the ashes of a left leg of Chung-khwei, which has been burnt.
“ And in cases of recurrent demoniacal fevers, two mace of ashes


1 Books ol the Sung Dynasty, cli. 76, 1. 3; History of the South, ch. 37, h 19.


(from a doll in the Musee Guimet).


“of paper on which Chung-kluvei is painted should be consumed” k
together with other ingredients mixed on the 15th day of the first
month of the year, or on the 5th of the fifth month.

^ Aliil

o ^ ® ^ ^ ® kawj muh,

chapter 38, I. 15.


1182


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


Fi^. 19.


Since Taoism has allotted to exorcising magic a leading position
in its system, it has naturally raised Lao-tsze, its Patriarch, to the
dignity of a main source of devil-expelling power. The priests or
doctors of this religion, assuming the position of bearers of his will
or orders, waged their war against evil principally with spells and
charms, and generally preferred, of course, spells in which his divine
name occurred (cf. p. 1053), and charms which he had imparted to
the world (p. 1036), or on which they had printed his seal (p. 1050

and Fig. 19). The function of Grand Exor-
cist he shares with another famous Pa-
triarch of Taoism, named Chang Ling or
Chang Tao-ling b who actually is a histo-
rical figure, a fact which cannot be uncon-
ditionally asserted of Lao-tsze.

There is in the Memoirs of the Three

Kingdoms and in the Books of the Later

Han Dynasty reliable evidence that the
f principles of Universalism or Taoism

had in the first centuries of our era given
rise to a disciplined Church. This process
is inseparably connected with Chang Ling’s
name. In the second century he founded
in the region which is now called Sze-chVen, a semi-worldly state
with a system of taxation, and with a religious discipline based
on self-humiliation before the higher powers, confession of sins,
and works of benevolence. Demonocracy played an important part
in it, and he is himself described as a first-rate exorcist, a god-
man able to command spectres and divinities, a thaumaturgist and
compounder of elixirs of life. When he had ascended to heaven,
the chieftainship of his Church passed to his son Chang Heng
by whose death it was transmitted to his son Chang Lu®; and
this hierarch finally surrendered his realm in A. D. 215 to Ts^^ao
Tsaob whereby it was swallowed up in the empire which this
hero by force of arms was then carving out for himself from the
territory of the decaying House of Han, the last emperor of which
was finally dethroned in 220 by Ts'^ao Ts'^ao’s son, known in history
by the name of Wen % emperor of the realm of V/ei®.


Seal of Lao-tszu,
bearing the characters

i:±


CHANG LING AND HIS SUCCESSORS.


1183


Chang Ling’s religious work evidently had expanded over the
whole territory of the Han dynasty. Indeed there existed, according
to the same two Standard Histories, two other religious realms with
similar organisation and principles, under two hierarchs bearing the
same surname, viz. Chang Siu ’ and Chang Kioh the three states
covering almost the whole surface of present China proper. The
realm of Chang Siu is stated to have been absorbed into that of
Chang Lu; but that of which Chang Kioh was the pontiff had a
terribly tragic end: in A. D. 184 it was cruelly assailed by the
government of Han, and, after many years of obstinate defence,
destroyed in streams of blood. This episode, which marked the final
downfall of the Han dynasty, is known as that of the “yellow
kerchiefs” on account of the headdress which the religious insur-
gents wore. ‘‘

The offspring of Chang Ling and Chang Lu in the main line
have, under the title of T Hen shi® or “Celestial Masters”, exer-
cised to this day, from their see in the district of Kwei-khi ® in
Kiangsi province, a kind of clerical predominance, manifesting itself
principally by a supremacy over the demon world, effected throughout
the Empire by various means, but especially by charms and spells
imparted to the Taoist clergy. We may therefore call each living
Celestial Master the principal professional exorcist of the Empire.
The history of that pontificate and its place in Chinese religious life
will, of course, be a subject of description in our Book on Taoism.
The great progenitor of their line, from whom that hierarchy of
devil-expellers borrows its power and position, himself performs
exorcising functions of importance to this hour. Charms and spells
in which his name and title are mentioned, or which professedly
are bestowed by him on the world through his successors, are
highly appreciated, and very frequently employed (p. 1044). Exor-
cising religious ceremonies, reputed to have been instituted by him,
are celebrated by the Taoist priesthood on an extensive scale, and
interwoven with exorcising magic the invention of which is ascribed
to him ; we may instance here the medico-exorcising method described
on pp. 1108 sqq. His portrait, as well as that of Chung-khwei,


4 tor further particulars we refer the reader to our treatise «On the Origin
of the Taoist Church » in the Tran«:actions of the Third International Congress for
the History of Religions, Vol. I.


6


1184


THE WAR AGAINST SPECTRES.


is often suspended in houses and rooms, as also on outer walls,
especially on the midsummer festival, which is celebrated on the
5th day of the fifth month (p. LOTS). It represents him (see Fig, 19)

19 .


C'haiij;' or Clhuig Tau~iinL^


as a black, giiin-Iooking, awe-inspiring lignre, often seated on a tiger,
the typical devil-destroying monster. He brandishes a sword which
he is stated to have received from heaven for the destruction of
spectres, or he holds before his breast a h w u h which is a tablet
such as before the accession of this dynasty was carried by courtiers
in the presence of the emperor, nominally for the purpose of taking
notes; indeed, his eminent position of prophet, delegated by the

1 #.


EXORCISING IMAGES OE CHANG LING.


1185


Universe itself for the foundation of the Universalistic Church on
earth, entitles him at all times to stand before the thrones of
Heaven and Lao-tsze, in order to receive their commands concerning
that Church, which is entrusted for ever to the pastorate of his
chief lineal descendant. His painted image on paper naturally appears
also among those of many divinities which, to ensure felicity by
their presence, are suspended above altars on which sacrificial masses
are celebrated by Wu-ist or Taoist priests. In order to scare spectres
away, his portrait is also as a rule painted outside on the front of
the sedan-chair in which a bride is being transported to the house
of hex Ji a nee for the consummation of her wedding; or it is fixed
on that spot in the shape of a piece of embroidery.


75


PART V.


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


CHAPTEK I.

WU-ISM BEFORE AND DURING THE HAN PERIOD.

From very early times, or even since the night of time in which
China’s Animistic Religion was born, this religion may have had
a priesthood, that is to say, persons of both sexes who wielded,
with respect to the world of spirits, capacities and powers which
were not possessed by the rest of men. A study of ancient books
leads us to the conclusion that these priests, either in the main or
exclusively, must have been the wu whom we have mentioned in
this work many times. We have seen, that in the classical age of Cheu
they armed themselves with bundles of reeds and branches of peach, to
accompany their prince when paying visits of condolence in cases
of death, and to perform then exorcising functions along with so-
called Invokers or Conjurers (Book I, pp. 36 and 41); and they
appeared in the same capacity of devil-expellers in official life in
the time of Confucius (Book I, page 42).

Oldest among all documents in which these persons are mentioned,
probably is the speech on the conduct of rulers, which was de-
livered in the 18th century before our era by the minister I-yin
(see p. 1154) to 'Rai-kiah of the Shang dynasty, in which we find,
in the midst of many remarks of the wisest kind, these words :
“The late sovereign instituted punishments for the officers, and
“warned the men in authority, saying, 'If you dare to have constant
“dancing in your mansions, and drunken singing in your houses,
“I call it w' u fashion’.” ‘ From this we are allowed to infer, that

' S.it

T S .ft si S H,- Shii king^ tlie Books of Shang, section P f II or
“ the Instructions of I


1188


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


wu were in those very early times a kind of chanting and dancing
dervishes, not peculiarly esteemed by grandees and ministers.

In the age of Cheu the w ii were not the only priests in
existence. The book of institutions of that House, entitled Cheu li,
acquaints us with the fact, that they shared the sacerdotal position
with quite a body of officers of various ranks and grades, who were
charged with the maintenance of the Rites and Ceremonies (li),
among which those of the Religion of the State or the dynasty
were the principal. The description of the functions of these offi-
cers fills one section of the six into which the Cheu li is divided,
namely the third, entitled ‘‘Officers of Spring”^, certainly one
of the richest sources of information on ancient religious matters.
Under the direction of a Minister, entitled Ta tsung poh ^ or
Superintendent of the Ancestry, and two Siao tsung poh^ or
Subintendents of the Ancestry, those officers had to direct the
erection and conservation of the temples and altars of the State
and the mausolea and tombs of the reigning House, furthermore,
the celebration of sacrifices with music and dances, victims and
implements, besides the funeral rites in the royal family, divination
and auguration, etc. This ministerial department was undeniably
a priesthood of Universal Animism, the gods whose worship they
had to maintain and regulate being the shen which animate Heaven
and Earth and their constituent parts and phenomena, as also the
spirits of the dead. This official priesthood was, according to the
Chinese, the prototype of the Ministries of Rites and Ceremonies
which were entrusted with the administration of the State Religion
under later dynasties to this day, so that we shall have again
to pay attention to them in our treatises on that main part of
China’s religious system. It was a priesthood different from that
of the wu since it was an official creation, and not, like the
latter, a spontaneous product of the animistic religion of the people
itself. We are not, however, for that reason justified in neglecting the
important third section of the Cheu li, for it contains a few pages
with very valuable information about w u of both sexes, who were
employed in the State Religion. It is remarkable to see the Cheu li
itself state that these priests and priestesses belonged to the lowest
class of officials, so that we hear from this source also, which was


THE WU IN THE CLASSICAL AGE.


1189


written much later than the Shu of the slight estimation

in which they were held : —

“ W u of both sexes, in indefinite numbers; their masters (shi)
“are four ordinary officers of the middle rank; with two store-
“keepers, four writers, four adjutants, and forty serfs. ^ — The
“male wu are bound to turn their faces to the sacrifices and the
“invited spirits, and to supply the exclamations wherewith to call
“ (the latter) from all sides while waving long grass. In winter
“(when spectres predominate), they eject (evil) from the halls, and
“perform the same task all around, without calculation (of direc-
“ tions or distances). In spring they call (gods, or felicity), and
“avert (demons, or evil), thus warding oflP diseases. And when the
“Sovereign pays a visit of condolence, they walk before him with
“the Invokers or Conjurers.’'^

“ And the female w u are directed to perform exorcism at fixed
“times annually, using ablutions with aromatics. In times of drought
“they perform dances or gestures during the sacrifices for rain.
“ When the Sovereign's consort pays a visit of condolence, they walk
“before her with the (female) Invokers or Conjurers. And at every
“great calamity in the kingdom they entreat (the gods or spirits),
“chantirg and wailing.”^

Besides, the Cheu li contains rescripts for certain “ Directors of
“ the w u , that is, two ordinary officers of the middle rank, who
“had one store*keeper, one writer, one adjutant, and ten serfs.
“They have to maintain the rescripts concerning all the wu. When
“there prevails a great drought in the realm, they take the lead
“of the wu to make them dance at the sacrifices for rain. And
“ when the kingdom is visited by a great calamity, they perform
“the old and customary Wu-ist practices at the head of the wu.

A > A H A , H A . a H + A - “ ' 28.

mifmw. 3E ffs m i ? * m ■

Ch. 25, 11. 38 seq.

sp M H la # . H, » 2 A « ®c 9? ffi IS ■ “ I M
‘ wIM 4'±-A,W-A>A-A>'S — A>tt

+ A . Ch. 17, 1. 27.


1190


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“At sacrifices they provide the boxes with the soul-tablets, the
“druggets for the roads, and the boxes with the straw mats. At
“sacrifices generally they see to the burial (of the offerings). And at
“funeral rites they are charged with the Wu-ist rites by which the
“soul descends. ” ^

Although there are some slight variances between commentators
who have sharpened their wits on the explanation of these pas-
sages, we must acknowledge that they constitute a very valuable
account of the functions of these priests and priestesses. We now
know indeed, that they exorcised spirits of evil and illness, also at
royal visits of condolence, and that they performed sacerdotal func-
tions at sacrifices, calling down the gods or human spirits to whom
these were presented. At the altars raised to pray and sacrifice for rain,
the priestesses, representing the Yin or female part of the Universal
Order, to which clouds and water belong, performed dances; and
when disasters prevailed, they conjured the gods by means of chants
expressive of grief and distress. Those dances arrest our attention.
They suggest indeed that the w u were nothing else than what we
might call the Chinese ramification of a large class of priests ot
both sexes which is distributed over several parts of Asia under a
variety of names, such as shaman in Siberian lands, faquir or
dervish in the Persian, bazir and balian, respectively of the male
and the female sex, among the aborigines of Ilorneo ; wgwalen in
Bali, bissoo in south-west Celebes, etc. Of all these priests and
priestesses it is well known that they are occasionally possessed by
spirits or gods, and manifest this condition by convulsive distortions
of their faces and bodies, twitching movements of their limbs, frantic
running, jumping, shivering murmurs and sobs; it is also known
that the possessing spirit endows them with a second sight and a
power to drive off spectres.

The identity of the w u with this general priesthood of Asian
paganism is corroborated by evidence of the Riooh yii. This work
relates, that king Chao*, who reigned in Ch'u ’ B. C. 515 — 488,
“asked (his Minister) Kwan She-fu, saying, ‘The writings of the


I ^ M SB it 2E 'g . »


THE WU WERE POSSESSED BT SPIRITS OR GODS.


1191


“ Cheu dynasty state, that Chung-li ^ was actually sent as an envoy
“to the inaccessible parts of heaven and earth; how was such a
“ thing possible ? should no such thing have occurred, then tell me
“whether there be any possibility for people to ascend to Heaven?’
“The answer was, ‘That is not the meaning of that statement.
“ Anciently the functions with respect to the people and with regard
“to the gods were not exercised by the same persons. Those among
“the people whose vital spirits (tsing) were in a bright and flour-
“ishing condition, and not distracted into different directions; who
“ moreover had the capacity of concentrating all their feelings of
“reverence, and possessed inward rectitude, — their knowledge was
“able to rise to higher spheres and descend into the lower, and
“ distinguish there the things which it would be proper to do ;
“ their perfect intelligence then could clearly observe things in the
“distant future and explain them; by their sharpsightedness- they
“could see them shine in their brightest light, and by the acuteness,
“of their ears they could hear and scrutinize them. Being in this
“condition, intelligent shen descended into them; if a shen thus
“settled in a male person, this was called a hih, and if it settled
“ in. one of the other sex, this was called a w u. As functionaries,

“ they regulated the places for the seats of the gods (at sacrifices),

“ the order of their tablets, as also their sacrificial victims and
“implements, and the ceremonial attires to be worn in connection
“ with the season.” *

These instructive lines thus state explicitly enough that the wu
and hih were possessed by shen, that is to say, by divinity or
spirituality, and that this descended into them in consequence of their
own powerful imagination. Their thought, strongly fixed upon spirits
on high and below, produced hallucination which allowed them to


1 According to Sze-ma Ts'^ien (ch. 40, I. 1), this worthy was ^lE or Director
of Fire under the mythical sovereign Ti-khuh in the 25th century B. C.


1192


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


pierce the future, and to learn within the spiritual world the wishes
of the gods in point of the offerings due. We may ask whether it
be this second sight which we see depicted in the graphic sign
hih, w'hich denoted the male wu, a dissection of which gives ^
wu, and to see. Should this be the case, the character indicates
also that such second sight was especially ascribed to the male
priests; which would not be strange for a people which assimilated
the male sex with the Universal Yang, the source of light, lucidity
and brightness.

The term ^ wu, which, as our extracts from the C/ieu li have
shown, denoted the male priests as well as the female, has done so
in all ages, to this day. Its written form may have had in ancient
ages quite another shape, and this point has been an object of
speculation to some authors; but we do not feel tempted to follow
them in such idle work.

When attending on a Ruler or a Ruler’s consort at visits of
condolence in the capacity of exorcists, the male or female w u
were, as we have seen (page 1189), accompanied by chuh,
“Invokers” or “Conjurers”, of their own sex. The functions of these
priestly officers are described in the Cheu li immediately before
those of the wu, so that we may admit that the wu were below
them in rank, but co-operated with them in the exercise of reli-
gious functions. This was decidedly the opinion of the learned
Wang Chao-yii of the Sung dynasty. Commenting upon the state-
ment of the Cheu li that the male w u attended sacrifices (see
page 1189), he wrote these lines: “The chuh as well as the wu
“ worshipped the s h e n , and therefore the w u on such occasions acted
“as assistants of the chuh. At sacrificial ceremonies at which the
“chuh officiated, the wu had to bring down the gods, and it was on
“this account that they then turned their faces to the sacrifices and
“the beings whom they invited.”^ From the Han dynasty onwmrd,
the expression wu-chuh ^ occurs in literature with great
frequency as denoting the w u only. From this it is evident that
there has taken place a commixture of the two functions, and that
the class of the wu has assumed the name chuh for themselves,
since it denoted in classical China a function which was higher
than their own, and therefore more fashionable.

iififli , « W V 1^ * jji 1 . ti; K ^ a « M tff ft-


THE WU WERE EMPLOYED IN TIMES OF DROUGHT.


1193


After this it is almost superfluous to state, that the position of
the w u in ancient China as exorcists is to be explained by their
possession by shen, since the main principle of exorcism is the
universal law that the shen oppose, expel, and even destroy the
kvvei. Likewise we may admit that it was their possession which,
manifesting its reality by their dances, assigned to them a place at
the altars for the rain*sacriflces at which the presence of gods was
so urgently needed. We read in the Li ki, that ^ in a year of
“drought the ruler Muh (B. C. 409—377) called Hien-tsze, and
“asked him as follows: 'Heaven has not sent down any rain for a
“long time; 1 will expose some vvang to the sun; do you agree
“to this?’ 'Exposing such unsound children of men in the sun’,
“ran the answer, 'when Heaven does not give rain, is an act of
“cruelty; no, you may not do it’. 'Well then, 1 will expose some
“wu; has this your approval?’ The answer was, 'Heaven does
“not give rain, and do you expect rain from silly wives? will you
‘‘seek it by means of them? no, that would be still more wide of
“the mark’.” ^

A similar story is ^ related in the Tso cliicen of another prince
in a much earlier time, viz. the year 039 before our era. “ Tn
“summer there prevailed a great drought. The Ruler would burn
“the wu and the wang, but Tsang W’^en-chung said, 'This is no
“proper provision against a drought; what can be done with wu
“and wang against such a calamity? Tf Heaven desired them to
“be killed, it would probably not have given birth to them; there-
“fore, admitting that they really can cause a drought, to burn
“them might greatly increase it.’ The ruler followed this advice,
“and that year there was scarcity, but it did no harm.” ^

These two narratives evidently are ditferent readings of one, and


< a f* T- BB fW 0 , ^ ^ 7 ii . W Sfc

Section

Twenty-first 5 ear of the

reign of Hi.


1194


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


may both be inventions; nevertheless ‘ they have their value as
sketches of ancient idea and custom. Those “infirm or unsound”
wang were non-descript individuals, evidently placed somewhat
on a line with the w u ; perhaps they were queer hags or beldams,
deformed beings, idiotic or crazy, or nervously affected to a very
high degree, whose strange demeanour was ascribed to possession.
I think there is no objection to subscribing to the opinion which
Chiilg Khang-chfing, the illustrious scholar and commentator of the
second century of our era, expressed in these lines: “Muh would
“expose the wang to the sun in the expectation that Heaven would
“compassionate them and send down its rains upon them; and as
“ the w u had received ashen into themselves, he also expected that
“Heaven, compassionating the latter, would send down rain upon
“ them. ” 1 Wang Chhing, who lived one century before Ching,

declared that the cruel measure involved a maltreatment of the
Yang which dwelt in the w u , for it was this universal power which
caused the drought. “Popular opinion pretends that boys are yang,
“and that on this account spiritual revelations come forth from
“ the mouths of boys. Lads and w u contain Yang ; hence it is
“ that at the great rain-sacrifices they set boys to dancing, and
“ expose w u to the sun . . . When the sun is eclipsed, it is because
“the Yin vanquishes it; on this account attacks are then made
“by man on things which are yin. So also, at the time of a

“ drought, when the Yang predominates, the allies of the Yang are
“ made to smart ; and therefore, whereas the w u are allies of the
“Yang, Hi of Lu in a time of drought resolved to burn the wu.
“The wu contain the breath of the Yang in themselves; hence it
“is that so many people who live in a yang country (in the sunny
“south) become w u. The wu thus being affiliated with the spirit-
“ world, they perform spiritual Wu-ism, and the latter has close

“affinity with the utterance of ditties by boys. The revelations of
“ w u point out what is felicitous or ominous, so that they are fortune-
“ tellers. Thus it was that the phantom of Shen-sheng manifested
“itself by means of a wu; indeed, as the wu contain Yang,

“they can see apparitions of spirits.”^ That apparition of the


, The Khienlung etiition of the Li /a‘, loc. cU.


YOUNG MEN ARE ANIMATED OR POSSESSED.


1195


crown-prince Shen-sheng has been related by us on page 433.

From these few Chinese lines we learn things which we must not
disregard. Long ago, when Wang Chhing lived, young men on ac-
count of their strong masculinity were considered to be peculiarly
animated with universal yang fluid or shen; and no doubt the
male wu were for that reason preferably young. Therefore also boys
stood side by side with the w u at rain-sacrifices, to exhaust and
torture themselves with dancing and gestures under the scordhing
sun. Ghosts of the dead, such as that of Shen-sheng, might be
consulted by the wu, and through their mouths reveal felicity and
misfortune, and other spirits might do the same thing; and in the
historical books of all times we read, that the t " u n g y a o * or
“ditties of boys”, of which Wang Ch'ung speaks, were devoutly
listened to in the streets and received as divine revelations, even
reported to the magistrates, studied and interpreted as oracles, and
afterwards officially recorded in the dynastic annals. Thus the pen of
Wang Ch'ung gives us a plausible explanation of the presence of
devil-expelling lads in the no processions of the Han dynasty (see
pp. 976 indeed, just as much as the wu who performed their

important part therein, those lads possessed exorcising capacity
because of their animation by shen. On page 985 we have stated
that they appear in such processions up to this day.

As soothsayers, the w u in ancient China no doubt held a place
of great importance. This fact is evidenced by the episode of the
year 580 before our era, which we have quoted from the Tso diwen
on page 678: a ruler, threatened in his dream by a revengeful
spectre, ordered a w u to be called, who proved able to tell him what
he had dreamt, and to prophesy his fate therefrom with striking
exactitude. Another narrative in the same Tso cli'wen tells of
Chfing king of Ch'u from 407—402 B. C., to whom it was foretold
by a wu that himself and two grandees would die a violent death;


. Lini chapter 22,


1196


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


and indeed, one of the latter put an end to his own life, and the
other with the king were slain The enormous capacity of the
w u for prediction was also instanced by Chwang-tsze in the follow-
ing lines: “In Ching there was a wu, animated by a shen;
“ his (dr her) name was Ki-hien. He knew everything about the
“death and birth of men, the continuation and cessation of their
“lives, their misfortunes and happiness, and whether they would
“die at a great age or prematurely. He assigned (propitious or
“ unpropitious) )'ears, months, decades, and days, as if he were
“himself the shen. Whenever people of Ching saw him they shivered
“and ran away. Lieh-tsze had no sooner seen him than his mind
“ was inebriated. ” “

The powerful influence of Wu-ism in ancient China is illustrated
peculiarly well by the historian Ch'u ^ writings of whom are bound
up with Sze-ma TsTen’s Historical Records. “ At the time of the
“ruler Wen of the kingdom of Wei (425 — 387 B. C.) Si-men Pao
“ became prefect of Yeh On his arrival there he convoked the
“elders, and asked them what things afflicted the people. ‘The
“worst thing’, they replied, ‘is the marriage of the River-lord; it
“is on account thereof that we are so poor’. He then asked them
“ to explain the matter, and they answered as follows :

“‘When the three elders in Yeh and their officers collect the
“yearly taxes from the people, they take away several millions of
“its money; they then spend three hundred thousand coins on
“the marriage of the River-lord, and dividing the rest among
“themselves and the wu-chuh, take it to their homes. When
“ the time for that ceremony is coming, the w u travel about to
“examine who among the daughters of the people is the nicest;
“ and this one the} order to become the wife of the River-lord.
“ They forthwith betroth her to him, wash her, have an attire made
“ for her of new silk and satin, and let her fast in solitude, in a
“fasting-house made for her. They then build a brown tent at the
“ river-side, place the girl therein, prepare a sacrificial ox with spirits


1 The eleventh year of the ruler Wen.

Nan him chcn king, ch. 3, sect. , See alitO

Lieh’tsze, cli. 2.

3 See page 839^ note 2.

4 In the north-east of the present Honan province.


HUMAN SACRIFICES TO RIVER-GOBS.


1197


‘‘and food, carry her round in procession for ten or more days,
“adorn her with white face-powder, make a nuptial bed, tell her
“to sit down upon it, and launch it into the stream. It will then
“ float away for some dozen miles, and sink, i^amilies with hand-
“some daughters, fearing that the chief wu-chuh will fetch them
“for the River-lord, take to fliglit in great numbers to regions far
“ off, taking the maids with them ; thus the city is more and more
“ depopulated, and impoverishment has been the result of these
“practices for a long time.’

“Si Men-pao now said, ‘Next time the River-lord marries, I want
“ the three elders and the wu-chuh to be there with the old
“ men, to launch the maid into the stream ; then also kindly come
“and tell me, that I myself may go there to escort her away.’ All
“promised to do so, and when the hour had come, Si Men-pao
“ went to join them at the river-side. ^

“The three elders, the officers with their followers, the notables,
“and the old men of the wards all had flocked to the spot, with
“two or three thousand spectators from among the people. The
“wu was a spinster of seventy years; ten female disciples, each
“dressed in a gown of silk, stood behind her. ‘Call the wife of


nm.

s w . ai » > a i ® ® >

. * Jg * ± . » 2 W 'I’ . iS + M .

A ^ ^

S W -ffi *

iS A W ± ® ^ ft a A.-g’ 0 K >


1198


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


"the River-lord hither’; said Si Men-pao, "that I may see whether
"she is handsome or ugly’. They forthwith fetched her out of the
" tent, and as she stood before him, he looked at her and, turning
"to the three elders, the wu-chuh and the old men,^said, "This
"maid is not nice enough; chief wu-dame, be so kind as to go
"into the water for me and tell the River-god that we will try to
"get one of greater beauty, to send to him another day’. And on
"his orders the constables lifted up the chief wu-dame, and flung her
"into the stream. After a while he said, "Why does she stop in
"there so long? disciple, go and tell her to make haste’ — and
"they cast a disciple into the river. Again there was a pause, after
"which he exclaimed, "Wherefore does that disciple stay away so
"long? despatch another one to hurry her on!’ and they flung yet
"another disciple into the water. Still a third of them suffered the
"same fate, whereupon Si-Men Pao said, "Those disciples of the
"wu dame are merely women, unable to deliver any message; the
"three elders must go into the water and deliver it’; and they too
"were cast into the stream.

"Now Si-men Pao stuck his writing- pencil into his hair, bent
" forward towards the river, and remained in this position for a
"good while, the old men, the officials, and the spectators standing
"horror-stricken. He now turned towards them; "how is it’, said
"he, "that the wu dame and the three elders do not come back?
"I will now despatch an officer and a notable to hurry them on’.

“ But they all struck their heads against the ground again and again,
"so that their foreheads were almost broken and the blood gushed
"out on tlm ground; their faces had an ashy colour of death.
""Yes’, said Si-men Pao, "let us wait here a few moments more’;
"and when these had elapsed,* he said, "Officers, rise! the River-
"god detains his visitors so long that evidently they are gone for
"ever; let us go home now’. So great a fright thus came on the
"official class and the people in Yeh that from that moment nobody -
“ even ventured to speak of marriages of the River-lord.” ^


* + A Air * . A A ® . a l"J »!) 0 .

W -(6 4i * , H * iff- 11 . tl « * ffi Wt If! * S # >


MARRIAGES OE MEN WITH MOUNTAIN GODS.


1199


These drastic measures of Si-men Pao did not deliver the country
everywhere from marriages of gods with daughters of men by the
agency of Wu-ism. As late as the year 57 of our era they were in vogue
“ in the district of Siiin-tsiu ’ (in the present Nganhwui province),
“where two mountains, named 'Fang and Heu, were worshipped
“together by the people with sacrifices. The wu carried away boys
“and girls from among the people and made them the consorts (of
“those mountains), replacing them every year by others; and there-
“ after nobody ventured to marry those persons. None of the prefects
“who had been in office there had ever ventured to forbid those
“practices; but Sung Kiiin issued a decree to the effect that
“ thenceforth the women married by the mountains should e.xclusive-
“ ly be taken from the class of w u , and that the people should
“no longer be troubled with the matter. In this way that practice
“ was stopped.” '■

We have now had before us many instances of the very old fact
which we noted on page 1188, that the wu were by no means
always on the best of terms with the ruling class. Indeed, it is in


Aas. -tpiJ

. Historical Records, ch. \ 26, 11. \ 2 sqq.

Later Han Dynasty, chapter 71, I. 15.


1200


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


the highest degree improbable that proud grandees, who deemed them-
selves and their power above gods and spirits, should see any
reason to respect mere common people just because certain spirits
occasionally descended into them. And yet these people continued
to be employed under the Han dynasty by the ruling class for the
celebration of official or non-official rites. Even emperors, according
to precedent set by the great founder of that House, for this pur-
pose employed w u of various sorts, who were distinguished by names
of countries. “Four years afterwards (201 B. C.), order having been
‘• established in the empire, the emperor decreed that sacrifices should
“ be instituted in Ch'ang-ngan (the imperial residence), with officers
‘•for invocation or conjuration and female w u. The wu of the Liang
“country were to sacrifice to Heaven and Earth, the celestial spirits
“ of the soil, the celestial water, the gods within the rooms and
“ the upper part of the hall, etc. The w u of Tsin sacrificed to the
“ five emperors, to the king of the East (the sun), the gods of the
“ clouds, the rulers of destiny, the earth-divinities of the w u, the
“(deceased) clansmen of the wu, to the persons who first cooked food,
“and the like. The wu of Ts‘in sacrificed to the chief among the
“local gods of the soil, to the protectors of the wu, to Tsuh and
“ Lei, etc. The w u of King sacrificed downstairs before the hall to
“ the ancestors of the w u , to the rulers of destiny, the bestowers of
“ rice, and othets. The w u for the nine divisions of the sphere
“sacrificed to these nine divisions. All those wu sacrificed within the
“ Palace at fixed annual times. The w u of the Flwangho sacrificed
“ to this river at Lin-tsin, and the w u of the southern mountains
“sacrificed to these mountains, as also to Ts'in-chung, who is the
“emperor Rh-shi. Each of these sacrifices was celebrated in stipu-
“ lated seasons and months.” i

Liang, Tsin, IVin and King, whence the founder of the Han
dynasty gathered his w u for the worship of all those deified parts

^ ^ ^ M Al ^ M oW ^

z M o it ^ ^ o ^ M ^ m A* . ^ M

. Historical Records, chapter 28, 11. 16 seq. Also the
Books of the Early Han Dynasty, chapter 25, I, 1. 15.


THE WU AS POSSESSED MEDIUMS FOR GODS.


1201


of the Universe and human spirits, were four large regions with which
he deemed the history of his family to be connected. The prevalence
of Wu-ism in those four parts of the empire involves the proba-
bility that it existed in all its parts. Even the non-Chinese peoples
who lived towards the west had it, for we have learned before in
this work (pp. 830 sqq,) that in the year 91 B. C. Hunnish wu,
probably belonging to foreign troops quartered in the capital, were
cruelly employed under Kiang Ch'ung in the discovery and persecu-
tion of sorcerers whom the emperor Wu suspected of attacks on
his health and life; those people were seers, who could discover
hidden objects of sorcery, and even the sorcerers and sorceresses
themselves when the latter were at work in the dark. Those blood-
stained pages of China’s history have taught us at the same time
that the Chinese wu themselves had an odious reputation for sorcery,
and w^ere openly accused of having in their employ evil spirits
which they impelled by means of sacrifices to assail the emperor;
they have also taught us that those people were so readily believed
to indulge in the breeding of ku, that wu ku or “wu-ist ku”
was the common term to denote this odious practice (cf. p. 828),
and that a persecution of several years’ duration was undertaken for
their extermination.

With these facts before us, it is certainly curious to read that
the same emperor who ordered that chase had nevertheless himself
employed the wu on behalf of his own interests, and paid fervent
worship to the gods who descended into them. ^In the next
"year (118 B. C.) the Son of Heaven was ill in the Ting-hu palace,
"and his condition became very precarious; there was no wu, no
"physician whom he did not call, and yet he did not recover.
"Then Yiu-shui Fah-ken said, 'There is in the province under
"Your Majesty’s immediate rule a wu, into whom, ever since a
"certain day on which she was taken ill, a spirit descends’. The
"emperor called her, and instituted sacrifices for that spirit in
"Kan-ts^iien; and when he felt ill, he sent some one thither to
"interrogate the (deceased) princess Shen. This princess said (by
"mouth of the wu?), 'the Son of Heaven need not feel concerned
"about his illness; but as soon as he feels a little better he must
"do his best to come to me at Kan-ts'^iien’. The emperor became
"better, rose, and went to Kan-ts^iien; and when he had recovered
"he proclaimed a general amnesty, and banqueted the princess Shen
"in the temple of Longevity.

"The being which the princess Shen in this temple of Longevity

76


1202


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


“especially esteemed, was T‘ai-yih ; her assistant deities were Ta-
“kin, the rulers of destiny, and others, who all accompanied her.
“They could not be seen, yet their words could be understood, for
“they spoke like human beings. Sometimes they was absent, and
“sometimes present, and when they came they soughed like the
“ wind, and settled behind the curtains of the tabernacle. Some-
“ times they spoke in the daytime, but as a rule they did so in
“the night. The Son of Heaven did not enter but after purification
“from evil influences. The wu was the directress there, and there-
“fore was provided with food and drink; and she was the medium
“through whom the princess spoke.

“Moreover the emperor erected a temple to the north of that'
“of Longevity. There he put up long plumes and banners, and set
“out sacrificial implements for the worship of the princess, and
“whatever she said he ordered to be written down. Her orders were
“called written law, but merely told things which even ordinary
“ people knew, and they contained nothing extraordinary ; nevertheless
“the Son of Heaven extended an exclusive preference to them.

“ They were kept secret, and the world at that time knew nothing
“of them.” ^

These interesting lines picture to us the wu not only in the


SAM ^2*.
^ 2 W # Ji .M * W . W H A .9# i ^

A-TWffi^A. HailSi AIK: A. BBmn

T.

. Historical Records, chapter 2S, 11. 23 i,eq., and chapter 12,
11. 6 seq. Books of the Early Han Dynasty, chapter 25 I, 11. 21 scq.


THE WU AS PHYSICIANS.


1203


garb of sacrificing priests or priestesses, and as possessed mediums
by whom the gods gave forth their oracular revelations, but also
as professors of the healing art. It is quite a matter of course
that they should be physicians, since they were expellers of demons,
and illness was ascribed in the main to demoniacal possession. It
is then not at all strange that the character ^ , which denotes
the medical art, is to this day so often written with the sub-
stitution of the radical ^ w u for the radical g" . The medical
position of the wu is also evidenced by^the use of the binomium
M. W wu-i in all ages, to denote the faculty or its practitioners.
This binominal term is even classical, for it is stated in the Lun yu
that Confucius said, “ The people of the south have this saying,
“‘of a man without constancy nobody can make a wu-i’. This
“is well said.”^

Evidently Mencius was thinking of the medical character of the
wu when he spoke of them as protectors or prolongers of lives
in this passage: “Are arrow-makers less humane than the makers
“of armour? and yet the only fear of an arrow-maker is lest men
“should not be hurt, while it is the armour-smith’s only fear lest
“men should be hurt. So it is respectively with wu and coffin-
“ makers.”* The Slian-hai king refers to the wu as physicians in
two passages, which may be very old. “On the east of Khai-ming
“are the six wu P"eng, Ti, Yang, Li, Fan, and Siang, who carry
_“the corpse of I-yu and have death-banishing medicinal herbs
“in- their hands to drive him away. I-yii had the shape of a
“snake with a human face, and was killed by a minister of
“Rh-fu. * Within the great desert is a mountain, called the Jasper
“Gate of Fung-tsii, behind which the sun and the moon set. Ten
“wu, named Hien, Tsih, Fen, PYng, Ku, Chen, Li, Ti, Sie, and
“Lo, go up and down an animated mountain there, on account

^ ^ . Lun yu, XIII, 22.

•»A, ®Aii®«A, The works of Mencius,

section I

, Chapter H.


]204


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“of the hundreds of medicinal herbs which grow there.” ^ Nobody
in China knows what all these names mean or express, and authors
abstain from interpreting them. Hien, the first of those wu, is also
mentioned in the Shan-liai ling in this passage, no less obscure:
“The kingdom of the wu Hien lies north of Nil-ch'eu. In his right
“hand he holds a blue snake, and in his left a red one, and he
“ lives on the Teng-pao mountain, on which all the w u move up
“and down”. ^ Some authors conjecture that we have to do here
not with a wu bearing the name of Hien, but with a realm
called Wu-hien, the peoplb of which possessed the curious habit of
carrying such snakes.

This Hien j^, who was either a wu, or simply a bearer of
the name Wu-hien, has occupied the attention of scholars because
he is mentioned in the Shu king. We I’ead in this Classic, that
“in T"ai-meu’s time ( 17 th century E. C.) there was Wu-hien
“who regulated the royal household, and in Tsu-yih’s time ( 16 th
“cent. B. C.) there was a man like Wu-hien”.^ Those two names,
written and ^ niay, of course, as some commentators

duly state, be names of offices; but others maintain that they
virtually denoted priests, seeing that it is stated in the Bamboo
Annals that “in the eleventh year of his reign T'^ai-meu directed
Wu-hien to pray to hills and streams”. The riddle must be left
in its obscurity. Tales and legends have been framed upon those
proper names or dignities. The name Wu-hien has also been borne
by some valleys and mountains to which attached the fame Of
having produced or harboured Wu-ist priests and priestesses of
significance; but these things do not inspire much interest. ^ We
may, however, take notice of the fact that the term ^ not

Books of Cheu, section

, Chuh shii hi 7iien, IV.

See also Chavannes, Les Memoires Historiques, I, page 101.

5 A good survey of those questions is given by Ku Yen-wu in the Jih chi luh,
chapter 25.


ancient wu-ism in the south of china.


1205


seldom appears since the Han dynasty as denoting wu of a su-
perior kind or even of ordinary quality, as also that many wu to
this day regard the mysterious Wu-hien of antiquity as the patriarch
or patron-divinity of their profession, for whom they occasionally
make images, and whom they worship with sacrifices.

The historical writings relating to the reign of the famous emperor
Wu, rich in details about Wu-ism, confirm also the statement of
Wang Ch'^ung (see p. 1194) that Wu-ism must have flourished par-
ticularly in the southern regions, for they tell us, that this monarch
specially engaged quite a number from there for the celebration
of their religious rites on his own behalf. “In that time (109 B. C.)
“the two Yueh states^ had been destroyed. A man from there,
“named Yung-chi, said, ‘The people of Yueh believe in kwei,
“ and in their sacrificial services they see them ; these beings are
“often employed by them with useful results. The king of eastern
“ Ngeu honoured the kwei and lived for one hundred and sixty
“years; his descendants neglected their worship, and came to decay
“and ruin.’ On this the emperor ordered that the wu of Yueh
“should institute invocations and sacrifices which were in vogue
“in Yueh, and lay out a terrace for the purpose, without an altar,
“and that they should also sacrifice to the celestial deities, the
“supreme Emperor, and hundreds of kwei, and practise divination
“ by means of cocks. ® The emperor placed his confidence in those
“w'u, and thus the sacrifices of Yueh with the divinations by
“means of cocks commenced.”’

We have now had before us sufficient evidence to perceive,
that in the second and first centuries before our era the Wu-ist
priesthood actually was the priesthood proper of China, even for
the highest man in the world under heaven. It wms then evidently
not yet dethroned by a Confucian state-rdigion, which in those


1 CoiM‘e.>ponding to the present Kwangtung, Kwangsi, and the adjacent north

and south. Chapter 12, 1. 20 of the Historical Records has in this place ^^7

South Yueh.

2 Bv the examination of figures on the bones of the cooked biixl.


^ Am Z7*f^

ho

Z h ^ M • Historical Records, ch. 28, I. 33, and ch. 12, I. 20.


1206


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


ages was just being built up from elements mentioned in the Clas-
sics, and which was destined to become to this day the only offi-
cial and orthodox religion, which excommunicates Wu-ist office from
its pale. The strength of the position of Wu-ism in that period
must appear quite natural to us if we merely admit that it was
the pristine priesthood of China, spontaneously produced by the
Animistic Religion, which, having been probably the religion pro-
per of its people from the first days of. its existence, still bore
supreme sway in the age of Han.

If emperors of the Han dynasty were so anxious to employ the
Wu-ist priesthood, we cannot be surprised to read that the princes
were no less addicted to its services for sorcerous and other designs.
Wu had five sons, the fourth of whom was Sii *, feudal king of
Kwang-ling*; the third had succeeded him in 86 B. C. and is known
in history by his posthumous name Chao “ Under the reign of
“ the emperor Chao, Sii, considering that this monarch was young
“and childless, aspired to the crown himself; and as in that Ch'u
“region Wu-ist and demonistic practices were in vogue, he fetched
“a female wu, Li Nii-sii by name, and ordered her to bring down
“a shen and make incantations. Nii-sii burst into tears as she
“said, ‘the emperor Hiao Wu descends into me’; and while all the
“bystanders prostrated themselves she exclaimed, ‘It is my strict
“order that Sii shall become the Son of Heaven’. Many a time Sii
“gave money to Nii-sii and sent her to the Wu-shan (or hill of
“the wu) to pray, and — the emperor died (74 B. C.). Sii then
“said,. ‘how good a wu this Nii-sii is’; he slaughtered an ox,
“to present it as a thank-offering with prayers.

“But the king of Ch'ang-yih (Wu’s fifth son) was called to the
“ throne ; therefore Sii ordered the w u again to use her ineanta-
“ tions against this emperor, who after that was deposed. Sii’s con-
“ fidence in Nii-sii and the other wu thus increased again, and he
“ frequently gave her money and presents ; nevertheless the emperor
“ Siien mounted the throne. ‘ Why is the grandson of the heir-
“ apparent (see page 842) placed on the throne instead of I?’ he
“ exclaimed, and ordered Nii-sii again to make her incantations in
“ the same way ....

“ Afterwards his son Pao, under-vassal in Nan-li, was found guilty
“ of murder, ■ and divested of his dignity. He returned to Kwang-
“ ling, and there committed incest with Tso-siu, a consort of his


THE WU AS SORCERERS.


1207


“father’s. This was discovered;- they were imprisoned, and executed
“in public. The minister Shing-chi now proposed to the emperor
“to sequestrate the king’s pasture-grounds on the banks of the
“ She, in order to distribute them among the poor; and the
“ emperor approved of this proposal. Now Sii told the w u again
“ to make her incantations as before. Then the red leaves on some
“ten branches of a jujube tree in his palace-park turned as white
“as silk; and in the pond the water became red and the fish died;
“and rats hopped in full daylight in erect attitude in the queen’s
“courtyard. ‘This strange behaviour of that tree, that water, those
“fish and those rats is most alarming’, said Sii to Ki Nan-teng,
“and in fact only a few months elapsed before the incantations
“ were betrayed. Officers arrived to examine the matter, and Sii,
“ seized with fear, imposed silence on the w u and more than
“ twenty of his palace officials by poisoning them. The high ministers
“proposed that he should be put to death, and the emperor
“delegated a court-judge in chief with a minister for the State
“Ceremonial to examine him. Sii avowed his guilt, declared that
“he had deserved more than death, everything being true, and
“requested that, as those matters had taken place so long ago, he
“ might be allowed to go home, in order to recall them to his
“ memory. This request was readily granted. *


# . W.® H 4 ' ® a i + ft M . $ ± * 0 in * .


ms


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


"" After this interview with the delegates he went home, set out
“spirits in the liien-yang hall, called his eldest son Pa and his
“daughters-in-law Tung Tsze and Hu Sheng, and passed the night
“with them drinking. At his command his favourite concubine
“ Kwoh Chao-kiiin, his domestic named Chao Tso-kiiin and others
“strummed the psaltery, chanted and danced, and he himself chimed
“in with a song, which moved to tears all those who were present.
“They drank wine till the crowing of the cocks; then he said to
“ his eldest son Pa, ' His Majesty has bestowed favours upon me
“which I have returned with the greatest ingratitude; therefore I
“deserve that after my death my remains should lie exposed to the
“open air; but 1 shall be happy if they are just buried with little
“care’. He then strangled himself with his seal-ribbons. The con-
“cubine Kwoh Chao-kiiin and another one committed suicide. The
“Son of Heaven by way of favour spared his (eight) sons, but
“ they were all degraded to the rank of commoners.” ^

Certainly we are here entitled to assume, that the domination which
a w u exercised over the mind of that sou of an emperor, rested
in the main on his firm belief in her power to call down into
herself even the spirit of his late mighty imperial father, whose
words, according to the old classical law of filial submission, were
to be obeyed by him as sacred commands. We may even draw a
general conclusion from the episode, and say that the power of
the Wu-ist priesthood to have intercourse with ancestors, even
with the most exalted among them, and to reveal their will, was the


Han Dynasty, chaptei\63, 11. 14 sqcj.


SPIRITS SPEAKING BY WU WHO ARE IN ECSTAZY. 1209


great source of the influence of that priesthood among every class
upon human conduct of every kind. Peculiarly instructive on this head
is also the following episode in the history of the same House of
Han. In the year 25 of our era, when the troubles resulting from
the usurpation of the throne by Wang Mang were drawing to a
close, a military adventurer, Fan Ch'^ung ‘ by name, had an enormous
army in the field, known as that of the Red Eyebrows as they
were wont to dye their eyebrows blood-colour. . “ There always was
“ in that army a w u from Tsfl, who with drumming and dancing
“sacrificed to King, feudal prince of Chflng-yang (a deceased scion
“of the House of Han), in order to obtain his blessing and help.
“This WU said in her ecstasy, ‘Prince King bursts into anger, and
“says that we must appoint a district prefect (a covert term for
“emperor); wherefore else have we raised the standard of rebellion?’
“Some who railed at the wu were forthwith smitten with disease,
“ so that she inspired terror in the army . . . The w u then insisted
“ with greater emphasis, and when the army had invaded Clung,
“and Fan ClTung consulted her, she said, ‘As we are now drawing
“near Ch‘ang-ngan (the capital), and the spirit manifests its will so
“emphatically, we must look about for a member of the Liu family
“(i. e. of the House of Han), unanimously acknowledge him, and
“place him upon the throne’. And in the si.xth month they raised
“ Liu P^en-tsze (a descendant of the emperor King) to the imperial
“ dignity. ” ^ Ch'^ang-ngan was then taken by these insurgents, sacked
and destroyed; but Liu P'en-tsze submitted in the next year to another
scion of the House of Han, who founded the Later Han dynasty.

As the Wu-ist priesthood consisted largely, probably even princi-
pally, of women, we cannot wonder that its influence was preva-
lent to a great extent among the female sex. A remarkable testimony
to this fact was given in the first half of the second century of
our era by Wang Fu, who considered it his duty to disparage
this influence in the following reproachful terms; “ The Odes satirized


2


M * till s .5 (f 1 ii ...iffi ® t S® M . » 15 . ^
I? « , 0 . 4 a a ft ^ w A St jp lit . ® #

Hun Dynasty, ch. 41, ), ii.


1210


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM,


“a woman who did not twist her hemp, but sauntered in the
“ market ' ; yet even now there are so many who do not occupy
* themselves with the dressing of food at home, neither rear any
“silk-worms, nor weave, but above everything learn the profession
“of the wu-chuh. Dancing to the sound of drums, they employ
“spirits, and with this practice cheat the people and mislead its
“married and unmarried women, to the effect that the weak and
“the sick, when in -distress and sorrow, altogether fear them. They
“then advise them to flee till felicitous times have come, and to
“abandon their good houses, and to lodge in ravines or by the
“roadside, where they are wetted from above, and soaked from
“ below ; there wind and cold hurt them ; there rogues prey upon
“them, thieves and robbers strike them — the numbers of those on
“ whom such misfortunes and other consequences of their devilish
“ work are heaped to such an extent as to cause the worst thing
“ (viz. death), has reached the utmost limit. There are also people who
“reject medical help and drugs, but go and employ the spirits (of
“the wu), thus incurring death without even guessing that they
“were victims of the imposture of the wu; on the contrary they
“regret that they have too late begun to employ the latter. We
“ here have to do with the worst kind of deception of the people.” ^
Wu-ist imposture is denoted in these lines by the character
composed of ^ “words”, and ^ wu. To this day that character
signifies imposture in general. It is even classical, as it occurs in
the Yih king, the Lun yii, the Li ki, and the writings of Mencius,
as also in the Shu king, in a piece professedly dating from the
year 1765 B. C. ’ May we consider its antiquity and composition


1 See the Shi king, section ^ JIH, t 2.

S « # S « B| . * » S ^ . nt *B SS ± T ti .

a « »f tl . S A )!»f *1 . K ^ *0 ^ H it

, Ts'ieii fit /un, ch. 3, sect. 12,

3 Books of Sliang, sect.


THE GHOSTS OF THE DEAD SPEAK THROUGH THE W U. 1211


as another proof of the contempt which men of letters have cherished
for Wu-ism since the remotest times?

We learn from that passage from Wang Fu’s book, that the Wu-
ist practices were exercised by any woman, married or unmarried,
who felt able to evoke and employ spirits, and that they were
diligently studied within the circle of home-life. There is, of course,
no reason to suppose that this state of affairs dates from the Han
epoch, in which Wang Fu lived; it may have prevailed as long
as Wu-ism itself. It prevails at the present day, as we shall have
an opportunity of seeing in Chapter VI.

There is no reason to doubt that the shen or kwei, which
the Wu-ist priesthood employed for its animistic practices, were for the
most part ghosts of the dead. Wang Chhing affirms this in the
following lines from his critical pen: “Among men the dead speak
“ through living persons whom they throw into a trance, and the
“ w u , thrumming their black chords, call down souls of the dead,
“ which then speak through the mouths of the w u. But whatever
“these people say is always falsehood. If we allow that it is no
“ falsehood, but reflections of the vital spirits of (dead) beings, then it
“ may be objected that such a vital spirit cannot speak, and there-
“fore cannot have any intelligence, since intelligence and speech
“both require breath. Anterior to a man’s death his intellect and
“vital spirit are in good order, but as soon as he falls ill his intel-
“lect is dimmed and his vital spirit is disorganized; — death is the
“ last stage of illness; if they are dimmed and disorganized even during
“an illness, which is only a small beginning of death, how much
“ more must they be so when the last stage is reached ! A patient
“ whose life-spirit is in disorder has no longer any intelligence ;
“ how will it be when that spirit is dissolved (by death) ! ” ^


® « tf II .a * ® S .

Lun Jieng^ chapter 20, ,


CHAPTER II,


WU-ISM AFTER THE HAN PERIOD.

In the long series of ages which lie between the epoch in which
the Han dynasty reigned and our own time, Wu-ism may have,
changed its outward aspect, but has certainly not altered its fun-
damental characteristics. The w u have ever remained what they
probably were from the night of time: men and women possessed
by spirits or gods, and consequently acting as seers and soothsayers,
exorcists and physicians; invokers or conjurers bringing down gods
at sacrifices, and performing other sacerdotal functions, occasionally
indulging also in imprecation, and in sorcery with the help of spirits.
This fact is evinced by Chinese literature of every age, a certain
number of pages from which must occupy our attention, because
they throw some new light on our subject.

Take for instance an interesting narrative from the life of one
Hia T"ung a virtuous man of Hwui-ki in the present province
of Chehkiang, who lived under the Tsin dynasty. ‘^His stepfather
“ King Ning was sacrificing to his ancestors and had engaged for
“this occasion two female wu, one Chang Tan and one Ch^'en
“Chu, who more than any others in the empire were endowed
“with beauty. They were dressed very gaudily, and chanted and
“danced excellently, and they could render themselves invisible.
“The first evening was opened by them with bells and drums,
“the noise of which they alternated with music of stringed instru-
“ ments and bamboo pipes , and then Tan and Chu drew knives
“or swords, cut their tongues therewith, swallowed the swords, and
“spat fire, a cloud hiding them from view, from which streams
“of light flashed like lightning.*

“T^ung’s step-brothers were anxious to go and witness the per-


\


2 Does this passage indicate a knowledge of gunpowder fireworks at that date?


A DESCaiPTION OF WU-IST PERFORMANCES.


1213


^formance, but T'^ung felt objection to it. They unanimously urged
^him, saying, 'Your step-fether has been ill and is now cured,
''and old and young consider this as an occasion for congratulation;
"as he is offering his sacrifices, everybody is anxious to go and
"congratulate him; cannot you go with us?’ And 'Pung v\ent with
"them. No sooner had he entered the door than he saw Tan
"and Chu in the central courtyard, dancing with light steps and
"whirling round and round; they uttered a language of spirits and
"laughed like spectres, caused basins to spin and fly against each
"other, and with gestures as though flying invited one another to
" drink. Thing stood horror-stricken ; off he ran, not through the
"gate, but right through the fence, and went home.

"'Sirs’, he cried reproachfully, 'why did you receive such ominous
"spectral beings into our home and are you idly amusing yourselves
"with them in the dark of night? why do you unbridle your vicious
"instincts and your licentious habits, thus throwing the social laws
"concerning the relation between the two sexes into confusion, and
"annulling the rules of chastity and distinction of rank?’ And he
" hid himself in his bed, and lay down with disordered hair, without
"saying one word more. All his kinsmen stood apart respectfully
"and timidly; they sent Tan and Chu away, and all dispersed.”^

This narrative is instructive. Shamans, dervishes, bazirs and balians,
wewalen, and all members of Asiatic animistic priesthood generally


tp s ^ « ti * IS , H JH « tj- , a 7j .

aw. SiSitttI®.

stiim. it;)?'#. Books of the Tsin Dynasty,

chapter 94, 1. 4.


1214


THK PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


are well known to exhibit their possession by dancing to drums
and music at religious festivities, and to occupy themselves with
magical arts and tricks of legerdemain, ascribed to the power of
the divinity which possesses them: — here we see the wu of
China described as behaving in like manner. Their ecstasy, mani-
tested by dancing and ascribed to possession, is, of course, produced
or furthered by the monotonous music and drumming. The sta-
tement that the above priestly couple cut their tongues is the earliest
printed reference to a strange custom of self-mutilation which, as
we shall see in Chapter IV, prevails among the w u on a large scale
to this day. We finally note, that when that exemplary Hia T'^ung
lived, female Wu-ism had so firm a position in Chinese society,
that it could boldly defy Confucian morality, which peremptorily
forbids the presence of women in public before male eyes.


1. The wu as seers of spirits and as soothsayers.

We have demonstrated on pp. 1166 sqq. that a man by the pos-
session of a shen of peculiar strength may also possess a second
sight, enabling him to discover spectres with their doings and designs,
and then to modify and frustrate the latter. But that same second
sight will, of course, enable him to see also good spirits; and there-
fore, as the Chinese express it, he may “ have intercourse with these
shen” or “understand them” \ and exert influence upon their
wills and ways. The extent of his capacities on this head altogether
is exactly equivalent to the excellence and quantity of the shen
substance which dwells in him.

It is then by no means necessary that a man, to be a seer and
magician, should be a professional w u. In the fourth century of
our era Yii Pao stated this fact in the following lines: “Hia-heu
“ Hung himself declared, that he could see spectres and speak with
“them. The riding-horse of one Sie Shang of Chen-si having sud-
“denly died, this man said to Hung, ‘If you restore it to life,
“you are the real spectre-seer’. Hung absented himself for a while;
“he came back, and said, ‘The god in the temple took a fancy to
“your horse and appropriated it, but it will presently revive’. Shang
“sat down by the dead animal, and forthwith his horse came run-


THE WU AS SEERS OF SPIRITS.


1215


“ning back out of the temple-gate and disappeared into the carcase,
“ which at the same moment moved, rose, and walked.” ^
Nevertheless the role of animistic seers and magicians is in China
conferred in particular on the Wu-ist priesthood, whose possession
'by spirits naturally implies the power of seeing and controlling
these beings. As early as the fourth century Koh Hung wrote, that
“in the books about divine Immortals mention is made of magic
“power to call down gods and arraign and punish spectres, as also
“ magic enabling men to see spectres. Ordinary men, when they
“hear of such things, are wont to say that it is all idle words;
“some even pretend that there exist no kwei or shen at all
“under the sky; others say, that if there are such beings, yet the
“kwei cannot be arraigned, nor the shen evoked; and besides
“ there are others who say, that seers of spectres are h i h of the
“ male sex or w u of the female, and that their second sight is a
“natural gift, which cannot be acquired by study or practice.” *

To this assertion we may add, that the seer who, according to
Yii Pao, was asked by the emperor King of the Wu dynasty in
the third century of our era for medical advice, and could see the
spirit of a goose which was dead and buried, was a h i h (see page
543). The same author tells us of yet other ghost-seers of the Wu-
ist profession. “Sun Siiin of Wu had killed the princess Chu, and
“buried her in a rocky hill. When Kwei-ming had ascended the
“throne (A. D. 264), this emperor wished to remove her remains
“ into another grave. Her grave and the others were, however, so simi-
“lar that they could not be distinguished from each other; but the
“inmates of the Palace well remembered what dress the princess wore


^ . wt B . m a- n. M M, &

BSfiSSS. ^ Shell shen chapter 2.

Zm. -til**.

® ic S ® * S BB # • '««. “«■


1216


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


when she perished. The emperor told two w u to take position each
^ in a different spot to discover the soul, and he gave orders to watch
“ them, lest they should approach one another. After a while both
"wu reported that they had seen a woman over thirty years of
“age, with a blue embroidered headband, a red tunic, a white
“petticoat, and shoes of vermilion silk, who came forth from the
“rocky hill, ascended halfway up it, there stopped for a while, and
“ went back to a grave, where she halted, lingered about for some
“time, and suddenly vanished. As the reports of the two men tallied
“without any collusion, that grave was opened, and the dress
“of the corpse was found to answer to the description which had
“ been given of it.” ^

Under the emperor Hiao Wu (A. D. 454 — 465) of the first
Sung dynasty “ there was a w u , who could see spirits and assured
“the emperor that it would be possible to make his secondary
“consort appear. The emperor was very glad for it, and bade him
“evoke her. In a few moments she was actually seen on a curtain
“in the shape which she had had when alive. The emperor desired
“to speak with her, but she remained silent, and just as he would
“fain have grasped her hand, she vanished. His sorrow was increased
“ by this incident.” ^ This story bears a striking resemblance to
that of the emperor Wu of the Early Han dynasty, which we have
translated on page 87 from the Historical Records.

The capacity of the Wu-ist priesthood to see spirits, and to have
intercourse with them and understand them, naturally raised its


AmM±

jt. ziA2

fi R > * 4 b . SJieii shen ki^ chapter 2.

History of the South, chapter 11, 1. 8.


GODS AND SPIUITS SPEAKING THROUGH THE WU 1217

members to the rank of soothsayers through whom gods and ancestors
manifested their will and desires, and their decisions about human
fate. Occasionally, as we have seen on pages 120G and 1209, in that
capacity they have even seduced grandees to scheme and plot for
the elevation of themselves or others to imperial dignity, thus
giving ample reason to crowned heads for viewing their class as a
continual source of insidious political danger, and strictly forbidding
their prophesying practices. Thus in A. D. 485 did Kao Tsu of the
Wei dynasty; ‘^in the ninth year of the T^ai hwo period he
“decreed, that the wu and hih were strictly forbidden to foretell
“good or bail fortune under pretext of doing so by means of shen
“or kwei’’ h Undoubtedly, the enactment of such edicts as a rule
signified cruel persecution and execution ; nevertheless political events
under the impulse of Wu-ist inspiration often repeated themselves.
“Lo Hung-sin (S35 — 898), whose name of maturity was Teh-feu,
“ was a native of Kwei-hiang in Wei-cheu, an excellent horseman
“and archer, a martial figure. In Wei-cheu a wu said to him,
“ ‘An old grey-haired man sends me to you with the expression of
“his gratitude; you are destined to become the owner of this earth’.
“But Hung-sin said, ‘Does that god intend to bring danger upon
“me?’ When Chao Wen-pien was dead, the soldiers asked, ‘Who
“is willing to become the commander of our army?’ Hung-sin
“answered immediately, ‘A god has appointed me for that task’.
“The troops crowded around him to see him, and as they saw that
“he was the proper man, they placed him at their head”-. This
event occurred in the second month of the year S83.

Before the emperor Fei ^ of the short-lived posterior T'ang dynasty
obtained possession of the throne, he had revolted in A. U. 934 against
Ming Tsung \ his adoptive father, at the instigation of five coun-


^IT • tlie Wei Dynasty, chapter 7, I, 1. 21.

fll-, n ^ Al Dynasty, chapter 210, I. 10.

Also the Old Books of the same House, chapter 181, 1, 0.

3 S'


77


1218


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


sellors, one of whom, “Fang Kao by name, admired whatever kwei,
“shen and the wu-chuh said. There was then a blind person,
“Chang Mung by name, who pretended to have in his employ the
“god of the T"ai-poh mountain, namely Ts^ui Hao, (a minister) of
“the Wei dynasty. All good or evil which that person foretold
“came true, and Fang Kao, who had great confidence in him,
“introduced him to the (future) emperor.... When the emperor
“ was about to rise in rebellion , his warriors were not numerous
“and his provisions scarce, so that he wavered and hesitated greatly.
“ At his order Fang Kao then asked Chang Mung for "advice ;
“and as this man transmitted the following words of the god,
“'Prince, you are destined to become the owner of the world
“under the sky, and you need therefore have no anxiety at all’,
“he made up his mind to revolt”. Ming Tsung then died; his son
Min ' ascended the throne, and Fei unfurled the standards of rebel-
lion. “On his order. Fang Kao interrogated that spirit again, who
“said, ‘Prince, your warriors are not numerous, but the army of the
“east is coming to you in order to receive you’; and indeed, the
“eastern army revolted, and submitted to him. He then occupied

“ the capital (Loh-yang), and ascended the throne P’rom that

“time, his intimacy with P’ang Kao and his confidence in him
“ became greater than ever they were, and he managed matters
“exclusively with the advice of wu-chuh”*. These priests and
their inspiring divinities proved, however, unable to secure Fei’s
life and throne, for as early as the eleventh month in A. D. 936,
when the Khitan Tartars were marching up to his capital, he
burned himself in his palace.

Descriptive accounts of the ways in which in bygone ages the
wu were wont to conjure and consult spirits, are, I believe, very


■« 2 » ?l (1 Ji . . . f • » S ffi i'- . X g; * lit
® * AH ... X si # ra i# .null 0 i!-' *

waft...

History of the Five Dynasties, chapter 27, 11. 3 seq.


SPIRITISM IN THE NINTH CENTURT.


1219


scarce, for not more than one have I been able to discover. It
occurs in a booklet of the ninth century of our era^ written by
one Li Fuh-yen ^ and entitled Suh yiu kioni luh ^ or " Supplement-
ary Ytu kioai luW \ this Yiu kicai luh or “Record of Wonders of
Mysticism was also written in the T"ang period by one Wang Yun ^ :

“In the first year of the Yuen hwo period (A. D. 806), Lu
“Tsung-shi^ was, as Vice-Superintendent of the six Boards, invested
“ with the government of Tseh and Lu (in Shansi) . . . (Afterwards),
“ when in Khang-cheu (in Kwangtung pr.), he was ordered by the
“emperor to commit suicide, a former intent to revolt having been
“completely discovered.

“In the first year of the Pao lih period (825) the prefect of
“Mung-cheu (in Kwangtung), Li Siang by name, was travelling
“from this prefecture to the Imperial residence. He was conscious
“of being nothing more or better than merely a prefect of an out
“of the way department somewhere on the sea-shore, none of whose
“relations lived in terraced houses or were privileged to appear one
“day before the supreme head of the empire; in fact, nothing
“ better was he than a flat-bottomed boat drifting on an ocean vast
“and wide. Hence, hearing that a female wu in the district of
“Twan-khi knew the future, he moored his boat there, and bade
“ her come. ®

“ When she came she said, H can discover future things because
“ I am a spirit-seer who can summon spirits by calling them
“hither. There are two kinds of spirits, viz. spirits which enjoy
“happiness and blessing, and others which are poor and mean;
“the former have a vital spirit (tsing slien) which is so vigorous
“and healthy that it enables them to speak themselves with men
“from time to time, while the latter have a breath which is so
“weak, and a shen which is so exhausted, that they are obliged
“to employ me to act as their mouth-piece. The sole question


^ ^ ^ o’ • ^ ^ ^ ^ 3E ‘1^ •

4 A biography of this statesman occurs in the Old Books of the T'ang Dynasty,
chapter 132, 1. 8, and in the New Books, chapter 141, 1. 8.

ss.


1220


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANJMIS3J.


^ now is, of which kind will be the one whom we shnll meet ; it
^^is not in iny power to know this’.

“Li Siang now asked, ‘What now is the way to find a spirit
“for an interview?’ And her answer was, ^ Under the ts in tree
“in front of this hall stands a man in a red dress to which a
“fish is fastened; he says he is Lu (Tsung-shi) of fseb and Lii,
“second Superintendent of the Boards; salute him with bows . And
“Siang, dressed in his ceremonial attire and with a memorial tablet
“ in his hands, went to that tree and performed his obeisances.
“^The Superintendent has returned your obeisances, said the wu,
“and Siang, his clasped hands politely raised, went up the steps.
“A voice in the air then said, ^Lu Tsung-shi has died here in this
“hall, strangled by a bow-string; even now he abhors such strings;

“ kindly let that bow be removed from above your divan, Sir . And
“Siang forthwith had it taken away. ^

“There was only one divan in the hall of that posting-house,
“standing above the side-steps. Siang, forgetting that the spirit had
“been bearer of a dignity higher than his, was about to seat himself
“on it and begin the interrogation, when the wu exclaimed, ‘Sir,
“this is a discourtesy; the dignity of a Vice-Superintendent is
“higher than yours; would you not invite him to sit down, instead
“of acting as if he were a petty official? He is now going away in
“great indignation; quick, run after him with humble apologies,
“that he may deign to come back’. And Siang, having prostrated
“himself with his face to the ground, hunded down the steps, asked
“in which direction the spirit had gone, and made a bow at every
“pace; and after a few dozen paces a voice up in the air was heard.
“‘So gross a mistake!’ said it; ‘your office is even lower than


1

n ^ =■ 9 bb & ^ M m ^ A ,mm

T - A .


SPIRITISM IN THE NIxNTH CENTURY.


1221


“that of a lieutenant in ray array, and yet you presumed to sit
“down in ray presence!’ and Siang had to apologize again and again
“before the ghost would return. ' The Vice-Superintendent is coining!’
“said the wu; and Siang, his hands clasped on his breast, walked
“back, and when he was at the steps, the wu exclaimed: 'The
“Vice-Superintendent ascends’! She placed a second divan on the
“spot, and laid out a mat upon it to invite the spirit to sit down,
“and when she had said 'Sit down’, Siang seated himself. ^

“'What has that gentleman to ask?’ said a voice in the air. 'He is
“an officer from a distant region, Siang by name, travelling to the
“imperial residence, and a prey to the greatest doubts and cares;
“ most humbly he begs to be favoured with one word telling him
“whether glory or distress is in store for him’. And the voice in

“the air answered, 'He sliall be welcomed there by many people,

“and in a month after his arrival in the city he shall be prefect of
“Wu-cheu’. Siang too put some questions, which the spirit left
“unanswered, and said, 'Vice-President, it is long since you left
“the human world; why did you never return among men, but
“stay all that time in the nether world?’ — 'O’, was the answer,
“'what talk is this! in the world of men it is all toil and misery;
“ myriads of cares lie there coiled around every man’s heart, and
“the end of it is like that of a moth in a lamp; it is all strife

“ and fighting there for fame and gain ; and when distress and cares

“have finally been overcome, the hair is white, the soul is a wreck,
“and the body is weak and lean, a wave (of sorrow) a myriad of
“fathoms in length having passed over every square inch of it.
“Men envy and assail each other there with more cruel ferocity
“than even wild beasts; Buddha therefore called that world 'a
*“ house in the fire’, and taught that the human material existence

■SI St ip , H

St ± ^ . SI) M S tffi K a # 0 ^ . MB . ^ ^ .


1322


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“is the greatest of evils. Released from that world, I am now gazing
“down into that fiery whirlpool; to think that I should go down
“ again and lay myself therein ! ’ . . . Siang further asked what would
“happen to him after his stay in Wu-cheu, but the ghost was
“silent, and left him.

“On his arrival in the capital he wanted financial help, in order
“to be able to bestow the customary presents, and it was* readily
“afforded him by several people. And ere a month had elapsed he
“was appointed prefect of Wu-cheu. The prophecy thus came per-
“fectly true. He ended his life in Wu-cheu, and this was the
“reason why Lu did not tell him about the things that would
“occur after his residence there.” ^

This description of a spiritualistic seance fully entitles us to suspect
Wu-ism of the practice of ventriloquism. ^ It is noteworthy that the
revelations of that spirit consisted merely in talk rising in no way
above the level of vulgarity. But to vulgar minds even the most
silly oracular language is of a higher order. VV'^e need not doubt
that Wu-ism has been thus exploited in all ages as a rich source
of revelations from the other life. Souls have in this wise been
enabled to give accounts of their experience and fate, their tortures

# ?l S -■;« A M W E9

0.i>f A lit Kit **'.1*1

^ i .

tS ttl « a. -g *1 * W . « tg « ijlf 0 ^ «

2 It presents striking analogies with the episode of the witch of Endor (I Sa-
muel, 28), who called up before Saul the spirit of Samuel, which she alone could
see ; he bowed to it with his face to the ground, and did obeisance, and they spoke
together; and Saul having asked for advice, Satnuers ghost prophesied about the
impending fate of his kingdom. See also Isaiah VIII, 19, and XXIX, 4.


WU-ISM AMONG THE ElAOTUNG TARTARS.


1223


and woe in hell; opportunity has been thus at the same time afford-
ed .to them to mention the religious rites and Buddhist masses
by which their pains might be assuaged by their sorrowing offspring,
and the quantity of paper money, clothes, and requisites of life that
ought for that purpose to be burned for them; but all those revela-
tions will hardly ever have divulged anything beyond what Bud-
dhism or Taoism had to teach in every age on the subject of the
life hereafter.

Our hypothesis, set forth on page 1201, that Wu-ism also pre-
vailed in countries contiguous to China proper, is confirmed by a
page in the Chinese standard history of the Tartar House of Nii-
chen ^ in Liaotung. This informs us that a ruler of that House in
the eleventh century was positively addicted to belief in its pro-
phetic practices. His name was Sliiklu but he is known in history
by his posthumous temple-name Chao Tsu^; he was the great-
great-grandfather of T"ai Tsu \ who assumed imperial dignity
in 1115, and gave his House the name of Kin, “This emperor
“Chao Tsu had been childless for a long time. There was a wu
“who could speak the language of a shen, which proved very
“reliable. The emperor went to pray to that spirit, and after a
“while the wu said, ‘Yonder comes the soul of a son who will
“largely enjoy felicity and blessing, and whose offspring will glori-
“ously prosper; do obeisance and accept this child; and when it
“is born, call it Ukunai’. This child afterwards became the emperor
“King Tsu. Then, after another pause, the wu said, ‘The soul of
“a girl has now come; call her Ngalunk Again there was a pause,
“after which she said, ‘Prognostics of a daughter appear again;
“let her name be Kantupat’. And once more after some moments
“she said, ‘Prognostics of another son are now visible; his cha-
“racter will be neither docile, nor good; he will grow up a but-
“cher, indifferent, ungrateful for all that his parents do for him,
“and he is sure to commit disloyal acts; you had better not accept
“him’. But Chao Tsu just bore in his mind that no offspring had
“yet been born to him, and said, that though that son might not
“be a good one, he would rather have him too. ‘Call him Ukuchut’,
“said the wu.

“Afterwards two sons and two daughters were born to him in
“the same sequence as the wu had predicted, and the names were


1


3 Wi mi.-


^ is: iifi.-


1224


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


^ given them which the wu had ordered. When King Tsu had
^ascended the throne, Ukuchut indulged in drunkenness; and as
often as he behaved obstinately towards the empress Wei-shun,
"she said, 'The wu has spoken true'.” ^

Chinese authors, whether influenced or not by Confucian animo-
sity and prejudice, frequently declare that the Wu-ist priesthood has
included the basest characters who stained its name by vile abuse of
their knowledge of things to come for mere selfish or even rebel-
lious purposes. It was about the year 1320, when Yii P"an * was
judge in Siang-hiang ^ in the present Hunan, " that there came a
"wu to that department, who pretended that a shen descended
unto him He told the people that there would be a conflagration
"in such a place, and the fire indeed broke out there. Then he
"said, that the next day there would be a fire in this or that
"place, and whenever the people reported an outbreak to Yii P%n,
"this officer ran to the rescue either by day or night, even several
" dozens of time, oblivious of his bed and his meals. All the officers
"of that district, high and low, welcomed this w u in their homes,
“and overwhelmed him with courtesy.

"Then the wu predicted a great inundation and an invasion of
"the department by soldiery, and in consequence the well-to-do fled
" with all they had in their houses. Yii P an had arrested a soldier who
"had pilfered during the conflagrations; and when he examined this


.Mm

^ s .# an 2 fT -sr # m

t =S ^ 0 * tB .

m .m B mf)r ^ ^ Z ± .M i Si mm .

MtfSliIS6,fe0,adsSI^- History of the Kin Dynasty,
chapter G5, 1. 4.


3


THE WU AS SEERS OF HIDDEN THINGS.


1225


^man under torture, he extorted the confession that the Wu-ist
“priesthood had caused them. Now Yii P‘an charged the official
“thief-catchers with complicity, and summoned that w u in order to
“examine him, but nobody had the coinage to administer the whip
“or the bamboo lath to him. It was not before P"an had cried to
“ the constables, 'How can people, who are employed in creating great
“confusion, possibly liave a god or godly power wdthin them!’

“ that they belaboured him properly. This proceeding opened the
“way to the arrest of the whole gang, which was several dozens
“strong and had its web both in the city and abroad. They really
“had been plotting a revolutionary rising; but now none of their
“fellow-conspirators ventured to show himself, and each of them
“said to the rest, 'Sir, do it yourself’. P^in passed sentence on
“the WU and his gang in accordance with the huv.” ^

In the writings of Ch'^en Kwah, which date from the eleventh
century, we find the w u in their capacity of seers represented as
very far-sighted, and able to look through opaque matter and to
read human thoughts. In Shan-yang (in Kiangsu pr.) lives a female
“wu, whose shen displays spiritual power (ling) in the very
“highest degree. My uncle once called her and interrogated her,
“and she proved able to reveal anything he wanted to kno\v from
“her about things in this human world, even though they were
“more than a thousand miles off. She even knew the thoughts
“arising in others. Guests who were just then playing draughts
“held in their hands some white or black draughtsmen wdiich they
“ had previously counted, and asked her how many there were, and
“she gave the answer correctly every time; but then they took

34 s , ;f II ^ .

*11 if®

^*'^‘^'■'"7 of file Yuen Dynasty, cliapter

181 , 1 . 13 .


12:26


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


“ handfuls without counting them, and she could not mention their
“ numbers. It was thus evident that she could know what others
‘^knew, but not what others did not bear in their minds.

“She was then asked about the things which were within the
“linen boxes; and she could tell their number in every case. My
“uncle had a copy of the Wadjra sutra in one hundred books, and
“placed it in a large box; then pointing to this, he asked her what
“ was therein, and she said that the box was empty. As my uncle
“opened it and showed her the contents, saying, ‘This is a Buddhist
sutra in one hundred books ; how could you speak of an empty
“ box ? , she pondered for a while, and said, ‘And yet it is an
“empty box; do you think that you can make a fool of me? I say
that those things are emptiness (Nirwana) in a written form’. Having
“ to apply her orthodox mind to the discovery of unreasonable
“(Buddhist) things, her spectre or god could not see them.’-’ ^


2, The wu as exorcising physicians.

The capacity of the w u to act the part of physicians may be
considered to result naturally from the clairvoyance and exorcising
capacity which their possession by shen aflPords. As we have seen
on page 1203, their position as practitioners of the medical art may
be traced in classical literature' to the age of Confucius. We regu-
larly find mention made of it in the literature of subsequent ages.


)ilf si *

. Muncj khi pit Van^ chapter 20.


EXORCISING MEDICAL CURES,


1227


We have seen in this work (page 577) that a Chinese author
as early as the fourth century of our era described the wu as
hygienists who assiduously chased away foxes and lizards which were
deemed to produce sickness. Others have acquainted us (p. 1068) with
an astounding Wu-ist cure of an insane maid possessed by a gavial,
which occurred in the fifth century, as also (p. 633) with a wu in
the 'Fang epoch who exorcised a crazy girl by means of drums
and music, sacrifices and spells. In the same epoch the celebrated
Han Yii wrote his febrifugal poem in which he described the wu
as persons who ejected demons of disease by imprecation and
scolding (p. 1055). And an author in the tenth century stated, that
the w u for the same purpose erected altars (p. 638). Last, but not
least, mention is made of wu who caught and unmasked old
witches who, with the help of cats, disturbed the health and quiet
of babies in the homes of harmless people (p. 810).

We have not yet, however, seen the particulars of the exorcising
.practice of those animistic doctors and doctoresses described by any
Chinese authors. By the following written narrative we are acquainted
with some few: “In the time of the Fang dynasty there was
“in Ch^l-cheu b in Poh-t"ien, a female wu, named Sih Rh-niang,
“ who pretended to expel evil spectres by employing tlie Great
“King of the Metallic (or western) Heaven. And among the
“rural population there was one Cli'^en, whose daughter was so
“ terribly tortured by a spectre that she had fits of madness, in
“which she sometimes inflicted' injuries on her own self, jumping
“into fire or running into water; and meanwhile she became
“pregnant as if by sexual commerce with men. Her afflicted parents
“sent for Sih the wu, to apply his treatment to her. ^

“ When this woman had come, they put up an altar in a room,
“and laid the patient by it; then they made a large fire-pit at
“the side, over which they heated an iron pan till it was red.
“The wu, in full ceremonial dress, danced to the sound of music
“and drums, thus calling her shen. In a few moments this spirit
“descended into her, and while the spectators constantly did obeis-

1 Now Hwai-ngan-fu , in Kiangsu.


122S


THE TRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“ance, she made a libation and conjured the spirit, saying, ‘Fortli-
“ with call that demon before you’. With these words she stepped
"^into the fire-pit and sat down therein, without any change being
^produced in her countenance. After a while she shook her clothes
“and rose, placed the hot pan, the bottom upward, upon her head,

^ and danced to the rolling of a drum, and her ditty finished, she
'‘put down the pan and, in accordance with the Hunnish method,
"ordered the patient with an imperious voice to bind herself; on
" which the patient put her hands behind her back, as if to have
" them bound. Now the w u ordered the demon to make its con-
"fession, but the patient merely shed tears, and said nothing. The
" w u flew into a passion ; she drew her sword and struck at the
"patient, so that the blade passed through her with a rasping
"sound, and yet the body remained unhurt; but the patient ex-
"claimed, 'I surrender!’ and made the. following confession:

am an old otter from the river Hwai; I fell in love with this
"maid when she was washing clothes on the sandy beach; but.
"unexpectedly I have encountered you, sage mistress; pray allow
“ me to retire from here ; but alas for my unborn children within
"her womb! it will be more than I can hope for that you should
"not kill them at their birth, but give them back to me’. And
"she cried and she sobbed, and the bystanders were altogether
“moved by compassion. Taking a writing-pencil, she wrote a farewell
"poem, and though she had never known any characters, the verses
" which flowed from her pencil were quite beautiful. At this moment
" the patient fell asleep, and the next day she was released. She
"then related, that when at the washing place, a beautiful lad had
" seduced her, and thereupon had commerce with her. Ten days
"afterwards she was delivered of three otters. They would have
"been killed, but for somebody who said, 'That demon has placed
“confidence in us, and should we, who are men, prove untrust-
"worthv? we had better let them go free’. And he took them to
"the lake, where a large otter received them with transports of
"joy, and carried them on his back into the deep.” ^

MM ^ M ^ m ^


GREAT MEDICAL CAPACITIES OF THE W D.


1229


It stands to reason that the medical capacities of nihny a wu
have been highly vaunted and extolled, even with most fantastic
exaggeration. A work of the tenth century tells of “one Cli'^en Chai,
“a wu in Tsin-kiang in IViien-cheu (in Fuhkien), who was skilled
“in exorcising and conjuring magic, and very successful in his
“ treatment of the sick. One Su Meng, an inn-keeper in Chang-
“cheu, had a son who was mad, and as nobody could cure him,
“ they called Ch^en Chai. He came, but no sooner had the son
“seen him than he assailed him with his fists and with foul curses;
“‘the sickness has entered his heart’, said Ch'^en Chai. He put up
“an altar in the hall, forbade any one to spy upon him, and
“ towards night cleft the lad into two halves, which he suspended
“on the eastern wall of the hall; but the heart he hung under the
“eaves on the north side. He then performed his magic in the hall,
“during which the suspended heart was devoured by the dog.
“ Ch'en Chai sought for it in vain ; in great consternation he grasped
“ his sword, and ran out of the house. ’


,t. # S ^ in « . Si ❖ i » . vl Bfi ^ W . * S ,

# 7J . mt.

mmm'ifsm. Jt ,t. « * 7' n# , mMrn^m
ik ef ^ m <¥ Ml m .

, T'^unrj yiii ki work unknown to me, quoted in K K, ch. 470.

0 .ft * A * ^ .7J A Jt 7 A « # ^ II .

air.

S«*T. 0fS2'Cl'^®A

A. ^fS:^t#7J.ajPttf5i.


1230


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“In a few moments he re-entered with a heart in his hand. He
“ put it into the breast of the patient, and with hair unbound gave
“ utterance to a series of exclamations ; and lo, the breast closed,
“and Su Meng’s son revived, but he called incessantly 'the next
“station! the next station!’ None of the inmates of the house could
“guess what these words meant; but that same day, some miles off,
“a post-runner with an official despatch had expired at the road-
“ side ; and in the south there is on the post-roads every twenty
“ miles a station where the runner has to deliver his despatch to
“another runner, whom he warns of his approach by means of those
“exclamations. The heart of that runner had been taken by Ch^en
“Chai to revive young Su, who thereupon became as well as he
“ever had been” b

Thus there is reason to say, that the medical attainments of
Wu-ism are just as extensive as imagination which invents them.
Even patients who lie in a swoon or trance because the vital spirit
has been torn out of them by gods or spectres, may be cured by
their powerful magic. “When a tsin-shi graduate in Hwa-cheu
“(in Shensi pr.), Wang Hiun by name, was visiting there the temple
“of Mount Hwa with his disciple Chao Wang-shu, the former, while
“standing before the throne of the third consort of that god, pleased
“this goddess by his grace and beauty, thus bewitched her, and
“died at the same moment. The affrighted Wang-shu called an
“animated wu, who came with spirits and dainties, and danced
“ before the god to the sound of a drum until Wang Hiun revived.
“But Wang Hiun now turned against Wang-shu in great anger,
“ exclaiming, ‘ I found myself there released from all misery ; why
“ have you told that animated w u to recall me with the music of
“lutes?’ All the bystanders laughed at these words; but when they
“asked him to explain himself, he said, ‘At first the woman con-
“cealed me in her litter, and we were just going to rejoice in

* » ^ ^ . n re ^ gt ff . ta a I# a «i a « A

luh^ quoted in K K, chapter 220.


WU-IST PHYSICIANS RAtSED TO OFFICIAL DIGNITIES. J231

“close embrace, when a complaint was lodged by Wang-shu with
“ the accompaniment of a lute ; the king (of the Mountain) there-
“ upon ordered an eunuch to search the vehicle of the secondary
“consort, so that she could not save herself from being dashed to
“the ground, in consequence of which I revived.’'^

The animistic medical capacities of the w u must have secured
for them in all ages a considerable amount of influence, and many
have been raised thereby to rank and dignity. We read, for instance,
that Wang Ch^'u-chih, a prominent generalissimo in the period of
struggle between several dynasties in the first decades of the tenth
century, “favoured the wu, and gave hospitality in his house to
“one, Li Ying-chi by name, a magician and impostor, who thereupon
“cured him of illness by means of his heterodox practices. Thus
“his belief in the divine power of this man became stronger than
“ever; he ordered him to wear the dress of the doctors of Taoism,
“treated him like a field-marshal, and held decisive consultations
“with him concerning all military measures, whether they were
“important or not.” ^

But also quite other ways of treating the w u are recorded in
Standard History. Muh Tsung, one of the emperors of the Liao
dynasty, “returned to his capital in the seventh year of the Ying
“lih period (A. D. 957). The female wu Siao-ku had presented to
“him a life-prolonging medicine which was to be mixed with gall
“of boys, so that she had in a few years destroyed a great many


Bf a. S* ifii W a R# >ti .


Kivang i ki] quoted in T S, sect. A* , cliaj)ter 99.

. History of the Five Dynasties, chapter 39, 1. 9.


1:232


TUE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIillSM.


“lives. Bat now the emperor became aware of her imposture, and
“shot her on the day sin-sze.”*

“In the Khai pao period (968 — 976) Li VVei-tsdng put aside
“ the dress of the people to become prefect of Feu-ling (in Sze-
“chSven). The people of Shuh, bent on heterodox sacrifices, listened
“to the wu and the hih in all cases of incurable illness; therefore
“ Wei-tshng arrested the principal among the latter and flogged
“ them with bamboo laths. The people felt sure that he would now
“incur some calamity, but as he flogged them once more the next
“(lay, they became convinced of their lack of spiiitual power. He
“ thereupon instructed the people in the use of medicines, and in
“ this way gradually modified their customs.” ®

It was about one century later that “ Heu Kho ruled the Hwa-
“chhng district in Pa-cheu (in Sze-ch'wen). The people of Pa had
“so much regard for spectres that they even had abandoned the use
“of medicines, and followed no other directions than those which
“ the w u gave. At every marriage the w u exacted a sum of
“ money, so that the daughters of the poor had to remain unmar-
“ried till their old age. Heu Kho took measures against those
“ things, and made rescripts and laws, and punished the trangres-
“sors, and in this way he almost entirely changed those practi-
“ces.”^ — And, somewhat at the beginning of the twelfth century,
“ Tsiang Tsing, having taken his t s i n - s li i degree, became prefect
“of Ngan-jen. The people there were so attached to VVu-ism that,
“ when contagious disease was rife, the sick preferred to die rather
“ than to use medicines. For this reason Tsiang Tsing passed sen-


^ • ^listory of the Liao Dj'nasty, chapter 6, 1. 4.

Hii'tory of tlie Sung Dynast}^ chapter 267, 1. 24.

Dynasty, chapter 456. 1. 17.


THE wa-IST PRIESTHOOD EMPLOYED BY THE STATE.


1233


“tence on the wu everywhere; he collected the heterodox images,
“which were used and worshipped by them, to the number of
“ three hundred, smashed them, and flung them into the river.” *


3. Wu-ism employed and persecuted by the State.

In works which are reputed in China to date from the classical
age, male and female w u are, as we have seen in Chapter I, de-
scribed as persons of official standing, by whose invocations and other
performances at the celebration of sacrifices the spirits came down
to enjoy the offerings. There are also in one of the books of the
Li ki three characters ^ which point to their appearance in that role,
as they seem to state that, at sacrifices, “ the w u had their place in
front of the sovereign”. But there is nothing in the ancient books
which indicates that on such occasions they presented the offerings.
This fact is noteworthy, as it may explain why Wu-ism has never
occupied a conspicuous place as a sacrificial priesthood in the
State Religion which the dynasty of Han built up, for all following
ages, out of material exclusively provided by the classical works of
the Confucian school.

This does not imply that Wu-ist practices have in all times been
strictly and rigorously banished from that religion. The w u , as we
admit, were China’s only pristine priesthood, forming an integral
element of Chinese life from the earliest time; they were therefore
able to hold their place tenaciously in the official religion by mere
dint of pious conservatism, which at all times in China has exercised
certainly not less influence than elsewhere in the world. We have
pointed out on pp. 1200, 1201 and 1205, by means of quotations
from standard historical works, that emperors of the Han dynasty
had many wu in their employ for the presentation of their private
sacrifices, thus simply yielding to the religious instincts of themselves
and the whole race of which they were the supreme lords. But, to
comprehend this, we must take into consideration the fact that the


History of the Sung Dynasty, chapter

356, I. 12.

2 Section IV, I. 2.


78


1234


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


State Religion at that time was merely in its period of inception,
and had by no means advanced to the full maturity of an ultra-
rigid system rejecting everything non-classical as damnable hetero-
doxy; there then existed nothing as yet to restrain the personal
liberty of that monarch in point of religion.

But time came when the State Religion firmly established its
supremacy, and Wu-ism as a consequence was ejected from it. This
process we find depicted in one of the chapters of the standard
history of the Tartar house of Topa, which at first employed the
wu in its official religion, but ultimately, when this had been orga-
nized on the Confucian model, expelled them from it. We read
there, that the founder of that dynasty in the year 400 of our- era
instituted or celebrated a series of sacrifices, “ at all of which female
wu conducted the service” At a solemn sacrifice which he oflFered
to Heaven in A. D. 405, ‘‘female wu with drums (or tambourines?)
“in their hands stood at the east side of the altar steps, their
“faces turned westward; seven lads selected from the ten branches
“of the Imperial House, bearing sacrificial spirits, stood on the
“ south side of those w u , with their faces to the west, and the
“principal among them on the north side. Female wu ascended
“the altar, and shook their tambourines”^, the emperor and the
officers thereupon making prostrations and presenting the sacrificial
articles. But, in 472, a decree of the emperor Wen breathed a quite
different spirit. “The Canon of Sacrificial Worship is dormant and
“fallen to the ground; the ritual and ceremonial statutes are in a
“ lethargy or destroyed, in consequence of which female w u and
“sorcerous hih have in a heterodox way introduced rites which
“are wrongful. They drum and dance when the sacrificial victims
“are being killed; as musicians and chanters they indulge in sexual
“familiarities; how can the gods of light be honoured with such
“practices? can the promulgators of the Tao of the Sages be wor-
“ shipped in that wise? From this moment, and for ever in future,
“ it shall be the rule in the temples of Confucius to offer spirits
“and flesh with nothing more, and without any married or un-
“ married women (w u) officiating there to pray for unexpected

Books of the Wei Dynasty, chapter 108, I. 1. 3.

a®,


FEMALE VVU EMPLOYED BY THE STATE.


1235


“blessing. Those who violate this order shall be punished as trans-
“gressors of Our rescripts”

Exclusion of the wu from the celebration of canonical sacrifices
of the State Religion did not, however, include their dismissal as
exorcists and destroyers of evil; and emperors, as ever before, might
freely charge them with the presentation of sacrifices to certain
State gods, in order to avert dangers from the realm and throne.
In the time of the T'^ang dynasty, under the reign of Suh Tsung
(756 — 763), the minister “ Wang Yii proposed that an altar should
“be erected to the god T"ai-yih on the east side of the southern
“suburb, and he requested that His Majesty should go thither
“ in person to sacrifice and worship. But ere Suh Tsung was pre-
“ pared to do so, the deviner in chief declared that the hills and
“streams of the empire harboured spectral evil. Wang Yii therefore
“sent female wu in different directions throughout the empire, in
“order to pray and saorifice to the famous mountains and large
“streams. These women travelled in complete ceremonial attire in
“relays; officers of the Palace (eunuchs?) were direeted by the emperor
“ to keep watch over them. But roguery was the result; wherever they
“came, they exacted gifts and presents through the medium of the
“head policemen. One of these wu, a beauty of mature age who
“had several dozens of depraved young men in her suite, was the
“ worst of all. She had put up with them in the posting-house at
“ Hwang-cheu, when the prefect Tso Ch'en happened to arrive there
“in the morning. He found the door closed so fast that it could
“not be opened, but he broke the lock and entered, dragged the wu
“down the steps, and beheaded her. He also killed her wicked
“young followers, and on- examining her ill-gotten gains, laid hands
“ upon more than a hundred thousand coins. Having made an
“inventory, he reported the matter to the emperor, and proposed
“him to take this money instead of ground rent from the poor
“ people ; and the Palace officers he sent back to the capital.” -

Op, cif.y chapter 7, I, I. 2.

^ m±m

h 5- ® Ul ill .


1230


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


Of Suli TsuHg’s grandson, Teh Tsung \ it is stated that ® after
^ his accession (in 780) he discontinued the meetings of Buddhist
^priests at altars in the Palace, and abolished the sacrifices of wu-
^chuh’\ ^ Nevertheless, as we have read on page 477, this monarch
employed wu-chuh as sacrificing exorcists on the occasion of a
spectre-panic in his residence. State servants followed such examples
of their sovereign lords. We read, for instance, that in the same
eighth century Chang Shoh was prefect of Phag-ch^ang in Teh-
""cheu (in Shantung pr.), when a great drought prevailed, and
“ prayers against the calamity were, by order of the Governor, said
“by s h i p ^ 0 (female w ii) and Buddhist priests for more than
“ twenty days. Nothing resulting, Feu-hiu-tsze (?. e, Chang Shoh)
“dashed to the ground a dragon of clay; and that same night
“there fell as much rain as was wanted.’’^

The Tartar dynasty of Liao is also known to have employed wu
for the performance of exorcising work. When Shing Tsung ^ had
died in A. D. 1030, and his encoffined remains were placed on the
funeral car, “the wu drove away evil from iC’ '^; and in the place
where sacrifices were presented to him, “ the chief w u prayed and


mt.

0±l3fl,

Old Books (d the T\ing Dynasty, chajiter 130, I. 1. Also the New Books
chapter 109, 1. 13.

^ im

Books of the T'ang Dynasty, chapter 130, 1. 7.

. Chao ye tb^ien tsni; quoted in K K, cliapter 283.

4

. History of the Liao Dynasty, cliapter 50, 1. 1.


WU-ISM CONDEMNED BY CONFUCIANISM.


1237


averted evil’' K The wu were for a time priests and priestesses
of the official religion of the Tartar house of Kin; for we read
that one of its emperors, renewing the measures of Wen of the
dynasty of Topa (see page 1234), expelled them from the sacrificial
worship of Confucius. "In the twenty-sixth year of the Ta ting
"period (1186), in the second month, Shi Tsung issued the following
"decree: Of late We have had many troubles in the border coun-
"tries, and from the south (the territory still held by the House of
"Sung) no envoys have as yet come to Us. In consequence of this
"state of affairs the temples of Confucius have fallen into ruins,
"the Sacrificial Canon has collapsed, female wu and various hih
" by offering heterodox sacrifices are violating the ritual and social
"laws. From this moment it shall be the rule at sacrifices in the
"temples of Confucius to present spirits and flesh, without anything
" more being done. Violation of this Our order shall be punished
"as transgression of Our rescripts”^.

The Confucian State Religion is, from its own point of view, the
only true religion, as it alone represents the religion of Antiquity,
which is that of the Tao or Order of the World, established on
earth by the holy Ancestry and embodied in the Classics. Therefore,
since the right of Wu-ism to a place in the State Religion has always
been considered highly contestable, and even has been totally rejected,
the Wu-ist practices are confessedly heterodox and its priests are
false priests, dangerous for the rectitude of the human race and
its government, the highest duty of both of whom it is to work
and move in the one and indivisible path of the Tao. Good Con-
fucians then are always a priori justified when they consider and
decry the wu as a perverse rabble, Wu-ism as a social and poli-
tical evil; and those among those worthies whom the Imperial
Government invests with ruling power almost at discretion, that is
to say the mandarins, are even in duty bound to suppress it, and
to persecute its professors. Hence it is that, as we have learned in
the preceding chapter from textual evidence, cruelly harsh measures


* :fe M ®ff I® • Op- " '«<■

Jill chi luh^ chapter 14.


1238


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


against the wu are so often recorded in history. A few more
instances may be mentioned here.

“On Jen Tsung’s accession to the throne (in 1023), Hia Sung was
“commissioned to govern the three departments of Shea, Ngan, and
“ Hung (in Nganhvvui pr.). The people of Plung were attached to
“ spectre-worship, so that wu and hih deceived them frequently.
“Investigation which Hia Sung made in his territory taught him
“ that there were more than a thousand of them ; he ordered them
“ to take to the farming profession, and demolished their heretical
“ sacrificial temples. As he reported these measures to the Throne,
“ tlie emperor issued a. decree to the effect that in the regions
“from the Yangtsze and the Cheh river southward Wu-ism should
“ be totally forbidden and exterminated.” ^

Hardly ten years had elapsed after this memorable event, when
“Ch'en Hi-liang became prefect of the district of Yii (in Shensi pr.).
“ There the w u and h i h were in the habit of collecting every year
“ money among the people for sacrifices to spectres , which they
“called celebration of the 'spring-lent’; otherwise fires broke out, and
“it was then told among the people that three old men in red dress
“were committing arson. Hi-liang prohibited those festivities, and
“the people did not venture to disobey, and yet no fires broke out;
“then he demolished several hundreds of their heterodox sacrificial
“buildings, and compelled more than seventy wu to devote them-
“ selves to husbandry. When he laid down his dignity and departed,
“the .elders escorted him away across the borders of the district,
“and with lamentations said, ‘Now that our lord leaves us alone,
“those old men in red are sure to appear again’.” ^

And when, about the year 1080, “Shang-kwan Kiiin was prefect
“of the district of Kwang-tseh (in Euhkien pr.), the wu who lived


Sung Dynasty, chapter 283, 1. 13.

Vats. Op. cil.^ chapter 298, 1.19.


PEaSECDTlONS OF THE W U.


1239


“ there could, by means of their inspiration by s h e n , render people
“ happy or unhappy, and they thus acquired much wealth for
“ themselves. But Kiiin burned the images of their gods, punished
“ the w u with rods, and banished them beyond his frontiers.” ^
Also under the Ming dynasty, which excelled in the purity of
Confucianism, rigorous measures against Wu-ism certainly were more
frequent than authors relate. “In the Ting department (in Fuhkien
“pr.), where it is in the customs of the people to revere spectres,
“ the w u and h i h in the city of Shang-hang masked like spectres,
“and celebrated sacrificial masses on an altar set up in the suburbs,
“ beating their gongs and drums till daybreak. This had lasted for
“ three days and nights, during which crowds of people of both
“sexes were hurrying to the altar in disorderly fashion, and non-
“ pregnant wives were induced by their talk to put off and give
“ to them their clothes, for thus, they said, they would cut away
“the shah or murderous influences from their bodies, and those
“influences gone, obtain pregnancy. But Tsiang Tfing-tsTien, the
“prefect of the district, repaired to the altar ground, arrested several
“ of the leaders, and castigated them painfully ; and from that
“ moment the said custom had finished.” ^

Chang Ping, the same excellent mandarin of the later part of
the fifteenth century of whom we have read something on page
654, once performed a feat of like value. “A wu who could render
“ himself invisible, committed sexual irregularities with other people’s
“wives and daughters. Ping arrested him, and had him rigorously
“chastised with rods, but he felt no pain. He then disappeared
“with the other wu; but Ping had him quickly fettered and
“brought back. An impression of his seal, which he then made on


Op. cit. chapter 355, 1. 6.

S ^ it A 1 ^ ^ .§, ■ SliMiff-Uan!/ him

chi , Memoirs concerning the Shang-hang District ; T S, • section

mm. chapter 810.


1240


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“his back, caused him to die immediately under the whip^; and
“he demolished the heterodox sacrificial places altogether.”®

From this series of textual evidenees we learn many things which
we must not allow to escape our attention. The wu had their
temples containing images of gods, to whom they paid worship and
offered sacrifices, and whom they employed for magical purposes.
These temples no doubt were no other than those which nowadays
everywhere stud the soil of China by thousands, erected, owned
and maintained by villages, wards or parishes for the promotion
of the common weal by celebration of what we may call rites and
ceremonies of popular religion. Many, if not most of them, are,
from the Confucian point of view, “heterodox sacrificial places”’,
the gods to whom they are devoted being not mentioned in any
of the Classics, and therefore not enthroned on the Parnassus of
the State Religion ; mandarins are therefore entitled, even morally
obliged, to destroy them at any time. Yet the rule is, that in
order to spare popular sensitiveness and provoke no wrath, such
gods and their temples are tolerated. Their worship is winked at
also because they may be deified historical or mythical men, and
anthropolatry is an essential element of Confucianism.

No doubt it was in the main the gods o^ such temples by whom,
in the past as .at present, the w u were animated, and thus endowed
with magical power and the faculty of giving oracles and perform-
ing exorcisms. Under the sacerdotal guidance of these magicians, the
people, according to our quotations, used to celebrate in those temples
religious feasts, sacrificial masses or so-called t s i a o ^ contributing
money for the purpose, a good portion of which disappeared no
doubt into the purses of those priests. Occasionally, temporary altars
were put up in the open air with the same purpose. All such
things, as we shall see in the next Chapter, occur on the most
extensive scale to this day and hour.

Possessors of power conferred by spirits, which enables them to
employ these beings in promoting the welfare of man, the wu have


1 Thus a mandarin’s seal, apart from spectres (cf. p. 1160), conquers spirits by
which magicians are animated.

ill® a AS*. m

"fr ^ ^ ^ History of tlie Ming Dynasty, ch. 161, 1. 18.


THE WU AS SORCERERS.


1241


always been invested by the people with authority and influence.
But, just on account of the same quality, they have been objects
of suspicion, since that same power might occasionally be abused
by them to induce spmts to inflict injury. We have shown on pp,
82S sqq. by means of historical texts, that as early as the Han
dynasty the w u were decried and persecuted as sorcerers whose
operations extended even as far as the private apartments of the Im-
perial court. They no doubt carried out there this abominable part
of their practice in conspiracy with inmates of the harem. An
accomplice to Wu-ist sorcery was, for instance, the Imperial consort
Chang ^ of Heu Chu the last sovereign of the Ch'^en dynasty
who was dethroned in A. D. 5S9. A peerless beauty, “she performed
“black art by means of spectres in subjection (yen-inei, p. 889)
“and by making a wrong use of spectres (page 815), in order to
“confound Heu Chu; she instituted heterodox sacrifices within tlie
“Palace, assembling there female vvu, by whom she had dances
“performed to the sound of drains”,^ Literature of all ages repre-
sents the wu as binding themselves regularly for money to harm
people by spells and imprecations *, or by invocation ^ of spirits,
or by burying or hiding all sorts of “objects of sorcery” generally

called ku; or by using evil-producing charms, or by committing

such terrible crimes as “life-plucking” (pp. 870 5^^.). The life-plucker
Wang Wan-li of the fourteenth century was, as we have seen on
page 874, explicitly stated to be a w u. A sorcerous wu was
described by a Chinese author of that same century in the passage
which we have quoted on page 90S, and yet another has been

mentioned by such an author on page 926. We see then that the

Government and the mandarinate in China, apart from the other
reasons which we have mentioned, are justified by literature for
persecuting the Wu-ist priesthood also on account of criminal black art.

In spite of the oppression and persecution to which it has
subjected for ages, Wu-ism has not perished, for undoubtedly Con-
fucianism has showed itself in the main tolerant, owing to the fact
that even its most bigoted votaries found themselves occasionally
in need of its spiritualistic soothsaying and exorcism, dictated by

^ ^ i *

History of the South, chapter 12, 1 11.


1242


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


ancient custom and endemic superstition. Nevertheless, Confucian
Government has for many centuries severely forbidden Wu-ist work
by a written law, thus supplying its mandarinate with a sword
ready at hand to unsheathe and use under any impulse of orthodox
zeal. Dynasties may have done the same thing in all times and
ages, but their codes are lost. That of the Ming dynasty we have
complete. It contains a special law against religious heterodoxy,
the first clause of which deals with Wu-ism in the following terms:
“If any shi wu or ‘Wu-ist master’ pretends to Ctall down here-
“tical gods or spirits, writes charms, or pronounces spells on water,
“or bears a phoenix', or invokes saints, calling himself twan kung
“or ‘orthodox lord’, t^ai pao or ‘chief patron or protector’, or
“shi p‘^ 0 , ‘female master’, he or she, being the principal offender,
“shall be strangled, or, being an accessary, shall receive a hundred
“blows with the long stick followed by banishment for life to a
“ distance of three thousand miles.” ^ This law is in force to this
day, all the 1 u h ’ or fundamental articles of the Code of the Ming
dynasty having been transcribed to the letter into that of the
present House. *

1 A branch or rod, called k i , into which a spirit is summoned, so that
it moves in the hand of a medium and scratches oracles in sand, flour, or ashes.
See Chapter V.

Chapter IG, title M Ih M 34 ?|i ■

3

4 For further particulars about this legislation on heresy we refer to our work
on Sectarianism and Religious Persecution in China, chapter 4.


CHAPTER III.


THE . SACUIFICING AND EXORCISING VV U OF THE PRESENT TIME.

The two preceding chapters, composed from original historical
documents, may be received in the main as a representation of
Wu-ism as it exists at the present day. Indeed, among the Chinese
people, which is more profoundly influenced by the spirit of con-
servatism than any other nation in the world, religious institutions
above all are bound to be stationary. The functions of its animistic
priesthood to-day, as in the past, therefore may be divided into three
categories, embracing in fact the constituents of heathen sacerdotal
work in general, viz. clairvoyance and soothsaying, exorcism, sacri-
ficial work, with invocation and conjuration.

No doubt those various functions were by no means always exer-
cised conjointly by every priest or priestess. Division of labour, or
specialism, must have prevailed; and in fact there are, to this day,
soothsaying wu, exorcising wu, and sacrificing wu, as also wu
who both foretell and sacrifice, or sacrifice and exorcise, or foretell
and exorcise. The chuh, the “Invokers” or “Conjurers” of the
classical age, whom we know especially by the Gheu li, evidently
were such specialists of the animistic priesthood, and the fact, noted
by us on page 1193^ that the wu for many ages have been gene-
rally called wu-chuh, points to the intimate connexion of the
two functions, and their regular combination in the same person.
This specialism may also be inferred from certain denominations
which occur in books, such as “masters of divination who walk in
the night (of the nether world) “masters who see spectres”^, etc.

This division of labour actually prevails nowadays in the south-
eastern region of the province of Fuhkien, including Amoy island,
where, as we may state at once, we have made those researches
into modern Wu-ism the results of which we are now going to


1 h m-


2 ^ Jill JPl .


1244


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


lay before our readers. We find there, indeed, everywhere a class
of so-called sat konj, who almost exclusively occupy themselves with
sacrificial work and exorcising magic; and moreover, there are there
numerous men and women who act as devil-expellers, seers, sooth-
sayers or diviners with the help of spirits, which possess them, or
are subject to their will and influence. We Avill try to treat these
classes as far as possible separately, and first of all give our atten-
tion to the aai kony^ who in the eyes of the people themselves are
the most important representatives of the Wu-ist priesthood.

The word mi kong represents the local pronunciation of the cha-
racters shi kung, of which the first means “ master”, while

the second is a common title of notable or honorable male persons,
comparable with “lord” or “sir”; but the significance of the terra
lies in the fact that sai or shi is an abbreviation of wu shi
mm or shi w u mm> “Wu-ist master” or “master wu”,
frequently occurring in literature even in early ages to denote the
wu, and used also (see p. 1242) in the law which forbids Wu-ist
practices. The custom of denoting the wu as shi or “masters”
is evidently very old, for, as we have seen on page 1189, there is
a statement in the C/teu U to the effect that the principal wu in
official employ were thus called. The corresponding denomination
of the female w u , likewise used in the said law, is s
p^'o being a title for women of distinction, correlative with kung;
as we may see on page 1236, this term occurs in a book as early
as the eighth century. No doubt our sai kong are priests of the
same class as those who, according to this law against Wu-ism,
call themselves twan kung and t'^ai pao; but concerning the
use of these names we are unable to give any information ; they
probably are in the main merely of local use. In other works we
have found kung of dancing spirits'',

fah shi or “magic masters", etc.; the last named is to this day
generally used in Amoy in the local form /^oa/ su.

The sai kong do not borrow their dignity or function from any
ecclesiastical authority or hierarchy. Undoubtedly it has always been
the rule in China that all men and women were w u who had the
will and the capacities, and moreover a circle of customers suffi-
ciently large and confiding to supply them with a livelihood by
paying for their services. The sai kong are married men and fathers.
They wear no distinctive dress or badges, except when they officiate.
To their houses, which are in no way distinguished from those of


THE PRIESTHOOD IS HEREDITARY.


1245


other people, clients are directed by a sign-board, displaying the
characters lt|^> “there is a Taoist altar here”, that is to

say, boards and trestles, decorations, painted portraits of gods, and
other requirements for the erection of an altar in any place which
may be desired. To us this sign-board is significant because we see
from it that the sai kong openly take position as priests of Taoism,
a point on which we shall hear somewhat more. Many a sni kong
transforms his dwelling into a workshop, where his wife and children,
and he himself in his spare hours, occupy themselves with the
fabrication and sale of sacrificial articles of paper, etc. ; and if his
charms, spells, and sacrificial work enjoy a high reputation for
efficiency, his shop may have a large and lucrative custom, even
though he values his wares above the market-price.

As is customary in China among fathers who are blessed with
male offspring, every sai kong as a rule designs at least one of his
sons for his own profession, so that wu-ship practically is hereditary.
There are very good reasons for this. In the first place, no father
who possesses that precious treasure of mystic knowledge of cere-
monies, formulie, charms and spells by which magical power may
be efficiently exerted over gods and spectres, will deliver it to
strangers if he can possibly avoid it; and in the second place, that
same magical power, but for the possession of which ceremonies,
formulae, charms and spells are, if not totally useless, at least of
little effect, is positively hereditary by birth, since it is homogeneous
with the ling or power of the shen or yang soul which a child
receives from his father. No wonder then that every sai kong is
anxious to make out that he himself is a descendant from a Iona:
stock of priestly ancestors, many of whom, according to his preten-
sions, stood in high repute among people of their time for magical
attainments and sacerdotal perfection.

The great talisman then wherewith a sai kong commands spirits
and gods in prayer and sacrifice for the weal of men, and dominates
the world of spirits, is the power of his shen, which supplies
high “mental intelligence” or shen, ming*, and ling* or “spiri-
tuality”, in fact divine wisdom and power. It also bestows clear-
sightedness, and consequently knowledge of the future. He is, indeed,
a magician, obeyed by gods, believed in by men, feared by spectres.
But his endowments are of smalt material advantage if they are


1 IMJ-


2


1246


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


not known and acknowledged by gods, men and spectres. It is
therefore necessary that every priest should, at the beginning of his
career, display them before the whole visible and invisible world.
He does so on one of the days which are indicated in the almanac
by the characters “fit for transmission of the calling to

a disciple”; that day is a great moment in his life, actually his
initiation, his entry into the priesthood.

Paternal instruction has for years sufficiently acquainted him with
the details and secrets of the profession. Subsequently, the author
of his being entrusted him to a colleague of advanced age, honoured
by the profession as a kao tsil^ or “Chief of the Religion”, who
gave his education the finishing touch, and adopted him as his
successor. Finally, immediately preparatory to the great day, the
pupil “entered upon a taboo”®, that is to say, isolated himself in
a clean cell or closet, to pass seven or ten days in abstinence from
meat, fish, onions, leek, garlic and spirituous liquor. During this
purifying vigil he washed his body frequently, and from time to
time put on new clothes, thus thoroughly cleansing himself outwardly
also, the process being furthered all that time by invocations, spells
and conjurations, learned from his father and the Chief of the
Religion.

This vigil tends to corroborate his shen or tsing shen, and
thus increases its ming or intelligence. It is based on a classical
rescript, laid down in one of the books of the Li hi, which explains
most lucidly the whole rite. “The superior man, when he desires
“ to sacrifice at the seasons of the year, observes a vigil. Vigil
“ means collection or concentration (of the qualities or faculties of
“ his vital spirit and intelligence) ; it is a concentration of what is
“not yet concentrated, so that concentration is really effected. The
“superior man does not perform a vigil unless he has to perform
“ some important act, or to worship. Unless the vigil has to be
“observed, no precautions need to be taken against material things,
“ nor desires or lusts to be restrained ; but he who is going to
“observe the vigil must protect himself from things that are sie,
“and put a check on his desires and lusts. His ears may not
“listen to music; the saying of the Record that man while observ-
“ing a vigil has no music, means that he does not venture to
“divert his attention in more than one direction. He has no vain


i


2 A


FAST OR VIGIL OBSERVED BEFORE INITIATION.


1247


“thoughts in his mind, but strictly adheres to the Tao; his hands
“and feet make no disorderly movements, but move exclusively in
“accordance with the ritual rescripts. Such is the vigil of the superior
“man, solely purporting the highest development of the qualities
“ or faculties of his vital spirit (t s i n g) and his intellect (m i n g) ;
“to this end he observes a less rigorous vigil for seven days, in
“order to fix or adjust the same, and a rigorous vigil till the third
“day, in order to concentrate them. Their fixation signifies their
“concentration, and their concentration means the perfection of the
“ vital spirit and the intellect, after which he can enter into com-
“ munication with the gods.” ‘

On the last day of this vigil of the candidate, the temple of the
parish, where the Chief of the Religion is wont to officiate, presents
a lively scene. For three days at least a sacrificial mass ^ is cele-
brated in that building at the cost of the candidate’s family, in
honour of the idols which permanently reside there, and, besides,
in honour of a considerable number of divinities, called down by the
priests into their portraits which, painted on paper scrolls, are hanging
above the altar. Many more gods, however, are expected to be
present, in fact the whole Taoist Pantheon, even though not called
down.

The Chief of the Religion acts as celebrant at the mass. At a
fixed hour, the • candidate, full of mental intelligence and power in
consequence of his vigil, in clean underwear beneath a sacrifical
vestment, with bare feet and a sacerdotal head-cover, is carried on
some one’s back out of his retreat to the temple; indeed, he may
not touch the earth, since any contact with this great repository


« * . MiJ ^ g ^ ® W « Ejr ifc . * a * Ifc .

IE H « .W ^ .<0 ^

« ^ 7 ^ » . * « . ft ^ »

. Section

2 Tsiao or tsio ; see page 1240.


1248 THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.

of the Yin might neutralize the yang substance or shen which is
in him. In the temple, the Chief awaits him and formally interro-
gates him concerning his vigil, whether it has been performed in
the proper way, with total abstraction of his thoughts from this
material world, especially from his nearest relations, and whether,
as a consequence, he now feels strong and energetic enough to risk
his safety at all times and in all places on behalf of mankind in the
war against spectres, even to the extent of catching these beings,
or snatching stolen human souls out of their power. All answers
are, of course, in the affirmative. Finally he is asked whether he
can give proof of all this by climbing yonder to tai ^ or “ sword-
ladder”, which has for rungs swords with the edges upward; and
on replying that he can, he is borne towards it on a man’s back.
A bundle of baby-clothes, taken for the purpose to the temple by
parishioners, is fastened on his back, as also one or two bundles
of paper charms; and while he climbs with cautious steps, the
musicians, employed for the mass, play their shrill clarinets, but
especially their horrid gongs and cymbals.

Meanwhile the Chief incessantly rings his hand-bell (see Fig. 21),
utters loud spells, spurts charm-water (pp. 1052
and 1144) about, and strews rice and salt (page
1118), but for which precautions the host of
spectres, which crowd around to witness the
scene and are already beginning to feel uneasy,
would certainly approach closely and frustrate
the climbing ceremony. He also blows from
time to time long melancholy strains on a
buffalo’s horn, especially when the candidate
from the top of the ladder is letting his charms
fly downward among the crowd, who vie with
each other in picking them up as powerful
preservatives against spectral work. After his
descent, the candidate kneels before the Chief,
to receive from his lips the happy news
that this ladder-trial has qualified him for the
priestly dignity. The baby-clothes are given
back to their owners, and the new priest is
Hand-bell of a sai kontj. carried home in a sedan-chair, escorted by the

musicians. And a message that the initiation has been successfully


' 7 )#.


ClilMBING THE LADDER OP SWORDS.


1249


accomplished is thereupon politely sent, or personally brought, by
the Chief to the family of the neophyte.

And the spectral world, having thus seen a barefooted man on
so dangerous a ladder without incurring even the slightest wound,
now tacitly confesses itself beaten, and, thoroughly convinced of
his enormous magical oompetency, will henceforth flee before him
with the utmost terror wherever he shows himself. His exorcising
labours for the benefit of the lay world will therefore under all
circumstances be a perfeet success. But those spectres, however
shrewd and numerous they were, did not perceive that they were
duped: as a matter of fact the swords were blunt, and their harm-
lessness was concealed from view by means of paper charms pasted
over the edges, while, moreover, these charms scared the spectres
to a distance whence they could not discern the truth. And
besides, the bellowing through a buffalo horn by the Chief, himself
so terrible and powerful an exorcist, as also the presence of so
many gods on and about the altar, forbade the spectres to approach.

The sacerdotal power of a wu, and the respect and awe which he
commands in the world of gods, men, and spectres, is proportionate
to the number of the rungs he has climbed on that memorable day.
Many sai kong proudly vaunt that number till the end of their
days, even though, either on account of the surrounding spectres,
or because of the edges, they may have taken fright on the fourth
or even the third rung, and come down in a hurry, being never-
theless considered as fully initiated. The baby-clothes, which were
attached to the neophyte, as well as the charms which he carried,
have, of course, become as efficacious as the man himself in dispel-
ling spectres, and are therefore carefully worn by the children of
the owners as precious preservatives from evil and sickness.

As a rule there are twelve rungs in the ladder, but there may
be in it a multiple of this number. As it is not always easy to pro-
cure so many swords, because the mandarins do not permit the
people to possess any arms, they are, if necessary, borrowed from some
government arsenal. The ladder, while being climbed, is leaned
against a wall or the eaves, but sometimes two ladders are used, one
for the ascent, and the other for the descent, either leaning against
one another, or connected at the top by a board or a bridge-work
of bamboo, over which the candidate has to pass into the bargain.
If he is heroic, he will perform the ascent and the descent several
times, trying, if possible, 4o reach the maximum number of 108
rungs, for this will assuredly secure for him supremacy over the

79


1250


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


whole world of evil, since, according to Wa-ist and Taoist calcula-
tion in iVmoy, that world consists of 36 fieri hong ^ or “ celestial evil
influences”, and 72 ie soah^ or “ murderous influences of the earth”. ’
The remainder of this the grandest day in his life is spent by
the neophyte in making calls on the notables of the parish which
has been the sphere of the sacerdotal activity of the Chief who
adopted him as his successor. He makes this round in a sedan-chair,
clad in the sacerdotal vestment which we shall describe on pp. 1264
sqq. (PI. XVIll), for he has at the same time to introduce himself to
their household gods. To this end, at every call, he approaches the
domestic altar, and while ringing his hand-bell, invokes the images
there and informs them of his initiation, finally purifying the altar,
and therewith the whole house, by means of a few spells and
formulae. For the performance of this purification some will give him
a fee, which serves at the same time as a congratulatory present.


3 It is ^vortll notice that this curious initiation ceremony is mentioned as oc-
curring also across the southern borders of China, in Burma “According to Major
“Sladen (Official Narrative of Expedition to Westei-n China’’, j). 49), one wlio aspires
“to the dignity of medium or necromancer among the Kakhyens, who are said
“to bear clo^e affinity to the Karens, must climb a ladder made of sharp swords
“with tlieir edges upwards, and sit on a platform thick set with spikes, without
“personal inconvenience, before he is believed in”.

The work from which we borrow these lines, viz. The Karens, by McMahon
(page 158), informs us also of the existence among the Karens of a class of jiriests,
called Wee, which word may be another form of the Chinese word wii. “Tliey are
“supposed, and suppose themselves, to be capable of working themselves into a
“‘superior state’, in which they are enabled to see what is invisible to other men.
“They can see the departed life or spirit of the dead, and even have the power of
“recalling this spirit, and bringing it back to its body, and tlius restoring the dead
“to life. When a prophet is approached by an inquirer after future events, or any-
“ thing which is Iiidden from other men, the prophet’s first object is to throw him-
“self into a state of clairvoyance. He writhes Ids body and limbs, rolls himself on
“the ground, and often foams at the mouth in the violence of Ids pai'oxysms. When
“he is satisfied with his condition, lie becomes calm and makes his prophetic an-
“ nounceinent.

“There is another class of pro [diets of a different character, rarely making pre-
“ tensions to the prediction of future events, who are called Bookliahs, or masters
“of feasts, and might be called the priests of religion. They have methods of deter-
“ mining the future in cases of sickness, take the direction of the general religions
“ceremonies of the people, and teach the doctrines of the system they adopt in
“worship, the charms, etc. They are not so much dreaded by the people as the
“Wees” (Journal of tlie American Oriental Society, IV, 305 — 308).

The reader may now form his own ideas on the remarkable resemblance which
this Burmese piiesthood bears to Chinese Wu-ism. Is the term wu-hih (see page
1192) bidden in that word Bookhah?


Plate XVII.


A sat kong in full sacerdotal vestments.


THE STATE LAW CONCERNINU THE ADOPTION OP PUPILS. 1251

SO that the excursion is not unprofitable to his purse. Somewhat
later on, he and his family will reciprocate these attentions by
means of a festive meal, to which they invite in the first place the
Chiet of the Religion, as also the chief administrator of the parish-
temple with which the neophyte will henceforth be intimately con-
nected; and the rest of the guests will consist as a rule of notable
laymen who are wont to distinguish themselves by liberal gifts for
the support of that building.

The celebration of the sacrificial mass, requisite at an initiation,
is no cheap matter, as it demands musical and theatrical perform-
ances for the entertainment of the gods and the people, and in many
cases should last as long as three days. Therefore, if possible, two
or more candidates are initiated at the same time, and the expenses
thus divided between them.

In China, where Imperial absolutism reigns supreme, government
is thoroughly autocratic even in matters of religion, and the priesthood
of every cult is under strict tyrannical law. Legislation considers
the sai kong to belong to the wide class of secular Taoist priests
who are styled hwo kiih “dwellers by the fire”, that is to say,
who live at a domestic hearth of their own; or that term may mean
“dwellers in the fire”, the flaming whirlpool of worldly dangers
and cares. Impelled by Confucian intolerance, the laws prescribe an
exact registration of these priests and a strict control ; and to pre-
vent their numbers from increasing, it strictly forbids that any of
them shall adopt more than one pupil to succeed him in his pro-
fession. Then, when he is too old to do his work any longer, or
has departed this life, his state-diploma which authorizes him to
exercise his profession, may be transferred to his pupil; but be-
forehand it must be registered by the prefect, for which registra-
tion a fee is to be paid, apart from additional presents exacted by
the Yamen otticials.

The written law enforcing restriction of the adoption of pupils
for the clerical vocation is severe. “The Buddhist clergy living in
“the world, as also the hwo kii and other sorts of Buddhist and
“Taoist priests, are not allowed to adopt pupils at their own discre-
“tion. He who has passed the age of forty may take one; he may
“afterwards adopt another if the first, without having committed
“any offence, falls ill and dies. He, who takes a pupil liefore he
“ is forty, or adopts more than one, shall for transgression of the


1252


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“law receive fifty blows with the short bamboo lath. If the adopted
“pupil is guilty of sedition or robbery, or any serious crime, his
“master shall not adopt another, on penalty of (the same) chastise-
“ment for transgression of the law/’’

Although, accordingly, from the point of view of the Government,
every sai hong remains a pupil until his master’s death, the priesthood
itself considers him to “receive his investiture”®, or full investment
with the power and capacity to perform religious work, by the
tsiu^9 to-Cui^ or “knife-ladder climbing” ceremony. After that, he
may at sacrificial masses act as head celebrant or so-called tiong
tsun^, “reverend in the middle”, or ko hong^, “high performer”,
in distinction to the two who, on his left and right, take the part
of acolytes or assistant priests, respectively with the titles to kdng
“general speaker”, and hit kctng’^^ “auxiliary speaker’, to whom
the functions of saying prayers and pronouncing spells principally
are assigned.

We have stated, that Wu-ist capacity of a high order can hardly
be obtained except by inheritance from a stock of able priestly
ancestors (p. 1245). Therefore a sai kong will seldom adopt a
pupil who is not the son of a colleague; and the existence of a
professional bond of fraternity is the almost natural consequence of
this fact. In Amoy we find the sai kong united into a L6-kun
hoe^ or “Lao-kiiin association”, so called because it worships Lao-
kiiin or Lao-tsze, the Patriarch of Taoism, as its patron divinity.
It possesses a fund, to which every member is bound to contribute,
in exchange for the privilege of drawing upon it in times of need
or illness. Each of the members diplomated by Government is
treasurer in his annual turn, with the title of lo tsu^^ “keeper of


tlie third title, fourth bye-law.


THE ASSOCIATION OF THE PRIESTS; THEIR ALTARS. 1253

the censer”. Indeed, the association possesses a precious jewel in
the shape of an open pot of metal or porcelain, containing the ashes of
the incense-sticks which every day, from year to year, have been
stuck therein as a sacrifice to Lao-tsz^l, slowly but continuously
increasing the quantity of ashes in which, according to pious belief,
the spirituality or ling of that saintly prophet lodges, and
thence imparts itself to all the members, especially if they wear
portions of it in little satchels on their breasts. Committed to
the custody of the lo tsii, this repository of sanctity stands on the
domestic altar of this man the whole year round, he and his family
in particular thus enjoying the fulness of its blessings. On that
altar we also see Lao-tsze’s image or painted portrait. Every year,
on the 15th day of the second month, which is the chief festival
of this prophet, professedly his birthday, a sacrificial mass with
theatrical performances is celebrated in his honour at the altar of
the lo tsu at the expense of the fraternity; and the ceremony
finished, this dignitary, in full sacerdotal costume, either alone, or
accompanied by one or more colleagues, transports the holy censer
to the domestic altar of his successor, under escort "of a playing band.

As a rule, the domestic altar of a sai kong, like that of the people
generally, is furnished with the images or portraits of the usual
popular household gods, even including the Buddhistic Kwan-yin.
But, in addition, it bears an image of Lao-tsze, and not seldom one
of Chang Ling, whose position in the Taoist Church we have
sketched on pp. 1182 sqq. Many also worship there, as patron divi-
nity of their profession, the mystic Wu-hien, of whom we have
spoken on page 1204. The supreme God of Heaven has in his ser-
vice quite a staff of so-called iii sin'^ or “itinerant gods”, con-
stantly travelling to this earth to report thence the good and evil
done by men and spectres, and to receive the complaints which
gods and men may wish them to lodge before that highest throne.
These divine inspectors or spies cannot, of course, travel uninter-
ruptedly, and therefore do so by daily turns as so-called t'lk jit
kong-tso, ® “judges of merit for a stated day”. Now as 9. sai kong has
every day to send, on behalf of his clients, petitions and prayers
on high to Heaven by burning them, he sagely keeps the messen-
ger always ready at hand on or by his altar, either in the shape
of a sheet of paper, inscribed with those five characters and thereby


0


1*254


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


containing the messenger’s spirit, or in that of a small image in
which the spirit may likewise be settled.

The sacerdotal work of the sai kong moves within the sphere of
the ritual of Taoism, which in the long course of ages has been
drawn up in a great variety of forms, and compiled in the great
Canon of that religion. They accordingly call themselves preferably,
and even exclusively, io sU, which is the local pronunciation of
tao shi^ or "Taoist doctor”. This term has been used since the
age of Han to denote the votaries of the discipline by which,
preferably in seclusion from the busy world, assimilation with the
Tao or Order of the Universe was sought; but these votaries be-
came at an early date a class who devoted themselves to the sacer-
dotal work of propitiation, on behalf of human felicity, of the gods
who animate the Universe, composing the yang part of its Order,
as also to the frustration of spectres which in that same Order compose
the yin part, and exercise a baneful influence. Actually then, the
tao shi became a priesthood working for the same great object
for which W'u-ism had existed since the night of time; moreover,
properly considered, Wu-ism was Tao-ism, because the spirits, which
it exploited or exorcised for the promotion of human happiness,
were Taoist gods and spectres, that is to say, the same parts of
the dual Universal Soul, Yang and Yin, which compose the Tao.
It is accordingly quite natural, that as soon as the tao shi made
themselves priests of Universal Animism, their actual assimilation
with the wu w^as imminent. It was from the wu alone that the
tao shi could learn and borrow the venerable and ancient exor-
cising practice; they wove it inseparably into the ritualism of
their sacrificial worship of the gods. The difference between the
tao shi and the wu class was finally effaced entirely when the
older part of the function of the tao shi, viz. assimilation with
the Tao by mental and bodily discipline in seclusion, was discarded,
being incapable of being maintained by them against the competi-
tion of Buddhist monasticism, and against the oppression of ascetic
and conventual life by the Confucian State.

It thus seems incorrect to pretend, that the tao shi has sup-
planted the w u or h i h in Chinese religious life. Even with regard
to such parts of the empire where, as in Amoy, the words wu
and hill seem to have disappeared from the vernacular language,
such supposition may be preposterous. Certainly it is much more

'i:±.


EXORCISING MAGIC.


J 255


rational to believe here in a process of commixture. This process
may still be unfinished in various parts of China, but this matter
is to us as yet a closed book. It is, however, pretty certain that
there exist everywhere men and women who represent ancient Wu-
ism in its ruder original state of animistic simplicity by lending
their bodies to spirits for possession or obsession, with a view to
the performance of exorcising work and discernment of hidden
matters. No doubt they are denominated by a variety of terras,
and but seldom by the word tao shi, since sacrificial work in a
grade of ritualistic development is no part of their competency.
The result of our studies concerning those persons will be given
in Chapters IV, V and VI.

Sacrificial work being the most important part of the function
of the sat hong, it seems our duty to enlarge on it here. But be-
cause, as we have stated, that work is almost in every respect
ritualism of Taoist make, systematic treatment compels us to defer
its description to our Book on Taoism. It may merely be stated
here that it consists in the main in the celebration, both in temples
and in houses, of tsiao or masses, by means of which sacrifices are
offered to gods, their blessings are invoked, and thus catastrophes
and misfortunes averted. Various magical performances are grouped
around those masses or woven into them, and much of that magic
bears most distinctly the character of exorcism.

The exorcising magic, to which the sai kong devote themselves
most busily, represents the older Wu-ist side of their function, and
is therefore exactly the subject which demands in particular treat-
ment in these pages. We have already seen them set it in working
order in exorcising processions during times of epidemic, moving therein
in full sacerdotal dress with jingling hand-bells, while giving vent
to long intimidating spells, and blowing long strains on buffalo
horns (pp. 984 seq), VVe have depicted them behaving in a simi-
lar manner at initations by means of the knife-ladder (page 1248).
It is especially they who make and sell exorcising charms, and
pronounce powerful spells over the sick and against all sorts of
demoniacal evil. Some possess Taoist books which give models of
charms and spells for various circumstances; or they have extracts
of such books in manuscript or print; but most of them help
themselves with a small stock which they obtained from their
priestly fathers, or from the masters whom they succeeded. They
have, of course, also specimens of their own invention, the power
of which is larger or smaller according to their own spiritual power


1256


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


or intelligence (cf. page 1048). Very often their charms contain
diagrams or characters referring to Lao-tsze or to Chang Ling; and
they have seals, by means of which they impress thereon the
names of these saints, and therewith their divine power (cf. pp.
1182 seg.).

As we have pointed out on pp. 1226 sgq,, exorcism was at all
times one of the chief parts of the Wu-ist function. Chinese litera-
ture shows, that it was in no less degree a part also of the magic
of the tao shi, and the texts which we have translated on several
pages of this work * bear evidence to this fact. No wonder then
that the sai kong of to-day, who unite in themselves the two dignities,
brandish their exorcising swords over the sick with the greatest
zeal, sometimes having at the same time their hair hanging dishevelled
down their naked backs, and a dagger clasped between their jaws.
Thus do they drive the sie of insanity, delirium, fever, etc. out
of patients, and the sie which cause sterility out of women. They
also treat patients with caustics and needles (pp. 946 and

blow on buffalo-horns over and around their beds. The use of this
primitive noise-making instrument in the war against spectres may
be old, for we read that there was in the time of the Tsin
dynasty a tradition current, to the effect that “Cffi-yiu (Book I,
^page 1403), at the head of ch^i and mei spectres, had warred
“against Hwang-ti (27th cent. B. C.) at Choh-luh, and this emperor
“had given orders to blow on horns beforehand, in order to. imitate
“the bellowing of dragons and thereby subdue him”. ^ They may
have been used for the purpose at all times, for we read with
respect to the official exorcising processions of the T^'ang dynasty
which we have mentioned on page 980, “ that the Director of the
drums and wind instruments”, that is to say, the Chief of the
office for the imperial profane music, “at the no ceremonies was
“the leader of the drums and the horns by which the lads were
“to be helped while singing their exorcising songs.” ^

And certainly with no less frequency the sai kong cask out devils
by wielding the spectre- whip, called hoat soli* or “magic rope”.


1 As 472, 584, 606, 640.

^ . Books of the Tsin Dynasty, chapter 23, I. 23.

of the T'ang Dynasty, chapter 44, 1. 15. -4 •


TREATMENT OF PREGNANT WOMEN AND BABIES. 1257

which we have seen before (p. 985) in the hands of boys in exor-
cising processions. This practice, too, is old, as whip-bearers are
explicitly stated in Standard History to have appeared in official
exorcising processions of the Sui and the T‘ang dynasties (cf. pp.
979 seq.). The magical rope (PI. X, opp. page 985), also called
ling pi” ‘ or “whip with spiritual power”, is a braided cord, about
eight feet in length, tapering towards the end like a snake, and
fastened to a handle of spectre-frightening peach or willow wood,
a span in length, which is carved in the shape of a snake’s head and
scaled neck. May we conjecture that it represents the blue and red
snakes which , according to very old tradition preserved in the
Shan-hai king (see p. 1204), Hien, the patriarch of Wu-ism, was
used to carry in his clenched hands?

Theoretically, the exorcising medical work of the sai kong is
fruitless unless, with amiable unselfishness, they perform it gratuitously.
Indeed, the gods of the universal Yang, whose mediums they are,
themselves most unselfishly fill the world every year anew with
blessings, at the same time frustrating, with like spontaneous bene-
volence, the evil work of spectres; — is it then to be expected, or
even imaginable, that any fruits of such natural unselfishness could
reach mankind through selfish mediums? Hence it is that no sai
kong of respectable standing demands pay, but each one decently
accepts what his employers deem to be the market price of his
services, and voluntarily offer him in the shape of money, kind, or
any other things.

Of all spectres which molest mankind with illness, none fill so
large a space in the popular mind in Amoy as the fo sin or
fai sin, “spectres of the ground or the womb”, which, nestling in
furniture or utensils, corners and recesses, if they are disturbed there
or annoyed, assail babies and pregnant women. This fact, brought out
on pp. 536 sqq. and fill seq., naturally involves the consequence
that the frustration of their work is one of the main functions of
the sai kong. But the pay, prescribed by custom, is rather high,
so that no family has recourse to their intervention until it has
tried in vain the plain domestic expedients.

Should, for example, a young baby be supposed by its mother
to be unable to pass urine, or be smitten with illness of any de-
scription; or should a woman be troubled by pangs of pregnancy,
the first thing necessary is to remove nails, which have inadvertently


1258


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


been driven into a wall, door, etc., or heavy things which have
been placed upon or against others, as they may be harassing,
squeezing or crushing some earth-spirit. If no relief is thus afforded
to the patient, boxes, cupboards, doors and windows are thrown
open, to release the imprisoned spirit. Small handbooks for daily
use, such as we have mentioned on page 1108, facilitate the disco-
very of the place where the cause of the evil is situated. Starting
from the undisputed truth that the earth-spirits, like all that exists
in the World, spontaneously move therein with absolute passivity,
submissive to its Order or Course, that is to say, with regularity of
Time, the compilers of these handbooks, on the authority of authors
yet wiser than themselves, mention with complete assurance the
objects or the parts of the dwelling in which the earth-spirits abide
during every subdivision of Time. Moving with observance of the
twenty-four seasons (see Book I, p. 968), they lodge during the
first season, called “the beginning of spring”, in the beds of the
human race, staying therein also till the third season, styled “reviv-
al of hibernating insects”, when they remove into the doors. The
fifth season and the sixth find them settled in the front doors, the
seventh and the eighth in the furnaces of the kitchens, the ninth
and the tenth in pregnant women, the eleventh and the twelfth in
the fire-places again. Subsequently, in the thirteenth season, they
settle in mallets, used for pounding rice, in the fifteenth in cupboards,
in the seventeenth in gates or doors, in the nineteenth in doors
and cupboards, to pass into jars and furnaces in the twenty-first
season, and again into pregnant women for the rest of the year.
This same round they make every year, for indeed, the Course
itself of the Universe consists in annual revolutions of Time. But
some handbooks teach, that these spirits remove at the beginning
of every month, thus passing through a series of twelve similar
abodes annually; while others promulgate the theory that they
change their places every day, moving constantly in the same order
through ten or twelve abodes in accordance with the ten kan or
the twelve Branches (Bk. I, page 103), With this broad knowledge
of the ambulatory nature of those spectres, domestic self-help may,
of course, do much for the relief of patients by releasing the
squeezed or crushed spectres from their disagreeable situation.

But should these efforts be of no avail, a messenger is sent to
the shop of a sat kong^ to buy for a few coins two tsing hit ^


TREATMENT OF PREGNANT WOMEN AND OTHER PATIENTS. 1259

or “purifying charms”, also called fo hu^ or “earth charms”.
One is placed on the patient, or if this be a pregnant woman, on
the seat of her pains, and the other is burned to ashes, which,
mixed with water, the patient swallows; and finally, if this outward
and inward medication shows no good result, the priest himself is
fetched.

Tolling his hand-bell before the altar, he bids his gods descend,
and with water, salt, and rice, to which he has imparted magical
virtue by means of charm-ashes and spells, exorcises the apart-
ment in .the way which we have described in Bk. I, pp. 107 sqq.
The curtains of the bed are meanwhile kept closed with wise precau-
tion, lest in their straits the spectres should take refuge inside it,
upon or in the patient. Now being compelled to seek safety in
their own element, the earth, they tumble headlong into a pit
which the priest has carefully made in the floor in front of the
bed by scratching there, by means of his sword, two parallel strokes,
crossed by two others, indeed giving the character a well. This
done, the priest brandishes his sword with terrifying gestures,
striking it also against the four corners of the bed, to scare away any
earth-spectres which may still be lurking in it; and all the while
he utters powerful spells. Thus the poor things, having again to
run for their lives, hurry over a bridge, formed by the priest before
his breast by joining his hands in a mystic manner; but this outlet
leads them headlong into the well. At once a mighty spell closes
the latter and seals it, the main passage of the exorcising formula
pronounced by the priest before, te-iem kui te, “detested influences
of the earth, go ye back into the earth” (Bk. I, page 108) thus
reaching its full effect. And to crown all, the priest swings his
magical rope over the well, blows his horn, and exclaims hoat lah,
“ magic !”

But the demonish evil, in order to be thoroughly removed from
the patient, must pass into a foe sin or “substitute” (see p. 1103).
Gently the priest passes this puppet three times over the patient’s
body, or if this be a woman’s, over a garment of hers, since
decency forbids him to approach her too closely; he may, however,
in the latter case direct a female relation or slave to pass the
puppet over her. This rubbing produces an excellent effect on
account of some such spell as the following, which is to be simul-
taneously pronounced ;


1260


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ASIMISM.


foe sin foe (sing, bg-hg he-siu khah kia’' ling,
foe sin foe ao, bg-hg hok-siu tsidh lao lao.
foe iso, ni-ni 1i6 ; foe iu, fiem he-siu .
foe tsit ke, he-siu thg pah dzl-tsdp he.
f oe nhg ke, hiong ok soah b6 ao-bln fe.
foe saf ke, it fiea sii kiii p6 ping-an. ‘

“Substitute, be thou in place of the fore part of the body, that
he or she (here the name is mentioned) may live to a green old
age, with greater strength than a dragon’s.

“ Substitute, be thou in place of the back parts, that he may
live a long and happy life, and live to very old age.

“Substitute, be thou in place of the left side, that health may be
ensured to him for year upon year; be thou iu place of the
right side, that his years may be multiplied to him.

“Once be thou in his stead, that his days may be prolonged even
to one hundred and twenty years.

“Twice be thou in his stead, so that no evil-omened or murderous
influences may dog his path.

“ Thrice be thou in his place, so that the full cycle of fourfold
seasons may ensure him peace.”

A blast upon the horn, with a loud ngd hong fdi-siong L6-kun
tHk'^, “I am invested with the authority of the Supreme Lao-
kiiin” or Lao-tsze, terminates this powerful spell. The substitute,
which now harbours all the sie, is burned by the priest. He also
puts an impression of the seal of Lao-tszS or Chang Ling on the
garment of the patient, to prevent, as long as it exists, any spectres
or sie from nestling in or on its wearer. A paper charm is
also fastened in the hair of the patient; he is made to swallow
charm-ashes in water; and fin hu^ or “subduing charms”, each
bearing a name or rude portrait of a commander of the Celestial
Army, are put up round the walls of the room. Then also, unless


PURIFICATION OF HOUSES, STREETS, AND VlIXAGES. 1261

such precaution is deemed superfluous or too expensive, the other
apartments of the house are cleansed from evil; and finally the
gods on the altar are politely thanked by the priest for their esteemed,
devil-intimidating presence, and informed that they may go whither-
soever they please.

This Wu-ist treatment of patients is called an /V*, “pacification
of the earth”, or when performed for the sake of a pregnant woman,
an “appeasement of the foetus or womb”. It is sure also to

prevent premature accouchment. Should it be suspected that the
earth-spirits are discharging their sie into the patient from some-
where outside the house, where builders, diggers or stone-cutters
are at work, or heavy objets are being moved, — to that spot the
priest repairs to perform the ceremonies which drive the spectres
into a magical well. He may be quite sure of a kind reception
there, for exorcising work is always welcome in China; and, more-
over, the service which he comes to perform will prevent miscar-
riage or monstrous births in the neighbourhood, which might form
the ground of inconvenient claims for indemnification.

The reader will readily perceive for himself, that the exorcising
ritual, which we have described, is suitable for performance against
demonish work of any kind, including all cases of disease whatsoever.
It will then, of course, be subject to slight modifications; but we
cannot enter upon these.

A sni kong who has reached the proper standard of efficiency, not
only exorcises men and women, but whole houses, streets, wards
or parishes, and villages. In Amoy this part of his function is pre-
ferably called tslng iu \ “ cleansing by means of oil”.

Having carefully wound a strip of red cloth round his waist
over his sacerdotal vestment, in order to keep the spectres, which he
is going to drive mad with fear, off his person, he takes position
before the domestic altar of the family which has engaged him.
Tolling his handbell, he calls down the gods, in order that they
may hover around him, and lend him a helping hand. Then he
takes the magical whip, cleaving the air with it on all sides, and
at the same time causes his terrifying horn to resound, while a
small band of musicians make all the noise they can with their
shrill clarinets, drums, gongs, and cymbals. The panic thus created


2


12G:2


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


among the spectres is then enhanced by draughts of water con-
taining ashes of a mighty charm, which, mixed with his exorcising
breath (cf. p. 1144), the priest spurts into the air on all sides of
the altar. But at the same time he is merciful, and, turning to
the altar, constructs with his hands the magic bridge, by Avhich,
owing to a magic spell which he pronounces, the terrified horde in
desperation hurry into his magic well ; this well is thereupon closed
and sealed, exactly as we have described on page 1259.

The altar and its immediate vicinity being thus cleansed of the
hideous brood, a man appears who carries an iron basin with a long .
handle, filled with glowing charcoal. At this sight, the priest blows
his horn again; then he sips some oil or spirits out of a cup, and
spurts it into the fire, which suddenly sends up a large bluish
flame. The effect which this flaming fire exercises upon the spectres
is enhanced by the no less alarming cry of hoat lah, “magic!”,
unanimously uttered by the priest and the lookers on. At this
moment, a lad or urchin carrying on his left arm a round shield,
made of cane, vertically cleaves the air quite close to the brazier
with a sword, while the priest exclaims, sat Hong hong “down

with the yellow spectres of the centre”. So many drastic measures
all at once create, of course, a panic among the horde, and yet the
priest further exclaims this mighty word, “I am invested with the
authority of the Supreme Lao-kiiin” (see p. 1260). Then with great
velocity they repeat the fire-work, the spells, and the sword-blow
successively towards each side of the apartment, the blue spectres
of the east, the red of the south, the white of the west, and the
black of the north being thus mercilessly destroyed.

The apartment with the altar being now thoroughly cleansed,
the priest proceeds to purify in the same way the central part of
the courtyard and its four sides. The water-well, which is there,
has its turn as well, as also the side rooms or outhouses, the
kitchen with its furnace, and finally the open ground surrounding
the outer walls on all four sides, the music, gongs and drums
closely escorting the priest and the fire-bearer. If it is deemed
necessary, the cleansing is even extended to the streets. This excur-
sion finished, the remains of the fire, purer than any fire whatever
because the divine priestly breath was so repeatedly blown into it
with the spirits or the oil, are carefully placed in the furnace of
the kitchen, because thence this fire is bound to radiate happiness,


UNUIPLOMATED PRIESTS.


1263


wealth, longevity, and other blessings of all kinds upon the family
through the agency of the tutelary God of Fire, universally believed
in China to inhabit furnaces.

The effect of this exorcising work may be enhanced by using oil
and missiles impregnated with the virtue of fire. The priest, if he
knows that the family will grant him an additional fee, places on the
altar, over a charcoal fire, a small iron pot with a handle, until
it is red-hot. Suddenly he pours a little oil into it, and forthwith
raising the pot, pours the oil into his mouth, immediately spurting
it into the charcoal, so that it sends up a smoky flame. Having
repeated this action a few times, he, or a colleague who assists him,
puts some sand or gravel into the glowing pot, and picking some
bits out of it with his unprotected fingers, scatters them through
the room. The two practices are mostly combined, and ar-e called
bu ill t^sd soa “to spurt oil and fry gravel”.

In the exercise of their functions, about which the next Chapter
and other parts of this work will give more information, the sai
Icony are often seconded by colleagues, either bearers of the official
diploma, or not. If undiplomated, these men are in the strict sense
of the Law illegal priests, but their existence is openly connived at
by the mandarins; they are created by the people’s natural want
for more priests than the Government allows them to have. People
do not call them sai kong, but hoat liii’v or liout koa’‘^, “chiefs
or functionaries of magic”; which titles are considered to be lower
than hoat su^ or “masters of magic”, borne, as we have seen on
page 1244, by the sai kong.

Not being diplomated, nor initiated into the profession by means
of a ladder of swords, they are not admitted as members into the
Lao-kiiin association. They do ‘not act as celebrants in the t s i a o
or other sacrificial rites of importance, except in villages where no
sai kong live, the diplomated dignitaries being, indeed, not very
numerous, and preferably living in towns where custom is large
and lucrative. As a rule, the hoat tiii^o are traders, shopkeepers,
farmers, indeed anything, even coolies, so that their Wu-ist business
is merely accessory; and this may be the chief reason why the
mandarins do not persecute them as clandestine priests.

The hoat tiii'y too are wont to transfer their priestly business
to one or more of their sons. Many are sons of sai kong, whom


3 asili.


1264


THK PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


no colleagues could be found to adopt as successors; many are
employed by their fathers as assistants, especially for exorcising
work, for instance as leaders of the boys called 16 ien se in pro-
cessions for the expulsion of devils (see page 985). Many are
exorcists, seers and soothsayers by the help of spirits who descend
into their bodies, so that they may be classed with the specialists
of the Wu-ist priesthood whom we have mentioned on page 1244,
and to whom we will devote the next Chapter.

We may further note here, that the seafaring exorcists of Amoy,
called hu tik klih, of whom we have said a few words on page 533,
are to be ranked in the boat class.


The religious dress of the Wu-ist priests.

As is the rule with priesthood generally in all parts of the world,
the sai kong are wont* to don a special vestment while performing
religious work. This ritual dress is highly significant, and is there-
fore worthy of attention and description.

The principal article of it, always worn at ceremonies of the
highest order, is a so-called kang i, which term, according to some,
is written ^ “red garment”, or, according to others, repre-
sents the characters “garment of descent”, since it is worn

at the presentation of offerings or during the celebration of sacri-
ficial masses, the main object of which always is to call down
the gods, that they may enjoy the offerings and requite the givers
with blessings. This vestment is also called hong i “square

garment”. Indeed it is a square sheet of silk, which has in the

^ centre a round hole for the neck

i of the wearer; an opening runs

' from that point, down the breast,

I ! extending to the edge of the gar-

I ment. Its form represents that of

; the Earth, for, according to ancient

j philosophy, expressed in the writ-

— ^ ings of Liu Ngan, “Heaven is

round and Earth is square . . . the Tao of Heaven is roundness,
and that of Earth squareness” b


Hung Ueh kiai

chapter 3.


THE RELIGIOUS DRESS OF THE PRIESTHOOD. 1265

Having no sleeves, this vestment may be called a chasuble. It
is broad enough to cover even the hands. It is fastened at the
opening by means of tapes. The silk of which it is made must be
strong, because it is heavy with embroidery, especially in gold
thread. The vestment is for this same reason solidly lined.

The embroidery especially covers the back. We notice on Plate
XVIII, by using a magnifying glass, rolling waves, representing the
oceans which encompass the continent of the world on all sides.
Beaten by these waves, this continent rises as a pile of mountains,
the summit in the centre of which is Mount T"ai or the Principal
Mountain, in Shantung (p. 1105), nominally the highest peak in the
world. On the left and right, a large dragon rises high above the billows,
in an attitude denoting a soaring motion towards the continent;
these animals symbolize the fertilizing rains, and are therefore sur-
rounded by gold thread figures which represent clouds, and some
which resemble spirals and denote rolling thunder. Above the dragons
we see the sun and the moon, each as a gold disk showing respect-
ively a crow, and a rabbit which is pounding medicines, those
luminaries being, according to old philosophy, inhabited by these
animals; around them, too, we see embroidered clouds, and stars.
Exactly in the midst of the chasuble stands a lolty palace with
a three-storied pagoda-like roof; it represents the residence of the
God of Heaven. It is surrounded by a circle of flames. Around
we see a circle of smaller palaces with two-storied roofs, each
likewise in a halo of flames; they are the residences of divinities
of lower order.

This picture of the Universe is stitched on a red ground, which
represents the Yang, the universal Soul of Light, Pire, and Warmth.
It stands in a very broad frame of blue silk, in which colour of the
Empyrean we see, in various other colours, embroidered animals
symbolizing felicity, such as elephants, a lion, an unicorn, a tiger,
phoenixes, dragons, and peony flowers. There is also a broad border
of blue silk around the neck, stitched with two ascending dragons
which are belching out a ball, probably representing thunder.

The front of the chasuble bears no embroidery, except that on
the neck-border, and some clouds on the shoulders. But on either
side of the opening there is, fixed to the neck-border, a very broad
pendent ribbon, which is embroidered with four of the kwa in gold
thread ; the ribbons thus complete the picture of the Universe, since,
as we know (cf. Bk I, p. 960), the kwa represent the phenomena
and chief constituent parts of the Universe. It is now abundantly

80


1266


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


clear why the priests themselves are wont to call this vestment
id po'^, “gown of the Tao” or of the Order of the Universe.

This name is, however, also given to a vestment of the same
character, but with a somewhat different ornamentation, which is
worn either by the principal officiant while celebrating services of
secondary order or performed at a cheaper rate,' or by the assistant
priests at first class services. It is (see Plate XIX) a gown of red
silk or even broadcloth, with very spacious sleeves, and with an
opening in front with tapes to close it, along which two broad
ribbons with the eight k w a are dangling ; but in the middle of
the front and the back it has the eight kwa, embroidered in a
regular octagon round the T'ai Kih or the Tang and the Yin (see
Book I, page 1042), thus representing the whole Tao. Under these
fiofures we see ocean waves, and above and beside them stars and
clouds, a sun or a moon, or both; or the octagon rests on the
back of a tortoise; or there are other symbolical figures, because
no hierarchical regulation prescribes uniformity of clerical dress.
Below, there is stitched on the whole rim of this gown a broad
ornamental border of another colour, and the sleeves are similarly
bordered. An oblong piece of blue silk, embroidered with two dragons
which belch out a ball, as also with a continent and waves over
which they soar, is stitched in the middle of the gown, both on
the back and in front. These two pieces seem to be a substitute
for a belt, called kak toa^ or “horn belt’’, which like a broad
hoop suspended by loops, encircled the waist of grandees in former
ages, and is nowadays often worn by actors on the stage.

It is then obvious, that the sacerdotal dress of the sai kong is a
magical dress. The priest, who wears it, is invested by it with the
power of the Order of the World itself, and thus enabled to
restore that Order whenever, by means of sacrifices and magical
ceremonies, he is averting unseasonable and calamitous events, such
as drought, untimely and superabundant rainfall, or eclipses. Besides,
since the Tao is the mightiest pov/er against the demon world
(page 1011), the vestment endows the wearer with irresistible exor-
cising power. Hence the mi kong almost always wear it while per-
forming the evil-expelling ceremonies which we have described. It
characterizes them emphatically as priests of the Tao, a dignity
which, as we have stated (page 1254), they have assumed for
many ages.


THE RELIGIOUS DRESS OF THE PRIESTHOOD. 1267

To that ritual dress belongs a curious head cover. Traditional
pictures of Taoist saints show, that these worthies were wont to
wear their hair in a knot on the top of the head. The wu, pro-
fessing to be Taoists, no doubt did so too, at least while officiating
at their altars. But the Manchu Tartars conquered China, and
compelled the people to adopt their ovvn coiffure and shave their
heads, except on the top, where it was allowed to grow long and was
braided as a pigtail. The sai hong, like the whole nation, had to
submit to this order; but with pious conservatism they have pre-
served the ancient orthodox fashion on behalf of their altar service;
that is to say, while officiating, they coil their hair into a knot
upon their heads, and cover the shaven part around it with a wig
of braided human hair (PI. XVIT, facing page 1250). Poorer priests
have a wig of horse-hair, or even of black linen or cotton. The
name of this religious head cover is
hoan *, a term which has denoted
official caps of the mandarinate since
classical times, and for many ages also
the caps worn by Taoist doctors.

Moreover, while clad in the garb
of the Universe, the priests complete
it by wearing upon the top of the
hair-knot a so-called him hoan giong
“gold apex of the cap”, or thdo giong
“apex of the head”, which is a gilded,
drum-shaped wooden block of about
two inches high, one plane surface
of which stands upward. The gilt
represents the brilliant light of the
Universe, and the rounded side, which
is set with beads of glass, represents
the starry sky; the plane surface is
carved with the T^ai Kih and the
eight k w a. And a metal wire projects
from it, which bears (see Pig. 22)

a round mirror of the size of a shilling, set in a gilded frame of
metal which has a serrated edge like a halo of long flames. This


Fig. 22.


3 ^fp.


2


12G8


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


Fig. 23.


mirror represents the sun. In many cases it rests on a metal
representation of a cloud (see Fig. 23).

Since nothing, except traditional custom, dominates the shape and

decoration of the sacerdotal
wear, it presents variations
which may even be very
considerable. I have seen
chasubles embroidered with
portraits of famous Taoist
Immortals, or with generals of
the Celestial Army; but priests
themselves avow that these
are arbitrary novelties, based
on no legitimate authority.
At the celebration of masses
against conflagrations, vest-
ments of black material ought
to be worn, because black
represents the North, which
is associated with the element
Water (cf. Bk I, p. 983); red
chasubles must then not be
worn, since red is the colour
of Fire.

The chasuble is worn over
a so-called id ^ * or “ dress
of the Taoists”, which is a
plain black gown without any
ornamentation at all. It has
very spacious sleeves, and a
broad lapel, fastened under
the right arm with tapes.
Probably it represents the
common overwear of Taoist ascetics of earlier and later ages. At
everyday ceremonies of no great significance it is worn without the
chasuble.


SuRj worn by a sai hong upon his head.


CHAPTER IV.


POSSESSED MEDIUMS, EXORCISTS AND SEERS.

The specialists of Wu-ism, who act as seers, soothsayers and exor-
cists by the power of spirits which possess them, have been observed
by us on pp. 983 seq., engaged in processions which are organized
in times of epidemic, stripped to the waist, dancing in a frantic
or delirious state, covering themselves with blood by means of
wounds inflicted by themselves with swords and prick-balls, or
with thick needles thrust through their tongues, or being seated
or stretched on nail-points and rows of sword-edges. On such occa-
sions, they stick daggers into their arms and cheeks, and have been
seen carrying heavy peuter lamps, fastened by hooks thrust through
their arms. * By frightening and intimidating the spectres by so
great a display of divine power, these men support and complete
the work of the sai kony, who move in the same processions.

They are called sin tdny^, i. e. “godly youths”, or “youths who
have siren or divinity in themselves”, or “youths who belong to
a god”. More popularly they are known as ki tony “ divining
youths”, or tdny ki\ “youthful diviners”, even simply tdny ts'i^
or youths. They are, in fact, in the main young persons, and I have
never seen one of advanced age. My Chinese informants probably
spoke the truth when they asserted, that the eight characters which
constitute their horoscope or fate, are light (see page 1121), so that
their constitution is so frail that they are bound to die young.
We may then admit that they must be a nervous, impressionable,
hysterical kind of people, physically and mentally weak, and
therefore easily stirred to ecstasy by their self-conviction that gods
descend into them; but such strain on their nerves cannot be borne
for many years, the less so because such possession requires self-
mutilation entailing considerable loss of blood.

1 The Chinese Recorder, V, page 47.

aALa- ‘SAL-


1370


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


Most of these dancing dervishes come from the lower class.
People of good standing seldom debase themselves to things which,
as we have seen on p. 1187, were spoken of in terms of contempt
by the holy I-yin thirty-five centuries ago, however frequently they
may have recourse to them for revelation of unknown things. It
is generally asserted, that the capacity to be an animated medium
for gods and spirits is no acquisition, but a gift which manifests
itself spontaneously. It happens indeed, especially at religious festi-
vals, celebrated in temples with great concourse of people, that a
young man suddenly begins to hop, dance and waddle with wild
or drowzy looks, and nervous gestures of -arms and hands. Bystanders
grasp his arms to sustain him, knowing that, while in this condi-
tion, his fall to the ground may cause sudden death. All onlookers
at once realize the fact that one of the gods whose images stand
in the temple, or some other spirit, has “ seized the youth ”, lidh tdnc)
and the parish thus will henceforth rejoice in the possession of one
more medium for its intercourse with the divine world. Some make
obeisance to him, or even prostrate themselves in worship, and in a few
moments the officiating sai kong is at hand, to devote all his atten-
tion to the interesting case. Uttering efficacious spells, and blowing
his buffalo-horn with energy, he dispels all spectres which thwart
the divine spirit maliciously, and stiffen the tongue of the youth in
ecstasy. The latter now begins to moan; some incoherent talk
follows, mingled with cries; but all this is oracular language which
reveals unknown things, for in the mean time one or two bystand-
ers have in reality brought the spirit into him, and thus made a
seer of him, by busily burning small paper sheets, denoted by the
significant name of khai gdn tsod^, “paper for unsealing the eyes”
or “eye-opening papers”. These sheets are a very inferior kind of
paper, yellow coloured, and are not even so large as a hand. By
means of a matrix of wood, some ten or twelve men are printed
on each in very slovenly fashion ; some of these men have memo-
rial tablets in their hands, and are deemed to be messengers in
official costume; and the others are servants attending on them
with banners and canopies, and with horses and carriages which
complete their equipment. The papers being burned, these men,
horses and things are set free, and straightway depart to fetch the
spirit, who but for such escort, suitable to its taste and dignity, would
refuse to come. These useful instruments play a great part in


THE GOD AND THE CLUB OF A MEDIUM.


1‘271


religious magic, and are for sale in all paper money shops for a
very low price. Some moments pass by, and tlie patient relapses
into his normal condition because the spirit leaves his body.

An association of men, as a rule bearing his own tribe-name, is
now quickly formed, anxious to attach themselves to the new found
“godly youth”, and attract to their pockets a part of the profits
which his work as prophet, seer and exorcist will yield. Henceforth
they are frequently seen in this temple to conjure the spirit into
him and interpret the strange sounds he utters; and in the end it
is they alone who, by dint of experience and exercise, can under-
stand those inspired sounds and translate them into human language,
hhrst of all they try to discover in this way the name of the spirit;
indeed, they want it for their spells whenever they have to call
him down into the medium, and, moreover, they want to know
before which image they have to do this. In this way it is almost
always discovered that the spirit is that of an idol of inferior rank,
seated or standing somewhere in a temple; for indeed, gods of a
notable rank in the divine world, and therefore least of all those
who occupy a place in the State Religion, will seldom deign to
descend into a material, impure human body, save under 'excep-
tional circumstances, when, as in the striking case wliich we have
set forth on pp. 883 seq,, there is a valid reason for it. Hence it
is that ki tong gods mostly have their sees and their images in
inconsiderable, little-frequented temples or chapels, where sacrificial
food is offered so seldom that they are forced to try to increase
their attractiveness, in order to improve their condition of life. Such
buildings are the unauthorized, heterodox sacrificial places of the
present day, of the kind which in former ages also, as we have seen
on page 1240, were in particular the scenes of the labours of Wu-
isra. It may further be noted, that a god who selects a human
person as a medium, does so with the purpose of retaining him
for his own exclusive use; hence no other divine spirit can be
called into him.

Many ki tong gods reside in images which stand on altars in
dwelling-houses, enjoying a good reputation among the people
around for the many oracular hints which they give by the mouths
of their mediums, hints whereby the sick are cured, and blessings
of various kind obtained. Friends and acquaintances of the inmates
of the house, the general public, and even the gentry and manda-
rins, repair thither for oracular advice, paying fees of gratitude, to
be theoretically converted by the owner of the altar into sacrifices;


127 ^


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


many even give money for the celebration of masses and for the
support of the altar and the house; and while the god is thus a
source of blessing to the family among which it finds itself so
comfortably housed, the inhabitants of the ward may ultimately resolve
to purchase the sanctuary, in order to convert it into a real temple.
This is, indeed, the way in which many temples come into existence.

In several cases also, a hi tong god is the patron divinity of a
small club or association of so-called hing hia"9-tl * or “ sworn
brethren”, such as is formed very often among the lower classes
for mutual help and protection, especially in times of need. The
brethren call him their bing put^ or “oath Buddha”, because they
have sworn ‘ before his image their oath of mutual allegiance and
faith. Each member in his annual turn keeps the image, together
with its censer, on his own domestic altar. A main point in tlie
programme of the club, from the very first moment it is formed, is
in most cases to find out who of the members shall be its hi tong.
To this end, after certain ceremonies have been properly celebrated,
purporting to instil shen or divinity into the idol, the brethren
subject themselves one by one to a kind of ritual, calculated to
bring gods or spirits into mediums (see pp. 1273 seq.)-, and he who by
his singular movements and ecstasy shows that this ritual produces
the most profound effect upon him, is their man. The club-god
then may, by means of its oracles given to consultants, become a
source of income to the brethren; and its reputation may even raise
it to the exalted rank of a parish-god, should the people resolve
to buy its image and the house from which it radiates its blessings,
and rebuild the place as a chapel or temple.

No hi tong exists but by the will of a. shen. The theory is, that
a hi tong is a man whom natural fate, dictated by the Tao, had
designed for an early death because of the “lightness of his horo-
scope”, but whose departure is delayed because one of the innumerable
shen, who compose the yang part of the Tao, wants his living
body for a time as a medium between itself and the human race.
When then the man dies, it is taken for granted that this term has
expired, and the divine spirit no longer wishes to employ him.

Oracles given by gods through their hi tong may be of all sorts
and kinds. Yet the fact is, that these oracles principally concern
themselves with medical questions, owing to the circumstance that
the people are wont to consult the gods much more frequently on


BRINGING SPIRITS INTO MEDIUMS.


1273


behalf of the sick than for any other purpose. When a consultation
about a patient is to take place, one or more of his relatives repair
to the altar of the ki tong god, light candles on it, and place on

it a few dishes of food; and one of them having taken burning

incense-sticks in his clasped hands, whispers to the idol the motives
of their visit. The medium does not show as yet the slightest

symptoms of possession, but is sitting at the altar-table on a stool or
form, quietly chatting with his club-brethren, while two of these
on either side repeatedly utter an incantation in a chanting voice,
in order to “invite or bid the spirit”, cK'id'^a sin'^\ meanwhile

they burn incense and “eye-opening papers”, dropping the ashes
of the latter into a pot of water. The invocation is a formula which
professedly was uttered once upon a time by the god himself by
the mouth of his ki tong, with an additional promise to come
whenever he might hear it; it is then nothing short of a magical
spell, suited for exercising influence upon the divine world. It is
always to be recited in the literary or reading form, since otherwise
the god, who belongs, of course, to the educated class, would not or
could not understand it. The following specimen may enable the
reader to form some idea about the tenor of these spells:

“ Breaths of Rectitude soar and fly aloft, filling heaven and
“ earth, that the pure incense, which we kindle and lift upward,
“ may penetrate unto the gate of heaven. — Golden Raven (sun),
“ flieth forth like lightning through the clouds ; Rabbit of Jade
“(moon), shincith brightly round as a wheel. — Southern Stars and
“ Northern Bushel (Great Bear), altogether come down ; five-coloured
“ Tszg-wei (stars surrounding the Pole), showeth thy multifarious
“ magnificence. — Tsze-wei, openeth between thy lights a straight
“road, and inviteth the divine Immortal in his grotto beside the
“peach-lined brook. — His disciples before his incense-burner invite
“him here with three prostrations; prostrated they bid thee A. B.
“to descend hither. — • Divine warriors, be quick as light in obeying
“the law” (page 1051).^

1 ^ Yang and Yin; see page dOld.

il iin # s . i dl dt * Sr . II a « 4 ^ T l¥ .
^ ^ ^


1274


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


This spell being recited over and over, the sound of it reaches
the Celestial gods of light; the Tsze-wei constellation informs the
divine Immortal that he is wanted, and the escort of many hundreds,
sent up by the ^eye-opening papers’’, simultaneously arrives to fetch
him. His descent may be accelerated by the burning of papers on which
the same incantation is printed or written, as also by a special
kind of incense, the smoke of which is so exquisitely nice that no
divine being can withstand the temptation to hurry to any spot
where it is being burned. This wonderful stuff, highly estimated
as an article for sale, therefore bears the appropriate name of
kanfj tsin \ “incense which brings down holy beings”.

The symptoms of the descent of the spirit into the medium shortly
appear, that is to say, it effects the koan tang* or “communication
with the medium”. Drowsily staring, he shivers and yawns, resting
his arms on the table, and his head on his arms, as if falling
asleep; but as the incantation proceeds wdth increasing velocity and
loudness, with the accompaniment of one or more drums, and as the
“eye-opening papers” are being burned in a quicker succession, he
suddenly jumps up to frisk and skip about. Thus the spirit “sets
the medium to hopping or dancing”, tid tdng^ or d^ido tdng’^.
Two club-brethren grasp him, and force him back upon the form ;
which is not always easy, and may require the full exertion of
their muscles. His limbs shake vehemently; his arms knock on the
table; his head and shoulders jerk nervously from side to side,
and his staring eyes, half closed, seem to gaze straight into a hidden
world. This is the proper moment for the consultant or the inter-
preter to put his questions. Incoherent shrill sounds are the answer;
but the interpreter translates this divine language with the greatest
fluency into the intelligible human tongue, while another brother
writes these revelations down on paper. But the moment comes for
the spirit to announce in the same way its intention to depart. This
is a sign for a brother to beat a drum loudly; and for another to
spurt over the medium a draught of the water in which the ashes
of the “eye-opening papers”, were dropped; and for a third to burn
some gold paper money for the spirit, in order to reward it for its
revelations, and to buy its forgiveness, should it have been involun-
tarily displeased or impolitely^ treated. And the medium jumps up.


1 1^^#.


2

4


m


»


POSSESSED MEDIUMS CURING THE SICK.


1275


sinks into the arms of his brethren, or even to the ground, as if
in a swoon ; but he revives, rubs his eyes, gazes around, and behaves
like a normal man. This moment marks the fe tdng^ of the
spirit, its “retreat from the medium”. It is asserted that the 'man
thereupon has not the slightest notion or recollection of what has
occurred to him.

The written oracle, thus obtained, is, of course, found to be a
medical recipe. It is respectfully obeyed to the letter; indeed, as it
is believed to come from a shen, it cannot fail to be highly
effective against obstinate fever and demoniacal illness generally.
The hi tong and his club, or whoever may be the owner of the
idol, for the same reason deserve a handsome renumeration ; which
is duly paid out.

It stands to reason, that the descent of the shen into its hi tong
is nowhere effected so well as in the close proximity of its image,
and that the duration and intensity of his animation must be
greatest in the presence of this object. Therefore, should the
hi tong have to perform his ministry at a sick-bed, the shen having,
through his mouth, expressed his desire to see the patient, it is
the rule to convey the image thither in a small litter, which by
means of shafts is shouldered by two or four of the brethren. It is
then placed upon the domestic altar, with some sweetmeats, cakes,
and cups of tea to refresh it, and with a few incense-sticks to
please its olfactory nerves; the shen is then made to descend into
the medium in the vvmy described above, and the recipe written
down from his lips.

But advantage may be taken of the presence of the possessed
man on the spot for work of even greater efficacy, for he may himself
expel the demon of illness directly. To this end, the brethren
strip him of all his clothes, except his trousers, and tie a short
petticoat of white linen round his loins. By means of a cord, passed
behind his neck, they suspend on his stomach a siu to* or
“embroidered belly”, which is a piece of red cloth or silk, on which
two dragons are stitched with gold thread; for dragons are emblems
of imperial dignity, and consequently also those of the Emperor of
Heaven, in whose employ the indwelling spirit of the hi tong is,
as well as all other shen The brethren also unbraid the pigtail
of their hi tong, so that his long hair flows is disorder down his


2 aat-


1276 THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.

shoulders and back (cf. page 1151), and by a sword they complete his
exorcising equipment. In this formidable get-up he hops and waddles
through the bedroom (Fig. 24), howling and yelling from time
to time like a madman; he brandishes his sword over the patient,

and even beats him with
the flat of the blade; he
knocks the blade against
the bed, the door and
window posts, and the
furniture ; and certainly
it is not his fault if the
demon is not frightened
out of its wits and refuses
to decamp.

Should the patient mean-
while pant, groan, or wail,
the family feel highly gra-
tified in the conviction
that the demon finds itself
in great consternation and
dismay. The hi tong also
waves a magic whip, and
strews a mixture of un-
cooked rice and salt about
the room by bits (cf. page
1118); and as an ulti-
mate measure, he inflicts
wounds upon his own
body with his sword, or
with his c//S hill or “prick-
ball”. This instrument

Medium in the state of possession. /y- 25) is knOWn to the

reader (p. 983). It is espe-
cially efficacious against the spectral world if it has 108 points,
representing the sum of the murderous influences of heaven and
earth (see p. 1250). In many cases, if the nails are long, chips of
unsized paper are inserted between them to absorb the blood, and
to be afterwards used for charms, or for stimulating and exorcising
medicines. But not contended with thus scourging his naked back
till the blood flows, he pierces his tongue with a thick needle, or
makes an incision in it, spitting or smearing the blood upon sheets


SELF-MDTILATION OF POSSESSED MEDIUMS.


1277


of paper, which are to be placed upon the patient, or pasted on
the walls, as powerful huih Ini' or “ blood -charms”, in order to
frighten away the disease-demons; indeed, the vital fluid of any

Fig. 25,


Prick-ball of a possessed mediam.


man has exorcising power, but strongest that power must be in
the vital fluid of a man in whom a shen resides. The medium
even goes further, and thrusts through each cheek, upper arm or
shoulder a dagger or so-called koan-tsiong Cdo^, “general’s head”,
the hilt being a small wooden head of a commander of the Celestial
Army. A set of flve such daggers, implanted side by side in a


1


]278


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


small rack of 'wood (Plate XX), is to be found on the altar of the
god of the medium, ready for use; but the medium may have a
special set of shorter specimens for actual use. The Commanders,
whom they represent, are those of an eastern, western, southern,
northern, and central devil-destroying array of the God of Heaven.
For this reason, each dagger-head is decorated with a silk tassel of
the blue, white, red, black, and yellow colour respectively, which
represent the five cardinal points. The spectral world has no more
powerful and dangerous enemies than these Celestial Generals.
Therefore their heads, implanted in the body of a h tong^ endows
this man with all the terrors which their armies themselves inspire;
the more so, as their vital spirit, concentrated in their heads, is
instilled by the blades into his body.

While the dancing man is thus frantically wounding himself, the
consultants gently prevail upon him to temper his zeal and spare
himself; indeed, the cost might run up too high for the purse of
the family. Every wound inflicted is to be paid for; a dagger-stab
may even cost five-hundred coins; and should the god himself have
ordered the employ of his medium in this bloody way, the club
may raise its prices almost at pleasure, since prudence obliges the
family to obey the god's advice, and there is no other ki tong in
the god’s employ to compete on cheaper conditions.

But it is not always necessary for the ki tong to carry his ecstacy
to this highest pitch. By the power of his spirit he may see and
tell immediately which spectre is the author of the illness, having
been thwarted, braved or oflFended by the patient unwittingly, or
having been in collision with the latter; and interrogation by the
interpreter may furthermore reveal the fact that a sacrifice will
pacify that spectre. Idol, club-brethren and medium then go out
into the street, where after much strange dancing, twirling and
skipping, the possessed man discovers the spectre. Brandishing his
sword, he pounces upon this being, furiously cleaving the air and
pricking the ground in several places, until the interpreter under-
stands from his yells that they must set to digging. A hoe is
obtained ; and no sooner has it touched the ground than the inter-
preter understands from the ki tong\ mouth that the hard pressed
spectre, seeing the attack become a serious matter, resolves to
capitulate. And a few shrieks more suffice to learn the conditions
imposed by the spectre, to wit, such and such sacrificial articles,
and so much of them, in exchange for its voluntary exit from the
patient.


Daggers with which mediums wound themselves
when in an ecstatic state.


DELIVERING THE SICK FROM THE POWER OF SPECTRES. 1279

Now all return to the house with the happy news of the triumph.
It does not take long to prepare the sacrificial ransom, and the
whole company, now reinforced with one or two members of the
family who carry the offerings, go out again. Hopping, skipping
and twirling as before, the medium perceives the spectre again
somewhere in a street, alley, square or corner, and the family there
politely presents the things with incense-sticks, bows, and even
prostrations, burning also the paper money. Soon enough the spectre
has swallowed the immaterial, etherial parts of the food, and the
club-brethren may take the liberty of keeping the rest for them-
selves and their hi tong, by way of additional fee. Only in case
the food is valuable will the family keep it for itself. Again all
return to the liouse of the patient. There the spirit of the god leaves
the medium and returns into the image, and the former goes home
with his club, leaving the litter with the idol on the altar for one
or two days more, in order that it may tin feh ^ or “ maintain
authority in the house and its premises”, that is to say, prevent
other spectres, likewise greedy of conciliatory sacrifices, from taking
to worrying the patient. It may then also from time to time be
consulted by means of divining blocks (see p. 1285), to learn which
medicines ought to be given him.

Should the patient recover or improve, some display of gratitude
towards the god is necessary. To this end, the image is carried
back to its own altar, under escort of a few musicians and a
male member of the family, who wears ceremonial dress with
the tasselled hat, and has burning incense-sticks in his hands. The
family then appear before the idol with a sacrifice, which they
devoutly present; and if they think it may suit their interests, they
suspend by its altar a lacquered or painted board displaying a
laudatory inscription ; or they present the image with a new
embroidered gown, a cap, or some new piece of furniture for its
temple or altar. And the patient, if completely cured, becomes a
hhbe kiw^o or “patronized child” (p. 1123) of the god, morally
obliged to pay a gift to his temple every year about his principal
annual feast-day, thus to help the administrators or owners of the
building to reward him properly for his blessings by the celebra-
tion of a pompous tsib or sacrificial mass with brilliant, noisy
theatricals. As a consequence, a god with many such children may


1280


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


be a source of considerable income to his owners. Should the hhoe
kid'V actually be a child, its parents give it a special coat to wear,
on the breast and the back of which, in order to frighten away
all spectres, the name of the god is embroidered.

But it may be the case that the patient neither recovers, nor
improves. The ki tong then has to take measures of a cruel kind.

Knowing that the God of the Moats and Walls of the city is

charged by Heaven in that part of the eountry with the government
of the spirits and the administration of justice among them, he
repairs to the temple of that deity, escorted by the image of the
god whose medium he is, a gong-man, and one or more members
of the family with sacrifical articles. His possession is now peculiarly
intense. His sword cleaves the air in every direction all the way,
and now and then it passes across his shoulder, as if to split his
naked back; but a club-member steadily parries these blows by
means of a broad bamboo lath, upon which charms are pasted, or

with the shaft of a square black flag, which displays in white paint

the whole Universe, viz. the T"ai Kih, surrounded by the eight
diagrams, which figure the reader knows as an exorcising charm
of peculiar power (cf. page 1011), and even with the stars of the
Great Bear. Such a flag therefore is an indispensable article in the
equipment of every ki tong. At times he halts, hopping and jumping
on the spot, or seems nailed to the ground almost without any
gesticulation, while the gong resounds more loudly and quickly
until he starts forward at a galop or trot, or moves with a quick
lively step, forcing his attendants to give up their dignified slower
pace. And if, in spite of all this queer motion and formidable and
intimidating posturing, the guilty spectre is not discovered by the
ki tong somewhere on the road, praying for mercy, or humbly
offering its submission and conditions, the city-temple is reached.

While the family here arrange the offerings upon the altar-table,
the ki tong grasps it with his trembling hands, and wagging his
head, utters cries and shrieks to the shrine of the image of the
City-god. It is the spirit, who is in him, that thus lodges complaints
against the spectre which is tormenting the sufferer at home so
cruelly and so long, and who conjures the god to punish it.
Clearly and distinctly the interpreter now understands from his
exclamations, that the medium sees the bad spectre arrested by the
constables of the god, tortured and flogged before his tribunal,
exposed in the cangue, or even put to death. As a consequence, the
patient is released from its grip, and restored to health.


DELIVERING THE SICK FROM THE POWERS OF HELL. 1281

But the state of affairs may even be worse than that; that is
to say, at the sickbed, seeing right into Hades, the ki tdng may
discover that the patient himself, on account of his sins, has been
arraigned by the same City-god, or by the god of the Eastern
Mountain, the great judge of souls in hell. No release of his soul
from the hands of the -invisible constables, jailors, tormentors and
executioners is now possible but for a magical ceremony, which
none but a sai kong is able to perform. With as little delay as
possible such a priest is called. Immediately realizing the seriousness
of the case, he puts on his sacerdotal vestment, and strides to the
temple of the severe divinity, together with one or more members
of the family who carry sacrificial articles, and with the possessed
ki tong, the idol, and the club members. It may now come to pass
that the ki tong suddenly halts somewhere, his eyes, as his inter-
preter is able to understand from his cries, having perceived the soul
on that spot with the spectral police. Immediately the sai kong performs
there his redeeming magic; but in ordinary cases the march to the
temple is interrupted by no such incident. Forthwith the sacrifice
is set out upon the principal altar-table; candles are lighted there,
and scented incense-sticks are planted in the ashes of the censer; and
candles and incense are likewise arranged before the images of the
inferior gods, who have their seats in the building in their capacity
of adjutants to. the chief god. Also a garment of the patient is laid
upon the altar-table, together with a paper “substitute”, previously
passed over him a certain number of times.

Meanwhile the priest or the relations fashion on the altar-table
a human image out of a few handfuls of rice. Seven copper
coins serve to form the eyes, nose, mouth, nipples, and navel on
this image, and on its belly they place a small saucer with oil in
which a wick is floating, the burning extremity of which just peeps
over the rim. This wick must consist of twelve strands of pith if
the current year has twelve months, or of thirteen if there be an
intercalary month in it. The light represents the soul or vital spirit
of the patient, which at the moment is in the power of the divine

judge. .To prevent a draught from blowing it out, a wooden rice-

bushel is placed over it upside down ; this precaution has, moreover,
the advantage that thus the life-spirit is placed under the protec-
tion of the Northern Bushel, called by us the Great Bear, which,

as we have stated on pp. 317 seg. of Book I, represents the annual

rotation of the Universe, which is the yearly process of creation of
tife. All these preparations completed, the sai kong takes position

81


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


before the altar. Tolling his hand-bell, he calls the divine judge, or
a part of his spirit, down into his shrine or image, while the rela-
tions make devout obeisance and prostrations. The god descends,
and the priest reads a petition, printed after a fixed model. It states
^that the family, named So-and-so, and living in Such-and-such
“a department, district, town, vvard, and street, have devoutly come
^^to this altar, and have directed him, priest A. B., initiated in the
“Tao, to present this sacrifice for the improvement of the fate of
^ their patient, the promotion of his happiness, and the prolongation of
^ his life. This patient is named So-and-so ; he is born in such-and-such
“a year, month and day, and is indeed in a precarious condition,
“medicines refusing to do their work. Hence this sacrificial meal.
“It has been prepared by his family with care and devotion; it
“consists of such-and-such meats, vegetables and pastry work, and
“is arranged here before his holiness the god, not only as a mark
“of thankfulness for the favours which he has bestowed on his
“ people for so long a series of years, but also to obtain his approval of
“ the recall of the soul by means of Taoist ritual and canonical formulae,
“properly performed and recited by sacerdotal hand and mouth,
“ Mayest Thou, o God, deign to give Thy attention to the matter
“for which this prayer is sent up in such-and-such a year, month
“and day/’ — The document bears the impression of the seal of
the Supreme Lao Kiim (see p. 1182).

At the close of this prayer, the relations bump their foreheads
on the ground, and the priest puts it into an envelope on which
the address of the god is written; then he lights it at one of
the candles, dropping the flaming paper into a vase of metal or
stone, which stands on the altar for the cremation of such religious
documents. The goodwill of the god being thus ensured, a series
of spells, loudly uttered by the priest towards the four cardinal
points, does the rest; that is to say, it delivers the vital spirit of
the sufferer from the spiritual constables and lictors, and sends it
into the rice figure and the lamplight. Now the priest asks the
god whether that vital spirit has really arrived, and the answer is
received by means of a pair of divining-blocks in the way we shall
describe on page 1285. Should the blocks fall upon the ground in
a position which indicates a negative, the priest repeats his spells
and the same divination, even again if they reach the ground anew
in a position indicating a negative, and so on, until their position
indicates an affirmative. Now the priest prudently takes the bushel
off the lamp, and makes it spin round on the ground upon its


DEM 'BERING THE SICK FROM THE POWERS OF HEEL.


1283


rim. By this magic, the vital spirit, which, like all life in nature,
has to follow the revolution of the sphere, which is that of the
Northern Bushel, cannot help turning back into the rice and the
lamp. At the same time, a series of spells compels the spectral horde
to release their prey; to which end the ki long simultaneously
makes terrifying passes with his sword, and even wounds himself
therewith, or with any of his sharp instruments.

But there is still another difficulty, which has to be overcome.
At the fatal moment when the policemen of the divine judge pulled
the soul out of the patient’s body, sie naturally thronged into the
latter, and occupy the vacant space, and they must now be drawn out,
in order that that space may be re-occupied by the soul. To this
end, the paper “ substitute” is rubbed along the garment of the patient,
and the practice performed which we have described on pp. 1 259 seq.
But it may be that the patient is declared by the ki tong to be
tormented by more than one spectre. Then, by dint of horn-blowing
and spells, the priest drives these sie into as many “substitutes”
as correspond with their number, which are arranged for the pur-
pose upon the altar-table, behind a few dainties calculated to attract
sie. The “substitutes” are then burned on the pavement of the
temple, or in the large receptacle which is used for cremating paper
money, a considerable quantity of which the relations are just then
busily throwing into it, to enrich the divine judge and his police.

At this juncture, the priest is interrogating that god. It is, indeed,
of importance to know whether, for the re-animation of the patient,
it is sufficient for his family to keep the lamp burning in his room
until the oil is exhausted, without the addition of any further
quantity. The divining-blocks give the answer. If they give a nega-
tive, a term for the duration of its burning is proposed by the
priest, for instance a day and a night, and the blocks are thrown
again; and thus the time may be gradually lengthened, until the
blocks give an affirmative. This final answer is then duly communi-
cated to the attendant relations.

These people, like Chinese in general, are no spendthrifts, and
therefore carefully empty into their tankard the small tea-cups,
which they filled with sacrificial spirits on the altar-table of the
god, to take them back to their house, together with their other
offerings. But it would be perilous and unwise to take home also the
food which was placed in front of the “substitutes” for the use of
the sie; indeed, the latter might adhere to these dainties, and,
reaching the house with them, leap again upon the patient. The


1284


The priesthood of animism.


priest, however, owing to his exorcising power, has immunity from
such spectral infection, and appropriates them to himself without
a qualm. Custom also entitles him to a share of the rice which
formed the image of the patient; but the rest is for the family.
The coins, having represented the organs of the senses of the
patient, are imbued with his vital spirit and therefore taken home
with respect and care, as well as the lamp of life, covered by the
bushel, lest the wind should blow it out. Should it nevertheless be
extinguished on the way home, a smouldering;/c/i5«s of paper, lighted
af its flame beforehand in the temple, is ready at hand, to be
blown, by the relation who carries it, into a flame by which the
lamp may be relighted.

The interesting group having left the temple, one of the men
who compose it shouts the personal name of the patient from time
to time, lest the vital spirit go astray; and his cries are peculiarly
loud and clear at street-corners, and on entering the premises of
the house. And all the way, the possessed ki tong protects the soul
from evil spirits by his aw'e-inspiring gestures and movements. On
reaching the house, nothing is easier than to re-unite the life-spirit
with the patient. The garment, from which all the sie were
extracted in the temple by means of the paper substitutes, and
which was thereupon sealed to prevent their returning into it (cf.
p. 1260), is placed upon the patient; the rice and the coins are
put into its sleeves; and as soon as his condition allows, the
patient puts the garment on. And if, moreover, the rice is boiled
and consumed by him, together with some food or dainties purchased
with the coins, the lamp being kept burning close to the bed as
long as the god has ordained, restoration to health cannot reasonably
be delayed.

This rite, animistic, religious, magical and medical, is performed
at Amoy with remarkable frequency among all classes. It is styled
ch'^iu^o tsitKj-sin^, “to take possession of the vital spirit”. In the
temple of the City-god, and in that of the God of the Eastern
Mountain, priests may be found busy with it at all times and
hours, and one at least, permanently stationed there by the care
of the priestly guild, is ready to do the work at any time on
demand for all w'ho come to have it performed. Soothsayers also
have pounced upon this profitable source of revenue. Indeed, their
art too stands high enough to enable them to discover whether


BLOCKS FOR CONSULTATION OF GODS.


1285


and by whom theft of vital spirits has been perpetrated; and if
clients employ them, the considerable outlay, which the ministry
of a hi tong entails, is duly saved. Such a soothsayer even may at
all times be found ready to undertake the entire ceremony for a
fixed sum, including the delivery of the ready-made sacrificial
articles and the remuneration of the priest.

The divining-blocks which have been mentioned a few times in
the preceding pages, are Wu-ist instruments, invented to obtain
answers from gods and spirits. One pair at least belongs to every
altar as an indispensable article of furniture, to be used by every
male or female visitor who wants divine advice. As a rule they
are 'made out of a kidney-shaped piece of bamboo root, between
six and eight inches in length, by splitting this piece lengthwise
into two halves, each with one flat and one convex side. No doubt,
root of bamboo is preferred because, when the plant was living,
that root was able to throw out several stems, thus showing intense
vital and productive power, or, as the Chinese say, a strong anima-
tion by shen, which is equivalent to divinity. By constantly lying
on the altar, these blocks are imbued with the spirit of the god
who is w^orshipped there; moreover, their spirituality may be increased,
whenever they are used, by passing them through the smoke of
the incense-sticks which the questioner piously places in the censer
in honour of the god, and in the delicious scent of which its spirit
hovers with satisfaction and delight. The question should then be
put in such a form that the god may confine himself to a simple
“yes” or “no”. The blocks, the two flat faces upward, are then
piously lifted up a little towards the idol, and dropped to the
ground. If they lie there with the two convex sides uppermost, the
answer is called “double yin”, or “full yin”^; if both flat faces
are uppermost, it is “double yang” or “full yang”^, and in
both cases it is negative; but one flat and one convex side, is an
affirmative answer, and called “perfect”'.^ Of course the termino-
logy varies with local dialects; in Amoy, for instance, the two flat
sides turned up are called c/i^ib poe\ “smiling or laughing blocks”.

The literary name of the bLcks is kiao This character does
not occur in any of the Classics, nor are divining-blocks mentioned
therein. The character is interesting, because, evidently, when it


3


1286


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


was made, the blocks were pieces of ^ or jade, or some other
stone, used in ^ kiao or ^ union”; the Khang-hi Dictionary states
indeed, that ^the pei kiao were anciently of jade” It also states,
on the authority of the Ye7i fan la written in the second half
of the twelfth century, "that for pei kiao two mussehshells were
used, and also bamboo roots” thus we learn, that there existed
then another term for the blocks, viz pei U’ which character has
the radical or wood, referring, of course, to the material they
were made of. This word is generally used to this day; in Amoy
the blocks are called poe shi and their use kiu poe ^ to inter-
rogate the blocks”, or pocth poe^, "to throw them”. It may be
asked whether this word pei or poe, which means a cup, has been
applied to the blocks because these have somewhat the shape of
a cup; but the question must remain unanswered.

The use of bamboo in place of the stony material, of which the
blocks were originally made, explains why the character ^ is often
changed into ^ , by substitution of Yf , bamboo, for the radical
jade. But this change is unauthorized and, besides, erroneous,
since ^ has the signification of a bamboo rope. The altered form
existed as early as the eleventh century, being found in the Shih4ui
yen yu^ by the grandee Yeh Mung-teh indeed, according to the
Khang-hi Dictionary, that work contains the following passage:
"There are in the temple of Kao-sin (Yao’s fother, 25th cent. B. C.)
"pei kiao of bamboo, which are considered to give a "perfect’
"kiao when the flat face of one lies downward, and the other up”

This passage is also of interest because we learn from it, that
divining-blocks were used as early as the eleventh century. But
their use can be traced to a yet earlier date. 1 have before me a
poem of Han Yil, the scholar and statesman of the eighth century
whom we have mentioned already more than once, which commemorates


or Extension of the lucn that is to say, of the ChUni-tbiii fan
hi, nientiuned by us on page 35. It has sixteen ciiapteis with a supplement in six.
The author Is Ch'^ing Ta-ch^ing «*!•

* W-iS- » oM-


DISCOVERIES MADE BY POSSESSED MEDIUMS.


1287


a visit to the temple of the God of Mount Heng in Hunan pro-
vince, and in which the following lines occur: “The pei kiao
“ being in my hands, he directed me to throw them, and then
“ said, ‘ This is a most propitious throw ; I hope they may fall for
“you in the same wise whenever you consult them for other uncer-
“ tainties’’’ We seem entitled to ascribe a still higher age to the
custom of thus consulting the gods. But I possess no reliable
written evidence on this head.


It would hardly be possible to mention any thing which a
ki tong by his second sight is unable to reveal. He may discover that
the soul of a patient is crushed underneath some heavy object or
large stone, pillar, or wall; which, I think, means that an earth-
spirit has got into this disagreeable position, and makes that man
smart for it, according to the law of sympathy (cf. p. 1257). A cure
is then effected by subverting the object, or removing the pillar, or
by demolishing the wall, or, more conveniently, by affixing charms
thereto, bought from a sai kong. — Directed to see why in such
and such a river, lake or pool people are drowned in a rather quick
succession, a ki tong is just the man to ascertain that water-spectres,
seeking substitutes, are the cause of it (see page 525), and he
may indicate the spot where it is necessary to offer to those demons
a bounteous sacrifice with so much paper money; or he may
’ascertain whether it is necessary to employ one or more Buddhist
priests to deliver them from their pitiable condition by means of
special rites, instituted to raise them to a higher stage of sanctity. —
And should illness or adversity recur in a family with striking
frequency, or spectres haunt its dwelling, so that it is evident that
some evil-producing or sorcerous thing is hidden within or without
(cf. p. 910), the ki tong again is the man to whom recourse should
be had. Brandishing his sword, or inflicting wounds upon himself,
he reels through every part of the house and the premises, finally
pricking somewhere the wall or the ground with his sword, and
triumphantly producing from that spot a chip of wood, or a lump
of lime, or, better yet, a fragment of a bone. This odious thing is
then simmered in a saucer or pan with oil, and the sie, which it
harboured and emitted for so long a time, are thus annihilated for

C}fayig-li sim-sheurj ts^uen taih^ chapter 3, 1. 14.


1288


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


ever. This is the practice which the people in Amoy call lidh iao \
“catching things which bewitch”. It is performed there with
remarkable frequency.

And occasionally, when he is consulted about a patient, a pos-
sessed ki iong may, through his interpreter, open the eyes of the
family to the important fact that the complaint is a consequence
of the personal name which the patient bears. We know from
pp. 1134 sqq. that a name has a great influence upon the fate of
its bearer, and that this fate may be improved by changing it.
But since they are able to know whether names are bad, an animated
ki tong and his interpreter are also competent to mention others
which are good and have health-restoring eftect, as e. g. Pg-kok ^
or Restoration of felicity ; rSem-siu Increase of longevity ; Tsai-
sing ' or Re-birth, etc. In many cases, the god will, through his
ki tong, advise that the sufferer be transferred to another room, or
even that the whole family shall remove to another house. Or he
may order that strangers shall be carefully excluded from the room
for a few days, lest extraneous sie settle on the patient; this
precaution is called k'lm pang or k'lm idii ®, “ to lay the room or

the house under an interdict”. During this taboo, none but the

inmates of the house may enter, and even the physician has to
give his advices and prescriptions without seeing the patient.

And even if people are too poor to employ a ki tong in person,
they may afford some income to him and his club by borrowing
from time to time, for some coppers, his petticoat or his stitched ■

stomacher, or his sword, prick-ball or dagger; for it goes without

saying that each of these articles of equipment harbours in itself
the same exorcising power which its owner possesses, and therefore
can exercise a salutary influence in any house or bed which is
visited by spectres of illness or other evil.

And if then, after all, the ki tong effects no cure, fault is not
found with him, but with the fact that the spectre is a wronged
soul which is avenging itself under the auspices of Heaven, and
therefore is inexorcisable, unless the injury, done to it, be expiated
by religious atonement. It will not, of course, appear strange or
unnatural that the ki tong himself should in many cases be the first


^ j8

5 -K or

//7 >rc


MEDIUMS VISITING THE UNSEEN WORLD.


1289


to make timely discovery of this fact, and inform his employers. The
fact that there is an inexorcisable soul in the case is also ample
excuse for any sai hong whose cure proves a failure. Such a priest
will even in such cases discover sins committed by the patient or
his parents in their former existence, which are now entailing such
bitter punishment ; and he will prescribe the performance of some
act of merit, or an atonement by means of sacrifices. And to bring
out the power of such intractable spirits, the priesthood will tell
and re-tell of colleague? and ki long, who, while on the way to a
family which had required their ministrations, suddenly felt the sacri-
ficial articles or exorcising implements become so heavy in their
hands that they had to drop them ; nay, some of them who, though
warned in this way, did not immediately retrace their steps with
all speed, have thereupon fallen dead on the pavement. Such cases
perfectly illustrate at the same time how extremely efficient the
work of the sai komj and ki long is, as even spectres which are
authorized and sustained by Heaven lack courage to brave it,
deeming it safer to anticipate it by treachery.

Since, as the foregoing pages have sufficiently shown, the func-
tions of the sai kong are so intimately connected with those of the
ki long, and both sorts of priests co-operate on so many occasions,
it is somewhat natural that there exist ki long clubs which have
one member or interpreter who is a Mii kong, or, much oftener, a
boat tm”9. It may even be more correct to say, that a sai kong or
hoal liu'^ actually is a member of the ki tong club with which he
regularly works.

A study of the psychological and pathological side of Wu-ism,
which the present writer does not feel competent to make, would
no doubt reveal many points of interest in this branch of the
religious system of China. An explanation might then be dis-
covered of a phenomenon which is to this hour a puzzle, namely
how it is that many a ki tong occasionally employs the god or
spirit, who usually descends into him, as a guide into the unseen
world for the purpose of discovering unknown things. It is, indeed,
by no means rare, that while in the state of possession and extreme
excitement, he sinks to the ground as though in a fit of epilepsy,
resembling swoon or syncope, a condition ascribed by everybody to
a departure of Lis soul. Forthwith his club-brethren cover him with
paper charms, in order to keep off spectres and their sie, always
ready, as we know, to invade bodies which, owing to the absence
of the vital spirit, have lost power to offer resistance to their entrance.


1290


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


They scatter paper money upon and around him, which is calculated
to induce spectres, ever greedy as they are for ready cash, to hurry
off with it, forgetting and forsaking their prey; moreover, parts of
this money may serve the departing soul to defray its travelling-
expenses, for payment of its guides, and gifts to the spectres and
deities of lower order, who, but for liberal bribes, would harass it.
As a rule, on his revival the ki tong gives useful revelations, such
as those which we have mentioned on page 1287. But it may be
that he does not awake, the term of postponement of his death,
granted to the god or spirit in whose employ be is, being suddenly
ended (cf. p. 1272). Hence the custom of propping up a while

he is in a state of possession, in order to prevent him from falling
(cf. p. 1270).

Whoever directs his attention to the ki tong and their work, is
sure to be struck in the first place by their curious practice ot
inflicting wounds upon themselves. This practice is not inseparable
from their function, for there are many who do not indulge in it.
Professedly it is a means of accelerating the descent of the spirit
into them, or to intensify their animation; and indeed we may
suggest that anaemia is conducive to the hysterical ecstasies which
mark possession. Their self-wounding is by no means a practice of
modern times, for we have read on page 1212 of two female wu
in the time of the Tsin dynasty, who, while performing their dances,
made incisions in their tongues. 1 have never seen a ki tong bleeding
copiously from his dagger-wounds; all whom I saw always implanted
their daggers into the same old cicatrized spots. It is generally
averred that their wounds are not very painful; which seems not
inconsistent with the observation that over-hysterical persons not
seldom have insensitive spots. Moreover it is pretended, that the
wounds of the ki tong as a rule heal quickly, owing to certain
charms of paper, carefully plastered thereon.

This curious auto-phlebotomy being conducive to, and tending
to intensify divine animation, we fully understand why the ki tong
subject themselves to it in particular when, in order to overawe
and intimidate the world of spectres, they have to manifest the
highest degree of the seeing and exorcising power which their
divine possession confers, for instance in processions organized for
the expulsion of plague or cholera (pp. 988 ^e^.). On some of
these occasions, they intensify the awe, which they inspire, to the
very utmost by climbing a ladder of swords in the square before
the temple whence the procession starts. This ceremony, which, as


THE LADDER OF SWORDS AND THE BRIDGE OF SWORDS. 1291

we have seen on page 1248, is performed also by the sai hong at
initiation, is deemed of cardinal importance if the epidemic is violent
and of long duration. The ladder appears then as one of the chief
items in the programme of religious festivities which are celebrated
on the spot under direction of the mi kong\ and the rule then is,
that the god himself, by mouth of his hi iong or in some other
way, declares the climbing indispensable, and absolutely requisite
at such and such an hour of such and such a day. When this
moment has come, the hi tong, who has professedly observed the
vigil of seven or ten days, prepares to climb the ladder with
dishevelled hair, wearing his embroidered stomacher, his sword in
hand. The chief among the officiating sai hong clears the rungs
beforehand from spectres by spattering or spurting water which is
mixed with ashes of exorcising charms, and by throwing up rice and
salt, at the same time ringing his hand-bell, blowing his horn, and
uttering spells. An ear-splitting noise of gongs and drums resounds,
and the 16 ie/i s&, shaking their rings, mutter spells which bring
down the Celestial Army and its generals. As they call the northern
army, a /loat tiw^9 takes position at the north side of the ladder,
waving a black banner, and pacing out a magic figure on the ground;
he, or another, then furiously cleaves the air with a -sword, with
perpendicular strokes. And in the same wise the four other cardi-
nal points are operated on by four boat tiw^o^ each with a banner
of the colour which represents his cardinal point; thus, indeed, all
demons are sabred away, and the five celestial army-divisions,
assembled by those banners, bravely perform their salutary work of
destruction of spectres.

The possessed hi tong, ascending the ladder barefooted, has his
wdiole body covered with exorcising charms of paper. From the top
he scatters like charms among the public, who eagerly snatch at
them. No sooner does he descend by the other side than the
five boat tiie^9, who have likewise observed the vigil, climb up
successively, each with his banner, a strip of devil-expelling red
cloth round his waist. They too scatter charms, and distribute
the rest among the bystanders after their descent. And they all
climb a second time, a third, as many times as the god has
ordained, nay many times more if they have zeal; and all this
time the heavenly regiments with their thirty-six Generals fill
the air, fighting on all sides, and giving no quarter to the ugly
spectral crew.

In many cases, equally in obedience to the god, there is no


1292


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


ladder, but a to U6 ‘ or ‘^bridge of swords’", that is to say, two
parallel poles of bamboo or wood, which are placed horizontally a
little above the ground, and connected by pairs of blunt swords
with the edges up. They just allow the foot to rest at every step
on two edges at a time, so that the danger of wounding the soles
or causing them to ache is reduced to nothing. Paper charms
cover the swords. Thus, besides the boat and the hi tony^

any parishioner who pleases may make the salutary passage, and
thereby acquire resistance against the spectres, and immunity from
the plague. After the performance of the rites described, barefooted
workmen, coolies and farmers, especially young people, emulously
trot along in the suite of the hi tong and the boat txiC^o many
fashionable shoe-wearing persons follow; nay, many gentlemen or
even ladies make the passage so awkwardly that they have to be
sustained by others who move on the ground alongside the bridge.
Merry laughter and cheering mingle with the noise of gongs and
fire-crackers. The same scene may be watched at other temple-
festivities which we shall describe elsewhere in this work, including
those which recur annually for the purification of the parish from
spectral evil.

But, as we all may understand, for the acquisition of immunity
from evil nothing on such occasions is so useful as passing through
the element Eire, which is the very mightiest devil-destroying part
of the Universe, Therefore a ceremony is performed which is
denominated tdh ^treading fire”, or kid”o ke-lo^^ ^walking

on a path of fire”. By the care of the committee of administration
of the temple, a small layer of charcoal is laid out in the square
in front. It is gradually enlarged in the course of the day by gifts
of the devout laity, both men and women and children who are
under the patronage of the temple-god (see p. 1279). The propi-
tious hour, fixed by the god by mouth of his hi tong, or by the
magic writing-instrument to which we shall pay attention in the
next Chapter, is arriving, and the sai hong appears, to attach an exor-
cising charm of paper to each side of the layer. But he expels, the
sie yet more thoroughly from it by means of his bell and horn, and
with spells, charm-water, rice and salt, while a few men are busily
attending to the charcoal, igniting it and fanning the glow. The


2


PASSING THROUGH FIRE.


1293


16 ien se stand arranged on both sides, calling down the Generals
and their celestial hosts, while the five hoat tiu'‘3 with their ban-
ners incite them to the assault; and no sooner has the last of them
finished sabring the air in the same way as beside the sword-ladder
or the sword-bridge, than the sai hong advances with a rolled-up
mat. Everybody gives room to him, as, even surpassing the hoat
tiu’^ in display of energy and intrepidity, he vehemently flogs the
soil with his mat on the four sides of the fire, while uttering
imperative spells — an exorcising purification final and radical!
Then, with agility and quickness, he pushes the roll right through
the glowing mass, virtually splitting it up into two halves, in this
way “opening a fire-path”, khui he-lo^, which thus, while pushing,
he is himself the first to trod. But the layer of fire is thin, so thin
indeed that he might have opened the path with his shod feet; but
his aim being to overawe the spectres, ostentation before these beings
is necessary. Sai-kohg sak chHoh'^, “a sai kong pushing a mat”,
is a saying equivalent to our ‘much ado about nothing’.

The fire-path laid open, the sai kong walks it a second time at
a quick pace, now ringing his hand-bell and blowing his horn. He
is followed by the younger colleagues who are officiating with him,
after whom come the several hoat iiu”-9, brandishing their swords,
the 16 ien se with their rings, the children under patronage, and
the general public, many of whom wear paper charms on their
dresses, cheering tumultuously, to the rousing noise of gongs,
cymbals, and drums. Many pass through the fire two, three and
many more times; and the palankeens containing the images of
the temple-gods are fetched, and carried through it. And it is
not until the glowing fire is dying out that the noisy crowd
disperses from the spot, to seek diversion elsewhere in the square or
in the temple, especially at the theatricals, which on great festivals
fire always performed almost uninterruptedly for the amusement of
the gods and their beloved parishioners.

It is the theory that every one who passes through the fire or
over the bridge of knives ought to observe the vigil beforehand,
lest he might burn himself or incur wounds; but probably nobody
attends to this precaution, because it is so troublesome. But there
are some the cyclical characters of whose birthdays are in collision
Avith those of the days or hours when these rites are celebrated.


2 e® A o


1294


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


These persons should be careful to content themselves with attending
at a distance, lest their fate be injured or greatly endangered;
lest also the useful effect of the rites be frustrated by their
presence. It may therefore be called a wise measure that the colliding
characters are all published, for general information and warning,
on a piece of paper which is posted up in the temple or its
premises. People in mourning must likewise, by keeping their
distance, abstain from disturbing the propitious effect of the rites.


CHAPTER V.


SPIRIT-WRITING, AND OTHER ORACULAR WORK.

It is not only by gibberish, uttered by the mouths of their
possessed mediums, that spirits or gods in China dispel human
doubts and reveal unknown things. They may do so also by means
of writing, scribbled down by the hand of those persons, and like-
wise interpreted by the associates of the latter.

Eor writing-instrument they use a so-called ki fiL- This character
does not occur in the Classics, but must be, at least, as old as the first
century of' our era, because it is mentioned in the S/iwo/t loen as
meaning “divination, serving to ask for a solution of doubt” b It
contains the element , which is very old, and frequently occurs in the
Classics in the sense of interpretation of oracles, being indeed composed
of j>» or “divination”, especially by means of tortoise-shells, and p ,
mouth ; the element may have been added to represent a twig or
some lengthy object with which to write the oracles. But this is a mere
suggestion of our own. VVe do not venture to assert that spirit-
writing is as old as the Shwoh men, seeing that this book does
not state that a ki was an instrument for the production of such
writing. Moreover, we have not found any reliable reference to
spirit-writing in books anterior to the T'ang dynasty.

In Amoy, such an instrument is, besides ki , called ki pil^,
“divining-pencils”; the pencils used by the whole nation to write
with are there called pit. Spectres must be kept away from it,
lest they disturb its movements or cause it to give wrong oracles;
therefore it is made of peachwood, which spectres fear (seep. 960),
or occasionally, for the same reason (cf. p. 999), of willow. To
obtain an excellent ki, a natural fork ought to be cut from the
south-eastern, side of the tree, where this has always been exposed


* haiiasife , The Khnng-lii DicUonarj’.


1296


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


to the rising and culminating sun ; if obtained from that side, it not
only will be feared by spectres with a fear of peculiar intensity
(cf. page 959), but, being imbued with the light of nature in its
greatest strength, that light, which is the source of universal divine
intelligence, will cause it to produce oracles always thoroughly
intelligent, intelligible, and sage. The excellence of this fork may,
moreover, be perfected by human magic. That is to say, before
being cut’ off, one or more mighty charms may be carved in the
bark of the tree, or attached to it; and during the cutting, efficient
spells may be pronounced, commanding the fork to display anima-
tion and life for ever, and give clear revelations whenever handled.
And it stands to reason, that to enhance its excellence, the fork
must be cut off on a day and hour which are auspicious because
they are under the influence of the Universal Yang, Highly excel-
lent ki are also those which the gods, for the consultation of
whom they are destined, themselves point out on the tree in the
same way in which, as described on page 1321, they select medicines.


rig. 20.


Instrument for spirits to write with.


Finally, the forked branch is painted red, to increase its spectre-
expelling capacity. It is about 18 inches in length, and has (see Fig. 26)
a short stump, projecting at the point of bifurcation at almost
right angles to the arms; this stump serves to trace the divine scrawl
in some bran, sand or incense-ashes, poured out on a table or on a


ORACLES WRITTEN BY ANIMATED MEDIUMS.


1297


large wooden platter which is called M pod"’ ^ or “ divining-platter”,
on which the stuff is from time to time rolled smooth and even. The
medium, who holds one arm of the fork with his right hand, is
called the Icidh tsia"3 hi | Idng or khan tsid"9 hi ej, “ bearer or holder
of the right ki”; at the same time, a member of his club holds the
other arm with his left hand, and is therefore the kidh to hi e or
hhan to ki e Idng^, “bearer or holder of the left ki”. The latter
is also called the hu hi*, “secondary or auxiliary diviner”, as he
merely behaves neutrally and passively, abstaining from disturbing
the movements of the medium, which are those of the spirit which
is in him and in the ki. The writing down of oracles on the
table or platter is called kidh ki cldut jl or khan ki cJdut ji
“to produce characters by bearing or holding the ki”.

■ Clubs which practise the system are in many cases a shabby lot,
their chapels or temples unknown to fame, their spirit-writing only
appealing to the very lowest class. But there are many of a better
sort. The gods of some clubs are in special repute for their oracles,
so that their temples draw a considerable income from the purses
of the well-to-do, and even the literary and the mandarin class.
In such a case, the club will even contain educated men, transcrip-
tion of divine language into legible human writing being no work
for the rabble. There are large temples to which people of the best
classes, and even high officials, resort for oracles in numbers so
great every day, that it is necessary to register their names and
their subjects for consultation, in order that everybody may duly
have his turn. The ki of a fashionable club is as a rule clad in
red silk or broadcloth, on which dragons are stitched with gold
thread; for it is clear that, having to harbour so often the spirit
of a god, the instrument deserves, just as well as his image, to
wear the dress of divinity, which is a mantle embroidered with
the said imperial animals. Of such a ki of higher order, the end
below the vertex is also nicely carved and gilded, representing the
head and scaly neck of a dragon or snake (see Fig. 26).

For consultation of a god by means of this writing-implement,

1 |5L^-

2 S jE At 2 A ^ jE At *

»l AL-


82


1298


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM,


some members of the club assemble before his altar, on which,
in the hope of winning his good-will, incense with some sacrificial
food and spirits are arranged. The medium and the secondary,
each holding an arm of the ki, stand by the platter while “the
spirit is invited or invoked” ^ by means of an incantation in the
manner known to us (cf. page 1273); it “descends into the ki”,
hang hi*-, or it “goes up into it”, UiV/^ ki^-, or it “adheres to
it”, hu hi*; or it “has contact with it”, hoan ki^. Up and down
the vertex moves; the ki tong behaves as usual in his state of
possession; the motion of his right arm is slow and spasmodic, as
if he were wresting the ki out of the assistant’s hand. All this
tends to prove, that the implement has become extremely heavy in
consequence of its occupancy by the god. Suddenly with a bang
the tip comes down upon the writing-table ; like a hammer it
jumps up and down, two, three, even more times, its violence
being tempered by the automatic resistance of the other holder. But
almost instantly it scrawls something, and the interpreter reads,
“I am the god So-and-so”, for indeed it is always of high import-
ance for the consultants to know precisely from whom the oracle
comes. Should the spirit not mention its name and surname of its
own accord, these are politely asked for by the leading member of
the club by means of an incantation which is slowly chanted as
many times as is necessary, and which is comprised in terms like
for instance these, “ With whom do we meet? we must become better
“acquainted with thy name; in front of the hills of Lu-kiang
“(Amoy island) there are murderous influences which thwart our
“purposes, and we desire to walk through life with placid winds
“and smooth waves”®. The spirit w’ill then write an answer like
this : “ You desire to know the true surname and name of me,
“god that I am; the first part of it is Kung-sun, and Ch'eu is
“the second”’. It may even occasionally mention the time when
it lived, its birth-place, and other particulars.


' S 11# ^ fi# ■

* » i!iL- 3 J: AL.


ORACLES WRITTEN BY ANIMATED MEDIUMS. 1299

The name being obtained, the spirit is politely asked by the
leader whether it will now give an oracle; and the answer is given
by another flourishing, followed by a knocking or bumping and
scratching on the table. With remarkable insight and quickness the
reader dictates the scrawl to the scribe, who puts everything on
paper, an oracle being thus obtained in versified form, in two or
more lines which consist of an equal number of characters. It is
therefore evident that, to be a reader or scribe, some poetic ability
is essential; or he must be an improvisatore, knowing a quantity
of poetical phrases by heart. The task of a reader or scribe is
especially difficult when many clients are present, as the god wUl
then give his answers with a striking rapidity, and even with pre-
cipitation. Besides, gods and spirits have their odd fancies, and are
prone to write characters whimsically upside down, or the com-
ponents in the wrong sequence. Or they will suddenly stop writing
when just in the middle of a phrase, the ki at the same time
losing its weight because the spirit departs; it must then be set
in motion again by re-animation of the medium and the ki by
means of a continuous recital of the incantation and the burning
of many “eye-opening papers”. Apart from such incidents, it is
far from rare for the spirit to write anything but answers to the
questions which are propounded. If asked e.g. whether a certain
junk will safely return' into the port, it may occur to him to reply
that the consultant is a bad man, who had better atone for his
sins immediately by thoroughly reforming his conduct and conci-
liating the divine world by means of sacrifices, masses, and other
good works. Such disagreeable things may occur and recur in an
endless variety, even though many consultants undoubtedly are
shrewd enough to ascribe them to the reader and the scribe, who,
if at a loss how to answer, have recourse to smart improvisation
or to commonplace phrases.

When the oracle is consulted in cases of illness, the scrawl will
sometimes reveal the fact that the spirit can give no advice unless it
has seen the patient in person. It is then the task of the medium and
the other holder of the k i to shuffle through the street, firmly grasping
the instrument, until after much slow 'and uncertain movement,
alternated by hurried steps, they reach the house. There going on
in the same wise for some time in the premises and rooms, they
finally reach the sickbed, pass their writing-instrument over the
patient from time to time, and return in the same queer way to
the altar whence they came, to find now the instrument quite


1300


the priesthood of animism.


willing to write a recipe or some medical advice. It is also not
uncommon for the two men, while actually scribbling, to be pushed
by the k i to another part of the temple or its premises, or into
the street, the spirit having somebody there to consult or something
to see. But such ostentation, calculated to make an impression on
the public, is only indulged in by clubs of less fashionable standing,
and regarded with very little reverence by the educated.

But the situation becomes really critical when the ki goes totally
wrong because an undesired spirit, or even some spectre, takes
possession of it, or clings to the soul of the medium who holds it,
with evident intent to manifest its power of visiting men with evil
by causing the point to write very Unpropitious oracles, or oracles
which are mere nonsense, or which are utterly unintelligible and
useless. Fortunately, however, such base interference seldom lasts
longer than a few moments, for the real spirit is not long in coming
and making an end of it, even being so kind to write down the
name or quality of the peccant being. Such incidents are called
ts^'di ki^, “playing fast and loose with the ki”. To keep them
down to a minimum, good care is taken that the ki, while unused,
is always stored away on the altar of the god that is wont to
enter it, and even within the shrine of its image, so that the
spirit of the latter can pervade it perpetually and thoroughly, and
no other spirits can infect it.

On the other hand, the ki may cause surprises which arouse
great satisfaction and delight. A god not called, even not at all
thought of, may occasionally descend into it and state himself to be
of so high a rank and dignity, that his oracles must be of a pecu-
liar value. Even Kwan-ti in his own person, although he has a
place on the Parnassus of the State Religion as patron divinity of
military matters, often deigns to manifest himself in this way.
Great also is the joy when some deceased member of the family
of the consultant unexpectedly manifests himself. He is then sure to
describe his condition in yonder regions, and how, where, and
when his relations may mend that condition by means of sacrifices
and requiem-masses, the family thus learning the means by which
to ensure at the same time his gratitude, protection and help,
so useful in the life on earth. And should that same, soul then
come down another time, and declare that it is now happy and
contented, having, in consequence of those masses, even attained to


' » At-


ORACLES WRITTEN BY SPIRITS.


1301


the rank of a god or buddha, entitling it to the veneration of the
human race, then satisfaction is at its height, and may even lead
to the erection of a special altar, furnished with its image or painted
portrait, where it may gain fame, popularity and worship by giving
reliable oracles and sage advice to every comer. And having thus
yielded for a time great pecuniary profit to its owners, the dwelling
may in the end be gratefully bought by pious inhabitant.s of the
ward, for conversion into a temple (cf. p. 1272).

Oracles obtained by means of this graphic system of psycho-
mancy bear, of course, no other character than, those produced by

mediums verbally, since in point of fact they all alike proceed from

the brains of interpreters and scribes. The interest, which the edu-
cated take in the system, is so great that, desirous of oracles
thoroughly reliable, many will enable the god to prepare properly
for an answer; to this end, they first write a letter to him, in which
they lay down their questions with such precision of detail as

they think is wanted. This document at the same time informs
the god that they intend to set out a sacrifice on his altar on
such-and-such a day, and that they humbly invite him then to

come and partake of it and at the same time give his answer. In
-good time the letter is put into an envelope which bears the name
and title of the god, and is burned at his altar, together with
some counterfeit money, made of gold paper. The success of the
consultation may also be much furthered by the consultants piously
purifying themselves beforehand by means of ablutions and abstinence,
and dressing in clean clothes. Indeed, gods or shen are pure, just
as pure as the Universal Yang of which they are the components,
and pure beings are instinctively shy ’of impurity ; moreover, the
Li ki teaches explicitly, that for communication with gods a vigil
is requisite (cf. page 1247).

Any ki may also be instrumental in the acquisition of the hand-
writing of gods and famous men of the past. It occurs in fact
that such a being writes of its own accord that it wishes to give
autographs. Forthwith then an ordinary human writing-pencil is
tied to the stump of the ki, and dipped into vermilion ink; and the
two holders move it over a sheet of yellow paper, laid out to receive
the writing. The pencil may have to be dipped in several times,
and the paper replaced by many sheets; and the height of satis-
faction is reached should something like human letters be discernible
amid the scrawl. These may then be given a finishing touch and cor-
rected, and, copied on scrolls, suspended in rooms on the walls as


1303


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


rare, protective charms of unequalled excellence, valued in accord-
ance with the reputation of the god.

In 1894, when plague was rife in Hongkong, a handbill on
devil-expelling peach-red paper was put into circulation there, informing
the people that Kwan-ti had descended into a ki no less than five
times. At the first descent, he had scrawled this line


— it was not interpreted in the handbill, and we are, of course, not
able to decipher it ourselves. At the second visit of the god, the
ki produced the following scrawl


— explained to be an impression of his seal, being, in three rows,
these twelve characters;

“seal for the private use of Kwan So-and-so ', Assessor for the
administration of the labours of the Plague Department”. And on the
third descent, the divine pencil produced this line


- meaning: ^ W i

strong and indexible (in virtue) must sedulously
manifest these qualities, so that immoral persons
are induced to look to themselves”. His fourth
visit was of the greatest ethical interest; indeed,
he then wrote no less than forty-two lines of six
characters, reading as follows, in free translation ;


, So-and-so, stands for his pei*sonal name Yii m, tabooed out of respect.


AN ORACLE WRITTEN BT KWAN-Tl.


1303


“I am Kvvan So-and-so of the Great Han dynasty; I have
“something to announce to you, people that are now seeking for
“ medicines. If you observe with attention the seasonal conditions
“as they are doing their work among the people, you cannot fail
“to see that in this year they are not undisturbed in their course.
“ Dry and poisonous exhalations from the coal-yards which • lie
“adjacent to the forts have been spreading about in condensation
“for a long time; and yet you did remain irreligious then, until
“ the present distressing calamity came, to drive you to acts of
“repentance before Buddha and to recitation of Buddhist holy
“ books. But fate has disposed, and fate cannot be escaped ; hence
“even your charms and medicines are absolutely powerless against
“it. The catastrophe was reported among yourselves to be rife in
“ Kwangtung and Kwangsi, and to create terror and fright in
“Shantung and Shansi, and to prevail also in King-cheu and in
“Chihli; from all sides there came information about its prevalence,
“ and yet, why was there in that time no symptom of remorse
“ among you, nor any improvement of conduct ? Now the catastrophe
“can no longer be diverted from its course; indeed, fate must
“now have its fulfilment, and in the second place, punishment
“for your secret sins is necessary. This visitation shall not pass
“away until one or two out of every ten of you have succumbed
“before your own eyes; it is Heaven’s will that it shall be so,
“and it cannot be escaped. But Heaven is also compassionate for
“all that live. It has therefore deigned to entrust to me the
“management of the whole matter; indeed, on account of my
“ power, meritorious conduct, and feats performed formerly, spectres,
“wherever I show myself, stand in fear, and the gods in awe.
“Shame upon you! not one virtuous thought has as yet arisen in
“you, and nevertheless you pretend that the sacrificial victims which
“you kill for the gods, your expensive paper money, incense and
“candles will save you from this epidemic, and will lengthen your
* lives I Deplore your sins immediately before me, and take an oath
“ before Heaven, for who is there among you to whom the mani-
“festations of my majesty are unknown? And let there be no
“insincerity, either in your mouths or in your minds; but let your
“oath produce complete reformation and immediate evidence that
“you will no longer remain light-minded. If then there be clear
“proof that your house is a house of virtue, and that you recite
“my canon and rely upon it, not despising me in your hearts,
“thpn on the tenth day of recitation shall I positively manifest


1304


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


“ray power, and, appearing in person, make you firmly believe in
“ my majesty and might.” *

And descending into the ki for the fifth time, the god gave in
the following terms a detailed account of the way in which he
had been commissioned by Heaven to mitigate the effects of the
plague: “By appointment of the Great Imperial IVing dynasty, I
am the Inspector and Ruler of the Buddhas, Gods and Immortals,
as also the Keeper of the red book for registration of durations of
lives, and of the black register of the terminations of lives, and the
Manager of all temples and convents. Soaring upward to the Palace
of Heaven, in order to entreat for prolongation of human lives and to
deliberate with the Celestial Emperor about matters relating to human-
ity, I came at the gate of the third heaven, and met with the gods

of Winds and Eire and that of the planet Venus who had been

directed by Heaven to return to tlie earth. Heaven, thus they told me,
in his just indignation about the depravity of the human race,
among which wickedness and dishonesty prevail even among children,
had just then directed Venus to go to the god of Water and
order him to cause the Yangtze to inundate the border countries,
and also to visit the god of Wind and tell him to co-operate with
that of Water in such a way that a plague should spread, which.

It

# a fiE # (g • . PI g A « I# « 'It # ± .

A W # . it A ffl * - S . « 7: ^ ® .

M*+ H


ORACLES WRITTEN BY KWAN-TI.


1305


seconded by the god of Fire, might reduce the human race to
less than half its numerical strength. I was struck with consterna-
tion. Hurrying to the Empyrean, I implored the Celestial Emperor
of Jade mercifully to mitigate His order in so far that the visita-
tion should last no longer than half a year, and in every depart-
ment no more than five thousand families should be struck. Moreover
I requested, that, should there be sincere repentance of sins, the
“judges of merits” (see page 1253) might be entitled to sue out
Heaven’s pardon. On this the God of Heaven charged me with
the management of the Department of Plagues, and directed me
to appoint a hundred judges of merits for every province, who,
together with a number of honest and impartial officers who had
departed from human life, and a thousand itinerant devils of the
nether world, should descend into the world of men, and there

institute a close investigation into their conduct. You now know

the reason why, as you may see with your own eyes, in these

days spectres are so busy among men. But no dwelling where filial
devotion and friendship prevail will be entered by any plague-
demons; such homes have nothing to fear, and it is my wish that,
thinking of the greatness of my power, they will feel quiet and
resigned. Let them also bear in mind that the catastrophe is of

Heaven’s sending, and therefore cannot be diverted even by me.
People who slight my warning, be it ever so little, shall fall victims
to the plague; and those who slight it in a greater degree shall be
cut down by the sword of Cheu Ts'ang \ my attendant. Neither
with sacrifices, nor with worship will you be able to bribe me;
I do not at all belong to those beings who are greedy of sacrifice
and worship. My protection is not to be obtained save by cultiva-
tion of virtue and sanctity, combined with recitations of my canon;
or in the case of women who cannot read, it may be obtained by
one incense-stick kindled in the morning, and one in the evening.
But do not forget, that if your conduct is not filial, honest and
pure, it is far better for you to leave my canon unread.

“Those who have sincerely and fervently pledged an oath before
me to be virtuous, must draw with my swmrd thirty-six circles in
the air, and below them write this sentence, “Kwan So-and-so,
Assessor for the administration of the labours of the Plague De-
partment, is here”*; if affixed to the door, it will prevent all
spectres from entering. But woe to you if you thus use my names


1306


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


without repentance of sins or without taking the oath! the judge
of merit will discover you, and give no pardon. I lay great
stress upon these my life-saving instructions, imparted by me by
means of the ki. Beware of making use of them after the manner
of deceivers! He who distributes twenty copies of them will protect
himself from the plague, and distribution of two hundred copies
will protect his whole family”.

Here followed a recipe for a medical compound consisting of
seventeen ingredients, written down by the god on the occasion of
the same fifth descent, together with a direction how to prepare
it ; this mixture was to be swallowed should plague-boils appear and
the temperature rise. And finally the handbill gave these charms


calculated to avert the plague if duly copied with cinnabar ink
on a sheet of yellow paper, and pasted by the door, the canon of
Kwan-ti being in ‘the mean time piously recited. These characters
occur in no human dictionary, but are elementary symbols in
whimsical combinations, evidently harbouring some mystic meaning;

chuh indeed may mean the homonymous “ to drive away”,
and and may be deemed to represent the same sound; and
^ or “sickness” might stand for 5!^ or “the plague”.

If an idol which is private property is applied to for oracles by
means of the ki, the owners are paid for the consultations of it,
but the charges are seldom excessive, competition being rather keen
in this line of business. The image is frequently transported to private
dwellings, either for consultation about patients, or, owing to the
necessity of rebuilding or repair, for asking its divine advice with
respect to Fung-shui. In such cases, the god himself is consulted
beforehand by means of divining-blocks about the day and hour on
which he shall be thus transported. Very often it is deemed
sufficient to take only the ki thither, this instrument being, as
well as the image, imbued with the spirit of the god. In such
cases the possessed ki will hardly eVer begin to write until the
two bearers have careered about the house and its premises for a
while, in order to enable the spirit to inspect everything. Beside


SPIRITUALISTIC CONPERENCES.


1307


the altar-table, which bears a set of sacrificial articles, an arm-chair
is placed, and the god conjured down by means of incense, spells,
“eye-opening papers” and drumming; and after he has been invited
with polite phrases, bows and prostrations to sit down, more chairs
, are set out for other gods, should he be supposed to be accompanied
by any. Long hours, nay entire evenings and days, may then be
spent in letting the ki write; indeed the questions will be almost
endless should kinsmen and friends avail themselves of the oppor-
tunity to drop in and obtain advice. Should the family belong to
the fashionable class, great decorum is observed, as at every meeting
of educated people; each question is made in a soft and solemn
tone, or even carefully written on paper, and burned with an addi-
tional quantity of sheets of paper money to enrich the god.

Such spiritualistic conferences are frequent among the better classes.
They may be connected with a variety of magical and ceremonial
humbug for which there are no rules. Questions concerning success
expected in commercial and other enterprise, or in the state-
examinations, or about any matters of life and death, are put in
literary or reading language, and answered in the same style, even
in verse and rhyme, with classical and historical allusions; and
though the simplest explanation of this erudition of the god is
that the readers and writers of the scrawl themselves are men of
letters, the confidence of the consultants in the divine origin of the
answers is not shaken thereby. Nor is the general credulity strained
by the fact that spirits announce themselves in the scrawl very
often by names which occur in the Classics or in historical novels,
and therefore are familiar to scholars and even general readers.

No ki tong is required for such conferences. His place may be occupied
by anybody who is able to handle the ki even without any symp-
toms of possession or ecstasy. The reader is the leading man of the
conference. Though he is seldom non-plussed, and generally reads the
scrawl fluently, cases may occur when he discovers mixtures of lines
and points which defy interpretation, and just for this reason, unless
they are ascribed to tricks of spectres, attract attention to an uncommon
degree. All men of letters are sure to hear of the event and to
sharpen their wits upon the interpretation; and the solutions
suggested are apt in many such cases to create disquiet and nervous
agitation among a people who constantly live in fear of plagues,
droughts, robbers, rebels, and even attacks of devils en masse.

Thus the readers of spirit-scrawl may be considered to be the
actual professors of the system. Many make a calling of their art.


1308


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


receiving at their houses clients who seek to have their doubts
dispelled and are willing to pay for the boon; on these occasions
they do all the work by themselves, including the^ handling of the
ki, which they cause to write without themselves manifesting
any possession. Wild gesticulation and bumping thus being excluded,
it is not necessary for the instrument to be so solid as that which
we have described. In Kwangtung they use a thin rod of some
length, with a slight curve at one end, and the other end fixed
rectangularly in the middle of a broader piece of wood, about
half a foot in length, which is borne by the acting medium on
the forefingers or palms of the hands, while the curved end rests
on the writing-table. ^

The magical “phoenix’' thus “soars and flies” undoubtedly every-
where in the Empire, in the Metropolis in Imperial circles, as well
as in hamlets in the huts of the peasantry. It has a powerful
influence on the exercise of religion, because gods who descend into
it are wont also to use it for the promotion of their own private
interests, as e, g. to order that sacrifices shall be offered, or sacri-
ficial masses celebrated, or even chapels and temples shall be erected
for their worship. A case is even known, and recorded in books,
of a spirit which wrote on the table that it was longing for a
higher post in the divine world, and therefore bade its people send
to the Emperor of Heaven an earnest petition that it might be
promoted. Of course the people could not refuse to comply with
so reasonable a request; the petition was written and ceremoniously
burned; and not long afterwards the spirit descended again into
the ki, to announce the happy news that the petition had been
granted and such-and-such a dignity had been conferred upon it;
for which reason it now expressed to its votaries its most cordial
thanks.

Besides, application is made to gods by means of the ki for all
sorts of hints with regard to the celebration of their festivals.
They are asked, for instance, whether and at what times the people
shall “tread fire”, or climb a sword-ladder, or use a bridge of
swords, or how and when processions shall be organized, etc. It is
also the task of the ki to reveal incantations by which spirits may
be called into their mediums, or spells by which spectres may be
expelled from men, houses, parishes and villages; in short there is


1 Eite!, in Notes and Queries on China and Japan, I, page 164; and Gray,
China, II, pp. 21 and 22.


THE HISTOar OF SPIRIT-WRITING.


1309


nothing in the will of the Universe, represented and divulged by
its shen, which this admirable instrument may not reveal. It even
serves the gods to work out the moral education of the human
race. Indeed, exhortations and threats have for centuries been
received by means of it throughout China in very large numbers;
many are, by the care of virtuous men of erudition, printed to this
day for circulation by thousands, reprinted over and over, and
bound up into books for gratuitous distribution.


Spirit-writing may be an old art in China, seeing that Animism
in that part of the world is old. But nothing on this head can as
yet be stated with certainty, for want of documentary evidence.
No written reference to it of an earlier date than the T^ang dynasty
is known to us.

From two small books of the 'Uang epoch, which we have before
us, we learn that the art of making spirits write was practised in
that age, though in manners unlike the modern one which we
have described. One of these books is the Chih i hi “ On Strange
Matters collected and written down”, which bears the name of
Li Siiin ^ as its author. It contains the following lines :

“ When the high Minister of State and feudal prince of Wei was
“only a secondary officer in Ping-cheu, before he had been on
“duty there for ten months, suddenly a man from the country,
“named Wang, politely applied at the gate of his mansion for an
“interview. The prince told him to sit down with him, on which
“he said, ‘I am a man who can find out things concerning the
“unseen world’. And as the prince did not forthwith display much
“interest, the visitor bade him place a table in the principal inner
“apartment, with nothing else than some paper, a writing-pencil,
“incense, and water; then he told him to lower the mat which
“hung before the door, and silently pay attention to what would
“happen; whereupon they sat down together in the western side-
“ gallery. After a while, Wang said, ‘Now let us go and see’,
“and they found eight very big characters on the paper, with an
“explanation in ordinary square writing, reading thus, ‘Your dignity
“will be that of a very highest Minister; you will live to your
“sixty-fourth year’. Wang now hastily asked permission to go
“home, and it was never ascertained whither he went; and in the


^


1310


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


“Hwui ch'ang period (A. D. 841 — 847) the prince was three times
“registered as a grandee of the very highest official rank. He died
“in Hai-nan just at the age which Wang had ascertained.”^

The second of the two books is the £1 shen luh, which contains
the following tale: “In Kiang-tso there was one Chi Tsien, a
“ person from Yii-kan, belonging to a family of petty officials. He
“alone was bent on study and letters, and he called himself a
“graduate of the lowest class (siu-ts'ai). In the first month of the
year, in the night when the moon was full, it was customary for the
“people to take a wicker rice-tray, and dress it with clothes, and
“insert a chopstick into it by way of beak, which they caused to
write on a platter covered with flour, in order to divine. The

“family of Chi Tsien likewise did this, and without serious intent
“conjured the tray, saying, ‘Pray divine what office Chi Tsien the
“siu-ts'^ai will get’. Whereupon the tray wrote thus, ‘He will
“pass the age of fifty; I cannot write out anything from his

book of life, but only from that of his friend Ching Yuen-ch'^u;

“this man will remain poor and not be invested with an official

“dignity, and he will die at the age of forty-eight’. Afterwards,
“when living in Cheh-si, Ching Yuen-ch'u was recommended for
“ a post in active government service; but he had exercised this function
“for no longer than one day when a virulent illness carried him
“off, just in his forty-eighth year. Chi Tsien afterwards became
“Controlling Judge in Kin-ling, and died while on duty, at the
“age- of fifty-one.”®


IUj A #11 ^ ^ 0 . K #

ft.


2


ORACLES OBTAINED FROM TRATS AND DRUNKARDS. 1311


The trays which were used for oracle-writing at that time, were
probably the same as those which, made in a circular shape of thin slips
of bamboo, are in universal use to this day for winnowing rice or
grain by throwing it up in the wind. References to their use for
divination, which occur in works of later times, intimate that the
tray probably was suspended above the writing-table, in such a
manner that, as soon as the spirit did settle in it, the chopstick might
move over the table in any direction; or it was held by a
medium with one hand at one side, and by another person at the
other, thus being enabled to move up and down according to the will
of the spirit, also to reciprocate the obeisances of the consultants, or
even to strike at them. Brooms, likewise at hand everywhere, were
used in a similar manner. Sudden swinging or rotating motions,
occasionally remarkably quick, indicated occupation by the spirit.

Of course it must have been observed soon enough that oracles
could be drawn from any medium in a much simpler way, viz. by
letting him, while under inspiration, write them down directly with
an ordinary writing-pencil. Indeed, Cheu Mih, who wrote in the
thirteenth century, informs us that they were actually obtained in
this way. * Lii, Second Guardian of the Heir Apparent, recommended
“ a magician who could bring down Immortals and was a champion
“at his cups, called for this reason Li the drunkard. Whenever
“ people in Shi-cheu (in Hupeh pr.) prayed for anything, he directed
“them to write their prayer on paper and roll this up tightly;
“then he bade them recite the prayer while burning a lump ot
“incense, whereupon he put it into an envelope and sealed it,
“burning it in the censer, together with a hundred sheets of gold
“ paper. This done, he asked for spirits, and greedily swallowed even
“as much as four or five pints. Having thereupon rubbed his ink,
“he wrote big characters, either figures like kwa in running hand
“or not, or verses and poems, filling up several tens of sheets, all
“neatly and correctly, and quite legibly. The answers which they
“gave were now and then quite relevant to the questions.” ^


1i, tr^PI + A. S

#aL + --

‘


1312


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


These lines are instructive, as they show that it is to the Chinese
even a matter of indifference whether the inspiration of mediums
is obtained from “a spirit” or from “spirits”. That this drunken
medium proved only able to write large-sized characters is no more
astonishing than the fact that the writing, scrawled to this day by
such unwieldy writing-instruments as the ki are, is excessively gross
and large. As a matter of fact it is no writing, but merely a web
of lines, out of which only the wit and fancy of interpreters can
extract characters by arbitrary combination, alteration, addition,
and omission.

The abnormal dimensions of the characters written by spirits have
even given rise to extravagant tales. “In the second year of the
“Ching hwo period (A. D. 1112), some people of Siang-yih (in
“ Honan pr. ?) on the 1 5th day of the first moon called the goddess
“Tsze-ku (see p. 1324) by way of diversion. When she had finished
“her writing on the paper, the characters were one foot in diameter.
“One of the company then asked, ‘Can you write characters of
“still greater size?’ And forthwith she wrote, ‘Please paste together
“ two hundred maps of the Siang district ; 1 will write for you the
“one character jjjg (happiness) upon it’. On which somebody said,
“‘There is no difficulty about the paper, but where can so large a
“pencil be got?’ And she answered, ‘Please fasten together in a
“ bundle ten pounds of hemp, and thus make a pencil more than
“two feet in diameter; and for ink take a large basin with ready-
“made wet paint’. Those who interested themselves in the matter
“provided the paper and the pencil, and repaired to the wheat-fields
“of a rich man, where they laid out the paper and assembled, to
“see what would happen. And the goddess came, and wrote,
“‘Please procure a man round whose neck the pencil may be tied’.
“ And this man did not feel that his body rose in the air and moved
“ backwards and forvvards over the plain, in such a wise that the
“character was ready in a moment, neat and beautiful. And then
“(the said man) took a small pencil, and wrote in the corner of
“the paper these words, ‘Take it to the Siien-teh gate, and sell it


$mm. ja i #4r«-

mm.

Kivei sin isaii shih.


OHACULAR WRItlNG OF ENORMOUS SIZE,


1313


“there for five hundred strings of coins".

“But the prefect of the district arrested the persons who had
“gathered on the spot, pretending that they had occupied themsel-
“ves with sorcery. As a consequence, the prefect of the department
“was informed of the event and examined it judicially; thereupon,
“ without taking any further measures, he reported the matter to
“the emperor. Then there came an imperial order, to the effect
“ that there should be a repetition of the writing in the park behind
“the Palace, and thus the truth should be tested. The emperor
“in person went thither to see. On this occasion, the character Jg

“(felicity) was produced in about the same size as the character gg
“on the other day, and in the same style of writing. The emperor
“ was so much interested in the matter that he ordered a spot to
“ be selected in Siang-yih for the erection of a temple for the
“goddess, and that every year a sacrifice should there be presented
“to her.’"*

Ho Wei, the author of these lines, lived in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, under the Sung dynasty. Books written while this
House reigned inform us that the ki were not only called shen
ki^, “diviners of the shen”, but also sien ki^, “diviners of
the Immortals”, evidently because these saints by Taoist discipline


1 gt

811 * 0 .

mm.

. Cli^un’chii ki wen.


S3


1314


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


were found to descend into the instruments with obvious frequency.
Particularly famous for such manifestations was Lii Tung-pin
worshipped as one of the principal Taoist saints to this day, also
by the learned, who consider him one of the patron saints of
literary studies. He is reputed to have lived on earth as a literary
graduate in the eighth century; and the custom of erecting temples
and altars to him seems to have developed largely in particular
in the twelfth century. To this day it is especially students and
scholars who consult his spirit by means of the ki, side by side
with that of Kwan-ti, who, likewise on account of his literary
attainments, holds the same dignity of patron divinity of literature.

The use of the k i is mostly called in the books f u k i *, “to
bear the ki”.'A more poetical term is fu Iwan’, “to bear the
phoenix”, evidently because Gods and Immortals, like emperors,
are supposed to drive in so-called Iwan yii' or “ phoenix carri-
ages”, soaring therein through the air. Therefore, when the ki,
occupied by the spirit, is being waved and brandished, it is said
that “the phoenix is flying”^. We have found this term for the
first time in the Choh king hih, which was published in 1366 ;
and we have seen on page 1342 that it occurs also in the Code
of Laws of the Ming dynasty and the now reigning House, in an
article by which the use of the ki is prohibited.

It is certainly not strange to find this prohibition in the laws
of two dynasties whose principles of government and State Religion
were thoroughly classical, and therefore could not possibly tolerate
unclassical heresies. Stranger it seems, though by no means inexpli-
cable, that nevertheless the House of Ming has produced an emperor
who showed himself decidedly addicted to belief in the reliability
of such spirit-rapping. It is stated in its Standard History, that
Shi Tsung, who reigned from 1522 to 1567, “had erected in the
“private Palace a terrace for the consultation of an Immortal by
“means of the ki, and regulated the punishments and rewards
“ (of his officers) in accordance with the oracles which that spirit
“ gave. Hung Tsieh demonstrated the nonsense of it, but thereby infu-
“riated the emperor so much that he wished to punish him.® When
“this same Minister of the Board of Civil Office had thus criticized


'S'SS-

« « cf * At tm « .

, Chapter 197, 1. 17.


BRIilEI' OP EMPERORS IN SPIRIT-WRITING.


1315


“the use of the ki for the consultation of the said Immortal, the
“emperor immediately ordained the erasure of his name from the
“registers (of government ofiicers). *

“Lan Tao-hing had acquired imperial fasmur by his skill in bearing
“ the phoenix. Whenever the emperor had a question to ask, he
“ put it into a closed envelope, and sent a court-official with it
“to the altar, to burn it there; but in many cases the answers were
“irrelevant to the imperial writing. The emperor therefore accused
“that official of being unclean; on which the latter felt uneasy,
“ and informed Tao-hing of the matter. This man now opened the
“letters, to read them before burning them; from this moment
“the answers tallied well with the imperial handwriting, and the
“emperor was quite content. Once he put the question why there
“prevailed misrule in the realm. Tao-hing, who had an old grudge
“against Yen Sung, made the Immortal of the ki say, that there
“existed misrule because Yen Sung was plotting. Then the emperor
“asked, ‘Why then do not the Immortals on high kill him?’ The
“answer was, that they left it to the emperor to do it himself.
“Thereupon the emperor became very agitated; and as just then the
“Censor Tseu Ying-lung forwarded to the Throne an accusation
“against Yen Sung, he forthwith dismissed the latter and sent him
“ home. But Yen Sung knew perfectly well of the part which Tao-hing
“had played in this matter. By means of large bribes he induced
“ the officers in close attendance to undermine the imperial favour
“which he enjoyed, and to call attention to his lawless deeds; and
“the result was that the emperor ordered him to be brought to
“justice. He was then condemned to decapitation, but died in
“the gaol.”*

^ ^ ^ fit fill . in ^ #j Chapter 307, I. 23.

® . W 4 T « ja ® . a; n iH: J| # . IS fit fill
# m -t S a . # Oil . # » A « IS *1 a ift « ± .
a # tt a * .T M it.^ if .5E a ■

Chapter 307, II. 25 seq^


1316 THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.

After this historical digression returning to the hi tong of the
present time and their spirit-writing, we have to note that it is
common for them to use for the production of such writing, instead
of a ki, the litter in which they are wont to transport their god.
The medium and three of his club-brethren having shouldered the
shafts, the spirit is brought into the litter and the medium in the
usual way by means of incantations, * eye-opening papers”, and
incense; from that moment it becomes heavy and impels the bearers
to queer and unsteady careering; and as then the medium or the
other fore-man allows the end of his shaft to move in the dusty
stuff on the writing-table, or on the sacrificial table before the altar,
the desired scrawl may be produced. In Amoy, where this method
is much practised, it is called koan lien “communication (of the
spirit) with the litter”.

The litter or lien already mentioned on page 1275, is therefore
an almost indispensable piece of furniture for the altar of every
deity who deals in oracles. It may be described (see Plate XXI) as
a box, some twenty inches square, made of wooden ribs and
panels; the back is elevated, and resembles that of a chair. The
litter is in the main painted red, and in many cases the front
panel is elaborately carved and gilded. The image, in a little chair
or on a plank, is placed against the back, and fastened thereto
with a string, lest it should tumble in consequence of the unsteady
motions of the bearers. These men carry the litter on their shoulders
by means of two shafts, which run along the sides. Smouldering
incense-sticks are stuck into the top of the front, in honour
of the idol. If the litter is fitted out completely, there are inserted
behind the back five thin staffs, to each of which a triangular flag
is fastened, embroidered with the emblem of imperial dignity, viz.
an ascending dragon which vomits a ball. The centre flag is
yellow, and the others are blue, white, red, and black, to represent
the Centre, East, West, South, and North, or rather, owing to
the dragons, the divine Emperors who rule these great divisions of
the Universe, each of whom, in his own dominion respectively,
suppresses the work of the evil spectres by means of a celestial
army, of which he is the Commander in Chief. The white border
of the centre flag, by which this is attached to the staff, therefore
bears this inscription-. “Generals of


2


ORACLES OBTAINED FROM LITTERS OF IDOLS. 1317

the Yellow Emperor of the Central Army, pacify and suppress”;
that of the blue one has: “ Generals of the Blue Emperor of the Eastern
Army, pacify and suppress”; and so on. On the reverse of these
borders we read the names of the god, and those of the temple
to which he and the litter belong. It goes without saying, that
these standards serve to assemble around the litter the fivefold
Celestial Army with all its generals, thus ensuring safety against
the whole host of devils (see pp. 1058 and 1291).

The litter is not used as a vehicle for the principal image of
the god of the temple, which would be far too large for it. But it
merely serves for a smaller image more handy for use, called
hu sin^ or “secondary body”, which has its place on the altar just
in front of the principal one.

It is self-evident that the animation of a litter is increased to
the utmost by placing the image of the god in it. Custom requires
that, before doing so, the consent of the god himself is asked by
means of the divining-blocks which belong to his altar.

Either empty, or with the idol in it, the litter is regularly carried
to private dwellings where medical or geomantic advice is wanted.
On the way thither, the four bearers move most unsteadily, lurching
about, running or stopping irregularly; and at times the holy load
weighs so heavily upon their shoulders, that one or two of them,
even all, must sink on their knees, or have to exert themselves so
much that, if it is warm, they must put off everything except their
trousers. A gongman walks ahead, frightening the spectres by
thumping particularly hard and rapidly, even beating a roll whenever
the bearers move at a slower pace, or for some moments stand still,
as if nailed to the ground. A man or boy bears an exorcising black
flag which displays in white paint the Universe, represented by the
T‘'ai-kih figure which is surrounded by the eight diagrams, as
also the stars of the Great Bear, which represent the yearly rotation
of Cosmos (cf. page 984). Or this flag bears a tiger, ridden by
Chang Ling (page 1184), or some other first-rate exorcising charm.
Should the litter suddenly lose its weight and animation, eye-opening
papers are forthwith lighted and thrown up into the air, to bring
back the spirit; and this magic may have to be repeated even in
the house, should the shaft refuse to write.

Should the writing reveal the fact that the illness is caused by
a spectre which, having been offended, is to be reconciled by a


^ 0(1


1318


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


sacrifice, the animated litter is carried abroad with the usual unsteady
motions, in order to seek that spectre. It is then strange to see it
push its zeal for minute researches so far as even to drive the
bearers into the sea, till the water reaches their breasts. Each time
when the god forces the bearers to a standstill, the accompanying
relation of the patient reverently asks him whether here is the
place where the spectre is; and if then the divining-blocks, which are
carefully carried along in the litter, give him a denial, the bearers
move on, till the god stops them anew and may answer the same
question by means of the blocks, the answer ultimately being, of
course, in the affirmative. Now after a few moments the god is
asked whether he has successfully brought the spectre to an agreement;
and when this question has been put once, twice, or ottener, till
the blocks announce "yes’, he is carried back to the house of the
patient, to write down by means of the shaft the terms of the
agreement, which include the hour and place for the delivery of
the sacrificial articles. That hour having come, the god in his litter
accompanies the family to the spot where they must be presented;
and this ceremony finished, both are left for some time in the
dwelling, in order ^to maintain there authority” (cf. page 1279),
and to give, by means of the shaft or the blocks, further oracles
concerning the treatment of the patient. Finally the litter and the
god are fetched away for other clients.

Generally speaking, the god can exercise his oracular powder through
his living medium equally well by means of either his ki or
his litter; therefore a description of what the two instruments can
achieve would, in the main, be a repetition of our description of
the operations of the ki tong. Thus, for instance, they are used
with excellent results for the detection of dangerous objects which
have been hidden somewhere inadvertently or ivith sorcerous purposes.
The ki or the litter will then push the bearers, lurching and
galloping, to some spot where the vertex or the shaft will indicate
the object. It often occurs also that the god, if consulted about a
patient, writes down by means of the shaft that he desires to be
carried before the God of the City or of the Eastern Mountain, in
order to liberate the soul of the patient, or to lodge an accusation
against the demon which is the cause of the complaint. This order
is followed, and in the temple the ceremonies which we have
described on page 1280 are performed in front of the shrine, the
spirit achieving in the deepest silence what otherwise the ki tong would
do there with noisy ostentation. Or the ki or shaft may announce


FETCHING BACK SOULS OF SICK PEOPLE.


1319


that it is the god’s will that he should be carried abroad, in order
to be enabled to discover the place where the soul of the patient
is kept in custody by infernal or other spectral powers, and
accordingly the rite called ch^iw^3 tsing-sin (page 1284) must be
duly performed.

Such practices were a subject of Imperial attention in 1833,
We learn this from a decree which was given on the 18th day of
the ninth month or 30 October of that year, and which is of some
importance because it proves the existence of hi tong clubs and
their practices in other parts of the empire besides Fuhkien:

^It was reported to Us, that in Kiangsi, in the Ning-tu-cheu
“countrv of the district of I-hwang, local swindlers of the surname
“Tseu, brothers, in association with one Siao Tu-kvvaii, were plotting
"sedition and wantonly transgressing the laws. An Imperial order
"was then sent to the Governor General (of Kiangsi, Nganhwui and
"Kiangsu) and to the Governor (of Kiangsi), to the effect that they
"should send commissioners to that region, in order to institute
"a secret examination into the case and quickly arrest the culprits.
"The result was, that T'ao Chu (the Governor General) and Chen
"Chi-khi (the Governor) reported to Us, that their commissioners had
"completed the arrests. Then, as Cheu Chi-khi came to the Capital
" before Our Throne after the completion of his duties, an Imperial order
“was sent to Kwei Liang and Ching Hwai-king, to the effect that
“they should in person direct the examination of the culprits and
"the witnesses, so that by this means they might secure the arrest
"of the whole number and then rigorously examine the latter also,
" witli intent to collect reliable testimony about the seditious plots. ^

" Now a report has been sent to Us by Cheu Chi-khi, according
"to which he had directed in person the examination and torturing
"of Tseu Liang-li and Tseu Sung-li To judge from the confessions,
"they must have been cruel and perverse characters, gamblers,
"swindlers, feared by everybody, so that their fellow villagers changed


m.mm.Mmmnmm.


1820


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“ their names into Liang- wang (king of Liang), and Sung-wang
‘^(king of Sung). In their houses they worshipped a tablet of the
“T'^ien-kang star, before which they burned incense and humbly said
"prayers; but they did not use any charms or spells at all, nor
"any Buddhist sutras. In case they were bidden to cure a patient,
"they agreed to assemble some members of their family, that is to
" say, according to those Tseu people themselves, seven or eight
"persons, or even over ten. These then shouldered a litter with the
" tablet of that T'^ien-kang god, armed themselves with iron tridents,
"and having asked which paths or roads the patient was wont to
" walk, took the same themselves with loud cries, in order to fetch
" his soul. Nobody was allowed to interrupt their march, and all
"who saw them exclaimed, "Here is the TTen-kang club, the iron
"trident club!’ and fled right and left. They did not themselves
"call their club by these names. When then the patient became
"better, he regaled them with wine and food, but they accepted
"no money. Nor had Tseu Sung-li founded a new 'Fien-kang associa-
"tion”. Of course the Son of Heaven in this decree insisted
emphatically upon a diligent and rigorous investigation of this
abominable criminal dealing, so that torturing might continually
lead to more arrests, and total eradication of this and other associa-
tions, might then be effected by infliction of severe punishment.

The litter is often used in Amoy for a practice which is called
fo ioh^, "to fetch medicines”. When the god, seated in it, is brought
before a patient to scribble down a recipe, the shaft may reveal


-tAA> S +

* <14; a a it . « « ffl # « K A if A E # =« a ■

Shing hiun, Edicts of Suen Tsung, chapter 83.


FINDING GOOD MEDICINES BT THE HELP OF AN IDOL. 1331

his wish to fetch the medicines himself which the case requires.
Hereupon the bearers with their holy load are seen lurching through
the streets to some apothecary’s shop, which after much tarrying
they enter.

A relation of the patient, who accompanies them, piously wearing
his ceremonial hat, comes forward, and tells the druggist of the
wish of the god and about the illness, in such terms that the
wares as are usually bought in these cases may be laid out on the
counter. The god is now asked by the druggist whether it is these
he wants, and by means of a foreward or backward motion of the
bearers he says yes or no. Rejected medicines may thus be replaced
by others many times, till the god declares by means of the
divining-blpcks that he has picked out enough, and slowly pushes
the bearers out of the shop. The man with the hat now bargains,
pays, and goes home with quite a number of parcels, or even a.
basket full, carried by a boy.

It is not always to a druggist that the god in such cases pilots
his litter-bearers. They may be pushed by him to private houses,
and thus obtain some home-made medicines, or merely some tea or
sugar candy. Nothing more is paid here than some kind thanks
and polite bows from the man who wears the hat. And nobody
will find it in his heart, by keeping his door shut to such visits,
to brave the wrath of the god; besides, experience has taught suffi-
ciently that litter-shafts, if pushed by a god, are powerful enough
to burst closed doors. Backbiters say that such incursions have much
too often the purpose of robbing people of precious medicines, such as
jen-sen, if they are rumoured to possess some, advantage being
then taken of the absence of the male inmates, because timid
women rather dislike to cross the will of a deity. '

On coming home, the parcels are held up one by one before the
idol, to learn from the foreward or backward motions of the bearers
the sequence in which they are to be prepared and consumed.

There is undoubtedly much wisdom and prudence in similarly
letting the god in person select the branch which he desires for
a ki with which to write his oracles. It is even as a rule the
god himself who manifests by the mouth of his medium or on the
writing-table his wish to be taken out “to fetch a ki”, cli'oe ki'--,
and when on these occasions, after the usual irregular march, the
bearers halt before a tree, and a member of the club successively


1322


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


points to some branches which he thinks fit for the purpose, that
one is selected which the god approves by pushing his bearers into
the forward slanting position. It is then to be cut off on a felici-
tous day and hour, with observance of the precautions and care
which we have mentioned on page 1296.


CHAPTER VI.


FEMALE WU-ISM OF THE PRESENT.

Our first Chapter has set us before the fact that the w u in
ancient days were of both sexes. And from our second Chapter we
have learned that, since the Han dynasty, female w u are often
mentioned in Chinese writings; indeed we regularly meet therein
such terms as nii wuh “female wu”; wu p'o*, “wu dames”;
hill p‘'o’, “hih dames”; wu fu’, “wu wives”; and shi p'o%
“mistresses”. We have now to see whether such women exist at
present, and what is the part they play.

As far as we know, members of the female sex who perform
functions like those of the sni kong, do not exist in Amoy or the
surrounding districts. But women indulge there on a large scale in
Wu-ist work of other kind, even as professionals for the sake of
wain, either in their own houses, or in those of others, but exclusively
in private company.

There, in the presence of a small or large number of their own
sex, they act as mediums for spirits which descend into them in conse-
quence of conjuration, eye-opening papers, incense, drumming, cymbals,
and music, and which give oracles by their mouths, unintelligible
but for interpretation by female experts. In such a state of possession
or obsession the medium will hop and limp, supported by a woman
on either side, since her tightly compressed feet make her very
liable to tumble. Rattles, suspended to her body, indicate by increase
or decrease of their noise the extent of her possession. So far there
is not any essential difference between the work of such a woman
and that of a possessed ki tong. The spirit which is called into
her, mostly is that of Sam kq^, “Third Aunt or Lady”, a mysterious
being who is professedly one Tsze-ku ^ or “Lady Tsze”, who.


' 2 34 *- < mm-

s M *■ e = <*■ ■ % M


1324


THK PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


according to a valuable communication from Ch^en Kwah’s pen,
was called and consulted elsewhere in China many centuries ago.
That author, who lived in the eleventh century, wrote the following
lines in his interesting collection of jottings on all sorts of matters
connected with the life of the common people:

“ It is an old custom in the first month of the year, in the night
“on which the moon is full, to receive the shen of the privy,
“who is called Tsze-ku. This practice is not, however, strictly
“confined to the first month; she may be conjured up at any time.
“ When I was young, I saw children in their leisure hours call her
“for mere amusement. Among my own kinsm(3n it has come to
“pass, that after having been called she refused to go away; and
“as this occurred once more, they would not call her again.

“In the King yiu period (1034 — 1038), the family of Wang
“Lun, Doctor in the Court of Sacrificial Worship, was inviting
“Tsze-ku, when a spirit descended into one of the girls of the
“ female apartments, and itself said that it was a secondary consort
“in the harem of the Supreme Emperor (of Heaven). That girl
“thereupon was able to write literary ' compositions of exquisite
“beauty, which even now are circulating in the world under the
“title of Collectanea of the female Immortal. She wrote in several
“styles, and manifested the greatest artistic skill in the use of the
“pencil; but never did she write the seal characters or square
“characters which are used in this world. Wang Lun being an old
“friend of my father, I was conversant with his sons and younger
“brothers, and thus I saw her handwriting myself.

“In that house the spirit occasionally showed its shape, and then
“it was perceived that above the loins it was like an attractive woman;
“ but below the loins it was always veiled as by a cloud. She
“could play beautifully on the lute; and when her voice chimed in,
“it was so sweet and pleasant that all who listened forgot their cares.
“Once somebody asked her whether she could make an excursion
“with him on a cloud. She answered that she could, and lo, in
“the courtyard a white cloud whirled up like a vapour. She
“mounted it, but it would not bear her. Then her spirit said,
“'There is some dirty mud under your shoes; put them off and
“mount’. She now mounted in her stockings, and it seemed that
“her silk shoes slowly stepped towards her room. On her descent
“she said, 'You cannot go now; we will wait for another day\
“ Afterwards the girl was married, but the spirit did not come to her
“ in her new home. No specially bad or good consequences resulted


SPIRITS DESCENDING INTO WOMEN.


1325


“from its visits. All the written traditions concerning the latter
“give many details; and what I have seen myself is no more
“than roughly sketched here.

“ In late years, calling Tsze-ku is practised extremely frequently.
“ As a rule, the capacity to write literary compositions, songs or
“poems is thereby acquired, and I have often seen specimens which
“evidenced the greatest artistic skill. Often the spirit calls itself
“ the Punished Immortal from P%ng-lai '. It understands the medical
“art and divination, and can play at draughts as well as the best
“ hand in the realm ; but in displaying spiritualistic wonders none
‘ has ever come up to the spirit in the house of Wang Lun”


1 That is, perhaps, to say, banished from that paradise to the earth. The name
of Punished Immortal, fill- is in particular given to the famous scholar and poet
Li Poh j who lived about the sixty first years of the eighth century.

Witt;,

0 , ft « T w « ± , w * a ffi s . * IS i?5 a .
*ja»*##sa.=®TB,ft*w®, MM*
B . 1 Mmm.^

. Mung khi plh l^an^ chapter 21, II. 5 seq.


1326


THE PRIESTHOOD OE ANIMISM.


Every one of our readers, independently of Ch'en Kwah’s autho-
rity, will be able to decide for himself what is to be believed or
disbelieved of that writer’s assertions; but credit can hardly be
refused to his statement that, in his time, possessed or inspired ladies
of the best families produced screeds which proved convertible into
literary work worth seeing and showing, and that they displayed
medical and divining capacities. In that age, consultation of the
goddess Tsze-ku on the 15th day of the first month of the year
was already an old custom, for we read in the book of Annual
Customs in King and Ch\x, professedly written in the sixth century
(cf. page 643), this statement: “On the 15th of the first month, in
“the evening, they receive Tsz8-ku, in order to divine about the
“cultivation of silk and mulberry during the coming season, and
“about all other matters.” ^ This passage is usually printed with
the following additions-. “Liu King-shuh’s work, entitled I yuen
“(see page 118), states that Tsze-ku was somebody’s secondary wife,
“of whom the principal wife was jealous, whence she died in
“consequence of her fury on the 15th day of the first month. The
“people then made a body for her, and called her (soul) into it,
“using this incantation: ‘Tsz^-szS (the husband) is absent, and Mrs.
“Ts'ao (the principal wife) has gone; inferior lady, come forth’.

“Thus they receive her at the privy or the pig-stye, seize the image,

“and when they feel that its weight has increased, the spirit

“ has come.

“ One Meng, in Pfing-yuen, had received her on that day, but
“the image bored through the house and was gone. Hence the

“image was thenceforth dressed with rags.

“The T^ung Ian says, that when a daughter of the emperor Ti
“ kuh (25th cent. -B. C.) was dying, she declared that, having been
“fond of music during her life, she might be called by means of
“music in the first month; — this statement too bears upon the
“ subject. People say that she will not come in the stye or privy
“ unless silence prevails there. The Book on the various Natural
“Phenomena concerning Tsze-ku says, that the privy-god is called the
“emperor Heu. The / yuen relates, that T^ao Khan (a grandee of
“the third and fourth centuries; Book I, p. 981), while using the
“privy, saw a man, who told him that he was that emperor. He
“wore a single dress and a flat cap, and said to Khan, ‘Do not


' jE.g-1-aL 0 *

^ . King CKu sui-shi hL


#


THE SPIRIT OF TSZE-KU.


1327


“speak of me for three years; you may not speak of your superiors’.
“Is it the spirit of that emperor which possesses TszS-ku and speaks
“by her?”^

It is clear enough from these lines, written by Chinese hands,
that the origin of Tsze-ku and her consultation is very uncertain
and fabulous, and probably is lost for ever in the night of time.
Nor are doubts dissolved by P"ing Ying-king, who in his large
work on regularly recurring annual customs and rites, ancient and
modern, tells us, “ that according to the Description of Miracles
“ displayed, Tsze-ku was a native of Lai-yang (in Shantung), whose
“surname was Ho; her personal name was Mei, and her name of
“maturity Li-khing. Li King of Sheu-yang (in Shansi) married her
“as a secondary consort; but his principal wife was so jealous that
“she secretly murdered her in a privy on the 15th day of the first
“ month. The Emperor of Heaven took compassion on her, and
“invested her with the dignity of privy-goddess; and hence it is
“that people make a body for her, and call her in the privy that
“ night with presentation of a sacrifice, with the purpose of obtaining
“oracles on all sorts of matters. She is commonly called San-ku
“(or in Amoy Sam ko, see page 1323) or Third Lady.*

in Ml M A^S


1328


THE PRIESTHOOD OP ANIMISM.


“On the 15th day of the first month the women take a strainiug-
“ ladle (for lifting out boiled food), and surreptitiously take away
“ a door-god (painted on paper), in order to paste it on that ladle ;
“and they draw a human face thereon, and make a body of willow
“branches to it, which they dress with clothes. Then they join in
“calling her, and when her spirit has come, the puppet can make
“obeisance, and is found to be heavy when lifted up. It was a
“popular custom in the T'ang epoch on the night of the 15th
“of the first month to receive the spirit of TsTh-ku, who was one
“ lady Ts'ih ( ^ ) of the Han dynasty, who perished in a privy ;
“ hence it is, that those who call her, generally visit the privy for
“ this purpose. The people now call her TsHh-ku ( ^ , Seventh
“ Lady), because of the similarity of the sound of the two words”
The night of the full moon of the first month, which, according
to these lines, is devoted so especially to the consultation of TszS-ku,
is known as the Festival of Lanterns, it being customary on that
night to light paper lanterns in great numbers. This circumstance
might suggest a connection of that goddess with lunar worship, or
even that she is the Goddess of the Moon ; but we have not
discovered any proofs of this. We Jiave learned on page 1310, that
in the T^ang epoch the same fifteenth day or night was devoted to
obtaining oracles from rice-trays dressed with clothes; and there is
accordingly little or no doubt that the divinity who descended into
those household ustensils was Tsze-ku. We further find the following
extracts in P^g Ying-king’s book; “The people of Wu say,
“that in the first month all plants are animated, and at the period
“of lanterns they take measures for obtaining oracles in the temples
“ by way of amusement. This is done principally by the female slaves.
“To this end they may draw sounding oracles from wicker trays,
“ brooms, bamboo, rushes, or other things of the kind. If they wish to
“consult the Tray Lady, they take a basket or tray, stick a chopstick
“into it, cover it with a cloth or veil, and call the Lady; and
“ when she comes, they rest the object by the two edges on both
“ hands, and it can then write characters, or even beat people ;

+ 3l B » * « ^ ® , fi PI H «9 » ± . a

, Yueh ling kwang i, ch. 5, 11. 16 and 18,


Zo


ORACLES OBTAINED FROM ANIMATED OBJECTS.


1329


“or it merely moves up and down, answering to the k ho tows
“of the diviner. If they use the Broom Lady, they wind a petticoat
“around an old broom for divination; and when the Lady is in it,
“it can give oracles by upright or prone positions.

“Or a small bamboo is split into two halves, and two men,
“each holding a chopstick, support therewith the ends of these
“halves, so that they lie (parallel) like the shafts of a sedan chair.
“Paper money is then burned, while prayers are addressed to the
“spirit; and when this has come, its oracles consist in the two
“halves nearing and touching each other or knocking against each
“other, the number of times this happens deciding the answer to
‘the questions about which oracles are desired. Sometimes the spirit
“may rap inside the halves, and this is called the ‘unbudding’.
“ Consultation of the Rush Lady is performed in the same way”

The goddess accordingly bears a variety of names, corresponding
also to the objects by means of which she is consulted. In Amoy
especially young female candidates for marriage worship her, either
in their rooms, or on the 1 5th day of the first month by the privy.
They then present to her some petty sacrificial offerings, adding an
embroidered shoe, for, as the tradition asserts, she is one-footed,
the wicked chief wife of her husband having hacked off her other
foot before smothering her in the privy. The purpose of this
worship is that they may marry good husbands; indeed, the goddess
must be glad to protect her devotees from her own matrimonial
ill fate. Evidently there is a connection between these things, and
the strange custom of rude youths of the lower class amusing
themselves in the evening of the Lantern Festival with assaults on
the low adobe or masonry walls which surround the public privies.

zm.

mmh

A*.

. Chapter 5, 1. 16.


84


1330


THE PKIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


They do this merely on the theory which is expressed by this
saying, chHa-to sdi-hdk jiat jit tioa ho tsu-niu"9^, “push

down a privy-wall and some day you will marry a good wife .
Indeed, that practice may open access to brides who, being just
in the very act of sacrificing to the goddess, are thereby ensuring
matrimonial felicity.

Probably there is no reason for doubting, that female mediums
who give oracular advice in a state of possession, especially with
regard to the sick, exist in various parts of China. Among his tales,
so generally in the hands of the reading and learned public. Sung
Lin-p‘o has one which intimates, that such women are -common
in the north.

“In Tsi (Shantung) it is customary in cases of illness among the
“people to consult spirits (shen) in the female apartments. An old
“ w u is hired, who, playing a tambourine which consists of an iron
“ring with one skin, dances and makes grimaces, and is called the
“dancing spirit. But this practice flourishes specially in the capital
“of the empire, where even young married women in respectable
“families perform it from time to time. In the hall of the house
“they place on the table stands which are filled with meat, and goblets
“full of spirits, and they light large candles, so that it is clearer
“ there than in the daytime ; then the woman, tucking up her
“petticoat, draws up one leg and hops like a shang-yang*,
“ while two grasp her arms, and support her on either side. She babbles
“in a monotonous, tedious way, now in a sing song, now as if
“uttering conjurations, now with a flow of words, then with only
“a few, without any modulation or tune. Meanwhile drums are
“wildly banged in the apartment, so that their thunder stuns
“one, and in their noise the words which come from her opening
“and closing lips are far from distinct. In the end she droops her
“head, looks askance, and wants help to stand erect; but for her
“supporters she would tumble. But suddenly she stretches out her
“neck and jumps one or two feet into the air, and all the women
“in the apartment shiver and regard her with terror; thereupon
“she exclaims, ‘The ancestor comes and eats!’

“Now they blow out the lights, so that it is pitch dark every-
“ where. Silent the bystanders stand in the dark, and speak not a

' SI) 0 ssf* «•

2 A fabulous one-legged bird, which, according to the Khung4sze kia yu
(chapter III, ), appeared in the time Confucius as a harbinger of rain.


SPIRITtTAUSTIC MEETINGS OF WOMEN.


1331


“word to each other; indeed, owing to the confused noise, nothing
“they might say would be understood. After a while they hear
“the woman mention with a shrill voice the (deceased) father or
“ mother-in-law, or the husband or sister-in-law, by the name by
“ which he or she was familiarly known, this being a sign to the
“ whole company to re-light the candles. With out-stretched necks
“ they now ask the medium whether good or evil is to be expected, and
“ in the mean time they inspect the goblets, baskets and cups, to find
“them altogether emptied; and they try to read on her face whether
“ the spirit is contented or not ; and, full of respect, they address a
“ series of questions to her, which she answers as readily as an echo.

“Once there was at the meeting a woman who in her heart
“disapproved of such goings on. The ghost itself perceived it, and
“the medium, pointing her out with her finger, said, ‘She is
“mocking at me; that is very irreverent; 1 will pull off your
“nether garments’; and lo, the woman found herself completely in
“a state of nature, and thereupon saw her clothes hanging on a
“ tree outside the gate of the house. ^


« « m B Si > ® it # « . « 0 a in . Bs iH: « as If

silLSi.

jg iS. # a g » ,

AtS.ftiite'f . if
I# # K A Si ^ |S « . ® « M lift § . iH

& mm&mmt-. mm


1333


IHE PRIESTHOOn OE ANIMISM.


“Manchu women respect and employ such women with peculiar
“fervour. The slightest uncertainty which they feel is sure to make
“them recur to these persons for a solution. Sometimes the medium
“ masks herself, and, riding on a counterfeit tiger or horse, dances
“on the bed (of the patient) with a long lance. She is then called
“the god on the jumping tiger; the antics of her horse or tiger
“represent majesty or rage. With a sepulchral voice she utters confused
“sounds. Some call this practice the great altar of Kwan and Chang
“but it has more names beside this one. Her majesty and fury call
“forth dismay and terror (among the spectres), but is greatly cal-
“culated to frighten men as well. Any bold character, who makes a
“hole in the (paper) window to peep through, must expect a prick
“of her lance through the window in his hat, so that it is drawn
“into the room. The whole family, mothers, daughters-in-law and
“ sisters, move around her at a slow pace like a row of geese, thinking
“of nothing else, and every bone in their bodies being interested
“in her.” ^ ‘ '

It is then ghosts of deceased relations, as well as spirits of gods,
such as Kwan-ti, which through such mediums give advice and
foretell, and expel demons. Calling up spirits of the dead for the
purpose of such psychomancy is a very common practice among
the female sex in Amoy. It is called there khan h6ng “ to bring
up the dead”, or die sin', “to seek ghosts”. The mediums, mostly
professionals, there go by the name of ang i in which the term i,
though actually meaning a maternal aunt, wife’s sister, or maternal
female cousin, evidently stands as a polite epithet, while ang, the
main component, is the local form of wang, by which word the Li ki
denotes the sick or deformed persons by whom the ruler Muh wished
to produce rain by placing them in the scorching sun (see p. 1193).


i Kwan Yu or Kwan-ti^ and Chang Fei ^ another hero of the epoch of

the Three Kingdoms.

flStrA. cfti t, chapter U, |j||.


SPIRITUALISTIC CONFERENCES OF WOMEN IN AMOY. 1333

Many ang % are blind; but it is averred that it is just their lack
of eye-sight that affords them clairvoyance.

For the consultation of these mediums the women sometimes
organize conferences; and it is even customary in many families to
interrogate through them every deceased relation at least once, not
long after his demise, principally with the object of learning whether
his condition is tolerable, or needs improvement by means of reli-
gious work. The session is then mostly held in the Cia^ or main
apartment, at the domestic altar, so that every male or female
inmate is free to attend it. Not seldom, however, they meet in the
private female rooms, should the presence of the stronger sex not
be desired. Scepticism exercises an obstructive effect on spiritualism,
and of scepticism manfolk are the only representatives; indeed,
I'l teh khan bong, “you are bringing up the dead”, is among them
a common expression almost equivalent to “you are telling either
idle tales or falsehoods”.

An auspicious day is selected for the conference; but for which
the spirit would not appear. The apartment is swept and watered,
because spirits have an aversion from dirt and dust. To allure the
ghost, burning incense with some sacrificial food and dainties are
set out on the altar, or, should the conference be in a secluded
room, on an ordinary table. In the latter case, when the medium
has come, it is necessary for one of the women to go to the altar.
Having lighted there two candles and three incense-sticks, she
invites the ghost to leave its tablet and follow her. Then, with
the incense between her fingers, she slowly walks back into the
room, and plants the sticks in a bowl or cup with some uncooked
rice, which stands upon the table among the sacrificial dainties.

Meanwhile the women have carefully I’emoved all classical books
and almanacks, as they have a notion of the fact that orthodox
articles naturally thwart heterodox Wu-ist practice. Not until this
has been done can the medium set about her work. She chants conjura-
tions in a low voice, bowing, even prostrating herself from time to
time; she thrums a lute, or with one stick beats a drum, fixed on
a handle which she holds in her left hand; and very often the effect
of her invocations is stimulated by a loud noise of drums resting
on stands, which some women beat. This monotonous work in
many cases lasts a long time; but in the end the arrival of the
ghost is manifest from convulsions of the medium, rocking motions
of her body, and an outburst of perspiration. Two women hasten
to support her, and place her in a chair, where she falls into


1334


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


a slate of distraction or sleep, her arms resting on the table. Now
a black veil is cast over her head , and in order to cause the
interview to last long, they plant a needle in her hair, from the
eye of which a long thread hangs down on the floor. This mesmeric
state, in which her mind is deemed to be strictly occupied with
the ghost, enables her to answer the questions of the bystanders.

As a rule, the first thing they ask is how the ghost looks with
which she is in contact now, and what dress it wears. For a few
moments she remains motionless, but on a sudden she shivers,
rocks on her seat, drums the table nervously with her hands, or
with a small lump of wood which she clasps between her fingers,
and something like an answer comes from her lips. Shoald this not
tally with the age, countenance or grave-clothes of the deceased,
she falls asleep again and seeks another soul, the end being that
the women, some with symptoms of an affectionate weeping fit,
declare that she has hit upon the right one.

The questions now follow each other rapidly. The ghost through
the mouth of the medium tells about its condition, and about the
means by which the relations may improve this, and even effect
total redemption from suffering. It tells whether the sacrifices, pre-
sented to it, use to reach it safe and complete, and what sorts of
things it likes best and wants most. Counsel is asked on domestic
matters, and the answers are given by the medium either with an
outburst of nervous excitement as described, marking the return of
her soul which has been out for a while, or placidly, in a slow,
measured voice, the onlookers as best they can interpreting what
she says. Now and then the medium holds whispered monologues,
meaning conversations with the ghost. It is unnecessary to say,
that her words are no less ambiguous than is usual with oracular
language. She has, moreover, a terminology of her own, calling,
for instance, the ghost 'peh-hoe kid^s * or “ white-flower child” if it
is that of a son, and dng-hoe kid’^9 ^ or “ red-flower child ” if that
of a daughter.

And likewise, as at consultations of spirits and gods (cf. p. 1299),
the answers very often do not at all fit the questions. The medium will
e.g., though nothing has been asked concerning the appetite of the
ancestor, declare that it desires to eat such-and-such a thing; which
is then to be fetched at once from the kitchen, or even from a
shop, and placed upon the sacrificial table. Or quite unexpectedly

2


SPIRITUALISTIC CONFERENCE.


1335


exhortations may be uttered, rebukes, even invectives, and unasked
advice on matters belonging to the domain of ethics or religion,
tending to save the kinsfolk from straying outright into hell. Thus
the medium evidently helps herself whenever she finds herselt
perplexed by a question. The bystanders, however, explain such
irrelevant answers by a lack of seriousness on the part of the con-
sultants, spirits being averse from giving answers to insincere questions,
and rather apt to be nettled and silenced by the same. Moreover,
it is deemed to be impossible for a ghost to give any reliable
oracles if the questioners do not fix their thoughts upon it with
great intensity. This conviction apparently is an open confession
that it is stress of imagination which calls up the ghost. Apparitions,
evoked by thought, may then be placed on the same level as
apparitions evoked by dreaming (cf. pp. 110 in either case they

are professedly realities. Is it then so very strange, that participants
in a spiritualistic conference are deeply impressed by the presence
of their beloved dead, pant and sob, and even bathe their faces
in tears?

On a sudden the medium shivers and awakes, and raising herself
up, declares that the ghost has gone. She herself, or, if she is
blind, the child which has come along with her, forthwith pockets
the rice which is in the bowl with the incense-sticks, doing so
every time another soul has been fetched from the domestic altar
and interrogated. The conference finished, she demands her pay,
not seldom in an imperious, querulous voice, and departs.

The various phases in the condition of the medium during the
conference are, of course, taken by the onlookers for the several
moments of her connection with the other world. Yet we remain
entitled to consider them to be symptoms of psychical aberration
and nervous afiection. Her spasms and convulsions pass for possession,
either by the ghost which is consulted, or by the spirit with which
she usually has intercourse, and which thus imparts to her the faculty
of second sight by which she sees that ghost. And her mesmeric
fits confessedly are the moments when her soul leaves her. In order
to visit the other world, there to see the ghost and speak with it.
Her whispering lips indicate conversation with her spirit, or with
the ghost which is consulted. It may be asked, why, since this
ghost dwells in its tablet on the altar, her soul should travel to
the other world to see it. We can give no answer.

The reality of that excursion is testified by the following incan-
tation, used to send her soul away. “Sister San-ku, Lady Szg-ku,


1336


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM,


“guide me, if you please, to the region of the Yin. What do I
“want there in the region of the Yin? I want to search there for
“a near relation of mine. When I have found him, I want to
“ speak a few words with Kim ; quickly then lead me back, I pray,
“ to the region of the Yang.” ^

In Kwangtung, females are accustomed to have their souls guided
into Hades by San-ku (called Sam kg in Amoy, see p. 1323) and
by one Sze-ku or Fourth Lady, from the first to the twentieth day
of the eighth month. Several women, who desire to become the
mediums in the performance, sit around a table with their heads
resting on their arms and hands, in such a manner that their faces
are hidden, while other women wave incense-sticks over them, and
chant the following invocation : “ Sister San-ku, lady SzS-ku, whose
“high reputation mankind vaunts, we sows, creeping on all fours
“with quivering tails, desire to descend into the domain of the
“Yin. But there are a thousand roads descending* into that region;
“therefore let us go in search of souls by the side road of the
“Immortals, and find there our kinsmen, that we may speak with
“them; and when we have finished our interview, let us return to
“the region of the Yang. If our kinsmen are there, let us find
“them; if they are not there, let us tell about the flowers that
“grow there. Pray lady San(-ku), conduct us hencCj and pray Sze-ku,
“ conduct us thence.” *

While under this spell, the women sing of the sights they see,
and the friends they meet in the lower world. If they are not
fortunate enough to meet with friends, they roam through the
park, guided by the goddess Hwa-p'o “the Lady of the Flowers”,
or her assistants, and foretell future events, examining the plants.

< Amm

Eitel, in Notes and Queries on China and Japan,

II, page 20.

3


SOMNAMBULANTS WHO VISIT THE OTHER WOKED.


1337


There is indeed in the nether world a garden, in which every living
person has a representative plant with his name written on the pot
in which it grows. If a plant flourishes, the person it represents
prospers; if it dies, the person typifled dies also. When these plants
blossom, white is emblematic of sons, and red of daughters. ‘

That somnambulants, who profess to visit the nether world, are
common, may be concluded from the fact that Sui Yuen has
selected them as a topic for one of his instructive folk-lore tales.
“In Kiang-ning (Nanking) a certain boy of the clan Liu, seven
“years old, had red eruptions on his scrotum, which medical drugs
“could not cure. In their neighbourhood the woman Jiao performed
“the function of messenger of the Governor of the lower world. In
“her menstrual periods, when she could not share her husband’s
“bed, she refused to eat or drink, and behaved as if deranged in
“ mind. Liu’s mother bade her go to the Governor of the lower
“ world and obtain information (about the disease of her son). In
“three days she came back, and reported as follows: ‘his condition
“is not dangerous; in his former existence, this second son of yours
“was fond of frogs, of which he skinned and killed so large quanti-
“ ties that the now living generation of those animals assembles and
“ bites him in revenge. Go to the spot where Liu Ming, the General,
“abides; burn incense there and pray to him, and your patient
* will no longer be distressed by them’. Her advice was followed,
“ and the boy was really cured. ®

“One day, the woman Jiao awoke after having been asleep for
“two days and nights. Bathed in perspiration, she snored and
“gasped incessantly. Her sister-in-law asked her what was the
“matter. ‘That A. B.’, she answered, ‘our neighbour’s wife, that
“execrable woman, is hard to overpower; the king of the nether world
“ordered me to arrest her, but I did not expect to find her just


1 W. Stanton, in China Review, XV, page 124.


1338


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


“after her death strong enough to resist me so often; however
“her vigour happily relaxed; I could then take off the swaddling
“bands from my feet, handcuff her therewith, and bring her hither’-
“‘Where is she now?’ the sister-in-law asked. ‘There on the Sterculia
“tree outside the window’, was the answer. The sister went to see.
“but discovered nothing else than a blue fly, bound with a hair.
“She caught this insect, and put it into her sewing-box.

“Not long after, she heard the woman Jiao yell and cry in her
“bed. After a long while she regained consciousness, and said,
“‘Sister, without willing it you have brought down upon me the
“ greatest woe ; the Governor of the nether world has severely
“chastised me with thirty blows with a bamboo lath because I
“caught that woman and did not deliver her up to him; he has
“ now fixed a term for me to arrest her a' second time ; give me
“back my blue fly immediately, lest I be flogged again.’ And the
“sister in point of fact saw the marks of the lath on her rump,
“and deeply regretted her deed. She gave her the blue fly; and
“ Mrs. Jiao having put it into her mouth, fell asleep. Thenceforth
“she was calm and quiet. But never again w.ould she go to
“the Governor of the lower world to fetch information for other
“ people.” ^

There are in Amoy a number of ang t, who, in the exercise of
their profession, employ a spirit which they carry with them in a very
small image or puppet, concealed in the bosom or sleeve. Many of

p t**. AWiitfl

^ , Ts:e imh yii, chapter 4.


ORACLES OBTAINED FROtt SOULS OF UNBORN BABIES. 1339

their clients think that it is on account of this instrument that they are
called ang t, a puppet being called ang in the Amoy vernacular.
But this opinion is evidently not correct (see page 1332).

This animated puppet is of peach or willow wood, which, as
we need not say again, is peculiarly imbued with shen or spirit-
uality. When the ang i wants to make one, she furtively conceals
a small piece of that wood under or by the sill of a pregnant
woman’s house, and thereupon assiduously operates with spells; the
effect being, that as the woman passes frequently over the sill,
somewhat of the vitality of her foetus is instilled into the wood.
But all that time the future mother remains unaware of the foul
witchery, as else she would counteract its effect by wearing a pro-
tecting charm, or by uttering counter-spells. And when her child
is born, the ang i takes the wood away. Then, while pronouncing
suitable spells, she carves it to a likeness of the baby, being parti-
cularly careful to let it have the distinguishing sexual organ. She
thereupon preserves it carefully, until the baby can speak. Her
next work then is, to hide the likeness somewhere on or behind
an altar, so that a sai kong or other priest, while performing
sacrificial rites, can unwittingly pronounce over it his conjurations
for bringing spirits and gods to the spot; indeed, by the irresistible
influence of those formulae the soul of the baby is charmed into
the puppet. The baby, if its soul is thus stolen in its entirety,
thereupon dies; or if only a part of it is removed, incurs a serious
bodily or mental complaint. And since that moment, the puppet,
regularly exposed by the ang i to nocturnal dew, lest it may dry-
up and thereby lose its animation, is in her hands a dangerous
instrument for sorcery (cf. pp. 908 sqq), and, moreover, an excellent
psychomantic implement.

Indeed, carrying it in her sleeve, or in her dress somewhere close
to her stomach, she visits clients, and under inspiration of the
soul of the puppet while it visits the other world, answers questions
which are put, or lets that soul itself speak. Evidently then there
are ventriloquists among the ang i. It stands to reason, that men
of virtue, and good Confucianists in particular, despise and decry
such murderous witches. No doubt they must ultimately be punished
with poverty, sterility, and untimely death, these misfortunes being
the opposites of the three great blessings which Heaven is sure to
bestow upon the good, to wit: wealth, sons, and length of life*.


1340


THE PRIESTHOOD OF ANIMISM.


Indeed, their work is black sorcery by means of “subdued spirits”,
(cf. page 887), though in a milder form, inasmuch as they do not
compel the spirit to do evil; but certainly also they are guilty of
the crime of “drawing out or lifting out life” (see p. 886). Time
may have been when baby souls for such oracular work were
obtained by actually drawing foetuses out of wombs, that is to
say, by committing the heinous crime of “life-plucking”. This is
suggested to us by the following narrative from the early part of
the fourteenth century:

“In the Kih-ngan district (in Kiangsi pr. ?), within the precincts
“of a village, a pregnant woman lived, who every day had to take
“food to her husband in the field, and to this end took a road
“ winding past a temple which was shaded by trees. A countryman,
“ diviner by profession, who was stationed before that building, seeing
“her pass every day, spoke to her, and thus gradually they came to
“be on good terms. One day, as she passed again, he called her,
“saying, ‘I have fried flour-balls to-day; come and have some’. And
“she followed him into the temple to a quiet spot. ‘Your belly is
“very big’, he said laughingly, ‘to be sure, you are going to have
“twins’. ‘How can you make out that?’ asked the woman. ‘Put
“out your tongue, and I shall even see from it of what sex they
“are’. And the woman put out her tongue; but he hooked it with
“ something, so that she could not give a sound. Now he ripped
“up her belly, and in fact there were twins in it; he cut her body
“into pieces, cooked them for a sacrifice for certain shen, and
“kept the twins over the fire till they were quite dry, in order to
“use them as foretelling shen of speaking boys.

“That evening the family of the woman sought for her in vain.
“And old man in the village then told them that she regularly
“ was conversant with that diviner, so that they might be having
“illicit commerce now. They entered the temple to surprise them,
“and found all the parts of her body. They arrested the man, and
“delivered him to the magistrate in the district city. Heterodox
“people consider twins to possess spiritual power (ling) to an
“amount to which a single fcetus can not come up”. ^


I'®*.


ORACLES OBTAINED BT MEANS OF UNBORN TWINS.


1341


Much more, of course, might be written on the subject of Wu-ism
in its several phases. Investigation in different parts of China would
certainly tend to increase considerably our knowledge of this main
branch of oriental Religion, representing in particular its Animism,
Spiritualism, and Soothsaying, as also its Magic, black and white.
From time to time we shall have to touch upon the subject anew
in producing other sketches from China’s religious life.


n.. *«#ii

Kivei sin tsah shih^ quoted in T S, section

chapter 5B4.


INDEX


of the Chinese books and writings, used in the preparation of this
Volume or mentioned in it, apart from those mentioned in
Book I pp. XVIII sqq, and pp. 1427 sqq. and in the
Indexes at the end of Volume IV and Volume V.


The figures given refer to the pages where particulars about the boohs or writings may
be fouud, or the titles in Chinese characters.


C.

Cheh-kiang t^ng chi, 1030.
Chen i ki, 959.

Chih i ki, 1309.

Ching khi ko, 1011.

H.

Hung fan, 1011.

H.

Khiung kwai luh, 1030.
Khii i shwoh, 994.

Kih kin sien fang, 1074.
Kin Leu-tsze, 965.

King t4ng luh, 961.

Kiu ting ki, 1126.

Kwah ti I'll, 957.

L..

Ling i ki, 1114.

Ming tao chi, 1096.


Shan fan fang, 1092.

Shan t'^ng sze khao, 1026.
Shang-hang hien chi, 1239.
Shill liao pen-ts^ao, 961.

Sing king, 975.

Suh yiu kwai luh, 1219.
Sung-yang hien chi, 1100.

T.

Tao fah hwui yuan, 1024.

Tao kien luh, 992.

Tao tsang, 1024.

Ts4 min yao shuh, 997.
TsTng-cheu fu chi, 1169.
Tung-king fu, 978.

T'ung kien ch%ng pien, 1096.
T^^ung ming ki, 1000.

Y.

Yen fan lu, 1286.

Yiu kwai luh, 1219.

Yueh ling kwang i, 943.
