The Riddle, and Other Tales
Walter de la Mare (1923)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/riddleothertales0000walt
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

Jr 


_ Ward Edwards Library || 
Warrensburg, Missouri 


‘ 
2 


( 


ns 


ef 


¢ 


A 
a’ 


° 


~ 


A 


¢ 
? 


7 


10. Oye’ ‘9% 


Fam 


) 


G, 
® @ () 
@’ ‘se @ 


8A, NA NUON 
“ 
> @ 


e/ 


ee alee OC eh 


@ee at 4 
O25 4.29 Ys 
= 


7; 
se. Xe 


\ Se A 
2 & 


ene 


Ges 
be fee! Vy 


SS 


SF ta wy b> 


bat 34 
wv % 


\ et 
@, « Ae 
\ or % 


28 VO.4 4 


4% @- 7 * 


ey ie @& 


A, 
oe" “Oses 


<— Nel 
% @-./%.% &,7 * 


erurea® 


~ I © 


las Oz,8 


Wx 7 8 
@./ \.% 


2x08 Wea, 


b 
OS GT, ww 
% g-_9 e& 4 7 \ ‘ 


Books by 
WALTER DE LA MARE 


THE THREE MULLA-MULGARS 

MEMOIRS OF A MIDGET 

THE RETURN 

THE RIDDLE AND OTHER TALES 
In Preparation: 

HENRY BROCKEN 

CROSSINGS 


NEW YORK: ALFRED: 4+ KNOPF 


NEW YORK MCMXXIII 
ee BED wae NE 


COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY WALTER DH LA MARE 


Published June, 1928 
Second Printing, June, 1923 


Set wp, electrotyped, and printed by the Vatl-Ballou Oo., Binghamton, N. Y¥, 
Paper furnished by W. F. Etherington & Co., New York, 
Bound by the Plimpton Press, Norwood, Mass. 


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Contents 


The Almond Tree 

The Count’s Courtship 
The Looking-Glass 
Miss Duveen 

Selina’s Parable 
Seaton’s Aunt 

The Bird of Travel 
The Bowl 

The Three Friends 
Lispet, Lispett & Vaine 
The Tree 

Out of the Deep 

The Creatures 

The Riddle 

The Vats 


452113 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/riddleothertalesOO00walt 


The Almond Tree 


Y old friend, “the Count” as we used to call 

him, made very strange acquaintances at times. 

Let but a man have plausibility, a point of 
view, a crotchet, an enthusiasm, he would find in him an 
eager and exhilarating listener. And though he was 
often deceived and disappointed in his finds, the Count 
had a heart proof against lasting disillusionment. I con- 
fess, however, that these planetary cronies of his were 
rather disconcerting at times. And I own that meeting 
him one afternoon in the busy High Street, with a com- 
panion on his arm even more than usually voluble and 
odd—I own I crossed the road to avoid meeting the pair. 

But the Count’s eyes had been too sharp for me. He 
twitted me unmercifully with my snobbishness. “I am 
afraid we must have appeared to avoid you today,” he 
said; and received my protestations with contemptuous 
indifference. 

But the next afternoon we took a walk together over 
the heath; and perhaps the sunshine, something in the 
first freshness of the May weather, reminded him of by- 
gone days. 

“You remember that rather out-of-the-world friend of 
mine yesterday that so shocked your spruce proprieties, 
Richard? Well, I’ll tell you a story.” 

As closely as I can recall this story of the Count’s 
childhood I have here related it. I wish, though, I had 


3 


The Almond Tree 


my old friend’s gift for such things; then, perhaps his 
story might retain something of the charm in the reading 
which he gave to it in the telling. Perhaps that charm 
lies wholly in the memory of his voice, his companionship, 
his friendship. To revive these, what task would be a 
burden? .. 

“The house of my first remembrance, the house that 
to my last hour on earth will seem home to me, stood 
in a small green hollow on the verge of a wide heath. 
Its five upper windows faced far eastwards towards the 
weather-cocked tower of a village which rambled down 
the steep inclination of a hill. And, walking in its green 
old garden—ah, Richard, the crocuses, the wallflowers, 
the violets!—you could see in the evening the standing 
fields of corn, and the dark furrows where the evening 
star was stationed; and a little to the south, upon a crest, 
a rambling wood of fir-trees and bracken. 

“The house, the garden, the deep quiet orchard, all had 
been a wedding gift to my mother from a great-aunt, a 
very old lady in a kind of turban, whose shrewd eyes used 
to watch me out of her picture, sitting in my high cane 
chair at meal-times—with not a little keenness; some- 
times, I fancied, with a faint derision. Here passed by, 
to the singing of the lark, and the lamentation of autumn 
wind and rain, the first long nine of all these heaped-up 
inextricable years. Even now, my heart leaps up with 
longing to see again with those untutored eyes the lofty 
clouds of evening; to hear again as then I heard it the 
two small notes of the yellow-hammer piping from his 
green spray. I remember every room of the old house, 
the steep stairs, the cool apple-scented pantry ; I remember 
the cobbles by the scullery, the well, my old dead raven, 
4 


The Almond Tree 


the bleak and whistling elms; but best of all I remember 
the unmeasured splendour of the heath, with its gorse, and 
its deep canopy of sunny air, the haven of every wild bird 
of the morning. 

“Martha Rodd was a mere prim snippet of a maid then, 
pale and grave, with large contemplative, Puritan eyes. 
Mrs. Ryder, in her stiff blue martial print and twisted gold 
brooch, was cook. And besides these, there was only old 
Thomas the gardener (as out-of-doors, and as distantly 
seen a creature as a dryad) ; my mother; and that busy- 
minded little boy, agog in wits and stomach and spirit— 
myself. For my father seemed but a familiar guest in 
the house, a guest ever eagerly desired and welcome, but 
none too eager to remain. He was a dark man with grey 
eyes and a long chin; a face unusually impassive, unu- 
sually mobile. Just as his capricious mood suggested, our 
little household was dejected or wildly gay. I never shall 
forget the spirit of delight he could conjure up at a whim, 
when my mother would go singing up and down stairs, 
and in her tiny parlour; and Martha in perfect content 
would prattle endlessly on to the cook, basting the twirl- 
ing sirloin, while I watched in the firelight. And the 
long summer evenings too, when my father would find 
a secret, a magic, a mystery in everything ; and we would 
sit together in the orchard while he told me tales, with 
the small green apples overhead, and beyond contorted 
branches, the first golden twilight of the moon. 

“Tt’s an old picture now, Richard, but true to the time. 

“My father’s will, his word, his caprice, his frown, 
these were the tables of the law in that small household. 
To my mother he was the very meaning of her life. Only 
that little boy was in some wise independent, busy, inquisi- 

5 


The Almond Tree 


tive, docile, sedate ; though urged to a bitterness of secret 
rebellion at times. In his childhood he experienced such 
hours of distress as the years do not in mercy bring again 
to a heart that may analyse as well as remember. Yet 
there also sank to rest the fountain of life’s happiness. 
In among the gorse bushes were the green mansions of 
the fairies ; along the furrows before his adventurous eyes 
stumbled crooked gnomes, hopped bewitched robins. 
Ariel trebled in the sunbeams and glanced from the dew- 
drops; and he heard the echo of distant and magic waters 
in the falling of the rain. 

“But my father was never long at peace in the house. 
Nothing satisfied him; he must needs be at an extreme. 
And if he was compelled to conceal his discontent, there 
was something so bitter and imperious in his silence, so 
scornful a sarcasm in his speech, that we could scarcely 
bear it. And the knowledge of the influence he had 
over us served only at such times to sharpen his con- 
tempt. 

“T remember one summer’s evening we had been gather- 
ing strawberries. I carried a little wicker basket, and 
went rummaging under the aromatic leaves, calling ever 
and again my mother to see the ‘tremenjous’ berry I had 
found. Martha was busy beside me, vexed that her two 
hands could not serve her master quick enough. And in 
a wild race with my mother my father helped us pick. At 
every ripest one he took her in his arms to force it be- 
tween her lips; and of all those pecked by the birds he 
made a rhymed offering to Pan. And when the sun had 
descended behind the hill, and the clamour of the rooks 
had begun to wane in the elm-tops, he took my mother 
on his arm, and we trooped all together up the long strag- 
6 


The Almond Tree 


gling path, and across the grass, carrying our spoil of 
fruit into the cool dusky corridor. As we passed into 
the gloaming I saw my mother stoop impulsively and kiss 
his arm. He brushed off her hand impatiently, and went 
into his study. I heard the door shut. A moment after- 
wards he called for candles, And, looking on those two 
other faces in the twilight, I knew with the intuition of 
childhood that he was suddenly sick to death of us all; 
and I knew that my mother shared my intuition. She sat 
down, and I beside her, in her little parlour, and took up 
her sewing. But her face had lost again all its girlishness 
as she bent her head over the white linen. 

“T think she was happier when my father was away; 
for then, free from anxiety to be for ever pleasing his 
variable moods, she could entertain herself with hopes 
and preparations for his return. There was a little green 
summer-house, or arbour, in the garden, where she would 
sit alone, while the swallows coursed in the evening air. 
Sometimes, too, she would take me for a long walk, lis- 
tening distantly to my chatter, only, I think, that she 
might entertain the pleasure of supposing that my father 
might have returned home unforeseen, and be even now 
waiting to greet us. But these fancies would forsake her. 
She would speak harshly and coldly to me, and scold 
Martha for her owlishness, and find nothing but vanity 
and mockery in all that but a little while since had been 
her day-dream. 

“T think she rarely knew where my father stayed in 
his long absences from home. He would remain with 
us for a week, and neglect us for a month. She was too 
proud, and when he was himself, too happy and hopeful 
to question him, and he seemed to delight in keeping his 


7 


The Almond Tree 


affairs secret from her. Indeed, he sometimes appeared 
to pretend a mystery where none was, and to endeavour 
in all things to make his character and conduct appear 
quixotic and inexplicable. 

“So time went on. Yet, it seemed, as each month passed 
by, the house was not so merry and happy as before; 
something was fading and vanishing that would not re- 
turn; estrangement had pierced a little deeper. I think 
care at last put out of my mother’s mind even the sem- 
blance of her former gaiety. She sealed up her heart 
lest love should break forth anew into the bleakness. 

“On Guy Fawkes’ Day Martha told me at bed-time that 
a new household had moved into the village on the other 
side of the heath. After that my father stayed away 
from us but seldom. 

“At first my mother showed her pleasure in a thousand 
ways, with dainties of her own fancy and cooking, with 
ribbons in her dark hair, with new songs (though she had 
but a small thin voice). She read to please him; and tired 
my legs out in useless errands in his service. And a word 
of praise sufficed her for many hours of difficulty. But 
by and by, when evening after evening was spent by my 
father away from home, she began to be uneasy and de- 
pressed; and though she made no complaint, her anxious 
face, the incessant interrogation of her eyes vexed and 
irritated him beyond measure. 

“Where does my father go after dinner?’ I asked 
Martha one night, when my mother was in my bedroom, 
folding my clothes. 

“Tow dare you ask such a question?’ said my mother, 
‘and how dare you talk to the child about your master’s 
comings and goings?” 


8 


The Almond Tree 


“ ‘But where does he?’ I repeated to Martha, when my 
mother was gone out of the room. 

““«Ssh now, Master Nicholas,’ she answered, ‘didn’t you 
hear what your mamma said? She’s vexed, poor lady, 
at master’s never spending a whole day at home, but 
nothing but them cards, cards, cards, every night at Mr. 
Grey’s. Why, often it’s twelve and one in the morning 
when I’ve heard his foot on the gravel beneath the win- 
dow. But there, I’ll be bound, she doesn’t mean to 
speak unkindly. It’s a terrible scourge is jealousy, 
Master Nicholas; and not generous or manly to give 
it cause. Mrs. Ryder was kept a widow all along of jeal- 
ousy, and but a week before her wedding with her sec- 
ond.” 

“‘But why is mother jealous of my father playing 
cards ?” 

“Martha slipped my nightgown over my head. ‘Ssh, 
Master Nicholas, little boys mustn’t ask so many ques- 
tions. And I hope when you are grown up to be a man, 
my dear, you will be a comfort to your mother. She needs 
it, poor soul, and sakes alive, just now of all times!’ I 
looked inquisitively into Martha’s face; but she screened 
my eyes with her hand; and instead of further questions, 
I said my prayers to her. 

“A few days after this I was sitting with my mother 
in her parlour, holding her grey worsted for her to wind, 
when my father entered the room and made me put on my 
hat and muffler. ‘He is going to pay a call with me,’ he 
explained curtly. As I went out of the room, I heard my 
mother’s question, ‘To your friends at the Grange, I 
suppose ?” 

“*You may suppose whatever you please,’ he answered. 

2 


The Almond Tree 


I heard my mother rise to leave the room, but he called 
her back and the door was shut... . 


“The room in which the card-players sat was very low- 
ceiled. A piano stood near the window, a rosewood table 
with a fine dark crimson work-basket upon it by the fire- 
side, and some little distance away, a green card-table with 
candles burning. Mr. Grey was a slim, elegant man, with 
a high, narrow forehead and long fingers. Major Aubrey 
was a short, red-faced, rather taciturn man. There was 
also a younger man with fair hair. They seemed to be 
on the best of terms together; and I helped to pack the 
cards and to pile the silver coins, sipping a glass of sherry 
with Mr. Grey. My father said little, paying me no at- 
tention, but playing gravely with a very slight frown. 

“After some little while the door opened, and a lady 
appeared. This was Mr. Grey’s sister, Jane, I learned. 
She seated herself at her work-table, and drew me 
to her side. 

“ ‘Well, so this is Nicholas!’ she said. ‘Or is it Nick?’ 

““Nicholas,’ I said. 

““Of course,’ she said, smiling, ‘and I like that, too, 
much the best. How very kind of you to come to see me! 
It was to keep me company, you know, because I am 
very stupid at games, but I love talking. Do you?’ 

“TI looked into her eyes, and knew we were friends. 
She smiled again, with open lips, and touched my mouth 
with her thimble. ‘Now, let me see, business first, and— 
me afterwards. You see I have three different kinds of 
cake, because, I thought, I cannot in the least tell which 
kind he'll like best. Could I now? Come, you shall 
choose.’ 

10 


The Almond Tree 


“She rose and opened the long door of a narrow cup- 
board, looking towards the card-players as she stooped. I 
remember the cakes to this day; little oval shortbreads 
stamped with a beehive, custards and mince-pies; and a 
great glass jar of goodies which I carried in both arms 
round the little square table. I took a mince-pie, and sat 
down on a foot-stool near by Miss Grey, and she talked to 
me while she worked with slender hands at her lace em- 
broidery. I told her how old I was; about my great-aunt 
and her three cats. I told her my dreams, and that I was 
very fond of Yorkshire pudding, ‘from under the meat, 
you know.’ And I told her I thought my father the hand- 
somest man I had ever seen. 

“What, handsomer than Mr. Spencer?’ she said laugh- 
ing, looking along her needle. 

“T answered that I did not very much like clergymen. 

“*And why?’ she said gravely. 

“Because they do not talk like real,’ I said. 

“She laughed very gaily. ‘Do men ever?’ she said. 

“And her voice was so quiet and so musical, her neck 
so graceful, I thought her a very beautiful lady, admiring 
especially her dark eyes when she smiled brightly and yet 
half sadly at me; I promised, moreover, that if she would 
meet me on the heath, I would show her the rabbit warren 
and the ‘Miller’s Pool.’ 

“Well, Jane, and what do you think of my son?’ said 
my father when we were about to leave. 

“She bent over me and squeezed a lucky four-penny- 
piece into my hand. ‘I love fourpence, pretty little four- 
pence, I love fourpence better than my life,’ she whispered 
into my ear. ‘But that’s a secret,’ she added, glancing up 
over her shoulder. She kissed lightly the top of my head. 

II 


The Almond Tree 


I was looking at my father while she was caressing me, 
and I fancied a faint sneer passed over his face. But when 
we had come out of the village on to the heath, in the 
bare keen night, as we walked along the path together be- 
tween the gorse-bushes, now on turf, and now on stony 
ground, never before had he seemed so wonderful a com- 
panion. He told me little stories; he began a hundred, 
and finished none; yet with the stars above us, they 
seemed a string of beads all of bright colours. We stood 
still in the vast darkness, while he whistled that strangest 
of old songs—'the Songs the Sirens sang.’ He pilfered 
my wits and talked like my double. But when—how 
much too quickly, I thought with sinking heart—we were 
come to the house-gates, he suddenly fell silent, turned 
an instant, and stared far away over the windy heath. 

“Tow weary, stale, flat—’ he began, and broke off be- 
tween uneasy laughter and a sigh. ‘Listen to me, Nicho- 
las,’ he said, lifting my face to the starlight, ‘you must 
grow up a man—a Man, you understand; no vapourings, 
no posings, no caprices ; and above all, no sham. No sham. 
It’s your one and only chance in this unfaltering Scheme.’ 
He scanned my face long and closely. ‘You have your 
mother’s eyes,’ he said musingly. ‘And that,’ he added 
under his breath, ‘that’s no joke.’ He pushed open the 
squealing gate, and we went in. 

“My mother was sitting in a low chair before a dying 
and cheerless fire. 

“Well, Nick,’ she said very suavely, ‘and how have 
you enjoyed your evening?’ 

“T stared at her without answer. ‘Did you play cards 
with the gentlemen; or did you turn over the music?’ 

“*T talked to Miss Grey,’ I said. 
12 


The Almond Tree 


“ ‘Really,’ said my mother, raising her eyebrows, ‘and 
who then is Miss Grey?” My father was smiling at us 
with sparkling eyes. 

“*Mr, Grey’s sister,’ I answered in a low voice. 

“Not his wife, then? said my mother, glancing fur- 
tively at the fire. I looked towards my father in doubt, 
but could lift my eyes no higher than his knees. 

“You little fool! he said to my mother with a laugh, 
‘what a sharpshooter! Never mind, Sir Nick; there, run 
off to bed, my man.’ 

“My mother caught me roughly by the sleeve as I was 
passing her chair. ‘Aren’t you going to kiss me good- 
night, then,’ she said furiously, her narrow under-lip 
quivering, ‘you, too!’ I kissed her cheek. ‘That’s right, 
my dear,’ she said scornfully, ‘that’s how little fishes kiss.’ 
She rose and drew back her skirts. ‘I refuse to stay in 
the room,’ she said haughtily, and with a sob she hurried 
out. 

“My father continued to smile, but only a smile it 
seemed gravity had forgotten to smooth away. He stood 
very still, so still that I grew afraid he must certainly 
hear me thinking. Then with a kind of sigh he sat down 
at my mother’s writing table, and scribbled a few words 
with his pencil on a slip of paper. 

“*There, Nicholas, just tap at your mother’s door with 
that. Good-night, old fellow’; he took my hand and 
smiled down into my eyes with a kind of generous dark 
appeal that called me straight to his side. I hastened con- 
ceitedly upstairs, and delivered my message. My mother 
was crying when she opened the door. 

“ ‘Well?’ she said in a low, trembling voice. 

“But presently afterwards, while I was still lingering 

13 


1594142 


The Almond Tree 


in the dark corridor, I heard her run down quickly, and 
in a while my father and mother came upstairs together, 
arm in arm, and by her light talk and laughter you might 
suppose she had no knowledge of care or trouble at all. 

“Never afterwards did I see so much gaiety and youth- 
fulness in my mother’s face as when she sat next morn- 
ing with us at breakfast. The honeycomb, the small 
bronze chrysanthemums, her yellow gown seemed dainty 
as a miniature. With every word her eyes would glance 
covertly at my father; her smile, as it were, hesitating be- 
tween her lashes. She was so light and girlish and so 
versatile I should scarcely have recognised the weary and 
sallow face of the night before. My father seemed to 
find as much pleasure, or relief, in her good spirits as I 
did; and to delight in exercising his ingenuity to quicken 
her humour. 

“Tt was but a transient morning of sunshine, however, 
and as the brief and sombre day waned, its gloom per- 
vaded the house. In the evening my father left us to our 
solitude as usual. And that night was very misty over 
the heath, with a small, warm rain falling. 

“So it happened that I began to be left more and more 
to my own devices, and grew so inured at last to my own 
narrow company and small thoughts and cares, that I be- 
gan to look on my mother’s unhappiness almost with in- 
difference, and learned to criticise almost before I had 
learned to pity. And so I do not think I enjoyed Christ- 
mas very much the less, although my father was away 
from home and all our little festivities were dispirited. I 
had plenty of good things to eat, and presents, and a pic- 
ture-book from Martha. I had a new rocking-horse— 
how changeless and impassive its mottled battered face 


14 


The Almond Tree 


looks out at me across the years! It was brisk, clear 
weather, and on St. Stephen’s Day I went to see if there 
was any ice yet on the Miller’s Pool. 

“T was stooping down at the extreme edge of the pool, 
snapping the brittle splinters of the ice with my finger, 
when I heard a voice calling me in the still air. It was 
Jane Grey, walking on the heath with my father, who 
had called me, having seen me from a distance stooping 
beside the water. 

“*So you see I have kept my promise,’ she said, taking 
my hand. 

““But you promised to come by yourself,’ I said. 

“Well, so I will then,’ she answered, nodding her head. 
‘Good-bye,’ she added, turning to my father. ‘It’s three’s 
none, you see. Nicholas shall take me home to tea, and 
you can call for him in the evening, if you will; that is, if 
you are coming.’ 

“ “Are you asking me to come?’ he said moodily, ‘do you 
care whether I come or not?” 

“She lifted her face and spoke gravely. ‘You are my 
friend,’ she said, ‘of course I care whether you are with 
me or not.’ He scrutinised her through half-closed lids. 
His face was haggard, gloomy with ennui. ‘How you 
harp on the word, you punctilious Jane. Do you suppose 
I am still in my teens? Twenty years ago, now— It 
amuses me to hear you women talk. It’s little you ever 
really feel.’ 

“*T don’t think I am quite without feeling,’ she replied, 
‘you are a little difficult, you know.’ 

“ Difficult,’ he echoed in derision. He checked him- 
self and shrugged his shoulders. ‘You see, Jane, it’s all 
on the surface; I boast of my indifference. It’s the one 


15 


The Almond Tree 


rag of philosophy age denies no one. It is so easy to be 
heroic—debonair, iron-grey, fluent, dramatic—you know 
it’s captivation, perhaps? But after all, life’s comedy, 
when one stops smiling, is only the tepidest farce. Or 
the gilt wears off and the pinchbeck tragedy shows 
through. And so, as I say, we talk on, being past feeling. 
One by one our hopes come home to roost, our delusions 
find themselves out, and the mystery proves to be nothing 
but sleight-of-hand. It’s age, my dear Jane—age; it 
turns one to stone. With you young people life’s a 
dream; ask Nicholas here!’ He shrugged his shoulders, 
adding under his breath, ‘But one wakes on a devilish hard 
pallet.’ 

““Of course,’ said Jane slowly, ‘you are only talking 
cleverly, and then it does not matter whether it’s true or 
not, I suppose. I can’t say. I don’t think you mean it, 
and so it comes to nothing. I can’t and won’t believe 
you feel so littlek—I can’t.’ She continued to smile, yet 
I fancied, with the brightness of tears in her eyes. ‘It’s 
all mockery and make-believe; we are not the miserable 
slaves of time you try to fancy. There must be some 
way to win through.’ She turned away, then added 
slowly, ‘You ask me to be fearless, sincere, to speak my 
heart; I wonder, do you?” 

“My father did not look at her, appeared not to have 
seen the hand she had half held out to him, and as swiftly 
withdrawn. ‘The truth is, Jane,’ he said slowly, ‘I am 
past sincerity now. And as for heart it is a quite dis- 
credited organ at forty. Life, thought, selfishness, 
egotism, call it what you will; they have all done their 
worst with me; and I really haven’t the sentiment to pre- 
tend that they haven’t. And when bright youth and senti- 
16 


The Almond Tree 


ment are gone; why, go too, dear lady! Existence proves 
nothing but brazen inanity afterwards. But there’s al- 
ways that turning left to the dullest and dustiest road— 
oblivion.’ He remained silent a moment. Silence deep 
and strange lay all around us. The air was still, the 
wintry sky unalterably calm. And again that low dis- 
passionate voice continued: ‘It’s only when right seems 
too easy a thing, too trivial, and not worth the doing; and 
wrong a foolish thing—too dull. . . . There, take care of 
her, Nicholas; take care of her, “snips and snails,” you 
know. Au revoir, pon my word, I almost wish it was 
good-bye.’ 

“Jane Grey regarded him attentively. ‘So then do I,’ 
she replied in a low voice, ‘for I shall never understand 
you; perhaps I should hate to understand you.’ 

“My father turned with an affected laugh, and left us. 

“Miss Grey and I walked slowly along beside the frosty 
bulrushes until we came to the wood. The bracken and 
heather were faded. The earth was dark and rich with 
autumnal rains. Fir-cones lay on the moss beneath the 
dark green branches. It was all now utterly silent in the 
wintry afternoon. Far away rose tardily, and alighted, 
the hoarse rooks upon the ploughed earth; high in the 
pale sky passed a few on ragged wing. 

“What does my father mean by wishing it was good- 
bye?’ I said. 

“But my companion did not answer me in words. She 
clasped my hand; she seemed very slim and gracious 
walking by my side on the hardened ground. My mother 
was small now and awkward beside her in my imagina- 
tion. I questioned her about the ice, about the red sky, 
and if there was any mistletoe in the woods. Sometimes 


17 


The Almond Tree 


she, in turn, asked me questions too, and when I answered 
them we would look at each other and smile, and it seemed 
it was with her as it was with me—of the pure gladness 
I found in her company. In the middle of our walk to 
the Thorns she bent down in the cold twilight, and putting 
her hands on my shoulders, ‘My dear, dear Nicholas,’ she 
said, ‘you must be a good son to your mother—brave and 
kind; will you? 

“He hardly ever speaks to mother now,’ I answered 
instinctively. 

“She pressed her lips to my cheek, and her cheek was 
cold against mine, and she clasped her arms about me. 
‘Kiss me,’ she said. ‘We must do our best, mustn’t we? 
she pleaded, still holding me. I looked mournfully into 
the gathering darkness, ‘That’s easy when you’re grown 
up,’ I said. She laughed and kissed me again, and then 
we took hands and ran till we were out of breath, towards 
the distant lights of the Thorns. . . 

“T had been some time in bed, lying awake in the 
warmth, when my mother came softly through the dark- 
ness into my room. She sat down at the bedside, breath- 
ing hurriedly. ‘Where have you been all the evening?” 
she said. 

““Miss Grey asked me to stay to tea,’ I answered. 

“Did I give you permission to go to tea with Miss 
Grey?” 

“T made no answer. 

““Tf you go to that house again, I shall beat you. You 
hear me, Nicholas? Alone, or with your father, if you go 
there again, without my permission, I shall beat you. 
You have not been whipped for a long time, have you?’ 
I could not see her face, but her head was bent towards 
18 


The Almond Tree 


me in the dark, as she sat—almost crouched—on my bed- 
side. 

“I made no answer. But when my mother had gone, 
without kissing me, I cried noiselessly on into my pillow. 
Something had suddenly flown out of memory, never to 
sing again. Life had become a little colder and stranger. 
I had always been my own chief company; now another 
sentimental barrier had risen between the world and me, 
past its heedlessness, past my understanding to break 
down. 

“Hardly a week passed now without some bitter quarrel, 
I seemed ever to be stealing out of sound of angry voices; 
ever fearful of being made the butt of my father’s serene 
taunts, of my mother’s passions and desperate remorse. 
He disdained to defend himself against her, never rea- 
soned with her; he merely shrugged his shoulders, denied 
her charges, ignored her anger ; coldly endeavouring only 
to show his indifference, to conceal by every means in his 
power his own inward weariness and vexation. I saw 
this, of course, only vaguely, yet with all a child’s cer- 
tainty of insight, though I rarely knew the cause of my 
misery ; and I continued to love them both in my selfish 
fashion, not a whit the less. 

“At last, on St. Valentine’s Day, things came to a worse 
pass than before. It had always been my father’s custom 
to hang my mother a valentine on the handle of her little 
parlour door, a string of pearls, a fan, a book of poetry, 
whatever it might be. She came down early this morning, 
and sat in the window-seat, looking out at the falling snow. 
She said nothing at breakfast, only feigned to eat, lifting 
her eyes at intervals to glance at my father with a strange 
intensity, as if of hatred, tapping her foot on the floor. 

19 


The Almond Tree 


He took no notice of her, sat quiet and moody with his 
own thoughts. I think he had not really forgotten the 
day, for I found long afterwards in his old bureau a brace- 
let purchased but a week before with her name written 
on a scrap of paper, inside the case. Yet it seemed to be 
the absence of this little gift that had driven my mother 
beyond reason. 

“Towards evening, tired of the house, tired of being 
alone, I went out and played awhile listlessly in the snow. 
At nightfall I went in; and in the dark heard angry voices. 
My father came out of the dining-room. and looked at 
me in silence, standing in the gloom of the wintry dusk. 
My mother followed him. I can see her now, leaning in 
the doorway, white with rage, her eyes ringed and dark- 
ened with continuous trouble, her hand trembling. 

“Tt shall learn to hate you,’ she cried in a low, dull 
voice. ‘I will teach it every moment to hate and despise 
you as I— Oh, J hate and despise you.’ 

“My father looked at her calmly and profoundly before 
replying. He took up a cloth hat and brushed it with his 
hand. ‘Very well then, you have chosen,’ he said coldly. 
‘It has always lain with you. You have exaggerated, you 
have raved, and now you have said what can never be re- 
called or forgotten. Here’s Nicholas. Pray do not 
imagine, however, that I am defending myself. I have 
nothing to defend. I think of no one but myself—no one. 
Endeavour to understand me, no one. Perhaps, indeed, 
you yourself—no more than— But words again—the dull 
old round!’ He made a peculiar gesture with his hand. 
‘Well, life is ...ach! I have done. So be it.” He 
stood looking out of the door. ‘You see, it’s snowing,’ 
he said, as if to himself. 

20 


The Almond Tree 


“All the long night before and all day long, snow had 
been falling continuously. The air was wintry and cold. 
I could discern nothing beyond the porch but a gloomy 
accumulation of cloud in the twilight air now darkened 
with the labyrinthine motion of the snow. My father 
glanced back for an instant into the house, and, as I 
fancy, regarded me with a kind of strange, close earnest- 
ness. But he went out and his footsteps were instantly 
silenced. 

“My mother peered at me in terrible perplexity, her 
eyes wide with terror and remorse. ‘What? What?’ 
she said. I stared at her stupidly. Three snowflakes 
swiftly and airily floated together into the dim hall from 
the gloom without. She clasped her hand over her mouth. 
Overburdened her fingers seemed to be, so slender were 
they, with her many rings. 

“*Nicholas, Nicholas, tell me; what was I saying? 
What was I saying?’ She stumbled hastily to the door. 
‘Arthur, Arthur,’ she cried from the porch, ‘It’s St. Valen- 
tine’s Day, that was all I meant; come back, come back!’ 
But perhaps my father was already out of hearing; I do 
not think he made any reply. 

“My mother came in doubtfully, resting her hand on the 
wall. And she walked very slowly and laboriously up- 
stairs. While I was standing at the foot of the stair- 
case, looking out across the hall into the evening, Martha 
climbed primly up from the kitchen with her lighted taper, 
shut-to the door and lit the hall lamp. Already the good 
smell of the feast cooking floated up from the kitchen, 
and gladdened my spirits. ‘Will he come back?’ Martha 
said, looking very scared in the light of her taper. ‘It’s 
such a fall of snow, already it’s a hand’s breadth on the 

21 


The Almond Tree 


window-sill. Oh, Master Nicholas, it’s a hard world 
for us women.’ She followed my mother upstairs, carry- 
ing light to all the gloomy upper rooms. 

“T sat down in the window-seat of the dining-room, 
and read in my picture-book as well as I could by the 
flame-light. By and by, Martha returned to lay the table. 

“As far back as brief memory carried me, it had been 
our custom to make a Valentine’s feast on the Saint’s day. 
This was my father’s mother’s birthday also. When she 
was alive I well remember her visiting us with her 
companion, Miss Schreiner, who talked in such good- 
humoured English to me. This same anniversary had 
last year brought about a tender reconciliation between my 
father and mother, after a quarrel that meant how little 
then. And I remember on this day to have seen the first 
fast-sealed buds upon the almond-tree. We would have 
a great spangled cake in the middle of the table, with 
marzipan and comfits, just as at Christmastide. And 
when Mrs. Merry lived in the village her little fair daugh- 
ters used to come in a big carriage to spend the evening 
with us and to share my Valentine’s feast. 

“But all this was changed now. My wits were sharper, 
but I was none the less only the duller for that; my hopes 
and dreams had a little fallen and faded. I looked idly 
at my picture-book, vaguely conscious that its colours 
pleased me less than once upon a time; that I was rather 
tired of seeing them, and they just as tired of seeing me. 
And yet I had nothing else to do, so I must go on with a 
hard face, turning listlessly the pictured pages. 

“About seven o’clock my mother sent for me. I found 
her sitting in her bedroom. Candles were burning before 
the looking-glass. She was already dressed in her hand- 
22 


The Almond Tree 


some black silk gown, and wearing her pearl necklace. 
She began to brush my hair, curling its longer ends with 
her fingers, which she moistened in the pink bowl that was 
one of the first things I had set eyes on in this world. 
She put me on a clean blouse and my buckle shoes, talking 
to me the while, almost as if she were telling me a story. 
Then she looked at herself long and earnestly in the glass ; 
throwing up her chin with a smile, as was a habit of hers 
in talk. I wandered about the room, fingering the little 
toilet-boxes and nick-nacks on the table. By mischance 
I upset one of these, a scent-bottle that held rose-water. 
The water ran out and filled the warm air with its fra- 
grance. ‘You foolish, clumsy boy!’ said my mother, and 
slapped my hand. More out of vexation and tiredness 
than because of the pain, I began to cry. And then, with 
infinite tenderness, she leaned her head on my shoulder. 
‘Mother can’t think very well just now,’ she said; and 
cried so bitterly in silence that I was only too ready to 
extricate myself and run away when her hold on me 
relaxed. 

“T climbed slowly upstairs to Martha’s bedroom, and 
kneeling on a cane chair looked out of the window. The 
flakes had ceased to fall now, although the snowy heath 
was encompassed in mist; above the snow the clouds had 
parted, drifting from beneath the stars, and these in their 
constellations were trembling very brightly, and here 
and there burned one of them in solitude larger and 
wilder in its shining than the rest. But though I did not 
tire of looking out of the window, my knees began to ache; 
and the little room was very cold and still so near the 
roof. So I went down to the dining-room, with all its 
seven candlesticks kindled, seeming to my unaccustomed 

23 


The Almond Tree 


eyes a very splendid blaze out of the dark. My mother 
was kneeling on the rug by the fireside. She looked very 
small, even dwarfish, I thought. She was gazing into the 
flames; one shoe curved beneath the hem of her gown, 
her chin resting on her hand. 

“T surveyed the table with its jellies and sweetmeats 
and glasses and fruit, and began to be very hungry, so 
savoury was the smell of the turkey roasting downstairs. 
Martha knocked at the door when the clock had struck 
eight. 

“inner is ready, Ma’am.’ 

“My mother glanced fleetingly at the clock. ‘Just a 
little, only a very little while longer, tell Mrs. Ryder; your 
master will be home in a minute.’ She rose and placed 
the claret in the hearth at some distance from the fire. 

“Ts it nicer warm, mother?’ I said. She looked at me 
with startled eyes and nodded. ‘Did you hear anything, 
Nicholas? Run to the door and listen; was that a sound 
of footsteps?’ 

“T opened the outer door and peered into the dark- 
ness; but it seemed the world ended here with the warmth 
and the light: beyond could extend only winter and si- 
lence, a region that, familiar though it was to me, seemed 
now to terrify me like an enormous sea. 

“It’s stopped snowing,’ I said, “but there isn’t anybody 
there ; nobody at all, mother.’ 

“The hours passed heavily from quarter on to quarter. 
The turkey, I grieved to hear, was to be taken out of the 
oven, and put away to cool in the pantry. I was bidden 
help myself to what I pleased of the trembling jellies, and 
delicious pink blanc-mange. Already midnight would be 
the next hour to be chimed. I felt sick, yet was still 


24 


The Almond Tree 


hungry and very tired. The candles began to burn low. 
‘Leave me a little light here, then,’ my mother said at last 
to Martha, ‘and go to bed. Perhaps your master has 
missed his way home in the snow.’ But Mrs. Ryder had 
followed Martha into the room. 

“You must pardon my interference, Ma’am, but it 
isn’t right, it isn’t really right of you to sit up longer. 
Master will not come back, maybe, before morning. And 
I shouldn’t be doing my bounden duty, Ma’am, except I 
spoke my mind. Just now too, of all times.’ 

“Thank you very much, Mrs. Ryder,’ my mother an- 
swered simply, ‘but I would prefer not to go to bed yet. 
It’s very lonely on the heath at night. But I shall not 
want anything else, thank you.’ 

“Well, Ma’am, I’ve had my say, and done my con- 
science’s bidding. And I have brought you up this tum- 
bler of mulled wine; else you'll be sinking away or some- 
thing with fatigue.’ 

“My mother took the wine, sipped of it with a wan 
smile at Mrs. Ryder over the brim; and Mrs. Ryder re- 
tired with Martha. I don’t think they had noticed me 
sitting close in the shadow on my stool beside the table. 
But all through that long night, I fancy, these good souls 
took it in turn to creep down stealthily and look in on us; 
and in the small hours of the morning, when the fire had 
fallen low, they must have wrapped us both warm in 
shawls. They left me then, I think, to be my mother’s 
company. Indeed, I remember we spoke in the darkness, 
and she took my hand. 

“My mother and I shared the steaming wine together 
when they were gone; our shadows looming faintly huge 
upon the ceiling. We said very little, but I looked softly 


25 


The Almond Tree 


into her grey childish eyes, and we kissed one another 
kneeling there together before the fire. And afterwards, 
I jigged softly round the table, pilfering whatever sweet 
or savoury mouthful took my fancy. But by and by in 
tk2 silent house—a silence broken only by the fluttering 
of the flames, and the odd far-away stir of the frost, 
drowsiness vanquished me; I sat down by the fireside, 
leaning my head on a chair. And sitting thus, vaguely 
eyeing firelight and wavering shadow, I began to nod, 
and very soon dreams stalked in, mingling with reality. 

“It was early morning when I awoke, dazed and cold 
and miserable in my uncomfortable resting-place. The 
rare odour of frost was on the air. The ashes of the fire 
lay iron-grey upon the cold hearth. An intensely clear 
white ray of light leaned up through a cranny of the shut- 
ters to the cornice of the ceiling. I got up with difficulty. 
My mother was still asleep, breathing heavily, and as I 
stooped, regarding her curiously, I could almost watch 
her transient dreams fleeting over her face; and now she 
smiled faintly; and now she raised her eyebrows as if 
in some playful and happy talk with my father; then 
again utterly still darkness would descend on brow and lid 
and lip. 

“I touched her sleeve, suddenly conscious of my loneli- 
ness in the large house. Her face clouded instantly ; she 
sighed profoundly: ‘What?’ she said, ‘nothing—nothing ?” 
She stretched out her hand towards me; the lids drew 
back from eyes still blind from sleep. But gradually time 
regained its influence over her. She moistened her lips 
and turned to me, and suddenly, in a gush of agony, 
remembrance of the night returned to her. She hid her 
face in her hands, rocking her body gently to and fro; 
26 


The Almond Tree 


then rose and smoothed back her hair at the looking-glass. 
I was surprised to see no trace of tears on her cheeks. 
Her lips moved, as if unconsciously a heart worn out with 
grief addressed that pale reflection of her sorrow in the 
glass. I took hold of the hand that hung down listlessly 
on her silk skirt, and fondled it, kissing punctiliously each 
loose ring in turn. 

“But I do not think she heeded my kisses. So I re- 
turned to the table on which was still set out the mockery 
of our Valentine feast, strangely disenchanted in the 
chill dusk of daybreak. I put a handful of wine biscuits 
and a broken piece of cake in my pocket; for a determina- 
tion had taken me to go out on to the heath. My heart 
beat thick and fast in imagination of the solitary snow 
and of myself wandering in loneliness across its un- 
trampled surface. A project also was forming in my mind 
of walking over to the Thorns; for somehow I knew my 
mother would not scold or punish me that day. Perhaps, 
I thought, my father would be there. And I would tell 
Miss Grey all about my adventure of the night spent down 
in the dining-room. So moving very stealthily, and be- 
traying no eagerness, lest I should be forbidden to go, I 
stole at length unperceived from the room, and leaving 
the great hall door ajar, ran out joyously into the wintry 
morning. 

“Already dawn was clear and high in the sky, already 
the first breezes were moving in the mists; and breathed 
chill, as if it were the lingering darkness itself on my 
cheeks. The air was cold, yet with a fresh faint sweetness. 
The snow lay crisp across its perfect surface, mounded 
softly over the gorsebushes, though here and there a spray 
of parched blossom yet protruded from its cowl. Flaky 


27 


The Almond Tree 


particles of ice floated invisible in the air. I called out 
with pleasure to see the little ponds where the snow had 
been blown away from the black ice. I saw on the bushes, 
too, the webs of spiders stretched from thorn to thorn, and 
festooned with crystals of hoar-frost. I turned and 
counted as far as I could my footsteps leading back to the 
house, which lay roofed in gloomy pallor, dim and ob- 
scured in the darkened west. 

“A waning moon that had risen late in the night shone, 
it seemed, very near to the earth. But every moment light 
swept invincibly in, pouring its crystal like a river; and 
darkness sullenly withdrew into the north. And when at 
last the sun appeared, glittering along the rosy snow, I 
turned in an ecstasy and with my finger pointed him out, 
as if the house I had left behind me might view him with 
my own delight. Indeed, I saw its windows transmuted, 
and heard afar a thrush pealing in the bare branches of a 
pear-tree ; and a robin startled me, so suddenly shrill and 
sweet he broke into song from a snowy tuft of gorse. 

“TI was now come to the beginning of a gradual incline, 
from the summit of which I should presently descry in the 
distance the avenue of lindens that led towards the village 
from the margin of the heath. As I went on my way, 
munching my biscuits, looking gaily about me, I brooded 
deliciously on the breakfast which Miss Grey would 
doubtless sit me down to; and almost forgot the occasion 
of my errand, and the troubled house I had left behind 
me. At length I climbed to the top of the smooth ridge 
and looked down. At a little distance from me grew a 
crimson hawthorn-tree that often in past Aprils I had 
used for a green tent from the showers; but now it was 
28 


The Almond Tree 


closely hooded, darkening with its faint shadow the long 
expanse of unshadowed whiteness. Not very far from 
this bush I perceived a figure lying stretched along the 
snow and knew instinctively that this was my father 
lying there. 

“The sight did not then surprise or dismay me. It 
seemed but the lucid sequel to that long heavy night- 
watch, to all the troubles and perplexities of the past. I 
felt no sorrow, but stood beside the body, regarding it 
nly with deep wonder and a kind of earnest curiosity, 
yet perhaps with a remote pity too, that he could not see 
me in the beautiful morning. His grey hand lay arched 
in the snow, his darkened face, on which showed a smear 
of dried blood, was turned away a little as if out of the 
oblique sunshine. I understood that he was dead, was 
already loosely speculating on what changes it would 
make; how I should spend my time; what would happen 
in the house now that he was gone, his influence, his 
authority, his discord. I remembered, too, that I was 
alone, was master of this immense secret, that I must go 
home sedately, as if it were a Sunday, and in a low voice 
tell my mother, concealing any exultation I might feel 
in the office. I imagined the questions that would be 
asked me, and was considering the proper answers to 
make to them, when my morbid dreams were suddenly 
broken in on by Martha Rodd. She stood in my foot- 
steps, looking down on me from the ridge from which I 
had but just now descended. She hastened towards me, 
stooping a little as if she carried a burden, her mouth 
ajar, her forehead wrinkled beneath its wispy light brown 
hair. 


29 


The Almond Tree 


“Took, Martha, look,’ I cried, ‘I found him in the 
snow ; he’s dead.’ And suddenly a bond seemed to snap 
in my heart. The beauty and solitude of the morning, the 
perfect whiteness of the snow—it was all an uncouth 
mockery against me—a subtle and quiet treachery. The 
tears gushed into my eyes and in my fear and affliction I 
clung to the poor girl, sobbing bitterly, protesting my grief, 
hiding my eyes in terror from that still, inscrutable shape. 
She smoothed my hair with her hand again and again, 
her eyes fixed; and then at last, venturing cautiously 
nearer, she stooped over my father. ‘O Master Nicholas,’ 
she said, ‘his poor dark hair! What will we do now? 
What will your poor mamma do now, and him gone?” 
She hid her face in her hands, and our tears gushed out 
anew. 

“But my grief was speedily forgotten. The novelty 
of being left entirely alone, my own master; to go where 
I would; to do as I pleased; the experience of being pitied 
most when I least needed it, and then—when misery and 
solitariness came over me like a cloud—of being utterly 
ignored, turned my thoughts gradually away. My father’s 
body was brought home and laid in my mother’s little 
parlour that looked out on to the garden and the snowy 
orchard. The house was darkened. I took a secret 
pleasure in peeping in on the sunless rooms, and stealing 
from door to door through corridors screened from the 
daylight. My mother was ill; and for some inexplicable 
reason I connected her illness with the bevy of gentlemen 
dressed in black who came one morning to the house and 
walked away together over the heath. Finally Mrs. Mar- 
shall drove up one afternoon from Islington, and by the 
bundles she had brought with her and her grained box 


30 


The Almond Tree 


with the iron handles I knew that she was come, as once 
before in my experience, to stay. 

“T was playing on the morrow in the hall with my leaden 
soldiers when there came into my mind vaguely the voices 
of Mrs. Ryder and of Mrs. Marshall gossiping together 
on their tedious way upstairs from the kitchen. 

“*No, Mrs. Marshall, nothing,’ I heard Mrs. Ryder 
saying, ‘not one word, not one word. And now the poor 
dear lady left quite alone, and only the doctor to gainsay 
that fatherless mite from facing the idle inquisitive ques- 
tions of all them strangers. It’s neither for me nor you, 
Mrs. Marshall, to speak out just what comes into our 
heads here and now. The ways of the Almighty are past 
understanding—but a kinder at heart never trod this 
earth.’ 

“ *Ah,’ said Mrs. Marshall. 

““I knew to my sorrow,’ continued Mrs. Ryder, ‘there 
was words in the house; but there, wheresoever you be 
there’s that. Human beings ain’t angels, married or 
single, and in every—’ 

“*Wasn’t there talk of some—? insinuated Mrs. Mar- 
shall discreetly. 

“*Talk, Mrs. Marshall,’ said Mrs. Ryder, coming to a 
standstill, ‘I scorn the word! A pinch of truth in a hogs- 
head of falsehood. I don’t gainsay it even. I just shut my 
ears—there—with the dead.’ Mrs. Marshall had opened 
her mouth to reply when I was discovered, crouched as 
small as possible at the foot of the stairs. 

“Well, here’s pitchers!’ said Mrs. Marshall pleasantly. 
‘And this is the poor fatherless manikin, I suppose. It’s 
hard on the innocent, Mrs. Ryder, and him grown such 
a sturdy child too, as I said from the first. Well, now, 

31 


The Almond Tree 


and don’t you remember me, little man, don’t you remem- 
ber Mrs. Marshall? He ought to, now!” 

“‘He’s a very good boy in general,’ said Mrs. Ryder, 
‘and I’m sure I hope and pray he’ll grow up to be a com- 
fort to his poor widowed mother, if so be—’ They 
glanced earnestly at one another, and Mrs. Marshall 
stooped with a sigh of effort and drew a big leather 
purse from a big loose pocket under her skirt, and 
selected a bright ha’penny from among its silver and 
copper. 

““T make no doubt he will, poor mite,’ she said cheer- 
fully; I took the ha’penny in silence and the two women 
passed slowly upstairs. 

“In the afternoon, in order to be beyond call of Martha, 
I went out on to the heath with a shovel, intent on build- 
ing a great tomb in the snow. Yet more snow had fallen 
during the night; it now lay so deep as to cover my socks 
above my shoes. I laboured very busily, shovelling, 
beating, moulding, stamping. So intent was I that I did 
not see Miss Grey until she was close beside me. I looked 
up from the snow and was surprised to find the sun al- 
ready set and the low mists of evening approaching. 
Miss Grey was veiled and dressed in furs to the throat. 
She drew her ungloved hand from her muff. 

“ *Nicholas,’ she said in a low voice. 

“T stood for some reason confused and ashamed with- 
out answering her. She sat down on my shapeless mound 
of snow, and took me by the hand. Then she drew up 
her veil, and I saw her face pale and darkened, and her 
dark eyes gravely looking into mine. 

““My poor Nicholas,’ she said, and continued to gaze 
at me with her warm hand clasping mine. ‘What can I 


32 


The Almond Tree 


say? What canIdo? Isn't it very, very lonely out here 
in the snow?” 

““T didn’t feel lonely much,’ I answered, ‘I was making 
a—I was playing at building.’ 

“*And I am sitting on your beautiful snow-house, 
then?’ she said, smiling sadly, her hand trembling upon 
mine. 

“Tt isn’t a house,’ I answered, turning away. 

“She pressed my hand on the furs at her throat. 

“Poor cold, blue hands,’ she said. ‘Do you like play- 
ing alone?’ 

“*T like you being here,’ I answered. ‘I wish you would 
come always, or at least sometimes.’ 

“She drew me close to her, smiling, and bent ard kissed 
my head. 

“There, she said, ‘I am here now.’ 

“‘*Mother’s ill,’ I said. 

“She drew back and looked out over the heath towards 
the house. 

“*They have put my father in the little parlour, in his 
coffin; of course, you know he’s dead, and Mrs. Mar- 
shall’s come; she gave me a ha’penny this morning. Dr. 
Graham gave me a whole crown, though.’ I took it out 
of my breeches pocket and showed it her. 

“*That’s very, very nice,’ she said. ‘What lots of nice 
things you can buy with it! And, look, I am going to 
give you a little keepsake too, between just you and me.’ 

“Tt was a small silver box that she drew out of her 
muff, and embossed in the silver of the lid was a crucifix. 
‘I thought, perhaps, I should see you today, you know,’ 
she continued softly. ‘Now, who’s given you this?’ she 
said, putting the box into my hand. 

33 


The Almond Tree 


“*You,’ I answered softly. 

“*And who am I?’ 

“ ‘Miss Grey,’ I said. 

“Your friend, Jane Grey,’ she repeated, as if she were 
fond of her own name. ‘Say it now—always my friend, 
Jane Grey.’ 

“T repeated it after her. 

“And now,’ she continued, ‘tell me which room is— 
is the little parlour. Is it that small window at the corner 
under the ivy?’ 

“T shook my head. 

“Which? she said in a whisper, after a long pause. 

“T twisted my shovel in the snow. ‘Would you like to 
see my father?’ I said. ‘I am sure, you know, Martha 
would not mind; and mother’s in bed.’ She started, and 
looked with quiet, dark eyes into my face. ‘Where?’ 
she said, without stirring. 

“<Tt’s at the back, a little window that comes out—if 
you were to come this evening, I would be playing in the 
hall; I always play in the hall, after tea, if I can; and 
now, always. Nobody would see you at all, you know.’ 

“She sighed. ‘O what are you saying?’ she said, and 
stood up, drawing down her veil. 

““But would you like to? I repeated. She stooped 
suddenly, pressing her veiled face to mine. ‘I’ll come, 
Tl come,’ she said, her face utterly changed so close to 
my eyes. ‘We can both still—still be loyal to him, can’t 
we, Nicholas? 

“She walked away quickly, towards the pool and the 
little darkened wood. I looked after her and knew that 
she would be waiting there alone till evening. I looked 
at my silver box with great satisfaction, and after opening 


34 


The Almond Tree 


it, put it into my pocket with my crown piece and my 
ha’penny, and continued my building for awhile. 

“But now zest for it was gone; and I began to feel 
cold, the frost closing in keenly as darkness gathered. 
So I went home. 

“My silence and suspicious avoidance of scrutiny and 
question passed unnoticed. Indeed, I ate my tea in soli- 
tude, except that now and again one or other of the 
women would come bustling in on some brief errand. A 
peculiar suppressed stir was in the house. I wondered 
what could be the cause of it; and felt a little timid and 
anxious of my project being discovered. 

“None the less I was playing in the evening, as I had 
promised, close to the door, alert to catch the faintest 
sign of the coming of my visitor. 

“*Run down in the kitchen, dearie,’ said Martha. 
Her cheeks were flushed. She was carrying a big can 
of steaming water. ‘You must keep very, very quiet 
this evening, and go to bed like a good boy, and perhaps 
tomorrow morning I'll tell you a great, great secret.” She 
kissed me with hasty rapture. I was not especially in- 
quisitive of her secret just then, and eagerly promised 
to be quite quiet if I might continue to play where I was. 

“Well, very, very quiet then, and you mustn’t let Mrs. 
Marshall,’ she began, but hurried hastily away in answer 
to a peremptory summons from upstairs. 

“Almost as soon as she was gone I heard a light rap 
on the door. It seemed that Jane Grey brought in with 
her the cold and freshness of the woods. I led the way 
on tiptoe down the narrow corridor and into the small 
silent room. The candles burned pure and steadfastly in 
their brightness. The air was still and languid with the 

35 


The Almond Tree 


perfume of flowers. Overhead passed light, heedful 
footsteps; but they seemed not a disturbing sound, only 
a rumour beyond the bounds of silence. 

““T am very sorry,’ I said, ‘but they have nailed it down. 
Martha says the men came this afternoon.’ 

“Miss Grey took a little bunch of snowdrops from her 
bosom, and hid them in among the clustered wreaths of 
flowers; and she knelt down on the floor, with a little 
silver cross which she sometimes wore pressed tight to 
her lips. I felt ill at ease to see her praying, and wished 
I could go back to my soldiers. But while I watched 
her, seeing in marvellous brilliancy everything in the little 
room, and remembering dimly the snow lying beneath 
the stars in the darkness of the garden, I listened also 
to the quiet footsteps passing to and fro in the room 
above. Suddenly, the silence was broken by a small, 
continuous, angry crying. 

“Miss Grey looked up. Her eyes were very clear and 
wonderful in the candlelight. 

“What was that? she said faintly, listening. 

“T stared at her. The cry welled up anew, piteously, 
as if of a small remote helpless indignation. 

“* Why it sounds just like—a little baby,’ I said. 

“She crossed herself hastily and arose. ‘Nicholas!’ 
she said in a strange, quiet, bewildered voice—yet her face 
was most curiously bright. She looked at me lovingly 
and yet so strangely I wished I had not let her come in. 

“She went out as she had entered. I did not so much 
as peep into the darkness after her, but busy with a hun- 
dred thoughts returned to my play. 

“Long past my usual bed-time, as I sat sipping a mug 
36 


The Almond Tree 


of hot milk before the glowing cinders of the kitchen fire, 
Martha told me her secret... . 


“So my impossible companion in the High Street 
yesterday was own and only brother to your crazy old 
friend, Richard,” said the Count. “His only brother,” 
he added in a muse. 


37 


The Count’s Courtship 


T had long been our custom to muse and gossip 
i through the summer evening twilight, and now we 

had lingered so late that the darkness of night had 
come into the room. But two, at least, of the three of 
us were well content so to moon on, the fitful summer 
lightnings shining pale on our faces as we sat at the win- 
dow. As for myself, I can only confess that with every 
tick of the clock I had been more and more inclined to 
withdraw, and so give the others the opportunity and 
ease of my absence. But likely enough, had I done so, 
the Count would have bluffly recalled me, or my aunt 
would have roused herself from her reverie to candles 
and common sense. 

So I held my tongue, after my aunt’s example, who 
sat, still and erect, looking out through her glasses, her 
hands upon the arms of her chair, while the Count spoke 
seldom, and that generally in a kind of inarticulate dis- 
course with himself. 

There was plenty to busy my thoughts. The Count 
was evidently on the point of abandoning his long- 
cherished platonicism. My aunt, of late, had been far 
from her usual self, now brisk, now apathetic; but neither 
and nothing for long together. Matrimony was in the 
air, and I must soon be an exile. Soon, doubtless, a wife 
(and how capable and prudent a.wife) would relieve me 
38 


The Count’s Courtship 


of my duties to my eloquent, arbitrary old friend. I had 
become superfluous. The most amiable of chaperons 
now found himself gradually converted into a tartish 
gooseberry. The quick lightning had but just now illu- 
mined the Count’s face as he bent towards her. In his 
eyes was inspiration. And my aunt’s almost uncivil 
withdrawal of her hand was evidently all but the last 
capricious valedictory gesture to middle age and widow- 
hood. 

My aunt apparently suddenly realized this, and the 
hazard of keeping silent. She rose abruptly, smoothing 
out her silk skirts as if she had thought to herself, “Well, 
that’s done with.” 

“T fear I was nodding, Count; I beg pardon,” she said 
in a rather faint voice, and behind the semblance of a 
yawn. “The air’s close and heavy. It seems a storm’s 
gathering.” 

We neither of us answered her. 

“Richard,” she said, “oblige me by ringing the bell.” 

The Count deftly intercepted me. 

“It’s a waste of peace and quietness,” said he appeal- 
ingly. “Won't you sit but a few minutes longer? Who 
knows: not so many days may be left, with such quiet 
ends—the twilight, summer? Richard shall fetch you a 
shawl. We'll take a turn in the garden.” 

“Very pretty sentiments, Count,” answered my aunt, 
“but you must take pity on old bones. Upstairs must be 
my garden tonight. I’m tired and drowsy—it’s been a 
hot, dusty day—and I think I'll be getting to my rest 
while the thunder is out of hearing.” 

Soon candles gleamed on the wall; the pensive romantic 
twilight of evening was over. My aunt turned hér face 

39 


The Count’s Courtship 


slowly, even reluctantly, I fancied, into their radiance. 
She looked pale, tired; and seemed disturbed and per- 
plexed. 

“T think, Richard, I’d like your arm up the stairs.” 
Again the Count forestalled me. “Bless me, Count,” 
said my aunt in shaken, almost querulous tones, “you’ll 
be completely spoiling me with your—your kindness. I 
wouldn’t rob you of your peace and quiet for all the 
world. There, Richard, that’s it.” 

She leaned a little heavily on my arm, walking slowly 
and deliberately. In the doorway she turned; hesitated. 

“And now, good-night, my dear Count,” she said. 

The Count stood, stark as a patriot, against the wall. 
It was not to be “roses all the way.” 

“Good-night, my dear lady,” said he. 

As we slowly ascended the stairs I could hardly refrain 
from gently taxing my aunt with what seemed very like 
coquetry. Yet something in her words had set me doubt- 
ing. And as I now looked sidelong at her, I fancied I 
could detect a gravity in her face which no mere feminine 
caprice could cause or explain. At her bedroom door I 
handed her the candle. 

“T wish you could have stayed a little,’ I mumbled 
inanely ; “he really meant it, you know. I ought to have 
realized that . . .” 

She took the candle, staring vacantly into my face the 
while. 

“T should like to see you, Richard, in about ten minutes’ 
time,” she said. “Step up cautiously to my room here. 
I shall be awaiting you. I want a few minutes’ quiet, 
sensible talk—you understand ?” 

And with that she went in and shut the door. 


40 


The Count’s Courtship 


“Richard, Richard,” I heard the Count’s stealthy whis- 
per at the foot of the stairs; but I made a clatter with the 
door handle, pretending not to have heard him. 

I sat in my bedroom speculating in vain what my aunt 
wanted with me. 

In ten minutes I tapped softly, and she herself opened 
the door. She was attired in a voluminous dressing- 
gown of scarlet flannel; her hair was loosely plaited and 
looped up on her shoulders, with less of grey in it than 
I had supposed. She shut the door after me, and rather 
stiffly signed to me to sit down. 

“T’ll trouble you, please, to speak rather softly, Rich- 
ard,” she said, “because my window is open for air, and 
the Count is walking in the garden.” She seated herself 
on a stiff bedroom chair, clasping her hands in her ample 
lap. “I’ve called you in, my boy, to tell you that I am go- 
ing to leave here tomorrow.” 

I leaned forward to speak, but she peremptorily waved 
me back. “Janet has ordered a cab for me; it will be at 
the door at eleven o’clock in the morning. My trunks— 
these two, just what I shall require—are packed and ready. 
Janet will see to the rest. And I'll ask you to be kind 
enough to send the others to me by the railway before the 
end of the week. See that they’re securely locked and 
corded ; the keys are under the clock there. What’s more 
—I want you to take the Count for a walk early to- 
morrow morning, and not to return with him until lunch- 
eon, when I shall be—when I shall be, well—out of the 
house. Don’t keep on opening your mouth, Richard; it 
distracts me. Then in some sort of explanation you are 
to tell him that his hospitality was so—so congenial to 
me that I hadn’t the heart nor the words either—to say 

41 


The Count’s Courtship 


good-bye. Tell him [ll write good-bye. . . . Is that per- 
fectly clear, now?” 

A languid breath of air gently lifted the white blind, 
as if to cool the flush that had spread over my aunt’s 
cheek. Her face was inscrutable. 

“What address did you say for the boxes?” 

“Bless the boy! send them home.” 

“Very well, Aunt Lucy,” I answered, and rose from 
my chair. My aunt lifted her hand, and let it fall again 
into her lap. 

“Ts there anything else?” I said. 

The inscrutability of her expression angered and 
baffled me. She continued to look at me with an open 
solemnity, but as if I were a hundred miles away. 

“Why do you pick and choose your words, make such 
a pretence, Richard, when you might speak out?” 

“<Pretence, Aunt Lucy?” 

“Tf an old woman came in such straits to me, and I 
was a tolerably sensible young man like yourself, I hope 
and trust I’d use my wits to better purpose. I am in 
some anxiety. You see it. You are not blind. But 
you are saying to yourself, in your conceit and pique—‘I 
won’t ask her what it is.’ You think—‘T’ll wait for the 
old lady’s confession; it’s bound to come.’ I ask you 
candidly, is that open and manly? Is that the English 
frankness and chivalry we never weary of boasting about? 
Do you suppose that mere cleverness watched over your 
cradle? Do you think mere cleverness will ever win 
you a wife? Would—would the Count?” 

Colour once more had welled into her cheeks, and her 
carpet-slippered foot was thrust impatiently out from be- 
neath her dressing-gown. 


42 


The Count’s Courtship 


“T did not suppose you wished me to intrude,” I stam- 
mered. “You have your own reasons, I assume, for 
ordering me about. I assume you had your own reasons, 
too, for not taking me into your confidence. I am sorry, 
Aunt Lucy, but I don’t see what else I could have done.” 

“Sit down, Richard,” she said. 

“Look here, Aunt Lucy,” I interposed a little hotly, 
“you ask me to speak out. You’ve said a good many 
things a fellow would resent pretty warmly from—any one 
else. Now let me have my say, too. And I can’t help it 
if I do offend you; or if you think I’m butting in on what 
doesn’t concern me. I say this—it’s a mean, shabby thing 
to treat the Count like this. You’ve talked and walked 
with him. You know what he thinks—what he feels. 
He’s not the unfeeling simpleton you think me. But he 
can’t help hoping. Now is it fair and square then to go 
off like this behind his back—because you daren’t meet 
him and brave him to his face? He simply can’t help 
himself. That’s the point. I’m not blind. You can’t ex- 
plain and you daren’t wait to be asked for an explanation. 
It’s simply selfishness, that’s what it is. And, what is 
worse, you don’t want to go.” I blundered on and on 
to the grim lady, venturing much further than I had ever 
dreamed of doing; and then fell suddenly silent. 

“Tn some respects, that is the truth, Richard,’ she 
said at last, quite gently; “I own that freely. But it’s 
not fear or pusillanimity, and no injury, my boy. I am 
in the right; and yet it’s true I daren’t go to him and tell 
him so. If I lifted a finger—if, just as I am, I walked 
downstairs and went out and took a turn with him in the 
garden, on the man’s arm—well, I ask you, What would 
he do?” 

43 


The Count’s Courtship 


“He’d pop the question,” I said vulgarly and resent- 
fully, “and you know it. And a jolly good thing too, 
for both of you. What’s more, you’ve never given him 
an atom of reason to suppose you wouldn’t accept him.” 

“I say that’s untrue, Richard. And who asked for 
your views on that, pray? Be smart, sir, in better season. 
The Count, you say, would ask me to be his wife—what 
then? I am not too old; I am not too feeble; I am a 
practical housekeeper! And—I like the man. He’d ask 
me to be his wife—and then—as I walked in the garden 
with him, I should be stumbling and peering, pushing and 
poking my way. Dark to me! Whatever the happiness 
within, Richard, you poor blind creature, don’t you see 
it? Can the Count marry a woman who’s all but eyeless, 
who can but glimmer today out of what will be sightless 
and hopeless as that night outside, tomorrow? I have 
been struggling against the truth. I like being here. I 
like— Oh, I have stayed too long. You stupid, short- 
sighted men! He has seen me day after day. He has 
seen me go fingering on from chair to chair. Was I 
hiding it? Do TI or do I not wear spectacles? Do they 
distort my eyes till I look like an owl ina belfry? Should 
I wear this hideous monstrosity ifi—you should have seen, 
you should have guessed.” 

I put my hand on my aunt’s as it lay on her knee, 

“Good Lord,’ I muttered, and choked into silence again. 

“That’s it, Richard, that’s common sense,” she said, 
squeezing my fingers. “It’s all perfectly plain. As duty 
always is, thank the Lord. He wants a bright, active, 
capable wife—if he wants any. A blind old woman can’t 
be that. She can’t be, even if she had the heart. I’ma 


44 


The Count’s Courtship 


silly, Richard, for all my sour ways. Poor man, poor 
volatile generous creature. He’s not quiet and stay-at- 
home, as his age should be. He’s all capers, and fancies, 
and—and romance. God bless me, romance! ... And 
that’s the end of it.” 

She stayed; and we heard a light restless footfall upon 
the gravel beneath the window. 

“T never thought I should be saying all this stuff to 
you; I had no intention, Richard. But you’re of my own 
blood, and that’s something. And now off to bed with 
you, and not another word. Out with him at ten, and 
back with him at twelve. And my boxes at the week’s 
end.” 

“Look here, my dear aunt—” I began. 

“You are going to tell me,” she said, “that it’s all my 
fancy; that my eyes are as good as yours; that I shall 
wreck our old friend’s happiness. My dear Richard, do 
you suppose that my questions to the little snuff-coloured 
oculist were not sharp and to the point? Do you think 
life has not given me the courage to know that one’s 
eyesight is at least as precious and mortal as one’s heart? 
Do you think that an old woman, who was never idle 
in learning, has not by this time read through and through 
your old friend’s warm, fickle, proud, fantastic heart? 
There are good things a woman can admire in a man, 
besides mere stubborn adoration. And the Count has 
most of ’em. So you see, you would have told me only 
what ninety-nine young men would have told me nearly 
as well. I think too much of you to listen to it. The 
hundredth for me. There, give me a kiss and go away, 
Richard. I wish to retire.” 

45 


The Count’s Courtship 


My aunt rose hastily, kissed me sharply on the cheek, 
hurried me out of the room, and locked the door after 
me. 

While sitting there in her presence, I had almost failed 
to see the folly of the business. Her pitiless common 
sense had made me an unwilling accomplice. But as I 
turned over our talk in my mind, I was tempted at once 
to betray her secret to the Count. He, too, could be res- 
olute and rational and inflexible at need. Nevertheless, 
I realized how futile, how fatal the attempt might prove. 

To the letter then, I determined to obey her, trusting to 
the Count’s genius and the placability of fate for a happier 
conclusion. And even at that—a young man a good deal 
incensed with the ridiculous obligations these two elderly 
victims had thrust upon him found sleep that night very 
stubborn of attainment. 

I had little expected to see my aunt at breakfast next 
' morning; but when the Count came in from the garden, 
hot and boisterous, she sat waiting for him, and greeted 
us with her usual cheerful gravity. Only too clearly, 
however, my new knowledge revealed the tragic truth of 
her secret of the night before. She leaned forward a 
little on the table, gazing steadily across it, her hands wan- 
dering lightly over the cups, already half endowed with 
the delicacy at length to come. Never had the Count been 
so high-spirited, and she answered him jest for jest. Yet 
not one sign did she vouchsafe to assure me of our 
compact. She acted her part without a symptom of 
flinching to the end. 

In a rather clumsy fashion, I fear, I at last proposed 
to the Count a walk over the Heath. 

“An excellent suggestion, Richard,” said my aunt 
46 


The Count’s Courtship 


cordially. “There, Count, put on your hat, and take your 
stick, and walk off the steam. It’s no use looking at me. 
I have business to attend to, so J can’t come.” 

But the Count was exceedingly unwilling to go. The 
garden held more charm for him, and better company. 
A faint groping uneasiness, too, showed itself in his fea- 
tures. 

But my aunt would heed no scruples, no reluctances. 
“When a woman wants a man out of the way, don’t you 
suppose, Count, that she knows best ?” she enquired lightly 
but firmly. “Now where’s your stick?” 

In her eagerness she stumbled against the door-post, 
and the Count caught her impulsively by the arm. Her 
cheek flushed crimson. For an instant I fancied that fate 
had indeed intervened. But the next minute the Count 
and I were hurried out of the house, and bound for the 
Heath. My aunt had herself shut the door, and, heavy 
with fears and forebodings, I supposed that this was the 
end of the matter. 

It was a quiet summer morning, the sunshine sweet 
with the nutty and almond scents of bracken and gorse. 
At first, in our walk, the Count was inclined to be satirical. 
He scoffed at every remark I made, and scoffed at his 
scoffing. But at the bottom of the hollow his mood 
swerved to the opposite extreme. He walked, bent 
morosely, without raising his eyes from the grass. His 
only answer to every little remark I volunteered was a 
shrug or a grunt. His pace diminished more and more 
until at last he suddenly stopped, as if some one had 
spoken to him. And he turned his face towards home. 

“What’s wrong?” he said to me. 

“Wrong?” said I. 

47 


The Count’s Courtship 


“T heard your aunt calling.” 

“Nonsense,” I said; “she’s two miles distant at least.” 

““Nonsense!’” said he angrily; “I say I heard her 
calling. Am I all skin and bone? I’m done with the 
Heath.” 

I remonstrated in vain. It only served to make things 
worse. At each word the Count’s disquietude increased, 
he was the more obstinately bent on returning. 

“Home, boy, home! T’ll not be gainsaid.” 

I threatened to go on alone; but the threat, I knew, 
was futile, and proved me at my last resource. 

It was not until we were within a few yards of the 
house that, on turning a corner, we came in sight of 
the cab. With a sagacity that almost amounted to divina- 
tion, the Count jumped at once to the cause of its pres- 
ence there. 

“What’s it mean?” he hoarsely shouted, and waved his 
stick in the air. ‘“What’s that cab mean, I say? What’s 
it mean? Have you no answer, eh?” But after that 
one swift white glance at my face, he said no more. 
“Bring that box into the house, sir,” he bawled to the 
cabman, “and drive your cab to the devil.” 

I followed him into the house, and the tempest of his 
wrath raged through it like a cloud. My aunt was not in 
the dining-room. Janet had fled away into the kitchen. 
And I suppose by this time my aunt had heard the uproar 
of his home-coming, for when the Count assailed her 
door it was secure, and she was in a stronghold. 

“Mrs. Lindsay! what’s this mean?” he shouted. “What 
have I done, that you should be leaving my house like 
this? Am I so far in my dotage that I must be cheated 
48 


The Count’s Courtship 


like a child? Is it open with me? You shall not go. 
You shall not go. I'll burn the cab first. You daren’t 
face me, Mrs. Lindsay.” 

“Count, Count,” said I, “every word—the neighbours.” 

“The neighbours! the neighbours!” his scorn broke over 
me. “Look to your own pottering milksop business, sir! 
Now, Mrs. Lindsay, now!” 

In envious admiration I heard my aunt open her door. 
For an instant there was no sound in the house. 

“Count,” she said, “I will just ask you to go quietly 
down to your study and remain there for five minutes. 
By that time I shall be ready to say good-bye to you.” 

“Lucy, my dear friend,” said the Count—and all the 
resentment was gone out of his voice—“I ask only one 
thing: you will not treat me like this?” 

“Five minutes, Count, five minutes,” said my aunt. 

The Count came downstairs. He paid no heed to me; 
went into his study and shut the door. The cabman was 
on the doorstep. 

“Richard,” said my aunt from the loop of the stairs, 
“the cabman will carry out my orders.” 

I went up slowly and tapped at my aunt’s door. She 
would not open to me. 

“You have failed, Richard, that is all; a man can’t do 
worse,” she called to me from the other side of the panels. 

“He insisted, aunt,” I pleaded. “I almost used force.” 

“T don’t doubt it,” she said; “you used all the force 
that was in you. There, leave me now. I have other 
things to think about.” 

“On my word of honour, believe me or not, Aunt Lucy,” 
I cried, “I have done my best. ‘I hear her calling’—that’s 

49 


The Count’s Courtship 


what he kept saying: and home he came. I would have 
given anything. Let me tell him. I saw his face just 
now. Aunt Lucy, he’s an old man—” 

“Listen, Richard,” she answered, and she was pressing 
close to the door. “Say no more. I spoke hastily. I 
have thought it out; the day will pass; and all the noise 
and fret over. But, but—are you there, Richard?” She 
whispered in so low a voice that I could scarcely catch 
the words, “I go because I’m tired of it all; want liberty, 
ease: tell him that. ‘Just like a woman!’ say; anything 
that sounds best to rid him of this—fancy. Do you see?— 
and not a single word about the eyes. Richard! do you 
see? You have failed me once. I am trusting you again. 
That’s all.” 

So I went down and sat a while with my own thoughts 
to entertain me, in the little room with the French win- 
dows and the stuffed birds. In a few minutes I heard my 
aunt’s footsteps descending the stairs. She was all but 
groping her way with extreme caution, step by step. Veil 
or bonnet, I know not what, had added years to her face. 
I had not heard the Count open his door. But in a flash 
I caught sight of him, on the threshold, stiff as a mute. 

“Lucy,” he said, “listen. For all that I said—for an 
old man’s noise and fury—forgive me! That is past. 
My dear friend, all that I ask now is this—will you be my 
wife?” 

My aunt’s eyebrows were arched above her spectacles. 
She smoothed her wrinkled forehead with her fingers. 
“What did you say, Count?” she said. 

“TI said I am sorry—beyond all words. And oh, my 
dear, dear lady, will you be my wife?” 

“Ach—nonsense, nonsense, old friend,” said my aunt. 


50 


The Count’s Courtship 


“And you and me so old and staid! Grey hairs. 
Withered sticks. From the bottom of my heart I thank 
you for the honour. But—why, Count, you discommode 
an—an old woman.” She laughed like a girl. 

And she pushed her gloved hand along the wall of the 
passage, moving very heedfully and slowly. “Richard, 
may I ask you just once more to support my poor gouty 
knees down these odious steps?” My aunt was speaking 
in a foreign tongue. The Count strode after us. 

“Ts this all?” said he, gazing into her face. 

“God bless the man !—would he stare me out of counte- 
nance?” Her hand felt limp and cold beneath her glove. 
And we went out of the house into the sunlight, and 
descended slowly to the cab. 

And that was the end of the matter. My aunt had 
divined the truth. Her volatile, fickle, proud, fantastic 
old friend moped for a while. But soon the intervention 
of scribbling, projects, books, and dissensions with his 
neighbours added this one more to many another romantic 
episode in his charming repertory of memories. More- 
over, had my aunt chosen to return, here was a brotherly 
affection, flavoured with a platonic piquancy, eager to 
welcome, to serve, and to entertain her. 

Not for many a year did I meet my aunt again. I twice 
ventured to call on her; but she was “out” to me. 
Rumours strayed my way at times of a soured blind old 
woman, for ever engaged in scandalous contention with 
the parents of her domestics; but me she altogether ig- 
nored. And then for a long time I feared to force myself 
on her memory. But when the end came, and the Count 
was speedily sinking, some odd remembrance of her 
troubled his sleep. He begged me to write to my aunt, 

51 


The Count’s Courtship 


to “ask her to come and share a last crust with an old, 
broken, toothless friend.” But my poor old friend died 
the next evening, and the last stillness had fallen upon 
the house before she could answer his summons. 

On the day following I was sitting in the empty and 
darkened dining-room, when I heard the sound of wheels, 
and somehow divining what they portended, I looked out 
through the Venetian blind. 

My aunt had come, as she had gone, in a hackney cab; 
and, refusing any assistance from the maid who was there 
with her, she stepped painfully down out of it, and, tap- 
ping the ground at her feet with her ebony stick, the 
wintry sun glinting red upon her blue spectacles as she 
moved, she began to climb the flight of stairs alone, with 
difficulty, but with a vigorous assurance. 

I was seized with dismay at the very sight of her. 
Something in her very appearance filled me with a sense 
of my own mere young-manliness and fatuity. I drew 
sharply back from the window; hesitated—in doubt 
whether to receive her myself, or to send for Mrs. Rodd. 
I peeped again. She had come on slowly. But now, 
midway up the steps, she paused, slowly turned herself 
about, and stretched out her hand towards the house. 

“Cabman, cabman’’—her words rang against the stucco 
walls—“is this the house? What’s wrong with the 
house ?” 

The cabman began to climb down from his box. 

“Agnes, do you hear me?” she cried with a shrill pierc- 
ing horror in her voice. “Agnes, Agnes—is the house 
dark?” 

“The blinds are all down, m’m,” answered the girl look- 
ing out of the window. 


52 


The Count’s Courtship 


My aunt turned her head slowly, and I could see her 
moving eyebrows arched high above her spectacles. And 
then she began to climb rapidly backwards down the steps 
in her haste to be gone. It was a ludicrous and yet a 
poignant and dreadful thing to see. I could refrain my- 
self no longer. 

But she was already seated in the cab before I could 
reach her. “Aunt, my dear Aunt Lucy,” I said at the 
window, peering into the musty gloom. “Won’t you 
please come into the house? I have many things—a ring 
—books—he spoke often—” 

She turned and confronted me, a very speechless en- 
treaty in her blind face—an entreaty not to me, for no 
earthly help, past all hope of answer, it seemed; and then, 
with an extraordinary certainty of aim, she began beating 
my hand that lay upon the narrow window-frame with 
the handle of her ebony stick. 

“Drive on, drive on!” she cried. “God bless the man, 
why doesn’t he drive on?’ The jet butterflies in her 
bonnet trembled above her crimsoned brow. The cabman 
brandished his whip. And that was quite the end. I 
never saw my aunt again. 


53 


The Looking-Glass 


OR an hour or two in the afternoon, Miss Lennox 
had always made it a rule to retire to her own 
room for a little rest, so that for this brief inter- 

val, at any rate, Alice was at liberty to do just what she 
pleased with herself. That “just what she pleased,” no 
doubt, was a little limited in range; and “with herself” 
was at best no very vast oasis amid its sands. 

She might, for example, like Miss Lennox, rest, too, if 
she pleased. Miss Lennox prided herself on her justice. 

But then, Alice could seldom sleep in the afternoon be- 
cause of her troublesome cough. She might at a pinch 
write letters, but they would need to be nearly all of them 
addressed to imaginary correspondents. And not even 
the most romantic of young human beings can write on 
indefinitely to one who vouchsafes no kind of an answer. 
The choice in fact merely amounted to that between being 
“in” or “out” (in any sense), and now that the severity 
of the winter had abated, Alice much preferred the soli- 
tude of the garden to the vacancy of the house. 

With rain came an extraordinary beauty to the narrow 
garden—its trees drenched, refreshed, and glittering at 
break of evening, its early flowers stooping pale above 
the darkened earth, the birds that haunted there singing 
as if out of a cool and happy cloister—the stormcock 
wildly jubilant. There was one particular thrush on one 


54 


The Looking-Glass 


particular tree which you might say all but yelled messages 
at Alice, messages which sometimes made her laugh, and 
sometimes almost ready to cry, with delight. 

And yet ever the same vague influence seemed to haunt 
her young mind. Scarcely so much as a mood; nothing 
in the nature of a thought; merely an influence—like that 
of some impressive stranger met—in a dream, say,—long 
ago, and now half-forgotten. 

This may have been in part because the low and found- 
ering wall between the empty meadows and her own re- 
cess of greenery had always seemed to her like the bound- 
ary between two worlds. On the one side freedom, the 
wild; on this, Miss Lennox, and a sort of captivity. 
There Reality; here (her “duties” almost forgotten) the 
confines of a kind of waking dream. For this reason, if 
for no other, she at the same time longed for and yet in a 
way dreaded the afternoon’s regular reprieve. 

It had proved, too, both a comfort and a vexation that 
the old servant belonging to the new family next door had 
speedily discovered this little habit, and would as often 
as not lie in wait for her between a bush of lilac and a 
bright green chestnut that stood up like a dense umbrella 
midway along the wall that divided Miss Lennox’s from 
its one neighbouring garden. And since apparently it 
was Alice’s destiny in life to be always precariously bal- 
anced between extremes, Sarah had also turned out to be 
a creature of rather peculiar oscillations of temperament. 

Their clandestine talks were, therefore, though frequent, 
seldom particularly enlightening. None the less, merely 
to see this slovenly ponderous woman enter the garden, 
self-centered, with a kind of dull arrogance, her louring 
face as vacant as contempt of the Universe could make it, 


55 


The Looking-Glass 


was an event ever eagerly, though at times vexatiously, 
looked for, and seldom missed. 

Until but a few steps separated them, it was one of 
Sarah’s queer habits to make believe, so to speak, that 
Alice was not there at all. Then, as regularly, from her 
place of vantage on the other side of the wall, she would 
slowly and heavily lift her eyes to her face, with a sudden 
energy which at first considerably alarmed the young girl, 
and afterwards amused her. For certainly you are 
amused in a sort of fashion when any stranger you might 
suppose to be a little queer in the head proves perfectly 
harmless. Alice did not exactly like Sarah. But she 
could no more resist her advances, than the garden could 
resist the coming on of night. 

Miss Lennox, too, it must be confessed, was a rather 
tedious and fretful companion for wits (like Alice’s) al- 
ways wool-gathering—wool, moreover, of the shimmering 
kind that decked the Golden Fleece. Her own conception 
of the present was of a niche in Time from which she was 
accustomed to look back on the dim, though once appar- 
ently garish, panorama of the past; while with Alice, 
Time had kept promises enough only for a surety of its 
immense resources—resources illimitable, even though up 
till now they had been pretty tightly withheld. 

Or, if you so preferred, as Alice would say to herself, 
you could put it that Miss Lennox had all her eggs in a 
real basket, and that Alice had all hers in a basket that was 
not exactly real—only problematical. All the more rea- 
son, then, for Alice to think it a little queer that it had 
been Miss Lennox herself and not Sarah who had first 
given shape and substance to her vaguely bizarre intuitions 
concerning the garden—a walled-in space in which one 
56 


The Looking-Glass 


might suppose intuition alone could discover anything 
in the least remarkable. 

“When my cousin, Mary Wilson (the Wilsons of Aber- 
deen, as I may have told you), when my cousin lived in 
this house,” she had informed her young companion one 
evening over her own milk and oatmeal biscuits, “there 
was a silly talk with the maids that it was haunted.” 

“The house ?” Alice had enquired, with a sudden crooked 
look on a face that Nature, it seemed, had definitely in- 
tended to be frequently startled; “The house?” 

“T didn’t say the house,’ Miss Lennox testily replied 
—it always annoyed her to see anything resembling a 
flush on her young companion’s cheek, “and even if I 
did, I certainly meant the garden. If I had meant the 
house, I should have used the word house. I meant the 
garden. It was quite unnecessary to correct or contra- 
dict me; and whether or not, it’s all the purest rubbish— 
just a tale, though not the only one of the kind in the 
world, I fancy.” 

“Do you remember any of the other tales?” Alice had 
enquired, after a rather prolonged pause. 

“No, none,” was the flat reply. 

And so it came about that to Sarah (though she could 
hardly be described as the Serpent of the situation) to 
Sarah fell the opportunity of enjoying to the full an open- 
ing for her fantastic “lore.” By insinuation, by silences, 
now with contemptuous scepticism, now with enormous 
warmth, she cast her spell, weaving an eager imagination 
through and through with rather gaudy threads of super- 
stition. 

“Lor’, no, Crimes, maybe not, though blood is in the 
roots for all J can say.” She had looked up almost can- 

57 


The Looking-Glass 


didly in the warm, rainy wind, her deadish-looking hair 
blown back from her forehead. 

“Some’ll tell you only the old people have eyes to see 
the mystery ; and some, old or young, if so be they’re ripe. 
Nothing to me either way; I’m gone past such things. 
And what it is, ’orror and darkness, or golden like a saint 
in heaven, or pictures in dreams, or just like dying fire- 
works in the air, the Lord alone knows, Miss, for I don’t. 
But this I will say,” and she edged up her body a little 
closer to the wall, the raindrops the while dropping softly 
on bough and grass, “Mayday’s the day, and midnight’s 
the hour, for such as be wakeful and brazen and stoopid 
enough to watch it out. And what you’ve got to look for 
in a manner of speaking is what comes up out of the 
darkness from behind them trees there!” 

She drew back cunningly. 

The conversation was just like clockwork. It recurred 
regularly—except that there was no need to wind any- 
thing up. It wound itself up over-night, and with such 
accuracy that Alice soon knew the complete series of 
question and answer by heart or by rote—as if she had 
learned them out of the Child’s Guide to Knowledge, or 
the Catechism. Still there were interesting points in it 
even now. 

“And what you've got to look for’—the you was so ab- 
surdly impersonal when muttered in that thick coarse 
privy voice. And Alice invariably smiled at this little 
juncture; and Sarah as invariably looked at her and 
swallowed. 

“But have you looked for—for what you say, you 
know?” Alice would then enquire, still with face a little 
averted towards the black low-boughed group of broad- 
58 


The Looking-Glass 


leafed chestnuts, positive candelabra in their own season 
of wax-like speckled blossom. 

“Me? Me? I was old before my time, they used to 
say. Why, besides my poor sister up in Yorkshire there, 
there’s not a mouth utters my name.” Her large flushed 
face smiled in triumphant irony. “Besides my bed-rid 
mistress there, and my old what they call feeble-minded 
sister, Jane Mary, in Yorkshire, I’m as good as in my 
grave. I may be dull and hot in the head at times, but 
I stand alone—eat alone, sit alone, sleep alone, think 
alone. There’s never been such a lonely person before. 
Now, what should such a lonely person as me, Miss, I 
ask you, or what should you, either, for that matter, be 
meddling with your Maydays and your haunted gardens 
for?’ She broke off and stared with angry confusion 
around her, and, lifting up her open hand a little, she 
added hotly, “Them birds!— My God, I drats ’em for 
their squealin’ !” 

“But, why?” said Alice, frowning slightly. 

“The Lord only knows, Miss; I hate the sight of ’em! 
If I had what they call a blunderbuss in me hand I'd 
blow ’em to ribbings.” 

And Alice never could quite understand why it was 
that the normal pronunciation of the word would have 
suggested a less complete dismemberment of the victims. 

It was on a bleak day in March that Alice first heard 
really explicitly the conditions of the quest. 

“Your hows and whys! What I say is, I’m sick of 
it all. Not so much of you, Miss, which is all greens 
to me, but of the rest of it all! Anyhow, fast you must, 
like the Cartholics, and you with a frightful hacking cough 
and all. Come like a new-begotten bride you must in a 


59 


The Looking-Glass 


white gown, and a wreath of lilies or rorringe-blossom 
in your hair, same pretty much as I made for my mother’s 
coffin this twenty years ago, and which I wouldn’t do now 
not for respectability even. And me and my mother, let 
me tell you, were as close as hens in a roost... . But 
I’m off me subject. There you sits, even if the snow 
itself comes sailing in on your face, and alone you must 
be, neither book nor candle, and the house behind you shut 
up black abed and asleep. But, there; you so wan and 
sickly a young lady. What ghost would come to you, 
I’d like to know. You want some fine dark loveyer for a 
ghost—that’s your ghost. Oo-ay! There’s not a. want 
in the world but’s dust and ashes. That’s my bit of 
schooling.” 

She gazed on impenetrably at Alice’s slender fingers. 
And without raising her eyes she leaned her large hands 
on the wall. “Meself, Miss, meself’s my ghost, as they 
say. Why, bless me! it’s all thro’ the place now, like 
smoke.” 

What was all through the place now like smoke Alice 
perceived to be the peculiar clarity of the air discernible 
in the garden at times. The clearness as it were of glass, 
of a looking-glass, which conceals all behind and beyond 
it, returning only the looker’s wonder, or simply her 
vanity, or even her gaiety. Why, for the matter of that, 
thought Alice smiling, there are people who look into 
looking-glasses, actually see themselves there, and yet 
never turn a hair. There wasn’t any glass of course. 
This—this mirage sprang only out of the desire of her 
eyes, a kind of restless hunger of the mind—just to pos- 
sess her soul in patience till the first favourable May eve-. 
ning came along and then once and for all to set everything 
60 


The Looking-Glass 


at rest. It was a thought which fascinated her so com- 
pletely, that it influenced her habits, her words, her ac- 
tions. She even began to long for the afternoon solely 
to be alone with it; and in the midst of the reverie it 
charmed into her mind, she would glance up as startled 
as a Dryad to see the “cook-general’s” dark face fixing its 
still cold gaze on her from over the moss-greened wall. 
As for Miss Lennox, she became testier and more 
“rational” than ever as she narrowly watched the day ap- 
proaching when her need for a new companion would be- 
come extreme. 

Who, however, the lover might be, and where the tryst- 
ing-place, was unknown even to Alice, though, maybe, not 
absolutely unsurmised by her, and with a kind of cunning 
perspicacity perceived only by Sarah. 

“T see my old tales have tickled you up, Miss,” she 
said one day, lifting her eyes from the clothes-line she 
was carrying, to the girl’s alert and mobile face. “What 
they call old wives’ tales I fancy, too.” 

“Oh, I don’t think so,” Alice answered. “I can hardly 
tell, Sarah. I am only at peace here, I know that. I 
get out of bed at night to look down from the window and 
wish myself here. When I’m reading, just as if it were a 
painted illustration—in the book, you know—the scene 
of it all floats in between me and the print. Besides, I can 
do just what I like with it. In my mind, I mean. I just 
imagine ; and there it all is. So you see I could not bear 
now to go away.” 

“There’s no cause to worry your head about that,” said 
the woman darkly, “and as for picking and choosing I 
never saw much of it for them that’s under of a thumb, 
Why, when J was young, I couldn’t have borne to live 

61 


The Looking-Glass 


as I do now with just meself wandering to and fro. Mut- 
tering I catch meself, too. And, to be sure, surrounded 
in the air by shapes, and shadows, and noises, and winds, 
so as sometimes I can neither see nor hear. It’s true, 
God’s gospel, Miss—the body’s like a clump of wood, 
it’s that dull. And you can’t get t’other side, so to 
speak.” 

So lucid a portrayal of her own exact sensations 
astonished the girl. “Well, but what is it, what is it, 
Sarah?” 

Sarah strapped the air with the loose end of the clothes- 
line. “Part, Miss, the hauntin’ of the garden. Part as 
them black-jacketed clergymen would say, because we’s 
we. And part ’cos it’s all death the other side—all death.” 

She drew her head slowly in, her puffy cheeks glowed, 
her small black eyes gazed as fixedly and deadly as if 
they were anemones on a rock. 

The very fulness of her figure seemed to exaggerate 
her vehemence. She gloated—a heavy somnolent owl 
puffing its feathers. Alice drew back, swiftly glancing 
as she did so over her shoulder. The sunlight was liquid 
wan gold in the meadow, between the black tree-trunks. 
They lifted their cumbrous branches far above the brick 
human house, stooping their leafy twigs. A starling’s 
dark iridescence took her glance as he minced pertly in 
the coarse grass. 

“I can’t quite see why you should think of death,” Alice 
ventured to suggest. 

“Me? Not me! Where I’m put, I stay. I’m like a 
stone in the grass, I am. Not that if I were that old 
mealy-smilin’ bag of bones flat on her back on her bed 
up there with her bits of beadwork and slops through a 
62 


The Looking-Glass 


spout, I wouldn’t make sure over-night of not being 
waked next mornin’, There’s something in me that 
won't let me rest, what they call a volcano, though no more 
to eat in that beetle cupboard of a kitchen than would 
keep a Tom Cat from the mange.” 

“But, Sarah,” said Alice, casting a glance up at the 
curtained windows of the other house, “she looks such 
a quiet, patient old thing. I don’t think I could stand 
having not even enough to eat. Why do you stay?” 

Sarah laughed for a full half-minute in silence, staring 
at Alice meanwhile. “ ‘Patient’! she replied at last, 
“Oo-ay. Not to my knowledge did I ever breathe the 
contrary. As for staying; you'd stay all right if that 
loveyer of yours come along. You’d stand anything— 
them pale narrow-chested kind; though me, I’m neether 
to bend nor break. And if the old man was to look down 
out of the blue up there this very minute, ay, and shake 
his fist at me, I’d say it to his face. I loathe your whin- 
ing psalm-singers. A trap’sa trap. You wait and see!” 

“But how do you mean?” Alice said slowly, her face 
stooping. 

There came no answer. And, on turning, she was sur- 
prised to see the bunchy alpaca-clad woman already dis- 
appearing round the corner of the house. 

The talk softly subsided in her mind like the dust in 
an empty room. Alice wandered on in the garden, ex- 
tremely loth to goin. And gradually a curious happiness 
at last descended upon her heart, like a cloud of morning 
dew in a dell of wild-flowers. It seemed in moments 
like these, as if she had been given the power to think— 
or rather to be conscious, as it were, of thoughts not her 
own—thoughts like vivid pictures, following one upon an- 

63 


The Looking-Glass 


other with extraordinary rapidity and brightness through 
her mind. As if, indeed, thoughts could be like fragments 
of glass, reflecting light at their every edge and angle. 
She stood tiptoe at the meadow wall and gazed greedily 
into the green fields, and across to the pollard aspens by 
the waterside. Turning, her eyes recognised clear in 
the shadow and the blue grey air of the garden her solitude 
—its solitude. And at once all thinking ceased. 

“The Spirit is me: J haunt this place!” she said aloud, 
with sudden assurance, and almost in Sarah’s own words. 
“And I don’t mind—not the least bit. It can be only my 
thankful, thankful self that is here. And that can never 
be lost.” 

She returned to the house, and seemed as she moved 
to see—almost as if she were looking down out of the 
sky on herseli—her own dwarf figure walking beneath 
the trees. Yet there was at the same time a curious in- 
dividuality in the common things, living and inanimate, 
that were peeping at her out of their secrecy. The si- 
lence hung above them as apparent as their own clear re- 
flected colours above the brief spring flowers. But when 
she stood tidying herself for the usual hour of reading 
to Miss Lennox, she was conscious of an almost unendur- 
able weariness. 

That night Alice set to work with her needle upon a 
piece of sprigged muslin to make her ‘“‘watch-gown’’ as 
Sarah called it. She was excited. She hadn’t much 
time, she fancied. It was like hiding in a story. She 
worked with extreme pains, and quickly. And not till 
the whole flimsy thing was finished did she try on or ad- 
mire any part of it. But, at last, in the early evening of 
one of the middle days of April, she drew her bedroom 
64 


The Looking-Glass 


blind up close to the ceiling, to view herself in her yellow 
grained looking-glass. 

The gown, white as milk in the low sunlight, and 
sprinkled with even whiter embroidered nosegays of 
daisies, seemed to accentuate a girlish figure, already very 
slender. She had arranged her abundant hair with un- 
usual care, and her own clear, inexplicable eyes looked 
back upon her beauty, bright it seemed with tidings they 
could not speak. 

She regarded closely that narrow, flushed, intense face 
in an unforeseen storm of compassion and regret, as if 
with the conviction that she herself was to blame for 
the inevitable leavetaking. It seemed to gaze like an ani- 
mal its mute farewell in the dim discoloured glass. 

And when she had folded and laid away the gown in 
her wardrobe, and put on her everyday clothes again, she 
felt an extreme aversion for the garden. So, instead of 
venturing out that afternoon, she slipped off its faded 
blue ribbon from an old bundle of letters which she had 
hoarded all these years from a school-friend long since 
lost sight of, and spent the evening reading them over, 
till headache and an empty despondency sent her to bed. 

Lagging Time brought at length the thirtieth of April. 
Life was as usual. Miss Lennox had even begun to knit 
her eighth pair of woollen mittens for the annual Church 
bazaar. To Alice the day passed rather quickly ; a cloudy, 
humid day with a furtive continual and enigmatical stir 
in the air. Her lips were parched; it seemed at any mo- 
ment her skull might crack with the pain as she sat read- 
ing her chapter of Macaulay to Miss Lennox’s sparking 
and clicking needles. Her mind was a veritable rookery 
of forebodings, flying and returning. She scarcely ate 

65 


The Looking-Glass 


at all, and kept to the house, never even approaching a 
window. She wrote a long and rather unintelligible let- 
ter, which she destroyed when she had read it over. Then 
suddenly every vestige of pain left her. 

And when at last she went to bed—so breathless that 
she thought her heart at any moment would jump out 
of her body, and so saturated with expectancy she thought 
she would die—her candle was left burning calmly, un- 
nodding, in its socket upon the chest of drawers ; the blind 
of her window was up, towards the houseless byroad; 
her pen stood in the inkpot. 

She slept on into the morning of Mayday, in a sheet 
of eastern sunshine, till Miss Lennox, with a peevishness 
that almost amounted to resolution, decided to wake her. 
But then, Alice, though unbeknown in any really conscious 
sense to herself, perhaps, had long since decided not to be 
awakened. 

Not until the evening of that day did the sun in his 
diurnal course for a while illumine the garden, and then 
very briefly: to gild, to lull, and to be gone. The stars 
wheeled on in the thick-sown waste of space, and even 
when Miss Lennox’s small share of the earth’s wild living 
creatures had stirred and sunk again to rest in the ebb 
of night, there came no watcher—not even the very ghost 
of a watcher—to the garden, in a watch-gown. So that 
what peculiar secrets found reflex in its dark mirror no 
human witness was there to tell. 

As for Sarah, she had long since done with looking- 
glasses once and for all. A place was a place. There 
was still the washing to be done on Mondays. Fools and 
weaklings would continue to come and go. But give her 
her way, she’d have blown them and their looking-glasses 
all to ribbons—with the birds. 

66 


Miss Duveen 


SELDOM had the company of children in my grand- 
if mother’s house beside the river Wandle. The house 
was old and ugly. But its river was lovely and 
youthful though it had flowed for ever, it seemed, between 
its green banks of osier and alder. So it was no great mis- 
fortune perhaps that I heard more talking of its waters 
than of any human tongue. For my grandmother found 
no particular pleasure in my company. How could she? 
My father and mother had married (and died) against 
her will, and there was nothing in me of those charms 
which in fiction at any rate, swiftly soften a superannu- 
ated heart. 

Nor did I pine for her company either. I kept out of 
it as much as possible. 

It so happened that she was accustomed to sit with her 
back to the window of the room which she usually occu- 
pied, her grey old indifferent face looking inwards. 
Whenever necessary, I would steal close up under it, 
and if I could see there her large faded amethyst velvet 
cap I knew I was safe from interruption. Sometimes I 
would take a slice or two of currant bread or (if I could 
get it) a jam tart or a cheese cake, and eat it under a 
twisted old damson tree or beside the running water. 
And if I conversed with anybody, it would be with my- 
self or with my small victims of the chase. 

Not that I was an exceptionally cruel boy; though if 

67 


Miss Duveen 


I had lived on for many years in this primitive and com- 
panionless fashion, I should surely have become an idiot. 
As a matter of fact, I was unaware even that I was 
ridiculously old-fashioned—manners, clothes, notions, 
everything. My grandmother never troubled to tell me 
so, nor did she care. And the servants were a race apart. 
So I was left pretty much to my own devices. What won- 
der, then, if I at first accepted with genuine avidity the 
acquaintanceship of our remarkable neighbour, Miss 
Duveen? 

It had been, indeed, quite an advent in our uneventful 
routine when that somewhat dubious household moved 
into Willowlea, a brown brick edifice, even uglier than 
our own, which had been long vacant, and whose sloping 
garden confronted ours across the Wandle. My grand- 
mother, on her part, at once discovered that any kind 
of intimacy with its inmates was not much to be desired. 
While I, on mine, was compelled to resign myself to the 
loss of the Willowlea garden as a kind of No Man’s Land 
or Tom Tiddler’s ground. 

I got to know Miss Duveen by sight long before we 
actually became friends. I used frequently to watch her 
wandering in her long garden. And even then I noticed 
how odd were her methods of gardening. She would dig 
up a root or carry off a potted plant from one to another 
overgrown bed with an almost animal-like resolution ; and 
a few minutes afterwards I would see her restoring it to 
the place from which it had come. Now and again she 
would stand perfectly still, like a scarecrow, as if she had 
completely forgotten what she was at. 

Miss Coppin, too, I descried sometimes. But I never 
‘ more than glanced at her, for fear that even at that dis- 
68 


Miss Duveen 


tance the too fixed attention of my eyes might bring hers 
to bear upon me. She was a smallish woman, inclined to 
be fat, and with a peculiar waddling gait. She invariably 
appeared to be angry with Miss Duveen, and would talk 
to her as one might talk to a post. I did not know, in- 
deed, until one day Miss Duveen waved her handkerchief 
in my direction that I had been observed from Willowlea 
at all. Once or twice after that, I fancied, she called me; 
at least her lips moved; but I could not distinguish what 
she said. And I was naturally a little backward in mak- 
ing new friends. Still I grew accustomed to looking out 
for her and remember distinctly how first we met. 

It was raining, the raindrops falling softly into the un- 
rippled water, making their great circles, and tapping on 
the motionless leaves above my head where I sat in shelter 
on the bank. But the sun was shining whitely from be- 
hind a thin fleece of cloud, when Miss Duveen suddenly 
peeped in at me out of the greenery, the thin silver light 
upon her face, and eyed me sitting there, for all the world 
as if she were a blackbird and Ia snail. I scrambled up 
hastily with the intention of retreating to my own domain, 
but the peculiar grimace she made at me fixed me where 
I was. 

“Ah,” she said, with a little masculine laugh. “So this 
is the young gentleman, the bold, gallant young gentleman. 
And what might be his name?” 

I replied rather distantly that my name was Arthur. 

“Arthur, to be sure!’ she repeated with extraordinary 
geniality, and again, “Arthur,” as if in the strictest confi- 
dence. 

“TI know you, Arthur, very well indeed. I have looked, 
I have watched; and now, please God, we need never be 


69 


Miss Duveen 


estranged.” And she tapped her brow and breast, making 
the Sign of the Cross with her lean, bluish forefinger. 

“What is a little brawling brook,” she went on, “to 
friends like you and me?” She gathered up her tiny 
countenance once more into an incredible grimace of 
friendliness ; and I smiled as amicably as I could in re- 
turn. There was a pause in this one-sided conversation. 
She seemed to be listening, and her lips moved, though 
I caught no sound. In my uneasiness I was just about 
to turn stealthily away, when she poked forward again. 

“Yes, yes, I know you quite intimately, Arthur. We 
have met here.’ She tapped her\ rounded forehead. 
“You might not suppose it, too; but I have eyes like a 
lynx. It is no exaggeration, I assure you—I assure every- 
body. And now what friends we will be! At times,” 
she stepped out of her hiding-place and stood in curious 
dignity beside the water, her hands folded in front of her 
on her black pleated silk apron—“at times, dear child, I 
long for company—earthly company.” She glanced fur- 
tively about her. “But I must restrain my longings; and 
you will, of course, understand that I do not complain. 
He knows best. And my dear cousin, Miss Coppin—she 
too knows best. She does not consider too much com- 
panionship expedient for me.’”’ She glanced in some per- 
plexity into the smoothly swirling water. 

“T, you know,” she said suddenly, raising her little 
piercing eyes to mine, “I am Miss Duveen, that’s not, they 
say, quite the thing here.” She tapped her small fore- 
head again beneath its two sleek curves of greying hair, 
and made a long narrow mouth at me. “Though, of 
course,” she added, “‘we do not tell her so. No!” 

And I, too, nodded my head in instinctive and absorbed 


70 


Miss Duveen 


imitation. Miss Duveen laughed gaily. “He understands, 
he understands!” she cried, as if to many listeners. “Oh, 
what a joy it is in this world, Arthur, to be understood. 
Now tell me,” she continued with immense nicety, “tell 
me, how’s your dear mamma?” 

I shook my head. 

“Ah,” she cried, “I see, I see; Arthur has no mamma. 
We will not refer to it. No father, either?” 

I shook my head again and, standing perfectly still, 
stared at my new acquaintance with a vacuous curiosity. 
She gazed at me with equal concentration, as if she were 
endeavouring to keep the very thought of my presence in 
her mind. 

“Tt is sad to have no father,” she continued rapidly, half 
closing her eyes; “no head, no guide, no stay, no strong- 
hold; but we have, O yes, we have another Father, 
dear child, another Father—eh? . . . Where . . . Where?” 

She very softly raised her finger. “On high,” she whis- 
pered, with extraordinary intensity. 

“But just now,” she added cheerfully, hugging her 
mittened hands together, “we are not talking of Him; we 
are talking of ourselves, just you and me, so cozy; so 
secret! And it’sa grandmother? I thought so, I thought 
so, a grandmother! O yes, I can peep between the cur- 
tains, though they do lock the door. A grandmother—I 
thought so; that very droll old lady! Such fine clothes! 
Such a presence, oh yes! A grandmother.” She poked 
out her chin and laughed confidentially. 

“And the long, bony creature, all rub and double—” 
she jogged briskly with her elbows, “who’s that?” 

“Mrs. Pridgett,” I said. 

“There, there,’ she whispered breathlessly, gazing 

71 


Miss Duveen 


widely about her. “Think of that! He knows; He un- 
derstands. How firm, how manly, how undaunted! 
eae ne it 

I shook my head dubiously. 

“Why should he?” she cried scornfully. “But between 
ourselves, Arthur, that is a thing we must learn, and 
never mind the headache. We cannot, of course, know 
everything. Even Miss Coppin does not know every- 
thing—” she leaned forward with intense earnestness— 
“though I don’t tell her so. We must try to learn all we 
can; and at once. One thing, dear child, you may be 
astonished to hear, I learned only yesterday, and that is 
how exceedingly sad life is.” 

She leaned her chin upon her narrow bosom pursing 
her lips. “And yet you know they say very little about 
it... . They don’t mention it. Every moment, every 
hour, every day, every year—one, two, three, four, five, 
seven, ten,’ she paused, frowned, “and so on. Sadder 
and sadder. Why? why? It’s strange, but oh, so true. 
You really can have no notion, child, how very sad I am 
myself at times. In the evening, when they all gather to- 
gether, in their white raiment, up and up and up, I sit on 
the garden seat, on Miss Coppin’s garden seat, and pre- 
cisely in the middle (you'll be kind enough to remember 
that?) and my thoughts make me sad.” She narrowed her 
eyes and shoulders. “Yes, and frightened, my child! 
Why must I be so guarded? One angel—the greatest fool 
could see the wisdom of that. But billions !—with their 
fixed eyes shining, so very boldly, on me. I never prayed 
for so many, dear friend. And we pray for a good many 
odd things, you and I, T'll be bound. But, there, you see, 
poor Miss Duveen’s on her theology again—scamper, 


72 


Miss Duveen 


scamper, scamper. In the congregations of the wicked 
we must be cautious! ... Mrs. Partridge and grand- 
mamma, so nice, so nice; but even that, too, a little sad, 
eh?” She leaned her head questioningly, like a starving 
bird in the snow. 

I smiled, not knowing what else she expected of me; 
and her face became instantly grave and set. 

“He’s right; perfectly right. We must speak evil of 
no-one. No-one. We must shut our mouths. We—” 
She stopped suddenly and, taking a step leaned over the 
water towards me, with eyebrows raised high above her 
tiny face. “S—sh!” she whispered, laying a long fore- 
finger on her lips. “Eavesdroppers!” she smoothed her 
skirts, straightened her cap, and left me; only a moment 
after to poke her head at me again from between the 
leafy bushes. “An assignation, no!” she said firmly, 
then gathered her poor, cheerful, forlorn, crooked, lovable 
face into a most wonderful contraction at me, that as- 
suredly meant—“But, yes!” 

Indeed it was an assignation, the first of how many, 
and how few. Sometimes Miss Duveen would sit beside 
me, apparently so lost in thought that I was clean for- 
gotten. And yet I half fancied it was often nothing but 
feigning. Once she stared me blankly out of countenance 
when I ventured to take the initiative and to call out 
Good-morning to her across the water. On this occasion 
she completed my consternation with a sudden, angry 
grimace—contempt, jealousy, outrage. 

But often we met like old friends and talked. It was 
a novel but not always welcome diversion for me in the 
long shady garden that was my privy universe. Where 
our alders met, mingling their branches across the flow- 

73 


Miss Duveen 


ing water, and the kingfisher might be seen—there was 
our usual tryst. But, occasionally, at her invitation, I 
would venture across the stepping-stones into her de- 
mesne; and occasionally, but very seldom indeed, she 
would venture into mine. How plainly I see her, tip- 
toeing from stone to stone, in an extraordinary concentra- 
tion of mind—her mulberry petticoats, her white stock- 
ings, her loose spring-side boots. And when at last she 
stood beside me, her mittened hand on her breast, she 
would laugh on in a kind of paroxysm until the tears 
stood in her eyes, and she grew faint with breathlessness. 

“Tn all danger,” she told me once, “I hold my breath 
and shut my eyes. And if I could tell you of every 
danger, I think, perhaps, you would understand—dear 
Miss Coppin...” I did not, and yet, perhaps, very 
vaguely I did see the connection in this rambling state- 
ment. 

Like most children, I liked best to hear Miss Duveen 
talk about her own childhood. I contrived somehow to 
discover that if we sat near flowers or under boughs in 
blossom, her talk would generally steal around to that. 
Then she would chatter on and on: of the white sunny 
rambling house, somewhere, nowhere—it saddened and 
confused her if I asked where—in which she had spent 
her first happy years; where her father used to ride on 
a black horse; and her mother to walk with her in the 
garden in a crinolined gown and a locket with the painted 
miniature of a “divine” nobleman inside it. How very 
far away these pictures seemed! 

It was as if she herself had’‘shrunken back into this 
distant past, and was babbling on like a child again, already 
a little isolated by her tiny infirmity. 

74 


Miss Duveen 


“That was before—” she would begin to explain pre- 
cisely, and then a crisscross many-wrinkled frown would 
net her rounded forehead, and cloud her eyes. Time 
might baffle her, but then, time often baffled me too. 
Any talk about her mother usually reminded her of an 
elder sister, Caroline. “My sister, Caroline,’ she would 
repeat as if by rote, “you may not be aware, Arthur, was 
afterwards Mrs. Bute. .So charming, so exquisite, so 
accomplished. And Colonel Bute—an officer and a gen- 
tleman, I grant. And yet... But no! My dear sister 
was not happy. And so it was no doubt a blessing in 
disguise that by an unfortunate accident she was found 
drowned. In a lake, you will understand, not a mere 
shallow noisy brook, This is one of my private sorrows, 
which, of course, your grandmamma would be horrified 
to hear—horrified; and which, of course, Partridge has 
not the privilege of birth even to be informed of—our 
secret, dear child—with all her beautiful hair, and her 
elegant feet, and her eyes no more ajar than this; but 
blue, blue as the forget-me-not. When the time comes, 
Miss Coppin will close my own eyes, I hope and trust. 
Death, dear, dear child, I know they say is only sleeping. 
Yet I hope and trust that. To be sleeping wide awake; 
oh no!” She abruptly turned her. small untidy head away. 

“But didn’t they shut hers?” I enquired. 

Miss Duveen ignored the question. “I am not utter- 
ing one word of blame,” she went on rapidly ; “I am per- 
fectly aware that such things confuse me. Miss Coppin 
tells me not to think. She tells me that I can have no 
opinions worth the mention. She says, ‘Shut up your 
mouth.’ I must keep silence then. All that I am merely 
trying to express to you, Arthur, knowing you will re- 


75 


Miss Duveen 


gard it as sacred between us—all I am expressing is that 
my dear sister, Caroline, was a gifted and beautiful crea- 
ture with not a shadow or vestige or tinge or taint of con- 
fusion in her mind. Nothing. And yet, when they 
dragged her out of the water and laid her there on the 
bank, looking—” She stooped herself double in a sudden 
dreadful fit of gasping, and I feared for an instant she 
was about to die. 

“No, no, no,” she cried, rocking herself to and fro, 
“you shall nof paint such a picture in his young innocent 
mind. You shall not.” 

I sat on my stone, watching her, feeling excessively un- 
comfortable. ‘But what did she look like, Miss Duveen ?” 
I pressed forward to ask at last. 

“No, no, no,” she cried again. “Cast him out, cast him 
out. Retro Sathanas! We must not even ask to undet- 
stand. My father and my dear mother, I do not doubt, 
have spoken for Caroline. Even I, if I must be called 
on, will strive to collect my thoughts. And that is pre- 
cisely where a friend, you, Arthur, would be so precious; 
to know that you, too, in your innocence, will be helping 
me to collect my thoughts on that day, to save our dear 
Caroline from Everlasting Anger. That, that! Oh dear; 
oh dear!” She turned on me a face I should scarcely have 
recognized, lifted herself trembling to her feet, and hur- 
ried away. 

Sometimes it was not Miss Duveen that was a child 
again, but I that had grown up. “Had now you been 
your handsome father—and I see him, Oh, so plainly, 
dear child—had you been your, father, then I must, of 
course, have kept to the house . . . I must have; it is a 


76 


Miss Duveen 


rule of conduct, and everything depends on them. Where 
would Society be else?” she cried, with an unanswerable 
blaze of intelligence. “I find, too, dear Arthur, that they 
increase—the rules increase. I try to remember them. 
My dear cousin, Miss Coppin, knows them all. But I—I 
think sometimes one’s memory is a little treacherous. 
And then it must vex people.” 

She gazed penetratingly at me for an answer that did 
not come. Mute as a fish though I might be, I suppose 
it was something of a comfort to her to talk to me. 

And to suppose that is my one small crumb of comfort 
when I reflect on the kind of friendship I managed to 
bestow. 

I actually met Miss Coppin once; but we did not speak. 
I had, in fancy, gone to tea with Miss Duveen. The 
project had been discussed as “quite, quite impossible, 
dear child” for weeks. “You must never mention it 
again.” As a matter of fact I had never mentioned it 
at all. But one day—possibly when their charge had been 
less difficult and exacting, one day Miss Coppin and her 
gaunt maid-servant and companion really did go out to- 
gether, leaving Miss Duveen alone in Willowlea. It was 
the crowning opportunity of our friendship. The mo- 
ment I espied her issuing from the house, I guessed her 
errand. She came hastening down to the waterside, 
attired in clothes of a colour and fashion I had never 
seen her wearing before, her dark eyes shining in her 
head, her hands trembling with excitement. 

It was a still, warm afternoon, with Sweet Williams 
and linden and stocks scenting the air, when, with some 
little trepidation, I must confess, I followed her in formal 


77 


Miss Duveen 


dignity up the unfamiliar path towards the house. I 
know not which of our hearts beat the quicker, whose 
eyes cast the most furtive glances about us. My friend’s 
cheeks were brightest mauve. She wore a large silver 
locket on a ribbon; and I followed her up the faded green 
stairs, beneath the dark pictures, to her small, stuffy bed- 
room under the roof. We humans, they say, are en- 
veloped in a kind of aura; to which the vast majority of 
us are certainly entirely insensitive. Nevertheless, there 
was an air, an atmosphere as of the smell of pears in this 
small attic room—well, every bird, I suppose, haunts with 
its presence its customary cage. 

“This,” she said, acknowledging the bed, the looking- 
glass, the deal washstand, “this, dear child, you will par- 
don; in fact, you will not see. How could we sit, friends 
as we are, in the congregation of strangers?” 

I hardly know why, but that favourite word of Miss 
Duveen’s, “congregation,” brought up before me with ex- 
treme aversion all the hostile hardness and suspicion con- 
centrated in Miss Coppin and Ann. I stared at the queer 
tea things in a vain effort not to be aware of the rest of 
Miss Duveen’s private belongings. 

Somehow or other she had managed to procure for 
me a bun—a saffron bun. There was a dish of a grey 
pudding and a plate of raspberries that I could not help 
suspecting (and, I am ashamed to say, with aggrieved 
astonishment), she must have herself gathered that morn- 
ing from my grandmother’s canes. We did not talk 
very much. Her heart gave her pain. And her face 
showed how hot and absorbed. and dismayed she was 
over her foolhardy entertainment. But I sipped my milk 
and water, sitting on a black bandbox, and she on an 


78 


Miss Duveen 


old cane chair. And we were almost formal and distant 
to one another, with little smiles and curtseys over our 
cups, and polished agreement about the weather. 

“And you'll strive not to be sick, dear child,” she im- 
plored me suddenly, while I was nibbling my way slowly 
through the bun. But it was not until rumours of the 
tremendous fact of Miss Coppin’s early and unforeseen re- 
turn had been borne in on us that Miss Duveen lost all 
presence of mind. She burst into tears; seized and kissed 
repeatedly my sticky hands; implored me to be discreet ; 
implored me to be gone; implored me to retain her in my 
affections, “as you love your poor dear mother, Arthur,” 
and I left her on her knees, her locket pressed to her 
bosom. 

Miss Coppin was, I think, unusually astonished to see 
a small strange boy walk softly past her bedroom door, 
within which she sat, with purple face, her hat strings 
dangling, taking off her boots. Ann, I am thankful to 
say, I did not encounter. But when I was safely out 
in the garden in the afternoon sunshine, the boldness and 
the romance of this sally completely deserted me. I ran 
like a hare down the alien path, leapt from stone to stone 
across the river; nor paused in my flight until I was safe 
in my own bedroom, and had—how odd is childhood !— 
washed my face and entirely changed my clothes. 

My grandmother, when I appeared at her tea-table, 
glanced at me now and again rather profoundly and in- 
quisitively, but the actual question hovering in her mind 
remained unuttered. 

It was many days before we met again, my friend and I. 
She had, I gathered from many mysterious nods and 
shrugs, been more or less confined to her bedroom ever 


79 


Miss Duveen 


since our escapade, and looked dulled and anxious; her 
small face was even a little more vacant in repose than 
usual. Even this meeting, too, was full of alarms; for in 
the midst of our talk, by mere chance or caprice, my 
grandmother took a walk in the garden that afternoon, 
and discovered us under our damson tree. She bowed 
in her dignified, aged way. And Miss Duveen, with cheeks 
and forehead the colour of her petticoat, elaborately 
curtseyed. 

“Beautiful, very beautiful weather,’ said my grand- 
mother. 

“Tt is, indeed,” said my friend, fixedly. 

“T trust you are keeping pretty well?” 

“As far, Ma’am, as God and a little weakness of the 
heart permit,” said Miss Duveen. “He knows all,” she 
added, firmly. 

My grandmother stood silent a moment. 

“Indeed He does,” she replied politely. 

“And that’s the difficulty,’ ventured Miss Duveen, in 
her odd, furtive, friendly fashion. 

My grandmother opened her eyes, smiled pleasantly, 
paused, glanced remotely at me, and, with another ex- 
change of courtesies, Miss Duveen and I were left alone 
once more. But it was a grave and saddened friend I 
now sat beside. 

“You see, Arthur, all bad things, we know, are best 
for us. Motives included. That comforts me. But my 
heart is sadly fluttered. Not that I fear or would shun 
society ; but perhaps your grandmother . . . I never had 
the power to treat my fellow-creatures as if they were 
stocks and stones. And the effort not to notice it dis- 
tresses me. A little hartshorn might relieve the palpita- 
80 


Miss Duveen 


tion, of course; but Miss Coppin keeps all keys. It is 
this shouting that makes civility such a task.” 

“This shouting’”—very faintly then I caught her mean- 
ing, but I was in no mood to sympathise. My grand- 
mother’s one round-eyed expressionless glance at me had 
been singularly disconcerting. And it was only appre- 
hension of her questions that kept me from beating a 
retreat. So we sat on, Miss Duveen and I, in the shade, 
the day drawing towards evening, and presently we walked 
down to the water-side, and under the colours of sunset 
I flung in my crumbs to the minnows, as she talked cease- 
lessly on. 

“And yet,” she concluded, after how involved a mono- 
logue, “and yet, Arthur, I feel it is for your forgiveness 
I should be pleading. So much to do; such an arch of 
beautiful things might have been my gift to you. It is 
here,” she said, touching her forehead. “I do not think, 
perhaps, that all I might say would be for your good. I 
must be silent and discreet about much. I must not pro- 
voke”—she lifted her mittened finger, and raised her eyes 
—‘“them,” she said gravely. “I am tempted, terrified, 
persecuted. Whispering, wrangling, shouting: the flesh 
is a grievous burden, Arthur; I long for peace. Only to 
flee away and be at rest! But,” she nodded, and glanced 
over her shoulder, “about much—great trials, sad en- 
tanglements, about much the Others say, I must keep 
silence. It would only alarm your innocence. And that I 
will never, never do. Your father, a noble, gallant gen- 
tleman of the world, would have understood my difficulties. 
But he is dead. . . . Whatever that may mean. I have 
repeated it so often when Miss Coppin thought that I was 
not—dead, dead, dead, dead—but I don’t think that even 

81 


Miss Duveen 


now I grasp the meaning of the word. Of you, dear 
child, I will never say it. You have been life itself to 
me.” 

How generously, how tenderly she smiled on me from 
her perplexed, sorrowful eyes. 

“You have all the world before you, all the world. 
How spendid it is to be a Man. For my part I have 
sometimes thought, though they do not of course intend 
to injure me, yet I fancy, sometimes, they have grudged 
me my part in it a little. Though God forbid but Heaven’s 
best.” 

She raised that peering, dark, remote gaze to my face, 
and her hand was trembling again. “They are saying 
now one to another—Where is she? where is she? It’s 
nearly dark, m’m, where is she?’ Oh, Arthur, but there 
shall be no night there. We must believe it, we must— 
in spite, dear friend, of a weak horror of glare. My 
cousin, Miss Coppin, does not approve of my wishes. 
Gas, gas, gas, all over the house, and when it is not sing- 
ing, it roars. You would suppose I might be trusted with 
but just my own one bracket. But no—Ann, I think— 
indeed I fear, sometimes, has no—” She started violently 
and shook her tiny head. “When I am gone,” she con- 
tinued disjointedly, “you will be prudent, cautious, dear 
child? Consult only your heart about me. Older you 
must be... Yes, certainly, he must be older,” she re- 
peated vaguely. “Everything goes on and on—and 
round!” She seemed astonished, as if at a sudden radi- 
ance cast on an old and protracted perplexity. 

“About your soul, dear child,’ she said to me once, 
touching my hand, “I have never spoken. Perhaps it was 
one of my first duties to keep on speaking to you about 
82 


Miss Duveen 


your soul. I mention it now in case they should rebuke 
me when I make my appearance there. It is a burden; 
and I have so many burdens, as well as pain. And at 
times I cannot think very far. I see the thought; but it 
won't alter. It comes back, just like a sheep—‘Ba-aa-ah,’ 
like that!” She burst out laughing, twisting her head to 
look at me the while. “Miss Coppin, of course, has no 
difficulty; gentlemen have no difficulty. And this shall 
be the occasion of another of our little confidences. We 
are discreet?” She bent her head and scanned my face. 
“Here,” she tapped her bosom, “I bear his image. My 
only dear one’s. And if you would kindly turn your 
head, dear child, perhaps I could pull him out.” 

It was the miniature of a young, languid, fastidious- 
looking officer which she showed me—threaded on dingy 
tape, in its tarnished locket. 

“Miss Coppin, in great generosity, has left me this,” 
she said, polishing the glass on her knee, “though I am 
forbidden to wear it. For you see, Arthur, it is a duty 
not to brood on the past, and even perhaps, indelicate. 
Some day, it may be, you, too, will love a gentle girl. I 
beseech you, keep your heart pure and true. This one 
could not. Not a single word of blame escapes me. I 
own to my Maker, never to anyone else, it has not eased 
my little difficulty. But it is not for us to judge. Whose 
office is that, eh?” And again, that lean small fore-finger, 
beneath an indescribable grimace, pointed gently, deliber- 
ately, from her lap upward. “Pray, pray,” she added, 
very violently, “pray, till the blood streams down your 
face! Pray, but rebuke not. They all whisper about 
it. Among themselves,” she added, peering out beneath 
and between the interlacing branches. “But I simulate 

83 


Miss Duveen 


inattention. I simulate...” The very phrase seemed 
to have hopelessly confused her. Again, as so often now, 
that glassy fear came into her eyes; her foot tapped on 
the gravel. 

“Arthur,” she cried suddenly, taking my hand tightly 
in her lap, “you have been my refuge in a time of trouble. 
You will never know it, child. My refuge, and my peace. 
We shall seldom meet now. All are opposed. They re- 
peat it in their looks. The Autumn will divide us; and 
then, Winter; but, I think, no Spring. It is so, Arthur, 
there is a stir; and then they will hunt me out.” Her 
eyes gleamed again, far and small and black in the dusky 
pallor of her face. 

It was indeed already Autumn; the air golden and still. 
The leaves were beginning to fall. The late fruits were 
well-nigh over. Robins and tits seemed our only birds 
now. Rain came in floods. The Wandle took sound 
and volume, sweeping deep above our stepping stones. 
Very seldom after this I even so much as saw our neigh- 
bour. I chanced on her one still afternoon, standing 
fixedly by the brawling stream, in a rusty-looking old- 
fashioned cloak, her scanty hair pushed high up on her 
forehead. 

She stared at me for a moment or two, and then, with 
a scared look over her shoulder, threw me a little letter, 
shaped like a cock-hat, and weighted with a pebble stone, 
across the stream. She whispered earnestly and rapidly 
at me over the water. But I could not catch a single word 
she said, and failed to decipher her close spidery hand- 
writing. No doubt I was too shy, or too ashamed, or in 
a vague fashion too loyal, to show it to my grandmother. 
It is not now a flattering keepsake. I called out loudly 
84 


Miss Duveen 


I must go in; and still see her gazing after me, with a puz- 
zled, mournful expression on the face peering out of 
the cloak. 

Even after that we sometimes waved to one another 
across the water, but never if by hiding myself I could 
evade her in time. The distance seemed to confuse her, 
and quite silenced me. I began to see we were ridiculous 
friends, especially as she came now in ever dingier and 
absurder clothes. She even looked hungry, and not quite 
clean, as well as ill; and she talked more to her phantoms 
than to me when once we met. 

The first ice was in the garden. The trees stood bare 
beneath a pale blue sunny sky, and I was standing at the 
window, looking out at the hoar-frost, when my grand- 
mother told me that it was unlikely that I should ever 
see our neighbour again. 

I stood where I was, without turning round, staring 
out of the window at the motionless ghostly trees, and 
the few birds in forlorn unease. 

“Ts she dead, then?” I enquired. 

“T am told,” was the reply, “that her friends have been 
compelled to have her put away. No doubt, it was the 
proper course. It should have been done earlier. But it 
is not our affair, you are to understand. And, poor crea- 
ture, perhaps death would have been a happier, a more 
merciful release. She was sadly afflicted.” 

I said nothing, and continued to stare out of the window. 

But I know now that the news, in spite of a vague 
sorrow, greatly relieved me. I should be at ease in the 
garden again, came the thought—no longer fear to look 
ridiculous, and grow hot when our neighbour was men- 
tioned, or be saddled with her company beside the stream. 

85 


Selina’s Parable 


N the wide wooden staircase that led up to her 
() big sea-windy bedroom in the old house in which 
Selina was staying was a low, square window. 
For Selina, every window in her small private world had 
a charm, an incantation all its own. Was it not an egress 
for her eye to a scene of some beauty, or life, or of for- 
biddingness was it not the way of light; either her own 
outward, or the world’s inward? This small window in 
particular beguiled Selina, because, kneeling there (it was 
of too narrow a frame to permit a protracted standing or 
stooping) she looked out of it, and down from it, upon a 
farmyard. Selina knew farmyards that more seductively 
soothed her esthetic sense—farmyards of richer ricks, of 
solider outbuildings, of a deeper peace. But since this 
farmyard, despite its litter and bareness, was busy with 
life—dog in kennel, chicken, duck, goose, gander and 
goslings, doves, a few wild birds, some even of the sea, 
an occasional horse and man—contemplation of it solaced 
her small mind, keeping it gently busy, and yet in a state 
narrowly bordering on trance. 

Selina was dark and narrow-shouldered, with eyes of 
so intense a brown that, when the spirit that lurked be- 
hind them was absorbed in what they gazed on, they were 
like two small black pools of water. And one long, warm, 
languorous afternoon she found herself kneeling once 
86 


Selina’s Parable 


again at the low staircase window even more densely en- 
grossed than usual. At the bottom of the farmyard, per- 
haps twenty paces distant, stood a low stone barn or 
granary, its square door opening blackly into the sunlight 
upon a flight of, maybe, ten rough and weed-tousled stone 
steps. Beyond its roof stretched the green dreaming 
steeps of the valley. From this door, it was the farmer’s 
wont, morning and evening, to feed his winged stock. 

On this particular afternoon the hour was but hard 
on four. Something unusual was afoot. Selina watched 
the farmer ponderously traverse the yard, and, in his 
usual stout Alexander H. Selkirkian fashion, ascend into 
the granary. Surely not thus unseasonably to dispense 
the good grain, but for some purpose or purposes un- 
known—unknown at least to Selina. 

Nevertheless, all his chickens, such is faith, instinct, 
habit and stupidity, had followed close upon his heels, 
and were now sleekly and expectantly clustered in mute 
concourse upon the steps and on the adjacent yard-stones, 
precisely like an assemblage of humanity patiently wait- 
ing to be admitted into the pit of a theatre or into the 
nave of a church. 

There was a dramatic pause. The sun shone on. The 
blue seemed to deepen. A few late-comers flurried in 
from the byways and hedges. The rest of the congrega- 
tion was steadfast—with just a feverish effort apparent 
here and there of some one jealous individual to better her 
position at the expense of those more favourably situated. 
Then, after a prolonged interval, the square door was re- 
opened, and the farmer emerged, empty-handed and 
apparently unconscious of the expectant assemblage await- 
ing him. Without so much as a glance of compassion 


87 


Selina’s Parable 


or even of heed, he trod heavily down the stone steps 
through the assembled hens, careless to all appearance 
whether his swinging, cumbrous boots trod the more eager 
underfoot, and—wonder of wonders!—he left the door 
open behind him, and at its very fullest gape. 

Selina sighed: the happiest of sighs, that of expec- 
tation and forbidden delight. It was as if the commis- 
sionaire of the theatre or the gaitered archdeacon of the 
cathedral had simply betrayed his edifice, and its treasures, 
to the mob. God bless me, thought Selina, they'll go 
in and help themselves! 

Only one moiety of this brilliant speculation of Selina’s 
was to be proved justified. Led by a remarkably neat 
jimp blue-black Leghorn hen, deliciously feminine and 
adventurous, churchwarden’s helpmeet if ever there was 
one, the whole feathered mob, as if under the gesture of 
a magician, with an instantaneous and soundless ingurgi- 
tation of appetite and desire, swept upward and in. 
Threescore hens at least were there, the appropriate leaven 
of cocks, two couple of ducks, three doves, a few preda- 
tory wildings, while the little cluster of geese on the out- 
skirts outstretched their serpentine necks and hissed. 

Selina, transfixed there in a felicity bordering upon 
rapture, watched. Like Athene above the plains of Troy, 
she gathered in her slim shoulders as if to swoop. What 
was happening within, beyond that strange square of vel- 
vety afternoon darkness? The rapine, the orgy, the in- 
discriminate gorge? Alas, no! Whether or not the 
marauders had discerned or even so much as descried the 
fatted bags of oats and maize and wheat that were un- 
doubtedly shelved within that punctual hostel, Selina 
could not guess. This only was perfectly plain—that the 
88 


Selina’s Parable 


concourse was now dejectedly emerging, dispirited and 
unfed. One by one, in ruffled groups, peevish, crestfallen, 
damped, the feathered congregation by ones and twos and 
threes reappeared, trod, or hopped, or fluttered down the 
shallow familiar disenchanted steps, the ducks, too, dumb 
and ignoble, the cocks simulating indifference or contempt, 
the wildings—as wild as ever. 

When Selina, still agape, came to herself, the farm- 
yard was much as usual—dispersed clusters of huffed, 
short-memoried and dusting fowl, a pacing cock, the dog, 
head on paws, still asleep, doves in comparatively dispas- 
sionate courtship on the roof, duck and drake guzzling 
in that unfathomable morass of iniquity known as the 
duck pond. 

“Came to herself’—for Selina’s was a type of mind 
that cannot but follow things up (as far as ever she could 
go); it was compelled, that is, by sheer natural impulse, 
to spin queer little stories out of the actual, and even, 
alas, to moralise. 

“Why,” she mused, “poor hen-brained things, they 
came to be fed. Always when the farmer opened the 
door and went in, grain, the bread of life, came out. 
Always. And he, surely, being a more or less generous 
creature, capable at any moment of magnanimity, and not, 
gracious goodness, a cold and bloated cynic, since one 
must at least, think the best of what is and may be, why, 
of course, they simply could not but go in, as they did, 
and, to say the least of it, just see for themselves. You 
surely can’t impiously raid the given. Morning, and pos- 
sibly afternoon, the poor creatures as best their natural 
powers allow, reward the farmer for his benefactions. 
A little indirectly, perhaps, but surely you wouldn’t ex- 

89 


Selina’s Parable 


pect the poor things to reason that he gives—well, what 
he does give—solely for gain, that his bounty is sheer 
profiteering, that it is their eggs, their poor carcases, or 
their positive offspring he is after, for his own—well, to 
them—immeasurably barbarous purposes. 

“Suppose with avid beak (a little magnified, of course) 
they surge in one day and carry off his last squalling baby 
—that puffy little Samuel—from his cradle. Suppose they 
do. It will serve him right: it will be tit for tat. They 
had believed in him—that was the point. Now they 
won't: they can’t—at least not for ten minutes. Though 
they are always hungry. Yes, they had climbed up, lured 
on by sheer indifference masquerading as generosity, in 
the heat of the day, too, and that peculiarly slim and gimp 
black Leghorn pullet in particular, only to discover—noth- 
ing, just cool inner darkness and odoriferous vacancy. 
Even a horny, fussy old verger would at least have shooed 
them out again, have told them that they had made a 
mistake, that there wasn’t any extra thing ‘on’ of that 
kind—no confirmation service, you know.” And Selina 
fleetingly smiled, narrow cheek, delicate lip, and black ab- 
stracted eye. 

“How very like poor human beings,” she went on, pur- 
suing her small privy thoughts, slipping down, as she did 
so, from kneeling to sitting, and automatically readjusting 
the tortoise-shell comb in her dark hair; “punctually they 
go to church (some of them), not attempting to guess, or 
not capable, I suppose, of really knowing, what for; but 
confident that the bishop or rector or somebody will be 
in the pulpit and they be fed. 

“And then comes a day— Now what is the difference,” 
90 


Selina’s Parable 


mused Selina, contemplatively narrowing her inward gaze, 
“what is the real difference between Farmer Trepolpen 
and God, and between that fussy, forward—still she was 
adventurous—little Leghorn, who must lay the most de- 
licious little cream-coloured eggs, and Me? Surely no: 
He cannot want me (He cannot expect me to go to church 
and praise and pray) simply for the sake of my wretched 
little hard-boiled bits of goodness. Does He really only 
think of us twice in twenty-four hours, like the tides, 
like matins and evensongs, as—well, as I think of Him? 

“And if in between-whiles He did think of me or I of 
Him, isn’t there any inexhaustible store of heavenly 
manna which my trussed-up soul—and I suppose the 
others—though I wouldn’t mind the doves and the sea- 
gull or . . . Oh dear, oh dear!” 

Selina stared softly on, down the sunlit and intensely 
still staircase into the shadow. “Of course,” began again 
that still small voice within in far-away tones, “it’s not quite 
like that, it’s not on all fours. It’s a bigger dream than 
that. If they, silly cackling creatures, mercifully don’t 
know what that carnivorous old egg-hunter is after, I’m 
pretty certain he doesn’t know eventually himself. Merely 
keeping them alive: though that’s something. But not 
the other. Anyhow, suppose, just suppose not. Sup- 
pose there’s someone, a kind of unseen circumspectious 
spirit, kneeling crunched-up there at a little square stair- 
case window. Oh, ever so happy and dreamy and sor- 
rowful and alone, and not in the least muddle-minded— 
omniscient, I suppose, though that, of course, must be 
omni—omni-sensitive, too—just staring down in sheer 
joy and interest at the farmer, and the sunshine, and the 


gt 


Selina’s Parable 


valley, and the yard, and the hens, and that delicious filthy 
duck-pond and—and the Atlantic, absolutely all Jts, and 
piaeg Vat womldat i). brs 

But at that moment, and only just in time to dissever 
the philosophical net in which poor Selina’s soul was defi- 
nitely strangling, a whiff of hot baked “splitters” wafted 
itself up the staircase, and Selina with an exclamatory 
“Lawks!” and a thin flying hand flung up once more to 
her tortoise-shell comb, remembered her tea. 


92 


Seaton’s Aunt 


I actually encountered her. Seaton, in the hush of 

confidence, or at any little show of toleration in our 
part would remark, “My aunt,” or “My old aunt, you 
know,” as if his relative might be a kind of cement to 
an entente cordiale. 

He had an unusual quantity of pocket-money; or, at 
any rate, it was bestowed on him in unusually large 
amounts ; and he spent it freely, though none of us would 
have described him as an “awfully generous chap.” 
“Hullo, Seaton,” we would say, “the old Begum?” At 
the beginning of term, too, he used to bring back sur- 
prising and exotic dainties in a box with a trick padlock 
that accompanied him from his first appearance at Gum- 
midge’s in a billy-cock hat to the rather abrupt conclusion 
of his schooldays. 

From a boy’s point of view he looked distastefully 
foreign, with his yellow skin, and slow chocolate-coloured 
eyes, and lean weak figure. Merely for his looks he 
was treated by most of us true-blue Englishmen with 
condescension, hostility, or contempt. We used to call 
him “Pongo,” but without any much better excuse for 
the nickname than his skin. He was, that is, in one 
sense of the term what he assuredly was not in the other 
sense, a sport. 

Seaton and I, I may say, were never in any sense inti- 

93 


| HAD heard rumours of Seaton’s Aunt long before 


Seaton’s Aunt 


mate at school; our orbits only intersected in class. I 
kept deliberately aloof from him. I felt vaguely he was 
a sneak, and remained quite unmollified by advances on 
his side, which, in a boy’s barbarous fashion, unless it 
suited me to be magnanimous, I haughtily ignored. 

We were both of us quick-footed, and at Prisoner’s 
Base used occasionally to hide together. And so I best 
remember Seaton—his narrow watchful face in the dusk 
of a summer evening; his peculiar crouch, and his in- 
articulate whisperings and mumblings. Otherwise he 
played all games slackly and limply; used to stand and 
feed at his locker with a crony or two until his “tuck” 
gave out; or waste his money on some outlandish fancy 
or other. He bought, for instance, a silver bangle, which 
he wore above his left elbow, until some of the fellows 
showed their masterly contempt of the practice by drop- 
ping it nearly red-hot down his neck. 

It needed, therefore, a rather peculiar taste, a rather 
rare kind of schoolboy courage and indifference to criti- 
cism, to be much associated with him. And I had neither 
the taste nor, perhaps, the courage. None the less, he 
did make advances, and on one memorable occasion went 
to the length of bestowing on me a whole pot of some 
outlandish mulberry-coloured jelly that had been dupli- 
cated in his term’s supplies. In the exuberance of my 
gratitude I promised to spend the next half-term holiday 
with him at his aunt’s house. 

I had clean forgotten my promise when, two or three 
days before the holiday, he came up and triumphantly 
reminded me of it. 

“Well, to tell you the honest truth, Seaton, old chap—” 
I began graciously: but he cut me short. 


94 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“My aunt expects you,” he said; “she is very glad 
you are coming. She’s sure to be quite decent to you, 
Withers.” 

I looked at him in sheer astonishment; the emphasis 
was so uncalled for. It seemed to suggest an aunt not 
hitherto hinted at, and a friendly feeling on Seaton’s side 
that was far more disconcerting than welcome. 


We reached his home partly by train, partly by a lift 
in an empty farm-cart, and partly by walking. It was 
a whole-day holiday, and we were to sleep the night; he 
lent me extraordinary night-gear, I remember. The 
village street was unusually wide, and was fed from a 
green by two converging roads, with an inn, and a high 
green sign at the corner. About a hundred yards down 
the street was a chemist’s shop—a Mr. Tanner’s. We 
descended the two steps into his dusky and odorous in- 
terior to buy, I remember, some rat poison. A little 
beyond the chemist’s was the forge. You then walked 
along a very narrow path, under a fairly high wall, nod- 
ding here and there with weeds and tufts of grass, and 
so came to the iron garden-gates, and saw the high flat 
house behind its huge sycamore. A coach-house stood 
on the left of the house, and on the right a gate led into 
a kind of rambling orchard. The lawn lay away over 
to the left again, and at the bottom (for the whole garden 
sloped gently to a sluggish and rushy pond-like stream) 
was a meadow. 

We arrived at noon, and entered the gates out of the 
hot dust beneath the glitter of the dark-curtained win- 
dows. Seaton led me at once through the little garden- 
gate to show me his tadpole pond, swarming with what 


95 


Seaton’s Aunt 


(being myself not in the least interested in low life) I con- 
sidered the most horrible creatures—of all shapes, con- 
sistencies, and sizes, but with whom Seaton seemed to 
be on the most intimate of terms. I can see his absorbed 
face now as he sat on his heels and fished the slimy things 
out in his sallow palms. Wearying at last of these pets, 
we loitered about awhile in an aimless fashion. Seaton 
seemed to be listening, or at any rate waiting, for some- 
thing to happen or for someone to come. But nothing 
did happen and no one came. 

That was just like Seaton. Anyhow, the first view I 
got of his aunt was when, at the summons of a distant 
gong, we turned from the garden, very hungry and 
thirsty, to go into luncheon. We were approaching the 
house when Seaton suddenly came to a standstill. In- 
deed, I have always had the impression that he plucked 
at my sleeve. Something, at least, seemed to catch me 
back, as it were, as he cried, “Look out, there she is!” 

She was standing at an upper window which opened 
wide on a hinge, and at first sight she looked an exces- 
sively tall and overwhelming figure. This, however, was 
mainly because the window reached all but to the floor 
of her bedroom. She was in reality rather an under- 
sized woman, in spite of her long face and big head. 
She must have stood, I think, unusually still, with eyes 
fixed on us, though this impression may be due to Sea- 
ton’s sudden warning and to my consciousness of the 
cautious and subdued air that had fallen on him at sight 
of her. I know that without the least reason in the 
world I felt a kind of guiltiness, as if I had been “caught.” 
There was a silvery star pattern sprinkled on her black 
silk dress, and even from the ground I could see the 


96 


Seaton’s Aunt 


immense coils of her hair and the rings on her left hand 
which was held fingering the small jet buttons of her 
bodice. She watched our united advance without stir- 
ring, until, imperceptibly, her eyes raised and lost them- 
selves in the distance, so that it was out of an assumed 
reverie that she appeared suddenly to awaken to our 
presence beneath her when we drew close to the house. 

“So this is your friend, Mr. Smithers, I suppose?” 
she said, bobbing to me. 

“Withers, aunt,’ said Seaton. 

“Tt’s much the same,” she said, with eyes fixed on 
me. “Come in, Mr. Withers, and bring him along with 
you.” 

She continued to gaze at me—at least, I think she did 
so. I know that the fixity of her scrutiny and her iron- 
ical “Mr.” made me feel peculiarly uncomfortable. None 
the less she was extremely kind and attentive to me, 
though, no doubt, her kindness and attention showed up 
more vividly against her complete neglect of Seaton. 
Only one remark that I have any recollection of she made 
to him: “When I look on my nephew, Mr. Smithers, I 
realize that dust we are, and dust shall become. You are 
hot, dirty, and incorrigible, Arthur.” 

She sat at the head of the table, Seaton at the foot, and 
I, before a wide waste of damask tablecloth, between 
them. It was an old and rather close dining-room, with 
windows thrown wide to the green garden and a wonder- 
ful cascade of fading roses. Miss Seaton’s great chair 
faced this window, so that its rose-reflected light shone 
full on her yellowish face, and on just such chocolate 
eyes as my schoolfellow’s, except that hers were more 
than half-covered by unusually long and heavy lids. 

97 


Seaton’s Aunt 


There she sat, steadily eating, with those sluggish eyes 
fixed for the most part on my face; above them stood the 
deep-lined fork between her eyebrows; and above that the 
wide expanse of a remarkable brow beneath its strange 
steep bank of hair. The lunch was copious, and con- 
sisted, I remember, of all such dishes as are generally 
considered too rich and too good for the schoolboy di- 
gestion—lobster mayonnaise, cold game sausages, an im- 
mense veal and ham pie farced with eggs, truffles and 
numberless delicious flavours; besides kickshaws, creams 
and sweetmeats. We even had wine, a half-glass of old 
darkish sherry each. 

Miss Seaton enjoyed and indulged an enormous appe- 
tite. Her example and a natural schoolboy voracity soon 
overcame my nervousness of her, even to the extent of 
allowing me to enjoy to the best of my bent so rare a 
spread. Seaton was singularly modest; the greater part 
of his meal consisted of almonds and raisins, which he 
nibbled surreptitiously and as if he found difficulty in 
swallowing them. 

I don’t mean that Miss Seaton “conversed” with me. 
She merely scattered trenchant remarks and now and 
then twinkled a baited question over my head. But her 
face was like a dense and involved accompaniment to 
her talk. She presently dropped the “Mr.,” to my in- 
tense relief, and called me now Withers, or Wither, now 
Smithers, and even once towards the close of the meal 
distinctly Johnson, though how on earth my name sug- 
gested it, or whose face mine had reanimated in memory, 
I cannot conceive. 

“And is Arthur a good boy at school, Mr. Wither?” 
was one of her many questions. ‘Does he please his 


98 


Seaton’s Aunt 


masters? Is he first in his class? What does the rever- 
end Dr. Gummidge think of him, eh?” 

I knew she was jeering at him, but her face was ada- 
mant against the least flicker of sarcasm or facetiousness. 
I gazed fixedly at a blushing crescent of lobster. 

“T think you’re eighth, aren’t you, Seaton?” 

Seaton moved his small pupils towards his aunt. But 
she continued to gaze with a kind of concentrated detach- 
ment at me. 

“Arthur will never make a brilliant scholar, I fear,” 
she said, lifting a dexterously-burdened fork to her wide 
mouth. . . 

After luncheon she preceded me up to my bedroom, 
It was a jolly little bedroom, with a brass fender and rugs 
and a polished floor, on which it was possible, I after- 
wards found, to play “snow-shoes.” Over the washstand 
was a little black-framed water-colour drawing, depicting 
a large eye with an extremely fishlike intensity in the 
spark of light on the dark pupil; and in “illuminated” 
lettering beneath was printed very minutely, “Thou God 
Seest ME,” followed by a long looped monogram, “S.S.,” 
in the corner. The other pictures were all of the sea: 
brigs on blue water; a schooner overtopping chalk cliffs ; 
a rocky island of prodigious steepness, with two tiny 
sailors dragging a monstrous boat up a shelf of beach. 

“This is the room, Withers, my brother William died 
in when a boy. Admire the view!” 

I looked out of the window across the tree-tops. It 
was a day hot with sunshine over the green fields, and 
the cattle were standing swishing their tails in the shal- 
low water. But the view at the moment was only ex- 
aggeratedly vivid because I was horribly dreading that 

99 


Seaton’s Aunt 


she would presently enquire after my luggage, and I had 
not brought even a toothbrush. I need have had no fear. 
Hers was not that highly-civilised type of mind that is 
stuffed with sharp, material details. Nor could her 
ample presence be described as in the least motherly. 

“T would never consent to question a schoolfellow be- 
hind my nephew’s back,” she said, standing in the middle 
of the room, “but tell me, Smithers, why is Arthur so 
unpopular? You, I understand, are his only close friend.” 
She stood in a dazzle of sun, and out of it her eyes re- 
garded me with such leaden penetration beneath their 
thick lids that I doubt if my face concealed the least 
thought from her. “But there, there,” she added very 
suavely, stooping her head a little, “don’t trouble to 
answer me. I never extort an answer. Boys are queer 
fish. Brains might perhaps have suggested his washing 
his hands before luncheon; but—not my choice, Smith- 
ers. God forbid! And now, perhaps, you would like to 
go into the garden again. I cannot actually see from 
here, but I should not be surprised if Arthur is now 
skulking behind that hedge.” 

He was. I saw his head come out and take a rapid 
glance at the windows. 

“Join him, Mr. Smithers; we shall meet again, I hope, 
at the tea-table. The afternoon I spend in retirement.” 

Whether or not, Seaton and I had not been long en- 
gaged with the aid of two green switches in riding round 
and round a lumbering old gray horse we found in the 
meadow, before a rather bunched-up figure appeared, 
walking along the field-path on the other side of the 
water, with a magenta parasol studiously lowered in our 
100 


Seaton’s Aunt 


direction throughout her slow progress, as if that were 
the magnetic needle and we the fixed Pole. Seaton at 
once lost all nerve in his riding. At the next lurch of 
the old mare’s heels he toppled over into the grass, and 
I slid off the sleek broad back to join him where he 
stood, rubbing his shoulder and sourly watching the rather 
pompous figure till it was out of sight. 

“Was that your aunt, Seaton?’ I enquired; but not 
till then. 

He nodded. 

“Why didn’t she take any notice of us, then?” 

“She never does.” 

“Why not?” 

“Oh, she knows all right, without; that’s the damn 
awful part of it.” Seaton was about the only fellow at 
Gummidge’s who ever had the ostentation to use bad 
language. He had suffered for it too. But it wasn’t, 
I think, bravado. I believe he really felt certain things 
more intensely than most of the other fellows, and they 
were generally things that fortunate and average people 
do not feel at all—the peculiar quality, for instance, of 
the British schoolboy’s imagination. 

“T tell you, Withers,” he went on moodily, slinking 
across the meadow with his hands covered up in his 
pockets, “she sees everything. And what she doesn’t see 
she knows without.” 

“But how?” I said, not because I was much interested, 
but because the afternoon was so hot and tiresome and 
purposeless, and it seemed more of a bore to remain 
silent. Seaton turned gloomily and spoke in a very low 


voice. 
IOI 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“Don’t appear to be talking of her, if you wouldn’t 
mind. It’s—because she’s in league with the devil.” He 
nodded his head and stooped to pick up a round flat 
pebble. “TI tell you,” he said, still stooping, “you fel- 
lows don’t realise what it is. I know I’m a bit close and 
all that. But so would you be if you had that old hag 
listening to every thought you think.” 

I looked at him, then turned and surveyed one by one 
the windows of the house. 

“Where’s your pater?” I said awkwardly. 

“Dead, ages and ages ago, and my mother too. She’s 
not my aunt by rights.” 

“What is she, then?” 

“T mean she’s not my mother’s sister, because my 
grandmother married twice; and she’s one of the first 
lot. I don’t know what you call her, but anyhow she’s 
not my real aunt.” 

“She gives you plenty of pocket-money.” 

Seaton looked steadfastly at me out of his flat eyes. 
“She can’t give me what’s mine. When I come of age 
half of the whole lot will be mine; and what’s more”’— 
he turned his back on the house—“T’ll make her hand 
over every blessed shilling of it.” 

I put my hands in my pockets and stared at Seaton. 

“Ts it much?” 

He nodded. 

“Who told you?’ He got suddenly very angry; a 
darkish red came into his cheeks, his eyes glistened, but 
he made no answer, and we loitered listlessly about the 
garden until it was time for tea... . 

Seaton’s aunt was wearing an extraordinary kind of 
lace jacket when we sidled sheepishly into the drawing- 
102 


Seaton’s Aunt 


room together. She greeted me with a heavy and pro- 
tracted smile, and bade me bring a chair close to the little 
table. 

“T hope Arthur has made you feel at home,” she said 
as she handed me my cup in her crooked hand. “He 
don’t talk much to me; but then I’m an old woman. You 
must come again, Wither, and draw him out of his shell. 
You old snail!’ She wagged her head at Seaton, who 
sat munching cake and watching her intently. 

“And we must correspond, perhaps.” She nearly shut 
her eyes at me. “You must write and tell me everything 
behind the creature’s back.” I confess I found her rather 
disquieting company. The evening drew on. Lamps 
were brought in by a man with a nondescript face and 
very quiet footsteps. Seaton was told to bring out the 
chess-men. And we played a game, she and I, with her 
big chin thrust over the board at every move as she 
gloated over the pieces and occasionally croaked “Check !’” 
—after which she would sit back inscrutably staring at 
me. But the game was never finished. She simply 
hemmed me defencelessly in with a cloud of men that 
held me impotent, and yet one and all refused to admin- 
ister to my poor flustered old king a merciful coup de 
grace. 

“There,” she said, as the clock struck ten—“a drawn 
game, Withers. We are very evenly matched. A very 
creditable defence, Withers. You know your room. 
There’s supper on a tray in the dining-room. Don’t let 
the creature over-eat himself. The gong will sound three- 
quarters of an hour before a punctual breakfast.” She 
held out her cheek to Seaton, and he kissed it with ob- 
vious perfunctoriness. With me she shook hands. 

103 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“An excellent game,” she said cordially, “but my mem- 
ory is poor, and’”—she swept the pieces helter-skelter into 
the box—‘“the result will never be known.” She raised 
her great head far back. “Eh?” 

It was a kind of challenge, and I could only murmur: 
“Oh, I was absolutely in a hole, you know!” when 
she burst out laughing and waved us both out of the 
room. 

Seaton and I stood and ate our supper, with one candle- 
stick to light us, in a corner of the dining-room. ‘Well, 
and how would you like it?” he said very softly after 
cautiously poking his head round the doorway. 

“Like what?” 

“Being spied on—every blessed thing you do and 
think ?” 

“T shouldn’t like it at all,” I said, “if she does.” 

“And yet you let her smash you up at chess!” 

“T didn’t let her!” I said, indignantly. 

“Well, you funked it, then.” 

“And I didn’t funk it either,’ I said; “she’s so jolly 
clever with her knights.” Seaton stared fixedly at the 
candle. “You wait, that’s all,” he said slowly. And we 
went upstairs to bed. 

I had not been long in bed, I think, when I was 
cautiously awakened by a touch on my shoulder. And 
there was Seaton’s face in the candlelight and his eyes 
looking into mine. 

“What’s up?” I said, rising quickly to my elbow. 

“Don’t scurry,’ he whispered, “or she’ll hear. I’m 
sorry for waking you, but I didn’t think you’d be asleep 
so soon.” 

“Why, what’s the time, then?” Seaton wore, what 
104 


Seaton’s Aunt 


was then rather unusual, a night-suit, and he hauled his 
big silver watch out of the pocket in his jacket. 

“It’s a quarter to twelve. I never get to sleep be- 
fore twelve—not here.” 

“What do you do, then?” 

“Oh, I read and listen.” 

“Listen?” 

Seaton stared into his candleflame as if he were lis- 
tening even then. “You can’t guess what it is. All you 
read in ghost stories, that’s all rot. You can’t see much, 
Withers, but you know all the same.” 

“Know what?” 

“Why, that they’re there.” 

“Who’s there?” I asked fretfully, glancing at the door. 

“Why, in the house. It swarms with ’em. Just you 
stand still and listen outside my bedroom door in the 
middle of the night. I have, dozens of times; they’re all 
over the place.” 

“Look here, Seaton,” I said, “you asked me to come 
here, and I didn’t mind chucking up a leave just to oblige 
you and because I’d promised; but don’t get talking a 
lot of rot, that’s all, or you'll know the difference when 
we get back.” 

“Don’t fret,” he said coldly, turning away. “I shan’t 
be at school long. And what’s more, you’re here now, 
and there isn’t anybody else to talk to. I’ll chance the 
other.” 

“Look here, Seaton,” I said, “you may think you’re 
going to scare me with a lot of stuff about voices and 
all that. But I’ll just thank you to clear out; and you 
may please yourself about pottering about all night.” 

He made no answer; he was standing by the dressing- 

105 


Seaton’s Aunt 


table looking across his candle into the looking-glass; 
he turned and stared slowly round the walls. 

“Even this room’s nothing more than a coffin. I sup- 
pose she told you—‘It’s all exactly the same as when my 
brother William died’—trust her for that! And good 
luck to him, say I. Look at that.” He raised his candle 
close to the little water-colour I have mentioned. “There’s 
hundreds of eyes like that in this house; and even if 
God does see you, He takes precious good care you don’t 
see Him. And it’s just the same with them. I tell you 
what, Withers, I’m getting sick of all this. I shan’t 
stand it much longer.” 

The house was silent within and without, and even in 
the yellowish radiance of the candle a faint silver showed 
through the open window on my blind. I slipped off 
the bedclothes, wide awake, and sat irresolute on the bed- 
side. 

“T know you’re only guying me,” I said angrily, “but 
why is the house full ofi—what you say? Why do you 
hear—what you do hear? ‘Tell me that, you silly fool!” 

Seaton sat down on a chair and rested his candlestick 
on his knee. He blinked at me calmly. “She brings 
them,” he said with lifted eyebrows. 

“Who? Your aunt?” 

He nodded. 

“How?” 

“T told you,” he answered pettishly. “She’s in league. 
You don’t know. She as good as killed my mother; 
I know that. But it’s not only her by a long chalk. 
She just sucks you dry. I know. And that’s what 
she'll do for me; because I’m like her—like my mother, I 
mean. She simply hates to see me alive. I wouldn’t 
106 


Seaton’s Aunt 


be like that old she-wolf for a million pounds. And 
so”—he broke off, with a comprehensive wave of his 
candlestick—“they’re always here. Ah, my boy, wait 
till she’s dead! She’ll hear something then, I can tell 
you. It’s all very well now, but wait till then! I 
wouldn’t be in her shoes when she has to clear out—for 
something. Don’t you go and believe I care for ghosts, 
or whatever you like to call them. We’re all in the same 
box. We’re all under her thumb.” 

He was looking almost nonchalantly at the ceiling at 
the moment, when I saw his face change, saw his eyes 
suddenly drop like shot birds and fix themselves on the 
cranny of the door he had just left ajar. Even from 
where I sat I could see his colour change; he went green- 
ish. He crouched without stirring, simply fixed. And 
I, scarcely daring to breathe, sat with creeping skin, 
simply watching him. His hands relaxed, and he gave 
a kind of sigh. 

“Was that one?” I whispered, with a timid show of 
jauntiness. He looked round, opened his mouth, and 
nodded. “What?” I said. He jerked his thumb with 
meaningful eyes, and I knew that he meant that his aunt 
had been there listening at our door cranny. 

“Look here, Seaton,’ I said once more, wriggling to 
my feet. “You may think I’m a jolly noodle; just as 
you please. But your aunt has been civil to me and 
all that, and I don’t believe a word you say about her, 
that’s all, and never did. Every fellow’s a bit off his 
pluck at night, and you may think it a fine sport to try 
your rubbish on me. I heard your aunt come upstairs 
before I fell asleep. And I’ll bet you a level tanner she’s 
in bed now. What’s more, you can keep your blessed 

107 


Seaton’s Aunt 


ghosts to yourself. It’s a guilty conscience, I should 
think.” 

Seaton looked at me curiously, without answering for 
a moment. “I’m not a liar, Withers; but I’m not go- 
ing to quarrel either. You’re the only chap I care a but- 
ton for; or, at any rate, you’re the only chap that’s 
ever come here; and it’s something to tell a fellow what 
you feel. I don’t care a fig for fifty thousand ghosts, 
although I swear on my solemn oath that I know they’re 
here. But she’—he turned deliberately—‘‘you laid a 
tanner she’s in bed, Withers; well, I know different. 
She’s never in bed much of the night, and I’ll prove it, 
too, just to show you I’m not such a nolly as you think 
Iam. Come on!” 

“Come on where?” 

“Why to see.” 

I hesitated. He opened a large cupboard and took 
out a small dark dressing-gown and a kind of shawl-jacket. 
He threw the jacket on the bed and put on the gown. 
His dusky face was colourless, and I could see by the way 
he fumbled at the sleeves he was shivering. But it was 
no good showing the white feather now. So I threw 
the tasselled shawl over my shoulders and, leaving our 
candle brightly burning on the chair, we went out together 
and stood in the corridor. 

“Now then, listen!” Seaton whispered. 

We stood leaning over the staircase. It was like lean- 
ing over a well, so still and chill the air was all around 
us. But presently, as I suppose happens in most old 
houses, began to echo and answer in my ears a medley of 
small stirrings and whisperings. Now out of the 
distance an old timber would relax its fibres, or a scurry 
108 


Seaton’s Aunt 


die away behind the perishing wainscot. But amid and 
behind such sounds as these I seemed to begin to be 
conscious, as it were, of the lightest of footfalls, sounds 
as faint as the vanishing remembrance of voices in a 
dream. Seaton was all in obscurity except his face; out 
of that his eyes gleamed darkly, watching me. 

“You’d hear, too, in time, my fine soldier,” he muttered. 
“Come on!” 

He descended the stairs, slipping his lean fingers lightly 
along the balusters. He turned to the right at the loop, 
and I followed him barefooted along a thickly-carpeted 
corridor. At the end stood a door ajar. And from 
here we very stealthily and in complete blackness as- 
cended five narrow stairs. Seaton, with immense cau- 
tion, slowly pushed open a door, and we stood together 
looking into a great pool of duskiness, out of which, 
lit by the feeble clearness of a night-light, rose a vast 
bed. A heap of clothes lay on the floor; beside them two 
slippers dozed, with noses each to each, two yards apart. 
Somewhere a little clock ticked huskily. There was a 
rather close smell of lavender and eau de cologne, mingled 
with the fragrance of ancient sachets, soaps, and drugs. 
Yet it was a scent even more peculiarly commingled 
than that. 

And the bed! I stared warily in; it was mounded 
gigantically, and it was empty. 

Seaton turned a vague pale face, all shadows. “What 
did I say?” he muttered. “Who’s—who’s the fool now, 
I say? How are we going to get back without meet- 
ing her, I say? Answer me that! Oh, I wish to good- 
ness you hadn’t come here, Withers.” 

He stood visibly shivering in his skimpy gown, and 

109 


Seaton’s Aunt 


could hardly speak for his teeth chattering. And very 
distinctly, in the hush that followed his whisper, I heard 
approaching a faint unhurried voluminous rustle. Sea- 
ton clutched my arm, dragged me to the right across the 
room to a large cupboard, and drew the door close to on 
us. And, presently, as with bursting lungs I peeped out 
into the long, low, curtained bedroom, waddled in that 
wonderful great head and body. I can see her now, all 
patched and lined with shadow, her tied-up hair (she 
must have had enormous quantities of it for so old a 
woman), her heavy lids above those flat, slow, vigilant 
eyes. She just passed across my ken in the vague dusk; 
but the bed was out of sight. 

We waited on and on, listening to the clock’s muffled 
ticking. Not the ghost of a sound rose up from the 
great bed. Either she lay archly listening or slept a 
sleep serener than an infant’s. And when, it seemed, 
we had been hours in hiding and were cramped, chilled, 
and half suffocated, we crept out on all fours, with 
terror knocking at our ribs, and so down the five narrow 
stairs and back to the little candle-lit blue-and-gold bed- 
room. 

Once there, Seaton gave in. He sat livid on a chair 
with closed eyes. 

“Here,” I said, shaking his arm, “I’m going to bed; 
I’ve had enough of this foolery; I’m going to bed.” His 
lips quivered, but he made no answer. I poured out 
some water into my basin and, with that cold pictured 
azure eye fixed on us, bespattered Seaton’s sallow face 
and forehead and dabbled his hair. He presently sighed 
and opened fish-like eyes. 

“Come on!” I said. “Don’t get shamming, there’s a 
IIo 


Seaton’s Aunt 


good chap. Get on my back, if you like, and I'll carry 
you into your bedroom.” 

He waved me away and stood up. So, with my 
candle in one hand, I took him under the arm and 
walked him along according to his direction down the 
corridor. His was a much dingier room than mine, and 
littered with boxes, paper, cages, and clothes. I hud- 
dled him into bed and turned to go. And suddenly, I can 
hardly explain it now, a kind of cold and deadly terror 
swept over me. I almost ran out of the room, with 
eyes fixed rigidly in front of me, blew out my candle, 
and buried my head under the bedclothes. 

When I awoke, roused not by a gong, but by a long- 
continued tapping at my door, sunlight was raying in on 
cornice and bedpost, and birds were singing in the garden. 
I got up, ashamed of the night’s folly, dressed quickly, 
and went downstairs. The breakfast room was sweet 
with flowers and fruit and honey. Seaton’s aunt was 
standing in the garden beside the open French win- 
dow, feeding a great flutter of birds. I watched her for 
a moment, unseen. Her face was set in a deep reverie 
beneath the shadow of a big loose sunhat. It was deeply 
lined, crooked, and, in a way I can’t describe, fixedly 
vacant and strange. I coughed, and she turned at once 
with a prodigious smile to enquire how I had slept. And 
in that mysterious way by which we learn each other’s 
secret thoughts without a sentence spoken I knew that 
she had followed every word and movement of the night 
before, and was triumphing over my affected innocence 
and ridiculing my friendly and too easy advances. 


We returned to school, Seaton and I, lavishly laden, 
Ill 


Seaton’s Aunt 


and by rail all the way. I made no reference to the 
obscure talk we had had, and resolutely refused to meet 
his eyes or to take up the hints he let fall. I was re- 
lieved—and yet I was sorry—to be going back, and strode 
on as fast as I could from the station, with Seaton al- 
most trotting at my heels. But he insisted on buying 
more fruits and sweets—my share of which I accepted 
with a very bad grace. It was uncomfortably like a bribe ; 
and, after all, I had no quarrel with his rum old aunt, 
and hadn’t really believed half the stuff he had told me. 

I saw as little of him as I could after that. He never 
referred to our visit or resumed his confidences, though 
in class I would sometimes catch his eye fixed on mine, 
full of a mute understanding, which I easily affected not 
to understand. He left Gummidge’s, as I have said, 
rather abruptly, though I never heard of anything to 
his discredit. And I did not see him or have any news 
of him again till by chance we met one summer after- 
noon in the Strand. 

He was dressed rather oddly in a coat too large for 
him and a bright silky tie. But we instantly recognized 
one another under the awning of a cheap jeweller’s shop. 
He immediately attached himself to me and dragged me 
off, not too cheerfully, to lunch with him at an Italian res- 
taurant near by. He chattered about our old school, 
which he remembered only with dislike and disgust; 
told me cold-bloodedly of the disastrous fate of one or 
two of the old fellows who had been among his chief 
tormentors ; insisted on an expensive wine and the whole 
gamut of the foreign menu; and finally informed me, 
with a good deal of niggling, that he had come up to 
town to buy an engagement-ring. 
biz 


Seaton’s Aunt 


And of course: “How is your aunt?’ I enquired at 
last. 

He seemed to have been awaiting the question. It 
fell like a stone into a deep pool, so many expressions 
flitted across his long un-English face. 

“She’s aged a good deal,” he said softly, and broke 
off. 

“She’s been very decent,” he continued presently after, 
and paused again. “In a way.” He eyed me fleetingly. 
“T dare say you heard that—she—that is, that we—had 
lost a good deal of money.” 

“No,” I said. 

“Oh, yes!” said Seaton, and paused again. 

And somehow, poor fellow, I knew, in the clink and 
clatter of glass and voices that he had lied to me; that 
he did not possess, and never had possessed, a penny be- 
yond what his aunt had squandered on his too ample 
allowance of pocket-money. 

“And the ghosts?” I enquired quizzically. 

He grew instantly solemn, and, though it may have 
been my fancy, slightly yellowed. But “You are mak- 
ing game of me, Withers,” was all he said. 

He asked for my address, and I rather reluctantly 
gave him my card. 

“Look here, Withers,” he said, as we stood together in 
the sunlight on the kerb, saying good-bye, “here I am, 
and—and it’s all very well. I’m not perhaps as fanci- 
ful as I was. But you are practically the only friend 
I have on earth—except Alice. ... And there—to 
make a clean breast of it, I’m not sure that my aunt 
cares much about my getting married. She doesn’t 
say so, of course. You know her well enough for 

113 


Seaton’s Aunt 


that.” He looked sidelong at the rattling gaudy traffic. 

“What I was going to say is this: Would you mind 
coming down? You needn’t stay the night unless you 
please, though, of course, you know you would be aw- 
fully welcome. ‘But I should like you to meet my—to 
meet Alice; and then, perhaps, you might tell me your 
honest opinion of—of the other too.” 

I vaguely demurred. He pressed me. And we parted 
with a half promise that I would come. He waved his 
ball-topped cane at me and ran off in his long jacket 
after a “bus. 

A letter arrived soon after, in his small weak hand- 
writing, giving me full particulars regarding route and 
trains. And without the least curiosity, even, perhaps 
with some little annoyance that chance should have 
thrown us together again, I accepted his invitation and ar- 
rived one hazy midday at his out-of-the-way station to 
find him sitting on a low seat under a clump of double 
hollyhocks, awaiting me. 

His face looked absent and singularly listless; but he 
seemed, none the less, pleased to see me. 

We walked up the village street, past the little dingy 
apothecary’s and the empty forge, and, as on my first 
visit, skirted the house together, and, instead of enter- 
ing by the front door, made our way down the green 
path into the garden at the back. A pale haze of cloud 
muffled the sun; the garden lay in a grey shimmer—its 
old trees, its snap-dragoned faintly glittering walls. But 
now on them was an air of slovenliness where before 
all had been neat and methodical. In a patch of shal- 
lowly-dug soil stood a worndown spade leaning against 


114 


Seaton’s Aunt 


a tree. There was an old broken wheelbarrow. The 
roses had run to leaf and briar; the fruit-trees were un- 
pruned. The goddess of neglect brooded in secret. 

“You ain’t much of a gardener, Seaton,” I said, with 
a sigh of ease. 

“T think, do you know, I like it best like this,” said 
Seaton. “We haven’t any man now, of course. Can’t 
afford it.’ He stood staring at his little dark square of 
freshly-turned earth. “And it always seems to me,” 
he went on ruminatingly, “that, after all, we are nothing 
better than interlopers on the earth, disfiguring and stain- 
ing wherever we go. I know it’s shocking blasphemy 
to say so, but then it’s different here, you see. We 
are farther away.” 

“To tell you the truth, Seaton, I don’t quite see,” I 
said; “but it isn’t a new philosophy, is it? Anyhow, it’s 
a precious beastly one.” 

“Tt’s only what I think,” he replied, with all his odd 
old stubborn meekness. 

We wandered on together, talking little, and still with 
that expression of uneasy vigilance on Seaton’s face. 
He pulled out his watch as we stood gazing idly over 
the green meadows and the dark motionless bulrushes. 

“T think, perhaps, it’s nearly time for lunch,” he said. 
“Would you like to come in?” 

We turned and walked slowly towards the house, 
across whose windows I confess my own eyes, too, went 
restlessly wandering in search of its rather disconcert- 
ing inmate. There was a pathetic look of draggled- 
ness, of want of means and care, rust and overgrowth 
and faded paint. Seaton’s aunt, a little to my relief, did 

II5 


Seaton’s Aunt 


not share our meal. Seaton carved the coia meat, and 
dispatched a heaped-up plate by an elderly servant for 
his aunt’s private consumption. We talked little and in 
half-suppressed tones, and sipped a bottle of Madeira 
which Seaton had rather heedfully fetched out of the 
great mahogany sideboard. 

I played him a dull and effortless game of chess, yawn- 
ing between the moves he himself made almost at hap- 
hazard, and with attention elsewhere engaged. About 
five o’clock came the sound of a distant ring, and Seaton 
jumped up, overturning the board, and so ending a 
game that else might have fatuously continued to this 
day. He effusively excused himself, and after some little 
while returned with a slim, dark, rather sallow girl of 
about nineteen, in a white gown and hat, to whom I 
was presented with some little nervousness as his “dear 
old friend and schoolfellow.” 

We talked on in the pale afternoon light, still, as it 
seemed to me, and even in spite of a real effort to be 
clear and gay, in a half-suppressed, lack-lustre fashion. 
We all seemed, if it were not my fancy, to be expectant, 
to be rather anxiously awaiting an arrival, the appear- 
ance of someone who all but filled our collective con- 
sciousness. Seaton talked least of all, and in a restless 
interjectory way, as he continually fidgeted from chair 
to chair. At last he proposed a stroll in the garden be- 
fore the sun should have quite gone down. 

Alice walked between us. Her hair and eyes were con- 
spicuously dark against the whiteness of her gown. She 
carried herself not ungracefully, and yet without the least 
movement of her arms and body, and answered us both 
without turning her head. There was a curious pro- 
116 


Seaton’s Aunt 


vocative reserve in that impassive and rather long face, 
a half-unconscious strength of character. 

And yet somehow I knew—I believe we all knew— 
that this walk, this discussion of their future plans was 
a futility. I had nothing to base such a cynicism on, 
except only a vague sense of oppression, the forebod- 
ing remembrance of the inert invincible power in the 
background, to whom optimistic plans and love-making 
and youth are as chaff and thistledown. We came back, 
silent, in the last light. Seaton’s aunt was there—under 
an old brass lamp. Her hair was as barbarously massed 
and curled as ever. Her eyelids, I think, hung even a 
little heavier in age over their slow-moving inscrutable 
pupils. We filed in softly out of the evening, and I made 
my- bow. 

“In this short interval, Mr. Withers,’’ she remarked 
amiably, “you have put off youth, put on the man. Dear 
me, how sad it is to see the young days vanishing! Sit 
down. My nephew tells me you met by chance—or act 
of Providence, shall we call it?—and in my beloved 
Strand! You, I understand, are to be best man—yes, 
best man, or am I divulging secrets?” She surveyed 
Arthur and Alice with overwhelming graciousness. They 
sat apart on two low chairs and smiled in return. 

“And Arthur—how do you think Arthur is looking?” 

“T think he looks very much in need of a change,” I 
said deliberately. 

“A change! Indeed?” She all but shut her eyes at 
me and with an exaggerated sentimentality shook her 
head. “My dear Mr. Withers! Are we not all in need 
of a change in this fleeting, fleeting world?” She mused 
over the remark like a connoisseur. “And you,” she 

117 


Seaton’s Aunt 


continued, turning abruptly to Alice, “I hope you pointed 
out to Mr. Withers all my pretty bits?” 

“We walked round the garden,” said Alice, looking 
out of the window. “It’s a very beautiful evening.” 

“Ts it?” said the old lady, starting up violently. “Then 
on this very beautiful evening we will go in to supper. 
Mr. Withers, your arm; Arthur, bring your bride.” 

I can scarcely describe with what curious ruminations 
I led the way into the faded, heavy-aired dining-room, 
with this indefinable old creature leaning weightily on 
my arm—the large flat bracelet on the yellow-laced 
wrist. She fumed a little, breathed rather heavily, as 
if with an effort of mind rather than of body; for she 
had grown much stouter and yet little more proportion- 
ate. And to talk into the great white face, so close 
to mine, was a queer experience in the dim light of the 
corridor, and even in the twinkling crystal of the candles. 
She was naive—appallingly naive; she was sudden and 
superficial ; she was even arch; and all these in the brief, 
rather puffy passage from one room to the other, with 
these two tongue-tied children bringing up the rear. 
The meal was tremendous. I have never seen such a 
monstrous salad. But the dishes were greasy and over- 
spiced, and were indifferently cooked. One thing only 
was quite unchanged—my hostess’s appetite was as Gar- 
gantuan as ever. The old solid candelabra that lighted 
us stood before her high-backed chair. Seaton sat a 
little removed, with his plate almost in darkness. 

And throughout this prodigious meal his aunt talked, 
mainly to me, mainly at Seaton, with an occasional sa- 
tirical courtesy to Alice and muttered explosions of di- 
rections to the servant. She had aged, and yet, if it be 
118 


Seaton’s Aunt 


not nonsense to say so, seemed no older. I suppose to 
the Pyramids a decade is but as the rustling down of a 
handful of dust. And she reminded me of some such 
unshakable prehistoricism. She certainly was an amaz- 
ing talker—racy, extravagant, with a delivery that was 
perfectly overwhelming. As for Seaton—her flashes of 
silence were for him. On her enormous volubility would 
suddenly fall a hush: acid sarcasm would be left implied ; 
and she would sit softly moving her great head, with eyes 
fixed full in a dreamy smile; but with her whole atten- 
tion, one could see, slowly, joyously absorbing his mute 
discomfiture. 

She confided in us her views on a theme vaguely oc- 
cupying at the moment, I suppose, all our minds. “We 
have barbarous institutions, and so must put up, I sup- 
pose, with a never-ending procession of fools—of fools 
ad infinitum. Marriage, Mr. Withers, was instituted in 
the privacy of a garden; sub rosa, as it were. Civiliza- 
tion flaunts it in the glare of day. The dull marry the 
poor; the rich the effete; and so our New Jerusalem is 
peopled with naturals, plain and coloured, at either end. 
I detest folly; I detest still more (if I must be frank, 
dear Arthur) mere cleverness. Mankind has simply be- 
come a tailless host of uninstinctive animals. We should 
never have taken to Evolution, Mr. Withers. ‘Natural 
Selection !’—little gods and fishes!—the deaf for the 
dumb. We should have used our brains—intellectual 
pride, the ecclesiastics call it. And by brains I mean— 
what do I mean, Alice?—I mean, my dear child,” and 
she laid two gross fingers on Alice’s narrow sleeve, “I 
mean courage. Consider it, Arthur. I read that the 
scientific world is once more beginning to be afraid of 

119 


Seaton’s Aunt 


spiritual agencies. Spiritual agencies that tap, and ac- 
tually float, bless their hearts! I think just one more 
of those mulberries—thank you. 

“They talk about ‘blind Love,’” she ran inconsequently 
on as she helped herself, with eyes roving the dish, “but 
why blind? I think, do you know, from weeping over 
its rickets. After all, it is we plain women that triumph, 
Mr. Withers, beyond the mockery of time. Alice, now! 
Fleeting, fleeting is youth, my child. What’s that you 
were confiding to your plate, Arthur? Satirical boy. 
He laughs at his old aunt: nay, but thou didst laugh. He 
detests all sentiment. He whispers the most acid asides. 
Come, my love, we will leave these cynics; we will go 
and commiserate with each other on our sex. The 
choice of two evils, Mr. Smithers!’ I opened the door, 
and she swept out as if borne on a torrent of unintel- 
ligible indignation; and Arthur and I were left in the 
clear four-flamed light alone. 

For a while we sat in silence. He shook his head at 
my cigarette-case, and I lit a cigarette. Presently he 
fidgeted in his chair and poked his head forward into 
the light. He paused to rise and shut again the shut 
door. 

“How long will you be?” he said, standing by the 
table. 

T laughed. 

“Oh, it’s not that!” he said, in some confusion. “Of 
course, I like to be with her. But it’s not that. The 
truth is, Withers, I don’t care about leaving her too long 
with my aunt.” 

I hesitated. He looked at me questioningly. 

“Look here, Seaton,” I said, “you know well enough 
120 


Seaton’s Aunt 


that I don’t want to interfere in your affairs, or to offer 
advice where it is not wanted. But don’t you think 
perhaps you may not treat your aunt quite in the right 
way? It’s all simply a matter of give and take. I 
have an old godmother, or something. She talks, 
too... . A little allowance: it does no harm. But hang 
it all, I’m no talker.” 

He sat down with his hands in his pockets and still 
with his eyes fixed almost incredulously on mine. 
“How ?” he said. 

“Well, my dear fellow, if I’m any judge—mind, I 
don’t say that I am—but I can’t help thinking she thinks 
you don’t care for her; and perhaps takes your silence 
for—for bad temper. She has been very decent to you, 
hasn’t she?” 

“Decent’? My God!” said Seaton. 

I smoked on in silence; but he continued to look at 
me with that peculiar concentration I remembered of 
old. 

“T don’t think, perhaps, Withers,” he began presently, 
“I don’t think you quite understand. Perhaps you are 
not quite our kind. You always did, just like the other 
fellows, guy me at school. You laughed at me that 
night you came to stay here—about the voices and all 
that. But I don’t mind being laughed at—because I 
know.” 

“Know what?’ It was the same old system of dull 
question and evasive answer. 

“TI mean I know that what we see and hear is only 
the smallest fraction of what is. I know she lives quite 
out of this. She talks to you; but it’s all make-believe. 
It’s all a ‘parlour game.’ She’s not really with you; 

121 


Seaton’s Aunt 


only pitting her outside wits against yours and enjoy- 
ing the fooling. She’s living on inside, on what you’re 
rotten without. That’s what it is—a cannibal feast. 
She’s a spider. It doesn’t much matter what you call 
it. It means the same kind of thing. I tell you, Withers, 
she hates me; and you can scarcely dream what that 
hatred means. I used to think I had an inkling of the 
reason. It’s oceans deeper than that. It just lies behind: 
herself against myself. Why, after all, how much do 
we really understand of anything? We don’t even know 
our own histories, and not a tenth, not a tenth of the 
reasons. What has life been to me?—nothing but a 
trap. And when one is set free, it only begins again. 
I thought you might understand; but you are on a dif- 
ferent level: that’s all.” 

“What on earth are you talking about?” I said, con- 
temptuously, in spite of myself. 

“IT mean what I say,” he said gutturally. “All this 
outside’s only make-believe—but there! what’s the good 
of talking? So far as this is concerned I’m as good as 
done. You wait.” 

Seaton blew out three of the candles and, leaving the 
vacant room in semi-darkness, we groped our way along 
the corridor to the drawing-room. There a full moon 
stood shining in at the long garden windows. Alice 
sat stooping at the door, with her hands clasped, look- 
ing out, alone. 

“Where is she?” Seaton asked in a low tone. 

Alice looked up; their eyes met in a kind of instan- 
taneous understanding, and the door immediately after- 
wards opened behind us. 

“Such a moon!” said a voice that, once heard, remained 
122 


Seaton’s Aunt 


unforgettably on the ear. “A night for lovers, Mr. 
Withers, if ever there was one. Get a shawl, my dear 
Arthur, and take Alice for a little promenade. I dare 
say we old cronies will manage to keep awake. Hasten, 
hasten, Romeo! My poor, poor Alice, how laggard a 
lover !” 

Seaton returned with a shawl. They drifted out into 
the moonlight. My companion gazed after them till they 
were out of hearing, turned to me gravely, and suddenly 
twisted her white face into such a convulsion of con- 
temptuous amusement that I could only stare blankly in 
reply. 

“Dear innocent children!” she said, with inimitable 
unctuousness. “Well, well, Mr. Withers, we poor sea- 
soned old creatures must move with the times. Do you 
sing ?” 

I scouted the idea. 

“Then you must listen to my playing. Chess’”—she 
clasped her forehead with both cramped hands—‘chess 
is now completely beyond my poor wits.” 

She sat down at the piano and ran her fingers in a 
flourish over the keys. “What shall it be? How shall 
we capture them, those passionate hearts? That first 
fine careless rapture? Poetry itself.” She gazed softly 
into the garden a moment, and presently, with a shake 
of her body, began to play the opening bars of Bee- 
thoven’s “Moonlight” Sonata. The piano was old and 
woolly. She played without music. The lamplight was 
rather dim. The moonbeams from the window lay 
across the keys. Her head was in shadow. And whether 
it was simply due to her personality or to some really 


occult skill in her playing I cannot say: I only know 
123 


Seaton’s Aunt 


that she gravely and deliberately set herself to satirize 
the beautiful music. It brooded on the air, disillusioned, 
charged with mockery and bitterness. I stood at the 
window; far down the path I could see the white figure 
glimmering in that pool of colourless light. A few faint 
stars shone, and still that amazing woman behind me 
dragged out of the unwilling keys her wonderful grotes- 
querie of youth and love and beauty. It came to an 
end. I knew the player was watching me. “Please, 
please, go on!” I murmured, without turning. “Please 
go on playing, Miss Seaton.” 

No answer was returned to my rather fluttering sar- 
casm, but I knew in some indefinite way that I was 
being acutely scrutinized, when suddenly there followed 
a procession of quiet, plaintive chords which broke at 
last softly into the hymn, A Few More Years Shall Roll. 

I confess it held me spellbound. There is a wistful, 
strained, plangent pathos in the tune; but beneath those 
masterly old hands it cried softly and bitterly the soli- 
tude and desperate estrangement of the world. Arthur 
and his lady-love vanished from my thoughts. No one 
could put into a rather hackneyed old hymn-tune such 
an appeal who had never known the meaning of the 
words. Their meaning, anyhow, isn’t commonplace. I 
turned very cautiously and glanced at the musician. She 
was leaning forward a little over the keys, so that at 
the approach of my cautious glance she had but to turn 
her face into the thin flood of moonlight for every fea- 
ture to become distinctly visible. And so, with the tune 
abruptly terminated, we steadfastly regarded one an- 
other, and she broke into a chuckle of laughter. 

124 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“Not quite so seasoned as I supposed, Mr. Withers. 
I see you are a real lover of music. To me it is too 
painful. It evokes too much thought. .. .” 

I could scarcely see her little glittering eyes under 
their penthouse lids. 

“And now,” she broke off crisply, “tell me, as a man 
of the world, what do you think of my new niece?” 

I was not a man of the world, nor was I much flattered 
in my stiff and dullish way of looking at things by be- 
ing called one; and I could answer her without the least 
hesitation. 

“T don’t think, Miss Seaton, I’m much of a judge 
of character. She’s very charming.” 

“A brunette?” 

“T think I prefer dark women.” 

“And why? Consider, Mr. Withers; dark hair, dark 
eyes, dark cloud, dark night, dark vision, dark death, 
dark grave, dark park!” 

Perhaps the climax would have rather thrilled Sea- 
ton, but I was too thick-skinned. “I don’t know much 
about all that,” I answered rather pompously. “Broad 
daylight’s difficult enough for most of us.” 

“Ah,” she said, with a sly inward burst of satirical 
laughter. 

“And I suppose,” I went on, perhaps a little nettled, 
“St isn’t the actual darkness one admires, it’s the contrast 
of the skin, and the colour of the eyes, and—and their 
shining. Just as,” I went blundering on, too late to 
turn back, “just as you only see the stars in the dark. 
It would be a long day without any evening. As for 
death and the grave, I don’t suppose we shall much 

125 


Seaton’s Aunt 


notice that.’ Arthur and his sweetheart were slowly 
returning along the dewy path. “TI believe in making the 
best of things.” 

“How very interesting!” came the smooth answer. “I 
see you are a philosopher, Mr. Withers. H’m! ‘As for 
death and the grave, I don’t suppose we shall much 
notice that.’ Very interesting. . . . And I’m sure,” she 
added in a particularly suave voice, “I profoundly hope 
so.” She rose slowly from her stool. “You will take 
pity on me again, I hope. You and I would get on fam- 
ously—kindred spirits—elective affinities. And, of course, 
now that my nephew’s going to leave me, now that his 
affections are centred on another, I shall be a very 
lonely old woman... . Shall I not, Arthur?” 

Seaton blinked stupidly. “I didn’t hear what you 
said, Aunt.” 

“T was telling our old friend, Arthur, that when you 
are gone I shall be a very lonely old woman.” 

“Oh, I don’t think so;” he said in a strange voice. 

“He means, Mr. Withers, he means, my dear child,” 
she said, sweeping her eyes over Alice, “he means that 
I shall have memory for company—heavenly memory— 
the ghosts of other days. Sentimental boy! And did 
you enjoy our music, Alice? Did I really stir that 
youthful heart? ...O, O, O,” continued the horrible 
old creature, ‘‘you billers and cooers, I have been listen- 
ing to such flatteries, such confessions! Beware, be- 
ware, Arthur, there’s many a slip.” She rolled her little 
eyes at me, she shrugged her shoulders at Alice, and 
gazed an instant stonily into her nephew’s face. 

I held out my hand. “Good-night, good-night!” she 
cried. ‘He that fights and runs away.’ Ah, good-night. 
126 


Seaton’s Aunt 


Mr. Withers; come again soon!” She thrust out her 
cheek at Alice, and we all three filed slowly out of the 
room. 

Black shadow darkened the porch and half the spread- 
ing sycamore. We walked without speaking up the dusty 
village street. Here and there a crimson window glowed. 
At the fork of the high-road I said good-bye. But I 
had taken hardly more than a dozen paces when a sud- 
den impulse seized me. 

“Seaton!” T called. 

He turned in the moonlight. 

“You have my address; if by any chance, you know, 
you should care to spend a week or two in town be- 
tween this and the—the Day, we should be delighted to 
see you.” 

“Thank you, Withers, thank you,” he said in a low 
voice. 

“T dare say’—I waved my stick gallantly to Alice— 
“T dare say you will be doing some shopping; we could 
all meet,” I added, laughing. 

“Thank you, thank you, Withers—immensely,” he re- 
peated. 

And so we parted. 


But they were out of the jog-trot of my prosaic life. 
And being of a stolid and incurious nature, I left Seaton 
and his marriage, and even his aunt, to themselves 
in my memory, and scarcely gave a thought to them until 
one day I was walking in the Strand again, and passed 
the flashing gloaming of the covered-in jeweller’s shop 
where I had accidentally encountered my old schoolfel- 
low in the summer. It was one of those still, close 

127 


Seaton’s Aunt 


autumnal days after a rainy night. I cannot say why, 
but a vivid recollection returned to my mind of our 
meeting and of how suppressed Seaton had seemed, and 
of how vainly he had endeavoured to appear assured 
and eager. He must be married by now, and had doubt- 
less returned from his honeymoon. And I had clean 
forgotten my manners, had sent not a word of congratula- 
tion, nor—as I might very well have done, and as I 
knew he would have been immensely pleased at my do- 
ing—the ghost of a wedding-present. 

On the other hand, I pleaded with myself, I had had 
no invitation. I paused at the corner of Trafalgar 
Square, and at the bidding of one of those caprices that 
seize occasionally on even an unimaginative mind, I sud- 
denly ran after a green ’bus that was passing, and found 
myself bound on a visit I had not in the least fore- 
seen. 

The colours of autumn were over the village when 
I arrived. A beautiful late afternoon sunlight bathed 
thatch and meadow. ‘But it was close and hot. A child, 
two dogs, a very old woman with a heavy basket I en- 
countered. One or two incurious tradesmen looked idly 
up as I passed by. It was all so rural and so still, my 
whimsical impulse had so much flagged, that for a while 
I hesitated to venture under the shadow of the sycamore 
tree to enquire after the happy pair. I deliberately passed 
by the faint-blue gates and continued my walk under 
the high green and tufted wall. Hollyhocks had attained 
their topmost bud and seeded in the little cottage gardens 
beyond; the Michaelmas daisies were in flower; a sweet 
warm aromatic smell of fading leaves was in the air. 
Beyond the cottages lay a field where cattle were graz- 
128 


Seaton’s Aunt 


ing, and beyond that I came to a little churchyard. Then 
the road wound on, pathless and houseless, among gorse 
and bracken. I turned impatiently and walked quickly 
back to the house and rang the bell. 

The rather colourless elderly woman who answered 
my enquiry informed me that Miss Seaton was at home, 
as if only taciturnity forbade her adding, “But she doesn’t 
want to see you.” 

“Might I, do you think, have Mr. Arthur’s address?” 
T said. 

She looked at me with quiet astonishment, as if wait- 
ing for an explanation. Not the faintest of smiles came 
into her thin face. 

“T will tell Miss Seaton,” she said after a pause. 
“Please walk in.” 

She showed me into the dingy, undusted drawing-room, 
filled with evening sunshine and with the green-dyed 
light that penetrated the leaves overhanging the long 
French windows. I sat down and waited on and on, 
occasionally aware of a creaking footfall overhead. At 
last the door opened a little, and the great face I had 
once known peered round at me. For it was enormously 
changed ; mainly, I think, because the old eyes had rather 
suddenly failed, and so a kind of stillness and darkness 
lay over its calm and wrinkled pallor. 

“Who is it?” she asked. 

I explained myself and told her the occasion of my 
visit. 

She came in and shut the door carefully after her and, 
though the fumbling was scarcely perceptible, groped 
her way to a chair. She had on an old dressing-gown, 
like a cassock, of a patterned cinnamon colour. 

129 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“What is it you want?” she said, seating herself and 
lifting her blank face to mine. 

“Might I just have Arthur’s address?” I said defer- 
entially. “I am so sorry to have disturbed you.” 

“H’m. You have come to see my nephew?” 

“Not necessarily to see him, only to hear how he is, 
and, of course, Mrs. Seaton, too. I am afraid my silence 
must have appeared .. .” 

“He hasn’t noticed your silence,” croaked the old voice 
out of the great mask; “besides, there isn’t any Mrs. 
Seaton.” 

“Ah, then,” I answered, after a momentary pause, “I 
have not seemed so black as I painted myself! And 
how is Miss Outram?” 

“She’s gone into Yorkshire,” answered Seaton’s aunt. 

“And Arthur too?” 

She did not reply, but simply sat blinking at me with 
lifted chin, as if listening, but certainly not for what 
I might have to say. I began to feel rather at a loss. 

“You were no close friend of my nephew’s, Mr. 
Smithers?” she said presently. 

“No,” I answered, welcoming the cue, “and yet, do 
you know, Miss Seaton, he is one of the very few of 
my old schoolfellows I have come across in the last 
few years, and I suppose as one gets older one begins 
to value old associations. ...” My voice seemed to 
trail off into a vacuum. “I thought Miss Outram,” I 
hastily began again, “a particularly charming girl. I hope 
they are both quite well.” 

Still the old face solemnly blinked at me in silence. 

“You must find it very lonely, Miss Seaton, with 
Arthur away?” 

130 


Seaton’s Aunt 


“I was never lonely in my life,” she said sourly. 
“I don’t look to flesh and blood for my company. When 
you’ve got to be my age, Mr. Smithers (which God 
forbid), you'll find life a very different affair from what 
you seem to think it is now. You won’t seek company 
then, I’ll be bound. It’s thrust on you.” Her face edged 
round into the clear green light, and her eyes groped, 
as it were, over my vacant, disconcerted face. “I dare 
say, now,” she said, composing her mouth, “I dare say 
my nephew told you a good many tarradiddles in his time. 
Oh, yes, a good many, eh? He was alwaysa liar. What, 
now, did he say of me? Tell me, now.” She leant for- 
ward as far as she could, trembling, with an ingratiat- 
ing smile. 

“T think he is rather superstitious,” I said coldly, “but, 
honestly, I have a very poor memory, Miss Seaton.” 

“Why?” she said. “J haven't.” 

“The engagement hasn’t -been broken off, I hope.” 

“Well, between you and me,” she said, shrinking up 
and with an immensely confidential grimace, “it has.” 

“I’m sure I’m very sorry to hear it. And where is 
Arthur?” 

“Eh?” 

“Where is Arthur?” 

We faced each other mutely among the dead old by- 
gone furniture. Past all my scrutiny was that large, flat, 
grey, cryptic countenance. And then, suddenly, our eyes 
for the first time really met. In some indescribable way 
out of that thick-lidded obscurity a far small something 
stooped and looked out at me for a mere instant of time 
that seemed of almost intolerable protraction. Involun- 
tarily I blinked and shook my head. She muttered some- 

131 


Seaton’s Aunt 

thing with great rapidity, but quite inarticulately; rose 
and hobbled to the door. I thought I heard, mingled 
in broken mutterings, something about tea. 

“Please, please, don’t trouble,” I began, but could say 
no more, for the door was already shut between us. I 
stood and looked out on the long-neglected garden. I 
could just see the bright greenness of Seaton’s old tad- 
pole pond. I wandered about the room. Dusk began 
to gather, the last birds in that dense shadowiness of 
trees had ceased to sing. And not a sound was to be 
heard in the house. I waited on and on, vainly speculat- 
ing. J even attempted to ring the bell; but the wire was 
broken, and only jangled loosely at my efforts. 

I hesitated, unwilling to call or to venture out, and 
yet more unwilling to linger on, waiting for a tea that 
promised to be an exceedingly comfortless supper. And 
as darkness drew down, a feeling of the utmost unease 
and disquietude came over me. All my talks with Sea- 
ton returned on me with a suddenly enriched meaning. 
I recalled again his face as we had stood hanging over 
the staircase, listening in the small hours to the inexpli- 
cable stirrings of the night. There were no candles in 
the room; every minute the autumnal darkness deepened. 
I cautiously opened the door and listened, and with some 
little dismay withdrew, for I was uncertain of my way 
out. I even tried the garden, but was confronted under 
a veritable thicket of foliage by a padlocked gate. It 
would be a little too ignominious to be caught scaling a 
friend’s garden fence! 

Cautiously returning into the still and musty drawing- 
room, I took out my watch, and gave the incredible old 
woman ten minutes in which to reappear. And when 
132 


Seaton’s Aunt 


that tedious ten minutes had ticked by I could scarcely 
distinguish its hands. I determined to wait no longer, 
drew open the door, and trusting to my sense of direc- 
tion, groped my way through the corridor that I vaguely 
remembered led to the front of the house. 

I mounted three or four stairs and, lifting a heavy 
curtain, found myself facing the starry fanlight of the 
porch. Hence I glanced into the gloom of the dining- 
room. My fingers were on the latch of the outer door 
when I heard a faint stirring in the darkness above the 
hall. I looked up and became conscious of, rather than 
saw, the huddled old figure looking down on me. 

There was an immense hushed pause. Then, “Arthur, 
Arthur,” whispered an inexpressibly peevish rasping 
voice, “is that you? Is that you, Arthur?” 

I can scarcely say why, but the question horribly 
startled me. No conceivable answer occurred to me. 
‘With head craned back, hand clenched on my umbrella, 
I continued to stare up into the gloom, in this fatuous 
confrontation. 

“Oh, oh,” the voice croaked. “It is you, is it? That 
disgusting man! . . . Go away out. Go away out.” 

Hesitating no longer, I caught open the door and, 
slamming it behind me, ran out into the garden, under 
the gigantic old sycamore, and so out at the open gate. 

I found myself half up the village street before I 
stopped running. The local butcher was sitting in his 
shop reading a piece of newspaper by the light of a small 
oil-lamp. I crossed the road and enquired the way to 
the station. And after he had with minute and needless 
care directed me, I asked casually if Mr. Arthur Seaton 
still lived with his aunt at the big house just beyond the 

133 


Seaton’s Aunt 


village. He poked his head in at the little parlour door. 

“Here's a gentleman enquiring after young Mr. Seaton, 
Millie,” he said. ‘“‘He’s dead, ain’t he?” 

“Why, yes, bless you,” replied a cheerful voice from 
within. “Dead and buried these three months or more— 
young Mr. Seaton. And just before he was to be mar- 
ried, don’t you remember, Bob?” 

I saw a fair young woman’s face peer over the muslin 
of the little door at me. 

“Thank you,” I replied, “then I go straight on?” 

“That’s it, sir; past the pond, bear up the hill a bit to 
the left, and then there’s the station lights before your 
eyes.” 

We looked intelligently into each other’s faces in the 
beam of the smoky lamp. ‘But not one of the many ques- 
tions in my mind could I put into words. 

And again I paused irresolutely a few paces further 
on. It was not, I fancy, merely a foolish apprehension 
of what the raw-boned butcher might “think” that pre- 
vented my going back to see if I could find Seaton’s grave 
in the benighted churchyard. There was precious little 
use in pottering about in the muddy dark merely to dis- 
cover where he was buried. And yet I felt a little un- 
easy. My rather horrible thought was that, so far as I 
was concerned—one of his extremely few friends—he 
had never been much better than “buried” in my mind. 


134 


The Bird of Travel 


E had been talking of houses—their looks and 
ways and influences. What shallow defences 

\ \ they were, we agreed, even for the materialist, 
with their brittle glass, and baked clay bricks; and what 
mere fungi most of them. Worse still—the dreadful 
species that isn’t haunted at all, not even by the graces or 
disgraces of its inmates—mere barracks deaf to life and 
insensitive even to the weathers of heaven. A cheery- 
eyed little man of the name of Bateson, I remember, told 
us of a house he had known that had year by year gently 
and furtively shifted itself a few feet down its valley to- 
wards the sea. A full green mile to go. He said it was 
the property of a family so fair of skin and hair as to be 
almost albinos—but still, a happy one. 

Somebody capped this with the ancient yarn of Lord 
Montberris, who built a new wing to his family edifice 
every year, till the estate was utterly ruined. Whereupon 
he set fire to the place in the vain hope of getting rid of 
its Devil that way. And at last a quaint old creature 
whose name I have forgotten, but who, so I was told, had 
been something of a versifier in his younger days, told 
us the following rather pointless story, about a house 
called the Wood. 

“T must have been scarcely in my first breeches,” he 
began, rubbing his hand down his face, as if he was sleepy, 


135 


The Bird of Travel 


“when I first heard of the old house called the Wood. 
We lived then—my own people I mean—some few miles 
distant from it as the crow flies. There was a remote 
kinship with its inmates—people of a restless blood and 
with a fair acreage of wild oats to their credit. A quarrel, 
a mild feud of the Montague and Capulet order, had 
separated us; and—well, we rarely mentioned them; their 
name was seldom heard. But an old relative of my 
mother’s who lived with us in those days used to tell us 
about the house, warning us, in that peculiarly enticing 
fashion old people have, not to tempt Providence in that 
direction. Let but its evil genius squawk once in our 
young ears—we might never come back. That kind of 
thing. 

“The consequence was, that while we were still mere in- 
fants, my younger sister and I—she in a dark green tar- 
tan frock, I remember—set out one early morning, fully 
intending to see or hear the strange Bird that was re- 
ported to haunt its chaces and its glades. What if it did 
instil into us the wander-lust? It was just what we 
wanted—Seven League Boots. We hoped—with beating 
hearts—even to sprinkle a grain or two of salt on its tail! 

“But we never pushed as far as the house itself, nor 
even into the denser woods amongst which it lay. We sat 
in the sun-glazed buttercups and ate our dinner, and, I 
think, forgot our errand beneath the blossoming may- 
trees. 

“Later, I tried the same experiment alone. It was win- 
ter then. Deep snow lay on the ground, and I pushed on 
through the woods until I was actually sight of the up- 
per windows of the house. Dusk was beg_nning to thicken 
—its strange thievish blur creeping across the white- 
136 


The Bird of Travel 


ness of the snow. Presently, I found myself in a sort 
of walk or alley between a high hedge of yew and beech. 
And as I stood there, hesitating whether to go on or to 
turn back, a figure—a child of about my own age—ap- 
peared at its further end. She was dressed, I remember, 
in a cloak with a hood—crimson, I think, and carried a 
muff. 

“At that very instant, as our young eyes met across the 
wintry air, the last of the evening’s robins broke into its 
tiny, shrill, almost deafening peal of notes. And fled. 
What is it in such moments that catches the heart back, 
and stamps them on the memory as if they were tidings 
of another world? Neither of us stirred. A little snow 
fell from the vacant twig. 

“The scarcely visible, narrow, and, to my young eyes, 
strangely beautiful face gazed on at me. I might even 
then have realized that we were fated some day to meet 
again. But even if I had, I should hardly have surmised 
it would prove as eventlessly. 

“Then I was shy—a gawkish boy. Moreover, I was 
on forbidden ground. I naturally fancied, too, any such 
distant cousin might resent my being there—a stranger 
and uninvited. With a curious drag of my body in the 
dead silence that had followed the song, I began a tuneless 
sort of airy whistling, turned on my heel and crunched 
off in the snow. When in the white darkening alley I 
cast back this phantom creature a thief-like glance out 
of the corner of my eye, she had vanished. 

“T don’t suggest that this incident left much impres- 
sion on me—though I remember every detail of it to this 
day. Then Life called me away; and it was at least a 
score or so of years afterwards, while wandering one after- 

137 


The Bird of Travel 


noon in the neighbourhood of my old home again, that I 
chanced on a finger-post pointing and stooping towards 
a thicket of trees beyond a grassy lane, and marked ‘To 
the Wood.’ 

“T had seen something of the world by then, and with- 
out excessive satisfaction. The old story came back to 
mind. It linked up two selves rather crudely severed. I 
dropped a friendly nod at the post and turned off in its 
direction. The path—a pretty soggy one after the heavy 
summer rains—led through neglected preserves, and after 
walking for half an hour or so, I came out into a kind of 
clearing. And there amid the serene quietude of its re- 
markably dense woods was the long, low house. 

“Tts walls, once grey, were now densely mantled with 
greenery—trose, jasmine, wistaria. It showed, however, 
little trace of age or change. An unusual silence hung 
over its scene. No smoke, or sign of occupancy ; indeed, 
all but one of the windows within view were shuttered. 
I doubt if the Ancient Mariner’s spectral barque more 
eloquently expressed desertion and vacancy. 

“For a few minutes I leaned over a decrepit gate, my 
eyes roving to and fro across the wide stone facade. The 
whole place looked as if it had settled its eyelids and com- 
posed its mouth for a protracted and stagnant sleep. I 
have heard of toads being found immured but yet alive 
in the virgin rock of a coal mine: it looked like that. At 
last I made my way up the weedy path, and, at the back 
of the house, where even yet a few hardy human vege- 
tables contested the soil with Nature’s wildings, I dis- 
covered a door on the latch. © 

“JT tapped and listened ; tapped and listened again; and, 
as if it were Echo herself, some hidden thrush’s rapping 
138 


The Bird of Travel 


of a snail’s shell against its sacrificial stone was my only 
answer. Then, at a venture, I pushed open the door, 
stepped in, and making my way along a narrow passage, 
entered a little morning-room whose air was burdened 
with a faint odour as of sweetish mildew—long-faded 
flowers perhaps. A piano stood where the window might 
best illuminate the singer, and a few pictures in water- 
colour hung on the low walls. A volume of music lay 
open on the table: It was Gounod’s ‘How Beautiful upon 
the Mountains.’ 

“T passed from room to room, and from an attic win- 
dow surveyed many acres—versts, one might say—of the 
tree-tops—of the motionless woods. And there my mind 
lapsed into a sort of daydream. So closely familiar 
seemed all around me that I even began to doubt my own 
memory. The chests and cupboards, the posied carpets 
on the uneven floors, the faint nosegays of wall-paper— 
surely one couldn’t so instantly ‘recognize,’ so to speak, 
objects seen for the first time. And yet—well, most rare 
human experience is like that. 

“One talks of the years of childhood: centuries would 
be a better word. The sense of this familiarity, this rec- 
ognition—was only the sharper, the more wistful (to use 
an old-fashioned word) for the fact that the house was 
vacant, except for the faces upon its walls. Through 
narrow crannies sunshine had sucked the brightness of 
their colours from tapestry and curtain. The she-spider 
had woven and withered in her snares; and a legionary 
dust, like fine gold, floated and whirled in a beam of the 
declining sun, when I drew the shutter. 

“I spent the next hour or so that remained of daylight 
in roaming the woods, half-elated, half-ashamed at my 


139 


The Bird of Travel 


trespass, descending into every hollow, ascending every 
steep, but, nowhere surprised any secret, and nowhere 
confronted hint of ghost or man or beast. Indeed, so 
shut in was the house by its trees that from no point of 
vantage, so far as I could discover, could one command 
any glimpse of the country beyond the valley. It had 
been built in a bowl of verdure and foliage. And for 
those who had occupied it, rumour of the world must have 
been carried by the wind across the hills, unheeded in 
this hollow. 

“And then, while I was slowly returning towards it 
once more, under the still, reddish, evening sky, suddenly 
I heard thrice repeated an extraordinary call. It pierced 
my mind like an arrow. It almost absurdly startled me— 
like the shrilling of a decoy, as if my own name had been 
called in a strange or forgotten tongue. 

“Of English birds, the blackcap, perhaps, sings with a 
vestige of that wild and piercing sweetness. Imagine 
such a voice twenty times more vigorous suddenly break- 
ing in upon that evening silence—falling on from note 
to note as if some unearthly traveller were summoning 
from afar his strayed dog on the hillside! 

“Yet it was evidently a bird that had screamed, for 
presently after, as I stood hotly, attentively listening, I 
saw mount nobly into the deep blue air and wheel into the 
darker thicket a bird of the form and wing of a kestrel, 
but much larger—its plumage of an almost snowy white- 
ness, and of a flight inexpressibly serene. 

“TI heard no more his cry, though I listened long; nor 
did I set eyes on the bird again, either then, or after- 
wards; though the woods were motionless and so silent 
the gloaming it seemed as if the world had swooned. 

140 


The Bird of Travel 


“T was ridiculously elated with my adventure. Had I 
not now encountered the veritable Bird of Travel, which 
childish legend had credited with such fabulous powers? 
Here was the deserted house, and still echoing in my 
heart that cry, the lure, as of some innocent Banshee. 
Who, I wondered, had last heard the call in the green 
spring, and felt leap and kindle insatiable desire. The 
past slid back. I was a child again; looking up into the 
withered old face of my childhood :— 

“But is it true, Grandmamma? Please tell us, is it 
true?’ 

“*True, my dears? Why I myself perfectly well re- 
member Hamilton and Paul when they were boys not so 
very many years older than yourselves. I remember, too, 
my father telling me how, one autumn evening, while 
he and these two friends of his were returning with their 
guns and spaniels through the woods, the bird had flown 
out screaming above their heads. He stopped up his 
ears. He had his work to do. But the other two lads 
watched it in the air, drinking in its forbidden song. 
Nothing any one could say could restrain them then. 
Poor fellows !—fine handsome fellows. And now, Hamil- 
ton lies far away, unburied amid the Andes, and Paul 
drowned in the Straits of Magellan.’ 

“Tt didn’t matter how far the old lady wandered from 
her theme of this family’s destiny, and of their house, 
and of this ominous bird, she invariably concluded her 
narrative with this faint, high, trembling refrain—‘And 
now, Hamilton lies far away, unburied amid the Andes, 
and Paul drowned in the Straits of Magellan.’ 


“O Keith of Ravelston, the sorrows of thy line!” 


141 


The Bird of Travel 


“So ran the ancient story. And had I not that very 
afternoon returned the painted gaze of these young gen- 
tlemen? It seems to me, too, though you may build pretty 
strongly in this world, even the most substantial of us 
must depart in time. All the long annals of this family, 
anyhow, were a record of unrest, of fruitless (or worse) 
venture, of that absurd nomad instinct—travellers to 
whom had come eventually, far from home, the same prac- 
tised, inevitable guide. Well, there are some of us who 
prefer the kind of travel that can be enjoyed in an arm- 
chair ! 

“T had cast one last full look behind me and was re- 
turning by the path I have mentioned, cumbered with 
weeds and brambles, when I looked up from out of my 
thoughts, and saw approaching me a lady. A bright chill 
half-moon had now risen in the twilight above the woods, 
and I could see her face distinctly in its thin radiance. 
The brows were high and narrow (for she was carrying 
her hat in her hand), the nose was long, like the noses in 
some old Italian pictures; the chin firm, yet rounded to 
a point. 

“T could see her plainly in the silverish dusk-light: and 
yet, oddly enough, for a moment no flash of recognition 
told me who she was. And then I knew. She eyed me 
sharply and fully, almost arrogantly, a dark flush in her 
cheeks, and bowed. I apologized as best I could for 
my intrusion. I reminded her of the former neighbour- 
hood and acquaintance of our families; and told her of 
my childish curiosity to explore the woods, yes, and con- 
fessed to having heard the wordrous Phoenix, and con- 
fronted its victims. 

“She listened with face slightly averted, and now turned 
142 


The Bird of Travel 


with a lively smile. ‘You have guessed right,’ she said, 
‘the portraits of my great-uncles; and I am the child 
you—but evidently you don’t remember that. ... So 
please say no more. How I love those pictures—those 
two outlandish brilliant faces. A bad painter may be a 
queerly telling artist.’ 

“She glanced into my eyes with a peculiar smile on 
her lips. ‘You see, nowadays, so far as my own family 
is concerned, I am the last,’ she continued. ‘So you will 
realize how welcome even the remotest of cousins must be! 
Of all these years—all those births and deaths, and births 
again—there is not one left of us in this world here ex- 
cept me.’ She glanced up under the half-moon with 
shining eyes, almost as if in apology, yet still, as if in 
boast. 

“*And are you a traveller, too?’ I questioned. 

“She beckoned me to follow her back by the way I had 
come. 

“*A traveller? No indeed. Not I. Our bright par- 
ticular genius has always refused to meddle the least bit 
with me. I used to lie awake half the night long, summer 
and winter too, in hope to be exiled. That was years and 
years ago: the mad ’teens. But deep, deep down, per- 
haps, I feared my own desire. I cannot tell you—this 
place is rooted in my heart. Itisme. Here, only, I seem 
to catch at the meaning of being alive at all. It is a little 
lodge, and yonder winds the mysterious avenue. I'll wait. 
Forgive such nonsense; but it is that incessant expecta- 
tion—incessant; boxes packed and corded, as it were, the 
door ajar. It is that I hunger for—for then... . And 
this quiet—it is always silent in these woods. The winds 
and storms go over us, you see, like the waters in the book 

143 


The Bird of Travel 


of Job. I never remember it when I am away—this curi- 
ous quiet even beneath the hollow tumult of a gale far 
overhead—without an almost unendurable shudder of 
longing. Shall I ever cease if I begin to talk of it? But 
now I see that with that longing, that greed—far, far be- 
yond the greed of the little girl I used to be even for ices 
and macaroons (and would you believe it, to see a ghost!) 
—it was like keeping a wild beast without meat, to deny 
my poor heart its native air. Better dead than dying. It 
was an extraordinary home-coming—this very morning. 
I was alone. I got back early, soon after daybreak, and 
opened a window to the first rose of dawn. I cannot tell 
you the veracity of it all: the dew, the depth, and the im- 
mortal usualness. 

““And now—well, really it is very delightful—though 
an hour ago I should have madly resented such an idea— 
it 7s delightful to have found so old an unknown friend 
awaiting me—and one remembered so well.’ 

“She laughed out, when I tried to excuse myself for so 
dull a memory. 

“*That’s because you are a poet, Mr. , she said. 
“You see, I know all about you; and you, nothing about 
me! I have noticed it again and again. People with 
imagination are almost indecently bereft of the common 
feelings. And now, will you please sit on this bench 
while I make some tea for us both. It’s all I can offer. 
I shan’t be long. But stuff your fingers into your ears. 
He screams at night too! Now which was the door I 
left unfastened ?’ 

“T sat there—where she had left me. The moon slid 
on, casting her shadows. A few late moths ghosted 


144 


The Bird of Travel 


about me in and out of her beams. It might have been a 
dream. I might have been thousands of years old. 
Strange, that. Strange. Why, I might have been in 
another world. . . . But never mind that. 

“Well, my unconventional hostess returned in a few 
minutes, and we sat sipping our tea on the little balcony 
in the mild autumnal night. 

“And as we sat we talked—as fancy led; she in a 
rather high-pitched voice, and with curious half-gestures. 
It seemed as if she thought always with arrow on the 
string and bow bent—a bow which a dull world had in- 
variably reminded her to slacken. Her eyes were extraor- 
dinarily dark and lustrous in the shadow of that thin 
clear light, revealing, it seemed, a curious exaltation of 
spirit at this sudden and strange return to solitude and to 
her old home. She exulted in her solitude, and had not 
the least misgiving at the thought of staying indefinitely 
in the house. 

“Tt won’t be for long,’ she repeated. “They have 
patched and tortured and experimented, and at last I am 
done. They’ve as good as told me so now, the poor dear, 
scientific creatures. Surely it is not surrender when the 
wound is mortal and the enemy is—that one. But enemy! 
What shallow, stuffy nonsense that is! We have handed 
down our restless memories, the old forlorn absurdities, 
father to son and son again, and now I am, well, just the 
last echo of the refrain before the end. “Ah, Elizabeth,” 
mother used to laugh at me in the old days when we were 
a happy family in the Wood, “he will sing to you, too, in 
due season.” Probably she meant a far tamer fowl. In 
her heart of hearts she hated the wander-taint, as you may 

145 


The Bird of Travel 


imagine. And yet—she herself at last couldn’t resist it. 
We are wayfaring men one and all and my journey will 
be better than dreams.’ 

“There was a peculiar sidelong movement of her head, 
as she said this; she was stooping a little, busied over the 
tea-things. With teapot poised in one thin narrow hand, 
she suddenly turned on me. 

“Shall I tell you why? Shall I? Again that curi- 
ous movement, and I fancied for an instant that she was 
about to cry. ‘It is because J am coming back.’ 

“For an instant or two I did not catch her meaning; 
then, with that odd warmth and confusion within one’s 
very body which any unforeseen reference to death inevita- 
bly brings, I muttered a few of the familiar clichés. ‘Be- 
sides,’ I added, ‘look at me. Surely this face is nearer the 
sight of death than yours. You cannot see your own in 
this moonlight. Shall we have a wager on it? And pay— 
when at last we meet again? For good? Come, now.’ 

“Yes, but you see,’ she replied eagerly, ‘it’s all very 
well to talk about happy reunions. Where? Call it a 
condition of mind; whose? Surely that which found the 
very bones of its delight here? Do you remember what 
Catherine says in Wuthering Heights? But there, never 
mind, when my bird wings free, I know its resting place. 
I know it. You see? The ones that have gone—they © 
changed little; but strangely and instantaneously. And 
now they thrid some finer air, have rarer senses, and their 
tap is heard on walls of the mind that are scarcely there, so 
tenuous they are. Not that I want proof. And such 
proof! I know it. And when your time comes, I give 
* you my invitation now. What is that old Phoenix of ours? 
Do you suppose we could snare him, cage him; tie him 
146 


The Bird of Travel 


to a perch? Isn’t he in our very minds? How then? 
Could we be else than wanderers? May we be forgiven 
for this futile waste of its powers.’ 

“T suppose I was a little taken aback by this outpour- 
ing. For she leaned her face into her hands and laughed. 

“‘Tust “hysteria,” you are thinking,’ she said suddenly, 
looking up at me from them. I sat in the shadow now, 
so perhaps my face was not so clearly visible. 

“*But what is this coming back?’ I stupidly questioned. 

“‘Oh, but you don’t understand,’ she cried, turning 
breathlessly on me. ‘It is here now. And then, shall I 
not see? shall I not know? and probably before the very 
last of these leaves is fallen? Oh, how I detest the senti- 
mentality they talk; fobbing us off with their precious 
stones and golden harps. Symbols if you like, but be- 
yond any poor earthly spirit’s hope or desire. If we 
humans have climbed to where we are—though I don’t 
believe it—by way of the happy and innocent animals, do 
you suppose we are going to suddenly jump half-a-dozen 
stories instead of ascending on and on and on? What 
is space but the all I am? What is time but the all I 
was and shall be? I cannot express myself, but if you 
could hear the roaring of the fire here, you would not be 
wanting any words. Never in the whole of my reading, 
in the whole queer skein of things called my life—never 
have I encountered a single human being who expressed a 
tenth of the sheer delight of sharing—well, say, just that 
bit of garish moon in this tiny bowl of the world’s green- 
ery. “Blind,” “ungrateful,” “worms of earth,’ no word 
in the language could express our fatuity. Then I shall 
be free. . . . But there, it’s time, as the old Scottish bal- 
lad says, you were awa’. And it’s time, as some less 


147 


The Bird of Travel 


anonymous poet says, I sought my couch. I confess I 
hated the very sight of you when I saw you trespassing in 
my woods. Another hereditary trait. But you have for- 
given me... and I will walk a little distance with you 
on your way.’ 

“Well, I confess, her vehemence had stirred up my 
sluggish mind a good deal more even than had the bird 
before her. I followed her all but in silence. We came 
to a kind of alley, its yew hedge long untended, though 
the light of the moon pierced through upon its sward. 

“She paused, her face averted. ‘And now’—she said. 
‘good-bye, for this life. Yours that way; mine this. And 
may all that is meant by heaven be with you.’ 

“TJ did as I was bid. Silence crept in upon me—an en- 
tire world—like a dangerous flood. The grass was hoar 
with a moonlight almost as white as snow. The years 
seemed to melt away like a dream, and, as I turned, see- 
ing her there still waiting, I realized that she herself 
must have devised this echo of our first and only other 
meeting. The strange rapt face looked curiously unreal. 
With queer contrary thoughts in my mind, I gazed across 
at her, not more trustful of my eyes perhaps in that un- 
certain light than I had been of my ears earlier in the eve- 
ning. She did not stir. All perfectly still things seem 
to have a look of agelessness and of the eternal. And then 
—I turned on my heel, and when, now no longer a shy 
awkward silly boy, I looked back as of old and for the 
last time; again it was in vain: She was gone... .” 


So this, it appeared was all. This was the story of 
“The Wood”! We others glanced a little uncomfortably 
at one another, I remember, at this crisis in the evening’s 
148 


The Bird of Travel 


talk—a poet’s story in sober earnest: incoherent, obscure, 
unreal, unlifelike, without an ending. 

“And the Bird?” cried one of us, maybe a little more 
“fatuous” than the rest. The old man was at that mo- 
ment beckoning to the Club waiter, and appeared not to 
have noticed the question. And nobody, it seemed, had 
either the stupidity or the courage to add, “And what, 
pray, are you waiting for?” 


149 


The Bowl 


T was one autumn evening—in the month of October, 
I I think, for I can just remember that the thin gold 
and tawny beech leaves were still floating down in the 
garden in the hazy sunshine, and that already a fire burned 
in the grate to cheer the colder twilights, when first my 
very young eyes fell in wonder upon Mrs. Orchardson’s 
silver bowl. Perhaps it had always been there, and al- 
ways as conspicuous. But it was now, I am sure, that I 
first noticed it. It stood on the sideboard beside a cut- 
glass decanter reflecting the ruddy colour of its wine in 
the smooth cheeks of its two laughing Cupids. It had 
handles, two pendant rings as plain in workmanship as 
the buckle on a child’s shoe. I stood and stared up at it, 
as young eyes will at any such magical object. There was 
a sort of secret jollity in the very look of it—an air to 
blow bubbles in, cool as an orchard, or as the half-hidden 
valleys of a summer cloud. 

I was astonished at it, entranced by it; longed to touch 
and handle it, and even felt, I verily believe, a kind of 
covetousness and an envy of the friend whose bowl it was. 
And if I had been a jackdaw of equal proportions to my- 
' self, I should certainly have carried it off to hide in the 
chimney or hole in the wall, wherever my nest might be. 
As it was, I at least carried off a very vivid remembrance 
of it in my mind—which, fortunately, in a world hedged 
about with a superfluity of Dont’s, is not a felony. 

150 


The Bowl 


Anyhow, when one dark rainy morning the sharp need 
came for something of this kind, it was I who thought of 
the bowl, which, after all, could contain almost as much 
Jordan water as could the freestone font in St. Barnabas’s, 
and was twenty times more beautiful. 

All through the night, while I had been placidly asleep, 
I learned at my lonely breakfast, my friend Mrs. Orchard- 
son’s little baby had been simply burning like a coal at 
death’s door. It was a most interesting and enthralling 
piece of news. And I’m not so sure that I did not specu- 
late how it was that in my long nocturnal journeyings in 
the wilds of dreamland, I had not heard its wailing cries 
as it, too, a much smaller spirit, ran along into the 
shadowy valley. For after all, abstractions like death are 
for a child little more than a vague and menacing some- 
thing in a dream. 

Mrs. Orchardson’s baby had, of course, been sickening 
for some little time past. I had been angry and jealous 
more than once because it had been the cause of my seeing 
very little of her, and of my being entertained a good deal 
less than I thought proper on so short a visit. I could 
remember well enough its little blue-eyed puckered face 
and slatey-blue eyes, with an expression in them too, al- 
most as dull as slate. Indeed, one morning, not long 
before—an unusually hot morning for October—she and 
I and it had sate on a rug in the garden together under 
the elms. A few withered wild flowers still showed in 
the grass, I remember, with nothing but their swollen seed 
vessels left of their summer. 

And I had noticed, too, how peculiar a shiningness had 
come into Mrs. Orchardson’s grey eyes when she talked 
to her baby. Yet anxiety kept her forehead frowning 

I5I 


The Bowl 


even while she was smiling, as she stared down into its 
small ugly wizened face. I didn’t think it was in the 
least a pretty baby, and was vexed at its persistence in 
being ill. 

These last few days, indeed, I had been left almost en- 
tirely to myself, with nobody to say a word to, except 
Esther, the parlourmaid—a sandy-coloured woman with 
a thick down on her face—and now and then Mrs. 
Orchardson’s cook, who had a way of speaking to me 
as if I were a kind of clockwork image incapable of 
even hearing her words. “And how is the poor little 
infant this morning?” I asked her once, mimicking the old 
doctor. She looked at me as if I were a snake in the 
grass—as no doubt I was. 

But to come back to the silver bowl again. I had 
finished my bread and milk, had for the third time shooed 
away the cat from getting on to the table, and now sat star- 
ing through the long rainy window with my spoon in my 
mouth, when the door opened, and Mrs. Orchardson put 
her face in at it. It was grey, almost like wet chalk, and 
her eyes were so sharp and far-off looking that she seemed 
scarcely to be aware of meat all. She was certainly look- 
ing at me, and yet as if through me, and with almost as 
horrified an expression as if she could see the very bones 
in my body. And then, suddenly she came in, almost fell 
down on her knees beside my chair, clasped me round, 
and hid her face in my lap. “O, Nick, Nick, you poor 
lonely thing,” she said, sobbing, “she is worse, much, 
much worse. She is dying.” 

“Oh, dear!” I said in a mournful voice, “oh, dear!” 

“So you will just try,’ she went on hurriedly, as if 
she were saying something that any moment might be 
152 


The Bowl 


forgotten, “you will just try to be quiet and happy, by 
yourself. It won’t be long; not very long.” She paused, 
and I sat on as still as the loaf of bread on the table. 
She did not seem even to be breathing. But in a minute 
or two she lifted her wet face from my pinafore, and was 
looking entirely different from herself. I should hardly 
have recognized her—and yet she was quite calm, though 
her cheeks were almost like clay and her eyes as if they 
had fallen a little back into her head. “And now, you 
see,” she added, as if not to me at all, “Mr. Cairns is com- 
ing to christen her, to make her God’s little child. As 
you are, Nick.” 

“Tsn’t it going to be taken to Church, then?” I said in 
a sepulchral voice. 

“No,” she answered, listening, but not to me. 

“But why?” I said in disappointment. She put her 
hands to my cheeks, cupping my chin in them, and simply 
looking at me. 

“But,” I said wriggling away, “there’s no font here: 
there must be a font like as at Church.” I frowned, look- 
ing at her a little scornfully out of the corner of my eye. 
“Tt won’t be much good, if you don’t. At least that’s 
what Esther says.” 

She only shook her head, still gazing at me, and listen- 
ing. “J know!” I said, “will that big silver bowl on the 
sideboard do for a font, Mrs. Orchardson? It’s a very 
big bowl.” 

She smiled at me brightly. 

“Why, of course, you strange creature, that will do 
beautifully. ... And now—” She got up, and stood 
looking for a moment out of the window, as if she had 
forgotten my presence altogether. “In all this loveliness !” 


153 


The Bowl 


she almost whispered, though all that she could see was 
just an ordinary wet morning. 

Dr. Sharp would not return again for an hour, so there 
were only Mrs. Orchardson and Esther and Mr. Cairns 
in the bedroom besides myself and the baby. The cook, 
I heard, wouldn’t come, because she was afraid of being 
upset. That seemed silly to me. When I went into the 
room, a little square table already stood between the fire 
and the sunshine, and it was covered with a linen napkin 
with a fringe. On this were burning two tall white 
candles in silver sticks; and in the midst was the bowl 
with a little water in it which by tiptoeing I could just 
manage to see. I stared between surprise and dismay at 
Mr. Cairns when he came in in his surplice. He seemed 
to be a person absolutely different from the two Mr. 
Cairns’ I knew already—the one a smiling but rather silly- 
smiling elderly man in his old clerical clothes in the Vicar- 
age garden; the other, of course, looking almost artificial, 
as he stood intoning the service in church. 

Having blown out the candles, and placed them on the 
dressing table, he signed to us to stand up, myself being 
between Mrs. Orchardson and Esther, and the baby lying 
still and scarlet and open-eyed and without a single sound 
in Mrs. Orchardson’s arms. Once I remember, as he 
leaned over towards her, Mr. Cairns’ surplice brushed 
my cheek with its peculiar perfume of cambric. And 
when he dipped his fingers into the bowl I saw the water- 
butterflies jig on the ceiling. | 

He did not seem to have noticed that I was there, though 
for a moment or two his glasses blazed on me like lanterns 
when he fronted the window. He took the little baby in 
his great hands. It had begun to cry then. But its cry- 


154 


The Bowl 


ing was more like a very, very old woman’s than a natu- 
ral baby’s, and the fingers it spread out in the air an in- 
stant were like white match-sticks, they were so thin and 
shrunken. I smiled at it and made a grimace to please 
it, but it looked at me like purple glass, as if it was not 
there to see me or to be amused. 

When the service was done, Mr. Cairns stooped down 
and kissed the baby and he looked a very old man indeed; 
and yet when he stood up again and had taken off his 
stole and surplice, he was exactly the same as when I 
had seen him reading in his garden. 

“My dear, dear lady, you must not grieve overmuch,” 
he said to Mrs. Orchardson, at the door of the bedroom, 
“He knows His lambs, all His lambs. And He is merci- 
ful.” 

He leant his chin, and smiled towards me with a curi- 
ous wrinkle on his face. His brown eyes reminded me 
of berries. They were full of kindness even though the 
look in them was not very attentive. I whispered to 
Esther, asking if I might be allowed to carry the silver 
bowl downstairs again. And all she gave me was a sharp 
shake of the head and a greenish look, because I don’t 
think she liked to say no while Mr. Cairns was in hear- 
ing. He must have heard what I said, because he put his 
fingers on my hair and smiled at me again, so that I had 
to go downstairs in front of him, and I think he must have 
told Mrs. Orchardson meanwhile what to do with the 
bowl and the water. 

In the hall he talked for a minute or two in secret with 
Esther. “In that case send the little boy to me, then,” 
I heard him say. “Mrs. Cairns will be at home. Poor 
tiny lamb! To think it must have suffered like you and 

155 


The Bowl 


me!” Esther shut her fair-lashed eyes a moment as if 
to show it would be a mercy if the baby did die, and then 
opened them again very stern and mournfully when she 
saw me watching her. 

Yet in my heart of hearts I was perfectly sure that Mrs. 
Orchardson’s little baby would not die. I cannot tell 
whence this assurance came. It may have been the fruit 
of a child’s natural intuition; or even of his exquisite eye- 
sight—experienced, as it would seem, to see through, and 
not only on the surface. But for one thing, I had all 
along felt a firm belief in the inherent virtue of the bowl, 
and was contemptuous of Esther for shutting her eyes 
like that. It seemed impossible that the clear shallow 
water in its shadowy deeps should not wash all taint of 
sickness away. Besides, I had thought of it. 

This, I think was the reason why I flatly refused to 
accept Mr. Cairns’ invitation to go to the Rectory, when 
Esther told me to do so. I knew perfectly well she 
wouldn’t be able to make me go against my will while 
the baby was so ill. At last she gave a furious empty 
toss with my grey wool scarf that she was carrying in 
her hand, and looked at me as if no tongue could express 
her hatred. 

“And don’t you feel no pity for that poor suffering mite 
upstairs, you obstinate boy?” she asked me in a low com- 
pressed voice. I merely stared at her without answering, 
and she had to turn her eyes away. 

“He don’t even know the meaning of the word!” she 
said, and shut the door of the dining-room after her as 
if she hoped its wood would stick for ever after to the 
lintel. But I did not mind her temper. Presently she 
156 


The Bowl 


came in again, looking even angrier and whiter than 
before. 

“Ts this the time for building and Noah’s-arking,” she 
almost shouted in my ear as I sat on the hearth-rug; “is - 
this the time?—when that poor little innocent is rattling 
its very life out over your head?” 

I looked no further up at her than at the tray in her 
hand. “You little imp!” 

“T suppose when it gets well, it will have to be christened 
all over again, properly, won't it?” I enquired. I knew 
she was staring at me, and hating me for not caring what 
she said. 

“Where,”—she gasped almost losing herself in her rage, 
“where you pick up such evil heathenish notions from, I 
can’t think. Not from this house. There’s not a speck 
of sin left in the whole of that infant’s body now; not 
a speck. And if you had gone to that kind Mr. Cairns 
as he arst, he would have fold you so.” 

“T didn’t want to go, and Mrs. Orchardson wouldn’t 
have tried to make me.” The blood seemed to rise up in 
my body and I could hear my own voice growing more 
insolent and trumpeting every moment. “What’s more, 
Miss Esther, I don’t believe a bit in your old holy water. 
It isn’t going to die, and even if you hope it will, it won’t. 
And you’re treading on one of my animals.” 

At that she deliberately kicked down the fort I was 
building with her foot. 

“You are a little devil incarnate; that’s what you are,” 
she screamed at me, if one can scream without raising 
one’s voice. “A little devil. You ought never to have 
been allowed in a Christian house. It’s Tophet and the 

157 


The Bowl 


roaring flames that you’re bound for, my young man. 
You’ve murdered that poor mite. You mark my word!” 

I was so enraged at this that I hit at a little bulge in 
her boot with one of my bricks. 

“You’re a beast,” I bawled at her in a voice no louder 
than her own. “You’rea filthy beast. And I don’t mind 
where I go, so long as you aren’t there. Not a—not a 
dam’.” 

Her face was so close to mine in its hatred that I saw 
her eyes change, and her lips stiffen, as if she was afraid. 
“You wait, Master Nicholas; you wait! For that vile 
horrid word! You wait! The master shall hear of that.” 

I laughed at her sneeringly. “I dare you to say it to 
him. He wouldn’t care; he thinks you’re a stupid hairy 
woman. And J think your hateful.” She lifted her 
hand and shut her eyes. “Oh, my God,” she said, “I 
can’t stand it,” and all but ran out of the room. 

When she was gone—with the inside of my stomach 
feeling as if it were on fire—I climbed the stairs to my 
bedroom, and, boots and all, flung myself down on the 
white quilt of the bed. 

Nothing happened. The house remained in silence. 
A flying shower rattled on the window pane, and then 
the sun returned and shone gtey and golden on the rain- 
drops. And I hated everything I looked at. I thought 
how I would kill Esther; and how I would kick her body 
when she was dead. 

But gradually the furnace within me began to die down, 
my “thoughts” wandered away, and my eye-lids were 
drooping into a drowse when I heard a muffled sound of 
footsteps to and fro, to and fro, ascending from the bed- 
room immediately beneath me, and I remembered the 
158 


The Bowl 


baby. And suddenly a dark shivering horror turned me 
to ice, and there, as I lay, I prayed to be forgiven for 
having been myself, and implored God to let me take its 
sufferings or to die instead of it. So I lay; flat on my 
stomach, and prayed. 

The afternoon had now grown a little darker in the 
room, and in a while after this, [ must have emptily fallen 
asleep. For the next thing I remember is finding a cold 
arm around me in the dregs of the dusk and lips close to 
my face softly whispering and murmuring, their soft warm 
breath on my cheek. 

“Guess, Nick! Guess!” said that soft, thrilling voice, 
when I stirred a little nearer. “Guess!” 

I put back my head, and by staring could just see the 
light from the window reflected in Mrs. Orchardson’s 
eyes. A curious phosphorescence was there too; even 
her skin seemed very faintly to shine. 

“Why,” I said, “she’s much better.” 

At which those eyes gazed through the narrow air be- 
tween us as incredulously as if at an angel. “You knew 
it; you knew it? You precious holy thing! And all this 
while you have been brooding up here by yourself. What 
can I say? How can I tell you? Oh, Nick, I shall die 
of happiness.” 

She squeezed herself close to me in the vacant space 
on the bed, clasping me round—her shoulders shaking 
with what just for a minute I thought was laughing. 

“I never can say how, Mrs. Orchardson”; I managed 
to murmur after a long pause. “But I was quite sure, 
you know. I don’t think grown-up people understand.” 

“And I don’t, either,” she said with a little hysterical 
laugh. “Indeed, indeed I don’t. But there—” she raised 

159 


The Bowl 


her face, sat up, put her hands to her hair, and smiled 
down on me. I too scrambled up; and could see her 
plainly now as if by a thin mist-like light from her own 
body. “Bless me, Nick, I have made your hair all wet 
with crying. God bless you, my dear. It was all you; 
all you.” 

She sat in silence a moment, but not as if she was 
thinking. Then suddenly she breathed, and lifted her 
head. “And now I must go, and we mustn’t make the 
teeniest tiniest little crick of a sound. She is asleep. 
Follow me down—just two shadows. And don’t, Nick, 
don’t let me vanish away.” 

“Will everything,” I asked her when we were safely 
downstairs; “will everything be just as ordinarily again 
now, Mrs. Orchardson?” 

“You have missed me, you dear thing?” she asked, 
glancing over her shoulder, in the glaring light that now 
stretched down on us. She was kneeling at the sideboard. 

“Esther never says a word, except to make me hate 
her,” I replied. “So, of course, most what she says about 
me is true. So I think now that the baby’s quite better, 
Mrs. Orchardson, I had better go home again. Even 
Mr, Cairns wouldn’t let me carry the bowl downstairs. 
And if it hadn’t been for that . . .” 

The blue of her eyes shone across at me like bits of 
the sky seen through a window. They opened wider and 
wider. “But Nick, my dear!’ she cried at last, clear and 
small as a bird. “I hadn’t a notion that you had been un- 
happy. Indeed, indeed I hadn’t. Blind selfish creature 
that I am. He is shaking, poor darling. He is abso- 
lutely worn out!” 

160 


The Bowl 


And at that I could refrain my self-righteousness and 
self-commiseration no longer. I ran over to her, bowed 
myself double beside her on the floor, and sobbed “as if 
my heart would break.” 


161 


The Three Friends 


r “QHE street was narrow; yet, looking up, the two 
old friends, bent on their accustomed visit, could 
discern—beyond a yellow light that had sud- 

denly shone out into the hushed gloom from an attic win- 

dow—the vast, accumulated thunderclouds that towered 
into the darkening zenith. 

“That’s just it,’ continued Mr. Eaves, more em- 
phatically, yet more confidentially, it isn’t my health, 
Sully. I’m not so much afraid of my health. It’s—it’s 
my...” He took off his hat and drew his hand over 
his tall, narrow head, but pushed on no further towards 
the completion of his sentence. 

Mr. Sully eyed him stonily. ‘Don’t worry, then,” he 
said. “Why worry? There’s worry enough in the world, 
old sport, without dreaming about it.” 

“T know,” said Mr. Eaves; “but then, you see, Sully—” 
They had paused at the familiar swing-door, and now con- 
fronted one another in the opaque sultry silence. And 
as Mr. Sully stood for an instant in close contact with his 
old crony in the accentuated darkness of the mock-marble 
porch, it was just as if a scared rabbit had scurried out 
of Mr. Eaves’s long white face. 

“Look here,’ Mr. Sully exclaimed with sudden 
frivolity, “we'll ask Miss Lacey”; and was followed by 
his feebly protesting companion into the bar. 

162 


The Three Friends 


The long black stuffed bench and oblong mahogany 
table, darkened here and there by little circular pools of 
beer, stood close against the wall, and Mr. Sully began to 
divulge his friend’s confidences even before Miss Lacey 
could bring them their glasses. A commissionaire sat in 
the further bar, nodding over an old newspaper ; and Mr. 
Eaves kept his eyes fixed on his oblong lurching head, 
while he listened, fascinated and repelled, to his friend’s 
facetiousness. 

“Now, supposing, Miss Lacey, my dear,” began Mr. 
Sully shrewdly, half-closing his eyes as if to gloss over 
his finesse, “supposing a young man, a nice, curly-headed 
young man—just about our friend’s age here’—Miss 
Lacey, with a kind of arch and sympathetic good-nature, 
leaned a large, dark head to glance at Mr. Eaves—“sup- 
posing a nice young gentleman—just as it might be our 
old friend himself here—came, like an innocent, to entrust 
to your blessed bosom a secret—a sacred secret: what 
would you do?” 

“Lor’ bless me, Mr. Sully, sir, is that all you was com- 
ing to! A secret? Why, keep it, to be sure; and not 
the first time neether.” Miss Lacey advanced to the bar, 
black, precise, and cheerful, with the two small, thick 
glasses in her hand. 

“Good,” said Mr. Sully, with an almost professional 
abandon. “Good. So far. But step number two; sup- 
posing, my dear, you couldn’t for the life and love of you 
help him in his little difficulty—dependent on his secret, 
let’s say—what then?” 

“Why, I’d keep it all the more,” cried Miss Lacey 
brightly. 

“A woman’s answer, Eaves; and none the worse for 

163 


The Three Friends 


that,” said Mr. Sully. “But on the other hand, suppos- 
ing you were a practical”—he paused with the little water- 
jug hovering an inch or two above his friend’s glass— 
“supposing you were a practical, unromantic, old black- 
guard like me—why, you’d go and tell it to the first lovely 
blooming creature that came along.” He eyed her steadily 
yet jocosely. “And that’s why I’m going to tell it to you, 
my dear!” 

“How you do tease, to be sure!’ said Miss Lacey. 
“He’s a real tease, isn’t he, Mr. Eaves?” 

Mr. Sully’s eyes suddenly sobered with overwhelming 
completeness. He pointed coldly with his stick. ‘“He’s 
been dreaming of hell,” he said. 

Mr. Eaves, on his part, withdrew large, weak, colourless 
eyes from the uneasy head of the commissionaire, and 
turned them on Miss Lacey. She glanced at him swiftly, 
then stooped, and took up a piece of sewing she had laid 
down on her wooden chair, in the little out-of-the-way bar. 

“T don’t approve of such subjecs,” she said, “treated 
frivolous.” 

“Gracious goodness, Eaves,” said Mr. Sully, “she says 
‘frivolous.’ Hell—‘frivolous’!” 

“Why,” said Miss Lacey lucidly, “I’m not so green as 
I look.” 

“Well, you couldn’t look younger, if being young’s to 
be green,” said Mr. Sully; “and as sure, my dear, as that 
was a flash of lightning, it—it’s the real thing.” 

When the faint but cumulative rumble of thunder that 
followed had subsided, Miss Lacey seemed to have with- 
drawn her attention. Mr. Sully edged slowly round on 
his feet and faced his friend. “You old skeleton at the 
feast! You’ve alarmed the poor child,” he said. 

164 


The Three Friends 


Miss Lacey spoke without raising her eyes, bent closely 
on her needle. “Not me,” she said; “but I don’t hold 
with such ideas.” 

“Tell her yourself,” said Mr. Sully to his friend; “tell 
her yourself: they never will believe me.” 

Mr. Eaves shook his head. 

“Why not?” said Mr. Sully. 

“God bless me,” said Mr. Eaves, with sudden heat, 
“T’m old enough to be her father.” 

Miss Lacey looked up over her sewing. “You'd 
scarcely believe me,” she said mysteriously; “but there 
was a young gentleman down Charles Street, where I used 
to be, that had dreams—well, there, shocking! Nobody 
but me had the patience to listen to him. But you can’t 
give all your attention to one customer, can you? He,” 
she cast a curious glance into the shadows brooding over 
the commissionaire—‘he got up out of his bed one night, 
just as you or we might—he was living in private apart- 
ments, too—struck a match, so they said, and cut his 
throat—. Awful. From ear to ear!” Her thimbled fin- 
ger made a demure half-circuit of the large pearls of her 
necklace. 

Mr. Sully gazed roundly. “Did he, though? But 
there, you see,” and he leant in great confidence over the 
counter, “Mr. Eaves here doesn’t shave!” 

Mr. Eaves smiled vaguely, half-lifting his stick, as if 
in coquettish acknowledgment of his old friend’s jest. 

“No, no, old friend,” he said, “not that, not that, I 
hope.” 

“Gracious goodness,” said Mr. Sully cordially, “he 
mustn’t take it to heart like that. A dream’s a dream.” 

“Why, of course, it is,” said Miss Lacey. “You ought 

165 


The Three Friends 


to take more care of yourself, sir; didn’t he, Mr. Sully?” 

Mr. Eaves gazed dispassionately, and yet with some 
little dignity, in the isolation of attention he had evoked. 
He turned slowly towards the bar, and stooped a little— 
confidentially. “Not once, not twice,” he said ruminat- 
ingly, “but every blessed night. Every blessed night.” 

Miss Lacey eyed him with searching friendliness. 

“Tell her,” said Mr. Sully, walking slowly and cireum- 
spectly to the door, and peeping out through the cranny 
into the darkened street. 

Mr. Eaves put his empty glass deliberately upon the 
counter, drew his hand slowly across his lips and shook 
his head. “It’s nothing to tell, when you come to that. 
And...” he nodded a questioning head towards the 
solitary occupant of the other bar. 

“Oh, fast; bless you,” said Miss Lacey. “As reg’lar 
as clockwork—you’d hardly believe it.” 

“He'll break his neck, some day,” remarked Mr. Sully 
tersely, “with that jerking.” 

“You see, my dear,” continued Mr, Eaves trustfully, 
“T don’t mind my old friend, Mr. Sully, making a good 
deal of fun at my expense. He always has: eh, Sully? 
But he doesn’t see. You don’t see, Sully. There the 
thing is; and truth all over it. Facts are facts—in my 
belief.” 

“But fire and brimstone, and such-like; oh no!” said 
Miss Lacey with a dainty little shudder. “TI can’t credit 
it, really; oh no! And poor innocent infants, too! 
You may think of me what you like, but nothing’ll make 
me believe that.” 

Mr, Sully looked over his shoulder at Mr. Eaves. “Oh, 
that,” said his old friend, “was only Mr. Sully’s fun. He 
166 


The Three Friends 


says it’s Hell. I didn’t. My dream was only—after; the 
state after death, as they call it.” 

“T see,” said Miss Lacey, lucidly, summoning all her 
intelligence into her face. 

Mr. Eaves leaned forward, and all but whispered the 
curious tidings into her ear. “It’s—it’s just the same,” 
he said. 

“The same?” echoed Miss Lacey. “What?” 

“The same,” repeated the old man, drawing back, and 
looking out of his long, grey meaningless face at the little 
plump, bright .satiny woman. 

“Hell?” breathed Miss Lacey. 

“The state after death,” called Mr. Sully, still peering 
into the gloom—and stepped back rather hurriedly in the 
intense pale lilac illumination of a sudden flickering blaze 
of lightning. 

Thunder now clanged directly overhead, and still Mr. 
Eaves gazed softly yet earnestly into nothingness, as if in 
deep thought. 

“Whatever you like to call it,” he began again steadily 
pushing his way, “that’s how I take it. I sit with my 
knife, just the same; cap and ‘front’ and all, just the 
same; gas burning, decanter on the table, books in the 
case, marble clock on the mantelpiece, just the same. Or 
perhaps I’m walking in the street, just the same; carts 
and shops and dogs, all just the same. Or perhaps I’m 
here, same as I might be now; with Sully there, and you 
there, and him there,” he nodded towards the commission- 
aire. “All just the same. For ever, and ever, and ever.” 
He raised his empty glass to his lips, and glanced almost 
apologetically towards his old friend. “For ever, and 
ever,” he said, and put it down again. 

167 


The Three Friends 


“He means,” said Mr. Sully, “no change: like one of 
those blessed things on the movies; over and over again, 
click, click, click, click, click; you know. I tell him it’s 
his sentence, my dear.” 

“But if it’s the same,” Miss Lacey interposed, with a 
little docile frown of confusion, “what’s different?” 

“Mark me, Eaves, my boy,” cried Mr. Sully softly at 
the door; “it’s the ladies for brains, after all. That’s 
what they call a poser. ‘What’s different,’ eh?” 

Mr. Eaves pondered in a profound internal silence in 
the bar. And beyond the windows, the rain streamed 
steadily in a long-drawn gush of coolness and peace. 
“What's different?” repeated Mr. Sully, rocking infinitesi- 
mally on his heels. 

“Why,” said Mr. Eaves, “it seems as if there I can’t 
change; can’t. If you were to ask me how I know— 
why, I couldn’t say. It’s a dream. But that’s what’s 
the difference. There’s nothing to come. Now: why! 
I might change in a score of ways; just take them as they 
come. I might fall ill; or Mrs. Eaves might; I might 
come into some money; marry again. God bless me, I 
might dic! But there, that’s all over; endless; no escape ; 
nothing. I can’t even die. I’m just meself, Miss Lacey; 
Sully, old friend. Just meself, for ever, and ever. Noth- 
ing but me looking on at it all, if you take me—just what 
[ve made of it. It’s my”—his large pale eyes roved aim- 
lessly—“it’s just what Mr. Sully says, I suppose; it’s my 
sentence. Eh, Sully? wasn’t that it? My sentence?” 
He smiled courageously. 

“Sentence, oh no! Sentence? You!” cried Miss 
Lacey incredulously. “How could you, Mr. Sully? 
Sentence! Whatever for, sir?” 

168 


The Three Friends 


Mr. Eaves again glanced vaguely at the sleeper, and 
then at his friend’s round substantial shoulders, rigidly 
turned on him. He fixed his eyes on the clock. 

“You've never done no harm, Mr. Eaves!” cried Miss 
Lacey, almost as if in entreaty. 

“You see,” said the old gentleman, glancing over his 
shoulder, “it isn’t what you do; so I seem to take it.” 
Mr. Sully half turned from the door, as if to listen. “It’s 
what you are,” said Mr. Eaves, as if to himself. 

“Why, according to that,” said Miss Lacey, in generous 
indignation, “who’s safe?” 


A day of close and tepid weather followed the storm. 
But it was on the evening of the next day after that—an 
evening of limpid sunshine and peace, the sparrows chirp- 
ing shrilly in the narrow lights and shadows of the lane, 
that Mr. Sully came in to see Miss Lacey. 

She was alone: and singing a little quiet tune to herself 
as she went about her business. He shook his head when 
she held up two glasses; and raised just one forefinger. 

“He’s dead,” he said. 

“Oh, no!” cried Miss Lacey. 

“This morning ... in his sleep.” He gazed at her 
with an unusual—with a curiously fish-like concentration. 

“Poor, poor, gentleman,” said Miss Lacey. “He was a 
gentleman, too; and no mistake. Never a hard word for 
nobody ; man, woman, or child. Always the same. But 
it’s shocking. Well, well. But how dreadfully sudden, 
Mr. Sully, sir!” 

“Well, I don’t know,” said Mr. Sully almost irritably. 
“And if so, where’s the change?” His round shoulders 
seemed with slight effort almost to shrug themselves. 

169 


The Three Friends 


” 


“Goodness gracious,’ Miss Lacey cried, “you don’t 
mean—you don’t mean to think—you don’t say it’s true? 
What he was telling us, Mr. Sully?” 

“I’m not so sure,” her visitor replied vaguely, almost 
stubbornly. ‘Where else, after all, knowing all that, 
why, where else could he go?” 

“Mr. Eaves, Mr. Sully? Him? oh, no!” 

Mr. Sully, in the intense clear quiet of the bar, con- 
tinued to stare at her in a manner something like that of 
an overglutted vulture. He nodded. 

Miss Lacey’s kind brown eyes suddenly darkened as if 
with a gust of storm. “But, then, what about us?” she 
cried piteously, and yet with the tenderest generosity. 

“Well,” said Mr. Sully, opening the door, and looking 
out into the sunny evening air, “if you ask me, that’s 
merely a question of time.” 


170 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


AUNDERS’S little, clear, morning town was 
M busy with dogs and tradesmen and carriages. 
It wore an almost child-like vivacity and 
brightness, as if overnight it had been swept and garnished 
for entranceable visitors from over the sea. And there— 
in the blowy sunshine, like some grotesque Staffordshire 
figure on a garret chimney-piece—there, at the street 
corner, sat so ludicrous an old man that one might 
almost have described him as medieval. 

A peak cap, of a slightly marine appearance, was drawn 
down over his eyes. Beneath it, wisps of grey hair and 
a thin beard helplessly shook in the wind; and before 
him stood a kind of gaping wallet, of cracked American 
cloth, held yawningly open by its scissor-legs. 

From this receptacle, ever and again, he extracted a 
strand of his dyed bast, or dubiously rummaged in its 
depths for his scissors. Whereupon he would gingerly 
draw the strand between his lips—a movement that posi- 
tively set one’s teeth on edge—and at the same moment 
he would cast a bleared, long, casual glance first down the 
street to his right—High Street; and then up the street 
to his left—Mortimer Street ; as the bast drew him round. 

I had watched him awhile from under the canvas win- 
dow-blind of Lister Owlett’s, the Curio Shop, in which 
my friend Maunders was chaffering with a dark sardonic- 


171 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 

looking man over a piece of Sheffield plate, and, at last, 
with that peculiar mixture of shame, compassion, amuse- 
ment, and horror which such ineffectual (though possibly 
not unhappy) beings produce on one, I had crossed the 
road and had purchased an absurd little doll bast market- 
ing basket. Oddly, too, after I had actually selected my 
specimen, and had even paid its price, the queer remote 
old creature had insisted on my taking a rather more ornate 
example of his wares... . 

“You know, Maunders,” I said, when we were a hun- 
dred yards or so beyond the old gentleman’s pitch, “this 
thing isn’t at all badly made. The pattern is rather pretty, 
and there’s a kind of useless finish to it. There’s still 
something to be said for the amateur. Anyhow, Bettie 
will like it.” 

Maunders turned his long, large, palish face and 
looked at me with his extraordinary eyes. For the 
ninety-ninth time at least I noticed that their faint blue 
and his necktie’s azure called each to each, as deep calls 
to deep. 

“Amateur!” he echoed blandly, though a peculiar fixity 
of attention had gathered into his gaze; “why, that old 
gentleman is the last of—of the Lispets.” He turned his 
head away—a queer-shaped, heavy head—and added: 
“Quite the last.” 

“Lispets, Maunders; what are they?” 

“My dear K , believe me,” said Maunders almost 
mincingly, “not everything is'a jest. You must now 
have trodden the streets of this small town at least a 
dozen times. The Works—what remains of them—are 
not seven miles off. And yet, here you are, pleasantly 
fluting that you have lived a life of such obscurity as 
172 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


never to have heard of Lispet, Lispett, and Vaine’s. It’s 
an affectation. I can scarcely forgive you. Nor will 
Henrietta.” 

He was—as usual—gently thrusting out before him 
his handsome malacca cane in a manner which frequently 
persuaded approaching pedestrians that he was _ blind. 
And he repeated sotto voce, and as if out of an ocean of 
reflection, “ ‘Lispet, Lispett and Vaine; Mercers to Their 
Majesties . . .. I wish I could remember exactly how 
the old title went. In latter times, I mean.” 

“Who were ‘their Majesties,’ then?” 

“*Their Majesties’?” said Maunders. “Oh, mere kings 
and queens. In the Firm’s heydey they were, of course, 
the crowned heads of practically the whole barbaric 
globe. But what is history—mummified fact; desiccated 
life; the irretrievable. You are merely one of the crowd 
who care not tuppence for such things. The present 
generation—with its Stores and Emporiums and Trusts 
and ‘Combines’—is blind to the merest inkling of what 
the phrase Merchant Prince implies. We are not even 
conscious of irony in little Tommy Tucker’s Nation of 
Shopkeepers. Other times, better manners. The only 
‘entirely honest merchant’ of late years—so far as I have 
definitely heard—is bones in Shirley graveyard. Still, 
the Lispet tradition was not one of mere honesty.” 

_ “What, then,” said I. 
\ “Well, in the first place,” replied Maunders, sliding 
me a remote ruminative glance, “it rambles back almost 
to prehistoric times. You may hunt down the aboriginals 
of the Firm for yourself, if you feel so inclined. They 
appear to have been Phoenicians. Tyre, maybe, but I 
gather non-Semitic. Some remote B. C. glasswork in the 
173 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


Egyptian galleries of the British Museum bears their 
‘mark’—two inverted V’s with a kind of P between. 
There are others—a cone ‘supported by’ two doves; a 
running hound, a cresent moon, and a hand—yjust a slim, 
ungrasping hand. Such marks have been discovered, 
they say, woven into mummy linen, into Syrian embroid- 
ery, Damascus silks, and tapestry from the Persian Gulf. 

“The priestesses of Astaroth, according to Bateson, 
danced in gauze of L. L. and V.’s handiwork. They ex- 
ploited the true bombyx ages before Ptolemy; their gold 
thread gleamed on the Ark of the Covenant; and it was 
fabric of their weaving in which the Queen of Sheba mar- 
velled before Solomon. The shoes of his apes, sewn-in 
with seed pearls and splinters of amethyst were— 
But what’s the good of chattering on like this? I’m not,” 
groaned Maunders with a muffled yawn, “I’m not a per- 
ambulating encyclopedia. Some old pantaloon of a Ger- 
man, long before Bateson, burrowed in true German fash- 
ion into the Firm’s past. You may go to bed with his 
book, if you like—this very night. And then, of course, 
there are one or two of their old ledgers and curios in the 
local Museum. But I’m not an antiquarian. My only 
point is that the past even of a soapboiler is none the 
worse for being the distant past. What’s more, they 
knew in those days that objects are only of value when 
representative of subjects. Has it never occurred, to you 
(no, I suppose not) that the Wisest’s apes, ivory, and 
peacocks were symbolical? The apes representing, of 
course—” 

“Of course,’ I interrupted hurriedly. “But what I’m 
after, Maunders, is something faintly resembling matter- 
of-fact. These Lispet people—what is really their his- 


174 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


tory? Subsequent, I mean, to the Apocrypha on which 
you have already drawn. Honestly, that pathetic old 
guy with the pouch of bast at the corner rather interested 
me.” 

“Drawn on!’ he says,” drawled Maunders. ‘When I 
have not even distantly referred to Joseph’s Coat, or that , 
she-devil Jezebel’s headdress, or to the Grand Khan, or to 
the Princess Assinimova, or to the tanned Barbary kid 
cuirass of steel and emeralds in which Saladin met his 
end. A Firm that, apart from clients celebrated in Holy 
Writ, once happily wrote off bad debts incurred with 
such customers as Semiramis, Sappho, Paris, and the 
Arch—or, as we amused moderns suppose, the exceedingly 
arch—Druids, might well boast—though it didn’t—not 
only of its repute but also of its catholicity. 

“No, no”; he mooned slowly about him. “Your pre- 
cious old ‘matter-of-fact’! As if you were a clerk in un- 
holy orders, as if you bought your boots in Scotland 
Yard, as if you were a huckster of hardware. By all 
means you shall have the facts. But for heaven’s sake 
—for heaven’s sake, precocious K- , be careful with 
them. A friend of mine (an earnest man) was once given 
a fact, and it exploded—in his bathroom.” 

Dangling the last-of-the-Lispets’ little basket on my 
forefinger, I awaited the facts. 

“The point is,” Maunders murmured on, “what of the 
slightest interest to you can there be to say of a firm that 
is now dust, and that followed a tradition which in these 
days would within six months clap its partners into Bed- 
lam or the Bankruptcy Court? You must confess that 
that kind of sweet reasonableness, hardly less than the 
modern variety, is at last death to any decent humanity. 


175 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


At long last, maybe. And how divine a decay! Any- 
how, there they were—and there, too, are the ruins of 
them, edging the smooth sloping crest of Adderley Hill, 
on the other side of the town. Henrietta shall take you 
there tomorrow, if you’re a polite guest. She loves to 
expatiate on that kind of rubble—the Failures. 

“Still, try to imagine it, my dear K., in its green and 
early days. A long range of low buildings, part half- 
timbered Tudors with a few wombed-in bits of thirteenth- 
and fourteenth-century work, and a fringe of excellent 
eighteenth-century—weathered and lovely moulded brick. 
In its prime it must have been a ravishing sight, with its 
hanging sign of faded blue and gold, its walls and thatch, 
and shingles, cobbled alleys and water-conduits, worn and 
mellow with the peace of a thousand thousand sunsets, the 
mosses and the rain-stains and frost-flowerings of cen- 
turies of autumns and winters—just England’s history, 
moral and actual, in antique stone and gable and mullion. 

“That’s as it may be. I have no wish to exaggerate. 
There is no particular virtue in mere age—except to the 
imagination. Still, your mere ‘facts’ are something I 
suppose. The fact that they were spinning silk—here in 
England—before the Conqueror came over. The fact 
that they were world-renowned glovers long before Eliz- 
abeth’s time. The fact that their Egyptian cotton must 
have been abob on the Mediterranean when Lancashire, 
please God, was a verdant solitude, and your forefathers, 
my poor dear, were gadding about in woad. 

“They had their foreign agents, of course, netting in 
handiwork from all over the globe, on which they them- 
selves set the final seal. I won’t labour the point. All 
I suggest is that you should ask a Bond Street dealer 
176 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


to supply you with a Persian rug of L. L. and V. work- 
manship. But avoid the First of April for the enter- 
prise. And yet, do you know, there was really nothing at 
the root of them but—well, a kind of instinct: to keep 
themselves clean. Animals share it. That, and the pride 
with which a single virtue darkens and suffocates a man 
if he isn’t for ever toiling to keep its growth under. The 
one secret of their stability, of their being, and, in times 
past, of their success, was simply this—that nothing they 
should, would, or could ever conceivably offer for sale 
need disturb for a breath of a sob or the weight of a dew- 
drop the ashes of their sleeping forefathers in Adderley 
Churchyard. The like of which their forefathers had 
done by their forefathers. 

“Why, if the ancient Hebrew Jews bequeath the very 
droop of their noses, why shouldn’t an old English 
‘House’ bequeath its tradition? They believed—not 
Athanasian fashion but in their insides, so to speak—they 
believed in that perfect quality and consummate work- 
manship which, naturally, only exorbitant prices can as- 
sure. Exorbitant prices, mind you, not profits. They 
value their fair fame. Only what was good enough for 
a Lispet could hope to satisfy a partner who spelt his 
name with two t’s, and only what satisfied a Lispett left 
unashamed the conscience of a Vaine. 

“Tn plain Anglo-Saxon, the whole thing in decent prac- 
tical moderation was merely the positive forecast of a 
Utopian dream. If ever you pass that way, rest for a 
moment at the mouth of the Well at the World’s End. 
And drink, pretty creature. Perhaps you will discover a 
cone supported by two doves scrawled on the bottom of 
its bronze bucket.” 

177 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


“Perhaps,” I echoed, as cheerfully as possible. 

“At an extreme, of course, this tradition became the 
very devil. I don’t say they made any claim to be gentry, 
or that they refused any kind of exalted alliance if nicely 
and unostentatiously proffered. There’s an old tale of 
one of their apprentices who went sightseeing in the 
fourteenth century. Among other little romantic adven- 
tures, he hunted the Unicorn, got a siren with child, 
fought a demon in Babylon, and bartered tiaras with the 
reigning Pope in Avignon—very much at that precise 
moment at a loose end. 

“Still a tale’s only a tale, though none the worse for 
that. You want naked facts—a most indecorous variety ; 
and one of them is that during the nearer centuries the 
three families riotously intermarried, making the green 
one red, as the poet says. They were self-sufficient— 
like Leonardo. Except, of course, that they were artists 
only in the sense that they designed and distributed ob- 
jects of flawless craftsmanship; while he was a consum- 
mate craftsman only by degree of his supreme art. And 
that was—or was not—between himself and the infinite, 
so to speak.” 

“T love your ‘so-to-speaks,’ Maunders.” 

“Tt’s very nice of you,” said Maunders. “But what I 
really want to say is that gradually the ‘standing’ of the 
Firm lost everything in the nature of precarious. Then, 
enter Beelzebub. Their only conceivable corruption could 
come from within, in one of two forms, putrefaction or 
petrifaction. Well, you shall see. In their earlier an- 
nals they can never so much as have tasted temptation to 
sink to trade devices. Progress, on the other hand, was 
178 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


practically denied to them. Their monopoly was the 
only one to be had for the asking—their integrity. 

“T am not joking. Their wares were as innocent of 
guile and as beautiful as the lilies of the field. All they 
needed for mere prosperity was the status quo. Does 
Nature? The high and mighty sought them out for pre- 
cisely the same reason as a young man with imagination 
pursues that Will-o’-the-Wisp called Beauty. Have you 
ever noticed how different a respect one has for an ad- 
vertised article and for an article whose virtues have been 
sweetly absorbed into one’s soul? 

“Compare, for instance, a cottage loaf with foie gras; 
or the Mr. Anon of the Scottish Ballads with Sappho; or 
Lord Loveaduck’s ‘brilliance’ with Gamma in Leo. 
Lispet, Lispett and Vaine would have as gladly catalogued 
their goods as have asked for references. Advertise! 
Why a lady might as well advertise her great-grand- 
mother’s wig. They were merchants of the one true 
tradition. Their profits were fees. Their arrogance was 
beyond the imagination of a Tamburlaine, and their— 
what shall we call them?—their principles were as per- 
ennial as the secret springs of the Oceans. It was on 
similar principles that Satan sold the fruit to Mother 
Eve.” 

“T see,” said I. “If one can, Maunders—through a 
haze of contradictions.” 

“You cannot see,” said Maunders. “But that is simply 
because your modern mind is vitiated by the conviction 
that you just pay a tradesman to sell you a decent article, 
that you can with money buy quality. You can’t. L.L. 
and V. merely graciously bestowed on their customers the 


179 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


excellence of their wares, or their ‘goods’ in the true old 
meaning of the term—a peculiar something in the style 
and finish which only the assurance of their history and 
their intentions—their ideals, if you like—made pos- 
sible. 

“Good heavens, man, isn’t there a kind of divination 
between one’s very soul and a thing decently made— 
whether it’s a granite Rameses, or a Chelsea porringer? 
The mere look of a scarf or a snippet of damask or of 
lawn or of velvet, a stomacher or a glove of L. L. and V. 
make is like seeing for the first time a bush of blowing 
hawthorn or a nymph in a dell of woodruff, when, say, 
you are nine. Or, for the last, when you are nine-and- 
ninety.” 

“My dear Maunders,” I smiled benignly. “What on 
earth are you talking about? I have always supposed 
that speech was intended to disclose one’s meaning. 
Nymphs!” 

“Well,” replied Maunders, imperturbably shoving his 
“Sheffield” candlestick at last into his slate-covered great- 
coat pocket; “I merely mean that there is a kind of good- 
ness in good work. It confers a sort of everlasting 
youth. Think of the really swagger old boys we call the 
masters. What do you actually get out of them? The 
power to be momentarily immortal, that’s all. But that’s 
beside the point. What I wanted to tell you about—and 
you are a poor receptacle—is, of course, the Firm’s inevi- 
table degradation. I have, kept you pining too long. 
First they petrified, and then the stone began to rot away. 
The process must of course have been very gradual. It 
was Anthony Lispett who at the same time finished it off, 
and who yet—at least according to my notion of the 
180 


a 38 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 
thing, though Henrietta does not agree—and who yet re- 
deemed the complete contraption. 

“He must have come into the firm when he was a com- 
parative youngster, say nineteen, towards the end of the 
eighteenth century. Needless to say, not a single one of 
the partners, not at least to my knowledge, ever went to a 
university or any fallalery of that kind. They held aloof 
from alien ideals. Their ‘culture’ was in their history 
and in their blood; and not a Methuselah’s lifetime could 
exhaust even a fraction of that. They had no ambitions; 
did not mix; kept to themselves. Their ladies made their 
own county society—sparrowhawk-nosed, sloping-shoul- 
dered, high-boned, fair-haired beauties for the most part. 
It was an honour to know them; to be known by them; a 
privilege—and one arrogantly reserved, to be among their 
‘customers.’ They were Lispet, Lispett and Vaine. 

“Well, this Anthony seems to have been something of 
an exotic leaven. From the beginning, he was two-thirds 
himself, plus, if you like, three thirds a Lispett. There is 
a portrait of him in his youth—an efflorescent Georgian 
dandy, whiskers, hauteur, eyebrows all complete; a kind 
of antique Beau Brummel. No doubt the old boys 
squinted askew at him out of their spectacles, no doubt 
they nodded at each other about him over their port. No 
doubt their good ladies pursed their mouths at him over 
their teacups. 

“But they could no more resist the insidious growth of 
the creature than Jack’s mother could have held down 
the sprouting beanstalk. He was clearly the fruit of 
breeding-in, and of a kind of passive vain-gloriousness, 
as you will see when Henrietta exhibits the Family Tree. 

“Old John Vaine Lispet Lispett had married his first 

181 


« 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


cousin Jemima Lispett, and Anthony, it seems was their 
only child. There is a story that old John himself in his 
youth had—well, gossip is merely gossip, and gossamer’s 
merely gossamer, however prolific it may be. And, 
whether or not, there is no doubt that Anthony in his boy- 
hood had made an attempt to run away. They picked 
him up seven miles from the coast—half-starved and prac- 
tically shoeless. He must have been off to Tyre or 
Damascus, or something of that kind. One never knows 
how one’s worm may turn. 

“Poor child—just one whiff of freedom, and he was 
back once more, gluing his nose, beating his fledgling 
plumes, against an upper window of the house on the hill. 
The whole thing, top to bottom, was a kind of slavery, of 
course, The firm had its own Factory Laws. 

“No ‘hand,’ for example was allowed to wear, at least 
within sight of those windows, any fabric not of the firm’s 
weaving. No hand ever came into direct contact with 
one of the partners. There was a kind of hereditary over- 
seer—a friend of the name of Watts. Every hand, again, 
was strictly forbidden to starve. If he or she misbecame 
himself or herself, instant dismissal followed; and a gen- 
erous pension. 

“So drastic was the relation between the valley-village 
and the hill that for upwards of two hundred and fifty 
years, only one hand /rad so misbecome herself. She had 
smiled a little smile one spring morning out of her little 
bottle-glass casement above her loom at the middle-aged 
Vaine; and she drew her pension for six months! They 
say she drowned herself in the Marshes, It is as if you 
went and hanged yourself for having too short a nose.” 

“T cannot see the analogy,” said I. 

182 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


“No,” said Maunders, “but your Maker would—the 
Jehovah that blessed the race of the vulture that sold me 
this old replica of a candlestick. Can’t you understand 
that her smile was a natural thing (just out of herself), 
and that he was a kind of sacrosanct old Pharaoh? The 
discipline was abominable according to our sentimental 
modern notions. But then, the perquisites were pretty 
generous. 

“The long and the short of it was that every single one 
of the firm’s employés was happy. They were happy in 
the only sense one can be truly happy—in service. Cor- 
ruptions have swarmed in now, but in the old days the 
village in the valley must have been as beautiful as a pic- 
ture of this green old world hung up in the forecourt of 
Paradise. 

“Tt had houses contemporary with every wing of the 
Works on the hill-top. Its wages were for the most part 
the only decent wages one can accept. They were in kind. 
What, I ask you, in the sight of heaven is the fittest pay- 
ment to John Keats for a sonnet—a thousand guineas 
or a plume of your little Elizabeth’s golden fuzz? 

“T don’t want to sentimentalize. J. K. had to live, I 
suppose (though why, we may be at loggerheads to ex- 
plain). But what is porridge without cream, and what is 
cream if you loathe the cow? I ask you, my dear K., is 
not a living wage simply one that will keep the kind of 
life it represents fully alive? 

“Give them the credit, then. L. L. and V. kept their 
hands positively blossoming with life. I don’t mean they 
theorized. Marx is merely the boiled-up sentiment of a 
civilization gone wrong. They weren’t philanthropists. 
Nor am I, please heaven. The quality of the L. L. and V. 

183 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


merchandise ensured quality in their hands. Where we 
walk now—this macadamized road—was once a wood of 
birches and bluebells. Can you even imagine its former 
phantom denizens to have been knock-kneed or under- 
hung ?” 

“Perhaps not,” said I, “but are you intending to imply 
that the ‘phantom denizens,’ as you call them, manufac- 
ture the bluebells?” 

Maunders made an indescribably guttural noise in his 
throat. 

“What I am saying,” he replied, “is that the village was 
as lovely a thing to see and live and laugh and love and 
dream in as were the bodies of the human beings that oc- 
cupied it. Their stock, too, had climbed from grace to 
grace. They enjoyed a recognizable type of beauty. The 
girls were as fair-skinned as a plucking of apricots with 
hair of a spidery fine silkenness, and eyes worthy of their 
veiling. Just Nature’s mimicry, I suppose; like an Ama- 
zonian butterfly, or the praying mantis or—or the stick 
caterpillar. 

“T can see them—and so could you, if you had the eyes— 
I can see them dancing in the first of early moonlight, or 
bathing in what, prior to the human spawning of tin cans 
and old boots, was a stream crystal as Pharpar. I can see 
them sallying out and returning on their chattering to-and- 
fro in the morning dews and the greying twilight. No 
set hours ; only a day as long or as short as love of its task 
could make it. What indeed is breeding, my dear K., 
but the showing forth of a perfectly apt and peculiar ex- 
cellency? Just fitness for its job. Puma, pelican, Pata- 
gonian papalja, pretty Poll.” 

“What is a papalja, Maunders?” I enquired. 

184 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


“I don’t know,” said Maunders. “But imagine them— 
with whatever effort is necessary—ascending and descend- 
ing that hill-side through their Fruit Walk! It is about 
the nearest approach to any earthly vision I can achieve 
of Jacob’s ladder. Give even your abominable old Lon- 
don a predominant L. L. & V.—well, then, but not until 
then, you may invite me to the Mansion House for its 
annual November oth. But there, I’m not an iconoclast.” 

“T wish, Maunders,” said I, “you would at your leisure 
re-read Unto this Last; and that you would first make 
the ghost of an attempt to tell a decent story. What was 
the Fruit Walk?” 

The Town’s puddley, petrol-perfumed, outlying streets 
were still busy with pedestrians—nurses and perambula- 
tors, children in woollen gaiters, and young ladies with 
red hair. It was, therefore, almost as difficult to keep 
abreast with Maunders as it was to follow his obscure 
meanderings. 

“Oh, the Fruit Walk,” he muttered, staring vacantly 
through a dairyman’s window at an earthenware green- 
and-grey pelican with a fish in its bill, “The Fruit Walk 
was merely the cherries and quinces and crab-apples and 
damsons that had been planted in rosy, snowy, interlacing, 
discontinuous quincunx fashion; half circling and strag- 
gling over and down the green mounting and mounded hill 
to the very edge of the quarry. Not a miserable avenue, 
of course, but a kind of to-and-fro circuitous chace be- 
tween village and Works. Once your eyes might actually 
have seen that divine chimneyed cluster, tranquil as an 
image in water, on the dark emerald hilltop in the dying, 
gaudy sunset. And, shelving down, that walk in bloom! 
One might almost assume that L. L. & V. weather habitu- 

185 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


ally haunted the scene. Things do react on one another, 
you know; and Nature wears fourteenth century sleeves.” 

“Oh, for pity’s sake, Maunders, let’s get back to 
Anthony. What about Anthony ?” 

Maunders, softly striding along like an elephant in 
his flat square-toed shoes, appeared to be pondering. 

“Well,” he began slowly, “the ‘what-about’ of Anthony 
covers a rather wide field. I fancy, do you know, there 
was a tinge of Traherne in his composition, The beau was 
only the chrysalis stage. Of course it was Blake’s era. I 
fancy Anthony sowed pretty early his wild oats. There 
are many varieties, and his were mainly of the mind. 

“He was not, I venture to add, to make things quite 
clear to you, either a marrying or an un-marrying man. 
And, of course, like all instinctive creatures with a never- 
waning fountain of life in them, he shed. Some of us 
shed feathers, some fur, some innocence, some principles, 
and all shed skin—the seven year’s spring-cleaning, you 
know, that leaves the house in the flooding May-day sun- 
light a little bit dingier than it was before. 

“Well, Anthony seems to have shed what one mistakes 
for artificialities. He shed his ringlets, his foppish clothes, 
his pretences of languor, his dreamy superiority. He shed 
his tacit acceptance of the firm’s renown, and so dis- 
covered his own imagination. Only in the ‘tip-toppers’ do 
intellect and imagination lie down together, as will the 
lion and the lamb. 

“Then, of course, he seems gradually or suddenly to 
have shed the L. L. & V. pride and arrogance. He must 
have begun to think. All these centuries, please remem- 
ber, the firm had been gradually realizing why, actually 
why, their stuff was super-excellent in the eyes of 
186 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


humanity. And that— Oh, I don’t know; but to realize 
that, perhaps, is to discount its merits elsewhere. 
Anthony, on the other hand, had come to realize in his 
own queer vague fashion, that one’s only salvation is to 
set such eyes squinting. And yet, not of set and de- 
liberate purpose. He was not a wit. Art, my dear, dear 
K., whatever you may like to say, is useless; unless one 
has the gumption to dissociate use from materialism.” 

“T was not aware,” said I, “that I had said anything. 
You mean, I suppose, that man has only to realize that 
his work is excellent for it to begin to lose its virtue. 
Like beauty, Maunders, and the rouge-pot and powder- 
puff? Still, I prefer Anthony to trade ethics. What did 
the rest of them do?” 

“What I was about to tell you,” replied Maunders 
mildly, “is, that Anthony had bats in his belfry. Not the 
vampire variety; just esxtra-terrestrial bats. He was 
‘queer.’ Perhaps more in him than in most of us had 
come from elsewhere. And the older he grew the more 
the hook-winged creatures multiplied. No doubt the 
Firm would have edged him out if it had been practicable. 
No doubt the young hedge-sparrows would edge out the 
squab-cuckoo, if that were manageable. But it was not. 
Anthony was double-dyed, a Lispett with two t’s, and it 
would have been /ése majesté, domestic high-treason to 
acknowledge to the world at large that he was even 
eccentric. 

“Well, there he was, a smallish man, with short-grow- 
ing hair, a little like Thothmes II, to judge from his por- 
trait—a man of extraordinary gifts in his craft, of an ex- 
quisite sensibility to quality and design, but seldom, I 
imagine, at the Board Meetings. Often, it seems, he used 

187 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 

to ramble off into the country. He appears to have espe- 
cially hated a sort of Frenchiness that had crept into 
the Firms’ wares. But much worse than mooning about 
to soak in Englishness again, he would ramble off into 
the country of his mind, and there you need to have a faint 
notion of where you are before you can safely go any 
further. It’s difficult, of course, to know exactly what 
his broodings were. But the story goes that he would 
complete his nocturnal pilgrimages by climbing up before 
daybreak into one of the fruit-trees on the hill, a magnifi- 
cent mulberry—to see the sun, I suppose; to ‘look down’ 
as far as possible on the Works; to be up among the morn- 
ing birds, like the old man in the limerick.” 

“An odd bat, that,” I interposed. 

“There he would squat,” continued Maunders imper- 
turbably, “poor old creature, peering out of the leaves, the 
rose of dawn on his face, as when it lightened Blake’s. 
And presently, the angels up from the valley would pass 
by, singing and laughing, to their work. A pretty sight 
it must have been, with their young faces and pure colours 
and nimble practised gestures. For, mind you, it was 
still a happiness to be one of the hands in the Firm—as 
compared, at any rate, with being a grimy paw elsewhere. 
Only at long last would they become aware of the glow- 
ing gloom in the heads. Not merely were the brains of 
the Firm tending in one direction and the members re- 
maining more or less static in another, but things outside 
were beginning to change. The god of machinery was 
soon to spout smoke and steam from his dismal nostrils, 
and man to learn the bright little lesson that not only 
necessities, but even luxuries can be the cheaper if they 
are manufactured a gross at a time.” 

188 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


“Ves,” said I; “there he would squat; and then?” 

“Then,” breathed Maunders, “one morning, one shafted 
scarlet morning, it seems he saw—well, I cannot say what 
exactly he did see. No hand anyhow, but a light-embodied 
dream. A being lovelier than any goddess for whom even 
an L, L. & V. in the service of the Sorceress of Sidon 
could have been moved from bowels of superstitious 
horror to design sandals. A shape, a fleetingness, a 
visitant—poor old Bat-in-the-Belfry—evoked by a mo- 
ment’s aspiration and delight out of his own sublime wool- 
gatherings. And so this ageing creature, this extra- 
Lispetted old day-dreamer, fell in love—with a non- 
entity.” 

“My dear Maunders; pause,” I said. “In mere self- 
respect! How could such an occurrence as that have 
been recorded in the Firm’s annals? No; no.” 

“Weren’t there letters?” sighed Maunders, turning sud- 
denly on me, malacca cane in air. ‘‘Wasn’t there a 
crack-brained diary? Haven’t you a vestige of old- 
fashioned and discredited gumption? Wait till I have 
finished, and let your sweet-smelling facts have a show. 
Ask Henrietta. I say,” he repeated stubbornly, “that be- 
tween the dawn and the daytime, down out of his broad 
foliage, the hill-side in indescribable bloom, this old 
meandering Query, this half-demented old Jack-o’-Dreams 
saw a Vision, and his heart went the same way as long 
since had gone his head. Haven’t I told you he was 
what the dear old evolutionists, blind to the inexhaust- 
ible graces of creation, esteem a sport?” 

“The Family Tree had blossomed out of season, for the 
last time, jetting its dwindling virtue into this final, queer, 
anomalous bloom; rich with nectarous bane. It had re- 


189 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


turned upon itself. ’Tis the last rose of summer that 
sighs of the spring. ‘Ah, yes, but did the vision see him?” 
you are sneering to yourself. 

“And to that I reply: I don’t know. Do they ever? 
Or is it that only certain long-suffering eyes can afford 
them the hospitality of becoming visible? Anyhow, J see 
her. And in a fashion that is not only the bliss but the 
very deuce of solitude. Ignore its bidding, K., and we 
are damned. Oh, yes, I know. The inward eye is all 
very well. I know it. But to share that experience with 
these outward groping orbs, I’d—well, I’d gladly go bank- 
rupt. Ask Henrietta.” 

“What happened then?” 

“This happened. The wool-gathering wits flocked back 
and golden-fleeced him. One might almost say he be- 
came equally astute and extravagant. As a matter of 
fact, of course, only willing and selfless service can bring 
every human faculty to bear.” Maunders sighed. 

“He sent a cheque for a thousand guineas or so to a 
Dutch bulb-farm, and planted the hill-walk with tulips, 
April-blue scyllas and narcissi poetict. Narcissi poetici! 
He tapped an earth-bound spring and set up fauns and 
dryads, amoretti and what not, spouting subterranean 
water. He built a shrine of alabaster—with an empty 
niche. 

“It appeared to be mere scatter-brained fooling. Still, 
it was in a sense in the L. L. & V. tradition, and his part- 
ners appear to have let him have a free hand. Don’t for- 
get their even then almost illimitable resources. They'd 
far, far rather—even the strict-whiskered Vaine of the 
period, who in unhappier circumstances might have sat 
for the typical alderman—they’d infinitely rather he ex- 
190 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


hibited his peculiarities within their sphere, so to speak, 
than bring them to mockery before the world at large.” 
ng 

“They hadn’t till then, perhaps, baldly recognized the 
world at large, except as a hot-bed of prehistoric or syco- 
phantic customers. And they never—not for an instant-— 
even surmised his depredations would prove active from 
within. None the less, like some secret serpent, spawn 
of the forgotten fabulous, he was in fact gnawing at the 
very vitals of the tradition. Let me put it bluntly, in 
terms which even you, my dear K., will appreciate. 
Anthony Lispett had ‘gone balmy’ on his Vision. She— 
and therefore he—was ‘beside himself.’ 

“T do not suggest that he mixed her up with his super- 
aunuating old corpus vile; nothing vulgar to talk of, and 
tragic to think of, in that sort. He merely lived on from 
that daybreak dream to dream with but one desire in his 
poor cracked old cranium—to serve her idea. Aren’t we, 
all of us, myth-makers? Grins not the Lion at the Uni- 
corn? Does not the soapboiler bedizen our streets with 
Art—and ‘atmosphere’? Anthony’s myth was from else- 
where—neither from his stomach, his pocket, his reputa- 
tion, his utilitarian morals, nor his brains. That was all. 
And as he served her, I suppose, he found himself 
cherubically treading yet more secretly and inwardly her 
hesperidean meads.” 

I glanced at Maunders in some dismay. “How?” 

“Well,” said he, “it is not easy to divine how exactly 
Anthony began his malpractices. But clearly, since he 
was perpetually haunted by this illusion of a divine, un- 
earthly stranger, a sort of Athene haunting his hill, his 
one desire could not but be to set the Works working 


19l 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 
for her. He could bide his time. He could be quiet and 
gradual. Anyhow, we know the event, though we can’t 
say precisely how it evolved. 

“One may assume, I suppose, that he would steal to and 
fro among the nocturnal looms and presses and vats and 
dyeing rooms, and, ten times more richly gifted by his 
insane inspiration than he was even by nature, that he 
just doctored right and left. He would experiment night 
after night with the Firm’s materials in the raw. Worse, 
he rationed himself in his tree-gazing ; and climbed to his 
leafy perch only during certain conjunctions of the planets. 
Mere circumstances seem to have waited on him, as did 
the sun on Joshua. 

“But the Lispet and the Vaine of this time were noth- 
ing but hidebound old bachelors—intent only on saving 
the face of convention. The last Double-T died the day 
after the site of the shrine was decided on. There was 
no young blood in the firm. And with an almost dia- 
bolical ingenuity Anthony seems to have executed only 
the orders of such clients as wanted the Firm’s very finest 
handiwork. Even those, of course, who coveted or could 
afford only the commoner materials were already begin- 
ning to dwindle in numbers. 

“The other customers he kept waiting, or insulted with 
questions, or supplied with more delicate and exquisite 
fabrics than they required. 

“The story goes that a certain Empress renowned for 
her domestic virtues commanded a trousseau for yet an- 
other royal niece or what not. A day or two before the 
young woman’s nuptials, and weeks late, arrived silks and 
tissues and filigrees spun out of some kind of South 
American and Borneo spider silk, such as only a nymph 
192 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


could wear. My dear K., it nearly hatched a European 
War. That particular Court was little but a menagerie 
of satyrs. 

“Countesses and such-like soliciting ‘fives’ and ‘fours’ 
in gloves, and ‘ones’ in stockings, might still faintly hope 
to be accommodated; and even then their coveted wares 
were a tight fit. For a while the firm seems to have sur- 
vived on the proceeds from merchandise infended for 
grown-ups which your cosmopolitan Crcesuses snapped 
up for their children. At second-hand, of course, since 
few of them could extort a ‘reference’ to the firm for 
love or even for money. 

“Henrietta has a few bits of embroideries and silk of 
the time. Perhaps she will show them to you. Even a 
human craft can reflect a divine disaster. And the linens! 
—of a quality that would derange the ghost of an Egyptian 
embalmer. 

“Even worse, Anthony seems to have indulged an 
extraordinary sense of propriety. He would lavish L. L. 
& V. urbanities on some sylph of an actress who had no 
more morals in the usual acceptation of the term than a 
humming bird, and flatly returned fabulous cheques (with 
the order) to old protégés of the Firm merely convicted 
of fortune-making, or of organized ‘philanthropy,’ or 
of ‘bettering the conditions’ of their fellow-creatures. He 
seems to have hated the virtuous for their own sake alone. 

“In short, he grew madder and madder, and the custom, 
the good-will, even the reputation of the firm melted like 
butter in the sun. The last Lispett followed the last 
Double-T—expired of apoplexy in the counting-house, 
and was sat on by the coroner. The reigning Vaine 
turned religious and was buried in a sarcophagus of 


193 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


Portland stone under the foundations of the Unitarian 
Chapel which he himself had laid in the hope perhaps to 
lay the L. L. & V. devil at the same time. 

“The hands dwindled, died out, dropped away, or even 
emigrated to the paws. Only a few with some little 
competence and an impulsive fund of gratitude and 
courtesy worked on for a master of whom because they 
loved him, they asked the paltriest wages. The Fruit 
Walk mutinied into a thicket; the fountains choked them- 
selves with sighing and greened with moss; the tulips 
found a quieter Nirvana in mere leaf. And Anthony 
made at last no pretence even of patronizing the final 
perishing flower of the firm’s old clientele. 

“He trafficked in a kind of ludicrous dolls’ merchandise 
—utterly beautiful little infinitesimals in fabrics worth 
a hundred times their weight in rubies. So ridiculous 
a scandal had the ‘business’ at last become that when its 
few scoffing creditors for old sake’s sake sold it up, not a 
single bid was made for the property. It is in ruins now. 
Consult Ezekiel. Or Henrietta. 

“T have no wish to sentimentalize ; I am not a cynic or 
a philosopher. Yet I slide my eyes back to that narrow 
hilled-in strip of sea-coast whence once rose walled Tyre 
and Sidon, Arvard and Jebail, and—well, I merely remind 
myself that the Rosetta Stone is but a hornbook of the day 
before yesterday’s children of men. Things do as a 
matter of fact seem to rot of their own virtue—inverted, 
so to speak. It’s not likely to occur again. I mean, not 
for some time. The Town was almost apologetic. 
Democracy rarely runs to extremes—unless one may so 
describe the guillotine. But I am no politician. Enough 
of that. Even transatlantic visitors are now rare.” 


194 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 

Maunders and I were standing together by this time 
under the laurels and bay-trees, not of his own planting, 
beside his garden railings; he with his bulging, pale-blue 
eyes—and his sham candlestick branching out of his 
pocket ; and I—well, irritated beyond endurance. 

“Good heavens, Maunders,” I exclaimed, “the stuff 
» you talk! But one would not mind that so much if you 
could spin a decent yarn. You haven’t even told me 
what became of the Belfry. Was he nothing but bats at 
last ?” 

“Old Anthony?” he murmured softly. “Why there is 
nothing in that. He lived on—for years—in the Works. 
You could see his burning candle from the valley, even on 
nights of full moon. And, of course, some gay imbecile 
set the story about that the whole lovely abandoned 
derelict place was haunted. Twangling strings and van- 
ishing faces, and a musing shape at a remoter window, her 
eyes reflecting a scene which only an imagination abso- 
lutely denuded of common sense could hope or desire to 
share with her. After all, one does ignore the ghost until 
it is well out of the body. Ask Henrietta.” 

“But, Maunders,” I called after him. 

Too late: his shapeless slouching slate-grey body with 
its indescribable hat and malacca cane had vanished among 
the “evergreens,” and the only answer I received was the 
dwindling rumour of my own expostulatory voice among 
their leaves—“Maunders. . . .” 

Strange to say, it was in this moment of helplessness 
that I discovered that my little bast basket was gone. 
When? How? For an instant I hesitated—in pure 
cowardice. It was a quarter past one, and Mrs. Maun- 
ders, a charming and active hostess, if a little of a 

195 


Lispet, Lispett and Vaine 


martinet, disapproved of unpunctual guests. But only 
for an instant. The thought of Bettie’s fair glad little 
face decided me; and I set out to retrace my footsteps 
in search of the lost plaything. Alas, in vain. 


The Tree 


H teres in his dingy first-class railway carriage, 


the prosperous Fruit Merchant sat alone. From 

the collar of his thick frieze greatcoat stuck out a 
triangular nose. On either side of it a small, bleak, black 
eye gazed absently at one of the buttons on the empty 
blue-upholstered seat opposite to him. His breath spread 
a fading vapour in the air. He sat bolt upright, congealed 
in body, heated in mind, his unseeing eye fixed on that 
cloth button, that stud. 

There was nothing else to look at, for his six narrow 
glass windows were whitely sheeted with hoar-frost. 
Only his thoughts were his company, while the coach, the 
superannuated coach, bumped dully on over the metals. 
And his thoughts were neither a satisfaction nor a pleas- 
ure. His square hard head under his square hard hat 
was nothing but a pot seething with vexation, scorn, and 
discontent. 

What had invited him out so far, in weather so dismal, 
on a line so feebly patronized? Anger all but sparkled 
in his mind as he considered the intention of his journey, 
and what was likely to be the end and outcome of it. 
Twelve solid yet fleeting years divided him from his last 
encounter with his half-brother—twelve cent. per cent. 
years—shipload on shipload of exotic oranges and lemons, 
pineapples, figs, and blushing pomegranates. At this very 
moment three more or less seaworthy ocean tramps were 

197 


The Tree 


steaming across the watery channels of the world laden 
with cargoes of which he was the principal consignee. 
He stretched out his legs, crossed his feet. He was a 
substantial man. There was nothing fantastic about him. 

To put on airs when you couldn’t afford them; to meet 
a friendly offer with rank ingratitude; to quarrel with 
the only relative on earth who had kept you out of the 
workhouse—he had sworn never to set foot in the place 
again. Yet—here he was: and nothing but a fool for 
his pains. Having washed his hands of the whole silly 
business, he should have kept them washed. Instead of 
which he thrust them deeper into his capacious pockets 
and wondered to heaven when his journey was to come 
to an end, 

No, it was with no charitable, no friendly, no senti- 
mental motive that he was being glided joltingly on. A 
half-brother—and particularly if he owes you a hundred 
pounds and more—need not be even fractionally a being 
one smiles to think of for the sake of auld lang syne. 
There was nothing in common between the two of them, 
except a father now twenty-five years in his grave and 
a loan that would never be repaid. 

That was one galling feature of the situation. 
There was another. In plain print and in his own re- 
spectable morning newspaper the Fruit Merchant had 
chanced but a week or two ago on the preposterous fact 
that a mere woodcut of a mere “Bird and Flower,” 
initialled P.P., had fetched at Christie’s ninety-seven 
guineas. Ninety-seven guineas: sixty-eight crates of ex- 
cellent Denia oranges at thirty shillings a crate. What 
the devil! His small eyes seemed to congest and yet at 
the same time to protrude from their sockets. 

198 


| 


The Tree 


“P, P.” !—perfect pest; paltry poser; plaguey parasite. 
And yet—hardly a parasite. You couldn’t with a term 
like that dish a half-brother who hadn’t sent you a single 
word of greeting for twelve solid fleeting prosperous 
years. Even if he did owe you a hundred pounds. Even 
if he hadn’t the faintest wish to remind you of the fact. 
Not that the Fruit Merchant wanted his hundred pounds. 
He wasn’t a debt collector. He wasn’t even vindictive. 
It was the principle of the thing. 

For if half-an-hour’s silly scratching over a little lump 
of wood could fetch you £101 17s., about twenty-nine and 
a half minutes would bring in a round hundred. And 
there were more birds and more flowers in that infernal 
tree than Noah could have found room for in his Ark. 
The tree !—the very thought of it swept a pulsating cloud 
of rage over the Fruit Merchant’s eyes. Cool, quiet in- 
solence—he could have forgiven that, and could almost 
have forgotten it.. But the faintest recollection of the 
tree, and of the talk under it, never failed to infuriate 
him. It infuriated him now almost beyond endurance, 
simply because he knew, in the secrecy of his thoughts, 
that this was the decoy which was dragging him on these 
fifty-three interminable miles on a freezing hideous coun- 
try afternoon. 

The tree: never in all his life had he met with such 
an exhibition of sheer, stark, midsummer madness. And 
yet with every inch of his journey the recollection grew 
on him. He couldn’t get it out of his head. Curiosity, 
resentment, vindictiveness, a cold creeping cunning—a 
score of conflicting emotions zigzagged to and fro in his 
mind. He glared through them at the walls of his cage. 
But worst outrage of all was the creeping realisation— 

199 


The Tree 


and his body stiffened at the thought—that he was even 
now, and perhaps even a little more than ever, afraid of 
the tree. When you finally deal with a relative and a 
bloodsucker who has been a pest to you all your life, the 
one thing you do not look for is an interference of that 
kind. 

He could not deny it, the tree had impressed him. 
Ever since that first swimming stare at it, the moment 
he thought of his brother, of the country, even of his 
boyhood—there it was. It had impressed him so much 
that the upholstered button had now completely disap- 
peared, and he seemed to be actually in the presence of 
it again. He saw it as vividly as if its image hung there 
before his very eyes in the slightly self-warmed air of 
his solitary compartment. The experience filled him with 
so sudden a flood of aversion and resentment that the 
voice of the guard chaunting the name of his destination 
reached him only just in time to set him frantically pull- 
ing down his frozen window and ejecting himself out of 
the train. 

One hasty glance around him showed that he was the 
sole traveller to alight on the frosted timbers of the 
obscure little station. A faint rosiness in the west fore- 
told the decline of the still wintry day. The firs that 
flanked the dreary passenger-shed of the platform stood 
burdened already with the blackness of coming night. 

He was elderly, he was obese, his heart was none too 
sound, at least as compared with his head. Yet if he 
intended to catch the last train home, he had scarcely a 
couple of hours in which to reach his half-brother’s 
wretched little house, to congratulate him on his guineas, 
200 


The Tree 


to refuse to accept repayment of his loan, to sneer at his 
tree, and to return to the station. 

A bark at a weedy young porter in mittens, with mouth 
ajar over his long teeth, sent him ambling off for a con- 
veyance. The Fruit Merchant stood under the shed in 
his frieze coat and square hard hat and watched the train 
glide out of the station. The screech of its engine, horn- 
ing up into the windless air, had exactly expressed his 
own peculiar sentiments. 

There was not a living being in sight whereon to 
breathe a curse. Only himself, a self he had been 
vaguely cursing throughout his tedious journey. The 
frozen landscape lay white in the dying day. The sun 
hung like the yolk of an egg above the still horizon. 
Some menace in the very look of this sullen object hinted 
that P. P. might long since have crossed the bourne from 
which no belated draft on any earthly bank had ever been 
known to transpire. 

The thought diverted into ruggeder channels the cur- 
rent of the talk which he had intended to engage in with 
his half-brother. In other words, he would give the silly 
fool a bit of his mind. The fact was, their last quarrel— 
if anything so one-sided could be called a quarrel—had 
tinctured the Fruit Merchant’s outlook on the world a 
good deal more densely than he would until now have 
confessed. A frown settled above the sullen eyes. 

No living creature, no sound stirred the air. The 
fair country lay cold as if in a swoon. Like a shallow 
inverted saucer a becalmed sky curved itself over the 
unbroken quiet of the fields. His broad cleft chin thrust 
into his muffler, his hands into his capacious pockets, the 

201 


The Tree 


stranger to these parts stood waiting, just stood there, 
with his small black eyes staring desolately out of his 
clothes. Why, you might just as well be marooned in 
a foreign land, or on a stage—sinister, cold, vacant, and 
not a single soul in the audience. At the sound of wheels 
and hoofs he coughed as if in uncontrollable indignation ; 
and turned smartly on his heels. . . 

With a gesture of disdain the Fruit Merchant sourly 
thrust a shilling into the weedy porter’s immense knuckled 
hand and mounted into the cab. At his onset the whole 
square fusty interior leaned towards him like an extin- 
guisher over the stub of a candle. The vehicle disgraced 
the universe. Even the man on the box resembled some 
little cautious and obscure animal that had been dug up 
out of the earth. When given his direction his face had 
fallen into an indescribable expression beneath its whisk- 
ers: an expression, it appeared, which was its nearest 
approach to a smile. 

“And don’t spare your—horse,” had barked his fare, 

slamming the rickety door behind him. 
_ A railway carriage even of the most antique descrip- 
tion, when its glass is opaque with rime, is a little less 
like a prison cell than a four-wheeled cab. For which 
reason, perhaps, as the vehicle ground on beneath the 
misty leafless elms, the frigid air was allowed to beat 
softly in from the open window upon its occupant’s 
slightly impurpled face. 

And still on and on, now here, now there, memory _ 
retrieved for the sombre shape within it every incident 
of his last experience on this self-same road. It had 
been summertime—June. He had been twelve years 
younger, a good gross of years less prosperous, and 
202 


The Tree 


not perhaps quite so easily fanned into a peculiar helpless 
state of rage. 

Indeed, his actual meeting with his half-brother at 
the little white garden gate had been almost friendly. 
So friendly that it would hardly have been supposed they 
were in any way unpleasingly related to one another, or 
that the least responsibility of each to each could have 
caused any kind of festering recrimination. Not that 
P. P. was even then the kind of person one hastens to 
introduce to one’s friends. You not only never knew 
how he would look or what he would say. You weren’t 
even certain what he might do. A rolling stone that 
merely fails to gather moss is a harmless object by com- 
parison with one that appears to gather momentum. And 
even the most trifling suggestion, not so much of ec- 
centricity as of an alien and crooked gleam in the eye, is 
apt to make the most respectable company a little uneasy. 

Not that the two half-brothers had ever discussed to- 
gether their aims and intentions and ideas about life; 
their desires or motives or hopes, or aversions or appre- 
hensions or prejudices. The Fruit Merchant had his fair 
share of most of these human incentives, but he also had 
principles, and one of them was to keep his mouth shut. 

They had met, had shaken hands, had exchanged re- 
marks on the weather. Then P. P., in his frayed jacket 
and slippers, with his meagre expressionless face, had 
aimlessly led off his visitor into the garden, had aimlessly 
dropped a few distant remarks about their common past ; 
and then, surrounded as they were by the scenery, scents, 
and noises of summer, had pushed his knotted hands into 
his trousers’ pockets, and fallen silent; his grey, vacant 
eyes fixed on the tree. The Fruit Merchant had tried in 

203 


The Tree 


vain to break the silence, to shrug his way out of it. He 
also could only stand and stare up and up—at the tree. 

Solitary, unchallenged, exotic in its station all but at 
the foot of the broken-hedged, straggling garden, it rose 
to heaven, a prodigious spreading ascendant cone, with 
its long, dark, green, pointed leaves. It stood, from first 
springing branch to apex, a motionless and somnolent 
fountain of flowers. 

If his half-brother had taken the Fruit Merchant into 
a dingy little greenhouse and had shown him an ailing 
plant that with care, water, and guano had been raised 
from some far-fetched seed—well, that might have been 
something to boast about. He himself was in the trade. 
He knew a Jaffa orange from a mandarin. ‘The stuff has 
to grow, of course; and he was broad-minded enough to 
approve of rural enterprise. Giant Mangolds and Prize 
Pumpkins—they did no harm. They encouraged the 
human vegetable. But the. . 

At last he had come to his senses and had peered fret- 
fully about him. The garden was a waste, the hedges 
untrimmed, a rank lusty growth of weeds flaunted their 
flowers at the sun. And this tree—it must have been 
flourishing here for centuries past, a positive eyesore to 
any practical gardener. P. P. couldn’t even put a name © 
to it. Yet by the fixed idiotic dreamy look on his face 
you might have supposed it was a gift from heaven; 
that, having waved his hands about like those coloured 
humbugs with the mango, the thing had sprung up by 
sheer magic out of the ground. 

Not that the Fruit Merchant, had denied that it was 
unique. He had never seen, nor would he ever want to 
see, its double. The sun had beaten down upon his head ; 
204 


The Tree 


a low, enormous drone filled the air; the reflected light 
dazed his eyes. A momentary faintness had stolen over 
him as he had turned once more and glanced again into 
his half-brother’s long bony face—the absent eyes, the 
prominent cheek, the greying hair dappled with sun- 
light. 

“How do you know it’s unique?” he had asked. “It 
may be as common as blackberries in other parts of the 
country—or abroad. One of the officers on the Cata- 
maran was telling me .. .” 

“I don’t know,” his half-brother had interrupted him, 
“but I have been looking at trees all my life. This re- 
sembles all, reminds me of none. Besides, I’m not going 
abroad—at least for the present.” 

What had he meant by that? The Fruit Merchant 
hadn’t enquired; had merely stood there in the flowers 
and grasses, blinking up once more into the spreading 
branches, almost involuntarily shaking his head at the 
pungent sweetness that hung dense and sickly in the air. 
And the old familiar symptoms began to stir in him, as he 
now sat jolting on in his cab—symptoms which his in- 
timates would have described in one word: fuming. 

He was not denying it, not he—the tree had been re- 
markable as trees go. For one thing, it bore two distinct 
kinds and shapes of blossom. The one circular and full 
and milky in a dark cuplike calyx, with clusters of scarlet- 
tipped pistils; the other a pale yellow oval, three-petalled, 
with a central splash of orange. He had surreptitiously 
squeezed a couple of the fallen flowers into his pocket- 
book, had taken them out at his office in the Borough the 
next morning to show them to the partner he had after- 
wards advantageously bought out of the business, only 

205 


The Tree 


to find them black, slimy, and unrecognizable, and to be 
laughed at for his pains. 

“What’s the use of the thing?” he had next enquired 
of his half-brother in a gross voice. “Is it edible?” At 
which, with the faint smile on his face that had infuriated 
the Fruit Merchant even as a boy, the other had merely 
shrugged his shoulders. 

“Why not try it on the pigs?” 

“T don’t keep pigs.” 

Keep pigs, indeed; there wasn’t the faintest symptom 
that he would ever be able to keep himself! 

“Well, aren’t there any birds in these parts?” It had 
been a singularly false move. 

“Tt has brought its own,” had been his half-brother’s 
muttered retort. 

There was no denying it—at least so far as the Fruit 
Merchant’s small ornithological knowledge went. At that 
very moment birds of a peculiarly vivid green sheeniness 
were hovering and dipping between the deep blue of the 
sky and the mountainous blossoming. Little birds, with 
unusually long and attenuated bills, playing, fluttering, 
lisping, courting, and apparently sucking the heady nectar 
from the snowy and ivory cups, while poised like animate 
gems on the wing. He had again opened his mouth, but 
his half-brother had laid a lean tingling hand on his 
sleeve. “Listen!” he said. 

Half-stifled, jetting, delirious bursts of song twinkled, 
belled, rose, eddied, overflowed from the tented depths 
of the tree, like the yells and laughter of a playground of 
children suddenly released for an unexpected half-holi- 
day. Listen, indeed! The noise of the creatures was 
still echoing in his ears as he sat there bulkily swaying, 
206 


a 


The Tree 


his eyes fixed on the pallid, gliding hedgerow from his 
fusty cab. 

P. P. had not positively claimed that every single chor- 
ister in the chorus was an exotic visitant. He had gone 
further. He had gently bent down a low-lying fan of 
leaves and bloom, and not content with exhibiting one 
by one living specimens of a little spotted blue iridescent 
beetle, a horned kind of cock-chafer, and a dappled black- 
and-yellow-mottled ladybird—all of them following their 
lives in these surroundings; he had also waved a lean 
hand in the direction of a couple of gaudy butterflies 
intertwining in flight down the slope of the garden, had 
pointed out little clumps of saffron and sky-blue flowers, 
and a rank, ungainly weed with a cluster of black helmet- 
shaped florets at its tips, asserting that they were as rare 
—as unprecedented—in those parts as the tree itself. 

“You don’t mean to say because the thing’s brought 
its own vermin that it’s any the better for that? Lord, 
we can do that in the fruit trade.” 

“It’s brought me,” said the other, mooning meanwhile 
in the opposite direction. 

“And where do you raise your pertatoes and artichokes 
and scarlet runners? It looks to me like a damn waste 
of soil.” 

The wandering greenish-grey eyes had rested for a 
moment on the puffy contemptuous face a few inches be- 
neath them without the faintest symptom of intelligence. 
Empty eyes, yet with a hint of danger in them, like a 
bright green pool of water in a derelict quarry. “You 
shall have a basket of the fruit; if you'll risk it. It 
never really ripens—queer-looking seeds.” 

“You eat it yourself, then?” 

207 


The Tree 


The eyes slid away, the narrow shoulders had lifted 
a little. “I take things as they come.” It was precisely 
how he had afterwards taken the cheque. 

Seated there, on either side of the deal table, in the 
bare, uncarpeted, uncurtained living-room of the cottage 
over a luncheon of bread and dry cheese and onions, with 
the reflected light of the tree on his half-brother’s face, 
the talk between the two of them had gradually degen- 
erated into an altercation. 

At length the Fruit Merchant, with some little rele 
had completely lost his temper. A half empty jampot 
buzzing with bees was no more appetizing an object be- 
cause the insects were not of the usual variety. He had 
literally been stung into repeating a few semifraternal 
truths. 

To submit to being half-starved simply because nobody 
with money to waste would so much as look at your bits 
of drawings; to sit there dreamily grinning at a tree in 
your back-garden, twenty times more useless because 
there wasn’t its like for miles around, even if there 
wasn’t; to be content to hang like a bloodsucker on the 
generosity of a relative half-blood and half-water—well, 
he had given P. P. a bit of his mind. 

The Fruit Merchant instinctively drew a cold fat hand 
down his face as a more and more precise recollection 
of the subsequent scene recurred to him. Mere silence 
can be insulting, and there was one thing about his half- 
brother—worse than all the rest of his peculiarities put 
together—that had never failed to reduce him to a fev- 
erish helplessness: his eyes. They didn’t see you even 
when they were fixed on you across a couple of feet of 
208 


The Tree 


deal board. They saw something else; and with no ves- 
tige of common courtesy. 

And those hands—you could swear at a glance that 
they had never done a single honest day’s work in their 
owner’s lifetime. Every sight of them had made it easier 
for the Fruit Merchant to work himself up into a blind 
refreshing rage. The cottage had fairly shaken to his 
abuse. The raw onions had danced under his fist on the 
table. And twining in and out between his roarings and 
shoutings had meandered on that other low, groping, dis- 
passionate voice—his brother’s. 

He had found his own place; and there he intended 
to remain. Rather than sit on a stool in a counting-house 
writing invoices for crates of oranges and pineapples he 
would hang himself from the topmost branches of the 
tree. You had your own life to lead, and it didn’t matter 
if you died of it. He was not making any claims. There 
was nothing the same in this world for any two individ- 
uals. And the more different everything was, the more 
closely you should cling to the difference. 

Oh, yes, it was mere chance, or whatever you liked 
to call it, that had brought him here; a mere chance 
that the tree had not even been charged for in the rent. 
There it was, and it would last him his life-time; and, 
when that was over, he wouldn’t complain. He had 
wagged his skimpy beard, a pencil between his fingers. 
No, he wouldn’t complain if they just dug a hole in the 
garden and shovelled his body in under the grass within 
reach of the rootlets. What’s your body? ‘“They’ll buy 
me all right when I’m safely dead. Try it—it’s a fair 
speculation.” 

209 


The Tree 


“Try what?” The Fruit Merchant’s countenance had 
suddenly set like a gargoyle in cast-iron. 

His half-brother had nodded towards a dingy port- 
folio that stood leaning against a half-empty bookcase. 
And at that his guest had laid about him with a will. 
“So that’s the kind of profit you are hoping to make 
out of your old bee-bush? That’s your profit? That’s 
your fine airs—your miserable scribblings and scrag- 
glings.” 

He had once more slammed down his huge fist on the 
table and delivered his ultimatum. “See here, I give 
you a hundred pounds, here and now. There’s no claim 
on me, not a shred. We don’t even share the same 
mother, even if we share the same dad. You talk this 
abject rubbish to me. You have never earned a decent 
penny in your life. You never will. You are a fool and 
a loafer. Go to the Parish; and go for good. I’m sick 
of it, d’ye hear ?—sick of it. You sit there, whiffling that 
I haven’t eyes in my head, that I don’t know black from 
white, that you’d rather hang your miserable carcase in 
your wretched old tree than take a respectable job. Well, 
hang it there—it won’t break the branches if this is the 
only kind of meal you can give a visitor! I’m done with 
you. I wash my hands of you. Do you hear?” 

He had—inaccurately—pantomimed the operation, 
sweeping over the jampot as he did so, and now drew 
in his breath—a cold breath, too; as, with eyes fixed 
on the ever-lightening hedgerows beyond his oblong win- 
dow, he remembered the renewed red-hot stab of pain 
that had transfixed the ball of his thumb. 

It recalled him instantaneously to his surroundings. 
Scrambling up from his seat he ejected his head out of 
210 


The Tree 


the cab into the open. “Whoa, there! Whoa, I say, 
I’m getting out.” 

The horse was dragged up on to its haunches, the cab 
came to a standstill, and, to the roaring suspirations of 
the animal, the Fruit Merchant alighted on the tinkling 
ice of a frozen wayside puddle of water. He turned 
himself about. Time and the night had not tarried dur- 
ing his journey. The east was a blaze of moonlight. 
The moon glared in the grey heavens like a circular flat 
little window of glass. 

“Wait here—” the Fruit Merchant bade his cabman in 
the desolation. “You've pretty near shaken the head off 
my body.” 

The cabman ducked his own small head in reply, and 
saluted his fare with a jerk of his whip. “You won't 
be long,” he sang out between his whiskers. 

“What did he mean by that?” was the Fruit Merchant's 
querulous question to himself as he mounted the few re- 
maining yards of by-lane towards the crest of the slope. 
He was tired and elderly and cold. A pathetic look, one 
almost of sadness, came into his face. He pushed up his 
muffler and coughed. There replied the faintest echo 
from the low copse that bordered the lane. Grass, crys- 
talled with hoar-frost, muffled his footsteps. What had 
he meant by that? repeated self to self, but not as if 
expectant of an answer. 


When well out of sight of the cabman and his vehicle 
beneath the slope of the hill, the Fruit Merchant paused 
and lifted his eyes. League beyond league beneath him, 
as if to the confines of the world, the countryside spread 
on—frost-beclad meadow, wood and winding lane. And 

211 


The Tree 


one sole house in sight—a small, tumbledown, lightless, 
huddling cottage, its ragged thatch and walls chequered 
black with shadow and dazzling white with wash of moon- 
shine. And there—lifting itself into the empty skies, its 
twigs and branches sweeping the stars, stood, as if in 
wait for him, the single naked gigantic tree. 

The Fruit Merchant gazed across at it, like an obese 
minute Belial on the ramparts of Eden. He had been 
fooled, then; tricked. He might have guessed the fatuity 
of his enterprise. He had guessed it. The house was 
empty; the bird had flown. Why for a single instant 
had he dreamed otherwise? Simply because all these 
years he had been deceived into believing there was a 
kind of honesty in the fellow. Just that something quix- 
otic, stupid, stubborn, dense, dull, demented which—noth- 
ing but lies, then. 

That bee in his bonnet, that snake in his grass; nothing 
but lies. There was no principle by which you could 
judge a man like that; and yet—well, after all, he was 
like anybody else. Give him a taste of the sweets of 
success, and his boasted solitude, his contempt for the 
mere decencies of life, his pretended disgust at men more 
capable and square-headed than himself had vanished into 
thin air. There were fools in the world, he had now dis- 
covered, who would pay ninety-seven guineas for a sec- 
ond- or third-hand scrabble of a drawing. “Right you 
are; hand over the dibs, and I am off!” 

A scornful yet lugubrious' smile stole over the Fruit 
Merchant’s purplish features. He would be honest 
about it; he positively enjoyed acknowledging when a 
rival had bested him over a bargain. He would even 
agree that he had always nursed his own little super- 
212 


The Tree 


stitions. And now all that fine silly talk—sheer fudge. 
He had been himself childish fool enough to be im- 
pressed by it; yes, and to have been a little frightened by 
pe tree. 

He eyed it there—that gaunt, prodigious weed; and 
then, with one furtive glance over his round shoulder 
towards the crest of the slope behind which lay his way 
of escape from this wintry landscape and from every 
memory of the buffoon who had cheated him, he slowly 
descended the hill, pushed open the broken gate, and 
entered the icy untended garden. 

Once more he came to a standstill in his frieze coat, 
and from under the brim of his hard hat stared up into 
the huge frigid branches. There is a supple lift and ease 
in the twigs of a tree asleep in winter. Green living 
buds are everywhere huddling close in their drowsy de- 
fences. Even the Fruit Merchant could distinguish be- 
tween the dreaming and the dead, or, at any rate, between 
the unripe and the rotten. 

And as he looked, two thoughts scurried like rats out 
of the wainscot of his mind. An unprecedented fore- 
boding descended on him. These lean shrunken twigs, 
these massive vegetable bones—the tree was dead. And 
up there—he shifted rapidly to and fro in order to secure 
an uninterrupted view of a kind of huddling shape up 
aloft there, an object that appeared to be stooping crazily 
forward as if on a similar quest in respect to himself. 
But no need to dwell on that. One corpse at a time was 
enough for any man on a night like this and in a country 
as cheerless as the plains of Gomorrah. A phrase or two 
out of his familiar bills of lading recurred to the Fruit 
Merchant’s mind—‘“the act of God.” There was some- 

213 


The Tree 


thing so horrific in the contorted set of the branches out- 
thrust in ungainly menace above his head that he was re- 
minded of no less a depravity than the devil himself. 
Thank the Lord, his half-brother had not remembered to 
send him a parcel of the fruit. 

If ever poison showed in a plant, it haunted every knot 
and knuckle of this tree. Judgment had overtaken it— 
the act of God. That’s what came of boasting. That’s 
what came of idling a useless life away in a daydream at 
other people’s expense. And now the cunning bird was 
flown. The insult of his half-brother’s triumph stabbed 
the Fruit Merchant like a sword. 

A sudden giddiness, the roar as of water, caused in part 
no doubt by the posture of his head, again swept over 
him, reverberated in his ears. He thrust a cautious hand 
into the breast of his coat and lowered his eyes. They 
came to a stay on the rugged moonlit bole. And there, 
with a renewed intensity of gaze, they once more fixed 
themselves. 

The natural living bark of the tree had been of a russet 
grey, resembling that of the beech. Apart from a pecu- 
liar shimmeringness due to. the frost that crystalled it 
over, and as the skin of a dead thing, that bark now sug- 
gested the silveriness of leprosy. So far, so good. But 
midway up the unbranched bole, at the height of five to 
six feet from the ground, appeared a wide peculiar cica- 
trice. The iridescent greyness here abruptly ended. 
Above it stretched a clear blank ring of darker colour, 
knobbed over, in and out, with tiny sparkling clusters of 
fungi. 

The Fruit Merchant stole in a pace or two. No feat 
of the inhuman, this. Cleanly and precisely the thick rind 
214 


re 


The Tree 


of the tree must some time since have been cut and pared 
away in a wide equal ring; a ring too far from the ground 
to have been the work of pigs or goats, too smooth and 
sharp-edged to have been caused by the gnawings of cattle. 
It was perfectly plain; the sap-protecting skin of the 
thing had been deliberately cut and hacked away. The 
tree had been murdered. High in the moonlit heavens it 
gloated there: a victim. 

Not until then did the Fruit Merchant stealthily turn 
and once more survey his half-brother’s house. The slow 
and almost furtive movement of his head and shoulders 
suggested that the action was involuntary. From this 
garden side the aspect of the hovel was even more abject 
and disconsolate. Its one ivy-clustered chimney-stack 
was smokeless. The moonbeams rained softly and merci- 
lessly on the flint walls, the boarded windows, the rat-and- 
bird-ravaged thatch. 

Only a spectre could be content with such a dwelling, 
and a guilt-stricken wretch at that. Yet without any 
doubt in the world the house was still inhabited. For 
even now a slender amber beam of light leaned out at an 
obtuse angle from some crevice in the shuttering wood 
into the vast bath of moonshine. 

For a moment the Fruit Merchant hesitated. He could 
leave the garden and regain his cab without nearing the 
house. He could yet once more “wash his hands.” Cer- 
tainly, after sight of the maniac’s treacherous work on his 
unique God-given tree he hadn’t the faintest vestige’ of 
a desire to confront his half-brother. Quite the reverse. 
He would far rather fling a second hundred pounds after 
the first than be once more contaminated by his company. 
There was something vile in his surroundings. 

215 


The Tree 


In shadows black as pitch, like these, any inconceivably 
evil creature might lie in covert. If the tree alive could 
decoy an alien fauna to its succulent nectar, the tree dead 
might well invite even less pleasing ministrations. Come 
what would, he was prepared. It might startle him; but 
he was dead-cold already ; and when your whole mind is 
filled with disgust and disquiet there is no room for 
physical fear. You merely want to shake yourself free— 
edge out and be off. 

Nevertheless, the human intruder in this inhuman 
wilderness was already, and with infinite caution, making 
his way towards the house. On a pitch-black night he 
might have hesitated. Hadn’t venomous serpents the 
habit of stealing for their winter slumber into the cran- 
nies and hollows of fallen wood? Might not even the 
lightest northern zephyr bring down upon his head an- 
other vast baulk of timber from the withered labyrinth 
above? But so bright was the earth’s lanthorn, so still 
the starry sky, that he could hear and even see the seeds 
from the humbler winter weeds scattering out from their 
yawning pods, as, with exquisite care, he brushed on 
through the tangling growths around him. 

And having at length closely approached the walls, 
standing actually within a jutting shadow, he paused yet 
again and took a deep breath into his body before, gently 
lifting himself, he set his eye to the crevice from which 
poured out that slender shaft of light. 

So artificially brilliant was the room within—by com- 
parison with the full moonlight of the Fruit Merchant’s 
natural world without—that for an instant or two he saw 
nothing. But he persevered, and after a while his round 
protruding eye found itself master of at least half the 
216 


The Tree 


space on the other side of the shutters. Stilled through 
and through, his fingers clutching the frosted sill, he stood 
there half suspended on his toes, and as if hypnotized. 

For scarcely more than a yard distant from his own 
there stooped a face—his half-brother’s: a face to haunt 
you to your dying day. It was surmounted by a kind of 
nightcap, and was almost unrecognizable. The unfolding 
of the hours of twelve solitary years had played havoc 
with the once-familiar features. The projecting brows 
above the angular cheek-bones resembled polished stone. 
The ears stood out like the vans of a bat on either side 
above the corded neck. The thin unkempt beard on the 
narrow jaw brushed the long gnarled hand that was mov- 
ing with an infinite tedious care on the bare table beneath 
it. 

Motionless the hanging paraffin lamp poured its radi- 
ance upon the engrossed cadaverous visage, revealing 
every line and bone, hollow and wrinkle. 

Nevertheless its possessor, this old man, shrunken and 
hideous in his frame of abject poverty, his arms drawn 
close up to his fallen body, worked sedulously on and on, 
And behind and around him showed the fruit of his 
labours. Pinned to the scaling walls, propped on the ram- 
shackle shelf above his fireless hearthstone, and even 
against the stale remnant of a loaf of bread on the cracked 
blue dish beside him, was a litter of pictures. And every- 
where, lovely and marvellous in all its guises—the tree. 
The tree in May’s showering loveliness, in summer’s quiet 
wonder, in autumn’s decline, in naked slumbering wintry 
grace. The colours glowed from the fine old rough 
paper like lamps and gems. 

There were drawings of birds, too, birds of dazzling 

217 


The Tree 


plumage, of flowers and butterflies, their crimson and 
emerald, rose and saffron seemingly shimmering and astir ; 
their every mealy and feathery and pollened boss and 
petal and plume on fire with hoarded life and beauty. 
And there a viper with its sinuous molten scales; and 
there a face and a shape looking out of its nothingness 
such as would awaken even a dreamer in a dream. 

Only three sounds in that night-quiet, and these scarcely 
discernible, stirred in the watcher’s ear: the faint shrill 
sing-song of the flame of the lamp, the harsh wheezy 
breath of the artist, and a faint scuttling as of rats or 
mice. This austere and dying creature must have come 
in at last from the world of nature and mankind a long 
time ago. The arm that had given the tree its quietus had 
now not the strength to lift an axe. Yet the ungainly 
fingers toiled assiduously on. 

The Fruit Merchant, spying in on the old half-starved 
being that sat there, burning swiftly away among his in- 
sane gewgaws, as nearly broke out crying as laughing. 
He was frightened and elated; mute and bursting with 
words. The act of God! Rather than even remotely 
resemble that old scare-crow in his second childhood push- 
ing that tiny-bladed knife across the surface of a flat of 
wood, he would— An empty and desolate look stole 
into the gazing eye. 

Not that he professed to understand. He knew noth- 
ing. His head was completely empty. The last shred of 
rage and vindictiveness had vanished away. He was glad 
he had come, for now he was going back. What little of 
the present and future remained would soon be the past. 
He, too, was ageing. His life also was coming to an end. 
He stared on—oh, yes. And not even a nephew to inherit 
218 


The Tree 


his snug fat little fortune. Worldly goods, shipload on 
shipload—well, since he could not take them away with 
him, he would leave them behind. He would bequeath 
them to charity, to the W. F. M. P. A. perhaps; and he 
would make a note of the hundred pounds. 

Not in malice; only to leave things business-like and in 
order ; to do your duty by a greedy and ungrateful world 
even though you were soon to be washing your hands of 
that, too. All waste, nothing but waste. But he thanked 
the Lord he had kept his sanity, that he was respected; 
that he wasn’t in the artificial fruit trade—the stuff your 
grandmother belled under glass. He thanked the Lord 
he wasn’t foul to look at! foul probably to smell; and a 
poison even to think about. 

Yet still he peeped on—this old Tom, though at no Lady 
Godiva. “They” would buy right enough—there was no 
doubt of that. Christie’s would some day be humming 
with the things. He didn’t deny the old lunatic that. He 
knew a bird when he saw it—even on paper. Ninety- 
seven guineas: at that rate there was more money swim- 
ming about in this pestilent hovel than ever even he him- 
self could lay his practised hands on. 

And there were fools in plenty—rich, dabbling, affected, 
silly fools—dillytanties, you called ’em—who would never 
know that their lying, preposterous P. P. had destroyed 
the very life of the tree that had given its all for him. 
And why? And why? The Fruit Merchant was almost 
tempted to burn down the miserable cabin over his half- 
brother’s head. Who could tell? ... A gust of wind 
stirred in the bedraggled thatch, feebly whined in the 
keyhole. 

And at that moment, as if an angry and helpless thought 

219 


The Tree 


could make itself audible even above the hungry racket- 
ing of mice and the melancholic whistling of a paraffin 
lamp—at that moment the corpse-like countenance, almost 
within finger-touch on the other side of the table, slowly 
raised itself from the labour of its regard, and appeared 
to be searching through the shutter’s cranny as if into the 
Fruit Merchant’s brain. The glance swept through him 
like an avalanche. No, no. But one instantaneous con- 
frontation, and he had pushed himself back from the im- 
pious walls as softly as an immense sack of hay. 

These were not eyes—in that abominable countenance. 
Speck-pupilled, greenish-grey, unfocused, under their pro- 
tuberant mat of eyebrow, they remained still as a salt 
and stagnant sea. And in their uplifted depths, stretch- 
ing out into endless distances, the Fruit Merchant had 
seen regions of a country whence neither for love nor 
money he could ever harvest one fruit, one pip, one cank- 
ered bud. And blossoming there beside a glassy stream 
in the mid-distance of far-mountained sward—a tree. . . . 

In after-years an old, fat, vulgar, and bronchitic figure, 
muffled up in a pathetic shawl, would sometimes be seen 
seated in a place of honour, its hard square hat upon its 
thick bald skull, within positive reach of the jovial auc- 
tioneer’s ivory hammer. To purchase every “P. P.” that 
came into the market was a dream beyond even a multi- 
millionaire’s avarice. But small beetles or grubs or single 
feathers drawn “from the life” were within the scope of 
the Fruit Merchant’s purse. The eye that showed not the 
faintest vestige of reflected glory from the orange of the 
orange, the gamboge of the lemon, or the russet bronze 
of the pomegranate—in their crated myriads—would fit- 
fully light up awhile as one by one, and with reiterated 
220 


The Tree 


grunts of satisfaction, he afterwards in the secrecy of his 
home consigned these indifferent and “early” works of 
art to the flames. 

But since his medical man has warned him that any 
manifestation of passion would almost unquestionably 
prove his ultimate manifestation of anything, he steadily 
avoided thinking of the tree. Yet there it remained, un- 
exorcizable, ineradicable, in his fading imagination. 

Indeed, he finally expired in the small hours, one black 
winter’s morning, and as peacefully as a child, having 
dreamed that he was looking through a crevice into what 
could not be hell, but might be limbo or purgatory, the 
place of departed spirits. For there sat his half-brother, 
quite, quite still. And all around him, to be seen, haunted 
gay and painted birds and crystal flowers and damasked 
butterflies ; and, as it were, sylphs and salamanders, shapes 
of an unearthly beauty. And all of them strangely, pre- 
ternaturally still, as if in a peepshow, as if stuffed. 


221 


Out of the Deep 


"Te steely light of daybreak, increasing in vol- 
ume and intensity as the East grew larger with 
the day, showed clearly at length that the pro- 
digious yet elegant Arabian bed was empty. What might 
tenderly have cradled the slumbers of some exquisite Fair 
of romance now contained no human occupant at all. The 
whole immense room—its air dry and thin as if burnt— 
was quiet as a sepulchre. 

To the right of the bed towered a vast and heavily 
carved wardrobe. To the left, a lofty fireplace of stone 
flanked by its grinning frigid dogs. A few cumbrous and 
obscure paintings hung on the walls. And, like the draper- 
ies of a proscenium, the fringed and valanced damask 
curtains on either side the two high windows, poured 
down their motionless cataract of crimson. 

They had been left undrawn over night, and yet gave 
the scene a slight theatricality, a theatricality which the 
painted nymphs disporting themselves on the ceiling 
scarcely helped to dispel. 

Not that these coy and ogling faces suggested any 
vestige of chagrin at the absence of the young man who 
for some weeks past had shared the long nights with 
them. They merely smiled on. For, after all, Jimmie’s 
restless head upon a pillow had never really been in 
harmony with his pompous inanimate surroundings—the 
222 


Rat 


Out of the Deep 


thin high nose, like the beak of a small ship, between the 
fast-sealed lids and narrow cheekbones, the narrow bird- 
like brow, the shell of the ear slightly pointed. If, in- 
spired by the distant music of the spheres, the painted 
creatures had with this daybreak broken into song, it 
would certainly not have been to the tune of “Oh where, 
and oh where is my little dog gone?” There was even 
less likelihood of Jimmie’s voice now taking up their 
strains from out of the distance. 

And yet, to judge from appearances, the tongue within 
that head might have been that of an extremely vivacious 
talker—even though, apart from Mrs. Thripps, its talk 
these last few days had been for the most part with him- 
self. 

Indeed, as one of his friends had remarked, “Don’t 
you believe it. Jimmie has pots and pots to say, though 
he don’t say it. That’s what makes him such a damn good 
loser.” Whether or not; if Jimmie had been in the habit 
of conversing with himself, he must have had odd com- 
pany at times. 

Night after night he had lain there, flat on his back, his 
hands crossed on his breast—a pose that never failed to 
amuse him. A smooth eminence in the dark rich quilt 
about sixty inches from his chin indicated to his attentive 
eye the points of his toes. The hours had been heavy, 
the hours had been long—still there are only twelve or so 
of utter darkness in the most tedious of nights, and matins 
tinkles at length. Excepting the last of them—a night, 
which was now apparently for ever over, he had occupied 
this majestic bed for about six weeks, though on no single 
occasion could he have confessed to being really at home 
in it. 

223 


Out of the Deep 


He had chosen it, not from any characteristic whim or 
caprice, and certainly not because it dominated the room 
in which his Uncle Timothy himself used to sleep, yes, 
and for forty years on end, only at last to expire in it. 
He had chosen it because, when its Venetian blinds were 
pulled high up under the fringed cornice, it was as light as 
a London April sky could make it ; and because—well, just 
one single glance in from the high narrow doorway up- 
stairs had convinced him that the attic in which he was 
wont to sleep as a small boy was simply out of the ques- 
tion. A black heavy flood of rage swept over him at sight 
ef it—he had never before positively realized the abomina- 
tions of that early past. To a waif and stray any kind of 
shelter is, of course, a godsend, but even though this huge 
sumptuous barrack of a house had been left to him (or, 
rather, abandoned to him) by his Uncle Timothy’s relict, 
Aunt Charlotte, Jimmie could not—even at his loosest— 
have been described as homeless. 

Friendless rather—but that of his own deliberate 
choice. Not so very long ago, in fact, he had made a 
clean sweep of every single living being, male or female, 
to wham the term friend could, with some little elasticity, 
be applied. A little official affair, to put it politely, eased 
their exit. And then, this vacant hostel. The house, in 
fact (occupied only by a caretaker in the service of his 
Aunt’s lawyers) had been his for the asking at any time 
during the last two or three years. But he had steadily 
delayed taking possession of it until there was practically 
no alternative. 

Circumstances accustom even a young man to a good 
many inconveniences. Still it would have been a little 
too quixotic to sleep in the street, even though his Uncle 
224 


Out of the Deep 


Timothy’s house, as mere “property,” was little better 
than a white and unpleasing elephant. He could not sell 
it, that is, not en masse. It was more than dubious if 
he was legally entitled to make away with its contents. 

But, quite apart from an extreme aversion to your 
Uncle Timothy’s valuables in themselves, you cannot eat, 
even if you can subsist on, articles of virtu. Sir Richard 
Grenville—a hero for whom Jimmie had every respect— 
may have been accustomed to chewing up his wine-glass 
after swigging off its contents. But this must have been 
on the spur of an impulse, hardly in obedience to the in- 
stinct of self-preservation. Jimmie would have much 
preferred to balance a chair at the foot of his Uncle’s 
Arabian bed and salute the smiling lips of the painted 
nymphs on the ceiling. Though even that experiment 
would probably have a rather gritty flavour. Still, pos- 
session is nine points of the law, and necessity is the deadly 
enemy of convention. Jimmie was unconscious of the 
faintest scruples on that score. 

His scruples, indeed, were in another direction. Only 
a few days ago—the day, in fact, before his first indul- 
gence in the queer experience of pulling the bell—he had 
sallied out with his Aunt Charlotte’s black leather dress- 
ing bag positively bulging with a pair of Bow candlesticks, 
an illuminated missal, mutely exquisite, with its blues and 
golds and crimsons, and a tiny old silver-gilt bijouterie 
box. He was a young man of absurdly impulsive 
aversions, and the dealer to whom he carried this further 
consignment of loot was one of them. 

After a rapid and contemptuous examination, this gen- 
tleman spread out his ‘palms, shrugged his shoulders, and 
suggested a sum that would have caused even a more 

225 


Out of the Deep 


phlegmatic connoisseur than his customer’s Uncle Timo- 
thy to turn in his grave. 

And Jimmie replied, nicely slurring his r’s, “Really, 
Mr. So-and-so, it is impossible. No doubt the things have) 
an artificial value, but not for me. I must ask you to 
oblige me by giving me only half the sum you have kindly 
mentioned. Rather than accept your figure, you know, I 
would—well, perhaps it would be impolite to tell you 
what I would prefer to do. Dies irae, dies illa, and so on.” 

The dealer flushed, though he had been apparently con- 
tent to leave it at that. He was not the man to be easily 
insulted by a good customer. And Jimmie’s deprada- 
tions were methodical. With the fastidiousness of an ex- 
pert he selected from the rare and costly contents of the 
house only what was light and portable and became 
inconspicuous by its absence. The supply he realized, 
though without any perceptible animation, however reck- 
lessly it might -be squandered, would easily last out his 
lifetime. 

Certainly not. After having once made up his mind 
to accept his Uncle Timothy’s posthumous hospitality, the 
real difficulty was unlikely to be a conscientious one. It 
was the attempt merely to accustom himself to the house— 
the hated house—that grew more and more arduous. It 
falsified his hope that, like other experiences, this one 
would prove only the more piquant for being so pre- 
carious. Days and moments quickly flying—just his one 
funny old charwoman, Mrs. Thripps, himself, and the 
Past. 

After pausing awhile under the dingy and dusty portico, 
Jimmie had entered into his inheritance on the last after- 
noon in March. The wind was fallen; the day was be- 
226 


Out of the Deep 


ginning to narrow; a chill crystal light hung over the un- 
shuttered staircase. By sheer force of a forgotten habit 
he at once ascended to the attic in which he had slept as 
a child. 

Pausing on the threshold, he looked in, conscious not 
so much of the few familiar sticks of furniture—the 
trucklebed, the worn strip of Brussels carpet, the chipped 
blue-banded ewer and basin, the framed illuminated texts 
on the walls—as of a perfect hive of abhorrent mem- 
ories. 

That high cupboard in the corner from which certain 
bodiless shapes had been wont to issue and stoop at him 
cowering out of his dreams; the crab-patterned paper 
that came alive as you stared; the window cold with 
menacing stars; the mouseholes, the rusty grate—trumpet 
of every wind that blows—these objects at once lustily 
shouted at him in their own original tongues. 

Quite apart from themselves, they reminded him of 
incidents and experiences which at the time could scarcely 
have been so nauseous as they now seemed in retrospect. 
He found himself suffocatingly resentful even of what 
must have been kindly intentions. He remembered how 
his Aunt Charlotte used to read to him—with her puffy 
cheeks, plump ringed hands, and the moving orbs of her 
eyes showing under her spectacles. 

He wasn’t exactly accusing the past. Even in his first 
breeches he was never what could be called a nice little 
boy. He had never ordered himself lowly and reverently 
to any of his betters—at least in their absence. Neverthe- 
less, what stirred in his bosom as he gazed in on this dis- 
carded scene was certainly not remorse. 

He remembered how gingerly and with what peculiar 

227 


Out of the Deep 


breathings, his Uncle Timothy used to lift his microscope 
out of its wooden case; and how, after the necessary 
manipulation of the instrument, he himself would be bid- 
den mount a footstool and fix his dazzled eye on the slides 
of sluggish or darting horrors of minute magnified “life.” 
And how, after a steady um-aw-ing drawl of inappre- 
hensible instruction, his uncle would suddenly flick out 
a huge silk pocket handkerchief as a signal that little 
tongue-tied nervous boys were themselves nothing but 
miserable sluggish or darting reptiles, and his nephew was 
the most deplorable kind of little boy. 

Jimmie remembered, too, once asking the loose bow- 
shaped old gentleman in his chair if he might himself 
twist the wheel; and his Uncle Timothy had replied in 
a loud ringing voice, and almost as if he were addressing 
a public meeting: “Um, ah, my boy, I say No to that!” 
He said No to-most things, and just like that, if he vouch- 
safed speech at all. 

And then there was Church on Sundays; and his hoop 
on weekdays in the Crescent; and days when, with noth- 
ing to do, little Jimmie had been wont to sit watching the 
cold silvery rain on the window, the body he was in slowly 
congealing the while into a species of rancid suet pudding. 
Mornings, too, when his Aunt Charlotte would talk nasally 
to him about Christianity ; or when he was allowed to help 
his Uncle and a tall scared parlourmaid dust and re- 
arrange the contents of a cabinet or bureau. The smell 
of the air, the deck duster, the odious objets d’art and 
the ageing old man snorting and looking like a super- 
annuated Silenus beside the neat and frightened parlour- 
maid—it was a curious thing ; though Death with his lour- 
228 


Out of the Deep 


ing grin had beckoned him off: there he was—alive as 
ever. 

And when amid these ruminations, Jimmie’s eyes had 
at last fixed themselves on the frayed dangling cord that 
hung from the ceiling over the trucklebed, it was because 
he had already explored all that the name Soames had 
stood for. Soames the butler—a_ black-clothed, tub- 
bellied, pompous man that might have been his Uncle 
Timothy’s impoverished first cousin or illegitimate step- 
brother: Soames: Soames. 

Soames used frequently to wring Jimmie’s then pro- 
tuberant ears. Soames sneaked habitually; and with a 
sort of gloating piety on his drooping face, was invariably 
present at the subsequent castigation. Soames had been 
wont to pile up his plate with lumps of fat that even 
Destiny had never intended should consort with any 
single leg of mutton or even sirloin of beef—jelly-like, 
rapidly cooling nuggets of fat. And Soames invariably 
brought him cold rice pudding when there was hot ginger 
roll. 
Jimmie remembered the lines that drooped down from 
his pale long nose. The sleek set of his whiskers as he 
stood there in his coat-tails reflected in the glass of the 
sideboard, carving the Sunday joint. 

But that slack green bell-cord!—his very first glimpse 
of it had set waggling scores of peculiar remembrances. 
First, and not so very peculiarly, perhaps, it recalled an 
occasion when, as he stood before his Aunt’s footstool 
to bid her Good-night, her aggrieved pupils had visibly 
swum down from beneath their lids out of a nap, to fix 
themselves and look at him at last as if neither he nor she, 

229 


Out of the Deep 


either in this or in any other world, had ever so much 
as seen one another before. Perhaps his own face, if 
not so puffy appeared that evening to be unusually pasty 
and pallid—with those dark rings which even to this day 
added vivacity and lustre to his extremely clear eyes. And 
his Aunt Charlotte had asked him why he was such a 
cowardly boy and so wickedly frightened of the dark. 

“You know very well your dear Uncle will not permit 
gas in the attic, so there’s no use asking for it. You 
have nothing on your conscience, I trust? You have not 
been talking to the servants?” 

Infallible liar, he had shaken his head. And his Aunt 
Charlotte in return wagged hers at him. 

“Tt’s no good staring in that rebellious sullen way at 
me. I have told you repeatedly that if you are really in 
need of anything, just ring the bell for Soames. A good 
little boy with nothing on his conscience knows that God 
watches over him. I hope you are at least trying to be 
a good little boy. There is a limit even to your Uncle’s 
forbearance.” 

It was perfectly true. Even bad little boys might be 
“watched over” in the dead of night, and as for his 
Uncle Timothy’s forbearance, he had discovered the 
limitations of that fairly early in life. 

Well, it was a pity, he smiled to himself, that his Aunt 
Charlotte could not be present to see his Uncle Timothy’s 
bedroom of that first celebration of their prodigal neph- 
ew’s return. Jimmie’s first foray had been to range the 
house from attic to cellar (where he had paused to rest) 
for candlesticks. And that night something like six 
dozen of the “best wax” watched over his heavy and 
galvanic slumbers in the Arabian bed. Aunt Charlotte, 
230 


Out of the Deep 


now rather more accustomed to the dark even than Jimmie 
himself, would have opened her eyes at that. 

Gamblers are naturally superstitious folk, he supposed ; 
but that was the queerest feature of the whole thing. He 
had not then been conscious of even the slightest appre- 
hension or speculation. It was far rather a kind of ri- 
baldry than any sort of foreboding that had lit up positive 
constellations of candles as if for a Prince’s—as if for a 
princely Cardinal’s—lying-in-state. 

It had taken a devil of a time, too. His Uncle Tim- 
othy’s port was not the less potent for a long spell of ob- 
scure mellowing, and the hand that held the paper had 
been a shaky one. Yet it had proved an amusing process, 
too. Almost childish. Jimmie hadn’t laughed like that 
for years. Certainly until then he had been unconscious 
of the feeblest sqeamish inkling of anything—apart from 
old remembrances—peculiar in the house. And yet—well, 
no doubt even the first absurd impulsive experiment that 
followed had shaken him up. 

Its result would have been less unexpected if he 
hadn’t made a point and almost a duty of continually 
patrolling the horrible old vacant London mansion. 
Hardly a day had lately passed—and there was nothing 
better to do—but it found him on his rounds. He was not 
waiting for anything (except for the hour, maybe, when 
he would have to wait no more). Nevertheless, faithful 
as the sentinal on Elsinore’s hoary ramparts, he would find 
himself day after day treading almost cat-like on from 
room to room, surveying his paradoxical inheritance, 
jotting down a list in a nice order of the next “sacrifice,” 
grimacing at the Ming divinities, and pirouetting an 
occasional long nose at the portraits on the walls. 

231 


Out of the Deep 


He had sometimes had a few words—animated ones, 
too—with Mrs. Thripps, and perhaps if he could have 
persuaded himself to talk “sensibly,” and not to gesticu- 
late, not to laugh himself so easily into a fit of coughing, 
she would have proved better company. She was amaz- 
ingly honest and punctual and quiet; and why to heaven 
a woman with such excellent qualities should customarily 
wear so scared a gleam in her still, colourless eyes, and 
be so idiotically timid and nervous in his company, he 
could not imagine. 

She was being paid handsome wages anyhow; and, 
naturally, he was aware of no rooted objection to other 
people helping themselves; at least if they managed it as 
skilfully as he did himself. But Mrs. Thripps, it seemed, 
had never been able in any sense at all to help herself. 
She was simply a crape-bonnetted “motherly” creature, 
if not excessively intelligent, if a little slow in seeing 
“points.” It was, indeed, her alarm when he asked her if 
she had happened to notice any young man about the 
house that had irritated him—though, of course, it was 
hardly fair not to explain what had given rise to the 
question. That was perfectly simple. It was like this... . 

For years—for centuries, in fact—Jimmie had been, 
except in certain unusual circumstances, an exceedingly 
bad sleeper. He still hated sleeping in the dark. But 
a multitude of candles at various degrees of exhaustion 
make rather lively company ‘when you are sick of your 
Uncle Timothy’s cellar. And even the best of vintage 
wines may prove an ineffectual soporific. His, too, 
was a wretchedly active mind. 

Even as a boy he had thought a good deal about his 
Uncle and Aunt, and Soames, and the house, and the 
232 


Out of the Deep 


Rev. Mr. Grayson, and spectres, and schoolmasters, and 
painted nymphs, and running away to sea, and curios, 
and dead silence, and his early childhood. And though, 
since then, other enigmas had engaged his attention, this 
purely automatic and tiresome activity of mind still per- 
sisted. 

On his oath he had been in some respects and in secret 
rather a goody-goody little boy ; though his piety had been 
rather the off-spring of fear than of love. Had he not 
been expelled from Mellish’s almost solely for that rea- 
son? What on earth was the good of repeatedly thrash- 
ing a boy when you positively knew that he had lied merely 
from terror of your roaring voice and horrible white face? 

But there is was; if there had been some one to talk to, 
he would not have talked so much to himself. He would 
not have lain awake thinking, night after night, like a rat 
in a trap. Thinking was like a fountain. Once it gets 
going at a certain pressure, well, it is almost impossible 
to turn it off. And, my hat! what odd things come up 
with the water ! 

On the particular night in question, in spite of the 
candles and the mice and the moon, he badly wanted com- 
pany. In a moment of pining yet listless jocosity, then, 
he had merely taken his Aunt Charlotte’s advice. True, 
the sumptuous crimson pleated silk bell-pull, dangling 
like a serpent with a huge tassel for skull over his Uncle 
Timothy’s pillow, was a more formidable instrument than 
the yard or two of frayed green cord in the attic. Yet 
they shared the same purpose. Many a time must his 
Uncle Timothy have stretched up a large loose hand in 
that direction when in need of Soames’s nocturnal minis- 
trations. And now, alas, both master and man were long 


233 


Out of the Deep 


since gone the way of all flesh. You couldn’t, it appeared, 
pull bells in your coffin. 

But Jimmie was not as yet in his coffin, and as soon as 
his fingers slipped down the smooth pull, the problem, in 
the abstract, as it were, began to fascinate him. With 
cold froggy hands crossed over his beautiful puce- 
patterned pyjamas, he lay staring at the crimson tassel 
till he had actually seen the hidden fangs flickeringly jet 
out at him. 

The effort, then, must have needed some little courage. 
It might almost have needed a tinge of inspiration. It 
was in no sense intended as a challenge. He would, in 
fact, rather remain alone than chance summoning—well, 
any (once animate), relic of the distant past. But ob- 
viously the most practical way of proving—if only to your- 
selfi—that you can be content with your own reconnais- 
sances in the very dead of night, was to demonstrate to 
that self that, even if you should ask for it, assistance 
would not be forthcoming. 

He had been as fantastic as that. At the prolonged, 
pulsating, faint, distant tintinnabulation he had fallen 
back on to his pillow with an absurd little quicket of 
laughter, like that of a naughty boy up to mischief. But 
instant sobriety followed. Poor sleepers should en- 
deavour to compose themselves. Tampering with empty 
space, stirring up echoes in pitch-black pits of darkness 
is scarcely sedative. And then, as he lay striving with 
extraordinary fervour not to listen, but to concentrate his 
mind on the wardrobe, and to keep his eyes from the door, 
that door must gently have opened. 

It must have opened, and as noiselessly closed again. 
For a more or less decent-looking young man, seemingly 


234 


Out of the Deep 


not a day older than himself was now apparent in the 
room. It might almost be said that he had insinuated 
himself into the room. But well-trained domestics are 
accustomed to move their limbs and bodies with a be- 
coming unobtrusiveness. There was also that familiar 
slight inclination of the apologetic in this young man’s 
pose, as he stood there solitary in his black, in that terrific 
blaze of candle light. And for a sheer solid minute the 
occupant of the Arabian bed had really stopped thinking. 

When indeed you positively press your face, so to speak, 
against the crystalline window of your eyes, your mind 
is apt to become a perfect vacuum. And Jimmie’s first 
rapid and instinctive “Who the devil... ?” had re- 
mained inaudible. 

In the course of the next few days Jimmie was to be- 
come familiar (at least in memory) with the looks of this 
new young butler or valet. But first impressions are 
usually the vividest. The dark blue-grey eyes, the high 
nose, the scarcely perceptible smile, the slight stoop of 
the shoulders—there was no doubt of it. There was just 
a flavour, a flicker, there, of resemblance to himself. Not 
that he himself could ever have cut as respectful and re- 
spectable a figure as that. And the smile!—the fellow 
seemed to be ruminating over a thousand dubious, long- 
interred secrets, secrets such as one may be a little cau- 
tious of digging up even to share with one’s self. 

His face turned sidelong on his pillow, and through 
air as visibly transparent as a sheet of glass, Jimmie had 
Steadily regarded this strange bell-answerer ; and the bell- 
answerer had never so much as stirred his frigid glittering 
eyes in response. The silence that hung between them 
produced eventually a peculiar effect on Jimmie. Menials 

235 


Out of the Deep 


as a general rule should be less emphatic personally. 
Their unobtrusiveness should surely not emphasize their 
immanence. It had been Jimmie who was the first to with- 
draw his eyes, only once more to find them settling as if 
spellbound on those of his visitor. 

Yet, after all, there was nothing to take offence at in 
the young man’s countenance or attitude. He did not 
seem even to be thinking back at the bell-puller; but 
merely to be awaiting instructions. Yet Jimmie’s heart 
at once rapidly began to beat again beneath his icy hands. 
And at last he made a perfectly idiotic response. 

Wagging his head on his pillow, he turned abruptly 
away. “It was only to tell you that I shall need nothing 
more tonight,” he had said. 

Good Heavens! The fatuity of it! He wanted, thirsted 
for, scores upon scores of things. Aladdin’s was the 
cupidity of a simpleton by comparison. Time, and the 
past, for instance, and the ability to breathe again as easily 
as if it were natural—as natural as the process of diges- 
tion. Why, if you were intent only on a little innocent 
companionship, one or two of those nymphs up there 
would be far more amusing company than Mrs. Thripps. 
If, that is, apart from yearning to their harps and viols, 
they could have been persuaded to scrub and sweep. 
Jimmie wanted no other kind of help. There is a beauty 
that is but skin-deep. 

Altogether it had been a far from satisfactory experi- 
ence. Jimmie was nettled. His mincing tones echoed on 
in his mind. They must have suggested that he was un- 
accustomed to men servants and bell-pulls and opulent sur- 
roundings. And the fellow had instantly taken him at 
his word. A solemn little rather agreeable and unservile 
236 


Out of the Deep 


inclination of the not unfriendly head—and he was gone. 

And there was Jimmie, absolutely exhausted, coughing 
his lungs out, and entirely incapable of concluding whether 
the new butler was a creature of actuality or of dream. 
Well, well, well: that was nothing new. That’s just how 
things do take one in one’s weak moments, in the dead 
of night. Nevertheless, the experience had apparently 
proved sedative. He had slept like an infant. 

The morning found him vivacious with curiosity. He 
had paused to make only an exceedingly negligent toilet 
before beginning his usual wanderings about the house. 
Calm cold daylight reflection may dismiss almost any noc- 
turnal experience as a dream, if, at any rate, one’s tem- 
perature in the night hours is habitually above the norm, 
But Jimmie could not, or would not, absolutely make up 
his mind. So clear a picture had his visitant imprinted 
on his memory that he even found himself (just like a 
specialist sounding a patient in search of the secret ravages 
of phthisis)—he had even found himself stealthily tap- 
ping over the basement walls—as if in search of a con- 
cealed pantry! A foolish proceeding if one has not the 
least desire in the world to attract the attention of one’s 
neighbours. 

Having at length satisfied himself in a rather confused 
fashion that whatever understudy of Soames might share 
the house with him in the small hours, he must be a butler 
of the migratory order, Jimmie then began experiment- 
ing with the bells. Mounted on a kitchen chair, cornice 
brush in hand, he had been surprised by Mrs. Thripps, 
in her quiet boots as he stood gently knocking one by one 
the full eighteen of the long greened crooked jingle row 
which hung open-mouthed above the immense dresser. 

237 


Out of the Deep 


She had caught him in the act, and Jimmie had once 
more exercised his customary glib presence of mind. 

“They ought to be hung ina scale, you know. Oughtn’t 
they, Mrs. Thripps? Then we could have ‘Home, Sweet 
Home!’ and a hunting up and a hunting down, grand- 
sires and treble bobs, and a grand maximus, even on week 
days. And if we were in danger of any kind of fire— 
which you will never be, we could ring them backwards. 
Couldn’t we, Mrs. Thripps? Not that there’s much quality 
in them—no medizval monkish tone or timbre in them. 
They’re a bit mouldy, too, and one can’t tell t’other from 
which. Not like St. Faiths’! One would recognize that 
old clanker in one’s shroud, wouldn’t one, Mrs. Thripps? 
Has it ever occurred to you that the first companologist’s 
real intention was not so much to call the congregation, as 
to summon—well—what the congregation’s after?” 

“Yes, sir,” Mrs. Thripps had agreed, her watery grey 
eyes fixed largely on the elevated young man. “But it 
don’t matter which of them you ring; I’ll answer hany— 
at least while I’m in the house. I don’t think, sir, you rest 
your mind enough. My own boy, now: he’s in the 
Navy. st A) 

But with one graceful flourish Jimmie had run his long- 
handled brush clean East to West along the clanging row. 
“You mustn’t,” he shouted, “you shouldn’t. Once aboard 
the lugger, they're free! It’s you mothers....” He 
gently shook his peculiar wand at the flat-looking little 
old woman. “No, Mrs. Thripps; what I’m after is he who 
is here, here! couchant, perdu, laired, in these same sub- 
terranean vaults when you and I are snug in our nightcaps. 
A most nice-spoken young man! Not in the Navy, Mrs. 
Thripps!” 

238 


Out of the Deep 


And before the old lady had had time to seize any one 
of these seductive threads of conversation, Jimmie had 
flashed his usual brilliant smile or grimace at her, and 
soon afterwards sallied out of the house to purchase a 
further gross or two of candles. 

Gently and furtively pushing across the counter half 
a sovereign—not as a douceur, but merely as from friend 
to friend—he had similarly smiled back at the secretive- 
looking old assistant in the staid West End family- 
grocer’s. 

“No, I don’t suppose you could remember me. One 
alters. One ages. One deals elsewhere. But anyhow, 
a Happy New Year to you—if the next ever comes, you 
know.” 

“You see, sir,” the straight-aproned old man had re- 
torted with equal confidentiality, “it is not so much the 
alterations. They are what you might call un-cir-cum- 
ventible, sir. It’s the stream, sir. Behind the counter 
here, we are like rocks in it. But even if I can’t for the 
moment put a thought to your face—though it’s already 
stirring me in a manner of speaking, I shall in the future, 
sir. You may rely upon that. And the same, sir, to 
you; and many of them, I’m sure.” 

Somehow or other Jimmie’s vanity had been mollified 
by this pleasing little ceremoniousness ; and that even be- 
fore he had smiled yet once again at the saffron young 
lady in the Pay Box. 

“The truth is, my dear,” he had assured himself, as he 
once more ascended into the dingy porch, “the truth is 
when once you begin to tamper, you won’t know where 
you are. You won't, really.” 

And that night he had lain soberly on, in a peculiar state 

239 


Out of the Deep 


of physical quiescence and self-satisfaction, his dark 
bright eyes wandering from nymph to nymph, his hands 
folded over his breast under the bedclothes, his heart per- 
sisting in its usual habits. Nevertheless, the fountain 
of his thoughts had continued softly to plash on in its 
worn basin. With ears a-cock, he had frankly enjoyed 
inhaling the parched, spent, brilliant air. 

And when his fingers had at last manifested the faint- 
est possible itch to experiment once more with the bell- 
pull, he had slipped out of bed, and hastily searching 
through a little privy case of his uncle’s bedside books, 
had presently slipped back again, armed with a fat little 
copy of The Mysteries of Paris, in its original French. 

The next day a horrible lassitude descended upon him. 
For the better part of an hour he had stood staring out 
of the drawing-room window into the London street. At 
last, with a yawn that was almost a groan, and with an 
absurdly disproportionate effort, he turned himself about. 
Heavily hung the gilded chandeliers in the long vista of 
the room; heavily gloomed the gilded furniture. Scarcely 
distinguishable in the obscurity of the further wall stood 
watching him from a mirror what might have appeared 
to be the shadowy reflection of himself. With a still, yet 
extreme aversion he kept his eyes fixed on this distant 
nonentity, hardly realizing his own fantastic resolve that 
if he did catch the least faint independent movement there, 
he would give Soames Junior a caustic piece of his 
mind. ... 

He must have been abominably fast asleep for hours 
when, a night or two afterwards, he had suddenly awak- 
ened, sweat streaming along his body, his mouth stretched 
240 


Out of the Deep 


to a long narrow O, and his right hand clutching the bell- 
rope, as might a drowning man at a straw. 

The room was adrowse with light. All was still. The 
flitting horrors between dream and wake in his mind were 
already thinning into air. Through their transparency 
he looked out once more on the substantial, the familiar. 
His breath came heavily, like puffs of wind over a stormy 
sea, yet a profound peace and tranquillity was swathing 
him in. The relaxed mouth was now faintly smiling. 
Not a sound, not the feeblest distant unintended tinkling 
was trembling up from the abyss. And for a moment 
or two the young man refrained even from turning his 
head at the soundless opening and closing of the door. 

He lay fully conscious that he was not alone; that quiet 
eyes had him steadily in regard. But, like rats, his wits 
were beginning to busy themselves again. Sheer relief 
from the terrors of sleep, shame of his extremity and 
weakness, a festering sense of humiliation—yes, he must 
save his face at all costs. He must put this preposterous 
spying valet in his place. Oddly enough, too, out of the 
deeps a peculiar little vision of recollection had inexplic- 
ably obtruded itself into consciousness. It would be a 
witticism of the first water. 

“They are dreadfully out of season, you know,” he be- 
gan murmuring affectedly into the hush, “dreadfully. 
But what I’m really pining for is a bunch of primroses. 
. .. A primrose by the river’s brim . . . must be a little 
conservative.” His voice was once more trailing off into 
a maudlin drowsiness. With an effort he roused him- 
self, and now with an extremely sharp twist of his head, 


he turned to confront his visitor. 
241 


Out of the Deep 


But the room was already vacant, the door ajar, and 
Jimmie’s lids were on the point of closing again, sliding 
down over his tired eyes like leaden shutters which no 
power on earth could hinder or restrain, when at the 
faintest far whisper of sound they swept back suddenly— 
and almost incredibly wide—to drink in all they could of 
the spectacle of a small odd-looking child who at that 
moment had embodied herself in the doorway. 

She seemed to have not the least intention of returning 
the compliment. Her whole gaze, from out of her fair 
flaxen-pigtailed face, was fixed on the coarse blue-banded 
kitchen bowl which she was carrying with extreme care 
and caution in her two narrow hands. The idiots down 
below had evidently filled it too full of water, for the pale 
wide-petalled flowers and thick crinkled leaves it con- 
tained were floating buoyantly nid-nod to and fro as she 
moved—pushing on each slippered foot in turn in front 
of the other, her whole mind concentrated on her task: 

A plain child, but extraordinarily fair, as fair as the 
primroses themselves in the congregation of candlelight 
that motionlessly flooded the room—a narrow-chested 
long-chinned creature who had evidently outgrown her 
strength. Jimmie was well accustomed to take things 
as they come; and his brief sojourn in his uncle’s house 
in his present state of health had already enlarged the 
confines of the term “things.”. Anyhow, she was a relief 
from the valet. 

He found himself, then, watching this new visitor with- 
out the least trace of astonishment or even of surprise. 
And as his dark eyes coursed over the child, he simply 
couldn’t decide whether she most closely “took after” 
Soames Junior or Mrs. Thripps. All he could positively 
242 


Out of the Deep 


assure himself of was just the look, “the family likeness.” 
And that in itself was a queerish coincidence, since what- 
ever your views might be regarding Soames Junior, Mrs. 
Thripps was real enough—as real, at any rate as her 
scrubbing-brush and her wholesome evil-smelling soap. 

As a matter of fact, Jimmie was taking a very tight 
hold of himself. His mind might fancifully be compared 
to a quiet green swarming valley between steep rock- 
bound hills in which a violent battle was proceeding— 
standards and horsemen and smoke and terror and vio- 
lence—but no sound. 

Deep down somewhere he really wanted to be “nice” 
to the child. She meant no ill; she was a demure far- 
away harmless-looking creature. Ages ago... On the 
other hand he wished to heaven they would leave him 
alone. They were pestering him. He knew perfectly 
well how far he was gone, and bitterly resented this re- 
newed interference. And if there was one thing he de- 
tested, it was being made to look silly—“I hope you are 
trying to be a good little boy? . .. You have not been 
talking to the servants?” That kind of thing. 

It was, therefore, with mixed feelings and with a tinge 
of shame-facedness that he heard his own sneering tone- 
less voice insinuate itself into the silence: “And what, 
missikins, can I do for you? . . . What, you will under- 
stand; not How?” The sneer had degenerated into a 
snarl. 

The child at this had not perceptibly faltered. Her face 
had seemed to lengthen a little, but that might have been 
due solely to her efforts to deliver her bowl without spill- 
ing its contents. Indeed she actually succeeded in so do- 
ing, almost before Jimmie had time to withdraw abruptly 

243 


Out of the Deep 


from the little gilt-railed table on which she deposited the 
clumsy pot. Frock, pigtail, red hands—she seemed to 
be as “real” a fellow creature as you might wish to see. 
But Jimmie stared quizzically on. Unfortunately prim- 
roses have no scent, so that he could not call on his nose 
to bear witness to his eyes. And the congested conflict 
in the green valley was still proceeding. 

The child had paused. Her hands hung down now as 
if they were accustomed to service ; and her pale blue eyes 
were fixed on his face in that exasperating manner which 
suggests that the owner of them is otherwise engaged. 
Not that she was looking through him. Even the sharp- 
est of his “female friends’ had never been able to boast 
of that little accomplishment. She was looking into him; 
and as if he occupied time rather than space. Or was she, 
sneered that weary inward voice again, was she merely 
waiting for a tip? 

“Look here,” said Jimmie, dexterously raising himself 
to his elbow on the immense lace-fringed pillow, “‘it’s all 
very well; you have managed things quite admirably, con- 
sidering your age and the season, and so on. But I didn’t 
ask for primroses, I asked for violets. That’s a very old 
trick—very old trick.” 

For one further instant, dark and fair, crafty and sim- 
pleton face communed, each with each. But the smile on 
the one had fainted into a profound child-like contempla- 
tion. And then, so swift and imperceptible had been his 
visitant’s envanishment out of the room, that the very 
space she had occupied seemed to remain for a while out- 
lined in the air—a nebulous shell of vacancy. She must, 
apparently, have glided backwards through the doorway, 


244 


Out of the Deep 


for Jimmie had assuredly not been conscious of the re- 
motest glimpse of her pigtail from behind. 

Instantly on that, the stony hillside within had resounded 
with a furious clangour—cries and shouts and scream- 
ings—and Jimmie, his face bloodless with rage, his eyes 
almost blind with it, had leapt out of the great bed as if 
in murderous pursuit. There must, however, have been 
an unusual degree or so of fever in his veins that night 
so swift was his reaction. For the moment he was on his 
feet an almost unendurable self-pity had swept into 
possession of him. To take a poor devil as literally as 
that! To catch him off his guard; not to give him the 
mere fleck of an opportunity to get his balance, to explain, 
to answer back! Curse the primroses. 

But there was no time to lose. 

With one hand clutching his pyjamas, the other carry- 
ing the bowl, he poked forward out of the flare of the 
room into the cold lightlessness of the wide stone stair- 
case. 

“Look here,” he called down in a low argumentative 
voice, “look here, You! You can cheat and you can cheat, 
but to half strangle a fellow in his sleep, and then send 
him up the snuffling caretaker’s daughter— No, No.... 
Next time, you old makebelieve, we'd prefer company a 
little more—a little more congenial.” 

He swayed slightly, grimacing vacantly into the dark- 
ness, and listening to his speech as dimly as might a 
somnambulist to the distant roar of falling water. And 
then, poor benighted creature, Jimmie tried to spit, but 
his lips and tongue were dry, and that particular insult 
was spared him. 

245 


Out of the Deep 


He had stooped laboriously, had put down the earthen- 
ware bowl on the Persian mat at the head of the stair- 
case, and was self-congratulatorily re-welcoming himself 
into the scene of still lustre he had dared for that pro- 
tracted minute of abandon, when he heard as if from be- 
neath and behind him a kind of lolloping disquietude and 
the sound as of a clumsy-clawed, but persistent animal 
pushing its uncustomary awkward way up the soap- 
polished marble staircase. 

It was to be tit for tat, then. The miserable ménage 
had let loose its menagerie. That. They were going to 
experiment with the mouse-cupboard-and-keyhole trick- 
ery of his childhood. Jimmie was violently shivering ; his 
very toes were clinging to the mat on which he stood. 

Swaying a little, and casting at the same time a strained 
whitened glance around the room in which every object 
rested in the light as if so it had rested from all eternity, 
he stood mutely and ghastly listening. 

Even a large bedroom, five times the size of a small 
boy’s attic, affords little scope for a fugitive, and shutting 
your eyes, darkening your outward face, is no escape. 
It had been a silly boast, he agreed—that challenge, that 
“dare” on the staircase; the boast of an idiot. For the 
“congenial company” that had now managed to hoof and 
scrabble its way up the slippery marble staircase was al- 
ready on the threshold. 

All was utterly silent now. There was no obvious 
manifestation of danger. What was peering steadily in 
upon him out of the obscurity beyond the door, was merely 
a blurred whitish beast-like shape with still, passive, al- 
most stagnant eyes in its immense fixed face. A perfectly 
246 


es 


Out of the Deep 


ludicrous object—on paper. Yet a creature so nauseous 
to soul and body, and with so obscene a greed in its mo- 
tionless pig-like grin that with one vertiginous swirl Jim- 
mie’s candles had swept up in his hand like a lateral race 
of streaming planets into outer darkness. 

If his wet groping fingers had not then encountered 
one of the carved pedestals of his uncle’s bedstead, Jim- 
mie would have fallen; Jimmie would have found in fact, 
the thing’s physical level. 


Try as he might, he had never in the days that followed 
made quite clear in his mind why for the third time he 
had not made a desperate plunging clutch at the bell rope. 
The thing must have been Soames Junior’s emissary, even 
if the bird-faced scullery maid with the primroses had not 
also been one of the “staff.” 

That he had desisted simply in case she should her- 
self have answered his summons and so have encountered 
the spurious animal as she mounted the dark staircase 
seemed literally too “good” to be true. Not only was 
Jimmie no sentimentalist, but that particular kind of good- 
hess, even in a state of mind perfectly calm and collected, 
was not one of his pleasanter characteristics. 

Yet facts are facts—even comforting ones. And un- 
less his memory was utterly untrustworthy, he had some- 
how—somehow contrived to regain his physical balance. 
Candelabrum in hand, he had actually, indeed, at last 
emerged from the toom, and stooped his dark head over 
the balusters in search of what unaccountably had not 
awaited his nearer acquaintance. And he had—he must 
have—flung the substantial little blue-banded slop-basin, 

247 


Out of the Deep 


primroses and all, clean straight down in the direction 
of any kind of sentient target that happened to be in its 
way. 

“You must understand, Mrs. Thripps,’ he had after- 
wards solemnly explained, “I don’t care to be disturbed, 
and particularly at night. All litter should, of course, be 
immediately cleared away. That’s merely as things go 
in a well-regulated household, as, in fact, they do go. 
And I see you have replaced the one or two little specimens 
I was looking over out of the cabinet on the staircase, 
Pretty things, too; though you hadn’t the advantage of 
being in the service of their late owner—my uncle. As J 
was. Of course, too, breakages cannot be avoided. 
There, I assure you, you are absolutely free. Moth and 
rust, Mrs. Thripps. No; all that I was merely enquiring 
about at the moment is that particular pot. There was an 
accident last night—primroses and so on. And one 
might have expected, one might almost have sworn, Mrs. 
Thripps, that at least a shard or two, as the Psalmist says, 
would have been pretty conspicuous even if the water had 
completely dried away. Not that I heard the smash, 
mind. I don’t go so far as that. Nor am I making any 
insinuations whatever. You are the best of good crea- 
tures, you are indeed—and it’s no good looking at me like 
Patience on a monument; because at present life is real 
and life is earnest. All I mean is that if one for a single 
moment ceases to guide one’s conduct on reasonable lines 
—well, one comes a perfectly indescribable cropper, Mrs. 
Thripps. Like the pot.” 

Mrs. Thripps’s grey untidy head had remained oddly 
stuck out from her body throughout this harangue. “No, 
sir,’ she repeated once more. “High and low I’ve 
248 


Out of the Deep 


searched the house down, and there isn’t a shadder of what 
you might be referring to, not a shadder. And once more, 
I ask you, sir; let me call in Dr. Stokes. He’s a very nice 
gentleman ; and one as keeps what should be kept as close 
to himself as it being his duty he sees right and proper to 
do. Chasing and racketing of yourself up and down these 
runs of naked stairs—in the dead of night—is no proper 
place for you, sir, in your state. And I don't like to take 
the responsibility. It’s first the candles, then the bells, 
and then the kitching, and then the bason; I know what 
I’m talking about, sir, having lost two, and one at sea.” 

“And suppose, my dear,” Jimmie had almost as bril- 
liantly as ever smiled; ‘suppose we are all of us ‘at sea.’ 
What then?” 

“Why then, sir,’ Mrs. Thripps had courageously re- 
torted, “I’d as lief be at the bottom of it. There’s been 
as much worry and trouble and making two ends meet 
in my life not to make the getting out of it what you’d 
stand on no ceremony for. I say it with all decent respect 
for what’s respectful and proper, sir; but there isn’t a 
morning I step down those area steps but my heart’s in 
my mouth for fear there won’t be anything in the house 
but what can’t answer back. It’s been a struggle to keep 
on, sir; and you as generous a gentleman as need be, if 
only you’d remain warm and natural in your bed when 
once there.” 

A little inward trickle of laughter had entertained Jim- 
mie as he watched the shapeless patient old mouth utter 
these last few words. 

“That’s just it, Mrs. Thripps,” he had replied softly. 
“You’ve done for me far more effectively than any one I 
care to remember in my insignificant little lifetime. You 

249 


Out of the Deep 


have indeed.” Jimmie had even touched the hand bent 
like the claw of a bird around the broom-handle. “In 
fact, you know—and I’m bound to confess it as gratefully 
as need be—they are all of them doing for me as fast as 
they can. I don’t complain, not the least little bit in the 
world. All that I might be asking is, How the devil— 
to put it politely—how the goodness gracious is one to 
tell which is which? In my particular case, it seems to 
be the miller that sets the wind: not, of course, that he’s 
got any particular grain to grind. Not even wild oats, 
you funny old mother of a youthful mariner. No, no, 
no. Even the fact that there wasn’t perhaps any pot 
after all, you will understand, doesn’t positively prove 
that neither could there have been any primroses. And 
before next January’s four months old we shall be at the 
end of yet another April. At least—” and a sort of al- 
most bluish pallor had spread like a shadow over his face 
—‘“at least you will be. All of which is only to say, dear 
Madam, as Beaconsfield remarked to Old Vic., that I am 
thanking you now.” 

At which Mrs. Thripps immediately fell upon her knees 
on her housemaid’s pad and plunged her hands into her 
zinc pail—only instantly after to sit back on her heels, 
skinny hands on canvas apron. ‘All I says, sir, is, We go 
as we go; and a nicer gentleman, taking things on the sur- 
face, I never worked for. But one don’t want to move 
too much in the Public Heye, sir. Of all the houses be- 
low stairs I’ve worked for and all alone in I don’t want 
to charnst on a more private in manner of speaking than 
this. All that I was saying, sir, and I wouldn’t to none 
but you, is the life’s getting on my nerves. When that 
door there closes after me, and every day drawing out 
250 


Out of the Deep 


steady as you can see without so much as glancing at the 
clock—I say, to myself, Well, better that pore young gen- 
tleman alone up there at night, cough and all, than me. 
I wouldn’t sleep in this house, sir, not if you was to offer 
me a plateful of sovereigns. ... Unless, sir, you 
wanted me.” 

On reflection Jimmie decided that he had cut almost a 
gallant figure as he had retorted gaily—yet with extra- 
ordinary sobriety :—“You shall have a whole dishful be- 
fore I’m done, Mrs. Thripps—with a big scoop in it for 
the gravy. But on my oath, I assure you there’s ab- 
solutely nothing or nobody in this old barn of a museum 
except you and me. Nobody, unless, of course, you will 
understand, one happens to pull the bell. And that we’re 
not likely to do in broad daylight. Are we, Mrs. 
Thripps?” Upon which he had hastily caught up his 
aunt’s handbag and had emerged into a daylight a good 
deal bleaker if not broader than he could gratefully 
stomach. 


For a while Jimmie had let well alone. Indeed, if it 
had been a mere matter of choice, he would far rather 
have engaged in a friendly and jocular conversation of 
this description with his old charwoman than in the end- 
less monologues in which he found himself submerged 
on other occasions. One later afternoon, for instance, 
at half-past three by his watch, sitting there by a smail 
fire in the large muffled drawing-room, he at length came 
definitely to the conclusion that some kind of finality 
should be reached in his relations with the Night Staff 
in his Uncle Timothy’s. 

It was pretty certain that his visit would soon be draw- 

251 


Out of the Deep 


ing to a close. Staying out at night until he was almost 
too exhausted to climb down to the pavement from his 
hansom—the first April silver of dawn wanning the stark 
and empty chimney-pots—had proved a dull and tedious 
alternative. The mere spectator of gaiety, he concluded, 
as he stared at the immense picture of the Colosseum on 
his Uncle Timothy’s wall, may have as boring a time as 
must the slaves who cleaned out the cages of the lions 
that ate the Christians. And snapping out insults at 
former old cronies who couldn’t help their faces being as 
tiresome as a whitewashed pigsty had soon grown weari- 
some. 

Jimmie, of course, was accustomed to taking no in- 
terest in things which did not interest him; but quite re- 
spectable people could manage that equally well. What 
fretted him almost beyond endurance was an increasing 
inability to keep his attention fixed on what was really 
there, what at least all such respectable people, one might 
suppose, would unanimously agree was there. 

A moment’s fixture of the eyes—and he would find him- 
self steadily, steadily listening, now in a creeping dread 
that somewhere, down below, there was a good deal that 
needed an almost constant attention, and now in sudden 
alarm that, after all, there was absolutely nothing. Again 
and again in recollection he had hung over the unlighted 
staircase listening in an extremity of foreboding for the 
outbreak of a rabbit-like childish squeal of terror which 
would have proved—well, what would it have proved? 
My God, what a world! You'can prove nothing. 

The fact that he was all but certain that any such in- 
tolerably helpless squeal never had wailed up to him out 
of its pit of blackness could be only a partial consolation. 
252 


Out of the Deep 


He hadn’t meant to be a beast. It was only his facetious 
little way. And you would have to be something pretty 
piggish in pigs to betray a child—however insubstantial— 
into the nausea and vertigo he had experienced in the 
presence of that unspeakable abortion. The whole thing 
had become a fatuous obsession. If, it appeared, you only 
remained solitary and secluded enough, and let your mind 
wander on in its own sweet way, the problem was almost 
bound to become, if not your one and only, at least your 
chief concern. Unless you were preternaturally busy and 
preoccupied, you simply couldn’t live on and on in a 
haunted house without being occasionally reminded of 
its ghost. 

To dismiss the matter as pure illusion—the spectral pic- 
turing of life’s fitful fever—might be all very well; that 
is if you had the blood of a fish. But who on earth had 
ever found the world the pleasanter and sweeter a place 
to bid good-bye to simply because it was obviously “sub- 
stantial,” whatever that might mean? Simply because it 
did nothing you wanted it to do unless you paid for it 
pretty handsomely; or unless you accepted what it 
proffered with as open a hospitality as Jimmie had be- 
stowed on his pilgrims of the night. Not that he much 
wanted—however pressing the invitation—to wander off 
out of his body into a better world, or, for that matter, 
into a worse. 

Upstairs under the roof years ago Jimmie as a small 
boy would rather have died of terror than meddle with 
the cord above his bed-rail—simply because he knew that 
Soames Senior was at the other end of it. He had hated 
Soames; he had merely feared the nothings of his night 
hours. But, suppose Soames had been a different kind 

253 


Out of the Deep 


of butler. There must be almost as many kinds as there 
are human beings. Suppose his Uncle Timothy and Aunt 
Charlotte had chosen theirs a little less idiosyncratically ; 
what then? 

Well, anyhow, in a sense, he was not sorry life had been 
a little exciting these last few weeks. How odd that what 
all but jellied your soul in your body at night or in a 
dream, might merely amuse you like a shilling shocker 
in the safety of day. The safety of day—at the very 
cadence of the words in his mind, as he sat there in his 
aunt’s “salon,” his limbs huddled over Mrs. Thripps’s 
fire, Jimmie’s eyes had fixed themselves again. Again he 
was listening. Was it that, if you saw “in your mind” 
any distant room of place, that place must actually at the 
moment contain you—some self, some “astral body?” If 
so, wouldn’t, of course, you hear yourself moving about 
in it? 

There was a slight whining wind in the street outside 
the rainy window that afternoon, and once more the bright 
idea crossed Jimmie’s mind that he should steal upstairs 
before it was dark, mount up on to the Arabian bed and 
just cut the bell-pull—once for all. But would that nec- 
essarily dismiss the Staff? Necessarily? His eye wan- 
dered to the discreet S of yet another bell-pull—that which 
graced the wall beneath the expansive white marble chim- 
ney-piece. 

He hesitated. There was no doubt his mind was now 
hopelessly jaundiced against all bell-ropes—whether they 
failed to summon one to church or persisted in summon- 
ing one to a six-foot hole in a cemetery. His Uncle 
Timothy lay in a mausoleum. On the other hand he was 
properly convinced that a gentleman is as a gentleman 


254 


Out of the Deep 


does, and that it was really “up to you” to treat all bell- 
answerers with decent courtesy. No matter who, when, 
where. A universal rule like that is a sheer godsend. 
If they didn’t answer, well, you couldn’t help yourself. 
Or rather, you would have to. 

This shivering was merely physical. When a fellow 
is so thin that he can almost hear his ribs grid one against 
the other when he stoops to pick up a poker, such symp- 
toms must be expected. There was still an hour or two 
of daylight—even though clouds admitted only a 
greyish light upon the world, and his Uncle Timothy’s 
house was by nature friendly to gloom. That house at this 
moment seemed to hang doomed upon his shoulders like 
an immense imponderable shell. The flames in the chim- 
ney whispered, fluttered, hovered, like fitfully-playing, 
once-happy birds. 

Supposing if, even against his better judgment, he 
leaned forward now in his chair and—what was infinitely 
more conventional and in a sense more proper than sum- 
moning unforeseen entities to one’s bedside—supposing he 
gave just one discreet little tug at that small porcelain 
knob; what would he ask for? He need ask nothing. 
He could act. Yes, if he could be perfectly sure that 
some monstrous porcine caco-demon akin to the shapes of 
childish nightmare would come hoofing up out of the deeps 
at his behest—well, he would chance it. He would have 
it out with the brute. It was still day. 

It was still day. But, maybe, the ear of pleasanter 
visitors might catch the muffled tinkle? In the young 
man’s mind there was now no vestige of jocularity. In 
an instant’s lightness of heart he had once thought of pur- 
chasing from the stiff-aproned old assistant at his Aunt 

255 


Out of the Deep 


Charlotte’s family grocer’s, a thumping big box of choco- 
lates. Why, just that one small bowl in famille rose up 
there could be bartered for the prettiest little necklet of 
seed pearls. She had done her best—with her skimpy 
shoulders, skimpier pigtail and soda-reddened hands. 
Pigtail! But no; you might pull real bells: to pull 
dubiously genuine pigtails seemed now a feeble jest. The 
old Jimmie of that kind of facetiousness was a thing of 
the past. 

Apart from pigs and tweeny-maids, what other peculiar 
emanations might in the future respond to his summon- 
ings, Jimmie’s exhausted imagination could only faintly 
prefigure. For a few minutes a modern St. Anthony sat 
there in solitude in the vast half-blinded London drawing- 
room; while shapes and images and apparitions of mem- 
ory and fantasy sprang into thin being and passed away 
in his mind. No, no. 

“Do to the Book; quench the candles; 

Ring the bell. Amen, Amen.” 
—he was done with all that. Maledictions and anath- 
emas; they only tangled the hank. 

So when at last—his meagre stooping body mutely 
played on by the flamelight—he jerked round his dark 
narrow head to glance at the distant mirror, it must have 
been on the mere after-image, so to speak, of the once 
quite substantial-looking tweeny-maid that his exhausted 
eyes thirstily fixed themselves. 

She was there—over there, where Soames Junior had 
more than once taken up his obsequious station. She was 
smiling—if the dusk of the room could be trusted that far ; 
and not through, but really at Jimmie. She was fairer 
256 


Out of the Deep 


than ever, fairer than the flaxenest of nymphs on his 
uncle’s ceiling, fairer than the saffronest of young ladies 
in the respectablest of family grocers, fairer even then— 

Jimmie hung on this simple vision as did Dives on the 
spectacle of Lazarus in bliss. At once, of course, after 
his very first sigh of relief and welcome, he had turned 
back in his lips a glib little speech suggesting forgiveness. 
—Let auld acquaintance be forgot; that kind of thing. 
He was too tired even to be clever now. And the oddest 
of convictions had at once come into his mind—seemed 
almost to fill his body even—that she was waiting for 
something else. Yes, she was smiling as if in hope. She 
was waiting to be told to go. Jimmie was no father. He 
didn’t want to be considerate to the raw little creature, 
to cling to her company for but a few minutes longer, with 
a view to returns in kind. No, nothing of all that. “Oh, 
my God; my God!” a voice groaned within him, but not 
at any unprecedented jag or stab of pain. 

The child was still waiting. Quite quietly there—as 
if a shadow, as if a secret and obscure ray of light. And 
it seemed to Jimmie that in its patient face hung veil upon 
veil of uncountable faces of the past—in paint, stone, 
actuality, dream—that he had glanced at or brooded on 
in the enormous history of his life. That he may have 
coveted, too. And as well as his rebellious features could 
and would, he smiled back at her. 

“T understand, my dear,” he drew back his dry lips to 
explain. “Perfectly. And it was courtesy itself of you 
to look in when I didn’t ring. I didn’t. I absolutely 
put my tongue out at the grinning old knob... . But 
no more of that. One mustn’t talk for talking’s sake. 


257 


Out of the Deep 


Else, why all those old Trappists . . . though none of 
‘em such a bag-of-bones as me, I bet. But without jest- 
ing, you know... .” 

Once more a distant voice within spoke in Jimmie’s ear. 
“Tt’s important”; it said. “You really must hold your 
tongue—until, well, it holds itself.” But Jimmie’s face 
continued to smile. 

And then suddenly, every vestige of amusement aban- 
doned it. He stared baldly almost emptily at the faint 
inmate of his solitude. ‘All that I have to say,” he mut- 
tered, “is just this:—I have Mrs. Thripps. I haven't ab- 
solutely cut the wire. I wish to be alone. But if I ring, 
I’m not asking, do you see? In time I may be able to 
know what I want. But what is important now is that 
no more than that accursed Pig were your primroses 
‘real,’ my dear. You see things must be real. And now, 
I suppose,” he had begun shivering again, “you must go 
to—you must go. But listen! listen! we part friends!” 

The coals in the grate, with a scarcely audible shuffling, 
recomposed themselves to their consuming. 


When there hasn’t been anything there, nothing can 
be said to have vanished from the place where it has not 
been. Still, Jimmie had felt infinitely colder and im- 
measurably lonelier when his mouth had thus fallen to 
silence; and he was so empty and completely exhausted 
that his one apprehension had been lest he should be un- 
able to ascend the staircase to get to bed. There was no 
doubt of it: his ultimatum had been instantly effective. 
The whole house was now preternaturally empty. It 
was needless even to listen to prove that. So absolute 
was its pervasive quietude that when at last he gathered 
258 


Out of the Deep 


his bones together in the effort to rise, to judge from the 
withering colour of the cinders and ashes in the fireplace, 
he must have been for some hours asleep; and daybreak 
must be near. 

He managed the feat at last, gathered up the tartan 
travelling shawl that had tented in his scarecrow knees, 
and lit the only candle in its crystal stick in his Aunt 
Charlotte’s drawing-room. And it was an almost quix- 
otically peaceful though forbodeful Jimmie who, step by 
step, the fountain of his thoughts completely stilled, his 
night-mind as clear and sparkling as a cavern bedangled 
with stalagmites and stalactites, climbed laboriously on 
and up, from wide shallow marble stair to stair. 

He paused in the corridor above. But the nymphs 
within—Muses, Graces, Fates, what not—piped in vain 
their mute decoy. His Uncle Timothy’s Arabian bed in 
vain summoned him to its downy embraces. At the wide- 
open door he brandished his guttering candle in a last 
smiling gesture of farewell: and held on. 


That is why when, next morning, out of a sounding 
slanting shower of rain Mrs. Thripps admitted herself 
into the house at the area door, she found the young man, 
still in his clothes, lying very fast asleep indeed on the 
trucklebed in the attic. His hands were not only crossed 
but convulsively clenched in that position on his breast. 
And it appeared from certain distressing indications that 
he must have experienced a severe struggle to refrain 
from a wild blind tug at the looped-up length of knotted 
whipcord over his head. 

As a matter of fact, it did not occur to the littered 
old charwoman’s mind to speculate whether or not Jim- 

259 


Out of the Deep 


mie had actually made such a last attempt. Or whether he 
had been content merely to wait on a Soames who might, 
perhaps, like all good servants, come when he was wanted 
rather than when he was called. All her own small 
knowledge of Soameses, though not without comfort, had 
been acquired at second-hand. 

Nor did Mrs. Thripps waste time in surmising how 
Jimmie could ever have persuaded himself to loop up the 
cord like that out of his reach, unless he had first become 
abysmally ill-content with his small, primitive, and be- 
lated knowledge of campanology. 

She merely looked at what was left of him; her old 
face almost comically transfixed in its appearance of pity, 
horror, astonishment, and curiosity. 


260 


The Creatures 


T was the ebbing light of evening that recalled me 
l out of my story to a consciousness of my where- 
abouts. I dropped the squat little red book to my 
knee and glanced out of the narrow and begrimed oblong 
window. We were skirting the eastern coast of cliffs, 
to the very edge of which a ploughman, stumbling along 
behind his two great horses, was driving the last of his 
dark furrows. In a cleft far down between the rocks a 
cold and idle sea was soundlessly laying its frigid gar- 
lands of foam. I stared over the flat stretch of waters, 
then turned my head, and looked with a kind of sudden- 
ness into the face of my one fellow-traveller. 

He had entered the carriage, all but unheeded, yet not 
altogether unresented, at the last country station. His 
features were a little obscure in the fading daylight that 
hung between our four narrow walls, but apparently his 
eyes had been fixed on my face for some little time. 

He narrowed his lids at this unexpected confrontation, 
jerked back his head, and cast a glance out of his mirky 
glass at the slip of greenish-bright moon that was strug- 
gling into its full brilliance above the dun, swelling up- 
lands. 

“It’s a queer experience, railway travelling,” he began 
abruptly in a low almost deprecating voice, drawing his 
hand across his eyes. “One is cast into a passing privacy 

261 


The Creatures 


with a fellow-stranger and then is gone.” It was as if he 
had been patiently awaiting the attention of a chosen 
listener. 

I nodded, looking at him. “That privacy, too,” he 
ejaculated, “all that!” My eyes turned towards the 
window again: bare, thorned, black, January hedge, in- 
hospitable salt coast, flat waste of northern water. Our 
engine-driver promptly shut off his steam, and we slid 
almost noiselessly out of sight of sky and sea into a 
cutting. 

“Tt’s a desolate country,” I ventured to remark. 

“Oh, yes, ‘desolate,’ ’”’ he echoed a little wearily. “But 
what frets me is the way we have of arrogating to our- 
selves the offices of judge, jury, and counsel all in one. 
As if this world . . . I never forget it—the futility, the 
presumption. It leads nowhere. We drive in—into all 
this silence, this—this ‘forsakenness,’ this dream of the 
earth between her lights of day and night time. We 
desecrate. Consciousness! What restless monkeys men 
are.’ He recovered himself, swallowed his indignation 
with an obvious gulp. “As if,’ he continued in more 
chastened tones—“as if that other gate were not for ever 
ajar, into God knows what of peace and mystery.’ He 
stooped forward, lean, darkened, objurgatory. ‘Don’t 
we make our world? Isn’t that our blessed, our betrayed 
responsibility ?” 

I nodded, and ensconced myself, like a dog in straw, 
in the basest of all responses to a rare, even if eccentric, 
candour—caution. 

“Well,” he continued, a little weariedly, “that’s the in- 
dictment. Small wonder if it will need a trumpet to blare 
us into that last ‘Family Prayers.’ Then perhaps a few 
262 


The Creatures 


solitaries—just a few—will creep out of their holes and 
fastnesses, and draw mercy from the merciful on the 
cities of the plain. The buried talent will shine none the 
worse for the long, long looming of its napery spun from 
dream and desire. 

“Years ago—ten, fifteen, perhaps—I chanced on the 
queerest specimen of this order of the ‘talented.’ Much 
the same country, too. This’—he swept his glance out 
towards the now invisible sea—‘“this is a kind of dwarf 
replica of it. More naked, smoother, more sudden and 
precipitous, more ‘forsaken,’ moody. Alone! The trees 
are shorn there, as if with monstrous shears, by the winter 
gales. The air’s salt. It is a country of stones and 
emerald meadows, of green, meandering, aimless lanes, 
of farms set in their clefts and valleys like rough time- 
bedimmed jewels, as if by some angel of humanity, 
wandering between dark and daybreak. 

“T was younger then—in body: the youth of the mind 
is for men of a certain age; yours, maybe, and mine. 
Even then, even at that, I was sickened of crowds, of 
that unimaginable London—swarming wilderness of man- 
kind in which a poor lost thirsty dog from Otherwhere 
tastes first the full meaning of that idle word ‘forsaken.’ 
‘Forsaken by whom?’ is the question I ask myself now. 
Visitors to my particular paradise were few then—as if, 
my dear sir, we are not all of us visitors, visitants, reve- 
nants, on earth, panting for time in which to tell and share 
our secrets, roving in search of the marks that shall prove 
our quest not vain, not unprecedented, not a treachery. 
But let that be. 

“T would start off morning after morning, bread and 
cheese in pocket, from the bare old house I lodged in, 

263 


The Creatures 


bound for the unforeseen nowhere for which the heart, 
the fantasy aches. Lingering hot noondays would find 
me stretched in a state half-comatose, yet vigilant, on 
the close-flowered turf of the fields or cliffs, on the sun- 
baked sands and rocks, soaking in the scene and life 
around me like some pilgrim chameleon. It was in hope 
to lose my way that I would set out. How shall a man 
find his way unless he lose it? Now and then I suc- 
ceeded. That country is large, and its land and sea marks 
easily cheat the stranger. I was still of an age, you see, 
when my ‘small door’ was ajar, and I planted a solid 
foot to keep it from shutting. But how could I know 
what I was after? One just shakes the tree of life, and 
the rare fruits come tumbling down, to rot for the most 
part in the lush grasses. 

“What was most haunting and provocative in that far- 
away country was its fleeting resemblance to the country 
of dream. You stand, you sit, or lie prone on its bud- 
starred heights, and look down; the green, dispersed, 
treeless landscape spreads beneath you, with its hollows 
and mounded slopes, clustering farmstead, and scatter of 
village, all motionless under the vast wash of sun and 
blue, like the drop-scene of some enchanted playhouse 
centuries old. So, too, the visionary bird-haunted head- 
lands, veiled faintly in a mist of unreality above their 
broken stones,and the enormous saucer of the sea. 

“You cannot guess there what you may not chance 
upon, or whom. Bells clash, boom, and quarrel hollowly 
on the edge of darkness in those breakers. Voices 
waver across the fainter winds. The birds cry in a 
tongue unknown yet not unfamiliar. The sky is the 
hawks’ and the stars’. There one is on the edge of life, 
264 


The Creatures 


of the unforeseen, whereas our cities—are not our desic- 
cated jaded minds ever continually pressing and edging 
further and further away from freedom, the vast un- 
known, the infinite presence, picking a fool’s journey 
from sensual fact to fact at the tail of the he-ass called 
Reason? I suggest that in that solitude the spirit within 
us realizes that it treads the outskirts of a region long 
since called the Imagination. I assert we have strayed, 
and in our blindness abandoned—” 


My stranger paused in his frenzy, glanced out at me 
from his obscure corner as if he had intended to stun, to 
astonish me with some violent heresy. We puffed out 
slowly, laboriously, from a “Halt” at which in the 
gathering dark and moonshine we had for some while 
been at a standstill. Never was wedding-guest more 
desperately at the mercy of ancient mariner. 

“Well, one day,” he went on, lifting his voice a little 
to master the resounding heart-beats of our steam-engine 
—‘one late afternoon, in my goal-less wanderings, I 
had climbed to the summit of a steep grass-grown cart- 
track, winding up dustily between dense, untended hedges. 
Even then I might have missed the house to which it led, 
for, hair-pin fashion, the track here abruptly turned back 
on itself, and only a far fainter footpath led on over the 
hill-crest. I might, I say, have missed the house and— 
and its inmates, if I had not heard the musical sound of 
what seemed like the twangling of a harp. This thin- 
drawn, sweet, tuneless warbling welled over the close 
green grass of the height as if out of space. Truth can- 
not say whether it was of that air or of my own fantasy. 
Nor did I ever discover what instrument, whether of man 

265 


The Creatures 


or Ariel, had released a strain so pure and yet so bodiless. 

“T pushed on and found myself in command of a 
gorse-strewn height, a stretch of country that lay a few 
hundred paces across the steep and sudden valley in be- 
tween. Ina V-shaped entry to the left, and sunwards, lay 
an azure and lazy tongue of the sea. And as my eye slid 
softly thence and upwards and along the sharp, green 
horizon line against the glass-clear turquoise of space, 
it caught the flinty glitter of a square chimney. I pushed 
on, and presently found myself at the gate of a farmyard. 

“There was but one straw-mow upon its staddles. A 
few fowls were sunning themselves in their dust-baths. 
White and pied doves preened and cooed on the roof of 
an outbuilding as golden with its lichens as if the western 
sun had scattered its dust for centuries upon the large 
slate slabs. Just that life and the whispering of the 
wind: nothing more. Yet even at one swift glimpse I 
seemed to have trespassed upon a peace that had endured 
for ages; to have crossed the viewless border that divides 
time from eternity. I leaned, resting, over the gate, and 
could have remained there for hours, lapsing ever more 
profoundly into the blessed quietude that had stolen over 
my thoughts. 


“A bent-up woman appeared at the dark entry of a 
stone shed opposite to me, and, shading her eyes, paused 
in prolonged scrutiny of the stranger. At that I entered 
the gate and, explaining that I had lost my way and was 
tired and thirsty, asked for some milk. She made no 
reply, but after peering up at me, with something between 
suspicion and apprehension on her weather-beaten old 
face, led me towards the house which lay to the left on 
266 


The Creatures 


the slope of the valley, hidden from me till then by plumy 
bushes of tamarisk. 

“Tt was a low grave house, grey-chimneyed, its stone 
walls traversed by a deep shadow cast by the declining 
sun, its dark windows rounded and uncurtained, its door 
wide open to the porch. She entered the house, and I 
paused upon the threshold. A deep unmoving quiet lay 
within, like that of water in a cave renewed by the tide. 
Above a table hung a wreath of wild flowers. To the 
right was a heavy oak settle upon the flags. A beam of 
sunlight pierced the air of the staircase from an upper 
window. 

“Presently a dark long-faced gaunt man appeared from 
within, contemplating me, as he advanced, out of eyes 
that seemed not so much to fix the intruder as to encircle 
his image, as the sea contains the distant speck of a 
ship on its wide blue bosom of water. They might have 
been the eyes of the blind; the windows of a house in 
dream to which the inmate must make something of a 
pilgrimage to look out upon actuality. Then he smiled, 
and the long, dark features, melancholy yet serene, took 
light upon them, as might a bluff of rock beneath a thin 
passing wash of sunshine. With a gesture he welcomed 
me into the large dark-flagged kitchen, cool as a cellar, 
airy as a belfry, its sweet air traversed by a long oblong 
of light out of the west. 

“The wide shelves of the painted dresser were laden 
with crockery. A wreath of freshly-gathered flowers 
hung over the chimney-piece. As we entered, a twitter- 
ing cloud of small birds, robins, hedge-sparrows, chaf- 
finches fluttered up a few inches from the floor and sill 
and window-seat, and once more, with tiny starry-dark 

267 


The Creatures 


eyes observing me, soundlessly alighted. I could hear 
the infinitesimal tic-tac of their tiny claws upon the slate. 
My gaze drifted out of the window into the garden be- 
yond, a cavern of clearer crystal and colour than that 
which astounded the eyes of young Aladdin. 

“Apart from the twisted garland of wild flowers, the 
shining metal of range and copper candlestick, and the 
bright-scoured crockery, there was no adornment in the 
room except a rough frame, hanging from a nail in the 
wall, and enclosing what appeared to be a faint patterned 
fragment of blue silk or fine linen. The chairs and table 
were old and heavy. A low light warbling, an occasional 
skirr of wing, a haze-like drone of bee and fly—these 
were the only sounds that edged a quiet intensified in its 
profundity by the remote stirrings of the sea. 

“The house was stilled as by a charm, yet thought 
within me asked no questions; speculation was asleep in 
its kennel. I sat down to the milk and bread, the honey 
and fruit which the old woman laid out upon the table, 
and her master seated himself opposite to me, now in a 
low sibilant whisper—a tongue which they seemed to 
understand—addressing himself to the birds, and now, 
as if with an effort, raising those strange grey-green eyes 
of his to bestow a quiet remark upon me. He asked, 
rather in courtesy than with any active interest, a few 
questions, referring to the world, its business and trans- 
ports—our beautiful world—as an astronomer in the 
small hours might murmur a few words to the chance- 
sent guests of his solitude concerning the secrets of 
Uranus or Saturn. There is another, an inexplorable 
side to the moon. Yet he said enough for me to gather 
that he, too, was of that small tribe of the aloof and wild 
268 


The Creatures 


to which our cracked old word ‘forsaken’ might be ap- 
plied, hermits, lamas, clay-matted fakirs, and such-like; 
the snowy birds that play and cry amid mid-oceanic 
surges; the living of an oasis of the wilderness; which 
share a reality only distantly dreamed of by the time- 
driven thought-corroded congregations of man. 

“Yet so narrow and hazardous I somehow realized 
was the brink of fellow-being (shall I call it?) which we 
shared, he and I, that again and again fantasy within me 
seemed to hover that precipice Night knows as fear. It 
was he, it seemed, with that still embracive contem- 
plation of his, with that far-away yet reassuring smile, 
that kept my poise, my balance. ‘No,’ some voice within 
him seemed to utter, ‘you are safe; the bounds are fixed; 
though hallucination chaunt its decoy, you shall not irre- 
trievably pass over. Eat and drink, and presently return 
to “life.”’ And I listened, and, like that of a drowsy 
child in its cradlé, my consciousness sank deeper and 
deeper, stilled, pacified, into the dream amid which, as it 
seemed, this soundless house of stone now reared its 
walls. 

“T had all but finished my meal when I heard foot- 
steps approaching on the flags without. The murmur of 
other voices, distinguishably shrill yet guttural even at 
a distance, and in spite of the dense stones and beams of 
the house which had blunted their timbre, had already 
reached me. Now the feet halted. I turned my head— 
cautiously, even perhaps apprehensively—and confronted 
two figures in the doorway. 

“T cannot now guess the age of my entertainer. These 
children—for children they were in face and gesture and 
effect, though as to form and stature apparently in their 


269 


The Creatures 


last teens—these children were far more problematical. 
I say ‘form and stature,’ yet obviously they were dwarf- 
ish. Their heads were sunken between their shoulders, 
their hair thick, their eyes disconcertingly deep-set. They 
were ungainly, their features peculiarly irregular, as if 
two races from the ends of the earth had in them inter- 
mingled their blood and strangeness; as if, rather, animal 
and angel had connived in their creation. 

“But if some inward light lay on the still eyes, on the 
gaunt, sorrowful, quixotic countenance that now was 
fully and intensely bent on mine, emphatically that light 
was theirs also. He spoke to them; they answered—in 
English, my own language, without a doubt: but an 
English slurred, broken, and unintelligible to me, yet 
clear as bells, haunting, penetrating, pining as voice of 
nix or siren. My ears drank in the sound as an Arab 
parched with desert sand falls on his dried belly and gulps 
in mouthfuls of crystal water. The birds hopped nearer 
as if beneath the rod of an enchanter. A sweet continu- 
ous clamour arose from their small throats. The ex- 
quisite colours of plume and bosom burned, greened, 
melted in the level sun-ray, in the darker air beyond. 

“A kind of mournful gaiety, a lamentable felicity, such 
as rings in the cadences of an old folk-song, welled into 
my heart. I was come back to the borders of Eden, 
bowed and outwearied, gazing from out of dream into 
dream, homesick, ‘forsaken.’ 

“Well, years have gone by,’ muttered my fellow- 
traveller deprecatingly, “but I have not forgotten that 
Eden’s primeval trees and shade. 

“They led me out, these bizarre companions, a he and 
270 


The Creatures 


a she, if I may put it as crudely as my apprehension of 
them put it to me then. Through a broad door they con- 
ducted me—if one who leads may be said to be conducted 
—into their garden. Garden! A full mile long, be- 
tween undiscerned walls, it sloped and narrowed towards 
a sea at whose dark unfoamed blue, even at this distance, 
my eyes dazzled. Yet how can one call that a garden 
which reveals no ghost of a sign of humart arrangement, 
of human slavery, of spade and hoe? 

“Great boulders shouldered up, tessellated, embossed, 
powdered with a thousand various mosses and lichens, 
between a flowering greenery of weeds. Wind-stunted, 
clear-emerald, lichen-tufted trees smoothed and crisped 
the inflowing airs of the ocean with their leaves and 
spines, sibilating a thin scarce audible music. Scanty, 
rank, and uncultivated fruits hung close their vivid- 
coloured cheeks to the gnarled branches. It was the 
harbourage of birds, the small embowering parlour of 
their house of life, under an evening sky, pure and 
lustrous as a water-drop. It cried ‘Hospital’ to the 
wanderers of the universe. 

“As I look back in ever-thinning nebulous remembrance 
on my two companions, hear their voices gutturally sweet 
and shrill, catch again their being, so to speak, I realize 
that there was a kind of Orientalism in their effect. 
Their instant courtesy was not Western, the smiles that 
greeted me, whenever I turned my head to look back at 
them, were infinitely friendly, yet infinitely remote. So 
ungainly, so far from our notions of beauty and sym- 
metry were their bodies and faces, those heads thrust 
heavily between their shoulders, their disproportioned yet 

271 


The Creatures 


graceful arms and hands, that the children in some of 
our English villages might be moved to stone them, 
while their elders looked on and laughed. 

“Dusk was drawing near; soon night would come. 
The colours of the sunset, sucking its extremest dye from 
every leaf and blade and petal, touched my consciousness 
even then with a vague fleeting alarm. 

“T remember I asked these strange and happy beings, 
repeating my question twice or thrice, as we neared the 
surfy entry of the valley upon whose sands a tiny stream 
emptied its fresh waters—I asked them if it was they who 
had planted this multitude of flowers, many of a kind 
utterly unknown to me and alien to a country inexhaust- 
ibly rich. ‘We wait; we wait!’ I think they cried. And 
it was as if their cry woke echo from the green-walled 
valleys of the mind into which I had strayed. Shall I 
confess that tears came into my eyes as I gazed hungrily 
around me on the harvest of their patience? 

“Never was actuality so close to dream. It was not 
only an unknown country, slipped in between these placid 
hills, on which I had chanced in my ramblings. I had 
entered for a few brief moments a strange region of 
consciousness. I was treading, thus accompanied, amid 
a world of welcoming and fearless life—oh, friendly 
to me!—the paths of man’s imagination, the kingdom 
from which thought and curiosity, vexed scrutiny and 
lust—a lust it may be for nothing more impious than the 
actual—had prehistorically proyed the insensate means 
of his banishment. ‘Reality,’ ‘Consciousness’: had he 
for ‘the time being’ unwittingly, unhappily missed his 
way? Would he be led back at length to that garden 
wherein cockatrice and basilisk bask, harmlessly, at peace ? 
272 


The Creatures 


“TI speculate now. In that queer, yes, and possibly 
sinister, company, sinister only because it was alien to me, 
I did not speculate. In their garden, the familiar was 
become the strange—‘the strange’ that lurks in the in- 
most heart, unburdens its riches in trance, flings its light 
and gilding upon love, gives heavenly savour to the in- 
temperate bowl of passion, and is the secret of our 
incommunicable pity. What is yet queerer, these beings 
were evidently glad of my company. They stumped 
after me (as might yellow men after some Occidental 
quadruped never before seen) in merry collusion of nods 
and wreathed smiles at this perhaps unprecedented in- 
trusion. 

“T stood for a moment looking out over the placid 
surface of the sea. A ship in sail hung phantom-like on 
the horizon. I pined to call my discovery to its seamen. 
The tide gushed, broke, spent itself on the bare boulders, 
I was suddenly cold and alone, and gladly turned back 
into the garden, my companions instinctively separating 
to let me pass between them. I breathed in the rare, al- 
most exotic heat, the tenuous, honeyed, almond-laden air 
of its flowers and birds—gull, sheldrake, plover, wagtail, 
finch, robin, which as I half-angrily, half-sadly realized 
fluttered up in momentary dismay only at my presence— 
the embodied spectre of their enemy, man. Man? 
Then who were these? .. . 

“T lost again a way lost early that morning, as I trudged 
inland at night. The dark came, warm and starry. I 
was dejected and exhausted beyond words. That night 
I slept in a barn and was awakened soon after daybreak 
by the crowing of cocks. I went out, dazed and blinking 
into the sunlight, bathed face and hands in a brook near 

273 


The Creatures 


by, and came to a village before a soul was stirring. So 
I sat under a thrift-cushioned, thorn-crowned wall in a 
meadow, and once more drowsed off and fell asleep. 
When again I awoke, it was ten o’clock. The church 
clock in its tower knelled out the strokes, and I went into 
an inn for food. 

“A corpulent, blonde woman, kindly and hospitable, 
with a face comfortably resembling her own sow’s, that 
yuffed and nosed in at the open door as I sat on my stool, 
served me with what I called for. I described—not with- 
out some vanishing shame, as if it were a treachery— 
my farm and its whereabouts. 

“Her small blue eyes ‘pigged’ at me with a fleeting ex- 
pression, which I failed to translate. The name of the 
farm, it appeared, was Trevarras. ‘And did you see any 
of the Creatures?’ she asked me in a voice not entirely 
her own. ‘The Creatures? I sat back for an instant 
and stared at her; then realized that Creature was the 
name of my host, and Maria and Christus (though here 
her dialect may have deceived me) the names of my two 
gardeners. She spun an absurd story, so far as I could 
tack it together and make it coherent. Superstitious stuff 
about this man who had wandered in upon the shocked 
and curious inhabitants of the district and made his 
home at Trevarras—a stranger and pilgrim, a ‘foreigner,’ 
it seemed, of few words, dubious manners, and both 
uninformative. 

“Then there was something (she placed her two fat 
hands, one of them wedding-ringed, on the zinc of the 
bar-counter, and peered over at me, as if I were a delec- 
table ‘wash’), then there was something about a woman 
‘from the sea.’ In a ‘blue gown,’ and either dumb, in- 


274 


The Creatures 


articulate, or mistress of only a foreign tongue. She 
must have lived in sin, moreover, those pig’s eyes seemed 
to yearn, since the children were ‘simple,’ ‘naturals’— 
as God intends in such matters. It was useless. One’s 
stomach may sometimes reject the cold sanative aerated 
water of ‘the next morning,’ and my ridiculous intoxi- 
cation had left me dry but not yet quite sober. 

“Anyhow, this she told me, that my blue woman, as 
fair as flax, had died and was buried in the neighbouring 
churchyard (the nearest to, though miles distant from, 
Trevarras). She repeatedly assured me, as if I might 
otherwise doubt so sophisticated a fact, that I should find 
her grave there, her ‘stone.’ 

“So indeed I did—far away from the elect, and in a 
shade-ridden north-west corner of the sleepy, cropless 
acre: a slab, scarcely rounded, of granite, with but a 
name bitten out of the dark rough surface, ‘Femina 
Creature,” 


275 


The Riddle 


O these seven children, Ann, and Matilda, James, 
S William and Henry, Harriet and Dorothea, came 
to live with their grandmother. The house in 
which their grandmother had lived since her childhood 
was built in the time of the Georges. It was not a pretty 
house, but roomy, substantial, and square; and an elm- 
tree outstretched its branches almost to the windows. 
When the children were come out of the cab (five sit- 
ting inside and two beside the driver), they were shown 
into their grandmother’s presence. They stood in a little 
black group before the old lady, seated in her bow-window. 
And she asked them each their names, and repeated each 
name in her kind, quavering voice. Then to one she gave 
a work-box, to William a jack-knife, to Dorothea a painted 
ball; to each a present according to age. And she kissed 
all her grand-children to the youngest. 

“My dears,” she said, “I wish to see all of you bright 
and gay in my house. I am an old woman, so that I can- 
not romp with you; but Ann must look to you, and Mrs. 
Fenn too. And every morning and every evening you 
must all come in to see your granny; and bring me smil- 
ing faces, that call back to my mind my own son Harry. 
But all the rest of the day, when school is done, you shall 
do just as you please, my dears. And there is only one 
thing, just one, I would have you remember. In the large 
276 


The Riddle 


spare bedroom that looks out on the slate roof there stands 
in the corner an old oak chest; aye, older than I, my dears, 
a great deal older ; older than my grandmother. Play any- 
where else in the house, but not there.” She spoke kindly 
to them all, smiling at them; but she was very aged, and 
her eyes seemed to see nothing of this world. 

And the seven children, though at first they were 
gloomy and strange, soon began to be happy and at home 
in the great house. There was much to interest and amuse 
them there; all was new to them. Twice every day, 
morning and evening, they came in to see their grand- 
mother, who every day seemed more feeble; and she spoke 
pleasantly to them of her mother, and her childhood, but 
never forgetting to visit her store of sugar-plums. And 
so the weeks passed by. 

It was evening twilight when Henry went upstairs from 
the nursery by himself to look at the oak chest. He 
pressed his fingers into the carved fruit and flowers, and 
spoke to the dark-smiling heads at the corners; and then, 
with a glance over his shoulder, he opened the lid and 
looked in. But the chest concealed no treasure, neither 
gold nor baubles, nor was there anything to alarm the 
eye. The chest was empty, except that it was lined with 
silk of old-rose, seeming darker in the dusk, and smelling 
sweet of pot-pourri. And while Henry was looking in, 
he heard the softened laughter and the clinking of the 
cups downstairs in the nursery; and out at the win- 
dow he saw the day darkening. These things brought 
strangely to his memory his mother who in her glimmering 
white dress used to read to him in the dusk; and he 
climbed into the chest; and the lid closed gently down 


over him. 
277 


The Riddle 


When the other six children were tired with their play- 
ing, they filed into their grandmother’s room as usual for 
her good-night and her sugar-plums. She looked out 
between the candles at them as if she were unsure of 
something in her thoughts. The next day Ann told her 
grandmother that Henry was not anywhere to be found. 

“Dearie me, child. Then he must be gone away for a 
time,” said the old lady. She paused. “But remember 
all of you, do not meddle with the oak chest.” 

But Matilda could not forget her brother Henry, find- 
ing no pleasure in playing without him. So she would 
loiter in the house thinking where he might be. And she 
carried her wood doll in her bare arms, singing under her 
breath all she could make up about him. And when in a 
bright morning she peeped in on the chest, so sweet- 
scented and secret it seemed that she took her doll with 
her into it—just as Henry himself had done. 

So Ann, and James, and William, Harriet and Dorothea 
were left at home to play together. “Some day maybe 
they will come back to you, my dears,” said their grand- 
mother, “or maybe you will go to them. Heed my warn- 
ing as best you may.” 

Now Harriet and William were friends together, pre- 
tending to be sweethearts; while James and Dorothea 
liked wild games of hunting, and fishing, and battles. 

On a silent afternoon in October Harriet and William 
were talking softly together, looking out over the slate 
roof at the green fields, and they heard the squeak and 
frisk of a mouse behind them in the room. They went 
together and searched for the small, dark hole from 
whence it had come out. But finding no hole, they be- 
gan to finger the carving of the chest, and to give names 
278 


The Riddle 


to the dark-smiling heads, just as Henry had done. “I 
know! let’s pretend you are Sleeping Beauty, Harriet,” 
said William, “and I’ll be the Prince that squeezes through 
the thorns and comes in.” Harriet looked gently and 
strangely at her brother; but she got into the box and 
lay down, pretending to be fast asleep; and on tiptoe 
William leaned over, and seeing how big was the chest 
he stepped in to kiss the Sleeping Beauty and to wake 
her from her quiet sleep. Slowly the carved lid turned 
on its noiseless hinges. And only the clatter of James 
and Dorothea came in sometimes to recall Ann from her 
book. 

But their old grandmother was very feeble, and her 
sight dim, and her hearing extremely difficult. 

Snow was falling through the still air upon the roof; 
and Dorothea was a fish in the oak chest, and James 
stood over the hole in the ice, brandishing a walking- 
stick for a harpoon, pretending to be an Esquimaux. 
Dorothea’s face was red, and her wild eyes sparkled 
through her tousled hair. And James had a crooked 
scratch upon his cheek. “You must struggle, Dorothea, 
and then I shall swim back and drag you out. Be quick 
now!” He shouted with laughter as he was drawn into 
the open chest. And the lid closed softly and gently 
down as before. 

Ann, left to herself, was too old to care overmuch for 
sugar-plums, but she would go solitary to bid her grand- 
mother good-night; and the old lady looked wistfully at 
her over her spectacles. “Well, my dear,” she said with 
trembling head; and she squeezed Ann’s fingers between 
her own knuckled finger and thumb. “What lonely old 
people we are, to be sure!” Ann kissed her grandmother’s 

279 


The Riddle 


soft, loose cheek. She left the old lady sitting in her 
easy chair, her hands upon her knees, and her head turned 
sidelong towards her. 

When Ann was gone to bed she used to sit reading 
her book by candlelight. She drew up her knees under 
the sheets, resting her book upon them. Her story was 
about fairies and gnomes, and the gently-flowing moon- 
light of the narrative seemed to illumine the white pages, 
and she could hear in fancy fairy voices, so silent was 
the great many-roomed house, and so mellifluent were the 
words of the story. Presently she put out her candle, and, 
with a confused babel of voices close to her ear, and faint 
swift pictures before her eyes, she fell asleep. 

And in the dead of the night she arose out of bed in 
dream, and with her eyes wide open yet seeing nothing of 
reality, moved silently through the vacant house. Past 
the room where her grandmother was snoring in brief, 
heavy slumber, she stepped light and surely, and down 
the wide staircase. And Vega the far-shining stood over 
against the window above the slate roof. Ann walked 
in the strange room as if she were being guided by the 
hand towards the oak chest. There, just as if she was 
dreaming it was her bed, she laid herself down in the 
old rose silk, in the fragrant place. But it was so dark 
in the room that the movement of the lid was indistin- 
guishable. 

Through the long day, the grandmother sat in her 
bow-window. Her lips were pursed, and she looked with 
dim, inquisitive scrutiny upon the street where people 
passed to and fro, and vehicles rolled by. At evening she 
climbed the stair and stood in the doorway of the large 
spare bedroom. The ascent had shortened her breath. 
280 


The Riddle 


Her magnifying spectacles rested upon her nose. Lean- 
ing her hand on the doorpost she peered in towards the 
glimmering square of window in the quiet gloom. But 
she could not see far, because her sight was dim and the 
light of day feeble. Nor could she detect the faint 
fragrance, as of autumnal leaves. But in her mind was 
a tangled skein of memories—laughter and tears, and 
little children now old-fashioned, and the advent of 
friends, and long farewells. And gossiping fitfully, 
inarticulately, with herself, the old lady went down again 
to her window-seat. 


281 


The Vats 


ANY years ago now—in that once upon a time 
M which is the memory of the imagination rather 
than of the workaday mind, I went walking 
with a friend. Of what passed before we set out I have 
nothing but the vaguest recollection. All I remember is 
that it was early morning, that we were happy to be in one 
another’s company, that there were bright green boughs 
overhead amongst which the birds floated and sang, and 
that the early dews still burned in their crystal in the sun. 
We were taking our way almost at haphazard across 
country; there was now grass, now the faintly sparkling 
flinty dust of an English road, underfoot. With remark- 
ably few humans to be seen, we trudged on, turning our 
eyes ever and again to glance laughingly, questioningly, 
or perplexedly at one another’s, then slanting them once 
more on the blue-canopied countryside. It was Spring, 
in the month of May, I think, and we were talking of 
Time. 

We speculated on what it was, and where it went to, 
touched in furtive tones on the Fourth Dimension and 
exchanged “the Magic Formula.” We wondered if pigs 
could see time as they see the wind, and wished we could 
recline awhile upon those bewitching banks where it 
grows wild. We confessed to each other how of late we 
had been pining in our secret hearts for just a brief spell 
282 


The Vats 


of an eternity of it. Time wherein we could be and think 
and dream all that each busy, hugger-mugger, feverish, 
precipitate twenty-four hours would not allow us to be 
or to think or dream. Impracticable, infatuate desire! 
We desired to muse, to brood, to meditate, to embark 
(with a buoyant cargo) upon that quiet stream men call 
reverie. We had all but forgotten how even to sleep. 
We lay like Argus of nights with all our hundred eyes 
ajar. 

There were books we should never now be able to read; 
speculations we should never be able to explore ; riddles we 
should never so much as hear put, much less expounded. 
There were, above all, waking visions now past hoping 
for; long since shut away from us by the stream of the 
hasty moments—as they tick and silt and slide irrecov- 
erably away. In the gay folly of that bright morning we 
could almost have vowed there were even other “selves” 
awaiting us with whom no kind of precarious tryst we had 
ever made we had ever been faithful to. Perhaps they 
and we would be ready if only the world’s mechanical 
clocks would cease their trivial moralizings. 

And memories—surely they would come arrowing home 
in the first of the evening to haunts serene and unmolested, 
if only the weather and mood and season and housing we 
could offer were decently propitious. We had frittered 
away, squandered so many days, weeks, years—and had 
saved so little. Spendthrifts of the unborrowable, we had 
been living on our capital—a capital bringing in how 
meagre an “interest”’—and were continually growing 
poorer. Once, when we were children, and in our own 
world, an hour had been as capacious as the blue bowl 


of the sky, and of as refreshing a milk. Now its succes- 
283 


The Vats 


sors haggardly snatched their way past our sluggard 
senses like thieves pursued. 

Like an hour glass that cannot tell the difference be- 
tween its head and its heels; like a dial on a sunless day; 
like a timepiece wound-up—wound-up and bereft of its 
pendulum; so were we. Age, we had hideously learned, 
devours life as a river consumes flakes of the falling snow. 
Soon we should be beggars, with scarcely a month to our 
name; and none to give us alms. 

I confess that at this crisis in our talk I caught an un- 
comfortable glimpse of the visionary stallions of my 
hearse—ink-black streaming manes and tails—positively 
galloping me off—wreaths, glass, corpse and all, to keep 
their dismal appointment with the grave: and even at that, 
abominably late. 

Indeed, our minds had at length become so profoundly 
engaged in these pictures and forebodings as we paced 
on, that a complete aeon might have meanwhile swept 
over our heads. We had talked ourselves into a kind of 
oblivion. Nor had either of us given the least thought 
to our direction or destination. We had been following 
not even so much as our noses. And then suddenly, we 
“came to.” Maybe it was the unwonted silence—a si- 
lence unbroken even by the harp-like drone of noonday— 
that recalled us to ourselves. Maybe the air in these un- 
familiar parts was of a crisper quality, or the mere effect 
of the strangeness around us had muttered in secret to 
our inward spirits. Whether or ‘not, we both of us dis- 
covered at the same instant and as if at a signal, that 
without being aware of it, and while still our tongues were 
wagging on together on our old-fashioned theme, we had 
come into sight of the Vats. We looked up, and lo!— 
284 


The Vats 


they lay there in the middle distance, in cluster enormous 
under the cloudless sky: and here were we! 

Imagine two age-scarred wolf-skinned humans of pre- 
historic days paddling along at shut of evening on some 
barbarous errand, and suddenly from /a sweeping crest 
on Salisbury Plain descrying on the nearer horizon the 
awful monoliths of Stonehenge. An experience resem- 
bling that was ours this summer day. 

We came at once to a standstill amid the far-flung 
stretches of the unknown plateau on which we had re- 
found ourselves, and with eyes fixed upon these astonish- 
ing objects, stood and stared. I have called them Vats. 
Vats they were not; but rather sunken Reservoirs; vast 
semi-spherical primeval Cisterns, of an area many times 
that of the bloated and swollen gasometers which float like 
huge flattened bubbles between earth and heaven under 
the sunlit clouds of the Thames. But no sunbeams dis- 
pread themselves here. They lay slumbering in a grave, 
crystal light, which lapped, deep as the Tuscarora Trough, 
above and around their prodigious stone plates, or slats, 
or slabs, or laminz; their steep slopes washed by the 
rarefied atmosphere of their site, and in hue of a hoary 
green. 

As we gazed at them like this from afar they seemed 
to be in number, as I remember, about nine, but they 
were by no means all of a size. For one or two of the 
rotundas were smaller in compass than the others, just 
as there may be big snails or mushrooms in a family, and 
little ones. 

But any object on earth of a majesty or magnitude that 
recalls the pyramids is a formidable spectacle. And not 
a word passed between us, scarcely a glance, as with ex- 


285 


The Vats 


treme caution and circumspection we approached—creep- 
ing human pace by pace—to view them nearer. 

A fit of shivering came over me, I recollect, as thus ad- 
vantaged I scanned their enormous sides, shaggy with 
tufts of a monstrous moss and scarred with yard-wide 
circumambulations of lichen. Gigantic grasses stooped 
their fatted seedpods from the least rough ledge. They 
might be walls of ice, so cold their aspect; or of a matter 
discoverable only in an alien planet. 

Not—though they were horrific to the eye—not that 
they were in themselves appalling to the soul. Far rather 
they seemed to be emblems of an ineffable peace ; harmless 
as, centuries before Noah, were the playing leviathans 
in a then privy Pacific. And when one looked close on 
them it was to see myriads of animated infinitesimals in 
crevice and cranny, of a beauty, hue and symmetry past 
eye to seize. Indeed, there was a hint remotely human 
in the looks of these Vats. The likeness between them 
resembled that between generations of mankind, countless 
generations old. Contemplating them with the unparal- 
leled equanimity their presence at last bestowed, one might 
almost have ventured to guess their names. And never 
have I seen sward or turf so smooth and virginally emerald 
as that which heaved itself against their brobdingnagian 
and superannuated flanks. 

My friend and I, naturally enough, were acutely con- 
scious of our minuteness of stature as we stood side by 
side in this unrecorded solitude, and, out of our little 
round heads, peered up at them with our eyes. Obviously 
their muscous incrustations and the families of weeds 
flourishing in their interstices were of an age to daunt 
the imagination. Their ancestry must have rooted itself 
286 


The Vats 


here when the dinosaur and the tribes of the megatherium 
roamed earth’s crust and the pterodactyl clashed through 
its twilight—thousands of centuries before the green acorn 
sprouted that was to afford little Cain in a fallen world 
his first leafy petticoats. I realized as if at a sigh why 
smiles the Sphinx; why the primary stars have blazed on 
in undiminishing midnight lustre during Man’s brief his- 
tory, and his childish constellations have scarcely by a 
single inch of heaven changed in their apparent stations. 

They wore that air of lovely timelessness which decks 
the thorns, and haunts for the half-awakened sense the 
odour of sweet-brier ; yet they were grey with the everlast- 
ing, as are the beards of the patriarchs and the cindery 
craters of the Moon. Theirs was the semblance of having 
been lost, forgotten, abandoned, like some foundered Ne- 
reid-haunted derelict of the first sailors, rotting in dream 
upon an undiscovered shore. They hunched their vast 
shapes out of the green beneath the sunless blue of space, 
and for untrodden leagues around them stretched like a 
paradisal savanna what we poor thronging clock-vexed 
men call Silence. Solitude. 

In telling of these Vats it is difficult to convey in mere 
words even a fraction of the effect upon our minds. And 
not merely our minds. They called to some hidden being 
within us that, if not their coeval, was at least aware of 
their exquisite antiquity. Whether of archangelic or dae- 
monic construction, clearly they had remained unvisited 
by mortal man for as many centuries at least as there are 
cherries in Damascus or beads in Tierra del Fuego. 
Sharers of this thought, we two dwarf visitors had whis- 
pered an instant or so together, face to face; and then 
were again mute. 


287 


The Vats 


Yes, we were of one mind about that. In the utmost 
depths of our imaginations it was clear to us that these 
supremely solitary objects, if not positively cast out of 
thought, had been abandoned. 

But by whom? My friend and I had sometimes talked 
of the divine Abandoner; and also (if one can, and may, 
distinguish between mood and person, between the dream 
and the dreamer) of It. Here was the vacancy of 
His presence; just as one may be aware of a filament 
of His miracle in the smiling beauty that hovers 
above the swaying grasses of an indecipherable grave- 
stone. 

Looking back on the heatless and rayless noonday of 
those Vats, I see, as I have said, the mere bodies of my 
friend and me, the upright bones of us, indescribably 
dwarfed by their antediluvian monstrosity. Yet within 
the lightless bellies of these sarcophagi were heaped up, 
we were utterly assured (though how, I know not) floods, 
beyond measure, of the waters for which our souls had 
pined. Waters, imaginably so clear as to be dense, as if 
of melted metal more translucent even than crystal; of 
such a tenuous purity that not even the moonlit branches 
of a dream would spell their reflex in them; so costly, so 
far beyond price, that this whole stony world’s rubies and 
sapphires and amethysts of Mandalay and Guadalajara 
and Solikamsk, all the treasure-houses of Cambalech and 
the booty of King Tamburlane would suffice to purchase 
not one drop. 

It is indeed the unseen, the imagined, the untold-of, 
the fabulous, the forgotten that alone lies safe from mortal 
moth and rust; and these Vats—their very silence held us 
spellbound, as were the Isles before the Sirens sang. 

288 


The Vats 


But how, it may be asked; No sound? No spectral 
tread? No faintest summons? And not the minutest 
iota of superscription? None. I sunk my very being 
into nothingness, so that I seemed to become but a shell 
receptive of the least of whispers. But the multitudinous 
life that was here was utterly silent. No sigh, no ripple, 
no pining chime of rilling drop within. Waters of life; 
but infinitely still. 

I may seem to have used extravagant terms. My 
friend and I used none. We merely stood in dumb sur- 
vey of these crusted, butt-like domes of stone, wherein 
slept Elixir Vite, whose last echo had been the Chora- 
gium of the morning stars. 

God knows there are potent explosives in these latter 
days. My friend and I had merely the nails upon our 
fingers, a pen-knife and a broken pair of scissors in our 
pockets. We might have scraped seven and seventy score 
growths of a Nebuchadnezzar’s talons down to the quick, 
and yet have left all but unmarked and unscarred those 
mossed and monstrous laminz. But we had tasted the 
untastable and were refreshed in spirit at least a little 
more endurably than are the camel-riders of the Sahara 
dream-ridden by mirage. 

We knew now and for ever that Time-pure is; that 
here—somewhere awaiting us and all forlorn mankind— 
lay hid the solace of our mortal longing ; that doubtless the 
Seraph whose charge is the living waters will in the 
divine hour fetch down his iron key in his arms, and— 
well, Dives, rich man and crumb-waster that he was, 
pleaded out of the flames for but one drop of them. 
Neither my friend nor I was a Dives then, nor was ever 
likely to be. And now only I remain. 

289 


The Vats 


We were children of Lazarus, ageing, footsore, dusty 
and athirst. We smiled openly and with an extraordinary 
gentle felicity at one another—his eyes and mine—as we 
turned away from the Vats. 


290
