Practical Instruction in Animal Magnetism
J. P. F. Deleuze
Practical Instruction in Animal Magnetism. Translated from the French. New York: 1843.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/practicalinstru00dele).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

-

^%a^aAA,

Sir

I^^B

ky^KbJW

^WAWAprB

m^m

mdMmmww:


0$H

Mm


mmmmm.  *  ^m,


.AAA.AaA


GGU99X


HWPWBS^


gssseasss^sse^essseeasee©^


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS.


3GWQ^a^C^^^Q^c^^e£gQ^'


A  AAA


AaAA


mmm.

■■• A  A!  A 1  i ■


^aaA


i««S»iiM^w


K%{9KMSJErff


aAAAaAaA


amw]fflARRtaafi»ms


'OAAAA/VNiAr


CTffli  i  i  :«/>sr«K,a


^AAAv/^>£UAgaA".


Mfift


Aa_  1  '/"\a/\aj


^^M^miM


^  a  A'r  y  a  ^n


a'p.fr*&  ~  A'.^n  «  a


KIIE«£fc¥fJ


^fiA^rwrsKnw«!


^AaA»A


A^aCAa''


'PM^wfiSyw^


UiwMkntih


'AAAAAA^aAaVn


rfWW


BS&HfifeH KB


^TO^R^Ia/^


immmMM


n  a  a,  o-aa  a  rwio  A  A  A  A


SHttkH


^aA^^^^AAaKA/^a!


"«*^giiaS


aAA^  -,1a


aspp


A  '0  A  .  A


''■A'!m';A 1?«V


PRACTICAL INSTRUCTION


IN


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.


BY  J.  P.  F.  DELEUZE.
h


TRANSLATED  BY  THOMAS  C.  HARTSHORN


REVISED  EDITION.]


WITH  AN  APPENDIX  OF  NOTES  BY  THE  TRANSLATOR,  AND  LETTERS
FROM  EMINENT  PHYSICIANS  AND  OTHERS,


DESCRIPTIVE  OF  CASES  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES.


NEW-YORK:
D.  APPLETON  <fc  CO.,  200  BROADWAY.

PJH1LADELPHIA  : GEO.  S.  APPLLTON,  148  CHESTNUT STREET.

PROVIDENCE:  B.  CRANSTON  &  CO. BOSTON:

J.  SLY,  22  COURT  STREET.

1843.


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1843,

By  B.  Cranston,  &  Co.

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  Rhode-Island.


of .  /-  y&^C  f  A^asC /fty.


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

Since  the  first  edition  of  this  work  was  printed,  tL  ;
practice  of  Mesmerism  has  been  greatly  extended,  and  it
is  observable  that  every  advancement  has  confirmed  and
substantiated  the  statements  made  by  the  literary  and  pro-
fessional gentlemen  who  confided  to  me  the  publication
of  their  observations.  The  Appendix,  which  contains
them,  is  still  retained,  though  enlarged  by  additional  notes
and  letters,  which  cannot  fail  to  increase  the  interest  of
that  part  of  the  work.

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  views  and  opinions  of  these
gentlemen  vary ;  a  circumstance  not  to  be  regretted,  since
they  harmonize  in  their  facts.  Their  character  ensures
respect.  And  no  man  possessing  common  honesty  or  a
decent  sense  of  propriety,  will  go  abroad  and  report  that
few  scientific  men  in  this  vicinity  believe  in  Mesmerism.

The  character  of  Dr.  Charles  Poyen,  who  introduced
the  subject  into  this  country,  was  naturally  viewed  with
suspicion,  and  by  many  misunderstood ;  yet  the  complete
success  of  the  enterprise  in  which  he  embarked,  has  taken
away  all  motive  for  the  one,  and  all  pretense  for  the  other.
He  labored  zealously  and  unselfishly,  and  ever  demeaned


ir  translator's  preface.

himself  in  such  a  manner  as  to  justify  the  vindication
which  he  found  in  this  volume.  He  will  soon  return  to
this  country,  after  finishing  his  medical  course  in  Paris.

As  no  great  pains  were  taken  to  circulate  the  first  edi-
tion of  this  work,  several  small,  cheap  and  ill-digested
works  have  been  published  in  different  places,  containing
instructions  chiefly  derived  from  Deleuze,  without  ac-
knowledgement ;  and  mingled  with  precepts  either  doubt-
ful or  absolutely  injurious,  in  their  tendency.  The  price
of  this  edition,  is  therefore  reduced,  in  order  to  place  it
within  the  reach  of  all  who  wish  to  profit  by  the  experi-
ence of  Deleuze.

T.  C.  H.

Providence,  August,  1843.


INDEX.

LIFE  OF  DELEUZE, .....  9

INTRODUCTION, 17

CHAPTER  I. —  General  Views  and  Principles, .  21

CHAPTER  II.— Of  the  Processes, . .  .28

Explanation  of  the  word  pass, ....  29

Meaning  of  being  in  communication, . .  .31

To  magnetize  a  patient  who  is  in  bed, ...  33

Method  of  dislodging  pain, . . . .  .34

Processes  not  indifferent, ....  37

When  the  exertion  of  force  is  necessary, . .  .39

Case  of  M.  H.*  *  *. Coup  de  soleil, ...  39

Chevalier  de  Barbarin, . . . .  .40

CHAPTER  III.— Of  the  Effects,  and  their  Indications,  42

Effects  commonly  exhibited, . . .  .43

How  to  calm  nervous  movements, ...  45

How  to  proceed  with  contagious  diseases, . .  .46

When  you  should  not  magnetize, ...  47

Explanation  of  the  term  crisis, . . .  .47

The  patient  should  be  roused  gently, ...  48

Convulsive  motions,  when  produced,  how  managed,  . 49

How  to  make  a  feeble  magnetic  action  useful, . .  51

Case  of  Oudin. Another  case. Instruction  to  mothers,  . 52

CHAPTER  IV. — Of  the  accessory  means  to  increase  the  mag-
netic action,  and  of  those  by  which  the  direct  action  is  sup-
plied, ......  56

To  magnetize  water :  its  effects, . . .  .56

Magnetic  batteries,  mode  of  constructing, . .  60

Dr.  Roullier's  plates  of  glass, . . .  .63

The  chain,  how  formed, .....  63

Steel  wand, ....... 66

CHAPTER  V. —  Of  Somnambulism,  and  the  use  to  be  made  of  it,  68

Forced  Somnambulism  of  no  utility,. ...  71

How  to  proceed  when  it  occurs, . . .  .72

To  produce  moral  effects,  75

Susceptibility  of  Somnambulists, . . .  .77

Not  to  admit  spectators. The  author's  experience, .  79
1*


VI  INDEX.


And  gives  you  a  description  of  his  disease, . .  81

Cautions  about  following  his  prescriptions, .  . 83-86

Epileptic  fits. Case  at  the  Salpetriere, . .  86

Explaining  our  will  by  words, . . .  .87

Influence  in  the  natural  state, ....  88

Address  of  somnambulists, . . . .  .89

Ecstacy  or  magnetic  exaltation  :  its  dangers, . .  80

Description  of  an  abstracted  somnambulist, .  . 92

Retracing  the  ideas  of  infancy, ...  96
Imaginary  Inspiration, ..... 100

CHAPTER  VI. — Of  precaution  in  the  choice  of  a  Magnetizer,  106

Women  ought  to  magnetize  women, .  .  .  107

Madame  Chambon  de  Montaux, ....  108

You  should  inform  your  physician  when  you  resort  to  Mag-
netism, .  .  .  .  .  .  110

Magnetism  produces  the  effects  desired  of  medicines, .  110

How  to  proceed  when  a  treatment  is  commenced, .  Ill

To  magnetize  one's  self, .....  113

Magnetizers  by  profession,  ....  113

Why  they  should  receive  regular  fees, .  .  1 14

Puysegur's  valet  de  chambre,  Ribault,  .  .  115

Special  faculties  of  some  Magnetizers. Cases. .  .  116

Moral  influence  of  M.  N.  **  *  J19

CHAPTER  VII. — Application  of  Magnetism  to  Diseases,  and

its  connection  with  Diseases,  .  .  . 121

Why  Physicians  should  be  consulted  in  applying  it. .  123

The  best  rules  for  practice,  .... 124

Acute  and  cbronic  diseases  distinguished, .  .  127

In  acute  diseases,  call  in  the  physician, .  .  . 127

When  to  discontinue  the  action,  .  .  .  129

Putrid  and  malignant  and  nervous  fevers,  .  . 130

Local  inflammation  :  quinsy  :  acidulated  water,  .  130

Inflammation  of  the  stomach;  a  case,  .  .  . 131

M.  Boismarsas, ......  132

The  treatment  should  be  uninterrupted  in  certain  diseases, 134
Diseases  of  the  lymphatic  system. Dropsy. Enlargement

of  the  glands. Obstructions  of  viscera, .  135-136

In  what  case  magnetism  is  dangerous,  .  .  136

Scrofulous  diseases. Ulcers. Cases  cited,  .  . 137

Pulmonary  phthisis. Slow  fevers. Asthma,  .  138

Vomitings. Nervous  diseases. Vapors. Epilepsy, 139-140
Hysteric  affections. Hypochondria. Paralysis,  141-142

Spasms. Mental  alienation. A  case,  .  .  . 143

Schirrhosity  or  ulceration  in  utero. Suppression, .  144

Intermittent  fevers. Pains  in  the  stomach,  .  . 145

Headache. Rheumatism. Sciatica, .  «  .  146

Gout,  ....... 147

Scorbutic  affections. Diseases  of  the  eye, .  .  148


INDEX,


¥11


Hospital  treatment,


Cataract. Opacities  in  the  Cornea. Cases,
Deafness. Deaf  mutes. Cutaneous  phlegmasias. Biles
Scald  head. Pregnancy,  ....

M.  Thiriat. M .  Wolfart's  practice  with  children,
Orgelet. Bowel  complaint. Rickets. Spinal  affection,
Hip  disease. A  case, .....
Testimony  of  250  physicians  mentioned,
Case  of  tic  douloureux,  ....

Acting  at  a  distance  :  when  proper,  when  improper,
Somnambulism  renewed  by  a  magnetized  object,
Letters  written  in  somnambulism,
Chorea  and  constant  vertigo  cured,

CHAPTER  VIII. — Means  of  avoiding  inconveniences  and

dangers.
Of  the  moral  dangers.
Sir  David  Brewster,

Opinions  communicated  by  intimacy,  a  caution,
Ill-founded  prejudices  against  somnambulism,
Of  the  physical  dangers,  .

Nervous  irritation. How  to  proceed,
Critical  pains  not  to  be  feared, .
Interruption  of  a  treatment,
Two  cases  of  interrupted  treatment,
Severe  organic  diseases,
Nervous  crises  in  certain  cases  necessary,
■Magnetizers  in  bad  health  impart  disease. Case  of  a  som

nambulist, .....
They  sometimes  also  catch  diseases  of  their  patients
Directions  about  somnambulists,
Exciting  the  faculties  to  obtain  surprising  effects,
Magnetic  exaltation  or  ecstacy,  ....
Danger  of  too  much  confidence  in  somnambulists  :  directions
Professional  somnambulists. Their  mode  of  examining,
Consult  for  persons  absent  and  unknown  to  them,
Should  not  be  consulted,  unless  worthy  of  esteem,
Extraordinary  faculties  developed  do  not  exclude  error,
Faculty  of  prevision,  how  limited,

How  to  prevent  somnambulists  from  running  into  error,
Reveries  of  illuminism,  .....
Somnambulism  not  always  a  state  of  purity,

CHAPTER  IX. — Of  the  means  of  developing  in  ourselves  the
Magnetic  faculty,  and  of  deriving  advantage  from  this
developement,  .....  190

Mesmer,  a  good  observer  and  a  learned  physician,  , 190

Propositions  of  Mesmer. The  currents,  .  .  191

Somnambulists  perceive  the  seat  of  diseases,  .  . 192

Many  magnetizers  have  the  same  faculty,  .  .  192


Vlll  INDEX.

Mode  of  acquiring  and  using  it, ...  193

To  establish  intimate  communication  and  examine  diseases,  195

Magnetic  Vapor :  perceiving  the  currents, . .  197

Peculiar  sensations  of  the  magnetizer, . .  198
Observation  of  M.  Babst, . . . . .199

Magnetism  has  laws — is  a  science, . . .  200

CHAPTER  X. — Of  the  studies  by  which  a  person  may  per-
fect himself  in  the  knowledge  of  Magnetism, .  201
The  practice  and  the  science, ....  201

What  preliminary  knowledge  is  desirable  for  those  who  study

the  last,  .  .  .  .  .  .203

In  what  cases  experiments  may  be  made, . .  208
The  principles  of  Magnetism  not  to  be  sought  in  other

sciences, ......  212

Its  theory  based  upon  one  great  principle, . .  213

M.  de  Puysegur's  maxims, ....  214

APPENDIX, 217

NEW  APPENDIX,  .  .  .  .  .350

INDEX  TO  THE  APPENDIX, ...  400


LIFE  OF  DELEUZE.

The  life  of  the  author  of  this  work  was  translated  by  a  lady
from  the  elaborate  volume  of  Doctor  Foissac.  Whoever  reads
it,  will  find  his  confidence  irresistibly  drawn  towards  him  by  the
evidence  of  a  character  in  which  it  is  delightful  to  confide. —
Whatever  may  be  our  opinion  of  Mesmerism,  which  Deleuze  has
practised  gratuitously  for  more  than  half  a  century,  we  cannot
refuse  to  accord  to  him  sincerity  of  mind,  and  uprightness  of  in-
tention. His  various  works  indicate  a  careful,  and  scrutinizing
spirit,  dictated  by  a  single-mindedness  which  rarely  leads  into
mischievous  error.  We  trust  in  him  as  a  guide,  because  we  see
his  caution  ;  if  he  does  not  bring  conviction  to  his  theory,  he
drives  suspicion  from  his  motive.  And  he  is  little  to  be  envied,
who  suffers  a  vulgar  prejudice  to  influence  his  judgement,  when  a
subject  of  the  first  importance,  supported  by  the  practice  and  tes-
timony of  Deleuze,  claims  from  his  as  a  professional  man,  a  seri-
ous and  careful  investigation.

Joseph  Philip  Francis  Deleuze  was  born  at  Sisteron,  Low-
er Alps,  in  March,  1753.  Desirous  of  pursuing  a  military  ca-
reer he  came  to  Paris  in  1772,  intending  to  study  mathematics  ;
but  the  nominations  not  having  taken  place,  he  entered  the  infan-
try, with  the  rank  of  sub-lieutenant.  Three  years  after,  the  corps
in  which  he  served  being  disbanded,  he  left  the  service  and  de-
voted himself  to  the  study  of  the  natural  sciences.  While  resid-
ing in  the  country  near  Sisteron,  in  1785,  he  read  for  the  first
time  an  account  of  the  cures  performed  at  Buzancy,  in  which  he
put  no  confidence  ;  indeed,  he  suspected  them  to  be  fabrications,
designed  to  bring  ridicule  on  the  partisans  of  magnetism.  But
hearing  that  one  of  his  friends,  (\I.  D.  d'Aix,)  a  man  of  cool  rea-
son and  enlightened  mind,  had  been  to  see  Mesmer  at  M.  Ser-
van's,  and  on  his  return  to  Aix  had  succeeded  in  producing  som-
nambulism, he  resolved  to  visit  him  and  ascertain  the  truth.


X  LIFE  OF  DELEUZE.

"I  performed  the  journey  on  foot,"  said  he,  "botanizing  as  I
went,  and  arrived  at  Aix  the  second  day  at  noon,  having  walked
since  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  immediately  imparted  to  my
friend  the  object  of  my  journey,  desiring  him  to  tell  me  what  he
thought  of  the  prodigies  I  had  heard ;  he  smiled,  and  said  coolly,
*  wait  and  see  for  yourself;  the  patient  will  be  here  in  three
hours.'

At  the  end  of  that  time  she  arrived,  and  with  her  several  per-
sons who  were  to  form  a  chain.  1  joined  this  chain,  and  in  a  few
minutes  saw  the  patient  asleep.  I  looked  with  astonishment,  but
falling  asleep  myself  in  less  than  fifteen  minutes,  I  ceased  to  ob-
serve.  During  my  sleep  I  talked  much,  and  was  so  much  excit-
ed as  to  trouble  the  chain.  Of  this  I  had  no  recollection  when  I
awoke,  and  found  them  all  laughing  around  me.  The  next  day,
instead  of  sleeping  myself,  I  observed  others,  and  desired  my
friend  to  teach  me  the  processes.  On  my  return  home,  I  attempt-
ed to  magnetize  the  sick  who  were  in  the  neighboring  villages.
I  was  careful  not  to  excite  their  imaginations,  touching  them  un-
der various  pretexts,  and  trying  to  convince  them  of  the  salutary
effect  of  gentle  frictions.  In  this  way  I  obtained  some  very  cu-
rious and  beneficial  results,  which  strengthened  my  own  faith. —
In  the  autumn,  being  in  the  city,  I  applied  to  a  young  physician,
a  man  of  much  merit,  who  to  the  wisdon  that  sometimes  doubts,
added  the  desire  to  be  convinced  by  actual  experience.  I  request-
ed him  to  obtain  for  me  a  patient,  and  if  I  effected  a  cure,  he
might  consider  this  conclusive  proof;  suggesting  at  the  same
time  that  the  subject  should  not  be  considered  in  a  critical  state,
lest  fatal  consequences  might  follow  from  my  inexperience.  He
introduced  to  me  a  young  woman  who  had  been  sick  seven  years,
suffering  constantly  great  pain,  and  being  much  bloated ;  having
also  a  local  swelling  externally,  in  consequence  of  the  great  en-
largement of  the  spleen,  which  she  showed  to  us.  She  was  not
able  to  walk  or  lie  down.  I  succeeded  in  removing  the  obstruc-
tion, circulation  was  restored,  the  swelling  gradually  disappeared,
and  she  was  enabled  to  attend  to  her  customary  duties.  When  I
touched  her,  she  slept  but  did  not  become  a  somnambulist.  Soon
after,  an  intimate  friend  of  mine,  (Mr.  D.,)  magnetized  a  young
girl  of  sixteen,  who  became  a  somnambulic.  She  was  the  daugh-
ter of  very  respectable  parents.  I  assisted  in  the  treatment  of
this  patient,  and  I  have  never  known  a  more  perfect  somnambulist.


LIFE  OP  DELEUZE.  XI

She  dictated  remedies  for  other  sick  persons  as  well  as  for  her-
self. She  presented  most  of  the  phenomena  observed  by  M.  de
Puysegur,  M.  Tardy,  and  the  members  of  the  society  at  Stras-
burg.  Among  these  were  phenomena  I  could  not  have  imagined
or  explained  ;  I  can  only  affirm  that  I  saw  them,  and  after  this  it

impossible  for  me  to  suppose  the  least  illusion,  or  the  possibility
deception."

From  this  time  M.  Deleuze  neglected  no  opportunity  to  multi-
ply and  observe  facts,  relieving  and  curing  a  great  number  of
persons.  Two  years  after,  in  1787,  he  returned  to  Paris,  and
pursued  with  renewed  ardor,  literature,  science,  philosophy,  and
particularly  botany.  In  1798,  he  was  chosen  assistant  naturalist
of  the  Garden  of  Plants ;  and  when  the  professors  belonging  to
that  establishment  united  in  1802  in  publishing  the  Annals  of  the
Museum  of  Natural  History,  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  that
association.*

M.  Deleuze  was  first  known  to  the  learned  world  by  his  trans-
lation of  "  Darwin's  Loves  of  the  Plants,"  in  1799;  "Thom-
son's Seasons,"  in  1801-6,  at  which  time  he  published  his
"  Eudoxus,  or  Conversations  on  the  Study  of  the  Sciences,  Letters
and  Philosophy,"  2  vols,  ttvo.;  Paris,  1810.  The  various  know-
ledge displayed  in  his  writings,  the  soundness  of  his  doctrines,
his  exquisite  judgement,  his  style,  so  clear,  so  simple,  and  at  the
same  time  so  elegant,  place  him  among  writers  of  the  first  rank  ;
and  his  book,  the  best  of  those  intended  for  the  instruction  of  the
young,  has  received  from  the  learned,  praise  the  most  flattering
and  honorable.

Yet  notwithstanding  his  various  duties  in  the  Garden  of  Plants,
he  did  not  neglect  this  new  order  of  physiological  phenomena,  un-
til now  despised  by  the  learned.  He  did  not  say,  like  Fontenelle
and  others,  "  If  I  b  \d  my  hand  full  of  truth  I  should  be  careful
how  I  opened  it ;"  but  during  the  furious  contest  occurring  be-
tween the  partisans  and  the  enemies  of  magnetism,  he  was  con-
tented to  observe  in  silence  ;  and  waited  until  the  excitement  was
over,  in  order  to  publish  his "  Critical  History  of  Magnetism"

*  Several  of  the  great  natiinilists  of  Europe  have  written  upon  the
subject  of  Mesmerism  among  them  Nees  Von  Esenbeek,  mentioned  by
Deieuze,  page  204  and  205.  His  great  work,  "  Genera  Plantar  dm  Florae
Germanics,"  primed  in  1839,  in  20  volumes,  is  advertised  in  London  at
£4  per  volume. — Tkaks.


XII  LIFE  OP  DELEUZE.

the  result  of  twenty-nine  years  of  investigation  and  reflection. — -
This  work  appeared  in  1813,  forming  an  era  in  the  annals  of  sci-
ence, and  is  now  translated  into  all  the  principal  languages  of  Eu-
rope. In  this  work  he  took  a  different  course  from  those  who
had  preceded  him.  I  shall  not,  said  he,  permit  myself  to  form
any  hypothesis,  but  shall  state  what  has  been  witnessed  by  my-
self and  by  men  worthy  of  credit.  After  a  general  sketch  of  the
history  of  the  discovery  and  the  obstacles  opposed  to  it,  he  de-
votes a  very  remarkable  article  to  the  examination  of  the  proofs
on  which  the  new  doctrine  is  founded.  He  first  lays  down  prin-
ciples of  indisputable  correctness,  concerning  the  probability  of
testimony,  and  applies  them  with  equal  logic  and  sagacity  to  the
examination  of  the  proofs  of  magnetism.  He  shows  that  its  ef-
fects have  been  attested  by  thousands  of  witnesses,  in  whose
ranks  are  found  physicians,  savans,  and  enlightened  men,  who
have  not  been  afraid  to  brave  ridicule  in  obeying  the  voice  of  con-
science, and  fulfilling  a  duty  to  humanity  ;  that  those  who  have
published  their  opinions,  and  by  far  the  larger  number  who  make
their  observations  in  silence,  and  content  themselves  with  avow-
ing their  belief,  when  questioned  on  the  subject,  have  all  either
witnessed,  or  actually  produced  the  phenomena  of  which  they
speak  ;  while  among  the  adversaries  of  magnetism,  not  a  man  can
be  found  who  has  examined  the  subject  in  the  only  proper  way,
by  experimenting  for  himself  with  the  most  scrupulous  attention,

With  the  same  powerful  reasoning,  he  has  treated  of  the  means
by  which  magnetism  acts,  of  the  methods  of  producing  it,  of  the
influence  which  the  faith  of  the  patient§  and  the  comparative
power  of  magnetizers,  may  have  upon  the  efficacy  of  the  treat-
ment. In  speaking  of  the  therapeutical  application  of  magnet-
ism, he  points  out  the  cases  in  which  we  may  hope  for  success,
and  shows  that,  provided  the  proper  precautions  are  taken,  its
employment  can  never  be  injurious.  In  the  description  of  the
phenomena  of  somnambulism,  we  see  that  the  author  brings  them
forward  with  reserve,  that  he  endeavors  to  rob  them  of  their  mar-
vellous character,  and  to  show  that  they  are  not  in  contradiction
to  the  laws  of  nature.* His  explanations  of  them  agree  perfectly

*  An  able  paper  in  relation  to  this  subject,  appeared  in  the  Boston
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  of  October  25th,  1837.  It  is  from  the  pen
of  Benjamin  Haskell,  M.  D.  of  South  Boston.


LIFE OF DELEUZE.  Xlll

with  the  principles  of  sound  physiology.  "  Let  us  confine  our-
selves," says  he,  "  to  what  observation  teaches,  and  take  care
that  we  do  not  go  beyond  it."  No  one  has  insisted  so  much  as
M.  Deleuze  on  the  dangers  to  which  magnetism  may  give  rise,
and  the  means  of  avoiding  them.  His  advice  acquires  the  more.
value  that  it  comes  from  so  pure  a  source,  and  that  never  in  the
midst  of  the  most  eager  discussion,  has  the  most  envenomed,  calum-
ny dared  to  cast  a  doubt  on  the  veracity  of  the  savant,  or  the  hon-
esty of  the  magnetizcr .

The  second  volume  of  the  "  Critical  History"  fully  justifies
the  title  of  the  work.  It  is  devoted  to  an  analysis  and  examina.
tion  of  the  writings  which  have  been  published  concerning  mag-
netism, of  which  there  arc  nearly  three  hundred.  M.  Deleuze
has  fulfilled  this  difficult  task  with  great  discernment.  His  re-
searches show  that  the  adversaries  of  magnetism  have  in  vain  at-
tempted to  shake  the  foundation  of  the  doctrine,  and  the  authen-
ticity of  the  facts  on  which  it  rests.  "  It  is  to  be  decided,"  says
he,  in  conclusion,  "  that  the  science  of  magnetism  should  be  as-
sociated with  the  other  branches  of  human  knowledge :  that  after
having  proved  the  existence  of  the  agent,  we  should  ascertain  the
part  it  plays  in  the  operations  of  nature ;  and  having  classed  its
facts  according  to  the  degrees  of  probability,  we  should  place
them  beside  the  other  phenomena  of  physiology,  that  we  may  de.
cide  whether  they  depend  upon  a  new  principle,  or  upon  a  mod-
ification of  one  already  known."

Among  the  writings  which  M.  Deleuze  has  published  in  favor
of  magnetism,  we  should  particularly  notice,  first,  the  "  Answer
to  the  Author  of  Superstitions  and  Impostures  of  Philosophers."
M.  1*  abbe  Wurtz  de  Lyon,  in  which,  after  having  stated  objec-
tions which  seem  renewed  from  the  thirteenth  century,  he  exam-
ines the  causes  which  opposed  the  re-establishment  of  religion  in
France.  Second,  "  Defence  of  Magnetism  against  the  attacks
made  upon  it  in  the  Dictionary  of  Medical  Science,'"  Paris,  1819.
This  work,  cuiefly  devoted  to  an  examination  and  criticism  of  the
article,  "  Magnetism,"  of  M.  Virey,  at  the  same  time  answers,  in
the  most  satisfactory  manner,  the  declamations,  sarcasms,  and
-even  coarse  abuse,  in  which  men  of  merit,  blinded  by  rooted  prej-
2


XlV  LIFE OF DELEUZE.

udices,  have  allowed  themselves  towards  observers  who  were  only
actuated  by  the  love  of  truth,  and  the  desire  of  being  useful.

M.  Deleuze  proves  that  these  adversaries  knew  nothing  about
magnetism  ;  that  they  father  upon  its  partisans  absurd  opinions  ;
that  they  pass  by  in  silence  the  most  convincing  proofs  ;  and  that
forced  at  last  to  admit  indisputable  phenomena,  they  attribute
them  to  a  cause  incompetent  to  produce  them.  We  should  know
little  of  M.  Deleuze,  did  we  suppose  for  an  instant  that  he  profits
by  his  advantages,  and  hurls  back  upon  his  calumniators  the  rid-
icule and  contempt  with  which  they  wished  to  overwhelm  him. —
His  argument  is  a  model  of  dignity,  reason  and  politeness.

Among  the  instances  of  this  which  I  might  adduce,  there  is
one  I  cannot  pass  over  in  silence.  M.  Virey  says,  p.  404  of  his
article  on  Magnetism,  "  Should  Mesmer,  or  one  of  his  most  able
successors,  throw  a  horse  or  an  ewe  into  somnambulism,  then  I
would  recognise  the  empire  of  universal  magnetism."  To  this
strange  demand,  M.  Deleuze  contented  himself  with  replying  :
"  Every  body  knows  very  well,  that  M.  Virey  will  never  be  con-
vinced, if  he  must  first  witness  such  a  phenomenon  as  this."

After  having  addressed  the  learned  world  in  his  "  Critical  His-
tory," M.  Deleuze  wished  to  draw  up  a  system  of  rules,  which
should  place  the  subject  within  the  reach  of  all  minds.  This  end
he  has  attained  by  publishing  his  "Practical  Instruction"  Paris,
1825.  Men  versed  in  its  phenomena  will  find  in  this  book  the  re-
sults of  a  consumate  experience.  Those  who  have  as  yet  seen
nothing,  and  who  desire  to  assure  themselves  of  the  truth  of  the
facts,  will  draw  from  thence  all  the  knowledge  necessary  to  avoid
mistakes,  to  observe  with  profit,  and  to  give  to  their  practice  a  salu-
tary direction.

Since  that  period  M.  Deleuze  has  published  nothing  concern-
ing magnetism,  although  he  has  still  in  his  hands  rich  materials,
upon  which  some  physicians  who  have  read  them,  agree  in  be-
stowing the  highest  praise.  Such  are,  an  Essay  on  Prevision ;
several  very  curious  modes  of  treatment ;  the  remainder  of  the
articles  on  Van-Helmont ;  and  several  dissertations  on  the  most
important  questions  of  magnetism.

Upon  the  death  of  M.  Toscan,  in  1828,  he  was  appointed  libra-
rian of  the  Museum  of  Natural  History.  He  is  a  member  of  the
Philomathic  Society,  as  well  as  of  several  learned  bodies,  both  in


LIFE OF DELEUZE.  XV

France  and  foreign  countries,  and  for  fifteen  years  has  drawn  up
the  annual  reports  of  the  Philanthropic  Society,  of  which  he  is
secretary.  Such  is  the  ascendance  which  the  wisdom  and  private
virtues  of  M.  Deleuze  acquire  over  all  who  know  him,  that  in  the
discussions  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine,  his  name  has
never  been  pronounced  without  the  most  honorable  epithets  ;  the
commission  have  always  cited  him  as  authority.  His  rare  quali-
ties, his  pleasing  and  instructive  conversation,  have  gained  him
many  friends  among  the  most  celebrated  of  the  learned,  Levail-
lant,  Duperron,  Cuvier,  de  Humboldt,  etc.,  and  in  the  unanimous
opinion  of  his  contemporaries,  he  divides  with  M.  le  Marquis  de
Puysegur,  the  honor  of  having  defended  and  propagated  one  of
the  most  beautiful  discoveries  of  modern  times.


LIST  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  M.  DELEUZE.

I.  ON  MAGNETISM.

1.  Critical  History  of  Animal  Magnetism.  2  vols.  8  vo. —
Paris,  1813  and  1819.

2.  Letter  to  the  author  of  the  work  entitled,  Superstitions  and
impostures  of  the  philosophers  of  the  eighteenth  century.  8  vo.  80
pp.  1819.

3.  Defence  of  Magnetism  against  the  attacks  made  upon  it  in
the  Dictionary  of  Medical  Science. 1  vol.,  8  vo.,  1819.

4.  Observations  addressed  to  those  physicians  who  were  desir-
ous of  establishing  a  magnetic  treatment. 8  vo.  20  pp.  1821.

5.  Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism.  1  vol.  8  vo.
and  12mo.  472  pp.  1825.

6.  Letter  to  the  Members  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine.  8  vo.
39  pp.  1826.

7.  A  large  number  of  essays  upon  magnetism,  and  the  phenom-
ena of  therapeutics,  physiology  and  psychology,  which  it  has
brought  under  our  observation  ;  inserted  in  three  periodicals  which
appeared  successively,  to  wit:  1st,  The  Annals  of  Magnetism  ;  8
vols  ,  in  8  vo.  from  1814  to  1816.  Paris,  published  by  Dentu.—
2,  The  Library  of  Magnetism,  8  vols,  in  8  vo.  1813  to  1819.  3,
Hermes,  a  Journal  of  Magnetism,  4  vols.  8  vo.  from  1826  to
1829.

8.  A  treatise  on  the  faculty  of  Prevision,  8  vo.  1836.


XVI  LIFE  OF  DELEUZE.

II.  LITERATURE  AND  THE  SCIENCES.

1.  The  Loves  of  the  Plants,  a  poem  translated  from  the  English
of  Darwin,  one  vol.  12  mo.  1799.

2.  Thompson's  Seasons,  8  vo.  and  12  mo.  1801  and  1806.

3.  Eudoxus :  Conversations  on  the  Study  of  the  Sciences,  Lit-
erature and  Philosophy,  two  vols.  8  vo.  1810.

4.  History  and  Description  of  the  Royal  Museum  of  Natural
History  at  Paris,  published  by  order  of  the  administration  of  that
establishment,  two  vols.  8  vo.  1823.

5.  Several  historical  euloguims  of  learned  naturalists  and  cel-
ebrated travellers,  inserted  in  the  Annals  and  Memoirs  of  the  Mu-
seum of  Natural  History,  from  1803  to  1831  Also,  several  essays,
one  of  which  on  the  introduction  of  ornamental  plants,  has  been
mentioned  in  a  very  nattering  manner  in  the  poem  of  "  The  Three
Kingdoms  of  Nature"  by  Delille.

6.  Lastly,  several  articles  inserted  in  the  Moniteur  and  other
journals,  on  works  of  Natural  History  and  Belles  Lettres.

Dr.  Mialle  thus  writes  in  1836.  "A  new  era  has  commenced  for
Magnetism.  Authentically  recognised  by  the  Royal  Academy  of
Medicine  in  1831,  and  regarded  by  the  commission,  as  '  a  very
curious  branch  of  psychology  and  natural  history ,'  it  has  taken
rank  among  positive  truths.  The  rising  generation  toill  be  prompt
to  cultivate  the  new  field  laid  open  to  them.  What  surer  guide  can
they  take  than  the  man  who  by  the  superiority  of  his  intelligence,  ike
sagacity  of  his  conclusions,  and  the  example  of  his  whole  life,  has
so  powerfully  contributed  to  the  triumph  of  this  noble  discovery?''1


INTRODUCTION


Several  persons  have  requested  me  to  publish  upon
the  subject  of  magnetism,  plain  and  simple  instructions,
free  from  all  theory,  and  proper  in  all  cases  to  direct  those
who  are  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  agent,  and  who
are  at  a  loss  how  to  make  use  of  it.  I  am  now  going  to
fulfil  this  task,  solely  with  the  view  of  being  useful.

It  is  not  the  object  of  this  work  to  convince  men  who,
otherwise  well  informed,  still  doubt  the  reality  of  magnet-
ism ;  it  is  intended  chiefly  for  those  who  are  not  engaged
in  medicine,  physiology,  or  physics,  who  believe  upon  oral
testimony,  without  having  seen  any  person  magnetized,  and
who,  being  persuaded  that  I  know  more  than  themselves
upon  the  subject,  wish  to  try  my  method,  in  order  to  suc-
ceed, as  I  have  had  the  happiness  of  doing,  in  curing  and
ameliorating  the  ills  of  their  fellow-creatures.  I  shall  lay
down  principles,  which  I  believe  true,  without  entering
into  any  discussion  to  prove  their  truth.  I  shall  avoid
pronouncing  upon  that  which  appears  doubtful ;  and  if  I
sometimes  err  in  the  mode  of  explaining  things,  my  errors,
appertaining  solely  to  the  theory  which  I  have  adopted  to
connect  the  phenomena  by  referring  them  to  the  same
cause,  will  not  affect  the  indication  of  the  means  to  be
taken  to  produce  these  phenomena,  and  derive  advantage
from  them.  I  shall  not  stop  to  detail  facts  in  support  of
my  doctrine.  I  shall  limit  myself  to  the  citing  of  a  few
of  those  which  I  have  myself  observed,  whenever  exam-
ples shall  appear  necessary  to  the  better  understanding  of
my  subject.

For  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  more  orderly  arrange-
ment, I  shall  divide  this  instruction  into  chapters.

I  shall  first  lay  down  certain  principles,  in  order  to  make
2  *


18  INTRODUCTION.

ray  instructions  more  plain  and  simple.  If  my  manner  of
announcing  these  principles  be  somewhat  hypothetical,
there  can  be  no  change  in  the  results.  Thus  I  shall  em-
ploy the  expression  magnetic  fluid,  because  I  believe  in
the  existence  of  a  fluid,  the  nature  of  which  is  unknown
to  me ;  but  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  this  fluid,  who
compare  the  action  of  magnetism  in  living  beings  to  that
of  attraction  in  inanimate  bodies,  or  who  admit  a  spiritual
influence  without  a  particular  agent,  cannot,  on  that  ac-
count, contradict  the  consequences  to  which  I  shall  ar-
rive. The  knowledge  of  the  processes,  and  of  all  the
conditions  necessary  for  the  efficient  use  of  magnetism,  is
independent  of  the  opinions  which  serve  to  explain  the
phenomena,  and  of  which,  up  to  the  present  time,  none
are  susceptible  of  demonstration.

My  first  chapter  shall  contain  an  enunciation  of  the
principles  which  are  general  and  applicable  to  all  cases.

In  the  second  chapter,  I  shall  teach  the  various  pro-
cesses which  are  employed  in  magnetizing,  when  som-
nambulism does  not  take  place.

In  the  third,  I  shall  speak  of  the  indications  which  the
first  perceivable  effects  afford  for  the  choice  of  processes.

In  the  fourth,  I  will  give  information  concerning  the
auxiliary  means  by  which  the  force  of  magnetism  may  be
augmented,  either  by  communicating  the  magnetic  virtue
to  certain  bodies,  or  by  putting  magnetism  in  motion  and
circulation,  so  that  several  persons  may  at  the  same  time  ex-
perience the  action,  under  the  direction  of  one  magnetizer.

In  the  fifth,  I  shall  treat  of  somnambulism,  and  of  the
manner  of  proceeding  with  somnambulists.

In  the  sixth,  I  shall  speak  of  the  precautions  which  the
patient  ought  to  take  in  choosing  a  magnetizer.

In  the  seventh,  of  the  application  of  magnetism  to  vari-
ous diseases,  and  of  its  association  with  medicine.

In  the  eighth,  of  the  dangers  of  magnetism,  and  of  the
means  of  preventing  them.

In  the  ninth,  of  the  methods  of  developing  and  fortify-
ing in  one's  self  the  magnetic  power,  and  of  drawing  from
it  all  the  advantages  possible.


INTRODUCTION.  19

In  the  tenth  and  last,  I  shall  speak  of  the  studies  which
are  appropriate  to  those  who  wish  to  acquire  a  profound
knowledge  of  magnetism.

Persons  who  read  these  ten  chapters  in  course,  will  ob-
serve that  some  things  said  in  the  first  are  repeated  in  the
others,  in  almost  the  same  terms.  I  would  have  avoided
these  repetitions,  if  I  considered  my  work  as  a  literary
production.  1  have  left  them  thus,  that  those  who  con-
sult only  one  article,  may  find  all  the  advice  relative  to
the  subject  in  question,  without  my  being  obliged  to  refer
them  to  what  has  been  already  said.

If,  in  some  places,  I  permit  myself  to  speak  in  a  dog-
matic style,  it  is  not  because  I  hold  my  own  opinions  in
too  great  esteem  ;  it  is  merely  for  the  purpose  of  being
more  clear  and  precise,  and  of  not  leaving  in  uncertainty
whoever  shall  consent  to  take  me  for  a  guide.  No  per-
son feels  the  imperfection  of  the  work  more  than  myself,
since  there  must  be  in  it  many  omissions.  I  will  receive
with  gratitude  any  critical  observations  addressed  to  me,
and  will  profit  by  them  in  the  correction  of  my  faults,  and
in  adding  to  my  second  edition  whatever  may  appear  to
be  wanted  in  this  first  essay.

Among  the  men  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  the
practice  of  magnetism,  there  is  a  great  number  who  have
more  intelligence  and  more  knowledge  than  myself.  I
have  a  lively  desire  that  the  reading  of  this  work  may  de-
termine them  to  execute  the  plan  I  proposed  to  myself,
better  than  I  have  been  able  to  do  it.  I  invite  them  to
take  from  my  instructions  all  that  appears  to  them  worthy
of  being  preserved,  and  not  to  quote  me  except  to  rectify
the  errors  which  may  have  escaped  my  diligence.  Our
wish  is  to  do  good.  This  wish  unites  us,  it  identifies  us, —
so  to  speak, — ■  one  with  another.  When  success  is  obtained,
let  us  enjoy  it  equally,  whoever  may  be  the  author  of  it.
It  is  possible  for  self-love  to  be  gratified  in  the  discovery
of  a  truth,  but  never  in  having  done  good  deeds.

A  physician  who  has  already  become  celebrated,  would
perhaps  increase  his  reputation,  b}r  publishing  a  good  work
upon  magnetism. He  would  call  attention  to  an  order  of


20  INTRODUCTION.

phenomena  which  belongs  to  animated  nature ;  he  would
found  a  school ;  he  would  find  disciples  among  his  breth-
ren in  the  profession.  This  kind  of  success  is  impossible
for  us.  Our  adversaries  condemn  us  without  examina-
tion, and  they  exercise  a  great  influence  upon  public
opinion  We  have  no  partisans  except  among  those  to
whom  we  have  rendered  service,  and  the  greater  part  of
them  dare  not  raise  their  voice.  Happily,  their  number
increases  every  day ;  and  that  should  sustain  our  courage
and  our  hopes.  Let  us  continue,  then,  to  work  in  con-
cert, to  spread  abroad  the  knowledge  of  magnetism,  with-
out disputation,  without  fear,  and  without  the  spirit  of
system.  Let  us  banish  the  abuses  and  the  dangers  which
may  attend  the  use  of  it.  Let  us  collect  the  materials  of
a  beneficent  science.  The  time  will  arrive  when  a  man
of  genius  will  reunite  all  these  materials,  and  rear  an  edi-
fice which  time  cannot  overthrow.*

*  This  was  written  in  1825.  Since  that  time,  in  1831,  the  Royal
Academy  of  Medicine,  through  their  committee,  whose  report  is
worthy  of  study  as  a  model  of  accurate  philosophical  investigation,
pronounced  upon  the  subject  an  opinion,  which  has  changed  the
popular  feeling,  in  France,  in  relation  to  it.  Its  existence,  as  a  pe-
culiar faculty  of  the  human  mind,  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  question,
among  men  of  science  who  have  witnessed  its  phenomena.  The  ex-
tent of  its  utility  is  now  a  question  worthy  of  profound  investigation,
and  not  to  be  settled  by  men  who  never  think,  and  who  decide  with-
out looking  into  its  merits.  Theses  on  Mesmerism  have  been  writ-
ten, in  Paris,  by  candidates  for  the  degree  of  M.  D. ;  one  of  which,
in  1842,  was  dedicated  to  Prof.  Orfila,  dean  of  the  medical  academy.
Orfila  and  Arago  —  names  of  which  France  has  reason  to  be  proud  —
have  devoted  attention  to  this  subject.  The  former,  on  witnessing
some  of  its  results,  declared  that  they  ought  to  be  proclaimed  to  the
world  from  the  top  of  the  French  Institute.  Dr.  Lordat,  in  his  recent
work  on  Human  Physiology,  assigns  to  it  a  high  place  among  the
phenomena  appertaining  to  man's  organization.  The  evidences  in
favor  of  its  utility  are  so  abundant  in  European  works  of  high  au-
thority, that  an  ignorance  of  its  true  history,  which  is  not  to  be  found
in  the  Encyclopedias,  may  be  deemed  singular  in  men  of  good  in-
formation, and  disgraceful  if  they  suffer  themselves  to  oppose  it
through  incurious  prejudice.  In  this  vicinity,  it  receives  the  support
of  medical  practitioners  of  unquestionable  skill.  It  should  always
be  in  the  hands  of  such,  or  administered  under  their  direction.  To
promote  this  object,  and  to  recall  the  public  attention  from  the  curi-
ous phenomena  to  the  true  use  of  it,  the  translator  has  given  the  in-
structions of  the  venerable  Deleuze  an  English  dress.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM


CHAPTER I.


GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES

1.  Man  has  the  faculty  of  exercising  over  his  fellow-
men  a  salutary  influence,  in  directing  towards  them,  by  his
will,  the  vital  principle.

2.  The  name  of  Magnetism  has  been  given  to  this  fac-
ulty :  it  is  an  extension  of  the  power  which  all  living  beings
have,  of  acting  upon  those  who  are  submitted  to  their  will.

3.  We  perceive  this  faculty  only  by  the  results ;  and  we
make  no  use  of  it,  except  as  far  as  we  will  to  use  it.

4.  The  first  condition  of  action,  then,  is  to  exercise
the  will.

5.  As  we  cannot  comprehend  how  a  body  can  act  upon
another  at  a  distance,  without  there  being  something  to
establish  a  communication  between  them,  we  suppose  that
a  substance  emanates  from  him  who  magnetizes,  and  is
conveyed  to  the  person  magnetized,  in  the  direction  given
it  by  the  will.  This  substance,  which  sustains  life  in  us,
we  call  the  magnetic  fluid.  The  nature  of  this  fluid  is  un-
known ;  even  its  existence  has  not  been  demonstrated ;  but
every  thing  occurs  as  if  it  did  exist,  and  that  warrants  us
in  admitting  it,  while  we  are  indicating  the  means  of  em-
ploying magnetism.

6.  Man  is  composed  of  a  body  and  a  soul ;  and  the  in-
fluence he  exerts  participates  the  properties  of  both.  It
follows  that  there  are  three  actions  in  magnetism :  first,
physical ;  second,  spiritual ;  third,  mixed  action. It  will


22  GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  [CHAP.  I

soon  be  seen  how  easy  it  is  to  distinguish  the  phenomena
which  belong  to  each.

7.  If  the  will  is  necessary  to  direct  the  fluid,  belief  is
necessary  to  induce  one  to  make  a  firm  and  steady  use  of
the  faculties  he  possesses.  Confidence  in  the  power  we
possess,  makes  us  act  without  effort  and  without  distrac-
tion. As  to  the  rest,  confidence  is  only  the  consequence
of  belief:  it  differs  in  this  only  —  one  believes  himself  to
be  endowed  with  a  power  whose  reality  he  does  not  doubt.

8.  In  order  that  one  individual  may  act  upon  another,
there  must  exist  between  them  a  moral  and  physical  sym-
pathy;  as  there  is  between  all  the  members  of  an  animated
body.  Physical  sympathy  is  established  by  means  which
we  shall  indicate ;  moral  sympathy,  by  the  desire  of  doing;
good  to  one  who  desires  to  receive  it;  or  by  ideas  and
wishes  which,  occupying  them  both  equally,  form  between
them  a  communication  of  sentiments.  When  this  sympa-
thy is  well  established  between  two  individuals,  we  saj
they  are  in  communication.

9.  Thus  the  first  condition  of  magnetizing  is  the  will ;
the  second  is  the  confidence  which  the  magnetizer  has  in
his  own  powers ;  the  third  is  benevolence,  or  the  desire  of
doing  good.  One  of  these  qualities  may  supply  the  others
to  a  certain  point ;  but  to  have  the  action  at  the  same  time
energetic  and  salutary,  the  three  conditions  must  be  united.

10.  The  magnetic  fluid  may  not  only  act  directly  upon
the  person  whom  we  wish  to  magnetize,  but  it  may  also  be
conveyed  to  him  by  an  intermediate  body,  which  we  have
charged  with  this  fluid,  to  which  we  have  given  a  determi-
nate direction.

11.  The  direct  action  of  magnetism  ceases  when  the
magnetizer  ceases  to  will ;  but  the  direction  given  by  mag-
netism does  not  cease  in  that  case,  and  the  most  trifling
circumstance  sometimes  suffices  to  renew  the  phenomena
which  it  first  produced.

12.  A  constant  will  supposes  continued  attention ;  but
attention  is  sustained  without  effort  when  one  has  entire
confidence  in  his  powers.  A  man  who  makes  towards  a
designated  goal,  is  always  attentive  to  avoid  obstacles,  to
move  his  feet  in  a  proper  direction ;  but  this  sort  of  atten-
tion is  so  natural  to  him  as  to  be  easy,  because  he  has  first*


CHAP.  I.]  GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  23

determined  his  movement,  and  feels  in  himself  the  force
necessary  to  continue  it.

13.  The  action  of  the  magnetic  fluid,  being  relative  to
the  direction  given  it,  will  be  salutary  only  so  far  as  it
is  accompanied  with  a  good  intention.

14.  Magnetism,  or  the  action  of  magnetism,  springs
from  three  things:  first,  the  will  to  act;  second,  a  sign,
the  expression  of  that  will ;  third,  confidence  in  the  means
employed.  If  the  desire  of  doing  good  be  not  united  to  the
will  to  act,  there  will  be  some  effects,  but  these  effects  will
be  irregular.

15.  The  fluid  which  emanates  from  the  magnetizer,
exercises  a  physical  influence  upon  the  patient ;  hence  it
follows  that  the  magnetizer  ought  to  be  in  good  health.
This  influence  exerting,  in  the  course  of  time,  an  effect
upon  the  moral  condition  of  the  patient,  it  follows  that  the
magnetizer  ought  to  be  worthy  of  esteem  for  the  upright-
ness of  his  mind,  the  purity  of  his  sentiments,  and  the
honesty  of  his  character.  The  knowledge  of  this  principle
is  equally  important  for  those  who  magnetize,  and  for  those
who  are  the  subjects  of  magnetism.

16.  The  faculty  of  magnetizing  exists  in  all  persons  ;
but  all  do  not  possess  it  in  the  same  degree.  This  differ-
ence of  magnetic  power  in  various  individuals,  arises  from
the  superiority  which  some  have  over  others  in  moral  and
physical  qualities.  Among  the  moral  qualities  are,  confi-
dence in  one's  own  power;  energy  of  will ;  facility  in  sustain-
ing and  concentrating  the  attention;  the  sentiment  of  benev-
olence, which  unites  us  to  every  suffering  being ;  strength  of
mind,  enabling  one  to  remain  calm  in  the  midst  of  the  most
alarming  crises ;  patience,  which  prevents  uneasiness  in  a
long  and  painful  struggle ;  disinterestedness,  which  makes
one  forget  himself,  and  devote  himself  to  the  being  whom
he  attends,  and  which  banishes  vanity,  and  even  curiosity.
Of  physical  qualifications,  the  first  is  good  health,  the  next
a  peculiar  power,  different  from  that  which  raises  burdens
or  moves  heavy  bodies,  and  of  which  we  recognize  the
existence  and  the  degree  of  energy  in  ourselves,  only  by
the  trial  we  make  of  it.

17.  Therefore  there  are  men  who  have  a  magnetic
power  very  superior  to  that  of  others.  It  is  so  great  in
some  persons,  that  they  are  obliged  to  moderate  it.


24  GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  [CHAP.  ,

18.  The  magnetic  virtue  develops  itself  by  exercise,
and  a  person  uses  it  with  more  facility  and  success  when
he  has  acquired  the  habit  of  exerting  it.

19.  Although  the  magnetic  fluid  escapes  from  all  the
body,  and  the  will  suffices  to  give  it  direction,  the  external
organs,  by  which  we  act,  are  the  most  proper  to  throw  it  off
with  the  intention  determined  by  the  will.  For  this  reason,
we  make  use  of  our  hands  and  of  our  eyes  to  magnetize.
The  word  which  indicates  our  will,  can  often  exert  an  ac-
tion when  the  communication  is  well  established.  The
very  tones  of  the  magnetizer,  being  produced  by  the  vital
energy,  act  upon  the  organs  of  the  patients.

20.  The  magnetic  action  can  be  conveyed  to  very  great
distances ;  but  it  acts  in  that  manner  only  with  persons  who
are  perfectly  in  communication.

21.  All  men  are  not  sensible  to  the  magnetic  action;
and  the  same  persons  are  more  or  less  so,  according  to  the
temporary  dispositions  in  which  they  are  found.

Magnetism  generally  exercises  no  influence  upon
persons  in  health.  The  same  man  who  was  insensible  to
it  in  a  state  of  good  health,  will  experience  the  effects  of
it  when  ill.  There  are  diseases  in  which  the  action  of
magnetism  is  not  perceived ;  there  are  others  in  which  it  is
evident.  We  do  not  yet  know  enough  of  it  to  determine
the  cause  of  these  anomalies,  nor  to  pronounce  beforehand
whether  magnetism  will  or  will  not  act.  We  have  only
certain  probabilities  in  regard  to  it ;  but  that  should  not
create  an  objection  to  the  reality  of  magnetism,  since  at
least  three  fourths  of  the  patients  feel  the  effects  of  it.

22.  Nature  has  established  a  communion  or  a  physical
sympathy  between  certain  individuals.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  many  magnetizers  act  much  more  promptly  and  more
efficaciously  upon  certain  patients  than  upon  others,  and
that  the  same  magnetizer  does  not  agree  equally  with  all
patients.  There  are  even  some  of  them  who  are  more
powerful  over  certain  maladies.  Some  persons  think  them-
selves insensible  to  the  action  of  magnetism,  because  they
have  not  met  a  magnetizer  congenial  to  them.

23.  The  magnetic  virtue  exists  equally,  and  in  the  same
degree,  in  the  two  sexes ;  and  women  ought  to  be  preferred
as  magnetizers  of  women,  for  several  reasons,  which  we
shall  mention.


CHAP.  I.]  GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  25

24.  Many  persons  feel  much  fatigue  when  they  mag-
netize ;  others  do  not  feel  any.  This  is  not  owing  to  the
movements  that  are  made,  but  to  the  loss  of  the  vital  prin-
ciple or  magnetic  fluid.  He  who  is  not  endowed  with
great  magnetic  force,  would  exhaust  himself  in  the  course
of  time,  if  he  were  to  magnetize  every  day  for  several
hours.  Generally  speaking,  every  one  in  good  health,  and
not  enfeebled  by  age,  might  undertake  the  treatment  of  a
single  patient,  and  give  him  a  sitting  of  one  hour  each  day.
But  every  one  has  not  the  strength  necessary  for  magnet-
izing several  persons,  nor  several  hours  in  succession.  As
to  the  rest,  the  more  one  exercises  himself  in  it,  the  less  he
is  fatigued;  because  he  employs  only  just  as  much  force
as  is  necessary.

25.  Children  over  seven  years  of  age  magnetize  very
well,  when  they  have  witnessed  the  operation.  They  act
by  imitation,  with  an  entire  confidence,  with  a  determined
will,  without  effort,  without  being  distracted  by  the  least
doubt,  or  by  curiosity,  and  they  very  well  and  very  quickly
remove  a  casual  ailment.  They  learn  to  magnetize  as
they  learn  to  walk,  and  they  are  moved  by  the  desire  of
soothing  him  for  whom  they  have  an  affection  ;  but  they
ought  not  to  be  permitted  to  do  it,  because  it  would  injure
their  growth  and  weaken  them.

26.  Confidence,  which  is  an  essential  condition  with
the  magnetizer,  is  not  necessary  in  the  person  magnetized.
One  can  act  equally  upon  those  who  believe,  and  upon
those  who  do  not  believe,  in  magnetism.  It  suffices  if  the
patient  yields  himself  up  passively,  making  no  resistance.
Nevertheless,  confidence  contributes  to  the  efficaciousness
of  magnetism,  as  it  does  to  that  of  most  remedies.

27.  In  general,  magnetism  acts  in  a  more  sensible  and
efficacious  manner  upon  persons  who  have  led  a  simple
and  frugal  life,  and  who  have  not  been  agitated  by  passions,
than  upon  those  with  whom  the  course  of  nature  has  been
troubled,  either  by  habits  of  luxury  or  by  remedies.  Mag-
netism does  no  more  than  to  employ,  regulate,  and  direct
the  forces  of  nature.  The  more  the  course  of  nature  has
been  interrupted  by  foreign  agents,  the  more  difficult  it  is  for
the  magnetizer  to  reestablish  it.  Magnetism,  therefore,
cures  much  more  promptly,  and  much  better,  persons  who
reside  in  the  country,  and  children,  than  those  who  have

3


26  GENERAL  VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  [CHAP.  U

lived  in  the  world,  who  have  taken  much  medicine,  and
whose  nerves  are  irritated.  Nervous  persons,  when  mag-
netism has  once  gained  empire  over  them,  present  the  most
singular  phenomena,  but  much  fewer  cures,  especially  radi-
cal cures.

28.  Magnetism  having  for  its  object  the  developement
of  what  physicians  call  the  forces  mcdicatrices, — -that  is  to
say,  the  seconding  of  the  efforts  that  nature  makes  to  re-
lieve itself,  and  the  facilitating  of  the  cures  to  which  it  is
disposed,  —  it  is  essential  to  act  constantly  in  aid  of  nature,
and  never  to  oppose  it.  Whence  it  follows  that  people
ought  not  to  magnetize  through  curiosity,  nor  to  exhibit
the  power  with  which  they  are  endowed,  nor  to  produce
surprising  effects,  nor  to  convince  the  incredulous;  but
solely  for  the  purpose  of  doing  good,  and  in  cases  where  it
is  thought  to  be  useful.  It  follows  also  that  the  magnetic
zer  ought  to  employ  his  power  with  economy.  He  ought
to  be  exempt  from  vanity,  from  curiosity,  from  interest.
One  only  sentiment  ought  to  animate  him,  —  the  desire  of
doing  good  to  him  whose  cure  he  undertakes,  and  with
whom  he  ought  to  occupy  himself  wholly,  all  the  time  he
is  magnetizing  him.  He  ought  not  to  search  out  any  ex-
traordinary effect,  but  to  know  how  to  take  advantage  of
the  crises  which  nature,  sustained  by  magnetism,  produces
of  itself  for  promoting  the  cure.

29.  Although  the  choice  of  this  or  of  that  process  is
not  essential  in  order  to  direct  the  action  of  magnetism,  it
is  useful  to  adopt  a  method,  and  to  follow  it  habitually
without  thinking  of  it,  so  as  never  to  be  embarrassed,  and
to  lose  time  in  searching  what  motions  it  is  most  proper  to
make.

30.  When  one  has  acquired  the  habit  of  concentrating
his  attention,  and  of  abstracting  himself  from  every  thing
foreign  to  the  object  he  has  in  view,  he  will  feel  in  himself
an  instinctive  impulse  to  convey  the  action  to  this  or  to
that  organ,  and  to  modify  it  according  to  circumstances.
It  is  necessary  to  obey  this  impulse,  without  searching  into
the  cause  of  it.  When  the  patient  yields  himself  entirely
to  the  action  of  magnetism,  without  being  distracted  by
other  ideas,  it  often  happens  that  a  similar  instinct  causes
him  to  indicate  the  processes  which  are  the  most  proper
for  him  ;  the  magnetizer  should  then  suffer  himself  to  be
directed.


CHAP.  I.]  GENERAL VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES.  27

31.  Magnetism  often  excites  pain  in  that  part  of  the
body  where  the  disease  is  located.  It  renews  old  and
slumbering  pains.  These  pains  are  produced  by  the  efforts
which  nature  makes  to  triumph  over  the  malady.  We
ought  not  to  be  troubled  on  their  account ;  they  are  but
transient,  and  the  patient  always  finds  himself  better  after
having  experienced  them.  This  is  what  distinguishes  the
pains  which  are  called  critical,  from  those  which  are  pro-
duced by  the  progress  of  the  disease.

32.  When  any  crisis  takes  place,  it  is  very  dangerous
to  interrupt  or  trouble  it.  We  will  explain  what  we  mean
by  crises,  and  designate  the  various  kinds  of  them.

33.  Before  undertaking  a  magnetic  treatment,  the  mag-
netizer  ought  to  examine  himself.  He  ought  to  ask  him-
self whether  he  can  continue  it,  and  whether  the  patient  or
!•;  »se  who  have  influence  over  him,  will  put  any  obstacle
in  the  way.  He  ought  not  to  undertake  it  if  he  feels  any
repugnance,  or  if  he  fears  to  catch  the  disease.  To  act
efficaciously,  he  should  feel  himself  drawn  towards  the
person  who  requires  his  care,  take  an  interest  in  him,  and
have  the  desire  and  the  hope  of  curing,  or  at  least  relieving
him.  As  soon  as  he  has  decided,  which  he  should  never
do  lightly,  he  ought  to  consider  him  whom  he  magnetizes
as  his  brother,  as  his  friend;  he  should  be  so  devoted  to
him  as  not  to  perceive  the  sacrifices  that  he  imposes  upon
himself.  Any  other  consideration,  any  other  motive  than
the  desire  of  doing  good,  ought  not  to  induce  him  to  under-
take a  treatment.

34.  The  faculty  of  magnetizing,  or  that  of  doing  good
to  our  fellow-creatures  by  the  influence  of  the  will,  by  the
communication  of  the  principle  that  sustains  our  health
and  life,  being  the  most  delightful  and  most  precious  that
God  has  given  to  man,  he  ought  to  regard  the  employment
of  it  as  a  religious  act,  which  demands  the  greatest  self-
collectedness,  and  the  greatest  purity  of  intention. —  Hence
it  is  a  sort  of  profanation  to  magnetize  for  amusement,
through  curiosity,  or  through  the  desire  of  displaying  sin-
gular effects.  They  who  demand  experiments  to  see  a
spectacle,  know  not  what  they  demand ;  but  the  magneti-
zer  ought  to  know  it,  to  respect  himself,  and  to  preserve
tiis  dignity.


28


CHAPTER II.


OF  THE PROCESSES IN  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.

The  principles  we  have  given  in  the  preceding  chapter
are  essential,  invariable ;  and,  in  all  cases,  the  power  and
efficacy  of  magnetism  depend  upon  their  application.  The
processes  of  which  we  are  about  to  speak,  are  not  alike
employed  by  all  magnetizers.  Many  of  them  follow  pecu-
liar ones ;  but,  whatever  method  they  pursue,  the  results
are  nearly  the  same.  The  processes,  however,  ought  to  be
diversified  according  to  circumstances.  We  are  often  de-
termined in  the  choice,  not  only  by  the  kind  of  disease,  but
by  a  regard  to  convenience  and  other  circumstances,  and
even  by  the  desire  of  avoiding  what  might  appear  extraor-
dinary. What  I  am  about  to  say  is  useless  to  persons  who
have  acquired  the  habit  of  magnetizing.  Let  them  con-
tinue to  follow  the  method  which  has  constantly  issued  in
the  comforting  or  the  curing*  of  their  patients.  I  write
for  those  who,  not  yet  knowing  any  thing  about  it,  are  em-
barrassed in  the  exercise  of  a  faculty  whose  existence  they
do  not  doubt ;  and  I  am  about  to  teach  them  the  manner
of  magnetizing  which  I  adopted  after  having  received  in-
struction, and  after  having  collected  and  made  observations
during  thirty-five  years.

When  a  sick  person  desires  you  to  attempt  to  cure  him
by  magnetism,  and  neither  the  physician  nor  the  family
make  objection  to  it,  if  you  feel  the  desire  to  second  his
wishes,  and  are  resolved  to  continue  the  treatment  so  long
as  it  shall  be  necessary,  settle  with  him  the  hour  of  the
sittings,  make  him  promise  to  be  exact,  not  to  limit  him-
self to  an  attempt  of  a  few  days,  to  conform  himself  to  your
advice  in  relation  to  regimen,  and not  to  speak  of  the

*  I  add  the  words  comforting  and  curing,  because  every  method
having  for  its  object  the  production  of  surprising  effects,  or  to  show
the  power  of  the  magnetizer,  is  essentially  vicious.


CHAP.  II.] PROCESSES IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  29

undertaking  except  to  persons  who  ought  naturally  to  be
informed  of  it

When  you  are  once  agreed,  and  determined  to  treat  the
thing  seriously,  remove  from  the  patient  all  persons  who
would  be  troublesome ;  do  not  keep  near  you  any  except
necessary  witnesses,  (one  only,  if  it  can  be  so,)  and  request
of  them  not  to  occupy  themselves  at  all  with  the  processes
you  employ,  nor  with  the  effects  that  follow,  but  to  unite
with  you  in  the  intention  of  doing  good  to  the  patient
Arrange  things  so  as  not  to  be  too  cold  nor  too  warm,  so
that  nothing  shall  interfere  with  the  freedom  of  your  move-
ments, and  take  precautions  to  prevent  all  interruptions
during  the  sitting.

Cause  your  patient  to  sit  down  in  the  easiest  position
possible,  and  place  yourself  before  him,  on  a  seat  a  little
more  elevated,  so  that  his  knees  may  be  between  yours,
and  your  feet  by  the  side  of  his.  Demand  of  him,  in  the
first  place,  that  he  give  himself  up  entirely ;  that  he  think
of  nothing ;  that  he  do  not  trouble  himself  by  examining
the  effects  which  he  experiences  ;  that  he  banish  all  fear,
and  indulge  hope ;  and  that  he  be  not  disquieted  or  dis-
couraged if  the  action  of  magnetism  produces  in  him  tem-
porary pains.

After  you  have  brought  yourself  to  a  state  of  self-collect-
edness,  take  his  thumbs  between  your  two  fingers,  so  that
the  inside  of  your  thumbs  may  touch  the  inside  of  his.
Remain  in  this  situation  from  two  to  five  minutes,  or  until
you  perceive  there  is  an  equal  degree  of  heat  between
your  thumbs  and  his ;  that  being  done,  you  will  withdraw
your  hands,  removing  them  to  the  right  and  left,  and  wav-
ing them  so  that  the  interior  surface  be  turned  outwards,
and  raise  them  to  his  head ;  then  place  them  upon  his  two
shoulders,  leaving  them  there  about  a  minute ;  you  will
then  draw  them  along  the  arm  to  the  extremity  of  the  fin-
gers, touching  lightly.  You  will  repeat  this  pass  *  five  or
six  times,  always  turning  your  hands,  and  sweeping  them
off  a  little,  before  reascending ;  you  will  then  place  your
hands  upon  the  head,  hold  them  there  a  moment,  and
bring  them  down  before  the  face,  at  the  distance  of  one  or

*  I  employ  here  the  word  pass,  which  is  common  to  all  magnet-
izers ;  it  signifies  all  the  movements  made  by  the  hand  in  passing
over  the  body,  whether  by  slightly  touching,  or  at  a  distance.

3*


30  OF THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  II.

two  inches,  as  far  as  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  there  you
will  let  them  remain  about  two  minutes,  passing  the  thumb
along  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  the  other  fingers  down
the  sides.  Then  descend  slowly  along  the  body  as  far  as
the  knees,  or  farther ;  and,  if  you  can  conveniently,  as  far
as  the  ends  of  the  feet.  You  may  repeat  the  same  pro-
cesses during  the  greater  part  of  the  sitting.  You  may
sometimes  draw  nearer  to  the  patient,  so  as  to  place  your
hands  behind  his  shoulders,  descending  slowly  along  the
spine,  thence  to  the  hips,  and  along  the  thighs  as  far  as
the  knees,  or  to  the  feet.  After  the  first  passes,  you  may
dispense  with  putting  your  hands  upon  the  head,  and  make
the  succeeding  passes  along  the  arms,  beginning  at  the
shoulder;  or  along  the  body,  commencing  at  the  stomach.
/  When  you  wish  to  put  an  end  to  the  sitting,  take  care
to  draw  towards  the  extremity  of  the  hands,  and  towards
the  extremity  of  the  feet,  prolonging  your  passes  beyond
these  extremities,  and  shaking  your  fingers  each  time.
Finally,  make  several  passes  transversely  before  the  face,
and  also  before  the  breast,  at  the  distance  of  three  or  four
inches  ;  these  passes  are  made  by  presenting  the  two  hands
together,  and  briskly  drawing  them  from  each  other,  as  if
to  carry  oiF  the  superabundance  of  fluid  with  which  the
.  patient  may  be  charged.  You  see  that  it  is  essential  to
magnetize,  always  descending  from  the  head  to  the  extrem-
ities, and  never  mounting  from  the  extremities  to  the  head.
It  is  on  this  account  that  we  turn  the  hands  obliquely  when
they  are  raised  again  from  the  feet  to  the  head.  The  de-
scending passes  are  magnetic ;  that  is,  they  are  accompa-
nied with  the  intention  of  magnetizing.  The  ascending
movements  are  not.  Many  magnetizers  shake  their  fingers
slightly  after  each  pass.  This  method,  which  is  never  in-
jurious, is  in  certain  cases  advantageous ;  and  for  this  rea-
son it  is  good  to  get  the  habit  of  doing  it.

Although  you  may  have,  at  the  close  of  the  sitting,  taken
care  to  spread  the  fluid  over  all  the  surface  of  the  body,  it
is  proper,  in  finishing,  to  make  several  passes  along  the
legs  from  the  knees  to  the  end  of  the  feet.  These  passes
free  the  head.  To  make  them  more  conveniently,  place
yourself  on  your  knees  in  front  of  the  person  whom  you
are  magnetizing.

I  think  it  proper  to  distinguish  the  passes  that  are  made


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  31

without  touching,  from  those  which  are  made  with  the
touch,  not  only  with  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  but  with  all
the  extent  of  the  hand,  employing,  at  the  same  time,  a  slight
pressure.  I  give  to  these  last  the  name  of  magnetic  fric-
tions. They  are  often  made  use  of  to  act  better  upon  the
arms,  the  legs,  and  the  back,  along  the  vertebral  column.

This  manner  of  magnetizing  by  longitudinal  passes,
directing  the  fluid  from  the  head  to  the  extremities,  without
fixing  upon  any  part  in  preference  to  others,  is  called  mag-
netizing by  the  long  pass,  (magnetiser  a  grands  courans.)
It  is  more  or  less  proper  in  all  cases,  and  it  is  requisite  to
employ  it  in  the  first  sitting,  when  there  is  no  special  reason
for  using  any  other.  The  fluid  is  thus  distributed  into  all
the  organs,  and  it  accumulates  naturally  in  those  which
have  need  of  it.  Besides  the  passes  made  at  a  short  dis-
tance, others  are  made,  just  before  finishing,  at  the  distance
of  two  or  three  feet.  They  generally  produce  a  calm,  re-
freshing, and  pleasurable  sensation.

There  is  one  more  process  by  which  it  is  very  advanta-
geous to  terminate  the  sitting.  It  consists  in  placing  one's
self  by  the  side  of  the  patient,  as  he  stands  up,  and,  at  the
distance  of  a  foot,  making  with  both  hands,  one  before  the
body  and  the  other  behind,  seven  or  eight  passes,  com-
mencing above  the  head,  and  descending  to  the  floor,  along
which  the  hands  are  spread  apart.  This  process  frees  the
head,  reestablishes  the  equilibrium,  and  imparts  strength.

When  the  magnetizer  acts  upon  the  patient,  they  are
said  to  be  in  communication,  (rapport.)  That  is  to  say,  we
mean  by  the  word  communication,  a  peculiar  and  induced
condition,  which  causes  the  magnetizer  to  exert  an  influ-
ence upon  the  patient,  there  being  between  them  a  com-
munication of  the  vital  principle.

This  communication  is  sometimes  established  very  soon,
and  sometimes  after  a  long  trial.  This  depends  upon  the
moral  and  physical  conditions  of  the  two  individuals.  It  is
rare  not  to  have  it  established  at  the  first  sitting.  Expe-
rienced magnetizers  generally  perceive  it  in  themselves
when  this  takes  place.

When  once  the  communication  is  well  established,  the
action  is  renewed  in  the  succeeding  sittings,  at  the  instant
of  beginning  to  magnetize.  Then,  if  you  wish  to  act  upon
the  breast,  the  stomach,  or  the  abdomen,  there  is  no  utility


32  OP THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  II.

in  touching,  provided  it  is  not  found  more  convenient.
Ordinarily  magnetism  acts  as  well,  and  even  better,  in  the
interior  of  the  body,  at  the  distance  of  one  or  two  inches,
than  by  the  touch.  It  is  enough,  at  the  commencement  of
the  sitting,  to  take  the  thumbs  a  moment.  Sometimes  it  is
necessary  to  magnetize  at  the  distance  of  several  feet.
Magnetism  at  a  distance  is  more  soothing,  and  some  ner-
vous  persons  cannot  bear  any  other.

In  making  the  passes,  it  is  unnecessary  to  employ  any
greater  muscular  force  than  what  is  required  to  lift  the
hand  and  prevent  it  from  falling.  The  movements  should
be  easy,  and  not  too  rapid.  A  pass  from  the  head  to  the
feet  may  take  about  half  a  minute.  The  fingers  ought  to
be  a  little  separated  from  each  other,  and  slightly  bent,  so
that  the  ends  of  the  fingers  be  directed  towards  the  person
magnetized.

It  is  by  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  and  especially  by  the
thumbs,  that  the  fluid  escapes  with  the  most  activity.  For
this  reason  it  is,  we  take  the  thumbs  of  the  patient  in  the
first  place,  and  hold  them  whenever  we  are  at  rest.  This
process  generally  suffices  to  establish  the  communication  ;
to  strengthen  which  there  is  also  one  other  process.  It
consists  in  placing  your  ten  fingers  against  those  of  the
patient,  so  that  the  inside  of  your  hands  are  brought  near
to  the  inside  of  his,  and  the  balls  of  your  fingers  touch  the
balls  of  his.  The  fluid  seems  to  flow  less  copiously  from
the  back  of  the  hands  than  from  the  inside ;  and  this  is
one  of  the  reasons  for  turning  the  hands  in  raising  them,
without  carrying  them  off  too  far  from  the  body.

The  processes  I  have  now  indicated  are  the  most  regu-
lar and  advantageous  for  magnetism  by  the  long  pass:  but
it  is  far  from  being  always  proper,  or  even  possible,  to  em-
ploy them.  When  a  man  magnetizes  a  woman,  even  if  it
were  his  sister,  it  might  not  be  proper  to  place  himself  be-
is  obliged  to  keep  his  bed,  it  would  be  impossible  to  make
him  sit,  in  order  to  sit  in  front  of  him.

In  the  first  case,  you  can  place  yourself  by  the  side  of
the  person  whom  you  wish  to  magnetize.  First,  take  the
thumbs,  and,  the  better  to  establish  the  communication,
place  one  hand  upon  the  stomach,  and  the  other  upon  the
back  ;  then  lower  the  two  hands  opposite  to  each  other,  one


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  33

down  the  back,  and  the  other  at  a  distance  down  the  fore-
part of  the  body,  one  hand  descending  to  the  feet.  You
may  magnetize  the  two  arms,  one  after  the  other,  with  one
hand  only.

In  case  the  patient  cannot  raise  himself,  take  your  sta-
tion near  his  bed  in  the  most  convenient  manner  ;  take  his
thumbs,  make  several  passes  along  the  arms,  and,  if  he
can  support  himself  upright,  several  along  the  back  ;  then,
not  to  fatigue  yourself,  use  only  one  hand,  placing  it  upon
the  stomach,  and  making  longitudinal  passes,  at  first  slightly
touching  through  the  clothes,  then  at  a  distance.  You  can
hold  one  hand  fixed  upon  the  knees  or  upon  the  feet,  while
the  other  is  in  motion.  Finish  by  passes  along  the  legs,
and  by  transversal  passes  before  the  head,  the  breast,  and
the  stomach,  to  scatter  the  superabundant  fluid.  When
the  communication  is  established,  one  can  magnetize  very
well  by  placing  himself  at  the  foot  of  the  patient's  bed,  and
in  front  of  him  ;  then  directing,  at  that  distance,  both  hands
from  the  head  to  the  feet,  dashing  them  aside  after  each
pass,  so  as  not  to  conduct  the  fluid  to  himself.  I  have  pro-
duced somnambulism  by  this  process,  without  establishing
the  communication  by  touching.

This  is  what  I  have  to  say  about  magnetism  by  the  long
pass,  with  which  it  is  always  proper  to  commence,  and  to
which  a  person  may  confine  himself  until  he  has  a  reason
for  employing  other  processes.

Let  us  now  consider  the  circumstances  which  point  out
particular  processes.

When  any  one  has  a  local  pain,  it  is  natural,  after  estab-
lishing, a  communication,  to  carry  the  magnetic  action  to
the  suffering  part.  It  is  not  by  passing  the  hands  over  the
arms  that  we  undertake  to  cure  a  sciatic ;  it  is  not  by  put-
ting the  hand  upon  the  stomach  that  we  can  dissipate  a
pain  in  the  knee. Here  are  some  principles  to  guide  us.

The  magnetic  fluid,  when  motion  is  given  to  it,  draws
along  with  it  the  blood,  the  humors,  and  the  cause  of  the
complaint.  For  example,  if  one  has  the  headache,  owing
to  the  tendency  of  the  blood  to  the  head,  if  the  forehead  be
hot  and  the  feet  very  cold,  by  making  a  few  passes  from
the  head  to  the  feet,  and  others  along  the  legs,  the  head  is
relieved,  and  the  feet  become  warm.  If  one  has  a  pain  in
the  shoulder,  and  the  magnetizer  makes  passes  from  the


34  OP THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  11.

shoulder  to  the  end  of  the  fingers,  the  pain  will  descend
with  the  hand  ;  it  stops  sometimes  at  the  elbow,  or  at  the
wrist,  and  goes  off  by  the  hands,  in  which  a  slight  perspira-
tion is  perceived;  before  it  is  entirely  dissipated,  a  pain  is
sometimes  felt  in  the  lower  part  of  the  bowels.  Magnetism
seems  to  chase  away  and  bear  off  with  it  what  disturbs  the
equilibrium,  and  its  action  ceases  when  the  equilibrium  is
restored.  It  is  useless  to  search  out  the  causes  of  these
facts  ;  it  is  sufficient  that  experience  has  established  them,
for  us  to  conduct  ourselves  accordingly,  when  we  have  no
reason  to  do  otherwise.

The  following  rule,  with  some  exceptions,  may  thence
be  established  :  —

Accumulate  and  concentrate  the  magnetic  fluid  upon
the  suffering  part ;  then  draw  off  the  pain  towards  the  ex-
tremities.

For  example,  do  you  desire  to  cure  a  pain  in  the  shoul-
der 1  Hold  your  hand  upon  the  shoulder  for  several  minutes ;
then  descend,  and  after  having  quitted  the  ends  of  the  fin-
gers, recommence  patiently  the  same  process.  Would  you
cure  a  pain  in  the  stomach?  Place  your  hands  several
minutes  upon  the  stomach,  and  descend  to  the  knees.  You
will  accumulate  the  fluid  by  holding  your  hands  still ;  by
bringing  them  down,  you  will  draw  away  both  the  fluid
and  the  pain  at  the  same  time.

If  your  patient  be  troubled  with  an  obstruction,  place
your  hand  upon  the  seat  of  it ;  leave  it  there  for  some  time,
either  immovable  or  making  a  circular  motion,  and  draw  it
along  towards  the  extremities.  If  the  obstruction  does  not
occupy  a  great  space,  present  your  fingers  near,  without
uniting  them,  because  it  is  principally  by  the  points  that
the  fluid  escapes.  Turn  them  aside  when  you  bring  them
away,  and  then  wave  them  towards  the  extremities.  You
may  be  assured  that  the  motions  you  make  externally  will
operate  sympathetically  in  the  interior  of  the  patient's
body,  wherever  you  have  sent  the  fluid  into  it.

If  any  one  has  received  a  blow  behind  the  head,  pro-
ducing a  contusion,  take  the  head  between  your  two  hands,
conveying  the  action  of  your  will  to  the  seat  of  the  injury.
Then  bring  your  hand  down  along  the  back,  if  the  contu-
sion is  behind  the  head  ;  or  down  the  forepart  of  the  body
to  the  knees,  if  it  is  in  the  front  of  it ;  or  along  the  arm,  if


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  35

it  is  on  the  side.  You  will  thus  prevent  the  blood  from
tending  to  the  head  ,  you  will  avoid  the  danger  of  inflam-
mation, and  probably  render  bleeding  unnecessary.  If  you
wish  to  cure  a  burn,  chilblains,  or  a  felon,  follow  the  same
process.  The  examples  I  have  just  cited  may  be  applied
to  most  cases.  I  think  that,  in  general,  contact  is  useful
to  concentrate  the  action,  and  that  passes  at  a  short  dis-
tance are  preferable  for  establishing  and  maintaining  the
magnetic  currents.  Magnetic  frictions  are  employed  with
advantage  in  pains  of  the  limbs.

In  the  headache,  if  the  pain  is  very  great,  and  if  there
be  heat,  after  having  placed  your  hands  upon  the  head  for
some  time,  withdraw  them,  as  if  you  believed  the  fluid  you
have  introduced  to  be  united  to  that  of  the  patient,  that  the
mingled  fluid  stuck  to  your  hands,  and  that,  in  separating
your  hands  and  shaking  your  fingers,  you  could  draw  it  off
again  ;  it  is  in  effect  what  you  will  see  verified.  If  the
headache  proceed  from  the  stomach,  this  process  alone  will
not  succeed  ;  it  will  be  necessary  to  act  upon  the  stomach.
If  the  blood  tends  to  the  head,  it  will  be  requisite,  as  I
have  said,  to  draw  it  down,  and  repeat  the  passes  over  the
legs  and  over  the  ket.

I  have  said  that  the  fingers,  brought  near  and  pointed
towards  the  part,  act  more  powerfully,  and  concentrate  the
fluid  better,  than  the  extended  hand.  There  is  one  other
process,  the  action  of  which  is  much  stronger,  and  which
may  be  employed  with  success  for  local  pains  and  for  ob-
structions.

Place  a  piece  of  linen,  several  times  folded,  or  a  frag-
ment of  woollen  or  cotton  cloth,  upon  the  suffering  part ;
apply  the  mouth  above  it,  and  breathe  through  it ;  it  excites
a  lively  sensation  of  heat ;  and  the  breath,  which  is  charged
with  the  magnetic  fluid,  introduces  it  into  the  system.  It
is  also  observed  that  the  heat  is  not  merely  at  the  surface,
as  that  of  hot  iron  would  be,  but  it  penetrates  into  the  in-
terior. After  having  employed  this  process,  make  the
usual  passes  to  draw  off  and  expel  the  pain.

Blowing  cold  air  from  the  mouth  at  a  distance,  produces
a  refreshing  effect.  It  helps  to  dissipate  the  heat,  which  is
withdrawn  by  presenting  the  fingers,  taking  care  to  sepa-
rate them  as  you  draw  them  off,  in  the  usual  manner.

The  head  may  also  be  cooled  by  putting  the  palm  of  the


36  OP THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  II.

hands  upon  it,  and  holding  the  fingers  elevated  and  sepa-
rate. The  fluid  passes  off  at  the  ends  of  the  fingers.

It  is  often  impossible  to  draw  a  pain  far  from  the  part
where  it  is  fixed;  and  you  will  succeed  solely  by  driving  it
off  progressively  and  gradually.  A  pain  upon  the  top  of
the  head  will  be  lessened  at  first  in  the  centre,  by  waving
the  hands  downward  and  outward,  on  the  right  and  left.
At  every  pass,  a  portion  will  be  dislodged  and  carried  off
It  will  take  more  or  less  time  to  dissipate  it  entirely.

I  will  not  here  relate  the  details  given  by  M.  Kluge,  Pro-
fessor in  the  Medical  School  of  Berlin,  upon  the  various
kinds  of  manipulation.*  What  has  been  said,  suffices  to
indicate  the  processes  that  may  be  employed  when  no  per-
ceivable effect  has  been  produced.  I  will  merely  add,  that
the  action  is  more  lively  and  penetrating  by  the  digital
manipulation,  —  that  is,  when  one  presents  the  ends  of  the
fingers,  —  than  when  he  presents  the  hands  open  and  the
fingers  straight,  so  as  to  have  the  fluid  pass  from  all  the  in-
terior surface.  Manipulation  with  the  open  hand  at  a  dis-
tance, is  a  process  generally  used  to  soothe ;  it  is  often
sufficient  to  appease  the  sharpest  pains.  The  fingers,  uni-
ted to  a  point,  concentrate  the  action  upon  the  part  towards
which  they  are  directed.

I  am  now  going  to  recapitulate,  in  few  words,  what  I
have  said  upon  magnetism  with  the  long  pass,  by  indicat-
ing the  processes  which  are  the  most  convenient  at  the
commencement,  during,  and  at  the  termination,  of  the
sitting.

1.  Establish  the  communication  by  holding  the  thumbs,
placing  the  hands  upon  the  shoulders,  and  making  passes
along  the  arms  with  a  light  pressure,  and  placing  the  hands
upon  the  stomach,  2.  Direct  the  current  from  the  head
to  the  feet,  or  at  least  to  the  knees.  Touching  is  useless.
3.  Make  passes,  or  else  magnetic  frictions,  along  the  legs,
to  the  extremity  of  the  feet ;  soothe  the  patient  by  several
passes  at  a  distance  with  the  open  hand ;  and,  finally,  throw
off  the  superabundant  fluid,  by  a  few  transversal  passes.
The  first  sittings  ought  to  be  about  an  hour  in  duration,
when  there  is  no  reason  to  prolong  or  abridge  them. I  say

*  In  the  German  work,  entitled  "Animal  Magnetism  as  a  Curative
Means." Vienna,  1815.


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  37

the  first  sittings,  because  a  part  of  the  time  is  consumed
in  establishing  the  communication.  As  soon  'as  that  has
been  once  well  established,  the  action  of  magnetism  is
manifested  at  the  first  moment;  then  a  sitting  of  half  an
hour,  or  three  quarters,  provided  the  labor  commenced  is
duly  sustained,  will  be  sufficient.

It  is  necessary  to  order  the  treatment  in  the  most  uniform
and  regular  manner  possible.  The  sittings  must  be  period-
ical, and  equal  in  duration.  The  magnetizer  must  be
calm  and  self-collected ;  all  foreign  influence  must  be  ban-
ished :  all  curious  persons  excluded,  and  also  every  other
witness  except  the  one  chosen  at  first.  There  must  be  a
similar  degree  of  magnetic  power  exerted  at  each  sitting,
and  the  mode  of  procedure  first  adopted  must  be  contin-
ued. Nevertheless,  when  the  patient  experiences  sensa-
tions, these  often  determine  the  operator  to  vary  or  to
modify  the  processes.  This,  then,  is  the  place  to  speak  of
these  effects,  and  of  the  indications  they  afford  of  the  man-
ner of  proceeding.*

Before  entering  upon  the  details,  I  think  it  important  to
combat  an  opinion  which  appears  to  me  entirely  erroneous,
although  it  is  maintained  by  men  well  versed  in  the  knowl-
edge of  magnetism  ;  namely,  that  the  processes  are  in  them-
selves indifferent ;  that  they  serve  only  to  fix  the  attention,
and  that  the  will  alone  does  all.  People  have  been  led  to
adopt  this  idea,  at  the  sight  of  a  phenomenon  which  some
somnambulists  present,  and  by  the  application  of  a  particu-
lar case  to  a  general  theory.

There  are  some  somnambulists  perfectly  concentrated,
whose  interior  faculties  are  so  energetic  as  to  act  upon
themselves  by  their  own  power,  and  conformably  to  the  will
communicated  to  them  by  their  magnetizer.  The  magnet-
izer causes  a  headache  or  a  sideache  to  cease,  simply  be-
cause he  wills  it.  There  are  likewise  men  endowed  with
such  magnetic  power,  that  they  can  act  upon  patients  who
are  very  susceptible,  and  in  perfect  communication  with

*  Many  magnetizers  experience  sensations  which  ought  of  neces-
sity to  govern  them  in  the  choice  of  processes.  But  as  this  precious
faculty  is  not  common  to  all,  I  shall  in  another  chapter  speak  of  the
means  of  developin  it  in  ourselves,  and  of  the  advantages  arising
from  it.

4


38  OF THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  II.

them,  while  directing  the  action  upon  this  or  that  part,  by
the  thought  and  by  the  look ;  but  these  cases  are  extremely
rare,  and  no  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  them  for  ordi-
nary practice.

The  processes  are  nothing,  if  they  are  not  in  unison  with
a  determined  intention.  We  may  even  say  they  are  not
the  cause  of  the  magnetic  action;  but  it  is  indisputable
that  they  are  necessary  for  directing  and  concentrating,  and
that  they  ought  to  be  varied  according  to  the  end  one  has
in  view.

Somnambulists  point  out  for  themselves  processes  altogeth-
er different,  according  to  the  seat  of  the  disease  ;  and  when
they  advise  a  patient  to  have  recourse  to  magnetism,  they
to  employ.  It  is  certain  that,  by  proper  processes,  and  not
by  the  will  only,  one  is  able  to  displace  a  pain,  to  make  it
descend,  to  accelerate  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  to  dis-
sipate an  obstruction,  and  to  restore  the  equilibrium.  There
are  cases  when  one  does  much  good  by  placing  his  hands
upon  the  knees,  though  he  would  do  much  injury  by  hold-
ing them  long  upon  the  stomach.  Numbness,  heaviness,
disagreeable  sensations,  are  produced  by  charging  the  head
too  much.  It  is  often  necessary  to  scatter  the  fluid  at  the
close  of  a  sitting,  and  to  withdraw  it  by  the  extremities,  in
order  to  relieve  him  who  is  overcharged  with  it.

When  I  said  that  a  method  different  from  mine  might
succeed  equally  well,  I  intended  to  say  that  each  one  might
modify  the  processes  according  to  his  own  views  and  prac-
tice; but  not  that  he  could  omit  them,  or  employ  them  in
a  manner  contrary  to  the  general  rules.  For  example,  va-
rious magnetizers  act  equally  well  by  passes,  more  gentle,
or  more  rapid  ;  by  contact,  or  at  a  distance ;  by  holding
the  hands  to  the  same  place,  or  by  establishing  currents.
But  it  is  absurd  to  believe  one  can  cure  chilblains  on  the
feet  by  placing  the  hands  on  the  breast.

There  are  some  general  processes  that  are  employed  at
the  commencement ;  there  are  others,  that  are  suggested
by  circumstances,  or  by  the  effects  first  produced.  We
shall  discourse  of  these  in  the  next  chapter.


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.


JNOTE  I.

I  have  often  remarked  that  persons  who  are  not  in  the  habit
of  magnetizing  think  they  ought  to  exert  a  great  deal  of  force  ;
for  which  purpose,  they  contract  their  muscles,  and  make  efforts
of  attention  and  will.  This  method  is  not  good  ;  it  is  often  inju-
rious. When  the  will  is  calm  and  constant,  and  the  attention
sustained  by  the  interest  we  take  in  the  patient,  the  most  salutary
effects  ensue,  without  our  giving  ourselves  the  least  pain.  There
are  cases  when  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  violent  effort,  to  oppose
a  false  direction,  to  vanquish  an  obstacle,  to  sustain  or  terminate
a  crisis.  We  may  then  have  need  of  extraordinary  power ;  but  it
is  never  at  the  commencement  of  a  treatment,  that  we  are  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  it.  A  person  ought  not  to  fatigue  himself  by
magnetic  processes ;  he  will  experience  fatigue  enough  from  the
loss  of  the  vital  fluid.


NOTE II.

I  have  said  that,  at  the  close  of  each  sitting,  it  is  proper  to  re-
lieve the  patient  of  the  superabundant  fluid,  by  making  transver-
sal passes,  and  passes  beyond  the  extremities;  and  have  hinted
that  it  is  sometimes  better  to  draw  off  the  fluid  from  the  patient,
instead  of  charging  him  with  that  of  another  ;  but  I  neglected  to
insist  upon  this  point,  and  to  show  the  case  where  that  negative
method  is  of  great  importance.  I  will  explain  my  views  on  this
subject

When  there  is  a  great  excitement  of  the  nervous  system,  a
great  irritation,  or  a  tendency  to  inflammation,  you  will  always
produce  a  soothing  effect  in  drawing  away  the  fluid.  It  also  fre-
quently happens  that  the  ailment  is  drawn  away  with  the  fluid.
Thus,  in  the  inflammation  of  the  brain,  it  is  proper  to  begin  the
passes  at  the  lower  part  of  the  head,  to  draw  it  out  either  by  the
sides  or  by  the  top.  I  will  cite  a  remarkable  fact,  to  which  I
was  an  eye-witness.

M.  H***,  a  mate  of  a  vessel,  went  several  days  ago  to  see  M.
N#**,  of  whom  I  shall  soon  make  mention.  About  five  years
ago,  he  had  a  stroke  of  the  sun,  (coup  de  soleil,)  and  since  that
period,  he  has  frequently  felt  violent  pains  in  the  head.  One
day,  when  this  pain  caused  him  intense  suffering,  M.  N#**
thought  of  filling  a  glass  with  magnetized  water,  of  covering  it
with  linen  cloth,  so  that,  in  turning  it  over,  the  water  might  not
spill  out;  and  he  applied  it,  thus  inverted,  to  the  back  part  of  the
head  of  M.  H***,  who  leaned  down  for  that  purpose.  Then  he
made  passes  from  the  head  to  the  tumbler,  to  draw  off  the  fluid


40  OF THE PROCESSES  [CHAP.  I*.

and  make  it  enter  the  water.  M.  H***  felt  something  pass  from
his  head  towards  the  inverted  glass.  He  told  me  it  was  just  like
drawing  out  a  fine  stream  of  water.  In  five  minutes,  the  pain
ceased  entirely.  I  do-  not  know  whether  it  will  ever  return ;  but
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  same  means  will  succeed  in  causing  it
to  disappear.

You  might,  in  many  circumstances,  apply  this  process,  which
ought  to  be  accompanied  with  the  proper  intention.  I  believe
that  if,  after  the  operation,  any  one  had  drunk  the  water  con-
tained in  the  glass,  he  would  have  experienced  very  disagreeable
effects  from  it.


NOTE  111.

A  short  time  after  Mesmer,  who  explained  all  the  phenomena
of  magnetism  by  causes  purely  physical,  some  persons,  going  into
the  opposite  extreme,  substituted,  in  the  place  of  this  theory,  a
system  of  spiritualism.  M.  le  Chevalier  de  Barbarin,  a  very  pious
man,  but  probably  too  much  devoted  to  mystical  ideas,  pretended
that  all  processes  were  useless,  and  that  faith  and  the  will  were
sufficient  to  operate  prodigies.  Those  who  adopted  his  opinions,
had  recourse  to  prayers  at  the  patients'  bed-side,  and  often  suc-
ceeded in  curing  them.  The  success  they  obtained,  proves  noth-
ing to  support  their  principles ;  and  the  state  of  concentration
which  this  method  demands,  might  give  rise  to  bad  consequences.
Our  spirit  is  the  principle  of  voluntary  movements ;  it  gives  im-
pulse to  the  nervous  fluid ;  but  so  long  as  it  is  united  to  organ-
ized matter,  it  is  destined  to  act  externally,  by  the  aid  of  the  or-
gans, either  immediately,  or  by  the  emanation  which  is  conveyed
to  a  distance,  like  the  rays  from  a  luminous  body.  I  have  inter-
dicted myself  from  all  theory,  and  I  would  have  been  silent  upon
the  opinions  of  the  spiritualists,  if  there  were  not,  at  this  time,
men  of  good  intentions,  who,  disdaining  magnetism,  undertake  to
treat  patients  by  practices  which  they  think  mm-e  powerful  and
more  efficacious.  They  obtain  cures,  undoubtedly ;  they  produce
ecstatic  somnambulism;  and  their  somnambulists  are  persuaded
they  are  inspired.  This  may  lead  into  errors,  and  disturb  the
imagination  not  only  of  the  patients,  but  also  of  those  who  con-
sult them.  Let  any  one  recall  the  singular  ideas  entertained  by
those  who  witnessed  the  somnambulists  of  Suede,  and  he  will  see
that  nothing  can  be  more  contrary  to  reason.  Let  us  not,  then,
consider  somnambulism  as  a  supernatural  state,  in  which  they
have  celestial  visions  and  inspirations  ;  but  let  us  see  in  it  the
extension  of  our  faculties,  and  perhaps  the  developement  of  an
interior  sense,  which  is  active  when  the  external  senses  are
slumbering. Let  us  employ  magnetism  as  a  means  of  aiding  na-


CHAP.  II.]  IN ANIMAL MAGNETISM.  41

ture,  of  reanimating  strength,  of  establishing  the  equilibrium,  of
facilitating  the  circulation ;  and  let  us  not  imagine  that  man  can
give,  to  himself  or  to  others,  the  power  of  working  miracles.  If
no  other  advantages  were  derived  from  the  processes  than  that
of  curbing  the  imagination,  it  would  still  be  necessary  to  make
use  of  them.


42


CHAPTER  III.

OF  THE  EFFECTS,  AND  THEIR  INDICATIONS,

Of  the  Effects  by  which  the  Action  of  Magnetism  is  manifested,  and
of  the  Modifications  which  the  Observation  of  these  Effects  indi-
cates in  the  Processes,

There  are  some  patients  upon  whom  magnetism  does
not  act,  owing  either  to  peculiarity  of  constitution,  to  the
kind  of  disease,  or  to  a  want  of  analogy  with  the  magnet-
izer;  but  this  is  very  rare.  It  is  less  rare  that  the  commu-
nication cannot  be  established  until  after  several  sittings  -r
whence  one  cannot  presume  that  magnetism  does  not  act,
till  after  a  trial  of  five  days.

In  order  to  found  this  presumption,  even  after  this  lapse
of  time,  it  is  not  enough  that  the  patient  has  felt  nothing
when  you  have  attempted  to  magnetize  him.  It  is  to  be
considered  whether  he  has  experienced  no  change  in  his
condition ;  whether  he  does  not  find  himself  better,  or
whether  his  disease  is  not  rendered  worse5  by  pursuing  the
ordinary  course.  It  frequently  happens  that  magnetism
gradually  reestablishes  the  harmony  of  the  system  without
producing  any  sensation,  and  its  influence  is  perceived
only  in  the  restoration  of  health.  In  that  case,  you  ought
to  continue  zealously  to  follow  the  processes  I  have  pointed
out,  without  troubling  yourself  about  the  manner  in  which
the  magnetism  acts,  and  without  seeking  for  any  apparent
effect.  By  making  efforts  of  the  attention  and  of  the  will,
and  trying  processes  which  are  thought  more  active,  you
would  fatigue  yourself  uselessly,  and  perhaps  disturb  the
gradual  and  peaceful  course  of  nature.

The  happiest  thing  that  can  happen  to  him  who  for  the
first  time  attempts  to  magnetize,  is,  to  encounter  a  subject
who  is  not  insensible  to  the  action  of  magnetism,  and  who,
nevertheless,  feels  only  slight  and  gradual  effects  from  it.
If  the  first  patient  whose  case  is  undertaken  is  absolutely


CHAP.  IN.]  EFFECTS,  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  43

insensible  to  the  action,  one  is  apt  to  imagine  he  has  not
conducted  the  process  aright,  or  else  he  doubts  his  own
power ;  and  in  proportion  as  one  doubts  it,  it  really  be-
comes enfeebled.  If  one  were  at  first  to  see  wonderful
effects  produced,  he  would  be  apt  to  yield  to  curiosity  and
enthusiasm ;  and  the  attention  would  be  drawn  from  the
essential  object,  which  is  a  cure.  To  magnetize  well,  it
is  necessary  to  be  very  attentive,  to  be  surprised  at  nothing,
and  to  observe  the  effects  produced,  only  the  better  to
direct  the  action  of  magnetism.

The  instruction  which  I  here  give  has  for  its  principal
object  to  prevent  false  ideas  and  exaggerated  opinions,  to
which  persons  are  liable  to  be  exposed,  for  want  of  experi-
ence. They  who  adopt  my  principles  will  not  lose  confi-
dence in  their  powers  because  they  have  not  at  first  suc-
ceeded; they  will  not  be  precipitated  into  exaggeration
because  they  have  seen  surprising  things.  They  will  know
how  to  modify  both  the  influence  of  their  will,  and  the
processes  which  they  first  employed.

There  are  patients  in  whom  the  influence  of  magnetism
is  displayed  in  two  or  three  minutes;  others,  who  do  not
feel  it  for  a  long  time.  There  are  some  in  whom  the  effects
are  constantly  increasing;  others,  who  experience  at  the
first  time  all  that  they  will  experience  in  the  course  of  a
long  treatment.  We  sometimes  meet  with  persons  who
obtain  from  it,  the  first  day,  results  the  most  remarkable
and  salutary,  but  who  finally  become  accustomed  to  it,  and
receive  not  the  least  advantage  nor  the  least  impression.

The  effects  by  which  magnetism  manifests  its  action
are  greatly  varied :  sometimes  only  one  effect  takes  place  ;
sometimes  several  show  themselves  together,  or  succes-
sively, in  the  same  patient.  When  these  effects  have  been
once  produced,  it  is  very  common  to  have  them  promptly
renewed  at  each  sitting.  They  change  sometimes,  in  pro-
portion to  the  change  wrought  in  the  malady.

monly exhibited.

The  magnetized  person  perceives  a  heat  escaping  from
the  ends  of  your  fingers,  when  you  pass  them  at  a  little
distance  before  his  face,  although  your  hands  appear  cold
to  him,  if  you  touch  him.  He  afterwards  feels  the  heat
through  his  clothes,  in  some  parts,  or  in  all  parts  of  his


44  OF THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP.  III.

body  before  which  your  hands  pass.  He  often  compares
it  to  water,  moderately  warm,  flowing  over  him,  and  the
sensation  precedes  your  hand.  His  legs  become  numb,
especially  if  you  do  not  carry  your  hands  as  low  as  his
feet;  and  this  numbness  ceases  when,  towards  the  close,
you  make  passes  along  the  legs  to  the  toes,  or  below  them.
Sometimes,  instead  of  communicating  heat,  you  communi-
cate cold  ;  sometimes,  also,  you  produce  heat  upon  one  part
of  the  body,  and  cold  upon  another.  There  is  often  in-
duced a  general  warmth,  and  a  perspiration  more  or  less
considerable.  Pain  is  felt  in  the  parts  where  the  disease  is
seated. These  pains  change  place,  and  descend.

Magnetism  causes  the  eyes  to  be  closed.  They  are  shut
in  such  a  manner  that  the  patient  cannot  open  them ;  he
feels  a  calm,  a  sensation  of  tranquil  enjoyment ;  he  grows
drowsy ;  he  sleeps  :  he  wakes  when  spoken  to,  or  else  he
wakes  of  himself  at  the  end  of  a  certain  time,  and  finds
himself  refreshed.  Sometimes  he  enters  into  somnambu-
lism, in  which  state  he  hears  the  magnetizer,  and  answers
him  without  awaking.

As  the  state  of  somnambulism  ought  entirely  to  change
the  manner  of  magnetizing,  and  as  it  does  not  take  place
except  in  a  small  number  of  cases,  we  shall  speak  of  it  in
a  chapter  by  itself.  Now,  we  are  merely  describing  what
occurs  when  there  is  no  somnambulism,  and  pointing  out
the  conduct  to  be  observed  in  various  circumstances.

I  said,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  one  of  the  most
ordinary  effects  of  magnetism  is,  to  dislodge  the  pain,  and
make  it  pass  down  in  the  direction  of  the  current  given  to
the  fluid.  If,  when  this  is  dislodged,  it  does  not  at  first
reach  the  extremities,  you  will  succeed  in  forcing  it  thither
in  the  subsequent  sittings.  But  there  are  cases  when  this
result  requires  uninterrupted  action.

For  example,  if  the  gout  were  seated  in  the  head,  and  if,
in  descending,  it  is  arrested  at  the  breast  or  the  stomach,  it
is  essential  to  continue  the  action  until  it  is  conducted  to
the  feet.

The  displacement  of  the  malady  is  always  a  proof  of  the
efficacy  of  magnetism ;  but  this  displacement  sometimes
produces  very  sharp  pains:  instead  of  being  troubled  about
these,  it  is  necessary  to  magnetize  during  the  succeeding
days,  until  they  are  entirely  dissipated. I  once  saw  a  lady,


CHAP. III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  45

who  had  a  catarrh  with  a  severe  cough.  At  the  first  sitting,
the  catarrh  was  cured ;  but  there  remained  in  her  limbs
violent  pains,  which  lasted  three  days,  because  she  did  not
again  have  recourse  to  magnetism.

The  action  of  magnetism  is  sometimes  accompanied  with
nervous  movements,  and  very  often  a  disposition  to  yawn ;
sometimes  the  patient  experiences  pains  at  the  stomach,
and  nausea,  which  is  even  followed  by  vomiting ;  at  other
times,  he  experiences  colic  pains.

These  crises  ought  to  give  the  magnetizer  no  disquiet.
He  ought  to  know  how  to  calm  those  which  are  nervous,
and  to  aid  the  tendencies  of  nature.

It  sometimes  happens  that  the  patient  desires  to  have
the  sitting  prolonged,  sometimes  to  have  it  suspended,  be-
cause he  feels  a  species  of  irritation.  In  these  cases,  it  is
well  to  follow  his  inclination  as  far  as  possible.

lated effects,  exhibited  in  various  circumstances,  with  vari-
ous individuals,  at  different  times  ;  and  are  rarely  united
in  the  same  case.

Now  let  us  see  what  modifications  the  observation  of
these  effects  ought  to  suggest  in  the  processes.

If  the  patient  feels  the  sensation  of  heat  or  coolness
from  your  fingers,  content  yourself  with  magnetizing  with
long  passes.  If  the  action  of  magnetism  excites  pain  in
any  organ,  concentrate  the  action  upon  that  organ,  in
order  to  draw  it  away  afterwards.

If  there  be  manifested  any  heat  or  heaviness  at  the  head,
attract  it  to  the  knees.

If  magnetism  produces  a  sense  of  suffocation,  or  an
irritation  of  the  lungs,  make  passes,  beginning  below  the
breast,  and  continuing  to  the  knees.

If  colics  take  place,  and  if  they  indicate,  as  they  often
do  with  women,  that  the  circulation  ought  to  be  acceler-
ated, avoid  letting  the  hands  stop  at  the  breast,  or  even  at
the  stomach  ;  carry  the  action  to  the  sides,  and  below  them;
make  passes  along  the  thighs,  and  let  the  hands  remain
some  time  upon  the  knees.

If  the  patient,  have  pains  at  the  back,  make  passes  along
the  vertebral  column.

If  you  see  any  nervous  movements,  calm  them  by  your
will,  first  taking  the  thumbs  or  the  wrists,  and  afterwards


46  OF THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP.  III.

making  passes  at  the  distance  of  several  inches,  or  even  of
several  feet,  with  the  open  hand.

If  magnetism  seems  to  act  too  powerfully,  moderate  the
action,  and  render  it  more  soothing,  by  making  the  passes
at  a  distance.

If  the  patient  sleep,  let  him  sleep  tranquilly  while  you
continue  to  magnetize  him.  When  you  wish  to  rest  your-
self, take  the  thumbs  of  the  patient,  or  place  your  hands
upon  his  knees.

If  the  sitting  has  been  long,  and  you  are  obliged  to  quit,
rouse  the  patient  gently,  by  telling  him  to  awake,  and  by
making  passes  transversely  across  the  eyes.

If  the  eyes  are  closed  fast,  not  attended  with  sleep,  open
them  by  transverse  passes,  but  not  till  the  termination  of
the  sitting.

If,  after  being  roused,  the  patient  feels  anew  the  desire
of  sleeping,  you  will  leave  him  to  sleep  alone,  taking  pre-
cautions that  no  one  shall  trouble  him.

Here  I  ought  to  observe  that  the  magnetic  sleep  is  of
itself  essentially  restorative.  During  this  sleep,  nature,  un-
assisted, works  a  cure ;  and  it  is  often  sufficient  to  reestab-
lish the  equilibrium,  and  cure  nervous  complaints.

When  you  have  ended  the  sitting,  you  will  agree  with
the  patient  upon  the  hour  when  the  next  one  shall  take
place,  and  you  will  endeavor  to  be  exact.  It  is  advanta-
geous to  magnetize  every  day  at  the  same  hour,  and,  above
all,  not  to  change  the  hour  agreed  upon  for  many  days  in
succession.

Should  the  patient  whose  treatment  you  have  underta-
ken, appear  to  have  any  contagious  disease,  you  will  take
care  to  be  always  active  while  near  him,  so  as  always  to
impart,  and  not  to  receive ;  that  is  to  say,  to  sustain  your
attention,  and  employ  your  will,  that  you  may  constantly
throw  off  the  fluid  from  you.  You  will  also  avoid,  as  much
as  possible,  immediate  contact.  After  each  sitting,  if  you
have  the  opportunity,  you  will  cause  yourself  to  be  magnet-
ized for  some  minutes  with  the  long  pass,  to  free  yourself
from  the  bad  fluid  with  which  you  may  be  charged.  If
you  cannot  do  this,  you  should  pass  your  own  hands  along
your  arms,  to  withdraw  it  and  shake  it  off.  If  you  expe-
rience fatigue,  the  open  air,  and  especially  the  sun,  will  in
a  few  minutes  restore  your  energies.


CHAP.  III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  47

You  should  not  magnetize  when  you  have  eaten  heartily,
and  during  digestion ;  but  it  is  often  useful  to  take  some-
thing before  the  sitting  to  increase  your  strength.  He  who
undertakes  a  treatment,  ought  in  general  to  live  temperate-
ly, avoiding  all  excesses,  and  to  guard  as  much  as  possible
against  all  things  which  tend  to  interrupt  or  disturb  the
exercise  of  his  physical  and  moral  powers.

I  have  laid  it  down  as  a  principle,  that  when  magnetism
produces  crises,  it  is  dangerous  to  interrupt  them.  I  will
now  explain  what  is  meant  by  crises.

Physicians  give  the  name  of  crisis  to  every  sudden
change  which,  supervening  in  a  disease,  modifies  its  prog-
ress or  character,  and  enables  us  to  foresee  the  result
of  it.

These-crises  appear  to  be  the  effort  of  Nature  to  free
herself  of  the  morbific  principle.  They  are  salutary  when
they  operate  completely  ;  they  are  injurious  when  the  pa-
tient has  not  strength  to  sustain  them.  They  are  mani-
fested by  symptoms ;  such  as  a  removal  of  the  seat  of  the
malady,  a  remarkable  change  in  the  pulse,  evacuations,  ex-
cretions, eruptions,  the  gathering  of  humors,  pains  in  cer-
tain parts,  nervous  motions,  &,c.  In  acute  diseases,  these
crises  generally  operate  on  determinate  days,  which  are
called  the  critical  days.

Mesmer  says  there  are  no  cures  without  crises.  If,
by  this,  he  meant  that  the  patient  does  not  recover  his
health  except  by  a  change  of  state,  it  is  so  clear  as  to  re-
quire no  notice.  If  he  meant  that  the  cure  is  wrought  by
sudden  change  manifested  by  evident  symptoms,  it  is  not
always  true  ;  for  many  diseases  are  cured  by  slow  and
gradual  amelioration,  without  any  one's  being  able  to  mark
the  moment  when  they  assumed  a  favorable  character.  A
fever  diminishes  day  by  day,  and  entirely  ceases ;  and  a
hundred  other  diseases  are  soothed  and  disappear  when  no
one  can  determine  the  cause  of  the  cessation,  any  more  than
that  of  the  attack.  But  it  is  true  that,  in  most  acute  dis-
eases, the  cure  takes  place  by  an  evident  change,  which
occurs  all  at  once,  in  the  state  of  the  patient.

Magnetizers  have  given  the  name  of  crises  to  the  re-
markable changes  which  the  action  of  magnetism  produces
upon  those  who  are  subjected  to  it,  or  to  that  state  which
is  different from  the  natural one,  into  which they are


48  OF THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP.  III.

thrown  by  its  influence ;  and  as,  of  all  the  changes  of  state
which  are  produced  by  magnetism,  somnambulism  is  the
most  singular  and  most  characterized,  they  have  generally
designated  it  as  a  crisis,  and  they  have  called  somnambu-
lists crisiacs.

The  expression,  thus  limited,  loses  much  of  the  signifi-
cation usually  given  to  it  by  physicians ;  but  it  suffices  to
be  informed  of  it,  that  it  may  not  be  mistaken.

I  thought  this  explanation  necessary,  in  order  to  let  the
reader  understand  the  principle  I  have  laid  down.  We
come  to  the  application.

The  magnetic  action  has  put  your  patient  into  a  state
different  from  the  ordinary  state,  which  displays  itself  by
divers  symptoms,  such  as  sharp  pains  in  a  part  of  the  body,
the  sense  of  suffocation,  nervous  movement,  spasms,  a  con-
siderable perspiration,  the  impossibility  of  opening  the  eyes,
drowsiness,  sleep,  somnambulism.  You  ought  to  allow  the
crisis  time  to  develope  itself;  to  calm  the  spasm  by  degrees ;
to  concentrate  the  action  upon  the  seat  of  the  pain ;  then  to
draw  it  off,  taking  care  that  nothing  check  the  perspiration  ;
to  dissipate  by  little  and  little  the  drowsiness  or  the  sleep,
if  it  be  too  much  prolonged.  But  you  ought  never  to  wake
your  patient  suddenly,  nor  permit  any  one  to  trouble  him  ;
nor  ought  you  to  quit  him  until  the  singular  state  into
which  you  have  thrown  him  has  entirely  ceased.

The  term  magnetic  state  has  been  given  to  every  state
different  from  the  natural  one,  and  resulting  from  the  mag-
netic influence.  This  word  is  more  general  than  the  word
crisis,  and  is  not  equivocal.  You  ought  to  avoid  leaving
the  patient  so  long  as  he  is  in  this  state,  during  which  a
crisis  really  occurs.  It  is  essential  not  to  disturb  the  pro-
cess of  nature.

When  a  patient  is  put  into  a  profound  sleep,  if  he  is
touched  by  any  one  who  rouses  him  roughly,  he  feels  much
evil  from  it.  I  have  seen  this  thing  produce  convulsions,
or  violent  pains,  render  the  return  of  somnambulism  impos-
sible, and  even  change,  to  such  a  degree,  the  condition  of
the  patient,  that  he  could  not  afterwards  endure  the  action
of  magnetism  ;  and  it  was  necessary  to  leave  his  restoration
to  time  and  regimen.

Persons  who  have  been  for  the  first  time  put  into  som-
nambulism, have been  known  to  lose, all at  once,  the


CHAP.  III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  49

faculty  of  entering  into  it  again,  by  being  rudely  roused
from  it.

General  Rule.  —  Whenever  any  crisis  is  manifested,
the  magnetizer  ought  to  develope  it,  to  second  the  work  of
nature,  and  not  to  quit  the  patient  until  the  crisis  is  at  an
end,  and  until  he  is  brought  back  to  his  natural  state.

It  is  important  to  have  the  magnetizer  free  from  anxiety,
on  account  of  the  pains  which  he  may  excite  in  the  abdo-
men, and  which  are  often  renewed  during  several  sittings :
these  critical  pains  will  disappear,  of  themselves,  when  na-
ture has  reestablished  harmony,  and  triumphed  over  the
obstacle  which  is  the  cause  of  them.

I  ought  here  to  speak  of  an  effect,  happily  very  rare,  but
of  which  it  is  proper  to  forewarn  those  who  are  commen-
cing the  practice,  so  that,  if  it  takes  place,  they  may  not  be
alarmed,  and  commit  any  act  of  imprudence.

It  often  happens  that  the  first  impression  of  magnetism
produces  a  crisis,  accompanied  with  convulsive  motions,
stiffness  of  the  limbs,  and  fits  of  laughing  or  of  crying.

In  this  case,  it  is  essential  that  the  magnetizer  be  not
alarmed.  He  ought  first  to  take  the  thumbs  of  the  patient,
and  tell  him  to  be  calm ;  then  he  should  make  passes  along
the  legs  and  feet,  and  withdraw  himself  in  order  to  magnet-
ize him  at  a  distance  by  the  long  pass.  If  he  keeps  him-
self collected,  suffers  no  one  to  approach,  takes  merely  the
necessary  precautions,  and  trusts  in  his  own  powers,  and
the  action  of  his  will,  the  crisis  will  terminate,  and  the  per-
son magnetized  will  not  be  fatigued,  and  perhaps  retain
but  a  faint  recollection  of  what  has  passed.

If  he  wishes  to  continue  to  magnetize  him,  which  will
be  very  proper,  he  must,  at  the  next  sitting,  as  soon  as  he
has  put  himself  in  communication  by  holding  the  thumbs,
magnetize  him  by  the  long  pass,  with  the  intention  of
soothing,  and  not  augment  the  action  too  fast,  taking  care
not  to  produce  any  violent  shock.  Above  all,  it  is  impor-
tant for  the  magnetizer  to  have  a  mind  free  from  all  inqui-
etude, to  act  as  if  the  patient  were  as  free  from  it  as  him-
self, and  to  banish  all  witnesses  who  might  trouble  him.

The  effect  of  which  I  am  now  speaking  is  so  rare,  ex-
cept in  nervous  and  convulsive  diseases,  that  I  have  not
produced  it  myself  but  three  or  four  times,  in  the  course
of  a  practice  of  thirty -five  years.  I  know  very  well  that  it
5


50  OF THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP.  III.

has  taken  place  many  times,  and  been  attended  with  bad
consequences ;  but  it  was  in  the  hands  of  persons  who
magnetized  to  make  experiments,  to  exhibit  phenomena,
and  not  with  calmness,  and  the  pure  intention  of  doing
good.

I  should  hardly  have  dreamed  of  noticing  this  effect,  if  I
had  not  recently  seen  an  example  of  it,  which  I  am  going
to  give  an  account  of,  the  better  to  make  myself  under-
stood, although  this  work  is  not  intended  to  report  facts  in
support  of  what  I  advance.

I  was  desired,  several  days  ago,  to  instruct  a  lady  who
wished  to  magnetize  her  daughter,  while  laboring  under  a
slight  but  long-seated  disease,  the  cause  of  which  was  un-
known. I  caused  the  mother  to  sit  by  my  side,  and,  to
show  her  the  processes,  I  attempted  to  magnetize  her
daughter,  who  experienced  not  the  slightest  effect.

The  mother  having  told  me  that  she  herself  had  been
once  magnetized,  and  felt  the  necessity  of  closing  her  ^eyes,
I  wished  to  see  if  I  could  act  upon  her.

After  trying  the  long  pass  four  or  five  minutes,  and
placing  my  hand  upon  her  stomach,  she  cried  out,  "  O,
what  an  agreeable  sensation  ! "  One  minute  after,  she  was
seized  with  convulsive  movements;  her  limbs  were  stiffened ;
her  neck  became  swollen  ;  and  she  threw  her  head  back,
uttering  shrieks.  I  took  her  thumbs,  and  repeated  to  her,
several  times,  with  a  tone  of  authority,  "  Be  calm ! "  I  made
passes  along  the  legs.  I  then  withdrew  a  little,  to  magnet-
ize by  the  long  pass.  Finally,  keeping  at  a  distance,  I
attempted  to  make  transverse  passes,  in  order  to  draw  off
and  chase  away  the  fluid.  Her  appearance  then  changed,
but  a  laughing  fit  succeeded,  which  lasted  several  minutes.
She  gradually  became  calm.  She  told  me  she  felt  very
well,  and  that  she  did  not  believe  she  had  suffered.

Now,  if  I  had  called  in  any  one  to  hold  her,  or  if  I  had
been  frightened,  it  is  probable  that  the  lady  thus  magnet-
ized would  have  suffered  for  several  days.

If  it  is  rare  to  produce  convulsive  movements  by  the
method  generally  employed,  after  the  instructions  given  by
M.  de  Puysegur,  it  is  not  rare  to  meet  with  persons  upon
whom  magnetism  produces  a  nervous  irritation,  which
leaves  them,  after  the  sittings,  in  an  uneasy  state  of  feeling.
When  you  meet  with  subjects  who  are  thus  susceptible,  it


VHAP.  III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  51

is  proper  to  make  use  of  the  most  soothing  action,  and  to
act  from  a  distance.  If,  after  three  or  four  sittings,  the
same  effect  takes  place,  you  may  presume  that  magnetism
is  not  good  for  the  patient,  or  that  the  fluid  of  the  mag-
netizer  does  not  agree  with  him,  and  you  ought  not  to
persist  in  it.  One  might  merely  try,  two  or  three  times,
other  magnetizers.

Many  things  remain  to  be  said  about  the  indications
which  may  direct  one  in  the  choice  of  processes.  These
indications  are  of  two  kinds  ;  the  first  are  furnished  by  the
state  of  the  patient,  and  will  naturally  find  their  place  when
I  speak  of  the  application  of  magnetism  to  various  diseases;
the  others  belong  to  the  sensations  which  a  practised  and
attentive  magnetizer  frequently  experiences.  I  shall  not
discourse  of  these  last,  until  I  have  mentioned  the  details
rehtive  to  the  employment  of  magnetism,  to  the  crises  it
produces,  and  to  the  precautions  that  ought  to  be  taken  to
obtain  salutary  results.  But  before  ending  this  chapter,  I
ought  to  say  a  word  upon  the  advantages  one  might  obtain
from  a  very  feeble  magnetic  action,  exerted  by  persons  who
have  no  idea  of  it,  and  by  processes  much  more  simple

We  often  see,  in  the  most  laborious  class  of  people,  pa-
tients to  whom  we  presume  that  magnetism  would  do  the
greatest  good,  and  whose  treatment  it  is  impossible  for  us
to  undertake.  I  will  now  explain  how,  and  to  what  extent,
we  can  make  their  relations  and  friends  supply  our  place
for  their  service.

Although  I  have  thrown  all  the  light  I  could  into  the
explanation  of  the  processes,  it  would  be  useless  to  cause
it  to  be  read  by  peasants  and  laborers,  who  are  never  oc-
cupied in  any  thing  but  their  work.  They  would  not  un-
derstand it,  or  at  least  they  would  not  know  how  to  apply
it.  But  one  might  give  them  verbal  instructions  which
they  will  perfectly  comprehend,  and  which  will  suffice  to
put  them  in  the  way  of  doing  more  or  less  good  to  the  pa-
tient who  inspires  them  with  a  real  interest.  Here  is  the
way  to  effect  it.

Say  to  the  person  who  appears  to  you  to  have  the  great-
est affection  for  the  patient,  and  who  is  with  him  the  most,
that  he  can  soothe  him  by  making  slight  frictions;  that
these  frictions  make  the  blood  circulate;  that  the  heat


52  OP THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP. III.

which  escapes  from  the  hand  is  salutary;  that,  by  holding
the  hand  upon  the  suffering  part,  the  pain  is  lessened ;  and
that,  by  passing  the  hand  over  the  body,  he  may  draw  off
the  disease.  Tell  him  that  one  person  may  communicate
health  to  another  who  is  sick,  as  we  communicate  disease
to  a  well  man,  when  we  ourselves  are  diseased.  You  can
even  assure  him  that  the  heat  produced  by  breathing
through  a  linen  cloth  is  very  good  to  relieve  an  obstruc-
tion ;  and  that  blowing  from  the  mouth  at  a  distance
assists  in  soothing  a  local  inflammation.  You  may  add,
that  the  processes  you  are  teaching  produce  no  effect,
when  the  person  who  employs  them  is  thinking  of  any
thing  else.  If  the  persons  to  whom  you  address  yourself
are  pious,  you  have  a  sure  means  of  sustaining  their  at-
tention, of  directing  their  will,  and  of  exciting  their  con-
fidence. It  is,  to  recommend  to  them  to  pray  to  God  for
the  restoration  of  the  patient,  while  they  are  engaged  in
acting  upon  him.  When  they  are  persuaded  that  you  give
such  advice  through  goodness,  and  that  you  do  not  doubt
its  efficacy,  you  will  have  little  trouble  in  making  them
follow  it.  Then  show  them  how  they  ought  to  put  it  in
practice,  by  magnetizing  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and
gaining  the  assistance  of  the  person  you  are  instructing.
While  you  are  making  this  essay,  guard  well  against  seek-
ing to  produce  any  phenomenon.  Try  only  to  soothe
pains,  to  bring  heat  to  the  extremities,  and  ease  to  the
patient.  Finally,  warn  them  that,  if  the  patient  should
fall  asleep  during  the  operation  of  passing  the  hands  over
him,  they  must  not  awaken  him.  It  is  desirable  that  no
phenomenon  may  be  manifested  so  remarkable  as  to  aston-
ish the  one  who  is  magnetizing  him,  but  merely  such
effects  as  augment  his  confidence.  Among  the  persons
whom  you  have  thus  instructed,  you  will  meet  with  some
who,  after  a  few  days,  will  magnetize  very  well,  without
any  suspicion  of  what  they  are  about.

Ignorant  people  being  often  disposed  to  have  faith  in  the
efficaciousness  of  certain  practices,  one  might  point  out  to
them,  as  a  curative  means,  a  particular  sign,  or  a  form  of
prayer,  objects  which  have  received  the  benediction  of  a
priest,  or  a  sort  of  amulet.  But  this  is  what  no  one  ought
to  do,  because  it  is  practising  deception  upon  them,  and
the  paramount  obligation  is,  to  say  nothing  which  we  do


CHAP. III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  53

not  believe  to  be  true ;  besides,  the  abuse  of  means,  in-
nocent in  themselves,  may  keep  up  ignorance  and  favor
superstition.

I  have  frequently  obtained  the  most  happy  results  from
the  sort  of  instruction  which  I  have  just  proposed.  The
action  of  magnetism,  thus  directed,  is  doubtless  more  feeble
than  it  would  be  in  the  hands  of  one  who  is  acquainted
with  the  power  of  it ;  it  does  not  produce  surprising
effects,  but  it  is  salutary,  and  accompanied  with  no  danger.
I  have  often  seen  a  man  soothing  the  pains  of  a  wife,  and
a  wife  soothing  those  of  her  husband,  by  conforming  with
simplicity  and  confidence  to  the  directions  I  had  given
them. Two  examples  may  be  cited.

1.  Oudin,  an  old  soldier,  whose  case  has  been  de-
Diseases,"  was  paralyzed  from  the  hips  to  the  feet.  He
could  walk  only  by  the  aid  of  crutches,  and  his  legs  trem-
bled continually.  He  had  most  violent  pains  in  the  loins.
He  had  been  treated  unsuccessfully  at  the  Hotel  Dieu,
afterwards  in  the  fourth  dispensary  of  the  Philanthropic
Society,  when  I  directed  his  wife,  although  she  was  very
feeble,  to  make  slight  frictions,  almost  without  touching,
from  his  hips  to  his  feet.  From  the  first  day,  the  feet,
which  were  very  cold  and  white,  grew  warm  and  red,  as
when  sinapisms  are  applied,  and,  a  few  days  after,  the  legs
ceased  to  tremble.  The  pains  in  the  reins  were  always
very  sharp,  when  the  physicians  apprized  me  that  the  dis-
ease originated  in  the  spinal  marrow.  I  then  told  the
woman  to  apply  frictions  along  the  reins,  drawing  towards
the  legs;  and  very  soon  the  pains  were  entirely  removed.
Oudin  is  not  cured  of  his  paralysis,  but  he  suffers  no  more  ;
he  can  even  make  use  of  his  legs,  and  is  infinitely  better.
2.  The  wife  of  the  man  who  takes  care  of  my  apart-
ment, was  confined  to  her  bed  by  violent  pains,  attended
with  fever.  I  went  to  see  her,  and,  perceiving  she  was
very  sensitive  to  the  action  of  magnetism,  I  pointed  out  to
her  husband  how  he  ought  to  proceed  in  order  to  relieve
her.  The  benefit  which  he  at  first  produced,  imparted
confidence  to  him,  and  in  fifteen  days  his  wife  was  cured.
She  then  came  to  thank  me.  I  asked  her  if  she  still  suf-
fered pain.  She  replied,  "  Only  in  the  shoulder.  When
it  was  very  severe,  her  husband  caused  it  to  pass  away  ;
5*


54  OF THE EFFECTS,  [CHAP. Ill,

but  it  returned,  and  he  had  not  time  every  day  to  bestow
care  upon  her."  I  then  placed  my  hand  upon  her  shoul-
der, and  was  much  surprised  to  see  her  close  her  eyes,
and,  a  few  minutes  after,  fall  into  the  state  of  somnam-
bulism. I  spoke  to  her;  and  this  is  a  summary  of  our
conversation.

"Are  you  asleep?"  "Yes,  sir."  "Why  do  you
sleep?"  "I  do  not  know."  "Do  you  see  what  the
matter  is  with  you?  "  (After  a  little  reflection,)  "  Nothing
is  the  matter  with  me  but  the  pain  in  my  shoulder."
"  What  must  be  done  to  relieve  you?"  "  You  are  now
doing  what  will  cure  me."  "In  how  long  a  time?"
"  Three  days."  "  If,  when  you  are  awakened,  I  tell  you
to  come  three  or  four  days  successively,  will  you  do  it  ?  "
"  Yes,  sir."

I  then  caused  this  woman  to  come  four  days.  The  first
and  the  second  day,  somnambulism  was  renewed  ;  the
third  day  she  suffered  no  more,  and  it  was  difficult  to
produce  an  imperfect  sleep.  The  fourth  day  she  expe-
rienced absolutely  nothing;  and  since  that  time  she  has
not  been  ill.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  husband,  who  had  no  idea
of  somnambulism,  did  not  cause  it  to  occur,  although  his
wife  was  much  disposed  to  it.  I  did  not  produce  it  myself
the  day  I  went  to  see  her ;  because  I  did  not  intend  it,  and
because  I  avoided  acting  upon  her  head.

The  kind  of  instruction  which  I  have  given  is  particu-
larly appropriate  to  mothers  who  have  young  children.
What  they  are  taught  seems  to  them  analogous  to  what
they  are  naturally  prompted  to  do,  in  order  to  soothe  them
when  they  suffer ;  and  as  they  identify  themselves  with  the
object  of  their  solicitude,  and  as  nothing  can  withdraw
them  from  the  will  to  do  good,  it  is  enough  to  excite  their
confidence,  and  they  will  unite  all  the  qualities  requisite  to
the  efficacy  of  magnetism.


NOTE.


Among  the  effects  of  the  magnetic  treatment,  there  is  one  of
which  it  is  proper  to  be  premonished,  and  which  I  omitted  to
mention, I  will  now  supply  that  omission.


CHAP. III.]  AND THEIR INDICATIONS.  55

When  a  patient  has  an  issue,  it  frequently  happens  that  it
closes  after  several  sittings.  This  ought  to  give  the  operator  no
anxiety.  It  is  a  proof  that  the  humors  have  taken  another
course.  I  directed  the  treatment  of  a  lady  who  had  been  very
ill  for  many  years.  Two  issues,  which  she  had  been  advised  to
keep  open,  closed  in  a  few  days.  She  was  at  first  alarmed  at  it ;
but  very  soon  she  found  herself  better,  and  in  six  weeks  she  was
restored  to  health.


56


CHAPTER IV.


OF THE ACCESSORY MEANS TO INCREASE THE

MAGNETIC  ACTION,  AND  OF  THOSE  BY  WHICH

THE DIRECT ACTION IS SUPPLIED.

The  magnetizer  can  communicate  his  fluid  to  many
objects,  and  these  objects  become  either  the  conductors  of
his  action,  or  proper  instruments  of  its  transmission,  and
produce  magnetic  effects  upon  persons  with  whom  he  is  in
communication.  He  can  also,  by  means  of  some  one  of
these  auxiliaries,  and  without  fatiguing  himself,  conduct
the  treatment  of  many  patients  at  the  same  time,  when  they
are  not  somnambulists.

These  auxiliaries  are  water,  woollen  and  cotton  cloth,
plates  of  glass,  &c,  which  have  been  magnetized,  mag-
netized trees,  and  magnetic  troughs  or  reservoirs.  The
chain,  or  the  union  of  many  persons  holding  each  other  by
the  hands,  and  in  harmony,  under  the  direction  of  one
magnetizer,  is  also  among  the  auxiliary  means.

Magnetized  water  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  salu-
tary agents  that  can  be  employed.  The  patients  are  made
to  drink  of  it,  when  the  communication  is  established,
either  at  or  between  their  meals.  It  carries  the  magnetic
fluid  directly  into  the  stomach,  and  thence  into  all  the
organs.  It  facilitates  the  crises  to  which  nature  is  dis-
posed, and,  therefore,  sometimes  excites  the  perspiration,
sometimes  the  evacuations,  and  sometimes  the  circulation
of  the  blood.  It  strengthens  the  stomach,  appeases  pains,
and  often  supplies  the  place  of  several  medicaments.

To  magnetize  water,  take  the  vessel  which  contains  it,
and  pass  the  two  hands  alternately  from  the  top  to  the
bottom  of  the  vessel.  Introduce  the  fluid  at  the  opening
of  the  vessel,  by  presenting  the  fingers  close  to  it,  several
times  in  succession. Sometimes  you  may  breathe  upon


CHAP.  IV.] TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  57

the  water,  or  stir  it  round  with  the  thumb.  You  may
magnetize  a  glass  of  water,  by  holding  it  by  the  bottom  in
one  hand,  and,  with  the  other,  throwing  the  fluid  upon
the  glass.

There  is  one  process  which  I  employ  in  preference,  in
order  to  magnetize  a  bottle  of  water,  when  I  am  certain  it
is  not  disagreeable  to  the  person  whom  I  magnetize.  It
consists  in  placing  the  bottle  upon  my  knee,  and  applying
my  mouth  to  the  nose.  I  thus  throw  my  breath  into  the
bottle,  and,  at  the  same  time,  I  make  passes  with  both
hands  upon  all  the  surface.  I  believe  this  process  charges
strongly ;  but  it  is  not  necessary.  It  is  sufficient  to  mag-
netize it  by  the  hands.

One  may  magnetize  a  pitcher  of  water  in  two  or  three
minutes ;  a  glass  of  water  in  one  minute.  It  is  unneces-
sary to  repeat  here  that  the  processes  pointed  out  for  mag-
netizing water,  like  every  thing  else,  would  be  absolutely
useless,  if  they  were  not  employed  with  attention,  and  with
a  determinate  will.

I  have  seen  magnetized  water  produce  effects  so  mar-
vellous, that  I  was  afraid  of  having  deceived  myself,  and
could  not  be  wholly  convinced  until  I  had  made  a  thou-
sand experiments.  Magnetizers,  in  general,  have  not  made
sufficient  use  of  it.  They  would  have  spared  themselves
much  fatigue,  they  could  have  dispensed  with  many  medi-
cines, they  would  have  hastened  the  cure,  if  they  had
accorded  to  this  means  all  the  confidence  it  merits.

In  internal  diseases,  especially,  magnetized  water  acts  in
an  astonishing  manner.  It  carries  the  magnetism  directly
to  the  organs  affected.  You  give,  for  instance,  a  glass  of
magnetized  water  to  one  who  has  a  pain  in  the  side;  some
minutes  after  he  has  drunk  it,  it  seems  to  him  as  if  that
water  had  descended  to  the  seat  of  the  disease.  For  eight
days  in  succession,  I  have  purged  a  patient  with  magnet-
ized water.  The  effect  was  the  same  as  if  she  had  taken
the  ordinary  medicine,  with  this  difference, — the  operation
was  not  attended  with  colic.  Doctor  Roullier  says  that
one  of  his  patients  was  thus  purged  five  or  six  times  a  day
for  more  than  a  month,  and  that  the  evacuations,  the  con-
sequences of  which,  under  ordinary  medicine,  would  have
justly  excited  alarm,  procured  ease  and  a  return  of  health.
I  knew  a  patient  who  was  cured  in  the  same  manner. I


58  TO AUGMENT THE ACTION, AND*  [CHAP.  IV.

have  seen  magnetized  water  entirely  overcome  inactivity
of  the  intestines  which  had  lasted  many  years.

Magnetized  water  is  a  very  great  help  in  convalescence.
It  gives  strength;  it  restores  the  tone  of  the  stomach;  it
renders  digestion  easy ;  it  throws  off  from  the  system,  by
perspiration  or  otherwise,  every  thing  which  resists  the
entire  reestablishment  of  health.

A  man  of  merit,  whom  I  have  now  the  satisfaction  of
numbering  among  my  friends,  was  affected  with  colic  pains
in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  for  which  he  had,  during  seven
years,  in  vain  employed  all  the  remedies  of  medicine.
They  came  on  by  crises  which  lasted  two  or  three  days,
and  returned  every  week.  His  residence  was  sixty  leagues
off,  and  he  came  to  Paris  to  seek  some  further  advice.
He  made  application  to  me.  He  inspired  me  with  much
interest,  and  I  undertook  his  treatment.  After  the  third
sitting,  I  made  him  drink  a  glass  of  magnetized  water.  It
produced  in  his  stomach  a  very  great  heat.  He  told  me  that
it  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  had  drunk  a  glass  of  spirits  of
wine.  Two  minutes  afterwards,  this  heat  was  diffused  through
the  whole  system,  and  was  followed  by  a  gentle  perspi-
ration. From  that  moment  I  caused  him  to  make  use  of
the  magnetized  water;  and  in  fifteen  days  I  had  the  pleas-
ure of  delivering  him  from  all  his  sufferings.  He  then
wished  to  return  home.  "  I  am  very  well,"  said  he,  "  but
I  am  going  to  make  a  decisive  experiment.  I  never  could
travel  in  a  carriage  without  a  great  deal  of  pain."  I  gave
him  two  bottles  of  magnetized  water,  and  advised  him  to
drink  of  them  by  the  way.  He  had  hardly  been  a  half
hour  in  the  carriage,  before  he  began  to  feel  ill ;  he  then
drank  a  glass  of  the  water,  and,  during  more  than  four  hours,
he  felt  no  further  inconvenience.  By  thus  drinking,  every
four  hours,  his  glass  of  water,  he  reached  home  without  the
least  fatigue.  Yet  he  was  not  entirely  cured;  and  there
remains  in  him  the  principle  of  disease,  which  it  is  perhaps
impossible  to  destroy.  But  his  wife  magnetizes  him  when
it  appears  requisite;  and  in  the  evening,  when  he  finds
himself  indisposed,  she  gives  him  a  glass  of  magnetized
water,  which  soothes  him,  and  makes  him  pass  the  night
well.  When  he  is  obliged  to  travel,  the  magnetized  water
always  renders  him  the  same  service :  and  this  experiment
has  been  repeatedly  tried  for  five  years.


CHAP.  IV.] TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  59

Magnetized  water  has  been  employed  successfully  as  a
lotion  for  wounds.  In  affections  of  the  eyes,  it  strengthens
them,  and  generally  produces  a  sensation  like  that  of  water
in  which  have  been  mixed  a  few  drops  of  spirits  of  wine.
Baths  of  magnetized  water  have  often  produced  excellent
effects.

I  have  several  times  made  the  experiment  of  putting  a
bottle  of  magnetized  water  at  the  feet  of  a  patient,  who,
while  in  bed,  was  constantly  cold  at  the  feet;  and,  in
certain  cases,  I  have  seen  it  excite  a  great  deal  of  heat,
and  bring  on  a  perspiration.  The  bottle  acts  here  only  as
every  other  magnetized  object  will.  Nevertheless,  the  result
of  this  experiment  was  remarkable,  because  a  bottle  of
water  ought  to  produce  cold,  and  not  heat,  as  it  often
happens  when  the  patient  is  not  disposed  to  this  sort
of  crisis.

Patients  often  perceive  a  peculiar  taste  in  the  magnet-
ized water,  and  generally  they  distinguish  it  very  well  from
that  which  is  not  magnetized.

I  thought  I  could  see  that  the  taste  which  the  patient
found  in  it  indicated  the  species  of  remedies  of  which  he
had  need.  For  example,  if  he  found  it  bitter,  and  yet
drank  it  with  pleasure,  it  gave  grounds  of  presumption
that  bitter  things  were  salutary  to  him.  I  have  not  made
this  observation  frequently  enough  to  state  it  as  a  fact.  I
mention  it,  because,  in  many  cases,  any  one  can  easily
verify  it.

When  the  magnetizer  cannot  give  his  patient  more  than
two  or  three  sittings  a  week,  magnetized  water  supplies  the
direct  action.  The  use  of  it  must  be  continued  some  time
after  the  treatment  has  ceased.

I  am  certain  that  with  epileptics,  or  persons  attacked
with  a  nervous  disease  which,  to  those  who  are  not
physicians,  appears  to  be  epilepsy,  magnetized  water,  con-
tinued for  many  months  after  some  sittings  of  direct  mag-
netism, has  caused  the  fits  to  disappear  entirely.

I  believe  that  the  water  given  to  the  patient  to  drink
ought  always  to  be  magnetized  by  the  same  person  who
has  undertaken  the  treatment.  This  is  a  consequence  of
the  principle  I  have  laid  down,  that  a  patient  ought  not  to
be  magnetized  by  many  persons  who  have  not  a  perfect
congeniality  with  the  first  magnetizer,  and  that,  the  fluids


60  TO AUGMENT THE ACTION, AND [CHAP. IV..

of  various  individuals  not  having  the  same  quality,  and
not  acting  in  the  same  manner,  we  ought  not  to  unite  their
action.

Some  very  remarkable  phenomena  confirm  this  opinion.
Somnambulists  distinguish  very  well  when  an  object  has
been  magnetized  by  several  persons;  and  this  mixture  of
divers  fluids  is  sometimes  insupportable  to  them.

We  do  not  yet  know  how  long  the  magnetized  water
preserves  its  virtue;  but  it  certainly  retains  it  for  many  days,
and  numerous  facts  seem  to  prove  it  not  to  have  been  lost
after  several  weeks.  Nevertheless,  when  one  lives  near
the  patient,  it  is  proper  to  magnetize  every  day  the  water
or  other  drinks  of  which  he  makes  use.

Some  food,  also,  may  be  magnetized  in  the  same  manner,,
and  especially  liquid  food,  such  as  milk  and  broth.  Many
persons,  with  whom  milk  does  not  agree,  like  it  very  well
when  it  has  been  magnetized.

It  appears  that  magnetized  water  exercises  no  influence
upon  persons  who  have  never  been  magnetized.*  It  gen-
erally produces  marked  effects  only  after  two  or  three
sittings.  In  order  to  have  the  fluid  of  the  magnetizer  act
upon  the  patient,  the  communication  must  be  established;
and  it  is  never  established  except  by  direct  and  immediate
manipulation.

I  have  extended  my  observations  upon  magnetized  water
very  much,  but  those  who  make  use  of  it  with  confidence
will  discover  that  I  have  not  said  enough  upon  the  advan-
tages to  be  derived  from  it.  Yet  I  ought  to  add  that  there
are  some  persons  on  whom  it  appears  to  exert  no  action.
The  number  of  these,  however,  is  very  small.

Magnetized  reservoirs,  or  troughs,  are  vessels  filled  with
magnetized  materials,  and  provided  with  conductors  to
direct  the  fluid  which  they  contain.  The  most  common
mode  of  constructing  them  is  the  following :  —

Take  a  wooden  vessel,  two  feet  high,  larger  or  smaller,

*  Some  observations,  recently  communicated  to  me,  have  con-
vinced me  that  my  conjecture  was  false,  and  that  magnetized  water
does  sometimes  act  in  a  very  efficacious  manner  upon  persons  who
have  never  been  magnetized.  I  can  cite,  among  other  instances,
that  of  a  woman  who  had  been  troubled  for  a  long  time  with  dys-
pepsy,  who  was  promptly  cured  by  this  means.

Objects  magnetized  can  in  the  same  degree  exert  a  very  salutary
action,  although  no  communication  has  been  previously  established.


CHAP.  IV.J TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  61

according  to  the  number  of  persons  to  be  placed  round  it,
having  the  bottom  elevated  an  inch  from  the  floor  by  the
projection  of  the  sides.  Place  an  iron  rod  in  the  centre,  to
serve  as  the  principal  conductor,  having  a  diameter  of  half
an  inch,  or  of  one  inch,  descending  to  within  two  inches  of
the  bottom,  and  rising  above  the  trough  two  or  three  feet.
The  lower  end  of  this  iron  rod  should  be  firmly  fixed  in  a
glass  foot,  or  in  a  jug,  so  that  it  may  retain  its  vertical  po-
sition. Put  into  the  vessel  bottles  of  magnetized  water,  or
other  magnetized  substances  ;  cork  them,  and  run  through
each  cork  a  piece  of  iron  wire,  projecting  two  or  three
inches;  and  arrange  them  in  such  a  manner  that  the  neck
may  be  near  the  central  conductor,  and  communicate  with
it  by  the  iron  wire  which  pierces  the  cork.  Then  place  a
second  range  of  bottles  above  the  first.  If  the  baquet,  or
trough,  is  large,  you  can  put  two  ranges  of  bottles  in  the
same  order  ;  the  neck  of  one  being  placed  in  the  bottom
of  the  other.  This  being  done,  you  will  fill  the  vessel  with
water,  white  sand  well  washed,  pounded  glass,  and  iron
filings,  all  well  magnetized.  Place  upon  it  a  cover  in  two
pieces,  fitted  closely  together,  having  an  opening  in  the
middle  for  the  central  conductor.  At  a  short  distance  from
the  circumference,  at  points  corresponding  to  the  spaces
between  the  bottles,  you  will  pierce  several  holes,  for  the
purpose  of  thrusting  into  the  reservoir  iron  conductors,
bent  and  movable,  which  are  raised  and  lowered  at  pleas-
ure, so  that  one  may  direct  them  against  any  part  of  the
body,  and  pass  the  hands  above  them,  to  draw  off  the  fluid.
And,  lastly,  you  will  attach  to  the  central  conductor  cords
of  cotton  or  wool,  which  the  patients  may  twine  around
their  bodies.

Although  every  thing  that  is  placed  in  the  reservoir  has
been  magnetized  beforehand,  the  reservoir  is  to  be  regular-
ly magnetized,  when  its  construction  has  been  completed,
before  the  cover  is  placed  upon  it.  When  this  operation
is  first  performed,  it  takes  a  considerable  time  —  nearly  an
hour.  It  is  even  proper  to  repeat  it  three  or  four  days  in
succession.  But  when  once  the  reservoir  has  been  well
charged,  it  is  readily  charged  again,  by  the  magnetizer's
holding  the  central  conductor  in  his  hands  several  minutes.
I  do  not  know  whether  reservoirs  filled  with  water  are  more
easily  charged  with  the  magnetic  fluid,  than  those  which
6


62  TO AUGMENT THE ACTION,  AND  [CHAP.  IT.

contain  between  the  bottles  only  pounded  glass,  iron  filings,.
or  simply  sand ;  but  it  is  certain  that  these  last  are  more
proper  and  convenient,  and  for  this  reason  I  give  them  the
preference.  It  is  difficult  to  prevent  the  water's  escaping
from  the  haquet,  and  it  might  become  foul  in  the  course  of
time.  The  same  magnetizer  ought  always  to  charge  the
reservoir.

I  will  say  no  more  about  the  large  magnetic  reservoirs,
because  we  do  not  have  recourse  to  them  except  when  we
wish  to  magnetize  a  great  number;  in  which  case  we  ought
to  have  a  great  deal  of  leisure,  and  devote  ourselves  to  mag-
netism. He  who  does  this  ought  to  procure  the  principal
works  published  on  this  subject,  and  to  study  them  with
care.

But  a  large  bottle  filled  with  magnetized  water,  furnished
with  an  iron  wire  inserted  into  the  cork  and  forming  a
curvature  of  from  three  to  six  inches,  terminated  by  a  knob,
is  a  little  reservoir  which  keeps  up  the  magnetic  action,  and
may  be  very  useful.  The  magnetizer  charges  this  bottle
occasionally  without  taking  out  the  cork.

Some  magnetizers  think  that  the  fluid  which  comes
from  the  reservoir  brings  with  it  an  emanation  of  the  sub-
stances which  are  contained  in  it.  Many  facts  seem  to
authorize  this  opinion  :  it  is  not  yet  proved,  but  it  remains
a  subject  for  experiment.  You  might  put  into  the  reservoir
aromatic  plants,  carminative  or  tonic,  according  to  the  end
proposed.  You  might  also  try  whether  a  bottle  well  mag-
netized, and  filled  with  medicinal  matters,  would  act  more
efficaciously  than  one  of  pure  water.  Such  experiments
should  not  be  neglected.

The  water  contained  in  bottles  placed  upon  the  reser-
voir, and  put  in  communication,  by  an  iron  wire,  with  the
central  conductor,  becomes  magnetized  of  itself.

You  might  place  on  the  top  of  the  central  conductor  a
small  cap  of  iron  or  of  wood,  in  which  you  have  put  silk  or
cotton,  which  will  become  very  strongly  magnetized.

We  now  come  to  discourse  of  magnetized  objects,  of  the
mode  of  using  them,  and  of  the  effects  they  produce.

Tissues  wrought  in  silk  or  cotton  thread,  the  leaf  of  a
tree,  plates  of  glass,  gold,  or  steel,*  and  other  magnetized

*  Metals  whose  oxides  are  dangerous  must  not  be  used  for  this
purpose.


CHAP.  IV.] TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  63

objects,  placed  upon  the  seat  of  the  pain,  are  often  sufficient
to  ease  it;  but  they  produce  no  effect  until  the  magnetic
action  has  been  established.  I  have  very  often  seen  mag-
netized socks  produce  a  warmth  of  the  feet  which  could
not  have  been  obtained  by  any  other  means.  These  socks
preserve  their  virtue  during  four  or  five  days.  It  then
grows  feeble,  and  is  lost.

A  magnetized  handkerchief,  carried  upon  the  stomach,
sustains  the  action  during  the  interval  of  the  sittings,  and
often  calms  spasms  and  nervous  movements.  Sometimes
the  headache  is  dissipated  by  enveloping  the  head  during
the  night  with  a  magnetized  bandage.

I  ought  to  speak  here  of  the  use  which  is  made  of  plates
of  glass  magnetized,  both  because  I  have  often  succeeded,
by  means  of  them,  in  calming,  with  surprising  ease,  local
pirns  in  the  viscera,  and  because  their  application  is  usu-
ally accompanied  with  a  very  remarkable  phenomenon.
Dr.  Roullier  is,  I  think,  the  first  that  has  mentioned  this
phenomenon  ;  although  it  had  been  observed  by  other
magnetizers.  He  thus  expresses  himself :  "In  some  cir-
cumstances, I  have  caused  my  patients  to  wear  a  piece  of
magnetized  glass  upon  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I  prefer  a
lenticular  shape,  about  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  at-
tached to  the  neck  by  a  ribbon.  This,  when  magnetized,
will  commonly  adhere  to  the  skin,  and  remain  there  several
hours."  When  it  has  produced  its  effect,  it  falls,  and  will
not  again  adhere  until  magnetized  anew.  The  same  thing
takes  place  when  we  make  use  of  a  piece  of  steel,  or  the
leaf  of  a  tree.

Some  persons  are  very  impressible,  and  fear  that  any
other  than  their  own  magnetizer  should  act  upon  them.
A  magnetized  object  often  suffices  to  repel  all  foreign  in-
fluence. I  have  seen  many  examples  of  it,  which  could
not  be  attributed  to  the  imagination.*

It  now  remains  to  speak  of  the  chain  —  a  method  formerly
much  used,  and  which  is  the  most  effectual  of  all  for  aug-
menting the  power  of  magnetism,  and  putting  it  in  circula-
tion, but  which,  though  it  has  great  advantages,  has  also
great  inconveniences. I  am  going  to  explain  what  it  is,

*  To  produce  this  effect,  a  gold  ring  is  worn  on  the  finger  of  the
patient,  or  a  medallion,  set  in  gold  or  in  crystal,  is  placed  about  the
neck.


64  TO AUGMENT THE ACTION,  AND  [CHAP.  IV.

how  it  is  formed,  and  under  what  circumstances  and  con-
ditions it  may  be  useful.

If  you  have  near  you  many  persons,  in  good  health,  who
have  confidence  in  magnetism,  who  feel  an  interest  in  the
patient,  and  who  wish  to  aid  you  in  the  cure,  arrange  them
in  a  circle.  Let  them  all  take  each  other's  hands,  holding  on
by  the  thumbs,  so  that  he  who  is  on  the  right  of  the  patient
may  touch  him  with  the  left  hand,  and  he  who  is  on  the
left  may  touch  him  with  the  right  hand.  You  will  form  a
part  of  this  chain,  and,  when  you  wish  to  make  passes  with
your  hands,  the  two  persons  by  the  side  of  you  will  place
their  hands  upon  your  shoulders,  or  upon  your  knees.  If
you  place  yourself  in  the  centre,  your  two  neighbors  will
approach  each  other  so  that  the  chain  be  not  interrupted.
The  magnetic  fluid  will  be  soon  in  circulation,  the  patient
will  feel  the  effect  strongly,  and  your  power  will  be  consid-
erably augmented.

But  to  have  a  chain  good,  it  is  necessary  that  all  who
compose  it  should  be  thoughtful  only  of  the  patient,  and
unite  constantly  with  you  in  intention  :  without  this  condi-
tion, it  is  more  injurious  than  beneficial.  Some  persons
in  the  chain  often  feel  the  effects  of  the  magnetic  action ;
they  faint,  or  go  to  sleep.  But  that  does  not  counteract
the  effects  so  much  as  a  single  act  of  inattention.

You  should  avoid  admitting  into  the  chain  patients  sus-
ceptible of  nervous  irritation.  It  would  be  dangerous  to
put  persons  there  who  are  tainted  with  contagious  dis-
eases.

The  chain  might  be  made  use  of  in  families,  when  there
are  to  be  found  from  four  to  six  persons  who  take  a  lively
interest  in  the  patient,  and  who  desire  that  magnetism  may
be  of  advantage  to  him.

The  chain  should,  as  far  as  possible,  be  composed  of  the
same  persons.  If  a  new  individual  be  admitted  into  it,
especially  after  it  has  been  once  formed,  he  ought  first  to
be  placed  in  communication.

The  baquet  and  the  chain  have  often  been  employed  at
the  same  time.  This  is  done  after  arranging  the  patients
round  the  reservoir.  They  are  directed  to  form  a  chain.
For  the  folio  wing  reasons,  I  do  not  approve  of  this  method  :  —

When  several  patients  meet  round  the  haquet,  it  is  for
the  purpose  of  receiving  the  action  of  the  magnetic  fluid


CHAP.  IV.] TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  65

there  concentrated,  without  any  direct  communication
between  them  ;  but  when  a  chain  is  formed,  it  is  that  the
patient  may  receive  the  influence  of  all  the  persons  who
compose  it ;  whence  it  follows  that  all  of  them  ought  to  be
in  good  health.  These  two  means  should,  therefore,  be
employed  separately,  and  in  different  circumstances  :  they
do  not  agree  equally  with  all  patients,  and  each  one  has  its
advantages  and  its  inconveniences.  This  subject  demands
a  few  additional  observations.

Although  the  haquet  has  a  milder  and  slower  action  than
direct  manipulation,  persons  attacked  with  severe  diseases,
which  do  not  spring  from  morbid  inaction,  are  exposed  to
crises  which  should  be  soothed  apart.  When  these  crises
occur,  they  may  have  influence  upon  the  other  patients,  and
even  be  communicated  by  sympathy  or  by  imitation.  We
know  how  violent  these  crises  may  become,  when  we
remember  how  they  were  in  the  time  of  Mesmer.  It  is
true,  we  did  not  then  understand  how  to  calm  them,  and
the  same  accidents  did  not  take  place  at  Strasburg;  yet  it  is
always  proper  to  take  precautions ;  and  if  you  assemble  a
large  number  around  the  baquet,  it  is  necessary  to  have
several  magnetizers,  and  one  of  them  should  have  an
acquaintance  with  medicine,  I  think  then  that,  in  the
domestic  practice  of  magnetism,  it  is  not  necessary  to
make  use  of  the  baquet  for  nervous  affections,  but  solely
for  such  diseases  as  intermittent  fevers,  dropsy,  enlarge-
ments of  the  glands,  rheumatic  pains,  debility,  sluggish
circulation,  &c.  In  these  it  would  be  very  useful  to  the
patient  to  go  every  day  and  charge  himself  with  magnetism
at  the  baquet,  previously  to  being  magnetized  by  direct
manipulation.

As  to  the  chain,  several  conditions  are  requisite,  which
are  often  difficult  to  fulfil.  1st.  All  who  compose  it  ought
to  be  in  good  health.  2d.  They  should  be  such  as  have
an  interest  in  the  sick  person.  3d.  No  one  of  them  should
interrupt  the  action,  either  by  his  curiosity,  or  by  the
desire  of  exerting  a  particular  influence.

All  these  conditions  having  been  fulfilled  in  some  treat-
ments which  I  have  pursued,  I  have  obtained  from  it  very
energetic  and  very  salutary  effects ;  but  when  one  of  these
conditions  fails,  I  have  known  it  to  be  more  injurious
than  useful.

6*


66  TO AUGMENT THE ACTION, AND [CHAP.  IV*

In  diseases  of  the  lymphatic  system,  in  those  of  inaction,
&c,  it  is  doubtless  beneficial  to  have  recourse  to  the  chain,
if  it  be  possible  to  form  a  good  one.  In  disorders  of  the
nervous  system,  or  of  certain  viscera,  disorders  whose
treatment  exhibits  crises,  and  especially  in  those  where
somnambulism  takes  place,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that
the  patient  should  have  near  him  only  his  magnetizer,  and
the  person  he  has  chosen  from  the  commencement  to  assist
at  the  sittings.

It  is  essential  that  the  most  perfect  harmony  should  reign
in  a  magnetic  treatment;  and  this  cannot  be  obtained
unless  all  things  are  directed  by  a  single  will,  to  which  all
the  others  are  in  unison.  Hence  it  follows  that,  in  a
magnetic  treatment,  whatever  may  be  the  number  of  the
patients,  and  of  magnetizers,  there  ought  to  be  but  one
chief,  to  whom  all  those  who  cooperate  in  the  action  shall
be  in  submission  during  the  sitting.  If  he  who  has  estab-
lished the  treatment,  and  charged  himself  with  its  direc-
tion, has  for  cooperators  persons  better  informed  or  more
powerful  than  himself,  he  must  not  invite  them  to  take  the
lead ;  and  they  must  be  very  cautious  not  to  exert  a  direct
influence.  They  will  regard  themselves  merely  as  the  aids
and  the  instruments  of  the  leader,  and  must  magnetize
under  his  direction,  following  the  processes  which  he
points  out  to  them.  The  observance  of  this  rule  is  espe-
cially important  when  there  are  somnambulists.  I  speak
of  this  in  my  chapter  on  somnambulism.

I  ought  not  to  finish  this  chapter  without  saying  a  word
of  an  instrument  of  which  the  magnetizers  made  much
use  in  former  times,  and  of  which  they  make  little  use  at
present,  because  of  the  pleasantries  to  which  it  gave  occa-
sion. It  is  a  steel  wand,  in  the  form  of  a  long  cone,  ten
or  twelve  inches  in  length,  about  five  lines  in  diameter  at
one  end,  and  two  lines  at  the  other.  It  is  held  in  such  a
way  as  to  have  the  large  end  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  and
the  straightened  fingers  touch  it  at  their  extremities.  This
is  used  to  direct  the  fluid  at  a  distance,  to  fix  the  action  of
the  five  united  fingers  upon  any  particular  point.  It  is  also
used  in  magnetizing  water  ;  which  is  done  by  plunging  it
into  a  vase  half  its  length,  and  stirring  it  round  in  the
water.  This  wand  is  not  necessary,  but  it  is  often  conve-
nient, and  sometimes  very  useful. I  have  seen  a  patient  who


CHAP.  IV.] TO  SUPPLY  THE  DIRECT  ACTION.  67

felt  in  his  chest  all  the  movements  that  I  made  while
pointing  it  towards  him.  I  have  seen  others  who  found
the  action  too  powerful.

Some  magnetizers  make  use  of  wands  of  glass  in  the
shape  of  a  spindle :  they  are  as  good  as  steel  wands ;  per-
haps they  are  even  preferable.*

Some  have  occasionally  employed  iron  wands  artificially
magnetized,  like  the  compass  needle;  and  they  think  that
they  act  with  more  power ;  but  they  certainly  do  not  agree
with  all  patients.  I  do  not  recommend  them.  The  wand
is  designed  to  direct  and  concentrate  the  magnetic  fluid,
and  not  to  modify  it  by  a  foreign  influence.

The  magnetizer  who  makes  use  of  the  wand  ought  to
have  one  of  his  own,  and  not  lend  it  to  any  person,  lest
it  should  be  charged  with  different  fluids  —  a  precaution
more  important  than  it  is  commonly  thought  to  be.

*  The  conducting  power  of  glass  wands  evidently  proves  that  there
is  no  analogy  between  the  fluid  of  animal  magnetism  and  the  elec-
tric or  galvanic  fluids.


68


CHAPTER V.


OF  SOMNAMBULISM,  AND  OF  THE  USE  TO  BE  MADE
OF  IT.

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  certain  persons  walk,  speak,
and  act,  in  their  sleep;  and  that  when  they  are  awakened,
they  have  no  recollection  of  what  they  have  been  doing
These  persons  are  called  somnambulists ;  that  is,  sleep-
walkers; and  the  state  in  which  they  are,  is  called  som-
nambulism. The  disposition  to  walk  in  the  sleep  has  been
considered  as  a  nervous  affection,  which  we  should  endeavor
to  counteract,  because  of  the  accidents  which  might  spring
from  it.

The  apparent  resemblance  between  spontaneous  som-
nambulism, and  the  crises  which  are  often  produced  by
magnetism,  has  induced  men  to  call  the  latter  magnetic
somnambulism.  A  more  appropriate  name  might  have
been  found ;  but  as  this  has  been  received  for  forty  years,
it  is  useless  to  change  it.

Magnetic  somnambulism,  which  we  call,  simply,  som-
nambulism, because  that  term  cannot  be  equivocal  in  this
work,  is  a  mode  of  existence  during  which  the  person  who
is  in  it,  appears  to  be  asleep.  If  his  magnetizer  speaks  to
him,  he  answers  without  waking  ;  he  can  also  execute
various  movements,  and  when  he  returns  to  the  natural
state,  he  retains  no  remembrance  of  what  has  passed.  His
eyes  are  closed  ;  he  generally  understands  those  only  who
are  put  in  communication  with  him.  The  external  organs
of  sense  are  all,  or  nearly  all,  asleep ;  and  yet  he  experi-
ences sensations,  but  by  another  means.  There  is  roused
in  him  an  internal  sense,  which  is  perhaps  the  centre  of
the  others,  or  a  sort  of  instinct,  which  enlightens  him  in
respect  to  his  own  preservation.  He  is  subject  to  the  in-
fluence of  his  magnetizer,  and  this  influence  may  be  either


CHAP.  V.]  SOMNAMBULISM.  69

useful  or  injurious,  according  to  the  disposition  and  the
conduct  of  the  magnetizer.*

Somnambulism  presents  phenomena  infinitely  varied.  A
description  of  them  may  be  found  in  a  great  number  of
works  published  upon  this  subject.  This  is  not  the  place
of  obtaining  the  most  useful  results  from  this  crisis,  with-
out exposing  one's  self  to  the  least  inconvenience.

Of  all  the  discoveries  which  have  excited  attention,  from
the  remotest  antiquity,  that  of  somnambulism  certainly
gives  us  the  most  insight  into  the  nature  and  the  faculties
of  man.  The  phenomena  to  which  it  has  drawn  our  atten-
tion, demonstrate  the  distinction  of  two  things ;  the  two-
fold existence  of  the  internal  and  the  external  man  in  a
single  individual.  They  offer  a  direct  proof  of  the  spiritu-
ality of  the  soul,  and  an  answer  to  all  the  objections  raised
against  its  immortality.  They  make  evident  the  truth
known  to  ancient  sages,  and  so  well  expressed  by  M.  de
Bonald,  that  man  is  an  intelligence  served  by  organs.  This
advantage  cannot  be  too  highly  appreciated,  especially  in
an  age  when  audacious  minds  do  not  fear  to  employ  the
researches  of  physiology  to  shake  the  certainty  of  the  inte-
rior sentiment,  which  reveals  to  us  the  dignity  of  man,  his
supremacy  in  the  order  of  creation,  and  his  moral  liberty  —
a  sentiment  which  is  the  basis  of  social  life,  and  which
engages  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  by  pointing  out  to  us,  in
a  future  life,  the  developement  of  our  earthly  existence,  and
the  recompense  of  sacrifices  made  to  obey  the  dictates  of
conscience.  On  the  other  hand,  somnambulism  makes
known  to  us  the  means  of  curing  diseases  which  are  cura-
ble, and  of  relieving  those  which  are  not.  It  serves  to
rectify  the  errors  of  medicine  as  well  as  those  of  metaphys-
ics. Finally,  it  points  out  the  origin  of  a  great  number  of
opinions  prevalent  anterior  to  the  experiments  which  have
confirmed  their  correctness ;  and  it  restores  to  the  order
of  nature  a  multitude  of  facts  which  philosophers  have
disdained  to  examine,  either  because  ignorance  and  credu-
lity had  altered  some  of  their  circumstances,  or  because,  in
the  dark  ages,  they  were  made  to  serve  as  the  foundation
of  superstition.

*  There  are  exceptions  to  the  character  here  given,  but  they  are
extremely  rare.


70  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V.

The  discovery  of  somnambulism  having  been  made,  or
rather  renewed,  in  our  time,  without  our  being  prepared
for  it,  and  the  application  which  can  be  made  of  it  demand-
ing a  meditative  mind,  great  prudence,  severe  manners,
religious  dispositions,  gravity  of  character,  positive  knowl-
edge, and  other  qualities  which  do  not  accord  with  the
amiable  levity  and  excitable  imagination  of  Frenchmen,  it
may  be  doubted  whether  its  sudden  propagation  has  not
produced  as  much  evil  as  good,  and  whether  it  would  not
have  been  better  that  this  marvellous  phenomenon  had  not
been  at  first  observed,  and  that  people  had  confined  them-
selves merely  to  magnetism  as  Mesmer  taught  it,  and  as
many  persons  before  him  practised  it,  without  knowing
whether  they  employed  a  particular  agent,  or  a  faculty
common  to  all  men.  But  it  was  impossible  that  they  who
devoted  themselves  to  the  practice  of  magnetism,  should
not  be  struck,  sooner  or  later,  with  a  phenomenon  which
would  not  fail  to  present  itself.  It  was  equally  impossible
that  they  should  not  have  been  seized  with  enthusiasm  at
the  sight  of  the  wonderful  things  which  accompany  it,  and
made  it  a  secret.  It  was,  finally,  impossible  that  men  who
were  strangers  to  the  true  principles  of  magnetism,  should
not  seek  to  produce  the  same  wonderful  things,  to  exercise
their  power  and  satisfy  their  curiosity,  and  should  know
how  to  confine  themselves  within  proper  bounds,  to  avoid
dangers  and  errors.  Hence  it  has  resulted  that  magnetism
has  often  been  employed,  not  to  cure  diseases,  but  to  pro-
cure somnambulism.  And  as  somnambulists  have  faculties
and  means  of  knowledge  which  we  have  not,  people  have
imagined  they  ought  to  know  every  thing,  and  have  con-
sulted them  as  oracles.  If,  instead  of  yielding  to  enthusi-
asm, they  had  examined  the  phenomena  by  the  lights  of
physiology,  they  would  have  perceived  the  danger  of  push-
ing too  far  a  state  during  which  an  inexplicable  change
occurs  in  the  functions  of  the  nervous  system,  in  the  play
of  the  organs,  and  in  the  manner  of  perceiving  and  trans-
mitting sensation  ;  that  the  more  the  sensibility  is  exalted,
the  more  ought  they  to  be  on  their  guard  against  what
might  increase  that  exaltation  ;  that  at  the  extremity  of  the
course  which  Nature  has  marked  out  for  herself,  and  which
she  has  strength  to  run  over,  preserving  the  harmony  of  all
the  faculties  and  the  control  of  reason,  an  immense  field  is


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  71

open  to  the  imagination,  in  which  illusions  take  the  place
of  truth  ;  that  somnambulism  is  only  a  transient  crisis,  of
which  it  is  necessary  to  make  use  without  wandering  from
the  design  for  which  nature  has  produced  it ;  and  that
somnambulism  too  much  prolonged,  would  give  us  habits
which  would  not  be  in  accordance  with  our  ordinary  desti-
nation, and  of  itself  would  become  a  disease.

I  will  not  insist  upon  these  considerations,  the  develope-
ment  of  which  would  carry  me  to  a  great  extent.  I  pro-
pose to  teach  what  it  is  necessary  to  know  in  practice,
without  entering  into  any  discussion.

Somnambulism  is  known ;  it  presents  itself  often  in  the
magnetic  practice  :  let  us  see  what  are  the  means  of  always
deriving  from  it  the  greatest  advantage,  and  avoiding  all
misuse  of  it.

The  first  advice  I  shall  give  is,  that  you  never  seek  to
produce  somnambulism,  but  to  let  it  come  naturally,  in
order  to  profit  by  it  when  it  takes  place.

Many  magnetizers,  in  order  to  produce  it,  charge  the
head  very  much  ;  and,  by  this  means,  they  often  succeed
in  obtaining  a  forced  slumber,  a  reflux  of  blood  towards
the  brain,  and  partial  crises,  which  are  of  no  utility.  This
method  is  not  without  danger.  It  is  much  better  simply  to
employ  magnetism  by  the  long  pass,  and  not  to  charge  the
head  more  than  the  other  parts.  If  nature  is  disposed  to
this  crisis,  the  fluid  will,  of  itself,  be  carried  to  the  brain,
and  the  tendency  to  somnambulism  will  be  manifested  by
the  patient's  being  in  a  state  of  tranquillity,  by  his  closing
his  eyes,  and  by  his  sleeping.  You  may  then,  without  any
inconvenience,  pass  the  extremities  of  your  fingers  five  or
six  times  at  a  short  distance  before  his  eyes,  in  order  to
give  more  intensity  to  his  sleep.

You  may  then  ask  him  how  he  is,  or  whether  he  sleeps
well.  Then  one  of  these  three  things  will  take  place  —  he
will  wake,  he  will  not  answer,  or  he  will  answer.

If  he  awakes,  somnambulism  has  not  taken  place,  and
you  must  not  think  any  more  respecting  it  in  the  course
of  that  sitting.  If  he  continues  to  sleep,  without  answer-
ing, there  is  reason  to  suppose  he  is  entering  into  the  som-
nambulic state.  If  he  answers  without  waking,  and,  after
his  waking,  has  no  recollection  of  your  speaking  to  him,
the  somnambulism  is  real.


72  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V,

In  case  the  patient  continues  to  sleep  without  hearing
you,  you  will  continue  to  magnetize  him  as  I  have  pointed
out;  and  you  will  wait,  before  you  put  him  a  second  ques-
tion, until  the  moment  before  that  at  which  you  think  the
sitting  should  be  terminated.

If  he  makes  no  more  answer  to  this  question  than  to
the  first,  you  will  leave  him  to  sleep  tranquilly ;  or,  if  yoi*
judge  it  necessary  to  rouse  him,  you  may  merely  make
transversal  passes  at  a  distance,  bidding  him  to  awake,  in
a  gentle  voice,  and  not  commanding  him  with  a  tone  of
authority.

If  the  patient  makes  a  sign  that  he  understands  you,  yet
without  answering,  you  will  beware  of  urging  him  to  speak.
It  is  a  happy  thing  for  him  to  be  by  himself,  to  collect
himself,  and  accustom  himself  to  his  new  condition,  and  to
arrange  his  ideas.  You  will  merely  ask  him  to  let  you
know,  by  a  motion  of  the  head,  whether  he  desires  to  be
awakened,  or  to  sleep  longer;  and  you  will  conform  your-
self as  much  as  possible  to  his  wish.

You  will  continue  in  the  same  manner  during  the  suc-
ceeding sittings.  Yet  if  this  state  of  mute  somnambulism
is  prolonged,  you  will  inquire  of  him  whether  he  hopes
very  soon  to  acquire  the  faculty  of  speaking  ;  whether  you
magnetize  him  well ;  if  he  finds  himself  better  for  it ;  and
you  may  make  all  inquiries  of  him  which  he  can  answer
by  a  sign  and  without  effort.

Have  a  perfect  command  of  yourself,  be  patient,  and  be-
ware of  employing  your  will  to  influence  your  patient  to
speak,  or  to  make  his  somnambulism  more  profound.
Have  but  one  intention,  entertain  but  one  wish,  —  that  of
facilitating  the  cure ;  and  leave  Nature  to  employ,  of  her-
self, the  increase  of  power  which  you  give  him.

It  may  happen  that  his  somnambulism  will  not  proceed
farther  ;  but  this  is  of  no  consequence  ;  it  is  not  your  object
to  render  him  a  somnambulist,  but  to  cure  him.  If  som-
nambulism were  necessary,  —  if  his  constitution  rendered
him  susceptible  of  it,  —  this  state  would  spontaneously  de-
velope  itself.  Merely  observe  what  peculiar  precautions
this  demi-somnambulism  requires;  such  as,  not  suffering
those  to  approach  him  who  are  not  in  communication  with
him,  not  to  oppose  him,  not  to  awaken  him  roughly,  and
to  continue  to  occupy  yourself  about  him.


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  73

If  your  patient  speaks,  and  to  the  question,  "  Do  you
sleep?"  answers,  "Yes,"  he  is  a  somnambulist;  but  it
does  not  follow  that  he  is  endowed  with  clairvoyance.

Some  persons  have  distinguished  many  degrees  or  shades
of  somnambulism.  It  is  useless  to  occupy  your  time  with
all  that,  and  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  enter  into  this
examination,  to  point  out  to  you  the  surest  and  the  most
simple  path,  and  to  instruct  you  how  to  draw  all  the  a<i-
vantages  possible  from  somnambulism,  at  whatever  degree
it  may  occur.

When  your  somnambulist  shall  have  given  an  affirmative
answer  to  your  first  question,  "  Are  you  asleep?"  you  may
address  others  to  him.  These  questions  should  be  simple,
clear,  well  adapted,  and  concise  :  they  should  be  made
slowly,  with  an  interval  between  them,  leaving  the  som-
nambulist all  the  time  he  wishes  to  reflect  upon  them.  If
you  have  been  able  to  suppress  your  curiosity,  which  is
always  more  or  less  injurious;  if  you  do  not  suffer  yourself
to  be  astonished  to  see  one  who  is  asleep  answer  you  with
propriety ;  if  you  have  no  other  end  in  view  but  the  doing
of  good;  if  you  do  not  think  of  collecting  observations, —  you
will  put  only  those  questions  which  are  necessary.  The
response  made  to  the  first  one  will  suggest  others  to  you,
always  in  relation  to  the  means  of  curing  the  patient.

The  following  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  series  of
questions  to  be  first  put  to  your  somnambulist.

"  Do  you  feel  well  ?  "

"Does  my  manner  of  proceeding  agree  with  you?"

"  Will  you  point  out  any  other  mode?"

"  How  long  shall  I  let  you  sleep?  "

<{  How  shall  I  wake  you  ?  "

il  When  shall  I  magnetize  you  again  ?  "

*l  Have  you  any  directions  to  give  me?  "

"  Do  you  think  I  shall  succeed  in  curing  you  ?  "

These  questions  will  assuredly  be  enough  for  the  first
day,  when  somnambulism  has  been  induced.  At  the  next
sitting,  it  ought  to  be  induced  sooner;  but  you  will  not  try
to  bring  it  on  immediately,  by  charging  the  head.  You
will  first  employ  magnetism  by  the  long  pass;  and,  when
your  somnambulist  assures  you  that  he  is  sleeping,  you
will  let  him  have  a  little  time  longer  to  collect  himself.

Then,  after  having  repeated  some  of  the  preceding  ques-
7


74  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP. V.

tions,  you  may  ask  him  whether  he  sees  where  his  disease
he  says  no,  you  may  persuade  him  to  look  for  it,  observing
to  keep  his  attention  to  the  point.  You  will  take  care  not
to  form  your  questions  in  such  a  manner  as  to  suggest
replies  which  he  can  make  without  reflection,  through
indolence,  or  the  desire  of  pleasing  you  ;  you  must  let  him
be  occupied  wholly  with  himself,  with  his  disease,  and
with  the  means  of  cure.

When  he  has  once  explained  to  you  what  he  thinks  of
the  nature  of  his  disease,  of  its  causes,  of  its  consequences,
of  the  crises  he  expects,  you  should  ask  him  to  search  out
the  remedial  means  proper  to  be  pursued  in  connection
with  magnetism.  You  should  listen  to  him  attentively ;
you  should  take  notes  of  what  he  tells  you,  if  you  are  fearful
of  forgetting  it.  You  should  ask  him  whether  he  is  very
sure  of  the  effect  which  his  prescriptions  will  produce ;
and  if  in  them  there  is  found  any  thing  which  appears
to  you  improper  ^  you  should  make  known  to  him  your
objections.

You  should  especially  take  care  to  inform  yourself  well
of  the  crises  which  are  to  bring  on  the  cure,  that  you  may
not  be  alarmed  at  such  as  he  has  announced,  and  that  you
may  know  well  the  mode  of  soothing  them.

You  must  be  exact  in  magnetizing  him  at  the  hour  indi-
cated by  him,  and  by  the  processes  which  he  judges  most
appropriate.  You  must  ask  him  what  things  you  ought  to
let  him  forget,  what  things  it  is  proper  to  warn  him  of,  and
what  means  it  is  proper  to  take  to  induce  him  to  follow  out
his  own  prescriptions.

When  he  is  awake,  you  should  let  him  be  entirely  igno-
rant of  his  being  a  somnambulist,  and  not  let  him  suspect
that  he  has  spoken,  provided  he  has  not  of  himself  ex-
pressly recommended  that  you  should  inform  him  of  it,
either  to  inspire  him  with  confidence  in  regard  to  any
thing  that  disturbs  him,  or  to  induce  him  to  follow  a  course
of  regimen,  or  to  do  something  useful,  which,  when  he  is
awake,  is  counter  to  his  inclination.  But,  in  this  case,  you
will  merely  tell  him  what  he  believed  absolutely  necessary
to  know,  and  you  will  entreat  him  not  to  speak  about  it  to
any  person.  It  is  very  rare  that  a  patient  has  the  curiosity
to  be  informed  of  what  he  has  said  in  a  state  of  somnam-


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  75

bulism.  I  believe,  also,  that  it  never  happens,  when  the
raagnetizer,  during  somnambulism,  has  forbidden  him  to
meddle  with  it  after  waking.

I  have  indicated  the  kind  of  conversation  you  ought  to
hold  with  your  somnambulist.  I  cannot  insist  too  much
upon  a  point  on  which  chiefly  depends  the  developement
and  the  direction  of  his  faculties.  I  cannot  give  any
advice  in  relation  to  the  details,  because  it  would  not  be
equally  applicable  to  all  cases.  But  there  is  a  general  rule
from  which  you  ought  never  to  depart;  which  is,  never,  on
any  account,  to  permit  any  question  of  curiosity,  any  at-
tempt to  prove  the  lucidity  of  your  somnambulist ;  to  speak
to  him  solely  of  his  disease ;  to  direct  all  his  attention  to
the  means  he  ought  to  adopt  for  the  restoration  of  his
health.  His  cure  is  your  essential  object,  your  principal
airs  ;  you  should  not  desert  it  for  a  moment.

I  know  that  one  may  sometimes  profit  by  the  confidence
of  a  somnambulist,  to  combine  with  him  the  means  of
correcting  his  faults,  and  of  rendering  his  conduct  more
regular;  to  break  off  dangerous  associations;  and,  in  fine,  to
apply  to  his  ordinary  state  the  elevated  moral  sensibility
which  he  exhibits  in  somnambulism.  In  this,  one  will  not
a  greater  extension.  For  it  is  then,  in  effect,  a  question
about  preventing  or  curing  a  moral  disease,  more  de-
structive than  a  physical  one,  and  which  often  aggravates
the  latter.  You  are  doing  right,  since  you  have  really  no
other  object  in  view,  no  other  idea,  than  the  intention  of
doing  good  to  him  whom  you  magnetize,  and  do  not  engage
him  except  in  that  which  is  most  essential  to  him.

The  faculties  of  somnambulists  are  limited.  Their  sur-
prising penetration  may  be  regarded  as  the  effect  of  a  con-
centration upon  one  single  class  of  sensations,  upon  one
order  of  ideas;  the  more  their  attention  is  distracted  by
various  subjects,  the  less  of  it  will  they  give  to  the  essential
object.

If  your  somnambulist  appears  to  meddle  with  things
which  do  not  promote  his  return  to  health,  employ  your
will  to  withdraw  him  from  them ;  do  not  hear  him ;  and
especially  do  not  appear  as  if  you  were  astonished  at  the
proofs  which  he  affords  of  his  lucidity.  You  will  excite
his  vanity,  and  that  is  very  dangerous  ;  for  when  you  have


76  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CTHAP. T.

once  awakened  in  him  this  sentiment,  to  which  somnam-
bulists are  in  general  very  much  inclined,  you  can  no  more
depend  upon  any  thing.

In  the  state  of  somnambulism,  the  moral  sensibility  is
ordinarily  much  more  lively,  and  the  somnambulists  are
often  disposed  to  abandon  themselves  to  the  ideas  or  the
sentiments  which  have  affected  them  in  their  common
state.  Endeavor  to  withdraw  them  from  these,  or  at  least
do  not  say  or  do  any  thing  which  might  favor  this  dis-
position.

There  are  some  somnambulists  endowed  with  a  sur-
prising clairvoyance,  which  is  extended  to  objects  that
are  very  distant,  and  entirely  foreign  to  what  interests
them  in  the  wakeful  state.  But  these  somnambulists  are
rare ;  and  it  is  only  with  a  great  deal  of  precaution  and  re-
serve that  we  should  have  recourse  to  them.  I  shall  return
to  this  subject  after  having  finished  what  I  have  to  say
about  ordinary  somnambulists.

It  would  be  advantageous  to  the  somnambulist  to  be
alone  with  his  magnetizer.  As  in  most  circumstances
this  would  be  inconvenient  or  improper,  you  will  be  careful
to  have  only  one  witness,  who  is  always  to  be  the  same
person,  and  who  takes  an  interest  in  the  patient.  You»
will  banish  all  useless  witnesses,  all  who  are  excited  by
mere  curiosity,  and  especially  all  the  incredulous.  Ali
such  must,  of  necessity,,  distract  your  attention.  He  who  is
conscious  that  another  is  watching  his  motions,  does  not
act  with  the  same  single-mindedness,  and  the  same  freedom y
as  he  does  who  thinks  himself  alone.  The  idea  of  the
judgement  which  the  spectators  will  form,  seizes  him  from
time  to  time,  in  spite  of  himself,  and  prevents  him  from
concentrating  all  his  faculties  upon  a  single  object.  The
more  you  are  observed,  with  the  less  advantage  will  you
magnetize.

If  there  is  a  physician  to  whom  you  have  imparted  your
attempt  to  pursue  a  magnetic  treatment,  and  whom  you
have  also  engaged  to  attend  when  wanted,  you  will  cer-
tainly have  a  desire  to  let  him  see  your  somnambulist,
either  to  convince  him  of  the  effects  which  you  produce,
or  to  give  him  an  opportunity  of  forming  an  opinion  upon
the  character  of  the  disease;  but  guard  well  against  yield-
ing to  this  conceit,  which  appears  to  have  a  useful  purpose^,


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT,  77

though  it  really  has  its  source  in  vanity.  Nothing  is  more
hurtful  to  a  somnambulist  than  the  presence  of  a  physician
who  is  not  familiarized  to  the  processes  and  the  phenom-
ena of  magnetism.  The  physician  and  the  somnambulist
do  not  speak  the  same  language ;  they  do  not  see  in  the
same  manner.  Your  somnambulist  would  wish  to  convince
the  physician  ;  he  will  conduct  his  conversation  with  much
address ;  he  will  seek  to  answer  all  difficulties  ;  he  will  lose
that  simplicity  which  is  necessary  for  his  clairvoyance ;  he
will  depart  from  the  line  which  nature  has  traced  out  for
him;  he  will  make  use  of  all  the  resources  of  his  wit;
and,  in  the  same  degree,  he  will  cease  to  have  the  faculties
which  are  really  useful  to  him.  Give  an  account  to  the
physician  of  what  takes  place,  and  you  will  do  well ;  but
limit  yourself  to  a  simple  and  sincere  relation  of  facts.
What  he  does  not  believe  on  your  authority,  he  will  be-
lieve no  better  when  he  sees  it,  unless  he  has  made  experi-
ments ; and  every  experiment  is  extremely  injurious.

To  the  reasons  which  I  have  given  for  excluding  all
kinds  of  witnesses,  I  can  add  another,  which  is  stronger
than  the  others.

There  is  in  most  somnambulists  a  developement  of  sen-
sibility, of  which  we  can  have  no  conception.  They  are
susceptible  of  receiving  influence  from  every  thing  that
surrounds  them,  and  principally  from  living  beings.  They
are  not  only  affected  by  physical  emanations,  or  the  effluvia
of  living  bodies,  but  also,  to  a  degree  much  more  surpris-
ing, by  the  thoughts  and  sentiments  of  those  who  surround
them,  or  who  are  busy  with  them.

If  you  are  alone  with  a  somnambulist,  and  any  one  is
permitted  to  enter,  the  somnambulist  generally  perceives  it.
Sometimes  the  person  who  enters  is  indifferent  to  him ;  at
other  times  he  feels  for  him  either  a  sympathy  or  an  an-
tipathy. In  either  case,  it  diminishes  his  concentrativeness.
If  he  entertains  a  sympathy,  his  attention  is  divided  ;  if  an
antipathy,  he  suffers.  If  the  stranger  is  incredulous,  and
suspects  the  sincerity  of  the  somnambulist,  or  makes  a  jest
of  what  he  sees,  the  somnambulist  is  troubled,  and  loses  his
lucidity.  If  many  witnesses  surround  the  somnambulist,
and  are  occupied  about  him,  the  fluid  of  each  one  of  them
acts  upon  his  organization ;  and,  as  these  various  fluids  are
not  in  harmony,  he  experiences  discordant  effects  from
7*


78  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  T.

them.  If  you  have  around  you  only  the  persons  who  de-
sire the  cure  of  the  patient,  and  if  you  magnetize  them  all
to  put  them  in  communication,  and  all  are  in  good  health,
the  somnambulist  may  not  be  in  the  least  disquieted.  But
it  will  be  difficult  to  prevent  many  of  the  spectators  from
often  occupying  themselves  with  other  things  besides  the
patient.  For,  every  time  they  occupy  themselves  with
something  else,  they  will  break  the  communication;  and
these  interruptions  produce  shocks,  (secousses,)  which  dis-
turb the  tranquil  reign  of  somnambulism.  There  is  some-
times among  the  spectators  some  one  who  inspires  the
somnambulist  with  a  particular  affection,  of  the  most  ex-
alted kind  ;  and  that  would  turn  him  aside  from  his  atten-
tion to  himself:  the  will  of  the  magnetizer  being  no  longer
active,  he  does  not  exert  the  same  control,  and  the  som-
nambulism takes  an  irregular  character.  The  greater  part
of  somnambulists,  even  in  the  hands  of  good  magnetizers,,
have  lost  a  portion  of  their  faculties,  because  many  persons
in  succession  have  been  permitted  to  see  them.

At  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter,  I  said  that,  in  a
magnetic  treatment,  there  ought  to  be  only  one  will  active,,
to  which  all  others  ought  to  be  subordinate.  This  rule  is
especially  to  be  observed  when  you  have  somnambulists.
M.  de  Puysegur  has  not  failed  to  call  attention  to  this  ;  and
yet  many  well-informed  magnetizers  do  not  pay  sufficient
regard  to  it.  As  to  those  who  try  it  for  the  first  time,  it  is
almost  impossible  that  they  should  feel  the  importance  of  it,,
and  that  even  the  desire  of  enlightening  themselves  upon
the  means  of  doing  more  good,  should  not  mislead  them
from  the  path  which  would  conduct  them  most  surely  to
the  accomplishment  of  their  object.

It  is  proper  to  enter  into  some  details  upon  this  head.

When  a  person,  who  has  no  experience,  obtains  for  tne
first  time  some  of  the  singular  effects  which  generally  pre-
cede lucid  somnambulism,  he  thinks  it  would  be  useful  to
get  acquainted  with  an  experienced  magnetizer.  If  he
finds  one,  he  entreats  him  to  come  and  assist  at  the  sittings,
to  give  him  instructions.  This  conduct,  which  is  dictated
by  a  very  praiseworthy  motive,  is,  nevertheless,  in  need  of
precaution ;  and  I  cannot  point  out  the  precautions  except
by  recalling  attention  to  two  phenomena,  the  reality  of
which  a  great  number  of  magnetic  experiments  demonstrate.


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  79

1st.  Somnambulists,  or  the  persons  who  are  in  a  mag-
netic state,  feel  the  influence  of  those  who  approach  them,
especially  of  those  who  have  an  active  will.

2d.  Persons  who  are  in  the  habit  of  magnetizing,  natu-
rally emit  the  fluid  from  them,  and  act  powerfully,  even
without  a  determinate  intention,  upon  those  who  are  in  the
magnetic  state.

From  this  it  follows  that  the  presence  of  a  magnetizer
is  never  a  matter  of  indifference,  and  that,  in  certain  cir-
cumstances, it  might  be  more  hurtful  than  that  of  one  who
comes  out  of  curiosity.  If  the  magnetizer  disapproves  of
any  of  your  processes,  if  he  counteracts  your  action  in  any
manner  whatever,  he  will  do  an  injury  to  your  somnambu-
list. This  inconvenience  can  always  be  avoided  if  he  is
warned  against  it,  if  he  is  attentive  to  himself,  and  if,  on
your  part,  you  take  the  necessary  precautions.

When,  then,  you  desire  to  consult  with  a  magnetizer,  and
call  him  in  to  see  your  somnambulist,  this  magnetizer  must
put  himself  in  communication  with  you;  must  submit  his
will  to  yours  ;  must  beware  of  acting  alone ;  must  occupy
himself  only  in  concurring  in  the  good  you  wish  to  do ;
must  not  seek  the  reason  of  the  processes  you  employ;  must
not  pretend  to  direct  you  in  any  thing ;  so  that  nothing
shall  affect  your  somnambulist  except  through  you.  When
the  sitting  is  ended,  the  magnetizer  can  make  his  observa-
tions, and  give  you  advice  ;  and,  after  having  reflected  upon
the  principles  he  has  given  you,  you  can  adopt  and  make
use  of  them.

In  my  Critical  History ,  book  first,  chapter  fourth,  I  have
related  What  took  place  the  first  time  I  produced  somnam-
bulism. I  was  a  mere  novice.  I  invited  a  magnetizer,  a
pupil  of  Mesmer,  and  who  had  great  power,  to  instruct  me
how  to  make  my  somnambulist  speak.  He  came  to  see
him ;  he  did  not  touch  him ;  and  yet  he  exercised  such
an  influence  upon  him,  that  the  course  of  the  somnambu-
lism was  entirely  deranged,  and  my  young  somnambulist,
who  had  exhibited  for  several  days  the  most  extraordinary
clairvoyance,  ceased  to  manifest  his  different  faculties  to
acquire  suddenly  that  of  expressing  himself  by  words,  and
made  no  progress  afterwards.  May  the  instruction  which
I  now  give  cause  others  to  avoid  the  numerous  faults  I
committed  before  I  acquired  experience  of  my  own !


80  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [cttAP.  V,

1  might  here  enter  into  many  details  relative  to  the
essential  character  of  somnambulism,  the  general  cause  of
the  innumerable  modifications  it  presents,  the  distinction
between  the  states  of  wakefulness,  sleep,  and  delirium  ;  and
to  the  transitions  from  one  of  these  states  to  another ;  but  I
resolved  to  abstain  from  all  theory,  and  limit  myself  to  the
giving  of  precepts  which  I  believe  correct,  without  explain-
ing the  reasons  of  my  adopting  them.  I  will  then  sim~
ply  say, —

If  your  patient  become  a  somnambulist,  have  near  you
only  the  witness  whom  you  admitted  at  the  commence-
ment, and  who  is  in  communication  with  you.  Refuse
absolutely  to  show  him  to  any  curious  person,  and  let  no
one  approach  him,  except  when  it  will  be  of  utility,  and
with  the  precautions  which  I  shall  soon  indicate.  Put  no
questions  to  him  except  such  as  relate  to  his  health,  and
graduate  these  questions  so  as  not  to  fatigue  him.  Do  not
seek  for  wonderful  effects ;  refrain,  by  all  means,  from  re-
lating those  which  you  have  seen.  You  can  give  yourself
this  satisfaction  when  the  treatment  is  ended ;  but,  until
then,  you  ought  to  think  only  of  the  cure.

you  will  contrive  with  him  the  means  proper  to  be  followed
to  induce  him  to  take  them  when  he  is  awakened.

If  among  the  remedies  there  are  some  that  you  cannot
procure,  or  whose  application  presents  too  great  difficulty,
you  will  induce  him  to  substitute  others.  If  he  requests
you  to  magnetize  him  at  an  hour  or  under  circumstances
which  render  it  impossible  to  you,  you  will  explain  to  him
the  reasons  that  oppose  it,  and  determine  him  to  search
out  the  means  of  supplying  your  presence,  at  the  moment
when  he  thinks  it  would  be  necessary  to  him.

Some  somnambulists,  after  having  announced  that  their
condition  is  very  serious,  consider  it  with  a  sort  of  indiffer-
ence, and  do  not  wish  to  give  themselves  the  trouble  of
looking  for  a  remedy.  Others  manifest  a  reluctance  to
examine  their  disease.  The  sight  of  the  disorder  which
they  perceive  in  their  internal  organs,  affrights  them*
When  this  is  the  case,  you  must  not  partake  of  the  fears
of  your  somnambulist.  You  must  exert  the  power  of  your
will  to  determine  him  to  a  very  scrupulous  examination  of
his  complaint,  to  consider,  without  affright,  the  interior  of


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  81

his  own  body,  as  if  it  were  not  his  own,  and  to  make  efforts
to  discover  the  means  of  cure.  If  you  are  calm,  and  know
how  to  exert  your  will,  your  somnambulist  will  certainly
obey  you ;  he  will  recover  himself,  and  explain  to  you  the
actual  danger,  and  the  means  of  removing  it.  Perhaps
you  will  not  succeed  in  curing  him  ;  but  you  will  procure
him  all  the  soothing  influence  possible,  and  you  will  know
to  what  you  ought  to  direct  your  efforts.  Do  not  lose  hope,
even  when  he  assures  you  that  his  disease  is  incurable.
Somnambulists  have  often  said,  at  the  first  sittings,  that  it
was  impossible  to  rescue  them  from  death,  and  afterwards
have  found  the  means  of  restoration  to  health.

When  your  somnambulist  gives  you  a  description  of  his
disease,  you  must  listen  without  interrupting  him.  You
may  afterwards  request  him  to  explain  more  clearly,  and
more  in  detail,  what  you  were  not  able  to  understand.
You  may  interrogate  him  about  things  which  you  ought  to
be  acquainted  with  in  order  to  perform  your  own  duty  well,
but  you  should  go  no  farther.  Ask  him  no  anatomical
questions.  He  perceives  the  seat  of  his  own  disorder  ;  he
sees  the  lesion  which  exists  in  one  part ;  but  it  is  rare  that
he  sees  the  situation,  the  form,  and  the  tissue  of  his  organs,
especially  of  those  which  are  not  affected.  If  you  make
him  talk  beyond  this,  you  will  obtain  from  him  only  vague
and  perhaps  erroneous  views.  He  will  not  make  a  mistake
either  in  foretelling  a  crisis,  in  pointing  out  a  remedy,  or
in  describing  the  effects  it  will  produce ;  but  he  could
easily  give  you  explanations  which  would  be  ridiculous  in
proportion  to  the  interest  you  display  in  hearing  them.
You  do  ■  not  interrogate  your  somnambulist  to  dissipate
your  doubts,  for  you  ought  not  to  have  doubts;  if  you  have,
you  would  magnetize  very  badly  ;  nor  is  it  to  satisfy  your
curiosity,  for  this  would  withdraw  you  from  the  principal
object ;  nor  is  it,  finally,  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  physi-
ology, anatomy,  or  medicine  ;  for  what  a  somnambulist
says,  is  not  applicable  to  any  but  himself.  Confine  your-
self to  the  knowledge  of  what  is  requisite  for  his  restora-
tion, and  take  care  not  to  let  his  imagination  dwell  upon
things  foreign  to  this  object.  If  he  busies  himself  about
persons  absent,  bring  him  back  to  what  concerns  himself,
without  permitting  yourself  to  wonder  at  the  faculty  he


82  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP, V.

possesses  of  seeing  at  a  distance,  and  without  seeking  new-
proofs  of  this  faculty.

Some  circumstances  authorize  the  magnetizer  to  admit
some  one  to  his  treatment;  there  are  also  some  which
make  it  his  duty  to  do  it.  I  will  give  examples,  and  show
how  one  ought  to  conduct  himself  in  such  cases.  If  your
somnambulist  often  mentions  to  you  a  person  who  interests
him,  and  desires  you  to  bring  him  in,  and  you  see  no  in-
convenience in  doing  it,  you  may  yield  to  his  wish.  Thus
a  woman  in  the  magnetic  state  might  be  continually  dwell-
ing upon  her  daughter,  whose  state  of  health  gives  her
anxiety,  and  to  whom  she  wishes  to  give  advice.  Do  not
refuse  to  let  her  enter,  and  put  her  in  communication.
The  same  might  be  said  of  a  husband,  or  an  intimate
friend.

If  your  somnambulist  gives  proofs  of  remarkable  lucidity,
and  affirms  that  he  is  able  to  know  the  disease  of  another,
as  well  as  his  own,  and  if  a  consultation  would  not  fatigue
him,  you  could  consent  to  it,  in  order  to  render  service  to
one  who  desires  it,  and  has  confidence.  But  these  consul-
tations ought  to  be  rare,  and  you  ought  never  to  permit
two  to  be  held  the  same  day.  You  ought  also  to  avoid
trusting  the  direction  of  many  patients  at  a  time  to  a  som-
nambulist. He  can  hardly  take  the  same  interest  in  all,
identify  himself  alternately  with  each,  and  manage  them
well.  As  to  the  rest,  it  depends  upon  the  faculties  of  the
somnambulists.*  In  all  cases,  it  is  necessary  to  avoid
fatiguing  them.

Before  introducing  a  patient  to  your  somnambulist,  you
will  let  him  touch  something  that  the  patient  has  worn,
so  that  he  may  tell  you  whether  he  feels  any  repugnance
to  it,  and  whether  he  sees  any  danger  in  being  put  in
communication  with  him.  When  you  have  introduced
the  patient,  you  will  require  him  to  speak  only  of  his
health ;  and  if  the  conversation  takes  another  turn,  you
will  oppose  it.

You  will  not  permit  any  one  to  give  your  somnambulist
any  token  of  gratitude ;  he  should  not  be  moved  by  any
other  desire  than  that  of  doing  good.

*  The  sensibility,  the  clairvoyance,  the  power  of  attention,  differ
prodigiously  in  different  somnambulists,  and  in  the  same  somnam-
bulists at  various  times.


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  83

You  will  not  suffer  your  somnambulist  to  be  magnetized
indiscriminately  by  any  person.  The  somnambulists  who
are  in  communication  with  several  magnetizers,  end  by
losing  their  lucidity.

If  indispensable  business  forces  you  to  interrupt  the
treatment  of  your  somnambulist,  have  an  understanding
with  him  to  find  some  one  to  supply  your  place.  Should
the  interruption  be  only  for  a  few  days,  the  magnetizer
taking  your  place  should  act  only  in  your  name,  according
to  your  views  and  your  method,  and  under  your  direction.
If  the  interruption  is  to  be  of  long  continuance,  you  should
give  up  your  somnambulist  entirely.

If  your  somnambulist  has  caprices,  you  will  oppose  them
by  letting  him  know  your  will,  without  dispute.  Never
suffer  him  to  get  the  upper  hand  of  you.  You  ought  to
yield  all  that  will  conduce  to  his  good,  and  resist  his  fan-
tastic notions.  You  are  for  him  an  attentive  and  benevo-
lent, but  a  just  and  inflexible,  providence.

If  your  somnambulist  has  mental  troubles  which  aggra-
vate his  malady,  seek  with  him  the  means  of  easing  them.
You  will  console  him,  and  profit  by  his  confidence  to  re-
lieve his  anxieties,  and  destroy  the  cause.  If  he  has  any
inclinations  which  you  disapprove  of,  employ  your  ascen-
dency in  vanquishing  them.

You  must  avoid,  most  carefully,  penetrating  into  the
secrets  of  your  somnambulist,  when  it  is  not  evidently
useful  to  him  to  have  these  secrets  known  to  you.  I  need
not  add  that,  if  he  tells  you  any  thing  which  he  would  not
have  told  you  in  the  ordinary  state,  you  will  never  permit
yourself  to  impart  it  to  any  person,  not  even  to  your  most
intimate  friend.

for  himself  remedies  which  appear  improper  for  his  state,
the  magnetizer  ought  not  to  depend  upon  his  first  sug-
gestion. 1  ought  to  insist  upon  this  point.

It  is  very  rare  that  a  somnambulist  orders  for  himself  a
remedy  which  would  be  injurious  to  him,  or  mistakes  in
regard  to  the  doses;  yet  this  may  happen,  for  there  are
instances  of  it ;  and  though  it  happen  but  once  in  a  thou-
sand times,  it  would  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  taking  the
greatest  precautions.  I  am  going  to  explain  the  possible
causes  of  mistakes,  and  the  means  of  preventing  the  con-
sequences.


84  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [cHAP. V.

The  state  of  somnambulism  is  not  always  accompanied
with  a  perfect  clairvoyance;  and  that  clairvoyance,  when
it  is  manifested  in  the  most  surprising  manner,  is  often
relative  to  a  certain  order  of  ideas,  and  variable  in  its  in-
tensity. For  the  proper  exercise  of  it,  the  somnambulist
must  concentrate  his  faculties  upon  a  single  object,  without
distraction,  without  trouble,  without  the  intervention  of
any  foreign  influence  to  change  the  direction  of  his  mind.
It  is  necessary  that  the  interest  he  takes  in  the  object
which  occupies  his  mind,  should  determine  him  to  make
efforts  of  attention,  to  vanquish  his  indolence,  and  free
himself  from  all  the  prejudices  of  his  ordinary  state.  One
might  tell  me  that  the  interest  which  the  somnambulist
takes  in  his  own  health  will  prevail  with  him  over  every
other  consideration ;  that  he  will  see  his  own  body  more
distinctly  than  any  thing  else ;  and,  if  there  be  in  him  an
instinctive  faculty,  he  will  exercise  it  upon  his  own  wants.
This  would  appear  to  be  the  case,  but  it  is  not  always  so.

Many  somnambulists,  either  through  vanity  or  excess  of
benevolence,  are  more  fond  of  being  busy  about  others
than  about  themselves.  Others  are  unwilling  to  examine
their  own  disease  and  the  consequences  it  may  have.
Others,  again,  seem  to  set  little  value  upon  their  cure.
They  think  they  shall  be  more  happy  when  their  souls
shall  be  freed  from  the  bondage  of  matter.  The  magnet-
izer,  instead  of  being  amazed  at  this  species  of  exaltation,
should  employ  all  the  power  of  his  will  to  bring  it  to  an
end,  and  to  induce  the  somnambulist  to  be  occupied  only
with  his  own  health.  All  that  I  have  said  in  this  chapter
tends  to  show  the  importance  of  these  principles ;  and  if  my
readers  have  confidence  in  me,  they  will  keep  themselves
free  from  enthusiasm,  which  is  much  more  dangerous  than
incredulity.

But  suppose  a  somnambulist  is  occupied  only  about  his
own  physical  state,  and  his  own  cure ;  suppose  his  clair-
voyance is  real,  and  he  speaks  from  his  actual  perceptions,
and  not  from  anterior  impressions;  he  may,  nevertheless,
self. This  is  owing  to  a  cause  to  which  it  is  proper  to
call  attention.

It  often  happens  that  a  patient,  when  put  into  a  state  of
somnambulism,  is  afflicted  at  the  same  time  with  several


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT,  85

very  dangerous  diseases,  and  that  the  treatment  which  is
proper  for  one  is  not  proper  for  another.  The  somnam-
bulist at  first  is  employed  upon  the  organ  the  most  affected  —
the  most  severe  and  painful  malady;  he  fixes  his  attention
upon  that  which  gives  him  the  most  uneasiness,  and,  in
ining whether  they  are  not  otherwise  injurious.  I  have
lately  seen  an  instance  of  this.  A  somnambulist  whose
lungs  were  affected,  and  whose  stomach  was  much  im-
paired, ordered  for  her  stomach  a  remedy  which  would
have  probably  aggravated  the  disease  of  the  lungs.  The
magnetizer  made  some  observations  to  her  about  it;  she
agreed  that  these  observations  were  just ;  she  put  off  the
fifteen  days  afterwards,  she  cried  out,  of  her  own  accord,
**  How  glad  I  am  that  you  did  not  permit  me  to  take  the
medicine  I  thought  of  taking;  now  the  state  of  my  lungs
allows  me  to  make  use  of  it."  She  was,  in  fact,  cured.
She  would  not  have  been,  if  the  magnetizer  had  been  less
prudent  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,  that,  when
the  somnambulist  is  attacked  by  several  diseases,  he  is
naturally  induced  to  fix  his  attention  upon  that  which
appears  to  him  the  most  serious.

Some  precautions  will  now  be  given  by  which  you  may
be  sure  of  preventing  the  dangers  springing  from  too  much
precipitation,  or  from  blind  confidence.

edy which  appears  to  be  unsuitable  to  his  condition,  you
will  make  your  objections  to  him  ;  you  will  engage  him  to
examine  the  state  of  his  organs  successively,  and  with  the
greatest  attention,  and  give  you  an  account  of  them.  You
will  request  him  to  explain  the  reasons  which  have  induced
accurately  the  effects  he  anticipates  from  it.  You  will
present  him  the  medicine,  and  make  him  touch  and  taste
it.  You  will  request  him  to  tell  what  a  dose  should  be,
not  only  by  the  name  of  the  measure  or  weight,  but  by
showing  you  the  quantity  which  he  wishes  to  take.  If,
after  all  these  precautions,  he  persists,  you  may  depend
upon  him.

It  seems  impossible  to  me  that,  in  the  state  of  somnam-
bulism, an  individual  should  entertain  the  criminal  project
8


86  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [cHAP. V.

of  putting  an  end  to  his  own  existence ;  and  I  could  not
believe  that,  after  having  carefully  examined  a  deleterious
substance,  he  would  not  reject  it.  Yet  if  it  should  happen
that  the  prescription  of  a  somnambulist  may  put  his  life  in
imminent  danger,  the  magnetizer,  it  is  evident,  ought  not
to  conform  to  it.  Repeated  proofs  of  great  clairvoyance
and  purity  of  intention  are,  doubtless,  powerful  motives  of
confidence.  But  they  do  not  give  us  the  entire  certainty,
which  alone  may  authorize  us  to  make  use  of  an  unknown
means,  where  an  error  would  be  attended  with  fatal  con-
sequences.*

of  which  they  have  heard,  or  of  which  they  have  formerly
made  trial.  In  place  of  these  one  might  substitute  others
much  more  efficacious.  You  should  then  call  their  at-
tention to  what  appears  more  proper  for  them,  and  dis-
cuss the  motives  of  their  choice.

Many  things  might  be  added  in  relation  to  the  direction
of  somnambulists ;  but  I  think  they  will  be  naturally  de-
duced from  the  principles  which  I  have  laid  down.

I  return  to  the  manner  of  applying  the  processes  when
somnambulism  has  been  induced.

The  somnambulist  always  indicates  the  processes  which
are  proper  for  him ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  uncertainty
about  them.  These  processes  are  sometimes  very  labo-
rious and  very  fatiguing  to  the  magnetizer  ;  they  demand
from  him  patience,  courage,  and  devotedness ;  yet  they  are
indispensable  to  develope  and  happily  terminate  a  crisis
essential  to  the  cure :  but  this  is  very  seldom.  The  greater
part  of  the  time,  nature  labors  alone  during  somnambulism,
and  you  have  no  need  of  doing  any  thing  more  than  to

*  An  epileptic  patient,  who  was  under  magnetic  treatment  at  the
Salpetriere  Hospital,  declared  the  only  means  of  curing  her  would
be  to  excite  in  her,  in  the  most  critical  circumstances,  and  by  violent
means,  a  sudden  fright,  which  would  naturally  put  her  life  in  the
greatest  danger.  For  three  months  she  insisted  upon  the  same  thing.
They  finally  resolved  to  follow  her  advice,  and  the  result  was  a  cure.
But  they  who  did  this  were  able  physicians.  They  knew  the  des-
perate state  of  the  patient ;  they  had  never  seen  her  make  mistakes ;
they  judged  that  the  shock  indicated  might  produce  a  salutary  crisis,
which  could  not  be  obtained  by  any  other  means ;  and  their  pro-
fession authorized  them  to  calculate  the  chances  of  danger  and  suc-
cess. A  magnetizer,  who  was  not  a  physician,  would  not  have  been
able  to  assume  such  a  responsibility.


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  87

hold  the  thumbs  of  the  somnambulist,  or  place  your  hand
upon  his  knees,  or  even  to  be  busy  about  him.

You  need  not  magnetize  him  longer  than  he  judges
useful,  on  the  days  and  at  the  hour  he  intimates.  If  it  is
essential  not  to  interrupt  a  crisis  at  its  commencement,  it
is  often  injurious  to  prolong  it  beyond  the  necessary  time.

There  are  somnambulists  who  fear  the  impression  of  too
strong  a  light.  I  have  seen  some  of  them  who  caused
themselves  to  be  bandaged  across  the  eyes ;  but  there  are
others  who  experience  fatigue  by  closing  the  eyelids,  and
who  request  to  have  their  eyes  opened.  The  magnetizer
succeeds  in  doing  this  by  making  passes  across  the  eyes,
without  its  diminishing  the  intensity  of  somnambulism.
The  somnambulist  then  seems  to  be  in  his  natural  state;
but  it  is  necessary  to  watch  over  him  with  the  precautions
he  indicates.  There  are  cases  when  this  non-apparent
somnambulism  can  be  very  useful,  as  we  shall  soon  see.

When  we  wish  to  ask  the  somnambulist  a  question,  it  is
necessary  to  explain  our  will  by  words.  Good  somnam-
bulists understand  the  will  without  our  speaking  to  them.
But  why  should  we  employ  this  mode  when  there  is  no
need  of  it  ?  It  is  an  experiment ;  and  it  is  a  rule  which
every  one  ought  to  adopt,  to  interdict  all  experiment.  I
agree  that  there  are  cases  where  it  is  expedient  to  employ
only  the  influence  of  the  will.  For  instance,  there  may  be
near  you  a  third  person,  and  you  perceive  your  somnam-
bulist, who  thinks  himself  alone  with  you,  about  to  say
things  which  this  third  person  ought  not  to  know ;  you
will  impose  silence  by  your  will.

At  the  close  of  the  sitting,  when  you  wish  to  waken
your  somnambulist,  you  will  first  make  passes  along  the
legs  to  free  the  head ;  then  you  will  make  some  across  the
eyes,  to  open  them,  saying  to  him,  "Wake I"  The  eyes
often  remain  shut  after  the  somnambulist  is  awakened.  You
will  bring  them  from  this  condition  by  patiently  passing  your
fingers  many  times  across  them.  Then  you  will  disperse
the  fluid  from  the  head,  and  from  the  rest  of  the  body,  by
passes  made  crosswise  at  a  distance,  in  order  to  scatter  and
shake  it  off.  You  will  have  the  precaution  to  continue
this  until  your  somnambulist  shall  be  perfectly  roused  from
sleep.

It  is  of  the  very  greatest  consequence  to  establish  a  line


88  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP. V.

of  demarkation,  well  defined,  between  the  state  of  som-
nambulism, and  the  natural  state  of  wakefulness.  The
somnambulist,  when  he  is  awakened,  ought  to  preserve
nothing  —  positively  nothing  —  of  the  sensations  which  he
experienced,  nor  of  the  ideas  which  occupied  him,  in  som-
nambulism. Somnambulism,  prolonged  beyond  the  neces-
sary time,  imparts  a  nervous  susceptibility,  which  is  attended
with  great  inconveniences;  it  ought  to  cease  after  the  cure.
If  it  should  continue  and  renew  itself  spontaneously,  it
would  itself  be  a  disease.

I  have  already  noticed  that  it  would  always  be  expedient,
as  far  as  possible,  to  let  the  patient  remain  ignorant  that  he
has  been  a  somnambulist ;  and  that,  excepting  certain  very
rare  cases,  it  is  proper  never  to  repeat  what  he  may  have
uttered ;  for  it  would  establish  between  the  ideas  of  the
natural  state  and  those  of  somnambulism  a  relation  which
is  contrary  to  the  natural  order,  and  which  equally  alters
the  habitual  faculties  and  the  somnambulic  faculties.  If
you  know  how  to  control  yourself  by  your  own  will,  your
patient  will  never  be  informed  of  any  thing  which  you
think  ought  to  be  kept  from  him.

Somnambulists  perfectly  abstracted,  whose  interior  fac-
ulties have  acquired  great  energy,  are  often  found  in  a
frame  of  mind  of  which  you  might  avail  yourself  advan-
tageously to  make  them  follow  a  course  of  regimen,  or  to
make  them  do  things  useful  for  them,  but  contrary  to  their
habits  and  inclinations.  The  magnetizer  can,  after  it  has
been  mutually  agreed  upon,  impress  upon  them,  while  in
the  somnambulic  state,  an  idea  or  a  determination  which
will  influence  them  in  the  natural  state,  without  their
knowing  the  cause.  For  instance,  the  magnetizer  will  say
to  the  somnambulist,  "You  will  return  home  at  such  an
hour ;  you  will  not  go  this  evening  to  the  theatre  ;  you  will
clothe  yourself  in  such  a  manner ;  you  will  take  your  med-
icines without  being  obstinate ;  you  will  take  no  liquor  ;
you  will  drink  no  coffee;  you  will  occupy  yourself  no
longer  in  such  a  thing ;  you  ivill  drive  away  such  a  fear  ;
you  will  forget  such  a  thing."  The  somnambulist  will  be
He  will  recollect  it  without  suspecting  it  to  be  any  thing
more  than  a  recollection  of  what  you  have  ordered  for  his
benefit  \  he  will  have  a  desire  for  what  you  have  advised


CHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  89

him,  and  a  dislike  to  what  you  have  interdicted.  Take
advantage  of  this  empire  of  your  will,  and  of  this  concert
with  him,  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  patient.  Your  will
probably  acts  merely  in  modifying  his,  and  you  might
obtain  from  him  the  performance  of  indifferent  things,  to
which  he  would  devote  himself  to  please  you;  but  this
would  be  contrary  to  the  spirit  and  design  of  magnetism.

You  may  often  find  it  in  your  power,  while  your  patient
is  in  the  somnambulic  state,  to  induce  him  to  take  a  medi-
cine for  which  he  has  a  repugnance.  I  have  seen  a  lady,
who  had  a  horror  at  the  sight  of  leeches,  cause  them  to  be
applied  to  her  feet  during  somnambulism,  and  say  to  her
magnetizer,  "  Prevent  me  from  looking  at  my  feet  when  I
awake."  In  fact  she  never  suspected  that  any  one  had
applied  leeches  to  her.

Many  somnambulists  are  endowed  with  inconceivable
address,  and  can  perform  certain  operations  as  well  as  the
best  surgeons.  I  am  acquainted  with  a  lady,  who,  in  the
state  of  somnambulism,  opened  a  swelling  beneath  her
breast,  and  dressed  the  wound  until  it  was  healed.

This  address  of  somnambulists  can  be  useful  to  others
as  well  as  to  themselves,  especially  when  it  is  accompanied
with  clairvoyance ;  there  are  some  cases,  even,  when  they
can  render  the  greatest  service.  I  will  instance  a  midwife,
who,  having  become  a  somnambulist  during  a  disease  for
which  she  caused  herself  to  be  magnetized,  preserved  the
same  faculties  after  her  restoration  to  health.  When  she
is  called  upon  to  exercise  her  profession,  if  the  case  ap-
pears to  present  any  difficulties,  she  goes  to  her  mag-
netizer, who  puts  her  into  somnambulism,  and  opens  her
eyes.  She  declared  to  me  that,  in  this  state,  she  could
act  with  much  more  address,  strength,  and  certainty.  In
January  last,  she  in  this  manner  very  successfully  de-
livered of  three  children  a  woman  whose  state  was  very
dangerous

Among  the  phenomena  which  somnambulism  often  pre-
sents, there  is  one  from  which  persons  might,  under  certain
circumstances,  derive  a  great  advantage.  It  is  that  of  ab-
solute insensibility.  There  are  many  somnambulists  that
one  could  pinch  and  prick  very  hard  without  their  feeling
it.  One  of  the  somnambulists  that  were  in  the  Salpetriere
Hospital  received  no  impression  from  a  bottle  of  sal  volatile
8*


90  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V,

applied  to  her  nose ;  and,  when  experiments  in  magnetism
were  made  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  Hospital,  moxas  were  applied
to  two  somnambulists,  who  were  not  awakened  by  them.
Persons  have  concluded,  from  these  dangerous  experiments,
that,  if  a  surgical  operation  were  necessary  to  a  patient
susceptible  of  magnetism,  it  might  be  done  without  causing
pain;  and  it  is  true  in  certain  cases.  But,  although  this
insensibility  is  displayed  by  nearly  all  somnambulists  who
have  been  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  and  the  Salpetriere,  it  is  far
from  being  general.  I  am  even  inclined  to  think  it  would
never  occur,  if  the  magnetizers  did  not  overcharge  their
subjects,  and  if  they  took  care  to  preserve  the  harmony  of
the  system.  My  somnambulists  have  never  exhibited  it  to
me.  On  the  contrary,  their  sensibility  was  more  delicate
than  in  the  natural  state ;  the  contact  of  a  body  not  mag-
netized was  disagreeable  to  them  ;  and  the  touch  of  a
stranger  gave  them  a  great  deal  of  pain.  I  am  also  certain
that  somnambulists  have  experienced  convulsions,  and  have
been  awaked,  by  having  been  roughly  touched  by  some
one  who  was  not  in  communication.

I  know  that  a  magnetizer  can  by  his  will  paralyze  any
limb  of  his  somnambulist ;  but  he  ought  never  to  permit
himself  the  trial  of  this  experiment.  As  to  the  rest,  if  a
patient  has  need  of  an  operation  that  is  painful,  we  should
learn  from  him  whether  it  ought  to  be  performed  during
somnambulism,  or  during  the  natural  state,  and  what  pre-
cautions ought  to  be  taken  to  insure  success.

The  absolute  insensibility  of  the  organs  of  sense  and  of
those  of  motion,  united  to  the  exaltation  of  sentiment  and
of  thought,  sometimes  a  symptom  that  life  is  drawing
towards  the  brain  and  the  epigastrum.  The  spirit  seems
then  to  disengage  itself  from  the  organs,  and  the  somnam-
bulist becomes  independent  of  the  will  of  the  magnetizer.

This  state,  to  which  the  name  of  ecstasy,  or  magnetic
exaltation,  has  been  given,  and  which  many  German  authors
have  considered  as  the  most  elevated  state  of  magnetism,
is  exceedingly  dangerous.  You  could  not  suddenly  wake
one  who  is  in  it,  and  if  you  should  succeed  in  doing  it,  he
would  remain  in  a  state  of  excessive  weakness,  and  perhaps
of  paralysis,  which  you  could  not  put  an  end  to  without
great  exertion.  I  cannot,  then,  recommend  too  strongly  to
magnetizers  to  oppose  the  developement  of  this  crisis. I


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  91

believe  even  that  it  would  hardly  ever  present  itself,  if  the
somnambulist  were  to  busy  himself  only  about  his  own
health,  and  if  one  were  to  take  care  to  free  the  head,  and
to  reestablish  harmony,  when  he  sees  the  limbs  stiffen  and
become  insensible.  I  shall  return  hereafter  to  this  subject.
The  details  into  which  I  have  entered  appear  sufficient
to  make  you  acquainted  with  somnambulism,  as  it  fre-
quently presents  itself  in  the  course  of  a  magnetic  treat-
ment, and  with  the  means  of  directing  it  to  a  useful  purpose,
and  of  avoiding  its  inconveniences.  I  have  also  said,  with
sufficient  distinctness,  that  this  crisis,  if  you  oppose  the
workings  of  Nature,  might  become  as  hurtful  as  it  would
be  salutary  if  you  have  the  wisdom  to  listen  to  her  and  aid
her.  I  know  that  some  instances  of  success  obtained  by
imprudent  rashness  might  be  cited  ;  but  these  instances
are  rare.  Wise  cautiousness  can  never  be  a  disadvantage;
and  when  we  desert  it,  we  expose  ourselves  to  the  greatest
dangers.  There  remains,  then,  nothing  essential  to  say
upon  the  application  of  somnambulism  to  the  treatment  of
diseases  ;  and  when  I  commenced  writing  this  chapter,  it
did  not  enter  into  my  plan  to  go  farther.*  I  resolved  to
pass  over  in  silence  the  extraordinary  phenomena.  I
thought  that  those  who  had  not  seen  analogous  ones,  would
regard  me  as  a  visionary ;  and  that  such  a  reputation
would  not  only  be  afflictive  to  me,  but  might  also  put  an
obstacle  in  the  way  of  my  doing  the  good  which  I  wish  to
do ;  for  people  will  be  guided  by  the  counsels  of  a  man
subject  to  illusions  no  more  than  by  those  of  a  man  void
of  good  faith.  But  after  having  devoted  reflection  to  it,  I
thought  it  my  duty  to  yield  to  more  important  considera-
tions, and  to  elevate  myself  above  the  fears  excited  by  self-

*  Various  somnambulists  exhibit  very  different,  phenomena ;  and
the  only  distinctive  and  constant  character  of  somnambulism  is,  the
existence  of  a  new  mode  of  perception.  For  instance,  there  are
abstracted  somnambulists  ;  there  are  others  who  are  not.  Some  of
them  exhibit  a  species  of  attraction  like  magnetic  needles  ;  others
have  only  the  internal  faculties.  Some  of  them  have  all  the  sensa-
tions concentrated  at  the  epigastrum ;  others  make  use  of  some  of
their  senses.  There  are,  finally,  some  of  them,  who,  after  waking,
preserve  for  a  certain  time  the  recollection  of  the  impressions  they
have  received,  and  of  the  ideas  they  have  had  during  the  crisis.  I
was  obliged  to  limit  myself  to  explain  what  takes  place  most  com-
monly, and  to  teach  what  it  is  necessary  to  know  to  assist  nature,
and  to  derive  from  somnambulism  the  greatest  advantage.


92  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V.

love.  I  am  determined,  then,  to  speak  of  a  very  singular
state,  because  it  may  be  presented  to  others  as  it  has  been
to  me  and  to  many  of  my  friends,  and  which  it  is  important
to  know,  that  it  may  not  be  confounded  with  the  exaltation,
of  which  I  have  already  pointed  out  the  danger,  and  that
its  developement  may  not  be  counteracted.

of  which  I  wish  to  speak.  I  will  then  tell  how  one  ought
to  conduct  himself  with  those  who  have  reached  that  state,
if  he  would  derive  any  advantage  from  it,  to  them  or  to
himself.

In  this  state  the  circulation  is  regular,  the  heat  is  equal
through  all  the  body,  and  the  members  preserve  their  sen-
sibility. The  somnambulist  is  so  thoroughly  in  communi-
cation with  his  magnetizer  as  to  read  his  thoughts,  but
receives  no  impression  through  the  organs  of  sense.  It  is
no  longer  the  sensation  which  produces  ideas  ;  on  the
contrary,  it  is  the  ideas  which  produce  sensations.  In  the
ordinary  state,  every  thing  parts  from  the  circumference  to
reach  the  centre ;  in  this,  every  thing  parts  from  the  centre
to  reach  the  circumference  ;  and  this  circumference  some-
times extends  to  illimitable  distances.  But  it  is  not  this
which  characterizes  the  degree  of  somnambulism  of  which
I  speak.  It  is  the  absolute  indifference  to  what  appertains
to  terrestrial  objects,  to  the  interests  of  fortune  or  of  repu-
tation. It  is  the  absence  of  the  passions  and  the  opinions
by  which  one  is  governed  in  the  ordinary  state,  and  of
even  all  acquired  ideas,  of  which  they  can  very  well  pre-
serve the  recollection,  but  to  which  they  no  longer  attach
importance.  It  is  the  little  interest  that  they  take  in  life ;
it  is  a  novel  manner  of  viewing  objects  ;  it  is  a  quick  and
direct  judgment,  accompanied  with  an  intimate  conviction.
The  somnambulist  appears  to  have  lost  the  faculties  by
which  we  are  directed  ;  the  impressions  and  notions  which
come  from  without  do  not  reach  him  ;  but,  during  the
silence  which  he  observes  in  regard  to  what  is  foreign  to
his  soul,  he  feels  within  himself  the  developement  of  a  new
light,  whose  rays  are  darted  upon  all  that  excites  in  him  a
real  interest.  At  the  same  time,  the  sentiment  of  conscien-
tiousness is  aroused,  and  determines  the  judgement  which
he  ought  to  form.  Thus  the  somnambulist  possesses  at
the  same  time  the  torch  which  gives  him  his  light,  and  the


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  93

compass  that  points  out  his  way.  This  torch  and  this
compass  are  not  the  product  of  somnambulism  ;  they  are
always  in  us ;  but  the  distracting  cares  of  this  world,  the
passions,  and,  above  all,  pride,  and  attachment  to  perishable
things,  prevent  us  from  perceiving  the  one  and  consulting
the  other.

When  the  somnambulist  has  reached  this  degree  of  ex-
altation, his  manner  of  speaking  is  almost  always  different
from  that  which  he  has  in  his  ordinary  state.  His  diction
is  pure  and  simple,  elegant  and  precise ;  his  manner  unim-
passioned  ;  every  thing  announces  in  him  a  state  of  tran-
quillity, a  distinct  view  of  that  of  which  he  speaks,  and  an
entire  conviction  of  its  reality.  You  perceive  in  his  dis-
course not  the  least  of  what  is  called  excitement  or  enthu-
siasm ;  and  I  insist  on  this  point,  because  those  who  have
spoken  of  this  state  without  having  seen  it,  have  supposed
it  to  have  a  character  opposed  to  what  it  really  has,  and
which  even  serves  to  distinguish  it.

In  this  new  situation,  the  mind  is  filled  with  religious
ideas,  with  which,  perhaps,  it  was  never  before  occupied.
He  sees  every  where  the  action  of  Providence.  This  life
appears  to  him  only  a  journey,  during  which  we  ought  to
collect  what  is  necessary  for  us  in  our  everlasting  mansions.
The  independence  of  the  soul,  the  liberty  of  man,  immor-
tality, are  to  him  evident  truths.  He  is  convinced  that
God  hears  us  ;  that  prayer  is  the  most  efficacious  means
of  obtaining  his  aid,  and  dissipating  the  ills  around  us,  or
at  least  of  turning  them  to  our  advantage.  Taking  care  to
make  our  labors  on  earth,  as  well  as  the  troubles  we  expe-
rience, acceptable  to  God,  appears  to  him  a  means  of  moral
improvement.

Charity  is  for  him  the  first  of  virtues  —  that  which  affords
us  the  easy  means  of  expiating  our  sins,  and  which  often
suffices  to  obtain  their  remission.  He  is  so  much  pene-
trated with  it,  that  he  forgets  himself  for  others,  and  no
sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  doing  good  costs  him  too  much.
This  sentiment  of  benevolence  is  extended  to  all,  and  he
makes  supplications  for  those  who  hold  opinions  the  most
opposite  to  his  own.  Sometimes  the  prodigious  difference
he  perceives  between  his  new  manner  of  viewing  objects
and  that  which  he  had  in  his  ordinary  state,  the  new  lights
which  shine  for  him,  the  new  faculties  with  which  he  finds


94  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V.

himself  endowed,  the  immensity  of  the  horizon  which  is
spread  before  his  eyes,  persuade  him  that  he  is  inspired ;
what  he  says  seems  to  him  dictated  by  a  voice  from  within;
what  he  sees  is  shown  to  him ;  he  regards  himself  as  the
organ  of  a  superior  intelligence ;  but  this  does  not  excite
his  vanity.  He  delights  to  reflect  in  silence,  and  he  speaks
to  you  only  to  say  things  useful  for  your  moral  direction.

Happy  the  man  who  has  chanced  to  meet  a  somnambulist
of  this  kind  !  for  there  is  no  means  of  bringing  forth  from  an
It  is  a  horologe  fabricated  by  Nature  ;  we  can  easily  dis-
turb its  movements,  but  we  can  neither  set  it  a-going,  nor
regulate  it,  because  we  are  unacquainted  with  its  springs.
We  must  consult  it,  but  we  must  not  permit  ourselves  to
touch  it  for  the  purpose  of  accelerating  or  retarding  its
motion.

If,  then,  you  see  the  state  of  which  I  am  speaking  manifest
itself,  you  should  listen  attentively  to  your  somnambulist
You  will  put  no  question ;  for  the  moment  you  design  to
direct  him,  you  will  cause  him  to  leave  the  sphere  in  which
he  is  ;  you  will  turn  aside  his  faculties  from  the  object  for
which  they  are  destined,  and  transport  him  into  an  immense
field  of  illusions.  The  power  of  your  will,  however  great
it  may  be,  cannot  force  him  to  see  beyond  the  circle  in
which  he  is  placed.  If  you  mingle  your  ideas  with  his,
your  conjectures  with  his  perceptions,  you  will  obscure  his
clairvoyance.  The  only  mode  for  you  to  pursue,  is  to
favor  its  developement  and  its  application.  It  is  the  confi-
dence and  the  simplicity  that  you  show,  not  by  your  words,
but  by  the  disposition  of  your  soul,  which  has  need  of  no
expression  in  order  to  be  perceived  and  recognized  by  him.
Without  doubt,  some  person  will  say  to  me,  "  But  where
is  the  proof  that  this  state  of  my  somnambulist  is  not  owing
to  a  peculiar  disposition  of  his  imagination,  which  causes
him  to  mistake  chimerical  ideas  for  correct  notions?  Ought
I  to  withdraw  my  reason  to  grant  him  a  blind  confidence?
And  how  shall  I  assure  myself  of  the  truth  of  what  he  tells
me,  if  I  do  not  combat  his  opinions  in  order  to  hear  his
replies,  and  appreciate  their  correctness  and  their  worth?"

I  will  answer  you  in  this  manner  :  —  I  am  very  far  from
advising  you  to  renounce  your  reason  in  order  to  adopt  the
ideas  and  follow  the  instructions  of  a  somnambulist. On


CHAP.  V,]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  95

the  contrary,  your  reason  and  good  sense  must  combine
the  whole,  and  your  decision  must  spring  from  their  proper
exercise.  But  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  two  conditions.
While  your  somnambulist  is  giving  utterance  to  his  ideas,
you  will  let  him  speak  without  interruption.  You  will  not
only  make  no  objection,  but  you  will  banish  from  your
mind  all  those  which  suggest  themselves  to  you.  You  will
not  exert  your  will  to  influence  or  direct  him.  You  will
not  demand  of  him  an  explanation  of  what  he  has  told  you,
except  when  you  have  not  well  understood.  You  will  not
desire  to  know  what  he  wishes  to  teach  you  of  his  own
accord.  You  will  also  try  not  to  be  astonished  at  what
appears  to  you  extraordinary.  You  will  not  seek  to  pene-
trate into  that  which  appears  incomprehensible.  You  will,
above  all,  avoid  putting  your  somnambulist  to  the  proof,
and  taking  indirect  means  to  ascertain  his  clairvoyance.
You  will  listen  to  him  with  self-forgetfulness,  confidence,
and  simplicity,  as  a  child  listens  to  a  mother  when  she
relates  things  to  form  his  heart  and  his  understanding,
while  amusing  his  mind.  But  after  he  has  reentered  the
ordinary  state,  and  you  are  away  from  him,  you  will  reca-
pitulate all  he  has  told  you;  you  will  examine  the  con-
nection of  his  ideas;  you  will  appreciate  the  correctness  of
his  reasonings  ;  you  will  weigh  the  degree  of  utility  in  his
instructions.  You  can  then  indulge  your  astonishment  at
the  penetration  with  which  he  has  read  your  heart ;  at  the
sincerity  of  his  wishes  for  your  real  happiness ;  at  the
exactitude  which  he  has  shown  you  while  speaking  of  a
past  event  with  which  he  was  not  acquainted ;  at  the
probability  of  his  previsions  of  the  future,  which  it  is  useful
for  you  to  know.  But  this  astonishment  should  not  pro-
duce conviction.  The  more  marvellous  a  fact  is,  the  more
we  ought  to  fear  being  seduced  by  appearances,  to  mistrust
the  impression  they  first  make  upon  us,  and  search  out  the
circumstances  that  may  give  them  a  natural  explanation.

Many  somnambulists,  when  their  faculties  were  exalted,
have  been  known  to  read  the  thoughts  of  others,  to  have
previsions,  to  be  exempt  from  vanity,  and  moved  solely  by
the  desire  of  enlightening  others;  and  yet  to  be  the  dupes
of  illusions  which  are  mingled  with  the  most  luminous
perceptions.  You  ought,  then,  to  ascertain  that  his  opin-
ions are  not  produced  by  old  impressions  on  the  memory,


96  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP. V.

by  the  prejudices  of  early  youth,  by  lectures  or  conver-
sations which  have  formerly  acted  temporarily  upon  his
mind;  finally,  that  no  exterior  influence  has  contributed
to  impart  a  peculiar  character  to  his  manner  of  viewing
things.*  If,  in  all  he  tells  you,  there  is  nothing  which
cannot  be  verified,  you  will  evidently  perceive  that  he  is
not  deceived,  that  the  torch  by  which  he  is  enlightened
is  not  an  ignis  fatuus.  Then  your  confidence  will  be
excited  by  a  train  of  facts  and  observations  which  deter-
mine your  reasoning ;  and  not  by  discourses  more  or  less
eloquent;  by  exhortations  more  or  less  affecting;  by  phe-
nomena which  are  inexplicable,  but  which  are  seen  else-
where ;  nor  by  images  and  descriptions  more  or  less  calcu-
lated to  move  you.  It  should  be  only  after  this  exam-
ination, made  in  the  spirit  of  reflection  and  in  solitude,
that  you  should  form  your  judgment.  It  is  essential  that
your  belief  should  be  supported  by  facts  well  demonstrated
to  your  own  mind,  so  that  no  objection  may  afterwards  pre-
sent itself  which  has  not  been  settled  beforehand;  because
this  belief,  far  from  being  a  fugitive  opinion,  ought  in  cer-
tain respects  to  decide  your  conduct.

Then,  if  it  happens  that  your  somnambulist  enters  sev-
eral times  in  succession  into  the  same  state,  you  will  con-
tinue to  hear  him  without  any  expression  of  thankfulness
or  approbation,  but  with  a  desire  to  profit  by  what  he  will
tell  you ;  and  perhaps  you  will  find  in  him  a  guide  who
will  not  lead  you  astray.  He  will,  at  least,  convince  you
of  the  existence  of  an  order  of  things  different  from  the

*  There  are  somnambulists  who  retrace  with  surprising  facility
the  ideas  which  they  received  in  their  infancy,  and  upon  whom
these  ideas  exercise  more  control  than  those  which  they  have  since
acquired.  A  very  lucid  somnambulist,  magnetized  by  M.  de  Lau-
sanne, afforded  me  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  phenomenon.  She
was  a  woman  about  forty  years  old.  She  was  born  at  St.  Do-
mingo, from  whence  she  came  to  France  at  the  age  of  six  or  seven
years,  and  she  had  never  afterwards  been  among  Creoles.  As  soon
as  she  was  in  the  somnambulic  state,  she  absolutely  spoke  nothing
but  the  peculiar  dialect  (patois)  which  she  had  learned  from  the
negress  who  had  nursed  her.  In  these  recollections  of  infancy,  in
this  return  towards  the  first  years  of  life,  we  must  search  for  the
cause  of  the  opinions  of  some  somnambulists.  There  are  some  of
them  who  seem  to  forget  the  notions  they  have  acquired  by  reason
and  observation,  as  they  retrograde  by  degrees  towards  the  period
when  their  minds  were  but  as  smooth  tablets.


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  97

present  order,  and  will  bring  you  acquainted  with  the
source  of  pure  and  durable  felicity,  which  nothing  exter-
nal, terrestrial,  and  transient,  can  impart.

The  species  of  somnambulism  which  I  have  just  de-
that,  in  a  work  designed  to  teach  the  use  of  magnetism,
I  ought  to  have  abstained  from  speaking  of  it,  because
there  is  little  probability  of  its  being  presented  to  my
readers.  To  this  I  answer,  that,  if  this  state  is  rare,  it  is
our  own  fault ;  it  doubtless  supposes  an  unusual  develope-
ment  of  the  soul's  faculties;  but  this  developement  fre-
quently takes  place,  and  nearly  all  those  who  have  prac-
tised magnetism  have  had  it  more  or  less  in  their  power  to
observe  it.  If  it  has  not  been  attended  with  that  pure
lucidity  of  which  I  have  seen  examples,  it  is  because  they
have  disturbed  or  turned  aside  the  natural  tendency.  I
am  persuaded  that,  out  of  ten  somnambulists,  who,  left  to
themselves,  would  reach  this  state,  nine  have  been  thrust
into  a  false  direction.  Their  astonishing  faculties  have
then  made  them  run  over  a  thousand  paths  in  the  vast  do-
main of  the  imagination.  Hence  it  has  resulted  that,
among  those  who  have  had  opportunity  to  see  this  extra-
ordinary somnambulism,  some  have  regarded  it  as  the
result  of  a  communication  with  spirits ;  some,  as  a  gift  of
prophecy ;  others,  as  the  effect  of  the  soul's  exaltation ;
others,  again,  as  a  transient  insanity.  Sometimes  we  per-
ceive in  it  illusions  of  the  strangest  kind,  without  any  real
foundation ;  sometimes  a  mixture  of  superstitious  notions
with  very  astonishing  previsions ;  sometimes  metaphoric
language  and  incoherent  images  ;  and  people  have  formed
various  judgments  of  this  state,  according  as  they  were
most  struck  with  what  was  presented  of  light  and  truth,
or  of  darkness  and  illusion.  Nothing  of  this  would  have
existed,  if  the  somnambulist  had  been  well  directed,  or,
rather,  if  he  had  not  been  led  astray  by  the  ignorance,  the
vanity,  the  curiosity,  of  his  magnetizer  ;  if  the  natural  chain
of  his  ideas  had  not  been  interrupted,  to  occupy  him  in
subjects  which  were  absolutely  alien  to  him.

The  greater  part  of  my  readers  will,  without  doubt,
judge  that  I  labor  under  an  illusion  in  relation  to  the  phe-
nomena of  which  I  have  just  given  an  account ;  and  I
ought  the  more  to  expect  it,  because  I  would  not  myself
9


98  OP SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP. V.

believe  until  I  had  been  an  eye-witness.  I  did  not  per-
ceive their  reality  till  very  late,  and  long  after  I  had  pub-
lished ray  Critical  History  ;  but  then  they  were  fre-
quently renewed  before  my  eyes,  and  I  am  well  convinced
that  I  should  have  seen  them  sooner,  if  I  had  conducted
myself  with  more  singleness  of  purpose.  Those  who  will
follow  the  instructions  I  have  given  will  have  the  same
happiness  that  I  have  had;  and  this  consideration  alone
has  determined  me  to  give  them  precautions,  by  taking
which  they  will  profit  by  the  favorable  circumstances,  and
not  let  slip  an  opportunity  which  does  not  occur  when  we
search  for  it,  but  which  we  may  seize  when  it  comes  in
our  way.

I  ought,  further,  to  mention  that  this  state  is  rarely  much
prolonged;  and  that  the  magnetizer  has  no  power  what-
ever to  reproduce  it,  when  it  has  ceased  to  manifest  itself.
When  the  somnambulist  has  told  you  what  he  deemed  im-
portant to  tell  you,  his  clairvoyance  ceases,  or  at  least  is
no  longer  engaged  upon  things  of  the  same  nature.  You
must  profit  by  the  moment.

I  do  not  pretend  in  any  manner  to  discover  the  causes
of  the  phenomena  about  which  I  have  spoken.  Every  one
can  explain  them  as  he  chooses.  The  wisest  way  is  not  to
search  for  an  explanation.  For  in  our  waking  state  we
can  very  well  recognize,  by  the  effects,  the  existence  of  a
new  faculty  in  somnambulists ;  but  we  can  no  more  deter-
mine the  nature  of  it,  than  they  who  are  blind  from  birth
can  conceive  the  phenomena  of  vision.

Perhaps  some  one  will  ask  of  me,  whether  the  somnam-
bulists of  whom  I  speak  could  not  give  us  some  light  on
the  dogmas  of  religion,  on  the  choice  between  the  various
forms  of  worship,  and  on  certain  questions  which  have
unhappily  divided  mankind.  I  can  merely  answer  that  I
do  not  believe  they  can.  But  it  is  too  essential  an  object
to  forewarn  my  readers  against  a  curiosity  always  useless
and  often  dangerous,  for  me  to  neglect  adding  some  obser-
vations in  this  place  to  the  principles  I  have  already  laid
down.  These  details  will  also  serve  to  make  them  the
more  easily  distinguish  the  species  of  somnambulism  to
which  I  have  called  their  attention.

I  have  said  that  the  somnambulist  is  illuminated  by  a
light  which  our  spirit  received  from  God  when  it  received


GHAP. V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  9$

its  existence.  This  light,  anterior  to  human  education,
shows  to  man  that  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  religion,
as  the  conscience  unveils  to  him  that  which  is  the  foun-
dation of  all  morals ;  but  it  teaches  him  revealed  dogmas
no  more  than  it  does  positive  laws.

What  are  the  truths  which  are  shown  with  evidence  to
the  somnambulist  1  The  existence,  the  omnipotence,  the
bounty,  of  the  Creator ;  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  the
certainty  of  another  life ;  the  recompense  of  the  good,  the
punishment  of  the  evil,  which  we  have  done  in  this ;  Provi-
dence, the  necessity  and  efficacy  of  prayer,  the  preemi-
nence of  charity  over  the  other  virtues ;  to  which  is  joined
the  consoling  idea  that  those  who  have  preceded  us  on
earth,  and  who  have  merited  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  hap-
piness, hear  our  wishes,  take  an  interest  in  us,  and  may  be
our  intercessors  before  God;  the  profound  conviction  that
God  never  refuses  to  enlighten  us  in  what  we  ought  to
know,  when,  submitted  to  his  will,  we  ask  aid  of  him;  the
firm  persuasion  of  the  utility  of  worship,  which,  by  uniting
tice to  all,  by  which  they  pray  in  concert  to  obtain  the
blessings  of  Heaven.  These  are  the  ideas  common  to  all
religious  somnambulists.  They  go  not  beyond  that,  which
is  to  urge  you,  in  a  general  manner,  to  fulfil  the  duties
which  religion  imposes  upon  you.  But,  when  you  are  once
imbued  with  these  principles,  will  you  fail  to  have  the
means  of  instruction,  to  know  what  you  ought  to  believe
and  what  you  ought  to  practise?

"  But,"  says  some  one,  "  I  would  like  very  much  to  in-
terrogate my  somnambulist,  and  profit  by  his  knowledge,
to  dissipate  this  or  that  doubt,  to  answer  this  or  that  ob-
jection." You  will  gain  nothing ;  you  will  even  lose  the
advantages  which  you  might  derive  from  his  lucidity.  It
is  very  possible  that  you  could  make  him  speak  upon  all
the  subjects  of  your  indiscreet  curiosity  ;  but  in  that  case,
as  I  have  already  warned  you,  you  will  make  him  leave  his
own  sphere  to  introduce  him  into  yours.  He  will  no
longer  have  any  other  resources  than  yourself.  He  will
utter  to  you  very  eloquent  discourses,  but  they  will  no
more  be  dictated  by  the  internal  inspirations.  They  will
be  the  product  of  his  recollections,  or  of  his  imagination ;
perhaps  you  will  also  rouse  his  vanity,  and  then  all  is  lost ;


100  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP. Y,

he  will  not  reenter  the  circle  from  which  he  has  wandered,
And  how  can  you  suppose  that  a  light  which  is  innate  in
all  men  should  throw  its  rays  beyond  that  of  revelation  1
Is  it  not  enough  that  it  brings  us  to  recognize  the  advan-
tages of  this  revelation?  If  you  are  in  an  obscure  laby-
rinth, your  guide  makes  use  of  his  torch ;  but  as  soon  as
he  has  conducted  you  to  the  place  where  the  light  of  the
sun  is  shining,  his  torch  is  useless.  If,  in  embarrassing
circumstances,  you  have  to  decide  between  different  duties,
your  somnambulist  may  enlighten  you ;  but  if  you  say  to
him,  "Is  it  permitted  me  to  avoid  paying  such  a  tax?"  he
will  merely  answer,  "  Consult  the  laws."

I  know  very  well  that  somnambulists  have  been,  and  are
now,  known  to  discourse  about  religion,  and  even  about  the
social  organization ;  but  they  do  not  resemble  those  of
whom  I  have  just  spoken :  the  imagination  controlling  all
their  other  faculties,  their  manner  of  utterance,  and  the
expression  of  their  features,  stamp  them  as  enthusiasts.
The  two  states  cannot  be  confounded,  if  you  will  but  con-
form to  the  rules  I  have  given.  Moreover,  these  somnam-
bulists are  evidently  influenced  by  the  persons  who  sur-
round them,  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are
placed.  The  errors  to  which  they  are  subject,  the  illu-
sions of  which  they  are  the  sport,  the  extravagances  which
they  utter,  result  from  a  nervous  excitement  which  they
would  never  have  experienced,  if  the  faculties  had  been
naturally  developed,  in  silence,  solitude,  and  freedom  from
external  influence.*


*  I  have  said  that  the  somnambulist,  when  arrived  at  the  highest
degree  of  concentration,  sometimes  imagines  himself  to  be  inspired ;
but  he  can  impart  no  idea  of  the  beings  to  whom  he  thinks  he  owes
this  inspiration.  When  a  somnambulist  has  visions,  they  ought  to
be  considered  as  phantoms,  like  those  which  are  witnessed  in  dreams.
Bodies  only  have  forms.  If  spirits  could  communicate  with  us,  it
would  be  by  exerting  an  immediate  influence  upon  our  souls.  Soc^
rates,  who  believed  himself  inspired  by  a  good  genius,  affirmed  that
we  could  no  more  see  it  than  any  thing  else  which  is  divine.  (See
Plutarch  ;  the  Demon  of  Socrates,  section  35.)  He  said  that  we  could
have  an  internal  voice,  because  thought  is  manifested  to  us  only  by
language.

In  somnambulism,  the  sensibility  which  is  proper  to  the  organs  of
the  internal  life  is  exalted ;  from  the  latent  state  in  which  it  is,  it  be-
comes perceptible  ;  and  these  organs  are  then  the  instruments  of  ou?
soul,  as  Doctor  Bertrand  has  very  well  stated  it,  in  his  Treatise  oa


CHAP. V.J  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  101

Many  enlightened  men,  among  those  who  are  engaged  in
physiology,  and  who  have  some  notion  of  the  phenomena
of  magnetism,  will  not  fail  to  affirm  that  the  state  which  I
somnambulism,  which  differs  from  others  in  the  concen-
tration of  mind  upon  religious  ideas,  and  that  this  does  not
prove  any  thing  to  establish  the  truth  of  the  opinions  held
by  those  who  enter  into  that  state.  I  will  not  discuss  this
question,  because  it  is  not  the  design  of  this  work  to
inquire  into  the  nature  of  the  magnetic  phenomena,  nor  to
prove  the  truth  of  the  notions  they  impart  to  us.  I  have
merely  intended  to  point  out  how  the  peculiar  state  which
I  have  made  known,  ought  to  be  observed  when  it  occurs,
and  what  line  of  conduct  ought  to  be  pursued  so  as  not  to
trouble  or  change  its  direction.  Those  who  see  it  as  I
have,  and  take  the  proper  precautions,  will  soon  decide  for
themselves  as  to  the  degree  of  confidence  to  be  placed  in  it.
I  wished  to  teach  the  mode  of  avoiding  the  errors  spring-
ing from  ourselves ;  but  I  do  not  pretend  to  point  out  the
sure  characteristics  of  truth.  I  have  told  when  and  how
the  facts  might  be  observed;  but  it  is  for  each  one  to  draw
from  these  facts,  by  the  use  of  his  own  reason,  the  conse-
quences which  appear  to  him  the  most  probable  and  the
best  founded.  I  will  merely  call  attention  to  the  fact,  that
the  doctrine  which  somnambulists,  in  the  highest  state  of
concentration  and  abstraction,  (isolement,)  have  laid  down,
is  as  far  removed  from  mysticism  as  from  materialism,  as
much  opposed  to  intolerance  as  to  incredulity;  that  it
makes  no  innovations,  and  merely  confirms  opinions  ut-
tered at  all  times  by  some  of  the  sages;  that,  far  from  pro-
scribing philosophy,  it  brings  it  into  accordance  with
religion ;  finally,  that,  whether  it  be  regarded  as  the
product  of  the  imagination,  or  as  inspired  by  the  internal
sentiment,  we  are  forced  to  agree  that  the  consequences
flowing  from  it  inspire  a  high  idea  of  the  dignity  of  man,

Somnambulism.  But  this  new  mode  of  perception  may  lead  us  into
error,  as  does  that  which  we  enjoy  in  the  ordinary  state.  It  is  then
important  to  distinguish  what  appertains  to  the  natural  develope-
ment  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  and  the  notions  furnished  by  the
new  instruments,  from  what  may  be  produced  by  the  imagination,
or  by  a  foreign  influence.  I  have  endeavored  to  impart  the  means
to  avoid  confounding  these  two  classes  of  phenomena.
9*


102  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V,

favor  the  happiness  of  individuals,  and  tend  to  establish
peace  and  harmony  in  society.  It  is  pleasant,  it  is  de-
lightful, to  have  one  more  reason  for  expecting  another
life,  to  believe  that  Providence  watches  over  us,  that  our
afflictions,  supported  with  resignation,  will  have  a  recom-
pense; that  all  men,  the  children  of  a  common  parent,
ought  to  be  united  by  the  bonds  of  charity ;  that  those  who
have  preceded  us  on  earth  hear  our  wishes,  and  take  an
interest  in  us ;  and  that  the  good  will  one  day  be  united  in
a  communion  of  sentiments  and  enjoyments,  where  the
delights  of  pure  affection,  and  the  torch  of  truth  unob-
scured,  will  crown  the  desires  of  our  souls,  which  were
created  for  knowledge  and  love.

Among  the  men  who  are  engaged  in  magnetism,  there
are,  unhappily,  some  materialists.  I  cannot  conceive  how
it  is  that  some  of  the  phenomena  of  which  they  have  been
witnesses,  such  as  the  power  of  seeing  at  a  distance,  pre-
vision, the  action  of  the  will,  the  communication  of  thought
without  the  aid  of  external  signs,  have  not  appeared  to
them  sufficient  proofs  of  the  spirituality  of  the  soul.  Buty
finally,  their  opinion  is  opposite  to  mine ;  they  are  sincere,
because  they  have  no  object  in  sustaining  it;  they  are
better  instructed  than  I  am  in  the  physical  sciences ;  my
arguments  cannot  change  their  manner  of  seeing,  and  I
should  be  very  presumptuous  if  I  flattered  myself  with  the
idea  of  overcoming  them  in  the  warfare  of  opposition.
Well  persuaded  that  they  are  in  error,  I  ought  to  wish  for
new  phenomena  to  enlighten  their  minds.  Perhaps,  if  they
had  observed  the  developement  of  somnambulism,,  in  all  its
simplicity;  if  they  had  exercised  no  influence  over  their
somnambulists ;  if  they  had  not  excited  their  imagination
or  their  vanity  in  requiring  extraordinary  things  of  them ;
if  they  had  left  them  to  the  natural  order  of  their  ideas,  —
they  would  have  obtained  results  altogether  different.  I
invite  them  to  follow  the  path  I  have  traced  out.  It  is
an  experiment  worthy  of  their  sagacity,  as  it  is  of  their
courageous  frankness,  to  retract  their  first  opinions,  if
they  are  ever  convinced  of  their  having  embraced  an  error.

In  relation  to  the  employment  of  magnetism,  and  the
management  of  somnambulism,  I  believe  I  have  given  all
the  directions  necessary  to  persons  who  are  not  already
enlightened  by  experience. It  all  consists  in  having  but


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  103

a  single  end  in  view  —  that  of  rendering  service,  of  devoting
yourself  to  the  patient  whose  treatment  you  undertake,  to
make  an  entire  sacrifice  of  personal  considerations,  to  free
yourself  from  all  self-interest,  from  all  vanity,  from  all
curiosity;  but,  I  must  confess,  the  requisition  is  severe.
He  who,  by  the  desire  of  the  family,  and  with  the  consent
of  the  physician,  has  taken  charge  of  the  treatment  of  a
dangerous  disease,  ought  to  abstain  from  all  other  labor,
except  what  the  duties  of  his  condition  impose ;  to  be  in-
different to  the  pleasantries  of  worldly  men ;  to  be  silent  in
regard  to  the  phenomena  he  witnesses;  to  renounce  almost
all  diversions;  to  avoid  that  which  may  cause  lively  emo-
tions; to  husband  his  strength  habitually,  so  as  to  employ  it,
when  it  is  required,  without  the  fear  of  fatigue ;  finally,  to
occupy  himself  continually  about  the  patient  who  has
placed  in  him  his  confidence,  and  to  consider  him  as  the
counterpart  of  himself.

What  shall  indemnify  him  for  so  much  pains,  for  so
many  sacrifices  1  The  satisfaction  of  having  done  good,
There  is  nothing  beyond  such  enjoyment.  If  the  services
you  have  rendered  are  soon  forgotten,  —  if  you  are  exposed
to  pleasantry,  to  ridicule,  and  even  to  the  accusation  of
charlatanry,  —  you  will  remember  that  you  have  God  as  the
witness  of  your  actions,  and  that  you  are  happy  enough  in
having  Him  as  the  only  one  who  deigns  to  charge  him-
self with  your  reward.

After  what  has  been  said,  it  may  be  seen  that  the  prac-
tice of  magnetism  requires  the  possession  of  rare  qualities,
and  that  the  love  of  doing  good  should  be  the  sole  motive
for  engaging  in  it.  It  is  also  evident  that  great  prudence
should  be  exercised  in  the  choice  of  a  magnetizer,


NOTE  I.

I  have  stated  that  somnambulists  do  not  every  day  exhibit  the
same  degree  of  clairvoyance ;  but  I  forgot  to  mention  that  they
sometimes  lose  it  in  respect  to  this  or  that  patient  with  whom
they  have  long  been  in  communication,  while  at  the  same  time
they  show  a  great  deal  of  it  in  relation  to  others.  This  anomaly
is  singular ;  but  I  have,  unfortunately,  seen  many  instances  of  it,
I  will  explain.


104  OF SOMNAMBULISM,  [CHAP.  V.

In  severe  chronic  diseases,  it  happens  very  frequently  that,  at
the  first  consultation,  the  somnambulist  sees,  in  an  astonishing
manner,  the  anterior  state,  and  the  actual  state,  of  the  patient
He  points  out  the  remedies  which  first  produce  alleviation,  and,
some  days  after,  such  an  amelioration  as  to  make  us  consider  the
cure  as  certain.  Every  thing  he  tells  is  realized,  and  our  confi-
dence appears  to  be  well  founded.  But  in  the  sequel,  the  condi-
tion of  the  patient  changes.  He  grows  worse.  The  somnam-
intended  effects.  He  no  longer  judges  by  instinct,  by  intuition^
He  conjectures  ;  he  gropes  in  the  dark  ;  he  seeks  to  remedy  the
accidents  which  he  had  not  foreseen  ;  and  we  find  too  late  that
we  should  not  have  depended  upon  him  blindly.

It  is  expedient,  then,  to  conduct  ourselves  with  the  same  pru-
dence, and  the  same  circumspection,  during  the  whole  continu-
ance of  the  treatment ;  and  we  ought  not  to  persuade  ourselves
that  the  somnambulist  will  commit  no  mistakes  in  the  second  or
the  third  month,  because  he  saw  well,  and  perfectly  succeeded,
during  the  first  days.  As  soon  as  the  somnambulist  ceases  to
announce  beforehand,  with  exactitude,  the  effects  of  his  remedies,
and  the  crises  which  occur,  we  ought  no  longer  to  place  depend-
ence on  him.  It  is  entirely  futile  to  ask  the  somnambulist  for  an
explanation  of  what  has  befallen  him.  The  greater  part  of  the
time,  he  is  not  in  condition  to  give  it ;  but  he  ought  never  to  make
a  mistake  in  the  announcement  of  the  effects  which  will  occur.
What  I  have  now  said  applies  more  particularly  to  somnambulists
by  profession.  A  somnambulist  who  is  charged  with  the  cure
of  one  or  two  patients,  with  whom  he  identifies  himself,  almost
always  preserves  his  clairvoyance  unimpaired ;  or,  if  he  loses  it,
he  perceives  the  loss,  and  gives  notice  of  it.


INTOTE  II.

The  Treatise  on  Somnambulism  published  by  Doctor  Bertrand
is  the  first  work,  ex  professo,  upon  the  subject,  and  the  only  on&
in  which  it  has  been  examined  in  its  numerous  relations.  In  this
publication,  we  recognize  a  man  profoundly  versed  in  the  study
of  medicine,  physiology,  and  metaphysics.  The  author  com-
pares natural  somnambulism  to  that  which  is  exhibited  in  many
diseases,  to  that  which  arises  from  the  excitement  of  the  imagi-
nation, and  to  that  which  originates  in  the  magnetic  treatment :
and  he  proves  that  they  all  present  analogous  phenomena,
and  are  referable  to  the  same  cause.  He  also  reduces  to
the  natural  order  many  facts  which  have  been  attributed  to
supernatural  causes  ;  and  he  arrives  at  this  highly  important
conclusion,  that,  if  the  world  had  at  first  known  the  phenom-
ena of  magnetic  somnambulism,  they  would  not  have  attrib-*


CHAP.  V.]  AND ITS MANAGEMENT.  105

uted  to  the  devil  those  which  the  pretended  sorcerers  exhibited ;
to  a  celestial  inspiration,  those  which  were  witnessed  among  the
prophets  of  Cevennes ;  to  the  influence  of  Deacon  Paris,  those
which  were  witnessed  at  Saint  Medard.  But  he  seems  to  me  to
make  a  mistake  in  what  he  says  upon  the  action  of  magnetism,
and  upon  the  principles  of  that  action.  He  has  searched  into
physiology  for  the  explanation  of  phenomena  which  depend  upon
a  different  law  ;  he  has  generalized  the  observations  which  were
proper  for  his  purpose  ;  and  he  regarded  as  illusions  facts  less
surprising  than  the  ones  he  has  seen,  when  they  did  not  accord
with  his  theory.  If  he  had  been  a  witness  of  many  of  the  facts
which  have  passed  under  my  eyes,  —  if  he  had  examined  the  evi-
dence in  favor  of  most  of  those  which  have  been  reported  by
enlightened  men,  —  he  would  not  have  thrown  aside  what  he  calls
the  pretensions  of  the  magnetizers.

I  would  not  have  permitted  myself  to  make  critical  observa-
tions upon  this  work,  if  I  had  not  judged  it  sufficiently  instructive
and  important  to  make  it  a  duty  to  advise  the  reading  of  it.

I  would  also  add  that  M.  Bertrand,  though  he  is  not  endowed
with  great  physical  energy,  has  cured  by  magnetism  very  severe
and  very  inveterate  nervous  diseases.  This  does  not  in  any  de-
gree demonstrate  the  truth  of  his  ingenious  theory,  but  it  proves
that  he  possesses  many  of  the  qualities  which  constitute  a  good
magnetizer.


106


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  PRECAUTION  IN  THE  CHOICE  OF  A  MAGNETIZER;


Of  the  Precautions  to  be  taken  by  Patients  who  wish  to  be  magnet-
ized, in  Regard  to  the  Choice  of  a  Magnetizer,  and  the  Success
of  the  Treatment.

After  having  pointed  out,  to  those  who  wish  to  practise
magnetism,  the  principles  which  ought  to  direct  them,  the
processes  they  ought  at  first  to  employ,  and  the  conduct  to
be  pursued  in  case  somnambulism  occurs,  I  think  it  also
my  duty  to  give  advice  to  persons  who,  being  ill,  wish  to
try  magnetism  for  the  recovery  of  their  health,  and  who  do
not  know  in  their  own  society  any  person  in  whom  they
have  an  entire  confidence.

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  observe  that,  in  slight  and  re-
cent injuries,  such  as  a  bruise,  exposure  to  the  air,  a  head-
ache, pains  in  the  stomach,  and,  briefly,  all  those  which  do
not  require  a  treatment  prolonged  for  many  days,  you  may
dispense  with  the  precautions  I  am  about  to  indicate.

Look  out,  in  your  own  family,  or  among  your  friends,
for  some  one,  who*  if  he  is  not  convinced  of  the  reality  of
magnetism,  may  be  at  least  disposed  to  believe  in  it,  from
the  testimony  of  those  who  have  seen  its  effects,  and  from
the  desire  of  having  in  himself  the  means  of  soothing  the
distresses  of  his  fellow-men,  and  who  joins  to  this  dis-
position of  mind  physical  and  moral  qualities  essential  for
magnetizers  ;  that  is  to  say,  good  health,  discretion,  the  love-
of  good,  a  character  tranquil  and  firm,  and  having  leisure
to  give  you  the  attendance  requisite  for  your  restoration.

It  is  always  of  great  advantage  to  have  a  magnetizer  in;
your  own  family  ;  the  ties  of  blood  contribute,  by  a  physi-
cal sympathy,  to  establish  a  communication.  The  confi-
dence and  friendship  which  exist  between  a  husband  and
his  wife,  between  a  mother  and  her  daughter,  and  between.


CHAP.  VI.] CHOICE  OF  A  MAGNETIZER.  107

near  relations,  have  already  produced  that  affection  and
that  devotedness  which  ought  to  unite  the  magnetizer  to
the  somnambulist,  and  which  authorize  the  continuance  of
these  sentiments  when  the  treatment  has  ceased.

I  have  said  that  women  ought  to  be  preferred  to  magnet-
ize women :  I  say  more ;  it  is  that  (leaving  out  the  case
where  plain  good  sense  declares  it  a  matter  of  indifference)
they  alone  ought  to  be  charged  with  it.  The  reasons  are
these  :  —

1st.  It  is  clear  that  the  magnetic  processes  never  pre-
sent the  least  embarrassment  to  persons  of  the  same  sex,
and  when  a  man  magnetizes  a  woman,  he  is  obliged  to  be
attentive  lest  any  of  the  processes  wound  decency,  or  the
common  usages  of  life.  A  man,  for  example,  cannot  place
himself  opposite  to  a  woman  and  fix  his  eyes  upon  her  ;  if
any  crisis  occurs,  he  is  obliged  to  call  on  a  woman  for  the
purpose  of  administering  to  her  wants.

2d.  When  magnetism  is  accompanied  with  somnambu-
lism, it  generally  imparts  to  the  somnambulist  a  very  lively
affection  for  her  magnetizer  ;  and  this  affection  continues
in  the  wakeful  state,  even  after  the  treatment  is  at  an  end.
I  know  very  well  that  this  attachment  is  of  the  same  kind
as  that  which  we  feel  for  near  relations,  and  implies  no
idea  injurious  to  the  best  sentiments.  But  it  is  contrary
to  all  propriety,  that  a  young  woman  should  have  a  very
lively  friendship  for  any  other  than  her  father,  her  uncles,
or  her  brothers.  If  she  has  this  sentiment,  she  is  obliged
to  moderate  it,  and  especially  not  to  express  it,  if  she  re-
gards propriety.

3d.  Chronic  diseases  are  sometimes  attended  with  symp-
toms in  regard  to  which  modesty  compels  silence,  and
about  which  even  a  physician  is  obliged  to  conjecture,  for
the  want  of  being  informed.  They  often  spring  from
secret  chagrin,  mental  troubles,  constrained  feelings,  &c.
The  somnambulist  has,  and  ought  to  have,  an  entire  confi-
dence in  her  magnetizer ;  but  as  she  does  not  lose  the
sense  of  propriety,  there  are  many  things  about  which  a
woman  in  that  state  will  not  dare  to  speak  to  a  man.
There  are  also  many  questions  which  a  man  cannot  ask  of
a  woman,  much  advice  that  he  cannot  give  her,  many  par-
ticulars of  which  he  cannot  discourse.

4th. Finally,  magnetism  sometimes  produces,  in  nervous


108  OP PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE  [CHAP.  VI.

diseases,  spasmodic  movements,  and  other  crises,  of  which
it  is  not  proper  for  a  man  to  be  a  witness,  and  in  which  he
cannot  employ  the  processes  best  calculated  to  soothe  them.

Thus  they  who  have  said  that,  to  avoid  all  the  inconve-
niences of  magnetism  between  persons  of  different  sexes,  it
suffices  that  both  the  magnetizer  and  the  magnetized  pos-
sess an  honesty  and  delicacy  above  all  suspicion,  have  not
considered  the  thing  in  its  true  point  of  view.  All  I  have
now  said  is  without  allusion  to  the  fear  that  magnetism  will
create  sentiments  or  attachments  which  morality  forbids.*

All  other  things  being  equal,  the  best  magnetizer  for  a
woman  is  her  husband ;  for  a  husband,  his  wife ;  for  a
young  lady,  her  sister  or  her  mother.

One  other  consideration  makes  it  desirable  that  a  woman
should  find  a  magnetizer  in  her  own  family,  or  among  the
friends  she  most  frequently sees,  and  with  whom  she  is

*  I  owe  several  of  these  reflections  to  Madame  Chambon  de  Mon-
taux, who,  by  practising  magnetism  after  the  instructions  that  I
have  given  her,  has  obtained  such  success  as  her  ardent  charity
merited.  M.  Chambon  de  Montaux  was,  in  1784,  one  of  the  doctors
of  the  faculty  who  pronounced  against  magnetism.  He  had  then
seen  nothing.  I  showed  him  some  facts,  and  his  old  prejudices  did
not  prevent  him  from  yielding  to  the  evidence.  His  wife  has  many
times  aided  him  in  saving  patients  for  whom  the  resources  of  his
art  appeared  to  him  insufficient.

Unhappily  Madame  de  Montaux  is  of  delicate  health,  her  physical
powers  do  not  correspond  with  her  moral  energy,  and  the  practice
of  magnetism  causes  a  fatigue  which  she  is  always  too  late  in  per-
ceiving. After  a  treatment  of  a  malignant  fever,  which  she  had
cured,  by  joining,  at  the  request  of  her  husband,  magnetism  to  me-
dicinal remedies,  I  have  seen  her  so  ill  that  she  could  hardly  have
been*  restored  without  being  herself  magnetized.  One  very  extraor-
dinary thing,  which  I  cannot  account  for,  is,  that  she  commonly
takes  the  disease  of  the  person  she  magnetizes  ;  not  that  the  cause
of  the  disease  passes  to  her,  but  that  she  has,  for  several  days,  the
sensation  and  symptoms  of  it.  I  have  seen  an  instance  of  it  in  an
attack  of  the  gout,  and  in  an  ophthalmia,  which  are  not  contagious
diseases.

By  reflecting  upon  the  effects  she  has  produced,  and  on  those  she
has  experienced,  Madame  de  Montaux  has  discovered  of  herself  the
principles  of  magnetism  ;  and  she  has  drawn  from  them  the  most
useful  results.  She  has  written  down  her  observations,  and  shown
me  her  manuscript,  by  which  I  have  profited.  I  have  there  found
very  just  remarks,  singleness  of  purpose,  and,  above  all,  the  love  of
order,  and  a  zeal  for  good.  It  is  the  same  character  which  has  been
observed  in  the  work  she  published  under  the  title  of  "  Moral  and
Political  Reflections  upon  the  Advantages  of  Monarchy."


CHAP.  VI.]  OF A MAGNETIZER.  109

most  intimately  connected.  The  motives  I  am  going  to
mention  will  no  longer  exist  when  the  practice  shall  be
generally  spread,  and  when  physicians  shall  advise  the
use  of  it;  but  in  the  actual  state  of  things,  they  are
important.*

It  is  almost  impossible,  especially  in  a  small  town,  for  a
man  to  come  each  day  and  pass  an  hour  with  a  woman,
without  people's  perceiving  it,  and  discovering  the  reason.
Then  inquisitive  persons  ask  the  magnetizer  many  ques-
tions which  embarrass  him ;  and,  if  the  disease  be  not  a
very  severe  one,  the  incredulous  will  indulge  in  ill-placed
pleasantries.  Indiscreet  persons  will  talk  to  the  patient
about  the  method  she  has  chosen  to  pursue,  and  give  her
inquietude.  A  woman  does  not  like  to  draw  observation.
Those  who  surround  her,  and  who  approve  the  use  of
magnetism,  have  much  trouble  in  preventing  her  from
experiencing  some  inconveniences.  Doubtless  there  ought
to  be  no  mystery  in  the  practice  of  magnetism ;  but  it  is
useless  to  speak  of  it  to  those  who  do  not  believe  in  its
reality.

As  soon  as  you  have  chosen  a  person  in  whom  you  are
willing  to  place  confidence,  and  he  has  consented  to
bestow  care  upon  you,  you  will  entreat  him  to  read  this
little  work  attentively.  If,  after  having  read  it,  he  adopts
its  principles,  and  continues  willing  to  render  you  the
service  you  require,  you  will  entreat  him  to  speak  of  it  to
no  one  except  to  those  of  your  friends  to  whom  you  can
impart  a  secret,  in  order  to  avoid  the  talk  of  the  incred-
ulous, and  especially  the  solicitations  of  the  curious,  who
may  desire  to  assist  at  the  sittings.  You  will  arrange
things  so  as  to  fix  upon  an  hour  convenient  for  him  and
for  you ;  because  a  treatment  once  commenced  should
never  be  interrupted.

When  you  have  made  an  agreement  with  him,  and  he
has  given  you  his  word  not  to  try  any  experiments  upon
you  through  curiosity,  but  to  act  solely  for  your  resto-
ration, you  will  abandon  yourself  to  him  with  entire  confi-
dence, and,  as  you  are  sure  of  his discretion,  you  will


*  The  reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  these  observations  were
written  twelve  years  ago.  A  great  change  has  since  taken  place  in
the  opinions  of  men  of  science  in  regard  to  this  subject.  —  Trans.

10


110  OF PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE [CHAP. VT»

conceal  from  him  nothing  which  relates  to  the  cause  of
your  disease.

If  you  have  already  taken  remedies^  and  have  a  physi-
cian, you  will  impart  to  him  your  determination,  requesting
him  to  keep  it  a  secret.  Entreat  him  to  consent  to  your
employing  magnetism  as  auxiliary  to  medicine.  I  do  not
doubt,  that,  even  when  the  physician  looks  upon  magnetism
as  a  chimera,  and  attributes  all  its  effects  to  the  imagi-
nation, he  will  consent  to  observe,  from  time  to  time,  the
changes  which  this  new  agent  works  in  you  ;  to  combine
even  to  suspend  the  use  of  those  which  do  not  appear  to
him  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  judge  better  of  the
influence  of  the  new  means  you  wish  to  try.

It  is  essential  to  inform  your  physician  of  the  intention
you  have  formed;  because  he  may  attribute  the  crises
which  magnetism  may  produce  to  the  prescriptions  he
has  himself  administered.

In  severe  maladies,  the  action  of  magnetism  is  often  in-
sufficient ;  it  must  be  aided  by  medicine,  which  the  physi-
an  effect  similar  to  what  we  desire  of  a  medicine,  which
then  becomes  useless.  For  instance,  you  wish  to  admin-
ister an  emetic  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  you  will
magnetize  at  five  o'clock  ;  the  effect  takes  place  without
to  lessen  sharp  pains  and  restore  sleep ;  after  the  magnetic
sitting,  the  pains  have  ceased,  the  patient  sleeps  peaceably,
right ;  but  would  not  the  physician  have  cause  to  be  in-
jured in  his  feelings,  if  you  did  not  let  him  know  that  you
did  not  obey  his  orders,  and  if  you  make  a  mystery  of  the
motives  which  have  influenced  you?

In  case  of  lucid  somnambulism,  the  advice  of  the  physi-
cian is  no  longer  necessary  ;  but  it  is  no  more  than  right
to  inform  him  of  the  phenomena  you  have  obtained;  and
it  is  even  your  duty  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  be  en-
lightened upon  the  effects  of  magnetism,  so  that  he  may,
as  occasion  requires,  connect  with  it  the  resources  which
study  and  experience  have  rendered  familiar  to  him.

I  have  now  pointed  out  the  resolutions  and  the  measures
which  ought  to  be  taken  before  commencing  a  treatment :


CHAP.  VI.]  OF A MAGNETIZER.  Ill

we  will  now  see  how  we  ought  to  conduct  ourselves  when
the  treatment  is  commenced.

remedies  for  you,  you  will  follow  them  with  entire  security,
observing  his  directions  exactly,  without  asking  the  reason.
become  a  somnambulist,  and  satisfied  himself  that  your
somnambulism  is  accompanied  with  clairvoyance.  This  is
a  subject  on  which  you  ought  not,  by  any  means,  to  concern
yourself  until  after  your  restoration.  You  will  not  be  in
the  least  alarmed  at  any  crisis  or  transient  indisposition,
and  you  will  mention  them  unreservedly  to  your  mag-
netizer.

If  you  do  not  sleep,  one  of  these  three  things  will  occur:
you  will  feel  no  effects,  you  will  experience  either  relief  or
you  will  grow  worse.

In  the  first  case,  you  will  try  nearly  a  month  ;  in  the
second  case,  you  will  continue  with  patience  so  long  as
your  magnetizer  is  not  wearied;  in  the  third  case,  which
is  very  rare,  you  will  renounce  magnetism  after  some  days,
to  make  use  of  ordinary  medicine.

But  it  requires  careful  attention  before  you  can  say,  with
certainty,  that  the  disease  is  rendered  worse.  A  person
might  be  deceived  by  appearances,  and  renounce  magnet-
ism at  the  moment  when  it  is  on  the  point  of  doing  the
most  good,  A  physician  who  has  studied  and  practised
magnetism  would  assuredly  not  err  in  regard  to  the  nature
and  the  consequences  of  the  effects  it  produces ;  but  such
a  physician  is  not  readily  found.  I  am  going  to  make
some  observations,  from  which  a  person  might  form  a  judg-
ment according  to  circumstances,  and  conduct  himself
with  all  possible  prudence,  without  being  disturbed  by  ill-
founded  fears.

In  describing  the  effects  by  which  magnetism  manifests
its  action,  I  have  said  that  it  frequently  brings  on  very
sharp  pains.  These  pains  prove  that  it  acts  powerfully;
they  are  necessary  to  subdue  the  disease.  If,  then,  you
experience  sufferings,  you  will  have  the  fortitude  to  bear
them,  without  speaking  of  them  to  any  one.  You  will
regard  them  as  the  proof  of  a  salutary  action  ;  you  will  not
£ven  ask  your  magnetizer  to  calm  them. If  you  have  not


112  OF PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE [CHAP. VI.

beforehand  taken  the  firm  resolution  of  resisting  the  first
pains  that  it  causes  you  to  feel,  —  if  your  magnetizer  has  not
confidence  and  force  of  character  enough  not  to  be  alarmed
about  them,  —  it  would  be  better  for  you  not  to  commence.
The  impression  first  made,  being  no  longer  sustained  and
regulated,  becomes  injurious.

I  acknowledge  that  magnetism  has  been  known  to  excite
a  nervous  irritation  and  an  uneasiness,  which  continue
after  the  sittings,  without  being  followed  by  any  crisis;  and
there  is  cause  to  suppose  the  fluid  of  the  magnetizer
unsuitable.  But  this  irritation  and  this  uneasiness  do  not
resemble  the  pains  of  which  I  speak,  nor  the  convulsions
which  occur  in  nervous  diseases,  and  which  the  magnet-
izer can  always  quiet.

In  the  succeeding  chapter,  when  I  shall  treat  of  the
application  of  magnetism  to  various  complaints,  I  shall
enter  into  a  more  particular  examination  of  the  circum-
stances in  which  it  is  proper  to  suspend  the  use  of  it.

During  the  continuance  of  the  magnetic  treatment,  you
should  be  careful  to  follow  a  mild  regimen,  to  avoid  ex-
cesses of  all  kinds,  watchings,  fatigue  of  body  and  of  mind;
and  all  that  can  excite  lively  emotions  and  trouble  the
tranquillity  of  the  spirit.  You  should  make  use  of  mag-
netized water,  so  long  as  you  can  without  exciting  the
attention  of  others.

If  you  experience  a  considerable  amelioration  in  your
health,  and  people  of  your  acquaintance  take  notice  of  it,
do  not,  on  that  account,  tell  them  the  means  you  are
employing;  wait  until  your  restoration  is  sufficiently  ad-
vanced, so  that  no  doubt  may  exist  in  relation  to  the  effica-
ciousness of  magnetism.

It  is  as  useful  as  it  is  consoling,  to  flatter  ourselves  that
we  shall  obtain  a  complete  cure;  but  we  are  far  from
always  arriving  at  this  result.  In  long-seated  maladies,  it
frequently  happens  that  a  person,  at  first,  is  conscious  of
an  improvement  of  health,  which  continues,  but  does  not
increase  ;  then,  after  several  months  of  treatment,  he  may
cease  being  magnetized  every  day,  withdraw  himself
gradually  from  the  sittings,  and  finish  by  having  recourse
to  magnetism  only  when  he  feels  a  renewal  of  the  pain,
which  may  be  easily  dissipated.

Avoid  being  magnetized  when  it  is  no  longer  necessary.


CHAP. VI.]  OF A MAGNETIZER.  113

If  you  continue  after  being  cured,  or  even  after  having
obtained  from  magnetism  all  the  good  it  can  effect,  you
will  become  habituated  to  it;  and  this  is  a  great  incon-
venience to  persons  sensible  to  its  action,  and  especially  to
those  who  are  susceptible  of  somnambulism.

Although  magnetism  consists  in  the  influence  exercised
by  one  individual  over  another,  many  magnetizers  think
that  one  can  magnetize  himself;  it  is  true  —  but  only  in
regard  to  certain  persons  and  to  certain  cases.

When  a  man,  in  the  habit  of  magnetizing,  has  a  local
pain,  for  example,  in  the  arm,  the  leg,  or  the  stomach,  he
can  dissipate  or  relieve  it,  by  attentively  employing  upon
himself  the  magnetic  processes.  But  to  do  this,  he  must
be  in  good  health.  When  a  person  has  a  general  disease,
a  fever,  or  an  organic  aifection,  it  is  plain  that  he  cannot
draw  the  remedy  from  himself,  since  the  fluid  of  which  he
makes  use  has  no  longer  the  necessary  qualities.

Among  the  persons  who  have  been  magnetized  many
times,  there  are  some  who  can,  of  their  own  accord,  throw
themselves  into  the  magnetic  state.  I  think  it  a  faculty
they  ought  never  to  employ ;  because,  by  exercising  it,  they
acquire  the  habit  of  concentration,  which  may  fatigue  the
nervous  system,  and  become  very  injurious,  as  we  shall  say
when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  dangers  of  magnetism.

I  think  I  ought  not  to  finish  this  chapter  without  answer-
ing a  question  often  addressed  to  me.

In  the  present  state  of  things,  say  some  persons,  mag-
netism is  so  little  known,  that  many  patients  cannot  find,
either  in  their  family  or  among  their  friends,  any  one  who
can  or  who  is  willing  to  magnetize  them.  Among  those
to  whom  one  would  voluntarily  make  application,  some  are
incredulous;  others  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  agent,  but
not  in  their  own  power ;  others  lack  leisure  ;  others  have
not  the  physical  condition  and  the  health  necessary  to
follow  up  a  treatment.  Many  physicians  have  confidence
in  magnetism,  but  the  occupations  of  very  few  permit  them
to  practise  it.  Can  we  not  obtain  a  magnetizer  for  whose
cares  we  could  be  grateful,  and  whom  we  could  recom-
pense for  the  sacrifice  of  time  1

To  this  I  answer,  there  are  at  Paris  many  persons  en-
tirely devoted  to  the  practice  of  magnetism,  and  who,  when
they  are  not  already  charged  with  the  cure  of  many  pa-
10*


114  OF PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE [CHAP. VI.

tients,  are  ready  to  visit  those  who  give  them  a  call.
Among  these,  there  are  some  who  have  much  experience,
who  are  endowed  with  the  most  happy  faculties,  and  who
form  a  lively  attachment  for  the  persons  of  whom  they
undertake  the  charge.  I  know  some  of  them,  who  per-
ceive the  seat  of  the  disease,  and  modify  their  action
accordingly.  I  know  some  of  them,  who  pass  into  a  sort
of  demi-somnambulism,  during  which  they  magnetize  with
much  discernment  and  efficaciousness.  The  persons  of
whom  I  speak  have  not  chosen  the  exercise  of  magnetism
as  a  lucrative  profession.  After  they  themselves  have  been
cured  by  it,  they  have  endeavored  to  render  service  to  their
friends ;  and  they  who  have  witnessed  their  success  have
engaged  them  to  continue  it.  Thus  obliged  to  renounce
every  other  means  of  subsistence,  it  is  very  necessary  for
them  to  find  a  livelihood  in  their  new  occupation.

But  it  is  not  enough  that  any  one  is  known  to  practise
magnetism,  to  induce  us  to  make  application  to  him.  It
is  proper,  in  the  first  place,  to  find  out  whether  he  really
has,  independently  of  all  interested  motives,  a  decided
inclination  for  the  practice  ;  whether  he  has  any  instinctive
faculties;  whether  he  possesses  the  moral  qualities  desirable
in  a  friend ;  whether  he  is  not  already  engaged  in  taking
charge  of  many  patients;  whether  he  is  not  devoted  to
other  occupations,  which  distract  his  attention.  Sup-
posing we  are  satisfied  in  all  these  respects,  we  might  have
recourse  to  him  to  try  his  influence  beforehand,  and  after-
wards to  put  ourselves  wholly  under  his  care,  if  we  re-
ceive benefit,  and  if  the  physician  who  approved  having
recourse  to  magnetism  decides  that  it  produces  salutary
effects.

Then  the  person  to  be  magnetized  should  look  upon  the
magnetizer  as  a  friend,  and  treat  him  as  such ;  for  if  they
have  no  affection  for  each  other,  it  is  impossible  to  establish
a  perfect  communication.  Although  the  magnetizer  re-
ceives fees,  just  as  a  surgeon  would  when  he  has  come  to
dress  a  wound,  he  should  not  be  moved  by  this  motive,
but  by  the  desire  of  doing  good ;  and  although  the  patient
pays  for  the  service,  he  ought  not  to  show  himself  less  sen-
sible of  the  care  bestowed  upon  him.  The  relation  may
cease  at  the  termination  of  the  treatment ;  but,  so  long  as
it  lasts,  they  ought  to  be  in  confidence  and  friendship. If


CHAP.  VI.]  OF A MAGNETIZER.  115

the  patient  becomes  a  somnambulist,  he  should  have  near
him  a  relation  or  a  friend,  who  will  take  note  of  what  he
says  in  the  somnambulic  state,  and  who  will  apply  to  a
physician  to  know  what  is  to  be  thought  of  his  clairvoy-
ance. No  other  witness  should  be  admitted  to  the  sittings
than  the  one  first  chosen.  The  magnetizer,  on  his  part,
should  agree  never  to  mention  any  of  the  phenomena  which
take  place  during  the  treatment,  provided  he  is  not  freely
authorized  to  do  it ;  but  when  the  treatment  is  at  an  end,
he  might  publish  those  of  them  whose  publication  might
be  useful,  observing  the  precaution  of  suppressing  the
names,  and  of  concealing  the  circumstances  which  might
designate  them.

What  I  have  said  of  the  communication  established  by
magnetism  between  the  operator  and  the  recipient,  and  of
the  influence  temporarily  exercised  by  the  former  over  the
latter,  shows  clearly  enough  that,  in  the  present  state  of
society,  it  would  almost  always  be  inconvenient  for  a  man
to  be  magnetized  by  his  domestic.  That  can  be  done
when  he  has  an  entire  confidence  in,  as  well  as  friendship
for,  his  domestic,  and  the  domestic  entertains  towards  his
master  the  affection,  the  respect,  and  the  devotedness,  that
he  would  have  towards  a  father.*  It  is  not  unfrequent
that  a  waiting  woman  magnetizes  her  mistress  with  as
much  zeal  as  intelligence,  without  overvaluing  herself  on
account  of  the  good  she  does  her.

*  M.  le  Marquis  de  Puysegur  has  had  for  forty-five  years  in  his
service  a  valet  de  chambrc  by  the  name  of  Ribault,  who  takes  his
place  in  his  magnetic  treatment,  and  who,  in  concert  with  him,  has
accomplished  surprising  cures.  He  has  magnetized  the  marquis
with  as  much  success  as  zeal,  in  several  severe  indispositions.  He
is  an  excellent  man.  Being  instructed  and  perfectly  convinced  by
seeing  his  master  magnetize,  he  magnetizes  with  much  calmness  and
energy,  without  searching  into  the  reason  of  the  effects  that  he  pro-
duces. M.  de  Puysegur  thus  expresses  himself  on  this  subject,  in  a
note  to  the  work  which  he  published  in  1811 :  "  This  clever  man  is
the  same  that  I  had  for  an  assistant  magnetizer  in  1784  and  1785,
and  of  whom  I  speak  in  my  memoirs  of  that  period.  His  attachment
to  me  for  more  than  thirty  years,  the  esteem  and  friendship  which  I
have  for  him,  establish  between  us  that  unison  of  intention  and
of  will  which  is  known  to  be  so  necessary  for  the  unity  of  the  mag-
netic action."

It  is  unnecessary  to  observe  that  this  note  is  as  honorable  to  him
who  wrote  it  as  to  him  who  is  the  subject  of  it.  Why  are  not  such
examples  more  frequent  ?


116  OF PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE  [CHAP.  VI.

I  have  many  times  seen  domestics,  who  had  become  som-
nambulists, magnetize  exceedingly  well  while  they  were  in
the  somnambulic  state.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to  have
near  one  a  somnambulist  to  whom  we  may  have  recourse;
but,  whatever  gratitude  we  entertain  towards  him,  we  ought
as  much  as  possible  to  conceal  from  him  the  fact  that  he  is
a  somnambulist.  It  is  especially  important  not  to  let  him
suspect  that  he  magnetizes  while  in  the  somnambulic
state.


NOTE.

There  exists  with  some  individuals  a  magnetic  power  truly
prodigious,  of  which  I  do  not  pretend  to  know  the  cause,  but  of
which  I  think  it  my  duty  to  say  a  word ;  first,  to  request  those
who  are  naturally  endowed  with  it,  to  use  it  without  ostentation,
without  endeavoring  to  produce  astonishing  effects,  but  with
simplicity,  with  prudence,  and  solely  with  a  view  to  do  good ;
secondly,  in  order  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  people  may
apply  to  persons  of  whom  they  have  heard  marvellous  cures  related ;
thirdly,  in  order  that  they  may  be  well  satisfied  of  the  circum-
he  who  can  perform  certain  things,  will  not  succeed  in  obtaining
effects  less  surprising,  which  are  not  of  the  same  kind.

For  instance,  many  magnetizers  induce  somnambulism  with  very
great  facility,  and  do  not  hope  for  success  except  from  this  crisis,
while  others  scarcely  can  effect  it,  yet  do  not  do  the  less  good.
Some  of  them  cure  certain  diseases  only ;  others  soothe  or  cure
indifferently  all  that  are  curable.  Some  of  them  act  only  by  the
will,  without  any  apparent  magnetic  process ;  and  they  can  even
exert  this  action  at  a  distance  :  they  put  themselves  in  communi-
cation with  the  patient  who  applies  to  them,  by  uniting  intention
with  him,  and  by  the  interchange  of  thoughts  and  sentiments.
Finally,  magnetizers  have  been  known,  who,  possessing  an  ex-
traordinary power,  make  no  use  of  it  except  to  produce  astonish-
ing phenomena  without  any  utility.  These  last  expose  magnet-
ism to  ridicule;  they  drive  wise  men  from  the  subject;  they
furnish  arms  to  those  who  consider  it  dangerous.  I  cannot  too
much  persuade  persons  attached  to  the  good  doctrine  never  to
go  and  see  these  curious  experiments ;  they  will  derive  no  in-
struction from  them,  and  they  will  have  reason  to  reproach  them-
selves with  having,  in  some  degree,  authorized  them  by  their
presence.

To  give  an  idea  of  the  special  faculties  with  which  some  mag-
netizers are  endowed,  and  of  the  use  they  should  make  of  them,  I


CHAP.  VI.]  OP A MAGNETIZER.  117

will  relate  succinctly  what  determined  me  to  reflect  on  this
subject.

Last  year  I  had  occasion  to  form  an  acquaintance  with  M.  le
Compte  de  G#**s,  and  he  has  become  a  friend  of  mine.  He
communicated  to  me  his  observations,  and  gave  me  a  chance  to
witness  many  facts,  which  proved  to  me  how  much  his  power
excels  that  of  most  magnetizers.  Such  are  these  of  which  I  am
going  to  give  an  account.

1st  A  young  woman  suffered  much  from  an  obstruction  pecu-
liar to  her  sex,  which  had  existed  for  several  years.  She  made
use,  without  success,  of  medicinal  remedies,  of  such  as  were  indi-
cated by  somnambulists,  and  she  had  been  magnetized  by  several
persons.  M.  de  G#*#s  having  been  entreated  one  day  to  mag-
netize her,  he  did  it  with  all  the  energy  of  which  he  was  capable ;
and  in  an  hour  he  obtained  a  crisis  which  they  had  in  vain  at-
tempted to  produce,  and  which  was  necessary  for  the  reestablish
ment  of  her  health.

2d.  A  very  clairvoyant  somnambulist  was  suddenly  attacked
with  a  burning  fever,  accompanied  with  delirium.  She  ex-
perienced colics,  vomitings,  suffocating  sensations,  and  severe
pains  in  the  head  and  in  the  loins.  Her  magnetizer  could
neither  calm  her  nor  throw  her  into  somnambulism.  While  they
were  in  the  most  lively  alarm,  he  went  to  request  M.  de  G**#s  to
come  to  his  aid.  Three  hours  of  continued  action  sufficed  to  dis-
sipate the  fever  and  the  pains,  to  bring  on  a  tranquil  sleep  which
lasted  all  night,  and  to  reestablish  her  strength  to  such  a  degree
that  the  next  day  the  patient  found  herself  in  condition  to  come
on  foot  to  the  Jardin  dm  IRni.  to  give  me  an  account  of  her  cure.

3d.  A  woman,  whose  husband  had  cured  her  of  several  indis-
positions by  rendering  her  a  somnambulist,  and  in  whom  he  in-
duced this  crisis  with  the  greatest  ease,  was  run  over  by  a  car-
riage, and  received  very  severe  contusions  on  the  head  and  on
the  side :  she  was  soon  afflicted  with  violent  pains,  which  her
husband  could  not  drive  away.  This  state  lasted  three  days,
when  one  of  his  friends,  who  knewM.  de  G***s,  prevailed  upon  him
to  try  his  skill.  The  patient  soon  entered  into  somnambulism ;
but  she  declared  she  saw  no  remedy  for  her  injuries.  "  There  is,"
said  she,  "  a  swelling  in  my  head,  and  magnetism  only  augments
my  sufferings."  M.  de  G*##s  tried  in  vain  to  inspire  her  with
confidence ;  and  it  was  in  some  sort  against  her  will  that  he  per-
sisted for  three  hours  in  producing  very  painful  crises,  but  of
which  he  perceived  the  necessity.  He  finally  succeeded  in  free-
ing the  head  and  the  side.  He  restored  her  tranquillity,  and  she
assured  him  there  was  no  more  danger,  and  that  she  owed  her
life  to  him.  The  next  day  he  gave  a  second  sitting,  and  became
satisfied  that  the  cure  was  complete.

When  M.  de  G***s  assists  at  a  somnambulic  treatment  which
has  for  its  object  the  restoration  of  the  patient  to  health,  he  thinks


118  OF PRECAUTION IN THE CHOICE  [CHAP. VI.

it  would  be  indelicate  in  him  to  exert  his  influence  otherwise
than  in  subordination  to  that  of  the  magnetizer.  But  if  he  sees
that  this  magnetizer  desires  to  try  experiments  contrary  to  the
end  of  magnetism,  he  is  capable  of  annihilating  the  action ;  he
need  not  even  be  present  for  this  purpose  ;  provided  he  has  once
been  put  in  communication,  he  acts,  although  he  is  in  another
apartment,  and  without  the  magnetizer  or  the  somnambulist's
having  the  least  suspicion  of  it.

We  perceive  that  such  a  power  would  be  dangerous  in  the
hands  of  a  man  capable  of  abusing  it ;  but  it  would  lose  its  ener-
gy, if  it  were  not  moved  principally  by  the  love  of  doing  good.
M.  de  G#*#s,  besides  great  physical  force,  possesses  all  the  moral
qualities  which  can  render  his  action  salutary  ;  and  I  would  en-
large upon  this  point,  if  be  were  not  to  read  what  I  say  of  him.
He  succeeds  very  easily  in  producing  somnambulism;  but  this
is  only  when  he  wishes  it ;  and  he  magnetizes  without  bringing
on  this  crisis,  when  he  judges  it  necessary,  and  when  he  is  not
certain  of  being  at  liberty  to  continue  the  treatment.

I  will  now  give  an  account  of  faculties  very  different,  but  not
less  remarkable.

M.  N***,  who  holds  an  office  in  a  little  village  not  far  from
Paris,  had  no  idea  of  magnetism,  when,  at  the  beginning  of  last
year,  he  read  the  first  volume  of  my  Critical  History.  His  son
having  then  been  ill  for  four  years,  he  tried  to  magnetize  him,
and  he  cured  him.  His  cook  had  rheumatic  pains ;  he  dissipated
them.  The  latter  told  several  persons  of  her  acquaintance,  and
very  soon  several  patients  came  to  request  M.  N###  to  cure  them  ;
he  succeeded  in  doing  it.  - ■

The  number  of  these  patients  soon  became  so  considerable,
that,  not  being  able  to  treat  them  all  with  direct  manipulation,  he
constructed  a  baquet,  at  which  he  finished  by  connecting  a  dozen
or  fifteen  in  the  morning,  and  as  many  in  the  afternoon.  He
devoted  some  minutes  to  each  one  of  them,  to  direct  the  fluid  ;  he
soothed  those  who  experienced  crises,  by  taking  them  apart  from
the  rest.  But,  notwithstanding  the  desire  he  had  to  accomplish
it,  he  never  produced  complete  somnambulism.  Moreover,  he
went  to  the  houses  of  the  sick,  who  could  not  come  out  of  doors.

Things  were  thus  when  he  came  to  find  me,  to  tell  me  what
he  had  done,  and  to  ask  my  advice.  Although  he  expressed  him-
self with  the  greatest  simplicity,  what  he  related  appeared  to  me
so  extraordinary,  that  I  desired  to  ascertain  the  facts.  I  went  to
pass  two  days  with  him  at  his  house.  I  conversed  with  the
patients  whom  he  had  cured,  and  with  those  who  were  under
treatment.  I  advised  him  to  substitute,  for  his  baquet  filled  with
water,  a  dry  baquet,  in  which  should  be  placed  bottles  filled  with
magnetized  water ;  and,  three  months  after,  I  returned  to  pass
three  more  days  with  him,  to  find  out  the  results  obtained  since
my  first  visit


CHAP. VI.]  OF A MAGNETIZER.  119

I  will  not  here  relate  the  cures  performed  by  this  treatment ;  it
will  suffice  to  say,  that,  among  those  subjected  to  it,  many  had
inveterate  disease's,  which  had  resisted  medicinal  remedies,  and
that  the  small  number  of  those  who  were  not  restored  to  perfect
health  were  considerably  relieved.

But  here  is  what  may  be  considered  as  more  remarkable.  M.
N***  is  exempt  from  enthusiasm,  and  he  exerts  over  his  patients
a  moral  influence  which  is  congenial  with  the  dispositions  of  his
own  spirit.  All  who  place  themselves  round  his  baquet  feel  calm
and  agreeable  sensations.  Their  imagination  is  never  excited.
They  are  attached  to  their  magnetizer,  and  take  an  interest  in
each  other.  This  influence  is  perceptible  in  their  character  and
their  habits.  A  woman  one  day  said,  "  I  did  not  dare  to  be  alone  at
night ;  I  was  afraid  of  thunder  ;  I  was  afraid  of  mice :  now  I  fear
nothing."  "Neither  do  I,"  responded  three  or  four  at  the  same
instant.

Although  there  is  no  decided  case  of  somnambulism,  many  of
the  patients  are  in  a  magnetic  state,  which  struck  my  attention,
and  which  M.  N###  did  not  himself  suspect :  they  see  the
magnetic  fluid  ;  some  of  them  even  perceive  the  currents  of  it.
When  M.  N###  magnetizes  a  glass  filled  with  water,  they  see  a
luminous  vapor  enter  the  water ;  and  this  water,  which  they  drink
with  avidity,  is  for  them  an  excellent  remedy.  Some  of  them
perceive  when  M.  N**#  approaches ;  and  I  have  seen  a  child,
eight  years  old,  whom  he  used  to  magnetize  at  the  house  of  his
mother,  indicate  the  moment  when  he  left  his  apartment,  and  the
path  he  had  taken.  M.  N**#  sometimes  makes  the  relations
supply  his  place  with  the  patients ;  and  the  confidence  he  inspires
in  those  to  whom  he  gives  a  few  simple  instructions  enables
them  to  succeed  very  well.

We  see  that  the  action  exercised  by  M.  N###  differs  greatly
from  what  we  have  seen  manifested  in  other  magnetic  treatments.
He  dissipated  some  slight  affections  in  two  or  three  minutes.  It
seems  as  though  a  curative  fluid  continually  emanates  from  him,
and  as  though  he  needs  only  to  use  a  simple  act  of  the  will  to
direct  it.  If  I  had  a  friend  seriously  ill,  I  would  advise  him  to
address  himself  to  this  excellent  man.

Nevertheless,  M.  N**#  has  not  great  physical  force,  and  the
fatigue  to  which  he  has  subjected  himself  has  several  times
affected  his  health.  He  can  see  no  one  suffer  without  identifying
himself  with  him,  and  devoting  himself  to  his  good  service.
More  than  forty  patients  owe  their  restoration  to  him.  No  person
can  suppose  that  any  other  motive  than  charity  could  have  de-
termined him  to  consecrate  to  the  relief  of  the  afflicted  all  his
leisure  time.  Yet  he  has  not  been  able  to  escape  malicious  in-
sinuations. Some  persons  have  endeavored  to  detach  from  him
those  who  came  to  ask  his  assistance,  by  telling  them  he  could
not  do  things  so  extraordinary  but  by  the  influence  of  the  devil.


120  CHOICE OF A HAGNETIZER.  [CHAP.  VI,

Several  persons  have  given  him  notice  that,  if  he  continues  to
receive  patients,  they  will  denounce  him  as  a  charlatan,  and  that
he  will  lose  his  office.  They  have  also  troubled  the  quiet  of  his
wife,  who  found  herself  happy  in  the  good  she  saw  him  do.  And
finally,  to  preserve  his  peace,  he  has  been  obliged  to  end  his
magnetic  labors.

I  appeal  to  enlightened  men :  there  are  many  of  them  among^
the  ecclesiastics,  and  among  men  eminent  in  society,  who  have
correct  ideas  of  magnetism.  I  hope  they  would  not  refuse  to
undertake  the  defence  of  the  man  whose  sentiments  I  have  made
known,  if  he  had  to  repel  the  attacks  of  ignorance  or  of  envy.


121


CHAPTER VII.


OF  THE  APPLICATION  OF  MAGNETISM  TO  DISEASES,
AND  ITS  CONNECTION  WITH  MEDICINE.

From  the  time  of  Hippocrates  to  our  own  days,  medi-
cine has  been  practised  by  men  who  have  consecrated  their
lives  to  study,  who  have  called  to  their  aid  all  the  natural
and  physical  sciences,  and  who,  endowed  with  the  talent
of  observation,  and  with  indefatigable  zeal,  unite  to  their
own  experience  that  of  their  contemporaries  and  that  of
their  predecessors.  Innumerable  facts  have  been  collect-
ed, discussed,  and  compared.  A  positive  foundation  has
been  established  in  anatomy  ;  in  the  knowledge  of  external
signs,  which  indicate  the  alterations  of  various  organs ;  in
that  of  the  constant  action  which  certain  substances  exert
over  the  human  body ;  in  the  comparison  of  the  effects  ob-
tained by  various  modes  of  treatment ;  in  the  classification
of  diseases ;  and  in  some  general  principles,  founded  upon
experience,  in  relation  to  which  all  are  agreed.  And  yet
medicine  is  still  uncertain.  Although  it  has  been  taught
in  the  schools  for  two  thousand  years,  physicians  do  not
agree  either  about  the  cause  of  diseases,  or  the  choice  of
proper  remedies.  The  science  has  changed  a  hundred
times  since  the  days  of  Galen,  and  opposite  opinions  have
reigned  successively  in  the  schools.  There  is  hardly  a
disease  which  has  not  been  vanquished  by  different  means :
there  is  no  system  unsupported  by  facts.  The  method
preferred  in  one  age  has  been  rejected  in  another ;  and,  at
the  same  time,  different  sects  have  been  seen  to  oppose
each  other,  each  one  professing  to  have  discovered  the  true
way.  Some  physicians  have  declared  themselves  for  the
medicine  that  is  to  be ;  others,  for  medicine  as  it  is.  Some
are  for  using  few  remedies ;  others  advise  having  recourse
to  many.  The  most  active  medicines  have  been  cried  up
11


122  MAGNETISM  APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

with  enthusiasm,  or  condemned  as  dangerous,  according
to  their  agreement  with  the  doctrines  of  the  leader  of
this  or  that  school.  Even  at  the  present  day,  when  the
science  of  medicine  has  been  so  well  taught ;  when  the
most  exact  observations  have  been  collected,  classed,  and
compared ;  when  pathologic  anatomy  has  arrived  at  the
highest  degree  of  perfection,  —  physicians  are  still  seen  to
differ  in  opinion  relative  to  the  use  of  bleeding,  leeches,
purgatives,  and  Peruvian  bark,  in  this  or  that  disease.
The  pupils  of  one  master,  doubtless  very  skilful,  maintain
that,  up  to  his  time,  no  one  has  properly  understood  med-
icine; while  those  of  another  school,  acknowledging  that
he  has  shed  great  light  upon  the  nature  and  the  seat  of
many  diseases,  and  confessing  the  success  he  has  himself
obtained  by  his  method,  consider  him,  nevertheless,  as  a
rash  innovator,  whose  principles,  too  much  generalized^,
may  be  erroneous  and  dangerous.

Since  there  is  so  much  uncertainty  in  medicine,  which
for  more  than  two  thousand  years  has  formed  a  regular
science,  and  whose  principles,  founded  upon  innumerable
observations,  have  been  incessantly  rectified  by  new  obser-
vations, how  much  uncertainty  there  must  of  necessity  be,
in  regard  to  magnetism,  which,  if  it  has  been  practised
empirically  from  the  highest  antiquity,  has  not,  at  least,
formed  a  particular  science,  except  for  a  small  number
of  years,  and  can  be  sustained  by  but  few  observations.
Further,  these  few  observations  have  been  collected  by
men  who  are  unacquainted  with  medicine,  and  who  are
liable  to  be  deceived,  both  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
diseases  and  to  the  effects  they  have  produced.  Many  of
them  have  even  been  led  astray  by  enthusiasm.  And,
finally,  if  we  have  very  circumstantial  and  correct  rela-
tions of  cures  effected  by  magnetism  in  this  or  in  that
case,  they  have  passed  over  in  silence  similar  cases,  where-
in they  have  made  use  of  it  without  any  success.

Magnetism  doubtless  has  a  curative  power  truly  prodi-
gious. But  in  what  cases  ought  we  to  have  recourse  to  it?
In  what  manner  ought  we  to  modify  its  action,  to  give  it
the  degree  of  energy  which  circumstances  require  ?  When
ought  we  to  employ  it  alone  1  When  and  how  ought  we
to  associate  it  with  other  remedial  means  ?  What  modi-
fications of  the  ordinary  medical  treatment  ought  it  to


€HAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  123

introduce?  When  does  it  act  as  a  palliative?  when
as  a  radical  cure  ?  In  what  cases  will  the  effects  it  pro-
duces authorize  us  to  believe  it  will  operate  a  perfect  cure?
Are  there  no  cases  where  it  may  do  mischief?  Are  there
none  where  it  is  absolutely  insufficient  1  Ought  it  to  be
employed  equally  in  chronic  and  acute  diseases?  What
are  the  diseases,  in  these  two  classes,  which  it  will  most
readily  and  most  surely  cure  ?  Should  the  crises  resulting
from  its  action  be  always  considered  as  salutary  effects?
As  many  somnambulists  desire  to  be  magnetized  only
during  a  certain  number  of  minutes,  and  at  intervals  more
or  less  distant,  ought  we  thence  to  conclude  that  persons
easily  affected,  but  who  are  not  somnambulists,  can  receive
any  injury  from  an  action  too  much  prolonged,  or  too  fre-
quently renewed?  and,  under  this  supposition,  by  what
symptoms  shall  we  determine  the  season  and  the  duration
of  the  sittings  ?  All  these  questions,  and  a  thousand  oth-
ers not  less  important,  cannot  yet  be  satisfactorily  and  pos-
itively solved ;  and  he  to  whom  these  do  not  present  any
embarrassment  is  either  an  enthusiast,  who  breaks  down
all  difficulties,  or  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  them.

Magnetism  cannot  take  its  rank  among  the  sciences,
and  present  a  doctrine  of  which  application  may  in  all
cases  be  made,  until  physicians  take  it  up  seriously,  to  de-
termine its  effects  upon  various  temperaments,  diseases,
and  modes  of  applying  it,  and  to  compare  these  effects
with  those  which  other  remedies  produce  in  the  same  cir-
cumstances.

Hence  it  follows  that  it  would  be  rash  to  depend  upon
it  alone  for  the  cure  of  severe  diseases,  except  in  some  des-
perate cases,  where  medicine  has  been  thoroughly  tried
without  success.  I  am  far  from  advising  you  to  trust  in
magnetism  exclusively :  I  advise  you  to  recur  to  it  solely
as  an  auxiliary  to  ordinary  medicine.

I  will  here  add  a  moral  consideration,  which  I  have  laid
down  in  my  Critical  History.  It  is  this :  If,  in  a  danger-
ous malady,  you  rely  upon  magnetism  without  consulting
your  physician,  you  take  upon  yourself  a  great  responsibil-
ity ;  and,  if  the  patient  dies,  you  will  have  cause  for  self-
reproach.  Medicine  itself  could  not  have  raised  him :
this  may  be  true  ;  but  you  would  have  followed  the  ordinary
course;  you  would  have  done  what  has  always  been  done;


124  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [cHAP.  VIL

and  you  would  not  be  troubled  with  the  fear  of  having
neglected  more  efficacious  means  than  the  ones  you  have
employed ;  relations  and  friends  would  not  be  justified  in
blaming  you  for  having  made  the  patient  follow  a  treatment
of  your  own  choice.

Ought  it  thence  to  be  concluded  that  one  should  be  very
reserved  in  the  application  of  magnetism  ?  that  we  should
not  have  recourse  to  it  except  in  slight  affections,  or  in
desperate  cases  ?  Not  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  we  ought
to  make  use  of  it  every  time  we  can,  observing  to  be  pru-
dent, and  not  to  discard  medicine.

I  know  very  well  that  cases  will  be  found,  where  mag-
netism, employed  alone,  with  unbounded  confidence,  with
all  the  energy  possible,  would  have  cured  a  patient ;  but
he  is  not  cured,  because  the  magnetizer  has  moderated  the
action  too  much,  because  he  has  not  entirely  devoted  him-
self to  him,  and  because  he  has  used  in  connection  there-
with medicines  which  neutralized  or  counteracted  its  influ-
ence. But  how  shall  we  determine  beforehand  whether
we  ought  to  renounce  all  other  means  ?  And  is  it  not  bet-
ter to  expose  ourselves  to  the  danger  of  not  doing  all  the
good  possible  to  the  patient,  than  run  the  risk  of  leaving
him  to  perish  by  renouncing  the  methods  generally  pur-
sued 1  A  man  who  is  wearied  of  medicine  by  useless  at-
tempts,—  who,  not  having  received  any  relief  from  reme-
dies, is  determined  to  take  no  more  of  them,  —  may  well
devote  himself  exclusively  to  magnetism,  and  to  claim  for
that  purpose  the  cares  of  a  relation  or  a  friend;  but  none
other  than  a  physician  has  the  right  to  give  him  such
advice.

I  believed  these  reflections  necessary  to  quiet  the  enthu-
siasm of  those  whom  many  astonishing  cures  have  per-
suaded that  magnetism  can  triumph  over  all  diseases ;  that
it  is  the  medicine  of  nature,  and  the  only  medicine  truly
salutary.

I  will  lay  down  what  I  consider  the  best  rules  for  prac-
tice; first,  by  examining  the  derangements  of  health  in
general,  and  then  the  various  diseases.*

In  slight  and  recent  indispositions,  in  those  which  are

Before  giving  this  chapter  to  the  printer,  I  submitted  it  to  the
judgement  of  several  physicians.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  125

not  absolutely  attended  with  danger,  and  when  the  object
is  to  dissipate  a  local  pain,  to  prevent  the  consequences  of
a  contusion,  to  promote  the  circulation  by  restoring  heat
to  the  extremities,  to  accelerate  a  cure  which  nature  is
operating  alone,  you  might  employ  magnetism  without  any
other  precautions  than  the  ones  I  have  pointed  out,  and
without  the  least  apprehension :  the  only  inconvenience
might  be  that  of  not  having  succeeded.

For  example,  one  has  a  headache ;  you  try  to  dissipate
it:  a  woman  has  colic  pains;  you  drive  them  off:  or  if  an
accident  has  recently  arrested  the  progress  of  circulation,
you  make  the  blood  take  its  natural  course.  You  magnet-
ize for  a  fluxion,  a  whitlow,  {mal  cVaventure,)  for  a  slight
wound,  for  a  sprain,  for  a  rheumatic  pain,  for  the  stomach-
ache, for  difficulty  of  breathing,  &,c.  Slc.  There  is  no
need  of  consulting  any  one ;  it  is  enough  if  the  patient
desires  it.  Continue  it  as  long  as  you  think  it  useful,  and,
if  you  do  not  succeed,  you  are  not  to  be  astonished  at  your
want  of  success,  but  hope  to  be  more  successful  another
time.  I  have  nothing  to  say  upon  these  kinds  of  indisposi-
tions, except  that  the  magnetizer  should  set  himself  to
curing  them  the  most  promptly,  and  as  completely  as  pos-
sible, by  simply  aiding  the  action  of  nature,  without  search-
ing for  any  phenomena,  without  permitting  any  experi-
ment, without  dreaming  of  displaying  the  power  with
which  he  is  endowed,  or  of  proving  to  the  incredulous  the
reality  and  the  efficiency  of  the  means  he  employs.

I  wish  to  speak  of  diseases  for  which,  if  we  did  not  have
recourse  to  magnetism,  it  would  be  requisite  to  follow
some  other  treatment ;  and  I  say  it  is  prudent  to  impart  to
a  physician  the  resolution  which  has  been  taken  to  try
magnetism,  and  to  entreat  him  to  observe  the  effects  which
this  new  agent  produces,  in  order  thereby  to  modify  the
treatment.  This  is  a  general  rule ;  let  us  now  discuss  par-
ticular cases.

Although  we  have  not  yet  a  great  number  of  observa-
tions made  by  able  men  upon  the  effects  of  magnetism,
there  are  some  of  them,  however,  well  established,  and
from  which  conclusions  may  be  drawn.  There  are  also
some  which  prove  the  peculiar  efficacy  of  this  agent  in
certain  cases.  I  am  going  to  enter  into  some  details  on
this  subject.

11*


126  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

In  Germany,  Sweden,  Prussia,  and  Holland,  the  physi-
cians have  attended  to  magnetism :  they  have  published
the  facts  which  they  have  witnessed,  and  have  drawn  in-
structive results  from  them ;  but,  as  I  am  not  acquainted
with  the  languages  in  which  they  have  written,  I  have  not
been  able  to  read  their  works.  I  am,  therefore,  obliged  to
limit  myself  to  the  observations  I  have  been  able  to  collect
in  French,  Latin,  and  English  books,  to  those  which  have
been  communicated  to  me  by  enlightened  men,  and  to
those  which  I  have  myself  made,  to  serve  as  the  basis  of
my  principles.  I  am  at  least  sure  that  I  shall  not  go  be-
yond the  truth,  and  that  no  one  can  reproach  me  with
having  pushed  my  confidence  too  far.  I  invite  physicians
who  have  studied  magnetism,  to  rectify  my  ideas,  and  to
lay  down  rules,  by  the  aid  of  which  one  may  act  with  more
boldness.

Cures  of  almost  all  diseases,  effected  by  magnetism,  have
been  cited  ;  but  it  would  be  wrong  to  conclude  from  them
that  magnetism  is  a  specific  for  all.  There  are  many  indi-
viduals on  whom  it  acts  very  slightly,  and  perhaps  not  at
all ;  as  there  are  others  who  are  extremely  sensible  to  it.
Therefore  it  cannot  he  said  that  magnetism  cures  this  or
that  disease ;  but  only  that  it  has  cured  these  or  those  indi-
viduals who  icere  attacked  by  it;  which  is  a  very  different
thing.

Besides,  those  who  have  written  upon  magnetism  have
generally  related  cases  wherein  they  have  produced  re-
markable effects,  without  speaking  of  those  in  which  its
action  has  been  powerless.

Thus  the  various  relations  which  have  been  published  of
cures  effected  by  magnetism,  are  well  calculated  to  reveal
to  us  the  inconceivable  power  of  this  agent;  but  they
do  not  enable  us  to  understand  either  the  limits  of  this
power,  or  the  obstacles  which  prevent  its  full  effect.  In
regard  to  this,  we  can  obtain  instruction  only  from  our
own  experience,  or  by  that  of  men  who,  after  having  prac-
tised it  a  long  time,  have  not  forgotten  the  unsuccessful
trials  they  have  made,  or  the  desperate  cases  in  which  they
have  succeeded.

But,  though  we  cannot  affirm  beforehand  whether  an  in-
dividual will  be  affected  by  magnetism,  and  whether  he
will  be  benefited  by  it,  yet  we  know  what  diseases  have


CHAP. VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  127

most  frequently  yielded  to  its  action,  and  in  what  manner
we  ought  to  modify  its  use  to  draw  from  it  all  the  advan-
tages possible.

I  am  going,  then,  to  speak  of  various  diseases,  and  to
point  out  the  line  of  conduct  which  appears  to  me  the
wisest  according  to  circumstances,  and  the  cases  wherein,
from  experiments  made  during  forty  years,  you  may  be
most  warranted  in  expecting  success.

There  are  two  great  classes  of  diseases;  —  the  acute,
which  are  rapid  in  their  progress,  and  which,  when  the
dangers  that  they  exhibit  in  their  developement  are  sur-
mounted, terminate  at  a  known  period,  and  are  succeeded
by  convalescence ;  and  the  chronic,  which  are  not  limited
in  duration,  whose  course  is  uncertain,  and  whose  crises
and  symptoms  vary,  without  our  knowing  any  very  certain
means  of  judging  from  them  the  probability  of  a  cure.
These  diseases  sometimes  prove  fatal  in  the  end ;  more
often  they  render  existence  painful  or  languishing.  Some
are  incurable ;  but  in  regard  to  no  one  of  them  can  we
determine  at  what  epoch  a  crisis  will  occur  which  an-
nounces death  or  a  cure.

The  conduct  of  the  magnetizer  should  be  altogether
different  in  these  two  classes  of  diseases.

In  acute  diseases,  call  in  the  physician  as  soon  as  you
can,  and  follow  the  prescriptions  that  he  gives;  but  tell
him  you  desire  to  try  magnetism  as  auxiliary.  I  do  not
think  a  sensible  physician  would  take  it  ill  that  you  passed
your  hands  over  the  patient  with  the  desire  of  curing  him.
If  he  regards  the  practice  as  absolutely  useless,  he  cannot
regard  it  as  dangerous,  provided  it  does  not  hinder  you
from  administering  the  remedies  he  has  ordered.  If  you  ob-
tain any  remarkable  effects;  if  you  produce  any  crises,  such
as  perspiration,  evacuations,  &c. ;  if  you  allay  the  fever,
or  the  pains,  —  you  will  let  the  physician  know  it,  requesting
him  to  observe  it;  and  you  will  continue  to  follow  his  ad-
vice, until  you  have  the  happiness  of  obtaining  well-marked
somnambulism,  accompanied  with  lucidity ;  for  in  this
case,  the  physician  can  enlighten  you,  and  indicate  to  you
the  questions  which  you  should  put  to  your  somnambu-
list ;  but  the  somnambulist  should  be  heard  in  preference
to  him.

You  will  attentively  observe  the  sensations  experienced


128  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

by  the  patient,  as  you  are  establishing  the  currents  of  the
fluid,  and  slowly  making  passes  over  all  the  body.  These
sensations,  which  often  indicate  the  seat  of  the  disease,  will
intimate  to  you  when  to  modify,  to  lessen,  or  to  increase
your  action,  and  to  direct  it,  in  preference,  to  this  or  that
part.  The  indications  furnished  by  the  physician  may  also
be  very  useful  to  you,  by  engaging  you  to  create  a  reaction
towards  a  particular  point,  to  the  advantage  of  an  essential
organ  dangerously  threatened  with  attack.  You  will  take
care  to  magnetize  thoroughly  all  the  drink  which  is  given
to  your  patient.  You  will  examine  whether  the  action  of
magnetism  is  agreeable  to  him.  In  case  it  disturbs  him,
it  is  necessary  to  cease.  Try  to  make  use  of  the  simplest
processes,  in  order  to  cause  your  patient  neither  trouble,
inquietude,  nor  astonishment.  If  your  physician  is  not
well  convinced  of  the  reality  of  magnetism,  you  should
avoid  magnetizing  in  his  presence.  The  desire  you  have
to  produce  perceptible  and  convincing  effects,  might
withdraw  your  attention  from  the  principal  object,  and  be
injurious  to  your  patient.  If  you  are  too  much  fatigued,
if  your  strength  is  exhausted,  discontinue ;  you  should  not
magnetize  him  more.  If  the  inquietude  which  the  state
of  your  patient  causes,  or  the  want  of  rest,  has  brought  you
into  a  state  of  nervous  excitement,  cease ;  you  will  do  him
harm.  Wait  until  your  tranquillity  is  restored,  and  your
confidence  banishes  your  apprehension.

If  you  have  within  reach  a  somnambulist  who  has  already
given  you  proofs  of  clairvoyance,  you  may  consult  him  ;
but  you  should  make  it  a  rule  not  to  follow  any  one  of  his
prescriptions  without  the  consent  of  a  physician.  It  may
happen  that  the  somnambulist  will  say  the  physician  has
not  well  judged  the  character  of  the  disease ;  and  that  you
have  good  reason  to  suppose  he  says  the  truth,  from  the
description  of  the  circumstances  which  preceded  the  mani-
festation, and  of  the  symptoms  displayed  by  the  patient,
of  which  he  had  not  the  least  knowledge.  In  this  case,
you  will  find  yourself  embarrassed.  You  should  have  an
explanation  with  the  physician,  preserving  the  respect  due
to  him,  but  speaking  with  frankness  and  confidence,  and
entreat  him  to  institute  a  new  examination.  If  he  does
not  agree,  call  in  another  physician  to  consult  with  him.
If  the  physicians  reject  the  advice  of  the  somnambulist,


CHAP. VII.]  ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  129

you  ought  to  rely  upon  them,  whatever  may  be  your  own
opinion.  I  make  this  one  exception  —  when  the  physicians
pronounce  the  disease  desperate,  and  a  perfectly  disin-
terested somnambulist  answers  for  the  cure,  and  supports
his  assertions  by  arguments  and  proofs.

During  convalescence,  you  should  sustain  the  strength
of  the  patient  by  magnetism.

Neither  during  the  disease,  nor  during  convalescence,
should  we  magnetize  too  long  at  a  time.  Two  or  three
sittings  of  a  half  hour,  or  of  three  fourths  of  an  hour,  ought
to  be  enough  in  almost  all  cases ;  and  you  will  fatigue
yourself  uselessly  by  devoting  more  time  to  it.

I  say  "  in  almost  all  cases,"  because  we  sometimes  meet
with  circumstances  where  we  ought  to  keep  up  the  move-
ment impressed,  or  terminate  a  crisis  commenced.  Thus,
the  gout  being  carried  to  the  head,  and  you  have  contrived
to  make  it  descend  to  the  breast ;  it  is  necessary  to  con-
tinue until  you  have  drawn  it  to  the  feet.  But  then  the
effect  produced  suffices  to  point  out  what  ought  to  be  done,
without  the  necessity  of  instruction.

In  the  most  violent  acute  diseases,  magnetism  has  often
been  seen  to  quiet  nervous  movements,  spasms,  and  the
attacks  of  pain,  to  free  the  head,  to  put  an  end  to  the
comatose  state,  to  produce  salutary  crises,  and  to  put  the
patient  in  a  condition  to  take  the  remedies  ordered  by  the
physician,  which  it  was  before  impossible  to  administer.

Several  physicians,  who  have  caused  magnetism  to  be
employed  under  their  own  eyes,  have  declared  to  me  that
it  has  been  of  great  assistance  to  them  in  facilitating  the
administering  of  remedies,  and  insuring  their  efficiency.

It  often  happens  that  patients  who  are  reduced  very  low,
and  can  hardly  breathe,  are  revived  after  being  magnetized
one  hour :  they  feel  new  strength ;  they  experience  a  sense
of  ease  which  surprises  them ;  they  even  request  to  have
some  nourishment,  which  the  physician  can  give  them
without  inconvenience.  Almost  always,  when  magnetism
produces  good,  the  pulse  becomes  regular.  The  change
is  so  observable  that  the  physician  can  always  be  con-
vinced of  it.

Magnetism  very  often  assuages  a  fever,  or  at  least  its
paroxysms;  it  puts  a  stop  to  the  delirium;  it  imparts
strength  at  the  same  time,  when  it  diminishes  the  agitation


130  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

of  the  nerves.  But  the  violence  of  the  fever  sometimes
opposes  the  establishment  of  the  magnetic  communication;
it  appears  to  repel  the  action,  when  this  action  has  not
been  previously  established.*

There  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  in  the  most  severe  acute  dis-
eases that  magnetism  acts  with  the  most  readiness  and  effi-
cacy. It  truly  operates  prodigies  in  those  kinds  of  diseases.
It  does  not  always  act;  but  when  it  does  once  act,  it  hastens
the  course  of  the  disease  ;  it  sustains  and  developes  the
forces  medicatrices.  It  rapidly  brings  on  the  crises  which
are  to  determine  the  cure.

It  is  of  great  aid  in  putrid  and  malignant  fevers :  in  the
former,  it  sustains  the  strength ;  in  the  latter,  it  regulates
the  motions.  It  quiets  the  nerves  in  nervous  fevers ;  it
gives  strength  to  the  stomach,  and  produces  evacuations  in
bilious  and  gastric  fevers.

I  would  not  dare  to  advise  recourse  to  magnetism  when
a  very  great  inflammation,  accompanied  with  a  general
disturbance  of  the  functions,  indicates  the  necessity  of  re-
tarding the  movement  of  the  blood,  and  of  weakening  the
patient.  Magnetism,  properly  applied,  is  soothing,  since  it
reestablishes  the  equilibrium  ;  but  it  is  not  less  true  that
it  is  a  tonic,  and  generally  accelerates  the  circulation  of  the
blood,  and  augments  the  vital  action.  Nevertheless,  we
can,  in  case  of  a  general  irritation,  magnetize  by  the  long
pass  at  a  distance,  with  the  palms  of  the  hands,  and  with
the  intention  of  soothing,  taking  care  to  throw  off  the  fluid
from  the  sides.  If  the  magnetizer  perceives  a  burning
sensation  in  his  hands,  he  can,  from  time  to  time,  moisten
them  in  acidulated  water.

When  there  is  merely  a  local  inflammation,  as  in  the
sore  throat,  it  is  easy  to  turn  the  blood  from  the  direction
it  has  taken  :  by  drawing  the  fluid  towards  the  legs  and
the  feet,  the  upper  portions  of  the  body  are  disengaged.  I
have  cured  a  quinsy  under  the  eyes  of  a  physician  whom  I
had  invited.  I  magnetized  on  the  second  day  of  the  dis-
ease ; the  inflammation  was  stopped ; and  on  the  day  fol-

*  A  physician,  who  has  practised  magnetism  with  great  success,
told  me  that,  in  very  violent  fevers,  he  had  obtained  good  effects  by
a  process  which  I  ought  to  mention.  It  consists  in  dipping  the
hands  into  water  acidulated  with  vinegar,  and  then  making  long
passes  with  the  palms  of  the  hands.  He  assured  me  that,  by  this
means,  he  soothed  the  paroxysm,  and  often  produced  perspiration


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  131

lowing,  the  tumor  could  be  opened  without  employing  any
other  means.

In  certain  inflammatory  diseases,  which  are  seated  in  the
most  essential  viscera,  magnetism,  employed  at  the  time  of
the  attack,  can  perform  wonders  in  reestablishing  the  gen-
eral harmony,  and  bringing  about  a  crisis.  Many  experi-
ments prove  that  it  has  promptly  cured  pleurisies  which
commenced  by  a  sharp  pain  in  the  side,  and  the  spitting  of
blood.  In  this  case,  we  begin  by  placing  the  palm  of  the
hand  upon  the  seat  of  the  pain  :  we  let  it  remain  there
some  time ;  then  we  spread  the  pain  by  making  passes  at  a
distance  with  the  open  hand.  We  continue  this  during
two  hours:  and,  if  the  pain  is  not  dissipated,  or  at  least  con-
siderably lessened,  or  if  we  have  not  brought  on  a  salutary
crisis,  such  as  a  general  perspiration,  we  have  recourse  to
the  more  prompt  means  of  medicine.  The  time  which
passes  between  the  instant  when  the  physician  is  sent  for,
and  the  instant  when  he  is  enabled  to  come  to  the  house
of  the  patient,  suffices  to  ascertain  whether  magnetism  acts
well,  and  whether  it  can  subdue  the  disorder.  And  it  is
seldom  that  we  are  not  necessitated  to  join  some  medical
remedies  to  the  magnetic  treatment ;  and  it  belongs  to  the

I  have  known  magnetism  to  cure  very  speedily,  and  by
an  action  altogether  peculiar,  very  severe  inflammatory  dis-
eases. Here  is  an  example.

A  lady,  about  fifty  years  old,  had  an  inflammation  of
the  stomach  for  more  than  a  month.  They  had  employed
leeches,  and  all  the  remedies  recommended  by  able  physi-
cians;  yet' the  condition  of  the  patient  became  every  day
more  alarming.  Her  son,  a  medical  student,  having  come
to  consult  me  in  relation  to  the  employment  of  magnetism,
I  advised  him  to  make  use  of  it,  by  holding  only  for  a  short
time  his  hands  upon  the  stomach,  and  making  many  passes
along  the  thighs  and  legs.  Two  days  after,  the  young  man
came  to  tell  me  the  pains  had  quitted  the  stomach,  and
were  lodged  in  the  bowels,  which  troubled  the  physician.
I  assured  him  that  he  had  rendered  himself  master  of  the
disease,  and  that  he  could  make  it  descend  to  the  extremi-
ties. In  fact,  the  following  day,  she  experienced  slight
twinges  in  the  thighs,  afterwards  in  the  legs,  and  the  abdo-


132  MAGNETISM APPLIED  TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII,

men  was  entirely  freed  from  inflammation.  During  the  dis-
ease, the  stomach  had  lost  its  digestive  energies.  As  there
was  then  no  more  irritation  to  be  feared,  they  acted  strong-
ly upon  the  stomach  by  the  application  of  the  hands,  and
its  usual  tone,  which  it  had  lost,  was  restored.  The  patient,
having  been  weakened  by  leeches  and  by  dieting,  had  a
very  long  period  of  convalescence,  but  her  health  was  per-
fectly established  in  the  sequel.

One  might  collect  from  the  works  on  magnetism,  and
especially  from  those  which  have  been  published  by  the
physicians  of  Germany,  a  great  many  instances  of  cures
effected  in  acute  disease  by  the  magnetic  treatment.  I
should  make  two  observations  on  this  subject.  1st.  To
form  an  opinion  of  the  curative  power  of  magnetism,  we
should  depend  solely  upon  relations  given  by  physicians,
who  have  been  enabled  to  judge  the  character  of  the  dis-
order, the  severity  of  the  symptoms,  and  the  progress  of
the  cure.  2d.  We  should  not  attribute  to  the  action  of
magnetism  alone  the  cures  of  diseases  in  which  the  patient
has  been  somnambulous,  and  still  less  those  in  which  he
has  consulted  somnambulists,  because  then  the  action  has
been  aided  by  remedies.

I  have  sometimes  seen  acute  diseases  cured  by  mag-
netism alone,  at  the  moment  when  they  had  reached  the
highest  degree  of  violence.  I  think  it  proper  to  recite  an
instance  of  this  kind.

M.  Boismarsas,  an  old  soldier,  at  present  guard  of  the
monument  erected  in  the  Place  Vendome,  having  been  at-
tacked by  the  cholera  morbus,  with  excruciating  pains,
vomitings,  and  convulsions,  the  ordinary  remedies  had  been
resorted  to  in  vain,  and  they  entertained  little  hope  of  sav-
ing his  life.  M.  Despres,  one  of  the  physicians  called  to
the  consultation,  proposed  to  try  magnetism,  which  he  had
known  to  succeed  in  an  analogous  case ;  the  other  physi-
cians having  consented,  although  they  expected  nothing
from  it,  he  came  instantly  to  look  for  me.  I  soon  saw  that
the  patient  was  sensible  to  the  magnetic  action ;  and  his
wife  perceiving  the  effect  I  had  produced,  I  told  her  she
could  cure  her  husband,  and  I  showed  her  how  to  set
about  it.  The  vomitings  and  the  convulsions  ceased  at
the  first  application  of  the  hands ; a  slight  sleep  soothed


€HAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  133

him,  he  took  no  more  medicine,  and  in  five  days  the  pa-
tient was  restored.*

I  do  not  pretend  to  conclude  from  this  fact  that  we
should  obtain  the  same  result  in  all  similar  cases.  I  merely
conclude  from  it  that  the  soothing  action  of  magnetism  can
readily  restore  the  equilibrium;  and  this  is  a  reason  for  try-
ing it  in  the  most  violent  diseases.  We  are  sure  it  cannot
be  injurious  when  properly  applied,  but  its  efficiency,  less
or  great,  depends  upon  a  number  of  circumstances  which
we  cannot  appreciate.

Among  the  proofs  of  the  power  of  magnetism,  one  of  the
most  convincing  is,  that  it  has  been  known  to  rekindle  life
at  the  very  moment  it  seemed  to  be  extinguished,  as  oxy-
gen gas  relumes  the  brand  upon  which  there  remains  only  a
feeble  spark. f  When  important  organs  are  so  much  altered
as  to  be  no  more  able  to  perform  their  functions,  this  return
to  life  is  of  short  duration.  But  there  are  cases  when  such
a  power  has  been  able  to  save  a  patient  who  appeared  in  a
desperate  condition.

If  the  French  physicians  would  take  the  trouble  to  col-
lect the  facts  hitherto  published,  to  submit  them  to  a  critical
examination,  and  join  them  to  their  own  observations,  we
should  soon  have  surer  data  in  regard  to  the  efficaciousness
of  magnetism  in  acute  diseases ;  at  present  we  must  employ
it  with  prudence,  and  as  auxiliary  to  medicine.  Let  us
come  to  chronic  diseases.

The  patient  who  applies  to  you  has  a  disease  more  or
less  inveterate  ;  he  has  tried  various  remedies,  or  he  has
not  yet  tried  any.

If  the  disease  is  recent,  and  if  the  patient  has  not  under-
gone any  treatment,  you  can  dispense  with  the  services  of  a
physician  ;  provided  you  do  not  wish  to  obtain  his  opinion
upon  the  nature  of  the  disease,  upon  the  chances  and  means
of  cure,  in  order  to  appreciate,  in  the  sequel,  the  effects
which  magnetism  shall  have  produced.

*  M.  J.  Dupotet  has  already  reported  this  fact  in  his  "  Exposition
of  the  Experiments  made  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  1820."

t  There  are  several  examples  of  it  in  German  writers.  A  very
remarkable  one  is  found  in  a  work  entitled  "  The  Russian  in  Paris,  '
printed  in  1814,  by  Barba,  2  vols.  12mo.,  at  the  223d  page  of  the  first
volume.  The  anecdote  there  related  is  the  exact  truth.  The  author,
who  was  an  eye-witness,  put  the  recital  of  it  into  my  mouth,  although
I  had  not  recounted  it  to  any  person.
12


134  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

As  the  progress  of  these  diseases  is  slow,  there  is  no  in-
convenience in  deferring  the  use  of  remedies ;  and  this  for
various  reasons:  In  the  first  place,  to  assure  yourself  that
the  changes  effected  are  due  to  magnetism ;  in  the  next,  to
avoid  disturbing  the  course  of  nature  by  foreign  agents ;
finally,  that  nothing  may  trouble  or  annoy  the  patient,  who
ought  to  abandon  himself  entirely  to  you.  Continue  this
for  about  a  month,  even  although  you  obtain  no  apparent
result,  and  with  stronger  reason  if  crises  occur  ;  except  in
case  you  see  the  essential  symptoms  of  the  disorder  grow
worse.  In  general,  the  curative  action  displays  itself  sooner
the  less  inveterate  the  disease  is.

If  the  patient  has  already  taken  remedies,  you  will  pre-
vail with  him  to  leave  them  off  for  a  few  days,  in  order  to
observe  more  carefully  the  action  of  magnetism.  Substi-
tute for  his  drinks  magnetized  water.  You  will  recommend
to  him  to  live  temperately,  and  avoid  fatigue  and  excess  of
all  kinds.

There  are  some  diseases  which  are  both  very  severe  and
very  long  seated,  the  origin  and  principal  seat  of  which  are
not  well  ascertained,  which  have  for  a  long  time  resisted
all  the  remedies,  whose  symptoms  become  every  day  more
alarming,  and  which  excite  apprehensions  for  the  life  of  the
patients.  For  these  diseases,  people  generally  desire  to  try
magnetism  as  a  last  resource  ;  but  it  is  in  relation  to  these
that  the  magnetizer  ought  to  reflect  much,  and  take  the
most  measures  before  charging  himself  with  the  treatment.

First,  he  must  ascertain  whether  the  patient  is  firmly  de-
cided to  continue  the  treatment  all  the  time  necessary,  per-
haps for  more  than  six  months,  and  whether  the  persons
who  have  influence  or  authority  over  him  will  not  endeavor
to  oppose  this  decision.  For  in  this  kind  of  diseases,  when
the  action  is  once  well  established,  and  the  crises  are  at
hand,  it  is  very  troublesome  to  struggle  against  obstacles,
and  dangerous  to  interrupt  the  treatment.  It  is  also  neces-
sary for  the  magnetizer  so  to  arrange  matters  as  to  have
the  treatment  regular,  to  have  it  regarded  as  the  most  im-
portant affair  for  himself,  for  the  patient,  and  for  the  family
of  the  patient,  until  a  cure  is  effected.  Finally,  the  patient
must  make  it  a  point  of  honor  to  give  all  his  confidence  to
his  magnetizer,  to  take  advice  from  him  only,  and  to  follow


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  135

If,  as  I  have  always  recommended,  he  wishes  to  avail
himself  of  the  information  and  skill  of  a  physician,  it  is
essential  to  choose  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  effects
of  magnetism,  that  he  may  not  order  remedies  which  might
oppose  the  developement  of  crises.  This  physician  ought
not  to  assist  at  the  treatment,  provided  he  is  not  familiar
with  the  various  phenomena  of  magnetism ;  he  may  see
the  patient  in  the  intervals  of  the  sittings,  and  favor  the
magnetizer  with  his  observations.  But  he  should  never
be  admitted  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  his  curiosity,  or
of  augmenting  his  belief.  It  is  proper  for  the  magnetizer
to  have  a  good  substitute  ready,  in  case  any  circumstance,
such  as  sickness,  or  a  necessary  journey,  imposes  a  sus-
pension of  his  duties  for  some  days.  And  it  would  be  very
advantageous  that,  until  a  cure  is  effected,  the  treatment
undertaken  should  be  kept  secret  from  all  but  the  relations
or  intimate  friends,  with  whom  we  ought  not  and  cannot
make  a  mystery  of  it.  In  imparting  it  to  the  physician  in
whom  we  have  confidence,  we  should  request  him,  in  like
manner,  to  say  nothing  about  it.

The  precepts  I  here  give  are  very  rigorous ;  but  there
are  cases  when  they  are  very  important.  Their  application
may  be  modified  according  to  circumstances,  and  according
to  the  severity  of  the  complaint.

Let  us  now  enter  into  some  details  relative  to  the  various
chronic  diseases,  which  are  the  most  common.

In  torpid  diseases,  in  those  of  the  lymphatic  system,  em-
ploy magnetism  with  all  the  energy  possible.  Aid  yourself
with  the  chain,  if  you  have  the  means  of  forming  one.

Many  examples  of  the  cure  of  dropsy  are  given  in  the
books ;  I  have  myself  cured  it  in  three  instances.  Mag-
netism produces  crises  of  perspiration  and  of  diuresis.
You  may,  nevertheless,  second  nature  by  light  sudorifics
or  diuretics ;  in  selecting  which,  you  should  consult  your
physician,  and  magnetize  them  thoroughly.  They  will
then  take  effect,  although  they  have  ceased  to  exert  any
action,  if  they  have  been  given  in  large  doses  before  the
magnetic  treatment.

Magnetism  is  a  sovereign  remedy  for  enlargements  of
the  glands.  I  have  often  seen  the  glands  of  the  breast,
when  much  enlarged  and  very  painful,  cured  by  it,  when
the  most  able  physicians  and  surgeons  had  advised  their


136  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII,

extirpation  ;  and  I  have  been  successful  in  that  way  myself,
I  have  seen  some  of  them  which  would  not  entirely  dis-
appear, but  would  be  reduced  to  very  small  size,  and  which,
remaining  in  this  condition  for  several  years  after  the  treat-
ment had  ceased,  have  not  caused  the  least  pain  or  incon-
venience. When  the  action  is  established,  it  is  proper  to
blow  upon  the  affected  parts  through  a  linen  cloth  several
times  folded,  when  it  can  be  done  without  fatigue.  Gen-
erally, when  the  gland  begins  to  lessen,  a  crisis  comes  on,
manifested  by  inflammation  and  local  pains.  This  crisis  is
transient;  it  creates  no  cause  of  alarm ;  until  it  has  passed,
you  may  employ  magnetism  by  the  long  pass,  to  lessen  the
pains  and  the  inflammation.

In  obstructions  and  enlargements  of  the  viscera,  mag-
netism is  the  most  powerful  of  all  remedies.  You  should
present  the  points  of  the  fingers,  moving  them  round  to
spread  the  fluid,  and  then  drawing  it  off;  or  you  may  use
the  breath,  as  before.  The  treatment  is  sometimes  very
long.  Critical  pains  are  experienced  in  the  region  of  the
obstruction  ;  but  the  patient  grows  better  each  day,  and  the
obstruction  is  dissipated  gradually.  The  obstructing  sub-
stance may  be  thrown  out  of  the  system,  by  using  lax-
atives. Insensibility  to  magnetism  proves  the  cure  to  be
complete.

But  when  the  obstruction  of  an  essential  organ  is  arrived
to  such  a  point  that  it  performs  none  of  its  functions,  and
its  tissue  is  destroyed  or  entirely  changed,  magnetism  may
be  dangerous.  By  rousing  the  sensibility,  by  exciting  a
lively  movement  in  the  obstructed  organ,  it  may  produce  a
crisis  beyond  the  ability  of  nature  to  support ;  and  the  pa-
tient will  die  much  sooner  than  he  would  if  the  obstruction
had  remained  inactive.  I  have  known  examples  of  this
sort.  In  order  to  avoid  this  liability,  you  should  consult  a
physician,  who  will  determine  whether  the  obstruction  has
become  incurable ;  and  in  this  case,  you  should  not  under-
take the  treatment.  You  might,  however,  attempt,  two  or
three  times,  not  to  concentrate  the  fluid  upon  the  seat  of
the  obstruction,  but  to  magnetize  by  the  long  pass,  to  see
whether  the  patient  is  susceptible  of  somnambulism;  for  if
he  becomes  a  somnambulist,  he  will  tell  what  ought  to  be
done,  and  we  do  not  know  but  he  may  be  cured.

Magnetism  has  wrought  astonishing  cures  in  scrofulous


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  137

diseases.  The  history  of  Greatrakes  suffices  to  prove  it.
When  these  diseases  are  long  seated  and  inveterate,  much
patience  is  required.  When  they  are  hereditary,  I  doubt
whether  they  can  be  radically  cured.

Ulcers,  which  have  exhausted  the  resources  of  medicine,
have  frequently  been  healed  by  magnetism.  I  will  mention
a  few  instances.

A  woman,  fifty-eight  years  old,  had  an  ulcer  on  the  leg,
and  it  was  apparently  healed  by  topical  applications.  But
two  months  afterwards,  there  rose  on  the  top  of  her  head
a  swelling,  which,  having  acquired  the  size  of  an  egg,
burst,  and  poured  forth  a  greenish,  purulent,  and  foetid
matter,  mingled  with  clots  of  corrupted  blood.  Soon  after,
the  bones  of  the  head  exfoliated,  exposing  an  orifice;  the
ulcer  increased,  and  the  physicians  judged  it  incura-
ble. The  patient  was  about  five  years  in  this  state.  She
suffered  continually.  She  was  deprived  of  sleep,  and  de-
sired nothing  but  death,  when  M.  le  Chevalier  Brice,  a  geo-
graphical engineer  attached  to  the  post-office  department,
wished  to  make  trial  of  magnetism,  of  which  she  had  no
idea.  At  first,  he  quieted  the  violence  of  the  pains;  he
restored  sleep;  he  produced  crises;  and,  notwithstanding
the  strong  repugnance  which  this  frightful  malady  natu-
rally inspired,  —  notwithstanding  the  fatigue  he  experienced,
—  he  had  the  courage  to  continue,  and  the  happiness  of  suc-
ceeding after  four  months  of  uninterrupted  cares.  The
cure  being  accomplished,  he  still  magnetized  her  once  a
week  for  several  months.  This  fact  is  still  more  worthy
of  attention,  because  it  was  not  attended  with  somnam-
bulism, nor  with  any  phenomenon  calculated  to  excite
curiosity.  This  woman  constantly  made  use  of  magnet-
ized water,  and  took  no  medicine.  She  was  one  day  mag-
netized by  a  very  strong  man,  who  put  her  asleep ;  but
this  proved  to  be  injurious.

The  four  facts  following  just  took  place  at  Corbeil,  the
correctness  of  which  I  went  thither  to  ascertain  :  —

1st.  A  woman  who  had  an  ulcer  on  the  leg  for  ten  years
was  cured  in  thirty-five  sittings.

2d. A  man  seventy-five  years  of  age,  who  for  the  last

three  months  apprehended  the  necessity  of  having  his  leg

amputated,  on  account  of  an  ulcer  as  large  as  his  hand,

which  increased  from  day  to  dav,  is  now  almost  cured,

12*


138  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII,

The  opening  is  no  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in
diameter.*

3d.  A  man,  who  had  been  wounded,  had  been  troubled
with  a  sore,  in  consequence  of  it,  for  two  years,  which
had  been  dressed  with  lint.  This  sore  was  closed  in  a
few  days.

4th.  A  soldier  lost  antral  in  service  in  1813.  Last
winter,  the  wound  opened,  Mid  he  suffered  much.  He  was
restored  to  health  with  such  rapidity  as  greatly  to  astonish
him.  "  I  have  travelled  much,"  said  he  to  me,  "  but  I
never  saw  the  like  of  this."

In  pulmonary  phthisis  in  the  last  stages,  I  do  not  believe
that  magnetism  can  effect  a  cure :  it  is  beyond  its  power  to
regenerate  an  essential  organ  which  is  almost  destroyed.
If  there  is  a  cough,  oppression,  difficulty  of  breathing,  or
weakness,  it  eases  the  respiration,  lessens  the  cough,  re-
stores the  strength,  diminishes  the  sufferings,  and  quickly
brings  on  an  observable  relief;  but  it  does  not  prevent  the
progress  of  the  disorder ;  perhaps  it  is  even  to  be  feared
that,  by  augmenting  the  activity,  it  accelerates  the  final
crisis.  It  is  requisite,  then,  to  use  much  moderation  and
prudence,  and  to  continue  the  use  of  magnetism  only  so
long  as  the  patient  desires  it,  and  feels  its  soothing  in-
fluence.

It  is  proper  to  try  magnetism  in  a  slow  fever.  If  this
fever  be  of  a  nervous  kind,  we  can,  perhaps,  succeed  in
restoring  the  equilibrium ;  if  it  is  produced  by  an  interior
suppuration,  the  cure  is  not  very  probable,  unless  we  can
induce  somnambulism.  But  as  the  action  is  borne  directly
to  the  seat  of  the  disease,  it  powerfully  aids  medicinal
remedies,  and  even  has  a  particular  efficaciousness.

Asthmatic  attacks  are  almost  always  soothed  by  mag-
netism; and  I  am  persuaded  that  this  disease  could  be
entirely  driven  off  by  a  prolonged  treatment.

We  have  seen  wonderful  effects  in  casual  and  chronic
vomitings,  when  all  medical  means  have  been  thrown  aside.

M.  Barbier,  who  resides  at  Rheims,  was  for  twenty
years  afflicted  with  this cruel malady. He  could  not,

*  M.  de  Puysegur  has  just  published  an  account  of  an  analogous
edies for  himself,  and  his  cure  was  not  wholly  owing  to  the  mag-
netic action.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  139

for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  keep  the  lightest  food  upon  his
stomach.  He  followed  my  advice  in  having  recourse  to
magnetism.  On  the  second  day,  the  vomiting  ceased,  and
a  treatment  of  two  months  established  him  in  perfect
health.

Two  girls,  one  of  whom  had  been  troubled  in  this  man-
ner for  fifteen  months,  the  other  for  ten  months,  were  lately
magnetized  at  the  Hotel  Bfku  ;  both  of  them  ceased  to
vomit  after  the  second  sitting.*

In  nervous  diseases,  if  there  be  a  prostration  of  strength,
inaction,  or  torpor,  magnetism  is  a  sovereign  specific.  It
acts  without  producing  apparent  crises.

If  there  are  spasms,  convulsions,  &c,  it  generally  quiets
them ;  and  it  often  produces  crises  more  or  less  singular.

If  there  is  a  general  irritation,  an  excitement  of  the
nerves,  or  a  nervous  fever,  it  frequently  happens  that  it
does  not  act;  sometimes  it  augments  the  irritation.  In
general,  it  is  less  efficacious  in  the  nervous  affections
which  are  called  vapors,  and  in  the  greater  part  of  other
diseases,  when  they  are  long  seated,  and  when  many  rem-
edies have  been  taken,  it  produces  singular  phenomena, -
but  this  does  not  prove  that  it  will  cure  the  more  readily
or  the  more  speedily.  The  somnambulism  of  persons
whose  nerves  are  very  delicate,  presents  strange  crises,
and  traits  of  marvellous  clairvoyance ;  but  the  patient
whose  imagination  is  very  excitable,  and  whose  attention
is  distracted  by  a  thousand  objects,  does  not  see  so  dis-
tinctly his  disorder  and  its  remedy.  With  such  somnam-
bulists we  most  require  calmness  and  prudence ;  it  is  with
these  that  we  should  most  fear  to  be  dazzled  by  wonderful
results,  and  led  away  by  curiosity.  It  is  especially  neces-
sary to  be  attentive,  that  the  patient  do  not  remain  in  the
magnetic  state  during  the  interval  between  the  crises.

Of  all  disorders,  the  most  frightful  in  its  attacks,  the
most  formidable  by  the  dangers  to  which  it  exposes,  and
the  most  inaccessible  to  remedies,  is  precisely  that  which
offers  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  the  power  of  magnet-
ism; I  mean  epilepsy. It  is  not  because  we  are  sure  of

*  See  the  "  Exposition  of  Experiments  in  Animal  Magnetism  made
at  the  Hotel  Dieu  at  Paris,  during  the  Months  of  October,  November,
and  December,  1820,  by  J.  Dupotet."


140  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

triumphing  over  it.  If  many  epileptics  have  been  radically
cured,  with  many  others,  the  violence  and  the  frequency  of
the  attacks  have  been  diminished  merely ;  and  I  have  found
such  in  my  own  practice.  But  it  is  certain  that,  in  the
great  number  of  epileptics  who  have  been  under  magnetic
treatment,  many  more  perfect  cures  have  been  obtained
from  it  than  from  medicine.  We  should,  therefore,  never
hesitate  to  employ  it.  The  Attempts  may  be  fruitless,  but
they  are  not  attended  with  any  inconvenience.  In  many
other  long-seated  diseases,  you  ought  not  to  commence  a
treatment  until  you  are  sure  of  continuing  it:  if  you  have
excited  a  crisis,  it  is  essential  to  bring  it  to  a  close ;  but  in
this  one,  the  worst  thing  is  to  leave  the  patient  in  the  state
in  which  he  is.

A  good  magnetizer  will  hardly  ever  fail  to  put  a  speedy
stop  to  an  attack  of  epilepsy ;  but  he  would  do  wrong  to
conclude  from  this  that  the  cure  of  the  disorder  is  easy.
The  treatment  of  epilepsy  demands,  on  the  part  of  the
magnetizer,  great  confidence,  courage,  perseverance,  and
devoted  ness.

Epilepsy  may  be  hereditary  or  accidental,  long  seated  or
recent.  It  may  originate  in  a  defect  of  organization,  in  a
derangement  of  the  nervous  system,  in  an  irregular  move-
ment of  the  blood  or  of  the  humors,  in  the  suppression  of
an  evacuation,  or  in  several  other  causes;  therefore  we
cannot  know  beforehand  whether  it  will  yield  to  the  mag-
netic treatment.  The  attacks  being  generally  irregular,
and  renewed  at  epochs  more  or  less  distant,  they  may
be  suspended  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  without  having
the  cause  destroyed.  But  we  have  more  reason  for  confi-
dence when  the  attacks  are  frequent,  than  when  they  were
rare,  before  the  employment  of  magnetism.  For  example,
he  who  had  attacks  every  day  may  be  regarded  as  cured,
if  he  passes  two  or  three  months  without  having  any;  while
it  is  necessary  to  wait  a  year  to  form  a  similar  judgement  in
relation  to  one  who  had  these  attacks  only  once  a  month.

Hence  it  follows  that,  when  the  patient  is  freed  from  his
attacks,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  magnetizing  him,  in
order  to  prevent  the  return  and  destroy  the  cause  of  them.
When  several  of  the  epochs  at  which  the  patient  usually
experiences  his  attacks  have  passed  away  without  his
having  the  least  symptoms  of  the  disorder,  we  may  discon-


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  141

tinue  magnetizing  him  every  day  ;  we  may  at  first  let  a
day,  then  two  days,  then  three  days,  and  finally  a  month,
intervene  between  the  sittings;  bnt  we  should  constantly
continue  the  use  of  magnetized  water,  which  ought  to  be
employed  from  the  first  day  of  the  treatment,  and  a  long
time  after  discontinuing  the  sittings.  It  would  be  well,
also,  for  the  convalescent  to  carry  about  him  an  object
magnetized,  which  the  magnetizer  will  take  care  to  charge,
from  time  to  time,  with  the  fluid.

Somnambulism  has  been  frequently  induced  in  cases  of
epilepsy.  If  it  occurs,  the  magnetizer  knows  what  he
ought  to  do  and  what  he  ought  to  expect.  He  is  even
almost  sure  of  curing  the  patient,  provided  he  conforms
himself  to  the  principles  I  have  given  for  the  direction  of
somnambulists.

I  am  acquainted  with  a  young  lady  of  twenty,  who  has
had  attacks  of  epilepsy  ever  since  she  was  nine  years  of
age.  They  were  very  frequent  at  certain  periods,  and  had
been  unsuccessfully  treated  by  able  physicians.*  It  is
three  months  since  she  had  recourse  to  magnetism.  From
the  first  month,  the  attacks  became  weaker  and  less  fre-
quent ;  at  the  end  of  the  second  month,  they  entirely  dis-
appeared, and  her  health  is  now  as  good  as  any  one  can
desire.  She  interdicted  to  herself  all  sorts  of  medicine,
and  declared  it  necessary  to  magnetize  her  two  months
more,  every  other  day,  and  that  without  this  the  disorder
would  return.

Unhappily,  she  imagines  that  magnetism  makes  her  sleep
three  hours  every  day  of  natural  sleep.  She  does  not  be-
lieve in  somnambulism.  She  says  she  is  cured,  and  her
mother  has  great  trouble  in  making  her  continue  a  treat-
ment of  which  she  is  wearied.

As  the  disease  was  caused  by  an  accident,  and  as  the
somnambulist  has  given  proofs  of  great  clairvoyance,  I  do
not  doubt  that  she  will  be  radically  cured,  provided  she
does  not  interrupt  her  treatment  before  the  termination  of
the  period  she  has  assigned.

In  the  diseases  which  physicians  call  hysteric  affections,

*  I  have  read  four  of  the  consultations  given  by  different  physi-
cians. In  the  three  first,  the  malady  is  designated  by  the  name  of
symptomatic  or  sympathetic  epilepsy ;  in  the  fourth,  it  was  called  an
incurable  hysteric  affection.


142  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES* [CHAP.  VII.

—  diseases  which  are  long,  painful,  variable  in  their  symp-
toms, the  seat  of  which  is  in  the  abdominal  viscera,  and
which  Medicine  herself  despairs  of,  —  magnetism  exerts  the
most  powerful  and  the  most  salutary  action.  It  produces
wonderful  effects,  and  the  cure  is  generally  wrought  by
singular  crises,  sometimes  very  violent,  and  about  which
we  should  not  be  alarmed.  It  is  in  this  malady  that  we
most  frequently  obtain  a  very  lucid  somnambulism,  at-
tended with  extraordinary  phenomena;  but  we  should  not
forget  any  one  of  the  precautions  I  have  mentioned.  The
magnetizer  ought  to  restrain  his  curiosity;  preserve  his
self-possession ;  interdict  to  himself  all  experiments ;  care-
fully avoid  exciting  the  imagination  of  the  somnambulist;
prevent  him  from  attending  to  things  foreign  to  his  health ;
not  flatter  his  vanity  by  appearing  astonished  at  his  clair-
voyance ;  not  yield  to  his  caprices ;  watch  that  he  follows  a
suitable  regimen;  not  push  the  magnetic  action  beyond
what  is  necessary ;  and  absolutely  break  all  communication
between  the  magnetic  and  the  ordinary  state.  When,  in
this  disease,  somnambulism  naturally  ceases,  it  is  a  proof
of  the  perfect  reestablishment  of  health.  I  here  repeat
several  things  which  I  have  said  in  my  chapter  on  som-
nambulism ;  but  it  is  because  there  is  no  disease  in  the
treatment  of  which  the  magnetizer  is  more  exposed  to  be
carried  beyond  bounds  by  the  wonderful  phenomena,  and
because  there  are  none  in  which  such  deviations  are  more
dangerous.

The  hypochondriac  affection  is  nearly  allied  to  the  hys-
teric affection,  and  yields  in  the  same  manner  to  mag-
netism, but  with  this  difference  —  the  cure  is  often  effected
without  apparent  crises,  and  by  a  gradual  diminution  of
the  symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  strength,  the  gayety,  the
appetite,  the  complexion,  the  good  bodily  condition,  return
by  degrees.  The  same  effect  takes  place  in  chlorosis,  or
leucorrhoea.

Magnetism  is  effectual  in  all  kinds  of  paralysis.  It
almost  always  restores  the  sensibility,  and  reestablishes  the
movement ;  but  sometimes  sharp  pains  appear  as  the  sen-
sibility returns.  It  is  then  necessary  for  the  magnetizer
and  his  charge  to  have  patience.  In  palsy  of  the  limbs,
it  is  proper  to  make  magnetic  frictions.  If  magnetism  acts
in  a  perceptible manner, and appears insufficient, you


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  143

physician.

Paralysis  of  the  organs  of  motion  is  sometimes  attended
with  pains,  which  the  magnetic  action  can  drive  off,  with-
out restoring  motion.  The  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs
often  springs  from  an  affection  of  the  spinal  marrow.  It
is  then  necessary  to  magnetize,  commencing  at  the  back,
and  conducting  the  action  along  the  thighs  to  the  extremi-
ties of  the  feet.  I  have  magnetized  a  man  who  was  in  this
condition.  I  did  not  cure  him,  but  I  greatly  relieved  him.
After  each  sitting,  his  feet  were  red,  as  if  they  had  been
served  with  a  mustard  poultice.  In  paralyses  which  origi-
nate in  the  disorganization  of  a  part  of  the  brain,  I  pre-
sume that  a  cure  is  impossible.

In  the  "  Relations  of  Cures  effected  in  France,"  you
will  find  more  than  sixty  of  paralysis  ;  and  in  this  number
only  three  are  mentioned  as  somnambulists.  I  make  this
remark  because  nothing  more  fully  proves  the  efficacy  of
magnetism  than  this  disease.  In  the  first  place,  the  pa-
tients not  having  been  somnambulists,  they  did  not  pre-
to  magnetism  alone.  In  the  next  place,  when  people  wish
to  publish  magnetic  treatments,  they  prefer  to  choose  the
ones  which  have  presented  singular  phenomena ;  and  since
they  have  cited  sixty  cures  of  paralysis,  it  is  probable  that
there  have  been  ten  times  as  many.

Magnetism  speedily  soothes  spasms,  by  reestablishing
the  equilibrium.  In  spasms,  especially  when  they  proceed
from  a  moral  cause,  a  concentration  of  the  vital  power
generally  takes  place  towards  the  interior  of  the  body,
which  becomes  evident  from  the  coldness  and  paleness  of
the  extremities.  These  spasms  ordinarily  terminate  in  a
diuretic  movement,  which  the  magnetic  action  favors,  while,
at  the  same  time,  it  brings  back  the  heat  towards  the  parts
which  were  deprived  of  it.

Recourse  should  be  had  to  magnetism  in  cases  of  mental
alienation.  I  do  not,  however,  believe  that  it  will  cure  this
disorder  when  it  is  hereditary  or  of  long  standing,  when
it  springs  from  a  defect  of  organization,  and  when  there  is
a  continued  state  of  phrenzy.  But  when  the  disorder  is
accidental  and  recent,  there  is  much  reason  to  hope  for


144  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP. VII.

success.  As  a  proof  of  this,  I  will  mention  a  fact  of  which
I  was  a  witness.

A  young  man,  twenty  years  old,  became  so  insane  as  to
be  placed  in  a  lunatic  asylum.  His  afflicted  family  made
application  to  a  man  who  possesses  in  a  high  degree  all
the  qualities  which  constitute  a  good  magnetizer.  He
went  to  see  the  young  man,  and  after  reiterated  attempts
for  three  days,  he  succeeded  in  putting  himself  in  commu-
nication, to  make  his  presence  desirable,  and  entirely  to
soothe  his  fits.  In  fifteen  days,  the  cure  was  complete,  and
there  remains  no  symptom  of  the  excitement  which  pre-
ceded the  phrensy.

Persons  whose  minds  are  alienated  are  often  known  to
experience  pleasurable  sensations  in  the  presence  of  certain
persons  who  have  a  natural  dominion  over  them,  and  to
whom  they  submit  without  resistance.  These  are  the  per-
sons who  would  most  readily  succeed  in  curing  them.
Those  whose  presence  frightens  or  repulses  them  will  not
accomplish  it.  It  is  probable  that  with  most  insane  people
whose  fits  are  irregular,  one  might  produce  a  soothing  in-
fluence followed  with  sleep,  and  eventually  with  somnam-
bulism ;  *  then  their  restoration  is  almost  certain.  If  he
has  a  prevalent  idea,  the  magnetizer  may  chase  it  away  by
an  effort  of  the  will.  I  know  very  well  that  the  greater
part  of  the  trials  of  this  kind  would  be  fruitless ;  but  here
the  thing  is  so  important,  and  medicine  has  so  few  re-
sources, that  we  should  not  neglect  a  means  whose  success
is  possible.

When  women  are  threatened,  in  an  essential  organ,  with
scirrhosity  or  ulceration,  magnetism  is  the  best  and  the
most  active  of  all  remedies ;  but  I  do  not  believe  it  will
bring  about  a  cure  if  the  disease  has  made  much  progress.
In  this  case,  it  first  dissipates  the  pain,  and  restores  the
strength ;  but  the  disease  reappears  afterwards,  and  grows
worse,  notwithstanding  all  the  care  bestowed  upon  it.

Many  inconveniences,  and  also  some  severe  diseases,  are
produced  in  women  by  a  suppression  or  a  disturbance  in

*  The  history  of  the  disorder  and  the  cure  of  the  young  Hebert,
published  by  the  Marquis  de  Puys6gur,  is  one  of  the  most  curious
and  most  instructive  works  that  can  be  consulted  in  relation  to  the
power  of  magnetism  to  calm  the  agitation  of  the  nerves,  and  to  stop
the  fits  of  madness  which  spring  from  it.


CHAP. VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  145

the  course  of  circulation  to  which  nature  has  subjected
them.  In  these  cases,  which  are  very  frequent,  the  efficacy
of  magnetism  is  proved  by  innumerable  facts.  It  almost
always  establishes  the  circulation,  sooner  or  later,  accord-
ing to  the  length  of  time  since  the  appearance  of  the  dis-
order. It  is  requisite  to  direct  the  action  from  the  sides  to
the  feet,  letting  the  hands  rest  a  moment  at  the  knees.*
You  will  avoid  putting  them  on  the  stomach,  except  when
you  are  about  to  commence  the  long  passes.  You  will
particularly  avoid  putting  them  on  the  head,  for  fear  of
causing  a  tendency  of  the  blood  thither.  Somnambulism
being  frequently  displayed  in  this  disease,  you  may  expect
to  obtain  it ;  but  for  the  reason  I  have  just  hinted  at,  you
must  take  good  care  not  to  provoke  it,  by  concentrating
the  action  upon  the  brain.  When  the  desired  effect  has
been  produced,  you  will  content  yourself  with  lightly  mag-
netizing, so  as  to  establish  the  general  harmony  of  the
system.

In  intermittent  fevers,  you  should  first  employ  the  long
passes  upon  the  arm,  then  the  application  of  the  hands
upon  the  stomach,  from  whence  sweep  off  towards  the  feet.
You  should  choose  the  moment  when  the  attack  commences.
You  will  often  have  the  satisfaction  of  arresting  the  ague  fit
the  first  time  you  try,  and  the  fever  only  will  take  place  with
great  heat.  You  will  also  magnetize  on  days  when  there
will  not  be  any  attack.  Fevers  very  frequently  cease  after
a  few  sittings,  say  from  three  to  six.  It  is  proper  to  mag-
netize several  days  more,  and  give  the  patient  magnetized
water  to  drink,  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  complaint.

In  pains  of  the  stomach  which  proceed  from  debility,
the  application  of  the  hand  upon  the  stomach  creates  a  heat
which  is  tonic  and  curative.  If  there  is  any  irritation,  this
process  is  not  proper  ;  you  should  then  act  at  a  distance,
with  the  most  soothing  processes.  If  the  stomach  is  coated
with  bile  or  with  sordes,  which  may  be  discovered  by  the
state  of  the  tongue,  you  should  not  dispense  with  an  emetic
or  a  purgative,  provided  magnetism  does  not  immediately
excite  one  of  those  motions  which  often  takes  place  with
persons  very  sensitive  to  its  action.

*  This  process  ought  not  to  be  employed  if  there  is  reason  to  sus-
pect a  state  of  pregnancy.

13


146  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VIL

To  cure  the  headache  attended  with  cold  feet,  put  your
hands  upon  the  head  for  several  minutes,  continue  with
the  long  passes,  and  make  repeated  passes  over  the  limbs.
The  feet  will  become  warm ;  the  head  will  be  free.  If  the
headache  be  accidental,  it  will  not  return  ;  if  it  is  habitual,
make  use  of  magnetized  socks.  The  megrims  which  have
their  seat  in  the  stomach,  yield  to  the  application  of  the
hand  upon  the  region  of  that  organ.  Those  which  are
nervous  are  more  difficult  to  cure.  You  may  make  a  trial
of  various  processes,  and  draw  the  fluid  from  the  head,  by
conducting  it  towards  the  sides.  If  the  pain  is  periodic,  if
it  has  existed  for  years,  if  it  is  the  consequence  of  a  blow,
if  it  is  produced  by  a  gathering  in  the  head,  it  ought  to  be
considered  as  a  chronic  disease,  which  exacts  prolonged
^attention.  In  this  case,  you  could  easily  throw  it  off  on  a
sudden  ;  but  there  is  danger,  if  you  do  not  continue  your
treatment  many  days  in  course,  in  order  to  destroy  the
cause,  by  bringing  on  a  crisis.  In  general,  when  we  have
dislodged  a  periodical  pain,  it  is  essential  to  continue  the
use  of  magnetism,  until  the  epoch  when  an  attack  is  ex-
pected to  return.  The  cure  cannot  take  place  except  by  a
crisis,  which  must  not  be  left  imperfect,  and  we  have  no
grounds  for  supposing  it  to  have  been  effected,  until  we
see  that  the  expected  attack  has  failed  to  come  on.  The
sudden  dislodgement  of  a  humor,  which  has  been  fixed  a
long  time  in  an  important  organ,  may  bring  on  a  serious
disorder  when  we  neglect  to  sustain  and  direct  the  move-
ment we  have  first  given.

Pains  produced  by  a  stoppage  of  the  perspiration  are
almost  always  cured  by  magnetism,  the  most  ordinary  effect
of  which  is  to  reestablish  the  perspiration.  The  ills  caused
by  the  suppression  of  a  local  perspiration,  as  in  the  feet?
the  hands,  &c,  disappear  in  the  same  manner  by  the  re-
turn of  that  perspiration,  which  may  be  effected  by  drawing
towards  the  extremities.  You  must  take  some  care  to  keep
up  this  perspiration.

In  rheumatisms,  sciatica,  &c,  the  pains  are  sometimes
considerably  relieved,  and  even  carried  off,  at  the  first  sit-
ting; at  other  times,  they  are  merely  dislodged.  They  are
most  generally  soothed  or  dissipated  by  degrees,  after  a
treatment  of  greater  or  smaller  duration.  Rheumatism  is
generally  chronic ; but  it  may  be  classed  with  the  acut©


CHAP.  Til.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  147

diseases,  be  accompanied  with  a  violent  fever,  and  impose
the  necessity  of  a  medical  treatment  analogous  to  that  of
inflammatory  fevers.  In  this  case,  we  should  magnetize  at
a  distance,  drawing  beyond  the  extremities,  and  by  the
most  soothing  processes.  We  should  hasten  to  call  in  a
physician,  who,  from  the  effects  first  produced,  will  judge
whether  he  can  dispense  with  having  recourse  to  other
remedies.  It  is  in  acute  rheumatism  that,  upon  certain
subjects,  magnetism  operates  in  the  most  prompt  and  sur-
prising manner.  I  have  seen  patients,  who  were  affected
in  every  limb  with  pains  so  lively  that  the  slightest  touch
was  insupportable  to  them,  become  so  much  relieved,  after
half  an  hour  of  magnetic  action  at  a  small  distance,  that  I
could  give  them  frictions  without  their  experiencing  the
ieast  unpleasant  sensation.  But  when  the  pains  are  thus
a  -  i aged,  we  should  not  imagine  the  disease  to  be  cured.
This  cannot  be  done  without  a  crisis,  or  a  prolonged  treat-
ment ;  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  belongs  to  the  physi-
cian to  declare  what  it  is  proper  to  do  in  order  entirely  to
dissipate  the  inflammation,  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of
the  pains,  and  to  destroy  the  cause  of  the  disease.

I  ought  to  add  that,  of  all  the  diseases  treated  by  mag-
netism, rheumatism  is  the  one  in  which  the  most  success
has  been  obtained,  although  somnambulism  has  been  very
rarely  produced.

I  do  not  know  whether  it  would  cure  the  gout  seated  in
the  foot  or  the  hand,  when  there  are  chalky  concretions^
(nodus,)  but  I  have  seen  a  fit  of  the  gout,  so  violent  that
the  patient  could  not  put  his  foot  to  the  earth,  relieved  by
one  sitting,  and  so  cured  by  three,  that  the  pains  have  not
returned  for  eighteen  months.  I  have  also  seen  a  somnam-
bulist, in  fifteen  days,  cure  her  magnetizer,  who,  for  a  long
time,  suffered  with  the  gout  in  the  knees  and  in  the  feet
For  this  purpose  she  merely  employed  passes  along  the
legs,  continuing  them  each  day  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.
As  it  is  only  six  months  since  this  cure  was  wrought,  I
cannot  affirm  that  the  somnambulist  does  not  mistake  in
saying  the  disease  will  never  again  return.

When  the  gout  has  mounted  into  the  head  or  the  chest,
magnetism  readily  brings  it  down  to  the  feet.  Three  ex-
periments of  this  kind,  which  I  have  lately  made,  were
perfectly  successful It  is  true  that  the  patient  was  very


148  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP. VII.

sensible  to  the  magnetic  influence,  and  perfectly  in  com-
munication with  me.

I  think  magnetism  would  be  an  excellent  remedy  in
scorbutic  affections,  produced  by  bad  air,  by  bad  diet,  by
obstructed  evacuations,  &c.  When  this  affection  is  con-
stitutional, and  has  reached  its  last  stage,  if  the  cure  is
possible,  it  must  at  least  be  very  difficult;  but  the  magnetic
action  will  greatly  aid  the  power  of  medicine.  The  mag-
netizer  ought  to  employ  an  energetic  and  well-sustained
action.

Diseases  of  the  eye  are  so  numerous  and  so  various,  that
they  are  become  the  special  object  of  study  with  a  class  of
physicians  who  attend  exclusively  to  them,  and  who  judge
that  the  treatment  takes  a  long  time,  and  that  the  cure  is
very  uncertain.  I  believe  that  magnetism  is  better  suited  to
them  than  any  other  remedy,  because  it  directs  its  action
immediately  upon  the  organ  of  vision,  and  penetrates  into
the  brain.  In  most  cases,  it  acts  more  efficaciously  than
bleeding,  purgatives,  and  blisters.  If  the  eyes  are  weak,  it
imparts  to  them  strength.  In  ophthalmia,  it  dissipates  the
inflammation,  by  turning  aside  the  humor  which  has  a  ten-
dency to  the  eyes.  In  an  incipient  paralysis  of  the  optic
nerve,  it  would  be  well  to  restore  motion  and  sensibility
to  it.

I  have  many  times  seen  cures  effected,  in  a  few  days,  of
ophthalmias  for  which  the  most  skilful  oculists  had  judged
it  necessary  to  make  a  complicated  treatment.  The  pro-
cesses should  be  varied  according  to  the  nature  of  the
disorder.  If  there  is  an  inflammation,  we  should  seek  to
lessen  it,  and  draw  it  off;  we  establish  the  equilibrium.  If
there  is  want  of  action,  (atonic,)  we  act  directly  upon  the
eyes  by  presenting  the  fingers  united  at  the  ends  ;  or,
rather,  we  hold  the  thumbs  over  the  eyes,  and  place  the
fingers  upon  the  temple.  It  is  expedient,  in  all  cases,  to
bathe  the  eyes  with  magnetized  water,  which  almost  always
excites  a  peculiar  sensation.  One  might  also,  for  a  quarter
of  an  hour,  and  several  times  a  day,  hold  in  his  hand  a
bottle  of  magnetized  water,  presenting  the  mouth  towards
the  eyes  at  the  distance  of  a  quarter  of  an  inch.*

*  In  speaking  of  magnetized  water  in  another  chapter,  I  forgot  to
point  out  this  process,  from  which  I  have  seen  remarkable  effects,
especially  in  an  inflammation  in  the  interior  of  the  nose.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  149

When  a  disease  of  the  eyes  has  reached  a  certain  point,
or  when  it  springs  from  organic  injury,  it  is  plain  we
cannot  succeed  in  the  remedy.  In  the  gutta  screna,  when
blindness  had  been  total  for  seven  years,  I  have,  at  the  end
of  fifteen  days,  restored  the  faculty  of  seeing  the  light,  and
of  distinguishing  certain  objects.  The  pupil  recovered  its
sensibility,  which  caused  it  to  contract ;  but  I  could  go  no
further;  and  when  I  ceased  to  magnetize,  at  the  end  of  six
months  of  patient  attention,  the  blindness  returned  by
degrees.  If  the  disease  had  not  been  of  such  long
standing,  it  is  probable  that  I  should  have  succeeded  in
curing  it.

I  do  not  think  it  would  be  possible  to  destroy  a  well-
formed  cataract;  yet  I  saw,  at  Corbeil,  a  woman  whose
total  blindness  was  attributed  to  a  cataract,  and  who  was
cured  in  a  fortnight.

Opacities  in  the  cornea  of  the  eyes  (tales)  have  been
frequently  made  to  disappear.  I  am  acquainted  with  a
woman  whom  this  disorder,  produced  by  the  smallpox,  had
deprived  of  the  use  of  one  eye,  and  who  recovered  it  while
being  magnetized  for  another  disease.  Here  is  another
instance  to  prove  that  we  may  sometimes  succeed  by  con-
tinuing with  patience,  although  at  first  we  may  have  pro-
duced no  effect

M.  Paul  Geritz,  a  physician  and  a  professor  in  the  Insti-
tute Georgicon,  at  Keszthely,  being  at  Pest,  was  consulted
in  relation  to  a  girl  eight  or  nine  years  of  age,  who,  in
consequence  of  the  smallpox,  had  one  eye  entirely  cov-
ered with  a  film  so  thick  that  she  could  not  see  the  light
He  judged,  as  did  all  the  physicians  who  had  been  con-
sulted, that,  the  disease  being  incurable  by  the  ordinary
means,  it  was  useless  to  administer  remedies;  but,  the
child  having  inspired  him  with  much  interest,  he  resolved  to
undertake  her  treatment  with  magnetism.  During  two
months,  the  action  appeared  absolutely  powerless ;  the  third
month,  the  film  grew  thinner;  and  in  the  succeeding  one,
the  cure  was  complete.  M.  Geritz,  during  his  recent  visit
to  Paris,  related  this  fact  to  me,  and  authorized  me  to
cite  it.

For  two  months,  I  magnetized  a  young  woman  of  seven-
teen, who  had  had,  ever  since  her  birth,  a  film  upon  the
right  eye,  and  whose  left  eye  was  so  feeble  that  she  could
13*


150  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

not  read  or  work  by  the  light  of  a  wax  candle  without
much  fatigue.  The  film  was  made  considerably  thinner,
and  I  do  not  doubt  that  it  would  have  entirely  disappeared,
if  I  had  not  been  obliged  to  discontinue  the  treatment.  As
to  the  left  eye,  it  acquired,  and  it  has  preserved  for  ten
years,  all  the  strength  she  could  desire.

Accidental  deafness  yields  to  or  resists  the  magnetic
treatment,  according  to  the  cause  which  produced  it.
The  most  appropriate  process  consists  in  directing  the
magnetism  into  the  orifice  of  the  ear  by  the  fingers  united
to  a  point,  and  by  blowing  into  it,  to  determine  thither  the
currents.  Deaf  mutes  have  sometimes  been^  successfully
treated ;  apparently  when  the  deafness  has  originated  in
torpid  action  (atonie)  or  obstruction,  and  not  in  the  ab-
sence or  the  lesion  of  any  essential  parts  of  the  organ.*  As
to  buzzings  and  pains  in  the  ear,  they  are  often  dissipated
with  surprising  quickness.  It  is  the  same  with  the  tooth-
ache when  nervous.

I  have  not  yet  spoken  of  a  class  of  diseases,  some  of
which  are  chronic,  others  acute.  These  are  cutaneous
phlegmasias;  as  the  smallpox,  the  measles,  the  chicken-
pox,  biles,  ulcers  or  carbuncles,  pimples  in  the  face,  scald
head,  &c.  I  believe  magnetism  a  remedy  for  all.  In  the
smallpox  and  the  measles,  it  hastens  and  regulates  the
progress  of  the  disease,  and  facilitates  the  eruptions.  If  by
accident  the  eruptions  strike  in,  which  is  very  dangerous,
it.  makes  them  reappear.  There  are  many  instances
of  it.

In  biles,  if  you  magnetize  at  the  moment  the  inflam-
mation commences,  it  is  possible  to  reduce  it,  by  facilitating
the  circulation  and  producing  a  slight  crisis.  If  the  bile
is  already  formed,  you  may  lessen  the  pains,  and  greatly
hasten  the  maturity,  by  employing  a  local  action.  I  have
several  times  made  the  attempt  with  complete  success.
For  a  felon,  we  ought  to  make  passes  along  the  arm  as  far

*  In  the  establishments  where  there  are  together  either  deaf  mutes
or  the  blind  at  birth,  it  would  be  very  useful  if  the  physician  would
treat  the  sick  magnetically,  at  first  to  cure  them,  then  to  find  out
what  ideas  are  developed  in  those  who  become  somnambulists,  and
what  expression  they  give  them.  The  result  of  this  experiment,
which  does  not  present  any  difficulties,  would  certainly  throw  light
upon  physiology  and  psychology.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  151

as  the  extremity  of  the  finger,  upon  which  we  concentrate
the  action,  and  then  draw  it  off  from  the  end ;  and  if  we
make  use  of  a  soothing  or  a  drawing  cataplasm,  we  should
take  care  to  magnetize  it  well.  For  pimples  in  the  face,
we  should  employ  the  long  passes,  and  repeat  the  passes
over  the  legs.

There  are  possibly  cases  wherein  magnetism  would  not
succeed  in  curing  the  scald  head  ;  but  it  will  always  be
well  to  try  it  before  having  recourse  to  medicinal  remedies.
I  have  seen  a  child  of  five  or  six  years  cured  in  two  months,
by  the  long  passes,  by  the  trough,  (baquet,)  and  especially
by  magnetized  water,  which  was  a  powerful  drastic.

It  is  probable  that  the  use  of  magnetism  in  tetters,  and
similar  affections,  would  be  attended  with  good  results,
especially  if  magnetized  water  acts  as  a  purgative.

The  state  of  pregnancy  ought  never  to  be  an  obstacle  to
the  use  of  magnetism.  In  this  state,  it  can  even  render  the
greatest  service.  It  has  often  been  known  to  remedy
serious  accidents,  which  occasioned  fear  of  premature
accouchement.  It  has  also  been  seen  to  render  the  pains
of  childbirth  more  easy;  which  may  be  readily  supposed
from  its  increasing  the  strength,  and  quieting  pains  and
nervous  crises.

I  believe  that,  in  the  state  of  pregnancy,  especially  during
the  early  months,  passes  ought  not  to  be  made  along  the
thighs  and  the  legs.  They  might  give  the  blood  a  move-
ment which  it  is  important  to  avoid.

After  the  birth  has  taken  place,  magnetism  may  still  be
of  great  utility,  particularly  in  reestablishing  the  natural
course  of  the  milk,  when  it  has  been  interrupted.*  The
choice  of  processes  depends  upon  circumstances,  and  can
be  determined  by  the  principles  I  have  given.

At  the  close  of  a  very  laborious  accouchement,  the  newly-
born  child  exhibits  scarce  any  sign  of  life,  because  it  has
not  strength  to  move  the  inspiratory  muscles,  which  is
necessary  to  establish  the  respiration.  It  would  then
perish  for  want  of  air,  if  people  did  not  succeed  in  exciting
this  movement  by  various  means ;  such as frictions,  and

*  It  is  plain  that  we  should  abstain  from  magnetism  when  we
wish  to  let  the  milk  dry  up.


152  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

the  introduction  of  air  into  the  lungs.  M.  Thiriat,  Pro-
fessor of  Obstetrics,  has  ascertained  by  experience,  that
magnetism  produces  the  desired  effect  very  speedily.  He
has  employed  it  by  blowing  upon  the  chest  through  a  linen
cloth.  He  supposes,  with  some  reason,  that  the  same
means  would  be  very  efficacious  in  recalling  persons  to
life  in  cases  of  asphyxia.  [See  "Bibliotheque  Magnetiquc"
torn.  iv.  p.  149.]

Magnetism  drives  away  most  of  the  pains  of  children  at
the  breast;  it  gives  them  strength,  and  favors  the  develope-
ment  of  their  organization.  Mothers  employ  it  by  a  nat-
ural impulse  when  they  see  their  children  suffering,  and
succeed  in  soothing  them.  They  would  have  much  more
success  if  they  had  entire  confidence  in  the  power  with
which  nature  has  endowed  them.

In  general,  children  are  very  sensible  to  the  magnetic
action.  As  soon  as  they  have  experienced  benefit  from  it,
they  perceive  that  he  who  has  magnetized  them  has  the
power  of  curing  them  by  the  processes  they  have  seen  him
employ,  and  they  are  eager  to  demand  the  same  assistance
when  they  find  themselves  unwell.  A  child  of  five  years,
that  I  see  every  day,  having  been  stung  in  the  nose  by  a
bee  while  T  was  walking  with  him,  I  took  away  the  pain  in
a  few  minutes.  Ever  since  that,  he  comes  to  ask  me  to
cure  him,  whenever  he  has  the  slightest  complaint.

A  physician  who  has,  for  eighteen  months,  followed  the
treatment  of  M.  Wolfart,  at  Berlin,  tells  me  that  this  cele-
brated magnetizer  used  to  have  a  sitting  twice  a  week,  for
very  young  children ;  that,  after  having  placed  around  the
trough  the  nurses  and  the  mothers,  who  carry  them  in
their  arms,  or  hold  them  by  the  hand,  he  makes  several
passes  over  them,  which  the  children  regard  with  delight.
He  also  told  me  that  he  did  not  recollect  seeing  any  of
them  cry  during  the  time  of  the  sitting.  Finally,  he  said
that,  at  the  hour  of  the  treatment,  the  children  that  had
been  carried  thither  many  times,  testified,  by  their  gestures
and  their  cries,  their  desire  of  being  conducted  to  the
place again.

Among  the  numerous  facts  which  prove  the  speedy  and
efficacious  action  of  magnetism  upon  children,  I  will
record  two,  which  I  have  verified.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  153

A  child  of  eighteen  months,  a  girl,  hid  an  orgdci,  which
caused  her  much  inconvenience.  Her  father  took  her
upon  his  knees,  and  magnetized  her,  putting  his  hand  over
her  eyes.  The  child  immediately  fell  asleep.  One  hour
after,  she  awoke,  and  the  orgekt  had  disappeared.

Madame  ***,  of  Chalons  on  the  Marne,  had  a  child  of
six  years,  whose  bowels  were  extremely  loose  for  a  long
time.  All  imaginable  means  had  been  employed  to  remedy
this  weakness.  His  mother  at  length  began  to  magnetize
him.  At  the  first  sitting,  magnetism  produced  an  extra-
ordinary evacuation;  at  the  second,  there  was  another
movement  of  the  same  kind ;  and  at.  the  third,  the  child
was  cured.  She  continued  the  treatment  several  days,
without  his  experiencing  any  sensation ;  and  he  has  not
since had  the  least  symptoms  of  his  complaint.

Surprising  effects  have  often  been  obtained  by  means  of
magnetism  upon  young  persons  who  were  rickety  ;  or  who
had  defects  of  conformation,  which  seemed  to  demand,  for
a  long  time,  the  well -contrived  mechanical  means  of  our
days,  joined  to  internal  remedies.  An  able  physician
related  to  me,  that,  after  having  attended  unsuccessfully  a
young  lady  who  had  a  considerable  curvature  of  the  spine,
he  made  a  trial  of  magnetism,  and  was  much  astonished
to  see,  at  the  end  of  some  months,  the  vertebral  column
restored  to  its  proper  position.

I  knew  a  girl,  twelve  years  old,  whose  lumbar  vertebrae
formed  a  considerable  projection;  a  respectable  clergyman,
who  had  first  administered  the  communion  service  to  her,
advised  her  mother  to  magnetize  her,  and  he  charged  him-
self with  the  direction  of  the  treatment.  In  a  fortnight,  the
vertebras  recovered  their  natural  position.  This  girl  had
a  fever,  and  internal  pains  for  two  years;  she  had  consulted
many  physicians,  and  taken  much  medicine.  Magnetism
constantly  relieved  her,  but  it  could  not  cure  her.

I  saw,  at  Corbeil,  a  girl  of  fifteen  years,  who,  from  early
infancy,  had  one  leg  shorter  than  the  other  by  six  inches,
and  a  callosity  at  the  hip  as  large  as  the  fist.  In  six  weeks
of  treatment,  the  callosity  diminished  one  half,  and  the  leg
lengthened  three  inches  ;  at  the  same  time,  she  recovered
her  strength.

I  will  not  say  more  in  relation  to  the  effects  produced
by  magnetism  in  various  diseases,  and  to  the  mode  of  ap-


154  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP.  VII.

plication  which  I  think  preferable,  according  to  circum-
stances.* I  return  to  general  observations.

I  have  said  that,  in  order  to  succeed,  we  must  unite  con-
fidence to  will.  But  it  is  useful  to  be  forewarned  that  the
power  which  we  employ  has  limits  which  we  cannot  pass.
In  many  chronic  diseases,  known  to  be  incurable,  because
they  attack  an  essential  organ,  and  have  made  much  prog-
ress, magnetism  often  produces  a  change  which  astonishes
us,  and  after  which  we  do  not  doubt  that  we  have  obtained
mastery  of  the  disease,  and  that  it  will  be  cured  in  a  short
time ;  but  the  patient  very  soon  relapses  into  his  former
state,  and  perishes  at  last.  It  is  because  magnetism,  which
cannot  triumph  over  an  organic  affection  in  an  advanced
stage,  dissipates  at  first  the  accessory  diseases ;  it  gives
strength,  it  restores  sleep,  it  quiets  the  nerves,  it  puts  an  end
to  pains,  it  diminishes  swellings;  but  the  essential  malady
always  exists;  it  afterwards  reappears;  magnetism  has  less
influence,  and  the  patient  ordinarily  loses  all  confidence.
This  is  no  reason  for  not  making  a  trial  of  magnetism  ;  but
it  is  a  reason  for  not  flattering  ourselves,  for  not  declaring
as  certain  the  cure  of  a  long-seated  disease,  because  we
have  produced  in  a  few  days  a  notable  change,  and  an
amelioration  which  we  could  not  have  obtained  by  all  the
medicinal  remedies.

Besides,  there  are  many  diseases  which  are  constitutional,
or  which  originate  in  the  blood,  or  which  principally  attack
the  nerves.  In  these,  magnetism  may  act  beneficially  with-
out destroying  the  cause. We  should  not,  therefore,  expect

*  One  of  the  founders  of  the  Magnetic  Society,  which  existed  at
Paris,  and  of  which  M.  le  Marquis  de  Puysegur  was  president,  pro-
poses to  publish  an  exposition  of  all  the  cures  effected  in  France
from  the  time  of  Mesmer  until  the  present.  This  work,  the  manu-
script of  which  I  have  read,  will  form  two  octavo  volumes,  with
analytic  tables.  The  works  from  which  its  authorities  are  extracted
make  more  than  sixty  volumes.  One  may  therein  find  all  that  can
throw  light  upon  the  kind  of  diseases,  the  mode  of  treatment,  and
the  crises  which  have  brought  relief,  or  a  cure.  The  compiler  chiefly
intended  to  give  an  account  of  cures  made  by  physicians,  or  under
their  direction.  The  number  of  those  who  have  given  their  testi-
mony is  more  than  two  hundred  and  fifty.  This  collection  of  facts
will  save  the  trouble  of  searching  for  them  in  a  great  number  of
books,  some  of  which  are  very  difficult  to  find,  and  nearly  all  of
which  contain  useless  details,  or  theories  more  or  less  hypothetical.
[This  valuable  work  was  published  in  1826. — Trans.]


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  155

more  from  it  than  it  can  perform.  One  would  be  wrong  in
supposing  he  might  find  a  better  magnetizer,  or  might  suc-
ceed by  more  active  processes.  It  is  necessary  for  the
patient  to  know  how  to  resign  himself  to  living  with  his
enemy,  (as  the  vulgar  saying  is,)  and  for  the  magnetizer  to
have  the  courage  to  continue  a  treatment  which  does  more
good  than  any  other,  and  is  not  attended  with  inconve-
nience. Governing  himself  by  the  nature  of  the  malady,  one
might  cause  himself  to  be  magnetized  a  quarter  of  an  hour
daily,  or  not  have  recourse  to  magnetism,  except  when  the
need  of  it  is  felt.  How  many  people  of  my  acquaintance
owe  to  magnetism  a  supportable  existence,  without  flatter-
ing themselves  with  the  prospect  of  being  restored  to  per-
fect health  !

It  happens  pretty  frequently  that,  after  having  at  first  a
very  perceptible  amelioration,  magnetism  ceases  to  act,  or
at  least  to  manifest  its  action  :  then  the  patient  becomes
dissatisfied  ;  he  renounces  it,  and  has  recourse  to  medicine.
This  is  very  prudent,  in  case  he  has  not  yet  taken  any ;
but  I  ought  to  observe  that  I  have  never  seen  a  disease,
for  which  the  resources  of  medicine  have  been  exhausted,
and  which  has  afterwards  been  aided  by  magnetism,  cured
by  new  medicinal  remedies,  after  the  aid  of  magnetism  has
been  renounced.

On  the  contrary,  a  disease  has  been  known  to  be  weak-
ened, and  to  be  finally  cured,  by  magnetism,  after  a  very
long  time,  when  the  patient  dared  no  more  to  please  him-
self with  the  hope  of  restoration.  I  am  going  to  cite  an
instance.

A  young"  woman,  very  interesting,  born  in  Paris,  and
married  in  one  of  the  provincial  towns,  was  for  three  years
tormented  by  the  tic  douloureux.  She  had  consulted  sev-
eral physicians;  she  had  tried  a  great  number  of  remedies,
and  made  great  use  of  Peruvian  bark.  Her  stomach  was
in  a  very  bad  state.  Having  had  an  opportunity  to  see  her
during  a  journey  which  she  made  to  Paris,  I  advised  her  to
try  magnetism,  and  I  made  trial  of  it  for  two  months  in
succession.  I  put  her  asleep  several  times  without  pro-
ducing somnambulism.  I  succeeded  in  driving  off  the
pains  when  she  had  an  attack,  but  I  could  never  prevent
their  return.  When  she  returned  home,  I  made  her  hus-
band engage  to  continue  the  treatment. During  two  years,


156  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP. VII.

he  magnetized  her  almost  every  day,  without  being  able  to
cure  her ;  but  the  attacks  became  less  frequent  and  less
painful  ;  and  the  magnetized  water,  of  which  she  made
constant  use,  rendered  her  digestion  very  easy.  Finally,
at  the  end  of  four  years,  she  was,  by  the  perseverance  of
her  husband,  restored  to  perfect  health.

The  subject  of  which  I  have  just  treated  is  susceptible
of  great  developement.  When  able  physicians  shall  have
studied  magnetism,  they  will  be  able  to  give  us  new  light
upon  the  modifications  which  the  seat  and  the  symptoms  of
different  diseases  require  in  the  application  of  this  agent.
Nevertheless,  the  details  into  which  I  have  entered  appear
to  me  sufficient  for  the  direction  of  persons  who  wish  to
employ  their  faculties  in  the  doing  of  good.  If  I  have
sought  to  inspire  confidence,  I  have  taken  still  more  care
to  maintain  that  confidence  within  the  limits  of  prudence.
By  following  the  plan  I  have  traced  out,  no  one  will  have
cause  to  repent  having  made  use  of  magnetism  as  an  auxil-
iary to  medicine.

It  remains  for  me  to  make  two  observations,  one  of  which
is  applicable  to  all  the  severe  diseases  which  have  been
cured  by  magnetism  ;  and  the  other  to  those  in  which  it
has  exerted  a  great  influence.

I  have  said  that,  when  one  has  restored  health  to  a
patient,  and  when  the  convalescence  has  terminated,  it  is
necessary  to  cease  magnetizing.  But  people  have  remarked,
in  many  diseases,  that,  a  year  after  the  cure,  they  have
experienced  disagreeable  feelings,  or  some  symptoms  which
rouse  their  concern  lest  the  cause  of  the  disease  may  not
have  been  entirely  destroyed.  When,  therefore,  we  have
ended  the  treatment  of  one  of  these  diseases,  I  think  it  a
very  prudent  precaution  to  have  recourse  anew  to  magnet-
ism for  a  fortnight,  when  about  a  year  has  elapsed  since
the  termination  of  the  treatment  which  brought  on  the
cure.  This  is  not  always  necessary  ;  but,  in  the  uncer-
tainty, you  would  do  well  to  follow  this  rule,  especially  if
you  are  not  far  from  the  magnetizer  to  whom  you  owe
your  restoration.

When  magnetism  has  established  a  communication  be-
tween the  magnetizer  and  the  person  magnetized  ;  when  the
latter  has  entered  into  the  state  which  we  call  the  magnetic.
state; and,  above  all,  when  he  is  a  somnambulist, —  there


CHAP. VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  157

is  no  doubt  that  the  magnetizer  may  act  upon  him  at  a
distance,  if  he  makes  a  vigorous  effort  to  that  end.  I  ought
to  observe  that  the  exercise  of  this  power  exacts  the  great-
est precautions,  and  that  we  never  should  permit  ourselves
to  make  use  of  it  for  mere  experiment.  It  is,  without  doubt,
very  curious  to  try  whether  we  can  make  our  action  per-
ceptible to  one  who  is  distant  from  us,  and  who  is  not  con-
scious of  our  attempt ;  but  it  may  be  attended  with  many
inconveniences  ;  it  may  even  give  rise  to  mischievous  re-
sults. When  there  is  no  somnambulism,  the  inconvenience
is  to  excite  demi-crises,  which  we  can  neither  develope  or
sustain.  Upon  him  who  is  susceptible  of  somnambulism,
there  is  danger  of  producing  that  state  when  the  patient  is
with  persons  who  are  not  in  communication  with  him,  and
who,  by  touching  him,  or  by  seeking  to  awaken  him,  may
do  him  injury.  I  have  said  that  he  who  would  magnetize
ought  to  free  himself  from  all  curiosity ;  and  it  is,  in  this
case  especially,  highly  requisite  to  make  the  application  of
this  principle.

Yet  there  are  cases  when  the  magnetizer  should  make
use  of  the  faculty  which  he  has  of  magnetizing  from  a  dis-
tance ;  but  this  should  be  after  having  taken  all  the  proper
precautions,  and  never  through  motives  of  curiosity.  Your
patient  has  sharp  pains ;  you  presume  they  will  prevent
his  sleeping  at  night ;  you  have  discovered  that  you  can
assuage  these  pains  by  your  presence  :  occupy  yourself
with  him,  and  magnetize  him  by  the  thought,  with  the  sole
intention  of  soothing  him  ;  it  is  probable  you  will  succeed
in  it.  If  your  patient  is  a  somnambulist,  ask  him,  when  in
the  somnambulic  state,  if  you  could  do  him  any  good  by
acting  upon  him  at  such  an  hour.  If  he  makes  you  engage
to  do  it,  then  take  the  proper  precautions,  so  that  nothing
may  interrupt  him  ;  tell  him  at  what  hour  he  ought  to  be
alone,  or  with  the  person  who  is  accustomed  to  assist  at
the  sittings,  and  to  whom  you  have  imparted  your  intention.
Thenceforth  you  have  nothing  to  fear,  and  somnambulism,
brought  on  at  the  hour  when  nature  has  need  of  it,  will  do
him  much  good.  But  people  will  say  that  somnambulism
has  been  brought  on  by  the  imagination  of  the  patient,  and
not  by  my  thought  and  by  my  will.  People  will  say  nothing
about  it ;  for  you  ought  not  to  tell  any  one  of  the  phenom-
ena, at  least  until  after  the  cure.  But  I  should  not  know
14


158  MAGNETISM APPLIED TO DISEASES. [CHAP. VII..

myself  whether  I  have  really  acted  upon  him.  Of  what
consequence  is  that  ?  Do  you  magnetize  in  order  to  con-
vince yourself,  or  to  cure  your  patient  1  If  to  cure  him,  it
is  indifferent  whether  you  cure  him  by  your  own  influence,
or  by  that  of  his  imagination.  Besides,  you  have  no  need
of  searching  for  extraordinary  phenomena  to  fortify  your
own  faith ;  and  if  you  have  a  somnambulist  very  susceptible,
chance  will  offer  you  so  many  wonderful  facts,  so  many
convincing  proofs,  as  to  astonish  you.  Once  more :  When
you  magnetize,  it  is  not  for  yourself;  it  is  solely  for  the
patient  who  has  delivered  himself  over  to  your  care,  your
benevolence,  and  your  affection.

It  has  frequently  happened  that  a  magnetizer  has  con-
tinued the  treatment  of  a  somnambulist,  who  had  been
obliged  to  separate  from  him,  and  that  the  patient  has
written,  while  in  the  somnambulic  state,  a  detail  of  his
crises,  and  what  must  be  done  to  finish  the  cure.*  This
will  always  succeed  with  a  prudent  magnetizer  and  a  docile
somnambulist.  But  if  the  precautions  have  been  badly
taken,  if  the  magnetizer  neglects  to  occupy  himself  with
his  patient  at  the  appointed  hours,  it  would  be  better,  a
hundred  times,  to  break  the  communication,  and  abandon
the  patient  to  nature.

With  many  subjects  we  may  renew  somnambulism  by
means  of  a  magnetized  object.  This  facilitates  the  action
of  the  magnetizer,  but  it  does  not  dispense  with  the  neces-
sity of  thinking  about  the  patient  in  order  to  sustain  and
regulate  the  crisis.

They  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of
magnetism  wrill  consider  as  absurd  what  I  have  just  said  ;
but  they  who  have  once  recognized  in  themselves  the  in-
fluence they  can  exert  upon  their  somnambulists  would  be
exposed  to  commit  imprudences,  if  I  did  not  warn  them  of
the  danger.  It  is,  therefore,  my  duty  to  make  known  what
I  know  to  be  the  truth,  without  troubling  myself  about  the
opinions  of  the  incredulous.  I  do  not  ask  of  the  persons
to  whom  I  address  this  instruction  to  take  my  word  for


*  I  possess  several  letters  written  in  a  state  of  somnambulism.
They  are  much  superior  to  those  which  the  same  persons  write  in
their  ordinary  state,  not  only  as  it  respects  depth  of  thought,  but
also  elegance  of  style  and  choice  of  expression.


CHAP.  VII.] ITS CONNECTION WITH MEDICINE.  159

the  reality  of  the  extraordinary  phenomena.  I  merely
request  them  to  follow  the  advice  I  give  them,  whenever
these  phenomena  present  themselves.


.NOTE.

A  physician  of  the  faculty  of  Paris  has  just  sent  me  an  obser-
vation which  I  think  it  useful  to  publish,  because  it  relates  to  a
disease  of  which  I  have  not  made  mention.

A  constant  vertigo  and  an  accidental  chorea  cured  by  mag-
netism.—  Mademoiselle  S***,  aged  thirty-eight  years,  experi-
enced, on  the  17th  of  October,  a  violent  fright,  which  suddenly
changed  the  state  in  which  she  was,  by  producing  a  suppression.
T  ^enty-four  hours  after,  there  were  heaviness  in  the  lumbar
regions  and  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  abdomen,  headache,  loss
of  appetite,  irregular  motion  in  the  arm  and  the  leg  on  the  right
side.  These  motions  greatly  resembled  the  Saint  Vitus's  dance.
The  physician  employed,  for  the  space  of  three  months,  all  the  ap-
propriate remedies,  —  leeches,  sedatives,  antispasmodics,  sulphate
of  quinine,  &c.  He  considered  the  stomach  and  the  abdomen  to
be  better ;  but  he  could  not  succeed  in  dissipating  the  vertigo,  in
reestablishing  the  course  of  the  blood,  or  in  quieting  the  ner-
vous motions.  The  patient,  who  was  much  afflicted,  demanded
whether  magnetism  would  not  be  useful  in  these  circumstances.
The  physician  advised  her  to  try  it.  He  ceased  giving  medi-
cines, and  recommended  her  to  live  temperately.  They  com-
menced magnetizing  her  in  the  middle  of  January,  only  three
times  a  week,  and  twelve  or  fifteen  minutes  at  a  sitting.  The
patient  drank  nothing  but  magnetized  water.  At  the  beginning
of  February  >  the  nervous  symptoms  were  gradually  disappearing,
and  totally  disappeared  by  the  middle  of  the  month.  The  patient
recovered  her  freshness  and  gayety,  the  blood  retook  its  natural
course,  and  in  the  month  of  March  her  health  was  restored.


160


CHAPTER VIII.


OF  THE  INCONVENIENCES,  THE  ABUSES,  AND  THE

DANGERS,  OF  MAGNETISM,  AND  OF  THE

MEANS  OF  PREVENTING  THEM.

I

The  opposers  of  magnetism,  after  declaring  that  it  does
not  exist,  have  declaimed  against  the  dangers  which  attend
it.  I  will  not  stop  to  prove  that  what  they  have  said  of  the
processes  employed  to  put  it  in  action,  and  of  the  effects  it
produces,  is  very  far  from  the  truth,  and  that  the  anecdotes
they  have  cited  to  render  it  odious  are  entirely  foreign  to
it.  I  agree  that  magnetism  has  been  sometimes  abused,
and  is  still  liable  to  be  abused  again.  But  a  danger  ceases
to  be  important  when  we  are  warned  of  it,  and  have  easy
and  certain  means  of  avoiding  it.  Magnetism  is  an  agent
of  inconceivable  power.  Its  utility  depends  upon  the  way
in  which  it  is  employed ;  and  in  this  it  is  like  fire,  the  use
of  which  is  not  interdicted  for  fear  of  conflagration.

They  who  will  conform  to  the  directions  laid  down  in
the  preceding  chapters,  will  never  have  occasion  to  fear
the  least  inconvenience  from  the  "use  of  magnetism.  Yet,
as  many  of  my  readers  may  not  see  the  importance  of  the
precautions  I  have  recommended ;  as  others  may  be  alarmed
by  what  has  been  said  of  the  bad  consequences  of  some
treatments;  as  others,  finally,  may  reproach  me  with  having
misstated  the  motives  of  those  who  condemn  magnetism, —
I  think  it  proper  to  devote  an  article  to  recapitulate  and
develope  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject.  I  would
rather  fall  into  repetitions  than  leave  the  least  uncertainty
about  things  which  are  essential.  I  am  now  going  to  point
out  the  inconveniences,  the  abuses,  and  the  dangers,  of
magnetism;  and  I  will  show  that  all,  without  exception,
will  be  infallibly  avoided  by  applying  the  principles  which
I  have  established.

To  obtain  more  order  and  clearness  in  this  discussion,  I


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  161

will  consider  magnetism  under  three  points  of  view  ;  and
I  will  speak,  first,  of  the  moral  dangers  which  may  attend
the  practice  ;  secondly,  of  the  disorder  which  a  wrong  di-
rection of  this  agent,  or  the  want  of  some  essential  condi-
tions, may  produce  in  the  animal  economy  ;  thirdly,  of  the
inconveniences  which  spring  from  a  blind  confidence  in
somnambulists,  and  from  the  erroneous  opinions  to  which  a
person  is  sometimes  conducted  by  a  sight  of  extraordinary
phenomena,

1.  —  Of  the  Moral  Dangers  of  Magnetism, and  of  the
Means  of  obviating  them.

In  describing  the  processes,  I  said  that  we  might  employ
light  frictions,  the  application  of  the  hands  upon  the  chest,
upon  the  heart,  upon  the  knees,  blowing  with  the  mouth,
looking  steadily  at  the  patient,  &c. ;  but  I  also  said  that
these  processes,  pointed  out  as  the  most  active,  may  be  laid
aside  for  others,  which,  sustained  by  the  will  and  the  atten-
tion, will  be  equally  efficacious.  When  a  man  is  desired
to  magnetize  a  woman  who  is  ill,  he  ought  to  avoid  what-
ever may  wound  the  most  scrupulous  modesty,  or  cause  the
least  embarrassment,  and  even  whatever  might  to  a  spectator
seem  improper.  He  will  not  place  himself  directly  in  front
of  the  person  whom  he  intends  to  magnetize ;  he  will  not
request  her  to  look  at  him;  he  will  merely  ask  her  to
abandon  herself  entirely  to  the  influence  of  the  action ;
he  will  take  her  thumbs  during  some  moments,  and  he  will
then  make  passes  at  a  distance,  without  touching  her.  It
is  unnecessary  to  observe  that  some  one  of  the  family,  or  a
female  friend,  ought  always  to  be  present

If  the  magnetic  processes  are  attended  with  any  incon-
veniences, it  is  neither  in  society,  where  one  is  obliged  to
avoid  impropriety  of  conduct,  nor  in  the  public  treatments,
where  all  things  are  ordered  in  a  decent  manner.  It  is  in
the  hospitals,  —  and  I  ought  to  fix  the  attention  of  superin-
tending physicians  upon  this  point ;  not  that  they  should
restrain  the  employment  of  this  salutary  agent,  but  that  they
should  direct  and  oversee  the  method  of  employing  it ;  for
it  will  be  their  fault  if  any  thing  reprehensible  should  be
mingled  with  the  good  which  ought  to  be  derived  from  it.
I  will  explain.

14*


162  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP.  VIIJ.

Physicians  and  medical  students  attached  to  the  hospitals
are  now  beginning  to  try  the  action  of  magnetism.  They
choose,  in  preference,  young  women  or  young  girls  attacked
with  nervous  diseases,  because  they  believe  them  more
susceptible,  and  more  likely  to  present  curious  phenomena.
As  they  are  accustomed  to  touch  indiscriminately  all  the
patients,  either  to  ascertain  the  seat  of  disease,  or  to  dress
their  wounds  and  ulcers,  and  as  they  never  have  any  other
idea  than  that  of  fulfilling  the  duties  with  which  they  are
charged,  they  do  not  suspect  that  the  magnetic  processes
demand  a  particular  reserve,  and  precautions  taken  before-
hand to  banish  every  thing  which  might  act  upon  their
imagination  or  upon  that  of  the  patient.  I  am  willing  to
believe  that  they  respect  themselves  so  much  as  never  to
permit  the  least  thing  injurious  to  modesty,  and  to  repel
every  thought  foreign  to  the  end  proposed ;  but  the  very
effort  which  is  made  to  chase  away  an  intrusive  idea  turns
one  aside  from  the  object  which  alone  ought  to  occupy  the
attention.  They  ought,  therefore,  to  distrust  themselves ;  to
dread  equally  the  impressions  which  they  can  experience,
and  those  which  they  can  produce ;  and  to  take  measures
in  advance,  so  that  nothing  shall  trouble  the  purity  of  an
influence  which  has,  at  the  same  time,  both  a  physical  and
a  moral  effect.

These  are  the  counsels  which  I  ought  to  give  in  relation
to  this  subject,  until  magnetism  is  so  generally  known,
established,  and  practised,  as  to  render  them  unneces-
sary.

When  a  physician  intends  to  magnetize  a  woman  who
keeps  her  bed,  the  clothes  ought  to  be  kept  over  her.  If
she  can  rise,  she  ought  to  be  clad  in  the  most  decent  man-
ner. The  physician  will  not  touch  her  except  to  take  her
thumbs,  or  to  make  frictions  along  the  feet  outside  of  her
garments.  All  the  passes  will  be  made  at  a  distance.  It
is  often  necessary  to  concentrate  the  action  upon  an  organ ;
for  example,  upon  the  solar  plexus,  the  liver,  or  the  spleen.
In  this  case,  he  will  present  the  fingers  brought  to  a  point,
or  else  he  will  make  use  of  a  glass  or  steel  rod,  in  order  to
avoid  touching.  It  would  be  proper  to  have  a  nurse  near
the  bed  during  the  sitting.  No  person  should  enter  the
room.  The  magnetizer  should  not  permit  himself  to  make
any  experiment ;  and,  if  he  obtains  somnambulism,  he  will


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  163

ask  the  patient  only  about  her  disease,  and  the  means  of
curing  it.  He  will  give  an  account  to  the  chief  physician
of  the  results  of  the  treatment.

It  may  happen  that  a  nurse,  endowed  with  intelligence
and  kindness,  may  perceive,  with  her  own  eyes,  the  effi-
cacy of  magnetism,  and  feel  the  desire  and  the  power  of
doing  good.  In  this  case,  the  magnetizer  will  excite  her
confidence,  and  get  her  to  take  his  place  after  giving  her
suitable  instructions  how  to  proceed.  He  will  always  rec-
ommend to  her  not  to  speak  of  it.  The  time  is  not  yet
arrived  for  nurses  to  consider  the  exercise  of  magnetism  as
one  of  their  most  important  functions.

I  have  here  spoken  of  the  employment  of  this  agent  in
the  hospitals  merely  because  several  trials  have  been  re-
cently made  of  it  there.*  I  suppose  that,  if  the  young  phy-
sicians continue  to  occupy  themselves  with  it,  they  will  not
neglect  to  learn  the  conditions  essential  to  the  success  of
the  trials  which  they  would  make  to  furnish  a  powerful
auxiliary  to  therapeutic  medicine.

Let  us  return  to  the  employment  of  magnetism  in  society.
The  precautions  already  pointed  out  will  suffice  to  banish
all  the  inconveniences  attending  it,  when  it  is  merely  in-
tended to  make  use  of  it  several  days,  and  when  neither
somnambulism  nor  magnetic  sleep  presents  itself.  But
there  must  necessarily  be  many  others  in  chronic  com-
plaints which  appear  to  require  a  very  long  treatment,  and
whose  cure  is  preceded  by  crises  and  by  a  decided  mag-
netic state.

In  these  kinds  of  diseases,  magnetism  between  persons  of
and  morals  of  the  two  individuals  prevent  the  fear  of  an
improper  influence.  The  only  men  who  can  undertake  the
treatment  of  a  young  woman  are  the  father  or  the  husband.
I  have  told  the  reason  in  another  place.  I  think  it  useless
to  go  into  greater  details.  I  ought  only  to  point  out  the
exceptions  to  what  I  have  given  as  a  general  rule.

*  It  is  now  used  in  them  very  extensively  in  many  parts  of  Eu-
rope. Sir  David  Brewster  says  that  the  medical  colleges  in  Ger-
many have  professors  whose  business  it  is  to  deliver  lectures  on  this
subject,  in  its  connection  with  medicine.  I  have  learned  the  same
fact  from  an  intelligent  German,  and  from  several  travellers. —
Trans.


164  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [cHAP. VIII.

These  are  to  be  sought  in  the  advanced  age  of  one  of
the  parties,  and  in  the  difference  of  circumstances  in  which
they  are  found.

I  foresee  that  some  one  will  seek  to  put  me  in  contra-
diction with  myself.  "  You  have,"  says  one,  "  a  hundred
times  uttered  the  wish  that  physicians  only  would  make  use
of  magnetism  ;  how,  then,  can  women  be  magnetized  unless
by  men  1 " This  is  my  reply  :  —

It  is  to  be  desired  that  experienced  physicians  only
should  be  charged  with  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  treat-
ments ;  but  it  is  one  thing  to  have  the  direction  of  a  treat-
ment, and  another  to  perform  the  manipulatory  processes.

A  physician  might  gather  round  a  magnetic  reservoir  a
great  number  of  sick  persons  of  all  ages  and  of  each  sex,
and  devote  his  cares  to  each  one  according  to  circum-
stances ;  yet  he  cannot  charge  himself  with  a  direct  treat-
ment, but  by  observing  all  the  proprieties,  by  banishing  all
the  possible  dangers,  and  preventing  even  ill-founded  sus-
picions. He  must,  therefore,  cause  another  person  to  take
his  place  to  magnetize  a  female  patient,  and  choose  for
this  purpose  a  woman  instructed  by  him  how  to  proceed,
and  having  equally  the  confidence  of  himself  and  of  the
patient.

I  say  more  :  When  magnetism  shall  be  generally  recog-
nized, when  it  shall  become  an  essential  part  of  medicine, —
and  this  time  is,  perhaps,  not  far  distant,  —  the  physician  who
has  an  extensive  practice  will  have  two  treatments,  one  for
men,  and  another  for  women.  He  will  thus  avoid  affording
occasion  for  improper  remarks.

As  magnetism  establishes  confidence  and  friendship  be-
tween the  magnetizer  and  the  patient,  the  precaution  of
interdicting  the  use  of  it  between  persons  of  different  sexes
is  not  the  only  one  to  be  taken,  especially  in  regard  to
young  persons,  being,  as  they  are,  more  susceptible  of  new
impressions.  If  the  father  or  the  mother  cannot  themselves
magnetize  their  son  or  their  daughter,  they  ought  to  know
the  character  and  the  principles  of  the  person  who  performs
the  office  for  them,  not  only  because  opinions  are  commu-
nicated by  intimacy,  but  because,  in  long  treatments,  and
particularly  when  somnambulism  occurs,  the  magnetizer
will  at  length,  even  without  his  own  knowledge,  exert  a
moral  influence  capable  of  modifying  the  temper,  the  sen-


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  165

tiraents,  and  the  principles,  of  him  to  whom  he  restores
health.  As  to  the  rest,  persons  who,  without  any  selfish
motive,  undertake  the  treatment  of  a  disease,  are  urged  by
the  desire  of  doing  good ;  and  charity  supposes  almost  all
the  virtues.

What  has  been  related  of  the  dependence  which  som-
nambulists have  upon  their  magnetizer,  has  given  rise  to
ill-founded  prejudices  against  somnambulism.  But  this
dependence  is  only  relative.  It  has  necessary  limits,  and
cannot  have  the  consequences  which  some  have  dreaded.
The  somnambulist  preserves  his  reason,  and  the  use  of  his
will.  When  he  perceives  that  the  magnetizer  designs  his
benefit,  he  yields  to  him ;  and,  fortified  by  him,  he  deter-
mines to  vanquish  a  bad  habit,  to  resist  an  inclination  or
an  injurious  fantasy,  to  take  a  medicine  to  which  he  feels
a  repugnance,  and  which  he  has  judged  necessary.  He
profits  by  the  ascendency  of  the  latter  to  work  for  himself,
and  to  put  himself  in  an  advantageous  position,  which  may
be  continued  in  the  waking  state.  Sometimes  he  obeys
the  orders  of  his  magnetizer  in  things  that  are  indifferent,
because  the  desire  of  satisfying  him  predominates  over  the
reluctance  which  he  experiences;  but  the  magnetizer  could
not  obtain  from  him  either  the  revelation  of  a  secret  which
it  is  his  duty  or  his  interest  to  conceal,  nor  things  essen-
tially contrary  to  the  principles  of  honesty,  to  which  he  is
attached  in  the  common  state.  A  reprehensible  act  of
volition  would  cause  him  to  revolt,  and  throw  him  into
convulsions.*

The  experiments  which  have  been  made  to  show  that
one  could  make  somnambulists  obey  his  will,  have  always

*  M.  Passavant  expresses  himself  thus,  citing,  in  support  of  his
opinions,  several  remarkable  facts  :  —

"  Exterior  agents  may,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  carry  disorder  into
our  physical  organization  ;  but  our  moral  constitution  depends  only
upon  our  will.  Thus,  so  long  as  a  man  wills  to  be  free,  he  remains
so  in  somnambulism  as  much  as  in  the  ordinary  state.  One  might
wound  or  kill,  but  he  could  not  demoralize,  a  human  being  without
his  consent."

Yet  suppose  the  possibility  of  a  lethargic  somnambulism,  and  the
existence  of  a  being  sufficiently  depraved  to  take  advantage  of  it ;  we
need  not  inquire  whether  any  damage  might  result,  if  we  observe
the  rule  laid  down  above,  —  that  a  woman,  when  magnetized,  ought
always  to  have  a  female  friend  near  her.


166  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP.  VIII.

been  experiments  of  curiosity,  without  any  moral  danger,
but  very  imprudent,  since  they  fatigue  the  patients  useless-
ly, and  may  prevent  their  restoration.  People  will  abso-
lutely interdict  them  when  magnetism  shall  be  so  well
known  as  not  to  astonish  by  its  phenomena,  and  when  they
are  well  convinced  that  it  is  a  sort  of  profanation  to  employ
for  amusement  a  faculty  which  God  has  given  us  to  do
good  to  our  fellow-creatures.

I  will  finish  this  article  by  a  remark  worthy  of  attention.
It  is,  that,  among  those  who  are  induced  by  curiosity  to  at-
tempt magnetism,  some  renounce  it  as  soon  as  their  curi-
osity is  satisfied ;  and  some,  on  the  contrary,  attach  them-
selves more  and  more  to  the  practice,  as  their  curiosity  is
extinguished.  These  last  are  captivated  solely  by  the
pleasure  of  doing  good.  The  enjoyments  of  the  mind  are
enfeebled  by  the  loss  of  novelty;  those  of  the  heart  become
more  lively  the  longer  we  have  enjoyed  them.  The  source
of  the  last  is  inexhaustible.

2.  —  Of  the  Dangers  that  may  occur  to  the  Animal
Economy,  either  by  the  Abuse  or  the  Misapplication  of
Magnetism,  and  of  the  Means  of  avoiding  them.

Those  who  have  wished  to  inspire  the  fear  of  employing
this  agent  as  a  curative  means,  have  based  their  obser-
vations upon  very  specious  reasoning,  which  would  be
unjust  if  applied  to  ordinary  medicine.  Since  magnetism
has  a  very  powerful  action,  they  have  said  that  this  action
ought  to  be  salutary  or  injurious,  according  to  the  nature
of  the  disease.  If  it  is  a  tonic,  it  will  augment  the  evil
when  there  is  too  much  excitement ;  if  it  is  soothing,  it
can  produce  no  good  results  in  a  torpid  state  of  the  system.

The  defenders  of  this  agent  have  answered  that  it  can-
not be  compared  to  medicines  which  have  in  themselves  a
determinate  property.  Magnetism,  say  they,  acts  upon
the  whole  system ;  it  seconds  the  efforts  which  nature  is
making  to  throw  off  the  principle  of  the  disease.  If  it
soothes,  it  is  by  reestablishing  the  equilibrium ;  if  it
strengthens,  it  is  by  recalling  the  vital  fluid  into  the  organs
in  which  there  is  a  deficiency.

The  answer  is  dictated  by  the  theory  which  is  most  ap-
parently true ; and  I  think  that  if  magnetism  were  em-


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  167

ployed  in  all  its  purity,  and  freed  from  all  extraneous  prin-
ciples, it  could  not  in  any  case  be  injurious.

Some  privileged  beings  exist  who  are  endowed  with  a
lively  faith,  which  never  hesitates;  with  a  confidence  exempt
from  pride;  with  a  charity  so  expansive  that  they  foiget
themselves,  and  are  identified  with  the  suffering  being.
The  union  of  these  qualities  puts  them  into  a  state  for
employing  this  agent,  during  which  they  are  directed  by
an  instinct  more  sure  than  all  the  calculations  of  reason.
The  power  of  their  soul  predominates  over  all  the  interior
forces  of  the  patient.  It  excites  or  soothes  them  at  will.
Their  action,  sometimes  insufficient,  will  be  always  more
or  less  salutary.  But  I  ought  here  to  consider  magnetism
as  it  can  be  practised  at  the  present  time,  and  by  the  per-
sons to  whom  this  instruction  is  addressed.

Let  us  not,  then,  dwell  upon  an  abstract  theory.  Let  us
consult  experience,  to  know  if,  in  certain  circumstances,
magnetism  has  not  done  some  evil.  Let  us  listen  to  those
physicians  who  condemn  the  use  of  it,  not  to  dispute  with
them,  but  to  profit  by  whatever  truth  may  be  found  in  the
motives  of  their  opinion.  Innumerable  facts,  collected  for
forty  years,  have  demonstrated  in  general  the  curative
power  of  magnetism.  But  has  it  not  sometimes  produced
effects  contrary  to  what  people  have  desired  to  obtain  ?  If
it  be  true  that  it  has,  we  must  examine  in  what  circum-
stances they  have  occurred,  to  what  causes  they  ought  to  be
attributed,  and  what  precautions  we  ought  to  take  to  pre-
vent the  recurrence  hereafter.

I  am  persuaded  there  is  hardly  a  disease  which,  by  itself,
is  of  a  nature  to  be  aggravated  by  magnetism  properly  em-
ployed. But  it  may  happen  that  magnetism  does  not  agree
with  this  or  with  that  individual,  either  because  of  peculiar
temperament;  or  because  there  exists  no  sympathy  be-
tween him  and  the  magnetizer;  cr  because  the  latter  has
too  strong  an  action,  which  produces  trouble;  or  because
the  action  is  too  feeble,  so  that  it  induces  a  struggle  in
which  it  cannot  triumph;  or  because  he  does  not  know  the
mode  of  application  which  is  useful.  In  these  circum-
stances, it  is  prudent  not  obstinately  to  struggle  against
obstacles,  unless  the  patient  is  forced  by  a  kind  of  instinct
to  demand  its  continuance.  There  are  certain  persons  on
whom  magnetism  causes  a  nervous  irritation. When  this


168  MEANS OP AVOIDING  [CHAP. VIII.

is  perceived,  it  would  be  well  to  magnetize  at  a  distance,
with  the  intention  of  soothing,  and  withdraw  one's  self
gradually  from  one  end  of  the  apartment  to  another ;  you
will  even  draw  off  the  fluid  by  transversal  passes ;  you  will
not  give  yourself  any  uneasiness  ;  but  you  will  stop  if  you
do  not  make  a  state  of  calmness  succeed  this  first  nervous
shock.  We  know  by  the  somnambulists  that,  in  certain
cases,  magnetism  ought  to  be  employed  with  much  reserve,
and  that  its  application  ought  to  vary  according  to  circum-
stances, either  in  the  degree  of  force,  in  the  duration  of
the  sittings,  or  in  the  choice  of  the  processes.  When  there
is  an  exaltation  of  the  nervous  system,  it  is  prudent  to
moderate,  or  even  to  suspend,  the  action.

The  species  of  nervous  irritation  of  which  I  have  spoken,
does  not  in  the  least  resemble  the  pains  which  magnetism
produces  or  renews  in  an  affected  organ.  These  pains
prove  the  action  of  magnetism,  and  result  from  its  efforts
to  expel  the  principle  of  disease  ;  and  they  often  make
known  the  seat  of  it.  It  is  customary  to  continue  these
critical  pains  for  a  certain  time,  and  to  calm  them  as  well
as  we  can  before  the  end  of  the  sitting.  You  may  expect
to  see  them  renewed  at  the  following  sitting,  and  some-
times in  the  intervals,  until  there  is  no  longer  an  obstruction
to  the  free  circulation  of  the  fluid ;  and  you  need  not  be
affrighted  on  account  of  them.  In  palsy,  magnetism  often
excites  lively  pains,  because  it  reestablishes  sensibility  in
the  limbs  before  restoring  movement  to  them.

This  leads  me  to  speak  of  a  real  danger,  —  the  interruption
of  a  treatment  commenced,  and  the  omission  to  sustain  a
crisis  which  has  been  excited,  and  which  nature  cannot
develope  and  terminate  without  being  aided  by  magnetism.
This  danger  is  nothing  in  slight  and  recent  indispositions;
but  it  is  very  serious  in  organic  and  long-standing  diseases.
A  person  might  do  much  mischief  by  magnetizing  with
energy  only  once  to  drive  off  an  internal  pain  caused  by  a
tumor,  or  by  a  humor  which,  for  many  years,  attacks  an
organ  at  certain  periods.  When  a  person  has  deranged  a
movement  which  was  established,  or  excited  a  contrary
movement,  it  is  necessary  to  regulate  it  so  that  it  may  not
bring  on  any  disorder.  The  accidents  which  have  oc-
curred by  the  rude  interruption  of  a  treatment  ought  not
to  be  attributed  to  magnetism,  but  to  the  imprudence  of


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  169

the  magnetizer.  I  shall  make  myself  better  understood  by
citing  two  examples.  The  first  is  that  of  a  lady  who  for
twelve  years  had  a  violent  headache  every  month.  One
day,  when  I  was  at  her  house,  and  she  was  suffering  much,
I  relieved  her  of  the  attack  in  half  an  hour.  The  following
month,  the  headache  having  returned,  she  sent  for  me.  I
relieved  her  as  before.  The  next  day  she  was  very  well  ;
but  two  days  afterwards  she  had  insupportable  pains  in  the
body.  She  was  attacked  with  a  violent  fever,  which  lasted
six  weeks,  and  of  which  she  was  cured  by  ordinary  medi-
cine. Since  that  time  she  has  not  had  a  return  of  the
headache.  I  do  not  doubt  that  this  acute  disease  was  pro-
duced by  the  humor  displaced  by  me;  and  that  it  would
not  have  taken  place,  if,  when  I  drove  off  the  headache  at
first,  I  had  continued  to  magnetize  her  for  a  month,  in
order  to  produce  some  crisis.

The  second  fact  is  still  more  remarkable.  It  clearly
proves  that  one  ought  not  to  permit  himself  to  attempt  the
action  of  magnetism,  except  when  he  is  sure  of  continuing
it  as  long  as  it  is  necessary.

A  girl  of  sixteen,  who  lived  in  the  country,  having  had  a
fall,  experienced,  for  several  months,  pains  in  the  head,  and
became  completely  blind,  having  the  gutta  screna.  Per-
sons who  took  much  interest  in  her  caused  her  to  be
placed  under  the  care  of  able  oculists.  She  was  sent
forthwith  to  the  Hotel  Dieu,  where  all  the  remedies  were
essayed.  She  was  finally  declared  incurable;  and,  as  her
parents  were  without  fortune,  she  was  sent  to  the  Salpe-
triere.  She  was  there  for  three  years,  when  a  medical
student,  who  was  magnetizing  a  lady,  proposed  to  her  to
come  to  the  house  of  that  lady,  telling  her  he  had  hopes  of
curing  her.  She  accepted  the  offer  with  gratitude;  and
some  of  her  acquaintances  undertook  to  see  that  she  was
attended  thither  every  day.  She  came  then  to  the  lady's
house,  and  he  who  had  offered  her  his  cares  magnetized
her  with  energy  for  an  hour,  by  putting  his  hands  upon
her  head.  She  experienced  an  extraordinary  sensation,
which,  nevertheless,  was  not  painful  ;  but  the  following
night  she  was  attacked  with  violent  pains  in  the  head.
She  returned  to  the  house  of  the  lady,  but  she  did  not  find
the  magnetizer,  who  had  left  word  that  unexpected  circum-
stances obliged  him  to  suspend  the  treatment.  The  pains
15


170  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP. VIII.

increased  from  day  to  day.  They  finally  became  insup-
portable, and  were  accompanied  with  a  fever,  which  con-
tinued every  evening  and  a  part  of  the  night.  The  poor
girl  was  sent  to  the  infirmary,  where  many  remedies  were
administered  to  her  without  effect.  She  was  eleven  months
in  this  suffering  condition,  when  some  one  requested  me
to  magnetize  her.  She  came  to  my  house  every  day.  I
employed  magnetism  by  the  long  pass,  and  made  passes
along  the  legs,  which  became  at  first  so  benumbed  that
she  could  not  move  them.  After  five  sittings,  she  was
restored;  and,  since  that  period,  she  has  enjoyed  good
health,  excepting  her  blindness.

This  is  the  same  girl  whose  treatment  I  continued  for
nearly  a  year,  because  the  effects  which  I  had  produced
after  the  cessation  of  the  pains  made  me  hope  to  restore
her  sight.  I  spoke  of  this  in  the  preceding  chapter.  It  is
evident  that  the  pains  in  the  head  were  critical  pains,  pro-
duced by  magnetism,  and  that  they  would  have  ceased  in
a  few  days,  if  the  crisis  had  been  sustained.  Perhaps,  at
that  time,  vision  might  have  been  restored.

In  certain  organic  diseases  which  are  very  severe  and
long-seated,  the  efforts  of  nature  to  take  a  new  direction
may  produce  the  most  painful  and  alarming  crises.  If  the
magnetizer  is  frightened,  if  he  interrupts  the  action,  the
patient  runs  the  risk  of  succumbing.  In  these  cases,
happily  very  rare,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  somnam-
bulist sufficiently  clairvoyant  to  announce  the  crises,  to
which  they  ought  to  have.  The  magnetizer  would  be
equally  assured,  if  he  were  directed  by  a  physician  versed
in  the  knowledge  of  magnetism.  If  this  aid  be  wanting,
I  can  only  recommend  confidence  and  courage.  I  have
seen  the  interruption  or  the  false  direction  of  a  treatment
have,  in  the  course  of  time,  the  most  fatal  consequences  ;
but  I  have  never  seen  a  serious  accident  follow  a  violent
crisis,  the  developement  of  which  has  not  been  hindered.

Many  persons  fear  that  magnetism  excites  nervous  com-
motions, and  even  convulsions,  because  they  recall  to  mind
the  effects  which  were  produced  at  first  by  Mesmer.  But
at  the  time  when  Mesmer  connected  patients  for  the  first
time  around  the  baquet,  he  knew  neither  the  means  of
directing  the  agent  that  he  employed,  nor  of  calming  the


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  171

crises  ;  and  since  1784,  the  true  principles  of  magnetism
being  well  known,  the  scenes  which  once  made  so  much
noise  are  no  longer  reproduced.  But  it  is  well  to  say  here
in  what  case  nervous  crises  may  occur,  and  how  all  their
inconveniences  may  be  avoided.

Magnetism  really  produces  nervous  crises  in  disorders  of
the  nervous  system ;  but  they  are  necessary  for  the  cure ;
they  are  the  consequences  of  the  efforts  of  nature  to  change
a  bad  direction,  and  reestablish  the  equilibrium.  The
magnetizer  does  not  interrupt  them  ;  he  calms  them  by  a
soothing  action,  and  by  his  will.  Let  him  not  be  troubled,
—  let  him  have  patience  and  the  desire  of  doing  good,  —  and
after  the  crisis  the  patient  will  find  himself  better  than
before.  It  is  very  essential  to  know  that  magnetism  renews
attacks  which  it  gives  the  strength  to  support ;  but  it  accel-
erates the  progress,  to  destroy  the  cause  of  the  disease.

Magnetism  also  excites  nervous  motions  when  people
make  use  of  it  out  of  curiosity,  to  exert  its  power,  or  to
obtain  singular  effects  ;  when  its  action  is  concentrated  upon
the  head,  or  when  an  extraordinary  force  is  employed  sud-
denly, while  the  subject  resists  the  action  ;  when,  instead  of
being  tranquil,  the  operator  is  himself  agitated.  Do  not
magnetize  unless  you  are  yourself  in  a  state  of  calm,  and
nothing  disturbs  the  employment  of  your  faculties.  Employ
your  force  gradually.  Have  no  other  desire  than  that  of
curing,  and  you  will  never  excite  the  least  trouble  in  the
one  you  magnetize.

If,  in  a  treatment  wherein  several  persons  unite  in  a
chain,  or  around  a  magnetic  reservoir,  a  nervous  crisis
displays  itself,  the  patient  attacked  by  it  should  be  instantly
taken  from  the  chain,  and  led  to  another  place,  that  he  may
be  calmed.  It  is  known  that  nervous  attacks  are  commu-
nicated by  imitation  or  by  sympathy ;  and  this  is  a  reason
for  not  exposing  the  other  patients  to  them.

I  ought  here  to  reiterate  a  condition  essential  to  the  suc-
cess of  every  treatment;  namely,  that  the  magnetizer  must
be  in  good  health.  Rheumatic  pains,  nervous  affections,
and  especially  organic  diseases,  are  communicated  from  the
magnetizer  to  the  person  magnetized,  with  facility  propor-
tioned to  the  thoroughness  of  the  communication  between
them.  In  the  state  of  disease,  the  vital  fluid  may  be  vitiated,
or  at  least  morbific  principles  may  be  thrown  off  with  it. I


172  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [GHAP. VIII.

will  add,  that  in  the  magnetic  communication  there  is  estab-
lished a  sympathy  between  the  similar  organs  of  the  two
individuals ;  whence  it  follows  that  a  person  whose  lungs
are  delicate,  cannot,  without  danger,  magnetize  any  one
whose  lungs  are  affected.*

Hitherto  I  have  spoken  only  of  the  dangers  to  which  we
are  exposed  in  magnetizing,  without  precautions,  persons
who  are  not  somnambulists.  Those  which  spring  from
somnambulism  are  still  greater.  To  avoid  them,  it  is  ne-
cessary to  know  them,  and  I  will,  therefore  point  them  out.

I  have  just  said  that  a  magnetizer  whose  health  is  essen-
tially bad  may  communicate  the  disease  to  the  person  whom
he  magnetizes.  This  thing  is  especially  to  be  feared  in
somnambulism.  I  have  several  times  seen  the  proof  of  it.
I  will  merely  recite  a  fact  which-  struck  me  forcibly.  A
young  lady  who  for  a  long  time  had  a  very  serious  ner-
vous disease,  was  magnetized  by  a  friend  of  her  family,
who  rendered  her  a  somnambulist  the  first  day.  She  very
soon  had  favorable  crises,  and  her  health  appeared  to  be
sensibly  ameliorated.  She  flattered  herself  with  the  pros-
pect of  obtaining  a  complete  cure,  when  her  magnetizer  was
attacked  with  an  inflammation  of  the  larynx.  As  he  could
no  longer  go  out  of  his  own  house,  he  sent  every  evening
to  the  patient  a  magnetized  handkerchief,  which  renewed
somnambulism  for  two  hours.  The  young  lady  was  very
soon  attacked  with  the  same  disease,  accompanied  by  the
most  alarming  symptoms.  Happily,  another  magnetizer
came  to  her  aid  —  a  circumstance  which  did  not  prevent  her
from  being  in  the  greatest  danger  when  the  former  one
died.  And  it  was  only  after  a  very  long  treatment,  and
making  use  of  all  the  remedies  which  her  clairvoyance  sug-
gested, that  she  was  perfectly  reestablished  in  health.

I  will  not  here  return  to  the  accidents  that  may  result
from  temporary  imprudences ;  I  confine  myself  to  a  succinct
summary  of  what  I  have  said  on  this  subject.  Never  in-
terrupt a  crisis.  Do  not  suffer  your  somnambulist  to  be
touched  by  any  one  who  is  not  in  communication  with  him*

*  The  magnetizer  who  enjoys  good  health  sometimes  sympathet-
ically experiences  the  pains  of  his  patient,  but  he  does  not  catch  the
principles  of  the  disease ;  the  reason  of  which  is,  that,  as  he  throws
the  fluid  from  himself,  he  is  active,  and  not  passive ;  he  gives,  and
does  not  receive..


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  173

Do  not  put  him  in  communication  with  any  one,  except  it
be  for  some  good  purpose,  and  ivhtn  he  desires  it.  Avoid
magnetizing  him  in  presence  of  many  persons.  Occupy
yourself  solely  with  his  health,  Follow  the  processes
which  he  indicates  to  you.  Do  not  fatigue  him  with  cxper*
iments.  If  you  neglect  these  precautions,  you  will  diminish
his  lucidity,  retard  his  cure,  and  do  him  an  injury.  Yet
this  injury  may  be  ordinarily  repaired  by  proper  cares;  and
the  greater  part  of  magnetizers  are  not  instructed  on  this
point  by  their  own  experience.

The  dangers  of  which  I  am  about  to  speak  are,  happily,
much  less  frequent.  They  are  not  caused  by  a  momentary
fault  of  the  magnetizer,  but  by  the  abuse  of  his  own  power.
They  are,  with  some  individuals,  the  natural  consequences
of  somnambulism ;  and,  as  they  are  very  serious  and  diffi*
cult  to  remedy,  the  magnetizer  ought  to  conduct  himself  in
such  a  manner  as  infallibly  to  prevent  them.

Persons  who  have  been  for  a  long  time  somnambulists
have  been  known  to  preserve,  even  after  their  restoration
to  health,  a  nervous  susceptibility  which  renders  them  im-
pressible in  the  highest  degree ;  and  the  slightest  action  of
magnetism  may  cause  them  to  fall  again  into  an  imperfect
somnambulism.  Some  of  them  have  been  seen  to  be  habit-
ually in  a  magnetic  state.  This  is  a  great  inconvenience,  and
you  must  avoid  it  by  observing  the  following  directions :  —

Do  not  magnetize  your  somnambulist  any  longer  than  he
tells  you  it  is  necessary.  Never  speak  to  him,  after  he
awakes,  of  what  he  said  in  somnambulism.  In  terminating
each  sitting,  disembarrass  him  of  the  fluid  with  which  he  is
charged,  and  wake  him  perfectly,  so  that  there  may  be  no
intermediate  point  between  the  ordinary  and  the  somnam-
bulic state.  As  soon  as  your  patient  is  cured,  refrain  ab-
solutely from  the  desire  of  preserving  in  him  the  somnam*
bulic  faculties;  will,  on  the  contrary,  that  they  cease,  until
a  new  complaint  renders  them  useful  to  him.  Somnambu-
lists who  are  no  longer  ill  are  generally  poor  somnambu-
lists ;  and  the  tendency  to  somnambulism  is  not  in  accord-
ance with  the  ordinary  habits  of  life.  Many  magnetizers
preserve  somnambulists  after  their  cure,  and  they  hope
through  them  to  render  service  to  other  patients  ;  but  it  is
wrong  to  have  confidence  in  such  somnambulists.  They
are  often  made  use  of  for  experiments  of  curiosity.  They
15*


174  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP.  THJL

are  exhibited  to  persons  who  interrogate  them  upon  various
subjects.  All  this  does  no  good.  It  does  not  even  convince
the  incredulous ;  and  this  presents  many  inconveniences.

I  know  that  some  exceptions  to  this  rule  may  be  citedy
and  that  somnambulists,  when  thoroughly  cured,  have  been
known  to  preserve,  for  many  years,  a  surprising  clairvoy-
ance. This  phenomenon  is  very  infrequent.  It  has  its
source  in  moral  and  physical  dispositions,  independent  of  the
magnetizer's  influence,  since  persons  who  have  never  been
magnetized  have  been  seen  to  be  naturally  in  a  state  simi-
lar to  that  of  the  most  extraordinary  magnetic  somnambu-
lists; but  this  state  demands  so  much  management,  and  re-
quires so  much  prudence,  discretion,  and  disinterestedness,,
to  derive  advantage  from  it,  that  a  wise  man  will  not  seek
to  produce  it,  or  to  sustain  it  by  magnetic  action.

But  the  inconveniences  of  a  somnambulism  too  much
prolonged,  and  made  almost  habitual,  are  nothing,  compared
to  the  dangers  to  which  one  is  exposed  by  turning  somnam-
bulism aside  from  the  single  end  to  which  it  should  be
directed  ;  that  is,  by  exciting  the  faculties  of  somnambulists
to  obtain  of  them  surprising  things,  from  which  they  can
derive  no  advantage,  either  to  their  health,  or  to  the  per-
fecting of  their  moral  qualities.  There  is  not  the  least
doubt  that  such  an  abuse  of  magnetism  may  carry  trouble
into  the  nervous  system,  and  derange  the  imagination.  If
you  exact  of  your  somnambulist  things  which  are  difficult
and  contrary  to  his  will ;  if  you  should  wish  to  act  upon  him
in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  him  see  the  dead  or  spirits ;  if
you  compel  him  to  go  into  distant  times  or  places,  to  discover
things  lost,  or  to  announce  the  future,  to  tell  you  what
numbers  will  be  fortunate  in  a  lottery  —  a  thing  which  he
knows  no  better  than  you  ;  if  you  interrogate  him  about  po-
litical affairs,  &c,  —  you  will  do  him  much  mischief,  and
might  even  make  him  idiotic.  If  this  should  occur,  it  will
be  your  own  fault;  it  ought  not  to  be  attributed  to  mag-
netism, but  wholly  to  your  temerity.  Somnambulism  will
never  produce  the  least  disorder  when  not  abused  ;  and  we
are  sure  of  not  abusing  it  when  we  employ  it  solely  for  the
purpose  of  learning  the  means  of  doing  good  to  the  somnam-
bulist, or  to  the  patients  with  whom  he  consents  to  interest
himself.  Somnambulism  of  itself  is  a  state  of  calm,  during
which  all  the  forces  of  nature  put  themselves  in  equilibrium.


CHAP. Vin.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  175

The  stream  of  life  then  flows  freely  ;  its  waters,  united  in  a
single  channel,  are  purified  in  their  tranquil  current ;  but
if  you  build  dikes,  it  will  overflow  its  banks,  and  produce
the  greatest  disasters.

In  many  works  on  magnetism,  and  especially  in  those
which  have  been  published  in  Germany,  the  authors  have
distinguished  different  degrees  or  states  of  somnambulism,
the  most  elevated  of  which  has  been  called  ecstasy,  or
magnetic  exaltation.  I  spoke  of  this  extraordinary  state  in
the  preceding  chapter.  I  ought  here  to  state  that  it  is  very
dangerous,  and  that,  in  the  hands  of  a  magnetizer  who
lacks  force,  coolness,  and  experience,  and  who  is  governed
by  the  desire  of  witnessing  marvels,  it  may  be  attended  with
the  most  fatal  consequences.  When  this  state  has  reached
a  certain  decree,  the  magnetizer  has  no  longer  anv  control
over  it.  If,  then,  you  see  somnambulism  taking  this  direc-
tion, it  is  necessary  forthwith  to  oppose  it ;  and  if  you  fear
you  shall  not  succeed,  you  should  renounce  the  treatment.
It  is  never  at  the  first  time  that  this  state  becomes  suffi-
ciently manifest  for  the  will  of  the  magnetizer  to  be  ineffi-
cient. I  think  this  danger  has  never  been  better  exposed
than  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Memoire  sur  le  Magnetisme
animal,  presente  a  V Academic  de  Berlin"  1820.  This  is
from  the  pen  of  a  distinguished  physician,  and  I  knew  the
man  whose  somnambulism  was  the  subject  of  his  observa-
tions.

I  believe  that  the  accidents  which  have  sometimes  re-
sulted from  somnambulism,  have  never  occurred  except
when  it  has  been  pushed  too  far,  or  when  its  beneficial  and
restorative  action  has  been  counteracted.

3.  —  Of  the  Dangers  to  which  Persons  expose  themselves
who  place  too  much  Confidence  in  Somnambulists.

Many  enthusiastic  magnetizers  have  a  blind  faith  in  their
somnambulists.  They  believe  them  infallible,  both  in  the
judgment  they  give  of  their  own  disease,  and  in  that  which
they  give  of  the  diseases  of  others.  If  the  remedies  ordered
by  them  do  not  succeed,  they  suppose  it  is  because  the  pre-
scriptions have  not  been  followed  with  sufficient  exactitude;
if  the  remedies  have  done  mischief,  they  regard  the  mis-
chief as  a  necessary  crisis. As  they  have  sometimes  seen


176  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [cHAt\  VltL

inconceivable  wonders,  they  have  become  credulous,  and
this  credulity  makes  them  lose  all  prudence.  Even  when
a  mischance  arrives,  they  continue  in  the  illusion.

There  are,  without  doubt,  some  somnambulists  endowed
with  such  a  lucidity,  that  when  they  have  been  placed  in
communication  with  a  sick  person,  they  clearly  explain  the
origin,  the  cause,  and  the  nature  of  the  disorder,  and  pre-
they  ought  to  produce,  and  the  crises  which  are  to  be
expected.  They  announce  a  disease  which  will  develope
itself  in  several  months,  and  the  precautions  which  ought  to
be  taken  when  the  first  symptoms  are  perceivable.  They
even  see  the  moral  condition  of  the  patient,  penetrate  his
thoughts,  and  give  him  appropriate  advice ;  but  these  som-
nambulists are  rare ;  and  even  those  who  have  given  proofs
of  this  inconceivable  clairvoyance,  do  not  always  preserve
it,  and  do  not  possess  it  except  at  certain  moments.

It  often  happens  also  that  the  clairvoyance  of  somnam-
bulists is  not  extended  equally  to  all  objects ;  they  see  very
well  things  which  no  person  in  the  ordinary  state  could
conjecture  ;  and  they  do  not  perceive  others  which  a  phy-
sician would  notice  at  the  first  glance  of  the  eye.

Let  us  not  doubt  of  the  faculties  of  somnambulists,  but
let  us  be  the  more  prudent,  since  we  are  engaged  in  a
career  in  which  we  do  not  see  the  rocks  and  quicksands.

In  order  to  avoid  all  the  dangers  of  a  blind  confidence,
observe  the  following  directions:  —

When  you  have  been  so  happy  as  to  meet  with  a  som-
nambulist who  has  given  proofs  of  his  lucidity,  present  your
patient  to  him,  sustain  his  attention,  and  let  him  speak
symptoms  of  the  disease;  if  he  points  out  the  origin  of  it;  if
he  speaks  of  remedies  which  have  been  employed,  and  of
the  effects  they  have  produced ;  if  he  sees  clearly  what  it  is
impossible  to  divine,  and  especially  what  you  are  ignorant
of  yourself,  as  it  has  often  happened  to  me,  —  it  is  evident
that  he  is  well  acquainted  with  the  disease,  and  this  knowl-
edge will  be  very  useful  to  you.

Then  you  will  request  him  to  point  out  the  treatment  to
be  pursued.

If  this  treatment  exhibits  nothing  that  can  be  injurious,
and  if  it  does  not  oblige  the  patient  to  renounce  that  which


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  177

he  is  already  pursuing,  and  from  which  he  has  experienced
relief,  —  if  the  somnambulist  affirms  that  the  medicines
which  he  points  out  will  produce  such  or  such  an  effect,
and  that  the  patient  will  be  cured  after  having  experienced
such  or  such  a  crisis,  —  you  will  follow  his  prescriptions
with  the  most  rigorous  exactitude.

But  if,  among  the  remedies  indicated,  there  are  some
which,  in  certain  cases,  might  do  mischief,  you  will  apply
to  an  enlightened  physician,  who,  if  he  be  not  a  partisan  of
magnetism,  may  be  at  least  exempt  from  prejudice,  and  you
will  submit  to  him  the  advice  of  the  somnambulist,  which
you  will  follow  in  case  he  sees  no  danger  in  it.  You  will
not  put  your  somnambulist  in  consultation  with  the  physi-
cian, provided  the  physician  is  not  himself  a  magnetizer  ;
for,  in  talking  with  him,  the  somnambulist  may  yield  to  his
vanity,  and  say  things  not  prompted  by  instinct ;  but  you
will  combine  what  he  says  with  what  the  physician  in
whom  you  repose  entire  confidence  tells  you.  By  this
means,  you  will  have  no  risk  to  run  ;  and,  even  if  the  treat-
ment does  not  succeed,  you  will  have  no  cause  for  self-
reproach.

There  are  at  Paris  somnambulists  who  make  a  profession
of  giving  advice  for  a  fee,  and  the  enemies  of  magnetism
do  not  fail  to  say  that  their  somnambulism  is  pretended.  I
can  affirm  the  contrary,  and  I  have  examined  a  great  num-
ber of  them  with  the  most  scrupulous  attention.  I  have
collected  a  large  number  of  facts,  which  I  have  examined
in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  me  in  no  uncertainty  on  this
head.  They  differ  among  themselves  in  the  degree  of  their
faculties  and  of  their  moral  qualities ;  but  all  are  really
somnambulists.*

Among  those  whom  I  have  observed,  there  is  not  one
that  I  have  not  known  to  commit  errors ;  but  there  is  not
one  that  has  not  exhibited  to  me  proofs  of  clairvoyance.
This  clairvoyance  has  appeared  to  me  imperfect  and  limited

*  It  is  possible  to  feign  an  imperfect  somnambulism  in  presence
of  persons  who  take  no  precautions  to  verify  the  reality  ;  and  I  rec-
ollect having  been  for  three  days  the  dupe  of  a  person  whom  I
thought  incapable  of  deceiving  me :  but  whatever  address  the  pre-
tended somnambulist  may  have,  you  may  discern  the  deception  at
the  first  examination.  The  faculties  peculiar  to  somnambulists  can-
not be  successfully  imitated  by  any  one  who  does  not  possess  them.


178  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP.  VIII.

on  several  occasions.  At  other  times,  they  have  singularly
astonished  me.  For  instance,  I  have  conducted  to  the
houses  of  these  somnambulists  patients  whom  they  could
not  have  known,  and  of  whose  state  I  was  myself  ignorant;
and  I  have  seen  them,  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  concen-
tration and  of  silence,  divine  the  origin,  the  cause,  and  the
stages  of  the  diseases,  determine  the  seat  of  the  pains,  dis-
exactitude  the  character,  the  habits,  and  the  inclinations
of  those  who  consult  them.  I  have  seen  some  of  them  who
have  cured  very  severe  acute  diseases,  and  inveterate
chronic  disorders,  by  boldly  changing  the  treatment  pur-
sued up  to  that  time.

Each  of  the  somnambulists  of  whom  I  speak  has  methods
of  investigation  peculiar  to  himself.  The  attention  of  some
is  at  first  struck  with  the  most  serious  evil ;  others  examine
separately  and  successively  all  the  organs,  commencing  at
the  head  ;  and  it  is  only  after  having  viewed  them  apart,
that  they  endeavor  to  determine  their  reciprocal  influence.
There  are  some  of  them  who,  to  make  this  examination,  do
nothing  more  than  to  touch  with  one  hand  the  pulse  of  the
patient,  while  with  the  other  they  feel  over  all  the  body  ;
they  thus  perceive  by  sympathy  which  are  the  affected
organs,  and  they  sometimes  experience  the  pains  of  the
patient  so  much  as  to  suffer  considerably  after  the  sitting.

Some  of  them  consult  for  persons  who  are  absent  and
unknown  to  them.  Some  hair  of  the  patient,  or  something
which  he  has  worn  for  several  days  on  the  stomach,  next  to
the  skin,*  suffices  to  put  them  in  such  close  communica-
his  physical  and  moral  condition.  I  do  not  pretend  that
they  do  not  often  deceive  themselves;  but  I  have  seen  them
many  times  succeed,  in  an  astonishing  manner,  in  cases
where  they  had  nothing  to  guide  them,  and  where  the  dis-
ease for  which  they  were  consulted  had  characteristics  too
rare  for  them  to  come  at  the  truth  by  conjecture  or  chance.
If  he  who  consults  has  for  his  aim,  not  to  enlighten  himself,
but  to  put  the  somnambulist  to  the  proof,  it  is  possible  that,


*  It  is  necessary  to  envelope  these  things  in  paper,  and  not  to
have  had  the  packet  opened,  when  it  is  presented  to  the  somnam*
bulist.


CAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  179

without  knowing  it,  he  will  exert  an  influence  which  will
furnish  him  with  new  reasons  for  his  incredulity.

To  what  I  have  just  said  of  the  somnambulists  by  pro-
fession, in  reference  to  their  varying  faculties,  I  ought  to
add  that  I  have  noticed  in  many  of  them  much  uprightness
and  sensibility.  Some  of  them  take  the  most  lively  interest
in  their  patients,  and  magnetize  them  with  zeal.  I  have
seen  them  carefully  distinguish  between  what  they  thought
themselves  sure  of,  and  what  they  thought  merely  probable,
and  refuse  to  give  a  consultation  when  they  did  not  feel
themselves  to  be  in  possession  of  sufficient  clairvoyance;
or,  when  the  state  of  the  patient  appeared  desperate,  they
would  not  declare  the  opinion  they  had  formed  respect-
ing it.

The  part  which  these  somnambulists  have  taken,  of  giv-
ing consultations  every  day,  which  fatigue  them,  obliges
them  to  take  care  of  themselves,  and  renounce  all  other
business.  It  is  proper  that  they  should  be  recompensed
for  their  trouble,  and  the  sacrifice  of  their  time.  The  per-
sons who  apply  to  them  are  very  glad  to  be  able  to  acquit
themselves  of  the  obligation,  if  they  have  received  good
advice ;  and  as  no  one  designs  to  deceive  them,  they  have
no  reason  to  complain,  if  they  have  merely  satisfied  their
curiosity.

This  is  what  I  had  to  say  to  justify  an  abuse  which  will
exist  so  long  as  magnetism  is  not  practised  in  families,
under  the  direction  of  a  physician,  and  which,  in  the  actual
circumstances  of  the  case,  ought  not  to  be  condemned.*
But  without  pretending  to  make  any  particular  application,

*  Some  men,  who  have  not  taken  the  pains  to  inform  themselves
of  the  services  rendered  every  day  by  the  somnambulists  of  whom  I
speak,  would  have  the  police  forbid  their  giving  consultations.  Such
a  measure  would  create  inconveniences  a  thousand  times  more  seri-
ous than  the  ones  sought  to  be  obviated.  In  the  first  place,  these
somnambulists  could  no  longer  find  a  magnetizer  who,  by  a  disinter-
ested zeal,  would  consent  to  direct  them  and  sustain  their  strength.
In  the  second  place,  those  of  the  somnambulists  who  have  the  most
delicacy,  would  think  they  ought  to  renounce  a  practice  which  is
interdicted  to  them.  Finally,  those  who,  in  spite  of  the  law,  would
continue  to  see  patients,  having  risks  to  run,  would  demand  a  higher
price  for  their  services,  and  require  secrecy  ;  and  the  persons  who
obtain  a  consultation  from  them,  would  not  dare  to  submit  it  to  a
physician,  for  fear  of  compromising  their  obligations  to  the  somnam-
bulists.


180  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP. VIII.

—  without  disapproving  what  exists,  —  I  ought  to  show  that
somnambulists  by  profession,  those  especially  who  succeed
in  throwing  themselves  into  the  crisis,  ought  in  general  to
inspire  less  confidence  than  those  of  whom  I  spoke  farther
back,  and  who,  in  the  waking  state,  are  ignorant  of  the
faculties  with  which  they  are  endowed  daring  sleep.  What
I  am  about  to  say  is  supported  by  the  true  principles  of
magnetism,  and  confirmed  by  numerous  observations.

In  order  to  have  a  somnambulist  judge  correctly  the  state
of  a  disease,  he  must  in  some  sort  identify  himself  with  the
patient ;  for,  the  motive  which  determines  him  to  identify
himself  with  a  suffering  being,  can  be  no  other  than  the
sentiment  of  pity,  or  the  love  of  good.  It  supposes  a  for-
getfulness  of  one's  self,  and  personal  interest  must  neces-
sarily alter  its  purity.

When  somnambulism,  by  being  too  much  prolonged,  be-
comes a  habit,  there  is  established  a  communication  between
this  and  the  ordinary  state.  Instinct  no  longer  acts  inde-
pendently. The  acquired  ideas,  recollections,  prejudices,
interests,  are  mingled  with  that  species  of  inspiration  which
developes  in  the  somnambulist  a  faculty  absolutely  foreign
to  those  which  we  enjoy  in  the  common  state.

Professional  somnambulists  are  rarely  in  a  state  of  ab-
straction (isoles;)  from  which  it  is  to  be  presumed  that
they  have  not  reached  the  degree  of  concentration  which
ordinarily  precedes  perfect  clairvoyance.  As  they  see  many
patients  in  the  course  of  the  day,  the  impressions  which
they  receive  change  their  nature  at  every  moment,  and  it
is  difficult  for  them  to  identify  themselves  alternately  with
each  one  of  those  for  whom  they  are  consulted.  Besides,
origin,  is  not  all.  The  somnambulist  is  also  required  to
point  out  the  treatment.  The  faculty  of  seeing  remedies
is  very  different  from  that  of  seeing  diseases,  and  is  not
always  united  with  it.  It  may  also  be  remarked  that  many
professional  somnambulists  have  a  pharmacy  peculiar  to
themselves.  They  order,  according  to  circumstances,  a
certain  number  of  medicines  which  they  are  acquainted
with,  because  they  have  made  use  of  them,  and  their
complicated  prescriptions  often  appear  to  embrace  useless
things.

The  lucidity  of  somnambulists  varies  from  one  moment


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  181

to  another.  A  somnambulist  who  consults  only  with  the
desire  of  relieving  a  suffering  being,  when  he  perceives
that  he  is  not  for  the  moment  endowed  with  perfect  clair-
voyance, says  to  his  magnetizer,  "  I  do  not  see  well  to-day.
The  patient  must  return,  and  try  to  find  me  in  a  more
favorable  condition.  I  am  not  well  acquainted  with  the
disease;  I  cannot  devise  the  remedy.  I  suspect  such  or
such  to  be  the  case ;  but  I  am  not  certain,  and  I  cannot
permit  myself  to  say  positively,"  &c.

The  somnambulists  who  receive  in  succession  several
patients,  each  one  at  the  hour  they  have  appointed,  think
themselves  obliged  to  answer  the  questions  put  to  them,
provided  they  do  not  experience  too  much  fatigue ;  they
rarely  think  of  examining  themselves,  to  be  sure  of  their
own  lucidity.  They  would  not  willingly  deceive  you ;  but
they  depend  upon  the  first  sensations  they  feel,  and  pre
As  they  desire  you  to  entertain  as  favorable  an  opinion  of
their  lucidity  as  they  themselves  do,  they  are  dexterous  in
the  manner  of  expressing  themselves.  If  they  perceive  that
they  have  erred,  they  endeavor  to  rectify  their  judgement,
and  to  persuade  you  that  you  have  not  well  understood
them.  When  they  do  not  discover  the  essential  disease,
they  almost  always  conjecture  some  of  the  symptoms;  and,
if  you  appear  surprised  at  it,  they  profit  by  this  discovery
to  direct  themselves  and  to  augment  your  confidence.  If
the  remedies  they  have  ordered  do  not  produce  the  effects
they  expected,  they  do  not  on  that  account  think  themselves
in  error ;  they  find  pretexts  for  excusing  their  error,  and
plausible  reasons  for  modifying  their  treatment.  All  this
may  take  place,  without  any  misgivings,  and  with  an  entire
honesty  on  their  part ;  for  our  interest  influences  our  man-
ner of  viewing  things,  our  decisions,  and  our  conduct,
without  our  knowing  it.

Somnambulists  of  this  species  have  often  gone  to  see
physicians  who  are  prejudiced  against  magnetism,  and  who
wish  to  sustain  their  incredulity  by  experiments.  They
have  almost  always  succeeded  in  putting  them  at  fault ;  and
they  have  thence  concluded  that  all  those  who  profess  to
have  acquired  proof  of  the  lucidity  of  somnambulists  are
dupes.  If  they  had  known  the  principles  of  magnetism,
thev  would  not  have  drawn  this  conclusion.  Somnara-
16


182  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [CHAP. Villa-

bulists  of  whom  insidious  questions  are  asked,  are  mucfe
embarrassed;  and,  if  vanity,  or  the  fear  of  avowing  their
ignorance,  determines  them  to  answer,  they  make  efforts,
they  are  troubled,  they  speak  at  random,  and  very  soon
they  are  put  in  contradiction  with  themselves  by  some  one
better  informed  than  they  are.  Besides,  in  order  to  have
a  somnambulist  lucid,  he  must  be  sustained  by  the  confi-
dence and  the  will  of  the  person  who  magnetizes  him,  and
he  who  is  put  in  communication  must  desire  to  receive
useful  advice  from  him.  If  he  is  exempt  from  all  interest,
—  if  he  preserves  his  independence,  —  he  will  tell  the  one
who  comes  to  consult  him,  and  whose  intentions  are  not
in  accordance  with  his,  "I  cannot  consult  for  you;  I  am
not  in  condition  to  answer  your  questions."  But  in  the
contrary  case,  it  is  natural  that  he  should  employ  the  re-
sources of  his  wit  to  supply  the  instinctive  faculties  which
fail  him.*

Yet  these  somnambulists  may  be  very  useful ;  and,  as  I
have  said,  there  are  some  of  them  who  are  endowed  with
the  most  astonishing  faculties,  and  whose  goodness  of
heart  raises  them  above  every  other  sentiment.  Even
those  whose  clairvoyance  is  very  imperfect,  have,  at  cer-
tain moments,  and  as  it  were  by  flashes,  a  surprising  lucid-
ity. One  might  apply  to  them,  not  to  put  them  to  the
proof,  but  to  hear  their  advice  with  attention,  and  to  de-
rive from  it  some  information.  Tt  is  not  during  the  sitting,
but  it  is  afterwards,  that  we  ought  to  weigh,  combine,
and  discuss,  what  they  have  said,  in  order  to  judge  of  the
degree  of  confidence  which  they  merit.  I  will  point  out
the  conduct  you  ought  to  pursue,  and  which  you  can  do
without  fear.

If  you  decide  to  consult  one  of  these  somnambulists,
do  not  limit  yourself  to  the  inquiry  whether  he  has  given
proofs  of  lucidity  ;  endeavor  also  to  find  out  whether  in  his
conduct  he  has  always  shown  himself  worthy  of  esteem.


*  What  I  say  here  is  founded  upon  facts  which  have  been  related
to  me,  and  not  upon  my  own  observations.  I  never  permitted  my-
self to  consult  somnambulists  to  put  them  to  the  proof*.  I  have  not
even  gone  to  the  houses  of  any  except  those  whom  I  knew  to  have
given  evidence  of  clairvoyance.  It  seems  to  me  not  very  proper  to
employ  insidious  means  to  learn  the  truth.  It  discovers  itself  to  him
who  searches  for  it  with  perseverance  and  honest  intentions.


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  183

We  cannot  be  certain  that  a  somnambulist  will  not  deceive
himself,  but  it  is  at  least  necessary  to  be  assured  that  he  is
incapable  of  deceiving  others.  If  the  somnambulist  has  a
sensible  and  enlightened  man  for  a  magnetizer,  this  will
be  one  motive  for  confidence.

It  is  desirable  for  you  not  to  be  known,  directly  or  indi-
rectly, to  the  somnambulist,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  he  knows
nothing  of  your  disease;  but  this  is  not  always  possible.
In  all  cases,  when  you  have  been  put  in  communication
with  him,  you  will  not  inform  him  of  what  you  suffer;  yoo
will  answer  yes  or  no  to  his  questions,  without  testifying
disorder,  if  he  discovers  its  origin,  if  he  finds  out  what
could  not  be  known  by  his  senses,  you  will  have  some
reason  to  believe  in  his  clairvoyance,  and  you  will  take
not  until  he  has  finished  telling  you  what  he  has  seen  and
perceived,  and  what  he  advises  you  to  do,  that  you  will
permit  yourself  to  invite  him  to  direct  his  attention  to  any
particular  organ,  or  to  interrogate  him  upon  any  thing
which  disquiets  you.  I  suppose  that,  after  having  quitted
him,  and  reflected  upon  what  he  has  told  you,  you  will  be
entirely  satisfied,  and  even  astonished,  at  the  judgement
he  has  formed  of  your  condition.  You  will  then  address
yourself  to  a  candid  physician,  and  submit  to  him  the  ad-
vice of  the  somnambulist,  before  you  take  the  remedies
of  diseases  of  which  the  somnambulist  has  seen  but  one.
It  may  also  be  that  the  somnambulist  sees  the  disorder  very
well,  but  mistakes  in  regard  to  the  remedy.  The  physi-
cian will  certainly  find  in  the  advice  of  the  somnambulist
perceptions  calculated  to  enlighten  him:  but  it  belongs  to
him  to  appreciate  them,  and  to  modify  the  treatment  in
consequence.

himself,  we  should  conform  ourselves  exactly  to  his  pre-
scriptions. If  he  is  charged  with  only  one  patient  in  whom
he  takes  interest,  and  to  whom  he  devotes  himself,  he  ought
to  be  heard  with  great  confidence ;  and  you  will  follow  his
advice,  provided  there  appears  to  be  nothing  in  it  of  a  dan-
gerous character.  The  physician  is  solely  to  approve  or
to  disapprove. But  with  the  somnambulists  of  whom  I


184  MEANS OP AVOIDING  [CHAP. VIII.

have  just  spoken,  the  physician  ought  to  preserve  his  su-
premacy, and  direct  the  treatment,  while  he  profits  by  the
intelligence  of  the  somnambulist,  and  makes  use  of  the
remedies  indicated,  if  he  sees  therein  no  inconvenience.

If  reason  permits  us  to  depend  solely  and  unreservedly
upon  a  somnambulist  by  profession  who  has  given  proofs
of  lucidity,  it  is  only  when  physicians  have  declared  the
case  to  be  beyond  the  resources  of  their  art,  and  that  they
know  no  means  of  curing  the  patient  which  has  not  been
tried.

As  much  as  I  love  to  contemplate  somnambulism  in  its
purity,  when  the  soul,  disengaged  from  sensation  and  all
terrestrial  interest,  sees  nothing  without  her  but  what  is  en-
lightened by  the  torch  of  charity,  —  it  is  painful  for  me  to
consider  it  as  a  complicated  faculty,  of  which  I  know
neither  the  principle,  the  direction,  nor  the  limits,  pre-
senting itself  with  vacillating  and  diversified  characters.
But  the  details  into  which  I  have  entered  appeared  to  me
necessary,  because  this  work  is  not  destined  solely  for  per-
sons who  wish  to  practise  magnetism  to  do  good,  but  also
for  those  who,  having  heard  of  cures  effected  by  somnam-
bulists, come  to  consult  them  without  having  the  least  idea
of  the  circumstances  which  favor  or  trouble  their  clairvoy-
ance, and  without  being  acquainted  with  the  precautions
which  are  necessary  to  distinguish  between  their  instinctive
notions  and  the  illusions  to  which  they  are  often  exposed.

Somnambulists  may  give  erroneous  views  to  those  who
consult  them  with  too  much  confidence,  not  only  in  regard
to  the  treatment  of  diseases,  but  also  in  regard  to  things
not  less  important.  I  have  seen  persons  who,  at  sight  of
the  somnambulic  phenomena,  were  led  to  the  adoption  of
most  absurd  and  extravagant  opinions.  I  know  that  a
thorough  knowledge  of  somnambulism  places  one  beyond
the  reach  of  this  danger ;  but  there  are  few  persons  who
have  sufficiently  studied  this  state  to  escape  being  dazzled
by  its  phenomena,  and  to  distinguish  what  is  produced  by
the  imagination  from  what  is  perceived  by  the  new  faculty
developed  or  revealed  by  the  interior  sentiment.  I  should
wander  from  the  path  before  me,  if  I  stepped  aside  to  enter
into  many  details  on  this  subject.  It  should  suffice  for  me
simply  to  trace  the  route  you  ought  to  follow,  so  as  not  to
be  led  astray ;  yet  I  will  make  a  few  observations,  in  the


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES,  185

first  place,  which  will  render  the  justness  and  the  impor-
tance of  my  counsels  more  perceivable.

In  somnambulists  there  are  developed  faculties  of  which
we  are  deprived  in  the  ordinary  state;  such  as  seeing
without  the  aid  of  the  eyes,  hearing  without  the  aid  of  the
ears,  seeing  at  a  distance,  reading  the  thoughts,  appre-
ciating time  with  rigorous  exactitude,  and,  whit  is  still
more  astonishing,  having  a  presage  of  the  future.  But
there  is  often  with  somnambulists  an  extraordinary  exal-
tation of  the  faculties  with  which  we  are  endowed.  Thus,
among  them,  the  imagination  may  assume  a  prodigious  ac-
tivity;  the  memory  may  recall  a  thousand  ideas  which  were
entirely  effaced ;  the  elocution  may  become  so  elegant,  so
pure,  so  brilliant,  as  to  seem  the  product  of  inspiration.
But  all  this  does  not  exclude  error.  The  exercise  of  the
faculties  peculiar  to  somnambulists,  as  well  as  that  of  our
ordinary  faculties,  has  need  of  being  attended  with  certain
conditions,  in  order  to  give  us  exact  notions.  Experience
and  habit  have  taught  us  to  recognize  these  conditions  as  it
regards  the  external  senses.  We  know  that  for  our  eyes
to  impart  to  us  a  just  idea  of  the  form  and  color  of  objects,
these  objects  must  be  situated  in  the  light,  at  a  certain  dis-
tance, and  that  the  rays  of  light  reflected  from  them  must
not  pass  through  a  medium  which  distorts  the  images.
On  the  contrary,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  qualities  necessary
to  the  free  unfolding  of  the  new  faculty  of  the  somnam-
bulist. Further,  this  faculty  acts  alone,  while  the  testi-
mony of  each  of  our  senses  is  rectified  by  that  of  the
others.

As  to  the  exaltation  of  our  ordinary  faculties,  if  all
were  exalted  together,  and  to  the  same  degree,  harmony
would  be  preserved,  and  man  in  somnambulism  would  be,
in  all  respects,  superior  to  what  he  is  in  the  ordinary  state.
But  it  is  not  so.  One  faculty  is  exalted,  if  not  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  others,  at  least  more  than  the  others ;  it  pre-
dominates, and  harmony  no  more  exists.  It  sometimes
happens  that  reason  bears  the  sway,  which  is  a  happy  cir-
cumstance ;  but  this  is  precisely  what  strikes  people  least
forcibly.  The  astonishing  fact  is,  to  hear  a  somnambulist
display  much  information  upon  a  subject  to  which  he  had
heretofore  paid  no  attention;  and  people  do  not  reflect  that
things  which  he  may  have  heard  or  seen  at  a  very  distant
16*


186  MEANS OP AVOIDING  [CHAP. VIII.

period,  come  up  before  his  mind  with  extreme  vividness;
that  certain  associations  between  objects  become  perceiv-
able to  him,  which  are  imperceptible  to  us ;  that  the  preju-
dices of  his  childhood  operate  afresh  upon  him  in  all  their
power ;  that  his  imagination  can  realize  the  phantoms  it
has  created ;  that  the  facility  of  associating  his  ideas,  of
expressing  them  in  the  most  delightful  manner,  of  investing
them  with  all  the  charms  of  poetry,  of  joining  them  with
some  unperceived  truths,  which  he  causes  to  shine  with
the  brightest  splendor,  —  is  not,  by  any  means,  a  proof  of  the
truth  of  what  he  believes  and  of  what  he  says;  that  the
faculty  of  prevision,  the  most  inconceivable  of  all,  never
extends  but  to  a  certain  number  of  objects ;  that  it  is  con-
ditional; and  that,  if  there  are  facts  enough  to  prove  its
existence,  there  is  not  a  case  where  we  can  reckon  upon
the  exactitude  of  its  application  ;  finally,  that  all  the  facul-
ties of  the  mind  can  draw  man  far  from  the  truth  when
their  exaltation  has  destroyed  the  equilibrium  which  ought
to  reign  among  them,  and  which  is  necessary  to  maintain
the  supremacy  of  reason.

We  will  now  see  how  we  may  prevent  somnambulists
from  running  into  error,  and  preserve  ourselves  from  the
influence  of  their  illusions  over  us.  The  only  infallible
means  is,  not  to  let  them  busy  themselves  on  any  thing
except  the  subjects  in  relation  to  which  experience  has
taught  us  they  have  lights  which  we  cannot  have ;  that  is,
in  regard  to  their  own  health,  and  the  health  of  those  who
are  perfectly  in  communication  with  them,  and  to  interdict
them  absolutely  from  all  religious,  metaphysical,  and  politi-
cal discussion.

The  precept  I  here  give  is  not  in  contradiction  with
what  I  have  said  farther  back  relative  to  somnambulists,
who,  of  themselves,  and  without  being  invited,  expose  the
fundamental  ideas  of  religion.  These  ideas  are  inherent
in  the  human  soul,  which  cannot  know  itself  without  also
knowing  the  cause  and  the  end  of  its  existence;  without
ascending  to  its  origin ;  without  perceiving  its  relation  to
other  souls  free  from  matter.  The  existence  of  God,
Providence,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  are  proved  to  us
by  the  order  of  the  universe,  and  especially  by  the  inner
sense;  and  the  knowledge  of  the  essential  principles  of
morals  is  the  result  of  the  unfolding  of  our  intelligence.


CHAP. VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  187

For  the  view  of  the  order  of  the  universe  will  be  the
more  clear,  the  inner  sense  will  be  the  more  quick,  the
unfolding  of  intelligence  will  be  the  more  regular,  the
more  the  soul  is  disengaged  from  all  terrestrial  interest,  the
more  estranged  from  all  passion.  And  this  is  the  reason
why  the  somnambulist,  abstracted  and  concentrated  in  him-
self, is,  in  this  respect,  more  enlightened  than  we.  But  in
regard  to  things  which  have  been  revealed  to  man,  or
which  have  been  taught  us  by  tradition,  it  does  not  belong
to  somnambulists  to  instruct  us ;  they  have  merely  the
same  gift  that  we  have.  Their  disposition  to  piety  might
edify  us;  but  if  we  make  them  reason  about  mysteries,
their  imagination  will  be  exalted,  and  they  will  give  into
all  sorts  of  errors;  they  will  no  longer  draw  consequences
from  innate  principles,  but  from  the  prejudices  of  child-
hood, or  from  some  hypothetical  views.  They  will  con-
duct us  into  an  ideal  world,  where,  as  in  the  actual  world,
illusion  and  reality  will  be  mingled,  not  to  be  separated
except  by  the  aid  of  reason  and  experience.  Even  when,
in  this  ideal  world,  the  somnambulist  sees  what  is  concealed
from  us,  he  cannot  communicate  it  to  us,  more  than  we
can  give  to  those  who  are  born  blind  an  idea  of  the  phe-
nomena of  vision.

I  know  that  many  persons  have  been  led  to  embrace  the
reveries  of  what  is  called  illuminism,  by  the  confidence  they
have  had  in  mystic  or  ecstatic  somnambulists.  The  way
to  escape  from  this  danger  is,  not  to  let  the  somnambulist
wander  into  the  regions  of  fantasy,  and  to  limit  ourselves,
as  to  religious  doctrines,  to  what  we  are  required  to  be-
lieve. God  has  revealed  to  us  what  it  behoves  us  to  know,
and  the  indiscreet  curiosity  which  would  go  beyond  this,
will  be  always  punished.

Ecstatic  somnambulism  is  often  exhibited  without  being
induced  by  magnetism.  They  who  enter  into  this  state
manifest,  upon  certain  points,  a  clairvoyance  which  would
appear  miraculous  ;  they  do  not  exhibit  less  in  the  strangest
errors ;  and  they  have  exerted  the  most  fatal  influence
upon  those  who  have  had  the  imprudence  to  listen  to  them
as  oracles.

If  it  is  dangerous  to  consult  somnambulists  upon  the
dogmas  of  religion,  it  is  not  less  so  to  consult  them  upon
political affairs. I  have seen men, otherwise well in-


138  MEANS OF AVOIDING  [ciIAP. VIII.

formed,  become  the  dupes  of  their  visions  and  their  pre-
dictions. I  cannot  too  much  recommend  your  never  per-
mitting them  to  enter  upon  such  a  course.

The  metaphysical  acumen  of  certain  somnambulists  is
sometimes  very  surprising.  Doubtless  it  is  better  than  that
of  the  materialists,  but  it  does  not  repose  upon  a  solid
basis.  It  generally  conducts  us  to  systems  analogous  to
those  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  or  of  the  Eclectics  of  the
third  century,  in  which  sublime  truths  were  associated  with
senseless  creeds.  Somnambulists  who  give  themselves  up
to  this  species  of  research,  ordinarily  lose  the  most  impor-
tant faculties;  and  the  proofs  of  lucidity  which  they  exhibit
in  relation  to  certain  things  of  a  useless  nature,  merely
serve  to  mislead  the  judgement  of  those  who  mistake  their
visions  for  realities.

I  have  seen  persons  who  had  certain  proofs  of  the  clair-
voyance of  a  somnambulist,  consult  him  about  the  conduct
of  their  domestic  affairs,  and  suffer  themselves  to  be  guided
by  him ;  and  I  have  also  seen  them  by  this  means  take  im-
prudent steps.  I  do  not  deny  that  a  somnambulist  may
sometimes,  and  in  certain  circumstances,  give  excellent
advice,  because  of  the  penetration  he  possesses,  and  even
because  of  his  ability  to  foresee  the  issue  of  an  event  which
is  in  progress;  but  for  this  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  speak
of  his  own  accord,  yielding  to  his  instinct,  without  being
excited,  without  being  solicited,  and  without  reasoning.
A  very  good  somnambulist,  who  is  in  thorough  communi-
cation with  you,  will  tell  you,  "  Beware  of  such  a  person ;
he  is  deceiving  you:"  or,  "Do  not  undertake  such  a
journey  ;  the  result  will  be  unfortunate."  This  merits  some
attention.  But,  if  you  argue  with  him,  he  will  enjoy  no
advantage  over  you,  except  that  of  having  more  wit,  and
more  facility  in  conveying  his  thoughts.

I  repeat  it  for  the  last  time,  —  if  you  desire  to  avoid  the
danger  of  the  influence  which  somnambulists  may  exercise
over  you,  do  not  consult  them  except  about  what  apper-
tains to  their  real  interest,  and  about  what  they  may  know
better  than  you,  namely,  upon  the  means  of  reestablishing
their  health,  or  of  directing  their  moral  conduct.

In  many  works  upon  magnetism,  somnambulism  has
been  represented  as  a  state  of  purity,  in  which  man  is  supe-
rior to  the  passions,  and  would  reject  the  slightest  thought


CHAP.  VIII.]  ITS DANGERS AND ABUSES.  189

which  would  wound  decency  or  the  moral  sense.  Those
who  have  sustained  this  thesis  are  supported  by  some  facts;
but  the  principle  generalized  is  absolutely  false.  Many
somnambulists  preserve  the  passions  and  the  inclinations
which  they  had  in  the  waking  state.  There  are  some  of
them  who  would  sacrifice  themselves  for  others ;  there  are
some  who  are  profoundly  selfish ;  there  are  some  who  are
of  angelic  purity,  and  these  would  go  into  convulsions  if
the  magnetizer  had  a  thought  injurious  to  modesty.  Some
may  be  found  who  preserve  in  somnambulism  the  depravity
which  they  display  in  the  ordinary  state.  There  are  some
of  them  who  calculate  their  own  interests,  and  profit  by
what  is  told  them  to  procure  themselves  some  advantages.
Vanity  and  jealousy  are  sentiments  very  common  among
them.

It  follows,  from  all  I  have  just  said,  that  the  greatest  wis-
dom and  the  greatest  prudence  are  requisite  for  the  good
management  of  somnambulists,  and  for  preventing  their
gaining  an  ascendency  over  the  magnetizer;  that  he  ought
always  to  preserve  his  supremacy,  and  yet  not  to  make  use
of  it  except  to  retain  them  in  subjection,  and  never  to  excite
them  ;  finally,  that  this  state,  in  some  sort  supernatural,
may,  in  bad  hands,  be  attended  with  many  dangers.  But
let  plain  and  upright  men  be  fearless;  let  them  but  exercise
an  unshaken  will  for  good:  let  them  employ  somnambulism
only  for  the  object  for  which  Providence  has  destined  it ;  let
them  repress  their  curiosity,  the  spirit  of  proselytism,  the
rage  for  experiments ;  let  a  compassionate  charity,  an  un-
bounded confidence,  be  the  only  motives  of  their  action,
—  and  they  will  never  have  any  thing  to  dread.


190


CHAPTER  IX.

OF THE MEANS OF DEVELOPING IN OURSELVES

THE MAGNETIC  FACULTIES,  AND OF  DERIVING

ADVANTAGE FROM THIS DEVELOPEMENT.


When  Mesmer  announced  his  discovery,  he  would  not
divulge  a  secret  of  which  he  thought  himself  the  sole  pos-
sessor, unless  they  would  allow  him  a  certain  number  of
select  students,  to  whom  he  could  explain  all  his  theory,  and
at  the  same  time  teach  them  the  mode  of  its  application.
But  to  let  the  world  know  how  vast  and  important  that
theory  was,  and  to  establish  his  priority  of  discovery,  (pour
prendre  date,)  he  published  its  fundamental  principles  in
twenty-seven  propositions,  the  proofs  of  which  he  reserved,
and  the  developement  of  which  he  promised  to  give,  and
also  to  explain  its  consequences,  as  soon  as  they  had  con-
sented to  arrange  the  matter,  and  to  take  the  measures  he
judged  proper  to  prevent  the  abuse  of  his  principles,  and  the
robbing  him  of  the  glory  of  having  discovered  them.  These
propositions  were  very  obscure.  Several  of  them  seemed
contrary  to  the  received  principles  of  physics.  They  have
never  been  clearly  explained,  and  yet  the  practice  of  mag-
netism has  been  attended  with  the  greatest  success.  This
proves  that  they  were  not  so  important  as  their  author
thought  them;  and  that  the  effects  which  he  produced,  and
those  which  his  pupils  produced,  were  not  essentially  allied
to  his  doctrine.  Yet  we  cannot  but  agree  that  the  asser-
tions of  Mesmer  merit  the  greatest  attention,  if  not  for  the
general  system  of  physics  with  which  he  associated  his  dis-
covery, at  least  as  far  as  it  relates  to  the  proper  action  of
magnetism,  its  power,  its  effects,  to  the  means  of  directing
and  strengthening  its  action,  and  to  the  utility  derivable  from
it,  especially  in  the  treatment  of  diseases ;  for  Mesmer  was
both  a  good  observer  and  a  learned  physician.

The  twenty-seventh  of  the  propositions  of  Mesmer  com-


CHAP. IX.]  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  191

mences  in  this  manner  :  "This  doctrine  will  put  the  physi-
cian in  the  way  of  forming  a  correct  judgement  of  the  degree
of  each  individual's  health."

People  have  not  sufficiently  reflected  upon  this  proposi-
tion, and  they  will  search  in  vain  in  most  of  the  works
upon  magnetism  to  discover  how  it  leads  the  physician  to
decide  in  relation  to  the  state  of  the  sick.

Mesmer  also  said,  in  the  thirteenth  proposition,  "Experi-
ment has  proved  the  existence  of  a  subtile  matter,  which
penetrates  all  bodies  without  apparently  losing  its  activity ."
This  proposition  has  been  left  unexplained,  as  well  as  the
twenty-seventh.

Mesmer  afterwards  spoke  much  of  the  currents,  and  no
account  has  been  given  of  what  he  meant  by  the  term.
The  supposition  of  currents  passing  and  repassing  through
bodies,  as  that  of  the  poles,  appertains  to  the  general  system
of  Mesmer,  and  I  agree  that  it  is  useless  to  look  into  this
subject  now ;  but  if  we  can  ascertain,  by  experiment,  the
flowing  of  a  subtile  fluid,  and  if  the  name  current  is  given
to  this  emanation,  the  nature  of  this  emanation,  the  degree
of  force  with  which  it  escapes,  and  the  cause  of  the  direc-
tion it  takes,  are  physical  and  physiological  problems  which
ought  to  be  examined  with  the  greatest  care.

The  phenomenon  mentioned  by  Mesmer  has  been  known
to  a  great  number  of  his  scholars.  It  was  in  particular
known  to  M.  d'Eslon,  who  fixed  upon  this  subject  the  at-
tention of  almost  all  those  to  whom  he  taught  the  practice
of  magnetism.  This  knowledge  was  common  to  several  of
the  members  of  the  Society  at  Strasburg ;  and  yet,  in  the
numerous  memoirs  which  they  have  published,  they  have
spoken  of  it  only  in  a  vague  manner,  as  of  a  thing  known
to  all  the  world  by  an  oral  tradition,  which  it  is  therefore
useless  to  explain.  I  have  myself  scarcely  said  any  thing
upon  this  subject  in  my  "Critical  History,"  because  I  did  not
well  understand  its  nature,  and  not  being  endowed  with  the
faculty  of  perceiving  in  myself  the  diseases  of  others,  and
not  having  paid  attention  to  the  action  of  the  currents,  I
could  not  speak  of  it  from  my  own  experience.  I  have
since  read  some  manuscripts  of  M.  d'Eslon,  in  which  the
question  has  been  treated  of;  I  have  also  read  a  manuscript
work,  written  thirty-six  years  ago,  by  a  highly-intelligent
gentleman,  an  excellent observer,  and  who,  having  first


192  TO DEVELOPE IN OURSELVES  [CHAP.  IX,

been  instructed  by  M.  d'Eslon,  had  added  much  to  the
knowledge  he  had  acquired  as  a  pupil ;  and  I  am  convinced
that  what  I  had  neglected  to  look  into,  was  a  very  remark-
able phenomenon,  the  observation  of  which  is  the  most  use-
ful in  the  practice  of  magnetism.

M.  de  Lausanne  recently  gave  a  long  extract  from  the
manuscript  I  have  just  cited.  It  forms  the  first  volume  of
the  work  entitled  "  The  Processes  and  Principles  of  Mag-
netism" 2  vols.  8vo.  1819.  I  invite  those  who  wish  to
practise  magnetism  to  read  this  work  with  the  greatest  at-
tention, and  to  exercise  themselves  patiently  in  the  method
taught  by  the  author.  Of  course  I  cannot  here  lay  down
all  the  principles,  nor  give  their  explanation.  I  must  limit
myself  to  let  the  reader  know  the  principal  phenomenon,  and
the  indications  with  which  it  furnishes  us,  the  better  to  suc-
ceed in  the  treatment  of  diseases.

It  is  well  known  that  good  somnambulists  discover  the
seat  of  the  diseases  of  persons  put  in  communication  with
them,  sometimes  by  experiencing,  sympathetically,  pains  in
the  part  of  their  body  corresponding  with  that  which  is  af-
fected in  the  patient;  sometimes  by  passing  the  hands  over
them,  and  examining  with  attention  from  the  head  to  the
feet.  It  is  also  well  known  that  without  any  instruction
they  magnetize  much  better  than  they  do  when  awake,  and
that  they  give  to  the  magnetic  fluid  the  most  suitable  di-
rection.

This  faculty  of  perceiving  the  seat  of  diseases,  and  the
direction  which  we  ought  to  give  to  the  fluid,  does  not  be-
long exclusively  to  somnambulists ;  it  is  also  developed  in
many  magnetizers,  when  they  are  attentive  to  the  different
sensations  they  experience,  either  while  magnetizing  various
patients,  or  while  carrying  the  action  of  magnetism  upon
any  organ  of  a  patient  with  whom  they  are  in  communi-
cation.

I  know  many  magnetizers,  who,  when  they  hold  their
hand  upon  the  seat  of  an  internal  disease,  perceive  a  pain
which  extends  to  the  elbow ;  their  hand  is  benumbed,  and
even  becomes  swollen.  This  effect  diminishes  with  the
disease  ;  it  ceases  with  the  cure  ;  and  its  cessation  indicates
that  magnetism  is  no  longer  necessary.

I  saw  a  physician  experience  this  sensation  the  first  time
he  attempted  to  magnetize. With  others  it  does  not  show


CHAP,  IX.]  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  193

itself  until  after  reiterated  attempts.  I  have  not  observed
it  in  myself,  because  my  occupations  have  not  permitted  me
to  magnetize  except  by  intervals,  and  when  I  was  induced
to  it  by  the  desire  of  alleviating  a  sick  person.  Yet  some
effects  which  I  have  perceived  in  various  circumstances,
make  me  think  I  should  have  acquired  it,  had  I  taken  care
to  notice  the  causes  which  produced  them.

The  delicate  tact  which  enables  us  to  perceive  the  seat,
and  sometimes  the  nature,  of  the  disease ;  to  foretell  a  crisis
which  is  in  progress ;  to  judge  of  the  moment  when  a  crisis
will  terminate ;  and  to  choose,  as  by  instinct,  the  processes
best  calculated  to  direct  the  action  well,  —  being  the  most
useful  of  all  the  faculties  to  the  magnetizer,  I  am  going  to
treat  succinctly  of  the  mode  of  acquiring  it,  and  of  making
use  of  it.  What  I  shall  say  is  not  the  result  of  my  own
experience,  but  of  the  explanation  which  many  magnetizers
have  given  me  of  the  method  pursued  by  themselves,  by
whom  I  have  seen  wonderful  cures  effected ;  of  my  conver-
sations with  the  late  M.  Varnier,  with  many  pupils  of  M.
d'Eslon,  and  many  members  of  the  Society  of  Strasburg ;
of  the  theory  explained  in  the  work  I  have  just  cited ;  of  some
observations  which  I  extracted  from  the  English  work  of
Dr.  de  Maineduc ;  *  and  finally,  of  the  examination  and  com-
parison of  a  great  number  of  facts  which  I  have  witnessed,
and  of  all  those  which  I  have  been  able  to  collect.

When  a  man  magnetizes,  he  puts  himself,  by  the  exer-
tion of  his  will,  in  a  state  different  from  his  habitual  one ;
he  concentrates  his  attention  upon  a  single  object ;  he
throws  off  and  directs  beyond  himself  the  nervous  or  vital
fluid ;  and  this  new  manner  of  being  renders  him  suscep-
tible of  new  impressions.  He  first  perceives  a  change
operated  in  himself  by  the  action  in  which  he  is  engaged.
He  then  experiences,  by  the  reaction  of  him  whom  he  mag-
netizes, various  sensations  which  affect  him  more  or  less,
according  to  the  degree  of  susceptibility  with  which  he  is
endowed,  and  according  to  the  degree  of  attention  which
he  pays  to  recognise  and  distinguish  them.

*  I  have  no  longer  this  book  in  my  possession.  It  was  published
at  London,  nearly  thirty  years  ago,  in  an  octavo  edition.  The  au-
thor therein  unfolds  a  curious,  but  very  systematic  theory ;  and  it
demands  of  those  who  wish  to  practise  magnetism  a  knowledge  of
things  which  do  not  appear  to  me  at  all  necessary.

17


194  TO DEVELOPE IN OURSELVES  [CHAP. 1X»

The  change  which  occurs  in  us  when  we  act  magnet-
ically,—  that  is  to  say,  when  the  passes  we  make  are  mag-
netic, —  and  the  feeling  which  persuades  us  we  are  in  com-
munication with  him  whom  we  wish  to  magnetize,  are
who  are  in  the  habit  of  magnetizing,  and  who  have  ob-
served what  passes  in  themselves,  recognise  with  certainty.
This  disposition  is  composed  of  a  determined  intention,
which  banishes  all  distraction  without  our  making  any
effort ;  of  a  lively  interest  which  the  patient  inspires  in  us,
and  which  draws  us  towards  him ;  and  of  a  confidence  in
our  power,  which  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  as  to  our  success
in  alleviating  him.  When  experience  has  taught  you  that
you  are  susceptible  of  this  feeling,  if  you  do  not  perceive
it  after  you  have  tried  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  it  is  useless  to
continue ;  the  efforts  of  will  that  you  could  make  would  be
unavailing.  You  will  try  two  or  three  times  more  on  the
following  days,  and  you  will  cease  if  you  have  no  more
success ;  for  then  it  proves  that  you  are  not  in  a  state  to
magnetize,  or  that  your  action  does  not  agree  with  the
person  on  whom  you  wish  to  act.  On  the  contrary,  if  you
perceive  in  yourself  a  manifestation  of  the  disposition  of
which  I  speak,  you  should  persevere  ;  for,  when  the  pa-
tient feels  nothing,  it  is  extremely  probable  that  you  exer-
cise upon  him  a  real  action,  whose  effects  will  be  mani-
fested in  the  sequel,  either  by  some  crises  or  by  an
amelioration  of  health.

Besides  the  change  in  the  moral  dispositions,  there  are
also  some  signs  purely  physical,  or  some  sensations  which
will  indubitably  assure  the  magnetizer  that  he  has  estab-
lished a  communication,  and  exercises  a  magnetic  action.
Commonly  his  hands  are  warm;  it  seems  as  if  the  vital
action  were  carried  outwards.

I  have  been  intimately  connected  with  a  man  who  had
a  very  energetic  and  a  very  salutary  magnetic  power.
When  he  had  begun  to  act  upon  any  one,  he  was  obliged
to  continue  nearly  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  or  otherwise
he  found  himself  the  rest  of  the  day  in  a  state  of  agitation.
When  he  had  once  put  the  fluid  in  motion  within  himself,
it  was  necessary  to  let  it  pass  off  in  the  direction  he  had
given  it.  He  ceased,  if  at  the  end  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour
his  hands  were  not  warmed. In  the  last  case,  he  was  sure


CHAP.  IX.]  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  195

that  he  had  not  acted ;  in  the  first,  he  was  sure  of  the  con-
trary; and  I  have  never  seen  him  deceived,  although  at
first  the  patient  experienced  nothing.

I  am  acquainted  with  a  lady,  who,  when  she  begins  to
magnetize,  experiences  much  heat  in  the  hands.  After  a
sitting  of  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  (more  or  less,  which
depends  upon  whether  the  person  she  magnetizes  draws  off
more  or  less  of  the  fluid,)  her  hands  become  very  cold.
Then  she  acts  no  more.  The  same  thing  takes  place  when
she  magnetizes  water.  Her  magnetic  faculties  are  reestab-
lished after  an  hour  of  repose,  especially  when  she  walks
in  the  open  air.

Some  magnetizers  feel,  at  the  end  of  several  minutes,
a  correspondence  which  is  established  between  their  two
hands,  so  that  when  they  place  one  upon  the  stomach  of
the  patient,  and  the  other  behind  his  back,  it  seems  to  them
as  if  their  hands  touch  each  other.  This  sensation  proves
that  the  fluid  penetrates  the  patient.

Let  us  now  come  to  the  effects  produced  upon  the  mag-
netizer  by  the  reaction  of  his  patient.  These  effects  occur
only  when  the  communication  is  well  established.  They
can  manifest  themselves  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  by  three
phenomena  of  a  different  order.  The  first  of  these  phe-
nomena is  very  ordinary,  and  known  to  a  great  number  of
magnetizers.  The  two  others  do  not  show  themselves  dis-
tinctly, except  to  those  who  have  made  them  an  object  of
incessant  study ;  perhaps  it  is  even  necessary  to  have  pecu-
liar dispositions  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  them.

I  here  stop  a  moment  to  tell  the  means  which  the  author
of  the  work  published  by  M.  de  Lausanne  has  pointed  out
to  establish  the  intimate  communication  which  is  necessary
to  the  end  which  he  proposes,  namely,  the  examination  of
diseases.

Place  yourself  in  such  a  manner  that  all  the  parts  of  your
body  may  be  as  much  as  possible  opposite  to  the  corre-
sponding parts  of  the  patient's  body,  and  hold  him  by  the
thumb  six  or  eight  minutes,  directing  your  will  and  con-
centrating your  attention  upon  him.  Then  make  very
slow  passes  along  the  arms  and  before  the  body,  from  the
head  to  the  feet,  or  at  least  to  the  knees.  Withdraw  your-
self by  degrees  to  make  passes  at  first  at  the  distance  of  an
inch,  then  at  several  inches,  giving  to  your  hands  only  the


196  TO DEVELOPE IN OURSELVES  [CHAP.  IX*

force  necessary  to  sustain  them,  continuing  to  observe
well  all  your  sensations.

Here  I  will  tell  you  what  you  will  experience,  in  a  man-
ner more  or  less  sensible,  perhaps  at  the  first  time,  perhaps
at  the  end  of  eight  or  ten  sittings,  perhaps  only  at  the  end
of  some  months.  I  am  ignorant  whether  there  are  persons
who  have  not  the  necessary  temperament  to  obtain  this
end.  To  determine  this,  it  would  be  requisite  to  know
whether  they  who  have  never  attained  it,  have  not,  like  me,
failed  in  patience  and  perseverance  in  their  researches,  and
whether  the  habit  of  magnetizing  without  taking  notice  of
their  sensations,  has  not  hindered  them  from  following  the
necessary  course  to  develope  them.

These  are  the  three  phenomena,  and  this  is  the  advan-
tage derivable  from  them.

1.  While  drawing  your  hands  slowly  before  your  patient,
at  the  distance  of  three  or  four  inches,  and  holding  your
fingers  slightly  bent,  you  will  feel,  either  at  the  ends  of  the
fingers,  or  at  the  palm  of  the  hand,  different  sensations,  as
they  pass  along  before  the  affected  organ  of  the  patient.
These  sensations  will  be  either  of  cold,  or  of  prickly  heat,
or  of  slight  pain,  or  of  numbness.  They  will  indicate  to
you  the  principal  seat  of  the  disease,  and  consequently  the
part  upon  which  you  ought  to  direct  the  action.

2.  You  may  experience  a  feeling  of  pain  or  a  difficulty
in  the  internal  organs  of  your  body,  corresponding  with
those  which  are  affected  in  your  patient.  This  is  a  sym-
pathetic action  noticed  in  many  somnambulists.  It  is
evident  that  this  sensation  intimates  to  us  the  seat  and  the
nature  of  the  disease.  I  will  add  one  thing,  the  reason  of
which  I  will  soon  explain.  If  you  experience  pain  in  an
organ  on  the  right  or  on  the  left  of  your  body,  you  should
first  approach  by  little  and  little  to  render  the  sensation
more  strong,  and  then  withdraw  yourself  gradually  to  the
distance  of  two  or  three  feet;  for  it  may  be  that  the  affected
organ  of  your  patient  may  act  at  a  little  distance  upon  the
organ  in  you  which  is  opposite;  that  his  spleen,  for  in-
stance, may  make  its  action  be  felt  upon  your  liver;  but  by
withdrawing  yourself,  you  may  be  sure  that  the  sensation
will  be  transferred  from  the  right  to  the  analogous  organ
on  the  left.

3L And  here  there  is  something  more  important  which


CHAP.  IX.]  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  197

has  been  unhappily  too  much  neglected  in  our  day.  You
will  perceive,  as  it  were,  a  vapor  which  escapes  from  cer-
tain parts  of  the  body  of  your  patient,  and  takes  a  certain
direction.  This  vapor  will  act  upon  you  as  a  slight  force,
which  will  attract  or  repel  your  hand,  and  which  will  con-
duct it  from  one  place  to  another,  provided  you  abandon
yourself  entirely  to  its  action.

These  are  what  are  called  the  currents.  The  faculty  of
perceiving  them  is  often  acquired  only  after  a  time,  longer
or  shorter  ;  but  when  they  are  once  recognised,  you  will
follow  them  naturally;  you  magnetize,  as  it  were,  by  instinct;
you  will  assist  nature  by  carrying  the  vital  action  upon
the  deficient  organ  ;  you  will  augment  or  moderate  your
force  at  will.  It  is  by  these  currents  that  the  analogous
organs  of  the  magnetizer  are  sometimes  affected.

The  currents  will  enable  you  to  perceive  a  crisis  which
is  at  hand.  They  also  indicate  the  moment  when  it  is
terminated ;  for  then  calmness  is  reestablished  :  you  are
withdrawn  far  from  the  body,  and  you  feel  nothing  further
to  attract  you  to  it.  They  also  enable  you  to  discover  the
principal  focus  of  the  disease,  and  they  direct  you  to  follow
all  its  ramifications,  A  very  severe  disorder  of  the  liver,
or  of  the  spleen,  or  of  some  other  viscus  of  the  abdomen,  is
often  accompanied  with  no  pain  in  that  organ ;  but  it  pro-
duces either  headaches,  or  ophthalmias,  or  earaches,  or
appearances  of  an  affection  of  the  chest.  The  currents
conduct  you  to  the  part  where  the  cause  of  the  disease  re-
sides ;  they  direct  your  action ;  they  can  even  indicate  to
the  physician  the  remedies  to  be  employed  to  aid  and  favor
the  work  of  nature,  excited  by  magnetism.

It  is  almost  useless  to  say  that,  to  observe  the  currents
carefully,  the  magnetizer  must  be  free  from  distraction  ;
but  it  is  well  to  remark  that,  when  he  has  once  habituated
himself  to  being  directed  by  them,  he  needs  to  make  no
effort  of  attention  to  follow  them.

I  am  acquainted  with  a  man  who  was  closely  allied  to
him  whose  work  I  have  cited.  He  perceives  the  disorder
of  those  whom  he  magnetizes  ;  he  experiences  beforehand,
and  sometimes  in  a  very  painful  manner,  the  crises  which
they  are  soon  to  experience,  and  which  he  developes  in
them.  When  he  is  in  communication,  he  examines  succes-
sively all  the  parts  of  the  patient's  body;  he  shuts  his  eyes,
17*


198  TO DEVELOPE IN OURSELVES  [CHAP.  IX,

and  concentrates  his  attention.  He  very  soon  perceives  his
hand  to  be,  as  it  were,  wrapped  in  a  vapor,  the  current  of
which  he  follows  involuntarily,  and  this  vapor  conducts  him,
by  different  routes,  to  the  place  where  it  must  stop.  I  have
sometimes  seen  him  magnetize  several  hours  in  succession.
He  does  not  cease  until  the  crisis  is  terminated.

I  will  enter  into  no  further  details  concerning  the  cur-
rents, because  those  who  shall  once  have  acquired  the
faculty  of  perceiving  them,  will  read  the  work  I  have  cited,
and  then  conduct  themselves  according  to  the  experience
they  will  soon  secure.  But  I  ought  to  add  something  rela-
tive to  the  sensations  which  are  felt  at  the  ends  of  the
fingers,  at  the  roots  of  the  nails,  or  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,
because  this  phenomenon  is  more  frequent,  and  it  is  good
to  be  aware  of  the  indications  thence  to  be  derived,  accord-
ing to  the  opinions  of  those  who  have  observed  them.
What  I  am  going  to  say  on  this  subject  is  extracted  from
the  work  entitled  "  Principes  du  Magnetisme,"  and  from
that  of  Dr.  de  Maineduc.

"A  sensation  of  cold  almost  always  indicates  an  ob-
struction, an  enlargement,  inaction,  or  a  stagnation  of  the
humors.  You  must  at  first  exert  a  gentle  and  soothing
action,  augment  it  gradually,  concentrate  it  upon  the  spot
that  produces  coldness,  and  then  spread  it  out  to  reestablish
the  equilibrium.  If  the  patient  feels  a  sensation  of  cold
from  your  hand,  you  should  continue  until  you  have
changed  it  into  a  sensation  of  gentle  heat,  in  which  you
will  not always succeed  at  the  first  sitting."  —  Prin.  du


"  A  dry  and  burning  heat  announces  a  great  tension  of
the  fibres,  and  inflammation.  You  must  use  the  circular
motion,  to  spread  the  fluid,  until  this  heat,  becomes  gentle
and  moist."  —  Ibid.

"  The  pricking  sensations  at  the  ends  of  your  fingers
indicate  the  existence  of  a  humor  more  or  less  acrid,  if  they
are  felt  when  you  hold  them  before  the  viscera ;  they  are
the  proof  of  an  irritation,  and  of  what  is  commonly  called
acrimony  in  the  blood,  if  they  are  perceived  when  you
touch  the  head  or  the  arm."  —  Ibid.

"  Numbness  at  the  ends  of  your  fingers  indicates  want
of  circulation.  You  must  then  magnetize  with  activity,  to
reestablish  the  currents."  —  Ibid.


CHAP. IX.]  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  199

"  The  magnetizer  sometimes  feels  a  fluctuating  move-
ment in  his  hands  and  fingers.  This  indicates  a  move-
ment of  the  patient's  blood,  and  an  incipient  evacuation,
which  you  must  favor,  by  making  passes  along  the  sides
and  thighs."  —  Ibid.

"When  there  is  sordes  (glaircs)  in  the  stomach-  or  lungs,
the  magnetizer  experiences  a  sensation  of  thickness  and
stiffness  of  the  fingers.  Sometimes  he  feels  at  the  ends
of  the  fingers  a  circular  pressure,  as  though  a  thread  were
bound  round  them." — Maincduc.

"  When  the  nerves  have  lost  their  tone,  he  perceives  a
weakness  in  his  fingers  and  wrist." — Ibid.

"  In  obstructions,  the  magnetizer  has  a  sensation  of  acri-
mony, dryness,  contraction,  and  formication,  if  there  is  no
inflammation  ;  and  of  heat,  if  there  is  inflammation." —
Ibid.

"  Contusions  produce  heaviness  and  swelling  in  the
•hand."  —  Ibid,

"  The  presence  of  worms  excites  formication  and  pinch-
ing (piticement)  in  the  fingers."  —  Ibid.

I  will  say  no  more  on  this  subject,  because,  if  it  appears
to  me  indisputable  that  the  sensations  experienced  by  the
magnetizer  indicate  the  seat  of  the  disease,  it  seems  very
doubtful  whether  he  can,  by  means  of  them,  determine  its
character.

We  are  indebted  to  M.  Babst  for  the  knowledge  of  the
means  of  exploring  the  nature  of  a  disease  in  which  he  has
always  succeeded.  He  has  observed  that,  when  he  puts  his
hand  upon  the  seat  of  the  disease,  the  pulse  is  raised.  In
consequence,  after  being  put  in  communication,  he  draws
his  right  hand  slowly  before  the  body  of  the  patient ;  he
holds,  at  the  same  time,  his  left  hand  closed,  so  as  to  feel
the  pulsation  of  the  artery  in  the  thumb,  and  directs  ah
his  attention  to  that  hand.  When  the  pulsations  are  accel
erated,  he  stops  ;  and  if  the  acceleration  continues,  he  con-
cludes that  he  has  found  the  seat  of  the  disorder.  I  have
tried  in  vain  to  experience  this  effect,  but  I  advise  magnet-
izers  to  observe  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  person  might
feel  more  distinctly  the  acceleration  of  the  arterial  move-
ment, by  placing  a  finger  of  the  left  hand  upon  the  temporal
artery.


200  THE MAGNETIC FACULTIES.  [CHAP.  IX.

The  theory  treated  of  in  this  chapter  will  not  be  of  much
utility  to  the  greater  part  of  the  persons  to  whom  this  in-
struction is  addressed;  but  as  many  of  them  will  be  disposed
to  acquire  the  faculties  of  which  I  speak,  I  thought  it  my
duty  to  point  out  the  means  of  developing  them.  Let  not
others  be  disquieted  on  this  account :  by  conforming  to  the
principles  I  have  given,  they  will  be  always  sure  of  doing
much  good.

Magnetism,  considered  as  a  means  of  relieving  our  fellow-
men,  of  aiding  the  action  of  nature,  of  facilitating  the  crises,
of  assisting  ordinary  medicine,  is  an  instrument  of  charity
which  all  men  of  good  intentions  may  employ  with  success,
without  any  study,  without  any  knowledge  of  the  physical
sciences.  One  might  even  say  that  an  innate  instinct  often
induces  us  to  exercise  it ;  and  perhaps  the  practice  of  ob-
serving every  thing,  of  explaining  every  thing,  of  admitting
nothing  which  lacks  accordance  with  our  acquired  notions,
of  rejecting  every  thing  of  which  our  senses  do  not  afford
a  direct  proof,  and  every  thing  not  found  in  the  philosophy
we  have  adopted,  is  much  less  favorable  to  the  exercise  of
this  faculty  than  a  benevolent  simplicity  unaccustomed  to
investigation  and  discussion.  Why  do  children  whom  we
have  seen  magnetize,  magnetize  with  success  ?  They  do
not  account  for  what  they  do,  but  they  believe  they  will,
and  they  perform  cures  in  proportion  to  their  strength.

Yet  magnetism  presents  phenomena  which  may  enlighten
us  upon  our  physical  organization,  and  upon  the  faculties
of  our  soul.  It  is  an  action  in  living  beings  resembling
attraction  in  inanimate  matter.  This  action  hath  its  laws.
Let  physicians,  physiologists,  and  metaphysicians,  unite  to
study  them,  and  they  will  soon  make  a  science  whose  appli-
cation will  add  much  to  the  various  branches  of  knowledge
which  are  destined  to  strengthen  the  ties  that  bind  men
together,  and  diminish  the  ills  to  which  they  are  exposed.


201


CHAPTER X.

OF THE STUDIES BY WHICH A PERSON MAY

PERFECT HIMSELF IN THE KNOWLEDGE

OF  MAGNETISM.

Magnetism  may  be  considered  under  two  points  of  view
—  either  as  the  mere  employment  of  a  faculty  which  God
has  given  us,  or  as  a  science  whose  theory  embraces  the
greatest  problems  of  physiology  and  psychology,  and  whose
applications  are  extremely  varied.

Hence  it  follows  that  the  persons  who  are  engaged  in
this  subject  may  be  divided  into  two  classes.

The  first  class  comprehends  those  who,  having  recog-
nised in  themselves  the  faculty  of  doing  good  by  magnet-
ism, or,  at  least,  hoping  to  succeed  therein,  wish  to  make
use  of  it  in  their  families,  or  among  their  friends,  or  with
some  poor  patients,  but  who,  having  duties  to  fulfil  or  busi-
ness to  follow,  do  not  magnetize  except  in  circumstances
where  it  appears  to  them  necessary,  without  seeking  pub-
licity, without  any  motive  but  that  of  charity,  without  any
other  aim  than  that  of  curing  or  relieving  suffering  hu-
manity. ,

The  second  class  is  composed  of  men  who,  having  lei-
sure, wish  to  join  to  the  practice  of  magnetism  the  study  of
the  phenomena  it  exhibits;  to  enter  largely  into  it;  to  estab-
lish treatments  for  taking  care  of  many  patients  at  a  time ;
to  form  pupils  capable  of  aiding  them;  to  have  somnambu-
lists who  may  enlighten  them ;  to  examine  closely,  compare
and  arrange  the  phenomena,  in  such  a  way  as  to  establish
a  regular  code  of  laws,  whose  principles  may  be  certain,
and  whose  consequences,  extending  daily,  may  lead  to  new
applications.

This  class  is  separated  from  the  preceding  by  a  great
number  of  degrees,  which  must  be  successively  mounted
before  one  can  find  himself  situated  where  he  can  command


202  OF THE STUDIES APPERTAINING  [CHAP. X.

a  more  extended  horizon.  I  therefore  advise  those  of  the
former  class  not  to  think  of  passing  beyond  their  limits
unless  they  are  masters  of  their  own  time,  and  have  some
preliminary  knowledge.  Their  lot  is  very  good  ;  they  are
strangers  to  the  vanities  and  the  inquietudes  which  attend
new  attempts,  to  the  uncertainty  which  springs  from  the
conflict  of  opinions  and  of  various  points  of  view  under
which  things  are  presented  to  us ;  they  taste  without  mix-
ture or  distraction  the  satisfaction  of  doing  good.  May
they  be  so  wise  as  not  to  meddle  with  any  theory,  or  to
search  for  extraordinary  phenomena !  Let  them  continue
to  employ,  with  confidence  and  self-collectedness,  the  pro-
cesses by  which  they  have  succeeded,  without  any  other
design  than  to  benefit  the  patient  in  whom  they  are  inter-
ested. When  they  have  obtained  a  cure,  they  will  speak
of  it  unboastingly,  so  as  to  engage  other  persons  to  employ
the  same  means.  The  instruction  I  am  publishing  is  suffi-
cient to  direct  them  in  all  cases ;  they  will  not  even  need
to  have  recourse  to  it,  except  according  to  circumstances.

As  to  the  persons  who  desire  to  belong  to  the  second
class,  I  advise  them  to  consider  at  first  the  extent  of  the
career  they  will  have  to  run.  It  is  better  not  to  enter  it,
than  to  stop  in  the  midst  of  their  enterprise.  In  what  ap-
pertains to  the  practice,  a  prudent  simplicity  is  preferable
to  science.  In  what  relates  to  theory,  imperfect  notions
expose  us  to  dangerous  errors.  The  laborer  who  cultivates
his  farm,  as  his  fathers  did  before  him,  collects  every  year
the  price  of  his  labors.  Should  he  give  way  to  an  inclina-
tion to  pursue  an  experimental  method,  he  might  be  ruined
before  he  is  enlightened  by  his  own  experience.

It  is  not  in  my  power  to  impart  to  others  much  of  the
knowledge  they  ought  to  have  ;  but  I  perceive  the  need  of
it.  I  see  the  superiority  of  those  who  possess  it ;  and  I
could  point  out  the  mode  they  must  pursue  to  acquire  it,  and
especially  the  disposition  of  mind  which  is  requisite  to  di-
rect its  application  to  the  object  in  view.

I  think  it  useful,  therefore,  to  end  this  work  with  some  ad-
vice to  those  who  wish  to  elevate  themselves  into  the  region
of  which  I  have  only  had  a  glimpse,  but  the  chart  of  which
is  well  known  to  me  through  the  relations  of  those  who  have
run  over  it  with  more  or  less  success.  I  suppose  the  men
whom  I  now  address  to  be  entirely  convinced  of  the  power


CHAP.  X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OP MAGNETISM.  203

of  magnetism,  and  to  have  recognised  in  themselves  the
faculty  of  using  it,  and  of  producing  the  most  surprising
and  the  most  salutary  effects.  Without  this  first  condition,
what  I  am  going  to  say  would  be  to  them  absolutely  useless.

It  is  desirable  that  persons  who  wish  to  study  this  sub-
ject thoroughly,  should  have  at  first  some  elementary  no-
tions of  physics,  of  anatomy,  of  physiology,  and  of  medicine,
in  order  to  appreciate  the  facts,  and  to  avoid  being  duped
by  the  errors  which  are  found  in  various  books.  There  is
also  a  necessity  for  them  to  be  versed  in  that  part  of  philos-
ophy which  treats  of  the  origin  of  ideas,  of  the  develope-
ment  and  of  the  relation  of  the  various  faculties  of  the  soul,
so  that  the  view  of  certain  marvellous  facts  may  not  precip-
itate them  into  false  systems.

Supposing  a  person  to  have  the  dispositions,  the  faculties,
and  the  preliminary  knowledge,  of  which  I  speak,  he  must
read  in  order  what  has  been  written  upon  magnetism.  I
think  that  they  who  are  not  acquainted  with  foreign  lan-
guages may  commence  with  my  "  Critical  History,"  not  be-
cause this  work  is  worth  more  than  many  others,  but  be-
cause it  presents  in  a  mass,  and  gives  an  idea  of,  the  history,
the  proofs,  the  processes,  the  phenomena,  the  application
to  the  cure  of  diseases,  the  means  of  avoiding  the  incon-
veniences, and,  finally,  because  it  contains  a  succinct  notice
of  all  the  books  which  had  appeared  in  France  upon
the  same  subject  at  the  time  when  it  was  published.

To  those  books,  which  I  have  classified,  may  be  added
i(Les  Annates  du  Magnetisme,"  "  La  Bibliotheque  du  Mag-
netisme" and  other  works  recently  printed,  of  which  it  is
easy  to  procure  a  catalogue.  You  should  not  neglect  to
inform  yourself  of  the  objections  made  by  physicians,  and
of  the  explanations  they  have  given  of  the  phenomena,  the
reality  of  which  they  do  not  deny.*

*  You  will  find,  in  my  "  Defence  of  Magnetism,"  some  references
to  most  of  the  articles  in  which  it  has  been  attacked.  Those  objec-
tions which  it  is  essential  to  know,  were  afterwards  collected,  and
presented,  with  much  talent,  in  the  article  "  Mesmerism,"  in  the
Encyclopaedia.  I  owe  thanks  to  the  author  of  the  article  for  the
great  politeness  with  which  he  has  spoken  of  me.  I  do  not  think
myself  deserving  of  the  eulogium  he  passes  upon  me  ;  but  I  think,  if
his  article  had  not  been  composed  before  the  publication  of  my
"  Defence  of  Magnetism,"  he  would  have  found  in  it  a  solution  of
most  of  the  difficulties  he  proposes ;  and  I  would  have  voluntarily
depended  upon  his  judgement.


204  OF THE STUDIES APPERTAINING  [CHAP. X.

You  will  consult  the  works  on  medicine  and  physiology,
in  which  the  authors,  treating  of  questions  foreign  to  mag-
netism, have  been  led  to  assent  to  its  action  and  to  the
effects  it  produces.  Such  is  the  work  of  M.  Georget,  en-
titled "  Physiologic  du  Systeme  Nerveux."  You  will  also
examine  into  the  nature  of  the  diseases  in  which  some  of
the  most  extraordinary  phenomena  of  magnetism  are  spon-
taneously presented,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  work  of  Dr.
Petetin,  and  in  the  history  of  Mademoiselle  Julie,  by  M.
le  Baron  de  Strombeck.

You  will  not  fail  also  to  read  the  fine  dissertation  of  Van
Helmont,  the  writings  of  Maxwell,  Wirdig,  and  other
authors  of  the  same  time,  who  are  quoted  by  Thouret,  in
his  "  Rechcrches  et  JDoutes,"  although  he  read  them  su-
perficially.

But  the  instruction  to  be  obtained  from  French  and  Latin
books  is  nothing  compared  to  what  may  be  obtained  by
those  who  are  acquainted  with  foreign  languages.  The
Dutch  work  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Backer,  of  Groningen
contains  excellent  precepts  and  very  curious  facts ;  and  the
German  works  of  Kluge,  Wienholt,  Wolfart,  Eschenmayer,
Passivant,  Ennemoser,  Kieser,  and  Nees-von-Esenbeck,  are
an  inexhaustible  mine.  All  these  authors  agree  to  the
same  facts ;  they  differ  in  regard  to  method  and  explanation ;
they  have  combined  the  knowledge  acquired  by  magnetism
with  what  they  have  drawn  from  other  sciences ;  and  several
of  thern  have  associated  the  theory  of  magnetism  with  the
most  elevated  philosophy.  Ennemoser  has  much  erudition;
and,  although  not  much  of  a  critic,  he  points  out  traces  of
magnetism  in  the  historians  and  philosophers  of  antiquity.
Kluge  was  the  first  to  give  a  classical  work,  in  which  phe-
nomena are  compared  and  explained  by  a  very  ingenious
hypothesis,  based  chiefly  upon  anatomy  and  physiology.
Wienholt  collects  a  great  number  of  facts,  carefully  observed
and  ingenuously  discussed.  Wolfart  has  published  in  suc-
cession all  that  he  has  observed,  either  in  his  individual  prac-
tice or  in  his  public  treatment,  in  which  he  is  aided  by
several  of  his  pupils.  He  has  thrown  great  light  upon  the
application  of  magnetism  to  the  cure  of  diseases.  He  adopt-
ed, expanded,  and  rectified,  the  theory  of  Mesmer.  Eschen-
mayer admits  the  existence  of  an  organic  ether,  spread
every  where,  and  much  more  subtile  than  light. In  other


CHAP. X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OF MAGNETISM.  205

respects,  he  is  a  metaphysical  spiritualist.  Passivant  unites
his  theory  to  the  most  touching  and  sublime  religious  senti-
ments. His  work  carries  light  to  the  head  and  charity  to
the  heart.  Kieser  is  a  bold  and  systematic  genius,  who
searches  for  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  in  a  very
singular  theory  of  the  general  system  of  nature.  Nees-
von-Esenbeck,  and  the  authors  of  "  Hermes"  modified  the
hypothesis  of  Kieser.  Without  adopting  the  opinions  of
these  various  authors,  you  will  at  least  derive  this  advan-
tage from  the  study  of  them,  namely,  the  certainty  of  the
principles  in  which  they  all  agree,  and  the  facts  upon  which
they  equally  depend,  which  have  been  observed  with  the
greatest  care.

In  studying  these  various  works  upon  magnetism,  we
ought  not  to  lose  any  opportunity  to  make  observations  for
ourselves.  I  ought  here  to  lay  it  down  as  an  important
principle,  unhappily  too  much  neglected,  not  only  by  those
who  are  pursuing  these  investigations  by  themselves,  but
still  more  by  those  who  have  undertaken  the  task  of  en-
lightening others  by  their  writings.

In  all  sciences,  we  should  commence  by  the  most  simple
principles,  and  pass,  by  degrees,  to  such  as  are  complex.
The  solution  of  the  highest  problems  in  physics  would  be
unintelligible  to  him  who  is  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  motion
and  the  action  of  electricity  and  caloric.  It  is  the  same  in
the  study  of  this  subject.  You  should  begin  by  closely
examining  the  most  simple  and  the  most  common  effects,
such  as  are  daily  produced  with  perfect  facility,  such  as
merely  prove  that  magnetism  produces  influences  which
are  peculiar  to  itself,  before  you  think  of  taking  notice  of
the  striking  phenomena,  such  as  somnambulism  ;  for  these
are  complicated  by  several  causes  which  it  is  first  necessary
to  study  separately.

While  reading  works  published  upon  magnetism,  you
should  not  neglect  to  form  acquaintance  with  persons  who
practise  it ;  to  see,  test,  and  collect,  new  phenomena  ;  to  dis-
tinguish what  is  common  to  all,  and  what  is  peculiar  to  each
of  them.  You  will  endeavor  to  discriminate,  in  the  various
phenomena  which  the  same  somnambulist  often  presents,
those  which  originate  in  the  action  of  the  magnetizer,  from
those  which  may  have  been  produced  or  modified  by  the
will  or  by  the  imagination  of  the  patient ;  those  which  are
18


206  OP THE STUDIES APPERTAINING  [CHAP. X.

owing  to  a  very  great  excitation  of  the  organs  of  sense,
from  those  which  announce  the  developement  of  a  peculiar
sense ;  finally,  those  which  demonstrate  a  clairvoyance
more  or  less  extensive,  but  which  is  displayed  only  in  re-
gard to  real  and  sensible  objects,  from  those  where  the  same
clairvoyance  is  clouded  with  illusions.  You  will  also  ex-
amine whether  there  is  not  a  magnetic  force  pervading  na-
ture, which  acts  upon  men  when  disposed  to  receive  it,  and
when  voluntarily  placed  in  circumstances  that  may  con-
centrate and  direct  it.

After  having  collected  a  great  number  of  phenomena,
you  should  endeavor  to  class  and  compare  them,  and  to
establish  a  theory  resulting  from  this  comparison,  if,  per-
chance, we  have  arrived  to  the  point  where  it  would  be  truly
philosophical  to  form  a  theory.  Up  to  the  present  time,
nearly  all  the  writers,  who  have  wished  to  lay  down  general
principles,  have  founded  them  upon  some  facts  of  the  same-
order,  without  regard  to  other  facts,  to  which  they  are  not
applicable.  This  is  very  natural,  for  the  reason  that  the
somnambulists  of  the  same  magnetizer  have  generally  a
certain  analogy  among  themselves,  because  of  the  identity
of  the  influence  exerted  over  them.  Hence,  to  discover
general  laws,  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  have  seen  many
facts  with  your  own  eyes,  but  to  have  collected  a  great
number  of  others,  which  are  to  be  carefully  proved,  and  all
their  circumstances  scrutinized.

As  to  the  curative  action  of  magnetism,  independently
of  the  indications  which  somnambulism  has  been  able  to
furnish,  we  cannot  know  how  far  it  extends,  —  in  what
diseases  and  upon  what  temperaments  it  is  most  efficacious,
—  until  physicians  shall  have  submitted  to  the  magnetic
treatment  a  great  number  of  patients  whom  they  have  ex-
amined before  the  treatment,  to  determine  the  nature  of
the  disease,  and  to  know  if  it  be  curable  by  ordinary  means,
and,  after  the  treatment,  to  judge  of  the  changes  that  may
have  been  produced.  Yet  the  multitude  of  cures  effected
in  a  short  time  by  the  magnetic  practice,  in  certain  disor-
ders whose  character  is  well  marked,  such  as  rheumatisms,
intermittent  fevers,  glandular  enlargements,  contusions,
&c,  is  a  proof  of  its  efficaciousness  in  diseases  of  the
same  kind.

I  have  now  pointed  out  the  kinds  of  knowledge  to  be


CHAP. X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OF MAGNETISM.  207

acquired,  and  the  objects  requiring  attention,  if  you  wish  to
examine  the  general  subject  of  magnetism,  to  determine  the
rank  it  occupies  among  the  grand  phenomena  of  animated
nature,  to  discover  its  laws,  and  to  fix  its  applications.  But
I  have  not  yet  spoken  of  the  plan  to  be  pursued  to  gain
skill  in  the  practice,  without  which  the  notions  drawn  from
books  amount  to  nothing.  I  have  merely  said  it  is  neces-
sary to  pass  from  the  most  simple  to  the  most  complex
facts,  and  this  is  all  that  the  method  of  study  proper  for
magnetism  has  in  common  with  what  is  appropriate  to
other  sciences.  In  these,  the  more  ardor  one  has  for  the
work,  the  more  activity  in  vanquishing  obstacles,  the  more
desire  of  discovering  truth,  the  greater  will  be  his  prog-
ress. In  the  investigation  of  magnetism,  these  qualities
would  be  more  injurious  than  useful,  if  they  were  not
united  with  much  reserve,  patience,  and  moderation.  In
the  physical  sciences,  and  even  in  medicine,  there  are  two
means  of  acquiring  knowledge  —  observation  and  experi-
ment ;  in  the  practice  of  magnetism,  there  is  but  one,  —  for
he  who  magnetizes  ought  never  to  make  experiments.  He
should  let  the  phenomena  present  and  develope  themselves,
and  note  them  down  after  each  sitting.

The  most  difficult  thing  for  a  magnetizer  who  wishes  to
gain  instruction  is,  that  he  must  have  in  himself,  as  it  were,
two  persons,  who  must  not  exist  together,  but  successively  ;
one  to  act,  and  the  other  to  reason.

While  you  are  magnetizing,  you  must  occupy  yourself
wholly  with  the  cure  of  the  patient,  to  whom  you  have
devoted  your  time.  You  must  not  investigate ;  you  must
not  take  note  of  any  thing ;  you  must  withdraw  from  all
prejudices,  opinions,  and  knowledge  :  even  reason  itself
ought  not  to  be  busy ;  the  soul  ought  to  have  but  one  fac-
ulty active,  —  the  will  to  do  good  ;  the  mind  but  one  idea,
—  confidence  of  success.*

But  after  the  termination  of  the  sitting,  you  will  recall

*  You  must  conform  to  this  precept  not  only  when  you  are  your-
self magnetizing,  but  also  when  you  are  admitted  to  see  phenomena.
You  must  then  unite  intentions  with  the  magnetizer,  and  look  on
attentively  without  permitting  yourself  to  form  any  judgement.  In
a.  word,  you  must  conduct  yourself  when  you  assist  at  a  magnetic
sitting,  just  as  if  you  were  carrying  on  the  process  yourself,  with  this
single  difference,  that,  when  you  are  merely  a  witness,  you  must  not
sxert  your  will  but  in  subordination  to  that  of  the  magnetizer.


208  OF THE STUDIES APPERTAINING  [CHAP.  X.

to  your  mind  what  you  have  seen ;  you  will  take  note  of  it ;
you  will  combine  all  the  circumstances,  search  into  the
causes,  and  try  to  reach  results  which  will  be  more  certain
as  succeeding  observations  confirm  them.  The  magnetizer,
while  acting,  should  have  unbounded  confidence ;  he  should
doubt  of  nothing.  But  when  he  takes  note  of  the  phenom-
ena presented  to  him,  he  should  be  distrustful,  doubtful  of
every  thing,  and  admit  no  fact  except  upon  incontestable
evidence ;  no  principle,  unless  supported  by  a  series  of
observations  congruent  with  themselves,  and  which  are
not  contrary  to  any  of  the  received  truths  of  physics  and
physiology.

This  self-denial  is  a  thing  very  difficult  to  men  habitu-
ated to  observe  coolly,  and  to  men  who  suffer  themselves
to  be  carried  off  by  their  imagination :  and  this  is  the
reason  why  men  who  possess  simplicity  of  character  and
little  knowledge  of  the  subject,  are  often  more  proper  to
cure  diseases,  than  those  who  are  versed  in  the  sciences,
and  especially  than  those  who  have  a  lively  imagination.

Greatrakes,  the  Irish  gentleman,  who  was  so  successful
in  curing  various  diseases,  was  neither  a  learned  man,  nor
an  enthusiast.

Many  rustics  and  matrons,  who  believe  they  possess  the
gift  of  healing,  —  some  of  them,  bruises ;  others,  the  tooth-
ache ;  and  others,  attacks  of  fevers,  —  often  succeed ;  and
if  they  were  more  enlightened  they  might  not  succeed
so  well.

When  I  laid  it  down  as  a  principle  that  the  magnetizer
ought  to  interdict  himself  from  all  experiment,  I  wished  to
speak  solely  of  the  direct  action  which  one  individual  ex-
erts over  another  by  an  emanation  from  himself,  imparted
by  his  will  and  by  the  appropriate  processes,  and  of  the
natural  developement  of  phenomena  which  this  action  pro-
duces. But  this  principle  is  no  longer  applicable,  or  at
least  it  should  be  modified,  as  it  respects  modes  of  treat-
ment, or  the  means  of  directing,  strengthening,  and  con-
centrating the  action  which  magnetism  may  exert  of  itself,
when  once  put  in  motion.  Upon  this  subject,  a  man  who
has  well  studied  the  particular  effects  of  this  agent,  and
who  has  an  acquaintance  with  the  physical  and  natural
sciences,  ought  to  permit  himself  various  trials,  to  ascertain
the  best  means  of  employing  an  agent  which  is,  perhaps,


CHAP. X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OP MAGNETISM.  209

diffused  through  all  nature.  For  instance,  what  relates  to
the  construction  of  baquets,  or  magnetic  reservoirs;  to  the
direction  of  extensive  treatments;  to  the  employment  of  the
chain,  and  to  the  precautions  it  requires;  to  the  influence
exerted  by  certain  substances ;  to  the  property  which  cer-
tain substances  have  of  imparting  a  particular  quality  to
the  fluid  passing  through  them  ;  to  the  question  whether
there  are  bodies  which  insulate  the  magnetic  fluid*  or  re-
tard its  action,  and  others  which  are  conductors  of  its  ac-
tion, or  concentrate  it  so  as  to  render  it  stronger ;  to  the
difference  which  the  seasons,  the  hour  of  the  day,  the
presence  or  the  absence  of  the  light,  the  temperature,  the
state  of  the  atmosphere,  &c,  can  make  in  the  effects  of
magnetism ;  and,  finally,  to  the  action  of  magnetism  upon
animals,  and  even  upon  vegetables.  All  this  cannot  be
known  except  by  trials  made  prudently,  but  frequently,
and  taking  note  of  all  the  circumstances.  Let  no  one  be
in  haste  to  form  a  theory  ;  for  it  is  easy  to  select  facts  in
support  of  such  an  hypothesis  as  one  might  desire  to  ima-
gine, without  having  this  scaffolding  of  plausible  proofs  serve
for  the  erection  of  a  solid  edifice.  It  is  necessary  for  a
long  time  to  collect  all  the  known  facts ;  to  group,  to  ar-
range, to  class  them,  and  to  remain  in  doubt  in  relation
to  the  causes,  until  we  see  a  theory  spring  spontaneously
from  their  arrangement,  and  until  the  applications  and  the
consequences  of  this  theory  lead  to  results  seen  and  an-
nounced beforehand.

A  man  of  distinguished  learning  has  just  published,  in
Germany,  a  work,  in  two  volumes  octavo,  in  which  he  con-
siders magnetism  in  all  its  relations.  He  believes  there  is
in  magnetism  two  different  actions  —  one  which  depends


*  What  we  call  the  magnetic  fluid  may  be,  as  Van  Helmont
thought,  and  as  Kieser  believes,  an  agent  which  penetrates  all  bodies.
The  recent  discoveries  of  M.  CErsted,  of  M.  Ampere,  and  of  many
other  celebrated  physicians ;  the  researches  of  Messieurs  Provost  and
Dumas,  and  of  various  physiologists,  upon  the  influence  of  electri-
city in  the  phenomena  of  the  animal  economy ;  the  observations  of
M.  de  Humboldt  upon  the  electric  gymnotus,  &c,  may  give  us  some
light  upon  this  subject.  But  the  problem  does  not  consist  in  this ;
it  is  in  the  power  which  man  has  of  directing  this  fluid,  of  modifying
it,  of  communicating  to  it  such  or  such  a  virtue.  This  problem  I
believe  to  be  incapable  of  solution,  because  our  external  senses  teach
us  nothing  about  the  internal  principle  of  life.

18*


210  OF THE STUDIES APPERTAINING [cHAP. X.

upon  a  vital  principle  spread  throughout  nature,  and  circu-
lating in  all  bodies;  the  other,  the  same  principle,  modified
by  man,  animated  by  his  spirit,  and  directed  by  his  will.
He  thinks  that  the  first  sort  of  magnetism,  which  he  calls
tellurism,  or  siderism,  can  be  employed  without  the  con-
currence of  the  human  will,  and  solely  by  the  action  of
certain  mineral  or  vegetable  substances.  According  to
him,  a  baquet  regularly  constructed  can,  without  having
been  magnetized,  act  upon  a  patient  who  comes  to  place
himself  there  every  day  for  a  certain  time,  and  produce,  in
the  course  of  time,  most  of  the  phenomena  obtained  by  the
magnetic  processes.  I  invite  philosophers  to  examine  this
theory.  My  ignorance  of  the  German  language  does  not
permit  me  to  judge  of  it ;  but  the  testimony  of  Kieser  is  of
great  weight ;  and  if,  as  I  suppose,  there  is  reason  to  reject
his  theory,  there  is  none  at  all  to  deny  the  facts  upon  which
he  sustains  it,  and  which  are  certainly  worthy  of  attention.
This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  into  greater  details  upon
the  researches  to  which  a  person  should  devote  himself,
when  he  wishes  to  study  magnetism  as  a  science.  He
who  has  this  object  in  view  will  learn,  by  reading  the
works  published  within  a  few  years,  what  things  ought
most  particularly  to  fix  his  attention.  I  merely  recommend
to  him  not  to  neglect  any  thing;  to  consult  the  works  of
the  enemies  of  magnetism  as  well  as  those  of  its  partisans;
to  search  out,  in  the  books  of  historians,  philosophers,  and
physicians,  phenomena  analogous  to  those  which  the  prac-
tice of  magnetism  brings  to  our  view ;  to  separate  them
from  all  the  hypotheses  to  which  they  have  given  birth,  and
not  to  be  hasty  in  adopting  general  principles.  By  reading
the  works  published  upon  magnetism  in  the  various  schools,
from  Van  Helmont  to  the  present  time,  we  shall  soon
perceive  that  there  are  effects  which  have  been  exhibited
every  where,  always  with  the  same  characteristics;  and
phenomena  which  are  presented  only  in  certain  schools
and  by  certain  magnetizers,  and  which  one  might  vainly
seek  to  reproduce  himself.  These  phenomena  ought  not
to  be  rejected ;  the  most  of  them  are  real,  though  often  at-
tributed to  chimerical  causes:  people  have  drawn  errone-
ous conclusions  from  them,  and  you  cannot  use  too  much
care  to  distinguish  facts  in  themselves  from  the  colors  with
which  they  have  been  invested  by  enthusiastic  and  credu-
lous narrators.


CHAP. X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OF MAGNETISM.  211

I  have  now  pointed  out  the  road  for  you  to  follow,  if  you
would  reach  the  elevation  from  whence  you  may  behold
the  subject  in  all  its  extent,  penetrate  its  depths,  see  through
the  veil  which  covers  some  of  its  mysteries,  free  it  from
what  does  not  belong  to  it,  and  determine  the  part  it  acts
in  the  drama  of  Nature.  But  upon  the  route  I  have  traced
out,  there  are  stumbling-blocks  of  which  I  should  warn
you,  because  it  is  essential  to  avoid  them  if  you  would
make  a  just  application  of  the  knowledge  you  have  acquired
by  reading  and  observation.

I  have  said  that  one  would  gain  but  vague  ideas  from
books,  if  he  had  not  been  first  convinced,  by  his  own  expe-
rience, of  the  power  of  magnetism.  The  phenomena  of
somnambulism  which  it  offers  are  truly  wonderful  and  in-
structive, and  it  is  impossible  to  get  a  conception  of  them
if  you  have  not  seen  some  of  them  with  your  own  eyes.
The  various  relations  that  have  been  given  contain  facts
so  unlike  in  appearance,  that  you  cannot  perceive  the  tie
which  connects  them,  —  so  marvellous,  that  you  are  dazzled,
and  know  not  on  what  to  rest  your  faith.  When  you  have
once  produced  these  extraordinary  phenomena  yourself,
you  are  at  least  convinced  of  their  reality ;  and  you  might
employ  the  time  which  you  would,  perhaps,  have  uselessly
sacrificed  in  satisfying  yourself  by  reading,  in  examining
its  successive  stages  and  its  circumstances.  Even  in  this
case,  much  attention  and  prudence  are  requisite,  to  dis-
criminate, in  the  discourses  and  in  the  perceptions  of  som-
nambulists, what  appertains  to  the  exaltation  of  the  senses,
to  the  nervous  susceptibility,  to  the  influence  of  acquired
ideas,  to  the  errors  of  the  imagination,  from  the  manifes-
tation or  the  developement  of  a  real  faculty,  absolutely  for-
eign to  those  which  we  enjoy  in  our  ordinary  state.  I
have  many  examples  of  somnambulists  endowed  with  an
astonishing  clairvoyance,  in  the  exercise  of  their  new  fac-
ulty applied  to  things  positive  and  within  their  scope,  who
would  speak  at  random  if  asked  by  what  means  they  were
enabled  to  see,  and  especially  when  requested  to  speak  on
subjects  which  excite  their  imagination.  I  would  compare
somnambulism  to  a  microscope  which  causes  objects  at  its
focus  to  be  distinctly  seen,  though  imperceptible  to  the
naked  eye ;  but,  on  this  side  of  or  beyond  the  focus,  the
rays  cross  each  other,  the  hues  become  more  brilliant,  and


212  OF THE STUDIES APPERTAINING  [CHAP.  X.

the  images  are  wholly  distorted.  The  clairvoyance  of
somnambulists,  inconceivable  as  it  is,  is  not  less  incontest-
able ;  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  what  has  been  related
concerning  it;  but  it  is  in  each  individual  limited  to  cer-
tain objects,  and  confined  to  a  certain  order  of  ideas ;  and
it  is  only  by  comparison  between  great  numbers  of  facts,
in  which  truth  has  been  separated  from  illusion,  that  you
will  be  enabled  to  perceive  the  extent  of  which  it  is  sus-
ceptible, what  is  its  origin,  and  what  are  the  conditions
which  favor  its  developement.  If  two  magnetizers  were
each  to  form  a  theory  of  somnambulism  from  the  facts  ex-
hibited by  their  respective  somnambulists,  it  is  very  proba-
ble that  those  theories  would  not  resemble  each  other.  I
go  further,  and  affirm  that,  by  reasoning  from  some  phe-
nomena considered  separately,  a  person  might  form  not
only  the  strangest  hypotheses,  but  might  also  be  induced  to
deny  even  the  reality  of  magnetism.

I  have  told  you  to  how  many  errors  you  may  be  exposed
by  an  incomplete  and  limited  examination  of  the  phenom-
ena. I  ought  now  to  advert  to  those  which  spring  from
an  inconsiderate  application  of  the  branches  of  knowledge
which  do  not  belong  to  magnetism.

I  am  convinced  that  a  person  will  never  make  a  real
progress  in  the  science  of  magnetism  when  he  looks  for
its  principles  in  other  sciences.  To  explain  magnetic  phe-
nomena by  the  laws  of  electricity  or  galvanism,  by  anatom-
ical considerations  of  the  functions  of  the  brain  and  nerves,
would  be  very  much  like  explaining  vegetation  by  crystal-
ography.  It  is  essential  for  learned  men  and  physicians
to  know  that  the  most  profound  knowledge  of  physics  and
of  physiology  will  never  lead  them  to  the  discovery  of  the
theory  of  magnetism;  yet  this  knowledge  will  be  useful  to
secure  the  observers  from  many  errors,  by  enabling  them
to  distinguish  what  belongs  to  magnetism  from  what  is
due  to  other  causes,  by  furnishing  them  the  means  of  veri-
fication, by  authorizing  them  to  reject  all  consequences
essentially  contrary  to  well-known  physical  laws.

Magnetism,  considered  as  an  agent,  is  entirely  different
from  the  other  agents  of  nature.  It  has  its  own  laws,  which
are  not  identical  with  the  laws  of  matter.  Considered  as  a
science,  it  has  peculiar  principles,  which  cannot  be  known
except  by  observation,  no  idea  of  which  can  be  caught  from


CHAP.  X.] TO A KNOWLEDGE OP MAGNETISM.  213

known  sciences.  So  much  I  can  say  with  certainty ;  but  I
permit  myself  here  to  add  an  opinion,  common  with  me
and  many  enlightened  men,  but  which  I  merely  propose  as
an  opinion

The  theory  of  magnetism  is  based  upon  this  great  prin-
ciple, that  there  is  in  nature  two  sorts  of  elements,  radical-
ly different  in  their  characteristics  and  properties,  —  spirit
and  matter;  that  these  two  elements  act,  the  one  upon
the  other,  but  each  one  possessing  laws  peculiar  to  itself.
Among  the  laws  that  regulate  the  action  of  matter  upon
matter,  many  have  been  successively  brought  to  light  by
observation,  determined  by  calculation,  and  verified  by  ex-
periment :  such  are  the  laws  of  motion,  of  attraction,  of
electricity,  of  the  transmission  of  light,  &c.  It  is  not  so
with  the  mind ;  although  the  existence  of  our  soul  has  been
demonstrated,  and  many  of  its  faculties  are  known  to  us,
its  nature  is  a  mystery,  its  union  with  organized  matter  in-
conceivable, and  most  of  the  laws  by  which  mind  acts  upon
mind  are  unknown.  Living  bodies  which  are  composed
of  mind  and  matter,*  act  upon  living  bodies  by  the  combi
nation  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  two.  It  is  perceiv
able  that  there  are  in  this  action  two  distinct  elements,  and
a  mixed  element.  The  knowledge  of  the  laws  that  govern
them  constitutes  the  science  of  magnetism ;  and  it  is  only
by  observing,  contrasting,  and  comparing,  the  various  phe-
nomena, that  we  can  arrive  at  the  discovery  and  the  eluci
dation  of  these  laws.

Hence  it  follows  that  those  who  would  establish  a  theory
of  magnetism  upon  the  properties  of  matter,  and  those  who
search  for  it  wholly  in  the  faculties  of  the  soul, strike


*  Instead  of  recognizing  only  two  elements  in  man,  it  would  per-
haps be  more  exact  to  distinguish  three,  —  the  soul,  the  body,  and  an
intermediate  element,  which  is  the  principle  of  life.  This  was  the
opinion  of  the  ancients,  who  designated  the  last  as  the  spirit,  or  the
chariot  of  the  soul,  {char  de  V  ame.)  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  most
somnambulists  who  have  reached  the  highest  degree  of  clairvoyance.
It  will  be  perceived  that  this  metaphysical  question  is  foreign  to  my
subject.  I  speak  of  it  merely  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  not  know-
ing it.  That  there  are  in  sentient  beings  two  elements  essentially
different,  is  an  incontestable  fact :  one  is  matter,  the  other  is  not.

The  principle  of  life  is  distinct  from  matter,  because  it  is  a  princi-
ple which  acts  upon  matter  and  organizes  it ;  it  is  distinct  from  the
principle  of  intelligence,  because  the  plants  are  alive.


214  OP THE STUDY OP MAGNETISM.  [CHAP.  X.

equally  aside  of  the  truth.  Magnetism,  being  an  emana-
tion from  ourselves,  directed  by  volition,  partakes  equally
of  the  two  elements  which  compose  our  being.

This  is  not  the  place  to  enlarge  upon  this  idea.  The
object  I  proposed  to  myself  being  to  teach  the  practice  of
magnetism,  it  is  rather  to  restrain  than  to  excite  the  per-
sons who  wish  to  study  it  profoundly,  that  I  have  permit-
ted myself  to  lay  down  the  route  they  should  follow,  and
the  difficulties  they  must  vanquish  to  effect  their  object.
Longer  details  would  be  useless;  I  will  therefore  merely
sum  up,  in  a  brief  way,  what  I  have  said  in  this  chapter.

To  practise  magnetism,  you  have  need  only  of  will,  con-
fidence, and  charity ;  and  all  the  books  which  have  been
written  since  men  have  been  treating  it  as  a  discovery,
would  add  nothing  essential  to  the  principles  proclaimed
by  M.  de  Puysegur ;  namely,  an  active  will  to  do  good;  a
jirm  belief  in  our  'power ;  and  an  entire  confidence  in  em-
ploying it.  To  examine  into  the  cause  and  the  similarity
of  the  phenomena,  you  must  have  first  acquired,  by  your
own  experience,  an  entire  conviction  of  the  power  of  the
agent.  Next,  you  must  have  gained  a  general  acquaintance
with  the  natural  laws,  then  of  the  organization  of  man,  and
of  the  various  conditions  in  which  he  is  found;  and,  finally,
you  must  rise  to  another  class  of  ideas,  in  order  to  become
acquainted  with  the  influence  of  mind  upon  organized
matter,  and  to  explain  how  one  man  acts  upon  another  by
his  will.

Let  us  thank  Heaven  that  the  exercise  of  a  faculty  so
useful,  so  sublime,  as  that  of  magnetism,  demands  only  sin-
gleness of  faith,  purity  of  intention,  and  the  developement
of  a  natural  sentiment  which  connects  us  with  the  suffer-
ings of  our  fellow-men,  and  inspires  us  with  the  desire  and
the  hope  of  relieving  them.  What  need  have  we  to  consult
the  wavering  decisions  of  the  mind,  when  we  may  act  effi-
caciously by  abandoning  ourselves  to  the  impulse  of  the
heart?


217


APPENDIX


NOTE  1.


This  work  ivas  originally  published  in  three  parts,  and  the  appen-
dix of  each  part  embraced  such  communications  as  were  received  at
the  time  of  its  publication.  It  was  then  intended  to  make  a  new
arrangement  of  these  and  the  translator's  notes  as  soon  as  another
edition  should  be  put  to  press  ;  but,  on  refection,  it  seems  better  to
preserve  the  original  form,  and  to  add  the  new  ones  at  the  con-
clusion.

It  must  now  appear  to  every  one  conversant  with  Mesmerism,  that
many  of  the  experiments  detailed  in  this  Appendix  must  have  been
injurious  to  the  subjects  of  them,  and  can  find  no  excuse  except  in
the  inexperience  of  those  who  permitted  them,  and  in  their  strong
desire  to  convince  scientific  men  of  the  power  of  this  agency,  then  re-
cently introduced  to  our  notice.  It  is,  however,  useful  to  let  them
remain,  since  they  tend  to  lessen  the  public  curiosity  to  see  them  re-
peated, in  proportion  to  the  authenticity  by  which  they  are  sup-
ported ;  and  since  they  establish,  by  the  most  respectable  testimony,
the  fact  of  the  wonderful  influence  which  may  be  exercised.  To
tliat  portion  of  the  correspondence  to  which  physicians  of  high
standing  have  contributed,  we  must  look  for  the  legitimate  exercise
of  this  agency.  In  such  hands,  it  is  destined  to  produce  much
good,  as  an  auxiliary  to  medicine.


NOTE  II.  — Page  25.

A  child  about  nine  years  of  age,  attending  the  school  of  Miss
S***,  in  this  city,  was,  about  a  month  ago,  during  an  intermission,
found  to  be  asleep  in  the  school -room.  One  of  the  young  scholars
came  and  gave  information.  Miss  S#*#  and  others  tried  to  rouse
her ;  but,  not  succeeding,  they  became  alarmed.  A  young  medical
student,  a  son  of  Commodore  John  Orde  Creighton,  being  called
in,  soon  perceived  that  she  was  in  a  magnetic  sleep.  A  little  girl,
about  ten  years  old,  betrayed  her  agency  in  the  matter  by  bursting
into  tears.  She  was  so  much  terrified  at  the  result  of  the  mis-
19


218  appendix.

chief,  that  Miss  S***  called  her  into  another  room,  soothed  her
distress,  and  told  her  she  need  not  be  frightened ;  she  had  only
to  go  to  Anne,  and  ask  her  to  wake  up.  This  was  done.  She
merely  spoke  to  her,  and  she  came  out  of  her  magnetic  state,
with  that  smile  upon  her  visage  which  is  peculiar  to  those  who
are  gently  roused  from  it.

The  child  had  been  once  before,  and  only  once,  put  into
the  somnambulic  state.  It  was  effected  in  about  five  minutes,
by  a  lady  who  had  never  before  tried  her  hand  at  this  business.

I  learned  these  particulars  from  Mr.  Benjamin  Cozzens,  and
Mr.  Joseph  Balch,  Jr.

An  instance  of  the  power  of  magnetizing  without  manipula-
tion, and  causing  sleep  at  the  first  trial,  is  afforded  in  the  case  of
a  woman  who,  being  in  a  nervous  state,  was  put  to  sleep  for  the
first  time  by  her  husband,  in  the  course  of  fifteen  minutes,  with-
out her  knowing  any  thing  of  his  intention ;  she  sitting  at  one
part  of  the  room,  and  he  in  another.  When  she  was  asleep,  he
went  into  an  adjoining  room,  out  of  her  direct  vision,  and,  taking
down  a  book,  began  to  read  it.  After  being  some  time  in  the  mag-
netic state,  she  was  awakened.  She  related  correctly  what  he  had
done,  and  evinced  the  usual  proofs  of  clairvoyance.  The  gentle-
man is  a  resident  of  this  city,  a  friend  of  mine,  on  whose  veracity
I  can  depend.

Dr.  ##*,  of  this  city,  informed  me  that  one  of  his  daughters,
seven  years  of  age,  put  her  little  sister,  between  two  and  three
years  of  age,  into  a  deep  magnetic  sleep,  so  that  her  mother
could  not  rouse  her.  Some  time  afterwards,  she  was  very  eager
to  experience  the  effect  again,  and  cried  because  she  was  not
permitted  to  be  magnetized. See  page  152.

An  instance  occurred  of  one  boy's  putting  another  into  the
same  state,  which  was  related  to  me  by  an  eye-witness  of  the
fact It  took  place  in  this  city.


NOTE  III.  — Page  40.

The  power  exercised  over  the  imagination  of  the  patient  is
not  the  least  singular  thing  connected  with  the  subject.  The
success  of  all  experiments  of  this  kind  depends  upon  the  control
which  the  magnetizer  has  over  his  own  imagination,  as  well  as
upon  the  strength  which  belongs  to  it.  A  long  practice  will
enable  a  man  to  call  up  a  clear  conception  of  the  axticle  which
he  wishes  to  administer ;  and  he  will  succeed  in  proportion  to  the
clearness  and  strength  of  this  conception,  other  things  being  equal.

A  glass  of  water  being  held  in  your  hand,  you  will  cause  the
magnetizer  to  be  called  into  another  room,  where  a  person  whom
you  select  will  whisper  to  him  what  you  wish  to  have  it  taste  like.


APPENDIX.  219

The  magnetizer  returns,  fixes  his  mind  upon  the  glass  of  water,
to  impart  to  it  the  desired  quality,  and  requests  the  somnambulist
to  take  it  from  your  hand  and  drink  it.  He  will  then  ask  him
what  he  is  drinking1.  The  somnambulist  rarely  fails  to  tell,  if  it
be  any  thing  with  which  he  is  acquainted.  It  may  be  he  is  but
slightly  acquainted  with  the  liquor  whose  taste  is  induced  into
the  glass  of  water :  in  this  case  is  evidently  involved' another
condition  to  render  the  trial  satisfactory,  viz.,  the  patient  must
know  the  article  attempted  to  be  imposed  upon  him.

An  empty  glass  does  as  well  as  a  full  one.  A  peach  may  thus
be  transformed  into  an  apple,  a  pear,  an  iron  ball,  &c.  A  hand-
kerchief folded  may  be  changed  into  a  child,  a  cat,  or  a  dog,
and  thrown  into  the  lap.  In  the  first  case,  it  will  be  fondled  ;  in
the  second,  thrown  off  with  violence,  or  caressed,  as  the  feeling
or  the  prejudice  may  happen  to  be.

Nor  is  it  the  fact,  as  some  suppose,  that  the  effect  is  produced
merely  upon  the  imagination  of  the  patient.  Any  medicine
which  the  magnetizer  can  form  a  strong  conception  of  may  be
administered  in  this  manner,  and  will  be  accompanied  with  all
its  usual  effects,  as  if  it  were  really  taken.  This  is  a  well-
known  and  common  fact.

This  brings  me  to  the  design  of  this  note.  At  page  39,  men-
tion is  made  of  magnetized  water.  An  explanation  of  its  uses,
and  of  the  manner  of  preparing  it,  will  be  found  on  the  56tb
page.  Water  is  magnetized  by  making  a  few  passes  along  the
vessel  containing  it,  stirring  it  Avith  the  thumb,  and  accompany-
ing the  action  with  a  steady  exercise  of  the  will,  as  to  the  effects
which  it  shall  produce.  This  experiment  differs  from  the  ones
In  the  present  case,  the  taste  is  not  altered  much,  and  sometimes
not  at  all.  "  The  patient  generally  distinguishes  it  from  other
water  by  a  peculiar  sensation  which  it  excites  in  the  stomach."


NOTE  IV.  —  Page  76.

Clairvoyance.  —  This  term  is  used  to  denote  the  faculty
peculiar  to  somnambulists  and  epileptic  persons,  which  enables
them  to  see  things  near,  and  also  things  distant,  without  appear-
ing to  use  the  eye.  It  seems  to  be  a  more  expressive  word  than
any  in  the  English  language  that  could  be  brought  to  convey  its
meaning,  because  the  idea  meant  to  be  conveyed  is  peculiar ;  and
we  must  either  limit  a  familiar  word  to  one  of  its  significations,
invent  a  new  one,  or  adopt  that  which  is  already  introduced,  and
is  appropriate  in  the  technology  of  magnetism.  Its  literal  signi-
fication is,  clear-sightedness;  its  technological  signification  iss
clear-sightedness  in  the  somnambulic  state.


220


APPENDIX.


Somnambulists,  when  they  wish  to  examine  an  object  atten-
tively, generally  press  it  lightly  against  the  epigastrium.  The
translator  has  seen  one  case  where  the  seat  of  vision  was  on  the
back  part  of  the  head  ;  and  another,  where  it  was  on  one  side  of
the  head,  near  the  organ  designated  by  Spurzheim  as  alimentive-
ness.  The  objects  examined,  such  as  bank  bills,  and  the  super-
scriptions of  letters,  are  always  held  with  the  blank  side  next  to
the  seat  of  vision,  so  as  to  be  read  from  right  to  left.

Mr.  Stephen  Covill,  of  Troy,  New  York,  being  desirous  of
testing  the  clairvoyant  power  of  one  of  our  somnambulists,  and
being  withal  a  skeptic,  notwithstanding  the  evidence  offered  by
the  statements  and  by  the  thorough  convictions  of  some  of  his
own  friends,  wrote  a  sentence  upon  a  piece  of  paper,  without  the
knowledge  of  any  person,  enclosed  it  between  two  thick  cards,
folded  them  all  up  in  a  deep-blue  sheet  of  paper,  to  prevent  the
transmission  of  light,  took  the  precaution  to  seal  it  with  his  own
seal  and  a  number  of  wafers,  and  put  the  whole  into  a  larger
sheet,  directed  to  Mr.  Isaac  Thurber.  Mr.  Thurber  presented
the  letter,  sealed,  as  it  came,  to  Miss  Brackett,  while  she  was  in
the  somnambulic  state,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Henry  Hopkins,
and  a  number  of  others,  and  requested  her  to  read  the  contents
without  breaking  the  seals.  Miss  B.  took  the  letter  with  her  on
retiring  for  the  night.  In  the  morning  she  gave  the  following
as  the  sentence  contained  therein,  which  Mr.  Hopkins  wrote
down  at  her  dictation :  —

"  No  other  than  the  eye  of  Omnipotence  can  read  this  in  this
envelopement.  *  *  *  * #  * 1837."

The  letter  was  then  sent  back  in  an  envelope,  the  seals  not
having  been  broken,  with  the  above  sentence  written  upon  the
outside  of  it.  There  was  something  where  the  stars  are  placed
which  she  could  not  read.

This  number  will  be  published  before  an  answer  can  be
received,  from  Troy.  In  the  second  number,  it  shall  be  made
known,  whatever  may  be  its  purport.  The  following  letter  may
serve  to  show  on  what  basis  we  raise  our  confidence  :  —

"  Sir  :  Previous  to  the  experiment  of  Mr.  Stephen  Covill,  of
Troy,  I  had  done  this  thing  to  try  the  clairvoyant  power  of  Miss  B.
I  wrote  this  sentence  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  "  Animal  Magnetism
may  be  rendered  useful"  and  carefully  folded  up  the  sheet  so  that
the  writing  was  covered  with  three  thicknesses,  sealing  it  with
four  seals.  I  then  directed  it  to  Dr.  Capron,  with  a  request
that  he  would  find  out  the  contents  of  the  letter,  and  write  the
same  on  the  back  of  it.  No  person  but  myself  knew  what  was
in  it  Dr.  Capron  brought  it  the  next  day  to  my  counting-room,
and  it  was  opened  in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  witnesses,


APPENDIX.  221

"The  writing  on  the  back  corresponded  exactly  with  the  writing
inside,  and°the  seals  had  not  been  broken.

"  On  another  occasion,  Miss  B.,  who,  by  the  way,  is  perfectly
blind  in  the  natural  state,  as  Mr.  Jesse  Metcalf  will  inform  you,  —
for  she  has  resided  many  weeks  in  his  family,  —  recognized  a  lady
of  her  acquaintance  in  a  house  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off.
Miss  B.  had  never  been  there  till  that  morning,  and  then  only  in
spirit.  My  object  in  sending  her  to  that  house  was,  to  see  if
she  would  recognize  that  lady,  who,  I  knew,  was  there  on  a
visit  Yours,

"ISAAC  THURBER."

In  order  to  prove  whether  a  somnambulist  can  really  visit  a
appearance  of  things  there,  many  trials  have  been  made.  One
of  these  was  made  by  a  young  lady  in  this  city,  who  sent  a  som-
nambulist to  the  residence  of  her  father,  and  received  a  satisfac-
tory description  of  it.  After  the  sitting  was  at  an  end,  she  in-
vited the  patient  to  go  home  with  her  ;  and  as  the  latter  had  been
told  to  remember,  when  awake,  what  she  had  seen  when  in  the
magnetic  state,  she  readily  told  at  the  door  of  several  rooms
what  she  had  seen  within.

Still  the  suspicion  very  naturally  remained,  that  the  somnam-
bulist derives  all  his  notions  from  the  mind  of  the  person  in  com-
munication, which,  though  it  be  an  astounding  circumstance,
would  induce  us  to  view  the  subject  in  an  entirely  different  light
To  try  this,  I  one  day  put  an  old  spike  into  a  gun-barrel,  and
placed  it  about  four  or  five  feet  from  my  writing-desk,  against  the
wall.  I  then  sent  a  note  to  Dr.  Brownell,  who  was  with  one  of
his  patients  in  the  somnambulic  state,  requesting  him  to  ask  her
what  was  in  a  gun-barrel  lying  on  my  desk.  The  lad  who  car-
ried the  note  did  not  know  its  contents,  and  did  not  go  into  the
house,  but  came  immediately  back.  In  about  thirty  minutes,  a
line  came  from  Dr.  Brownell,  stating  that  there  was  no  gun-bar-
rel on  my  desk ;  but  that  there  was  one  leaning  against  the  wall
a  short  distance  from  it  Other  facts  affording  similar  proofs
are  abundant.  It  is  proper  to  state  that  the  gun-barrel  had  prob-
ably never  been  in  the  room  before.

A  still  more  interesting  proof  is  exhibited  in  the  following  re-
lation, which,  1  am  authorized  to  say,  is  true  in  all  its  important
facts,  and  is  known  to  have  created  a  great  sensation  at  the  time.
Fortunately  the  witnesses  are  gentlemen  of  high  standing,  and
of  scientific  attainments,  whose  words  are  the  currency  of  truth.
The  relation  is  extracted  from  a  long  and  interesting  article  in
the  "  Salem  Gazette."

**  Dr.  b**##*#*?  0f  Providence,  operated  upon  a  young  lady,
19*


222  APPENDIX.

who,  during  the  period  of  magnetic  sleep,  frequently  left  the
body,  and  could  see  and  hear  without  the  aid  of  eyes  or  ears.
She  could  tell  correctly  the  time  by  a  watch,  though  enveloped
in  a  cloth,  and  at  the  same  time  having  a  bandage  over  her  eyes.
The  doctor  had  a  patient,  sick,  as  was  believed,  of  the  liver  com-
plaint, and  bade  the  girl,  who  was  sitting  near  him,  go  (in  spirit)
to  the  man's  house.  Arrived,  she,  at  the  doctor's  request,  de-
tered. '  What  do  you  see  ? '  asked  Dr.  B.  '  A  man  sick.'  '  Now
I  want  you  to  tell  me  what  ails  him.  First  look  at  his  head ;
is  that  well?'  'Yes.'  'How  do  you  know?  Do  you  mean  to
say  that  you  see  the  internal  organization  ?  '  '  Yes.'  '  Is  the
liver,  heart,  &c,  well  ?  '  '  Yes ;  it  looks  just  the  same  as  yours,
or  anybody's  else.'  '  Well,  do  you  see  any  thing  wrong?'  « Yes,
there  is  an  enlargement  of  the  spleen.'  Several  questions  were
then  put  to  confuse  her,  and  also  to  ascertain  if  she  knew  what
the  spleen  was,  and  where  situated  ;  to  all  which  she  gave  satis-
factory replies.  Still  the  doctor  was  incredulous.  But  now
comes  the  proof.  In  four  days,  the  man  died ;  and  Dr.  B.,  having
obtained  permission  to  institute  a, post  mortem  examination,  called
on  every  physician  in  the  city,  and  narrated  the  story  of  the  girl.
In  presence  of  several  of  them,  the  body  was  subsequently  open-
ed, when,  to  their  surprise,  the  girl  was  right  —  all  that  ailed  the
man  was  an  enlargement  of  the  spleen.

"  What  shall  we  say  to  this  fact  ?  It  is  substantiated  beyond
the  possibility  of  a  doubt,  as  may  be  learned  by  any  one  passing
through  Providence.  Shall  we  set  it  down  among  the  list  of
curious  coincidences,  or  admit  that  the  girl  actually  possessed  a
supernatural  sense  of  vision,  and  that,  for  the  time  being,  her  im-
mortal spirit,  released  from  the  body,  roved  freely  and  at  the  wili
of  the  operator !

"  As  in  the  state  of  vision,  the  fact  is  no  more  strange  than  in
the  well-attested  case  of  the  famed  Springfield  somnambulist
Now,  if  we  admit  that  the  soul,  in  this  case,  saw  without  the  aid
of  the  eyes,  why  not  admit  that,  in  certain  states  of  the  nervous
system,  other  senses  or  faculties  of  the  mind  may  also  act  inde-
pendently of  their  material  organs  ?  We  know  the  soul  thus
exists  after  death,  and  why  not  in  the  state  of  temporary  death
caused  by  animal  magnetism  ?  What  know  we  of  the  nature  of
that  deathless  spark  within  us  ?  And  if  we  allow  that  it  may,
without  the  body,  enter  the  next  room,  we  cannot  deny  the  pos-
sibility that  it  may  in  the  same  manner  annihilate  time  and  space,
and  travel  hundreds  of  miles  as  easily  and  quickly  as  it  can  so
many  feet

"  But  some  say, '  We  cannot  believe  that  God  has  given  such  a
dangerous  power  to  the  human  will.  It  is  out  of  the  common
order  of  nature  ;  it  is  a  miracle ;  we  cannot  believe  it'  But
who  can  set  bounds  to  the  dominion  of  the  human  will  ? Man


APPENDIX.  223

—  before  the  steady  gaze  of  whose  eye  the  forest-king  trembles
and  flees ;  whose  power  extends  to  the  huge  dwellers  in  ocean's
unfathomed  infinite :  man  —  at  whose  nod  the  giant  oak,  which
for  centuries  has  braved  heaven's  thunderbolts,  falls  prostrate,
and  rises  again  in  beauty  to  adorn  his  mansion;  who  lays  his
will  upon  the  everlasting  rock,  and  it  becomes  as  wax ;  whose
highway  is  earth,  and  air,  and  ocean ;  whose  servant  is  the  light-
ning; wrhose  intellect  spans  earth  and  encircles  heaven ;  thinking,
reasoning,  godlike  man  —  who  can  set  bounds  to  the  untried
power  of  his  mysterious  will  ?  Who  shall  say  to  it,  '  Thus  far
shalt  thou  come,  and  no  farther  '  ?

"  Now,  though,  in  the  above-mentioned  cases,  our  will  operates
through  more  tangible  means,  the  facts,  were  they  not  so  com-
mon, are  as  wonderful  as  the  alleged  fact  that  this  same  mighty
agent,  operating  through  the  nervous  system,  produces  all  the
wonders  of  animal  magnetism.  If  actual  experiment  demon-
strates the  fact,  fools  may  laugh,  but  wise  men  believe  ;  and,  be-
lieving, bow  down  and  adore  with  deeper  reverence  that  Great
Being  from  whose  almighty  will  these  millions  of  human  wills
emanated."

On  reading  this  communication,  which  nearly  accorded  with
what  I  had  heard  stated,  I  conversed  with  Dr.  B.,  who  is  one
of  our  oldest  physicians,  and  asked  him  whether  trie  statement
there  made  was  correct.  He  replied  that  it  was,  in  substance ;
but  some  of  the  particulars  were  imperfectly  stated.  He  gave
me  the  following  account :  —

"  The  patient  lived  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  my  resi-
dence. I  requested  a  somnambulist,  then  at  my  house,  to  see  if
she  could  find  such  a  man,  at  the  same  time  pointing  out  to  her
the  situation  of  the  house,  which  was  not  in  sight  from  the  room
where  we  continued  all  the  time.  She  saw  him.  On  being  asked
in  what  room,  she  replied,  in  the  third  room  back  from  the  street.
in  it,  in  order  to  discover  whether  she  had  got  into  the  right
place,  and  whether  her  clairvoyance  might  be  trusted  to  at  that

"  I  then  told  her  my  patient  had  been  sick  a  long  time,  and  de-
sired her  to  examine  him,  and  tell  what  the  disease  was.

"  She  said,  'He  looks  so  bad  I  do  not  like  to  do  it'  I  replied,
'Never  mind  that;  it  looks  bad  to  you,  because  you  have  not
been  accustomed  to  looking  at  the  interior  of  a  body.'

"  As  I  supposed  him  to  be  affected  with  a  diseased  liver,  and
with  indigestion  arising  from  a  diseased  state  of  the  stomach,  I
asked  her  to  look  at  the  stomach,  to  see  if  that  was  diseased;  she
answered,  '  No.'

" « Is  the  liver  diseased  ? ' '  No.'


224  APPENDIX.

" *  Well,  examine  the  whole  intestinal  canal,  and  see  if  there  is
any  disease  there.'

" '  I  do  not  see  any,'  said  she.

" «  Examine  the  kidneys.' '  Nothing  is  the  matter  with  them.'

"  Not  knowing  what  other  part  to  call  her  attention  to,  I  re-
quested her  to  look  at  every  part  of  him.

"  After  some  little  time,  she  says, '  His  spleen  is  swelled ;  it  is
enlarged.'

"  '  His  spleen ! '  said  I ;  '  when  we  speak  of  a  person  who  is
spleeny,  we  suppose  he  has  an  imaginary  complaint  What  do
you  mean  ? '

"  Said  she,  '  The  part  called  the  spleen  is  enlarged.'

"  *  How  do  you  know  it  is  enlarged  ? '  t

" '  It  is  a  great  deal  larger  than  yours.'

"  '  Do  you  see  mine  ? ' '  Yes.'

u  '  How  large  is  his  spleen  ? '

" '  It  is  a  great  deal  longer  and  thicker  than  your  hand.'

"  I  then  asked  her  to  put  her  hand  where  the  spleen  is  situated.
She  immediately  placed  her  hand  over  the  region  of  the  spleen.

"  I  then  asked  her  what  the  shape  of  the  stomach  was.  She
replied,  that  it  was  like  a  flower  in  the  garden.  I  was  not  ac-
quainted with  that  flower,  and  do  not  recollect  the  name  she
gave  it

"  I  then  requested  her  to  recollect  all  about  this,  saying  I
wished  to  talk  with  her  about  it  when  she  awoke.

"  After  she  came  out  of  the  somnambulic  state,  she  was  asked
whether  she  remembered  having  examined  the  sick  person.  She
remembered  it.

"  '  What  part  did  you  tell  me  was  diseased  ? '  After  a  little
consideration,  she  replied,  'I  believe  I  told  you  the  spleen  is
enlarged.'

" '  How  came  you  to  call  it  the  spleen  ? '

"  '  I  do  not  know.'

"  'Did  you  ever  hear  any  description  of  the  internal  organs,  or
see  any  plates  of  them  ? ' '  No.'

"  '  Should  you  know  the  plate  representing  the  stomach,  if  you
were  to  see  it  ? '

" '  I  think  I  should,  if  it  looked  like  it.'

" '  I  will  go  into  the  library,  and  bring  out  some  plates,  to  see
whether  you  know  the  internal  organs.'

"  While  I  was  gone  into  the  library,  she  said  to  a  lady  present
4  Every  once  in  a  while  I  saw  fluids  pass  from  his  stomach  into
his  bowels.'

"  On  returning  with  the  volume  of  plates,  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  she  really  distinguished  the  different  organs,  I  showed
her  a  plate  somewhat  resembling  the  stomach,  and  asked  her  if
that  was  what  she  saw  for  the  stomach.  She  said,  « No.'  Turn-
ing to  several  plates  in  succession,  she  declared  that  neither  of
them  resembled  the  stomach.


APPENDIX.  225

«  Then  turning-  to  the  true  plate,  as  if  accidentally,  while  throw-
ing open  the  leaves,  intending  to  pass  it  by,  unless  she  noticed
it,  —  she  immediately  cried  out,  '  That's  it ;  that's  what  I  saw  for
the  stomach.'

"  I  then  conversed  with  her  in  relation  to  the  other  viscera ;  and
she  gave  a  very  correct  description  of  them,  as  she  had  done  in
her  sleep.  I  asked  her  if  she  had  conversed  upon  the  subject,
or  seen  any  plates  of  the  internal  organs.  She  declared  she
never  had.

"  Seven  days  after  this,  the  patient  was  taken  more  seriously
ill,  and  died  on  Saturday,  the  third  day  following.

"  On  Monday,  a.  post  mortem  examination  took  place  ;  previous
to  which  I  invited  all  the  physicians  whom  I  could  find  in
the  city.

"  Eighteen  persons  were  present,  of  whom  sixteen  were  physi-
cians.

"  I  then  stated  all  the  particulars  of  the  examination  by  the
somnambulic  patient,  and  requested  the  physicians  to  examine
the  body  to  see  if  they  could  discover  the  diseased  spleen  from
external  examination.  They,  with  one  voice,  declared  they
could  not.

"  I  then  opened  the  body,  and,  to  the  utter  astonishment  of  the
physicians  present,  found  the  spleen  so  enlarged  as  to  weigh  fifty-
seven  ounces. Its  usual  weight  is  from  four  to  six  ounces.

"  No  other  disease  was  perceptible,  except  a  general  inflam-
mation, which,  no  doubt,  came  on  about  three  days  before  his
death."*


NOTE  V.  — Page  165.

Among  the  somnambulists  that  I  have  seen,  there  has  been  a
peculiar  delicacy  exhibited  while  in  the  magnetic  state.  Though
the  magnetizer  undoubtedly  possesses  the  power  of  changing  the
appearance  of  things  to  their  perception,  —  such  as  turning  an
apple  into  a  walnut,  and  water  into  lemonade, — yet  he,  probably,
cannot  destroy  that  native  sense  of  propriety  which  seems  to  be
quickened  in  the  somnambulist

*  "Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn:

"  Sir  :  In  the  account  you  have  given,  from  conversation  with  me,
of  the  discovery  of  the  diseased  spleen,  you  have  stated  that  all  the  physi-
cians present  at  the  pose  mortem  examination,  declared  they  could  not
discover,  by  external  manipulation,  any  enlargement  of  that  organ.  Two
of  those  gentlemen  have  since  told  me  that  they,  individually,  did  not
make  such  examination.  I  therefore  beg  you  would  make  this  correction
in  your  second  edition.  A  general  invitation  was  given  to  examine  the
body.  If  there  were  any  who  did  not  do  it,  it  was  presumable  that  they
were  satisfied  with  the  examination  of  those  who  took  that  trouble. B,"


226  APPENDIX.

Foissac  says,  page  392,  that  "  when  M.  de  Puysegur  saw,  in
1784,  the  control  which  he  exercised  over  somnambulists,  he  was
affrighted  at  the  thought  that  others  might  turn  aside  this  power
from  its  holy  intention.  But  all  his  patients  declared  to  him  that
they  preserved  in  that  state  their  judgement  and  their  reason  ;  that
they  perceived  very  quickly  the  designs  of  the  magnetizer,  and
that  these  could  readily  cause  them  to  awake.  The  authors  1
have  cited  in  the  preceding  paragraph  are  of  the  same  opinion.
My  somnambulists  have  told  me  exactly  the  same  things.  If,
then,  some  instances  of  a  contrary  nature  are  thrown  out  against
us,  I  will  say  that  magnetism  has  been  the  pretext,  and  not  the
cause,  of  these  disorders ;  because  it  does  not  take  from  all  those
who  practise  it,  the  vicious  propensities  of  their  hearts,  and  all
the  abuses  of  which  complaint  is  made,  would  have  existed  as
much  without  it  as  with  it."


i +**'  NOTE  VI.  — Page  71.

The  gentlemen  who  have  practised  magnetism  in  this  country
have  arrived  to  the  observation  of  the  same  general  rules  which
govern  the  more  experienced  practitioners  of  Europe.  This  is
the  more  remarkable,  since  they  have  been  obliged  to  depend
upon  the  experience  which  they  gained  from  their  own  practice,
through  a  want  of  proper  means  of  information.  This  fact,  about
the  consequences  of  making  short  passes  before  the  head,  which
M.  Deleuze  calls  charging  it  too  much,  was  observed  to  me  by
one  of  them  who  had  never  read  on  the  subject.


NOTE  VII.  — Page  48—90.

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  if  some  rough  attempts  made
to  rouse  a  somnambulist,  by  persons  who  doubted  the  reality  of
the  sleep,  have  effected  the  object  and  thrown  a  temporary  sus-
picion upon  Mesmerism  itself,  as  though  it  professed  to  do  what
it  could  not  perform.  One  instance  of  this  kind  has  sometimes
produced  strong  skepticism  in  the  minds  of  many  persons.  Hence
it  is  proper  to  know  that  there  is  always  a  liability,  though  a
very  slender  probability,  of  having  a  patient  waked  by  such
means.  Unfortunately,  the  curious  phenomena  must  be  exhibited,
before  magnetism  can  gain  converts  to  faith  in  its  curative  and
restorative  virtues ;  and  few  are  satisfied  with  hearing  about  the
power  possessed  by  somnambulists,  of  visiting  in  spirit  the  houses
of  their  neighbors  and  friends  ;  each  one  claims  the  privilege  of
sending  one  into  his  own  house,  and  hearing  his  own  furniture


APPENDIX.  227

have  obtained  it,  they  depart  in  wonder  and  astonishment,  like
the  woman  of  Samaria  from  the  well  of  Sychar,  and  relate  what
they  have  seen,  to  excite  the  wonder  and  astonishment  of  others.
Hence  they  who  merely  hear  of  these  phenomena,  form  an  esti-
mate of  the  subject  not  from  its  real  utility,  but  from  its  curious
nature.  And  there  is  some  danger  of  having  its  curative  and
restorative  powers  overlooked  in  the  rage  of  curiosity.  When
this  rage  shall  have  subsided,  the  magnetizers  will  have  leisure
to  pursue  their  avocation  without  interruption.  Jlnd  the  maxims
of  the  benevolent  Deleuze,  who  forbids  such  experiments,  will  com-
mand the  respect  and  the  attention  which  they  deserve.


NOTE  VIII.  — Page  90.
PARALYSIS.

The  translator  has  himself  witnessed  the  exertion  of  this  par-
alyzing power,  both  upon  patients  who  were  in  the  magnetic
sleep,  and  upon  others  while  they  were  not.  He  has  not,  however,
seen  a  person  paralyze  the  limbs  of  another  who  had  never  been
put  into  the  magnetic  sleep  by  him.  It  seems  to  be  a  necessary
condition  that  a  perfect  communication  shall  have  been  established
at  some  previous  time.  The  power  which  is  gained  by  the  prac-
tice of  magnetism  is,  however,  so  great,  that  it  may  be  found  to
be  effectual  in  a  trial  of  this  kind,  without  this  condition.

When  the  patient  is  in  the  state  of  magnetic  sleep,  this  paral-
ysis of  the  limbs,  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  of  the  tongue,  and
of  the  eyelids,  has  been  produced  in  the  presence  of  many  per-
sons, who  tried  all  means  to  detect  imposture  or  mistake.  The
magnetizer  would  act,  by  the  will  merely,  upon  the  part  indicated
on  a  slip  of  paper  thrust  into  his  hands,  he  continuing  at  the  dis-
tance of  eight  or  ten  feet  from  the  person  whose  limbs  were  to
be  paralyzed,  and  not  uttering  a  single  audible  word.  Nor  was
this  effect  produced  by  strangers  whom  we  do  not  know.  On
the  contrary,  they  are  our  own  citizens,  in  whom  we  have  perfect
confidence  as  to  their  integrity  of  purpose ;  and  who  have  never
been  known  to  be  devoted  to  tricks  of  legerdemain  and  diablerie.

"  Providence,  August  25,  1837.

"Sir:  In  the  'Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism,'
which  I  am  now  publishing  in  English,  the  author  mentions  the
power  that  some  magnetizers  have  of  paralyzing  the  limbs  of  a
patient  in  the  magnetic  state.  But  the  instance  which  you  re-
cently related  to  me  is  so  much  more  extraordinary,  that  I  wish


228


APPENDIX.


to  obtain  from  you,  in  writing,  a  statement  of  the  facts  in  relation
to  it,  with  permission  to  make  use  of  it  in  a  note.  I  shall  esteem
it  a  valuable  addition  to  the  authentic  matter  to  be  embraced  in
the  appendix  of  each  number  of  that  work.

"  Yours,  respectfully,

«T.  C.  HARTSHORN.
«  Dr.  Thomas  H.  Webb."

"Providence,  Sept.  1,  1837.

"  Dear  Sir  :  My  time  has  been  so  much  occupied,  of  late,  as
to  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  me,  until  the  present  moment,
to  reply  to  your  note  of  the  25th  ult;  and  even  now  I  am  so  cir-
cumstanced as  to  be  unable  to  do  more  than  write  a  very  brief
reply.

"  In  conversation  with  Mr.  Daniel  Greene,  of  Pawtucket,  who,
as  you  probably  well  know,  is  the  most  powerful,  as  he  has  been
the  most  extensive,  magnetizer  in  this  country,  I  inquired  if  he
were  able  to  magnetize,  and  thereby  obtain  control  over,  a  single
limb,  ivhttst  the  rest  of  the  body  remained  in  a  natural  state.  He
said  that  he  had  done  it,  in  the  case  of  Miss  J.,  with  whom  you
are  acquainted,  and  would  attempt  it  on  another  patient  that  we
were  going  to  see  that  afternoon,  if  reminded  of  it.

"  The  individual  alluded  to  had  never  been  magnetized  but  three
times,  and  did  not  present  a  very  striking  exemplification  of  the
usual  magnetic  phenomena.  After  trying  various  experiments,
that  consumed  several  hours,  we  left  the  house,  having  forgotten
the  subject  matter  of  my  interrogatory.  But,  upon  recollecting
it,  we  returned,  and  the  patient  reseated  herself  upon  being  re-
quested so  to  do,  without  any  reason  being  given  her  for  making
the  request.

"  Mr.  Greene  then  went  through  the  usual  manipulations  some
dozen  or  twenty  times,  confining  them  to  the  space  reaching  from
the  top  of  the  left  shoulder  to  the  extremities  of  the  fingers  on
the  same  side.  He  afterwards  requested  her  to  raise  the  left
hand  to  the  head.  She  said  she  could  not.  There  was  evident-
ly a  powerful  effort  made  to  do  this,  as  was  shown  by  the
working  of  the  muscles  inserted  into  the  upper  portion  of  the
shoulder ;  but  the  limb  remained  powerless  and  motionless,  not
obeying  the  dictates  of  the  owner's  will.  She  was  asked  to  raise
her  right  arm  to  the  head,  which  was  done  promptly,  and  with
perfect  ease  and  freedom.  Again  she  was  directed  to  stretch  out
the  left  hand,  but  unavailingly.  It  was  completely  paralyzed  —
devoid  of  motion  and  sensation.  I  gave  it  a  severe  pinch,  nip-
ping with  the  thumb  and  finger,  as  hard  as  I  deemed  it  prudent
to,  leaving  deep  impressions  with  my  nails.  Upon  inquiring  if
it  did  not  hurt  her,  she,  with  an  incredulous  smile,  observed  that
I  had  not  done  any  thing  to  her. I  then,  without  saying  any


APPENDIX.  229

thing,  pinched,  in  the  same  manner,  though  less  severely,  the
other  hand,  when  she  drew  back  from  me  with  a  sudden  start,
and  complained  that  I  hurt  her.  The  arm,  to  one  lifting  it,  was
a  perfect  dead  weight.  I  poised  it  on  my  lingers,  and  Mr.  G.
restored  it ;  and  there  was  a  very  marked  difference  in  it
and  about  it,  as  it  passed  from  the  magnetic  to  the  natural
state.

"  To  a  person  not  acquainted  with  the  magnetizer,  magnetizee,
and  the  gentlemen  present,*  there  will  of  course  appear  nothing
conclusive  upon  the  subject  of  magnetism,  in  what  is  here  de-
tailed ;  but  to  those  of  us  who  had  previously  examined  other
patients,  and  satisfied  ourselves  of  the  existence  of  a  power  by
means  of  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  one  individual  may  obtain
mental  mastery  over  another,  the  experiment  was  satisfactory.

"  (Should  a  suitable  opportunity  hereafter  present,  I  may  furnish
you  with  a  statement  of  some  singular  cases  which  I  have  wit-
nessed. In  the  mean  time,  I  remain,

«  Yours,  &c. THOMAS  H.  WEBB.

"  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."

Among  the  persons  who  have  possessed  this  extraordinary
power,  Gassner  deserves  especial  mention.  A  brief  notice  of  him
may  be  found  in  the  volume  of  Doctor  Foissac,  page  446.  I
will  translate  a  portion  of  it

"  John  Joseph  Gassner,  born  at  Braz,  in  the  circle  of  Suabia,
1727,  having  been  delivered  by  exorcism  from  a  long-continued
disease,  which  had  resisted  all  the  resources  of  the  medical  art,
persuaded  himself  that  the  greater  part  of  human  infirmities
might  be  attributed  to  no  other  cause  than  demoniacal  posses-
sion, and  that  they  should  be  treated  with  exorcism.  He  began
by  curing  the  sick  persons  of  his  own  parish ;  but  very  soon
Switzerland,  Tyrol,  and  Suabia,  sent  him  theirs,  and  he  cured
four  or  five  hundred  a  year.  After  having  gone  over  different
provinces,  he  established  himself  at  Ratisbon,  under  the  protec-
tion of  the  lord  bishop,  (prince- eveque.)  The  number  of  persons
resorting  to  him  was  so  considerable,  that  he  often  had  ten  thou-
sand of  them  encamped  in  the  neighborhood  of  Ratisbon.  Gass-
ner regarded  faith  as  an  essential  condition  to  be  cured.  It  was
rare  to  have  the  patients  delivered  from  their  afflictions  at  the
first  exorcism.  He  consecrated  to  them  several  hours,  and  often
many  days.  When  he  wished  to  act  upon  a  patient,  he  made
him  place  himself  on  his  knees  before  him;  he  almost  always
touched  the  affected  part  Sometimes  he  rubbed  his  hands
upon  his  waist  or  upon  his  neck,  but  it  was  not  always  the  case.

*  Mr.  Benjamin  Hathaway,  of  Providence,  and  Mr.  Abner  Jones,  of
JNew  York,  were  present.

20


230  APPENDIX.

"  Gassner  had  the  power,  by  his  will,  to  make  the  pulse
of  his  patients  vary ;  he  made  it  small,  great,  strong,  feeble,
slow,  quick,  irregular,  intermittent ;  and,  finally,  just  as  the  phy-
sicians who  were  present  requested  of  him.  He  paralyzed  their
limbs ;  caused  them  to  weep,  to  laugh ;  and  soothed  or  agitated
them  simply  by  expressing  his  order  in  Latin,  or  rather,
mentally.

"He  thus  operated  the  most  extraordinary  cures.  They  found
a  small  number  of  persons  to  contradict  the  facts.  But,  strange
to  tell,  the  celebrated  De  Haen,*  one  of  the  first  physicians  of
his  age,  not  conceiving  how  Gassner  had  been  able  to  perform
such  cures,  concluded  that  his  power  was  derived  from  the  devil.
He,  however,  first  argued  the  question  whether  they  could  have
been  done  by  sympathy,  or  by  magnetism ;  but  he  declared  he  did
not  know  any  one  sufficiently  well  versed  in  occult  philosophy  to
perform  such  wonderful  things.

"About  this  time,  Mesmer  published  his  first  observations.
On  his  journey  to  Munich,  being  consulted  by  the  elector  of
Bavaria,  in  relation  to  the  cures  of  the  curate  of  Ratisbon,  he
recognised  in  his  exorcisms  the  presence  of  the  virtues  of  ani-
mal magnetism,  the  nature  and  the  properties  of  which  it  was
reserved  for  him  to  make  known."

Mesmer  himself  was  endowed  with  the  same  degree  of
power,  which,  whether  exerted  in  the  form  of  exorcism  or  of
manipulation,  would  have  exhibited  effects  equally  remarkable.
From  the  notes  reported  by  Thouret,  in  his  "  Recherches  et  Doutes"
I  shall  translate  a  few  instances.

"Mesmer,  being  one  day  with  Messrs.  Camp***  and  d'E***
near  the  great  basin  of  Meudon,  proposed  that  they  should  pass
alternately  round  to  the  other  side  of  the  basin,  while  he  re-
mained in  his  place.  He  made  them  plunge  a  cane  into  the
water,  and  plunged  his  own  into  it.  At  this  distance,  M.  Camp***
experienced  an  attack  of  the  asthma,  and  M.  d'E***  a  pain  in  the
side,  to  which  he  was  subject  Some  persons  have  been  seen
who  were  not  able  to  sustain  the  experiment  without  fainting.

"  One  day,  Mesmer  was  walking  in  the  woods  of  the  country
beyond  Orleans.  Two  girls,  taking  advantage  of  the  freedom  of
the  country,  went  ahead  of  the  company  to  chase  him.  He  be-
gan to  run  ;  but,  suddenly  turning  round,  he  presented  his  cane
towards  them,  forbidding  them  to  come  farther.  Immediately
their  knees  bent  under  them,  and  they  could  not  advance.

"  One  evening,  Mesmer  went  into  the  garden  of  M.  le  Prince  de
Soubise,  with  six  persons.  He  prepared  a  tree,  and,  a  short  time
after,  Mme.  la  M.  de  ***  and  Mesdemoiselles  de  Pr***  and  P***
fell  senseless. Mme.  la  D***  de  T***  held  on  to  the  tree  with-

*  De  Hagn,  under  whom  Mesmer  studied.


APPENDIX.  231

out  power  to  leave  it  M.  le  C**#  de  Mons*  was  obliged  to  sit
down  on  a  bank,  not  being-  able  to  sustain  himself  on  his  limbs.
I  do  not  recollect  what  effect  M.  Ang****,  a  very  strong  man,
experienced,  but  it  was  terrible.  Mesmer  then  called  his  servant
to  take  away  the  bodies  ;  but,  I  do  not  know  how  it  was,  although
well  accustomed  to  this  sort  of  scene,  even  he  found  himself  in
no  condition  to  act.  It  was  necessary  to  wait  a  long  time  for
each  one  to  come  to  himself."


NOTE  IX.  — Page  89.

In  the  report  of  the  committee  appointed  by  the  Royal  Acad-
emy of  Medicine  at  Paris,  and  read  to  that  learned  body  in
1831,  may  be  found  the  following  statement :  —

"  You  have  all  heard  of  a  fact  which  at  the  time  fixed  the
attention  of  the  Chirurgical  Section,*  and  which  was  commu-
nicated to  it  at  the  session  of  April  16,  1829,  by  M.  Jules  Clo-
quet. The  committee  thought  it  their  duty  to  imbody  it  in  this
report,  as  one  of  the  least  equivocal  proofs  of  the  power  of  the
magnetic  sleep.  It  relates  to  Madame  Plantin,  aged  G4  years,
living  at  151  Rue  Saint-Denis,  who  consulted  M.  Cloquet,  on
the  8th  of  April,  1829,  about  an  ulcerated  cancer  on  her  right
breast,  which  she  had  had  many  years,  and  which  was  compli-
cated with  a  considerable  enlargement  of  the  axillary  ganglions.
M.  Chapel ain,  the  physician  of  this  woman,  whom  he  had  mag-
netized for  some  months,  with  the  intention,  as  he  said,  of  re-
ducing the  enlargement  of  the  breast,  had  been  able  to  obtain  no
other  result  than  a  very  profound  sleep,  during  which  her  sensi-
bility appeared  to  be  annihilated,  but  the  ideas  preserved  all  their
lucidity.  He  proposed  to  M.  Cloquet  that  he  should  operate
upon  it  while  she  was  plunged  into  the  magnetic  sleep.  M.
Cloquet,  considering  the  operation  to  be  indispensable,  consented
to  do  it ;  and  it  was  agreed  that  it  should  take  place  on  the
following  Sunday,  April  12.  The  two  evenings  previous,  this
woman  was  magnetized  several  times  by  M.  Chapelain,  who  dis-
posed her,  when  in  somnambulism,  to  support  the  operation  with-
out fear,  and  even  led  her  to  speak  of  it  with  composure,  while,
as  soon  as  she  waked,  she  repelled  the  idea  with  horror.

"  On  the  day  appointed  for  the  operation,  M.  Cloquet,  on  his
arrival  at  half  past  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  found  the  patient
dressed,  and  seated  in  an  arm-chair,  in  the  position  of  a  person
peacefully  wrapped  in  a  natural  sleep. It  was  nearly  an  hour

*  The  Academy  was,  in  1820,  divided  into  three  sections  —  Medicine,
Surgery,  and  Pharmacy.  —  Trans.


232  APPENDIX.

since  she  had  returned  from  mass,  which  she  always  attended  at
the  same  hour.  M.  Chapelain  had  put  her  into  the  magnetic
sleep  since  she  came  back.  The  p  itient  spoke  with  great
calmness  of  the  operation  she  was  about  to  undergo.  Every  ar-
rangement having  been  made  for  the  operation,  she  undressed
herself,  and  sat  down  upon  a  chair.

"  M.  Chapelain  held  the  right  arm,  the  left  arm  being  suffered
to  hang  by  her  side.  M.  Pailloux,  a  student  at  the  Saint-Louis
Hospital,  was  charged  to  hand  the  instruments  and  to  make  the
ligatures.  First  an  incision  was  made  from  the  armpit,  above  the
tumor,  to  the  inner  side  of  the  breast.  The  second,  commencing
at  the  same  point,  separated  the  tumor  below,  and  passed  round
to  meet  the  first.  M.  Cloquet  dissected  the  enlarged  ganglions
with  caution,  on  account  of  their  proximity  to  the  axillary
artery,  and  took  off  the  tumor.  The  time  consumed  in  the  oper-
ation was  ten  or  twelve  minutes.

"During  all  this  time,  the  patient  continued  to  converse  tran-
quilly with  the  operator,  and  did  not  exhibit  the  slightest  sign  of
sensibility ;  no  movement  of  the  limbs  or  of  the  features,  no
change  in  the  perspiration,  nor  in  the  voice,  no  emotion,  not  even
in  the  pulse,  were  manifested  ;  the  patient  did  not  cea^e  to  be  in
the  state  of  self-forgetfulness  and  passive  insensibility,  in  which
she  was  several  minutes  before  the  operation.  They  were  not
obliged  to  hold  her ;  they  merely  sustained  her.  A  ligature  was
applied  to  the  lateral  thoracic  artery,  which  was  exposed  during
the  extraction  of  the  ganglions.  The  wound  was  closed  with
sticking  plaster,  and  dressed ;  the  patient  was  put  on  the  bed,
still  in  the  state  of  somnambulism,  and  left  there  forty-eight
hours.  An  hour  after  the  operation,  a  slight  hemorrhage  ensued,
which  did  not  continue.  The  first  dressing  was  removed  on  the
succeeding  Tuesday,  April  14.  The  wound  was  cleansed  and
dressed  anew ;  the  patient  manifested  no  sensibility  nor  pain.
The  pulse  preserved  its  natural  beat.

"  After  the  dressing  had  been  put  on,  M.  Chapelain  awoke  the
patient,  whose  somnambulic  sleep  had  lasted  ever  since  one  hour
before  the  operation,  that  is  to  say,  for  two  days.  This  woman
did  not  appear  to  have  any  idea  or  any  impression  of  what  had
passed  ;  but,  on  learning  that  she  had  been  operated  upon,  and
seeing  her  children  around  her,  she  experienced  a  very  lively
emotion,  which  the  magnetizer  terminated  by  putting  her  asleep
immediately."

The  following  names  were  appended  to  this  report:  —
Bourdois  de  la  Motte,  President ;  Fouquier,  Guenoau  de  Mus-
sy,  Guersent,  Itard.  *T.  J.  Leroux,  Marc,  Thillaye,  Husson*


APPENDIX.  233


NOTE  X.


"  Providence,  August.  31 1837.

«  Sir  :  In  compliance  with  your  request,  expressed  in  a  note,
dated  the  24th  inst.,  I  herewith  furnish  you  a  statement  of  the
case  of  somnambulism  which  I  have  under  my  charge,  to  append
as  a  note  to  the  work  you  have  in  progress.

"Numerous  professional  engagements  at  this  time  will  render
the  statement  necessarily  very  brief  and  general  in  its  character.
This  brevity,  however,  is  less  to  be  regretted,  as  you  are  able  to
obtain  statements  of  many  of  the  particulars  from  a  number  of  re-
spectable gentlemen,  who  have  witnessed  the  case,  and  who  could
command  more  time  to  devote  to  making  particular  experiments.

"Miss  L.  Brackett,  the  subject  of  this  case,  is  a  respectable
and  intelligent  young  lady  from  Dudley,  Mass.  Four  years
since,  when  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  she  had  the  misfortune
to  have  an  iron  weight,  weighing  two  or  three  pounds,  fall  from
a  height  upon  the  top  of  her  head.  The  injury  which  she  sus-
tained was  so  considerable  as  to  deprive  her  of  her  reason  for  a
number  of  months,  during  which  time  she  was  subject  to  the
most  violent  spasms,  and  other  serious  derangements  of  her  ner-
vous system.  From  the  immediate  effects  of  this  injury  she
gradually  recovered,  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  her  general  health
was  partially  restored.  Notwithstanding,  however,  the  improve-
ment in  her  general  health,  an  affection  of  her  eyes,  which  com-
menced immediately  after  the  reception  of  the  injury,  and  which
threatened  total  blindness,  was  daily  growing  worse.  The  disease
with  which  her  eyes  were  affected  is  called  amaurosis ;  it  is  an
affection  of  the  optic  nerves,  often  of  a  paralytic  character.  As  is
usual  in  cases  of  amaurosis,  the  loss  of  sight  was  very  gradual ;
and  it  was  not  till  the  end  of  two  and  a  half  years  that  it  was
entirely  destroyed.  Simultaneously  Avitli  the  loss  of  sight,  she
sustained  a  loss  of  voice,  which  was  so  complete,  that  for  fifteen
months  she  was  unable  to  utter  a  single  guttural  sound,  and
could  only  whisper  in  almost  inaudible  tones.

"This  was  her  state,  in  respect  to  her  eyes  and  vocal  organs,
when  I  first  saw  her,  about  the  middle  of  May  last ;  and  her  gen-
eral health,  though  somewhat  improved,  was  still  far  from  being
good.

"  Considering  her  case  as  a  hopeless  one,  arrangements  had
been  made  by  her  friends  to  send  her  to  the  Asylum  for  the
Blind  in  Boston,  in  hopes  of  her  being  able,  after  finishing  her
education,  to  obtain  a  livelihood  as  a  teacher  in  that  or  some  other
similar  institution.  When  on  her  way  to  Boston,  she  stopped,  for
the  purpose  of  making  a  visit  of  a  few  days,  with  some  friends
which  she  had  residing  in  this  city.  Being  in  attendance,  at  the
time,  in  the  family  of  one  of  her  friends,  I  was  requested  to  see  her
20*


234  APPENDIX.

and  examine  her  case,  rather  as  a  matter  of  curiosity,  than  from  &
ble malady.  In  the  course  of  conversation  with  her,  I  found
that  all  the  usual  means  in  such  cases  had  been  perseveringly
employed  by  the  most  skilful  physicians,  without  material  benefit.

"There  being-,  at  this  time,  a  considerable  excitement  upon
the  subject  of  animal  magnetism,  and  being  myself  engaged  in
investigating  it  with  a  view  to  its  remedial  effects,  and  having
become  fully  convinced  of  its  salutary  influence  upon  some  dis-
eases, especially  those  of  a  paralytic  character,  —  it  occurred  to
me  that  it  might  be  beneficially  practised  in  this  case,  upon  the
supposition  that  her  complaints  were  dependent  upon  a  paralysis
of  the  nerves  supplying  the  affected  organs ;  and  I  accordingly,
as  a  dernier  resort,  proposed  a  trial  of  it.  The  following  day,
having  consulted  her  friends  and  obtained  their  consent,  she
desired  me  to  make  an  experiment.  The  first  sitting  occupied
about  forty  minutes,  before  she  was  thrown  into  a  profound  mag-
netic sleep.  On  this  occasion,  she  manifested  many  of  the  usual
phenomena  of  that  state.  She  walked  about  the  house,  drank  her
tea,  &c,  with  as  much  ease  and  confidence  as  she  could  have
done,  had  she  been  in  the  full  possession  of  her  sight,  and  in  a
waking  state.

"From  the  time  of  the  first  experiment  to  the  present  date,
being  three  and  a  half  months,  she  has  been  magnetized  daily,
sometimes  twice  daily,  with  the  exception  of  thirteen  days  at  one
time,  and  three  or  four  at  another.  The  number  of  times  she  has
been  magnetized,  therefore,  considerably  exceeds  one  hundred.

"  The  magnetic  phenomena,  though  very  astonishing  at  first,
became  more  and  more  so  from  day  to  day.  Whether  it  were  in
consequence  of  the  magnetic  state  becoming  more  and  more  per-
fect the  more  she  was  magnetized,  or  whether,  by  becoming  bet-
ter acquainted  with  the  subject,  we  learn  to  elicit  those  phenomena
with  the  better  success,  it  is  difficult  to  determine ;  but  it  is
probable  that  it  is  owing  to  a  combination  of  both  these  causes.

"The  somnambulic,  or  perhaps  more  properly  the  magnetic
phenomena,  have  been  of  several  different  kinds,  and  each  kind
manifested  in  several  different  ways.  The  first  and  most  obvious
of  these  phenomena  is  what  the  French  term  clairvoyance  —  clear-
sightedness, mental  vision,  or  vision  without  the  use  of  the  visual
organs.  This  wonderful  power  is  manifested,  first,  in  her  being-
able  to  see  any  object  that  is  presented  to  her,  when  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  though  totally  blind  when  awake.  Experiments  have
been  varied  and  multiplied  almost  indefinitely,  to  prove  the  ex-
istence of  this  power,  and  with  entire  success,  as  you  have  had
frequent  opportunities  to  witness.  Objects,  when  examined  by
her,  are  never  held  in  a  direction  to  be  seen  with  the  eyes,  but
are  laid  down  upon  the  top  of  the  back  part  of  the  head,  from
which  point  she  has  generally  seen,  though  the  seat  of  vision


APPENDIX.  235

has  varied  at  different  times.  She  has  been  able,  though  with
more  exertion,  to  see  objects  that  were  enclosed  in  boxes,  trunks,
and  watch-cases ;  to  read  letters  that  were  folded,  &c.

"  Secondly,  this  power  is  manifested  in  the  ability  to  see  ob-
jects not  present  —  in  a  distant  city,  for  instance.  In  the  exercise
of  this  power,  another  seems  to  be  necessary  —  that  of  locomo-
tion, as  it  has  been  called,  or  of  transporting  herself  from  one
place  to  another. This  she  says  she  does  through  the  air.

"  Another  description  of  phenomena,  which  may  be  called
those  of  intelligence,  is  manifested  in  the  somnambulist's  under-
standing the  will  of  the  mignetizer,  or  of  the  person  with  whom
she  may  he  in  communication.  To  test  this  power,  I  have  made
a  great  number  of  experiments,  which  have  been  almost  uniformly
successful.  She  can,  for  instance,  be  willed  to  have  in  her  hand
various  kinds  of  fruits,  cakes,  wines,  animals,  birds,  &c. ;  or  any
other  things  may  be  changed  from  one  to  another  at  the  will  of
the  magnetizer.

"There  is  a  class  of  phenomena  which  seem  to  partake  more
of  a  physical  character  than  those  above  mentioned,  as  wit-
nessed in  the  attraction  which  takes  place  between  the  hand  of
the  magnetizer  and  the  magnetized,  and  also  as  witnessed  in  the
attraction  and  repulsion  in  the  application  of  the  artificial  mag-
net. I  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  to  mean  that  this  phenom-
enon certainly  partakes  of  a  physical  character,  though  the  sudden,
powerful,  and  apparently  involuntary  action  of  the  muscles  seems
to  favor  this  opinion.  On  the  contrary,  it  must  be  admitted  that
the  patient,  in  this  case,  not  only  understands  the  will  of  the
magnetizer,  but  observes  all  his  actions  ;  and  therefore  these  mo-
tions may  be  voluntary  and  in  obedience  to  his  will.  Or,  in  using
the  magnet,  a  powerful  influence  may  be  produced  upon  the
imagination,  and  those  effects  may  be  occasioned  by  the  imagi-
nation acting  upon  an  excitable  nervous  system.

"  The  want  of  time  and  opportunity  on  my  own  part,  and  the
desire  to  have  as  many  distinguished  and  scientific  persons  see
and  investigate  this  case  in  their  own  way,  as  has  been  consistent
with  her  convenience,  have  prevented  my  making  experiments
calculated  to  establish  this  point  conclusively;  neither  have  I,
for  the  same  reasons,  been  able  to  determine,  satisfactorily,
whether  all  the  senses  can  be  used  in  reference  to  things  not
present,  as  is  the  case  with  virion,  though  from  some  recent  ob-
servations, I  hive  myself  no  doubt  of  the  fact.

"  In  speaking  of  the  magnetic  phenomena,  I  mean  only  to  refer
to  those  which  have  been  manifested  in  this  particular  case.
Many  others,  differing  materially  from  these,  have  been  observed
in  other  cases,  of  which  it  is  neither  necessary  nor  proper  that  I
should  speak  at  this  time.  Should  I,  however,  ever  find  it  con-
venient to  communicate  to  the  public  a  more  detailed  and  better
digested  history  of  this  case,  —  which  is  my  present  intention, —


236  APPENDIX.

I  shall  attempt,  after  giving  the  result  of  my  investigations,  to
follow  out  the  classification  of  the  phenomena  which  I  have  here
merely  glanced  at.  By  pursuing  this  mode,  perhaps  we  may
arrive  at  some  rational  theory.  At  present,  however,  until  a
greater  number  of  facts  have  been  established,  and  more  clearly
arranged,  to  attempt  to  theorize  appears  to  me  to  be  entirely
futile.

"  In  conclusion,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  enabled  to  say
from  my  own  observations,  that,  however  interesting  animal  mag-
netism may  be  when  considered  in  relation  to  science,  however
interesting  as  matter  of  curiosity  and  wonder,  or  however  inter-
esting it  may  be  as  a  means  of  discovering  the  condition  of  our
absent  friends,  or  the  machinations  of  our  enemies,  it  is  still
more  interesting  as  the  means  of  mitigating  the  suffering  incident
to  human  nature.  It  will  be  recollected  I  have  stated  that,  when
Miss  Brackett  came  to  this  city,  about  the  middle  of  May  last,
her  general  health  was  far  from  being  good ;  she  was  totally
blind,  and  unable  to  speak  excepting  in  the  lowest  whisper.  Her
condition  is  materially  different  at  this  time.  Her  health  is  good;
her  vision  is  partially  restored ;  and  she  speaks  in  her  natural
tone  of  voice.

"  With  much  respect,

"  Yours,  &c.

"  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."  G-  CAPRON.


Providence,  August  30,  1837.

Mr.  Henry  Hopkins  states  that  Miss  Brackett  has  lived  in
his  family,  as  an  invited  guest,  four  or  five  weeks,  at  different
times.  He  is  satisfied  that  she  was  totally  blind  Avhen  she  first
came  to  live  with  him.  Her  voice,  when  he  first  became  ac-
quainted with  her,  was  so  low  and  weak  that  it  was  difficult  to
hear  her  speak.

Her  eyes  were  very  much  inflamed  and  painful ;  the  lids  were
scarcely  open ;  they  were  easily  affected  by  the  light,  so  as  to  be
painful.  She  has  since  improved  very  much  in  her  eyesight
Her  eyes  have  assumed  a  healthy  appearance;  they  are  not
troublesome.  She  can  even  lay  aside  the  green  shades,  which
she  used  to  wear,  without  experiencing  inconvenience,  except  in
a  very  bright  light.  She  is  now  able,  in  the  natural  state,  to  dis-
cern the  outlines  of  objects,  such  as  a  book,  or  a  fan,  for  instance.

There  is  also  a  very  great  improvement  in  her  appetite,  appear-
ance, and  general  health.  She  has  been  magnetized  almost  daily
by  Dr.  Capron ;  and  it  is  to  this  that  this  improvement  is  to  be
attributed.  Her  natural  cheerfulness  and  elasticity  of  spirits  have
improved  with  her  health.  In  the  magnetized  state,  she  enjoys  a
walk  as  much  as  any  one,  and  often  walks  in  the  garden  among
the  flowers. If  she  wishes  to  examine  any  flower  very  closely,  sht


APPENDIX.


237


holds  it  just  behind  her  head,  near  the  top,  ivithout  taking  off  her
bonnet ;  in  this  mariner  she  holds  whatever  things  she  examines.
To  look  at  any  picture  hanging-  up  in  a  room,  in  a  house  where
she  has  not  been  before,  she  steps  into  a  chair,  and  brings  the
top  of  her  head  towards  it.

Mr.  Hopkins  permits  me  to  publish  the  above  statement.

Mr.  Jesse  Metcalf  says  he  has  known  Miss  B.  about  two
months.  She  has  resided  in  his  family,  at  different  times,  about
four  weeks.  He  was  not  acquainted  with  her  when  she  first
came  to  Providence,  and  could  not  understand  her  very  well  at
first,  because  her  voice  was  very  feeble ;  she  did  not  speak,  ex-
cept in  low  whispers.  Her  health  was  quite  delicate,  and  her
appetite  poor.  Her  eyes  appeared  to  be  quite  inflamed ;  it  was
necessary  to  keep  the  blinds  of  the  room  almost  always  closed,
and  the  lamp  where  it  could  not  shine  so  as  to  pain  her  eyes.
While  at  his  house,  she  has  generally  been  magnetized  every
day.  She  would  sometimes  remain  in  the  magnetized  state  ten
or  twelve  hours,  during  which  she  would  walk  about  the  house  as
well  as  any  other  person  ;  but  when  she  was  in  her  ordinary  state,
she  would  have  to  grope  about,  and  feel  her  way.  In  the  mag-
netized state,  she  enjoys  vision,  looking  at  objects  with  great
pleasure,  especially  pictures,  portraits,  &c.  This  makes  her  de-
accurately.

Mr.  Metcalf  says  that  her  general  health  and  her  appetite  are
very  much  improved.  When  in  the  somnambulic  state,  she  walks
along  the  streets  with  perfect  ease,  and  hears  any  person  she  is
directed  to,  very  well.  She  has  been  to  meeting  three  times
with  his  family  in  that  state,  and  could  remember  some  parts  of
the  discourses,  having  heard  them  very  well.

When  Dr.  Capron  leaves  her  in  the  magnetic  state,  he  first
tells  her  to  answer  and  converse  with  all  his  family,  or  with  some
member  of  it  She  cannot  then  talk  with  any  but  these  persons;
nor  can  she  hear  any  thing  addressed  to  her  by  any  one  else.
She  cannot,  when  in  that  state,  hear  the  conversation  between
any  two  individuals.

She  can  only  see  their  lips  move,  and  wonders  they  do  not
talk.  She  cannot  even  hear  the  person  Avith  whom  she  converses,
when  he  talks  with  any  body  else.  She  hears  him  only  when  he
addresses  her.  Miss  B.  is  intelligent,  has  received  a  good  edu-
cation, and  is  cheerful  and  pleasant.  When  in  the  magnetized
state,  she  can  tell  imnie  liately  in  ivhat  part  of  the  house  every  mem-
ber of  the  family  is,  without  moving  or  turning  from  her  seat.  Mr.
M.  has  eleven  in  the  family,  including  Miss  B.,  Avho  is  now  stay-
ing with  him.

Miss  B.  says  the  walls  of  the  house,  as  do  all  other  walls,


233  APPENDIX.

appear  to  be  transparent.  She  can  see  through  them,  and  yet
on  them.  Miss  B.  is  of  pleasing  manners,  and  is  an  invited  guest
in  his  house,  where  she  has  interested  all  the  family.

Mr.  Metcalf  permits  me  to  publish  this  statement,  which  he
made  at  my  request.

Unless  she  is  magnetized,  she  cannot  enjoy  the  pleasure  of
reading,  and  this  is  one  cause  of  her  being  so  fond  of  remaining
magnetized.

While  she  was  residing  at  the  mansion  of  Stanford  Newel,
Esq.,  she  found  there  Hannah  More's  "  Private  Devotions,"  a  small
work  which  has  been  printed  since  she  became  blind.  This  she
took  with  her  when  she  retired  one  night;  and  in  the  morning,
before  she  was  restored  to  the  natural  state,  she  observed  that
she  had  been  reading  most  of  the  night.  There  was  no  light  in
the  room.  One  of  the  ladies  of  Mr.  Newel's  family  soon  discov-
ered that  by  giving  out  the  first  line  of  several  of  the  poems,  she
was  able  to  repeat  the  whole,  verbatim.  In  this  manner  she  had
learned  at  least  twenty  of  the  pieces.  I  have  seen  the  book.  It
is  the  fine-type  edition  of  Messrs.  Crocker  &  Brewster;  Boston,
1836.  This  exercise  doubtless  has  a  tendency  to  retard  the
progress  of  her  cure ;  but  the  natural  activity  of  her  mind  makes
it  difficult  for  her  to  sit  idle.


NOTE XI.

The  following  paper  was  drawn  uo  by  M.  B.  L#*'##*#*,  a  gen-
tleman at  the  head  of  one  of  our  noblest  literary  institutions,  from
notes  taken  at  the  time  of  experimenting.  One  thing  adds  much
to  its  value ;  and  that  is,  the  early  date  at  which  it  ivas  drawn  up.
This  serves  also  to  explain  why  circumstances  are  stated  so  mi-
nutely, which  are  now  so  well  known  to  be  attendant  on  most
experiments  of  the  kind.  There  is  no  danger  of  carrying  such
minuteness  too  far  in  this  subject,  since  those  whi  are  familiar
with  its  phenomena,  and  those  who  are  not,  are  equally  prone  to
form  hasty  conclusions,  without  sufficiently  considering  the  great
variety  of  phases  they  present,  and  the  intricacy  of  principles
they  may  involve.  To  make  theories  is  very  easy  ;  but  to  observe
facts  requires  patience  and  caution.  Hence  we  hear  men,  every
day,  in  regard  to  this  subject,  speak  dogmatically,  as  though  they
had  established  every  thing  they  utter  by  a  carpful  observation
of  the  facts  as  they  exist;  whereas  its  acknowledged  difficulties
ought  to  make  us  more  cautious,  and  more  willing  to  bestow  care
upon  it. This  paper  was  not  intended  for  publication.


APPENDIX.  239

';  Providence,  12th  month,  1836.

"  To  assist  the  memory  of  the  writer,  and  for  the  gratification
of  a  few  of  his  particular  friends,  the  following  brief  account  of
animal  magnetism,  as  witnessed  and  practised  by  himself,  has
been  penned.  It  contains  a  simple  statement  of  certain  phenom-
ena produced  upon  one  individual  by  another,  principally  by  the
agency  of  the  icill,  assisted  by  certain  manipulations,  known  by
the  name  of  'passes.'  The  attention  of  the  writer  was  first
called  to  the  subject  by  perusing  notices,  published  in  Boston
papers,  of  wonderful  effects,  caused  by  Bugard  and  others,  such
as  producing  a  sleep  so  profound  that  a  tooth  could  be,  and  actu-
ally was,  drawn,  without  occasioning  any  painful  sensation.  Far
from  putting  confidence  in  these  statements,  but  little  was  thought
of  the  subject,  till  an  intimate  friend  gave  him  some  account  of
a  lecture  he  had  attended,  (perhaps  the  evening  previous,)  on
animal  magnetism,  by  Charles  Poyen.  He  was  unphilosophical
enough  to  exclaim,  'I  do  not  believe  it!'  and  to  attempt  to
prove  its  fallacy  by  its  strangeness.  This  circumstance  is  men-
tioned to  show  that  the  writer  was  far  from  being  prejudiced  in
favor  of  what  was  then  generally  believed  to  be  a  humbug.

tt  As,  however,  it  became  the  general  topic  of  conversation,

and  as  questions  of  this  sort —  'What  do  you  think,  Mr.  ,

of  animal  magnetism  ? ' 'Dost  thou  think,  M ,  there  is  any

thing  in  animal  magnetism?'  were  repeatedly  asked,  to  which,
of  course,  he  could  give  no  satisfactory  answer,  he  came  to  the
conclusion  to  embrace  every  opportunity  for  gaining  information,
which  could  lend  assistance  in  forming  a  judgment.  Far  from
finding  an  associate  in  his  immediate  circle,  he  undertook  the
investigation  alone.

"  To  carry  into  effect  this  resolution,  Charles  Poyen's  lectures
were  attended,  his  experiments  at  Pawtucket  witnessed,  and
finally  the  Report  of  the  French  Commissioners  read.  (It  is
proper  to  remark  that  the  experiments  at  Pawtucket  were  far
from  being  satisfactory.  It  seemed  to  be  the  opinion  of  the  ex-
perimenter that  the  object  in  coming  was  rather  to  behold  won-
ders than  to  investigate.  There  was  apparently,  therefore,  no
exertion  to  remove  whatever  might  lead  to  suspicion  of  artifice.)
But  still  being  unsatisfied,  the  only  way  remaining  seemed  to
be  for  the  writer  to  experiment  for  himself,  which  he  did,  as
follows :  —

"First  attempt  —  Individual, L T , a young man,

about  twenty-three  years  of  age,  in  good  health,  except  occa-
sional difficulty  of  digestion.  Time,  twenty-five  minutes.  Ef-
fects, nothing  worthy  of  note.

"  Second  attempt.  —  Subject,  time,  and  effect,  same  as  last.

"Third  attempt.  —  Subject,  a  young  lady,  about  seventeen
years  old,  in  good  health ;  said  to  be  nervous.  Time  and  effect,
same  as  above.


240


APPENDIX.


"Fourth  attempt.  —  Subject,  time,  and  effect,  same  as  before.

"Fifth  attempt  —  Subject,  a  young  lady,  about  eighteen  years
of  age,  apparently  in  good  health.  Time,  twenty-five  or  thirty
minutes.  Effects,  drowsiness  and  great  difficulty  of  keeping  the
eyes  open,  flow  of  saliva  to  the  mouth.

"  Sixth  attempt.  —  Subject,  G C ,  a  lad  fourteen  years

old,  subject  to  attacks  of  croup.  Knew  nothing  more  of  anima*
magnetism  than  the  name.  Of  good  endowments,  and  an  inno-
cent and  affectionate  disposition.

"12  mo.  13th.  —  Time,  effects,  &c.  —  He  was  called  to  the
writer's  room  about  5  P.  M.,  seated  in  a  rocking-chair,  and  told
that  he  was  to  be  magnetized,  and  all  that  he  must  do  was,  to  sit
still,  and  keep  his  eyes  open  as  long  as  he  could ;  to  which  he
assented.  There  was  no  one  in  company  except  his  brother.
The  manipulations  were  the  same  as  those  mentioned  in  the
French  report,  under  the  name  of  'passes.'  Notwithstanding  re-
peated laughter  from  the  brother,  yet  scarcely  five  minutes  had
elapsed,  before  evident  effects  were  produced  —  an  incessant
tremor  of  the  hands,  and,  occasionally,  motions  of  the  feet  Ten
minutes,  convulsions  increased,  particularly  in  the  hands  and
arms ;  lids  partly  closed,  with  constant  motion,  resembling  rapid
winking.  Fifteen  minutes,  convulsions  continued ;  lids  closed,
but  still  in  motion.  Twenty  minutes,  little  change  during  the  last
five  minutes ;  occasionally,  sudden  convulsive  motions  of  the
whole  body.  The  magnetizer  now  despaired  of  producing  sleep,
supposing  the  nervous  system  to  be  affected  by  the  imagination,
and  mistaking  the  convulsive  motions  of  the  eyelids  for  voluntary.
The  process  ceased.  The  brother,  with  a  laugh,  exclaimed,
'George!'  But  no  reply  was  obtained.  The  magnetizer. —
'  Art  thou  sleepy,  George  ?  '  '  Yes,'  replied  G.  C.  '  How  long
before  thou  wilt  be  asleep  ? '  '  One  minute.'  S.  A.  (a  teacher)
was  called  in,  and  requested  to  ask  him  a  question;  which  he
did  repeatedly,  without  getting  any  answer,  till  the  magnetizer
mentally  directed  him  to  reply,  when  he  answered  immediately.
The  company  were  completely  astounded.  It  appeared  to  be
the  general  wish  that  he  should  be  waked.  His  eyes  remaining
closed,  he  was,  however,  asked  how  many  there  were  in  the
room ;  to  which  he  replied  correctly.  A  knife  was  held  before
his  forehead,  and  he  was  requested  to  name  it.  Reply,  '  A  knife.'
'How  dost  thou  know?'  'It  has  iron  about  it'  His  brother,
being  requested  to  wake  him,  endeavored  to  by  shaking  him,
speaking  his  name  aloud,  &c,  but  in  vain.  'Come,  George,  it  is
time  to  wake  up,'  said  the  magnetizer,  taking  him  by  the  hand.
He  immediately  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  arose  from  his  seat  The
trembling  of  his  hands  still  continued,  but  ceased  in  a  few  min-
utes. Said  he  felt  well,

"  Second  sitting.  —  Commenced  magnetizing  about  7  P.  M.
In  twelve  minutes,  profound  sleep  was  produced,  accompanied  by


APPENDIX.  245.

convulsive  motions,  as  before.  He  went  to  sleep  in  presence  of
his  class,  twenty-five  in  number.  He  was  asked  how  many  there
were  present ;  to  which  he  replied,  without  hesitation,  i  Thirteen.'
{Wrong.)  The  great  ease  with  which  he  comprehended  the  wiit
of  the  magnetizer  at  this  sitting,  is  remarkable.  A  single  mental
request  was  sufficient  to  cause  him  to  take  or  reject  the  hand  of
any  one  present ;  and  by  the  same  means,  communication  with
those  around  him  was  readily  established  and  broken  off.  Sev-
eral articles,  as  knives,  pencils,  &c,  were  presented  to  different
parts  of  his  head,  which  he  named,  generally,  correctly.  At  this
sitting,  and  most  of  the  following,  he  manifested  great  uneasiness
at  the  presence  of  iron.  '  What  is  it,  George  ?  '  (A  key  being
held  by  his  forehead.)  '  A  key,'  —  at  the  same  time  withdrawing
his  head.  After  repeatedly  endeavoring  in  vain  to  awake  him,
his  schoolmates  retired  ;  when  the  magnetizer  left  him  for  a  few
minutes,  to  invite  the  superintendents  and  teachers  to  witness
magnetic  sleep.  Upon  the  return  of  the  magnetizer,  being  asked
who  was  present,  he  repeated  the  names  of  several  of  the  teach-
ers. (Right.)  And  being  asked  whether  any  women  were  in
the  room,  he  spoke  the  names  of  most  of  the  females  present.
Again  he  was  requested  to  tell  what  was  held  by  his  head,  which
he  did,  generally,  correctly,  and  invariably  took  or  rejected  the
hand  of  any  one,  at  the  will  of  the  magnetizer.  He  would  also
converse,  or  not,  according  as  he  was  commanded  to,  or  not,  by
the  thoughts  of  the  magnetizer.  S.  A#**#*  requested  him  to  rise
and  walk  with  him,  which  proposal  being  mentally  opposed  by  the
magnetizer,  he  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  comply,  till  the
magnetizer,  in  accordance  with  the  wish  of  S.  A.,  expressed  by  a
sign,  willed  that  he  should  rise  ;  when  he  immediately  arose.
Magnetizer  offered  his  arm,  which  was  accepted.  Magnetizer
asked  him  if  he  perceived  a  comb  before  his  face ;  to  which  he
replied  in  the  affirmative.  (A  comb.)  Being  requested  to  re-
member the  comb  after  the  sleep  ended,  he  promised  to  do  so.
Finally,  all  being  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  was  completely  sub-
ject to  the  will  of  the  magnetizer,  and  that  he  alone  could  awake
him,  '  Come,  George,'  said  the  magnetizer,  <  it  is  time  to  get  up.'
He  immediately  rubbed  his  eyes  and  awoke.  Being  asked  if  he
knew  what  he  had  done,  he  replied,  '  No,'  (hesitatingly.)  '  Some-
thing about  a  comb.'  He  thought  he  should  not  remember  the
comb,  as  he  did  not  see  it  distinctly.  Upon  presenting  two  dis-
similar ones,  he  immediately  selected  it.  He  said  he  had  some
recollection  of  a  key,  and  that  he  knew  it  to  be  a  key,  because
he  '  felt  a  bunch  of  attraction,  a  line  of  attraction,  and  a  ring  of
attraction?

"  12  mo.  14th.  —  Third  sitting.  —  Pulse  seventy-nine,  sleep  in
nine  minutes,  lids  closed. Magnetizer  put  the  questions,  and

received the answers  which  follow : <  Is  I D in  the

room  ? ' 'I  can't  see  him.' '  Dost  thou  feel  pleasant  ? ' '  Yes.'
21


242  APPENDIX.

*  How  many  are  present,  George  ?  '  '  Thirty-eight,'  —  moving  his
head  round  as  if  to  count  them.  (Right.)  '  Dost  thou  count  thy-
self? '  '  No.'  '  Dost  thou  count  me  ?  '  '  No.'  « Dost  thou  count
Jonathan  ? '  '  No.'  (There  were  thirty-eight  in  the  room  be-
sides  the  three  excepted.)  '  Dost  thou  count  Samuel  ?  '  '  Don't
know.'  '  What  lesson  art  thou  to  recite  this  morning  ?  '  '  Spell-
ing.' (Right.)  'From  what  book?'  'Philadelphia  Expositor.'
(Right.)  '  What  smell  has  this  ?'  (Ammonia.)  '  Acid.'  'What
is  this?'  (a  shell  being  presented.)  'Paper.'  (Paper  being
near  in  magnetizer's  other  hand.')  'What  is  it,  George  ?  (The
paper  being  removed.)  '  A  shell.'  '  Feel  any  thing  ? '  (Being
pricked  under  the  nail  with  a  pm.)  '  Yes.'  (At  the  same  time
manifesting  sensation.)  '  What  is  the  matter  ? '  '  Pricking  me.'
'What  with?'  'A  pin.'  'Who  pricked  thee?'  '  J  *******
{§#**#*.»  (Right.)  'What  is  this?'  (A  file  being  presented.)
'Steel.'  'What  is  this?'  (Hare's  aerometer.)  'Some  copper
about  it.'  '  What  is  this  ? '  (Button.)  '  Button.'  '  How  many
in  the  room? '  '  About  seventy.'  (Being  eighty.)  '  What  time
is  it  ? '  (Being  five  minutes  after  nine.)  '  Quarter  of  nine.'
'  How  dost  thou  tell ? '  'By  watch.'  '  Who  has  it ? '  '  Moses.'
(The  magnetizer.)  '  What  time  dost  thou  say  it  is  ? '  '  No  —  a
little  past  nine.'  '  Wilt  thou  wake,  George,  in  just  three  min-
utes from  now  ?  ' '  Yes.' (He  fulfilled  his  promise  to  a  second.)

"  N.  B.  Pulse  somewhat  increased.

"12  mo.  18th.  —  Commenced  about  half  past  6,  P.  M.
Sound  sleep  in  four  minutes.  At  this  time,  magnetized  readily
obeyed  the  will  of  magnetizer,  and  generally  told  correctly  what
was  held  before  him.  He  manifested  much  uneasiness  at  the
presence  of  iron,  &c,  as  before.  Convulsive  motions  about  the
same  as  previous  sittings.  He  told  the  number  of  persons  correctly,
some  of  whom  had  come  in  after  he  was  put  asleep.  He  was  re-
quested to  wake  in  two  and  a  half  minutes.  In  two  and  a  quar-
ter minutes,  sleep  ended.

"  About  five  minutes  after,  he  was  again  put  to  sleep  in  two
minutes,  by  the  will  alone  of  the  magnetizer,  who  sat  at  the  dis-
tance of  four  feet.  Lids  fixed,  but  not  closed.  He  shut  them
at  the  wish  of  the  magnetizer,  accompanied  by  a  motion  of  the
hand  downwards.  He  told  the  number  in  the  room  correctly,
and  answered  various  questions  put  to  him  by  others,  when  per-
mitted by  the  magnetizer.  Convulsive  motions  entirely  ceased.
Magnetizer  stepped  to  a.  distant  part  of  the  room,  and  mentally
requested  magnetized  to  come  to  him.  He  complied.  Finally,
he  was  requested  to  awake  in  just  ten  minutes,  which  he  did  to
a  second.

"  Lastly,  magnetizer  retired  to  an  adjoining  room,  and  willed
him  to  sleep  in  one  and  a  half  minutes.  After  a  few  experi-
ments, to  be  fully  satisfied  that  he  was  asleep,  magnetizer  waked
him.


APPENDIX.  243

w  12  mo.  19th.  —  Fifth  sitting.  —  G.  C****  was  explaining  to
his  teacher  the  method  of  solving1  a  question  in  algebra,  after
which  he  was  to  solve  two  others  to  finish  his  lesson.  He  knew
nothing  of  the  intention  to  put  him  asleep.  Magnetizer  seated
himself  in  a  room  at  least  seventy  feet  distant,  between  whom  and
magnetized  there  were  as  many  as  three  stone  and  brick  walls,
besides  several  partitions.  To  take  the  nearest  route  from  one  to
the  other,  seven  doors  are  to  be  passed  through,  five  of  which
were  shut.  The  process  of  magnetizing  continued  about  two
and  a  half  minutes,  when  magnetizer  went  to  ascertain  the  re-
sult. He  found  magnetized  explaining  his  sum,  but  manifesting
a  fixedness  of  countenance.  After  he  had  gone  through  the  ex-
planation, which,  as  his  teacher  informed,  was  rather  singularly
accomplished,  he  commenced  upon  the  questions  following.  G.
R*##,  a  teacher,  spoke  to  him,  but  could  get  no  answer.  Magnet-
izer then  stepped  to  an  adjoining  room,  and  magnetized  about  a
minute  longer.  On  returning,  he  could  perceive  no  change.
Magnetized  still  sat  engaged  about  his  lesson.  His  eyes  were
open,  and  he  was  free  from  convulsive  motions.  Magnetizer
said,  '  Come,  George,  wake  up.'  No  reply  or  sign  of  waking.
'  When  art  thou  going  to  wake  up  ? '  '  When  I  get  my  sums  done.'
Magnetized  took  off  his  cravat,  and  laid  it  aside ;  being  asked  the
reason,  he  said, '  It  is  warm.'  Magnetizer,  feeling  some  anxiety
at  his  inability  to  wake  him,  rendered  him  some  assistance,  at  the
same  time  telling  him  to  finish  his  lesson  as  soon  as  he  could,
and  then  to  wake.  Several  attempts  were  made  to  deceive  him,
that  he  might  get  through  sooner ;  but  one  only  succeeded,  at
which  time  he  was  looking  in  his  book  for  the  answer.  As  soon
as  the  questions  were  solved,  he  rubbed  his  eyes  and  awoke.
Being  questioned,  he  said  he  remembered  nothing  that  had  oc-
curred, not  having  seen  the  magnetizer  before  that  moment  since
quarter  past  3,  P.  M.  We  proceeded  immediately  to  the  ta-
ble ;  but  just  as  we  were  leaving  the  room,  he  inquired  for  his
cravat,  not  recollecting  that  he  had  laid  it  aside.  After  tea,  mag-
netizer told  him  he  had  interrupted  him  some  during  the  after-
noon, and  wished  to  know  if  he  had  finished  his  lesson.  He  re-
plied, 'I  have  two  more  sums  to  do  ;'  entirely  forgetting  that  he
had  solved  them  during  his  sleep.

"  Sixth  sitting.  —  Sleep  produced  in  half  a  minute.  A  bar
magnet  was  brought  near,  when  magnetized  manifested  great
uneasiness.  Magnetizer  said,  '  What  is  it,  George  ? '  '  Magnet.'
'Why  dost  thou  not  sit  still?'  'It  hurts.'  'Which  pole  is  to-
wards thee  ? '  '  North  pole,'  (right,)  —  at  the  same  time  moving  his
head  towards  it.  '  How  dost  thou  know ? '  'It  pulls.'  Upon  re-
versing the  poles,  he  instantly  started  back  as  if  touched  by  a
hot  iron.  '  Which  pole  is  it  ?'  '  South.'  (Right.)  'How  dost  thou
know  ?  '  'It  pushes.'  This  experiment  was  several  times  repeat-
ed, with  the  same  result In  a  word,  it  was  impossible  to  deceive


244


APPENDIX.


him.  Whether  the  '  magnetizer '  or  any  other  person  held  the
magnet,  he  invariably  moved  his  head  toward  the  north,  and  from
the  south  pole,  even  when  it  was  presented  at  the  distance  of  eight
feet.  Indeed,  he  showed,  by  words  and  various  movements,  that  he
was  not  at  all  pleased  with  the  experiment.  Magnetizer  extended
his  hand  towards  him,  to  which  he  moved  his  head.  Being  asked
how  it  felt,  he  replied,  '  It  pulls.'  It  seemed  to  be  rather  agree-
able to  him  than  otherwise.  Magnetizer  then  withdrew  his
hand,  and  brought  his  head  near  to  the  forehead  of  the  magnet-
ized, at  which  he  manifested  the  same  uneasiness  as  at  the  south
pole  of  the  magnet.  The  novel  thought  occurred  to  the  magnet-
izer, that  perhaps  himself  might  be  magnetized,  negatively,  by
induction.  He  therefore  concluded  to  form  the  circuit,  and  know
the  result.  It  was  formed  by  placing  the  hand  of  the  magnetizer
upon  the  head  of  the  magnetized,  and  the  hand  of  the  magnet-
ized upon  the  head  of  the  magnetizer.  Just  as  the  connection
was  being  made,  the  magnetized  sprang  as  if  he  had  received  an
electric  shock,  though  nothing  was  felt  by  magnetizer.  I****
jj#####«  tried  the  same,  with  the  same  result.  Magnetizer  —
1  What  is  the  matter,  G  eorge  ? '  '  Giving  me  shocks.'  The  con-
nection was  made  by  several  persons,  (perhaps  five,)  taking  hold
of  hands.  Still,  the  shocks  were  felt.  To  ascertain  whether
the  will  of  the  magnetizer  was  at  all  concerned  in  the  production
of  the  shocks,  he  willed  that  the  magnetized  should  feel  cold,
where  the  connection  was  made.  But  in  vain ;  the  shocks  were
felt  as  before.  Glass  proved  not  to  be  a  non-conductor.  On
being  waked,  he  had  no  recollection  of  what  had  occurred,  but
complained  that  he  felt  as  if  he  had  been  receiving  severe  elec-
tric shocks.

"  12  mo.  25th.  —  Seventh  sitting.  —  Magnetizer  at  least  one  and
a  half  miles  distant.  —  Time,  6,  P.  M.  —  Perfect  sleep  in  one
minute.  Magnetizer  directed  him  to  shut  his  eyes ;  also,  to  tell
one  present,  J.  L.  S#####,  that  he  was  coming,  and  then  proceed-
ed to  join  the  company.  At  the  same  time,  magnetized  whis-
pered something  which  was  not  audible.  A  communication
being  thus  established  between  him  and  J.  L.  S*****,  the  fol-
lowing questions  were  put  and  answers  received :  —

" '  Where  is  the  magnetizer  ? '  '  Coming.'  '  Where  was  he
when  he  put  thee  to  sleep  ?  '  'In  a  house,  and  sitting.'  (Right)
It  may  be  proper  here  to  remark,  that  G.  C####  was  informed  that
he  was  to  be  magnetized  some  time  during  the  evening,  but  not
at  what  hour.  Neither  did  he  know  whether  the  magnetizer  was
at  the  institution  at  the  time  or  not.  '  How  dost  thou  know  ? '
4 1  saw  him.'  'Has  he  an  umbrella?'  'Yes.'  'How  dost  thou
know  ? '  'I  feel  he  has  his  hand  on  it.'  '  Canst  thou  see  the
streets,  or  the  lamps  in  the  streets  ? '  '  No.'  '  Canst  thou  see
the  bridge?'  'No;  it  is  dark.'  'In  what  direction  is  he?"
(Magnetized  placed  his  hand  upon  his  forehead,  and  then  moved


APPENDIX.  245

it  towards  the  place  at  which  he  said  the  magnetizer  was.)  '  How
dost  thou  know  he  is  in  that  direction  ? '  '  1  feel  him  pull.'  (At
the  same  time  manifesting  uneasiness  at  what  he  called  the  pull-
ing of  the  magnetizer.  The  last  two  questions  were  often  re-
peated, and  the  same  answers  as  often  received.)  <  Shall  I  stop
the  pulling  ? '  '  Thou  canst  not  stop  it ;  no  one  can  stop  it'  '  Is
he  walking,  or  running  ? '  '  Running,  now.'  (Magnetizer  does  not
now  recollect  whether  he  ran  any  or  not.)  '  How  many  are  there
in  the  room,  and  who  are  they?'  'Four.  J.  L.  S#***#,  J.
q##*#?  j$  g*****^  an(j  mySelf.'  (Two  entered  while  he  was
asleep.)

"  Magnetized  was  shocked,  as  at  the  last  sitting.  When  mag-
netizer had  approached  about  one  mile,  he  wished  him  to  speak
to  J.  L.  S#*###  and  C.  W.  J******?  supposing  them  both  to  be
present.  About  the  same  time,  he  took  J.  L.  S*####  by  the
hand,  and  with  the  other  seemed  to  feel  for  some  one.  Being
asked  by  J.  L.  S##**#  what  he  wished,  he  replied,  <  C*####*
W.  J******.'  At  the  same  time,  magnetizer  wished  him  to
speak  to  none  but  the  two  individuals  just  mentioned,  when  he
ceased  to  answer  the  questions  of  J.  C  ****,  his  brother,  with
whom  he  had  been  conversing,  without  any  directions  from  the
magnetizer.  During  the  early  part  of  his  sleeping,  he  made
various  gestures,  supposed  to  indicate  a  wish  to  hurry  the  mag-
netizer, saying  at  the  same  time,  '  Faster !  faster ! '

"At  thirty-five  minutes  past  6  o'clock,  magnetizer  arrived,
and  found  magnetized  asleep,  in  company  with  J.  C#***  and  J.
L.  S**##*.  Of  his  own  accord,  on  the  entrance  of  the  magnet-
izer, he  put  out  his  hand,  smiled,  and  seemed  glad  to  see  his
friend.  After  a  few  moments  in  conversation,  the  sleep  of  the
magnetized  was  terminated  by  the  will  of  the  magnetizer."


note  xn.

To  Messrs.  A.  V.  and  C.  C.  Potter,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for
many  opportunities  of  seeing  and  trying  interesting  experiments,
I  take  this  occasion  to  express  my  thanks.  The  former  gentle-
man, in  addition  to  all  other  obligations,  has  furnished  me  the
following  account  of  his  experience  as  a  magnetizer.  It  is  very
observable,  to  one  who  has  had  a  chance  to  become  acquainted
with  the  statements  of  foreign  writers,  that  there  is  a  striking
similarity  of  conclusion  between  them  and  our  own  magnetizers,
in  cases  where  it  was  almost  impossible  for  the  latter  to  obtain
the  notions  of  the  former.  This  is  certainly  a  priori  proof  of  the
strongest  kind  in  favor  of  the  reality  of  magnetism,  and  of  the
universality  of  its  principles ;  and  it  should  be  an  inducement,  to
euch  as  have  leisure,  to  investigate  the  subject,  until  those  prin-
21*


%4&  APPENDIX.

ciples  are  as  clearly  demonstrable  as  those  of  electricity.  I
would  remark  that  Mr.  P.  differs  from  some  others  in  regard  to
the  intuitive  knowledge  of  time,  which  is  claimed  as  one  of  the
faculties  of  somnambulists.  He  has  even  now  a  patient  who
wakes  every  morning  precisely  at  the  hour  he  tells  her  to  the
evening  previous,  —  a  fact  which  I  learned  from  Captain  James
Brattelle,  in  whose  family  she  now  resides.  This  young  lady,
whose  case  is  a  very  peculiar  one,  cannot  see  while  in  the  mag-
netic state.  Her  waking  up  at  the  hour  indicated  by  her  mag-
netizer  is  a  strong  objection  to  his  own  conclusion,  which  isy
that  somnambulists  borrow  their  notions  of  time  from  the  thoughts
of  others,  or  see  it  on  the  nearest  watch  or  other  timepiece.  This
ease,  however,  has  occurred  since  the  article  below  was  written.

"  The  first  good  subject  I  ever  obtained,  was  a  married  lady,  of
about  twenty-three.  At  the  fifth  sitting,  of  about  forty  minutes
each,  she  became  sound  asleep.  1  asked  her,  after  a  few  ques-
tions in  regard  to  her  feelings,  whether  she  could  see  any  thing
out  of  the  room  where  she  was  sitting.  She  replied  that  she
could.  I  asked  her  the  time,  by  the  clock  in  the  other  room.
She  said,  twenty-tivo  minutes  past  eight ;  upon  looking,  I  found
it  to  be  correct  to  a  minute.  I  knew  that  she  had  never  been  in
my  shop,  where  men  only  had  been  employed.  I  asked  her  how
it  appeared.  She  gave  a  correct  account  of  its  appearance.  I
then  asked  her  if  there  was  any  one  in  at  the  time.  She  said
there  were  three.  I  supposed  that  there  was  no  one  there ;  it
being  evening,  and  at  a  time  when  it  was  generally  closed.  I
went  directly  thither,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  I  found  three  of
my  apprentices  at  work.  On  my  return,  I  took  an  out  of  the
way  road,  and  sat  down  upon  a  drag  for  a  few  moments,  to  see  if
she  would  observe  it.  When  I  returned,  she  told  me  exactly
where  I  had  been,  what  way  I  returned,  and  observed  that  the
short  time  I  sat  upon  that  drag  could  not  have  rested  me,

"  I  asked  her  to  tell  the  number  of  persons  in  the  room  directly
over  where  we  sat,  it  being  occupied  by  another  family.  She
answered,  *  There  are  seven  ;  Mr.  Day,  his  wife,  and  two  children,
a  small  girl  who  lives  with  them,  and  two  ladies  that  I  do  not
recollect  to  have  seen  before.'  I  sent  up  the  maid  directly  to  as-
certain the  fact.  While  she  was  gone,  I  asked  the  patient  what
she  said,  and  to  whom  she  spoke.  She  replied,  that  she  spoke  to
Mr.  Day,  and  asked  him  what  time  in  the  evening  it  was ;  and  no
one  but  him  made  reply.

k  The  girl  asked  the  time  of  night,  as  a  pretext  to  ascertain  the
number  in  the  room.  She  stated  the  number  precisely  the  same
as  my  subject.  There  were  two  ladies  there  whom  she  did  not
know.  The  maid  was  not  in  the  room  when  my  subject  told  the
number  in  the  chamber,  nor  did  she  know  the  reason  of  my  sefcd-
iag  her  on  such  an  errand*


APPENDIX.  247

"  I  took  a  number  of  small  things  from  the  shelf,  and  enclosed
them  perfectly  tight  in  my  hand,  and  she  told  what  they  were.
I  took  my  watch  and  covered  it  as  closely  as  possible  in  my
handkerchief;  she  mentioned  the  time  to  a  minute.  I  took  a
piece  of  blank  paper,  and  marked  one  or  two  capital  letters  with
a  lead  pencil,  and  placed  them  between  the  leaves  in  the  middle
of  a  book.  She  had  no  difficulty  in  telling  what  they  were.
She  would  frequently  tell  the  time  of  day  by  a  dozen  watches
that  were in  the  room,  without  their  being  taken  from  the  fob.

"  I  have  the  most  indisputable  proof  of  their  seeing  to  a  great
distance,  although  they  frequently  fail  in  experiments  of  this
kind.  I  find  a  great  difference  in  the  veracity  of  subjects,  owing
partly,  I  think,  to  their  vanity  and  desire  to  answer  every  thing
that  is  asked  them,  and  partly  to  their  inability  at  times  to  dis-
tinguish small  objects.  They  sometimes  appear  to  draw  largely
from  their  imaginations  and  preconceived  opinions.  They  are
apt  to  get  into  this  habit  after  being  magnetized  a  great  number
of  times.  I  consider  the  information  obtained  from  new  subjects
to  be  much  the  most  correct.

"Two  gentlemen  came  to  see  one  of  my  subjects  one  evening  ;
they  had  passed  Newport  that  afternoon,  and  had  observed  some
things  to  test  her  clairvoyance.  They  sent  her  into  a  room  of  a
house  there,  to  which  she  and  myself  were  total  strangers,  where
she  found  an  old  gentleman  asleep  in  his  chair.  They  said  it
could  not  be  otherwise  than  correct,  as  it  was  a  fixed  habit  for
the  occupant  of  the  house  to  sleep  at  that  time  in  the  evening,
in  his  chair.

"  She  gave  a  minute  description  of  every  house  and  room  which
they  directed  her  to.  On  asking  her  the  time  of  night  by  the
clock  at  Newport,  she  said  that  the  clock  did  not  go,  and  both
hands  hung  directly  down.  The  gentlemen  were  astonished  at
its  correctness,  as  they  saw  them  taking  down  the  clock  when
they  passed  through  in  the  afternoon,  and  remarked  that  it  would
be  a  perfect  test  of  her  clairvoyance.  Newport  is  thirty  miles
distant,  and  a  place  where  my  subject  had  never  been.  I  do  not
mention  this  as  an  insulated  fact,  but  as  one  that  will  not  admit
of  contradiction,  not  only  from  the  nature  of  the  proof,  but  the
character  of  the  witnesses ;  they  being  the  Honorable  Judge
Durfee  and  Judge  Staples,  both  of  our  Supreme  Court,  and
Horace  Manchester,  Esq.,  attorney,  of  this  city.

"  I  have  had  gentlemen  from  Boston,  Salem,  Newport,  Taunton,
New  Bedford,  New  York,  and  other  places,  who  have  witnessed
experiments  of  seeing  to  a  great  distance  ;  and  in  such  cases  I
have  directed  my  subject  to  go  (as  we  term  it)  to  their  respective
places  of  abode,  and  have  generally  enforced  the  most  perfect
conviction.

"I  sent  a  subject  to  New  York  that  was  never  in  the  city.  She
gave  a  most  correct  description  of  Trinity  Church,  the  monuments


248  APPENDIX.

in  the  enclosure,  their  situation,  and  the  whole  of  its  internal
structure.  I  then  sent  her  into  a  broker's  office  in  Wall  Street,
(Mr.  Vernon's.)  He  informs  me  that  the  description  is  correct
She  said  she  saw  nothing  except  a  few  books  and  some  money.
She  could  not  see  any  goods,  although  I  called  it  a  store.  Mr.
Vernon  was  an  entire  stranger  to  myself,  as  well  as  to  the  som-
nambulist.

"  A  good  clairvoyant  will  never  fail  to  tell  the  denomination  of  a
bill,  the  superscription  on  a  letter,  or  any  sentence  distinctly
written,  even  if  it  is  folded  so  as  to  bring  the  writing  on  the  in-
side. I  have  lately  been  trying  some  very  interesting  experi-
ments, in  connection  with  two  or  three  gentlemen,  upon  the
faculty  of  clairvoyance,  which  I  should  not  feel  justified  in  laying
before  the  public  in  their  present  unfinished  state.

"  I  have  found  that  all  my  clairvoyants  can  tell  the  time ;  but
upon  asking  them  how  they  tell,  they  will  say  they  see  some
neighboring  clock ;  such  as  that  in  their  own  house,  or  the  near-
est church.  I  said  to  a  patient  of  mine  one  evening,  '  Can  you
tell  what  time  it  is  ? '  She  said,  f  No  ;  our  clock  does  not  go."1
Upon  looking,  I  found  the  clock  had  been  stopped  fifteen  minutes
—  two  hours  after  she  had  been  put  into  the  magnetic  sleep.  I  have
very  accurate.  At  other  times,  they  would  wake  before  half  the
period  had  elapsed.

"  There  are  some  subjects,  however,  that  are  very  exact  in  their
time  of  waking,  very  rarely  varying  more  than  six  seconds  from
and  in  four  minutes  more  to  go  to  sleep  again ;  they  would  wake
in  three  minutes,  or  less,  and  go  to  sleep  again  in  the  same  time.
I  have  told  others  to  wake  in  four  minutes  by  a  certain  clock,  or
watch,  and  go  to  sleep  in  the  same  time ;  they  would  wake  at  the
exact  time,  and  go  to  sleep  one  minute,  or  one  minute  and  a  half,
too  soon.  So  that  I  am  convinced,  not  only  from  the  artificial
divisions  of  time,  but  from  a  great  number  of  experiments,  that
they  either  see  some  timepiece,  or  guess  at  its  duration."


NOTE  XIII.


S  OMNAMB  UL1SM,


No  one  who  reads  medical  works  is  ignorant  of  the  frequent
occurrence  of  natural  somnambulism.  A  hundred  cases  could
undoubtedly  be  quoted  from  the  best  authorities.  A  remarkable
and  well-authenticated  one  recently  appeared  in  the  "Boston
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal." I  do  not  know  whether  to  class


APPENDIX.  249

the  following  relation,  which  I  find  in  a  very  old  translation  of
Pliny's  "  Natural  History,"  with  facts  or  with  fictions.  Does  not  its
resemblance  to  what  is  known  to  take  place  in  induced  somnam-
bulism, authorize  us  to  consider  it  as  having  some  foundation  in
truth  ?

"  We  read  in  Chronicles,  that  the  ghost  of  Hermotimus  Clazo-
menius  was  accustomed  to  abandon  his  body  for  a  time,  and,  wan-
dering up  and  down  in  far  countries,  used  to  bring  home  news,
from  remote  places,  of  such  things  as  could  not  possibly  be
known,  unless  it  had  been  present  there ;  and  all  the  while  his
body  lay,  as  it  were,  half  dead  in  a  trance.  This  practice  it
continued  so  long,  that  at  last  the  Cantharidae,  who  were  his
mortal  enemies,  took  his  body  and  burnt  it  to  ashes ;  and  by  that
means  disappointed  his  poor  soul,  when  it  came  back  again,  of
that  sheath,  as  it  were,  or  case,  where  she  meant  to  bestow  her-
self." —  Pliny,  b.  7,  ch.  52.

There  is  some  similarity  between  the  above  relation  and  the
following,  which  is  extracted  from  Watson's  "  Annals  of  Phila-
delphia," page  235,  edition  of  1830 :  —

"  The  good  people  of  Caledonia  have  so  long  and  exclusively
engrossed  the  faculty  of  second  sight,  that  it  may  justly  surprise
many  to  learn  that  we  also  have  been  favored  with  at  least  one
case  as  well  attested  as  their  own.  I  refer  to  the  instance  of
Eli  Yarnall,  of  Frankford.  Whatever  were  his  first  peculiarities,
he  in  time  lost  them.  He  fell  into  intemperate  habits,  became
a  wanderer,  and  died  in  Virginia,  a  young  man.  He  was  born  in
Bucks  county,  and,  with  his  family,  emigrated  to  the  neighbor-
hood of  Pittsburg.  There,  when  a  child  seven  years  old,  he  sud-
denly burst  into  a  fit  of  laughter  in  the  house,  saying  he  saw  his
father  (then  at  a  distance)  running  down  the  mountain  side,
trying  to  catch  a  jug  of  whisky  which  he  had  let  fall.  He  saw
him  overtake  it.  When  the  father  came  home,  he  confirmed  the
whole  story,  to  the  great  surprise  of  all.-  The  boy,  after  this,  ex-
cited much  wonder  and  talk  in  the  neighborhood.  Two  or  three
years  after  this,  the  family  was  visited  by  Robert  Verree,  a  pub-
he  Friend,  with  other  visiting  Friends  from  Bucks  county.  I
have  heard,  in  a  very  direct  manner,  from  those  who  heard  Ver-
ree's  narrative,  that  he,  to  try  the  lad,  asked  him  various  questions
about  circumstances  then  occurring  at  his  own  house,  in  Bucks
county ;  all  of  which  he  ascertained  to  have  been  really  so  at
that  precise  time.  Some  of  the  things  mentioned  were  these,
viz.:  '  I  see  your  house  is  made  partly  of  logs  and  partly  of  stone ;
before  the  house  is  a  pond,  which  is  now  let  out ;  in  the  porch
sits  a  woman,  and  a  man  with  gray  hairs  ;  in  the  house  are  sev-
eral men,'  &c.

"  When  Verree  returned  home,  he  ascertained  that  bis  mill-


250  APPENDIX.

pond  before  his  house  had  been  just  let  out,  to  catch  muskrats ;
that  the  man  in  the  porch  was  his  wife's  brother,  Jonathan ;  that
the  men  in  his  house  were  the  mowers,  who  had  all  come  in
because  of  a  shower  of  rain.  In  short,  he  said  every  iota  was
exactly  realized.

"  The  habit  of  the  boy,  when  he  sought  for  such  facts,  was,  to
sit  down,  and  hold  his  head  downwards,  his  eyes  often  shut ;  and
after  some  waiting,  declared  what  he  saw  in  his  visions.  He  has
been  found  abroad  in  the  fields,  sitting  on  a  stump  and  crying ;
on  being  asked  the  reason,  he  said  he  saw  great  destruction  of
human  life  by  men  in  mutual  combat.  His  descriptions  answered
exactly  to  sea  fights  and  army  battles,  although  he  had  never
seen  the  sea,  nor  ships,  nor  cannon ;  all  of  which  he  fully  de-
him,  became  anxious  for  his  future  welfare,  and,  deeming  him
possessed  of  a  peculiar  gift  and  a  good  spirit,  desired  to  have
the  bringing  of  him  up.  He  was  therefore  committed  to  the
mastery  of  Nathan  Harper,  engaged  in  the  business  of  tanning,
m  Frankford.  There  he  excited  considerable  conversation  ;  and
so  many  came  to  visit  him  as  to  be  troublesome  to  his  master,
who  did  what  he  could  to  discourage  the  calls.  Questions,  on
his  part,  were  therefore  shunned  as  much  as  he  could.  He  lost
his  faculty  by  degrees,  and  fell  into  loose  company,  which  of
itself  prevented  serious  people  from  having  any  further  wish  to
interrogate  him.

"  To  instance  the  kind  of  inquiries  which  were  usually  pre-
sented to  him,  it  may  be  stated  that  wives,  who  had  missed  their
husbands  long,  supposed  by  shipwreck,  for  instance,  would  go
to  him  and  inquire.  He  would  tell  them,  it  is  said,  of  some  still
alive,  what  they  were  about,  &,e.  Another  case  was,  a  man,  for
banter,  went  to  him  to  inquire  who  stole  his  pocket-book ;  and
he  was  answered,  no  one ;  but  you  stole  one  out  of  a  man's
pocket  when  at  the  vendue  ;  —  and  it  was  so.

"  His  mother  would  not  allow  him  '  to  divine  for  money,'  lest
he  should  thereby  lose  the  gift,  which  she  deemed  heaven-
derived.

"These  are  strange  things.  I  give  these  facts  as  I  heard
them."

The  above  were  cases  of  natural  somnambulism ;  and  it  is  to
be  observed,  that  such  subjects  are  frequently  in  condition  to
talk  with  any  who  address  them.  This  was  the  case  with  the
Springfield  somnambulist,  who  was  recently  thrown  into  induced
somnambulism  by  a  gentleman  of  this  town,  as  will  be  seen  by
his  letter,  published  in  this  Appendix.* It  is  laid  down  by  some

*  The  same  has  been  done  in  the  case  of  the  Uxbridge  somnambulist.
She  was  found,  as  I  am  told  by  Dr.  Parsons,  to  be  exceedingly  susceptible
to  the  action  of  magnetism.


APPENDIX.  251

writers  on  magnetism,  that  the  diseases  which  produce  the  one
may  be  cured  by  the  other.  Where  somnambulism  is  induced
by  the  magnetic  process,  the  magnetizer  gains  such  a  mastery
over  the  patient,  as  to  turn  his  clairvoyance  to  a  useful  purpose  ;
which  is,  to  look  into  the  nature  of  the  disease  which  made  him
naturally  subject  to  this  crisis,  and  to  point  out  its  proper  rem-
edy. Not  only  so,  but  magnetism  alone,  without  other  aid,  re-
stores such  persons  to  health,  and  then  generally  ceases  to  act


In  one  of  the  numbers  of  "  The  Magnetizer,"  a  series  of  pa-
pers published  by  the  translator  in  the  "  Providence  Journal,"  the
following  description  of  a  magnetic  sitting  may  be  found.  It  is
designed  to  convey  to  the  imagination  of  the  reader  who  has
never  seen  any  thing  of  the  kind,  a  correct  conception  of  the
real  power  exerted,  and  of  the  feelings  excited  by  its  contem-
plation.

"  /  confess  that  1  am  sometimes  astonished  at  my  oivn  indifference
to  the  singula)'  phenomena  exhibited  by  my  friend,  while  he  is  in  the
magnetic  sleep.  He  is  this  evening  sitting  beside  me  in  his  arm-
chair, while  1  am  at  the  desk  penning  these  observations.  He  has
been  asleep  about  an  hour.  No  one  is  present  but  myself.  He  is
immovable  —  in  his  deep  and  placid  serenity.  His  breath  is  scarce-
ly heard ;  the  pattering  of  the  rain-drops  against  the  casement
comes  with  thrilling  distinctness  of  sound  to  break  the  stillness  of
the  room  ;  and,  now  and  then,  the  lightning,  which  leaps  from  the
riven  cloud,  sends  foiih  its  rolling  thunder  in  the  distance.  But
these  cannot  arouse  him  from  his  slumber.  There  is  on  his  coun
ienance  that  godlike  tranquillity  which  the  ancient  artists  strove  to
express  in  the  representations  of  their  fabled  deities.  His  eyes  art
closed ;  he  feels  not  mortal  touch ;  the  surgeon  might  sever  his  sev-
eral joints,  and  the  exquisite  nerves  of  feeling  shall  not  convey  the
intimation  to  the  brain.  There  is  no  restless  movement,  no  nervous
irritation,  as  in  ordinary  repose.

"  In  vain  has  Carlos,  who  has  just  entered,  called  him  by  his
name.  He  answers  not.  How  shall  he  hear  the  voice  of  friendship
who  hears  not  the  voice  of  thunder  ?  His  ears  are  sealed  as  with
seven  seals.  The  mysterious  will  hath  closed  the  avenues  of  intel-
ligence in  the  mortal  body.  But  from  this  dreary  death  of  sensa-
tion, how  quickly  is  he  roused !  By  a  simple  volition  I  cause  him
to  see,  to  hear,  to  recognise,  every  thing  about  him.  I  can  send  him
forth  instantly,  through  the  thick  darkness  of  night,  into  distant
lands,  and  cause  him  to  bring  us  tidings  of  our  absent  fiends.  His
spirit  seems  to  delight  in  this  activity  ;  his  intellectual  countenance
brightens  up  with  various  emotions.  He  glides  along  the  surface
of  the  earth  and  ocean,  as  rapid  as  the  lambent  borealis ;  and  ever
and  anon,  as  different  scenes  arrest  his  attention,  he  bursts  out  into


252  APPENDIX.

involuntary  exclamations  of  pleasure  or  surprise,  of  joy  or  sorrow.
The  smile  that  tells  of  some  ludici-ous  sight  is  occasionally  seen  to
play  over  his  features.  Anon,  the  hot  tears  course  down  his  cheeh
Powerful  feeling  is  in  every  lineament.  He  is  weeping  over  a
death-bed  scene  which  he  accidentally  witnesses  in  a  distant  city ;
and  he  cries  aloud,  ivith  the  generous  fervor  of  excited  sympathy,
1  He  is  gone !  poor  man !  She  has  no  protection  for  her  orphan
children  —  but  God!'

"  Instantly,  by  a  power  ivhich  is  more  mysterious  to  myself  than
I  think  it  seems  to  others,  I  replunge  him  into  the  profoundest  sleep  ;
I  sprinkle  the  waters  of  Lethe  over  his  spirit.  His  muscles  lose
their  tension ;  his  limbs,  their  elasticity ;  his  senses  forget  their
office  ;  the  placid  serenity  of  slumber  settles  upon  his  features,  and
he  becomes  as  void  of  sensation,  of  motion,  of  volition,  as  the  beau-
tiful creations  of  Canova,  or  the  stony  victims  of  Medusa.11

It  is  sometimes  necessary  to  send  a  somnambulist  to  examine
the  sick.  This  has  been  practised  to  some  extent  here ;  and  it
will  be  practised  much  when  magnetism  becomes  more  exten-
sively appreciated  in  this  country.  Great  caution  should  be  used,
in  such  cases,  to  test  the  clairvoyance ;  and  it  seems  proper  to
give  some  hints  to  those  who  seek  direct  evidence  of  this  power
from  somnambulists.  1st  If  you  send  them  away,  give  them
time  enough  to  look  round  after  you  have  assured  yourself  that
there  is  no  mistake  in  the  house  to  which  you  send  them.
2d.  If  you  are  in  communication,  keep  yourself  perfectly  free  from
excitement,  and  attend  to  what  the  somnambulist  says.  3d.  Ob-
serve simplicity  of  conduct ;  not  wearying  the  somnambulist  by
asking  questions  which  manifest  skepticism,  or  an  intention  to
embarrass  him.  4th.  Be  careful,  as  far  as  possible,  not  to  ask
unimportant  questions  ;  for  the  somnambulist,  if  properly  trained,
does  not  view  your  interrogatories  as  intended  to  test  his  clair-
voyance, but  to  obtain  information  of  things  as  they  are.  Apollo
himself,  in  the  palmy  tranquillity  of  his  soul,  took  it  in  high  dud-
geon, says  Plutarch,  to  be  interrogated  about  so  many  trifles.
Besides,  most  somnambulists  imagine  you  to  be  present  with
them  wherever  they  go,  and  think  you  can  see  as  well  as  they
can.  It  therefore  requires  caution  and  skill,  not  only  to  obtain
information  from  them,  but  also  to  direct  their  attention  to  the
proper  objects.

The  Marquis  de  Puysegur  says,  in  his  work  entitled  "J?e-
cherches  Physiologiques  sur  VHomme,"  page  423,  "  There  are
somnambulists  whose  active  energy  makes  them  almost  sponta-
neously perceive  all  that  can  be  useful  and  salutary  to  them-
selves. There  are  also  some  who  are  inert  and  indolent,  whose
intuitive  faculties  are  not  manifested  unless  their  developement
is  aided.  A  somnambulist  may  be  compared  to  a  person  having
very  good  eyes,  who  is  unexpectedly  placed  upon  an  eminence


APPENDIX.  253

rising  from  a  vast  plain.  His  vision  would  sweep  over  a  great
extent,  without  distinguishing  any  thing.  He  would  wonder  at
all  things,  without  remarking  any  ;  and  the  most  beautiful  situa-
tions, the  most  interesting  objects,  would  often  be  the  very  ones
to  which  he  would  pay  no  attention.  It  is  exactly  so  with  many
somnambulists.  If  you  do  not  arrest  and  fix  their  attention  upon
that  which  ought  particularly  to  interest  them,  they  will  often
observe  nothing  in  the  vast  and  indefinite  domain  of  their  per-
ception."


NOTE XIV.
TRAVELLING SOMNAMBULISTS.

The  somnambulist  always  appears  to  have  a  perfect  knowledge
of  what  the  magnetizer  is  doing.  If  he  occasionally  loses  trace
of  him,  it  is  because  some  other  person  is  in  communication,  and
absorbs  his  whole  attention.  But  the  magnetizer  generally  keeps
his  control  over  his  patient,  even  though  at  a  distance  from  him  ;
that  is,  he  can  cause  him  to  sink  into  a  state  of  insensibility  ;  he
can  make  him  answer  the  question  of  one  person,  and  return  no
answer  to  the  question  of  another ;  can  make  him  lose  the  power
of  seeing  any  one  present ;  can  make  him  call  for  any  particular
article  of  food  ;  can  wake  him  suddenly,  &c,  —  all  by  the  mere
power  of  the  will.  It  sometimes  happens  that  such  experiments
fail ;  but  it  is  evident  that  the  patient  commonly  has  the  faculty
of  divining  the  will  of  his  magnetizer.  He  seems  to  be  drawn
towards  him  by  an  intense  impulse.  He  can  almost  always  tell
where  he  is.  I  have  known  one  somnambulist,  who,  when  left,
by  the  physician  that  magnetized  her,  would  voluntarily  trace
him  through  all  his  professional  calls,  and  give  a  pretty  correct
account  of  them  to  the  persons  left  in  communication  with  her.
At  the  same  time,  she  would  mention  how  many  and  what  de-
scription of  persons  were  in  the  several  rooms  of  his  patients.

I  could  never  discover  an  architectural  anomaly  in  the  descrip-
tions given  by  somnambulists  of  the  houses  to  which  they  are
sent.  It  is  not  proper,  however,  to  conclude  that  they  never
commit  such  an  error,  though  I  have  made  many  experiments  of
the  kind. I  will  explain  my  meaning.

Somnambulists  frequently  get  into  the  wrong  house,  and  fre-
quently give  a  wrong  description  when  they  get  into  the  right
house  ;  and  it  requires  some  tact  to  draw  from  them  a  correction
of  the  errors  into  which  they  fall  at  the  first  sight,  as  well  as  to
discover  the  cause  of  their  being  led  into  the  commission  of  such
errors.

But  when  they  get  into  a  house,  or  imagine  they  have  got  into
one,  —  which  neither  they  nor  any  present  have  ever  been  into,  —
22


254  APPENDIX.

they  will  give  such  a  description  as  will  be  congruent  in  itself,
whether  it  be  true  or  false,  in  respect  to  the  house  supposed  to
the  parlor  as  being  on  the  north  side,  and  a  door  as  being  on  the
right  of  the  fireplace  leading  into  the  room  back  of  the  parlor,
he  will,  when  carried  into  that  back  room,  make  the  fireplace
there  correspond  with  the  position  of  the  chimney  previously  in-
dicated in  the  description  of  the  first  room.  As  soon  as  I  took
notice  of  this  congruency,  I  varied  the  experiments  very  much,  to
ascertain  whether  it  is  always  so.  After  examining  one  room
in  a  house,  in  relation  to  the  position  of  the  windows  and  the
grates,  I  proceeded  to  the  second  or  third  story  in  one  of  the
back  rooms,  to  get  a  description  of  it ;  then  down  into  the
yard,  to  get  a  description  of  the  back  part  of  the  house  ;  then  into
situation  of  things  from  this  new  point  of  view  ;  then  to  one  side
of  the  house,  to  look  in  at  a  window  into  a  room  in  which  we
had  not  yet  been ;  then  into  a  room  in  the  second  story,  directly
over  the  room  back  of  the  parlor,  and  the  fireplace  was  found  to
be  on  the  south  side,  exactly  corresponding  with  the  rest  of  the
description.  This  experiment  has  been  tried  by  me  when  I  was
not  in  communication  with  the  somnambulists,  but  conducted  it
through  a  person  who  was  in  communication  with  them,  in  re-
spect to  buildings  which  neither  of  us  had  ever  seen.

But,  it  may  be  said,  the  somnambulist,  having  a  good  idea  of  the
manner  in  which  houses  are  generally  built,  could  not  fail  in  a
matter  of  that  kind ;  and  if  he  merely  imagines  himself  to  be  in  a
distant  house,  he  would  not  be  so  obscure  in  his  imaginary  per-
ceptions as  to  make  such  an  architectural  error ;  for  the  imagina-
tion must  grasp  the  whole  object  at  once  in  all  its  complexity.
Besides,  there  is  also  reason  to  believe  that '  the  somnambulist
borrows  the  whole  description  from  the  model  in  the  mind  of  the
person  in  communication  with  him.

To  all  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  innumerable  examples  are
given,  some  in  this  book,  of  the  power  not  only  of  transition,
but  also  of  transition  and  clairvoyance  united,  which  were  prop-
erly verified.  And,  in  the  next  place,  these  trials  were,  some  of
them,  made  when  the  person  in  communication  had  no  particular
knowledge  of  architecture,  and  no  intimation  of  the  design  of
the  experiment. Hence  we  must  adopt  the  obvious  explanation.

If  you  wish  to  carry  a  somnambulist  to  your  own  house,  or  to
the  house  of  a  friend,  it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  trace  out  the
path  for  him  to  travel ;  at  least  I  have  found  it  so  in  all  the  trials
I  have  made,  and  they  are  many.  Just  take  the  hand  of  the
somnambulist,  observing  first  to  request  to  be  put  in  communica-
tion with  him.  You  must  remember,  by  the  way,  that  it  requires
much  circumspection  on  your  part  in  making  the  proper  advances,
especially  if  the  somnambulist  be  a  woman,  and  you  a  stranger.


APPENDIX.  255

After  being  put  in  communication,  take  his  hand,  and  ask  him
if  he  will  go  with  you  to  your  house  ;  (you  need  not  tell  him
where  or  in  what  direction  it  is ; )  and  if  he  says  he  does  not
know  the  way,  tell  him  you  will  go  with  him.  If  he  consents  to
go  with  you,  carry  your  mind  home,  and  he  will  soon  be  there
with  you.  Bid  him  let  you  know  when  he  arrives.  He  will
enter  the  house,  and  will  surprise  you  by  the  correct  description
which  he  will  give  you  of  it.  At  the  same  time,  if  you  have  or-
dered some  one  of  your  family  to  make  an  arrangement  of  the
furniture  in  a  particular  room,  without  letting  you  know  what  the
arrangement  is,  you  will  probably  discover  that  he  does  not  de-
rive his  ideas  from  your  own  mind.  You  may,  however,  influence
his  mind,  and  mislead  him.  He  will  sometimes  make  wonderful
mistakes  in  some  things,  while  he  is  wonderfully  correct  in  others.
He  who  is  acquainted  with  the  mode  of  proceeding,  will  frequent-
ly, by  attending  closely  to  their  motions,  discover  the  cause  of
their  mistakes.

T  have  known  several  cases  analogous  to  this.  You  send  a
the  house  correctly,  and  your  friend  correctly.  He  says,  your
friend  is  sitting  at  his  desk  in  his  study.  You  go  off  satisfied
that  all  is  right ;  but  on  writing  an  account,  and  receiving  an
answer  from  your  friend,  you  are  astonished  to  learn  that  he  was
not  at  home  on  the  day  in  question.  How  did  Somnambulus
contrive  to  give  such  a  description  of  him,  if  he  did  not  see  him  ?
The  following  letters  present  instances  of  the  kind  to  which  1
refer.

FROM DOCTOR HARTSHORN.

"  Providence7  September  1,  1837.

"  Dear  Sir  :  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  cheerfully
submit  to  you  an  account  of  an  experiment  in  animal  magnetism,
made  a  few  evenings  since  by  Mr.  William  Grant,  at  his  father's
residence,  in  High  Street.  The  person  magnetized  was  a  young
lady,  a  relative  of  the  family.  Similar  experiments  had  often
been  made  by  him,  and  it  was  by  particular  request  that  he  con-
sented to  gratify  the  curiosity  of  a  few  individuals  on  this  occa-
sion. There  were  present,  Bishop  Brownell,  of  Connecticut,  Dr.
Brownell,  of  this  city,  Major  Lomax,  of  the  U.  S.  Army,  Mr.  E.
Dyer,  Jr.,  Mr.  Potter,  and  myself.  Mr.  Grant  placed  himself  in
front  of  his  patient,  and,  fixing  his  eyes  steadily  upon  her,  she
soon  gave  evidence  of  being  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  As  it
seemed  to  us  among  the  most  interesting  and  extraordinary  facts,
in  connection  with  this  subject,  that  the  person  magnetized  could
cluded to  test  her  powers  in  that  way.  The  magnetizer  was  accord-
ingly requested  to  direct  her  to  Newport She  soon  signified  her


256  APPENDIX.

arrival,  and  was  directed  from  the  landing,  through  the  town,  to
the  residence  of  Major  Lomax.  Passing  through  the  front  door
into  the  entry,  and  then  into  one  of  the  side  rooms,  she  gave  such
a  description  of  the  interior,  the  furniture,  and  family,  as  to  satisfy
all  present  that  she  was  not  exercising  the  Yankee  prerogative
of  guessing.  Major  Lomax  had  previously  intimated  to  me  that,
ture in  his  house,  it  would  serve,  as  forcibly  as  any  thing  could,
to  remove  his  doubts,  inasmuch  as  the  article  in  question  was
rare,  probably  what  she  had  never  seen.  She  was  now  directed
to  return  to  the  entry,  and  enter  the  room  on  the  opposite  side.
As  soon  as  she  had  entered  the  room,  she  declared  it  to  be  a
parlor ;  and  immediately  her  attention  was  arrested  by  an  object
which  she  said  was  a  musical  instrument.  She  was  told  to  play
upon  it ;  but  she  said  she  could  not,  because  it  was  covered.
She  was  asked  what  the  covering  was,  and  answered  it  was
green  baize.  She  now  went  through  the  motions  of  untying  the
covering,  lifting  it  from  the  instrument,  and  laying  it  aside.  She
was  now  told  by  Mr.  Grant,  who  did  not  know  what  the  instru-
ment was,  and  who  alone  was  in  communication  with  her,  to
strike  the  keys  ;  but  she  declared  there  were  no  keys.  She  now
drew  her  hand  rapidly  across,  as  if  to  vibrate  the  strings  of  an
instrument,  at  the  same  time  turning  her  ear,  and  listening  with
apparent  surprise  and  pleasure.  She  next  took  hold  with  her
thumb  and  finger,  and  motioned  as  if  to  spring  the  chords.  She
was  asked  what  the  instrument  was,  and  answered  that  she  could
not  tell ;  that  she  had  never  seen  any  thing  like  it  before.  To
the  question  if  it  were  a  guitar,  she  answered  that  it  was  not :
that  she  had  seen  a  guitar ;  that  this  was  not  like  one ;  that  it
had  many  more  strings,  and  was  much  larger.  This  description
Major  Lomax  assured  the  company  corresponded  with  the  fact.
There  was  in  the  parlor  a  harp  of  large  size,  and  it  had  a  cover-
ing of  green  baize  cloth.  Upon  subsequent  inquiry,  it  was  ascer-
tained that  the  harp  had  been  on  that  evening  removed  from  the
front  parlor  to  the  one  immediately  in  the  rear,  communicating
with  the  first,  however,  by  means  of  a  door.*  The  gentlemen
were  assured  that  the  young  lady  had  never  been  in  Newport,
and  she  was  also  a  stranger  to  them.

"It  should  be  remarked,  in  conclusion,  that  this  statement  has
been  submitted  to  Major  Lomax,  and  has  his  concurrence.
"  Yours,  very  respectfully,

"ISAAC  HARTSHORN.
«  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

*  It  is  asserted  by  all  clairvoyants,  that  walls  always  seem  to  be  trans-
parent. When  told  to  pass  from  one  room  to  another  through  the  parti-
tion or  a  fastened  door,  they  appear  to  find  no  difficulty  in  doing  it;-«-

2  Vans..


APPENDIX.  257

FROM REV. FREDERICK A. FARLEY.

"  Tuesday  Morning,  October  3.

"My  dear  Sir:  In  reply  to  your  note  of  yesterday,  I  am
happy  to  give  you  any  statement  of  facts  in  my  power ;  nor  can  I
have  the  least  objection  to  the  use  of  my  name  in  connection
therewith,  since  I  mean  that  it  shall  be  a  statement  of  facts,  and
neither  more  nor  less.

"  Somewhere  about  two  months  since,  I  asked  Miss  Brackett,
(the  blind  lady,)  in  an  interview  at  my  own  house,  she  being  in
the  state  of  magnetic  somnambulism,  to  go  with  me  to  Boston.  1
with  remarkable  accuracy  much  of  the  arrangement  of  the  house,
the  furniture  of  the  drawing-rooms,  &c.  As  I  understand  you,  in
your  present  inquiries,  to  seek  illustrations  '  of  the  uncertainty
which  attends  the  relations  of  somnambulists  when  they  are  at  a
distance  in  spirit,  and  of  the  singular  errors  and  illusions  to  which
they  are  liable,'  I  confine  myself  to  this  point.  Miss  B.  said
there  was  a  gentleman  in  the  front  parlor,  standing  near  the  win-
have  done  to  any  inquirer.  She  said,  indeed,  that  his  hair  was
'very  thin,'  when  I  should  have  said  he  was  'bald  on  the  top
of  the  head  ;'  and  that  he  wore  spectacles  which  had  '  not  silver
bows,'  when  I  should  have  said  they  had  '  gold '  bows.  Upon
seeking  to  know  how  far  these  statements  corresponded  with  the
facts,  it  was  found  that  the  occupant  of  the  house  was  not  at
home  at  that  hour,  (half  past  6  o'clock,  P.  M.,)  not  having  been
at  home  between  half  past  3  o'clock  and  8  o'clock.

"Again,  she  said  that  a  man  was  spreading  a  cloth  on  the
floor  in  the  back  parlor ;  and  a  little  black  boy  came  in,  and  they
talked  together.  It  was,  indeed,  about  the  hour  when  the  male
domestic  of  the  family  might  have  been  preparing  for  the  even-
ing meal ;  but  it  was  found  that  nobody  interrupted  him.

"  Upon  leaving  the  house,  she  crossed  the  street  to  inspect  the
church  on  Church  Green.  While  apparently  engaged  in  exam-
ining its  exterior,  she  of  a  sudden  drew  herself  up  with  an  air  of
great  dignity,  saying,  'I'll  thank  you  to  mind  your  own  busi-
ness,' or  words  to  that  effect.  '  What  now  ? '  I  asked.  She
replied,  'That  boy  is  troubling  me!'  I,  as  if  I  saw  him,  com-
manded him  to  desist.  '  There,  he  is  laughing  at  you,'  said  she.
'  Well,  then  I'll  kick  him,'  I  rejoined,  accompanying  the  words
with  a  suitable  movement  of  the  foot.  '  Ah,  you've  made  him
cry,  now,'  she  replied.

"  After  this,  upon  returning  through  the  streets,  she  complained
constantly  of  being  jostled  by  the  crowd ;  although,  as  I  after-
wards learned,  there  was  nothing  to  cause  any  unusual  crowd  at
that  time.

22*


258


APPENDIX.


"  In  this  interview,  Miss  B.  exhibited  the  faculty  of  clairvoy-
ance, in  my  house,  with  perfect  accuracy.  I  do  not  remember  a
single  error  in  regard  to  the  things  around  her  in  several  distinct
rooms.  And,  as  I  before  hinted,  the  external  appearance  of  the
house  at  Boston,  its  entry  or  hall,  both  drawing-rooms,  the  china
closet,  and  many  articles  of  furniture,  both  what  thev  were,  and
"  Very  truly  yours,

"FREDERICK  A.  FARLEY."

FROM DOCTOR JOHN FUNT.

"  Boston,  October  1, 1837.

"  Dear  Sir  :  I  have  been  so  much  engaged  since  my  return
from  Providence,  that  I  have  not  until  now  found  leisure  to  com-
ply with  your  request ;  and  even  now  I  fear  I  shall  be  able  to
give  you  but  a  very  succinct  account  of  the  state  of  things  on  my
return  to  Boston.  In  your  note  of  the  28th  September,  you  wish
to  know  if  Miss  Brackett  was  correct  in  relation  to  the  fire  in
Pearl  Street.  You  will  perhaps  recollect  that  she  did  not  say
there  was  a  fire ;  but  after  having  visited  my  house,  on  going
into  the  street,  she  made  this  remark :  '  What  is  the  cause  of  so
many  people's  running  ? '  and  then  observed,  '  There  is  a  lamp
raised  upon  a  pole.'  And,  on  requesting  her  to  follow  them,  she
soon  said  she  was  in  Pearl  Street,  but  that  the  people  were  re-
turning. There  was  no  alarm  of  fire  on  that  evening ;  neither
could  I  ascertain  that  there  was  any  disturbance  in  the  streets
for  several  days.  Finally,  however,  a  friend,  Mr.  E.,  was  passing
the  evening  at  my  house,  and  in  conversation  incidentally  re-
marked that  there  was  a  disturbance  at  a  neighboring  house  a
few  evenings  before,  and  that  the  watchman  sprung  his  rattle ;
consequently  many  people  were  collected  in  the  street.  Upon
making  particular  inquiries  respecting  the  evening,  I  ascertained,
for  a  certainty,  that  it  was  on  the  evening,  and  at  the  veinf  time,
we  were  in  communication  with  Miss  Brackett.  That  a  lamp
was  taken  from  the  engine-house  —  it  being  next  door  to  the
watch-house  —  on  the  alarm  being  given  by  the  watch,  I  think
very  probable.  The  fact,  however,  is  not  known.  Miss  B.,  you
may  remember,  would  not  give  any  account  of  my  parlors,  but
answered  all  questions  by  saying,  '  You  can  see  as  well  as  I
can.'  Neither  was  I  much  more  successful  on  visiting  the  office ;
for  she  dismissed  that  with  two  or  three  remarks,  such  as,  '  You
are  not  very  neat;'  'It  looks  nearly  as  bad  as  Dr.  Capron's ; '
which,  sub  rosd,  was  satisfactory  evidence  to  my  mind  that  she
must  have  seen  it.  I  then  prevailed  upon  her  to  step  into  the
kitchen ;  and  upon  inquiring  if  any  one  was  there,  she  answered
that  there  was  a  girl  about  twenty-five  years  of  age,  dressed  in  a
small  figured  pink  calico  dress,  and  that  she  was  mixing  bread  or


APPENDIX.  259

cake,  and  that  no  one  was  with  her.  Immediately  upon  my  re-
turn, I  inquired  of  the  girl  whether  she  mixed  any  bread  or  cake
on  Tuesday  evening,  and  she  gave  a  decided  negative  answer;  but
said  she  mixed  bread  on  Monday  evening.  1  then  left  her,  and
concluded  that  Miss  B.  must  have  been  mistaken.  The  girl  soon
followed  me  into  the  parlor,  with  eyes  as  large  as  tolerably-sized
tea-cups,  and  exclaimed,  '  Why,  yes,  sir,  I  did  bring  some  dough
from  the  cellar  into  the  kitchen,  and  worked  it  over,  and  put  it
into  the  closet'  Upon  asking  her  what  time  in  the  evening,
she  said,  'Between  half  past  9  and  10  o'clock  ;'  which  corresponds
with  the  time  when  Miss  B.  was  on  her  visit  to  Boston.

"  With  regard  to  her  giving  you  cistern  water  *  to  drink,  from
a  tin  wash-bowl,  and  her  remarks  concerning  the  dog,  I  was  fully
satisfied  of  the  correctness  of  her  statements  then,  and  have  found
no  cause  to  alter  my  opinion  since  my  return.  You  will  recol-
lect, upon  leaving  my  house,  I  took  her  to  visit  the  house  of  a

sister  of  mine,  Mrs.  G ,  and  upon  going,  as  I  supposed,  into

the  parlor,  she  evidently  took  another  door  leading  from  the  same
entry,  and  went  into  Mrs.  G.'s  chamber.  For,  after  giving  her  a
reasonable  time  to  look  around,  she  says,  "  If  you  will  get  up,  1

*  In  order  to  obtain  a  more  particular  description  of  things,  1  said  to
Miss  B., —  Dr.  Flint  and  myself  being  both  in  communication  with  her, —
"  Let  us  sit  down  here  in  the  parlor.  I  wish  you  would  have  the  good-
ness to  ask  the  girl  to  bring  me  some  water."  Miss  B.,  immediately
gliding  down  into  the  kitchen,  made  the  request ;  but,  after  waiting  for  a
reply,  she  added,  "  I  shall  have  to  do  it  myself,  for  she  will  not  answer
me."  She  returned,  and,  with  her  fingers  arranged  as  if  she  were  holding
a  dish,  said,  "  Here  it  is  ;  the  girl  would  not  answer  me."  1  drank.  She
took  the  vessel,  and,  carrying  it  to  the  place  from  whence  she  took  it,  she
exclaimed,  "  There,  1  have  given  Mr.  Hartshorn  water  out  of  the  wrong
pump  :  this  is  the  good  water.  I  gave  him  the  hand-basin  to  drink  from."
and  said  she  found  the  basin  hanging  up  by  the  side  of  it.  "  But,"  said
she,  "  the  other  pump  has  good  water  in  it,  for  I  drew  some  and  tasted  it.
I  hope  you  will  excuse  me,  sir."

Dr.  Flint,  several  of  whose  friends  from  Boston  were  present,  assured
me,  as  he  has  in  this  letter,  that  the  description  of  the  relative  position  of
the  pumps,  &c,  was  accurate.

It  may  as  well  be  added  in  this  place,  that  it  was  necessary  for  each
of  us  to  have  hold  of  the  young  lady's  hand,  or  to  touch  her  person,  other-
wise the  communication  is  entirely  destroyed.  Once,  when  I  wished  Dr.
Flint  to  converse  with  her  alone,  I  withdrew  my  hand  from  hers,  saying,
before  releasing  it,  "  1  will  return  directly."  "  I  wonder  he  should  go  off
so,"  said  Miss  B.  During  the  time  the  two  were  in  conversation,  I  re-
tained my  seat;  and.  on  taking  her  hand  again,  she  asked  me  where  I
had  been,  observing,  "  I  wonder  you  could  leave  me  in  the  house  of  a
stranger."

But  when  a  somnambulist  is  not  sent  abroad,  it  is  not  by  any  means
necessary  to  retain  the  hand.  You  may  be  in  communication,  though  at
any  part  of  the  room.  Sometimes  he  is  told  to  converse  with  all  who  are
present.  Then  he  hears  every  thing  addressed  directly  to  him,  but  not
.he  conversation  of  others. [See  Note  X.]


260  APPENDIX.

will  pm  your  dress  for  you.  Your  brother  is  in  the  other  room,
and  wishes  to  see  you."  She  likewise  remarked,  that  there  was
a  child  in  the  bed  with  her,  (Mrs.  G.,)  about  eighteen  months  old*
Mrs.  G.  was  in  bed  at  that  time,  and  her  little  girl,  about  four
years  old,  with  her.  I  would  remark,  that  Miss  B.  was  correct
with  respect  to  the  color  of  Mrs.  G.'s  hair.

"  I  fear  I  have  not  given  you  a  sufficiently-minute  account  of
the  matter,  but  want  of  time  must  be  my  excuse.  If  there  are
any  particulars  upon  which  you  would  like  a  more  detailed  ac-
count, I  shall  be  happy  to  furnish  them.

"  I  am,  sir,  very  respectfully,

"  Your  friend  and  servant,

"JOHN  FLINT.
"  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."


NOTE  XV.

In  note  fourth  of  part  first,  I  detailed  the  experiment  of  Mr.
Covill,  of  Troy,  in  New  York ;  and  as  no  reply  had  been  received,
I  promised  to  make  known  the  result  in  this  part  As  the  whole
has  been  laid  before  the  public  in  Colonel  Stone's  "  Letter  to  Dr.
Brigham"  I  will  merely  add, that  Mr. Isaac  Thurber  has  received
a  letter  from  the  gentleman  in  question,  which  confirms  the  truth
of  Colonel  Stone's  statement.  Miss  B.  read  the  sealed  packet  in
the  following  manner :  —

"  No  other  than  the  eye  of  Omnipotence  can  read  this  in  this  en-
velopement.  ****  #*  1837."

The  true  reading  was, —

"  No  other  than  the  eye  of  Omnipotence  can  read  this  sentence
in  this  envelope. Troy,  New  York,  August,  1837."

"Providence,  Octobers,  1837.
"  Dear  Sir  : About  three  weeks  since,  I  received  a  letter
Rev.  Richard  Stone,  pastor  of  the  First  Congregational  So-
Tf  West  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  enclosing  one  addressed  to
ackett,  with  a  request  that  she  would  read  it  without
g  the  seals. As  he  is  a  particular  friend  of  hers,  she  was
J  induced  to  do  it,  though  such  communications  have  gen-
erally been  read  with  reluctance,  as  it  requires  great  exertion  to
read  through  several  thicknesses  of  paper,  as  is  frequently  ne-
cessary.

"  I  addressed  a  line  to  Mr.  Stone,  giving  Miss  Brackett's  read-
ing of  the  letter  directed  to  her,  and  have  just  received  an  answer
from  him,  in  which  he  says,  '  Your  letter  containing  mine,  with


APPENDIX.  261

the  seals  unbroken,  came  safely  to  hand,  and,  to  my  gratification,
it  was  read  correctly.'

"  Should  you  consider  this  fact  of  any  importance,  you  are  at
liberty  to  make  such  disposition  of  it  as  you  may  think  proper.

"  Yours,  with  respect,

"G.  CAPRON.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

Experiments  of  this  kind  have  been  tried  frequently.  The
fact  that  some  somnambulists  have  the  faculty  of  seeing
through  opaque  substances,  is  established  beyond  a  doubt.  [See
Note  X.]


NOTE  XVI.

When  a  somnambulist  has  any  thing  in  his  hand,  the  magnet-
izer  may  will  him  to  give  it  to  any  person  in  the  room,  and  it  will
be  done  accordingly,  though  not  a  word  be  said  by  any  one.  If
another  individual  attempt  to  take  it  by  grasping  it,  or  by  insinu-
ating his  hand  between  the  object  and  the  hand  of  the  person  to
whom  it  is  offered,  the  somnambulist  evades  him  with  the  rapidi-
ty of  thought,  and  places  it  where  he  was  requested  to  place  it
I  have  seen  several  persons  try  in  this  manner,  all  at  a  time,  to
seize  the  object,  but  without  success.  With  almost  inconceiva-
ble dexterity  of  evasion,  the  somnambulists  retained  their  own
hold,  and  conveyed  the  charge  in  safety.

What  is  equally  singular  was  related  to  me  by  Mr.  Pot-
ter. A  patient  of  his,  with  whom  I  am  acquainted,  when  she
is  in  the  somnambulic  state,  though  she  does  not  see,  that  is,  has
no  clairvoyance,  when  requested  to  hand  any  object  to  another,
though  the  magnetizer  endeavor  to  exert  no  influence  at  the  time,
will  not  give  it  up  to  any  hut  the  person  designated.  She  does
not  offer  any  explanation  of  this  herself,  but  says  she  always
knows  when  the  right  person  presents  his  hand,  even  when  he
says  nothing.  This  has  been  Avitnessed  by  several  of  my  friends.
The  case  of  this  young  lady  is  a  strong  one  to  prove  the  allevi-
ating power  of  magnetism.  She  is  under  the  medical  care  of
Dr.  L.  L.  Miller. [See  a  note  at  the  end  of  the  Appendix.]


NOTE  XVII.

Somnambulists  frequently  display  ingenuity  and  acuteness  of
thought  which  are  very  striking.  An  instance  may  be  given
which  was  related  to  me  by  Dr.  Cleveland,  of  Pawtuxet.

Professor  Yates,  of  Schenectady,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Dumont,  of
Newport,  had  been  admitted  by  him  to  see  a  patient  of  his,  while


262  APPENDIX.

in  the  somnambulic  state.  After  various  experiments  to  test  the
clairvoyance  of  the  lady,  one  of  the  gentlemen,  perhaps  to  dispel
the  lingering  mist  of  incredulity,  opened  the  Testament,  and,
pointing  to  a  verse,  requested  her  to  read  it.  She  declined  read-
ing it ;  but  at  length  said  she  would  read  one  on  the  opposite
leaf.  On  being  desired  to  do  so,  she  pointed  her  finger  to  the
following  passage,  and  read  it :  "  Except  ye  see  signs  and  won-
ders, ye  will  not  believe ! "  —  John  iv.  48.


NOTE  XVIII.

The  following  passage  is  extracted  from  one  of  the  letters  of
Lafayette  to  Washington.  As  it  was  written  in  English,  the
reader  will  perceive  the  peculiarities  which  stamp  it  as  the  pro-
duction of  a  foreigner.  It  is  found  in  the  "Memoirs,  Corre-
spondence, and  Manuscripts,  of  General  Lafayette,  published  by  his
Family,"  3  vols.,  just  issued  by  Messrs.  Saunders  &  Otley,  New
York.

"  A  German  doctor,  called  Mesmer,  having  made  the  greatest
discovery  upon  animal  magnetism,  he  has  instructed  scholars,
among  whom  your  humble  servant  is  called  one  of  the  most
enthusiastic.  I  know  as  much  as  any  conjurer  ever  did,  which
reminds  me  of  our  friend's  at  Fishkill  interview  with  the  devil,
that  made  us  laugh  so  much  at  his  house ;  and,  before  I  go,  I  will
get  leave  to  let  you  into  the  secret  of  Mesmer,  which,  you  may
depend  upon,  is  a  grand  philosophical  discovery."


NOTE  XIX.

Somnambulism  will  probably  give  the  death-blow  to  supersti-
tion, at  least  in  some  of  its  forms.  The  superstitious  are  they
who,  through  ignorance,  attribute  natural  appearances  and  events
to  a  supernatural  cause,  and  are  the  least  likely  to  have  faith  in
the  power  of  this  agent.  Prepossessed,  as  they  generally  are,
with  the  opinion  that  a  supernatural  influence  is  exerted  in  all
uncommon  things  which  they  cannot  account  for,  they  are  un-
willing to  listen  to  one  who  refers  them  to  a  principle  whose
laws  are  but  little  known.  They  see  all  history  full  of  unac-
countable relations ;  and  they  look  upon  the  attempt  to  explain
them  rationally  as  daring,  and  even  impious.  Such  is  the  case
with  some  very  conscientious,  but  very  weak,  people.  They  do
not  consider  that  Omnipotence  is  displayed  as  much  in  the  ex-
traordinary application  of  known  principles,  as  in  the  application
of  those  which  are  hidden  from  us ;  and  that  the  idea  of  a  contra-


APPENDIX.  263

vention  of  natural  laws,  does  not  of  necessity  enter  into  the  sig-
nification of  the  word  miracle.  The  word  miraculous,  meaning
wonderful,  may  with  propriety  be  applied  to  every  exertion  of
divine  power  which  surpasses  our  ordinary  experience.  But  if
it  were  necessary  to  quiet  the  apprehensions  of  such  people,  it
might  be  stated  that  the  least  miracle  recorded  in  holy  writ  is
beyond  comparison  greater  than  any  thing  effected  by  this  agent.
The  turning  of  water  into  wine,  and  the  healing  of  the  sick  by
the  touch,  are  the  only  things  that  are  approached  in  semblance
by  the  magnetic  action.  To  affirm  that  the  two  things  are  the
same,  is  an  assumption  not  warranted  by  a  careful  attention  to
the  facts.  And  if,  in  the  two  cases,  the  same  agent  is  employed,
we  cannot  help  perceiving  a  vast  difference  in  the  effects  pro-
duced. In  one,  the  cure  is  instantaneous ;  in  the  other,  long  and
tedious.  In  the  one,  there  is  no  failure ;  in  the  other,  there  is
uncertainty.

The  tree  that  is  caused  to  spring  from  the  earth  instantane-
ously to  a  great  growth,  and  the  one  that  throws  out  its  branches
one  by  one,  gaining  its  maturity  in  a  hundred  years,  may  both
be  sustained  by  the  same  laws  of  vegetative  growth,  accelerated
in  one  case,  and  not  in  the  other.  Yet  the  first  exhibits  an
instance  of  miraculous  power  exerted,  and  the  other  follows  the
course  of  nature  in  its  slow  developement.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a
derogation  from  the  virtue  of  recorded  miracles  to  suppose  we
have  obtained  a  faint  glimpse  of  the  principles  by  which  they
were  performed ;  but  the  supposition  is  gratuitous.

The  crude  and  ill-digested  state  of  our  knowledge  on  this  sub-
ject, the  wonderful  effects  which  have  been  produced,  and  the
suggestive  energy  with  which  they  are  fraught,  have  led  enthu-
siastic men  into  a  wide  and  boundless  field  of  speculation.  They
imagine  there  are  no  limits  to  this  power  because  they  cannot  fix
them.

They  are  like  the  first  discoverers  of  Nootka  Sound,  who  laid
it  down  on  their  charts  as  a  vast  inland  sea,  simply  because  the
mist  prevented  their  seeing  the  opposite  shore.  They  do  mis-
chief to  the  cause  of  truth  by  rash  attempts  to  sustain  unfounded
theories ;  and  they  are  they  who  have  broached  the  doctrine  to
which  allusion  has  been  made.

When  we  examine  the  subject  coolly,  we  shall  find  in  it  traces
of  what  has  been  practised  for  centuries.  Witchcraft,  magic,
exorcism,  and  sorcery,  will  soon  be  capable  no  more  of  perplex-
ing the  minds  of  men ;  for  superstition  will  be  known  no  more.
As  the  progress  of  astronomy  dispelled  the  dread  inspired  by
eclipses  and  by  comets,  which  "from  their  horrid  hair  shook
pestilence  and  war,"  so  may  the  discovery  of  this  new  power  in
the  human  mind  destroy  the  lingering  remnants  of  superstition,
while  it  also  rescues  from  the  reproach  of  utter  falsehood  many
a  tale  of  barbaric  times.


264  APPENDIX.


NOTE  XX.  — Page  108.

Transmission  of  Pain.  —  The  transmission  of  the  symptoms
from  the  magnetizer  to  the  magnetized  is  frequent,  and  it  is  for
this  reason  that  Deleuze  considers  good  health  indispensable  in
a  magnetizer.  In  the  case  of  Madame  Montaux,  we  see  the
opposite  effect  taking  place.  If  this  occurs  more  frequently  than
we  are  aware  of  it,  it  may  account  for  the  peculiar  oppression
and  weakness  which  some  persons  feel  after  magnetizing.  And
if  there  be  any  truth  in  the  theory  of  a  fluid,  the  directions  given
by  Deleuze  to  flirt  the  fingers  at  the  termination  of  a  pass,  in  order
to  throw  it  off  from  ourselves,  derive  additional  weight  from  this
circumstance,  and  are  worthy  of  being  implicitly  followed  in
cases  of  contagious  disease.

I  have  known  a  somnambulist,  when  in  her  natural  state,  to  be
afflicted  with  a  violent  side-ache,  in  consequence  of  sitting  down
and  taking  the  hand  of  a  patient  then  being  magnetized  for  that
complaint.  Her  susceptibility  to  the  magnetic  influence  was  so
great  that,  although  the  magnetizer  did  not  direct  his  attention
to  her,  she  was  the  first  of  the  two  to  fall  into  the  magnetic
state.

The  same  thing  has  been  observed  by  the  celebrated  physiol-
ogist Georget.  He  says  that,  whenever  he  put  his  somnambulists
in  communication  with  a  sick  person,  they  immediately  experi-
enced a  pain,  an  uneasiness,  and  sometimes  a  sharp  affection,  in
the  corresponding  organs.


NOTE  XXL  — Page  119.

The  Magnetic  Fluid.  —  I  have  heard  patients  say  they  can
see  the  magnetic  fluid,  as  did  those  of  M.  N.  Whether  this  is
an  illusion  of  the  imagination,  or  whether  there  is  in  reality  a
fluid,  has  long  been  a  matter  of  question  among  the  learned.
M.  Bertrand,  in  his  work  on  somnambulism,  rejects  the  opinion
of  its  existence.  He  says  that  the  idea  originates  or  is  per-
petuated in  the  minds  of  the  magnetizers,  and  is  thence  trans-
fused into  the  minds  of  their  patients.  That  such  might  be  the
case,  were  there  no  fluid,  there  cannot  be  much  doubt ;  but  it
has  frequently  happened  that  patients  have  professed  to  see  the
fluid  when  they  who  magnetized  them  were  not  fluidists.  And
it  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  imagination  of  somnam-
bulists cannot  be  permanently  affected  in  regard  to  an  object.
As  soon  as  the  will  of  the  operator  ceases  to  act,  the  object
returns  to  what  it  really  is.  For  instance,  he  may  cause  a  lady's
work-bag  to  have  the  appearance  of  a  child,  and  he  may  in-


APPENDIX.  265

duce  the  patient  to  caress  it  as  such ;  but  the  moment  he  with-
draws his  attention  from  the  subject,  it  returns  to  its  proper
appearance,  and  she  hugs  the  illusion  no  more.*  If  you  try
this  experiment,  and  find  out  that  every  impression  of  that  kind
is  of  necessity  transient,  will  there  not  be  some  difficulty  in
adopting  Bertrand's  notion?  Besides,  it  requires  a  positive  ef-
fort to  induce  a  deception  of  any  kind ;  and  many  who  try  to  do
it,  fail,  because  they  have  not  exerted  sufficient  energy  of  con-
ception. It  would  therefore  seem  impossible  for  a  mere  opinion
among  magnetizers  that  such  a  fluid  does  exist,  to  produce
an  illusion  so  strong  as  to  deceive  their  somnambulists,  and
make  them  constantly  affirm  the  same  thing  in  regard  to  its  ex-
istence.

It  should,  however,  be  borne  in  mind,  as  somnambulism  pre-
sents so  great  a  variety  of  phases,  and  is  attended  with  such
diversity  of  powers,  we  cannot  be  too  cautious  in  adopting  the-
ories, especially  such  as  tend  to  foreclose  all  further  investigation
of  the  points  in  question.

It  ought  to  be  stated  here,  that  some  somnambulists  do  not  see
any  fluid,  even  when  their  attention  is  drawn  to  it

If  any  one  thinks  this  a  strong  objection  to  the  theory  of  a
fluid,  let  him  remember  that  somnambulists  vary  greatly  in  the
power  of  clairvoyance ;  and  not  only  so,  the  same  individual  has
it  at  one  time  very  weak,  and  at  another  time  very  strong.  It  is
difficult  to  conceive  how  any  effect  can  take  place  without  a
material  medium.  It  may  be  granted  that  somnambulism  may,
under  certain  circumstances,  occur  by  the  mere  power  of  the
imagination ;  but  this  does  not  by  any  means  admit  the  conclu-
sion that  the  phenomena  are  attributable  to  the  same  cause,  or
that  the  will  and  influence  of  another's  mind  do  not  produce  any
effect  when  they  are  exerted.  Polarity  may  be  given  to  an  iron
rod,  heated  to  a  certain  degree  and  held  in  a  certain  direction,
by  a  smart  blow  at  one  end  with  a  hammer ;  and  the  rod  may
acquire  polarity  by  the  silent  operation  of  nature  in  the  course
of  a  long  time,  if  left  in  the  same  position.  But  if,  from  the  lat-
ter fact,  we  infer  that  the  hammer  had  no  agency  in  the  former
one,  we  are  guilty  of  an  absurdity  altogether  analogous  to  the
one  hinted  at  above.

Allowing,  then,  that  the  effect  is  produced  by  the  vis  volunta-
tis of  the  magnetizer,  and  that  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  it
can  act  without  a  medium,  we  should  not  reject  an  opinion  which
is  supported  by  the  authority  of  perhaps  nine  tenths  of  the  Euro-
pean writers  on  the  subject,  unless  we  can  present  the  apology

*  I  am  assured  by  Dr.  Cleveland,  of  Pawtuxet,  that  he  has  one  patient
whom  neither  he  nor  any  other  person  has  ever  succeeded  in  deceiving  by
experiments  of  this  kind,  though  they  have  been  often  tried.

23


%66  APPENDIX.

of  a  thorough  investigation.  We  may  hold  it  in  doubt  until  it  is
proved  to  be  correct.

But  we  could  give  another  reason  in  favor  of  the  theory.  The
passes  are  always  made  downwards  to  produce  an  effect,  and
upwards,  or  transversely,  when  we  wish  to  lessen  the  magnetic
action,  or  relieve  it  entirely.

Let  any  one  try  the  one  for  the  other,  and  the  result  may  assist
him  in  perceiving  the  force  of  the  argument  If  a  patient  re-
quires the  manipulations  in  order  to  be  put  to  sleep,  and  you
cannot  effect  it  by  the  upward  passes,  is  it  not  a  proof  that  the
imagination  does  not  play  the  most  important  part  in  producing
the  magnetic  sleep  ?  Of  course,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that
some  magnetizers  make  no  passes  at  all  with  very  susceptible
persons ;  but  since  the  passes  are  generally  requisite,  we  may
argue  from  the  general  fact.

Sitting  once  with  a  somnambulist  while  she  was  in  a  mag-
netized state,  she  observed  to  me,  "  You  could  magnetize  very
well;  you  can  magnetize  my  hand;"  at  the  same  time  she  ex-
tended her  hand  towards  me.  I  took  her  lightly  by  the  wrist,
and,  with  my  other  hand,  made  several  passes  along  her  hand
from  the  wrist  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers.  It  was  paralyzed.  I
suspected  she  had  done  it  voluntarily,  for  I  have  heard  of  their
doing  it  of  their  own  accord,*  and  I  had  determined  not  to  exert
any  will  during  the  manipulation.  Several  persons  in  the  room
came  to  examine  the  hand.  "  Now  bring  it  back  again,"  said
the  somnambulist.  "  Well,"  said  I ;  and  I  began  the  passes  in
the  same  direction  as  before.  The  rigidity  of  the  fingers  and
the  tension  of  the  muscles  became  extreme.  She  seized  my
wrist,  and,  with  considerable  violence,  made  me  change  the  di-
rection of  the  passes  from  the  fingers  to  the  wrist;  and  eight  or
ten  of  them  restored  the  hand  to  the  natural  state.  This  is  a
question  which  may  one  day  be  satisfactorily  settled ;  and,  per-
haps, it  involves  important  considerations  in  regard  to  the  pro-
cesses employed  in  curing  the  sick.

*  Miss  A****,  a  young  lady  magnetized  by  Mr.  William  Grant,  of  Prov-
idence, has  the  power  of  paralyzing  either  of  her  own  arms  or  fingers,
when  she  is  in  the  natural  state,  and  that  by  the  mere  force  of  her  own
will.

While  Miss  A****  was  on  a  visit  in  !New  York,  Dr.  David  L.  Rogers
called  upon  her,  stating  his  desire  to  investigate  the  subject,  and  his  utter
disbelief  in  its  power.  Miss  A.  being  in  the  natural  state,  Mr.  Grant,  in
order  to  convince  him  that  he  possessed  this  power,  requested  Dr.
Rogers  to  magnetize  the  lower  part  of  one  of  her  arms.  The  doctor  took
hold  of  the  forearm,  and  at  the  same  time,  as  he  afterwards  declared,
willed  to  have  the  shoulder  paralyzed.  On  asking  the  question,  it  was
found  that  she  could  move  the  forearm  very  well,  but,  on  requesting  her
to  move  her  shoulder,  it  was  completely  paralyzed,  so  that  she  could  not
move  it.


APPENDIX.  267


NOTE  XXII.  —  Page  136.

Scrofula.  —  Mr.  Daniel  Greene,  of  Pawtucket,  has  been  suc-
cessful in  diseases  of  this  class.  1  have  seen  one  of  his  pa-
tients, thirteen  years  of  age,  a  somnambulist,  whom  he  has  cured
of  the  king's  evil.


NOTE  XXIII.  —  Page  139.

Epilepsy.  —  Miss  *#****,  of  this  city,  has  been  successfully
treated  for  this  complaint  by  Dr.  Brownell.  He  began  to  mag-
netize her  in  the  month  of  January  last,  and  has  continued  the
treatment  up  to  the  present  time.  This  young  woman  has  exhib-
ited some  of  the  most  striking  traits  of  clairvoyance.  Among  the
many  individuals  who  have  had  an  opportunity  to  witness  them,
p.to  Rev.  John  A.  Clark,  of  Philadelphia,  Rev.  Drs.  Yates  and
Potter,  of  Schenectady,  Rev.  A.  Kaufman,  of  Charleston,  S.  C,
and  Dr.  Joshua  B.  Flint,  of  Boston.  In  the  consultations  she  has
had,  she  has  been  successful  in  pointing  out  the  causes  and  the
seats  of  some  diseases ;  and  so  much  confidence  has  been  inspired
in  the  correctness  of  her  observations,  that  few  who  know  the
circumstances,  would  hesitate  to  rely  upon  them  in  cases  of  dis-
location, of  diseases  which  affect  the  bones,  &c.  She  is  not  a
*  somnambulist  by  profession,"  and  is  not,  therefore,  liable  to  the
suspicion  which  is  involved  in  the  consideration  of  pecuniary
interest.

In  order  to  state  this  case  correctly,  I  have  just  been  to  see
Dr.  Brownell,  and  gathered  the  following  particulars  in  the
course  of  conversation :  —

She  had  been  troubled  with  epileptic  fits  about  six  years.
They  were  at  first  irregular  in  their  attacks,  but  afterwards  they
came  on  as  frequently  as  once  a  fortnight,  and  sometimes  once  a
week ;  and  they  were  very  severe.  She  has  been  under  mag-
netic treatment  about  eight  months,  during  which  no  medicinal
remedies  have  been  administered.

At  the  first  sitting,  which  lasted  about  three  quarters  of  an
hour,  no  apparent  effect  was  produced  by  the  manipulations.  At
the  second,  sleep  was  induced  in  about  twenty  minutes.  At  the
third,  in  about  ten  minutes.  At  the  fourth  sitting,  she  was  put
into  the  magnetic  sleep  in  a  minute,  the  magnetizer  standing
about  eight  feet  off,  and  making  no  motions  of  the  hands ;  since
which  time  no  manipulatory  processes  have  been  used.

She  is  generally  awakened  by  making  the  reversed  passes ;
but  is  easily  roused  by  the  volition  of  the  magnetizer.  If  she  is
told  to  wake  up  at  any  given  time,  she  is  punctual  in  doing  it
Dr.  Brownell  once  left  her  in  the  somnambulic  state  at  his  own


268  APPENDIX.

house,  and  in  communication  with  several  visitors,  bidding  her  to
wake  up  at  5  o'clock.  He  then  took  the  Fall  River  steamer,
which  started  at  3  o'clock,  intending  to  be  absent  about  twen-
ty-four hours.  While  on  the  passage,  about  ten  miles  down
the  river,  fearing  that  the  visitors  at  his  house  might,  by  their
experiments  and  conversation  with  her,  prevent  the  patient  fiom
waking  at  the  specified  time,  and  being  desirous  of  trying  the
extent  of  his  influence,  he  told  the  Rev.  Frederick  A.  Farley,
who  was  in  the  boat,  that  he  intended  to  "cut  off  the  communi-
cation between  them."  On  his  return,  he  learned  that  she  had
ceased  speaking  at  fifteen  minutes  before  4  o'clock,  after  which
no  one  in  the  room  could  get  any  replies  to  the  questions
which  were  asked  her.  On  waking  up  at  the  appointed  time^
(5  o'clock,)  before  the  visitors  had  retired,  she  gave  as  a  reason
for  her  conduct,  that  Dr.  Brownell  had  told  her  not  to  answer
them.

The  health  of  this  young  lady  appears  now  to  be  fully  estab-
lished. She  has  not  had  an  epileptic  fit  since  the  commence-
ment of  the  treatment.  In  the  magnetic  state,  she  declares  that
she  is  perfectly  cured,  and  shall  have  no  return  of  the  disorder.*


NOTE  XXIV.  — Page  148.

Blindness..  —  In  the  Appendix  to  the  first  part  of  this  work,  I
have  inserted  some  articles  in  relation  to  Miss  Loraina  Brackett,
which  the  reader  will  recollect.  Since  those  articles  were  pub-
lished, I  have  received,  among  other  foreign  books  on  the  subject,
two  large  volumes,  containing  an  alphabetical  list  of  cures  effected
in  France,  from  the  time  of  Mesmer  to  the  present,  to  which  Be-
leuze  refers  in  a  note,  p.  154.  Among  these  cures,  which,  by  the
way,  are  duly  authenticated  by  the  names  of  physicians,  patients,
and  witnesses,  so  that  they  may  as  justly  claim  our  attention  as
any  on  record,  there  are  several  performed  upon  persons  totally
or  partially  blind.

It  will  be  recollected  that  Mesmer  had  nearly  succeeded  in
restoring  perfect  sight  to  Mademoiselle  Paradis,  at  Vienna,  and
would  doubtless  have  succeeded  thoroughly,  had  he  been  per-
mitted to  remain  secure  from  the  attacks  of  bigotry  and  igno-
rant malice.  The  whole  of  that  case  is  detailed  at  length  in
these  volumes. Many  others  also  may  be  found  under  the  heads

*  This  case  ocetirred  more  than  five  years  ago.  Dr.  Brownell  ceased
the  treatment  on  her  assuring  him,  while  in  somnambulism,  of  her  com-
plete restoration,  and  future  exemption  from  the  attacks.  She  said  it
would  be  injurious  to  prolong  the  treatment.  Her  brother,  Mr.  Thomas
M.  Parker,  recently  informed  me  that  her  health  has  continued  very  good;
and  her  appearance  seems  fully  to  justify  the  assertion. (1843.)


APPENDIX.  269

of  Cteite,  Goutte  Sereine,  and  OpMalmie. I  cannot  refrain  from
translating  two  of  them.

"M.  Hebert  was  at  Paris  in  January,  1814,  among  the  con-
scripts destined  to  join  the  grenadiers  of  the  guard.  Certain
writings  which  had  been  given  him  to  do  at  the  barracks,  and  in
the  performance  of  which  he  had  already  passed  several  nights,
occasioned  an  inflammation  of  the  right  eye.  Having  gone  to
pay  a  visit  to  M.  Ducommun,  the  latter  proposed  to  magnetize
him.  He  consented,  but  with  the  air  of  a  person  who  placed  no
faith  in  it.  The  next  day,  he  returned,  with  his  eye  still  more
red  than  it  was  the  day  before.  M.  Ducommun  put  him  in  com-
temples.  The  two  succeeding  days,  not  having  seen  him,  M.
Ducommun  went  to  him,  and  found  him  on  a  bed,  surrounded
with  domestics,  neighbors,  a  nurse,  and  all  the  medical  parapher-
nalia. He  was  told  that  M.  Hebert  had  passed  a  very  bad  night ;
that  he  had  had  a  frightful  delirium  ;  that  four  persons  could  hardly
hold  him;  and  that  the  physician  had  declared  him  to  be  affected
with  a  nervous  malignant  fever.  He  approached  the  bed  gently,
and  placed  his  hand  upon  the  pit  of  his  stomach,  scarcely  touching
him,  and  saying  nothing.  At  the  end  of  several  minutes,  M.
Hebert  was  in  somnambulism,  and  could  tell  the  cause  of  his
disorder.  It  was  the  optic  nerve,  which,  irritated  by  the  inflam-
mation of  the  eye,  had  communicated  the  same  irritation  by  sym-
pathy to  all  the  nervous  system.  In  the  evening,  M.  Ducommun
returned,  and  found  the  patient  sitting  near  the  fire,  alone  with
his  nurse.  The  latter  told  him  he  had  been  better  during  the
day.  He  approached  him,  put  him  to  sleep  by  touching  his
stomach,  and  made  him  write  down  the  state  of  his  health,  and
the  remedies  proper  for  him.  He  ordered  for  himself  a  copious
bleeding  on  the  right  arm,  leeches  at  the  temples,  clysters,  bath-
ing of  the  feet,  barley-broth  (sirop  oVorgeat)  for  drink,  &c.
When  he  was  awakened,  M.  Ducommon  showed  him  his  pre-
scription, and  told  him  to  request  his  physician  to  bleed  him  the
next  morning,  if  it  appeared  to  him  proper.  '  He  will  be  so  much
the  more  willing,'  replied  Hebert,  '  as  he  told  me  this  morning
such  was  his  intention.'

"The  next  day,  February  3d,  M.  Ducommun  arrived,  and  asked
the  patient  the  effects  of  the  bleeding.  <  The  physician  would
not  do  it'  *  Why  ?  he  ordered  it  himself.'  '  Yes ;  but  when  he
knew  that  I  had  been  magnetized,  and  that  my  own  prescrip-
tion, given  in  somnambulism,  had  been  presented  to  him,  he  was
excited  against  you,  and  he  went  out,  declaring  he  would  never
set  foot  in  the  house  again.'

"  M.  Ducommun  was  grieved  by  this  disappointment ;  but  he
put  M.  Hebert  asleep,  who  told  him  to  send  for  a  surgeon  merely
to  bleed  him.  As  soon  as  the  patient  was  bled,  he  experienced
23  *


270  APPENDIX.

relief.  On  the  5th,  he  caused  leeches  to  be  applied  at  9  o'clock
in  the  morning.  On  the  6th,  he  was  much  better;  he  ordered
for  himself  clysters  and  foot-baths ;  and  finally,  on  the  27th,  he
said  the  eye  was  cured,  and  that  it  was  only  necessary  to  cover
it  with  a  bandage  to  protect  it  from  the  cold.

"  The  next  day,  he  wrote  to  his  father  an  account  of  his  disease,
and  the  singular  circumstances  of  his  cure ;  and,  as  nothing  pre-
vented his  going  out,  he  came  to  pass  the  evening  at  M.  Ducom-
mun's,  and  to  be  magnetized.  Three  or  four  hours  had  hardly
passed  away,  when  he  perceived  a  foreign  body  introduced  into
his  weak  eye,  which  had  there  caused  a  little  globule  of  blood.
and,  in  case  the  blood  were  not  dissipated  at  the  end  of  two
days,  a  leech  was  to  be  applied  to  the  eye,  directly  on  the  af-
fected part.

"  The  next  morning,  the  mistress  of  the  house  where  he  resided
sent  a  servant  to  M.  Ducommun,  to  inform  him  that  M.  Hebert
had  just  been  arrested  by  two  agents  of  police,  who,  without
hearing  his  expostulations,  and  without  regarding  the  state  of  his
disease,  had  compelled  him  to  dress  himself  forthwith,  and  car-
ried him  away  with  the  poultice  over  his  eye.  M.  Ducommun
ran  immediately,  but  he  could  obtain  no  information  from  the
persons  in  the  hotel.  No  one  had  thought  or  dared  to  ask  these
agents  whither  they  were  conducting  M.  Hebert.  He  went  to
the  police  office,  without  any  information ;  he  went  to  the  houses
of  all  the  friends  of  the  prisoner,  without  introductions.  Finally,
after  fifteen  days  of  fruitless  search  and  painful  expectation,  he
received  a  letter  from  M.  Hebert,  in  which  he  announced  to  him
that  he  had  been  arrested  as  a  refractory  conscript ;  that,  without
more  ample  information,  they  had  cast  him  into  a  cold  and  damp
prison,  where  he  had  nothing  but  straw  for  bed  and  covering ;
that  the  fever  had  seized  him  anew,  and  the  ophthalmia  had
returned ;  but,  nevertheless,  the  symptoms  had  diminished  by
degrees,  and  he  was  cured ;  but  had  lost  his  right  eye  entirely.*

"  On  the  reception  of  this  distressing  intelligence,  M.  Ducom-
mun wrote  forthwith  to  general  the  Baron  Preval,  to  obtain  leave
of  absence  for  M.  Hebert,  having  still  the  hope  of  restoring  sight
to  him. The  general  had  the  goodness  to  grant  the  request

"  Hebert  hastened  to  the  house  of  M.  Ducommun.  After  many
explanations  of  his  adventure,  and  its  sad  results,  and  after  the
examination  of  his  eye,  which  appeared  to  be  very  good,  but
which  was  insensible  to  the  impression  of  the  strongest  light,  the
latter  magnetized  him.  Hebert  was  no  sooner  in  the  magnetic
state,  than  he  burst  out  into  the  most  lively  emotions  of  anger
and  despair. '  Wretches ! '  cried  he ;  'to  treat  me  like  a  vile

*  Many  examples  of  the  danger  of  interrupting  magnetic  treatment  are:
given  in  this  work.  —  Trans.


APPENDIX.  271

criminal !  to  throw  me  into  prison!  to  refuse  me  all  aid  !  If  I  am
not  dead,  it  is  no  fault  of  theirs  ! What  injustice  !  what  infamy ! '

"'My  friend,  be  calm.'  '  Ah,  sir,  let  me  breathe  out  my  rage
and  my  chagrin.  In  the  wakeful  state  I  command  myself;  but  I
injure  myself  by  doing  it.  This  tends  to  console  me,  and  dissi-
pate the  sadness  into  which  I  am  plunged.'

"  When  his  passion  was  calmed,  M.  Ducornmun  demanded
whether  his  eye  was  irretrievably  lost.  He  examined  it  with
attention,  and  said,  no ;  there  were  three  days  left  to  commence
a  new  treatment ;  and  if  it  were  not  done  in  that  space  of  time,
there  were  no  human  means  capable  of  curing  it.  'How  many
days  are  required  to  accomplish  a  complete  cure  ? ' '  Twelve?

"As  soon  as  he  was  awakened,  M.  Ducornmun  told  him  to  go
and  ask  leave  of  absence  for  a  fortnight,  to  enable  him  to  bring
him  under  treatment.  He  obtained  it  the  next  day,  and  returned
in  the  evening  with  his  father,  who,  alarmed  at  what  had  befallen
his  son,  had  come  from  Merlerault,  where  he  lived.

"  When  the  elder  Hebert  was  gone,  M.  Ducornmun  put  the
young  man  asleep.  The  crisis  occurred  as  he  had  announced  it,
but  much  weaker  than  the  first  one.  '  Do  not  abandon  me,'  said
he  to  his  magnetizer ;  '  if  you  do  not  treat  me  yourself,  I  shall
never  recover  my  health.'  '  What  must  be  done  to  your  eye,  to
commence  with?'  'Recall  the  ophthalmia;  my  eye  is  in  the
condition  of  a  limb  broken  and  unskilfully  set,  which  ought  to  be
broken  anew.'  '  How  much  time  have  we  now  to  commence  a
new  treatment  ? '  '  Until  12  o'clock,  to-morrow.'  '  Why  not  a.
longer  time  ? '  '  Because  there  still  remains  a  trace  of  the  last
inflammation,  which  would  cease  at  that  epoch.  If  it  were  com-
pletely passed,  the  eye  would  be  radically  cured,  and  I  should  be
one-eyed  for  life  ;  but  by  means  of  the  remains  of  this  inflamma-
tion, not  apparent,  it  is  true,  but  which  nevertheless  exist-,  I  will
recall  the  disease ;  I  will  treat  it  as  it  ought  to  have  been  treated,
and  as  fast  as  the  pain  and  the  inflammation  disappear,  the  sight
will  return.'

"  He  then  said  it  was  necessary  to  put  a  handful  of  coarse  salt
into  boiling  water,  to  place  his  eye  above  the  vapor,  and  to  con-
tinue this  three  days,  in  order  to  bring  on  a  speedy  inflammation.
M.  Ducornmun  observed  to  him,  that,  according  to  the  laws  of
chemistry,  the  salt  does  not  volatilize  with  the  steam,  and,  in  con-
sequence, the  irritation  he  wished  to  produce  could  not  occur.
'  I  am  sorry  for  chemistry,'  said  he,  '  but  I  assure  you  the  water
will  raise  a  part  of  the  salt,  which  will  irritate  the  eve  and  bring
on  an  inflammation.'

"  This  effect  took  place  as  he  had  predicted.

"The  fourth  day,  he  ordered  for  himself  the  following  collyrium :
Boil  a  fresh  egg  till  it  is  hard,  take  off  the  shell,  cut  it  into  two
equal  parts,  take  away  the  yolk,  put  in  the  place  of  it  a  piece
of  white  vitriol  as  large  as  a  pea,  moisten  the  whole  with  four


272  APPENDIX.

spoonfuls  of  rose-water,  put  it  into  a  fine  linen  cloth,  press  out  the
liquid  through  the  linen,  and  use  it  to  make  three  injections
daily  into  the  affected  eye.

"  This  collyrium,  three  drops  of  which  were  put  into  the  eye  by
the  end  of  the  finger,  as  he  had  directed,  was  the  only  remedy
employed  in  the  cure.  On  the  fifth  day,  the  patient  said  he  could
see  the  light,  if  one  would  uncover  his  eye  a  moment.  The  ex-
periment was  made  for  my  own  satisfaction  ;  but  only  once.  On
the  tenth  day,  the  inflammation  began  to  diminish,  the  pain  was
not  so  sharp,  and  he  could  bear  daylight  for  a  few  instants.  On
the  twelfth,  he  was  perfectly  cured.  He  then  ordered  for  him-
self the  use  of  green  spectacles  for  two  months,  because  his  eye
would  be  still  feeble  and  delicate  all  that  time,  on  account  of  the
various  treatments  which  it  had  received.

"  Some  days  after  his  entire  cure,  he  gave  notice  to  M.  Ducom-
mun,  that  he  should  lose  his  clairvoyance  in  less  than  two  days.
'Will  you  cease  to  sleep?'  'No;  I  shall  always  sleep  when
you  wish  me  to ;  but  I  shall  cease  to  see  so  long  as  I  am  well.'
At  these  words,  M.  Ducommun  testified  his  sorrow  at  losing  him
at  the  moment  when  he  had  a  sick  son.  M.  Hebert  reflected  an
instant ;  all  at  once  he  uttered  a  cry  of  joy,  and  informed  him
he  had  just  found  out  how  to  preserve  his  clairvoyance  while  in
health.  He  afterwards  told  him  what  was  to  be  done  for  this
purpose,  put  off  the  execution  of  it  till  the  next  day,  and  made
him  promise  never  to  tell  this  method  to  any  person,  not  even  to
himself,  when  he  should  awake.  The  next  day  after  he  had  been
put  into  somnambulism  in  pursuance  of  his  own  direction,  he
assured  us  he  should  be  clairvoyant  so  long  as  he  was  in  good
health  ;  but,  by  a  change  in  the  ordinary  laws  of  magnetism,  he
should  see  no  more  when  sick,  provided  the  same  means  were
not  employed  which  had  then  just  been  used.*

"  M.  Ducommun  adds,  that  he  never  saw  a  somnambulist  less
fatigued  with  holding  consultations,  more  prompt  and  correct  in
seeing  diseases,  or  more  sure  in  pointing  out  the  remedy  or  the
treatment.  Such  was  the  superiority  of  his  clairvoyance,  that
other  somnambulists  asked  his  advice.

"  We  once  had  occasion  to  see  M.  Hebert  in  somnambulism ;  he
was  wounded  in  the  knee,  and  at  first  consulted  one  of  the  most
celebrated  physicians  in  Paris,  M.  D**#.  Not  being  satisfied
with  his  advice,  he  came  to  M.  Ducommun  to  be  magnetized.
As  soon  as  he  was  in  somnambulism,  he  mentioned  the  consulta-
tion of  the  doctor,  and  told  us  in  what  respect  appearances  had
deceived  him.  Then  he  detailed  the  cause  and  the  effects  of  his
disease,  and  pointed  out  the  remedies  with  the  greatest  readiness
and  the  most  entire  confidence."

*  "  '  We  know,'  says  the  compiler,  '  that  the  execution  of  this
means  was  preceded  by  a  terrible  nervous  crisis.'  " — Trans.


APPENDIX.  273

The  next  case  which  I  shall  translate  is  that  of  the  Mar-
chioness of  Rousses,  aged  forty-five  years,  at  Paris,  in  1818,
under  the  charge  of  M.  B*#*,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Mag-
netism, originally  published  in  the  "Biblioifaque  du  Magnetisme"
No.  16,  p.  47.

"  On  the  26th  of  June,  1816,  Madame  la  Marquise  des  Rousses,
coming  from  mass  at  the  church  of  Saint  Sulpice,  where  she  had
had  a  long  fainting  fit,  while  in  the  midst  of  the  Petit-Bourbon
Street,  was  suddenly  struck  with  an  attack  of  the  gutta  serena,
She  was  conducted  home  by  her  attendants,  and  had  lost  her
sight.  A  large  blister  was  applied  immediately  to  the  back  of
the  neck.  The  next  day,  when  it  was  removed,  she  experienced
something  like  an  electric  shock  ;  she  saw  something  flash  before
her  eyes ;  and  she  fainted  again.  Recovering  her  senses,  she
perceived  that  all  hope  was  vain ;  she  was  totally  blind.

"During  the  first  months  of  her  disease,  the  marchioness  expe-
rienced inconceivable  pains  in  the  head.  The  disease,  without
being  apparent,  manifested  itself  all  at  once  by  a  swelling  so
extraordinary  in  the  muscles  of  the  back  part  of  the  head,  that
her  head-dress  was  moved  by  the  violence  of  their  contraction.
Not  able  to  endure  the  bed,  she  thus  passed  three  months  ex-
tended upon  a  sofa,  and  without  sleeping.  M.  l'Abbe  d'A#*
T***  had  then  occasion  to  see  her.  He  magnetized  her ;  but  in-
dispensable affairs  obliged  him  to  discontinue  the  treatment.
Her  health  grew  worse,  and  she  removed  into  the  country.

"Finally,  after  two  years  and  a  half  of  suffering,  she  returned
to  Paris  in  the  beginning  of  July,  1818,  and  stopped  at  the  house
of  M.  l'Abbe  d'A***.  By  good  fortune,  she  there  met  M.  B***,
to  whom  she  spoke  of  her  sad  condition.  Touched  with  her  mis-
fortunes, he  proposed  to  magnetize  her.  She  consented  to  it,
and  in  a  few  minutes  she  was  in  somnambulism.  Her  clairvoy-
ance was  gradually  developed  in  a  singular  manner.  One  day,
consulting  with  herself  about  the  fate  of  her  son,  who  had  been
absent  ten  years,  she  saw  him  arrive  from  America,  and  land  at
Calais  three  days  afterwards.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  circum-
stance was  not,  as  some  might  think,  altogether  foreign  to  the
treatment  of  Madame  des  Rousses.  She  caused  M.  B***  to
write  a  letter  to  her  son,  and  with  her  own  hand  added  to  the
letter  two  lines,  while  she  was  in  the  somnambulic  state,  and
announced  the  time  when  an  answer  would  arrive.  The  answer
did  not  arrive  at  the  time  specified  ;  *  and  the  inquietude  of  Ma-
dame des  Rousses  caused  her  to  quit  the  country  seat  where  she
lived,  and  where  M.  B***  used  to  go  every  week  to  magnetize

*  "  M.  des  Rousses  remained  but  a  few  days  at.  Calais.  Important
affairs  obliged  him  to  go  suddenly  to  Havre  ;  and  this  is  what  pre-
vented  his  answer  from  arriving  in  due  season."


274  APPENDIX.

her,  and  she  returned  to  Paris.  M.  B**#  arrived  at  her  house
with  a  somnambulist,  M.  Lemaire,  a  young  soldier,  of  twenty-
three  years,  blind  also,  in  consequence  of  a  gun-shot  wound  in
the  head.  M.  B**#  put  the  two  in  communication,  and  made
them  examine  each  other's  case.  Madame  des  Rousses  told  M.
Lemaire  that  he  would  see  well  enough  to  walk.  And  he,  in  his
turn,  assured  her  that  the  same  cause  which  had  deprived  her
of  sight  would  restore  it,  viz.,  the  blood.  lA  strong  excitement?
said  he,  '  will  give  it  an  impetuous  tendency  to  the  head.''  '  Yes,
it  is  true ;  and  I  see  all  the  humors  flow  out  by  the  ears.  This
excitement  will  be  occasioned  by  the  presence  of  my  dear  son;
and  I  shall  see  him  at  Havre.  I  must  go  thither ;  I  must  depart
immediately.'  Instantly  Madame  des  Rousses  employed  herself
in  searching  the  places  where  the  hacks  usually  st:ind.  She
looked  at  them  all,  and  finally  found  some  in  the  Bouloy  Street
'  There  are  two  left,'  said  she.  Some  one  went  and  ascertained
it  to  be  a  fact.  Filled  with  confidence  in  divine  Providence,
Madame  des  Rousses  departed  the  same  day  for  Havre,  and,
some  days  after  her  arrival,  she  had  the  happiness  of  embracing
her  son.  The  impression  of  this  moment  produced  an  extraordi-
nary effect  upon  her  organs.  She  seemed  to  herself  absolutely
light-headed.  The  second  day  she  experienced  in  her  head  the
most  violent  pains,  and  especially  on  the  night  of  the  20th  and
21st  of  October.  Finally,  between  4  and  5  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, after  a  moment  of  horrible  sufferings,  she  heard,  as  she
thought,  the  report  of  a  pistol  close  to  her  ears.  She  fainted,
and  remained  in  a  profound  stupor  until  8  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, when  some  one  entered  to  call  her.

"  They  found  her  inundated  with  blood,  and  with  a  very  black
matter,  which  had  flowed  from  the  ears  during  the  sleep  which
had  succeeded  her  fainting  fit.  She  put  her  hand  to  her  head,
and,  raising  the  bandage  which  she  kept  constantly  over  her  eyes,
she  perceived  with  rapture  that  the  sight  was  restored  to  them.

"  The  physician,  who  was  immediately  sent  for,  was  confounded
by  an  effect  so  extraordinary.  He  declared  that  the  flowing
which  had  taken  place  through  the  ears,  ought,  according  to  all
the  rules  of  the  art,  to  have  been  diffused  over  the  back  part  of  the
brain,  and  consequently  to  have  occasioned  the  death  of  the  pa-
tient. Madame  des  Rousses  did  not  recollect,  in  her  ordinary
state,  that  she  had  two  months  before  announced  this  effect,  and
that  from  this  moment  she  had  requested  M.  B#'*#  not  to  go  be-
yond the  ears  at  each  pass,  in  order  to  concentrate  the  action  of
the  fluid  there.

"  Since  her  return  to  Paris,  she  has  been  magnetized  many
times,  and  has  ordered  for  herself  the  few  medicaments  which
were  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  cure.  M.  B###  attended
her  to  one  of  the  sittings  of  the  magnetic  society,  in  order  to
remove  all  doubt  in  respect  to  this  case. While  there,  Madame


APPENDIX.  275

des  Rousses,  in  compliance  with  the  desire  of  some  one  of  the
members,  took  the  first  volume  presented  to  her,  and  read  with-
out hesitation.  At  present,  her  sight  is  so  strong  that  she  can
read,  work,  or  write,  even  without  the  aid  of  glasses.

"  We  have  entered  into  some  details  in  regard  to  the  Mar-
chioness des  Rousses,  because  we  have  had  the  happiness  of
seeing  her  many  times.  We  were  present  when  she  made  the
relation  of  her  treatment  in  somnambulism.  It  is  impossible  to
imagine  any  thing  more  touching  and  interesting."


NOTE  XXV.

The  reader  is  here  presented  with  letters  from  various  physi
cians,  which  cannot  fail  to  be  highly  interesting,  not  only  from
the  high  characters  of  the  authors  in  their  own  profession.  Most
of  the  intelligent  physicians  of  the  country  are  turning  then
attention  to  this  subject,  with  a  desire  to  become  acquainted  with
its  claims  as  a  remedial  agent  ;  and,  so  far,  it  has  sustained
itself  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  who  have  approached  it  in  this
spirit  These  letters  embrace  precisely  such  cases  as  are  stated
in  Deleuze,  and  have  thus  stamped  the  "  Practical  Instruction  "  with
marks  of  its  intrinsic  value.

FROM DOCTOR CLEVELAND.

"Pawtuxet,  October  2,  1837.
«  Dear  Sir  :  It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  comply  with  your
request  that  1  would  communicate  to  you  for  publication  the  re-
sults of  my  experience  and  observations  in  animal  magnetism,  as
a  therapeutic  agent  in  the  removal  or  mitigation  of  disease.  I
am  the  more,  willingly  disposed  to  submit  the  following  cases,
from  the  firm  conviction  that  many  persons  who  are  laboring
under  severe  indisposition,  and  who  might  be  relieved,  hesitate
about  having  recourse  to  this  agent,  because  they  have  not  suffi-
cient evidence  of  its  power.  If,  by  communicating  them,  I  can
induce  such  persons  to  have  confidence  enough  in  it  to  make  a
trial  of  its  efficacy,  I  will  also  suggest  the  propriety  of  applying
to  some  magnetizer  who  has  an  acquaintance,  not  only  with  the
diseases  to  which  we  are  liable,  but  also  with  the  complicated
machine  upon  which  he  is  to  act,  and  with  the  peculiar  sympa-
thetic movements  which  are  constantly  going  on,  and  are  ever
liable  to  be  excited  therein.*

*  The  observation  here  made  by  Dr.  Cleveland  is  worthy  of  attention.
It  requires  no  little  exertion  of  magnanimity  to  rise  above  the  fear  of  hav-
ing selfish  motives  attributed  to  us,  when  a  sense  of  duty  obliges  us  to  tell
what  we  believe  to  be  an  important  truth. It  will  be  found,  when  Deleuze


276  APPENDIX.

"  First  Case,.  —  The  first  case  I  will  present  is  that  of  Miss ,

possessing  a  constitution  originally  firm,  but  recently  much
impaired  by  disease,  affecting  principally  the  nervous  system.
Neither  the  patient  nor  myself  had  ever  seen  any  manipulations,
and  she  knew  nothing  of  magnetism,  even  by  name,  as  it  was
then  but  recently  introduced  to  public  notice  in  New  England.

"  About  the  first  of  January  of  the  present  year,  she  was  at-
tacked with  an  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  Her  nerves  became
so  much  excited  as  to  baffle  all  the  ordinary  means  of  quieting
them,  or  of  producing  sleep.  She  was  fast  sinking  for  the  want
of  rest,  the  least  noise,  even  the  snapping  of  the  fire,  throwing
her  into  painful  spasms.

"  Having  heard  of  the  effects  of  animal  magnetism  in  cases  of
this  kind,  I  gave  it  a  trial,  which  resulted  in  procuring  more  quiet
sleep,  in  five  successive  hours,  than  she  had  experienced  in  as
many  preceding  days.  But  it  took  me  an  hour  and  a  half  before
she  was  put  into  this  sleep,  and  my  perseverance  was  rewarded
by  the  most  clairvoyant  somnambulism  at  this  first  essay.  This
was  repeated  daily,  with  the  same  happy  effects  in  relation  to  the
repose  which  she  enjoyed;  and  she  soon  became  convalescent
A  firmness  was  imparted  to  the  nerves,  which  1  had  despaired  of
imparting  by  the  usual  medicinal  means ;  and  although  she  is  not
restored  to  perfect  health,  her  life  was,  in  my  opinion,  preserved
wholly  by  the  salutary  influence  of  the  magnetic  practice.

"  Dr.  Eldridge,  of  East  Greenwich,  Dr.  Perry,  of  Newport,  Dr.
Cleveland,  of  Pawtucket,  and  many  other  physicians,  have  had
an  opportunity  to  see  this  patient.  Her  clairvoyance  is  very
lucid,  and,  while  in  the  magnetic  state,  she  reads  any  book  with
facility,  though  every  precaution  be  used  to  bandage  and  secure
her  eyes.

"  Case  second. — I  was  called  to  attend  Miss ,  and  found  her

laboring  under  a  severe  attack  of  the  tic  douloureux.  I  pursued
the  ordinary  course  of  treatment  for  four  days,  without  affording
her  the  least  alleviation.  On  the  evening  of  the  fourth  day,  I
resorted  to  magnetism.  After  an  hour  and  a  half,  complete  relief
was  obtained.  Owing,  however,  to  the  disturbed  state  of  her
mind,  perfect  sleep  was  not  induced,  though  I  have  good  evi-
dence of  her  not  having  closed  her  eyes  one  hour  for  the  three
preceding  days  and  nights.  At  the  end  of  seven  hours,  the  pain
returned,  though  it  was  less  violent  I  saw  her  soon  after,  and
removed  it  as  before,  in  one  fourth  part  of  the  time.  In  ten  hours,
it  returned  again,  when,  by  a  slight  effort,  it  was  permanently  re-
moved. Somnambulism  did  not  occur.

is  thoroughly  studied,  and  when  the  subject  of  which  he  treats  is  better
known,  that  his  cautions  on  this  head  are  not  the  result  of  timidity,  but
of  well-informed  fear,  Jest  it  should  be  abused  by  the  ignorant.  His
character  and  his  long  practice  have  justly  made  the  u Practical  Instruc-
tion "  the  text-book  of  all  European  practitioners.


APPENDIX.  277

"  Case  third.  —  On  the  third  day  of  last  June,  I  was  requested

to  visit  Mrs. ,  of  Providence,  between  thirty  and  forty  years

of  age,  from  whom,  and  from  her  attending  physician,  Dr.  L.  L.
Miller,  I  obtained  the  following  histoiy  of  her  recent  and  her  then
present  situation.  She  had  been  laboring  for  three  montJis  under
an  affection  of  the  liver.  During  this  time,  she  had  not  left  her
chamber,  had  become  considerably  emaciated,  and  was  daily
losing  her  strength.  Her  nervous  system  had  become  so  much
deranged  that  she  could  not  see  her  friends,  could  not  sit  up  but
a  few  minutes  at  once,  and,  at  that  time,  she  was  suffering  for  the
want  of  sleep.  This  deprivation  of  sleep  was  the  occasion  of  my
being  called  to  see  her.

"I  found  that  the  principal  cause  of  her  suffering  was  the  large
accumulation  of  bile,  which  nothing  but  powerful  doses  of  calomel
could  remove.  From  this  she  experienced  temporary  relief,  al-
though she  said  it  rapidly  exhausted  her  strength.  In  short,  she
appeared  to  be  convinced  that  she  could  not  continue  long,  and
was  satisfied  that  this  was  also  the  opinion  of  her  physician.
'  Now,'  said  she,  '  if  you  can,  by  the  aid  of  magnetism,  afford  me
any  alleviation  from  my  present  sufferings,  —  if  you  can  in  the
least  smooth  my  passage  to  the  tomb,  —  it  is  all  I  can  expect'

"The  first  attempt  to  procure  sleep  proved  successful  in  thirty
minutes ;  and,  though  she  slept  but  one  hour,  she  felt  much  re-
freshed, it  being  the  first  she  had  had  in  forty-eight  hours.  The
next  morning,  I  found  she  had  passed  a  comfortable  night  I
then  magnetized  her  again,  which  had  the  effect  of  procuring  a
copious  evacuation  of  bile,  affording  her  all  the  relief,  ivithout
being  attended  with  the  debilitating  effects,  of  calomel.  Magnetism
was  continued  several  days,  followed  by  the  same  results,  and
thus  rendering-  the  use  of  cathartics  unnecessary.  Her  health
soon  began  to  improve,  and  at  the  end  of  two  weeks  she  was  able
to  ride  out  I  discontinued  my  visits  on  being  assured  by  her
that  she  was  getting  well  fast  enough.  She  was  confident  that
she  owed  her  restoration  to  magnetism,  and  she  recently  assured
me  that  she  should  resort  to  it  again,  if  she  found  herself  re-
lapsing into  her  former  .miserable  condition.

"  Case  fourth.  —  Mrs.  W ,  about  thirty  years  old,  was  afflict-
ed with  hypochondriasis.  I  cannot  give  a  better  account  of  her
situation  than  by  giving  Dr.  Cullen's  description  of  this  disease,
'  The  state  of  mind  peculiar  to  hypochondriasis,'  says  Dr.  C,  '  is
characterized  by  languor,  listlessness ;  a  want  of  resolution  and
activity  with  respect  to  all  undertakings ;  a  disposition  to  seri-
ousness, sadness,  and  timidity,  as  to  all  future  events ;  an  appre-
hension of  the  worst  or  the  most  unhappy  state  of  tilings ;  and
therefore,  upon  slight  grounds  of  apprehension  of  great  evil,  such

24


278  APPENDIX.

persons  are  peculiarly  attentive  to  their  health,  to  even  the  small-
est change  of  feeling  in  their  bodies;  and  from  any  unusual
sensation,  perhaps  of  the  slightest  kind,  they  apprehend  great
danger,  and  death  itself.  In  respect  to  these  feelings  and  fears
there  is  commonly  the  most  obstinate  belief  and  persuasion.'

"Considering  Mrs.  W a  suitable  subject  to  receive  benefit

from  magnetism,  I  obtained  permission  to  make  use  of  it,  though
she  was  entirely  skeptical,  and  thought  the  whole  process  of
magnetism  ridiculous  and  chimerical.  On  the  first  trial,  August
12th,  1837, 1  had  the  satisfaction  of  inducing  magnetic  sleep  in
less  than  five  minutes,  and  it  continued  five  hours.

"  When  she  awoke,  the  favorable  change  in  her  appearance
was  evident  to  all  the  family.  I  saw  her  the  second  day  after,
and  she  appeared  to  be  much  improved.  She  was  magnetized
again,  with  the  same  eifect  as  before.

"As  her  place  of  residence  is  Jive  miles  from  my  own,  I  had  an
understanding  with  the  husband  and  family  that  she  should  retire
precisely  at  9  o'clock,  or  before  that  time,  in  the  evening,  and
I  was  to  magnetize  her  as  soon  after  as  would  be  convenient,
without  regard  to  the  place  where  1  might  be  at  the  moment.
My  attempts  to  magnetize  her  under  the  above  circumstances
were  perfectly  successful,  not  only  in  inducing  sleep,  but  also  in
the  entire  removal  of  all  those  unpleasant  symptoms  enumerated
above.  She  is  now  enjoying  better  health  than  she  has  for  the
last  four  years,  which  blessing  she  and  her  friends  attribute  to
the  influence  of  animal  magnetism.

"  Yours,  respectfully,

"THOMAS  CLEVELAND.

"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM  DOCTOR CUTTER.

"Nashua,  N.  H.,  September  19, 1837.

"Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn:

"  Sir  :  Yours  of  the  14th  came  to  hand  three  days  since ;
but,  being  engaged  extensively  in  the  practice  of  medicine,  I  have
not  had  an  opportunity  to  reply  ere  this.  Although  not  habituated
to  writing  for  the  public  eye,  yet  sometimes  the  cause  of  truth
may  require  our  observations  and  experience,  however  limited,
to  be  made  public,  our  private  feelings  to  the  contrary  not-
withstanding. For  the  last  four  years,  I  have  felt  an  interest  in
animal  magnetism.  For  the  last  few  months,  I  have  been  prac-
tically engaged  in  its  investigation.  I  am  convinced  that  it  is
based  upon  truth,  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  is  a  real  science.  I
have  come  to  this  conclusion  from  sober  reflection  and  observa-


APPENDIX.


279


tion.  As  all  truth  is  of  value,  and  none  need  fear  the  truth
if  their  conduct  is  right,  this  may  be  made  a  blessing  to  our
country.

"  My  attention  has  been  directed  principally  to  its  use  as  a  re-
medial agent  in  disease.  I  have  attempted  but  few  of  the  many
interesting  experiments  which  may  be  performed  upon  persons  in
a  magnetic  sleep,  except  for  its  therapeutic  power.  I  do  not  un-
derrate them  as  connected  with  science ;  but  the  investigation
and  treatment  of  disease  is  my  business,  and  in  this  I  use  mag-
netism, and  deem  it  of  much  utility.  Among  the  number  that  I
have  magnetized  for  disease,  there  have  been  more  than  twenty
perfect  somnambulists.  Some  of  them  excel  in  pointing  out  and
describing  disease ;  and  to  this  I  have  directed  their  attention,
among  my  patients.  Out  of  several  cases  of  examination  of
patients  by  somnambulists,  I  will  briefly  relate  two.

"  Sept  10,  1837,  I  put  Miss  M.,  a  somnambulist,  living  in  my
family,  into  a  magnetic  sleep,  for  a  headache,  as  she  supposed.
In  about  half  an  hour,  Mr.  Samuel  F.  Jenness  came  to  my  house,
by  previous  appointment,  accompanied  by  Miss  Martha  Dunn,
aged  twenty-four,  who  has  been  deaf  and  dumb  for  twenty-two
years.  This  was  caused  by  sickness.  Health  is  now  good ;
formation  of  head  apparently  perfect ;  intellect  very  good.  I  re-
quested Miss  M.,  the  somnambulist,  to  examine  Miss  D.  After
a  little  time,  the  somnambulist  said  that  there  was  a  reddish-yel-
low body  in  the  brain  connected  with  the  nerve  that  went  to  the
ear ;  and  that  Miss  D.  could  not  hear  or  talk.  I  asked  Miss  M.
if  Miss  D.  could  see ;  she  replied  that  she  could.  I  then  asked
the  somnambulist  if  Miss  D.  could  smell ;  and  the  reply  was,  that
she  could.  The  somnambulist  and  Miss  D.  had  no  knowledge
of  each  other  previous  to  the  examination ;  no  person  in  my  fami-
ly knew  of  the  examination  previous  to  its  taking  place.  Sub-
sequently, Miss  M.  informed  me  that  she  knew  nothing  of  deaf
persons,  or  the  cause  of  deafness.

"  Aug.  16,  1837,  I  put  the  same  somnambulist  into  a  mag-
netic sleep ;  and,  by  appointment,  my  respected  and  talented
friend,  Dr.  Bartlett,  mayor  of  Lowell,  came  in  with  his  lady.  I
then  sent  a  short  distance  for  Mrs.  Collins,  who  had  a  child  about
nine  months  old,  which  had  been  afflicted  with  incipient  cataract
in  both  eyes  for  four  months.  Mrs.  Collins  has  previously  had
three  children  similarly  diseased,  who  died  young,  with  disease  in
the  head.  The  child,  being  asleep,  was  examined  by  the  som-
nambulist, who  soon  said  that  there  was  something  in  the  body
of  the  ehild's  eye  that  prevented  its  seeing  well.  She  further
said  that  this  was  caused  by  the  nerves  of  the  eye  being  diseased
in  the  brain.  I  am  certain,  as  Mrs.  Collins  had  recently  come
into  town  from  Lynn,  that  Miss  M.  could  not  have  known  of  the
/child's  eyes  being  diseased  previous  to  the  examination ;  and  no


280


APPENDIX.


person  in  my  house  knew  of  the  examination  previous  to  its  oc-
currence.

"For  some  months  I  have  been  in  the  practice  of  using  magnet-
ism in  the  treatment  of  many  diseases,  among  which  I  may  name
tic  douloureux,  rheumatism,  cephalalgia,  bronchitis,  pneumonia,
hepatitis,  tonsillitis,  spinal  irritation,  hemorrhoids,  delirium  tre-
mens, ulcers,  and  paralysis.  With  the  exception  of  three  cases,
the  results  have  been  salutary  ;  and  in  these  cases  no  influence
was  induced  by  magnetism.  The  effects  of  magnetism  I  have
found  to  be  various,  and  yet  I  have  noted  some  results  which  1
term  general ;  among  which  I  may  name  increased  activity  of
the  capillary  circulation,  warmth  and  free  perspiration,  removal
of  pain,  and  somnolence.  The  last  is  not  so  common  as  the  for-
mer. I  will  relate  a  case  or  two  of  diseases,  and  their  cure  by
magnetism.  I  shall  relate  only  three,  in  which  I  am  certain  im-
agination did  not  cause  the  result.

"  Eleazer  Barret,  aged  about  forty-five,  for  eight  years  past  has
been  afflicted  with  a  paralysis  of  the  right  arm.  For  the  space
of  three  years,  he  has  been  suffering  from  pain  in  the  back  of  the
•lead,  attended  with  dyspnoea  and  cough.  Some  months  since,
out  of  curiosity,  he  challenged  me  to  put  him  to  sleep.  I  mag-
netized him  at  his  house,  and  produced  sleep  in  about  fifteen
minutes.  The  warmth  of  the  skin  and  the  circulation  of  the
capillary  vessels  were  much  increased,  perspiration  was  free,  and
the  paralyzed  arm  became  warm  and  swelled.  I  repeated  it  four
times.  The  pain  in  the  head,  neck,  and  chest,  together  with
the  dyspnoea  and  cough,  were  removed  ;  mobility  and  sensibility
were  restored  to  the  paralyzed  arm.  I  have  obtained  the  same
result  in  two  other  cases  of  paralysis.

"  Miss  R.  Mclntyre  for  about  two  years  has  been  afflicted  with
an  irritable  ulcer  on  the  ankle,  the  diameter  of  which  was  about
two  inches.  The  pain  has  been  so  smart  as,  much  of  the  time,  to
prevent  sleep ;  and  it  caused  much  swelling  of  the  foot.  She
made  application  for  medical  aid  to  many  good  surgeons,  but  re-
ceived no  benefit.  June  29,  1837,  Miss  M.  applied  to  me  to  try
the  effects  of  magnetism.  Without  attempting  to  produce  sleep,
I  magnetized  the  ulcer  and  foot.  The  immediate  effect  was  the
cessation  of  the  excruciating  pain,  a  visible  diminution  of  the
redness  around  the  ulcer,  followed  by  a  subsidence  of  the  swell-
ing. The  foot,  which  had  been  for  months  cold,  became  warm.
Without  any  other  means  being  used,  the  ulcer  rapidly  healed,
and  is  now  entirely  well.  Her  health  has  not  suffered  by  the
healing  of  the  ulcer.  This  interesting  phenomenon  and  fact,  of
the  redness  attendant  on  the  inflammation  surrounding  the  ulcer
subsiding  under  the  immediate  action  of  magnetism,  has  been
witnessed  by  many  in  this  place,  among  whom  I  may  name  Dr
Ebenezer  Dearborn,  of  Nashua,  and  Drs,  Bartlett  and  Kimball3  of
Lowell,


APPENDIX.  '{281

« If  the  magnetic  power,  whatever  it  may  be,  immediately  re-
moves the  pain,  the  swelling,  the  redness,  and  the  heat  attendant
on  the  inflammatory  areola  of  this  ulcer,  why  will  it  not  in  the
same  manner  in  inflammation  of  the  brain,  lungs,  stomach,  liver,
or  any  other  organ  ?  Some  other  facts  which  have  come  under
my  notice,  lead  me  to  believe  that  such  is  the  case.  Facts  like
the  above  open  an  interesting  field  of  inquiry  for  the  philanthro-
pist and  the  scientific  physician.  I  wish  that  some  investigating
physician  would  enter  this  field  of  inquiry,  and  make  public  his
observations  for  the  benefit  of  suffering  humanity.

"  I  have  perused  with  much  pleasure  the  first  number  of  your
translation  of  the  work  of  the  venerable  and  philanthropic  De-
Jeuze.  With  pleasure  I  can  give  my  testimony  in  favor  of  the
truth  of  many  of  his  statements  in  that  work,  and  I  presume  that
most  of  the  statements  which  I  have  not  verified  are  equally
correct

"  Yours  respectfully,

«  CALVIN  CUTTER."


FROM THE SAME.

"Nashua,  N.  H.,  October  3,  1837.
*  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn  :

"  Sir  :  In  conformity  with  your  respectful  request,  I  will
now  briefly  detail  a  few  observations  in  addition  to  my  former
communication.  To  render  this  agent  more  useful,  it  has  ap-
peared to  me  a  desideratum  to  convince  people  that  we  could  act.
upon  local  and  definite  parts  of  the  system,  the  other  parts  re-
maining uninfluenced  Although  this  requires  a  greater  effort,
•on  the  part  of  the  magnetizer,  than  to  affect  the  whole  system,
yet  I  have  succeeded  in  this,  in  many  cases,  to  my  own  satisfac-
tion, and  producing  an  entire  conviction  of  the  utility  of  magnet-
ism in  many  beholders.

"  In  two  instances,  I  have  succeeded  in  curing  complete  paraly-
sis of  the  limbs  of  persons  who  had  not  been  previously  magnet-
ized, and  this  without  any  somnolence ;  and  in  these  cases  the
individuals  were  unbelievers  in  magnetism.  These  experiments
are  important  and  interesting,  as  they  show  the  ability  which
good  magnetizers  possess  to  act  upon  the  diseased  organs  of  the
system  without  altering  the  state  of  the  normal  organs,  which
very  much  enhances  the  value  of  magnetism  as  a  remedial  agent
in  disease ;  for  it  is  well  known  to  physicians  that,  to  cure  dis-
eased organs,  the  medicine  given  often  induces  functional  disease
in  some  other  organ  of  vital  importance  ;  and  happy  is  it  for  the
patient,  if  the  functional  disease  thus  induced  does  not  become
organic.  If  we  can  show,  by  careful  experiment  and  observation,
that  the  above  statement,  in  relation  to  the  local  effects,  is  true,
certainly  the  remedial  power  of  magnetism  is  a  boon  not  to  be
24*


282  APPENDIX.

despised.  As  it  is  probable  that  many  cases  of  fatal  disease
commence  with  only  an  irritation  of  some  organ,  and  as  probably
this  irritation  is  at  its  commencement  merely  an  increase  of  the
sensibility,  inducing  an  influx  of  fluids  to  the  part,  and  as  the
direct  and  apparently  specific  effect  of  magnetism  is  to  lessen
the  sensibility  and  vascular  activity  of  the  organs,  might  we  not
expect  relief  by  the  use  of  magnetism  in  irritated  and  inflamed
organs  ?  This  relief  I  have  obtained  in  irritated  and  inflamed
brain,  bronchia,  lungs,  liver,  stomach,  and  limbs.  I  will  here
mention  that  the  patients  whom  I  have  magnetized  for  the  above-
named  diseased  organs,  make  use  of  the  same  language  to  de-
paralysis  of  the  limbs  ;  and  the  consecutive  warmth  and  perspira-
tion are  the  same  in  both  cases.  Hence  I  infer  that  the  action
of  magnetism  upon  the  important  and  vital  organs  is  the  same  as
upon  the  limbs. This  is  to  me  an  interesting  field  of  inquiry.

"  I  will  now  detail  a  case  or  two.

"  Mrs.  Ober,  a  respectable  lady  of  this  town,  had  been  afflicted
with  an  inveterate  cutaneous  disease,  of  about  eighteen  months'
standing.  This  was  attended  with  an  intolerable  itching,  to  so
great  an  extent  that  sleep  was  often  prevented,  sometimes  for
many  days  and  nights  in  succession.  At  the  request  of  the  fam-
ily, and  in  particular  of  her  son,  Dr.  Benjamin  Ober,  of  Montville,
Maine,  I  magnetized  her  in  the  month  of  June.  This  I  repeated
several  times.  She  became  a  good  somnambulist.  To  the  sur-
prise of  all,  the  intolerable  itching  was  removed  immediately,  and
returned  no  more.  Under  the  use  of  magnetism,  the  cutaneous
eruption  subsided ;  but  in  a  little  time  I  ceased  to  magnetize  this
lady. In  August,  she  died  of  dysentery.

"  June  9,  1837.  —  I  was  called  to  attend  Mrs.  Fern,  of  this  vil-
lage, as  accoucheur.  She  had  been  in  travail  about  forty-eight
hours,  and  her  labor  pains  had  been  somewhat  irregular.  She
had  obtained  no  sleep  for  three  nights.  At  her  request,  and  in
presence  of  Mrs.  Lawrence  and  Mrs.  Weston,  I  magnetized  her.
She  went  into  a  magnetic  sleep  in  less  than  one  minute.  I  would
mention  that  1  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Fern  previous  to  this  evening.
Her  sleep  was  very  quiet  She  slept  about  three  hours,  and  then
awoke  very  much  refreshed.  To  my  own  surprise,  and  the  aston-
ishment of  all  present,  we  observed  this  curious  and  interesting
fact  and  phenomenon,  viz.,  that  the  specific  and  regular  uterine
contractions  attending  accouchment  continued  with  perfect  regular-
ity. After  she  came  out  of  the  magnetic  sleep,  she  was  much
refreshed,  and  it  was  apparently  of  benefit  to  her.

"  The  following  are  the  names  of  some  of  those  who  have  been
magnetized  by  me  for  diseases  :  —  Eliza  Barrett,  Abigail  Wynn,
Mrs.  Marshall,  Deacon  E.  Barrett,  Mrs.  Sargent,  Mrs.  Ober,  Flora
Fuller,  Sarah  Mevens,  Mary  Russell,  Mary  M.  Kean,  Mrs.  Ames,
Miss  Tarbell,  Mrs.  Adams,  Rebecca  Mclntyre,  Miss  Woodbury,


APPENDIX.  283

Mrs.  Fern,  Mrs.  Smith,  Samuel  Lawrence,  Sally  Putney,  Mrs.
Shurtliff,  Mrs.  Frost,  Mrs.  Reed,  Miss  Noyes,  Miss  Brigham,  Mrs.
Merrill,  Miss  Phelps,  Susan  Hartshorn,  Moses  Saunders,  Abigail
Gage.  Almira  Cartee,  Mrs.  Butler,  Hannah  Conrey,  Martha  Dunn,
Miss  Adams,  Miss  Dustin,  Mrs.  Wilson,  Mrs.  Cutter-.

"  I  name  only  those  on  whom  the  magnetic  action  was  well
marked.  I  have  as  yet  found  only  two  individuals  who  were  not
susceptible  of  magnetic  influence.

"  A  list  of  all  who  have  witnessed  my  magnetic  experiments
would  fill  an  entire  sheet  1  will  name  only  Drs.  Bartlett  and
Kimball,  of  Lowell ;  Dearborn,  of  Nashua  ;  Ober,  of  Montville,
Maine  ;  Rev.  Messrs.  Pratt  and  Smith,  of  Nashua  ;  Rev.  Mr.
Porter,  of  Lowell ;  Rev.  Mr.  Carpenter,  of  Milford ;  and  Rev.  Mr.
Pease,  of  Hudson.  To  this  list  I  could  add  some  hundred  of
other  citizens.

"  Yours,

"C.  CUTTER.

"  P.  S.  Write  me  relative  to  the  third  number  soon,  as  I  am
having  new  and  interesting  cases  daily,  some  of  which  I  would
communicate  if  desired. Use  any  part  of  the  above  you  please."


FROM DOCTOR CAPRON.

"Providence.  October  10,  1837.

"  Dear  Sir  :  As  you  have  requested  that,  should  any  thing
interesting  occur  in  my  practice  in  reference  to  the  subject  of
animal  magnetism  generally,  and  especially  when  remedially
employed,  I  would  communicate  the  same  to  append  to  the  second
part  of  the  work  you  are  publishing,  I  have  hastily  drawn  up  the
following  statement  of  a  few  cases  which  have  fallen  under  my
observation.  Should  you  consider  them  of  sufficient  interest  to
enhance  the  value  of  your  publication,  you  are  at  liberty  to  use
them.

"It  is  not  pretended  that  magnetism  has  acted  as  a  specific  in
any  of  these  cases  ;  but  that  it  was  a  valuable  auxiliary  in  the
treatment  of  them,  and  that  it  may  be  employed  as  such  in  the
treatment  of  diseases  generally,  does  not,  in  my  mind,  admit  of  a
doubt.

"  Case  first.  —  On  the  evening  of  the  25th  of  last  month,  1  was
requested  to  visit  Mrs.  L.,  in  High  Street,  who,  on  the  previous
morning,  had  had  a  severe  paroxysm  of  the  fever  and  ague.
Upon  inquiry,  I  found  that  she  Avas  attacked  by  this  disease  in  its
usual  form  the  fore  part  of  August,  soon  after  returning  from  a
journey  in  the  western  country.  She  immediately  put  herself
under  the  care  of  skilful  physicians,  and  followed  their  prescrip-


284  APPENDIX.

tions  about  two  weeks  ;  but  the  progress  of  the  disease  was  not
arrested,  medicine  in  this  case  not  having  its  usual  beneficial
effects.  She  was  advised  by  one  of  her  physicians  to  have  re-
course to  magnetism,  and  Mr.  P.  was  sent  for  to  magnetize  her.
Having  magnetized  her  once  to  establish  the  communication,  he
commenced  the  second  operation  as  the  cold  stage  of  the  parox-
ysm was  beginning.  In  about  twenty  minutes,  the  patient  began
to  feel  more  comfortable ;  in  thirty,  the  cold  stage  had  entirely
passed  off,  and  was  succeeded  by  an  agreeable  glow  of  heat
The  paroxysm,  in  this  instance,  was  very  much  shortened  in  all
its  stages,  and  she  was  soon  materially  improved,  though  she  took
but  little  medicine  after  this  time.

"  Mr.  L.,  her  husband,  seeing  the  beneficial  effect  of  these  two
operations,  was  induced  to  continue  the  treatment  himself,  by
magnetizing  her  daily,  and  on  some  days  several  times.  While
this  was  continued,  she  had  no  return  of  the  disease ;  but  Mr.  L.'s
business  calling  him  again  to  the  west,  the  treatment  was  discon-
tinued, and  in  about  three  weeks  she  had  a  relapse  of  it  in  a  more
severe  form.  The  fever  was  of  the  tertian  type,  the  paroxysms
returning  every  third  day,  and  constantly  increasing  in  severity,
except  an  interruption  of  three  or  four  days.

"  When  I  first  saw  her,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  she
was  suffering  from  a  violent  headache.  For  several  hours  pre-
vious, she  had  been  delirious,  from  the  intensity  of  the  fever.
Understanding  that  magnetism  had  been  of  service  to  her  on  a
former  occasion,  I  thought  it  proper  to  make  a  trial  of  it,  and  was
gratified  with  the  success  of  the  experiment.  Her  headache
was  cured  in  a  few  minutes  ;  she  became  tranquil ;  the  fever  in
some  measure  subsided ;  and  in  a  short  time  I  left  her  compara-
tively very  comfortable.

"  The  following  day,  though  somewhat  more  comfortable,  her
state  did  not  differ  materially  from  what  it  had  usually  been  on
the  days  when  she  had  been  exempt  from  fever.  I  called  on  the
third  day,  at  the  hour  when  the  paroxysm  was  expected  to  return.
The  cold  stage  had  begun.  The  hands  and  feet  were  cold,  and
purple  under  the  nails ;  the  surface  generally,  and  especially  the
nose,  was  cold  and  contracted.  The  shaking  had  not  yet  com-
menced.

"  Being  anxious  to  put  in  requisition  all  the  means  in  my  power
to  arrest  the  paroxysm,  I  gave  a  dose  of  Dover's  powder,  and
immediately  began  to  magnetize  her.  During  the  first  twenty
minutes,  there  was  occasionally  a  shudder  from  the  cold,  when
she  began  to  feel  warm  and  comfortable  ;  and,  in  a  few  minutes
more,  the  cold  stage  had  entirely  subsided,  instead  of  lasting  two
or  three  hours,  as  it  had  previously  done.  The  Dover's  powder
produced  slight  sickness  at  the  stomach,  and  she  vomited  once
moderately.  The  succeeding  hot  and  sweating  stages  were  al-
most entirely  prevented,  and  she  was  as  free  from  fever  and  dis-


APPENDIX.  285

tress  when  I  left  her,  an  hour  after  my  arrival,  as  she  had  usually-
been  on  the  days  of  the  intermission.

"  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  medicine  given  in  this  instance
probably  had  some  agency  in  arresting  the  disease ;  but  if  we
recollect  that,  when  Mr.  P.  magnetized  her,  the  same  effects  pre-
cisely were  produced,  although  she  took  no  medicine  at  that  time,
and  that,  notwithstanding  she  left  off  taking  medicine  entirely,
the  paroxysms  did  not  return  as  long  as  she  continued  that  treat-
ment, it  must  certainly  be  admitted  that  magnetism  was  the  most
efficient  agent  employed.  It  is  now  thirteen  days  since  I  was
called  to  her,  and  she  has  had  no  recurrence  of  the  paroxysms
except  the  one  I  have  mentioned.  Magnetism  has  not  been
trusted  to  alone  in  this  case,  though  it  has  frequently  been  prac-
tised, particularly  for  the  headache,  to  which  she  has  been
subject,  and  which  it  has  never  failed  to  relieve  in  a  very  few
minutes.

"  Though  Mrs.  L.  has  never  been  somnambulic,  she  has  been
generally  put  into  a  magnetic  sleep,  which  has  been  very  sooth-
ing and  restorative. She  is  now  nearly  free  from  disease.

"  Case  second.  —  The  second  case  which  I  shall  mention  where
magnetism  has  been  employed  to  advantage,  is  that  of  Mrs.  C.
This  Avas  a  case  of  the  most  violent  distress  in  the  head,  depend-
ent upon  a  relapse  of  fever,  which  partook  of  the  irritative  rather
than  of  the  inflammatory  or  typhoid  character.  This  affection  of
the  head,  which  was  somewhat  different  from  the  common  head-
ache, returned  with  great  severity  every  afternoon.  The  usual
remedies,  though  perseveringly  employed  for  four  or  five  days,
had  failed  to  give  much  relief.  My  success  in  the  case  of  Mrs.
L.  suggested  to  me  the  propriety  of  trying  magnetism  in  this,  and
I  accordingly  proposed  it.  At  this  proposition,  Mrs.  C.  smiled
with  a  look  of  incredulity,  having  never  had  the  least  confidence
in  the  existence  of  such  an  agent.  She  consented,  however,  to
make  a  trial  of  it.  In  five  minutes,  her  head  was  relieved,  and,
at  the  end  of  twelve  or  fifteen,  was  quite  free  from  distress.  It
did  not  return  again  that  afternoon.  She  has  since  been  mag-
netized several  times,  with  a  similar  result.

"  In  this  case,  it  was  not  carried  so  far  as  to  produce  sleep,
though  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  effect  would  have  been  pro-
duced, had  the  operation  been  continued  long.  Mrs.  C.  has  now
no  doubt  of  the  magnetic  influence.

"  Case  third.  —  In  December  last,  I  was  requested  to  visit  Miss
M.,  a  young  lady  who  had  for  nearly  two  years  been  subject  to
epileptic  fits.*  During  the  first  year,  she  had  only  three  or  four ;
but,  during  the  second,  they  had  become  more  frequent,  so  that

*  See  Note  XXIIL,  for  another  case  of  epilepsy.


286  APPENDIX.

she  had  had  three  within  the  two  weeks  immediately  preceding
my  first  visit.  She  was  put  upon  such  a  course  of  medicine  and
partial  success,  as  she  continued  to  have  a  fit  every  two  months
until  May.

"  A  trial  was  now  made  of  magnetism,  and  medicines  were
almost  wholly  discontinued.  She  was  occasionally  magnetized
for  six  weeks,  at  first  by  myself,  and  afterwards  by  another  gen-
tleman. The  whole  number  of  sittings  may  have  been  twelve
or  fifteen.  While  this  treatment  was  continued,  and  for  three
months  afterwards,  she  had  no  recurrence  of  the  fits.  Two  weeks
ago,  however,  she  had  a  return  of  the  disease.

"  Sleep  was  not  induced  in  this  patient,  though  the  magnetic
influence  was  very  apparent.  The  young  lady  herself  is  fully
sensible  of  the  benefit  derived  from  it ;  and,  had  the  treatment
been  persevered  in,  I  am  persuaded  a  recurrence  would  have
been  prevented.

"  Case  fourth.  —  The  next  case  I  shall  mention  is  that  of  Miss
O.,  who,  if  I  mistake  not,  was  the  first  somnambulist  in  this  city.
This  young  lady,  who  had  been  in  delicate  health  for  four  years,
was  afflicted  with  a  most  distressing  spasmodic  cough,  recurring
periodically  every  evening.  Most  of  the  articles  of  the  materia
medica  had  been  employed  for  this  cough,  without  the  least  bene-
fit, but  magnetism  never  failed  to  silence  it  in  a  very  short  time  ;
on  some  occasions,  in  less  than  two  minutes,  as  was  witnessed  by
a  considerable  number  of  the  physicians  of  this  place.

*  Case  fifth.  —  Some  time  in  the  course  of  the  last  spring,  I
was  called  upon  to  go  and  extract  some  teeth  for  a  lady,  who  had
been  for  a  number  of  weeks  tormented  with  that  worst  of  all
torments,  the  teethache.  It  was  her  desire  to  be  put  into  the
magnetic  state,  that  she  might  not  be  sensible  of  the  pain  of  ex-
tracting. To  gratify  her,  I  made  the  experiment,  with  little
confidence  of  success,  I  acknowledge.  I  continued  the  process
about  half  an  hour  without  producing  sleep.  Being  fatigued,  I
discontinued  it,  and  advised  her  to  have  them  extracted  in  the
waking  state  ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  her  teeth  were  so  effectually
relieved  from  the  pain,  that  she  considered  the  operation  of  ex-
tracting unnecessary.

"  Three  months  afterwards,  she  informed  me  that  she  had  had
no  return  of  this  troublesome  affection.

"  Case  sixth.  — While  visiting  a  patient  in  the  westerly  part  of
the  city  a  few  weeks  since,  Mrs.  J.,  a  lady  apparently  in  delicate
health,  came  into  the  room,  who,  as  I  was  informed,  had  been
magnetized,  and  manifested  several  of  the  phenomena  of  somnam-
bulism. After  having  some  conversation  with  her,  1  was  anxious


APPENDIX.  287

to  see  the  character  of  her  somnambulism,  and  she  consented  to
let  me  magnetize  her  I  put  her  into  a  state  of  somnambulism  in
a  very  short  time,  not  exceeding  fifteen  minutes.  Considering
that  she  had  been  magnetized  only  once  in  several  months,  and
then  by  a  different  person  from  the  one  who  first  put  her  asleep,
I  found  her  powers  somewhat  extraordinary.  In  the  evening  of
a  case  of  violent  pains  of  a  spasmodic  character  in  the  stomach
and  bowels.  I  gave  her  immediately  a  dose  of  anodyne  medi-
cine, and,  knowing  the  influence  magnetism  had  had  upon  her,  I
thought  it  proper  to  try  it.  About  ten  or  twelve  minutes  after  I
commenced  the  manipulations,  she  was  entirely  free  from  pain,
though  not  asleep.

"  I  left  her  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour,  with  directions  to  repeat
the  same  kind  of  medicine  she  had  already  taken,  should  the  pain
return.  She  afterwards  informed  me  that  it  did  return  soon  after
I  left,  and  that  several  doses  of  the  medicine  were  taken,  with
only  partial  success.  Had  the  relief,  in  the  first  instance,  been
wholly  dependent  upon  the  anodyne,  it  is  rational  to  suppose  that
the  operation  of  the  succeeding  doses  would  have  been  more
prompt  than  that  of  the  first,  as  the  anodyne  was  accumulating
upon  the  system.

"  It  is  proper  to  observe,  in  this  place,  that  this  lady  subsequent-
ly informed  me  that,  on  the  evening  when  I  first  magnetized  her,
she  was  threatened  with  the  indisposition  for  which  I  was  after-
she  did  not  mention  it  at  the  time.

"  After  receiving  your  note,  I  called  upon  this  patient  to  learn
the  particulars  of  her  case  previous  to  my  seeing  her.  And  she
informed  me  that  some  time  in  the  latter  part  of  March,  or  the
first  of  April  last,  she  was  magnetized  by  Mr.  H.,  of  Brown  Uni-
versity. She  did  not  believe  in  magnetism,  and  submitted  to  it
rather  to  convince  the  gentleman,  who  was  an  advocate  of  it,  of
his  error,  than  from  the  expectation  of  receiving  any  benefit  from
it ;  but,  to  her  very  agreeable  surprise,  after  these  few  experi-
ments, she  found  herself  nearly  cured  of  an  inveterate  palpitation
which  had  for  several  years  rendered  her  life  miserable  and  ap-
parently precarious.  So  severe  indeed  was  this  affection,  that
she  had  not,  for  a  year  or  more,  been  able  to  ascend  a  flight  of
stairs,  or  walk  an  eighth  of  a  mile,  without  stopping  to  recover
from  the  agony  occasioned  by  the  exertion.

"  It  is  now  six  months  since  she  was  first  magnetized,  during
which  time  she  has  been  entirely  free  from  the  complaint,  with
the  exception  of  a  few  slight  attacks  within  the  last  six  or  eight
weeks.

"  Case  seventh.  —  The  20th  of  September,  1  received  a  message
to  visit  Mr.  D.,  a  gentleman  who  has  a  painful  affection  of  the  hip


288  APPENDIX.

and  back.  Having-,  a  number  of  times,  been  relieved  from  his
excruciating  sufferings  by  being  magnetized  by  Mr.  P.,  he  was
desirous  of  continuing  this  treatment,  with  the  hope  not  only  of
relief,  but  of  a  permanent  cure.

"  Upon  examination,  I  found  his  disease  to  be  one  not  likely  to
be  cured  by  magnetism  alone,  and  advised  him  to  an  efficient  sur-
gical course  of  treatment.  I,  however,  magnetized  him  a  number
of  times,  and  always  with  some  mitigation  of  his  sufferings.  He
was  not  put  into  a  sound  magnetic  sleepr  but  the  influence  was
certain.

"  Case  eighth.  —  1  magnetized  a  young  lady  for  a  distressing
affection  of  the  whole  nervous  system,  attended  with  erratic  pains
in  the  head  and  eyes,  wakefulness,  and  disturbed  and  unrefresh-
ing  slumbers.  The  optic  nerves  participated  in  this  affection  to
such  a  degree  that  she  apprehended  a  total  loss  of  vision.  She
was  frequently  annoyed  by  the  appearance  of  dark  motes  floating
before  her  eyes,  and  other  ocular  spectra,  as  is  frequently  ob-
served in  cases  of  incipient  amaurosis.  The  number  of  sittings
was  twelve ;  and  the  benefit  to  her  general  health  was  unequiv-
ocal. Her  nervous  system  was  soothed  and  strengthened,  and
her  slumbers  became  calm  and  restorative.  The  effects  of  mag-
netism in  this  case  were  somewhat  peculiar;  for,  though  her
physical  system  was  completely  under  its  influence,  her  mental
faculties  continued  wakeful,  and  her  senses  were  unusually
acute.  When  apparently  in  a  sleeping  state,  she  was  perfectly
conscious  of  her  situation,  which  is  not  usual  in  somnambulism, '
or  in  ordinary  sleep.

"  This  case  is  reported  to  show  the  influence  exerted  by  mag-
netism upon  the  system  generally,  and  especially  in  affections  of
the  nerves.

"  Case  ninth.  —  In  answer  to  an  inquiry  in  your  note  of  the  8th
instant,  respecting  the  health  of  Miss  Brackett,  it  gives  me  much
pleasure  to  inform  you  that,  notwithstanding  an  alarming  general
indisposition  of  two  or  three  weeks'  continuance,  her  vision  is  still
improving.  She  believes  herself  capable  of  walking  the  streets
safely  without  a  guide ;  she  can  judge  of  the  comparative  size
of  even  small  objects,  and  readily  distinguish  colors  when  there
is  a  strong  contrast.

"  Her  present  indisposition  has  proceeded  from  an  accidental
cause.  It  has  been  of  a  highly  inflammatory  nature,  and,  when
she  was  in  a  waking  state,  attended  with  great  pain  and  suffer-
ing. Under  these  circumstances,  magnetism  has  been  invaluable
to  her,  as  it  has  never  failed  to  render  her  insensible  to  suffering,
and  has  wholly  superseded  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  giving
opiates.  She  is  now  convalescent,  and  we  hope  soon  to  see  her,
not  only  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  general  health,  but  in  the  full


APPENDIX.  l&Si3

possession  of  that  most  useful  as  well  as  delightful  of  our  senses,
—  vision.

"  The  subjects  of  all  the  above  cases  are  respectable  and  intel-
ligent persons,  living  in  this  city  ;  and  most  of  them  may  be  re-
ferred to,  should  any  one  have  a  particular  interest  in  obtaining
further  information  in  relation  to  them.

"  With  much  respect,

«G.  CAPRON,
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn.


NOTE  XXVI.  — Pages  75—88.

Deleuze  remarks,  in  the  chapter  on  somnambulism,  that  "  Som-
nambulists whose  interior  faculties  have  acquired  great  energy,
are  often  found  in  a  frame  of  mind  of  which  you  might  avail
yourself  advantageously  to  make  them  follow  a  course  of  regi-
men, or  do  things  useful  to  them,  but  contrary  to  their  inclina-
tions. The  magnetizer  can,  after  it  has  been  mutually  agreed
upon,  impress  upon  them,  while  in  the  somnambulic  state,  an
idea  or  a  determination  which  will  influence  them  in  the  natural
state,  without  their  knowing  the  cause."  He  then  gives  in-
stances to  show  in  what  cases  this  influence  may  be  exerted.
Following  up  this  intimation,  the  author  of  the  following  letter,
who  is  acquainted  with  this  work  in  the  original,  has  arrived  at.
some  important  results  in  verification  of  what  Deleuze  and  other
writers  have  stated  in  reference  to  this  curious  branch  of  the
subject


FROM DOCTOR ROBBINS.

"  Uxbridge.  October  3,  1837.
"  Dear  Sir  :  I  had  the  pleasure,  some  days  ago,  of  receiving  a
copy  of  the  first  part  of  your  work,  and  the  accompanying  letter.
I  am  particularly  pleased  with  the  execution  and  the  whole  char-
acter of  this  specimen  of  the  performance.  I  feel  that,  when  com-
pleted, it  will  render  the  subject  strong  in  ample  evidence  both  of
its  power  and  its  utility.  You  are  at  liberty  to  publish  the  sub-
joined article,  if  it  meets  your  purpose.

"  Yours,  respectfully,

"J.  W.  ROBBINS.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."
25


290  APPENDIX.


CORRECTION  OF  THE HABITS OF SOMNAMBULISTS.

The  influence  which  the  magnetizer,  with  the  consent  of  the
somnambulist,  is  able,  through  his  somnambulism,  to  exert  upon
his  waking  state,  may  be  readily  proved  by  a  variety  of  experi-
ments of  pure  curiosity ;  but  the  magnetizer  should  seldom  in-
dulge in  such  kind  of  experimenting.  This  power  may,  however,
be  frequently  rendered  highly  useful  in  the  correction  of  habits  —
and  those  not  only  bodily,  but  mental.  The  following  instances
where  the  writer  has,  with  some  success,  employed  this  influence
for  the  benefit  of  his  patients,  may  serve  as  illustrations  of  this
power,  and  may  induce  magnetizers  to  have  recourse,  in  all  simi-
lar cases,  to  its  exercise.

One  individual,  of  a  highly-nervous  temperament,  and  much
affected  with  dyspepsia,  had  at  times  a  craving  almost  irresistible
for  certain  fruits  and  aliments,  which  were  sure  to  distress  her
stomach  and  aggravate  her  nervous  symptoms.  Having,  upon  my
first  essay  of  magnetism,  with  great  facility  induced  somnambu-
lism, I  resolved  to  make  trial  of  this  power,  with  little  confidence,
however,  in  the  success  of  the  attempt,  impossible  as  it  had  been
to  restrain  her  in  the  use  of  those  articles.  I  accordingly  en-
joined upon  her,  in  the  most  impressive  manner,  not  to  indulge
herself  in  their  use.  The  day  following,  having  procured  an
apple,  she  wished  to  eat  it,  but  found  herself  under  the  control  of
a  mysterious  influence,  which  rendered  it  morally  impossible.  It
seemed  to  her  that  a  person  told  her,  while  asleep,  not  to  eat  such
things;  "And,"  said  she,  "I  do  not  think  I  shall  be  able  to  eat
one  all  summer."

I  soon  found  that  I  had  not  included  in  my  prohibition  one
important  item,  namely,  tea  —  in  the  use  of  which  she  had  for
years  been  in  the  practice  of  freely  indulging,  and  which  I  be-
lieved to  exert  so  unfavorable  an  influence  upon  her  nerves,  that
I  had  for  a  long  time  employed  every  means  to  induce  her  to
abandon  it,  but  without  success.  I  therefore  issued  the  order;
and,  as  every  law  has  usually  its  appropriate  penalty,  I  annexed
it,  as  follows,  namely,  that  the  use  of  the  smallest  quantity  should
be  followed  by  nausea.  The  experiment  was  perfectly  success-
ful, all  succeeding  attempts  to  take  tea  being  followed  by  dis-
I  tressing  sickness.  As  long  as  she  remained  in  the  family  where
she  then  was,  she  continued  unable  to  take  either  tea  or  the
interdicted  articles  of  food.  I  was,  two  months  afterwards,  in-
formed that  those  habits  remained  corrected,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped
that  they  are  permanently  cured.

Another  somnambulist  I  had  observed  to  have  the  habit  of  con-
veying air  into  the  stomach  in  the  act  of  swallowing.  Suspecting
that  the  practice  tended  to  increase  the  distress  which  she  some-
times experienced  at  the  stomach,  I  directed  her  to  swallow  no


APPENDIX.  291

more  air,  or,  if  she  did  so,  that  she  should  be  seized  with  a  pain
in  the  throat.  This  pain  was  actually  observed,  by  the  inmates
of  the  family  where  she  was  boarding-,  to  seize  her  twice  on  the
day  following ;  and  she  afterwards  informed  me,  in  somnambu-
lism, that  she  believed  she  was  getting  cured  of  the  habit

A  third  patient  had  long  indulged  freely  in  the  use  of  tea  and
coffee,  and  they  had  become,  as  she  supposed,  absolutely  neces-
sary to  enable  her  to  continue  her  labor.  Endowed,  as  she  was
in  her  somnambulism,  with  the  faculty  of  prevision  of  a  character
almost  perfect  in  regard  to  the  exacerbations  of  her  own  disease,
and  the  effects  which  were  to  result  from  different  agents,  I  de-
sired her  to  examine  the  influence  of  tea  and  coffee  upon  her  sys-
tem. The  result  of  her  examination  was  an  acknowledgement
of  their  bad  effect,  and  her  consent  that  I  should  break  her  of  the
habit  of  using  them.  I  accordingly  issued  the  prohibition,  ac-
companied with  the  penalty  that  they  should  taste  unpleasantly,
and  be  followed  by  nausea.  The  next  day,  to  her  utter  astonish-
ment,(for  she  retained,  while  awake,  no  trace  of  what  had  occurred
in  her  somnambulism,)  both  her  tea  and  coffee  were  not  only
offensive  to  her  taste,  but  the  forced  introduction  of  small  quan-
tities into  the  stomach,  from  the  conviction  that  she  could  not  do
without  them,  was  followed  by  distressing  sickness  of  considera-
ble duration.  The  various  attempts  which  she  has  at  intervals
made  to  take  them  have  for  months  been  followed  by  the  same
results.

A  similar  course  was  subsequently  pursued  in  regard  to  snuff.
She  had  long  been  in  the  habit  of  using  this  article  in  considera-
ble quantities.  The  result  of  her  examination  of  it  during  her
somnambulism  was,  that  it  was  decidedly  prejudicial,  but  that  its
use  ought  not  to  be  at  once  abandoned.  She  accordingly  con-
sented that  I  should  restrict  her  to  the  use  of  six  pinches  daily.
I  did  so,  adding  the  injunction  that  whatever  she  should  take
and  offensive.  She  assented,  but  went  on,  for  some  time  after
waking,  in  its  use  as  before.  At  length,  after  taking  a  pinch,  the
sudden  contortions  of  her  countenance,  and  her  strong  exclama-
tions of  loathing  and  disgust,  plainly  indicated  what  had  occurred.
She  had  unwittingly  transgressed  her  limits ;  she  had  taken  the
prohibited  pinch,  and  could  take  no  more  during  the  day.  The
following  day,  she  could  take  it ;  but  her  passion  for  it  daily  di-
minished, as  she  was  several  times  dreadfully  annoyed  by  the
seventh  pinch.  The  habit  was  thus  entirely  broken,  and  but  a
trifle  in  comparison  has  been  used  in  several  months.  She  attrib-
uted the  effect  to  the  constant  use  of  magnetized  water.

From  the  following  example,  we  should  be  led  to  suppose  that
certain  habits  and  weaknesses,  more  especially  mental,  might  be
corrected  by  the  same  means,  which,  unfortunately,  are  applica-
ble only  to  somnambulists.. One  of  my  patients  had  always  been


292  APPENDIX.

unable  to  see  any  one  in  convulsions,  or  in  great  distress,  or  to
assist  in  rendering  the  necessary  attention  to  a  corpse.  If  obliged
to  be  present  upon  such  occasions,  the  effect,  both  upon  her  mind
and  body,  was  severe  and  distressing.  She  told  me,  in  her  som-
nambulism, that  she  had  exerted  herself  strongly  to  overcome  this
weakness,  which  was  a  source  of  much  mortification  and  incon-
venience to  her,  but  without  success,  and  she  begged  me  to  assist
her.  I  accordingly  pursued,  in  this  instance,  the  same  course  as
before.  Apparently  assured  now,  in  her  own  mind,  of  the  cure  of
her  failing,  she  thanked  me  in  the  most  grateful  terms ;  and,  al-
though totally  ignorant,  while  awake,  of  what  had  occurred  in  her
somnambulism,  she  assisted  at  the  next  preparation  for  a  funeral
without  any  exhibition  whatever  of  her  former  weakness.

These  facts,  like  others  appertaining  to  animal  magnetism,  will
doubtless  appear  of  a  very  extraordinary  character,  and  fail  to
gain  the  credence  of  those  who  have  not  examined  the  subject  in
the  true  spirit  of  philosophic  investigation ;  but  they  are  confirmed
by  many  writers  on  the  subject.  A  work  entitled  "  Cures  effected
in  France  by  Animal  Magnetism,"  details  various  similar  facts.
To  those  who  wish  to  apply  the  science  to  use,  these  facts  may
serve  to  furnish  hints  which  may  lead  to  highly-useful  results,
It  would  give  the  writer  pleasure  to  exhibit  the  evidence  of  these
or  any  other  facts  of  interest  in  his  possession  to  such  as  may
wish  candidly  to  investigate  the  subject


NOTE  XXVIL  —  Page  89.

Insensibility  to  Pain.  —  The  following  letter  from  Dr.
Esten,  surgeon  dentist,  of  this  city,  gives  the  particulars  of  ope-
rations performed  by  him  while  the  patient  was  in  the  somnam-
bulic state.

"Providence,  October  4,  1837.

"Dear  Sir:  I  cheerfully  comply  with  your  request.  Some
time  during  the  last  summer,  I  was  informed  by  Dr.  Brownell
that  one  of  his  patients  was  at  his  house  in  the  magnetic  sleep,
and  was  invited  to  call  and  see  her.  I  accepted  the  invitation^
and  found  the  lady  sleeping.  After  some  curious  experiments,
she  was  aAvakened.  She  requested  me  to  examine  her  teeth,
which  she  said  she  had  unfortunately  broken  off  by  a  fall,  and
expressed  a  desire  to  have  some  new  ones  inserted.  Upon  ex-
amination, I  found  her  teeth  badJy  decayed  and  broken,  and
informed  her  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  the  roots  of
some  of  the  broken  teeth  extracted,  and  others  cut  off  to  a  level
with  the  gums,  before  she  could  have  artificial  ones  inserted.  It
was  accordingly  agreed  that,  on  some  suitable  occasion,  it  should


APPENDIX.  293

be  done,  while  she  was  asleep.  Several  weeks  after,  I  was  again
called  in  by  Dr.  B.,  and  found  the  lady  sleeping  very  comfortably
in  an  easy  chair.  I  immediately  extracted  the  roots  of  four  front
teeth,  which  had  been  broken  off,  without  awaking  her,  or  even
disturbing  her  repose.  The  case  was  rather  a  severe  one,  as  the
teeth  were  broken  down  so  low  that  I  could  not  take  hold  of
them  with  a  pair  of  forceps,  and  was  obliged  to  take  them  out
with  a  hook  which  I  use  for  such  a  purpose.  On  examining
them  about  a  week  after,  I  found  it  to  be  necessary  to  remove
one  more.  She  was  put  asleep,  and  I  extracted  the  tooth.  She
appeared  not  to  know  what  I  was  doing,  and  manifested  no  signs
of  pain.  She  did  not  on  this,  or  on  the  former  occasion,  spit  the
blood  from  her  mouth.  It  was  removed  by  a  towel,  the  corner  of
which  was  laid  in  her  mouth.  After  I  had  extracted  this  last  tooth,
Dr.  B.  asked  her  whether  it  hurt  her.  She  replied  by  saying, '  Does
what  hurt  ? '  She  afterwards  came  to  my  office  with  Dr.  B.,  and,
after  being  magnetized,  had  the  two  central  incisors  cut  off  to  a
level  with  the  gums,  and  holes  were  drilled  into  the  roots  of  them,
preparatory  to  inserting  artificial  ones.  She  afterwards  had  seven
artificial  teeth  inserted.  The  operation  was  not  all  performed  at
one  time,  but  at  two  or  three  different  sittings.  Every  part  of
the  work  usually  attended  with  any  pain  was  done  while  she  was
asleep;  and,  according  to  all  appearances,  and  her  own  testi-
mony, she  was  not  sensible  of  any  pain.  She  was  several  times
asked  by  Dr.  Brownell,  during  the  most  painful  part  of  the  ope-
ration, if  it  hurt  her ;  she  always  replied  by  saying,  '  Does  what
hvrtV

«W.  T. ESTEN.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


The  readers  of  the  "  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal "  will
remember  a  similar  case  detailed  at  length  by  Dr.  Benjamin  H.
West,  in  the  twenty-second  number  of  the  fourteenth  volume  of
that  valuable  work.  The  operation  was  performed  by  Dr.  Har-
wood,  surgeon  dentist,  on  an  epileptic  patient  of  Monsieur  Bugard,
an  accomplished  French  teacher  of  that  city,  in  the  presence  of
Professor  Treadwell,  of  Harvard  University,  Drs.  Ware,  Lewis,
Lodge,  A.  D.  Parker,  Esq.,  and  Messrs.  Ware  and  West,  med-
ical students.  The  latter  gentleman,  the  writer  of  the  article,
had  previously  extracted  a  molar  tooth  from  the  same  patient,
who  was  a  girl  of  nearly  thirteen  years  old,  without  producing
the  slightest  indication  of  feeling  on  her  part.

The  Taunton  Whig,  of  September  13th,  gives  an  account  of  a
similar  operation,  by  Dr.  Nahum  Washburn,  upon  an  intelligent
young  gentleman,  now  a  medical  student  of  that  town.  The
character  of  the  witnesses  who  are  named  precludes  the  possibil-
ity of  a  doubt  in  regard  to  the  literal  correctness  of  the  relation.
25*


294  APPENDIX,

It  is  somewhat  singular  that  in  Taunton  almost  all  the  somnam-
bulists are  men.

"A  gentleman  who  had  a  carious  tooth  was  desirous  of  having
it  extracted  while  under  the  magnetic  influence,  and  seated  him-
self for  that  purpose.  He  was  put  into  a  state  of  perfect  mag-
netic sleep  in  the  course  of  five  minutes,  at  a  distance  of  eight
feet,  by  a  friend  who  had  magnetized  him  many  times  before.
In  that  state,  he  remarked  that  the  room  was  too  light,  and  a  silk
handkerchief  was  therefore  bound  over  his  already  closed  eye-
lids. Being  then  asked  if  he  wished  to  have  his  tooth  extracted,
he  answered  that  he  did.  After  a  lapse  of  a  few  minutes,  the
magnetizer,  standing  at  a  distance,  willed  him  to  open  his  mouthy
which  he  did,  asking,  at  the  same  time,  if  it  was  wide  enough.

"  The  magnetizer  then  retired  to  an  adjoining  room,  and  the
operation  was  performed  during  his  absence.*  I  was  near  the
patient,  watched  him  closely,  and  did  not  observe  any  sign  of
suffering.  There  was  not  the  slightest  contraction  of  a  muscle,
either  of  his  face  or  limbs,  during  the  operation ;  no  change  of
the  countenance,  or  of  the  respiration.  His  whole  body  remained
as  perfectly  composed  as  in  the  most  quiet  natural  sleep.  A
bowl  was  placed  under  his  chin,  but  he  made  no  effort  to  free  his
mouth  from  the  blood  which  flowed  out  between  his  lips,  until
the  magnetizer  returned,  and  willed  him  to  do  so.

"He  inquired  'what  made  him  spit  so  much;'  and  shortly
after  complained  of  the  '  stuff  running  down  his  throat.'  Being
asked  what  it  was,  he  replied,  after  tasting,  that  he  'did  not
know.'

"  He  was  permitted  to  sleep  a  few  minutes  more,  when  the
magnetizer  went  into  an  adjoining  room,  and  willed  him  to  awake
in  ten  minutes.  Ir\  precisely  that  time,  there  was  a  considerable
movement  of  the  eyelids.  The  sleep  continued  three  minutes
longer.

"Soon  after  awaking,  he  observed  the  bowl  containing  the

*  Dr.  Cleveland,  of  Pawtuxet,  mentioned  to  the  translator  a  curious
fact,  which  fully  agrees  with  what  has  been  asserted  in  a  previous  note,
namely,  the  somnambulist  always  appears  to  know  what  his  magnetizer  is
doing.

Having  put  one  of  his  patients  into  the  somnambulic  state,  for  the  pur-
pose of  performing  a  slight  surgical  operation,  he  found  that  he  could
not  do  it  himself,  because  the  patient,  though  insensible  to  the  touch  or
others,  exhibited  towards  himself  a  perfect  consciousness  and  sensibility
which  he  could  not  annihilate  long  enough  to  continue  the  operation.
The  moment  his  mind  was  fixed  upon  the  object,  it  was  withdrawn  from
the  exertion  of  the  will,  so  that  consciousness  and  sensation  instantly
returned  to  baffle  his  purpose.  It  may  be  further  observed  that,  in  Clo-
quet's  excision  of  a  cancerated  ulcer,  mentioned  in  part  first,  the  patient
was  magnetized  by  another  person.  If  this  should  be  discovered  to  be  a
general  principle,  we  shall  see  one  more  reason  for  Deleuze's  instruction?
to  keep  the  intention  well  sustained.


APPENDIX.  295

blood  in  a  chair  by  his  side,  and,  immediately  placing  his  finger
upon  the  cavity,  asked,  with  the  appearance  of  great  surprise,  if
his  tooth  had  been  extracted.  He  declared  that  he  was  not  until
then  aware  that  the  operation  had  been  performed.

"The  tooth  was  a  large  one,  had  two  stout  fangs,  and  came
out  unusually  hard.  It  was  one  of  the  molar  teeth  of  the  un-
der jaw.

"I  have  shown  this  communication  to  Messrs.  C.  R.  Atwood,
Hiram  M.  Barney,  Samuel  C.  West,  Horatio  Gilbert,  Francis  S.
Munroe,  and  Jonathan  Hodges,  who  were  present,  and  to  Dr.
Nahum  Washburn,  who  operated,  and  have  their  authority  to
state  that  it  is  an  accurate  recital  of  the  incidents  of  the  scene.

«G."


NOTE  XXVIII.  —  Page  76.

Distant  Clairvoyance. —  The  following  letters  are  inserted
for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  a  rational  curiosity  in  regard  to  the
wayfarings  of  the  spirit  in  somnambulism.  Others  will  appear
in  the  third  part.  They  are  from  gentlemen  who  are  well  known
in  this  quarter,  and  their  authority  is  second  to  none  which  can
be  produced.  The  reflecting  mind  will  find  in  them  enough  to
excite  activity  of  thought,  and  the  most  sensual  enough  to  be
kindled  into  a  spiritual  flame,  though  it  flicker  and  be  temporary
in  its  rising.  That  the  human  spirit  hath  power  to  leave  the
body,  and  take  cognisance  of  things  distant  in  space,  is  but  an
elementary  truth  in  this  branch  of  psychology. He  who  cannot

frasp  the  evidence  on  which  it  rests,  with  a  firm  hold,  will  find
imself  constantly  vacillating  between  belief  and  incontinence
of  faith;  but  he  who  has  once  weighed  it,  and  suffered  the  con-
viction to  produce  its  legitimate  effect,  will  find  his  notions  of
things  to  cohie  quickened  and  informed,  and  be  happy  in  the
consciousness  of  immortality.  For,  if  we  are  convinced  that  the
spirit  can  be  absent,  or  partially  absent,  from  the  body,  and,  while
deriving  little  or  no  sensation  from  it,  be  engaged  in  real  scenes
in  other  climes,  we  are  furnished  with  the  aliment  which  strength-
ens our  conceptions  of  a  separate  spiritual  existence,  so  that  the
doctrine  of  a  future  state  appears  to  be  consequent  upon  our  na-
ture, if  not  susceptible  of  direct  proof.


FROM E.  L.  FROTHINGHAM, ESQ.

"Boston,  October  3,  1837,
"  Dear  Sir  :  1  have  just  received  your  note  of  the  30th  ult*?
containing  a  request  that  I  would  send  to  you  some  account  of


296  APPENDIX.

my  experience  in  animal  magnetism,  while  on  a  visit  to  Provi-
dence in  August  last.  You  are  perfectly  welcome  to  all  my  ex-
perience, and  should  be  still  more  welcome  were  it  of  greater
importance.  The  facts  which  I  have  to  state  are  more  general
in  their  character,  and  of  course  less  satisfactory,  in  some  re-
spects, than  they  would  have  been  had  I  not  been  so  limited  in
time.  On  this  account,  they  may  not  be  thought  of  sufficient
importance  to  require  their  publicity,  as  many  others  may  be
furnished,  if  1  may  judge  from  what  I  have  heard  related  by  oth-
ers, which  are  much  more  circumstantial,  and  therefore  more
generally  interesting.

"  Hearing  from  many  sources  of  the  wonders  of  animal  mag-
netism previous  to  my  visit  to  Providence,  and  being  anxious  to
satisfy  myself  of  the  real  or  visionary  character  of  these  phenom-
ena, on  my  arrival  there  I  obtained  an  introduction  to  Dr.  Capron,
who,  upon  being  made  acquainted  with  my  wishes,  very  politely
expressed  a  willingness  to  gratify  my  curiosity,  and  appointed  a
meeting  for  this  purpose  on  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day.  At
the  time  appointed,  I  was  introduced  to  Miss  Brackett,  the  inter-
esting young  woman  whose  case  you  have  laid  before  the  public.
After  the  process  of  magnetizing  had  been  completed,  she,  at  the
request  of  Dr.  Capron,  rose  from  her  chair,  to  which  she  had  been
previously  led  in  a  helpless  state,  walked  through  the  room  witli
the  greatest  confidence,  avoiding  the  chairs  which  stood  in  her
way,  and  passed  into  the  next  room.  In  a  few  moments,  she  re-
turned, equipped  for  a  walk,  and,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  fam-
ily, but  without  any  assistance,  passed  rapidly  down  a  flight  of
stone  steps  into  the  street,  and  disappeared.  The  change  from
sightless  helplessness  to  clear-sighted  confidence  was  remarkably
striking.  In  a  few  moments,  we  followed,  and,  on  stopping  at  the
house  where  she  had  been  directed  to  go,  we  found  this  blind
young  lady,  now  endowed  with  more  than  natural  sight,  running
through  the  house  like  a  young  girl  let  loose  from  school  on  a
holyday,  and  examining  pictures  in  a  very  novel  manner,  by
placing  her  back  towards  them.

"  After  being  seated,  she,  at  the  request  of  Dr.  Capron,  agreed
to  accompany  him  to  Boston;  for,  being  a  stranger  to  her,  and
unaccustomed  to  such  odd  ways  of  travelling,  I  did  not  feel  my-
self competent  to  take  charge  of  her.  The  journey  to  Boston
was  accomplished  in  about  one  minute,  passing,  as  she  said,
through  the  air,  on  a  line  with  the  railroad.  On  arriving  at  the
depot  in  Boston,  she  was  directed  through  several  streets,  com-
plaining, all  the  while,  of  being  jostled  by  the  crowd,  to  my  res-
house,  and,  upon  entering,  three  members  of  my  family,  in  a  very
particular  and  correct  manner,  even  some  particular  points  of
dress  quite  unusual,  which,  upon  my  return  to  Boston,  I  found  to
have  been  correct I  also  ascertained  that  the  individuals  of  the


APPENDIX.


297


some  cause,  however,  nothing  more  could  be  extracted  from  her,
the  answer  to  all  questions  being,  '  You  can  see  them  as  well  as  I.'
As  she  appeared  to  be  so  uncommunicative,  a  second  meeting  was
appointed  to  take  place  on  the  evening  of  the  following  day,
which  I  attended  with  a  friend,  Mr.  Nathaniel  W.  Brown,  of
your  city,  being  the  only  individuals  present  at  this  experiment,
excepting  the  members  of  the  family.

"  Miss  Brackett  appeared  to  be  in  the  magnetic  sleep  when
we  arrived.  In  a  few  moments  after,  Dr.  Capron,  having  other
engagements  for  the  evening,  left  the  house,  placing  Mr.  B.  and
myself  in  communication  with  Miss  Brackett,  and  directing  her
to  wake  at  half  past  9  o'clock.  As  some  time  was  consumed
in  visiting  Mr.  B.'s  house,  which  resulted  very  satisfactorily  to
him,  there  was  something  less  than  an  hour  left  at  my  disposal
previous  to  the  time  set  for  the  termination  of  her  sleep.  This,
you  must  be  aware,  was  altogether  insufficient  for  a  full  experi-
ment, as  it  is  impossible,  in  these  cases,  to  hurry  any  thing ;  and
renders  the  facts  obtained  less  particular  and  numerous  than  1
wished.  However,  although  not  fruitful  in  particulars,  this  ex-
periment may  be  found  to  illustrate  some  'principles  in  the  most
striking  manner  ;  and  this,  after  all,  is  the  principal  object

"The  same  process  was  employed  in  accomplishing  the  jour-
ney to  my  house  in  Boston,  as  before,  and  her  description  of  its
external  appearance  was  in  the  same  words.

a  very  peculiar  table,  which  were  in  the  entry.  As  she  said
there  was  no  individual  in  the  lower  part  of  the  house,  I  invited
her  up  stairs  into  the  parlor.  In  this  room,  without  any  leading
articles  of  furniture,  ornaments,  and  pictures,  in  the  order  in
which  they  are  placed  in  the  room,  and  in  such  a  manner  that
each  article  was  immediately  recognized  by  me,  although  her
descriptions  were  general.

"  Upon  entering  the  room,  I  asked  her  to  tell  me  what  there
was  in  it  that  pleased  her.  She  immediately  commenced  de-
scribing a  figure  with  her  hand,  as  if  passing  over  a  solid,  smooth
substance.  'What  are  you  looking  at?'  'Why,  this  portrait'
'  What  kind  of  a  portrait  is  it  ? '  '  Why,  it  is  white :  how  smooth
it  is ! '  '  How  heavy  is  it  ? '  '  It  is  very  heavy.  I  should  think
it  was  marble.'  '  What  kind  of  a  shelf  does  it  stand  upon  ?  '  'It
does  not  stand  upon  any  shelf;  but  on  a  projection  from  the  fire-
place.' This  was  her  description  of  a  marble  bust,  weighing  not
far  from  one  hundred  weight,  standing  upon  a  Doric  stove  which
projects  into  the  room.  She  distinguished  differences  of  size,
figure,  weight,  color,  and  surface,  (as  smooth  or  rough,)  in  the


298  APPENDIX.

omitted,  and  some  only  partially  indicated,  not  the  slightest  mis-
take was  made,  although  many  attempts  were  made  to  mislead  her.
The  subject  of  two  pictures,  which  she  very  obstinately  refused
when  she  awoke.  In  this  room  she  recognised  my  daughter,  and
said  she  had  seen  her  before,  but  could  find  no  other  person  in
the  house.  I  then  asked  her  to  pass  into  the  chamber,  and  look
for  the  children.  After  a  moment's  pause,  she  stooped  over,  and
turned  her  hand,  as  if  turning  down  the  clothes  of  a  bed",  and
said  there  was  a  child  asleep ;  but  that  his  head  was  entirely
covered  with  clothes.  At  this  she  seemed  quite  disturbed.  She
said  the  child  was  very  uncomfortable,  and  that  'it  was  not
healthy  to  be  so  covered  up.'

"  As  there  was  now  very  little  time  to  spare,  I  said,  '  Let  us  go
down  stairs ;  perhaps  we  shall  now  be  able  to  find  the  rest  of  the
family.'  In  a  moment  she  said,  '  Good  evening.'  On  asking  her
two  of  whom  she  recognised  as  having  seen  the  day  before,  and
the  other  as  an  elderly  Quaker  lady,  whose  very  peculiar  dress
humor.  This  was  the  close  of  my  experiment,  as  the  time  fixed
by  Dr.  Capron  for  her  to  awake  was  near  at  hand  ;  and  I  hastened
to  conduct  her  back  to  Providence.  I  arrived  at  the  end  of  my
imaginary  journey  just  as  the  time  expired,  at  which  moment
she  awoke.  On  my  return  home,  I  ascertained  that  all  her
descriptions  relaxing  to  the  individuals  of  my  family  were  perfectly
correct.

"At  the  time  of  our  supposed  visit,  my  daughter  was  alone  in
the  house,  —  with  the  exception  of  the  children,  who  were  in  bed,
other  three  members  of  the  family  did  return  about  the  time  at
which  our  experiments  concluded,  and  were  in  the  lower  room,
the  little  boy  on  her  return,  found  him  in  precisely  the  uncom-
fortable situation  which  so  much  distressed  the  sympathetic  invis-
ible visitant.

"  You  will  excuse  me  from  making  any  observations  or  offering*
any  opinion  upon  these  remarkable  phenomena.  As  facts,  you
are  perfectly  welcome  to  them,  and  to  make  what  use  of  them
you  please  ;  being  satisfied  that  all  remarkable  facts,  but  particu-
larly those  of  a  character  not  referable  to  any  known  principle,
should  be  made  public.

"  Yours,  truly,

"E.  L.  FROTHINGHAM.

"Mr.T.C.  Hartshorn."


APPENDIX.  299

FROM  MONSIEUR  B.  F.  BUGARD.

"Boston,  October  10,  1837.

"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn:

"  Dear  Sir  :  I  do  not  delay  a  moment  to  answer  yours  of  the
7th  inst  At  another  time,  you  shall  hear  from  me  again;  at
present,  1  will  relate  a  fact  about  a  somnambulist.

"  About  three  months  ago,  I  went  to  the  house  of  Mr.  L.,  to
spend  an  evening.  I  found  him  and  his  lady  at  home,  and  with
them  their  son  A.,  Mrs.  C,  a  French  lady,  and  Mr.  G.,  a  friend  of
mine.  Mrs.  C.  not  feeling  very  well,  one  of  the  company  sug-
gested to  me  that  I  ought  to  magnetize  her.  Having  offered  my
services  to  relieve  her  in  that  way,  she  accepted  the  offer.  I  put
her  asleep  in  less  than  five  minutes.  As  it  generally,  though  not
always,  happens  in  such  cases,  she  answered  all  my  questions.

"  This  lady  has  come  to  this  country  with  her  husband,  leaving
m  Paris  her  mother  and  three  children.  After  a  little  conversa-
tion, during  which  she  drank  some  tea,  I  sent  her  home  to  Paris,
to  look  after  her  family  there.  She  answered  a  question  in  rela-
tion to  their  health,  by  saying  that  her  eldest  daughter  was  not
well,  but  was  affected  with  sore  eyes ;  that  a  certain  physician
was  in  attendance,  whom  she  named  distinctly,  but  whose  name
is  at  this  moment  out  of  my  memory ;  that  her  second  daughter
had  a  cold,  and  that  her  little  son  was  perfectly  well.

"  Upon  asking  her  whether  her  mother  had  attended  church
during  the  day,  it  being  Sunday,  she  replied  that  she  attended  in
the  morning,  but  not  in  the  afternoon.  On  being  requested  to
look  at  the  clock,  and  tell  the  time,  she  replied,  without  hesitation,
;  4  o'clock ; '  and  on  making  the  calculation  myself,  /  found
her  to  he  correct.*

"  I  soon  after  awoke  her  by  the  mere  exertion  of  my  will.  She
was  not  aware  of  having  taken  any  tea,  and  although  she  put  the
question  to  every  one  in  turn  whether  she  had  taken  any,  she
remained  unconvinced  of  what  she  had  actually  done.

"  About  five  or  six  weeks  after  this  experiment,  Mrs.  C.  re-
ceived a  letter  from  her  mother,  corifirming  every  particular  she
had  said  concerning  her  children.

"  I  would  observe  that,  when  awake,  I  asked  her  what  o'clock
she  thought  it  then  was  at  Paris.  She  was  obliged  to  calculate,
and,  in  giving  the  answer,  she  was  far  from  being  positive.  If  any
one  desires  to  know  who  these  persons  are,  whose  initials  only  are
given,  I  shall  at  any  time  be  ready  to  give  them,  together  with
such  additional  proof  as  may  be  wanted.

"  I  am  your  obedient  servant,

"B.F.  BUGARD."

*  I  have  tried  this  experiment  by  sending  several  somnambulists  far  to
the  west.  The  result  showed  a  correspondence  between  the  time  and
the  longitude,  though  the  signification  of  the  latter  word  was  unknown  to
two  of  them.  —  Trans.


300  APPENDIX.

FROM  REVEREND  E.  B.  HALL.

"  Providence,  December  1, 1837.
"To  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn  :

"  Dear  Sir  :  You  wish  me  to  write  you  something  about  my
experience  and  opinions  on  the  subject  of  animal  magnetism.  I
have  been  unwilling  to  say  any  thing  publicly  about  that  of  which
I  know  so  little ;  and  I  should  decline  now,  if  my  name  had  not
already  appeared  in  several  journals  without  my  permission,  and
in  support  of  facts  not  correctly  given.  It  was  so  in  the  refer-
ence to  me  which  the  appendix  to  your  first  number  contained,
afterwards  quoted  by  Colonel  Stone,  although  there  was  no  exag-
geration. A  man's  own  opinion  may  be  of  little  importance  ;  but
truth  is  of  great  importance  on  all  subjects,  and  especially  as  to
matters  of  observation  and  fact.  I  feel  willing,  therefore,  and
feel  it  to  be  due  to  others,  to  say,  in  brief,  what  I  have  seen  and
what  I  believe.

"  I  can  do  this  best  by  giving  a  view,  first,  of  the  principles  by
which,  not  I  alone,  but  many  observers  in  this  city,  have  exam-
ined this  subject,  and  then  of  some  of  the  results,  so  far  as  they
can  be  called  results.  There  seems  to  be  an  impression  abroad,
and  here  also,  with  many,  that  those  of  us  who  have  not  had  suffi-
cient confidence  in  our  own  wisdom,  nor  seen  sufficient  cause  in
the  facts  offered,  to  pronounce  this  whole  affair  an  imposition,
or  reject  it  as  an  absurdity,  are  altogether  believers  and  dupes.
How  far  we  are  dupes,  I  am  not  concerned  to  say.  That  we  are
not  believers,  I  do  say.  I  believe  I  may  say  it  of  a  very  large
portion  of  the  intelligent  in  this  place,  though  I  am  not  authorized
to  speak  for  others.  What  is  exactly  intended,  in  saying  that  we
are  not  believers,  will  appear  from  what  follows.  It  may  not  be
useless,  to  this  or  any  cause,  to  speak  of  principles  of  evidence,  —
the  kind  of  inquiry  and  test  to  which  all  matters  of  this  kind
should  be  subjected,  —  and  the  distinction  between  inquiring  and
believing.  Candor  and  credulity  are  too  often  confounded.  The
first  is  one  of  the  noblest  of  traits,  most  rare  and  most  useful ;
the  last  is  one  of  the  most  common  and  most  hurtful.  Let  me
to  Judge  Williams,  of  Taunton,  published  first  in  a  paper  there,
and  afterward  appended  to  a  pamphlet  by  Charles  Poyen,  as  writ-
ten by  'a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  Bench.'

"  The  reality  of  that  which  is  called  animal  magnetism  is  pure-
ly a  question  of  fact.  As  such  I  view  it ;  as  such  alone  do  I
attach  any  importance  to  that  which  is  said  or  done  about  it
Whether  it  be  new  or  old  ;  whether  it  agree  with  preconceived
opinions  or  oppose  them  all ;  whether  the  wise  men  in  France  of
the  last  century,  or  those  of  the  present,  believe  or  disbelieve ;
whether  the  marvellous  powers  here  supposed,  if  real,  would  do
most  good  or  evil ;  whether  the  « possessed  nuns,'  the  '  Salem


APPENDIX.  301

witches,'  and  the  '  old  wives,'  of  all  ages  and  hoth  sexes,  have  not
wrought  as  great  wonders  as  the  modern  somnambulists,  —  are  all
questions  of  lively  interest,  it  is  true,  and  proper  inquiry,  but
utterly  impotent,  if  not  irrelevant,  in  settling  a  question  of  fact
Then,  as  to  fears  or  hopes  in  regard  to  the  truth  of  animal  mag-
netism, I  have  neither.  I  have  not  the  least  solicitude  that  it
should  prove  either  true  or  false.  I  know  it  is  either  true  or  false,
whether  proved  so  or  not,  whether  I  believe  or  reject,  or  any  man,
or  all  men.  If  it  be  false,  it  will  do  no  great  harm.  If  true,  it
will  do  good ;  for  all  truth  is  good,  and  does  good.  Its  interfer-
ence with  any  other  truth  is  an  impossibility.  It  is  not  in  the
power  of  animal  magnetism,  or  any  tiling  else,  known  or  un-
known, to  destroy  one  particle  of  truth  in  religion,  or  nature,  or  man.
Truths  are  never  destroyed.  They  are  not  of  man ;  he  can
neither  create  nor  annihilate  the  smallest  of  them.  They  are  of
God,  and  they  are  imperishable.  There  is  but  one  question  and
one  investigation,  in  this  or  any  subject,  that  should  awaken  great,
anxiety,  or  be  deemed  essential — What  is  truths

"  Now,  in  seeking  the  truth,  in  regard  to  animal  magnetism,
there  seems  to  me  to  have  been  too  much  credulity,  a  too  easy
faith,  with  many.  The  public  at  large  are  incredulous,  and  they
ought  to  be.  Some  of  them,  to  be  sure,  are  very  weakly  incredu-
lous, from  self-conceit,  or  obstinacy,  or  timidity,  or  blank  igno-
rance. But  many  are  wisely  incredulous.  A  healthy  mind  will
never,  as  it  cannot,  believe  that  which  is  wholly  strange,  intrinsi-
cally improbable,  and  not  yet  supported  by  evidence  adapted  to
its  nature  or  proportioned  to  its  magnitude.  And  much  of  the
evidence  offered  in  this  case,  and  relied  on,  is  neither  of  the  kind
nor  degree  that  the  case  demands.  I  have  seen  many  trials,  where
the  truth  of  every  thing  was  almost  taken  for  granted ;  and  the
men  and  women  merely  looked  on  with  open  mouths.  Supposing
the  '  subject '  was  of  course  asleep,  and  insensible  to  all  sounds
and  sights,  they  have  openly  said  and  done  every  thing,  and  then
wondered  that  she  knew  it !  Tins  is  singular  folly.  It  is  child's
play.  The  true  principle  in  testing  such  supposed  wonders,  is  to
take  nothing  for  granted  ;  no,  nothing.  1  go  to  the  examinations
without  assuming  a  single  fact  in  the  case,  but  rather  distrusting
every  thing  until  it  is  proved.  The  whole  matter  is  improbable ;
i.  e.  is  opposed  by  all  we  have  ever  seen,  and  all  we  know.  I
have  a  right,  therefore,  to  institute  the  most  rigid  and  suspicious
scrutiny  on  every  point  I  will  not  believe  because  the  operator
is  an  honest  man,  and  the  subject  pure  and  true.  That  I  do  not
dispute,  and  it  is  to  be  taken  into  the  account  But  it  does  not
of  itself  prove  much  in  a  case  like  this.  The  best  men  in  the
world  may  be  deceived,  and  so  may  the  wisest  Nay,  such  is
human  nature,  that,  in  certain  circumstances,  the  best  and  wisest
may  deceive  others,  however  unintentionally.  I  will  not  believe
even  my  own  senses,  in  matters  so  unaccountable,  until  I  have
26


302  APPENDIX.

had  frequent  opportunities  of  examining.  I  hold  that  any  thing
which  is  possible,  is  more  probable  than  that  a  person  should  see
without  eyes,  and  travel  without  moving-.  I  demand,  therefore,
for  such  facts,  such  evidence  as  it  is  not  possible  to  evade  or
resist.  So  long-  as  there  can  be  any  evasion  or  other  explanation,
my  own  mind  will  not  receive  the  appearances  as  facts,  whether
others  receive  them  or  not,  whether  I  wish  to  receive  them  or  not

"  I  distrust  all  appearances  that  may  be  feigned,  or  in  which
imagination  may  be  the  sole  agent ;  and  the  power  of  imagina-
tion is  almost  indefinite.  I  distrust  all  answers  given  to  leading
questions.  A  very  great  portion  of  the  questions  which  I  have
heard  put  to  supposed  somnambulists,  have  been  suggestive.  I
distrust  all  information  given,  when  that  information  could  have
been  obtained  either  from  hints  carelessly  dropped  in  the  room,
or  from  personal  intercourse  and  previous  knowledge  of  objects
and  places.  To  make  out  a  case  of  actual  clairvoyance,  or  of
mental  locomotion,  there  must  be  not  only  no  probability,  but  no
possibility,  of  any  of  the  above  helps  or  explanations.  Nor  can
I  conceive  of  but  one  kind  of  proof  of  this  particular  power,  so
inconceivable  and  inexplicable.  That  proof  is  the  consciousness
of  holding  in  one's  mind  a  fact  unknown  to  all  others,  proposing
the  inquiry  ourselves  in  the  most  guarded  manner,  without  any
suggestion,  or  hint,  or  help  of  any  kind,  and  then  hearing  a  true
and  unequivocal  answer.  It  is  little  to  hear  others  ask  questions,
when  you  know  not  what  communication  there  may  have  been
previously.  It  is  insufficient  to  be  told  even  that  letters  were
read,  through  bandages  and  envelopes  many,  if  you  know  nothing
of  the  actors,  even  if  you  believe  their  assertions.  For  letters
have  been  read,  by  peculiar  processes,  without  being  opened ;
and  letters  have  been  opened  and  returned  so  well  sealed^  that
the  writer  himself  could  not  detect  any  appearance  of  change.
So  that,  while  I  disclaim  all  suspicion  of  foul  play  in  the  cases  of
this  kind  occurring  here,  I  insist  that  they  are  not  positive  proof
of  the  power  of  seeing  through  opaque  substances,  except  where
the  letter  is  not  for  a  moment  lost  sight  of  by  the  writer  or  opera-
tor. If  it  is  not  lost  sight  of,  but  openly  read,  and  its  contents
correctly  told,  then  is  this  also  evidence  of  the  highest  kind ;
supposing,  as  before,  that  the  writer  is  sure  no  one  but  himself
knows  what  the  letter  contains.

"  These  things  are  said,  not  for  their  peculiar  value,  but  in  ex-
planation of  the  kind  of  feeling  and  principles  of  evidence  which
many  in  this  place  have  brought  to  this  subject.  They  show
that,  so  far  at  least,  there  has  been  no  very  great  credulity  or
liability  to  be  deceived.  And  I  believe  I  may  add,  —  to  speak
now  more  definitely  of  the  results,  —  that,  whether  deceived  or
not,  some  of  us  have  not  been  satisfied.  I  know  of  few  intelli-
gent observers  of  animal  magnetism  in  Providence  who  look
upon  the  subject  as  settled,  or  who  wish  to  be  considered  as  any


APPENDIX.  303

other  than  interested  and  candid  inquirers.  If  there  are  those
who  know  not  the  difference  between  inquirers  and  believers,  or
who  think  that  the  only  wise  ones  are  the  scoffers,  we  must  be
excused  from  going  into  any  argument  with  them  or  about  them.
It  is  violating  all  probability  and  all  common  sense,  to  suppose
that  hundreds  of  men  and  women,  of  every  profession  and  station,
of  unimpeachable  veracity,  and  at  least  respectable  information,
without  any  concert,  compensation,  or  assignable  motive,  should
engage  in  the  same  childish  attempts  at  imposition,  produce  the
same  strange  results,  and  in  different  places  become  operators  or
subjects  on  a  large  scale,  for  no  earthly  end  but  the  pleasure  of
being  duped  !  Then,  to  crown  the  wisdom  of  such  a  supposition,
it  is  only  necessary  to  take  a  single  case  ;  for  instance,  that  of  a
young  woman,  of  good  sense  and  character,  feigning  total  blind-
ness for  a  year  or  two  before  she  hears  of  animal  magnetism,  in
order  to  be  prepared  for  it;  subjecting  herself  to  all  manner  of
privations ;  denying  herself  the  agreeable  privilege  of  seeing,
working,  eating,  walking,  or  doing  any  thing  with  comfort ;  falling
repeatedly,  in  this  pretended  blindness,  so  as  to  receive  serious
injury,  and  remain  for  weeks  in  severe  pain  and  dangerous  illness ;
then  all  at  once  contriving,  her  eyes  still  closed  and  covered,  to
walk  about  easily  and  to  see  correctly ;  not  for  her  own  comfort
or  gain,  but  only  for  the  public  entertainment  or  public  suspicion ;
her  family,  physicians,  and  friends  at  home,  all  the  while  assert-
ing her  actual  blindness,  and  all  with  whom  she  lives  being
unable  to  detect  in  her  a  single  appearance  of  insincerity,  or  even
power  of  management ;  yet  all  an  imposition  !  Believe  it  who
will.  Find  its  parallel  or  explanation,  if  possible,  in  any  case  of
witchcraft  or  delusion,  or  rather,  imposition ;  for  it  is  important  to
distinguish.  Delusion  there  may  be,  of  some  kind,  in  this  very
case,  and  every  other  ;  but  imposition  there  is  not,  if  any  evidence
can  be  trusted,  or  any  fact  proved  by  testimony  or  observation.

"This  is  the  first  result  to  which  I  am  brought,  viz.,  that  there
is  no  intentional  deception  in  this  matter.  I  do  not  say  that
none  who  have  ever  engaged  in  animal  magnetism  have  been
deceivers,  or  that  there  has  been  no  wilful  deception  in  a  single
instance  here.  I  mean  simply  that,  as  a  general,  if  not  a  universal
fact,  the  circumstances  of  the  case  forbid  a  suspicion  of  fraud.
Self-delusion  there  may  be.  But  an  attempt  to  delude  others,
any  kind  of  collusion  or  imposition,  artifice,  management,  hum-
bug, there  is  no  reason  to  suspect.  Those  only  who  exhibit
themselves  for  mon^y,  give  room  for  any  such  suspicion ;  and
they  may  not  have  been  guilty.  In  the  most  remarkable  cases
we  have  had,  in  almost  every  case  that  I  have  seen  or  heard,
there  has  been  an  utter  absence  of  all  ground  for  suspicion  of
motives.  Nor  have  I  known  of  more  than  one  observer  who  has
imputed  bad  motives ;  and  he  has  given  more  evidence,  in  his
book,  of  having  practised,  than  of  having  detected,  fraud.


304  APPENDIX.

"  A  second  conclusion  to  which  I  have  come,  in  common  with
most  inquirers,  is  in  favor  of  the  reality  of  the  magnetic  sleep.
This  follows  indeed  from  a  belief  in  the  honesty  of  those  con-
cerned. But  it  deserves  notice  as  a  conviction  almost  universal
now,  in  the  minds  of  those  who  have  given  any  attention  to  the
subject.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  least  doubt,  that  a  peculiar
sleep  is  produced  by  certain  manipulations,  differing  widely  from
common  sleep,  accompanied  often  by  a  suspension  of  sensibility,
and  sometimes  by  a  remarkable  activity  of  mind  and  power  of
communication.  So  far  as  this  constitutes  animal  magnetism,  I
doubt  if  there  are  many  informed  minds,  in  this  or  any  city,  or
any  country,  who  doubt  its  reality.

"  Of  all  beyond  this,  there  are  many  who  doubt,  and  there  is
reason  for  great  diffidence  and  caution.  In  all  that  pertains  to
the  action  of  one  mind  upon  another  without  words  or  signs,  i.  e.
the  power  of  simple  volition,  —  and  all  that  is  meant  by  clairvoy-
ance, especially  the  faculty  of  inspecting  human  bodies,  and
visiting  in  spirit  distant  places,  —  I  have  no  opinions  which  can  be
called  conclusions,  or  absolute  convictions.  Much  of  the  evi-
dence adduced  in  support  of  these  wonderful  faculties,  is  to  me
wholly  insufficient.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  suspicious  or  unim-
portant, but  insufficient  to  produce  conviction.  I  have  seen  evi-
dence, at  times,  which  in  itself  was  irresistible  ;  facts  which  I
defy  any  man  to  account  for,  on  any  known  principles.  But  the
powers  themselves  which  these  facts  tend  to  prove,  are  so  amaz-
ing, so  utterly  incomprehensible  and  tremendous,  that  my  mind
demands  more  evidence,  repeated  in  every  variety  of  circum-
stance, and  tested  by  all  orders  of  men.  before  it  will  or  can  fully
believe.  Then,  too,  there  are  so  many  failures  made  by  every
somnambulist,  so  many  inequalities,  inconsistencies,  and  perplex-
ities, that  it  becomes  the  part  of  wisdom,  if  not  of  necessity,  to
suspend  judgment,  and  wait  for  greater  revelations.  Inequalities,
it  is  true,  and  failures,  are  no  proof  of  the  absence  of  the  power.
They  belong  to  all  states  of  mind,  and  occur  often  even  in  the
natural  sciences.  They  weigh  something  in  favor  of  the  honesty
of  the  parties.  And  at  all  events,  until  we  know  what  the  power
must  always  do  this  or  never  do  that.  We  ought  only  to  exam-
ine the  more  closely  and  widely  on  this  account,  and  draw  infer-
ences and  pronounce  judgments  with  extreme  caution.

" '  But  there  are  the  facts?  you  say — '  what  will  you  do  with  them  W
I  can  only  say  I  know  not  what  to  do  with  them.  Facts  they  are;
so  far  as  I  can  discover.  I  have  witnessed  them,  I  have  tried
them  severely,  I  have  been  compelled  to  admit  them  in  some
cases.  The  evidence  has  sometimes,  in  some  few  instances  of
my  own  observing,  been  as  high  and  complete  as  I  can  conceive.
But  the  cases  have  not  been  sufficiently  numerous  and  varied,
the  evidence  not  sufficiently  tested,  to  sustain  belief  in  such  man-


APPENDIX.  305

strous  capacities.  I  will  believe  any  thing,  or,  more  properly,  I
must  believe  any  and  every  thing,  that  is  proved,  whether  I  un-
derstand its  nature  or  not,  whether  I  can  reconcile  it  or  not  with
my  preconceived  notions.  Its  relations,  its  purpose,  its  uses,  and
consequences,  I  leave  with  Him  who  gives  all  powers  and  or-
dains all  truth.  But  it  must  be  proved ;  and  the  proof  must  be
proportioned  to  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  thing  to  be
established.

"  You  may  wish  me  to  refer  to  some  facts.  It  cannot  be  ne-
cessary, and  I  have  already  been  too  long.  In  the  particular  case
with  which  my  name  has  been  connected,  I  had  Miss  B.  wholly
under  my  own  control.  I  questioned  her  about  places  and  objects
which  she  had  never  seen,  and  some  of  which,  as  they  then
existed,  no  creature  but  myself  could  have  known.  I  proposed
the  questions  in  the  most  guarded  manner.  I  had  never  been
satisfied  before,  and  I  did  not  expect  to  be  then.  But,  if  not  sat-
position  in  some  cases  I  had  just  changed,  whose  existence  in  other
cases  I  did  not  then  know  or  believe,  so  truly,  so  wonderfully,  that
I  could  only  marvel.  At  other  times,  she  has  done  the  same  in
regard  to  my  own  house,  and  houses  in  other  towns  and  states.
Then,  as  to  her  power  of  seeing,  (not  taking  her  blindness  for
granted,  though  unquestionable,)  I  have  tried  it  in  various  ways,
and  am  convinced  that  she  sees  either  by  some  other  organ  than
the  eye,  or  with  such  rays  of  light  only  as  can  penetrate  all  sub-
stances, if  there  are  any  such.  /  have  seen  a  sealed  letter,  con-
taining a  passage  enclosed  in  lead,  ichich  letter  she  held  at  the  side
of  her  head  not  more  than  a  moment,  all  in  sight,  then  gave  it
back  to  the  writer,  and  afterward  wrote  what  she  had  read  in  it:
the  letter  was  opened  in  my  presence,  and  the  two  writings  agreed  in
every  word,  there  being  two  differences  in  spelling  only.  Of  her
power,  or  that  of  any  somnambulist,  to  examine  bodies  and  de-
one  of  our  first  physicians,  who  has  published  nothing  on  the
subject,  has  recently  told  me  of  a  case  of  his  own  which  is  enough
to  silence,  if  not  convince,  most  skeptics.

"I  regard  the  whole  subject  as  a  matter  of  curious  study.  It
has  no  claim  to  be  called  a  science,  for  that  denotes  something
known  and  settled.  It  is  hardly  a  subject  for  lectures  or  public
discourses,  much  less  for  exhibition  and  profit.  It  should  be
subjected  to  private  and  quiet  examinations,  scientific  inquiry,
patient,  rigid,  unsparing  experiment,  yet  candid  and  kind.  If  it
will  not  bear  this  trial,  let  it  fall.  If  it  will,  let  us  learn  what  it
is.  There  is  much  doing  now,  I  am  told,  privately  and  encour-
agingly. Yet  it  will  not  surprise  me  if  the  whole  matter  dies
away  soon,  and  is  not  revived  again  for  years.  I  am  not  san-
guine about  its  progress  or  its  benefits.  If  wisely  pursued,
neither  weakly  trusted  nor  weakly  scorned,  whatever  of  truth  or
26  *


306  APPENDIX.

delusion  it  contains  will  appear  in  good  time. As  yet,  I  believe
little,  but  hope  something,  and  fear  nothing.

"  With  great  regard,

"E.  B.  HALL."


FROM THE REV. MR. KENT.

"Roxbury,  November  27,  1837.
«Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn:

"Dear  Sir:  I  shall  give  you  a  simple  narrative  of  what
passed  in  my  presence,  on  the  evening  when  Miss  Brackett  was  put
into  the  magnetic  sleep  and  conducted  to  my  place  of  residence  in
Roxbury,  as  the  facts  appeared  to  me,  leaving  you  to  make  such  a
use  of  it  as  you  may  think  proper,  and  others  to  draw  whatever
inferences  from  it  they  please.  If  charged  with  too  great  mi-
nuteness, I  will  only  say  that  my  desire  and  purpose  is  to  state
the  whole  truth,  without  coloring  or  reservation.

"  Intending  to  visit  the  Mansfield  mines  in  my  August  vacation,
I  was  induced,  by  friends  in  Boston,  who  had  recently  witnessed
the  powers  of  different  somnambulists,  to  go  on  to  Providence,,
and  seek  an  opportunity  to  see  them  myself.  One  of  these
friends  kindly  obtained  for  me  the  letter  of  introduction  pre-
sented to  you  by  me  from  your  brother  in  Boston,  in  which  he
simply  mentioned  my  being  « a  brother  teacher,'  and  one  anxious  to
see  the  effects  of  animal  magnetism,  from  other  motives  than  those
of  mere  curiosity.  Not  a  syllable  was  said,  and  I  am  sure  no  one
could  have  conjectured,  about  the  objects  I  should  wish  to  have
promptness,  accuracy,  and  particularity,  which  amazed  me.  You
must  remember,  also,  that,  in  the  course  of  my  conversation  with
you,  I  had  avowed  myself,  as  I  really  was,  before  trial,  a  skeptic
on  the  whole  subject,  to  be  reclaimed  only  by  evidence  which
should  seem  to  me  irresistible ;  and  a  determination  to  watch,
with  the  closest  scrutiny,  every  circumstance,  look,  and  move-
ment, that  might  pass  before  me ;  and  1  distinctly  remember  that
this  was,  also,  your  evidently  sincere  and  repeatedly  expressed
desire.

"  Meeting  accidentally  with  my  friend  Mr.  Joseph  Harring-
ton, Jr.  of  this  place,  who  assured  me  of  his  strong  desire  to
witness  an  exhibition  of  somnambulic  clairvoyance,  if  it  existed,
I  requested,  in  your  presence,  the  privilege  of  having  him  accom-
pany me,  which  Mr.  Metcalf,  at  whose  house  Miss  B.  was  then
residing,  very  kindly  and  politely  granted.  After  calling,  with
Mr.  Harrington,  on  Dr.  C apron,  the  magnetizer,  stating  the  mo-
tive which  led  me  to  wait  on  him  and  solicit  the  favor  of  seeing
his  patient  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  having  the  hour  fixed
upon,  we  went  to  Mr.  Metcalf's  at half  past  7,  P.  M.  and


APPENDIX.


307


were  introduced  to  Miss  Brackett.  Dr.  Capron  soon  came  in,
with  several  other  gentlemen  and  ladies,  who  were  successively
introduced ;  and,  in  a  few  minutes,  he  proposed  to  commence  the
process  of  magnetizing,  after  I  had  placed  a  rocking-chair  where
I  pleased,  and  Miss  B.  had  been  led  to  it  in  the  perfect  attitudes
of  blindness,  by  Miss  Metcalf.

"In  order  to  prevent  unfairness  or  collusion  between  the  parties,
i  requested  that  lamps  might  be  placed  near,  and  directly  before,
Miss  B.,  and  took  my  seat  at  her  side.  Dr.  Capron  readily  com-
plied with  my  request,  but  said  that,  as  her  eyes  were  still,  as
they  had  been  for  several  days,  inflamed,  it  would  be  necessary
to  put  a  bandage,  or  cotton,  before  them,  to  prevent  the  effects
of  too  strong  a  light  I  proposed  the  latter  ;  it  was  brought,  and,
in  our  presence,  rolled  into  balls,  and  inserted  between  the  spec-
tacles she  wore  and  her  eyes,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would  have
been  impossible  for  her,  even  with  the  best  eyes,  to  see  a  ray  of  light.
This  cotton  was  watched,  and  it  remained  in  its  place  through  the
vjhole  time.  Of  the  process  of  magnetizing,  I  will  only  mention
one  or  two  phenomena  which  I  have  not  seen  stated.  After  Miss
Brackett  was  apparently  in  a  profound  sleep,  Dr.  Capron  re-
quested us  to  observe  the  effect  of  pointing  his  fingers  towards,
but  without  touching  by  several  inches,  her  hand.  At  first,  her
arm  and  hand  Avere  gently  agitated,  the  agitation  increasing  as
his  fingers  approached,  until  her  hand  was  drawn  or  attracted
with  violence  up  to  the  magnetizer's.  The  experiment  was
repeatedly  tried  on  the  right  and  left  hands,  according  to  our  di-
rection, in  every  instance  successfully,  and  with  the  same  result,
without  a  word  spoken,  or  sign  given,  which  could  have  indi-
cated which  hand  would  be  approached.  We  were  then  requested
to  try  the  same  experiment  ourselves,  and  did  so  without  the
least  effect

"On  being  roused  by  Dr.  Capron,  Miss  Brackett  instantly
started  from  her  chair,  and,  to  our  astonishment,  passed  twice
round  the  room,  with  a  rapid  and  sure  step,  avoiding  every  indi-
vidual and  article  of  furniture,  and  saying  that  she  "could  not,
and  would  not,  stay  where  there  were  so  many  people."  She
then  hurried  through  the  parlor  to  the  door  of  the  entry,  seized
its  handle  instantly  and  unerringly,  and,  turning  her  face  towards
us,  opened  it,  and  gained  the  outer  step,  where  Dr.  Capron  took
her  arm,  and,  persuading  her  to  return,  seated  her  in  the  chair
she  had  left,  when  she  was  again  introduced  to  all  the  strangers
present;  the  first  introduction  having  been  made  while  she  was
in  her  natural  state,  the  last  while  in  the  magnetic  state.

"  Dr.  Capron  then  requested  a  tumbler  of  water  to  be  brought,
and,  after  drinking  about  half  of  it  himself,  he  roused  Miss  B.,
who  had  apparently  sunk  into  a  profound  and  quiet  sleep,  as  she
afterwards  did  repeatedly,  and  requested  her  to  drink  some  of  it
She  did  so,  when  Mr.  Harrington  drew  to  a  corner  of  the  room,


308  APPENDIX.

and,  after  writing  on  a  slip  of  paper,  beckoned  me  to  him,  and
simply  held  the  paper  before  me,  on  which  was  written,  '  Will
the  contents  of  the  tumbler  to  be  castor  oil,''  or  words  to  that  effect
He  then  beckoned  to  Dr.  Capron,  who  went  to  him,  and,  reading
the  sentence,  indicated  by  a  nod  that  he  would  cheerfully  do  it ;
and,  retaking  his  seat,  which  was  placed  between  two  and  three
feet  before  Miss  Brackett,  he  said,  without  moving  a  limb,  or
uttering  a  syllable  more,  —

" '  Come,  Lurena,  drink  a  little  of  this,  and  you  will  feel  better,
I  think ; '  alluding,  as  I  supposed,  to  a  severe  headache,  of  which
she  had  spoken  to  us  in  the  course  of  our  conversation,  before  the
doctor's  entrance.

"  She  raised  the  tumbler  to  her  lips,  and  suddenly  replaced  it
in  her  lap,  with  evident  nausea  and  aversion.

"  Dr  C. '  Come,  drink  a  little  of  it. It  is  very  good.'

"  Miss  B. ' Good ! '  moving  her  lips ; ' you  know  it  is  not  good.'

"Dr.  C. 'Why?'

"  Miss  B. '  Why  ? It  makes  me  sick.'

"  Dr.  C. '  O,  no ;  drink  one  mouthful.'

"She  did  so;  and,  had  she  witnessed  the  ceremony  of  taking
pure  castor  a  thousand  times,  the  apparent  effect  on  her  could  not
have  been  more  true  to  nature.

"  Mr.  Harrington  again  summoned  the  doctor,  and  whispered,
too  low  to  be  heard  by  any  other  person  in  the  room,  '  Will,  now,
that  it  is  snuff?  He  returned,  and  repeated  only  words  resembling
those  used  in  the  first  experiment.  On  looking  into  the  tumbler,
she  seemed  to  smile  ironically,  and  said,  —

"  •  Drink  this !  drink  this !  you  know  I  cannot,'  with  an  expres-
sion of  countenance  which  any  one,  seeing  snuff  to  be  the  con-
tents of  a  tumbler  about  to  be  drank  off,  must  have  assumed.

"I  then  requested  Dr.  C,  in  the  same  manner,  to  'ivill  it  to  he
pleasant  lemonade.''  After  long  persuasion,  without  a  word  or
gesture,  however,  which  could  have  indicated  the  nature  of  my
request,  on  Dr.  C.'s  part,  she  put  the  tumbler  cautiously  to  her
lips,  and,  tasting,  drank  the  whole  of  the  water  that  remained.

"  Dr.  C. '  Well,  Lurena,  how  do  you  like  that  ? '

"Miss  B. 'Why,  it's  very  good,  but  a  little  too  sour?

"  Some  one  of  the  strangers  present  now  requested,  in  a  whis-
per, that  he  would  '  will  the  tumbler  to  be  filled  ivith  an  ice-cream.1
I  sat  at  Miss  B.'s  elbow,  and  watched  both  her  countenance  and
Dr.  C.'s  words  and  motions.  Collusion,  or  any  thing  like  a  secret
understanding  between  them  in  what  followed,  I  believe  to  have
been  impossible.

"  Dr.  C.  '  Come,  Lurena,  drink  what  I  have  got  for  you  now.
You  will  find  it  very  good.'

"  Rousing,  she  looked  into  the  empty  tumbler,  and  continued
silent. On  further  inquiry,  she  said,  —

"  '  You  know  I  cannot  drink  it'


APPENDIX.  309

"Dr.  C. 'Why?'

"  Miss  B. '  I've  been  waiting  for  a  spoon  this  half  hour.1

"  A  spoon  was  then  brought  and  given  her.  She  raised  the
tumbler,  and,  imitating  to  perfection  the  manner  of  a  lady  taking
an  ice-cream  in  a  fashionable  and  elegant  circle,  she  finished  it,
and  replaced  the  tumbler  in  her  lap,  as  one  waiting  for  a  servant
to  take  it

«  Dr.  C. <  Well,  is  not  that  good  ? '

"  Miss  B.  «  Yes,  it's  very  good,  but  a  little  too  highly  flavored
for  me.'

"I  should  have  mentioned  that,  while  eating  it,  she  put  her
hand  to  her  face  in  apparent  pain.

"Dr.  C. '  What  is  the  matter  with  your  face  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  Why,  it  makes  my  teeth  ache,  it 's  so  cold'

"I  then  requested  Dr.  Capron  to  take  the  tumbler  from  her,
and,  in  a  whisper  scarcely  audible  to  him,  to  '  ivill  a  black  kitten
to  be  in  her  lap'  He  assented,  and,  taking  his  seat  before  her,
as  I  did  mine  at  her  side,  he  said,  without  previously  uttering  a
syllable,  even  in  whisper,  to  any  one,  or  making  the  least  motion,
'Lurena,  come,  wake  up,  and  see  what  you  have  in  your  lap.'
She  seemed  gradually  to  wake.  '  What  have  you  in  your  lap?'
Looking  down,  she  instantly  began  to  draw  her  arms  up  with
aversion  at  the  object  seen,  but  remained  silent.

"  Dr.  C. <  What  is  the  matter  ? Is  it  not  pretty  ?'

"  Drawing  her  arms  still  farther  up,  she  said,  evidently  offended,
1  Pretty  ?  no.  What  have  you  put  that  in  my  lap  for  ?  I  sha'n't
take  it!  I  won't!'

"  Dr.  C. '  O,  yes  ;  take  it'

"  Miss  B. '  I  wonV

"  Dr.  C.  '  Well,  if  you  do  not  like  it,  give  it  to  me.'  Lifting
it  precisely  as  one  would  by  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  tossing  it
she  said,  '  There,  take  the  dirty  black  thing!'

"The  preceding  experiments  were  tried,  in  consequence  of
our  having  heard  that  similar  ones  had  been  made  without  failure
in  any  instance  ;  and  I  am  as  certain  as  I  am  of  being  able  to
see  or  hear  any  thing  directly  before  me,  that  no  direction,  either
by  a  whisper,  pause,  or  gesture,  was  given  by  the  magnetizer  to
the  magnetized  ;  and  I  know  that  the  directions  I  gave  Dr.  C.
could  not  have  been  anticipated  by  him  or  any  one  else.

"I  now  requested  Dr.  Capron  to  take  her  to  Roxbury,  and  to
'  stop  in  front  of  the  Universalis  meeting-house  at  the  bottom  of
the  hill,'  as  the  nearest  prominent  object  to  my  own  house.

"  Dr.  C.  '  Well,  Lurena,  Mr.  Kent  wishes  us  to  go  to  Roxbury
and  visit  his  house. Will  you  go  ? '

"Miss  B. '  Yes,  I  should  like  to  go  very  well.'

"  Dr.  C, '  In  what  way  shall  we  go  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  We  will  go  through  the  air,  if  you  please,  and  I
should  like  to  go  high.'

«  Dr.  C,  at  some  one's  suggestion.  « Why  do  you  wish  to  go  high  ?'


310  APPENDIX.

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  to  avoid  the  steeples  and  trees  that  will  be
in  our  way.'

"The  appearance  manifested  on  her  passage  from  place  to
a  half  minutes,  Dr.  C.  said,  —

"  '  Well,  Lurena,  have  we  got  there  ? '

"  Miss  B. 'Yes,  we  have  ;'  with  an  appearance  of  exhaustion.

P  At  this  moment,  Dr.  Capron  proposed  to  put  me  in  communi-
cation with  her,  as  he  had  engagements  to  attend  to  at  the  hour
arrived.  I  requested,  however,  that  I  might  first  see  you  take
the  guidance  of  her,  as  I  was  wholly  ignorant  of  the  manner  of  it
Dr.  C.  mentioned  that  this  might  be  as  well,  and  introduced  you.

" Mr.  H.  'Miss  Brackett,  how  do  you  do ?  I  am  very  happy
to  meet  you  in  Roxbury.'

"  Miss  B. '  Why,  Mr.  Hartshorn,  how  came  you  to  be  here  ? '

"  Mr.  H. '  I  am  here  on  a  visit.'

"  You  were  not  in  the  room  when  all  present  were  led  up  and
mentioned  or  introduced,  after  she  was  magnetized.  Mr.  Har-
rington now  requested  you  to  ask  her  what  she  saw.

"Mr.  H. '  Well,  Miss  Brackett,  what  building  have  we  here  ?'

"  Miss  B.  '  Why  do  you  ask  that  question  ?  You  can  se,e  for
yourself,  as  well  as  I  can.'

"Mr.  H. '  Yes,  but  I  should  like  to  know  how  we  agree.5

"  Miss  B. '  Why,  it  is  a  large  meeting-house.'

"Mr.  H. '  Well,  look  round  ;  look  up;  what  o'clock  is  it?'

"  Miss  B.,  after  apparent  examination.  '  It  has  no  clock.1  This
is  correct.

"  Mr.  H. '  What  do  you  see  ? Are  there  any  lights  ? '

"  *  Yes,  there  are ;  and  what  strange  people  they  are  in  Roxbu-
ry, to  have  lights  on  posts  in  the  daytime !  If  I  could  only  reach
higher,  I  would  take  them  down,  it  looks  so  silly.'

"  Mr.  Harrington  now  directed  you  to  ask  what  she  saw  before
the  meeting-house.

"Miss  B. 'I  see  a  building.'

«  Mr.  H. <  What  sort  of  a  building  is  it  ?  '

"Miss  B. 'It  is  a  brick  one.' Correct.

"  Mr.  H.,  at  Mr.  Harrington's  suggestion.  '  Now,  Miss  Brack-
ett, we  will  go  to  this  building. Are  we  there  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  Yes,  we  are.'

"  Mr.  H.  '  Well,  should  you  like  to  go  in,  and  see  what  there
may  be  there  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  I  should.'

"  Mr.  H.,  after  a  moment's  pause. '  What  do  you  see  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  O,  how  beautiful  these  are !  How  good  they  taste ! '
She  then  appeared  to  eat  some  kind  of  fruit ;  but,  suddenly
stopping,  said,  '  O,  I  forgot ;  I  have  no  money,  sir ;  1  beg  your
pardon;'  and  apparently  kid  down  what  she  held  in  her  hand.

"Mr.  H.  'What  are  you  eating,  Miss  Brackett?  Do  }Ovl
wish  for  money  ? Here  it  is.'


APPENDIX,


311


■5  Miss  B.,  smiling  with  evident  pleasure.  '  I  thank  you  ; '  and
seeming  to  take  up  the  fruit  again  and  eat  it,  said,  '  How  pleasant
it  is! It  is  so  good  I  think  I'll  take  another.' She  did  so.

"  Mr.  H.,  by  direction. «  What  sort  of  fruit  is  it  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  I  don't  hardly  know.  They  are  apples  or  pears.
They  taste  very  good.'

"  Mr.  H.  «  Well,  Miss  Brackett,  look  round  and  see  what  else
you  may  like.  It  will  refresh  you  to  take  something  after  your
rapid  journey.'  In  a  few  moments,  putting  her  left  hand  under
the  chin,  she  seemed  like  one  attempting  to  crack  a  hard-shelled
nut  with  the  teeth.

"  Mr.  H. <  What  have  you  there  ? '

"  Miss  B.  i  Why,  it's  a  Castalia  nut,  and  so  hard  that  I  can't
crack  it ;'  trying  with  still  greater  effort.

"  Mr.  H.  '  Castalia  nut  ?  You  mean,  do  you  not,  the  Castana
nut  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Yes  ;  I  don't  know  what  you  call  it ;  but  J  call  it.
a  Castalia  nut.'

"  Mr.  H. '  Well,  shall  we  go  now  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  If  you  please.  But,  O,  I  haven't  paid  the  gentle-
man. There,  sir  ; '  laying,  as  it  were,  money  upon  a  counter.

"  The  building  where  this  imaginary  scene  passed  is  a  brick
one,  occupied  at  present  as  a  West  India  goods  store.  The  day
after  my  return  from  Providence,  I  called  at  this  store  and  in-
quired, first,  whether  the  storekeeper  had  any  fruit  for  sale  on
Wednesday  evening.  He  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  directed
me  to  a  basket  of  apples  which  he  said  had  been  on  the  counter
three  or  four  days.  On  tasting  one,  I  certainly  should  not  have
doubted  the  correctness  of  Miss  B.'s  taste,  had  she  been  present
when  she  seemed  to  enjoy  them  so  much  in  imagination.  '  Have
you  any  Castana  nuts?'  'You  will  find  them  in  the  window
next  to  the  door.'  They  were  there  in  one  of  the  three  divisions  of
a  box,  containing  different  kinds  of  nuts.

"  At  the  door  of  the  store  you  will  remember  having  put  me  in
communication  with  her.

"  Mr.  H.  '  Miss  Brackett,  here  is  our  mutual  friend,  Mr.  Kent,
who  was  introduced  to  you  in  Providence.'

" l  Good  evening,  Miss  Brackett ;  I  am  very  glad  to  see  you  in
Roxbury ; '  taking  her  hand.

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  Mr.  Kent,  how  did  you  get  here  so  soon  ? '
with  apparent  surprise  and  emphasis.

" '  I  followed  you  in  the  railroad  cars,'

"  Miss  B.  '  la  the  cars !  That  is  impossible !  You  could  not
travel  so  fast  in  the  cars  as  I  did  through  the  air.'

"  *  Well,  suppose,  then,  that  I  came  in  the  stage.'

"  Miss  B.  '  In  the  stage  !  You  have  just  said  you  came  in
the  cars  ! Your  stones  do  not  seem  to  hang  together ; '  smiling.

u  'I  confess,  Miss  Brackett,  that  I  cannot  tell  you  how  I  came ;


312  APPENDIX.

but  that  is  of  no  consequence ;  it  is  certain  I  am  here,  and
wish  you  to  go  with  me  to  my  house,  a  short  distance  from  this,
Will  you  attend  me  ? '

"  Miss  B. *  Yes,  sir,  I  will,'

"  After  a  time  sufficient  to  conduct  her  only  a  few  steps,  and
giving  two  or  three  directions,  I  said,  '  Stop,  we  must  go  back
and  start  again.  I  believe  I  am  wrong.'  She  laughed  audibly.
'  What  are  you  laughing  at,  Miss  Brackett  ?  '

"Miss  B.  'Why,  I  am  laughing  at  the  fact  that  you,  a  gen-
tleman, should  invite  me  to  attend  you  to  your  house,  ivhen  you
don't  know  the  way  there  yourself! '  I  cheerfully  confess,  sir,  that
my  feelings  at  this  moment,  in  consequence  of  what  I  had  wit-
nessed and  heard  after  her  arrival  in  Roxbury,  very  much  resem-
bled those  of  an  oratorical  tyro,  who  has  lost  the  place  in  his
manuscript,  and  stands  before  an  audience  evidently  waiting  for
words,  which  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  command,  utterly  at  fault !
I  did  not  feel  certain  that  I  should  select  such  landmarks  and  use
such  terms  as  would  be  sure  to  guide  such  a  companion  to  the
house,  and  said,  'I  am  very  free  to  acknowledge,  Miss  Brackett,
that  you  may  have  a  better  guide,  under  my  direction,  and  here
is  our  friend,  Mr.  Hartshorn,  Avho  will  take  you  in  charge.'

«  Mr.  H. '  Will  you  go  with  me  to  Mr.  Kent's  ? '

"Miss  B.,  with  evident  pleasantry.  'I  will;  for  he  does  not
seem  to  know  the  way  there  himself! '

"  Mr.  H.,  by  direction.  '  We  are  now  at  the  first  corner  on
the  right,  Miss  Brackett. What  do  you  see  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  See  ? A  large  brick  house.'

"  Mr.  H. '  Is  it  a  tavern  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  It  may  be. I  think  it  is.'

"  Mr.  H. '  We  will  go  forward  a  little. What  do  you  see  ? '

"  Miss  B.,  after  a  pause.  '  I  shall  not  tell  you,  for  you  can
see  it  yourself.'

"  Mr.  H. '  I  wish  to  see  whether  we  agree  in  opinion.'

"  Miss  B.  '  It's  a  very  large  barn.'  The  stable  by  which  she
must  pass  measures  ninety  feet  by  thirty-two.

"  Mr.  H. '  Is  there  any  thing  on  the  top  of  it  ? Look  up.'

"  Miss  B.,  after  looking  up.  '  Why,  what  curious  people
there  are  here !  They  keep  lamps  on  posts  burning  in  the  day-
time, and  put  creatures  on  their  barns.'  There  is  on  this  livery
stable  an  unusually  large  gilded  vane,  in  the  form  of  a  horse.

"Mr.  H.  'We  will  now  go  forward,  cross  a  street,  and  on  the
left-hand  corner  is  Mr.  Kent's  house.'  After  a  short  pause,  *  Are
we  there  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  Yes.'

"  Mr.  H. '  What  is  there  before  his  house  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  I  sha'n't  tell  you,  for  you  know.'

"  Mr.  H.  '  O,  yes,  tell  me.  Is  there  any  yard  here  ? '  As  you
had  never  seen  my  house,  your  question  was  put  at  random.

"MissB. 'Yard? Yes.'


APPENDIX.  31$

u  Mr.  H. '  What  sort  of  one  is  it  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  Why  do  you  ask  such  questions  ? '

"  Mr.  H. '  Is  it  a  gravelled  one  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  No ;  it  is  a  green  one  ;  you  know  it  is.'  She
seemed  here,  as  in  several  other  instances,  to  feel  that  she  was
trifled  with. Her  answer  was  correct.

"  Mr.  H.  '  Well,  we  will  go  in  and  enter  the  room  on  the
left. Are  we  there  ?  '

"  Miss  B. '  Yes. What  a  handsome  carpet  this  is  ! '

"  Mr.  EL,  by  direction.  '  What  kind  of  a  carpet  is  it  ?  Is  it
Brussels,  Kidderminster,  or  what  is  it  ? '

"  Miss  B.  ' 1  hardly  know  what  to  call  it.  It's  a  very  hand-
some one,  but  it  is  not  woollen.1  The  carpet  is  a  painted  canvass,
one  which  had  been  purchased  at  the  factory  and  laid  down  a
short  time  before.

"I  was  here  again  put  in  communication  with  her.  'Well,
Miss  Brackett,  you  see  me  now  at  home,  and  I  wish  you  to  look
round  this  room  and  tell  me  what  you  think  of  the  different
objects  here.'

"  Miss  B.,  apparently  looking  at  the  wall.  '  O,  what  a  beauti-
ful picture  this  is !  It  would  be  perfect  if  the  hair  of  the  lady  was
pushed  a  little  farther  back.  It  comes  too  low  over  the  forehead.'
Speaking  in  a  whisper  to  herself,  '  O,  what  hair !  it  spoils  it  I
wish  I  could  push  it  back ; '  motioning  with  her  fingers,  as  if
attempting  to  do  so.  '  How  beautiful  that  arm  is  ! '  The  picture
arms,  and  hangs  nearest  the  door.  Although  it  has  been  there
three  years,  I  was  unconscious  of  any  striking  defect  in  the  hair,
but  found,  on  my  return,  that  no  artist,  with  perfect  eyes  and  the
most  discriminating  taste,  could  have  made  more  just  criticism
upon  it  than  she  did.  Her  remark  upon  the  arm  was  precisely  the
same,  in  words,  that  I  have  repeatedly  heard  made  by  others.

"  '•  We  will  now,  Miss  Brackett,  pass  on,  if  you  please.  What
do  you  see  here  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  See !  what  you  see,  sir,  —  a  table.'

'"Is  there  any  thing  over  it?'

"  Miss  B.  '  O,  that  lady  is  perfect  How  beautiful  she  is  ! '
with  earnest  emphasis.  The  painting  over  the  table  is  a  Chinese
copy,  also,  of  a  full-length  portrait  of  '  the  Maid  of  Athens,'  and

" '  Is  there  any  thing  on  this  table  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Yes  ;  and  they  are  the  handsomest  of  the  kind  I
ever  saw.  How  very  beautiful  these  are  !  I  must  look  into  one
of  them.'

" '  Well,  Miss  Brackett,  open  and  look  into  it'

"  Miss  B.,  seeming  to  make  an  unsuccessful  attempt  '  I  can't  ;
it  is  locked.'

"  At  your  suggestion. '  You  can  look  through  the  top  of  it'
27


314  APPENDIX.

«  Miss  B.  '  No ;  I  want  the  key.  I  shall  not  look  through  the
cover  of  such  a  one  as  this  is.'

" '  Well,  here  is  the  key ; '  putting  the  ends  of  my  fingers  to  hers,

"Miss  B»,  trying  it,  and  handing  it  back  again.  'It  does
not  fit.'

" '  O,  I  have  given  you  the  wrong  one. This  is  the  key.'

"  Miss  B.,  holding  it  up,  and  looking  at  it  with  a  smile.  '  What
a  pretty,  cunning  little  key  this  is !  I  never  saw  one  of  such  a
color.'  Inserting  and  carefully  turning  it,  she  opened  the  box,
and  seemed  to  admire  the  inside.  There  were  on  the  table  two
Chinese  work-boxes,  having  the  usual  pieces  within,  and,  what  1
believe  is  not  common,  a  very  beautiful  cluster  of  flowers  painted
on  white  satin,  in  the  cover  of  each,  with  a  third,  resembling
amusing  and  singular  accuracy  ;  and  I  found,  on  my  return,  that
Mrs.  K.  had  locked  the  outside  work-box,  in  compliance  with  our
agreement  before  I  left  home,  that  she  should  make  what  striking
alterations,  unknown  to  me  and  every  one  else,  in  my  room,  she
pleased.  I,  in  a  few  moments,  asked  what  else  she  saw  on  the
table,  having  in  my  own  mind  a  large  book  of  paintings  on  rice
paper,  which  I  remembered  leaving  on  this  table  before  the  work-
boxes,  of  whose  merits  I  was  curious  to  learn  her  opinion.  She
smiled,  but  would  make  no  reply.

"  *■  I  wish  you  now  to  look  at  the  fireplace.  Is  there  any  thing
before  it  ? '

u  Miss  B.  '  Yes.  O,  what  a  singular  and  splendid  urn  that
is  ! I  never  saw  one  so  large,  and  of  such  a  color.'

"'What  is  its  color?'

"  Miss  B.  '  I  don't  know  what  color  to  call  it ; '  speaking  in  an
undertone.  '  It  looks  white  —  red.'  The  urn  standing  there  was
a  large  one,  of  polished  variegated  porphyry.

" '  Now,  Miss  Brackett,  look  over  the  mantel-piece ;  look  high.
Is  there  any  thing  there  ? '

"  Miss  B.,  speaking  with  evident  emotion  and  veneration.
'  O,  how  beautiful  —  beautiful!'  And,  as  she  spoke,  she  bent
forward,  folded  her  arms  on  her  breast,  and  put  herself  exactly  in
the  attitude  of  our  Saviour,  as  he  is  painted  in  a  miniature  which
represents  him  at  the  moment  when  he  said,  '  Thy  will  be  done.'
This  painting  is  on  ivory,  three  inches  square  in  the  clear,  set  in
a  deep  and  broad  gilt  frame,  and  hangs  about  one  and  a  half  feet
over  the  mantel-piece.  It  was  received  from  Canton,  and  placed
there  but  a  few  days  before,  and  I  know  that  no  individual  in
America,  except  my  family,  had  then  seen  it. I  continued, —

" '  What  do  you  see,  Miss  Brackett  ? '

"  Miss  B.,  raising  her  eyes. '  What  a  beautiful  picture  that  is !  *

" '  Is  it  a  large  one  ? '

u  Miss  B. '  No ;  it's  a  very  small  one. It's  too  small.'

"■ '  Is  it  as  small  as  the  one  opposite  ? '


APPENDIX.  315

tt  Miss  B. '  Yes ;  why,  you  know  it  is  as  small  again.' Correct,

" ' Well,  look  down ;  is  there  any  thing  under  it?'

"  Miss  B. '  You  know  there  is.'

"'What  is  it?'

"  Miss  B.,  promptly.  '  It  's  an  image1  of  ChrisV  There  was,
standing  directly  under  the  picture,  a  cast-iron  image  of  our
Saviour  bearing  his  cross,  in  bass-relief.

" l  What  more  do  you  see  here  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  What  large  and  beautiful  vases  these  are  ! '

" '  Vases ! How  many  are  there  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  you  can  see  as  well  as  I  do.  There  are
two.'  There  were  four  glass  shades,  or  vases,  covering  large
specimens  of  Chinese  rice-paper  flowers ;  two  of  them  touching
each  other  at  each  end  of  a  long  and  broad  mantel-piece.

« '  We  will  now,  if  you  please,  go  into  the  other  room,  and  see
what  may  be  there.'

"  Miss  B.  '  Stop  a  moment ;  I  want  to  rest  me  on  this  sofa ;  my
he  id  aches.'  A  sofa  stands  between  the  fireplace  and  door,  by
which  she  would  naturally  pass.

"  In  a  few  moments. '  Will  you  go  now  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  Yes,  I  will.'

" «  And  what  do  you  find  in  this  room  ? 7

"  Miss  B.  '  What !  are  there  pictures  here,  too  ?  But  1  dotft
like  this  room  so  well  as  the  other.'

" '  You  do  not  ?  Look  round,  if  you  please,  and  tell  me  what
the  pictures  are.'

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  I  don't  know  what  they  are.  There  is  one
that  looks  like  an  apostle.'  There  was  no  such  picture  in  the  room,
although  there  had  been  hut  a  few  days  before.  'O,  these  are
beautiful. O,  they  are  beautiful,  very  beautiful.'

" '  What  are  they  ? '

"MissB. '  Why,  this  book  of  pictures. Don't  you  see  them?"'

"  <  Where  are  they  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  On  the  piano-forte.  But  I  must  go  back  into  the
other  room.  I  want  to  look  longer  at  the  pictures  there.'  I  found,
on  my  return,  that  Mrs.  K.  had  removed  this  book  from  the  table  in
the  other  room,  where  I  left  it,  to  the  piano,  in  this  room ;  and,  in
sport,  placed  a  coffee-pot  in  its  stead.  Whether  or  not  this  was  the
object  smiled  at,  but  not  mentioned,  I  leave  others  to  decide.  Re-
turning with  my  charge  to  the  other  room,  I  requested  Dr.  Ca-
pron,  who  had  now  come  in,  to  receive  her  from  me.  He  did  so,
and,  after  indulging  her  in  looking  at  the  pictures  a  short  time,
on  which  she  made  the  same  remarks  as  before,  he  said,  —

"'Well,  Lurena,  Mr.  Kent  wishes  us,  now,  to  go  up  stairs.
Will  you  go  ? '

«  Miss  B. '  Yes,  I  will.'

"Dr.  C* 'We  will  go  up  and  enter  the  left-hand  door.'

*  These  and  many  of  the  succeeding  questions  were  put  by  my  direc-
tion, Dr.  C.  being  unacquainted  with  my  house.


316  APPENDIX.

" '  What  do  you  see  here  ? '

"  Miss  B. '  See ! I  see  a  lady.'

"  Dr.  C. '  How  is  she  dressed  ? ' Her  answer  was  correct

" « How  old  is  she  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  that  is  a  polite  question !  Madam,  bowing
and  smiling  as  she  spoke, '  the  gentleman  wishes  me  to  ask  you  how
old  you  are ! '

"  Dr.  C. '  How  old  do  you  think  she  is  ? '

"  Miss  B.,  raising  her  eyes.  '  I  don't  know.  I  should  think  she
is  about  twenty.'

"  Dr.  C. '  Are  there  any  other  persons  in  the  room  ? '

"Miss  B.  'No.'  Mrs.  K.  was  the  only  person  up,  in  the
chamber,  at  the  time.  There  were,  however,  two  children  asleep  in
the  bed.

"  Dr.  C.  '  We  will  now  go  forward  and  down  stairs,  and  pass
through  the  left-hand  door.'

" «  What  sort  of  room  is  it  ? '

"Miss  B.  'It's  a  large  kitchen.'  Correct.  In  a  short  time
she  seemed  to  be  sipping  something.

"Dr.  C.  'What  have  you  found,  Lurena, — any  thing  to
eat?'

"Miss  B.  'Eat!  no.  It's  water,  and  very  good  water  too.'
There  is  in  the  corner  of  this  kitchen  a  small  table,  on  which  my
cook  keeps  habitually  a  water-pail,  and  generally  a  long-handled
tin  dipper  in  it.  On  my  return,  I  inquired  of  her  if  she  remem-
bered certainly  whether  there  was  water  left  in  the  pail  on  the
evening  mentioned.  She  replied  that  she  was  certain  of  having
left  it  half  full,  in  consequence  of  finding  more  water  in  the
boiler  than  she  expected  on  that  evening.  This  pail,  however,  1
found,  without  letting  any  one  know  the  object  of  my  examina-
tion, to  be  left  empty  when  my  domestics  retired,  four  nights  in
succession.  I  now  directed  Dr.  Capron  to  take  her  into  the  next
apartment,  'the  pump-room,  with  a  lattice  front,'  forgetting,  in  my
astonishment  at  what  had  passed  before  me,  that  there  was  an  inter-
mediate room.

"  Dr.  C.  '  Well,  we  will  now  go  into  the  next  room.  What
sort  of  room  is  it  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  this  is  a  kitchen  too,  only  it  is  a  smaller  one.''
Correct

"  Dr.  C.  '  We  will  go  through  the  next  one,  and  take  the  left-
hand  door  into  another  room. Are  we  there  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Yes,  but,''  with  evident  surprise, '  why  did  they  tell
me  Mr.  Kent  was  a  minister  ?  It  isn't  true.  He's  a  schoolmaster ! '
Dr.  C.  looked  at  me,  and  appeared,  at  least,  to  believe  that  his
patient  was  here  at  fault  You  will  remember  having  assured
me,  sir,  on  the  evening  when  we  separated  before  the  Franklin
House  in  Providence,  that  you  had  mentioned  me,  both  to  Miss
Brackett  and  Dr.  Capron,  only  as  a  minister. On  my  stating  to


APPENDIX.  317

the  latter  that,  although  I  had  been  a  minister,  she  was  correct,  he
said,  '  A  schoolmaster,  Lurena  ?  Why  do  you  say  he  is  a  school-
master ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Why,  you  say  this  is  his  room,  and  he  is  a  school-
master because  this  is  a  school-room.  And  I  never  saw  such  a
one.  He  lias  pictures  here  too.  And  what  singular  desks  these
are !  He  has  chairs  fixed  instead  of  seats.'  It  would  have  been
impossible  for  a  person  with  perfect  eyes,  and  in  broad  sunlight,
to  give  a  more  accurate  description  of  this  room  than  she  did.
I  could  not  at  this  moment  repress  my  impatience  to  have  her
conducted  to  the  room  above,  the  character  and  contents  of  which,
I  was  sure,  could  be  known  neither  to  yourself,  to  Dr.  Capron,  to
Miss  Brackett,  nor  to  any  one  else  in  Providence,  except  Mr.
Harrington,  who  had  been  totally  silent  on  the  subject,  from  the  fact
that  I  had  myself  scrupulously  guarded  against  giving  the  least
hint  of  them  to  any  one,  that  less  than  three  days  had  elapsed
since  my  letter  of  introduction  to  you  was  written,  that  I  was  a
perfect  stranger  to  your  brother  in  Boston,  who  penned  it,  and
that  to  entertain  a  moment's  suspicion  of  collusion  between  him
and  the  gentleman  who  obtained  it  for  me,  by  which  any  intelli-
gence of  the  truth  might  have  been  secretly  communicated,
would  be  a  gross  and  unpardonable  insult  to  unimpeachable  in-
tegrity.

"  Dr.  C.  at  length  said,  *  Come,  Lurena,  we  will  now  go  out  of
this  room,  and  up  stairs  into  the  room  above,  which  Mr.  Kent
wishes  us  to  see. Will  you  go  ? '

"  Miss  B.  <  Stop ;  I  can't  go  up  yet  I  must  sit  down  in  this
chair  and  rest  me  ;  my  head  aches.'

"  Dr.  C.  '  Well,  sit  down ;  we  need  not  be  in  haste.'  He  then
made  a  few  motions  with  the  hands  before  her,  after  which  she
soon  roused,  and  said,  in  reply  to  his  invitation,  *  I  don't  want  to  go
up  these  stairs.'

"Dr.  C. 'Why?'

"  Miss  B.  *  Because  they  are  so  steep  and  twisting.'  Appa-
rently making  an  effort,  '  They  are  the  hardest  stairs  I  ever  went
up.'  The  stairs  leading  to  the  room  above  are  in  one  corner  of
the  school-room,  not  out  of  it ;  are  '  steep  and  twisting,'  and  have
more  than  once  occasioned  in  others  the  same  complaint  while
ascending  them.

"  Dr.  C. '  Well,  are  you  in  the  room  ? '

"  Miss  B.  «  Yes.  Why,  is  it  possible  ?  What  a  singular  man
Mr.  Kent  is  !  He  is  a  minister  and  a  schoolmaster,  and  keeps  a
museum.  I  must  see  all  these  things.  I  could  stay  here  four  or
five  days ;  yes,  a  month.  How  many  things  there  are ! '  While
she  appeared  to  examine  objects,  I  requested  Dr.  C.  to  question
her  in  relation  to  what  she  saw. He  did  so.

"  Miss  B.  «  Why,  what  a  curious  loindow  that  is!  I  never
saw  one  before  that  went  clear  across  a  room !  And  onlv  look  !
27*


318  APPENDIX.

He  has  got  it  full  behind  the  windows,  too.  What  large  things !
The  glass  seems  to  magnify  them.'  My  astonishment  was  at
this  moment  complete.  There  is  a  glass  window,  or  partition^
across  the  room,  to  secure  my  apparatus,  and  several  large  articles
connected  with  natural  history.

"  Dr.  C. *  What  now  do  you  see  ? Look  up.'

"  Miss  B. '  Why,  that  is  very  handsome.'

«Dr.  C. 'What  is  it?'

"  Miss  B.  '  It  looks  like  marble.'  Alluding,  as  I  supposed,  to
a  bust  of  plaster  of  Paris,  standing  on  a  pedestal  against  the  par-
tition.

"  Dr.  C. '  Are  there  any  shells  here  ? '

"  Miss  B.  '  Why  do  you  ask  me  that  question,  when  you
know  I  have  just  put  one  into  your  hand  ? '  There  were  shells
within  her  reach.  After  she  had  seemed  to  examine  the  different
objects  around  with  the  different  sensations  which  they  were
adapted  to  produce,  I  requested  Dr.  C.  to  take  her  to  a  friend's
house  in  this  place ;  but  she  refused  decidedly  to  go,  saying,  she
would  leave  this  room  to  see  no  other  one  in  Roxbury.  She  was
then  charged  to  remember  some  of  the  things,  with  a  view  to
turn to  look  at  my  cabinets  when,  and  stay  as  long  as,  she  pleased.

"  Reconducted  to  Providence  in  the  same  manner  as  she  came
to  Roxbury,  and  reentering  the  room  at  Mr.  Metcalf 's,  she  in-
stantly said,  '  Why,  there  are  two  gentlemen  here,  to  whom  I
have  not  been  introduced ! '  It  was  acknowledged,  and  she  was
introduced  to  these  gentlemen,  strangers  from  a  distant  state,
who  had  entered  the  room  between  her  leaving  and  returning  to
Providence.

"  In  eight  or  ten  days  after,  the  parents  of  Mr.  Harrington
called  upon  me  and  expressed  a  wish  to  see  my  cabinets,  saying
that  they  had  received  a  letter  from  him,  (he  had  not  yet  returned
home,)  mentioning  that  Miss  Brackett  had  returned  to  them,  and
spent  the  night  in  examination,  after  being  put  into  the  magnetic
tain objects  which  he  mentioned,  but  which  they  had  decided  not
to  name,  until  they  had  seen  for  themselves.  We  went  to  the
room,  where  they  found  every  object  Mr.  H.  had  specified  in  his
letter —  a  bust  of  Milton,  a  large  table  in  the  centre  of  the  room,
several  pictures  scattered  on  one  side  of  it,  which  belong  to  a
perspective  box,  and  a  box  covered  with  paper,  which  strikingly
resembles  what  Miss  Brackett  said  it  was  — '  something  like  Mo-
saic work.''  I  could  not  account  for  her  recognition  of  Milton's
bust,  seen,  as  it  was,  in  a  teacher's  room,  or  '  museum,'  where  any
other  than  his  would  be  likely  to  have  place,  until  I  found,  on
being  requested  by  a  gentleman  to  examine  it,  what  I  had  for-
gotten—  the  name, '  Milton,'  written  deeply  and  legibly  on  the
back  of  it,  which  touched  a  board  partition.


APPENDIX.  319

"  I  am  aware,  sir,  that  there  may  seem  to  be  indelicacy  in  thus
exposing  to  the  public  the  objects  to  be  found  in  a  private  dwell-
ing, and  I  would,  if  I  could,  have  avoided  it.  But  I  promised,  at
posal an  account  of  what  I  saw  and  heard.  It  is  right  to  keep
that  promise  ;  and,  in  doing  this,  I  have  felt  obliged  to  give  liter-
ally the  questions  asked  and  answers  returned.  You  have,  ac-
cording to  my  best  recollection,  the  whole  truth,  without  reservation
or  intentional  coloring.  The  facts,  as  they  appeared  to  me,  are
at  your  disposal.  With  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  them  I
have  nothing  here  to  do,  and  cheerfully  leave  the  subject  with
those  who  may  think  it  worthy  either  of  their  ridicule  or  serious
consideration,  calmly  and  humbly  asking  for  myself,  '  What  shall
we  do  with  these  things  ? '

"  Yours,  very  respectfully  and  truly,

"BENJAMIN  KENT."

FROM MR.  JOSEPH HARRINGTON,  JUN.

"  Roxbury,  November  29,  1837.

"  Dear  Sir  :  I  was  present  at  the  above-mentioned  interview
of  my  friend,  Mr.  Kent,  with  Miss  Brackett ;  and  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  few  unimportant  particulars,  wherein  my  memory  does
not  distinctly  serve  me,  I  bear  unhesitating  witness  to  the  truth
of  every  statement  contained  in  his  communication.  Unless  our
senses  were  grossly  deceived,  or  our  judgments  thoroughly  be-
wildered, we  were,  on  the  evening  referred  to,  spectators  of  won-
derful and  unexplained  mental  phenomena.  And  most  desirous
must  every  lover  of  truth  be,  that  the  subject  of  'animal  mag-
netism '  should  receive  that  attention  which  it  merits,  and  that  its
juggles,  if  it  possess  any,  should  be  exposed,  or  its  astounding
revelations  be  corroborated  by  accumulated  testimony,  and  its
mysterious  nature  unravelled.  If  your  humble  servant,  sir,  has
been  duped,  hardly  less  wonderful  is  the  dexterity  of  the  impos-
tors than  somnambulism  itself.

"  With  great  respect,

"  Your  obedient  servant,

"JOSEPH  HARRINGTON,  Jun.

"  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

FROM MR.  FREDERICK S.  CHURCH.

"  Providence,  September  1,  1837.
**  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn  :

"Sir:  In  a  conversation  with  you  a  few  evenings  ago,  you
asked  of  me  a  short  sketch  of  what  I  had  seen  of  the  phenomenon
called  somnambulism.

"  In  reply,  I  can  only  say  that  my  observation  has  been  con-


320  APPENDIX.

fined  principally  to  one  case,  and  that  of  a  young  lady  of  this  city
known  to  you.  I  first  saw  her  the  latter  part  of  May,  and  having
previously  heard  much,  but  seen  nothing,  I  was,  like  most  others,
rather  incredulous  respecting  the  facts  related  to  me  by  those
who  had  witnessed  them.  After  seeing  her  put  into  an  appa-
rently sound  and  quiet  sleep,  from  which  she  could  not  be  awak-
ened by  any  of  the  means  usually  employed  to  rouse  sleeping
persons,  the  magnetizer  proceeded  to  show  the  influence  of  his
will,  by  causing  her  to  see  things  which  existed  only  in  imagina-
tion ;  for  instance,  to  drink  water  from  an  empty  cup,  and  to
eat  bread,  fruit,  cake,  &c,  from  an  empty  plate.  She  was  also
room,  articles  of  small  size  wrapped  in  many  thicknesses  of  cloth,
or  in  the  pockets  of  the  persons  present.  Having  known  of  her
being  sent  abroad  and  describing  persons  and  things,  and  having
found  her  descriptions  to  be  generally  correct,  where  proof  was
to  be  had,  I  was  once  induced  to  request  her  being  sent  to  the
of  which  neither  she  nor  any  one  present,  save  myself,  had  the
most  remote  conception,  it  would,  in  my  mind,  put  the  matter  of
her  spiritual  vision  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt.  The  re-
quest was  complied  with,  by  sending  her  along  the  sea-coast  in  a
south-westerly  direction,  until  she  came  to  the  peninsula  of  Flor-
ida. She  was  then  directed  to  go  directly  south  over  the  sea,
until  she  came  to  land.  Not  more  than  half  a  minute  elapsed
before  she  announced  her  arrival.  She  was  then  told  to  seek  a
city.  It  was  almost  immediately  found,  and,  being  called  on  to
Matanzas.  Wishing  at  that  time  to  have  her  at  Havana,  she
was  directed  to  go  west  about  sixty  miles,  until  she  came  to
another  city,  which  she  did.  Being  told  to  enter  it  by  the  harbor,
and  relate  what  she  saw  on  the  right-hand  side  going  in,  she
a  new  prison  then  building,  likewise  the  city  walls,  mounted  with
cannon,  the  shipping  and  the  harbor  generally,  with  the  forts  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  entrance,  Moro  Castle,  Castle  Blanco,
the  lighthouse,  &c. Leading  questions  were  of  course  avoided.

from  an  open  shed,  with  many  persons  there  collected,  standing
smoking,  &c. ;  which  place  is  used  as  a  kind  of  Exchange,  where
the  '  merchants  do  most  congregate.1

"She  was  then  directed  to  enter  a  large  building  in  that  vicini-
ty —  the  Cathedral ;  and  her  description  of  it  was  very  minute,  and,
so  far  as  my  memory  served,  was  very  correct  Being  asked  what
kind  of  church  it  was,  she  replied  she  did  not  know,  having  never
seen  any  thing  of  the  kind  before.  Observing  a  number  of
priests  officiating  at  the  altar,  her  attention  was  directed  to  them.
On  being  asked  their  probable  age,  she  said  that « two  were  near-


APPENDIX.  321

ly  bald,  and  three,  although  very  young1,  were  beginning  to  be
so;'  fully  satisfying  me  that  she  recognised  the  'priest  with  the
shaven  crown.'1  She  saw  one  bearing  a  bright  vessel,  suspended
by  a  chain,  from  whence  issued  a  smoke,  which  he  swung  before ,
and  others  engaged  apparently  at  prayer,  and  kneeling  before  the
altar.  Occasionally  a  lid  would  close  over  it,  and  the  smoke
cease,  when  it  would  be  handed  to  a  boy  in  attendance,  then
taken  back  again,  and  so  used  several  times  during  the  cere-
small  for  so  large  a  building,  and  much  out  of  place,  which  is
the  fact,  being  situated  in  an  arch  of  the  ceiling  above  the  capi-
tals of  the  columns ;  the  floor  of  the  altar  as  being  beautifully
inlaid  with  marble,  in  Mosaic  ;  also  the  many  and  splendid  paint-
ings on  the  walls.

"  At  another  time,  she  visited  Matanzas,  describing  the  vessels
in  the  harbor  with  sufficient  exactness  for  me  to  identify  one  in
which  I  was  interested  ;  the  quay  or  landing ;  the  public  square,
with  orange-trees  on  the  border,  and  a  marble  statue  in  the
centre  ;  the  church  at  that  place,  with  the  peculiar  architecture
and  location  of  the  town ;  together  with  the  interior  of  the  church,
the  altar,  statues,  ornaments,  &c,  including  a  miniature  brig  sus-
pended from  the  ceiling,  by  some  pious  individual,  who  had  been
saved  from  shipwreck  by  praying  heartily  to  his  patron  saint,
and  thus  fulfilled  his  vows  by  dedicating  the  said  vessel  to  his  or
her  glory.

"  I  recognised,  by  her  description,  three  ladies  of  my  acquaint-
ance at  their  residence.  And  her  whole  description,  so  far  as
my  memory  could  be  relied  on,  was  strictly  correct.  I  would  ob-
serve, that,  on  first  being  sent  to  Cuba,  no  name  of  place  was
given  her,  and  nearly  ten  days  elapsed  before  I  met  her  again,
when  she  asked  me  where  she  had  been  sent ;  as  she  knew  it
must  have  been  in  a  foreign  country,  the  appearance  of  things
being  so  entirely  different  from  any  thing  she  had  before  seen.

"I  close  by  giving  you  the  assurance  of  my  most  implicit
belief  in  what  I  have  witnessed,  only  stating  facts,  and  not  at-
tempting to  account  for  them.

"  Respectfully  yours,

«  FREDERICK  S.  CHURCH."


NOTE XXIX.  — Page  102.

It  may  be  that  Deleuze  had  then  in  his  mind  the  lamented
Georget,  who  had  published  his  work  on  physiology  a  few  years
before.  I  am  sure  the  reader  will  be  obliged  to°me  for  trans-
lating the  brief  notice  of  him  taken  by  M.  Foissac,  page  283.

"  The  experiments  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  have  proved  the  reality
of  a  particular  agent,  entirely  independent  of  the  patient's  imagi-


322  APPENDIX.

nation.  Those  of  La  Salpetriere  afford  instances  of  the  extraordi-
nary phenomena  of  somnambulism,  produced  and  tested  by  men
who  are  an  ornament  to  science,  and  whose  talents  and  integrity
no  person  has  yet  dared  to  dispute.  It  was  not  the  love  of  the
marvellous,  nor  of  notoriety,  Avhich  induced  M.  Georget  to  study
the  subject.  In  his  work  on  madness,  he  inserted  the  following
passage:  'So  long  as  these  magnetizers  perform  their  experi-
ments in  the  dark,  with  the  aid  of  their  abettors  ;  so  long  as  they
do  not  work  their  miracles  before  the  Academy  of  Sciences  or
the  Faculty  of  Medicine,  they  will  permit  us  to  omit  the  trouble
of  refuting  their  reveries  or  their  faith.'  But  Georget's  incredu-
lity having  been  shaken  by  the  experiments  of  the  Hotel  Dieu,
he  examined  with  distrust  what  he  at  first  rejected  with  dis-
dain ;  and,  six  months  after  having  written  the  preceding  lines,
he  added,  in  a  note,  while  his  work  was  in  the  press,  that  he  had
since  witnessed  several  magnetic  phenomena,  and  that  he  had
himself  put  to  sleep  several  of  his  convalescent  patients,  and
caused  them  to  speak,  of  which  we  shall  present  a  very  succinct
analysis.

"When  he  put  his  somnambulists  in  communication  with  a  sick
person,  they  immediately  experienced  a  pain,  an  uneasiness,  and
sometimes  a  sharp  affection  in  the  corresponding  organs.  It  often
happened  that  they  were  immediately  attacked  with  epilepsy  and
hysterical  fits  when  they  touched  persons  afflicted  with  these
maladies,  just  before  the  attacks  came  on.*

"A  somnambulist,  who  had  an  inflammation  of  the  left  lobe  of
the  lungs,  said  she  saw  very  well,  and  as  if  with  her  eyes,  the
organs  of  her  chest,  and,  in  fact,  gave  a  very  remarkable  descrip-
tion of  them.  The  heart,  said  she,  is  enveloped  by  a  membrane
to  which  it  does  not  adhere ;  it  receives  seven  vessels,  two  of
which,  appearing  largest,  were  agitated  by  a  peculiar  movement
The  disordered  lobe  appeared  very  red,  resembling  the  liver  in
some  parts,  and  presenting  grayish  spots  in  several  others.  The
healthy  lobe  had  a  rosy  appearance.  In  proportion  as  the  inflam-
mation diminished,  she  saw  less  and  less  clearly,  and  finally  could
not  see  at  all.  There  was  a  relapse,  and  lucidity  returned ;  but
it  was  limited  to  the  diseased  lobe,  the  other  organs  being  no
more  seen. Georget  observed  several  facts  of  the  same  kind.

"The  therapeutic  resources  of  his  somnambulists  presented
nothing  very  remarkable.  They  rarely  employed  any  but  those
remedies  which  were  daily  made  use  of  in  their  presence  —  bleed-
ing, leeches,  baths,  moxas,  blisters,  and  few  potions.  He  always
had  reason  to  repent  of  doing  it.  'It  was  curious,'  says  he,  'to
see  them,  when  awake,  exclaim  against  their  own  prescriptions
while  blisters  or  moxas  were  in  preparation.' One  of  them,

*  See  note  on  transmission  of  pain.


APPENDIX.  323

however,  caused  eighteen  or  twenty  moxas  to  be  applied  to  her-
self, several  setons  or  issues,  and  a  great  number  of  blisters,  in
the  space  of  eighteen  months.

"  Georget  could,  at  pleasure,  deprive  his  somnambulists  of  sen-
sation. The  skin  was  totally  insensible  to  the  lively  irritation
of  hot  water  deeply  charged  with  ground  mustard-seed,  and  even
to  the  burning  of  the  moxa  —  a  burning  and  irritation  which
were  extremely  painful,  when,  by  his  will,  the  skin  resumed  its
sensibility.

"He  suspended  the  muscular  power  of  his  somnambulists  with
the  same  success,  sometimes  in  one  part,  and  sometimes  in  an-
other, and  sometimes  in  all.  .  One  day,  he  tried  this  power  upon
the  respiratory  muscles,  and  he  produced  such  an  immobility  of
the  thorax,  and  such  danger  of  suffocation,  as  very  much  to  alarm
himself,  and  make  him  determine  to  attempt  nothing  of  the  kind
again.  He  says  that,  if  one  were  to  recall  a  patient  from  the
somnambulic  state  without  having  restored  motion  to  the  mus-
cles, and  their  proper  faculties  to  the  senses,  a  paralysis  of  the
muscles  and  of  sensation  will  continue.*  Nothing  could  equal
the  surprise  and  fright  which  such  a  phenomenon  caused  to  a
person  who  experienced  it  for  the  first  time,  whether  it  were  the
loss  of  hearing,  of  speech,  or  of  motion.  '  The  most  singular
phenomenon,  and  the  most  worthy  of  attention,'  continues  Geor-
get, ;  relates  to  the  foreknowledge  of  organic  action,  more  or  less
distant  in  point  of  time.  J  have  seen,  positively  seen,  a  great  many
times,  somnambulists  announce,  several  hours,  several  days,  twenty
days  beforehand,  the  hour,  the  minute,  even,  of  the  attack  of  epilep-
tic and  hystencjits,  and  of  the  menstrual  eruptions,  and  indicate  the
duration  and  the  intensity  of  the  attacks  —  things  which  were  exactly
verified.''

"Six  months  after  writing  this  article,  he  had  observed  many
other  new  and  extraordinary  facts.  He  promised,  in  a  note,  to
report  an  instance  in  the  chapter  on  epilepsy ;  but  when,  in  his
second  volume,  he  traced  the  history  of  that  disease,  he  added
that  the  reason  which  had  made  him  defer  the  publication  of
these  phenomena  to  the  article  on  magnetism,  induced  him  to
put  it  off  to  another  period.  He  says,  nevertheless,  the  person  to
whom  he  referred  had  displayed  to  him  instances  of  prevision
and  clairvoyance  so  astonishing,  that  he  had  never  read  any
thing  so  extraordinary,  in  any  work  on  magnetism,  not  even  in
those  of  Petetin.

"This  somnambulist,  Petronille,  declared  that  a  great  fright
would  cure  her. After  she  had  been  thrown  into  one,  she  as-

*  I  have  the  authority  of  two  magnetizers,  in  this  place,  to  state  this
fact  as  having  fallen  within  their  own  practice  ;  but  the  subjects,  on  being
plunged  again  into  the  magnetic  state,  were  relieved,  and  then  were
awakened  free  from  pain.


324  APPENDIX.

sured  her  friends,  while  in  somnambulism,  that  she  was  radically
cured.  In  fact,  she  experienced  no  new  attack  during  three
months,  while  before  she  used  to  have  two  every  day.

"  The  author  of '  Cures  effected  in  France,''  states,  in  his  first
volume,  page  259,  that  this  patient,  Petronille,  said,  one  day,  to
Dr.  Londe,  one  of  the  French  physicians  sent  into  Poland  to
observe  the  cholera,  that  in  fifteen  days  he  would  have  an  affair
of  honor,  and  would  be  wounded.  Dr.  Londe  consigned  this
fact  to  his  memorandum,  without  attaching  importance  to  it ;  and
he  appeared  to  have  forgotten  it,  when,  fifteen  days  afterwards,
he  received  a  sword-cut  from  the  hand  of  one  of  his  associates.

"  In  the  '  Physiology  of  the  Nervous  System,''  Georget  makes  no
mention  of  the  names  of  his  somnambulists,  nor  of  the  place
where  he  made  his  experiments,  nor  of  the  numerous  witnesses,,
physicians,  and  others,  who  were  convinced,  like  himself.  lIt  is
because,''  says  he,  '  we  live  in  an  age  when  it  is  permitted  to  conceal
our  belief  in  magnetism.1

"  How  shall  we  reconcile  this  timidity  with  the  courageous  hom-
age which,  in  his  work,  he  renders  to  all  useful  discoveries,  and
especially  to  magnetism  ?  The  true  reason  of  his  reserve  and
his  silence  was,  the  fear  of  displeasing  those  who  had  the  admin-
istration of  the  hospitals,  who  had  severely  interdicted  all  essays
of  that  nature.  He  proposed  to  publish,  at  some  future  day,  more
in  detail,  if  his  time  should  permit  him,  the  result  of  his  observa-
tions. He  expressed  his  desire  to  me,  in  the  last  interview  I  had
with  him ;  he  wished  to  recommence  his  experiments,  and  give
himself  up  wholly  to  new  researches.  'For  I  am  persuaded,'
said  he  to  me,  '  that  great  truths  have  escaped  observers ;  but,
far  from  accusing  them  of  exaggeration,  I  rather  believe  they
have,  in  their  recitals,  kept  below  the  reality.  I  believe,  for
example,  that  there  is  no  perfect  mode  of  treatment  but  that  which
render  their  admirable  instinct  serviceable  to  others.  In  one  disease,
[fluxion  de  poitrine,)  every  physician  knows  that  bleeding  is  ne-
cessary, but  he  does  not  know  the  precise  moment  of  the  opera-
tion, at  what  vein  it  ought  to  be  done,  and  the  exact  quantity  of
blood  it  is  necessary  to  draw,  &c.'

"  He  then  read  to  me  the  details  of  his  first  experiment  at  the
Salpetriere.  The  woman  whom  he  magnetized  became  somnam-
bulous,  and,  in  the  midst  of  great  agitation,  told  him  that,  at  a
certain  period,  she  would  be  attacked  by  a  serious  disease,  and
die  of  it,  at  such  a  day  and  such  an  hour.  Georget,  not  then
knowing  any  works  in  which  facts  of  this  kind  were  mentioned,
and  ignorant  that  somnambulists  could  themselves  give  the  means
of  turning  aside  the  effects  of  their  previsions,  believed  it  must  of
necessity  be  accomplished.  Full  of  terror  and  grief,  he  hastened
to  awake  her ;  and,  at  the  time  indicated,  she  fell  a  victim  to  the
disease  which  she  had  foreseen.


APPENDIX.  325

"  Georget  died  at  the  commencement  of  a  career  so  brilliantly
begun,  in  the  midst  of  the  labors  he  had  sketched  out  for  him-
self, and  of  his  dreams  of  the  future.  All  the  physiological  facts
which  he  had  observed  with  so  much  care,  are  probably  lost  to
science ;  for,  since  his  death,  no  person  has  spoken  of  publish-
ing the  notes  which  he  left.  But  he  himself  rendered  a  last,  a
striking  homage  to  the  principles  of  magnetism,  by  these  words
inserted  in  his  will:  'I  will  not  finish  this  document  without
adding  to  it  an  important  declaration.  In  1821,  in  my  work  on
the  "  Physiology  of  the  Nervous  System"  I  proudly  professed  mate-
rialism. The  preceding  year,  I  had  published  a  treatise  on  "  Mad-
ness" in  which  are  laid  down  principles  contrary  to,  or  at  least
different  from  the  ideas  in  agreement  with,  the  general  belief,
(pp.  48,  51,  52,  1 14 ;)  and  hardly  had  I  published  the  "  Physiology
of  the  Nervous  System"  when  new  meditations  upon  a  very  ex-
traordinary phenomenon  —  somnambulism  —  would  permit  me  no
longer  to  doubt  of  the  existence  in  us,  and  out  of  us,  of  an  intel-
ligent principle,  altogether  different  from  material  existences.  It
is,  if  you  please,  the  soul  and  God.  In  regard  to  this  matter,  /
have  a  profound  conviction,  founded  upon  facts  which  are  not  to  be
controverted.  This  declaration  will  not  see  the  light,  until  no  one
can  doubt  its  sincerity  or  suspect  my  intentions.  If  I  cannot
publish  it  myself,  I  urgently  entreat  the  persons  who  may  take
notice  of  it,  at  the  opening  of  the  present  testament,  that  is  to
say,  after  my  death,  to  give  it  all  the  publicity  possible.  March
1,1826'"


NOTE  XXX.

FROM MOSES B. LOCKWOOD.

"  Respected  Friend  :  In  the  appendix  to  the  second  part  of
thy  translation  of  '  Deleuze's  Practical  Instruction?  I  notice  a
number  of  cures  that  have  been  either  wholly  or  partially  ef-
fected through  the  agency  of  animal  magnetism.  It  seems  de-
sirable to  record  as  many  cases  of  this  kind  as  facts  will  permit.
If  an  unbeliever  be  told  of  an  individual  who,  after  being  mag-
netized, has  ceased  to  be  afflicted  by  a  malady  that  had  been
hanging  about  him  perhaps  for  years,  he  will  be  very  likely  to
reply,  'It  wasn't  magnetism;  it  will  happen  so  sometimes.'
Chance,  however,  can  only  be  brought  to  bear  against  solitary
instances.  By  multiplying  cases,  retreat,  under  cover  of 'It  will
happen  so  sometimes,'  will  be  cut  off.

"  It  is  for  this  reason  that  1  take  additional  pleasure  in  comply-
ing with  thy  request.

«  q<  q####^  for  four  or  £ve  winterS)  hag  been  subject  to  the

28


326  APPENDIX.

croup,  (as  he,  and  those  who  have  attended  him,  termed  it,)  so  that
scarcely  the  space  of  two  weeks,  during  either  of  these  winters,
elapsed,  without  his  becoming  an  inmate  of  the  nursery,  until
the  12th  month,  13th  day,  1836,  when  T  magnetized  him,  not  only
wishing  to  put  him  asleep,  hut  also  to  cure  his  disease.  No  med-
icine was  used  ;  yet  he  has  not  had  a  return  of  it  since.

"  The  following  facts  go  to  show  that  '  the  phenomena  of  ani-
mal magnetism  are  not  produced  solely  through  the  influence  of
the  imagination.'  In  endeavoring  to  ascertain  this  point,  in  the
early  part  of  my  experimenting,  frequent  occasion  was  taken  to
magnetize  an  individual  when  he  was  totally  ignorant  of  my
intention,  and  when  his  mind  was  closely  engaged  with  other
things.  For  example,  when  he  was  studiously  endeavoring  to
solve  some  mathematical  question,  or  to  commit  some  passage  to
memory,  I  have  repeatedly  caused  him  to  sleep,  simply  by  the
action  of  my  will ;  being,  in  some  cases,  with  my  face  towards
him,  in  some  with  it  from  him ;  sometimes  in  the  same,  at  others
in  a  different,  room ;  generally  in  the  same  house,  but  occasion-
ally at  a  much  greater  distance.  On  one  occasion,  we  were  at
dinner,  he  at  one  table  and  I  at  another,  and  so  situated  that  my
face  could  not  be  seen  by  him.  When  I  went  to  the  table,  1
had  not  even  thought  of  magnetizing  at  that  time ;  but,  as  his
mind  appeared  to  be  very  far  from  magnetism,  it  seemed  to  be  a
very  favorable  opportunity  to  test  the  point;  and,  although  no
one  around  me  suspected  what  was  going  on,  yet,  in  less  than
three  minutes,  his  head  dropped  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  one
that  was  next  to  him.  I  then  awaked  him,  when  he  turned
round,  and  cast  a  look  towards  me,  by  which  I  understood  that
he  knew  what  I  had  been  doing.  In  this  and  the  other  instances
alluded  to,  it  would  be  absurd  to  endeavor  to  maintain  that  his
imagination  produced  the  result.  '  The  phenomena  of  animal
magnetism  are  not  produced,'  therefore,  '  solely  through  the  in-
fluence of  the  imagination.'

"  Clairvoyance.  —  After  putting  a  patient  asleep,  I  left  him  for  the
purpose  of  ascertaining  the  correctness  of  his  account  of  what
was  transpiring  at  a  distance.  He  was  in  communication  with
C.  W.  J.  With  me  were  M.  B.  H.  and  J.  C.  On  our  return,
after  an  absence  of  about  an  hour,  C.  W.  J.  informed  us  that  the
magnetized  had  traced  our  course ;  said  that  I  '  fell  down  on
some  ice  in  the  path,'  &c.  He  said,  further,  that,  while  we  were
returning,  'just  before  we  came  to  a  rope-walk,  we  all  laughed
very  loud  at  something  which  M.  B.  H.  told  us.'  He  was  correct
in  all  these  instances.

"  Respectfully,

"MOSES  B.  LOCKWOOD.

"Thomas  C.  Hartshorn,"


APPENDIX.  327

NOTE  XXXI.
LETTERS  FROM  PHYSICIANS.

FROM  DOCTOR  CUTTER,  OF  NEW  HAMPSHIRE.

"  Nashua,  November  22,  1837.

"  Sir  :  The  second  number  of  your  translation  of  Deleuze's
work  was  duly  received.  No  encomium  of  mine  can  add  to  its
intrinsic  merit  The  chapters  '  on  the  precautions  in  the  clwice  of
a  magnetizer,'  and  '  magnetism  applied  to  disease  in  connection  with
medicine?  need  only  to  be  read  to  be  appreciated  by  the  moral,
the  intelligent,  and  the  humane.  As  your  valuable  appendix  is
intended  to  record  facts  and  observations  made  by  American
citizens,  I  send  you  a  few  cases.

"  Neuralgia,  or  Tic  Douloureux.  —  I  was  called  to  see  Miss  E.
M...  of  this  town.  The  disease  was  confined  to  the  right  side  of
tue  face,  the  portio  dura  of  anatomists  being  diseased.  This  was
of  long  standing.  I  proposed  the  trial  of  magnetism.  To  this
she  assented.  Somnambulism  occurred  in  a  few  minutes.  After
she  had  slept  a  little  time,  I  awoke  her.  The  pain  was  gone.  I
repeated  magnetism  several  times.  There  has  been  no  return  of
the  pain.

"  JYeuralgia,  after  filling  a  carious  tooth.  —  Miss  D.  applied  to
a  skilful  dental  surgeon,  Dr.  J.  M.  Reed,  for  advice  relative  to  a
carious  tooth.  Dr.  R.  filled  the  tooth  with  gold  foil.  But,  the
nerve  being  exposed  and  very  sensitive,  the  filling  was  of  neces-
sity removed.  It  was  replaced  and  removed  several  times,  the
young  lady  not  being  able  to  endure  the  pain  caused  by  the  pres-
sure of  the  gold  on  the  sensitive  and  diseased  nerve.  All  the
branches  of  the  trifacial  nerve  had  become  painful.  After  the
tooth  had  been  filled,  she  applied  to  me  to  render  my  aid  in
giving  relief  by  magnetism.  At  the  first  sitting,  the  pain  was
completely  removed,  but  sleep  was  not  induced.  In  a  little  time,
there  was  a  partial  return  of  the  pain,  and  I  again  magnetized
her.  At  this  sitting,  she  became  a  lucid  somnambulist ;  the  pain
was  entirely  removed,  and  has  not  returned  From  the  result  of
this  and  some  other  cases,  I  think  magnetism  worthy  the  attention
of  dental  surgeons.

"Delirium  Tremens.  —  June  20,  1837.  — Mr.  S.  L.,  afflicted
with  delirium  tremens,  caused  by  the  free  use  of  stimulating
drinks,  applied  to  me  for  medical  advice,  having  passed  several
days  and  nights  without  sleep,  and  having  used  opiates  in  large
doses  without  benQfit  I  tried  the  effect  of  magnetism.  In  a
little  time,  it  caused  tranquillity,  followed  by  sleep.  I  repeated  it
two  or  three  times,  and  the  man  was  able  to  resume  his  usual
business. In  this  form  of  disease,  when  there  is  an  increase  of


328  APPENDIX.

action,  with  a  diminution  of  the  powers  of  the  system,  I  think
patients  may  receive  much  benefit  from  the  use  of  magnetism.

"  Bronchitis.  —  Aug.  27.  —  Miss  A.  C.  for  two  years  had  been
laboring  under  chronic  bronchitis,  characterized  by  cough,  dysp-
noea, pain  in  the  chest  and  between  the  shoulders.  After  trying
many  tilings,  she  consented  to  make  trial  of  magnetism.  She
was  magnetized  several  times.  At  each  sitting,  the  dyspnoea,
pain,  and  cough,  were  removed.  This  I  could  effect  without
influencing  any  other  part  of  the  system.  The  paroxysms  of
coughing  and  dyspnoea  became  less  severe  and  less  frequent,  but
her  circumstances  prevented  her  from  continuing  the  use  of
magnetism  but  a  little  time.  She  is  now  much  better,  but  not
well.

"  Dyspepsia  and  Spinal  Irritation.  —  Miss  F.  F.  for  some  years
had  been  afflicted  with  pain  in  the  stomach  and  back,  attended
with  soreness,  appetite  capricious,  and,  when  food  was  taken,  it
caused  much  distress.  Under  the  circumstances,  at  her  request,
I  magnetized  her.  It  caused  sleep,  free  sweating,  and  complete
relief  from  pain.  Magnetism  was  repeated  several  times.  The
pain  in  the  back  and  stomach,  and  distress  after  taking  food,  were
completely  removed.  In  this  case,  the  patient  became  a  lucid
somnambulist  After  the  disease  was  removed,  this  lady  ceased
to  be  a  somnambulist,  and  was  not  susceptible  of  magnetic  influ-
ence. This  is  worthy  of  observation  in  using  magnetism  as  a
remedial  agent.

"  Partial  Paralysis.  —  A  few  months  since,  I  was  consulted
by  Miss  S.  H.,  who  for  more  than  four  years  had  been  troubled
with  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  head,  and  want  of  feeling  and
strength  of  the  muscles  on  one  side,  something  like  the  wry  neck.
I  advised  a  frial  of  magnetism,  as  she  had  been  under  different
methods  of  treatment,  and  had  received  no  benefit.  To  this  she
consented.  At  the  first  sitting,  imperfect  sleep  was  induced,  fol-
lowed by  very  free  sweating  in  the  paralyzed  part.  I  repeated
magnetism  several  days  in  succession.  The  pain  in  the  head
was  removed,  and  sensibility  and  mobility  restored  to  the  parts
paralyzed.  In  this  case,  somnambulism  was  complete.  She  is
now  perfectly  well.

"  Headache  and  Dyspepsia.  —  A  few  months  since,  1  was  called
to  see  a  lady  from  Chelmsford,  Mass.,  who  for  some  two  years
had  been  afflicted  with  much  pain  and  heat  in  the  stomach  and
chest,  and  a  peculiar,  heavy  pain  in  the  head,  for  which  she  had
tried  many  things,  and  had  found  no  relief.  This  case  was
attended  with  pallor  of  the  skin,  and  great  coldness  of  the  ex-
tremities. I  made  use  of  gentle  aperient  medicine,  and  magnet-
ism. At  the  first  sitting,  the  pain  in  the  bead  and  stomach  was
much  increased  primarily,  but  this  was  followed  in  a  little  time
by  relief  from  pain,  free  sweating,  and  warmth  in  the  skin  and
extremities. I  continued  to  magnetize  this  lady  for  about  two


APPENDIX,  329

weeks,  once  each  day.  The  effects  after  each  sitting  were  the
same  as  at  first ;  but  the  primary  increase  of  pain  gradually  di-
minished, until  the  magnetic  action  was  quite  agreeable.  The
disease  in  the  head,  lungs,  and  stomach,  was  completely  removed
in  about,  three  weeks ;  and  this  lady  has  since  remained  well.

"  Hepatitis  and  Cephalalgia.  —  About  three  months  since,  Miss
A.  applied  to  me  for  medical  advice  relative  to  a  pain  in  the  head
and  the  region  of  the  liver.  Her  food  caused  much  distress.
These  complaints  were  of  some  years'  standing,  for  which  she
had  taken  much  medicine.  She  had  been  salivated  three  times
for  the  pain  in  the  side,  without  benefit.  At  her  request,  1
tried  magnetism.  The  pain  in  the  head  was  completely  removed
after  a  tew  sittings,  and  returned  no  more ;  but  the  side  was
not  bettered.  I  applied  a  blister  to  the  right  side,  and  con-
tinued the  use  of  magnetism.  The  pain  in  the  region  of  the
liver  yielded  immediately,  and  has  not  since  returned.  This  lady
is  now  perfectly  well.  In  this  case,  magnetism  and  vesication
mutually  aided  each  other.

"  Chronic  Inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  —  In  the  early
part  of  last  summer,  I  was  applied  to  by  Mrs.  S.  A.  for  medical
advice.  It  was  her  desire  to  be  magnetized.  This  was  one  of
the  most  complicated  cases  of  disease  I  ever  saw.  For  more
than  ten  years,  this  lady  had  been  afflicted  with  great  pain  in  the
head,  dizziness,  want  of  sleep ;  and  so  great  was  this,  that  she  said
she  had  not  slept  one  night  soundly  for  many  years,  and  frequent-
ly passed  many  nights  in  succession  without  sleep.  There  was
constant  pain  in  the  left  side,  steady  pain  and  soreness  in  the
stomach  and  bowels,  attended  with  frequent  paroxysms  of  vomit-
ing blood,  with  discharges  of  the  same  per  anum.  At  these
times,  the  tumefaction  of  the  bowels  was  great,  attended  with
severe  pains  resembling  colic,  retention  of  urine,  and  pain  in
voiding  the  same.  Food,  and  all  things  taken  into  the  stomach,
caused  great  distress,  if  not  rejected.  This  had  been  the  case  for
many  years.  These  are  a  few  of  the  leading  symptoms.  She
had  applied  to  many  medical  men  for  aid,  and  was  nothing  bet-
tered.

"  I  commenced  the  treatment  by  trying  the  power  of  magnet-
ism. At  the  third  sitting,  complete  magnetic  sleep  was  produced.
1  continued  this  for  some  days,  and  I  found  that  her  rest  became
better,  the  cephalic  and  abdominal  pains  less  severe.  After  some
little  time,  I  ceased  magnetizing  this  lady  myself,  and  Mrs.  Cutter
commenced  magnetizing  her.  From  time  to  time,  I  gave  such
medicines  as  the  case  seemed  to  require,  with  external  counter-
irritation.  Mrs.  A.  became  a  lucid  somnambulist,  examined  her-
self, and  directed  such  things  as  she  said  would  be  of  benefit
These  prescriptions  I  followed,  as  they  appeared  to  me  to  be
proper.  She  is  now  comparatively  well.  She  sleeps  well,  and  has
been  able  to  eat  any  thing  for  months  without  uneasiness  or  pain.
26*


330  APPENDIX.

The  pain  and  dizziness  in  her  head  very  much  lessened.  The
pain,  with  discharges  of  blood  from  the  stomach  and  bowels,  is
entirely  removed.  The  urinary  trouble  is  much  relieved.  Within
a  few  days,  she  examined  herself  when  in  the  magnetic  state.
She  said  that  magnetism  had  been  of  great  benefit  to  her,  but
that  the  medicine  she  had  taken  had  been  very  important.  She
said  that  the  blood  vomited  came  from  a  sore  in  the  stomach,  and
not  from  the  bowels,  as  I  had  supposed ;  and  that  this  was  cured
by  magnetism  and  a  particular  medicine,  and  that  it  was  now
completely  well.  This,  she  says,  was  the  cause  of  the  food's  dis-
tressing her.  She  says  there  are  eight  large  scars  on  the  inside
of  the  bowels,  where  there  were  sores  for  a  long  time.  She  says
the  bladder  is  small,  and  will  never  be  well ;  but  it  is  now  some-
what better.  She  has  been  uniform  in  her  assertions  at  the  dif-
ferent times  she  has  examined  herself.  I  might  mention  that  she
says  her  head  has  been  much  benefited  by  magnetism,  but  is  not
well,  and  never  will  be.  She  said  her  side  would  be  well ;  and
such  is  the  case  at  this  time.  In  this  case,  I  think  the  union  of
medicine  and  magnetism  has  been  very  happy,  and  the  results
highly  satisfactory  in  removing  a  mass  of  disease  which  many
good  judges  had  deemed  incurable.  This  and  some  other  cases
treated  by  me  this  season,  fully  sustain  many  of  the  remarks  of
the  excellent  Deleuze  in  his  chapter  on  the  connection  of  magnet-
ism with  medicine,  and  in  that  on  somnambulism.
"Yours,  &c,

"CALVIN  CUTTER.
"  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM THE SAME.

"Nashua,  November  29,  1837.

"  Sir  :  The  following  observations  are  at  your  disposal ;  do  with
them  as  you  may  think  proper.  It  is  known  to  the  observing
physician  and  others,  that  we  frequently  meet  with  diseases  in
which  there  is  a  local  increase  of  vital  power  or  action.  These
are,  in  general,  characterized  by  preternatural  heat,  arterial  throb-
bing, swelling,  and  frequently  pain,  commonly  termed  inflamma-
tion. We  also  meet  with  diseases  in  which  there  is  an  apparent
diminution  of  the  local,  and,  it  may  be,  general  vital  forces,  dis-
tinguished by  a  diminution  of  heat,  arterial  action,  and  contrac-
tion of  the  size  of  the  parts,  commonly  seen  in  cases  of  paralysis
and  debilitating  diseases.  Now,  it  is  obvious  to  any  person,
that,  in  most  cases,  a  remedy  producing  the  same  uniform  effects
would  not  be  proper  in  the  two  above-named  classes  of  disease.
Ceteris  paribus,  if  it  benefited  the  one,  it  would  injure  the
other.  Consequently,  if  the  magnetizer  cannot  modify  the  effects
of  the  influence  which  he  may  exert,  he  cannot  benefit  diseases


APPENDIX.  331

of  a  sthenic  and  asthenic  character  by  this  agent  It  will  be
seen  by  my  remarks,  that  I  think  it  highly  necessary  for  the  mag-
netizer  to  be  a  person  well  acquainted  with  the  causes  and  char-
acter of  diseases,  or  that  he  should  act  under  the  direction  of
some  person  who  has  this  knowledge.  Magnetism  should  not  be
used  at  hap-hazard  to  cure  diseases  by  every  ignorant  person,  or
any  ignorant  person  who  may  by  chance  have  learned  that  he
has  this  natural  and  inherent  power.  If  this  care  is  pursued,
magnetism  may  continue  reputable  and  useful.  In  relation  to
the  ability  which  I  possess  of  modifying  this  influence,  so  as  to
cause,  by  my  ivill  alone,  either  sedative,  stimulant,  or  soporific
effects,  I  have  been  making  observations  for  some  time,  and  upon
different  persons,  and  am  satisfied  that  it  can  be  done,  although
difficult  To  accomplish  it  easily,  I  am  obliged  to  keep  in  mind
the  relative  anatomy  of  the  different  parts  of  the  system,  particu-
larly that  of  the  nervous  system.  The  following  are  my  observa-
tions on  this  point :  —

"  About  the  middle  of  November,  I  accidentally  met  a  lad  in
the  street  a  son  of  Mr.  Wm.  Lovejoy,  who  was  obliged  to  use  two
crutches  in  consequence  of  a  complete  paralysis  of  one  leg,  from
the  hip  downward.  He  is  about  seven  years  old,  and  has  been
in  this  state  more  than  rive  years.  It  is  said  to  have  followed,
and  to  have  been  caused  by,  a  severe  fever.  He  could  move  the
toes  of  the  diseased  limb  a  very  little.  He  was  brought  to  my
office,  and  I  took  one  of  his  hands,  and  held  it  a  little  time,  and
then  passed  my  fingers  over  his  arm  a  few  times,  with  the  inten-
tion to  paralyze  his  arm.  I  then  asked  him  to  move  his  arm,  and
he  could  not  There  had  been  nothing  said  relative  to  magnet-
ism in  his  presence,  and  consequently  imagination  was  not  on
the  alert  A  short  time  after,  I  saw  the  boy  at  Mr.  Lovejoy's
house.  Without  making  any  remarks  concerning  my  desires,  1
took  his  hand,  with  the  intention  to  put  the  boy  to  sleep.  In
about  one  minute,  he  was  in  a  profound  sleep.  In  a  short  time,  I
awoke  him,  and  then  passed  my  fingers  over  the  diseased  limb
several  times.  This  limb  is  always  cold.  After  being  magnet-
ized as  above  named,  I  examined  the  limb,  and  found  it  of  an
icy  coldness,  and  no  mobility  in  the  toes.

"On  the  following  day,  I  again  called,  and  found  the  limb  with
its  wonted  coldness.  I  then  magnetized,  with  the  intention  of
removing  the  coldness  without  causing  the  least  loss  of  motion.
In  a  few  minutes,  the  limb  became  quite  warm,  as  much  so  as  the
other,  with  some  moisture,  and  he  could  move  the  toes  much  more
freely.  In  the  experiments  on  the  limb,  the  head  was  not  affected
In  these  different  experiments,  the  lad  and  those  present  were
not  made  aware  of  my  intention  until  after  magnetizing.

"  I  have  obtained  similar  results  on  many  different  persons ;
but  the  above  I  deem  satisfactory,  as  the  age  and  circumstances
of  the  lad,  and  his  entire  ignorance  of  magnetism,  preclude  the


332  APPENDIX.

probability  of  that  active  and  almost  universal  agent,  imagination,
being  in  the  field  of  this  experiment

"CALVIN  CUTTER.
"Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."

FROM DOCTOR CLEVELAND.

"Pawtuxet.  December  10,  1837.

"Dear  Sir: On  the  31st  of  May  last,  I  was  called  to  see

Mis. ,  a  lady  about  fifty  years  old,  whom  I  found  laboring

under  a  violent  inflammation  of  the  chest  On  the  3d  of  June,
her  symptoms  became  alarming.  At  a  consultation  of  physicians,
her  case  was  considered  quite  hopeless.  Her  pulse  was  inter-
mitting, her  extremities  cold  ;  she  had  a  partial  delirium,  a  wake-
fulness that  had  continued  forty-eight  hours,  restlessness,  and
extreme  distress  in  the  system  generally,  and  especially  in  the
chest  Further  attempts  were  made  to  procure  sleep,  which,  as
heretofore,  proved  unavailing.  Opium,  in  its  various  preparations,
was  resorted  to,  both  internally  and  externally,  with  no  other
effect  than  aggravation  of  suffering.  From  idiosyncrasy,  she  was
never  able  to  procure  rest  from  this  drug.  At  the  expiration  of
twelve  hours,  I  found  her  appearance  still  worse,  symptoms  of
mortification  being  more  decided.

"  Under  the  circumstances,  I  was  induced  to  magnetize  her,
though  I  had  but  slight  hopes  of  affording  relief.  At  the  end  of
thirty  minutes,  I  threw  her  into  a  quiet  sleep.  My  own  surprise
was  surpassed  by  that  of  her  friends,  who  were  entirely  ignorant
of  the  cause  of  her  sudden  and  unexpected  relief.  She  awoke  at
the  end  of  two  hours,  without  exhibiting  any  particular  change  in
her  appearance,  except  a  greater  regularity  of  the  pulse.  In  a
few  hours,  she  was  magnetized  again,  and  warmth  was  restored
to  the  extremities ;  the  circulation  was  also  improved.

"  She  was  magnetized  a  third  time,  and  awoke  twenty-four
hours  after  the  first  operation,  with  her  reason  perfectly  restored.
From  this  time,  her  disease  assumed  a  more  favorable  turn.  She
was  occasionally  magnetized  with  much  relief,  until  her  natural
sleep  was  restored,  and  recovery  ensued.

"  Not  much  doubt  can  exist  as  to  the  cause  of  the  changes
which  took  place  during  the  twenty  hours  alluded  to  above,  as
no  other  means  than  magnetism  was  made  use  of  during  that
time ;  and  without  this,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  case
would  have  terminated  fatally.

"  On  the  31st  of  August  of  the  present  year,  I  was  called  upon
to  attend  Mrs. ,#  who  was  suffering  a  severe  and  deep-seated

*  The  translator  had  conversed  with  the  husband  of  this  lady,  a  respect-
able trader  of  this  city,  in  relation  to  this  case,  before  he  received  Dr.  C.'s
account  of  it,  which  confirms  that  gentleman's  statement.


APPENDIX.  333

pain  in  the  breasts,  arising  from  a  scrofulous  affection.  Although
there  was  no  obstruction  to  the  flow  of  milk  upon  the  application
of  the  child  or  of  the  pump,  yet  the  pain  produced  by  them  was
almost  insupportable.  The  ordinary  means  had  been  resorted  to,
but  not  successfully  even  in  the  slightest  degree.  Her  sufferings,
on  the  contrary,  were  daily  increased,  until  other  organs,  from
a  peculiar  sympathy  well  known  to  nursing  women,  became
affected  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  application  of  the  child  or  of
the  pump  induced  such  violent  spasms,  that  it  became  absolutely
necessary  to  abandon  the  use  of  both  as  the  means  of  removing
the  superabundance  of  milk.

"  Recourse  was  had  to  magnetism.  Sleep  was  produced  in
forty  minutes,  and  sensibility  so  far  suspended  that,  instead  of  its
requiring  several  persons  to  confine  her  to  the  bed,  as  heretofore,
while  attempting  to  nurse  the  child,  she  expressed  the  greatest
delight  while  it  was  nursing,  turned  her  face  towards  it,  (her  eyes
being  closed,)  and  caressed  and  fondled  it  in  the  most  affection-
ate manner.  I  cautioned  her  to  retain  a  knowledge  of  her  im-
pressions when  she  awoke,  to  which  she  replied,  '  You  need  not
fear ;  I  never  shall  forget  them ! '

"It  being  necessary  for  me  to  leave  her,  I  asked  her  how  long
she  would  sleep ;  to  which  she  promptly  replied,  'A  week ! '

"  Her  friends  being  unwilling  that  I  should  leave  her  in  the
magnetic  state,  I  remained  two  hours,  during  which  time  her
sleep  was  uninterrupted.  I  then  left  her,  with  the  assurance  that
I  would  return  as  soon  as  possible.  About  six  hours  afterwards,
I  found  her  suffering,  though  less  severely  than  before.  The
same  pleasant  effects  followed  in  the  second  magnetic  sleep,  into
which  she  was  immediately  thrown.  After  directing  some  neces-
sary arrangements  for  the  night,  I  put  her  in  communication  with
her  husband  and  the  nurse,  and  retired,  leaving  a  request  that  I
should  be  called  if  occasion  required  it.

"  On  calling  again  the  next  morning  at  five  o'clock,  she  was
still  in  the  magnetic  state,  having  been  so  seven  hours,  although
she  had  been  removed  to  another  bed,  had  taken  refreshments  sev-
eral times  herself,  and  attended  duly  to  the  demands  of  her  child.

"Her  sufferings  from  this  time  became  less  severe,  although
permanent  relief  was  not  obtained  until  a  suppuration  had  taken
place  in  one  of  her  breasts.

"  Yours,

«  THOMAS  CLEVELAND.

"  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

FROM DOCTOR UTLEY.

"Providence,  October  13,  1837.

"Dear  Sir:  I  feel  that  I  should  do  injustice  to  withhold
some  facts  that  have  recently  come  under  my  observation,  apper-


334


APPENDIX.


taining  to  the  subject  in  which  you  are  interested.  Notwith-
standing my  former  skepticism  in  reference  to  this  matter,  I  must,
when  constrained  by  incontrovertible  evidence,  own  myself  a  be-
liever.

"  After  having  heard  much  from  credible  authority,  and  wit-
nessed some  astounding  facts  myself  in  two  cases,  I  resolved,  if
a  favorable  opportunity  ever  presented,  to  ascertain  whether  I
had  the  power  of  effecting  what  is  denominated  the  magnetic
sleep ;  and,  in  compliance  with  your  request,  I  submit  to  your  dis-
posal the  detail  of  the  following  case  :  —

"Mrs.  W.  C.  is  about  twenty-six  years  of  age.  Her  health
had  been  very  feeble  several  months,  and  she  had  been  most  of
the  time  under  medical  treatment.  One  day,  as  I  was  leaving
the  room  of  the  patient,  I  was  requested  by  several  of  those  who
were  present,  among  whom  was  the  husband  and  mother,  together
with  the  patient,  to  magnetize  her ;  they  having  reference  to  the
operation  as  a  remedy  for  her  restless  nights,  and  violent  pain  in
the  head,  with  which  she  had  been  afflicted  several  weeks.  In
answer  to  them,  I  acknowledged  my  inexperience  in  the  subject.
However,  after  they  had  repeated  their  importunities,  with  an
evident  expression  of  skepticism  depicted  in  their  countenances,
I  asked  the  patient  if  she  was  sincere  in  her  request.  She  said
she  was  willing  I  should  make  the  trial,  although  she  was  skepti-
cal in  regard  to  it.

"  Thus  privileged,  I  made  a  persevering  effort  by  manipulating,
accompanied  with  concentration  of  thought,  and  all  the  benevo-
lent and  pure  emotions  I  was  capable  of  feeling  towards  a  fellow-
being,  at  the  same  time  somewhat  faithless  in  regard  to  my
success  ;  but  determined  to  make  a  thorough  trial.  After  manip-
ulating about  twenty  minutes,  I  discovered  in  the  patient  an  in-
clination to  close  the  eyes.  This  appearance  evidenced  nothing
more  than  an  inclination  to  natural  sleep,  as  would  be  consequent
upon  soothing  the  nervous  system  in  this  manner.  After  contin-
uing the  manipulations  about  ten  minutes  more,  her  chest  heaved
with  a  sigh,  and  she  completely  closed  her  eyes  as  in  a  natural
sleep.  Still  doubting  my  success  as  to  its  being  a  magnetic
sleep,  I  thought  I  would  test  it.  I  passed  my  right  hand  at  a
distance  from  her  left,  and  willed  her  to  take  my  hand.  She  as
promptly  obeyed  as  though  she  had  consented  to  a  verbal  request
I  became  convinced  that  a  magnetic  sleep  was  produced.  I
then,  to  satisfy  myself  and  others  present  that  there  was  no  de-
ception on  her  part,  bandaged  her  eyes  with  several  thicknesses
of  a  handkerchief,  with  portions  of  it  placed  upon  the  inner  can-
thus  next  the  nose,  which  precaution  rendered  it  impossible  for
her,  under  any  circumstances,  to  use  her  natural  organs  of  sight
I  then  brought  my  hands  together  at  a  distance  from  hers,  and
rotated  my  thumbs  over  each  other,  with  a  mental  request  that
she  should  do  likewise,  which  desire  she  as  promptly  obeyed  as


APPENDIX.


335


though  she  had  seen  the  motion  of  my  thumbs  with  her  naked
eyes,  and  heard  my  voice  with  her  natural  organs  of  hearing.  I
then  reversed  the  motion  of  my  thumbs,  and  every  motion  and
position  of  my  hands,  thumbs,  ringers,  and  arms,  was  responded
to  by  her  in  obedience  to  my  will,  as  though  they  had  been  di-
rected and  moved  by  my  own  muscles  and  powers  of  volition.  I
then  tried  her  powers  of  speech,  and  asked  her  if  her  head  was
free  from  pain.  She  said  it  was.  I  asked  her  if  she  felt  comfort-
able in  every  other  respect.  She  said  she  did.  I  then  tested  her
discerning  powers.  I  held  my  watch  to  the  back  of  her  head,
and  requested  her  to  tell  which  side  of  it  was  next  to  her  head.
She  answered  correctly.  '  Can  you  discern  the  hands  of  my
watch  ? '  '  Yes.'  '  Will  you  tell  me  what  time  it  is  ? '  She  an-
swered, but  not  correctly,  within  several  minutes.  I  then  asked
her  if  she  could  see  the  clock,  which  was  in  an  adjoining  room.
It  was  impossible  for  the  patient,  or  any  others  in  the  room  where
we  were,  to  see  it  with  natural  vision.  She  said  she  could  see  it.
'Can  you  see  the  hands  of  the  clock  ?'  '  Yes.'  'Will  you  tell  me
the  time  by  it?'  She  told  to  a  minute.  The  same  questions  in
reference  to  the  time,  by  the  clock,  were  repeated  in  the  course
of  her  sleep,  and  answered  correctly.  I  then  requested  her  to
tell  me  how  many  persons  there  were  present  in  the  room.
She  hesitated  about  long  enough  to  count  them,  and  answered
correctly.  I  asked  her  in  what  position,  and  what  part  of  the
room,  certain  individuals  were.  She  told  correctly.  1  promiscu-
ously placed  the  hands  of  those  present  in  hers,  and  requested
her  to  designate  and  call  by  name  the  person  whose  hand  she
had  hold  of.  She  told  correctly,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,
which  mistakes  were  corrected  on  asking  the  question  the  second
time ;  and,  after  various  other  experiments,  to  test  the  magnetic
vision,  I  requested  her  to  wake  at  such  a  minute  by  my  watch.
She  passed  over  the  appointed  time  about  five  minutes,  with  all
the  appearances  of  rousing  from  her  usual  sleep.  I  asked  her
if  she  felt  refreshed  from  her  recent  sleep.  Said  she,  '  I  feel  re-
freshed, and  free  from  pain  in  my  head,  but  have  not  been  in  a
natural  sleep.  I  have  been  in  an  indescribable  state,  and  felt
perfectly  obedient  to  what  you  desired  me  to  do,  but  cannot  now
recollect  what  particular  requests  you  made  when  I  was  in  that
state.'

"This  want  of  recollection  corresponds  with  other  reports
upon  the  subject;  for  I  did  not  will  her  to  remember  the  experi-
ments that  were  performed.  After  informing  her  of  some  aston-
ishing facts  in  regard  to  them,  she  expressed  doubts  of  the
propriety  of  putting  one  into  such  a  state,  and  manifested  an  un-
willingness ever  to  be  magnetized  again  ;  but,  taking  into  consid-
eration its  remedial  effects  in  her  case,  I  thought  I  should  do
right  to  insist  upon  a  repetition,  and  obtained  the  privilege  but
three  subsequent  times,  the  fourth  and  last  time  in  the  presence


336  APPENDIX.

of  Dr.  Miller,  who  had  been  my  consulting  physician  in  the
case ;  and  for  further  information  and  evidence  in  regard  to  these
experiments  and  others  instituted  by  himself,  you  are  referred  to
him  for  testimony.*

"  Yours,  with  much  esteem,

"L.  UTLEY.
"  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

FROM DOCTOR TOOTHAKER.

"  Cambridgeport,  December  6,  1837.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn  :

"  Dear  Sir  :  Yours  of  the  2d  instant  was  duly  received  ;
since  which  my  engagements  have  been  such,  that,  till  the  present
moment,  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  answering  it.  I  am  perfect-
ly willing  to  furnish  you  with  any  facts  within  my  knowledge,  on
the  subject  of  animal  magnetism,  which  are  of  a  character  suited
to  a  popular  work.  The  detail  of  some  cures,  in  which  I  have
used  it  successfully  as  a  remedy,  would  be  better  suited  to  the
columns  of  a  medical  journal,  where  they  may  at  some  future
time  appear.

"  My  attention  was  directed  particularly  to  the  subject  of  ani-
mal magnetism,  nearly  a  year  since,  by  the  urgent  solicitation
of  a  literary  friend,  that  I  should  read  the  report  of  the  French
Academy.  I  was,  at  first,  entirely  incredulous,  and  unwilling
even  to  read  attentively.  But  1  soon  found  there  was  testimony
of  such  a  character  in  its  favor,  as  to  demand  of  every  physician
a  candid  examination  of  the  subject.  Further  to  satisfy  myself
of  the  reality  of  the  alleged  phenomena,  I  commenced  experi-
ments upon  a  girl,  aged  about  sixteen,  in  whose  case  idiocy  and
mania  were  combined.  I  thought  her  a  favorable  subject  for  ex-
periments, as  there  was  no  possibility  of  deception.  After  two  or
three  sittings,  I  succeeded  in  producing  evident  drowsiness,  as
was  apparent  to  all  present.  She  gaped  several  times,  dreuled,
and  presented  other  phenomena,  common  harbingers  to  sleep.
When  in  this  state,  she  will  always  start  suddenly,  as  if  to  re-
lieve herself  of  its  spell,  and  has  never  gone  into  a  sound  mag-
netic sleep.  On  one  occasion,  she  immediately  after  left  the
room,  and  went  up  stairs  into  her  sleeping  chamber  alone,  which
she  had  never  before  done  in  her  life.

"  These  experiments,  made  on  such  a  subject,  so  far  convinced
me  of  the  reality  of  a  natural  power  of  this  kind,  given  to  man

*  Her  complaint  was  dyspepsia,  and  her  stomach  was  apt  to  reject  her
food  a  short  time  after  eating.  But  after  being  magnetized,  it  appears  to
have  acquired,  in  a  greater  measure,  the  power  of  retaining  nutriment.
She  also  slept  without  the  anodynes  which  she  had  formerly  taken.

Dr.  Miller  sent  her  to  examine  a  patient  of  his,  and  her  description
of  the  disorder  was  strikingly  correct.


APPENDIX.  337

by  his  Creator,  that  I  determined  to  test  it  by  further  experi-
ments, when  opportunity  offered.  I  consequently  soon  tried  the
manipulations  on  a  young  lady  of  lymphatic  temperament,  and
plethoric  habit,  who  was  in  rather  poor  health  at  the  time.  At
the  second  or  third  sitting,  a  tolerably  sound  magnetic  sleep  was
produced,  yet  she  never  became  a  somnambulist,  strictly,  and
would  wake  if  I  conversed  much  with  her.

"  The  third  subject  of  my  experiments,  Mrs.  M.,  who  was  an
entire  unbeliever  in  it,  became  a  somnambulist  by  three  or  four
sittings.  I  am  certain  she  is  capable  of  receiving  impressions,
when  in  the  magnetic  state,  by  the  will  alone.  April  13th,  mag-
netized her  the  sixth  time.  While  she  was  eating  a  seed-cake,
I  willed  to  have  it  taste  bitter,  without  saying  a  word  or  making
a  sign.  She  immediately  said,  '  It  is  as  sour  as  swill,'  and  threw
it  away.  She  soon  after  said,  'It  is  bitter.'  I  gave  her  a  piece
of  wheat  bread  to  eat,  and  ivilled  it  to  be  brown  bread.  I  then
asked  what  kind  of  bread  it  was  ;  she  said,  '  Brown.'

"April  20th. —  Magnetized  her  in  presence  of  several  literary
gentlemen  of  this  place.  The  experiments  were  proposed  by
them,  singly,  to  me,  in  another  room,  that  there  might  be  no  pos-
sibility of  her  hearing.  I  gave  her  an  empty  tumbler,  and  asked
her  to  drink  some  lemonade ;  at  the  same  time  I  willed  it  to  be
tea.  She  made  the  motions  of  drinking,  and  said,  'It  tastes  sick-
ish.'  'What  is  it?'  ' Tea,' she  answered.  Also  by  will  made  an
apple  taste  bitter,  and,  soon  after,  sweet  as  honey.  These  and
other  similar  experiments  were  entirely  satisfactory  to  those  gen-
tlemen who  proposed  them,  though  they  were  previously  some-
what incredulous.

"May  2d.  —  Magnetized  the  same  patient.  There  were  pres-
ent Drs.  J.  V.  C.  Smith,*  editor  of  the  '  Medical  and  Surgical
Journal,'  and  Leland,  of  Boston.  Standing  at  some  distance
from  her,  I  willed  her  to  wake.  She  said,  '  Don't  be  willing  me
to  wake.'  Dr.  Smith  wrote  for  me  to  have  a  pleasant  apple  she
was  eating  taste  like  a  cranberry.  She  immediately  said,  'It
tastes  very  sour;'  and,  after  much  solicitation  to  tell  what  it
tasted  like,  she  said,  '  Cranberry.  I  knew  before,  but  would  not
tell,  you  are  always  asking  so  many  questions.'

"  With  respect  to  clairvoyance,  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  she  has
at  times  seen  objects  that  she  could  not  possibly  have  seen  when
awake.  But,  as  she  complains  of  severe  headache  after  much
effort  to  see,  and  my  principal  object  has  been  the  restoration  of
her  health,  I  seldom  urge  her  with  experiments  of  this  kind.  At
one  time,  she  sat  with  her  back  towards  the  door  of  another
room,  and  a  lady  present  passed  through  the  door,  and  selected

*  Dr.  Smith  had  given  me  some  account  of  these  experiments,  previous
to  my  writing  to  Dr.  Toothaker.  Many  physicians  in  Boston  and  its  vi-
cinity are  engaged  in  investigating  the  utility  of  Mesmerism  as  an  auxil-
iary in  medical  treatment.  —  Trans.

29


338  APPENDIX,

a  book  from  a  large  number  that  were  upon  the  bureau,  which;
she  brought,  privately,  and  held  over  the  head  of  Mrs.  M.,  then
in  magnetic  sleep.  I  asked  her  what  was  held  over  her  head>
She  said,  'A  book,'  and  afterwards  told  the  title.  There  was  no-
leading  question  put  to  elicit  the  answer,  nor  could  I  think  of
any  circumstance  by  which  she  would  be  induced  to  'guess
right'  I  must  therefore  infer  that  she  did  actually  see  it  To
this  some  may  object,  and  suppose  that  I  informed  her  mentally,
or  by  the  will.  I  answer,  it  was  impossible,  as  I  avoided  seeing
it  myself  till  she  told  what  it  was.

"June  17th. — Magnetized  Mrs.  M.  She  examined. a  gentleman
who  was  in  poor  health,  and  told  correctly  his  disease,  though  of
such  a  character  that  I  could  not  have  detected  it  by  any  exter-
nal examination ;  and  I  knew  nothing  of  it,  even  by  conjecture,
till  she  told.  I  was  informed  by  them  both  that  she  knew  nothing
of  it  before,  and  must  infer  that  she  saw  it,  as  she  said  she  did.
It  was  a  disease  of  a  portion  of  the  alimentary  canal,  for  which
he  had  formerly  been  under  treatment  at  the  Massachusetts  Gen-
eral Hospital  a  long  time.

"I  can  establish  a  communication  between  her  and  others,  either
by  will  or  by  contact.  This  I  have  done  with  six  or  eight  per-
sons at  a  time,  having  them  join  hands.  I  have  been  careful  to
ascertain  that  a  communication  may  thus  be  established  without
the  aid  of  the  will.  In  support  of  the  theory  of  some  physiolo-
gists, that  there  is  a  nervous  fluid,  of  an  extremely  subtile  char-
acter, by  the  agency  of  which  the  brain  and  the  nerves  are
enabled  to  perform  their  peculiar  functions,  I  will  add,  that  a
much  longer  time  is  requisite  to  establish  a  communication  with
several  persons  than  with  one  ;  and  it  is  not  destroyed  for  about
the  same  length  of  time  after  I  let  go  the  hand  of  the  one  farthest
from  the  somnambulist.  It  likewise  requires  a  longer  time  to
establish  a  communication  with  some  persons  than  with  others.
This  part  of  the  subject,  however,  needs  further  investigation
than  I  have  yet  been  able  to  give  it

"  Mrs.  M.  has  been  afflicted  with  painful  affections  of  a  dis-
tressing character,  and  chronic  disease,  which  seemed  to  bid
defiance  to  the  whole  catalogue  of  remedies  in  the  materia  med-
ica,  but  which  have  been  much  relieved  by  the  use  of  magnetism
as  a  remedy.  In  truth,  she  seems  to  be  fast  recovering  the  health
of  former  years-

"The  fourth  subject  on  whom  I  experimented,  was  put  into  the
somnambulic  state  at  the  second  trial.  I  have,  in  this  case,  once
or  twice,  obtained  decided  evidence  in  favor  of  clairvoyance.
She  was  in  the  magnetic  sleep  —  her  eyes  closed.  I  took  a
newspaper  from  my  pocket,  I  had  just  got  at  the  office,  and
handed  it  to  her.  She  began  to  read  it  A  lady  present  then
so  blinded  her  eyes  as  to  be  perfectly  certain  she  could  not
see  the  least  thing  if  awake,  and  yet  she  continued  to  read. I


APPENDIX.  339

'could  not  have  informed  her  mentally,  for  I  had  not  read  it ;  and
she  afterwards  told  me  she  had  not  before  seen  it.  I  have  fre-
quently relieved  this  patient  of  intense  pain  by  the  use  of  mag-
netism. A  short  time  before  she  was  magnetized,  she  applied  to
me  for  advice,  assuring  me  that,  for  nearly  or  quite  a  year  previ-
ously, she  had  been  afflicted  with  a  constant  headache,  and  had
used  leeches  and  other  remedies,  without  much  effect  After
being  magnetized  a  few  times,  she  said  her  headache  was  cured.
It  was  six  or  eight  months  since,  and  she  has  had  no  return  of  a
permanent  headache.

"I  have  magnetized  several  other  individuals  of  both  sexes.
A  little  boy,  aged  five  years,  was  put  into  a  profound  sleep  in
fifteen  minutes,  at  the  first  trial.  Also,  two  little  girls  were  mag-
netized about  as  easily ;  but  with  none  of  these  have  the  exper-
iments been  continued.  A  young  man  was  so  far  magnetized,
the  first  trial,  that  he  was  utterly  unable  to  keep  his  eyes  open,
hut  did  not  sleep.  The  same  effect,  with  slight  sleep,  was  pro-
d  -ced  upon  a  gentleman  who  is  engaged  in  investigating  the
subject.  Probably  further  experiments  would  produce  the  state
of  somnambulism  in  him.

"I  have  one  other  distinct  ease  of  somnambulism;  but  I  could
add  nothing  new  with  regard  to  it  that  would  be  of  special
interest.

"  I  have,  in  this  statement  of  facts  relative  to  magnetic  phe-
nomena, and  the  cure  of  diseases,  far  out-written  my  own  pre-
ardent  desire  that  the  whole  truth  may  be  known  relative  to  so
mysterious  and  deeply-interesting  a  subject,  I  submit  it  to  your
il.
"  I  am,  dear  sir,

"  Very  truly  yours,

"SAMUEL  A.  TOOTHAKER."


FROM MONSIEUR B. F. BUGARD.*

"  Boston,  November  10,  18S7.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn:

"Dear  Sir:  I  have  just  received  your  favor  of  the  7th
inst Only  two  of  my  cases  have  been  published. One  of  these

*  Mons.  Bugard  is  now  attending  lectures  in  Boston,  with  the  design
of  entering  the  medical  profession.  And,  as  his  course  of  preparatory
studies  will  soon  be  finished,  he  has  a  right  to  be  placed  here  among  the
physicians  who  have  been  so  kind  as  to  furnish  the  communications  em-
braced in  this  note.  He  will  have  the  advantage  of  carrying  into  his  pro-
fession the  practice  of  magnetism,  which  places  one  more  agent  in  the
hands  of  medical  men  —  calculated  not  to  supersede  the  use  of  remedies,  but
to  aid  their  operation. If  any  one  desires  to  know  how  far  this  practice


340  APPENDIX.

was  the  first  given  to  the  public  in  this  part  of  the  country —  that
of  Mrs.  Russell,  of  this  city,  which  appeared  in  the  '  Boston  Med-
ical and  Surgical  Journal,'  of  the  precise  date  of  which  I  am  ig-
norant, and  I  have  no  copy  to  send  you.

"Although  I  am  much  interested  in  the  subject,  I  am  sorry
to  be  obliged  to  say  that  I  have  been  prevented  from  devoting
to  it  the  attention  it  deserves.  The  little  information  I  can
give  you  shall  be  cheerfully  granted.  It  will  consist  of  a  few
facts  only.  As  to  the  names  of  the  persons  alluded  to  in  them,
I  do  not  feel  authorized  to  give  more  than  the  initial  letters  for
publication;  but,  on  personal  application,  I  shall  be  happy  to  give
any  one  whatever  proofs  he  may  desire.

"  One  day,  in  the  fall  of  1835, 1  was  requested  to  magnetize
Mrs.  R.,  a  widow  lady  of  almost  forty  years  of  age,  who  had
been,  for  several  years,  afflicted  with  the  tic  douloureux  in  the
lower  part  of  the  spine,  and  with  palpitations  of  the  heart  When
I  went  to  see  her,  she  had  not  for  a  fortnight  left  her  chamber,
which  was  in  the  fourth  story,  and  she  could  not  move,  without
assistance,  from  her  bed  to  her  chair,  or  from  her  chair  to  her  bed.
She  wished  to  be  magnetized  because  all  other  remedies  had
proved  of  no  avail ;  but,  being  entirely  ignorant  of  what  magnet-
ism is,  she  had  merely  fallen  in  with  the  suggestion  of  some  one
that  it  might  prove  beneficial  to  her.  After  I  had  magnetized  her
only  three  times,  she  was  so  much  better  that  she  was  able  to  go
down  into  her  kitchen,  and  attend  to  her  daily  occupations.
At  the  fourth  or  fifth  sitting,  she  became  a  somnambulist.  Her
health  improved  so  much  and  so  rapidly,  that,  on  the  day  suc-
ceeding the  seventh  sitting,  although  she  was  not  perfectly
cured,  she  found  herself  so  well  that  she  went  on  a  visit  to
Salem,  where  some  of  her  relations  resided.

"One  day,  after  putting  this  lady  into  somnambulism,  I  re-
quested her  daughter,  a  girl  about  nine  years  of  age,  to  speak  to
her.  She  addressed  her  mother  several  times,  calling  aloud;  but,
receiving  no  answer,  she  burst  into  tears,  thinking  her  mother  to
be  dead.  I  took  her  little  hand,  and,  placing  it  in  the  hand  of
her  mother,  told  her  to  speak  to  her  again.  Her  mother  imme-
diately answered  her  call,  and  the  countenance  of  the  child
Deamed  with  joy  at  the  certainty  of  her  being  alive.

"  This  lady  was  prevailed  upon  to  take  another  magnetizer,

obtains  in  the  north  of  Europe,  he  will  find  a  brief  account,  and  some
references  to  foreign  authorities,  in  the  work  of  Dr.  Poyen,  recently  pub-
lished, entitled  "Progress  of  Animal  Magnetism  in  ISiew  England" — -a
work  which,  from  the  great  variety  of  facts  which  it  contains,  is  highly
interesting,  and,  from  the  great  number  of  respectable  names  avouching
them,  is  worthy  of  confidence.  Of  Dr.  Poyen's  fidelity,  those  who  know
him  well  do  not  entertain  a  doubt.  He  labors  under  the  disadvantage  of
having  introduced  a  subject  entirely  new  to  the  unlettered,  and  of  haying
been  most  liberally  vilified  by  men  who  misunderstood  his  character.


APPENDIX.  341

because  I  refused  to  make  her  an  object  of  exhibition  to  the
•curious.  But  her  health,  instead  of  improving,  grew  worse,  and
her  new  magnetizer,  Dr.  D.,  who  magnetized  her  merely  for  the
purpose  of  making  experiments,  would  have  unmercifully  sent
her  to  the  grave,  had  she  not  refused  to  continue  the  treatment
I  mention  this  circumstance,  because  it  affords  a  striking  proof
of  what  is  observed  by  Deleuze,  in  his  'Practical  Instruction,'  as
well  as  by  other  authors,  relative  to  the  dangers  that  frequently
•attend  the  change  of  a  former  successful  magnetizer.

"  Last  summer  was  a  year  since  I  was  requested  to  magnetize
Mrs.  F.,  who,  with  other  affections,  had  a  pain  between  the
shoulders.  At  the  second  sitting,  she  experienced  a  sensation
like  the  pain  moving  about,  following  the  motion  of  my  hands.
She  soon  lost  herself  in  a  sleep,  or  at  least  in  a  partial  sleep,  and
I  left  her. The  pain  left  her  too,  for  she  felt  it  no  more.

li  At  another  time,  this  lady  was  suffering  from  the  tic  doulou-
reux in  the  face.  In  the  afternoon,  when  I  came  in  to  give  a
lesson  in  French  to  her  two  daughters,  she  was  in  the  same  room
with  us,  and  in  such  an  agony  that  I  offered  to  relieve  her  by
the  use  of  magnetism.  She  assented  to  the  trial.  She  had  been
magnetized  hardly  ten  minutes,  when  I  thought  she  was  sound
asleep;  but  she  opened  her  eyes,  and  said  that  her  pain  had  sub-
sided. I  then  left  her,  to  attend  to  the  French  lessons,  which
being  finished,  I  requested  one  «f  the  young  ladies  to  see  how
her  mother  was,  she  having  retired  into  another  room.  She  went,
and  returned,  saying  that  her  mother  was  entirely  free  from  pain.
I  understand  that  she  has  not  been  attacked  since,  though  she
had  formerly  suffered  pretty  often.

"  About  a  year  ago,  I  had  occasion  to  magnetize  Mrs.  L.,  a
French  lady,  Avho,  for  many  years,  had  been  afflicted  with  violent
periodical  headaches,  with  excessive  vomitings,  and  some  more  se-
rious affections.  The  day  after  the  first  sitting,  she  felt  much  bet-
ter, and  she  continued  to  improve  very  rapidly.  However,  on  the
morning  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  day  of  her  treatment,  at  about  ten
o'clock,  her  husband  came  to  tell  me  that  his  wife  had  a  violent
headache,  and  a  very  great  disposition  to  vomit  I  immediately
repaired  to  see  her.  She  was  sitting  by  the  fire,  having  pre-
pared some  tea  to  aid  the  tendency.  I  magnetized  her  head
only,  before  she  had  taken  any  thing.  She  soon  felt  better,  and
in  half  an  hour  the  pain  had  almost  subsided.  I  left  her.  In
the  evening,  I  returned,  and  found  her  very  well.  She  said  she
had  not  vomited,  and,  at  one  o'clock,  she  had  dined  with  a  very
good  appetite.  What  is  most  to  be  remarked  in  this  case  is,
that  before  being  magnetized,  whenever  such  a  headache  took
her,  it  never  subsided  until  she  had  vomited  to  exhaustion.

"  About  a  year  ago,  I  was  called  on  by  Mr.  H.,  who  requested
me  to  magnetize  his  wife.  This  lady  was  suffering  severely  with
the  tic  douloureux  in  the  face.  She  had  been  more  or  less  af-
29*


342  APPENDIX.

fected  with  it  for  several  years,  and  had  now  suffered  for  several
weeks,  without  rinding  any  relief  in  the  remedies  of  the  best
physicians  of  this  city.  I  magnetized  her  several  times  without
much  apparent  effect  during  the  operation,  but  she  slept  much
better  afterwards.  I  think  she  was  put  asleep  only  twice,  though
I  magnetized  her  about  fifteen  times.  Her  health,  however,  was
gradually  improving ;  the  tic  douloureux  had  subsided  ;  and  last
week  she  told  me,  in  the  presence  of  several  persons,  that  it  had
not  returned.

"  It  is  not  quite  a  year  since  I  was  requested  by  a  gentleman,
a  Mr.  V.,  to  magnetize  him.  For  two  or  three  years,  he  had  had
an  affection  of  the  stomach,  and  been  treated  as  a  dyspeptic.  His
physician  finally  declared  his  case  to  be  the  tic  douloureux,  and
not  the  dyspepsia.  He  had  been  in  a  state  of  constipation  for
nearly  a  month.  I  magnetized  him  only  five  times.  The  day
after  the  first  sitting,  he  felt  much  better,  and  had  satisfactory
evacuations.  His  health  improved  so  much  that  he  renounced
the  project  he  had  formed  of  going  to  Cuba  for  his  restoration.
1  would  observe  that  it  is  not  true  that  magnetism  always  has  the
effect  of  filling  the  heart  with  tender  and  grateful  sentiments ;
for  this  Mr.  V.  has  not  yet  come  to  my  rooms  to  thank  me  for
the  good  I  have  done  him,  although  he  found  the  way  thither  to
request  my  services.

"  One  evening,  last  winter,  1  went  to  see  my  friends,  Dr.  Ben-
jamin H.  West  and  Dr.  Ruel  W.  Lawton,  who  boarded  together,
and  occupied  the  same  room.  Some  refreshments  were  brought
in  during  my  visit Early  in  the  evening,  Dr.  L.  said  to  me,  —

" '  Monsieur  Bugard,  I  know  that  you  have  magnetized  several
persons ;  I  wish  you  would  give  me  some  information  on  the  sub-
ject of  magnetism ;  I  should  like  to  have  my  mind  satisfied ;  I  do
not  know  what  to  think  of  it'

" « Well,'  said  I, '  I  can  add  but  very  little  to  what  has  been
published  on  the  subject ;  but,  if  you  are  willing,  I  will  try  to
magnetize  you?

"  Although  I  think  it  very  wrong  to  magnetize  a  person  in  good
health,  I  made  him  this  proposal  the  more  readily  because  his  con-
stitution is  rather  feeble.

" «  Very  well,'  replied  he.

"  I  began  to  magnetize  him.  For  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  he
seemed  much  inclined  to  laugh ;  but  I  soon  perceived  I  could
produce  an  effect  upon  him.  I  therefore  continued  the  manipula-
tions, and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  from  the  time  of  commencing
he  was  perfectly  asleep.  Whilst  he  was  in  that  state,  Dr.  West
and  I  indulged  ourselves  in  demolishing  the  refreshments.  About
a  quarter  of  an  hour  had  elapsed,  when  Dr.  Lawton  wildly  opened
his  eyes.

"  I  immediately  put  my  right  hand  on  the  pit  of  his  stomach,
exerting  my  will  to  put  him  asleep. This  was  done  m  lees


APPENDIX.  343

than  half  a  minute.  Then  Dr.  West  and  I  went  on  demolish-
ing as  before ;  and  ten  minutes  had  hardly  elapsed  when  Dr.  L.
opened  his  eyes  upon  us.

"  I  again  placed  my  right  hand  upon  his  epigastrium,  and  my
left  on  his  thigh,  grasping  it  near  the  knee,  putting  forth  the
power  of  volition ;  and  again  Dr.  L.  went  to  sleep  in  less  than
no  time.

"  On  his  awaking,  about  ten  minutes  afterwards,  I  asked  him
what  he  thought  then  of  magnetism.  '  Well,  sir,  my  skepticism
is  rather  shaken,'  was  the  reply.

"  Receive  the  expressions  of  consideration  with  which  I  am
"Your  most  obedient  servant,

«B.  F.  BUGARD."


FROM DOCTOR BENJAMIN HASKELL.*

"  Boston,  October  20,  1837.
"Dear  Sir:  I  owe  you  an  apology  for  not  replying  to
your  letter  before.  But  the  truth  is,  it  was  not  in  my  power  to
send  you  any  tiling  satisfactory  relative  to  the  inquiries  you  saw
fit  to  make.  And,  as  I  was  in  expectation  of  receiving  some
further  details  from  a  brother  of  mine  residing  in  Gloucester,
whom  I  had  commissioned  to  make  inquiries  of  Mr.  Blatchford,
in  particular,  on  those  points  which  had  a  bearing  on  animal
magnetism,  your  object,  as  well  as  mine,  would  be  best  answered
by  delay.  Yesterday,  I  heard  from  him ;  but  he  had  not  seen,  nor
was  likely  to  see,  him  for  some  time.  When  any  thing  comes  to
my  knowledge,  calculated  to  throw  light  on  this  intricate  subject,
I  will  forward  it  without  delay,  that  it  may  obtain  all  the  publicity
possible.  In  the  mean  while,  as  you  seem  somewhat  desirous  of
knowing  my  views  on  it,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  express  them
without  reserve.  There  is  nothing  unphilosophical  in  supposing
that  somnambulism  may  be  induced  by  an  agency  transmitted
from  one  individual  to  another.  At  the  same  time,  whenever  and
however  it  takes  place,  it  is  a  disease,  and,  like  all  nervous  disor-
ders, has  not  only  a  tendency  to  recur,  but  to  superinduce  other
diseases  of  the  same  class. I  cannot  but  regard  the  practice  of

*  1  wrote  to  Dr.  Haskell,  in  relation  to  the  case  of  natural  somnambu-
lism, which  occurred  at  Gloucester,  Mass.,  in  1834.  1  wished  to  ascertain
whether  the  subject  of  that  case  had  ever  been  brought  under  the  influ-
ence of  Mesmerism,  as  three  other  similar  cases  have  been.  I  deem  his
reply  worthy  of  attention,  as  it  embraces  an  opinion  which  is*  important,
if  correct,  and  which  deserves  weight  from  the  scientific  attainments  of
him  who  advances  it.  The  case  of  young  Blatchford  is  given  in  a  ccm-
munication  to  the  editor  of  the  '•'  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal/'  of
June  24,  1837,  by  Dr.  Haskell.  Dr.  H.  is  also  the  author  of  an  ingenious
article  on  animal  magnetism  which  appeared  in  the  same  Journal,  Sep-
tember 20,  1837.


344  APPENDIX.

it  as  injurious  to  those  on  whom  it.  is  exercised,  and,  when  its
nature  is  fully  understood,  as  morally  wrong,  except  in  those  cases
in  which  it  is  made  use  of  as  a  remedial  agent.  You  have  my  per-
mission to  insert  this  opinion  in  a  note  to  your  translation,  and
combat  it  if  you  think  it  erroneous.  I  have  never  magnetized
any  one,  nor  have  I  made  myself  acquainted  with  the  steps  by
which  it  is  done.  The  interest  which  I  have  taken  in  it  is  not
practical,  but  theoretical.

"  Yours  respectfully,

«B.  HASKELL.
"Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."


NOTE  XXXII.
SEEING THROUGH  OPAQUE SUBSTANCES.

FROM ISAAC THURBER, ESQ.

"  Providence.  November  4,  1837.

"Dear  Sir:  I  take  the  opportunity,  which  a  few  moments
of  leisure  now  afford  me,  to  give  you  an  account  of  a  recent  visit
of  Miss  B.,  the  blind  young  lady,  to  my  house.  As  I  suppose  you
to  desire  an  account,  merely,  of  the  phenomena  then  exhibited
while  under  the  magnetic  influence,  I  shall  notice  briefly  the
facts  in  relation  to  them  only.  Miss  B.  came  to  my  house  on  the
morning  of  the  28th  of  October,  with  a  view  to  pass  the  day  with
my  family :  at  about  the  close  of  the  day,  she  was  put  into  the
magnetic  sleep  by  Dr.  C.  At  first,  she  appeared  to  be  in  a  state
entirely  senseless ;  from  this  apparent  slumber  she  was  aroused
by  having  her  attention  directed  to  the  objects  around  her.  Dr.
C.  then  left  her  in  communication  with  myself  and  family,  with
directions  to  awake  precisely  at  6  o'clock.  During  this  inter-
val, Miss  B.  appeared  cheerful,  much  disposed  to  converse,  and,
at  times,  quite  playful.  While  in  conversation,  she  expressed  a
desire  to  examine  the  arrangement  of  the  house,  the  furniture,
&c.  In  passing  through  the  different  rooms,  she  noticed  and
moved  various  articles.  She  was  then  conducted  into  a  dark
room,  in  which  the  largest  objects  could  not  be  discerned  by  any
one  who  was  not  possessed  of  more  than  ordinary  powers  of
vision.  On  being  requested  to  give  the  time  by  the  clock  which
was  in  the  room,  she  immediately  stepped  to  the  corner  in  which
the  clock  stood,  and  replied, '  It  is  twenty-three  minutes  past  five.'
The  answer  was  correct  I  then  asked  her  if  she  saw  any  other
object  in  the  room.  She  replied,  'I  am  looking  at  the  pictures.'
'What  pictures?'  'This  one  over  the  fireplace.'  The  picture
alluded  to  is  composed  of  various  emblems,  together  with  a  cer


APPENDIX.  345

tificate  of  membership  to  an  institution  in  this  town.  Miss  B.
certificate,  and  mentioned  the  place  in  the  picture  which  each
of  them  occupied.  When  speaking  of  the  emblem  of  wealth,  I
requested  her  to  place  my  finger  upon  it  On  admitting  light
into  the  room,  I  found  my  finger  pointing  to  a  small  figure  repre-
senting Wealth  dispensing  her  gifts  from  the  horn  of  plenty.  I
would  here  state  that  Miss  B.  was  never  before  in  this  room,  and
was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  furniture  which  it  contained.

"Having  obtained  the  evidence  of  clairvoyance,  I  gave  her  a
sealed  paper  containing  a  sentence,  which  I  requested  her  to
read.  She  held  the  paper  to  the  side  of  her  head  for  the  space
of  about  one  minute,  and  then  returned  it  to  me  without  appa-
rently noticing  its  contents.  No  further  notice  was  taken  of  the
letter  during  her  sleep.  Some  time  after  she  awoke,  she  gave
the  substance  of  the  letter  to  one  of  my  family,,  This  being  com-
municated to  me,  I  requested  Miss  B.  to  write  down  the  sentence
inside,  that  it  might  be  presented,  in  her  own  hand-writing,  to  a
company  that  would  meet  with  her  at  Mr.  J.  M.'s  on  the  follow-
ing evening ;  at  which  time  the  sentence  was  so  presented,  in
the  following  words:  ' In  these  latter  days,  as  informer  times,  the
blind  receive  their  sight.''  The  letter  was  then  brought  forward,
the  seals  of  which  until  this  time  had  not  been  broken,  neither
had  the  sentence  or  any  part  of  it  been  communicated  to  any
individual.  It  was  opened  by  Rev.  Mr.  Stetson,  of  Medford,  in
presence  of  Rev.  E.  B.  Hall,  of  this  city,  Mr.  Jesse  Metcalf,  and
a  number  of  others,  and  found  to  contain  the  same  sentence  as
that  written  by  Miss  B.,  differing  only  in  the  spelling  of  two  words.
The  sentence  was  written  on  a  slip  of  paper,  and  this  placed  be-
tween two  pieces  of  sheet  lead,  the  whole  enclosed  in  an  envelope
in  a  letter  form.

"Yours,  &c,

"ISAAC  THURBER.

"Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM MR. GEORGE HUNT.

"  Providence,  November  22,  1837.
"Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn:

"Sir:  Having  heard  much  of  the  wonderful  powers  of
Miss  Brackett,  under  the  magnetic  influence,  and  being  rather
previously  unknown  to  her  and  all  who  were  in  attendance,  —
believing,  at  the  time,  that  she  did  not  see  the  real  object  of  her
description  as  it  existed,  but  the  mere  image  of  it  in  the  mind
of  her  magnatizer  or  in  the  mind  of  those  who  were  in  communi-
cation with  her,  —  I  was  induced  to  try  the  experiment  alluded  to
in  your  note.


346  APPENDIX.

"I  took  a  wooden  box,  made  of  half-inch  stock,  measuring
eight  inches  by  fourteen,  perfectly  tight,  and  filled  it  with  vari-
ous articles,  curiously  arranged.  I  presented  it  to  Mr.  Metcalf
for  Miss  B.'s  inspection.  On  inquiring  about  the  result  of  her
examination,  I  was  informed  that  she  took  the  box,  and  held  it
over  her  head,  and  saw  a  great  variety  of  dried  pressed  leaves,  and
some  flowers.  Dr.  Capron  requested  her  to  enter  the  box,  which
she  effected  through  the  key-hole,  or  the  top,  —  I  do  not  remember
which,  —  and  then  mentioned  two  books,  one  pamphlet  with  a  blue
cover,  one  card,  marked  L.  M.,  and  a  substance  that  looked  like
tow,  which  I  suppose  was  the  bird's  nest  made  use  of  on  this
occasion,  the  greater  part  of  which  was  made  of  tow.  She  said
there  were  many  other  things  in  the  box,  but  the  air  was  so
confined  that  it  troubled  her  to  breathe,  and  she  was  obliged  to
come  out

"Her  description,  so  far  as  it  went,  was  correct,  except  as  to
the  nest.  In  this,  however,  she  was  correct  as  to  the  substance
she  saw.  In  the  conclusion  of  her  remarks  on  the  box  and  con-
tents, she  seemed  to  think  it.  belonged  to  some  old  maid.  The
result  of  this  experiment  is  in  every  way  satisfactory  to  me,  so
far  as  it  goes,  inasmuch  as  no  one  knew  the  contents  of  the  box
except  myself.  Every  article  was  packed  close,  so  that  no  one
could  have  formed  any  conception  of  what  the  box  contained  by
shaking,  or  otherwise  disturbing  it.  If  these  facts  will  aid  you,
you  are  welcome  to  them.

"  Yours  respectfully,

"GEORGE  HUNT."


In  the  eighth  note  of  part  first,  several  instances  of  the  power
of  producing  paralysis  are  given ;  and  I  there  stated  that  the
power  gained  by  the  practice  of  magnetism  may  be  found  effect-
ual in  producing  it  without  having  a  communication  previously
established.  The  following  letter  from  Dr.  Knox,  of  New  York,
give3  well-authenticated  evidence  that  the  conjecture  was  not
unfounded :  —

FROM DOCTOR KNOX.

"  Providence,  September  24, 1837.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn:

"Dear  Sir:  You  requested  me  to  communicate  to  you
some  facts  in  animal  magn  tism  which  I  had  observed.  Al-
though I  cannot  certainly  attach  much  importance  to  them,  yet,
if  you  can  make  any  use  of  them,  they  are  perfectly  at  your
service.

"A  few  evenings  since,  being  in  company  where  the  subject
of  animal  magnetism  —  at  present  so  engrossing  a  theme  —  was


APPENDIX.  347

the  topic  of  conversation,  I  was  requested  to  magnetize  some
person  present  for  the  amusement  of  the  company.  This  I  de-
clined, remarking-,  at  the  same  time,  that  I  had  frequently  known
peculiar  sensations  produced  locally  by  the  magnetic  passes,  and
offering  to  make  the  attempt.  Tn  this,  much  beyond  my  own  ex-
pectation, and  to  the  amusement  of  the  company,  I  was  com-
pletely successful.  The  magnetic  operations,  continued  during
two  minutes,  produced  complete  palsy  of  the  left  arm.  Besides
the  complete  annihilation  of  muscular  power,  the  arm  lost,  to  a
certain  degree,  its  sensibility,  and  its  temperature  was  somewhat
reduced.  The  firm  health  and  previous  skepticism  of  the  subject
of  this  experiment  conspired  to  render  the  result  remarkable ;
while  her  unquestionable  veracity,  her  eloquent  look  of  surprise,
and  her  reiterated  assertions,  precluded  all  suspicion  of  imposi-
tion. There  were  present,  on  this  occasion,  Dr.  Parsons,  and
General  Greene,  of  Providence.

"I  have  frequently  made  the  same  experiment,  and,  in  the
majority  of  cases,  some  peculiar  sensations  have  been  the  result ;
generally  a  sense  of  weight  in  the  arm,  a  degree  of  immobility,
when  compared  Avith  the  other  arm,  and,  though  less  frequently,
a  sense  of  pricking,  such  as  occurs  when  the  arm  or  foot  is  said
to  be  asleep.  Whether  these  results  are  the  product  of  an  ex-
cited imagination,  or  a  direct  influence  of  the  will  of  the  magnet-
izer,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  decide.  At  the  same  time,  I  must
candidly  avow  that  a  skepticism,  somewhat  more  than  philosoph-
ical, with  which  I  commenced  the  investigation  of  the  claims  of
animal  magnetism,  has  been  vanquished  by  facts  which  I  have
witnessed,  (and  less  than  ocular  demonstration  I  did  not  feel
inclined  to  admit,)  and  by  the  curious  results  which,  in  a  diver-
sity of  cases,  have  followed  my  own  experiments.  I  do  not  wish
to  be  understood  as  declaring  my  belief  in  all  that  magnetizers
or  their  patients,  much  less  the  retailers  at  second  hand  of  mag-
netic miracles,  have  asserted.  Much  allowance  must  be  made
for  credulity,  a  love  of  the  marvellous,  and  that  propensity,  so
common,  to  make  the  most  of  the  easy  faith  of  our  neighbors.
Vet,  after  all  these  deductions,  I  apprehend  there  will  remain  a
residuum  of  unimpeachable  testimony  for  facts  which  have  hith-
erto been  considered  as  warring  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and  as
possible  only  on  the  supposition  of  miraculous  interposition.

"By  the  politeness  of  Dr.  Capron,  I  have  had  several  oppor-
tunities of  seeing  Miss  Brackett,  whose  case  he  has  detailed  in
the  first  number  of  your  translation.  To  test  the  lucidity  of  this
somnambulist,  I  resorted  to  an  experiment  which  had  previously
been  frequently  tried,  and,  according  to  the  assertions  of  the
most  respectable  witnesses,  with  complete  success.  I  wrote  a
note  of  four  lines,  directed  to  Miss  Brackett,  to  the  contents  of
which  she  could  have  no  possible  clew.  I  enclosed  it  in  two
envelopes,  so  that  the  writing  was  covered  by  four  folds  of  paper.


348  APPENDIX.

I  sealed  it  with  four  wafers  and  four  wax  seals,  and  impressed  it
with  a  peculiar  device.  No  light,  however  strong,  could  render
it  possible  to  discover  that  there  was  any  thing  written  within.
This  was  left  with  the  somnambulist,  and,  two  days  after,  Dr,
Capron  returned  it  to  me  with  the  contents  of  the  note  written
on  the  outer  envelope,  with  the  exception  of  one  word,  which
she  could  not  decipher.  This  was,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the  illegi-
ble character  of  the  hand-writing,  as,  on  opening  it,  I  was  con-
vinced I  could  not  have  read  it  myself  but  from  recollection.  She
likewise  wrote  'sentiments,'  instead  of  'selections'  —  another
mistake  certainly  attributable  to  the  same  cause.  The  note  con-
tained seventeen  words,  which  were  known  to  no  one  but  myself.
It  was  returned  as  it  was  given,  without  the  slightest  appearance
of  having  been  handled  or  crumpled.  The  supposition  of  the
removal  or  opening  of  the  seals  was  out  of  the  question.  The
idea  that  the  discovery  was  a  happy  conjecture  is  absurd.  To
resort  to  a  mathematical  expression,  the  chance  of  such  a  solu-
tion being  unity,  no  number  short  of  infinity  could  represent  the
opposite  chances.  Such  facts  as  these,  I  grant,  require  for  their
establishment  a  mass  of  evidence,  great  in  proportion  to  their
marvellous  character.  Yet  such  a  weight  of  testimony  is  rapidly
accumulating,  if  it  does  not  already  exist,  as  must  shake  the  in-
credulity of  the  most  skeptical.  The  denial  that  any  proof  can
establish  such  facts,  involves  principles  no  less  dangerous  than
those  by  which  the  celebrated  Hume  vainly  sought  to  overthrow
the  evidence  of  Christianity.

u  Respectfully  yours,

"J.  R.  KNOX."


NOTE  XXXIII.

INSENSIBILITY  TO  PAIN

FROM  DOCTOR ESTEN.

"  Providence,  November  13, 1837,

"Dear  Sir:  In  the  appendix  of  Deleuze,  I  find  it  given  in
the  notes  as  an  opinion  that  the  somnambulist  always  appears
to  know  what  the  magnetizer  is  doing,  and  therefore  he  cannot
perform  a  surgical  operation  without  producing  pain.  I  am  led,
by  the  experiments  which  I  have  tried,  to  think  this  is  not  always
the  case.  I  think  the  patient,  in  the  somnambulic  state,  may
sometimes  know  what  the  magnetizer  is  doing,  even  while  he  is
performing  a  surgical  operation,  and  may  assist  in  the  operation,,
and  still  be  insensible  to  pain.  This,  perhaps,  depends  very
much  upon  the  degree  of  sympathy  which  the  operator  has  for  his


APPENDIX.  349

patient  —  a  sympathy  that  induces  apprehensions  lest  the  patient
should  suffer  under  the  operation.

"  On  the  28th  of  October  ultimo,  a  lady,  in  company  with  a
friend  of  hers,  called  on  me  to  have  some  teeth  filled.  One,  in
particular,  was  so  badly  decayed,  and  so  sensitive,  that  the  touch
of  an  instrument  produced  severe  pain,  so  much  so  that  she  could
not  endure  to  have  it  filled  until  she  was  magnetized.  Knowing
that  she  had  been  frequently  magnetized,  I  obtained  permission
to  make  use  of  it  on  this  occasion,  to  ascertain  whether  1  could
or  could  not  perform  the  operation  without  producing  pain.  I
threw  her  into  the  magnetic  sleep  in  about  five  minutes.  I
then  removed  that  entire  portion  of  the  tooth  which  was  cari-
ous, without  regarding  the  nerve  or  membrane,  and  filled  the
cavity.  During  the  whole  time,  she  showed  no  indications  of
pain.  She  appeared  to  know  every  thing  I  was  doing,  talked
about  the  operation,  opened  her  mouth  when  I  approached  her
with  an  instrument,  and  closed  it  again  when  I  withdrew  it  1
asked  her  if  the  operation  was  painful,  and  she  said  it  ivas  not  in
the  least

"The  pain  of  removing  the  carious  portion  of  a  tooth,  where
the  nerve  and  membrane  are  exposed,  as  in  this  case,  is  greater
than  that  of  extracting  the  tooth.  I  should  not  have  filled  this
tooth,  on  account  of  the  insufferable  pain  that  would  have  nat-
urally attended  the  work,  and  which  would  have  followed  it,  had
the  patient  not  been  magnetized.

"  I  filled  two  or  three  other  teeth  while  the  patient  was  in  the
somnambulic  state;  but  the  one  to  which  particular  reference
has  been  made  above,  is  the  only  one  that  would  naturally  be
attended  with  much  pain.  Before  1  awoke  her,  I  inquired  if  the
tooth  ached ;  she  said  it  did  not,  and  that  it  was  perfectly  easy.
On  being  awaked,  she  immediately  clapped  her  hand  to  her
face,  and  said  her  tooth  ached  1  advised  her  to  keep  the  filling
in,  to  give  it  a  trial,  and  see  if  it  would  not  stop  aching.  The
next  evening,  she  sent  for  me,  and  informed  me  that  her  tooth
had  continued  to  ache  ever  since  it  was  filled,  and  was  then
aching  violently.  I  removed  the  filling,  and  applied  some  kre-
osote,  but  without  producing  the  desired  effect  The  tooth  con-
tinued to  ache  violently.  She  was  afterwards  magnetized ;  and,
while  in  that  state,  she  asked  for  a  knitting-needle,  which  was
given  her.  She  heated  the  needle,  and  thrust  it  into  her  tooth
with  her  own  hand,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  nerve.  In
this  she  was  successful.  The  operation  which  she  performed
with  her  own  hands,  she  said,  did  not  produce  pain.

"  For  further  satisfaction,  I  cut  around  one  of  her  teeth  with  a

gum  lancet  while  she  was  in  the  somnambulic  state,  and  placed

a  pair  of  extracting  instruments  upon  the  tooth,  and  pulled  quite

hard,  giving  it  a  rotary  motion  with  as  much  force  as  the  tooth

30


350  APPENDIX.

would  bear  without  starting  it  I  asked  her  if  what  I  had  done
did  not  hurt.  She  said  she  did  not  feel  it,  for  I  had  not  pulled
any.  She  then  took  up  the  instrument  which  1  had  laid  down,
and  wished  to  extract  the  tooth  herself.  1  placed  the  instrument
upon  her  tooth,  when  she  seized  it  with  both  hands,  and  pulled
with  so  much  force  that  I  was  obliged  to  exert  my  strength  to
prevent  her  from  starting  it  The  instrument  bore  so  hard  upon
the  tooth  and  gums  as  to  start  the  blood.  She  still  said  she  felt
no  pain,  and  she  certainly  showed  no  indications  of  it  She  bore
the  whole  without  changing  countenance,  or  moving  a  muscle
that  indicated  pain.

"  1  think  1  could  have  extracted  either  of  her  teeth  without  her
being  sensible  of  pain,  but  did  not  wish  to  sacrifice  a  tooth  to
gratify  curiosity.

"  When  she  was  in  my  office  the  first  time,  I  had  occasion  to
take  an  artificial  tooth  from  a  small  box  in  a  closet,  which  had
been  shut,  and  into  which  she  could  not  have  looked  had  she
been  awake,  and  in  the  chair  where  she  then  was.  She  imme-
diately told  me  that  I  had  taken  it  from  a  box  in  the  closet,  and,
rising  up,  she  carried  it  back  to  the  same  box,  although  there
were  several  others  filled  with  the  same  sort  of  teeth.

"  Yours,  respectfully,

»W.  T.  ESTEN."


NOTE  XXXIV.

FROM MR. AMERICUS V. POTTER.

"  Saratoga  Springs,  September  14, 1837.

"Dear  Sir:  I  embrace  the  first  opportunity  to  give  you
the  information  you  asked  in  regard  to  the  effects  of  magnetism
upon  men.  I  am  not  prepared  to  speak  positively  about  the  rel-
ative susceptibility  of  the  two  sexes,  as  I  have  attempted  to
magnetize  but  few  men ;  yet  I  think  them  the  most  difficult  to
magnetize.  I  speak  of  susceptibility,  because  I  believe  the  ac-
tion depends  as  much  upon  a  certain  constitutional  adaptation
as  upon  the  health  of  the  subject

"I  magnetized  Mr.  Angell,  a  gentleman  of  Providence,  of
about  twenty-five,  in  good  health,  of  a  very  active  and  rather
nervous  temperament  At  the  first  sitting,  I  closed  his  eyes  in
about  five  minutes.  Afterwards,  I  found  no  difficulty  in  doing  it
in  about  two,  so  that  he  could  not  open  them.  I  have  done  it
more  than  once  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile.  I  was  never  able
to  get  him  beyond  this  state,  although  I  magnetized  him  six  or
eight  times  for  the  purpose.


APPENDIX.  351

"In  five  minutes,  at  the  first  sitting,  I  closed  a  gentleman's
eyes,  (Mr.  Rogers,  attorney,)  at  Saratoga  Springs,  so  that  he
could  not  open  them. I  have  not  attempted  since.

"In  ordinary  cases,  when  we  wish  to  convince  a  man  of  the
truth  of  any  thing,  we  desire  and  try  to  open  his  eyes.  But,  in
this  case,  you  will  perceive  I  have  taken  a  course  clean  con-
trary. I  convinced  Mr.  Rogers  of  my  magnetic  power  by  closing
his  eyes  in  spite  of  his  teeth.  To  tell  the  truth,  he  yielded  with  a
good  grace,  and  he  is  now  firm  in  the  faith.  I  trust  no  witling
will  infer  from  this  that  we  mean  to  blind  people  merely  to  im-
pose upon  their  imaginations,  or  that  Mr.  Rogers  rushed  blindly
into  a  belief  in  magnetism,  without  seeing  a  reason  for  his  sudden
conversion.

"  After  a  sitting  of  about  twenty  minutes  with  a  young  man
of  our  city,  I  found  him  unable  to  raise  his  hand,  or  even  speak,
with  evident  symptoms  of  somnambulism,  although  he  was  not
asleep.  After  two  more  sittings,  of  about  the  same  time,  he
progressed  very  sensibly,  so  much  so  that  I  could  act  considera-
bly upon  the  muscles  of  his  arm ;  yet  I  think  it  would  take  two
or  tliree  more  sittings  to  make  this  a  perfect  case.  His  health
appears  to  be  good,  but  he  has  a  very  slender  constitution.

"  At  the  solicitation  of  a  gentleman  at  Newport,  I  magnetized
a  very  active  colored  man,  a  waiter  at  the  Bellevue  Hotel,  of
strong  constitution  and  excellent  health.  In  about  forty  min-
utes, he  was  unable  to  speak  or  move.  I  raised  and  extended
his  arm  at  an  elevation  of  about  thirty  degrees,  and  kept  it  there
at  will  for  more  than  fifteen  minutes ;  although  I  asked  him  at
several  different  times  to  drop  his  arm,  he  could  not  do  it,  unac-
companied by  my  wilL  When  the  influence  was  thrown  off,  he
did  not  know  that  his  arm  had  been  moved.  I  saw  symptoms  of
somnambulism,  but  had  no  further  opportunity  to  continue  the
experiments.  This  man  had  never  heard  of  magnetism  before,
No  other  case  occurs  to  my  mind  worth  mentioning  at  this
time.*

"  On  my  passage  from  Providence  to  this  place,  by  the  care-
lessness of  the  driver  who  was  to  take  me  at  Springfield,  I  was
left,  and  obliged  to  wait  for  the  next  day's  stage.  Having  seen
an  account,  some  four  or  five  years  since,  of  a  girl  who  was  a
natural  somnambulist  at  that  place,  I  determined  to  see  her  if  she
was  to  be  found.  I  learned  that  Dr.  Belden  was  her  physician
at  the  time.  I  called  upon  the  doctor,  and  stated  my  business.
He  received  me  very  courteously,  and  was  perfectly  willing  to
give  ma  any  information.  On  my  declaring  it  to  be  my  convic-
tion that  I  could  produce  the  same  phenomena  by  magnetization,
which  she  formerly  exhibited  in  a  natural  way,  he  expressed  his

*  Since  this  letter  was  written,  Mr.  Potter  has  magnetized  several
men.


352  APPENDIX.

entire  unoelief,  yet  was  willing  1  should  try  the  experiment,  with
the  young  lady's  consent

"  I  found  her  to  be  a  girl  about  the  age  of  nineteen,  and  hav-
ing the  appearance  of  the  most  perfect  health.  I  sat  down  before
her,  holding  her  thumbs,  and  in  four  minutes  she  was  entirely
insensible  to  all  external  objects-*

"  Dr.  Belden  informed  me  that  the  appearance  of  the  girl  was
the  same  as  formerly,  when  in  that  state,  except  that  she  is  much
more  calm.  There  was  some  difficulty  in  waking  her.  He  ap-
peared to  express  his  conviction  of  the  power  of  magnetism,  from
the  singular  and  striking  effect  produced  in  this  case.

"  Since  my  arrival  here,  I  have  been  solicited  to  prove  the
existence  of  the  magnetic  power  by  magnetizing  various  individ-
uals. Among  them  was  Mrs.  F****,  about  twenty-five  years
old,  light  complexion,  hair,  and  eyes,  the  daughter  of  Judge
Cowing.  She  had  been  subject  to  tic  douloureux,  but  was  not
afflicted  with  it  at  the  time.  She  possesses  a  fine  mind  and  a
cultivated  taste.  At  the  first  sitting,  of  twenty  minutes,  she  ex-
perienced a  sense  of  numbness.  At  the  second  sitting,  the  next
day,  in  thirty  minutes  a  state  of  tranquillity  was  induced,  and  a
total  loss  of  muscular  power.  At  the  third,  the  above  symptoms
were  much  increased.

"  The  fourth  sitting  Avas  at  the  house  of  Mr.  J.  W.  Westcott,
In  twenty  minutes,  her  eyes  were  closed,  and  she  obeyed  a  mental
request,  by  raising  her  hand  several  times.  From  this  state,  sne
passed  into  the  most  perfect  ecstasy,  with  violent  and  energetic
action  of  the  hands  and  the  muscles  of  her  face,  frequently
exclaiming,  '  O,  what  thoughts !  if  I  could  only  clothe  them  m
words ! '  The  motion  of  her  hands  and  the  changes  of  her  ex-
pression were  as  if  she  were  acting  some  part  in  a  tragedy.
Sometimes  she  burst  into  violent  screams  of  laughter.  After
throwing  off  the  influence,  she  continued  in  the  same  state  far
about  an  hour,  till  it  gradually  wore  off,  and  she  was  enabled
to  go  home.  Before  it  wore  off,  her  eyes  being  wide  open,  she
continued  the  motions  of  the  hands,  and  watched  them  without
being  able  to  stop  them,  conversing,  at  the  same  time,  upon  other
subjects.  She  sat  down  and  played  upon  the  piano,  without
experiencing  any  difficulty ;  but,  as  soon  as  she  left  off  playing,,
the  motions  returned,  though  less  violently.

"  The  next  sitting  was  attended  with  the  same  results,  but  of
much  shorter  duration.  Mr.  Westcott  and  lady,  and  four  or  five
others,  were  present.

"  My  next  patient  was  Miss  Maria  Read,  sixteen  years  of  age
the  4th  of  July  last,  under  the  medical  attendance  of  Dr.
Steele. 1  understood,  from  Dr.  Allen,  that  she  had  suffered  a

*  In  a  letter  from  Dr.  Belden  to  the  translator,  this  statement  is  cQa^
firmed. Dr.  Belden  died  in  1342,


APPENDIX.  353

total  prostration  of  strength,  and  great  nervousness,  so  that  she
could  not  hold  any  thing  in  her  hand.  She  was  troubled,  more-
over, with  an  obstruction,  and  a  loss  of  appetite.  Dark  complex-
ion and  eyes.

"In  twenty  minutes,  she  went  into  a  magnetic  state,  resem-
bling natural  sleep.  She  would  not  answer  the  questions  of
others  or  of  myself.  Sometimes  she  would  answer  me  in  a  low
whisper.  Other  persons  could  rouse  her  by  a  noise,  but  not  by
speaking  to  her.  She  was  magnetized  once  a  day  for  ten  or  fif-
teen days.  The  effect  upon  her,  as  I  am  informed  by  her  mother
and  herself,  is  a  reestablishment  of  the  strength  of  her  nerves,
and  an  improvement  in  her  general  health.

"  At  Saratoga,  I  put  the  lady  of  General  Smith  asleep  in  fifteen
minutes.  For  some  time,  she  was  unable  to  speak ;  but,  when
I  commenced  waking  her,  she  requested  me  to  let  her  remain  in
that  state,  because  she  '  felt  so  happy.'  At  1  o'clock,  she  wished
to  remain  until  dinner-time,  which  was  at  2.

"I  then  asked  her  husband  to  inform  me,  at  2  o'clock,  if
every  tiling  was  not  right.  When  the  bell  rang  for  dinner,  Gen-
eral Smith  went  to  her  room,  took  Mrs.  S.  by  the  hand,  and  went
down  to  the  table,  where  she  was  immediately  taken  ill.  He
went  back  with  her  to  her  room,  seated  her,  and  returned  to  the
table.  At  3  o'clock,  he  came  to  her  room,  and  found  her  on
the  floor,  nearly  senseless,  quite  deranged,  and  suffering  the  most
excruciating  pain  in  the  head,  stomach,  and  bowels.  He  placed
her  upon  the  bed,  and  applied  frictions  over  the  chest  and  limbs,
without  giving  relief.  Although  it  roused  her  a  little,  she  re-
mained in  the  same  state  until  7  o'clock,  when  Mr.  Hubbard
chanced  to  meet  me,  and  informed  me  that  Mrs.  S.  was  danger-
one  hand  upon  her  forehead,  and  the  other  upon  her  waist,  and  in
five  minutes  she  was  entirely  restored.  General  Smith  should
have  informed  me,  as  I  had  particularly  requested  him  to,  as  soon
as  she  was  taken  ill  at  dinner-time.

"  October  7th,  Albany.  Miss  S######,  fair  complexion,  hair,
and  eyes.  I  drew  my  hand,  for  two  minutes,  from  the  shoulder
of  the  left  arm  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  slightly  touching  them.
She  complained  of  great  sense  of  weakness  in  the  arm.  On  the
next  Monday,  at  9  o'clock  in  the  morning,  there  was  a  pain  in  the
muscle  of  the  left  forearm.  This  had  continued  from  the  time
I  had  magnetized  it  on  Saturday,  so  that  she  was  not  able  to  raise
any  small  weight  or  to  use  it  1  restored  the  arm  in  five  minutes,
after  a  continued  paralysis  of  thirty-six  hours.

"While  in  Albany,  1  got  acquainted  with  Dr.  March,  who,  as
you  well  know,  lectures  on  anatomy,  and  whose  anatomical  col-
lection, by  the  by,  is  an  exceedingly  fine  one.  My  friend,  Mr.  G.,
threw  Dr.  March's  little  daughter,  seven  years  old,  into  a  mag-
30*


354  APPENDIX.

netic  sleep  in  about  ten  minutes,  without  touching  her,  and  with-
out using  the  manipulations.  To  ascertain  what  effect  could  be
produced  at  a  distance,  Mr.  G.  and  Professor  McKee  being  at  the
Temperance  Hotel,  and  Dr.  March  being-  with  the  little  girl  at  his
own  house,  about  fifty  rods  distant,  he  put  her  into  somnambulism
in  five  minutes,

"  This  was  only  the  fourth  time  of  magnetizing  her ;  and  she
not  only  did  not  know  of  the  attempt,  but  Dr.  March  kept  her
reading. She  dropped  her  book,  and  fell  asleep.

"A.  K.  Hadley, Esq.,  and  another  gentleman,  a  physician,  both
from  Troy,  were  present.

"  She  has  since  been  magnetized  in  the  presence  of  Drs.  James
and  George  McNaughton,  Dr.  Peck,  and  about  twenty  others,  of
the  first  respectability. Dr.  March  put  her  to  sleep  easily.

"  Mr.  G.  also  magnetized  Mr.  John  Perry,  in  the  presence  of
Governor  Marcy,  Mr.  Attorney-General  Butler,  and  several  phy-
sicians, among  whom  was  Dr.  March.  Sitting  at  the  distance  of
six  feet  from  Mr.  Perry,  he  began  to  magnetize  him  mentally.  In
five  minutes,  his  eyes  were  set  wide  open,  but  he  took  no  notice
of  things.  In  seven  minutes,  he  closed  them,  and  began  to  trem-
ble nervously,  and  his  whole  frame  to  shake.  The  convulsions
were  violent,  stamping  and  striking  with  his  fists,  and  they  con-
tinued about  half  an  hour.  By  placing  the  hand  upon  the  bare
neck  and  breast,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  stomach,  he  finally
succeeded  in  waking  him,  after  carrying  him  out  into  the  street*

"  At  the  second  sitting,  I  threw  him  into  the  same  state,  in  pres-
ence of  Professor  McKee  and  Dr.  March,  and  the  effects  were
about  the  same.  When  spoken  to,  he  would  not  answer.  He  is
an  active,  healthy,  intelligent  young  man.

"  Judge  Spreicker  was  also  magnetized  four  times.  He  was
so  much  affected  as  not  to  be  able  to  answer  any  one  but  Mr.  G.
The  judge  was  an  unbeliever  even  after  seeing  a  case  of  som-
nambulism. He  is  now  ready  to  testify  to  the  power  of  this
agent.

"  At  the  house  of  Rev.  Mr.  Wycoff,  in  the  presence  of  the
principal  of  the  Female  Academy,  Dr.  James  McNaughton,  and
others,  I  magnetized  Miss  Van  N.,  about  seventeen  years  of  age,

*  Mesmer  maintained  that  these  convulsions  were  useful.  He  endeav-
ored to  produce  them,  and  the  great  power  with  which  he  was  endued  was
thus  exhibited  in  an  extraordinary  degree.  Experience,  however,  has
shown  that  they  are  sometimes  attended  with  effects  which  are  bad,  though
neither  fatal  nor  permanent.  At  present,  the  magnetizers  use  their  infiu-
ence  soothingly,  and  find  its  effects  salutary.  Their  patients  are,  however,
sometimes  thrown  into  convulsions,  when  the  action  is  too  great,  or  not
sustained  by  firmness  of  purpose.  The  Messrs.  Potter  are  abundantly
Able  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  magnetic  power.  But  to  ascertain  the
true  value  of  it  as  a  means  of  alleviating  and  curing  the  sick,  demands  in-
cessant practice.  They  have  been  several  times  successfully  employed
by  physicians  in  this  city  to  magnetize  their  patients.  —  Trans.


APPENDIX.


355


light  hair,  light  eyes,  and  good  health  through  lite.  She  settled
down  from  mirth  and  laughter,  in  five  minutes,  to  a  vacant  stare,
without  winking.  In  a  few  minutes  more,  she  closed  her  eyes.
There  was  a  slight  trembling  of  the  frame.  In  fifteen  minutes,
she  would  answer  no  one  but  myself.  She  was  awaked  by  re-
versed motions  in  thirty  seconds.
"  Yours,

«  AMERICUS  V.  POTTER.
"  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn."


NOTE  XXXV.  — Page  165.

Deleuze  says  that  the  influence  of  the  magnetizer  will  be  felt
even  in  the  waking  state.  I  have  evidence  of  a  very  curious
nature  in  proof  of  this  assertion.

Every  one  who  takes  the  true  way  to  convince  himself  of  the
existence  of  the  agent  called  Mesmerism,  that  is,  by  attempting
the  proofs  on  individuals  whose  state  of  health  he  desires  to  ben-
efit, will  find  nothing  more  common  than  this  influence  over  som-
nambulists. Georget  seems  not  to  have  known  this,  for  he  might
have  prevented  the  repugnance  which  his  patients  manifested
when  they  were  served  with  moxas  and  blisters  of  their  own  pre-
scription. The  reader  is  referred  to  the  letter  of  Dr.  Robbins,  at
the  twenty-sixth  note,  for  some  curious  results.  In  a  subsequent
letter,  that  gentleman  states  that  he  does  not  find  the  plan  equally
efficacious  with  all.  An  inveterate  attachment  to  tobacco  in  its
various  shapes,  has  been  entirely  destroyed,  though  the  patient,
a  young  medical  student  of  about  twenty  years  of  age,  knew
nothing  of  the  cause  of  it  while  in  the  ordinary  state.  Many
weeks  have  elapsed,  but  I  am  informed  that  the  attachment  has
not  yet  revived.

It  is  not  therefore  so  extraordinary  that  any  article  of  food,
when  magnetized  with  the  design  of  changing  its  taste,  and  pre-
sented to  the  somnambulist,  should  retain  its  induced  qualities
long  after  he  is  awakened  from  sleep.  Any  person  who  is  merely
put  in  communication  with  one,  may  do  this  to  his  own  satisfac-
tion, without  saying  a  word  of  his  intention  even  to  the  patient
I  have  tried  this  successfully,  changing  a  piece  of  wheat  bread
into  cake,  a  part  of  which  was  eaten  immediately  and  pronounced
to  be  cake,  and  the  next  day  the  rest  was  eaten  while  the  patient,
who  is  blind,  was  in  the  ordinary  state,  and  did  not  know  that
she  had  had  the  piece  in  her  hand.  How  far  the  experiment
would  succeed  with  one  who  possesses  vision,  I  have  never  yet
availed  myself  of  my  opportunities  to  ascertain.  I  have  in  the
same  manner  imparted  a  peculiar  taste  to  water.

Dr.  Robbins  has  tried  experiments  of  the  same  kind. One  of


356  APPENDIX.

these  he  relates  in  a  recent  note  to  me,  which  exhibits  this  power
of  transfusing  tastes  in  a  very  striking  degree.  He  gave  one  of
his  somnambulists  a  clove  to  eat,  and  told  her  to  recollect,  after
waking,  that  she  had  eaten  a  piece  of  cinnamon.  On  waking,  she
had  some  of  it  remaining  in  her  mouth,  and  thought  it  was  in
reality  cinnamon,  while  another  clove  which  she  ate  had  its
proper  taste.  At  another  time,  when  she  was  asleep,  he  gave  her
a  piece  of  aloes,  not  informing  her  what  it  was,  and  told  her  to
have  it  taste  on  her  awaking  like  liquorice.  Observing  it  upon
the  table  after  waking,  she  mistook  it  for  opium  ;  but,  on  being
told  to  taste  it,  she  did  so,  and  recognised  at  once  the  nauseous
sweet  of  liquorice.  Such  is  one  of  the  powers  of  this  unknown
agent.  It  changes  the  most  disgusting  bitter  in  the  whole  mate-
ria medica  into  the  most  intense  sweet.  If  any  one  thinks  these
experiments  were  not  made  with  sufficient  care,  it  is  easy  for
him  to  repeat  them  in  many  ways,  if  he  can  obtain  the  privilege
of  being  put  in  communication  with  a  somnambulist.

There  is  another  power  closely  allied  to  this  which  is  no  less  sur-
prising. You  can  induce  a  desire  for  a  particular  species  of  food
at  a  particular  hour  of  the  day.  A  trial  of  this  was  recently  made
by  Dr.  Cleveland,  of  Pawtuxet.  The  patient,  without  knowing
any  thing  about  the  influence  which  had  been  exerted  the  day
before,  called  for  the  several  articles  which  had  been  specified
for  each  of  the  three  daily  meals.  The  patient's  want  of  appe-
tite f  >r  several  weeks  in  succession  was  the  reason  for  pursuing
this  course,  and  it  was  completely  successful.

Dr.  Cleveland  once  called  upon  another  of  his  patients,  who
enjoyed  a  good  appetite,  and  was  anticipating  a  choice  article  of
food  for  dinner.  He  advised  her  to  sleep  an  hour  before  dinner;
and,  while  she  was  in  the  Mesmeric  state,  he  told  her  that  she
must  not  eat  of  the  dish  she  was  anticipating,  but  of  another  one,
which  he  specified.  On  her  awaking,  no  one  being  present  but
the  r.urse,  who  knew  the  doctor's  intention,  she  refused  to  par-
take of  the  viand,  though  it  was  urged  upon  her  as  being  well
prepared  and  palatable ;  but  she  called  for  the  substituted  food,  on
which  she  dined  with  relish,  without  suspecting  the  cause  of  the
change  wrought  in  her  appetite.

Dr.  Cleveland  has  also  succeeded  in  several  other  experiments
of  a  highly-useful  nature,  the  particulars  of  which  I  have  in  some
letters  from  him  which  are  now  before  me.  One  of  these  was  to
induce  a  spirit  of  charitable  feeling  towards  an  individual  who
had  rendered  himself  an  object  of  the  patient's  hatred  and  indig-
nation. Thus  far  the  spirit  of  forgiveness  still  prevails,  although
the  somnambulist  knows  nothing  about  the  influence  exerted  by
the  magnetizer  to  produce  this  happy  result.

Some  other  experiments  have  been  made  by  him  upon  several
somnambulists  to  excite  cheerfulness,  hope,  and  order,  respec-
tively, which  were  attended  with  success  the  most  complete.


APPENDIX.  357

I  state  these  things  not  to  excite  the  marvellousness  of  the
reader,  but  with  the  design  of  enforcing  the  precepts  of  Deleuze,
wherein,  to  the  minds  of  men  who  are  not  sufficiently  acquainted
with  the  subject,  he  seems  to  be  over-cautious ;  for  instance,  in
the  chapter  on  somnambulism,  and  especially  in  his  chapter  on
the  choice  of  a  magnetizer.  That  one  could  take  advantage  of  the
magnetic  sleep,  in  some  instances,  to  subserve  an  evil  purpose,
seems  now  to  me  unquestionable.  But  the  physician  has  drugs
of  most  potent  effect,  a  drop  or  two  of  which  would  be  immediate
in  its  action,  whether  the  recipient  be  in  good  or  in  bad  health ;
while,  by  the  aid  of  Mesmerism,  the  process  is  slow,  uncertain,
and  tedious,  and  seldom  effective  on  persons  who  are  not  already
prostrated  by  disease.  The  physician  is  one  on  whom  we  bestow
our  confidence  in  an  especial  manner,  and  therefore  we  are  care-
ful, in  the  first  place,  to  choose  one  on  whom  we  can  depend ;
having  regard  not  wholly  to  his  skill,  but  to  certain  qualities  of
the  head  and  the  heart  which  vindicate  our  choice.  If  the  physi-
cian we  have  chosen  proposes  to  try  Mesmerism  in  aid  of  his
remedies,  we  do  not  require  the  exertion  of  greater  confidence
than  we  already  repose  in  him,  if  we  have  been  governed  by  the
right  motive,  and  have  made  no  mistake,  in  our  choice.  He  is
the  proper  person  to  employ  this  agent,  provided  he  is  in  good
health,  and  has  the  good  sense  to  make  a  trial  in  spite  of  his  pre-
possessions against  it

Yet  there  are  certain  requisites  in  a  magnetizer,  which  we  do
not  find  in  some  physicians.  I  cannot  do  better  than  to  recom-
mend the  reading  of  the  two  chapters  referred  to  above.  The
principles  advanced  in  them  derive  support  from  the  facts  em-
braced in  this  note,  and  from  the  experience  of  many  physicians
with  whom  I  have  conversed.  Many  men  of  science  are  heartily
engaged  in  the  investigation,  not,  I  trust,  with  partisan  feelings,
but  with  the  sincere  desire  of  doing  good  ;  and  at  this  very  time,
though  the  first  excitement  is  nearly  over,  there  are  more  som-
nambulists and  more  patients  under  treatment  than  at  any  pre-
vious period.  They  may  be  stated  at  several  hundreds  in  this
and  the  adjoining  states.  The  number  of  somnambulists  referred
to  in  this  appendix  is  upwards  of  sixty,  leaving  out  those  who
are  merely  thrown  into  the  Mesmeric  state,  who  are  much  more
numerous.


END,


359


NEW APPENDIX.


NOTE  XXXVI.

LETTERS FROM PHYSICIANS.

FROM  DOCTOR  DOUGLAS.

"  Hamilton,  N.  Y.  June  28,  1843.

"  Dear  Sir:  I  received  yours  oi  21st  inst.  this  day,  and  in

compliance  with  your  request,  proceed  to  give  you  a  detail

of  a  lew,  out  of  many  cases  which  have  occurred  under  my

own  treatment,  of  the effects  of  Mesmerism  upon disease.

--Case  1. — July  1842,  evening.  I  was  called  to  visit  Mrs.  — .
1  found  her  in  the  7th  month  of  pregnancy,  and  in  severe  la-
bor, which  had  continued  nearly  all  day.  The  pains  were
now  as  frequent  as  every  four  or  five  minutes,  and  very
urgent.  An  examination  showed  the  os  uteri  to  be  sufficient-
ly dilated  to  admit  the  ringer  with  considerable  play,  and  the
tense  membrane  was  plainly  felt.  She  had  been,  during  the
whole  afternoon,  much  stupified  with  opium,  in  the  hope  of
deferring  her  confinement  until  my  return,  having  been  absent
during  the  day.  She  expressed  a  perfect  determination  to
have  nothing  done  to  retard  the  progress  of  labor.  She  had
been  in  the,  same  condition  in  her  last  two  pregnancies  at
the  same  period,  and  all  the  means  employed  to  prevent  pre-
mature delivery,  had  only  prolonged  her  suffering.  She  had
sent  for  me  to  hasten,  and  not  retard  her  delivery.  With-
out saying  any  thing,  I  laid  my  hand  carelessly  outside  of  her
dress,  over  the  uterus.  The  first  pain,  after  doing  so,  was
obviously  lighter,  the  second  scarcely  waked  her,  and  the
third  did  not  appear.  I  remained  an  hour,  during  which
she  slept  undisturbed.  I  directed  the  husband  to  repeat  the
process,  if  the  pain  returned.  After  expressing  the  confi-
dent belief  that  my  hand  could  have  had  nothing  to  do  with
producing  the  result  which  had  followed,  he  promised  com-
pliance. On  visiting  her  the  following  evening,  I  was  inform-
ed by  the  husband  that  her  pains  had  returned  twice  since
my  former  visit,  and  he  had  found  himself  a  better doctor


360  NEW APPENDIX.

than  T,  for  he  had  perfectly  stopped  them  in  five  minutes.
They  recurred  a  few  times  afterwards,  and  were  allayed  by
the  same  means  with  the  same  facility.  About  two  months
from  this  period,  she  was  delivered  of  a  large  and  healthy
child.

"  Case  2.— In  May, 1843, I  visited  Mrs.  , a  young

married  lady,  who  had  suffered  one  abortion  at  an  early  pe-
riod. She  was  now  at  about  the  same  period  a  second
time,  and  had  had  regular  labor  pains  for  the  last  twelve
hours.  Knowing  her  to  be  very  susceptible  to  the  Mesmeric
influence,  I  laid  my  hand  over  the  uterus,  and  the  n°xt  pain
did  not  occur.  She  has  had  several  attacks  of  labor  pains
since,  and  the  husband  informs  me  that  she  is  so  sensitive
that  she  never  has  a  single  pain  after  he  lays  his  hand
upon  her.

"  Case  3.— March  29,  1842.  Visited  Miss  T.,  a  girl  of
about  ten  or  eleven  years  of  age,  who  had  been  attacked,
the  previous  day,  with  acute  rheumatism,  which  had  loca-
ted in  the  knees,  ancles  and  feet.  These  parts  were  swol-
len, hot,  red,  and  intensely  tender  and  painful.  She  had
slept  none  the  previous  night,  and  was  loudly  crying  with
pain.  The  pulse  was  over  120,  with  thirst  and  hot  skin.
The  slightest  motion  of  the  affected  joints  could  not  be  borne.
I  requested  the  father  to  lay  his  hands  on  the  affected  parts
and  make  passes  over  them,  expressing  the  hope  that  it
would  afford  her  relief.  He  chose  to  be  excused  from  what
he  deemed  so  useless  a  process,  but  at  length  consented.
In  about  five  or  six  minutes  she  ceased  to  groan,  and
talked  cheerfully,  saying  that  her  limbs  did  not  ache  at  all.
In  from  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  she  was  perfectly  relieved,
not  only  from  pain,  but  tenderness  also ;  and  suffered  her  joints
to  be  pressed  and  moved  lreely  in  every  direction,  declar-
ing that  there  was  not  the  slightest  tenderness.  About  the
middle  of  the  following  night,  the  pain  returned,  and  was
removed  by  the  same  process  with  equal  promptitude.  Twen-
ty-four hours  from  this,  it  again  returned,  and  was  removed
to  return  no  more.

"Case  4. — In  April  last,  I  was  attacked  with  rheumatism
of  the  feet.  It  increased  during  the  day,  and  was  so  painful
at  night  that  I  was  unable  to  sleep.  At  three  o'clock  in  the
morning,  the  pain  had  become  extremely  intense,  and  I  sent
across  the  street  for  Doctor  J.  Babcock.  He  applied  his  hand
and  made  passes  over  it,  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  when
the  pain  entirely  subsided,  leaving  slight  soreness  in  one  joml


NEW APPENDIX.  361

I  resumed  my  ordinary  business  in  the  morning,  with  slight
lameness,  which  disappeared  during  the  day  without  any
recurrence  of  the  pain.

"  Case  5.— In  the  Spring  of  1842,  I  suffered  a  bronchial
attack,  which,  in  the  afternoon  of  the  second  day,  had  be-
come severe,  and  was  attended  with  tightness  of  the  chest,
great  soreness  of  the  chest  and  throat,  shortness  of  breath,
incessant  and  harassing  cough,  -considerable  feverishness,
and  such  a  degree  of  hoarseness  that  it  was  difficult  to  emit
a  sound  above  a  whisper.  By  the  application  of  the  same
hand  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  to  the  throat  and  chest,
I  was  so  perfectly  relieved  of  all  these  symptoms,  that  I  could
not  ascertain  from  any  feeling,  thai  I  had  a  cold  or  was  in
the  slightest  degree  unwell.  1  did  not  feel  the  least  disposi-
tion to  cough  again  during  the  evening  or  night,  though  I
believe  I  did  not  pass  five  minutes  during  the  previous  after-
noon without  coughing.  The  change  was  palpable  toothers
as  well  as  myself,  in  the  immediate  and  almost  entire  restora-
tion of  my  voice.  In  the  morning,  the  Mesmeric  influence
seemed  to  have  passed  off,  and  my  disease  resumed  its  course,
but  so  much  improved  that  I  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to
trouble  my  friend  for  another  application  of  the  remedy.  If
I  might  be  allowed  to  use  such  a  form  of  expression,  I  would
say  that  it  was  three  quarters  cured.  I  cannot  doubt  but
another  application  would  have  rendered  the  cure  complete.

"  Case  6.— In  March  1842,  I  attended  Miss ,  for  a  spi-
nal affection.  It  was  extremely  tender — very  slight  pressure
producing  intense  pain  on  the  spot,  and  in  distant  parts  of
the  system  connected  by  nervous  communication  with  the
part  of  the  spine  pressed,  and  faintness.  By  passing  the
hand  over  the  spine  for  a  few  minutes,  the  tenderness  was
entirely  removed,  so  that  any  degree  of  pressure  was  borne
without  inconvenience.  I  then  proceeded  to  make  two  long
and  deep  issues  with  caustic  potash,  one  on  each  side  of  the
spine.  During  the  whole  operation,  she  declared  that  she
did  not  suffer  the  slightest  pain,  but  the  same  sensation  of
pleasure  which  she  experienced  from  the  passage  of  my
hand  in  Mesmerising.  Just  at  the  close  of  the  operation,  she
complained  of  sickness  of  stomach,  an  effect  which  I  have
often  witnessed,  on  Mesmerising  the  back,  unless  some  passes
are  made  at  the  same  time  over  the  stomach.  The  most  se-
vere pain  from  these  issues  was  subsequently  at  any  time  re-
moved in  a  few  moments,  by  some  one  passing  the  hand  over
them.

31


362  NEW APPENDIX.

"  Case  7. — In  February,  1842,  I  visited  Miss  ,  under

the  following  circumstances.  She  had  been  troubled  for  two
or  three  years,  with  a  chronic  affection  of  the  stomach,  at-
tended with  indigestion  and  vomiting  of  her  food.  She  had
recently  been  attended  by  a  quack,  who  had  pursued  a  stim-
ulating treatment.  This  had  brought  on  acute  inflammation
of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  attend-
ed with  uncontrollable  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  After  some
days  the  inflammation  had  extended  to  the  serous  mem-
brane, attended  by  obstinate  constipation,  and  great  pain
and  tumefaction  of  the  bowels.  When  I  saw  her,  she  had
vomited  almost  incessantly  for  ten  days,  retaining  nothing
upon  the  stomach;  she  had  had  no  evacuations  from  the  bow-
els for  four  or  five  days,  and  the  tumefaction  was  as  great
as  the  integuments  would  admit.  The  pain  was  constant
and  terribly  severe.  Other  symptoms  were  alarming.  The
face  was  pale  and  sunken,  and  covered  with  a  clammy  sweat
— the  pulse  was  a  weak  and  almost  undistinguishable  flutter.
Standing  by  the  bed-side,  and  reflecting  with  great  anxiety
upon  the  probable  impotency  of  medicine  in  such  a  state  of
things,  it  being  extremely  probable  that  mortificaiion  was
about  to  take  place,  or  was  already  taking  place,  I  almost  un-
consciously and  from  habit,  laid  my  hand  upon  her  stomach,
and  made  passes  over  it  and  the  bowels.  In  a  few  minutes-
she  ceased  groaning,  and  on  being  asked  if  she  was  easy,  she
replied,  '  easier.'  In  a  few  minutes  after,  on  being  asked
again,  she  replied,  '  perfectly  easy,  and  my  sickness  at  stomach
is  gone.'  Her  pulse  became  distinct  and  lull,  and  her  face,
from  a  deathly  paleness,  became  flushed.  I  proposed  giving
her  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  but  was  assured  that  that  article
was  always  very  nauseous  to  her.  I  however  turned  out  a
full  dose,,  raised  her  head  and  presented  it  to  her,  requesting
her  to  take  it.  She  swallowed  it  deliberately,  sipping  it  clean
from  the  cup,,  without  manifesting  the  least  dislike.  She  lay
apparently  asleep,  and  at  perfect  ease,  for  about  four  hours,
when  she  waked  and  soon  made  an  effort  to  vomit.  This
sickness  was  at  once  allayed  by  the  same  means,  and  the  oil
repeated.  During  the  night  it  produced  its  desired  effect,  and
every  immediately  alarming  symptom  had  disappeared.  By
the  daily  application  of  Mesmerism,  she  was  in  a  few  days
tolerably  comfortable.  But  the  bowels,  though  comparatively
free  from  pain,  retained  the  tenderness  and  tumefaction.  I
had  often  removed  the  tenderness  in  a  few  minutes,  and  there
I  had  stopped.  Continuing  the  process  a  little  longer  than
usual  one  day,  I  was  surprised  to  observe  an  obvious  dimi-
nution of  the  fullness.  Continuing  it  some  timelonger,  I  was
more  surprised  to  find  it  disappear  altogether. Their  pres-


NEW APPENDIX.  363

<ent  softness  and  flatness  contrasted  very  strangely  with  the
former  fullness,  extreme  hardness  and  distension.  This  was
often  repeated  afterwards,  with  uniformly  the  same  result —
the  great  fullness  and  hardness  being  perfectly  removed  in
about  fifteen  minutes,  leaving  the  abdomen  entirely  flat  and
soft.  This  process  was  repeated,  till  the  tendency  to  fullness
and  tenderness  was  overcome.  Since  that  time,  other  cases,
of  great  tumefaction  from  inflammation  of  bowels,  removed
in  the  same  manner,  have  come  under  my  observation.  The
above  patient,  under  the  daily  influence  of  Mesmerism,  finally
recovered  from  her  superinduced  attack  of  acute  disease  and
her  original  chronic  affection.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  attrib-
uting to  this  agent  the  preservation  of  her  life.

"The  above  are  a  few  ordinary  examples  illustrative  of  a
most  important  fact  in  Mesmerism,  viz.,  the  power  of  that
agent  to  annihilate  irritability  or  sensibility  to  pain,  and  thus
to  remove  one  of  the  most  powerful  exciting  causes  of  a  con-
tinuation of  disease,  and  one  of  the  most  obstinate  obstacles
in  the  way  of  its  removal.  It  supplies  a  disideratum  in
medicine.

"  At  the  time  of  addressing  you  in  1839,  I  was  in  the  in-
cipient stage  of  inquiry,  with  a  variety  of  phenomena  which
I  had  elicited,  and  which  surprised  and  puzzled  me.  Un-
acquainted with  any  practical  magnetist,  I  was  under  the
necessity  of  prosecuting,  to  some  extent,  an  independent
course  of  inquiry,  which  has  gradually  cleared  away  the
difficulties  and  led  to  many  clear  and  definite  results.  My
little  work  on  Mesmerism  was  intended  to  give  the  practi-
cal informrtion  I  possessed  at  the  time  of  its  publication,
and  supply  the  place,  at  less  trouble,  of  the  numerous  letters
I  was  obliged  to  write  in  answer  to  inquiries  addressed  to
me.  I  will  send  you  a  copy.  It  may,  to  some  extent,  an-
swer some  of  your  inquiries.  Since  its  publication,  my
greatly  increased  experience  discovers  many  imperfections  in
it,  and  some  errors.  It  has,  however,  more  than  answered
my  expectations  in  directing  the  attention  of  the  communi-
ty, and  especially  of  the  medical  profession,  to  the  subject.

"  The  cases  of  disease  of  various  character  to  which  I
have  applied  Mesmerism  with  benefit,  are  innumerable.  I
have  never  seen  an  amputation  under  its  influence,  but  1
have  performed  a  large  number  of  minor  and  every  day
operations  by  its  aid  without  pain,  as  cupping  on  tender
places,  upon  which  the  least  pressure  could  not  be  made
without  pain  before  magnetizing,  the  insertion  of  setons,
making  large  and  deep  issues  with  caustic  potash,  blister-
ing in  irritable  habits,  &c.


364  NEW APPENDIX.

"I  have  witnessed  the  most  surprising  relief  and  cures  in
all  of  the  following  diseases,  viz :  asthma,  (a  perfect  cure  of
the  most  distressing  breathing  in  fifteen  minutes  )  colds,  at-
tended with  great  hoarseness,  sore  throat,  tightness  of  the
lungs,  and  distressing  cough ;  angina  pectoris,  (a  perfect
cure  in  a  few  minutes.)  acute  rheumatism,  (many  striking
and  surprising  cases,)  inflammation  of  the  bowels,  gastritis,
dyspepsia,  spinal  irritation,  after-pains  of  the  most  severe
character,  headache,  dysmenorrhea,  toothaches,  universal
pain  attending  attacks  of  fever,  extreme  and  painful  fatigue,
habitual  sleeplessness,  &c.

"  Respectfully  yours,

"J.  S.  DOUGLAS.

"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM  DOCTOR  BARRETT.

"Forrestville,  N.  Y.,  June  14,  1843.

"Dear  Sir  :  I  am  gratified  to  learn  that  you  are  engaged
in  the  work  of  which  you  speak.  I  have  paid  some  attention
to  the  subject,  but  have  had  access  to  no  very  extensive  work.
I  am  satisfied  that  it  has  claims  which  but  iew  medical  men
at  present  duly  appreciate.  I  have  performed  no  amputation
on  a  person  in  the  Mesmeric  state,  although  I  have  the  most
perfect  confidence  that  it  may  be  done.

"  I  will  briefly  state  to  you  such  cases  as  have  come  under
my  notice  ;  and  shall  be  happy  if  I  can  do  any  thing  to  aid
you  in  the  furtherance  of  your  object.

"Miss  E.  J.,  aged  18,  was  attacked  in  January  last  with
Pleurisy.  On  being  magnetised,  the  breathing  became  easy
and  free  ;  but  the  pain  and  difficulty  of  breathing  returned
on  her  being  restored  to  consciousness.  She  was  again
magnetised,  and  bled  until  some  degree  of  faintness  was
manifest,  without  her  being  conscious  of  any  thing  having
been  done ;  only  she  felt  much  better.  She  was  then  put
into  the  Mesmeric  state  again  ;  and  a  blister  plaster,  6  by  8
inches,  applied  to  the  side,  which  remained  six  hours;  at  the
end  of  which  time  it  was  found  to  have  drawn  and  filled  well.
It  was  removed,  and  a  dressing  given;  she,  during  the  time,
apparently  enjoying  quiet  sleep,  and  perfectly  unconscious  of
having  been  bled  or  blistered.  The  incision  made  on  bleeding,
was  without  soreness,  which  was  quite  different  from  those
made  in  the  waking  state,  as  the  case  was  a  severe  one  and
required  repeated  bleedings.

"I  am  satisfied  the  cure  was  much  facilitated  by  bringing
to  my  aid  magnetism. She  was  afterward  afflicted  with  the


NEW APPENDIX.  365

teeth  ache ;  I  extracted  a  large  molar  tooth,  and  she  was  not
conscious  of  it;  nor  did  she  miss  it  until  some  half  hour  when
her  attention  was  directed  to  it.  Miss  S.  E.  also  had  a  molar
tooth  extracted  while  in  the  Mesmeric  state  without  being
conscious  of  it,  or  even  moving  a  muscle — the  soreness  in
either  case  following  the  operation  was  trifling  compared  to
what  it  had  been  when  they  had  had  teeth  extracted  before.

"Miss  E.  C.  has  been  afflicted  with  spinal  irritation  for
-several  years,  so  much  so  that  she  has  been  confined  to  her
bed  for  several  months  ;  she  could  not  bear  the  least  pressure
about  the  spine.  On  being  magnetised  she  could  be  scarified
and  cupped  without  any  pain,  and  it  only  became  necessary
to  magnetise  the  part  to  which  I  wished  to  apply  the  cup.

"  A  son  of  Mr.  G.,  14  years  old,  had  been  subject  to  natural
somnambulism,  in  which  the  organs  of  self-esteem  and  com-
bativeness  seemed  to  be  the  most  active,  though  in  character
he  was  naturally  diffident.  In  these  paroxysms  he  would
pay  no  respect  to  age ;  whatever  came  in  his  way  he  considered
himself  equal  to,  as  regards  mental  and  physical  powers.
These  paroxysms  would  last  from  two  to  four  hours.  What-
ever attempts  were  made  to  arouse  him  served  to  excite  his
combative  feelings,  and  he  was  ready  to  encounter  any  thing
that  came  in  his  way.  The  paroxysm  could  be  brought  on
at  any  time  when  he  was  asleep,  by  partially  arousing  him
and  leaving  him  to  himself  for  a  few  minutes.  He  would  get
up  and  put  something  on  him,  sometimes  his  clothes,  at  others
some  portion  of  the  bedclothes,  and  present  himself  wherever
the  family  were.  The  first  time  that  he  was  attempted  to  be
magnetized  in  these  paroxysms,  the  effect  was  but  partial :
on  the  second  attempt  the  effect  was  fully  produced  ;  and  by
exciting  other  portions  of  the  brain,  he  became  perfectly
quiet,  and  has  not  had  a  paroxysm  since,  now  three  months.
"  Yours,  in  much  haste,

"  SOLOMON  BARRETT."

"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM  DOCTOR  CLEAVELAND.

"Providence,  August  4th,  1843.
"Dear  Sir: In  compliance  with  your  request, I have
made  several  experiments  upon  the  memory,  or  rather  upon
the  power  of  recalling  events,  which  have  proved  very  sat-
isfactory.

"  The  first  experiment  consisted  in  inducing  the  mind  to
recall,  or  to  be  impressed  with  all  or  any  of  the  past  events
31*


366  NEW APPENDIX.

of  life,  back  to  the  earliest  period  possible.  Many  incidents
of  maturer  years,  which  had  long  been  forgotten,  were  men-
tioned with  a  perfect  remembrance  of  their  occurrence,  not
however  by  the  ordinary  means  of  the  accidental  association
of  ideas,  but,  as  it  were,  by  a  sadden  impression.  The
events  of  earlier  life,  without  that  clearness  of  memory  as  to
their  certainty,  were  very  distinctly  and  minutely  recalled  and
early  as  not  to  be  substantiated  by  the  evidence  of  memory,
but  appearing  like  dreams.  Events  that  took  place  before
the  magnetized  was  ten  months  old,  were  by  her  perfectly
upon  ihe  testimony  of  oihers,  as  to  their  reality.  Individuals
or  whose  names  she  had  not  heard  mentioned,  since  she  was
two  years  old,  more  than  twenty  years  ago.  The  events  of
infancy  and  early  childhood,  appeared  more  to  her  like  a
dream  than  a  reality.  The  restraints  under  which  she  was
placed  when  she  became  able  to  creep  about  house — the  cir-
cumstance of  falling  down  stairs,  and  the  person  who  took
her  up — her  first  attempts  to  walk — her  peculiar  favorites,  &c.
&c. — all  of  which  occurred  before  she  was  eleven  months  old,
the  recollection  of  others  of  the  family,  who  were  surprised
at  her  mentioning  them  without  knowing  the  reason  of  her
doing  so.

"  These  exercises  were  continued  two  days.  The  mind  was
then  directed  to  the  recalling  of  particular  events.  I  say  di-
rected, for  in  these  experiments,  my  subject  was  not  consult-
ed. The  influence  was  exerted  while  she  was  in  a  magnetic
state,  and  the  arrangements  made  the  day  previous  to  their
going  into  action.

"  So  perfect  was  the  success  of  this  second  experiment,
that  sermons,  prayers,  &c.  which  she  had  heard  seventeen
years  ago,  when  only  eight  years  of  age,  and  which  had  not
been  thought  of  for  years,  were  so  perfectly  recalled,  that
she  could  readily  repeat  large  portions  of  them.

"  These  experiments  have  resulted  with  several  patients
with  the  same  success.

"  I  have  also  been  enabled  to  direct  the  mind  to  any  sub-
ject for  study  and  meditation,  with  the  greatest  intensity  and
abstractedness,  for  any  given  period  of  time.

"I  have  been  induced  to  communicate  these  observations,
with  the  hope  that  others,  better  qualified,  may  be  led  to  im-
prove thereon,  and  reduce  them  to  some  important  results.

"  In  the  8th  chapter  of  the  Practical  Instruction,  some  ob-
servations are  made  on  the  transmission  of  pain. My  own


NEW APPENDIX.  367

•experience  accords  with  that  of  Deleuze.  One  of  my  patients,
a  lady  twenty-five  years  of  age,  was  afflicted  with  an  inflam-
mation of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  throat;  for  which  I
had,  on  a  former  occasion,  treated  her  in  the  ordinary  way
with  very  poor  success.  She  was  now  so  unwell  as  to  be  una-
ble to  swallow  any  thing  but  fluids.  After  being  Mesmerised
twice,  she  was  enabled,  the  next  day,  to  partake  of  food  as
usual.  But  as  for  myself,  I  found  it  very  troublesome  to  eat ;
my  throat  was  inflamed,  exhibiting  an  actual  transference  of
the  symptoms  of  her  disorder  to  myself.  As  this  was  not  the
customary  fee  for  medical  service,  I  went  on  the  third  day,
and  told  my  patient  that  I  meant  to  return  the  complaint
which  had  been  transferred  to  me.

"  I  then  made  a  [ew  passes  from  my  own  throat  towards
her's.  The  succeeding  day  I  found  myself  relieved,  and  my
patient  was  afflicted  as  before.

"  Neuralgia  seems  to  yield  readily  to  the  Mesmeric  action,
so  far  as  my  own  practice  is  concerned.  A  short  time  ago  I
was  called  upon  to  visit  a  lady  twenty-iwo  years  of  age,  who
had  for  four  days  been  prostrated  by  a  severe  nervous  pain
in  the  head.  She  could  neither  sit  up,  nor  endure  to  be
raised  from  the  bed.  She  was  cured  in  three  visits,  within
thirty-six  hours,  so  as  to  attend  to  her  affairs  in  perfect  health.

"A  sudden  blow  or  shock  has  been  known  to  throw  per-
sons into  a  sort  of  somnambulic  state ;  and  belore  I  relate
the  next  case,  I  will  give  the  relation  once  made  to  me  by  a
carpenter.  He  was  at  work  on  a  building;  he  fell  from  the
staging  to  the  ground.  '■As  T  struck  the  ground?  said  he,
iI  suddenly  bounded  up,  seeming  to  have  a  new  body,  and  to
be  standing  among  the  spectators  looking  at  my  old  one.  I
saw  them  trying  to  bring  it  to.  I  made  several  fruitless  efforts
to  re-enter  my  body,  and  finally  succeeded  /'

''Tetanus. — A  scuffle  which  I  witnessed,  took  place  in
the  street  between  two  men  at  a  short  distance  from  my  resi-
dence. I  seized  one  of  them  who  had  thrown  the  other  down,
and  held  him  fast;  but  as  the  fallen  man  was  rising,  he  re-
ceived a  kick  from  his  antagonist  directly  in  the  eye.  The
blow  was  very  severe  and  from  a  heavy  boot ;  he  staggered
and  fell,  struggling  to  rise  again  repeatedly,  and  plunging
headlong  to  the  ground.  Frightful  spasms  and  convulsions
and  furions  raving  succeeded.  He  was  taken  to  his  own
house,  by  three  or  four  men,  where  he  continued  to  rave  and
rattle  on  incoherently,  taking  no  notice  of  any  one  present.
Opium  was  exhibited  without  effect.  There  was  great  diffi-
culty in  swallowing,  on  account  of  the  spasmodic  affection,
and  an  appearance  like  one  laboring  under  hydrophobia.  It
required  two  or  three  men  to  hold  him.


368  NEW APPENDIX.

"Intending  to  Mesmerise  him,  I  could  scarcely  retain  his
hands,  which  he  twitched  from  me  several  times  with  vio-
lence. But  I  persevered,  and  at  length,  in  ten  or  fifteen  min-
utes, the  spasms  began  to  yield.  In  about  thirty  minutes  he
recognised  me,  expressing  great  satisfaction  at  my  having
come  to  see  him,  still  taking  no  notice  of  any  one  else,  but  be-
ing perfectly  quiet.  (He  seemed  all  the  time  to  suppose  him-
self in  a  certain  old  building  in  Foster.)

"I  then  put  him  in  communication  with  his  wife,  of  whose
presence  he  was  not  before  aware.  He  expressed  his  joy  at
seeing  her,  and  talked  of  his  being  still  kept  in  that  "  infer-
nal old  building,"  meaning  the  house  in  Foster.

"  As  he  remained  tranquil,  I  left  him  for  the  night  in  com-
munication with  his  wife,  directing  her  to  withdraw  her  com-
munication by  a  wave  of  the  hand,  if  he  should  prove  trouble-
some before  my  return.  This  she  was  obliged  to  do,  and  he
could  no  longer  recognise  her,  or  be  conscious  of  her  pres-
ence.

"In the  morning,  I  found  him  in  the  same  condition,  except
the  tetanic  symptoms,  talking  wildly  as  before.  As  soon  as
I  took  his  hand,  he  recognised  me,  complained  of  his  situa-
tion, and  wanted  me  to  go  home  with  him.  The  hint  this  sug-
gested, I  took  him  home  in  the  usual  Mesmeric  way.

"As  soon  as  we  arrived,  his  whole  appearance  changed.
He  seemed  pleased  and  called  for  his  wife,  whom  he  forth-
with discovered  in  another  pari;  of  the  house,  putting  together
fuel  for  a  fire.  (A  passage  or  entry  intervened  between  the
two  rooms,  and  both  doors  were  shut.)  His  words  were: —
1  Now  I  want  to  see  my  wife — I  see  her — she  is  making  a
fire  in  the  bed  room.'

"  When  his  wife  came  in,  I  established  the  communica-
tion between  them,  and  shortly  after  restored  him  to  the  natu-
ral state.  His  recovery  ensued  without  any  return  of  the
tetanic  symptoms.  The  peculiar  state  of  the  patient  is  ob-
servable ;  for,  in  ordinary  cases,  tetanus  is  not  accompanied
by  delirium,  which  in  this  case  may  be  accounted  for  by  the
injury  sustained  by  the  brain.  It  is  characterized  by  the
powers  of  thought  and  sensation  remaining  unimpaired,  and
this  distinguishes  it  from  epilepsy.  The  mesmeric,  or  rather
somnambulic  state,  may  be  brought  on  by  an  accident  of  this
nature,  as  in  the  instance  given  above,  of  a  carpenter's  fall-
ing from  a  scaffold.

"You  will  recollect,  my  dear  sir,  that  in  1837,  I  wrote  you
a  letter  in  reference  to  the  influence  which  may  be  exerted
over  the  faculties  of  somnambulists,  especially  cheerfulness,
hope,  order  and  charily.  That  letter  was  not  published  in
your  Appendix,  but  I  perceive  that  you  have  referred  to  it,


NE.V APPENDIX.


369


and  quoted  the  very  words  of  it  on  the  197th  page  of  the  Ap-
pendix to  your  first  edition,*  which  was  issued  in  1837.  I  re-
fer to  this,  because,  although  I  did  not  make  use  of  manipu-
lation, I  by  that  extract,  gave  a  hint  to  the  phrenologist,  which
is  certainly  prior  to  any  date  hitherto  claimed  by  those  who
have  discovered  the  manipulatory  process  of  exciting  the  or-
gans.

"Yours,  &c.

"THOMAS  CLEAVELAND."
"  Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


FROM  DOCTOR  CAPRON.

"Providence,  August  1,  1843.

"Dear  Sir:  Since  you  informed  me  of  your  intention  of
publishing  a  revised  edition  of  your  translation  of  Deleuze's
Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism,  and  desired  that  I
might  communicate  to  you  any  thing  upon  this  subject  which
I  deemed  of  sufficient  interest,  to  insert  in  the  appendix,  it
has  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  not  be  uninteresting  to  the
public  to  be  briefly  informed  of  the  sequel  of  the  case  of
Miss  L.  Brackett,  some  account  of  which  I  furnished  for  the
former  edition  of  this  work.

"This  case  appears  to  me  the  more  interesting,  as  being
one  of  the  first  which  attracted  much  public  attention,  and
gave  a  more  decided  impulse  to  the  investigation  of  the  sub-
ject of  animal  magnetism,  than  it  derived  from  any  other
source.

"  Had  it  not  been  for  a  few  cases  which  occurred  in  this
city  and  vicinity,  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  \vould  have  been
in  a  great  measure  neglected,  and  comparatively  little  known
upon  the  subject,  'n  this  country,  at  this  time.  Besides,  it
appears  to  me  that  justice  to  Miss  Brackett,  demands  some
further  notice  of  her  case.

"It  will  be  recollected  by  all  who  had  any  knowledge  of
the  events  of  the  year  1837,  in  which  the  cases  above  referred
to  were  the  cause  of  so  much  excitement  throughout  the  coun-
try, that  she,  in  common  it  is  true  with  others,  was  basely  slan-
dered by  those  who  had  no  knowledge  of  her  or  of  magnet-
ism ;  and  owing  to  her  peculiar  situation,  she  has  been  obliged
to  wait  patiently  for  time  and  circumstances  to  exculpate  her
from  the  imputation  of  witchcraft  or  imposture.  It  must  be
peculiarly  gratifying  to  her,  however,  as  well  as  lo  her  friends,
lo  be  conscious  of  having  outlived  this  slander,  and  to  know


*  See  page  356  of  the  present  edition*


370  NEW APPENDIX.

that  the  time  has  arrived  when  no  one,  who  is  not  either  wil-
fully ignorant  or  blindly  prejudiced,  will  presume  to  deny  the
occasional  existence  of  the  phenomena  developed  in  her  case.

"Among  all  the  cases  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge,
I  know  of  no  one  more  interesting  than  this— no  one  in  which
a  greater  number  of  the  somnambulic  phenomena  have  been
developed  or  were  more  clearly  manifested.  If  some  new
phases  have  since  been  observed,  it  is  perhaps  because  the
science,  and  manner  of  conducting  experiments,  are  better
understood,  rather  than  because  the  subjects  have  been  more
lucid.

"  Before  Miss  Brackett  left  Providence,  she  had  good  rea-
sons for  hoping  that  her  health  and  sight  would  ultimately  be
perfectly  restored,  should  the  magnetic  treatment,  to  which
she  had  then  been  subjected  for  four  or  five  months,  be  con-
tinued. The  recovery  of  her  voice,  the  improvement  of  her
sight  and  general  health,  which  were  evidently  the  effect  of
this  treatment,  were  the  grounds  of  those  hopes  ;  but  she  was
doomed  to  a  different  fate.

"Her  friends,  who  were  at  a  distance,  and  had  not  the
means  of  obtaining  correct  information  respecting  magnet-
ism, believing  all  the  idle  and  ridiculous  reports  which  were
then  so  rife,  thought  proper  to  remove  her.

"  This  injudicious  measure,  and  the  exciting  circumstance
attending  it,  in  addition  to  the  discontinuance  of  the  mag-
netic treatment,  were  the  cause  of  a  very  unfavorable  change
in  her  health,  both  of  body  and  mind.

"From  the  indisposition  into  which  she  was  at  that  time
thrown,  she  did  not  recover  for  more  than  a  year  and  a
half.

"After  having  been  magnetized  almost  daily  for  so  long
a  time,  it  is  not  strange  that  some  marked  change  should
follow  the  sudden  discontinuance  of  the  practice.  It  should
be  remarked,  that  her  mind  had  been  somewhat  deranged  at
times,  previous  to  her  commencing  this  treatment,  but  that
she  had  since  been  perfectly  sane,  except  on  a  few  occasions
when  some  other  persons  than  myself  were  permitted  to  mag-
netize her.

"The  supervention  of  some  disorganizing  disease  in  her
eyes,  soon  after  her  leaving  Providence,  destroyed  all  hope  of
her  sight  ever  being  restored  ;  and  as  soon  as  her  health
was  sufficiently  improved,  she  was  admitted  into  the  Perkins
Institution  for  the  Blind;  her  destination  when  I  incidentally
became  acquainted  with  her.  Since  she  has  been  at  the  in-
stitution, she  has  frequently  been  magnetized,  and  until  with-
in the  last  year,  continued  to  be  as  susceptible  and  clairvoy-
ant as  when  in  Providence,  six  years  ago. Within  the  last


NEW APPENDIX.  371

year,  however,  although  she  can  be  put  into  the  magnetic
state,  she  has  nothing  of  this  power ;  which  she  accounts  for
by  having  gained  a  more  perfect  state  of  health.

"  That  she  has  been  very  much  benefitted  by  the  magnetic
treatment,  neither  she,  nor  any  one  who  is  acquainted  with
her  case,  entertains  a  doubt;  and  if  she  has  not  been  entirely
restored,  she  has  been  sustained  and  rendered  comparatively
comfortable,  under  a  much  greater  load  of  affliction  than
usually  falls  to  the  lot  of  humanity.*

"  She  has  now  been  at  the  Institution  five  years,  during
which  time  her  intelligence,  industry  and  exemplary  conduct,
have  secured  to  her  a  comfortable  and  agreeable  home,  the
esteem,  the  sincere,  and  to  her,  invaluable  friendship  of  the
Superintendant,  and  the  love  and  affection  of  the  inmates  of
the  Institution  generally.

"Having,  for  the  last  five  or  six  years,  given  but  little  atten-
tion to  the  subject  of  animal  magnetism :  only  practising  it
occasionally,  as  a  remedial  agent,  I  have  not  been  able  to
carry  into  effect  the  intention  expressed,  in  my  former  com-
munication of  following  out  a  classification  of  the  phenomena,
and  thereby  arriving  at  some  rational  theory;  as,  however,  I  had
at  that  time  formed  an  opinion,  upon  this  subject,  and  adopt-
ed a  theory,  founded  upon  my  previous  observations  and  re-
flections, which  I  thought  it  would  be  premature  to  publish,
and  as  I  have  not  yet  seen  any  well  grounded  reasons  for
changing  the  views  which  I  then  entertained,  I  will  endeav-
or to  mould  this  theory,  into  as  condensed  and  intelligible  a
form,  as  the  difficulty  of  the  subject  and  my  limited  time  will
admit.  Should  it  appear  to  you  that  it  possesses  sufficient
merit  to  be  brought  before  the  public,  it  will  be  at  your  dis-
posal.

"  This  theory,  which  from  the  commencement  of  my  prac-
tice in  magnetism,  has  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  most  satis-
factory, is  based  upon  the  following  principles,  and  hypothe-
ses ;  all  of  which  I  believe  to  be  demonstrable  by  experiments,
or  are  the  legitimate  inferences  of  well  grounded  reasonings,
viz : —

"  That  there  is,  pervading  the  whole  created  universe,  an
inconceivably  fine  elastic,  invisible,  imponderable  fluid  or  aura,
serving  as  a  medium  of  communication,  and  a  bond  of  union

*  Among  other  afflictions,  any  of  which  were  sufficient  to  weigh  down
the  strongest  heart,  she  has,  for  the  last  three  years,  been  in  a  great  mea-
sure deprived  of  ihe  use  of  her  lower  limbs,  in  consequence  of  an  injury
received  upon  her  spine.  This  has  of  course  diminished  very  much  her
ability  of  being  useful  in  the  Institution,  and  deprived  her  of  the  oppor-
tunity of  reaping  that  amount  of  benefit  from  an  education,  which  she
might  have  otherwise  expected.


372  NEW APPENDIX.

to  all  its  parts ;  that  this  fluid  is  every  where  essentially  the
same,  but  is  manifested  under  a  number  of  different  modifi-
cations, among  which  are  Electricity,  Electro-Magnetism,
Voltaism  or  Galvanism,  Mineral  Magnetism,  Animal  Mag-
netism, Elective  and  Cohesive  Attraction,  and  Attraction  of
Gravitation;  and  consequently  that  the  same  agent  that  gives
impulse  and  motion  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  retains  them
in  their  respective  spheres,  puts  in  motion  the  wheel  upon  an
Electromagnetic  apparatus,  and  binds  together  the  particles
of  matter  in  the  smallest  pebble ;  that  through  the  agency
of  this  fluid,  every  thing  in  nature  has  a  particular  sphere  of
action ;  and  that  no  material  body,  however  nearly  or  re-
motely situated,  can  act  upon,  or  influence  another,  except
through  some  medium  ;  that  nervous  fluid,  sensorial  power,
energy  of  the  brain,  &c,  of  different  authors,  are  only  so
many  names  for  animal  magnetism,  or  a  manifestation  of  this
general  principle,  in  connection  with  living  animal  matter,
and  that  the  phenomena,  to  which  the  terms  animal  Magnet-
ism and  Mesmerism  are  popularly  applied,  are  peculiar  or  ab-
nominal  developements  of  this  particular  modification.

"  This  fluid  I  suppose  to  be  the  primum  mobile,  or  main
spring  of  created  nature,  and  that  in  whatever  way  it  may  at
first  have  been  brought  into  existence  and  put  into  operation,
the  quantity  is  ever  the  same,  and  cannot  as  a  whole  be  in-
creased or  diminished,  but  is  constantly  varying  in  particular
places  and  objects.  We  know  not  but  it  may  be  the  fluid
which  fills  that  space  in  the  universe,  which  would  otherwise
be  a  vacuum,  the  Ether  of  the  ancients,  the  soul  of  nature,
an  emanation  from  God  himself.

"  It  would  be  interesting  to  enter  into  a  consideration  of
each  of  these  hypotheses  particularly,  but  the  want  of  oppor-
tunity and  the  impossibility  of  condensing  such  a  mass  of
matter  into  a  reasonable  compass,  for  a  communication  of  this
kind,  will  oblige  me  to  limit  myself  to  a  few  remarks.

"  That  there  is  such  a  fluid  or  agent  as  above  supposed,  I
think  will  be  admitted  by  all  who  duly  consider  the  subject,
whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  views  I  have  taken  of  its  va-
rious modifications;  without  it,  in  fact,  the  works  of  creation
would  be  incomplete,  as  we  should  see  a  thousand  effects  for
which  there  would  be  no  assignable  cause.  Indeed,  few
natural  phenomena  can  be  accounted  for  upon  any  other  sup-
position.

"  When  in  conversation  with  a  learned  gentleman,  six
years  since,  I  suggested  the  idea  that  electricity,  galvanism,
the  nervous  fluid,  &c.  might  be  only  different  manifestations
of  the  same  fluid,  he  observed  that  it  was  unphilosophical  to
attribute  these  various  effects  to  the  same  agent ;  that  philos-


NEW APPENDIX.  373

lophy  taught,  on  the  contrary,  that  there  were  more  elemen-
tary principles  than  had  formerly  been  supposed,  and  there-
fore that  these  different  manifestations  were  more  likely  to  be
^dependent  upon  distinct  agents.  This,  as  a  general  princi-
ple in  physics,  is  no  doubt  true  ;  I  can  but  believe,  however,
that  the  instance  under  consideration,  is  an  exception  to  the
rule.

"  If  it  can  be  established  that  electricity,  galvanism,  elec-
tro-magnetism, and  the  nervous  fluid  are  identical,  I  see  no
reason  why  the  other  properties  of  matter  which  have  been
enumerated  above,  including  light  and  heat,  may  not  be
equally  referable  to  the  -same  general  principle.

"'Every  step'  says  an  anonymous  writer  in  the  Boston
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  Sept.  10,  1837,  '  made  in  the
progress  of  science,  tends  farther  to  generalize  the  laws
which  regulate  the  motions  and  affections  of  matter.  Grav-
itation, electricity,  magnetism,  light,  heat,  chemical  attraction,
have  approximated  so  far  towards  unity,  that  it  is  easier  to
say  in  what  they  resemble  each  other,  than  to  point  out  in
what  they  differ.'

"  A  great  number  and  variety  of  experiments,  which  are
familiar  to  every  one  at  all  conversant  with  the  subject,  have
been  made  to  establish  the  identity  of  the  nervous  and  gal-
vanic fluids,  which,  though  there  are  some  who  think  differ-
ently, I  believe  has  been  very  conclusively  done.

"  Dr.  Good,  who  seems  to  have  summed  up  and  put  into
an  agreeable  form  most  of  what  is  known  upon  the  subjects
of  which  he  treats,  in  speaking  of  the  principle  of  life,  ob-
serves, 'every  one  in  the  present  day,  has  some  knowledge
of  galvanism  and  voltaism ;  every  one  has  witnessed  some
of  those  curious  and  astonishing  effects  which  the  voltaic
fluid  is  capable  of  operating  on  the  muscles  of  an  animal  for
many  hours'  after  death ;  and  it  only  remains  to  be  add«d,
that  since  the  discovery  of  this  extraordinary  power,  oxygen
has  in  its  turn  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  the  voltaic  fluid,  and  this
last  has  been  contemplated  by  numerous  physiologists,  as
constituting  the  principle  of  life ;  as  a  fluid  received  into  the
animal  system  from  without,  and  stimulating  its  different  or-
gans into  vital  action.'

" '  The  identity,'  says  Wilson  Phillip,  in  his  work  on  Life,  '  of
galvanic  electricity  and  nervous  influence,  is  established  by
these  experiments !'

"  In  the  experiments  above  referred  to,  the  galvanic  fluid
has  often  been  substituted  for  the  nervous,  and  the  functions
dependent  upon  a  supply  of  this  power,  have  been  performed
in  the  same  manner  as  though  they  had  received  this  ne-
cessary stimulus  directly  from  the  sensorium.
32


374  NEW APPENDIX.

"  The  supposition  that  galvanic  electricity  and  sensorial
power  are  only  different  developements  of  the  same  general
principle,  derives  great  support  from  the  fact  that  there  are
occasional  instances  of  persons  in  whom  this  fluid  accumu-
lates to  such  an  excess  as  to  exhibit  sensible  effects.  It  is
not  long  since  there  was  published  what  appeared  to  be  an
authentic  account  of  a  lady,  in  a  neighboring  State,  who
when  approached  by  another  person,  or  had  applied  to  any
part  of  her  body  any  of  the  conductors  of  electricity,  gave
off  electric  sparks,  like  one  who  had  been  highly  charged
with  this  fluid  by  an  electrical  machine.

"  A  similar  case  was  communicated  to  Silliman's  Journal,
and  republished  in  the  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,
Jan.  24th,  1843,  which  is  so  much  to  the  point  that  I  shall

"Extraordinary  Case  of  Electrical  Excitement. — Dr.
Hosford,  of  Orford,  N.  H.,  relates,  in  the  last  number  of  Sil-
liman's Journal,  the  case  of  a  lady  in  that  town,  who  became
unconsciously  charged  with  electricity  at  the  time  of  the  oc-
currence of  an  unusual  aurora  borealis,  on  the  25th  of  Janu-
ary, 1837.  This  extraordinary  state  continued  until  the  mid-
dle of  the  following  May,  during  most  of  which  time  she  was
capable  of  giving  electrical  sparks  to  every  conducting  body
that  came  within  the  sphere  of  her  electrical  influence.  When
her  finger  was  brought  within  one  sixteenth  of  an  inch  of  a
metallic  body,  a  spark  that  was  heard,  seen  and  felt,  passed
every  second.  When  seated  motionless,  with  her  feet  on  the
iron  stove-hearth,  three  or  four  sparks  per  minute  would  pass
to  the  stove,  notwithstanding  the  insulation  of  her  shoes  and
silk  hosiery.  When  most  favorably  circumstanced,  four  sparks
per  minute  of  one  inch  and  a  half,  would  pass  from  the  end  of
her  finger  to  a  brass  ball  on  the  stove ;  these  were  quite  bril-
liant, distinctly  seen  and  heard  in  any  part  of  a  large  room,
and  sharply  felt  when  they  passed  to  another  person.  These
experiments  were  so  often  repeated,  that  there  was  no  doubt
left  of  their  actual  occurrence.  The  lady  had  no  internal
evidence  of  this  faculty,  which  was  only  manifest  to  her  when
the  sparks  left  her.  Her  health  had  never  been  good,  though
she  had  seldom  been  confined  to  her  bed.  She  had  suffered
much  from  unseated  neuralgia  in  various  parts  of  her  system,
for  some  months  previous  to  her  electrical  developement.  Her
health  is  now  better  than  for  many  years.  Dr.  H.  thinks  this
phenomena  was  not  caused  by  the  aurora  alluded  to,  but  that
it  was  an  appendage  of  the  animal  system.

"  The  astonishing  electric  powers  of  the  gymnotus  or  elec-


NEAT APPENDIX.  375

trie  eel,  and  of  the  torpedo,  are  well  known  instances  of  the
same  condition  of  the  animal  system,  continuing  permanently.
In  these  fishes,  this  power,  which  appears  to  be  a  weapon  of
defence,  is  evidently  under  the  control  of  the  will.

"  The  hook'd  torpedo,  with  instinctive  force,
Calls  all  his  magic  from  its  secret  source  ;
And  through  the  hook,  the  line,  the  taper  pole,
Throws  to  th'  offending  arm  his  stern  control.
The  palsied  fisherman,  in  dumb  surprise,
Feels  through  his  frame  the  chilling  vapors  rise,
Drops  the  vain  rod,  and  seems  in  stiffening  pain,
Some  frost-fixed  wanderer  o'er  the  icy  plain."

"'We  now  know,'  says  Dr.  Good,  from  whom  the  above
lines  are  quoted,  '  something  of  the  medium  through  which
this  animal  operates,  and  have  no  difficulty  in  referring  it  to
an  electric  or  voltaic  aura,  and  can  even  trace  a  kind  of  vol-
taic apparatus  in  its  structure.'

"  It  is  through  the  medium  of  the  sensorial  power  or  nerv-
ous fluid,  the  identity  of  which  with  the  galvanic,  I  consider
established  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt  that  the  mind  acts
upon  the  different  organs  of  the  body,  and  stimulates  them
into  an  obedience  to  will ;  it  is,  as  it  were,  the  messenger  of
the  sensorium,  and  if  not  life  itself,  is  as  essential  to  it  as  or-
ganization, and  forms  a  connecting  link  between  the  intellec-
tual soul  and  inert  matter.

"  In  whatever  manner  this  fluid  is  generated,  whether  se-
creted from  the  blood,  and  consequently  derived  from  the
aliments  taken  into  the  system,  or  absorbed  from  the  sur-
rounding atmosphere,  and  other  objects  with  which  the  body
may  come  in  contact,  its  production  and  concentration  in  an
available  state,  is  undoubtedly  a  function  of  the  brain  and  its
appendages;  which  may  in  this  particular  be  compared  to  a
galvanic  battery.  From  this  battery,  it  is  conducted  off  more
or  less  constantly,  through  appropriate  conductors,  to  supply
the  expenditure  in  the  different  parts  of  the  system.  To  the
heart,  respiratory  and  other  organs,  whose  functions  are  con-
stant and  involuntary,  the  supply,  in  a  state  of  health,  is  ne-
cessarily continuous  ;  but  to  those  organs  whose  functions  are
under  the  control  of  the  will,  and  not  constant,  it  is  irregular,
and  proportioned  to  the  demand.  It  is  necessary  to  observe
that  I  have  reference  here  to  the  sensible  or  more  obvious
effects  of  the  sensorial  power ;  and  that  excitability,  or  a  sus-
ceptibility of  being  stimulated  into  action,  is  dependent  upon
the  constant  presence  of  a  greater  or  less  proportion  of  this
same  principle,  which  is  in  a  comparatively  latent  state.

"I  have  assumed  as  a  principle  that  through  the  medium


376  new  appendix:.

under  consideration,  every  thing  in  nature,  every  heavenly
body,  from  the  largest  suns  to  the  smallest  satellites,  every
human  being,  animal,  vegetable,  and  even  the  most  minute
particle  of  matter,  has  a  particular  sphere  of  action  and  re-
ciprocal influence,  varied  perhaps  by  circumstances  with
which  we  are  unacquainted,  and  limited  by  laws,  few  of
which  are  yet  understood.

"  This  sphere  of  action,  in  the  animal  system,  at  least,  in
its  most  obvious  manifestation,  is  limited  by  the  extremities-
of  the  nervous  filaments.  If  we  will  a  hand  or  finger  to  move
in  a  particular  direction,  the  motion  is  instantaneously  per-
formed, every  other  part  of  the  system,  perhaps,  remain-
ing at  rest.  This  action  is  evident  to  our  senses,  and  it  is
equally  evident  to-  our  reason,  that  some  messenger  must
have  been  sent  to  the  muscles  performing  the  motion,  inform-
ing them  of  the  requirements  of  the  will,  or  in  other  words,
that  there  is  some  ethereal  medium  through  which  the  mind
acts  upon  these  organs.  The  sensorial  power  is- limited  here,
however,  only  in  its  most  obvious  operations  ;  it  has,  even  in  its
ordinary  influences,  a  much  more  extended  sphere  of  action,
which  is  manifested  in  a  thousand  different  ways : — the  inde-
scribable influence  that  some  persons  have  over  others,  an  influ-
ence which  cannot  be  imaginary  or  mistaken ;  the  same
thoughts  occurring  simultaneously  to  different  individuals  who*
are  in  the  presence  of  each  other ;  the  influence  exerted  by
some  persons  over  horses,  dogs  and  other  animals,  and  which
is  sometimes  known  to  disarm  the  fury  of  the  most  enraged
and  vicious  wild  beasts  of  the  forest.

"Fascination,  or  charming,  and  the  torporific  influence  of
some  individuals,  and  even  tribes,  over  poisonous  serpents
and  scorpions,  completely  disarming-  them  of  their  deadly
powers,  is  probably  allied  to  that  of  the  torpedo  and  electric
eel,  and  may  be  exerted  at  the  pleasure  of  the  possessor.

"  A  circumstance  worthy  of  notice,  which  varies  very  much
the  potency  of  the  sensorial  influence,  and  enlarges  its  sphere
of  action,  and  which  may  also  be  considered  among  its  natu-
ral operations,  is  a  state  of  joy  or  grief,  anger,  &c.  producing^
that  wonderful  and  most  useful  affection,  sympathy ;  an  affec-
tion of  which  I  am  not  aware  that  any  very  satisfactory  ex-
planation has  ever  been  given-.

"  The  excitement  of  joy,  grief,  and  other  strong  emotions
and  passions,  rapidly  increases  the  production  of  the  senso-
rial fluid,  and  an  unusual  accumulation  in  the  sensorium,  i^
the  consequence.  This  over  charged  state  of  the  sensorium,
is  the  cause  of  a  more  than  ordinary  radiation  or  projection
of  this  fluid,  increasing  very  much  its  influence.  This  radia-
tioa  may  be  compared  to  light  passing  off  from  luminous


NEW APPENDIX.  377

bodies,  or  to  currents  of  galvanism  passing  from  one  metal  to
another — and  all  who  may  be  within  the  sphere  of  its  action,
and  who  are  sufficiently  susceptible,  will  experience  from  its
influence  the  emotion  of  sympathy.  The  kind  of  emotion  or
passion  giving  rise  to  the  accumulation,  so  modifies  the  influ-
ence that  the  emotion  caused  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the
original.

"Every  person  must  have  observed  the  different  degrees
with  which  he  sympathizes  with  different  individuals,  under
what  appear  to  be  the  same  circumstances,  and  perhaps  has
reproached  himself  with  cold-heartedness,  because  he  did  not
feel  that  emotion  of  the  soul,  and  that  irresistible  flow  of
moisture  to  the  eye,  which  he  conceived  such  distresses  of  his
fellow  beings  should  excite.  Who  has  not,  on  the  contrary,
experienced  this  emotion  in  a  degree  which  did  not  seem
called  for  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case?  This  may  be  ac-
counted for  by  the  various  degrees  of  nervous  influence  which
different  persons  are  capable  of  exerting,  and  also  by  the
various  degrees  of  susceptibility  of  different  individuals,  and
even  of  the  same  individual  at  different  times.

"Dr.  Good,  under  the  article  Sympathy  and  Fascination,
says,  '  The  corollary,  then,  resulting  from  these  observations,
is,  that  in  the  animal  system  as  well  as  in  organic  nature,
bodies  in  various  instances  act  where  they  are  not,  and
through  channels  of  influence  or  communication  with  which
we  are  altogether  unacquainted.'

"  Perhaps  there  is  no  saying  more  frequently  repeated,  or
more  generally  believed,  figuratively,  than  the  old  one,  that
{the  devil  is  always  near  when  you  are  talking  about  him.'
How  often  are  we  accosted  with  '  How  do  you  do  !  We
were  just  talking  about  you  !'  And  I  would  inquire  if  it  is
not  only  possible,  but  even  probable,  that  that  principle  which
emanates  from  the  sensorium,  constituting  a  medium  of  com-
munication and  reciprocal  influence,  may  not  precede  an  in-
dividual, and  being,  of  course,  strongly  directed,  by  the  will,
upon  those  persons  whom  he  expects  to  see  at  the  place  of  his
destination,  excite  in  their  sensoria,  thoughts,  and  consequent-
ly conversation  about  him  ?

"The  sympathies  between  different  parts  of  the  same  body
are  numerous,  and  so  familiar  to  every  one,  as  to  render  it
unnecessary  to  make  any  farther  remark  upon  this  subject,
than  to  suggest  the  idea  that  they  are  dependent  upon  unu-
sual accumulations  in  the  particular  organs  which  are  the
seat  of  disease,  and  that  a  radiation  or  projection  may  take
place  from  these  organs,  which  have  become  so  many  distinct
batteries,  and  falling  upon  such  other  parts  of  the  system  as
32*


$78  NEW APPENDIX.

are  obnoxious  to  the  sympathetic  influence,  produce"  more  or
less  functional  derangement.

"In  connexion  with  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  would  be  in-
teresting to  make  some  remarks  upon' the  sympathies  and  other
affections  of  plants,  but  it  would  be  incompatible  with  my  pres-
ent design  to  do  more  than  to  allude  to  this  interesting  topic.
Here  too  we  have  evidences  that  every  thing  has  its  sphere
of  action  and  communication,  as  is  exemplified  by  the  recip-
rocal attraction  and  influence  observed  between  the  different
parts  of  the  same  flower,  and  between  different  flowers  some-
what remote  from  each  other,  when  the  males  and  females
are  situated  in  different  houses.  WeFe  vegetables  endowed
with  locomotion,  we  should  doubtless  witness  more  daring
exploits  among^  them,  than  swimming  the  Hellespont ;,  if  we
may  judge  from  the  conduct  of  the  gallant  Vallesneria,  an
aquatic  and  disecious  plant,  the  male  blossom  of  which  is  said
to  cast  itself  upon  the  bosom  of  the  waters  and  heroically  float
away  in  search  of  a  bride,  and  when  he  arrives  within  a  cer-
tain distance  of  her  dwelling,  to  approach  it  even  against  the
wind  and  current.

"Design  is  evident  in  every  department  oi  nature.  Nothing
is  left  to  chance. And  the  poet  has  truly  said  that

f  All  nature  is  but  art,  unknown  to  thee,

All  chance,  direction  which  thou  canst  not  see.'

"The  sphere  of  reciprocalinfluenee  of  plants  is  not  confined
to  the  sympathy  manifested  between  different  parts  of  the
same  plant,  or  plants  of  the  same  species,  but  is  occasionally
met  with  in  a  sensible  degree  between  those  which  are  pecu-
liarly sensitive  and  living  animal  matter.  The  effect  produ<-
ced  upon  the  sensitive  plant,  by  handling,  is  a  familiar  instance.

'  Weak  with  nice  sense,  the  chaste  Mimosa  stands,
From  each  rude  touch  withdraws  her  timid  hands.'

"  Dr,  Darwin,  from  whom  these  lines  are  quoted,  is  inclined
to  the  opinion  that  the  sudden  dropping  and  collapse  of  the
leaflets  of  this-  plant,  when  touched,  are  owing  to'  a  '  numb-
ness or  paralysis  consequent  to  too  violent  irritation,  like  the
faintings  of  animals,  from  pain  or  fatigue.'

"  The  supposition  that  both  are  the  effects  of  exhaustion,
of  what  in  animals  is  called  the  sensorial  power,  is  probably
correct,  but  in  the  case  of  the  sensitive  plant,  the  effect  is  so
sudden  that  it  appears  more  rational  to  suppose  that  the  elec-
tric or  sensorial  fluid  is  conducted  off  suddenly  by  the  hand,
which  may  have  a  greater  affinity  for  it.

"  The  phenomena  heretofore  very  imperfectly  considered,
are  among  the  more  constant  and  natural  operations  of  thi*


NEW APPENDIX.  379

universal  magnetic  or  galvanic  fluid,  the  existence  and  uni-
versal diffusion  of  which  has  been  assumed  as  a  principle.
There  is  still  another  class  of  phenomena  which  are  less  con-
stant, more  irregular  in  their  manifestations,  and,  the  laws  of
which,  are  but  very  imperfectly  understood.  To  these  the  terms
animal  magnetism,  and  Mesmerism  are  popularly  applied.

"In  regard  to  the  use  of  the  term  animal  magnetism, I  see
no  greater  objection  to  it  than  might  be  urged  against  any
other  that  has  been  suggested,  and  as  it  has  already  obtained
general  currency,  not  only  here  but  if  I  mistake  not,  through-
out Europe,  it  will  not  be  easily  supplanted,  by  that  of  Mes-
merism, which  some  have  adopted.

"  The  process  of  putting  the  system  into  this  peculiar  or  ab-
normal condition  called  somnambulism,  manipulating,  or
magnetizing,  as  owing  its  discovery  toMesmer,  may  properly
be  called  Mesmerising ;  but  when  speaking  of  the  fluid  itself,
I  know  of  no  good  reason  for  the  exchange.  Should  the  term
Mesmerism  be  generally  adopted,  the  compound  one,  Phreno-
magnetism  would  require  to  be  exchanged  for  Phreno-Mes-
merism,  as  there  would  not  be  a  proper  correspondence  be-
tween the  terras.

"  The  term  Pathetism  has  also  of  late  been  proposed,  and
almost  exclusively  employed  in  the  Magnet,  a  periodical  pub-
lished in  New  York,  by  La  Roy  Sunderland,  and  I  am  not
philologist  enough  to  discover  any  objection  to  the  term  itself,
but  I  very  much  doubt  the  propriety  of  introducing  any  new
terms,  unless  we  are  sure  that  they  are  not  only  better  than
the  old  ones,  but  also  that  they  will  be  generally  adopted.

"  If  the  view  which  I  have  taken  of  the  subject  be  correct,
we  shall  find  no  term  more  expressive  of  the  thing  meant
than  Animal  Magnetism,  or  Animal  Electricity,  until  we
have  a  scientific  term  for  the  general  agent,  from  which  to
derive  a'  part  of  the  name  of  each  of  its  modifications.

"By  the  process  of  Magnetizing,  or  Mesmerizing,  the  sen-
sorial fluid  may  be  increased  or  diminished,  in  the  whole  sys-
tem, or  any  particular  part  of  it,  according  to  the  will  of  the
magnetizer  and  the  manner  of  performing  the  operation,
thereby  communicating  to  the  different  organs  of  the  body,
increased  action  and  power,  or  depriving  them,  at  will,  of
that  of  which  they  are  possessed.  All  the  phenomena  of
somnambulism  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  different  condi-
tions of  the  system,  in  respect  to  the  quantity  and  distribu-
tion of  the  fluid  above  referred  to.  Exhaust  the  sensorium  of
this  principle,  and  a  state  of  coldness  and  stiffness  resembling
death  is  the  consequence.  A  case  of  this  kind  I  witnessed
in  the  summer  of  '37,  in  a  young  lady,  who  was  magnet-
ised by  Dr.  B.  of  this  city. There  was  in  this  case  complete


380  NEW APPENDIX.

insensibility  to  all  surrounding  objects,  and  to  pain ;  to  test
which  a  sufficient  number  of  experiments  was  instituted.-—
Deprive  an  organ  of  its  necessary  proportion  of  it,  and  it  will
be  paraHsed  and  cease  to  obey  the  will :  but  communicate  to
the  same  organ,  by  a  strong  effort  of  the  will,  an  increased
proportion,  and  unusual  energy  will  be  produced.  A  consid-
erable number  of  experiments  have  lately  been  witnessed  by
the  public  in  this  city,  which  very  conclusively  establish  the
truth  of  the  foregoing  remark ;  among  these  experiments  the
one  which  appeared  to  me  the  most  interesting,  and  convinc-
ing, was  that  of  diminishing  the  action  of  the  heart,  reducing
its  pulsations  nearly  one-third,  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes.
There  could  be  no  collusion  here.

"  But  it  is  unnecessary  to  particularize,  my  design  being
to  propose  a  theory  which  if  well  grounded  every  one  can
apply  to  practice — if  not  it  will  be  a  waste  of  words  to  dwell
upon  particulars.

"  Never  having  given  much  attention  to  Phreno-Magnet-
ism,  this  being  a  branch  of  the  subject  which  has  taken  its
rise  since  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  experimenting,  I  feel
inadequate  to  express  an  opinion  upon  it;  I  would  briefly
observe  however,  that  although  I  do  not  know  of  any  experi-
ments which  conclusively  establish  the  position  that  the  dif-
ferent organs  of  the  brain  can  be  magnetically  excited  singly,
thus  confirming  the  truth  of  both  of  the  sciences  incontrovert-
ably ;  I  can  conceive  of  no  reason  why  this  may  not  be  the
fact;  as  there  is  nothing  in  the  supposition,  tha't  is  opposed
to  the  principles  of  either.

"  Most  of  what  are  now  called  preno-magnetic  phenomena
I  have,  it  is  true,  witnessed  in  my  own  patients,  especially
Miss  Brackett,  from  an  effort  of  the  will,  without  even  think-
ing that  the  brain  was  constituted  of  many  different  organs,
performing  their  functions  in  some  measure  independently  of
each  other.  I  may  be  allowed  to  suggest,  that  the  experi-
menter will  find  it  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the  direct
magnetic  effect  upon  an  organ,  and  the  operation  of  his  will,  as
well  as  to  make  a  proper  allowance  for  the  habits  of  the  som-
nambulist.

"  That  some  persons,  in  certain  conditions,  have  a  peculiar
kind  of  vision,  a  peculiar  sense,  or  a  faculty  of  using  their
ordinary  senses  "in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  enabled  to  obtain
knowledge  through  some  other  channel  than  that  of  these
senses  in  their  natural  state,  is  a  fact  so  well  established,  that
I  believe  no  rational  man,  at  this  time,  with  the  usual  means
of  information,  controverts  it,  however  much  it  may  militate
against  his  own  preconceived  opinions,  or  those  of  the  philoso-
phers, the  dogmas  of  whom  he  may  have  adopted  as  his  rule


NEW APPENDIX.  381

of  faith.  To  account  for  this  strange  phenomenon,  which
has  frequently  occurred  spontaneously,  as  well  as  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  is  much  more  difficult  than  to  establish  the  truth
of  its  existence  : — Not  an  uncommon  case,  in  the  mysterious
works  of  nature.

"  The  only  approximation  to  a  satisfactory  hypothesis,  it
appears  to  me,  is  based  upon  the  foregoing  premises.  If  these
premises  are  correct,  we  may  suppose,  that  in  certain  pecu-
liar conditions  of  the  system,  the  sensorium  may  be  preter-
naturally  charged  with  the  sensorial,  galvanic,  or  as  it  may
with  propriety  be  called,  intelligent  principle,  and  that  an  unu-
sual emanation  or  radiation  may  be  the  consequence.  This
radiation  I  have  compared  to  light  passing  off  from  luminous
bodies,  and  may  extend  to  indefinite  distances,  taking  its  im-
pulse and  direction  from  the  will ;  and,  being  endued  with
the  greatest  imaginable  susceptibility,  receive  impressions
from  the  objects  to  which  it  may  be  directed,  and  communicate
them,  probably,  through  some  undulatory  or  vibratory  mo-
tion, to  the  sensorium.  Impressions  made  through  this  me-
dium upon  the  brain  or  sensorium,  which  is  supposed  to  be  in
an  exalted  condition,  are  taken  cognizance  of,  and  the  mind
perceives  them  in  the  same  manner  that  it  does  those  which
are  made  through  the  ordinary  inlets  or  senses.

"  In  the  foregoing  hypothesis,  we  have  also  the  only  rational
explanation  of  mental  communication,  or  the  understanding
the  will  without  the  use  of  language,  an  occasional  operation
of  the  mind,  familiar  to  every  one  who  has  seen  much  of  som-
nambulism. It  would  seem  that  with  persons  in  a  highly
magnetic  condition,  there  is  a  commingling  of  spirits,  not
only  with  those  individuals  with  whom  they  may  be  in  com-
munication, but  sometimes,  also,  with  others  who  may  be
present,  as  though  there  were  an  atmosphere  of  thought,  and
this  sensorial  emanation  were  sufficiently  sensitive  to  receive
distinct  impressions  from  similar  emanations  from  the  sensoria
of  others.

"It may  not  be  irrelevant  to  the  subject  to  observe,  in  this
place,  that  through  the  agency  of  clairvoyance  we  are  ena-
bled to  explain  and  reconcile  with  human  reason,  many  mar-
vellous and  otherwise  incredible  phenomena,  both  of  ancient
and  modern  times,  which  have  obtained  general  belief  among
mankind,  but  which  have  been  rejected  as  fabulous  by  a  few
who  are  too  bigoted  to  admit  the  existence  of  any  phenome-
non which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  their  philosophy.  I
have  reference  to  second  sight,  ecstacy,  trance,  magic,  for-
tune-telling, withcraft,  fascination  or  charming,  and  the  an-
cient oracles.

"I  am  not  unaware  that  there  are  some  who  account  for


382  NEW APPENDIX.

the  oracles  entirely  by  priestcraft,  and  others  by  what  is  but
little  worse,  the  machinaiions  of  the  Devil.  That  the  former
has  been  a  fruitful  source  of  imposture  and  deception,  through
all  ages,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  controvert,  but  I  believe  it  will
be  admitted  by  every  candid  person,  that  there  must  have
been  some  other  agency  concerned  in  these  oracles,  which
were  a  species  of  fortune-telling  conducted  upon  a  magnifi-
cent scale,  and  claimed  an  alliance  with  the  gods.  In  mod-
ern times,  this  art  is  confined  to  more  humble  circumstances,
and  the  artificers  are  vulgarly  believed  to  '  make  a  league'
with  a  very  different  being,  who  is  supposed  to  claim  their
souls  after  death,  as  a  recompense  for  his  services  while  they
are  permitted  to  remain  in  their  earthly  tabernacles.

"  Rollin,  after  endeavoring,  as  it  appears  to  me  with  but  lit-
tle success  to  discredit  the  Oracles,  by  the  ambiguity  of  the
language  of  the  Gods  in  giving  their  answers,  says,  '  It  must
be  confessed,  however,  that  sometimes  the  answer  of  the  Or-
acle was  clear  and  circumstantial,'  and  then  relates  two  cases
in  corrobation  of  this  reluctant  confession.  These  were  evi-
dently nothing  more  nor  less  than  cases  of  clairvoyance  such
as  have  been  often  witnessed  in  this  city.

"  All  or  many  of  the  circumstances  related  of  the  Oracles,
are  such  as  to  establish  almost  conclusively  that  the  answers
were  given  by  somnambulists.  It  appears  that  the  sybil  in
some  instances  officiated  at  different  Oracles.  In  speaking
of  the  sybil  of  Delphos,  this  author  observes  that  '  she  was
at  the  same  time  the  sybil  of  Delphos,  Eurythria,  Babylon,
Cuma  and  many  other  places,  from  having  resided  in  them
all'

"  The  manner  of  producing  the  magnetic  or  somnambulic
condition  appears  to  have  been  very  different  from  magnet-
izing as  practised  at  this  time.  It  is  probable  however,  that
historians  were  not  acquainted  with  the  whole  process,  just
enough  having  been  permitted  to  escape  through  the  walls  of
the  temples  to  confound  the  curious  without  enlightening
them.  Or  it  is  possible  that  this  condition  may  be  produced
by  intoxicating  exhalations  or  vapors  arising  from  substances
with  which  we  are  at  this  time  unacquainted.

"Whether  the  priests  and  priestesses,  themselves  knew  how
they  were  enabled  to  divine  what  was  hidden  to  others  is
matter  of  doubt,  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  they  really  be-
lieved in  some  divine  assistance,  being  themselves  deceived,
rather  than  they  who  consulted  them.

"  The  ridiculous  manner  in  which  Rollin  accounts  for  the
occasional  truth  of  the  Oracles,  is  one  of  the  many  instances
which  prove  to  us  that  the  greatest  men  are  not  exempt  from
the  prejudices  and  superstitions  of  the  age  in  which  they  live.


NEW APPENDIX.  383

"  Dreaming  in  natural  sleep  appears  to  be  of  two  kinds,  both
of  which  are  explicable  upon  the  principle  of  an  emanation
from  the  sensorium.  In  one  kind  the  mind  receives  distinct
and  true  impressions,  of  objects,  and  events,  whether  pres-
ent or  remote,  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  supposed  to  do
in  magnetic  somnambulism.  This  is  clairvoyance  occurring
naturally  or  spontaneously,  instances  of  which  are  too  numer-
ous to  be  set  down  to  the  account  of  '  remarkable  coinciden-
ce*.'

"  In  the  other  kind,  impressions  are  made  upon  the  same
intelligent  principle  and  conveyed  to  the  sensorium ;  but  the
will  which  in  other  conditions  directs  its  operations,  and  the
perceptive  faculties,  being  dormant  and  inactive,  these  im-
pressions are  consequently  vague  and  indistinct,  and  percep-
tion obscure  and  fleeting.

"Why  there  should  be  so  great  a  difference  in  the  suscep-
tibility of  different  individuals  to  the  magnetic  influence  is
difficult  to  explain,  but  it  is  probably  dependent  upon  the  quan-
tity of  that  portion  of  the  sensorial  fluid  which  is  constantly
present  in  every  part  of  the  living  system,  constituting  excit-
ability, and  upon  the  different  degrees  of  affinity  which  differ-
ent individuals  have  for  this  fluid.

"The  impossibility  of  putting  every  person  to  sleep  by
magnetizing  is  a  sufficient  reason  with  some  for  disbelieving
every  thing  connected  with  the  subject  5  I  see  no  reason  how-
ever why  they  should  not  upon  the  same  principle  refuse  to
believe  that  opium  will  produce  sleep ;  for  it  is  well  known
that  this  drug  not  only  frequently  fails  to  produce  that  effect
but  even  makes  some  persons  more  wakeful ;  and,  I  may  add
that  the  modus  operandi  of  magnetism  is  no  more  difficult  to
comprehend  than  that  of  opium.

"Although  it  is  impossible  to  put  some  individuals  into  the
magnetic  sleep,  I  believe  every  one  is  susceptible  in  some  de-
gree to  its  influence  and  that  it  will  frequently  have  a  reme-
dial effect  without  the  slightest  somnolency  being  produced.

"  Believing  as  I  do  in  the  universal  diffusion  of  the  mag-
netic principle,  I  deem  it  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that
animals  and  even  vegetables  may  also  be  in  a  greater  or  less
degree  susceptible  to  its  influence.

"  That  many  diseases  both  general  and  local  are  dependent
upon  some  irregularity  in  the  supply  of  the  sensorial  fluid,  re-
sulting either  from  a  deficient  production  of  it  in  the  sensori-
um or  from  some  imperfection  in  the  conductors,  is  generally
admitted,  though  scarcely  any  two  authors  employ  the  same
language,  in  expressing  their  views  upon  this  subject.  What-
ever the  cause  of  the  deficient  or  unequal  distribution  of  this
agent,  it  may  often  be  considered  as  the  primary  derange-


384  NEW APPENDIX.

ment,  and  as  the  cause  of  a  corresponding  derangement  in
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  the  performance  of  other
functions  necessary  to  health  and  life.  These  are  the  prima-
ry or  forming  stages  of  diseases,  and  if  arrested  here  there
may  be  a  restoration  to  health  without  any  serious  conse-
quences, but  being  allowed  to  go  on,  disorganization  may
follow,  and  if  an  important  organ  be  implicated,  death  will
be  the  consequence.

"  The  proximate  causes  of  diseases  are  of  so  obscure  a  na-
ture that  they  are  but  very  imperfectly  understood.  All  the
different  theories,  of  which  there  are  a  great  number,  are  found-
ed upon  hypotheses.  The  closest  observations  and  most  pro-
found researches  extend  no  further  than  the  effects  of  some
unknown  cause,  which  has  preceded.  The  obvious  reason
of  this  is  the  inscrutable  nature  of  life.  Until  we  know
more  of  life  we  shall  remain  in  ignorance  of  the  proximate
causes  of  disease.

"  The  most  eminent  men  in  the  profession,  however,  have
directed  their  researches  to  the  sensorium,  as  the  fountain
head  of  diseased  action.

"  Dr.  Cullen,  who  seems  to  have  had  very  clear  views  of
the  subject,  calls  the  sensorial  fluid  the  '  energy  of  the  brain,'
and  says,  '  all  nervous  power  commences  in  the  encephelon ;
it  consists  in  a  motion,  beginning  in  the  brain,  and  propagated
from  thence  into  the  nervous  fibres,  in  which  a  contraction  is
to  be  produced.  '  The  power  by  which  this  motion  is  propa-
gated, we  name,'  says  he,  '  the  energy  of  the  brain,  and
we  therefore  consider  every  modification  of  the  motions  pro-
duced, as  modifications  of  this  energy.'

"  The  theories  of  Brown  and  Darwin  are  founded  upon
the  doctrine  of  accumulated  and  exhausted  excitability  or
sensorial  power ;  only  another  mode  of  describing  the  same
agent  referred  to  by  Cullen.

"  As  the  doctrine  that  the  primary  derangement  in  most
diseases  is  in  the  sensorium,  is  generally  acknowledged,  it  is
matter  of  wonder  that  more  attention  has  not  been  bestowed
upon  investigating  the  means  of  preventing  and  curing  them
through  the  agency  of  the  sensorial  fluid,  before  disorganiza-
tion of  the  solids  takes  place.

"  This  branch  of  the  healing  art,  which  has  been  left  in  a
great  measure  uncultivated  until  the  present  age,  is  beginning
to  receive  that  attention  which  its  importance  demands.
Should  the  investigation  of  this  subject  be  continued  with
perseverance  and  in  a  proper  manner,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  some  further  useful  and  interesting  discoveries  will  be  the
result.

"  The exciting  causes of  epidemic diseases have  been


NEW APPENDIX.  385

sought  for  in  vain  in  the  sensible  conditions  and  various
changes  of  the  atmosphere.  The  degrees  of  heat,  moisture,
the  proportions  of  its  constituent  elements,  the  wind,  &c.  have
all  been  carefully  observed,  without  throwing  any  light  upon
this  obscure  subject,  but  to  prove  that  those  properties,
whether  natural  or  adventitious,  the  proportions  of  which  are
susceptible  of  measurement  or  detection,  have  no  agency  in
producing  those  affections,  except  as  accessories  ;  and  I  would
inquire  to  what  source  we  shall  direct  our  researches  for  these
causes,  if  not  to  that  universal  but  nameless  property  of  all
matter,  whose  effects  are  so  evident,  but  whose  essence  has
so  far  eluded  discovery.

"  In  my  former  communication  to  you,  I  expressed  my  opin-
ion of  the  remedial  effects  of  magnetizing ;  and  this  opinion
has  been  strengthened  by  my  subsequent  experience  and  ob-
servation. I  am,  in  fact,  as  well  grounded  in  the  belief  that
many  nervous  and  other  diseases,  in  which  disorganization
of  the  solids  has  not  taken  place,  may  be  cured  or  palliated
by  this  means,  as  I  am  that  electricity  and  galvanism  some-
times produce  beneficial  effects  ;  and  even  where  disorganiza-
tion has  taken  place,  some  benefit  may  be  derived  from  it,  by
diminishing  excitement  and  relieving  pain.

"In  the  present  imperfect  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the
causes  of  disease,  and  the  manner  of  applying  this  remedy,
we  shall  always  be  in  danger  of  making  a  wrong  application
of  it,  and  consequently  of  defeating,  rather  than  accomplish-
ing our  object.  Itis  from  this  cause  that  electricity  has  fallen
into  disrepute  and  neglect,  not  that  its  properties,  or  the  char-
acter of  diseases  have  changed.

"  I  do  not  feel  competent  to  enter  fully  into  the  various
methods  of  magnetizing  in  different  diseases,  neither  should  I
deem  it  necessary  or  proper  on  the  present  occasion,  having
already  exceeded  the  limits  of  my  original  design ;  but  I  will
take  the  liberty  to  make  a  very  few  general  remarks,  which
I  presume  will  be  found  applicable  to  a  large  proportion  of  the
cases  likely  to  be  benefitted  by  this  treatment.

"  In  treating  diseases  by  magnetizing,  as  wTell  as  other
remedial  agents,  we  should  endeavor,  as  far  as  possible,  in
the  first  place,  to  ascertain  by  the  symptoms  the  nature  of
the  affection ;  whether  there  is  a  surplus  or  deficiency  of  sen-
sorial power  in  the  system  generally,  or  in  any  particular
part  where  the  disease  may  be  located.  We  shall  thereby
establish  a  mode  of  proceeding  which  will  aid  very  essen-
tially the  concentration  of  the  will,  and  consequently  aug-
ment the  effect  of  the  manipulations.

"  In  the  second  place,  before  attempting  to  operate  particu-
33


386  NEW APPENDIX.

larly  upon  the  diseased  part,  we  should,  if  possible,  establish
a  communication  with  the  patient,  by  magnetizing  the  brain
and  its  appendages,  the  spinal  cord,  &c,  as  our  success  will
be  much  more  certain  than  if  we  commence  upon  the  disease
without  this  preparation  of  the  system.  I  do  not,  however,
consider  this  indispensably  necessary,  as  much  benefit  will
sometimes  be  derived  from  an  exclusively  local  operation.

"  Coldness,  paleness  and  loss  of  motion  or  feeling,  are  indica-
tions of  a  deficient  supply  of  the  vital  fluid ;  heat,  redness,
swelling  and  pain,  indicate  a  superabundance,  and  spasms  an
unequal  distribution  of  it.  In  the  first  of  these  states,  we
should  endeavor  to  restore  heat  and  action,  by  communica-
ting to  the  part  the  magnetic  or  vivifying  principle  ■  in  the
second,  our  efforts  should  be  directed  to  calling  it  off,  and
thereby  diminishing  excitement,  and  assisting  nature  in  re-
storing the  part  to  a  healthy  condition :  in  the  last,  our  object
will  be  to  equalize  the  excitement,  by  diffusing  the  fluid  over
the  system.

"Allow  me  sir,  to  say,  in  conclusion,  that  no  one  can  be
more  sensible  than  myself,  of  the  imperfect  manner  in  which
I  have  fulfilled  my  promise  of  moulding  this  theory  into  a
condensed  and  intelligible  form,  and  it  is  with  some  degree
of  reluctance  that  I  consent  to  its  publication.

"  As  an  apology  for  whatever  faults  may  be  observed  in
manner  or  matter,  to  the  difficulty  of  the  subject  and  my  lim-
ited time,  I  may  add,  and  hope  a  due  allowance  will  be  made,
for  the  frequent  interruptions  incident  to  a  professional  life.
"Respectfully  yours,

«G.  CAPRON.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."

[The  work  of  Wilson  Phillip,  quoted  at  the  373d  page  in  the  above
article,  is  entitled  "  The  Vital  Functions."]


NOTE  XXXVII.

Neurology. — The  following  letter,  from  Dr.  Buchanan,
will  be  read  with  interest  by  all  who  have  had  an  opportuni-
ty to  witness  his  experiments.  His  classes  in  New  York.
Boston,  and  other  places,  have  been  formed  among  men  of
science  and  literature,  and  composed  chiefly  of  such,  embra-
cing many  physicians ;  and  they  have,  in  several  published
reports,  expressed  a  very  favorable  opinion,  both  of  Dr.  Bn  ■
shanan  as  a  man,  and  of  his  system,  as  demonstrable  by  ex-
periments. Some  accounts  of  these  experiments,  which  are
oerformed  on  persons  in  the  natural  state,  have  been  given  in


NEW APPENDIX.  387

the  periodicals :  but  the  public  will  soon  have  Dr.  Buchan-
an's exposition  of  his  own  system.  Dr.  Buchanan  possesses
learning  and  science,  and  the  talent  of  applying  them.  His
error,  if  he  has  fallen  into  one,  may  consist  in  supposing  the
absence  of  the  vis  voluntatis  in  his  experiments ;  for  he  says
that  some  of  these  effects  can  be  produced  by  the  will  alone.
But  whatever  fate  may  befall  his  theory,  his  facts  are  very
novel  in  character,  and  easy  to  be  tested ;  and  cannot  fail  to
attract  the  attention  of  philosophic  minds.

u  Providence,  April  12,  1843.
"Sir:  The  sketch  of  the  principles  of  Neurology  which
you  desire,  may  be  given  in  a  few  words,  notwithstanding
the  intricacy  and  magnitude  of  the  science.  It  would  require
a  library  to  give  us  a  just  and  full  conception  of  the  subject,
although  the  cardinal  principles  of  the  science  may  be  stated

i  a  single  page.

"  The  science  of  Neurology  is  the  whole  science  of  man.
it  expounds  the  functions  of  the  brain,  and  proves  that  in
these  functions  we  may  learn  all  his  mental  powers,  and  all
the  laws  of  his  physiology.  It  proves  that  the  mind  of  man
is  a  microcosm,  in  which  we  may  discover  indications  of  the
laws  and  facts  of  external  nature.

"  This  science  owes  its  origin  to  the  discovery  which  I  first
publicly  announced  in  the  month  of  April,  1841,  that  the
human  brain  could  be  excited  and  compelled,  to  manifest  the
functions  of  its  different  convolutions.  By  pursuing  this  dis-
covery, and  exciting  each  convolution  so  as  to  make  its  func-
tions predominate  over  all  others,  (as  for  instance  by  exciting
Alimentiveness  until  hunger  became  uncontrollable,)  I  have
succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  mental  functions  of  the  differ-
ent organs,  which  in  most  respects  are  in  harmony  with  the
theory  of  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  and  in  establishing  the  con-
trolling power  of  the  brain  over  the  physiological  phenome-
na of  the  body.

"  An  intricate  system  of  Phrenology  and  Physiology  has
been  developed  by  my  experiments,  which  might  very  prop-
erly be  called  Anthropology.  But  as  this  system  has  been
developed  by  experiments  upon  the  brain,  and  as  the  nervous
substance  of  the  body  is  the  seat  of  its  vital  powers,  that  sci-
ence which  expounds  the  human  vital  functions  is  merely  the
science  of  the  nervous  substance,  and  should  therefore  be
called  Neurology.

"By  the  term  nervous  substance,  I  have  especial  reference
to  the  encephalon,  which  is  the  most  important  mass  of  nerv-
ous substance  in  the  body.  The  study  of  its  functions  gives
v.s  the  whole  science  of  man. The  mind  holds  its  communi-


388  NEW APPENDIX.

cation  with  the  physical  world  through  the  brain,  which  forms
its  connecting  link  with  the  body,  and  which  transmits  its  vo-
litions and  its  continual  influence  to  the  body.  The  body  re-
ceives an  infinite  diversity  of  physiological  powers  or  impul-
ses from  the  brain,  continually  modifying  its  circulation,  se-
cretions, respiration,  colorification,  nutrition,  health,  disease,
&c.  as  well  as  its  muscular  movements.

"  The  brain,  therefore,  being  the  common  theatre  of  physi-
ology and  psychology,  is  the  place  in  which  to  study  both.
Take  each  of  the  convolutions  and  parts  of  convolutions — ex-
cite them  to  a  manifestation  of  their  functions,  and  we  may
learn  the  source  of  each  faculty.  Thus  one  portion  of  the
brain,  when  excited,  makes  us  benevolent,  another  selfish;
another  makes  us  laugh,  another  makes  us  weep;  another
makes  us  violently  angry,  another  makes  us  love  the  whole
human  race.  Again,  the  physiological  phenomena  are  equal-
ly distinct ;  one  part  of  the  brain  makes  us  strong,  another
makes  us  weak;  one  makes  us  go  to  sleep,  another  makes  us
wide  awake  as  soon  as  it  is  excited ;  one  makes  us  hot,
another  makes  us  cold;  one  accelerates,  and  another  retards
the  action  of  the  bowels ;  one  accelerates,  and  another  sup-
presses the  respiration ;  one  developes  and  another  suppress-
es perspiration,  &c.  &c.  Thus  every  physiological  act  of  the
system  may  be  excited,  arrested  or  modified,  by  exciting  the
controlling  organs  in  the  brain.

"  The  phenomena  developed  in  the  processes  of  Animal
Magnetism,  are  thus  traced  to  their  physiological  causes  :
somnolence,  sleep,  strength,  paralysis,  clairvoyance,  sympa-
thy, the  volitionary  power  of  the  operator  over  the  subject,
&c,  are  merely  the  displays  of  certain  faculties  belonging  in
various  degrees  to  different  individuals,  according  to  their
endowment  of  the  organs  whence  these  faculties  or  tenden-
cies arise.

"  All  the  Mesmeric  conditions  may  be  produced  or  con-
trolled by  direct  operations  upon  the  organs  of  the  brain.
These  operations  are  not  made  by  means  of  will  or  sympa-
thy. They  are  as  simple  as  possible  ;  too  simple,  indeed,  for
that  love  of  display  and  wonder  which  belongs  to  the  unre-
flecting. No  apparatus  is  necessary — no  particular  state  of
body  or  mind.  No  formal  process  or  preparation  of  any  kind
whatever.

"  It  is  only  necessary  that  you  find  a  person  of  impressible
temperament,  which  is  indicated  generally  by  the  largeness
of  the  pupils  of  the  eyes,  and  by  a  general  delicacy  or  soft-
ness of  the  organization.

"When  you  find  such  an  individual,  if  you  hold  your  hand
near  to  his  without  touching,  as  by  bringing  the  tips  of  your


NEW APPENDIX.  389

fingers  near  the  palm  of  his  hand,  he  will  feel  a  slight  sensa-
tion of  coldness  in  less  than  one  minute,  which  will  be  quite
distinct  as  you  move  your  fingers  along  toward  the  extremi-
ties of  his  without  touching.  He  will  also  feel  very  peculiar
effects  if  you  touch  each  of  your  fingers  to  the  corresponding
finger  of  his  hand.  Each  finger  will  give  him  a  different
impression.

"Having  thus  ascertained  his  impressibility,  place  your
fingers  gently  in  contact  with  his  temples,  about  one  inch  or
one  inch  and  a  half  horizontally  behind  the  external  angle  of
the  brow  on  the  temples,  upon  the  spot  marked  in  the  Neu-
rological Diagram,  Somnolence,  and  you  will  in  a  few  minutes
(five  or  ten)  perceive  a  winking  of  the  eyelids  and  a  drowsy
influence,  which  gradually  increases  until  he  cannot  keep  his
eyes  open.

"  By  brushing  off  the  excitement  from  the  spot  which  you
have  touched,  and  placing  your  hand  upon  the  upper  part  of
the  occiput,  he  will  be  restored.  If  he  has  fallen  soundly
asleep,  it  maybe  necessary  to  touch  the  organ  of  Conscious-
ness, which  is  exactly  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead ;  or  the
organ  of  vision,  which  is  just  at  the  lower  part  of  the  phreno-
logical organ  of  color.

"In  this  experiment  you  may  on  some  persons  produce
unpleasant  effects,  from  the  excitement  of  the  neighboring
organ  of  disease.  These  may  be  removed  by  dispersive
frictions,  touching  the  head  very  lightly.

"If  successful  in  this  experiment,  you  may  then  excite  the
other  organs  of  the  brain,  and  bring  out  all  their  func-
tions in  the  same  manner.  Thus  you  may  take  the  Neuro-
logical Diagram,  and  verify  every  function  which  is  located
upon  it,  if  you  find  a  constitution  sufficiently  impressible  to
give  striking  manifestations.

"The  art  of  operating  in  this  manner  is  extremely  simple.
Any  one  may  acquire  it,  and  may  use  it  to  relieve  pain  or
disease,  by  learning  the  principles  of  Neurology,  which  point
out  the  proper  organs  to  be  excited  for  any  specific  result.
This  process,  however,  is  not  the  principal  aim  of  the  science.
It  is  applicable  to  a  comparatively  small  number  of  persons.
The  experiments  upon  the  human  brain  answer  their  great
purpose  by  revealing  the  nature  of  man — the  laws  of  his
physiology.

"  They  furnish  us  a  science  competent  to  guide  our  moral,
mental  and  physical  education.  They  give  clearness  _  to
physiology — they  make  pathology  and  therapeutics  intelligi-
ble, and  they  give  us  a  new  basis  and  a  new  philosophy  for
the  science  of  medicine.
33*


390  NEW APPENDIX.

"  Some  time  during  this  summer,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  pub-
lish a  volume  sketching  in  outline  the  principles  of  this  intri-
cate science. Very  respectfully,

"Your  humble  servant,

"JOS.  R.  BUCHANAN.
"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


NOTE  XXXVIII.

In  giving  directions  for  the  construction  of  the  Magnetic
battery,  Deleuze  points  out  the  danger  of  making  use  of  met-
als whose  oxides  are  poisonous.  The  fluid  might  convey  the
poison  to  the  patients,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Galvanic
fluid  is  known  to  transmit  acids  and  alkalies,  through  inter-
mediate substances.

The  following  experiments  by  Dr.  Buchanan  prove,  with
apparent  conclusiveness,  the  justice  of  this  caution.  It  is  ex-
tracted from  the  report  of  the  New  York  committee  published
in  the  Evening  Post  of  Dec.  6,  1842.  The  report  is  signed
by  Dr.  Forry,  Wm.  C.  Bryant,  and  J.  L.  O'Sullivan ;  whose
names  are  not  unfavorably  known  to  the  public.

"  The  committee  now  proceeded  to  the  house  of  Mrs.  R.
The  first  experiments  consisted  in  the  application  of  medicines
in  the  same  manner  as  was  practised  at  the  previous  sitting
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  to  what  extent,  a  medicinal
influence  may  be  imparted  through  the  hand.  Dr.  Forry
having  brought  with  him  six  different  articles  of  the  Materia
Medica,  each  was  tried  successively ;  and  as  none  of  the  par-
cels (each  being  enclosed  in  double  papers,)  had  any  labels,
the  results  could  not  be  anticipated,  as  the  contents  of  each
paper  were  unknown  even  to  Dr.  Forry  himself.  A  decided
effect  was  usually  produced  in  the  course  of  thirty  seconds ;
and  most  of  the  effects  which  did  occur,  were  similar  to  those
observed  in  the  usual  mode  of  administering  such  medicines.
her  feelings,  the  experiment  would  not  of  course,  be  so  suc-
cessful as  when  the  effects  would  exhibit  themselves.  In  re-
fect with  much  correctness,  as  '  cooling  and  strengthening.'
The  narcotics  however,  told  their  own  story,  and  in  language,
too,  admitting  of  no  two-fold  meaning.  A  paper,  for  instance,
was  placed  in  her  hand  (it  being  at  the  same  time  held  by
Dr.  Buchanan,)  which  speedily  produced  so  powerful  a  nar-
cotic effect  aa  to  create  some  alarm ;  and  it  was  some  min-
utes before  she  could  be  recovered  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  from
its  poisonous  influence. As  she  was  being  restored  to  a  state


NEW APPENDIX.  391

<of  consciousness,  she  made  several  efforts  to  vomit3  but  after
the  lapse  of  eight  or  ten  minutes,  during  which  time  various
passes  were  made  for  her  relief,  she  seemed  quite  recovered.
On  examination,  the  paper  was  found  to  contain  the  extract
of  stramonium,  (Jamestown  weed.)  One  of  the  papers  which
had  been  previously  tried,  and  found  to  produce  an  'irritat-
ing effect  and  copperish  taste  of  the  mouth,'  and  which  had
been  laid  aside  for  subsequent  trial,  was  now  again  present-
ed. The  effect,  as  it  now  perhaps  proved  less  irritating,
greater  degree  than  she  could  well  bear.  This  was  opened
and  found  to  contain  Cayenne  pepper.  Another  paper  was
presented  which  induced  narcotic  and  sickening  effects  some-
what similar  to  those  of  the  stramonium.  It  was  immediate-
ly removed,  and  the  paper  on  being  opened,  was  found  to
contain  opium,55

It  ought  to  be  observed  here  that  Dr.  Buchanan's  experi-
ments above  detailed  were  made  upon  an  impressible  person
in  the  natural  state ;  and  are  therefore  conclusive.  He  calls
the  agent  by  which  one  individual  makes  a  physiological  im-
pression upon  another,  when  in  contact,  Neuraicra,  an  appro-
priate name  until  it  shall  be  identified  with  the  universal  fluid
of  La  Place.  This  fluid,  says  Dr.  B.,  is  radiated  and  con-
ducted freely  from  the  human  hand.

It  should  be  remembered  that  Mesmer  maintained  the  ex-
istence of  such  a  fluid,  and  perhaps  justice  as  well  as  con-
venience would  suggest  the  propriety  of  continuing  to  call  it
the  Mesmeric  fluid  ;  in  the  same  manner  as  we  call  the  one
discovered  by  Galvani,  the  Galvanic  fluid.  An  arbitrary  name
in  such  a  case  has  peculiar  advantages,  for  it  continues  to
represent  the  same  thing  in  the  whole  progress  of  a  science.
Whereas  it  is  well  known  that  several  names,  such  as  animal
electricity,  derived  from  resemblances  and  partial  develope-
ments,  have  been  thrown  aside  in  the  course  of  investigation.


NOTE  XXXIX.

The  Rev.  Dr.  Packard,  of  Shelburne,  in  Massachusetts,
where  he  holds  pastoral  relations,  and  where  he  was  ordained
nearly  fifty  years  ago,  having  been  subjected  to  injurious  re-
ports in  consequence  of  the  attention  which  he  bestowed  upon
Mesmerism,  caused  a  coun&&£to  convene  in  August,  1841,
before  whom  he  laid  the  whole  subject,  together  with  the  evi-
dences of  the  good  effects  which  he  had  produced  through  its
agency.

The  report  of  that  council  is  here  given,  as  published  in


392  NEW APPENDIX.

the  Boston  Courier,  of  Nov.  28th,  1842.  "  We  are  acquaint-
ed," says  the  Editor  of  the  Courier,  "with  the  Rev.  Dr.
Packard,  and  we  believe  him  to  be  too  shrewd  to  be  imposed
upon,  and  too  honest  to  practice  imposition  upon  others."

Result  of  council  convened  August  18,  1841,  at  the  house,*
and  by  the  request,  of  Rev.  Theophilus  Packard,  D.  D.,
in  Shelburne,  consisting  of  Rev.  Moses  Miller  of  West
Hawley,  Rev.  Amariah  Chandler  of  Greenfield,  Rev.  Ty-
ler Thatcher  of  Hawley,  and  Rev.  Edward  Hitchcock  of
Amherst.

"  The  Council  were  requested  by  Dr.  Packard  to  consider
whether,  in  the  attention  he  had  given  to  animal  magnetism,
or  Mesmerism,  as  it  is  called,  there  was  any  reason  for  the
report,  circulated  in  the  community,  that  he  has  acted  incon-
sistently with  his  ministerial  character,  or  even  by  satanic  in-
fluence !  And  whether,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  not,  in  some
measure  successfully,  applied  mental  agency  to  the  relief  of
the  sick  and  suffering  ?

"  In  deciding  these  questions,  the  council  are  by  no  means
prepared  to  stand  forth  as  advocates  of  animal  magnetism  in
the  abstract.  They  cannot  but  admit,  however,  that  experi-
ments on  this  subject,  some  of  which  have  been  made  in  the
most  cautious  and  satisfactory  manner,  have  disclosed  re-
markable facts,  not  apparently  explicable  by  the  principles  of
any  established  science.  These  facts  appear  to  have  an  im-
portant bearing  upon  mental  philosophy,  the  doctrine  of  ma-
terialism, and  the  cure  of  diseases.  Sound  philosophy,  then,
dictates  that  they  should  be  examined  and  re-examined,  with
a  carefulness  and  accuracy  proportionate  to  their  marvelous
and  important  character.

"Instead  of  deciding  beforehand,  as  some  do,  that  they
cannot  be  true  because  they  are  so  marvelous ;  or  because
we  fear  they  are  contrary  to  established  principles  of  reli-
gion ;  or,  instead  of  imputing  them,  as  others  do,  to  a  satanic
agency,  let  them  be  put  to  the  test  of  the  severest  investiga-
tion. For  we  need  never  fear  that  the  developement  of  any
truth,  which  Providence  may  place  within  our  reach,  will,
when  fully  understood,  be  otherwise  than  beneficial.  The
earlier  discoveriesf  in  almost  every  physical  science,  have

*  The  Council  adjourned  to  the  meeting  house,  and  communications
made  to  them  and  the  hearing  and  investigation  were  in  public.  And
lest  vulgar  prejudice  should  make  misrepresentations  of  his  verbal  state-
ments before  the  council,  he  made  them  from  documents  written  out  and
preserved.

f  Every  new  discovery  in  science  is  a  further  discovery  of  the  goodness
of  God,  and  in  some  way  or  other  for  practical  use  to  man.


NEW APPENDIX.  393

'■created  alarm  in  timid  minds,  lest  they  should  become  an  en-
gine with  which  to  assail  religion  and  morality.  But  their
lull  developement  has  shown  them  to  be  only  allies  and
friends.

"If  these  views  are  correct,  animal  magnetism  deserves
examination ;  since  it  seems,  so  far  as  we  understand  it,  to
hold  a  close  relation  to  theology  and  human  comfort ;  and  it
is  surely  an  appropriate  study  of  the  minister  of  the  Gospel,
so  far  as  he  can  make  its  pursuit  consistent  with  his  more  im-
portant duties.  Particularly  proper  do  the  council  regard  it
for  Dr.  Packard.  For  it  is  well  known  that  during  a  long
life,  he  has  devoted  his  attention  to  mental  science ;  and  who
would  wish  him  to  pass  by  this  new  and  interesting  and  al-
most unexplored  field  1  If  this  wTere  his  only  object,  why
should  he  not  be  permitted  to  close  a  long  and  useful  life  in
researches  so  interesting  and  apparently  of  useful  tendency  ?
Especially,  when  it  is  known  that,  by  the  settlement  of  an
able  and  faithful  colleague,  much  leisure  time  has  been  se-
cured to  him  ?  Who  would  have  believed  that  a  man,  whose
praise  has  so  long  been  in  all  the  churches,  should  be  sub-
jected, on  this  account,  in  the  19th  century  and  in  the  centre
of  New-England,  to  ridicule,  and  even  to  the  suspicion  of
acting  under  satanic  influence  ?  The  council,  however,  are
happy  to  say,  that  no  evidence  has  been  presented  to  them,
that  the  people  of  Shelburne  have  originated,  or  circulated,  or
believed  these  imputations ;  and  they  have  too  much  confi-
dence in  the  intelligence  and  Christian  candor  of  that  people,
to  believe  that  they  can  obtain  a  footing  here.  But  they  ex-
ist abroad ;  and  as  the  reputation  of  Dr.  Packard  is,  in  a
sense,  the  property  of  the  Christian  church,  the  council  feel
themselves  called  upon  to  bear  strong  testimony  against  them.
On  these  grounds,  the  council  feel  as  if  Dr.  Packard  would
be  fully  vindicated  from  the  evil  and  ridiculous  surmises
which  a  busy  few  have  circulated  to  his  injury.

"  But  they  have  evidence  also  of  a  decided  character,  set
before  them,  to  show  that  a  still  more  powerful  motive,  by
which  he  has  been  actuated  in  his  attention  to  this  subject,  is
a  benevolent  desire  to  relieve  the  sick  and  suffering.  This
has  led  him  to  examine  more  than  two  hundred  cases  of
diseases,  by  means  of  Mesmeric  clairvoyance;  and  of  the
ascertained  results,  a  careful  record  has  been  kept.  This  was
presented  to  the  council,  and  certainly  forms  a  most  curious
and  remarkable  collection  of  evidence  on  the  subject,  which
they  cannot  but  hope,  will  some  day  be  made  public.  The
council  by  no  means  assume  the  place  of  medical  men,  nor


394  NEW APPENDIX.

but  if  they  can  place  any  confidence  in  the  testimony  of  the
sick  themselves,  or  of  their  friends,  or  of  several  respectable
'physicians,  they  cannot  doubt  but  important  relief  and  appar-
ent cure  were  often  the  result.  And  in  the  fact  that  Dr.
Packard  has  persisted  in  these  offices  to  the  sick  in  spite  of
the  obloquy  he  has  incurred;  and  that  he  has  never  lectured
on  the  subject,  or  performed  experiments  before  invited  audi-
ences, or  for  mere  gratification  of  curiosity,  and  that  instead
of  profit,  he  has  incurred  pecuniary  loss,  they  have  strong
evidence  that  his  motives  were  benevolent.  He  may  perhaps
have  devoted  more  time  and  effort  to  these  labors  than  other
duties  would  justify ;  nor  do  the  council  feel  called  upon  to
decide,  whether  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  he  has  taken  the
most  judicious  course  possible.  But  they  bear  the  most  de-
cided testimony  to  the  benevolence  and  purity  of  his  motives,
and  express  their  undiminished  confidence  in  his  Christian
and  ministerial  character.

"  And  although  they  do  not  understand  that  this  council
was  called  with  any  special  reference  to  the  church  and  peo-
ple of  Shelburne,  they  cannot  but  express  their  best  wishes,
and  their  fervent  prayers,  for  their  future  peace  and  prosperi-
ty, under  the  ministrations  of  their  long  tried  and  beloved

"MOSES  MILLER,  Moderator.


Some  communications  have  been  received  from  persons  who
are  not  willing  to  give  their  names.  The  translator  has
therefore  avoided  all  allusion  even  to  the  facts  contained  in
them,  being  desirous  of  presenting  such  accounts  as  are  duly
authenticated.  In  this  manner  he  is  obliged  to  omit  some  un-
doubted cases  of  medical  interest,  and  some  curious  phenom-
ena. The  caution  observed  in  this  particular  at  the  com-
mencement of  his  work,  enables  him  now  to  say  that  no  one
of  his  correspondents  has  expressed  a  desire  to  withdraw  any
statement  hitherto  made  in  this  appendix ;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, all  subsequent  experience  has  confirmed  their  faith
and  corroborated  their  facts.

An  exception,  however,  is  made  in  favor  of  the  following
statement,  because  the  translator  has  permission  to  refer  to
the  gentleman  who  makes  it ;  and  because  his  authority  is
acknowledged  by  all  who  know  him,  to  be  worthy  of  confi-
dence.

This  gentleman  recently  visited  Portland.  He  gives  the
following  account  of  an  interview  with  a  Somnambulist.


NEW APPENDIX.  395

M  The  next  morning  after  my  arrival  in  Portland,  I  went
into  a  store  where  I  was  not  personally  known,  and  where
some  gentlemen  were  discoursing  about  a  somnambulist's
having  discovered  concealed  property.

"  On  my  expressing  a  total  disbelief,  and  a  desire  to  wit-
ness something  of  this  kind,  one  of  the  gentlemen  offered  to
accompany  me  to  the  residence  of  Mr.  Tarbox,  who  was
magnetizing  his  wife.

"  Neither  the  gentleman  who  went  with  me,  nor  any  other
person  in  Portland,  knew  me  or  the  place  of  my  residence.
And,  as  I  afterwards  found  out,  neither  the  husband  nor  the
wife  had  ever  been  to  Providence.

"  Being  thrown  into  the  Mesmeric  state,  she  was  asked  by
Mr.  T.,  '  Can  you  tell  me  this  gentleman's  name  V

"  I  will  omit  the  questions  put  to  her,  after  observing  that
I  was  careful  to  give  no  clue  to  any  one  as  to  myself,  nor  to
her  by  asking  leading  questions.  When  she  gave  a  correct
account,  I  gave  no  sign  to  signify  its  correctness ;  and  when
she  gave  an  incorrect  account,  I  observed  the  same  conduct.
She  made  two  mistakes  only,  and  these  she  discovered  and
corrected  almost  immediately,  without  the  possibility  of  gain-
ing any  information  from  any  gesture  or  exclamation  of  mine.

"  First,  she  told  my  name.  Being  asked  how  she  knew  it,
she  said  it  was  written  in  my  pocket-book.  She  next  indica-
ted Providence,  R.  I.,  as  my  residence.

"My  name  and  residence  were  printed  in  large  letters.
My  pocket-book  was  in  the  inside  pocket  of  my  frock  coat.  I
was  not  in  communication  with  the  somnambulist  during  my
risit.

"  Mr.  Tarbox  sent  her  to  Providence,  where  she  gave  a
correct  account  of  my  house  and  family ;  and  mentioned  the
presence  of  two  children.  As  I  have  no  children,  I  was  at  a
loss  to  conjecture  whose  they  were,  and  thought  her  in  error  ;
but  having  minuted  down  the  precise  time — half  past  eleven
o'clock — and  remembering  it  was  the  general  election  in
Rhode-Island,  on  my  return  I  ascertained  her  to  be  correct.
She  also  declared  them  not  to  be  my  children.

"  She  was  then  asked  by  Mr.  T.,  not  at  my  suggestion,
whether  I  was  a  married  man.  She  replied  that  I  had  been
married  twice,  and  gave  an  account  of  the  number  of  chil-
dren I  had  had,  and  lost  ;  and  also  their  sex.

"  She  was  then  directed  to  ascertain  what  my  profession
is,  and  to  look  round  and  find  my  place  of  business.

interior.  She  said  that  the  stove  was  such  as  she  had  never
seen  before,  having  wires  inside  of  it.  While  busied  in  the
description,  she  suddenly  started  back,  and  give  as  a  reason


396  NEW APPENDIX.

the  appearance  of  the  hands  of  one  of  my  workmen:  saying'
they  had  been  burnt  very  badly.

'•  The  stove  is  one  of  the  self-regulating  air-tights.  The
young  man's  hands  and  arms  had  been  burnt,  and  shocking-
ly too.

my  desk :  and  being  requested  to  look  into  it,  she  declared
she  could  not  for  it  was  iron.  She  however  looked  into  the
stove,  without  being  requested  to  do  so.

"  On  being  asked  whether  there  was  a  church  near  my
it  had  no  steeple,  but  voluntarily  correcting  her  error,  and
declaring  it  a  very  high  one,  the  highest  she  ever  saw.  She
said  the  church  was  in  a  large  green  yard,  full  of  young
trees,  and  my  shop  in  the  same  yard ;  which  you  know  cor-
responds well  with  the  fact.


In  order  to  complete  the  view  of  Mesmerism  as  now  prac-
tised, the  translator  obtained  from  Mr.  Silas  Allen,  of  Boston,
a  number  of  certificates  of  cures  wrought  upon  his  patients-
whose  somnambulic  powers  are  often  called  into  requisition,
and  whose  character  is  worthy  of  confidence.

Among  the  diseases  specified,  are,  Palpitation  and  Enlarge-
ment of  the  Heart,  of  ten  years  duration;  severe  Cough  and
Raising  Blood,  Salt  Rheum,  dangerously  Ulcerated  Foot
Liver  Complaint,  General  Debility  of  the  System,  &c.  And
among  the  names  of  the  certifiers,  are  Mrs.  Tileston,  Boston,
49  Hanover  street;  Parker  Barnes,  B.  A.  N.  Atwood,  George
Paul,  Boston;  Dorcas  Hill,  Samuel  W.  Brown,  Bethiah
P.  Brown,  Julia  A.  Lewis,  Thomas  E.  Roberts,  C.  Wood-
ward, Lowell ;  II.  W.  Buxton,  Nashua,  N.  H. ;  Dr.  Charles
Stratton,  Keene,  N.  H.


The  cures  wrought  upon  children  are  peculiarly  interesting,
because  we  cannot  suppose  them  to  be  affected  through  the
agency  of  the  imagination.  Indeed,  the  imagination  often
acts  powerfully  in  aiding  the  results  of  ordinary  medicines ;
and  it  is  difficult  to  decide  how  much  it  interferes  with  ancl
modifies  the  practice  of  the  physician.  Dr.  Cleaveland  was
called  to  a  child  three  days  old,  troubled  with  convulsions,
which  had  lasted  twenty-four  hours.  He  placed  one  hand
upon  its  head,  and  made  passes  with  the  other  along  its  body.
The  convulsions  ceased  in  five  minutes,  and  the  child  went
into  a  quiet  slumber.


NEW APPENDIX.  397

(Fiona  the  Bangor  Courier.)

Surgical  Operation — a  Home  Case  and  a  Strong  one. —
An  operation  has  been  performed  in  this  city  which  goes  far
to  establish  the  fact  that  there  is  something  in  Mesmerism.
beyond  all  dispute.  Mrs.  Davis,  of  Eddington,  has  suffered
for  some  time  with  a  tumor  in  the  right  shoulder  and  was
advised  by  her  physician  to  have  it  removed.  While  think-
ing upon  the  subject  she  heard  of  Animal  Magnetism,  and
came  into  the  city  several  days  since  to  have  its  effects  tried
upon  her.  Mr.  Win.  E.  Small,  of  this  city,  who  has  recent-
ly been  practicing  Magnetism  among  his  friends  and  found
to  be  a  successful  magnetizer.  was  called  upon  and  succeed-
ed in  mesmerising  or  in  putting  her  into  a  magnetic  sleep. —
This  was  repeated  several  times  within  a  few  days,  when  the
physician  and  several  friends  met  for  the  purpose  of  remov-
ing the  tumor  by  a  surgical  operation.  The  excitement  of
the  preparation,  Mrs.  Davis  remarked,  was  so  great  that  she
doubted  whether  Mr.  Small  would  be  able  to  mesmerise  her
sufficiently  for  enduring  the  operation.  Mr.  Small  commen-
ced magnetizing  her  and  in  eleven  minutes  she  fell  asleep,
and  the  operation  was  continued  as  much  longer,  when  the
Surgeon,  Doct.  George  B.  Rich,  made  an  incision  in  the
shoulder,  over  the  tumor,  of  about  two  inches  in  length,  and
inserted  a  hook  into  the  tumor,  which  was  about  half  the  size
of  a  hen's  egg,  and  dissected  it  out,  and  dressed  the  wound.

During  the  operation,  Mrs.  Davis  manifested  some  slight
uneasiness  like  a  person  in  a  troubled  dream,  and  one  or  two
slight  spasms  in  the  opposite  arm.  On  being  taken  out  of
the  sleep,  she  was  told  that  they  had  not  been  able  to  extract
her  tumor,  to  which  she  replied  that  she  had  feared  they
would  not  as  she  was  so  much  excited  about  it.  She  was  at
length  apprised  of  the  result,  of  which  she  was  previously
quite  unconscious,  and  the  only  sensation  of  which  she  was
in  any  way  conscious  was  that  of  being  asleep,  and  wishing
to  wake  up  but  not  being  able.  Nor  has  she  suffered  any
pain  since.

We  have  this  statement,  substantially,  from  those  who
were  present ;  the  parties  are  of  the  highest  respectability,
and  have  no  motive  for  an  erroneous  statement.


(From  a  Cincinnati  paper.)
Death  baffled  by  Magnetism. — Every  day  is  bringing  out
new  wonders  performed  by  animal  magnetism,  which  appears
now  to  be  the  great  agent  in every  operation  of  nature.
34


39S  NEW APPENDIX.

From  putting  people  to  sleep  and  making  them  expose  the
secrets  of  other  people,  it  has  become  the  powerful  instru-
ment in  the  hands  of  medical  science  to  effect  the  cure  of
diseases.  The  Pittsburg  Intelligencer  gives  the  result  of  a
marvelous  case  of  this  kind,  which  occurred  there  last  week.
A  Mrs.  Erkson  had  been  confined  to  her  bed  since  the  latter
part  of  last  May,  with  a  disease  generally  known  as  "  milk
leg."  She  was  unable  to  leave  her  bed  to  walk  across  the
room,  or  take  a  step,  except  by  the  aid  of  a  crutch  or  stick ;
and  the  greatest  caution  and  watchfulness  were  necessary  to
prevent  her  death.  On  Sunday,  31st  July,  she  was  induced
to  submit  to  be  thrown  into  a  Mesmeric  sleep.  With  the
greatest  difficulty  she  was  moved  from  the  bed  to  the  chair,
and  in  about  thirty  minutes  Dr.  Ewing  had  her  in  a  sound
magnetic  slumber,  which  continued  about  two  hours,  during
which  several  successful  experiments  were  made  in  neurolo-
gy and  sympathy.  She  was  then  awakened,  and,  to  the  as-
tonishment of  herself  and  friends,  got  up  and  walked  about
the  room,  up  stairs  and  down  stairs,  and  through  every  room
in  the  house,  without  the  aid  of  a  crutch  or  stick,  as  if  noth-
ing ailed  her.  Another  experiment  was  tried,  and  it  had  the
effect  of  removing  every  trace  of  the  disease.  Dr.  Ewing  is
well  known  in  that  city,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Erkson  are  both
highly  respectable,  and  their  statements  are  entitled  to  full
credence.


NOTE  XLI.

"Providence,  August  4,  1843.

"Dear  Sir:  An  interesting  case  recently  occurred  to  me,
which  exemplifies  the  power  of  the  Mesmeric  agency  to
quicken  the  faculties.  A  gentleman  wished  me  to  Mesmer-
ise his  lady,  who  had  been  for  some  time  troubled  with  a
nervous  excitability.  After  a  few  sittings,  she  was  entirely
freed  from  this  affection.  She  never  reached  further  than  a
state  of  demi-somnambulism,  during  which  she  would  accom-
pany her  husband  with  her  voice,  while  he  was  playing  upon
the  harmonicon,  improvising  as  she  sung.  Some  stanzas  of
these  pieces  were  written  down  by  her  husband,  and  they
possess  great  merit.

"  This  lady  had  published  some  pieces  of  verse  exhibiting
a  fine  poetic  temperament,  which  seems  thus  to  have  been
excited  to  action.  When  in  the  natural  state,  she  could  not
compose  inverse  without  giving  thought  and  attention  to  the
subject  and  metre;  but  when  Mesmerised,  her  composition
would  be  adapted  to  the  tune  played.


NEW APPENDIX.  399

"One  of  my  friends  was  recently  attacked  by  a  severe
nervous  headache,  to  which  complaint  he  is  periodically  sub-
ject, and  which  commonly  lasts  from  36  to  48  hours.  He  was
in  great  distress  at  9  o'clock  in  the  evening,  from  which  I  re-
lieved him  completely  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  left  him  en-
joying a  quiet  sleep.  I  shall  probably  be  able  to  cure  this
tendency  by  operating  whenever  he  has  another  attack.

"I  have  succeeded  in  giving  great  relief  to  a  young  lady
who  was  in  danger  of  falling  a  victim  to  a  spinal  complaint.
She  was  not  clairvoyant,  but  was  perfectly  obedient  to  vo-
lition. Respectfully  yours,

"ISAAC  THURBER.

"Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn."


"The  effects  produced  upon  persons  who,  before  the  opera-
lion  (of  Mesmerising)  was  begun,  were  in  a  state  of  insen-
sibility ;  those  which  have  taken  place  upon  other  persons,
after  the  operation  itself  had  reduced  them  to  that  state  ;  and,
also,  the  effects  produced  upon  brutes;  no  longer  permit  it  to
be  doubted  that  the  proximity  of  two  animated  bodies,  in  a
certain  position,  and  with  the  help  of  certain  motions,  do  pro-
duce a  real  effect,  wholly  independent  of  the  imagination  of
either.  It  is  also  evident  that  these  effects  are  owing  to  a
communication  which  takes  place  between  the  nervous  systems
of  the  two  parties." — Cuvier,  Anatomie  Comparee  Tom.  II.

"  The  extraordinary  phenomena  which  result  from  the  ex-
treme sensibility  of  the  nervous  system  in  some  persons,  have
given  birth  to  a  variety  of  opinions,  on  the  existence  of  a
new  agent,  denominated  animal  magnetism.  It  is  natural  to
suppose  that  the  influence  of  those  causes  is  very  weak,  and
that  it  can  easily  be  disturbed  by  accidental  circumstances,
but  it  would  be  unfair  to  conclude  that  it  never  exists,  merely
because,  in  many  cases,  it  does  not  manifest  itself.  We  are
so  far  from  being  acquainted  with  all  the  agencies  of  nature,
and  with  their  different  modes  of  action,  that  it  would  be  un-
philosophical  to  deny  their  existence,  because  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  they  are  unexplainable  to  us." — La
Place,  Traite  Ajialytique  die  Calcul  des  Probabilites.  p.  41.


NOTE  XLII— Pa<re  245.


Magnetism  a  Science. — As  objections  are  sometimes  made
to  the  word  science,  as  applied  to  Mesmerism,  I  have  avoid-
ed the  use  of  it  in  the  Appendix ;  but  as  some  of  my  corres-
pondents have  used  it,  and  as  Deleuze  himself  does  not  hesi-


400  NEW APPENDIX.

tate  to  do  so,  it  may  be  expedient  to  consider  whether  it  is
entitled  to  that  appellation.

We  apply  the  term  to  any  subject  of  study  that  has  cer-
tain fixed  principles,  as  music,  electricity,  Galvanism.  The
whole  science  of  electricity,  so  far  as  it  is  known,  according
to  the  Franklinian  theory,  is  based  upon  two  principles.

But  there  are  many  facts  not  reducible  to  these  two  princi-
ples ;  perhaps  they  refer  to  laws  not  yet  discovered.  Its  re-
lation to  terrestrial  magnetism  and  to  Galvanism  is  not  ascer-
tained :  theory  supposes  them  to  be  modifications  of  the  same
agent.  If  it  were  necessary  for  all  the  principles  to  be  de-
veloped, before  a  subject  is  dignified  with  the  name  of  sci-
ence, we  may  have  been  too  hasty  in  regard  to  electricity.
And  if  we  were  to  examine  the  claims  of  all  the  other  branch-
es of  human  knowledge  to  this  term,  we  should  find  them,
by  the  same  argument,  equally  unfounded  ;  for  every  one  of
them  may  have  unexplored  or  undiscovered  laws.  Properly
speaking,  we  should  not  have  a  single  science.

Again,  if  we  limit  the  application  to  those  subjects  which
have  a  certain  number  of  discovered  laws,  how  shall  we  de-
termine the  number  that  is  necessary  ?  If  more  than  two  are
required,  then  electricity  is  no  science.

Every  one  who  reads  the  Practical  Instruction,  will  ob-
serve that  Mesmerism  has  two  fundamental  principles,  which
are  to  be  regarded  in  its  application.

First,  this  agent  must  be  employed  with  attention.

Secondly,  it  must  be  employed  with  the  proper  intention.

If  any  one  objects  that  these  principles  refer  solely  to  the
conditions  of  its  action,  it  is  easy  to  say  the  same  thing  of
the  two  laws  of  electricity,  which  do  not  pretend  to  explain
the  agent  itself.

The  laws  of  both  of  these  agents  are  easily  demonstrated  :
further,  there  are  certain  circumstances  which  are  requsite
before  the  demonstration  can  be  made.  It  cannot  therefore
be  urged  with  propriety,  that  Mesmerism  is  improperly  term-
ed a  science,  simply  because  its  effects  are  not  always  produ-
cible :  nor  can  it  be  urged  from  the  consideration  that  we  do
not  perfectly  know  the  circumstances  which  impede  its  action.
Electricity  would  itself  be  a  science,  if  we  were  ignorant  of
the  disturbing  cause  arising  from  the  moisture  of  the  atmos-
phere.

Neither  can  the  existence  or  the  non  existence  of  a  fluid  de-
termine this  question,  or  affect  it  in  the  least.  Electricity
cannot  be  proved  to  be  a.  fluid.  The  light  which  we  see
when  we  apply  the  discharger  to  a  Leyden  jar,  may  be  noth-
ing more  than  the  sudden  and  violent  compression  of  the  at-
mosphere, which  attends  the  restoration  of  the  equilibrium.


NEW APPENDIX.  401

l[  there  is  a  fluid  it  is  invisible ;  otherwise  we  should  see  it
in  the  Leyden  jar  when  fully  charged.

Since  we  cannot  suppose  effects  without  an  agent,  and
since  the  effects  of  Mesmerism  are  readily  demonstrated,  we
must  suppose  an  agent.  The  controlling  laws  of  this  agent
are  to  be  traced  in  these  effects.  The  knowledge  and  the
application  of  these  laws,  so  far  as  they  are  known,  constitute
a  science,  however  imperfectly  formed.

It  may  be  further  observed,  that  there  is  a  distinction  be-
tween the  manual  application  of  the  rules  of  this  science,
and  a  knowledge  of  its  laws  and  anomalies ;  which  exhibits
another  analogy  with  electricity,  for  the  latter  can  be  prac-
tised as  an  art,  medically  ;  or  studied  as  a  science,  philosophi-
cally.


Error. — The  word  abnormal,  on  the  372d  page,  was  misprinted
abnominaU


34*


INDEX  TO  THE  APPENDIX.

NOTE  I. 217

NOTE  II. — Scene  in  a  school-room.  Children  possess  the
magnetic  power.  Three  instances.  Somnambulism  at  the
first  trial  without  manipulation,  .  .  . 217

NOTE  III. — Power  over  the  subject's  imagination. Various

experiments. Magnetized  water, .  .  -  218

NOTE  IV. — Clairvoyance.  Explanation  of  the  term.  In
what  manner  some  somnambulists  examine  objects.  Read-
ing a  sealed  letter.  Note  from  Isaac  Thurber.  Experi-
ment by  a  young  lady  :  by  the  translator.  Extract  from
the  Salem  Gazette.  A  somnambulist  examines  one  of  Dr.
B's  patients.  Post-mortem  examination.  Note  from  Dr.  B.,  219
NOTE  V. — Degree  of  control  exercised  over  somnambulists,  225
NOTE  VI. — Coincidence  of  experience  in  this  country  and

in  Europe,  in  relation  to  the  magnetic  practice,  . 226

NOTE  VII.— Awaking  a  somnambulist,  .  .  226

NOTE  VIII. — Paralysis,  produced  in  somnambulists  by
volition  :  in  the  natural  state  by  manipulation.  Letter
from  Dr.  Webb.  Notice  of  Gassner.  Exorcism.  Mes-
mer's  extraordinary  power,  .... 227

NOTE  IX. — Cutting  out  a  cancer,  the  patient  being  in  the

somnambulic  sleep, .....  231

NOTE  X.— Dr.  Capron's  account  of  Miss  Brackett.  Blind-
ness. Curious  phenomena.  Statement  of  Henry  Hop-
kins and  of  Jesse  Metcalf,  ....  233
NOTE  XL— Experiments  by  M.  B.  L.  Effects  of  a  key.
Magnetizing  at  a  distance.  Obeying  the  will.  Somnam-
bulist solving  arithmetical  problems.  Effects  of  a  bar  mag-
net. Magnetic  circuit.  Glass  not  a  non-conductor,  239
NOTE  XIL— Experiments by A. V. Potter. Notions  of

time. Distant  clairvoyance,  .  .  .  245

NOTE  XIII. — Somnambulism. Hermotimus Clazomenius.
Eli  Yarnall. The  Magnetizer. Examining  the  sick. Ex-
tract from  Puysegur, ..... 248
NOTE  XIV. — Travelling  somnambulists. Mistakes  and  illu-
sions. Letter  from  Dr.  Hartshorn  :  from  Rev.  F.  A.  Far-
ley :  from  Dr.  John  Flint, ....  253
NOTE  XV.— Reading  sealed  letters. Note  from  Dr.  Capron,  260
NOTE  XVI.— Dexterity  of  somnambulists, . . 261
NOTE  XVII .—Instance  of  wit, ... 261
NOTE  XVIII. —La  Fayette  to  Washington, . . 262
NOTE  XIX.— Superstition, ....  262
NOTE  XX. — Transmission  of  pain, . . . 264
NOTE  XXL— The  magnetic  fluid. Argument. Paralysis, 264
NOTE  XXIL— Scrofula, ....  267


404  INDEX  TO  THE APPENDIX.

NOTE  XXIII.— Epilepsy.  Dr.  Brownell.  Distant  influ-
ence,  .267

NOTE  XXIV.— Blindness.  M.  Hebert.  Marchioness  des
Rousses. Prevision. Sight  at  a  distance, .  .  268

NOTE  XXV. — Letters  from  physicians.  Nervous  affection.
Tic  douloureux.  Liver  complaint.  Hypochondriasis.  Mes-
merising at  a  distance  of  five  miles.  Somnambulic  exami-
nations of  the  sick.  Case  of  Eleazur  Barrett — paralysis.
Miss  Mclntyre.  Local  action.  Curing  paralysis  in  two
instances  without  somnolence.  Inducing  functional  disease.
Inveterate  cutaneous  disease.  Labor  pains.  Fever  and
ague.  Affection  of  the  head,  with  fever.  Epilepsy.
Spasmodic  cough.  Toothache.  Bowel  pains.  Hip  com-
plaint. Neuralgia,  ..... 275

NOTE  XXVI.— Letter  from  Dr.  Bobbins,  on  the  correction
of  the  habits  of  somnambulists,  .  .  .  289

NOTE  XXV1L— Insensibility  to  pain.  Operations  by  Dr.
Esten,  Dr.  Harwood,  and  Dr.  Washburn,  .  . 292

NOTE  XXVIIL— Distant  Clairvoyance.  Letter  from  E.  L.
Frothingham,  Esq.  :  from  Dr.  Bugard  :  from  Rev.  E.  B.
Hall :  from  Rev.  Benjamin  Kent :  from  Joseph  Harring-
ton, Jr.  :  from  Frederic  S.  Church,  .  .  .  295

NOTE  XXIX. — Dr.  Georget.  Somnambulic  examinations
and  prescriptions.  Dr.  Georget's  power.  Prevision.  Pe-
tronille.  Dr.  Londe.  Somnambulist  foretelling  her  own
death. Remarkable  declaration  inserted  in  Georget's  Will,  321

NOTE  XXX.— Letter  from  Moses  B.  Lockwood.  Case  of
Croup.  Mesmerising  at  a  distance.  Tracing  the  mag-
netizer, ....... 325

NOTE  XXXI. — Letters  from  Physicians.  Neuralgia,  or
Tic  Douloureux.  Delirium  tremens.  Bronchitis.  Dys-
pepsia and  spinal  irritation.  Partial  Paralysis.  Headache
and  Dyspepsia.  Hepatitis  and  Cephalalgia.  Chronic  in-
flammation of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  Modifying  the
influence  according  to  circumstances.  Restoring  warmth
to  a  paralysed  limb.  Inflammation  of  the  chest,  with  symp-
toms of  mortification.  Deep  seated  pain  in  the  breasts.
Spasms  from  nursing.  Case  of  Mrs.  W.  C.  Dyspepsia.
Obeying  volition.  Seeing  through  opaque  substances.
Distant  clairvoyance.  Idiocy  and  mania  combined.  Mrs.
M.  Influence  on  the  taste.  Clairvoyance.  Somnambu-
lic examination.  Establishing  communication.  Clairvoy-
ance. Tic  Douloureux.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.  Chang-
ing Magnetizers.  Case  of  Mrs.  F.  Tic  Douloureux.
Chronic  periodical  headache.  Tic  Douloureux.  Consti-
pation and  ingratitude.  Demolishing  skepticism.  Mes-
merism should  be  used  only  as  a  remedial  agent,  327

NOTE  XXXII. — Seeing  through  opaque  substances.  Let-
ter from  Isaac  Thurber,  Esq. :  from  Mr.  George  Hunt :
from  Dr.  Knox,  .....  344

NOTE  XXXI11.— Insensibility  to pain. Letter  from Dr.


INDEX  TO  THE  APPENDIX.  405

Esten.  Severe  dental  operations.  The  Mesmerised  per-
son destroys  the  nerve  of  her  own  tooth  with  a  hot  needle,  348

NOTE  XXXIV.— Letter  from  Mr.  A.  V.  Potter.  Compara-
tive susceptibility  of  the  sexes.  Various  experiments.
Paralysis.  Springfield  somnambulist  put  asleep.  Curious
effects  on  Mrs.  F.  Maria  Reed.  Mrs.  Smith.  Miss  S.
Dr.  March's  daughter.  Effect  at  a  distance.  Mr.  John
Perry. Judge  Spreicker. Miss  Van  N.,  .  . 350

NOTE  XXXV. — Influence  in  the  waking  state.  Choice  of
Magnetizers  and  Physicians,  .  .  .  355

NOTE  XXXVI.— Letters  from  Physicians.

From  Dr.  Douglas.  Labor  pains,  two  cases.  Acute
Rheumatism.  Rheumatism  in  the  feet.  Bronchitis.  Spi-
nal affection.  Deep  issues  with  caustic  potash,  made  with-
out pain.  Acute  inflammation  of  stomach  and  bowels.
Tumefaction  of  the  bowels. Various  diseases,  . 359

From  Dr.  Barrett.  Case  of  Miss  E.  J.  Pleurisy.  Two
cases  of  extracting  teeth  without  pain.  Spinal  irritation.
Local  magnetism  rendering  the  patient  insensible  to  pain
in  the  part  magnetized. Natural  somnambulism  cured, 364

From  Dr.  Cleaveland.  Experiments  upon  the  memory.
Recalling  the  events  of  childhood,  and  those  of  a  later  pe-
riod. Transmission  of  pain  from  the  patient  and  to  the
patient.  Neuralgia.  Curious  effect  of  a  fall.  Singular
case  of  Tetanus. Tetanus  distinguished  from  Epilepsy, 365

From  Dr.  Capron.  Notice  of  Miss  Brackett's  case.  In-
terruption of  its  treatment.  Theory  proposed.  Wilson
Phillip.  Identity  of  Galvanic  Electricity  and  the  Nervous
Influence.  Extraordinary  cases  of  electrical  excitement
in  human  subjects.  Cymnotus.  Fascination.  Influence
of  the  passions.  Sympathies.  Sensitive  plants.  Redu-
cing the  pulsations  of  the  heart.  Phreno-magnetism.  Un-
derstanding the  thoughts  of  another.  Ancient  Oracles.
Dreaming.  Origin  of  diseases.  Dr.  Cttllen.  Mode  of
commencing  a  treatment,  .... 369

NOTE  XXXVII.— Neurology.  Letter  from  Dr.  Buchanan.
Explanation  of  the  science.  Indications  of  impressibility.
Mode  of  procedure, .....  386

NOTE  XXXVIIL— Dr.  Buchanan's  experiments.  Medicinal
influence  imparted  through  the  hand, .  .  . 390

NOTE  XXXIX.— Rev.  Dr.  Packard.  Result  of  Council.
Somnambulic  visit.  Notice  of  Mr.  Silas  Allen's  cases.
Various  diseases.  Convulsions  in  a  child  cured  by  Dr.
Cleaveland, ......  391

NOTE  XL. — Cutting  out  a  tumor  without  pain.  Dr.  Rich.
Milk-leg. Dr.  Ewing, ..... 397

NOTE  XLL— Letter  from  Isaac  Thurber,  Esq. Poetic  fac-
ulty excited. Chronic  headache. Spinal  complaint,  398
Extract  from  Cuvier. Extract  from  La  Place, . 399

NOTE  XLII. — Mesmerism  a  scienee, - .  -  399


NOTICES.

[Extracts  from  Providence  papers,  noticing  the  First  Edition.]
Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn,  of  this  city,  has  published  Part  I.  of
the  work  of  J.  P.  F.  Deleuze,  with  the  title  of  "  Practical  In-
struction in  Animal  Magnetism."  We  have  ever  been  skeptical
as  to  this  subject,  probably  because  we  have  taken  no  pains  to  ob-
tain evidences  of  its  truth  ;  and  we  have  probably  been  prevented
from  seeking  these  evidences,  first,  because  we  did  not  wish  to  be
carried  away  by  a  momentary  excitement ;  and  second,  because,
as  we  frankly  confess,  we  have  no  desire  to  be  convinced  of  its
truth,  until  satisfied  that  if  true,  it  will  be  productive  of  more
good  than  evil ;  and  which  we  do  not  believe.

But  as  to  the  work  before  us,  though  other  pressing  avocations
have  prevented  us  from  giving  it  a  thorough  perusal,  there  are
two  things  for  which  we  can  vouch.  Whatever  Mr.  H.  does,  is
well  done  ;  and  therefore,  the  public  may  have  the  utmost  confi-
dence in  his  translation  as  being  a  faithful  and  elegant  one  ;  and
be  assured  that  his  own  notes  are  penned  with  the  utmost  degree
of  candor  and  good  feeling. — Republican  Herald,  Sept.  12th.

We  have  been  favored  with  a  copy  of  a  work  entitled  Part  First,
Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism,  by  J.  P.  F.  Deleuze,
translated  from  the  Paris  edition  by  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn.  The
work  is  very  neatly  got  Up,  and  from  a  hasty  examination  of  the
same,  the  work  of  the  translator  appears  to  have  been  faithfully
and  ably  performed.  Mr.  Hartshorn  has  given  great  attention  to
this  subject,  and  we  know  of  no  person  better  qualified  than  him-
self to  favor  the  public  with  a  full  history  of  Animal  Magnetism
and  its  various  developements  in  this  region.  Public  curiosity  is
now  so  highly  excited,  and  the  interest  felt  in  this  subject  by  sci-
entific men,  especially  of  the  medical  profession,  is  now  so  great,
that  nothing  short  of  a  full  and  complete  investigation  of  the  ex-
traordinary phenomena  of  Magnetism  will  satisfy  the  demand  of
the  public. — Daily  Courier.

We  have  been  favored  with  the  perusal  of  the  proof  sheets  of
this  work,  now  in  the  press  of  B.  Cranston  &  Co.,  and  which
will  be  published  at  the  close  of  the  coming  week.  Considering
the  excitement  which  the  subject  of  Animal  Magnetism  has
made  of  late  and  is  still  destined  to  make  in  this  country,  more
particularly  in  consequence  of  the  astonishing  developements  of
its  power  that  have  been  for  months  past  transpiring  in  this  city
and  vicinity,  we  are  glad  to  see  our  recommendations  acted  upon,
and  to  learn  that  the  public  are  about  to  be  furnished  with  infor-
mation touching  the  whole  matter,  in  the  appendix  of  the  present
work. — Daily  Journal,  Aug.  24.


NOTICES.  407

The  translation  of  Deleuze's  work  on  Animal  Magnetism,  from
which  we  made  a  lew  extracts  while  it  was  passing  through  the
press,  is  now  published  and  on  sale  at  our  bookstores.  Besides
the  contents  of  the  original  work,  it  has  much  additional  matter
in  the  form  of  notes,  relative  to  some  of  the  cases  that  have  oc-
curred in  this  quarter.  We  recommend  both  believers  and  unbe-
lievers to  purchase  and  read  it ;  and  reiterate  what  we  some  time
since  stated,  that  implicit  reliance  may  be  placed  in  Mr.  T.  C.
Hartshorn,  as  a  translator  and  annotator. — Ibid.,  Sept.  6.

[From  the  Boston  Medical  aud  Surgical  Journal.]
ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.
Although  a  variety  of  facts  have  been  given  to  the  medical  pub-
lic within  the  last  year,  to  convince  the  profession  that  there  is
some  truth  in  animal  magnetism,  we  have  been  unwilling  to  med-
dle with  the  matter  of  late,  for  fear  of  being  considered  either  a
dupe,  or  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  designing  knaves.  But  the  recent
developements  in  the  city  of  Providence  are  so  well  authentica-
ted by  members  of  our  own  profession,  that  we  cannot  withhold
some  notice  of  them  without  doing  a  manifest  injustice  to  our
patrons,  who  have  a  right  to  expect  a  fair  chronology  of  all  events
."occurring  in  the  circle  of  professional  observation.  With  these
explanatory  remarks,  we  shall  republish,  from  an  Appendix  to
Deleuze,  just  published  at  Providence,  the  following  statements
of  Dr.  Webb,  Dr.  Capron,  and  others,  whose  reputations  place
them  entirely  above  the  suspicion  of  a  design  to  impose  upon  the
world. — Vol.  17,  page  89.

Deleuze's  Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism,  is  a  very
exciting  little  work,  translated  by  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn,  of  Pro-
vidence. A  page  will  hereafter  be  devoted  to  a  further  notice.
In  the  mean  time,  being  on  sale,  we  recommend  it  to  the  candid
perusal  of  the  profession. — Ibid.  vol.  17,  page  98.

Aside  from  any  particular  feelings  of  dislike  or  partiality  for
the  subject  of  animal  magnetism,  candor  obliges  us  to  acknowl-
edge that  this  compact  manual  is  a  very  captivating  production.
There  is  a  peculiar  manifestation  of  honesty  in  the  author,  who
writes  what  he  considers  to  be  substantially  true,  without  any  re-
ference to  the  opinions  of  the  world.  Having  no  guile  himself,
he  seems  to  be  unwilling  to  believe  that  any  one  else  can  be  in-
fluenced by  bad  motives.  Fully  aware  of  the  ridicule  to  which
the  devotees  of  Mesmerism  have  been  subjected,  he  shows  no
disposition  to  shun  the  criticisms  of  those  who  have  endeavored,
from  the  very  beginning,  to  overthrow  the  labors  of  those  who
are  toiling  in  this  new  field  of  philosophy.

What  are  we  to  know  of  animal  magnetism,  unless  some  exer-
tion is  made  to  become  acquainted  with  the  facts  which  are  con-
tinually being  presented?  To  be  so  thoroughly  obstinate  as  nei-
ther to  hear,  see  nor  read,  is  virtually  closing  our  eyes  against
the  admission  of  those  few  rays  of  light, which  men  of  science


408


and'  of  the  highest  respectability  are  concentrating  for  our  imme-
diate benefit.  The  mere  act  of  expressing  a  supreme  contempt
for  the  assertions  of  those  who  hrae  witnessed,  over  and  over
again,  in  different  countries,  preAely  the  same  phenomena  in
individuals  who  were  the  subjects  of  this  newly  discovered
power,  will  not  overthrow  it,  till  collusion  and  deep  hypocrisy
can  be  found  to  have  been  at  the  bottom  of  every  case,  both  in
the  operator  and  patient.

The  translator  of  this  work  has  certainly  presented  the  profess-
ion with  an  uncommonly  well-digested  treatise,  enhanced  in  value
by  his  own  notes  and  the  corroborative  testimony  of  eminent  phy-
sicians. There  is  an  orderly  arrangement  perceivable  in  it,  Avhich
gives  character  at  once  to  the  matter,  however  doubtful  we  may
be  in  relation  to  the  reality  of  the  details.

When  the  second  part  is  published,  which  cannot  be  deferred
very  long,  we  have  it  in  view  to  enter  into  a  more  minute  consid-
eration of  the  probable  value  of  magnetism,  as  an  agent  in  the  cure
of  diseases.  It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  biographical
sketch  of  the  life  and  services  of  Deleuze,  is  worth  the  price  of
the  book. — Ibid.  vol.  17,  page  113.


AAAriAA


a^/^WWa^


^knffftm


mmm


WWtWm*.


sM^W0M


WH0&&0m^


MN\M\m,


iiA  a ■•»  A  :


1-1J.AJ"


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004

PreservationTechnologies

WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066
(724)779-2111


Arvrnvm


^A*<y\AA/"W


!fw£^m*AtiAAMT<


^ts-K&W?.


'  '  -  38


^W^A/»A


&ftkn$2mkP\


mmmmm^mmm


bPts%*&


mmm^Sm^Si


mmmmm


W^Wa'A


AAAWAA,


a^OaHa:


r\m<wMMlrfo


a^A^


aaYVjpaaaaa


A .  aAAAaAa^AaaaaMaA/^^I


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS


0  013  521  957  5
