Babel and Bible (Friedrich Delitzsch (Thomas J. McCormack, trans.), 1903)
==========================================================
The Babel-Bibel lectures: Babylonian origins of the Bible; the great Assyriology controversy. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (babelbibl00deli).

% 


<?  V 


re*  '.    '^v    ^ 


\ 
.-y 


f     g      , 


v\- 


/■ 


Kr  *• 


,  - 


V     * 


*V 


50v 


0 


ve 


,V     CP 


<r 


*     ^ 


J? 


^ , 


**         * 


*«&►«**    \  W 


V*     *  ft. 


•>»      v 


6         Ax 


»    8 


/ 


V^'  : 


^      * 


o  ov 


V 


'"*  <$ 


\    I    B 


»-w-        1-1 


.0  0 


00 


'^    J 


^        ^  ^    rO 


,^o 


I 


■>% 


iir 


a\V  <V 


s*      ;\ 


*■    flfeov; 


.tf 


** 


V,^'         * 


/^ 


*> 


#   '% 


x\X 


'/     c* 


/^ 


^ 


«5      "^ 


^    \ 


,o  o 


'O0 


,\ 


0  /-       >  .  <r 


v 


\ 


Oo 


>*•.**' 


sj5  ^ 


\V  -^A 


■Cr 


^ 


^ 


% 


Zft.  ytCc^t/i^   ^c^6yr\^-^ 


BABEL   AND    BIBLE 


THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE 


SIGNIFICANCE  OF  ASSYRIOLOG- 
ICAL  RESEARCH  FOR  RELIGION 


EMBODYING   THE   MOST   IMPORTANT   CRITICISMS   AND 
THE   AUTHOR'S   REPLIES 


DR.  FRIEDRICH  DELITZSCH 

PROFESSOR  OF  ASSYRIOLOGY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  BERLIN 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN 


PROFUSELY  ILLUSTRATED 


CHICAGO 
THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  COMPANY 

1906 


LIBRARY  cf  CONGRESS 
Two  Copies  Received 

SEP  14  (906 

CfiCynjftt  Entry 
.ASS     ^V.XXc,  N«   i 
COPY  B.  i 


FIRST  LECTURE  COPYRIGHT  IC)02  - 

SECOND  LECTURE  COPYRIGHT  1903.      THIRD  LECTURE  COPYRIGHT  I906 

BY 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Co., 

CHICAGO. 


Jaa. 


2/ 

Or 


3<-7 


Excavations  and  the  Bible,  p.  I. — A  New  Epoch,  p.  2. — The  Back- 
ground of  the  Old  Testament,  p.  3. — The  Home  of  Abraham,  p.  4. 
— Cuneiform  Literature,  p.  5. — Illustrations  of  Bible  Reports,  p. 
6  ff. — Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib,  pp.  6-8. — Seals,  p.  9. — Sargon  I, 
pp.  9-10. — Racial  Types,  pp.  10-11. — Assyrian  Troops,  pp.  11-13. — 
Assyrian  Soldiers  and  Details  of  Armament,  pp.  15-18. — The  Royal 
Household,  pp.  18-20. — Battling  with  the  Lion,  pp.  20-22. — The 
Harem,  pp.  23-24. — A  Consort  of  Sardanapalus,  pp.  23-25. — Tech- 
nical Knowledge  and  Art,  pp.  25-28. — Affinity  Between  Babylonian 
and  Hebrew,  p.  29. — Aaron's  Blessing,  pp.  29-30. — A  Civilisation 
Comparable  with  Our  Own,  p.  30. — Hammurabi's  Laws,  pp.  30-31. 
— Commerce  and  Science,  p.  33. — The  Splendors  of  Babylon,  pp. 
33-34- — Clay  Tablets,  35-37. — Canaan  a  Babylonian  Domain,  p.  37. 
— The  Sabbath  Day,  pp.  37-38. — A  Tablet  from  El-Amarna,  p.  38. 
— The  Deluge,  p.  38  ff. — Xisusthros,  the  Babylonian  Noah,  p.  39 
ff. —  The  Gilgamesh  Epic,  p.  41  ff. — Marduk  and  Yahveh,  p.  43  ff. 
— Tiamat  and  Tehom,  p.  45. — Stress  Laid  on  Humane  Conduct,  p. 
47. — The  Serpent  and  the  Fall  of  Man,  pp.  47-48. — The  Under- 
world, pp.  49-50. — Job  and  the  New  Testament  on  Hell  and  Para- 
dise, p.  50. — The  Moslem  Paradise,  pp.  .50-52. — Seraphim  and 
Guardian  Angels,  pp.  53-55. — Demons  and  Devils,  pp.  55-5S. — 
Monotheism,  p.  59. — Abraham's  Conversion,  According  to  +' 
Koran,  p.  60. — The  Word  El,  pp.  60-61. — The  Name 
Clay  Tablet  of  Hammurabi's  Time,  pp.  61-62. — The  Sun-u^- 


/ 


0 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION.     (From  Report  of  Smithsonian  Institution.) ix 

Mounds  in  Mesopotamia,  p.  ix. — French  Excavations,  pp.  x-xi. — 
English  Excavations,  pp.  xi  ff.  —  Library  of  Sardanapalus,  pp. 
xiii  f. — The  Sun  Temple  of  Sippar,  pp.  xiv-xvi. — De  Sarzec's 
Discoveries  of  Diorite  Sculptures  and  Other  Works  of  Art,  p. 
xvii. — Ruins  of  the  Temple  of  Bel  at  Nippur,  p.  xviii-xix. — Ger- 
many's Part  in  the  Excavations,  p.  xxi. — Great  Value  in  Inter- 
pretation of  Old  Testament,  p.  xxii. — Origin  of  Modern  Science 
in  Chaldsea,  p.  xxiii. 

FIRST  LECTURE.     (Translated  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack) 1 


IV  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

PAGE 

Sippar,  pp.  62-63. — Ezekiel's  Vision  Illustrated,  pp.  64-65. — Baby- 
lonian Polytheism  and  Israelitic  Particularism,  pp.  65-66. 

SECOND  LECTURE.     (Translated  by  W.  H.  Carruth.) 67 

Isaiah's  Battle  Song,  p.  69. — Shrinking  from  Yahveh,  p.  70. — Babel 
as  Interpreter  of  the  Bible,  p.  71. — Kutha  and  Chalach,  the  Home 
of  the  Exiled  Israelites,  pp.  72-73. — The  Black  Obelisk  of  Shal- 
maneser  II,  pp.  74-78. — The  Re'em,  or  Wild  Ox,  pp.  79-83. — The 
Hill  of  Babil,  pp.  81-83. — The  Lion  of  Babylon,  p.  84. — The  Dragon 
of  Babel,  p.  85. — Old  Testament  Scriptures  Translated  by  Assyri- 
ology,  p.  86. — The  Insanity  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  p.  87. — Book  of 
Jonah,  p.  88. — Even  the  Modern  Orient  an  Interpreter  of  the  Bible, 
pp.  89-90.— The  Magic  Power  of  Spittle,  p.  90. — Smoke  and  Fire, 
pp.  90-91. — Gula,  the  Awakener  oLthe  Dead,  p.  91. — Revelation 
and  the  Old  Testament,  p.  92  fL — The  Second  Commandment  Sup- 
pressed, p.  93  ff.  and  also  p.  102. — The  Two  Tablets  Engraved 
by  God's  Own  Finger,  p.  94. — Miracles  of  the  Two  Tablets  in  Pre- 
historic Reports,  pp.  95-96. — The  So-called  Mosaic  Law  and  the 
Code  of  Hammurabi,  pp.  96-100. — The  Covenant  of  Sinai,  p.  100. 
— The  Institution  of  Sabbath,  p.  101. — The  First  Commandment 
and  Monotheism,  p.  102. — God  in  Names,  p.  102  ff. — Babylonian 
Polytheism,  Gross  but  Poetical,  pp.  103-104.— The  Homeric  Pan- 
theon, p.  104. — Anthropomorphism  of  Hebrew  Prophets,  p.  104. — 
Yahveh  with  Horns,  p.  104. — The  Ancient  of  Days,  p.  105. — The 
Ethical  Level  of  Israel  and  Babylon,  p.  106. — The  Position  of 
Woman  in  Israel,  p.  108. — The  Goddess  of  Birth  and  Eve,  p.  109  ff. 
— The  Narrowness  of  Hebrew  and  Moslem  Monotheism,  pp.  110- 
112. — The  Extermination  of  Gentiles,  p.  111-112. — God  no  Re- 
specter of  Persons,  pp.  112- 113. — Ethical  Monotheism,  p.  113. — 
Outlook  Upon  the  Future  Development  of  Religion,  p.  114. 

THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  BABEL  AND  BIBLE , 115 

Literature  on  "Babel  and  Bible." 117 

Opinions  on  "Babel  and  Bible." 120 

Emperor  William  on  "Babel  and  Bible,"  pp.  120-124. — Professor 
Harnack  on  the  Emperor's  Attitude  Toward  "Babel  and  Bible," 
pp.  125-130. — M.  Halevy's  Opinion,  pp.  130-131. — Cornill  on  "Ba- 
bel and  Bible,"  pp.  132-136. — A  Roman  Catholic  Verdict,  pp.  136- 
137. — Alfred  Jeremias  on  Delitzsch,  pp.  137-139. — Higher  Criticism 
and  the  Emperor,  pp.  139-144. 

Reply  to  Critics  of  the  First  Lecture 145 

The  Ethical  Aspect,  pp.  145-146. — The  Primordial  Chaos,  p.  146. 
— Traces  of  Polytheism,  p.  146. — Babylonian  Monotheism,  p.  146- 
147.— The  Name  "El,"  pp.  148-150.— The  Name  "Yahveh,"  pp. 
150-151. — The  Name  "Yahum-ilu,"  pp.  152-153. — Processions  of 
the  Gods,  p.  153. — Aaron's  Blessing,  pp.  153-155. — The  Sabbath, 
PP-   155-156.— The  Fall,  pp.   157-158. — Life  After  Death,  pp.   158- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  V 

PAGF 

159.  —  Tiamat,  pp.  159-161.  —  Angels,  pp.  161-162.  —  Babylonian 
Superstitions  in  Sweden,  p.  162. — Canaanites,  pp.  162-163. 

Reply  to  Critics  of  the  Second  Lecture 164 

Orthodoxy  in  Synagogue  and  Church,  pp.  164-167. — Conclusion, 
p.  167. 

THIRD  LECTURE.     (Translated  by  Lydia  G.  Robinson.) 169 

The  Limited  Ethnology  of  Genesis  X,  pp.  171- 173. — The  Sume- 
rians :  Their  Art  and  Character,  pp.  173-175.  —  Nebuchadnezzar 
and  Daniel,  pp.  175-178. — Tiglath-pileser,  pp.  178-180. — Character 
of  Galilaeans,  Babylonian,  not  Semitic,  pp.  180  f. — "Son  of  Man," 
pp.  181  f. — Musical  Instruments,  pp.  183-186. — Babylonian  and 
Hebrew  Psalms,  pp.  186 -191.  —  Psalm  to  Istar,  pp.  191-195. — 
Ten  Commandments  in  Code  of  Hammurabi,  pp.  197-200. — Love 
of  Neighbor,  pp.  200-205. — Sin  and  Its  Consequences,  pp.  205-209. 
— Image  Worship,  pp.  209-210. — Polytheism,  pp.  211-214. — Babylo- 
nian God-Conception,  pp.  214-220. — Semitic  God-Conception,  pp. 
221-224. — National  Gods,  pp.  224-232. — Prophecy  in  Babel  and 
Bible,  pp.  232-235. — Superiority  of  Christian  Ideals,  pp.  235-237. 


INTRODUCTION 


INTRODUCTION.* 

THE  traveler  starting  overland  from  the  port  of  Alexandretta, 
in  northern  Syria,  beholds  beyond  the  high  pass  of  Beilan  the 
widely  extended  plain  of  Antioch,  a  view  surprising  in  novelty  and 
charm.  As  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  the  plain  is  strewn  with  mounds 
of  varying  height,  often  grass-covered,  their  artificial  origin  easily 
discernible.  These  mysterious  elevations,  called  by  the  Arabs  Tell, 
by  the  Turks  Tepe,  accompany  the  traveler  to  Aleppo  and  even 
farther  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  and  they  constantly 
increase  in  height,  extent,  and  number,  from  Mosul  down  the 
stream  and  through  Babylonia,  crossing  into  the  Elamite  plain  and 
to  Susa.  They  are  the  marks  of  the  civilisation  of  pre-Christian 
millenniums.  The  large  and  small  cities  of  the  oldest  empires  of 
western  Asia,  of  the  Hittite  states  of  northern  Syria,  of  the  Assy- 
rian, Babylonian,  and  Elamite  empires,  with  their  palaces  and  tem- 
ples, walls  and  gates,  terraces  and  towers,  lie  buried  beneath  them. 
From  these  mounds  of  ruins  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  region, 
weather  beaten,  grave,  and  silent,  rising  from  the  lonely  and  lifeless 
desert,  French,  English,  and  American  explorers  have  plucked  un- 
fading laurels.  They  have  awakened  to  new  life,  after  the  sleep 
of  thousands  of  years,  the  buried  glory  of  millenniums  gone,  and 
from  innumerable  monuments  of  sculpture  and  writing  living  knowl- 
edge reaches  us  of  Babylon,  Nineveh,  and  of  those  earlier  peoples 
whose  civilisation  continues,  in  no  small  measure,  to  be  preserved 
in  our  own.    The  mounds  of  ruins  in  the  fairyland  of  The  Thousand 

*  This  article  is  a  lecture  which  Professor  Delitzsch  delivered  eight  years 
ago  and  which  was  published  by  J.  C.  Hinrichs  in  1898  under  the  title  Ex 
Oriente  Lux.  The  article  was  written  for  the  special  purpose  of  instigating 
interest  in  further  excavations  in  the  Orient,  and  has  been  translated  into 
English  by  the  Smithsonian  Institution  and  published  in  their  annual  report 
for  1901.  From  the  present  essay  which  has  been  reproduced  with  the  per- 
mission of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  those  passages  have  been  omitted  which 
are  of  a  merely  temporary  and  local  character,  or  practically  duplicate  por- 
tions of  the  text  of  Babel  and  Bible. 


X  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

and  One  Nights  have  become  for  France,  England,  and  America 
mounds  of  treasure-trove,  from  whose  darkness  they  bring  to  light 
treasures  of  human  art  and  science  that  are  the  greatest  ornament 
and  pride  and  the  never-resting  ambition  of  the  great  national 
museums. 

It  was  in  the  year  1820  that  Claudius  James  Rich,  an  officer 
of  the  English  East  India  Company  at  Bagdad,  undertook,  for  the 
recovery  of  his  health,  a  trip  into  the  Kurdish  Mountains,  and  on 
his  way  back  he  spent  a  few  days  at  Mosul,  the  well-known  com- 
mercial town  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris.  There  the  large 
mounds  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  attracted  his  attention.  They 
resembled  those  which  he  had  seen  near  Hilla  on  the  Euphrates 
and  which  he  correctly  took  for  the  remains  of  ancient  Babylon. 
As  the  southern  of  the  two  largest  mounds  still  has  the  official  name 
of  Nunia,  and  is  crowned  with  a  mosque  dedicated  to  the  prophet 
Jonah,  the  hypothesis  suggested  itself  that  there,  opposite  Mosul, 
lay  the  ruins  of  Nineveh,  the  ancient  capital  of  Assyria.  Rich  ex- 
amined the  mounds.  He  also  heard  of  a  large  stone  slab,  engraved 
with  representations  of  human  figures  and  animals,  which  had  been 
found  some  time  before,  but  had  been  broken  by  the  Turks  because 
of  religious  prejudice.  He  was  not,  however,  in  a  position  to  con- 
tinue his  investigations. 

Now  it  happened  that  in  1842  Emile  Botta,  son  of  the  well- 
known  Italian  historian,  was  appointed  French  consul  at  Mosul, 
and  was  encouraged  by  the  famous  Orientalist,  Julius  von  Mohl — 
the  second  of  the  four  brothers  Mohl,  who  are  a  lasting  honor  to 
their  native  city  Stuttgart — to  follow  up  the  path  entered  by  Rich 
and  to  begin  excavations  in  the  mounds  near  Mosul.  But  neither 
on  the  southern  mound,  Nebi  Yunus,  nor  on  the  northern,  Kuyun- 
jik,  were  his  endeavors  rewarded  with  success. 

In  March,  1843,  a  peasant  of  Khorsabad,  a  village  situated 
four  hours  north  of  Mosul,  told  him  that  in  the  mound  on  which 
the  village  was  built  inscribed  stones  and  similar  objects  had  been 
found  in  great  number.  Botta  thereupon  began,  on  the  20th  of 
March,  to  dig  at  Khorsabad,  and  after  but  three  days  a  room  was 
opened,  and  a  few  days  later  another,  the  inner  walls  covered  with 
alabaster  slabs,  on  which  were  represented  in  bas-relief  the  cam- 
paigns and  hunts,  the  gods  and  priests  of  a  king.  Full  of  joy, 
Botta,  on  the  2d  of  May,  sent  to  Mohl  a  letter,  with  drawings  of 
the  inscriptions  and  sculptures.  The  drawings  caused  a  lively  sen- 
sation, and  the  French  Government  immediately  made  an  appro- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XI 

priation  for  further  excavations.  Botta  had  discovered,  as  we  now 
know,  the  palace  of  Sargon,  the  conqueror  of  Samaria. 

In  May,  1844,  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  were  removed  with 
the  permission  of  the  Sublime  Porte,  and  thereupon  the  excavations 
continued  on  a  larger  scale.  New  rooms  were  continually  freed 
from  the  debris,  new  sculptures,  still  exhibiting  traces  of  color,  to- 
gether with  long-lined  inscriptions,  were  continually  brought  to  light, 
and  the  drawings  of  the  French  painter,  Eugene  Flandin,  which 
were  later  published  at  the  cost  of  the  State,  served  to  raise  still 
higher  the  general  interest  in  Assyrian  art  and  civilisation,  which 
was  believed  irrevocably  lost,  and  now,  as  if  by  magic,  arose  to 
new  life. 

Botta's  successor,  Victor  Place,  found,  in  1852,  the  walls  and 
gates  of  the  city  of  Sargon,  with  gigantic  winged  bulls,  and  com- 
pleted the  excavation  of  the  palace,  penetrating  to  the  cellar,  where 
the  wine  jars,  with  a  reddish  sediment  in  the  bottom,  were  still  stand- 
ing in  long  rows.  An  Assyrian  king,  concerning  whom  until  then 
only  a  simple  brief  notice  in  the  Old  Testament  (Isaiah  xx.  1)  gave 
information,  suddenly  rose  before  our  eyes  as  a  live,  tangible  per- 
sonage, and  we  now  know  as  much  about  his  wars  and  victories, 
his  buildings  and  hunts,  about  the  conditions  of  civilisation  of  the 
Assyrian  empire  and  the  contemporaneous  history  of  the  neighbor- 
ing states,  as  we  know  about  any  epoch  of  ancient  Greece  or  Rome. 

It  may  be  readily  imagined  that  the  glorious  achievements  ac- 
complished by  French  pluck,  energy,  and  perseverance,  which  turned 
the  eyes  of  the  whole  civilised  world  to  the  Assyrian  collections  in 
the  Louvre,  would  not  long  leave  the  English  idle  spectators.  Sir 
Austen  Henry  Layard,  afterwards  minister  of  Great  Britain  in 
Madrid  and  ambassador  to  Constantinople,  had  already  visited  those 
regions  in  1840,  and  had  shown  the  most  lively  interest  in  the  work 
of  Botta.  It  was  not  long  before  the  English  ambassador  at  Con- 
stantinople, Sir  Stratford  Cunning,  succeeded  in  securing  for  Lay- 
ard the  firman  permitting  excavations  and  the  necessary  funds. 
Layard  immediately  began  excavations  on  a  grand  scale,  receiving 
,  the  cordial  aid  of  the  native  population,  for  not  only  was  Layard 
an  adept  in  winning  the  love  and  gratitude  of  the  natives  every- 
where, but  he  had  also  in  Hormuzd  Rassam  the  most  ideal  com- 
panion, who,  fully  familiar  with  the  Arabic  character,  could,  as 
Layard  acknowledged,  secure  the  good  will  of  the  most  savage 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 

On  November  28,  1845,  Layard  commenced  his  labors  in  Nim- 


Xll  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

rud,  situated  a  few  kilometers  south  of  Nineveh,  and  the  first  four 
months  of  1846  brought  to  light  the  entire  northwest  palace  of 
Shalmaneser  I  (1300  B.  C.),  the  palace  of  Asurnazirpal,  of  the 
Biblical  Tiglathpileser  and  Esarhaddon,  and,  especially  with  the 
palace  of  Asurnazirpal,  a  large  number  of  sculptures  and  inscrip- 
tions of  various  kinds. 

Not  less  successful  were  the  excavations  at  Nineveh,  which 
Layard  carried  on  after  1849  a^  the  expense  of  the  British  Museum. 
Like  the  Babylonians,  their  masters,  the  Assyrian  kings  built  their 
temples  and  palaces  upon  raised  artificial  terraces,  from  whose  airy 
heights  they  not  only  enjoyed  a  purer  and  cooler  atmosphere  but 
escaped  the  fever,  the  inundations,  and  the  mosquito  swarms  of 
the  river  flats.  King  Sennacherib  erected  such  an  elevated  terrace 
of  bricks,  and  his  grandson,  Asurbanipal,  the  Greek  Sardanapalus, 
extended  it.  Both  of  these  rulers  built  there  magnificent  palaces, 
surrounded  by  large  parks,  rivulets,  and  ponds,  on  whose  isles 
water  birds  nested.  And  all  this  splendor  and  glory,  covered  by  the 
mighty  mound  of  ruins  of  Kuyunjik,  were  uncovered  by  the  two 
English  explorers. 

In  the  southwest  corner  of  the  mound  Layard  laid  open  the 
palace  of  Sennacherib,  the  largest  Assyrian  palace  thus  far  known, 
with  seventy-one  rooms,  galleries,  and  halls,  the  walls  on  every 
side  covered  with  artistic  bas-relief,  depicting  the  edifices,  the  cam- 
paigns, and  the  domestic  life  of  the  king  in  a  most  vivid  manner. 

Splendid  and  admirable  as  were  the  discoveries  in  the  so-called 
southwest  palace  of  Sennacherib,  they  were  to  be  greatly  surpassed 
by  the  treasures  which  were  brought  to  light  from  the  so-called 
north  palace  of  Sardanapalus,  discovered  by  Rassam  in  1854.  There, 
too,  one  state  chamber  after  another  was  freed  from  debris ;  the 
long  Babylonian  gallery,  the  smaller  Arabic  room,  so  named  because 
their  wall  reliefs  represent  the  great  deeds  of  the  king  and  his 
armies  in  Babylonia,  Arabia,  etc.  After  two  and  a  half  thousands 
of  years  of  darkness  the  light  of  the  sun  again  burst  in  the 
halls  decorated  with  sculptures  and  in  the  courts  artistically  paved 
with  mosaics,  exactly  as  when  they  were  deserted  in  the  year  607 
B.  C,  when  the  Median  hordes,  intoxicated  with  the  blood  of  foes 
and  the  triumph  of  victory,  raged  there,  burning  and  plundering. 
Light  fell  anew  into  the  royal  harem,  conjuring  up  before  our  eyes 
most  vividly  scenes  with  which  an  artist  of  the  seventh  pre-Christian 
century  decorated  its  walls  with  realistic  truthfulness.  On  the  floor 
of  these  and  the  adjoining  rooms  lay  in  thick  layers  fragments  of  +he 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  Xlll 

royal  library,  a  collection  of  tablet  books  and  •  documents  once  ar- 
ranged in  the  upper  rooms,  but  which  at  the  collapse  fell  through, 
crushed  into  thousands  of  large  and  small  pieces.  Baked  clay 
tablets  of  all  sizes,  inscribed  on  both  sides  with  fine  Assyrian  cunei- 
form characters,  which,  after  being  freed  from  dirt  and  dust  can  be 
as  distinctly  read  as  if  they  were  but  yesterday  impressed  into  the 
soft  clay,  constituted  this  unique  royal  library. 

As  if  presaging  the  approaching  collapse  of  the  Assyrian  em- 
pire, Sardanapalus  ordered  that  the  most  important  books  and  docu- 
ments from  all  the  libraries  in  Babylonia  should  be  collected,  copied, 
some  even  in  duplicate,  and  incorporated  in  his  own  library.  Thus 
through  the  library  of  Sardanapalus  there  came  to  us  a  great  part 
of  the  older,  and  indeed  of  the  most  ancient,  works  of  Babylonian 
literature,  and,  as  might  be  expected,  only  the  most  important 
works  were  considered  worthy  of  admission  into  the  royal  library. 

The  library  contained  historical  works  with  information  as  to 
the  relations,  now  peaceful,  more  often  warlike,  of  Assyria  with  its 
mother  country,  Babylonia ;  chronological  lists  accurately  fixing  the 
reigns  of  all  those  ancient  kings,  Shalmaneser,  Tiglathpileser,  Sar- 
danapalus, and  for  a  long  period  recording  the  most  important  event 
of  each  year ;  penitential  psalms  and  hymns  of  praise,  epics  and 
myths  that  reveal  the  religious  thought  as  well  as  the  poetical  en- 
dowment of  the  Babylonian  people ;  large  grammatico-lexicograph- 
ical  works  that  for  many  decades  to  come  will  be  an  inexhaustible 
mine  for  Semitic  philology ;  astronomical,  astrological,  and  magical 
tablets,  the  original  works  from  which  the  wise  men  of  the  East — 
the  Babylonian  Magi — drew  their  learning  which  they  afterwards 
spread  over  Greece  and  Rome ;  in  addition  a  multitude  of  letters 
addressed  to  the  great  king  of  Assyria  from  the  kings  of  Elam, 
from  the  generals  abroad  in  hostile  lands,  from  the  court  astron- 
omers who  report  to  the  king  the  happenings  in  the  starry  heavens, 
eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  from  the  Magi,  who,  on  the  basis  of 
the  flight  of  birds,  or  the  entrails  of  sacrificial  animals,  advise  the 
royal  ma j  esty  what  to  do  and  what  to  leave  undone ;  letters  from 
the  royal  physicians,  petitions  and  entreaties  from  captives ;  besides 
copies  of  the  letters  and  proclamations  of  the  king  himself.  Four 
royal-octavo  volumes,  with  1,952  pages  are  required  for  the  cata- 
logue of  the  thousands  of  clay  tablets  .and  prisms  or  fragments 
thus  far  transferred  from  Nineveh  to  the  British  Museum. 

What  a  mass  of  knowledge  and  multitude  of  new  points  of 
view  for  religious  and  profane  history,   for  linguistics  and  geog- 


XIV  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

raphy,  for  archaeology  in  all  its  branches,  has  not  the  study  of  these 
ancient  books  revealed !  Let  us  but  recall  that  memorable  autumn 
of  1872,  when  George  Smith,  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Egypto- 
Assyrian  collection  of  the  British  Museum,  while  looking  over  the 
cuneiform  fragments  of  the  mythological  series,  found  the  original 
of  the  Babylonian-Biblical  account  of  the  deluge.  He  reported  his 
find  at  the  meeting  of  the  London  Society  for  Biblical  Archaeology 
on  December  3,  1872. 

The  discovery  created  the  profoundest  sensation  in  England. 
and  far  beyond  her  borders.  In  press  and  pulpit  it  was  celebrated 
and  commented  upon.  Babel,  it  was  said,  confirms  the  Bible. 
"Where  men  are  silent  the  stones  cry  out."  The  proprietors  of  the 
Daily  Telegraph,  almost  immediately  after  that  lecture,  hastened  to 
give  George  Smith  a  thousand  guineas  for  further  explorations  in 
Nineveh.  On  January  20,  1873,  George  Smith  set  out  on  his  jour- 
ney. In  1874  he  was  again  sent — this  time  by  the  trustees  of  the 
British  Museum — to  Nineveh,  constantly  making  discoveries,  and  in 
1876  undertook  a  third  expedition  to  the  East,  which  was  to  him 
''a  way  without  return."  His  last  stay  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria — 
full  of  exertions  and  trials,  where  at  the  time,  pest  and  cholera 
were  raging — exhausted  the  strength  of  the  indefatigable  explorer. 
Accompanied  by  the  English  consul  to  Aleppo,  he  died  there  on 
August  19,  1876,  covered  with  glory,  fallen  like  a  hero  on  the  field 
of  honor. 

The  traveler  setting  out  from  Bagdad  in  the  direction  of  the 
little  town  of  Hilla,  traversing  the  plain  which  is  spread  out  between 
the  twin  rivers  Euphrates  and  Tigris  where  they  are  nearest  one 
another,  will,  after  passing  many  other  mounds  of  ruins,  arrive  at 
a  large  one  covering  two  English  miles,  named  Abu  Habba.  Wall 
and  castle  are  still  clearly  recognisable,  but  the  highest  point  of 
this  site  of  ruins  is  on  the  southwest  side  on  the  bank  of  a  former 
arm  of  the  Euphrates.  When  Rassam  excavated  here  in  1881  he 
struck  almost  at  once  the  walls  of  a  building.  The  inclosure  of  a 
large  quadrangular  structure.  1,500  feet  long  on  the  southwest  side, 
was  laid  bare,  and  further  trenches  and  shafts  showed  that  the 
edifices  were  grouped  around  a  central  court,  and  consisted  of  a 
line  of  long  narrow  rooms  with  exceptionally  thick  brick  walls. 
In  the  interior  of  this  structure  a  pair  of  interesting  rooms  was  dis- 
covered and  freed  from  the  debris.  At  the  excavating  of  a  shaft 
that  ran  along  a  wall  in  the  middle  of  the  mound  a  doorway  was 
reached  which  led  to  a  large  gallery   100  feet  long  and  about  35 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XV 

feet  wide.  On  it  stood  the  remnants  of  a  large  sacrificial  altar, 
made  of  bricks  and  measuring  30  feet  square.  Behind  the  altar, 
in  the  wall  of  this  room,  a  door  opened  leading  to  a  smaller  room, 
and  Rassam,  as  a  result  of  experience  gained  in  the  Assyrian  mound 
of  Balawat,  at  once  surmised  that  the  temple  archives  had  been 
here  preserved.  But  though  at  Balawat  the  corner-stone  documents 
of  the  builder  of  the  temple  were  found  in  a  stone  chest,  nothing  sim- 
ilar was  here  discovered.  On  the  other  hand,  the  asphalt  pavement 
attracted  Rassam's  attention,  and  he  therefore  sunk  a  shaft  in  the 
floor,  when,  behold,  scarcely  had  he  broken  through  the  cement 
layer  when  a  clay  chest  appeared  containing  a  beautiful  artistically 
inscribed  alabaster  tablet,  in  six  columns,  decorated  at  the  top  with 
a  carefully  executed  bas-relief. 

In  this  holy  of  holies  a  god  with  a  long-flowing  beard,  in  his 
hand  a  ring  and  short  staff,  was  seated  upon  a  throne  decorated 
with  cherubim  (p.  63).  A  king  followed  by  two  priests  approaches 
the  god  in  adoration,  while  two  other  men  are  raising  the  sun  disk 
with  ropes  upon  the  roof  of  the  holy  of  holies.  Certainlv  a  valuable 
and  admirable  find  in  itself,  but  much  more  so  because  this  document 
also  revealed  the  name  of  the  building,  and  of  the  city  which  was 
thus  discovered : 

"image  of  the  sun  god,  the  great  lord,  who  dwells  in  the 
temple  ebabbara  in  the  city  of  sippar." 

Thus  reads  the  explanatory  legend  of  the  bas-relief.  One  of 
the  oldest  Babylonian  cities  has  been  found — Sippar,  in  which 
Noah-Xisusthros,  by  the  command  of  the  god  Kronos,  was  ordered 
to  bury  the  documents  of  antediluvian  times ;  the  sun  temple,  which 
since  its  foundation  in  the  fourth  millennium  until  long  after  the 
time  of  the  last  Chaldaean  king,  Nabuna'id  (538  B.  C),  was  the 
center  of  worship  for  Babylonia  and  the  object  of  concern  of  all 
Babylonian  kings,  was  rediscovered.  This  sun  temple  in  the  course 
of  thousands  of  years,  through  revenues  and  donations,  came  in 
possession  of  untold  riches  in  money  and  land. 

The  forty  to  fifty  thousand  inscribed  tablets  that  since  1881 
have  been  flowing  from  Abu  Habba  as  from  an  inexhaustible  source 
into  the  Occidental  museums,  above  all  into  the  British  Museum, 
give  an  insight  not  only  into  the  cult  of  the  sun  god  and  the  deities 
worshipped  beside  him,  into  the  division,  obligations,  and  prerog- 
atives of  the  several  priest  classes,  but  also  into  the  system  of  the 


XVI  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

temple  revenues  and  their  application.  From  the  temple  archives 
of  the. sun  god  is  derived  a  great  mass  of  tablets,  which,  after  the 
fashion  of  commercial  bookkeeping,  record  the  temple  revenues 
in  money  and  other  commodities,  the  expenses  in  salaries,  wages, 
etc.,  and  the  investment  and  employment  of  the  temple  property 
in  loans,  real  estate,  rents,  etc.  If  to  these  be  added  the  numerous 
so-called  contract  tablets  from  Babylonia,  Tell  Sifr,  and  other  places, 
with  their  varied  contents,  purchase  and  sale  of  slaves,  marriage 
documents,  acts  of  lawsuits,  testaments,  and  the  letters  of  the  time 
of  Hammurabi  or  Amraphel  (Genesis,  xiv)  which  were  recently 
found,  we  derive  a  mass  of  the  most  important  information  on  the 
commercial  and  judicial  life  as  well  as  the  economic  conditions  in 
the  Babylonian  state  for  a  period  of  nearly  two  thousand  years 
from  the  first  Babylonian  dynasty  (2250  B.  C.)  until  long  after 
the  time  of  the  Achsemenian  kings. 

The  excavations  at  Sippar,  Babylon,  and  elsewhere  carried  us 
back  to  the  time  of  Hammurabi,  that  greatest  king  of  the  first  Baby- 
lonian dynasty,  who  united  the  north  and  the  south  into  one  great 
Babylonian  State,  with  Babylon  as  the  capital.  But  the  soil  of  Bab- 
ylonia, inexhaustible  in  surprises,  was  soon  to  afford  us  an  outlook 
into  a  much  higher  antiquity  of  the  Babylonian  people  and  to  carry 
us  to  still  more  remote  ages  in  the  history  of  humanity. 

From  the  same  archives  to  which  the  above-mentioned  votive 
tablet  belonged,  which  was  deposited  by  King  Nebobaladan  (882 
B.  C.)  in  the  sun  temple  at  Sippar,  came  also,  among  other  things, 
a  remarkable  clay  cylinder  of  the  last  Chaldaean  king,  Nabuna'id. 
In  it  the  king  relates  that  he  has  decided  to  re-establish  the  sun 
temple  upon  its  oldest  foundation ;  for,  in  consequence  of  the  re- 
peated rebuildings  in  the  course  of  many  centuries,  the  temple  was 
obviously  detached  from  its  original  foundation  site,  from  its  oldest 
"temen" ;  and  that  he  has  succeeded,  after  continuous  and  laborious 
digging  into  the  depths  of  the  earth,  in  finding  the  "temen"  of  the 
first  builder  of  the  temple,  Naram-Sin,  Son  of  Sargon  I,  a  "temen" 
which  for  forty-two  hundred  years  had  not  been  seen  by  the  eye 
of  man.  This  established  the  year  3750  before  our  era  as  the  date 
of  the  reign  of  Naram-Sin  and  about  3800  as  that  of  Sargon  I,  and 
opened  a  vista  into  the  past  of  the  human  race  on  Babylonian  soil 
which  lies  fifteen  hundred  years  beyond  the  time  of  Hammurabi- 
Amraphel,  or,  to  speak  with  the  Old  Testament,  beyond  the  time 
of  Abraham,  a  vista  never  anticipated  and  at  first  hardly  credible. 
And  still,  little  as  was  the  inclination  to  accept  so  remote  a  date,, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XV11 

there  was  as  little  reason  to  doubt  it,  and,  in  fact,  the  progress  of 
the  excavations  was  soon  to  prove  it  more  and  more  indubitable. 

The  French  consul  at  Bassora,  Ernest  de  Sarzec,  who  has  been 
directing  the  French  excavations  on  the  south  Babylonian  site  of 
the  ruins  of  Tell  Loh  (Telloh)  since  1875,  had  not  long  begun  his 
work  when  he  found  those  nine  diorite  statues,  which  represented 
partly  in  standing  position,  partly  seated,  the  old  priest-kings  (po- 
test) of  the  city  of  Lagash,  named  Ur-Bau  and  Gudea  (p.  174). 
These  statues,  although  the  heads  of  all  are  missing,  are  valuable 
examples  of  the  old  Babylonian  art  of  sculpture,  and  this  value  is 
considerably  increased  by  the  inscriptions  which,  on  the  breast, 
back,  etc.,  are  incised  with  the  most  consummate  artistic  skill  and 
neatness,  exciting  the  admiration  of  our  modern  stonecutters.  While 
the  archaism  of  the  writing  leads  us  back  to  a  time  long  be- 
fore Hammurabi,  the  language  in  which  they  are  composed  shows 
that  those  ancient  priest  kings  belonged  neither  to  the  Semitic  nor 
to  the  Indo-Germanic  stratum  of  the  Babylonian  population,  but  to 
the  so-called  Sumerian  people,  who  spoke  an  agglutinative  language, 
and  who,  though  through  the  early  centuries  settled  in  Babylonia 
contemporaneously  with  the  Semites,  and  in  lively  intercourse  with 
them,  must  still  be  considered  as  the  older  native  population  from 
whom  the  Semites  received  the  art  of  writing  and  other  achieve- 
ments of  civilisation. 

Since  that  first  great  discovery  of  De  Sarzec,  the  finds  of 
Telloh  have  steadily  carried  Babylonian  history  to  earlier  periods, 
as  is  evinced  by  indisputable  art,  historical  and  paleographical 
criteria.  They  carried  it  back  to  the  time  when  the  two  Semitic 
kings  of  Agade,  Shargani-shar-ali  and  Naram-Sin — and  these,  as  is 
recognised  with  ever-increasing  certainty,  are  Nabuna'id's  Sargon 
and  Naram-Sin  (3800  and  3750  B.  C.,  respectively) — exercised 
sovereignty  over  Lagash,  and  the  priest-king  of  this  city,  Lagal- 
Ushumgal,  was  their  vassal.  Nay  even  from  an  earlier  time — the 
close  of  the  fifth  millennium — there  rises  before  our  eyes  a  whole 
line  of  hoary  Sumerian  patesis  of  Lagash — Ur-Nina,  Eannadu, 
Enannatum,  Entemena.  And  we  know  not  only  their  names  but 
most  of  their  heroism  against  domestic  and  foreign  foes,  and  of 
their  efforts  for  the  general  welfare  of  their  city  and  its  inhabitants. 

As  the  origin  of  the  cuneiform  writing  is  more  and  more  cleared 
up  through  the  inscriptions  of  some  of  these  most  ancient  rulers — 
above  all,  that  of  Eannadu — so  one  ray  of  light  after  another 
brightens  the  darkness  spread  over  the  earliest  history  of  the  srreat 


XV111  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Babylonian  cities — Agade,  Babel,  Kish,  and  Lagash,  Erech,  and  the 
"city  of  bows."  Nay,  on  some  periods,  especially  the  times  of 
Sargon  I  and  his  son,  Naram-Sin,  a  flood  of  light  is  shed.  For 
much  as  it  may  be  deplored  that  the  archives,  consisting  of  some 
30,000  tablets,  cylinders,  and  large  inscribed  pebbles,  found  in  1894 
in  a  cellar-shaped  room  at  Telloh,  were  scattered  everywhere  by  the 
thievish  Arabs,  the  documents  themselves  are  not  lost  to  science, 
whether  they  came  to  the  museums  of  Constantinople,  Paris,  Ber- 
lin, Philadelphia,  or  elsewhere ;  and  they  reveal  to  us  in  a  surprising 
and  at  the  same  time  in  detailed  manner  the  commercial,  agricultural, 
and  economic  conditions,  as  well  as  the  civic  and  religious  life  of 
the  times  of  Sargon  I  and  Naram-Sin.  Even  pierced  lumps  of  clay 
were  found  with  the  names  of  Sargon  or  Naram-Sin  stamped  upon 
them,  inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  addressee,  the  place  of  desti- 
nation, and  evidently  attached  to  bales  of  merchandise,  to  be  for- 
warded from  Agade  to  Lagash. 

One  of  the  oldest  sanctuaries  upon  earth  is  the  temple  of  the 
lord  of  the  universe,  Bel,  in  the  middle  Babylonian  city  of  Nippur. 
The  ruins  of  this  city,  now  called  Nuffar,  and  especially  the  gigantic 
remains  of  this  temple,  were  the  goal  of  the  three  expeditions  from 
Philadelphia,  which,  from  1886  up  to  the  present  time,  under  the 
direction  of  John  P.  Peters,  Hermann  V.  Hilprecht,  and  J.  H. 
Haynes,  have  excavated  and  constantly  made  discoveries  of  the 
greatest  import  to  science  on  that  vast  site  of  ruins.  Two  temple 
archives  rewarded  the  labors  of  the  American  explorers  within  a 
few  years.  True,  those  of  Sargon  I  lay  in  ruins ;  enemies,  probably 
the  Elamites,  plundered  and  destroyed  them.  But  if  only  the  vases 
of  the  pre-Sargonic  king  of  Erech,  Lugal  Zaggisi,  son  of  a  patesi 
of  the  "city  of  bows,"  which  were  pieced  together  from  thousands 
of  fragments,  had  been  found  they  would  be  an  ample  reward  on 
account  of  the  historical  and  paleographical  information  that  they 
furnish.  The  records  of  the  Kossean  kings  were  intact.  They  con- 
tained all  the  votive  gifts  that  the  kings  of  the  so-called  third 
Babylonian  dynasty  had  presented  to  the  god  Bel. 

Down  to  1896  there  were  cleared  from  the  ruins  of  Nuffar, 
successively,  2,000,  8,000,  and  21,000  clay  tablets  and  fragments, 
inscribed  and  stamped  bricks,  stone  and  clay  vases.  They  were  of 
the  pre-Sargonic  period,  as  well  as  of  all  the  later  periods  of  Baby- 
lonian history,  from  Sargon  I  and  Naram-Sin,  and  even  from  Ur- 
Gur  and  Dungi,  the  two  ancient  kings  of  the  city  of  Ur,  down  to 
Darius  II  and  Artaxerxes  Mnemon.     They  embraced  syllabaries, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XIX 

chronological  lists,  letters,  astronomical  and  religious  texts,  tax  lists, 
plans  of  real  estate,  contracts,  besides  images  of  divinities  and  toys 
of  terra  cotta,  weapons  and  implements  of  stone  and  metal,  orna- 
ments of  gold,  silver,  copper,  and  bronze,  carved  precious  stones 
and  weights.  It  was  estimated  that  the  inscribed  monuments  found 
up  to  1896  would  fill  12  volumes  of  two  to  three  parts  each  if  pub- 
lished. What  specially  distinguishes  the  excavations  of  the  Amer- 
icans is  the  systematic  clearing  up  of  the  single  layers  of  the  mighty 
temple  edifice  and  of  its  superstructure. 

The  colossal  ruins  of  the  tower-  of  the  temple  of  Bel,  now 
called  Bint-el-Amir,  rises  29  meters  above  the  plain  and  15  meters 
above  the  mass  of  debris  which  surrounds  it.  The  immense  plat- 
form, about  2.40  meters  thick,  constructed  of  sun-dried  bricks,  to- 
gether with  the  three-story  temple  tower  erected  upon  it,  probably 
a  work  of  King  Ur-Gur,  was  laid  bare  and  the  ascent  to  the  single 
stages  in  the  southeast  of  the  ruin  was  found.  Close  under  this 
platform  another  pavement  was  discovered,  consisting  of  two  layers 
of  baked  bricks  of  about  50  centimeters  square  and  8  centimeters 
thick.  Most  of  them  were  stamped,  some  with  the  name  of  Shar- 
gani-shar-ali,  the  others  with  that  of  Naram-Sin.  Both  kinds  were 
intermingled  in  both  brick  layers,  so  that  the  identity  of  Shargani- 
shar-ali  with  the  Sargon  of  Nabuna'id  (3800 B.C.)  was  made  sure. 
Ur-Gur  had,  it  appears,  razed  the  buildings  of  his  predecessors  and 
elevated  the  platform  of  his  temple  tower  over  the  pavement  of 
Naram-Sin. 

J.  H.  Haynes  who  since  1894  has  been  alone  at  the  ruins  of  the 
temple  of  Bel,  superintending  the  excavations,  was  not  content  with 
these  chronologically  important  revelations,  but  sunk  shafts  in  sev- 
eral places  under  Naram-Sin's  platform  and  searched  the  entire 
earth  stratum,  which  was  about  9.25  meters  deep,  down  to  the 
underground  water,  for  remains  of  human  civilisation.  This  great 
sacrifice  of  time,  labor,  and  perseverance  was  to  be  rewarded  in  a 
way  that  could  not  have  been  anticipated.  For,  in  one  place,  not 
far  below  Naram-Sin's  platform,  was  found  an  altar  of  s*Un-dried 
bricks,  the  top  of  which  was  surrounded  by  a  rim  of  asphalt  and 
covered  with  a  layer  of  white  ashes,  6.5  centimeters  thick  and  the 
remains  of  burnt  sacrificial  animals ;  still  farther  below  there  was 
unearthed  a  large,  beautifully  decorated  terra-cotta  vase  in  perfect 
condition,  an  excellent  example  of  old  Babylonian  ceramic  art.  And 
in  another  part  of  these  underground  excavations  the  oldest  archi- 
tectural arch  of  a  drainage  canal,  and  still   farther  down,  in  the 


XX 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


deepest  layers,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same,  back  in  many  centuries 
beyond  the  fifth  millennium,  everywhere  interesting  and  valuable 
remains  of  human  civilisation  came  to  light,  fragments  of  vessels 
of  copper,  bronze,  and  clay,  a  mass  of  earthenware,  so  beautifully 
lacquered  in  red  and  black  that  one  might  consider  them  of  Greek 
origin,  or  at  least  influenced  by  Greek  art,  had  they  not  been  found 
8  meters  deep  under  Naram-Sin's  pavement. 

We  could  go  on  a  long  time  in  this  way  were  we  to  enumerate 
all  the  achievements  which  various  explorers,  supported  by  the 
energetic  interest  of  their  governments  and  aided  by  the  liberality 
of  their  countrymen,  have  accomplished  and  are  still  accomplishing 
on  the  ruined  sites  of  Assyria,  Babylonia,  and  Elam.  We  could 
speak  of  Hormuzd  Rassam's  finding  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  palace 
in  the  middle  mound  of  Babylon,  called  Kasr ;  of  two  beautiful  wells 
which  reached  down  to  the  water  level  of  the  Euphrates,  and  of 
other  traces  of  water  balances  in  the  extreme  northern  mound  Babil. 
probably  the  site  of  the  hanging  gardens  of  Semiramis.  We  could 
describe  the  successful  expeditions  of  Jules  Oppert,  William  Ben- 
nett Loftus,  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson,  and,  above  all,  tell  of  the  great 
work  of  the  Dieulafoys  on  the  ruins  of  Susa.  But  we  must  forego 
this  here,  and  will  mention  in  passing  that  only  recently  the  French 
Government  succeeded  in  acquiring  for  5,000  francs  the  right  from 
the  Shah  of  Persia  to  excavate  for  all  time  in  Susa  and  the  surround- 
ing province  and  to  transfer  half  of  the  finds  to  France,  while  for 
the  other  half  it  secured  the  first  option.  The  French  have  been 
active  in  Susa  since  November,  1897,  under  the  direction  of  De 
Morgan,  while  De  Sarzec  and  Haynes  continued  their  labors  with 
undiminished  and  untiring  zeal. 

Germany  may  justly  be  proud  that  one  of  her  sons,  the  Han- 
noverian  Georg  Friedrich  Grotefeld  (born  in  1775  at  Miinden), 
as  a  young  teacher  at  the  gymnasium  of  Gottingen  in  1802,  had  the 
genius  to  decipher  the  cuneiform  writing,  and  thus  placed  the  key 
in  the  hand  of  science  which  was  to  unlock  not  only  the  old  Persian 
monuments,  but  also  the  great  Babylonian-Assyrian  cuneiform  lit- 
erature, and  in  addition  to  that  make  possible  the  reading  of  the 
Armenian  and  Elamite  cuneiform  script.  Germany  may  also  glory 
in  the  fact  that  a  scholar  of  German  blood,  Julius  von  Mohl,  gave 
the  first  impulse  to  the  excavations  in  Nineveh ;  she  can  also  note 
with  satisfaction  that  the  enthusiastic  interest  which  is  being  brought 
to  the  Assyriological  studies,  especially  in  America,  and  from  which 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XXI 

grew  the  Philadelphia  expeditions,  was  awakened  in  the  German 
universities. 

No  one  can  deny  that  the  excavations  in  the  mounds  of  Meso- 
potamia have  opened  and  are  continually  opening  new  and  rich 
sources  of  highest  importance  for  an  entire  series  of  sciences — Old 
Testament  research,  ancient  history  and  geography,  the  history  of 
art  and  archaeology,  the  history  of  religion  and  comparative  mythol- 
ogy, Semitic  and  general  philology,  comparative  history  of  juris- 
prudence, the  history  of  astronomy  and  mathematics,  and  many 
other  sciences.  We  must  refrain  from  entering  into  details  and  can 
only  briefly  refer  to  a  few  facts. 

For  the  history  of  art,  particularly  the  history  of  sculpture  and 
architecture,  and  in  a  measure  also  of  painting  and  some  of  the 
industries,  such  as  stonecutting  and  pottery,  a  peculiar  and  highly 
important  link  was  recovered  through  the  resurrection  of  Assyrio- 
Babylonian  antiquity,  the  more  important  as  the  history  of  the 
development  of  the  Babylonian  art  can  be  followed  up  to  the  fifth 
pre-Christian  millennium.  The  image  of  Naram-Sin  found  at  Diar- 
bekr,  the  famous  vulture  stele  of  Eannadu,  the  sculpture  with  the 
representation  of  Ur-Nina  and  his  sons,  will  forever  remain  mile- 
stones in  the  history  of  the  art  of  western  Asia,  and  of  human 
artistic  skill  in  general.  And  as  it  is  an  established  fact  that  "the 
forms  of  the  column,  and  some  other  ornaments  of  Greek  art  which 
are  much  in  use,  are  first  met  in  Assyrian  sculptures,"  light  from  the 
East  may  also  be  hoped  for  to  illuminate  the  darkness  in  which 
the  origin  of  the  oldest  Greek  art  is  in  many  respects  still  enveloped. 

The  light  which  sprang  from  Oriental  ruined  mounds  has  with 
one  stroke  illuminated  the  sphere  of  the  ancient  peoples  and  states 
of  Western  Asia,  so  distant  in  time  and  space,  and  restored  it  to 
ancient  history.  The  nebulous  forms  of  Ninus,  Semiramis,  and  the 
effeminate  Sardanapalus  have  been  replaced  by  clear-cut  individ- 
ualities. The  old  great  culture  states — the  old  Babylonian,  Assyr- 
ian, and  Chaldaean  empires,  their  external  political  history  and  in- 
ternal development  in  commerce  and  industry,  law  and  religion, 
manners  and  customs — enter  into  our  horizon  with  steadily  increas- 
ing completeness  and  vividness.  At  the  same  time  they  furnish  us 
the  most  valuable  information  on  the  history  of  the  neighboring 
kingdoms,  from  Elam  to  Canaan,  on  the  ethnic  movements  which 
during  four  millenniums  took  place  in  the  large  quadrangle  of  lands 
between  the  Black  and  Caspian  seas  and  the  borders  of  Egypt- 


XX11  BABEL  AND  BIBLE- 

Arabia.  And  how  many  chronological  and  geographical  riddles 
have  not  been  solved  or  at  least  brought  nearer  to  solution ! 

Assyriological  research  which  sprang  from  the  ruins  of  Baby- 
lon and  Nineveh  has  above  all  shown  itself  fruitful  for  the  science 
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  for  it  promises  to  bear  still  more  fruit. 
For  not  only  is  the  Assyrian  language  most  akin  to  Hebrew,  afford- 
ing new  information  on  questions  of  grammar,  lexicography,  and 
phraseology,  but  there  is  scarcely  a  book  of  the  Old  Testament  the 
interpretation  of  whose  subject-matter  has  not  been  aided  to  some 
extent  by  the  cuneiform  monuments.  The  narratives  and  concep- 
tions of  the  Book  of  Genesis  of  the  creation  of  the  world — the  ser- 
pent as  the  arch-enemy  of  the  Deity  and  embodiment  of  all  sin  and 
malice,  the  ten  patriarchs,  and  the  catastrophe  of  the  Deluge  which 
destroyed  primitive  humanity,  so  well  known  and  familiar  to  us 
from  childhood — appear  in  a  new  light  through  the  surprising  par- 
allels which  the  Babylonian-Assyrian  clay  books  furnish.  The  Old 
Testament  history,  especially  that  of  Israel  from  Chedorlaomer  to 
Belshazzar  and  the  Achsemenian  kings,  interlinked  with  the  history 
of  Babel  and  Ashur,  continually  receives  new  light  from  the  latter. 
The  chronology  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  is,  through  the 
chronology  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  placed  on  a  more  secure  basis 
than  was  possible  before ;  and  since  in  the  annals  of  the  Assyrian 
kings  mention  is  made  of  the  kings  Ahab  and  Jehu,  Pekah  and 
Hosea,  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah,  the  possibility  is  afforded  of  comparing 
more  than  one  narrative  of  the  historical  and  prophetical  books,  as 
for  instance,  that  of  Sennacherib's  campaign  against  Jerusalem, 
wTith  the  records  of  the  opposing  side.  Hebrew  antiquity  is  con- 
nected by  hundreds  of  threads  with  that  of  western  Asia,  particu- 
larly of  Babylonia  and  Assyria.  The  deeper  insight  which  we 
now  have  into  the  belief  and  cult  of  the  gods,  especially  into  the 
nature  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Babylonians,  their  conception  of  the 
winged  angelic  beings  after  the  manner  of  the  cherubim  and  sera- 
phim, their  views  of  life  after  death,  their  bestowing  of  names,  the 
peculiarities  of  their  psalm  poetry  in  form  and  matter,  their  manners 
and  customs,  their  systems  of  measures  and  weights,  etc.,  directly 
serve  the  advancement  of  Old  Testament  theology  and  archaeology. 

The  resplendence  of  the  starry  sky  over  the  endless  expanse 
of  the  Euphrates's  land  is  something  wonderful ;  the  stars  sparkle 
with  the  greatest  brilliancy,  and  the  movements  of  the  planets,  the 
changes  of  the  moon,  the  various  meteors,  enchant  the  attention 
at  night.     The  Babylonians  learned  to  calculate  the  course  of  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  XX111 

stars,  their  observations  constituted  the  foundations  of  the  astro- 
nomical studies  of  the  learned  Alexandrians.  And  when  we  even 
to-day  divide  the  circle  into  360  degrees,  the  day  into  twelve  hours 
of  sixty  minutes ;  when  we  count  seven  days  of  the  week  and  name 
them  after  the  planets ;  when  we  divide  the  apparent  path  of  the  sun 
according  to  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  we  therein  directly  follow 
those  old  Chaldseans,  whose  great  scientific  accuracy,  while  it  has 
left  traces  in  some  other  things,  has  borne  imperishable  fruit  in  the 
science  of  astronomy,  which  originated  with  them.  And  just  as 
the  first  chapters  of  the  history  of  astronomy  can  only  be  written 
with  the  aid  of  cuneiform  works  or  notices,  we  must  see  in  the  same 
sources  the  history  of  mathematics,  geometry,  metrology.  Nay, 
in  many  respects  our  present  civilisation  is  still  under  the  influence 
of  the  hoary  Babylonian ;  the  week  and  its  seven  days  and  the  names 
of  so  many  constellations,  as  well  as  our  old  square  measure,  the 
cubit,  and  our  old  weight,  the  pound,  have  their  homes  in  Babylonia. 
Jurisprudence  has  good  reason  for  the  assumption  that  the  often 
striking  agreements  between  Roman  and  Babylonian  law  will  clear 
up  the  origins  of  Roman  law,  which,  at  least  partly,  are  still  obscure. 
In  the  exceedingly  rich  Babylonian-Assyrian  "contract  literature" 
an  abundant  as  well  as  valuable  source  was  disclosed  for  the  compar- 
ative history  of  jurisprudence  ;  many  other  functions  of  state  insti- 
tutions receive  new  and  instructive  data  of  a  comparative  and  his- 
torical nature  from  the  results  of  the  excavations.  We  have  in 
mind,  for  instance,  the  economic  development  of  those  ancient  cul- 
ture states,  or  of  the  history  of  war  in  its  manifold  branches.  Do 
not  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  alabaster  slabs  and  bronzes  of  the  Assyrian 
palaces  furnish  instructive  information  as  to  the  progress  in  cloth- 
ing and  arming  of  the  Assyrian  army,  the  developing  of  the  cavalry, 
the  technique  of  fortification,  the  defense  and  attack  by  means  of 
machines  of  assault  and  mines,  on  scouting  and  pontoon  building? 
Truly,  a  new  world  is  opened  to  human  knowledge  and  inquiry 
through  the  Babylonian-Assyrian  excavations. 


ERRATA 


age     90,  line     9. 

For  moisted  read  moistened. 

9i.    ' 

'          I. 

"    Assoria     "      Assyria. 

94-     ' 

'       9- 

"    ask            "      seek. 

"        121,      ' 

4- 

"    conform  *'      confirm. 

"        142,      ' 

'      13- 

"    victions    "      dictions. 

"        154.      ' 

'        1. 

' '    up  God     "      up  to  God. 

"        162,      * 

'       7 

irom  bottom.  For  than  these  read  that  these. 

"        165,      ' 

'     19 

Holly             "     Holy. 

"        165,      ' 

■     11 

"         "           "    on  the  other  "     on  the  other  hand 

»«        166,       ' 

'     11 

"    4903,              "     1903. 

"        167,       ' 

3 

For  the  least  read  in  the  least. 

FIRST  LECTURE 


-"  ""1 


1  LIBRARY  of  CONGRESS 

Two  Copies  Received 

SEP  14    906 

|         CopyrigM  Entry 


COPY  3. 


XXc,  No. ; 

I 

? 

J 


FIRST  LECTURE. 

TO  what  end  this  toil  and  trouble  in  distant,  inhospit- 
able, and  danger-ridden  lands?  Why  all  this  ex- 
pense in  ransacking  to  their  utmost  depths  the  rubbish 
heaps  of  forgotten  centuries,  where  we  know  neither 
treasures  of  gold  nor  of  silver  exist?  .  Why  this  zealous 
emulation  on  the  part  of  the  nations  to  secure  the  great- 
est possible  number  of  mounds  for  excavation?  And 
whence,  too,  that  constantly  increasing  interest,  that 
burning  enthusiasm,  born  of  generous  sacrifice,  now  be- 
ing bestowed  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  on  the  excava- 
tions of  Babylonia  and  Assyria? 

One  answer  echoes  to  all  these  questions, — one  an- 
swer, which,  if  not  absolutely  adequate,  is  yet  largely  the 
reason  and  consummation  of  it  all :  the  Bible.  A  magic 
halo,  woven  in  earliest  youth,  encircles  the  names  of 
Nineveh  and  Babylon,  an  irresistible  fascination  abides 
for  us  all  in  the  stories  of  Belshazzar  and  the  Wise  Men 
of  the  East.  The  long-lasting  dynasties  here  awakened 
to  new  life,  however  potent  for  history  and  civilisation 
they  may  have  been,  would  not  have  aroused  a  tithe  of 
their  present  interest,  did  they  not  number  among  them 
the  names  of  Amraphel,  Sennacherib,  and  Nebuchadnez- 
zar, with  whom  we  have  been  familiar  from  childhood. 


2  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

And  with  the  graven  memories  of  yonth  is  associated 
the  deeper  longing  of  maturity, — the  longing,  so  charac- 
teristic of  our  age, — to  possess  a  philosophy  of  the  world 
and  of  life  that  will  satisfy  both  the  heart  and  the  head. 
And  this  again  leads  us  directly  to  the  Bible,  and  notably 
to  the  Old  Testament,  with  which  historically  our  mod- 
ern views  are  indissolubly  connected. 

The  minute,  exhaustive  scrutiny  to  which  untold 
numbers  of  Christian  scholars  in  Germany,  England,  and 
America — the  three  Bible-lands,  as  we  may  justly  call 
them — are  submitting  the  Old  Testament,  that  little 
library  of  books  of  most  varied  hue,  is  nothing  less  than 
astounding. 

Of  these  silent  intellectual  labors  the  world  has  as 
yet  taken  but  little  notice.  Yet  this  much  is  certain, 
that  when  the  sum-total  and  ultimate  upshot  of  the  new 
knowledge  shall  have  burst  the  barriers  of  the  scholar's 
study  and  entered  the  broad  path  of  life, — shall  have 
entered  our  churches,  schools,  and  homes, — the  life  of 
humanity  will  be  more  profoundly  stirred  and  be  made 
the  recipient  of  more  significant  and  enduring  progress 
than  it  has  by  all  the  discoveries  of  modern  physical  and 
natural  science  put  together.  So  far,  at  any  rate,  the 
conviction  has  steadily  and  universally  established  itself 
that  the  results  of  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  excava- 
tions are  destined  to  inaugurate  anew  epoch,  not  only  in 
our  intellectual  life,  but  especially  in  the  criticism  and 
comprehension  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  that  from  now 
till  all  futurity  the  names  of  Babel  and  Bible  will  remain 
inseparably  linked  together. 

How  times  have  changed!     There   was   David  and 


BABRL  AND  BIBLE.  3 

there  was  Solomon,  1000  }Tears  before  Christ;  and  Moses, 
1400  years  ;  and  Abraham  eight  centuries  prior.  And  of 
all  these  men  we  had  the  minutest  information  !  It  was 
so  unique,  so  supernatural,  that  one  credulously  accepted 
along  with  it  stories  concerning  the  origin  of  the  world 
and  mankind.  The  very  greatest  minds  stood,  and  some 
of  them  still  stand  to-da}T,  under  the  puissant  thrall  of 
the  mystery  encompassing  the  First  Book  of  Moses.  But 
now  that  the  p3rramids  have  opened  their  depths  and  the 
Assyrian  palaces  their  portals,  the  people  of  Israel,  with 
its  literature,  appears  as  the  3Toungest  member  only  of  a 
venerable  and  hoar}-  group  of  nations. 

The  Old  Testament  formed  a  world  by  itself  till  far 
into  the  last  century.  It  spoke  of  times  to  whose  latest 
limits  the  age  of  classical  antiquity  barely  reached,  and 
of  nations  that  have  met  cither  with  none  or  with  the 
most  cursory  allusion  from  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans. 
The  Bible  was  the  sole  source  of  our  knowledge  of  the 
history  of  Hither  Asia  prior  to  550  B.  C,  and  since  its 
vision  extended  over  all  that  immense  quadrangle  lying 
between  the  Mediterranean  Sea  and  the  Persian  Gulf  and 
stretching  from  Mount  Ararat  to  Ethiopia,  it  naturally 
teemed  with  enigmas  that  might  otherwise  have  tarried 
till  eternit}^  for  their  solution.  But  now  the  walls  that 
formed  the  impenetrable  background  to  the  scenes  of  the 
Old  Testament  have  suddenly  fallen,  and  a  keen  invigo- 
rating air  and  a  flood  of  light  from  the  Orient  pervades 
and  irradiates  the  hoary  book, — animating  and  illuminat- 
ing it  the  more  as  Hebrew  antiquity  is  linked  together 
from  beginning  to  end  with  Babylonia  and  Assyria. 

The    American    excavations   at   Nippur   brought    to 


4  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

light  the  business  records  of  a  great  wholesale  house, 
Murashu  &  Sons,  operating  in  that  city  in  the  reign  of 
Artaxerxes  (450  B.  C).  We  read  in  these  records  the 
names  of  many  Jewish  exiles  that  had  remained  in  Babel, 
as  Nathaniel,  Haggai,  and  Benjamin,  and  we  read  also 
of  a  canal  Kabar  in  connection  with  the  city  of  Nippur, 
which  is  the  original  of  the  canal  of  Kebar  rendered  fa- 
mous by  Ezekiel's  vision  and  situated  "  in  the  land  of 
the  Chaldseans"  (Ezekiel  i.  3) .  This  u  grand  canal,' ' 
for  such  the  name  means,  may  possibly  exist  to  this  very 
day. 


Fig.  i.     Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  the  Home  of  Abraham  and  the 

Forefathers  of  Israel. 

(Ruins  of  el-Muqayyer,  pronounced  Mukayyer,  English  Mug-heir.) 

Since  the  Babylonian  bricks  usually  bear  a  stamp 
containing  along  with  other  marks  the  name  of  the  city 
in  which  the  building  of  which  it  formed  a  part  was 
erected,  it  was  made  possible  for  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  as 
early  as  the  year  1849  to  rediscover  the  much-sought-for 
city  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  the  home  of  Abraham  and  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  5 

ancestors  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  (Genesis  xi.  31  and  xv.  7) . 
The  discovery  was  made  in  the  gigantic  monnd  of  ruins 
of  Mugheir  on  the  right  bank  of  the  lower  Euphrates 
(see  Fig.  1) ,  which  is  now  the  storrn-center  of  warring 
Arab  tribes.  The  certainty  of  the  discovery  has  been 
more  and  more  established. 

The  data  of  the  cuneiform  literature  shed  light  also 
on  geographical  matters :   formerly  the  site  of  the  city  of 


Fig.  2.     Hittite   Ideographic 
Writing  from  Carchemish.1 


Fig.  3.   King  Hammurabi.  The  King 
Amraphel  of  the  Bible. 


Carchemish,  where  Nebuchadnezzar  in  605  B.C.  won  his 
great  battle  from  Pharaoh-necho  (Jeremiah  xlvi.  2)  was 
sought  for  at  random  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  but 
in  March,  1876,  the  English  Assyriologist  George  Smith, 
starting  from  Aleppo  and  following  the  river  downward 
from  Biredjik,  rode   directly  to  the  spot  where   from  the 

Confirming  the  discovery  of  the  site  of  Carchemish,  where  Nebuchednezzar 
defeated  Necho  in  605  B.  C. 


6  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

tenor  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  the  city  of  the  Hittite 
kings  must  have  lain,  and  at  once  and  unhesitatingly 
identified  the  vast  ruins  of  Dsherabis  there  situate,  with 
their  walls  and  palace-mounds,  more  extensive  than  Nin- 
eveh itself,  with  the  ancient  city  of  Carchemish, — a  con- 
clusion that  was  immediately  afterward  confirmed  by  the 
inscriptions  in  the  unique  ideographic  Hittite  script  that 
were  strewn  over  the  entire  site  of  the  ruins  (Fig.  2) . 

And  like  many  names  of  places,  so  also  many  of  the 
personalities  named  in  the  Bible,  have  received  new  light 
and  life.  The  book  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  (xx.  1)  men- 
tions an  Assyrian  king  by  the  name  of  Sargon,  who 
sent  his  marshal  against  Ashdod ;  and  when  in  1843  the 
French  consul  Emile  Botta  began  his  excavations  on  the 
mound  of  ruins  situated  not  far  from  Mosul,  and  thus  in- 
augurated archaeological  research  on  Mesopotamian  soil, 
the  first  Assyrian  palace  unearthed  was  the  palace  of  this 
same  Sargon,  the  conqueror  of  Samaria.  Na3T,  on  one  of 
the  superb  alabaster  reliefs  with  which  the  walls  of  the 
palace  chambers  were  adorned,  the  very  person  of  this 
mighty  warrior  conversing  with  his  marshal  appears  be- 
fore our  e}Tes  (Fig.  4) . 

The  Book  of  Kings  (2  Kings  xviii.  14)  narrates  that 
King  Sennacherib  received  tribute  from  King  Hezekiah 
in  the  city  of  Lachish  in  southern  Palestine.  Now,  a  re- 
lief from  Sargon 's  palace  in  Nineveh  shows  the  great  As- 
S3rrian  king  enthroned  before  his  tent  in  sight  of  a  con- 
quered cit}',  and  the  accompanying  inscription  reads: 
"Sennacherib,  the  king  of  the  universe,  king  of  Ashur, 
seated  himself  upon  his  throne  and  inspected  the  booty  of 
Lachish." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


And  again,  Sennacherib's  Babylonian  rival  Mero- 
dach-Baladan,  who  according-  to  the  Bible  (2  Kings  xx. 
12)  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  King  Hezekiah,  is  shown 
us  in  his  own  likeness  b}'  a  magnificent  diorite  relief  now 


;^f.'[ '.  j;'-'.ifi((!f'7",rM .   ^j,  \v ".'  r 


..  O'-^ '' 


irit,  \V  » 


.V  Ml' 


Fig.  4.     King  Sargon  II.  and  His  Marshal 


in  Berlin,  where  before  the  king  is  the  lord-ma3Tor  of  the 
city  of  Babylon,  to  whom  the  sovereign  in  his  gracious- 
ness  has  seen  fit  to  grant  large  tracts  of  land.      Even  the 


Fig.  5.      Assyrian  King  in  State  Costume. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


9 


contemporary  of  Abraham,  Amraphel,  the  great  king 
Hammurabi,  is  now  represented  by  a  likeness  (Fig.  3) . 
Thus,  all  the  men  that  made  the  history  of  the  world  for 
3000  long  3Tears,  rise  to  life  again,  and  the  most  costly 


Fig.  6.     Seal  of  King  Darius. 

relics  have  been  bequeathed  to  us  by  them.  Here  is  the 
seal  of  King  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes  (Fig.  6) ,  where 
the  king  is  represented  as  hunting  the  lion  under  the 
sublime  protection  of  Ahura  Mazda,  and  at  the  side  is  the 
trilingual  inscription :   "I  am  Darius,  the  great  king," — 


Fig.  7.     Seal  of  Sargon  I.     (Third  or  fourth  millennium  B.  C.) 

a  genuine  treasure  of  the  British  Museum.  Here  is  the 
state  seal  of  one  of  the  oldest  known  Babylonian  rulers, 
Shargani-shar-ali,  or  Sargon  I.,  who  flourished  in  the 
third,  or  possibly  the  fourth,  millennium  before  Christ 


10 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


(Fig.  7) .  This  king,  as  the  legend  rnns,  knew  not  his 
own  father,  the  latter  having  met  his  death  prior  to  the 
birth  of  his  son ;   and  since  the  father's  brother  cared  not 


Elamite 
Babylonian  merchant 

Fig- 


Jew  of  Lachish 


Racial  Types. 


Israelite 
Arab  horseman 


for  the  widowed  mother,  great  affliction  attended  the  son's 
entrance  into   this   world;   we  read:    "In  Azupiran,  on 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  11 

the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  she  bore  me  in  concealment ; 
she  placed  me  in  a  box  of  reeds,  sealed  my  door  with 
pitch,  and  cast  me  upon  the  river,  which  conveyed  me  on 
its  waves  to  Akki,  the  water-carrier.  He  took  me  up  in 
the  kindness  of  his  heart,  reared  me  as  his  own  child, 
made  me  his  gardener.  Then  Ishtar,  the  daughter  of  the 
King  of  Heaven,  showed  fondness  for  me  and  made  me 
king  over  men." 

And  not  only  kings  and  generals,  but  also  entire  na- 
tions, have  been  brought  to  life  again  by  these  discov- 
eries. If  we  compare  the  various  types  of  nationality 
engraved  on  the  monuments  of  Assyrian  art,  and,  taking 
for  example  two  types  that  we  know,  here  scrutinise  the 
picture  of  a  Jew  of  Lachish  (Fig.  8) ,  and  here  the  repre- 
sentation of  an  Israelite  of  the  time  of  Jehu,  we  are  not 
likely  to  be  wrong  in  our  conclusion  that  also  the  other 
national  types,  for  example  the  Elamite  chieftain,  the 
Arab  horseman,  and  the  Babylonian  merchant,  have  been 
depicted  and  reproduced  with  the  same  fidelity  and  exact- 
ness. Particularly  the  Assyrians,  who  sixty  years  ago 
were  supposed  to  have  perished  with  all  their  history  and 
civilisation  in  the  great  river  of  time,  have  been  made 
known  to  us  in  the  minutest  details  by  excavations  in 
Nineveh,  and  many  passages  in  the  prophetic  books  re- 
ceive gorgeous  illustration  from  our  discoveries.  Thus, 
Isaiah  describes  in  the  following  eloquent  language  the 
Assyrian  troops : 

"Behold,  they  shall  come  with  speed  swiftly:  None  shall  be 
weary  nor  stumble  among  them;  none  shall  slumber  nor  sleep; 
neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be  loosed,  nor  the  latchet  of 
their  shoes  be  broken  :  Whose  arrows  are  sharp,  and  all  their  bows 


12 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Fig.  9.     Bronze  Gates  of  the  Palace  of  Shalmaneser  II.     (At  Balawat.) 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


13 


bent,  their  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  counted  like  flint,  and  their  wheels 
like  a  whirlwind  :   Their  roaring  shall  be  like  a  lion,  yea,  they  shall 


Fig.  10.     Assyrians  Battering  a  Fortress. 


Fig.  n.     Detail-Group  on  Bronze  Gate. 
Above  war-chariots  and  below  captives  led  before  the  king. 

roar,  and   lay  hold   of  the   prey,  and  shall  carry  it   away  safe,  and 
none  shall  deliver  it." — (Isaiah,  v.  27-29.) 


14 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Fig.  12.    Procession  of  Female  Captives.     (Detail-group  on  bronze  gate.) 


Fig.  13.    Assyrian  Bowmen  and  Spearmen  Attacking  a  Hostile  Fortress. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLK. 


15 


We  can  now  see  these  same  Assyrian  soldiers  arising 
from  their  camp  in  the  early  morn  and  dashing  their  bat- 
tering-rams against  the  enemy's  fortress  (Fig.  10)  ;   and 


Fig.  13a.      Grazing  Antelopes. 
(Tdyllic  scene  picturing  the  intense  realism  of  Assyrian  art.) 


Fig.  14.    Assyrian  Slingers. 

on  other  representations  (Figs.  11  and  12)  may  be  seen 
the  unfortunate  prisoners  conducted  the  way  from  which 


16 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


there  is  no  home-coming.  We  see  also  (Fig.  13)  the 
Assyrian  bowmen  and  spearmen  casting  their  weapons 
toward  the  hostile  fortress,  and  in  another  case  Assyrian 
warriors  storming  an  elevation  defended  by  hostile  arch- 
ers.    They  pull  themselves  upward  by  the  branches  of 


Fig.  15.    Head  of  Winged  Bull. 

Showing  details  of  Assyrian  mode  of  dressing  the  beard,  as  worn 

by  the  king  and  the  officers  of  the  army. 

the  trees,  or  clamber  to  the  summit  with  the  help  of 
staffs ;  whilst  others  drag  in  triumph  the  severed  heads 
of  their  enemies  into  the  valley. 

The  military  system  of  this  first  great  warrior-state 
of  the  world  is  shown  forth  to  us  in  a  vast  number  of  sim- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


17 


Fig   16.     The  King's  Chariot  in  a  Parade. 


Fig.  17.     Officers  of  Ashurbanipal  (Sardanapalus)  Entering  Court. 


18 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


ilar  representations  on  the  bronze  doors  of  Shalmaneser 
II.  (Fig.  9)  and  on  the  alabaster  reliefs  of  the  palaces  of 
Sargon  and  Sennacherib,  with  all  details  of  armament 
and  equipment  and  in  all  phases  of  development.  (See, 
for  example,  Fig.  14.) 


;v;i'.U'VW.r(  "u 'iHlli (r'i|WyV^iiiiii!ni,^l^!:;vi',/.;|'iJi;i'i!^|Ni;('.-.,^ii'<  i/v^^-iii^Avi'-v^llMWllllNiliHI 


Fig.  18.     Pages  Carrying  the  Royal  Chariot. 

Again  we  have  the  portrait  of  an  Assyrian  officer  of 
Sargon's  general  staff,  the  style  of  whose  beard  surpasses 
in  artistic  cut  anything  that  has  been  attempted  by  mod- 
ern officers.  (See,  for  example,  Fig.  15.)  Here  we  see 
the  officers  of  the  royal  household  making  their  cere- 
monial entry  (Fig.  17) ,  or  pages  carrying  the  royal  char- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


19 


iot  (Fig.  18) ,  or  the  royal  throne  (Fig.  19) .  Many  beau- 
tiful reliefs  show  us  King  Sardanapalus  following  the 
chase,  especially  in  his  favorite  sport  of  hunting  lions,  of 
which  a  goodly  number  of  magnificent  specimens  were 


Fig.  19.      Pages  Carrying  the  Royal  Throne. 

constantly  kept  at  hand  in  parks  specially  reserved  for 
this  purpose.      (Figs.  20-25.) 

When  King  Saul  refused  to  suffer  young  David  to 
go  forth  to  do  battle  with  the  giant  Goliath,  David  re- 


1 


20 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


minded  hirn  that  lie  had  been  the  shepherd  of  his  father's 
flocks  and  that  when  a  lion  or  a  bear  had  come  and  taken 
a  lamb  from  his  flock,  he  had  gone  ont  after  the  beast  and 


;  - 

, 

-*jg 

Fig.  20.    King  Sardanapalus  on  Horseback. 

had  smitten  it  and  wrested  from  it  its  prey,  and  that  if 
after  that  it  had  risen  against  him  he  had  canght  the  lion 


\^'--;-->-^v^' 


aft  -•Wr'r-v-w 


■■»!'' 


%fe$tr^-  I 


Fig.  21.     Sardanapalus  Hunting  the  Lion  on  Horseback. 

by  its  beard  and  slain  it.  Precisely  the  same  custom  pre- 
vailed in  Assyria ;  and  the  reliefs  show  King  Sardana- 
palus doing  battle  with  the  lion,  not  only  on  horseback 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


21 


Fig.  22.      Hunting  the  Lion  from  a  Chariot. 


Fig.  23.     Sardanapalus  Bearding  the  Lion. 
(The  king  of  Ashur  measures  his  strength  with  the  king  of  the  desert.) 


Fig.  24.     Hunting  from  a  Boat. 


22 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


(Fig.  21)  and  from  his  chariot  (Fig.  22) ,  but  also  in  hand 
to  hand  combat  (Fig.  23) , — the  King  of  Ashur  measur- 
ing his  strength  with  the  king  of  the  desert. 


Fig   25.     Caged  Lion  Set  Free  for  the  Chase. 


Fig.  26.     Servants  Carrying  Fruit,  Hares,  Partridges,  Spitted 
Grasshoppers,  and  Onions. 

We  catch  glimpses  of  the  preparations  which  were 
made  for  the  royal  meal  (Figs.  26  and  27)  ;  we  see  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


23 


servants  bringing  hares,  partridges,  spitted  grasshoppers, 
a  plenitude  of  cakes  and  all  manner  of  fruits,  and  carry- 
ing fresh  branches  for  driving  away  the  flies.  We  are 
even  permitted  to  see  on  a  bas-relief  of  the  harem  (Fig. 
28)  the  king  and  queen  quaffing  costly  wine  in  a  leafy 
bower,  the  king  reclining  on  an  elevated  divan,  the  queen 
seated  opposite  him  on  a  chair,  and  clothed  in  rich  gar- 
ments.    Eunuchs  waft  cooling  breezes  toward  them  from 


mm/tQ^*  rt.Sc 


Fig.  27.     Slaves  Carrying  Fruit 

their  fans,  while  soft  music  from  distant  sources  steals 
gently  upon  their  ears  (Fig.  29) .  This  is  the  only  queen 
of  whom  we  possess  a  picture.  Her  profile  as  it  appeared 
years  ago  in  a  better  state  of  preservation  has  been  saved 
for  posterity  by  a  sketch  made  in  1867  by  Lieutenant, 
afterwards  Colonel,  Billerbeck.  (Fig.  30).  This  consort 
of  Sardanapalus  was  apparently  a  princess  of  Aryan  blood 
with  blond  hair. 

Many  other  things  of  interest  in  Assyrian  antiquity 


24 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Fig.  2S.     King  Sardanapalus  and  His  Consort. 


Fig.  29.     Attendants  Upon  King  Sardanapalus  and  His  Consort. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


25 


have  also  been  restored  to  our  bodily  vision.  The  prophet 
Isaiah  (xlvi.  1)  mentions  the  procession  of  the  idols,  and 
in  Fig.  31  we  actually  wit- 
ness one, — with  the  god- 
desses in  front,  and  behind, 
the  god  of  the  weather 
armed  with  hammer  and 
bolts ;  Assyrian  soldiers 
have  been  commanded  to 
transport  the  idols. 

We  see  in  Figure  32 
how  the  statues  of  the 
gigantic  stone  bulls  were 
transported,  and  catch  in 
this  way  all  manner  of 
glimpses  of  the  technical 
knowledge  of  the  Assy- 
rians.    But  our  greatest   and   most   constant   delight  is 


Fig.  30.  Consort  of  Sardanapalus. 
(From  a  sketch  by  Colonel  Billerbeck.) 


Fig.  31.     Procession  of  Idols. 

derived  from  the  contemplation  of  their  noble  and  simple 
architecture,  as  it  is  exhibited  for  example  in  the  portal 


26 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Fig.  32.     Transportation  of  the  Gigantic  Stone  Bulls. 


Fig.  33.     Portal  of  the  Palace  of  Sargon. 
(Representing  the  noble  style  and  simplicity  of  the  Assyrian  architecture  ) 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


27 


of  Sargon's  palace  excavated  by  Botta  (Fig.  33) ,  or  from 
the  magnificent  representations  of  animals,  replete  with 
the  most  startling  realism,  which  these  "Dutchmen  of 
antiquity"  created.  For  example,  the  idyllic  picture  of 
the  grazing  antelopes  (Fig.  13a  ;  also  Fig.  34) ,  or  the 
dying  lioness  of  Nineveh,  so  justly  renowned  in  art 
(Fig.  35) . 


Fig.  34.     Idyllic  Scenes  from  Assyrian  Art. 

The  excavations  on  Babylonian  soil  disclose  in  like 
manner  the  art  and  culture  of  the  mother  country  of  As- 
syrian civilisation  far  back  in  the  fourth  millennium, — a 
period  which  the  boldest  flights  of  fancy  would  otherwise 
have  scarcely  dreamt  of  recovering.  We  penetrate  lastly 
here  into  the  period  of  that  primitive  un-Indo-Germanic 
and  likewise  un-Semitic  nation  of  Sumerians,  who  are 


28 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


the  creators  and  originators  of  trie  great  Babylonian  civ- 
ilisation, of  those  Snmerians  for  whom  the  number  60 
and  not  100  constituted  the  next  higher  unit  after  10. 


Fig.  35.    The  Dying  Lioness  of  Nineveh. 

That  Sumerian  Priest-King  whose  magnificently  pre- 
served head  (Fig.  36)  the  Berlin  Museum  now  shelters, 


Fig.  36.     Head  of  a  Sumerian  Priest-King. 
(A  noble  type  from  the  dawn  of  human  history.) 

may  unquestionably  be  characterised  as  a  noble  represen- 
tative of  the  human  race  from  the  twilight  of  history. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  29 

But  gratifying  and  instructive  as  all  these  discov- 
eries may  be,  they  have  yet,  so  to  speak,  the  significance 
of  details  and  externalities  only,  and  are  easily  surpassed 
in  scope  and  importance  b}^  the  revelations  which  it  still 
remains  for  us  to  adduce. 

I  am  not  referring  now  to  the  highly  important  fact 
that  the  Babylonian  and  iVssyrian  methods  of  reckoning 
time,  which  were  based  on  accurate  astronomical  observa- 
tions of  solar  eclipses,  etc.,  enabled  us  to  determine  the 
chronology  of  the  events  narrated  in  the  Book  of  Kings, 
— a  circumstance  that  was  doubly  gratifying  owing  to  the 
discovery  of  Robertson  Smith  and  Wellhausen  that  the 
chronology  of  the  Old  Testament  had  been  forcibly  made 
to  conform  to  a  system  of  sacred  numbers,  which  counted 
480  years  from  the  end  of  the  Exile  back  to  the  founding 
of  the  temple  of  Solomon,  and  again  480  years  backward 
from  that  date  to  the  Exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel 
from  Egypt  (1  Kings  vi.  l) . 

I  can  also  adduce  in  this  place  but  a  single,  and  that 
an  inconspicuous,  illustration  of  the  far-reaching  influence 
which  the  cuneiform  investigations  have  exercised  on  our 
understanding  of  the  text  of  the  Old  Testament, — a  result 
due  to  the  remarkably  close  affinity  between  the  Baby- 
lonian and  Hebrew  languages  and  to  the  enormous  com- 
pass of  the  Babylonian  literature.  We  read  in  Numbers 
vi.  24-27: 

II  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee:  The  Lord 
make  his  face  to  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto 
thee :  The  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  thee,  and 
give  thee  peace." 

Countless  times  has  this  blessing  been  given  and  re- 


30  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

ceived !  But  it  was  never  understood  in  its  full  depth 
and  import  until  Babylonian  usage  informed  us  that  "to 
lift  up  one's  countenance  or  eyes  upon  or  to  another, " 
was  a  form  of  speech  for  "bestowing  one's  love  upon  an- 
other, for  gazing  lovingly  and  feelingly  upon  another,  as 
a  bridegroom  upon  a  bride,  or  a  father  upon  a  son."  This 
ancient  and  glorious  benediction,  therefore,  invokes  on 
man  with  increasing  emphasis  God's  blessing  and  protec- 
tion, God's  benignant  and  gracious  consideration,  and 
lastly  God's  own  love, — finally  to  break  forth  into  that 
truly  beautiful  greeting  of  the  Orient,  "Peace  be  with 
thee!" 

Yet  the  greatest  and  most  unexpected  service  that 
Babel  ever  rendered  the  philological  interpretation  of  the 
Bible  must  yield  the  palm  for  wide-reaching  significance 
to  the  fact  that  here  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and 
Tigris  as  early  as  2250  B.  C.  we  find  a  highly  organised 
constitutional  state.  Here  in  these  Babylonian  lowlands, 
having  an  area  not  greater  than  that  of  Italy,  yet  extra- 
ordinarily rich  by  nature  and  transformed  by  human  in- 
dustry into  a  veritable  hotbed  of  productiveness,  there 
existed  in  the  third  millennium  before  Christ  a  civilisa- 
tion comparable  in  many  respects  with  our  own. 

It  was  Hammurabi,  the  Amraphel  of  the  Bible,  that 
ultimately  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Elamites,  the  her- 
editary enemy  of  Babylon,  from  the  country,  and  in  weld- 
ing North  and  South  together  into  a  single  union,  with 
Babylon  as  political  and  religious  center.  His  first  solici- 
tude was  to  establish  a  uniform  system  of  law  over  the 
entire  country,  and  he  accordingly  promulgated  a  juridic 
code  that  determined  in  the  minutest  manner  the  rights 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE  31 

and  privileges  of  his  citizens.  The  relations  of  master, 
slave,  and  hireling,  of  merchant  and  apprentice,  of  land- 
lord and  tenant,  are  here  precisely  fixed.  There  is  a  law, 
for  example,  that  a  clerk  who  has  delivered  money  to  his 
superior  for  goods  that  he  has  sold  shall  obtain  a  receipt 
for  the  transaction.  Reductions  in  rent  are  provided  for 
in  case  of  damage  by  storms  and  wild  beasts.  The  fish- 
ing rights  of  boroughs  along  the  canals  are  precisely  de- 
fined. And  so  on.  Babylon  is  the  seat  of  the  Supreme 
Court,  to  which  all  knotty  and  disputed  points  of  law  are 
submitted.  Every  able-bodied  man  is  subject  to  military 
duty.  But  Hammurabi  softened  by  many  decisions  the 
severity  of  the  recruiting  laws  ;  for  example,  in  the  inter- 
ests of  stock-raising  he  exempted  herdsmen  from  military 
service,  and  he  also  conferred  special  privileges  on  an- 
cient priestly  families. 

We  read  of  money  having  been  coined  in  Babylon, 
and  the  distinctively  cursive  character  of  their  script 
points  to  a  very  extensive  use  of  writing.  Man}^  letters 
of  this  ancient  period  have  been  preserved.  We  read,  for 
example,  the  letter  of  a  wife  to  her  absent  husband,  ask- 
ing his  advice  on  some  trivial  matter ;  the  epistle  of  a 
son  to  his  father,  announcing  that  a  certain  person  has 
unspeakably  offended  him,  and  that  his  impulse  is  to  give 
the  miscreant  a  severe  drubbing,  but  that  he  prefers  to 
have  the  advice  of  his  father  on  the  matter ;  and  another, 
still  stranger  one,  in  which  a  son  implores  his  father  to 
send  him  at  once  the  money  that  he  has  so  long  promised 
him,  fortifying  his  request  with  the  contumelious  insin- 
uation that  in  that  event  only  will  he  feel  justified  in  re- 
suming his  prayers   for  his   father's   salvation.     Every- 


32 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


c 

o 

C3 


O 


_> 

'5b 
a 

B 


o 
> 

< 

ffl 

fa 
o 

w 

< 

a 

w 

E 
h 

iz; 

o 

W 

o 

< 

o 

Q 
Z 

< 

w 

§ 
w 

H 
w 
a 

h 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


33 


thing,  in  fact,  points  to  a  thoroughly  organised  postal 
system  throughout  the  empire,  and  this  conclusion  is 
corroborated  by  the  distinctest  evidence  that  there  existed 
causeways  and  canals  in  Babylonia  which  extended  far 
beyond  its  boundaries  and  which  were  kept  in  perfect 
condition. 

Commerce  and  industr}7,  stock-raising  and  agricul- 
ture, flourished  here  in  an  eminent  degree,  while  science, 


Fig.  38.    Palace  of  King  Sargon  at  Khorsabad. 
(Restored  by  Victor  Place.) 

geometry,  mathematics,  and  notably  astrononi}^,  attained 
a  height  of  development  that  has  repeatedly  evoked  the 
admiration  of  modern  scientists.  Certainly  not  Paris, 
and  at  most  Rome,  can  bear  comparison  with  Babylon  in 
the  extent  of  influence  which  it  exercised  upon  the  world 
for  2000  years. 

Bitter  testimony  do  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testa- 


34 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


ment  bear  to  the  surpassing  splendor  and  unconquerable 
might  of  the  Babylon  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (see  Figs.  37, 
38,  39,  40,  and  41) .  "Babylon,"  cries  Jeremiah,  "  hath 
been  a  golden  cup  in  Yahveh's  hand,  that  made  all  the 
earth  drunken"  (Jer.  li.  7)  ;  and  the  Revelation  of  St. 
John  still  quivers  with  the  detested  memory  of  Babel  the 
Great,  the  gay  voluptuous  city,  the  wealth-teeming  me- 
tropolis of  commerce  and  art,  the  mother  of  harlots  and 


Fig.  39.     Palace  of  Sennacherib  at  Nineveh. 
(Imaginative  Restoration.      After  Ferguson.) 

of  all  abominations  of  the  earth.  Yet  so  far  back  as  the 
beginning  of  the  third  millennium  before  Christ  Babylon 
had  been  this  great  focus  of  culture,  science,  and  litera- 
ture, the  "brain"  of  Hither  Asia,  the  power  that  dom- 
inated the  world. 

In  the  winter  of  1887,  a  band  of  Egyptian  fellahs 
who  were  excavating  in  the  ruins  of  the  palaces  of  Amen- 
ophis  IV.  at  El-Amarna,  between  Thebes  and  Memphis, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


35 


discovered  about  300  clay  tablets  of  many  forms  and 
sizes.  These  tablets  were  found  to  contain  the  corre- 
spondence of  Babylonian,  Assyrian,  and  Mesopotamian 
kings  with  the  Pharaohs  Amenophis  III.  and  IV.,  and, 
most  important  of  all,  the  letters  of  the  Egyptian  gover- 
nors of  the  great  Canaanite  cities  of  Tyre,  Sidon,  Akko, 
Askalon,  etc.,  to  the  Eg}7ptian  court;  and  the  museum 
at  Berlin  is  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  the  only  letters  that 


\ 


.x 


Fig.  40.    Chariot  and  Attendants  of  Sennacherib  with  Castle 
on  a  Mountain.     (After  Layard.) 

came  from  Jerusalem, — letters  written  before  the  entrance 
of  the  Israelites  into  the  promised  land.  Like  a  powerful 
searchlight,  these  clay  tablets  of  El-Amarna  shed  a  flood 
of  dazzling  effulgence  upon  the  profound  obscurity  which 
shrouded  the  political  and  cultural  conditions  of  the  period 
from  1500  to  1400  B.C.;  and  the  mere  fact  that  the  mag- 
nates of  Canaan,  nay,  even  of  Cyprus,  made  use  of  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  37 

Babylonian  language  and  script,  and  like  the  Babylonians 
wrote  on  clay  tablets,  the  mere  fact  that  the  Babylonian 
language  was  the  official  language  of  diplomatic  inter- 
course from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Nile,  is  in  itself  indis- 
putable proof  of  the  omnipotent  influence  which  Baby- 
lonian civilisation  and  literature  exercised  on  the  world 
from  the  year  2200  until  1400  B.C. 

When  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  invaded  the  land  of 
Canaan,  they  entered  a  country  which  belonged  absolutely 
to  the  domain  of  Babylonian  civilisation .  It  is  an  unim- 
portant but  characteristic  feature  of  the  prevailing  state 
of  things  that  a  Babylo7iish  garment  excited  the  avarice  of 
Achan  when  the  first  Canaanite  city,  Jericho,  was  stormed 
and  plundered  (Joshua  vii.  21) .  And  not  only  the  in- 
dustry, but  also  the  commerce  and  law,  the  customs  and 
the  science  of  Babylon  were  the  standards  of  the  land. 
Knowing-  this,  we  comprehend  at  once  why  the  systems 
of  measures,  weights,  and  coins  used  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, and  the  external  form  of  their  laws  ("if  a  man  do 
this  or  that,  he  shall  be  punished  after  this  manner  or 
that")  are  Bab}donian  throughout.  So  also  the  sacer- 
dotal customs  and  the  methods  of  offering  sacrifices  were 
profoundly  influenced  by  Babylonian  models ;  and  it  is  a 
remarkable  fact  that  Israelitic  traditions  are  altogether  at 
variance  in  their  accounts  of  the  origin  of  the  Sabbath, — 
as  will  be  rendered  apparent  by  a  comparison  of  Exodus 
xx.  11  and  Deuteronomy  v.  15.  But  now  the  matter  is 
clearer. 

The  Babylonians  also  had  their  Sabbath  day  (sha- 
battii) ,  and  a  calendar  of  feasts  and  sacrifices  has  been 
unearthed   according  to  which   the  7th,   14th,  21st,   and 


38  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

28th  days  of  every  month  were  set  apart  as  days  on  which 
no  work  should  be  done,  on  which  the  king  should  not 
change  his  robes,  nor  mount  his  chariot,  nor  offer  sacri- 
fices, nor  render  legal  decisions,  nor  eat  of  boiled  or 
roasted  meats,  on  which  not  even  a  physician  should  lay 
hands  on  the  sick.  Now  this  setting  apart  of  the  sev- 
enth day  for  the  propitiation  of  the  gods  is  really  under- 
stood from  the  Babylonian  point  of  view,  and  there  can 
therefore  be  scarcely  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  in  the 
last  resort  we  are  indebted  to  this  ancient  nation  on  the 
banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  for  the  plenitude 
of  blessings  that  flows  from  our  day  of  Sabbath  or  Sun- 
day rest. 

And  more  still.  There  is  a  priceless  treasure  in  the 
Berlin  Museum,  a  tablet  of  clay,  containing  the  Babylo- 
nian legend  of  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the  first  man  for- 
feited the  boon  of  immortality.  The  place  where  this 
tablet  was  found,  namely  El-Amarna  in  Egypt,  and  the 
numerous  dots  scattered  over  it  in  red  Egyptian  ink, 
showing  the  pains  that  some  Egyptian  scholar  had  taken 
to  master  the  intricacies  of  the  foreign  text,  are  ocular 
evidence  of  the  zeal  with  which  the  productions  of  Baby- 
lonian literature  were  cultivated  over  the  vast  extent  of 
territory  which  stretched  from  Canaan  to  the  land  of  the 
Pharaohs.  Shall  we  be  astonished,  therefore,  to  learn 
that  entire  cycles  of  Biblical  stories  have  been  suddenly 
brought  to  light  from  the  darkness  of  the  Babylonian 
treasure-heaps,  in  much  purer  and  more  primitive  form 
than  they  exist  in  the  Bible  itself? 

The  Babylonians  divided  their  history  into  two  great 
periods :  that  before  the  Flood  and  that  after  the  Flood. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  39 

Babylonia  was  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  the  land  of 
deluges.  Like  all  alluvial  lowlands  bordering  on  great 
streams  that  flow  into  the  sea,  it  was  exposed  to  floods  of 
the  direst  and  most  unique  character.  It  is  the  home  of 
the  cyclone  or  tornado,  with  its  accompaniment  of  earth- 
quake and  cloudburst.  Only  twenty-five  years  ago,  in 
the  year  1876,  a  tornado  of  this  character  gathered  in  the 
Bay  of  Bengal,  and  amid  the  crashing  of  thunder  and 
with  a  violence  so  terrific  as  to  dismast  ships  distant 
nearly  two  hundred  miles,  approached  the  delta  of  the 
Ganges,  met  the  ebbing  tide,  and  engulfing  it  in  its  own 
titanic  tidal- wave,  hurled  oceans  of  water  over  an  area  of 
141  square  leagues  to  a  depth  of  45  feet,  drowning  215,000 
human  beings,  and  only  losing  its  strength  as  it  broke 
against  the  highlands  that  lay  beyond.  Now  the  credit 
belongs  to  the  celebrated  Viennese  geologist,  Eduard 
Suess,  for  having  discovered  the  exact  and  detailed  de- 
scription of  just  such  a  tornado  in  the  Babylonian  story 
of  the  Flood  inscribed  on  this  tablet  (Fig.  42)  from  the 
library  of  Sardanapalus  at  Nineveh  and  committed  to 
writing  2000  years  before  Christ.  The  sea  plays  the  prin- 
cipal part  in  this  flood,  and  therefore  the  ark  of  the  Baby- 
lonian Noah,  Xisuthros,  is  cast  back  upon  a  spur  of  the 
Armenio-Medean  mountains ;  but  in  other  respects  it  is 
the  same  old  story  of  the  Flood,  so  familiar  to  us  all. 

Xisuthros  receives  from  the  god  of  the  watery  deep 
the  command  to  build  a  ship  of  certain  dimensions,  to 
coat  it  thoroughly  with  pitch,. and  to  put  on  board  of  it 
his  entire  family  together  with  the  seeds  of  all  living 
things.  The  ship  is  entered,  its  doors  are  closed,  it  is 
cast   adrift  upon  the   devastating  waves,    and   is   finally 


40 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


stranded  upon  a  mountain  bearing  the  name  of  Nizir. 
Then  follows  the  famous  passage:  "  On  the  seventh  day 
I  took  forth  a  dove  and  released  it ;  the  dove  flew  hither 
and  thither,  but  finding  no  resting-place  returned."  We 
then  read  that  a  swallow  was  sent  forth ;  it  also  found  no 
resting-place  and  returned.  Finally  a  raven  was  sent 
forth,  which,  noticing  that  the  waters  had  subsided,  did 


Fig.  42.     Tablet  Containing  Babylonian  Story  of  the  Flood. 

not  return.  Xisuthros  then  abandons  his  ship  and  offers 
sacrifices  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  The  sweet 
odor  was  scented  by  the  gods,  etc.,  etc. 

This  entire  story,  precisely  as  it  is  here  written, 
afterwards  travelled  to  Canaan,  but  owing  to  the  totally 
different  conformation  of  the  land  in  this  latter  country, 
it  was  forgotten  that  the  sea  had  played  the  principal  role, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  41 

and  we  accordingly  find  in  the  Bible  two  distinct  versions 
of  the  Flood,  which  are  not  only  absolutely  impossible 
from  the  point  of  view  of  natural  science,  but  are  also  at 
diametrical  variance  with  each  other,  the  one  giving  as 
the  duration  of  the  Flood  a  period  of  365  days  and  the 
other  a  period  of  40  +  (3  X  7) ,  or  61  days.  We  owe  the 
discovery  that  two  fundamentally  different  versions  of  the 
story  of  the  Flood  were  welded  together  into  one  in  the 
Bible,  to  the  orthodox  Catholic  body  surgeon  of  Louis 
XV.,  Jean  Astruc,  who,  in  the  year  1753  first  submitted, 
as  Goethe  expresses  it,  the  books  of  Moses  "to  the  probe 
and  knife,"  and  thus  became  the  founder  of  Pentateuch 
criticism,  or  that  branch  of  inquiry  which  seeks  to  in- 
crease and  clarify  our  knowledge  of  the  many  diversified 
sources  of  which  the  Five  Books  of  Moses  are  composed. 

These  are  facts  which  from  the  point  of  view  of  sci- 
ence are  as  immutable  as  rock,  however  stubbornly  people 
on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  may  close  their  eyes  to 
them.  When  we  remember  that  minds  of  the  stamp  of 
Luther  and  Melancthon  once  contemptuously  rejected  the 
Copernican  system  of  astronomy,  wre  may  be  certain  that 
the  results  of  the  scientific  criticism  of  the  Pentateuch 
will  tarry  long  for  recognition.  Yet  it  is  just  as  certain 
that  some  day  they  will  be  openly  admitted. 

The  ten  Babylonian  kings  who  reigned  before  the 
Flood  have  also  been  accepted  in  the  Bible  as  the  ten 
antediluvian  patriarchs,  and  the  agreement  is  perfect  in 
all  details. 

In  addition  to  the  Babylonian  Gilgamesh  epic,  the 
eleventh  tablet  of  which  contains  the  story  of  the  Flood, 


42  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

we  possess  another  beautiful  Babylonian  poem,  the  story 
of  the  Creation. 

In  the  primordial  beginning  of  things,  according  to 
this  epic,  down  in  the  gloomy  chaos,  surged  and  raged 
the  primeval  waters,  the  name  of  which  was  Tiamat. 
When  the  gods  declared  their  intention  of  forming  an 
orderly  cosmos  out  of  the  chaos,  Tiamat  arose  (usually 
represented  as  a  dragon,  but  alsp  as  a  seven-headed  ser- 
pent) ,  and  made  ready  for  combat  to  the  death.  Monsters 
of  all  descriptions  she  spawned  from  her  mighty  depths, 
especially  gigantic  venom-blown  serpents ;  and  in  their 
company  she  set  forth  bellowing  and  snorting  to  her  con- 
flict with  the  gods.  The  Celestials  quaked  with  terror 
when  they  saw  their  direful  foe.  The  god  Marduk  alone, 
the  god  of  light,  of  dawn,  and  of  the  vernal  sun,  came 
forward  to  do  battle  with  her,  his  sole  stipulation  being 
that  sovereign  rank  among  the  gods  should  be  accorded 
him. 

Then  follows  a  splendid  scene.  First  the  god  Mar- 
duk fastened  a  gigantic  net  to  the  East  and  the  South,  to 
the  North  and  the  West,  lest  any  part  of  Tiamat  should 
escape.  He  then  mounted  in  shining  armor  and  radiant 
with  majesty  his  celestial  chariot,  which  was  drawn  by 
four  spirited  steeds,  the  admired  cynosure  of  the  eyes  of 
all  the  surrounding  gods.  Straightway  he  made  for  the 
dragon  and  her  dread  embattled  train,  sending  forth  his 
challenge  for  the  contest.  Then  Tiamat  shrieked  loudly 
and  fiercely,  till  her  deepmost  foundations  trembled  and 
shook.  She  opened  her  maw  to  its  uttermost,  but  before 
she  could  shut  her  lips  Marduk  made  enter  into  her  belly 
the  evil  hurricane..     He  seized  his  lance  and  pierced  her 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  43 

heart.  He  cast  her  carcass  down  and  placed  himself  npon 
it,  whilst  her  helpers  were  taken  captive  and  placed  in 
close  confinement.  Thereupon  Marduk  cut  Tiamat  in 
twain,  as  cleanly  as  one  would  sever  a  fish,  and  of  the 
one  half  he  made  the  roof  of  heaven  and  of  the  other  he 
made  the  earth  ;  and  the  heaven  he  inlaid  with  the  moon, 
and  the  sun,  and  the  stars,  and  the  earth  he  covered  with 
plants  and  animals,  until  finally  the  first  man  and  the 
first  woman,  made  of  mingled  clay  and  celestial  blood, 
came  forth  from  the  hand  of  their  creator. 

Since  Marduk  was  the  city-god  of  Babel,  it  is  quite 
intelligible  that  this  story  found  widespread  diffusion  in 
Canaan.  Nay,  the  poets  and  prophets  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment went  so  far  as  to  attribute  directly  to  Yahveh  the 
heroic  deeds  of  Marduk,  and  to  extol  him  as  the  cham- 
pion that  broke  the  head  of  the  dragons  in  the  water 
(Psalms  lxxiv.  13  et  seq.  ;  lxxxix.  10) ,  and  under  whom 
the  helpers  of  the  dragon  stooped  (Job  ix.  13) . 

Passages  like  the  following  from  Isaiah  li.  9 : 
" Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  Yahveh;   awake, 
as  in  the  days  of  old,  in  the  generations  of  ancient  times.    Art  thou 
not  it  that  hath  cut  Rahab  in  pieces  and  pierced  the  dragon?" 

or  passages  like  that  from  Job  xxvi.  12 : 

"He  divideth  the  sea  with  his  power,  and  by  his  understand- 
ing he  smiteth  the  dragon," 

read  like  explanatory  comments  on  the  little  image  which 
our  expedition  found  representing  the  god  Marduk,  of 
the  powerful  arm,  the  far-seeing  eye,  and  the  far-hearing 
ear,  the  symbol  of  intelligence  clad  in  majestic  glory, 
with  the  conquered  dragon  of  the  primeval  waters  at  his 
feet  (Fig.  44) . 


M-ia 

>5# 


Fig.  43    The  "Black  Obelisk."1 
(Lenormant,  V.,  p.  329.) 


Fig.  45.   Conical  Piece  of  Clay  from  a 
Babylonian  Coffin. 


1  Erected  by  Shalmaneser  II.  (860-825  B.C.)  to  record  the  victories  of  his  31  military  expeditions. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  45 

The  priestl}7  author  that  wrote  the  first  chapter  of 
Genesis  took  infinite  pains  to  eliminate  all  mythological 
features  from  his  stor}r  of  the  creation  of  the  world.  But 
since  his  story  begins  with  the  gloomy,  watery  chaos 
which  bears  precisely  the  same  name  as  Tiamat,  namely 
Tehom,  and  since  this  chaos  was  first  divided  b}T  the 
light,  and  heaven  and  the  earth  appeared  afterwards,  and 
heaven  was  set  with  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars, 
and  the  earth  was  covered  with  flowers  and  with  animals, 
and  finally  the  first  man  and  woman  went  forth  from  the 
hand  of  God,  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  very  close  re- 
lationship between  the  Biblical  and  the  Bab3~lonian  story 
of  the  creation  of  the  world ;  and  it  will  be  obvious  at  the 
same  time  how  absolutely  futile  all  attempts  are  and  will 
forever  remain,  to  harmonise  our  Biblical  stor3T  of  the 
creation  with  the  results  of  natural  science. 

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  echoes  of  this  same  con- 
flict between  Marduk  and  Tiamat  may  still  be  heard  in 
the  Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine,  in  the  battle  be- 
tween the  archangel  Michael  and  the  beast  of  the  deep, 
"that  old  serpent  called  the  Devil  and  Satan."  This  en- 
tire group  of  stories,  which  is  also  represented  in  the  tale 
of  St.  George  and  the  dragon,  brought  by  the  crusaders 
from  the  East,  is  distinctively  Babylonian  in  character; 
inasmuch  as  man}7,  niany  hundred  years  before  the  Apoc- 
alypse and  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  were  written,  we 
find  this  conflict  between  the  powers  of  light  and  the 
powers  of  darkness  renewed  at  the  break  of  ever37  da}' 
and  the  beginning  of  every  spring,  depicted  in  gorgeous 
relief  on  the  walls  of  the  Assyrian  palaces  (Fig.  46) . 

But    the    discover}7   of    this    relationship    is    of    still 


46 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


greater  importance.  The  commandment  not  to  do  unto 
one's  neighbor  what  one  would  not  like  to  have  done  unto 
oneself  is  indelibly  engraven  on  every  human  heart. 
"  Thou  shalt  not  shed  the  blood  of  thy  neighbor,"  u  thou 
shalt  not  draw  near  thy  neighbor's  wife,"  "thou  shalt 
not  take  unto  thyself  the  garment  of  thy  neighbor," — all 
these   fundamental   postulates   of   the   human   instinct  of 


Fig.  46.     Battle  Between  Marduk  and  Tiamat,  the  Powers  of  Light 
and  the  Powers  of  Darkness. 

(Ancient  Assyrian  bas-relief  now  in  the  British  Museum.) 

self-preservation  are  read  in  the  Babylonian  records  in 
precisely  the  same  order  as  they  are  given  in  the  fifth, 
sixth  and  seventh  commandments  of  the  Old  Testament. 
But  man  is  also  a  social  being,  and  for  this  reason  the 
commandments  of  humanity,  charity,  mercy,  and  love, 
also  form  an  inalienable  patrimony  of  the  human  race. 
Therefore  when  a  Babylonian  Magus  was  called  to  a  man 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  47 

who  was  ill  and  began  to  inquire  what  sin  Had  stretched 
him  on  the  sick-bed,  he  did  not  rest  satisfied  with  the  re- 
cital of  the  greater  sins  of  commission  like  murder  and 
robbery,  but  he  asked :  "  Hath  this  man  refused  to  clothe 
one  that  was  naked  ;  or  hath  he  refused  light  to  one  that 
was  imprisoned?'  The  Babylonian  lays  great  stress, 
too,  on  the  higher  forms  of  human  morality;  speaking 
the  truth  and  keeping  one's  word  were  sacred  duties  with 
them,  while  to  say  uyes"  with  the  lips  and  uno"  with 
the  heart  was  a  punishable  transgression.  It  is  not  sur- 
prising that  infringements  of  these  commandments  were 
regarded  by  the  Babylonians  precisely  as  they  were  by 
the  Hebrews,  as  sins,  for  the  Babylonians  also  in  all  their 
doings  considered  themselves  as  dependent  on  the  gods. 
But  it  is  certainly  more  remarkable  that  they  also  con- 
ceived all  human  afflictions,  particularly  sickness  and 
death,  as  a  punishment  for  sins.  In  Babel  as  in  the  Bible, 
the  notion  of  sin  dominates  everything.  Under  these 
circumstances  it  is  intelligible  that  Babylonian  thinkers 
also  pondered  deeply  over  the  problem  of  how  it  was  pos- 
sible that  a  creature  that  had  been  created  in  the  image 
of  God  and  was  God's  own  handiwork  could  have  fallen  a 
victim  to  sin  and  to  death ;  and  the  Bible  has  a  profound 
and  beautiful  story  of  the  temptation  of  woman  by  the 
serpent. 

The  serpent  again?  That  has  an  unmistakably  Baby- 
lonian ring.  It  was  doubtless  the  same  serpent,  the  pri- 
mordial foe  of  the  gods,  that  sought  to  revenge  itself  on 
the  gods  of  light  by  seeking  to  estrange  from  them  their 
noblest  creature?  Or  was  it  the  serpent  of  which  it  is 
once  said  that  it  ' '  destroyed  the  dwelling-place  of  life ' '  ? 


48 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


The  question  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Biblical  story  of  the 
Fall  of  Man  is  of  the  utmost  importance  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  history  of  religion  as  well  as  from  that  of 
the  theology  of  the  New  Testament,  which,  as  is  well 
known,  contrasts  with  the  first  Adam  by  whom  sin  and 
death  were  brought  into  the  world,  a  second  Adam. 

May  I  lift  the  veil,  may  I  point  to  an  old  Babylonian 
cylinder-seal  (Fig.  47) ,  on  which  may  be  seen  in  the 
center  a  tree  bearing  pendent  fruits,  to  the  right  a  man, 

distinguishable  by  his 
horns,  which  are  the  sym- 
bol of  strength,  to  the  left 
a  woman,  both  with  their 
hands  outstretched  to- 
ward the  fruit,  and  be- 
-.  0  r  c  hind  the  woman  the  ser- 

Fig.  47.     Sacred  Tree  and  Serpent. 
A  Babylonian  conception  of  the  Fall  of  Man.    pent?       Is   it  not  the  Very 

er    mi  acme    of    likelihood   that 

there  is  some  connection  between  this  old  Babylonian 
picture  and  the  Biblical  tale  of  the  Fall  of  Man? 

Man  dies,  and  while  his  body  is  buried  in  the  grave 
his  departed  soul  descends  into  ' '  the  land  of  no  return- 
ing," into  Sheol,  into  Hades,  into  the  gloomy,  dust- 
impregnated  locality,  where  the  shades  flutter  around 
like  birds  and  lead  a  joyless  and  sodden  existence.  Dust 
covers  the  doors  and  the  bolts,  and  everything  in  which 
the  heart  of  man  took  delight  is  mouldy  and  dust-laden. 

With  such  a  disconsolate  outlook  it  is  intelligible 
that  both  Hebrews  and  Babylonians  looked  upon  length 
of  days  here  below  as  the  sovereign  boon ;  and  on  every 
single  one  of  the  great  flag-stones  with  which  the  holy 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  49 

street  of  Marduk  in  Babylon  was  paved,  and  which  was 
discovered  by  the  German  expedition  to  that  city,  there 
was  engraved  a  prayer  of  Nebuchadnezzar  which  closed 
with  the  words:  "O,  Lord  Marduk,  grant  to  us  great 
length  of  da}^s  !  ' ' 

But  strange  to  say,  the  Babylonian  conception  of  the 
Underworld  is  one  degree  pleasanter  than  that  of  the  Old 
Testament.  On  the  twelfth  tablet  of  the  Gilgamesh  epic, 
the  Babylonian  Underworld  is  described  in  the  minutest 
details.  We  read  there  of  a  space  situated  beneath  the 
Underworld  which  was  apparently  reserved  for  souls  of 
unusual  piety  and  ' '  in  which  they  reposed  on  beds  of 
ease  and  quaffed  clear  water. ' ' 

Many  Babylonian  coffins  have  been  found  in  Warka, 
Nippur,  and  Babel,  but  the  Berlin  Museum  recently  ac- 
quired a  small  conical  piece  of  clay  (Fig.  45) ,  which  has 
evidently  been  taken  from  a  coffin  of  this  kind,  and  the 
inscription  of  which  plaintively  requests  that  whosoever 
may  find  the  coffin  shall  leave  it  undisturbed  and  unin- 
jured in  its  original  resting-place  ;  and  the  text  concludes 
with  words  of  blessing  for  him  who  performs  so  kind  a 
deed  :  "  May  his  name  be  blessed  in  the  Upperworld,  and 
in  the  Underworld  may  his  departed  spirit  drink  of  clear 
water." 

In  Sheol,  therefore,  there  exists  a  place  for  particu- 
larly pious  souls,  where  they  repose  on  beds  of  ease  and 
quaff  clear  wrater.  The  remainder  of  Sheol,  therefore, 
appears  to  be  especially  adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  im- 
pious and  to  be  not  only  dusty  but  to  be  also  without 
water,  or  at  most  furnishing  "  roily  water," — in  any 
event  a  place  of  thirst. 


50  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

In  the  Book  of  Job  (xxiv.  18) ,  which  appears  to  be 
extremely  conversant  with  Babylonian  modes  of  thought, 
we  find  comparisons  drawn  between  the  arid,  waterless 
desert  which  is  reserved  for  those  that  have  sinned,  and 
the  garden  with  fresh,  clear  water  which  is  reserved  for 
the  pious.  And  in  the  New  Testament,  which  has  most 
curiously  amalgamated  this  sentiment  with  the  last  verse 
of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  we  read  of  a  flaming  hell  in  which 
the  rich  man  languishes  from  want  of  water,  and  of  a 
garden  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of  Paradise)  full  of  fresh, 
clear  water  for  Lazarus. 

And  the  pictures  which  painters  and  poets,  theo- 
logians and  priests,  and  last  of  all  Mahomet  the  prophet, 
have  drawn  of  this  Hell  and  this  Paradise,  are  well 
known. 

Behold  yonder  poor  Moslem,  sick  and  feeble,  who  on 
account  of  his  weakness  has  been  abandoned  by  the  cara- 
van in  the  desert.  A  jug  filled  with  water  is  by  his  side. 
With  his  own  hands  he  digs  his  shallow  grave  in  the  des- 
ert sands,  resignedly  awaiting  his  death.  His  eyes  are 
aglow  with  expectation,  for  in  a  few  moments  angels  will 
issue  from  the  open  portals  of  Paradise  and  greet  him 
with  the  words :  u  Selam  ''alaika,  thou  hast  been  a  god- 
fearing man ;  enter  therefore  for  all  eternity  the  garden 
that  Allah  has  prepared  for  his  own." 

The  garden  stretches  before  him  like  the  vast  ex- 
panse of  heaven  and  earth.  Luxuriant  groves  casting 
plentiful  shadows  and  laden  with  sweet  fruits  are  inter- 
sected in  all  directions  with  babbling  brooks  and  dotted 
with  bubbling  springs ;  while  aerial  bowers  rise  from  the 
banks   of   the   streams.     Paradisian   glory    suffuses    the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


51 


countenances  of  the  beatified  ones,  who  are  filled  with 
happiness  and  serenity.  They  wear  green  brocaded  gar- 
ments made  of  the  finest  silk ;  their  arms  are  adorned 
with  gold  and  silver  spangles ;  they  lie  on  conches  with 
lofty  bolsters  and  soft  pillows,  and  at  their  feet  are 
thick  carpets.  So  they  rest, 
seated  opposite  one  another 
at  richl3'  -  furnished  tables 
which  offer  them  everything 
their  hearts  desire.  Brim- 
ming goblets  go  the  rounds, 
and  youths  endowed  with 
immortality  and  resembling 
scattered  pearls  carry  silver 
beakers  and  crystal  vessels 
filled  with  Main,  the  most 
delicious  and  clearest  water 
from  the  spring  Tasnim, 
from  which  the  archangels 
drink,  redolent  with  cam- 
phor and  ginger.  And  this 
water  is  mixed  with  the 
rarest  old  wine,  of  which 
one  can  drink  as  much  as 
one  pleases,  for  it  does  not 
inebriate  and  causes  no  headaches. 

And  then  there  are  the  maidens  of  Paradise  !  Maidens 
with  skin  as  soft  and  delicate,  as  the  ostrich  egg,  with 
voluptuous  bosoms,  and  with  eyes  like  glittering  pearls 
concealed  in  shells  of  oysters, — gazelle-like  eyes  full  of 
chaste   but    enrapturing  glances.     Two   and   seventy   of 


Fig.  48.     Assyrian  Angel. 

Type  representing  manly  strength  and 

intelligence.   (Bas-relief  of  Kuyunjik. 

Lenormant,   IV.,  pp.   432-433.) 


52 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


these  Paradisian  maidens  may  every  god-fearing  man 
choose  unto  himself,  in  addition  to  the  wives  that  he  pos- 
sessed on  earth,  provided  he  cares  to  have  them  (and  the 
good  man  will  always  cherish  desire  for  the  good) .  All 
hatred  and  envy  has  departed  from  the  breasts  of  the  de- 
vout ones;  no  gossip,  no  slander,  is  heard  in  Paradise. 
"  Se/am,  Selam!"  everywhere;   and  all  utterances  ccm- 


Fig.  49.     Angels  with  Eagle  Heads. 
The  Holy  Tree  in  the  Centre.     (British  Museum.) 


elude  with  the  ringing  words :  el-hamdu  lillahi  rabbi-l- 
^alamin,  the  praise  is  the  Lord's,  the  master  of  all  crea- 
tures. 

This  is  the  culminating  point  in  the  development  of 
that  simple  and  unpretentious  Babylonian  conception  of 
the  crystal-clear  water  which  god-fearing  men  were  des- 
tined to  drink  in  Sheol.     And  these  conceptions  of  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


53 


torments  of  Hell  and  of  the  blissful  pleasures  of  Paradise 
to-da}T  swa}7  the  hearts  of  untold  millions. 

It  is  well-known,  also,  that  the  conceptions  of  the 
messengers  of  the  gods,  or  of  the  angels,  with  which  the 
Egyptians  were  utterty  unacquainted,  are  characteristi- 
calhy  Babylonian,  and  also  that  the  conception  of  cheru- 


Fig.  50.     Winged  Cherub,  with  Body  of  Bull  and  Human  Head 

(After  Layard.) 

bim  and  seraphim  and  of  the  guardian  angels  that  watch 
over  the  ways  of  men  had  its-  origin  in  Bab3don.  The 
Babylonian  rulers  stood  in  need  of  hosts  of  messengers 
to  bear  their  behests  into  all  quarters  of  their  dominions ; 
and  so  also  their  gods  were  obliged  to  have  at  their  beck 


54 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


and  call  legions  of  messengers  or  angels, — messengers 
with  the  intelligence  of  men,  and  therefore  having  the 
form  of  men,  bnt  at  the  same  time  equipped  with  wings, 
in  order  to  be  able  to  carry  through  the  winds  of  heaven 
the  commands  of  the  gods  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth ;  in 
addition,  these  angels  were  invested  with  the  keenness  of 
vision  and  the  rapidity  of  flight  of  the  eagle  ;   and  to  those 


Fig.  50a.     Winged  Cherub,  with  Body  of  Lion  and  Human  Head 

(After  Layard.) 

whose  chief  office  it  was  to  guard  the  entrance  to  their 
divine  masters  was  imparted  the  unconquerable  strength 
of  the  bull,  or  the  awe-inspiring  majesty  of  the  lion. 
(Figs.  48,  49,  50,  and  50a.) 

The  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  angels,  like  those  in 
Ezekiel's  vision,  are  very  often  of  hybrid  shape.  Take, 
for  example,  the  cherubim  of  which  a  type  is  given  in 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


55 


Fig.  50,  with  their  wings,  their  bull's  bodies,  and  their 
honest,  serious  human  countenances.  Then  again  we 
find  types  like  that  discovered  in  the  palace  of  Ashurna- 
zirpal  (Fig.  51) ,  which  bears  the  closest  possible  resem- 
blance to  our  conception  of  angels.  These  noble  and 
radiant  figures,  which  art  has  rendered  so  attractive  and 
familiar  in  our  eyes,  will  always  retain  a  kindly  place  in 
our  hearts. 


Fig.  51.     Angels  with  Human  Heads. 
(Noble  types  closely  resembling  the  Christian  conception  of  angels.) 

But  the  demons  and  the  devils,  whether  they  take 
for  us  the  form  of '  the  enemies  of  man  or  that  of  the 
primordial  foes  of  God, — to  these  we  were  destined  to  bid 
farewell  for  all  eternity,  for  the  ancient  Persian  dualism 
was  not  after  our  hearts.  "  I  form  the  light  and  create 
darkness  :  I  make  peace  and  create  evil:  it  is  /,  Yahveh, 
that  do  all  these  things."     So  justly  declares  the  greatest 


56 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


prophet  of  the  Old  Testament,  Isaiah  (xlv.  7) .  Demons 
like  that  represented  in  Fig.  52, — though  such  pictures 
are  not  without  interest  for  the  history  of  duelling, — or 
caricatures  like  that  represented  in  Fig.  53,  may  be  corn- 


Fig.  52.     Duel  of  Lion-Headed  and  Eagle-Footed  Demons. 
(British  Museum.     After  Lenormant.) 

mitted  forever  and  aye  to  the  obscurity  of  the  Babylonian 
hills  from  which  they  have  risen.      (See  also  Fig.  54.) 

In  his  excavations  at  Khorsabad,  Victor  Place  dis- 
covered the  supply-depot  of  the  palace  of  Sargon.  One 
of  the  store-rooms  contained  pottery  of  all  sorts  and  sizes, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


57 


and  another  utensils  and  implements  made  of  iron.  Here 
were  found  arranged  in  beautiful  order  abundant  supplies 
of  chains,  nails,  plugs,  mattocks,  and  hoes,  and  the  iron 
had  been  so  admirably  wrought  and  was  so  well  preserved 
that  it  rang  like  a  bell  when  struck ;  and  some  of  these 
implements  which  were  then  twenty-five  centuries  old 
could  be  forthwith  put  into 
actual  use  by  the  Arabian 
workmen. 

'This  drastic  intrusion  of 
Assyrian  antiquity  upon  our 
own  days  naturally  fills  us 
with  amazement,  and  yet  it  is 
nothing  more  than  what  has 
happened  in  the  intellectual 
domain.  When  we  distinguish 
the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac 
and  call  them  Aries,  Taurus, 
Gemini,  etc.  (see  Fig.  55) , 
when  we  divide  the  circle  into 
360  parts,  the  hour  into  60 
minutes,  and  the  minute  into 
60  seconds,  and  so  on, — in  all 
this,  Sumerian  and  Babylo- 
nian civilisation  still  lives  with  us  to-day. 

And  possibly  I  have  also  been  successful  in  my  en- 
deavor to  show  that  many  Babylonian  features  still  cling, 
through  the  medium  of  the  Bible,  to  our  religious  think- 
ing. 

The  elimination  from  our  religious  thought  of  the 
purely  human  conceptions  derived  from  these  admittedly 


Fig.  53.   Babylonian  Devil. 

Demon  of  the  Southwest  Wind. 

(Louvre.     After  Smith.) 


58 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


talented  peoples,  and  the  liberation  of  onr  thought  gen- 
erally from  the  shackles  of  deep-rooted  prejudices,  will  in 
no  wise  impair  true  religion  and  the  true  religious  spirit, 
as  these  have  been  taught  us  by  the  prophets  and  poets 
of  the  Old  Testament,  but  most  sublimely  of  all  by 
Jesus ;   on  the  contrary,  both  will  come  forth  from  this 


Fig.  54.     A  Demon  Supporting  a  Tablet.1 
(Assyrian  bronze  tablet.     After  Lenormant.) 


process  of  purification  far  truer  and  far  more  intensified 
than  ever  they  were  before. 

I  may  be  allowed  finally  a  word  with  regard  to  the 
feature  that  invests  the  Bible  with  its  main  significance 

1  The  two  upper  horizontal  strips  in  the  left-hand  side  of  the  figure  represent 
the  heavens  (the  celestial  bodies  and  the  celestial  genii).  The  third  strip  exhibits 
a  funeral  scene  on  earth.  The  fourth  strip  represents  the  Underworld  bathed  in 
the  floods  of  the  ocean. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE, 


59 


from  the  point  of  view  of  general  history, — its  monothe- 
ism. Here  too  Babel  early  opened  a  new  and  undreamt-of 
prospect. 

It  is  remarkable,  but  no  one  can  definitely  say  what 
our  Teutonic  word  God  originally  signified.  Philologists 
vacillate  between  "  inspiring  timidity"  and  "  delibera- 
tion.^     But  the  word  which  the  Semitic  Canaanite  races, 


Fig.  55.     Sagittarius  and  Scorpio. 
Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  as  represented  by  the  Babylonians.     (Lenormant,  V.,  p.  180.) 

to  whom  the  Babylonians  are  most  nearly  related  and 
from  whom  the  Israelites  afterward  sprang,  coined  for 
God,  is  not  only  lucid  as  to  its  meaning,  but  conceives 
the  notion  of  divinity  under  so  profound  and  exalted  a 
form  that  this  word  alone  suffices  to  shatter  the  legend 
that  "the  Semites  were,  time  out  of  mind,  amazingly 
deficient  in  religious  instinct ; ' '  while  it  also  refutes  the 


60  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

popular  modern  conception  that  the  religion  of  Yahveh, 
and  therefore  also  our  Christian  belief  in  God,  is  ulti- 
mately sprung  from  a  species  of  fetishism  and  animism 
such  as  is  common  among  the  South  Sea  cannibals  or  the 
inhabitants  of  Tierra  del  Fuego. 

There  is  a  remarkably  beautiful  passage  in  the  Ko- 
ran, VI,  75  et  seq.,  which  so  fascinated  Goethe  that  he 
expressed  the  desire  to  see  it  dramatised.  Mahomet  has 
mentally  put  himself  in  the  place  of  Abraham,  and  is 
endeavoring  to  realise  the  manner  in  which  Abraham  had 
reached  the  monotheistic  idea.  He  says:  "  And  when 
the  gloom  of  night  had  fallen,  Abraham  stepped  forth 
into  the  darkness;  and  behold,  there  was  a  star  shining 
above  him.  Then  he  cried  out  in  his  gladness  :  '  This  is 
my  Lord!  '  But  when  the  star  grew  dim,  he  said:  'I 
love  not  those  that  grow  dim.'  And  when  the  moon  rose 
radiantly  in  the  firmament,  he  cried  out  in  exceeding 
gladness  :  '  This  is  my  Lord !  '  But  when  it  set,  he  said  : 
'Alas,  I  shall  surely  be  one  of  the  people  that  must  needs 
err.'  But  when  the  sun  rose  dazzlingly  in  the  morning, 
he  said:  'This  is  my  Lord,  this  is  the  greatest  of  all!  ' 
But  when  the  sun  set,  then  he  said:  'O,  my  people, 
verily  I  am  rid  of  your  idolatry  of  many  gods,  and  I  lift 
up  my  countenance  to  him  alone  that  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.'  " 

That  ancient  Semitic  word  for  God,  so  well  known 
to  us  from  the  sentence,  Eli  Eli  lama  azabtani,  is  El, 
and  its  meaning  is  the  goal ;  the  goal  toward  which  are 
directed  the  eyes  of  all  men  that  look  Heavenward  only, 
"which  every  man  sees,  which  every  man  beholds  from 
afar"  (Job  xxxvi.  25)  ;  the  goal  to  which  man  stretches 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


61 


forth  his  hands,  for  which  the  human  heart  longs  as  its 
release  from  the  uncertainties  and  imperfections  of  this 
earthly  life, — this  goal  the  ancient  Semitic  nomads  called 
El,  or  God.  And  inasmuch  as  there  can  in  the  nature  of 
things  be  only  one  goal,  we  find  among  the  old  Canaanite 
races  which  settled  in  Babylonia  as  early  as  2500  years 
before  Christ,  and  to  whom  Hammurabi  himself  be- 
longed, such  beautiful  proper  names  as  "God  hath 
given,"  "God  be  with  thee,"  "With  the  help  of  my  God 
I  go  my  way,"  etc. 


Fig.  56.    Clay  Tablets  Containing  the  Words  "  Yahveh  is  God." 
(Time  of  Hammurabi  or  Amraphel.     British  Museum.) 


But  more !  Through  the  kindness  of  the  director  of 
the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  department  of  the  British 
Museum  I  am  able  to  show  you  here  pictures  of  three 
little  clay  tablets  (Fig.  56) .  What,  will  be  asked,  is  to 
be  seen  on  these  tablets,  fragile  broken  pieces  of  clay, 
with  scarcely  legible  characters  scratched  on  their  sur- 
face? True  enough,  but  they  are  valuable  from  the  fact 
that  their  date  may  be  exactly  fixed  as  that  of  the  time  of 
Hammurabi,  one  of  them  having  been  made  during  the 
reign  of  his  father,  Sin-muballit ;  but  still  more  so  from 


62  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

the  circumstance  that  they  contain  three  names  which 
are  of  the  very  greatest  significance  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  history  of  religion.     They   are   the   words: 

gfc^y  ^  ^_  »f 

la-    ah-     ve-      Hit 


la-  -hit-  wit-  ilk 
Yahveh  is  God.  Yahveh,  the  Abiding  One,  the  Perma- 
nent One  (for  such  is,  as  we  have  reason  to  believe,  the 
significance  of  the  name) ,  who,  unlike  man,  is  not  to- 
morrow a  thing  of  the  past,  but  one  that  endures  forever, 
that  lives  and  labors  for  all  eternity  above  the  broad,  re- 
splendent, law -bound  canopy  of  the  stars, — it  was  this 
Yahveh  that  constituted  the  primordial  patrimony  of 
those  Canaanite  tribes  from  which  centuries  afterward 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  sprang. 

The  religion  of  the  Canaanite  tribes  that  emigrated 
to  Babylonia  rapidly  succumbed,  indeed,  before  the  poly- 
theism that  had  been  practised  for  centuries  by  the  an- 
cient inhabitants  of  that  country.  But  this  polytheism 
by  no  means  strikes  an  unsympathetic  chord  in  us,  at 
least  so  far  as  its  conception  of  its  gods  is  concerned,  all 
^>f  whom  were  living,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent  be- 
ings that  hearkened  unto  the  prayers  of  men,  and  who, 
however  much  incensed  they  might  become  at  the  sins  of 
men,  were  always  immediately  ready  again  with  offers  of 
mercy  and  reconciliation.  And  likewise  the  representa- 
tions which  these  deities  found  in  Babylonian  art,  as  for. 
instance  that  of  the  sun-god  of  Sippar  enthroned  in  his 
Holy  of  Holies  (Fig.  57) x  are  far  removed  from  every  - 

1  See  also  Fig.  31. 


Fig.  57.     The  SuN'God  of  Sippar  Enthroned  in  His  Holy  of  Holies. 

(Lenormant,  V.,  p.  301.) 


64 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


thing  that  savors  of  the  ugly,  the  ignoble,  or  the  gro- 
tesque. The  Prophet  Ezekiel  (chap,  i.)  in  his  visions  of 
his  Lord  saw  God  enter  on  a  living  chariot  formed  of  four 
winged  creatures  with  the  face  of  a  man,  a  lion,  an  ox, 
and  an  eagle,  and  on  the  heads  of  these  cherubim  he  saw 
(x.  l)  a  crystal  surface  supporting  a  sapphire  throne  on 
which  God  was  seated  in  the  likeness  of  a  man,  bathed  in 
the  most  resplendent  radiance..    Noting  carefully  these 


Fig.  58.     Babylonian  Cylinder-Seal  with  Representation 
Resembling  the  Vision  of  Ezekiel. 


details,  can  we  fail  to  observe  the  striking  resemblance 
which  his  vision  presents  to  the  representation  of  a  god 
which  has  been  found  on  a  very  ancient  Babylonian  cyl- 
inder-seal (Fig.  58)  ?  Standing  on  an  odd  sort  of  vessel, 
the  prow  and  stern  of  which  terminate  in  seated  human 
figures,  may  be  seen  two  cherubim  with  their  backs  to 
each  other  and  with  their  faces,  which  are  human  in  form, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  65 

turned  to  the  front.  Their  attitude  leads  us  to  infer  that 
there  are  two  corresponding"  figures  at  the  rear.  On  their 
backs  reposes  a  surface,  and  on  this  surface  stands  a 
throne  on  which  the  god  sits,  bearded  and  clothed  in  long 
robes,  with  a  tiara  on  his  head,  and  in  his  right  hand 
what  are  apparently  a  scepter  and  a  ring:  and  behind  the 
throne,  standing  ready  to  answer  his  beck  and  call,  is  a 
servitor  of  the  god,  who  may  be  likened  to  the  man 
"  clothed  with  linen"  (Ezekiel  ix.  3,  and  x.  2)  that  exe- 
cuted the  behests  of  Yahveh. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  however,  and  despite  the 
fact  that  many  liberal  and  enlightened  minds  openly  ad- 
vocated the  doctrine  that  Nergal  and  Nebo,  that  the 
moon-god  and  the  sun-god,  the  god  of  thunder  Ramman, 
and  all  the  rest  of  the  Babylonian  Pantheon  were  one  in 
Marduk,  the  god  of  light,  still  polytheism,  gross  poly- 
theism, remained  for  three  thousand  years  the  Babylonian 
state  religion, — a  sad  and  significant  warning  against  the 
indolence  of  men  and  races  in  matters  of  religion,  and 
against  the  colossal  power  which  may  be  acquired  by  a 
strongly  organised  priesthood  based  upon  it. 

Even  the  religion  of  Yahveh,  under  the  magic  stand- 
ard of  which  Moses  united  into  a  single  nation  the  twelve 
nomadic  tribes  of  Israel,  remained  infected  for  centuries 
with  all  manner  of  human  infirmities, — with  all  the  un- 
sophisticated anthropomorphic  conceptions  that  are  char- 
acteristic of  the  childhood  of  the  human  race,  with  Israel - 
itic  particularism,  with  heathen  sacrificial  customs,  and 
with  the  cult  of  legal  externalities.  Even  its  intrinsic 
worth  was  impotent  to  restrain  the  nation  from  worship- 
ping the  Baal  and  the  Astarte  of  the  indigenous  Canaan- 


66  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

ite  race,  until  those  titanic  minds,  the  prophets,  discov- 
ered in  Yahveh  the  god  of  the  universe,  and  pleaded  for 
a  quickening  of  the  inner  spirit  of  religion  with  exhorta- 
tions like  that  of  Joel,  c<  to  rend  their  hearts  and  not  their 
garments , ' '  and  until  the  divinely  endowed  singers  of  the 
Psalms  expressed  the  concepts  of  the  prophetic  leaders  in 
verses  which  awaken  to  this  day  a  living  echo  in  the 
hearts  of  all  nations  and  times,— until,  in  fine,  the  proph- 
ets and  the  psalmists  paved  the  way  for  the  adhortation 
of  Jesus  to  pray  to  God  in  spirit  and  truth  and  to  strive 
by  dint  of  individual  moral  endeavor  in  all  spheres  of  life 
after  higher  and  higher  perfection, — after  that  perfection 
which  is  our  Father's  in  Heaven. 


SECOND  LECTURE 


LIBRARY  of  CONGRESS 

fv/u  Copies  Received 

SEP  14    906 

Copyright  Entry 


IN  EXPLANATION. 

WHO  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ? 
This  that  is  glorious  in  his  apparel,   marching  in  the  greatness  of  his 

strength  ? 
"It  is  I  (Yahveh)  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save." 
Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth 

in  the  winefat  ? 
"I  have  trodden   the   winepress  alone;    and  of  the  peoples  there  was  no   man 

with  me  : 
Yea,  I  trod  them  in  mine  anger,  and  trampled  them  in  my  fury  ; 
And  their  lifeblood  is  sprinkled  upon   my  garments,  and  I  have  stained  all  my 

raiment. 
For  the  day  of  vengeance  was  in  mine  heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redemption  was 

come. 
And  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help  ;  and  I  wondered  that  there  was  none  to 

uphold  : 
Therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation  unto  me,  and  my  fury,  it  upheld  me. 
And  I  trod  down  the  peoples  in  anger,  and  made  them  drunk  with  my  fury, 
And  I  poured  out  their  lifeblood  on  the  earth. 

In  language,  style,  and  sentiment,  forsooth  a  genuine  Bedouin 
song  of  battle  and  victory  !  Not  at  all  !  This  utterance  of  Isaiah 
lxiii.  1-6,  and  a  hundred  other  prophetic  utterances  full  of  inex- 
tinguishable hatred  toward  the  races  round  about :  toward  Edom 
and  Moab,  Asohu  and  Babel,  Tyre  and  Egypt,  mostly  masterpieces 
of  Hebrew  rhetoric,  are  to  be  accepted  as  representing  the  ethical 
prophetism  of  Israel,  and  this  at  its  high  tide  !  These  outpourings 
of  political  jealousy  and  of  passionate  hatred  on  the  part  of  long 
vanished  generations,  born  of  certain  contemporary  conditions  and 
perhaps  comprehensible  from  a  merely  human  standpoint,  must 
serve  us  children  of   the  twentieth  century  after  Christ,  must  serve 


70  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

even  Occidental  and  Christian  races,  as  a  religious  guide  for  refine- 
ment and  edification!  Instead  of  losing  ourselves  "in  grateful 
admiration "  in  the  contemplation  of  God's  manifestation  in  our 
own  people,  from  primitive  Germanic  times  down  to  the  present 
day,  we  continue,  from  ignorance,  indifference  or  blindness,  to 
concede  to  those  early  Israelitic  oracles  the  character  of  a  "revela- 
tion," which  cannot  be  justified  either  in  the  light  of  science  or  in 
that  of  religion  or  of  ethics. 

The  more  deeply  I  dive  into  the  spirit  of  the  prophetic  writ- 
ings of  the  Old  Testament,  the  more  I  shrink  from  Yahveh,  who 
slaughters  the  nations  with  the  insatiable  sword  of  his  wrath,  who 
has  but  one  favorite  child,  and  surrenders  all  other  nations  to  night 
and  shame  and  destruction,  who  said  even  to  Abraham  (Genesis 
xii.  2):  "I  will  bless  them  who  bless  thee,  and  those  who  curse 
thee,  them  will  I  curse  " — and  I  seek  refuge  with  him  who  taught 
in  life  and  in  death  :  "Bless  them  that  curse  you,"  and  I  hide,  full 
of  trust  and  joy  and  earnest  longing  for  moral  perfection,  in  the 
God  to  whom  Jesus  taught  us  to  pray,  the  God  who  is  a  loving  and 
just  father  to  all  men  on  earth. 

Charlottenburg,  May  1,  1903. 


SECOND  LECTURE. 

WHY  this  opposition  to  ' '  Babel  and  Bible ' '  when 
logic  itself  compels  this  sequence  of  the  words? 
And  how  can  anyone  expect  to  be  able  to  suppress  these 
serious  questions,  which  involve  the  entire  Bible  with  the 
catchword  "  Primitive  Revelation,"  when  this  is  shown 
to  be  false  by  a  single  forgotten  verse  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment? And  does  in  fact  uthe  ethical  monotheism  of  Is- 
rael ' '  in  its  function  as  u  a  real  revelation  of  the  living 
God,"  constitute  the  unassailable  bulwark  in  the  conflict 
of  opinions  which  Babel  has  aroused  in  these  later  days? 

It  is  a  pity  that  so  many  people  permit  their  delight 
in  the  great  advantage  which  Babel  is  constantly  offering 
us  as  ' ' interpreter  and  illustrator"  of  the  Bible  to  be 
spoiled  by  a  narrow  regard  for  dogmatic  questions  to  such 
a  degree  that  they  even  entirely  ignore  that  advantage. 
And  yet,  how  grateful  all  readers  of  and  commentators 
on  the  Bible  must  needs  be  for  the  new  knowledge  which 
has  been  revealed,  and  is  constantly  being  revealed,  to  us 
by  the  laborious  excavations  among  the  ruins  of  Babylon 
and  Assyria! 

On  principle  I  too  avoid  continually  speaking  of 
li  confirmations  "  of  the  Bible.  For  indeed  the  Old  Tes- 
tament as  a  source  of  ancient  history  would  be  in  a  bad 


72 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


case  if  it  required  everywhere  confirmation  by  cuneiform 
inscriptions.     But  when  the  Biblical  Books  of  Kings  (2 


■ 


wm^X% 


..Sv„ 


Fig.  59.     The  Ruins  at  Tell  Ibrahim,  Site  of  the  City  of  Kutha. 

Kings  xvii.  30)  states  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  of 
Kutha  who  settled  in  Samaria  worshipped  the  god  Nergal, 


Fig.  6o.     Nergal,  the  Patron  God  of  Kutha. 

and  we  now  know,  not  alone  that  this  Babylonian  city  of 
Kutha  (Fig.  59)  lies  buried  under  the  ruins  at  Tell  Ibra- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


73 


him,  twenty-one  miles  northeast  of  Babylon,  but  also  that 
a  cuneiform  inscription  expressly  informs  us  that  the 
patron  god  of  Kutha  was  called  Nergal  (Fig.  60) , — this 
is  really  valuable  information. 

While  there  seemed  to  be  no  prospect  of  ever  dis- 
covering the  town  and  district  of  Chalach,  to  which  a 
portion  of  the   Israelites   taken  captive  by  Sargon  were 


Fig.  61.  Black  Obelisk 
of  Shalmaneser  II. 


Fig.  62.  Assyrian  Letter. 

Written  from  Chalach,  the  Babylonian  home  of 

the  exiled  Israelites. 


transplanted  (2  Kings  xvii.  6 ;  xviii.  11) ,  we  now  pos- 
sess, from  the  library  of  Asurbanipal  at  Nineveh,  a  letter 
written  from  Chalach  (Fig.  62) ,  in  which  a  certain  Mar- 
duk-nadin-achi,  laying  emphasis  upon  his  steadily  mani- 
fested loyalty,  petitions  the  king  to  help  him  regain  his 
estate,  which  had  been  given  him  by  the  king's  father, 
and  which  had  supported  him  for  fourteen  years  until  at 


1 


4£i 


*  ^m  *m  v  *         ^  >^-ti  ^i  £$h?  *** 


Fig.  63. 


j^^^irr^^TiH    ffigr*  ^^"M 


J*ww^  grr  mifHA»m  ***  Jr  <#F>jr4** 


p^^^4W>TWT«<>*^^^^^ 


Fig.  64. 


Fie;.  65. 


£W>**THF<  «*  *&«**=*«<  *4  -^  & 


*s> 


HfUfcef*  *^r"'*!jJ3f. 


t^^#  &... 


i 

'1 


Fig.  66. 


78  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

last  the  governor  of  the  land  of  Mashalzi  had  taken  it 
from  him. 

As  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  kingdom  of 
Israel,  who  are  presented  to  oui  eyes  so  vividly  by  the 
famous  black  obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  II.  (Fig.  61)  in  its 
second  row  of  relief  figures  (Figs.  63-66) — they  are  the 
ambassadors  of  King  Jehu  (840  B.  C.)  with  gifts  of  vari- 
^^^^^^^  ous  sorts, — we  now  know  all  three 
of  the  localities  where  the  ten  tribes 
found  their  grave  :  Chalach,  some- 
what farther  east  than  the  moun- 
tainous source  of  the  upper  Zab, 
called  Arrapachitis ;  the  province 
of  Goshen  along  the  Chabor  prob- 
ably not  far  from  Nisibis ;  and 
thirdly,  the  villages  of  Media. 

Until  recent  times  the  con- 
quest and  plundering  of  Egyptian 
Thebes  mentioned  by  the  prophet 
Nahum  (iii.  8  ff.)  has  been  a 
puzzle,  so  that  no  one  knew  to 
__>'  what  the  words  of  the  prophet  re- 
Fig.  67.    assurbanipal's  Ten-  ferred  : 

S.DEDCLAVPRISM.  , ,  ^     ^      (Nineyeh)      bett£r 

than  No-amon  (i.  e.,  Thebes),  that  is  situate  in  the 
waters  of  the  Nile,  with  waters  round  about  her.  .  .? 
Yet  was  she  carried  away,  she  went  into  captivity;  her 
young  children  were  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  all 
the  streets,  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  honorable  men,  and 
all  her  great  men  were  bound  in  chains. " 

But  then  there  was  discovered  at  Nineveh  the  mag- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


79 


nificent  ten-sided  clay  prism  of  Asurbanipal  (Fig.  67) , 
which  reports  in  its  second  colnmn  that  it  was  Asurbani- 
pal  who,  pursuing  the  Egyptian  king  Urdamane  from 
Memphis,  reached  Thebes,  conquered  it  and  carried  away 
silver,  gold,  and  precious  stones,  the  entire  treasure  of 
the  palace,  the  inhabitants,  male  and  female,  a  great  and 
immeasurable  booty,  from  Thebes  to  Nineveh  the  city 
of  his  dominion. 

And  how  much  the  language  of  the  Old  Testament 


Fig.  68.  Antelope  Leukoryx. 

is  indebted  to  the  cuneiform  literature !  The  Old  Testa- 
ment mentions  repeatedly  an  animal  called  re' em,  a  fierce, 
untamable  animal  armed  with  fearful  horns  (Psalms  xxii. 
22)  and  most  nearly  related  to  the  ox  (Deuteronomy 
xxxiii.  17;  Psalms  xxix.  6;  comp.  Isaiah,  xxxiv.  7),  to 
use  which  in  field  labor  on  the  plain  like  a  common  ox 
seems  to  the  poet  of  the  Book  of  Job  (xxxix.  9  ff.)  a  ter- 
rible, an  inconceivable  thought:  "Will  the  wild  ox  be 
content  to  serve  thee,  or  will  he  abide  by  thy  crib?   Canst 


80 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


thou  bind  the  wild  ox  with,  his  guiding-band  in  thy  fur- 
row?    Or  will  he  harrow  the  valleys  after  thee?  n 

Despite  the  fact  that  the  buffalo  now  roams  in  herds 
the  forests  beyond  the  Jordan,  it  was  nevertheless  diffused 
over  Asia  Minor  from  Arachosia  only  a  short  time  before 
the  beginning  of  our  era  ;  hence  it  had  become  customary 
as  a  result  of  comparison  with  Arabian  usage,  which 
styles  the  antelopes  "cattle  of  the  desert"  and  applies 
the  name  rPm  to  a7ttilope  leukoryx  (Fig.  68) ,  to  under- 


Fig.  69.  The  Re'em,  or  Wild  Bull. 
(After  a  bas-relief  in  the  palace  of  Sennacherib.) 

stand  under  the  Hebrew  re'em  this  species  of  antelope. 
But  as  this  antelope,  despite  its  long,  sharp  horns,  is  a 
slender-limbed  and  soft-eyed  creature,  it  was  beyond  com- 
prehension how  it  should  occur  to  a  poet  to  imagine  it 
hitched  to  a  plow  and  then  to  shudder  at  the  thought. 

The  cuneiform  inscriptions  have  informed  us  what 
the  remu  is :  it  is  the  powerful,  fierce-eyed,  wild  ox  with 
stout  curved  horns,  an  animal  of  the  wood  and  the  moun- 
tain, which  scales  the  highest  summits,  an  animal  of  tre- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


81 


mendous  physical  strength,  the  chase  for  which,  like  that 
for  the  lion,  was  especially  popular  with  the  Assyrian 
kings  on  account  of  its  hazardonsness.     The  presence  of 


Fig.  70.   Hunting  the  Re'em. 

this  animal,  which  is  most  closely  related  to  the  bos  urus 
of  Caesar  (Bell.  Gall.  VI.  28)  and  to  the  wisent   (bison) 


Fig.  71.  The  Hill  of  Babil. 

of  Middle-High-German  literature,  is  scientifically  estab- 
lished for  the  region  of  Mt.  Lebanon :  the  cuneiform  in- 
scriptions mention  the  re'em  countless  times,  and  the 
alabaster  reliefs  of  the  Assyrian  royal  palace  present  it 
very  clearly  to  our  eyes.      (Fig.  69.) 


r 


If 

Li'WVill  •)      i\  '; <        U\  i         \  i|  I    1 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  83 

King  Nebuchadnezzar  reports  that  he  adorned  the 
city  gate  of  Babylon  which  is  dedicated  to  the  goddess 
Istar  with  burned  bricks  upon  which  were  represented 
remus  and  gigantic  serpents  standing  upright.  The  re- 
discovery of  this  Istar  Gate  and  its  excavation  to  a  depth 
of  fourteen  meters,  where  the  underflow  begins,  consti- 
tutes one  of  the  most  valuable  achievements  of  recent 
years  in  our  exploration  of  the  ruins  of  Babylon. 

Hail  to  thee,  thou  hill  of  Babil  (Fig.  71) ,  and  to  all 
thy  fellows  on  the  palm-bordered  banks  of  the  Euphrates ! 


Fig.  73.  The  Wild  Bull  (Re'em)  on  the  Istar  Gate. 
Brick  mosaic  in  enameled  colors. 

(Fig.  72.)  How  the  heartbeats  quicken  when,  after 
weeks  of  picking  and  shoveling  under  the  glowing  sun- 
beams of  the  East,  suddenly  the  structure  that  has  been 
sought  is  revealed,  when  upon  a  giant  block  of  stone  cov- 
ered with  characters  the  name  "  Istar  Gate"  is  read,  and 
gradually  the  great  double  gate  of  Babylon,  flanked 
northward  on  each  side  by  three  mighty  towers,  rises  in 
a  splendid  state  of  preservation  from  the  bowels  of  the 


84  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

earth!  And  wherever  you  may  look,  on  the  surfaces  of 
the  towers  as  well  as  upon  the  inner  walls  of  the  gate- 
way, droves  of  remus  carved  in  relief,  the  uppermost  row 
in  brilliant  contemporary  enamel,  standing  forth  in  fasci- 
nating splendor  of  colors  against  the  deep  blue  back- 
ground.     (Fig.  73.) 

11  Vigorously  strides  the  wild  ox  with  long  paces, 
with  proudly  curved  neck,  with  horns  pointed  threaten- 
ingly forward,  ears  laid  back,  and  inflated  nostrils ;  his 


P'^"V.;.--;'r~".-.^V;.:    '"_".  "'-  ■;-"'".':  n~""     """" 


Fig.  74.    The  Lion  of  Babylon. 
Brick  mosaic  in  enameled  colors. 

muscles  are  tense  and  swelling,  his  tail  raised  and  yet 
falling  stiffly  downwards, — all  as  in  Nature,  but  ideal- 
ised."1 Where  the  smooth  hide  is  white,  horns  and  hoofs 
shine  like  gold;  where  the  hide  is  yellow,  these  are  of 
malachite  green,  while  in  both  kinds  the  long  hair  is  col- 
ored dark  blue.  But  a  truly  imposing  effect  is  produced 
by  a  white  ox  in  relief,  in  which  the  long  hair,  as  well  as 
the  horns  and  hoofs,  is  tinted  a  delicate  green.     Thus 

1  From  a  treatise  on  these  relief  figures  by  Walter  Andrae. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


85 


the  re 'em  of  the  Istar  Gate  through  which  led  the  tri- 
umphal highway  of  Marduk  proves  to  be  a  worthy  com- 
panion for  the  widely  known  " lion  of  Babylon"  which 
adorned  the  triumphal  highway  itself.      (Fig.  74.) 

And  Biblical  science  is  enriched  by  still  another  ani- 
mal of  the  strangest  sort,  a  fabulous  animal,  familiar  to 
us  from  the  days  of  our  youthful  religious  instruction, 
and  which  could  not  fail  to  make  a  fascinating  impression 
upon  all  who  passed  through  the  Istar  Gate  toward  the 


Fig.  75.  The  Dragon  of  Babel. 
Enameled  brick  mosaic. 


palace  of  Nebuchadnezzar, — I  refer  to  the  Dragon  of  Ba- 
bel. (Fig.  75.)  u  With  neck  stretched  far  forward  and 
looks  darting  poison  the  monster  marches  along, " — it  is 
a  serpent,  as  is  shown  by  the  elongated  head  with  its 
forked  tongue,  the  long,  scale-covered  trunk  and  the 
wriggling  tail,  but  at  the  same  time  it  has  the  fore-legs 
of  the  panther  while  its  hind-legs  are  armed  with  mon- 
strous talons ;  in  addition  to  all  this  it  has  on  its  head 
long,  straight  horns  and  a  scorpion's  sting  in  the  end  of 


86  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

its  tail.  Thanks  are  due  to  all  whose  faithful  labor  con- 
tributes to  secure  such  choice  and  exceedingly  important 
archaeological  treasures ! 

Quite  apart  from  many  such  individual  interpreta- 
tions and  illustrations,  Assyriology  is  restoring  confi- 
dence in  the  authenticity  of  the  text  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, which  has  for  some  time  been  so  violently  assailed. 
For,  finding  itself  constantly  face  to  face  with  more  and 
more  difficult  texts  full  of  rare  words  and  phrases,  it  real- 
ises that  there  are  also  in  the  Old  Testament  scriptures 
great  numbers  of  rare  and  even  unique  words  and  phrases ; 
it  takes  delight  in  these,  attempts  to  interpret  them  from 
their  context,  and  in  not  a  few  cases  finds  its  efforts  re- 
warded by  the  presence  of  these  very  same  words  and 
phrases  in  Assyrian.  In  this  manner  it  recognises  what 
a  fatal  error  it  is  on  the  part  of  modern  exegesis  to  make 
conjectural  interpretations  of  such  rare  words  and  diffi- 
cult phrases,  to  "emend"  them,  and  only  too  frequently 
to  replace  them  with  meaningless  substitutes.  In  truth 
every  friend  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  should  as- 
sist with  all  his  might  in  bringing  to  light  the  thousands 
of  clay  tablets  and  all  other  sorts  of  written  monuments 
that  lie  buried  in  Babylon,  and  which  our  expedition  will 
bring  to  light  as  soon  as  the  first  objects  set  before  it  are 
accomplished,  thereby  making  possible  for  the  textual 
interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament  more  rapid  and  more 
important  progress  than  it  has  experienced  within  the 
two  thousand  years  preceding. 

Indeed,  entire  narratives  of  the  Old  Testament  re- 
ceive their  interpretation  from  Babylon.  In  our  early 
youth  we  inherit  the  burden  of  the  foolish  notion  of  a 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  87 

Nebuchadnezzar  who  was  turned  into  a  beast ;  for  the 
Book  of  Daniel  tells  us  (iv.  26-34)  how  the  King  of 
Babylon  walked  upon  the  roof  of  his  palace,  and  after 
feasting  his  eyes  once  more  on  the  splendor  of  the  city 
he  had  built,  received  from  heaven  the  prophecy  that  he 
should  live,  an  exile  from  among  men,  with  the  beasts  of 
the  field  and  after  the  fashion  of  the  beasts.  Thereupon, 
according  to  account,  Nebuchadnezzar  ate  grass  in  the 
wilderness  like  unto  an  ox,  wet  by  the  dew  of  heaven, 
while  his  hair  grew  like  unto  the  feathers  of  the  eagle  and 
his  finger-nails  like  unto  birds'  claws. 

Yet  no  educator  of  youth  should  ever  have  ventured 
to  teach  such  things,  and  especially  not  after  the  appear- 
ance of  Eberhard  Schrader's  treatise  on  The  Insanity  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  without  at  the  same  time  pointing  out 
the  fact  that  the  purer  and  more  primitive  form  of  this 
story  has  long  been  known  in  a  Chaldsean  legend  trans- 
mitted to  us  in  Abydenus.  This  tells  us  that  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, after  reaching  the  zenith  of  his  power,  went  out 
upon  the  roof  of  his  palace,  inspired  by  a  god,  he  ex- 
claimed: u  I  here,  Nabuchodrosor,  announce  to  you  the 
coming  of  the  calamity  which  neither  Bel  nor  Queen 
Beltis  can  persuade  the  Fates  to  avert.  Perses  (that  is, 
Cyrus)  will  come  .  .  .  and  bring  servitude  upon  you.  O 
would  that  he,  before  my  fellow-citizens  perish,  might  be 
driven  through  the  desert,  where  neither  cities  nor  the 
track  of  men  can  be  found,  but  where  wild  beasts  graze 
and  birds  fly  about,  while  he  wanders  about  solitary  in 
caves  and  gorges.     But  may  a  better  lot  .  .  .  befall  me." 

Who  could  fail  to  perceive  in  this  that  the  Hebrew 
writer  has  made  a  free  version  of  the  Babylonian  legend, 


88  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

especially  since  lie  lets  us  see  plainly  in  verse  16  that  the 
very  wording  of  the  original  was  quite  familiar  to  hiin ! 
What  Nebuchadnezzar  wishes  for  the  enemy  of  the  Chal- 
dseans,  this  the  author  of  the  pamphlets  full  of  errors  and 
carelessness  which  are  combined  to  make  the  Book  of 
Daniel,  has  Nebuchadnezzar  suffer  himself,  in  order  to 
exemplify  as  drastically  as  possible  to  his  countrymen, 
who  were  being  persecuted  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the 
truth  that  God  the  Lord  is  able  to  humble  deeply  even 
the  mightiest  king  who  rebels  against  Yahveh. 

When  shall  we  finally  learn  to  distinguish  the  form 
from  the  content  even  within  the  covers  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament ? 

The  author  of  the  Book  of  Jonah  preaches  to  us  two 
lofty  doctrines :  that  no  one  can  escape  from  God,  and 
that  no  mortal  dare  presume  to  dictate  terms  to  God's 
mercy  and  patience,  or  even  to  set  limits  for  them.  But 
the  form  in  which  these  truths  are  clothed  is  human,  is 
fancifully  Oriental,  and  if  we  should  continue  to  believe 
to-day  that  Jonah  while  in  the  whale's  belly  prayed  a 
conglomeration  of  passages  from  the  Psalms,  part  of  which 
were  not  composed  until  several  centuries  after  the  de- 
struction of  Nineveh,  or  that  the  King  of  Nineveh  did 
such  deep  penance  that  he  gave  commands  even  to  oxen 
and  sheep  to  put  on  sackcloth,  we  should  be  sinning 
against  the  reason  bestowed  upon  us  by  God. 

But  all  these  are  details  which  sink  into  insignifi- 
cance under  an  intenser  light. 

It  was  an  exceedingly  happy  thought  which  struck 
the  representatives  of  the  various  German  ecclesiastical 
bodies  who  went  to  Jerusalem  as  guests  of  the  German 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  89 

Emperor  to  take  part  in  the  dedication  of  the  Church  of 
Our  Saviour,  that  of  founding  in  Jerusalem  a  u  German 
Evangelical  Institute  for  the  Archaeology  of  the  Holy 
Land."  O  would  that  our  young  theologians  might  go 
thither,  and  not  merely  in  the  cities,  but  better  still  out 
in  the  desert,  familiarise  themselves  with  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  Bedouins,  which  are  still  so  com- 
pletely the  same  as  in  the  times  of  Ancient  Israel,  and 
plunge  deeply  into  the  Oriental  mode  of  thought  and  ex- 
pression :  might  listen  to  the  story-tellers  in  the  tents  of 
the  desert  or  hear  the  descriptions  and  accounts  of  the 
sons  of  the  desert  themselves,  full  of  fancy  that  bubbles 
up  vigorously  and  unhampered  and  only  too  often  ex- 
ceeds unconsciously  the  bounds  of  fact ! 

And  if  even  the  modern  Orient,  wherever  we  go  and 
listen  and  look,  furnishes  such  an  abundance  of  sugges- 
tions for  the  interpretation  of  the  Bible,  how  much  more 
will  this  be  the  case  with  the  study  of  the  ancient  litera- 
ture of  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians  which  is  in  part 
contemporary  with  the  Old  Testament!  Everywhere 
there  are  more  or  less  important  agreements  between  the 
two  literatures  which  are  most  closely  related  in  language 
and  style,  in  mode  of  thought  and  expression. 

I  will  cite  here  the  sacredness  of  the  number  seven 
as  well  as  that  of  the  number  three,  for  which  we  have 
evidence  in  both  literatures  :  "  Land,  land,  land,  hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord,"  exclaims  Jeremiah  (xxii.  29)  ;  "  Hail, 
hail,  hail  to  the  king,  my  lord,"  more  than  one  Assyrian 
scribe  begins  his  letter.  And  as  the  seraphim  before  the 
throne  of  God  call  one  to  another:  "Holy,  holy,  holy  is 
Yahveh  Zebaoth"  (Isaiah  vi.  3),  so  we  read  at  the  be- 


90  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

ginning  of  the  Assyrian  temple  liturgy  a  threefold  asur} 
that  is,  "  salutary,"  or  "holy." 

' '  God  created  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  be- 
came a  living  soul," — thus  runs  the  so-called  Yahvistic 
account  of  creation  (Genesis  ii.  7) .  The  very  same  con- 
ceptions are  found  among  the  Babylonians  :  man  is  formed 
of  earth  (mud,  clay) ,  as  for  instance  Eabani  is  created 
out  of  a  pinched  off  and  moisted  piece  of  clay  (compare 
Job  xxxiii.  6 :  "  I  too  am  made  of  a  pinch  of  clay  ") ,  and 
for  that  reason  he  returns  again  thither  (so  Genesis  iii. 
19)  ;  but  he  becomes  a  living  being  through  the  breath 
of  God.  In  the  opening  of  a  letter  to  the  Assyrian  king 
the  writers  characterise  themselves  as  "  dead  dogs"  (cf. 
2  Samuel  ix.  8) ,  whom  the  king,  their  master,  had  caused 
to  live  by  u  putting  the  breath  of  life  into  their  nostrils. " 

According  to  Babylonian  notions  the  spittle  of  human 
beings  possesses  in  a  marked  degree  magic  power.  Spittle 
and  spells  are  closely  related  conceptions,  and  spittle  has 
death-dealing  as  well  as  life-giving  power.  uO  Mar- 
duk," — thus  runs  a  prayer  to  the  patron  deity  of  Babel, 
— "  O  Marduk !  thine  is  the  spittle  of  life  I "  Who  is  not 
reminded  by  this  of  New  Testament  narratives  such  as 
that  of  Jesus  taking  the  deaf  and  dumb  man  aside,  put- 
ting his  fingers  in  his  ears,  spitting  and  touching  the 
man's  tongue  with  the  spittle,  saying,  "Hephata,"  "  Be 
opened!"  (Mark  vii.  33  ff.,  and  compare  viii.  23,  John 
ix.  6  ff.) 

Yahveh  conducts  his  people  on  the  march  through 
the  desert  by  means  of  a  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  a  pil- 
lar of  fire  by  night  (comp.  also  Isaiah  iv.  5)  ;  but  Esar- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  91 

haddon,  King  of  Assoria,  before  setting  ont  npon  a  cam- 
paign, also  receives  the  prophetic  message:  "I,  Istar  of 
Arbela,  will  canse  to  rise  upon  th3'  right  hand  smoke  and 
upon  thy  left  fire." 

"  Set  thine  house  in  order,"  says  the  prophet  Isaiah 
to  King  Hezekiah  when  he  is  sick  unto  death,  "for  thou 
art  sick  and  wilt  not  live"  (Isaiah  xxxviii.  l) ,  while  the 
Assyrian  general  Kudurru,  to  whom  the  king  has  sent 
his  own  personal  physician,  thanks  the  king  with  the 
words:  "I  was  dead,  but  the  king,  my  lord,  has  made 
me  to  live."  The  soul  of  a  man  sick  unto  death  is  con- 
ceived as  already  straying  in  the  underworld,  has  already 
gone  down  into  the  pit  (Psalms  xxx.  4) .  For  this  reason 
the  goddess  Gula,  the  patron  genius  of  physicians,  has 
the  title  "Awakener  of  the  dead"  :  an  Oriental  physician 
who  did  not  raise  people  from  the  dead  would  be  no  phy- 
sician at  all. 

How  great  the  similarity  between  all  things  in  Babel 
and  Bible !  Here  as  well  as  there  the  fondness  for  ren- 
dering speech  and  thought  vivid  by  symbolical  actions  (I 
cite  here  merely  the  scapegoat  which  is  chased  away  into 
the  desert)  ;  here  as  well  as  there  the  same  world  of  con- 
stant wonders  and  signs,  of  perpetual  revelations  of  the 
divinity,  particularly  through  dreams,  the  same  naive 
conceptions  of  the  divinity !  As  in  Babel  the  gods  eat  and 
drink  and  even  retire  to  rest,  so  Yahveh  goes  walking  in 
Paradise  in  the  cool  of  the  evening,  or  takes  delight  in 
the  smell  of  Noah's  sacrifice.  And  just  as  in  the  Old 
Testament  Yahveh  speaks  to  Moses  and  Aaron  and  to  all 
the  prophets,   so  also  in  Babel  the  gods  speak  to  men, 


92  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

either  directly  or  through  the  mouth  of  their  priests  and 
divinely  inspired  prophets  and  prophetesses. 

Revelation !  For  a  long  time  all  scientifically  trained 
theologians,  whether  Evangelical  or  Catholic,  have  for 
centuries  been  firmly  convinced  that  it  was  a  grievous 
error  to  have  regarded  the  invaluable  remains  of  ancient 
Hebrew  scriptures  collected  into  the  Old  Testament  as 
constituting  collectively  a  religious  canon,  as  being  from 
beginning  to  end  a  revealed  book  of  religion.  For  among 
them  are  writings  such  as  the  Book  of  Job,  which  ques- 
tions the  very  existence  of  a  just  God,  and  in  language 
that  sometimes  borders  on  blasphemy,  and  other  very 
profane  compositions,  such,  for  example,  as  wedding 
songs  (the  so-called  Song  of  Solomon) .  In  the  pretty 
love-song,  Ps.  45,  we  read,  v.  11  ff. :  "Hear,  O  daughter, 
and  consider  and  incline  thine  ear :  forget  also  thine  own 
people  and  thy  father's  house;  and  if  the  king  shall  de- 
sire thy  beauty — for  he  is  thy  lord — fall  down  before 
him." 

It  is  very  easy  to  imagine  what  the  results  must  be 
when  books  and  passages  like  these  were  forced  to  submit 
to  a  theological,  and  even  a  Messianic,  interpretation  (cf. 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  i.  8  f.) , — the  result  could  not 
fail  to  be  such  as  it  was  in  that  mediaeval  Catholic  monk 
who,  when  he  read  in  his  Psalter  the  Latin  maria,  "the 
seas,"  crossed  himself  as  in  the  presence  of  "Maria," 
meaning  Mary,  the  mother  of  Christ.  But  for  the  re- 
mainder of  the  Old  Testament  literature  also  the  doctrine 
of  verbal  inspiration  has  been  surrendered  even  by  the 
Catholic  Church.  The  Old  Testament  itself  has  com- 
pelled this  result,  with  its  mass  of  contradictory  duplicate 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  93 

accounts,  and  with  the  absolutely  inextricable  confusion 
which  has  been  brought  about  in  the  Pentateuch  by  per- 
petual revision  and  combination. 

And  to  be  perfectly  serious  and  frank, — we  have  not 
deserved  such  an  immediate  and  personal  revelation  from 
the  divinity  anyway.  For  mankind  has  unto  this  day 
treated  with  absolute  flippancy  the  most  primitive  and 
genuine  revelation  of  the  holy  God,  the  ten  command- 
ments on  the  tables  of  the  law  from  Sinai.  Dr.  Martin 
Luther  said : 

11  Das   Wort  sie  sollen  lassen  sta/in." 
(Inviolate  the  Word  let  stand  !) 

and  yet  in  the  Smaller  Catechism,  from  which  our  chil- 
dren are  instructed,  the  entire  second  commandment  has 
been  suppressed,  the  same  upon  which  God  laid  such 
especial  emphasis  (Exodus  xx.  22  f.)  :  u  Thou  shalt  not 
make  unto  thyself  any  image  or  any  likeness,"  etc.,  and 
have  put  in  its  place  the  last  commandment,  or  rather 
prohibition  of  covetousness  (wicked  desire) ,  after  having 
torn  it  in  two,  which  might  easily  have  been  recognised 
as  unpermissible  by  comparing  Exodus  xx.  17  and  Deu- 
teronomy v.  18. 

The  command  to  honor  father  and  mother  is  not  the 
fourth  but  the  fifth,  and  so  on.  And  in  the  Catholic 
Catechism,  which  has  the  same  method  of  numbering  the 
commandments,  the  first  commandment  is,  indeed,  fuller : 
' '  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me ;  thou  shalt 
not  make  unto  thyself  any  graven  image,  to  worship  it," 
but  immediately  after  we  read:  u Nevertheless,  we  make 
images  of  Christ,  of  the  mother  of  God  and   of  all  the 


94  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

saints,  because  we  do  not  worship  them,  but  only  rev- 
erence them."  This  entirely  ignores  the  fact  that  God 
the  Lord  expressly  says :  ' '  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto 
thyself  any  graven  image  to  worship  and  to  reverence.1 
(Consider  also  Deuteronomy  iv.  16.) 

But  if  we  regard  the  matter  for  a  while  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  letter  of  the  Thora,  this  reproach  falls 
still  more  heavily  upon  Moses  himself,  a  shrill  and  unani- 
mous reproach  from  all  the  people  of  the  earth  who  ask 
after  God  if  haply  they  may  find  him.  Just  think  of 
it:  The  Almighty  God,  "the  All-container,  the  All-sus- 
tainer,"  the  inscrutable,  unapproachable,  proclaims  from 
the  midst  of  fire  and  cloud  and  to  the  accompaniment  of 
thunder  and  lightning  his  most  holy  will,  Yahveh,  uthe 
rock  whose  work  is  perfect,"  with  his  own  hands  carves 
two  tablets  of  stone  and  engraves  upon  them  with  his 
own  fingers,  those  fingers  that  keep  the  world  in  equilib- 
rium, the  Ten  Commandments,— and  then  Moses  in 
anger  hurls  away  the  eternal  tables  of  the  eternal  God 
and  breaks  them  into  a  thousand  pieces !  And  this  God 
a  second  time  writes  other  tables,  which  present  his  last 
autograph  revelation  to  mankind,  the  most  unique  and 
tangible  revelation  of  God, — and  Moses  does  not  consider 
it  worth  while  to  report  literally  to  his  people,  and  thus 
to  mankind,  what  God  had  engraved  upon  those  tables. 

We  scholars  regard  it  as  a  serious  reproach  to  one  of 
our  number  if,  in  dealing  with  an  inscription  by  any  one 
soever,  though  but  a  shepherd  who  may  have  perpetuated 
his  name  upon  some  rock  on  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  he 
reports   it  inaccurately  or  incorrectly   in  even   a   single 

1R.  V.,  "serve."     . 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  95 

character;  whereas  Moses,  when  he  impresses  the  ten 
commandments  upon  his  people  once  more  before  cross- 
ing the  Jordan,  not  only  changes  individual  words,  trans- 
poses words  and  sentences,  but  even  substitutes  for  one 
long  passage  another  which,  however,  he  also  emphasises 
expressly  as  being  the  very  literal  word  of  God.  And 
accordingly  we  do  not  know  to  this  day  whether  God 
commanded  that  the  Sabbath  day  be  kept  holy  in  memory 
of  his  own  rest  after  finishing  the  six  days'  labor  of  crea- 
tion (Exodus  xx.  11 ;  comp.  xxxi.  17) ,  or  in  commem- 
oration of  the  incessant  forced  labor  of  his  people  during 
their  stay  in  Egypt  (Deuteronomy  v.  14  ff.) . 

The  same  carelessness  has  to  be  regretted  in  other 
points  that  concern  God's  most  sacred  bequest  to  men. 
To  this  day  we  are  hunting  for  the  peak  in  the  mountain- 
chain  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  which  corresponds  with 
all  that  is  told,  and  while  we  are  most  minutely  informed 
regarding  vastly  less  important  things,  such,  for  in- 
stance, as  the  rings  and  the  rods  of  the  box  which  con- 
tained the  two  tables,  we  learn  absolutely  nothing  about 
the  outward  character  of  the  tables  themselves,  except 
that  they  were  written  upon  both  sides. 

When  the  Philistines  capture  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
and  place  it  in  the  temple  of  Dagon  at  Ashdad,  they  find 
on  the  second  morning  following  the  image  of  the  god 
Dagon  lying  in  fragments  before  the  ark  of  Yahveh  (1 
Samuel  v.  f.) .  And  then  when  it  is  brought  to  the  little 
Jewish  border-town  of  Beth  Shemesh  and  the  inhabitants 
look  at  it,  seventy  of  them  pay  for  their  presumption  by 
death, — according  to  another  account  fifty  thousand  ( ! ) 
(1  Sam.  vi.  19) .     Even  one  who  touches  the  ark  from 


96  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

inadvertence  is  slain  by  the  wrath  of  Yahveh  (2  Sam. 
6-7  f.) . 

Bnt  as  soon  as  we  tonch  the  soil  of  the  historical 
period,  history  is  silent.  We  are  told  in  detail  that  the 
Chaldseans  carried  away  the  treasures  of  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem  and  the  gold,  silver,  and  copper  furnishings  of 
the  temple,  the  fire  pans  and  basins  and  shovels  (2  Kings 
xxiv.  13  ;  xxv.  13  ff.) ,  but  no  one  is  concerned  about  the 
ark  with  the  two  God-given  tables  ;  the  temple  goes  down 
in  flame,  but  not  a  single  word  is  said  of  the  fate  of  the 
two  miracle-working  tables  of  the  Almighty  God,  the 
most  sacred  treasure  of  the  Old  Covenant. 

We  do  not  propose  to  ask  the  cause  of  all  this,  but 
only  to  record  the  fact  that  Moses  is  exonerated  by  the 
critical  study  of  the  Pentateuch  from  the  reproach  which 
belongs  to  him  according  to  the  strict  letter  of  the  Thora. 
For,  as  is  confirmed  by  many  and  among  them  Dillmann 
(Commentary  to  the  Books  of  Exodus  and  Leviticus,  p. 
201) ,  this  authority  so  highly  valued  even  on  the  Catholic 
side,  uWe  have  the  ten  commandments  in  two  different 
revisions  neither  of  which  is  based  upon  the  tables  them- 
selves, but  upon  other  versions. " 

And  similarly  all  the  other  so-called  Mosaic  laws 
are  transmitted  to  us  in  two  comparatively  late  revisions, 
separated  from  each  other  by  centuries,  whence  all  the 
differences  are  easily  enough  accounted  for.  And  we 
know  this  also,  that  the  so-called  Mosaic  laws  represent 
regulations  and  customs  part  of  which  had  been  recog- 
nised in  Israel  from  primitive  times,  and  part  of  which 
had  not  received  legal  recognition  until  after  the  settle- 
ment of  the  people  in  Canaan,  and  were  then  attributed 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  97 

bodily  to  Moses,  and  later,  for  the  sake  of  greater  sacred- 
ness  and  inviolability,  to  Yahveh  Himself.  The  same 
process  we  see  in  connection  with  the  laws  of  other  races 
— I  will  mention  here  the  law-book  of  Manu — and  it  is 
precisely  the  case  with  the  law-making  Babylon. 

In  my  first  lecture  on  this  subject  I  pointed  out  the 
fact  that  we  find  in  Babylon  as  early  as  2250  B.  C.  a 
State  with  a  highly  developed  system  of  law,  and  I  spoke 
of  a  great  Code  of  Hammurabi  which  established  civil 
law  in  all  its  branches.  While  at  that  time  we  could 
only  infer  the  existence  of  this  Code  from  scattered  but 
perfectly  reliable  details, — the  original  of  this  great  Law 
Book  of  Hammurabi  has  now  been  found,  and  therewith 
a  treasure  of  the  very  first  rank  has  been  conferred  upon 
science  and  especially  upon  the  science  of  law  and  the 
history  of  civilisation.  It  was  in  the  ruins  of  the  acrop- 
olis of  Susa,  about  the  turn  of  the  year  1901-1902,  that 
the  French  archaeologist  de  Morgan  and  the  Dominican 
monk  Scheil  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  a  monument  of 
King  Hammurabi*  in  the  shape  of  a  diorite  block  2.25 
meters  high.  It  had  apparently  been  carried  away  from 
Babylon  along  with  other  plunder  by  the  Elamites.  On 
it  had  been  engraved  in  the  most  careful  manner  282 
paragraphs  of  law  (Fig.  76) .  As  the  King  himself  says, 
they  are  "laws  of  justice  which  Hammurabi,  the  mighty 
and  just  King,  has  established  for  the  use  and  benefit  of 
the  weak  and  oppressed,  of  widows  and  orphans. "  "  Let 
the  wronged  person,"  thus  we  read,  u  who  has  a  case  at 
law,  read  this  my  monumental  record  and  hear  my  pre- 
cious words  ;  my  monument  shall  explain  his  case  to  him 
and  he  may  look  forward  to  its  settlement !    With  a  heart 


98 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


full  of  gratitude  let  him  then  say :    '  Hammurabi  is  a  lord 
who  is  like  a  real  father  to  his  people.'  n     But  although 


Fig.  76.  A  Portion  of  the  Inscription  of  the  Laws  of  Hammurabi. 

the  King  says  that  he,  the  sun  of  Babylon,  which  sheds 
the  light  over  North  and  South  in  his  land,  has  written 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


99 


down  these  laws,  nevertheless  he  in  his  tnrn  received 
them  from  the  highest  judge  of  heaven  and  earth,  the 


Fig.  77.  Hammurabi  Before  Shamash,  the  God  of  Law. 

Snn  god,  the  lord  of  all  that  is  called  "right,"  and  there- 
fore the  mighty  tablet  of  the  law  bears  at  its  head  the 

L.0FC. 


100  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

beautiful  bas-relief  (Fig".  77) ,  which  represents  Hammu- 
rabi in  the  act  of  receiving  the  laws  from  Shamash,  the 
supreme  law-giver. 

Thus  and  not  otherwise  was  it  with  the  giving  of  the 
Law  on  Sinai,  the  so-called  making  of  the  Covenant  be- 
tween Yahveh  and  Israel.  For  the  purely  human  origin 
and  character  of  the  Israelitic  laws  are  surely  evident 
enough !  Or  is  any  one  so  bold  as  to  maintain  that  the 
thrice  holy  God,  who  with  his  own  finger  engraved  upon 
the  stone  tablet  16  tirzach  "thou  shalt  not  kill,"  in  the 
same  breath  sanctioned  blood-vengeance,  which  rests  like 
a  curse  upon  Oriental  peoples  to  this  day,  while  Hammu- 
rabi had  almost  obliterated  the  traces  of  it?  Or  is  it  pos- 
sible that  any  one  still  clings  to  the  notion  that  circum- 
cision, which  had  for  ages  before  been  customary  among 
the  Egyptians  and  the  Bedouin  Arabs,  was  the  mark  of 
an  especial  covenant  between  God  and  Israel? 

We  understand  very  well,  according  to  Oriental 
thought  and  speech,  that  the  numerous  regulations  for 
every  possible  petty  event  in  daily  life,  as  for  instance, 
the  case  of  a  fierce  ox  that  kills  a  man  or  another  ox 
(Exodus  xxi.  28  f.,  35  f.) ,  that  the  prohibitions  of  foods, 
the  minute  medicinal  prescriptions  for  skin  diseases,  the 
detailed  directions  regarding  the  priest's  wardrobe,  are 
represented  as  derived  from  Yahveh.  But  this  is  alto- 
gether outward  form ;  the  God  who  prefers  the  offerings 
of  M  a  broken  spirit,  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart  (Ps. 
li.  17) ,  and  who  took  no  pleasure  in  the  worship  by  burnt 
offerings  after  the  fashion  of  the  li heathen"  peoples,  cer- 
tainly did  not  ordain  this  worship  by  burnt  offerings  .with 
its  minute  details,  nor  devise  the  recipes  for  ointment 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  101 

and  burnt  incense  "  after  the  art  of  the  perfumer,' '  as  the 
expression  runs  (Exodus  xxx.  25,  35). 

It  will  be  the  business  of  future  investigators  to  de- 
termine to  just  what  extent  the  Israelitic  laws  both  civil 
and  levitical  are  specifically  Israelitic,  or  general  Semitic, 
or  how  far  they  were  influenced  by  the  Babylonian  code 
which  is  so  much  older  and  which  had  certainly  extended 
beyond  the  borders  of  Babylon.  I  think,  for  instance,  of 
the  law  of  retribution,  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a 
tooth,  of  the  feast  of  the  new  moon,  the  so-called  "  shew 
bread,''  the  high  priest's  breast  plate,  and  many  other 
things.  For  the  present  we  must  be  thankful  that  the 
institution  of  the  Sabbath  day,  the  origin  of  which  was 
unclear  even  to  the  Hebrews  themselves,  is  now  recog- 
nised as  having  its  roots  in  the  Babylonian  Sabattu, 
"the  day  par  excellence." 

On  the  other  hand,  no  one  has  maintained  that  the 
Ten  Commandments  were  borrowed  even  in  part  from 
Babylon,  but  on  the  contrary  it  has  been  pointed  out 
very  emphatically  that  prohibitions  like  the  Fifth,  Sixth, 
and  Seventh  spring  from  the  instinct  of  self-preservation 
which  is  common  to  all  men.  In  fact,  the  most  of  the 
Ten  Commandments  are  just  as  sacred  to  the  Babylo- 
nians as  to  the  Hebrews:  disrespect  for  parents,  false 
witness,  and  every  sort  of  covetousness  are  also  punished 
severely  in  Babylonian  law,  generally  with  death.  Thus, 
for  instance,  we  read  in  the  very  third  paragraph  of  Ham- 
murabi's code :  u  If  in  a  law  suit  any  one  on  the  witness- 
stand  utters  falsehoods  and  cannot  support  his  testimony, 
he  shall  himself  be  punished  with  death  if  the  life  of  an- 
other is  involved." 


102  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

The  Second  Commandment  is  specifically  Israelitic, 
the  prohibition  of  every  sort  of  image-worship,  which  in 
its  direct  application  seems  to  have  a  distinctly  anti- 
Babylonian  point. 

But  in  connection  with  the  eminently  Israelitic  First 
Commandment,  "I  am  Yahveh,  thy  God;  thou  shalt 
have  no  other  gods  beside  me,"  may  I  be  permitted  to 
treat  more  fully  one  point  which  deeply  and  permanently 
concerns  all  who  are  interested  in  Babel  and  Bible, — the 
monotheism  of  the  Old  Testament.  From  the  standpoint 
of  Old  Testament  theology  I  can  understand  how,  after 
it  has  unanimously  and  rightly  given  up  the  verbal  in- 
spiration of  the  ancient  Hebrew  scriptures  and  thus  rec- 
ognised, perhaps  unintentionally  but  quite  logically,  the 
wholly  unauthoritative  character  of  the  Old  Testament 
writings  as  such  for  our  belief,  our  knowledge  and  our 
investigations, — I  say  I  can  understand  how  theology 
now  claims  as  divine  the  spirit  that  pervades  them  and 
preaches  with  so  much  the  greater  unanimity  the  ' '  ethi- 
cal monotheism  of  Israel,"  the  c<  spirit  of  prophecy"  as 
"  a  real  revelation  of  the  living  God." 

Great  consternation  seems  to  have  been  produced  by 
the  names  mentioned  in  my  first  lecture,  which  we  find 
in  surprisingly  great  numbers  among  the  North-Semitic 
nomads  who  immigrated  into  Babylon  about  2500  B.C.: 
"El  (i.  e.,  God)  hath  given,"  "  God  sits  in  control," 
u  If  God  were  not  my  God,"  "  God,  consider  me,"  "  God 
is  God,"  "Jahu  (i.  e.,  Yahveh)  is  God."  I  really  do 
not  understand  this  uneasiness.  For  since  the  Old  Testa- 
ment itself  represents  Abram  as  preaching  in  the  name 
of  Yahveh  (Gen.  xii.  8) ,  and  since  Yahveh  had  already 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  103 

been  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  those  old 
names  such  as  Jahu-ilu,  i.  e.,  Joel,  ought  really  to  be 
welcomed  with  joy.  And  these  names  should  prove  very 
opportune,  particularly  for  those  theologians  who  regard 
themselves  as  affirmative  and  who  hold  that  ' '  all  divine 
inspiration  has  undergone  a  gradual  historical  develop- 
ment, "  thereby  turning  the  orthodox  notion  of  inspira- 
tion upside  down,  as  it  seems  to  me. 

However,  the  great  majority  of  theologians  feel  and 
fear  rightly  that  these  names,  which  are  more  than  a 
thousand  years  older  than  the  corresponding  names  in 
the  Old  Testament,  which  attest  the  worship  of  a  single 
god  named  Jahu,  "the  permanent"  (whether  a  tribal 
god  or  what  not) ,  and  which  moreover  might  indicate  the 
initial  point  of  an  historical  development  of  the  belief  in 
Yahveh  as  existing  in  very  much  wider  circles  than 
merely  among  the  descendants  of  Abram,  will  thereby 
throw  serious  doubt  upon  its  claim  to  be  a  special  revela- 
tion. And  therefore  they  are  laboring  and  tormenting 
themselves  in  the  effort  to  explain  away  these  names, 
hesitating  at  no  means.  But  though  the  waves  spew  and 
foam,  like  a  lighthouse  in  the  dark  night  stand  fast  the 
names  of  the  descendants  of  North  Semitic  Bedouins  from 
2300  B.  C,  "  God  is  God,"  "  Jahu  is  God." 

It  seems  to  me  that  exaggerations  should  be  avoided 
in  either  direction.  I  have  never  ceased  to  emphasise 
the  gross  polytheism  of  the  Babylonians,  and  am  far 
from  feeling  obliged  to  disguise  it.  But  I  regard  it  as 
just  as  much  out  of  place  to  make  the  Sumerian-Babylo- 
nian  pantheon  and  its  representation  in  poetry,  particu- 
larly in  popular  poetry,  the  butt  of  shallow  wit  and  sar- 


104 


BABEIy  AND  BIBLE. 


castic  exaggerations,  as  we  should  properly  condemn 
such  ridicule  if  directed  at  the  gods  of  Homer.  Nor 
should  the  worship  of  divinities  in  images  of  wood  or 
stone  be  in  any  wise  glossed  over.  Only  it  should  not 
be  forgotten  that  even  the  Biblical  account  of  creation 

has  man  created  uin  the 
likeness  of  God,"  in  dia- 
metrical contradiction  of 
the  constantly  emphasised 
"  spirituality ' '  of  God, — 
as  has  rightly  been  pointed 
out  by  students  of  theology. 
And  in  view  of  this  fact  we 
can  understand  after  all  how 
the  Babylonians  reversed 
this  method  and  conceived 
and  represented  their  gods 
in  the  image  of  man. 

The  prophets  of  the  Old 
Testament  do  exactly  the 
same  thing,  at  least  in  spirit. 
In  perfect  agreement  with 
the  Babylonians  and  Assy- 
rians the  prophet  Habakkuk 
(chap,  iii.)  sees  Yahveh  ap- 
proach with  horses  and  char- 
iot, bow  and  arrows  and  lance,  and  even  with  u  horns  at 
his  side,"1  with  horns,  the  symbol  of  authority  and 
strength  and  victory  (cp.  Numbers  xxiii.  22),  the  cus- 
tomary adornment  of  the  headdress  of  both  higher  and 


Fig.  78.  Horns  the  Emblem  of 
Strength. 


1R.  V.,  "rays  coming  forth  from  his  hand" 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


105 


lower  divinities  among  the  Assyrio-Babylonians  (Fig. 
78) .  And  the  representations  of  God  the  Father  in 
Christian  art:  in  Michael  Angelo,  Raphael,  and  all  our 
illustrated  Bibles, — the  representation  of  the  first  day  of 


~  n 


Fig.  79.    The  Ancient  of  Days.     (After  Schnorr  von  Karolsfeld.) 

creation  (Fig.  79)  is  taken  from  Julius  von  Schnorr's 
illustrated  Bible, — are  all  derived  from  a  vision  of  the 
Prophet  Daniel  (vii.  9)  who  sees  God  as  the  u  Ancient  of 
Days,  his  garments  white  as  snow  and  the  hair  of  his 
head  like  unto  pure  wool." 


106  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

But  the  Babylonians  can  endure  with  the  same  equa- 
nimity as  the  Catholic  Church  the  wearisome  ridicule  of 
the  Old  Testament  prophets  cast  upon  the  Babylonian 
idols  who  have  eyes  but  see  not,  ears  but  hear  not,  a  nose 
but  smell  not,  and  feet  but  cannot  go.  For  just  as  intel- 
ligent Catholics  see  in  the  images  merely  the  representa- 
tions of  Christ,  Mary,  and  the  saints,  so  did  the  intelli- 
gent Babylonians :  no  hymn  or  prayer  was  addressed  to 
the  image  as  such, — they  are  always  appealing  to  the 
divinity  that  dwells  beyond  the  bounds  of  earth. 

In  passing  judgment  upon  the  "ethical  monothe- 
ism ' '  of  Israel  also  a  certain  moderation  would  seem  to 
be  desirable.  In  the  first  place,  we  must  except  from 
consideration  in  this  connection  much  of  the  pre-exilic 
period,  during  which  Judah  as  well  as  Israel,  kings  as 
well  as  people,  were  dominated  by  an  ineradicable  yet 
quite  natural  predilection  for  the  indigenous  Canaanitish 
polytheism. 

Furthermore,  it  seems  to  me  a  particularly  unwise 
proceeding  on  the  part  of  certain  hotspurs  to  portray  the 
ethical  level  of  Israel,  even  that  of  the  pre-exilic  period, 
as  elevated  far  above  that  of  the  Babylonians.  It  is  un- 
deniable that  the  warfare  of  the  Assyrio-Babylonians  was 
cruel  and  sometimes  barbarous.  But  so  was  the  conquest 
of  Canaan  by  the  Hebrew  tribes  accompanied  by  a  tor- 
rent of  innocent  blood ;  the  capture  of  ' '  the  great  and 
goodly  alien  cities,  of  the  houses  full  of  all  good  things, 
of  the  cisterns,  the  vineyards,  the  olive-groves"  (Deuter- 
onomy vi.  10  f.)  was  preceded  by  the  "devoting"  (Deu- 
teronomy vii.  2,  R.  V.,  margin)  of  hundreds  of  villages 
on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan,  that  is,  by  the  merciless 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  107 

massacre  of  all  the  inhabitants,  even  of  the  women  and 
the  very  smallest  of  children.  And  as  for  right  and  jus- 
tice in  state  and  people,  the  persistent  denunciations  by 
the  prophets  of  both  Israel  and  Judah  of  the  oppression 
of  the  poor,  of  widows  and  of  orphans,  taken  in  conjunc- 
tion with  stories  such  as  that  of  Naboth's  vineyard  (1 
Kings  xxi) ,  reveal  a  profound  corruption  of  both  kings 
and  people,  while  the  almost  two  thousand  years'  exist- 
ence of  the  nation  of  Hammurabi  would  seem  to  justify 
the  application  to  it  of  the  saying :  ' '  Righteousness  ex- 
alteth  a  nation." 

We  actually  possess  a  monumental  tablet  which 
warns  the  Babylonian  king  himself  most  insistently 
against  every  species  of  injustice !  "If  the  king  takes 
the  money  of  the  people  of  Babylon  to  appropriate  it  to 
his  own  treasury,  and  then  hears  the  suit  of  the  Babylo- 
nians and  permits  himself  to  be  inclined  to  partisanship, 
then  Marduk,  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  will  set  his 
enemy  against  him  and  give  his  possessions  and  his 
treasure  to  his  enemy." 

In  the  matter  of  love  of  one's  neighbor,  of  compas- 
sion upon  one's  neighbor,  as  has  already  been  remarked, 
there  is  no  deep  gulf  to  be  discovered  between  Babylon 
and  the  Old  Testament. 

In  passing  let  me  call  attention  here  to  one  other 
point.  Old  Testament  theologians  make  very  merry 
over  the  Babylonian  account  of  the  Flood  with  its  poly- 
theism, and  yet  it  contains  one  element  which  appeals  to 
us  much  more  humanely  than  that  of  the  Bible.  "The 
Deluge,"  thus  Xisuthros  tells  us,  "was  over.  I  looked 
forth  over  the  wide  ocean,  lamenting  aloud  because  all 


108  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

humankind  had  perished. "  Eduard  Suss,  the  celebrated 
Austrian  geologist,  confessed  long  since  that  in  touches 
like  this  ' l  the  simple  narrative  of  Xisuthros  bears  the 
stamp  of  convincing  truth."  We  find  no  report  of  any 
compassion  on  the  part  of  Noah. 

The  Babylonian  Noah  and  his  wife  are  transformed 
into  gods ;  this  too  would  have  been  impossible  in  Israel. 
Of  the  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  to  the  Feast  of  Weeks  we 
read,  Deuteronomy  xvi.  11  (comp.  also  xii.  18)  :  "And 
thou  shalt  rejoice  before  Yahveh,  thy  God,  thou  and  thy 
son  and  thy  daughter  and  thy  manservant  and  thy  maid- 
servant,"— but  where  is  the  wife?  It  is  generally  recog- 
nised that  the  position  of  women  in  Israel  was  a  very 
subordinate  one  from  earliest  childhood.  We  find  in  the 
Old  Testament  scarcely  a  single  girl's  name  which  ex- 
presses in  the  cordial  manner  customary  in  the  case  of 
boy's  names,  joyful  gratitude  to  Yahveh  for  the  birth  of 
the  child.  All  the  tender  pet-names  of  girls,  such  as 
"Beloved,"  "Fragrant  One,"  "Dew-born,"  "Bee," 
"Gazelle,"  "Ewe"  (Rachel),  "Myrtle"  and  "Palm," 
"  Coral"  and  "  Crown"  cannot  in  my  opinion  deceive  us 
on  this  point.  The  woman  is  the  property  of  her  parents 
and  afterwards  of  her  husband  ;  she  is  a  valuable  ' '  hand  r 
upon  which  in  marriage  a  great  share  of  the  heaviest  do- 
mestic burdens  are  laid.  And  above  all,  as  in  Islam,  she 
is  disqualified  for  performing  religious  rites. 

All  this  was  different  and  better  in  Babylon :  for  in- 
stance, we  read  in  the  time  of  Hammurabi  of  women  who 
have  their  chairs  carried  into  the  temple ;  we  find  the 
names  of  women  as  witnesses  in  legal  documents,  and 
other  similar  things.     Right  here  in  this  matter  of  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  109 

position  of  women  we  may  perceive  clearly  how  pro- 
foundly the  Babylonian  civilisation  was  influenced  by  the 
non-Semitic  civilisation  of  the  Sumerians. 

And  how  variously  pitched  is  that  instrument,  the 
human  temperament !  While  Koldewey  and  others  with 
him  are  astonished  anew  that  the  excavations  in  Babylo- 
nia bring  to  light  absolutely  no  obscene  figures,  a  Catho- 
lic Old  Testament  scholar  knows  of  ' '  numberless  statu- 
ettes found  in  Babylon  which  have  no  other  purpose  but 


^ 


Fig.  80.  Babylonian-  Clay  Figures  Representing  the  Goddess  of  Birth. 

to  give  expression  to  the  lowest  and  most  vulgar  sensual- 
ity." Thou  poor  goddess  of  childbirth,  poor  goddess  Is- 
tar!  However,  although  thou  be  moulded  only  of  clay, 
yet  needst  thou  not  blush  to  appear  in  this  company 
(Fig.  80)  ;  for  I  am  certain  thou  wilt  give  no  offence, 
just  as  certain  as  that  we  are  none  of  us  offended  but  on 
the  contrary  love  to  give  ourselves  up  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  glorious  and  familiar  marble  statue  of  Eve 
with  her  children  (Fig.  81) . 


110 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


And  although  an  Evangelical  specialist  in  the  Old 
Testament,  finding  occasion  in  a  passage  of  a  Babylonian 
poem,  which  has  not  yet  received  its  definitive  interpre- 
tation, exclaims  with  similar  ethical  indignation,  that  we 
1  i  must  needs  search  through  the  most  vulgar  corners  of 
Further  Asia  in  order  to  find  its  analogues,"  I  cannot, 
indeed,  boast  of  equal  knowledge  of  local  details,  but  I 

would  like  to  remind  him  of 
the  reasons  why  our  school 
authorities  so  urgently  de- 
manded extracts  from  the  Old 
Testament,  and  to  warn  him 
against  throwing  stones,  lest 
all  too  speedily  his  own  glass- 
house come  crashing  about  his 
ears. 

However,  these  skirmishes, 
provoked  by  my  opponents, 
into  the  realm  of  the  moral 
level  of  the  two  nations  in- 
volved, seem  to  me  of  infinitely 
less  importance  than  a  final  ob- 
servation in  connection  with 
the  proclamation  of  the  ' '  eth- 
ical monotheism"  of  Israel  or  of  the  "  spirit  of  prophet- 
ism"  as  "a  genuine  revelation  of  the  living  God," 
which  in  my  opinion  has  not  yet  received  fitting  atten- 
tion. 

Five  times  a  day  and  even  more  frequently  the  ortho- 
dox Moslem  prays  the  Paternoster  of  Islam,  the  first  Sura 
of  the  Koran,  which  closes  with  the  words :   "  Lead  us,  O 


Fig.  81.  Eve  and  Her  Children. 
(A  marble  statue  by  Adolf  Briitt.) 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  Ill 

Allah,  the  right  way,  the  way  of  those  whom  thou  hast 
favored,  who  are  not  smitten  by  thy  wrath  [like  the  Jews] 
and  who  are  not  in  error  [like  the  Christians] . n  The 
Moslem  alone  is  the  one  favored  by  Allah,  he  alone  is  the 
one  chosen  by  God  to  adore  and  worship  the  true  God. 
All  other  men  and  races  are  kafirun,  heretics,  whom  God 
has  not  predestined  to  eternal  salvation.  Just  such  and 
not  otherwise,  deeply  rooted  in  the  nature  of  the  Semite, 
does  the  Yahvism  of  Israel  show  itself  to  be,  in  the  pre- 
exilic  as  well  as  in  the  post-exilic  period.  Yahveh  is  the 
only  true  (or  highest)  God,  but  at  the  same  time  he  is 
the  God  of  Israel  solely  and  exclusively,  Israel  is  his 
chosen  people  and  his  inheritance ;  all  other  nations  are 
Gojim  or  heathen,  given  over  by  Yahveh  himself  to  god- 
lessness  and  idolatry.  This  is  a  doctrine  absolutely  ir- 
reconcilable with  our  nobler  conception  of  God,  but  which, 
nevertheless,  is  uttered  in  uncloaked  language  in  the 
nineteenth  verse  of  the  fourth  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  a 
passage  which  at  the  same  time  destroys  with  a  single 
phrase  the  illusion  of  a  "  primitive  revelation n  :  "  Lest 
thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven  and  when  thou  seest 
the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of 
heaven,  thou  worship  them  and  reverence  them,  which 
Yahveh,  thy  God,  hath  divided  unto  all  the  peoples  under 
the  whole  heaven ;  but  you  Yahveh  hath  taken  and 
brought  forth  out  of  Egypt,  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of 
inheritance."  According  to  this,  the  worship  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  and  of  idols  was  willed  and  decreed  by 
Yahveh  himself  upon  the  peoples  under  the  whole  heaven. 
So  much  the  more  dreadful  is  the  shock  when  in  Deute- 
ronomy vii.  2,  Yahveh  gives  the  command  to  exterminate 


112  BABKL  AND  BIBLE. 

mercilessly  on  account  of  their  impiety  the  seven  great 
and  powerful  peoples  whom  Israel  may  expect  to  find 
already  in  possession  of  Canaan,  or  when  we  read,  verse 
16 :  "And  thou  shalt  consume  all  the  peoples  which  Yah- 
veh  thy  God  shall  deliver  unto  thee ;  thine  eye  shall  not 
pity  them." 

It  goes  hard  to  regard  as  inspired  by  the  holy  and 
just  God  this  monotheism  of  the  exclusively  national 
type.  It  is  not  manifested  in  the  nature  of  the  case  in 
such  passages  as  the  account  of  the  creation,  but  in  gene- 
ral it  runs  throughout  the  Old  Testament  undeniably 
from  Sinai  on:  UI  am  Yahveh,  thy  God, "  to  Deutero- 
Isaiah :  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,"  and  to 
Zechariah's  prophecy  (xx.  8,  23)  :  u  Thus  saith  Yahveh 
Zebaoth :  In  those  days  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  ten 
men  shall  take  hold,  out  of  all  the  languages  of  the  na- 
tions ( Gojim) ,  shall  even  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him 
that  is  a  Jew,  saying:  'We  will  go  with  you,  for  we 
have  heard  that  God  is  with  you.'  "  It  is  this  monotheism 
that  left  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  "  without  hope  " 
and  " without  God  in  the  world,"  as  for  instance  the 
Apostle  Paul  assumes  (Ephesians  ii.  11  f.).  And  yet 
we  have  all  been  so  hypnotised  from  youth  up  by  this 
dogma  of  the  * '  exclusive  inheritance  of  Israel ' '  (Ephe- 
sians ii.  12) ,  that  we  regard  the  history  of  the  ancient 
world  from  an  entirely  wrong  point  of  view  and  are  even 
satisfied  to  claim  for  ourselves  at  this  day  the  role  of  a 
u  spiritual  Israel,"  forgetting  the  mighty  historical  revo- 
lution which  was  accomplished  in  the  New  Testament 
times  under  the  influence  of  John  the  Baptist  and  the 
preaching  of  Jesus,  that  dramatic  conflict  between  Juda- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  113 

ism,  Jewish  Christianity,  and  Gentile  Christianity ,  which 
made  it  possible  for  Peter  to  exclaim  (Acts  x.  34  f.)  : 
"  Of  a  trnth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  per- 
sons, but  that  in  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  him  and  is 
acceptable  to  him,"  thus  tearing  down  the  partition  be- 
tween the  Oriental-Israelitic  and  the  Christian-philosophic 
conception  of  the  universe. 

For  my  own  part,  I  live  firm  in  the  belief  that  the 
early  Hebrew  scriptures,  even  if  they  lose  their  standing 
as  " revealed "  or  as  permeated  by  a  " revealed"  spirit, 
will  nevertheless  always  maintain  their  great  importance, 
especially  as  a  unique  monument  of  a  great  religio-histo- 
rical  process  which  continues  even  into  our  own  times. 
The  lofty  passages  in  the  prophets  and  the  psalms,  filled 
with  a  living  confidence  in  God  and  wTith  longing  for  re- 
pose in  God,  will  always  find  a  living  echo  in  our  hearts, 
despite  the  particularistic  limitation  of  its  literal  text  and 
its  literal  meaning,  which  are  largely  obliterated  anyway 
in  our  translation  of  the  Bible.  Indeed,  words  like  those 
of  the  prophet  Micah  (vi.  6-8)  :  "Wherewith  shall  I 
come  before  Yahveh,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high 
God?  Shall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt  offerings,  with 
calves  of  a  year  old?  Will  Yahveh  be  pleased  with  thou- 
sands of  rams,  or  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil?  Or  shall 
I  give  my  firstborn  for  my  transgression,  the  fruit  of  my 
body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul?  He  hath  showed  thee,  O 
man,  what  is  good;  and  what  doth  Yahveh  require  of 
thee,  but  to  do  justice ,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
humbly  with  thy  God!  n — words  like  these,  insisting  on 
an  ethical  manifestation  of  religion  in  the  life  (and  which 
are  also  found  in  Babylonian  writings) ,  come,  as  it  were, 


114  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

from  the  very  soul  of  all  sincerely  religious  people  to- 
day. 

But  on  the  other  hand,  let  us  not  blindly  cling  to 
antiquated  and  scientifically  discredited  dogmas  from  the 
vain  fear  that  our  faith  in  God  and  our  true  religious  life 
might  suffer  harm!  Let  us  remember  that  all  things 
earthly  are  in  living  motion  and  that  standing  still  means 
death.  Let  us  look  back  upon  the  mighty,  throbbing 
force  with  which  the  German  Reformation  filled  the  great 
nations  of  the  earth  in  every  field  of  human  endeavor  and 
human  progress !  But  even  the  Reformation  is  only  one 
stage  on  the  road  to  the  goal  of  truth  set  for  us  by  God 
and  in  God.  Let  us  press  forward  toward  it,  humbly  but 
with  all  the  resources  of  free  scientific  investigation,  joy- 
fully professing  our  adherence  to  that  standard  perceived 
with  eagle  eye  from  the  high  watch-tower  and  courage- 
ously proclaimed  to  all  the  world  :  ' '  The  further  develop- 
ment of  religion." 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  BABEL 

AND  BIBLE 


LITERATURE  ON  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


J.  Barth,  Babel  und  israelitisches  Religionswesen.  A  Lecture.  Ber- 
lin, 1902  ;   36  pp. 

Prof.  Dr.  Karl  Budde,  Das  Alte  Testameiit  und  die  Ausgrabungen. 
Giesen,  1903.  (A  Lecture,  delivered  May  29,  1902,  at  the 
Theological  Conference  at  Giessen);  39  pp.,  of  which,  how- 
ever, only  pp.  1-10  are  pertinent. 

Dr.  Johannes  Doller,  Imperial  and  Royal  Court  Chaplain  and 
Director  of  Studies  at  the  Frintaneum,  Vienna,  Bibel  und 
Babel  oder  Babel  und  Bibel?  Eine  Entgegnung  auf  Prof.  F. 
Delitzscli's  "Babel  und  Bibel."     Padernborn,  1903. 

Prof.  Dr.  Hommel,  Die  altorientalischen  Denkmdler  und  das  Alte 
Testameiit.  Eine  Erwiderung  auf  Prof .  Fr.  Delitzscli's  ' l  Babe  I 
und  Bibel."     Berlin,  1902;   38  pp. 

Dr.  Alfred  Jeremias,  pastor  of  the  Lutheran  Church  at  Leipzig, 
Im  Kampfe  um  Babel  und  Bibel.  Fin  Wort  zur  Ver  standi  gun g 
und  Abwehr.      Leipzig,  1903;   35  pp. 

Prof.  D.  R.  Kittel,  Die  babylonischen  Ausgrabungen  tind  die  biblische 
Urgeschichte.  Leipzig,  1902;  36  pp.  See  also  under  Sec- 
tion II.,  p.  91. 

W.  Knieschke,  pastor  at  Sieversdorf,  Bibel  und  Babel,  El  und  Bel. 
Eine  Replik  auf  Friedrich  Delitzselis's  Babel  und  Bibel.  West- 
end-Berlin,  1902  ;  64  pp. 

Dr.  Eduard  KSnig,  Prof,  of  theology.  Bibel  und  Babel.  Eine 
kulturgeschichtliche  Skizze.  Sixth,  enlarged  edition,  with  ref- 
erence to  the  most  recent  literature  on  the  subject  of  Babel 
and  Bible.      Berlin,  1902;  60  pp. 


118  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Prof.  D.  Sam.  Oettlt,  Der  Kampf  um  Bibel  und  Babel.  Ein  reli- 
gionsgeschichtlicher  Vortrag.  Second  edition.  Leipzig,  1902; 
32  pp. 

Rabb.  Dr.  Ludw.  A.  Rosenthal,  Babel  und  Bibel  oder  Babel  gegen 
Bibel?     Ein  Wort  zur  Kldrung.      Berlin,  1902;   31  pp. 

Prof.  Bruno  Baentsch,  Jena,  " Babel  und  Bibel.  Eine  Priifung 
des  unter  diesem  Titel  erschienenen  Vortrages  von  Friedrich 
Delitzsch,  besonders  auf  die  darin  enthaltenen  religions- 
geschichtlichen  Ausftihrungen,"  in  the  Protestantische  Monats- 
hefte,  edited  by  D.  Julius  Websky.  Vol.  VI.,  No.  8  (August 
15,  1902).  Berlin,  1902.  Cf.  also  two  articles,  signed  B.  B., 
"Noch  einmal  Babel  und  Bibel,"  in  the  Thiiringer  Rund- 
schau, March  2nd  and  9th,  1902. 

Prof.  Dr.  C.  H.  Cornill,  Breslau,  Deutsche  Litter  aturzeitung, 
1902,  No.  27  (July  5). 

Heinrich  Danneil  (Schonebeck  a.  E.),  "Babel  und  Bibel," 
Magdeburgische  Zeitung,  No.  25,  1902,  Beiblatt. 

Privatdocent  Dr.  W.  Engelkemper,  Miinster,  "Babel  und  Bibel," 
Wissenschaftliche  Beilage  zur  Ger mania,  1902,  Nos.  31  (July 
31)  and  32  (August  7).      Berlin,  1902. 

Prof.  D.  Gunkel,  "Babylonische  und  biblische  Urgeschichte. " 
Christliche  Welt,  XVII.,  1903,  No.  6  (Feb.  5),  cols.  121- 
134. 

Prof.  Dr.  Peter  Jensen,  "Babel  und  Bibel,"  Die  christliche  Welt, 
XVI.,  1902,  No.  21  (May  22),  cols.  487-494. 

Franz  Kaulen,  Bonn,  "Babel  und  Bibel,"  Literarischer  Hand- 
weiser  zundchst  fur  alle  Katholiken  deutscher  Zunge.  XL., 
Nos.  766  and  767,  1901-1902. 

P.  Keil,  London,  "Babel  und  Bibel."     Pastor  bonus.      Zeitschrift 
fiir  kirchliche  Wissenschaft  und  Praxis,  edited  by  Domkapitular 
Dr.  P.  Einig.     XV.,  parts  1,  2,  3   (Oct.  1,   Nov.  1,    Dec.  1, 
1902). 

Prof.  D.  R.  Kittel,  Leipzig,  "  Jahve  in  Babel  und  Bibel,"  Theo- 
logisches  Liter aturblatt,  XXIII.,  No.  17  (April  25,  I902)v 
Also,  "Noch  einmal  Jahve  in  Babel  und  Bibel,"  ibid.,  No. 
18  (May  2,  1902),  and   "Der  Monotheismus  in   Babel  und 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  119 

Bibel,"  Allgemeine  evangelisch-lutherische  Kirchenzeitung,  1902, 
No.  17  (April  25,  1902). 

Rabbi  Dr.  S.  Meyer,  Regensburg,  "Die  Hypothesenglaubigen," 
Deutsche  israelitische  Zeitung,  XIX.,  No.  8  (20th  February, 
1902);  and  "Nochmals  Babel  und  Bibel,"  ibid.,  No.  10 
(6th  March). 

"Babel  und  Bibel,"  Neue  preussische  {Kreuz-*)  Zeitung,  1902,  No. 

211    (7th   May).      Signed  1    [Lie.    theol.    Prof.    Riedel, 

Greifswald]. 

Wolff,  "Babel  und  Bibel,"  Evangelische  Kirchenzeitung,  1902,  No. 
28  (cols.  657-662). 


OPINIONS  ON  "BABEL  AND  BIBLE." 

EMPEROR  WILLIAM  ON   "BABEL  AND  BIBLE." 

(A  Letter  from  His  Majesty  Emperor  William  II    to  Admiral  Hollman,  President 

of  the  Oriental  Society.) 

February  15,  1903. 
My  Dear  Hollman: 

My  telegram  to  you  will  unquestionably  have  removed  the 
doubts  which  you  still  entertained  regarding  the  concluding  pas- 
sage of  the  lecture,  which  was  clearly  understood  by  the  audience 
and  therefore  could  not  be  altered.  I  am  glad,  nevertheless,  that 
the  subject-matter  of  the  second  lecture  has  again  been  taken  up, 
and  I  gladly  seize  the  opportunity  after  a  perusal  of  a  copy  of  the 
proofs  to  state  again  clearly  my  position  with  regard  to  it. 

During  an  evening's  entertainment  with  us  Professor  Delitzsch 
had  the  opportunity  to  fully  confer  and  debate  with  Her  Majesty, 
the  Empress,  and  Dr.  Dryander,  while  I  listened  and  remained 
passive.  Unfortunately  he  abandoned  the  standpoints  of  the  strict 
historian  and  Assyriologist,  going  into  religious  and  theological 
conclusions  which  were  quite  nebulous  or  bold. 

When  he  came  to  speak  of  the  New  Testament,  it  became 
clear  at  once  that  he  developed  such  quite  divergent  views  regard- 
ing the  person  of  our  Saviour  that  I  had  to  express  the  diametri- 
cally opposite  view.  He  does  not  recognise  the  divinity  of  Christ 
as  a  deduction  therefrom  and  asserts  that  the  Old  Testament  con- 
tains no  revelation  about  him  as  the  Messiah. 

Here  the  Assyriologist  and  the  historical  investigator  ceases 
and  the  theologian  begins,  with  all  his  light  and  shadow  sides.  In 
this  province  I  can  only  urgently  advise  him  to  proceed  cautiously, 
step  by  step,  and  at  any  rate  to  ventilate  his  theses  only  in  the 
theological  books  and  in  the  circle  of  his  colleagues.      Spare  us, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  121 

the  laymen,  and,  above  all,  the  Oriental  Society,  from  hearing  of 
them. 

We  carry  on  excavations  and  publish  the  results  in  behalf  of 
science  and  history,  but  not  to  conform  or  attack  religious  hypoth- 
eses. 

Professor  Delitzsch,  the  theologian,  has  run  away  with  Profes- 
sor Delitzsch,  the  historian ;  his  history  is  exploited  merely  for  the 
benefit  of  his  theology. 

I  regret  that  Professor  Delitzsch  did  not  adhere  to  his  original 
program  which  he  developed  last  year;  viz.,  to  determine,  on  the 
basis  of  the  discoveries  of  our  society  and  by  means  of  critically 
verified  translations  of  the  inscriptions,  the  extent  to  which  these 
materials  shed  light  on  the  history  of  the  people  of  Israel  or  eluci- 
date the  historical  events,  customs  and  habits,  traditions,  politics 
and  laws  of  the  Israelites.  In  other  words,  he  should  have  shown 
the  mutual  relationship  in  which  the  undeniably  powerful  and 
highly  developed  civilisation  of  the  Babylonians  stood  to  that  of 
the  Israelites,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  former  might  have  in- 
fluenced the  latter  or  have  impressed  upon  it  its  own  stamp.  He 
could  thus  have  saved,  so  to  speak,  from  a  purely  human  point  of 
view,  the  honor  and  good  name  of  the  Babylonian  people  which 
has  certainly  been  depicted  in  the  Old  Testament  in  a  revolting 
and  grossly  one-sided  manner.  This  was  indeed  his  original  inten- 
tion,— at  least  as  I  conceive  it, — and  certainly  his  is  a  most  fruit- 
ful and  interesting  field,  the  investigation,  elucidation,  and  expla- 
nation of  which  necessarily  interests  us  laymen  in  the  highest 
degree  and  would  have  placed  us  under  the  highest  obligation  to 
him.  At  precisely  here  is  the  place  where  he  should  have  stopped 
but  beyond  which  unfortunately  his  ardent  zeal  led  him.  As  was 
not  otherwise  to  be  expected,  the  excavations  brought  information 
to  light  which  has  a  bearing  also  on  the  religion  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. He  should  have  mentioned  this  fact  and  should  have  em- 
phasised and  explained  whatever  coincidences  occurred ;  but  all 
purely  religious  conclusions  it  was  his  duty  to  have  left  for  his  hear- 
ers themselves  to  draw.  Thus  the  interest  and  the  favor  of  the  lay 
public  would  have  been  gained  in  the  fullest  measure  for  his  lec- 
ture. 

He  approached  the  question  of  revelation  in  a  polemical  tone, 
more  or  less  denying  it  or  reducing  it  to  a  matter  of  purely  human 
development.  That  was  a  grave  error,  for  thereby  he  touched  on 
the  innermost,  holiest  possession  of  many  of  his  hearers. 


122  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

And  whether  he  did  so  justifiably  or  unjustifiably, — and  that  is 
for  our  present  purpose  quite  indifferent,  since  we  are  concerned 
here  not  with  scientific  conventions  of  theologians  but  with  lay 
people  of  all  ages  and  professions, — he  still  either  demolished  or 
endangered  the  dearest  conceptions,  or  it  may  be,  the  illusions  of 
many  of  his  hearers, — conceptions  with  which  these  people  had  in- 
terwoven their  oldest  and  dearest  associations.  And  unqestionably 
he  shattered  or  at  least  undermined  for  these  people  their  faith.  It 
is  a  deed  that  only  the  greatest  genius  should  venture  to  attempt 
and  for  which  the  mere  study  of  Assyriology  did  not  justify  him. 

Goethe  also  once  discussed  this  question,  calling  emphatic  at- 
tention to  the  fact  that  one  must  be  on  one's  guard  in  speaking  to 
the  general  public  not  to  destroy  even  such  insignificant  structures 
as  mere  "pagodas  of  terminology. "  The  fundamental  principle, 
that  it  is  very  important  to  distinguish  precisely  between  what  is 
and  what  is  not  adapted  to  the  place,  the  public,  etc.,  appears  to 
have  escaped  the  excellent  Professor  in  his  zeal.  As  a  professional 
theologian  it  is  permissible  for  him  to  publish  in  technical  reviews 
and  for  his  colleagues  theses,  hypotheses,  and  theories,  nay,  even 
convictions  which  it  would  not  be  proper  for  him  to  utter  in  a  pub- 
lic lecture  or  book. 

I  should  now  like  to  advert  again  to  my  personal  attitude 
toward  the  doctrine  of  revelation  and  to  state  it  in  terms  similar  to 
those  I  have  formerly  employed  toward  you,  my  dear  Hollman, 
and  toward  other  gentlemen. 

I  distinguish  between  two  different  kinds  of  revelation, — one 
progressive,  and,  as  it  were,  historical ;  the  other  purely  religious, 
as  preparing  the  way  for  the  future  Messiah. 

Regarding  the  former,  it  must  be  said  for  me,  it  does  not  ad- 
mit of  a  doubt,  not  even  the  slightest,  that  God  reveals  himself 
continuously  in  the  race  of  man  created  by  him.  He  breathed  into 
man  the  breath  of  his  life  and  follows  with  fatherly  love  and  inter- 
est the  development  of  the  human  race.  In  order  to  lead  it  for- 
ward and  develop  it,  he  reveals  himself  in  this  or  that  great  sage, 
whether  priest  or  king,  whether  among  the  heathen,  the  Jews,  or 
the  Christians.  Hammurabi  was  one.  So  was  Moses,  Abraham, 
Homer,  Charlemagne,  Luther,  Shakespeare,  Goethe,  Kant,  and 
Emperor  William  the  Great.  These  he  sought  out  and  endowed 
with  his  grace  to  accomplish  splendid,  imperishable  results  for 
their  people,  in  their  intellectual  and  physical  provinces,  according 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  123 

to  his  will.  How  often  my  grandfather  pointed  out  that  he  was 
only  an  instrument  in  the  Lord's  hands. 

The  achievements  of  the  great  intellects  of  the  world  were  do- 
nated by  God  to  the  nations  in  order  that  they  might  through  their 
aid  make  further  progress,  and  might  feel  their  way  farther  and 
farther  through  the  labyrinths  which  yet  remained  uninvestigated. 
Unquestionably  God  did  "reveal"  himself  differently  to  the  differ- 
ent races  according  to  their  position  and  rank  in  the  scale  of  civil- 
isation, and  he  does  the  same  to-day.  For  just  as  we  may  be  over- 
whelmed by  the  grandeur,  magnificence,  and  might  of  nature  when 
we  look  upon  it  and  wonder  while  so  doing  at  the  grandeur  of  God 
who  is  revealed  in  it,  so  assuredly  are  we  justified,  when  we  con- 
template the  grand  and  splendid  deeds  that  a  man  or  a  nation  has 
accomplished,  in  wondering  with  gratitude  at  the  splendor  of  the 
revelation  made  by  God  in  them.  He  works  directly  upon  us  and 
among  us. 

The  second  form  of  revelation,  the  more  religious,  is  that  which 
leads  to  the  manifestation  of  our  Lord.  It  was  introduced  with 
Abraham,  slow  but  forward  looking  and  omniscient,  for  humanity 
was  lost  without  it.  Now  begins  the  most  astonishing  activity  of 
God's  revelation.  Abraham's  race  and  the  peoples  developing  from 
it  regard  faith  in  one  God  as  their  holiest  possession,  and,  it  fol- 
lows, hold  fast  to  it  with  ironlike  consistency.  It  is  their  duty  to 
foster  and  cherish  it.  Split  up  during  their  Egyptian  captivity^ 
the  divided  elements  were  again  welded  together  by  Moses,  ever 
trying  to  hold  fast  to  their  monotheism.  It  was  the  direct  inter- 
vention of  God  that  caused  the  rejuvenation  of  this  people,  thus 
proved  through  centuries,  till  the  Messiah,  heralded  by  prophets 
and  psalmists,  finally  appeared,  the  greatest  revelation  of  God  in 
the  world,  for  he  appeared  in  the  son  himself.  Christ  is  God,  God 
in  human  form.  He  redeemed  us  and  inspires,  entices  us  to  follow 
him.  We  feel  his  fire  burning  in  us.  His  sympathy  strengthens 
us.  His  discontent  destroys  us.  But  also  his  intercession  saves 
us.  Conscious  of  victory,  building  solely  upon  his  world,  we  go 
through  labor,  ridicule,  sorrow,  misery,  and  death,  for  we  have  in 
him  God's  revealed  word,  and  he  never  lies. 

That  is  my  view  of  these  matters. 

For  us  of  the  Evangelical  Denomination  the  Word  has,  through 
Luther,  been  made  our  all,  and  as  a  good  theologian  Delitzsch 
should  not  have  forgotten  that  our  great  Luther  taught  us  to  sing 
and  believe  ■ 


124  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

"Inviolate  the  Word  let  stand." 

It  is  to  me  self-evident  that  the  Old  Testament  contains  many 
sections  which  are  of  a  purely  human  and  historical  nature,  and  are 
not  God's  revealed  word.  These  are  merely  historical  descriptions 
of  incidents  of  all  kinds  which  happen  in  the  political,  religious, 
moral,  and  intellectual  life  of  this  people. 

The  legislative  act  on  Sinai,  for  example,  can  be  only  regarded 
as  symbolically  inspired  by  God.  When  Moses  had  to  reburnish 
well  known  paragraphs  of  the  law,  perhaps  derived  from  the  code 
of  Hammurabi,  in  order  to  incorporate  and  bind  them  into  the 
loose,  weak  fabric  of  his  people,  here  the  historian  can  perhaps 
construe  from  the  sense  or  wording  a  connection  with  the  laws  of 
Hammurabi,  the  friend  of  Abraham.  That  is  perhaps  logically 
correct.  But  that  will  never  disguise  the  fact  that  God  incited 
Moses  thereto  and  in  so  far  revealed  himself  to  the  people  of  Israel. 

Accordingly  it  is  my  opinion,  that  henceforward  in  his  lectures 
before  our  society  it  will  be  better  for  our  good  Professor  to  let 
matters  of  religion  alone.  On  the  other  hand,  he  may  depict  un- 
disturbed the  relation  which  the  religion,  customs,  etc.  of  the  Baby- 
lonians bear  to  those  of  the  Old  Testament. 

For  me  the  following  conclusions  result  from  the  foregoing 
discussions. 

i.   I  believe  in  the  one  and  only  God. 

2.  We  human  beings  need  a  form  in  order  to  teach  his  exist- 
ence, especially  for  our  children. 

3.  This  has  hitherto  been  the  Old  Testament.  The  present 
version  of  this  will  be  possibly  and  substantially  modified  under  the 
influence  of  research  through  inscriptions  and  excavations.  That 
does  not  matter.  Neither  does  it  matter  that  much  of  the  nimbus 
of  the  chosen  people  will  thereby  disappear.  The  kernel  of  the 
contents  of  the  Old  Testament  will  remain  always  the  same, — God 
and  his  works. 

Religion  has  never  been  the  result  of  science,  but  the  pouring 
out  of  the  heart  and  being  of  man  from  intercourse  with  God. 
With  cordial  thanks  and  greetings, 

Your  Faithful  Friend, 

Wilhelm,  I.  R. 

P.  S. — You  may  make  the  utmost  use  of  these  lines.  Let  all 
who  are  interested  read. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  125 


PROFESSOR    HARNACK    ON    THE    EMPEROR'S  ATTITUDE  TOWARD 

"BABEL  AND  BIBLE." 

The  Emperor  has  spoken,  in  order  to  express  his  position 
without  ambiguity  in  an  historico-theological  dispute.  This  is 
something  new,  but  in  view  of  all  the  circumstances  the  Emperor's 
decision  is  quite  easily  explained.  The  opinion  was  likely  to  be- 
come widespread,  had  indeed  become  widespread,  that  the  Em- 
peror occupied  the  same  theological  standpoint  as  Dr.  Delitzsch. 
Not  wishing  to  permit  this  misunderstanding  to  continue,  the  Em- 
peror wrote  as  the  public  has  read. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  scholars  there  was,  indeed,  no  real 
controversy.  It  has  long  been  known  that  a  portion  of  the  myths 
and  legends  of  the  Old  Testament,  together  with  important  ele- 
ments of  ancient  Israelitish  civilisation,  had  their  origin  in  Baby- 
lon. It  was  equally  beyond  question  that  this  fact  is  fatal  to  the 
current  notion  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament.  For  the 
refutation  of  this  belief  there  was  no  need  of  reference  to  Babylon : 
a  hundred  other  observed  facts  had  contributed  to  destroy  it. 

But  the  knowledge  of  these  facts  had  not  become  common 
property.  However,  the  theologians  cannot  be  held  to  blame  for 
this.  They  had  done  their  duty  toward  spreading  the  information 
in  books  and  pamphlets  and  lectures.  Our  German  literature  points 
with  pride  to  a  work  of  such  eminence  as  Wellhausen's  History  of 
Israel',  it  appeals  to  all  educated  people  and  is  classic  in  form  and 
content.  And  beside  it  stand  a  half  dozen  other  excellent  works, 
each  of  which  gives  full  and  accessible  information  regarding  Old 
Testament  literature  and  history.  But  Church  and  School  have 
been  in  league  to  suppress  this  knowledge  by  excluding  it  from 
their  domain.  And  indeed  they  are  not  alone  to  blame.  Indolence 
and  fear  have  done  their  share. 

To  Delitzsch's  lectures  is  due  the  credit  for  the  fact  that  we 
now  hear  preached  from  the  house-tops  what  before  was  but  like  a 
voice  in  the  wilderness.  "Credit,"  indeed,  is  scarcely  the  word ; 
it  is  due  .to  the  force  of.  circumstances.  But  we  do  not  need  to 
weigh  the  individual  credit  for  the  result ;  we  hail  with  gratitude 
the  fact  that  Delitzsch  has  given  wide  currency  to  a  more  correct 
view  of  the  Old  Testament. 

But  has  he  in  fact  done  this?  Unquestionably  he  has  removed 
a  great  error :  the  belief  that  the  materials  of  the  Old  Testament 


126  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

are  all  original.  But  how  little  does  the  material  amount  to  in  the 
history  of  religion  and  of  the  spirit!  If  to-day  some  one  should  go 
before  the  public  and  announce  to  it:  "Gentlemen,  I  come  to  re- 
relieve  you  from  a  great  error ;  you  have  hitherto  believed  that 
Goethe's  I^aust  was  an  original  work,  while  in  fact  it  is  only  a  recent 
secondary  product ;  for  the  entire  material  of  it  is  found  in  a  popu- 
lar legend  of  the  sixteenth  century," — what  would  be  the  reply  to 
him?  He  would  be  laughed  to  scorn,  and  Delitzsch  would  join  in 
the  laugh. 

Without  doubt  he  is  very  far  from  trying  to  determine  the 
value  of  the  Old  Testament  religion  on  the  ground  of  its  depend- 
ence upon  Babylon,  but  in  my  opinion  he  has  not  done  enough  to 
prevent  the  establishment  of  a  false  conception  of  the  matter  in  his 
hearers  and  readers.  This  public  is  very  far  from  conceding  to  the 
prophets  and  the  psalmists  what  it  concedes  without  hesitation  to 
a  Goethe.  Furthermore,  for  the  very  reason  that  there  has  pre- 
vailed hitherto  a  notion  of  the  supernatural  character  of  the  Old 
Testament,  the  pendulum  of  opinion,  following  a  familiar  psycho- 
logical law,  now  swings  to  the  opposite  extreme.  To-day  it  is  the 
talk  of  the  streets  that  "the  Old  Testament  no  longer  amounts  to 
much." 

At  this  point  the  Emperor  enters  the  arena  with  his  letter. 
But  meantime  the  chasm  had  become  deeper.  As  the  result  of  an 
interview  the  monarch  had  become  convinced  that  Professor  De- 
litzsch did  not  hold  the  orthodox  belief  regarding  the  divinity  of 
Christ,  and  that  the  examination  of  the  Old  Testament  among  other 
reasons  prevented  his  holding  this  belief.  In  the  face  of  this  nega- 
tive conviction  the  Emperor  wished  to  leave  no  doubt  regarding 
his  own  positive  conviction. 

We  must  thank  him  for  the  way  in  which  he  did  this.  It  is 
true,  the  reproof  which  Delitzsch  has  received  cannot  fail  to  be 
painful  to  him,  and  he  must  feel  deeply  his  being  excluded  from 
the  domain  of  theology  upon  which  the  Emperor  himself  now  en- 
ters. But  that  was  surely  not  the  intention  :  the  Emperor  means 
to  say,  and  he  is  right  in  so  saying,  that  Delitzsch's  authority  as  an 
Assyriologist  does  not  also  extend  to  his  theological  doctrines.  Be- 
yond this  he  concedes  absolute  freedom  to  the  convictions  of  the 
scholar. 

Absolute  freedom, — this  sentiment  shines  forth  from  the  Em- 
peror's utterances  with  pleasing  and  inspiring  effect.  He  has  no 
thought  of  issuing  a  peremptory  decree ;  the  whole  letter  is  per- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  127 

meated  with  the  spirit  of  freedom.  He  knows  very  well  that  com- 
mands are  out  of  place  in  connection  with  these  delicate  and  sacred 
matters,  and  he  knows  that  theology  cannot  pass  by  these  ques- 
tions, but  that  they  must  be  treated  most  seriously,  with  liberty 
and  courage.     He  leaves  them  to  theological  science. 

But  still  more  pleasing  is  the  effect  of  the  positiveness,  the 
frankness  and  warmth  with  which  the  Emperor  himself  takes  his 
stand  in  these  matters.  What  he  has  written  is  from  the  depth  of 
his  heart ;  he  utters  it  just  as  he  thinks  and  feels  it,  and  he  has 
written  it  down  like  one  who  is  trying  to  take  account  of  his  own 
mind,  with  all  the  minute  marks  of  individual  feeling  and  individ- 
ual experience.  He  feels  his  soul  bound  to  Christ,  and  he  is  not 
willing  to  speak  of  religion  without  praising  him  and  confessing  his 
allegiance  to  him. 

The  Emperor's  utterance  professes  to  be  a  personal  confession 
of  faith,  and  as  such  it  deserves  respect.  But  it  would  certainly 
not  be  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  imperial  author  if  we 
were  to  give  no  other  response  than  silence.  In  the  Evangelical 
Church  the  ultimate  and  supreme  questions  are  always  open  to  dis- 
cussion, and  each  generation  must  work  out  the  answers  anew. 
Our  spiritual  life  also  depends  upon  crises  and  finds  its  very  vitality 
in  them.  How  should  we  be  silent  when  the  profoundest  and  most 
solemn  questions  challenge  us  in  this  form? 

All  Evangelical  Christians  will  frankly  and  joyfully  agree  with 
the  final  sentence  of  the  Emperor's  letter:  "Religion  was  never 
the  result  of  science,  but  an  overflow  of  the  heart  and  being  of  man 
from  his  intercourse  with  God."  Theology  subscribes  to  this  prop- 
osition ;  it  knows  right  well  that  it  does  not  work  creatively,  but 
merely  tries  to  follow  reverently  in  thought  something  that  already 
is. 

Not  less  will  be  the  general  accord  with  the  Emperor's  convic- 
tion that  religion  must  have  forms,  so  that  we  may  explain  our- 
selves and  give  mutual  instruction,  but  that  these  forms  cannot  be 
imperishable.  I  think  that  even  Professor  Delitzsch  has  attained 
the  capital  feature  of  his  purposes  in  the  concession  that  the  cus- 
tomary forms  of  the  current  school  traditions  regarding  the  Old 
Testament  are  in  urgent  need  of  change. 

But  questions  and  disputes  will  arise  chiefly  in  connection  with 
two  convictions  expressed  by  his  majesty :  the  theory  of  a  twofold 
revelation,  and  the  divinity  of  Christ.  And  the  two  are  closely  con- 
nected. 


128  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

The  difference  between  faith  and  science  in  connection  with 
religion  becomes  clear  immediately  on  the  mention  of  the  word 
"revelation."  Science  in  the  strictest  sense  cannot  admit  the  no- 
tion at  all,  finding  it  too  transcendental.  On  the  other  hand,  faith 
cannot  permit  itself  to  be  deprived  of  revelation.  But  in  the  course 
of  development  there  has  been  an  approach  between  the  two  sides. 
Aside  from  the  reverent  contemplation  of  the  universe  the  Evan- 
gelical faith  has  ceased  to  recognise  revelation  through  any  medi- 
ums but  persons.  The  whole  lower  series  of  alleged  revelations 
has  been  put  aside.  There  are  no  revelations  by  means  of  things. 
The  Emperor's  letter  also  took  this  ground  :  the  revelations  of  God 
in  his  humanity  are  persons,  especially  great  persons.  Now  in  so 
far  as  great  personages  have  their  mystery  even  for  science  in  their 
individuality  and  power,  in  so  far  harmony  is  established  between 
faith  and  science.  But  the  recognition  by  me  and  others  of  these 
personages  as  revelations  of  God  is  an  act  of  subjective  experience 
which  no  science  can  either  create  or  prevent. 

But  upon  this  common  ground  the  Emperor's  letter  distin- 
guishes two  sorts  of  revelation  :  a  general  one,  and  a  peculiarly  re- 
ligious one.  There  is  a  great  element  of  strength  in  this  distinc- 
tion, for  it  brings  out  vigorously  the  fact  that  there  is  no  more  seri- 
ous concern  for  man  than  his  relation  to  God,  and  that  everything 
is  dependent  on  this  relationship.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the 
thinking  mind  cannot  possibly  repose  in  the  assumption  of  two 
revelations  running,  as  it  were,  parallel  with  each  other,  and  the 
imperial  letter  has  given  utterance  to  this  observation  by  putting 
Abraham  into  both  categories.  Accordingly  there  cannot  be  two 
revelations, — for  religion,  moral  force,  and  knowledge  stand  in  most 
intimate  union, — but  one  revelation,  the  bearers  of  which  were,  and 
still  are,  very  different  in  nature  and  greatness,  calling  and  function. 
If  Jesus  Christ  loses  nothing  of  his  individuality  and  uniqueness 
when  he  is  placed  in  the  series  with  Moses,  Isaiah,  and  the  psalm- 
ists, neither  does  he  suffer  by  the  comparison  when  we  see  him  in 
the  line  with  Socrates  and  Plato  and  the  others  who  are  mentiond 
in  the  Emperor's  letter.  The  religious  conception  of  history  must 
in  the  last  analysis  be  one  and  the  same :  it  must  be  mankind  led 
forth  by  God  out  of  the  state  of  primitive  nature,  out  of  error  and 
sin,  and  saved  and  brought  into  the  estate  of  the  children  of  God. 
Here,  however,  we  make  reservation  of  the  fact  that  the  divine  his- 
tory finds  its  specific  line  in  ancient  times  in  Israel. 

The   Christian   Church   must   reject   every   estimate   of   Christ 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  .  129 

which  ignores  the  difference  between  him  and  other  masters.  He 
himself,  his  disciples  and  the  history  of  the  world  have  spoken  so 
distinctly  on  this  point  that  there  should  be  no  room  for  doubt,  and 
he  still  speaks  to  us  in  his  word  as  distinctly  as  to  his  disciples  of 
old.  But  it  may  and  must  be  questioned  whether  the  inflexible 
formula  "divinity  of  Christ"  is  the  correct  one.  He  himself  never 
used  it,  but  chose  other  designations,  and  it  is  at  least  very  doubt- 
ful whether  any  of  his  disciples  ever  uttered  it.  And  the  early 
Church,  too,  did  not  speak  directly  of  the  divinity  of  Christ,  but 
always  of  his  divinity  and  humanity.  "God-man,"  therefore,  is  the 
only  correct  formula  even  in  the  intent  of  the  ancient  dogma.  In 
this  phrase  we  have  almost  restored  the  mystery  which  according 
to  the  will  of  Christ  himself  was  to  remain  in  this  matter.  He 
made  no  secret  of  the  fact  that  he  was  the  Lord  and  Saviour,  and 
his  disciples  were  expected  to  observe  and  experience  the  fact  in 
his  words  and  deeds.  But  how  his  relation  to  the  Father  arose, 
he  withheld  from  us  and  kept  to  himself.  In  my  historical  opinion, 
therefore,  and  according  to  my  feeling  in  the  matter,  even  the  for- 
mula "man  and  God"  (God-man-hood)  is  not  beyond  criticism, 
inasmuch  as  it  has  already  begun  to  intrude  upon  a  mystery  into 
which  we  are  not  permitted  to  look. 

But  the  formula  may  be  allowed  to  stand,  because  at  bottom  it 
does  not  pretend  to  explain  anything,  but  only  protects  the  extra- 
ordinary from  profanation,  just  as  does  the  expression  "Son  of 
God."  The  Pauline  expression  "God  was  in  Christ"  seems  to  me 
to  be  the  last  word  that  we  are  permitted  to  speak  in  this  matter, 
now  that  we  have  liberated  ourselves  slowly  and  painfully  from  the 
erroneous  notion  of  ancient  philosophers  that  we  can  penetrate  the 
mysteries  of  God  and  Nature,  humanity  and  history. 

"If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments;"  "In  this  shall 
every  one  recognise  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  that  ye  love  one  an- 
another," — it  is  more  important  to  meditate  upon  these  words  and 
try  to  live  up  to  them  than  to  put  the  incomprehensible  and  the 
venerable  into  formulas.  The  time  is  coming  and  even  now  is  near 
when  Evangelical  Christians  will  join  hands  sincerely  in  the  con- 
fession of  Jesus  Christ  as  their  master  and  in  the  determination  to 
follow  his  words,  and  our  Catholic  brethren  will  then  be  obliged  to 
join  with  us  to  the  same  end.  The  burden  of  a  long  history  of  mis- 
understandings, of  formulas  that  bristle  like  swords,  of  tears  and 
blood,  weighs  upon  us,  but  in  it  there  is  also  preserved  to  us  a  pre- 
cious inheritance.      The   two   seem   to  be  united  inextricably,  but 


130  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

nevertheless  they  are  gradually  separating,  although  the  "Let  there 
be  light"  has  not  yet  been  spoken  across  this  chaos.  Frankness 
and  courage,  honesty  with  ourselves,  freedom  and  love, — these  are 
the  levers  which  will  lift  the  burden.  And  the  Emperor's  letter 
also  is  intended  to  aid  in  this  lofty  undertaking. 

M.   HALEVY'S  OPINION. 

M.  Joseph  Halevy,  the  French  coryphaeus  of  Oriental  research, 
born  December  15,  1827,  says  about  Babel  and  Bible:  "Sincerity 
nevertheless  compels  me  to  point  out  certain  inept,  inaccurate,  and 
redundant  statements  which  disfigure  this  otherwise  beautiful  lec- 
ture. The  meaning  of  Numbers  vi.  26  (page  29,  Babel  a?id  Bible) 
is  perfectly  clear  in  itself  and  parallel  to  the  passage  in  Job  xxii. 
26.  The  Babylonian  form  of  expression  adds  absolutely  nothing 
new.  There  is  not  a  vestige  of  a  proof  that  the  Ur  of  Kasdi'm,  the 
home  of  Abraham,  is  identical  with  the  city  of  Ur  of  Babylonia 
(page  4);  the  appellation  Kasdim  designates  in  the  Pentateuch 
1  territory  which  is  exclusively  Aramean' ;  Babylonia  is  called  there 
'the  land  of  Sincar.'  To  make  a  princess  of  Aryan  blood  and  blond 
complexion  out  of  the  wife  of  Sardanapalus,  of  whom  we  have  only 
an  old  and  hastily  executed  sketch;  to  call  the  converted  Jew  Jean 
Astruc  ' zealously  orthodox'  (page  41);  to  attribute  to  the  Koran 
the  beautiful  legends  of  the  Talmud,  and  to  pass  over  almost  in 
silence  the  magnificent  results  of  the  French  excavations  in  Assyria 
and  Babylonia,  is  carrying  cleverness  to  an  unjustified  extreme. 
The  picture  (page  48)  of  the  First  Sin,  borrowed  from  M£nant, 
and  the  comparison  of  the  destruction  of  Rahab,  a  name  for  Egypt 
(Psalms  lxxiv.  13,  lxxxix.  11;  Job  xxvi.  12),  with  the  splitting  in 
twain  of  the  body  of  the  chaotic  goddess  Tiamat  by  Marduk,  who 
made  of  it  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  will  not  stand  before  exami- 
nation. In  the  first  picture,  the  man  and  the  woman  who  are  seated 
opposite  each  other  on  the  two  sides  cf  the  tree  are  extending 
toward  each  other  their  hands  and  are  not  gathering  the  fruit  that 
hangs  upon  the  lower  branches  of  the  tree  near  their  feet.  And 
furthermore,  the  undulating  line  behind  the  woman  is  not  beyond 
all  doubt  a  serpent.  The  same  disposition  to  rest  content  with 
superficial  appearances  shows  itself  in  the  interpretation  which  is 
put  upon  Figure  58,  page  64,  which  has  no  points  of  resemblance 
with  the  chariot  of  Ezekiel. 

"Must  it  be  repeated  for  the  tenth  time  that  the  institution  of 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  131 

Sunday  rest  is  nowhere  mentioned  in  cuneiform  literature?  The 
abstinences  prescribed  for  the  seventh,  fourteenth,  nineteenth  (an 
awkward  date  omitted  by  the  lecturer),  twenty-first,  and  twenty- 
eighth  days  of  the  second  Elud,  which  is  an  exceptional  month, 
have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  Jewish  Sabbath? 

"Absolutely  fantastical  also  is  the  attribution  of  the  head  of  a 
patesi  or  priest-king  preserved  in  the  Berlin  Museum  to  the  imagi- 
nary and  undiscoverable  race  of  Sumerians  who,  although  the  origi- 
nators of  the  great  Babylonian  civilisation,  are  said  to  have  been 
unable  to  count  beyond  60  !  This  error  is  an  old  one ;  the  number 
6  could  never  have  formed  a  primitive  multiple ;  the  first  series 
obtained  by  actual  counting,  which  is  based  on  the  fingers  of  the 
hand,  finds  its  natural  termination  at  the  number  3  ;  Delitzsch  has 
confounded  instinctive  counting  with  the  artificial  or  scientific  mode 
of  computation  by  6o's,  which  has  its  advantages.  We  must  deplore 
indeed  the  sad  lot  of  these  great  allophylian  creators  of  the  most 
ancient  civilisation  who  have  left  as  a  witness  of  their  vanished 
glory  only  a  single  head  of  stone,  fac-similies  of  which  can  be  found 
by  the  hundreds  in  real  flesh  and  blood  in  the  ghettos  of  Podolia 
and  Morocco. 

"But  the  acme  is  reached  in  the  following.  Delitzsch  affirmed 
in  his  Paradise  that  the  name  Yahveh  came  from  the  Sumerian  Y 
and  the  consonants  hvh.  He  now  declares, — and  this  is  the  culmi- 
nation of  his  lecture, — that  he  has  found  on  three  Babylonian  tab- 
lets names  belonging  to  Canaanites  established  in  Babylon,  and  com- 
posed of  the  element  Yahveh  (page  61).  Now,  the  spelling  of  the 
second  form,  ya-u-um-il  (written  an),  signifies  in  good  Babylonian 
'Yaum  [with  mimmation  for  iau  =  iam-mu,  Okeanos,  god  of  the  sea] 
is  god.'  The  first  form,  written  ia-ah-pi-il,  exhibits  a  general  Se- 
mitic name  Yahpeel  (El  covers,  protects,  ^HPrC  analogous  to  ?85?r£). 
The  possible  reading  Yahveh-ill  would  be  equivalent  to  the  Aramean 
?NVT£,  '  God  exists/  and  would  not  necessarily  signify  'Yahveh  is 
god.'  In  no  case  could  a  name  like  Yahveh-el  be  Canaanite-Phce- 
nician ;  for  these  people  express  the  verb  to  be  by  vot  and  not  by 

,m 

"With  so  alluring  a  subject  and  before  an  audience  chosen 
from  among  the  highest  intellects  of  the  nation,  it  would  have  been 
more  prudent  to  limit  oneself  to  established  facts,  and  not  to  offer 
ephemeral  conjectures  which  can  serve  no  other  purpose  than  to 
dazzle  superficial  and  inquisitive  minds. " 


132  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


CORNILL  ON   "BABEL  AND  BIBLE." 

"  Babel  and  Bible  offers  nothing  essentially  new  to  Old  Testa- 
ment scholars.  There  is  doubtless  not  a  single  professor  of  Old 
Testament  research  in  any  German  university  that  has  not  already 
told  all  these  things  to  his  students  in  his  lectures  on  Genesis.  And 
Delitzsch  does  not  gainsay  this.  He  maintains  only  that  the  world 
at  large  has  as  yet  heard  very  little  of  the  silent  labors  of  the  As- 
syriologists  and  that  it  is  now  time  for  this  knowledge  to  burst  the 
barriers  of  the  scholars'  study  and  enter  the  broad  path  of  life. 

"If  this  is  to  be  interpreted  as  an  aspersion  upon  us  scholars, 
it  may  be  answered  that  we  have  never  treated  this  knowledge  as 
an  esoteric  doctrine,  and  that  any  one  who  desired  any  information 
about  it  had  ample  opportunity  to  obtain  such,  and  further  that 
there  are  matters  and  problems  in  science  concerning  which  exces- 
sive discretion  is  the  lesser  evil.  Now,  in  the  exercise  of  this  nec- 
essary discretion  Delitzsch  has  been  extremely  chary.  The  im- 
pression that  the  lecture  is  apt  to  make  on  unprofessional  readers 
is  that  the  Bible  and  its  religion  is  to  a  certain  extent  a  mere  off- 
shoot of  Babylonian  heathendom  which  we  have  'in  purer  and 
more  original  form'  in  Babel;  and  this  impression  is  intensified  by 
the  fact  that  Delitzsch  by  his  own  statements  actually  expects  from 
the  results  of  the  Assyrio-Babylonian  excavations  the  advent  of  a 
new  epoch  in  the  interpretation  as  well  as  in  the  understanding  of 
the  Old  Testament.  I  shall  consider  Delitzsch's  statements  under 
this  point  of  view. 

"The  Babylonians  also  had  their  shabattu,  he  says,  and  'there 
can  therefore  be  scarcely  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  in  the  last  re- 
sort we  are. indebted  to  this  ancient  nation  on  the  banks  of  the 
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  for  the  plenitude  of  blessings  that  flows 
from  our  day  of  Sabbath  or  Sunday  rest.'  What  now  was  this 
Babylonian  shabattu}  Not  the  seventh  day  of  each  week,  for  the 
Babylonians  regarded  the  seventh,  fourteenth,  nineteenth,  twenty- 
first,  and  twenty-eighth  calendar  days  of  every  month  as  days  in 
which  no  work  could  be  done;  and  for  what  reason?  For  fear  of 
the  wrath  of  the  gods.  These  were  the  days  that  the  Romans 
called  dies  atri,  and  are  we  now  to  believe  that  these  dies  atri  of  the 
Babylonians,  which  were  inseparably  linked  with  the  dates  of  the 
calendar,  are  our  Biblical  Sabbath?  Never!  The  Sabbath  as  the 
'day  of  the   Lord,'  the  view  that  on  one  day  in  every  week  we 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  133 

should  cast  aside  all  the  trials  and  tribulations  of  our  earthly  life 
and  live  for  God  alone  and  be  happy  in  communion  with  Him,  is 
exclusively  the  property  of  the  Bible,  and  for  the  'plenitude  of 
blessings'  contained  in  it  the  world  is  indebted,  not  to  Babel,  but 
to  Bible. 

"We  have  long  known  that  the  Biblical  story  of  the  Creation 
(Genesis  i. )  reposed  on  a  Babylonian  foundation;  but  the  only 
genuinely  religious  and  imperishable  fact  of  this  history,  the  al- 
mighty God,  creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  speaks  and  it  comes 
to  pass,  who  commands  and  it  is  so,  the  holy  personal  God,  who 
created  man  in  his  own  image  and  entrusted  him  with  the  duties 
attendant  upon  morality  and  a  religious  life,  was  given  to  the 
world,  not  by  Babel,  but  by  Bible. 

"And  how  is  it  with  the  story  of  Paradise  and  the  Fall  of  Man 
(Genesis  ii.  and  iii. )?  Delitzsch  reproduces  on  page  48  the  well- 
known  ancient  Babylonian  clay  cylinder  which  is  said  to  contain  a 
pictorial  representation  of  this  story.  Assyriologists  of  the  stand- 
ing of  Oppert,  M£nant,  Halevy,  and  Tiele  vigorously  contest  this 
interpretation,  even  explaining  the  figures  on  the  cylinder  as  two 
men,  and  are  absolutely  unable  to  recognise  a  serpent  in  the  undu- 
latory  line  in  this  picture.  No  Babylonian  text  corresponding  to 
Genesis  iii.  has  yet  been  discovered,  and  if  the  reader  of  page  38 
of  Delitzsch's  book  imagines  that  the  clay  tablet  there  mentioned 
containing  'the  Babylonian  legend  of  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the 
first  man  forfeited  the  boon  of  immortality'  is  the  Biblical  story  of 
Genesis  iii.,  'in  much  purer  and  more  primitive  form,'  I  have  only 
to  say  that  he  is  sorely  mistaken.  But  even  granting  that  such  is 
the  case  and  that  it  has  been  proved  that  the  Babylonians  had  a 
story  according  to  which  the  first  woman,  tempted  by  the  serpent, 
ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit  and  thereby  brought  sin  and  death  into 
the  world,  it  will  be  distinctly  seen  from  the  picture  that,  leaving 
everything  else  out  of  account,  the  Babylonian  pair  are  clothed,  and 
that  therefore  what  is  perhaps  the  profoundest  and  most  significant 
feature  of  the  story  of  Genesis  iii.  belongs  to  Bible,  and  not  to 
Babel. 

"The  conception  of  angels  is  without  doubt  'characteristically 
Babylonian.'  But  whether  they  are  also  such  in  the  Biblical  sense 
as  so  grandly  expressed  in  Psalms  xci,  verses  11  and  12,  and  in  the 
utterance  of  Jesus,  Matthew  xviii.  10,  is  another  question.  In  the 
Biblical  representations  Babylonian  angels  and  eunuchs  surround 
only  the  throne  of  the  great  king.     And    before  Delitzsch  wrote 


134  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

(page  55)  his  remarks  concerning  the  demons  and  the  devils  which 
he  says  were  possible  only  for  the  ancient  Persian  dualism,  and 
were  so  destined  to  be  committed  forever  and  aye  to  the  obscurity 
of  the  Babylonian  hills  from  which  they  rose,  he  should  have  re- 
called to  mind  the  important  role  which  these  concepts  played  in 
the  religious  life  of  Jesus,  so  that  we  might  be  justified  in  saying 
that  there  are  'still  many  Babylonian  traits  clinging  even  to  the  re- 
ligious thoughts'  of  Jesus.  But  these  concepts  in  the  Bible  are  no 
Parsee  importation ;  for  the  Bible  can  think  of  Satan  and  his  an- 
gels under  no  other  form  than  that  of  creatures  of  God  who  had 
fallen  through  their  own  sins  and  who  stand  thus  on  the  most  essen- 
tial point  in  the  sharpest  imaginable  contrast  with  the  afore-men- 
tioned Persian  dualism.  And  does  Delitzsch  mean  to  say,  when 
he  affirms  that  the  5th,  6th,  and  7th  commandments  occur  'in  pre- 
cisely the  same  order'  in  the  Babylonian  records,  that  Moses,  or 
whoever  else  composed  the  Decalogue,  sought  advice  from  Babel, 
in  the  face  of  the  fact  that  the  order  of  the  treasures  which  man 
seeks  to  protect,  namely,  life,  family,  and  property,  could  not  pos- 
sibly be  more  natural  and  obvious,  and  that  the  humane  Baby- 
lonian commandments  have  also  their  parallel  in  the  Egyptian 
Book  of  the  Dead? 

"And  how  do  matters  stand  with  the  Biblical  problems  con- 
cerning which  we  are  led  to  believe  that  Babel  only  can  explain 
Bible?  Delitzsch  sees  in  the  Bible  Amraphel  of  Genesis  xiv.  the 
great  Babylonian  king  Hammurabi,  the  founder  of  the  old  Baby- 
lonian kingdom.  I  shall  not  gainsay  that  this  identification  is  pos- 
sible;  and  since  Amraphel  was  'the  contemporary  of  Abraham'  we 
shall  certainly  be  glad  to  reckon  the  period  of  Abraham  by  that  of 
Hammurabi.  But  if  we  consult  the  Assyriologists  we  shall  find 
that  in  fixing  the  chronological  place  of  the  fifty-five  years  of  the 
reign  of  this  king  they  vary  between  2394-2339  B.  C.  and  1923- 
1868  B.  C,  with  all  the  intermediate  possibilities.  From  the  point 
of  view  of  method,  therefore,  is  it  not  better  to  follow  the  plan  of 
the  Assyriologist  Hommel,  who,  convinced  of  the  correctness  of 
the  equation  Amraphel  =  Hammurabi,  as  of  the  historical  authen- 
ticity of  the  events  narrated  in  Genesis  xiv.,  starts,  contrariwise, 
from  the  Bible  and  moulds  the  Babylonian  chronology  until  it  ac- 
cords with  the  Biblical? 

"Delitzsch's  statements  (page  61)  concerning  the  three  clay 
tablets  containing  the  name  of  Yahveh  are  quite  new.  I  cannot 
revive  here,  much  less  resolve,  the  question  of  the  original  mono- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  135 

theism  of  the  Semites,  or  at  least  of  'the  old  Canaanite  races  which 
settled  in  Babylonia  2500  years  before  Christ,  and  to  whom  Ham- 
murabi himself  belonged';  but  I  have  to  confess  that  I  cherish  the 
gravest  doubts  concerning  the  correctness  of  the  meaning  of  these 
tablets,  or  at  any  rate  of  the  interpretation  of  the  names  Ya-ah-ve- 
ilu  and  Ya-hu-u?n-ilu.  Of  names  containing  the  proper  names  of  a 
god,  and  asserting  additionally  that  this  god  is  God,  there  are  no 
instances  whatever  among  the  thousands  of  Semitic  proper  names 
which  we  know.  Even  the  well-known  Biblical  Joel  does  not  mean 
'Yahveh  is  God.'  But  even  granting  that  these  old  'Canaanites' 
did  possess  the  theophorous  name  Yahu,  is  this  any  proof  that  they 
also  possessed  the  Biblical  concept  of  Yahveh?  How  does  it  hap- 
pen that  of  these  'monotheistic'  kings  one  is  called  Sinmu-ballit 
which  means  'Sin  gives  life,'  and  another  is  Samsu-iluna,  which 
means  'the  sun  is  our  god.' 

"There  are  also  other  evidences  in  Babel  and  Bible  that  De- 
litzsch's  statements  must  be  accepted  with  reserve.  We  read  on 
page  50:  'In  the  Book  of  Job  (xxiv.  18),  which  appears  to  be  ex- 
tremely conversant  with  Babylonian  modes  of  thought,  we  find 
comparisons  drawn  (xxiv.  18  et  seq. )  between  the  arid,  waterless 
desert  which  is  reserved  for  those  that  have  sinned,  and  the  garden 
with  fresh,  clear  water  which  is  reserved  for  the  pious.'  I  believe 
that  I  also  am  tolerably  well  acquainted  with  the  Book  of  Job,  and 
I  was  consequently  not  a  little  astonished  at  reading  these  words, 
for  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  absolutely  nothing  of  the  kind  in  Job 
xxiv.  18,  and  if  Delitzsch  possibly  introduced  this  meaning  into 
the  passage  conjecturally,  it  was  entirely  inadmissible  on  his  part 
to  deal  with  it  as  with  something  that  had  been  absolutely  estab- 
lished. 

"Again,  the  passage  on  pages  51-52  concerning  Mahomet's 
Paradise, — namely:  'Two  and  seventy  of  these  Paradisian  maidens 
may  every  god-fearing  man  choose  unto  himself,  in  addition  to  the 
wives  that  he  possessed  on  earth,  provided  he  cares  to  have  them 
(and  the  good  man  will  always  cherish  desire  for  the  good),' — is 
not  to  be  found  at  all  in  the  Koran,  but  has  been  taken  from  E.  W. 
Lane's  Customs  and  Manners,  part  I.,  page  59,  of  the  German  trans- 
lation. 

"We  are  delighted  and  proud  that  Germany  also  is  at  last 
taking  an  independent  part  in  the  excavations  in  the  valley  of  the 
Euphrates.  But  in  entering  upon  this  undertaking  it  is  only  ful- 
filling a  national  obligation  of  honor  toward  the  educated  world, 


136  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

and  no  one  could  entertain  greater  sympathy  with  these  labors  or 
wish  them  greater  success  than  we  theological  investigators  of  the 
Old  Testament,  for  we  know  the  light  which  will  be  shed  from  that 
source  upon  the  object  of  our  studies.  But  we  are  far  from  be- 
lieving that  a  new  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament  will  ever  be 
brought  to  pass  by  these  investigations,  nay  we  are  firmly  con- 
vinced that  in  the  struggle  between  Babel  and  Bible  the  Bible  will 
ultimately  come  out  victorious.  Gunkel  spoke  for  us  all  when  he 
said : 

"  'How  incomparably  superior  the  Hebrew  legend  is  to  the 
Babylonian  !  Should  we  not  really  be  delighted  at  having  found 
in  this  Babylonian  parallel  a  criterion  for  estimating  the  real  sub- 
limity of  the  conception  of  God  in  Israel, — a  conception  of  so  much 
intrinsic  power  that  it  can  purge  and  recast  in  such  a  manner  ma- 
terial so  repellent  and  outlandish?  And  this  also  we  may  say,  that 
the  Babylonian  legend  strongly  impresses  us  by  its  barbaric  charac- 
ter, whereas  the  Hebrew  legend  is  far  nearer  and  more  human  to 
us.  Even  granting  that  we  have  been  accustomed  from  childhood 
to  the  Hebrew  legends,  we  yet  learn  from  this  example  that  in  our 
whole  world  of  ideas  we  owe  far  more  to  these  Hebrews  than  to  the 
Babylonians." 

The  same  theologian  wrote  to  the  editors  of  The  Open  Court 
after  the  appearance  of  Professor  Delitzsch's  First  Lecture  as  fol- 
lows:  "You  are  to  be  commended  for  having  made  the  American 
public  acquainted  with  Delitzsch's  Babel  and  Bible,  for  the  little 
book  contains  an  extraordinary  amount  of  stimulating  and  instruc- 
tive matter,  and  it  has  been  cleverly  constructed,  so  as  to  appeal 
at  once  to  the  great  reading  public.  Yet  while  there  is  no  direct 
polemical  attack  made  in  it  against  the  Bible,  you  will  nevertheless 
understand  that  we  theologians  have  witnessed  the  appearance  of 
this  essay  and  the  great  sensation  which  it  has  made  with  solici- 
tude, nay  even  with  distress ;  for  the  impression  which  it  is  inevi- 
tably destined  to  make  on  the  unprepared  reader  is  one  that  we 
could  never  wish  to  see." 

A  ROMAN  CATHOLIC  VERDICT. 

The  Catholic  News  of  New  York,  a  journal  "recommended  by 
the  Catholic  hierarchy  and  the  clergy  as  a  model  family  paper," 
takes  the  following  view  of  the  situation:  "The  school  of  which 
Professor  Delitzsch  is  a  distinguished  member  is  by  no  means  pre- 
occupied about  establishing  the  veracity  of  the  Bible.     The  gene- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  137 

ral  purport  of  this  lecture  is  to  indicate  that  the  Bible  has  borrowed 
almost  all  its  religious  and  moral  elements  from  the  pagan  Assyrians 
and  Babylonians,  and  that  it  is  merely  a  human  compilation.  The 
success  which  has  attended  the  propagation  of  this  view  is  to  be  seen 
in  the  total  disintegration  of  all  Protestant  belief.  It  is  the  climax 
of  irony  that  the  sects  which  broke  away  from  the  Catholic  Church 
with  the  cry,  'A  free  Bible;  the  Bible  is  the  sole  rule  of  faith,' 
are  to-day  giving  up  all  supernatural  belief  because  they  have  lost 
faith  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  consequent  upon  the  attacks 
of  the  higher  criticism.  Meanwhile  the  Catholic  Church  stands  un- 
disturbed on  her  old  platform.  The  Catholic  repeats  the  profession 
of  St.  Augustine:  'I  would  not  accept  the  Bible  except  on  the  au- 
thority of  the  Church.'  He  is  confident  that  in  the  long  run,  when 
all  facts  have  been  garnered  and  after  hasty  theories  shall  have 
been  tried  and  found  wanting,  the  light  thrown  by  science  on  all 
the  complications  of  the  Biblical  question  will  serve  to  corroborate 
the  authoritative  teaching  of  the  Catholic  Church,  whose  more  than 
human  prudence  is  nowhere  more  conspicuous  than  in  her  few 
guarded  but  comprehensive  declarations  concerning  the  fact  and 
the  nature  of  inspiration.  Students  who  may  not  have  time  to 
study  larger  volumes  dealing  with  Assyriology  will  find  this  little 
book  a  handy  one  to  consult  for  the  interpretation  given  to  many 
archaeological  discoveries  by  the  representatives  of  the  higher  criti- 
cism." 

ALFRED  JEREMIAS  ON  DELITZSCH.1 

Alfred  Jeremias,  in  an  interesting  pamphlet  bearing  the  title 
Im  Kampfe  um  Babel  und  Bibel,  thoroughly  reviews  the  situation 
and  calls  attention  from  another  point  of  view  to  this  very  topic. 
Confuting  the  expressions  of  fear  that  Assyriological  science  is 
shaking  the  foundations  of  the  sanctuary  of  Holy  Scriptures,  he 
remarks  that  it  is  strange  the  situation  has  been  so  completely  re- 
versed with  years.  In  the  first  periods  of  Assyriological  research, 
the  inscriptions  on  the  excavated  monuments  were  stridently  ad- 
duced as  evidence  in  corroboration  of  the  traditional  views  of  the 
Bible.  It  was  triumphantly  proclaimed  that  now  (Luke  xix.  40) 
the  very  bricks  of  Babylon  cried  out  in  confirmation  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  the  world  should  hold  its  peace.  Exact  copies  of 
the  writings  of   Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  during  their  so- 

IWritten  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.     Extracted  from  The  Open  Court,  Vol.  XVII.,  No.  3,  pp. 
130-132. 


138  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

journ  in  the  desert  were  supposedly  recovered  from  Nabatsean  in- 
scriptions; the  historical  existence  of  Abraham  was  confirmed  by  a 
brick;  and  the  wall  was  actually  discovered  on  which  Belshazzar 
saw  written  the  fateful  words,  Mene  mene  tekel  upharsin  ! 

But  in  Herr  Jeremias's  opinion  the  use  of  Assyriology  as  a 
weapon  of  destructive  criticism  for  the  overthrow  of  the  traditional 
Bible  is  just  as  wicked  as  the  preceding  specimens  of  its  applica- 
tion are  stupid.  One  very  advanced  critic,  cited  by  Jeremias,  goes 
so  far  even  as  to  wish  for  the  time  when  the  bricks  of  Babylon  shall 
compel  a  more  truthful  view  of  the  Old  Testament,  shall  shatter  in 
shards  the  doctrine  of  inspiration,  and  paVe  the  way  for  a  deeper, 
more  spiritual,  and  more  "pious"  conception.  Verily,  Babel  has 
"laid  her  mailed  fist  on  the  Old  Testament. " 

But  we  need  have  no  fear.  Orthodoxy  and  piety  may  yet  lie 
down  in  harmonious  union  with  Assyriology ;  and  Herr  Jeremias, 
who  takes  both  the  strictly  religious  and  the  strictly  scientific  view, 
well  expresses  the  terms  of  the  compromise  as  follows:  "In  so  far 
as  the  Old  Testament  as  a  document  of  God's  education  of  the  hu- 
man race  may  lay  claim  to  being  a  fides  divina,  it  stands  in  no  need 
of  corroboration  by  any  auxiliary  science.  Here  Babel  can  never 
promote  the  comprehension  of  the  Old  Testament,  nor  put  it  to 
hazard  in  any  way,  be  the  philological  and  scientific  imbroglio  what 
it  may.  Any  ten  of  the  marked  passages  of  Luther's  Bible  are  suf- 
ficient to  demonstrate1  how  superior  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment is  to  that  of  Babylon.  But  the  Old  Testament  has  also  its 
human  side, — a  side  so  stupendously  interesting  that  no  literature 
of  antiquity  can  be  mentioned  with  it  in  the  same  breath.  Much 
of  this  remained  obscure  so  long  as  the  historical  and  cultural 
framework  in  which  the  life  of  Israel  was  enacted  was  veiled.  But 
now  the  world  around  about  Canaan  is  flooded  with  light;  we  can 
contemplate  the  people  of  the  Old  Testament  in  their  relationship 
with  the  political  and  cultural  conditions  out  of  which  it  evolved 
and  which  have  exerted  a  determining  influence  upon  its  destinies. 
In  this  domain  cuneiform  research  can  perform  important  services 
for  the  comprehension  of  the  Bible.  But  the  imperishable  jewel 
which  Israel  possesses  will  shine  only  more  brilliantly  under  this 
illumination,  and  likewise  the  fides  humana  upon  which  this  unique 
book  of  literature  rests  its  claims  will  stand  triumphantly  the  ordeal 
of  fire  to  which  it  has  been  subjected." 

IThe  most  significant  passages  of  the  Bible  are  printed  in  Luther's  translation  in  bold-faced 
type. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  139 

There  has  been  little  criticism  of  Delitzsch's  book  from  the 
side  of  the  Assyriologists  proper.  There  are  many  points  on  which 
all  Assyriological  inquirers  do  not  agree,  but  upon  the  whole  it  is 
the  universal  verdict  of  the  Assyriologists  that  Delitzsch's  lecture 
"gives,  so  far  as  the  monuments  are  concerned,  those  facts  that 
may  be  regarded  as  indubitably  established  results  of  cuneiform  in- 
quiry." And  the  advantage  in  the  bout  will  doubtless  also  remain 
with  Delitzsch.  For  in  purely  technical  and  Assyriological  matters 
it  is  with  him,  as  opposed  to  most  of  his  theological  critics,  a  case 
of  Krupp  guns  against  "halberds  and  blunderbusses." 

HIGHER  CRITICISM  AND  THE  EMPEROR. 

BY  DR.   PAUL  CARUS. 
Manager  of  The  Open  Court  Publishing  Co. 

Emperor  William  criticises  Delitzsch  for  "abandoning  the 
standpoint  of  the  strict  historian"  and  "straying  into  religious  and 
historical  conclusions  and  hypotheses  which  are  quite  nebulous  and 
bold."  He  says  that  "Delitzsch  the  theologian  has  run  away  with 
Delitzsch  the  historian." 

The  Emperor  means  to  say  that  in  his  historical  research  work 
Delitzsch  is  carried  away  by  his  liberal  theological  views ;  but  the 
case  is  probably  just  the  reverse.  Professor  Delitzsch,  the  son  of 
an  equally  famous  Hebrew  scholar  and  a  pious  Christian,  was  from 
the  start  an  orthodox  theologian,  and  his  theology  was  modified 
under  the  influence  of  his  historical  investigations.  The  Emperor, 
who  still  clings  to  the  old  conception,  concedes  that  "the  Old  Tes- 
tament contains  many  sections  which  are  of  a  purely  human  and  his- 
torical nature,"  and  goes  even  so  far  as  to  add  that  they  "are  not 
God's  revealed  word."  He  declares  "that  the  legislative  act  on 
Sinai,  for  example,  can  only  be  symbolically  regarded  as  inspired 
of  God."  Apparently  the  Emperor  makes  a  difference  between  the 
Jewish  and  the  Christian  Scriptures,  and  in  this  sense  he  says  : 
"Neither  does  it  matter  that  much  of  the  nimbus  of  the  chosen 
people  will  thereby  disappear." 

The  Emperor's  letter  is  an  important  document  in  the  evolu- 
tion of  religion.  He  is  a  pronounced  upholder  of  militant  and 
pious  Protestantism,  and  his  views  may  be  regarded  as  typical  for 
large  classes  of  all  Protestant  denominations. 

The  struggle  over  Babel  and  Bible  opens  to  the  Christian  laity 
a  period  of  discussion  concerning  the  nature  of  the  Old  Testament 
which  is  bound  to  lead  to  an  investigation  of  the  New  Testament. 


140  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

The  battle  concerning  the  Old  Testament  is  as  good  as  ended. 
Whether  or  not  Delitzsch  is  right  in  his  sundry  contentions  as  to 
the  names  "El"  and  "Yahveh,"  the  identification  of  the  Ruins  of 
Mugheir  with  the  home  of  Abraham,  and  his  interpretation  of  Baby- 
lonian seal-cylinders,  is  quite  indifferent.  The  essential  point  lies 
deeper  and  there  is  no  need  to  conceal  it.  No  one  who  has  investi- 
gated the  subject  will  any  longer  deny  that  the  Old  Testament  is 
the  product  of  an  historical  evolution.  Of  course,  it  is  Jewish,  not 
Babylonian  ;  nevertheless,  the  Babylonian  civilisation  forms  the 
background,  and  many  things  which  were  formerly  believed  to 
have  been  dictated  by  the  Holy  Ghost  are  now  seen  to  be  the  nat- 
ural outcome  of  historical  conditions.  But  on  that  account  the 
nimbus  of  the  chosen  people  will  no  more  disappear  than  the  glory 
of  Homer,  and  Phidias,  and  Pericles,  and  Socrates  can  be  dimmed 
because  we  can  trace  their  greatness  to  conditions  and  understand 
how  they  naturally  grew  and  rose  into  being. 

The  old  narrow  view  cannot  be  abandoned  at  once,  and  many 
intermediate  steps  are  being  taken  which  attempt  compromises.  So 
we  read  for  instance  in  the  interesting  pamphlet  of  Alfred  Jeremias 
that  we  must  grant  the  prevalence  of  a  monotheism  among  the  pa- 
gan nations  long  before  the  rise  of  Israel  as  a  nation.  Hammurabi, 
for  instance,  a  contemporary  of  Abraham  who  lived  more  than  half 
a  millennium  before  Moses,  introduces  his  code  of  laws  with  the 
invocation,  "Thus  speaketh  ILU  SIRU,  i.  e.,  God  the  Supreme." 
"But,"  adds  Professor  Jeremias,  "there  is  this  difference  between 
the  pagan  monotheism  which  can  be  traced  among  all  the  nations, 
and  Hebrew  monotheism,  that  'God  himself  filled  the  latter  with 
his  own  revelation."  In  other  words,  when  Plato  speaks  of  God, 
we  have  to  deal  with  a  purely  human  speculation,  but  when  David 
danced  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord  we  are  expected  to  believe  that 
then  God  was  personally  present. 

The  truth  is,  we  are  familiar  with  the  Hebrew  view,  for  our 
own  belief  has  developed  out  of  it.  We  are  not  so  familiar  with 
pagan  views.  Therefore  when  Zarathustra  speaks  of  Ahura  Mazda, 
the  Lord  Omniscient,  we  admire  his  wisdom,  but  fail  to  find  any 
connection  with  our  own  belief.  The  term  sounds  strange  to  our 
ears  because  it  remains  unassociated  with  our  prayers  and  has  no 
relation  to  the  traditions  that  have  become  sacred  to  us.  It  ap- 
pears as  the  natural  product  of  human  thought,  while  the  Hebrew 
names  Jehovah,  Zebaoth,  Elohim,  even  when  the  context  betrays 
a  pagan  or  even  polytheistic  conception,  are  filled  with  a  sanctity 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  141 

and  a  religious  awe  that  is  to  us  the  evidence  of  a  supernatural 
revelation. 

How  true  this  is  appears  from  the  fact  that  the  original  and 
correct  form  Yahveh,  which  is  not  used  in  our  churches,  does  not 
possess  the  same  sacred  ring  to  our  ears  as  the  corrupted  form  Je- 
hovah. The  name  Yahveh  is  written  in  our  brains,  not  in  our 
hearts.  Yahveh  is  the  name  of  a  deity  with  which  we  have  become 
acquainted  through  the  study  of  Hebrew  literature,  and  we  would 
deem  it  all  but  a  sacrilege,  a  kind  of  paganism,  to  pray  to  Yahveh 
or  to  sing  hymns  to  him.  The  word  Jehovah,  an  unmeaning  and 
positively  nonsensical  combination  of  the  consonants  of  the  word 
"Jahveh, "  with  the  vowels  of  another,  "Adonai,"  was  invented  in 
the  days  of  Luther.  It  was  unknown  before  the  year  1519;  but 
having  slipped  into  our  prayers,  we  still  sing  the  triumphal  strain, 
''Jehovah  is  King." 

When  we  become  acquainted  with  the  monotheism  of  Ham- 
murabi, we  put  him  down  as  a  philosopher,  but  the  God  of  Moses 
is  the  same  God  to  whom  Christians  bend  the  knee.  That  makes 
a  difference.  The  associations  with  our  own  religious  life,  our 
forms  of  worship,  our  prayers,  are  important  for  obvious  psycho- 
logical reasons. 

Through  Delitzsch,  the  Emperor  became  familiar  with  the  re- 
ligion of  ancient  Babylon,  and  he  took  a  liking  to  the  Assyrians. 
The  Assyrian  guards  were  so  much  like  the  Prussian  grenadiers; 
their  kings  were  generals  enjoying  the  display  of  armies  ;  they  be- 
lieved in  the  religion  of  the  mailed  fist  and  bestowed  much  atten- 
tion upon  military  attire,  even  as  to  the  minute  details  of  hair- 
dressing.  While  the  Emperor's  court  barber  patented  the  fashion 
of  an  upturned  mustache  under  the  name  Es  ist  erreicht,  which 
means  "surpassing  all,"  Delitzsch  speaks  of  the  official  style  of 
the  Assyrian  beard  as  Noch  nicht erreicht,  i.  e.,  "still  unsurpassed." 
Whether  Delitzsch  intended  the  joke  or  was  serious  in  making  this 
comparison  we  have  no  means  to  tell.  Certainly  the  similarities 
were  so  many  and  so  striking  that  the  Emperor  felt  the  thrill  of 
kinship  and  showed  himself  willing  to  transfer  the  nimbus  from 
the  chosen  people  to  the  rulers  of  ancient  Babylon. 

Truly,  the  Emperor  is  right  when  he  says  that  "God  reveals 
himself  continuously  in  the  race  of  men."  It  is  a  good  old  doc- 
trine, and  orthodox  too,  that  "God  spoke  not  to  Moses  alone,"  and 
St.  John  the  Evangelist  says  that  "that  was  the  true  light  which 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world." 


142  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

But  it  is  natural  that  Christians  raised  in  the  traditional  dog- 
matism should  shrink  from  the  idea  that  the  New  Testament  (as 
well  as  the  Old)  should  be  conceded  to  be  the  product  of  historical 
conditions.  "Here,"  they  argue,  "Christ  speaks  himself,"  and  (to 
use  the  Emperor's  own  words)  "Christ  is  God,  God  in  human  form 
. .  .  .We  have  in  Him  God's  revealed  word,  and  He  never  lies." 

Certainly,  God  never  lies.  But  do  we  have  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Christ's  own  words?  We  have  reports  about  Jesus,  and  these 
reports  are  as  human  as  are  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Christianity  would  be  in  a  sad  plight  if  the  New  Testament  had  in- 
deed to  be  regarded  as  inspired  verbati?n  by  God.  We  cannot  en- 
ter here  into  details  but  would  suggest  only  that  the  mere  contra- 
victions  in  the  Gospels  alone  force  us  to  look  upon  them  as  human 
compositions. 

The  difficulties  of  regarding  the  Bible  as  literally  the  word  of 
God  are  almost  greater  in  the  New  Testament  than  in  the  Old. 
Any  one  who  has  studied  the  Scriptures  knows  that  the  problem  is 
grave  and  cannot  be  easily  disposed  of. 

The  great  question  back  of  all  these  discussions  is  simply  this  : 
"Shall  we,  or  shall  we  not,  grant  Science  the  right  Xo  modify  Re- 
ligion?" And  the  question  need  not  be  answered.  Men  of  science 
know  that  whether  or  not  we  grant  science  the  right  to  modify  reli- 
gion, science  is  shedding  her  light  upon  religious  problems,  and 
she  is  constantly  and  continuously  modifying  religion.  Science 
(represented  in  physics,  astronomy,  physiology,  psychology,  his- 
tory, text-criticism,  etc.,  etc.)  has  enlarged  our  view  of  the  world 
and  deepened  our  conception  of  God.  The  scientific  spirit  of  the 
age  has  begotten  a  new  theology,  a  truly  scientific  treatment  of  the 
problems  of  Gody  inspiration,  and  revelation,  which  we  call  theon- 
omy,  for  it  ranges  as  high  above  the  antiquated  theology  as  astron- 
omy is  superior  to  astrology.1 

After  all,  Christians  are  not  pledged  to  dogmas,  but  to  the 
truth.  Orthodoxy  means  the  right  doctrine,  and  the  right  doctrine 
is  that  which  can  stand  the  test  of  critique.  Orthodoxy  so  called 
is  a  misnomer  and  ought  to  be  called  dogmatism.  The  truth  can 
be  found  only  by  searching,  and  the  methods  of  an  exact  search 
are  called  science. 

Science  is  not  human ;  science  is  divine,  and  the  development 

lCf.  the  writer's  articles  "Theology  as  a  Science  "  in  The  Monist,  Vol.  XII.,  No.  4,  and  Vol 
XIII.,  No.  1. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  143 

of  science  is  the  coming  of  the  spirit  of  God, — of  the  true  God,  of 
the  God  of  Truth,  who  is  "the  light  that  lighteth  every  man." 

The  dogmas  of  Christianity  are  formulations  of  the  Truth  as 
interpreted  by  our  forefathers.  Let  no  Athanasius  with  his  limited 
knowledge  bind  the  conscience  of  a  Delitzsch.  Had  Delitzsch  lived 
in  the  da3Ts  of  the  Alexandrian  church-father,  he  would  most  likely 
have  acquiesced  in  the  Nicene  formulation  of  the  Christian  creed ; 
but  new  issues  have  arisen  and  some  of  the  traditional  beliefs  have 
become  untenable.  Dogmas  may  be  venerable  on  account  of  their 
antiquity,  but  they  cannot  stand  against  Truth.  Truth  alone  is 
holy,  and  the  Truth  of  Science  will  finally  win  the  day. 

The  struggle  for  Babel  and  Bible  is  important  not  on  its  own 
account  but  because  it  forces  upon  us  in  a  new  form  the  issue  of 
Science  versus  Faith,  and  compels  us  to  revise  our  conception  of  the 
nature  of  divine  revelation.  It  is  a  mere  skirmish  which  will  soon 
be  followed  by  the  more  important  struggle  over  the  Gospels.  The 
issues  at  stake  are  graver  there,  and  thus  we  anticipate  that  the 
latter  will  be  a  more  bitter  and  obdurate  battle.  The  main  histor- 
ical questions  of  Christianity  lie  in  the  New  Testament,  and  though 
Assyriology  contributes  its  goodly  share  toward  the  solution  of  the 
religious  problem,  it  is  after  all  a  side  issue  only,  which  must  be 
complemented  by  work  along  other  lines  of  research. 

Delitzsch  sums  up  his  position  in  these  words :  "  Do  not  let 
us  blindly  cling  to  dogmas  which  science  has  shown  to  be  super- 
annuated, merely  for  fear  of  abandoning  them.  Faith  in  God  and 
the  true  religion  may  thereby  be  injured." 

Whatever  the  final  result  of  the  present  discussion  shall  be, 
we  may  rest  assured  that  the  modification  of  our  religious  faith  will 
not  be  for  the  worse.  Christianity  has  again  and  again  adapted  it- 
self to  a  more  scientific  conception  of  the  world.  How  strong  was 
the  opposition  of  the  so-called  orthodox  to  the  Copernican  system, 
how  fierce  were  their  attacks  on  the  doctrine  of  evolution  !  But 
that  is  now  a  matter  of  the  past,  and  religion  has  certainly  been 
broadened  as  well  as  deepened  by  a  broader  and  deeper  insight 
into  the  constitution  of  nature. 

The  task  of  the  theology  of  to-day  is  a  reconstruction  of  our 
conception  of  Christianity  upon  a  strictly  scientific  basis.  In  the 
background  of  the  several  historical  questions  there  is  looming  up 
the  struggle  for  a  scientific  world-conception,  and  rightly  considered, 
the  philosophical  problem  is  the  main  issue  which  over-shadows  all 
others. 


144  BABEL  AND  BIBLE- 

It  is  not  difficult  to  foresee  the  final  result  of  the  whole  move- 
ment. It  will  not  lead  to  a  destruction  of  religion,  but  to  its  puri- 
fication and  reconstruction  upon  a  more  solid  foundation.  There- 
fore let  us  have  faith  in  the  Truth. 

Says  Esdras :  "As  for  the  truth,  it  endureth,  and  is  always 
strong ;  it  liveth  and  conquereth  for  evermore. 

"With  her  there  is  no  accepting  of  persons  or  rewards  ;  but 
she  doeth  the  things  that  are  just,  and  refraineth  from  all  unjust 
and  wicked  things ;  and  all  men  do  well  like  of  her  works. 

"Neither  in  her  judgment  is  any  unrighteousness;  and  she  is 
the  strength,  kingdom,  power,  and  majesty  of  all  ages.  Blessed 
be  the  God  of  Truth."     (i  Esdras  iv.  38-40.) 


REPLY  TO  CRITICS  OF  THE  FIRST  LECTURE. 

THE  ETHICAL  ASPECT. 

In  his  Der  Kampf  um  Babel  und  Bibel,  p.  20  ff.,  Professor 
Samuel  Oettli  says:  "The  materials  transmitted  to  us  in  the  Old 
Testament  have  been  plunged  into  an  atmosphere  of  ethical  mono- 
theism and  purified  by  this  bath  from  all  ethically  or  religiously 
confused  and  confusing  elements.  We  no  longer  find  the  deluge 
here  as  the  product  of  the  blind  wrath  of  a  god,  but  as  the  ethically 
warranted  punishment  sent  by  a  just  god  upon  a  degenerate  race." 

This  is  an  error.  Even  the  report  of  Berosus  shows  us  that  to 
the  Babylonians  also  the  world -flood  was  a  sin-flood.1  Consider 
his  words:  "The  others  cried  aloud  when  a  voice  commanded 
them  to  fear  God,  as  Xisuthros  had  been  translated  to  the  gods 
because  lie  had  been  godfearing."  While  we  may  assure  ourselves 
from  this  alone  that  the  Babylonian  Noah  escaped  from  the  judg- 
ment of  the  deluge  because  of  his  piety  and  the  remainder  of  man- 
kind were  destroyed  because  of  their  ever-increasing  sinfulness, 
the  inference  is  confirmed  by  the  words  in  the  cuneiform  inscrip- 
tion, spoken  by  Ea  after  the  deluge  to  Bel  who  had  caused  it : 
"Lay  up  his  sin  against  the  sinner,"  etc. 

Professor  Edward  Konig,  in  his  essay  Bibel  und  Babel,  p.  32, 
says:  "The  spirit  of  the  two  traditions  (Babylonian  and  Hebrew) 
is  totally  different.  This  is  shown  by  a  single  feature  :  The  Baby- 
lonian hero  rescues  his  inanimate  as  well  as  his  living  property, 
while  in  both  the  Bible  accounts  we  have  the  higher  point  of  view 
represented  by  the  rescue  of  the  living  creatures  only."  What 
blind  zeal !  Even  in  the  fragment  of  Berosus  we  read  that  Xisu- 
thros was  commanded  to  "take  in  winged  and  fourfooted  animals," 
and  the  original  cuneiform  account  says  expressly:  "I  brought  up 
into  the  ship  the  cattle  of  the  field  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field.'' 

1  An  untranslatable  German  pun  and  popular  etymology  (Sintflut  =  "  universal  flood":  Siind- 
flut  =  "  sin-flood  "). 


146  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Accordingly,  the  "higher  point  of  view"  must  be  conceded  to  the 
Babylonian  account  by  Konig  himself. 

THE  PRIMORDIAL  CHAOS. 
With  reference  to  mythological  features  in  the  Biblical  account 
of  the  creation  something  further  may  be  said.  Oettli  remarks  with 
much  truth,  p.  12,  on  the  presumption  of  the  existence  of  a  chaos : 
"The  notion  of  a  primitive  matter  which  was  not  derived  from 
God's  creative  activity  but  which  had  rather  to  be  overcome  by  it, 
cannot  have  grown  up  on  soil  of  the  Religion  of  Israel,  which  is 
strictly  monotheistic  in  its  thought,  at  least  on  the  prophetic 
heights,  and  consequently  excludes  the  dualistic  conflict  of  two 
hostile  primitive  principles."  I  call  attention  here  to  the  remark 
of  Wellhausen  also:  "If  we  take  Chaos  for  granted,  everything 
else  is  developed  out  of  this ;  everything  else  is  reflection,  syste- 
matic construction,  which  we  can  figure  out  with  little  difficulty. " 

TRACES  OF  POLYTHEISM. 

In  the  Elohistic  account  of  the  creation  also  there  are  traces 
of  polytheistic  elements.  When  we  read  (Genesis  i.  26):  "Let  us 
make  men  in  our1  own  image,  after  our  semblance,"  Oettli  says 
with  justice :  "Moreover,  that  plural  of  self-appeal  preceding  the 
creation  of  man  is  not  so  easily  to  be  reconciled  with  the  later  strict 
monotheism,  nor  the  'image  of  God'  in  which  man  is  created, 
with  the  spirituality  of  Yahveh  which  is  afterwards  so  strongly  em- 
phasised, when  once,  rejecting  all  exegetic  arts,  we  give  to  words 
their  simple  and  obvious  meaning.  And  this,  notwithstanding  the 
fact  that  the  Biblical  author,  in  accordance  with  his  religious  posi- 
tion, has  given  a  higher  value  to  these  originally  foreign  elements." 

In  fact.  Genesis  i.  26  and  Isaiah  xlvi.  5  are  in  irreconcilable 
opposition.  The  polytheistic  coloring  of  Genesis  i.  27  with  its  im- 
plied distinction  of  gods  and  goddesses  would  appear  peculiarly 
drastic  if  the  three  members  of  the  sentence  are  thought  of  as  quite 
closely  connected  :  "And  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in 
the  image  of  God  created  He  him,  male  and  female  created  He 
them."     But  we  cannot  regard  this  as  sure. 

BABYLONIAN  MONOTHEISM. 
It  may  be  recalled  that  I  said  in  my  first  lecture:   "Despite 
the  fact  that  free  and  enlightened  minds  publicly  taught  that  Nergal 

IThe  assumption  that  we  have  here  a  case  of  pluralis  majestaticus  is  not,  indeed,  precluded 
by  general  Hebrew  usage,  but  it  is  far-fetched  ;  compare  lii  2,  the  saying  of  Yahveh :  "  Lo,  man 
has  become  as  one  of  us." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  147 

and  Nebo,  moon-god  and  sun-god,  the  thunder-god  Ramman  and 
all  the  other  gods  were  one  in  Marduk,  the  god  of  light,  polytheism 
remained  for  three  thousand  years  the  state  religion  of  Babylon.'' 

Jensen  has  felt  warranted  in  accompanying  this  remark  with 
the  following  observations,  which  have  been  carried  further  by 
Konig  and  others  with  much  gratification,  as  was  to  be  expected: 
"This  would  indeed  be  one  of  the  most  significant  discoveries  ever 
made  in  the  realm  of  the  history  of  religion,  and  therefore  we  must 
regret  exceedingly  that  Delitzsch  does  not  cite  his  source.  I  be- 
lieve that  I  may  declare  with  all  positiveness  that  nothing  of  the 
sort  can  be  derived  from  the  texts  that  are  accessible  to  me.  There- 
fore we  beg  urgently  that  he  publish  soon  the  text  of  the  passage 
which  deprives  Israel  of  the  greatest  glory  that  has  hitherto  illu- 
mined that  race, — that  of  being  the  only  one  that  worked  its  way 
out  into  pure  monotheism. " 

Very  good,  if  indeed  Jensen  stands  by  his  expression,  Israel  is 
now  actually  deprived  of  this  its  greatest  glory,  and  this  by  the 
Neo-Babylonian  cuneiform  tablet  81,  11-3,  in,  known  since  1895 
and  published  in  the  Journal  of the  Transactions  of  the  Victoria  Insti- 
tute by  Theo.  G.  Pinches, — a  tablet  which  is  indeed  preserved  only 
as  a  fragment,  but  the  remaining  portion  of  which  shows  us  that 
upon  it  all  the  divinities  of  the  Babylonian  pantheon  (or  at  least 
the  chief  ones)  are  indicated  as  being  one  with  and  one  in  the  god 
Marduk.     I  quote  only  a  few  lines  i1 

"The  god  Marduk  is  written  and  called  Ninib  as  the  possessor 
of  power,  Nergal  or  perhaps  Zamama  as  lord  of  combat  or  of  battle, 
Bel  as  possessor  of  dominion,  Nebo  as  lord  of  business  (?),  Sin  as 
illuminator  of  the  night,  Samas  as  lord  of  all  that  is  right,  as  lord 
of  rain." 

Accordingly,  Marduk  is  Ninib  as  well  as  Nergal,  moon-god  as 
well  as  sun-god,  etc.,  in  other  words,  the  names  Ninib  and  Nergal, 
Sin  and  Samas  are  only  various  designations  of  the  one  god  Mar- 
duk; they  are  all  one  with  him  and  in  him.  Is  this  not  "indoger- 
manic  monotheism,  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  which  develops  only 
out  of  variety"? 


ilNin-ib 

Marduk  sa  alii 

ilNgrgal 

Marduk  sa  kablu 

ilZa-ma-ma 

Marduk  sa  tahazi 

il  Be*l 

Marduk  sa  be'lutu  u  mitluktu 

ilNabu 

Marduk  sa  nikasi 

ilSin 

Marduk  munammir  musi 

il  Samas 

Marduk  sa  k€nSti 

iiAddu 

Marduk  sa  zunnu 

148  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


THE  NAME  "EL." 


On  il,  ^8  God. — All  Semitic  prepositions  were  originally  sub- 
stantives. For  the  preposition'^.,  which  is  originally  //,  "toward, 
to,  at,"  the  fundamental  significance  which  from  the  start  seems 
most  probable,  "aim,  direction,"  is  still  preserved  in  Hebrew,  al- 
though this  was  until  recently  overlooked.  It  is  found  in  the 
phrase,  "This  or  that  is  *]7t  ^fcp,"  tnat  1S>  "at  tne  disposal  of  thy 
hand,"  "it  is  in  thy  control." 

The  opinion  that  5N  in  this  phrase  means  "power"  may  have 
the  support  of  tradition,  like  thousands  of  other  errors  in  the  He- 
brew lexicography,  but  it  has  never  been  demonstrated,  and  there- 
fore it  is  not  true,  as  Konig  declares  (p.  38),  that  "el  is  surely  equiv- 
alent to  'power'  or  ' strength.'"  The  only  meaning  that  can  be 
demonstrated  is  "aim,  direction,"  which  carries  with  it  as  a  matter 
of  course  the  concrete  significance  "that  toward  which  one  directs 
himself,  end,  goal." 

The  Sumerians  conceived  of  their  gods  as  dwelling  up  above 
where  the  eye  of  man  is  directed,  in  and  over  the  sky;  we  ourselves 
use  "heaven"  figuratively  for  "God"  (comp.  Daniel  iv.  23);  and 
furthermore,  a  Babylonian  psalm  calls  the  sun-god  digil  irsitim 
rapostim,  the  "goal  of  the  wide  world,"  that  is,  the  end  toward 
which  the  eyes  of  all  the  earth-dwellers  are  directed,  and,  finally, 
the  poet  of  the  Book  of  Job  (xxxvi.  25),  in  harmony  with  an  abun- 
dance of  other  passages  in  Semitic  literatures,  glorifies  God  as  the 
one  "on  whom  all  eyes  hang,  toward  whom  man  looks  from  afar." 
And  just  so  the  earliest  Semites  called  the  "divine"  being  whom 
they  conceived  of  as  dwelling  in  the  heavens  above  and  ruling 
heaven  and  earth  il,  el,  "that  toward  which  the  eye  is  directed,' 
(cp.  the  analogous  application  of  53?  to  God  and  things  divine  in 
Hosea  xi.  7).  In  my  opinion  the  first  and  original  meaning  of  the 
word  is  "goal  of  the  eye,"  as  is  the  case  with  the  sun  and  the  sky. 

Inasmuch  as  il  is  thus  demonstrated  to  have  the  meaning 
"aim,  goal,"  and  as  the  designation  of  the  deity  by  this  word  is 
perfectly  in  accord  with  the  Semitic  habit  of  thought,  and  it  is 
therefore  not  permissible  to  assume  another  primitive  noun  il,  my 
interpretation  of  el,  the  name  of  God,  is  established  in  every  point. 

It  is  just  as  useless  and  impermissible  to  seek  after  a  verb  cor- 
responding to  such  a  primitive  noun  as  il  (see  Konig,  p.  38),  as  to 
seek  after  a  verbal  stem  to  match  others  of  these  most  ancient  bi- 
consonantal  nouns,  such  asjim,  "day,"  or  ?nut,  "man." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  149 

Besides,  the  etymology  of  the  word  //,  el  is  not  the  most  im- 
portant consideration.  The  chief  thing  is  rather  the  fact  that  those 
North-Semitic  tribes  which  we  find  established  about  2500  B.  C. 
both  north  and  south  of  Babylon,  and  whose  greatest  monarch  in 
later  times  (about  2250)  was  King  Hammurabi,  conceived  of  and 
worshipped  God  as  a  unitary,  spiritual  being.  Let  it  be  observed 
that  this  applies  to  the  North-Semitic  tribes  which  had  in  part  im- 
migrated to  Babylonia  and  afterwards  established  themselves 
there,  not  to  Sumerian-Semitic  Babylonians. 

A  number  of  journals  have  represented  it  as  my  opinion  that 
"even  the  Jewish  conception  of  God  was  derived  from  the  Baby- 
lonian cosmology";  and  Oettli  (p.  4)  says  that  in  my  view  even 
"the  name  and  the  worship  of  Yahveh  himself,  united  with  a  more 
or  less  definitely  developed  monotheism,  was  a  primitive  posses- 
sion of  Babylon."     But  these  are  misrepresentations. 

As  to  those  names  of  persons  which  occur  so  frequently  in  the 
time  of  the  first  Babylonian  dynasty,  Konig  is  utterly  mistaken  in 
declaring  (p.  40,  42)  that  among  notorious  polytheists  the  names 
must  needs  be  translated  and  interpreted  as  lia  god  hath  given "; 
and  so  is  Oettli  (p.  23)  when  he  asks :  "Who  can  prove  that  those 
names  are  not  to  be  taken  polytheistically,  'a  god  hath  given,'  l a 
god  be  with  me'  "?  To  say  nothing  of  other  reasons,  this  interpre- 
tation breaks  down  in  the  case  of  such  names  as  Ilu-amranni,  "God 
consider  me!"  Ilu-turam,  "God,  turn  thee  hither  again!"  and 
others.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  are  we  to  cease  to  render  Bdb-ilu 
"Gate  of  God,"  and  say  "Gate  of  a  god"?  No!  For  the  time  of 
Hammurabi  we  hold  fast  to  those  beautiful  names  which  signify  so 
much  for  the  history  of  religion  :  Ilu-ittia,  "God  be  with  me,"  Ilu- 
amtahar,  "I  called  upon  God,"  Ilu-abi,  Ilu-milki,  "God  is  my  fa- 
ther," or  "my  counsel,"  Iarbi-ilu,  " Great  is  God,"  lamlik-ilu, 
"God  sits  in  power,"  Ibsi-ina-ili,  "Through  God  came  he  into  be- 
ing," Avel-ilu,  "Servant  of  God,"  Mut{um)-ilui  "Man  of  God" 
(=Methuscha'el),  Iluma-leH,  "God  is  mighty,"  Iluma-abi,  "God 
is  my  father,"  Iluma-ilu,  "God  is  God,"  Summa-ilu- Id-ilia,  "If  God 
were  not  my  God,"  and  so  on. 

The  names  must  of  course  be  judged  collectively.  In  the  case 
of  certain  of  them  (as  in  certain  Assyrian  names,  like  Na'id-ilu)  we 
might  certainly  see  in  "God"  merely  an  appellative,  as  perhaps  in 
the  phrase  from  the  laws  of  Hammurabi :  mahar-ili,  to  assert  any- 
thing "before  God";  or  in  the  phrase  that  occurs  hundreds  of 
times  in  the  Babylonian  contracts  of  that  period,  "to  swear  by  God 


150  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

(ilu)  and  the  king"  (cp.  i  Samuel  xii.  3,  5  :  "by  Yahveh  and  the 
king"),  but  taking  them  all  together  it  seems  to  me  that  they  make 
it  impossible  to  think  that  ilu  means  a  "city  or  family  god,"  or  the 
"special  tutelary  deity." 

Precisely  in  "the  endeavor  of  a  people  without  philosophical 
development  to  be  as  concrete  and  specific  as  possible  in  its  notions 
and  expressions,"  we  should  inevitably  expect  to  find  in  each  case 
the  name  of  the  particular  divinity  intended,  or  on  the  other  hand 
if  the  tutelary  divinity  of  the  family  or  of  the  infant  was  meant  we 
should  expect  to  find  "my  God,"  or  "his  God."  An  unprejudiced 
and  unsophisticated  consideration  of  all  these  and  other  names  of 
the  Hammurabi  period  leads  rather  to  the  renewed  assumption  that 
they  are  rooted  in  a  religious  conception  different  from  the  poly- 
theistic views  that  were  native  in  Babylon.  What  was  the  nature 
and  value  of  that  monotheism  the  contemporary  sources  do  not 
enable  us  to  determine,  but  only  to  infer  them  from  the  later  de- 
velopment of  "Yahvism." 

THE  NAME  "YAHVEH." 

We  must  insist  with  all  positiveness  that  in  the  two  names 
Ya-cC-ve-ilu  and  Ya-ve-ilu  the  reading  Ya've  is  the  only  one  that 
can  be  regarded  as  within  the  realm  of  possibility. 

The  assault  upon  my  reading — which  in  the  light  of  our  pres- 
ent knowledge  is  irrefutable — has  revealed  a  lamentable  state  of 
ignorance  in  the  critics :  this  ignorance  may  account  for  the  mis- 
cellaneous insinuations  which  have  been  indulged  in,  as  when  Pro- 
fessor Kittel  ventures  to  speak  of  my  reading  as  a  "partisan  ma- 
neuver." 

In  order  to  at  least  correct  this  ignorance,  I  beg  to  make  the 
following  brief  and  condensed  exposition  of  the  matter  for  the  ben- 
efit of  my  theological  critics  and  of  certain  of  the  Assyriologists 
who  have  volunteered  to  advise  them.  The  sign  vu  has  the  follow- 
ing syllabic  values  :  pi;  tal;  tu;  tarn,  and  besides  in  Babylonian  in 
particular:  me/ve;  mh /vd;  a;  (vu),  or  as  would  be  perhaps  bet- 
ter: ve;  vd;  d;  (vu).  But  any  one  who  has  become  measurably 
familiar  with  the  style  of  writing  of  the  Hammurabi  period  knows 
that,  even  if  the  reading  Ya-'u-md  be  granted,  this  md  cannot  pos- 
sibly be  interpreted  as  the  emphasising  particle  ma.  Accordingly 
Konig  (p.  48  f. )  and  Kittel  and  others  are  mistaken;  on  the  con- 
trary,  ma   is  without   exception   written  with   its  customary  sign. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  151 

Thus  the  interpretation  of  the  names  in  question  as  "Ya,  Ya'u  is 
God"  is  absolutely  precluded.  Let  him  who  denies  this  cite  one 
single  instance  in  which  the  emphatic  particle  ma  is  written  with 
the  character  vu.  And  in  the  case  of  Ya-ii-uvi  ilu,  I  may  remark 
incidentally,  the  m  may  be  only  mimation  and  not  an  abbreviated 
ma. 

Neither  is  the  reading  proposed  by  Bezold,  Ya-  a-bi-ilu,  pos- 
sible, for  in  the  time  of  Hammurabi  the  sign  bi  does  perhaps  rep- 
resent also  the  syllable  pi,  but  the  reverse,  sign  vu  for  bi,  is  never 
the  case.  And  on  mature  reflection  the  reading  Ya-(^ay~pi-ilu  can- 
not be  considered.  It  is  true  that  the  sign  vu  is  found  for//  in  the 
time  of  Hammurabi,  as  frequently  in  the  contracts  published  by 
Meissner  in  his  Beitrdge  zum  altbabylonischen  Privatrecht,  and  also 
in  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,  but  the  regular  sign  for //occurs  much 
more  frequently.  For  instance,  in  the  79  letters  from  this  very 
period,  published  by  King,  pi  is  represented  exclusively  by  its  regu- 
lar sign. 

Besides  this,  a  "canaanitish"  verb  form  ia'pi,  iapi  could  be 
derived  only  from  a  stem  ns.%  which  does  not  exist.  Instead  of 
Ya(')ve  ilu  we  might  then  at  most  read  Ya-^a/w-^vd/u-ilu,  with 
radical  v,  but  by  this  very  emendation  we  should  expose  ourselves 
to  the  dreaded  recognition  of  a  god  ftVT*.  Accordingly  my  reading 
Ya-d'-ve-ilu,  Ya-ve-ilu  remains  the  most  obvious  as  well  as  the  only 
one  deserving  serious  consideration. 

I  venture  on  the  interpretation  of  the  name  Ya(')ve-ilu  with 
less  confidence  than  on  the  reading  of  it.  The  interpretation  pro- 
posed by  Konig  (p.  50),  "May  God  protect"  (why  not,  "May# 
god  protect"?),  from  Arabic  hama,  "to  protect,"  as  well  as  that 
of  Barth  (p.  19),  "God  gives  life"  {Ya-ah-ve-ilu),  is  highly  improb- 
able. As  names  from  a  foreign  language  they  would  needs  appear 
as  Yahve-ilu,  not  Ya've-ilu  or  even  Ydve-ilu,  and  only  in  the  last  ex- 
tremity would  one  be  justified  in  the  assumption  that  these  foreign 
personal  names  had  gradually  been  Babylonised  in  pronunciation, 
at  the  same  time  becoming  wholly  unintelligible.  No,  if  we  are  to 
concede  that  there  is  a  verb-form  contained  in  ya've,  ydve,  then  it  is 
certainly  the  most  obvious  thing  to  think  of  the  verb  flVJ,  the  older 
form  of  nTl  which  is  assumed  in  Exodus  iii.  14,  and  to  interpret  it 
with  Zimmern  as  "God  exists."  My  interpretation,  "Ja've  is 
God,"  would  accordingly  remain  by  far  the  most  probable  in  and 
of  itself. 


152  BABEL  AND  BIBLE- 


THE  NAME  "YAHUM-ILU." 


The  name  Yau-utn-ilu  is  and  remains  a  foreign  name.  It 
belongs  among  the  North-Semitic  tribes,  more  precisely  Canaan- 
itic.  Among  these  tribes  there  is  no  other  god  Ya-u  but  the  god 
%T},  Yahu,  that  god  who  is  contained  in  the  name  Ya-u-ha-zi  and 
others. 

Now  this  name  of  the  divinity  Yahu  which  is  found  at  the  be- 
ginning and  especially  at  the  end  of  Hebrew  names  of  persons,  is 
the  shorter  form  of  Yahve,  "the  Existing/'  and  consequently  pre- 
supposes the  fuller  form  Yahve.  Now  even  to  the  Jews  of  the  exilic 
and  post-exilic  periods  the  name  Yahveh  was  by  no  means  a  nomen 
ineffabile,  as  is  shown  by  the  many  names  of  this  later  time  :  Ya-se7- 
va-a-va  =  Isaiah  (^TJ¥fl?J),  Pi-li-ya-a-va,  and  others.  So  much  the  less 
could  it  have  been  such  to  that  primitive  period  in  which  the  name 
of  God,  Yahveh,  was  very  far  from  possessing  the  sanctity  which  it 
was  to  attain  later  in  Israel. 

The  name  Yahum-ilu,  therefore,  presupposes  a  fuller  equiva- 
lent name  Ya?ve-ilu.  Now  when  such  a  name  is  really  twice  docu- 
mented, in  YcC-ve-ilu,  Ya-veilu,  should  it  not  be  recognised  as  such 
without  reserve,  and  the  more  so  as  the  refusal  to  recognise  it  will 
after  all  not  obliterate  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  North-Semitic 
("Canaanitic")  name  of  the  divinity  Yahu,  which  is  perfectly  iden- 
tical with  Yahveh,  nor  the  existence  of  a  name  Yahu-ilu,  "Yahu  is 
God,"  similar  to  the  Hebrew  581*  (Joel),  a  thousand  years  before 
the  prophet  Elijah's  utterance  upon  Carmel,  "Yahveh  is  God'' 
(i  Kings  xviii.  39)? 

It  needs  no  demonstration  to  convince  competent  judges  that 
Barth's  interpretation  (p.  19)  of  Ya-hu-um-ilu  as  abbreviated  from 
Ya-ah-we-ilu  must  be  rejected. 

Jensen  too  regards  it  as  "certainly  in  the  highest  degree  prob- 
able that  both  composita  contain  the  name  of  God  Yaveh-Yahu," 
adding  very  correctly  :  "  Now  since  the  Ya'wa  in  the  name  cannot 
be  of  Assyrio-Babylonian  origin,  it  is  surely  of  foreign  origin,  and 
hence,  in  all  probability,  the  whole  name  is  'Canaanitic,'  and  its 
wearers,  or  wearer,  also  'Canaanites.'  "  But  when  he  goes  on  to 
say:  "But  because  a  Miiller  or  a  Schultze  is  met  with  in  Paris,  we 
are  not  warranted  in  assuming  that  the  Germans  are  the  prevalent 
race  in  Paris;  and  just  as  little  does  an  Ya'wa-il^u'),  appearing  in 
Babylon  2000  years  ago,  need  to  prove  anything  more  than  that 
the  bearers  of  this  name  occasionally  came  to  Babylon," — when  he 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  153 

reasons  thus  I  confidently  leave  it  to  the  unprejudiced  reader  to 
decide  whether,  in  view  of  all  the  names  like  Yarbi-ilu,  Yamlik-ilu, 
and  so  on  (not  to  mention  Hammurabi,  Ammi-zaduga,  and  other 
Canaanitish  names),  the  delicate  parallel  of  Miiller  and  Schulze  is 
even  remotely  justified.  Furthermore,  even  Jensen  is  compelled, 
as  we  see,  to  admit  that  the  evidence  is  good  for  the  existence  of 
the  divine  name  Yahve  (  Yahvu)  before  2000  B.  C.  Moreover,  Zim- 
mern  makes  this  concession:  "Even  supposing  that  we  have  in 
ya-u-um  the  name  of  a  divinity,  which  is  not  improbable,  and  even 
the  name  Yahu,  Yahve,  which  is  possible."  That  is  enough  for  the 
present;  the  admission  of  the  reading  Ya-{cC)ve  and  of  my  inter- 
pretation will  probably  follow. 

And  accordingly,  if  Ya-u-u?n  holds  its  own  as  equivalent  to 
V1J,  i.T,  then  the  names  of  that  same  period:  Ilu-idinnam,  "God 
hath  given,"  Sd-ili,  "Belonging  to  God,"  Ilu-amtahar,  "I  called 
upon  God,"  Ilu-tHram,  "God,  turn  to  me,"  etc.,  may  with  double 
right  be  regarded  as  equivalent  in  their  content  to  the  correspond- 
ing Hebrew  names. 

PROCESSIONS   OF   THE    GODS. 

Jensen  would  not  countenance  my  proposition  that  processions 
of  Gods  are  mentioned  in  Isaiah.  We  read  (xlv.  20):  "They 
have  no  knowledge  that  carry  their  graven  image  of  wood,  and  pray 
unto  a  God  that  cannot  help,"  and  again  (xlvi.  1):  "Bel  has  sunk 
down,  Nebo  is  bowed  down,  their  idols  are  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the 
beasts  and  to  the  cattle,  the  things  (i.  e.,  fabrications)  that  ye  car- 
ried about  are  made  a  load,  a  burden  to  the  weary  beasts."  There 
can  be  but  few  commentators  here  who  do  not  think  in  connection 
with  these  passages  of  the  Babylonian  processions  of  the  gods,  in 
which  Bel  and  Nebo  were  carried  in  ceremonious  progress  through 
the  streets  of  Babel. 

AARON'S  BLESSING.1 

What  I  have  said  as  to  the  significance  of  the  phrase  in  the 
Aaronite  blessing,  "Yahveh  lift  up  his  countenance  to  thee,"  i.  e., 
"turn  his  favor,  his  love,  towards  thee,"  holds  good  in  spite  of  my 
critics.  When  spoken  of  men,  "to  lift  the  countenance  to  any  one 
or  to  anything"  means  nothing  more  than  "to  look  up  at"  (so  it  is 
used  in  2  Ki.  ix.  32).  It  is  used  in  Job  xxii.  26  (cf.  xi.  15),  as  well 
as  in  2  Sam.  ii.  22,  with  reference  to  a  man  who;  free  from   guilt 

INum.  vi.  24  ff. 


154  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

and  fault,  can  look  up  God  and  to  his  fellow-men.  This  meaning, 
of  course,  is  not  appropriate  if  the  words  are  spoken  of  God.  Then 
it  must  mean  precisely  the  same  thing  as  the  Assyrian,  "to  raise 
the  eyes  to  anyone, "  that  is  to  say,  to  find  pleasure  in  one,  to  direct 
one's  love  towards  him  ;  therefore  not  quite  the  same  as  to  take 
heed  of  one  (as  in  Siegiried-Sta.de1  s  Hebraisc/ies  Worterbuch,  p.  441). 
If  it  were  so,  "the  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  to  thee"  would  be 
equivalent  to  "the  Lord  keep  thee."  When  Jensen  {op.  cit.,  col. 
491)  insists  that  the  Assyrian  expression  is  literally,  not  to  lift  up 
"the  face,"  but  to  lift  up  "the  eyes,"  he  might  with  equal  justice 
deny  that  Assyrian  bit  Amman  means  the  same  thing  as  the  He- 
brew bene  A??imon.  In  fact,  whereas  the  prevailing  Hebrew  usage 
is  "if  it  be  right  in  thine  eyes,"  the  Assyrian  says  in  every  case, 
"if  it  be  right  in  thy  countenance"  (Jna  pdnika;  cf.  summa  [ina] 
dan  sarri  mahirs)\  "eyes"  and  "countenance"  interchange  in  such 
phrases  as  this. 

In  Hebrew  we  find  "to  lift  up  the  eyes  to  one"  used  as  equiv- 
alent to  "to  conceive  an  affection  for  one,"  only  with  reference  to 
human,  sensual  love  (Gen.  xxxix.  7).  The  value  of  the  Assyrian 
phrase,  "to  lift  up  the  eyes  to  any  one,"  in  its  bearing  on  the 
Aaronite  blessing,  rests  in  the  fact  that  it  is  used  with  preference 
(though  not  exclusively,  as  Jensen  thinks)  of  the  gods  who  direct 
their  love  towards  a  favored  person  or  some  sacred  spot.  In  reply 
to  Jensen  who  claims  (p.  490)  that  the  choice  of  my  example  of 
the  usefulness  of  Assyrian  linguistic  analogies  is  "a  failure,"  I 
comfort  myself  with  the  thought  that  the  recognition  of  our  in- 
debtedness as  to  a  deepening  of  the  meaning  of  the  Aaronite  bless- 
ing to  cuneiform  literature,  was  many  years  ago  publicly  endorsed 
by  no  lesser  one  than  Franz  Delitzsch. 

J.  Barth  attacks  on  trivial  grounds  my  statement  that  Canaan 
at  the  time  of  the  Israelite  Incursion,  was  a  "domain  completely 
pervaded  by  Babylonian  culture."  This  fact,  however,  obtains 
ever  wider  recognition.  Alfred  Jeremias  in  the  "Zeitgeist"  of  the 
Berliner  Tageblatt,  February  16,  1903,  says:  "Further,  at  the  time 
of  the  immigration  of  the  'children  of  Israel,'  Canaan  was  sub- 
ject to  the  especial  influence  of  Babylonian  civilisation.  About 
1450  the  Canaanites,  like  all  the  peoples  of  the  Nearer  East,  wrote 
in  the  Babylonian  cuneiform  character,  and  in  the  Babylonian  lan- 
guage. This  fact,  proved  by  the  literature  of  the  time,  forces  us 
to  assume  that  the  influence  of  Babylonian  thought  had  been  ex- 
erted for  centuries  previously.    Of  late  Canaan  itself  seems  to  wish 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  155 

to  bear  witness.  The  excavation  of  an  ancient  Canaanite  castle  by 
Professor  Sellin  has  brought  to  light  an  altar  with  Babylonian 
genii  and  trees  of  life,  and  Babylonian  seals." 

It  may  be  briefly  recalled  here  that  the  religion  of  the  Cana- 
anites  with  their  god  Tammuz,  and  their  Asherahs,  bears  unmistak- 
able marks  of  Babylonian  influence,  and  that  before  the  immigration 
of  the  children  of  Israel  a  place  in  the  neighborhood  of  Jerusalem 
was  called  Bit-Ninib  (house  of  Ninib),  after  the  Babylonian  god 
Ninib.  There  may  have  been  actually  in  Jerusalem  itself  a  bit 
Ninib,  a  temple  of  the  god  Ninib.  See  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek, 
V.,  No.  183,  15,  and  cf.  Zimmern,  in  the  third  edition  of  Schra- 
der's  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testa?nent,  second  half,  p.  411. 
Cf.  also  Lecture  II.,  p.  184. 

THE  SABBATH. 

The  vocabulary  (II.  R.  32,  No.  1)  mentions,  among  divers 
kinds  of  days,  a  um  nuh  libbi  (1.  16,  a,  b),  a  day  for  the  quieting  of 
the  heart  (viz.,  of  the  gods),  with  its  synonym  sa-pat-tum,  which 
word,  in  view  of  the  frequent  use  of  the  sign  pat  for  bat  (e.  g.,  su- 
tiat,  var.  bat,  "dwelling";  Tig.  vi.  94),  might  be  interpreted  to 
mean  sabattum,  and  on  the  authority  of  the  syllabary  (82,  9-18, 
4159,  col.  1,  24)  where  UD  (Sumer.  u)  is  rendered  by  sa-bat-tum, 
it  must  be  so. 

The  statement  in  the  syllabary  not  only  confirms  the  view  that 
the  word  sabattum  means  a  day,  but  it  may  also  explain  the  sabat- 
tum  to  be  the  day  par  excellence,  perhaps  because  it  is  the  day  of 
the  gods. 

Jensen  in  Z.  A.  iv.,  1889,  pp.  274  et  seq.  says  that  sabattu 
means  "appeasement  (of  the  gods),  expiation,  penitential  prayer," 
and  the  verb  sabdtu  "to  conciliate"  or  "to  be  conciliated"  (Jensen 
in  Christliche  Welt,  col.  492).  But,  neither  from  83,  1-8,  1330,  col. 
1,  25,  where  ZUR  is  rendered  sa-bat-tim  (following  immediately 
upon  nuhhu),  nor  from  IV.  8,  where  TE  is  rendered  by  sa-bat-tim 
[why  not,  as  elsewhere,  in  the  nominative?],  may  Jensen's  propo- 
sition be  inferred  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  The  verb  sabdtu 
is  hitherto  only  attested  as  a  synonym  of  gamdru  (V.  R.  28,  14,  e,f). 
Therefore,  the  only  meaning  that  may  be  justifiably  assumed  for 
sabattu  at  present  is  "cessation  (of  work),  keeping  holiday."  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  compiler  of  the  syllabary  83,  1-8,  1330,  de- 
rived his  statement  ZUR  and  TE  =  sabbalim  from  the  equations 
UD.  ZUR  and  UD,  TE~um  nuhhi  or  pussuhi=^um  sabattim. 


156  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Accordingly,  the  Babylonian  sabattu  is  the  day  of  the  quieting 
of  the  heart  of  the  gods  and  the  rest  day  for  human  work  (the  latter 
is  naturally  the  condition  of  the  former). 

If  in  the  well-known  calendar  of  festivals  (IV.  R.  32/m)  the 
seventh,  fourteenth,  twenty-first,  and  twenty-eighth  days  of  a  month 
are  expressly  characterised  as  days  whereon  every  kind  of  labor 
should  rest,  should  we  not  see  in  these  days  no  other  than  the  sa- 
battu-da.y? 

The  mooted  words  in  the  calendar  of  festivals  run,  according 
to  our  present  knowledge,  thus:  "The  shepherd  of  the  great  na- 
tions shall  not  eat  roasted  or  smoked  (?)  meat  (variant :  anything 
touched  by  fire),  not  change  his  garment,  not  put  on  white  raiment, 
not  offer  sacrifice."  [It  is  doubtful  whether  these  prohibitions  are 
of  universal  application,  binding  also  the  flocks  of  the  shepherd. 
Then  the  particular  prohibitions  follow]  ;  "the  King  shall  not 
mount  his  chariot,  as  ruler  not  pronounce  judgment;  the  Magus 
shall  not  give  oracles  in  a  secret  place  [i.  e.,  removed  from  pro- 
fane approach],  the  physician  shall  not  lay  his  hand  on  the  sick, 
[the  day  being]  unauspiscious  for  any  affair  whatever"  (/  ana  kal 
sibuti;  sibutu  here,  it  seems  used  like  ^¥,  in  Dan.  vi.  18;  "afffair, 
cause"). 

Accordingly  we  must  acquiesce  in  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew 
Sabbath,  ultimately  is  rooted  in  a  Babylonian  institution.  More 
than  this  was  not  claimed. 

We  need  not  quarrel  with  Konig  who  emphasises  that  the 
Israelite  Sabbath  received  its  specific  consecration  on  account  of 
its  "humanitarian  tendency  towards  servants,  and  animals." 

The  setting  apart  of  the  seventh  day  as  the  day  in  which  we 
are  to  refrain  from  labors  of  any  kind  finds  its  explanation,  as  I 
showed  years  ago,  in  the  fact  that  the  number  seven  was  in  this  as 
in  other  instances  to  the  Babylonians  an  'evil'  number,  and  this 
is  the  reason  why  the  seventh,  fourteenth,  twenty-first,  twenty- 
eighth  days  in  the  above-mentioned  calendar  are  called  UD.  HUL. 
GAL. ,  i.  e.,  evil  days. 

Alfred  Jeremias  (1.  c,  p.  25)  aptly  recalls  the  Talmudic  story, 
according  to  which  Moses  arranged  with  Pharaoh  a  day  of  rest  for 
his  people,  and  when  asked  which  he  thought  the  most  appropriate 
for  the  purpose,  answered :  "The  seventh,  dedicated  to  the  Planet 
Saturn,  labors  done  on  this  day  will  anyhow  not  prosper,  in  any 
case." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  157 


THE  FALL. 

Any  one  who  reads  without  bias  my  comments  on  the  cylinder 
seal  (Fig.  47)  representing  a  Babylonian  conception  of  the  Fall, 
will  grant  that  in  comparing  it  to  the  Biblical  story  of  the  Fall, 
that  I  merely  proposed  to  emphasise  the  circumstance  that  the 
serpent  as  the  corrupter  of  the  woman  was  a  significant  feature  in 
either  version.  The  dress  of  the  two  Babylonian  figures,  naturally 
prevented  me  also  from  regarding  the  tree  as  the  tree  "of  knowl- 
edge of  good  and  eviL', 

It  seems  to  me  that  possibly  there  may  loom  back  of  the  Bib- 
lical story  in  Gen.  chapters  ii.-iii.  another  older  form  which  knew  of 
one  tree  only  in  the  middle  of  the  garden,  the  Tree  of  Life.  The 
words  in  ii.  9,  "and  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,', 
seem  to  be  superadded,  and  the  narrator,  quite  engrossed  with  the 
newly  introduced  tree  of  knowledge,  and  forgetful  of  the  tree  of 
life  inadvertently  makes  God  allow  man  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life 
which  is  in  contradiction  with  iii.  22. 

As  to  the  tree,  but  that  alone,  I  agree  with  the  late  C.  P.  Tiele 
who  sees  in  the  mooted  Babylonian  picture,  "a  god  with  his  male 
or  female  worshippers  partaking  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life,"  "a 
symbol  of  the  hope  of  immortality,"  and  also  with  Hommel,  who 
says  (p.  23):  "It  is  most  important  that  the  original  tree  was  ob- 
viously conceived  to  be  a  conifer,  a  pine  or  cedar  with  its  life  and 
procreation  promoting  fruits.  There  is,  accordingly,  an  unmistak- 
able allusion  to  the  holy  cedar  of  Eridu,  the  typical  tree  of  Para- 
dise in  the  Chaldsean  and  Babylonian  legends." 

Jensen  (col.  488)  argues  as  follows:  "If  the  picture  has  any 
reference  to  the  story  of  the  Fall,  it  is  likely  to  represent  a  scene 
in  which  a  god  forbids  the  first-created  woman  to  partake  of  the 
fruit  of  the  tree  of  life." 

That  one  of  the  figures  is  distinguished  by  horns,  the  usual 
symbol  of  strength  and  victory  (see  Amos  vi.  13)  in  Babylonia  as 
well  as  in  Israel,  is  in  my  opinion  a  very  ingenious  touch  on  the 
part  of  the  artist,  in  order  to  give  an  unmistakable  indication  as  to 
the  sexes  of  the  two  clothed  human  figures.  Those  who  see  in  the 
serpent  behind  the  woman  a  "meandering  line  "  or  "an  ornamental 
division,"  may  do  so  if  they  please,  but  they  will  find  few  that  will 
concur. 

I  do  not  stand  alone  with  my  opinion.  Hommel,  for  instance, 
says  (p.  23):   "The  woman  and  the  writhing  serpent  behind  her 


158  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

express  themselves  clearly  enough";  and  Jensen  (col.  488):  "a 
serpent  stands  or  crawls  behind  the  woman." 

As  to  the  nature  of  this  serpent,  nothing  definite  can  be  said 
so  long  as  we  depend  upon  this  pictorial  representation  alone.  We 
might  regard  it  as  one  of  the  forms  of  Tiamat,  who,  like  Leviathan 
in  Job  iii.  8,  and  the  old  serpent  in  the  Apocalypse,  would  be  as- 
sumed to  be  still  in  existence.     But  this  is  very  uncertain. 

Haupt's  Akkadische  und  sumerische  Keilschrifttexte,  p.  119,  con- 
tain a  bilingual  text  (D.  T.  67)  which  may  deserve  a  passing  notice 
in  this  connection:  It  mentions  a  fallen  hand-maid,  the  "mother 
of  sin,"  who  being  severely  punished,  bursts  into  bitter  tears — "in- 
tercourse I  learned,  kissing  I  learned  " — and  we  find  her  later  on 
lying  in  the  dust  stricken  by  the  fatal  glance  of  the  deity. 

LIFE  AFTER  DEATH. 

In  the  code  of  Hammurabi  (xxvii.  34  et  seq. ),  the  sinner  is 
cursed  in  the  words:  "May  God  utterly  exterminate  him  from 
among  the  living  upon  earth,  and  debar  his  departed  soul  from  the 
fresh  water  in  Hades." 

The  last  passage  confirms  the  great  antiquity  of  the  Babylonian 
conception  concerning  the  life  of  the  pious  after  death. 

The  Book  of  Job  which  shows  a  close  acquaintance  with  Baby- 
lonian views,  describes  the  contrast  in  the  underworld  between  a 
hot,  waterless  desert  destined  for  the  wicked,  and  a  garden  with 
fresh  clear  water  for  the  pious.  The  passage  is  rendered  in  a  phil- 
ologically  unobjectionable  translation  in  my  book  Das  Buck  Job, 
Leipzig,  1902:  "Cursed  be  their  portion  on  earth.  Not  does  he 
turn  to  vineyards.  Desolation  and  also  heat  will  despoil  them. 
Their  prayer  for  snow-water  will  not  be  granted.  Mercy  forgets 
him,  vermin  devours  him;  no  longer  is  he  remembered." 

Thus  in  its  right  interpretation  this  passage  forms  a  welcome 
bridge  to  the  New  Testament  conception  of  a  hot,  waterless,  and 
torture-inflicting  Hell,  and  the  garden  which  to  the  Oriental  mind 
cannot  be  conceived  of  as  lacking  water,  abundant,  running,  living 
water. 

The  concluding  verse  of  the  prophetic  book  of  Isaiah  (ch.  lxvi. 
24):  "and  they  shall  go  forth  and  look  with  joy  upon  the  dead 
bodies  of  those  that  have  revolted  from  me  :  how  their  worm  dieth 
not,  neither  is  their  fire  quenched  :  and  they  are  an  abomination  to 
all  flesh,"  means  that  those  whose  bodies  are  buried  in  the  earth 
will  forever  be  gnawed  by  worms,   and  those  whose  bodies  are 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  159 

burnt  with  fire  shall  forever  suffer  the  death  of  fire.  In  two  respects 
the  passage  is  important :  first,  it  shows  that  cremation  is  thought 
of  as  standing  entirely  on  the  same  level  with  burial,  and  that,  ac- 
cordingly, not  the  slightest  objection  can  be  made  to  cremation  on 
account  of  the  Bible;  secondly,  it  follows  that  the  words,  " where 
their  worm  dieth  not,"  in  Mark's  account  of  the  description  of  hell- 
fire  as  given  by  Jesus1  should  not  have  been  admitted ;  they  are 
out  of  place. 

TIAMAT. 

Jensen  (/.  c,  p.  489)  observes  with  reference  to  Tiamat:  "Be- 
rossus  calls  this  being  <a  woman/  she  is  the  mother  of  the  gods,' 
has  a  husband  and  a  lover,  and  nowhere  throughout  Assyrian  or 
Bab}donian  literature  is  there  found  even  the  slightest  hint  that 
this  creature  is  regarded  otherwise  than  as  a  woman." 

Nothing  can  be  farther  off  the  mark  than  this  assertion,  which 
contradicts  not  merely  me,  but  also  a  fact  recognised  by  all  Assyri- 
ologists.  Or  is  it  not  true  that  a  human  woman  gives  birth  to 
human  beings,  while  a  lioness  brings  forth  young  lions?  Therefore, 
a  creature  which  gives  birth  to  si?~mahhe,  i.  e. ,  gigantic  serpents 
{ittalad,  see  Creation-epic,  III.,  24  and  passim},  must  itself  be  a 
great,  powerful  serpent,  a  Spa/cuv  /ueyas  or  some  serpent-like  mon- 
ster. As  a  matter  of  fact,  Tiamat  is  represented  in  Babylonian  art 
as  a  great  serpent.  (See,  e.  g.,  Cheyne's  English  translation  of 
the  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  in  Haupt's  edition  of  the  Bible,  p. 
206.) 

I  see  by  no  means  in  the  scene  reproduced  in  my  First  Lec- 
ture (Fig.  46,  p.  46)  an  exact  portrayal  of  Marduk's  fight  with  the 
Dragon,  as  described  to  us  in  the  creation-epic ;  on  the  contrary,  I 
speak  expressly  and  cautiously  of  a  battle  between  "the  power  of 
light  and  the  power  of  darkness"  in  general. 

The  representation  of  this  battle,  especially  of  the  monster 
Tiamat,  naturally  left  a  wide  scope  to  the  imagination  of  the  artist. 
A  dragon  could  be  represented  in  various  ways,  such  as  we  see  in 
Figure  44,  page  44.  The  beast  which  lies  at  the  feet  of  the  god 
Marduk  has  since  been  palpably  proved  by  the  German  excavations 
to  be,  as  explained  by  me,  the  dragon  Tiamat.  The  relief  of  the 
sirrussu  found  on  the  Gate  of  Ishtar  at  Babylon  unmistakably 
agrees  with  the  figure  familiar  to  us  from  our  illustration. 

Oettli,   following   Gunkel  {Schopfung  und  Chaos,   pp.  29—114), 

1  Mk.  ix.  44,  46,  48. 


160  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

practically  agrees  with  my  conclusion  when  he  says:  "There  are 
enough  references  in  the  prophetical  and  poetical  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  to  make  it  obvious  that  the  old  [Babylonian]  creation- 
myth  survived  in  the  popular  conceptions  of  Israel,  and  that  in  a 
highly-colored  form."  And  again:  "There  are  indeed  enough 
cases  where  the  original  mythical  meaning  of  the  monsters  Tehom, 
Leviathan,  Tannin,  Rahab,  is  unmistakable."1  Isaiah  proceeds  (li. 
10):  "Art  thou  not  it  that  dried  up  the  sea,  the  water  of  the  great 
Tehom,  that  made  the  depths  of  the  sea  a  way  for  the  ransomed  to 
pass  over?"  Here  the  prophet  actually  couples  "those  mythical 
reminiscences "  with  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  as  another  tri- 
umph of  Yahveh  over  the  waters  of  Tehom.  And  when  we  con- 
sider how  in  other  passages  (e.  g.,  Ps.  cvi.  9-1 1,  lxxviii.  13)  Yah- 
veh's  achievement  of  the  passage  of  the  children  of  Israel  through 
the  Red  Sea  is  described  and  celebrated,  we  cannot  apply  to  any 
but  primaeval  times  the  words  in  Ps.  lxxiv.  13  sq.\  "Thou  brakest 
the  heads  of  the  dragons  in  the  waters,  thou  didst  dash  to  pieces 
the  heads  of  the  sea-monsters"  (Leviathan*).  Leviathan,  according 
to  Job  iii.  8  also,  is  a  personification  of  the  dark  chaotic  primaeval 
waters,  the  sworn  enemy  of  light. 

Even  Konig  reluctantly  grants  (p.  27)  that  the  Book  of  Job2 
"alludes;  in  all  probability,  to  the  conquest  of  the  primaeval  ocean  ;  " 
Jensen  accordingly  seems  to  stand  quite  alone  when  he  says  (/.  c, 
p.  490): 

"Wherever  the  Old  Testament  mentions  a  struggle  of  Yahveh  against  serpents 
and  crocodile-like  creatures,  there  is  no  occasion  to  assume  with  Delitzsch  and 
with  a  goodly  number  of  other  Assyriologists  [add :  also  with  Gunkel  and  most 
Old  Testament  theologians]  a  reference  to  the  Babylonian  myth  of  the  struggle 
with  Tiamat." 

Oettli  is  right  when  he  declares  (p.  17): 

"To  submit  the  researches  of  Natural  Science  to  the  Biblical  version  of  the 
creation  is  a  wholly  erroneous  proceeding,  which  is  the  more  unintelligible  as  the 
details  of  the  second  account  of  Genesis  and  many  other  passages  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment are  quite  incompatible  with  the  first.  Let  us,  therefore,  unreservedly  give  to 
Science  that  which  belongs  to  Science." 

Oettli  proceeds : 

"  But  let  us  also  give  to  God  that  which  is  God's ;  the  world  is  a  creation  of 
God's  omnipotence,  which  supports  it  as  its  law  of  life, — this  the  first  page  of  Gen- 
esis tells  us." 

1  Oettli  cites  Job  ix.  13  and  Isaiah  li.  9,  where,  moreover,  "  pierced  "  might  be  better  than 
dishonored." 

2  "  God  turns  not  his  anger,  the  helpers  of  rfihfib  brake  in  pieces  under  him"(ix.  13).  and 
in  his  power  he  smote  the  sea  and  in  his  wisdom  he  dashed  rdhdb  to  pieces  "  (xxvi.  12). 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  161 

In  this  I  can  no  longer  concur.  Our  faith  claims,  and  many 
passages  in  the  Old  Testament  assert,  that  God  is  the  Almighty 
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  but  this  truth  is  certainly  not  stated  on 
the  first  page  of  Genesis,  where  we  read:  "In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth, — and  the  earth  was  waste  and 
desolate,"  etc. ;  for  this  passage  leaves  unanswered  the  question, 
"Whence  did  chaos  originate?"  Besides,  even  among  the  Baby- 
lonians the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  is  ascribed  to 
the  gods,  and  the  life  of  all  animate  creatures  is  regarded  as  rest- 
ing in  their  hands. 

I  will  call  attention  to  a  passage  in  II.  R.  51,  44^,  where  a 
canal  is  named  after  "the  Serpent-god  who  bursts  (or  destroys) 
the  house  of  life,"  apparently  referring  to  some  as  yet  unknown 
Babylonian  myth.  This,  however,  would  upset  Jensen's  view,  that 
we  may  perhaps  see  in  the  two  figures,  two  gods  dwelling  by  the 
tree  of  life,  and  in  the  serpent,  its  guardian. 

Zimmern1  regards  the  serpent-god  as  ultimately  identical  with 
the  chaos-monster. 

ANGELS. 

Cornill  (/.  c,  p.  1682),  also,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  "the 
conception  of  angels  is  genuinely  Babylonian."  When  I  spoke  of 
guardian  angels  who  attend  on  men  (Ps.  xci.  11  et  seq.,  Matt, 
xviii.  10),  I  had  in  mind  such  passages  as  Apia's  well-known  letter 
of  consolation  to  the  queen-mother  (K.  523).  The  Babylonian 
officer  writes:  "Mother  of  the  king,  my  lady,  be  comforted  (?)  ! 
Bel's  and  Nebo's  angel  of  mercy  attends  on  the  king  of  the  lands, 
my  lord."  Further  the  writing  addressed  to  Esarhaddon  (K.  948): 
"May  the  great  gods  send  a  guardian  of  salvation  and  life  to  stand 
by  the  king,  my  lord ; "  and  also  the  words  of  Nabopolassar,  the 
founder  of  the  Chaldsean  kingdom:  "To  lordship  over  land  and 
people  Marduk  called  me.  He  sent  a  Cherub  of  mercy  (a  tutelary 
god)  to  attend  on  me,  and  everything  I  undertook  he  sped"  (see 
Mitteilungen  der  deutschen  Orient- Gesellschaft,  No.  10,  p.  14  et  seq.). 

In  "the  Old  Serpent  which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan"  is  pre- 
served the  ancient  Babylonian  conception  of  Tiamat,  the  primaeval 
enemy  of  the  gods,  while  Satan,  who  appears  several  times  in  the 
later  and  latest  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  is  always  the 
enemy  of  man,  not  of  God,2  owes  his  origin  to  Babylonian  demon- 

1  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  3rd  ed.,  second  half,  p.  504  et  seq. 
2See  Job,  ch.  i.  et  seq.,  1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  Zech.  iii.  1  et  seq. 


162  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

ology  in  which  we   become   acquainted  with   an  ilu  limnu  or   '  evil 
god'  and  a  gallu  or  'devil.' 

BABYLONIAN  SUPERSTITIONS  IN  SWEDEN. 

How  much  Assyria  intrudes  into  our  own  time  can  be  seen 
from  G.  Hellmann's  most  interesting  communion  on  the  Chaldaean 
origin  of  modern  superstitions  about  the  understorms  (in  the*Me- 
teorologische  Zeitschrift,  June,  1896,  pp.  236-238),  where  it  is  proved 
that  an  ancient  Babylonian  belief  survives  even  at  the  present  day 
in  the  popular  Swedish  book,  Sibyllae  Pro_phetia,  in  which  a  chapter 
entitled  "Tordons  marketecken"  treats  of  the  prognostics  of  the 
weather  and  fertility  as  indicated  by  the  thunder  in  the  several 
months. 

CANAANITES. 

The  term  used  by  me  in  its  usual  linguistic  sense  (see,  e.  g., 
Kautzsch,  Hebraische  Grami?iatik,  27th  ed.,  p.  2),  has  been  replaced 
in  later  editions  by  "North  Semites,"  simply  because  the  name  was 
frequently  misunderstood.  That  the  kings  of  the  first  Babylonian 
dynasty,  Sumu-abi  and  his  successors,  do  not  belong  to  that  Semitic 
stock  of  Babylonian  Semites  who  had  become  fused  with  the  Sume- 
rians,  but  rather  to  later  immigrants,  is  proved  by  the  ancient  Baby- 
lonian scholars,  for  they  deemed  the  names  of  the  two  kings  Ham- 
murabi (also  Ammurabi*)  and  Ammisaduga  (or  Ammizaduga)  to  be 
foreign  and  stand  in  need  of  explanation,  rendering  the  former  by 
Kimta-rapastum,  "wide- spread  family"  (cf.  0^30^,  Rehoboam),  and 
the  latter  by  Kimtum-kettum,  "upright  family"  (VR.  44,  21,  22,  a, 
b).  The  replacement  of  the  y  (in  D^,  people,  family)  by  h  in  the 
name  Ham?nurabi  shows  that  these  Semites,  unlike  the  older  stock 
that  had  been  settled  for  centuries  in  Babylonia,  still  pronounced 
the  j>  as  an  y.  Further,  their  pronunciation  of  sh  as  an  s,1  no  less 
than  the  preformative  of  the  third  person  of  the  perfect  tense  with  ia 
(not  *2),  proves  that  these  Semitic  tribes  were  quite  distinct,  which 
fact,  first  stated  by  Hommel  and  Winckler,  is  and  remains  true,  in 
spite  of  Jensen's  opposition  (/.  c,  p.  491).  Linguistic  and  his- 
torical considerations  make  it  more  than  probable  than  these  im- 
migrant Semites  belonged  to  the  Northern  Semites  and  are  most 
closely  affiliated  with  the  linguistically  so-called  "Canaanites"  (i. 
e.,  the  Phoenicians,  Moabites,  Hebrews,  etc.).     The  knowledge  of 

ISamsu  in  Sa-am-su-iluna   fcf.  also  Samu-abi)   as  contrasted  with  the  older  Babylonian 
Shamshu. 

2  In  the  personal  names  of  that  age  Yamlik-ilu,  Yarbi-ilu,  Yali-bani-ilu,  etc 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  163 

this  we  owe  to  the  acumen  of  Hugo  Winckler  (see  his  Geschichte 
Israels},  who  thereby  made  a  particularly  important  addition  to  his 
many  other  merits.  The  na  of  il&na  (in  Samsu  iltina),  which  is 
alleged  to  mean  "our  God,"  is  not  sufficient  to  prove  tribal  rela- 
tionship with  Arabia,  since,  in  view  of  the  names  Ammi-zadziga, 
Ammi-ditana,  it  is  at  least  equally  probable  that  iluna  represents  an 
adjective.1  However,  zadug,  "righteous,"  may  indicate  a  "Cana- 
anite"  dialect,  both  lexically2  and  phonetically;3  and  the  same  may 
be  said,  too,  of  such  personal  names  as  Ya-sit-ub-ilu  belonging  to 
the  same  age.4  Will  Jensen  be  able  ever  to  produce  an  unobjec- 
tionable explanation  from  the  Babylonian  language  of  such  names 
as  Yasub-ilul 

INote  the  personal  name  I-lu-na  in  Meissner's  Beitrage  zum  altbabylonischen  Privatrecht, 

No.  4;  cf.yfrs? 

ZZadftg  must  be  the  Hebrew  p*]*^;  for  the  verbal  stem,  compare  saduk,  "he  is  righteous," 
in  the  Amarna  tablets. 

3 The  vowel  8  is  obscured  to  d,  ft  ;  e.  g.,  in  anftki,  signifying  the  pronoun  •'  I "  in  the  Amarna 
tablets,  etc. 

4  Cf.  Phcen.  Ba-a-al-ia-sxi-bu,  VR,  2,  8t. 


REPLY  TO  CRITICS  OF  THE  SECOND  LEC- 
TURE. 

That  a  discussion  of  these  momentous  theological  or  religio- 
historical  questions,  if  they  are  but  treated  in  the  right  spirit, 
could  be  considered  an  injury  or  even  an  insult  to  Judaism,  least  of 
all  to  the  modern  Jewish  faith,  is  in  my  opinion  absolutely  ex- 
cluded. Dispassionate,  strictly  objective  inquiry  into  the  origin 
of  the  Sabbath,  of  the  position  of  woman  in  Israel  as  well  as  in 
Babylonia,  and  of  kindred  questions,  can  only  sharpen  our  judg- 
ment and  promote  the  truth.  In  the  same  way  we  shall  gradually 
witness  in  Jewish  circles  a  unanimity  regarding  the  worth  of  Old 
Testament  monotheism,  which  at  present  is  not  yet  attained.  In 
contradiction  to  the  universalism  of  the  belief  in  God  which  several 
Jewish  writers  of  open  letters  assume  to  prevail  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment (and  they  imagine  they  prove  their  case  by  quotations  of  Scrip- 
tural passages),  the  opinion  of  other  Israelites,  authorities  both  for 
their  general  knowledge  and  Biblical  scholarship,  has  been  voiced, 
the  purport  of  which  appears  in  the  following  private  letter  of  Jan- 
uary 14,  1903  : 

' '  Irrefutable  is  your  assertion  that  lewish  monotheism  is  egotistic,  particular- 
stic,  and  exclusive  ;  equally  irrefutable,  however,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  fact  that 
this  rigorously  particularistic  monotheism  alone  could  preserve  Judaism  for  thou- 
sands of  years  in  the  midst  of  all  kinds  of  persecution  and  hostility.  From  the 
Jewish  standpoint,  the  national  theism  is  brilliantly  justified;  to  give  it  up  means 
to  give  up  Judaism ;  and  though  much  can  be  said  in  favor  of  such  a  surrender, 
there  are  many  points  that  militate  against  it." 

The  divine  character  of  the  Torah,  of  course,  will  have  to  be 
excluded  from  scientific  discussion,  at  least  so  long  as  a  complete 
neglect  of  the  results  of  Pentateuch-criticism  on  the  Jewish  side 
can  be  regarded  as  "exact  science,"  and  so  long  as  reviews  of 
Babel  and  Bible  based  on  such  a  neglect  are  looked  upon  as  "  scien- 
tific criticism." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  165 

A  deep  pain  seizes  me,  who  myself  am  sprung  from  a  strictly 
orthodox  Lutheran  house,  when  I  consider  the  abyss  of  obscurant- 
ism, confusion,  halfheartedness,  contradiction,  let  alone  worse  fea- 
tures, of  the  evangelical  orthodoxy  displayed  towards  the  questions 
raised  by  Babel  and  Bible.  From  all  quarters  and  corners  the  cry  is 
raised  that  I  have  said  "nothing  essentially  new":  but,  if  that  be 
so,  why  this  extraordinary  excitement? 

On  the  one  hand,  a  deep  lamentation  and  bitter  accusation  of 
Assyriology  comes  from  Aix-la-Chapelle,  because  the  Old  Testa- 
ment traditions,  e.  g.,  Nebuchadnezzar's  madness,  are  arbitrarily 
assumed  to  be  borrowed  from  Babylonian  myths;  on  the  other 
hand,  an  "orthodox  pastor"  exclaims  in  the  columns  of  a  journal 
of  central  Germany  that  I  am  fighting  windmills,  because  the  story 
of  Balaam's  ass,  of  the  sun  standing  still,  of  the  fall  of  the  walls  of 
Jericho,  of  the  fish  which  swallows  Jonah,  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
madness,  are  not  contained  in  the  historical  books  of  the  Bible. 
"They  are  accounts,"  he  says,  "whose  historical  trustworthiness 
may  be  contested  even  according  to  orthodox  views." 

Accordingly  even  evangelical  orthodoxy  set  aside  "revela- 
tions "  which  are  no  longer  deemed  in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  the 
age :  will  not  the  orthodoxy  once  for  all  condescend  to  an  open 
confession,  and  explain  unequivocally  which  books  and  narratives 
of  "Holly  Scripture"  they  think  proper  to  surrender? 

Professor  Ernst  Sellin  of  Vienna,  one  of  the  first  and  most 
meritorious  among  the  positive  Old  Testament  investigators,  gladly 
acknowledges  in  his  glosses  on  Babel  and  Bible  {Neue  Freie  Presse, 
January  25,  1903)  "the  innumerable  helps,  elucidations,  and  cor- 
rections which  in  grammatical  and  lexicographical  questions  as 
well  as  in  the  field  of  the  history  of  civilisation  and  general  history 
Old  Testament  investigation  owes  to  the  decipherment  of  the  Baby- 
lonian inscriptions.  Yet,  on  the  other,  he  is  of  opinion  that  if  I 
dispose  of  the  fact  of  a  divine  revelation  in  the  Bible  on  account 
of  the  Songs  of  Songs  and  the  amalgamation  of  tradition  out  of 
heterogeneous  sources,  I  appear  on  the  scene  a  hundred  years  too 
late.  This  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  gross  exaggeration.  When  my 
dear  father,  Franz  Delitzsch,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  found 
himself  compelled  by  the  weight  of  the  facts  of  the  Old  Testament 
text  criticism  to  make  some,  and  indeed  the  smallest  possible,  con- 
cessions for  the  book  of  Genesis,  he  was  persecuted,  even  on  his 
deathbed  (1890),  by  the  denunciation  of  whole  synods.  And  the 
great  commotion   excited  by  my  Second  Lecture  serves  to  show 


166  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

convincingly  enough  that  the  circles  which  govern  Church  and 
school  cherish  a  different  conviction  from  that  of  my  highly- 
esteemed  critic. 

The  several  clergymen  who  have  not  wasted  their  time  at  the 
university  adhere  to  freer  views,  but  Church  and  School — especially 
the  public  schools — have  remained  unaffected,  and  this  inconsist- 
ency is  no  longer  endurable,  as  stated  in  my  First  Lecture  and  also 
freely  granted  by  Harnack. 

And  this  inconsistency  produces  an  increasingly  widening  gulf. 
When,  e.  g.,  a  theologian  of  no  less  authority  writes  (26th  January, 
4903):  "You  criticise  a  conception  of  Revelation  that  sensible 
Protestants  no  longer  share ;  it  is  that  of  the  antiquated  Lutheran 
Dogmatists.  .  .  .  All  divine  revelation  is,  of  course,  affected  by  the 
human  medium,  and  must  therefore  have  historically  developed;  " 
he  describes  exactly  the  standpoint  that  I  myself  advocate,  only  I 
regard  the  conceptions  of  ' '  divine  revelation  "  as  held  by  the  Church 
and  as  a  historical,  i.  e.,  human,  development  to  be  irreconcilable 
contradictions.  Either  we  take  the  one  or  the  other.  Tertium  non 
datur. 

I  hold  the  view  that  in  the  Old  Testament  we  have  to  deal 
with  a  development  effected  or  permitted  by  God  like  any  other 
product  of  this  world,  but,  for  the  rest,  of  a  purely  human  and  his- 
torical character,  in  which  God  has  not  intervened  through  a  "spe- 
cial, supernatural  revelation." 

The  Old  Testament  monotheism  plainly  shows  itself  to  be 
such  a  process  marked  by  an  advance  from  the  imperfect  to  the 
perfect,  from  the  false  to  the  true,  here  and  there  indeed  by  occa- 
sional retrogression.  The  modification  of  the  original  conception 
of  revelation,  deeply  rooted  in  ancient  Orientalism,  by  a  surrender 
of  the  verbal  inspiration,  made  by  both,  evangelical  and  Catholic 
theology,  and  even  by  the  Church,  irretrievably  divests  the  Old 
Testament  of  its  character  as  the  "Word  of  God,"  ushering  in,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  the  end  of  the  theological  and  the  beginning  of  the 
religio-historical  treatment  of  the  Old  Testament. 

The  present  resurrection  of  the  Babylonio-Assyrian  literature 
has  certainly  not  been  accomplished  without  God's  will.  It  has 
suddenly  taken  its  place  by  the  side  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  litera- 
ture, the  only  one  of  Hither-Asia  heretofore  known  to  us,  and  com- 
pels to  revise  our  conception  of  revelation  bound  up  with  the  Old 
Testament.  Would  that  we  might  more  and  more  become  con- 
vinced that  only  by  a  dispassionate  reinvestigation  of  the  docu- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  167 

merits  we  can  reach  our  aim,  and  that  in  this  controversy,  neither 
now  nor  when  its  solution  has  been  approached,  our  piety  and  the 
communion  of  our  hearts  with  God  can  suffer  the  least. 

CONCLUSION. 

I  shall  endeavor  to  reply  only  to  scientific  criticisms,  but  I  fear 
that,  if  I  adhere  to  this  maxim,  I  shall  have  little  opportunity,  if 
matters  continue  as  heretofore,  to  concern  myself  with  Evangelical 
Orthodoxy.  Their  method  of  warfare,  especially  that  of  the  Evan- 
gelical Orthodox  Press,  fills  me  with  profound  disgust.  In  the 
Evangelische  Kirchenzeitung,  founded  by  the  venerable  Hengsten- 
burg,  Pastor  P.  Wolff,  of  Friedensdorf,  Seelow,  one  of  its  regular 
contributors,  writes  (No.  4,  January  25,  1903)  as  follows: 

"Judging  from  the  proofs  given  by  Delitzsch,  we  must  expect  him  in  his  next 
Lecture  to  point  out,  how  much  lower  the  views  of  Christianity  regarding  marriage 
are  than  those  of  the  Babylonians  by  a  reference  to  the  elopment  of  the  Saxon 
Crown-Princess.  No  Babylonian  princess  ever  ran  away  with  the  tutor  of  her 
children." 

And  again : 

"Delitzsch  intends  to  deliver  another  lecture  on  Babylon  and  the  New  Testa- 
ment ;  perhaps  he  will  also  treat  the  subject  '  Babel  and  Berlin '  :  and  therein  will 
discover  many  points  of  contact.  A  small  contribution  I  could  offer  myself.  By 
the  latest  discoveries  it  has  been  proved  that  even  the  Prussian  decorations  are  de- 
rived from  Babylon.  On  a  monolith  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  King  Samsi- 
Ramman  IV.,  is  represented  wearing  upon  his  breast,  on  a  ribbon  round  the  neck, 
a  cross,  which  appears  to  be  exactly  like  a  modern  cross  such  as  is  used  for  orders 
What  a  new  light  is  shed  by  this  last  discovery  upon  our  comprehension  of  the 
real  meaning  of  orders !  Even  in  Babylon  the  order  of  the  Red  Eagle  of  the 
fourth  class  was  already  bestowed  !  Since  our  orders  are  unquestionably  derived 
from  Babel,  it  is  evident  that  our  modern  civilisation  is  steeped  through  and 
through  with  Babylonian  ideas  " 

What  a  slough  of  mental  and  moral  depravity  in  a  German 
clergyman  these  words  bespeak  !  And  samples  like  this  could  be 
multiplied  tenfold  ! 

In  contrast  to  this,  I,  as  an  Evangelical  Christian,  greet  with 
gratitude  Rev.  Dr.  Friedrich  Jeremias  of  Dresden,  whose  discus- 
sion of  my  lecture  {Dresdner  Journal,  February  4,  1903),  though 
according  to  his  standpoint  he  naturally  rejects  my  position,  is 
truly  noble  both  in  diction  and  substance. 

A  third  lecture  on  "Babel  and  Bible"  will  be  delivered  as 
as  soon  as  the  views  on  these  two  lectures  shall  have  become  clear 
and  settled. 


THIRD  AND  LAST  LECTURE 


I  LIBRARY  ol  CONGRESS 

Two  Ocpies  Received 

SEP  14    906 

Copyright  Entry 


CLA; 


KXC,  No. 


COPY 


THIRD  AND  LAST  LECTURE. 

i. 

ONCE  again  let  me  point  out  how  the  restoration  of 
Babylonian  and  Assyrian  antiquity  is  broadening 
our  spiritual  insight,  how,  together  with  the  achievements 
of  Old  Testament  research,  it  is  radically  changing  our 
judgment  in  regard  to  the  essential  value  of  ancient  He- 
brew literature,  and  how  it  seems  destined  to  shed  light 
upon  the  most  vital  religious  questions. 

•  The  horizon  of  the  tribal  genealogy  of  Genesis  x  (the 
so-called  Vblkertqfel)  only  extended  as  far  as  the  Persian 
Gulf,  and  its  geography  and  ethnology  corresponded  to 
the  limited  knowledge  of  about  the  seventh  century  before 
Christ,  yet  no  one  would  hold  it  responsible  for  its  many 
errors  and  omissions.  In  the  second  verse  Japheth's  oldest 
son  is  given  as  Gomer  (mentioned  also  in  Ezekiel  xxxviii^ 
6) ,  and  the  third  as  Madai.  While  the  Indo-Germanic 
Medes  (Madai)  first  come  within  the  horizon  even  of  the 
Assyrians  in  the  time  of  Sargon  (722-705  B.  C.) ,  this  is 
not  the  case  with  Gimir  (Gomer)  until  Asarhaddon's  time 
(681-668  B.  C.)1  The  Sapardseans  were  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land  Saparda-u  which  is  named  in  the  inscriptions 
of  King  Darius  together  with  Cappadocia  and  Ionia  and 

1  See  my  paper  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  p.  245  f.  Leipsic,  1881. 


172 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


was  probably  also  in  Asia  Minor ;  and  these  people  appear 
on  the  clay  tablets  (Sm.  2005,  K.  4668  and  others)  to- 
gether with  the  Girmirraeans,  Medes,  and  Mannaeans  as 
enemies  of  Asarhaddon.  Thus  a  little  light  falls  on  the 
land  Sepharad  mentioned  by  the  prophet  Obadiah  (i.  20) 
to  which  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were  taken  as  captives 
probably  by  Ionian  merchants  or  pirates. 

To  rightly  appreciate  the  actual  facts,  we  must  take 


Fig.  82.     Silver  Vase  of 

Entemena. 

Original  in  the  Louvre. 


Fig.  83.     Bronze  Ox  Head. 
Original  in  the  Royal  Museum  at  Berlin. 


into  account  that  it  was  a  Hebrew  author  who  gave  Shem 
the  rank  of  first  born  of  the  father  of  post-diluvian  human- 
ity. But  we  may  not  always  persist  in  slavish  dependence 
upon  such  a  shortsighted  representation  of  the  history  of 
civilisation  which  is  constantly  fettered  by  Semitic  preju- 
dices ;  but  rather  must  we  be  thankful  for  the  enormous 
expansion  of  our  knowledge  that  has  been  brought  about 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  173 

by  excavations  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  in  the  realm  of 
the  earliest  history  of  mankind.  The  Old  Testament 
writers  had  no  presentiment  of  those  people,  for  instance, 
who  preceded  the  later  Indo-Germanic  Medes  (the  descen- 
dants of  Japheth)  or  the  Semites  in  Mesopotamia.  The 
genealogy  in  Genesis  takes  no  note  of  the  non-Semitic 
Elamites  whose  dominion  extended  for  a  time  over  Baby- 
lon as  far  as  Canaan  in  the  third  millennium  before  Christ, 
and  the  inexhaustible  plenitude  of  whose  power  set  limits 
even  to  the  victorious  Assyrian  columns. 

Even  the  Sumerian  nation  disappeared  completely 
from  the  remembrance  of  the  writers  of  the  Old  Testament 
as  well  as  of  Greek  authors,  although  by  a  curious  chance 
Abraham's  home,  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  bears  a  Sumerian 
name,  and  the  temple  (hechal)  on  Zion  as  well  as  David's 
throne  (kisse)  are  called  by  foreign  names  borrowed  from 
the  Sumerian  language.  Ur  (Hebrew,  Ur-Kashdim1) 
is  the  Sumero-Babylonian  Uru,  originally  Urum,  i.  e., 
"city,"  so  called  as  a  "place  of  refuge."  The  Hebrew 
words  for  "temple,"2  and  "throne"3  are  borrowed  like  the 
corresponding  Babylonian-iVssyrian  words  ekallii  and 
knssu,  from  the  Sumerian  e-gal,  i.  e.,  "large  house,"  and 
guzd. 

Ever  clearer  and  more  tangible  appears  before  our 
eyes  this  small  but  highly  talented  nation  whose  people 
shared  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  Semitic  Babylonians 
and  more  or  less  influenced  the  Canaanite  tribes ;  this 
nation  of  pioneers  in  everything  which  makes  for  the  re- 
fining, ennobling  and  beautifying  of  life.  Their  workings 
in  silver  of  the  third  or  even  the  fourth  millennium  before 


174 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Christ,  like  the  magnificent  silver  vase  of  the  royal  priest 
Entemena,  arouse  our  admiration ;  or  bronzes  like  those 
splendidly  molded  oxen  heads  with  eyes  of  lapis  lazuli. 
Their  diorite  sculptures,  like  that  of  the  architect  with 
his  construction  plans  upon  his  knees,  are  not  so  very 


Fig.  84.     Sitting  Statue  of  Gudea. 


inferior  to  the  ideal  that  must  have  been  present  in  the 
mind  of  the  Sumerian  artist. 

When  we  observe  these  heads  of  Sumerian  men  and 
women  in  whose  finely  cut  features  the  ennobling  influ- 
ence of  hard  work  is  clearly  evident,  and  realise  that  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  175 

culture  of  these  people  not  only  founded  that  of  the  Semitic 
Babylonians,  but  is  still  operative  in  our  own  in  matters 
of  no  inconsiderable  importance,  then  we  feel  justified  in 
the  hope  that  the  form  of  which  instruction  in  the  earliest 
history  of  mankind  has  availed  itself,  will  in  the  future 
be  made  to  conform  to  the  advance  of  science,  even  if  the 
old  form,  Shem,  Ham  and  Japheth  must  be  abandoned. 


Fig.  85.     Restoration  of  the  Sumerian  Architect.1 

Only  two  kings  of  the  few  rulers  of  the  kingdom  of 
Chaldaea  which  Nabopolassar  had  founded,  held  any  in- 
terest for  the  people  of  Judsea :  Nebuchadnezzar  who  led 
the  Jewish  nation  into  captivity,  but  by  the  vastness  of 
his  dominion  compelled  veneration  and  awe  even  from  his 
enemies,  and  the  last  minor  king  Nabuna'id  in  whose 

1  The  restitution  en  nature  of  the  statue  of  "The  Architect"  is  due  to  L£on 
Heuzey  and  may  be  found  in  plate  XI  of  Heuzey's  Origines  orientales  de  I  'art ; 
recueil de memoir es  archeologiques  et  de  monume?its figures ,irepartie,  Paris,  1891. 
Heuzey  observes  in  regard  to  this  photograph  of  his  model,  "Thus  we  can  account 
for  the  arrangement  of  the  shoudda  or  Indian  woolen  shawl  which  I  have  used  in 
restoring  the  fringed  shawls  of  the  statues  of  Gudea." 


176 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


reign  Babylon  fell  into  the  hands  of  Persian  Cyrus,  the 
redeemer  of  Judah's  captivity.  And  as  their  recollection 
became  less  vivid,  Nabuna'id  was  replaced  in  the  minds 


Fig.  86.     Heads  of  Sumerian  Mbn. 
Originals  in  Paris  and  Berlin. 


of  the  people  by  his   son  Belshazzar,  the  leader  of  the 
Chaldaean  army  in  the  war  against  Persia,  who  in  turn 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


177 


was  wrongfully  called  the  son  of  Chaldsea's  greatest  king, 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

Thanks  to  excavations,  however,  we  are  now  correctly 


Fig.  87.     Heads  of  Sumerian  Women. 
Originals  in  Paris  and  Berlin. 


informed  about  all  these    matters  without  casting  any 
special  reflections  upon  the  Book  of  Daniel,  a  production 


178  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

of  the  second  century  before  Christ.  Much  rather  are  we 
grateful  to  the  author  that  whatever  liberties  he  has  other- 
wise taken  with  the  history  and  interpretation  of  the  words 
mend  mene  tekel  u-phar sin,  he  has  nevertheless  given  us 
the  key  to  their  correct  explanation.  For,  as  the  French 
archaeologist  Clermont- Ganneau  has  recognised,  the  con- 
trast so  impressively  depicted  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the 
Book  of  Daniel  between  the  great  father  Nebuchadnezzar 
and  his  exceedingly  inferior  son  under  whom  the  Persians 
had  seized  the  kingdom,  betrays  in  connection  with  the 
once  possible  meaning  of  the  words,  " There  has  been 
numbered  a  mine,  a  sekel  and  a  half  mine"  that  this  fa- 
miliar saying  had  its  origin  in  Jewish  circles  where  the 
insignificant  son  of  a  great  man  used  to  be  figuratively 
designated  as  usekel,  son  of  a  mine"  and  vice  versa.  To 
this  epithet  then  the  word  play  between  parsin,  "half- 
mine,"  and  " Persian"  was  easily  adapted.  This  spirited, 
somewhat  sarcastic  bon  mot  comprehensively  sums  up  the 
entire  Chaldsean  history  in  the  words,  a  mine,  i.  e. ,  a  great 
king ;  a  sekel,  i.e.,  a  worthless  prince :  and  half  mine,  i.e., 
the  division  of  the  realm  between  the  Medes  and  the 
Persians.1 

We  need  no  longer  discuss  the  identity  of  the  Assyr- 
ian king,  Pul,  who  reigned  in  the  days  of  Men  ahem  of 
Israel  (2  Kings,  xv.  19)  with  the  Assyrian  king  Tiglath- 
pileser,    the   contemporary    of  Pekah    (verse  29) .      The 

1  Of  the  large  number  of  treatises  written  on  the  words  mne  mne  tkel  H-fhar- 
sin>  the  following  are  worthy  of  especial  mention:  ClermoDt-Ganneau  in  the 
Journal  asiatique,  Serie  VIII,  i  (1886),  p.  36  ff . ;  Th,  Noldeke,  "Mene  tekel 
upharsin"  in  the  Zeitschrift filr  Assyriologie  (ZA)  1,  1866,  p.  414-418.  Georg 
Hoffmann,  "Mene,  mene  tekel  upharsin,"  ibid.,  II,  1887,  pp.  45-48;  but  above  all 
others  Paul  Haupt  in  Johns  Hopkins  Univei'sity  Circular,  No.  58,  p.  104.  Cf. 
also  ibid.  No.  98,  May,  1892,  John  Dyneley  Prince,  "Mene,  Mene,  Tekel,. 
Upharsin." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  179 

question  at  issue  has  long  been  settled,  and  was  forever 
done  away  with  by  the  discovery  of  two  more  cuneiform 
chronologies.  I  refer  to  the  list  of  Babylonian  kings  in 
which  Poros  is  written  Pu  lu  (Hebrew  Pul1)  ;  and  the 
Babylonian  chronicle,  which,  although  copied  from  a  Baby- 
lonian original  for  a  Babylonian,  inserts  instead  of  Pulu 
the  Assyrian  name  of  this  king  Tukulti-apil-eshara .  In- 
cidentally we  notice  the  play  of  chance,  that  just  as  in  the 
Hebrew  record  (1  Chron.  v.  6,  26;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  20) 
the  name  of  this  Assyrian  king  is  wrongly  written  Tig- 
lathpil^eser,  so  in  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  (I.  23)  it  is 
incorrectly  written  Tukul-ti-apil-z/z^-eshar-ra.  This  error 
is  accounted  for  by  the  ina  Bdbili  which  immediately 
follows. 

A  bas  relief  in  the  palace  of  Nimrud  represents  him  as 

standing  vividly  before  us  on  his  war-chariot,  the  renowned 
Pul   or   Tiglathpileser   III,    whose  protection  Menahem 

purchased  for  one  thousand  talents  of  silver,  but  who  after- 
wards threw  in  the  face  of  Assyria,  the  whole  of  Galilee 
with  its  neighboring  territory  and  led  away  the  inhabitants 
captive.  Thus  was  furnished  occasion  for  that  amalgama- 
tion of  Galilseans  and  Samaritans  which  sprang  into  ex- 
istence in  the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries  before  Christ, 
by  transplanting  on  that  soil  foreign  nationalities  at  whose 
head  were  citizens  from  the  Babylonian  towns,  Babel, 
Kutha,  and  Erech.  According  to  2  Kings  xvii,  24,  the 
king  of  Assyria  (Sargon  is  meant)  placed  people  from 
Babylon,  Kutha,2  Ava,  Hamath  and  Sepharvaim  in  the 
cities  of  Samaria ;  so  also  Ezra  iv.  9  records  where  the 
inhabitants  of   Erech   and  Babylon   are  likewise  named 

1  ^S  2  For  Kutha  see  pp.  72  and  73. 


180 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


among  those  nationalities  transplanted  by  Asnappar 
(Asurbanipal)  to  Samaria  and  other  lands  across  the 
Euphrates,  together  with  the  Susianians,  i.  e.  Elamites. 
The  underlying  current  of  this  mixed  race  was  Baby- 
lonian and  remained  so  to  such  a  degree  that  the  Talmud 
in  countless  passages  calls  the  Samaritans  Kuthaeans 
directly  after  the  Babylonian  city  Kutha,  and  that  the 
Galilaean  dialect  with  its  peculiarly  Babylonian  slurring 


Fig.  88.     The  Assyrian  King  Pul  (Tiglathpileser  hi). 


of  gutturals  betrayed  the  Galilaean  even  in  Jesus'  time 
(Matt.  xxvi.  73).  To  illustrate  this,  compare  the  familiar 
passage  of  the  Talmud  {Erubin  53  b.)  :  "When  the 
Galilaean  said,  'Who  has  an  amar1}''  they  answered  him, 
'Thou  foolish  Galilaean,  meanest  thou  an  ass  (kamor)2  to 
ride,  wine  (hamar)3,  to  drink,  or  wool  (kamary  for  clothing, 
or  a  lamb  Cimmar)s  to  slay?'  n  Gutturals  were  for  the 
most  part  similarly  reduced  to  a  spiritus  lenis  in  the  Bab- 
ylonian language.       The  Israelites  regarded  the  Babylo- 


nttN 


2  TEn 


3"wn  nvn) 


4i±v  (i®$) 


*1BK 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  181 

nians  as  so  little  Semitic  that  tlie  author  of  the  ethnolog- 
ical lists  in  Genesis  did  not  include  them,  at  all  in  his 
enumeration  of  the  "Sons  of  Shem."  The  establishment 
of  the  Babylonian  character  (which  from  this  very  fact, 
therefore,  was  not  purely  Semitic)  of  the  mixed  race  of 
the  Samaritans  and  Galilaeans  might  prove  worthy  of 
consideration,  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  New  Testament  in- 
vestigations of  the  future. 

Many  of  the  sayings,  ideas,  and  actions  of  the  Gali- 
laean  Jesus  unconsciously  compel  Babylonian  comparisons , 
as,  for  instance,  there  might  prove  to  be  an  intrinsic  con- 
nection between  the  Babylonianism  "Son  of  Man,"  by 
which  term  Ezekiel  was  usually  addressed  by  Yahveh; 
and  the  use  of  exactly  the  same  expression  in  the  mouth 
of  Jesus.  It  no  longer  requires  explanation  that  in  Aramaic 
usage  as  well  as  in. the  Babylonian,  "son  of  man"  is  a 
circumlocution  for  "man"  (children  of  men=men)  and 
that  Dan.  vii.  13  (where  with  reference  to  the  coming 
Messiah  it  is  said  one  like  the  "son  of  man"  came  with, 
the  clouds)  is  to  be  understood  as  "there  came  a  being  in 
human  form."  As  regards  Yahveh 's  constant  mode  of 
addressing  the  prophet  Ezekiel  as  son  of  man  (benadam),1 
which  is  found  elsewhere  only  in  Dan.  vii.  17,  it  seems 
to  me  we  must  accept  it  as  a  Babylonianism  like  others 
in  the  book  of  Ezekiel.  Smend  in  Der  Prophet  Eze chief 
considers  that  the  prophet  is  thus  addressed  as  one  "who 
in  relation  to  the  majesty  of  God  feels  himself  simply  as 
an  accidentally  chosen  individual  of  his  wretched  race  (Ps. 
viii.  5 ;  Job  xxv.  6)  and  not  as  a  particular  personality 
(cf.  Amos  vii.  8  ;  viii.  2  ;  Jer.  i,  11)  "  ;  and  on  that  account 

1  Z*K  p  2  Second  ed.,  p.  17.  Leipsic:  1880. 


182  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Luther  translates  it  "child  of  man"  to  be  more  exact.  But 
why  were  none  of  the  other  prophets  addressed  by  Yahveh 
as  "son  of  man"  or  "child  of  man"?  If  the  Ezekiel  mode 
of  address  is  only  a  Babylonianism,  then  the  epithet  "son 
of  man"  might  prove  to  be  simply  a  substitute  for  the 
personal  name.  For  the  Babylonian  mar  avilim,  "son 
of  man,"  or  "child  of  man"  is  only  a  circumlocution  for 
the  simple  avilum,  "man,"  and  is  interchangeable  with 
it,  for  instance,  in  the  Code  of  Hammurabi;  but  with  the 
Babylonian  "son  of  man"  (and  consequently  also  with 
the  simple  "man")  there  is  always  connected  the  idea  of 
a  certain  dignity.  For  in  contrast  to  a  slave  whose  name 
never  received  the  added  "son  of  such  and  such,"  and  in 
contrast  to  a  person  of  obscure  parentage  who  was  called 
"son  of  nobody"  (mar  la  maman),  the  idea  of  the  free 
man,  the  nobleman,  was  closely  connected  with  the  term 
"son  of  man."  For  this  very  reason  the  Babylonian  "son 
of  man"  made  a  very  suitable  substitute  for  a  personal 
name,  just  as  old  Babylonian  letters  bear  in  place  of  the 
individual  name  of  the  addressee,  the  words  "Speak  to 
the  man  whom  Marduk  will  endow  with  life"  (ana  avilim 
sha  Marduk  uballatshu)  .2 

It  surely  seems  as  if  it  would  be  an  easy  matter  to 
prove  a  close  connection  between  this  Babylonianism  as 
used  in  the  accounts  of  the  prophets  and  the  same  ex- 
pression spoken  by  Jesus.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  be 
well  to  add  just  here  that  a  far  more  important  Biblical 
usage  is  now  at  last  conclusively  cleared  up,  and  indeed 
in  a  way  that  no  Old  Testament  exegetist  ever  dreamed 
of.     The  old  Babylonian  law  documents,  like  the  Code  of 

1  See  VATh  793.      Bu.88,  5-12,  207.      Bu.  91,  5  9,  354. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  183 

Hammurabi,  bring  to  light  certain  short  formulas  by 
means  of  which  definite  expressed  wishes  receive  irrevo- 
cable legal  authority.  If  the  father  or  mother  says  to  a 
child  "You  are  not  my  child,"  (ul  m&rl  atta),  then  by 
that  statement  he  is  repudiated  and  cast  out  from  house 
and  home.  And  as  a  child  was  legally  adopted  in  Babylonia 
by  pronouncing  the  words  "You  are  my  son,"  so  the 
psalmist  in  that  familiar  seventh  verse  of  the  second  psalm 
explains  the  Messiah  allegorically  as  Yahveh's  adopted 
son  and  heir  of  the  nations  until  the  end  of  the  world  by 
Yahveh's  own  inviolable  decree,  "Thou  art  my  son :  this 
day  have  I  begotten  thee." 

It  is  interesting  in  this  connection  to  compare  the 
Code  of  Hammurabi,  Sec.  170  :  "When  a  man's  wife  bears 
him  children  and  his  slave  bears  him  children,  and  during 
his  lifetime  he  says  to  the  children  which  the  slave  bore 
him  'my  children'  (mdrua)  they  are  included  with  the 
children  of  the  wife.  After  the  father's  death  the  property 
will  be  divided  equally  among  the  wife's  children  and 
those  of  the  slave,  but  the  son  of  the  wife  will  have  the 
first  choice  of  the  portions."  It  is  similarly  stated  in 
Sec.  171.  We  read  further  in  Sec.  192  :  "If  a  child  says 
to  his  foster  father  or  mother,  'You  are  not  my  father, — 
You  are  not  my  mother,'  his  tongue  shall  be  cut  out."1 

Indeed,  the  reawakening  of  the  Assyrio-Baby Ionian 
antiquity  proves  to  be  especially  significant  for  the  Old 
Testament  psalter,  that  hymn  book  of  post-exilic  Israel. 
Of  course  I  do  not  refer  here  to  the  minor  consideration 

1  For  these  short  juridical  formulas  see  Kohler-Peiser,  Hammurabis  Gesetz 
(Vol.  I,  Leipsic,  1904,  p.  123,  note  1) — where  reference  is  made  (and  with  reason) 
to  Hosea  i.  9,  "Ye  are  not  my  people,"  and  Psalms  lxxxix.  27,  "Also  I  will  make 
him  my  firstborn." 


184 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


that  the  many  musical  instruments  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament  and  particularly  in  the  psalms,  such  as  harp, 


Fig.  89.     Musicians. 
Relief  from  Sendschirli  in  Northern  Syria. 


Fig.  90.     Assyrian  Procession  of  Musicians. 
From  the  time  of  Asurbanipal. 


zither,  cymbals,  and  timbrels,  are  now  found  to  be  repre- 
sented on  Assyrian  monuments,  although,  because  of  the 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


185 


near  relationship  of  the  Israelites  with  the  Babylonians 
and  Assyrians,  the  Assyrian  reliefs  may  well  bespeak  onr 
interest  above  all  others.     By  others,  I  mean  those  repre- 


Fig.  91.     Assyrian  Harp  and  Zither 
Players. 


Fig.  92.     Assyrian  Quartet. 


Fig.  93.     Assyrian  Harp  and  Flute  Players. 


sentations  which  furnish  valuable  illustrations  to  the 
Hebrew  or  Syrian  musical  instruments  as,  for  instance, 
the  relief  brought  to  light  by  German  excavations  in  Send - 
schirli  under  the  leadership  of  Felix  von  Luschans  and 


186  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

which  is  now  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  Constantinople. 
Indeed,  when  we  observe  more  closely  this  long  triumphal 
procession  of  singing  and  playing  musicians,  men,  women 
and  children,  and  perhaps  single  out  the  first  lute  players 
and  place  by  their  side  analogous  pictures  of  harp  and 
zither  players,  reliefs  of  the  ninth  and  seventh  centuries 
before  Christ;  perhaps  add,  too,  this  quartet  which  repre- 
sents both  cymbals  and  timbrels,  connoisseurs  would  then 
be  sufficiently  informed  in  regard  to  the  construction  and 


Fig.  94.     Ancient  Babylonian  Harp  of  Eleven  Strings. 

manner  of  playing  on  those  old  stringed  instruments.  It 
is  interesting  to  be  able  to  place  by  the  side  of  the  ten- 
stringed  harp  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament 
psalms  an  eleven-stringed  harp  represented  in  a  primi- 
tive Babylonian  relief. 

But  of  far  greater  importance  is  the  fact  that  in  the 
Assyrio-Babylonian  poetry  a  perfectly  consistent  parallel 
has  arisen  to  the  Hebrew  psalms  themselves,  especially 
as  far  as  concerns  the  external  form  of  their  lyrics. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  187 

i(0  Lord,  Thou  who  judgment  pronouncest  on  earth  and  in  heaven, 
Against  whose  decrees  there  is  none  who  prevaileth, 
Thou  who  fire  and  water  controllest,  and  guidest  each  breath-en- 
dowed creature, 
Who  of  the  gods  can  come  near  Thee  in  power  majestic  ? 
In  heaven — who  is  exalted?     Thou  alone  art  exalted! 
On  earth — who  is  exalted?     Thou  alone  art  exalted! 
When  Thy  word  goeth  forth  in  the  heavens,  the  heavenly  hosts1 
bow  before  Thee ; 
When  Thy  word  goeth  forth  upon  earth,    the   spirits  of  earth2 
kiss  the  ground. 
When  upward  mounteth  Thy  word  like  a  hurricane,  food  and 
drink  are  in  plenty  abounding. 
Resoundeth  Thy  word  in  terrestrial  places,  green  groweth  the 
grass  in  the  meadows. 
Thy  word  maketh  fat  the  flocks  and  herds,    and  increaseth  all 
breath-endowed  creatures, 
Thy  word  bringeth  truth  and  justice  to  pass,  so  that  truth  by 
mankind  may  be  spoken, 
Thy  word's  like  the  heavens  afar  or  the  earth  deeply  hidden — 
none  can  it  fathom, 
Thy  word — who  can  learn  it?     Or  who  can  struggle  against  it?" 

This  might  be  a  psalm  of  the  Old  Testament  after 
the  manner  perhaps  of  the  148th,  yet  the  words  are  taken 
from  a  Babylonian  hymn  addressed  to  the  local  deity  of 
Ur,  the  moon-god,  and  show  plainly  how  similar  was  the 
poetical  form  of  religious  songs  of  the  two  lands ;  the 
verses  are  usually  formed  of  two  parallel  portions  and  two 
or  more  of  the  individual  verses  unite  to  form  a  stanza. 

The  Babylonian  psalms,  certain  ones  of  which  the 
Babylonians  themselves  divided  off  metrically  by  strokes, 
unite  with  the  Creation  Epic  to  add  a  new  and  rich  element 

1  ^r^z*  i-  e->  "the  strong  ones"  of  heaven. 

2  Anunnaki,  i.  e.,  "the  strong  ones:'  of  the  earth. 


188  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

to  the  question  which  has  for  centuries  been  a  mooted 
subject;  namely,  whether  or  not,  and  to  what  degree  and 
extent  a  definite  rhythm  depending  on  rise  and  cadence 
might  be  accepted  as  existing  within  the  divisions  of  a 
separate  line.1  Some  of  the  Babylonian  psalms2  in  which 
smaller  or  larger  groups  of  lines  begin  with  the  same  syl- 
lable, furnish  parallels  to  the  so-called  acrostic  psalms  of 
the  Old  Testament,  in  which  every  line  or  group  of  lines 
begins  with  a  definite  letter  arranged  in  alphabetical  order. 
It  will  continue  to  redound  to  the  glory  of  the  later 
Old  Testament  knowledge  that  by  an  untiring  application 
to  progressive  work  it  has  struggled  through  to  the  now 
almost  universally  accepted  truth  that  much  the  greater 
number  of  the  Old  Testament  psalms  belong  to  the  latest 
period  of  Hebrew  literature ;  that  especially  the  seventy 
odd  psalms  labeled  "of  David"  are  later  addenda  most  in- 
consistent in  language  and  theme ;  that  on  the  whole  not 
a  single  psalm  of  the  Old  Testament  can  be  proved  to  be 
of  David's  authorship — or  can  even  be  assigned  to  him 
with  any  degree  of  probability.  And  it  only  remains  to 
wish  that  the  knowledge  may  extend  to  broader  circles, 
since  that  labeling  of  the  psalms  "of  David"  is  especially 
adapted  to  thoroughly  veil  the  development  of  the  Jewish 
religion.  Meanwhile,  however  easy  it  would  be  because 
of  these  facts,  to  admit  an  influence  of  the  Babylonian 

1  See  Ed.  Sievers,  Metrische  Studien,  I.  Studien  zur  hebraischen  Metrik, 
Proceedings  of  the  philological-historical  department  of  the  Kgl.  Sachs.  Ges.  d. 
Wiss.  Bd.  XXI,  No.  I  and  II,  Leipsic,  1901.  See  also  H.  Zimmern,  "Ein  vor- 
laufiges  Wort  iiber  babylonische  Metrik,"  in  the  Zeitschriftfiir  Assyriologie,  VIII, 
1893,  pp.  121-124;  also  ibid.  X,  pp.  1-24;  and  compare  my  article  "Das  babylonische 
Waltschopfungsepos"  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  philological-historical  department 
of  the  Kgl.  Sachs.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.,  XIII,  1896,  pp.  60-68. 

2  E.  g.,  K.  9290  +  K.  9297  +  K.  3452 — K.  8463.     Sp.  II,  265  a. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  189 

lyrics  upon  the  Hebrew,  yet  I  will  limit  myself  entirely 
to  pointing  out  the  parallels.  And  I  do  this  the  more 
willingly  since  the  near  relationship  of  the  Hebrew  and 
Semitic  Babylonian,  as  well  as  the  similarity  of  their 
language,  modes  of  thought  and  points  of  view,  are  clearly 
enough  explained  when  the  two  systems  of  poetry  fre- 
quently prove  to  be  alike  in  language  and  style,  rhythm, 
thought  and  figures. 

Whoever  knows  his  Psalms,  will  recall  the  extrava- 
gant wretchedness  of  body  and  soul  into  which  the  poet 
has  fallen  by  sin  and  retribution,  by  persecution  and 
threats :  he  cries  from  out  of  the  depths,  he  sinks  in  deep 
mire,  he  goes  about  wailing  as  one  that  mourneth  for  his 
mother,  his  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd,  his  bones 
and  his  soul  are  distressed,  he  is  like  a  pelican  of  the 
wilderness,  and  laments  like  a  dove,  his  heartbeats  wildly, 
his  soul  already  dwells  in  Sheol  and  is  encompassed  by 
the  sorrows  of  death.  "I  am  weary  with  my  groaning: 
all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim :  I  water  my  couch 
with  my  tears"  (Ps.  vi.  6) .  All  these  and  many  similar 
thoughts  and  pictures  we  read  also  almost  literally  in  the 
Babylonian  psalms.  " Lamenting  he  sits  amid  grievous 
complaints,  in  anguish  of  spirit."  Like  a  dove  he  mourns 
bitterly  both  day  and  night,  to  his  merciful  God  he  cries 
like  a  wild  beast,  his  form  is  bent  like  a  reed,  his  heart 
takes  its  flight,  he  is  already  the  prey  of  death,  the  tomb 
stands  open,  vermin  are  lying  in  wait  for  him.  Yes, 
certain  Old  Testament  psalms  like  Psalm  lxxxviii,  that 
melancholy  cry  of  distress  from  the  heart  of  one  who  was 
abandoned  as  if  he  were  dead,  deserted  by  his  fellows  and 
confined  within  himself  from  his  youth  up,  bear  a  strong 


190  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

resemblance  to  the  Babylonian  songs  of  lamentation  in 
their  entire  line  of  thought.  For  instance  I  have  in  mind 
the  Babylonian  dirge,1  in  which  a  pious  man  who  was 
sorely  afflicted  describes  his  wretched  condition  in  the 
following  parting  words : 

"My  dwelling  has  become  a  prison, 
In  the  bonds  of  my  flesh  my  members  are  stricken, 

In  fetters  of  my  own  my  feet  are  entangled . .  . 
My  persecutor  tracks  me  all  the  day, 

Nor  in  the  night  time  hath  my  pursuer  let  me  draw  a  breath. 
Torn  asunder,  my  bones  have  become  disjointed, 

Loosened  are  my  limbs  and  stretched  upon  the  ground .  .  . 
No  god  came  to  help,  none  gave  me  gently  his  hand, 

No  goddess  had  pity  upon  me,  nor  helpfully  walked  by  my  side. 
Wide  open  stood  my  coffin;  they  made  ready  for  my  burial, 

While  yet  I  was  alive,  funeral  songs  for  me  were  sung, 
And  vermin  they  called  to  destroy  me. 

My  adversary  hath  heard  it,  his  face  beams  with  radiance, 
Delightedly  was  my  undoing  noised  abroad,  and  his  heart  rejoiced. " 

Instructive,  too,  are  the  manifold  references  on  both 
sides  to  personal  enemies  and  malicious  foes.  The  Old 
Testament. psalms  contain  many  such  prayers  of  devout 
and  righteous  Israelites  against  those  who  hate  them  to 
the  death,  against  those  enemies  who  laugh  aha!  aha! 
with  grinning  mouth  when  misfortune  or  destruction 
comes  upon  them.  That  realistic  psalm  from  the  bed 
of  sickness  (xli)  closes  with  these  words,  "But  thou  O 
Lord,  be  merciful  unto  me  and  raise  me  up  that  I  may 
requite  them,"  referring  to  those  enemies  who  had  already 
desired  the  singer's  death.  These  malicious  enemies  are 
to  be  " brought  to  confusion  together  and   clothed  with 

1  IV  R  60,  together  with  VR  47. 


BABFX  AND  BIBLE.  191 

shame  and  dishonor"  (xxxv.  26)  and  the  singer  longs  for 
the  time  when  he  may  "see  his  desire  upon  his  enemies" 
(liv.  7  ;  lix.  10) . 

In  like  manner  a  prayer  to  Nebo  begins,  "I  declare 
thy  renown  O  Nebo,  above  all  great  gods,  [in  spite  of  the 
crowd]  of  my  adversaries  my  life  was  taken,"  and  closes, 
"In  spite  of  the  crowd  of  my  adversaries  thou,  O  Nebo, 
wilt  not  forsake  me ;  in  spite  of  the  crowd  of  them  that 
hate  me  thou  wilt  not  forsake  my  life.1" 

We  read  similar  passages  in  a  penitential  psalm  ad- 
dressed to  the  goddess  Istar  which  has  been  published  by 
L.  W.  King  in  his  work  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation.7, 

As  a  further  instance  of  Babylonian  poetry  this  psalm 
is  quoted  entire  from  Professor  King's  translation  {ibid. 
Vol.  I,  pp.  223-237)  : 

"I  pray  unto  thee,  lady  of  ladies,  goddess  of  goddesses! 

O  Ishtar,  queen  of  all  peoples,  directress  of  mankind! 

O  Irnini,    thou   art  raised  on  high,    mistress   of    the    Spirits   of 

heaven ; 
Thou  art  mighty,  thou  hast  sovereign  power,  exalted  is  thy  name! 
Thou  art  the  light  of  heaven  and   earth,    O   valiant  daughter  of 

the  Moon-god. 
Ruler  of  weapons,  arbitress  of  the  battle! 
Framer  of  all  decrees,  wearer  of  the  crown  of  dominion! 
O  lady,  majestic  is  thy  rank,  over  all  the  gods  is  it  exalted! 
Thou  art  the  cause  of  lamentation,  thou  sowest  hostility  among 

brethren  who  are  at  peace; 
Thou  art  the  bestower  of  strength! 
Thou  art  strong,    O  lady  of  victory,   thou  canst  violently  attain 

my  desire! 

1  K,  1285,  published  by  James  A.  Craig,  in  the  first  volume  of   his  Assyrian 
and  Babylonian  Religious  Texts,  Leipsic,  1895,  p.  5  ff. 

2  London,  1902,  Vol.  II,  Plate  LXXV— LXXXIV. 


192  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

O  Gutira,  who  art  girt  with  battle,  who  art  clothed  with  terror, 
Thou  wieldest  the  sceptre  and  the  decision,  the  control  of  earth 

and  heaven! 
Holy  chambers,  shrines,  divine  dwellings,   and  temples  worship 

thee! 
Where  is   thy   name   not   (heard)?      Where  is   thy  decree   not 

(obeyed) ? 
Where  are  thine  images  not  made?     Where  are  thy  temples  not 

founded  ? 
Where  art  thou  not  great  ?     Where  art  thou  not  exalted  ? 
Anu,  Bel,   and  Ea  have  raised  thee  on  high,   among  the  gods 

have  they  made  great  thy  dominion, 
They  have  exalted  thee  among  all  the  Spirits  of  heaven,   they 

have  made  thy  rank  pre-eminent. 
At  the  thought  of  thy  name  the  heaven  and  the  earth  quake, 
The  gods  tremble,  and  the  Spirits  of  the  earth  falter. 
Mankind  payeth  homage  unto  thy  mighty  name, 
For  thou  art  great,  and  thou  art  exalted. 
All  mankind,   the  whole  human  race,  boweth  down  before  thy 

power. 
Thou  judgest  the  cause  of  men  with  justice  and  righteousness; 
Thou  lookest  with  mercy  on  the  violent  man,  and  thou  settest 

right  the  unruly  every  morning. 
How  long  wilt  thou  tarry,   O   lady  of  heaven  and  earth,  shep- 
herdess of  those  that  dwell  in  human  habitations  ? 
How  long  wilt  thou  tarry,  O  lady  of  the  holy  E-anna,   the  pure 

Storehouse? 
How  long  wilt   thou   tarry,    O   lady,    whose  feet  are  unwearied, 

whose  knees  have  not  lost  their  vigor  ? 
How  long  wilt  thou  tarry,  O  lady  of  all  fights  and  of  the  battle  ? 
O  thou  glorious  one,  that  ragest  among  the  Spirits  of  heaven, 

that  subduest  angry  gods, 
That  hast  power  over  all  princes,  that  controllest  the  sceptre  oi 

kings, 
That  openest  the  bonds  of  all  handmaids, 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  193 

That  art  raised  on  high,  that  art  firmly  established,  —  O  valiant 

Ishtar,  great  is  thy  might ! 
Bright  torch  of  heaven  and  earth,  light  of  all  dwellings, 
Terrible  in  the  fight,  one  who  cannot  be  opposed,   strong  in  the 

battle  ! 
O  whirlwind,   that   roarest   against   the   foe   and   cuttest   off  the 

mighty  ! 
O  furious  Ishtar,  summoner  of  armies  ! 
O  goddess  of  men,   O  goddess  of  women,  thou  whose   counsel 

none  may  learn  ! 
Where  thou  lookest  in  pity,  the  dead  man  lives  again,   the  sick 

is  healed ; 
The  afflicted  is   saved    from  his  affliction,   when  he    beholdeth 

thy  face  ! 
I,  thy  servant,  sorrowful,  sighing,  and  in  distress  cry  unto  thee. 
Look  upon  me,  O  my  lady,  and  accept  my  supplication, 
Truly  pity  me,  and  hearken  unto  my  prayer ! 
Cry  unto  me  "It  is  enough  ! "  and  let  thy  spirit  be  appeased  ! 
How  long  shall  my  body  lament,  which  is  full  of  restlessness  and 

confusion  ? 
How  long  shall  my  heart  be  afflicted,  which  is  full  of  sorrow  and 

sighing  ? 
How    long    shall   my  omens   be    grievous    in    restlessness  and 

confusion  ? 
How  long  shall  my  house  be  troubled,  which  mourneth  bitterly  ? 
How  long   shall  my   spirit    (be   troubled),   which  aboundeth  in 

sorrow  and  sighing  ? 
O  [  ]  Irnini,  fierce  lioness,  may  thy  heart  have  rest  ! 

Is  anger  mercy  ?     Then  let  thy  spirit  be  appeased  ! 
May  thine  eyes  rest  with  favor  upon  me ; 
With  thy  glorious  regard  truly  in  mercy  look  upon  me  ! 
Put  an  end  to  the  evil  bewitchments  of  my  body ;  let  me  behold 

thy  clear  light ! 
How  long,  O  my  lady,  shall  mine  enemies  persecute  me? 
How  long  shall  they  devise  evil  in  rebellion  and  wickedness, 


194  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

And  in  my  pursuits  and  my  pleasures  shall  they  rage  against  me  ? 
How  long,  O  my  lady,  shall  the  ravenous  demon  pursue  me? 
They  have  caused  me  continuous  affliction,   but  I  have  praised 

thee. 
The  weak  have  become  strong,  but  I  am  weak  ; 
I  am  sated  like  a  flood  which  the  evil  wind  maketh  to  rage. 
My  heart  hath  taken  wing,   and  hath  flown  away  like  a  bird  of 

the  heavens ; 
I  moan  like  a  dove,  night  and  day. 
I  am  made  desolate,  and  I  weep  bitterly  ; 
With  grief  and  woe  my  spirit  is  distressed. 
What  have  I  done,  O  my  god  and  my  goddess? 
Is  it  because  I  feared  not  my  god  or  my  goddess  that  trouble 

hath  befallen  me? 
Sickness,  disease,  ruin,  and  destruction  are  come  upon  me; 
Troubles,  turning  away  of  the  countenance,  and  fulness  of  anger 

are  my  lot, 
And  the  indignation  and  the  wrath  of  all  gods  and  men. 
I  have  beheld,  O   my  lady,   days  of  affliction,  months  of  sorrow, 

years  of  misfortune; 
I  have  beheld,  O  my  lady,  slaughter,  turmoil,  and  rebellion. 
Death  and  misery  have  made  an  end  of  me  ! 
My  need  is  grievous,  grievous  is  my  humiliation ; 
Over  my  house,  my  gate,  and  my  fields  is  affliction  poured  forth 
As  for  my  god,  his  face  is  turned  elsewhere ; 
My  strength  is  brought  to  nought,  my  power  is  broken  ! 
But  unto  thee,  O  my  lady,  do  I  give  heed,    I  have  kept  thee  in 

my  mind; 
Unto  thee  therefore  do  I  pray,  dissolve  my  ban  ! 
Dissolve  my  sin,  my  iniquity,  my  transgression,  and  my  offence  ! 
Forgive  my  transgression,  accept  my  supplication  ! 
Secure  my  deliverance,  and  let  me  be  loved  and  carefully  tended  ! 
Guide  my  footsteps  in  the  light,  that  among  men  I  may  gloriously 

seek  my  way ! 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  195 

Say  the  word,   that  at  thy  command  my  angry  god  may  have 

mercy, 
And  that  my  goddess,  who  is  wroth,  may  turn  again  ! 
The  darkness  hath  settled  down,  so  let  my  brazier  be  bright ; 
Thou  art  the  ruler,  let  then  my  torch  flame  forth  ! 
May  my  scattered  strength  be  collected  ; 
May  the  fold  be  wide,  and  may  my  pen  be  bolted  fast ! 
Receive  the  abasement  of  my  countenance,   give  ear  unto  my 

prayer, 
Truly  pity  me,  and  [accept  my  supplication]  ! 
How  long,  O  my  lady,  wilt  thou  be  angry  and  thy  face  be  turned 

away  ? 
How  long,  O  my  lady,  wilt  thou  rage  and  thy  spirit  be  full  of 

wrath  ? 
Incline  thy  neck  which  (is  turned)  a  vay  from   my  affairs,    and 

set  prosperity  before  thy  face  ; 
As  by  the  solving  waters  of    the    river    may    thine    anger    be 

dissolved  ! 
My  mighty  foes  may  I  trample  like  the  ground  ; 
And  those  who  are  wroth  with  me  mayest  thou  force  into  sub- 
mission and  crush  beneath  my  feet  ! 
Let  my  prayer  and  my  supplication  come  unto  thee, 
And  let  thy  great  mercy  be  upon  me, 

That  those  who  behold  me  in  the  street  may  magnify  thy  name, 
And    that    I    may    glorify  thy  godhead  and  thy    might   before 

mankind  ! 
Ishtar  is  exalted  !     Ishtar  is  queen  ! 
My  lady  is  exalted  !     My  lady  is  queen  ! 
Irnini,  the  valiant  daughter  of  the  Moon-god,  hath  not  a  rival  !" 

But  the  significance  of  the  Babylonian  psalms  is  still 
further  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  they  offer  us  a  particu- 
larly clear  insight  into  the  moral  and  religious  ideas  of 
the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians.  Of  course  it  is  clear 
without  further  question  that  the  accounts  of  wars  and 


196  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

triumphs  of  the  Assyrian  kings  are  of  as  little  value  as 
sources  for  critique  of  the  Assyrio-Babylonian  religion, 
as,  say,  the  annals  of  the  Thirty  Years  War  would  be  to 
familiarise  any  one  with  the  Evangelical  or  Catholic  re- 
ligion and  ethics.  Whoever  aspires  with  earnest  zeal  to 
discover  the  ideas  the  Babylonians  held  in  regard  to  man's 
moral  duties,  to  divinity  and  its  attributes,  to  man's  re- 
lation to  God  and  vice  versa ,  cannot  help  becoming  ab- 
sorbed in  the  epigrammatic  wisdom  of  the  Babylonians 
and  in  the  religious  content  of  their  literary  monuments. 

Since  this  has  been  undertaken  hitherto  by  but  very 
few  people,  I  would  like  now  to  sketch  in  rough  outlines 
a  picture  of  the  Babylonian  ethics  and  religion.  And  this 
has  the  rather  become  a  duty,  since  we  have  been  com- 
pletely misled  with  reference  to  Babylon  by  traditional 
historical  treatment ;  but  henceforth  we  will  be  in  a 
position  to  examine  critically  and  to  pronounce  judgment 
on  the  religious  views  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  also  in 
large  part  on  our  own,  from  this  newly  acquired  Babylonian 
standpoint. 

What  I  emphasised  some  time  ago1  has  since  been 
splendidly  confirmed  beyond  all  expectation  by  the  Code 
of  Hammurabi,  viz.,  that  the  first  and  original  commands 
of  man's  impulse  to  self-restraint,  and  of  human  society, 
namely  not  to  shed  a  neighbor's  blood,  not  to  approach 
his  neighbor's  wife,  not  to  take  unto  himself  his  neighbor's 
garment,  were  at  least  no  more  sacred  and  inviolable  in 
Israel  than  in  a  typical  constitutional  state  such  as 
Babylon  had  been  since  the  third  millennium  before  Christ, 

1  Supra,  p.  46. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  197 

and  whose  legislation  arouses  the  admiration  even  of  the 
modern  world. 

This  is  equally  true  of  most  of  the  specific  command- 
ments. Of  the  one  with'  reference  to  honor  due  to  parents, 
Hammurabi's  law  takes  account  only  in  so  far  as  punish- 
able violations  are  concerned;  as,  for  example,  in  Sec. 
195,  "If  a  child  strikes  his  father,  his  hand  shall  be  cut 
off"  ;  as  for  the  rest,  the  documents  of  religious  purport, 
psalms  and  prayers  as  well  as  the  epigrammatic  poetry 
of  the  Babylonians  must  serve  as  sources  for  the  demands 
which  Babylonian  morals  and  piety  made  upon  individuals. 
There  is  a  text  of  this  kind  (IV.  R.  51)  where  while 
seeking  the  cause  of  divine  retribution  which  had  befallen 
a  man,  among  others  the  questions  were  asked:  "Has  he 
set  the  son  against  his  father  ?  Has  he  set  the  father 
against  his  son?"  (Here  follows  the  estrangement  of 
mother  and  daughter,  mother-in-law  and  daughter-in-law, 
brother  and  brother,  friend  and  friend.)  "Has  he  not  set 
free  the  captive?  .  .  .  .Perhaps  it  is  a  trespass  against 
God,  perhaps  a  crime  against  Istar;  perhaps  he  has 
offended  God,  or  scorned  Istar,  or  held  father  and  mother 
in  contempt,  disparaged  his  elder  brother,  or  spoken 
untruthfully  ....  Has  he  broken  into  his  neighbor's  house? 
Has  he  approached  his  neighbor's  wife  ?  Has  he  shed  a 
neighbor's  blood  ?  Has  he  taken  his  neighbor's  garment  ?" 

With  reference  to  the  commandment  against  adul- 
tery, compare  Sec.  129a  of  the  Hammurabi  Code  :  "When 
a  wife  is  discovered  sleeping  with  another  man,  both  shall 
be  bound  and  thrown  into  the  water."  Transgression  of 
the  command,  "Thou  shalt  not  steal"  is  with  a  few  ex- 


198  BABEL  AND  BIBLE- 

ceptions  made  punishable  by  death.1  The  Code  treats  of 
murder  in  only  two  places.  In  the  first  section  we  read  : 
"When  a  man  brings  another  under  suspicion  and  accuses 
him  of  murder,  but  does  not  prove  it,  then  he  who  has 
brought  suspicion  upon  the  other  shall  be  put  to  death "  ; 
and  in  Sec.  153  provocation  for  murder  is  mentioned, 
"When  a  wife  causes  her  husband's  death  on  account  of 
some  other  man,  she  shall  be  hanged,"  ina  gashishi 
ishakkanu. 

The  commandment,  "Thou  shalt  not  bear  false 
witness  against  thy  neighbor' '  is  paralleled  in  Hammurabi 
Sec.  3,  " Whoever  bears  false  witness  in  a  case  at  law, 
and  can  not  support  his  testimony,  that  man  shall  himself 
be  put  to  death,  if  the  case  is  a  trial  for  life."  How 
strictly  the  unlawful  appropriation  of  other  people's  prop- 
erty was  censured  also  in  Babylon,  may  be  seen  in  Sec. 
7,  " Whosoever  buys  without  witnesses  or  contract,  or 
consents  to  keep  either  silver  or  gold,  a  man  servant,  or 
a  maid  servant,  or  an  ox  or  a  sheep,  or  an  ass,  or  any 
other  thing  from  bondman  or  free,  that  man  is  a  thief  and 
shall  be  put  to  death."  This  commandment  which  says, 
"Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's  house,  wife,  serv- 
-  ants,  etc.,"  implies  nothing  more  than  "Thou  shalt  not 
attempt  to  acquire  for  thyself,  shalt  not  appropriate  thy 
neighbor's  house,  etc." 

Quite  analogous  to  this  we  read  in  Sec.  25  of  the 
Code  of  Hammurabi,  "When  some  one  who  has  come  to 
extinguish  a  fire  covets  something  that  belongs  to  the 
master  of  the  house,  and  helps  himself  to  the  property  of 
the  master  of  the  house,  he  shall  be  thrown  in  the  same 

1  See  Sections  6,  j,  9,  10,  19,  25. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  199 

fire."  This  Hebraic -Babylonian  u  coveting,"  as  we  can 
see,  implies  the  simultaneous  action — Jesus  with  his  "But 
I  say  unto  you' '  was  the  first  to  brand  the  sinful  inclination 
or  the  evil  desire  as  sin.  And  since  to  this  day  law  and 
religion  are  inseparable  in  the  Orient  it  must  be  recognised 
as  a  special  merit  of  the  Code  of  Hammurabi  that  it  has 
avoided  any  confusion  of  law  and  religion  within  the  Code 
itself.  For  this  same  reason  all  transgressions  of  the 
commandments  are  considered  as  sins  against  God  which 
incur  the  wrath  and  vengeance  of  God  over  and  above  the 
earthly  legal  punishment.  But  we  read  that  all  the  other 
duties  over  which  the  jurisdiction  of  authorities  does  not 
extend  were  impressed  as  rigidly  upon  the  Babylonians 
as  upon  the  Israelites,  and  their  neglect  threatened  with 
divine  punishment. 

Truthfulness  stands  first  in  this  line.  Hammurabi's 
government  knew  how  to  protect  its  subjects  effectively 
against  false  weight,  false  measure  and  false  testimony. 
But  the  moral  consciousness  of  the  Babylonians  as  of  the 
Israelites  demanded  truthfulness  in  a  much  broader  and 
deeper  sense,  and,  since  this  is  true,  it  can  only  be  a 
matter  of  regret  that  the  Hebrew  commandment  instead 
of  being  limited  to  false  witness  was  not  worded  so  as  to 
contain  the  more  universal  application  uThou  shalt  not 
lie."  If  we  could  have  been  so  inocculated  with  the 
consciousness  of  the  wrong  involved  in  a  lie  in  any  form, 
from  our  earliest  youth,  as  the  Persians,  according  to 
Herodotus  (I,  36) ,  brought  up  their  children  from  five  to 
twenty  years  of  age  exclusively  to  the  three  things,  riding, 
archery  and  truthfulness,  it  would  have  brought  incalcu- 
lable blessing  to  the  world.     But  falsehood  existed  even 


200  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

among  the  Babylonians.  Not  to  keep  the  word  one  had 
given,  to  refnse  the  promised  protection,  to  say  uyea': 
with  the  month  and  "  nay  "  with  the  heart — generally 
speaking  any  lie  was  expressly  and  repeatedly  branded 
as  a  sin  contrary  both  to  man's  law  and  to  God's  ;  while 
on  the  other  hand  sincerity  was  regarded  as  a  noble  virtue. 
As  far,  however,  as  the  virtue  of  love  for  one's 
neighbor,  and  mercy  towards  one's  fellows  is  concerned, 
none  will  contest  with  the  people  of  Israel  the  sublimity 
of  their  moral  law/ c  Love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,"  in  spite 
of  its  undeniable  limitation  to  the  people  of  their  own 
nation  (Lev.  xix.  18) .  But  as  gladly  as  we  render  to 
Judaism  whatever  credit  is  due,  let  us  give  just  as  freely 
and  honestly  to  other  nations  what  is  theirs,  and  unto 
God  what  is  God's.  We  must  not  permit  the  virtue  of 
neighborly  love  to  be  considered  a  monopoly  of  the  He- 
brew people  or  such  rash  words  to  be  spread  abroad  in  the 
world  as  these,  that  "The  fundamental  principles  of  all 
true  morality  i  I  desired  mercy  and  not  sacrifice '  (Hosea 
vi.  6,  cf.  Isaiah  i.  n  ff,  Mic.  vi.  8  etc.)  '  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbor  as  thyself  have  no  analogy  whatever  in 
Babylon."1  If  it  seems  at  the  outset  quite  unthinkable 
that  the  Babylonians  who  like  the  Hebrews,  acknowledge 
themselves  to  be  entirely  dependent  on  the  divine  mercy, 
should  have  known  in  their  time  no  love  nor  mercy  toward 
their  fellows,  this  assertion  is  directly  contrary  to  the 
testimony  of  the  monuments.  I  have  previously  pointed 
out2  how  the  question  was  asked  when  seeking  the  cause 
of  divine  wrath :  uHas  he  not  set  free  a  captive,  and  loosed 

1  E.   Sellin,    "Ein  Schlusswort   zu    Babel  und  Bibcl"   in    the    Eva?igelische 
Kirchen-Zeitung fiir  Oesterreich,  July  1903,  No.  14,  15,  p.  210. 

2  Sufra  p.  47. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  201 

the  bound,  and  has  he  refused  light  to  one  who  was  im- 
prisoned ?  n  That  was  one  instance.  The  British  Museum 
contains  clay  tablets  (unfortunately  still  incomplete)  with 
Babylonian  proverbs  which  give  us  glimpses  into  the 
depths  of  the  moral  and  religious  thought  of  the  better 
class  of  Babylonians  similar  to  those  which  the  Code  of 
Hammurabi  has  given  of  the  ' '  immeasurable  culture  ' '  of 
this  nation.  There  we  read  maxims  like  these  which  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  they  have  been  taught  by  the  expe- 
rience of  thousands  of  years,  continue  to  be  disregarded 
by  mankind  to  their  great  injury : 

"Open  not  wide  thy  mouth,  and  guard  thy  lips, 
Art  thou  aroused,  speak  not  at  once. 
If  thou  speak  rashly,  later  thou'lt  rue  it, 
Rather  in  silence  soothe  thy  spirit." 

Just  there1  we  read  the  admonition  of  the  Babylonian 
sages,  which  is  comparable  to  a  jewel  whose  radiance  re- 
mains undisturbed  by  place  and  time :  to  show  love  to 
one's  neighbor,  not  to  despise  him  nor  oppress  him  harshly 
which  would  necessarily  call  down  the  wrath  of  God,  but 
much  rather  to  give  food  and  drink  to  him  who  asks,  which 
is  well  pleasing  in  God's  sight,  to  be  helpful  and  to  do 
good  at  all  times.  While  we  are  deep  in  perusal  of  tablets 
like  these,  we  rejoice  inwardly  that  the  allmerciful  God, 
who  is  Love,  has  not  given  his  heavenly  virtues  exclu- 
sively to  one  people,  but  that  his  mercy  reaches  as  far  as 
the  clouds  extend,  and  therefore  his  reflection  is  found  in 
the  heart  of  man  everywhere. 

These  admonitions  did  not  exist  in  word  only,  but 

1  See  the  tabl^  K.  7897  which  is  now  completed,  and  is  translated  and  published 
by  K.  D.  Macmi1  an  in  the  Heitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  V.  1905. 


202  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

we  read  also  of  instances  of  their  practice  extending  even 
to  slaves.  The  Book  of  Kings  closes  with  the  account  of 
a  Babylonian  king's  act  of  grace  towards  his  political 
enemy — the  liberation  from  prison  of  the  King  of  Judah 
by  Nebuchadnezzar's  son  Evilmerodach.  And  whoever 
makes  a  careful  study  of  the  Code  of  Hammurabi  will  be 
obliged  to  admit  that  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  life, 
property  and  reputation  of  each  individual  was  carefully 
protected,  and  the  conscientious  performance  of  duty  was 
required  of  every  one  of  whatever  calling  or  position,  and 
every  neglect  of  duty  was  visited  with  the  strictest  pun- 
ishment, with  the  purpose  of  intimidation;  nevertheless 
gentleness,  love  and  mercy  came  also  to  their  rights: 
loving  care  for  the  invalid  (Sec.  148) ,  for  the  widows 
(Sec.  171-172a)  and  orphans  (Sec.  177) ,  clemency  toward 
the  unfortunate  debtor  (Sec.  48) ,  forbearance  with  the 
unruly  son  (Sec.  169) .  In  fact  why  waste  further  words 
when  it  was  shown  at  the  beginning  of  the  lecture  that 
the  Samaritans  are  really  Babylonians  as  far  as  character 
is  concerned  and  that  the  Jews  pass  for  Kuthseans,  i.  e., 
Babylonians  !  Jesus  himself  has  erected  a  monument  to 
universal  neighborly  love,  an  ideal  of  the  Babylonians, 
great-hearted  in  this  point,  too,  in  his  divinely  spiritual 
parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan,  which  towers  perceptibly 
over  the  whole  terrestrial  globe  !  Yes,  indeed,  not  only 
do  Babel  and  Bible  clasp  hands  in  brotherly  fashion 
whenever  in  the  wide  world  Samaritan  service  is  rendered, 
but  the  Babylonian  has  been  set  up  by  Jesus  as  a  pattern 
for  all  mankind :   l '  Go  and  do  likewise  !  ' ' 

Why  Jesus  chose  the  Samaritan  to  be  the  pattern  of 
the  universal  love  which  should  encompass  all  men  and 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  203 

nations  without  distinction,  can  now  be  fully  comprehen- 
ded for  the  first  time.  The  Code  of  Hammurabi  has  justly 
occasioned  surprise,  among  other  reasons  because  ua 
distinction  between  native  and  foreigner  practically  does 
not  appear  at  all,"  whence  we  may  confidently  expect  to 
find  that  the  repeated  command  of  Israel  to  treat  well  the 
stranger  within  the  gates  will  be  missing  in  the  Code. 
M  It  seems,"  observes  Kohler,  {Hammurabis  Gesetz,  p. 
139)  "  that  in  this  respect  a  complete  leveling  has  entered 
into  Babylon,  quite  in  accordance  with  historical  precedent, 
while  foreign  tribes  were  transplanted  more  and  more  into 
Babylon,  and  a  general  commingling  and  amalgamation 
of  the  nations  of  the  earth  and  their  civilisations  was 
brought  about."  To  this,  also,  corresponds  the  highly 
developed  commerce,  international  relations  and  the  char- 
acter of  the  civilisation  inherent  in  Babylonian  culture. 
We  know  that  even  Hammurabi  like  the  later  Babylonian 
kings  regarded  himself  as  lord  of  the  earth,  and  like  the 
German  emperors  of  the  Middle  Ages,  aspired  to  include 
all  tribes  under  his  dominion  and  by  so  doing  to  wipe  out 
all  distinction  between  native  and  foreigner. 

Right  here  lies  the  difference  between  the  juridical 
condition  of  Babylon  and  Israel ;  for  in  Israel  the  stranger 
remained  a  stranger  and  was  kept  aloof  from  the  Israelitish 
national  life  ;  only  the^r,1  the  foreign  guest  who  enjoyed 
the  protection  of  Israel,  was  included  in  the  circle,  and 
even  he  was  not  on  an  entire  equality  with  the  Israelites 
in  legal  privileges.  This  accounts  for  the  standing  in- 
junction to  treat  him  well,  an  injunction  which  would 
have  been  out  of  place  in  Babylon  where  no  discrimination 


204  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

was  made  between  stranger  and  native-born.  But  what 
a  contrast !  Here  in  Israel  a  few  refugees,  probably 
deserters,  exiles,  fugitives,  fearing  either  murderous 
revenge  or  punishment;  there,  a  multitude  of  strangers  ! 
This  developed  Babylon  into  the  commercial  metropolis 
of  the  world. 

To  these  and  other  commands  and  prohibitions  were 
added  in  Babylonia  as  in  Israel  manifold  priestly  regula- 
tions with  reference  to  the  offering  of  prayer,  sacrifices 
and  voluntary  gifts,  above  all,  however,  the  commandment 
not  to  "take  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain,"  that  is,  not 
to  misuse  it.  Especially  was  it  so  absolutely  sacrosanct 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Babylonians  to  swear  by  the  name  of 
God,  that  in  the  Code  of  Hammurabi  as  far  as  has  yet 
come  to  our  notice,  as  well  as  in  trial  reports,  the  possi- 
bility of  perjury  is  not  even  considered.1  On  the  other 
hand  the  Babylonian  was  not  supposed  to  eat  without 
mentioning  God's  name,  always  mindful  of  the  duty  of 
gratitude  toward  his  maker.  And  if  we  take  all  the  many 
passages  in  which  the  fear  of  God  is  made  the  most  im- 
portant duty  of  man,  and  not  to  fear  God  appears  as  the 
root  of  all  evil,  we  can  confidently  assert  that  to  the  Bab- 
ylonian as  to  the  Hebrew,  the  fear  of  God  was  considered 
the  beginning  of  wisdom.  The  saying  "Fear  God  and 
honor  the  king ' '  we  read  in  the  same  terse  style  on  a  tablet 
in  the  library  of  Sardanapal.  Ilu  tapalah  sarru  tana? ad. 
This  reverence  for  the  king  which  saw  in  the  head  of  the 

1  For  the  refusal  to  taken  an  oath  see  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,  Sec.  20,  103, 
131,  206,  227,  249.  Also  all  statements  made  "before  God"  as  for  instance  esti- 
mates of  losses  (Sec.  9,  23,  120,  126,  240,  266,  281)  are  regarded  as  absolutely  in- 
violable, truthful  and  incontestable.  We  learn  the  same  facts  from  the  law  suits , 
the  oath  of  the  defendant  determines  the  verdict.  See  for  instance  Bu.  91,  5-9; 
2181  {Cuneiform  Texts,  II  46). 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  205 

state  the  representation  of  deity  npon  earth,  this  deference 
to  the  laws  of  the  state  given  by  the  highest  lawgiver  of 
heaven  and  earth,  and  above  all  the  fear  of  God, — these 
were  the  pillars  upon  which  rested  the  duration  of  the  Bab- 
ylonian government  for  200  years  in  spite  of  surrounding 
enemies.  How  seriously  the  kings  themselves  regarded 
sin  we  learn  from  the  inscription  which  the  last  Chaldaean 
king  caused  to  be  placed  on  the  tower  of  the  Temple  of 
the  Moon,  the  closing  prayer  of  which  was  to  the  effect 
that  Belshazzar,  the  king's  eldest  son,  might  be  shielded 
from  all  sin. 

Every  man  who  faces  the  facts  with  an  unprejudiced 
mind  will  admit  that  the  meaning  of  the  idea  of  "sin," 
or,  in  other  words,  the  sum  of  all  that  man  is  in  duty 
bound  before  God  and  man  to  do  or  to  avoid,  is  entirely 
the  same  in  Babel  as  in  the  Old  Testament.  And  the 
same  agreement  may  be  noted  with  reference  to  the  con- 
sequences of  sin. 

No  sin  is  hidden  from  the  divine  eye,  none  remains 
unpunished.  The  consequence  of  sin  is  the  wrath  of  God 
which  acts  upon  the  sinner  like  a  spell  and  works  itself 
out  in  punishment  of  sickness  and  misery,  poverty  and 
persecution,  destruction  and  death.1  The  idea  common 
to  both  Old  and  New  Testaments  that  sickness  and  want 
are  the  wages  of  sin  is  exactly  the  Babylonian  view,  and 
I  might  add,  it  is  fortunate  that  this  is  the  case.  For  it 
justifies  us  to  a  greater  degree  in  investigating  the  problem 
as  to  whether  or  not  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  be- 
tween sickness  and  sin  may  still  be  accepted  in  the  light 
of  later  knowledge. 

1  Ps.  xxxviii.  3ff.  ;  lxxxviii.  8  fi.  ;  xc.  7  ff.  et  passim. 


206  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

With  penitent  confession  and  tearful  prayers  the  de- 
vout Babylonian  seeks  to  appease  God's  wrath  and  to 
propitiate  the  heart  of  God,  while  he  clings  firmly  to  his 
confidence  in  God's  fatherly  compassion.  All  the  Old 
Testament  prayers  from  the  depths  of  wretchedness  and 
sin,  as  Ps.  vi.  I,  uO  Yahveh,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  an- 
ger, neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure  ;"  the  cry, 
"  O  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  all  the  expressions  of  longing  for 
freedom  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  at  the  same  time 
for  an  end  to  illness,  misery  and  persecution,  as  well  as 
for  the  blessing  of  length  of  days  in  order  to  walk  hence- 
forth in  righteousness  in  God's  sight  ;  all  these  professions 
of  firm  confidence  in  divine  grace  we  read  in  the  Babylo- 
nian prayers  and  psalms  in  varying  styles  of  touching 
petition. 

"O  that  the  heart  of  the  Lord  would  turn  his  wrath  far  from  me  ! 

0  Lord  !  my  sins  are  many,  great  are  my  transgressions, 

0  my  God,  my  Goddess,  whether  known  or  unknown  to  me, 
Many  are  my  sins  and  great  are  my  transgressions.  .  .  . 

1  sought  around  about,  but  no  one  took  my  hand, 

1  wept,  but  there  was  none  came  near  to  comfort. 
I  cry  aloud,  but  no  one  gives  me  ear, 

Sorrowful,  and  overwhelmed,  I  can  not  look  up. 
Unto  my  compassionate  God  make  I  'mid  sighs  my  petition, 

The  feet  of  my  Goddess  I  kiss  and  embrace(?)  them. 
O  Lord,  cause  not  thy  servant  to  fall 

Who  lies  in  the  pool  of  the  mire1 — help  him  up  ! 
The  sins  that  I  have  committed,  turn  into  mercies, 

The  misdeeds  I  have  done,  let  the  wind  bear  away, 

My  many  wickednesses  tear  in  pieces  like  a  garment ! 

1  This  is  Dr.  Delitzsch's  rendering,  "Im  Wasser  des  Schlammes  liegend," 
but  Dr.  Jastrow  in  The  History  of  Religions  interprets  the  same  line  as  "over- 
flowing with  tears, "  explaining  in  a  footnote  that  the  literal  meaning  is  "rushing 
water.''     (Tr.) 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  207 

Yea,  pardon  all  my  misdemeanors,  and  I'll  obey  thy  sovereign 
power. 
Incline  towards  me  thy  heart,  like  the  heart  of  a  mother, 
Like  a  mother's  or  father's  heart,  incline  Thou  to  me." 

It  goes  without  saying  that  in  the  Babylonian  peni- 
tential psalms  and  prayers  for  the  forgiveness,  washing 
away,  putting  aside  or  saving  from  sin,  the  meaning  of 
the  prayer  was  first  of  all  that  the  spell  be  broken  and 
disappear,  and  that  sickness,  misfortune,  misery  and  death, 
be  driven  from  the  body  and  from  the  house  of  the  suppli- 
cant. Had  it  been  otherwise  the  Babylonians  would  not 
have  been  human.  But  he  grossly  deceives  himself  and 
others  who  would  maintain  that  Israel  had  a  deeper,  yea 
"  infinitely  deeper,  "  conception  of  the  nature  of  sin.  If 
perchance  it  is  held  that  the  Babylonians  experienced  a 
deep  conviction  of  sin  simply  on  account  of  its  outward 
consequences,  this  would  gainsay  the  oft  reiterated  lamen- 
tations of  the  devout  Babylonian  which  mention  always 
the  sufferings  of  the  sin-sick  soul  as  well  as  material  hard- 
ships. Whence  it  appears  that  the  Babylonian  religion 
developed  an  especially  tender  and  devout  view  as  to  man's 
faith  concerning  his  relation  to  God,  and  the  disruption 
of  that  relation  by  sin. 

Every  human  being,  the  king  no  less  than  every 
other  mortal,  is  the  " child  of  his  God."  His  God  to 
whom  he  owes  his  life,  has  at  the  same  time  entered  his 
being  as  his  good  spirit,  guiding  and  protecting  him.  No 
more  terrible  blow  can  befall  a  human  being — more  terrible 
even  than  sickness  and  pain — than  when  because  of  his 
misdeeds  his  God  (or  in  the  case  of  the  daughters  of  men, 
Goddess)  departs  from  him  and  takes  up  an  abode  else- 


208  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

where.  Such  a  literal  abandonment  by  God  and  the  re- 
sultant spiritual  pangs  are  looked  upon  by  the  Babylonians 
as  sin's  most  dreadful  curse. 

The  sinner  is  dependent  solely  upon  the  grace  of 
God,  not  only  because  in  spite  of  rigorous  self-examination 
he  is  often  totally  unaware  of  the  sin  he  must  confess,  but 
because  God's  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  and  some- 
times man  thinks  objectionable  what  is  pleasing  in  God's 
sight,  audi  vice  versa.  As  appears  in  IV  R  10,  34b,  "No  one 
knows  whether  he  is  doing  well  (udammtk)  or  ill  (ukal- 
ltiyu.    But  the  Babylonian  lives  in  the  firm  assurance  of 

faith,  that 

"Fear  of  God — begets  grace, 

Sacrifice — strengthens  life, 

And  prayer — redeems  from  sin.  "2 

Yes,  the  divinities  are  gracious  and  merciful,  and 
gladly  turn  again  to  the  repentant  sinner.  And  this  is 
especially  true  of  Marduk  whose  favorite  attribute  is  to 
awaken  the  dead,  to  revive  anew  the  victims  of  death,  and 
who  is  entirely  devoted  to  deeds  of  mercy.  The  physician 
of  both  man's  body  and  soul,  he  is  one  of  the  brightest 
and  noblest  figures  of  the  Babylonian  pantheon.  But  all 
the  other  great  gods  are  also  looked  upon  as  moral  powers. 
The  god  Shamash,  the  sun-god,  is  called  the  "King  of 
Justice."  He  is  the  righteous  and  incorruptible  judge 
whose  eye  penetrates  into  the  most  hidden  depths,  and  as 
it  is  said  of  Yahveh  (Ps.  lxxxv.  13)  :  " Righteousness 
shall  go  before  him  and  shall  set  us  in  the  way  of  his 
steps,"3  or  (Ps.  xcvii.  2)  " Righteousness  and  judgment 

1  Cf.  IV  R  6o*. 

2  K.  7897.     Z.  20  22. 

3  The  emandation  from  vayashem   (Ps.    lxxxv.    13)   to   vayashar   (parallel 
Tsedek)  is  required  by  the  context. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  209 

are  the  habitation  of  his  throne, "  so  at  all  times  the  di- 
vinities ' '  Judgment ' '  and  ' l  Righteousness ' '  stand  before 
the  Babylonian  sun-god  (comp.  Ps.  lxxxix.  15) .  And 
what  a  noble  and  lofty  idea  must  have  been  connected 
with  Marduk's  son  Nebo  that  he  should  have  been  desig- 
nated and  worshipped  as  the  "  Light  of  Truth.' ' 

It  is  very  clear  from  the  above  that  the  Babylonian 
gods,  too,  were  living  powers.  In  regard  to  this  point  we 
must  learn  all  over  again  from  the  beginning.  The  Old 
Testament's  mocking  description  of  the  Assyrio- Babylo- 
nian gods  as  idols  of  wood  and  stone,  manufactured  by 
human  hands,  (e.  g.  Deut.  iv.  28;  Is.  xliv.  9  ff.  andxlvi. 
1-2) ,  harps  on  an  external  of  Babylonian  worship.  As 
our  excavations  have  proved,  the  Holy  of  Holies  (adytum) 
of  the  Babylonian  temple  was  so  tiny  a  room  that  some- 
times it  was  entirely  filled  by  the  pedestal  of  the  god's 
statue  and  hardly  permitted  one  priest  any  freedom  of 
motion.  The  image  as  such,  accordingly,  could  not  be 
intended  as  an  object  of  worship  on  the  part  of  the  people, 
but  it  must  rather  have  designated  symbolically  the  place 
where  the  deity  had  especially  chosen  to  dwell  among  men, 
particularly  with  his  own  people,  and  in  order  that  he 
might  surely  be  found  at  all  times.  Just  as  Yahveh,  the 
God  of  Israel,  when  the  center  of  power  was  established 
in  Jerusalem  and  Solomon  had  built  his  temple  upon 
Zion,  chose  Jerusalem  for  his  earthly  abiding  place  (1 
Kings  viii.  44,  48;  xi.  13  et  passim)  and  the  temple  on 
Zion  for  the  house  where  his  power  dwelt ;  so  Marduk 
selected  the  city  of  Babylon  as  the  seat  of  his  splendor, 
and  the  temple  Esagila  for  the  house  that  was  dear  to  him. 
Man  feels  most  near  the  divine  when  in  the  earthly  house 


210  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

of  deity.  Therefore  as  the  Hebrew  singer  longeth,  yea 
even  fainteth,  for  the  conrts  of  Yahveh,  so  one  devout 
Babylonian  petitions  in  his  evening  prayer  that  he  may 
be  transported  to  Esagila,  the  sanctuary  of  Marduk. 

The  removal  of  the  image  of  a  Babylonion  god  by  the 
hands  of  an  enemy,  or  the  entire  destruction  of  a  shrine, 
was  accordingly  an  infallible  sign  that  the  deity  was  angry 
and  had  withdrawn  into  the  heavens.  When  the  divine 
wrath  subsided  the  god  came  back  to  his  dwelling  place 
here  below,  just  as  Yahveh  returned  to  his  city,  and  to 
his  land  and  people  after  the  exile  was  over.  It  was  nat- 
ural for  a  simple  people  to  feel  a  certain  veneration  for  the 
serious  and  dignified  images  of  the  gods  when  they  were 
carried  forth  in  solemn  procession,  and  even  for  the 
smaller  statuettes  which  may  have  been  sold  to  believers 
by  the  temple  authorities.  But  this  image  worship  was 
by  no  means  the  kernel  of  the  Babylonian  religion  as  even 
the  prophets  of  Judaea  knew  of  a  mysterious  mountain  of 
God  in  the  north  upon  which  the  Babylonian  gods  dwelt 
(Is.  xiv.  13  ;  Cf .  Ez.  xxviii.  14,  16)  and  clearly  recognised 
the  difference  between  the  gods  themselves,  and  their 
u  modes  of  representation  "  on  earth.  In  an  article  entitled 
u  Xhe  Towers  of  Zion ' '  in  a  Catholic  periodical  (Zwan- 
zigstes  Jahrhundert,  March  14,  1903)  we  read: 

"It  is  superfluous  in  these  days  to  prove  the  justifi- 
cation of  the  use  of  images.  Only  let  this  fact  be  borne 
in  mind.  Corresponding  to  the  spiritualised  sensuous 
nature  of  man,  the  use  of  images  as  modes  of  representa- 
tion of  transcendental  truths  is  entirely  in  accordance 
with  reason,  and  the  esteem  or  comparative  worship  in 
which  they  are  held,  is  psychologically  well  founded." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  211 

In  the  same  way  the  Babylonian  image  worship  may  be 
justified.1 

It  could  not  well  be  otherwise  than  that  the  powers 
and  manifestations  of  the  living-  deity  should  seem  as  living 
deities,  since  each  was  individually  personified.  And  so 
the  Assyrio-Babylonian  gods  differ  in  no  particular  as  far 
as  their  attributes  are  concerned  from  Yahveh,  the  God  of 
Israel.  They,  too,  do  whatsoever  they  please  in  heaven 
and  earth,  in  the  seas  and  all  deep  places  (Ps.  cxxxv.  6) . 
As  the  mountains  melt  like  wax  before  Yahveh,  so  the 
word  of  the  gods  levels  mountains  to  the  ground.  Marduk 
commands  and  it  is  done,  and  as  in  Nahum  i.  4  we  read 
of  Yahveh's  word  of  wrath  and  power, 

"He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry 
And  drieth  up  all  the  rivers ; 
Bashan  languisheth  and  Carmel, 

And  the  flower  of  Lebanon  languisheth;" 

so  also  as  a  surprising  coincidence  we  find  in  a  psalm  to 
Marduk, 

"Thy  word  is  an  exalted  net,  o'er  heaven  and  earth  extended ; 
It  cometh  over  the  sea  and  the  sea  recedeth  backwards, 
It  cometh  over  the  meadow  and  the  meadow  lamenteth, 
It  cometh  over  the  flood  of  Euphrates'  waters, 

And  thy  word,  O  Marduk,  troubleth  the  bed  of  the  river(?).'f 

The  Babylonian  gods,  too,  let  their  word  pass  through 
heaven  and  earth  now  in  a  breath  of  wind,  now  in  the  blast 
of  a  storm,  and  "speak"  to  men,  especially  to  their  cho- 
sen prophets  and  seers. 

The  gods  see  all  and  know  all ;  their  glance  penetrates 
into  the  deepest  secrets  ;  they  observe  the  paths  of  nations 

1  Cf.  supra  p.  106. 


212  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

just  as  they  examine  the  heart  and  try  the  reins  of  each 
individual ;  they  are  present  with  every  person.  There- 
fore the  Babylonian  lived  in  the  firm  belief  that  his  god 
heard  his  fervent  supplication  and  received  him  into  his 
favor.  "  Prayer-answering,  petition-granting,7 '  were 
favorite  epithets  of  the  Assyrio-Babylonian  deities.  Every 
day  and  many  times  every  day  the  Babylonian  raised  his 
hands  to  the  gods,  full  of  confidence  that  they  were  at  all 
times  able  and  ready  to  grant  their  gracious  aid,  and  I  do 
not  know  that  the  power  of  prayer  can  be  expressed  in 
more  beautiful  words  than  we  read  on  the  Assyrian  clay 
tablet  to  which  frequent  reference  has  previously  been 
made  (K.  7897)  : 

"Prayer,  supplication  and  worship 
Thou  should'st  offer  at  early  morn,  and  thy  strength  will  increase, 
And  they  will  lead  thee  with  God  until  the  end." 

To  repeat,  man  is  entirely  dependent  upon  divine 
mercy  from  his  entrance  into  life  until  its  close,  whence 
it  becomes  him  to  walk  in  humility.  Joyfully  welcomed 
by  his  parents  as  the  gift  of  divine  grace,  every  child, 
whether  boy  or  girl,  travels  the  path  of  life  under  the 
protection  of  God.  As  it  is  said  in  Job  (xiv.  6)  ,*  ■'  Look 
away  from  him,  and  all  is  over  with  him,"  so  we  read  the 
reverse  in  the  cuneiform  tablets,  "If  thou,  O  goddess 
lookst  graciously  upon  him,  he  will  surely  live ;"  (K.  101, 
Ob  v.)  or,  "Wherever  thou  lookst,  there  the  dead  live 
again,  the  sick  recovers ;  what  is  wrong  becomes  right 
when  thy  countenance  is  seen."  (26187  Z  40  ff.)  And 
the  best  benediction  which  the  parting  Babylonian  priest 

1  The  Authorized  Version  differs  from  Professor  Delitzsch's  interpretation  of 
this  passage.     It  reads,  "Turn  from  him,  that  he  may  rest."     Tr. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  213 

could  and  did  leave  with  the  sick  or  suffering,  sounds  very 
like  the  expression  from  Psalms  (xxxi,  5)  with  which 
Jesus  closed  his  eyes  upon  the  cross,  "Commit  thyself 
into  the  gracious  hands  of  thy  God."   - 

As  we  have  seen,  the  ethical  and  the  religious  feeling 
of  the  Babylonian  nation  did  not  suffer  in  spite  of  the  poly- 
theistic character  of  its  faith  and  cult.  Instead,  we  find 
in  all  main  points  a  far  reaching  unity  between  them  and 
the  Israelites.  Indeed,  even  with  reference  to  the  regard 
felt  for  the  sacrificial  system,  that  "  heathenish"  feature 
which  clung  also  to  the.  religion  of  Yahveh,  we  meet  with 
a  remarkable  parallel.  It  is  justly  considered  as  an  in- 
stance of  enlightenment  of  certain  isolated  Israelitish 
singers  and  prophets,  when  Hosea  (vi.  6)  causes  Yahveh 
to  say:  "  For  I  desired  mercy  and  not  sacrifice,  and  the 
knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offerings,"  or  when 
the  singer  of  the  fiftieth  psalm  in  the  second  century  be- 
fore Christ,  one  who  developed  religion  in  the  fullest  sense 
of  the  word,  represents  God  as  denouncing  in  vigorous 
language  the  official  ritual  of  sacrifices,  and  pronounces 
thanksgiving  and  vows  to  be  the  offering  most  pleasing 
in  God's  sight.  The  most  significant  portion  of  the 
chapter  consists  of  verses  7  to  15  : T 

"Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I  will  speak;  O  Israel,  and  I  will 
testify  against  thee :  I  am  God,  even  thy  God. 

I  will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  sacrifices  or  thy  burnt  offerings, 
to  have  been  continually  before  me. 

I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house,  nor  he  goats  out  of  thy 
folds. 


1  Cf.  Is.  i.  ii  flf. ;  the  passage  cited  on  p.  113,   Mi.   vi.   6-8;  and  on  page    100, 
Ps.  Ii,  17;  also  xl.  6. 


214  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

For  every  beast  of  the  forest  is  mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a 
thousand  hills. 

I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains  :  and  the  wild  beasts  of 
the  field  are  mine. 

If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell  thee:  for  the  world  is  mine, 
and  the  fulness  thereof. 

Will  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats  ? 

Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving;  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the 
most  High : 

And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  glorify  me." 

But  even  to  these  deep  and  refined  thoughts  we  find 
analogies  in  Babylonia  (K.  7897  Z  12-15)  : 

" Offer  prayers  to  God  each  day; 
Words  of  purity  are  the  worthiest  burnt  offering. 
Towards  thy  God  shouldst  thou  act  with  sincerity, 
For  that  is  the  worthiest  part  of  divinity." 

It  is  not  altogether  easy  to  enter  deeply  into  the  Bab- 
ylonian God-conception  which  was  original  with  the  Su- 
merians  and  was  later  adopted  by  the  immigrant  Semites 
as  an  integral  part  of  Sumerian  culture  and  was  trans- 
mitted unchanged  to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  And  yet 
with  the  help  of  the  cuneiform  monuments  we  may  conjure 
up  the  following  picture. 

Far  down  in  the  most  southern  portion  of  the  Baby- 
lonian lowlands  where  the  two  rivers  sought  to  reach  the 
sea  through  thick  jungles  of  tall  rushes,  the  Sumerian 
nation  rose  in  the  gray  dawn  of  time  in  a  brave  but  hard 
struggle  with  floods,  blistering  sunbeams,  and  many 
another  foe  to  the  dwellings  of  men.      They  supported 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  215 

themselves  by  agriculture  and  the  raising  of  cattle,  and 
because  the  welfare  of  the  individual  depended  on  the  reg- 
ular and  harmonious  working  together  of  many,  they 
became  the  first  pioneers  of  human  culture  and  civilisation. 

But  although  the  world  was  small  in  which  man  built, 
sowed  and  tended  his  flocks  in  the  sweat  of  his  face,  still 
it  was  full  of  mysteries  and  overwhelming  impressions 
vibrating  under  the  manifest  sway  of  invisible,  unsearch- 
able, super-human,  that  is,  godlike  powers.  Between  the 
boundless,  unfathomed,  never  resting  ocean  and  the  flow- 
ing torrents  of  the  twin  rivers  now  bringing  blessing  and 
now  destruction,  there  lay  like  an  island  a  piece  of  land 
drenched  with  water,  which  rewarded  marvelously  the 
industry  of  the  people  with  the  costliest  gifts  of  grain  and 
palms  and  every  variety  of  fruit  in  inexhaustible  profusion. 
And  above  earth  and  sea  stretched  the  wide  unexplored 
expanse  of  heaven  with  its  myriad  wonders ! 

With  exultant  hearts  men  saw  the  sun's  fiery  ball 
come  forth  in  ever  changeless  majesty  from  heaven's  gate  ; 
but  in  the  evening  when  uncanny  night  sank  down  upon 
their  dwellings  and  they  observed  the  bright  and  countless 
host  of  stars  and  constellations  upon  the  dark  background 
of  the  sky,  their  eyes  remained  fixed  with  amazement 
upon  each  moving  creature  of  light  full  of  wonderful 
splendor,  especially  that  glorious  but  mildly  beaming  star 
which  accompanies  the  ball  of  the  sun  at  its  going  and 
coming  like  a  true  and  inseparable  sister — Istar,  the 
goddess  who  at  evening  time  invites  man  to  rest  in  the 
arms  of  love,  and  in  the  morning  wakens  him  to  the  re- 
newed struggles  of  life.  They  greeted  the  moon  with  ever 
new  thankfulness  as  a  fatherly  friend  and  protector  when 


216  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

at  definitely  appointed  times  he  turned  toward  mankind 
now  His  sickle,  and  now  His  full  and  brillant  diadem, 
while  the  borders  of  his  light  garments  fluttered  over 
meadows  and  streams  of  water. 

All  this  they  observed, — and  besides,  the  manifold 
destructive  powers,  the  pestilence  which  creeps  up  in  the 
dark  and  suddenly  lays  its  victims  low,  and  the  sand 
storms  which  come  rushing  along  from  the  desert  with 
horrible  and  pitiless  force,  and  even  darken  the  face  of 
heaven ;  all  these  filled  mankind  with  dread  of  the  divine. 
They  sought  and  discovered  godlike  powers,  effects  and 
revelations  everywhere.  From  the  heights  of  the  heavens 
down  to  the  earth  and  beneath  it  as  well,  in  fire,  in  stream, 
in  waving  fields  of  grain,  in  each  human  being  they  saw 
a  divine  force  operating,  and  thought  that  in  each  a  god 
dwelt. 

11 A  lies  wies  den  eingeweihten  Blicken, 
A  lies  eines  Gottes  Spur.'''' 
[Everything  but  proved  the  hallowed  presence, 
Everything,  the  presence  of  some  god.] 

And  as  the  ability  to  make  tiles  out  of  earth,  and  to 
put  tiles  and  bricks  together  into  Houses,  walls  and  towers, 
or  the  art  of  forcing  pure  gold  into  the  service  of  men  for 
all  sorts  of  decorative  purposes  seemed  godlike  to  them  as 
gifts  of  the  gods,  so  too  in  justice  and  righteousness  they 
perceived  creatures  of  divine  origin.  Not  as  if  they  wor- 
shipped the  bricks  as  a  kind  of  fetish  (not  even  of  the  sun 
did  they  do  that)  but  much  rather  did  they  see  in  the  whole 
universe  of  nature  and  spirit,  phenomena  and  effects  of  a 
God  outside  and  far  above  the  world  whose  empire  ex- 
tended beyond  earthly  things. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


217 


Fig-  95-     Babylonian  Kudurru  Showing  Emblems  of  the  Gods. 


218  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

The  Babylonians  personified  separate  divine  manifes- 
tations as  did  all  ancient  peoples  not  even  entirely  except- 
ing the  Hebrews,  for  I  recall  for  instance  the  angel  of  the 
pestilence  (2  Sam.  xxiv,  15  ff.).  Moreover,  the  imagi- 
nation of  the  Hebrews  exacted  the  strict  requirement  that 
Yahveh  as  an  invisible  God  could  not  and  should  not  be 
represented  pictorially,  but  this  again  was  abundantly 
offset  in  that  Yahveh  himself  appeared  even  in  bodily-  and 
visible  form  upon  earth  having  intercourse  with  men  as 
the  " angel  of  Yahveh' ' — a  personification  of  God  to  which 
there  is  no  analogy  either  in  Babylonia  or  Assyria.  The 
Babylonians  conferred  upon  their  gods  different  degrees 
of  rank  according  to  their  spheres  of  influence,  their  effi- 
cacy, or  their  mutual  relationship,  representing  the  now 
generative  and  now  productive,  now  primary  and  now 
secondary  phenomena  as  masculine  or  feminine,  and  under 
the  figure  of  parents  and  children.  Since  the  oldest  forms 
of  written  characters  for  the  word  "month"  have  taught 
us  that  it  is  not  made  from  "day"  and  the  number  30, 
but  is  a  comparative  form  of  "day"  by  which  "month" 
is  designated,  so  to  speak,  as  a  single  day  raised  to  a  higher 
power,  I  begin  to  realise  why  the  Babylonians  considered 
the  moon-god  as  the  father  of  the  sun-god.  And  while 
they  thus  ingeniously  personified  single  manifestations  of 
deity,  and  saw  the  good,  beneficent  powers  maintaining 
victories  on  every  side  over  the  evil  and  destructive  agen- 
cies, they  created  a  pantheon  of  gods,  goddesses,  and  lesser 
divinities  (angels  and  demons)  full  of  imagination  and 
poetry,  and  at  the  same  time  provided  a  favorable  soil  for 
mythological  images  and  tales  such  as  those  which  have 
been  familiar  to  us  since  the  days  of  Greece. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


219 


The  Babylonians,  too,  were  acquainted  with  a  chariot 
of  the  sun-god  to  which  strong  and  never  wearied  mules 
were  daily  harnessed,  and  they  had  mythical  creatures 
like  fauns  and  satyrs.  While  at  the  first  glance  emblems 
of  the  gods  like  those  represented  on  the  kudurru  here 
reproduced,  or,  to  select  two  in  particular,  one  which  re- 
presents the  god  Marduk,  and  one  which  symbolises  Ea 
the  god  of  the  waters  within  and  under  the  earth,  might 
appear  more  like  the  denizens  of  hell ;  to  him  who  searches 
farther  and  sees  for  instance  the  fish,  the  symbol  of  the 
water,  united  with  the  goat,  this  goat-fish  becomes  the 
symbolisation  of  the  merrily  gushing  and  blithely  bubbling 


Fig.  96.  Emblem  of  Marduk. 


Fig.  97.  Emblem  of  Ea. 


spring — in  other  words,  becomes  simply  poetry.  And  as 
the  Babylonians  were  taught  by  constant  observation  of 
the  sky  to  recognise  the  eternal  laws  of  the  gods  in  the 
courses  of  the  stars  and  their  constellations,  so  they 
thought  to  discover  indications  of  the  divine  presence 
in  every  earthly  thing,  in  great  things  and  in  small 
— and  even  in  the  very  smallest,  as  the  flight  of  birds. 
Hence  the  Babylonians  prove  to  be  seekers  after  God, 
yes,  the  most  inquiring  spirits  among  them  even  gave 
themselves  up  entirely  to  the  search  after  God. 

Countless  traces  point  to  the  fact  that  like  the  philos- 
ophers of  Greece  and  Rome,  the  deeper  thinkers  of  Bab- 


220 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


ylonia  divined  the  ideal  unity  of  the  godhead  behind  the 
multiplicity  of  their  individual  gods.1  Yet  I  may  not 
carry  out  the  proofs  of  this  to  completion,  at  least  not 
with  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  Babylonian  God-con- 
ception with  Semitic  monotheism.  In  this  particular, 
Babel  and  Bible  will  always  remain  contrasts,  although 
here  again  even  in  this  contrast  they  prove  to  possess  one 
parallel,  the  parallel  of  human  imperfection,  from  which 


Fig.  98.     A  Scene  in  the  Desert. 


even  the  Semitic,  even  the  Israelitish  God-conception  is 
not  free. 


* 


* 


Stern,  motionless  and  dead,  the  monotonous  desert 
stretched  out  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  and  unspeakably 
monotonous  was  the  life  of  the  nomadic  tribes.  No  seed 
time,  nor  harvest,  and  therefore,  too,  no  appreciative  joy 

1  Cf.  Alfred  Jeremias,    Monotheistische    Str'omungen   innerhalb  der  baby- 
lonischen  Religion,  Leipsic,  1904. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  221 

in  the  precious  gifts  of  the  earth  ;  in  consequence,  too,  of 
the  unsettled  wandering  no  investigating  research  in  the 
miracles  of  the  starry  heavens.  An  entire  lifetime  was 
but  a  struggle  for  pasture  ground  and  watering  places, 
and  victory  was  only  possible  because  of  the  close  unity 
of  the  race  and  the  strict  discipline  of  their  warriors  under 
the  incontestable  judgment  of  one  man  in  command.  A 
Semitic-Babylonian- proverb  says,  "Man  is  the  shadow  of 
God,  the  slave  is  the  shadow  of  the  man,  but  the  king 
is  like  God."1  Because  of  this  saying  Naram-Sin,  the 
son  of  Sargon  I,  calls  himself  " the  god  of  Agade"  and  is 
represented  with  the  horn -bedecked  head-covering.  For 
the  same  reason  probably,  names  of  the  deity  are  often 
found  affixed  to  the  names  of  the  Semitic  kings,  as  for 
instance,  Shargani-shar-ali,  Naram-Sin,  Bur-Sin,  Ur- 
Ninib,  Bur-Sin,  Ishme-Dagan  of  Isin,  Nur-Adad,  Rim- 
Sin;  and  Dungi  of  Ur  sometimes  follows  this  Semitic 
custom.  We  observe,  too,  that  in  the  Code  of  Ham- 
murabi the  property  of  a  god  or  of  the  palace  is 
equally  respected  (Sec.  VI,  8)  and  in  the  letter  of  the 
gushing  Adam-shum-usur  to  the  Assyrian  king,  we  find 
the  words:  "The  king's  father,  my  Lord,  was  the  image 
(salam)  of  the  god  Bel;  the  king,  my  Lord,  is  also  Bel's 
image."  Of  no  less  interest  is  the  confession  of  a  devout 
Babylonian  (IV  R  60*  V  R  47,  II,  29-32)  "  I  taught  my 
country  to  keep  the  name  of  God  and  to  honor  Istar's 
name  I  instructed  my  people ;  the  sublimity  of  the  king 
I  made  equal  to  God  and  I  had  my  people  learn  the  fear 
of  the  palace."     It  may  be  worth  while  to  call  attention 

1  In  the  Assyrian  letter  8o,  7-19,  22,  Z.  30  ff.  In  distinction  from  the  word 
avelu  meaning  "slave"  we  have  here,  it  seems  to  me,  the  really  free  man  charac- 
terised by  the  plural  avele. 


222  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

to  the  interesting  parallel  that  in  the  Amarna  letters  the 
king  is  called  shdr  baldtz,  uthe  breath  of  life"  just  as  in 
Lam.  IV,  20  Yahveh's  anointed  is  called  "the  breath  of 
our  nostrils."1 

Whether  and  in  how  far  the  nature  and  life  of  the 
desert  contributed  to  the  Semitic  God-conception  is  doubt- 
ful. At  any  rate,  the  Semitic  nomads  saw  in  El  or  God  to 
whom  they  raised  eyes,  hands  and  heart  as  to  their  "goal,"* 
one  single  and  united  being  that  made  heaven  and  earth 
and  alone  exercises  judgment  over  all  above  and  below ; 
that  does  not  walk  and  act  as  man  do,  but  remains  un- 
changeable from  generation  to  generation, — a  truly  ex- 
alted, serious  and  sublime  God-conception  which,  however, 
after  the  manner  of  men  immediately  became  confused. 
As  the  Sumerians  split  up  the  godhead  into  the  single 
manifestations  of  divine  power  and  wisdom,  and  in  so  doing 
forgot  the  fountain-head  of  the  One,  so  the  Semites  divided 
the  one  God  of  heaven  and  earth  into  different  racial  and 
national  gods.  They  drew  him  down  to  the  narrow  limits 
of  their  paltry  separate  existence,  full  of  jealousy  and  love 
of  fighting,  and  made  the  God  of  the  universe  their  own 
personal  special  god  under  a  name  of  their  own  particular 
dialect,  and  made  themselves  the  people  and  property  of 
this  personal  god. 

From  this  particularistic  God-conception    even   the 

1  ^ss  nn 

2  In  spite  of  all  expressions  of  my  critics  to  the  contrary,  it  is  certain  that  the 
fundamental  meaning  of  the  Semitic  word  for  God,"  yil,  'el,  "aim"  or  "goal,"  is 
direction.  Not  only  because  the  former  use  of  the  word  '<?/  in  Hebrew  proves  it, 
but  even  the  Assyrian- Babylonian  scholars  testify  to  the  fact  as  unmistakably  as 
possible.  See  supra,  p.  60-61,  and  148  ff.  The  traditional  view  to  which  the 
people  have  held  so  tenaciously  and  according  to  which  'el  is  thought  to  designate 
God  as  "the  strong  one,'  is  without  any  trace  of  a  linguistic  support,  and  is  at  once 
wrecked  upon  the  short  i  of  the  original  particle  'z7. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  223 

great  prophets  of  Judah  and  Israel  did  not  succeed  in  free- 
ing themselves  completely  and  permanently.  As  the 
Arabian  is  impervious  to  the  truth  that  his  Allah,  the  one 
omnipotent  creator  of  heaven  and  earth  of  whom  Moham- 
med taught  him,  is  none  other  than  Yahveh,  the  one  om- 
nipotent creator  of  heaven  and  earth  whose  worship  Moses 
kept  alive  in  his  people,  so  the  Israelites  since  the  time  of 
their  earliest  forefathers  worshipped  the  one  God  under 
the  name  of  Yahveh,1  the  Moabites  under  the  name  of 
Kammosh2,  and  the  Ammonites  under  the  name  of  Melech 
(Milcom)3,  i.  e.,  the  judge,  but  each  without  exception 
recognised  the  national  gods  of  the  others  as  actually  and 
positively  existing.  It  is  generally  known  that  the  Old 
Testament  itself  teaches  this. 

We  are  all  familiar  with  the  beautiful  passage  in  the 
book  of  Ruth  where  Ruth's  sister-in-law  at  Naomi's  wish 
returned  "unto  her  people  and  unto  her  gods"  (Ruth  i. 
15) ,  while  Ruth  says  to  her  mother-in-law  "Thy  people 

1  My  earlier  claim  (see  page  150)  that  the  Semitic  nation  which  had  penetrated 
into  Babylon  seventy-five  centuries  before  Christ  and  from  which  Hammurabi 
sprang  knew  and  worshipped  the  God  la 'vet  la'il  (i.  e.,  Yahveh,  Yahu)  has  bril- 
liantly triumphed  over  all  criticism  and  doubt.  Cf.  Giesebrecht,  Fried e  filr  Babel 
und  Bibel,  p.  3  ff . ;  41-47;  also  Kamphausen  who  says  in  the  Historische  Ze:t- 
schrift,$6,  488:  "With  praiseworthy  discretion  Zimmern  points  out  (K  A  T  465- 
468)  that  the  name  Yahu  or  Yahveh  appears  in  Babylonian  language  only  as  the 
name  of  a  foreign  God."  Since  it  is  well  known  that  I  myself  have  never  made 
a  different  claim,  another  interpretation  of  these  words  would  have  been  nearer 
the  fact. 

2  The  Assyrian  rendering  of  the  name  of  the  national  god  of  the  Moabites  by 
Kammfisu  shows  that  the  Hebrew  KMVSH  is  more  correctly  vocalised  Kamosh 
than  Kemosh;  root  form  Kammdsh. 

3  The  designation  of  the  highest  god  as  Malach,  "judge,  king,"  is  known  to 
have  been  spread  in  Canaan  far  beyond  the  Ammonite  boundary,  whence  the  cunei- 
form List  of  the  Gods  (K\  2100  Col.  IV,  12)  says  that  "God"  was  called  malahum 
in  the  western  country.  Observe  here  the  same  rendering  of  the  vowel  a  {Siigol) 
by  the  cuneiform  a,  as  this  Babylonian  Idva  proves  to  be  in  so  many  of  the  names 
of  the  exile.  It  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  the  Babylonian  system  of  punctuation 
made  no  distinction  between  a  and  a. 


224  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God,  my  God"  (verse  16) . 
So  speaks  the  simple  faith  of  the  people,  and  so  too  the 
historians  and  prophets  who  repeatedly  mention  Moab  as 
the  nation  of  Kammosh  (Num.  xxi.  29;  Jer.  xlviii,  46) 
as  Israel  is  Yahveh' s  people.  And  since  we  have  not  the 
slightest  foundation  for  the  suspicion  that  Kammosh  was 
not  worshipped  as  the  one  creator  of  heaven  and  earth  as 
much  as  Yahveh  or  the  umost  high  God"  of  Melchizedek 
(Gen.  xiv.  18  ff.)  or  that  the  moral  and  religious  life  of 
the  Moabites  was  below  the  level  of  Israel,  so  it  is  evident 
that  the  characterisation  of  the  national  gods  of  the  Moab- 
ites and  Ammonites  as  an  "abomination"  (1  Kings  xi,  7) 
was  purely  the  outcome  of  political  jealousy. 

How  indispensably  a  particular  god  as  the  head  and 
representative  of  national  unity  seemed  to  the  Semitic 
races,  we  have  a  glowing  example  in  the  Assyrians.  When 
in  the  second  half  of  the  third  millennium  before  Christ, 
the  Semitic  Babylonians  who  had  pressed  forward  into  the 
land  which  later  was  to  be  Assyria  developed  an  indepen- 
dent national  existence,  they  yielded  themselves  at  once, 
without  disparagement  of  the  Babylonian  pantheon  which 
they  brought  with  them,  to  their  especial  primitive  na- 
tional god  Asur  (Ashtr,  Ashur).  He,  the  "saving"  and 
"holy"  god,  self -begotten,  without  even  a  consort,  and 
not  united  with  nature  or  any  forces  of  nature  but  standing 
high  above  all,  was  thought  of  and  worshipped  as  the  first 
cause  of  all  things,  and  as  the  father,  lord  and  king  of  all 
the  gods.  As  Yahveh  is  called  "the  God  of  gods"  and 
"Lord  of  lords"  (Ps.  cxxxvi,  2-3)  so  was  Asur  exactly 
the  same  ;  and  if  in  Israel  the  cry  was  heard  '  *  Who  is  like 
Yahveh  among  the  gods  ?  "  so  on  the  Tigris  it  resounded : 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  225 

c<  Who  is  like  Asur  among  the  gods  ?  "  But  the  princes 
over  the  Assyrians  were  " priests  of  Asur"  chosen  by 
Asur  since  time  immemorial  to  serve  him  as  priests. 

Asur  never  ceased  to  be  the  only  and  most  high  na- 
tional God  of  the  Assyrians  although  it  is  probable  that  the 
ancient  Babylonian  pantheon  influenced  Asur's  position 
among  the  other  gods  in  many  particulars.  Although  the 
ancient  kings  of  Assyria  preferred  the  titles  "Bel's  viceroy, 
Priest  of  Asur,"  thus  rigidly  distinguishing  Asur  from 
the  Babylonian  Bel,  the  lord  of  earth  and  of  humanity, 
yet  it  was  natural  that  Bel,  the  chief  of  the  Babylonian 
•gods,  and  Asur,  of  the  Assyrian  should  gradually  fuse  into 
one  idea.  Indeed  we  find  E-kur,  the  name  of  the  temple  of 
the  Babylonian  god  Bel,  the  tutelary  deity  of  Nippur, 
transferred  to  Asur's  temple  Esara  and  consequently  Bel's 
son  Ninib  called  the  son  of  Esara.  Since  Asur  from  the 
beginning  dispensed  with  any  consort  (otherwise  how 
easy  it  would  have  been  to  give  him  one  by  the  name  of 
Ashirtu ! )  and  finally  was  assigned  a  goddess  only  to  suit 
the  "system,"  it  is  easy  to  realise  that  Bel's  consort  Belit 
Hani  was  permitted  to  be  Asur's  wife  at  the  same  time. 
With  the  interchangeableness  of  Asur  and  Bel  it  is  in- 
teresting to  compare  the  analogous  case  of  Marduk  and 
Bel,  as  it  is  strikingly  brought  out  in  the  Marduk-litany,1 
' '  Thy  city  Nippur  cast  not  aside ; ' '  and  also  in  another 
passage,2  where  Bel  the  second  god  of  the  highest  trinity 
is  missing  because  he  has  just  been  identified  with  Mar- 
duk.3 

1  IV  R  18  No.  2  +  BE  13  420.     See  Weissbach's  Miscellen  No.  XIII. 

2  Z  63-64  and  25-30. 

3  The  treatise  of  Morris  Jastrow,    '  'The   God  Ashur"  in  the  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society  (XXIV.  1903,   282-311)   suffers  from   the  fundamental 


226  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

The  chosen  people !  The  egotistic  appropriation  of 
the  Most  High  on  the  part  of  the  single  Semitic  tribes 
necessarily  led  to  the  further  acceptation  that  every  nation 
was  "chosen"  by  the  God  concerned  to  serve  him  exclu- 
sively,— an  acceptation  well  adapted  to  fill  the  particular 
tribe  with  especial  pride.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  with 
what  self-satisfaction  the  Moslem  looks  down  upon  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  who  were  not  predestined  like  himself 
by  Allah  to  know  and  worship  the  true  God.  In  the  same 
way  in  the  case  of  Asur's  people  we  meet  with  the  same 
idea  of  "election,"  although  without  the  slightest  admix- 
ture of  contempt  towards  the  other  nations  and  their  gods.' 
Ashur  is  the  city,  the  land  of  Asur;  the  Assyrians  his 
people,  and  especially  the  priest-kings  of  Assyria  consid- 
ered themselves  called  of  Asur  from  the  beginning  to  fear 
him,  and  their  race  chosen  to  be  Asur's  priests  and  min- 
isters forever.  In  the  same  way  Israel  is  the  chosen 
people  of  Yahveh,  not  of  God  in  our  present  comprehensive 
sense  any  more  than  the  Assyrians  as  the  people  of  the 
Lord  God  Asur  could  advance  the  claim  of  passing  for  the 
chosen  people  of  "God." 

The  national  god  made  a  contract  with  his  people 
which  in  Israel  was  even  strengthened  by  a  special  exter- 
nal symbol,  the  circumcision  (Gen.  xvii.  10-14) .  He 
hated  those  who  hated  his  people,  and  blessed  those  who 
blessed  his  people.  Therefore  Israel's  enemies  were  eo 
ipso,  enemies  of  Yahveh  (Ps.  lxxxiii) .  "I  (Yahveh)  will 
be  an  enemy  unto  thine  enemies,  and  an  adversary  unto 
thine  adversaries"  (Ex.  xxiii.  22) .     And  just  as  Yahveh 

error  that  it  confuses  the  adjective  forms  under  consideration  in  the  name  Asur,  viz., 
ashir ,  ashur  from  ashdru,  "to  be  saving,  prosperous"  (whence  too  the  Hebrew 
asher  is  derived)  with  the  participle  dshir  from  ashdru,  "to  have  charge." 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  227 

went  to  battle  before  Israel's  Hosts  or  Zebaoth,  against  her 
enemies,  so  Asnr  starts  out  with  the  armies  of  his  people 
to  battle  and  to  victory.  Therefore  we  often  see  on  the 
Assyrian  reliefs,  the  symbol  of  the  god  Asur  in  front  of 
or  above  the  royal  commander,  in  the  whirl' of  battle  or  in 
the  triumphant  return.  This  symbol  represents  a  half 
figure  of  a  bearded  man  in  the  center  of  a  circle,  the  sym- 
bol of  eternity,  the  whole  borne  upon  wide  spreading  wings 
similarly  to  the  way  Yahveh  is  represented  as  flying  upon 
the  wings  of  the  wind  (Ps.  xviii.  10) .  And  as  Yahveh 
is  poetically  represented  as  armed  with  shield,  buckler 
and  spear  (Ps.  xxxv.  2-3)  or  as  it  is  said  of  him  in  the 


Fig.  99.     Symbols  of  Asur. 

seventh  Psalm  (verses  12-13)  :  "If  he  turn  not,  he  will 
whet  his  sword  ;  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready. 
He  hath  also  prepared  for  him  the  instruments  of  death," 
(Cf.  Ps.  xxi.  12) ,  so  Asur  too  appears  armed  with  the 
bow.  If  a  battle  is  to  be  fought,  he  is  seen  drawing  the 
death-dealing  arrow  from  the  string ;  if  victory  is  won  he 
lowers  his  bow.  The  Assyrian  standards  also  show  the 
archer  Asur  standing  upon  an  ox  (Cf.  Ps.  xviii.  10)  or 
hovering  above  oxen  as  he  draws  the  arrow  against  his 
enemies  and  the  foes  of  his  people. 

Although  Yahveh  himself  was  not  symbolised  by  any 
image,  but  was  thought  to  dwell  in  the  sanctuary  of  the 


230 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


ark  of  the  covenant,  yet  his  invisible  throne  (in  remarkable 
contradiction  to  the  absolute  prohibition  of  the  decalogue 
against  any  likeness)  was  thought  to  be  hovering  over 
cherubim  ("he  sitteth  between  the  cherubim,"  Ps.  xcix. 
1) .  The  representation  of  these  higher  angelic  figures 
the  Hebrews  must  have  adopted  as  they  found  them  from 
other  people  with  whom  they  came  in  contact.  And  the 
most  probable  theory  is  that  they  were  representations 


Fig.  102.     Assyrian  Standards. 


similar  to  the  winged  oxen  deities  of  Assyria.  The  As- 
syrian standards  which  show  Asur  standing  on  or  hovering 
over  oxen,  favor  this  acceptation. 

How  deeply  rooted  the  belief  was  among  the  Semites 
that  every  nation  and  every  land  had  its  special  divinity 
who  wished  and  was  permitted  to  be  worshipped  according 
to  the  custom  of  his  own  country,  the  Old  Testament  like- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  231 

wise  teaches  in  two  memorable  narratives.  We  read  in 
the  Second  Book  of  Kings  (xvii.  25-28)  that  as  long  as 
the  people  who  were  transplanted  into  Samaria  from  Babel, 
Kutha,  Hamath,  etc.,  "feared  not  the  Lord"  and  "know 
not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land,"  Yahveh  sent 
lions  among  them  until  at  the  command  of  the  Assyrian 
king  one  of  the  priests  of  Israel  was  brought  back  to  Bethel 
and  " taught  them  how  they  should  fear  the  Lord. ' '  Sargon 
did  the  same  thing  according  to  the  Sargon  cylinder  (74) 
with  the  captive  tribes  of  many  tongues  who  were  located 
in  his  capital  city ;  he  had  them  taught  by  especially 
qualified  Assyrians  the  "fear  of  God  and  the  king."1 
And  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  we 
are  told  that  Naaman,  captain  of  the  Syrian  hosts,  when 
he  had  been  healed  of  his  leprosy  and  turned  to  Yahveh, 
took  with  him  "two  mules'  burden  of  earth "  in  order  to 
worship  Yahveh  on  Yahveh' s  own  soil.  Corresponding 
to  this  conviction,  all  the  Semitic  tribes  immigrating  into 
Babylonia  accepted  at  once  the  intrinsically  Sumerian 
religion  of  the  land  ;  Terachat  an  early  day  became  "idol- 
ater" in  Babylon,  and  even  Yah veh-f earing  parents  in 
exile  called  their  child  after  the  name  of  a  Babylonian 
deity;  as,  for  instance  Mordecai,  Esther's  foster  father, 
was  consecrated  by  his  father  to  the  god  Marduk. 

In  this  way  and  in  no  other  we  can  understand  what 
would  otherwise  be  incomprehensible ;  namely,  why  after 
they  had  penetrated  into  Canaan,  the  Israelites  both  high 
and  lowly  took  up  almost  from  physical  necessity  the  cult 
of  their  new  Canaanite  home,  the  worship  of  Baal  and 

1  mdr<>  Ashshilr  mtidM{e)  i-ni  kaldma  ana  shilhuzi sibitte-i  $aldh  iliu  sham 
akle  shaire  umaHrshunUte. 


232  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

Ashera  on  the  ancient  sacred  high  places.  And  the  pre- 
exilic  prophets  in  spite  of  the  titanic  fight  which  they 
maintained  for  Yahveh  against  the  Canaanite  idolatry  of 
their  companions  could  not  succeed  in  attaining  any  last- 
ing results.  It  was  truly  a  dramatic  struggle  which  these 
inspired,  austere,  fearless  men  waged  untiringly  against 
kings  and  nation,  urging  their  people  to  purity  of  life 
with  the  ardor  of  a  holy  passion,  with  rapturous  eloquence 
and  with  every  available  means,  by  promises  and  threats, 
in  order  to  keep  Israel  even  on  the  ground  of  the  captured 
land  of  Canaan,  to  the  God  of  her  fathers  and  forefathers, 
and  to  preserve  the  nation  pure  and  unpolluted  as  a  polit- 
ical and  religious  unity. 

Parallels  between  Babel  and  Bible  may  also  be  found 
in  religious  ecstasy,  or  prophecy, — that  condition  in  which 
personalities,  highly  endowed  with  spiritual  gifts  and 
ardently  zealous  for  great  political,  ethical  or  religious 
ideals,  feel  themselves  seized  and  impelled  by  God  him- 
self, and  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  publish  abroad  visions, 
maxims,  and  speeches  usually  of  a  lofty,  poetical  tenor 
and  winning  eloquence.  As  there  were  many  holy  men  in 
Israel  and  Judah  who  were  conscious  of  the  spirit  of  God 
working  in  them,  and  were  therefore  convinced  that  Yah- 
veh himself  spoke  in  them  and  through  them  (Amos  iii. 
8  ;  vii.  14-15) ,  so  too  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria  there  were 
seers  and  prophets  and  prophetesses  like  Huldah  (2  Kings 
xxii.  14)  who  were  in  particularly  close  communion  with 
deity  and  made  known  the  divine  will  to  king  and  people. 

In  Assyria  and  Israel  the  prophets  were  sought  to 
inquire  of  heaven  whether  or  not  the  armies  should  start 
out  to  war  (1  Kings  xxii;  2  Kings  iii).     In  both  cases 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  233 

we  hear  at  the  beginning  the  encouraging  "Fear  not,  I 
am  with  thee"  ;  we  read  the  declaration  that  God  would 
go  with  them  to  battle  and  would  destroy  the  enemy  of 
his  people  with  fire,  and  we  gladly  hear  the  words  of  the 
prophet  ending  "that  ye  may  know  I  am  Yahveh"  (1 
Kings  xx.  13,  28)  or  Nebo,  or  Istar,  as  the  case  may  be. 
Interesting  cuneiform  parallels  may  be  found  in  many 
single  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  as  well 
as  the  Psalms,  as  a  result  of  the  same  modes  of  thought 
and  speech  in  both  Semitic  nations.  One  of  these  seems 
especially  worthy  of  note  in  this  connection.  In  Zeph. 
iii.  13,  we  read  of  the  absolutely  happy  condition  of  Israel 
in  the  last  days,  ( c  The  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniq- 
uity, nor  speak  lies ;  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be 
found  in  their  mouth,  for  they  shall  feed  and  lie  down  and 
none  shall  make  them  afraid . ' '  This  coupling  of  the  practice 
of  righteousness  and  truthfulness  with  quiet  and  peace- 
ful pasturage  is  certainly  peculiar,  but  it  is  to  be  found  in 
just  the  same  way  in  the  cuneiform  literature  as  the 
promise  of  an  ideal  and  blessed  existence.  For  instance, 
we  read  in  destiny  tablets,  "If  the  sun  and  moon  are  seen 
together  on  the  fourteenth  day,  the  speech  of  the  land 
will  be  truthful,  truthful  words  will  be  in  the  mouths  of 
the  people,  the  cattle  of  Akkad  will  lay  them  down  in 
security  (fpargdnzsh)  upon  the  fields." 

But  all  the  painstaking  endeavors  of  the  prophets 
were  for  the  most  part  of  no  avail,  and  the  catastrophes 
of  the  nation  which  seemed  to  the  prophets  to  be  the  judg- 
ments of  Yahveh  broke  upon  them.  The  ten  tribes  of  the 
northern  kingdom  became  the  spoil  of  the  Assyrian  do- 
minions and  fell  to  pieces  in  further  exile,  and  even  the 


234  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

inhabitants  of  the  southern  kingdom  were  uprooted  from 
the  Canaanite  soil  and  transplanted  in  foreign  lands.  Still 
the  holy  zeal  of  the  prophets  of  Yahveh  continued  to  burn, 
they  comforted  their  people  with  the  promise  that  Yahveh 
would  turn  aside  their  captivity,  would  bring  his  people 
back  and  lead  them  to  a  glorious  future  if  from  this  time 
forth  they  would  cling  undisturbed  to  the  law  of  Moses 
and  would  serve  no  other  god  than  Yahveh. 

And  the  hope  of  the  prophets  did  not  remain  unful- 
filled. In  539  B.  C.  when  without  a  stroke  of  the  sword 
Cyrus  entered  the  gates  of  Babylon  which  had  been  opened 
to  him  by  treachery  from  within,  and  the  people  strewed 
his  path  with  palm  branches,  he  issued  the  command  that 
to  all  cities  whose  gods  had  been  carried  away  to  Babylon, 
the  gods  should  be  returned  and  their  former  religion  re- 
established, and  to  the  exiled  Judaeans  he  gave  permission 
to  return  in  order  that  they  might  erect  again  at  Jerusalem 
their  ancient  and  venerable  places  of  worship. 

It  is  true  that  only  a  relatively  small  number  of 
Judaeans  made  use  of  the  privilege  granted  them  by  the 
Persian  monarch,  but  within  those  who  did  return  to 
Palestine  the  joyful  certainty  came  to  be  more  and  more 
confirmed  that  Yahveh  had  forgiven  his  people  all  their 
sins  (Ps.  lxxxv.  1-3)  and  himself  had  brought  them  back 
home  to  their  own  country,  thus  before  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  acknowledging  Israel  to  be  his  people. 

We  all  know  the  continuation  of  the  history  of  Israel. 
The  temple  rebuilt  upon  Zion  under  the  most  discouraging 
circumstances,  under  Antiochus  IV  fell  a  prey  to  the  most 
extreme  devastation.  The  conquests  of  the  Maccabaean 
heroes  over  the  Syrian  army  raised  once  more  the  jubila- 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  235 

tions  of  devout  Judaeans  to  the  utmost:  u  Blessed  is  the 
people  whose  God  is  the  Lord ;  and  the  people  whom  he 
hath  chosen  for  his  own  inheritance"  (Ps.  xxxiii.  12). 
The  proclamation  of  the  glory  of  Yahveh  was  made  known 
to  all  nations  that  his  grace  was  great  over  Israel,  that 
Israel  was  his,  "his  people  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture  " 
(Ps.  c.  3) ,  heaven  and  earth  shall  glorify  Yahveh  as  the 
one  who  has  exalted  Israel  as  the  ' ( people  near  unto  him  " 
(Ps.  cxlviii) .  New  songs  continually  celebrated  the  king- 
dom of  Yahveh  and  his  anointed  among  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth. 

But  the  successes  of  the  Maccabees  brought  about 
new  defeats  and  renewed  search  for  a  habitation ;  the  rule 
of  Yahveh,  or  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  Messiah  with 
all  the  extravagant  earthly  expectations  connected  with 
it,  would  come,  but  although  postponed  to  a  promised  fu- 
ture, continued  to  disappear  into  the  far  and  ever  farther 
distance. 

A  sower  went  forth  to  sow  his  seed,1  and  with  gentle 
forbearing,  and  loving  hand,  and  with  words  so  homely 
and  withal  powerful  put  aside  the  barriers  which  a  partic- 
ularistic national  religion  had  erected  between  God  and 
the  world,  and  planted  in  the  hearts  of  men  a  new  concep- 
tion of  God  and  his  relation  to  humanity — Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth in  Galilee  who  fulfilled  the  law  and  the  prophets  in 
that  he  interpreted  both  in  an  entirely  new  spirit,  developed 
and  perfected  them.  He  made  an  end  of  all  external  le- 
gality and  hypocrisy,  elevated  the  laws  of  eating  by  the 

1  With  these  same  words  J.  Wellhausen  begins  the  24th  Chapter  entitled  "The 
Gospel,"  of  his  Israelitische  und  Judische  Geschichte,  5th  ed.  Berlin,  1904,  p.  381. 


BB 


236  BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 

eternally  valid  word  that  not  that  which  goeth  into  the 
mouth  but  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth  defileth 
the  man ;  he  met  the  misuse  of  the  Sabbath  with  the  bold 
remark  that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  and  not  man 
for  the  Sabbath ;  he  laid  the  emphasis  of  human  iniquity 
upon  the  heart  and  its  desires ;  he  did  away  with  the  con- 
finement of  worship  to  one  particular  place  like  Jerusalem, 
and  for  the  pagan  sacrifices  and  priestly  ceremonial,  sub- 
stituted the  secret  prayer  in  the  privacy  of  one's  closet; 
he  destroyed  all  hopes  in  a  kingdom  of  God  which  would 
come  in  outward  appearance,  but  taught  rather  that  it  was 
already  dawning  among  men ;  by  the  removal  of  all  al- 
leged prerogatives  he  opened  to  all  men  and  to  all  nations 
alike  the  free  and  immediate  access  to  their  Heavenly 
Father ;  liberated  the  love  of  one's  neighbor  from  the 
limitations  which  still  clung  to  it  and  above  all  spiritualised 
the  personal  and  human  representation  of  God  by  the  ever 
abiding  words :  u  God  is  spirit,  and  those  who  worship 
him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth"  (John  iv. 
24)  ;  "  God  is  love,  and  who  abideth  in  love  abideth  in 
God  and  God  in  him.n  Truly  a  new  religion  which, 
when  all  the  manifold  human  superfluities  that  are  foreign 
to  the  personality  and  life  of  Jesus  are  removed,  is  still 
destined  to  save  the  world. 

c 1  If  such  and  such  a  star  appear  on  such  and  such  a 
day,  then  will  a  mighty  king  arise  in  the  West  land" — 
this  and  similar  words  we  read  repeatedly  on  Babylonian 
destiny  tablets,  and  it  is  clear  that  such  astrological  lore 
is  reflected  in  that  story  which  is  surrounded  by  an  ever 
new  fascination, —  the  story  of  the  Wise  Men  of  the  East 
who  had  seen  the  star  of  the  newborn  king  in  the  sky  and 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  237 

came  to  worship  the  babe  (Matt,  ii) .  We  rejoice  in  this 
story,  for  what  Goethe1  says  is  true :  "  By  no  means  do 
we  know  what  we  owe  in  general  to  Luther  and  the  Ref- 
ormation. We  have  been  made  free  from  the  fetters  of 
spiritual  narrowness,  and  as  a  result  of  the  continual 
growth  of  culture  we  have  become  qualified  to  return  to 
the  fountain  head  and  comprehend  Christianity  in  its 
purity.  Once  more  we  have  the  courage  to  stand  with 
firm  feet  upon  God's  earth  and  to  have  a  realisation  of 
our  God-given  human  nature.  Let  spiritual  culture  con- 
tinue to  advance,  let  the  natural  sciences  grow  in  ever 
greater  extent  and  depth,  and  the  human  spirit  expand 
as  it  will,  it  will  never  advance  beyond  the  sublimity  and 
moral  elevation  of  Christianity  as  it  glistens  and  gleams 
in  the  Gospels." 

As  certainly  as  this  is  the  truth,  when  we  search  the 
ancient  Babylonian  world  and  see  the  leading  spirits  of 
Babylon  endeavoring  with  earnest  zeal,  even  with  fear 
and  trembling  to  seek  God  and  the  truth,  we  can  joyously 
welcome  the  fact  that  the  Evangelist  granted  to  the  Bab- 
ylonian Wise  Men  to  be  the  first  to  offer  their  homage  at 
the  cradle  of  the  Christian  faith. 

1  Biedermann,   Goethes  Gesfrache.     Leipsic,    1890.       Vol  VIII,    149.      Con- 
versations with  Eckermann.     March  iz,  1832. 


INDEX 


. 


INDEX 


Aaron's  blessing,  29,  153. 

Abomination,  224. 

Abraham,  4,  60,  134. 

Abu  Habba,  xiv. 

Abydenus,  87. 

Achan,  37. 

Adam,  First  and  second,  48. 

Adam-shum-usur,  221. 

Akko,  35- 

Alexandretta,  Syria,  ix. 

Amenophis  III,  35. 

Amenophis  IV,  34,  35. 

American  excavations,  xix ;   at  Nip- 
pur, 3. 

Amraphel.     See  Hammurabi. 

Ancient  history  illuminated,  xxi. 

Andrae,  Walter,  84. 

Angel,  Assyrian,  51 ;   of  the  pesti- 
lence, 218;  of  Yahveh,  218. 

Angels,  53  ff.  161. 

Antelopes,  80;  Grazing,  15,  27. 

Antioch,  ix. 

Antiochus  IV,  (Epiphanes),  88,  234. 

Archaeology,  German  Evangelical  In- 
stitute of,  89. 

Ark  of  the  Covenant,  95. 

Arrapachitis,  78. 

Art,  Babylonian,  xxi. 

Asarhaddon,  171. 

Ashdod,  6. 

Ashera,  232. 

Ashur,  226. 

Askalon,  35. 

Assyria,  Military  system  of,  13-18. 

Assyrian    angel,    51 ;    beard,    141 ; 
meals,  23;  sculptures,  xxi;  stand- 


ards, 227;  throne,  19;  troops,  11- 

13. 

Astronomy,  xxiii. 

Astruc,  Jean,  41,  130. 

Asur,  224  ff. ;  armed,  227 ;  and  Bel, 
225 ;  Emblem  of,  227 ;  Esara,  tem- 
ple of,  225. 

Asurbanipal,  xii,  55,  180 ;  Library  of, 
73 ;  Ten-sided  prism  of,  79. 

Asurnazirpal,  Palace  of,  xii. 

Attributes  of  gods,  211. 

Baal,  231. 

Babel,  179,  231;  Coffins  found  at,  49; 
confirms  the  Bible,  xiv ;  Dragon  of, 
85;  Marduk,  god  of,  43. 

Babel  and  Bible,  Alfred  Jeremias  on, 
137 ;  Catholic  Nezvs  on  136  f ;  con- 
trasts, 220;  Cornill  on,  132;  Har- 
nack  on,  125  ff. ;  Joseph  Halevy 
on,  130  f. ;  linked  together,  2 ;  Op- 
position to,  71 ;  Parallels  between, 
91,  232. 

Babylon,  Influence  of,  33,  37;  Istar 
Gate  of,  83  ;  Lion  of ,  85;  Marduk, 
god  of,  209 ;  Ruins  of,  82 ;  Splendor 
of,  32,  34- 

Babylonia,  Commercial  and  judicial 
life  of,  xvi ;  Hebrew  antiquity  con- 
nected with,  xxii. 

Babylonian  art,  xxi ;  ethics  and  re- 
ligion, 196, 213 ;  language,  37 ;  pray- 
ers, 206  ff. 

Babylonians  seekers  after  God,  219. 

Baentsch,   Bruno,   118. 

Barth,  J.,  117,  154. 


242 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Beard,  Assyrian,  16,  18,  141. 

Bedouin  desert,  89. 

Beilan,  ix. 

Bel,  153;  and  Asur,  225;  Consort  of, 
225 ;  E-kur  temple  of,  225 ;  identi- 
fied with  Marduk,  225 ;  Temple  of, 
Bint-el- Amir,  xix;  Temple  of,  at 
Nippur,  xviii. 

Belshazzar,  176. 

Benediction,  29  f. ;  Babylonian,  212. 

Berlin  Museum,  49. 

Berosus,  145,  159. 

Beth  Shemesh,  95. 

Bezold,  151. 

Bible,  cause  of  interest  in  Babel,  1 ; 
Confirmations  of,  71 ;  Traces  of 
polytheism  in,  146;  Study  of,  2. 

Bibliography,  117  f. 

Biedermann,  237  n. 

Billerbeck,  Colonel,  23. 

Bint-el-Amir,  Temple  of  Bel,  xix. 

Bison,  81. 

Blessing,  Aaron's,  29,  153. 

Botta,  Emile,  x  f.,  6,  27. 

Breath  of  life,  90,  222. 

British  Museum,  xii,  xiii,  xv,  61,  201. 

Budde,  Dr.  Karl,  117. 

Bull,  Head  of  winged,  16. 

Bulls,  Transportaion  of,  25. 

Burnt  offerings,  100,   113,  213. 

Canaan,  Conquest  of,  106. 

Canaanites,  162. 

Canal  of  Keber,  4. 

Cappadocia,  171. 

Carchemish,    (Dsherabis),  5,  6. 

Carus,  Paul,  139. 

Catholic  News  on  "Babel  and  Bible," 

136  f. 
Chabor,  78. 
Chalach,  73,  78. 
Cherubim,  230. 
Child,  Adopted,  183. 
Childbirth,  Istar,  goddess  of,  109. 
Children  of  wife  and  slave,  183. 
Chosen  people,  226. 
Christianity,  237. 
Circle  of  360  degrees,  xxiii. 
Circumcision,  226. 


Coins,  31,  37. 

Constantinople,  Museum  of,  186. 

Cornill,  Dr.  C.  H„  118,  161;  on  "Ba- 
bel and  Bible,"  132. 

Craig,  James  A.,  191. 

Creation,  xxii,  90;  Babylonian  poem 
of,  42  f.,  159,  187;  Biblical  account 
of,  45,  104,  133. 

Cunning,   Sir  Stratford,  xi. 

Cyrus,  87,  176,  234. 

Dagon,  95. 

Daily  Telegraph,  xiv. 

Danneil,   Heinrich,    118. 

Darius,  171 ;  hunting  lion,  9. 

David,  19;  Psalms  of,  188. 

Days  of  the  week,  xxiii. 

Deity,  Manifestations  of,  personified, 

211,  2l8. 
Delitzsch,  Franz,  154,  165. 
Deluge,  xxii. 
Demons,  55  f.,  58,  134. 
De  Morgan,  xx,  97. 
De   Sarzec,   Ernest,  xvii,  xx. 
Desert,  89,  220. 

Devil,  The  Old  Serpent,  45,  161. 
Devils,  55  f.  134. 
Dieulafoys,  xx. 
Dillmann,  96. 
Dirge,  Babylonian,  190. 
Divine  presence  in  all  things,  216, 219. 
Doller,  Johannes,  117. 
Dragon  of  Babel,  85. 
Dryander,  120. 
Dsherabis,  See  Carchemish. 

Ea,  Emblem  of,  219. 
Eannadu,  xvii ;  Vulture  stele  of  xxi. 
East  India  Company,  x. 
Eclipses,  Solar,  29. 
E-kur,  Temple  of  Bel,  225. 
El,  The  name,  60  ff.,  148  ff.,  222. 
El-Amarna,  34,  35,  38,  222. 
Elamites,  29,  97,  173,  180. 
Emblems  of  the  gods,  217,  219. 
Emperor    William    and   higher    criti- 
cism, 139;  on  revelation,  122. 
Enannatum,  xvii. 
Engelkemper,  Dr.  W.,  118. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


243 


Entemena,  xvii,  174. 

Erech,  179. 

Esagila,  Temple  of  Marduk,  209. 

Esara,  Temple  of  Azur,  225. 

Esarhaddon,  161 ;  Palace  of,  xii. 

Ethical  monotheism,    106,   no. 

Ethics  and  religion,  Babylonian,   196, 

213. 

Ethnic  movements  traced  by  excava- 
tion, xxi. 

Eve,  Statue  of,  109. 

Evilmerodach,  202. 

Excavations  of  Babylonia  and  As- 
syria, 1,  71,  173;  French,  130. 

Exile,  Ten  tribes  of,  233. 

Ezekiel,  Vision  of,  64,  130. 

Faith  and  science,  128,  143. 

Fall  of  man,  48,  130,  133,  157. 

Flandin,  Eugene,  xi. 

Flood,  Babylonian  story  of  the,  41, 
39  f.,  107 ;  Biblical  story  of  the,  41 ; 
of  1876,  39. 

Foreigners,  203. 

French  achievements,  xi ;  at  Susa, 
xx ;  excavations,  xvii ;  excavations 
in  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  130;  gov- 
ernment, Appropriation  of,  xi. 

Galilaean  dialect,  180. 

Galilaeans  and  Samaritans,  Babylo- 
nian character  of,  181. 

Ganneau,  Clermont,  178. 

Genealogy,  Tribal,   171,   173. 

Genesis,  Book  of,  xxii. 

George,  St.,  and  the  dragon,  45. 

German  Evangelical  Institute  of  Ar- 
chaeology, 89. 

Germany,  xx. 

Giesebrecht,  223  n. 

Gilgamesh  epic,  41,  49. 

Goat-fish,  219. 

God,  "Ancient  of  Days,"  105;  Child 
of,  207;  Conception  of,  91,136,  142; 
Fear  of,  204;  Grace  of,  208;  Most 
high,  224 ;  Names  formed  with,  103  ; 
the  Father,  105 ;  The  word,  59,  62 ; 
Yahveh  the  only  true,  in. 

Gods,  Attributes  of  211;  Emblems  of 


the,  217,  219;  living  powers,  209, 
211 ;  National,  222,  224,  226,  230  ff. ; 
Polytheistic  conception  of,  62 ;  speak 
to  men,  91,  211;  Unity  in  multi- 
plicity of,  220. 

God  -  conception,  Babylonian,  214; 
Particularistic,  22-2 ;  Semitic,  222 ; 
Sumerian,  214. 

Goethe,  60,  122,  237. 

Goliath,  19. 

Gomer,   171. 

Good  Samaritan,  202. 

Goshen,  78. 

Grotefeld,  Georg  Friedrich,  xx. 

Gudea,  xvii;  Statue  of,  175. 

Gula,  91. 

Gunkel,   D.,    118,    136,    159 

Halevy,  Joseph,  on  "Babel  and  Bible," 
130  f. 

Hamath,  231. 

Hammurabi  (Amraphel),  xvi,  61,97- 
99,  122,  134;  Code  of,  29,31,97, 101, 
124,  196,  182,  183,  197,  201,  202,  203, 
204,  221 ;  contemporary  of  Abra- 
ham, 9. 

Harnack,  166;  on  "Babel  and  Bible," 
125  ff. 

Haupt,  Paul,   158,  178. 

Haynes,  J.  H.,  xviii,  xix,  xx. 

Hebrew    antiquity    connected    with 
Babylonia,  xxii;  scripture,  113. 

Hell,  50. 

Hellmann,  G.,  162. 

Herodotus,  199. 

Heuzey,  Leon,   175. 

Hezekiah,  6,  7. 

Hilla,  xiv. 

Hilprecht,  Hermann  V.,  xviii. 

Hoffmann,  Georg,  178. 

Hollman,  120. 

Hommel,  Prof.  Dr.,  117,  157,  162. 

Huldah,  232. 

Idols,  in,  209;   Procession  of,  25. 

Image  worship,  106,  211. 

Images,  modes  of  representation,  210. 

Immortality,  38. 

Ionia,  171. 


244 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Iron  implements,  57. 

Islam,  Paternoster  of,   no. 

Israel,  Twelve  tribes  of,  37,  62,  65. 

Istar,   Gate  of  Babylon,  83,  85,    159; 

goddess   of  childbirth,    109;    Psalm 

to,  191. 

Japheth,    171. 

Jastrow,   Morris,  206  n.,  225  n. 

Jehovah,  The  name,  141. 

Jehu,  78. 

Jensen,  Dr.  Peter,  118,  147,  152,;.  153, 

154,  155,  157,  160,  162,  163. 
Jeremias,    Dr.   Alfred,    117,    154,    156, 

220  n. ;  on  "Babel  and  Bible,"  137. 
Jeremias,  Friedrich,   167. 
Jericho,  37. 

Jesus  of  Nazareth,  235. 
Jonah,  x,  88. 

Judgments  of  Yahveh,  233.     .     -, 
Jurisprudence,  xxiii. 

Kabar.    See  Keber. 

Kammosh,  223. 

Kamphausen,  223  n. 

Kaulen,  Franz,  118. 

Keber,  Canal  of,  4. 

Keil,  P.,  118. 

Khorsabad,  x;  Palace  at,  33,  56. 

King,  L.  W.,  191. 

Kittel,  Prof.  D.  R.,  117,  118,  150. 

Knieschke,  W.,  117. 

Kohler,    183,  203. 

Koldewey,  109. 

Konig,  Dr.  Eduard,  117,  145,  148,  149, 

150,  151,  156,  160. 
Koran,  60,  no,  130. 
Kronos,  xv. 

Kudurru,   Assyrian  general,  91. 
Kutha,  72,  179,  231. 
Kuyunjik,  x,  xii. 

Lachish,  6. 

Lagash,  xvii. 

Lamentation,  Psalms  of,  190. 

Language,   Babylonian,  37. 

Law,  of  retribution,   101 ;  Tablets  of 

the,  94. 
Laws,  Israelitic,  96,  101. 


Layard,  Sir  Austen  Henry,  xi. 
Lazarus  and  the  rich  man,  50. 
Leviathan,  158,  160. 
Library  of  Sardanapalus,  xiii. 
Life,  Breath  of,  90. 
Lion  of  Babylon,  85. 
Lioness,  Dying,  27. 
Loftus,  William  Bennett,  xx. 
London   Society  for   Biblical  Archae- 
ology, xiv. 
Love  of  neighbor,  107,  200  f .,  236.    - 
Love,  Universal,  202. 
Lugal,  Zaggisi,  xviii. 
Luschans,  Felix  von,  185. 
Luther,  123,  182,  237. 

Maccabees,  234. 

Madai,  171,        - 

Magi,  Babylonian  xiii. 

Magic  power,  90. 

Mahomet,  50,  60,  223. 

Man,  Creation  of,  90;  Fall  of,  48, 
130,  157- 

Manifestations  of  deity  personified, 
211,  218. 

Manu,  Law-book  of,  97. 

Marduk,  208 ;  All  gods  united  in,  65 ; 
and  Tiamat,  42  f.,  45 ;  and  Yahveh, 
43;  Bel  identified  with,  225;  Em- 
blem of,  219;  Esagila,  temple  of, 
209;  god  of  Babel,  43,  209;  -litany, 
225. 

Marduk-nadin-achi,  73. 

Mashalzi,  78. 

McCormack,  Thomas  J.,  137. 

Meals,  Assyrian,  23. 

Measures,  37. 

Medes,  xii,  171. 

Media,  Villages  of,  78. 

Melchizedek,  224.   . 

Melech,  223.     . 

Menahem,  178  f. 

Mene  mene  tekel  u-pharsin,  178 

Merodach-Baladan,   7. 

Meyer,  Dr.  S.,  119. 

Michael,  St.,  and  the  beast,  45. 

Milcom,  223. 

Military  system  of  Assyria,,  13-18. 

Mohammed.     See  Mahomet. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


245 


Mohl,  Julius  von,  x,  xx. 
Monotheism,    59;     Babylonian,    146; 

Ethical,    106,    no,    145;    National, 

112;    Semitic,    220. 
Moon-god  father  of  sun-god,  218. 
Mordecai,  231. 
Mosaic  laws,  96,  101. 
Moses,  65,  94. 
Mosul,   x,  6. 
Mugheir,  5. 
Musical  instruments,  184. 

Naaman,  231. 

Nabopolassar,   161,   175. 

Nabuna'id,  xv,  175 ;  Clay  cylinder  of, 
xvi. 

Names  formed  with  "God,"  61,  103; 
of  girls  and  boys,   108. 

Naram-Sin,22i ;  Image  of,  xxi;  Plat- 
form of  xix;  son  of  Sargon  I,  xvi, 
xvii,  xviii. 

Nebi  Yunus,  x. 

Nebo,   153;   Prayer  to,   191. 

Nebobaladan,  xvi. 

Nebuchadnezzar,  5,  83,  165,  175 ;  In- 
sanity of,  87;   Palace  of,  xx. 

Neighbor,  Love  of,  107,  200  f.,  236. 

Nergal,  72. 

Nimrud,  xii ;  Palaces  of,  36. 

Nineveh,  78,  88;  Excavations  at,  xii; 
Library  of  Asurbanipal  at,  73. 

Ninib,  155,  225. 

Nippur,  49,  225 ;  American  excava- 
tions at,  3 ;  Temple  of  Bel  at,  xviii. 

Nisibis,  78. 

Nizir,  40. 

Noah,  91,  108;  Babylonian  (Xisuth- 
ros),  xv,  39  f.,   108. 

Noldeke,  Th.,  178. 

Nunia,  x. 

Obelisk,    Black,    of    Shalmaneser    II, 

44,  73,  78. 
Obscene  details,   109. 
Oettli,  Samuel,  118,  145,  .146,  149,  159, 

160. 
Old    Testament,    Chronology   of   the, 

29;   interpretation,  xxii;   source  of 

history,  71 ;   Text  of,  86. 


Open  Court,  136,  137. 
Oppert,  Jules,  xx. 
Ox,  Wild,  79,  84. 
Oxen,  Winged,  230. 

Paradise,  50-53,  91- 

Pasturage,  Peaceful,  233. 

Patriarchs,  Ten  antediluvian,  41. 

Pekah,  178. 

Pentateuch  criticism,  41,  93,  96. 

Perfection,  66,  70. 

Perjury,  204. 

Peters,  John,  P.,  xviii. 

Pharaoh-necho,  5. 

Philadelphia,  Expeditions  from,  xviii; 
xxi. 

Pillar  of  cloud  and  fire,  90. 

Pinches,  147. 

Place,  Victor,  xi,  33,  56. 

Polytheism,  62,  65,  103,  106;  Traces 
of,  in  Bible,  146. 

Pottery,  56. 

Prayer,  212 ;   Babylonian,  206  ff. 

Priest-kings  of  Lagash,  xvii. 

Priestly  regulations,  204. 

Prince,  John  Dyneley,   178. 

Procession  of  Idols,  25,   153. 

Prophecy.  232. 

Prophets,  66,  232,  234;  Denunciation 
by,   107;    Pre-Exilic,   232. 

Psalms,  186  ff. ;  Acrostic,  188 ;  of 
David,  188;  of  lamentation,  190; 
Penitential,  207 ;  Rhythm  of  Baby- 
lonian,  188;   to  Istar,   191. 

Pul,  178  f. 

Punishment  for  sin,  47. 

Rassam,  Hormuzd,  xi  f.,  xiv,  xx. 

Rawlinson,   Sir  Henry,  xx,  4. 

Re'em,  79. 

Reformation,    114,  237. 

Religion,  and  science,  142 ;  Develop- 
ment of,  114;  and  ethics,  Babylo- 
nian, 196,  213;  Ethical  manifesta- 
tions of,  113. 

Religious  life,  114;  thought,  Puri- 
fication of,  57  f. 

Remu,  80. 

Retribution,  Law  of,   101. 


246 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


Return  to  Palestine,  234. 
Revelation,  70,   121 ;    Primitive,  71. 
Rhythm  of  Babylonian  psalms,  188. 
Rich,    Claudius    James,    x. 
Riedel,  Prof.,  119. 
Rosenthal,  Dr.  Ludwig  A.,   118. 
Ruth  and  Naomi,  223. 


Sabbath,  37  f.,  95,  101,  131,  132,  155  f., 
236;   Origin  of,   101. 

Sacrifices,  37,  204,  213. 

Samaria,   72,    179,  231. 

Samaritan,   Good,  202. 

Samaritans  and  Galilaeans,  Babylo- 
nian character  of,   181. 

Sapardseans,  171. 

Sardanapalus,  Consort  of,  25,  130; 
hunting  lions,  19-22 ;  Library  of, 
xiii,  39;.  North  palace  of,  xii. 

Sargon  I  (of  Akkad),  xvi,  xvii, 
xviii, 

Sargon  II  (Assyrian  king,  conqueror 
of  Samaria),  6,  7,  171,  179;  cyl- 
inder, 231 ;  Palace  of,  xi,  26  f., 
33,  56. 

Saul,  19. 

Scheil,  97. 

Schrader,  Eberhard,  87. 

Science,  and  faith,  128 ;  and  religion, 
142;  versus  faith,  143. 

Sculptures,  Assyrian,   xxi. 

Seekers  after  God,  Babylonians,  219. 

Sellin,  Ernst,  155,  165,  200. 

Semiramis,  Hanging  gardens  of,  xx. 

Sendschirli,  185. 

Sennacherib,  6;  Southwest  palace  of, 
xii. 

Sepharad.   172, 

Serpent,  158,  159;  and  woman,  47; 
called  the  Devil,  45  ;  Old,  which  is 
the  Devil,  161. 

Seven,  89,  156. 

Shalmaneser  II,  Black  obelisk  of,  44, 
73,  78;  Bronze  gates  of,  12,  18; 
Palace  of,  xii. 

Shamash,  208;  the  god  of  law,  99. 

Shem,  172. 

Sidon,  35. 


Sin,  47, 205  ff. ;  Consequences  of,  205 : 
Punishment  for,  47. 

Sinaitic  peninsula,  95. 

Sin-muballit,  father  of  Hammurabi, 
61. 

Sippar,  Sun-god  of,  62  f. ;  Temple 
Ebabbara  of  the  sun  at  xv. 

Sixty,  28,  131. 

Smend,    181. 

Smith,  George,  xiv,  5. 

Smith,   Robertson,   29. 

Solar  eclipses,  29. 

Solomon's  temple,  209. 

Son  of  man,  181. 

Sower  went  forth,  225 

Spittle,  90. 

Standards,  Assyrian,  227. 

Sublime   Porte,   xi. 

Suess,  Eduard,  39,  108. 

Sumerian  architect,  174  f . ;  God-con- 
ception,   214;    priest-king,    28,    131. 

Sumerians,  27,  28,   109,  173. 

Sun-god,  Moon-god  father  of,  218; 
of  Sippar,  62  f. 

Susa,  xx. 

Symbolism,  91. 


Tablets,  Clay,  37;  of  the  law,  94. 

Talmud,  130. 

Tasnim,  the  spring,  51. 

Tehom,  160. 

Tell   Ibrahim,  73. 

Telloh,  xvii. 

Temple  Ebabbara  of  the  sun  at  Sip- 
par, xv. 

Ten  antediluvian  patriarchs,  41 ;  com- 
mandments, 46,  94,  96,  101  f.,  197 
ft". ;    tribes   of   exile,   233. 

Terach,  231.   . 

Thebes,  Conquest  of,  78. 

Thousand  and  One  Nights,  x. 

Three,  89. 

Throne,  Assyrian,  19. 

Tiamat,  158,  159;  and  Marduk,  42  1, 

45- 
Tiele,  C.   P.,   157. 
Tiglathpileser,  178;   Palace  of,  xii. 
Time,  Methods  of  reckoning,  29. 


BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 


247 


Torah,  94,  96. 
Truth,  Speaking  the,  47. 
Truthfulness,   199,  233. 
Tyre,  35. 

Underworld,  Babylonian,  49. 
Unity  in  multiplicity  of  gods,  220. 
Ur  of  Kasdim,  130;  of  the  Chaldees, 

4,   173. 

Ur-Bau,  xvii. 
Ur-Gur,  King,  xix. 
Ur-Nina,  xvii ;   and  his  sons,   Sculp- 
ture of,  xxi. 

Verbal  inspiration,  92. 

Warka,  49. 

Weights,  37. 

Weissbach,  225  n. 

Wellhausen,  J.,  29,  235  n. 

William  II,  Emperor,  89;  Letter  of, 

120  ff. ;   on  revelation,   122. 
Winckler,  Hugo,  162,  163. 


Winged  oxen,  230. 

Wise  Men  of  the  East,  xiii,  1,  236. 

Wolff,  P.,  119,  167. 

Woman  and  serpent,  47 ;  Position  of, 

108. 
Writing,  31. 

Xisuthros,  Babylonian  Noah,  xv,  39 
f.,   107. 

Yahveh,  91,  223 ;  and  Marduk,  43 ; 
Angel  of,  218;  armed,  227;  god  of 
the  universe,  66 ;  god  of  wrath,  70 ; 
Judgments  of,  233 ;  Name  of,  62, 
134,  141,  150  ff.,  223  n. ;  on  wings 
of  the  wind,  227 ;  the  only  true 
God,  n;  with  horns,  104. 

"Yea"  and  "Nay,"  47,  200. 

Zab,  78. 

Zimmern,  151,  153,  161,  188,  223  n. 

Zodiac,  Signs  of,  xxiii,  57,  59. 


A  Complete 

Classified  List  of  Books 

Pamphlets,  Etc. ,  Published  Exclusively  by 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Co. 

Including  also  a  few  valuable  importations. 
With  Author  and  Title  Index  July,  1906 


H0O2   AN©POnfit  AAIMDN 
"Character  is  man's  destiny.'' 

•  CONTENTS  PAG8 

BIOLOGY,  EVOLUTION,  Etc .     .    2 

MATHEMATICS,  MECHANICS,  PHYSICS  ....  3,  4 
PHILOSOPHY,  PSYCHOLOGY  &  LANGUAGE  4,  5,  6,  7 
HISTORY  OF  RELIGIONS  ORIENTAL  WORKS   7,  8,  9,  10 

ETHICS  AND  RELIGION .      10,  11 

FICTION  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS  .  11,  12,  13 
THE  RELIGION  OF  SCIENCE  LIBRARY    13,  14,  15,  16,  17 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Company,  1322  Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago 

London :  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  &  Co. ,  Ltd. 


TITLE  LIST  OF  THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLICATIONS,  WITH 
AUTHOR  and  TITLE  INDEX,  PRICES  and  ORDER  NUMBERS 

Biology,  Evolution,  Etc. 

COPE,  E.  D.,  Ph.  D. 

219.  THE  PRIMARY  FACTORS  OF  ORGANIC  EVOLUTION,  by  E.  D.  Cope,  Ph.  D., 
Member  of  the  United  States  National  Academy  of  Sciences;  Professor  of  Zoology 
and  Comparative  Anatomy  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Second  edition. 
1904.     121  illustrations.    Pp.  550.     Cloth  $2.00  net.     (10s.). 

DE  VRIES,  HUGO 

332.  SPECIES  AND  VARIETIES,  THEIR  ORIGIN  BY  MUTATION,  Lectures  deliv- 
ered at  the  University  of  California  by  Hugo  De  Vries,  Professor  of  Botany  in 
the  University  of  Amsterdam.  Edited  by  Daniel  Trembly  Mac  Dougal,  Di- 
rector Department  of  Botanical  Besearch,  Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington. 
Second  thoroughly  revised  and  corrected  edition,  with  portrait  in  photogravure. 
1906.     Pages  xviii.,  847.     Price  $5.00  net.     (21s.  net.) 

332a.  FRAMING  PORTRAIT  OF  HUGO  DE  VRIES,  Platino  finish.  Size,  10"xl2"; 
unmounted.     Price,  postpaid,  $1.00.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

HUEPPE,  DR.  FERDINAND 

257.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  BACTERIOLOGY,  by  Dr.  Ferdinand  Hueppe,  Professor  of 
Hygiene  in  the  University  of  Prague.  Authorized  translation  from  the  German  by 
Dr.  E.  O.  Jordan,  Assistant  Professor  of  Bacteriology  in  the  University  of  Chicago. 
1899.     Pp.  xi.,  465.     $1.75  net.     (9s.). 


D.. 


ROMANES,  GEORGE  JOHN,  M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S. 

240.    AN  EXAMINATION  OF  WEISMANNISM,  by  George  John  Romanes,  M.  A.,  LL.  * 
F.  R.   S.,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Gonville   and   Caius  College,   Cambridge.    Second 
edition.     1899.     Pp.  ix.,  221.     Cloth  $1.00  net. 

237.  DARWIN  AND  AFTER  DARWIN,  An  Exposition  of  the  Darwinian  Theory  and  a 

Discussion  of  Post-Darwinian  Questions,  by  George  John  Romanes,  M.  A.,  LL.  D., 
F.  R.  S.,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.  Three  vol- 
umes.   $4.00  net.  i 

238.  PART  I.     THE  DARWINIAN  THEORY.    Third  edition.    1901.    Pp.  xiv.,  460.   Cloth 

$2.00. 

239.  PART  n.    POST-DARWINIAN  QUESTIONS:   HEREDITY  AND  UTILITY.    Second 

edition.    1897.    Pp.  xii.,  344.    Cloth  $1.50. 

252.  PART  III.  POST-DARWINIAN  QUESTIONS:  ISOLATION  AND  PHYSIOLOGI- 
CAL SELECTION.    1897.    Pp.  181.    Cloth  $1.00. 

SHUTE,  D.  KERFOOT,  A.  B.,  M.  D. 

276.  A  FIRST  BOOK  IN  ORGANIC  EVOLUTION,  by  D.  Kerf  oot  Shute,  A.  B.,  M.  D.,  Oph- 
thalmic Surgeon  to  the  University  Hospital  (Columbian),  Professor  of  Anatomy 
in  the  Columbian  University.  1899.  39  illustrations.  Pp.  xvi.,  285.  Cloth  $2.00 
net.     (7s.  6d.  net.) 

VON  NAGELI,  CARL 

300.  A  MECHANICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL  THEORY  OF  ORGANIC  EVOLUTION,  by  Carl 
von  Nageli.     Summary.     1898.     Pp.  53.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

w 

WEISMANN,  AUGUST 

299.  ON  GERMINAL  SELECTION,  as  a  Source  of  Definite  Variation,  by  August  Weismann. 
Translated  from  the  German  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Second  edition.  1902. 
Pp.  87.     Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


Mathematics,  Mechanics,  Physics 

DEDEKIND,  RICHARD 

287.  ESSAYS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  NUMBERS.  I.  CONTINUITY  AND  IRRATIONAL 
NUMBERS.  H.  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  NUMBERS,  by  Richard  Dede: 
kind.  Authorized  translation  by  Wooster  Woodruff  Beman,  Professor  of  Mathe- 
matics in  the  University  of  Michigan.  1901.  Pp.  115.  Cloth  75c  net.  (3s.  6d. 
net.) 

DE  MORGAN,  AUGUSTUS 

271.  ELEMENTARY    ILLUSTRATIONS    OF    THE   DIFFERENTIAL    AND   INTEGRAL 

CALCULUS,  by  Augustus  DeMorgan.  New  edition.  1899.  Pp.  viii.,  144.  Cloth 
$1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

264.  ON  THE  STUDY  AND  DIFFICULTIES  OF  MATHEMATICS,  by  Augustus  DeMor- 
gan.    Second  reprint  edition.     1902.    Pp.  viii.,  288.     Cloth  $1.25  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

FINK,  DR.  KARL 

272.  A  BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  MATHEMATICS.     An  authorized  translation  of  Dr.  Karl 

Fink's  Geschichte  Der  Elementar-Mathematik,  by  Wooster  Woodruff  Beman, 
Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  of  Michigan,  and  David 
Eugene  Smith,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Teachers'  College,  Columbia  University. 
Second  revised  edition.     1903.    Pp.  xii.,  343.    Cloth  $1.50  net.     (5s.  6d.  net.) 

HILBERT,  DAVID,  Ph.  D. 
289.     THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  GEOMETRY,  by  David  Hilbert,  Ph.  D.,  Professor  of  Mathe- 
matics, University  of  Gottingen.     Authorized  translation  by  E.  J.  Townsend,  Ph. 
D.,  University  of  Illinois.     1902.     Pp.  vii.,  143.     Cloth  $1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

LAGRANGE,  JOSEPH  LOUIS 

258.  LECTURES  ON  ELEMENTARY  MATHEMATICS,  by  Joseph  Louis  Lagrange.  From 
the  French  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Second  edition.  1901.  Pp.  172.  Cloth 
$1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

MACH,  ERNST 

230.  POPULAR  SCIENTIFIC  LECTURES,  by  Ernst  Mach,  formerly  Professor  of  Physics 
in  the  University  of  Prague,  now  professor  of  the  History  and  Theory  of  Inductive 
Science  in  the  University  of  Vienna.  Translated  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Third 
edition.  Revised  and  enlarged,  with  59  cuts  and  diagrams.  1898.  Pp.  415.  $1.50 
net.     (7s.  6d.). 

229.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS,  A  Critical  and  Historical  Account  of  its  Develop- 
ment, by  Ernst  Mach,  Professor  of  the  History  and  Theory  of  Inductive  Science  in 
the  University  of  Vienna.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack. 
Second  revised  and  enlarged  edition,  with  259  cuts  and  illustrations.  1902.  Pp. 
xx,,  605.     Cloth  $2.00  net.     (9s.  6d.  net.) 

362.  SPACE  AND  GEOMETRY  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL,  PSYCHO- 
LOGICAL, AND  PHYSICAL  INQUIRY,  by  Dr.  Ernst  Mach,  Emeritus  Professor 
in  the  University  of  Vienna.  From  the  German  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack, 
Principal  of  the  La  Salle-Peru  Township  High  School.  1906.  Clothr  gilt  top. 
Pages  143.     Price,  $1.00  net.      (5s.  net.) 

ROW,  T.  SUNDARA 

GEOMETRIC  EXERCISES  IN  PAPER  FOLDING,  by  T.  Sundara  Row.  Edited  and 
revised  by  Wooster  Woodruff  Beman,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University 
of  Michigan,  and  David  Eugene  Smith,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Teachers' 
College  of  Columbia  University.  With  87  illustrations.  1901.  Pp.  xiv.,  148.  Cloth 
$1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


SCHUBERT,  HERMANN 

266.  MATHEMATICAL  ESSAYS  AND  RECREATIONS,  by  Hermann  Schubert,  Professor 
of  Mathematics  in  the  Johanneum,  Hamburg,  Germany.  From  the  German,  by 
Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Second  edition.  1903.  37  cuts.  Pp.  149.  Cloth  75c  net. 
(3s.  6d.  net.) 

SMITH,  PROF.  DAVID  EUGENE 

202c.  PORTRAITS  OF  MATHEMATICIANS.  Edited  by  Prof.  David  Eugene  Smith,  Teach- 
ers '  College,  Columbia  University.  New  York.  1905.  12  Portraits  on  Imp.  Jap. 
Vellum,  $5.00;  12  Portraits  on  Am.  Plate  Paper,  $3.00. 

202d.  The  Same.     Second  Series.     Send  for  descriptive  circular. 

WITHERS,  JOHN  WILLIAM,  Ph.  D. 

835.     EUCLID'S  PARALLEL   POSTULATE:    ITS   NATURE,   VALIDITY  AND   PLACE 

IN  GEOMETRICAL  SYSTEMS.  Thesis  presented  to  the  Philosophical  Faculty 
of  Yale  University  for  the  Degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy,  by  John  William 
Withers,  Ph.  D.,  Principal  of  the  Yeatman  High  School,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  1905.  Pp. 
vii.,  192.     Cloth,  net  $1.25.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

Philosophy,  Psychology  and  Language 

ASHGROFT,  EDGAR  A. 

356.  THE  WORLD'S  DESIRES  or  The  Kesults  of  Monism,  an  elementary  treatise  on 
a  realistic  religion  and  philosophy  of  human  life,  by  Edgar  A.  Ashcroft.  1905. 
Pages,  xii.,  440.     Cloth,  gilt  top.     Price,  $1.00  net. 

BERKELEY,  GEORGE 

307.  A  TREATISE  CONCERNING  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  HUMAN  KNOWLEDGE,  by 

George  Berkeley.     Reprint  edition.    1901.    Pp.  xv.,  128.    Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

308.  THREE  DIALOGUES  BETWEEN  HYLAS  AND  PHLLONOUS,  by  George  Berkeley. 

Reprint  edition.     1901.     Pp.  vi.,  136.     Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

BINET,  ALFRED 

296.  ON  DOUBLE  CONSCIOUSNESS,  Experimental  Psychological  Studies,  by  Alfred 
Binet.     New  edition.     1896.    Pp.  89.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

201.  THE  PSYCHIC  LIFE  OF  MICRO-ORGANISMS,  A  Study  in  Experimental  Psychology, 
by  Alfred  Binet.     Reprint.     1897.     75c.     (3s.  6d.).     Pp.  xii.,  120. 

270.  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  REASONING,  based  on  Experimental  Researches  in  Hyp- 
notism, by  Alfred  Binet,  Doctor  of  Science,  Laureate  of  the  Institute  (Academie 
des  Sciences  and  AcadSmie  des  Sciences  Morales),  Director  of  the  Laboratory  of 
Physiological  Psychology  in  the  Sorbonne  (Hautes  etudes).  Translated  from  the 
second  French  edition  by  Adam  Gowans  Whyte,  B.  Sc.  1899.  Pp.  191.  75c  net. 
(3s.  6d.). 

CARUS,  PAUL 

204.  FUNDAMENTAL  PROBLEMS,  the  Method  of  Philosophy  as  a  Systematic  Arrange- 
ment of  Knowledge,  by  Paul  Carus.  Third  edition.  1903.  Pp.  xii.,  373.  Cloth, 
$1.30.     (7s.  6d.). 

312.  KANT'S  PROLEGOMENA  TO  ANY  FUTURE  METAPHYSICS.  Edited  in  English 
by  Paul  Carus.  With  an  Essay  on  Kant's  Philosophy,  and  Other  Supplementary 
Material  for  the  Study  of  Kant.    1902.    Pp.  301.    Cloth  75c  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

303.  KANT  &  SPENCER,  A  STUDY  OF  THE  FALLACIES  OF  AGNOSTICISM,  by  Paul 
Carus.     Pp.  105.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

210.  MONISM  AND  MELIORISM,  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Causality  and  Ethics,  by  Paul 
Carus.     1885.     Pp.  83.     Paper,  50c.     (2s.  6d.). 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


208.  PRIMER  OF  PHILOSOPHY,  by  Paul  Cams.  Revised  edition.  1899.  Pp.  vi.,  242. 
Cloth,  $1.00.     (5s.). 

213.  (a)  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  TOOL.  Pp.  24.  10c.  (6d.).  (b)  OUR  NEED  OF 
PHILOSOPHY.     Pp.  14.    5c.     (3d.     (c)    SCIENCE  A  RELIGIOUS  REVELATION 

Pp.  21.     5c.     (3d.).     By  Paul  Cams. 

207.  THE  SOUL  OF  MAN,  an  Investigation  of  the  Facts  of  Physiological  and  Experi- 
mental Psychology,  by  Paul  Cams,  with  182  illustrations  and  diagrams.  Third 
edition.     1905.     Pp.  482.     Cloth,  $1.50  net.     (6s.  net.) 

290.  THE  SURD  OF  METAPHYSICS,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Question  ARE  THERE 
THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES?  by  Paul  Cams.  1903.  Pp.  vi.,  233.  $1.25  net. 
(5s.  6d.  net.) 

353.  THE  RISE  OF  MAN,  A  sketch  of  the  Origin  of  the  Human  Race,  by  Dr.  Paul 
Cams.  Printed  in  large  type  with  fine  illustrations.  Octavo.  Circa  90  pages. 
In  preparation. 

DEANE,  SIDNEY  NORTON,  B.  A. 

J24.  ST.  ANSELM  PROSLOGIUM;  MONOLOGIUM;  An  Appendix  in  Behalf  of  the  Fool, 
by  Gaunilon,  and  Cur  Deus  Homo,  translated  from  the  Latin  by  Sidney  Norton 
Deane,  B.  A.  With  an  Introduction,  Bibliography  and  Reprints  of  the  Opinions 
of  Leading  Philosophers  and  Writers  on  the  Ontological  Argument.  1903.  Pp. 
xxxv.,  288.    Cloth,  net  $1.00. 

DESCARTES,  RENE 

301.  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  METHOD  OF  RIGHTLY  CONDUCTING  THE  REASON  AND 
SEEKING  TRUTH  IN  THE  SCIENCES,  by  Ren§  Descartes.  Translated  from  the 
French  and  Collated  with  the  Latin  by  John  Veitch,  LL.  D.,  late  professor  of 
Logic  and  Rhetoric  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  Authorized  reprint.  1899.  Pp. 
vi.,  87.     Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

310.  THE  MEDITATIONS  AND  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  PRINCIPLES  of  Ren6  Des- 
cartes. (1596-1650.)  Translated  by  John  Veitch,  LL.  D.,  late  Professor  of  Logic 
and  Khetoric  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  With  a  Preface,  Copies  of  Original 
Title  Pages,  a  Bibliography  and  an  Essay  on  Descartes'  philosophy,  by  L.  L6vy- 
Bruhl,  Maitre  de  Conferences  in  the  Sorbonne.  1901.  Pp.  xxx.,  248.  Cloth  75c  net. 
(3s.  6d.  net.) 

DE  SPINOZA,  BENEDICTUS 

346.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DESCARTES'  PHILOSOPHY,  by  Benedictus  De  Spinoza 
(the  Philosopher's  Earliest  Work).  Translated  from  the  Latin  with  an  Introduc- 
tion by  Halbert  Hains  Britan,  Ph.  D.  Pp.  lxxxi,  177.  Price,  cloth,  75c  net; 
mailed,  85c.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

FICHTE,  JOHANN  GOTTLIEB 

361.  THE  VOCATION  OF  MAN,  by  Johann  Gottlieb  Fichte,  translated  by  William 
Smith,  LL.  D.,  with  biographical  introduction  by  E.  Ritchie,  Ph.  D.  1906. 
pages    185.      Cloth,    75    cents    net.    (3s.    6d.). 

GARBE,  RICHARD 

223.  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ANCIENT  INDIA,  by  Richard  Garbe,  Professor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Tuebingen.     1897.     Pp.  89.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

HERING,  PROF.  EWALD 

298.     ON  MEMORY  AND  THE  SPECIFIC  ENERGIES  OF  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEM,  by 

Prof.  Ewald  Hering.     Third  edition.     1902.     Pp.  50.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 


SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


HUME,  DAVID 

305.  AN   ENQUIRY   CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING  AND   SELECTIONS 

FROM  A  TREATISE  OF  HUMAN  NATURE,  by  David  Hume,  with  Hume's 
Autobiography  and  a  letter  from  Adam  Smith,  edited  by  Thomas  J.  MeCor- 
maek,  Principal  of  the  La  Salle-Peru  Township  High  School,  and  Professor 
Mary  Whiton  Calkins  of  Wellesley  College.  1906.  Pages  xxv.,  267.  Price, 
cloth,  75   cents  net.      (3s.   6d.). 

306.  AN  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS,  by  David  Hume. 

Reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1777.     1900.     Pp.  169.     Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

INGRAHAM,  ANDREW 
322.     SWAIN  SCHOOL  LECTURES,  by  Andrew  Ingraham,  late  Head-Master  of  the  Swain 
Free  School,  New  Bedford,  Mass.     1903.    Pp.  197.     Net  $1.00. 

le'vy-bruhl,  lucien 

273.  HISTORY  OF  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY  IN  FRANCE,  by  Lucien  Levy-Bruhl,  Maltre 
de  Conferences  in  the  Sorbonne,  Professor  in  the  ficole  Libre  des  Sciences  Poli- 
tiques,  with  portraits  of  the  leading  French  philosophers.  1899.  Pp.  500.  $3.00 
net.     (12s.  net.) 

MACH,  DR.  ERNST 

250.  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  SENSATIONS,  by  Dr.  Ernst  Mach, 
formerly  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  University  of  Prague,  now  Professor  of  the 
History  and  Theory  of  Inductive  Science  in  the  University  of  Vienna.  Trans- 
lated by  C.  M.  Williams,  with  37  cuts.     1897.     Pp.  xi.,  208.     $1.25  net.     (6s.  6d.). 

MONTGOMERY,  DR.  GEORGE  R. 

311.  LEIBNIZ  DISCOURSE  ON  METAPHYSICS,  Correspondence  with  Arnauld  and 
Monadology.  With  an  Introduction  by  Paul  Janet,  Member  of  the  French  Insti- 
tute. Translated  from  the  Originals  by  Dr.  George  R.  Montgomery.  1902.  Pp. 
xxi.,  272.     Cloth  7oc  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 


MULLER,  F.  MAX 

231.  THREE  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT,  delivered 

at  the  Royal  Institution,  London,  during  the  month  of  March,  1887,  by  F.  Max 
Miiller,  with  an  Appendix  which  contains  a  Correspondence  on  THOUGHT  WITH- 
OUT WORDS  between  F.  Max  Miiller  and  Francis  Galton,  the  Duke  of  Argyll, 
George  J.  Romanes  and  Others.    1888.    Pp.  128.    Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

232.  THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE,  delivered  at  the  Oxford 

University  Extension  Meeting,  with  a  supplement,  MY  PREDECESSORS,  by  F. 
Max  Miiller.     Third  edition.     1899.     Pp.  112.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

NOIRE,  LUDWIG 
297.     ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LANGUAGE,  AND  THE  LOGOS  THEORY,  by  Ludwig  Noire. 
Second  unaltered  edition.     1899.     Pp.  57.    Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

POWELL,  J.  W. 

263.     TRUTH  AND  ERROR,  or  the  Science  of  Intellection,  by  J.  W.  Powell.     1898.     Pp. 
423.    $1.75.     (7s.  6d.). 

RIBOT,  TH. 

235.  THE  DISEASES  OF  PERSONALITY,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative  and 

Experimental  Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation.  Third 
revised  edition.     1898.     Pp.  157.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

236.  THE  DISEASES  OF  THE  WILL,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative  and  Experi- 

mental Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation  from  the 
eighth  French  edition,  by  Merwin-Marie  Snell.  Second  enlarged  English  edition. 
1896.     Pp.  vi.,  121.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 


SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


279.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  GENERAL  IDEAS,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  in  the  College  de 
France.  Authorized  translation  from  the  French  by  Frances  A.  Welby.  1899.  Pp. 
xi.,  231.     Cloth  $1.25.     (5s.). 

234.  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ATTENTION,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative  and 
Experimental  Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation. 
Fourth  revised  edition.     1898.     Pp.  121.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

360  ESSAY  ON  THE  CREATIVE  IMAGINATION,  by  Prof.  Th.  Ribot,  translated 
from  the  French  by  A.  H.  N.  Baron,  Fellow  in  Clark  University.  1906.  Cloth, 
gilt  top.     Pages  357.     Price,  $1.75  net.     (7s.  6d.  net.) 

STANLEY,  HIRAM  M. 

274.  PSYCHOLOGY  FOR  BEGINNERS,  an  Outline  Sketch,  by  Hiram  M.  Stanley, 
Member  American  Psychological  Association,  Author  of  "Evolutionary  Psychology 
of  Feeling"  and  "Essays  on  Literary  Art."  1899.  Pp.  44.     Boards  40c  net.     (2s.). 

TOPINARD,  PAUL 

269.  SCIENCE  AND  FAITH  OR  MAN  AS  AN  ANIMAL,  AND  MAN  AS  A  MEMBER  OF 
SOCIETY,  with  a  DISCUSSION  OF  ANIMAL  SOCIETIES,  by  Paul  Topinard,  late 
General  Secretary  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris  and  some  time  Professor 
in  the  School  of  Anthropology.  Translated  from  the  Author's  Manuscript  by 
Thomas  J.  McCormack.     1899.     Pp.  361.     $1.50  net.     (6s.  6d.  net.) 

202a.  PHILOSOPHICAL  PORTRAIT  SERIES.  43  portraits,  on  plate  paper,  $6.25  (30s.). 
Single  portraits,  on  plate  paper,  25c   (Is.  6d.). 

202b.  PSYCHOLOGICAL  PORTRAIT  SERIES.  25  portraits,  on  Japanese  paper,  $5.00 
(24s.)  per  set;  plate  paper,  $3.75  (18s.)  per  set.  Single  portraits,  on  Japanese 
paper,  50c  (2s.  6d.)j  single  portraits,  on  plate  paper,  25c  (Is.  6d.). 

202.  PHILOSOPHICAL  AND  PSYCHOLOGICAL  PORTRAIT  SERIES.  68  portraits  on 
plate  paper,  $7.50  (35s.)  per  set. 

History  of  Religion,  and  Oriental  Works 

BUDGE,  E.  A.  WALLIS,  M.  A.,  Lift.  D.,  D.  Lit. 

317.  A  HISTORY  OF  EGYPT,  From  the  End  of  the  Neolithic  Period  to  the  Death  of 
Cleopatra  VII,  B.  C.  30,  by  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  M.  A.,  Litt.  D.,  D.  Lit.,  Keeper  of 
the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum.  Richly  illus- 
trated.    8  vols.     Cloth  $1.25  each,  8  vols,  net  $10.00.     1902. 

226.  THE  BOOK  OF  'I'H  K  DEAD,  an  English  translation  of  the  Chapters,  Hymns,  etc.,  of 
the  Theban  Recension,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  etc.,  by  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge, 
M.  A.,  Litt.  D.,  D.  Lit.  Keeper  of  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  Antiquities  in  the 
British  Museum,  with  four  hundred  and  twenty  vignettes.  1901.  3  vols.  Pp.  702. 
$3.75  per  set  net.    Vols.  VI,  VII,  Will  in  the  series  of  Books  on  Egypt  and  Chaldea. 

325.  THE  GODS  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS  OR  STUDIES  IN  EGYPTIAN  MYTHOLOGY, 
by  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  M.  A.,  Litt.  D.,  D.  Lit.,  Keeper  of  the  Egyptian  and 
Assyrian  Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum.  With  98  coloured  plates  and  131  illus- 
trations in  the  text.     1904.     2  vols.     Cloth  $20.00  net. 

344.  THE  DECREES  OF  MEMPHIS  AND  CANOPUS,  in  three  volumes.  .THE  ROSET- 
TA  STONE,  Vols.  I.  and  II.  THE  DECREE  OF  CANOPUS,  Vol.  III.,  by  E. 
A.  Wallis  Budge,  M.   A.,  Litt.   D.,   D.   Lit.   Vol.  I.,  Pages   xiv,   226,   One   plate; 

kvol.  II,  Pages  196,  Three  plates;  Vol.  III.  Pages  249,  Ten  plates.  1904.  Price, 
$1.25  per  volume  net.  Three  volumes  $3.75  net. 
63.  THE  EGYPTIAN  HEAVEN  AND  HELL,  by  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  M.  A.,  Litt. 
D.,  D.  Lit.  Three  volumes  in  set.  Vol.  I.,  The  Book  of  Am  Tuat;  Vol.  II., 
The  Book  of  Gates;  Vol.  III.,  The  Egyptian  Heaven  and  Hell.  1906.  Cloth, 
Illustrated.     Price,   $5.00  per  set  net. 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


CARUS,  PAUL 

254.  BUDDHISM  AOT>  ITS  CHRISTIAN  CRITICS,  by  Paul  Cams.     Second  edition.     1905. 

Pp.  311.     $1.25.     (6s.  6d.). 

216.  DAS  EVANGELIUM  BUDDHAS,  a  German  translation  of  THE  GOSPEL  OF 
BUDDHA,     1895.     Pp.  352.     Cloth  $1.25.     (5  marks.) 

261.  GODWARD,  A  Record  of  Religious  Progress,  by  Paul  Carus.  1898.  Pp.  26.  50c. 
(2s.  6d.). 

255.  LAO-TZE'S   TA  O^TEH-KENG.     Chinese-English.     With   Introduction,   Transliteration 

and  Notes  b}  Paul  Carus.     1898.     Pp.  345.     $3.00.     (15s.). 

357.  T'AI-SHANG  KAN-YING  P'lEN,   Treatise   of   the   Exalted   One   on  Response   and 

Retribution.  Translated  from  the  Chinese  by  Teitaro  Suzuki  and  Dr.  Paul 
Carus.  Containing  Chinese  Text,  Verbatim  Translation,  Explanatory  Notes  and 
Moral  Tales.  Edited  by  Dr.  Paul  Carus.  16  plates.  Pages  135.  1906.  Boards, 
75c  net. 

358.  YIN  CHIH  WEN,  The  Tract  of  the  Quiet  Way.     With  Extracts  from  the  Chinese 

commentary.  Translated  by  Teitaro  Suzuki  and  Dr.  Paul  Carus.  1906.  Circa 
50  pages.     Boards,  25  cents  net. 

321.  THE  AGE  OF  CHRIST,  A  Brief  Review  of  the  Conditions  under  which  Christianity 
Originated,  by  Paul  Carus.    1903.     Pp.  34.    Price  paper,  15c  net.     (lOd.) 

34L     THE  DHARMA,  or  the  Religion  of  Enlightenment,  An  Exposition  of  Buddhism,  by 

Paul  Carus.    Fourth  edition.    1898.    Pp.  50.    15c.     (9d.) 
215.     THE  GOSPEL  OF  BUDDHA,  according  to  old  records,  told  by  Paul  Carus.     Ninth 

edition.     1904.     Pp.  xiv.,  275.     Cloth  $1.00.     (5s.). 

278.  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVIL  AND  THE  DDEA  OF  EVIL,  From  the  Earliest 
Times  to  the  Present  day,  by  Paul  Carus.  1900.  311  illustrations.  Pp.  xvi., 
496.     $6.00.     (30s.). 


CONWAY,  MONCURE  DANIEL 

277.  SOLOMON  AND  SOLOMONIC  LITERATURE,  by  Moncure  Daniel  Conway.  1899. 
Pp.  viii.,  243.     Cloth  $1.50  net.     (6s.). 

CORNILL,  CARL  HEINRICH 

262.  GESCHICHTE  DES  VOLKES  ISRAEL,  von  Carl  Heinrich  Cornill.  330  Seiten. 
Gebunden  $2.00.     (Marks  8.)     1898. 

259.  HISTORY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  ISRAEL,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Destruction 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans.  Written  for  lay  readers  by  Carl  Heinrich  Cornill, 
Ph.  D.,  S.  T.  D.,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University  of  Konigsberg.  Trans- 
lated by  W.  H.  Carruth,  Professor  of  German  in  the  University  of  Kansas.  Second 
edition.     1899.     Pp.  vi.,  325.     Cloth  $1.50.     (7s.  6d.). 

220.  THE  PROPHETS  OF  ISRAEL,  Popular  Sketches  from  Old  Testament  History, 
by  Carl  Heinrich  Cornill,  Doctor  of  Theology  and  Professor  of  Old  Testament  His- 
tory in  the  University  of  Konigsberg.  Translated  by  Sutton  F.  Corkran.  Fifth 
edition.    1901.    Pp.  210.    $1.00  net.     (5s.). 

251.     THE  RISE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  ISRAEL,  by  C.  H.  Cornill,  in  EPITOMES  OF 
THREE  SCIENCES,   COMPARATIVE  PHILOLOGY,   PSYCHOLOGY  AND  OLD 
TESTAMENT  HISTORY,  H.  H.  Oldenberg,  J.  Jastrow,  C.  H.  Cornill.   1890.   Pp. 
130.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.). 

CUMONT,  FRANZ 

319.  THE  MYSTERIES  OF  MITHRA,  by  Franz  Cumont,  Professor  in  the  University  of 
Ghent,  Belgium.  Translated  from  the  Second  Revised  French  Edition  by  Thomas 
J.  McCormack,  Principal  of  the  La  Salle  and  Peru  Township  High  School.  With 
a  Frontispiece,  Map  and  Fifty  Cuts  and  Illustrations.  1903.  Pp.  xiv.,  239.  Cloth 
$1.50  net.     (6s.  6d.  net.) 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


DELITZSCH,  DR.  FRIEDRIOH 

293b.  BABEL  AND  BIBLE,  Three  lectures  on  the  Significance  of  Assyriological  Re- 
search  for  Beligion,  Embodying  the  most  important  Criticisms  and  the  Author's 
Keplies,  by  Dr.  Friedrich  Delitzsch,  Professor  of  Assyriology  in  the  University 
of  Berlin,  Translated  from  the  German.  Profusely  illustrated.  1906.  pages 
xv.,   240.     Price   $1.00   net. 

EDMUNDS,  ALBERT  J. 

345.  BUDDHIST  AND  CHRISTIAN  GOSPELS,  being  Gospel  Parallels  from  Pali  Texts. 
Now  first  compared  from  the  originals  by  Albert  J.  Edmunds,  Honorary  Member 
and  American  Bepresentative  of  the  International  Buddhist  Society  of  Rangun, 
Translator  of  the  Dhammapada,  the  Buddhist  Genesis,  etc.  Member  of  the 
Oriental  Society  of  Philadelphia.  Third  and  Complete  Edition,  edited  with 
Parallels  and  notes  from  the  Chinese  Buddhist  Triptaka,  by  M.  Anesaki,  Professor 
of  the  Science  of  Beligion  in  the  Imperial  University  of  Tokyo.  Pp.  xvii,  230, 
with  index,  printed  in  large  octavo,  clear  type,  good  paper;  bound  in  limp  board, 
with  paper  wrapper,  printed  in  two  colors.     Price  $1.50,  net.     (7s.  6d.  net.) 

218.  HYMNS  OF  THE  FAITH  (DHAMMAPADA),  being  an  Ancient  Anthology  Preserved 
in  the  Short  Collection  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Buddhists.  Translated  from 
the  Pali  by  Albert  J.  Edmunds.  1902.  Pp.  xiii.,  119.  Cloth  $1.00  net.  (4s.  6d. 
net.) 

FREYTAG,  GUSTAV 

248.  MARTIN  LUTHER,  by  Gustav  Freytag.  Translated  by  Henry  E.  O.  Heinemann. 
1897.     26  illustrations.     Pp.  130.     Cloth  $1.00  net.     (5s.). 

GUNKEL,  HERMANN 

227.  THE  LEGENDS  OF  GENESIS,  by  Hermann  Gunkel,  Professor  of  Old  Testament 
Theology  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  Translated  by  W.  H.  Carruth,  Professor  of 
German  in  the  University  of  Kansas.     1901.     Pp.  164.     Cloth  $1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.). 

HAUPT,  PAUL 

292.  BIBLICAL  LOVE-DITTIES,  A  CRITICAL  INTERPRETATION  AND  TRANSLA- 
TION OF  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON,  by  Paul  Haupt,  Professor  in  the  John! 
Hopkins  University,  Baltimore.     1902.     Pp.  10.     Paper,  5c.     (3d.). 

HOLYOAKE,  GEORGE  JACOB 

228.  ENGLISH  SECULARISM,  a  Confession  of  Belief,  by  George  Jacob  Holyoake.    1896. 

Pp.  xiii.,  146.    Cloth  50c  net. 

HUO,  M. 

244.  TRAVELS  IN  TARTARY,  THIBET  AND  CHINA,  during  the  years  1844-5-6, 
by  M.  Hue.  Translated  from  the  French  by  W.  Hazlitt.  Second  reprint  edition. 
Illustrated  with  100  engravings  on  wood.  In  one  volume.  1900.  Pp.  688.  $1.25 
net.     (5s.  net.) 

260.     THE  SAME.     Two  Vols.     Pp.  688.     $2.00.     (10s.). 

EHEIRALLA,  IBRAHIM  GEORGE 

326.  BEHA  'U'LLAH  (THE  GLORY  OF  GOD),  by  Ibrahim  George  Kheiralla,  assisted  by 
Howard  MacNutt.     1900.     Pp.  xiii.,  545.     $3.00. 

LOYSON,  MADAME  EMILIE  HYACINTHE 

338.  TO  JERUSALEM,  THROUGH  THE  LAND  OF  ISLAM,  among  Jews,  Christians  and 
Moslems,  by  Madame  Emilie  Hyacinthe  Loyson,  preface  by  Prince  De  Polignac. 
Pp.  viii,  375.  Cloth,  gilt  top,  octavo,  profusely  illustrated,  $2.50  net.  (10s.  6d. 
Det.) 


SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


10  THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


MILLS,  REV.  LAWRENCE  HEYWORTH,  D.  D. 

339.  ZARATHUSHTRA,  PHILO,  THE  ACHAEMENIDS  AND  ISRAEL,  A  Treatise 
upon  the  Antiquity  and  Influence  of  the  Avesta,  by  Dr.  Lawrence  H.  Mills, 
Professor  of  Zend  Philology  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  1906.  460  pages. 
Cloth,  gilt  top.     Price,  $4.00  net. 

318.  ZARATHUSTRIAN  GATHAS,  in  Metre  and  Rhythm.  Second  edition  of  the  author's 
version  of  1892-94,  with  important  additions,  by  Lawrence  H.  Mills,  D.  D.,  Hon. 
M.  A.,  Professor  of  Zend  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  1903.  Pp.  xix., 
196.    Cloth  $2.00. 

OLDENBERG,  PROF.  H. 

233.  ANCIENT  INDIA,  Its  Language  and  Religions,  by  Prof.  H.  Oldenberg.  Second  edi- 
tion.    1898.     Pp.  ix.,  110.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.). 

RADAU,  DR.  HUGO 

294.  THE  CREATION — STORY  OF  GENESIS  L  A  Sumerian  Theogony  and  Cosmogony, 
by  Dr.  Hugo  Radau.     1902.     Pp.  vi.,  70.     Boards  75c  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

SUZUKI,  TEITARO 

283.  ACVAGHOSHA'S  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  AWAKENING  OF  FAITH  IN  THE  MAHA- 
YANA.  Translated  for  the  first  time  from  the  Chinese  Version  by  Teitaro  Suzuki. 
1900.     Pp.  xiv.,  160.     Cloth  $1.25  net.     (5s.  net.) 

Ethics  and  Religion 

BONNEY,  HON.  CHARLES  CARROLL,  LL.  D. 

304.  WORLD'S  CONGRESS  ADDRESSES,  Delivered  by  the  President,  the  Hon.  Charles 
Carroll  Bonney,  LL.  D.,  to  the  World's  Parliament  of  Religious  Denominational 
Congresses  of  1893  at  the  Pinal  Session  of  the  World's  Congress  Auxiliary.  1900. 
Pp.  iv.,  88.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

CARUS,  PAUL 

205.  HOMUJES  OF  SCIENCE,  by  Paul  Cams.     1892.     Pp.  xi.,  317.     Cloth,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

(7s.  6d.). 

212.  KARMA,  A  STORY  OF  BUDDHIST  ETHICS,  by  Paul  Carus.  Hlustrated  by  Kwason 
Suzuki.     1903.     American  edition.     Pp.  47.     15c.     (10d.). 

302.     THE  DAWN  OF  A  NEW  ERA,  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS  ON  RELIGION,  by  Paul 

Carus.     1899.     Pp.  50.     Cloth  50c  net.     2s.  6d.  net.) 

268.  THE  ETHICAL  PROBLEM,  Three  Lectures  on  Ethics  as  a  Science,  by  Paul 
Carus.  Second  edition.  Enlarged  by  a  Discussion  of  the  subject  by  William 
M.  Salter,  John  Maddock,  F.  M.  Holland,  Prof.  Friedrich  Jodl,  Dr.  R.  Lewins,  Prof. 
H.  Hoeffding,  Prof.  L.  M.  Billia,  with  replies  by  the  Author.  1899.  Pp.  351. 
Cloth  $1.25.     (6s.  6d.). 

206.  THE  IDEA  OF  GOD,  by  Paul  Carus.     Fourth  edition.     Revised  and  enlarged.     1896. 

Pp.  32.     Paper  cover,  15c.     (9d.). 

211.  THE  RELIGION  OF  SCIENCE,  by  Paul  Carus.  Second  edition.  Revised  and  en- 
larged.    1896.     Pp.  vi.,  145.     Cloth  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.). 

285.  WHENCE  AND  WHITHER,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  the  Soul,  Its  Origin  and 
Its  Destiny,  by  Paul  Carus.  Second  edition.  1903.  Pp.  viii.,  218.  Cloth  75c  net. 
(3s.  6d.  net.) 

HUTCHINSON,  WOODS,  A.  M.,  M.  D. 

256.  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  DARWIN,  by  Woods  Hutchinson,  A.  M.,  M.  D. 
Pp.  xii.,  241.     Cloth  $1.50.     (6s.). 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO  11 


HYLAN,  JOHN  P. 

309.  PUBLIC  WORSHIP,  A  STUDY  IN  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  RELIGION,  by  John  P. 
Hylan.     1901.     Pp.   94.     Cloth   60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

POWELL,  ELMER  ELSWORTH,  A.  M.,  Ph.  D. 

359.  SPINOZA  AND  RELIGION,  A  Study  of  Spinoza's  Metaphysics  and  of  his  par- 
ticular utterances  in  regard  to  religion,  with  a  view  to  determining  the  sig- 
nificance of  his  thought  for  religion  and  incidentally  his  personal  attitude  to- 
ward it,  by  Elmer  Ellsworth  Powell,  A.M.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in 
Miami    University.      1906.      Pp.   xi.,    344.      Price,    $1.50    net.      (7s.    6d.). 

ROMANES,  GEORGE  JOHN,  M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  P.  R.  S. 

214.  A  CANDID  EXAMINATION  OF  THEISM,  by  Physicus  (the  late  G.  J.  Romanes, 
M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.)     Third  edition.     1892.     Pp.  xi.,  197.     Cloth  $2.00. 

242.  THOUGHTS  ON  RELIGION,  by  the  late  George  John  Romanes,  M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S. 
Edited  by  Charles  Gore,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Westminster.  Fifth  edition.  1902.  Pp. 
195.     Cloth  $1.25  net. 

RUTH,  J.  A. 
S29.     WHAT  IS  THE  BIBLE?  by  J.  A.  Ruth.     1904.      Pp.  xi.,  172.    75c  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

TOLSTOI,  COUNT  LEO 

348.  CHRISTIANITY  AND  PATRIOTISM,  with  Pertinent  Extracts  from  other  Essays, 
by  Count  Leo  Tolstoi,  translated  by  Paul  Borger  and  others.  Circa  96  pp.  Paper, 
35c  net;  mailed,  40c.     (2s.  net.) 


Fiction  and  Miscellaneous  Works 

336.  PORTFOLIO  OF  BUDDHIST  ART,  A  collection  of  illustrations  of  Buddhism,  His- 
torical and  Modern  in  portfolio.     Net  50c.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

316.  THE  TEMPLES  OF  THE  ORIENT  AND  THEIR  MESSAGE  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF 
HOLY  SCRIPTURE,  Dante's  Vision,  and  Bunyan's  Allegory,  by  the  Author  of 
"Clear  Round \"  " Things  Touching  the  King,"  etc.  With  a  Map.  1902.  Pp. 
viii.,  442.     $4.00. 

J65.  SCENES  FROM  THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA,  Reproduced  from  paintings  by  Keichyu 
Tamada,  Professor  in  the  Imperial  Art  Institute,  Tokyo.  1898.  Price,  $5.00 
net.      (21s.   6d.). 

BAYNE,  JULIA  TAFT 
323.     HADLEY  BALLADS,  by  Julia  Taft  Bayne.     1903.     Pp.  52.     Net  75c. 

BLOOMFIELD,  MAURICE 

334.  CERBERUS,  THE  DOG  OF  HADES,  the  History  of  an  Idea,  by  Maurice  Bloomneld, 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  Johns  Hopkins  University.  1905. 
Boards,  cloth  back.     Frontispiece.    50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.)     Pp.  41. 

BONNEY,  FLORENCE  PEORIA 

286.    MEDITATIONS  (Poems),  by  Florence  Peoria  Bonney.    1900.    Pp.  36.  Cloth  $1.00  net. 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


12  THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


CARUS,  PAUL 

282.  EROS  AND  PSYCHE,  A  Fairy-Tale  of  Ancient  Greece,  Eetold  after  Apuleius,  by  Paul 
Cams.     Illustrations  by  Paul  Thumann.     1900.     Pp.  xv.,  99.     $1.50  net.     (6s.  net.) 

343.  FRIEDRICH  SCHILLER,  A  Sketch  of  his  Life  and  An  Appreciation  of  his 
Poetry,  by  Dr.  Paul  Carus.  Profusely  illustrated.  1905.  102  pages,  octavo. 
Boards,   Cloth  back,  illustrated  cover,  price,   75   cents  net.      (3s.   6cL). 

224.  GOETHE  AND  SCHILLER'S  XENIONS.  Selected  and  translated  by  Paul  Carus. 
1896.     Pp.  vii.,  162.     Paper  ed.  50c.     (2s.  Sd.). 

217G.  KARMA,  Eine  buddhistische  Erzahlung,  von  Paul  Cams.  1897.  Illustrated  in  black. 
Pp.  29.     35c. 

217.  KARMA,  A  STORY  OF  EARLY  BUDDHISM,  by  Paul  Cams.  Third  Edition.  1898. 
Illustrated.     Crepe  paper,  tied  in  silk.     75c.     (3s.  6d.).     Pp.  20. 

291.  NIRVANA,  A  STORY  OF  BUDDHIST  PSYCHOLOGY,  by  Paul  Cams.  Illustrations 
by  Kwasong  Suzuki.     1902.     Pp.  93.     Cloth  60c  net.     (3s.  net.) 

313.  AMITABHA,  A  story  of  Buddhist  Theology,  by  Dr.  Paul  Carus.  1906.  Pages 
121.     Price,  Boards,  50  cents  net. 

267.  SACRED  TUNES  FOR  THE  CONSECRATION  OF  LIFE,  Hymns  of  the  Religion  of 
Science,  by  Paul  Cams.    1899.    Pp.  48.    50c. 

247.  THE  CHIEF'S  DAUGHTER,  a  Legend  of  Niagara,  by  Paul  Cams,  with  illustrations 
by  E.  Biedermann.    1901.    Pp.  54.     Cloth  $1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.). 

246.  THE  CROWN  OF  THORNS,  a  Story  of  the  Time  of  Christ,  by  Paul  Carus.  Illustrated 
by  Eduard  Biedermann.    1901.    Pp.  73.    Cloth  75c  net.     (3s.  6d.). 

295.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  STATE,  by  Paul  Carus.  1894.  vii.,  56.  Cloth  50c  net. 
(2s.  6d.  net.) 

365.  OUR  CHILDREN:  HINTS  FROM  PRACTICAL  EXPERIENCE  FOR  PARENTS 
AND   TEACHERS,  by  Dr.  Paul  Carus,   Circa  125   pages.     In  preparation. 

CLEMENT,  ERNEST  W.,  M.  A 

331.  THE  JAPANESE  FLORAL  CALENDAR,  by  Ernest  W.  Clement,  M.  A.  Profusely 
illustrated.    1905.    Pp.  '57.    Boards.     Cloth  back,  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.) 

EVANS,  HENRY  RIDGELY 

S30.  THE  NAPOLEON  MYTH,  by  Henry  Ridgely  Evans.  Containing  a  Reprint  of  • '  The 
Grand  Erratum, ' '  by  Jean  Baptiste  PSres,  and  an  Introduction  by  Paul  Cams.  1905. 
Pp.  65.     Illustrated.    Boards.    Cloth  back,  75c  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

347.  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW  MAGIC,  by  Henry  Ridgely  Evans,  with  an  introduction 
by  Paul  Carus,  with  numerous  illustrations  and  programmes  of  entertainments  of 
leading  magicians  of  all  times.  Circa  400  pp.  Cloth,  gilt  top,  price  $1.50  net; 
mailed,  $1.70.     (7s.  6d.  net.) 

FEOHNER,  GUSTAV  THEODOR 

349.  ON  LIFE  AFTER  DEATH,  by  Gustav  Theodor  Fechner,  translated  by  Dr.  Hugo 
Wernekke,  Head  Master  of  the  Eealgymnasium  at  Weimar,  1906.  Pages,  133. 
Cloth,  gilt  top.     12   mo.     Price,   75   cents  net.     Postage   8    cents.    (3s.   6d.). 

PREYTAG,  GUSTAV 

221.  THE  LOST  MANUSCRIPT.  A  Novel,  by  Gustav  Freytag.  Authorized  translation 
from  the  sixteenth  German  edition.  In  two  volumes.  1890.  Pp.  Vol.  I,  xvi.,  409; 
Vol.  II,  xvi.,  544.    Cloth  $4.00.    (21s.). 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO  13 

221a.  THE  LOST  MANUSCRIPT.  A  Novel,  by  Gustav  Freytag.  Authorized  translation 
from  the  sixteenth  German  edition.  Complete  in  one  volume.  Second  unaltered 
edition.     1898.     Pp.  xxxii.,  953.     $1.00.     (5s.). 

GARBE,  RICHARD 

222.  THE  EEDEMPTION  OF  THE  BRAHMAN,  by  Richard  Garbe,  Professor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Tuebingen.     1896.    Pp.  96.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

GILBERT,  GROVE  KARL 

315.  JOHN  WESLEY  POWELL:  A  Memorial  to  an  American  Explorer  and  Scholar,  Com- 
prising Articles  by  Mrs.  M.  D.  Lincoln  (Bessie  Beach),  Grove  Karl  Gilbert,  Marcus 
Baker  and  Paul  Carus.  Edited  by  Grove  Karl  Gilbert.   1903.  Pp.  75.  Paper  50c  net. 

KNIGHT,  G.  T.,  D.  D. 

364.  THE  PRAISE  OF  HYPOCRISY,  An  Essay  in  Casuistry  by  G.  T.  Knight,  D.  D. 
Professor  of  Christian  Theology  in  Tufts  College  Divinity  School.  1906.  Circa 
96  pages.     Price,  $1.00. 

STARR,  FREDERICK 

327.  READINGS  FROM  MODERN  MEXICAN  AUTHORS,  by  Frederick  Starr.    1904.    Pp. 

vii.,  420.     $1.23  net.     (5s.  6d.  net.) 

328.  THE  AINU  GROUP  AT  THE  SAINT  LOUIS  EXPOSITION,  by  Frederick  Starr. 

1904.     Profusely  illustrated.    Pp.  118.    Boards,  75c  net.     (3s.  6d.  net.) 

STRODE,  MURIEL 

333.  MY  LITTLE  BOOK  OF  PRAYER,  by  Muriel  Strode.  1905.  Alexandra  paper. 
Boards,  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.  net.)     Second  edition. 

333a.  MY  LITTLE  BOOK  OF  PRAYER,  by  Muriel  Strode.  Second  edition.  1905.  Strath- 
more  Japan  paper.     Cloth,  $1.00  net.     (4s.  6d.  net.) 

TRUMBULL,  M.  M. 

245.  THE  FREE  TRADE  STRUGGLE  IN  ENGLAND,  by  M.  M.  Trumbull.  Second  edi- 
tion.    Revised  and  enlarged.     1892.     Pp.  296.     Cloth  75c.     (3s.  6d.). 

243.     WHEELBARROW,  ARTICLES  AND  DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  LABOR  QUESTION, 

including  the  Controversy  with  Mr.  Lyman  J.  Gage  on  the  Ethics  of  the  Board  of 
Trade;  and  also  the  Controversy  with  Mr.  Hugh  O.  Pentecost,  and  others,  on  the 
Single  Tax  Question.     1894.     Pp.  303.     Cloth  $1.00.     (5s.). 

WAGNER,  RICHARD 

249.  A  PILGRIMAGE  TO  BEETHOVEN,  A  Novel  by  Richard  Wagner.  Translated  by 
Otto  W.  Weyer.     1897.     Pp.  vii.,  40.     Boards  50c  net.     (2s.  6d.). 

-  The  Religion  of  Science  Library 

L  THE  RELIGION  OF  SCIENCE,  by  Paul  Carus.  Third  edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
1899.     25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  vi.,  145. 

2.  THREE  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT,  by  F. 

Max  Muller,  with  a  correspondence  on  "Thought  Without  Words7 '  between  F. 
Max  Muller  and  Francis  Galton,  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  George  J.  Romanes  and 
others.    1898.      25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.)     Pp.  vi.,  123. 

3.  THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE,  delivered  at  the  Oxford 
University  Extension  Meeting,  with  a  supplement,  MY  PREDECESSORS,  by  F. 
MaxMtiller.    Third  edition.    1899.    25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.112. 

SENt)  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


14  THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING -CO.,  CHICAGO 


4.  THE  DISEASES  OF  PERSONALITY,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative  and 

Experimental  Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation.  Third 
revised  edition.     1898.     25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.  viii.,  163. 

5.  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ATTENTION,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative  and 

Experimental  Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation.  Fifth 
revised  edition.    1903.    25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.  120. 

6.  THE  PSYCHIC  LIFE  OF  MICRO-ORGANISMS,  A  Study  in  Experimental  Psychology, 

by  Alfred  Binet.    Reprint.    1903.    25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.  xii.,  120. 

7.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  STATE,   by  Paul   Carus.     1904.     13c,   mailed   18c.     (9d.). 

Pp.  vii.,  56. 

8.  ON   DOUBLE    CONSCIOUSNESS,    Experimental   Psychological    Studies,    by   Alfred 

Binet.     New  edition.    1905.     15c,  mailed  18c.     (9d.).     Pp.  89. 

9.  FUNDAMENTAL  PROBLEMS,  the  Method  of  Philosophy  as  a  Systematic  Arrange- 

ment of  Knowledge,  by  Paul  Carus.  Third  edition.  1903.  50c,  mailed  60c.  (2s.  6d.). 
Pp.  xii.,  373. 

10.  DISEASES  OF  THE  WILL,  by  Th.  Ribot,  Professor  of  Comparative   and   Experi- 

mental Psychology  in  the  College  de  France.  Authorized  translation  from  the 
eighth  French  edition  by  Merwin-Marie  Snell.  Third  enlarged  English  edition. 
1903.     25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  vi.,  137. 

11.  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LANGUAGE  and  The  Logos  Theory,  by  Ludwig  Noirg.     Second 

unaltered  edition.    1899.    15c,  mailed  18c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.  57. 

12.  THE  FREE  TRADE  STRUGGLE  IN  ENGLAND,  by  M.  M.  Trumbull.     Second  edi- 

tion revised  and  enlarged.     1892.     25c,  mailed  31c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  288. 

13.  WHEELBARROW,  ARTICLES  AND  DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  LABOR  QUESTION, 

including  the  Controversy  with  Mr.  Lyman  J.  Gage  on  the  Ethics  of  the  Board  of 
Trade;  and  also  the  Controversy  with  Mr.  Hugh  O.  Pentecost,  and  others,  on 
the  Single  Tax  Question.     1895.     35c,  mailed  43c.     (2s.).     Pp.  303. 

14.  THE  GOSPEL  OF  BUDDHA,  according  to  old  records,  told  by  Paul  Cams.     Ninth 

edition.     1904.     35c,  mailed  42c.     (2s.).    Pp.  xvi.,  275. 

16.     PRIMER  OF  PHILOSOPHY,  by  Paul   Carus.     Fourth  revised   edition.     1904.     25c, 
mailed  32c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  vi.,  243. 

16.  ON  MEMORY  AND  THE  SPECIFIC  ENERGIES  OF  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEM,  by 

Prof.  Ewald  Hering.     Third  edition.     1902.     15c,  mailed  18c.     (9d.).     Pp.  48. 

17.  THE  REDEMPTION  OF  THE  BRAHMAN.    A  Novel  by  Richard  Garbe.    1896.    25e, 

mailed  28c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  82. 

18.  AN  EXAMINATION  OF  WEISMANNTSM,  by  George  John  Romanes,  M.  A.,  LL.  D., 

F.  R.  S.,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.  Second 
edition.     1899.     35c,  mailed  41c.     (2s.).     Pp.  ix.,  221. 

19.  ON  GERMINAL  SELECTION  AS  A  SOURCE  OF  DEFINITE  VARIATION  by  August 

Weismann.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Second 
edition.     1902.     25c,  mailed  28c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  87. 

21.  POPULAR  SCIENTIFIC  LECTURES,  by  Ernst  Mach,  formerly  Professor  of  Physics 

in  the  University  of  Prague,  now  Professor  of  the  History  and  Theory  of  Inductive 
Science  in  the  University  of  Vienna.  Translated  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Third 
edition.  Revised  and  enlarged,  with  fifty-nine  cuts  and  diagrams.  1898.  50c, 
mailed  60c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  viii.,  411. 

22.  ANCIENT   INDIA,   ITS  LANGUAGE   AND   RELIGIONS,   by   Prof.   H.   Oldenberg. 

Second  edition.     1898.     25c,  mailed  28c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  110. 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO  15 


23.  THE    PROPHETS    OF    ISRAEL,    Popular    Sketches   from   Old    Testament    History, 

by  Carl  Heinrich  Cornill,  Doctor  of  Theology  and  Professor  of  Old  Testament 
History  in  the  University  of  Konigsberg.  Translated  by  Sutton  F.  Corkran. 
Sixth  edition.     1904.     25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  xiv.,  194. 

24.  HOMILIES  OF  SCIENCE,  by  Paul  Carus.     Third  edition.     1905.     35c,  mailed  43c. 

(2s.).     Pp.  x.,  317. 

25.  THOUGHTS  ON  RELIGION,  by  the  late  George  John  Romanes,  M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  F.  R. 

S.     Edited  by  Charles  Gore,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Westminster.     Fourth  edition.     1898.- 
50c,  mailed  55c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  196. 

26.  THE   PHILOSOPHY  OF   ANCIENT  INDIA,   by   Richard   Garbe,   Professor  in   the 

University  of  Tuebingen.    Second  edition.    1899.  25c,  mailed  28c.    (Is.  6d.).  Pp.  85. 

27.  MARTIN  LUTHER,  by  Gustav  Freytag.     Translated  by  Henry  E.  O.  Heinemann. 

1897.     25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  133. 

28.  ENGLISH  SECULARISM,  A  Confession  of  Belief,  by  George  Jacob  Holyoake.     1896. 

25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  xii.,  146. 

29.  ON   ORTHOGENESIS   AND    THE    IMPOTENCE    OF   NATURAL   SELECTION   IN 

SPECIES-FORMATION,  by  Th.  Eimer,  Professor  of  Zoology  in  Tuebingen.  An 
address  delivered  at  the  Leyden  Congress  of  Zoologists,  September  19,  1895. 
Translated  by  Thomas  J.  McCormack.     1898.     25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  56. 

30.  CHINESE   PHILOSOPHY,   an  Exposition   of  the  Main  Characteristic  Features   of 

Chinese  Thought,  by  Dr.  Paul  Carus.  Second  edition.  1902.  25c,  mailed  30c. 
(Is.  6d.).    Pp.  64. 

31.  THE  LOST  MANUSCRIPT,  a  novel  by  Gustav  Freytag.     Authorized  translation  from 

the  sixteenth  German  edition.   Complete  in  one  Volume.    Second  unaltered  edition. 
1898.     60c,  mailed  80c.     (3s.)     2  v.  in  1.    Pp.  xxxii.,  953. 

32.  A  MECHANICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL  THEORY  OF  ORGANIC  EVOLUTION,  by  Carl 

von  Nageli.     Summary.     1898.     15c,  mailed  18c.     (9d.).     Pp  53. 

S3.     CHINESE  FICTION,  by  the  Rev.  George  T.  Candlin,  with  illustrations  from  original 
Chinese  works.    1898.    15c,  mailed  18c.     (9d.).    Pp.  51. 

34.  MATHEMATICAL  ESSAYS  AND  RECREATIONS,  by  Hermann  Schubert,  Professor 

of  Mathematics  in  the  Johanneum,  Hamburg,  Germany.  From  the  German  by 
Thomas  J.  McCormack.  Second  edition.  1903.  25c,  mailed  30c.  (Is.  6d.). 
Pp.  149. 

35.  THE    ETHICAL    PROBLEM,    Three    Lectures    on    Ethics    as    a    Science,    by    Paul 

Carus.  Second  edition.  Enlarged  by  a  discussion  of  the  subject  by  William  M. 
Salter,  John  Maddock,  F.  M.  Holland,  Prof.  Friedrich  Jodl,  Dr.  R.  Lewins,  Prof. 
H.  Hoeffding,  Prof.  L.  M.  Billia,  with  replies  by  the  Author.  1899.  50c,  mailed 
60c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  xxiv.,  351. 

36.  BUDDHISM  AND  ITS  CHRISTIAN  CRITICS,  by  Paul  Carus.     Second  edition.     1905. 

50c,  mailed  58c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  316. 

37.  PSYCHOLOGY    FOR    BEGINNERS,   -an    Outline    Sketch,    by    Hiram    M.    Stanley 

Member  American  Psychological  Association,  author  of  "Evolutionary  Psychology 
of  Feeling"  and  "Essays  on  Literary  Art."  1905.  20e,  mailed  23c.  (Is.). 
Pp.  44. 

38.  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  METHOD  OF  RIGHTLY  CONDUCTING  THE  REASON,  AND 

SEEKING  TRUTH  IN  THE  SCIENCES,  by  Bene  Deseartes.  Translated  from 
the  French  and  collated  with  the  Latin  by  John  Veitch,  LL.D.,  late  Professor  of 
Logic  and  Bhetoric  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  Authorized  reprint.  1903. 
25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  vi.,  87. 

SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


16  THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 

39.  THE  DAWN  OF  A  NEW  RELIGIOUS  ERA  and  other  Essays,  by  Paul  Cams.     1899. 

15c,  mailed  18c.     (9d.).    Pp.  50. 

40.  KANT  &  SPENCER,  a  study  of  the  Fallacies  of  Agnosticism,  by  Paul  Carus.    Second 

edition.     1904.     20c,  mailed  25c.     (Is.).    Pp.  104. 

41.  THE  SOUL  OF  MAN,  an  Investigation  of  the  Facts  of  Physiological  and  Experi- 

mental Psychology,  by  Paul  Carus,  with  182  illustrations  and  diagrams.  Third  edi- 
tion.    1905.     75c,  mailed  85c.     (3s.  6d.).    Pp.  xviii.,  482. 

42.  WORLD'S  CONGRESS  ADDRESSES,  Delivered  l»y  the  President,  the  Hon.  Charles 

Carroll  Bonney,  LL.  D.,  to  the  World's  Parliament  of  Religions  and  the  Religious 
Denominational  Congresses  of  1893,  with  the  closing  address  at  the  final  session  of 
the  World's  Congress  Auxiliary.  Printed  as  a  Memorial  of  the  Scientific  Events 
of  the  Columbian  Tear.    1900.    15c,  mailed,  20c.     (9d.).    Pp.  iv.,  88. 

48.  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  DARWIN,  by  Woods  Hutchinson,  A.  M.,  M.  D.  1900. 
50c,  mailed  57c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  viii.,  241. 

44.  WHENCE  AND  WHITHER,  an  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  the  Soul,  Its  Origin  and 
Its  Destiny,  by  Paul  Carus.  Second  edition.  1903.  25c,  mailed  32c.  (Is.  6d.). 
Pp.  viii.,  218. 

45.  AN  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING  AND  SELECTIONS 
FROM  A  TREATISE  OF  HUMAN  NATURE,  by  David  Hume,  with  Hume's 
Autobiography  and  a  letter  from  Adam  Smith,  edited  by  Thomas  J.  McCor- 
mack,  Principal  of  the  La.  Salle-Peru  Township  High  School,  and  Professor 
Mary  Whiton  Calkins  of  Wellesley  College.  1906.  Pages  xxv.,  267.  Price, 
paper  35  cents  net,  mailed  43  cents.   (2s.). 

46.  AN  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS,  by  David  Hume. 

Reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1777.     1900.     25c,  mailed  31c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  169. 

47.  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  REASONING,  Based  on  Experimental  Researches  in  Hypno- 

tism, by  Alfred  Binet.  Doctor  of  Science,  Laureate  of  the  Institute,  (Academie  des 
Sciences  and  Academic  des  Sciences  Morales),  Director  of  the  Laboratory  of 
Physiological  Psychology  in  the  Sorbonne  (Hautes  etudes).  Translated  from  the 
second  French  edition  by  Adam  Gowans  Whyte,  B.  Sc.  1901.  25c,  mailed  31c. 
(Is.  6d.).    Pp.  191. 

48.  A  TREATISE  CONCERNING  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  HUMAN  KNOWLEDGE,  by 

George  Berkeley.  Reprint  edition.  1904.  25c,  mailed  31c.  (Is.  6d.).  Pp.  xv., 
128. 

49.  THREE  DIALOGUES  BETWEEN  HYLAS  AND  PHLLONOUS,  by  George  Berkeley. 

Reprint  edition.    1904.     25c,  mailed  30c.     (Is.  6d.).    Pp.  vi.,  136. 

50.  PUBLIC  WORSHIP,  A  STUDY  IN  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  RELIGION,  by  John  P. 

Hylan.     1901.     25c,  mailed  29c.     (Is.  6d.).     Pp.  94. 

6L  THE  MEDITATIONS  AND  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  PRINCIPLES  of  Rene  Des- 
cartes. (1596-1650.)  Translated  by  John  Veitch,  LL.  D.,  late  Professor  of  Logic 
and  Rhetoric  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  with  a  Preface,  Copies  of  original  title 
pages,  a  Bibliography  and  an  Essay  on  Descartes'  Philosophy  by  L.  Levy-Bruhl, 
Maitre  de  Conferences  in  the  Sorbonne.  1903.  35c,  mailed  42c.  (2s.).  Pp.  xxx., 
248. 

52.  LEIBNIZ,    DISCOURSE    ON    METAPHYSICS,    Correspondence    with    Arnauld    and 

Monadology,  with  an  Introduction  by  Paul  Janet,  Member  of  the  French 
Institute.  Translated  by  Dr.  George  R.  Montgomery,  Instructor  in  Philosophy  in 
Yale  University.     1902.     50c,  mailed  58c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  xxiii.,  276. 

53.  KANT'S  PROLEGOMENA  to  any  Future  Metaphysics.     Edited  in   English  by  Dt. 

Paul  Carus,  with  an  Essay  on  Kant's  Philosophy  and  Other  Supplementary  Mate- 
rial for  the  Study  of  Kant.     1902.     50c,  mailed  59c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  301. 


SEND  FOR  COMPLETE  ILLUSTRATED  CATALOGUE 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO  17 


54.  ST.  ANBF.T.M  PROSLOGIUM;  MONOLOGIUM;  AN  APPENDIX  IN  BEHALF  OP 
THE  FOOL,  by  Gaunilon;  and  CUB  DEUS  HOMO.  Translated  from  the  Latin  by 
Sidney  Norton  Deane,  B.  A.,  with  an  Introduction,  Bibliography  and  reprints  of 
the  Opinions  of  Leading  Philosophers  and  Writers  on  the  Ontological  Argument. 
1903.    50c,  mailed  60c.     (2s.  6d.).     Pp.  xxxv.,  288. 

65.  THE  CANON  OF  REASON  AND  VIRTUE  (LAO-TZE'S  TAO  TEH  KING).     Trans- 

lated  from  the  Chinese  by  Paul  Cams.  1903.  25c,  mailed  28c.  (Is.  6d.).  Pp. 
iv.,  138. 

66.  ANTS  AND  SOME  OTHER  INSECTS,  an  Inquiry  into  the  Psychic  Powers  of  these 

Animals,  with  an  Appendix  on  the  Peculiarities  of  Their  Olfactory  Sense,  by  Dr. 
August  Forel,  late  Professor  of  Psychiatry  at  the  University  of  Zurich.  Translated 
from  the  German  by  Prof.  William  Morton  Wheeler,  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History,  New  York.     1904.    50c,  mailed  53c.     (2s.  6d.>.    Pp.  49. 

57.  THE  METAPHYSICAL  SYSTEM  OF  HOBBES,  as  contained  in  twelve  chapters  from 

his  " Elements  of  Philosophy  Concerning  Body/'  and  in  briefer  Extracts  from  his 
"Human  Nature"  and  "Leviathan,"' selected  by  Mary  Whiton  Calkins.  1905. 
40c,  mailed  47c.     (2s.).     Pp.  iv.,  187. 

58.  LOCKE'S  ESSAY  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING,   Books   II   and  17 

(with  omissions).  Selected  by  Mary  Whiton  Calkins.  1905.  50c,  mailed  60c.  (2s. 
6d.).     Pp.  xiii.,  342. 

59.  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  DESCARTES'    PHILOSOPHY,   by  Benedictus  De    Spinoza 

(the  Philosopher's  Earliest  Work).  Translated  from  the  Latin  with  an  introduc- 
tion by  Halbert  Hains  Britan,  Ph.  D.  Pp.  lxxxi.  177.  Price,  paper,  35c;  mailed, 
42c.     (2s.) 

60.  THE  VOCATION  OF  MAN,  by  Johann  Gottlieb  Fichte,  translated  by  William 
Smith,  LL.  D.,  with  biographical  introduction  by  E.  Eitchie,  Ph.  D.  1906.  Pages 
185.     Paper,  25  cents  net.      (3s.  6d.). 


CHRISTIANITY  AND   PATRIOTISM 

With  pertinent  extracts  from  other  essays 

by 

COUNT  LEO  TOLSTOY 

Translated  by  PAUL  BORGER  and  Others 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
PREFATORY  NOTE.— Christianity  and  Patriotism.  Translated  by  Paul  Borger.    Overthrow  of  Hell 
and  its  Restoration.  Translated  by  V.  Tchertkoff.    Appeal  to  the  Clergy,  Translated  by  Aylmer  Maude. 
Answer  to  the  Riddle  of  Life,  Translated  by  Ernest  H.  Crosby.     Views  on  the  Russo-Japanese  War, 
Translated  for  the  London  Times.    Epilogue,  Patriotism  and  Chauvinism,  Paul  Carus. 

Frontispiece,  98  Pages,  Sewed  Paper  Cover,  Large  Type,  Price,  35  cents. 

"There  is  much  to  admire,  much  to  lay  to  heart  in  the  stimulating  words  from  this 
strange  man  in  his  rude  peasant  garb.  The  essay  is  well  worth  reading  by  all, 
whether  interested  in  Tolstoy  himself  or  not." — The  Dominion  Presbyterian. 

"His  eloquent  plea  for  peace  on  earth  will  compel  the  serious  attention  and  earnest 
reflection  of  the  true  patriot  and  philanthropist,  and  will  materially  contribute  to  the 
happy  realization  of  the  Christian  ideal  of  universal  and  perpetual  peace  among  the 
nations  of  the  world." — The  Baptist  Commonwealth. 

"While  Americans  may  not  wholly  agree  with  the  great  Russian  sage's  philosophy, 
or  rather  his  application  of  it,  they  cannot  fail  to  appreciate  his  sympathy  and  effort  in 
the  cause  of  oppressed  humanity,  and  in  behalf  of  real  freedom  in  the  fullest  sense 
of  the  term," — The  Progress. 

"These  excellent  translations  give  a  very  clear  idea  of  the  strong  verile  style  of  the 
author  who  never  minces  words  in  the  expression  of  his  convictions.  The  reader,  even 
if  not  agreeing  with  him  in  entirety,  can  easily  understand  the  strong  influence  which 
he  exerts,  not  only  in  his  own  country,  but  wherever  his  writings  have  a  foothold." — 
The  Toledo  Blade. 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Company,    1322  Wabash  Ave.,    Chicago 


18 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


Author  and  Title  Index 


Page 

Acvaghosha's    Discourse,    T.    Suzuki 10 

Ainu  Group,  The,  Prof.  Starr 13 

Amitabha,  Paul  Carus    12 

Anesaki,   M 9 

Anselm,   St 5,  17 

Ants  and  Some  Other  Insects,  Forel....l7 

Ashcroft,   Edgar  A 4 

Attention,  The  Psychology  of,  Th.  Ribot 

7,   14 

Babel  and  Bible,  F.  Delitzsch 9 

Bacteriology,  Principles  of,  F.  Hueppe.  .    2 

Bayne,  Julia  Taf t 11 

Beethoven,  Pilgrimage  to,  Richard  Wag- 
ner     13 

Beha  'U'llah,  G.  B.  Kheiralla 9 

Berkeley,    George    4,   16 

Biblical  Love  Ditties,  P.  Haupt 9 

Biedermann,  Eduard ."" 12 

Binet,  Alfred    4,   14,   16 

Bloomfield,    Maurice 11 

Bonney,  Charles  Carroll   10,   16 

Bonney,  Florence  Peoria 11 

Book  of  the  Dead,  Budge 7 

Borger,   Paul    11 

Brahman,  The  Redemption  of  the,  Rich- 
ard  Garbe    13,    14 

Britan,  Halbert  Hains    .  . .- 17 

Buddha,  Gospel  of,  Paul  Carus 8,   14 

Buddha,    Scenes   from   the   Life    of,    Kei- 

chyu    Yamada    11 

Buddhas,  Das  Evangelium,  Paul  Carus..    8 
Buddhism  and  its  Christian  Critics,  Paul 

Carus   S,  15 

Buddhist  Art,  Portfolio  of 11 

Buddhist     and     Christian     Gospels,     Ed- 
munds           9 

Budge,"  E.  A.  W 7 

Calculus,    Elementary    Illustrations,    De 

Morgan 3 

Calkins,  Mary  Whiton    6,   16,   17 

Candlin,   George   T 15 

Canon   of   Reason   and  Virtue,   Paul   Ca- 
rus     17 

Carus,  Paul.. 4,  5,  8,  10,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17 
Cerberus,    the    Dog    of    Hades,    Maurice 

Bloomfield    11 

Chief's  Daughter,  The,  Paul  Carus 12 

Chinese  Fiction,  G.  T.  Candlin 15 

Chinese   Philosophy,   Paul   Carus 15 

Christ,  Age  of,  Carus 8 

Christianity   and   Patriotism,    Count   Leo 

Tolstoi    11 

Clement,  Ernest  W 12 

Consciousness,   On  Double,  Alfred  Binet, 

4,   14 

Conway,  Moncure  D 8 

Cope,    E.    D 2 

Cornill,   Carl  Heinrich 8,   15 

Crown   of  Thorns,   The,   Paul  Carus    ....12 
Cumont,   Franz    8 

Darwin  and  after  Darwin,  G.  J.  Romanes  2 

Darwinian  Theory,  G.  J.   Romanes    2 

Dawn  of  a  New  Religious  Era,  The,  Paul 

Carus   10,  16 

Deane,   Sidney  Norton,  B.   A 5,   17 

Dedekind,    Richard    3 

Delitzsch,     F 9 

DeMorgan,   Augustus    3 

Descartes,    Rene    5,    15,    16,    17 

DeSpinoza,   Benedictus    5,    17 

Devil,  History  of  the,  Paul  Carus 8 

Devries,  Hugo    2 

Dharma,   Carus    8 

Discourse  on  Method,  Rene  Descartes. 5,  15 

Edmunds,  Albert  J 9 

Egypt,   History  of,   E.  A.   W.   Budge    ....  7 

Egyptians,  Gods  of,  Budge 7 

Egyptian    Heaven    and    Hell,    E.    A.    W. 

Budge     7 


_  Page 
Eimer,    Th 15 

English  Secularism,  G.  J.  Holyoake.  .  .9,  15 
Enquiry    Concerning    the    Principles    of 

Morals,  David  Hume    6,   16 

Eros      and   Psyche,   Paul   Carus    12 

Ethical  Problem,  The,  Paul  Carus...  10,  15 
Euclid's    Parallel    Postulate,    "Withers    .  .    4 

Evans,  Henry  Ridgely   12 

Evolution,  First  Book  on  Organic,  D.  L. 

Shute 2 

Evolution,    Mechanico-Physiological, 

Theory    of,    C.    VonNaegli    2,    15 

Evolution,   Primary   Factors   of   Organic, 

E.   D.   Cope    2 

Fechner,    Gustav    Theodor    12 

Fichte,  Johann  Gottlieb 5,  17 

Fink,   Karl 3 

Forel,    Dr.    August    17 

France,    History    of    Modern    Philosophy 

in,  L.  Levy-Bruhl 6 

Free    Trade    Struggle    in    England,    The, 

M.  M.   Trumbull    13,   14 

Freytag,   Gustav    9,   12,   13,   15 

Fundamental  Problems,   Paul  Carus.. 4,   14 

Garbe,  Richard   5,  13,  14,  15 

Genesis,   Creation  Story  of,  Radau    10 

Genesis,      The      Legends      of,      Hermann 

Gunkel     9 

Geometric    Exercises    in    Paper    Folding, 

T.  Sundara  Row   3 

Geometry,  Foundations  of,  D.  Hilbert...  3 
Germinal  Selection,  A.  Weismann   ....2,  14 

Gilbert,  Grove  Karl 13 

God,   The   Idea  of,   Paul   Carus    10 

Godward,   Carus    8 

Gospel  According  to  Darwin,  The,  Woods 

Hutchinson     10,     16 

Grand      Erratum,      The      (See     Napoleon 

Myth)      12 

Gunkel,    Hermann 9 

Hadley  Ballads,  Julia  Taft  Bayne   11 

Haupt,    Paul     9 

Hering,    Ewald 5,    14 

Hilbert,    D     3 

Hobbes,   Metaphysical    Sj^stem    of    17 

Holyoake,  George  Jacob 9,  15 

Homilies  of  Science,  Paul  Carus   ....10,  15 

Hue,   M 9 

Hueppe,    Ferdinand    2 

Human  Knowledge,  Berkeley 4,   16 

Human  Understanding,  Hume 6,  16 

Hume,    David    6,    16 

Hutchinson,    Woods    10,   16 

Hylan   J.    P 11,    16 

Hymns   of   the   Faith,    Edmunds    9 

Hypocrisy,  The  Praise  of   13 

Ideas,  Evolution  of  General,  Th.  Ribot.  .  7 
Imagination,  Essay  on  the  Creative,  Th. 

Ribot     7 

India,    Ancient,    Its   Languages   and   Re- 
ligions,   H.    Oldenberg    10,    14 

India,    Philosophy    of    Ancient,    Richard 

Garbe     5,     15 

Ingraham,     Andrew     6 

Israel,    History    of   the   People    of,    C.    H. 

Cornill     8 

Israel,  Geschichte  des  Volkes,  C.  H.  Cor- 
nill  8 

Israel,  The  Prophets  of,  C.  H.  Cornill,  8,  15 
Israel,   The  Rise  of  the  People  of,  C.  H. 
Cornill    8 

Japanese    Floral    Calendar,    The,    Ernest 
W.    Clement 12 

Kant   &    Spencer,    Paul   Carus    4,    16 

Kant,   Immanuel    4,    16 

Kan-Ying  P'ien,   T'ai-Shang,  Paul  Carus  8 

Karma,   Paul   Carus    10,   12 

Kheiralla,     George     Ibrahim     9 

Knight,    G.    T 13 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  CHICAGO 


19 


Page 

Lagrange    Joseph   Louis    3 

Language,     On    the    Origin    of,    Ludwig 

Noire    6,    14 

Language,  Three  Lectures  on  the  Science 

of,   F.   Max  Mueller    6,   13 

Lao-Tze    8,    17 

Leibniz     6,     16 

Levy-Bruhl,  Lucien    6 

Life  After  Death,  On,  G.  T.  Fechner   ...  .12 
Locke's   Essays   Concerning  Human  Un- 
derstanding, Mary  W.  Calkins   17 

Lost    Manuscript,    The,    Gustav    Freytag 

12,   13,   15 

Loyson,  Madame  Emilie 9 

Luther,   Martin,   Gustav   Freytag    ....9,   15 

MacDougal  D.   T 17 

Mach,  Ernst 3,  6,   14 

Magic,    The    Old    and    The    New,    H.    R. 

Evans     12 

Mathematical    Essays    and    Recreations. 

H.  Schubert   4,  15 

Mathematics,     A    Brief    History     of,     K. 

Fink    3 

Mathematics,    Lectures    of    Elementary, 

J.  L.  Lagrange    3 

Mathematics,  On  The  Study  and  Difficul- 
ties of,  A.   DeMorgan    3 

McCormack,   Thomas  J 

2,   3,  4,   6,   7,   8,   14,   15,   16 
Mechanics,  The  Science  of,  Ernst  Mach.    3 

Meditations,   Rene   Descartes    5,    16 

Meditations,   F.   P.   Bonney    11 

Memory,   On,   Ewald  Hering    5,   14 

Metaphysical     System    of    Hobbes,     The, 

Mary    W.    Calkins    17 

Metaphysics   Leibniz    6,    16 

Metaphysics,  '  Surd    of,    Paul    Carus    ....    5 
Micro-Organisms,    The    Psychic    Life    of, 

Alfred    Binet     4,     14 

Mills,   Professor   Lawrence  Heyworth    ..10 

Monism  &  Meliorism,  Paul  Carus   4 

Montgomery,  Dr.  George  R 6 

Muller,  F.  Max 6,  13 

Mysteries  of  Mithra,  Franz  Cumont   .% . .  .    8 

Naegeli,   Carl  von 2,   15 

Napoleon    Myth,    The    12 

Nirvana,  Paul  Carus   12 

Noire,     Ludwig     6,     14 

Numbers,    Essays   on   the   Theory   of,    R. 
Dedekind     3 

Oldenberg,     H 8,     10;    14 

Orthogenesis,  On,  Th.  Eimer    15 

Our  Children,  Paul  Carus 12 

Peres,    Jean   Baptiste    12 

Personality,  The  Diseases  of,   Th.  Ribot, 

6,   14 

Philosophers,    Portraits    of    7 

Philosophy,   Our  Need  of,  Paul  Carus    .  .    5 
Popular  Scientific  Lectures,   Ernst  Mach 

3,   14 
Portraits   of   Philosophers   and   Psychol- 
ogists          7 

Portraits     of     Eminent     Mathematicians, 

David    Eugene    Smith     4 

Post-Darwinian     Questions,     G.     J.     Ro- 
manes     2 

Powell,    E.    E • 11 

Powell,    J.    W 6,    13 

Prayer,   My  Little   Book,  of,    Strode    ....13 
Primer   of  Philosophy,   Paul   Carus    ..5,    14 
Principles  of  Philosophy,  De  Spinoza  .5,  17 
Prolegomena   to   Any   Future   Metaphys- 
ics,   Immanuel    Kant    4,    16 

Prosologium,   Anselm    5,    17 

Psychologists,   Portraits   of    7 

Psychology   for   Beginners,    H.    M.    Stan- 
ley     7,    15 

Radau,    Hugo     10 

Readings  from  Modern  Mexican  Authors, 
Prof.    Frederick   Starr    13 


Page 
Reasoning,   Psychology   of,  Alfred  Binet 

4,   16 

Religion   of   Science  Library    

13,  14,  15,  16,   17 
Religion  of  Science,  The,  Paul  Carus.  10,  13 

Ribot,    Th 6,    14 

Rise   of  Man,    The,   Paul   Carus    5 

Ritchie,    E 5,     17 

Romanes,   George   John    2,    11,    14,   15 

Rosetta  Stone,  E.  A.  W.  Budge 7 

Row,   T.   Sundara    3 

Ruth,  J.  A 11 

Sacred   Tunes,   Paul   Carus    12 

Schiller,    Friedrich,    Carus    12 

Schubert,  Hermann   4,  15 

Science  and  Faith,  Paul   Topinard    7 

Science     a    Religious     Revelation,     Paul 

Carus    5 

Sensations,   The  Analysis  of  the,  Ernest 

Mach     6 

Shute,    D.    Kerfoot    2 

Smith,    David    Eugene    4 

Solomon    and    Solomonic    Literature,    M. 

D.   Conway 8 

Soul  of  Man,   The,   Paul   Carus    5,   16 

Space  and  Geometry,  Ernst  Mach 3 

Species,   Varieties,   Their  Origin   by  Mu- 
tation,   DeVries    2 

Specific    Energies    of    the    Nervous    Sys- 
tem,   Ewald    Herring    5,    14 

Spinoza  and  Religion,  E.  E.  Powell   ....11 

Stanley,    H.    M 7,    15 

Starr,    Prof.    Frederick    13 

State,  The  Nature  of  the,  Paul  Carus.  12,  14 

Strode,     Muriel     13 

Suzuki,    Kwason    10,    12 

Suzuki,    Teitaro     , 8,    10 

Swain    School   Lectures 6 

Tao  Teh  King,  Lao-Tze's,  Paul  Carus.  8,  17 
Tartary,    Thibet   and    China,    Travels    in, 

M.     Hue      9 

Temples    of    the    Orient,    The    11 

Theism,  A  Cafidid  Examination  of,  G.  J. 

Romanes    11 

Thoughts    on    Religion,    G.    J.    Romanes, 

11,   15 
Thought,  Three  Introductory  Lectures  on 

the  Science  of,  F.  Max  Muller   ....6,  13 
Three     Dialogues     Between     Hylas     and 

Philonous,   George  Berkeley 4,   16 

Through  the  Land  of  Islam,  Loyson   ....    9 

Tolstoi,    Count   Leo    11 

Tool,  The  Philosophy  of,  Paul  Carus....    5 

Topinard,   Paul    7 

Trumbull,  M.  M 13,  14 

Truth  and  Error,  J.  W.  Powell 6 

Veitch,     John     5,     16 

Vocation  of  Man,  The,  J.  G.  Fichte...5,  17 

Wagner,    Richard     13 

Weismann,  A < 2,  14 

Weismannism,     Examination     of,     G.     J. 

Romanes    2,    14 

Wernekke,    Dr.    Hugo     12 

What  is  the  Bible,  J.  A.  Ruth    11 

Wheelbarrow,   M.   M.   Trumbull    13,   14 

Whence   and  Whither?     Paul  Carus.  10,   16 
Will,  The  Diseases  of  the,  Th.  Ribot.. 6,  14 

Withers,  John  William,  Ph.  D 4 

World's  Congress  Addresses,  C.  C.  Bon- 
ney      10,    16 

World's  Desires,   The,   E.  A.  Ashcroft    ...4 
Worship,    Public:    A    Study    in    the    Psy- 
chology of  Religion,  J.  P.  Hylan.ll,   16 

Xenions,  Goethe  and  Schiller's   11- 

Yamada,    Keichyu    12 

Yin  Chih  Wen,  Paul   Carus    8 

Zarathushtrian  Gathas,   L.   H.   Mills    .....10 
Zarathushtra,    Philo,     The    Achaemenids 
and  Israel,   L.   H.   Mills    10 


JUST  PUBLISHED 

ON    LIFE   AFTER   DEATH 

BY 

GUSTAV  THEODOR  FECHNER 

TRANSLATED   BY 

DR.  HUGO  WERNEKKE 
Head  Master  of  the  Realgymnasium  at  Weimar. 

Pages,  133.  Cloth,  gilt  top.  i2mo.  Price,  75  cents  net.  Postage  8  cents. 
Gustav  Theodor  Fechner  was  a  professor  of  physics,  but  he  took  great  interest  in 
psychology  and  by  combining  the  two  sciences  became  one  of  the  founders  of  the  science 
of  "psychophysics,"  based  upon  the  obvious  interrelation  between  sensation  and  nerve- 
activity.  While  he  did  much  creditable  work  in  the  line  of  exact  psychology,  he  devoted 
himself  with  preference  to  those  problems  of  the  soul  which  touch  upon  its  religious  and 
moral  life  and  its  fate  after  death.  His  little  book  On  Life  After  Death  is  his  most  im- 
portant publication  in  this  line. 

Fechner  believes  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  his  treatment  is  of  especial 
interest  because  he  uses  a  distinctive  scientific  method  in  dealing  with  the  subject. 
Though  the  thoughtful  reader  may  often  find  the  ideas  expressed  at  variance  with  his 
preconceived  notions  of  the  after  life,  he  cannot  fail  to  be  impressed  with  the  importance 
and  suggestiveness  of  Professor  Fechner' s  thought. 


UI  ivish  to  congratulate  you  and  the  translator  upon  the  beautiful  translation  of  Fech- 
ner. It  did  not  seem  possible  that  such  a  translation,  breathing  as  it  did  the  entire  spirit 
of  the  original,  could  have  been  made  by  a  German.  I  have  seldom  seen  a  more  successful 
bit  of  translating."— DAVID  EUGENE  SMITH,  Ph.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Math- 
ematics,  Teachers'  College,  New   York  City. 

"The  essay  of  which  this  little  book  is  a  translation  was  first  published  in  German 
in  1S35.  Its  author  held  that  'the  spirits  of  the  dead  continue  to  exist  as  individuals  in 
the  living?  and  has  worked  out  this  idea  in  quaint  suggestions  and  meditations  which 
will  interest  many  and  perhaps  will  add  somewhat  of  illumination  to  their  eager  gaze  into 
the  world  beyond  death.  It  is  devout,  hopeful  and  confident  of  a  kind  of  a  personal 
immortality r— THE  CONGREGATION ALIST  AND  CHRISTIAN  WORLD. 

"A  volume  that  will  greatly  interest  if  not  influence  lovers  of  philosophical  writings" 
THE  BURLINGTON  HAWK  EVE. 


THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO. 

1322  WABASH  AVENUE,  CHICAGO. 


SEP  14  '90S 


\ 


w 


A 


^  v*v 


A\ 


%  ' 


O,         *- 


<2/  '   *  *  ^       <&  .    .  <  '  0  *   *  *         A  ^        ' 


.• 


<■■ 


W 


^ 


>*    ,^ 


^ 


\ 


\N 


V        V 


'/ 


■    V  * 


oN 


-4 


aV  --f> 


aV 


J**  .' 


■o 


rtVJ 


^  v* 


o  0  A  > 


•/- 


V 


r>  • 


