The Races of Man (Joseph Deniker, 1900)
=======================================
Deniker's 1900 English 'Races of Man' — the 29-race classification that replaced Blumenbach's five and framed 20th-century physical anthropology. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (racesmananoutli01denigoog)


Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


The  Contemporary  Science  Series.

Edited  by  Havelock  Ellis.


I.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SEX.    By  Profs.  Patrick  Geddes

and  J.  A.  Thomson.     With  92  Illustrations.     Fourth  and  Revised
Edition.     6s.

"The  aathors  have  brought  to  the  task— as  indeed  their  names  guarantee— a  wealth
of  knowledge,  a  lucid  and  attractive  method  of  treatment,  and  a  rich  vein  of  pictur-
esque language."— Aature.

II.  ELECTRICITY    IN    MODERN    LIFE.     By  G.   W.    de

TuNZELMANN.    With  ovcr  100  Illustrations.    Second  Edition,  Revised
and  Enlarged.     3s.  6d.

"  A  clearly-written  and  connected  sketch  of  what  is  known  about  electricity  and
magnetism,  the  more  prominent  modem  applications,  and  the  principles  on  which
they  are  based."— Saturday  Review.

in.  THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    ARYANS.      By    Dr.    Isaac
Taylor.     Illustrated.     Second  Edition.     3s.  6d.

"Canon  Taylor  is  probably  the  most  eneyclopiedic  all-round  scholar  now  liTing.
His  new  volume  on  the  Origin  of  the  Aryans  is  a  first-rate  example  of  the  excellent
account  to  which  he  can  turn  his  exceptionally  wide  and  varied  information.  .  .  .
Masterly  and  exhaustive."— Polf  Mall  Qiuette.

IV.  PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.     By  P.  Mante-

GAZZA.     Illustrated.     Second  Edition.     3s.  6d.

"Brings  this  highly  interesting  subject  even  with  the  latest  researches.  .  .  .
Professor  Mantegazza  is  a  writer  full  of  life  and  spirit,  and  the  natural  attractiveness
of  his  subject  b  not  destroyed  by  his  scientific  handling  of  it."— Literary  World  (Boston).

V.  EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.    By  J.  B.  Sutton,  F.R.C.S.

With  135  Illustrations.     3s.  6d.

"  The  book  is  as  int«esting  as  a  novel,  without  sacrifice  of  accuracy  or  system,  and
is  calculated  to  give  an  appreciation  of  the  fundamentals  of  pathology  to  the  lay
reader,  while  forming  a  useful  collection  of  illustrations  of  disease  for  medical
reference."— i/ottmai  <^f  Mental  Science.

VI.  THE    VILLAGE    COMMUNITY.      By  G.   L.    Gomme.

Illustrated.     3s.  6d.

*'  His  book  will  probably  remain  for  aomo  time  the  bast  work  of  reference  for  facta
botring  on  thoae  tmoea  of  the  village  oommnnity  which  have  not  been  eflEaced  by
eoB^Mit,  eBcraacfamMit,  and  the  heavy  band  of  Roman  law."— ^MMisA  Leader,


XV.  EDUCATION   AND   HEREDITY.     By  J.    M.   Guyau.

3s.  6d.

"It  is  at  once  a  treatise  on  sociology,  ethics,  and  psedagogics.  It  is  dcnbtful
whether  among  all  the  ardent  evolutionists  who  haTe  had  their  say  on  the  moral
and  the  educational  question  any  one  has  carried  forward  the  new  doctrine  so  boldly
to  its  extreme  logical  consequence."— Professor  Sully  in  Mind,

XVI.  THE  MAN  OF  GENIUS.     By  Prof.  Lombroso.     Illus-
trated.   3s.  6d.

"  By  far  the  most  comprehensive  and  fascinating  collection  of  facts  and  generalisa-
tions concerning  genius  which  has  yet  been  brought  together."— JounusJ  qf  Mental
Sdenee.

XVII.  THE    HISTORY   OF   THE    EUROPEAN    FAUNA.
By  R.  F.  ScHARFF,  B.Sc.,  Ph.D.,  F.Z.S.     6s.

"The  book  is  trustworthy,  the  information  carefully  gathered  and  judiciously
treated.*— 7%e  Bookman,

XVIII.  PROPERTY  :  ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT.

By  Ch.  Letourneau,  General  Secretary  to  the  Anthropological  Society,
Paris,  and  Professor  in  the  School  of  Anthropology,  Paris.     3s.  6d.

**  M.  Letourneau  has  read  a  great  deal,  and  he  seems  to  us  to  have  selected  and
interpreted  his  facts  with  considerable  Judgment  and  leAramg.*'— Westminster  Jiecieic.


XIX.  VOLCANOES,  PAST  AND  PRESENT.  By  Prof.
Edward  Hull,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.     3s.  6d.

*'A  very  readable  account  of  the  phenomena  of  volcanoes  and  earthquakes.*'
—ytUure,

XX.  PUBLIC    HEALTH.     By   Dr.    J.    F.    J.    Sykes.     With

numerous  Illustrations.     3s.  6d.

*'  Not  by  any  means  a  mere  compilation  or  a  dry  record  of  details  and  statistics,
but  it  takes  up  essential  points  in  evolution,  environment,  prophylaxis,  and  sanitation
bearing  upon  the  preservation  of  public  health."— -Z/anc^L

XXL  MODERN  METEOROLOGY.  An  Account  of  the
Growth  and  Present  Condition  of  some  Branches  of
Meteorological  Science.  By  Frank  Waldo,  Ph.D.,  Member
of  the  German  and  Austrian  Meteorological  Societies,  etc.  ;  late
Junior  Professor,  Signal  Service,  U.S.A.  With  112  Illustrations.
3s.  6d.

*'  The  present  volume  is  the  hest  on  the  subject  for  general  use  that  we  have  seen."
"  DvUy  TeUyjrapk  (London).


XXIX.  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  BRAIN:  A  Study  of
THE  Nervous  System  in  Relation  to  Education.  By  Henry
Herbert  Donaldson,  Professor  of  Neurology  in  the  University  of
Chicago.     3s.  6d.

"  We  can  say  with  confidence  that  Professor  Donaldson  has  executed  his  work
with  much  care,  judgment,  and  discrimination.**— TAe  LaneeL

XXX.  EVOLUTION  IN  ART:  As  Illustrated  by  the
Life-Histories  of  Designs.  By  Professor  Alfred  C.  Haddon,
F.R.S.     With  130  Illustrations.    6s.

**It  is  impossible  to  speak  too  highly  of  this  most  unassuming  and  iufaluable
book." — JourtuU  Anthrqpologieal  ImtUute,

XXXI.  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  EMOTIONS.  By
Th.  Ribot,  Professor  at  the  College  of  France,  Editor  of  the  /^tvu€

Philosophiqui,     6s.

"Charmingly  written,  and  full  of  lucid  explanation  and  brilliant  comparison.    A
masterly  exposition."— SntuA  Medical  Journal,

XXXIL  HALLUCINATIONS  AND  ILLUSIONS :  A  Study
of  the  Fallacies  of  Perception.    By  Edmund  Parish.    6s.

*'  The  most  comprehensive  and  most  scientific  work  on  false  perception  that  has  up
till  DOW  hteai  written  in  any  language."—- youniat  qf  Menial  Science.

XXXIIL  THE  NEW  PSYCHOLOGY.     By  E.  W.  Scripture,

Ph.D.  (Leipzig).     With  124  Illustrations.     6s.


«<<


'We  have  at  present  no  work  in  English  which  gives  in  so  compact  a  form  so
coDprebeiisiTe  a  view  of  the  subject"— Ltoei7>oo<  Po»U

XXXIV.  SLEEP :  Its  Physiology,  Pathology,  Hygiene,  and

Psychology.     By  Marie  de  Manac^ine  (St.  Petersburg).     Illus-
trated.    3s.  6d.

"  The  book  is  a  complete  and  wonderfully  interesting  exposition,  and  as  such
oogbt  to  recetve  a  hearty  welcome."— ^Scotemavk

XXXV.  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  DIGESTION.
By  A.  LocKHART  Gillespie,  M.D.,  F.R:C.P.  Ed.,  P\R.S.  Ed.
With  a  large  number  of  Illustrations  and  Diagrams.     6s.


««'


Dr.  Gillespie's  work  is  one  that  has  been  greatly  needed.  No  comprehensive
collation  of  this  kind  exists  in  recent  English  literature.  All  the  important  work
Uiat  has  appeared  within  the  past  few  years  is  discussed  so  far  as  the  limits  of  the
book  allow  of  discussion,  and  extremely  little  of  value  has  been  omitted.  Not  kasi
InterestiBf  are  the  accounts  of  the  anthor^s  own  original  worlL^^iliiMrioan  JomrmU
^  the  MedUtil  Seieneet^


THE  CONTEMPORAR  Y  SCIENCE  SERIES.


Edited  by  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.


THE   RACES   OF   MAN.


THE   RACES  OF  MAN:


AN  OUTLINE  OF  ANTHROPOLOGY
AND   ETHNOGRAPHY


BY


J.  DENIKER,  Sc.D.  (Paris),

Chitf  Librarian  of  the  Museum  of  Natural  History^   Paris;  Honorary

Fellow   of   tie   Anthropological   Institute   of  Great   Britain;

Corresponding  Member  of  the  Italian  Anthropological^

Netherland  Ceographicalf  and  Moscow  Natural

Science  SocietieSf  etc.


WITH   176  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  2  MAPS.


LONDON

WALTER   SCOTT,    LIMITED

PATERNOSTER  SQUARE
1900


361544


•  •


*  •


•  •       •

•  •  •


PREFACE.


My  object  in  the  present  w<»k
form  the  essent


THIS  ITEM  HAS  BEEN  MICROFILMED  BY
STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES

REFORMATTING  SECTION  1993  CONSTUT
SUL  CATALOG  FOR  LOCATION


condensed

pology

undertaking

ime  time

numerous

at  least,

esent  the

with  as


'J


•«««•%««•  m^^m^»^mj   ..-.  ^  ^  e  iaciS|  in

so  far  as  such  may  be  educed  from  theories  among  which
there  is  often  sufficient  perplexity  of  choice.  In  many
cases  I  have  ventured,  however,  to  give  my  personal  opinion
on  different  questions,  as,  for  instance,  on  the  signification
of  the  laryngeal  sacs  among  anthropoid  apes,  on  many
questions  of  anthropometry  in  general,  on  the  classing  of
"states  of  civilisation,"  on  fixed  and  transportable  habi-
tations, on  the  classification  of  races,  on  the  races  of  Europe,
on  the  Palae-American  race,  etc.

My  book  is  designed  for  all  those  who  desire  to  obtain
rapidly  a  general  notion  of  ethnographic  and  anthropological


)


PREFACE.


IX


his  editors  Fr.  Vieweg  &  Sons,  Professor  Haddon,  Dr.
Lapicque,  Mr.  Otis  Mason,  Dr.  Soren  Hansen,  MM.  S.
Sommier,  P.  and  F.  Sarasin  and  their  editor  Herr  C.  Kreidel
of  Wiesbaden,  Dr.  Ten  Kate,  Mr.  Thurston,  Miss  Godden,
Miss  Werner,  and  Messrs.  Harper  &  Bros.

I  desire  also  to  thank  in  this  place  Dr.  Collignon,  Mr.
Havelock  Ellis,  and  M.  Salomon  Reinach,  for  the  trouble
they  have  taken  in  revising  the  proofs  of  certain  parts  of
my  work.

J.  DENIKER.


CONTENTS.


-♦♦-


INTRODUCTION.

PAGE

Ethnic  Groups  and  Zoological  Species       i

Difficulties  in  applying  to  Man  the  terms  of  zoological  nomen-
clature— Criterion  of  siKJcies — Terms  to  give  to  the  **  Soma-
tological  Units  "  constituting  the  genus  Homo — Monogenesis
and  Polygenesis— The  "  Ethnic  Groups"  are  constituted  by
the  different  combinations  of  the  *'  Somatological  Units"  or
'*  Races" — Somatic  characters  and  ethnic  characters.


CHAPTER  I.
Somatic  Characters       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...     12

Distinctive  Characters  of  Man  and  Apes.— Monkeys
and  anthropoid  apes — Erect  attitude — Curvature  of  the
spine — Brain — Skull — Teeth — Other  characters — DifTercnces
less  accentuated  in  the  foetus  and  the  young  than  in  the
adult.

Distinctive  Morphological  Characters  of  Human
Races. — Stature:  Individual  limits — Dwarfs  and  giants —
Average  stature  of  diflferent  populations — Influence  of
environment — Differences  according  to  sex — Reconstitution
from  the  long  bones — Teguments:  Skin — Hair  of  head  and
body — Four  principal  types — Microscopic  structure — Cor-
relation between  the  hair  of  the  head  and  the  pilosity  of  the
body — Pigmentation :  Colouring  of  the  skin,  the  eyes,  and
the  hair — Changes  in  the  pigment.


CONTENTS.  xiii

CHAPTER  Y\f,—{coniinued).

PAGE

I. — Linguistic  Characters.— iW<fM^  of  exchanging  ideas
within  a  short  distance — Gesture  and  speech — Divisions  of
language  according  to  structure — Jargons — Communications
at  a  relatively  remote  distance:  optic  and  acoustic  signals —
Transmission  of  ideas  at  any  distance  and  time  whatever —
Handwriting —  Mnemotechnic  objects — Pictography — Ideo-
graphy — Alphabets— Direction  of  the  lines  of  handwriting.

CHAPTER  V.
n. — Sociological  Characters 144

1.  Material  Life :  Alimentation:  Geophagy — Anthropophagy

— Preparation  of  foods — Fire — Pottery — Grinding  of  corn —
.  Stimulants  and  Narcotics — Habitation  :  Two  primitive  types
of  dwellings — Permanent  dwelling  (hut) — Removable  dwell-
ing (tent) — Difference  of  origin  of  the  materials  employed  in
the  two  types — Villages— Furniture — Heating  and  lighting —
Clothing:  Nakedness  and  Modesty — Ornament  precedes
dress— Head-dress — Ethnic  mutilations — Tattooing — Girdle,
necklace,  and  garland  the  origin  of  all  dress — Manufacture
of  garments — Spinning  and  weaving — Means  of  Exiiietue :
tools  of  primitive  industry — Hunting — Fishing — Agriculture
— Domestication  and  rearing  of  animals.

CHAPTER  VL
IL  Sociological  Characters — {continued)      197

2.  Psychic  Life  :  Games  and  Recreations — Their  importance —

Games  of  children  and  adults — Spoits  and  public  spectacles
— Masks  —  Ftne  Arts  —  Graphic  arts  —  Ornamentation —
Drawing  —  Sculpture  —  Dancing  —  Its  importance  among
uncultured  peoples —Pantomime  and  dramatic  art — Vocal
and  instrumental  music— Instruments  of  music — Poetry—
Religion — Animism — Its  two  elements  :  belief  in  the  soul,
and  l)clief  in  spirits — Fetichism — Polytheism — Rites  and
ceremonies — Priesthood — International  religions —  Myths —
Science — Art  of  counting — Geometry — (Calculation  of  time —
Clocks  and  calendars  —  Geography  and  cartography —
Medicine  and  surgery.


CONTENTS.  XV

CHAPTER  IX.

PAGE

Races  and  Peoples  of  Europe  299

Problem  of  European  ethnogeny— I.  Ancient  inhabitants  of
Europe — Prehistoric  races — Quaternary  period — Glacial  and
interglacial  periods — Quaternary  skulls— Spy  and  Chancelade
races  or  types — Races  of  the  neolithic  period — Races  of  the
age  of  metals — Aryan  question — Position  of  the. problem —
Migration  of  European  peoples  in  the  historic  period —
II.  European  races  of  the  present  day — Characteristics
of  the  six  principal  races  and  the  four  secondary  races —
— III.  Present  peoples  of  Europe— a.  Aryan  peoples:
Latins,  Germans,  Slavs,  Letto- Lithuanians,  Celts,  Illyro-
Hellenes — B.  Anarycm  peoples:  Basques,  Finns,  etc. —
C   Caucasian  peoples:  Lesgians,  Georgians,  etc.

CHAPTER  X.
Races  and  Peoples  of  Asia     359

Ancient  Inhabitants  of  Asia.  —  Prehistoric  Wxti^%^  Pithe-
canthropus erectus  (Dub.) — Ages  of  stone  and  metals. —
Present  Inhabitants  of  Asia.  —  Races  of  Asia —
I.  Peoples  of  Northern  Asia — Yeniseian,  Palaeasiatic  and
Tunguse  groups. — II.  Peoples  of  Central  Asia — Turkish,
Mongolian,  and  Thibetan  groups — Peoples  of  the  south-
west of  Thibet  and  of  South  China  (Lolo,  Miao-ts^,  Lu-ts^,
etc). — III.  Peoples  of  Eastern  Asia — Chinese,  Coreans,  and
Japanese.— IV.  Peoples  of  Indo- China — Aborigines,  Mois,
Kuis,  Siam,  Naga,  etc. — More  recent  mixed  populations:
Annamese,  Cambodians,  Thai,  etc. — V.  Peoples  of  India —
Castes — Dravidians  and  Kolarians — Indo- Aryans  and  un-
classified populations  —  VI.  Peoples  of  Anterior  Asia  —
Iranians  and  Semites.

CHAPTER  XI.
Races  and  Peoples  of  Africa  426

Ancient  Inhabitants  of  Africa— Succession  of  races  on
the  "dark  continent"— Present  Inhabitants  of  Africa
— L  Arabo- Berber  or  Semito-Hamite  Group:  Popolations  of


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

FIO.  PAGE

Naga  of  Manipar  in  gala  costume        ....      Frontispiece

1.  Skull  of  gorilla i6

2.  Skull  of  man 17

3.  Microscopic  section  of  skin  and  of  hair 34

4.  Mohave  Indians  of  Arizona 35

5.  6.  Pure  Veddah  of  Dangala  Mountains  of  Ceylon         •  36,  37

7.  Toda  woman  (India) 39

8.  Kurumba  man  of  Nilgiri  Hills 40

9    Agni  N^ro  of  Krinjabo,  Western  Africa 41

xa  Dolichocephalic  skull  of  an  islander  of  Torres  Straits  -  •  '57

11.  Brachycephalic  skull  of  a  Ladin  of  Pufels  (Tyrol)  •  •  -     57

12,  13.  Skull  of  ancient  Egyptian  exhumed  at  Thebes  •  60,  61
14,  15*  Jenny,  Australian  woman  of  Queensland        •  -  66,  67

16.  Japanese  officer  (old  style) 70

17.  Two  men,  Nagas  of  Manipur 71

18.  Eye  of  a  young  Kalmuk  girl  of  Astrakhan 78

19.  Welsh  type  of  Montgomeryshire 79

20«  Kalmuk  of  Astrakhan 81

21.  Jew  of  Algiers 82

22.  Persian  Hadjemi 83

23.  A,  Skull  with  Inca  bone;  B,   Malar  bone  divided  in  two;  C,

Superior  part  of  femur,  etc 83

24.  Hottentot  woman  of  Griqualand 94

25.  Brain  with  indication  of  the  three  ''centres  of  projection"  and

the  three  "  centres  of  association  " 102

26.  Dakota  Indian  gesture  language  -  -129

37.  Writing  by  notches  of  the  Laotians 136

2&  Coloured  prehistoric  pebbles  of  the  grotto  of  Mas-d'Azil  (Ari^e)  137


XX


LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS.


KIO.

29.  Journal  of  the  voyage  of  an  Eskimo  of  Alaska     -         .        .        .

30.  Petition  of  Chippeway  Indians  to  the  President  of  the  United  States

31.  Various  signs  of  symbolic  pictography

32.  Paternoster  in  Mexican  hieroglyphics

33.  Ancient  Chinese  hieroglyphics   -

34.  Method  of  fire-making  by  rubbing

35.  Do.  do.  sawing

36.  Do.  do.  twirling

37.  IJark  vessel,  used  by  Iroquois  Indians

38.  Type  of  Iroquois  earthen  vessel

39.  Making  of  pottery  without  wheel

40.  Primitive  harvest       ....

41.  Hemispherical  hut  in  straw  of  Zulu-Kafirs

42.  Hut  and  granary  of  the  Ovampos  (S.  Africa)

43.  Summer  tent  of  Tunguse-Manegres    -

44.  "Gher"  or  tent  of  the  Kalniuks  of  Astrakhan

45.  Hexagonal  house  of  non-roving  Altaians     -

46.  Kraal,  or  Kafir  village,  with  defensive  enclosure

47.  Zulu  girl,  with  head-dress,  necklace,  belt,  and  chastity  apron

48.  Ufhtaradeka,  typical  Fuegian  with  mantle

49.  Ainu  woman,  tattooed  round  the  lips

50.  51.  Foot  of  Chinese  woman  artificially  deformed

52.  Native  of  the  Department  of  Haute-Garonne

53.  Dancing  costume  of  natives  of  Murray  Islands    •

54.  Method  of  making  stone  tools  by  percussion

55.  Method  of  flaking  stone  by  pressure  -

56.  Knife  of  chipped  flint  of  the  Hupa  Indians

57.  Kalmuk  turning  lathe  with  alternating  rotatory  movement

58.  Principle  of  tackle  utilised  by  Eskimo,  landing  a  walrus

59.  Dance  of  Australians  during  the  Corroboree

60.  Anthro|>omorph   ornamental   design   of    the   Papuans    of    New

(iuinca       ........

61.  62.  Zoomorph  ornamental  designs  on  a  club  and  a  spatula

63.  Conventional  representation  of  an  alligator

64.  Ornamental  motive  derived  from  the  preceding  design

65.  Ornamental  designs  of  the  Karayas    ....

66.  Bushman  painting,  representing  the  battle  going  in  favour  of  the

Bechuana


PAGE

140
140
141

ISO

151

151

154

154

155
156

161

162

164

165

166

167

171
172

174
175
177
179

18s

185
186

188

190

200

201
202
203
203
204

205


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.  XXI

no.  PAGR

67.  Symbolic  adzes  of  Mangaia  Island 207

68.  "Sansa"  or  "Zimba,"  a  musical  box  of  the  Negroes      -        -211

69.  "  Marimba,"  the  Negro  xylophone 212

7a  Bushman  playing  on  the  "  gora  " 213

71.  Detail  of  construction  of  the  **gora''        .....  214

72.  Eskimo  geographical  map 226

73.  Chipped  flint  dagger  of  the  dlifornian  Indians         ...  256

74.  Axe  of  the  Banyai  (Matabeleland) 258

75.  Missile  arms  of  the  Australians 260

76.  Thro  wing-stick  of  the  Papuans  of  German  New  Guinea    -        -  261

77.  Different  methods  of  arrow  release 265

78.  Australian  shield  in  wood 267

79.  Indonesian  shields 268

8a  Shield  of  Zulu-Kafirs 268

81.  Money  of  uncivilised  peoples 272

82.  Method  of  tree-climbing  in  India 276

83.  Malayo- Polynesian  canoe  with  outrigger 279

84.  Chellean  flint  implement.  Saint- Acheul  (Somme)      •        -        -     302

85.  Quaternary  art  (Magdalenian  period) 308

86.  Spy  skull,  first  quaternary  race 311

87.  Chancelade  skull,,  second  quaternary  race  •         •         -         -312

88.  Islander  of  Lewis  (Hebrides) 319

89.  90.  Norwegian  of  South  Osterdalen  ....      322,  323

91.  Young  Sussex  farmer 326

92.  Englishwoman  of  Plymouth 328

93.  Fisher  people  of  Island  of  Aran  (Ireland)  ....     330

94.  Young  woman  of  Aries 331

95.  96.   Pure  type  of  Highlander  (clan  Chattan)       -         •         -     332,  ^j^

97.  Anglian  type,  common  in  north  and  north-east  of  England        -     336

98.  Frenchman  of  Ouroux  (Morvan) 337

99.  100.  Dolichocephalic  Frenchmen  of  Dordogne  -  -     338

loi.  Englishman  (Gloucestershire) 341

102,  103.   Russian  carpenter,  district  of  Pokrovsk     -        -         -      342,  343
104,  105.   Russian  woman,  district  of  Ver^ia     ....     346,  347

106.  Cheremiss  of  Ural  Mountains 350

107,  108.  Kundrof  Tatar  (Turkoman)  of  Astrakhan  •     352,  353

109^  Georgian  Imer  of  Kutais 355

110,111.  Chechen  of  Daghestan SS^i  357


•  •  •


LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS.  XXUl

no.  PAOE

154,155.  Tahitian  woman  of  Papeete 502,503

156.  Tahitian  of  Papeete 504

157.  West  Greenland  Eskimo 518

158.  159.  Gahhigue-Vatake,'  a  Dakota-Siouan  Indian  -     522,  523
i6a  Woman  of  Wichita  tribe,  Pawnee  Nation,  Ind.  Terr.,  U.S.      -     525

161.  Christian  Apache  Indian 529

162.  Young  Creole  woman  of  Martinique 538

163.  Miztec  Indian  (Mexico) 539

164.  Miztec  women  (Mexico) 541

165.  Gaaraunos  chief,  with  his  two  wives 548

166.*  Guaraunos  of  the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco 549

167,  168.  Kalina  or  Carib  oPDutch  Guiana      •        •  -     554i  555

169,  170.  Miranha  Indian  of  Rio  Yapura  ....     ^^S,  559

171.  Bakairi,  Carib  tribe  of  upper  Xingu 562

172.  Aramichaux  Indian  (Carib  tribe  of  French  Guiana)  ■        -        -  566

173.  Bororo  woman  (unclassified  tribe  of  Matto  Grosso)    -         -         •  568

174.  Kamanakar  Kipa,  young  Yahgan  Fuegian  girl  -        -        -  574

175.  Tualanpintsis,  Yahgan  Fu^ian,  and  his  wife  Ticoacli       -         -  575


Map  I.  Europe  in  the  first  glacial  period 303

„    2.  Approximate  distribution  of  the  races  of  Europe  -        •        -    327


THE   RACES   OF  MAN.


* '   •

-2 *  A   -


*   •       ■


A  •


INTRODUCTION.

ETHNIC   GROUPS   AND   ZOO  LOG  ICA"t.  *5  FECI  ES.


Difiiculties  in  applying  to  Man  the  terms  of  zoologiiil  nptpenclature —
Criterion  of  species — Terms  to  give  to  the  **  Somal61«gieal  Units"
constituting  the  genus  Homo — Monogencsis  and  Poij'^j.p^s — The
"Ethnic  Groups"  are  constituted  by  the  different  comSinali(X2S  of
the  •*  Somatological  Units'*  or  "Races" — Somatic  characletc*  and
ethnic  characters.  -*  *"  -

The  innumerable  groups  of  mankind,  massed  together  or
scattered,  according  to  the  varying  nature  of  the  earth's
surface,  are  far  from  presenting  a  homogeneous  picture.
Every  country  has  its  own  variety  of  physical  type,  language,
mSinners,  and  customs.  Thus,  in  order  to  exhibit  a  systematic
view  of  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  a
certain  order  in  the  study  of  these  varieties,  and  to  define
carefully  what  is  meant  by  such  and  such  a  descriptive  term,
having  reference  either  to  the  physical  type  or  to  the  social
life  of  men.  This  we  shall  do  in  the  subsequent  chapters  as
we  proceed  to  develop  this  slight  sketch  of  the  chief  general
facts  of  the  physical  and  psychical  life  of  man,  and  of  the  most
striking  social  phenomena  of  the  groups  of  mankind.

But  there  are  some  general  terms  which  are  of  more
importance  than  others,  and  their  meaning  should  be  clearly
onderstood    from    the    first.       I    refer    to    expressions    like


•  I


INTRODUCTION.  3

capable  of  forming  what  zoologists  call  "species,"  "sub-
species," "  varieties,"  in  the  case  of  wild  animals,  or  "  races "
in  the  case  of  domestic  animals?  One  need  not  be  a  pro-
fessional anthropologist  to  reply  negatively  to  this  question.
They  are  ethnic  groups  formed  by  virtue  of  community  of
language,  religion,  social  institutions,  etc.,  which  have  the
power  of  uniting  human  beings  of  one  or  several  species,
races,  or  varieties,^  and  are  by  no  means  zoological  species;
they  may  include  human  beings  of  one  or  of  many  species,
races,  or  varieties.

Here,  then,  is  the  first  distinction  to  make:  the  social
groups  that  we  are  to  describe  in  this  work  under  the  names
of  clans,  tribes,  nations,  populations,  and  peoples,  according  to
their  numerical  importance  and  the  degree  of  complication  of
their  social  life,  are  formed  for  us  by  the  union  of  individuals
belonging  usually  to  two,  three,  or  a  greater  number  of
**somatological  units."  These  units  are  ** theoretic  types"
formed  of  an  aggregation  of  physical  characters  combined  in
a  certain  way.  The  separate  existence  of  these  units  may  be
established  by  a  minute  analysis  of  the  physical  characters  of
a  great  number  of  individuals  taken  haphazard  in  any  given
"ethnic  group."  Here  are,  then,  entities,  theoretic  con-
ceptions exactly  like  "species"  in  zoology;  only  instead  of
having  within  our  reach  the  "types"  of  these  species  as  in
zoological  collections,  we  are  obliged  to  rest  content  with
approximations  thereto,  for  it  is  a  very  rare  occurrence  to  meet
with  an  individual  representing  the  type  of  the  somatological
unit  to  which  he  belongs.  Most  frequently  we  have  to  do  with
subjects  whose  forms  are  altered  by  blendings  and  crossings,
and  in  whom,  setting  aside  two  or  three  typical  traits,  we
find  only  a  confused  mixture  of  characters  presenting  nothing
striking.     Ordinarily,  the  more  peoples  are  civili.sed  the  more

'  In  these  eihnic  groups  there  may  further  be  disiinguishcd  several
subdivisions  due  to  the  diversity  of  manners,  customs,  etc.  ;  or,  in  the
groups  with  a  more  complicated  social  organisation,  yet  other  social
groups — priests,  magistrates,  miners,  peasants,  having  each  his  particulai
■*  social  type."


INTRODUCTION.  7

According  to  some,  these  differences  are  sufficiently  pro-
nounced for  each  group  to  form  a  "species";  according  to
others  they  are  of  such  a  nature  as  only  to  form  racial  distinc-
tions. Thus  it  is  left  to  the  personal  taste  of  each  investigator
what  name  be  given  to  these.

We  cannot  do  better  than  cite  upon  this  point  the  opinion
of  a  writer  of  admitted  authority.  **It  is  almost  a  matter  of
indifference/'  says  Darwin,  "whether  the  so-called  races  of
man  are  thus  designated,  or  ranked  as  'species'  or  'sub-
species,' but  the  latter  term  appears  the  most  appropriate."^
The  word  "race"  having  been  almost  universally  adopted
nowadays  to  designate  the  different  physical  types  of  mankind,
I  shall  retain  it  in  preference  to  that  of  "sub-species,"  while
reiterating  that  there  is  no  essential  difference  between  these
two  words  and  the  word  "species."

From  what  has  just  been  said,  the  question  whether
humanity  forms  a  single  species  divided  into  varieties  or  races,
or  whether  it  forms  several  species,  loses  much  of  its  im-
portance.

The  whole  of  this  ancient  controversy  between  monogenists
and  polygcnists  seems  to  be  somewhat  scholastic,  and  com-
pletely sterile  and  futile;  the  same  few  and  badly  established
facts  are  always  reappearing,  interpreted  in  such  and  such  a
fashion  by  each  disputant  according  to  the  necessities  of  his
thesis,  sometimes  led  by  considerations  which  are  extra-
scientific.  Perhaps  in  the  more  or  less  near  future,  when  we
shall  have  a  better  knowledge  of  present  and  extinct  races  of
man,  as  well  as  of  living  and  of  fossil  animal  species  most
nearly  related  to  man,  we  shall  be  able  to  discuss  the  question
of  origin.  At  the  present  time  we  are  confined  to  hypothesis
without  a  single  positive  fact  for  the  solution  of  the  problem.
We  have  merely  to  note  how  widely  the  opinions  of  the  learned
differ  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  race  of  certain  domestic
animals,  such  as  the  dog,  the  ox,  or  the  horse,  to  get  at  once
an  idea  of  the  difficulty  of  the  problem.     And  yet,  in  these

'  Darwin,  ioc,  ciL^  vol  i.,  p.  280.


•.  \.r>  or  MAN.

,  :\>:ums  much  less  complicated


•  ■ « \  I


. » .


•    v.iricty,    unity    or  plurality

^  i   >'*i.ill  always  be  obliged  to

■'i    existence  in   mankind  of

•4.  i M.^ii  a  character  of  its  own,

.i.: -.TV  of  which  constitute  the

-      .  ■.  ■.^:"'0£ronists,  even  the  most

.    »>:..:''ished  hypot helically  a

-■. ' --s^'*."  quickly  cause  the

,     ., ■.,'/:    i^f  environment,   into

••    primitive  ''stocks,"  or

*.   .         :.     >omatological    units

•.    .   .  >     ..-v:  s.-^  forth.

\N  .  ,        -.  -,>:.;     >,;i.i  in  a  few  proposi-

V*     .'.  -  ....-:':  "ethnic  groups"

.....  ..     .N  ..  .    N       'flvs/'   etc.,   we

.•-..-.    ,.  -   ..      .  ■    .../r.  vX  her  especially

:  X  .    .  ■         .!:•;.:   manners:  and

x».  .*..-..  .•  >  :  ...  .  > ..  •  ,  .  .  .>  .  ;.  ^si^\il  type  are
•'.:'«.  ■  :  •>  :  ..  .>.•..  ^■..  .n  >.:r.v times  con-
-     .  ■..     .■.-.  \  _■...-.■:....  ■        :\  :-:  of  h.il>iiat.


^        •-  .       .    .     .?:..  ..  ..x>  >..       :*.>.  groups  some

^..:  -   .     :«    -    r.    -■.•  -v     :.   :;•..:   '^^ .    ..-.    ..\".  :.^  .idmit  the

^'    ..--■•.   .      •■■       .  ■•  . '  >...  •  ^:.j.>  :^  :'■'.  M^ndinij  of


.    1


■' •    "  .         >.  "v  .      ->  .   .. .  '^  fc  .,  •  V  ..  ^    ....   -      -.»^^>,     u>.ii£^  me

«  ■«-  .  ■  «

»'.         »  V...        ^-  "*..        V- •.•«(.tl         \KJ         11

/'  _;.  .  :^.:  /  .':cv.-.:'.  o>  I:  i^  .;  >"j:v  :.:.i'.  . ;'  >.""r;atoK>gicaI
•..'.*:<.  riN::<:>  *  r:- <.  iv.vi  wih  in  .;  rta*  vin'or.  of  individuals,
\  i}\\  •^•'aUcrni  :m  fr.::::iu  v:-;  ot  \.iT\'.pj;  projH'ijions  among
V.  \i  mI  "«:l'nr  -r(>iij<,"  from  wliirh  11  can  no  longer  be
(i:;)!  r-  nli.;«  «1  f-X'tpl  by  a  princes  ol'  ilolicaie  analysis.

1  i,i  liill-  r«  ij<«  "-  iM.lwcc-n  "races"  are  shown  in  the  stiniutn.
lojii  :il  <  li.ira*  t«.iir,lies  which  are  the  resultant  of  the  continual
siMi--li'  in  ihi-  inilividiial  of  two  factors:  variability,  that  is  to
.viy,  the  piuduclioii  «»!  the  disi^imilar;  and  heredity,  that  is  to


INTRODUCTION.  9

say,  the  j)erpetuation  of  the  similar.  There  are  the  differences
in  outer  form,  in  the  anatomical  structure,  and  in  the  physio-
logical functions  manifested  in  individuals.  Thus  the  study
of  these  characters  is  based  on  man  considered  as  an  in-
dividual  of  a  zoological  group.  On  the  other  hand,  the
differences  between  the  ethnical  groups  are  the  product  of
evolutions  subject  to  other  laws  than  those  of  biology — laws
still  very  dimly  apprehended.  They  manifest  themselves  in
ethnical,  linguistic,  or  social  characteristics.  The  study  of
them  is  based  on  the  grouping  of  individuals  in  societies.

To  study  these  two  categories  of  characteristics,  either  in
their  general  aspect  as  a  whole,  or  in  describing  successively
the  different  peoples,  is  to  study  mankind  with  the  object  of
trying  to  assign  the  limits  to  the  "races"  constituting  the
ethnical  groups,  and  to  sketch  the  reciprocal  relations  and
connections  of  these  groups  with  each  other.

The  science  which  concerns  itself  more  especially  with  the
somatological  characteristics  of  the  genus  Homo^  whether
considered  as  a  whole  in  his  relation  to  other  animals,  or
in  his  varieties,  bears  the  name  of  anthropology ;  that  which
deals  with  the  ethnical  characteristics  is  called  ethnography
in  some  countries  and  ethnology  in  others.

This  latter  science  should  concern  itself  with  human  societies
under  all  their  aspects ;  but  as  history,  political  economy,  etc.,
have  already  taken  possession  of  the  study  of  civilised  peoples,
there  only  remain  for  it  the  peoples  without  a  history,  or  those
who  have  not  been  adequately  treated  by  historians.  How-
ever, there  is  a  convergence  of  characters  in  mankind,  and
we  find  even  today  the  trace  of  savagery  in  the  most  civilised
peoples.  Ethnical  facts  must  not  then  be  considered  separ-
ately. We  must  compare  them  either  among  different  peoples,
or,  down  the  course  of  the  ages,  in  the  same  people,  without
concerning  ourselves  with  the  degree  of  actual  civilisation
attained.

Certain  authors  make  a  distinction  between  ethnography
and  ethnology,  saying  the  first  aims  at  describing  peoples  or
the  different  stages  of  civilisation,  while  the  second  should


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  1 3

the  marsupial  mammals  (implacentals  or  Mefatheriaus\  or  com-
pleting their  development  in  a  hatched  egg,  as  in  the  case  of
the  monotremata  or  Prototherians,

In  this  sub-class  of  the  placental  mammals,  man  belongs  to  the
order  of  the  Primaies  of  Linnseus,  in  view  of  certain  peculiarities
of  his  physical  structure — the  pectoral  position  of  the  breasts,
the  form,  number,  and  arrangement  of  the  teeth  in  the  jaw,
etc.

The  order  of  the  Primates  comprises  ^\st,  groups  or  families:
the  Marmosets  {Hapalid(e\  the  Cebida^  the  Cercopithecida^  the
anthropoid  apes  {Simida\  and  lastly,  the  Hominida}  Putting
aside  the  first  two  groups  of  Primates,  which  inhabit  the  New
World,  and  which  are  distinguished  from  the  three  other
groups  by  several  characters,  let  us  concern  ourselves  with
the  apes  of  the  Old  World  and  the  Hominians,  Let  us  at  the
outset  remember  that  the  monkeys  and  the  anthropoid  apes
exhibit  the  same  arrangement  of  teeth,  or,  as  it  is  termed,  the
same  "dental  formula,"  as  man.  This  formula,  a  character
of  the  first  impoitance  in  the  classification  of  mammals,  is
summed  up,  as  we  know,  in  the  following  manner:  four
incisors,  two  canines,  four  premolars,  and  six  molars  in  each
jaw.

The  Cercopilhecida  walk  on  their  four  paws,  and  this  four-
footed  attitude  is  in  harmony  with  the  structure  of  their  spine,
in  which  the  three  curves,  cervical,  dorsal,  and  lumbar,  so
characteristic  in  man,  are  hardly  indicated;  thus  the  spine
seems  to  form  a  single  arch  from  the  head  to  the  tail.  As  to
this  last  appendage,  it  is  never  wanting  in  these  monkeys,  which
are  also  provided  with  buttock  or  ischiatic  callosities,  and
often  with  cheek -pouches.

The  anthropoid  apes  form  a  zoological  group  of  four  genera
only.  Two  of  these  genera,  the  gorilla  and  the  chimpanzee,
inhabit  tropical   Africa;    the  two  others,  the  orang-utan  and

'  If  we  include  the  I^emurs  in  the  order  of  Prinialc55,  the  five  families
just  enumciatcd  are  all  included  in  a  "suborder,"  ihat  of  Anthropoidea,
(See,  for  further  details,  Flower  and  Lydekker,  Introduction  to  tht  Study
of  Mammals  Living  and  Extinct^  London,  1 891.)


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  IS

to  the  movements,  at  once  so  numerous  and  varied,  of  the
savage.^

But  to  what  does  man  owe  this  erect  and  biped  attitude  ?
Professor  Ranke  has  put  forward  on  this  subject  a  very
ingerHOus  hypothesis.*  According  to  him,  the  excessive
development  of  the  brain,  while  conducive  to  enlargement  of
the  skull,  would  at  the  same  time  determine  the  change  of
attitude  in  a  being  so  imperfectly  and  primitively  biped  as  was
our  progenitor.  In  this  way  would  be  assured  the  perfect
equilibrium  on  the  vertebral  column  of  the  head,  made  heavy
by  the  brain.  Without  wishing  to  discuss  this  theory,  let  me
say  that  several  peculiarities  in  the  anatomical  structure  of
man,  compared  with  those  of  anthropoid  apes  and  other
mammals,  give  it  an  air  of  plausibility.

In  fact,  while  with  the  majority  of  mammals  the  equilibrium
of  the  head  is  assured  by  very  powerful  cervical  ligaments^  and
with  anthropoid  apes  by  very  strong  muscles,  extending  from
the  occiput  to  the  spinous  processes  of  the  cervical  vertebrae,
twice  as  long  as  those  of  man  (Figs,  i  and  2,  a\  which  prevent
the  massive  muzzle  from  falling  upon  the  chest  and  pressing
on  the  organs  of  respiration,^  we  see  nothing  of  a  similar  kind
in  the  genus  Homo — no  cervical  ligament,  and  no  powerful
muscles  at  the  nape  of  the  neck.  The  very  voluminous  brain-
case  of  man  suffices  to  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the
much  reduced  maxillary  part,  almost  without  the  aid  of  muscles
or  special  ligaments,  and  the  head  balances  itself  on  the  vertebral
column  (Fig.  2).

This  equilibrium  being  almost  perfect,  necessitates  but  very
thin  and  flexible  ligaments  in  the  articulation  of  the  two  occi-

*  D.  J.  Cunningham,  '^The  Lunikir  Curve  in  Man  and  the  Apes,"
Cunningham  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Irish  Atademy^  No.  II.,  Dublin,  1886.

•J.  Ranke,  •*  Ucber  die  aufrcchtc  Korperhahung,  etc.,"  Corr.-BL  der
deiilsch,  GeselL  f,  Anthr.^  1895,  p.  154.

'  The  enormous  development  of  the  laryngeal  sacs  in  the  orang-utan
U  perhapt  also  in  harmony  with  this  protective  function,  as  I  have  shown
in  a  spectal  work.  See  Deniker  and  Boulart,  **  Notes  anat.  sur  .  .  .
orang-outans,"  Nouv,  Arch,  AIus,  cChist,  nai,  de  Paris^  3rd  Series,  vol.
▼it,  |X  47,  1895.


SOMATIC   CHARACTERS.


17


vical  cunre  only  shows  itself  at  the  time  when  the  child  begins
to  "hold  up  its  head,"  in  the  sitting  posture  to  which  it
gradually  becomes  accustomed — that  is  to  say  about  the  third
month.  On  the  other  hand,  as  soon  as  the  child  begins  to
walk  (the  second  yearX  the  prevertebral  muscles  and  those  of
the  loins  act  upon  the  lower  regions  of  the  spine  and  produce
the  lumbar  curve.
Thus,  perhaps,  the  chief  fact  which  determines  the  erect


^


|j  V-


Fio.  2. —Skull  of  Man,  one-fourth  natural  size.
a,  spinous  processes  of  cervical  vertebra?.


attitude  so  characteristic  of  man  is  the  excessive  development
of  his  brain,  and  the  consequent  development  of  the  Imiin-caso.
It  is  in  this  excessive  development  of  the  brain  tliat  the
principal  diflerence  between  man  and  the  anthropoid  apes
must  be  sought  We  know  in  fact  fiom  the  researches  of
numerous  anthropologists  (see  Chapter  II.)  that  the  average
weight  of  a  man's  brain  in  European  races  (the  only  races  suffi-
ciently known  in  this  respect)  is  1360  grammes,  and  that  of  a
woman's  is  121 1  grammes.     These  figures  may  rise  to  1675


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  I9

With  the  anthropoid  apes,  the  facial  portion  forming  a
veritable  muzzle  rises,  massive  and  bestial,  in  advance  of  the
skull,  while  with  man,  very  reduced  in  size,  it  is  placed
Mow  the  skull.  The  facial  angle,  by  means  of  which  the
d^ree  of  protuberance  of  the  muzzle  may,  to  a  cerlain  point,
be  measured,  exhibits  notable  differences  when  the  skulls
of  man  and  animals  are  compared  in  this  particular.  On
continuing  the  examination  of  the  profiles  of  the  bony
structures  of  the  two  heads  in  question,  we  notice  also  the
slight  development  of  the  facial  part  of  the  malar  bone  in
man,  as  compared  with  its  temporal  part,  and  the  contrary
in  the  ape ;  as  well  as  the  difference  in  the  size  of  the  mastoid
processes,  very  strong  in  man,  very  much  diminished  pro-
portionately to  the  dimensions  of  the  head  in  the  anthropoid
apes.

Seen  from  the  front  {norma  facialis)^  the  human  skull
presents  a  peculiarity  which  is  not  observed  in  any  anthropoid
skull,  namely,  that  the  top  of  the  nasal  opening  is  always
situated  higher  than  the  lowest  point  of  the  lower  edge  of  the
orbits  (Fig.  12);  while  in  the  anthropoid  apes  it  is  always
found  below  this  point  I^astly,  if  the  skulls  in  question,
always  placed  on  the  horizontal  plane,  are  compared  from
behind  (norma  occipitalis)^  it  will  be  noted  that  on  the  human
skull  the  occipital  foramen  is  not  seen  at  all ;  on  the  skulls  of
monkeys  it  is  plainly  visible,  if  not  wholly,  at  least  partly.^

All  the  other  characters  which  distinguish  man  from  the
anthropoid  apes  are  only  the  consequences  of  the  great
enlargement  of  his  brain-case,  at  the  expense  of  the  maxillary
part  of  the  face,  and  of  the  erect  attitude  and  biped  progression.

Let  us  take,  for  instance,  those  enormous  crests  which
give  an  aspect  at  once  so  strange  and  horrible  to  the  skulls
of  the  adult  males  of  the  gorilla  and  the  chimpanzee.  These
projections  are  due  to  the  extreme  development  of  the  masti-
catory muscles  which  move  the  heavy  jaws  and  of  the
cervical  muscles,  ensuring  the  equilibrium  of  the  head.     Not

*  Sec  on  this  subject  the  inleresting  stutly  of  Dr.  Tiirok  in  the  Central-
kiMit/Sr  Anikropohgie^  etc,  directed  by  Puschan,  ist  yetXT,  \%^^lilo.  '^,


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  21

anthropoid  apes,  and  to  their  biped  movement  necessitating
the  support  of  the  hands.

The  differences  in  the  form  and  size  of  the  teeth  are  also
the  consequence  of  the  inequaUty  of  the  development  of  the
maxillary  part  of  the  face  in  man,  and  in  the  apes  in  general.

The  size  of  the  teeth  in  proportion  to  that  of  the  body
is  less  in  man  than  in  the  apes  (Figs,  i  and  2).  Putting
aside  the  incisors  and  the  canines,  the  size  of  the  molars  and
the  premolars  of  these  animals  is  larger  in  relation  to  the
length  of  the  facial  portion  of  the  skull.  The  "dental  index  "
of  Flower,  that  is  to  say  the  centesimal  relation  of  .the  total
length  of  the  row  of  molars  and  premolars  to  the  length  of  the
naso-basilar  line  (from  the  nasal  spine  to  the  most  advanced
point  of  the  occipital  foramen),  is  always  greater  in  the
anthropoid  apes  than  in  man ;  in  the  latter  it  is  never  above
47.5,  while  it  is  48  in  the  chimpanzee,  58  in  the  orang,  and
63  in  the  gorilla.

As  to  the  arrangement  of  the  teeth  on  the  alveolar  arch,  with
man  they  are  in  a  compact  line  forming  a  continuous  series
without  any  notable  projection  of  any  one  tooth  above  the
common  level;  while  in  all  the  apes  is  observed  an  interval
(diasiema)  between  the  canines  and  the  lateral  incisors  of  the
upper  jaw,  and  between  the  canines  and  the  first  premolars  of
the  lower  jaw.  These  gaps  receive  in  each  jaw  the  projecting
part  of  the  opposite  canine.

Like  the  anthropoid  apes,  man  has  five  tubercles  in  the
lower  molars,  while  the  monkeys  have  in  general  only  four.
This  rule  admits,  however,  of  numerous  exceptions:  very
often  the  fifth  posterior  tubercle  is  wanting  in  the  two  last
molars  in  man;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  regularly  found  in  the
last  molar  in  certain  kinds  of  monkeys  (Cynocephali^  Semno-
pithed).  As  to  the  wisdom  tooth,  in  certain  pithecoid  apes
{Cynocepkaliy  Semnopitheci)  it  is  greater  in  size  than  the  anterior
molars;  whilst  in  certain  others,  like  the  Cercopiiheci^  it  is
much  less  than  the  two  first  molars.  With  the  anthropoid  apes
this  tooth  is  of  the  same  size  as  the  other  molars  or  a  little
Miiallery  and  it  is  generally  the  same  with  man,  though  in  some-


SOMATIC  CttAUACTEftS.  23

young  when  being  suckled)  would  soon  cause  the  disappearance
of  the  hair  from  that  place,  as  indeed  we  see  in  apes.^  It  is
curious  to  observe  in  this  respect  that  the  disposition  of  the  hair
of  the  arms  in  man  is  far  from  recalling  that  of  the  anthropoid
apes,  as  Darwin  thought,  but  rather  resembles  the  disposition
observed  among  the  monkeys.  In  fact,  instead  of  being  directed
upwards  towards  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  this  hair  is  turned
downwards  towards  the  wrist  in  the  higher  half  of  the  arm,
and  transversely  in  its  lower  half.  The  anthropoid  apes  being
accustomed  to  cover  the  head  with  their  arms,  or  to  keep  them
above  their  head  so  as  to  cling  to  the  branches  of  the  trees  on
which  they  spend  their  life,  the  hairs  may  have  taken  in  this
case  an  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  primitive  type  of  the
Primates  by  the  simple  effect  of  gravity. -

Space  does  not  permit  us  to  pass  in  review  several  other
characters  distinguishing  man  from  the  anthropoid  apes :
absence  of  certain  muscles  (acromiolrachelian^  etc.)  in  the
former,  simplicity  of  the  cerebral  folds  in  the  latter,  the  absence
of  the  lobulation  of  the  liver  and  that  of  the  penile  bone
in  the  former  and  their  presence  in  some  of  the  anthropoid
apes,  etc.

Let  me  say  in  conclusion  that  all  these  distinctions  are  only
very  marked  when  adult  individuals  are  compared,  for  they
become  accentuated  with  age.  The  foetus  of  the  gorilla  at
five  months  bears  a  very  close  resemblance  to  the  human  foetus
of  the  same  age.  A  young  gorilla  and  a  young  chimpanzee,  by
their  globular  skull,  by  their  not  very  prominent  muzzle,  and  by
other  traits,  remind  one  of  young  Negroes.  In  comparing  the
skulls  of  gorillas,  from  the  foetal  state  through  all  the
stages  of  growth  to  the  adult  state,  we  can  follow  step  by
step  the  transformation  of  a  face  almost  human  into  a  muzzle
of  the  most  bestial  aspect,  as  a  result  of  the  excessive  develop-

'  Bell,  The Naiuraliiiin  Nicaragua^ '^.  209,  1874;  Shevyref,  '*  Parasites
of  the  Skin,  etc  ,"  Works  Soc.  of  Naturalists^  St.  Petersburg,  1891,  in
Russian.

'  Walter  Kidd,  <*  Certain  Vestigial  Characters  in  Man,"  Nature,  1897,
▼oL  Iv.,  p.  237.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.


25


beginning  with  those  furnished  to  us  by  the  body  as  a
whole— the  stature,  the  nature  of  the  tegument  -  (the  skin
and  hair),  and  its  colouring.  We  shall  afterwards  pass  to
an  examination  of  the  morphology  of  the  head,  and  the
different  parts  of  the  body,  with  their  bony  framework  (skull
and  skeleton).  We  shall  complete  this  brief  account  by  a
glance  at  the  internal  organs,  muscles,  brain,  viscera.

Stature, — Of  all  the  physical  characters  which  serve  to
distinguish  races,  stature  is  perhaps  that  which  has  hitherto
been  regarded  as  eminently  variable.  It  has  been  said  that  not
only  does  stature  change  with  age  and  sex,  but  that  it  varies
also  under  the  influence  of  external  agencies.  These  variations
are  unquestionable,  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  they  are
•produced  in  a  similar  way  in  all  races,  and  cannot  exceed
certain  limits  imposed  by  race.

Even  from  birth  stature  varies.  Setting  aside  individual
variations,  the  new-born  are  on  an  average  a  little  taller,  for
example,  in  Paris  (499  millim.  for  boys)  than  in  St.  Peters-
burg (477  millim.).  Unfortunately  we  have  hardly  any  data
in  regard  to  this  important  question  for  the  non-European
populations.  Here  in  a  tabulated  form  is  the  average  height
of  the  new-born  of  different  populations,  so  far  as  information
has  been  obtainable.


AVERAGE  STATURE.


POPVLATIOKS.

Boys.

Girls.

Name  op

Mniim.

Inches.

Millim.

Inches.

Obsehver.

Annamese

474

18.49

464

18.10

Mondicrc.

Russians  of  St.  Peters-
burg

477

18.60

473

18.45

Mies,

Germans  of  Cologne

486

18.95

484

18.88

Mies.

Americans  of  Boston

490

19.27

482

18.80

Bow  ditch.

English

496

«9.35

491

19.31

C.  Roberts.

French  of  Paris

499

1

19.52

492

19.35

Mies.

SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  2^

lo  represent  the  average  stature  of  the  whole  number  of  adult
males  of  any  given  population.  We  may  then,  while  making
certain  reservations,  take  the  height  of  those  enrolled  (but
not  that  of  all  the  conscripts)  as  representing  the  height  of
the  adults  of  any  given  population.

The  individual  limits  between  which  the  height  varies  are
very  wide.  It  is  admitted  in  general  that  the  limits  of  height
in  the  normal  man  may  vary  from  im.  25  (4  feet  i  inch)  to
im.  99  (6  feet  6}  inches).  Below  im.  25  begins  a  certain
abnormal  state,  often  pathological,  called  Dwarfism.  Above
2m.  we  have  another  corresponding  state  called  Giantism.
Dwarfs  may  be  38  cent,  high  (15  inches),  like  the  little  feminine
dwarf  Hilany  Agyba  of  Sinai  (Joest),  and  giants  as  high  as
2m.  83  (9  feet  5  inches),  like  the  Finn  Caianus  (Topinard).^

Dwarfism  may  be  the  result  of  certain  pathological  states
(microcephaly,  rickets,  etc.),  as  it  may  be  equally  the  result
of  an  exceeding  slowness  of  growth.^  In  the  same  way
giantism  is  often  seen  associated  with  a  special  disease  called
acromegaly,  but  most  frequently  it  is  produced  by  an  excessive
growth.  In  any  case,  exceptional  statures,  high  or  low,  are
abnormal  phenomena,  the  acknowledged  sterility  of  dwarfs
and  giants  being  alone  sufficient  to  prove  this.

Extreme  statures  which  it  is  agreed  to  call  normal,  those  of
im.  25  and  im.  99,  are  very  rare.  One  might  say  that,  in
general,  statures  below  im.  35  and  above  im.  90  are  excep-
tions. Thus  in  the  extensive  American  statistics,^  based  on
more  than  300,000  subjects,  but  one  giant  (above  201.)  is  met
with  out  of  10,000  subjects  examined,  and  hardly  five  indi-
viduals in  1000  taller  than  im.  90  (75  inches).  Again,
in  the  statistics  of  the  Committee  of  the  British  Association,*
which  embrace   8,585   subjects,   only  three   individuals  in  a

*  Joest,  Verh,  Berl,  geseii.  Anthn^  p.  450,  1887;  Topinard,  EUin,
AtUhr,  gin.^  p.  436.

'  Manouvrier,  BulL  Soc.  Anthr.  Paris ^  p.  264,  1896.

*  R  A.  Gould,  Ittvesiigaiions  in  the  A/iiif,  ami  Aitthrop,  Statistics  of
Atturican  Soldiers,     New  York,  1869.

*  Final  Report  of  the  Anthropometric  Committee,  Brit.  Ass.,  1883.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  29

when  the  fibrocartilaginous  discs  situated  between  the  ver-
tebrae are  compressed,  more  closely  packed,  and  the  vertebral
column  is  more  bent.  Unscrupulous  conscripts  whose  stature
is  near  the  regulation  limit  know  perfectly  well  that  if  the  day
before  the  official  examination  they  carry  heavy  loads,  they
compress  their  intervertebral  discs  so  that  their  height  is  some-
times diminished  by  three  centimetres.

It  is  necessary  then,  in  order  to  avoid  error,  not  only  to  have
measurements  taken  from  adult  subjects,  but  also  from  several
series  containing  a  great  number  of  these  subjects.  Calcu-
lation and  inference  have  shown  us  that  it  is  necessary  to  have
at  least  a  series  of  one  hundred  individuals  to  guarantee  the
exact  figure  of  the  height  of  a  population  but  slightly  blended.
Series  of  50  to  100  individuals  may  still  furnish  occasionally
good  indications,  and  series  of  25  to  50  individuals  an  approxi-
mation; but  with  series  under  25  individuals  doubt  begins  and
the  figures  are  often  most  deceptive.

I  have  brought  together  and  grouped  in  the  table  at  the
end  of  this  volume  (Appendix  I.)  average  statures  calculated
in  series  of  twenty-five  individuals  or  more  These  series
have  been  based  on  the  collation  of  hundreds  of  documents,
of  which  limits  of  space  prevent  a  full  enumeration.

An  examination  of  our  table  shows  that  the  extreme  averages
of  different  populations  fluctuate,  in  round  figures,  from  im.  38
(4  ft.  6  in.)  with  the  Negrillo  Akkas,  to  im.  79  (5  ft  10.5  in.)  with
the  Scots  of  Galloway.^  But  if  we  set  aside  the  pigmy  tribe  of
the  Akka,  quite  exceptional  as  regards  stature,  as  well  as  the
Scots  of  Galloway,  and  even  the  Scots  of  the  north  in  general
(im.  78),  who  likewise  form  a  group  entirely  apart,  we  arrive
at  the  extreme  limits  of  stature,  varying  from  1465  mm.  with

^  These  figures  differ  from  those  up  to  the  present  f^ven  in  most  works,
according  to  Topinard  {EUm.  Anikro.  gM.,  p.  462),  who  fixes  the  limits
between  im.  44  (Bushmen  of  the  Cape)  and  im.  85  (Tatagonians),  but  the
first  of  these  figures  is  that  of  a  series  of  six  subjects  only,  measured  by
Fritsch,  and  the  second  the  average  of  ten  subjects  measured  by  Lista  and
Moreno.  This  is  insufficient,  and  since  the  publication  of  Topinard 's  work
we  have  only  been  able  to  add  a  few  isolated  observations  concerning  those
intcreftiog  popnlatkms  the  actual  height  of  which  is  still  to  be  determined.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  3 1

where  it  is  met  with  as  well  among  Negroes  as  among  Ethio-
pians.

What  is  the  influence  of  environment  on  stature?  This  is
one  of  the  most  controverted  questions.  Since  the  time  of
Villerm^  the  statement  has  been  repeated  in  a  variety  of  ways
that  well-being  was  favourable  to  growth  and  increase  in
stature,  and  that  hardship  stunted  growth.  There  are  facts
which  seem  to  prove  this.  In  a  population  supposed  to  be
formed  of  a  mixture  of  many  races,  the  well-fed  upper  classes
appear  to  possess  a  higher  stature  than  the  lower  classes;  thus,
while  the  English  of  the  liberal  professions  are  69.14  inches
(1757m.)  in  height,  the  workmen  of  the  same  nation  are  only
65.7  inches  (i7o5m.).^  But  can  we  not  likewise  adduce  here
the  influence  of  race  ?  That  predominating  in  the  aristocracy
and  well-to-do  classes  does  not,  perhaps,  predominate  in  the
working  classes.  Beddoe^  and  others  have  remarked  that  the
stature  of  miners  is  lower  than  that  of  the  population  around
them ;  in  the  same  way,  workmen  in  shops  and  factories  are
inferior  in  height  to  those  who  labour  in  the  open  air,  and
this  in  Belgium  (Houze)  as  well  as  in  England  (Beddoe,
Roberts)  or  Russia  (Erisman,  Anuchin).^  Acc6rding  to
CoUignon,*  the  populations  of  Normandy  and  Brittany  living
in  the  neighbourhood  of  railways  and  high-roads  are  superior
in  height  to  those  living  in  out-of-the-way  places.  He  con-
cludes from  this  that  the  material  conditions  of  life  being
improved  since  the  formation  of  roads,  the  stature  of  the
population  has  increased.  According  to  Ammon  and  Lapouge,
the  population  of  the  towns  in  France  and  Southern  Ger-
many   are    taller    in    stature    than   those    of    the    country,

'  Final  Report  Brit.  Assoc,  ^  1883,  p.  17.

•  Beddoe,  Tlie  Stature  and  Bulk  of  Man  in  the  Brit,  Isles ^  pp.  148
et  seq,     London,  1870.

•  Houz^,  BulL  Soc,  Anthr,  Bruxelles,  1887;  Rolycris,  A  Manual  of  An-
thropometry^  London,  1878,  and yi^wr.  Stai.  Soc,^  London,  1876;  Anuchin,
"O  gcograficheskom,  etc.,"  Ceojrra/'h.  Distrib.  oj  Stature  in  Ru^sia^  St.
Petersburg,  1889;  Erisman,  Arch.  J.  soz.  gesetzgelh  ^  Tiibingen,  1888.

•  CnUignon,  **  L' Anthropologic  au  conseil  de  revision,"  Hull,  Soc,
Antkr*  Paris,  1890,  p.  764.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  33

ence  between  the  stature  of  the  two  sexes  in  all  races.  The
data  for  the  height  of  women  being  very  scarce,  I  have  only
been  able  to  bring  together  thirty-five  series  of  measurements
of  women  comprising  each  more  than  fifteen  individuals^  for
comparison  with  series  of  measurements  of  men.

It  follows  from  this  slight  inquiry  that  in  twenty  cases  out
of  thirty-five,  that  is  to  say,  almost  two-thirds,  the  difference  in
height  between  the  two  sexes  in"  any  given  population  hardly
varies  more  than  from  7  to  13  centimetres  (3  to  5  inches);
fourteen  times  out  of  thirty-five  it  only  varies  from  11  to  13
centimetres  (4  5  to  5  inches),  so  that  the  figure  of  1 2  centi-
metres (5  inches)  may  be  accepted  as  the  average.  Besides,
the  difference  does  not  appear  to  change  according  to  the
average  stature,  more  or  less  high,  of  the  race:  it  is  almost
the  same  for  the  Tahitians  and  the  Maricopas,  who  are  tall,
as  it  is  for  the  Samoyeds  and  the  Caribs,  who  are  short.^

Thus,  then,  in  a  general  way,  the  categories  of  statures — tall,
short,  etc. — for  women  will  be  comprised  within  the  same
limits  already  indicated  for  man,  only  reduced  by  12  centi-
metres for  each  category.  Thus,  high  statures  for  women  will
begin  at  im.  58  instead  of  im.  70;  short  statures  under
im.  48  instead  of  im.  60

The  stature  of  a  living  man  is  naturally  higher  than  that  of
his  skeleton,  but  what  the  difference  is  is  not  exactly  known.
It  can  hardly,  however,  exceed  2  or  3  centimetres,  according
to  Topinard,  Rollet,  and  Manouvrier.

By  means  of  measurements  of  the  long  bones  of  the  limbs
(femur,  humerus,  etc  ),  the  height  of  the  skeleton  of  which
they  form  part  may  be  approximately  calculated.  For  this
purpose  we  make  use  of  RoUet's  formula,^  according  to  which
the  length  of  the  femur  must  be  multiplied  by  3.66  for  the
height  of  man,  and  by  3.71  for  the  height  of  woman,  or
multiply  the  length  of  the  humerus  by  5.06  or  by  5.22,  according

*  Boas  {Zeii.  /.  EthnoL^  1895,  P-  375)  found,  however,  in  thirty-nine
series  of  Indians  the  difference  greater  with  trilx^s  of  high  stature  (13.5
centimetres)  than  with  tribes  of  low  stature  (9.9  centimetres).

*  Rollet,  Mifmiraiions  des  os  hngs^  tU,^  Lyons,  1889  (thesis).


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  43

to  60  for  that  of  the  Negroes,  while  the  straight  hair  of  the
Eskimo  will  have  this  axis  =  7  7,  that  of  the  Thibetans  =  80,
that  of  the  Japanese  =  85,  etc.  The  hair  of  Europeans  repre-
sents an  elliptical  section  in  which  the  major  axis  being  =  100,
the  minor  axis  will  be  represented  by  figures  varying  from  62
to  72  (Topinard).  It  can  be  said  to-day  with  certainty,  after
the  work  of  Unna,^  that  the  woolly  hair  of  Negroes  rolls  up
into  a  con)pact  spiral  precisely  because  of  the  flattened  shape
of  this  elliptical  section,  and  of  the  special  form  of  the  follicle
and  papilla.  In  fact,  in  the  Negro  the  follicle,  instead  of  being
straight,  as  in  the  European  (Pig.  3,  A),  is  curved  inward  in  the
form  of  a  sabre,  or  even  of  the  arc  of  a  quarter  of  a  circle
(Fig.  3,  B);  further,  the  papilla  is  flattened  instead  of  being
round.  One  would  say  that  the  hair  has  encountered  in  its
development  so  much  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  dermis
(which  IS  so  hard,  in  fact,  among  the  Negroes),  that  it  would
be  twisted,  as  it  were,  from  the  first.  Emerging  from  an
incurvated  mould,  it  can  only  continue  to  roll  up  outside,
given  especially  its  flattened  shape ;  it  rolls  up  into  a  spiral,
the  plane  of  which,  at  the  beginning,  is  perpendicular  to  the
surface  of  the  skin.^  As  to  the  thickness  of  the  hair,  it  appears
that  in  general  it  is  greater  in  straight  hair  than  in  woolly;
however,  the  hair  of  the  western  Finns  is  straight  and  fme  at
the  same  time.

A  certain  correlation  appears  to  exist  between  the  nature  of
the  hair  and  its  absolute  and  relative  length.  Thus  straight
hair  is  at  the  same  time  the  longest — Chinese,  Americans,
Indians  (Fig.  4),  while  woolly  hair  is  shortest,  from  5  to  15
centimetres  (Fig.  9) ;  wavy  hair  occupies  an  intermediate
position.  Moreover,  the  difference  between  the  length  of  the
hair  of  men  and  women  is  almost  inappreciable  in  the  two
extreme  divisions.  In  certain  straight-haired  races  the  hair  of
the  head  is  as  long  with  men  as  with  women  ;  one  need  but  to

'  P.  S.  Unna,  **  Uelicr  das  Ilaar  als  Rasscnmcrkmal,"  Deutsche  Med,
Z€ii,^  1896,  Nos.  82  and  83.

■  Sec  Stewart,  Microsc,  fount.  ^  1873,  p.  54;  and  T.  Anderson  Stuart,
/mrm.  Amti.  Phys  ,  1881-82,  xvi.,  p.  362.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  45

I^astly,  among  Red  Indians  it  seems  to  be  still  more  rare  than
among  Negroes.     White  hair  follows  almost  the  same  rule.^

In  the  mass,  the  human  races  may  be  divided  according  to
the  character  of  their  hair  as  follows  : —

Woolly  Hair, — Bushmen,  Negro,  and  Melanesian  races.

Frizzy  Hair, — Australian,  Ethiopian,  Beja,  Fulb^,  etc,  and
Dravidian.

Wavy  Hair, — The  white  races  of  Europe,  of  Northern
Africa,  and  Asia  (Melanochroi  or  the  dark-complexioned
Whites,  and  Xanthochroi  or  pale  Whites).

FinCy  straight^  or  lightly-waved  Hair. — Turco-Tatars,  Finns,
Ainus,  and  Indonesians  (Dyaks,  Nagas,  etc.);  lastly,

Coarse  straight  Hair, — Mongolians  and  American  races,
with  some  exceptions.  It  must  be  noted  that,  in  the  manifold
blendings  of  races,  characteristics  of  the  hair  amalgamate.
Thus  the  half-breeds  between  Negroes  and  American
Indians  have,  most  frequently,  the  hair  frizzy  or  wavy.  But
there  are  also  frequent  reversions  to  the  primitive  type,  almost
always,  however,  a  little  weakened.

There  are  no  races  of  hairy  men.  Everything  that  has
been  said  of  different  **  hairy  savages  "  in  the  interior  of  Africa
or  Indo-China  resolves  itself  into  the  presence  of  a  light  down
(probably  the  remains  of  embryonic  lanugo)  in  the  case  of  the
Akkas  of  the  Upper  Nile,  or  to  the  fortuitous  existence  of  one
or  two  families  of  hairy  men  and  women  from  Burma  exhibited
some  years  ago  in  Europe  and  America,  Other  ** phenomena"
have  been  shown,  like  the  famous  Julia  Pastrana  or  the  *'  Dog-
men  "  of  Russia.  All  these  subjects  are  only  particular  cases
of  atavism,  or  of  a  reversion  to  the  probable  primordial  con-
dition of  man  or  of  his  precursor  at  the  period  when  he  was  as
hairy  as,  for  instance,  the  anthropoid  apes  of  to-day;  they  are
by  no  means  the  representatives  of  a  hairy  race.

The  beard  is,  as  we  know,  one  of  the  sexual  characteristics  of
man,  although  many  ^\x\q  ones  are  found  among  certain  women,
notably  among  the  Europeans  of  the  south,  and  especially  among
Spanish  women.     The  more  hairy  the  body,  the  thicker  as  a

>  B.  A  Gould,  toe,  ciL,  p.  562.


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  47

and  being  deposited  in  the  cells  under  the  combined  action  of
air,  heat^  and  light;  the  congestion  of  the  vessels  has  also
something  to  do  with  it  In  the  same  way,  persons  living  a
long  time  in  dense  forests  or  in  dark  though  airy  places  end
by  becoming  paler,  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  the  pigment,
but  recover  colour  immediately  on  re-exposure  to  the  sun.  But
the  modifications  produced  by  the  action  of  air  and  sun  vary
even  among  Europeans  according  to  the  colouring  peculiar  to
their  race.

Thus  among  the  fair  races  of  Northern  Europe  the  skin,
burnt  by  the  sun,  becomes  red,  as  if  swollen;  on  the  other
hand,  among  the  dark-coloured  peoples  of  the  Mediterranean,
it  takes  a  bronze  tint  There  are  thus  between  these  two  races
notable  differences,  if  not  in  the  chemical  nature  of  the  pigment,
which  is  scarcely  likely,  at  least  in  regard  to  its  quantity.  It
is  the  same  with  other  races  generally,  and  ten  principal  shades
of  colour  at  least  can  easily  be  distinguished.  In  the  first
place,  among  Whites,  three  shades:  ist,  pale  white;  2nd,
florid,  or  rosy,  peculiar  to  the  Scandinavians,  English,  Dutch,
etc.;  3rd,  brownish-white,  peculiar  to  Spaniards,  Italians,  etc.
In  the  races  called  Yellow,  three  varieties  of  colour  can  like-
wise be  distinguished:  4th,  yellowish-white,  a  sickly  hue  the
colour  of  wheat,  as,  for  example,  among  certain  Chinese;  5th,
olive-yellow,  the  colour  of  new  portmanteau  leather,  as  among
the  majority  of  South  American  Indians,  Polynesians,  and  Indo-
nesians; 6th,  dark  yellow-brown,  dark  olive,  or  the  colour  of
dead  leaves,  as  among  certain  Americans,  Malays,  etc.  In
the  dark-skinned  races,  four  shades  at  least  must  be  distin-
guished: 7th,  red,  copper  coloured,  a«?,  for  exanjple,  among
the  Bejas,  Niam-Niam,  Fulbd;  8th,  reddish-brown,  choco-
late, as  among  the  Dravidians,  the  Australians,  certain  Negroes
and  Melanesians;  lastly,  9th,  sooty  black,  and  loth,  coal-
black,  for  example,  among  the  different  Negro  populations.

In  order  to  avoid  an  arbitrary  designation  of  colours,
anthropologists  make  use  of  chromatic  tables,  in  which
examples  of  the  chief  variations  of  colour  are  marked  by
numbers.    The  best  table,  almost  universally  adopted,  is  that


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  49

ing,  according  to  the  quantity  of  it,  under  the  form  of  a
trail  radiating  very  clearly  from  the  pupil  towards  the  periphery
of  the  eye  occupying  one-third,  two-thirds,  or  even  the  whole
of  the  iris.

Seen  at  a  certain  distance,  irises  without  pigment  in  their
stroma  appear  blue  or  grey;  those  having  the  whole  or  the
greater  part  of  this  charged  with  pigment  appear  brown,  dark
brown,  or  almost  black,  according  to  the  quantity  of  this
pigment.  But  irises  havmg  a  blue  or  grey  foundation  strewn
with  yellowish  spots  of  pigment  appear  green,  yellow,  yellowish-
grey,  greenish-grey,  etc

There  are  thus  distinguishable  only  three  fundamental
shades  of  the  iris,  or,  as  is  commonly  said,  of  the  colour  of
the  eyes :  light  (blue  or  grey);  dark  (bright  or  dull  brown  or
black) ;  and  intermediate  shades  (green,  yellow,  yellowish-grey,
greenish-grey,  etc).  This  classification  is  entirely  based  on
the  quantity  of  pigment  in  the  iris.

It  is  only  in  fair  European  races  that  blue  or  grey  eyes  are
found,  perhaps  also  in  the  Turco-Ugrian  races;  light-brown
eyes  are  met  with  among  some  Mongolians.  In  all  the  other
populations  of  the  earth  the  eyes  are  dark-brown  or  black.
It  is  the  same  with  the  colouring  of  the  hair.  It  varies
appreciably  among  the  wavy-haired  races,  much  less  so  among
the  straight  and  frizzy-haired  races,  and  remains  always  black
among  the  woolly-haired  races.  Four  principal  shades  can  be
distinguished  in  the  hair — black,  dark-brown,  chestnut-brown
{chAtain  in  French),  and  fair.  In  this  last  shade,  golden
must  be  separated  from  flaxen  and  dull  grey -reddish  hair.
Red  hair  of  all  shades  is  only  an  individual  anomaly,
accompanied  besides,  almost  always,  by  freckles  (ephelides)  on
the  face  and  neck.  There  are  no  red-haired  races,  but  light
and  chestnut  hair  may  have  a  reddish  reflection  in  it.  Red
hair  is  very  common  in  countries  where  several  white-coloured
races  (brown  or  fair)  are  intermixed.  In  these  crossed
races  there  are  found  heads  of  hair  of  all  colours — black,
brown,  fair,  reddish  brown,  dull-grey,  chestnut,  etc.  This  is
4he  natural  result  of  the  intermixture  of  blood.     Among  a

4


SOMATIC  CHARACTERS.  51

The  presence  of  temporary  spots  of  pigment  noticed  among
new-born  Japanese  by  Grimm  and  Baelz,  among  the  Chinese
by  Mafignon,  among  the  Tagals  of  the  Philippines  by  Collig-
non,  and  among  the  Eskimo  by  Soren-Hansen,i  is  more
puzzUng.  These  are  somewhat  large  blue,  grey,  or  black
spots,  situated  in  the  sacro-lumbar  region  and  on  the
buttocks,  which  disappear  about  the  age  of  two,  three,  or  five
years.  The  existence  of  these  spots,  like  that  of  the  ephelides
in  the  European  child,  would  prove  rather  the  migration  of
pigmental  granules  to  the  places  selected  than  a  general
increase  of  them.  In  most  races  women  appear  to  have
clearer  skin  than  men;  in  that  respect,  as  in  many  other
characters,  they  have  a  closer  resemblance  to  children.  It
is  thought  by  some  that  the  hair  of  women  is  lighter  than  that
of  men  among  European  races. *^

Among  Negroes  the  pigment  is  visible  not  only  on  the
skin,  in  the  hair,  and  the  iris,  but  also  in  the  sclerotic,  in
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lips,  the  mouth,  the  genital
organs,  etc. ;  the  internal  organs,  even,  are  not  free  from  it ;
the  suprarenal  capsules,  the  mesenter}*,  the  liver,  the  spleen,
are  often  coloured  with  black  spots  of  pigment,  and  even
the  brain  contains  numerous  pigmented  points  in  its  envelopes
and  in  its  grey  matter.  Such  an  abundance  of  pigment
would  become  a  danger  to  the  White,  as  is  proved  by  certain
diseases,  melanism,  for  example,  in  which  the  pigment
especially  invades  the  viscera,  or  Addison's  disease,  in  which,
on  the  contrar)',  there  is  an  over-production  of  pigment  in  the
skin  and  the  mucous  membranes.

The  total  absence  of  pigment,  which  may  occur  with  the
Negro  as  with  the  White,  is  termed  albinism.  This  may  be
accompanied,  if  complete  (that  is  to  say,  when,  besides  the
white  skin  and  hair,  the  iris  is  also  deprived  of  pigment,  and
appears  red),  by  somewhat  serious  affections  of  the  eyesight.

'  Each,  loc.  cit.y  vol.  iv.,  p.  40;  Malignon,  Bull,  Soc.  Anthr,^  p.  524,
Pam,  1896;  Collignon,  ibid.,  p.  528;  Sorcn- Hansen,  Bidrai^  Vestponl.
An'hr.y  Copenhagen,  1893;  Kxtr.  from  MediUl.  om  (7n'>i/.,vol.  vu.,^. a'x;^.

•  Havelock  EIJw,  Afan  ami  IVoman^  p.  223.     ljot\AoT\,  \%91.


52


THE   RACES  OF   MAN.


But,  in  every  respect,  albinos  are  weakly,  and  probably  not
fertile  amongst  themselves.

In  considering  from  all  points  of  view  the  nature  of  hair
and  pigmentation  in  general,  we  cannot  help  noticing  a  certain
correlation  between  these  two  characters.  In  fact,  to  the
white  colouring  of  the  skin  corresponds,  in  a  general  fashion,
wavy  hair,  the  colouring  of  which  varies  often  in  accord  with
the  colour  of  the  eyes  and  the  shades  of  the  skin  (white,  fair,
brown  races);  to  the  yellow  colouring  corresponds  straight,
smooth  hair;  to  the  reddish-brown  skin,  frizzy  hair;  and  to
the  black,  woolly  hair.


CHAPTER  II.

I.   MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS  (fanitnuect).

Cranium  or  Skull:  Cranial  measurements—Orbits  and  orbital  index —
Nasal  bone  and  nasal  index — Prognathism — Head  of  the  living
subject:  Cephalic  index — Face — Eyes — Nose  and  nasal  index  in  the
living  subject — Lips —  Trunk  and  Limbs:  The  Skeleton — Pelvis
and  its  indices — Shoulder  blade — Thoracic  limb— Abdominal  limb—
Prdportions  of  the  body  in  (he  living  subject — Trunk  and  neck — Curve
of  the  back — Steatopygy — Various  Organs:  Genital  organs — Brain —
Its  weight — Convolutions — The  neuron — Its  importance  from  the
psychical  point  of  view

Having  treated  of  the  body  in  its  general  aspect,  we  shall
now  examine  from  the  morphological  point  of  view  its  different
parts :  the  head,  trunk,  limbs,  etc.,  as  well  as  their  relations  to
each  other  and  their  reciprocal  dimensions,  both  in  the
skeleton  and  the  living  subject

Cranium  or  Shu//. — This  part  of  the  skeleton  forms  the
object  of  investigation  of  a  very  extended  branch  of  anthro-
pology called  craniology.

Craniology  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  cranioscopy
of  the  phrenologists,  a  sham  science  founded  by  Gall,  who
wished  to  establish  a  connection  between  certain  bumps  or
irregularities  of  the  surface  of  the  skull  and  the  parte  of  the
brain  in  which,  as  was  pretended,  were  localised  the  different
intellectual  functions.  It  is  now  demonstrated  that  the  in-
equalities of  the  external  table  of  the  cranium  walls  have  no
relation  whatever  with  the  irregularities  of  the  internal  table,
and  still  less  have  they  anything  in  common  with  the  con-
formation of  the  various  parts  of  the  brain.    BmV  \l  \)^^x^  X^ft.

53


MORPIIOLOGICiVL   CHARACTERS.  55

older.  Formed  of  a  single  cartilaginous  and  membranous
substance  at  the  beginning  of  embryonic  life,  the  cranium  is
composed  in  the  last  foetal  state  of  a  great  number  of  foinis  of
ossification  of  various  texture.  At  birth  the  number  of  these
points  has  considerably  diminished;  they  have  united  for  the
most  part  to  form  the  different  parts  of  the  bones  of  the  cranium
or  brain  case  and  the  bones  of  the  face;  as  the  child  grows,
these  points  grow  and  end  by  being  contiguous;  about  the
age  of  eighteen  or  twenty  years  they  form  bones  separated  by
sutures.  There  are  twenty-one  separated  bones  described  in
classic  treatises  on  anatomy.  Later  on  these  bones  begin  to
unite,  the  sutures  which  separate  them  disappear,  and  in
extreme  old  age  the  cranium  is  formed  of  a  bony  mass  almost
as  continuous  and  homogeneous  as  was  the  cranial  carti-
laginous and  membranous  mass  in  the  embryo.  According
to  the' number  of  the  pieces  composing  the  cranium,  and  also
according  to  their  position,  structure,  and  conformation,  accord-
ing to  the  degree  of  obliteration  of  the  sutures  and  the  order
in  which  the  obliteration  of  each  suture  takes  place,  according
to  the  general  form  of  the  forehead,  the  angle  of  the  lower
jaw,  according  to  the  volume  and  dimensions  of  the  skull,  and
lastly,  according  to  the  state  of  the  dentition,  etc.,  the  nearly
exact  age  of  the  individual  to  whom  the  skull  had  belonged
may  easily  be  discovered  in  this  cycle  of  development.  Other
characters  serve  to  distinguish  the  sex:  the  forehead  is  straight
and  rounded  in  woman,  retreating  in  man;  the  cranial  cavity
is  less  in  woman  than  in  man  in  any  given  race;  the  orbital
edges  are  sharper  in  woman,  the  impress  of  the  muscles  less
marked,  the  weight  of  the  skull  in  general  less  than  that  of
the  masculine  skull,  etc.^     Lastly^  the  characters  of  race  are

*  These  characters,  in  conjunction  with  several  others — the  small  develop-
ment of  the  lower  jaw-bone,  the  frontal  sinuses  poorly  developed,  the  much
greater  development  of  the  cranial  vault  proportionately  to  its  base,  the
persistence  of  the  frontal  and  parietal  bumps— make  the  feminine  skull
approxim^e  to  the  infantile  form.  See  the  works  of  Broca,  Manouvrier,
and  also  Rabentisch,  Der  Weiberschiidel^  Morfhohg,  Atb.,  Schwalbci
1892,  voL  iL,  p.  207;  and  H.  Ellis,  foe.  cit.t  p.  73.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.


57


is  almost  double  the  minor  (Fig.  lo).  The  numerical  expres-
sion of  the  cranial  form  is  given  in  anthropology  by  what  is
called  the  cephalic  index — that  is  to  say,  by  the  relation  of  the
length  of  the  cranium  (ordinarily  measured  from  the  glabella
to  the  most  prominent  point  of  the  occiput  (Figs.  lo  and
13,  A  b)  to  its  greatest  breadth  (Fig.  10,  c  d,  Fig.  12,  M  n).
Reducing  uniformly  the  first  of  these  measurements  to  100,
we  obtain  the  different  figures  for  the  breadth,  which  expresses
the  cranial  form;  thus  very  round  skulls  (Fig.  11)  have  85,  90,


Fig.  la — Dolichocephalic  skull  of
an  islander  of  Torres  Straits.
Cephalic  index,  61.9.  {After
O,  Thcmas,)


Fig.  it. — Brachycephalic  skull  of
a  Ladin  of  Pufels  (Tyrol).
Cephalic  index,  95.  {After
HolL)


and  even  100  (extreme  individual  limit)  for  index,  while
elongated  skulls  (Fig.  10)  may  have  an  index  of  70,  of  65,  and
even  of  j8  (extreme  individual  limit).  According  to  Broca's
nomenclature,  skulls  having  indices  between  77.7  and  Scare
mesaticcphalic  or  mesocephalic;  those  having  the  indices
below  this  figure  are  sub-dolichoctphalic  (up  to  75),  or
doUchocephalic  (beyond  75,  Fig.  10);  those  which  have  the


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         SO

If  we  apply  these  methods  to  the  study  of  the  cephalic
index,  we  see  that  generally  the  crania  of  Negroes,  Mclanesians,
Eskimo,  Ainus,  Berbers,  the  races  of  Northern  Europe,  etc.,
are  dolichocephalic,  while  those  of  the  Turkish  peoples,  the
Malays,  certain  Slavs,  Tyrolese,  etc.,  are  brachycephalic;  that
the  dolichocephalic  predominate  in  Great  Britain,  while  the
brachycephalic  are  in  a  majority  in  France,  etc.  (See  p.  75,
and  Appendix  IL)

The  relation  of  the  height  to  the  breadth  or  to  the  length  of
the  skull  gives  likewise  an  idea  of  its  general  form.  It  is
thus  that  we  recognise  low  skulls  (platycephalic),  medium
(orthocephalic  or  metriocephalic),  or  high  (hypsicephalic).

In  order  more  correctly  to  describe  the  different  peculiarities
of  the  cranium,  and  to  be  able  to  refer  the  measurements  to
fixed  co-ordinates,  it  is  desirable  to  place  the  skull,  when  being
studied,  on  a  horizontal  plane.  Unfortunately,  anthropologists
are  far  from  being  agreed  as  to  this  initial  plane.  In  France,  in
England,  and  in  many  other  countries,  that  adopted  is  the  aveolo-
condylean  plane  of  Broca  (Fig.  13,  l  k),  which  passes  through
the  condyles  and  the  alveolar  border  of  the  upper  jaw;  it  is
nearly  parallel  to  the  horizontal  plane  passing  through  the  visual
axes  of  the  two  eyes  in  the  living  subject;  "whilst  in  Germany
the  plane  still  in  favour  is  one  passing  through  the  inferior
border  of  the  orbit  and  the  centre  or  top  of  the  contour  of  the
auditory  meatus^  (Fig.  13,  n  m).  The  skull  once  conveniently
placed  in  position  according  to  a  horizontal  plane,  the  different
views  of  it  are  the  following :  seen  from  above  {norma  ver-
ticaiis  of  Blumenbach,  Figs.  10  and  11),  from  below  {norma
basilaris\  from  the  side  or  in  profile  {norma  lateralis^  Fig.  13),
from  the  full  face  {norma  facialis^  Fig.  12),  or  from  behind
{norma  occipitalis).

will  be  81.  Further,  the  scries  should  be  considered  as  not  very  homo-
geneous, for  it  comprises  i  dolichocephalic,  I  sub-dolichocephalic,  I  meso-
cephalic,  6  sub-brachycephalic,  and  i  brachycephalic.

'  It  is  rather  a  line  than  a  plane ;  the  cranium  always  being  asymmetrical,
we  cannot  make  a  horizontal  plane  pass  exactly  through  the  borders  of  the
two  ofbiis  and  the  two  auditory  meatus.


MORPHOLQGICAL  CHARACTERS.


6l


be  measured.  According  to  Broca,i  the  breadth  is  measured
from  the  point  called  dacrion  (Fig.  12,  x)  (situated  at  the  inter-
section of  the  fron to-lachrymal  suture  and  the  crista  lachrymalis)
to  the  most  distant  point  of  the  opposite  edge  of  .the  orbit
(Fig.  12,  y);  the  height  (Fig.  12,  t  z)  is  also  measured  per-
pendicularly to  the  preceding  line.  The  relation  of  this  height
to  the  breadth  =  100,  or  the  orbital  index,  expresses  in  figures
the  form  of  the  more  or  less  shallow  quadrilateral  of  the  orbit.


Fig.  13.  — ^ame  skull  na  Fig.  12,  profile  view.

Wiat  arc  called  average  orbits,  or  mesosemes^  arc  those  whose
index  varies  from  83  (Broca),  or  from  84  (Flower\  to  89;
shallow  orbits,  or  mictosemes,  those  which  have  the  index
lower  than  83  or  84;  finally,  higher  or  large  orbits,  tnegasemes^
those  which  have  their  index  from  90  and  upwards.  The
annexed  table  gives  the  orbital  indices  of  the  principal  popula-
tions of  the  globe.

»  Broca,    "Recherche*  sur  Tindicc  orbilaire,"  Kev.  Anthro.^  p.   577,
IHtfit,  1875.


•


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         6^

The  capacity  of  the  orbital  cavity  and  its  depth  are  also
measured,  but,  as  the  researches  of  L.  Weiss  have  demon-
strated, there  is  no  correlation  between  the  form  of  the  skull
(dolicho-  or  brachy-cephalic)  and  this  depth.  On  the  other
hand,  it  appears  to  have  some  relation  with  the  form  of  the
face;  broad  faces  (chamaprosopes)  have  deeper  orbits  than  long
faces  {Jeptoprosopes)}

The  skeleton  of  the  nose  presents  numerous  variations
according  to  race.  The  nasal  bones  may  be  more  or  less
inclined,  one  in  relation  with  another,  so  as  to  form  either
an  almost  flat  plane  or  a  sort  of  prominent  roof;  their
outline  may  be  straight,  concave,  or  convex;  their  breadth  and
their  length  also  vary.  The  form  of  these  bones,  together  with
the  nasal  opening  which  is  found  below,  may  be  expressed  by
the  figures  of  the  nasal  index — that  is  to  say,  of  the  relation
between  the  height  of  the  bony  mass  (from  the  root  of  the  nose
to  the  anterior  nasal  spine)  lind  its  breadth  (lines  v  b  and  e  d
of  Fig.  12).  According  to  the  greater  or  lesser  breadth  of
the  nasal  bones  and  of  the  nasal  opening,  the  skull  is  called
leptorhinian  (long-nosed)  ox phUyrhinian  (flat-nosed);  the  inter-
mediate forms  bear  the  name  of  tnesorhinian.  The  form  of
the  nasal  opening  appears  to  be  transmitted  very  tenaciously
by  heredity  (Broca).

The  following  table,  in  which  I  have  introduced  only
series  of  more  than  ten  skulls,  gives  the  distribution  of  the
principal  ethnic  groups  according  to  their  nasal  index.

It  is  easy  to  see  in  running  the  eye  over  this  table,  that
almost  all  the  populations  of  the  so-called  white  races  arc
leptorhinians,  while  all  the  yellow  populations  are  comprised
exclusively  in  the  group  of  mesorhinians,  and  Negroes  and
Bushmen  in  that  of  the  platyrhinians.

The  Polynesians  seem  to  be  leptorhinians,  the  Melanesians
with  the  Australians  show  a  tendency  towards  platyrhiny.

Frogfirtthism^  that  is  to  say  the  degree  of  projection  of  the
maxillary  jwrtion  of  the  face,  is  a  characteristic  trait  of  certain
skulls;  however,  it  does  not  seem  to  play  so  important  a  part

*  L  Weiss,  Bfitr,  Anat,  der  Orbita,  part  3,  p.  25.    Tubingen,  1890.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         73

viduaL  The  corresp>ondence  of  the  tourbillon  of  the  hair  with
the  lambda^  or  point  of  junction  on  the  cranium  of  the  sagittal
and  occipital  sutures  (Fig.  1 1,  f),  has  not  either  been  clearly
demonstrated.  The  principal  measurement,  the  cephalic  index^
does  not  appear  always  to  correspond  on  the  cranium  and  on
the  head  of  the  living  subject  A  priori^  the  living  head
should  have  the  index  a  little  higher  than  the  cranium,  the
muscles  of  the  temporal  region  being  thicker  than  those  of  the
supra-occipital  and  frontal  region.  However,  experiments  made
in  connection  with  this  subject  are  contradictory.  According
to  Broca,  two  units  must  be  subtracted  from  the  index  taken
on  the  living  subject  in  order  to  obtain  the  index  on  the
cranium;  this  is  also  the  opinion  of  Stieda  and  Houz^  and
a  great  number  of  anthropologists,  while  Mantegazza  and
Weisbach  advocate  the  reduction  of  the  index  by  three  units ;
and  Virchow  and  Topinard  do  not  admit  any.  In  the  face  of
these  divergent  opinions,  it  is  best  to  give  the  indices  on  the
cranium  and  the  living  subject  separately  as  they  are,  and
indicate  the  rate  of  reduction  or  augmentation.

However,  in  a  general  way,  one  may  admit,  and  I  admit
in  this  book,  the  difference  of  two  units  between  the  indices
of  the  cranium  and  the  living  subject.  In  this  way  the  two
may  be  compared  by  adding  these  two  units  to  the  index  of
crania  and  removing  them  from  the  index  of  the  living  subject.
I  have  given  (p.  57)  the  divisions  of  the  cephalic  index  of
the  cranium ;  those  of  the  living  subject  are  the  same  with
the  addition  of  two  units.

We  may  now  proceed  to  examine  a  little  more  closely  the
principal  measurements  and  the  indices  on  the  living  subject
by  beginning  precisely  with  the  cephalic  index^  which  I
believe  to  be,  in  spite  of  the  recent  criticisms  of  Sergi  ^  and
Ehrenreich,'  one  of  the  good  characteristics  of  race,  enabling
us  to  make  some  secondary  partitions  in  the  principal  parti-

^  Sergi,    Cangr,  iniemat.   d^ AnhM,  et  d^ Anthr.   pMist.^    iitb   sess.,
Moscow,  1S93,  ^'ol*  iif  P-  ^9^'
•  Eltrenreich,  ^»Mr.  Stud,  Urbewohuer  Brasih'enstchtnip.  i.,  Brunswick,

1897-


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         75

Westermarck,  Miss  Fawcett  and  Pearson,  as  well  as  my  own
(yet  unpublished),  lead  to  the  same  result.^

The  differences  of  the  cephalic  index  according  to  sex  are
insignificant.  According  to  my  personal  researches,  this
difference  hardly  exceeds  on  the  average  0.7  in  the  living
subject  and  1.5  in  the  cranium;  and  even  this  latter  figure  is
exaggerated.  It  may,  in  a  general  way,  be  admitted  that  the
difference  between  the  cephalic  index  of  men  and  women
hardly  exceeds  one  unit — that  is  to  say,  the  degree  of
personal  error  in  the  observation.  This  difference  is,  in
any  case,  less  than  the  discrepancies  between  the  different
series  of  a  single  and  homogeneous  race.

In  the  table  of  the  cephalic  index  which  app>ears  at  the  end
of  this  volume  (Appendix  II.),  however,  I  have  given  only
the  figures  relating  to  men.  A  few  series  comprising  in-
dividuals of  both  sexes  appear  there  as  exceptional  cases.  I
have  taken  care  to  mark  these  with  a  letter  S.  In  this  table  will
be  found  side  by  side  with  indices  taken  on  the  living  subjects
some  taken  on  crania,  but  no  series  contains  measurements  of
crania  and  heads  intermingled.  The  series  of  ten  to  twenty
subjects  or  crania  in  the  table  appear  there  exceptionally,  for
the  only  series  furnishing  figures  really  exact  are  those  com-
prising more  than  twenty  individuals.

An  inspection  of  the  table  shows  us  that  there  is  a  certain
regularity  in  the  distribution  of  the  different  cranial  forms  on
the  surface  of  the  earth.

Dolichocephaly  is  almost  exclusively  located  in  Melanesia,
in  Australia,  in  India,  and  in  Africa.  Sub-dolichocephaly,
diffused  in  the  two  extreme  regions,  North  and  South,  of
Europe,  forms  in  Asia  a  zone  round  India  (Indo-China,  Anterior
Asia,  China,  Japan,  etc),  but  is  met  with  only  sporadically  in
other  parts  of  the  world,  especially  in  America.     Mesocephaly

*  Spalikowski,  "Eludes  d'anthrojwlogie  normande,"  Buil.  Soc.  amis
Sciences  not,  Ktmen^  1895,  Nos.  i  and  2,  p.  113;  Amnion,  /or.  f//.,  p.  143 ;
Johmnsson,  and  F.  Westermarck,  Skandin,  Arch,  f,  Physiol,^  vol.  vii.,
«897f  pt  341;  Miss  Fawcelt  and  K.  Pearson,  Prcc.  Roy.  Soc,  London^
vol  62,  1898,  p.  413.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         'JJ

(oblique,  Fig.  21)  or  straight  (Figs.  24  and  90),  it  may  present
a  medium  protuberance,  as  for  instance,  among  many  Negro
tribes  (Fig.  1 40),  etc.  The  superciliary  arches  may  be  absent
(Mongolian  races)  or  very  prominent,  overhanging  the  eyes
(Australians,  Fig.  15;  Veddahs,  Fig.  5).

The  cheek-bones  may  be  little  developed  (Europeans)  or  very
prominent  (Mongolians,  Figs.  17  and  20;  Bushmen,  Fig.  24,
etc),  but  cheek-bones  projecting  forward  must  be  distinguished
from  those  developed  laterally.  The  chin  may  be  pointed,
rounded,  square,  projecting,  retreating  (Fig.  15),  but  these
variations  are  of  little  importance,  and  may  be  found  in  con-
junction with  the  most  diverse  forms  of  the  face,  while  giving
to  it  its  own  character.  The  posterior  angles  of  the  lower
jaw  may  be  more  or  less  wide,  and  thus  help  to  produce  the
angular  contour  of  the  face ;  quadrangular  in  the  case  of  the
square  chin  (Fig.  121),  or  with  pentagonal  contour  in  the  case
of  the  pointed  chin  (Fig.  118).

The  eyes  furnish  also  some  differences  of  form.  We  dis-
tinguish the  ordinary  eye,  as  in  our  countries,  and  the  oblique
or  narrowed  Mongolian  eye.  The  latter  presented  in  its  most
perfect  form  is  characterised  as  follows.  It  is  placed  obliquely,
so  that  its  external  angle  is  higher  than  its  inner  angle  (Fig.
121).  This  disposition  is  due  to  the  too  high  attachment  of
the  external  palpebral  ligament  to  the  skull,  as  Regalia  has
sliown.'  Its  palpebral  aperture  is  much  narrower  than  in  the
ordinary  eye,  and  instead  of  having  the  form  of  an  almond,  it
has  rather  that  of  a  scalene  triangle  (Figs.  18  and  118)  or  of
a  little  fish  whose  head  corresponds  to  the  inner  angle  (Fig.
119).  But  these  peculiarities  are  not  the  most  important,  and
may  be  met  with,  though  rarely,  in  ordinary  eyes.  The
essential  characters  of  the  Mongolian  eye  consist,  as  Metch-
nikof*  has  shown,  in  a  puffiness  of  the  upper  eyelid,  which
turns  down  at  the  inner  angle  of  the  narrowed  eye,  and,
instead  of  being  free,  as  in  the  ordinary  eye,  is  folded  towards

'  Regalia,  •*  Orbila  ed  obliqiiita  dell'  occhio  Mongolico,"  Archivio  /.
Attir.^  voL  xviii.,  p.  1,  Florence,  1888.
*  E.  Metchnikof,  Zeitsch,/.  EthnoLy  p.  153,  Berlin,  1874.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  85

of  a  playing-card  heart  in  man,  etc.  But,  as  may  be  seen  by
our  table,  if  these  differences  are  very  appreciable  in  certain
races,  notably  among  Whites  and  Negroes,  they  become  less
and  less  among  Melanesians,  among  whom  the  pelves  of  the
two  sexes  approximate  nearly  to  the  masculine  type.

Has  the  form  of  the  pelvis,  and  especially  that  of  the  inlet,
any  relation  to  the  form  of  the  head  of  the  foetus  and  of  the
child?  Exact  data  for  solving  this  question  are  wanting.
However,  comparing  from  our  tables  the  index  of  the  superior
inlet  and  that  of  the  cephalic  index,  it  may  be  observed  that,
in  a  general  way,  pelves  with  a  large  aperture  are  met  with  in
brachycephalic  races,  and  pelves  with  a  narrow  aperture  in
dolichocephalic  races.  But  there  are  numerous  exceptions:
I  note  at  least  four  (English,  Russian,  Swedish  mesocephal
and  Malay  women)  in  the  meagre  list  of  12  series  of  women
that,  with  much  difficulty,  I  have  been  able  to  draw  up.

The  form  of  the  shoulder-blade  varies  little  with  race.  The
scapular  index — that  is  to  say,  the  centesimal  relation  between
the  breadth  of  the  shoulder-blade  and  its  length  (measured
on  the  vertebral  edge  and  taken  as  the  unit  of  comparison) —
oscillates  between  64.9  (Australians)  and  70.2  (Andamanese).
In  a  .list  of  14  series  of  from  10  to  462  shoulder-blades
that  I  have  drawn  up  from  the  works  of  Broca,  Livon,
Turner,  Topinard,  Garson,  Martin,  Hyades,  Sarasin,  Hamy,
Koganei,  and  my  own  measurements,  the  populations  are
arranged  as  follows :  index  from  64.9  to  66.6,  Australians,
Europeans,  Fuegians,  Bushmen,  Ainus,  Peruvians,  Polynesians;
indices  from  67.2  to  70.2,  Japanese,  Veddahs,  Hindu-Sikhs,
Malays,  N^roes,  Melanesians,  Andamanese.  This  classifi-
cation suffices  to  show  that  the  greater  or  less  breadth  of  the
shoulder-blade  has  almost  no  value  as  a  seriate  character  or
as  a  character  of  race.  It  is  the  same  with  the  sub-spinal
indcx^  which  it  has  been  proposed  to  add  to  the  foregoing  in
order  to  judge  of  the  form  of  the  shoulder-blade^

'  On  the  index  of  the  shoulder-blade  see  Broca,  Bull.  Soc,  Anikr,^  1^78,
pw  66;  Livon,  Di  Vomoplale  (thesis),  Paris,  1879;  Garson, /dmnt.  Amai^
Pl^shLt  voL  nv-f  1879-80,  p.  13 ;  Turner,  !oc,  eit.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  87

As  to  the  skeleton  of  the  limbs,  here  is  a  summary  of  what
can  be  said  about  it  from  the  point  of  view  which  specially
concerns  us  now.  In  the  thoracic  limb  the  humerus  presents
an  interesting  peculiarity:  the  perforations  of  the  olecranon
cavity  (which  receives  the  extremity  of  the  ulna)  are  very
frequent  in  prehistoric  bones  in  Europe  (10  to  27  times  in
100),  as  well  as  in  America  (31  times). ^

This  perforation  is  met  with  more  often  among  men  than
women,  perhaps  because  it  is  more  especially  connected
with  the  extent  and  frequent  repetition  of  the  movements
of  flexion  and  extension.  Here  is  its  growing  frequency  in
the  races  from  a  list  which  I  have  drawn  up  with  series
varying  from  20  to  249  humeri :  white  p>opulation  of  the
United  States  (3.8  times  in  a  hundred),  French,  Fuegians,
Ainus,  Basques,  Melanesians,  Japanese,  Negroes,  Polynesians,
Mongolians,  and  American  Indians  (36.2  times  in  a  hundred).
The  torsion  of  the  humerus — that  is  to  say,  the  degree  of
rotation  of  the  lower  part  of  this  bone  in  relation  to  its
upper  part,  is  a  character  of  a  certain  seriate  value;  but
it  is  of  no  use  in  the  differentiation  of  races.  Besides,
the  degree  of  torsion  varies  too  much  in  the  same  race:
it  is  greater  in  woman  than  in  man,  in  short  than  in
long  humeri  (Manouvrier,  Martin,  etc.).  This  torsion  is
measured  by  the  angle  of  torsion^  which  is  taken  either  accord-
ing to  Broca's  method  or  Gegenbaur's.  This  is  how  the
different  peoples  are  arranged  according  to  the  decreasing
figures  of  this  angle  (series  of  10  humeri):  according  to  Broca's
system: — Melanesians  (angle  of  i4i'*)»  Guanches,  Arabs  or  at
least  Kabyles,  Polynesians, -Negroes,  Peruvians,  Californians,
Europeans,  French  (164'*);  according  to  Gegenbaur's  system : —
Ainus  (149.5*),  Fuegians,  Veddahs,  Japanese,  Swiss,  Germans

*  It  has  been  thought  that  this  frequency  was  due  to  the  facility  with
which  the  thin  lamella  in  question  forming  the  bottom  of  the  cavity  can  be
destroyed  after  prolonged  interment.  However,  there  are  prehistoric
liurial-places,  as,  for  example,  certain  long  Iwrrows  of  Great  Britain,  in
wlndi  not  a  single  perforated  humerus  in  a  series  of  from  ten  to  thirty
hnt  been  found.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS


89


furnishes  a  point  of  attachment  to  the  lower  part  of  the  gluteus
maximus.  This  projection,  pointed  out  and  studied  for  the
first  time  by  Houz^,^  appears  in  infancy  as  a  special  centre  of
ossification  analogous  to  those  of  the  other  diaphyses  (Torok,
Deniker,  Dixon),  and  so  does  not  seem  to  depend  on
the  greater  or  less  development  of  the  gluteus  maximus
(Bertaux).*  The  third  trochanter  is  almost  always  accom-
panied by  a  hypotrochanteric  fossa  (Fig.  23,  C).

Here  is  the  frequency  with  which  the  third  trochanter  occurs
according  to  a  list  which  I  have  compiled : —


Number

Froquenoy

of
Feman.

Populatloni.

per  100

of  the  8rd

trochanter.

Observers.

42

Belgians  and  French  of  the  Reindeer

X  wl lOU            •••                  ••■                  •••                  •••

13

Houz^

28

MCJ^OCS           •••           •••            ...           •••

21

Houz^,  Costa

68

4\jiUllS                                       •••                          •••                          •■•                           •••

26.5

1  Koganei

73

1  siusiucsc          •••            •••            •••            •••

28.8

67

Inhabitants  of  Brussels

302

Houz^

102

Italians

30-4

Costa

54

Hungarians

36.1

Torok

no

Belgians  and  French  of  the  Polished

Stone  Period

38

Hour/

76

Fu^ians

64.3

Hyad.,Denik.^
Martin,  Costa

Two  points  will  be  observed  in  this  table,  the  rarity  of  the
third  trochanter  among  Negroes,  and  its  excessive  frequency
among  the  Fuegians.  The  women  of  the  latter  have  also  the
hypochanteric  fossa  80  times  in  a  100  (out  of  76  femurs
examined) ;  it  almost  forms  then,  like  the  third  trochanter,  a
character  of  race.

*  Honz^,  "  Lc  3«  trochanter,"  BuU.  So€.  Anihr.,  Brussels,  1883.

*  See  the  summary  of  the  question  by  Dwight  in  Journ.  of  Anai,
Fkyttpt,^  voL  xxiv.,  pt.  t,  London,  1889,  p.  61  ;  also  that  hy  CoMa,  in
AnkbMt^tAntr,^  voL  xjl,  1890,  p.  280;  and  liy  Poirier  in  his  Traiti
dAwatmah^  vol  L,  pu  221,  P^ms,  1890.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         9 1

importance,  for  they  permit  us  to  reconstitute  approximately,
as  we  have  already  seen  (p.  33),  the  height  of  subjects  of
which  we  have  only  the  bones,  as  is  the  case  of  all  populations
that  have  preceded  us.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  give  the  following  figures  derived
from  nine  series  of  from  five  to  seventy-two  skeletons.  The
length  of  the  humerus  represents  from  19.5  (Polynesians)  to
20.7  per  cent.  (Europeans)  of  the  height  of  the  skeleton ;  that
of  the  radius  from  14.3  (Europeans)  to  15.7  (Negroes);  that
of  the  femur  from  26.9  (South  Americans)  to  27.9  (New
Caledonians);  lastly,  the  length  of  the  tibia  represents  from
21.5  (E^thonians)  to  23.8  per  cent.  (New  Caledonians)  of
the  height  of  the  skeleton.  Thus  the  differences  are  insig-
nificant, and  the  variations  between  race  and  race  do  not
extend  beyond  the  limits  of  a  unit  and  a  half  for  each  of  the
bones.

The  length  of  the  radius  in  relation  to  the  humerus  (=  100)
exhibits  variations  a  little  more  appreciable.  It  is  72.5  among
Europeans,  76  among  New  Caledonians,  79  among  Negroes,
79.7  among  Veddahs,  80.6  among  Fuegians,  81.7  among
Andamanese.  Let  us  note  that  the  forearm,  relatively  to
the  arm,  is  much  longer  in  the  foetus  in  the  first  stages  of
development  and  in  early  infancy  than  in  the  adult ;  Mt  is
shortened  in  proportion  to  the  height  as  the  foetus  and  the
infant  grow.

Proportions  of  the  Body  in  the  Living  Subject, — In  spite  of  the
quantity  of  material  accumulated,  we  have  not  been  able  up  to
the  present  to  make  any  use  of  the  difTerences  which  these
proportions  exhibit  according  to  race.  The  reason  is  that
these  differences  are  very  trifling.  In  order  to  understand
this  proposition  better  I  will  give  by  way  of  illustration  the
proportions  which  we  may  consider  as  nearly  normal  in  a
European  of  average  stature  (im.  65,  or  5  ft.  5  ins.).  Topinard
established  thus  the  principal  proportions  of  the  European,*
assaming  the  height « 100.

1  Hamy,  Rev,  d^Anthrop.^  1872,  p.  79.

*  Tofniiard,  IJkcmme  dam  la  Nature^  p.  126.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         93

of  Georgian  Svancs  and  Jews,  or  other  populations  which
happen  to  be  in  bad  hygienic  conditions.

Thus  proportions  of  the  limbs  are  not  good  characters  of  race.
Besides,  certain  dimensions  (length  of  limbs,  of  the  head)  are
always  dependent  on  height.  Thus  individuals  and  races  of
high  stature  have  the  face  and  abdominal  limb  a  little  more
elongated  than  individuals  and  races  of  short  stature.  On  the
other  hand,  individuals  and  races  of  short  stature  have  in
general  the  head  larger,  the  trunk  shorter,  and  the  thoracic
perimeter  relatively  more  considerable  than  individuals  and
races  of  high  stature,  but  the  differences  are  very  trifling  as  a
general  rule.

Trunk  and  Limbs  of  the  Living, — To  complete  our  study  on
the  living  subject,  let  us  again  note  some  peculiarities.  The
neck  is  ordinarily  long  and  thin  among  Negroes,  Ethiopians
(Figs.  9  and  138),  and  on  the  contrary  short  among  the
majority  of  the  American  Indians  (Figs.  163  and  169);  the
shoulders  are  very  broad  among  the  women  of  the  latter
(Fig.  165),  and  very  narrow  among  the  Chechen  and  Lesghi
women.  Usually  the  long  neck  is  associated  with  a  form  of
trunk  like  an  inverted  pyramid  and  a  high  stature,  while  the
short  neck  surmounts  a  cylindrical  trunk  and  is  associated
with  a  low  stature.  Ensellure — that  is  to  say,  the  strongly
marked  curve  of  the  dorso-lumbo-sacral  region — is  especially
marked  among  Spanish  women  whose  lumbar  incurvation  is
such,  and  the  movements  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae  so  ex-
tensive, that  they  are  able  to  throw  themselves  backwards  so
as  even  to  touch  the  ground  (Duchenne  of  Boulogne).
Ensellure  is  also  more  marked  among  Negroes  than  among
Whites.  It  must  be  noted  that  it  may  also  be  merely  a  conse-
quence of  abdominal  obesity,  pregnancy,  or  steaiopygia.

By  the  last-mentioned  term  is  designated  excessive  projec-
tion of  the  buttocks  due  to  the  accumulation  of  subcutaneous
fat  (Fig.  24);  these  are  physiological  fatty  tumours  proceeding
from  the  hypertrophy  of  the  adipose  tissue  more  or  less  abundant
in  these  regions  among  all  races,  and  analogous  to  the  fatty
tumours  of  the  cheeks  of  the  orang-utan,  which  are  si'


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         95

veloped  calf,  and  the  foot  with  the  prominent  heel  which
is  observed  among  certain  Negroes  •  (but  not  among  all) ;
on  the  more  or  less  diverging  big  toe  which  is  remarked
among  the  majority  of  the  peoples  of  India,  Indo-China,
and  the  insular  world  dependent  on  Asia,  from  Sumatra  to
Japan,  etc.

Two  words,  however,  on  the  subject  of  the  pretended  exist-
ence of  races  of  men  with  tails.  We  must  relegate  to  the
domain  of  fable  the  cases  of  this  kind  which  are  announced
from  time  to  time  in  publications  for  the  popularisation  of
science  so  called.  The  costumes  of  certain  populations  have
given  rise  to  the  fable  of  men  with  tails  (see  frontispiece).
Isolated  cases  of  men  having  as  an  anomaly  a  caudal  excres-
cence more  or  less  long,  free,  or  united  to  the  trunk,  are  known
to  science,  and  numbers  have  been  described,  but  no  single
serious  description  has  ever  been  given  of  populations  with
tails.  ^  Quite  recently,  again,  Lartschneider  has  demonstrated
that  the  ilio-coccygian  and  pubio-coccygian  muscles  in  manimi-
fera  have  lost  in  man  their  character  of  symmetrical  and  paired
skeleton  muscles,  and  are  driven  back  towards  the  interior  of
the  pelvis  as  single  unpaired  muscle  plates  (fibres  of  the  levator
ant).  Primitive  man  has  never  had  a  caudal  appendage  since
he  acquired  the  biped  attitude ;  the  disappearance  of  the  tail
is  even  one  of  the  indispensable  conditions  of  that  attitude.^

The  different  internal  or  external  organs  of  man  afford
also  some  special  characters,  though  not  very  numerous,  for
differentiating  race.

The  muscular  system^  little  known  outside  white  races,  has,
up  to  the  present,  not  given  any  important  indication  on  this
point  At  the  very  outside,  we  can  say,  thanks  to  the  works  of
Chudzinsky,  Le  Double,  Macalistcr,  Popovsky,  Testut,  Turner,
etc.,  and  the  Committee  of  the  Anatomical  Society  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland,  that  certain  muscular  anomalies  arc  more
frequent  in  the  Negro  than  in  the  While,  and  that  the  muscles

*  M.  Bartels,  Arck.f,  Anthr.^  vol  xiii.,  1880,  p.  i.

*  Lartschneider,  "Die  Stei»sbeinmuskcln,  etc.,"  Dtnkichr,  A'.  Akad.
Wiss.  Wiin,  mat.  not.  Kl.^  voL  Ixii.,  1895.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERa         97

among  the  Bushman  race  and  the  people  into  whose  com-
position enters  the  Bushman  element — Hottentots,  Nama,
Griqua,  etc.^

The  breasts  of  women  may  also  present  variations  of
form.  Ploss^  classes  them  under  four  heads  according  to
their  height,  which  is  inferior,  equal,  or  more  or  less  superior
to  the  diameter  of  their  base ;  we  have  thus  mammae  like
a  bowl  or  the  segment  of  a  globe,  hemispherical,  conical,  and
pyriform.  These  forms  may  be  found  in  combination  with
a  more  or  less  extended  and  prominent  areola,  and  with  a
nipple  which  may  be  discoidal,  hemispherical,  digitiform,  etc.
It  is  especially  among  Negresses  that  we  meet  with  conical
and  pyriform  mammae,  and  digitiform  nipples,  while  mammae
shaped  like  the  segment  of  a  sphere  predominate  among  Mon-
golian and  European  women  of  the  fair  race;  women  of  the
south-east  of  Europe  and  hither  Asia  have  for  the  most  part
hemispherical  breasts.

Among  the  internal  organs,  the  brain,  or  better,  the  ence-
phalon,  deserves  a  little  more  attention.  I  have  already
said  with  regard  to  cranial  capacity  (p.  56)  that  appreciable
differences  have  been  observed  in  the  volume  of  the  brain-case
according  to  age,  sex,  and  race.  This  difference  is  in  har-
mony with  irregularity  in  the  volume  and  consequently  in
the  weight  of  the  brain.  At  birth,  European  boys  have  334
grammes  of  brain  on  an  average,  girls  287  grammes.  This
quantity  increases  rapidly  up  to  20  years  of  age,  remains
almost  stationary  between  20  and  40  or  45,  then  begins  to
decrease,  slowly  at  first,  until  60  years,  then  more  rapidly.

Let  me  also  add  that  the  weight  of  the  encephalon  varies
enormously  according  to  individuals.  Topinard*  in  a  series
of  519  Europeans,  men  of  the  lower  and  middle  classes,  found
that  variations  in  weight  extended  from  1025  grammes  to  1675

*  R.  Blanchard,  "Observations  sur  le  tablicr  .  .  .  d'apr^s  Teron  et
Lesueur,"  Bull,  Sec,  Zool,  de  Frame,  1883,  wiih  Figs.

«  11.  IMoss,  JMs  Iryeib,  5th  edit.,  by  Max  Battels,  vol.  i.  Leipzig,
1897.

*  Topinard,  Vhomme  dam  la  Nature^  p.  215.

1


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         99

Not  having  at  our  disposal  sufficient  data  for  the  weight,
let  us  see  if  the  cranial  capacity  could  not  supply  them,  for
we  know,  since  the  investigations  of  Manouvrier,^  that  we  have
just  to  multiply  by  the  co-efficient  0.87  the  capacity  of  the
cranial  cavity  to  get  with  reasonable  exactitude  the  weight  of
the  brain  which  it  contained.  This  is  what  we  learn  from
the  figures  of  cranial  capacity  brought  together  by  Topinard,*
after  the  necessary  corrections,  and  reduction  to  cubic  measure-
ment by  the  system  of  Broca :  among  Europeans  the  measure-
ment is  1565  C.C  on  an  average  for  men,  varying  from  1530  c.c.
(22  Dutch)  to  1 60 1  c.c.  (43  Finns).  We  have  in  various  series
the  following  succession  of  cranial  capacities  for  the  popula-
tions of  the  other  parts  of  the  world :  the  greatest  is  contained
in  a  series  of  26  Eskimo  (1583  cc),  the  least  that  of  36
Australians  (1349  c.c.)  and  of  11  Andamanese  (1310  c.c).
Between  these  two  extremes  the  otljer  populations  would  be
thus  arranged  in  a  decreasing  order  of  capacity:  36  Poly-
nesians (1525  cc),  18  Javanese  (1500  cc),  32  Mongols  (1504
cc),  23  Melanesians  (1460  cc),  74  Negroes  (1441  c.c),  and
17  Dravidians  of  Southern  India  (1353  c.c).

The  difference  between  the  highest  and  lowest  of  these
figures  is  255  cc,  a  little  greater  than  that  which  is  shown
between  man  and  woman  in  all  races.  On  the  other  hand,
Manouvrier'  gives  the  following  weights,  deduced  from
cranial  capacities:  187  modem  Parisians,  1357  grammes;  61
Basques,  1360  grammes;  31  Negroes,  1238  grammes;  23  New
Caledonians,  1270  grammes;  no  Polynesians,  1380  grammes;
and  50  Bengalis,  1184  grammes;  the  difference  of  the  two
extremes  is  196  grammes.  Must  we  then  see  in  these
differences   the   influence   of  stature    and  bulk  of   body,   as

'  Manouvrier,  **  De  la  quantity  dans  Tenc^phale,"  Mim,  Soe.  Anihr,^
2nd  ser.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  162.     Paris,  1888.

'  Elem.  AtUhr,  ght,^  pp.  61 1  et  seq.  The  figures  are  drawn  from  the
series  of  Broca  and  Flower,  the  latter  being  augmented  by  64  cc  (the
mean  difference  established  by  Topinard  and  Garson  between  the  two
systems  of  determining  cranial  capacity).

>  Article  "Cerveau,"  in  the  Diet,  de  PhysioL  of  Ch.  Richet,  vol  ft
P^rt  3,  p.  687.     Paris,  1897.


MORPHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  101

the  increase  of  the  voluriie-of'the  brain  made  at  the  cost  of  the
white  substance  formed  sohily.  -pf  conducting-fibres,  or  of  the
grey  substance  formed  princi'paflypt  cells  with  their  prolonga-
tions (neurons),  that  is  to  say,  oF  ijfio.  fxirt  which  is  exclusively
affected    by    the    psychic    processes?'  .This    question    still
waits  its  solution.     It  is  not  the  gross  weigl^t  of  the  brain,
but  really  the  weight  of  the  cortical  layer  Vh'ich. should  be
compared    in    the    different    races    and    subjects,   in    order
to    judge    of   the    quantity    of   substance    devotf-d  •.' tf> .  the
psychic  functions  in  each  particular  case.*     Before  the  vtjry
delicate  weighings  of  this  kind  are  made,  we  have  a  rouddr
about  method  of  ascertaining  the  quantity  of  that  substance*
by   the   superficial   area   which    it    occupies.      l*he   cerebral
cortex,    composed    of    the    grey    substance,    forms    on    the
surface  of  the  brain  sinuous  folds  called  cerebral  convolutions.
Now,  in  brains  of  equal  volume,  the  greater  the  surface  of
the  cortex,  the   more   numerous,   sinuous,   and  complicated
wiU  be  these  folds.     As  the  thickness  of  the  grey  layer  is
very  much  the  same   in  all   brains,   it   is   evident  that   the
complexity  in  the  structure  of  the  convolutions  corresponds
to  tl^  increase  of  the  grey  substance,  and  consequently  of  the
psychic  force.     Now,  the  little  that  is  known  of  the  cerebral

1430  gnnuDei — ibz:  u  to  uv.  txat^irjz  '^-^  '^  -^  YffsrM  ^  aSgh  inr-at

and  the  SooCdi.     Frooi  !£«  r-ay  r/t  -f/fwr.  rr^  v>r>::xw'^  'Jsat  imuHi^tmit

causes  an  increaie  in  :i>t  wrl^g^.*  'A  'Ty.  '.nlz.  'i:ji^/f:zji'yxj:rw  ^JL  tiit  i&i::sr«u

Here,  by  waj of  cfcrsaaetr.*,  %:-.  *<r.*ri.'  'i*:* '/-.hi*  ir.'tr'rrf'Jij  ler^ru    Tut

miniinam  of  tins  jerin  r*tv-r.T\  ",  ••.-►  \z:itxz,,a  l^.C^jq^Kt ,  ».v*  i^»  »•

the  age  of  iercBlTr-^jce     'i2r/:   jri^-.ti-T*  -  ':jt  t^iis^-.s,   '/,  ?i*t  x^/sefikiC

Thackefaj,  wl»  dicjf  a;  *JJt  i;*  -J  i/r*-  r.:*^,  'i<44  {raauiun;.     l>Erve»ni

these  two   e&UCBes   trt   -::-c-  v..    xli/vtw    'lij*   v*s:,x^^^,  i'^hmii^ix

(l294graiBac»'.  Lic^-vt     -'.'2  ?r*v.-^«rt  ,  l^^rxM    1452  s^aaMbe^.,  lir'/'A

(1485  giaflHBO,^  Oi-i>4     's/i2  ;:/i". -.-•■i      A{».wt;c     15J2   374i«m^(  ,  ^aA

Dc  Mornj  (15JO  ffB^m^.       -  v..*- .  .i^x.  -r.:,!  ' v?  -^n/  iiu'/»i  w.r^i  f^^tl^

between  iheat  rtTr*^^^      V--    V-fi.v^nf^rf  .-.^i  •■*.-•:  v'-i^  ''-^.•,    -i-i  «   '

e»:eplioaall7  ksvj  'u^.3eli,  J-*-*    ■>•.«  '/  v^'-u^w  j;^,;  ^i^uu-Bi.  -  -y  Cj

(1899 gnaiMCil*  «if  T'.nr^^cnut^'  ^^2z  ^/«^iua«n  .  i-r;  ^^/.^  ">  i^'s-.a.


jj^m  ^  yet  "jesLx^  V  -tit  VAu  »n|;ic  4/  -fis


CHAPTER  III.

2. — PHYSIOLOGICAL   CHARACTERS.

Functions  of  nutrition  and  assimilation:  Digestion,  alimentation,  growth,
temperature  of  the  body,  etc. — Respiration  and  circulation:  Pulse,
composition  of  the  blood,  etc. — Special  odour — Functions  of  com-
munication:  Expression  of  the  emotions,  acuteness  of  the  senses,
etc — Functions  of  reproduction:  Menstruation,  menopause,  increase
in  the  number  of  conceptions  according  to  season,  etc. — Influence  of
environment:  Acclimatation— Cosmopolitanism  of  the  genus  Homo
and  the  races  of  mankind — Cross-breeding.

3.— PSYCHOLOGICAL  AND   PATHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.

Difficulties  of  studying  them — Immunities— Nervous  diseases  of  uncivilised
peoples.

2. — PHYSIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.

The  differences  observable  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  organic
functions — nutrition,  respiration,  circulation  of  the  blood,
reproduction,  etc. — according  to  race  are  unquestionable;
but  they  are  still  too  Httle  studied  for  us  to  be  able  to  speak
with  as  much  certainty  of  them  as  of  morphological  differences.
Further,  these  functions  exhibit  so  many  individual  variations
that  it  will  always  be  difficult  to  rely  on  averages;  besides,  the
latter  present  as  far  as  we  know  a  great  uniformity.

The  Junctions  of  nutrition  and  assimilation  scarcely  present
any  varieties  according  to  race.  Indigent  populations  living
from  hand  to  mouth  by  hunting,  fishing,  the  gathering  of
fruit,  etc,  exposed  to  the  alternations  of  famine  and  plenty,
surprise  us  by  their  faculty  of  absorbing  a  great  quantity  of
food;  thus  the  Eskimo  and  the  Fuegians  feed  for  several  days
nmning  on  a  stranded  whale.     The  tendency  to  obesity  is

105


PHYSIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I07

the  limit  of  their  stature;  while  women  seem  to  stop  growing
at  twenty.

The  size  of  most  of  the  organs  increases  pretty  regularly;
the  heart  in  girls  at  the  age  of  puberty  and  the  brain  in  the  two
sexes  are  the  only  exceptions  to  this  rule.  The  weight  of  the
brain  is  2  J  times  greater  at  one  year  than  at  birth,  3 J  at  five
years,  3.7  at  ten,  and  3.9  at  fifteen;  later  its  growth  diminishes,'
to  reach  its  maximum  before  the  age  of  twenty,  4  times  its
initial  weight,  and  to  decline  slightly  after  forty  or  forty-five
years.

At  birth  the  brain  represents  12.4  per  cent,  of  the  total
weight  of  the  body,  at  a  year  old  10.9  per  cent.,  at  five  8.4,
at  fifteen  3.8,  and  at  twenty-five  2.3  per  cent,  only.^  Unfor-
tunately we  have  hardly  any  parallel  observations  on  non-
European  populations.  The  only  observations  of  this  kind
based  on  a  sufficient  number  of  subjects  (several  thousands)
relate  to  the  Japanese.  According  to  Baelz,  the  stature  of
the  Japanese  increases  after  the  age  of  puberty  only  8  per
cent.,  whilst  it  increases  13  per  cent,  among  Europeans.  On
the  other  hand,  Drs.  Hamada  and  Sasaki  say  that  growth
diminishes  greatly  among  Japanese  men  from  sixteen  or
eighteen,  and  is  found  to  be  completely  arrested  at  the  age
of  twenty-two.*  There  is  abundance  of  evidence  that  Negroes,
Melanesians,  and  Malays  attain  their  maximum  height  between
eighteen  and  twenty-one.  Dietary  regimen  and  comfortable
circumstances  have  a  great  influence  on  growth,  as  I  have
already  said  when  speaking  of  stature  (p.  31).

The  activity  of  transformations  in  the  system  certainly
presents  differences  according  to  climate,  but  not  according  to
race.  Thus  the  alimentary  supply  is  conditioned  solely  by  the
heat  required-*     The  temperature  of  the  body  hardly  varies  two

*  H.  Vicrordt,  "Das  Mas%n*wAchsthuni,  etc  ,"  Arch,  fiir  Ana(om.  u.
PJkyi. ;  Anaiom.  Division,  1890,  wpplcm.  volume,  p.  62.

*  Baelc,  ••Die  Kdq>erlichen  Eigenwrhaflcn  dcr  Japancr,"  Mittktil,
DttUsdL  GeselL  Osi.  A  si.,  1882,  vol  iiL,  p.  348;  Hamada  and  Sasaki  in
StU'Kwmi  {j€Spameu  Med.  Joum.  of  Tokic),  Fa^oary  No.,  189a

'  L^iio^o^  iUo.  Mms.  tcole.  AtUhr.,  1897,  No,  f2.


PHYSIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  109

(76.6),  and  among  the  Kirghiz  (77.7).  The  number  of  red
globules  in  the  blood  varies  but  little  according  to  race :
Europeans  have  on  an  average  five  millions  of  them  to  the
cubic  millimetre,  Hindus  and  Negroes  seem  to  have  half  a
million  less,  and  the  Fuegians  half  a  million  more.^  But
these  differences  are  insignificant  when  we  think  that  the
number  of  these  elements  of  the  blood  may  vary  by  a  million
in  the  same  subject  according  to  the  state  of  his  health,
nutrition,  etc.

Certain  travellers  (Erman,  Hue)  have  asserted  that  they
could  recognise  a  population  by  its  odour.  Without  going
so  far  as  this,  it  must  be  admitted  that  some  ethnic  groups
and,  more  particularly,  the  Negroes  and  the  Chinese  have
their  specific  odour,  which  gets  fainter  with  scrupulous
cleanliness,  but,  it  is  said,  never  disappears.  In  the  case
of  the  Negro  this  odour  is  due  especially  to  the  abundance
of  the  secretion  of  his  very  voluminous  and  numerous
sebaceous  glands.  It  was  on  this  property  that  the  planters
relied  for  putting  their  dogs  on  the  scent  of  the  fugitive
Negro.  The  Blacks  themselves  are  perfectly  aware  of  it,  it
appears,  and  those  of  the  West  Indies  have  even  framed  this
proverb —

'*  The  Lord  He  loves  the  nigger  well,
He  knows  His  nigger  by  the  smelL"

The  odour  of  musk  exhaled  by  the  Chinese  is  attested  by  a
great  amount  of  evidence;  that  of  the  Australians  and  New
Caledonians  appears  to  be  also  duly  rei)orted.  Wc  must  not
confound  these  odours  iui  generis  with  thos^:  which  certain
peoples  contract  from  the  fowl  they  eat,  as,  for  instance,  the
odour  of  garlic  among  the  fK>pulations  of  S<^;uthern  Eijrof>e
and  the  Jews.'

With  regard  to  muscular  force,  the  data  furnished   by  the

'  Maorel,  BmiL  S^c,  An/k.  Pan':,  1&83,  p.  699;  Uyz^Urt  ami  Deatker,
p.  183.
*  ft.  Andrce,  Eikm^i.  ParalUU,  S^w:  Folgr,  I>fiptc«  i«8^


PHYSIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  II3

Quetelet  for  Belgium  and  Holland  (maximum  of  births  in
February,  the  maximum  of  conceptions  in  May);  Wappaeus
for  Central  Europe  (two  maxima  of  conception,  in  winter,
and  at  the  end  of  spring  or  the  beginning  of  summer);
Villerm^  (same  periods)  for  different  countries,  including  those
of  the  southern  hemisphere ;  Sormani  for  Italy  (conceptions
in  July);  Mayr  for  Germany  (conceptions  in  December);
Beukemann  for  the  different  provinces  of  the  German  empire
(maximum  of  conceptions  in  December  in  the  north,  in  spring
in  the  south) ;  Hill  for  India  (maximum  of  conceptions,
December-January) ;  lastly,  different  authors  for  Russia  (maxi-
mum of  conceptions  in  winter).

The  explanations  which  have  been  put  forward  up  to  the
present  of  this  phenomenon  are  of  different  kinds.  According
to  certain  authors,  the  maxima  observed  in  many  countries  in
the  spring  are  owing  to  the  fact  of  there  being  in  this  season
"  plenty  of  everything,"  better  nourishment,  in  short,  something
which  compels  the  genesic  instinct  of  man,  like  that  of  most
animals,  to  participate  in  the  "awakening  of  nature."  To
this  it  is  replied  by  other  observers  that  in  certain  countries  the
maxima  are  reported  in  the  winter  months,  that  is  to  say  in
the  season  when  the  temperature  and  the  relative  absence  of
the  good  things  of  life  do  not  seem  to  be  <7  priori  favourable
to  generation ;  these  scientists  look  for  the  cause  in  the  social
organisation.  They  notice  that  in  countries  of  the  north
it  is  in  the  month  of  December  that,  after  having  finished
their  work  in  the  fields,  the  inhabitants  give  themselves  up  to
festivities  and  rejoicings,  and  that  it  is  in  this  month  the
greatest  number  of  unions  are  contracted ;  on  the  other  hand,
in  the  south  the  most  popular  festivals  are  those  of  the  spring
at  the  awakening  of  nature.  Others,  again,  assert  that  these
differences  are  owing  as  much  to  religion  as  to  latitude.

All  these  explanations  are  somewhat  unscientific,  and  have
never  been  verified  by  figures  or  experienca  According  to
Rosenstadt,^   cosmic  and  social  influences  do  not  count  at

'  B.  RosMBladt,  '*  Ursachen  welche  die  Zahl  der  Concepiionen*  etCy**
Miitk,  Embryol,  InsiiL  Unrvers,  Wien,  2nd  series  port  4,  ViemuL,  l%yi


PSYCHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS,   ETC.  121

the  blending  and  their  respective  fecundity,  but  this  selection
has  hardly  begun  to  be  studied.


3. — PSYCHOLOGICAL  AND   PATHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.

It  remains  to  speak  of  psychological  characters — that  is  to
say,  of  temperament  and  the  different  manifestations  of  mind,
feeling,  and  affections.  But  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is
almost  impossible  to  treat  these  in  the  face  of  many  contra-
dictory facts.  Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the
American  and  Mongoloid  races  are  grave,  meditative,  a  little
obtuse,  melancholic;  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  Negro
races  and  Melanesians  are  playful,  laughing,  lively,  and  super-
ficial as  children.  But  there  are  many  exceptions  to  such
general  rules.  Each  traveller,  each  observer,  tends  to  judge
in  his  own  way  a  given  people  according  to  the  nature  of
the  relations  (pacific,  hostile,  etc.)  which  he  has  had  with
it  We  are  unable  to  afHrm  anything  when  we  have  once
made  up  our  minds  to  escape  from  the  commonplace
generalities  that  savages  are  wanting  in  foresight  and  general
ideas,  that  they  are  cruel,  that  their  imitative  faculties  are
highly  developed,  etc.

Pathological  characters  are  better  known,  as  for  example,  in
regard  to  immunities.  It  is  a  proved  fact  that  Negroes,
for  instance,  are  proof  against  the  contagion  of  yellow  fever ;
that  they  resist  much  better  than  Europeans  the  terrible  inter-
mittent fevers  which  prevail  on  the  coasts  of  Africa.  But  if
savage  peoples  enjoy  certain  immunities,  they  are,  on  the
contrary,  very  susceptible  to  the  infectious  diseases  which
civilised  peoples  introduce  among  them ;  whole  tribes  have
been  exterminated  by  syphilis,  measles,  and  consumption  in
South  America,  Polynesia,  and  Siberia."*  There  are  also
diseases  peculiar  to  certain  populations,  such,  for  example,
as  the  sleeping  sickness  among  the  Wolofs  and  Songha'i,  which
manifests  itself  in  an  invincible  tendency  to  sleep.^    It  has

>  For  details  sec  Bordier,  Ghgr,  Atedicale,  Paris,  1883,  with  flLtU&«
*  BulL  GSt^.  kistar.  et  dtscript.^  p.  53,  Paiis,  1%^.


CHAPTER  IV.
ETHNIC  CHARACTERS.

Various  stages  of  social  groups  and  essential  characters  of  human  societies:
Prc^ess.  —Conditions  of  Progress :  Innovating  initiative, .  and  tra-
dition— Qassification  of  **  states  of  civilisation."

I. — LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.

Methods  of  exchanging  ideas  within  a  short  distance — Gesture  and  speech
— Divisions  of  language  according  to  structure — ^Jargons — Coni'
munications  at  a  relatively  remote  distance:  optic  and  acoustic
signals — Transmission  of  ideas  at  any  distance  and  time  whenever —
Handwriting — Mnemotechnic  objects — Pictography — Ideography —
Alphabets — Direction  of  the  lines  of  handwriting.

So  far  we  have  considered  man  as  an  isolated  being,  apart
from  the  groupings  which  he  forms  with  his  fellows.  But
in  order  to  get  a  correct  idea  of  the  sum-total  of  the  mani-
festations of  his  physical  life,  and  especially  of  his  psychical
life,  we  must  further  consider  him  in  his  social  environment.

Nowhere  on  the  earth  has  there  been  found  a  race  of  men  the
members  of  which  lived  completely  alone  and  isolated  as  the
majority  of  animals  are  seen  to  do.  It  is  in  fact  but  very
rarely  that  the  latter  combine  into  societies;  they  form  a
family  group  only  temporarily  during  the  period  of  raising  the
young,  etc  Man, .oh  the  contrary,  becomes  almost  helpless
apart  from  society,  incapable  of  maintaining  the  struggle  for
existence  without  the  help  of  his  fellow-men.  The  develop-
ment of  all  the  manifestations  of  "sociality"  is  then  the
measure  of  progress  of  human  societies.     The  more  man

"3


124  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

is  "  socialised/'  if  I  may  thus  express  it,  the  less  he  depends
on  nature.

This  dependence  on  nature  has  long  served  as  a  criterion
in  ethnography  for  dividing  peoples  into  two  groups — the
"civilised"  and  the  "savage."  The  name  given  by  the
Germans  to  "savages,"  Naturvblker  (peoples  in  a  state  of
nature),  explains  sufficiently  this  way  of  looking  at  things.
According  to  their  greater  or  less  dependence  on  nature,
peoples  were  divided  into  hunters,  shepherds  or  nomads,  and
tillers  of  the  soil  or  settlers,  without,  however,  characterising  in
a  very  precise  way  each  of  these  states.  Morgan  was  the  first
to  bring  a  little  definiteness  into  this  nomenclature,  and  at  the
same  time  he  has  shown  the  necessity  of  introducing  another
criterion  into  the  estimate  of  states  of  civilisation.  In  fact,
to  establish  the  three  forms  of  socialisation — savage^  bar-
barous^  and  civilised — he  has  accepted  as  a  distinctive  mark
between  the  second  and  the  third  the  existence  of  handwriting
— that  is  to  say,  of  the  material  means  used  by  the  two  forces
necessary  to  the  inception  and  maintenance  of  progress:  inno-
vating initiative,  and  conservation  of  what  has  been  acquired.^
He  has  not  made  as  much  of  this  classification  as,  in  my
opinion,  he  might  have  done.  In  fact,  the  ethnic  groups  of
the  earth  only  difTer  among  themselves  from  the  social  point
of  view  by  the  degree  of  culture— its  essence  being  always  and
everywhere  the  same:  pursuit  of  more  and  more  easy  means
of  satisfying  wants  and  desires.  Now,  if  the  form  assumed
by  this  species  of  activity,  in  a  word,  if  production^  subject
to  the  influence  of  climate,  geographical  position,  etc.,  is  the
basis  of  all  social  development,  as  Grosse  has  so  well  shown,'
the  nature  and  evolution  of  the  needs  and  desires  themselves
depend  up  to  a  certain  point  on  the  "temperament"  of  the

*  \^  Morgan,  Proc,  Am,  Assoc,  Acad,  Sc,^  Detroit  Session,  1875,
p.  266,  xsxA  Journal  Anthro,  Inst,^  vol.  vi.,  1878,  p.  114.  The  distinc-
tion between  the  first  and  the  second  form  lies,  according  to  Morgan,  in  the
knowledge  of  pottery — a  somewhat  unreliable  and  narrow  criterion,  which,
however,  does  not  directly  interest  us  here.

^  Grosse,  Die  Formender  Wirtschaft^  etc.,  Leipzig,  1896.


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.  12$

race,  which  must  likewise  be  taken  into  consideration.  The
nature  and  amount  of  psychic  force  in  any  given  society,
the  evolution  of  which  is  effected  by  its  mode  of  pro-
duction, may  in  its  turn,  having  attained  a  certain  degree
of  development,  re-act  on  the  economic  state,  and  modify
it.  We  see  nothing  like  this  in  the  animal  communities.
Bees  and  ants  arrange  their  hives  and  manage  the  affairs  of
their  community  to-day  as  they  did  a  thousand  insect-genera-
tions ago.  It  is  very  probable  that  race  has  something  to  do
with  psychic  force,  but  up  to  the  present  time  the  fact  has
not  been  scientifically  demonstrated.  However  that  may  be,
in  order  to  form  a  correct  opinion  as  to  the  degree  of  civilisa-
tion of  any  people,  we  should  have  to  take  into  consideration
not  only  its  material  culture,  but  also  its  itat  (fdme^  its  psycho-
logy, to  realise  the  psychical"  resources  which  it  has  at  its
command.  Thus  certain  peoples  (Australians,  Bushmen),
though  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale  as  regards  material
culture,  are  nevertheless  well  endowed  from  the  artistic
point  of  view;  in  the  same  way  the  Polynesians  of  a  hundred
years  ago,  who  were  inferior  in  knowledge  of  pottery  and
metallurgy  to  the  Negroes,  were  superior  to  them  in  general
intelligence  and  the  richness  of  their  mythology.

But  progress  is  only  possible  if,  side  by  side  with  individual
power  of  initiating  change,  there  exists  in  the  social  aggr^ate
what  may  be  called  the  |X)wer  of  conservation.  There  may  be
produced  among  savage  peoples,  as  Ratzel  ^  has  so  well  pointed
put,  persons  of  exceptional  natural  talent,  men  of  genius ;  but
the  activity  of  these  will  almost  always  be  sterile.  Even  if
they  succeed  in  ameliorating  the  material  condition,  in  raising
the  moral  or  intellectual  level  of  the  members  of  their  tribe  or
of  their  class,  the  result  of  their  activity  has  only  an  ephemeral
existence,  their  efforts  are  not  continued,  and  after  their  death,
for  want  of  the  conservative  power,  everything  falls  back  into
the  primitive  condition.  The  secret  of  civilisation  lies  not  so
much  in  efforts  of  isolated  individuals  as  in  accumulation  of
these  efforts,  in  the  transmission  from  one  generation  to
'  Ratxel,  History  of  Afankittd^  vol.  i.,  p.  24.     London,  1896.


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.  1 27

mentioned  above,  I  arrive  at  a  classification  of  "states  of
civilisation"  which  recalls  somewhat  that  of  Vierkandt,  but
which  differs  from  it  on  several  points.  It  may  be  summarised
as  follows : —

(i)  Savage  peoples^  progressing  exceedingly  slowly,  without
writing,  sometimes  possessing  a  piclographic  method;  living
in  little  groups  of  some  hundreds  or  thousands  of  individuals.
They  are  divided  into  two  categories :  hunters  ^  (examples :
Bushmen,  Australians,  Fuegians)  and  tillers  of  the  soil  (ex-
amples :  Indians  of  North  America,  Melanesians,  the  majority
of  Negroes).

(2)  Semi-civilised  peoples^  making  an  appreciable  but  slow
progress,  in  which  the  conservative  power  predominates,
forming  authoritative  societies  or  states  of  several  thousands
or  millions  of  individuals;  having  an  ideographic  or  phonetic
writing,  but  a  rudimentary  literature.  They  are  divided  like-
wise into  two  categories  :  tillers  of  the  soil  (examples:  Chinese,
Siamese,  Abyssinians,  Malays,  Ancient  Egyptians,  and  Peru-
vians) and  nomads  (examples  :  Mongols,  Arabs).

(3)  Civilised  peoples^  making  rapid  progress,  in  which  the
initiating  and  innovating  power  predominates,  forming  states
based  on  individual  liberty,  and  consisting  of  several  millions
of  individuals;  having  a  phonetic  writing  and  a  developed
literature.  Their  economic  state  is  especially  characterised
by  industrialism  and  cosmopolitan  commercialism  (examples:
the  majority  of  the  peoples  of  Europe  and  North  America).

Having  said  this  much,  we  shall  b^gin  the  study  of  ethnic
characters  with  those  which  we  may  consider  the  indispens-
able condition  of  all  associability,  that  is  to  say  the
linguistic  characters.

I. — LINGUISTIC    CHARACTERS.

Without  pursuing  the  inquiry  whether  language  is  born  of
inarticulate  cries,  of  onomatopaeias  or  otherwise,  whether  it
has  a  single  or  a  multiple  origin,  we  may  content  ourselves

'  That  is  to  say,  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  land  animals  (hunting),  or
of  aquatic  (fishing) ;  or  gathering  plants  or  fruits.


LINGUISTIC   CHARACTERS.


139


of  gesture.  G.  Mallery  has  collectcc]  the  treasures  of  this
language,  which  is  being  lost  today,  and  has  drawn  up  a
vocabulary  of  it.^  At  the  period  when  this  language  flourished,
the  Indians  were  able  to  express  by  gestures  not  only  com-
mon and  proper  nouns,  but  also  verbs,  pronouns,  particles,
etc;  they  made  elaborate  speeches  by  combining  the  gestures
of  the  body,  the  head,  and  the  arms.  They  introduced  abbre-
viations exactly  as  that  is  done  in  pictographic  trriling.
Here  is  an  example  of  how  a  Dakota  Indian  (Fig.  26)  says  by


Fio.  a6.— Dakota  Indian  sesliirc  language.     (-*//"■  Afafltyy.)

means  of  gestures,  /  17m  going  home:  he  brings  his  hand  with
the  forefinger  stretched  out  towards  his  breast  (/),  then  ex-
lends  it  forward  and  outward  as  high  as  Ihe  shoulder  {am  going),
and,  closing  the  fisl,  he  lets  it  drop  abruptly  {home).  It  is
supposed  that  extreme  diversity  of  dialects  has  been  the
chief  cause  of  the  development  of  this  strange  sign- language;
it  would  serve  as  a  bond  betivtcn  tribes  which  could  not
converse  with  one  another.

Sfeuh. — Setting  aside  the  almost  unique  example   of  the
North    American    Indians,  gestures    are    generally   only   the

'  G.    Mallcry,    "Sign    Langiia(;p,"    First    Annnal   Ktfcrl    Bnr.   tf
MthmO.,  1879-80,  p.  169      Wuhincton,  1S81,


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.  13 1

tchi  designates  the  person  concerned  with  something,  etc.,  for
instance,  arkantchi,  rope-maker;  the  suffix  fy  indicates  posses-
sion (ex.  arkaniy^  with  a  cord,  attached).  Other  suffixes,  /r/,
lyk,  denote  action,  quality  {arkania,  to  attach  with  a  cord;
arkanlyk,  the  best  kind  of  cord).*

Among  the  agglutinative  languages  we  distinguish  a  special
group  Q2\\t^  poly  synthetic  or  incorporating  languages;  this  group
is  formed  exclusively  of  American  idioms.  It  is  characterised
by  the  phenomenon  of  incorporation,  by  syncope  or  by
ellipsis,  of  nouns  to  the  verb,  so  as  to  form  but  one  word  of
the  whole  proposition ;  for  instance,  in  Algonkin,  the  phrase-
word  nadholiniu^  "  bring  us  the  canoe,"  is  formed  of  the  elided
words  naten  bring,  amochol  canoe,  /  euphonic,  and  niu  to  us.
A  similar  incorporation  takes  place  when  in  Italian  they  say,
for  instance,  dicendo-ci-lo^  "  in  telling  it  to  us."

The  inflectional  languages  differ  from  the  agglutinative  to
this  extent,  that  the  root  may  modify  its  form  to  express
its  relations  with  another  root  But  this  change  is  not  in-
dispensable; sometimes  the  inflection  may  be  attained  by
the  modification  of  prefix  or  suffix.  Thus,  in  Hebrew,  the
root  mlch  gives,  when  modified,  malach  he  reigned,  malchu
they  reigned,  melechu  the  king,  melachim  kings,  etc.

With  the  exception  of  the  Chinese,  the  peoples  of  Indo-
China,  and  the  Thibetans,  who  speak  monosyllabic  languages,
and  also  the  Indo-Europeans  and  the  Semito-Hamites,  who
use  inflectional  languages,  all  the  rest  of  mankind  belongs,  by
its  mode  of  speech,  to  the  division  of  agglutinative  lan-
guage. It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  the  difference
is  very  marked  in  the  three  categories  which  I  have  just
mentioned.  We  have  already  seen,  for  example,  that  the
inflectional  languages,  like  Italian,  may  have  agglutinative
forms;  the  Arab,  the  Frenchman,  the  Provencal  have  also
recourse  occasionally  to  agglutination;  on  the  other  hand,
most  of  the  isolating  languages  of  Indo-China  and  Thibet
exhibit    several    agglutinative    characteristics,   and    even    in

*  See  for  the  details  Fr.  MUller,  Grutidr,  d,  S^achwistenuh,^  vol.  I.,
VieBiM,  1876 ;  Horelaoque,  Lingmaiqui^  Paris,  1877.


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.  I33

Let  us  not  forget  either  that  the  different  sexes  and  certain
castes  or  classes,  especially  of  sorcerers  and  priests,  have
often  a  special  language,  sacred  or  otherwise,  but  always
unknown  to  persons  of  the  other  sex  or  of  other  castes,  and
kept  secret.  Language  varies  also  among  certain  peoples
(for  example,  among  the  Javanese)  according  as  a  superior
speaks  to  an  inferior,  or  vice  versa,

Signa/s, — To  communicate  at  a  distance  relatively  remote,
all  peoples  make  use  of  opiic  or  acoustic  signals.  Optic
signals  are  at  first  amplified  gestures;  thus  the  various
tribes  of  Red  Indians  recognised  each  other  at  a  distance
by  making  conventional  signs  with  the  arms  and  the  body.
x\n  arm  raised  high  with  two  fingers  uplifted  and  the  others
closed,  signified  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  etc.  Signals  by  means
of  lighted  fires,  to  announce  the  tidings  of  a  beast  killed,
the  approach  of  the  enemy,  etc.,  still  remain  in  use  among
the  Indians  of  America,  not  only  in  the  north,  but  also
in  the  south  of  the  continent  as  far  as  Cape  Horn.
Signalling  by  means  of  objects  visible  from  afar,  of  a  more
complicated  kind,  is  in  everyday  use  even  among  civilised
peoples,  forming  the  basis  of  optic  telegraphy;  and  there
exists  for  sailors  of  all  nations  a  truly  international  language,
by  means  of  flags  of  different  colours,  the  code  and  the
dictionary  of  which  are  found  on  board  of  every  ship  bound
on  a  long  voyage.

Among  acoustic  signals^  apart  from  conventional  cries  and
sounds  of  instruments,  we  must  note  two  kinds  of  language
of  a  quite  special  character.  There  is,  firstly,  the  whistle
language^  which  by  means  of  whistles  more  or  less  loud,
succeeding  in  a  certain  order  and  produced  simply  by  the
mouth,  sometimes  by  introducing  into  it  two  fingers,  enables
a  conversation  to  be  held  at  a  distance.

This  language  has  attained  a  high  degree  of  perfection  in

Portuguese,  employed  in  the  ports  of  the  Far  Kast ;  the  '*  wh.ilcrs'  lan-
guage/' a  mixture  of  Hawaiian,  Chinese,  Knglish,  Chukchi,  Japanese,
etc,  which  is  heard  in  the  north  of  the  Pacific  Ocean;  the  Foky-I-oky  of
Uuiana,  etc


LINGUISTIC  CMAkACTEkS.  I3S

the  value  of  diplomatic  documents  to  the  Indians.^  The
staff-messages  in  use  among  the  Melanesians,  the  Niam-Niams,
the  Ashantis,  and  the  peasants  of  Lusatia  and  Silesia,  etc.,
have  the  same  signification.  This  is  often  a  sort  of  passport
or  a  summons ;  the  form  of  the  staff,  as  well  as  the  particular
marks  which  it  bears,  are  so  many  signs  to  make  known  the
commands  of  the  chief,  or  of  the  mayor,  the  order  of  the  day
for  the  assembly,  etc.

The  notches  which  these  staffs  sometimes  bear  form  a  con-
necting link  with  the  mnemonic  marks  which  the  less  civilised
peoples  have  the  habit  of  making  on  trees,  on  bits  of  bark,  or
pieces  of  wood.  It  is  the  first  step  towards  writing  properly
so  called.  Little  horn  tablets  bearing  notches  have  been
found  in  the  sepulchral  caverns  of  the  quaternary  period  at
Aurignac  (Dordogne).  Even  still  the  Eskimo,  the  Yakuts,
the  Ostiaks,  the  Macusis  of  Guiana,  the  Negroes  of  the  west
coast  of  Africa,  the  Laotians,  the  Melanesians,  the  Micro-
nesians,  commonly  make  use  of  them  to  keep  their  accounts,
or  note  simple  facts ;  they  even  continue  in  use  among  Euro-
peans, as  a  survival  of  the  old  practice  under  the  form  of
"  baker's  tallies,"  or  words  to  denote  letters  {Buchstabe^  little
staff  of  "beechwood,"  in  German),  etc.  Here,  for  instance,
is  the  translation  of  what  was  conveyed  by  a  notched  tablet
found  by  Harmand  in  a  I^otian  village  attacked  by  a  cholera
epidemic  (Fig.  27):  Twelve  days  from  now  (12  notches  to  the
right)  every  man  who  shall  venture  to  penetrate  into  our  enclo-
sure will  remain  a  prisoner,  or  pay  us  four  buffaloes  (4  notches
lower  down)  or  twelve  ticals  (pieces  of  money)  as  ransom  (12
notches).  On  the  other  side,  but  doubtful,  is  the  number  of
men  (8),  women  (9),  and  children  (n)  of  the  village.^

An  analogous  mnemotechnical  object  is  the  knotted  cord,

*  See  for  details,  H.  Hale,  "Four  Huron  Wainpum  Records," /wr//.
Anihr,  Inst.^  vol.  xxvi.,  No.  3  ( 1 887),  and  the  interesting  note  of  E.  B.
Tylor  at  the  end  of  this  paper.  Hamy,  Galerie  Anuric,  du  Mus,  Troeadiro^
Paris,  1897,  PI.  I.

•  Harmand,   Mim.    Soc,    An.'Aro,,   Paris,    2nd   scr.,   vol.   ii.,   1875-851


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS.  139

leads  a  certain  road  (ii).  The  petition  is  painted  in
symbolic  colours  (blue  for  water,  white  for  the  road,  elc)
on  a  piece  of  bark.  FJRUte  i  represents  the  principal
petitioning  chief,  the  totem  of  whose  clan  is  an  emblematic
and  ancestral  animal  (see  Chapter  VH.),  the  crane;  the
animals  which  follow  are  the  tolenis  of  his  co -petitioners.
Their  eyes  are  all  connected  with  his  to  express  unity  of
view  (6),  their  hearts  with  his  to  express  unity  of  feeling.
The  eye  of  the  crane,  symbol  of  the  principal  chief,  is  more-
over the  point  of  departure  of  two  lines:  one  directed  towards
the  President  (claim)  and  the  other  towards  the  lakes  (object  of


IO,U.  B.nJ  ^.«kr,        ^WI^'W.     ^««        l!III.UKik

Fit:.  30  — Pelilion  of  Chippeway  Indian!)  10  ihe  Prejideul  of  the  Uuiled
Slates.     Example  of  piclt^iaphy.     (A/lir  Scheeltra/l.)

claim).  In  the  other  pictc^raphs  the  symbolism  is  carried  yet
further  by  the  reproduction  either  of  parts  of  [he  object  for  the
object  itself  (head  or  footmarks  for  the  whole  animal,  etc),  or
by  conventional  objects  for  very  complicated  ideas.  Thus  the
Dakoias  indicate  "a  fight  "  by  the  simple  drawing  of  two  arrows
directed  against  each  other  (Fig.  31,  i);  the  Ojibways  represent
morning  by  the  rising  sun  (2),  "nothing"  by  the  gesture  of  a
man  stretching  out  his  arms  despairingly  (3),  and  "to  eat"  b>
the  gesture  of  the  hand  carried  to  the  mouth  (4),  exactly  as  the
ancient  Mexicans  and  Egyptians  have  drawn  it  in  their  bieio-
ejljrphics,  or  again,  the  natives  of  Easter  Island  (Fig.  31,  5)


LINGUISTIC   CHARACTERS.  I4I

syllable.  This  transformation  may  be  traced  in  the  Egyptian
hieroglyphics  as  well  as  in  the  cuneiform  writing  of  the  ancient
Assyrians.  In  Chinese  writing  the  same  phenomenon  has
taken  place,  as  is  evident  from  Fig.  33,  which  represents  the
ancient  hieroglyphics  side  by  side  with  the  modern — morning,
i;  the  moon,  2;  a  mountain,  3;  tree,  4;  dog,  5;  horse,  6;
man,  7.  These  characters,  though  simplified,  have  kept  their
first  signification  corresponding  to  the  figure.  The  association
of  these  figures  with  the  purely  phonetic  signs  constitutes  one
of  the  principal  resources  of  Chinese  writing,  which  enables
homophonic  words,^  etc.,  to  be  distinguished.

Chinese  characters  have  been  adopted  by  only  one  people
with  an  agglutinative  language,  the  Japanese,  who  along  with

^  n  Uj  *.  :R  1)  A


Fig.  33. — Ancient  Chinese  hieroglyphics  (top  line).
Modern  (bottom  line).

these  characters  {Mana)  use  another  method  of  writing  {Karta)y
which  is  syllabic.  The  Egyptians,  speaking  an  inflectional
language,  had,  on  the  contrary,  to  abandon  hieroglyphic
writing  at   an   early  period  in   order  to  pass  on  to  syllabic

*  The  two  hundred  and  fourteen  *' keys  "or  hieroglyphics  comparable
with  the  hieratic  characters  of  Egypt — that  is  to  say,  ideograms  represent-
ing categories  of  objects  or  symlx)lising  general  ideas — joined  to  a  thousand
phonetic  signs,  suffice  by  their  combinations  to  convey  a  definite  sense  to  the
series  of  homophonous  hieroglyphics  forming  the  forty-four  thousand  char-
acters of  Chinese  handwriting.  Thus  the  word  or  syllable  pa  signifies
Ijanana,  war-chariot,  scar,  cry,  etc.  To  distinguish  the  various  accepta-
tions of  the  word,  there  must  be  joined  to  the  phonetic  sign  pa  (derived
from  a  word  the  proper  sense  of  which  has  long  lieen  obliterated)  the  key
of  plants,  or  that  of  iron,  of  diseases,  of  the  mouth,  according  to  the  sense
which  it  is  desire<l  to  give  to  it.  The  monosyllabic  structure  of  Chinese
lends  itself  admirably  to  this  hieroglyphic  writing.


LINGUISTIC  CHARACTERS  143

The  propagation  of  the  different  methods  of  ancient  and
modem  writing  and  their  adoption  by  different  peoples,  are
closely  bound  up  with  the  religion  and  progress  in  civilisa-
tion of  these  peoples.  Thus  the  Mussulman  world  has
adopted  the  Arabic  writing;  the  Buddhists  of  the  north,
without  distinction  of  race,  hold  in  great  esteem  the  sacred
Thibetan  characters,  whilst  those  of  the  south  venerate  the
Pali  writing.  The  Mongol  and  Manchu  alphabets  are  remains
of  the  Uighuro-Nestorian  influence  and  of  the  Syriac  writing
in  Central  Asia,  as  the  Javanese  alphabet  is  the  remains  of
the  civilising  domination  of  the  Hindus  in  Java.  With  the
expansion  of  European  colonisation  the  characters  of  the  Latin
alphabet  become  more  and  more  prevalent;  in  Europe  even,
they  tend  to  relegate  to  the  second  place  the  other  characters
fgothic,  cyrilic,  etc.).  At  the  same  time,  new  modes  of  writing
are  coming  to  the  front,  the  telegraphic  alphabet,  stenography,
precursors  of  a  writing  of  the  future,  universal,  international,
simple,  and  rapid.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I45

cchinoderms  (sea-urchins),  nay,  even  worms  (large  earth-
worms of  China,  Tonkin,  and  Melanesia),  also  furnish  their
contingent  to  human  gluttony.

The  mineral  kingdom  contributes  only  salt,  which,  however,
is  unknown  to  certain  tribes,  as,  for  example,  the  Veddahs
(Sarazin),  the  Somalis  (Lapicque),  etc.  Besides,  according  to
Bunge,^  peoples  whose  food  is  almost  exclusively  animal  (as  is
the  case  of  the  Veddahs,  Eskimo,  etc.)  never  eat  salt,  while
those  whose  chief  food  is  of  vegetable  origin  experience  an
irresistible  need  for  this  condiment,  probably  because  of  the
insufficiency  of  mineral  substances  in  plants.

Perhaps  also  to  this  need  of  supplying  the  deficiency  of  mineral
substances  (calcareous  or  alkaline  salts)  is  due  the  habit  of
eating  certain  earthy  substances  —  kaolin,  clay,  limestone.
Geophagy  has,  in  fact,  been  observed  in  all  parts  of  the
world :  in  Senegal  (the  earth  called  "  konak "),  in  Persia
(argillaceous  earth  from  Nichapur  and  the  saline  steppes  of
Kirman,  composed  of  carbonate  of  magnesia  and  chalk),^
and  especially  in  the  Asiatic  archipelago,  in  India,  and  South
America.  In  the  markets  of  Java  are  sold  little  squares  or
figures  in  baked  clay  (**ampo*'  in  Javanese)  which  are  much
valued,  especially  by  pregnant  women.'  In  Calcutta  are  sold
similar  products,  and  in  several  towns  of  Peru  hawkers  offer
for  sale  little  figures  in  edible  earth.  The  Indians  of  Bolivia
eat  a  white  clay,  a  kind  of  kaolin  called  "pasa,"*  The  Whites
settled  in  South  America  are  likewise  addicted*  to  geophagy.
Women  assert  that  the  eating  of  earth  gives  a  delicate  com-
plexion to  the  face.  Ihe  same  custom  has  also  been
pointed  out  among  women  m  several  countries  of  Europe,
more  especially  in    Spain,   where  the   sandy  clay  which  is

-  Bunge,  Lthrbuch  phyiioL  Chemie^  2nd  ed.,  p.  no,  Leipzig,  1896.

*  Goebel,  BulL  Ac,  Sc,  St,  PeUrsb.,  vol.  v.  (1861),  p.  397,  and  Schmidt,
ibid,,  vol.  xvL  ( 1 871),  p.  203.

'  Wilken,  Vergelijk,  Volkenk,  v.  Ned  hid,,  p.  89,  Ley  den,  1893;
Sciemm  Nature t  Paris,  18S5,  ist  half-year,  p.  393.

^  T.  Gftutier,  "Sur  une  certaine  argile  blanche,  etc.,"  Actes  de  la  S§e,
SeiiHt.  dm  Ckiii^  vol.  v.  (1895),  pt.  i  to  3,  Santiago,  189^.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I47

incorrigible  cannibals.  We  can  speak  less  confidently  as  to
the  other  inhabitants  of  Oceania.  Dyaks,  Fijians,  New  Cale-
donians, Karons  of  New  Guinea,  seem  to  have  abandoned
cannibalism.  In  South  America  positive  facts  abound  con-
cerning the  anthropophagy  of  the  Arovaques  and  certain
Indians  of  Columbia,  the  Botocudos  and  some  other  Brazilian
tribes;  but  for  the  rest  of  the  continent  they  resolve  them-
selves into  the  statements  of  ancient  travellers  or  to  the  report
of  survivals.  On  the  other  hand,  Central  Africa  appears  to  be
the  chief  seat  of  anthropophagy.  It  is  of  frequent  occurrence
among  the  Niam-Niams,  the  Monbuttus,  the  Bandziris,  and
other  tribes  of  the  River  Ubangi,  as  well  as  among  the  tribes
of  the  Congo  basin,  the  Basangos,  the  Man3ruema,  the  tribes
of  Kassai,  etc.  We  have  likewise  genuine  proofs  enough  for  the
Fans  of  French  Congo  and  certain  tribes  of  the  Benguelas.  In
general,  cannibalism  appears  to  be  unknown  in  Africa  beyond
the  tenth  degree  of  latitude  to  the  north  and  south  of  the
Equator.

Cannibalism  is  practised  for  three  reasons :  necessity,
gluttony,  superstition.

Necessary  Anthropophagy  may  take  place  in  consequence  of
the  want  of  animal  food,  as  in  Australia,  or  in  consequence
of  accidental  circumstances  (shipwreck,  famine),  as  it  may
occur  even  among  civilised  peoples;  but  this  kind  of
cannibalism  is  as  rare  as  that  which  is  attributable  to  gluttony.
It  is  said,  however,  that  the  Melanesians  of  the  Solomon
Islands,  the  New  Hebrides,  and  New  Britain  hunt  man
merely  to  satisfy  their  taste  for  human  flesh.  The  Niam-
Niams  pursue  the  same  kind  of  sport  not  only  for  the
flesh,  but  for  the  human  fat  which  they  utilise  for  lighting
purposes.  Various  tribes  of  the  Ubangi  buy  slaves  or  capture
men  separated  from  their  fellows  in  order  to  fatten  them  up
and  eat  them  afterwards;  sometimes,  to  improve  the  flavour
of  this  kind  of  meat,  the  carcasses  are  left  to  soak  in  water :
similar  fects  have  been  observed  among  the  Manyuema.
However  that  may  be,  the  majority  of  cases  of  cannibalism  may
be  esqdained  by  superstitious  beliefs.     There  i&  es^ecoSX^  ^


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  1 49

almost  half  civilised;  one  has  a  well-developed  method  of
writing  and  a  style  of  ornament,  the  others  have  a  fairly  ad-
vanced social  organisation.  As  a  survival,  anthropophagy
manifests  itself  not  only  in  the  practice  of  cutting  off  the  heads
(I)yaks)  in  human  sacrifices,  but  also  in  a  multitude  of
religious  or  superstitious  practices  among  a  great  number  of
even  civilised  peoples.  The  belief  in  the  supposed  curative
properties  of  human  flesh,  especially  that  of  executed  criminals,
is  still  in  full  force  in  China,^  and  was  so  in  Europe  in  ancient
times  and  in  the  Middle  Ages;  the  Salic  law  forbade  the  magical
practices  associated  with  anthropophagy.  To  drink  from  the
skull  of  an  enemy  was  a  very  widespread  custom  in  Asia  and
Europe,  and  even  until  the  beginning  of  this  century  the
remains  of  the  skull  of  a  hanged  criminal  figured  among  the
remedies  in  the  pharmacopoeias  of  Central  Europe.

Preparation  of  Foods. — There  is  no  people  on  earth  which
eats  all  its  food  quite  raw,  without  having  subjected  it  to  pre-
vious preparation.  Some  few  northern  tribes,  the  Eskimo,
the  Chukchi,  eat,  it  is  true,  reindeer's  flesh  and  fish  quite
raw,  but  they  cut  these  up,  prepare  dried  provisions  from  them,
and  moreover  they  cook  their  vegetable  food.

Food  is  prepared  by  cutting  it  into  pieces,  subjecting  it  to  a
fermentation,  moistening  it,  triturating  it,  and  especially  by
exposing  it  to  the  action  of  fire.

No  tribe  exists,  even  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale  of  civilisation,
which  is  not  to-day  acquainted  with  the  use  of  fire,  and  as  far
back  as  we  can  go  into  prehistoric  times  we  find  material  traces
of  the  employment  of  fire  (cinders,  charcoal,  pieces  of  worn-out
pyrites,  cracked  flint,  etc.).  However,  the  preservation  of
fire  produced  by  the  natural  forces  (conflagrations,  lightning,
volcanoes,  etc.)  must  have  preceded  the  production  of  fire
(Broca,  Von  den  Steinen).  Most  of  the  forces  of  nature  trans-
formable into  heat — light,  electricity,  motion,  and  chemical
aflftnity — have  been  turned  to  account  by  man  in  the  production
of  fire  with  more  or  less  success.     Kindling  flame  by  concentrat-

*  Scblegelf  **  Ftttgabe  fiastians "   (suppl.  No.  to  vol.  ix.  of  Intiniaf,
Ankw.  fur  Ethnogr,^  1896).


ISO


THE  RACES  OF  MAN.


ing  the  solar  light  with  bi-convex  glasses  and  mirrors,  mentioned
from  the  remotest  antiquity,  could  never  have  become  general.
It  is  the  same  with  electricity.  On  the  other  hand,  motion  and
chemical  affinity  have  been  at  all  times,  and  still  are,  pre-
eminently the  two  productive  forces  of  fire.  Motion  is  utilised
in  three  different  ways :  by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of  wood,
by  the  striking  together  of  two  pieces  of  certain  mineral  sub-
stances, or  by  pneumatic  compression.  The  last  method  is
little  used ;  it  has  been  observed  among  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo
and  in  Burma.  It  is  based  on  the  principle  of  the  pneumatic
tinder-box  of  our  scientific  demonstration  rooms.     But  the  two

other  modes  of  utilising
motion  are  still  in  general
use  among  all  savage
peoples.^

A  little  red-hot  ember
capable  of  setting  fire  to
certain  substances  (tinder,
down,  dry  grass,  etc.)  may
be  obtained  either  by
rubbing  together  two  pieces
of  wood,  or  by  sawing
one  across  the  other,  or  by
turning  the  'end  of  one  in  a
little  hole  made  in  the  other.
Hence,  three  ways  of  making  fire  by  friction,  each  having  a
well-defined  geographical  area.  The  first  way  (simple  rubbing),
the  most  primitive  and  the  least  easy,  is  employed  especially  in
Oceania.  It  consists  in  rubbing  a  little  stick  of  hard  wood,
bending  it  downward,  against  a  log  of  soft  wood  held  between
the  knees  (Fig.  34).  A  little  channel  is  thus  hollowed  out  of
the  log,  and  in  the  end  the  operator  succeeds  in  obtaining
incandescent  particles  of  pulverised  wood,  which  gather  at  the
bottom  of  the  channel.  He  has  only  to  throw  in  a  little  dry
grass  or  tinder  and  to  blow  upon  it  to  obtain  the  flame.

'  W.   Hough,   "The  Methods  of  Fire-making,"   J^epori  of  the   C/.S.
A^ational  Museum  for  iSgOt  ^,  ^S'     Washington,  189 1.


Fig.  34. — Method  of  fire-making  by
rubbing.    [After  Hough.)


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.


151


The  sawing  method  (Fig.  35)  is  employed  by  the  Malays  and
by  some  Australian  tribes,  as  well  as  in  Burma  and  India.  A
piece  of  bamboo  split  longitudinally  is  sawn  with  the  cutting
edge  of  another  piece  of  bamboo  until  the  sawdust  becomes
hot  and  sets  fire  to  the  tinder  on  which  it  falls.


Fig.  35- — Mclhod  of  fire-miliing  by  sawing.    {A/itr  Hau^k.)


The  twirling  or  rolalory  method  (Fig.  36),  which  consists
in  turning  the  end  of  a  fragment  of  wood  supported  on  the
surface  of  another  fragment,  is  the
most  generally  used.  It  is  met
with  among  Negroes,  the  Indians
of  North  and  South  America,  the
Chukchi,  in  certain  regions  of
India,  etc.  The  most  primitive
apparatus  consists  of  a  log  or  board
of  soft  wood,  held  horizontally  with
the  feet,  on  which  is  placed  the  blunted
point  of  a  cylindrical  stick  of  hard
wood.      Twirling    the    stick    rapidly

between  the  bands  in  both  directions,  Fio.  36.— Method  of  fire-
a  little  hole  is  hollowed  and  the  dust  making  by  twirling  among
of  the  wood  which  gathers  around  the  "■*  ^"'^"-  '-^^'""  "''**'■'
point  becomes  incandescent  It  is  thus  that  some  tribes  of
Zulus  and  of  Australians,  the  Ainus,  etc.,  make  fire.

But   to  tbis  primitive  apparatus  important    improvements

are   made   among  other    populations,    especially  among   tb"

a  and  the  Eskimo.     The  hole  in  a  hoiisontal  b


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I  S3

The  long  and  difficult  processes  of  obtaining  fire  compel
savage  tribes  to  preserve  it  as  one  of  the  most  precious  things.
Almost  everywhere  it  is  to  women  that  the  care  is  committed.
Among  the  Australians,  women  who  let  the  fire  go  out  are
punished  almost  as  severely  as  were  the  Roman  vestals  of  old.
The  Papuans  of  Astrolabe  Bay  (New  Guinea)  prefer  to  go
several  leagues  in  search  of  fire  to  a  neighbouring  tribe  than  to
light  another  (Miklukho-Maclay).  The  preparation  of  "new
fire"  among  a  great  number  of  tribes,  especially  in  America
and  Oceania,  is  celebrated  with  festivals  and  religious  cere-
monies.^

Cooking. — Fire,  once  discovered,  heat,  light,  and  at  the  same
time  the  means  of  rendering  a  great  variety  of  foods  more
digestible,  were  artificially  assured  to  man.  But  it  is  some-
what difficult  to  roast  a  piece  of  meat  in  the  fire,  especially
when  there  is  not  a  'metal  skewer  at  hand,  as  was  the  case  with
primitive  man.  So,  at  an  early  stage,  he  tried  to  find  some
method  of  cooking  his  food,  especially  fruits.  He  heated
stones  in  the  open  fire,  and  with  these  stones  he  cooked  his
meat  and  vegetables.  The  process  is  still  in  use  to-day  among
tribes  unacquainted  with  pottery.  Thus  the  Polynesians  before
their  "  civilisation  "  by  Europeans  proceeded  in  the  following
way  to  cook  their  food.  Stones  heated  in  the  fire  were  put  at
the  bottom  of  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground;  upon  these  stones  was
spread  a  layer  of  leaves,  on  which  were  placed  the  fruit  of  the
bread-tree,  then  a  fresh  layer  of  leaver  and  other  heated  stones;
care  being  taken  to  cover  the  whole  with  leaves  and  earth.  In
half-an-hour  a  delicious  dish  was  drawn  out  of  the  hole.^

Among  most  savage  Indonesians  food  is  cooked  in  bamboo
vessels  filled  with  water,  in  which  heated  stones  have  been
previously  plunged.  This  method  of  cooking  with  stones  is
also  in  use  at  the  two  extreme  points  of  America,  among  the

*  A  certain  moderation  must  nevertheless  be  observed  in  the  explanation
of  myths  and  practices  in  which  fire  is  concerned.  See  on  this  subject  an
intelligent  though  somewhat  exaggerated  critique  by  £.  Veckenstedt,
"Das  wilde,  heilige  und  Gcbrauchsfeuer,"  Zeitschr,  jur  Nafurwiss.y  vol.

IxvL,  p.  191.  Leipzig,  1893.
'  O.  Mason,  Origins  0/  Inwtif ion,  p.  158,  London,  1895.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  169

the  fire  as  the  end  is  consumed.  Hie  smoke  issues  by  the
open  extremity  of  the  hut  The  Altaians,  the  Kamtchadales,
the  Tunguses,  the  Kalmuks,  arc  content  with  a  similar  fire
kept  in  the  middle  of  the  tent  or  wooden  house  (Figs.  44
and-  45).  Among  the  Russian  peasants  one  may  meet  witli
houses,  '*koomaia  izba,"  having  a  stove,  but  not  a  chimney;
the  smoke  issues  by  the  windows  and  by  an  orifice  in  the
•roof.  In  Corea  the  smoke  of  the  stove  is  carried  under  the
planks;  in  China  under  a  sort  of  clay  bed  (Rang).  The
mantelpiece,  raised  above  the  hearth,  appears  to  be  a  Euro-
pean invention  which  preceded  that  of  the  true  chimney,
which  latter  appeared  in  the  eleventh  century.  Among  the
Eskimo  the  seal  oil,  which  burns  in  great  lamps  of  earth
dried  in  the  sun,  serves  to  give  warmth  and  light  at  the  same
time.

Very  finely  made  lamps  have  been  described  as  existing
among  the  Indians  of  North  America.  The  Polynesians  burn
coco-nut  oil  in  a  half  of  the  shell  of  the  coco-nut  itself,  using
the  fibres  which  cover  the  fruit  by  way  of  wick.  In  Egypt,  in
Babylon,  in  Europe,  lamps  have  been  known  from  the  earliest
times ^  But  most  primitive  peoples  are  still  content  to  burn
fat  pine-knots  or  resinous  torches  for  lighting  pur{)oses.  The
Mois-Lays  of  French  Indo-China  obtain  light  by  means  of
little  pieces  of  fir-wood  burning  aloft  on  a  chandelier  formed  of
a  double  metal  fork.^  This  description  may  be  applied  word
for  word  to  the  "loocheena"  of  the  Russian  peasants,  the  use  of
which  has  not  disappeared  at  the  present  time.  Moreover,
the  torch  was  much  used  in  the  whole  of  Europe  side  by  side
with  closed  and  open  lamps  before  the  invention  of  the  candle,
the  light  of  which  grows  dim  to-day  before  the  petroleum  lamp
even  in  China  and  Turkestan,  and  before  the  electric  light
among  us.

'  It  is  |>assible  that  in  Western  Kurope  a  haid  leaf  of  M>iiie  plant  ff.Ideti
in  a  certain  way  has  scrvcil  as  a  uKMlel  for  the  lamps  with  uick.>  railed
Roman,  to  jodge  from  certain  actual  forms. — Letourneau  and  Papillault,
BmiL  So€.  Amikr.  Paris,  1896,  p.  348.     Vinchon,  ibid.,  p.  615.

*  Neb,  Extmrsionset  Reconttaissatices,  Saigon,  vol.  x  ,  p.  33,  1881.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  1 73

shock  to  modesty;  that  a  European  woman  could  never
uncover  her  breast  in  the  street  and  does  it  in  a  ball-
room, etc.

Starting  from  the  primordial  nudity  of  mankind,  we  are  led
to  inquire  what  was  the  motive  which  prompted  men  to  clothe
themselves.  In  countries  with  a  rigorous  climate  it  was  the
necessity  of  protecting  themselves  from  cold  and  damp,
but  in  the  other  parts  of  the  world  this  has  not  been  the  case.
The  sentiment  of  vanity,  the  desire  of  being  different  from
others,  of  pleasing,  of  inspiring  with  horror,  begot  ornaments
which  became  transformed  little  by  little  into  dress.

Adornment  of  the  Body. — Strange  as  it  may  appear  at  the
outset,  the  fact  that  ornament  preceded  dress  is  well  established
in  ethnography.  It  is,  moreover,  often  difficult  to  draw  the
boundary-line  between  the  two.  Thus  the  first  and  most
primitive  made  of  personal  adornment  is  certainly  that  in  which
the  body  itself  is  adorned  without  the  putting  on  of  any
extraneous  objects  whatsoever.  And  the  most  simple  of  these
primitive  adornments,  the  daubing  of  the  body  with  colouring
matter,  may  also  be  considered  as  one  of  the  first  garments.
Almost  all  peoples  who  go  naked  practise  this  mode  of  adorn-
ment (Figs.  59  and  124),  but  it  is  held  in  special  esteem  on
the  American  continent.  The  colours  most  used  are  red,
yellow,  white,  and  black,  yielded  by  such  substances  as  ochre,
the  juice  of  certain  plants,  chalk,  lime,  and  charcoal.  Certain
tribes  of  the  Amazon  basin  fix  a  covering  of  feathers  on  their
body,  daubed  with  a  sticky  substance.  The  painting  of  the
face  (Figs.  158  and  159)  is  colouring  only  of  a  modified  form.
Thibetan  women  coat  their  face  over  with  a  thick  layer  of
paste  or  starch,  which  with  a  refinement  of  coquetry  they
inlay  with  certain  seeds  arranged  so  as  to  form  designs  more
or  less  artistic,  without  interfering  with  the  red  spots  on  the
cheeks  made  with  the  juice  of  certain  berries.  Chinese  women
only  put  a  thin  coating  of  rice-starch  without  seeds,  and  the
Javanese  women,  like  our  ladies  of  fashion,  arc  content  with
rice  powder.  The  red  spots  on  the  cheeks  of  Mongolian  and
Thibetan  women  are  the  prototyi>es  of  the  paint  which  spoils


/


i^  i


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  17S

principal  cat^ories:  tatlooingby  indsion,  Jn  which  the  design
is  produced  by  a  series  of  scars  or  gashes,  and  taltooing  by
puncture,  in  which  the  design  is
formed  by  the  introduction  under
the  skin  of  a  black  powder  by
means  of  a  needle.  The  first
method  is  practised  by  dark-
■'.'  \.  \  skinned  peoples,  Negroes,  Me-
/  ^■■■'    ^^     lanesians,  Australians  (Figs,  14,

/        ?jMb       ■J^^W   ^^  incision   having  injured  the
I  ^t^ff^^r       non- pigmented  dermic  layer  the

scars  are  less  coloured  than  the
surrounding  skin.     Tattooing  by
puncture  is  only  possible  among
clear-skinned  peoples;  among  the
Fio.  sa— Foot  of  Chinese  woman  htter  may  be  instanced  the  New
.Hificially  deformed.    {AjUr  gealandcrs.  the  Dyaks,  and  the
Laotians,  called  "green-bellies.
In  the  case  of  a  great  number  of  peoples,   tattooing  is  re-
stricted to  one  sex  only,  chiefly
to  women  (Ainus,  Fig.  49,  Chuk-
chi), or  else  to  certain  categories
of  persons  (postilions  and  drawers
of  carriages   in    Japan;    sailors,
criminals,     and      prostitutes      in
Europe).

Tattooing  may  be  already  con-
sidered as  an  elk>iic  mutilation;
but  there  exist  many  others  of  a
less  anodyne  character  which  are
also  connected  with  ornamenta-
tion. Chinese  women  deform
their  feet  by  means  of  tight
bandages,  and  end  by  transform-
ing them  into  horrible  stumps  Fjn.  si.-Skc!«ion  of  the  fool
(Figs.    50  and   51),    which   only  repicst:nied  io  Fie- 50,  wiih

oailine  of  shoe.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  iSl

recognised:  garlands,  collars,  belts  (Fig.  47),  and  bracelets  (on
the  arras  and  legs).  To  these  simple  bands  men  began  at
first  to  attach  all  sorts  of  secondary  ornaments :  bright  shells
(frontispiece  and  Figs.  53  and  151),  seeds  and  gay-coloured
^insects,  beads  of  bone  and  shellfish  (Figs.  151,  159,  and  160),
claws  of  wild  beasts,  teeth  and  knuckle  bones  of  animals
and  human  beings  (Figs.  158  and  159),  bristles  and  hoofs  of
the  Suidas,  pieces  of  fur,  feathers  of  birds,  leaves  and  flowers.
And  it  is  to  these  superadded  ornaments  that  we  may  trace  the
origin  of  the  garment  proper.  The  thong  of  the  head,  over
and  above  its  utilitarian  purpose  as  a  quiver  (the  Bushmen  push
their  arrows  into  it),  becomes  transformed  into  the  crown  of
feathers  so  well  known  among  the  American  Indians  and
Melanesians  (Fig.  53),  into  a  wreath  of  flowers  among  the
Polynesians,  into  all  kinds  of  head-covering  among  other  tribes
(Figs.  22,  40,  107,  108,  109,  115,  134,  145,  etc.).

To  the  thong  of  the  neck  or  collar  may  be  suspended  a
beast's  skin,  and  you  have  it  then  transformed  into  a  mantle.
Among  the  Fuegians  this  piece  of  skin  is  s.o  scanty  that  they
are  obliged  to  turn  it  about  according  to  the  direction  of  the
wind  in  order  to  protect  the  body  effectually  (Fig.  48).  The
thong  of  the  waist,  the  girdle,  was  likewise  laden  with  different
appendages,  and  became  transformed  into  a  skirt.  The  leafy
branches  which  the  Veddahs  push  under  their  lx;lt,  the  pie<:e»
of  bark  upheld  by  the  belt  among  the  Niam-Niams,  the
Indo-Malayan  "sarong"  (Figs.  126  and  146),  whirh  com-
bines the  functions  of  a  skirt  and  a  Ixrlt,—  thevc  are  all
merely  the  prototype  of  the  skirt.

Space  fails  us  to  show  in  detail  how  the  other  ornament h  and
garments  have  sprung  from  the^'  humble  UrginningH.  How
from  the  bracelet  proceeded  th<:  ring ;  how  the  %ioty:,  the
twisted  toothy  the  perforated  •^hcll  ^Fig^.  53  and  tf^if  rtr\AiU^ui
the  thongs  in  this  class  of  ornamc-nt ;  how,  wUt.u  on**:  m^rtiiU
became  known,  gold  and  silver  plates  hollow  and  v/Hd  ring*
in  gdd,  silver,  copper,  or  iron  fl-\^%,  112  unA  15/$;,  Uatf
wire  rolled  scnreral  time>  around  the  nn^k  stnd  th^  limlidy
weie  substituted  kn  thong)i  tA  %kfn,  f/lades  of  graM,  and


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  1 83

trees,  almost  in  its  natural  state  or  scarcely  beaten,  is  employed
as  a  garment  by  the  Monbuttus,  the  Niam-Niams,  the  tribes
of  the  Uganda,  and  is  characteristic  of  Zandeh  peoples  in
general;  this  kind  of  garment  is  also  found  in  America  (among
the  Warraus  of  Guiana  and  the  Andesic  tribes).  In  Oceania
the  preparation  of  stuffs  from  the  beaten  bark  of  paper  mul-
berry {Brusonnelia  papyriferd)  has  attained  a  high  degree  of
perfection,  and  the  "Tapa"  of  Tahiti  with  its  coloured  and
printed  patterns,  the  "Kapa"  of  Hawaii,  might  enter  into
competition  with  woven  stuffs.^

The  latter  have  been  known  since  remote  antiquity.  Woven
stuffs  are  found  in  the  pile-dwellings  of  the  bronze  age  in
Europe  and  in  the  pyramids  of  Egypt.  But  it  seems  that  the
plaiting  of  vegetable  fibres  and  grasses,  as  it  is  still  practised
to-day  with  esparto  grass,  must  have  preceded  true  weaving.
The  Polynesians  still  manufiactured,  at  the  beginning  of  this
century,  robes  plaited  with  the  stems  of  certain  grasses,  and
plaited  straw  hats  are  made  by  Malays,  Indians  of  North-west
America,  etc.  On  the  whole,  weaving  is  only  plaiting  of  a  finer
substance,  yarn,  which  itself  is  only  very  thin  cord  or  twine.
The  process  of  spinning  cord  or  thread  is  always  the  same.
In  its  most  primitive  form  it  consists  simply  in  rolling
between  the  palms  of  both  hands,  or  with  one  hand  on  the
thigh,  the  fibres  of  some  textile  substance.  This  is  how  the
Australian  proceeds  to  make  a  line  with  his  wife's  hair,  or
the  New  Zealander  when  he  transforms  a  handful  of  native  flax,
inch  by  inch,  into  a  perfect  cord.  The  Australian  had  only  to
transform  into  a  spindle  the  little  staff  with  two  cross-pieces,  on
which  he  rolls  up  his  precious  line,  to  effect  a  great  improvement
in  his  art'^  In  fact,  the  spindle  is  a  device  so  well  adapted
for  its  purpose  that  it  has  come  down  from  the  most  remote
Egyptian  antiquity  into  our  steam  spinning  factories  almost  with-
out alteration  in  form.  Primitive  weaving  must  have  been  done
at  first  with  the  needle,  like  tapestry  or  modern  embroidery,

'  See  for  details  W.   Brighani,  **  Hawaiian  Kapa-making,"  Hawaiian
Alman.  and  Annual^  p.  76.     Honolulu,  1896.
•  Tyler,  Anthropology^  p.  246.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.


l8S


smiths  (Fig.  135),  though  otherwise  less  advanced  than  certain
peoples  unacquainted
with  metals,  like  the
New  Zealanders  or  the
Incas  of  Peru,  for  ex-
ample (before  the  ar-
rival of  the  Europeans).
We  cannot  dwell  on
the  methods  of  working
each  of  the  materials
from  which  tools  may
be  made.  It  is  enough
to  say  that  there  are
two  principal  methods
of  working  stone — cut-
ting and  polishing.  The
chips  are  removed  from
a  stone  either  by  percus-
sion with  another  stone
(Fig.  54),  or  by  pressure
with  the  end  of  a  bone  or  piece  of  pointed  wood  (Fig.  55).     It


Fig.  54.— Method  of  making  stone  tools  by
percussion;  the  first  blow.    {After  Holmes. )


Fig.  55. — Method  of  flaking  stone  by  pressure;  the  splinter  (0
is  severed  by  outside  pressure  on  the  stone  with  a  pointed
bone  (a).    {After  Holmes,)


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.         18^

In  the  early  stages  of  material  progress  the  objects  manu-
factured were  not  differentiated;  the  weapon  of  to-day  became
the  tool  of  to-morrow,  the  agricultural  implement  of  the  day
after.  However,  there  are  savages  who  have  sometimes
special  instruments  for  cutting  or  chopping  (axes,  knives,  saws
of  stone  or  shell),  saws  for  scraping  or  planing  (scrapers  and
raspers  of  stone,  bone,  shell,  etc.),  for  piercing  (awls  of  bone
or  hom,  stone  bits),  for  hammering  and  driving  in  (stone
hammers),  etc.  As  to  the  fastenings  which  keep  together
the  different  parts  of  the  tools,  these  are  chiefly  bands  (sinews,
strips  of  hide  or  bark,  plaited  or  spun  cords)  and  the  sticky
preparations  of  various  gums  and  resins.  An  axe  or  a  knife
is  fixed  to  its  handle  by  means  of  cords  of  plaited  coco-nut
fibres  in  Polynesia  (Fig.  71)  and  very  rarely  among  Negroes
(Fig.  74),  by  resin  in  Australia  and  among  the  Hupa  Indians  of
the  Oregon  (Fig.  56),  and  by  sinews  or  strips  of  sealskin  among
the  Chukchi  and  the  Indians  of  CaHfornia  (Fig.  73).

The  invention  of  primjtive  ''machines"  followed  that  of
tools.  Alternate  rotatory  motion  must  have  been  utilised  in
the  first  instance  as  being  the  easiest  to  obtain.  Example:
the  flint-pointed  drill  of  the  Indians  of  the  north-west  of  America,
the  apparatus  for  making  fire  (see  P'ig.  36),  or  the  turning-
lathe  of  the  Kalmuks  (Fig.  57),  the  Egyptians  and  the
Hindus,  moved  by  the  palms  of  the  hand  at  first,  with  a  cord
afterwards,  and  later  again  with  a  bow.^  The  transformation
of  this  alternating  motion  into  a  continuous  circular  one  must
probably  have  resulted  from  the  use  of  the  spindle  furnished
with  its  wheel.  In  this  instrument,  so  simple  in  appearance,
is  found  the  first  application  of  the  important  discovery  that
rotatory  movement  once  produced  may  be  maintained  during
a  certain  time  by  a  heavy  weight  performing  the  function  of  a
fly-wheel.

The  potter's  wheel  (p.  55)  is  a  second  application  of  the
same  principle;  rollers  for  the  conveyance  of  heavy  objects  are
a  third  (see  Chap.  VII.,  Transports).     The  screw  and  the  nut

*  Retileaux,  Hist,  du  cUvtlopp,  da  machines  dans  Chumat^f^
from  the  German),  Paris,  1876  (extr.  from  the  seclion  ''


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  1 89

man  was  obliged  to  hunt  without  weapons,  as  certain  tribes
still  sometimes  do.  On  dark  nights,  when  the  cormorants  arc
asleep,  the  Fuegian  hunter,  hanging  by  a  thong  of  seal-skin,
glides  along  the  cliffs,  holding  on  to  jutting  points  of  rock;
when  near  a  bird  he  seizes  it  with  both  hands  and  cruslies  its
head  between  his  teeth,  without  giving  it  time  to  utter  a  cry  or
make  a  movement.  He  then  passes  on  to  another,  and  so
continues  until  some  noise  puts  the  cormorants  to  fligiit.

But  more  frequently  the  inventive  faculty  is  brought  into
play  to  construct  all  kinds  of  weapons  for  facilitating  tlic  cap-
ture of  prey.  As  most  of  these  contrivances  are  at  the  same
time  weapons  of  war,  we  shall  glance  at  them  in  Chapter  VIL
Moreover,  the  multiplicity  of  weapons  has  not  previ-nted
primitive  man  from  using  all  sorts  of  stratagems  for  capturing
animals.  Any  one  who  has  dipped  into  the  old  books  on
venery,  or  even  into  catalogues  of  modern  gunsmiths,  is  ahle  to
realise  this,  for  most  of  the  traps,  snares,  and  pitfalls  represented
are  also  found  among  savages.  I'ow-tra{)S  are  espet  ially
favoured,  but  the  springe  forbirdsand  the  pitfallsfor  large  aniinals
are  not  despised.  To  these  we  may  add  the  us^;  of  bait,  poison-
ing, the  smoking  of  \yees  in  order  to  take  thr;ir  honey,  the
imitation  of  the  song  of  birds  to  allure  them  to  the  gin,  di<igni';e
by  means  of  the  skin  of  a  beast  the  U.-tter  to  apj^roa/li  it,  and
the  artifices  devised  by  man  in  his  war  with  anirn.ils  are  not  yet
exhausted.  There  is  still  the  most  trea^: herons  of  ;ill ;  having
d^raded  certain  animals  by  don  jest  irat  ion  /f;ilron,  tUiy,
cat,  etc.),  man  makes  them  hiint  their  nntarri'/i  kind  /<;«■/:
Domestication),

In  fishing  there  is  the  same  di  .play  of  arflfi//:.  '\  \\t  nimpi/-
gathering  of  shells,  sea-ur«'-hin',,  arid  tu  .f:i/'ar»^  ;if  |/,w  ti/I/-,
mostly  left  to  the  women,  S'ipfi!':rfj' rif.-,  bjf  lift!'-  tl,i  u^r.x^,•^  t,\
subsistence  of  fishin:^  jVip-iI;j':or. ..  'f  f.'  \>m\V  of  f»;f,  u\A
animals  of  aquati'':  fiaMf-*  are  f.i>'o  oy  u\*'tu\  f,(  -.*ti* :»},]*•
weapons,  and  still  mop;  of'er*  '^y  rr^*■.:^r^'i  of  -^'p".,  *'  \r<,  jr'M^/r»'d
waters,  etc.

The  weapons  mr/^t  •;>■;  .r,  f.  ..in:^  are  piit' >  w;»h  on*-  or
seveial  teeth  (trident*,  fi^'r* -.p^ari;.  tUul  the   \U\jir»^-^i,^n\  th»*:


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I9I

Eskimo  make  use  of  instruments  to  hurl  them  (see  Chap.  VII.).
In  many  harpoons  the  head  is  only  fitted  to  the  shaft  and
attached  to  it  by  a  long  cord;  immediately  the  animal  is
wounded  the  shaft  separates  itself  from  the  head  and  acts  as  a
float,  indicating  the  spot  where  the  victim  has  plunged,  for  it
will  not  be  long  before  he  comes  again  to  the  surface  to  breathe,
and  other  wounds  are  then  inflicted.  The  Eskimo  of  Asia
and  the  Chukchi  also  attach  bladders  to  the  shaft  as  floats.
But  all  these  weapons  are  chiefly  employed  against  marine
mammals  (seals,  sea-lions,  walruses,  whales,  etc.);  for  catching
fish  recourse  is  liad  to  other  means.  Poisoning  the  water
appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  primitive.  It  is  constantly
practised  by  Australians,  Indonesians,  and  Melanesians.  We
have  next  to  refer  to  the  various  devices  for  catching  fish,
which,  according  to  O.  Mason,  may  be  grouped  into  two  cate-
gories— (i)  those  intended  to  bring  the  fish,  quietly  following
its  way,  into  a  place  or  trap  from  which  it  cannot  afterwards
get  out,  and  (2)  those  which  consist  in  getting  it  to  swallow  a
hook  hidden  under  some  form  of  bait.

Among  the  former  of  these  devices,  bow-nets  and  sweep-
nets  in  bamboo  and  rattan  are  ver)'  widely  used  among  the
Dyaks,  Micronesians,  etc  Cast-nets  are  less  common  among
uncivilised  peoples ;  they  are  met  with,  however,  in  Polynesia.
Fish-hooks  other  than  those  in  metal  are  made  of  bone,  the
thorns  of  certain  trees,  of  wood,  and  especially  of  mother-of-
pearL     Yor fishing-boats,  see  Chapter  \\\.  {Xiuigation).

Agriculture. — It  is  constantly  stated  that  man  has  passed
successively  through  three  stages — that  in  the  first  he  was  a
hunter,  in  the  second  a  nomadic  shepherd,  and  in  the  third  a
tiller  of  the  soil.  This  is  only  true  if  we  consider  agriculture  as
it  is  understood  at  the  present  day  in  Europe,  that  is  to  say  as
closely  connected  with  the  existence  of  certain  domestic  animals
(horses,  oxen,  etc.)  which  supply  man  with  motive  power  and
at  the  same  time  with  manure.  Rut  there  are  numerous
peoples,  without  these  domestic  animals,  who  nevertheless  are
acquainted  with  agriculture,  only  it  is  a  special  kind  of  agri-
culture which  is  related  rather  to  our  ornamental  and  maikd


192  THE   RACES  OF   MAN.

gardening,  at  least  by  the  method  of  cultivation.^  Hahn  has
proposed  to  call  this  species  of  cultivation  after  the  principal,
and  almost  the  only,  tool  which  is  used — "Hoe-culture"
(Hackbau  in  German);  while  cultivation  by  means  of  a  plough
drawn  by  animals  might  be  called  true  agriculture  (Ackerbau).

It  is  evident  that  in  the  development  of  mankind  the  most
primitive  hoe-culture,  such  as  is  practised  by  certain  tribes  of
Africa  and  South  America,  may  well  have  sprung  from  the
gathering  of  plants  and  roots.  The  Australians,  the  Papuans
(Fig.  152),  and  the  Indians  of  California  even  yet  make  use  of
pointed  staves,  hardened  in  the  fire,  to  unearth  natural  roots ;
certain  Negroes  and  Bushmen  join  to  the  staff  a  stone  whorl
which  makes  the  work  easier.  These  '*  digging  sticks  "  are  the
first  agricultural  implements ;  they  perhaps  preceded  the  hoe.
The  habit  that  many  Australian  tribes  have  of  returning
periodically  to  the  same  places  for  the  gathering  of  fruits  and
roots,  giving  these  time  to  grow,  is  one  of  the  first  steps  towards
the  cultivation  of  the  ground;  it  proves  a  comprehension  of  the
development  of  a  plant  from  a  sown  seed.  Hoe  culture
prevails  at  the  present  time  in  vast  regions  of  tropical  Africa
and  in  South  America.  The  tubers,  maniocs,  yams,  and  sweet
potatoes  play  a  prominent  part  there,  but  the  graminacese  also
are  represented  by  the  maize  introduced  from  America  and  rice
from  Asia,  and  it  is  among  the  two  peoples  who  have  adopted
these  cereals  as  the  staple  of  their  food,  the  Incas  of  Peru  and
the  Chinese,  that  hoe-culture  has  been  improved  by  the  intro-
duction of  manure.  Carried  to  a  still  greater  degree  of  perfection
by  the  employment  of  artificial  manure,  it  has  been  transformed
by  civilised  peoples  into  "plantations"  (sugar-cane,  coffee,  etc.)
in  tropical  countries  and  into  "horticulture"  in  all  climates.

True  agriculture  could  only  have  originated  where  the
ox,  the  horse,  the  buffalo,  and  other  animals  used  in
ploughing  were  first  domesticated — that  is  to  say,  in  Eurasia,
and  perhaps  more  particularly  in  Mesopotamia,  where  the
art  of  irrigation  was  known  at  a  period  when  in  other
countries  there  was  not  even  any  agriculture  at  all.  As  far
^  Hahn,  Pie  Hausthiere^  etc.,  Leipzig,  1896,  in  8vo,  with  map.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  I93

back  as  the  historic  Chaldean  monuments  can  take  us
we  find  agriculture  existing  in  this  part  of  Asia.  In  Europe
it  has  appeared  since  the  neolithic  age,  after  the  quaternary
period.  Domestic  animals  having  most  probably  been  intro-
duced into  Egypt  from  Asia,  it  may  be  supposed  that  before
their  introduction  the  country  of  the  Pharaohs  was  cultivated
by  the  hoe,  like  the  kingdom  of  the  Incas  of  old,  or  that  of
the  '*  sons  of  Heaven  "  of  the  present  day.  Besides,  in  Asia,
as  in  Europe,  hoe-culture  existed  thus  early,  and  the  favourite
plant  cultivated  was  millet  {Panicum  miliaceum^  L.),  con-
sumed but  little  to-day,  but  universally  known,  which  attests
its  importance  in  antiquity.^

The  system  of  laying  lands  fallow  and  raising  crops  in
rotation  could  only  have  been  established  with  the  develop-
ment of  agriculture.  Hoe-culture  was  satisfied  with  the  total
exhaustion  of  the  soil,  even  if  it  had  to  seek  out  new  ground
cleared  by  a  conflagration  of  the  forests,  the  ashes  of  which
were  the  first  and  only  manure.

The  plough,  that  implement  so  characteristic  of  true  agri-
culture, has  evolved,  as  regards  its  form,  from  the  double-
handled  hoe  of  Portuguese  Africa  (Livingstone),  which  bears
so  close  a  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Egyptian  monuments,
to  the  "sokha"  of  the  Russian  peasants,  and  even  to  the  steam
plough  of  the  modern  farmer,  not  to  mention  the  heavy  ploughs,
all  of  wood  except  the  share  and  the  coulter,  still  in  use  in  many
rural  districts  of  Central  Europe.  Reaping  in  both  systems  of
cultivation  is  accomplished  with  knives  or  special  implements,
bill-hooks,  examples  of  which,  almost  as  perfect  as  those  of
to-day,  are  found  as  far  back  as  the  days  of  ancient  Egypt  and
the  bronze  age  in  Europe;  the  scythe,  known  to  the  ancient
Greeks,  appears  to  be  a  later  improvement.

The  threshing  of  wheat,  which  often  constitutes  but  a  single

^  This  opinion  of  Hahn's  appears  to  be  corroborated  by  this  fact,  that
millet  is  still  the  "national  cereal"  of  the  Turkish  peoples,  who,  like
all  other  nomad  shepherds,  beginning  with  hoe-culture,  have  arrived  at
their  present  state  through  having  preferred  to  breed  animals  other  than
those  used  in  ploughing — that  is  to  say,  the  camel,  sheep,  and  later,  the
horse.

13


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  1 9$

Asia,  of  Oceania,  and  Africa  would  be  derived  from  a  different
type,  represented  to-day  by  the  Dingo  of  Australia.^  We  may
lay  stress  on  these  differences  of  canine  races  because  often
the  races  of  domestic  animals  vary  according  to  the  human
races  which  breed  them.  Thus,  it  has  been  observed  in  the
T3rrol  that  the  geographical  d  stribution  of  races  of  oxen  corre-
sponds with  that  of  varieties  of  the  human  race.

After  dogs,  several  other  carnivorous  animals  have  been
tamed  with  a  view  to  the  chase:  tiger,  ferret,  civet  cat,  wild
cat,  leopard,  and  falcon;  but  man  has  only  been  able  to
domesticate  two:  the  ferret  and  the  cat  The  Chinese  have
succeeded  in  domesticating  the  cormorant  and  utilising  it  for
fishing,  placing,  however,  a  ring  on  its  neck,  so  that  it  can-
not give  way  to  its  wild  instinct  to  swallow  the  fish  which  it
catches.

Many  animals  have  been  domesticated  by  peoples  acquainted
only  with  hoe-culture ;  such  as  the  pig  and  the  hen  in  Africa
and  Oceania;  the  she-goat  in  Africa;  the  turkey,  the  duck
{Anas  mo5chata\  the  guinea-pig,  and  the  llama  in  America.
But  true  agriculture  begins  only  with  the  domestication  of  the
bovine  races,  the  she-goat,  and  the  ass;  and  true  breeding  of
cattle  with  the  domestication  of  the  camel  and  the  sheep
among  nomads.  The  horse  and  the  mule  do  not  appear  until
a  little  later  among  nomads,  as  among  sedentary  peoples.

Among  the  domesticated  bovidie  other  than  the  ox  must
be  mentioned  the  yak  in  Thibet  and  around  Thibet;  the
gayal  of  Assam  and  Upper  Burma;  the  banteng  i^Bos
sondaicus)  of  Malaysia;  and  the  buffalo,  which  is  found
everywhere  where  rice  is  planted.  In  mentioning,  besides
the  animals  just  referred  to,  the  reindeer  of  hyperborean
peoples  (Laplanders,  Samoyeds,  Tunguses,  Chukchi),  we
shall  have  exhausted  the  list  of  nineteen  domesticated
mammals  actually  known  to  the  different  peoples,  according
to  Hahn.     As  to  birds,  out  of  thirteen,  we  have  named  only

^  Tb.  Studer,  '*  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  unserer  Hundcrossen,"  Natur^
wisMMch,  Wockemckrift^  1897,  No.  28.  See  also  Mem.  Sac,  Hihiiipte
uiemett  naiureilest  1896.


196


THE   RACES  OF   MAN.


four:  cormorant,  duck,  hen,  and  turkey;  to  these  must
be  added  the  goose,  the  swan,  the  Guinea-fowl,  the  peacock,
the  pheasant,  the  canary,  the  parrot,  the  ostrich,  and,  lastly,
the  pigeon,  which  perhaps  of  all  the  winged  race  is  the  easiest
to  tame.  The  other  classes  of  animals  have  furnished  few  useful
helpers  of  man.  Among  insects  there  are  the  bee  and  the  silk-
worm; among  fishes  we  can  mention  only  three:  carp,  gold-
fish, and  Macropus  virtdiauratus,  I^cep.,  chiefly  bred  for
amusement  by  the  Chinese.


CHAPTER  VI.
II.  SOCIOLOGICAL  CKWihCTEKS —Continued.

2.  Psychic  Life:  Games  ami  Recreations — Their  iiinK)rlance — Gaines  of
children  ami  adults — SporLs  and  public  spectacles — Masks — Fine  Aris
— Graphic  arts  —  Ornamentation  —  Drawing—  Sculpture — Dancing  —
II^  importance  among  uncultured  peoples — Pantomime  and  dramatic
art — Vocal  and  instrumental  music  — Instruments  of  music — Poetry
— Religion — Animism — Its  two  elements  :  belief  in  the  soul,  and
belief  in  spirits — Fctichism— Polytheism  — Rites  an<l  ceremonies-
Priesthood — International  religions — Myths—Science — Art  of  counting
— Geometry — Calculation  of  time — Clocks  and  calendars—  Geography
and  cartography—  Medicine  and  surgery.

2.    PSYCHIC    LIFE.

Games  and  Recreations, — In  two  works  based  on  carefully
observed  facts,  Groos  has  shown  that  animals  do  not  expend
all  their  muscular  and  psychic  energy  in  procuring  the  means
of  material  existence,  but,  further,  expend  this  energy  in
games,  which  are  really  a  process  of  training,  of  education.
In  a  greater  degree  is  this  the  case  with  man,  that  animal
whose  psychical  life  has  expanded  so  enormously.*  In  fact,
games  are  the  first  manifestations  of  the  psychical  life  not
only  of  man  individually  but  of  mankind  as  a  whole.

It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  games  of  chiidren
and  those  of  adults.  The  former  are  above  all  imitation,
while  the  latter  aim  at  either  gaining  an  advantage  or  demon-
strating muscular  or  mental  strength  and  skill.

The  boys  of  "  savages  "  handle  tiny  bows  and  lassoes  made
by  themselves,  and  hunt  toy  guancos,  birds,  and  turtles  made
of  clay  and  wood,  in  imitation  of  their  fathers;  while  the  little

*  K.  Groos,  Die  Spicle  dcr  ThUrc^  1896;  Die  Spiele  dcr  Menschen^  1899.

197


^^•ni:


[ape


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHAKACTEKS.  209

Australians  leap,  advance  suddenly,  then  fall  back  with  threat-
ening or  lascivious  gestures,  as  the  case  may  be  (Fig.  59);
N^roes  add  to  the  steps  and  innuendoes  movements  of  the
head  and  pelvis.  Among  most  Asiatics  (Chinese,  Japanese,
Malays)  men  do  not  dance,  and  in  the  case  of  women,  the
choregraphic  art  degenerates  into  a  series  of  rhythmical
movements  of  the  arms  and  trunk,  without  change  of
position.  It  is  to  mimicry,  that  is  to  say,  the  first  step
towards  pantomime,  that  dances  imitating  the  move-
ments of  animals  (Eskimo,  Araucans)  owe  their  origin.
The  pantomime  of  the  uncultured,  like  their  dancing,
is  always  accompanied  by  music  and  song,  sometimes  by
masks  and  disguises.  We  have  but  to  develop  the  share  of
song  and  recitation,  to  render  the  music  less  dependent  on
the  rhythm,  in  order  to  transform  these  exercises  into  real
dramatic  representations}

Vocal  and  instrumental  music  are  the  common  property  of
mankind  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  people  that  does  not  know
at  least  how  to  hum  an  air  of  a  few  notes ;  and  rare  are
those  who  have  no  instrument  of  music  (Fuegians,  certain
Micronesians,  Veddahs).  The  music  of  uncivilised  peoples  is
most  frequently  reduced  to  one  only  of  its  elements,  rhythm,
— better  understood  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  greater
part  of  the  time  it  forms  only  the  accompaniment  of  dancing.
Melody  and  harmony  are  reduced  to  their  simplest  expres-
sions.* And  yet  in  the  opinion  even  of  specialists  it  is  very
difficult  to  note  the  airs  of  "savages,"  and  three-fourths
of  the  notations  published  in  dififerent  works  are  incorrect.
That  is  the  result  of  these  airs  having  been  written  down
according  to  our  scale,  which  is  heptatonic.  Now  this  scale,
although  existing  even  among  many  uncivilised  peoples,  is
not  the  only  one  which  is  used.

We  find  them  using  certain  successions  of  sounds  with
fixed  intervals,  that  is  to  say,  true  scales  of  two,  three,
and  even  six  sounds.     Most  frequently  ''natural  tones"  ^'

^  Wallofichek,  Primitive  Music ^  chap.  viiL,  Londc
'  Grussc,  Anf,  d,  Kumt^  chap.  iiL


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  2X5

of  fear  that  they  imagine  themselves  to  be  attacked  by  the
"savages  of  the  west,"  by  the  "Walapatu,"  which  some  of
them  regard  as  ghosts,  and  others  quite  simply  as  individuals
of  a  neighbouring  tribe,  that  of  the  Alakalufs.^

But  cases  of  this  kind  are  rare,  and  most  uncivilised
peoples  have  the  rudiments  of  natural  religion  a  little  more
developed,  a  belief  in  spirits  less  vague.  We  may,  with  the
eminent  ethnologist  Tylor,  give  the  name  of  "  Animism  "  to
this  primitive  religion.

Animism  in  the  most  primitive  forms  consists  in -believing
that  the  body  of  a  man  contains  another  more  subtle  being,
a  "soul,"  capable  of  being  temporarily  separated  from  its
envelope,  and  admitting  further  that  everything  that  exists,
beasts,  plants,  stones,  down  to  objects  fashioned  by  hand,
have  equally  a  soul  which  is  endowed  with  corresponding
qualities.  Thus  the  Shans  of  the  Kieng-Tung  (upper  Burma)
believe  that  the  soul  leaves  the  body  of  a  man  asleep  in
the  form  of  an  iridescent  butterfly  ;2  the  Malays  have  the
same  ideas,  and  take  care  on  that  account  not  to  awaken  a
man  asleep.  His  observation  of  the  shadow  which  exactly
repeats  every  movement  of  a  man,  of  reflections  in  the
water,  may  confirm  a  savage  in  his  animistic  beliefs,  but  what
especially  establishes  them  are  the  dreams  and  visions  during
which  he  lives  another  life  and  is  "another  man."  Death  is
considered  as  a  separation  of  man  from  his  shadow  or  his
soul,  something  like  the  separation  which  is  eflected  during
sleep.      Most  frequently  it   is  the  breath,  the  air  breathed

*  These  Yabgans  give  the  name  of  "Kachpik"  vaguely  to:  i,
very  wicked  imaginary  l^eings  living  in  the  depth  of  the  forests,  and,  2,
every  person  who  has  a  strange  or  wicked  character.  They  give  the  name
of  "Hanuch"  to:  i,  imaginary  l)eings  with  an  eye  at  the  l)ack  of  the
head  and  no  hair,  and,  2,  to  madmen  or  individuals  living  alone  in  the
forests.  It  is  the  belief  in  these  three  or  four  imaginary  beings  to  which
all  religious  manifestations  of  the  Vahgans  niny  be  reduced.  (Hyades  and
Deniker,  lac,  cit. ,  p.  253. )

'  R.  Woodthorpe,  yw/r//.  An/hr,  Inst.^  vol.  xxvi.,  No    i,  August  1896.
In  Yorkshire  the  country  people  call  the  night  butterfly  (sphinx)  "sonl,**
and   in    Ireland    butterflies   are    the   souls    of  ancestors  H^    Gomr
fitkn^iogy  in  Folklore .


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  217

ordinarily  endowed  the  tribe  or  the  family  with  some  material
advantage  by  giving  during  life  counsels  dictated  by  their
long  experience,  they  are  laid  under  contribution  after
death.  Their  memory  is  recalled  in  times  of  misfortune,
and  advice  is  asked  of  them.  This  is  the  origin  of  ancestor
worship.

The  number  of  spirits  is  infinite,  there  is  a  whole  world  of
them.  Every  object,  sometimes  every  category  of  objects,  has
its  spirit,  and  as  objects  may  be  made  so  spirits  may  be
created,  or  at  least  may  be  made  to  communicate  to  objects
a  portion  of  their  power.  This  circumstance  gives  birth  to
feiichisMy^  which  is  only  one  of  the  sides  of  animism,  one
of  the  grossest  forms.  Fetichistic  peoples  consider  certain
objects  called  fetiches^  gris-gris^  etc.,  as  beings  endowed  with
an  inherent  will  and  power.  Every  object,  a  piece  of  wood,
a  bundle  of  grass,  a  stone,  a  nail,  a  claw,  a  lock  of  hair,  a
horn,  a  rag,  a  bit  of  string,  may  become  fetiches ;  the  material
value  of  the  object  bears  no  relation  to  its  power  as  a  fetich ;
the  most  insignificant  things  may  be  the  greatest  fetiches.^
As  to  the  relations  which  exist  between  spirits  and  objects,
they  are  of  a  twofold  character:  either  the  fetich  is  regarded
as  an  animated  being,  as  the  material  envelope  of  a  spirit,

*  The  word  "  fetichism  "  is  a  corruption  of  the  Porlugiiesc  term  feiiifOy
"charm,"  derived  probably  from  the  Latin  factitius^  in  the  sense  "full  of
magical  artifices,"  which  the  first  navigators  on  the  coast  of  Guinea  applied
to  the  fetiches  venerated  by  the  Negroes,  Des  Brosses  was  the  first  to
introduce,  in  1760,  the  term  **fetichism  "  to  denote  the  l>elicf  in  fetiches.
Auguste  Comte  gave  a  much  more  extended  meaning  to  the  word,  to  de-
note a  religious  state  opposed  to  polytheism  and  monotheism.  Today  the
fetichism  of  Auguste  Comte  is  the  animism  of  English  ethnographers,  of
which  true  fetichism  forms  only  a  part.     (E.  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.y  vol.  ii.,

p.  143)
'  In  certain  cases,  fetiches  are  supposed  to  be  animated  with  power  of

movement ;  thus  the  stafl's  which  cegio  sorcerers  put  into  the  hands  of  men

in  convulsions,  caused  by  wild  dances,  are  reputed  to  draw  these  men  in  their

mad  career,  and  to  direct  them  in  the  search  of  per««»  mrtmmmA.  of  crime.

Similarly,  the  two  staffs  which  the  Siberian  Sb*

during  their  exorcisms  are  supposed  to  draw

full  gallop,  towards  regions  inhabited  by  spiril


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  219

ful  than  the  others.  They  become  superior  divinities  entitled
to  ''worship."  Thus  we  have  the  worship  of  water  ^sacred
rivers,  Ganges,  Nile),  worship  of  plants  and  especially  trees
(sacred  forests  of  the  Gauls,  the  Germans,  the  Finns,  the
Papuans),  the  worship  of  animals  and  more  especially  birds
(the  eagle  of  the  Aztecs  and  the  Peruvians,  the  ibis  of  the
Egyptians),  and  serp)ent-worship  (prevalent  everjwhere,  but
principally  in  India  and  Western  Africa).

The  worship  of  the  elements  varies  according  to  the  kind  of
life  led  by  a  people;  the  succession  of  climates,  the  ruin
which  gives  life  to  the  seed,  the  sun  which  burns  the  7ra=>e>
etc.,  are  incarnations  of  so  many  divinities  for  agricultural
peoples,  while  they  have  no  importance  for  peoples  livir:^  '^y
the  chase.     Fire  is  considered  as  a  divinitv  bv  several  r;:o:.!e-.

tf  4  I  •

(see  p.  153).  The  adoration  of  fire  was  the  anci.r.t  re'jio::  of
the  Persians,  and  is  still  preser\'ed  to-day  ar:.or._'  c'r*..-  n
Parsees  of  India:  we  pass  over  the  god  Xiuhv.-'-.-:!',  *' iord
of  fire,"  of  the  ancient  Mexicans,  the  ^o'^i'^l-.-.s  \'e=^t'^  o'  the
Romans,  etc  Often  the  worship  of  the  h\:n  -.vrs  '-^rr.'/::.:'!
with  that  of  fire,  and  the  ancient  solar  festivals  >■::.::  •/.  0'.?[
have  become  the  midsummer  eve  bonfires,  v.h:'.:i  t-.e  '  ler;;/
still  bless  every  year  in  several  places  in  Lov.er  iir.*/-  r.v.  I
can  only  mention  the  legends  relatin;:  to  the  f]i-.irje  o-^:  n  of
fire,  which  all  resemble  more  or  less  that  of  Prorr.'.-*. :.•::-,  ^:,/:
Mahonika  of  the  Polynesians,  the  Tkpi  of  the  <.'.:*%■... ■.:'.. ^
etc.).  The  difference  between  the  great  spirits  whi^r.  ;j/.;rr.rj?/;
the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  little  sj;:r:is  cone*  rr.'y]  v.i*!,
the  trivial  facts  of  man's  daily  life  once  a'lmitte^i,  th're  v.
established  a  hierarchy  in  the  world  of  spirit';  M.t:r':Iy  \i\fA^\\<A
on  the  hierarchy  of  human  society.  Ahove  '^y/iu.*.-.^  elv,
demons,  sprites,  and  so  many  common  -j/irit';.  v.e  \,:x<\  uw. ',:.■;
the  Khonds^  the  six  great  gods  (<>{  rai:.,  fir.*  fruit-,,  j.rocr".'!^
tion,  hunting,  w»ir,  and  boundaries/,  '.siiO  in  their  \k\\\  .ire
governed  by  the  sun-god  and  his  v.if*:,  the  pov.erfiil  v'A*V.-,
of  the  earth.  The  religion  of  the  Khonds  is  already  poIyihfi\m
and  this  may  end  either  m  the  dualism  r;f  two  contrary  priri-
>  Macpherson,  quoted  hy  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture^  vol.  li.,  p.  325.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  2JI

in  annual  celebration  for  the  purpose  of  getting  rid  of  all  the
ghosts  of  the  last  year's  dead ;  the  Negroes  of  the  Gold  Coast
assemble  together  in  arms  from  time  to  time  to  drive  the  evil
spirits  from  their  village ;  rushing  about  in  all  directions,  with
frantic  howling,  they  return  home  and  assert  that  they  sleep
more  easily,  and  for  a  while  afterwards  enjoy  better  health.^
But  these  contests  with  spirits  are  rare,  and  it  is  usually  found
preferable  to  employ  craft  against  them  (hence  exorcism,
incantation,  the  use  of  symbols,  etc.),  or  gentleness  (prayer,
offerings,  sacrifices).  The  last  method,  which  is  most  fre-
quently used,  develops  into  an  outward  cult ;  the  '*  fetich-
house,"  like  that  seen  in  Dahomey  and  other  Negro  countries,
becomes  transformed  into  a  temple ;  the  place  of  sacrifice  into
an  altar,  and  instead  of  real  animals  or  plants,  images  of  them
in  paper,  butter,  clay,  etc.,  are  sacrificed,  or  finer  offerings  such
as  grass,  flowers,  perfumes,  etc.

Priesthood, — In  the  earliest  stages  of  religion  man  put  him-
self into  communication  with  spirits  at  his  own  risk  and  peril;
but  as  he  soon  perceived  that  he  was  frequently  unsuccessful
in  obtaining  what  he  wished,  and  could  not  prevent  them
laying  their  spells  on  him,  he  was  compelled  to  have  recourse
to  intermediaries.  He  observed  that  certain  individuals  are
better  fitted  to  deal  with  spirits  ;  that  they  can  fall  into  a
trance  and  remain  in  this  death-like  condition  long  enough
to  be  able  to  treat  with  demons,  and  he  came  to  the
conclusion  that  they  were  appointed  to  intercede  with
spirits  for  simple  mortals  and  to  direct  propitiatory  cere-
monies, offerings,  and  prayers.  It  was  thus  that  the  priest-
hood arose,  under  the  form  of  fetich-men  or  shamans,  who
play  so  important  a  part  in  the  life  of  Negroes,  the  Tunguse
peoples  and  Mongols,  and  the  Indians  of  North  America.
All  the  functions  of  life,  marriage,  pregnancy,  the  entering
upon  the  age  of  puberty,  birth,  death,  hunting  or  warlike
expeditions,  require  the  offices  of  the  sorcerer,  of  the  shaman,
who  is  usually  at  the  same  time  a  doctor  (see  belowV.  As
society   develops,    numerically  and    in    civilisati'

*  K.  Tylur,  ltf<,  tV/.,  vul.  ii,  p.  1 99.


SOCIOLOGICAL  ClIARACTEUS.  22^

ground  of  animism.  Thus  religion  and  myths  are  often  one
and  the  same  thing,  since  they  are  derived  from  a  common
source,  from  that  habit  which  primitive  men  share  with  children
of  giving  a  personality  to  every  object  they  contemplate,  from
the  sun  to  a  knife,  from  a  blade  of  grass  to  the  ocean.  We
cannot  dwell  longer  on  this  subject,  which  would  require  de-
veloping at  considerable  length;^  I  will  merely  say  that  on
carefully  studying  myths  we  find  in  them  psychological  data
relating  to  the  mode  of  thinking  of  a  people,  rather  than
indications  of  the  relations  and  affinity  of  one  people  with
another,  for  borrowed  details  in  myths  are  innumerable  among
all  peoples.^

Sciences. — It  is  only  with  the  rudiments  of  the  sciences  that
we  have  to  deal  in  the  case  of  uncivilised  and  even  half-
civilised  peoples.

The  knowledge  of  numbers  exists  more  or  less  among  all  the
peoples  of  the  earth.  We  often  say,  "  Such  a  people  can  only
count  up  to  three,  because  it  has  no  special  word  to  denote  a
higher  number."  This  reasoning  is  not  always  just,  for,  by
adopting  it,  we  might  accuse  the  French  of  scarcely  being
able  to  count  beyond  sixty,  since  they  have  no  s[)ecial  words
for,  say,  seventy-five  or  eighty,  and  to  express  these  fall  back
on  words  already  employed  in  counting — sixty  and  fifteen  or
four  score.  Many  savages  employ  a  similar  method.  Thus
the  Yahgan  Fuegians  have  only  words  for  the  number  one
{Kaueit)y  two  (Kombcti\  and  three  {Maien)\  but  they  make
use  of  the  words  Akokombai  (literally  "  the  other  two,"  or
"another  time  two")  to  denote  four,  and  Akomaten  (the  other
three)  to  indicate  six.^

Certain  Australians  proceed  in  a  similar  manner.^     If  these

'  See  A  Lang,  Culture  and  Myth;  and  his  Modern  Mythology ^  Lundun,

1897.
^  Legends,  traditional  tales,  proverbs,  etc.,  are  simplified  myths,  with

the  poetic  element  predominating.     The  study  of  them  forms  a  special

branch  of  ethnology  called  **  Folk-lore."

'  Hyades  and  Deniker,  loc,  cit»^  p.  316.

*  Brough  Smyth,  The  Abongines  of  Victoria^  vol.  ii.,  p.  3,  London,  1878;
Cuu,  Th€  Australian  Race^  Melbourne-London,  1 886-87,  4  voU  passim.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  22/

distance  between  the  coast  and  each  of  the  islands.  The
ancient  Mexicans  had  topographical  maps,  marine  charts,
and  even  cadastral  plans,  much  more  perfect  than  those  of
the  ancient  Egyptians.  The  Chinese  maps  still  further  surpass
these  models,  and  remind  one  already  of  our  coasting  pilot
books  in  their  use  of  orientation  by  means  of  the  compass.^

I  should  take  up  the  whole  chapter  if  I  were  to  give  an
account,  even  in  an  abridged  form,  of  everything  concerning
primitive  medicine.^  I  will  merely  point  out  that,  according  to
their  animistic  conception  of  the  world,  "savages"  have  no
other  idea  of  disease  than  as  a  malevolent  manifestation  of  a
spirit  who  enters  into  the  man,  of  a  demon  who  "  possesses  "
him.  Thus,  fetich-men  and  shamans  are  the  first  doctors.
They  know  how  to  **  drive  "  from  the  body  of  the  patient  the
evil  spirit  who  torments  him,  to  "draw  out"  the  disease  in
the  form  of  a  pebble,  or  some  other  object  deftly  concealed
before  the  operation.  Moreover,  the  bones,  mummified  por-
tions of  the  body  of  sick  persons,  or  of  fetich-men  thernselves,
may  become  after  their 'death  relics  possessing  miraculous
healing  power,  etc.  For  the  matter  of  that,  even  among
civilised  peoples  diseases  are  often  attributed  to  the  "evil  eye,"
to  "spells"  (France),  to  "  Jettatura"  (Italy),  etc.  Among  the
Indians  of  North  America  there  are  also  special  healers
(medicine-men)  who  are  held  in  great  esteem,  and  who  some-
times form  a  corporation  {Mide),  into  which,  admission  can
only  be  gained  after  a  professional  examination  in  the  "doctors'
cabin"  (Schoolcraft,  Hoffmann).  Along  with  incantations
and  magical  proceedings,  with  dancing  and  music,  the
principal  remedies  of  the  Australian  healers  and  the  American
medicine-men  are  scarifications,  blood-letting,  and  blood-
sucking. Negroes  show  a  preference  for  cupping-glasses.  The
processes  of  advanced  surgery  among  certain  peoples  go  as  far
as  ov&riotomy  (Australians),  laparotomy  and  the  cesarian
operation  (Negroes  of  Uganda) ;  but  not  as  far  as  the  amputa-
tion of  limbs,  the  fingers  excepted.     Trepanning,  known  from

*  Sec  for  ihe  details,  Andrcc,  Elhn.  Paral.,  p.  197.

*  See  Max  Bartets,  Afedecin  dcr  Naturvolker^  Leipzig,  1893.


228


THE   RACES  OF   MAN.


the  quaternary  period  in  Europe,  is  also  employed  among
Negroes,  Persians,  New  Hebridians,  etc.,  for  nervous  diseases,
epilepsy,  etc.  The  clyster,  the  great  remedy  of  our  ancestors,
is  hardly  used,  except  by  the  Dakota  Indians  and  the  Negroes
of  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  where  also  the  doctor  squirts  the
drug  into  the  sick  person  from  his  mouth  through  the  medium
of  a  calabash  (Monnier).^  Attenuation  of  virus  is  even  prac-
tised by,  for  example,  the  Bushmen,  who  use  it  to  cure  the
bite  of  scorpions  and  serpents.^

^  M.  Monnier,  La  France  Noire^  p.  no,  Paris,  1894.

-  H.  Schintz,  Deutsch  SUd-wesi  Africa^  p.  396,  Oldenburg,  1894.


CHAPTER  VII.

SOCIOLOGICAL   CHARACTERS — COncluSWH,

3. — Family  Life. — Relations  of  the  two  sexes  before  marriage —
Afarriage  and  family — Theory  of  promiscuity — Group  marriage —
Exogamy  and  endogamy — Matriarchate— Degrees  of  relationship  and
filiation  —  Polyandry  —  Levirate — Polygamy  and  monogamy — Patri-
archate— Rape  and  purchase  of  the  bride — Duration  of  conjugal  union
—  Children — Birth — Nurtuie — Name  of  the  child  and  of  adults —
Initiation,  circumcision,  etc. — Old  men  and  their  f ale — Funereal  rites
— Mourning.

4. — Social  Life. — {a)  Home  life  of  a  people — Economic  organisatioft —
The  forms  of  property  depend  on  production — Common  property
and  family  property — Village  community — Individual  property —
Social  organisation— ToK^mx^m — Clan  rule — Family  rule —Territorial
rule— Caste  and  class  rule— Democratic  rule — Social  morals— Right
and  justice— Taboo — Retaliation,  vendetta,  and  ordeals — Secret
societies — Extra  legal  judges— Formulae  of  politeness — {b)  Inter-
national life  of  peoples — Absence  of  sympathetic  relations — Hostile
relations —  War — Arms  of  offence — Bow  and  arrows — Arms  of  defence
— Neutral  relations — Commerce — Money — Cowry — TransjKjrts  and
means  of  communication — Primitive  vehicles — Navigation.

The  subjects  about  to  be  treated  are  so  vast  and  complicated
that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  give  an  idea  of  them  in  a  few
words  and  without  going  into  details.  So  our  account  will  of
necessity  be  somewhat  dogmatic,  and  will  only  touch  on  some
salient  facts  of  family  and  social  life.

3. — FAMILY    LIFE.

The  relations  of  the  two  sexes  are   somewhat   free  among

uncivilised  and  half-civilised  peoples  so  long  as  there  is  no

formal  marriage  or  birth  of  a  child.     In  the  whole  of  Oceania-

229


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  ^31

The  position  of  woman  in  society,  ideas  on  conjugal  obliga-
tions, etc.,  are  entirely  subordinated  to  the  ideas  which  prevail
about  property  and  the  social  organism.

Theory  of  Promiscuity, — We  often  hear  it  said  that  marriage
has  sprung  from  a  "state  of  promiscuity"  in  which  mankind
primitively  lived;  every  man  could  then  couple  with  every
woman,  "like  the  animals,"  people  sometimes  add,  forgetting
that  among  animals  the  most  akin  to  man  this  state  of  promis-
cuity is  rather  exceptional,  and  that  the  polygamous  and  even
monogamous  family  exist  among  a  great  number  of  birds  and
mamm^ls.^

The  theory  of  promiscuity  or  "communal  marriage,"  so
well  summed  up  some  time  ago  by  Lubbock,^  has  few  de-
fenders at  the  present  day.  We  know  that  actually  there  does
not  exist  on  the  earth  any  population  practising  an  "  irregular
promiscuity,"  and  the  evidence  of  history  is  reduced  to  three
or  four  texts  of  Herodotus,  Strabo,  and  Solinus,  the  interpreta-
tion of  which  is  far  from  easy.^

Group  Marriage, — What  has  been  often  taken  for  pro-
miscuity is  only  a  form  of  marriage,  different  from  our
individual  marriage,  which,  nevertheless,  represents  the
first    attempt    to    regulate    sexual    relations    and    to    define

*  Sec  for  further  details,  Lctourneau,  The  Evolution  of  Marriage y  etc.  ^
chap,  i.,  London  ;  and  Weslcrmarck,  Hisiory  of  Human  Marriage ^
chaps,  iv.  to  vi.,  London,  1S91.

'  Lubbock,  Origin  of  Civilisation^  chap,  iii.,  1 87 5.

'  The  long  list  of  peoples  practising  promiscuity  given  by  Lubbock
dwindles  as  we  beconu:  better  acquainted  with  the  different  |x>pulations  in
question.  Certain  peoples,  like  the  Fucgians  (Hyades  and  Denikcr,  loc,
tit,)t  the  Bushmen,  the  Polynesians  (Wcslermarck,  loc.  cit.)^  the  Irulas
(Thurston,  Bull.  Madras  Mus.^  vol.  ii..  No.  I,  1897),  the  Teehurs  of
Oude  (W.  Crooke,  Tribes  ami  Castes  N.  W.  Proviiue^  etc.^  vol.  i.,  p.
dxxxiii.,  Calcutta,  1896),  should  be  mercilessly  struck  out  of  this  list,  since
they  all  have  individual  marriage  to  the  exclusion  of  other  forms.  Others,
like  the  Australians,  the  Todas,  the  Nairs,  have  been  entered  in  it  because
they  practise  *' group  marriage"  or  certain  forms  of  polyandry,  whidr
IS  not  the  same  thing  as  promiscuity.  There  remains  of  the  list  but  f
or  three  tribes  alxmt  whom  we  have  no  exact  general  infor*
(example,  the  Olo-Ot  of  Borneo).


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  233

the  elder  brother  takes  precedence  of  the  younger,  the  man
up  in  years  of  the  youth.  ^

Exogamy  and  Endogamy. — Group  marriage  is  closely  con-
nected with  what  is  called  exogamy  or  exogeny,  that  is  to
say,  marriage  outside  the  clan,  as  opposed  to  endogamy  or
endogeny^  marriage  within  the  clan.  It  must  be  said,  however,
that  exogamy  is  as  often  met  in  the  individual  form  of  mar-
riage, and  that  sometimes  endogamy,  interdicted  within  the
limits  of  a  clan,  is,  on  the  contrary,  practised  within  the  limits
of  the  tribe  of  which  these  clans  are  the  components.  There
is  in  this  case  exogamy  in  relation  to  the  clan  and  endogamy
in  relation  to  the  tribe.

Mairiarchate, — But  how  are  matters  of  filiation  and  family  to
be  decided  with  such  a  system  of  marriage,  for  it  is  impossible
to  settle  the  question  of  paternity  in  this  case  ?  To  Bachofcn
and  McLennan^  we  must  attribute  the  honour  of  having
discovered  a  complete  system  of  filiation,  in  vogue  among
many  uncivilised  peoples,  and  the  exact  opposite  to  that
which  we  are  accustomed  to  in  our  societies  :  filiation  by  the
mother,  or  matn'archate.  Thus  in  our  example  of  the  Aus-
tralians of  Wotjoballuk  (p.  232),  the  posterity  of  a  man  of
the  Gamutch  clan  married  to  a  woman  of  the  Krokitch  clan
will  belong  to  the  Krokitch  clan ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  the
father  is  a  Krokitch  and  the  mother  a  Gamutch,  the  children
will  belong  to  the  Gamutch  clan.  This  filiation  establishes
the  uterine  relationship  and,  united  to  exogamy,  prevents
marriage  between  nearest  relatives.  In  fact,  the  son  of  the
first  couple  being  of  the  Krokitch  clan,  will  not  be  able  to  marry

*  A.  W.  Howitt,  ••  Dieri,  qXc.,'  Jount.  Authr,  lusi.^  vol.  xx.,  i8<;o,
p.  53.  Among  ihc  Nairs  of  the  coast  oi"  Malabar  things  arc  clone  in
exactly  the  same  way.  The  main  point  in  both  cases  is  tlie  ])rohibiiion  nf
marriage  in  the  clan  itself  (L.  Fison,  "  Classificat.  Relationship,"  Jonrn.
Anthr,  Inst.t\o\,  xxv.,  1S95,  p.  369).  Among  the  Todas  of  Nilgiri  the
groufM  arc  limited  in  this  sense,  that  the  nicn  who  cohabit  with  a  woman
must  be  brothers,  and  at  the  same  time  can  only  marry  with  the  sisters  of
this  woman.

'  Bachofen,  Das  MutUrrecht^  Stuttgart,  1S61  ;  J.  K.  McLennan,
SiuHes  in  A  mien/  History^  London,  1876.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  235

consider  as  my  sons  and  daughters;  lastly,  the  fifth  group  is
composed  of  the  grandchildren  of  my  brothers  and  sisters,
whom  I  consider  as  my  grandchildren.  A  similar  system  of
nomenclature  is  very  common  among  certain  peoples  of  India,
and  sometimes  causes  much  embarrassment  to  English  judges
newly  landed.  To  give  an  example:  A  witness  said  that  his
father  was  at  home  at  such  and  such  an  hour;  then,  a  few
minutes  after,  he  affirmed  that  his  father  was  in  the  fields.
The  judge  is  perplexed  until,  by  a  series  of  questions,  he  elicits
the  fact  that  the  witness  means  his  "  little ''  father,  equivalent  to
our  term  uncle.^  Westermarck  has  tried  to  interpret  the  classi-
ficatory  system  differently;  he  sees  in  it  only  an  artifice  of
speech,  a  way  of  addressing  persons  of  different  ages ;  but  as
Fison  judiciously  observes,  if  it  be  held  that  this  system  lias
no  reference  to  degrees  of  relationship  we  should  have  to
deny  any  idea  whatever  of  this  subject  to  certain  peoples
who  have  no  other  expressions  to  denote  degrees  of  rela-
tionship.'

Polyandpy^  that  is  to  say,  marriage  in  which  the  woman
possesses  several  husbands,  is  considered  by  the  majority  of
authors  as  a  form  derived  from  group  marriage.  With  the
exception  of  two  doubtful  examples  (Khasias  and  Saporogian
Cossacks),  polyandry  always  assumes  the  fraternal  form ;  that
is  to  say,  the  husbands  of  the  woman  are  brothers.  The
classic  country  of  polyandry  is  Thibet.  There  each  of  the
brothers  cohabits  in  turn  with  their  common  wife,  a  certain
period  being  allotted.  Among  the  ancient  Arabs,  according  to
Strabo,  matters  were  arranged  less  systematically,  and  the  first
comer  on  his  arrival  at  the  woman's  house  asserted  his  marital
rights,  after  having  taken  care,  however,  to  place  his  staff
across  the  door,  as  is  still  done  in  the  case  of  temporary
marriages  in  Persia  and  among  the  Todas,  who  leave  the  cloak
as  well  as  the  staff.  Polyandry  is  practised  by  several  peoples
living  on    the    borders   of    Thibet   (Miris,    Dophlas,   Abors,

'  1y\ox ^Journ,  Anthr.  Inst.^  vol.  xviii.,  i8S8-89,  p.  262.
*  Westermarck,  loc  {it,,  \\  82;  L  Fison,  loc.  cii,  (•*  Classific  System"),
P-369.


SOCIOLOGTCAL  CHARACTERS.  237

or  less  firmly  planted.  Woman  is  then  considered  very  much  as
a  slave,  from  whom  pleasure  and  labour  may  be  obtained ;  she
is  treated  like  any  other  property ;  the  more  wives  a  man  has,
the  richer  and  more  esteemed  is  he.  Polygamy  is  widely
diffused  over  the  world,  either  in  its  pure  form  (Mahomedans,
Australians,  American  Indians,  Negroes,  etc.)  or  in  its  modified
forms:  lawful  concubinage  (all  over  the  East),  or  unlawful
(Europe),  and  temporary  marriage  (Persia,  Japan).

It  is  only  with  the  development  of  society  that  monogamy^
nominal  or  real,  develops,  and  with  it  a  little  respect  for
womaiL  She  enjoys  more  liberty,  as  do  also  the  children
who  have  passed  a  certain  age.  Thus  is  constituted  the
family  of  to-day,  in  which,  however,  the  patriarchal  spirit  is
still  dominant

Patriarchate. —  Individual  polygamous  marriage  is  most
frequently  allied  to  a  new  form  of  affiliation,  that  of  kinship
through  males,  which,  in  its  turn,  is  rooted  in  the  constitution
of  property  and  the  subordination  of  woman  to  man.  In
the  matriarchate  the  natural  protector  of  the  child  and  tlie
family  is  the  mother*s  brother;  in  the  patriarchate  his
place  is  taken  by  the  father,  who  extends  the  ri-^ht
of  property  not  only  to  include  the  mother,  but  also  the
children;  he  may  sell  them,  hire  them  out,  etc.  The
patriarchate  is  the  regime  under  which  live  most  half-civilisod
peoples  and  a  great  number  of  uncivilised.

Several  matrimonial  customs  may  be  explained  by  the
primitive  forms  of  marriage.  Thus  the  practice  of  showing
hospitality  to  a  stranger  by  lending  him  onc\s  wife,  so  common
among  savages  and  half-civilised  nomads,  may  be  explained  as
a  relic  of  group  marriage,  in  which,  as  we  have  seen,  the
exchange  and  the  lending  of  women  are  practised.*  Similarly,
the  custom,  very  prevalent,  especially  in  Malaysia,  which
requires  a  husband  to  live  in  his  wife's  family,  is  considered
by   most    authors  as  a    relir    of  the  matriarchate.     Another

'  The  Torgoni  Mcmgnls,  wlio  pr.iclisc  ihis  custom,  explain
general  rules  of  hospit.ility  (IvMnovski,  loc.  n'f.);  in  this  respect  t
agreement  with  Wcstermarck,  /oc.  a'/,,  chap.  vi.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  239

exogamous  relations  between  tribes,  and  contributed  to  their
social  cohesion,  preventing  quarrels  and  wars  (Tylor).  The
marriage  portion  is  only  found  in  societies  having  a  relatively
high  organisation.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  payment  for  the
guardianship  which  the  husband  assumes  over  the  wife  and  her
children  under  the  patriarchal  system.  The  institution  of  the
marriage  portion  is  probably  derived  from  the  practice  still  in
vogue  among  many  peoples,  according  to  which  the  parents
offer  presents  in  exchange  for  the  money  or  the  service  given
as  the  purchase-price  of  their  daughter.

The  duration  of  the  conjugal  union  varies  so  much  among
different  peoples  that  no  general  rule  can  be  laid  down  re-
garding it  From  unions  of  a  night  (under  the  rigime  of
group  marriage,  in  temporary  or  trial  marriages)  to  the
indissolubility  prescribed  by  the  Christian  religions,  there  is
quite  a  scale  of  conjugal  relations  more  or  less  durable.  Most
frequently  the  husband  may  discard  the  wife  when  she  has
ceased  to  please  him;  sometimes  divorce  is  hedged  round  with
certain  formalities  of  established  custom.

Children, — In  all  societies,  as  in  the  animal  world,  the
family  is  principally  established  for  the  bringing  up  of
children.  But  it  is  far  from  true  that  the  arrival  of  children
is  everywhere  accepted  with  joy.  The  voluntary  limitation
of  progeny  is  not  an  invention  of  advanced  civilisation.
Savages  could  teach  us  much  on  this  point.  The  Australians
with  this  object  practise  ovariotomy  on  women,  the  operation
"mika"  (artificial  hypospadias)  on  men,  or  simply  kill  off  the
superfluous  infants.  Infanticide  on  a  large  scale  was  practised
by  the  Polynesians  before  their  "  Europcanisation";  it  exists
still  here  and  there  in  Thibet,  so  far  as  giris  are  concerned.
Some  would  even  see  in  this  custom  the  origin  of  polyandry.

Birth, — But  having  once  decided  to  let  a  child  live,  the
uncivilised  look  well  after  it.  One  could  write  a  volume,  if
one  wished  to  enumerate  all  the  hygienic  and  at  the  same
time  superstitious  customs  attendant  on  the  pregnancy,  par-
turition, and  recovery  of  the  woman  among  different  peoples.
The  act  of  generation   is  considered   by  nearly  all  the  un-


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  24 1

circumstances  in  1895,  called  one  of  their  new-born  **The
Frenchman."  But  most  frequently  the  name  given  is  of  a
plant  or  animal  (Red  Indians,  Mongols,  etc.).  It  must
be  said,  however,  that  among  many  peoples  the  name
given  at  birth  is  not  borne  throughout  life.  It  may  be  changed
more  than  once.  The  most  frequent  cause  for  doing  this  is
the  fear  of  spirits;  the  Dyaks  and  the  Mongols  change  the
name  of  sick  persons  to  "  deceive  the  spirit "  who  has  caused
the  disease;  among  the  Fuegians,  the  Indians  of  North
America,  the  Polynesians,  and  the  Malays,  the  name  of  a
dead  man  is  not  allowed  to  be  uttered,  and  all  his  name-
sakes are  obliged  to  change  their  name.  Often,  too,  the
name  is  changed  because  their  ** trade"  requires  it;  the
Okanda  healers  bear  another  name  when  they  practise  their
art ;  and  among  civilised  peoples  changes  of  name  are  bound
up  with  certain  social  conditions  (monks,  actors,  prostitutes,
etc.).

Education  of  Children. — Suckling  ordinarily  lasts  a  very
long  time  among  uncivilised  peoples,  till  the  child  is  two,
three,  four,  and  ^sq  years  old,  sometimes  even  older. ^  Children
are  treated  kindly  by  uncivilised  peoples,  and  rarely  are  they
chastised  as  they  are  in  Europe,  though  a  certain  ** discipline"
appears  among  the  half-civilised,  with  the  necessity  of  making
the  child  learn  many  more  things.  At  the  age  of  puberty,
among  most  uncivilised  peoples,  the  ceremony  of  initiation
takes  place.  This  is  a  sort  of  higher  education  with  certain
tests,  followed  by  a  ceremony,  after  which  the  individual  is
declared  adult.  It  is  met  with  among  the  Australians,  as  also
among  the  American  Indians,  Negroes,  etc,  with  the  same
essential  features.  The  young  men  of  the  tribe  are  led  into  a
place  apart,  where  the  sorcerers,  the  fetichers,  or  the  "  old  men,"
teach  them  during  a  varying  period  all  that  a  "man"  should
know  about  social  and  sexual  life.  The  candidates  are  then
put  tests,  sometimes  very  cruel,  to  make  sure  of  their  power

»  rioss  {ioc,  di.)  mentions  Australian,  Eskimo,  and  North  American
Indian  trilKJS  among  whom  the  child  is  suckled  till  the  age  of  fourteen  or
fifteen.

16


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  243

Still  practised  all  over  Europe  at  the  interments  of  superior
officers.  In  India  women  are  sacrificed,  slaves  in  Dahomey
and  among  the  Dyaks,  etc.,  in  order  that  the  dead  may  not
be  deprived  of  anything  in  the  other  world. ^

Funeral  ceremonies  and  the  practice  of  going  into  mourning
give  place  to  feasts  of  diverse  character.  Among  the  Dualas
of  the  Cameroons  (Western  Africa),  the  "  feast  of  the  dead "
lasts  nine  days,  the  time  required  for  his  soul  to  make  the
journey  to  Bcla^  the  place  of  eternal  rest.  Among  the  Battas  of
Sumatra,  we  find  these  funeral  feasts  accompanied  by  dances
and  a  special  kind  of  game,  the  Topingha,  The  exhumation
of  the  bones  of  the  dead  person  at  the  end  of  a  certain  time,
practised  by  several  Indonesian,  Melanesian,  and  American
tribes,  is  the  occasion  of  orgies ;  I  may  also  mention  the  habit
of  visiting  the  cemetery  at  stated  periods,  and  taking  food
either  on  the  grave  or  by  the  side  of  it,  which  is  very  general
in  Europe.

Among  the  feasts  organised  in  honour  of  the  dead  let  us
mention  the  Bung  of  the  Japanese,  at  the  end  of  which
miniature  skifis  in  straw  are  thrown  into  the  sea,  supposed  to
transport  the  souls  of  the  dead  who  have  been  present  at  the
feast  back  to  their  dwelling-place.

.  The  modes  of  sepulture^  although  very  varied, — interment,
incineration,  exposure  to  the  air  (natural  mummification),  em-
balming, pure  and  simple  abandonment  on  the  earth  or  to
the  waves, — have  not  a  great  importance  from  the  ethnical
point  of  view ;  often  two  or  three  modes  may  co-exist  among
the  same  people  (examples,  Mongols,  Papuans).

Mourning. — Outward  manifestations  of  grief  caused  by
the  death  of  a  near  relative  exist  among  all  peoples  of  the
world,  even  the  most  uncivilised.  These  are,  first,  cries,
lamentations,  and  tears  (Bushmen,  Bechuana,  ancient  Egyp-

'  Many  practices  io  relation  to  the  dead  are  explained  by  the  belief  that
they  are  sleeping  for  a  greater  or  less  time  (see  p.  216).     Thus,  among  the
Micronesians  of  the  Gilbert  Islands,  the  woman  sleeps  by  the  side  of  her
dead  hasband,  and  covers  her  body  with  the  putrid  matter  which  oc
firom  the  coq)se.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  245

tions  have  taken,  as  well  as  on  usages  and  customs;  and  the
latter  in  their  turn  are  derived  principally  from  family  organisa-
tion and  religious  ideas.

The  international  life  of  peoples  manifests  itself  in  three
different  ways :  either  in  hostile  relations  (war),  in  pacific
neutral  relations  (commerce),  or  in  sympathetic  relations  (ex-
change of  ideas  and  feelings,  feasts,  congresses,  etc.).

Inner  Life  of  a  People — Economic  Organisation, — The  system
by  which  property  is  held  depends  on  the  mode  of  production,
for  the  distribution  and  consumption  of  wealth  are  in  intimate
relation  with  the  mode  of  procuring  it.  Among  savage  hunters
it  is  often  necessary  for  several  to  combine  to  catch  big  game;
thus  Australians  hunt  the  kangaroo  in  bands  of  several  dozen
individuals;  the  Eskimo  gather  quite  a  flotilla  of  kayaks  for
whale-fishing.  The  captured  kangaroos,  the  whale  brought
to  shore,  are  considered  common  property;  each  eats  of  the
spoil  according  to  his  hunger.  The  territory  of  each  tribe
among  the  Australians  and  Red  Indians  is  considered  collective
property;  every  one  hunts  on  it  in  his  own  way,  on  condition
that  he  does  not  encroach  on  the  territory  of  neighbouring
tribes.  But  in  the  midst  of  this  common  property  certain
objects  used  solely  by  the  individual,  his  garments,  his  weapons,
etc.,  are  considered  personal  properly,  while  the  tent  with  its
furniture,  etc.,  belongs  to  the  family;  as  the  canoe  which  is
used  for  whale  fishing,  holding  five  or  six  persons,  belongs  to
these  persons  in  common.

Thus  in  the  same  society  three  sorts  of  property,  collective,
family,  and  individual,  may  exist  simultaneously  side  by  side.
What  decides  its  category  is  the  character  of  the  labour
expended,  the  mode  of  production.  I  have  made  a  flint
implement  with  my  own  hands,  it  is  mine;  with  the  assist-
ance of  my  wife  and  children  I  have  built  the  hut,  it  belongs
to  the  family;  I  have  hunted  with  the  people  of  my  tribe,
the  beasts  slain  belong  to  us  all  in  common.  The  animals
which  I  have  killed  by  myself  on  the  territory  of  the  tribe  are
mine,  and  if  by  chance  the  animal  wounded  by  me  escapes  and
is  killed  by  another,  it  belongs  to  both  of  us  and  the  skin  *


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  247

same  box.^  With  the  growth  of  population,  this  family  joint-
ownership  developed  into  an  agricultural  commune,  the
true  "  village  community  '  of  English  authors,  with  the
alienation  of  holdings  and  the  admission  of  strangers  into
its  midst,  with  periodic  distributions  of  the  various  strips
of  land.  The  best  type  of  this  kind  of  community  is  the
Russian  "mir."  In  India  it  is  met  with  side  by  side  with  the
family  commune  among  the  Dravidian  and  Aryan  peoples,
and  in  Western  Europe  numerous  traces  of  it  are  found.^
But  these  are  only  traces  and  survivals,  for  communal  property
has  been  destroyed  here  as  in  the  Mussulman  world,  often  by
means  of  force,  with  the  establishment  of  the  feudal  system,
which  gave  birth  to  the  different  modes  of  land  tenure  which
we  find  to-day.  In  Russia  and  in  India  the  dissolution  of  the
communal  system  is  still  taking  place  under  our  eyes,  but  from
intrinsically  different  causes,  especially  the  rapid  increase  of
population  and  diminution  of  the  size  of  holdings.

Social  Organisation. — The  constitution  of  society  is  modelled
on  that  of  property.  In  the  simplest  cases  the  family  organisa-
tion is  at  the  same  time-  the  social  organisation.  Under
the  regime  of  group  marriage,  and  even  after  its  partial
replacement  by  individual  marriage,  tribes  are  divided  into  a
certain  number  of  clans,  each  of  which,  with  the  majority
of  peoples,  has  its  iotenu  The  tolem  is  a  class  of  material
objects  (never  an  isolated  object,  thus  differing  from  the
fetish)  for  which  uncivilised  man  professes  a  superstitious
veneration,  believing  in  a  sort  of  mysterious  connection
between  himself  and  each  representative  of  the  class  of  objects.
Most  frequently  the  totem  is  some  species  of  animal  or  vegetable
which  the  members  of  the  clan  regard  as  their  ancestor,  and
also  as  the  patron  and  protector  of  the  whole  clan.  The
Iroquoian  legends  relate  circumstantially  how  the  tortoise,  their
totem  and  ancestor,  got  rid  of  its  shell  and  gradually  developed

1  Kovalcwsky,  Tableau  des  engines  di  la  fanUlle^  ei^  ^ "

Stockholm,  1890 ;  Maine,  Early  Ilislory  of  JnstUt

'  G.  L.  ^MB£f«  The  Village  Community^  U
lewsky,  /^.^SR^den-PowclI,  Indian  Viik^  i


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  249

Territorial  Organisation, — When  family  ownership  is  re-
placed by  communal  ownership,  the  social  organisation  takes
the  territorial  form.  All  the  people  inhabiting  a  given  territory,
whether  related  by  blood  or  not,  form  the  social  unit.  The
Russian  "Volost,"  the  Annamese  commune,  the  Japanese
"Mura,"  the  "Calpulli"  of  the  ancient  Toltecs,  are  examples
of  this  kind  of  grouping.^  Sometimes  these  territorial  organisa-
tions form  by  themselves  independent  states,  governed  by  an
elected  chief,  assisted  by  the  delegates  of  each  commune  (Moqui
in  North  America,  Krumen  and  Vakamba  in  Africa,  Samoans  in
Oceania),  or  controlled  by  popular  assemblies  (New  Hebrideans,
most  of  the  peoples  of  Western  Africa  and  the  Congo  basin).
Sometimes  also  they  form  part  of  vaster  confederations  at  the
head  of  which  is  an  elected  chief,  a  council,  etc.  (Rejangs
of  Sumatra  with  their  **  Pangherans,"  or  princes,  Afghans  with
their  "  Khans, '*  etc.).

Organisation  of  Castes  and  Classes. — We  may  find  already  in
the  territorial  organisation  of  society  the  rudiments  of  the  forma-
tion of  classes,  shown  by  the  development  of  private  property
and  wealth,  and  also  by  the  authority  of  the  chiefs  and  powerful
persons  who  become  the  "  protectors  "  of  the  weak.  This
differentiation  of  classes  is  also  marked  by  the  appearance
of  slavery,  the  result  of  wars  and  the  right  of  private  property
(enslavement  for  debt).  It  takes  definite  form  in  the  class
organisation  which  presupposes  the  existence  of  two  groups
of  citizens  at  least — the  lords  and  nobles,  the  aristocracy  or
directing  class,  and  the  "people,"  the  plebeian  or  directed
class.  The  relations  between  these  classes  may  extend  from
the  complete  servitude  of  the  one  and  the  exercise  of  the  right
of  life  and  death  by  the  other,  to  an  almost  absolute  equality
of  the  two.

There  is  similarly  a  perfect  gradation  for  non-free  people,
as  opposed  to  citizens  divided  into  two  or  more  classes.     At

'  Laveleye,  PropH^U  primitive,  p.  9,  Paris,  1891  ;  Kovalew&ky,  toc»  a'i,,
passim ;  Sakuya   Yoshida,    GeschichtL    Entwickl,  dm  -^
Japan^   p.  46,  Hague,   1893;   Bancroft,  Naiivi  Ri
vol.  iL,  p.  226,  San  Francisco,  1882.


250  ,T11E  RACES  OF  MAN.

the  foot  of  the  ladder  are  *'  slaves/'  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
word,  not  regarded  even  as  men;  while  at  the  top  are  found
those  who  by  birth  are  not  free,  but  who  by  fortune  or  other-
wise may  come  to  occupy  a  position  almost  equal  to  that  of
free  citizens  of  the  highest  class.

What  are  the  qualifications  required  in  order  to  become
chief  in  primitive  social  organisations?  Most  often,  by
election,  those  become  chief  who  are  bravest  in  war,  strongest,
most  skilful  in  the  chase  (American  Indians,  Congolese),  or
the  chiefs  are  the  richest  (Indians,  Polynesians,  Negroes),  or
simply  they  are  the  biggest,  the  best  fed  (Athapascans,
according  to  Bancroft).  But  whatever  may  be  the  ground  on
which  they  are  chosen,  the  power  of  these  chiefs  is  often  most
precarious,  and  it  may  disappear  with  the  cause  of  its
origin  (war,  hunting  expedition).  Chiefs  elected  for  a  stated
period  are  iuvested  with  more  real  power.  Sometimes  they
are  elected  for  life;  this  is  a  step  towards  hereditary
power  which  may  degenerate  into  the  purest  absolutism
(ancient  Dahomey).  The  outward  ensigns  of  authority  are
of  various  sorts :  clubs  and  commander's  staffs  (Oceania  and
Europe),  parasols  (Asia,  Africa),^  etc.  In  the  same  way
as  the  clan  is  responsible  for  the  misdeeds  of  each  of
its  members,  so  the  absolute  monarch,  king,  sultan,  khan,
prince,  etc.,  is  responsible  for  the  acts  committed  by  his
subjects.  The  corollary  of  the  conception  that  kings  or  other
potentates  represent  the  most  skilful,  influential,  and  bravest
men  is  that  of  forfeiture  of  power  when  the  holder  becomes
aged  or  infirm,  or  when  he  shows  himself  incapable  of
reigning  (Quechuas,  Masai);  in  certain  absolute  States  the
right  of  revolt  against  an  incapable  holder  of  royal  power
is  expressly  recognised  (China),  at  least  in  theory.^

Feudal  and  Democratic  Organisation, — It  would  be  out  of
place  here  to  dwell  on  the  development  of  the  feudal  system  and
the  theocracy  which  result  from  the  regitne  of  classes.     I>et  us

*  See  Andrec,  Ethnofos*,  ParaiUle,  p.  250.

^  See  for  fuirlhcr  details,  Post,  ..     cit,,  Crundria  der  elhnol.  Jurisprud,^
vol.  i.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  251

merely  say  that  almost  all  half-civilised  peoples  are  still  in  the
midst  of  the  feudal  regime  or  are  just  emerging  from  it.  The
recognition  of  individual  liberty  forms  the  first  step  towards
the  organisations  of  modern  European  states,  constitutional
monarchies  or  republics,  in  which  the  aim  is  to  reduce  to  a
minimum  governmental  action  and  the  differences  of  classes,
especially  before  the  law, — to  establish,  in  a  word,  a  defnocratic
regime.

Social  morality^  or  the  basis  of  conduct  imposed  on  the
members  of  society,  is  a  convention  recognised  by  the  laws  and
by  public  opinion.  This  is  to  say  that  it  changes  from  one  people
to  another,  according  to  the  degree  of  culture,  surrounding
circumstances,  etc.  In  the  most  uncivilised  tribes  life  has  a
relative  security,  owing  to  certain  rules  of  conduct  to  which
each  member  submits  from  fear  of  punishment  or  the  dis-
approbation of  public  opinion.  The  right  of  the  strongest  is
not  applied  in  all  its  brutal  logic  even  among  savages.

Their  rules  of  morality  are  of  course  not  always  in  accordance
with  ours.  Among  the  uncivilised,  it  is  not  a  question  of
absolute  right,  of  absolute  morality;  everything  is  reduced  to
a  very  restricted  altruism,  not  extending  beyond  kin  and  imme-
diate neighbours.  It  is  wrong  to  kill  a  man  of  one's  own  clan,
or  to  steal  something  from  the  collective  property  of  the  clan ;  but
it  is,  on  the  contrary,  very  praiseworthy  to  strike  down  with  a
well-directed  arrow  a  stranger  to  the  clan,  or  to  carry  off  some-
thing from  a  neighbouring  clan.  Gradually  the  moral  senti-
ment extends  to  people  of  the  same  tribe,  of  the  same  class  or
caste,  of  the  same  religion,  but  such  extension  is  slow.  Among
the  civilised  the  moral  code  sometimes  varies  as  it  is  applied
on  this  or  that  side  of  political  or  social  boundaries.

Besides,  in  a  general  way,  a  number  of  acts  regarded  as
culpable  by  the  codes  of  all  civilised  states,  are  yet  tolerated,
and  even  extolled,  in  certain  particular  circumstances;  such
as  the  taking  of  life,  for  example,  in  legitimate  defence,
in  a  duel,  during  war,  or  as  capital  punishment  Thus  in
recalling  examples  of  this  kind,  we  shall  be  less  severe  on
a  Dyak  who  cuts  off  a  man's  head  solely  that  he  may  carry


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  253

true  culprit  is  sometimes  difficult,  the  whole  clan  is  held
responsible  for  the  act  committed  by  one  of  its  members,  and
it  becomes  lawful  to  kill  any  one  belonging  to  this  clan
to  avenge  the  murder.  The  law  of  retaliation  also  implies
that  the  misdeed  should  be  avenged  in  nearly  the  same
form  in  which  it  was  committed.  Gradually,  however,  ven-
geance passes  into  the  hands  of  the  representatives  of  society
(judges,  magistrates),  and  the  penal  code  is  established.

Ordeals  represent  one  of  the  most  widespread  methods  of
judicial  procedure  of  non-civilised  peoples.  Most  frequently
the  carrying  out  of  these  trials  is  entrusted  to  magicians
believed  to  have  the  faculty  of  discovering  the  guilty  person.
Needless  to  say  that  the  presents  offered  by  interested  parties
had  a  considerable  influence  on  the  decision  of  these  umpires.^

The  taking  of  an  oath  is  the  last  remnant  of  this  mode  of
procedure;  it  is  a  moral  test  which,  among  many  peoples,  is
associated  with  the  obligation  of  swallowing  certain  special
beverages  (the  rust  of  a  sword  in  wine  in  Malaysia,  blood
among  the  Chinese,  etc.).

Secret  Societies — Extra-legal  Judges, — In  every  social  organi-
sation which  is  imperfect  or  powerless  to  give  satisfaction
to  the  just  claims  of  its  members,  secret  societies  are  formed
which  undertake  the  redressing  of  wrongs  and  the  re-establish-
ment of  justice.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  societies  of  the
"  Duk-Duk  "  of  New  Britain,  usually  formed  of  a  confidant
of  the  chief  of  the  tribe,  and  of  young  men  who  have  entered
the  "  club  '*  on  payment  of  a  somewhat  large  sum.  Each
Duk-Duk  is  on  occasion  a  justiciary;  clad  in  his  particular  dress
and  wearing  a  horrible  mask,  he  runs  howling  through  the  village,
and  all  those  who  are  not  in  the  secret  run  away  terrified.  He
goes  to  the  hut  of  the  native  against  whom  a  complaint  had  been

'  The  most  common  ordeals  are  the  trial  by  water  (swimming  across  a
river,  remaining  some  time  under  water,  etc.)  and  that  by  fire.  In  the
latter  case  the  accused  ^  made  to  run  on  hot  coals,  as  in  India,  among  the
Somalis,  in  Siam;  to  lick  red-hot  iron,  as  among  the  Dyaks,  the  Khonds,
the  Negroes  of  Sierra-Leone  ;  or  again,  to  dip  the  hands  in  molten  lend,
as  in  Burma  among  the  Jakuns  of  Malacca,  or  the  Alfurus  of
Bum,  etc


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  255

the  origin  of  them  all  is  the  desire  to  show  inferiority  to
the  person  saluted,  and  to  express  sympathy  and  devotion.
The  expression  of  inferiority  is  a  posture  which  puts  you
lower  than  the  person  saluted.  This  posture  varies  from
prostration  to  the  ground  (Negroes,  Cambodians)  to  simple  in-
clination of  the  head  (Europeans),  passing  through  a  series  of
intermediate  forms:  touching  the  ground  with  the  forehead
(Chmese),  simple  genuflexion,  and  the  "  curtsey"  of  our  mothers.
As  to  manifestations  of  sympathy,  they  are  almost  always
expressed  by  an  embrace  or  kiss.  In  the  case  of  the  most
humble  submission,  the  kiss  is  given  to  the  soil  trodden  by
the  feet  of  the  person  saluted,  while  in  that  of  friendship
between  equals  it  is  bestowed  on  the  cheek  or  lips;  inter-
mediate forms  are  not  wanting  here  either,  and  the  various  habits
of  kissing  the  foot,  the  garments,  the  hand,  etc.,  are  universally
known.  To  these  two  principal  manifestations  of  politeness
several  otheis  may  be  added.  A  person  meeting  a  friend  or
even  a  casoal  acquaintance  uncovers  the  whole  or  a  part  of
the  body,  the  breast  (certain  Negroes),  the  arm  or  head
(Europeans);  each  rubs  the  other  with  oil  or  with  earth,
nose  is  brouj^  into  contact  with  nose,  and  each  "  sniffs "  the
other's  health  ^I^ps,  Eskimo,  Malays,  Polynesians);^  each
shakes  the  othei's  hands,  pbces  the  hand  on  the  forehead
(Hindus)  or  on  the  breast  (Mussulmans),  or  draws  out  the
tongue  while  scratching  at  the  same  time  the  ear  (Thibetans;,
eta).*

b.  International  Life  of  Peoples. — The  relations  of  ethnical
groups  one  with  another  may  be  of  three  sorts — hostile,
neutral,  or  sympathetic  The  relations  of  the  last  category
are  only  just  indicated  among  civilised  peoples  in  the  form

^  The  custom  of  applying  the  nose  to  the  cheek  and  drawing  a  breath,
with  closed  eyes  and  a  smacking  of  the  lips,  exists  among  the  Southern
Chinese,  but  only  as  an  act  of  love.  According  to  P.  D'Enjoy,  it  is  an
olfactoiy  gesture  derived  from  the  sensations  of  nutrition,  as  the  European
kiss  on  the  lips  is  derived  from  the  lascixious  bite.  iBuU.  Sot.  Anthr.,
Paris,  1897,  pt.  2.)

'  See  for  details  Ung  K^Ah,  Journ.  Antkr,  Insi,^  vol.  xix.,  1SS9,
p.  164;  Andree,  Etk.  ParaL^  N.F.,  p.  225;  Hellwald,  Rosubp.^  p.  i.


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  257

the  same  for  hunting  and  war.  It  is  only  among  the  half-
civilised  that,  with  more  or  less  permanent  armies,  weapons
specially  designed  for  war  make  their  appearance,  as  well  as
works  of  a  defensive  character — fortresses,  palisades,  protective
moats,  and  caltrops.

I  can  give  here  but  a  very  brief  description  of  offensive
and  defensive  weapons.^

Offensive  weapons  may  be  divided  into  two  categories —
weapons  held  firmly  in  the  hand  and  missile  weapons;  each
of  these  categories  .comprises  striking,  cutting,  and  piercing
weapons.

Among  the  weapons  held  firmly  in  the  hand,  the  striking  01
d/unt ones  play  an  important  part  among  the  uncivilised,  for  these
are  derived  directly  from  the  staff,  pre-eminently  the  weapon
of  primitive  peoples.  The  most  common  is  the  c/u^,  only
just   distinguished  from  a  staff  by  its   terminal   swelling   in

*  The  difference  between  offensive  and  defensive  weapons  is  often  not
very  marked  even  in  our  civilisation ;  thus  the  sword  and  the  sabre  serve
sis  much  for  giving  as  warding  off  blows ;  the  same  is  true  among  savages
in  regard  to  the  staff,  the  club,  etc  Frequently,  too,  objects  which
originally  have  nothing  in  common  with  war,  become  offensive  or  defensive
weapons.  Thus  the  bracelet  is  sometimes  a  defensive  weapon.  Among
several  Negroes  (Ashantis,  Kafirs,  Vakambas),  and  in  Melanesia,
warriors  put  on  their  legs  and  arms  bracelets  formed  of  the  long  hair  of
different  animals  (goat,  boar,  zebra)  which  almost  completely  cover  the
limbs  and  protect  them  effectually  against  the  blows  of  club  and  spear.
The  bracelets  of  wire  rolled  in  numerous  spirals  around  the  fore-arm
or  the  leg,  which  are  met  with  among  the  Dyaks,  the  Mois  of  Indo-China,
the  Niam-Niams,  and  the  Baghirmis  of  Central  Africa,  are  veritable
protective  armour;  they  are  the  prototypes  of  the  vantbrace  and  greaves.

In  certain  rarer  cases  the  bracelet  is  an  offensive  weapon.  Among  the
Jurs,  a  negro  tribe  of  the  upper  Nile,  bracelets  are  found  provided  with
two  points  or  spurs,  four  inches  long,  and  very  dangerous.  The
bracelet  of  the  Irengas  (to  the  cast  of  the  upper  Nile),  as  well  as  that  of
thejibba  (living  on  the  banks  of  the  Jibba,  a  left-hand  tributary  of  the
Sabba),  is  a  great  disc,  with  an  o|)ening  in  the  middle  through  which  to
pass  the  arm.  A  portion  of  the  disc  is  removed  in  order  to  give  it  more
elasticity,  and  its  outer  edge,  exceedingly  sharp,  forms  a  kind  of  circular
sabre.  In  order  not  to  wound  himself,  the  wearer  covers  the  edge  with  a
drcttlar  case  which  he  only  removes  for  battle.

n


E^


SOCIOLOGICAL   CIIAKACTERS.  261

in  motion:  direct  .ipplication  of  the  muscular  force  of  man,
elasticity  of  certain  solid  bodies,  and  lastly,  the  pressure  of  pases.

Of  the  first  of  these  forces  but  little  use  o

is  made.     The  ameuliim  of  classic  anti-  6

quity    had    only   a    restricted    use.     The  S  —

thro  wing -stick,'  or  stick  provided  with  a  •- _g

Dotch  which  serves  to  increase  the  force  '«  ^

of  the  impulse  given   by  the  arm  to  a  n  ^

javelin,  is  only  used  in  some  very  circum-  "s  S

scribed  regions  of  the  globe,  especially  on  S  ^
the    borders    of    the    Pacific    Ocean,    in
Australia,    where    it    bears   the   name   of

IVoomtni, 'm  Melanesia  (Fig.  76),  in  the  %^

north-west  of  America,  among  the  Eskj-  S

mo  and  Chukchis.     It  was  also  known  in  g'^y

pre-Columban  limes  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  3  ^

whence,    perhaps,    it    passed    into  Brazil.  ^  -j

Another    similar    weapon,    the    s'ing,    in  ^  J

former    times    much     used     by    Semitic  g  a

peoples,  and  still  surviving  as  a  common  I  "S

toy  of  our  children,  is  scarcely  used  as  a  o  J

weapon   of    any    importance,    except    by  *  ^

some    Polynesian     or     American    tribes  |  "g

(Hupa  Indians,  Araucans,  Fuegians).  S"^

Missile  weapons  which  make  use  of  the  u  %

pressure    of  gases   are  very  little  known  Z  S

among  uncivilised  peoples.     We  can  only  j*  |

mention  the  blow-tube,  the  Sarbacan,  or  a  %

more  correctly  speaking  the  Zitrnialana,  ^  ■'

of  the  South  American   Indians,  and  its  %  'g

homol<%ue  the  Siimpitan  of  the  Malays,  j5  -2.

in  common  use  among  the   Indonesians  i  -c

of    the    Asiatic    Archipelago   and    Indo-  ■~j=

Chinn.  i

This  weapon  is  known  in  Europe  from

'  O.   Masun,  "  ThKHving. sticks,"  Rep.    U.S.  N.  Mils,  for  1884;  F.  v.
LutchoD,  "Wurfholi,  etc.,"  Fulithr.  .  .  ,  Batluut,  p.  131,  Berlin,  iSg&


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  263

several  Finnish  languages.^  However  that  may  be,  we  may
divide  the  infinite  variety  of  bows  into  two  groups :  the  plain
bow — that  is  to  say,  the  bow  formed  of  a  single  piece  of  wood,
and  the  composite  bow,  made  of  various  materials — wood,  horn,
ivory,  sinews,  leather,  etc.,  glued  solidly  together.

The  least  complicated  type  of  the  composite  bow  is  that  of
the  eastern  Eskimo,  of  wood  and  horn,  or  of  wood  and  bone,  the
weapon  being  strengthened  by  a  cord  of  sinews  applied  along
the  '^back"  or  the  outer  side  (opposed  to  the  "belly,"  inner
sidej  which  is  nearest  the  archer  when  he  bends  the  bow).*^

Among  simple  bows  we  must  mention  that  of  the  Mela-
nesians,  having  a  groove  sometimes  on  the  outer,  sometimes
on  the  inner  side;  that  of  the  Monbuttus,  provided  with
a  "grip";  lastly,  that  of  the  Andamanese,  in  the  form  of  an  S,
resembling  in  its  general  appearance  on  the  one  hand  certain
bows  of  the  Eskimo,  and  on  the  other,  those  of  certain  Bantu
Negroes  of  Eastern  Africa  (according  to  Foa).^

'  M.  Buch,  Die  VVotiakefty  p.  78.  Helsingfors,  1882 ;  Extract  from
Acta  Soc.  Scient.  Fennica,  vol.  xii.

'•*  The  prototype  of  the  true  composite  boWy  characterised  by  the  addition
to  it  of  a  mass  of  moistened  sinews  which,  on  drying,  make  the  bow
curve  up,  must  have  had  another  form ;  it  bore  a  resemblance  probably  to
the  bow  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  north-west  of  America  and  of  California,
in  which  the  sinew  covering  often  goes  beyond  the  body  of  the  bow  and
hangs  down  at  its  two  extremities.

The  improved  forms  of  the  composite  bow  are  only  found  on  the  Asiatic
continent  The  so-called  ** Tatar"  or  Mongolian  bow,  the  Chinese
**  kung,"  is  chiefly  composed  of  a  piece  of  wood  to  which  is  fixed  with
bird-lime  on  the  inner  side  a  piece  of  horn,  and  on  the  outer  side  two  layers
of  sinews  covered  with  two  layers  of  birch-bark.  All  other  composite  bows,
Persian,  Hindu,  etc,  are  only  complicated  forms  of  this  type,  to  which  we
may  also  refer  the  exceptional  types  of  bow  of  the  Lapp  and  Javanese,  etc

Accepting  the  view  of  General  Pitt  Rivers,  loc.  cit.^  we  may  say  that  the
composite  bow  is  not  a  more  perfect  weapon  than  the  simple  lx)w,  and  that
it  could  only  have  had  its  orij^in  in  countries  where  the  absence  of  very
elastic  varieties  of  wood  make  it  necessary  to  seek  in  the  superposition  of
various  materials  the  elasticity  required  to  augment  the  force  of  the  weapon.

^  The  substance  used  in  the  manufacture  of  the  bow-string  varies  with
the  region ;  thus  in  the  west  of  Africa  it  is  always  of  rattan,  as  far  as
Butembo  (country  of  the  Ponondas),  where  strings  of  Crofaiaria  and  bam-
boo begin  to  be  used.  (Weule,  EtknoL  Notizblatt*  A/us,  Be* tin ^  voL  L|
No.  2,  p.  39,  1895-96.)


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.


26s


out  thumb  and  the  second  joint  of  the  bent  forefinger  (Ainus,
Chippewas,  Assyrians,  etc.).  The  second  method  is  only  a
variant  of  the  first,  and  is
widespread  like  the  first,
especially  among  the
North  American  Indians.
Both  give  but  a  moderate
propelling  power  to  the
arrow.  The  third  method
consists  in  holding  the
arrow  between  the  thumb
and  the  second  joint  of
the  scarcely  bent  fore-
finger, whilst  the  first  joint
of  this  finger  draws  the
string,  with  the  help  of
the  third  finger.  In  this
method  of  release  it  is
necessary  to  hold  the
bow  horizontally  (Omahas,
Siamese,  the  natives  of  the
greater  Andaman  Island,
the  Egyptians  and  the
Greeks  of  antiquity).
The  fourth,  so-called
Mediterranean,  method
(Fig.  77,  bottom)  con-
sists in  drawing  the  string
by  the  first  joints  of  all
the  fingers  except  the
thumb  and  the  little  finger,
the  arrow  being  nipped
between  the  fore  and
middle  fingers  and  placed
on   the   left  of  the  bow;


I^'g-  77« — Different  methods  of  arrow
release.  Top,  primitive  release.
Middle,  Mongolian  release.  Bottom,
Mediterranean  release.  {After  E.
Morse. )


this  is  the   method   practised  by   European   archers  of   all
ages,  as  well  as  that  of  the   Hindus,  Arabs,  Eskimo,  and


SOCIOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS.  2/5

thin  rings,  from  five  and  a  half  to  six  inches  long,  and  weigh*
ing  about  seven  ounces,  was  used.

A  general  fact  to  be  noted  in  regard  to  primitive  money  is
that  it  may  be  transformed  without  much  trouble  into  an
object  of  use  (lance-iron,  shovel,  hoe,  arrow-head,  sword).
In  China  the  first  bronze  money  had  the  form  of  a  knife,  the
handle  of  which  terminated  in  a  ring;  in  time  the  blade
became  shorter  and  shorter,  and  at  last  disappeared,  leaving
only  the  ring,  which  was  transformed  into  that  Chinese  money,
pierced  with  a  square  hole,  called  "  sapec,"  or  "cash."  Brass
or  copper  wire,  of  which  pieces  are  cut  up  (Fig.  81,3),  represents
money  in  Central  Africa.  Silver  bars,  pieces  of  which  are  cut
according  to  need,  are  also  current  money  in  China,  as  they
were  in  Russia  in  the  fifteenth  century,  as  well  as  skins.

The  question  of  transport  and  means  of  communication  is
closely  allied  to  that  of  commerce.  There  is  little  to  say  about
trade-routes,  which  most  frequently  are  tracks  made  by  chance
in  savage  countries,  and  sometimes  horrible  neck-breaking
roads  in  half-civilised  countries.  The  means  of  transport  are
very  varied,  and  may  furnish  matter  for  an  interesting  mono-
graph, as  O.  Mason  has  shown.^  The  simplest  mode  of  trans-
port is  that  on  men's  backs,  with  or  without  the  aid  of  special
apparatus,  like  the  ski  and  snow-shoes  in  cold  countries  (Figs.
115  and  1 1 6).  To  be  noted  apart  are  the  attachments  for  climb-
ing trees,  used  from  Spain  to  New  Caledonia,  passing  through
Africa  and  India  (Fig.  82).  We  come  next  to  the  utilisation
of  animals,  the  ass,  horse,  mule,  camel,  ox,  zebra,  dog,  etc.,
which  at  first  carried  the  loads  on  their  backs,  and  were
afterwards  employed  as  draught  animals.

Primitive  Vehicles, — Most  uncivilised  peoples  are  unacquainted
with  any  form  of  vehicle.  This  is  so  among  the  Australians,
Melanesians,  and  most  of  the  natives  of  Africa  and  America.
But  there  are  also  a  number  of  populations  pretty  well  advanced
in  civilisation  whom  their  special  circumstances  do  not  permit
the  use  of  chariots  or  other  vehicles  on  wheels;  such  are  the

'  O.  Mason,  loc,  cit.^  p.  327,  and  "Prim.  Travel  and  Transport,"
Smithsonian  Report  U.S.  Nat.  A  fits,  for  i8g4^  p.  239,  Washington,  1S96.


CLASSIFICATION   OK   RACES   AND   PEOPLES.        2S1

introduction  on  "  races  *'  and  "  ethnic  groujis,"  they  will  under-
stand  all  the  difficulties  this  causes.

In  order  to  class  peoples,  nations,  tribes,  in  a  word,  '*  ethnic
groups,"  we  ought  to  take  into  consideration  linguistic
differences,  ethnic  characters,  and  especially,  in  my  opinion,
geographical  distribution.  It  is  thus  that  I  shall  describe
the  different  peoples  in  the  subsequent  chapters,  while
classing  them  geographically.  But  for  a  classification  of
"races"  (using  the  word  in  the  sense  given  to  it  in
the  introduction),  it  is  only  necessary  to  take  into
account  physical  characters.  We  must  try  to  determine  by
the  anthropological  analysis  of  each  of  the  ethnic  groups
the  races  which  constitute  it;  then  compare  these  races
one  with  another,  unite  those  which  possess  most  similarities
in  common,  and  separate  those  which  exhibit  most  dis-
similarities.

On  making  these  methodic  groupings  we  arrive  at  a  small
number  of  races,  combinations  of  which,  in  various  proportions,
are  met  with  in  the  multitude  of  ethnic  groups.

Let  us  take  for  example  the  Negrito  race,  of  which  the
Aetas  of  the  Philippines,  the  Andamanese,  and  the  black
Sakai  are  the  almost  pure  representatives.  This  race  is  found
again  here  and  there  among  the  Melanesians,  th&  Malays,  the
Dravidians,  etc.  In  all  these  populations  the  type  of  the
Negrito  race  is  revealed  on  one  side  by  the  presence  of  a
certain  number  of  individuals  who  manifest  it  almost  in  its
primitive  purity,  and  on  the  other  by  the  existence  of
a  great  number  of  individuals,  whose  traits  likewise  repro-
duce this  type,  but  in  a  modified  form,  half  hidden  by
characters  borrowed  from  other  races.  Characteristics  of
various  origin  may  thus  be  amalgamated^  or  merely  exist  in
juxtaposition.

Race-characters  appear  with  a  remarkable  persistency,  in
spile  of  all  intermixtures,  all  modifications  due  to  civilisa-
tion, change  of  language,  etc.  What  varies  is  the  prnportion
in  which  such  and  such  a  race  enters  into  the  constitution
of  the  ethnic  group.      A  race  may  form  the  preponderatii


CLASSIFICATION    OF   RACES   AND   PEOPLES.        283


"modifications."^  Finally,  in  1878,  Topinard  enumerated
sixteen  races,  and  increased  this  number  in  1885  to  nineteen.^
In  mixed  classifications,  based  on  both  somatic  and  ethnic
characters,  a  very  much  greater  number  of  sub-divisions  is
found,  but  the  reason  of  that  is  that  "ethnic  groups"  are
included.

Putting  these  aside,  we  see  in  the   most  complete  mixed


*  Priucital  Rcucs,

(i)  Negroid.

(2)  Australoid.

(3)  Mongoloid.

(4)  Xanthochroid.

(5)  Melanochroid.


Secondary  Races  or  ^*Afodi/UaiioPis**

(i)  Bushmen,  (2)  Negro,  (3)  Papuan.

(4)  Australians,  (5)  Black  race  of  Deccan
(Dravidians),  (6)  Ethiopian  (Ilamitc).

(7)  Mongol,  (8)  Polynesian,  (9)  American,
(10)  Eskimo,  (11)  Malay.

(12)  Xanthochroid  of  Northern  Europe.

(13)  Melanochroid  of  Southern  Europe,  (14)
Melanochroid  of  Asia  (Arabs,  Afghans,
Hindus,  etc.).

— T.  Huxley,  *'Geogr.  Distrib.  of  Mankind,"  Joum.  EthnoU  Soc,
London^  N.S.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  404,  map,  1870.  The  classification  of  Flower
(//.  AnthrO'  InU.^  vol.  xiv.,  1S85,  p.  378)  differs  from  that  of  Huxley  in  a
few  detaib  only.  This  eminent  anatomist  grouped  his  eleven  races  and
three  sub-races  under  three  *'  types" — Negro,  Mongolian,  and  Caucasian.

^  In  the  first  edition  of  his  classification  {Rev,  d^Anihr.^  2nd  series,
vol.  i.,  p.  509,  Paris,  1878),  Topinard  admits  sixteen  races  in  three  groups: —

(a)  Straight-haired  Rcues. — Eskimo,  Red  Indians,  Mexico- Peruvians,
Guarani-Caribs,  Mongols.

(^)  Wavy  or  Frizzy -haired  Races. — Fair-haired  people  of  Europe  (Xan*
thochroids  of  Huxley),  dark-haired  people  of  Europe  and  Semites  (Melano-
chroids  of  Huxley),  Australians  and  Indo-Abyssinians  (Australoids  of
Huxley),  Fulb^*,  Finns,  Cclto-Slavs,  Turanians.

{c)  Woolly -haired  Races. — Bushmen,  Papuans,  Kafirs,  Negritoes.

In  the  second  eiiition,  dating  from  1885  {EUtn*  Anthr,  gin*,  p.  502,
we  find  nineteen  races  grouped  under  three  heads: —

(a)  While  Leptorhine  AW^J.— Anglo-Scandinavians,  F'inns  (first  type.
Western),  Mediterraneans,  5>emito- Egyptians,  Lapono-Ligurians,  Celto-
Slavs.

(^)  Yellow  Mesorhine  Races. — Eskimo,  Tthuclchcs,  Polynesians,  Red
Indians,  yellow  peoples  of  Asia  (including  Finns  of  the  second  type),  Guar-
anis  (or  South  Americans,  except  the  Tehuelches),  Peruvians.

(<-)  Black  Platyrhine  Races. — Australians,  Bushmen,  Melanesians,
Negroes,  Tasmanians,  Negritoes.


CLASSIFICATION   OF   RACES  AND   PEOPLES.       285

and  my  own  researches,  have  compelled  me  since  then  to
modify  this  classification.  This  is  how  it  may  be  summarised
in  the  form  of  a  table,  giving  to  my  former  "types"  the  title
of  race  or  sub-races,  and  grouping  them  under  six  heads —


A.  VVooLi.v  Hair,  Broad  Nose.


Races  and  Sub-races.


Yellow  skin,  sleatopygous,  short  stature,     Bushmen  (s.  r.  Hottentots     I
dolichocephalic  and  Bushmen)

( Reddish-brown,     very    short     Negrito  (s.  r.  Negrillo  and     2
stature,  sub-brachycephalic        Negrito)
or  sub-dolichocephalic
Black,   stature  tall,  dolicho-
cephalic
Brownish-black,  medium  sta
.     ture,  dolichocephalic

B.  Curly  or  Wavy  Hair.


Dark  skin


Negro  (s.  r.  Nigritian  and    3

Bantu)
Meianesian  (s.   r.  Papuan     4

and  Meianesian)


Dark  skin  *


^Reddi»h-brown,  narrow  nose,     Ethiopian  5

tall  stature,  dolichocephalic

Chocolate-brown,  broad  nose,     Australian  6

medium    stature,    dolicho-
cephalic

Brownish- black,     broad      or     Dravviian  (s.  r.  Platyrhine     7
narrow  nose,  short  stature,        and  Leptorhine)
dolichocephalic


Skin    of  a    tawny    white,     nose    narrow,     Assyroid
hooked,  with  thick  top,  brachyce[>halic

C.  Wavy  Brown  or  Black  Hair,  Dark  Eyes.

Clear    brown    skin,   black    hair,    narrow,     Indo- Afghan
straight  or  convex   nose,   tall    stature,
dolichocephalic


8


Tawny

white

skin,   •<

black

hair


Tall

stature,

elongated  *

face


Aquiline  nose,  promi-
nent occiput,  doli-
chocephalic, ellip-
tical form  of  face

Straight  coarse  nose,
dolichocephalic,
square  face

Straight  fine  nose,  me-
socephalic,  oval  face
.Short  stature,  dolichocephalic


Arab  or  Semite


Berber  (4  sub-races)


10


II


Dull        rShort  stature,  strongly   bra-
white  skin,  I      chyccphalic,  round  face
brown     '|  Tall  stature,  brachycephalic,
hair        \     elongated  face


Littoral  European

12

Ibero'insular

13

Western  European

14

Adriatic

15

CLASSIFICATION   OF  RACES  AND  PEOPLES.       287

vain  to  attempt  to  exhibit  these  affinities  in  the  lineal
arrangement  of  a  table;  each  race,  in  fact,  manifests  some
points  of  resemblance,  not  only  with  its  neighbours  in  the
upper  or  lower  part  of  the  table,  but  also  with  others  which
are  remote  from  it,  in  view  of  the  technical  necessities  of  con-
struction of  such  a  table.  In  order  to  exhibit  the  affinities  in
question,  it  would  be  necessary  to  arrange  the  groups  accord-
ing to  the  three  dimensions  of  space,  or  at  least  on  a  surface
where  we  can  avail  ourselves  of  two  dimensions.  In  the  ensuing
table  (p.  289)  are  included  twenty-nine  races,  combined  into
seventeen  groups,  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  races  having
greatest  affinities  one  with  another  are  brought  near  together.
Seven  of  these  groups  only  are  composed  of  more  than  one  race.
They  may  be  called  as  follows  (see  the  table) : — XIII.,  American
group;  XII.,  Oceanian;  II.,  Negroid;  VIII.,  North  African;
XVI.,  Eurasian;  X.,  Melanochroid;  IX.,  Xanthochroid.  This
table  shows  us  clearly  that  the  Bushman  race,  for  example,  has
affinities  with  the  Negritoes  (short  stature)  and  the  Negroes
(nature  of  the  hair,  form  of  nose) ;  that  the  Dravidian  race  is
connected  both  with  the  Indonesian  and  the  Australian ;  that
the  place  of  the  Turkish  race  is,  by  its  natural  affinities,
between  the  Ugrians  and  the  Mongols ;  that  the  Eskimo  have
Mongoloid  and  American  features;  that  the  Assyroids  are
closely  related  to  the  Adriatics  and  the  Indo-Afghans ;  that
the  latter,  by  the  dark  colour  of  their  skin,  recall  the
Ethiopians,  and  the  Arabs  by  the  shape  of  the  face,  etc.  Here
are,  moreover,  some  details  of  the  twenty-nine  races  (marked
by  their  numbers  of  order)  of  the  first  table,  and  of  the  seven-
teen groups  of  the  second  (marked  in  Roman  figures).

I.  I.  The  Bushman  race  is  found  in  a  relative  state  of  purity
among  the  people  called  Bushmen  (Fig.  24),  and  less  pure
among  the  Hottentots  (Fig.  143).  The  presence  of  the  Bush-
man type  may  be  detected  among  a  great  number  of  Negro
peoples  to  the  south  of  the  equator  (for  example,  among  the
Bechuana  and  Kiokos,  etc).

II.  The  Negroid  group  comprises  three  races  :  Negrito,
Negro,  and  Melanesian.


CLASSIFICATION   OF   RACES  AND   PEOPLES.        289


•uuidoup3
•III


•UUIS3UTJ13J^


•II


to

H

u«

<


X
H

8

O
Q

u

<


u


<

5:

S
H

Ex
O

O

SI
p
o

O


X


c


•UBjiTJjjsnv
•AI


c

.c
bo

<
•

o

G


J3


u
Xi

V

PQ


c


c


>      •>


o

u
en


o      ^j


(4


X


c

c

•    M4

en

«/)

V

Oi

C

c

>«

0

T3

C

C3

c
o


c
a
u

E
<


o


c

U

E

c

V

U


c

rs
u

•c

c

<


3

O

C/5


X,


c5

B


X


•qsi^ijnx


*rf

ci

.5

0

*c

«rf

13

4>^

■  ^4

<

-1

•

rt

V

a

0

3

Ui

3

tf)

r^

c

U

^■^

V

•

«>rf

0

l/i

k.

(J

V

>

J2

X


c

*c

bo


>

X


C


X


C

c

cc

rt
V

tL

0

S

3

3

M

g

v

JS

t:

c«

0

w

;2;

•irciuoSu;Kj


19


CLASSIFICATION  OF  RACES  AND  PEOPLES.       29 1

Vllf .  The  North  African  group  is  composed,  10,  of  the  Arab
or  Semite  race,  represented  by  typical  individual?  among  the
Arabs  and  certain  Jews  (Fig.  21),  the  features  of  which  are
often  found  in  most  of  the  populations  of  Syria,  Mesopotamia,
Beloochistan  (Fig.  134),  Egypt,  and  the  Caucasus;  11,  of  the
Berber  race  (Fig.  136),  which  admits  four  varieties  or  "types,"
according  to  Collignon  (see  Chapter  XL).

IX.  The  Melanochroid  group  comprises  the  four  dark-com-
plexioned races  of  Europe  (12  to  15),  Littoral^  Ibero-insular^
Western  (Fig.  98),  and  Adriatic,

X.  The  Xanthochroid  group  contains  the  two  fair  races
of  Europe  (16  and  17),  Northern  (Figs.  88  to  90)  and
Eastern,  (For  further  details  respecting  groups  IX.  and
X.  see  Chapter  IX.)

XL  18.  The  Ainu  race  is  preserved  fairly  pure  among  the
people  of  this  name  (Figs.  49  and  117);  it  forms  one  of  the
constituent  elements  of  the  population  of  Northern  Japan
(see  Chapter  X.).

XII.  The  Oceanian  group  is  formed  of  two  races,  the
relations  of  which  are  somewhat  vague.  19.  The  Poly-
nesian race  (Figs.  154  to  156),  found  more  or  less  pure
from  the  Hawaiian  Islands  to  New  2^1and,  undergoes
changes  in  the  west  of  Polynesia  owing  to  intermixture
with  the  Melanesians  (Fiji,  New  Guinea).  It  furnishes
p>erhaps  a  more  hirsute  sub-race  in  Micronesia.  20.  The
Indonesian  race  is  represented  by  the  Dyaks,  the  Battas,
and  other  populations  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  (Nias,
Kubus),  or  of  Indo-China  (Nicobariese,  Nagas,  Fig.  17  and
Frontispiece).  It  is  modified  by  intermixture  with  Negrito
elements  (White  Sakai  of  the  Malay  peninsula),  Hindus
(Javanese,  Fig.  145),  Mongoloids  (Malays,  Khamtis,  Fig.  22),
or  Papuans  (Natives  of  Flores,  Figs.  146  to  148).

XIII.  The  American  group  comprises  the  four  races
numbered  in  my  table  21  to  24,  which  will  be  dealt  with
in  the  chapter  devoted  to  America.  Let  me  merely  say  that
the  type  of  Central  Americans^  brachycephalic,  short,  with
straight  or  aquiline  nose  (Figs.  163  and   164),  is  frequently


292  THE  RACES  OF   MAN.

«
met  with  on  the  Pacific  slope  of  the  two  Americas,  as  well  as

on  several  points  of  the  Atlantic  slope  of  South  America.     In

the  former  of  these  two  regions  the  population  is  principally

formed  of  a  blending  of  this  type  with  the  North  American

race;  in  the  latter,  with  the  South  American  race  (Fig.  171).

Two  sub-races  may  be  distinguished  in  the  North  American
race :  tf,  Atlantic^  mesocephalic,  of  very  tall  stature,  good  re-
presentatives of  which,  for  example,  are  the  Siouans  (Figs.  158
and  159);  and  ^,  the  Pacific^  of  which  the  Tlinkit  Indians
may  give  an  approximate  idea,  diflfering  from  the  former  by
shorter  stature,  more  rounded  head,  and  better  developed
pilous  system.  Further,  in  the  South  American  race  we  most
probably  admit  two  sub-races :  ^,  the  dolichocephalic  race,  with
hair  often  wavy,  or  even  frizzy  (Figs.  48,  165,  172,  and  175),^
which  is  perhaps  derived  from  the  ohlest  inhabitants  of  the
continent,  and  which  I  called  Palceo^American  type  in  my
first  attempt  at  a  classification  of  the  human  races  (1889),
and  another  (b\  which  would  be  the  present  type  of  South
American  mesocephalic  race  with  straight  hair  (Figs.  167  to
1 70).  The  tall  Patagonian  race,  brachycephalic,  of  deep  brown
colour,  has  its  representatives  among  the  Patagonians  and
among  certain  peoples  of  Chaco  and  the  Pampas.^

XIV.  25.  The  Eskimo  race  (Fig.  157)  has  kept  fairly  pure  on
the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  as  well  as  in  the  north  of  Canada ;
but  it  is  modified  by  intermixtures  with  the  North  American  race
in  Labrador,  in  Alaska,  on  the  west  coast  of  Greenland  (where
there  is,  further,  intermixture  with  the  Northern  European  race),
and  with  the  Mongolic  races  (Chukchi,  Aleuts,  etc.)  on  the
shores  of  Behring's  Sea.

^  Ehrenreich,  loc,  (it,  (Urbewohner  Brasil,)^  and  Von  den  Steinen,  toe.
cit,f  describe  numerous  individuals  with  wavy  or  frizzy  hair  among  the
Bakairis,  the  Karayas,  the  Arawaks,  etc.  I  myself  have  noticed  Fuegians
with  frizzy  or  wavy  hair  (Ilyades  and  Deniker,  loc,  cU,),  See  also
Fig.  171,  which  represents  the  blending  of  the  Central  American  and
South  American  types,  and  portraits  of  the  Goajires  in  Le  Tour  du  Mondty
1898,  1st  half  year.

^  A.  Barccna,  **  Arte  .  .  .  lengua  Toba,"  Rev,  Mus,  de  la  Plata,  vol.
v.,  1894,  p.  142.


CLASSIFICATION   OF   RACES   AND   PEOPLES.        293

XV.  26.  The  Lapp  race  is  fairly  pure  among  some
tribes  of  Scandinavian  Lapps ;  elsewhere  it  is  blended
with  the  northern  and  eastern  races  (Scandinavians,  Finns,
Russians).

XVL  The  two  races  which  compose  the  Eurasian  group  (so
named  because  its  representatives  inhabit  Europe  as  well  as
Asia)  have  only  a  few  common  characters  (yellowish-white  skin,
modified  Mongolian  features,  etc.).  27.  The  Ugrian  race  pre-
dominates among  the  eastern  Finns  (Ostiaks,  Permiaks,
Cheremiss,  Fig.  106),  and  perhaps  as  a  variety  among  the
Yeniseians.  It  is  found  again  interblended  with  the  Samoyeds,
and  perhaps  with  the  Yakuts.  28.  The  Turkish  race,  which
I  would  willingly  call  Turanian^  if  this  term  were  not  too
much  abused,  enters  into  the  composition  of  the  peoples  called
Turco-Tatars,  who  speak  Turkish  idioms.  The  type,  fairly
pure,  is  common  among  the  Kirghiz  and  the  Tatars  of
Astrakhan  (Figs.  107,  108),  but  in  other  ethnic  groups  it  is
weakened  by  intermixture  with  such  races  as  the  Mongolo-
Tunguse  (Yakuts),  Ugrian  (Shuvashes),  Assyroid  (Turkomans,
Osmanli  Turks,  etc.).

XVII.  The  Mongol  race  admits  two  varieties  or  sub-races :
Tunguse  or  Northern  Mongolian,  with  oval  or  round  faces
and  prominent  cheek-bones,  spread  over  Manchuria,  Corea,
Northern  China,  Mongolia  (Figs.  20,  115,  116,  and  118);
and  Southern  Mongolia,  with  lozenge-shaped  or  square  faces
and  cheek-bones  laterally  enlarged,  which  may  be  observed
especially  in  Southern  China  (Fig.  119)  and  in  Indo-China
(Fig.  121).

We  have  now  sketched  out  the  classing  of  races,  that  is  to
say  of  the  somatological  units.  It  remains  for  us  to  deal  with
the  "  ethnic  groups  "  or  sociological  units.

In  these  the  grouping  must  rest  on  linguistic,  sociological,
and  especially  geographical  affinities,  for  sociological  difference,
are  very  often  the  product  of  differences  in  the  immediate
environment.

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  classing  of  languages  (p.  127)
and  social  states  (p.  124).      In  subordinating  them  to  <


CLASSIFICATION   OF   RACES   AND   PEOPLES.        295

sub-divisions,  seeing  that  frequently  one  and  the  same  people
may  be  at  the  same  lime  shepherds  and  fishers  (Chukchi),
hunters  and  tillers  of  the  soil  (Tlinkits),  hunters,  shepherds,
and  tillers  of  the  soil  (Tunguses),  etc.  Certain  characters  of
civilisation,  especially  of  material  culture,  are  of  clearly  defined
extent,  and  form  what  Bastian  calls  "ethnographic  pro-
vinces." I  have  spoken  of  them  in  connection  with  the
geographical  distribution  of  plate-armour,  the  throwing-stick,
pile  dwellings,  etc.  But  similarity  of  manners  and  customs,
and  identity  of  objects  in  common  use,  do  not  yet  give
us  the  right  to  infer  an  aflfinity  of  race  or  language,  and
still  less  a  common  origin.  At  the  very  most,  they  may
indicate  frequent  communication,  whether  pacific  or  not,
between  two  peoples  and  "  adoption  "  of  customs  and  material
culture.  Sometimes  even  two  distinct  peoples,  having  never
communicated  with  each  other,  may  happen  to  produce  almost
identical  objects  and  adopt  almost  similar  manners  and
customs,  as  I  have  previously  shown.

Having  said  this  much  I  shall  proceed  to  give  the  classi-
fication of  the  "  ethnic  groups  "  adopted  in  this  work.

I  adopt  in  the  first  place  the  best  known  geographical
division,  into  five  parts,  of  the  world  (including  Malaysia  or
the  Asiatic  Archipelago  with  Oceania).^  I  afterwards  divide
each  part  of  the  world  into  great  linguistic  or  geographical
regions,  each  comprising  several  populations  or  groups  of
populations,  according  to  the  following  arrangement: —

I.  Europe. — We  may  distinguish  here  two  linguistic  groups:
Aryan  and  Anaryan,  and  a  geographical  group,  that  of  the
Caucasians.

The  Aryans  are  sub-divided  into  six  groups :  the  Latins  or
Romans  (examples:  Spaniards,  French,  etc.),  the  Germans  or
Teutons  (Germans,  English,  etc.),  the  Slavs  (Russians,  Poles,

'  Each  continent  in  fact  contains  dislinct  populations,  with  the  exception,
however,  of  Asia,  to  which  belongs  half  a  score  of  peoples,  of  whom  part
live  fatstde  its  borders:  in  America  (Eskimo),  Oceania  (Malays  and  Ne-
gritoes), Africa  (Arabs),  Europe  (Samoyeds,  Vogule-Ostiaks,  Tatars,
Kirghiz,  Kalmuks,  Caucasians,  Armenians,  and  Russians),  or  in  other
puts  of  the  world  (Greeks,  Jews,  Gypsies).


CLASSIFICATION    OF   RACES   AND   PEOPLES.       297

Araba-Berbers  {To}ji2ixegSj  Fellahs,  etc.),  the  Ethiopians  {OMdi%
Bejas,  Abyssinians),  and  the  Fulah-Zandehs  (Fulahs,  Niam-
Niams,  Masai,  etc.).  The  Bushmen- Hottentots  form  an
ethno-somatological  group  quite  apart.  As  to  the  Negroes^
they  may  be  divided  as  follows: — the  Negrilloes  or  Pygmies
(Akkas,  Batuas,  etc.),  the  Nigritians  or  Negroes  properly  so
called  (Dinkas,  Hausas,  Wolofs,  Krus,  Tshis,  etc.),  and  the
Bantus  (Dwalas,  Batekes,  Balubas,  Swaheli,  Kafirs,  Bechuanas,
etc.).  The  populations  of  the  Island  of  Madagascar  also  form
a  linguistic  and  geographical  group  apart.

IV.  Oceania. — Four  ethnic  regions  are  here  well  defined :
Malaysia,  Australia,  Melanesia,  and  Polynesia.  Malaysia  (to
which,  strictly  speaking,  should  be  joined  a  portion  of  the
populations  of  Madagascar,  Indo-China,  and  the  Sino-Japanese
islands)  comprises  four  great  groups  of  populations :  the
Negritoes  (Acta,  etc.),  the  Indonesians  (Battas,  Tagals,  etc.),  and
mixed  peoples  like  the  Javanese,  the  Bugis,  the  Malays,  etc.
Australia  is  peopled,  over  and  above  the  white  or  yellow
colonists,  by  only  one  race-people,  the  Australians ;  the  Tas-
manians  who  lived  near  them  no  longer  exist.  Melanesia  is
peopled  by  Papuans  (of  New  Guinea),  and  by  Melanesians
properly  so  called  {oi  New  Caledonia,  Solomon  Islands,  etc.).
I,,astly,  Polynesia  comprises  the  Polynesians  properly  so  called
(Samoans,  Tahitians),  and  the  Micronesians  (natives  of  the
Carolines,  the  Marshall  Islands,  etc.).

V.  America. — F'or  North  America  we  may  adopt  three
ethno-geographical  groups:  the  Eskimo^  with  the  Aleuts;  the
American  Indians  (Athapascans,  Yumas,  Tlinkits,  etc.);  and
the  Indians  of  Mexico  and  of  Central  America  (Aztecs,  Pimas,
Miztecs,  Mayas,  Isthmians,  Ulvas,  etc.).

South  America  has  four  geographical  groupings :  the
Andeans  (Chibchas,  Quechua-Aymara,  etc);  the  Amazonians
(Caribs,  Arawak,  Pano,  Miranha,  etc.);  the  Indians  of  East
Brazil^  and  of  the  central  region  (Tupi  Guarani,  Ges  or
Botocudo-Kayapo,  etc.);  and,  finally,  the  Patagonians^  tribes
of  Chaco,  of  the  Pampas,  etc.,  with  the  Fuegians.

It  18  likewise  well,  as  regards  the  New  World,  to  take  into


298


THE  RACES  OF   MAN.


account  the  imported  Negroes,  and  the  descendants  of  colonists:
Anglo-Saxon  in  the  north,  Hispano-Lusitanians  in  the
south.  These  settlers  form  the  nucleus  of  the  dififerent
civilised  nations  of  the  two  Americas,  around  which  are
grouped  other  elements  from  Europe  or  originating  on  the
spot  (Half-breeds  of  various  degrees,  Quadroons,  Creoles,  etc).


CHAPTER  IX.

RACES   AND  PEOPLES   OF   EUROPE.

Problem  of  European  ethnogeny— I.  Ancient  inhabitants  of  Europe
— Prehistoric  races — Quaternary  period — Glacial  and  interglacial
periods — Quaternary  skulls— Spy  and  Chancelade  races  or  types —
Races  of  the  neolithic  period — Races  of  the  age  of  metals — Aryan
question — Position  of  the  problem — Migration  of  European  peoples
in  the  historic  period— W,  European  races  of  the  present  day —
Characteristics  of  the  six  principal  races  and  the  four  secondary  races
—III.  Present  peoples  of  Europe— a.  Aryan  peoples:  Latins,
Germans,  Slavs,  Letto- Lithuanians,  Celts,  I llyro- Hellenes — B.  Anar-
yan peoples:  Basques,  Finns,  etc. — c.  Caucasian  peoples:  Lesgians,
Georgians,  etc.

Of  all  parts  of  the  world  Europe  presents  the  most  favourable
conditions  for  the  interblending  of  peoples.  Easy  of  access,  a
mere  peninsula  of  Asia,  from  which  the  Ural  mountains  and
straits  a  few  miles  wide  hardly  separate  it,  Europe  has  a
totally  different  configuration  from  the  continental  colossus,
heavy  and  vague  in  outline,  to  which  it  is  attached.  Indented
by  numberless  gulfs,  bays,  and  creeks,  provided  with  several
secondary  peninsulas,  crossed  by  rivers  having  no  cataracts,
and  for  the  most  part  navigable,  it  offers  every  facility  for
communication  and  change  of  place  to  ethnic  groups.  Thus
from  the  dawn  of  history,  and  even  from  prehistoric  times,  a
perpetual  eddying  has  taken  place  there,  a  coming  and  going
of  peoples  in  search  of  fortune  and  better  settlements.

These  migrations,  combined  with  innumerable  wars  and  active
commerce,  have  produced  such  a  blending  of  races,  such
successive  changes  in  the  manners  and  customs  and  languages
^oken,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  separate  from  this  chaos  the

299


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF   EUROPE.  30I

hypothetical  being,  for  no  remains  of  human  bones  have  been
found  up  to  the  present  time  in  the  tertiary  beds  of  Europe.^

It  is  only  in  quaternary  beds  that  the  presence  of  human
bones  has  been  ascertained  beyond  question.  The  quaternary
age  in  Europe  is  characterised,  as  we  know,  by  the  succession
of  "glacial  periods,"  each  of  which  comprises  a  greater  or  less
extension  of  glaciers,  followed  by  their  withdrawal  (**  inter-
glacial  periods  "),  with  accompanying  changes  of  climate.  The
well-known  geologist  Geikie  ^  claims,  from  the  end  of  the  plio-
cene age  to  proto-historic  times,  the  existence  in  Europe  of  six
glacial  periods;  but  most  other  geologists  (Penck,  Boule)
reduce  this  number  to  two  or  three,  considering  the  move-
ments of  the  glaciers  of  some  of  Geikie's  periods  as  purely
local  phenomena,  having  exercised  no  influence  on  the
continent  as  a  whole.

At  the  beginning  of  quaternary  times  the  climate  of  Europe
was  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  present  day ;  hot  and  moist,  it
was  favourable  to  the  growth  of  a  sub-tropical  flora.  Dense
forests  gave  shelter  to  animals  which  no  longer  exist  in  our
latitudes — the  Elephas  meridioftalis,  a  survival  of  the  pliocene
age,  the  Rhinoceros  Eiruscus^  etc.

But  soon,  from  causes  still  imperfectly  known,  ice  began  to
accumulate  around  certain  elevated  points  of  Northern  Europe;
a  veritable  "  mer  de  glace  "  covered  all  Scandinavia,  almost  the
whole  of  Great  Britain,  the  emerged  lands  which  were  between
these  two  countries,  as  well  as  the  north  of  Germany  and  half
of  Russia.^    This  is  X\\q  first  glacial  period,  or  the  period  of  the

*  The  so-called  tertiary  skeleton  of  Caslenedolo,  near  Brescia,  discovered
by  Ragazonni,  is  an  ** odd  fact,"  an  ''incomplete  observation,"  to  use  the
happy  phrase  of  Marcellin  Boule,  and  cannot  be  taken  into  account.

*  J.  Geikie,  Great  la  Age,  London,  1894;  Marcellin  Boule,  "Pal^ontol.
stratigr.  de  ITIomme,"  JKev.  tfAn/Ar.,  Paris,  1888.

*  The  extreme  limit  of  the  spread  of  glaciers  to  the  south  at  that
period  may  be  indicated  by  a  line  which  would  pass  near  to  Bristol,
London,  Rotterdam,  Cologne,  Hanover,  Dresden,  Cracow,  Lemberg;
then  would  go  round  Kief  on  the  south,  Oicl  on  the  north,  and  rise  again
(on  the  south  of  Saratov)  up  to  Nijni- Novgorod,  Viatka,  the  upper  valley
of  the  Kama,  to  blend  with  the  line  of  the  watershed  of  this  river  and  the
Pechora  (see  Map  L ).


304  THE   RACES  OF   MAN.

ments  of  a  very  rude  type :  fragments  of  flint  of  pointed  form,
the  sinuous  edges  of  which  are  scarcely  trimmed  by  the  re-
moval of  some  flakes.^  These  implements  are  called  '*  knuckle-
dusters" (G.  de  Mortillct),  or  "Chellean  axes"  (Fig.  84),  from
the  Chelles  bed  in  the  valley  of  the  Seine;  but  such  imple-
ments are  found  in  sitH  in  numerous  places — in  France
(especially  in  the  valley  of  the  Somme),  in  England  (valleys
of  the  Ouse  and  the  Thames),  in  Spain,  Portugal,  Austria,
Belgium,  etc.^

The  first  interglacial  period,  characterised,  as  we  have  just
seen,  by  a  mild  and  moist  climate,  was  followed  by  a  new
glacier  invasion  (second  glacial  period).  This  time  the  sea  of
ice  did  not  extend  as  far  as  in  the  first  period:  it  covered
Ireland,  Scotland,  the  north  of  England  (as  far  as  Yorkshire),
Scandinavia,  Finland,  and  stopped  in  Germany  and  Russia  at
a  line  passing  nearly  through  the  present  site  of  Hamburg,
Berlin,  Warsaw,  Vilna,  Novgorod,  I-^ke  Onega,  Archangel.

To  this  period  succeeded,  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  glaciers,
a  period  called  "post-glacial"  (or  second  interglacial  period)^
characterised  at  first  by  a  continental  climate,  dry,  with  a  very
cold  winter,  and  a  short  but  hot  summer,  and  by  flora  of  the
Tundras  and  steppes.  At  the  end  of  this  epoch,  the  climate
becoming  milder,  there  appeared  the  flora  of  the  meadows  and
forests,  which  has  remained  to  the  present  day.'    The  harsh

^  See  G.  and  A.  de  Mortillet,  MmSe  prihistorique^  Paris,  pi.  vi.  to  ix. ;
J.    Evans,   Ancient  Stone  Implements^   2nd  cd.,   chap,   xxiii.,  London,

1897.
'  Frequently  these  implements  have  been  found,  in  sufficiently  deep  l)cds,

l>e9ide  bones  of  the  straight-tusked  elephant  {Elephas  antiquus)t  the  smooth-
skinned,  two-horned  rliinoccros  {Rhinoceros  Merckii)^  the  great  hippopota-
mus— that  is  to  say,  of  animals  characteristic  of  the  first  interglacial  period.
As  these  species  are  allied  to  the  elephant,  the  rhinoceros,  and  the  hippo-
potamus of  Africa  of  the  present  day,  the  hypothesis  has  been  propounded
that  they  came  from  this  continent,  utilising  the  numerous  isthmuses  then
existing  (between  Gibraltar  and  Morocco,  between  Sicily,  Malta  and
Tunin,  etc.).  Man,  the  maker  of  the  Chellean  implements,  followed,  it
is  fcuppose<l,  in  their  steps.  One  nii^ht  argue  with  equal  force  that  the
migration  took  place  in  the  opposite  direction.
•  Woldrich  (after  Nehring),  Mit,  Anthr.  CesclL^  vol.  xL,  p.  187,  Vienna.


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF   EUROPE.  30$

climate  of  the  beginning  of  this  period  could  only  be  favourable
to  the  preservation  and  growth  of  thick -furred  animals :  the
mammoth  or  elephant  with  curved  tusks  (Eiephas  primigenius\
the  rhinoceros  with  divided  nostrils  i^R,  tichorinus\  the  rein-
deer {Cervus  tarandus\  the  saiga,  the  lemming,  etc.

The  man  who  inhabited  Europe  during  the  two  overflows  of
the  glaciers  and  the  two  intcrglacial  periods  is  known  to  us
chiefly  by  the  stone  implements  which  are  found  in  the  strata
of  these  periods,  along  with  the  bones  of  animals  which  are
now  extinct  or  which  have  migrated  into  other  regions.  It
must  not  be  inferred  from  this  that  palaeolithic  man  used  no
other  but  stone  tools  or  weapons.  The  finds  of  objects  made
out  of  bone,  horn,  stag's  horn,  shell,  and  wood  belonging  to
these  periods  are  there  to  bear  witness  to  the  contrary.  Only
these  finds  are  much  more  rare,  on  account  of  the  ease  with
which  bone,  horn,  and  especially  wood,  decompose  after  a
more  or  less  prolonged  stay  in  the  ground.  Basing  their  con-
clusions on  the  variety  of  the  forms  of  the  stone  implements
and  partly  on  the  frequent  occurrence  of  bone  objects,  palae-
ethnologists  have  divided  the  two  intcrglacial  periods  which  form
their  stone  age  or  palaolithic  period  into  two  or  three  periods,
according  to  country.  It  would  have  been  better,  in  my
opinion,  to  have  replaced  in  the  present  instance  the  word
** period"  by  the  term  "state  of  civilisation,"  for  these  periods
are  far  from  being  synchronous  throughout  the  whole  of
Europe;  the  Vogules  and  the  Samoyeds  were  in  the  "stone
age  "  hardly  a  century  ago.

Nevertheless,  for  certain  defined  regions,  we  may  consider  it
settled  that  the  first  so  called  Chellean  "  period,"  characterised
by  the  "knuckle-duster,"  belongs,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  302),  to
the  first  intcrglacial  period,  and  that  the  others  coincide  with
the  second  (Boule).  In  a  general  way,  we  may  distinguish
in  the  latter  a  more  ancient  period,  characterised  by  the
abundance  of  mammoth  bones  and  by  smaller  and  more  varied
implements  than  the  Chellean  tool ;  and  a  more  recent  period
characterised  by  the  presence  of  the  reindeer  in  Central  and
Western  Europe,  by  the  frequent  occurrence  of  bone  tools,  and


KACES   AND   PEOPLES  OK   EUROPE.  309

which  the  glaciers  have  not  yet  altogether  withdrawn,  was  in
course  of  formation  during  this  period.^  The  "neolithic
folk,"  settling  at  first  in  Denmark,  then  in  Gothland,  have
left  us  in  the  kitchen-middens  (kitchen  refuse,  accumulations
of  shells)  certain  chipped  stone  implements,  a  sort  of  hatchet
of  a  special  form,  contemporaneous  with  the  neolithic  tools
of  the  rest  of  Europe.

These  tools  are  associated  in  the  geological  beds  and  pre-
historic stations  with  other  objects  which  denote  among  the
Europeans  of  this  period  a  fairly  advanced  civilisation:  know-
ledge of  agriculture,  pottery,  the  weaving  of  stuffs,  the  rearing
of  cattle.

The  "  neolithic  people  "  constructed  pile-dwellings  near  lake-
sides,  in  Switzerland,  France,  Italy,  Ireland;  they  buried  their
dead  under  dolmens,  and  raised  other  megalithic  monuments
(upright  stones,  the  rows  at  Carnac,  etc.),  of  which  the  meaning
has  not  yet  been  cleared  up.

As  may  have  been  seen  from  this  brief  account,  it  is  almost
perfectly  well  known  what  were  the  stages  of  civilisation  of  the
Europeans  in  the  quaternary  and  neolithic  periods.  It  is
different  with  regard  to  the  physical  type  of  these  Europeans.
In  fact,  of  interglacial  man,  contemporary  of  the  Ehphas  anti-
quus,  the  maker  of  those  flint  implements  exhumed  from  the
lowest  beds  of  the  oldest  quaternary  alluvia,  we  have  no
remains,  except  perhaps  two  molar  teeth,  found  by  Nehring  in
the  Taubach  station  (near  Weimar),  and  some  other  disputed
fragments  (Neanderthal,  Brux,  and  Tilbury  skulls).  This  state-
ment, made  for  the  first  time  by  Boule  in  1888,  is  now  admitted
by  many  palaeethnologists.^      As  far  as   man   contemporary

'  There  was  yet  to  take  place  another  sinking  of  the  ground  which
established  a  communication,  by  means  of  the  Sound,  between  the  **  Ancy-
lus  I^ke  "  of  the  preceding  period  with  the  North  Sea,  transforming  it
thus  into  a  very  salt  and  warm  sea  called,  from  the  principal  fossil  which
reveals  to  us  its  existence,  the  Littorina  Sea.

'*  Nehring,  Zeitschr. /.  EthnoL^  1895,  No.  6  (Vcrh.,  pp.  425  and  573);
Salomon  Rcinach,  IJ Anthropologies  1897,  p.  53;  P.  Salmon,  Rcues  hum,
prihist,^  p.  9,  Paris,  1888;  Cartailhac,  he.  cit.,  p.  327;  M.  Boulc,  loc,  (it,^
p.  679;  G.  de  Mortillet,  /^  Fortnat,  de  la  Nat,  Franc,  ^  p.  289.


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF   EUROPE.  313

is  rather  low.  This  is  the  type  to  which  approximates  the  race
of  the  BaumesChaiides  of  Hervd  or  the  true  race  of  Cr<hMagnon^
which  appeared  quite  at  the  end  of  the  Magdalenian,  if  not  at  the
transitional  or  mesolithic  period.  The  latter  race  differs  from
the  former  in  its  very  pronounced  dolichocephaly  (ceph.  ind.
from  63  to  74  8),  its  lower  face  and  orbits,  its  very  lofty  stature
(from  im.  71  to  im.  80),  and  many  other  characters.^  We  see
then,  at  the  beginning  of  the  neolithic  period,  the  second
quaternary  dolichocephalic  race  still  existing  slightly  modified,
but  we  also  see  the  earliest  brachycephals  appearing  along  with  it.

Several  hundred  skulls,  found  in  neolithic  burial-places  in
France,  Switzerland,  Austria,  and  Germany,  exhibit  an  inter-
mixture of  brachycephals  and  dolichocephals.  According  to
the  more  or  less  frequent  occurrence  of  the  former  in  relation
to  the  latter  in  each  burial,  we  may,  with  Herv<5,^  trace  the  route
followed  by  these  brachycephals  of  Central  Europe,  from  the
plains  of  Hungary,  by  the  valley  of  the  Danube,  into  Belgium
and  Switzerland;  from  these  last-named  countries  they  flung
themselves  on  the  dolichocephalic  populations  of  France  and
modified  the  primitive  type,  especially  in  the  plains  of  the
north-east  and  in  the  Alpine  region.

But  if  the  "  neolithic  "  people  of  France  and  Central  Europe
belonged  to  at  least  two  distinct  races,  the  same  has  not  been
the  case  with  the  other  countries  of  our  continent.  In  the
Britisli  Isles  we  find  ourselves,  on  the  contrary,  as  regards  this
period,  in  presence  of  a  remarkable  homogeneity  of  type;  it  is
without  exception  dolichocephalic  (cephal.  ind.  from  65  to  75
for  the  men),  with  elongated  faces,  such  as  are  found  in  the  long-
barrows.  Did  they  come  from  the  Continent  in  neolithic
times,  or  are  they  the  descendants  of  the  palaeolithic  men  of
Great  Britain,  the  physical  type  of  which  is  unknown  to  us?
This  is  a  question  which  still  awaits  solution.     In  Russia  also,

'  Dc  Qualrefages  and  Ilamy,  Cr.  Ethn.^  p.  ^4;  I)e  Qualrefages,  Hist,
Ghi.  Races  Hiini.y  vol.  i.,  p.  67;  Herve,  Rev.  EcoU,  AfUhr.^  Paris,  1893,
p.  173;   1894,  p.  105;   1896,  p.  97.

-  Hcrvc,  '*  Les  brachyccphales  ncolilh.,"  Rev.  Ecolc.  AtUhr,,  Parb,
1894,  p.  393;  and  1895,  p.  18.


kACES  AND  I>EOPLES  OF  EUROPE.  JlS

the  valley  of  the  Elbe,  the  Moldau,  and  the  Danube.  The
commercial  relations  between  the  north  and  south  explain  the
similarities  which  archaeologists  find  between  Scandinavian
bronze  objects  and  those  of  the  JEge2in  district  (Schliemann's
excavations  at  Mycenae,  Troy,  Tiryns,  etc.).^

It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  ancient  bronze  age  corre-
sponds with  the  "  -^gean  civilisation  "  which  flourished  among
the  peoples  inhabiting,  between  the  thirtieth  and  twentieth
centuries  b.c.,  Switzerland,  the  north  of  Italy,  the  basin  of  the
Danube,  the  Balkan  peninsula,  a  part  of  Anatolia,  and,  lastly,
Cyprus.  It  gave  rise  (between  1700  and  iioo  b.c)  to  the
"Mycenian"  civilisation,  of  which  the  favourite  ornamental
design  is  the  spiral.^

In  Sweden  the  bronze  age  began  later,  in  the  seventeenth  or
eighteenth  century  B.C.,  but  it  continued  longer  there  than  in
Southern  Europe.

So  also,  according  to  Montelius,  the  introduction  of  iron
dates  only  from  the  fifth  or  third  century  b.c  in  Sweden,
while  Italy  was  acquainted  with  this  metal  as  far  back  as  the
twelfth  century  B.C.  The  civilisation  of  the  "iron  age"  dis-
tributed over  two  periods,  according  to  the  excavations  made
in  the  stations  of  Hallstatt  (Austria)  and  La  T^ne  (Switzer-
land), must  have  been  imported  from  Central  Europe  into
Greece  through  Illyria.  This  importation  corresponds  perhaps
with  the  Dorian  invasion  of  the  Peloponnesus.  The  so-called
•*  Hallstattian  "  period  lasted  in  Central  Europe,  France,  and
Northern  Italy  from  the  tenth  or  ninth  to  the  sixth  century
B.C.  The  Hallstattian  civilisation  flourished  chiefly  in  Carinthia,
Southern  Germany,  Switzerland,  Bohemia,  Silesia,  Bosnia,  the
south-east  of  France,  and  Southern  Italy  (the  pre-Etruscan  iron

*  S.  Reinach,  **  Mirage  oriental,"  I* Anthropologies  1894,  pp.  539  and
699;  A.  Evans,  "Eastern  Question,"  Rep.  Brit.  Assoc,  1896,  p.  911;
Montelius,  /oc.  cit.;  Much,  *'  Die  Kupferzeit  in  Europa,"  Jena,  1893.

*  A.  Evans,  /oc.  cit.,  **  Eastern  Question";  Sal.  Reinach,  VAnthropol.,
1893,  p.  731 ;  Montelius,  "The  Tyrrhenians,  tic. ^^^  Jour.  Anthr,  2mt.,
vol.  xxvi.,  1897,  p.  254,  pi.;  and  **Pre-classic  Chronology  in  Greece," i^it/.,
p.  261.


RACES  AND   rEOPLES  OF   EUROPE.  317

what  were  the  languages  spoken  by  these  peoples.  Most
historians  believed  until  quite  recently  that  the  Euscariaiis,  and
perhaps  the  Ligurians  or  Lygians  of  Western  Europe,  as  well
as  the  Iberians,  the  Pelasgian  Tursans  or  Turses^  of  the  three
southern  peninsulas  of  our  continent,  were  the  "autochthones,"
or  rather  the  oldest  European  peoples  known  to  history.  These
would  then  be  the  probable  descendants  of  the  palaeolithic
Euroix^ans,  the  races  of  Neanderthal,  Spy,  and  Chancelade.
Further,  according  to  the  philologists  and  historians,  these
peoples  spoke  non-Aryan  languages,  and  at  a  certain  period,
which  l)*Arbois  de  Jubainville^  places  vaguely  at  twenty  or
twenty-five  centuries  b.c.,  Europe  was  invaded  by  the  Aryans^
coining  from  Asia,  who  imposed  their  languages  on  the  autoch-
thones. The  Basque  language  of  the  present  day,  derived  from
the  Euscarian,  is  the  only  dialect  surviving  this  transformation.
The  central  point  for  the  ethnographic  history  of  Europe  is,
according  to  the  philologists,  the  arrival  of  the  Aryans.

But  who  were  these  Aryans?  Nobody  quite  knows.  It  is  no
part  of  my  plan  to  write  the  history  of  the  Aryan  controversy. '
It  is  enough  to  say  that  men  of  acknowledged  authority  in
science  (Pott,  Grimm,  Max  Miiller)  have  maintained  for  a  long
time,  without  any  solid  proof,  the  existence  not  only  of  a  primi-
tive Aryan  language,  which  gave  birth  to  the  dialects  of  nearly
every  people  of  Europe,  but  also  of  an  "  Aryan  race,"  supposed
to  have  sprung  up  "somewhere"  in  Asia,  one  part  migrating
towards  India  and  Persia,  while  the  remainder  made  its  way
by  slow  stages  to  Europe.  Cienerations  of  scientific  men  have
accepted  this  hypothesis,  which,  after  all,  had  no  other  founda-
tion than  such  aphorisms  as  "ex  oriente  lux"  put  forward  by
Pott,  or  "the  irresistible  impulse  towards  the  west"  invented  by

*  Tc^lhcr  with  ihc  Sards,  the  Turscs  arc  the  only  European  peoples  of
which  the  Kg>'ptian  inscriptions  anterior  to  the  thirteenth  century  B.C.
make  mention,  unil6r  the  name  of  ShcrJana  and  Thursana  (\V.  Max
Miiller,  Europa  ttn.i  Asien,  1894).

'  D'Arl>ois  de  Ju1)ainvillc,  Lcs  Ancicns  Habitants  de  V Europe ^  new  ed.,
vol.  i.,  p.  201,  Pans.

•  Sec  for  this  history,  Isaac  Taylor,  The  Origin  of  the  Aryans^  chap,  i.,
London,  1890,  and  S.  Kcinach,  Vorigine  ties  Aryetts^  Paris,  1892.


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF   EUROPE.  33S

and  civilisation.  What,  for  example,  have  the  two  Latin
peoples,  the  Portuguese  and  Romans,  in  common?  or  the
two  Slav  peoples,  like  the  Kashoobs,  fair,  short,  thick-set,  peace-
ful cultivators  of  the  plain,  and  the  Montenegrins,  dark,  tall,
slender,  warlike  shepherds  of  the  mountain  ?  What  more  strik-
ing contrast  can  we  imagine  than  that  between  a  Norwegian,
tall  and  fair,  a  bold  sailor,  whose  flag  floats  in  every  port  of  the
world,  and  a  Tyrolese  of  the  north,  dark  and  short,  a  seden-
tary cultivator  of  the  soil,  whose  horizon  is  bounded  by  the
summits  of  his  mountains  ?  However,  both  these  are  included
in  the  "  Germanic  "  group.

Nevertheless,  and  only  to  bring  out  better  the  differences
between  linguistic  divisions  and  those  of  ethnography  and
ethnology,  I  shall  rapidly  pass  in  review  the  "  peoples "  of
Europe,  according  to  the  linguistic  grouping  as  outlined  above.

A. — ETHNIC    "ARYAN"   GROUPS.

I.  Latin  or  Rofnan  Peoples^  that  is  to  say  speaking  languages
derived  from  the  Latin.  The  majority  of  philologists  divide  them
into  seven  distinct  groups,  viz.,  French  of  the  north,  I^ngue-
docian-Catalan,  Spanish,  Portuguese-Galego,  Italian,  Romansch-
Ladino,  and  Rumanian.

I.  The  French  group  of  the  norths  or  the  Langue  d*oil,  com-
prises the  populations  (Fig.  98)  on  the  north  of  the  line  which,
starting  from  the  Gironde,  passes  by  Angouleme,  Montmorillon,
Montlucon,  Lyons,  and  the  crests  of  the  Jura,  to  terminate  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Berne  in  Switzerland.^  Among  the
numerous  dialects  recognisable  in  it,  we  must  make  special
mention  of  Wallon^  spoken  in  the  southern  part  of  the  depart-
ment of  the  north  in  France,  and  in  the  southern  half  of
Belgium,^  in  the  commune  of  Malmedy  in  Prussia,  and  in

*  Ch.  de  Tourtoulon  and  Bringuier,  "  Li  mite  .  .  de  la  langue  d'oc,
etc.,"  Arch.  Miss,  Sc,  Pan's,  1876.  Cf.  A'cv,  EcoU  An'.hr.  Paris,  1 891,
p.  21S.

*  Province  of  Namur,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  provinces  of  Hainault,
Li^,  and  Luxemburg,  as  well  as  the  southern  part  of  Brabant.  Ct
Bremer,  Nationality  und  Sprache  in  Belgiin  (with  map),  Stuttgart,  1887.


358  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

place,  they  form  a  less  homogeneous  group;  we  must  distinguish
in  it  between  the  eastern  and  the  western  Georgians.  The
former  (Gruzins)  are  true  brachycephals,  though  in  a  lesser
degree  than  the  Lesgians,  while  the  latter  (Mingrelians,  Imers)
are  distinguished  from  all  the  other  Caucasians  by  the
elongated  form  of  the  head  (see  Appendix  II.).  The  stature
varies  in  harmony  with  the  cranial  forms ;  the  Kartvel  tribes
with  rounded  heads  have  the  shortest  stature,  and  the
dolichocephalic  tribes  the  highest ;  light  hair  is  less  common
in  the  two  groups  than  among  the  Lesgians,  but  we  find
among  the  Georgians  in  general  a  great  number  of  subjects
in  whom  the  iris  has  a  particular  yellow  colour,  a  grey  or
greenish  yellow.  The  Gruzins  have  a  rather  rounded  face  and
broad  nose,  while  the  Imers  have  an  elongated  visage,  thin
nose,  tight  lips,  pointed  chin  (Fig.  109);  their  physiognomy
reminds  one  of  a  goat's  head,  according  to  Pantiukhof,  who
considers  the  Imers  to  be  the  purest  representatives  of  the
primitive  Kartvels.^

^  For  particulars  see  Deniker,  loc,  cii,  {Races  de  PEut9p€\,


CHAPTER  X.

ftACES   AND   PEOPLES   OF  ASIA.

Ancient  Inhabitants  op  Asia.  —  Prehistoric  times  —  Pithecanthropui
erechis  (Dub.) — Ages  of  stone  and  metals. — Present  Inhabitants  of
Asia. — Races  of  Asia — I.  Peoples  of  Northern  Asia — Yeniseian,  Palae-
asiatic  and  Tung:use  groups. — II.  Peoples  of  Central  Asia — Turkish,
Mongolian,  and  Thibetan  groups — Peoples  of  the  south-west  of  Thibet
and  of  South  China  (Lolo,  Miaots^,  Lu-ts^,  etc  ). — III.  Peoples  of
Eastern  Asia — Chinese,  Coreans,  and  Japanese. — IV.  Peoples  of  Indo-
China — Aborigines,   Mois,   Kuis,    Siam,    Naga,  etc — More  recent
mixed  populations:  Annamese,  Cambodians,  Thai,  etc. — V.  Peoples  of
India^CstsXesi  —  Dravidians   and    Kolarians — Indo- Aryans   and   un-
classified populations — VI.    Peoples  of  Anterior  ^xw— Iranians  and
Semites.

ANCIENT   INHABITANTS   OF  ASIA.

Prehistoric  Times, — It  is  a  common  practice  to  call  Asia,  of

at  least  certain  regions  of  Asia,  "  the  cradle  of  mankind,"  tb^

**officina  gentium."     The  migrations  and  invasions    of  tb^

Asiatic  peoples  into  Europe,  which  took  place  from  the  mo^^

remote  times,  gave  birth,  naturally  enough  to  this  idea  amoO^

the  western  peoples  (p.  317  et  seq,).     However,  1^^  serious  ^^^^

authorise  us  to  say  that  the  first  man  w^s  Worn  rather  it\  ^$^^

than  Europe.     Nowhere  do  we  find  there      v  traces  of  t^t^^^^^y

man.^     Eugene  Dubois  discovered,  it  is  1.  ^^  nui^e  clos^  t.o  ^^

iruCi "  ^

»  The  flint  flakes  resembling  palaeolithic  trw  n^  ^T  ^*     >^oct^**^<

(Records  Ceol,   Survey,  India,  vol.   xxvii.,        ^  ^*^^  Calcu^^^»      x^^^>    ^
Miocene  or  lower  Pliocene  beds,  at  Venan^^'    ^^^Vcot^a^  B\x¥"rrxaO,  ^  ,
considered  by  Oldham  and  other  scholars  ^s    ^^^tig  ^     oducts.      l^ci^^wcv^
Noetling  has  since  (in  1897)  described  an  anittv  '^^^Ural  ^^-Aci^VXy  pc^VxsWcA^
of  the  same  beds.~Aa^.  Science,  London.Ja  ^^  ^tiC  ^^^i>4.  ^-    ^^^  *     "^
lit  half-year,  p.  367;  2nd,  pp.  i99and2Q4.  ^^  VofVct  ^^iW^-'^*^^'  ^

359         ^M^ssr*'"^


RACES   AND   PEOPLES  OF   ASI.V.  363

found  in  the  same  region  by  Adrianof  present  a  type  some-
what European.^

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  many  of  these  monuments  date
from  the  historic  epoch  and  belong,  as  proved  by  the  niniform
inscriptions  of  Mongolia  discovered  by  Yadrintsef  and  de-
ciphered by  Thomson,  to  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries  of
the  Christian  era.'

The  kitchen-middens  of  Omori,  near  Tokio,  and  of  several
other  localities  in  Japan  examined  by  Morse,  Milne,  andTsuboi,
afford  evidence  of  the  existence  in  this  country  of  a  fairly
civilised  race  which  was  acquainted  with  pottery,  but  employed
only  bone  and  partly  polished  stone  implements.  The  excava-
tions of  ancient  underground  dwellings  in  the  islands  of  Yezo
(Morse,  Tsuboi)  and  Saghalien  (Poliakoff)  lead  us  to  believe
that  this  race  extended  much  farther  to  the  north.  It  is
possible  that  it  was  related  to  the  men  whose  polished  flint
implements  have  been  found  in  Siberia  in  the  valley  of  the
Tunka,  in  that  of  the  Patcha,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the
river  Amur  (Uvarof),  and  in  the  shell-heaps  of  the  Pacific
coast  near  Vladivostok  (Margaritof).^    Polished  stone  hatchets

*  Potanin,  Otcherki^  etc.  {Norlh-West  Mont^,  Sketches)^  St.  Peters-
burg, 1881-83,  4  vols,  (in  Russian);  Adrianof,  **Zapiski,  etc.,"  Mem,  Auss,
Ceog.  Soc,y  Sect.  Gen.  Geog.,  vol.  xi.,  1888,  p.  149;  Radloff,  Aus  Sibinen^
Leipzig,  1884,  2  vols.,  and  Arbeit,  Orkhon.  Expei.^  St.  Petersburg,  1893-97
(in  course  of  publication).  For  summary  of  the  question  and  bibliography,
sec  Deniker,  NouvcUes  Geogr.^  p.  54,  Paris,  1892  (with  map).

*  Radloff,  loc,  cU,  {Arbeit. ^  etc);  Thomson,  Mem,  Soc,  Finno-Ougrienne
vol.  v.,  Helsingfors,  1896.  We  cannot  admit  as  a  general  rule  an  exact
synchronism  between  the  prehistoric  periods  of  Europe  and  those  of
Northern  Asia.  If,  as  Uvarof  says,  the  age  of  the  mammoth  was  earlier
in  Siberia  than  in  Europe,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  many  peoples  of
Eastern  Siberia  were  still  in  the  midst  of  the  *'  stone  age  "  at  the  time  when
the  Russians  penetrated  into  this  country  (seventeenth  century).  As  to  the
peoples  of  Western  Siberia  and  the  Kirghiz  Steppes,  the  beginning  of  their
bronze  age  goes  back  at  the  furthest  to  the  1>eginning  of  the  Christian  era.

*  Margaritof,  Memoirs  Amurian  Sac,  of  Naturalists^  vol.  i.,  Vlatlivostok,
1S87.  The  only  skull  found  in  these  heaps  is  dolichocephalic  and  reminds
one  of  the  Ainu  skull.  Thus  one  might  suppose,  as  Milne  had  done
{Trans,  As,  Soc,  /a/.,  Tokio,  1899,  vol.  vii.,  p.  61),  in  connection  with


RACES  AND  PEOPLES  OF  ASIA.  365

Chinese  annals  have  preserved  for  us  a  record.  The  monu-
ments of  Chaldea,  Assyria,  Asia  Minor,  India,  and  Cambodia,
also  reveal  ethnographical  facts  of  great  interest  (see,  for
instance,  note  2,  p.  419).

Present  Inhabitants  and  Races  of  Asia. — It  is  impos-
sible in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  to  draw  up  a
complete  table  of  the  migrations  which  have  taken  place  on  the
Asiatic  continent  in  historic  times.  I  shall  mention  those  in
connection  with  some  peoples  whose  history  is  partially  known
(Chinese,  Turks,  Mongols,  Thai).

So  also,  in  the  present  state  of  anthropological  knowledge,
we  can  only  discern  in  the  midst  of  the  numerous  Asiatic
populations,  in  a  quite  general  way,  the  elements  furnished  by
the  following  eleven  races: — Five  races  peculiar  to  Asia  {Dra-
vidiatiy  Assyroid^  IndoAfghan^  Ainu^  Mongolian)^  and  six  races
which  are  also  met  with  in  other  part^  of  the  world:  Negrito^
Indonesian^  Arab^  Ugrian,  Turkish^  and  Eskimo  (leaving  out
of  account  the  Assyroid  and  Indo-Afghan  races,  which  are
found  again  among  the  Jews  and  the  European  Gypsies).
I  have  already  given  (p.  285  et  seq,)  the  principal  characters
of  these  races;  it  only  remains  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  their
geographical  distribution  in  Asia.

The  Eskimo  race  is  quartered  in  the  north-east  of  the
continent;  that  of  the  Ainus  in  Saghalien,  Yezo,  and
perhaps  in  northern  Japan;  while  the  Ugrian  race  is  repre-
sented by  its  Yeniseian  variant.  The  Mongolian  race  (with  its
two  secondary  races,  northern  and  southern)  is  found  almost
all  over  Asia.  The  Turkish  race  is  limited  more  particularly
to  the  inland  regions  of  Central  Asia.  The  Indonesians  are
numerous  in  Indo- China,  and  in  the  islands  from  Japan  to
the  Asiatic  Archipelago,  while  the  Vravidians  and  Indo-
Afghans  abound  in  India.  The  latter  are  also  met  with  in
anterior  Asia,  side  by  side  with  the  Assyroids  and  Arabs,
Some  representatives  of  the  Negrito  race  inhabit  the  Malay
peninsula  and  the  Andaman  Islands;  the  elements  of  this  race
are  also  found  among  the  inhabitants  of  Indo-China  and
perhaps  India.


kACES  AND   PEOPLES  Ol^  ASlA.  3/7

of  the  Caucasus  and  Persia,  and  lastly  the  Osmanli  Turks,
Included  under  this  name  are  subjects  of  the  Sultan  speaking
the  Turkish  language  and  professing  Islamism.  We  must
distinguish  among  them  the  settled  Osmanli,  much  intermixed,
and  the  nomadic  tribes  {Turkomans,  Yuruks,  etc.),  who
exhibit  several  characteristics  of  the  Turkish  race.

The  Turkish  race,  so  far  as  can  be  gathered  from  recent
anthropological  works,  is  preserved  in  a  comparatively  pure
state  among  the  Turks  of  the  central  group,  but  in  the  eastern
group  it  has  been  profoundly  modified  in  consequence  of
intermixtures  with  the  Mongolian,  Tunguse,  and  Ugrian  races;
as  also  in  the  western  group,  in  which  we  have  to  take  into
account  elements  of  the  Assyroid,  Indo-Afghan,  and  Arab
races,  and  certain  European  races  (Adriatic  chiefly).  The
Turkish  race  may  be  thus  described :  Stature,  above  the
average  (im.  67 — im.  68);  head,  hyper-brachycephalic  (ceph.
ind.  on  the  liv.  sub.,  85  to  87),  elongated  oval  face,  non-
Mongoloid  eyes,  but  often  with  the  external  fold  of  eyelid
(P-  7^)  9  ^^6  pilous  system  moderately  developed ;  broad
cheek-bone;^  thick  lips;  straight,  somewhat  prominent  nose;
tendency  to  obesity.^

The  Turks  are  essentially  nomadic,  and  when  they  change
their  mode  of  life  it  is  rather  towards  the  chase,  commerce,  or
trade  that  their  efibrts  are  directed ;  the  true  cultivators  of  the
soil  (Taranchi,  Sartes,  Osmanli,  Volga  Tatars)  are  Turks  already
powerfully  affected  by  intermixtures.  The  Turkish  tent  is  the
most  highly  finished  of  transportable  habitations  (p.  164-166).
Meat  and  milk  products  form  the  staple  foods,  as  they  do
among  all  nomads.  With  the  exception  of  the  Christian
Chuvashes  and  the  Shaman  Yakuts,  all  the  Turks  are  Mussul-
mans; but  often  they  are  only  nominally  such,  at  bottom  remain-

'  For  statistics  as  to  stature,  ceph.  index,  etc.,  sec  Appendices  I.  to
III.  ;  these  figures  are  borrowed  from  the  works  of  Benzengre,  Bogdanof,
Chantre,  Elissi^ef,  Erckert,  Hecker,  Kharuzin,  Ly^n,  Malief,  Merejkovsky.
Nazarof,  Palifel,  Pantiukhof,  Sommicr,  Ujfalvy,  Vyrubof^  Weisbach,
Weitfcnberg,  Yadrintzef,  etc.  (Cf.  Deniker,  Les  Races  di  VEurtptt  I.
Ind.  ceph.,  Pliris,  1S99.)


RACES   AND   PEOPLKS   OF   ASIA.  -^/'i

Stretch  in  isolated  groups  far  beyond  the  political  limits  of  ili':
"eighteen  provinces."  Manchuria,  Southern  Mongolia,  Dzun-
garia,  a  portion  of  Eastern  Turkestan  and  Thiljet  liave  Jy-on
invaded  by  Chinese  colonists ;  and  outside  of  the  Kmpirc  it  is
estimated  there  are  not  less  than  three  millions  of  "0;l^:stials  *'
who  have  emigrated  to  Indo-China,  Malaysia,  the  two  Ameri^^s,
and  even  to  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  Africa.

The  Chinese  people  have  sprung  from  manifold  intermixti:r^:\
and  indeed  there  are  several  types  to  discov^rr  in  this  nation.
the  anthropological  study  of  which  is  scarcely  more  than  oi^t-
lined;  as  it  is,  however,  according  to  historical  data  we  rrisy
presume  that  five  or  six  \'arious  elements  enter  into  its  com-
position.

We  know  from  the  books  of  Shu- King  that  the-  prirriiriv^:
country  of  the  Chinese  was  the  north  of  the  pres'rnt  provir.^':
of  Kan-su.     Thence  the  agriculfjral  colonists  wovA  ^aV^-jt
the  year  2200  blc,  according  to  a  do'jotful  chror;olo;^yy  ir/o
the  fertile  \-alIey  of  the  Ho-jng-ho  and  its  tri h'ltary  tr.':  'AV;  or
HweL     Little  by  little,  the  Ch:n*v:  rolonivu   '-.,or':a^i   a  or.;^
other   val!e}*s,   b-Jt   i:   tv/*   th'rm    centuri^*.   to   <^ori'.;:':r   •'.'-
aboriginal  tribes  ^the  Djoon/^^  the  ^fan^  t:.':  Pa^  ih':  Aftaof:^.
Again   in   the  seventh  ler.f-ry  h.c.  fv^ttn   ewa   ^r.ror.o  v/>
commences)  the  terrtor)-  fx/,'^y."A  f^y  th*:  f,f»:'.'rv:  va-r^: ;
extended  beyond   t'.e  vi.>;y   of  tr.*;   lo^'rr   Var.jCi     or.    •-.-:
south  and   that   of  tr.^  ?*::  :.o  or.   t:.':  .'.ort:.,  ar.'l  "orr.^*-.  .r  :
within  these  limits  s^.^'s    --.'.'.:-  -.s"  tr  v:'.  .v:  t.*:  /Axvf  of  --y:
\'alle7  of  the  sam^  r.^rr.--.  o-  f.':  /^/  of  *:.':  \'.'-.'*  ."j  y.-  -r.  i.
who  maintained  :hr.'    • 'i^.'j^.'A*-"/:,     Ho»'.-/"r  '  '«:  v--«i  ->-
the  Chinese  s-ioe^^:: :   .  ••>i  v.      *  '     -    :'.':;   .^*'v  ■         -^
occupiers  of  th-e  *•-;.  ,  :.'.:o  •.•  -:  :  ',  .-.vi  -  .  o'  •'.':  «  :-.'  *-.•:   •.-.•/
where  thev  are  nl.  fo-'i  ,• -'.r.  ".-.  .'iv:-:  '.'  S/yr*  fuf   ..V-.;.-
/f^,  /-;pf«-  Afafi:,  The:.  *".

While  this  work  'J.  I-  •  */  vi'./  ««•  ':"    -:  '--.    '     -     v.-:  -.
the  Turkish  vr.'-j^iK,  •-  ".  .- -.-r^     ■  ■-.  /,-:;-,  :  "  -


..«


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  ASIA.  395

intermediate  between  those  of  the  Malays  and  the  Thai  (see
below).  Numbering  about  a  million,  they  are  speedily  becom-
ing civilised  while  striving  at  the  same  time  to  preserve  their
independence.^

The  Khyens  or  Chin  of  the  mountains  of  Arakan  and  the
Tung'tu  of  Tenasserim  are  Karens  crossed  with  Burmese  and
Shans  (p.  401).  The  Lemeis^  the  Does^  and  the  Khmus  of  Fr.
Gamier  {Kamu  and  Kamet  of  MacLeod)  who  inhabit  the  east
of  Luang-Prabang  (French  Laos),  and  perhaps  the  Lavas  or
Does  of  H.  Hallet,  mountaineers  of  West  Siam,  are  related  to
the  Karens  or  Khyens.

/.  The  Nagas  of  Manipur  and  the  mountains  extending  to
the  north  (Patkoi,  Barai)  of  this  country  are  Indonesians  more
or  less  pure  both  in  physical  type  (Frontispiece  and  Fig.  17)
and  manners  and  customs.  They  may  be  sub-divided  into
Angami\  Kanput\  etc.,  wearing  the  petticoat  or  apron,  of  the
west ;  into  Lhota^  Ho^  etc.,  wearing  the  plaid,  of  the  centre ;  and
into  Nangia^  or  naked,  of  the  east.  Various  ethnic  peculiarities,
skull-hunting  and  multicoloured  hair  or  feather  ornaments,  long
shields  (Frontispiece),  breast-plates,  method  of  weaving,  and
houses  in  common  (Aforong\  connect  them  with  the  Dyaks
and  other  Indonesians.  Tattooing  prevails  only  among  the
tribes  with  a  monarchical  organisation  (Klemm).  The  Lushai^
who  live  at  the  south  of  Manipur,  are  Nagas  mixed  with  Kyens
and  Burmese  of  Arakan.  They  may  be  sub-divided  into  several
tribes :  the  Kuki^  subject  to  the  English,  very  short  (medium
height  im.  57);  the  Lushai  properly  so  called,  partly  in  sub-
jection (41,600  in  Assam),  somewhat  slender  (im.  63),  with
brown  skin,  flat  nose,  prominent  cheek-bones,  husbandmen  ;  ^
the   SakSy   Kamis,  and   Shendons  or   Shows,      West  of  the

*  Mrs.  Mason,  Civilising  Afotsnfain  Alen^  etc.,  London,  1862,  and
other  works  of  this  author.  Smeaton,  The  Loyal  A'aren,  etc,  London,
ig86.

'  There  exists  among  them  a  strange  custom  :  the  men  experience  ipreat
pleasure  in  putting  into  their  mouths  and  then  spitting  out  the  inice  ^
the  narghiles  smoked  by  the  wives.      The  ofTer  of  ttboif  ^
the  first  duties  of  hospitality.


RACES   AND   PEOPLES   OF   ASIA.  4OI

Four  principal  Thai  peoples  may  be  distinguished  in  this
territory :  the  Thos-Muong  in  the  north-east  (Tong  King  and
China),  the  Shans  in  the  north-west  (Upper  Burma),  the
Laotians  in  the  south-east  (French  Laos),  and  the  Siamese  in
the  south-west  (Siam).

We  put  together,  under  the  name  of  Thos-Muong^  all  the
natives  of  Upper  Tong  King  and  the  Tong  King  hinterland
(except  the  mountain  summits  occupied  by  the  Mans,  allied
probably  to  the  Lo-lo),  as  well  as  the  primitive  inhabitants  of
Kwang-si,  Southern  Kwei-chow,  and  Eastern  Yunnan,  now
driven  back  to  the  mountains.  The  Thos  inhabiting  Tong
King  to  the  east  of  the  Red  River  (basin  of  the  Claire  River),
are  sub-brachycephalic  (ceph.  ind.  82.5),  of  lofty  stature
(im.  67),^  having  elongated  face,  straight  non-Mongoloid  eyes,
and  brownish  complexion.  They  partly  recall  the  Indo-
nesians, and  partly  the  still  mysterious  race  to  which  the
Lo-lo  belong  (p.  381).  They  are  husbandmen,  living  in
houses  on  piles,  and  wearing  a  very  picturesque  costume
different  from  that  of  their  ancient  masters  the  Annamese.
The  Muongs  of  Tong  King  lo  the  west  of  the  Red  River
(basin  of  the  Black  River),  the  Pueun  and  the  Pu-Thai  of
Annamese  Laos  resemble  them  both  in  type  and  in  language,
which  is  a  Thai  dialect  very  much  altered  by  Chinese  and
Annamese.  The  Tu-jen,  the  Pe-miaOy  the  Pa-i^  forming
two-thirds  of  the  population  of  Kwang-si,  and  found  in  the
south  of  Kwei-chow  and  the  north-west  of  Kwangtung,  as  well
as  the  Pe-jen  or  Minkia  of  Yunnan,  are  Thos  slightly  crossed
with  Chinese  blood  in  the  same  way  as  the  Nongs  of  Tong
King,  the  neighbours  of  the  Thos.  Most  of  these  peoples
have  a  special  kind  of  writing,  recalling  that  of  the  Laotians,
The  latter,  as  well  as  the  Shans^  differ  some^vhat  from  the  Thos
in  regard  to  type,  in  which  we  may  discern  interminglings  with
the  Indonesians,  Malays,  Mois,  and  Burmese.  Among  the
Shans  we  must  distinguish  the  Khamti  (Fig.  122),  a  very  pw
race,  and  the  Sing-po  with  the  Kackyen  or  Katchin^  soro

^  From  Dr.  Gitard,  quoted  by  Billet,  locHt^^v


420  THE  RACES  OF  BiAN.

some  measure  the  Piirsis^  who  are  dolichocephalic  (77.9X
and  of  average  height  (im.  65),  are  of  the  Assyroid  or  Indo-
Afghan  t3rpe.

The  Parsis  are  not  very  numerous  in  Persia.  Most  of  ihero
emigrated  into  India  afler  the  destruction  of  the  empire  of  the
Sassanides  (in  634);  they  form  there  an  important  and  very
rich  community  (89,900  individuals  in  189 1),  having  still
preserved  their  ancient  2k>roastrian  religion.  This  community,
if  chiefly  composed  of  bankers,  has  also  many  men  of  letters.
The  education  of  women  in  it  is  specially  looked  after,  the
first  woman  to  obtain  the  diploma  of  Doctor  in  Medicine  in
India  being  a  Parsi.^  Physically  they  are  of  the  mixed  Indo-
Assyroid  type,  the  head  sub-brachycephalic  (ceph.  ind.  82,
according  to  Ujfalvy).

After  the  Persians  come  the  Pathan  Afghans*  or  Pashtu.
They  form  the  agricultural  population  of  Afghanistan,  and  are
divided  into  Duranis  (in  the  west  and  south  of  the  country),
Ghiizisfyci  the  east),  and  into  several  other  less  important  tribes:
the  Swatis^  the  Khostis^  the  Maz/ris,  the  Kakars^  etc.  The
Afghans  of  India  and  the  Indo -Afghan  frontier  are  divided
into  several  tribes,  of  which  the  principal  ones  are  the  Afridis
near  the  Khyber  pass  and  the  Yusafzais  near  Peshawar.'

The  Baiuchis  or  Biloch  of  Baluchistan  and  Western  India
speak  an  Branian  dialect  akin  to  Persian;  physically  they  belong
to  the  Indo-Afghan  race,  but  mixed  with  the  Arabs  on  the
south  and  the  Jats  and  the  Hindus  on  the  east,  with  the  Turks

Asia  Minor  in  ancient  times.  The  famous  sculptured  head  of  Tello  (in
the  LouvTc)  has  a  false  Turkish  air,  owing  to  the  head-dress  and  the
broken  nose;  three  other  statuettes  from  the  same  locality,  preserved  at
Paris,  have  a  fine  and  prominent  nose  and  meeting  eyebrows:  Assyroid
characters  (see  De  Clercq,  Album  de.i  Aniiq.  de  la  ChcJdie^  Paris,  1889-91;
Maspcro,  Hist,  des  pettpU  Orient,  Class.  ^  vol.  i.,  p.  613,  Paris,  1895;  and
E.  de  Sarzec,  Dicouvertes  en  Chaldhy  published  byHeurey,  Paris,  1885-97).

*  D.  Menant,  **  Lcs  Parsis,"  Ann,  Mus,  Gttin.^  Bibl.  Et.^  vol.  vii.,
Pai  is.

"  E.  Oliver,  Across  the  Border ^  Pathan  and  Biloch^  London,  1890.

*  For  ihc  measurements  of  the  Iranians  see  Appendices  I.  to  III.  (from
Danilof,  Houssey,  Ujfalvy,  Bogdanof,  Chantre,  Troll,  Risley).


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  ASIA.  425

Bosnia,  called  Spaniols,  coming  from  Spain  by  Constantinople,
are  under  average  height  (im.  63)  and  mesocephalic  (ceph.
ind.  80.1,  Gluck);  those  of  Galicia,  Western  Russia,  and
Russian  Poland  are  shorter  (im.  61  and  62)  and  sub-
brachycephalic  (ceph.  ind.  82) ;  those  of  England  are  of  the
same  stature  (im.  6i),  but  mesocephalic  (ceph.  ind.  80).^

Along  with  the  Jews  we  must  put  another  people,  also
dispersed  over  nearly  the  whole  earth,  and  of  Asiatic  origin,
probably  from  India,  to  judge  by  the  affinities  of  its  language
with  the  Hindu  dialects— the  Gypsies,  They  are  found  in
India  {BanjarSy  Nais^  etc.),  Persia  and  Russian  Turkestan
(Zw//,  Afazang^  Kara-Luliy  etc.),  in  Asia  Minor  (where  are  also
found  their  congeners,  the  Yuruks)  \  then  in  Syria  {Chingane)^
in  Egypt  {Fhagari^  Nuri^  etc.),  and  all  over  Europe,  with
the  exception,  it  is  said,  of  Sweden  and  Norway;  they  are
found  in  considerable  numbers  in  Rumania  (200,000),  Turkey,
Hungary,  and  the  south-west  of  Russia.  In  all  they  number
nearly  a  million.  The  pure  so-called  "  Black  Gypsies  "  are
of  the  Indo-Afghan  race  (stature  im.  72,  ceph.  ind.  on  the
liv.  sub.  76.8),  but  very  often  they  have  intermingled  with  the
populations  in  the  midst  of  which  they  dwell.*

*  See  the  art  "  Juifs"  in  the  Diet,  Giog,  Univers,  of  Vivien  de  Saint-
Martin  and  Rousselet,  vol.  ii.,  Paris,  1884  (with  bibliog.);  Andree,
Zur  Volkerkunde  der  Juden^  Bielefeld,  188 1,  with  map;  and  publications
of  the  Soc.  des  iiudes  fuivesy  Paris.  The  measurements  given  in  the
Appendices  are  after  Ikof,  Chantre,  Jacobs  and  Spielmann,  Gluck,
Kopenicki,  Wcissenberg,  Wcisbach,  etc

2  See  my  art.  "  Tsiganes,"  in  the  Diet,  Giog,  Univ,^  quoted  above,
vol.  vL,  1893;  Paspati,  Etude  sur  les  Tchinghiani^  Constantinople,  1870;
A.  Co!occi,  Gli  Zingan\  Turin,  1889,  with  map;  H.  von  Wlislocki,
Vom  .  .  .  Zigeuner-Voiket  Hamburg,  1890;  and  the  publications  of  the
Gypsy- Lore  Society,  London  (1886-96).


CHAPTER  XI.

RACES   AND   PEOPLES   OF  AFRICA.

Ancient  Inhabitants  of  Africa — Succession  of  races  on  the  '*dark
continent  ^'—Present  Inhabitants  of  Africa— i.  Arabo- Berber  or
SemitO'Hamite  Group:  Populations  of  Mediterranean  Africa  and
Egypt — II.  Ethiopian  or  Kushito-Hamite  Group:  Bejas,  Gallas,
Abyssinians,  etc. — III.  Fulah-Zatideh  Group:  The  Zandeh,  Masai,
Niam-Niam  {xjpulations  of  the  Ubangi-Shari,  etc  ♦  FulW  or  Fulahs —
IV.  Nigritian  Group:  Nilotic  Negroes  or  Negroes  of  eastern
Sudan — Negroes  of  central  Sudan — Negroes  of  western  Sudan  and
the  Senegal — Negroes  of  the  coast  or  Guinean  Negroes,  Kru,
Agni,  Tshi,  Vei,  Yoruba,  etc.— v.  Negrillo  Group:  Differences  of
the  Pygmies  add  the  Bushmen— vi.  Bantu  Group:  Western  Bantus
of  French,  German,  Portuguese,  and  Belgian  equatorial  Africa —
Eastern  Bantus  of  German,  English,  and  Portuguese  equatorial  Africa
— Southern  Bantus:  Zulus,  etc. — vii.  Hottentot- Bushman  Group:
The  Namans  and  the  Sans — viii.  Populations  of  Madagascar :  Hovaa,
Malagasi,  Sakalavas.

The  term  "  Black  Continent "  is  often  applied  to  Africa,  but  it
must  not  therefore  be  supposed  that  it  is  peopled  solely  by
Negroes.  Without  taking  into  account  the  white  Arabo-
Berbers  and  the  yellow  Bushmen- Hottentots,  which  have
long  been  known,  it  may  now  be  shown,  after  a  half-century
of  discovery,  that  the  population  of  Africa  presents  a  very
much  greater  variety  of  types  and  races  than  was  formerly
imagined.

Ancient  Inhabitants  of  Africa. — We  are  only  just
beginning  to  know  something  about  prehistoric  Africa.  Egypt,
that  classic  land  of  the  oldest  historic  monuments  of  the
earth,  has  yielded  in  late  years,  thanks  to  the  excavations  of
Flinders  Petrie,  D'Amelineau,  and  above  all,  of  De  Morgan,  a
large  quantity  of  wrought  stone  objects,  similar  in  character  to

426


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  AFRICA.  427

those  of  Europe,  and  if  certain  objections  may  still  be  raised
in  regard  to  the  palaeolithic  period  of  Egypt,  which  is  not
dated  by  a  fauna,  we  can  scarcely  deny  the  existence  of  the
neolithic  period  in  this  country,  the  period  which  preceded  or
was  contemporaneous  with  the  earliest  dynasties  of  which
monuments  have  yet  been  discovered.^

Hatchets,  knives,  and  scrapers  of  very  rude  palaeolithic  and
neolithic  types  have  been  discovered  in  Cape  Colony  (W.
Gooch,  J.  Sanderson) ;  flint  arrow-heads  and  implements  of
the  Chellean  type  in  the  country  of  the  Somalis,  in  the
Congo  Free  State  ;2  ironstone  arrow-heads  in  the  country
of  the  Monbuttus  (Emin  Pacha).  Numerous  stone  imple-
ments and  weapons  of  various  palaeolithic  types,  much  finer
than  the  preceding,  as  well  as  neolithic  hatchets,  have
been  found  in  Algeria  (at  Tlemcen),  in  South  Algeria  (at
El-Golea,  etc.),  and  as  far  as  Timbuctoo  (Weisgerber,  Lenz,
Collignon,  etc.).  Lastly,  Tunis  presents  a  progressive  series
of  palaeolithic  implements  absolutely  similar  to  those  of
Europe  in  several  stations  (at  Gafsa  and,  in  a  general  way,
west  from  the  Gulf  of  Gabes).'  But  all  these  finds  are  very
isolated  and  too  far  removed  one  from  another  to  enable  us  to

*  FL  Petrie  and  Quibell,  Nagada  and  BaliaSt  London,  1896 ;  De
Morgan,  Recherches  sur  Us  Origincs  de  tEgypte,  Paris,  1897-98,  2  vols.
See  for  summary  of  the  question  :  S.  Reinach,  VAnihropol.^  1S97,  p.  322  ;
and  J.  Capart,  Rev.  University ^  Brussels,  4th  year  (1898-99),  p.  105.
Let  us  remember  while  on  this  point  that  at  the  quaternary  period  lower
Egypt  was  still  covered  by  the  sea,  and  that  the  climate  of  Egypt  and  the
Sahara  was  much  more  humid  than  to-day  (Shirmer,  Le  Sahara^  p.  136,
Paris,  1893).  Most  of  the  prehistoric  finds  in  Egypt  have  been  made
on  the  table-lands,  not  covered  by  the  alluvial  soils  of  the  Nile.

'  W.  Goochf  Journ.  Anthr,  Inst.^  vol.  xi.  (1882),  p.  124;  Seton  Karr,
"  Discov.  of  Evid.  Paleoliih.  Age  in  Somaliland,"  yw//7i.  Anthr,  /nst,,
vol.  XXV.  (1896),  p.  271  ;  X.  Stainier,  **  L'ilge  de  la  pierre  au  Congo,"
Annales  Mus.  du  Congo,  3rd  series  (Anthr.),  vol.  i.,  part  I,  Brussels,  1899
(with  plates).

'  R.  Collignon,  *'  Les  ages  de  la  pierre  en  Tunisie,"  Maier,  Hist.  Nat,
Homme^  3rd  series,  vol.  iv.,  Toulouse,  1887;  C^uillault,  ''Station
prehist.  Gafsa,"  V Anihrofologie^  vol.  v.,  1894,  p.  530;  Zaborowski,
"  Period  ncolith.  Afr.  du  nord,'*  Rev,  Ec,  Antkr,^  Paris,  1899,  p.  41.       ,


438  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

Stratum  of  the  population  of  the  Abyssinian  plateau  is  formed
by  the  Agaw^  Eth'iopian  in  type,  Hamitic  in  language,  but  the
Abyssinians  of  the  higher  classes  are  strongly  Semitised.  The
national  religion  of  the  Abyssinians  is  monophysite  Christianity,
closely  allied  to  the  Coptic  religion,  but  impregnated  with
Mussulman,  Judaic,  and  indigenous  animist  elements.

To  the  south  of  the  Abyssinian  plateau,  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  Lake  Tsana  to  the  extreme  limits  of  the  extension  of
the  Ethiopian  peoples  to  the  south  and  west  is  the  territory  of
the  Gailas  or  Oroma^  representing  the  purest  Ethiopian  type.
To  the  east  of  the  Gailas,  from  about  the  42  nd  degree  long,  east
of  Greenwich,  dwell  the  Somalis^  probably  only  Gailas  more  or
less  intermingled  with  the  Arabs,  who  for  several  centuries
have  overrun  the  country.  They  occupy  the  whole  of  the
seaboard  from  Cape  Jibuti  (at  the  southern  extremity  of
Obok)  to  the  mouth  of  the  Jeb,  or  Jubba,  and  the  plain  of
Aji-Fiddah,  which  extends  below  the  equator,  but  in  the
interior  of  their  country,  especially  in  the  north,  numerous
Galla  tribes  are  found.

To  the  north  of  the  Gailas,  between  Abyssinia  and  the
coast  (from  Cape  Jibuti  to  Hamfila  Bay),  are  the  Afar  (in  the
plural  Afara)  or  Danakil  {Dankali  is  in  the  singular),  who
form  the  bulk  of  the  population  of  the  French  colony  of  Obok-
Tajura.  Physically  they  resemble  the  Somalis,  but  they  are
less  Arabised.  To  the  north  of  the  Danakil  there  is  a
population  akin,  it  is  said,  to  the  Agaw,  or  aborigines  of
Abyssinia,  and  known  by  the  name  of  Saho  or  Shaho.  It
occupies  the  southern  part  of  the  country  of  Massowah,  the
northern  being  taken  by  the  Ethiopian  tribes  known  by  the
collective  name  of  Massowans.*

From  the  somatological  point  of  view,  the  Ethiopians  are
characterised  by  a  rather  high  stature  (im.  67  on  the  average),
a  brownish  or  chocolate-coloured  complexion  with  a  reddish
tinge,  by  an  elongated  head  (average  ceph.  ind.,  75.7  to  78.1

1  Rcvoil,  La   Vallie  du  Darrar,  Paris,  1882 ;   Paulitschke,  ioc.  a'/,  ;
Sergi,  Av.  a/,,  p.  178;  Saotelli,  Bu//.  Soe.  Anlhr,  Paris,  1893,  p.  479*


448  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

nie  signifying  "people"  in  ihe  Mand^  language)  form  a  compact
linguistic  group  whose  domain  extends  from  the  Senegal  and
Upper  Niger  to  that  portion  of  the  West  African  coast  comprised
between  Saint  Louis  and  Monrovia.  The  domain  of  the
Mandd  language  extends  much  farthev  to  the  east  than  the
territory  of  the  Mand^nke  peoples  properly  so  called ;  it  en-
circles Timbuctoo,  the  countries  of  the  Gurma  and  the  Diumma,
where  it  competes  with  the  dialect  of  the  Fulahs,  and
encroaches  even  on  the  domain  of  the  Dogomba  and   the


Fig.  140.— Bonna  M'BsnJ,  Mandingan-Souj ;  height,  im.  74;  ceph.
ind.,  74.7;  nasaliadex,  103.    {PAe/,  Ctlligntn.)

Gonja  (to  the  north  of  Salaga),  where  the  Hausa  speech
prevails.  The  Mand^nk^  properly  so  called  includes  a  laige
number  of  tribes,  which  may  be  divided  into  two  great
clans:  the  Bamma  or  Bambara,  whose  "tennS"  or  totem
is  the  crocodile,  and  the  Malink^  (hippopotamus  totem).
The  Mand^nk^  are  Mussulmans,  except  the  clan  Bamma
or  Bambara  of  the  basin  of  the  upper  Niger,  which  has  remained
fetichist.  Related  to  the  Mand^nkd,  according  to  their  dialects,
are  the  Sonhiki  of  the  interior  and  many  other  populations  of


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  AFRICA.  .      44$

the  coast  of  Senegal.  The  Sonink^  or  SarakoltSs  ^  inhabit  the
right  bank  of  the  Senegal,  above  Matam  and  the  margins  of  the
Niger, and  below  the  Bamako  as  far  as  the  vicinity  of  Timbuctoo;
they  are  crossed  with  the  Torodo,  Bambaras,  and  Fulahs.  As
to  the  populations  of  the  coasts,  the  following,  proceeding  from
north  to  south,  are  the  chief.^  First,  the  Diola,*  between
Casamanze  and  the  Gambia,  who  have  remained  fetichist.
They  are  tall  (im.  70)  and  dolichocephalic  (cephalic  index,  74.5
according  to  Collignon  and  Deniker).  The  principal  tribe,
that  of  the  Felups,  has  imposed  its  dialect  on  all  the  others.
To  the  south  of  the  Diola  are  the  Balantes  and  the  Bagnoris,  a
bellicose  and  turbulent  people ;  the  Papels,  one  of  the  tribes
of  which,  the  Mandjacks,  is  the  most  in  harmony  with  its
masters,  the  Portuguese;  the  Bujagos  of  the  Bissagos  islands ;
the  Biafares,  the  Nalus,  the  Landumans,  fetichists  of  Rio
Nunez,  having  afHnities  with  the  Hausa ;  finally,  the  Baga  of
the  Compong  delta,  half-savage  fishers,  fetichist  like  the  two
preceding,  but  of  much  fairer  skin  and  more  pacific*  To  the
south  of  the  Pongo  river  are  met  the  Sussus  or  Soss^  (Fig.  140),
driven  from  Futa-Jallon  by  the  Fulahs.  Their  language  is
spoken  fluently  in  French  Guinea,  and  even  among  the  Nalus
and  Landumans.  To  the  south  of  Mellacory,  in  Sierra  Leone,
the  Timni  take  the  place  of  the  Sussus;  then  come  the  Vei  or
Way,  who  extend  as  far  as  Monrovia ;  alone  among  Negroes,
they  appear  to  possess  a  special  mode  of  writing.  All  the  Mande
peoples  bear  a  strong  likeness  to  each  other  in  physical  type
(high  stature,  im.  70,  dolichocephalic,  colour  black,  etc.),  and
the  different  tribes  are  only  to  be  distinguished  by  tattooings
and  other  signs  of  an  ethnographic  kind,  and  by  their  dialects.^

*  Faidherbe,  **  Les  Sarakol^s,"  Rev,  de  Linguist.,  188 1,  p.  80.
'  For  details  see  C.  Madrolle,  En  GuiiUe,  Paris,  1895.

'  They  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Diula  of  the  regions  of  Kong
and  the  upper  Niger,  one  of  the  first  Mandenk^  tribes  converted  to
Islamism,  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  least  fanatic,  perhaps  because  the
most  given  to  trade.     (See  M.  Monnier,  loc,  cit.)

*  Coflfinieres  de  Nordeck,  Tour  du  MonJe^  vol.  li.,  p.  273,  1886.

'  Binger,  loc.  tit. ;  Tautin,  •*  Les  Castes  des  Mandingues,"  Rev.  Ethncgr.,
vol.  iii.,  Paris,  1884.

29


462  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

Zambesi,  and  on  the  west  by  the  Mubungo  tributary
of  Lake  Ngami ;  they  are  excellent  smiths,  supplying  articles
in  iron  to  their  neighbours,  who  are  the  AmboeUn^  the
Kimbandky  and  the  Kioko  or  Akioko,  These  last,  scarcely
thirty-five  years  ago,  taking  up  a  position  to  the  east  of
the  Ganguelas,  have  to-day  advanced  to  the  loth  degree  of
S.  latitude,  into  the  western  part  of  Muata-Yamvo.  But  the
basis  of  the  population  of  this  ancient  kingdom  is  constituted
by  the  Lunda  tribes,  whose  territory  extends  from  the
Kwango  (affluent  of  the  Kasai)  to  lakes  Bangweolo  and  Moero.
They  occupy  the  basin  of  the  Kasai  {Kaiunda\  the  swampy
plains  to  the  east  of  the  upper  Zambesi  (the  Balunda^  the
Lobali)^  and  are  distinguished  by  their  peaceable  habits  and
hospitality.     Their  women  enjoy  a  certain  freedom.

The  Baluba^  who  form  an  important  nation,  occupy  the
territory  between  the  Kasai,  the  chain  of  the  Mitumba  moun-
tains and  the  6th  degree  of  S.  latitude.  They  appear  to  have
many  analogies  with  the  Lunda.  Of  tall  stature  (im.  70),
their  head  is  more  globular  and  complexion  less  dark  than
with  most  Negroes  (ceph.  ind.  79,  according  to  Wolff).  The
original  country  of  these  tribes  is  the  upper  basin  of  the
Congo.  Many  of  the  Baluba  are  mixed  with  the  Bashilange
aborigines  who  dwell  between  the  middle  valley  of  the  Kasai
and  that  of  its  right  affluent,  the  Lulua,  and  form  a  separate
population,  relatively  civilised,  who  emigrate  as  far  as  the
Congo,  where  they  become  engaged  as  carriers.  These  are  a
lively  people ;  the  head  is  slightly  elongated  (stature,  i  m.  68,
cephalic  index  76.9,  according  to  Maistre).  About  1870
they  underwent  a  politico-religious  revolution  and  introduced
the  hemp  or  **Riamba"  cult,  in  accordance  with  which  all  the
smokers  of  Riamba  declare  themselves  friends,  the  duty  of
mutual  hospitality  is  acknowledged,  the  sale  of  girls  inter-
dicted, etc.  Crimes  are  punished  by  excessive  administrations
of  the  drug,  which  in  the  end  stupefy  the  criminal  (Pogge,
Wolflf).  Their  neighbours  to  the  north,  the  Bakuba  of  the
great  bend  of  the  Sankuru,  who  speak  a  different  language,
are  more  sedentary  and  busy  themselves  in  trade  and  the


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  AFRICA.


473


The  Sakalava  tribes  are  numerous.  The  best  known  are
the  Menabe,  Milaka,  Ronondra,  and  Mahafali.  In  the  north
of  the  island  the  Sakalavas  are  mixed  with  the  Betsimasaraka,
and  form  the  Antankar  or  Antankara  people,  wild  shepherds
and  tillers  of  the  soil,  recalling  the  Bantus;  their  centre  is
at  Diego-Suarez.  In  the  south,  blended  with  the  Bara,
they  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  Antandroy  population
(about  20,000),  almost  savage,  who  depend  largely  for  sus-
tenance on  the  cactus  berries  of  their  sterile  country,  live  by
cattle-raising,  and  have  many  manners  and  customs  borrowed
from  the  Bara.


490  THE   RACES  OF   MAN.

elements.  The  Madurese  of  Madura  and  Bavean  islands,  as
well  as  the  Balinese  of  Bali,  are  like  the  Javanese.  In  the  less
accessible  mountains  of  the  province  of  Bantam  (west  of  the
island)  live  the  Baduj,  and  in  those  of  the  east  (province  of
Pasuruan)  the  Tenggerese.  These  are  two  fairly  pure  Indo-
nesian tribes,  who  have  preserved  their  heathen  customs  in
the  midst  of  the  Mussulman  population  of  Java,  There  are
people  like  them  in  Bali,  Lombok,  and  Sumbawa.^

In  Borneo,  the  coast  is  occupied  by  Malays,  except  the
north-east  part,  where  are  found  Suluans  (Arabised  Indonesians
from  the  Sulu  Islands),  Bugis,  and  the  Bajaus  or  Sea  Gypsies,
analogous  to  those  of  Riu  and  Mergui  (p.  396).

The  interior  of  the  large  island  is,  however,  the  exclusive
domain  of  the  Dyaks,  the  numerous  tribes  of  which  may  be
divided  into  two  great  groups,  the  one  of  stationary,  the  other
of  nomadic  habits.  The  sedentary  tribes,  more  or  less  inter-
mixed with  immigrant  elements,  Chinese,  Malay,  and  Bugi,
are  more  or  less  civilised.  First  come  the  Kayans,  the  Bahau,
and  the  Segai;  then  the  Tagans,  among  whom,  it  is  said,  the
practice  obtains  of  girls  being  deflowered  by  their  fathers;  and,
lastly,  the  Dusuns  or  Sun  Dyaks,  the  Baludupis,  the  Land
Dyaks,  and  the  Sea  Dyaks  of  Sarawak,  etc.  Second,  the
nomads,  who  are  purer  than  the  fixed  tribes,  and  sometimes
half  savage,  as,  for  example,  the  Punan  and  Olo-ot  of  the
middle  of  the  island,  are  still  little  known.^

The  Philippine  archipelago**  contains,  besides  Negritoes
(p.  483),  a  crowd  of  Indonesian  tribes,  which,  from  the  lin-

*  See  J.  Jacolis,  De  Badoejs^  S'Gravcnhage,  1891,  and  Kohlbrugge,  ioc.
eft.,  and  **De  heilige  bekers  d.  Tcncgerezen,"  Tijdschr,  v,  Ind,  Taal-
Land-in  Volkenk^  vol.  xxxiv.,  1896.  Among  the  Tenggerese  some  vestiges
of  Buddhism  may  be  discovered.

'  Sec  Ling  Roth,  7'he  Natives  of  Sarawak ^  2  vols.,  London,  1896,  and
Jour.  Anthr,  Inst.,  vols.  xxi.  and  xxii.  (1892-93).

'  Blumentritt,  **  Versuch.  einer  Ethnographic  der  Philip.,"  Ergdmungs^
heftf  Petenti,  Afitteii.,  No.  67,  Gotha,  1887,  with  map;  Montano, /<>r.
«V.;  Virchow,  "Die  Bevolker.  d.  Philip.,"  Sitzungsber.  Berlin  Acad,
IViss.,  1897,  p.  279,  and  1899,  p.  14;  Brinlon,  **  The  Peoples  of  Philip."
(short  summary),  Amer,  Anthropologist^  October,  1898.


RACES  AND  PEOPLES  OF  OCEANIA.      49I

guistic  and  ethnic  point  of  view,  may  be  grouped  as  follows: —
Starting  in  the  north-east  we  meet  first  the  Cagayanes  or  Ibangs
around  Lake  Cagayan  in  the  island  of  Luzon,  and  their
neighbours  the  Ifugaos,  who  are  hunters  of  skulls;  then
farther  south  we  find  the  Igorrotes  and  their  congeners;  then
the  Tagals;  then,  still  farther  south,  in  the  interior,  on  all  the
east  coast  of  Luzon,  as  well  as  on  the  coast  of  Mindoro,
are  found  the  savage  Mangianes.  At  many  points  these
peoples  are  intermixed  with  Chinese  blood.  The  west  coast
of  Luzon  is  occupied  by  the  Ilocanos,  who  are  bold  colonists,
and,  farther  south,  towards  Manilla,  tribes  of  the  Zambales  and
Pangasinanes.  The  quite  southern  extremity  of  Luzon  is
occupied  by  the  Bicols,  nearly  related  to  the  Tagals,  whom
one  finds  again  also  scattered  over  the  islands  (Catanduanes
Islands,  north  Masbate  Island,  etc.).  West  Mindanao  is  taken
up  by  the  mixed  population  (Arabo-Negri to-Indonesian)  of
pirates,  Mussulman  fanatics,  known  by  the  name  of  Moros;
the  east  of  this  island  being  inhabited  by  several  tribes  as  yet
little  known,  such  as  Mandayas  in  the  south,  Bogobos  in  the
north,  etc.,  and  the  Caragas  tribe  of  Bisaya  or  Vissaya,
Most  of  these  last  people  occupy  the  rest  of  the  archipelago
north  of  Mindanao,  as  far  as  and  including  the  south  of  Masbate
and  Samar  and  Tablas  islands.  They  are  met  again  beside  the
Moros  in  Palawan  Island  between  the  Philippines  and  Borneo.
The  Tagaloc  language  is  largely  superseding  other  dialects  in
the  archipelago;  it  has  already  displaced  Bicol  in  the  north  of
the  province  of  Camarine,  Bisayan  on  Marinduque  Island,  eta
Besides,  Tagals  emigrate  to  the  other  parts  of  the  archipelago
and  even  to  Marianne  Islands.  Most  of  the  Tagals  are
Christians;  many  can  read  and  write  Spanish,  and  not  a  few
have  received  a  superior  education.

Celebes  Island  is  peopled  in  the  north  (Minahassa  province)
by  the  Alfurus ;  in  the  south  by  Mangkassars  and  Bugis,  and
by  various  tribes  (Toraja,  Gorontolo,  etc.),  who  as  yet  have
been  little  studied,  in  the  middle.  The  Moluccas  are  inhabited
by  other  "  Alfurus,"  with  a  greater  strain  of  Papuan  blood.
Timur,  apart  from  its  Malay  or  Indonesian  coast  populations,


RACES  AND  PEOPLES  OP  OCEANIA.  493

whom  may  be  found  all  the  degrees  between  Indonesian  and
almost  pure  Papuan.  This  applies  also  to  the  Solorese  of
the  Solor  Archipelago,  east  of  Floris  (Figs.  197  and  198).!

III.  Melanesia. — The  Melanesians  are  a  well-characterised
race.  However,  they  exhibit  in  somatic  type  differences
sufficiently  marked  to  separate  the  Melanesian  race  into  two
sub-races.  The  one,  Papuan,  with  elongated  face  and  hooked
nose,  is  especially  spread  over  New  Guinea;  the  other,  or
Melanesian  properly  so  called,  with  broader  face,  straight  or
concave  nose,  has  a  geographical  area  which  covers  (from
north-west  to  southeast)  the  Admiralty  Islands,  New  Britain
(Bismarck  Archipelago),  Solomon,  Santa-Cruz,  and  Banks
Islands,  the  New  Hebrides,  Loyalty  Islands,  and  the  Fiji
Archipelago.  Further,  there  are  a  certain  number  of  ethnic
characters  which  also  justify  the  separation  of  the  Papuans
from  the  Melanesians  properly  so  called     (See  pp.  494-495)

The  Papuans^  are  found  in  the  large  island  of  New  Guinea
and  the  coast  islets ;  for  the  most  part  they  present  the  more
or  less  uniform  type  of  the  Papuan  sub-race  (long  face,  convex
nose,  etc),  but  the  Melanesian  type  properly  so  called  is  also

^  For  the  populations  of  Celebes,  Timur,  Floris,  etc. ,  see  Max  Weber,
Tijdsch,  Aardrijksk,  Cenoois,,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  vii.,  Amsterdam,  1890,  and
ffUer,  Arch,  Ethncgr.^  suppL  to  vol.  iii.,  Leyden,  1890,  pi.;  Brothers
Sarasin,  Verk.  Ces.  Erdk.  Beriitt,  1894,  1895,  ^"^  1^9^;  Ten  Kate,
'*Reis  in  de  Timor  groep,**  TijJ,  Aardr,  Ccnoct.,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  xi.,
p.  199,  Amsterdam,  1894,  and  VAnth'opologie^  1893,  P-  ^79!  Lapicque,
loc,  cii.

'  See  my  summary  of  what  was  known  of  the  Papuans  in  1882  in  the
Rev.  ttAntkr,^  1883,  p.  484,  and  the  following  works  which  have  since
appeared:  Chalmers,  Pioneering  in  New  Guinea,  London,  1887,  and
other  works;  De  Clercq  and  Scbroeltz,  Ethfugr.  Beschrijving  van  de  iV.
en  N.  NederL  New  Cuin,,  Leyden,  1893;  Finsch,  Samoafahrieiu
Leipzig,  1888,  and  his  articles  in  the  Ann,  naiurh.  I/e/mut.,  Vienna,  1888
and  1891,  in  the  Rev,  d*Eiknogr,,  1886,  etc.;  Haddan,  "  Dec^^rat.  art
Brit.  N.  Guin.,"  Cunningham  Memoirs,  vol.  x.,  Rcy,  Irish  Acad.,  1894;
and  ••The  Ethnography  of  BriL  New  Guinea,"  Science  froj^reu,  vol.  ii.,
1^1  pp.  85  and  227,  Loodoii,  with  map  and  bibliog.;  Macgregor,  Proc.
R.  Ce^r.  S0C.,  1890^  p,  191, and  hif  official  reporU;  TboaMOO,  SH/.  Nem
(7tw»«i,  LoodoD,  1891.


4^3  THE   k.\CE=  OF   MAX-

(Fig.  153/.  in  ger.eial  thtrjr  a^  Lallsr  and  more  dolicfao-
«rpha!;c  than  the  Papuans.  (See  Appendices  L  and  11.;
All  tilkxs  of  the  soil,  ciLi:rai:::g  e^ieciallj  the  jam  and  taro.


FlO,  IS3.— Woman  of  ihe  Fualu  clan  (east  coast  of  New  Caledonia),
of  put*  Melanesia  race.     (PA^t.  E.  Robin.)

they  practise  hunting  and  fishing  only  at  .tiroes^  the  pig
is  their  only  domestic  animal.  Most  of  the  Melanesians
still  live  in  the  stone  age,  but  the  former  fine  axes  of
polished  serpentine,  artistically  hafted,  are  disappearing  more


5CX)  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

especially  in  the  west  islands,  the  population  is  already  inter-
mixed with  Polynesian  elements.^

IV.  Polynesians.*— Seeing  that  the  Polynesians  are  distri-
buted over  a  number  of  islands,  and  exist  under  the  most  varied
conditions,  we  might  expect  to  find  a  multitude  of  types.
This  is  not  the  case;  the  Polynesian  race  shows  almost  the
same  traits  from  the  Hawaii  Islands  to  New  Zealand.  This
fact  is  due  to  the  constant  migrations  from  island  to  island,  and
the  active  trading  conducted  by  all  the  Polynesians  with  each
other,  the  effect  of  which  is  to  efface,  by  process  of  inter-
mixture, differences  arising  from  insular  isolation.

From  the  physical  point  of  view  the  Polynesian  is  tall  (im.
74,  average  of  254  measurements),  sub-brachycephalic  (ceph.
ind.,  82.6  according  to  178  measurements  on  the  living  subject,
79  according  to  328  skulls),  of  a  fair  complexion  (warm  yellow  or
brownish),  with  straight  or  curly  hair,  most  often  straight  nose,
the  cheek-bones  fairly  projecting,  the  superciliary  arches  little
marked,  and,  especially  among  the  women,  something  languorous
in  the  look  (Figs.  154  to  156).  The  Polynesian  therefore  differs
completely  from  the  Melanesian,  whose  stature  is  below  the
average  (im.  62  according  to  295  measurements),  and  who  is
dolichocephalic  (ceph.  ind.,  77  according  to  223  measurements
on  living  subject);  he  has  dark  skin,  woolly  or  frizzy  hair,  con-
cave or  convex  nose,  and,  lastly,  prominent  superciliary  arches,

'  The  number  of  Polynesians  (2,310  in  1897)  has  diminished  by  half  in
the  Fijis  since  1881,  while  that  of  the  natives  (100,321  in  1897)  has  hardly
varied.  The  Polynesian  element  is  appreciable  in  the  Aoba,  Tanna,  and
Espiritu  Santo  islands  of  the  New  Hebrides,  but  its  importance  has  been
exaggerated  so  £sr  as  the  Loyalty  Islands  and  New  Caledonia  are  concerned
(see  my  note  in  the  Sti//.  Soc,  Anthr,,,  p.  791,  1893).

^  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches^  4  vols.,  London,  1853;  Tautoin,  "  Les
Marquisiens,''  V AfUhropclogiey  1894,  1895,  and  189}$;  Meinecke.  DU
Inselen  des  stWen  Oceans ^  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1875;  Markuse,  Die  Hatuai*
schen  /nse/en,  BevVin,  1894;  Lister,  "Natives  ofKakaofu  (Bowditch  Island),"
Journ.  Anthr.  Inst.^  vol.  xxi.,  1892,  p.  43;  Ch.  Hedley,  **The  Atoll  of
Fanafuli,  EUice  group,*'  Australian  Museum^  Memoir  ///.,  Sydney,
X897;  H.  Gros,  '*  Les  populations  de  la  Polynesie  fran^aise  en  1891/'
9m//,  Soc.  Anthr.  Paris ^  1896,  p.  144 ;  Ten  Kate,  loc.  cit.


S06  THE   RACES  OF  MAN.

some  chance  breeze  in  setting  off.  Legends  afford  little  help
to  determine  these  migrations  in  detail,  and,  apart  from  some
historic  facts,  it  is  difficult  to  state  precisely  the  origin  of  the
populations  of  each  of  the  Oceanian  islands.


CHAPTER  XIII.

RACES   AND   PEOPLES   OF   AMERICA,

The  four  ethnic  elements  of  the  New  World — Origin  of  the  Americans —
Ancient  Inhabitants  of  America — Problem  of  palaeolithic  man
in  the  United  States — Palaeolithic  man  in  Mexico  and  South  America
—  Lagoa  Santa  race;  Samljaquis  and  Paraderos — Problem  of  the
Mound- Builders  and  ClifT-Dwellers — Ancient  civilisation  of  Mexico
and  Peru — Present  American  Races — American  languages.

Peoples  of  North  America — i.  Eskimo^n,  Indians  of  Canada  and
United  States:  a.  Arctic— Athapascan  group;  ^.  Antarctic — Algonquian-
Iroquois,  Chata-Muskhogi,  and  Siouan  groups  ;  c.  Pacific — North-
west Indians,  Oregon-California  and  Pueblo  groups — ill.  Indians
of  Mexico  and  Cetitral  America :  a.  Sonorian-Aztecs ;  b.  Central
Americans  (Mayas,  Isthmians,  etc.) — ftalf-breeds  in  Mexico  and  the
Antilles .

Peoples  of  South  America — i.  Andeans :  Chibcha,  Quechua,  and  other
linguistic  families;  the  Araucans — ii.  Amasonians:  Carib,  Arawak,
Miranha,  and  Panos  families;  unclassed  tribes — IIL  Indians  of  East
Brazil  and  the  Central  Region :  Ges  linguistic  family ;  unclassed
tribes  (Puri,  Karaya,  Bororo,  etc);  Tupi-Guarani  family — iv.  South
Argentine :  Chaco  and  Pampas  Indians,  etc. ;  Patagonians,  Fuegians.

At  the  present  day  about  six-sevenths  of  the  population  of
the  two  Americas  are  composed  of  Whites  and  Half-breeds
of  all  sorts.  The  remainder  is  made  up  almost  equally  of
Negroes  and  natives,  the  latter  improperly  called  Indians.^
Notwithstanding  the  relatively  small  number  of  these  last
(about  lo  millions),  I  shall  deal  almost  exclusively  with  them

^  A.  von  Humboldt,  in  his  Evaluation  numerique  de  la  population  du
Nouveau  Cotitinent^  Paris,  1825,  reckoned  that  in  the  Americas  there  were
13  millions  of  Whites,  6  millions  of  Half-breeds,  6  millions  of  Negroes,  and
9  millions  of  Indians ;  three-quarters  of  a  century  later  (in  1895*97}  it  was
computed  that  there  were  80  millions  of  Whites,  37  milliODS  of  Hi^l^
breeds,  10  millions  of  Negroes  and  10  millions  of  Induuit  i
population  of  137  millions  (1897).

507


5 10  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

there  during  the  quaternary  age.  This  period,  in  the  New
World  as  in  the  Old,  had  its  glacial  epochs.  According  to
Dawson,  Wright,  and  Chamberlin,  there  were  two  or  three  great
movements  of  invasion  and  withdrawal  of  the  American
glaciers.  It  is  not  known  if  these  movements  were  synchronous
with  those  of  Europe,  but  it  is  established  that,  as  in  Europe,
the  first  invasion  of  glaciers  was  also  the  more  widespread.^

Chipped  argilite  tools,  similar  to  the  quaternary  quartz  tools
of  sub-Pyrennean  countries,  have  been  found  by  Abbott  in  the
gravels  of  the  Delaware,  near  Trenton  (New  Jersey),  side  by
side  with  quaternary  animals  (probably  of  the  second  glacial
period,  notably  the  fragment  of  a  jaw-bone).  Other  imple-
ments have  been  gathered  on  the  spot  by  Haynes  in  New
Hampshire;  by  Dr.  Metz  in  the  gravels  of  Little  Falls  (Minne-
sota), regarded  by  W.  Upham  as  more  recent  than  those  of
Trenton;  by  Cresson  at  Medora  (Indiana),  and  at  Claymont
(mouth  of  the  Delaware),  in  a  more  ancient  deposit  than  the
Trenton  one;  by  Wright  and  Volk  at  Trenton  (in  1895);  with-
out reckoning  the  thousands  of  finds  either  on  the  surface  or
in  lesser-known  beds,  which  have  been  enumerated  in  a
special  memoir  by  Wilson.  If  1  dwell  on  these  details,  it  is
because  all  these  finds  have  latterly  been  vigorously  attacked
in  the  United  States,  since  Holmes,  who  had  studied  the
ancient  quarries  of  the  Indians,  pointed  out  the  great  resem-
blances between  the  spoiled  or  waste  argilite  axes  and  arrow-
heads which  he  had  found  in  these  quarries,  and  the  supposed
palaeolithic  implements,  particularly  those  of  Trenton.  Several
authorities,  such  as  Chamberlin,  MacGee,  Brinton,  have,  like

'  At  this  period  Greenland,  all  Canada,  a  corner  of  Alaska,  and  a  good
part  of  the  United  Stales  were  covered  with  glaciers  almost  uninterruptedly.
The  limit  of  the  moraine  to  the  south  may  be  indicated  by  a  line  which,
leaving  New  York,  for  Lake  Erie,  would  follow  the  course  of  the  Ohio  as
far  as  the  region  of  its  junction  with  the  Mississippi,  and  would  he  continued
along  or  a  little  to  the  west  and  to  the  south  of  the  Missouri  to  coincide  then
with  the  Canadian  frontier.  The  fauna  of  the  American  quaternary  period
differed  somewhat  from  that  of  Europe:  the  Rhinoceros  iichorhinus,  for
instance,  was  missing,  while  the  Mastodon  ohioticus  and  several  large
edenlata,  such  as  the  Megatherium^  Mylodon,  etc.,  are  met  with.


514  THE   RACES  OF  MAN.

represented  by  the  present  Indians.  Such,  at  least,  was  the
prevailing  hypothesis.  However,  an  attentive  study  of  these
mounds  and  the  objects  they  covered  has  led  little  by  little  the
most  competent  authorities  (Cyrus  Thomas,  Carr,  H.  Hale,
Shepherd,  and  the  numerous  members  of  the  "  Mound
Exploring  Division")  to  distinguish  several  **  types"  of  mounds,
the  geographical  distribution  of  which  would  serve  to  indicate
the  settlements  of  diverse  tribes.  E.  Schmidt,  in  a  compre-
hensive work,  has  brought  together  all  these  investigations,  and,
by  the  light  of  4inguistic  data  furnished  by  Hale,  Brinton  and
others,  has  been  able  to  state  precisely  who  these  various
tribes  were.^

It  may  be  said  at  once  that  these  investigations  have  by  no
means  confirmed  the  great  antiquity  of  the  mounds;  on  the
contrary,  objects  of  European  origin  (iron  swords,  etc.),  found
in  certain  mounds,  the  tales  of  the  early  explorers  which  tell
us  that  the  Indians  raised  these  mounds,  and  the  traditions
of  the  natives  themselves,  all  force  us  to  the  conclusion  that
the  builders  of  these  funereal  monuments  or  fortified  enclosures
were  no  other  than  the  various  Indian  tribes  whose  remaining
descendants  exist  today  in  the  reservations.  These  tribes  were
tillers  of  the  soil  at  the  period  of  the  discovery  of  America,  as
indeed  the  tales  of  contemporary  explorers  bear  witness,  as  do
also  the  traces  of  irrigation  canals  and  other  agricultural
operations  around  these  mounds.  But  the  invasion  of  the
country  by  Europeans  from  the  seventeenth  century  onward,
and  the  introduction  of  the  horse,  hitherto  unknown,  brought
so  much  confusion  into  the  existence  of  these  tribes,  that  such
of  the  Indians  as  survived  the  wars  of  extermination  changed


^  E.  Schmidt,  Die  Vorgeschichte  Nord-Amerikas^  Brunswick,  1894 ;
cf.  Arch,  f,  Anthrop.y  vol.  xxiii.,  1894.  I"or  details  see  Cyrus  Thomas,
•*  Burial  Mounds,"  Fifth  Amu  Kep.  Bur,  Ethn.,  Washington,  1887  and
**  Rep.  Mound  Ex plorat.,  Iwel/th  Kep.  Bur.  Ethu.  for  jSgo-gr^  Washing-
ton, 1894;  Carr,  **  Ciania  from  Stone  Graves,  etc.,"  Eleventh  Rep.
Peahoiiy  Mu5.\  Hale,  **  Indian  Migration,  eic."  A nter.  An/i^uar.,  1883  ;
Shepherd,  An/it/ui/ies  o/S/a/e  Ohio^  Cincinnati,  1890;  Brinton,  Essays  of
an  Americanist^  p.  90,  Philadelphia,  1890.


$26  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

Mexico),  from  whom,  however,  they  differ  in  regard  to  manners
and  usages.  They  are  husbandmen  relatively  civilised,  fierce
warriors  and  bold  robbers,  whose  name  has  been  popularised
by  the  novels  of  Gustave  Aimard  and  Gabriel  Ferry.  They
are  more  numerous  (23,500  in  the  United  States)^  than  the
Athapascans  of  the  north  (8,500)  and  the  Hupas  (scarcely
9oo).«

A  TA€  Indians  0/  the  Atlantic  slope  are  divided  into  three
great  linguistic  families:  Algonquian-Iroquoian,  Muskhogean-
Choctaw,  and  Siouan  or  Dakota.

I.  The  Algonquians  and  Iroquoians  occupy  the  "ethnographi-
cal province ''  which  bears  their  name  and  extends  over  the  east
of  Canada  and  the  north-east  of  the  United  States,  between  the
Mississippi  and  about  the  36th  degree  of  N.  latitude.  This
province  is  characterised  by  a  temperate  climate,  abundance
of  prairies,  and  broad  water-ways;  it  affords  facilities  for  the
chase  and  the  gathering  of  wild  rice  and  tobacco;  certain
usages  are  common  to  all  the  tribes  inhabiting  it  (tattooing
colouring  the  body,  moccasins  similar  to  those  of  the  Atha-
pascans, etc.).

The  original  home  of  the  Algonquians  was  the  region  around
Hudson's  Bay,  where  the  Cree  tribe,  which  speaks  the  purest
Algonquian  language,  still  exists.  Leaving  this  region,  they
spread  as  far  as  the  Atlantic,  the  Mississippi,  and  the  Alleghany
Mountains,  driving  back  the  Dakotas  into  the  prairies  of  the
right  bank  of  the  Mississippi.  The  Abnakis  of  Lower  Canada,
the  Micmacs  of  Acadia  and  Newfoundland,  the  Leni-Lenapk  of
the  Delaware,  who  fought  so  valiantly  against  the  European
immigrants;  the  Mohicans^  idealised  by  Cooper;  the  warlike
Shawnees,   the    Ojibwas  or   Chippewas  (Fig.   30),    who,   to-

^  There  are  some  Apache  tribes  in  Mexico,  the  Lipam^  the  Jarros^  but
their  numerical  force  is  not  known.

"  See  J.  Stevenson,  "Navajo  Ceremonial,"  Eighth  Rep,  Bur,  ElhnoL^
and  articles  by  Matthews  on  the  Navajos  in  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  5th  Reports
of  the  Bur,  Ethnol.\  Ten  Kate,  Reizen  en  Ondetokongei  in  N,  Amer,^
Leyden,  1885;  cf.  Bull,  Soe.  AnthropoL^  1883,  and  **Somatol.  Observ.
Ind.  South-west," /iwm.  Amer,  Ethnol  ^  vol.  iii.,  Cambridge,  1S91.


528  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

The  wars  in  which  the  Iroquoians  have  been  engaged  have
singularly  reduced  their  number;  to-day  there  are  only  about
43,000,  of  whom  9000  are  in  Canada.

2.  The  Muskhogean group  comprises  several  tribes:  Apalachi^
Chata-Chociaw,  Chicasaws^  Creeks  or  Muskhogis^  who  fonnerly
dwelt  between  the  lower  Mississippi,  the  Atlantic,  the  Tennessee
River,  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  To  these  we  must  add  the
Seminoles  who  formerly  occupied  the  Florida  peninsula.*  The
habits  of  the  Muskhogean  tribes,  of  which  Hernando  de  Soto
drew  so  vivid  a  picture  in  1540,  were  those  of  husbandmen
somewhat  advanced  in  civilisation;  they  had  a  hieroglyphic
writing  (Brinton),  but  were  unacquainted  with  the  use  of
metals,  gold  excepted.  The  southern  portion  of  the  United
States  which  these  tribes  occupied  is  a  region  with  a  sub-
tropical climate,  favourable  to  the  cultivation  of  the  sugar-cane,
maize,  and  tobacco.  The  ancient  Muskhogis  wore  garments
of  special  texture,  and  daubed  their  bodies  like  the  Algonquians,
but  were  unacquainted  with  tattooing.  At  the  present  day
they  have  dwindled  down  to  25,500  individuals.  Certain
tribes,  like  the  Yamasis,  have  completely  disappeared;  in  1886
there  were  only  three  Apalachi  women  left.  We  include
among  the  Muskhogis  the  tribes  who  formerly  lived  in  the
lower  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  whose  dialects  have  not
been  classified:  the  Natchez^  idealised  by  Chateaubriand,  a
score  of  whom  still  dwell  among  the  Creeks  and  Cherokis;
the  Atacapas^  reduced  in  number  to  a  dozen  individuals,  in  the
Calcasieu  Pass  (Louisiana),  etc.

3.  The  Siouans  or  Dakotas  (Figs.  158  and  159)  occupied  at
the  time  of  the  discovery  of  America  the  whole  country
extending  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi,  between  the  river
Arkansas  on  the  south  and  the  Saskatchewan  on  the  north,
as  far  as  the  Rocky  Mountains.  For  a  long  time  this  was
believed  to  be  their  original  home;  but  it  has  been  found

^  The  primitive  population  of  Florida,  the  Timuquanans^  appear  to  have
been  exterminated  in  the  eighteenth  century.  See  MacCauIey,  **The
Seminol  Ind.,"  Fifth  Rep,  Bur.  Ethn.for  1883-84^  p.  467,  Washington,
1887.


}


S40  TH£  RACES  OP  MAN.

civilisation  resembled  that  of  Mexico,  the  sanguinary  creeds  of
the  latter  excepted;  their  writing  was  of  a  perfect  hieroglyphic
type.     Besides  the  Mayas  properly  so  called  of  Yucatan,  the
principal  tribes  of  this  group  are:  the  Tsendals  or  Chonlafs  of
Mexico,  already  mentioned  above;  the  Mopans  of  Northern
Guatemala;   the  Koitches  or  Quichks  farther  south,  the  only
Indian  people  possessing  an  aboriginal  written  literature;  the
Pokomams  of  the  district  around  the  town  of  Guatemala;  the
Chortis  on  the  territory  where  the  ruins  of  Copan  stand ;  and
a  long  way  off,  isolated  from  the  rest  of  their  kinsmen,  in  the
Mexican  province  of  Tamaulipas,  the  HuaxUcs  (p.  537).     In
spite  of  linguistic  differences,  all  the  Guatemalans  or  Indians  of
Guatemala  resemble  each  other  physically;  they  are  short,  thick-
set, with  high  cheek-bones,  prominent  and  often  convex  nose.'
Some  characteristic  habits,  as  for  instance  geophagy,  are  com-
mon to  all  these  populations.

III.  The  Isthmians, — We  include  under  this  name  the  native
populations  of  Central  America,  scattered  between  Guatemala
and  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  whose  dialects  do  not  fit  into  any
group  of  American  languages.^

These  are  the  Lenkas  of  the  interior  of  Honduras;  the
Xicaks  or  Sihahv  in  the  north  of  this  country;  the  Chonfa/s  of
Nicaragua,  formed  from  the  Matagalpes^  speaking  a  language
peculiar  to  themselves;  and  the  tribes  adjoining  the  Lenkas^
the  Guatusos  or  Huaiusos^  who  inhabit  the  forests  surrounding
San  Juan.  The  latter  were  formerly  classed,  without  adequate
reason,  with  the  Nahua,  and  they  were  represented  as  having
dark  complexions,  whereas  they  are  as  yellow  as  the  rest  of
Americans.     In  number  they  scarcely  exceed  600  individuals.'

'  A.  Stoll,  Zttr  Ethnogr,  d.  Rep,  Cutemala^  Zurich,  1S84 ;  K.  Sapper,
**Ethnogr.  von  S.-E.  Mexico  und  Brit.  Honduras,"  Petemt,  MittheiLy  1895,
p.  177,  chart,  and  **  Die  unabhangige  Indianerstaaten  von  Yucatan/'
Globus y  vol.  67,  1893,  P*  '9^'

^  See  for  the  geographical  distribution  of  these  peoples  in  pre-Columbian
times,  D.  Pector,  Arch,  Soc,  Americaine^  new  series,  vol.  vi  ,  Paris,  1888,
pp.  97  and  145.

'  Fernandez  and  Bramford,  Rep-  Smiths,  Inst,^  1882,  p.  675;  Brinton,
loc,  (it,  {Am.  R.),  p.  163.


548  THE   RACES   OF   MAN.

south-west  provinces,  Argenton,  Catamafca,  Rioja,  Santiago,
etc,  probably  also  spoke  a  Qucchua  dialect.  It  was  a  very
civilised   population;   the  only  one  in  the  South  American


continent  which  knew  how  to  construct  buildings  of  freestone.
Although  partly  borrowed  from  the  Peruvians,  the  Calchaqui
civilisation  has  a  character  of  its  own,  and  in  several  respects


550  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

To  the  eastward  of  the  Chibchas  (p.  545)  dwelt  several  families
of  the  Paniquitas  and  Faezes^  included  in  a  distinct  linguistic
group,  of  which  the  other  representatives,  Colimas  and
Manipos^  have  entirely  disappeared.  In  central  Columbia
(state  of  Antioquia)  dwell  the  last  remnants  of  the  Nuiabehs
and  Tahamis^  tribes  resembling  the  Muisca  Indians  (p.  546)
in  their  customs  and  social  state.

As  to  the  Ando-Peruvian  region,  several  ethnic  groups,
using  special  dialects,  are  also  found  there,  having  no  relation
with  the  Quechuas.  Such  as  the  small  tribe  of  the  Pu-
quinas  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Titicaca,  the  Yuncas
or  Cuna-  Yuncas  ("  inhabitants  of  the  hot  lands "  in  the
Quechua  tongue),  settled  on  the  Pacific  coast  between  the  5th
and  loth  degrees  of  S.  latitude);  finally,  the  Atacameflos^
fishers  of  the  Loa  valley,  and  the  Shangos  or  Changos^  more
to  the  south,  in  the  desert  of  Atacama.  These  two  tribes  are
characterised  by  their  low  stature  (im.  60,  according  to
D'Orbigny).

It  may  be  as  well  to  class  with  the  Andeans  the  Araucans,
or  Mapu-clie  as  they  call  themselves,  whose  linguistic  affinities
are  still  obscure,  but  whom  we  must  connect  with  the  Cen-
tral American  race  by  their  physical  characters;  stature
almost  low  (im.  61),  subbrachycephalic  (ceph.  ind.  on  the
liv.  sub.,  82,  skull  81),  elongated  face,  with  slightly  projecting
cheek-bones,  straight  or  convex  nose,  etc.,  the  general  appear-
ance recalling  the  Aymaras  and  the  Quechuas;^  certain  ethnic
characters  (perfected  weaving  of  stuffs,  irrigation,  hoe-culture,
metallurgy,  etc.)  place  them  in  the  same  category  as  the
Andeans,  and  point  to  Peruvian  influence.  They  are  only
found,  in  fact,  to  the  north  of  the  Bio-Bio  river  (37*--38"  S.  lat.)

'  Siemiradzki,  he,  cit.^  p.  160.  The  figures  here  given  from  Oldendorf.
Manouvrier,  Hamy,  Virchow,  and  derived  from  my  own  observations,  relate
to  the  Chilian  Araucans.  The  Araucans  of  the  Pampas  are  shorter  ( I m.
57,  according  to  De  la  Vaulx,  Compt.  rend.  Sec.  Ceogr.^  Paris,  1898,
p.  99),  and  brachyccphalic,  to  judge  from  the  measurements  of  Ten  Kate
{f^ev,  Mus.  La  Plata^  vol.  iv.,  p.  209),  who  finds  the  mean  cephalic  index
of  53  skulls  to  be  83.92  in  a  series  in  which,  however,  several  skulls  of  the
Palaeo- American  type  are  met  with.


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  AMERICA.  55 1

— that  is  to  say,  only  in  those  places  reached  by  the  Inca
civilisation.  South  of  this  line,  with  the  exception  of  the
coast,  where  European  influence  makes  itself  felt,  the  Araucans
have  remained  until  recent  times  hunters  or  nomadic  shepherds,
almost  uncivilised.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  40,000
Chilian  Araucans.  At  a  comparatively  recent  period  some
Araucan  tribes  migrated  to  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Cordilleras
(the  Manzanieros)^  and  into  the  Argentine  pampas,  as  far  as
the  neighbourhood  of  Buenos  Ayres.  In  these  parts  they
have  been  pushed  back,  firstly  by  the  European  colonists,
then  by  the  Argentine  soldiers,  farther  and  farther  south,
beyond  the  Rio  Negro.  This  population  is  a  very  mixed  one;
we  find  in  it  Patagonian,  Quechua,  Chaco,  and  even  European
elements  (see  p.  574).

From  the  social  point  of  view,  all  the  Araucans  have  pre-
served their  ancient  organisation  of  hordes  governed  by  a
hereditary  chief.  Little  is  known  about  their  religious  ideas ;
it  is  understood  that  they  hold  in  the  highest  reverence  an  evil
spirit  called  "  Pilgan  "  by  the  Andean  Araucans,  **  Nervelu "
('*  bird  with  metal  beak  and  claws  ")  by  the  Araucans  of  the
Pampas.  Formerly,  the  Araucan  warriors  were  buried  with  their
weapons,  their  horse  was  felled  on  the  grave  and  consumed.^

*  The  Manzanicros,  so  named  from  the  country  of  crab-apple-tree  forests
which  they  inhabit,  have  preserved  I)etter  than  the  Araucans  of  the
Pampas  their  physical  type  ;  but  ihey  have  adopted  for  the  most  part,  like
the  latter,  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Indians  of  the  Pampas  and  the
Gauikcs  Kuro- Indian  half-breeds,  similar  to  the  Ccnv-hoys  of  the  western
parts  of  the  United  States.  They  live  as  nomadic  shepherds  in  tents  of
guanaco  skins,  and  wear  garments  of  tanned  skin,  after  the  manner  of  the
Gauchos ;  they  have  no  pottery,  sul»sist  almost  exclusively  on  meat,  etc.
Excellent  horsemen,  they  hunt  the  guanaco  with  bolas,  exactly  like  the
Patagonians  and  the  Gauchos.

'^  The  Archipelagoes  of  ChiioJ  and  Chonos^  which  lie  off  the  Chilian
coast  in  the  neighl)ourhood  of  Cape  Pefias,  were  peopled  by  Araucan  tribes
of  Gauchos y  Payos  and  Chonos,  of  whom  there  remain  only  a  few  de-
scendants, with  a  strain  of  Spanish  blood.  These  Gauchos  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  half-breeds  of  the  same  name  (see  alxjve,  note  I),
nor  the  Chonos  with  the  tribe  of  the  same  name  living  farther  to  the  sonlh
between  Cape  PeiSas  and  the  Straits  of  Magellan ;  the  Utter  tribe  appetn
to  be  related  rather  to  the  Fuegians.


552  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

Among  the  Andean  populations  we  must  also  mention
the  YurucareSy  to  the  west  of  the  Rio  Mamor^,  of  very  high
stature,  their  skin  being,  it  is  said,  almost  as  white  as  that
of  Europeans.

II.  The  Amazonians. — The  vast  plains  and  impenetrable
forests,  rich  in  birds  and  arboreal  mammalia,  watered  by  the
great  tropical  streams,  the  Amazon  and  the  Orinoco,  are
peopled  by  a  large  number  of  tribes  who  may  be  grouped
to-day — thanks  to  the  recent  works  of  philologists — into  four
families.  Two  of  these,  the  Carib  and  Arawak,  or  Maypure
families,  comprise  the  tribes  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  country;^
the  two  others,  which  are  less  important,  the  Miranha  and
Pano  families,  are  composed  of  the  tribes  of  the  western  part
of  the  country.

I.  The  Carib  Family, — It  was  thought  until  recently  that  the
peoples  of  this  linguistic  group  had  settlements  only  in  the
Guianas  and  the  Antilles,  but  recent  studies  have  shown  that
they  extended  much  farther  over  the  South  American  continent,
as  far  as  the  source  of  the  Yapura  on  the  west,  and  the  i4tb
degree  of  S.  latitude  on  the  south.  As  the  speech  of  the  southern
Caribs  is  purer,  less  sprinkled  with  Arawak  words  than  that  of
their  northern  brethren,  philologists  suppose  that  the  original
home  of  the  Caribs  in  general  should  be  found  somewhere  in
the  centre  of  Brazil,  to  the  south  of  the  Amazon.  It  is  from
there  that  they  must  have  migrated  into  Guiana,  whence  their
hordes  moved  towards  the  Antilles  probably  two  centuries

^  For  the  philology  of  the  Caribs  and  the  Arawaks,  see  L.  Adam,
"Trois  fam.  linguist.  .  .  .  de  TAmazone,  de  TOr^noque,  etc.,"  C^ngrh
Intern,  Americanistei^  Berlin,  1888,  p.  489,  and  Biblioth,  linguist,
Americaine^  vol.  xviii.,  Paris,  1893;  Von  den  Steinen,  he,  cit.^  and
Centr,  Brasil^  Leipzig,  1886;  Ehrenreich,  ioc,  cit.^  and  Petirm,  Mitth,^
1897,  No.  4.  For  the  ethnography,  sec  the  works  already  quoted  of
Ehrenreich,  of  Von  den  Sleincn,  and  the  following  works :  Schoniborgh,
Reisen  in  Brit.  Guy  ana  ^  Leipzig,  1847,  2  vols.  ;  Coudreau,  "  Note  sur
54  trib.  Guyane,"  Bull,  Soc,  Geogr.^  Paris,  1891,  and  *'Dix  ansde  Guyane,"
ibid,^  p.  447,  map ;  E.  Im  Thurn,  Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana^  London,
1883;  Crevaux,  Voyages  dans  t Amer,  du  Sud^  Paris,  i88j;  Stoddard,
Cruising  among  the  Caribbus^  London,  1895.


554  THE  RACES  OK  MAN.

particularly  the  Uiiotos  or  Carijonas,  who  live  side  by  side  with
the  Miranhas  (p.  560)  (Crevaux).  To  judge  from  some
ethnographical  analogies  (similarity  of  tattooing,  etc.),  the
Ararat  or  Yumas,  who  wander  on  the  right  bank  of  the
Amazon,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mouths  or  the  Xingu,
Tapajos,  Madeira  and  Purus,  belong  also  to  the  Canb  family,
but  as  yet  nothing  is  known  about  their  language.*


(.Cotl.  Mus.  Nal.


The  physical  type  of  the  Caribs  of  Guiana  and  Venezuela
differs  slightly  from  that  of  the  Caribs  of  the  upper  Xingu.
The  former  are  of  low  stature  (ini.  58  for  men,  im.  45  for
women),  and  mesocephalic  (mean  ceph,  ind.  in  the  liv.  sub,
81.3),  while    the  Catibs  of  tlie  upper  Xingu  are  below  the

'  According  to  Sictniradiki,  loc.  cit,,  p.  147,  the  Cuancavtliiii  and
Monhibie  Indians  of  the  ci>ni>t  of  Ecuador,  whu  are  complelely  IILspanitied,
as  well  as  the  Payaptat  [ym  p  S7i),  bcai  t,  atron{;  reicmlilaDce  in  physical
tyjie  (o  Ihc  Carilti.


RACES  AND  PEOPLES  OF  AMERICA.  SSS

average  height  and  sub-dolichocephalic  (im.  6i  for  men,
im.  52  for  women;  mean  ceph.  ind.  on  the  liv.  sub.,  79-6).'
What  is  characteristic  of  certain  Carib  tribes  of  the  south
(Bakairis,  etc.)  is  the  frequent  occurrence  of  individuals  with
wavy  or  fthzy  hair  and  convex  nose,  in  the  midst  of  the
common  type  having  straight  hair,  short  and  somewhat  broad
nose,  etc.     The  ancient  Caribs  of  the  Antilles  were  short.


somewhat  light-skiimed,  and  had  the  custom  of  deforming  the
head  by  flattening  the  frontal  region  of  the  skull.

From  the  ethnic  point  of  view,  the  Caribs  are  distinguished
by  their  acquaintance  with  the  hammock ;  a  plaited  {not  woven)
texture;  and  a  particular  kind  of  cassava  squeezer  (p.   188);

'  These  liguiea  are  given  fioni  ihe  measurements  uf  Manuuvrier  and
Deniker  {BuU.  Sm.  ^n/Aro/i.,  Paris.  1893},  of  Mauiel  {.Vim.  S<k.
Atithrop.,  Paris,  and  ser.,  vol.  ii.,  1875-85),  Ten  Kale  {Kcv.  d'AiUhr.,
Paris),  and  Prince  Roland  Itonapaite  {Les  Habitanis  de  Surinam,  Pirb,
1SS4),  for  the  Cariba  of  the  north  ;  from  Ehreotrich,  lot.  eil.  {Aalhnf.
Slud\  for  the  Carihs  of  the  south.


5S6  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

by  their    fondness   for   painting  the    body;    by  the  practice
of  the  "  couvade  "  (p.  240),  etc     The  blow-pipe  and  poisoned
arrows  are  not  their  '*  national  weapons,"  as  has  sometinaes
been  said;   the  Caribs  of  the  south  are  unacquainted   with
them,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  several  non-Carib  tribes  of  the
Amazon  basin  make  use  of  them.     Their  favourite  weapon  is
or  was  the  battle- axe  of  polished  stone  (basalt,  diabase).     The
slight  difference  between  the  mode  of  life  of  the  Caribs  of
the  Antilles  and  that  of  the  Caribs  of  the  present  day  was  due
to  the  existence  of  anthropophagy,  the  presence  of  *'  communal
houses''  {Carb€ts\  and  to  some  other  characteristics  which
denote  their  superiority  over  the  modern  Caribs  from  the  social
point  of  view.^

2.  The  Arawak  linguistic  family,  as  constituted  by  L.
Adam,  at  first  by  the  name  of  Maypure^  has  been  called  by
Von  den  Steinen  " Nu-Arawaky*  from  the  prenominal  prefix
''  nu  "  for  the  first  person,  common  to  all  the  Arawak  tribes,
scattered  from  the  coast  of  Dutch  Guiana  and  British  Guiana
to  the  upper  basins  of  the  Amazon  and  Orinoco.  The
principal  tribes  are  :  the  Aturai  and  the  Vapisiana  of  British
Guiana;  the  Maypures  and  the  Banivas  of  Venezuela;  the
Manaos  and  the  Aruacos  of  the  Rio  Negro ;  the  Yumanas  and
the  Passehs  of  the  lefl  bank  of  the  Solim9es ;  the  Afaraaas
more  to  the  south ;  the  Paumary  and  the  numerous  Ipurina
tribes  of  the  Purus  basin ;  lastly  the  half-civilised  Moxos  or
Mohos  of  the  upper  Mamor^,  and  the  Canopos  or  Antis  of  the
forests  of  the  upper  basin  of  the  Ucayale  (Peru),  of  average
stature,  brown-coloured  skin,  skilful  hunters.*  The  tribes  of
the  upper  Xingu  are  the  Vaura  and  the  AfeAinacu,  Let  us
also  note  the  Parea's  of  the  region  of  the  sources  of  the
Tapajos,  among  whom  we  observe  the  influences  of  the
Quechua  civilisation  (Pandean  pipes)  or  the  Peruvian  (a
particular  head-dress  of  birds'  feathers  and  porcupine  quills,

^  See,  for  example,  the  summary  of  the  data  of  ancient  authors  In  J.
Ballet's  La  Cuoiklonpe^  vol.  i.,  2nd  pt.,  p.  220,  Basse-Terre,  1894.

2  O.  Ordinaire,  **  Les  Sauvages  du  Perou,"  Rn*  Ethnogr,^  1887,
p.  264.


56o  THE   RACES  OF   MAN.

established  by  R.  de  la  Grasserie,^  chiefly  inhabited  the  north-
west of  eastern  Peru,  but  they  are  likewise  met  with  in  the  west
of  Brazil  (the  Karipunas  of  the  banks  of  the  Madeira),  and  in
the  north  of  Bolivia  (the  Pacaguara)^  separated  from  their
racial  brothers  by  a  series  of  tribes  speaking  the  Arawak
dialects.  The  principal  Pano  tribes  in  Peru  are :  the  JCassrvo,
cannibals  of  the  upper  Ucayle  who  resemble  the  Fuegians;
the  Combos  of  the  same  river,  very  low  in  stature;^  the  Panos^
of  whom  there  remain  but  a  few  families.*  The  Araunos^  of
the  region  comprised  between  the  two  principal  branches  of
the  Madeira  (Madre  de  Dios  and  Beni)  speak  a  Pano
language,  but  with  a  considerable  admixture  of  Quechua
elements.

4.  The  tribes  of  the  banks  of  the  Iga  and  the  Yapura  have
received  from  their  neighbours  the  name  of  Miranhas^  which,
it  appears,  means  "  rovers."     Ehrenreich  employed  this  name
to  designate  various  tribes  whose  dialects  presented  a  certain
family  likeness.     Of  these  tribes,  which  are  rarely  visited  by
the  Brazilian-Portuguese  merchants,  the  following  are  the  chief:
the  Miranhat  properly  so  called  (Figs.  169  and  170),  between
the  I^  and  the  lower  Yapura,  mentioned  long  ago  by  Martius;
the  Kcerunas  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Yapura;  the  Tucanoszn^  the
Jupuas  to  the  east  of  the  last-named,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  river
Uaupes.     The  Miranhas  have  maintained  their  primitive  con-
dition.     Of  a  very   warlike   disposition,    they  use   as    their
principal  weapon  a  particular  kind  of  club,  a  sort  of  broadsword
of  hard  wood.     They  employ  the  dtum  language  (see  p.  134).
Though  living  on  the  banks  of  fish-yielding  rivers,  they  do  not
fish,    but   confine   themselves   to    hunting,   like   the    ancient


*  R.  de  la  Grasserie,  Conj:^.  lntemat»  Americanistes^  Berlin,  i888»
p.  438.

'  Barboza  Rodrigue^  {Revista  da  Exposi^ao  Anthrop,  bratiieira,  Rio
de  Janeiro,  1882)  has  measured  four  specimens,  which  have  given  him  the
mean  height  of  im.  47.

'  Ordinaire  {he.  cit.)  also  describes  together  with  these  populations  the
wholly  savage  tribe  of  the  /j>renzos  living  completely  in  the  stone  age  on
the  banks  of  the  Palcazu.


564  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

those  of  the  prehistoric  race  of  Lagoa  Santa  and  the  "  Samba-
quis/'  while  the  living  subjects  are  closely  allied  to  the  Fuegians,
as  much  by  the  size  and  form  of  the  head  as  by  the  lines  of  the
face,  the  prominent  supraciliary  ridges,  the  sunk  nose  narrow
at  the  root,  etc.     I  have  given   (pp.   160,   210,   etc.)  several
characteristics  of  the   ethnography  of  the  Botocudos.     The
Kayapos,^  who  were  believed  to  be  an  extinct  race,  and  who,  on
the  contrary,  are  one  of  the  most  important  and  warlike  tribes
of  Brazil,  are   divided   into  three   sections.      The  Horthem
Kayapos  occupy  the  middle  Tocantins,  and  overflow  on  one
side  into  the  sterile  "  Sertaos  "  of  the  province  of  Maranon,  and
on  the  other  into  central  Brazil,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  lower
Araguaya;  the  Western  Kayapos^  who  keep  in  the  upper  valley
of  the  Xingu,  have  been  described  by  Ehrenreich  and  Von  den
Steinen  under  the  names  of  Suya  and  Akua  (the  Chavantes-
Cherentes  of  the  Brazilians).     They  differ  from  the  Botocudos
in  physique,  being  brachycephalic,  tall,  and  very  light-skinned.
As  to  ethnical  characteristics,  these  are  for  the   most   part
borrowed  from  their  Carib  and  Arawak  neighbours.      The
Southern  Kayapos  (near  the  river  Parana,    20*  S.  lat.)    are
merely  known  by  name.     The  Kaingans  or  Kame^  wrongly
called  Coroados  (see  p.   545),  inhabit  the  mountains   of  the
Brazilian  provinces  of  SSLo  Paulo,  S.  Catharina,  and  Rio  Grande
do  Sul ;  they  are  tribes  of  uncivilised  and  nomadic  hunters.

Besides  the  clans  of  the  Ges  family,  we  must  also  mention  in
the  eastern  region  of  Brazil  the  following  tribes  whose  languages
have  not  been  classified^  and  whose  affinities  with  the  Ges  are
not  very  clear.  The  more  important  of  these  tribes  are  the
Paris  or  Pouris  and  the  KiririSy  wrongly  called  "Tapuyas"
or  "  Coroados  "  (see  p.  545).  At  the  beginning  of  the  century
the  Puris  in  fairly  large  numbers  still  inhabited — together  with
the  Koropos — the  mountains  between  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  Uro
Preto.  There  is  but  a  small  remnant  left  at  the  present  day,
consisting  of  a  few  individuals  living  together  in  the  hamlet  of

^  Castelnau,  Expedition  partiei  Ctntr,  Am,  du  Sud,  Hist,  des  w^.,
Paris,  1852-57,  6  volt.  ;  Mattius,  loc,  cit.\  Ehrenreich,  loc,  cit,  {Ptterm.
Mitt.),


566  tHE  RACES  OF  MAN,

The  Trumai  of  the  sources  of  the  Xingu  are,  on  the  contrary,
short  {im.  59)  and  mesocephalic  (ceph.  ind.  81. i),  and  the j
have  convex  noses  and  retreating  foreheads.

The  Bororos  (Fig.  173),  scattered  from  the  upper  Paraguay
to  the  upper  Parana,  are  hunters;  they  have  great  bows  and
arrows  of  bamboo  or  bone.  Polygamy  exists  among  them,
and  there  are  also  cases  of  polyandry.  They  are  tall  (rm.  74)
and  mesocephalic  (ceph.  ind.  81.5).*


Fig.  173.— Aramichau  Indian  (Tupi  ot  Carib  (tibe  of  French  Guiana).
(.Call.  Mi.s.  Nal.  Hiit.,  ParU.)

In  spite  of  the  diversity  of  language  and  race,  several  of  the
tribes  of  the  central  region,  living  side  by  side,  have  the  same
manners  and  customs,  and  the  same  kind  of  existence,  as  a
resuh  of  mutual  borrowings.*  The  best  example  of  this  is
furnished  by  the  Caribs,  Arawaks,  Ges,  Tupis,  and  Trumai  of
the  upper  Xingu.  They  all  go  naked,  the  women  sometimes
wearing  the  triangular  palm-leaf  which  plays  the  part  of  the  fig-

'  J.  Koslowsky,  "  Algiin.  datos  sobre  los  Bororos,"  Bal.  InU.  Gecgr.
Arftat.,  vol.  vi.,  1895;  Ehrenrcich,  Uc.  dl-  {Attihr.  Unltr.).

*  See  on  Ms  ]>uint  Ihc  isuj^eslive  monagta|>h  of  II.  Meyer,  "  Bows  and
Arrows  in  Cenir,  Braiil,"  SmilAt.  Jiefi-  /or  /Sg6,  ])■  S49.  g'-.  Washington,


576  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

conjectured  in  D'Orbign/s  day,  have  now  been  absolutely
demonstrated.      Paraguay  and  the  east  of  Bolivia  were   the
starting-points  of  these  migrations.     The  exodus  of  the  Tupis
took  place  at  first  towards  the  coast,  then  along  the  seaboard
to  the  mouth  of  the  Para,  and  thence  further  northward  into
French  Guiana,  where  some  Tupi  tribes  are  still  to  be  found,
the  Emerilhns  of  the  valley  of  the  Sai,  a  left  tributary  of  the
Inini,  the  Ovampis  of  the  upper  Oyapoc,  etc.    The  Aramichaux
(Fig.  172),  who  were  believed  to  be  extinct,  and  who  dwell
between  the  Uaqui  and  the  Arua,^  seem  to  be  also  of  the
Tupi  stock.      Another  stream   of  migration  may  be  traced
straight  towards  the  north-east;  it  passes  through  the  upper
basin  of  the  Xingu,  to  terminate  eastward  of  the  Tocantins
(the  tribe  of  the  Guajajazd),    An  isolated  Tupi  group  exists  far
to  the  north-west  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  bulk  of  this
family.     It  consists  of  the  Omaguas  and  the  Cocomas^  half-
civilised  tribes  of  the  upper  valley  of  the  Maranon  (Peru),  to
the  eastward  of  the  Jivaros.     Individuals  with  wavy  or  friaszy'
hair  are  not  rare  among  these  hybrid  peoples.

The  family  of  the  Western  Tupis^  whose  linguistic  affinities
are  less  clear,  comprises,  provisionally,  the  Mundrucus^  or
Mundurukus^  of  the  middle  Tapajoz,  the  Yurunas  of  the
lower  Xingu,  the  Anetii  of  the  upper  course  of  this  river,  etc.

Physically,  the  Tupis  differ  but  little  from  the  Caribs;  those
of  the  north,  the  Mauh^s  and  the  Mundurukus  for  example,
studied  by  Barboza  Rodriguez,  are  im.  58  and  im.  60  in
stature,  whilst  the  Kamayuras  and  the  Anefo  of  the  upper
Xingu  are  taller  (im.  62  on  an  average);  the  cephalic  index
of  the  latter  is  79  (Ehrenreich).  The  Guarani  should  be,
according  to  D'Orbigny,  more  than  im.  66  in  height.*  But  the
anthropological  study  of  the  Tupis  is  still  to  be  made.

*  Coudreaii,  he,  cit.^  pp.  123  ami  131.

*''  Koppi};,  quoted  hy  Brinton  {Am.  A'.,  p.  231).  VVc  must  not  confound
these  Cocomas  with  the  tribe  of  the  same  name  living  l>etween  the  upper
Burus  and  the  Jurua,  and  which  appears  to  belong  to  the  Pano  family.

*  Barboza  Rodriguez,  lo<.  a'/.;  Ehrenreich,  /oc,  ct/,  {Anihrop,  Stud.);
^"^rbigny,  /ac,  f//.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  324.


S72  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

as  curiosities  in  Paris  in  1830.  The  Charruas  had  a  very  dark-
coloured  skin  and  were  of  somewhat  high  stature  (im.  68),  like
their  neighbours  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata,  the
ChanaseSf  and  especially  the  Querandis^  whose  bands  were
decimated  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  after  their  last
attack  on  Buenos  Ayres.^

Their  hybrid  descendants,  called  Talhuefs,  were  still  fairly
numerous  in  i860  between  Buenos  Ayres  and  Rio  Negro.
The  Abipones  to  the  west  of  the  Paraguay,  so  well  described
by  Dobrizhoffer,^  were  destroyed  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth
century,  partly  through  conflicts  with  their  congeners  the
MocoviSj  of  whom  there  are  no  survivors.

All  these  tribes  probably  belonged  to  the  Guaycuru
linguistic  family^  established  by  L.  Quevedo,  whose  most
numerous  representatives  are  now  the  Tobas  of  southern  Choco
to  the  north  of  Pilcomayo,  and  the  Ma/acos  who  wander  about
between  the  latter  river  and  the  Vermejo.^  We  must  further
add  to  this  group  the  Caduves  or  Caduvei  of  the  Brazilian
bank  of  the  Paraguay,  between  20'  and  23'  S.  lat.,  a  hundred
or  so  of  unhybridised  individuals,  all  that  remain  of  the  ancient
Mbaya  people,  and  the  Payaguas^  an  ancient  warlike  and
plundering  tribe  thought  to  have  disappeared,  but  of  which  there
remain  between  two  and  three  score  representatives  in  the

*  Martin  de  Moiissy,  Descn'f,  Confed,  Argent,^  vol.  ii.,  p.  141,  Paris,
1 86 1,  and  Industry  des  Indiens  La  Plata,  Paris,  1866;  LAfone  Quevedo,
**  La  Razza  Americana  de  Brinton,  etc.,"  BoL  Inst,  Gtogr,  Argent,^
vol.  xiv.,  1894,  p.  524  (on  the  disappearance  of  the  Charruas),  and  BcL
Inst.  Geogr,  Argent,^  vol.  xviii.,  1897,  pp.  124  and  127;  Arrivh  en  Frame
de  quaire  sauvages  Charrua^  Paris,  1 830,  and  Flourens,  Ann,  Se,  Nat.^
2nd  ser.,  Zool.,  vol.  viii. ,  p.  156;  F.  Outes,  Los  QuerandieSt  Buenos
Ayres,  1897,  and  Ethnogr,  Argent,  ^  Seconda  Contrite  al  Ethnog,
Querandiy  Buenos  Ayres,  1899 ;  Ambrozetti,  •*  Alfarerias  Minuanes,"
BoL  /.  G,  Argent. ^  vol.  xiv.,  1893,  p.  212;  I.  Quevedo,  Bol,  Inst,
Ceogr,  Argent. y  vol.  xviii.,  1897,  pp.  117  and  130.

''*  Dobrizhofler,  An  Account  of  the  Abipones^  London,  1822,  2  vols.

^  L  Quevedo,  loc,  cit.^  La  Razza^  etc.,  p.  519,  Arte  TotHS^  etc  ;
Massei  and  L.  Quevedo,  **Grupo  Mataco-Matag^uayo,"  ^^/.  Inst,  Geogi;
^rg.,  1895  and  1896;  Pelleschi,  "Los  Indios  Matacos,"  Bol,  Inst,
Ceogr,  Arg,,  1897,  P-  173'


RACES  AND   PEOPLES  OF  AMERICA.  573

immediate    neighbourhood    of   Assumption,  peaceful  basket-
makers,  potters,  or  fishers.^

The  Lenguas  of  the  ancient  authors  (a  term  used  by  them  to
describe  very  different  tribes),  who  hved  side  by  side  with  the
Tobas,  and  of  whom  there  remain  but  a  few  individuals,  seem
to  form,  with  the  Guanes  of  southern  Chaco,  the  Sanapanas^
the  Angaites^  and  other  tribes  between  the  Salado  and  the
Yababeri  (tributaries  on  the  left  of  the  Paraguay),  a  separate
linguistic  family,  which  Boggiani  proposes  to  call  Ennema,
Their  neighbours,  the  Samucos  or  Chamococos  of  the  Bolivian
Chaco  also  constitute  a  special  linguistic  group,  but  their
manners  and  customs  approximate  to  those  of  the  southern
Arawaks.2

The  Guaios  of  the  marshes  which  extend  from  the  Paraguay
to  the  Sao  Lauren^o  also  speak  a  special  language.  They  are
excellent  boatmen,  who  fish  with  their  great  bows  and  bone-
pointed  arrows.  They  are  also  renowned  as  hunters  of
jaguars.^

Most  of  the  Guaycurus  and  their  neighbours  seem  to  be  of
high  stature  and  to  have  a  brownish-yellow  skin;  but  almost
nothing  is  known  either  as  to  the  shape  of  their  head  or  their
other  somatic  characters.

To  the  south  of  the  Choco,  between  the  Rio  Salado  de
Santa  Fe  and  the  Rio  Chubut,  in  the  Pampas  and  the  north  of
the  Patagonian  table-land,  the  primitive  population  which  spoke
the  Guaycuru  language  in  the  north  and  the  Patagonian  language
in  the  south,  has  disappeared.      It   has   been  absorbed  or

^  Certain  authoriiies  (Ameghino,  Brinton,  etc.)  place  the  Charmas,  the
Chanases,  and  the  Qucrandis  in  the  Tupi-Guaranian  family,  and  make  a
separate  group  of  the  Matacos.

*  Boggiani,  Viaggi  iT  un  artista  in  Amer,  Merui,,  I.  Caduvei,  II.
Ciamococo,  Rome,  1894-95  (preface  and  note  by  Colino) ;  and  *'  Ethno-
grafia  del  Alio  Paraguay,"  BoL  Inst.  Geog.  Arg.^  vol.  xviii.,  i8g7,  p.  613,
elhn.  chart.  According  to  Brinton  (**  Ling.  Cartogr.  of  Chaco,"  JPrac,  Am,
Phil,  Soc,  vol.  37,  p.  178,  Phihd.,  1898),  the  dialect  of  the  Samucos
should  belong  to  the  Arawak  family.

'  Koslowsky,  **Tres  semanas  entre  .  .  .  Guatos,"  BoL  Insi,  Getf
Arg.^  voL  vi.,  p.  22 1,  Buenos  Ayres,  1895.


574  THE   RACES   OF   MAN.

—  modified  by  the  invasions  of
the  Araucans  coming  from
(he  west,  and  by  the  en-
croachmentsof  (he  Europeans
coming  from  the  east.  The
intermingiings  have  given
birth  to  new  tribes  like  the
PueUhes,  sprung  from  the
Patagunians  and  the  Aniucans
{P-  SSOi  with  a  strain  of
(juaycuru  blood,  and  the
Gtiuchos,  Guaycuru' European
hybrids.  The  invasion  of
the  Europeans  increasing,  the
Puelches  and  the  Araucans
( Pehufftchti,  Rankeh,  Hui-
litchti)  have  been  pushed
back  farther  and  farther  to
the  south.  After  the  war
of  extermination  waged  by
(jeneral  Roca  in  iSSi,  the
"Pampe.ins"  migrated  in  a
mass  to  the  south  of  the  Rio
Negro,  where  they  absorbed
a  portion  of  the  Patagonia ns,
driving  away  the  remainder
to  the  south  of  the  Rio  Santa
Cruz.i

Cramped  between  this  river
and  the  Strait  of  Magellan,
^\^t  Patagoniam  at  Tthutlchei,
who  call  themselves  by  the
name  of    Tioon-ke,  are    now

reduced  to  looo  individtials.

Fir..  174.— Kamanikar  K.\\in;  young

Vahg.in  Fiiegian  yirl  1  heighl,   im.         '  Sieniiradiki,   let.   til.;   De  la
40!  «ph.  iml.,79.7.     (Phsl.  Caj^     VniiN,    C.    R.    Sot.   Ciog.    Parii,


576  THE  RACES  OF  MAN.

the  Vakgans  to  the  south  of  the  chain  running  from  Sarmiento
to  Mount  Darwin,  and  the  Alakalufs  to  the  north  of  this
chain.  I  have  mentioned  several  facts  concerning  the
somatic  characters  (pp.  89,  108,  etc.)  and  the  ethnic  ones
(p.  146,  note  2,  pp.  181,  189,  214,  etc.)  of  the  Fuegians.  I^t
me  further  add  that  the  predominant  type  among  them  is  that
of  the  Palaso-American  sub-race.  Their  language  is  not  yet
classified.  The  Alakalufs  are  at  the  present  day  reduced  to
200  individuals.  The  Yahgans,  who  numbered  about  a
thousand  individuals  in  1884,  no  longer  exist  to-day  as  an
independent  tribe.  The  last  survivors  of  ravages  caused
by  epidemics  are  gathered  together  in  the  two  missionary
stations  called  Ushuaia  (Beagle  Channel)  and  Tekenika;
numbering  about  90,  they  are  dressed  in  the  European
fashion,  speak  English,  and  are  employed  in  the  various
works  at  the  mission.^

'  For  measurements  see  the  Appendices.  The  bibh'ography  of  the
Fuegians  wiU  be  found  in  the  work  of  Hyades  and  Deniker  already  quoted.
To  these  must  be  added  the  following  selection  from  important  works
omitted  or  recently  published:  L.  Darapski,  "  Fuegians,"  BoL  Insi,  Gtog.
Arg,,  vol.  X.,  1889,  p.  276;  Bridges,  "La  Tierra  del  Fuego,  etc.,"  Bo!.
Inst,  Ceog.  Arg.,  vol.  xiv.,  1893;  and  O.  Nordcnskjold,  "  Das  Feuerland,''
Geog,  Zeitsch.f  vol.  ii.,  p.  66 j,  Leipzig,  1896.


APPENDIX   I.

AVERAGE  HEIGHT  OF  MEN,  288  SERIES

(see  p.  29).


Nnmber  of
Subjects.


38
64


42

"5
28

36

25

33
99
75
58
33
32
95
29
26

200

ICX)

155
300

210

45

359

457

2,500

125

100

1,100

76

56


ETHNIC  GROUPS.


LOW  STATCJRRS  (UNDBR    IM.  6o,  OR  63  INCHBS).

Africans,

Akka  Negrilloes  of  the  country  of  the  Monbuttus
Kalahari  Bushmen  of  Angra  Pequena,  etc.   •

AsicUics,

Aeta- Negritoes  of  the  Philippines

Andamanese

Black  Sakais  or  Menings  of  Gunong-Inas     -
Jakuns  and  Mantras  of  Johor
Ostiaks  of  the  Yenisei  (Turukhansk)    •
Pure  Veddahs  of  Central  Ceylon
Samoyeds  (of  Asia  and  Europe)   •
Kurumbas  of  Wynaad  (India)

Irulas  (Nilgiri  plains)

MaM  (Nayar  and  Arrayan)  of  Southern  India
Japanese  (workmen  and  coolies)  •
Annamese  of  Cochin- China  -        .        .        •
Paniyans  of  Malabar  ....

Cherumas  of  Calicut  ....

Mal-Paharias  (Dravidians  of  Bengal)    -
Dravidian  Bhuiyas  of  Chota  Nagpur    -
Veddahs  of  Ceylon  generally
Trao  Mois  of  French  Indo-China

Ostiaks

Solorese  of  Flores  and  Solor

Annamese  in  general

Mois  in  general  (French  Indo  China)  •
Japanese  (1,260  of  them  soldiers)
Islanders  of  Bavean  (between  Java  and  Borneo)
Munda  Kols  of  Chota  Nagpur     ...
Japanese  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes

Annamese  of  Tonkin

Laotians  of  Lower  Laos      ....


HeVcht
inMilU-
metres.


1,378
1,529


,46s
,485
,490

,535
,540

,554
,555
,556
,560

,564
,570

,571
,574
,574
,577
,577
,578

,579
,581
,582

,583
,585
,585
,587
,589
,590
,590
,590


S77


37


578


APPENDIX.


Numbar  of
HubJ«ott.


BTHNIC  GKOUPS.


Height
in  mil
metrei.


76

90

100

29


28
26

139
50


259

25

126


X05

58
27
30

100

90

45
31
27
45

83
100

80

100

149

500

15,582

45
80

25
296

695
82
26

685

i»443
1,616


Sundanese  of  Java

Bhumij  (Bils  of  Chota  Nagpur)    -
Chakamas  (Araknese- Bengali  half- breeds)    -
Timurians  (of  the  western  part  of  the  Island)

Americans.

Caribs  of  the  three  Guianas  and  Venezuela  •

Eskimo  of  Labrador

Yahean  and  Alakaluf  Fuegians    -

Maune  and  Mundurucus  (probably  Tupis)    -

Europeans.

Lapps  of  Scandinavia  ....
Lapps  of  Russian  Lapland  ....
Vogules


STATURES  BELOW  THE  AVERAGE  (160O-I649M.,

OR  63*65   INCHES).

Asiatics.

Tenggerese  of  Eastern  Java
Batlas  of  Lake  Toba  (Sumatra)    •
Rotti  Islanders  (south-west  of  Timur)  -

Siamese

Kurmis  (Kols  of  Chota  Nagpur)  -
Maghs  or  Arakanese  of  Chittagong
Sumba  Islanders  (south  of  Flores)
Bugis  of  Celebes  ....

KuTu-Lahulis  of  Nepal
Dards  of  Ghuraiz,  Hunza  and  Ghilgit  -
Tipperahs  of  Chittagong  (Lushai-Kumis)

Baltis

Santals

Southern  Chinese  of  Long-Chow  (Kwang-si]

Javanese

iCharvars  (Dravidians  of  Chota  Nagpur)

Malays  of  Sumatra  and  Malacca

Oraons  of  Chota  Nagpur

Southern  Chinese  (principally  Hakkas)

Singhalese  of  Colomlx)  and  Candy

Kling  Tamils  born  at  Sumatra     •

Kothas  of  the  Nilgiris

Kalmuks  or  Mongol  Torgots  of  Dzungaria

Hindus  of  the  province  of  Behar  -

Brahmans  of  Southern  India

Nicobarcse

Dravidians  N.W.  pro  v.  and  Oiulh  (Chero,  etc  )
Dravido- Hindu  castes,  N.W.  prov.  and  Oudh
Malayalim  of  Southern  India


1,591
1,592
1,596
1,597


1,572
'.575
1.577
i.58«


',529
1,555
i.59t


,604
,605
,605
,607
.60S
,608
,609
,609
^610
,61  f
,611
,612
,614

,615
,616
,617

.617
,621

,622

1625

,629

,629

,629

,630

,631

.631

►634

»634

.634


58o


APPENDIX.


Namber  of
SttbjMti.


BTHNIO  GBOUPa


447,»7a

9.456

1.483

33.541


90

28
614

73

15

55


36


31
67

38
40

142


H
108

792

40

362

60

60

72

979

56

54
33
74
53
54
38
120


French  in  general  (conscripts)
Conscripls  of  French  Switzerland
Minereiian  Georgians  -
Piedmontese  (soldiers)


Americans,

Salishans  (Harrison  Lake,  British  Columbia)
Salishans  of  the  Frazer  River  delta  (British  Col.)
Guaranis  (Kamayuras  and  Anetos)
Eskimo  of  Greenland  .        •        .
Zufiis  of  New  Mexico  -

MoGuis

Eskimo  of  Alaska

Kwakiutl  Indians  (British  Columbia)

A/ncans,

Mzabites  (Berbers  of  M'Zab,  Algeria)  -
Batekes  of  the  Congo  -        .        .        .


Oceanians,

Aborigines  of  the  island  of  New  Britain
Papuans  of  German  New  Guinea
Natives  of  the  Solomon  Islands   -
Melanesians  of  the  archioelago  of  New  Britain
Australians  of  Southern  New  South  Wales  -
Papuans  of  New  Guinea  in  general

STATUSES  ABOVE  THE  AVERAGE  (l650-l699M.,
OR  65-67  INCHES).

Asia/ics,

KoU  (of  the  N.  W.  provinces  and  Oudh)
Hajemi  Persians  (principally  of  Teheran)     •
Armenians  of  the  province  of  Tiflis  (conscripts)
Badagas  of  the  Nilciri  plains
Osmanli  Turks  (288  of  them  in  Asia  Minor)
Baluchis  of  Baluchistan        ....
Khatris  (Punjab  caste)  •        .        .        .

Chuhras  (do.)  ....

Brahmans  and  other  higher  castes  of  the  N.  VV

provinces  and  Oudh      ....
Tamils  of  Southern  India    ....
Sartes  of  Russian  Turkestan
Aissores  of  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Urmia  (Cauc.
Kara- Kirghiz  of  Russian  Turkestan
Turkomans  of  the  Transcaspian    •
Chinese  of  the  north  (Che-Fu  and  Kuldja  provinces)
Sibos  (Manchu  Tunguses)    ....
Uzbegs  of  Russian  Turkestan


la  Mi


hi

iUi-


1,646
1,646
1,646
1.649


1,613
1,618
1,620
1,621

1.623
1.629

1,630
1.639


1,620
1,641


1,602
1,608
1,616
1,620
1,630
1,640


.650

.651
.652

.658
,660
,662
,662
,666

.666
.667
,668
,668
,668
,670

.674

.675
.683


582


APPENDIX.


Number  of
Hubjecta.


32

28

1,103
29

35

52
244

180

27
2,020

863

28

25,828


ETHNIC  OEOUPS.


He»bt

inMOli.

metres.


SO
65
233
52
72

58
50


61

32

121

26

37
165

104

74
30

5^
68

57

147

37

32

71
28


Africans,

Arabs  of  Algeria
Mushikongos  of  the  Congo  •
Berbers  of  Tunis
Abyssinians
Danakils  of  Tajura
Berbers  of  Biskra  (Chauia  tribe?)
Kabyles  of  Great  Kabylia    •
Berbers  of  Algeria
Bashilange  of  the  Kasai
Negroes  of  the  United  States
Mulattos  of  the  United  States
Ikchuanas  ....
Negroes    and    Mulattos   of   the    United    States
(conscripts)  •


Oceaniam,

Aborigines  of  Southern  Australia
Australians  in  general
Australians  of  Central  Australia
New  Caledonians  (Melanesians)
Papuans  of  British  New  Guinea
Australians  of  Victoria
Maoris  of  New  Zealand


Anuricans,

Tinn^  of  the  S.W.  (interior  of  British  Columbia)
Hupa  Indians  (Tinn^  of  Oregon)

Ute  Indians

Bilkula  Indians

Tsimshian  Indians  (Brit.  Columbia)     •
Shushwap  Indians  (Salish)  *
Cherokis  of  the  East

Comanches

Klamath  Indians  -         •        .         •

Chicasaw  Indians        ....

Piute  Indians

Crcc  Indians

A|)aches  and  Navajos  ....
Flathcnd  Indians  (Salishan  Tetes  plates)
Papagos  of  California  -         .         .         -
Sahaptin  Indians  (Nez  perc^s)
Ottawa  Indians  ....


i,6s6
1.658
1,663
1,669
1,670

1,673
i»677
1,680
i,6&>
i,68c
1,682

1.684
1.693


»,6S7
1,667
1,670
1,673

1,674
1,677
1.680


1.658
1,661
1,661
1,661
1,666
1.670

1.677
1,678

1.679
1.679

1.683
1,685
1,686
1.687

1,695
1,697
1.699


APPENDIX.


583


Number  of
Subjects.


Ill


260


lOO
21,645

76
198

41
92

79
315.620

29

1,413
612

94
517

91
213

53
35
50


31
25
72
56

56
30
62

25

35


33
97
29


25
414

32
202


ETHNIC  GROUPS.


Ueiffht
in  MiUi.
metres.


high  statures  (im.  70,  or  67  inches  and

upwards).

Americans.

Indians  of  the  south  of  the  State  of  California

(Yuma?)

Choctaws

Pimas

Canadian  soldiers  (chiefly  descendants  of  French)

Cherokis  of  the  west

Ojibwas  of  the  south    ----,--

Pawnees

Delawares  and  Blackfeet

Micmacs  and  Abcnakis

Citizens  of  the  United  States  born  in  the  country  -

Maricopas  of  California

Ojibwas  of  the  cast

Siouans

Iro(^uoians  or  Iroauois

Indians  of  the  United  States  (chiefly  Iroquois)

Omahas  and  Winnebagos

Crow  Indians

Creek  Indians     -  -        -        -

Mohaves  of  California

Cheyennes


Africans,

Mandingans  in  general

Bejas  (called  Nubians)

Kafirs  (Ama-Xosa  and  Ama-Zulu)

Western    Zandehs  (Mandjas,   Akungs

etc.)     -        -        -
Somalis  (Eyssa,  Habis,  Awals,  etc.)
Toucouleurs  or  Torodos
Wolofs,  Serers  and  Leybus  -
For  Negroes  of  Darfur
Fulschs  or  Fulb^  of  F^rench  Sudan


Awakas


Asiatics,

A  wan  (Ghazikhan  tribe,  Punjab)
Sikhs  of  the  Punjab     -        -        -        -
Gypsies  of  Russian  Turkestan  (Lulls,  etc.)

Oceanians.

Polynesians  of  the  Samoan  Islands
Polynesians  in  general
Polynesians  of  Tahiti,  Pomolu,  Tubuai
Polynesians  of  the  Marquesas  Islands  •


1,700

1,700

1.703

1,703
1,712

1,712

1,713

1,71s

1,717

1,719
1,722

1.723
1.726

1.727

1.730
1.732
1,732

1,735
1,740

1,745


1,700
1,708

1,71s

1,717
1,723
1,725
1.730
1,730
1,741


1,706
1.709
1,719


1,726
1,730
«,733
1.743


584


KTHNIC  GROUPS.


6l
68

1,107
763

6,194

1,489
3*5

9.979


Dutch  of  ihe  province  of  Ovciijsset  (conicripls)    ■
Cossacki  of  Kuban  (Lillle  Kusiians)    •

Letis  of  EslhonU

Sweilei  in  general  (soldiers)         .         .         .        -
Serbs  of  Ihe  Kingdom  of  Servia  (conscripts)
Bosnian-Heriogoviniani  (Kildiers)

English  in  general

Finns  of  Finland  in  general  (6S3  of  them  lotdieis)

Dalmatians

Swedes  of  the  province  of  Helsinghe  (•oldicrs)      -
Inhabitants  or  the   United   Kingdom    of   GiMl

Britain  and  Ireland

Norw«iajn  (toldien)

Irish

Uvonians

Scotch  in  general

Scotch  of  the  north  (Ayrshire,  etc.]      -
Scotch  agricollurists  of  Galloway-


APPENDIX  II.

CEPHALIC  INDEX,  336  SERIES  (see  p.  75).


NUMBER.

UTing
Sabjects.

SkollB.

73  (S.)

204

—

52

—

148

-—

24  (S.)

_

71

10

29  (S.)

—

118  (S.)

—

16  (S.)

27

82  (S.)

—

10

—

20

—

51

20

—

—

24

1.

25

23

30  (S.)

95

__

40

—

32

—

979

■—

68^

— >

&>

"^

ETHNIC  GROUPS.


DOLICHOCEPHALS,  BELOW  77  (75).

Oceanians,

Islanders  of  Viti-Levu  (Fiji)
Natives  of  the  Caroline  Archipelaco
Natives  of  the  smaller  Fiji  Islands
Papuans  of  Misore  Island
Islanders     of     Mallicollo     (New

Hebrides)         .        .        -        -
New  Caledonians
Islanders  of  Lifu  (Loyalty  Islands)
Natives  of  the  Duke  of  York  Islands

(New  Britain)   -        -        -        -
Natives  of  Engineer  Island  (Louis*

iade  Archipelago)
Various  Australians
Australians  of  Queensland     -
Natives  of  Ruck  Island  (Carolines)
Maoris  of  New  Zealand
Natives  of  the  Solomon  Islands     -
Papuans  of  the  Fly   River  (New

Guinea)

Tasmanians  ....

Natives  of  New  Britain  Archipelago

Asiatics.

Badagahs  of  the  Nilgiris
Cashmerians         ....
Kols  of  the  N.  W.  Prov.  and  Oudh
Brahmans,  Rajputs,  and  other  high

castes  of  the  N.W.  Prov.  -
KoUrians,  N.W.  Prov.
Sikhs  of  the  Punjab

585


CEPH.  IND.


69.4


72.4


74-2


76.3


76.7


71.8
72.2
72.4

72.6
72.7
72.7


67.2

69.0
70.2

70.4
707
7a  8

71.7

71.9
71.2
72.2
72.8
73-6


74.2

74.9
72.4


586


APPENDIX.


NUMBER.


LiTiDK
Subjects.

Skulls.

I,6l6

—  ■

103

—

1,443

—

45

—

25

—

444

—

54

BMM*

27

—

100


90


55
58

43

15

—

100

—

45

—

100

—

695

—

100

—

25

—

100

—

20

100

—

12

64
80

37

33

—

1,570

—

27

14
36

—

30

—■

30

30

15

37

—

35

—

14

—

27
62

13

29

10

13

—

47

—

ETHNIC  GROUPS.


Hindus  of  various  castes  (N.W

Prov.  and  Oudh)
Ballis  ....

Dravido.Hindus(N.  W.  Pr.&  Oudh)
Todas  ....

Kolas  of  the  Nilgiris    -
Punjabi  (Hindus,  Baluchis,  etc.)
Alalayalim  of  the  Shevaroy  Hills
Kulu-Lahuli
Mal^  or  Assal  (Dravid.  of  Bengal)
lihumij  of  Chota  Nagpur
Veddans  of  Ceylon
Irulas  of  the  £.  slope  of  the  Nilg.
Gypsies  of  Lycia  -        -        -
Kharvars    (Dravidians   of    Chota


Nagpur)
ardi  (I


of


Dardi  (India)
Kurmi  of  Chota  Nagpur
Hindus  of  the  Prov.  of  Behar
Mal-Paharia  (Drav.  of  Beng.)
Urur-Kurubas  of  Mysore
Bhuiyas  (Drav.  of  Beng.)
Dums  of  Chota  Nagpur
Santals  of  Chota  Nagpur
Alfurus  of  Ceram
Ainus  of  Saghalien
Tamils  of  Ceylon
Pathans  (Afghans)  of  Punjab
Kanarese  of  Mysore
Bengalese    -        .        -        -
Islanders  of   Rotti  (to  the  S.
Timur)      ....

Africans.

Mushikongo  and  Bakongo    •

Bateke  (Congo)    -

Toucouleurs-

Jagga  (Bantu  of  Kilimandjaro)

Hottentot-Orlans

Kulahs  or  Fulb^s  -

Danakils  of  Tajura

Duala  or  Dwala  of  the  Cameroons

Negro- Krus  ...

Wolofs,  Serer,  and  Leybus   -

Various  Mandingans    -

Kakongo      -         -         -         -

Arabs  of  Algeria


CBPU.  IND.


LiTing

SabjecU


72.8
73-6

73.8
74.1

74.1
74.2

74.3
74.6

74.8

750

75.1

751

75.2

75.6

75.6

75.7

75-7
75.8

758
76.0

76.0

76.1


76.3
76.5

76.8

76.9

76.9


72.5
73-6
73.8

74.3

74  3

74.5

75- 1

75.1
75.2

75-5
75.6

76.3


Hknlls.


71.5


74-3
74.8


71.9


69.8
78.8


APPENDIX.


587


NUMBER.


Living
Subjects.


184

27
13


12


614


10


500
502


12
17

20

75
136

360

17
II
23
18
208
168
II

332
78
68

30

20
28

29


Skulls.


56


76

31
152

16
33  (S.)


417


92


64


ETHNIC  CROUPS.


Kafirs  (Ama-Zulus  and  others)
Retsimisaraka  (Madagascar)
Kabylcs  of  Palestro
Bashilanges  of  the  Kasai
Ashantis       .         -        .         -         -

Americans.

Karayas  (Amazon  Basin)

Ilurons

Eskimo  of  Greenland

do.  E.  America

do.           W.  America
Botocudos

Europeans,

Portuguese

Corsicans     .         -        -         .         -
Spaniards  of  Valencia  -

SUB-DOLICHOCEPH.  77-79.6(75-77.6).

Asiatics,

Ladaki

Inhabitants  of  Nagar,  Hunaza,  and

Yasin       -        .        -        -
Chinese  of  the  North    -
Kurumbas  (to  the  £.  of  the  Nil

giris)         ....
Tamils  of  the  South  of  India  and

Ceylon      ....
Mois  of  French  Indo-China  -
Sikas  (Central  Floris)   -
Ainus  of  Yezo

Turkomans  of  the  Transcaspian
Lio  (Central  Floiis)
Aderl>aijanis
Persians  in  general
Disfulis  of  Susa     -
Kurds  ....

Japanese  of  all  classes  •
White  and  Yellow  Sakais  ( Malay  P. )
Atoni  of  the  west  of  Timur   •
Singhalese    ....
Yuruks  of  Lycia  -
Black    Sakais   of    Gunong    Inas

(Malay  Peninsula)     -
Tales  of  the  Transcaucasus  •


CEPH.  IND.


Uvin^
Subjects.


76.3
76.4

76.8

76.9


730
76.8

76.8


76.6
76.8


77.0

77.0
77.0

77.3

77.4
77.5
77.7
77.8

77.9
7^1

78.1

78.4
78.4
78.5
78.5

78.7
78.8
78.8
78.9

79^5
79.0


Skulls.


72.5


74.7
72.4

74.8
73-9


74.3


76.5


80.2


588


APPENDIX.


NUMBER.


Li?Inff
Sabjects.


I06
45

io6
i6

25


50
56


14

31
419
123

28

114

135
26

570
261


163


22  (S.)
59


122

6,579
1.410

574
8,368


Skalls.


44
37
37


14

139

13


62

315


37
103

27

42

136


12  (S.)

30
22  (S.)


ETHNIC  aBOUP&


Moormen  of  Ceylon

Sumbawa  Islanders

Nias  Islanders

Ostiaks

Tatar-Tchern  (Altaians)

South  Chinese  of  LangChoo


Africans,

M'Zabits  of  Algeria      -     •  •
Western  ZandeTk  (Mandja,  etc.)
Bushmen      •        .        .        .
Negroes  of  Fernand-Vaz
Hausas        ....

Americans,

Half-caste  Algonquians

Natives  of  Santa  Barbara  Archip.

Arawaks     of     the     Rio     Xingu

(Mehinaku,  etc.)
Indians  of  Arizona
Pimas  of  New  Mexico  -
Ute  Indians
Tupis  of  the  Xingu  (Kamayuras

and  Anetos)
Eskimo  of  Alaska
Indians  of  the  Califomian  coast
Iroquoians   -        -        -        .
Yahgan  Fuegians
Indians :    Algonquians,   Abenaki

Cree,  etc
Siouans        ....


Oceanians*

Natives  of  Solomon  Islands
Morioris  of  the  Chatham  Islands  -
Natives  of  the  Marquesas  Islands  -
Natives  of  the  Gilbert  Islands
(Kingsmill)  -  -  -  .
Various  Polynesians


Europeans.

Catalans  of  the  Balearic  Islands
Sardinians    -        .        .        .
Castillians    -        .         -         -
Catalans  of  Spain
Spaniards  in  general


CBPH.  INB.


Uvinff
Sabj«cto.


79-1
79.1

79.3
79-5
79.5


77.3

77-9


78.2
78.6
78.4
79.5

79.1
79.2

79.3
79.5

79.8
79.8


77.6


78.4
79.7


77.7

77.5
78.5

78.1

78.2


SknliL


77.6
74-3


75-9
75.9
77.3


76.2
76.9


77.0
77-3

76.8

77-4
78.9


76.2
76.4


589


590


APPENDIX.


NUMBER.

ETHNIC  GROUPS.

CEPB

[.  IND.

Living
Subjectii.

Slculli.

Living
Sabjeets.

SkalU.

1,000

Normans  (Calvados,  Seine-Inf.,etc. )

81.3

—

I7

Dutch  of  the  province  of  Friesland
Inhabitants  of  the  prov.  of  Pruasia

^

78  I

—

206

mm^

79.2

—

96  (S.)

Cherkess(  Abkhazians,  Chap8ug,etc. )

^^

r  ^

79  4

—

159

Franconians  of  N.  W.  of  Bavaria  -

y

79.8

59.165

Italians  of   the  South    (Abruzzi,

#  y

Puglie,  etc.)     .        -        .        -

81.2

_^„

54

—

Magyar- Szcklers  ....

81.4

^.^

67

—

Georgian-Mingrelians,  and  Imers  -

81.4

_^„

91

—

Provencals

Meshtcheriaks      ....

81.7

^^^^

59

—

#

81.8


Oceaniam,

14

^^

Islanders    of    Fakaofu    (Takelau

Arch.)

8a6

,

12

Natives  of  New  Ireland

SUB-BRACHYCBPHALS,  82-85.2
(80.83.2).

Asiatics  and  Eurasians,

81.0

22

_^

Parsees  of  Bombay
KouYs  of  Caml^odia

82.0

—^

20

82.0

—

97  (S.)

51  (s.)

Kalmuks  of  the  Volga  -

82.1

81.4

II

14

Coreans

82.6

81.6

25

Man-Tien  of  Kaubang(Tong  King)

82.5

—

182

—

Annamcsc  in  general    ...

82.8

—

49

—

Malays  of  Sumatra  and  Penang    -

82.8

—

231

—

Burmese

83.1

—

139

—

Yakuts

83.1

— .

14

^

Tsiams  of  French  Indo-China

83.2

—

18  (S.)

Tunguse  Reindeer-holders    -

"^

81.2

21

—

Solorese  (E.  of  Flores  and  Solor)  -

83.4

—

56

—

Laotians  of  Lower  Laos

83.6

— .

30

—

Cambodians

83.6

—

76

—

Annamese  of  Tong  King

83.8

—

IS2(S.)

15  (S.)

Samoyc<ls

83.8

82.4

13

13

Takhladji  of  Lycia

84.2

^^^

26

Ansariehs  of  Anlioch    -

84.2

100

—

Chakam.i(Arakan-IJcngali  mongrels)

84.3

—

197

M

Kalmuks  of  Kuldja  and  Tarbagat.

84.5

83-3

12

30  (S.)

HurIs  of  Manjjkassar     ...

84.6

80.6

—

12

Islanders  of  Madura  (N.  of  Java)  -

...

82.6

66

88  (S. )

Javanese

84.6

83.0

18

—

Negrito  Adas  (Philippines)  -

84.7

—

APPENDIX.


592


APPENDIX.


NUMBER.

LtTtng
SabjectL

Bkalli.

98

168

—

416

—

I.3SS

—

90

—

17

—

187

—

15.914

—

170

-~

165

—

20

—

19

—

6,800

—

53.020

—

226

40  (S.)

78

—

200

—

52

—

44

^—

52,410

—

S3


56

17
341

21

ao(S.)
16  (S.)

333
270


32,790
16

«3o


134


16
17

13

35  (S.)


1000  (S.)


ETHNIC  GROUPS.


Wurtembergers    -

Mordvinians

Jews  of  Galicia  and  Western  Russia

Ruthenians  of  the  Plain  (Galicia)

Georgian-Gruzins

Veps  or  Chud  of  Olonetsk    -

Ruthenians    of     the     Mountains

(Galicia)   •        .        .        -
French  in  general
Tatars  of  the  Mountains  (Caucasus
Cherkess-Kabards
Russian  Lapps
Georgian-Svanes
Inhabitants  of  Baden    -
Italians  (Lomb.,  Umbr.,  March.)
Magyars  in  general
Eastern  Chechen
Little  Russians  of  Kiev
Lesghi-Didos        ...
Kuniyks  of  the  Caucasus
Italians  of  Venetia-Emilia     •
Swiss  of  Untervalden    -
Jews  of  Akhaltsikh  (Caucasus)

BRACHYCBPHALS;  85.3-86.9

{83. 3-84- 9).


Asiatics,

Galchas  (Russian  Turkestan)
Tunguse-Orochons
Siamese        -        -         .        -
Armenians  in  general    •
Burmese  of  Arakan  and  Talaing
Sundanese  (West  Java)
Giliaks         -        -        -
Bicols  of  Luzon  (I*hilippines)
Taranchi  of  Russian  and  Eastern

Turkestan
Armenians  of  Transcaucasia


Europeans,

Bavarians  of  old  Bavaria
Piedmont  esc         ...
Tatar  Nogai  of  the  Caucasus
Lesghi-Darghis  of  the  Caucasus


CBPH.  INa


Sobjeeu.


831
83.3
834
834
835
83.5

83.6
83.6
83.6

83.7
83.8

83.9
84.x

84.1

84.5

84.5
84.6

84.6

84.7
85.1

85.2


85.5


85.6

86.3
86.3
86.6

86.6
856


85.9
858

86.2


SkoIlL


82.3


83.8


83.4
83.0

83.7
85.5

83.4


832


APPENDIX.


NUMBER.

JS&

Skulk.

'3S

-

so

36

3P

105  (S.)

140

6s  (S.)
41  (S.  J

384
33

-

ETHNIC  OBOUPS.


SnbJeeU.    '


Rumanians  ofBalcovina
Lesghi-Udes
Geo^iati  Lues    ■
Savoyards    ....

Ociattians  and  Amtriamt.
IslanaertofTahili

Aleuts

Anucans  of  Argentine  Repobtic    ■

h^pkr-bhaciivcefhals,  87  {85)


Romanchcs  of  Switzerland  -
Dalinaliani  ....
Jewi  of  Daghestan  (MonnUinecrs)
Scandinavian  Lapps
Mag]Fan  of  Ramanu  -
French  (Haute-L^re,  Lcoire,
Guual)      ...        -


8^0
85.0


APPENDIX  III.

NASAL  INDEX  OF  LIVING  SUBJECTS,  71  SERIES

(sec  p.  79).


Nnmber

of
Bafejactii.


no
62

1.969


100

41
49
SO

30

20

23

50

184

160

88

27

237
168

21

1.443
i,cxx>

70

80

80

98

60

120


BTHiaC  GROUPS.


Lepiorhinians  (less  than  70).

Armenians    .        •        .        -
Georgian  Imers     -
BrahmanSy  Rajputs  and  other

high  castes,  N.W.  province

and  Oudh ...
French  (fair  type,  dolicho. )
Georgian  Mingrelians    -
Georgian  Gruzins  -
Lorraines      ...
French     Catalans      (Eastern

Pyr.)  -        .        .

Anglo-Scotch
Arabs  of  Tunis
French    dolichoceph.   of  the

South
Various  Kabyles    •
French  of  Normandy
Sardinians     -
Galchas  of  Turkestan
Ossets  ...        -
Mordvinians  •
English

Dravido-Hindus,  N.W.  Prov.
French  in  general  -
Bretons

Palhans  of  the  Punjab  •
Sikhs  -  -  .  -
Parisians

Baluchis  of  Baluchistan  •
Tunisians  (2nd  Berber  race)

S94


Nawl

lodei.

60.4

60.8

63.0

63.0

63.1

64.  s

64.6

65.1

651

65.2

65-7

66.5

66.5

66.6

66.8

66.8

66.9

67.0

67.0

67.3

67.5

68.4

68.8

69.1

69.4

69.8

ObMrren^


Pantiukhof

Pan.,  Chantre,  Erckert


Crooke,  Drake-Brocken

CoUignon

Pan.,  Chant  re,  Krckert

Pan.,  Chantre,  Erckert

Collignon


Beddoe


Collignon


..


Prengrubcr

Collignon

Gilbert  d'Hercourt

Uifalvy

Ghiltchen.,  Ch.,  Erck.

Malnof

Beddoe

Collignon

.»
Risley


M


Collignon

Risley

Collignon


APPENDIX.


595


Number

of
Subjects.

RTHNIC  GROUPS.

Nasal
Index.

Observers.

Mtsorhinians  (70-84.9).

lo

Scotch

70.0

Beddoe

".334

Tunisians  in  general

70.2

Collignon

444

Punjabis        -        -        .        -

70.2

Risley

865

Dravidians(Kharvars,  Korwas,
Cheros,  Khunjas)  of  N.W.

•

Prov.         ....

71.0

Crooke,  Drake- Brock.

20

Baltis  of  Cashmere

714

Ujfalvy

50

Berbers  (brachycephalic  race)

72.5

Collignon

29

Singhalese    .        -        -        •

74-9

Deschamps,  Manouv.
Deniker,  Erck.  ,Chantrc

36

Kalmuks  of  the  Volga   -

74  7

40

Kara- Kirghiz  of  Semiriechie  -

74.9

Seeland

27

Todas

74.9

Thurston

40

Badagas  of  Nilgiris

75.6

1*

23

Siouans         ....

759

Denik. ,  L^loy,  Manouv.

33

Kanarese  of  Mysore

76.8

Thurston

40

Tamil- Brahmans  of  Madras   -

77.2

»»

22

Kotas  of  the  Nilgiri  Hills       -

79.2

t>

36

Malayalim   of   the  Chevaroy

HUls          ....

744

>f

20

Dums  of  Chota  Nagpur

791

KUley

695

Hindus  of  Behar   ...

80.0

>>

1,616

Hindus  of  the  N.W.  Provs.

and  Oudh .        -        -        -

80.9

f>

17

Rhodias    of     Ceylon     (both

sexes)        ....

81.3

Deschamps

32

Kols  of  the  N.W.  Provinces

and  Oudh  -         .         -         -

82.2

Risley  and  Oude

100

Kurmis  of  Chota  Nagpur

82.6

If

90

Maghs      or     Arakanese     of

Chittagong         ...

82.7

>*

30

Annamese  of  Cochin-China    •

83.3

Deniker,  Laloy

34

Irulas  of  the  Nilgiris

834

Thurston

100

Chakamas      (Arakanese-Ben-

galis)          ....

854

Risley

23

Zuflis

Platyrhiniam  (85-99.9).

849

Ten  Kate

23

Annamese  of  Tong  King

86.2

Deniker,  Laloy

90

Bhumij  of  Chota  Nagpur

86.5

Risley

27

Bashilanges

87.0

iMaistre

21

Bubangis       ....

87.2

100

Santab  of  Chota  Nagpur

88.8

Risley

15

KammbAS  of  Wynaad   -

88.8

Thurston

596


APPENDIX.


Number

of
Subjects.

ETHNIC  GROUPS.

NaMl
Index.

OtMerrefs.

100

Munda-Kols  of  Chota  Nagpur

89.0

Risley

13

Polynesians  -        -        -        .

89.8

After  Collignon

II

New   Caledonians  and    New

Hebridians

93-8

Collignon
Deniker,  Collignon

17

Fulahs  or  FulWs  -

95-3

44

Negroes  of  Tunis  -

96.3

Collignon

21

Toucoaleurs  -        -        -        -

99.9

Deniker

UUraplaiyrhinians  {over
100).

23

Leybus  and  Serers

loai

Deniker,  Collignon

52

Negroes  of  Zambesi

101.5

After  Collignon

21

Mandingans  and  Bambaras    •

101.6

Deniker,  0>nignoD

13

Ashantis        ....

107.5

Deniker

11

Australians    ....

107.6

After  Collignon

14

Angolese  Negroes  (both  sexes)

107.9

Deniker

INDEX  OF    AUTHORS.


Abbott,  5t  I

Adam,  11,  553

Adiunor,  36J

Amat,  431

AmbUlct,  177

Ame^ino,  jia

Ammon.  74,  31S

Andeiton,  G.,  307

Anderaon,  J.,  397

Andree,   K.,    109,    IZ8,   198,  301,

ao6,    1J7,  250,  ass,  274>  34'.

415.  42a
Anuchin.  162,  277,  373
Araiuadi,  34S
Aubio,  140
Aymooier,  393,  394,  399,  4CO,  401

Biber,  C,  400

Bichofen,  333

BwlcD -Powell,  147

Bselz,  51,  63,  64,  107

Bahoioo,  530

Bain,  394

Balfour,  H.,  iGi,  273

Ball,  409

Bancroft,  H.  II.,  349,  S3I

BaadelicT,  536      ■

Baicena,  293

Panels,  Max,  9S,  137,  330

Barth,  446

Banbel,  429

Bastian,  A.,  460

Baichelor,  373

Bates,  H.,  IS9

Bcddoe,  50,  314,  348

Bell,  33

Bjran^-Finud,  443,  447, 450

Be^^ne,  394

i,  a!,  497,  SOS


Bertbetot,  S.,  431
Bertholon,  433
BetlilloD,  A.,  So
Berlin,  S.,  435
Bcrtianil,  331
Beti,  134
Biarl.  537
Biddulph,  415
Billet,  400,  401
BiDger,  447,  449.  45>
Bischoff,  18,  98
Blsuichard,  97
Bland  rord,  363
Blumentiilt,  49a
Boas,  510,  531
"      ■    i,  573.


Borlase,  W.,  313
Boucbeieau,  469
Boulart,  is.  iS,  94
Boule,  M.,  301,  309,  Sll


Bowditch,  106

Boyd,  18

Bremer,  33;,  340

Bieal,  4^

Brigham,  I  S3

Brinton,   133,  490,  $n,  517,  S'^i

5*1.  5*7.  535.  536.  544.  547
Bioca,  16,  48,  55,  57,  61,  63,  64,

72.  73.  83,  85,98,  "77,  348
Btuhl,  S36
Buch,  »i3
Buchner,  M.,  134
Bunge,  14s
Burrows,  4S4
Buscbmann,  S34
BuUer,  I.,  396
ButLikofei,  4JI


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS.


599


Gaches-Sarraute,  Mme.,  176

Gaidoz,  336

Gamier,  F.,  381,  382

Garson,  72,  84,  85,  99,  351

Galschet,  517,  527

Gautier,  T.,  145

Geer,  G.  de,  307

Geikie,  J.,  301,  511

Gibbs,  530

Giglioli,  280

Gilchenko,  100

Gillen,  F.,  477,  478

Giraud-Teulon,  230

Glaumont,  170

Godden,  Miss,  396

Godron,  312

Goebel,  145

Gomme,  G.  L.,  215,  247

Gonner,  74

Gooch,  W.,  427

Gosse,  L.  A  ,  177

Gottsche,  387

Gould,  50,  508

Grandidier,  469

Groos,  197

Gros,  500

Grosse,  E.,  124,  202,  209,  212

Guiral,  458

Gappy,  497

Haddon,  A.  C,  202,  204,  493,  494,

497.  557
Haeckel.  284

Hageo,  486,  497

Hahn,  192,  195

Hale,  H,  135.  514,  527,  531

Hamada,  107

Hamy.  62,  91,  135.  313,  454,  467,

486,  495.   5««.   535.   536,  537,

550.  561
Ilanoteaa,  432

Ilannaiid,  135.  392,  393.  402
Hartmano,  431.  435,  436
Haxthaosen,  236
Hedley,  500
Hellwald,  146,  159,  255
Henning,  84
Hcrrera,5ii
Henr^,  96,  310,  313
Henenildn,  ill
HeftDcr,  120
Hifkwchy  374
UMt.3J0


Hoernes,  316
Holm,  G.,  520
Holm,  S.,  226
Holmes,  184,  509,  51  x
Holub,  465
Hosel,  163
Hosie,  400
Hough,  150,  269
Houssay,  422
Houz^,  S^f  332
Ilovelacque,  96,  131
Hovorka,  83

Howitt,  A.  W.,  232,  233
Hoyer,  83
Hull,  H.,482

Humboldt,  A.  von,  507,  517
Hunt,  497
Huxley,  X19,  283

Hyades,  64,    108,    109,   215,  220,
223,  231,  292,  512,  576

•

Ihering,  513

Imbault-Huart,  39X

Im  Thurn,  £.,  552

Ino,  391

Inostrantsev,  314

Inuzuka,  362

lokbelson,  370

Ivanof,  64

Ivanovsky,  92,  108,  230,  378

Jackson,  521

Jacobs,  J.,  424

Jacquard,  69

Jacques,  V.,  458,  461

James,  H.,  374

Jellinghaus,  408

Johansson,  74

Johnston,  Sir  H.  il.,  465

Jolly,  A-,  469

Jubainville,  U'Arbois  de,  317,  32 1

Junghuhn,  486

Junker,  W.,  440,  441,  454

Junod,  465

Karr,  Seton,  427

Keane,  A.,  132,  280,  351

Kemp.  D. .  452

Key,  Axel,  106

Kharoozin,  166,  376

Kidd,  23

Kinesfey,  Mki  M.,  453


6oo


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS.


Koganei,  64

Kohlbrugge,  14,  483,  490
Koike,  386
Koslowsky,  566
Kotelroann,  iii
Kovalewsky,  247,  249
Krause,  226,  254,  531
Kropf,  465
Kubary,  271,  505
Kuhn,  E.,  394
Kulischer,  114
Kuznetsof,  361

Labarth,  400

Lacerda,  513

lAJardf  134

Lalov,  399,  450,  453,  4S4»  458,  486

Landor,  A.  H.  S.,  373

Lang,  A.,  223

Lang,  L.,  206

Langle,  Fleuriot  de,  451

Lapicque,  107,  397,  485

Lapouge,  318

Lartschneider,  95

Last,  469

Laveleye,  249

Leclerc,  469

Le  Double,  96

Leitner,  413

Lenr,  O. ,  454

Leroy-Beaulieu,  236

Lelourneau,    159.    i69»   231,  252,

271
Leiourneux,  431
Lister,  500
Li  von,  85
Lloyd,  527

Lubboch,  Sir  J.,  231,  234
Lumholtz,  477,  535,  536
Luschan,   F.   von,   261,  423,   440,

ASh  467.  497
Lydekker,  13

Macalistcr,  95
MacCauley,  528
Macdonald,  465
Macgregor,  493
Madrolie,  449
Maine,  Sir  H.  S.,  236,  247
Mainof,  351
Maistre,  442,  446
Malicf,  64

Uery,  G.,  129,  138


Man,  397

Manolesca,  339

Manouvrier,  55,  56,  87,  90,  99,  100,

361,  555
Mantegazza,  64,  73,  no,  158,  351
Margaritof,  363
Marillier,  220

Markham,  Sir  Ciemeots,  118
Markase,  500
Marri,  84
Marshall,  411
Martin,  87
Martins,  274
Martonne,  E.  de,  446
Mason,  Mrs.,  395
Mason,  Otis,   153,   154,   182,   184,

191,  225,  261,  262,  270,  27s,  278,

284
Maspero,  278,  420
Mathews,  R.,  242
Maurel,  109,  394
McLennan,  J.  F.,  233
Medlicot,  362
Meinecke,  500
Menant,  D.,  420
Mens^,  458
Metchnikof,  77
Metzger,  122
Meyer,  A.  R. ,  483
Meyer,  E.  H.,  341
Middendorf,  547
Milne,  363
Mindeleif,  516
Mdckler,  421
Modigliani,  216,  486
Mohnike,  391
Moloney,  453
Monnier,  228
Montano,  64,  483,  486
Montefiore,  351
Monteil,  446
Montelius,  314.  3' 5
Mooney,  527,  530
Morel,  399
Moreno,  513
Morgan,  Dc,  426,  429
Morgan,  Lewis,  124,  234,  516
Morgen,  458
Morse,  £.,  264
Mortillet,  A.  dc,  304
Mortillet,  G.   de,    184,   300,    304,

3061309
Moser,  278


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS.


Mouta,  399

I'osI,  230,  250,  252

Much,  3' S

Mailer,  K„  114,  131

183

3.  Sai.  5^4

Muller,  Max,  317

Muoro,  H.  R.,  16

381

Naebliral,  444.  445.
NadailUc,  511

446

Pull*.  337
Pypine,  3J4

N.«geli,  s
Nanien,  520
Nehriofi,  309
Nds.  169.  391
Niblack/Sji

„397,4S4.483,  S°S.  5"

Nicdeile,  J44

Qu.bell,  427

NilUwn,  371

Rabentisch,  sj
Radde,  116

^36^5 16

Radlof ,  363
kainon  y  Cajal,  104

Ranke,  J.,  15,  341

O'Brien,  H.  0.,  121

Ranke   K.  i,  iij

Oliver,  E. ,  4m

Rasch.  122

Opperi,  41 1

Ratiel,  125

Oroico  y  Betra,  535

^y.  494.  497

Read,  72

Parfiuii,  106
piBa*.  US.  378

Reclus,  Elie,  411,416

R«lus.Elisie,  118,  383.460,  463

Puiliukbaf,  116,353

358,  422

RtSalia,  7?

Pamlluilt,  169

Regibm,  101

Paiket,  L.,  47S

R=rd.  396
Rein.  J.  J.  391

Pa»pati,  42s

PauUuchke.  436.  43

Reioach,  Salomon,  3ce.  309,  310,

Peacock.  98

.  427

Peal.  S.,  364.  396

6

Peanon.  Karl,  75

Peary,  530

Revoil,  438

Peinoto,  513

Rey,  P..  563

Penka,  318

Richthofcn,  385

PeteneD,  423

Rink,  S20

Pelilot,  Sto

Peine.  Flinders,  427

428.  435

Ripiey.  335

PhilUps,  162

Risley.  381.  404.  4t>3,  413
Rivell-Carnae,  362

Pielte.  137,  3°S

Pinabel.  392

Rockhill,  380

Pinart.  546

Kojdestvensky,  92

Pinto,  Serpa,  461

Plcyle,  475.  488

Roscnbere,  1 19
Roscnsladl,  II3

rioM,  97,  111,  no.  241

i^'rji'

Rohlfs,  434

Romanes,  5

Pog&,387

Roth.  Line,  15 S<  4S2,  40a

Poole,  S.,  4JS

Roth.  W.  E..  477

P«cb«,399

Roa«,  382

602


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS.


Royce,  C,  527
Kttskikh,  116

Sachier,  336

Saint- Hilaire,  J.  G.,  282

Santelli,  438

Sarasin,  62,  64,  418,  493

Sarzec,  £.  de,  420

Sasaki,  107

Schadenberg,  483

Schellong,  494

Schinz,  228,  456,  467

Schlegel,  149

Schlichter,  454

Schmelz,  226,  254

Schmidt,    £.,    10,    106,  290,   408,

416,  43S»  5«4
Schradcr,  366,  373,  374
Schramm,  225
Schrenck,  366,  373,  374
Schwalbe,  83,  361
Schweinfurth,  429,  441,  446,  454
Seler,  547
Senart,  404

Sergi,  73,  3 JO,  435,  438
Serurrier,  450
Shortt,  236,  41 1
Shcvyref,  23
Shrubsall,  467
Sibree,  469
Siret,  H.  &  J.,  314
Sittig,  505
Smeaton,  395
Smirnov,  351
Smith,  E.,  248
Smith,  Donaldson,  454
Smith,  Worthington,  312
Smith,  W.  T.,  140,  475
Smyth,  Brough,  223,  226,  475
Sorcn  Hansen,  51,  512,  520
Sommier,  351
Spalikowsk),  74
Spassovitch,  344
Spencer,  Baldwin,  477,  478
Stainicr,  427,  428
Stanley,  H.  M.,  454
Staudinger,  446
Stearns,  274

Stcinen,  K.  von  den,  170,  204
Steinmetz,  148,  220
Stf^vf'nson.  T>i  526


'1'7


Stoddard,  552

Stolpe,  H.,  202

Strabo,  436

Studer,  195

Stuhlmann,  440,  446,  454

Tarentsky,  373
Tautain,  475,  500
Taylor,  I.,  317

Ten  Kate,  62,  64,  68,  96,  450,  4S5,
493.   517,   524.    526,   533.   536,

547.  555.  569
Terrien  de  Lacouperie,  382

Testut,  95,  96

Thomas,  Cyrus,  514

Thomson,  J. ,  440

Thurston,  4x1

Torok,  19

Topinard,  10,  18,  48,  64,  72,  73,

76.  91,  92,  97.  98,  99.  177.  280,

283.  432,  476,  477
Tourette,  G.  de  la,  122
Tourtoulon,  335
Turner,  Sir  W.,  16,  62,  64,  84,  85.

95.  103,  400,  477
Tylor,  E.  B.,  135,  152,  161,  183,

184,  199,  2x0,  214,  217,  219,  220,

235.  240,  242

Ujfalvy,  416
Uvarof,  361,  363

Veckenstedt,  E.,  153
Verneau,  84,  431,  450,  513
Vierkandt,  126
Vierordt,  107,  108
Villot,  432

Virchow,  64,  435,  436,  490
Vogt,  142
Voit,  C.,  100

Waddell,  380.  416

Wallace,  A.  K.,  5

Wallaschek,  209,  210

Wauters,  458,  461

Weber,  Max,  493

Weeren,  186

Weigand,  339

Weisbach,  73

Weiss,  63

Westermarck,    E.,  231,   235,   236,

237.  238
Westermarck,  F.,  75


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS


Wenle,a63  .
Wilhelm,  E-»3
Wilkeo,  145.  *30.  «S

Willianw,  S"

Windle,  B.,  y*.  3'*
Wiodl,  De,  14»
WKth,  A..  39»       -       g
WUtmann,  I4».  '4"'  V


1         Wolff.     461  ,,,         ,Qfi

I  v»drint»rf.  3*T

Z»boro«ki,  4»7

ZittigraS.  *S0

1   Zogr»(,  344.  3Sl


INDEX   OF  SUBJECTS.


Ababdeh,  436

Abnakis,  526

Abyssinians,  437,  438

Accredians,  452

Achango,  454

Achinese,  4S9

Aderbaijani,  294,  376,  419

Aduma,  459

iEgean  civilisation,  315

Aetas,  397,  483

Afara,  438

Afiffi,  454      .

Africa,  grouping  of  existing  popula-

'  lions  of,  431
Afridis,  420
^Ainus,   44,   59,   68,  85,    1 10,    291,

365,  371-375
Akkas,  454

Alakalufs,  576

Albinism,  51

Aleuts,  521

Alfurus,  136,  491

Algonquians,  526,  527

Alimentation.  — Geophagy,  anthro-
pophagy —  preparation  <;f  foods
— method  of  fire-making  and
cooking,  pottery,  stimulants  and
narcotics,  144-160

Amazonians,  552

American  linguistic  families,  number
of,  519

American  Indians  (Norths  38,  So,
87,  133>  I5i»  204,  241,  248,
521

Andamancse,      56,     85,     91,     99,

159

Andeans,  545

Andean  dialects,  544
Angolese,  461


604


Animistic  religion,  absence  of  moial
element  in,  220

Annamese,  98,  399

Antaifasina,  471

Antaimoro,  471

Antaisaka,  471

Antaisara,  472

Antambahoaka,  471

Antanosi,  472

Anthropology  and  ethnology,  dis-
tinction between,  9

Anthropological  classification,  vari-
ous, 280-284

Apaches,  525

Apalachi,  528

Apollonians,  451

Arabs,  87,  422,  432

Araucans,  550

Arawaks,  556

Arimichaux,  570

Armenians,  81,  422

Arts,  the. — Primitive  design,  sculp-
ture, dancing,  music  vocal  and
instrumental,  musical  instruments,
ix)etry,  197-212

Aryan  question,  317-320

Ashantis,  451

Asia,  peoples  of  Anterior,  41S-425  ;
peoples  of  Central,  374  -  382 ;
peoples  of  Eastern,  3S2  -  390 ;
peoples  of  Northern,  366-374

Asiatic  races,  geographical  distrilni-
tion  and  princiimt  characters  of
existing,  365-425    .

Asikuya,  460

Assinaboins,  529

Assinians,  451

Assyroid  race,  290,  365

Athapascans,  524


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


605


Australians,  39,  44,  80,  109,  137.

151,   170,    204.   207,    220,    226,

232,  241,  248,  290,  476
Awekwom,  451
Aymaras,  547
Aztecs,  536,  537

Bacongo,  460

Badagas,  41 1

Bajaus,  490

Bakairis,  553

Bakalai,  459

Bakamba,  460

Bakoris,  458

Bakunda,  458

Balinese,  490

BallaU,  460

Baltis,  415

Balaba,  462

Baluchis,  420

Banga,  463

Bangi,  461
'  Banja,  440

Bantus,  159,  429,  456,  463

Barabra,  435

Basas,  458

Bashkir- Meshcheriaks,  376

Basques,  87,  99,  240,  348

Bateke,  460

Battas,  489

Batua,  454

Bayanzi,  463

Bechuana,  ic36,  465,  466

Bedouins,  422

Bejas,  436

Benin,  453

Berbers,  43^1  433

Betsileo,  471

Betsimasarakn,  471

Bicols,  491

Biped  attitude,  condition  of  brain
development,  16

Black  Feet,  527

Bongo,  445

Bonjos,  461

Bororos,  566

Botocudos,  50,  147,  159,  170,  563

Bows,  262

Boyaeli,  454

Brahuis,  421

Brain  weight  among  different  races ;
relative  we^t  of,  in  men  and
women;  rewtion  of  stature  and


weight  of  body  to  weight  of
brain,  etc,  97-104;  brain  weights
of  man  and  anthropoid  apes,  17,
18;  weight  at  different  ages,  107

Bubuendi,  460

Bujis,  490

Buriats,  379

Burmese,  400

Bushmen,  41,  44,  56,  80,  94,  204,
206,  287,  467

Bushmen-Hottentots,  467

Cagayanes,  491

Cahitas,  535

Cainguas,  563,  568

Calchaquis,  547

Cambodians,  398

Caribs,  541,  $$2

Caste  and  class  organisation,  249

Caste  in  India,  402

Cayugas,  527

Celts,  323,  347

Cephalic  index,  its  numerical  ex-
pression and  nomenclature,  57-
59 ;  its  relation  to  mentality,  76

Chapanecs,  538

Characterisation  of  races  in  author's
classification,  285-293

Charruas,  571

Chechen-Lesgians,  354

Che-hoan,  391

Chenooks,  532

Cherkess  (Circassians),  354

Cheyennes,  527

Chibchas,  546

Chicasaws,  528

Children. — Voluntary  limitation  of,
infanticide,  rearing  of  children
among  primitive  peoples,  naming,
education,  etc.,  239-241

Chinese,  38,  43,  47,  50,  109,  141,
382,  386

Chins,  413

Chippewas,  524,  526

Chontals,  538,  540

Chukchi,  149,  182,  191,  242,  367

Cilx)neys,  557

Classification  of  ethnic  groups,  293-
298

Commerce,  conduct  of,  in  primitive
societies,  270

Coreans,  386,  387

Corroborees,  207


INDEX   OF  SUBJECTS.


609


Ossets,  III,  356,  421
Otomis,  537
Ottawas,  527

Faharias,  415

Pai-pi-bri,  451

Palae- American  sub- race,  292,  512

Palenbangs,  4S9

Palkhpaluk,  415

Pftmpeans,  571

Ptoos,  559

P*P*J<».  535

Papuans,  4*3.4841  493-497

Panis,  419,  420

Pashtu,  420

Passumahs,  4S9

Patagonians,  574

Pawnees,  530

Pelvic  index,  84

Pepo-hoan,  391

Persians,  419

Peruvians,  67,  85

Physiological  characters,  functions
of  nutrition  and  assimilation,
respiration  and  circulation,  repro-
duction, etc.,  105-120

Pictography,  137140

Pigmentation,  race  variations  of,  46;
ten  principal  shades  of  colour  of
skin,  47 ;  pigmentation  of  the  iris,
48;  three  fundamental  shades  of
the  iris,  49 ;  colour  of  the  eye  in
different  races,  49;  colouring  of
the  hair,  49 ;  four  principal  shades,
49;  pigmentation  at  oirth,  50;
absence  of  pigment,  51

Pigmies,  455

Pimas,  535

Piikecantkropus  erectus^  360

Politeness,  rules  of. — ''Exchanging
blood,"  salutations,  etc,  254-255

Polyandry,  235

Polygamy  and  monogamy,  the  patri-
aroiate,  237

Polymorphism,  5

Polynesians,  47,  63,  85,  87,  91,  112,
204,  206,  500

Ponkas,  530

Pottery-making,  modellix^,  mould-
ing, and  coiling  metho£  of,  154,

Prehistoric  "finds"  in  Africa,  427;
in  Oceaniftt  475


Promiscuity,  231

Property,  systems  under  which  held,
collective,  family,  individual,  245-

247
Psychological      and      Pathological
characters,  121

Quaternary  age  in  Europe,  301
Quaternary     human      remains     in

Europe,  309
Quaternary  man  in  Asia,  361
Quechuas,  547

Race,  in  what  manner  term  applied,
8

Reiangs,  489

Reli^on — animism,  fetichism,  wor-
ship of  natural  objects  and
phenomena,  religion  and  mor-
ality, rites  and  ceremonies,  priest-
hooids,  214-223

Respiration  among  uncivilised
peoples  and  among  Europeans,
108

Right  and  justice,  the  power  of
taboo,  vendetta,  ordeals,  oath-
taking,  extra-legal  judges,  etc,
252-254

Russians,  ill,  167,  344

Sakai,  397

Sakalavas,  470

Salishans,  532

Samarai,  495

Samoans,  504

Santals  (Sonthals),  114,  409

Sartes,  376,  419

Savaras  (Saoras),  409

Scandinavians,  47,  186,  220,  228

Scapular  index,  85

Sciences,  primitive — ^knowledge  of
numbers,  calculation  of  4ime,
calendars  and  clocks,  geography
and  cartography,  223-228

Selungs,  390

Senecas,  527

Sexes,  relation  of,  before  marriage,
229

Shans,  401

Shawnees,  526

Shield,  evolution  of  the,  266-269

Shiluks,  445

Shnvashes,  376

39


INDEX  or  SUBJECTS.


6ll


Veddahs,  85,  87,  91,  145,  157,  159,

270.  417
Vei,  449

Wagogo,  464

Wahabits,  423

Wakamba,  464

Wakguro,  464

Wambutti,  454

Wapokoinpo.  464

Wataita,  464

Weapons  of  offence  and  defence,
clubs,  missile  weapons,  boomer-
angs, the  bow  and  arrow,  me-
thods of  arrow  release,  shields,
protective  armour,  257-269

Wichitas,  530


Yakuts,  375
Yamas,  554
Yasafzais,  420
Yeniseians  or  Tubas,  366
Yeshkhun,  413
Yezides,  423
Yolofs,  450
Yorubas.  453
Yukagirs,  370
Yumas,  533


Zaparos,  561
Zapotecs,  537
Zoques,  538
Zulus,  465
Zuiiis,  155,  225,  534


THE  END.


tta  WALTER  SCOTT  PRESS,  NEWCASTLK-ON-TYIfB


tl


I ;

.   I


I"

I


Crown  8vc,  Cloth  Elegant,  in  Box,  Price  2S,  6d.

THE

CULT    OF     BEAUTY:


A  MANUAL  OF  PERSONAL  HYGIENE.

By  C.   J.   S.   THOMPSON.

[Extract  from  Preface.]

Toe  muck  care  cannot  be  taken  of  the  exterior  of  the  huntan  body^  on
which  the  general  health  so  largely  depends.  The  most  recent  discoveries
in  science  go  to  prove  that  cleanliness,  with  proper  attention  to  bodily
exercise f  is  the  greatest  enemy  to  disease  and  decay.  Quackery  hcu  never
been  more  rampant  than  it  is  to-day ^  and  advertised  secret  preparations
for  beautifying  the  person  me^  us  cU  every  turn.  It  is  with  the  object
of  showing  how  Beauty  may  be  preserved  and  aided  on  purely  hygienic
principles ^  that  this  work  has  been  written,  the  grecUest  secret  of  Beauty
being  Health,

CONTENTS—

Chapter  I. —THE  SKIN.  Chapter  II.— THE  HANDS.

Chapter  III.— THE  FEET.  Chapter  IV.— THE  HAIR.

Chapter  V.— THE  TEETH.  Chapter  VI.— THE  NOSE.

Chapter  VII.— THE  EYE.  Chapter  VIII.— THE  EAR.


'*  'Quackery/  says  Mr.  Thompson,  Svas  never  more  rampant  than  it  is
to-day'  with  regard  to  *aids  in  beautifying  the  person.'  His  little  book
is  based  on  parely  hygienic  principles,  and  comprises  recipes  for  toilet
purposes  which  he  warrants  are  'practical  and  harmless.'  These  are
virtaes  in  any  book  of  health  and  beaaty,  and  Mr.  Thompson's  advice
and  guidance  are,  we  fiud,  not  wanting  in  soundness  and  common-sense."
-^Saturday  Review.


London :  Walter  Scott,  Limited,  Patcrooster  Square.


BOOKS    OF    FAIRY    TALES.

Crown  8»<7,  Cioth  Elegant,  Price  3/6  per  Vol,

ENGLISH    FAIRY   AND    OTHER

FOLK  TALES.

Selected  and  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,

By  EDWIN  SIDNEY  HARTLAND.

With  Twelve  Full-Page  Illustrations  by  Charles  E.  Brock.


SCOTTISH  FAIRY  AND  FOLK  TALES.

Selected  and  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,

By  Sir  GEORGE  DOUGLAS,  Bart.

IVith  Twelve  Full-Page  Illustrations  by  James  Torrance


IRISH  FAIRY  AND  FOLK  TALES.

Selected  and  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,

By  W.  B.  YEATS.

IViih  Twelve  Full-Page  Illustrations  by  James  Torrance.


London :  Walter  Scott,  Limited,  Paternoster  Square.


Ibsen's  Prose  Dramas

Edited  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER

Complete  in  Five  Vols,    Crown  %vOt  Clothe  Price  31.  &/.  tacJU
Set  of  Five  Vols,,  m  Case,  ijs,  6d, ;  in  Half  Morocco^

in  Case,  32/.  6^

'  We  ieem  at  last  te  Be  tkewm  men  anH  w^men  as  they  are  ;  aiut  atjtrei
it  is  m»re  than  we  eon  endure.  .  •  ,  Ail  thten's  characters  spenk  amd  act
as  if  they  wers  hypnotised ^  amd  under  their  creator* e  imperitms  demand
te  reveal  themselves.  There  never  wat  snch  a  mirrvr  held  up  te  nature
i^/ewe ;  it  is  tee  terrible,  .  .  •  Yet  we  must  return  te  fhsen,  with  his
remerselese  eufftry,  his  remorseless  electricliiht,  until  we,  /«#,  hdtve
grewn  strong  and  teamed  to  Joes  ike  naked—i/  necessary,  the  flayed  and
hleedini-reaiiiy:—%f9MLm  (LoodonX

Vol.     I.  'A  DOLUS  HOUSE/  'THE  LEAGUE

OF  YOUTH,'  and  •THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY/
With  Portrait  of  the  Author,  and  Biographical  Introduc-
tion by  William  Archer.

Vol.  IL  'GHOSTS,'  'AN  ENEMY  OF  THE
PEOPLE/  and  'THE  WILD  DUCK.'  With  an  Intro-
ductory Note.

Vol.  in.  'LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAT,'  'THE

VIKINGS  AT  HELGELAND,*  'THE  PRETEND-
ERS.'   With  an  Introductory  Note  and  Portrait  of  Ibsen.

Vol.  IV.  'EMPEROR  AND  GALILEAN.'  With
an  Introductory  Note  by  William  Archer.

Vol.    V.  « ROSMERSHOLM,'     'THE     LADY

FROM  THE  SEA,'  <HEDDA  GABLER.'  Translated
by  William  Archer.    With  an  Introductory  Note.

Tbt  tcqa«iicc  of  the  playt  mi  eetch  volume  b  chronoloflcal ;  the  c<M»pl«t«
•ct  of  volumet  compritinc  the  dramas  preaenti  them  in  cmonological  order.


LONDON :  Walter  Scott,  Paternoster  Square.


COMPACT  AND  PRACTICAL.
In  Limp  Cloth  ;  for  the  Pocket.    Price  One  SlUlling.

THE   EUROPEAN

CONVERSATION  BOOKS.


FRENCH  ITALIAN

SPANISH  GERMAN

NORWEGIAN

CONTENTS.

Hints  to  Travellers — Everyday  Expressions-^ Arriving  ai
tmd  Leaving  a  Railway  Station — Custom  House  Enquiries — In
a  Train^At  a  Buffet  and  Restaurant— At  an  Hotel— -Paying  an
Hotel  Bill^Enquiries  in  a  Town— On  Board  Ship — Embarking
and  Disembarking— Excursion  by  Carriage — Enquiries  as  to
Diligences— Enquifies  as  to  Boat s-^ Engaging  Apartments^
Welshing  List  and  Days  of  Week — Restaurant  Vocabulary —
Telegrams  and  Letters^  etc.^  etc.


The  contents  of  these  little  handbooks  are  so  arranged  ai  to
permit  direct  and  immediate  reference.  All  dialogues  or  enquiries  not
considered  absolutely  essential  have  been  purposely  excluded,  nothing
being  introduced  which  mi^ht  confuse  the  traveller  rather  than  assist
him..  A  few  hints  are  given  in  the  introduction  which  will  be  found
valuable  to  those  unaccustomed  to  foreign  travel


LONDON  :  Walter  Scott,  Paternoster  Square,


The  Scott  l^ihrary—con/ifiued.


63  TALES  FROM  WONDERLAND.

69  JERROLD'S  ESSAYS.

70  THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMAN.

71  ••  THE  ATHENIAN  ORACLE."

72  ESSAYS  OP  SAINTE-BEUVB.

73  SELECTIONS  FROM  PLATO.
71  HEINE'S  TRAVEL  SKETCHES.

75  MAJD  OF  ORLEAN&

76  SYDNEY  SMITH.

77  THE  NEW  SPIRIT.

78  MALORY'S     BOOK     OF    MAR-

VELLOUS  ADVENTURES.

79  HELPS*  ESSAYS  k  APHORISMS

80  ESSAYS  OF  MONTAIGNE.

81  Thackbrat*8  BARRY  LYNDON.

82  SCHILLER'S  WILLIAM  TELL

83  CARLYLE'S  GERMAN  ESSAYS.

84  LAMBS  ESSAYS.

85  WORDSWORTH'S  PROSE.

86  LEOPARDI'S  DIALOGUES.
67  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL
83  BACON'S  ESSAYS.

89  PROSE  OP  MILTON.

90  PLATO'S  REPUBLIC.

91  PASSAGES  FROM  FROISSART.

92  PROSE  OP  COLERIDGE.

93  HEINE  IN  ART  AND  LETTERS.

94  ESSAYS  OF  DE  QUINCEY.


95  VASARrS  LIVES  OF  ITAUAN

PAINTERa

96  LESSINGS  LAOCOON.

97  PLAYS  OF  MAETERLINCK.

98  WALTON'S  COMPLETE  ANGLER

99  LESSING'S  NATHAN  THE  WISE

100  STUDIES  BY  RENAN.

101  MAXIMS  OF  GOETHE.

102  SCHOPENHAUER,

103  RENAN'S  LIFE  OF  JESUS.

104  CONFESSIONS    OF    SAINT

AUGUSTINE,

105  PRINCIPLES   OF   SUCCESS  IN

LITERATURE  (G.  H.  Lewes).

106  WHAT  IS  ART  I  (ToUtoy).

107  WALTON'S  LIVES.

108  RENAN'S  ANTICHRIST.

109  ORATIONS  OF  aCERO.

110  REFLECTIONS  on  thb  REVOLU-

TION  IN  FRANCE  (B.  Burke).

111  LETTERS  OF  THE    YOUNGER

PLINY.    (Series  L)

112  Do.  (Series  H.)

113  SELECTED    THOUGHTS    OF

BLAISE  PASCAL.

lU  SCOTS  ESSAYISTS.


London:  Walter  Scott,  Pateroosler  Square.


The   World's    Great    Novels.

Large  Crown  Svo,  Jliusirated^  y,  6d,  each,

A  series  of  acknowledged  masterpieces  by  the  most  eminent  writen
of  fiction.

THE     COUNT     OF     MONTE- CRISTO.       By

Alexander  Dumas.  With  Sixteen  Full-page  lUustrations
drawn  by  Frank  T.  Mrrrilu

THE  THREE  MUSKETEERS.    By  Alexandre

Dumas.  With  Twelve  Fullpa^e  Illustrations  by  T.  Eyrb
Macklin,  and  a  Frontispiece  Portrait  of  the  Author.

TWENTY    YEARS    AFTER.     By   Alexandre

Dumas.  With  Sixteen  Full-page  Illustrations  by  Frank  T.
Merrill.

MARGUERITE  DE  VALOIS.    By  Alexandre

Dumas.  With  Nine  Full-page  Illustrations  by  Frank  T.
Merrill.

CHICOT,  THE  JESTER  (La  Dame  de  Mon-

soreau).  By  Alexandre  Dumas.  With  Nine  Full-page
lUustrations  by  Frank  T.  Merrill.

THE  FORTY-FIVE  GUARDSMEN.     By  Alex-

ANDRE  Dumas.  With  Nine  Full-page  Illustrations  by  Frank
T.  Merrill.

LES  MISfiRABLES.    By  Victor  Hugo.     With

Eleven  Full-page  Illustrations.

NOTRE    DAME.      By    Victor    HUGO.      With

numerous  Illustrations.

JANE  EYRE.     By  Charlotte  Bronte.     With

Sixteen  Full-page  Illustrations  and  Thirty-two  Illustrations  in  the
Text,  by  Edmund  H.  Garrett,  and  Photogravure  Portrait  of
Charlotte  Bronte.

Tolstoy's  Great  Masterpiece.     New  Edition  of  Anna  Kar^nina.

ANNA    KARENINA:     A    Novel.      By   COUNT

Tolstoy.  With  Ten  Illustrations  drawn  by  Paul  Fr^nzeny,
and  a  Frontispiece  Portrait  of  Count  Tolstoy.

"  Other  novels  one  can  afford  to  leave  unread,  but  Anna  Karinina
never;  it  stands  eternally  one  of  the  peaks  of  all  fiction." — Review
of  Reviexv:,  _.

LONDON :  Walter  Scott,  Paternoster  Square.


To  avoid  fine,  this  book  shruM  *  s  r-ti«nied  on
or  before  the  date  las*


17  2t


130


^'J&  y


■r

4


?


cs
