AHIMAN REZON:
A Help io a Brother;

Shewing the

EXCELLENCY of SECRECY,

And the firft Caufe, or Motive, of the Inftitution of

FREE-MASONRY;

THE
PRINCIPLES of the CRAFT,
And the
Benefits arifing from a {trict Obfervance thereof ;
What Sort of MeN ought to be initiated into the Mysrery,
And what Sort of Masons are fit to govern Lopcss,
With their Behaviour in and out of the Lodge.
Likewife the

Prayers ufed in the fewi/h and Chriftian Lodges,

The Ancient Manner of
Conftituting new Lodges, with all the Charges, ©.
Alfo the
OLD and NEW REGULATIONS,

The Manner of Chufing and Inftalling Grand-Majier and Officers,
and other ufeful Particulars too numerous here to mention.

Towhich is added,

The aa ColleGtion of Masons Sones ever prefented to
public View, with many entertaining ProLocues and Epitocuss ;

Together with
SoLomon’s TEMPLE an ORATORIO,
As it was performed for the Benefit of

F R E E- M AS ON S.
By Brother LAURENCE DERMOTT, Sec.

LONDON:
Printed for the Epiror, and fold by Brother fames Bedford, at the
-Crown in St. Paul’s Church-Yara.

MDCCLVI

er Ca ae Teeter
; iit ye
i Scaixd el eH SESy tate

eererre Sirrerer

TO: PvE

RicHut HONOURABLE

wiLLiaAnmM
Ear of Bélefington.

My Lorp,

$T the Requeft of feveral Worthy

ea Free-Masons, I undertook to

publifh the following Suerers,

wherein I have endeavoured to let the young

Brethren know how they ought to condué

their Actions, with Uprightnefs, Integrity,

Morality, and Brotherly Love, ftill keeping
the ancient Land-Marks in View.

On

DEDICATION.

On the Perufal, Your Lorpsu 1p will find
that the Whole is defigned not only for the
Good of the Fraternity, but alfo to thew
the miftaken Part of the World, that the
true Principles of Frez-Masonry are to love

Mercy, do Juftice, and walk humbly before
GOD.

My Lorp, to fpeak of your LorpsurP’s
Zeal for the Craft, or to tell the Brethren
that your Lorpsuip has been as a Father to
the Fraternity, &c. would be making a Re-
petition of what is well known already.

Nor are the reft of Mankind lefs ac-
quainted with your Lorpsuip’s Affability,
Generofity, Benevolence, and Charity.

Tur Year 1740 has recorded fo much of
Your Lor psurp’s Goodnefs and extenfive
Love to Mankind, that there is no Room

left

DEDICATION.

left to fay more than that I know Nothing
to recommend this Work fo much as pre-

fixing your Lorpsuir’s Name.

I am,
My Lorn,
With all due Refpett,
Your Lorvsute’s
Moft oblig’d
Mol Senile, ‘aul
Moft obedient Servant
And faithful a

Lau. Dermott.

ER SE 2 eh POETPEPD

ED I T O R

spogeT has been the general Cuftom of all my
: worthy Brethren, who have honoured the

i aa sone t Craft with their Books of Conftitutions, or
* Pocket-Companions for Free-Mafons, to give

us along and pleafing Hiftory of Mafonry from the
Creation to the Time of their writing and publifhing
fuch Accounts, viz. from Adem to Noah, from Noab
to Nimrod, from Nimrod to Solomon, from Solomon to
Cyrus, from Cyrus to Seleucus Nicater, from Seleucus
Nicator to Auguftus Cefar, from Auguffus Cefar to the
Havock of the Goths, and fo on until the Revival of
the Auguflan Style, &c. Gc. Sc. Wherein they give
us an Account of the drawing, {cheming, planning,
a de+

VI The EDITOR = ¢o

defigning, erecting, and building of Temples, Towers,
Cities, Cattles, Palaces, Theatres, Pyramids, Monu-
ments, Bridges, Walls, Pillars, Courts, Halls, Fortifi-
cations, and Labyrinths, with the famous Light-houfe
of Phares and Coloffus at Rhodes, and many other won-
derful Works performed by the Akcu1TECTs, to the

great Satisfaction of the Readers and Edification of
Free-Matons *.

Havinc called to Mind the old Proverb, Better out
of the World than out of Fafhion, Iwas fully determined
to publifh a Hiftory of Mafonry, whereby I did expe
to give the World an uncommon Satisfaction; and in
order to enable myfelf to execute this great Defign, I
purchafed all or moft of the Hiftories, Conftitutions,
Pocket-Companions, and other Pieces (on that Subject)
now extant in the Exg/i/h Tongue.

- My next Step was to furnith myfelf with a fufficient
Quantity of Pens, Ink, and Paper: This being done,
I immediately fancied myfelf an HisTorian, and in-
tended to trace Mafonry not only to Adam, in his
fylvan Lodge in Paradi/:, but to give fome Account of
the Craft even before the Creation : And (as a Founda-
tion) I placed the following Works round about me,
fo as to be convenient to have Recourfe to them as
Occafion flould require, iz. Door Auderfin and

Mr.

* Quere, Wether fuch Hiftories arc of any Ufe in the fecret
Myfteries of the Craft.

the READER. vil

Mr. Spratt directly before me, Doctor D' Ajizny and
Mr. Smith on my Right-hand, Dottor Defagulier and
Mr. Pennell on my Left-hand, and Mr. Scott and
Mr. Lys behind me: A Copy of (that often called)
the Original Conftitutions ({aid to be in the Poffeflion
of Mr. ‘fobn Clark, in Paris), and another Copy of the
fame Magnitude handed about in England, together
with the Pamphlet printed at Frankfort in Germany, 1
tied up in the Public Advertifer of Friday, Ocfcber 19,
1753, end threw them under the Table.

Havince tried my Pen, and wrote a Line not unlike
the Beginning of a Chapter in the Alcoran *, I began
to flourifh away in a moft admirable Manner, and in a
few Days wrote the firft Volume of the Hiftory of
Mafonry, wherein was a full Account of the Tranfac-
tions of the firft Grand Lodge, particularly the exclud-
ing of the unruly Members, as related by Mr. Mi/-

ton +.

By this Time I imagined myfelf fuperior to Sefephus,
Stackboufe, or any other Hiftorian whom the Reader
fhall pleafe to think on. And as I intended to give the

a2 World

* Next after the Title at the Head of every Chapter (except the
ninth) of the Alcoran, is prefixed the following fclema Form:

In the Nome of the moft merciful Ged.

+ See Paradife Loft:

Vill The EDITOR ‘¢to

World a Hiftory of Mafonry for feveral Years before the

Creation, I made no manner of Doubt but my Work
fhould live (at leaft) two Thoufand Ycars after the ge-
neral Conflagration.

Peruars fome of my Readers (I mean thofe that
are beft acquainted with my Capacity) Will fay, he has
more Vanity than Wit; and as to Learning, it is as
great a Stranger to him, as Free-Mafonry is to Women ;
yet he has the Folly to think himfelf an Hiftorian, and
expecis to become a great Man, @c.

Wuerier fuch an Opinion be true, or falfe, it
matters nought to me; for the World muft allow, that
(tho’ no Man has yet found out the perpetual Motion)
all Men ever had, has now, and ever will have, a per-
petual Notion: And furthermore, we read that the fol-
lowing Perfons, fo much fam’d in Hiftory, were not
only poor Men, but many of them of avery mean Ex-
traction. The wiie Philofopher Secrates, was the Son
of a poor Stone-Carver ; the tragic Poet Euripides, was
the Son of poor Parents ; as was De:zofthenes, the Ho-
nour of Greek Eloquence ; Virgil, the famous Latin
Poet, was the Son of a poor Mantuan labouring Potter ;
Horace, the incompurabie Lyric, was the Son of a
Trumpeter in the Wars; Tarquinius Prifcus, King of

the Romans, wes the Son of a Merchant ; and Servius
Tullius, another King of the Romans, was begotten on
a Woman-Slave; S-pitmius Severus, is faid to come of

a very

the READER. Ix

a very bafe Degree ; Agathocles, King of Sicily, wasa
Potter's Son ; Zélius Pertinax was a poor Artificer, or
as fome fay a fimple Seller of Wood; the Parents of
Venadius Baffus, are faid to be very miferable poor Peo-
ple; and drfaces, King of the Parthians, was of fo
inean and obfcure Parentage that no Man’s Memory
could make a Report of his Father or Mother ; Psolomy,
King of Egypt, was the Son of a Squire in Alexander's
Army ; the Emperor Liccle/ien, was the Son of a Scri-
vener; the Emperor Valentinian, was the Son of a
Rope-Maker ; the Emperor Probus, was the Son of a
Gardener; and the Parents of /urelius, were fo ob-
fcure that Writers have not agrced who they were ;
Maximinus was the Son of a Smith, or as fome fay a
Waggon-Wright ; Alarcus Fubus Licinius, was the Son
of a Herdfman ; Bonofus, was the Son of a poor ftipen-
dary Schoolmafter ; Mauritus Fufinus, Predeceflor to
SFuflinian, and likewife Galerus, were both Shepherds ;
Pope ‘fobn, the Twenty-fecond of that Name, was the
Son of a Shoe-maker ; Pope Nicholas the Fifth, was
the Son of a Man that fold Eggs and Butter about the
Streets; and Pope Sxtus the Fourth, was a Mariner’s
Son; Lamufius, King of the Lombards, was the Son of
a common Strumpet, who (when he was an Infant)
threw him into a Ditch, but was taken out by King
Agelmond; Primiflaus, King of Bohemia, was the Son
of a country Peafant ; Tamerlane the Great, was a Herdt-
man; Caius Marius, {even Times Confui of Rome, was

born

x The EDITOR «@

born of poor Parents in the Village of Arpinum; and
Marcus Tullius Cicero, Conful of Rome and Pro-Conful
in Afia, was from the poor Tuguricle of Arpinum, the
meaneft Parentage that could be; Ventidius, Field-
Martfhal and Conful of Rome, was the Son of a Mule-
teer ; and Theopbraflus was the Son of a Botcher, 7. ¢.
a Mender of Garments, &c.

I wave heard of many others of later Date (not fo
far diftant as Feguin *) that have been preferr’d to Places
or Offices of great Truft, and dignified with Titles of
Honour, without having the leaft Claim to Courage,
Wir, Learning, or Honefty ; therefore if fuch Occur-
rences be culy confidered, I humbly conceive it will
not be deem’d as a capital Offence, that I fhould enter-
tain my own perpetual Notion, while I do not endea-
vour to difinherit any Man of his Properties.

I povstT I have tired the Reader’s Patience ; and if
fo, I humbly beg his Pardon for this long Digreffion.
But to return: While my Mind was wholly taken up
with my fancied Superiority as an Hiftorian, &c. 1 in-
fenfibly fell into a Slumber, when me-thought four
Men entered my Room ; their Habits appeared to be of
very ancient Fafhion, and their Language alfo I ima-
gined to be either Hebrew, Arabic, or Chaldean, in
which they addreffed me, and J immediately anfwered

them

* Fequin is fuppofed to be 7272 Miles Eaft of London.

the READER. XI

them after the Pantomine Fafhion: After fome formal
Ceremonies, I defired to know their Names and from
whence they came; to which onc of them anfwered
me (in Engli/h) Weare four Brothers, and came from
the holy City of ‘ferufelem; our Names are Shallum,
Abiman, Akhub, and Talmon. Hearing they were So-
journers from Yerufalem, I afked them whether they
could give any Account of SOLOMON’s TEMPLE;
to which Shallum * (the chief of them) made Anfwer
and faid, The wife King SOLOMON, Granp-
Master of J/rael, appointed us head Porters at the
Temple, in the thirty-fecond Year of his Age, the
twelfth of his Reign, and about the Year of the World
2942; and therefore we can give a full and particular
Defcription of that wonderful Fabrick, and likewife of
the ingenious Artifts who perform’d it.

I was glad to meet with fuch Brethren, from whom
I did expect a great deal of Knowledge; which the
many Ages they had lived in muit have taught them,
if their Memories did not fail : Upon this Confideration
TF told them, that I was writing a Hiflory of Mafonry,
and beg’d their Afliftance, Gc.

A History of Mafonry! (fays Abiman) from the
Day of the Dedication of the Holy Temple to this
prefent Time, I have not feen a Hiftory of Mafonry,

though

* 4 Chron. ix, 17.

xil The EDITOR @

though fome have pretended (not only) to defcribe the
Length, Breadth, Heighth, Weight, Colour, Shape,
Form, and Subftance of every Thing within and about
the Temple ; but alfo to tell the fpiritual * Meaning of
them, as if they knew the Mind of him who gave
Orders for that Building, or feen it finifhed : But I can
affure you, that fuch Surveyors have never feen the
Temple, nay never have been within a thoufand Miles
of Ferufalem +: Indeed (continued he) there was one
Flavius (1 think he was a Soldier) took a great deal of
Notice of the Temple, and other Matters about it; as
did another Man, called ‘ferry: There were two others
whofe Names I have forgot, but remember one of them
was an excellent Dreamer {, and the other was very
handy in collecting all Manner of good Writings || after
the Captivity.

Tose were the only Men that have wrote moft and
beft upon that Subject, and yet all their Works together
would not be fufficient for a Preface to the Hiftory of
Mafonry ; but for your further Inftruétion, you fhall
hear an eminent Brother who can inform you in every
Particular that is neceflary to your prefent Undertal:ing.
The Words were fcarce ended, when there appeared a

grave

* See Sclomon’s Temple fpiritualized by Bunyan.

t Ferufalem is fuppofed to be 2352 Miles S. E. by E, of London.
t Ezekiel.

|| Ezra.

te READER, xiii
grave old Gentleman, with a long Beard; he was
drefled in an embroidered Veft, and wore a Breaft-
plate of Gold, fet with twelve precious Stones, which
formed an oblong Square: I was informed that the
Name of the Stones were Sardine, Emerald, Ligure,
Beryl, Topas, Saphire, Agate, Onyx, Carbuncle, Dia-
mond, Amethyft, and ‘fafper: Upon thefe Stones were
engraved the Names of the twelve Tribes, viz. Reuben,
‘Yudab, Gad, Zebulun, Simeon, Dan, Afber, Fofeph,
Levi, Naphthali, Iffacher, and Benjamin.

Upon his Entrance, the four Sojourners did him the
Homage due to a Superior ; and as to me, the Luftre
of his Breaft-Plate dazzled my Sight, in fuch a Man-
ner that I could fcarce look at him. But Abiman give
ing him to underftand that the People of this Country
were weak-fighted, he immediately covered his Breaft.
Plate; which not only gave me an Opportunity of per-
ceiving him more diftin&, but alfo of paying him my
Refpects in the beft Manner I wag capable of; and
making a very low Bow, I prefented him with the
firft Volume of the Hiftory of Mafonry, hoped he
would do me the Honour of perufing it, and beg’d his
Advice for my further Proceedings: He kindly received
it, and read it over, whilft I impatiently waited to
hear his Opinion ; which at laft (to my Mortification)
amounted to no more than an old Hebrew Proverb
(which biman tranflated thus; Thou haft div’d deep

to

XIV The EDITOR ‘ff

into the Water, and haft brought up a Potfherd): Never-
thelefs he took me by the Hand, and faid*; MySon, if
thou wilt thou fhalt be taught, and if thou wilt apply
thy Mind thou fhalt be witty ; if thou love to hear thou
fhalt receive (Doétrine) ; and if thou delight in hearing
thou fhalt be wife: And although your Hiftory of Ma-
fonry is not worth Notice, yet you may write many
other Things of great Service to the Fraternity.

CERTAIN it is (continued he) that Free-Mafonry
has been from the Creation (though not under that
Name); that it was a divine Gift from Gop; that Caiz
and the Builders of His City were Strangers to the fe-
cret Myftery of Mafonry that there were but four Ma-
fons in the World-when the Deluge happened ; that
one of the four, even the fecond Son of Noah, was
not Mafter of the Art; that Nimrod, nor any of his
Bricklayers, knew any Thing of the Matter; and that
there were but very few Mafters of the Art (even) at
Solomon's Temple: Whereby it plainly appears, that the
whole Myftery was communicated to very few at that
Time ; that at Solomon’s Temple (and not before) it
received the Name of F: ree-Mafonry, becaufe the Ma-
fons at ‘ferufalem and Tyre were the greateft Cabalifts +
then in the World; that the Myftery has been, for the

moit

* Eccluf. vi. 33, 34.

+ People fkilled in the Cabala, i.e. Tradition, their fecret Science
of expounding divine Myfteries, &c.

th READER. XV

moft Part, practifed amongft Builders fince Solomon's
‘Time ; that there were fome hundreds mentioned (in
Hiftories of Mafonry) under the Titles of Grand-
Matters, &c. for no other Reafon than that of giving
Orders for the building of a Houfe, Tower, Caftle,
or fome other Edifice (or perhaps for fuffering the Ma-
fons to erect fuch in their Territories, Gc.) while the
Memories of as many Thoufands of the faithful Crafts
are buried in Oblivion: From whence he gave me to
underftand, that fuch Hiftorics were of no Ufe to the
Society at prefent ; and further added, that the Manner
ner of conttituting Lodges, the old and new Regula-
tions, &c. were the only and moft ufeful Things (con-
cerning Free-Mafonry) that could be wrote: To which
I beg’d to be informed, whether Songs were to be in-
troduced: His Aniwer was*: Jf ikcu be made the
Majler, lift not thyfelf up; but be among them as one
of the ret: Take diligent Care for them, and fo fit
down.

And when thoi kaft done all thy Duty, fit down, that
thou mavft be merry with then; and receive a Crown
Sor thy good Bebavicur.

Speak thou that crt the elder, for it Lecometh thee ;
bui with found Judgment: And binder not Mufic.

t And at ati Tines let thy Garments be W tite.

Wurit he was ipeaking thete laft Words, I was a-
waked by a young Puppy that (got into the Reom

while

*Eccluf. xxxii, 1, 2, 3. + Eccief ix. 8.

XV1 Thr EDITOR w

while I flept, and, feizing my Papers, eata great Part
of them, and) was then (between my Legs) fhaking
and tearing the laft Sheet of what I had wrote.

I nave not Words to exprefs the Sorrow, Grief,
Trouble, and Vexation I was in, upon feeing the

Cataftrophe of a Work which I expected would out-
laft the Teeth of Time.

Like one diftracted (as in Truth I was) I ran to the
Owner of the Dog, and demanded immediate Satisfac-
tion: He told me he would hang the Cur; but at the
fame Time he imagined I fhould be under more Ob-

ligation to him for fo doing, than he was to me for
what had happened.

Ix fhort, I looked upon it asa bad Omen; and my
late dream had made fo great an Impreffion on my
Mind, that Superftition got the better of me, and
caufed me to deviate from the general Cuftom of my
worthy Predeceffors; otherwife I would have publifhed
a Hiftory of Mafonry: And as this is rather an acci-
dental than a defigned Iault, I hope the Reader will
look over it with a favourable Eye.

In the following Sheets I have inferted nothing but
what are undeniable ‘Truths, which will be found (if
obterved) to be of great Ufe to the Fraternity, and
likewite to Numbers that are not of the Society ; to the

Jatter,

the READER. xvii
latter, becaufe it will (in fome Meafure) fhow them
their Folly in ridiculing a Society founded upon Reli-
gion, Morality, Brotherly-Love, and good Pellowthip 5
and to thofe of a more gentle and_ better polifhed Na-
ture, give them an Opportunity of examining them-
felves, and judging how much they are endued with
the neceffary Qualifications of a I’ree-Mafon, before
they apply to be made Members of the Society.

How far I may fucceed in this Defign, I know not;
but as my Intent is good, I hope my Brethren and
others will accept the Will for the Deed, and receive
this as the Widow’s Mite was received; which will
amply reward the Trouble taken by him who is,

With all due Refpect,

The Reader’s moft obiig'd,

Humble Servant,

he).

eh CaP Ceol Vo Verh Wer Yosh Went Wie tf We

"Mok

ASRS RoR Rodi Med Ma

THE

Subfcribers Names.

A.
ME: John Abercromby
§.G.W. A.M.
Mrs. Anne Abercromby
Mr. Auftin Allen
Mr. Lewis Anfon
Mr. Edward Angel
Mr. John Albifon
Mr. Thomas Allen, 2 Books.

B.
Mr. Chriftopher Balfour
Mr. James Bedford
Mr. Robert Blunt
Capt. John Benfon
Mr. Thomas Box
Mr. Thomas Blake
Mr. Charles Byrne
Mr. Thomas Bridge
Mr. Laurence Boyne
Mr. John Burkmar
Mr. Paul Blunt
Mr. John Buckley
Mrs. Elizabeth Bridge
Mrs. Judith Bowden
Mr. Alexander Birmmyrthe
Mr. Samuel Barlow
Mr. James Bowden
Mr. James Bradfhaw
Mr. Enoch Bradley
Mr. John Barnes
Mr. Thomas Braddock
Mr. Benjamin Burroughs

Cc.
Mr. Jeremiah Colemaf
Mr. James Callan
Mr. John Coleman
Mrs, Sarah Chapman
Mrs. Mary Coxon
Mr. Henry Chapman
Mr. Abraham Cook
Mr. John Cartwright
Mrs. Elizabeth Cartwright
Mr. Edward Collins
Mr. George Curtis
Mr. Jofeph Carter.
Mr. John Carbery
Mr. John Clemenfon

D.

Mr. Thomas Devenifh
Mr. Dominick Dermott
Mr. Denis Donovan
Mr. John Downes

Mr. Pater Dunn

Mr. William Dignan
Mr. Thomas Duncafter
Mr. ae Delany.

Mr. Charles Dod

E.
Mr. Evans
Mr. George Edwards
Mr. Richard Eafterby
Mr. Jobn Eare '

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES,

F.
Mr. William Fox
Mr. David Fifher
Mr. James Frayne
Mr. Patrick Fizgerald
Mr. Coleman Ford.

a)

Mr. Samuel Galbraith, J.G.W.
A.M.

Mr. Robert Goodman
Mrs, Rebecca Goodman
Mr. John Gray

Mr. Francis Gough
Mr. John Games

Mr. James Glover
Mr. Thomas Gibfon
Mr. James Gibfon
Mr. William Grayfon
Mrs, Ann Grant

Mr. William Green
Mr. Richard Gollins
Mr. John Gilbeard
Mr. Wiltthire Gwynn
Mr. Nathaniel Gun
Mr. Richard Gough
Mr. George Grigg.

H.
William Holford, D.G.M. A.M.

Doétor William Henning
Mr. John Hutchins

Mr. George Hutchinfon
Mr. Levi Bart

Mr. Thomas Hamilton
Mr. Robert Hughes, 2 Boots
Mr. Phelemy Hanlan
Mr. Thomas Humber
Mr, John Hare

Mr. Benjamin Hobbs
Mr. James Heffernon
Mr. Samuel Hutchins

Mr. William Healy
Mr. William Hall
Mr. Oliver Hurft
Mr. John Holt

Mr. James Hayes
Mr. Thomas Howard
Mr. James Hagan
Mr, John Hilt.

J.
Mr. John Jackfon, S.G.W.
A. M.°

Mrs. Elizabeth Jackfon
Mrs. Sarah Jones

Mr. Barent Jacobs

Mr. Abraham Jacob
Mr. Thomas Jordan
Mr. Mordicai Ifaacs
Mr. William Joyce
Mr. Thomas James
Mr. Barnard Jackfon.

K.

Mr. Richard Kirk

Mr. William Kelly
Mr. Ifaac Kettel

Mr. Pafchan Kufe

Mr. Alexander Kenedy.

L.
Mr. Alexander Legerwood
Mr. Thomas Lloyd
Mr. Martin Lyon
Mr. David Lyon
Mr. Edward Lee
Mr. William Lay
Mr. John Leech
Mr. Edward Lyon
Mr. Daniel Laycock.
Mr. John Littlewood

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES,

M.

Enfign Ea M‘Intofh,

j.GW. A.M.
Mr. Alexander M‘Dougall
Mr, John Millar
Mr. John Matthews
Mr. Nicholas Manfield
Mr. James M‘Clenan
Mr. John M‘Coy
Mr. Peter Mufket
Mr. Denis M‘Guire
Mr. Jofeph Martin
Mrs. Elizabeth Mondet
Mr. Richard Moore
Mr. John Mafters
Mr. Richard Mofs
Mr. John M‘Cormick
Mr. Matthew Mullady
Mr. John Mafterman
Mr. George Morgan.

N.
Mr. John Nowlan
Mr. John Nowlan

oO.
Mr. Noblet O Keeffe
Mr. Emanuel Oldham

P.
Mr. John Pick
Mr. Valentine Pryce
Mr. Epheraim Proéter
Mr. Thomas Pearfall
Mr. Michael Pillon
Mr. Joannes Pechin
Mr. James Pedley.

Mr. James Quin

R.
Mr. William Rankia D, G. M.

A.M. 2 Books
Mr. Jofeph Read
Mr. John Rutherford
Mr. John Ray
Mr. Peter Reylands
Mr. Francis Richmond
Mr. Jonathan Radford
Mr. Richard Radford

S.

Mr, Thomas Sargent
Mr. James Savage
Mr. Thomas Sneath
Mr. te Say
‘Mr. Richard Scott
Mr. John Spencer
wee John Gold Smith

Mr. William Sherry
Mr. James Swit
Mr. Lion Selomon
Mr. Sibley
Mr. George Swinerton
Mr. Richard Storer
Mr. Jofeph Steel
Mr. Strong
Mr. Michael Lewis Shaw
Mr. William Shrevee
Mr. John Stanton.

T.

Enfign John Templeton
Mr. Owen Tewdor
Mr. Daniel Tuffnel
Mr. Gilbert Tuffnel
Mr. Richard Turner
Mr. James Towbin
Mr. Mayer Tobias

Mr. William Tarr

SuBSCRIBERS NAMES.

Mr. Robert ‘Turner
Mr. Richard Tongue
Mr. Edmund Thomas

V

Mr. Edward Vaughan G. M.

A.M.
Mr. Edward Vaux

Ww

Mr. James Wade

Mr. John White

Mr. John Wingrove
Mrs. Anne Whitehall
Mr. John Wells

Mr. Samuel Williams
Mrs. Elizabeth Williams
Mr. Ifrael Wolfe

Mr. John Wynne

Mr. William Waters
Mr. Thomas Wood, junior
Mr. Edward Webb

Mr. Willian W heatcraft

Mr. Thomas Warren

Mr. Fenwick Widdrington
Mr. Robert Whitehall
Mr. Francis Wingrave
Mr. Jofeph Wright

Mrs. Elizabeth Whitaker
Mrs. Elizabeth Wallworth
Mr. Robert Whitaker
Mr. Anthony Wood

Mr. Henry Walworth
Mr. Samuel Watfon

Mr. James Watfon

Mr. Pcter Walker

Mr. Benjamin Wilfmith
Mr. Mich2el Whitlock
Mr. James Wharmby
Mr. William Wallace
Mx. Partrick Wall

Mr. Jofeph Wright

¥i.
Mr. Vhomas Yardley
Mr. Aaron Young.

THE

GRBERGESS CHS

The CONTENTS,

T HE Excellency of SECEEEYs and with what Care ic is
to be kept —_ _ page «£

The Character of a juft and ftedfatt Man — _
Free-Mafons fuperior tq all athers in concealing Secrets 16
e Caufe or Motive of the firft Inftitutign of Free-

Masonry _— — — ibid,
Its great Ufe to the “World — — — 4
The Principles of the Craft _~ — 414

The Benefits arifing from a ftrié& Obiwane: thereof 1
What Sort of Men ought to be panicianed into the Mys-

TERY — 18
‘What Sort of V Mafons are re fit to govern Lodars — QE
Behaviour in and out of the Lodge — — 22

Tue OLD CHARGES,
Charge 1. Concerning Gop and Religion

25
Charge 11. Of the ¢ fupreme Magirm:, fopreme and and fubor
dinate

— 2

Charge 111. Conceming a Lodge — —— 27
Charge Iv. Of Matters, Wardens, Reloes, and Appren-
tices _ — 28
Charge v. Of the Management of the C rath i in working 29
Charge vi. Concerning “Mafon’s Behayiour = 39
Charge vir. Concerning Law-Suits % — = 22
A fhort Charge to a new admitted Brother —— 33
The Manner of conffituting a new Lodge — 39

A Prayer faid in Fecvifh Lodges — 43
A Prayer ufed amoneft the primitive Chriftian Mafons 45
Another Prayer, and that which is molt ufed at making or

opening = poor = — jbid.
AwaBatu Oram, the Royal Arch Prayer —— 46

The

The CONTENTS.

The general Regulations of the Free and Accepted Ma-
fons — — — st

1, Shewing the Grand-Officers Power in all Lodges, and
their Jewels, &c.

1, Shewing who ought to prefide in the Abfence of the
Matter of a particular Lodge.

mt. Tranfactions of Lodges to. be written in their Books,
and Lodges removed fhall be reported to the Grand-
Secretary.

1v. The Age of Perfons when made Free-Mafons, and
what Number fhould be made at 2 Time.

v. Of Difpenfations, and how to obtain them.

v1. Concerning Vifitors.

wir. Concerning the admitting a new Member, with Re-
fpect to a particular Jodge, and the grand Fund. ;

yur, Concerning clandeftine Makings, and how the Tranf:
.greffors are to be treated.

ix. The Manner of moving a Lodge from one Houfe to
another.

x. Congregated Lodges have Power to inftruct their Officers
when going to the Grand Lodge.

xr, All Regular Lodges ought to follow one Method, &e.

xr, Shewing who are the Members of the Grand Lodge.

xitt. The Bufinefs of the Grand Lodge, the freafurer, Se+

_ retary, and Members of the Grand-Lodge.

xiv. Shewing who fhould fill the Chair inthe Grand+
Mafters Abfence.

xv. Shewing who fhould fill the Grand-Wardens Places
when they are abfent.

xvi. oe Applications fhould be made to the Deputy Grand-
Matter.

xvi, A Grand-Officer may be an Officer of a particular
Lodge, but not aét as fuch in the Grand Lodge.

xviit. Who fhould fupply the Deputy’s Abfence, and how

' the Deputy and Grand-Wardens are to be chofen.

xix The Grand-Mafter abufing his Authority, how he is to
be treated.

xx. Conterning Grand Officers vifiting Lodges, and by
whom Lodges are to be conftituted;

xx1, Who

The CONTENTS

xxr. Who fhould fill the Grand-Mafter’s Place in his Ab
fence.

xxi1. Concerning meeting on St. Zobn’s Day.

xxii, Chufing and Inftalling Grand-Matfter.

xxiv. Concerning ditto.

xxv. The Grand-Mafter has Powet to chufe his Deputy,
and the Grand Locge can chufe Grand- Wardens,

xxvi. Inftallations by Proxy.

xxvit, In whofe Power it is to make New Regulations.

xxvi11. The Order of the Grand-Lodge, from Pag. 85 to 88.

The Regulations for Charity, as in Ireland and by York-

Come Boys, iet us more Liquor get —

Mafons in England _ — _ — 89
MASONS SONG sas

The Matfter’s Song — _— — 99
The Wardens Song _ _ — 100
The Fellow Crafts Song = — —_ — 101
The Enter’d *Prentice’s Song _. — 103
The Deputy Grand Mafter’s Song _ — 105
The Grand Wardens Song _ — 106
The ‘Treafurer’s Song = — _ — 107
The Secretary’s Song, 108
As I at Wheeler’s Lodge one Night — — uy
A. Mafon’s Daughter fair and young _ — 116
A Health to our Sifters let’s drink —_— — 117
An Ode on Mafonry — — 141
As Mafons once on Sbhinar’s Plat _ —- 148
Actend loving Brethren and to me give ear — 160
Attend, attend the Strains _ — 163
An Ode — —_ _ — 166
An Ode _— — 174
By Mafons Art th’ af afpiring Domes _ — et
Come are you prepared — — 120
Come, come, my Brethren dear, _ — 127.
Come follow, follow me _ — — 128
, = 34g
Come fill up a Bumper and let it go round — 170
Come ye Elves that be ~ =~ — 186

The CONTENTS

Epilogues — — — —~ from1g5 to

From the Depths let us raife — ae
Glorious Craft which fires the Mind -- —
Guardian Genius of our Art divine ~ — as
Hail facred Art by Heaven defigned — oe
How bleft are we from Ignoranee free’d _
Hail fecret Art by Heaven defigned — =
Hail Mafonry divine _
How happy a Mafon whofe Bofom ftill flows —
If Unity be good in every Degree — _—
King Solomon that wife Projecture — aes
Let malicious People cenfure, nies par
Let Mafons be merry each Night when they m meet
Let worthy Brethren all combine ~ —
On you who Mafonry difpenfe _ ~<e
Of all Inftitutions to form well the Mind Soe
Once I was blind and cou’d not fee mere at
Prologus — —- -— -+ from 189 to
Some Folks have with curious Impertinence ftrove —
Sing to the Honour of thofe — as
See in the Eaft the Mafter plac’d = —
Solomon’s Temple an Oratorio — on
The curious Vulgar could never devife —
To the Science that Virtue and Art do maintain = —
The Progrefs of Mafonry — _ rae
* Tis Mafonry unites Mankind ~- aie
To Mafonry your Voices raife -- ne
Urania fing the Art divine — oe
We have no idle prating —
We Brethren Free-Matons let’s mark the great Name
What though they call us Mafon Fools — —
With Plum, Level, and Square to work let’s prepare
When Earth’s Foundation firft was laid hd
With Harmony and flowing Wine — ons
When Mafonry by Heaven’s Defign -- ot
With cordial Hearts let’s drink a “Health a
Whoever wants Wifdom muft with fome delight —
You People who laugh at Mafons draw near = ——

Ye ancient Sons of Tyre 2 Ss ati

200
153
125
140
176
167
119
177
180
179
132
126
178
181
110
134
158
195
112
118
162
201
121
135
144
157
164
171
115
123
124
130
137
151
180
183
185
113
152

MEN BENE

Lerisee pita airs

AHIMAN REZON.

>E FORE we enter into the Caufe

© or Motive of the firft Inftitution of

iq Vree-Mafonry, it is necefiary in

fome meafure to fhew the Exccl-

it lency of Secrecy, and with what
SFY GEA Care it is to be kept.

One of the principal Parts that makes a Man be
deemed wife, is his intelligent Strength and Ability
to cover and conceal fuch honeft Secrets as are com-
mitted to him, as well as his own ferious Affairs.
And whoever will perufe facred and profane Hiftory,
fhall find a great Number of virtuous Attempts (in
Peace and War) that never reached their defigned
Ends, but were fhaken into Shivers and defeated,
only through Defe& of fecret Concealment ; and
yet, befides fuch unhappy Prevention, infinite Evils
have thereby enfued, But before all other Examples,
B let

2 AHIMAN REZON.

let us confider that which excels all the reft, deriv’d
ever from God himfelf. Who {0 efpecially preferves
his own Secrets to himfelf, never letting any Man
know what fhould happen on the Morrow; nor
could the wife Men in Ages paft, divine what fhould
befall us in this Age: Whereby we may readily dif-
cern, that God himfelf is well pleafed with Secrecy.
And although (for Man’s good) the Lord has been
pleafed to reveal fome Things, yet it is impoffible at
any Time to change or alter his Determination, in
regard whereof the reverend wife Men of ancient
Times, evermore affected to perform their Intentions

fecretly.
WE read that Cato the Cenfor often faid to his
Friends, that of three Things he had good Reafon
to repent, if ever he neglected the true Performance
of all or any one of them: The firft, if he divulged
any Secret; the fecond, if he adventured on the
Water when he might ftay on dry Land; and
thirdly, if he fhould let any Day neglettedly efcape
him without doing fome good Action. The latter
two are well worthy of Obfervation ; but the firft
concerns our prefent Undertaking. Alexander hav-
ing received divers Letters of great Importance from
his Mother, after he had read them, in the Prefence
of none but his dear Friend Epbeftion and himfelf,
he drew forth his Signet which fealed his moft pri-
vate Letters, and without fpeaking fet it upon Ephe-
fiion’s Lips; intimating thereby, that he in whofe
Bofom

AHIMAN REZON. 3

Bofom a Man buries his Secrets, fhould have his
Lips locked up from revealing them.

Amonc the reft it may not be difagreeable to the
Reader to perufe the following Story, as told by
Alius Gellius in his Attich Nights, and by Macro-
bius in his Saturnals.

Tue Senators of Rome, at their ufual fitting in
the Senate-Houfe, had conftituted a Cuftom among
themfelves, that each Brother Senator who had a
Son, fhould be admitted with his Father to abide in
the Senate-Houfe during their fitting, or depart if
Occafion required; nor was this Favour general,
but extended only to Noblemens Sons, who were
tutored in fuch a Manner as enabled them to become
wife Governors, capable of keeping their own Se-
crets. About this Time it happened that the Sena-
tors fat in Confultation of a very important Caufe, fo
that they ftayed much longer than ufual, and the
Conclufion referred to the following Day, with ex-
prefs Charge of Secrecy in the mean Time. Among
the other Noblemens Sons who had been at this
weighty Bufinefs, was that faithful Youth the Son of
the grave Papirius, whofe Family was one of the
moft noble and illuftrious in all Rome.

Tue young Lad being come home, his Mother
(as moft of the Fair-Sex, are highly affected with
Novelty) intreated him to tell her what ftrange Cafe
had been that Day debated in the Senate, that had
Power to detain them fo long beyond their uftal
Hour: The virtuous and noble Youth courtioufly

B2 told

4 AHIMAN REZON.

told her that it was a Bufinefs not in his Power to
reveal, he being in a folemn Manner commanded to
Silence: Upon hearing this Anfwer, her Defires be-
came more earneft in ftricter Enquiries into the Cafe,
and nothing but Intelligence thereof could any way
content her : So that firft by fair Speeches and En-
treaties, with liberal Promifes, fhe endeavoured ‘to
break open this poor little Cafket of Secrecy: But
finding thofe Efforts in vain, to Stripes and violent
Threats was her next Flight; becaufe Force may
compel, where Lenity cannot.

_ Tue admired noble Spirit finding a Mother's
Threats to be very harfh, but her Stripes more bitter
than any Thing befide ; comparing his Love to her
as his Mother, with the Duty he owed to his Fa-
ther; the one mighty, but the other impulfive; he
lays her and her fond Conceit in one Scale; his Fa-
ther, his own Honour, and the folemn Injunctions
to Secrecy, in the other Scale; and finding her in-
trinfic Weight as being his Mother, but lighter than
Wind being thus gene out of herfelf. Whetting
his tender Wit upon the fandy Stone of her edging
Importunity, to appeafe her, and preferve his own
Honour by remaining faithful, he thus refolved
her.

Mapa, and dear Mother, ‘you may well blame
the Senate for their long fitting, at leaft for calling
in Queftion a Cafe fo impertinent; for except the
Wives of the Senators be admitted to confult there-
on, there can be no Hope of aConclufion: I fpeak

this

AHIMAN REZON. .

but out of my young Apprehenfion, for I know
their Gravity may eafily confound me; and yet,
whether Nature or Duty fo inftru&t me, I cannot
tell: But to them it feems neceffary, for the Increafe
of People, and for the public Good, that every Se-
natur fhould be allowed two Wives ; or otherwife,
their Wives two Hufbands: I thall hardly under
one Roof call two Men by the Name of Father; I
had rather call two Women by the Name of Mother.
This is the Queftion, Mother ; and To-morrow it
muft have Determination.

Tue Mother hearing this, and his feeming un-
willing to reveal it, took it for infallible Truth: Her
Blood was quickly fired, and Rage enfued. I need
not put the Reader in mind that fuch fudden Heats
feldom admit of Confideration ; but on the contrary,
hurry the Senfes and Faculties further to Rathnefs,
and other Follies ; by which they are rendered in-
capable of doing themfelves fuch good Acticns, or
Service, as their Cafe often require : So without re-
quiring any other Counfel, the immediately {ent to
the other Ladies and Matrons of Rome, to acquaint
them with this weighty Affair, wherein the Peace
and Welfare of their whole Lives was fo nearly
concerned. This melancholy News blew up fuch a
brain-fick Paffion, that the Ladies imniediately af-
fembled ; and though (fome falfely fay) that a Parlia-
ment of Women are very feldom governed by one
Speaker, yet this Affair being fo urgent, the Hafte
as pertinent, and the Cafe (on their Behalf ) meerly

in-

6 AHIMAN REZON.

indulgent, the revealing Woman muft prolocute for
herfelf and the reft. And on the next Morning fuch
a Din was at the fenate Door, for Admiffion to fit
with their Hufbands in this wonderous Confultation,
as if all Rome had been in an Uproar, Their Minds
muft not be known before they have Audience;
which (though againft all Order) being granted,
{uch an Oration was made by the Woman Speaker,
with Requeft that Women might have two Hufbands
rather than Men two Wives, who could {carcely con-
tent onc, Gc. Upon the Riddle’s Solution, the noble
Youth was highly commended for his Fidelity, and
the Ladies greatly confounded, and departed very
hkely with -blufhing Cheeks. Neverthelefs, to avoid
the like Inconveniency for the future, it was deter-
mined that thence forward they fhould bring their
Sons no more into the Senate ; only young Papirius,
who was freely accepted, and his Secrecy and dif-
creet Policy not only applauded, but himfelf with
Titles of Honour dignified and rewarded.

Nor fhould we forget the faithful Anaxarchus
(as related by P/iny, in his feventh Book and twenty-
third Chapter) who was taken in order to force his
Secrets from him, bit his Tongue in the Midft be-
tween his Teeth, and afterwards threw it in the
Tyrant’s Face.

Tue Athenians had a Statue of Brafs, which they
bowed to; the Figure was made without a Tongue,
to declare Secrecy thereb

LIKE-

AHIMAN REZON. 7

Likewise the Egyptians worthipped Harpecrates,
the God of Silence ; for which Reafon he is always
pidtured holding his Finger on his Mouth.

Tue Romans had a Goddefe of Silence named
Angerona, which was pictured like Harpocrates,
holding her Finger on her Mouth, in Token of
Secrecy.

Tue Servants of Plancus are much commended,
becaufe no Torment could make them confefs the
Secret which their Mafter intrufted them with.

Likewise the Servant of Cato the Orator was
cruelly tormented, but nothing could make him re-
veal the Secrets of his Mafter.

Quintus Curtius tells us, that the Perfans held it
as an inviolable Law to punifh moft grievioufly (and
much more than any other Trefpafs) him that dif
covered any Secret; for Confirmation thereof, he,
fays that King. Darius, being vanquifhed by Alexander,
had made his Efcape fo far as to hide himfelf where
he thought he might reft fecure ; no Tortures what-
foever, or liberal Promifes of Recompence, could
prevail with the faithful Brethren that knew it, or
compel them to difclofe it to any Perfon: And fur-
thermore fays, that no Man ought to commit any
Matter of Confequence to him that cannot truly keep
a Secret.

Horace, among his continual Laws, would have
every Man keep fecret whatfoever was done or faid:
For this Reafon the Athenians were wont (when
they met at any Feaft) that the moft ancient among

them

8 AHIMAN. REZON.

them fhould fhew every Brother the Door whcreat
they entered, faying, Take Heed that not fo much
as one Word pafs out from hence, of whatfoever
fhall here be acted or f{poken.

Tue firft Thing that Pythagoras taught his Scho-
lars was to be filent, therefore (for a certain Time)
he kept them without fpeaking, to the End that
they might the better Icarn to preferve the valuable
Secrets he had to communicate to them, and never
to fpeak but when Time required, expreffing there-
by that Secrecy was the rareft Virtue: Would toGod
that the Mafters of our prefent Lodges would put
the fame in Practice. :

Arifiotle was demanded what Thing appeared
eoft difficult to him ; he anfwered, to be fecret and
filent.

To this Purpofe St. mbrofe, in his Offices,
placeth among the principal Foundations of Virtue,
the patient Gift of Silence.

Tue wife King Solomon fays.in his Proverbs, that
a King ought not to drink Wine, becaufe Drunken-
nefs is an Enemy to Secrecy; and in his Opinion,
he is not worthy to reign that cannot keep hss own
Secrets ; he farthermore fays, that he which difcovers
Secrets is a Traitor, and he. that conceals them is a
faithful Brother : He likewife fays, that he that re-
fraineth his Tongue is wife: And again, he that
keeps his Tongue, keeps his Soul. I could men-
tion many other Circumftances of the Excellency of
Secrecy ; and I dare venture to fay that the greateft

Honour,

AHIMAN REZON. 9
Honour, Juftice, Truth, and Fidelity, has been al-
ways found arhongft thofe who could keep their
own and others Secrets; and this is moft nobly fet
forth by Horace, who fays:

The Man refolv’d and fteady to his Truft,
Inflexible to Ill, and obftinately juft ;

May the rude Rabble’s Infolence defpife,

Their fenfelefs Clamours and tumultuous Cries ;
The Tyrant’s Fiercenefs he beguiles,

And the ftern Brow and the harth Voice defies,
And with fuperior Greatnefs fmiles :

Not the rough Whirlwind, that deforms
Adria’s black Gulph, and vexes it with Storms ;
The ftubborn Virtue of his Soul can move:

Not the red /.:m of angry Jove,

That flings the Thunder from the Sky,

And gives it Rage to roar and Strength to fly.

Should the whole Frame of Nature round him break,
In Ruin and Confufion hurl’d ;

He unconcern’d wou’d hear the mighty Crack,
And ftand fecure amidft a falling World.

Tuererore I am of Opinion, that if Secrecy and
Silence be duly confidered, they will be found moft
neceffary to qualify 2 Man for any Bufinefs of Im-
portance : If this be granted, I am confident that no

C Man

10 AHIMAN REZON.

Man will dare to difpute that Free-Mafons are fupe-
tior to all other Men, in concealing their Secrets,
from Times immemorial ; which the Power of Gold,
that often has betrayed Kings and Princes, and fome-
times overturned whole Empires, nor the moft cruel
Punifhments could never extort the Secret (even)
from the weakeit Member of the whole Frater-
nity.

THEREFORE I humbly prefume it will of Confe-
quence be granted, that the Welfare and Good of
Mankind was the Caufe or Motive of fo grand an
Inftitution as Free-Mafonry (no Art yet ever being fo
extenfively ufeful) which not only tends to protect
its Members from external Injuries, but to polifh the
rufty Difpofitions of iniquitous Minds, and alfo to
detain them within the pleafant Bounds of true Re-
ligion, Morality, and Virtue ; for fuch are the Pre-
cepts of this Royal Art, that if thofe who have the
Honour of being Members thereof would but live
according to the true Principles of the Ancient Craft,
every Man that’s endowed with the leaft Spark of
Honour or Honefty, muft of courfe approve their
Actions, and confequently endeavour to follow their
Steps. And although very few or none of the Bre-
thren arrive to the Sublimity and beautiful Contri-
vance of Hiram Abif; yet the very Enemies of
Free-Mafonry muft own, that it is the moft re-

nowned Society that ever was, is now, or (perhaps)
ever will be upon Earth; the following true Def-
cription

AHIMAN REZON. II
cription of the Royal Art, will clearly fhew its great
Ufe to Mankind.

Wafte and irregular ftill the World had been,

A Profpe& rude not pleafant to be feen ;

Inclement Seafons would deftroy Mankind,

With Dog-Star’s Heat and Winter’s freezing Wind :
The greedy Savage, whofe Voice to human Ear
Ungrateful Sound, and fill the Heart with Fear:
Afpiring Warriors, Who could their Strength withhold ?
Their daring Infults and Attempts moft bold ?
Without Mafonry, Our glorious Shicld,

We to all thofe and many more mutt yicld.

Hail! mighty ART, theu gracious Gift of FIcaven,
To aid Mankind by our Creator given :

It was you alone that gave the Ark its Form,
Which fav’d the Faithful from the impending Storm ;
When finful Cowans were grov’ling in the Tide,
The Mafons Ark triumphantly did ride

O’er mighty Waves, nor car’d they where it fteer’d
Till Floods abated and dry Land appear’d :

On Arrarat’s Mount, after the mighty Storm,
There ftood their Ark and open’d Lodge in Form ;
There the Mafon, of his own Accord,

Built an Altar to the heavenly Lord ;

Return’d Thanks with offering Sacrifice,

Which pleas’d Jehovah ; and to himfcit he'cries,

C2 I ne’er

12

AHIMAN REZON.
I ne’er will curfe the Ground no more,
Nor {mite the Living as I’ve done before :
While Earth remain this Bleffing [ll beftow,
A proper Time when you your Seed may fow ;
The Harveft-Time to blefs the lab’ring Swain,
With fruitful Crops for all his Care and Pain :
Nights, Days, and Seafons fhall furround this Ball,
Nor fhall they ceafe until the End of all :
And to confirm my Promife unto thee,
Amidft the Clouds my Bow a Witnefs be ;
An heav’nly Arch fhews how God fav’d the Lives
Of Mafons four, likewife their happy Wives.
Such are the Bleffings of each Time and Seafon,
Which God has promis’d to that Mafter-Mafon ;
By which we fee that mighty Things were done _
By this great Art, fince firft the World began. -
What Mortal living, whether far or near,
Arcund the Globe within the heavenly Sphere,
Can name one Art fo much by God approv’d,
As Mafonry in David whom he lov’d ;
Witnefs Moriah where God appear’d to Man,
Ana gave the Prince the holy Temple’s Plan;
Which Charge wife Solomon after did fulfil,
By Tyre’s Aid and Hiram’s mighty Skill.
This is the Art that did the World excel,
And pleas’d the Lord of Hofts ta come and dwell

Amongt

AHIMAN REZON., 12
Amongft the Mafons ; who did the Temple frame,
To worfhip God and keep his facred Name.

By Mafons Art afpiring Domes appear,
Where God is worfhip’d ftill in Truth and Fear :
By Mafons Art the greedy Miler’s Breatt,
(Tho’ Iron-bound, impenetrable as his Cheft)
Compaffion feels and values not his Store,
And freely gives what he ne’er thought before :
By Mafons Art the injurious Tongue doth fall
B:fore the Throne, when awful Silence call :
By Mafons Art the Wings of loofe Defire,
Are foon clipt fhort and cannot foar no higher ;
The lafcivious Mind the Ancient Craft reftrain,
From immodeft Bents, unlawful and profane :
By Mafons Art the puny foppifh Afs,
(Mankind’s Difgrace, and Sport of ev’ry Lafs)
Soon quits his Folly, and more wifer grown,
Looks on himfelf as one before unknown;
By Mafons Art the proud Enfigns of State,
(Ambition’s Nurs’ry, and her lofty Seat)
Are deemed vain and ufelefs Toys,
Free-Mafons prize more folid Joys,

But methinks I hear fome of my Readers fay,
furely if Free-Mafonry be fuch as it is here repre~
fented, the Brotherhood moft certainly are the hap-
pieft Men living ; and vet, on the contrary, we often

miect

14 AHIMAN REZON.

meet fome very miferable, others very great Knaves,
and a number of ignorant, illiterate, ftupid Fools of
the Society ; or at leaft would endeavour to make the
World believe fo. This fhall be duly confidered,
and anfwered, in its proper Place hereafter. In the
mean Time I am well affured, that none but Stran-
gers to the Craft, and ungenerous Enemies to good
Society, will doubt the Veracity of what is here in-
ferted concerning Free-Mafonry. And for further
Satisfaction to my female Readers, and fuch of the
male Sex as have not the Honour of being initiated
into the Myftery, I here beg Leave to treat of the
Principles of the Craft (fo far as comes under the
Limitation of my Pen) which I hope will meet with
a juft Admiration, becaufe they are founded upon
Religion, Morality, Brotherly-Love, and good Fel-
lowfhip.

A Mason is obliged by his Terure to believe
firmly in the true Worthip of the eternal God, as
well as in all thofe facred Records which the Digni-
taries and Fathers of the Church have compiled and
publifhed for the Ufe of all good Men: So that no
one who rightly underftands the Art, can poffibly
tread in the irreligious Paths of the unhappy Liber-
tine, or be induced to follow the arrogant Profeffors
of Atheifm or Deifm; neither is he to be {tained
with the grofs Errors of blind Superftition, but may
have the Liberty of embracing what Faith he {hall
think proper, provided at all Times he pays a due

Re-

AHIMAN REZON. 5

Reverence to his Creator, and by the World deals
with Honour and Honefty, ever making that golden
Precept the Standard-Rule of his Actions, which
engages, To do unto all Men as he would they
fhould do unto him: For the Craft, inftead of en-
tering into idle and unneceffary Difputes concerning
the different Opinions and Perfuafions of Men, ad-
mits into the Fraternity all that are good and true ;
whereby it hath brought about the Means of Re-
conciliation amongft Perfons, who, without that Af-
fiftance, would have remained at perpetual Vari-
ance.

A Mason is a Lover of Quiet ; is always fubject
to the civil Powers, provided they do not infringe
upon the limited Bounds of Religion and Reafon :
And it was never yet known, that a real Craftfman
was concerned in any dark Plot, Defigns, or Con-
trivances againft the State, becaufe the Welfare of
the Nation is his peculiar Care; fo that from the
higheft to the loweft Step of Magiftracy due Regard
and Deference is paid by him.

Bur as Mafonry hath at feveral Times felt the
injurious Effeéts of War, Bloodfhed, and Devafta-
tion, it was a ftronger Engagement to the Craftf-
men to act agreeable to the Rules of Peace and
Loyalty, the many Proofs of which Behaviour hath
occafioned the ancient Kings and Powers to protect
and defend them. But if a Brother fhould be fo far
unhappy as to rebel againft the State, he would mect

with

16 AHIMAN REZON.

with no Countenance from his Fellows ; nor would
they keep any private Converfe with him, whereby
the Government might have Caufe to be jealous, or
take the leaft Umbrage.

A Mason, in Regard to himfelf, is carefully to
avoid all Manner of Intemperance or Excefs, which
might obftruct him in the Performance of the ne-
ceffary Duties of his laudable Profeffion, or lead him
into any Crimes which would reflect Dithonour upon
the ancient Fraternity.

He is to treat his Inferiors as he would have his
Superiors deal with him, wifely confidering that the
Original of Mankind is the fame; and though Ma-
fonry divefts no Man of his Honour, yet does the
Craft admit that ftrictly to purfue the Paths of Vir-
tue, whereby a clear Confcience may be preferved,
is the only Method to make any Man noble.

A Mason is to be fo far benevolent, as never to
fhut his Ear unkindly to the Complaints of wretched
Poverty; but when a Brother is oppreffed by Want,
he is in a peculiar Manner to liften to his Sufferings
with Attention ; in Confequence of which, Pity
muft flow from his Breaft, and Relief without Pre-
judice according to his Capacity.

A Mason is to pay due Obedience to the Au-
thority of his Mafter and prefiding Officers, and to
behave himfelf meekly amongft his Brethren ; nei-
ther neglecting his ufual Occupation for the Sake of
Company. in running from cne Lodge to another ;

nor

AHIMAN REZON. 17

nor quarrel with the ignorant Multitude, for thcir
rediculous Afperfions concerning it: But at his lei-
fure Hours he is required to ftudy the Arts and
Sciences with a diligent Mind, that he may not oniy
perform his Duty to his great Creator, but alfo to
his Neighbour and himfelf: For to walk humbly in
the Sight of God, to do Juftice, and love Mercy,
are the certain Charaéteriftics of a Real Free and
Accepted Ancient Mafon : Which Qualifications I
humbly hope they will poffefs to the End of Time ;
and I dare venture to fay, that every true Brother
will join with me in, Amen.

Tue Benefits arifing from a ftri€t Obfervance of
the Principles of the Craft, are fo apparent that I
muft believe every good Man would be fond to
profefs and practife the fame ; becaufe thofe Princi-
ples tend to promote the Happinefs of Life, as they
are founded on the Bafis of Wifdom and Virtue.

In the firft Place; our Privileges and Inftruc-
tions, when rightly made Ufe of, are not only pro-
duétive of our Welfare on this Side of the Grave,
but even our eternal Happinefs hereafter.

For the Craft is founded on fo folid a Bafis that
it will never admit Blafphemy, Lewdnefs, Swearing,
Evil-Plotting, or Controverfy ; and tho’ they are not
all of the fame Opinion in Matters of Faith, yet they
are ever in one Mind in Matters of Mafonry ; that is,
to labour juftly, not to eat any Man’s Bread for

Nought,

18 AHIMAN REZON.

Nought, but to the utmoft of our Capacity to love
and ferve each other, as Brethren of the fame Houf-
hold ought to do: Wifely judging, that it is as great
an Abfurdity in one Man to quarrel with another be-
caufe he will not believe as he does, as it would be
in him to be angry becaufe he was not exactly of
the fame Size and Countenance, &c.

THEREFORE to afford Succour to the Diftreffed,
to divide our Bread with the induftrious Poor, and
to put the mifguided Traveller into his Way, are
Qualifications inherent in the Craft and fuitable to its
Dignity, and fuch as the worthy Members of that
great Body have at all Times ftrove with indefatigable
Pains to accomplith.

Tuese and fuch like Benefits, arifing from a ftri@
Obfervance of the Principles of the Craft (as Num-
bers of Brethren have lately experienced) if duly
confidered, will be found not only to equal but to
exceed any Society in being.

Ir fo, the worthy Members of this great and moft
ufeful Society, can never be too careful in the Elec-
tion of Members; I mean, a thorough Knowledge
of the Character and Circumftance of a Candidate
that begs to be initiated into the Myftery of Free-
Mafonry.

Upon this depends the Welfare or Deftruction
of the Craft; for as Regularity, Virtue, and Con-
cord, are the only Ornaments of human Nature,
(which is often too, prone to act in different Capaci-

ties)

AHIMAN REZON. 19
ties) fo that the Happinefs of Life depends, in a
great Meafure, on our own Election and a prudent
Choice of thofe Steps.

For human Society cannot fubfift without Con-
cord, and the Maintenance of mutual good Oji-
ces; for, like the working of an Arch of Stone, it
would fall to the Ground provided one Piece did net
properly fupport another.

In former Times every Man (at his Requeft) was
not admitted into the Craft, (tho’ perhaps of a good
and moral Reputation) nor allowed to fhare the Be-
nefits of our ancient and noble Inftitution, unlefs he
was endued with fuch Skill in Mafonry, as he might
thereby be able to improve the Art, either in Plan or
Workmanhhip ; or had fuch an Affluence of For-
tune as fhould enable him to employ, honour, and
protect the Craftfmen.

I would not be un-lerftood, by this, to mean that
no reputable Tradefmen fhould receive any of our
Benefits ; but, on the contrary, am of Opinion that
they are valuable Members of the Commonwealth,
and often have proved themfelves real O:naments to
Lodges.

Tuose whom I aim at, are the miferable Wretches
of Low-Life, (often introduced by excluded Men *)

D 2 fome

* That is, Men excluded from their Lcdges for Mifdemea-
nors, &c. who (finding themfelves deemed unworthy of fo noble
a Society) ftill endeavour to make the reft of Mankind believe,
that they are good and true, and have full Power and Authority

to

20 AHIMAN REZON.

fome of whom can neither read nor write ; and when
(by the Affiftance ot Mafonry) they are admitted in-
to the Company of their Betters, they too often act
beyond their Capacities; and under Pretence of
fearching for Knowledge, they fall into Scenes of
Gluttony or Drunkennefs, and thereby negle¢t their
neceflary Occupation and injure their poor Families,
who imagine they have a juft Caufe to pour out all
their Exclamations and Invectives againft the whole
Body of Free-Mafonry, without confidering or know-
ing that our Conftitutions and Principles are quite
oppofite to fuch bafe Proceedings.

Heke [think it neceffary to put in a Word of
Advice to {ome who may have an Inclination to be-
come Members of this ancient and honourable So-
ciety: Firft, they are to underfland that no Man
crn be made a regular Free-Mafon, but fuch as are
frec irom Bondage, of mature Age, upright in Body
and Limbs, and endued with the neceffary Senfes of
a Man: This has bcen the general Cuftom of Ma-
fons, in all Ages and Nations, throughout the known
World.

To

to admit, enter, and make Free-Mafons, when and wherefoever
they pleafe, &c. Thefe Traders, (though but few in Number)
affociate together, and for any mean Confideration admit any
Perfon to what little they know of the Craft. Little I fay, for I
honefily aflure my Readers, that no Man who rightly underftands
the Craft, can be fo blind as to trample over its ancient Land-
marks ; therefore all Victuallers, &¢ ought to be very cautious
of entertaining fuch, from whom neither Benefit nor Credit can
be expcRed, See New Regulation, VILL

AHIMAN REZON. 21

To this I beg Leave to add a Word or two: The
Perfons to whom I now fpeak, are Men of fome
Education, and an honeft Character; but in low
Circumftances : I fay, let them firft confider their
Income and Family, and know that Free-Mafonry
requires Ability, Attendance, and a good Appear-
ance, to maintain and fupport its ancient and ho-
nourable Grandeur. I could fay a great deal more
on this Point, but I think the Regulations are fuf-
ficient, and therefore refer the Reader to the Perufal
of them.

Tue next Thing to be confidered is the Choice of
Officers to rule and govern the Lodge, according to
the ancient and wholefome Laws of our Conftitution ;
and this is a Matter of great Concern, for the Offi-
cers of a Lodge are not only bound to advance and
promote the Welfare of their own particular Lodge,
but alfo whatfoever may tend to the Good of the
Fraternity in general.

THEREFORE no Man ought to be nominated or
put in fuch Election, but fuch as by his known Skill
and Merit, is deemed worthy of Performance, viz.
He mutt be well acquainted with all the private and
public Rules and Orders of the Craft; he ought to
be ftri@ly honeft, humane of Nature, patient in In-
juries, modeft in Converfation, grave in Counfel and
Advice, and (above all) conftant in Amity and faith-
ful in Secrecy.

Sucre

pap) AHIMAN REZON.

Sucn Candidates well deferve to be chofen the
Rulers and Governors of their refpective Lodges, to
whom the Members are to be courteous and obe-
dient, and, by their wife and ancient Dictates, may
jearn to difpife the over-covetous, impatient, conten-
tious prefumptious, arrogant, and conceited Prattlers,
the Bane of human Society.

Here I cannot forbear faying, that I have known
Men whofe Intentions were very honeft, and with-
out any evil defign commit great Errors, and fome-
times been the Deftruction of good Lodges; and
this occafioned by their Brethren hurrying them in-
difcreetly into Offices, whercin their flender Know-
ledge of Mafonry rendered them incapable of exe-
cuting the Bufinefs committed to their Charge, to
the great Detriment of the Craft and their own
Difhonour.

AmoncsT the Qualities and Principles of the
Craft, I have given a Hint concerning the Behaviour
of a Mafon in the Lodge, to which I beg he may
add the few following Lines, vzz. he is to pay due
Refpect, aad be obedient (in all reafonable Matters)
to the Mafter and prefiding Officers: He muft not
curfe, fwear, nor offer to lay Wagers; nor ufe any
Jewd or unbecoming Language, in Derogation of
GOD’s Name, and Corruption of good Manners;
nor behave him(elf ludicroufly, nor jeftingly, while
the Lodge is engaged in what is ferious and folemn:
Neither is he to introduce, fupport, nor mention any

Dif-

AHIMAN REZON. 23

Difpute or Controverfy about Religion or Polit'cks ;
nor force any Brother to eat, drink, or ftay againit
his Inclination ; nor do or fay any Thing that may
be offenfive, or hinder a free and innocent Conver-
{ation ; leaft he fhould break the good Harmony, and
defeat the laudable Defigns and Purpofes, of the an-
cient and honourable Fraternity.

Anp I honeftly recommend Free-Mafonry, as the
moft fovereign Medicine to purge out the above, or
fuch other Vices; and regular Lodges, as the only
Seminaries where Men (in the moft pleafant and
cleareft Manner) may hear, underftand, and learn
their Duty to God; and alfo to their Neighbours,
And this without the Multiplicity of {pitetul and
malicious Words, long Arguments, or fierce De-
bates ; which have been made Ufe of, among mif-
taken Mortals, upwards of a thoufand Years paft:
And inftead of uniting Men in one facred Band (as
the Servants of God, and Brethren of the fame Houf-
hold) have divided them into as many different Opi-
nions, as there were (not only Languages, but even)
Men at the Confufion of Badel.

As to the Behaviour of the Brethren when out of
Lodge, I hope the fhort Space between each Lodge-
Night will not admit of Forgetfulnefs of the De-
cency and good Decorum obferved in the Lodge,
which may ferve them as an unerring Rule for their
Behaviour and Condué¢t in all other Companies and
Places ; and like the worfhipful difcreet Mafter of a

Lodge,

24 AHIMAN REZON.

Lodge, rule, govern, and inftru& their Families at
home in the Fear of God and Love of their Neigh-
bours, while they themfelves imitate the Member’s
Obedience, Gc. in paying due Refpect to their Su-
periors.

Tuese few Hints may ferve to put the Brethren
in Mind of the Duty incumbent on them as Free-
Mafons ; and likewile, how to behave themfelves in
fuch a Manner as may be acceptable to God, agree-
able to the Principles of Mafonry, and much to
their own Honcur: But for further Satisfaction to
my Readers in general, I fhall here infert the feve-
ral old Charges of Free and Accepted Mafons.

bees 2 3

| shocks Repke heokes sKookeokos
Bh ear hiro ie POOR REET ae
+04. tee +ee atts re
+
+

uf i
sutimwigud?

Be te = tat if x Sak ix td at 2
EA
oF

&
g ae ee &
WSucg. stir bart ears 4 fox e

THE

OLD CHARGES

OF THE

FREE and ACCEPTED

MAS ON S.

RHncoagcoso ctachocHootooho ooo ofa cho opooke check ofc ofc chic kc ofoohooke cfc ao

CHARGE I
Concerning GOD and RELIGION.

sisteresee MASON is obliged by his Tenure to
+a me obferve the moral Law as a true Noa-
> cuipa*; and if he rightly underftands
ireterets the Craft, he will never be a ftupid
Atheift nor an irreligious Libertine, nor act againft

Confcience.
In antient Times, the Chriftian Mafons were
eharged to comply with the Chriftian Ufages of each
E Country

Sons of Noah, the firlt Name of Free-Mafons.

26 AHIMAN REZON.
Country where they travelled or worked ; being
tound in all Nations, even of divers Religions.

Tuey are generally charged to adhere to that
Religion in which all Men agree (leaving each Bro-
ther to his own particular Opinion) ; that is, to be
good Men and true, Men of Honour and Honetty,.
by whatever Names, Religions, or Perfuafions they
may be diftinguifhed ; for they all agree in the three
great Articles of Noah, enough to preferve the Ce-
ment of the Lodge.

Tuus Mafonry is the Center of their Union, and
the happy Means of confiliating Perfons that other-
wife muft have remained at a perpetual Diftance.

CHARGE IL

Of the Cryin Macissrate, fupreme
and fubordinate.

MASQN mutt Se a peaceable Subject, never

to be concerned in Plots againft the State, ner
difrefpectful to inferior Magiftrates. Of old, Kings,
Princes, and States, encouraged the Fraternity for
their Loyalty, whoever flourifhed moft in Times of
Peace; but though a Brother is not to be counte-
nanced in his Rebellion againft the State, yet, if
convicted of no other Crime, his Relation to the
Lodge remains indefeatible.

CHARGE

AHIMAN REZON, 27

CHAR GE — Wi,
Concerning a@ L O D G E,

JA Lodge is & Place where Mafons meet to work
. in; hence the Ariembly, or organized Body
of Free-Mafons, is called a Lodge; jutt as the Word
‘Church, is expreffive both of the Congregation and
‘the Place of Worfhip.

Every Brother ‘fhould belong to fome particular
Lodge, and cannot be abfent without incurring Cen-
dure, if not neceffarily detained.

Tur Men made Matons muft be free-born (or no
Bondmen), of mature Age, and of good Report ;
hail and found, not deformed or difmembered, at
the Time of their making; but noWoman, no
Eunuch.

Wuen Men of Quality, Eminence, Wealth, and
Learning, apply to be made, they are to be refpect-
fully accepted, after due Examination ; for tuch often
prove good Lords (or Founders) ot Work, aud will
not employ Cowans when true Mafons:can be had 5
they alto make the beft Officers of Lodges, and the
deft Defigners, to the Honour and Strength of the
Lodge; nay, from among them the Fraternity can
have a Noble Granp-Master ; but thofe Brethren
are equally fubject to the Charges and Regulations,
except in what more immediately concerns Operative
Maions.

E2 CHARGE

23 AHIMAN REZON

CHARGE IV.
Of Masters, Warpens, Fettows, and
APPRENTICES.

LL Preferments among Mafons, is grounded
upon real Worth and perfonal Merit only, not
upon Seniority. No Matter fhould take an Appren-
tice that is not the Son of honeft Parents, a perfect
Youth pwithout Maim or Defeét in his Body, and
capable of learning the Myfteries of the Art; that
1o the Lords (or Founders) may be well ferved, and
the Cratt not deipifed ; and that when of Age and
expert, he may become an Entered Apprentice, or
a Free-Maton of the loweft Degree ; and upon his
Improvements, a Fellow-Craft and a Mafter-Mafon,
capable to undertake the Lord’s Work.

Tue Wardens are chofen from among the Mafter-
Mafons, and no Brother can be a Matter of a Lodge
till he has acted as Warden fomewhere, except in
extraordinary Cafes, or when a Lodge is to be form-
ed, and none fuch to be had, for then three Mafter-
Matons, tho’ never Mafters nor Wardens of Lodges
before, may be conftituted Mafter and Wardens of
that new Lodge.

Bur no Number, without three Mafter-Mafons,
can form a Lodge; and none can be the Grand
Mafter, or a Grand Warden, who has not acted as
the Matter of 2 particular Lodge.

CHIARGE

AHIMAN REZON, 29

CHA RG EUYN,
Of the Management of the Carry iz
Working.

LL Mafons fhould work hard and honeftly on
+ working Days, that they may live reputably
and appear in a decent and becoming Manner on
Hollidays ; and likewife the working Hours appoint.
ed by Law, or confirmed by Cuftom, thall be ob-
ferved.

A Mafter-Mafon only muft be the Surveyor or
Matter of the Work, who fhall undertake the Lord’;
Work reafonably, fhall truly difpend his Goods as
if they were his own, and fhall noggive more Wages
than juft, to any Fellow or Apprentice.

Tue Wardens fhall be true both to Mafter and
Fellows, taking Care of all Things both within an.
without the Lodge, efpecially in the Matters Ab-
fence; and their Brethren thall obey them.

Tue ‘Matter and the Matons thall faithfully finith
the Lord’s Work, whether Tafk or Journey; nor
fhall they take the Work at Tatk, which hath been
accuftomed to Journcy.

None fhall fhow Envy at a Brother's Prafperity ;
nor fupplant him, nor put him out of his Work, if
capable to finifh it.

Att Mafons fhall meekly receive their Wages
without murmuring or Mutiny, and not desert the

Matter

AHIMAN REZON,

Nailer tilt the Lord’s Work is finifhed ; they nut
avoid ‘11 Language, calling each other Brother or
Fellow with much Courtefy, both within and with-
out the Lodge; they thall inftruét a younger Brother
to become bright 2nd expert, that the Lord’s Ma-
terials may not be ipeiled.

Bu Free and Accepted Mafons fhall not allow
Cowans to work with them, nor fhall they be em~-
ployed by Cowans without ar urgent Neceflity; and
even in that Cafe they muft not teach Cowans, but
mutt have a feparate Communication ; no Labourer
fhall be ernployed in the proper Work of Free-
Mafons.

CHARGE VI.
Concerning M AS ONS Benaviour.

1. Bebaviour in the Lodge before clofing.

OU mutt not hold private Committees, or {e-
parate Converiation, without Leave from the
Mafter; nor talk of any Thing impertinent, nor in-
terrupt the Mafter or Warden, or any other Brother
{peaking to the Chair ; nor act ludicroufly while the
Lodge is engaged in what is ferious and folemn ;
but you are to pay due Reverence to the Matter,

Wardens, and Fellows, and put them to worfhip.
Every Brother found guilty of a Fault, fhall ftand
to the Award of the Lodge, unlefs he appeals to. the
Grand Lodge, or unlefs a Lord’s Work is retarded ;

for then 2 particular Reference may be made.
No

AHIMAN REZON. 34
No private Piques, no Quarrels about Nations,
Families, Religions, or Politics, muit be brought
within the Doors of the Lodge ; for as Mafons, we
are of the oldeft Catholic Religion, before hinted ,
and of all Nations upon the Square, Level, and
Plumb ; and like our Predeceffors in all Ages, we
are refolved againft political Difputes, as contrary to
the Peace and Welfare of the Lodge.

2. Behaviour after the Lodge is cloftd, and the
Brethren not gone.

You may enjoy yourfelves with innocent Mirth,
treating one another according to Ability, but avoid-
ing all Excefs ; not forcing a Brother to cat or drink,
beyond his own Inclination (according to the old
Regulation of King hafuerus), nor hinder him
from going home when he pleafes; for though attcr
Lodge-Hours you are like other Men, yct the Blame
of your Excefs may be thrown upon the Fraternity,
though unjuftly.

3. Behaviour at meeting without Strangers, bit
not ina forned Lidge.

You are to falute one another as you have been,
or fhall be, inftructed ; freely communicating [iints
of Knowledge, but without ditcloting Secrets, un-
lefs to thofe that have given long Provf ef their Ta.
citurnity and Honour, and without derogating from
the Refpect due to any Brother, were he not a in-
fon ; for though ail Brothers. and Fellows are upon

the

42 AHIMAN REZON.

the Level, yet Mafonry divefts no Man of the Ho-
nour that was due to him before he was made a Ma-
fon, or that fhall become his Due afterwards; nay,
it rather adds to his Refpeét, teaching us to give
Honour to whom it is due, efpecially to a noble or
eminent Brother, whom we fhould diftinguifh from
all of his Rank and Station, and ferve him readily,
according to our Ability.

4. Behaviour in the Prefence of Strangers, ne:
Mafons.

You muft be cautious in your Words, Carriage,
and Motions ; fo that the moft penetrating Stranger
may not be able to difcover what is not proper to be
intimated : And the impertinent or enfnaring Que-
ftions, or ignorant Difcourfe of Strangers, muft be
prudently managed by Free-Mafons.

5- Behaviour at home, and in your Neghbaur
kod,

Masons ought to be moral Men, as above charg-
ed; confequently good Hufbands, good Parents, good
Sons, and good Neighbours ; not flaying too long
from home, and avoiding all Excefs ; yet wile Men
too, for certain Reafons known to them.

6. Bebavieur towards a Sereign Brother, o
Stranger.

You are cautioufly to examine him, as Prudence
thall dire&t you, that you may not be impoted on by
a Pre-

AHIMAN REZON. 33
a Pretender, whom you are to reject with Derition,
and beware of giving him any Hints ; but if you
difcover him to be true and faithful, you are to re-
fpe&t him as a Brother, and if in Want you ir: co
relieve him if you can, or elfe dire&t him ho,, ae
may be relieved: You muft employ him if you can,
or elfe recommend him to be employed; but you
are not charged to do beyond your Ability.

7. Behaviour bebind a Brother's Back, as well as
before his Face.

Free and Accepted Mafons have ever been charg-
ed, to avoid all Manner of flandering and backbiting
of true and faithful Brethren, or talking difrefpeét-
fully of a Brother’s Performance or Perfon, and all
Malice or unjuft Refentment; nay, you muit sot
fuffer any others to reproach an honeft Brothei, but
defend his Character as far as is confiftent with Ho-
nour, Safety, and Prudence ; though no farther.

CHARGE VII.
Concerning LAW-SUITS,

EF a Brother do you Injury, apply firft to your own

or his Lodge, and if you are not fasued vou
may appeal to the Grand Lodge; bit you mutt re
ver take a legal Courfe, till the Cauie can:o: be
otherwife decided ; for if the Atiur is only 'wveen
Majons, and about Maionry, Law-Suits ovzat to be

I pre-

34 AHIMAN REZON.
prevented by the good Advice of prudent Brethren,
who are the beft Referees of Differences.

Bur if that Reference is either impracticable or
unfuccefsful, and the Affair muft be brought into the
Courts of Law or Equity; yet ftill you muft avoid
all Wrath, Malice, and Rancour in carrying on the
Suit ; not faying or doing any thing that may hinder
the Continuance or Renewal of brotherly Love and
Friendfhip, which is the Glory and Cement of this
ancient Fraternity; that we may fhew to all the
World the benign Influence of Mafonry, as ail wife,
true, and faithful Brethren have done from the Be-
ginning of Time, and will do till Archite€ture fhall

be diffolved in the general Conflagration. Amen |
So mote it be!

*,* All thefe Charges you are to obferve, and alfe
thofe that fhall be communicated to you in @
Way that cannot be written.

A SHORT

ESRC eet BSE TR POH a DEER F
+ See Ne See See SS Se ee Ne 4
if MESS M ELS R StH XK SEP MB?
Spal + be PEC ad + Se PGC al se RCI SEG

GEEEEEEEEE EE TEEPE LEE EEE REET EE bs Odd GEE
A
SHORT CHARGE

To 2 new admitted

M A S O N.

BRoTueERr,

¥ KOU are now admitted (by the unanimous
¥ y & Content of our Lodge) a Fellow of our
re moft ancient and honourable Society ; an-
cient, as having fubfifted from 'Time immemurial ;
and honourable, as tending in every Particular to
render a Man fo who will be but conformable to its
glorious Precepts: The greateft Monarchs in all
Ages, as well of 4fa and Africa as of Europe, have
been Encouragers of the Royal Art; and many of
them have prefided as Granp-Masters over the
Mafons in their refpective Territories, not thinking
it any leflening to their Imperial Dignities, to level

F 2 them-

36 AHIMAN REZON.

them‘elves with their Brethren in Mafonry, and to
act 2° they did.

Tue World’s great Architect is our Supreme Maf-
ter; and the unerring Rule he has given us, is that
by which we work ; religious Difputes 2:c never fuf-
fered within the Ledge, for as Mafons we only pur-
fuc the univerfal Religion, or the Religion of Na-
ture; this is the Cement which unites the moft diffe-
rent Principles in one facred Bund, and brings toge-
ther thofe who were the moft diftant from one an-
cther.

THERE are three general Heads of Duty which
Majons ought aiways to inculcate, vz. to GOD,
our Neighbour, and ourfelves ; to GOD, in never
mentioning his Name but with that reverential Awe
which a Creature ought to bear to his Creator,
and to look upon him aiways as the Swmmum Bonum
which we came into the Wurld to enjoy, and accord-
ing to that View to regulate all our Purfuits ; to our
Neighbours, in acting upon the Square, or doing as
we would be done by; to ourfelves, in avoiding all
Intemperarce and Excefles, whereby we may be ren-
dered incapable of following our Work, or Ied into
Behaviour unbecoming our jaudable Profeffion, and
always keeping within due Bounds and free from all
Pollution.

In the State, a Mafon is to behave as a peaceable
and dutiful St:yjet, conforming chearfully to the
Government uncer which he lives,

Tie

AHIMAN REZON. 37

He is to pay a due Deference to his Superiors ,
and from his Inferiors he is rather to receive Honour,
with fome Reluétance, than to extort it: He is to be
a Man of Benevolence and Charity, not fitting down
contented while his Fellow-Creaturecs (but much
more his Brethren) are in Want, when it is in his
Power (without prejudicing himfelf or Family) to
relieve them.

In the Lodge he is to behave with all due Deco-
rum, leaft the Beauty and Harmony thereof fhowld
be difturbed or broke: He is to be obedient to the
Master and the prefiding Officers, and to apply
himfelf clofely to the Bufinefs of Mafonry, that he
may the fooner become a Proficient therein, both for
his own Credit and for that of the Lodge.

He is not to neglect his own neceffary Avoca-
tions * for the Sake of Mafonry, nor to involve him-
felf in Quarrels with thofe who through Ignorance
may {peak Evil of or ridicule it.

He is to be-aLover of the Arts and Sciences,
and is to take all Opportunities to improve himéfel?
therein.

* Here you are to underftand that a Mafon ought not to be-
long to a Number of Lodges at one Time, nor run from Lodge
to Lodge ; or otherwitfe, after Mafons or Mafonry, whereby his
Bufinefs or Family may be neglected; but yet every Mafon is fub-
ject to all the Bye-Laws of his Lodge, which he is ftriétly and
conftantly to obey; — for the Attendance and Dues of one Lodge,
can never prejudice neither him nor his Faniily,

ly

38 AHIMAN REZON.

Ir he recommends a Friend to be made a Mafon,
he mutt vouch him to be fuch as he really believes will
conform to the aforefaid Duties, leaft, by his Mif-
conduct at any Time, the Lodge fhould pafs under
fome evil Imputations.

NoTHING can prove more fhocking to alt faithful
Mafons, than to fee any of their Brethren profane or
break through the facred Rules of their Order ; and
fuch as can do it, they with had never been ad-
mitted.

ARIE AIO RORE IO ERTL DN,
Aeenee AER ENPRENS RENEE ER

Koon ton $

oeaato
he. Saf oto be Bad offo be Bad of be. eh oe eed Boe
b RUA SRSASRELSREA TEA SKE

THE
ANCIENT MANNER

oF

Conftituting a Lodge.

New Lodge, for avoiding many Ifregula-
ay: ities, fhould be folemnly conftituted by the
Grand-Mafter, with his Deputy and War-
dens; or, in the Grand-Mafter’s Abfence, the De-
puty acts for his Worfhip, the fenior Grand-Warden
as Deputy, the junior Grand-Warden as the fenior,
and the prefent Mafter of a Lodge as the junior: Or
if the Deputy is alfo abfent, the Grand-Mafter may
depute either of his Grand-Wardens, who can ap-
point others to act as Grand-Wardens, pro cempore.
Tue Lodge being opened, and the Candidates or
‘new Mafter and Wardens being yet among the Fel-
low-Crafts, the Grand-Mafter fhall afk his-Deputy
if

40 AHIMAN REZON.

if he has examined them, and whether he finds the
Mafter well {killed in the Noble Science and the
Royal Art, and duly inftructed in our Myfteries, Ge.
the Deputy anfwering in the affirmative, thall (by
the Grand-Mafter’s Order) take the Candidate from
among his F ellows, and prefent him to the Grand-
Mafter, faying, Right Worfhipful Grand-Mafter, the
Brerbren here defire to be formed into a regular Lodge;
and I prefent my worthy Brother, A.B. to be (in-
fte’. d) their Mafter, whom I know to be of good
iitorals and great Skill, true and trufty, and a Lover
of the whole Fraternity, whercfoever difperfed over the
Face of the Earth.

TueEn the Grand-Mafter placing the Candidate on
his Left-Hand, and having afked and obtained the
unanimous Confent of the Brethren, fhall fay (after
fome ciner Ceremonies and Expreffions that cannot
be written), I confiitute and form thefe good Brethren
into a new regular Lodge, and appoint you, Brother
A\B. the Mafter of it, not doubting of your Capacity
and Care to preferve the Cement of the Lodge, &c.

Upon this the Deputy, or fome other Brother for
him, fhall rehearfe the Charge of a Mafter; and the
Grand-Mafter fhall afk the Candidate, faying, Do
you fubmit to thefe Charges as Mafters have done in all
Ages? And the new Mafter fignifying his cordial
Submiffion thereto, the Grand-Matfter fhall, by certain
fignificant Ceremonies and ancient Ufages, inftall
him and prefent him with his Warrant, tle Book of

of

AHIMAN REZON. 41
Conftitutions, the Lodge-Book, and the Inftruments
of his Office, one after another ; and after each of
them the Grand-Mafter, his Deputy, or fome Bro-
ther for him, fhall rehearfe the fhort and pithy
Charge that is fuitable to the Thing pretert.

Next, the Members of this new Lodze, bowing
altogether to the Grand-Mafter, fhall return his
Worthip their Thanks (according to the Cuftom of
Matters) and fhall immediately do Homage to their
new Matter, and (as faithful Craftsmen) fignify their
Promife of Subjeétion and Obedience to him by
ufual Congratulations.

THE Deputy and Grand-Wardens, and any other
Brethren that are not Members of this new Lodge,
fhall next congratulate the new Mia uiter, and he fhall
return his becoming Acknow ledgments (as Mafter-
Mafons), firft to the Grand-Mafter and grand Off-
cers, and to the reft in their Order.

Tuen the Grand-Mafter orders the new Matter
to enter immediately upon the Exercife of his Office,
and, calling forth his fenior Warden, a Fellow-Craft
(Mafter-Mafon) prefents him to the Grand-Mafter
for his Worfhip’s Approbation, and to the new Lodge
for their Confent ; upon which the fenior or junior
Grand-Warden, or fome Brother for him, fhall re-
hearfe the Charge of a Warden, Gc. of a private
Lodge; and, he fignifying his cordial Submiffion
thereto, the new Mafter fhall prefent him fingly with
the feveral Inftruments of his Office, and, in ancient

G Manner

42 AHIMAN REZON.

Manner and due Form, inftall him in his proper
Place.

In like Manner the new Matter thall call forth
his junior Warden, who fhall be a Mafter-Mafon,
and preicnted (as above) to the junior Grand-
Warden, or fome other Brother in his ftead, and
fhall in the above Manner be inftalled in his proper
Place; and the Brethren of this new Lodge fhall
fignify their Obedience to theie new Wardens, by
the ufual Congratulations due to Wardens.

Tue Grand-Mafter then gives all the Brethren
Joy of their Mafter and Wardens, &c, and recom-
mends Harmony, &c. hoping their only Contention,
will be a laudable Emulation in cu:tivating the Royal
Art, and the Social Virtues.

Tuen the Grand-Secretary, or fome Brother for
him, (by the Grand-Mafter’s Order) in the Name of
the Grand Lodge, declares and proclaims this new
Lodge duly conftituied N2, Ge.

Upon which all the new Lodge together (after
the Cuftom of Matters) return their hearty and fin-
cere Thanks for the Honcur of this Conftitution.

Tue Grand-Mafter alfo orders the Grand-Secretary
to regifter this new Lodge in the Grand Lodge-Book,
and to notify the {ame to the other particular Lodges ;
and, after {ome other ancient Cuftoms and Demon-
ftrations of Joy and SatisfaGion, he orders the fenior
Grand-Warden to clote the Lodge.

A Prayer

AHIMAN REZON., 43

FATE LR RON Te A AOR See,
SRS tS Ke ROK S OOK ES KS OK
“Remmill Ko Meh RD Ree sh CRE eat RS bse RE Reems?

os

A PRAYER faid at the Opening of the
Lodge, &e. ufed by Jewith Free-Mafons.

Lorn, excellent art thou in thy Truth, and

there is nothing great in Comparifon to thee ;
for thine is the Praife, from all the Works of thy
Hands, for evermore.

ENLIGHTEN us, we befeech thee, in the true
Knowledge of Mafonry: By the Sorrows of Adam,
thy firft made Man; by the Blood of ,4e/, thy holy
one; by the Righteou!nefS of Sel, in whom thou
art well pleafed ; and by thy Covenant with Noah,
in whofe Architecture thou was’t pleafed to fave the
Seed of thy beloved; number us not among thofe
that know not thy Statutes, nor the divine Myfteries
of the fecret Cabbala.

But grant, we befeech thee, that the Ruler of
this Lodge may be endued with Knowledge and
Wifdom, to inftrué us and explain his fecret Myfte-
ries, as our holy Brother Mofes* did (in his Lodge)

G2 to
* In the Preface to the Mina, we find this Tradition of the
Jews, explained as follows :

Gop not only delivered the Law to Mofes on Mount Sinai, but
the Explanation of it likewife: When Mofes came down from the

44 AHIMAN REZON.

to Aaron, to Eleazar and Ithamar, (the Sons otf
Aaron, and the feventy Elders of I/rael.

Anp grant that we may underftand, learn, and
keep all the Statutes and Commandments of the
Lord, and this holy Myftery, pure and undefiled
utno our Lives End. Amen, Lord.

Mount, and entered into his Tent, Aaron went to vifit him; and
Mofes acquainted Aaron with the Laws he had received from Gop,
together with the Explanation of them: After this daron placed
himfelf at the Right-Hand of Mofes, and Eleazar and Ithamar
(the Sons of Aaron) were admitted, to whom Mofes repeated what
he had juft-before told to Aaron: Thefe being feated, the one on
the Right-Hand, the other on the Left-Hand of Mofes; the feventy
Elders of J/rael, who compofed the Sanhedrim, came in; and
Mofes again dectared the fame Laws to them, with the Interpre-
tations of them, as he had done before to Aaron and his Sons.
Laftly, all who pleafed of the common People were invited to
enter, and A4s/es inftructed them likewife in the fame Manner as
the reft: So that 4aron heard four Times what Mafes had been
taught by Gop upon Mount Sinai, Eleazar and Ithamer three
Times, the feventy Elders twice, and the People once. Mofes
afterwards reduced the Laws which he had received into Writing,
but not the Explanations of them; thefe he thought it fufficient to
truft to the Memories of the abovementioned Perfons, who, he-
ing perfectly inftructed in them, delivered them to their Children,
and thefe again to theirs from Age to A ge.

AHIMAN REZON. 45

A PRAYER ufed amongft the primitive
Chriftian Masons.

mee Might of the Father of Heaven, and the

Wifdom of his glorious Son, through the
Grace and Goodnefs of the Holy Ghoft, being three
Perfons in one Godhead, be with us at our Begin-
ning, and give us Grace fo to govern us here in our
living, that we may come to his Blifs that never fhall
have End. Amen.

PRDPHOIS SSS FS SIGH SOSS ISSCC SS COS

Another Prayer, and that which is moft ge-
neral at Making or Opening.

M°t holy and glorious Lord God, thou great

Architect of Heaven and Earth, who art the
Giver of all good Gifts and Graces, and haft pro-
mifed that where two or three are gathered together
in thy Name, thou wilt be in the Midft of them: In
thy Name we affemble and mect together, moft

‘~ pees

Salvation of our Souls,
ANpD

46 AHIMAN REZON.

Anp we belecch thee, O Lord God, to biefs this
our prefent Undertaking, and grant that this our new
Brother may dedicate his Life to thy Service, and be
atrue and faithful Brother among us: L’ndue him
with a Competency of thy divine Wifdom, that he
may, with the Secrets of Free-Mafonry, be able to
unfold the Myfteries of Godlinefs and Chriftianity.
This we moft humbly beg, in the Name, and for
the Sake, of Jesus Curis our Lord and Saviour.
Amen.

SSSSSSSISSSS SSCS SSS0835 30006

*AHABATH OLAM.

A Prayer repeated in the Royal Arch
Lodge at Jerufalem.

HOU haft loved us, O Lord our God, with
eternal Love; thou haft {pared us with great

and excceding Patience, our Father and our King,
for thy great Name’s Sake, and for our Father's
Sake who trufted in thee, to whom thou didft teach
the Statutes of Life, that they might do after the
Statutes of thy good Pleafure with a perfect Heart :
So be thou merciful unto us, O our Father, merci-
ful Father, that fheweth Mercy, have Mercy upon
us we befeech thee, and put Underftanding into our
Hearts, that we may underftand, be wife, hear, learn,
teach,

*® See Ds. Wooton, on the Mifbna,

AHIMAN REZON. 47

teach, keep, do, and perform all the Words of the
‘Doétrine of thy Law in Love, and enlighten our
Eyes in thy Commandments, and caufe our Hearts
to cleave to thy Law, and unite them in the Love
and Fear of thy Name; we will not be afhamed,
nor confounded, nor ftumble, for ever and ever.

Because we have trufted in thy Hoty, Great,
Micuty, and TerrisLE NAME, we will rejoice
and be glad in thy Salvation, and in thy Mercies, O
Lord our God; and the Multitude of thy Mercies,
fhall not foriake us for ever. Selah: And now make
Hafte and bring upon us a Bleffing, and Peace from
the four Corners of the Earth ; for thou art a God
that workeft Salvation, and has chofen us out oi
every People and Language; and thou, our King,
haft caufed us to cleave to thy Great NAME, in
love to praife thee and to be united to thee, and to
love thy Name: Bleffed art thou, O Lord God,
who haft chofen thy People J/rae/ in Love.

GSSGSSSS93SS6E9O0 0 9S6 T9558 G%

AVING inferted this Prayer, and mentioned
that Part of Mafonry commonly called the
Royal Arch (which I firmly believe to be the Root,
Heart, and Marrow of Free-Mafonry) I cannot for-
bear giving a Hint of a certain evil Defigner, who
has made a Trade thercof for fome Time paft, and
has drawn ina Number of worthy, bonett Men,
and

48 AHIMAN REZON.

atid made them believe that he and his Affiftants
trully taught them all and every Part of the above-
named Branch of Mafonry, which they foon com-
municated to the worthy Brethren of their Acquaint-
ance, without being able to form any Sort of Judg-
ment whereby they might diftinguith Truth from
Falfhood, and confequently could not difcern the
Impofition ; but, as the wife Seneca juftly obferves, it
fares with us in human Life as in a routed Army,
one ftumbles firft and then another falls upon him;
and fo they follow, one upon the Neck of another,
till the whole Field comes to be but one Heap of
Mifcarriages. This is the Cafe of all thofe who
think themfelves Royal Arch Mafons, without paff-
ing the Chair in regular Form, according to the an-
cient Cuftom of the Craft: To this I will add the
Opinion of our Worfhipful Brother Doctor Fifield
D’ Afigny, printed in the Year 1744. ‘ Some of
*« the Fraternity (fays he) have expreffed an Uneafi-
« nefs at this Matter being kept a Secret from them
‘¢ (fince they had already paffed through the ufual
“© Degrees of Probation) I cannot help being of
“© Opinion, that they have no Right to any fuch
« Benefit until they make a proper Application, and
“* are received with due Formality: And as it is an
“* organifed Body of Men who have paffed the
«© Chair, and given undeniable Proofs of their Skill
‘in Archite€ture, it cannot be treated with too
«* much Reverence; and more efpecially fince the
« Characters of the prefent Members of that parti-

© cular

AHIMAN REZON. 49

« cular Lodge are untainted, and their Behaviour
‘« judicious and unexceptionable: So that there can-
«© not be the leaft Hinge to hang a Doubt on, but
“« that they are moft excellent Mafons.”

Tue Refpeét I have for the very Name of Free-
Maton, is fufficient to make me conceal the Name
of the Perfon here pointed at; and, inftead of ex-
pofing him, or ftigmatizing him with a Name he
juftly deferves, I earneftly with that Gop may guide
him back, out of his prefent Labyrinth of Darknefs,
to the true Light of Mafonry ; which is, Truth,
Charity, and Juftice.

I make no Manner of Doubt, but that this will
reach the Hands of the Perfon aimed at ; and as my
Intention is rather to reform than offend, I hope he
will anfwer my Expectation, in laying afide fuch
Evils as may bring Difhonour to the Craft and him-
felf; and I affure him (upon the Honour of a Ma-
fon). I have no evil Defign againft him, no more
than Hefod had againft his Brother Per/es, when he
wrote the following Advice.

O Perfes, foolith Perfes, bow thine Ear,
To the good Counfels of a Soul fincere ;
To Wickednefs the Road is quickly found,
Short is the Way and on an eafy Ground ;
The Paths of Virtue muft be reach’d by Toil, —
Arduous and long and on a rugged Soil ;
H Thermy

50 AHIMAN REZON.
Thorny the Gate, but when the Top you gain,
Fair is the future and the Profpect plain :

Far does the Man all other Men excel,

Who from his Wifdom thinks in all Things well;
Wifely confidering to himfelf a Friend,

All for the prefent Beft and for the End :

Nor is the Man without his Share of Praife,
Who well the Dictates of the wife obeys ;

But he that is not wife himfelf, nor can

Hearken to Wifdom, is a ufelefs Man.

THE

To cee ae

3 eM ate * xX 4 ge xf
a GED, aR et RD q

atic palalh elise tah hea ——

tomes!

THE

GENERAL REGULATIONS

OF

THE

FREE and ACCEPTED

M A 5

ON S.

SRIKSKS KS KS KSI SKS KOKROKSOKS MS

Old Regulations.
¥OKuEe Grand-Mafter
Le or Deputy has
full Authority
and Right, not only to be
prefent, but alfo to prefide
in every Lodge with the
Mafter of the Lodge on
his

Jew Regulations.
T. ®XOK HAT is only when
ale the Grand-War-
dens are abfent,
for the Grand-Mafter can-
not deprive them of their
Office without fhewing
Caufe, fairly appearing to
the

H 2

52 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

his Left-Hand ; and to or-
der his Grand-Wardens to
attend him, who are not
to act as Wardens of par-
ticular Lodges, but in his
Prefence, and at his Com-
mand; for the Grand-Ma-
fter, while in a particular
Lodge, may command the
Wardens of that Lodge, or
any other Mafter-Mafons,
to act as his Wardens, pro
tempore.

li. The

New Regulations.
the Grand Lodge, accord-
ing to the Old Regulation,
XVIII: So that if they
are prefent in a particular
Lodge with the Grand-

Mafter, they muft act as
Wardens there.

Some Grand Lodges (to
cure fome Irregularities)
have ordered that nonce but
theGrand-Maiter, his De-
puty, and Wardens (who
are the only Grand Offi-
cers) fhould wear their
Jewels in Gold, pendant,
to blue * Ribbons about
their Necks, and white
Leather Aprons with blue
Silk; which Sort of Aprons
may alfo be worn by for-
mer Grand Officers.

II. It

* Tfhall at ail Times be conformable, and pay due Refpect, to
every Right Worfhipful Grand Lodge of regular Free-Mafons, and
am well affured that Grand Officers only fhould be diftinguifhed by
Gold Jewels, and them according to thcir proper Order ; but at the
fame Time I am certain, that every Member of the Grand Lodge
pas an undoubted Right to wear Purpic, Blue, Whitc, or Crimfcn.

AHIMAN REZON. 53

Old Regulations.

ll. The Mafter of a
particular Lodge, has the
Right and Authority of
congregating the Members
of his Lodge into a Chap-
ter, upon any Emergency
or Occurrence, as well as
to appoint the Time and
Place of their ufual form-
ing ; and in cafe of Death
or Sicknefs, or neceflary
Abfence of the Matter,
the fenior Warden {hall
act as Mafter, pro tempore,
if no Brother is prefent
who has been Mafter of
that Lodge before ; for the
abfent Mafter’s Authority
reverts to the laft Mafter
prefent, though he cannot
act till the fenior Warden
congregates the Lodge.

III. The Mafter of each
particular Lodge, or one
of the Wardens, or fome
other Brother by Appoint-

ment

New Regulations.

TJ. It was agreed, that
if the Mafter of a particu-
lar Lodge is depofed, or
demits, the fenior War-
den fhall forthwith fill the’
Matter’s Chair till the next
time of choofing, and ever
fince in the Mafter’s Ab-
fence he fills the Chair,
even though a former Ma-
fter be prefent.

III. Ifa particular Lodge
remove to a new Place for
their ftated Meeting, the
Officers fhall immediately

fignity

S4 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

ment of the Matter, fhall
keep a Book containing
their Bye-Laws, the Names
of their Members, and a
Litt of all the Lodges in
Town, with the ufual
Times and Places of their
forming, and alfo the
Tranfactions of their own
Lodge, that are proper to
be written.

IV. No Lodge {hall
make more than five new
Brothers at one and the
fame Time, without an
urgent Neceffity; nor any
Man under the Age of
twenty-five Years, (who
mutt alfo be his own Ma-
fter) unlefs by a Difpenfa-
tion from the Grand-Ma-
fter.

V. No Man can be ac-
cepted a Member of a
particular Lodge, without
previous Notice one Month

be-

New Regulations.

fignify the fame to the
Grand Secretary.

The Precedency of
Lodges is grounded on
the Seniority of their Con-
ftitution.

IV. No Brother hall
belong to more than one
Lodge within the Bills of
Mortality (though he may
vifit them all) except the
Members of a forcign
Lodge.

But this Regulation is
neglected for feveral Rea-
fons, and is now obfolete.

V. The Grand Secreta-
ry can direct the Petitio-
ners in the Form of a Dif-
penfation, if wanted; but

if

AHNIMAN REZON, 55

Old Regulations.

before given to the Lodge,
in order to make due In-
quiry into the Reputation
and Capacity of the Can-
didate, unlefs by a Dif-
penfation.

VI. But no Man can be
entered a Brother in any
particular Lodge, or ad-
mitted a Member thereof,
without the unanimous
Confent of all the Mem-
bers of that Lodge then
prefent, when the Candi-
date is propofed, and when
their Confent is formally
afked by the Mafter, they
are to give their Confent in
their own prudent Way ;
either virtually, or in
form; but with Unanimi-
ty: Nor is this inherent
Privilege fubject to a Dif-
penfation, becaufe the
Members of a_ particular
Lodge are the beft Judges
of it; and becaufe, if a

ture

New Regulations.
if they know the Candi-
date, they do not require
a Difpenfation.

VI. No Vifitor, how-
ever fkilled in Mafonry,
fhall be admitted into a
Lodge, unlefs he is per-
fonally known too, or well
vouched and recommend-
ed by one of that Lodge
then prefent.

But it was found incon-
venient to infift upon Una-
nimity in feveral Cafes,
and therefore the Grand-
Mafters have allowed the
Lodges to admit a Mem-
ber if there are not above
three Ballots againft him ;
though fome Lodges de-
fire no fuch Allowance.

I fhall not mention the
Caufe of the above new
Regulation being made, bu

cer-

56 AHIMAN

Old Regulations.
turbulent Member fhould
be impofed on them, it
might {poil their Harmony
or hinder the Freedom of
their Communication, or
even break or difperfe the
Lodge, which ought to be
avoided by all that are true
and faithful.

VII. Every new Bro-
ther, at his Entry, is de-
cently to cloath the Lodge,
that is, all the Brethren
prefent, and to depofit
fomething for the Relief
of the indigent and decay-
ed Brethren, as the Can-
didate fhall think fit to be-
ftow, over and above the
{mall Allowance that may
be ftated in the Bye-Laws
of that particular Lodge,
which Charity fhall be kept
by the Cafhier; alfo the
Candidate fhall folemnly
promife to fubmit to the

Con-

REZON.

New Regulaticns.
certain it is that real Free-
Mafons have no Occafion
for any fuch Regulation,
they being able to diftin-
guith a true Brother, let his
Country or Language be
ever fo remote or obfcure
to us; nor is it in the
Power of falfe Pretenders
to deceive us.

VII. See this explain-
ed in the Account of the
Conftitution of the Gene-
ral Charity ; only particu-
lar Lodges are not limited,
but may take their own
Method for Charity.

VT. E-

A HIMAN

Old Regulations.
Conftitutions, and other
good Ufages, that fhall be
intimated to him, in Tim
and Place convenient.

VIII. No Set or Num-
ber of Brethren fhall with-
draw, or feparate them-
felves from the Lodge in
which they were made,
or were afterwards admit-
ted Members, unlefs the
Lodge become too nume-
rous ; nor even then, with-
out a Difpenfation from
the Grand-Mafter or De-
puty; and when thus fe-
parated, they muft either
immediately join them-
felves to fuch other Lodges
that they fhall like heft
(who are willing to receive
them), or elfe obtain the
Grand - Mafter’s Warrant
to join in forming a new
Lodge, to be regularly
conftituted in good Time.

If

REZON, 57

New Regulations.

VIII. Every Brother
concerned in making Ma-
fons clandeftinely, fhall
not be allowed to vifit any
Lodge till he has made
due Submiffion, even tho’
the Brother fo admitted
may be allowed.

None who make a fta-
ted Lodge without the
Grand - Mafter’s Warrant,
fhall be admitted into re-
gular Lodges, till they
make due Submiffion and
obtain Grace.

If any Brethren form a
Lodge without L eave, and
fhall irregularly make new
Brothers, they fhall not be
admitted into any regular
Lodge, no not as Viliters,
till they render a good

Rea-
T

58 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

If any Set or Number
of Mafons, fhall take up-
on themfelves to torm a
Lodge without the Grand-
Mafters Warrant, the re-
gular Lodges are not to
countenance them, nor
own them as fair Brethren
duly formed, nor approve
of their Acts and Deeds;
but muft treat them as
Rebels, until they humble
themfelves as the Grand-
Matter fhallin his Prudence
dire&t, and until he ap-
prove of them by his War-
rant fignified to the other
Lodges, as the Cuftom is
when a new Lodge is to
be regiftered in the Grand
Lodge-Book.

IX. But

New Regulations.
Reafon, or make due Sub-
miffion.

If any Lodge within the
Limits of the City of Lon-
don, ceafe to meet regular-
ly during twelve Months
fucceflive, and not keep
up to the Rules and Or-
ders of the Grand Lodge,
its Number and Place fhall
be erafed or difcontinued
in the Grand Lodge -
Books ; and if they Peti-
tion to be inferted or
owned as a regular Lodge,
it muft lofe its former
Place and Rank of Prece-
dency, and fubmit to a
new Conttitution.

Seeing that fome extra-
neous Brothers have been
lately made in a clande-
ftine Manner ; that is, in
no regular Lodge, nor by
any Authority or Difpen-
fation from the Grand-
Mafter, and upon {mall
and unworthy Confidera-
tions,

AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

TX. But if any Brother
fo far mifbehave himéelf,
as to render his Lodge
uneafy, he fhall be thrice
duly admonifhed by the
Mafter and Wardens in
that Lodge formed ; and
if he will not refrain his
Imprudence, nor obedi-
ently fubmit to the Advice
of his Brethren, he thall
be dealt with according to
the Bye-Laws of that par-
ticular Lodge ; or elfe in

fuch

59

New Regulations.
tions, to the Difhonour of
the Craft.

The Grand Lodge de-
creed, that no Perfon fo
made, nor any concerned
in making him, fhall be
a grand Officer, nor an
Officer of any particular
Lodge ;_ nor fhall any fuch
partake of the general
Charity, if they fhould

come to want it.

IX. Whereas feveral
Difputes have arifen about
the Removal of Lodges
fromm one Houfe to an-
other, and it has been
queftioned in whom that
Power is invefted, it is
hereby declared, That no
Lodge fhall be removed

. without the Mafter’s Know-

ledge, that no Motion be
made for removing in the
Mafter’s Abfence, and that
if the Motion be fcconded,
or

12

60 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.
fuch a Manner as the
Grand Lodge fhall in their
great Prudence think fit,
for which a new Regula-
tion may be afterwards
made.

New Regulations.
or thirded, the Maftcr hall

order Summons's to every in-
dividual Member, fpecifying

the Bufinefi, and appoint-

ing a Day for bearing and
determining the Affair, at

leaft ten Days before, and
the Determination fhall be

made by the Majority ; but
if be be of the Minority

againft removing, the Lodge
fhall not be removed, un-
lefs the Majority confifts of
full two Thirds of the Mem-
bers prefent.

But if the Mafter refufe
to dire€t fuch Summons’s,
either of the Wardens may
do it; and if the Mafter
neglects to attend on the
Day fixed, the Warden
may prefide in: determin-
ing the Affair, in the
Manner prefcribed; but
they fhall not, in the Ma-
fters Abfence, enter upon
any other Caufe but what

X. The is

AHIMAN

Old Regulations.

X. The Majority of eve-
ry particular Lodge, when
congregated (not elfe )
fhail have Privilege of
giving Inftructions to their
Mafter and Wardens be-
fore the Meeting of the
Grand Chapter, becaufe
the faid Officers are their
Reprefentatives, and are
fuppofed to fpeak the Sen-
timents of their Brethren
at the faid Grand Lodge.

XI. All particular
Lodges are to obferve the
Ufages

REZON, 61
New Regulations.
is particularly mentioned
in the fame Summons.
And if the Lodge is
thus regularly ordered to
be removed, the Matter
or Warden fhall fend No-
tice to the Secretary of the
Grand Lodge, for the pub-
lifhing the fame at the
next Grand Lodge.

X. Upon a fudden Emer-
gency, the Grand Lodge
has allowed a private Bro-
ther to be prefent, and,
with Leave afked and gi-
ven, to fignify his Mind
if it was about what con-
cerned Mafonry.

XI. The fame Ufages
for Subftance are actually
ob-

6¢ AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

Ufages as much as _pofli-
ble ; in order to which,
and alfo for cultivating a
a good Underftanding a-
mong Free-Mafons, fome
Members of every Lodge
fhall be deputed to vifit
other Lodges, as often as
fhall be thought conve-
nient.

XII. The Grand Lodge
confifts of, and is formed
by, the Mafters and War-
dens of all the particular
Lodges upon Record, with
the Grand-Mafter at their
Head, the Deputy on his
Left-Hand, and theGrand
Wardens in their Places.

Thefe muft have their
quarterly Communicati -
ons, or monthly Meetings
and Adjournments, as of-
ten as Occafion requires,
in fome convenient Place,
as the Grand-Mafter thall
appoint, where none fhall

be

New Regulations.

obferved in every regular
Lodge, (of real Free and
Accepted Mafons) which
is much owing to vifiting
Brethren, who compare
the Ufages.

XII. No new Lodge is
owned, nor their Officers
admitted into the Grand
Lodge, unlefs it be regu-
larly conftituted and regi-
ftered.

All who have been or
fhall be Grand - Matters,
fhall be Members of and
vote in all Grand Lodges.

All who have been or
fhall be Deputy Grand -
Mafter, fhall be Members
of and vote in all Grand
Lodges.

All who have been or
fhall be Grand-Wardens,

fhall

AHIMAN REZON, 63

Old Regulations.

be prefent but its own
proper Members, without
Leave afked and given;
and while fuch a Stranger
(though a Brother) ftays,
he is not allowed to vote,
nor even to fpeak to any
Queftion, without Leave
of the Grand Lodge, or
unlefs he is defired to give
his Opinion.

All: Matters in the
Grand Lodge are deter-
mined by a Majority of
Votes, each Member hav-
ing one Vote, and the
Grand-Mafter two Votes,
unlefs the Grand Lodge
leave any particular Thing
to the Determination of
the Grand-Matfter, for the
Sake of Expedition.

XIII. At the Grand
Lodge Meeting, all Mat-
ters that concern the Fra-
ternity in general or parti-

cular

New Regulations.
fhall be Members of and
vote in all Grand Lodges.

Mafters or Wardens of
particular Lodges, hall
never attend the Grand
Lodge without their Jew-
els, except upon giving
good and fufficient Rea-
fons.

If any Officer of a par-
ticular Lodge cannot at-
tend, he may fend a Bro-
ther (that has been in that
or a higher Office before)
with his Jewel and Cloath-
ing, to fupply his Room
and fupport the Honour
of his Lodge.

XIII. What Bufinefs
cannot be tranfacted at
one Lodge, may be refer-
red to the Committee of

Cha-

64 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.
cular Lodges, or fingle
Brothers, are fedately and
maturely to be difcourfed
of.

1. Apprentices muft be
admitted Fellow - Crafts
and Mafters only here,
unlefs by a Difpenfation
from the Grand-Matter.

2. Here alfo all Dif-
ferences that cannot be
made up, or accommoda-
ted privately, nor by a
particular Lodge, are to
be ferioufly confidered and
decided ; and if any Bro-
ther thinks himfelf ag-
grieved by the Decifion,
he may appeal to the
Grand Lodge next enfu-
ing, and leave his Appeal
in writing with theGrand -
Matter, the Deputy, or
Grand-Wardens.

Hither alfo all the Offi.
cers of particular Lodges,
fhall bring a Lift of fach

Mem-

New Regulations.
Charity, and by them re-
ported to the next Grand
Lodge.

The Matter of a Lodge,
with his Wardens and a
competent Number of the
Lodge affembled in due
Form, can make Matters
and Fellows at Difcre-
tion.

It was agreed in the
Grand Lodge, that no Pe-
titions and Appeals thal]
be heard on the annual
Grand Lodge or Feaft-
Day ; nor fhall any Bufi-
nefs be tranfacted that
tends to interrupt the Har-
mony of the Affembly, but
all thall be referred to the
next Grand Lodge.

XIV. In

AHIMAN REZON. 65

Old Regulations.

Members as have been
made, or even admitted
by them fince the laft
Grand Lodge.

4. There fhall be Books
kept by the Grand-Mafter
or Deputy, or rather by
fome other Brother ap-
pointed Secretary of the
Grand Lodge, wherein
fhall be recorded all the
Lodges, with the ufual
Times and Places of their
forming, and the Names
of all the Members of
each Lodge ; alfo all the
Affairs of the Grand Lodge
that are proper to be writ-
ten.

5. The Grand Lodge
fhall confider of the moft
prudent and effectual Me-
thod of collecting, and
difpofing of what Money
fhall be lodged with them
on Charity, towards the
Relief only of any true

Bro-

New Regulations.

XIV. In

66 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

Brother fallen into Pover-
ty and Decay, but none
elfe.

6. But each particular
Lodge may difpofe of their
own Charity for poor Bro-
thers, according to their
own Bye-Laws, until it be
agreed by all the Lodges
(in a new Regulation *)
to carry in the Charity col-
collected by them, to the
Grand Lodge at their
quarterly or annual Com-
munication, in order to
make a common Stock for
the more handfome relief
of poor Brethren.

7. They thall appoint a
Treafurer, a Brother of
worldly Subftance, who
fhall be a Member of the
Grand Lodge by virtue of
his Office, and {hall be al-
ways prefent, and have
Power to move to the

Grand

New Regulations.

XIV. In

© See this explained in the Regulation for Charity.

AHIMAN REZON. 7

Old Regulations.
Grand Lodge any Thing
that concerns his Office.

8. To him fhall be
committed all Money raif-
ed for the general Charity,
or for any other Ufe of the
Grand Lodge, which he
fhall write down in a
Book, with the refpective
Ends and Ufes for which
the feveral Sums are in-
tended, and fhall expend
or difburfe the fame by
fuch a certain Order fign-
ed, as the Grand Lodge
fhall hereafter agree to in
a new Regulation.

But by Virtue of his
Office, as Treafurer, with-
out any other Qualifica-
tion, he fhall not vote in
choofing a new Grand-
Mafter and Grand-War-
dens, tho’ in every other
Tranfaction.

g. In like Manner the
Secretary fhall be a Mem~-
ber of the Grand Lodge
by Virtue of his Office,

and

New Regulatiants

XIV In

68 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

and fhall vote in every
Thing except in chcofing
Grand Officers.

10. The Treafurer and
Secretary may have each
a Clerk or Affiftant if they
think fit, who muft be a
Brother and a Mafter-Ma-
fon, but muft never be a
Member of the Grand
Lodge, nor fpeak without
being allowed or com-
manded.

11. The Grand-Mafter
or Deputy, have Authori-
ty always to command the
Treafurer and Secretary to
attend him, with their
Clerks and Books, in or-
der to fee how Matters go
on, and to know what is
expedient to be done upon
any Emergency. i

12. Another Brother and
Maiter-Mafon fhould be
appointed the Tyler, to
look after the Door ; but
he mutt be no Member of
the Grand Lodge.

13, Buc.

New Regulations.

XIV. In

AHIMAN

Old Regulations.

13. But thefe Offices
may be further explained
by a new Regulation, when
the Neceffity or Expedien-
cy of them may more ap-
pear than at prefent to the
Fraternity.

XIV. If at any Grand
Lodge, ftated or occafio-
nal, magnthly or annual,
the Grand - Mafter and
Deputy fhould both be
abfent, then the prefent
Mafter of a Lodge, that
has been longeft a Free-
Mafon, fhall take the
Chair and prefide as
Grand-Mafter, pro tem-
pore, and {hall be vefted
with all the Honour and
Power for the Time be-
ing, provided there is no
Brother prefent that has
been Grand-Mafter or De-
puty formerly; for the
laft former Grand-Mafter
or Deputy in Company,

takes

REZON, 69

New Regulations.

XIV. Jn the firft Edi-
tion the Right of Grand-
Wardens was omitted in
this Regulation, and it has
been fince found that the
old Lodges never put into
the Chair the Mafter of
a particular Lodge, but
when there was no Grand
Warden in Company, pre-
fent nor former ; and that
in fuch a Cafe, a grand
Officer always took Place
of any Mafter of a Lodge
that has not been a grand
Officer.

Therefore, in cafe of
the Abfence of all Grand-
Mafters and Deputies,
the prefent fenior Grand-

War-

70 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

takes Place of right in the
Abfence of the Grand -
Mafter or Deputy.

XV. In the Grand
Lodge none can att as
Wardens but the prefent
Grand - Wardens, if in
Company ; and if abfent,

the

New Regulations.

Warden fills the Chair,
and in ‘his Abfence, the
junior Grand - Warden ;
and in his Abfence, the
oldeft for:er Grand-War+
den in Company; and if
no former grand Officer
be foun.i, thea the oldeft
Free-Mafon who is now
the Mafter of a Lodge.

But to avoid Difputes,
the Grand-Mafter ufually
gives a particular Commif-
fion, under his Hand and
Seal of Office counter,
figned by the Grand Se-
cretary to the fenior Grand
Warden, or in his Ab-
fence to the junior, to a&
as Deputy Grand -Mafter
when the Deputy is not
in Town.

XV. Soon after the firft

. Edition of the Book of

Conftitutions, the grand
Lodge finding it was al-

ways the ancient Ufage

that

AHIMAN REZON. re

Old Regulations.

the Grand - Mafter fhall
order private Wardens to
a@ as Grand -Wardens,
pro tempore, whofe Places
are to be fupplied by two
Fellow-Crafts, or Mafter-
Mafons of the fame
Lodge, called forth to
at, or fent thither by the
Mafter thereof; or if by
him omitted, the Grand-
Mafter, or he that pre-
fides, fhall call them forth
to act; fo that the Grand
Lodge may be always
compleat.

XVI. 1.The

New Regulations.

that the oldeft former
Grand - Wardens fupplied
the Places of thofe of the
Year when abfent, the
Grand-Mafters ever fince
has ordered them to take
Place immediately, and
act as Grand - Wardens,
pro tempore; which they
always do in the Abfence
of the Grand - Wardens
for the Year, except when
they have waved their Pri-
vilege for that Time, to
honour fome Brother
whom they thought more
fit for the prefent Ser-
vice.

But if no former
Grand - Wardens are in
Company, the Grand -
Mafter, or he that pre-
fides, calls forth whom
he pleafes, to act Grand-
‘Wardens, pro tempore.

XVI. 1.This

Old Regulations.

XVI. 1. The Grand -
Wardens, or any others,
are firft to advife with the
Deputy about the Affairs
of the Lodges of private
fingle Brothers, and are
not to apply to the Grand-
Mafter without the Know-
ledge of the Deputy, un-
lefs he refufe his Concur-
rence.

2. In which Cafe, or
in Cafe of any Difference
of Sentiment between the
Deputy and Grand-War-
dens, or other Brothers,
both Parties are to go to
the Grand-Mafter by Con-
fent; who, by Virtue of
his great Authority and
Power, can eafily decide
the Controverfy, and make
up the Difference,

3. The Grand-Mafter
fhould not receive any pri-
vate Intimations of Bufi-
nefs concerning Mafons
and Mafonry, but from

his

72 AHIMAN REZON.

New Regulations.

XVI. 1. This was in.
tended for the Fafe of
the Grand - Mafter, and
for the Honour of the

Deputy.

2. No fuch Cafe has
happened in our Time,
and all Grand - Matters
govern more by Love than
Power.

3- No irregular Appli-
cations have been made
(in our Time) to the

Grand-Matfter.

XVII. Old

AHIMAN

Old Regulations.

his Deputy firft, except
in fuch Cafes as his Wor-
fhip can eafily judge of;
and if the Application to
the Grand- Matter be irre-
gular, his Worfhip can or-
der the Grand-Wardens,
or any fo applying, to wait
upon the Deputy, who is
fpeedily to prepare the Bu-
fines, and lay it orderly
before his Worthip.

XVII. No Grand-Ma-
fter, Deputy Grand-Ma-
fter,Grand-Warden, Trea-
furer, or Secretary, or who-
ever acts for them, or in
their Stead, pro tempore,
can at the fame Time a@&
as the Mafter or Werden
of a particular Lodge; but
as foon as any of them has
difcharged his publick Of-
fice, he returns to that
Poft or Station in his par-

ticular

REZON. 73

New R egulations.

XVII. Old Grand Off-
cers, are now fome of
them Officers of particu-
lac Lodges, but are not
deprived of their Privilege
in the Grand Lodge, to
fit and vote there as old
Grand Officers; only he
deputes a paft Officer of
his particular Lodge to
act, pro tempore, as the
Officer of that Lodge, at
the Grand Lodge.

XVIII. 1. The

74 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

ticular Lodge, from which
he was called to officiate.

XVIII. 1. If the Depu-
ty be fick, or neceffarily
abfent, the Grand-Mafter
can chufe any Brother he
pleafes to a&t as his Depu-

ty, pro tempore.

2. But he that is chofen
Deputy at the Inftallment,
and alfo the Grand-War-
dens, cannot be difcharg-
ed, unlefs the Caufe fair-
ly appear to the Grand
Lodge.

3. For the Grand-Ma-
fter, if he is uneafy, may
call a Grand Lodge, on
Purpofe to lay the Caufe
before them, for their Ad-
vice and Concurrence.

And if the Members of
the Grand Lodge cannot
reconcile the Grand-Ma-

fter

New Regulations.

XVII. 1. The fenior
Grand-Warden now. e-
ver fupplies the Dc puty’s
Place ; the junior, acts as
the fenior; the oldeft for-
mer Grand - Warden, as
the junior ; alfo the oldeft
Maton, as above.

2. This was never done

in our Time. See New Re-
gulation I,

3. Should this Cafe ever
happen, the Grand~Matter
appoints his Depuiy, and
the Grand Lodge the other
Grand Officers,

XIX. The

AHIMAN REZON. as

Old Regulations.

fter with his Deputy or
Wardens, they are to al-
low the Grand-Mafter to
difcharge his Deputy or
Wardens, and to choofe
another Deputy immedi-
ately, and the fame Grand
Lodge, in that Cafe, hall
forthwith choofe other
Grand-Wardens, fo that
Harmony and Peace may
be preferved.

XIX. If the Grand-
Mafter fhould abufe his
great Power, and render
himfelf unworthy of the
Obedience and Submiflion
of the Lodges, he fhall be
treated in a Way and Man-
ner to be agreed upon in
a new Regulation; be-
caufe hitherto the ancient
Fraternity have had no
Occafion for it.

XX. The

New Regulations.

XIX. The Free-Mafons
firmly hope, that there
never will be any Occafion
for fuch a new Regula-
tion.

xX Or

L2

76 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulatzons.

XX. The Grand - Ma-
fter, with his Deputy,
Grand-Wardens, and Se-
cretary, fhall at leaft once
go round and vifit all the
Lodges about Town dur-
ing his Mafterthip.

XXI. If

New Regulations.

XX. Or elfe he halt
fend his Grand Officers to
vifit the Lodges: This old
and laudable Praétice of-
ten renders a Deputy ne-
ceffary: When he viiits
them, the fenior Grand-
Warden atts as Deputy,
the junior as the fenior, as
above ; or if both or any
of them be abfent, the
Deputy, or he that pre-
fides for him, may ap-
point whom he pleafes in
their Stead, pro tempore.

For when both the
Grand-Mafters are abfent,
the fenior or juniorGrand-
Warden may prefide as
Deputy, in vifiting the
Lodges or in the Confti-
tution of a new Lodge;
neither of which can be
done without, at leaft, one
of the prefent Grand Offi-
cers; except Places at too
great a Diftance from the
Grand Lodge, and in fuch

Cafe

AHIMAN REZON. 77

Old Regulations.

XXI. If the Grand -
Mafter dies during his
Mafterfhip; or by Sick-
nefs, or by being beyond

Sea, or any other Way be
render'd incapable of dif-
charging his Office; the
Deputy, or in his Abfence
the fenior Grand-Warden,
or in his Abfence the ju-
nior Grand-Warden, or in
his Abfence any three Ma-
fters of Lodges thall af-
femble at the Grand
Lodge immediately, in or-
der to advife together up-
on the Emergency, and to

fend

New Regulations.

Cafe fome faithful Brother
who has paffed the Chair,
&c. fhall have a proper
Deputation, &c. under the
Grand Lodge Seal for the
Conftitution of fuch new
Lodge or Lodges, in di-
ftant or remote Countries,
where the Grand Officers
cannot poflibly attend.

XXI. Upon fuch a Va-
cancy, if no former Grand-
Mafter, nor former Depu-
ty be found, the prefent
fenior Grand-Warden fills
the Chair, or in his Ab-
fence the junior, tillanew
Grand-Mafter is chofen ;
and if no prefent nor for-
mer Grand - Warden be
found, then the oldeft
Free-Mafon who is now

the Mafter of a Lodge.

XXII. Or

78 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

fend two of their Number
to invite the laft Grand-
Matter to refume his Of-
fice, which now of Courfe
reverts to him; and if he
refufes to act, then the
next laft, and fo back-
ward; but if no former
Grand-Mafter be found,
the prefent Deputy thall
act as Principal till a new
Grand-Mafter is chofen ;
or if there be no Deputy,
then the cldeft Mafon the
prefent Mafter of a Lodge,

XXII. The Brethren of
all the regular Lodges in
and near the City of Lon-
don, fhall meet in fome
convenient Place on every
St. Joun’s Day; and when
Bufinefs is over, they may
repair to their feftival Din-
ners, as they fliall think
moft convenient ; and
when St. foun’s Day hap-
pens to be cn 2 Sunday,

then

New Regulations.

XXII. Or any Brethren
around the Globe (who
are true and faithful
Members of the ancient
Craft) at the Place ap-
pointed, till they have
built a Place of their own;
but none but the Mem-
bers of the Grand Lodge
are admitted within the
Doors during the Eleétion
of Grand Officers.

XXL Ap.

AHIMAN

Old Regulations.

then the public Meeting
fhall be on the next Mon-
day.

The Grand Lodge mutt
mect in fome convenient
Place on St. Joun the E-
vangelift’s Day, in every
Year, in Order to proclaim
the new, or recognize the
old Grand-Mafter, Depu-
ty, and Grand-Wardens.

XXIII. If the prefent
Grand-Mafter fhall con-
fent to continue a fecond
Year, then one of the
Grand Lodge (deputed for
that Purpofe) hall repre-
fent to all the Brethren, his
Worfhip’s good Govern-
meni, &c. and, turning to
him, fhall in the Name of
the Grand Lodge, hum-
bly requeft him to do the
FRATERNITY the Great
Honour (if nobly born, if
hot, the great Kindnefs)
of continuing to be their

Grand-

REZON. 79

New Regulations.

XXIII. Application thall
be made to the Grand-
Mafter, by the Deputy,
(or fuch Brother whom
the Grand Lodge thall ap-
point, in cate of his Fai-
lure) at leaft one Month
before St. Fobn the Evan-
gelift’s Day, in order to
enquire whether his Wor-

fhip will do the Frater-
nity the Great Honour (or

Kindnefs) of continuing in
his Office a fecond Year,
or of nominating his Suc-
ceflor; and if his Wor-

fhip

80 AHIMAN REZON.

Old Regulations.

Grand-Matter for the Year
enfuing ; and his Wor-
fhip declaring his Confent
thereto, (in what Manner
he thinks proper) the
Grand SecreTary fhall
thrice proclaim him aloud,

GRAND-MASTER

OF
MASONS!
All the Members of the
Grand Lodge fhall falute
him in due Form, accord-
ing to the ancient and
laudable Cuftom of Free-

Mafons.

XXIV. The prefent
Grand-Mafter fhall nomi-
nate his Succeffor for the
Year enfuing ; who, if u-
nanimoufly approved of by
the Grand Lodge, and
there prefent, he thall be
proclaimed, faluted, and
congratulated, the new
Grand-Mafter, as before
hinted ; and immediately

in-

New Regulations.

fhip fhould at that Time
happen to be out of
Town, or the Pétrfon
whom he fhall think pro-
per to fucceed him ; that
then the Secretary {hall
write to either, or both,
concerning the fame, the
copies of which Letters
fhall be tranfcribed in the
Tranfaétion - Book of the
Grand Lodge, as alfo the
Anfwérs received.

XXIV. This is the ge-
neral Prattice of Grand
Lodges, for they feldom
or never difapprove the

Choice.

XXV.1. A

AHIMAN REZON. oe

Old Regulations.
inftalled by the laft Grand-
Mafter, according to an-
cient * Ufage.

But if that Nomination
is not unanimoully approv-
ed, the new Grand-Matfter
fhall be chofen immedi-
ately by Ballot, viz. every
Mafter and Warden writ-
ing his Man’s Name, and
and the laft Grand-Mafter
writing his Man’s Name
too, and the Man whofe
Name the laft Grand-Ma-
fter fhall firft take out ca-
fually or by Chance, fhall
be Granp- Master of
MASONS for the Year
enfuing: And if prefent,
he fhall be proclaimed,
faluted, and congratulat-
ed, as before hinted, and

forth-

New Regulations.

There has been no Oc-
cafion for this old Regu-
lation in our Time, the
Grand Lodge (as before)
having conftantly approv-
ed of the Grand-Mafter’s
Choice ; and my Reafon
for inferting it is, leaft any
Brother (acquainted with
the old Conftitutions )
fhould think the omitting
it a Defeétion.

XXV.1.

_ * This is a moft noble and grand Ceremony, but cannot be de-
fcribed in Writing, nor ever known to any but Mafter-Mafons.

82

Old Regulations.
forthwith inftalled by the
laft Grand-Matter, accord-
ing to Ufage.

XXV. 1. The laftGrand-
Matter thus continued, or
the new Grand - Mafter
thus inftalled, fhall next,
as his inherent Right, no-
minate and appoint his
Deputy Grand - Mafter,
(either the laft ora new
one) who fhall alfo be pro-
claimed, faluted, and con-
gratulated in due Form.

2. The new Grand-
Mafter hall alfo nominate
his new Grand-Wardens ;
and, if unanimoufly ap-
proved by the Grand
Lodge, they thall alfo be
forthwith proclaimed, fa-
luted, and congratulated
in due Form.

XXVI. That

AHIMAN REZON.

New Regulations,

XXV.1. A Deputy was
always needful when the
Grand-Mafter was nobly
born, and this old Regu-
lation has been always
practifed in our Time.

2. This old Regulation
has fometimes been found
inconvenient, therefore the
Grand Lodge referve to
themfelves the Eleétion of
Grand - Wardens ; where
any Member has a Right
to nominate one, and the
two Perfons who have the
Majority of Votes (ftill
preferving due Harmony)
are declared duly elected.

XXVI. The

AHIMAN

Old Regulations.

XXVI. That if the
Brother whom the prefent
Grand-Mafter fhall nomi-
nate for his Succeffor (or
whom the Grand Lodge
fhall choofe by Ballot, as
above) be out of Town,
and has returned his An-
fwer, that he will accept
of the Office of Grand-
Mafter, he fhall be pro-
claimed, as before in old
Regulation xxiii, and may
be inftalled by Proxy,
which Proxy muft be the
prefent or former Grand-
Mafter, who fhall act in
his Name, and receive the
ufual Honours, Homage,
and Congratulations.

XXVII. Every Grand
Lodge has an_ inherent
Power and Authority to
make new Regulations, or

to

REZON. 83

New Regulations.

XXVI. The Proxy
muft be either the laft or
former Grand-Maiter (as
the Duke of Richmind
was for Lord Paifly) or
elfe a very reputable Bro-
ther, as Lord Southwell
was for the Earl of Strath-
more.

But the Grand Inftal-
lation is not performed
until the real new Grand-
Mafter is prefent.

Nor is the new Deputy,
nor the Grand-Wardens,
allowed Proxies when ap-

pointed.

XXVII. All the Altera.
tions, or new Regulations
above written, are only for
amending or explaining

the

M2

84

Old Regulations.

to alter thefe for the real
Benefit of the Ancient
FRATERNITY, provided
always that the old Land-
Marks be carefully pre-
ferved, and that fuch new
Regulations and Altera-
tions be propofed and a-
gteed to by the Grand-
Lodge, and that they be
offered to the Perufal of
all the Brethren in Writ-
ing, whofe Approbation
and Confent (or the Ma-
jority thereof) is abfolute-
ly neceffary to make the
fame binding and obliga-
tory; which muft there-
fore, after the new Grand-
Matter is inftalled, be {o-
lemnly defired and obtain-
ed from the Grand Lodge,
as it was for thefe old Re-
gulations by a great Num-
ber of Brethren.

The End cf te

vy

ct

AHIMAN REZON.

New Regulations.

the old Regulations for the
Good of Mafonry, without
breaking in upon the an-
cient Rules of the Frater-
nity, ftill preferving the
old Land-Marks, and were
made at feveral Times, (as
Occafion ofered) by the
Grand Lodge, whu have
an inherent Power of a-
mending what inay be
thought inconvenient, and
ample Authority of mak-
ing new Regulations for
the Good of Free-Ma‘on-
ry, which has not been
difputed ; for the Members
of the Grand Lodge are
truly the Repreientatives
of all the Fraternity, ac-
cording to old Regula-
tion X.

old Regulation:,

NEW

ANIMAN REZON. 85

NEW. REGULATION S.

XXVHI. 1. That no Brothers be adinitted into the
Grand Lodge, but the immediate Members thereof, v72z-
the four prefent and all former Grand Officers, the Trea-
furer and Secretary, the Mafters and Wardens of all :c-
gular Lodges, except a Brother who is a Petitioner, or
a Witnefs in fome Cafe, or one called in by Motion.

2. That at the third Stroke of the Grand-Mafter’s
Hammer (always to be repeated by the fenior Grand-
Warden) there fhall be a general Silence ; and that he
who breaks Silence, without Leave from the Chair,
fhall be publickly repremanded.

3. That under the fame Penalty every Brother fhall
keep his Seat, and keep ftri&t Silence whenever the
Grand-Mafter or Deputy thall think fit to rife from the
Chair, and call Zo Order.

4. That in the Grand Lodge every Member thall
keep in his Seat (according to the N° of his Ledge)
and not move about from Place to Place during the
Communication, except the Grand-Wardens, as hav-
ing more immediately the Care of the Grand Lodge.

5. That no Brother is to fpeak but once to the fame
Affair, unlefs to explain himfelf, or when called upon

by the Chair to fpeak.

6. Every one that fpeaks fhall rif, and keep fland-
ing, addreffing himfelf (in proper Manner) to the
Chair; nor fhali any prefume to interrurm him, under

the

86 AHIMAN REZON.

NEW REGULATIONS.
the aforefaid Penalty; unlefs the Grand-Mafter find
him wandering from the Point in Hand, fhall think fit
to reduce him to Order ; for then the faid Speaker {hall
fit down: But, after he has been fet right, he may
again proceed if he pleafes.

7. If in the Grand Lodge any Member is twice
called to Order at any one Affembly, for tranfgrefling
thefe Rules, and is guilty of a third Offence of the
fame Nature, the Chair fhall peremptorily order him to
quit the Lodge-Room for that Night.

8. That whoever fhall be fo rude as to hifs at any
Brother, or at what another fays or has faid, he {hall
be forthwith folemnly excluded the Communication,
and declared incapable of ever being a Member of any
Grand Lodge for the future, till another Time he
publickly owns his Fault, and his Grace be granted,

9 No Motion for a new Regulation, or for the Con-
tinuance or Alteration of an old one, fhall be made
"till it be firft handed up in Writing to the Chair ;
and, after it has been perufed by the Grand-Matter,
at leaft about ten Minutes, the Thing may be moved
publickly, and then it thall be audibly read by the Se-
cretary ; and if he be feconded, and thirded, it muft
immediately be committed to the Confideration of the
whole Affembly, that’ their Senfe may be fully heard
about it; after which the Queftion fhall be put, pro
and con,

to. The

AHIMAN REZON. 87

NEW REGULATIONS.

10. The Opinion, or Votes of the Members, are to
be fignified by holding up of Hands; that is, one
Hand each Member ; which uplifted Hands the Grand
Wardens are to count, unlefs the Number of Hands
be fo unequal as to render the counting them ufe-
lefs.

Nor fhould any other Kind of Divifion ever be ad-
mitted among Free-Mafons.

The End of the new Regulations,

My Son, forget not my Law ; but let thine Heart keep
my Commandments, and remove not the ancient Land-
Mark which thy Fathers have fet Sovomon.

SSSIESS SSSISESSISS SISCISSSEOSS

TH OUGH the foregoing are called newRegulations,

yet they are of manyYears ftanding, and have been
wrote at different Times, by Order of the whole Com-
munity, as Amendments or Explanations of the olé
Regulations ; for we are not to break in upon the an-
cient Rules of the Fraternity, as before mentioned in
New Regulation XXVIL.

As

88 AHIMAN REZON.

TEER RONG R ORE SLE OR AERO ATES
” "No a oe
33 Eo ee Rare et

3 peetesseeeeriteet SPEPEEEP EEE EEE DEE beh

§ my chief Aim and Defign in this Undertaking

is to acquaint my worthy Brethren with the old

and new Regulations (and in Truth they are the moft

requifite Subject concerning Free-Mafonry that can be

committed to Writing) I have added the following Re.

gulations of the Committee for Charity, as they have

been approved of and practifed by the Grand Lodge
of Ireland fince the Year 1738, when our

Right Worthipful and Right Honourable Brother
WIL!TFIAM STUART,

Lord Vifcount Mountjoy (now Earl of Blefington)
was Grand-Mafter.

Alfo the Regulations of the Stewards Lodge, or
Committee for Charity, as they have been approved
of and practifed by the ancient York-Mafons in Eng-
land fince the Year 1751.

"Rae of

AHIMAN REZON. 89

THE

REGULATIONS

FOR

CHARITY,

As prattifed in Ireland, and by York-Mafons
in England.

ORD $ Of $ of sh Oho H Off0 oo foo # Oo shoo + otto & ofo Fcho $ clo +h of foo oto

Trifh Regulations. York Mafons Regulations.

I, HAT the Com- I. $11 prefent and
Seeg mittee fhall be Sae5 former Grand
and confift of the Grand- Officers, Treafurer and Se-
Mafter, the DeputyGrand- retary, with the Mafters
Mafter, and Grand-War- of eight regular Lodges,
dens, and allformerGrand who are fummoned and
Officers obliged

90 AHIMAN REZON.

- Trifh Regulations.

Officers; the Treafurer and
Secretary, with the Mafter
of every regular Lodge in
the City of Dudlin for the
Time being.

IL. That all Colleétions,
Contributions, and other
charitable Sum or Sums of
Money, of what Nature or
Kind foever, that fhall at
any Time be brought into
the Grand Lodge, fhall be
depofited in the Hands of
the Treafurer, who is not
to difburfe or expend the
fame, or any Part thereof,
on any Account whatever,
without an Order from
the faid Committee, which
Order fhall be figned by

the

York Mafins Regulations.

obliged to attend in their
turns; the Method is four
of the oldeft, and four of
the youngeft Matters, are
fummoned Monthly to
hear all Petitions, &c. and
to order fuch Relief to be
given to diftreffed Bre-
thren, as their Neceffity
may appear and Prudence
may direct.

II. This is punctually
practifed here.

II]. This

AHIMAN REZON.

Trifh Regulations.
the Secretary, or the Grand
Officer or Mafter then pre-
fiding in the Chair.

Ill. That neither the
Treafurer, or any other
Perfon whatever, fhall give
or fign any Order on the
Treafurer for any Sum of
Money, until the fame be
firft approved of by the
Majority of the Commit-
tee then prefent, and en-
tered into their Tranfac-
tion-Bo.k together, with
the Name or Names of
the Perfon or Perfons to
whom the fame is to be
given.

IV. That no anony-
mous Letter, Petition, or
Recommendation, by or
from any Perfon, or on
any Account or Pretence
whatloever, be introdu-

ced

Q!

York Mafons R egulations.

HI. This is likewite

practifed here.

IV. The fame obferved

here,

N 2

V. Re-

y2 AHIMAN REZON.,

Trifh Regulations.

ced or read in this Com-
mittee.

V. That any Perfon who
fhall petition the Grand
Lodze, or this Commit-
tee for Charity, fhail be
known to be at Icaft one
whole Year a contributing
Member to the Fund
thereof, and that no Pe-
tition fhall be received or
read in this Committce,
but what fhall be figned
with the Names of (at
leaft) three of the Mem-
bers thereof; and the
Merits of the Petitioner
be well vouched by them,
or fome other worthy
Brethren, who fhall have
perfonal Knowledge there-
of; and that no Perfon
fhall prefer, or bring in,
any Petition to this Com-
mittee, but one of the
Menzbers who figns it, the

Peti-

York Majons Regulations.

V. Regiftered Mafons,
who have contribu:tcd for
fix Months, and a Mem.
ber of a reguls: Lodge
during that “sime, 2re
heard and confidered, &c.
and Sojourners, o; travel-
ling Mafons, are relicved
by private Collections not
out of the Fund.

All Petitions or Recom-
mendations fhall be figned
by fome Maiter or War-
den of a regular Lodge, to
whom the Petitioner is per-
fonally known, and who
fhall (if in Town) attend
the Steward’s Lodge, to
affert the Truth of the Pe-
tition.

Any Brother may fend
in a Petition or Recom-
mendation, but none are
admitted to fit and hear

the

AHIMAN REZON. 93

Trijh Regulations.
Petitioner alfo attending in
Perfon, except in Cafes of
Sicknefs, Lamenefs, or Iin-
prifonment.

VI. That it fhall be the
inherent Power of this
Committee, to difpofe of
the Fund laid in for Cha-
rity to charitable Ufes, and
no other (and that only to
fuch Perfons who {hall ap-
pear by their Petitions, as
aforefaid, to be deferving
and in real Want of cha-
ritable and brotherly Af-
fiftance) not exceeding the
Sum of five Pounds to any
one Perfon, or otherwife

fupply them with a week-
ly

Dork Mafon's Regulations.
the Debates but the Grand
Otficers, ‘Treaturer, and
Secretary, and the eight
Maiters fummoned for
that Purpofe

The Petitioners alfo are
to attend (if in or adjacent
to London) except in Cafes
of Sicknefs, Lamenefs, or
Imprifonment.

VI. This Regulation is
the Praétice here, only
with this Alteration, oz,
the Steward’s Lodge have
full Power and Authority
to give the Petitioner more
than five Pounds, if it
feems prudent to them.

VIL. This

94 AHIMAN

Trifh Regulations.

ly Support, as they fhall
jedge moft neceflary.

VII. That no Brother
who has received Ailift-
ance from this Committee
of Charity, fhall petition a
fecond Time, unlefs fome
new and well-attefted Al-
legation appear.

VIII. That no extrane-
ous brother, that is not
made in a regular Lodge,
but. made in a clandeftine
Manner, or only with a
View to partake of this
Charity, nor any aflifting
at fuch irregular Makings,
fhall be qualified to re-
ceive any Affiftance there-
from.

IX. That this Commit-
tee of Charity may refolve
itfelf into a Committee of
the Grand Lodge, at any
Time when they {hall

have

REZON.

York Mafons Regulations,

VII. This is left to the
Difcretion of the Stewards

Lodge.

VIII. This Regulation
is obferved by the York
Mafons, and it is firmly
hoped it will be always
continued,

IX. The Stewards
lodged have full Power
and Authority to hear and
determine all Matters
(concerning Free-Mafon-

ry)

AHIMAN REZON. 95

Trifh Regulations.

have Bufinefs from the
Grand Lodge laid betu:e
them, or that the Grand
Lodge fhall refer any Cafe
to them, when they have
too much to do in one
Night ; and that the Re-
port of the faid Committee
fhall be read in the Grand
Lodge, and by them be
approved of, before the
fame be put in Execution
or Practice.

X. That it is the in-
difpenfible Right of the
Grand Lodge, to order
the Committee to meet
when they fhall judge it
neceflary, who fhall then
have Power to adjourn

themfelves from Time to,

Time, as Bufinefs may re-
quire, at any Time be-
tween the monthly Meet-
ings of the Grand Lodge,
where all the preceeding
Bufinefs of the Commit-

ings

York Mafons Regulations.
ry) that fliall be laid be-
fore them, except making
new Regulations, which
Power is wholly invetted
in the whole Community
when met at their quarter-
ly Communication, where
all the Tranfactions of «ie
Stewards Lodge thall be
audibly read before all the
Free-Mafons then prefent

X. The Stewards Lodge
mcet on the third Wed-
nefday in each Kalendar
Month, &c. or fooner, if
the Grand Lodge give
Orders for fo doing.

XI, For

96 AHIMAN REZON.

Trifh Regulations.

tec fhall be read over, in
order to inform the Grand
Lodge of the Charity ex-
pended, and to receive
their Concurrence. in any
Matter that may be refer'd
to them.

XI. That when this
Committee is ordered to
be affembled, and thereto
duly fummoned, any ele-
ven of them then meeting
fhall be 2 Quorum, and
proceed upon Butinefs ;
and if any Debate fhall
happen to arife, the Ma-
jority of Votes then pre-
fent fhall be decilive, al-
ways allowing the Grand
Officer, or he that fhatl
then piefide in the Chair,
two Votes if Occafion re-
quire.

York Mafons Regulations,

XI. For the fpeedy Re.
lief of diftreffed Brethren,
&c. three of the eight
Mafters fummoned for
that Purpofe ( with or
without Grand Officers )
the Secretary and Books
always prefent, may pro.
ceed to Bufinefs, as Pru-
dence and brotherly Love
thall dire&t them, ©

The End of the ivi aid York Mafons Regulations.

A CHOICE

f&. °“@.HOvpc #

COLLECTION

OF
MASONS SONGS,
With feverai ingenious
PROLOGUES and EPILOGUES,

To which js added,
> ]
Solomon’s Temple,
AN
O RA TORI QO,
‘As it was performed at the
PurtyarMonic-Room, in Fi/baméle-Strect,
DUBLIN,
For the Benefit of fick and diitreffed
FREE-MASON S.

LONDON:
Printed in the Year MDCCLYI.

pantie
EeeatS «es if Gi ai
a + Ke

re %

& CHOTCE

COLLECTION

OF

MASONS SONGS, &e.

FORKGAKSGMORKSRKORKS K OKGKS KS KG MOKE

In the old Book of Conftitutions the Mafter’s Song
was of too great a Length to be fung at one Time,
therefore the Brethren never fing more than the
following Verfe and Chorus.

I. The Mafter’s Song.

if) Ragan mighty Eaftern Kings, and fome
Of brain's Race, and Monarchs good
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Reme,
True ARCHITECTURE underftoad ;
O2 No

100 A Choice CoLLection of

No Wender then if Mafons join,

To celebrate thofe Maton Kings ;
With folemn Nite and flowing Wine,
Whilf e’ery Brother jointly fings.

CHORUS.

Who can unfold the Royal Art,

Cr thew its Secrets in a Song;
They’re fately kept in Mafon’s Heart,
And to the Ancient Lodge belong.

To the King and the Craft, as Mafler-Mafias.

In the old Book this Song was thought too long, there-
fore the fol!owing laft Verte and Chorus is thought
fufficient.

ll. The Wardens Song.

From hence-forth ever fing,
‘The Craftfman and the King ;
With Poetry and Mufick fweet,
Reiound their Harmony compleat ;
And with Geometry in fkilful Hand,
Due Homage pay,
Without Delay,
To the King and to our Mafter grand ;
He rules the free-born Sons of Art,
By Love and Friendfhip, Hand and Heart.

CHORUS.

MASONS SONGS. lol
CHORUS.

Who can rehearfe the Praife,
In foft poetic Lays;
Or folid Profe of Mafons true,
Whofe Art tranfcends the common View ;
Their Secrets ne’er to Strangers yet expos’d,
Referv’d fhall be,
By Mafons free,
And only to the Ancient Lodge difclos’d ;
Becaufe they’re kept in Mafon’s Heart,
By Brethren of the Royal Art.

To all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates, that ever pro-
pagated the royal excellent Art.

Ili. The Fellow-Craft’s Song.

I.
Hail Mafonry! thou Craft divine!
Glory of Earth! from Heav’n reveal’d!
Which doth with Jewels precious fhine,
From all but Mafons Eyes conceal’d.
Chor. Thy Praifes due who can rehearfe,
In nervous Profe or flowing Verfe.

Il.
As Men from Brutes diftinguifh'd are,
A Mafon other Men excels ;
For what’s in Knowledge choice and rare,
Within his Breaft fecurely dwells.
Chor. His filent Breaft and faithful Heart,
Preferve the Secrets of the Art.

From

$o2 A Choice CoLLECTION of

Il.
From fcorching Heat and piercing Cold,
From Beafts whofe Roar the Foreft rends ;
From the Affaults of Warriors bold,
The Mafons Art Mankind defends.

Chor. Be to this Art due Honour paid,
. From which Mankind receives fuch Aid.

IV.
F.nfigns of State that feed our Pride,
Diftinétions troublefome and vain ;
By Mafons true are laid afide,
Art’s free-born Sons fuch Toys difdain.
Chor. Innobl’d by the Name they bear,
Diftinguifh’d by the Badge they wear.
Vv.
Sweet Fellowfhip from Envy free,
Friendly Converfe of Brotherhood ;
The Lodge’s lafting Cement be,
Which has for Ages firmly ftood,
Chor. A Lodge thus built, for Ages paft
Has lafted, and fhall ever laft.
VI.
Then in our Songs be Juftice done,
‘To thofe who have inrich’d the Art;
From Adam down until this Time,
And let each Brother #ar a Part.
Cher. Let noble Mafons Healths go round,
Their Praife in lofty Lodge refound.

To bis Ingurial Majefiv (cur Brother) FRANCIS,
Hinperor of Germany.
IV. The

MASONS SONGS. 103

IV. The Enter'd ’Prentice’s Song.

I.
Come let us prepare,
We Brothers chat are,
Affembled on merry Occafion ;
Let’s drink, laugh, and fing,
Our Wine has a Spring,
Here’s a Health to an Accepted Mafon,

II.
The World is in Pain,
Our Secrets to gain,

And ftill let them wonder and gaze ons
Till they’re brought to the Light,
They'll ne’er know the right

Word or Sign of an Accepted Mafon,

Ill.
Tis This and ’tis That,
They cannot tell What,
Why fo many Great Men of the Nation,
Shou’d Aprons put on,
To make themfelves one,
With a Free and an Accepted Mafon,

IV.
Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,
Have Jaid by their Swords,
Our Myft’ry to put a good Grace on 5
And thought themfelves fam’d,
To hear themfelves nam’d,
With a Free and an Accepted Mafon,

Antis

104 A Chorce CoLLection of

Vi
Antiquity’s Pride,
We have on our Side,
Which maketh Men juft, in their Station ;
There’s nought but what’s good,
To be underftoed,
By a Free and an Agcepted Mafon.

VI.
We’re true and fincere,
And juft to the Fair,
They'll truft us on any Occafion ;
No Mortal can more,
The Ladies adore,
Than 2 Free and an Accepted Mafon,

VII.
Then join Hand in Hand,
By each Brother firm ftand,
Let’s be merry and put a bright Face on;
What Mortal can boaft,
So noble a Toaft,
As a é'ree and an Accepted Mafon.

[ Thrice repeated in due Form.]

To all the Fraternity round the Globe.

V. The

MASONS SONGS. 105

V. The Deputy Grand-Mafler’s Song.

N. B. The two laft Lines of each Verfe is the Chorus.

I,
On on my dear Brethren, purfue your great Lecture,
And refine on the Rules of old Architecture ;
High Honour to Mafons the Craft daily brings,
To thofe Brothers of Princes and Fellows of Kings.

II.
We've drove the rude Vandals and Goths off the Stage,
Reviving the Arts of Auguftus fam’d Age ;
Vefpafian deftroy’d the vaft Temple in vain,
Since fo many now rife in Great George’s mild Reign.

Il,
Of Wren and of Angelo mark the great Names,
Immortal they live as the Tiber and Thames ;
To Heav’n and themfelves they’ve fuch Monuments rais’d,
Recorded like Saints and like Saints they are prais’d.

IV.
The five noble Orders compos’d with fuch Art,
Will amaze the fix’d Eye and engage the whole Heart ;
Proportion’s dumb Harmony gracing the whole,
Gives our Work, like the gicrious Creation, a Soul.

Vv.
Then Mafter and Brethren preferve your great Name,
This Lodge fo majeftic will purchafe you Fame ;
Rever’d it fhall ftand till all Nature expire,
And its Glories ne’er fade till the World is on Fire.

Pp See,

106 A Choice CoLLecTion of

VI.
See, fee, behold here what rewards all our Toil,
Enlivens our Genius and bids Labour fimile ;
To our noble Grand-Matfter let a Bumper be crown’d,
To all Mafons a Bumper, fo let it go round.

VII.
Again my lov’d Brethren, again let it pafs,
Our ancient firm Union cements with the Glafs ;
And all the Contentions ’mong{t Mafons fhall be,
Who better can work or who beft can agree.

To the Right Worfhipful the Grand-Mafer.

VI. Grand-W arden’ s Song.

hamoe *
Let Mafonry be now my Theme,
Throughout the Globe to fpread its Fame,
And eternize each worthy Brother’s Name ;
Your Praife thall to the Skies refound,
In lafting Happinefs abound,
And with fweet Union all your noble Deeds be crown’d.

[Repeat this laft Line.j

CHORUS.
Sing then my Mufe to Mafon’s Glory,
Your Names are fo rever’d in Story
That all th’ admiring World do now adore ye.
II.
Tet Harmony divine infpire
Your Souls with Love and gen’rous Fire,
To copy well wife Solomon your Sire ;
Know-

MASONS SONGS 107

Knowledge fublime fhall fll each heart,
The Rules of G’ometry to impart,
WhileWifdom, Strength, and Beauty, crown the royal Art.
Chorus. Sing then my Mufe, &c.

Til.
Let ancient Mafons Healths go round,
In fwelling Cups all Cares be drown’d,
And Hearts united ’mongft the Craft be found ;
May everlafting Scenes of Joy,
Our peaceful Hours of Blifs employ,
Which Time’s all-conqu’ring Hand fhall ne’er deftroy.
Cherus. Sing then my Mufe, &c.
IV.
My Brethren thus all Cares refign,
Your Hearts let glow with Thoughts divine,
And Veneration fhow to Solomon’s Shrine ;
Our annual ‘Tsibute thus we'll pay,
That late Pofterity fhall fay,
We’ve crown’d with Joy this happy, happy Day.
Chorus. Sing then my Mule, &e.

To all the Noble Lords, and Right Werftipful Brethren,
that have been Grand-Maflers.

VII. The Treafurcr’s Song.
Tune. Near fome cool Shade.

I.

Grant me kind Heav’n what I requ. ft,

In Mafonry let me be bleft ;

Direé& me to that happy Place,

Where Friendhhip {miles in every Face ;
P 2 Where

108

A Choice CoLLection of

Where Freedom and {weet Innocence,
Enlarge the Mind and cheers the Senfe.

II.
Where fcepter’d Reafon from her Throne,
Surveys the Lodge and makes us one ;
And Harmony’s delightful Sway,
For ever fheds ambrofial Day ;
Where we bleft Eden’s Pleafures tafte,
While balmy Joys are our Repatt.

Ill.
Our Lodge the focial Virtues grace;
And Wifdom’s Rules we fondly trace 3
Whole Nature open to our View,
Points out the Paths we fhould purfue 3
Let us fubfift in lafting Peace,
And may our Happinefs increafe.

IV.
No prying Eye can view us here,
No Fool or Knave difturb our Cheer ;
Our well-form’d Laws fet Mankind free,
And give Relief to Mifery ;
The Poor, opprefs’a with Woe and Grief,
Gain, from our bounteous Hands, Relief.

To all well-difpofed charitable Mafons.

VIII. The Secretary's Song.

I.
Ye Brethren of the ancient Craft,
Ye fav’rite Sons of Fame ;
Let Bumpers cheerfully be quaff’d,
To each good Mafon’s Name ;

Happy,

MASONS SONGS. 109

Happy, long happy may he be,
Who loves and honours Mafonry ,
With a fa, la, la, &e.
II.
In vain wou’d D’Aavers with his Wit,*
Our flow Refentment raife ;
What he and all Mankind have writ,
But celebrates our Praife ;
His Wic this only Truth imparts,
That Mafons have firm faithful Hearts ;
With a fa, la, la, &e.
Ill.
Ye Britifo Fair, for Beauty fam’d,
Your Slaves we with to be ;
Let none for Charms like yours be nam’d,
That loves not Mafonry ;
This Maxim D’ Anvers proves full well,
That Mafons never kifs and tell ;
With a fa, la, la, &c.
IV.
Free-Mafons ! no Offences give,
Let Fame your Worth declare ;
Within your Compafs wifely live,
And act upon the Square ;
May Peace and Friendfhip e’er abound,
And every Mafon’s Health go round ;
With a fa, la, la, &e.

To the Deputy Grand-Mafter.

* That thofe who hang’d Captain Porteous, at Edinburgh, were
all Free-Mafons, becaufe they kept their own Secrets. See the
Craft/man of the 16th of April, Number 563.

IX. Song

Ilo

A Choice CoLLEcTION of

IX. Song to the foregoing Tune.

I.
On you who Mafonry defpife,
This Counfel I beftow ;
Don’t ridicule, if you are wife,
A Secret you don’t know:
Yourfelves you bant&r, but not it ;
You fhow your Spleen, but not your Wit 5
With a fa, la, la, &e.
I.
Infpiring Virtue by our Rules,
\ And in ourfelves fecure ;
We have Compaffion for thofe Fools,
Who think our Acts impure :
We know from Ignorance proceeds,
Such mean Opinion of our Deeds;
With a fa, la, la, &c.
Ill.
If Union and Sincerity,
Have a Pretence to pleafe ;
We Brothers of Free-Mafonry,
Lay, juftly, claim to thefe :
To State-Difputes we ne’er give Birth ;
Our Motto, Friendfhip is and Mirth ;
With a fa, la, la, &e.
the EVE
Some of our Rules I will impart,
But muft conceal the reft ;
They’re fafely lodged in Mafon’s Hearts,
Within each honeft Breaft :

We

MASONS SONGS.

We love our Country and our King ;
We toaft the Ladies, laugh, and fing ;
With a fa, la, la, &c.

To the Worfkipful Grand-Wardens.

X. SONG.

I.
By Mafon’s Art th’ afpiring Domes,
In ftately Columns fhall arife
All Climates are their native Homes,
Their well-judg’d Actions reach the Skies ;
Heroes and Kings revere their Name,
While Poets fing their lafting Fame.

Il.
Great, Noble, Gen’rous, Good, and Brave,
Are Titles they moft juftly claim ;
Their Deeds fhall live beyond the Grave,
Which thofe unborn fhall loud proclaim ;
Time fhall their glorious Aéts enrol,
While Love and Friendfhip charm the Soul.

To the perpetual Honour of Free-Majons.

XI. SONG.

I.
As I at Wheeler’s Lodge one Night,
Kept Bacchus Company ;
For Bacchus is a Mafon bright,
And of all Lodges Free.

II!

Said

112 4 Choice Correction of

Il.
Said I great Bacchus is a-dry,
Pray give the God fome Wine;
Jove ina Fury did reply,
Oétober’s as divine.
Il.
It makes us Mafons more compleat,
Adds to our Fancy.,Wings ;
Makes us as happy and as great,
As mighty Lords and Kings.

To the Mafters and Wardens of all regular Lodges.

XII. SONG.

I.
Some Folks have with curious Impertinence ftrove,
From Free-Mafons Bofoms their Secrets to move,

I'll tell them in vain their Endeavours muft prove,
Which Nobody can deny, &c.

Il.
Of that happy Secret when we are poffefs’d,
Our Tongues can’t explain what is lodg’d in our Breafts,
For the Bleffing’s fo great it can ne’er be exprefs’d.
Which Nobody can deny, &e.

Ill.
By Friendfhip’s ftrict Ties we Brothers are join’d,
With Mirth in each Heart and Content in each Mind,
And this is a difficult Secret to find.
Which Nobody can deny, &c.
; But

MASONS SONGS. 113
IV.

But you who wou’d fain our grand Secret expofe,
One Thing beft conceal’d to the World you difclofe,
Much folly in blaming what none of you knows.
Which Nobody can deny, &c.
V.
Truth, Charity, Juftice, our Principles are,
What one doth poftfs the other may fhare,
All thefe in the World are Secrets moft rare.
Which Nobody can deny, &c.
VI.
While then we are met the World’s Wonder and boaft,
And all do enjoy what pleafes each moft,
Vl give you the beft and moft glorious Toaft.
Which Nobody can deny, &e.
Vi.
Here’s a Health to the Gen’rous, Brave, and the Good,
To all thofe who think and who aé as they fhou’d,
In all this thy Free-Mafon’s Health’s underftood.
Which Nobody can deny, &e.

To all true and faithful Brethren, &c.

XII. SON G.
Tune. Oh Polly you might have toy’d and kifs’d.

I.
You People who laugh at Mafons draw near,
Give Ear to my Song without any Sneer;
And if you’ll have Patience you foon fhall fee,
What a noble Art is Mafanry.

Q There’s

Tig A Choice Cotttc ion of

I.
There’s none but an Atheift can ever deny,
But that this great Art came firlt from on high ;
The Almighcy Gor here 1’ll prove for to be,
The firit great Matler of Mafonry,

Ill.
Fe took up his Compafs with mafterly Hand,
He ftrétch’d out his Rule and he meafur’d the Land ;
Le laid the Foundation o’th’ Faith and the Sca,
By his known Rules of Mafonry.

IV.
Our firft Father ddan, deny it who can,
A Maton was made as foon as a Man;
And a Fig-L.caf Apron at firft wore he,
In Token cf’s Love to Mafonry.

Vier.
The principal Law our Lodge does approve,
Is that we fhou’d live in Brotherly-Love ;
‘Thus Cain was banifh’d by i leaven’s Decree,

For breaking the Rules of Maloy.

VI.
The Temple that wife King Sclomon rais’d,
For Beauty, for Order, for Elegance prais’d ;
‘To what did it owe its Flegancy ?
‘Yo the juft form’d Rulcs of Mafonry.

VIE
But fhou’d I pretend in this humble Verfe,
The Merits of Free-Mafons Arts to rehearfe ;
Years yet to come too little wou’d be,
‘Yo fing the Praifes of Mafonry.

Then

MASONS SONGS. 115

VIII.
Then hoping I’ve not detain’d you too long,
I here fhall take Leave to finifh my Song ;
With a Health to the Mafter and thoie that are free,
That live to the Rules of Mafonry,

To all the free-born Sons of the Ancient and Ucnourable
GRAFT.

XIV. SON G.

I,
We have no idle prating,
Of either Whig or Tory ;
But cacn agrees,
To live at Eafe,
And fing or tell a Story.

CHORUS.
Fill to hii,
Yo the Brim,
Let it round the Table row! :
The Divine,
Tells you Wine,
Checrs the Body and tie Soul,
Il.
We're always Men of Plcalure,
Defpifing Pride and Party ;
While Knaves and Fools,
Pretcribe us Rules,
We are fincere and hearty.
Cher. Fill to him, ©e.

Q:2 It

116 A Choice Cottection of

II.
If an Accepted Mafon,
Shou’d talk of high or low Church ;
We'll fet tim down,
A fhallow Crown,
And underitand him no Church.
Chor. Fiilto him, &e.
IV.
The World is all in Darknefs,
About us they conjecture ;
But little think,
A Song and Drink,
Succeeds the Mafons Leéture.
Cher. Fillto him, &e.
V.
Then Landlord bring a Hogfhead,
And in the Corner place it 5
Till it rebound,
With hollow Sound,
Each Mafon here will face it.
Chor. Fill tcohim, &e.

To the Memory of him who firft planted a Vine.

XV. SONG.
Tune. Young Damon once the happy Swain.
I.
A Mafon’s Daughter fair and young,
The Pride of all the Virgin Throng,
Thus to her Lover faid ;
Tho’ Damon I your Flame approve,

Your Actions praife, your Perfon love,

Yet (till PI live a Maid.
Nore

MASONS SONGS.

Il.
None fhall untie my Virgin Zone,
But one to whom the Secret’s known,
Of fam’d Free-Mafonry ;
In which the Great and Good combine,
To raife with generous Defign,
Man to Felicity,
Ill.

The Lodge excludes the Fop and Fool,

The plodding Knave and Party-Tool,
That Liberty wou’d fell ;

The Noble, Faithful, and the Brave,

No golden Charms can e’er deceive,
In Slavery to dwell.

IV.

This faid he bow’d and went away,

Apply’d was made without delay,
Return’d to her again ;

The fair-one granted his Requeft,

Connubial Joys their Days have bleft,
And may they e’cr remain.

To Mafons and to Mafons Bairns,
And thofe that lie in Mafons Arms,

XVI. SONG,

I,
A Health to our Sifters let us drink ;
For why fhou’d not they,
Be remember’d I pray,
When of us they fo often do think,
When of us they fo often do think.

117

*Tis

118 A Choice CoLLEcTion of

II.

Tis they give the chiefeft Delight ;
‘Tho’ Wine cheers the Mind,
And Mafonry’s Kind,

Thefe keep us in Tranfport all Night,

Thete keep us in Tranfport all Night.

To all the Female Friends of Free-Mafans, -

XV. SONG.

Tune. ‘Lhe merry ton’d Horn.

I.
Sing to the Honour of thofe,
Who Bafenefs and Error oppofe ;
Who from Sages and Magi of old,
Have got Secrets which none can unfold ;
Whilft thro’ Life’s fwift Career,
With Mirth and good Cheer,
We're revelling,
And levelling
The Monarch, till he
Says our Joys far tranfcend
What on Thrones do attend,
And thinks it a Glory, like us, to be free.

II.
The wifeft of Kings pav’d the Way,
And its Precepts we keep tv this Day ,
The mott glorious of Temples gave Name
‘To Free-Mafons, who ftill keep the fame ;
Tho’ no Prince did arife,
So great and fo wile ;

Yet

MASONS SONGS. 119

Yet in falling,
Our calling
Still bore high Applaufe,
And tho’ Darknefs 0’er-run,
‘The Face of the Sun,

We, diamond-like, blaz’d to illumine the Caufe,

To hin that firft the iork began, &e,

XVII. SONG.

I.
Hail fecret Art! by Heav’n defign’d
To cultivate and cheer the Mind ;
Thy Secrets are to all unknown,
But Mafons juft and true alone,
But Mafons juft and true alone.

CHORUS,
Then let us all their Praifes fing,
Fellows to Peafant, Prince, or King,
Fellows to Peafant, Prince, or King,

II.
From Weft to Eaft we take our Way,
To meet the bright approaching Day ;
‘That we to work may go in Time,
And up the fecret Ladder clime.
And up the, &c.

Cher. Then let us all, &c.
Ill.

Bright Rays of Glory did infpire,
Our Mafter great who came from Tyre ;

Still

120 A Choice Cotrection of

Still facred Hiftory keeps his Name,
Who did the glorious Temple frame.
Who did, &e.

Chor. Then Jet us, Ge.

IV.
The noble Art divinely rear’d,
Uprightly built upon the Square ;
Encompafs’d by the Powers divine,
Shall ftand until the End of Time.
Shall ftand, &c.

Chor. Then let usall, €&c.

Vv.
No human Eye thy Beauties fee,
But Mafons truly juft and free ;
Infpir’d by each heav’nly Spark,
Whilft Cowans labour in the Dark.
Chor. Then let us all, &ec.

To the Memory of the Tyrian Artift, &c.

XXI. SON G.

To the Tune of the Enter’d-’Prentice.
iy

Come are you prepar’d,

Your Scaffolds well rear’d,
Bring Morter and temper it purely;

*Tis all fafe I hope,

Well brac’d with each Rope,
Your Ledgers and Putlocks fecurely.

Then

MASONS SONGS. 121

Il.
Then next your Bricks bring,
It is Time to begin,
For the Sun with its Rays is adorning ;
The Day’s fair and clear,
No Rain you need fear,
*Tis a charming, lovely, fine Morning.

Ill.
Pray where are your Tools,
Your Line and Plumb-Rules,
Each Man to his Work iet him ftand Boys ;
Work folid and fure,
Upright and fecure,
And your Building be fure will be ftrong Boys.
IV.
Pray make no Miftake,
But true your Joints break,
And take Care that you follow your Leaders ;
Work, rake, back, and tueth,
And make your Work fmooth,
And be fure that you fill up your Headers.

To the Memory of Vitruvius, Angelo, Wren, and other
noble Artifts, &c.

XX. SON G.
Tune. On, on my dear Brethren.

I.
The curious Vulgar could never devife,
What focial Free-Mafons fo highly do prize;
No human Conjeéture, no ftudy in Schools,

Such fruitlefs Attempts are the Actions of Fools. =
oud-

122 A Cheice CoLtection of

II.

Sublime are our Maxims, our Plan from above,
Old as the Creation cemented with Love;
To promote all the Virtues adorning Man’s Life,
Subduing our Paflions, preventing all Strife.

Ill.
Purfue my dear Brethren, embrace with great Care,
A Syftem adapted our Adtions to fquare ;
Whofe Origin clearly appeareth divine,
Obferve how its Precepts to Virtue incline.

IV.
The Secrets of Nature King Solomon knew,
The Names of all Trees in the Foreft that grew ;
Architecture his Study, Free-Mafons fole Guide,
Thus finifh’d his Temple, Antiquity’s Pride.

Vv.
True ancient Free-Mafons our Arts did conceal,
Their Hearts were fincere and not prone to reveal ;
Here’s the Widow Son’s Mem’ry, that mighty great Sage;
Who {killfully handled Plum, Level, and Gage,

Vi.
Toaft next our Grand-Mafter of noble repute,
No Brother prefuming his Laws to difpute ;
No Difcord, no Faction, our Lodge fhall divide ;
Here Truth, Love, and Friendfhip, muft always abide.

VII.
Ceafe, ceafe ye vain Rebels, your Country’s Difgrace ;
To ravage like Vandals, our Arts to deface ;
Learn, learn to grow loyal, our King to defend,
And live like Free-Mafons, your Lives to amend.

To the ancient Sons of Peace.
XXI. Song

MASONS SONGS. 123

KA. S OUENG,

To the foregoing Tune.

I.
We Brethren Free-Mafons, !et’s mark the great Name ;
Moft ancieni and loyal, recorded by Fame :
In Unity met, let us merrily fing ;

The Life of a Mafon’s like that of a King.

II.
No Difcord, no Envy, amongft us fhall be,
No Confufion of Tongues, but let’s all agree :
Not like building of Bade/, confound one another ;
But fll up your Glaffes, and drink to each Brother.

HII.
A Tower they wanted to lead them to Blifs,
I hope there’s no Brother but knows whut it is ;
Three principal Steps in our Ladder there be,
A Mift’ry to all but thofe that are free.

9 IV.
Let th’ Strength of our Reafon keep th’ Square of our Heart,
And Virtue adotn ev’ry Man in his Part ;
The Name of a Cowan we’ll not ridicule,
But pity his Folly and count him a Fool.

V.
Let’s lead a good Life whilft Power we have,
And when that our Bodies are laid in the Grave,
We hope with good Confcience to Heav’n to climb,
And give Peter the Pafs-word, the Token, and Sign.

R 2 Saint

124 A Choice Cottection of

VI.
Saint Peter he opens and fo we pafs in,
To a Place that’s prepar’d for all thofe free from Sin 5
To that heav’nly Lodge which is tyi’d moft fecure,
A Place that’s prepar’d for all Mafons that’s pure.

Io all pure and upright Mafons.

XXII. SON G.
Tune. What though they call me Country Lafs.

I.

What tho’ they call us Mafon-fools,

We prove, by G’ometry, our Rules

Surpafs the Arts they teach in Schools,
They charge us falfely then :

‘We make it plainly to appear,

By our Behaviour every where,

That when you meet with Mafons there,
You meet with Gentlemen.

IL.
*Tis true we once have charged been,
With Difobedience to our Queen,
But after Monarchs plain have feen,
The Secrets fhe had fought :
We hatch no Plots againft the State,
Nor ’gainft great Men in Power prate,
Bur all that’s noble, good, and great,
Is daily by us taught.

Theie

MASONS SONGS, 125

Ill.
Thefe noble Structures which we fee,
Rais’d by our fam’d Society,
Surprife the World ; then fhall not we,
Give Praife to Mafonry :
Let thofe who do defpife the Art,
Live in a Cave or fome Defart,
To herd with Beafts, from Men apart,
For their Stupidity.
IV.
But view thofe favage Nations, where
Free-Mafonry did ne’cr appear,
What ftrange unpolifh’d Brutes they are ;
Then think on Mafonry :
Tt ma!:-s us courteous Men alway,
Gen’rous, hefpitable, and gay,
What other Art the like can fay ;
Then a Hicalth to Mafons Free,

Profperity to the moft ancient and mot honourable Craft.

XXIII. SONG,

I.
Glorious Craft which fires the Mind,
With fweet Harmony and Love ;
Surely thou wer’t firft defign’d, -
A Fore-Tafte of the Joys above,

II.
Pleafures always on thee wait,
Thou reformeft Adam’s Race ;
Strength and Beauty in thee meet,
Wifdom’s radiant in thy Face,

Arts

126

A Choice CoLLECTION of

III.
Arts and Virtues now combine,
Friendfhip raifes cheer:ul Mirth ;
All united to refine,
Man from’s groffer Part of Earth,

IV.
Stately Temples now arife,
And on lofty Cclumns ftand ;
Mighty Domes attempt the Skies ;
To adorn this happy Lan.

To the Secret and Silent, &c.

XXIV. SONG.

I.

Let malicious People cenfure,
They’re not worth a Mafon’s Anfwer ;
While we drink and fing,
With no Confcience fting ;
Let their evil Genius plague ’em,
And for Mollies Devil take ’em;
We'll be free and merry,
Drink Port and Sherry ;
Till the Stars at Midnight fhine,
And our Eyes with them combine ;
The dark Night to banith,
Thus we will replenifh
Nature, whilft the Glaffes
With the Bottle paffes :

Brether

MASONS SONGS.

Brother Mafon Free,
Here’s to thee, to thee ;
And let it run the Table round,

While Envy does the Mafons Foes confound.
To all Mafons who walk the Line, &c.

XXV. SON G.

I.
Come, come my Brethren dear,
Now we’re affembled here,
Exalt your Voices clear,
With Harmony ;
Here’s none fhall be admitted in,
Were he a Lord, a Duke, or King,
He’s counted but an empty Thing,
Except he’s free.

CHORUS.
Let ev’ry Man take Glafs in Hand,
Drink Bumpers to our Mafter Grand,
As long as he can fit or ftand,
With Decency.
II.
By our Arts we prove,
Emblems of Truth and Love,
Types given from above,

To thofe that are free;
There’s ne’er a King that fills a Throne,
Will ever be afhamed to own,

Thofe Secrets to the World unknown,

But fuch as we.

Chorus. Let ev’ry Man, &c.

127

Now

128 A Choice CoLLECTION of

II.
Now Ladies try your Arts,
To gain us men of Parts,
Who beft can charm your Hearts,
Becaule we’re free ;
Take us, try us, and you'll find,
We’re truc, loving, juft, and kind,
And taught to pleafe a Lady’s Mind,
By Mafonry.

Chorus. Let ev’ry Man, &e.

GRAND CHORUS.
God Blefs Kinc G EOKG E, long may he reign,
To curb the Pride of Foes that’s vain,
And with his conq’ring Sword maintain,
Free-Mafonry.

To the King’s good Health.
The Nation’s Wealth ;

The Prince Gon blefs ;
The Flect Succefs ;

The Lodge «no. lefs.

XXVI S ON G.
Tune. The Fairy Elves,
I.

Come follow, follow me,

Ye jovial Mafons free;

Come ‘oilow all the Rules,

‘That e’er was taught in Schools,
By Soleici, that Mafon King,
Who Honour to the Crait did bring.

He's

MASONS SONGS, 129

Il.
He’s juftly call’d the wife,
His Fame doth reach the Skies ;
He ftood upon the Square,
And did the ‘Temple rear ;
With true Level, Plum, and Gage,
He prov’d the Wonder of the Age.

III.
The mighty Mafon Lords,
Stood firmly to their Words ;
They had it in Efteem,
For which they’re juftly deem’d ;
Why fhou’d not their Example prove,
Our prefent Cratt to live in Love.

IV.
The Royal Art and Word,
Is kept upon Record ;
{n upright Hearts and pure,
While Sun and Moon endure ;
Not written but indented on,
Lhe Heart of e’ery Arch-Mafon.
V.
And as for Hiram’s Art,
We need not to impart ;
‘The Scripture plainly th:ws,
Vrom whence his Knowledge flows 5
His Genius was fo much refin’d,
His Peer he has not left behind.
VI.
Then let not any one,
Forget the Widow's Soa 5
$s Put

130 A Choice COLLECTION of

But toaft his Memory,

In Glafits charg’d full high;
And when our proper Time is come,
Like Brethren part, and fo go home.

To him that did the Temple rear, &c.

XXVII. SONG.

I.
With Plum, Level, and Square, to work let’s prepare,
And join in a fweet Harmony ;
Let’s fill up each Glafs, and around let it pafs,
To all honeft Men that are free,
To all honeft Men that are free.

CHORUS.

Then a Fig for all thofe, who are Free-Mafons Foes,
Our Secrets we'll never impart ;
But in Unity w’!l always agree,

And chorus it, profper our Art, profper our Art,
And chorus it, profper our Art.

Il.

When we’re properly cloathed, the Mafter difclofes
The Secrets that lodg’d in his Breaft

Thus we ftand by the Caufe, that deferves great Applaufe,
In which we are happily bleft.
In which, &e.
Chor. Then a Fig for all thofe, &c.

The

MASONS SONGS. 131
If.

The Bible’s our Guide, and by that we'll abide,
Which fhews that our Aétions are pure ,
The Compafs and Square, are Emblems mott rare,
Of Juftice our Caufe to infure.
Of Juftice, &c.
Chor. ‘Then a Fig for all thofe, &c.
IV.
The Cowan may ftrive, nay plot and contrive,
To find out our great Myftery ;
The inquifitive Wife, may in vain fpend her Life,
For ftill we'll be honeit and free.
For ftill, €c.
Chor. ‘Then a Fig for all thofe, &c.
V.
True brotherly Love, we always approve,
Which makes us a!! Mortals excel;
If'a Knave fhould by Chance, to this Grandeur advance,
That Villain we’ll firaitway expel,
That Villain, &c.
Chor. ThenaFig, &c.
Lee
Our Lodge that’s fo pure, to the End will endure,
In Virtue and true Secrecy ;
Then let’s toaft a good Health, with !fenour and Wealth,
To attend the bleft biands mace us free,
To attend, &c.

Chor. ‘Vhena Fig for all thofe, &c.

To each true and faithful Heart,
That jill preferves the fecret Art.

S 2 XXVIII Son

132

A Choice Correction of

XXVIII. SONG.

To the Tune of Ferry Fitzgerald.
I.

King Solomon, that wif Projecture,
In Mafonry took great Delight ;
And Hiram. tin great Archit-Cure,
Whofe Actions hall ever fhine bright :
From the Heart of a true honeft Mafon,
There’s none can the Secret remove ;
Our Maxims are Juftice, Morality,
Friendfhip, and brotherly Love.

Fa, la, la, &c.

II.

We meet like true F-icnds on the Square,
And part on a Level that’s fair ;
Alike we refpect King and Beggar,
Provided they’re juft and fincere :
We fcorn an ungenerous Action,
None can with Free-Mafons compare ;
We love for to live within Compafs,
By Rules that are honeft and fair.

Fa, Ja, la, &e,

III.
Succefs to all Accepted Matons,
Their’s none can their Honour pull down ;
Fore’er fince the glorious Creation,
Thefe brave Men were held in Renown:

When

MASONS SONGS. 13

wo

When dam was King of all Nations,
He form ’d a Plan with al! Speed ;
And foon made a fweet Habitation,
For him and his Companion Eve,

Fa, la, la, &e.

IV.

We exclude all talkative Fellows,
That will babble and prate paft their Wit;
They ne’er fhall come into our Secret,
For they’re neither worthy nor fit:
But the Perfons that’s well recommended,
And we find them honeft and true ;
When our Lodge is well tyl’d we'll prepare ’em,
And like Mafons our Work we’ll purfue.

Fa, la, la, &e.

V.

There’s fome foolifh People rcject us,
For which they’re highly to blame ;
They cannot fhew any Objection,
Or Reafon tor doing the fame :
The Art’s a divine Infpiration,
As all honeft Men will declare ;
So here’s to all true-hearted Brothers,
That live within Compafs and Square.

Fa, la, la, &e.

To all thofe who live within Compess and Square.

XXX. Seng

134 A Choice CoLLection of

XXIX. SONG.
By Brother R—— P——., Efq;
Tune. By Fove I'll be free.

I.

Of all Inftitutions to form well the Mind,
And make us to every Virtue inclin’d ;
None can with the Craft of Free-Mafons compare,
Nor teach us fo truly our Actions to fquare ;
For it was ordain’d by our Founder’s Decree,
That we fhou’d be loyal, be loving, and free,

be loving, and free, €e.

II.

We in Harmony, Friendfhip, and Unity meet,
And every Brother moft lovingly greet ;

And, when we fee one in Diftrefs, {till impart
Some Comfort to cheer and enliven his Heart ;
Thus we always live and for ever agree,
Refolved to be loyal, moft loving, and free,

moft loving, and free, &c.

Il.

By Points of good Fellowfhip we ftill accord,
Obferving each Brother’s true Sign, Grip, and Word ;
Which from our Great Architect was handed down,
And ne’er will to any but Mafons be known ;
‘Then here’s to our Brethren of every Degree,
Who always are loyal, are loving, and free,

are loving, and free, &c.

Thus

MASONS SONGS.

IV.

Thus we interchangeably hold one another,
To let Mankind fee how we are link’d to each Brother ;
No Monarch that fecret Knot can untie,
Nor can prying Mortals the Reafon know why ;
For our Hearts, like our Hands, ftill united fhall be;
Still fecret, ftill loyal, ftill loving, and free,

ftill loving, and free, &c.

To all Free Social Mafons, &c.

XXX. Song to the foregoing Tune.
By Brother B dCi ke.

Magna eft Veritas et prevalebit.

I.

To the Science that Virtue and Art do maintain,
Let the Mufe pay her Tribute in foft gliding Strain ;
Thofe myftic Perfections fo fond to difplay,
As far as allowed to poetical Lay ;
Each Profeffion and Clafs of Mankind muft agree, -
That Mafons alone are the Men who are free,

the Men who are free, &c.

I.
Their Origin they with great Honour can trace,
From the Sons of Religion and fingular Grace ;
Great Hiram and Solomon, Virtue tu prove,
Made this the grand Secret of Friendfhip and Love;
Each Profeffion and Clafs of Mankind mutt agree,
That Mafons, of all Men, are certainly free,

are certainly free, &e.

*55

The

136 A Choice CoLLecTion of

III.

The Smart and the Beau, the Coquet and the Prude,
The dull and the comic, the heavy and rude ;
In vain may enquire, then fret, and defpife
An Art that’s ftill fecret ’gainft all they devife ;
Each Profcffion and Clafs of Mankind muft agree,
That Mafons, tho’ fecret, are loyal and free,

are loyal and free, &c.

IV.

Commit it to thoufands of different Mind,
And this golden Precept you’ll certainly find ,
Nor Intereft nor Terror can make them reveal,
Without juft Admittance, what they fhould conceal ;
Each Profeffion and Clafs of Mankind muft agree,
That Mafons alone are both fecret and free,

both fecret and free, &¢.

Vv.
Fair Virtue and Friendfhip, Religion and Love,
The Motive of this noble Science ftill prove ;
*Jis the Lock and Key of the moft godly Rules,
And not to be trufted to Knaves or to Focls;
Each Profeffion and Clafs of Mankind muft agree,
That Ancient Free-Mafons are fteady and free,

are fteady and free, &c.

VI.
Th’ lfr’lites diftinguifh’d their Friends from their Foes,
By Signs and Chara¢ters ; then fay why fhould cthofe
Of Vice and Unbelief be permitted to pry,
Into Secrets that Mafons alone fhould difcry ;
Fach Profeffion and Clafs ot Mankind muft agree,
That Maforis, of all Me::, are fecret and free,

are fecret and free, &c.

The

MASONS SONGS,

VII.

The Dunce he imagines, that Science and Art

Depend on fome Compact or magical Part 5

Thus Men are fo ftupid, to think that the Caufe

Of our Conftitution’s againft divine Laws ,

Each Profcflion anu Clafs of Mankind muft agree,

That Mafons are jovial, religious, and free,
religious, and free, &e,

VIII.

Puth about the brifk Bowl, let it circl’ing pafs
Let each chofen Brother lay hold on his Glafs,
And drink to the Heart that will always conceal,
And the Tongue that our Secrets will ne’er reveal ;
Each Profeffion and Clafs of Mankind muft agree,
That the Sons of old Hiram are certainly free,

are certainly free, Fc.

To the innocent and faithful Crafts, &c.

XXXI. SON G.
By Brother /—— C——.
True. Rule Britannia, &c,

I].
When Earth’s Foundation firft was laid,
By the Almighty Artift’s Hand ,

137

Ie was then our perfeé&t, our peric&t Laws were made,

Eftablith’d by his ftri@ Command,
Hail! myfterious hail! glorious Mafonry,
That makes us ever great and Free.
.

138 4 Choice CoLtecTIon of

Il.
As Man throughout for Shelter fought,
In vain from Place to Place did roam ;
Until from Heaven, from Heaven he was taught,
To plan, to build, and fix his Home.
Hail! myfterious, &c.

Il.
Hence illuftrious rofe our Art,
And now in beauteous Piles appear ;
Which thall to endlefs, to endlefs Time impart,
How worthy and how great we are.
Hail! myfterious, &c.

IV.
Nor we lefs fam’d for ev’ry Tye,
By which the human Thought is bound ;
Love, Truth, and Friendthip, and Friendthip focially,
Doth join our Hearts and Hands around.
Hail! myfterious, &c.

Vv.
Our Actions ftill by Virtue bleft,
And to our Precepts ever true ;
The World admiring, admiring fhall requeft
To learn, and our bright Paths purfue.

Hail! myfterious, &e.

To all true Mafens and upright,
Who faw the Eaft where rofe the Light.

XXXII. Song

MASONS SONGS.

XXXII. SONG.

I.

Come Boys let us more Liquor get,
Since jovially we all are met,
Since jovially, &e.

Here none will difagree ;
Let’s drink and fing, and all combine,
In Songs to praife that Art divine,
In Songs, &c.

That’s called Free-Mafonry.

Il.

True Knowledge feated in the Head,
Do teach us Mafons how to tread,
Do teach, &c.

The Paths we ought to go;
By which we ever Friends create,
Drown Care and Stsife, and all Debate,
Drown Care, &e.

Count none but Fools our Foe.

Ill.

Here Sorrow knows not how to weep,
And watchful Grief is lull’d afleep,
And watchful, &c.

In our Lodge we know no Care ;
Join Hand in Hand before we part,
Each Brother takes his Glafs with Heart,
Each Brother, &c.

And toaft fome charming Fair.

T 2

139

140 A Choice CoLLtection of

IV.

Hear me ye Gods, and whilft I live
Good Mafons and good Liquor give,
Good Mafons, &e.

Then always happy me ;
Likewife a gentle She I crave,
Until I’m fummon’d to my Grave,
But when I’: fuis.mon’d to my Grave,

Adieu my Lodge and fhe.

Jo cach charming Fair and faithful She,
That loves the Craft of Mafonry.

XXXII. SONG.
I.

Guardian Genius of our Art divine,
Unto thy faithful Sons appear ;

Ceafe now o’er Ruins of the Eaft to pine,
And {mile in blooming Beauties here.

Il.
Egypt, Syria, and proud Babylon,
No more thy blifsful prefence claim ;
In England fix thy ever-during Throne,
Where Myriads do confefs thy Name.

Il.
The Sciences from Eaftern Regions brought,
Which, after fhewn in Greece and Rome,
Are here in feveral ftately Lodges taught ;
To which remoteft Brethren come.

Behold

MASONS SONGS. 141

IV.
Behold what Strength our rifing Domes uprears,
*Till mixing with the azure Skies ;
Behold what Beauty thro’ the whole appears,
So wifely built they muft furprife.
Vv.
Nor are we only to thefe Arts confin’d,
For we the Paths of Virtue trace ;
By us Man’s rugged Nature is refin’d,
And pollifh’d into Love and Peace.

Io the Increafe of perpetual Friendfhip, and Peace
amongft the Ancient Craft.

XXXIV.
AnODEonMASON RY.
By Brother . Banks.

Genius of Mafonry defcend,

In myftic Numbers while we fing ;
Enlarge our Souls, the Craft defend,
And hither all thy Influence bring ;
With focial Thoughts our Bofoms fill,
And give thy Turn to every will.

While yet Batavia’s wealthy Powers,
Neglect thy Beauties to explore ;

And winding Seine adorn’d with Towers,
Laments thee wandering from his Shore ;
Here fpread thy Wings and glad thefe Ifles,
Where Arts refide and Freedom {miles.

142 A Choice CoLLecTion of

Behold the Lodge rife into View,

The Work of Induftry and Art;

*Tis grand, and regular, and true,

For fo is each good Mafon’s Heart ;
Friendfhip cements it from the Ground,
And Secrecy fhall fence it round.

A ftately Dome o’er-looks our Eaft,
Like orient Phebus in the Morn ;
And two tall Pillars in the Weft,
At once fupport us and adorn ;
Upholden thus the Structure ftands,
Untouch’d by facralegious Hands,

For Concord form’d our Souls agree,
Nor Fate this Union fhall deftroy ;
Our Toils and Sports alike are free,
And all is Harmony and Joy ;

So Salem’s Temple rofe by Rule, ~
Without the Noife of noxious Tool.

As when Ampbion tun’d his Song,
Even rugged Rocks the Mufic knew ;
Smooth into Form they glide along,
And to a Thebes the Defart grew ;

So at the Sound of Hiram’s Voice,
We rife, we join, and we rejoice.

Then may our Vows to Virtue move,
To Virtue own’d in all her Parts ;
Come Candour, Innocence, and Love,
Come and poffefs our faithful Hearts ;
Mercy,

MASONS SONGS, 143

Mercy, who feeds the hungry Poor,
And Silence, Guardian of the Door.

As thou Aftrea, tho’ from Earth,
When Men on Men began to prey ;
Thou fled’ft to claim celeftial Birth,
Down from Olympus wing’d thy Way ;
And mindful of thy ancient Seat,

Be prefent ftill where Mafons meet.

Immortal Science too, be near ;

We own thy Empire o’er the Mind ;
Drefs’d in thy radient Robes appear,

With all thy beautious Train behind ;
Invention young and blooming there,
Here’s Geometry with Rule and Square.

In Egyp??s Fapric Learning dwelt,
And Roman Breafts cou’d Virtue hide;
But Vulcan’s Rage the Building felt,
And Brutus laft of Romans died ;

Since when, difpers’d the Sifters rove,
Or fill paternal Thrones above.

But loft to Half of human Race,

With us the Virtues fhall revive ;

And driven no more from Place to Place,
Here Science fhall be kept alive ;

And manly Tafte, the Child of Senfe,
Shall banifh Vice and Dulnefs hence.

United thus and for thefe Ends,
Let Scorn deride and Envy rail ;
From

144 A Choice CoLLecTion of

From Age to Age the Craft defcends,
And what we build fhall never fail ;
Nor fhall the World our Works furvey,
But every Brother keeps the Key.

To cach faithful Brother, both Ancient and Young,
That governs his Pafion, and bridles bis Tongue.

XXXV.
The PROGRESS of MASONRY.

I.
Pray lend me your Ears my dear Brethren awhile,
Full fober my Senfe tho’ joaking my Stile ;
I fing of fuch Wonders unknown to all thofe,
Who flutter in Verfe or who hobble in Profe.

Derry down, down, down derry down.

II.
As all in Confufion the Chaos yet lay,
F’re Evening and Morning had made the firft Day ,
The unform’d Materials lay tumbling together,
Like fo many Dutchmcea in thick foggy Weather.
Derry down, &e.

Ill.
When to this Confufion no End there appear'u,
The fovereign Mafon’s Word fudden was heard ;
Then teemn’d Mother Chaos with maternal Lhiroce,
By which this great Lode of the World then arofe
Derry down, fe,

MASONS SONGS.

IV.
Then Farth and the Heavens with Jubilee rung,
And all the Creation of Mafonry fung ;
When lo! to compleat and adorn the gay Ball,
Old Adam was made the Grand-Mafter of all.
Derry down, &e.
Y;
But Satan met Eve when fhe was a gadding,
And fet her (as fince, all her Daughters) a madding;
To find out the Secrets of Free-Mafonry,
She eat of the Fruit of the forbidden Tree.
Derry down, &c.

VI.
Then as fhe was fill’d with high flowin Fancies,
As e’er was fond Girl who deals in Romances ;
She thought her with Knowledge fufficiently cram’d,
And faid to her Spoufe, My Dear cat and be d——d.
Derry down, &e.
VII.
But dam aftonifh’d like one ftruck with Thunder,
Beheld her from head to Foot ovsr with Wonder ;
Now you bave done this Thing, Madam, f:id he,
For your Sake no Women I'ree-Mafons fuall be.
Derry down, &e.

VIII.
Now as fhe bewail’d her in forrowful Ditty,
The good Man beheld her, and on her took Pity ;
Free-Mafons are tender, fo for the fad Dame
He made her an Apron to cover her Shame.
Derry down, &e.
U

Then

146 A Choice CoLLecTion of

IX.
Then did they folace in mutual Joys,
Till in Procets of Time they had two chopping Boys;
The Pric ft of the Parifh, as Goffips devis’d,
By Names Cain and bel the Youths circumcis’d.
Derry down, &e.

X.
Old Father Seth next mounts on the Stage,
In Manners fevere, but in Mafonry fage ;
He built up two Pillars, they were tall and thick,
One was made of Stone and the other of Brick.

Derry down, &c.

XI.
On them he engrav’d with wonderful Skill,
Each lib’ral Science with adamant Quill ;
Proportion and Rule he form’d by the Square,
And direéted the Ufe of all Mafonry there.
Derry down, &c.

XII.
But foon did Mankind behave paft enduring,
In drinking, in fwearing, in fighting, and whoring ,
Then Jove arofe, and, fierce in his Anger,
Said, That be wou'd fuffer fuch Mifcreants no longer.
Derry down, &c..
XIII.
Then from their high Windows the Heavens did pour,
Forty Days and Nights one continual Shower ;
Till nought cou’d be feen but the Waters around,
And in chis great Deluge moft Mortals were drown’d.
Derry down, &e.

Sure

MASONS SONGS. 147

XIV.
Sure ne’er was beheld! fo dreadful a Sight,
As the old World in fuch a very odd Plight ;
For there were to be feen all Animals fwimming,
Men, Monkeys, Priefts, Lawyers, Cats, Lapdogs, and Women,
Derry down, &e.

XV.
There floated a Debtor away from his Duns,
And next Father Greybeard ftark naked ’midft Nuns ;
Likewife a poor Hufband not minding his Life,
Contented in drowning to fhake off -his Wife.

Derry down, &e.

XVI.
A King and a Cobler next mingled to view,
And fpendthrift young Heirs there were not a few ;
A Whale and a Dutchman came down with the Tide,
Anda reverend old Bifhop by a young Wench's Side.
Derry down, &c.
XVII.
But Noab being wifeft, faithful, and upright,
He built him an Ark fo ftout and fo tight ;
Tho’ Heaven and Earth feem’d to come together,
He was fafe in his Lodge and fear’d not the Weather.
Derry down, &e.
XVII.
Then after the Flood, like a Brother fo true,
Who ftill had the Good of the Craft in his View,
He delved the Ground and he planted the Vine,
He form’d a Lodge, aye and gave his Lodge Wine.
Derry down, &e.
U 2 Let

148 A Choice CoLLecTion of

XIX.
Let Statefmen tofs, tumble, and jumble the Bull ;
We fit fafe in our Lodge, and we laugh xt them all :
Let Bifhops wear Lawn Sleevesand Kings have their Ointment,
Free-Mafonry fure is by Heaven’s Appointment.
Derry down, &c.
».@. 4

£N ode

Now charge my ¢ear Brethren wod chorus with me,
A Health to all Matons both honeft and free ;

Nor be Icfs our Duty unto our good King,

So God blefs Great Giorce let each Brother fing.

Derry down, &e.
To the King and the Craft (as the Mafter’s Song)

XXXVI. SONG.
By Brother L D

Tune. Mutual Love.
I.

As Mafons once on Shinar’s Plain,
Met to revive their Arts again,
Did mutually agree,
Did mutually, &c.
So now we meet in Britain’s Ife,
And makes the royal Craft to fmile,
Jn ancient Mafonry,
In ancient, Er.

The

MASONS SONGS, 149

II.

The Mafons in this happy Land,

Has reviv’d the ancient Grand,
And the ftrong Tu/can laid,
And the, &e.

Each faithful Brother by a Sign,
Like Salem’s Sons each other join,
And foon each Order made,

And foon, &e.

Ill.

Thrice happy bleft Fraternity,
Whofe Bafis is fweet Unity,
And makes us all agree,
And makes, &c.
Kings, Dukes, and Lords to us are kind,
As we to Beggars when we find,
Them {kill’d in Mafonry,
Them fkill’d, &e.

IV.
How happy are the ancient Brave,
Whom no Cowan can deceive,
And may they fo remain,
And may, &e.
No modern Craftfman e’er did know,
‘What Signs our Mafter to us fhow,
Tho’ long they ftrove in vain,
Tho’ long, &c.

150 A Choice COLLECTION of

V

The horn’d Buck and Gallican*,
As the Monkey imitates the Man,
Their Cluts do Lodges call,
Their Clubs, &-.
While ancient Mafons know full well,
No Fools like thofe amongft them dwell,
No no, nor never fhall;
Noro, &e.
VI.
My Brethren all take Glafs in Hand,
And toaft our noble Maiter grand,
And in full Chorus fing,
And in, &e.
A Health to ancient Mafons free,
Throughout the Globe where-e’er they be,
And fo God fave the King,
And fo God fave the King.

To all Ancient Mafons, wherefoever difpers'd, or opprefs d,
round the Globe, &c.

* Here is meant a certain Club who call themfelves Autizallic
Mafons, and not the laudable Affociation of Antixallicans, whom
I efteem as an honourable and ufeful Society and worthy of Imi-
tation.

XXXVII. Song.

MASONS SONGS. 1S}

XXXVII. SON G.

By the foregoing Hand.
Tune. Greedy Midas

I.

With Harmony and flowing Wine,
My Brethren all come with me join;
To celebrate this happy Day,

And to our Mafter Homage pay.

Il.
Hail! happy, happy, facrea Place,
Where Friendfhip fmiles in e’ery Face ;
And royal Art! doth fill the Chair,
Adorned with his noble Square.

III.
Next fing my Mufe our Warden’s Praife,
With Chorus loud in tuneful Lays ;
Oh! may thefe Columns ne’er decay,
Until the World diffolves away.

IV.
My Brethren all come join with me,
To fing the Praife of Mafonry ;
The Noble, Faithful, and the Brave,
Whofe Arts hall live beyond the Grave.

152 A Choice COLLECTION of

V.
Let Envy hide her fhameful Face,
Before us ancient Sons of Peace ;
Whofe golden Precepts ftill remain,
Free from Envy, Pride, or Stain.

To Salem’s Sons, &c.

XXXVIII. SONG.

By the foregoing Hand.
Tune. Ye Mortals that love Drinking.

I.

Ye ancient Sons of Tyre,

In Chorus join with me ;

And imitate your Sire,

Who was fan’d for Mafonry :
His anciest Dictates follow,
And from them never part ;
Let each fing like Apollo,
And praife the royal Art.

HH

Litze S.iem’s fecond Story,

We raife the Craft again ;
Which ftill retains its Glory,
The Secret here remain :
Amongft true ancient Mafons,
Who always did diidain,
Thefe new invented Fafhions ;
Which we know are vain.

MASONS SONGS, 183

Ill.
Our Temple now rebuilding,
You fee grand Columns * rife ;
The Mac: they refembling,
They are both good and wife:
Each feem as firm as 4¢f/as,
Who on his Shoulders bore
The ftarry Frame of Heaven ;
‘What Mortals can do more ?

IV.
Come now my loving Brethren,
In Chorus join all round ;
With flowing Wine tull Bumpers,
Let Mafons Healths be crown’d ;
And let each envious Cowan,
By our good Actions fee ;
That we are made free and loving,
By Art of Mafonry.

To the Memory of P, H. Z. L. and J. A.

XXXIX. SONG.
To the Tune of the Enter’d ’Prentice.

i.
From the Depths let us raife,
Our Voices and Praife,
The Works of the glorious Creation ;
And extol the great Fame,
Of our Maker’s great Name,
And his Love to an accepted Mafon.

x In
* Grand Offcers.

A Choice COLLECTION of

Il.
In primitive Times,
When Men by high Crimes,
Had caufed a great Devattation ;
When the Floods did abound,
And all Mankind were drown’d
Save the free and the accepted Mafons.

Ill.
There were Architects four,
Where Billows did roar,

Were fav’d from that great Inundation;
Who’s Father from on high,
Taught Geometry,

That honour’d Science of a Mafon.

IV.
In an Ark that was good,
Made of Gopher Wood,

And was built by divine Ordination
And the firft in his Time,
That planted a Vine,

Was a free and an accepted Mafon.

V.
Then Nimrod the Great,
Did next undertake,

To build him to Heaven a Station ;
But Tongues of all Kind,
Prevented his Mind,

For he was no excellent Mafon,

Whea

MASONS SONGS. 155

VI.

When Pharaoh, the King
Of Egypt, did bring
To Bondage our whole Generation ;
That King got a Fall,
And his Magicians all,
By a princely and learned wife Mafon,

VII.
Then thro’ the Red-Sea,
Heaven guided their Way,

By two Pillars of divine Ordination ;
And Pharoah’s great Train,
Were loft in the Main,

For purfuing an Army of Mafons.

VIII.
When Ameleck’s King,
Great Forces did bring,
Likewife the great Midianite Nation ;
Thofe Kings got a Fall,
And their great Armies all,
And their Wealth fell a Spoil to thofe Mafons.

IX,
In the Plains they did rear,
A Pavillion fair,

The Beauty of all the Creation ;
Each Part in its Square,
Which none cou’d prepare,

Save a free and an accepted Mafon.

X 2 King

A Choice COLLECTION of

X.
King Solomon, he
Was known to be free,
Bu:'r a holy Grand Lodge for his Mafons ;
Each beautiful Part,
Was due to the Art,
Of Hiram the great learned Mafon.

XI.
They to Fordan did go,
And met their proud Foe,
And fought the great Cancanite Nation ;
Whofe giantic Strain,
Cou’d never fuftain,
The Force of an Army of Mafons.

XII.
Then let each Mafon that’s Free,
Toaft his Memory,
Join Hands without Difimulation ;
Let Cowans think on,
We know they are wronc,
Drink a Health to an accepted Ma/on.

XII.
But if any fo mean,
Thro’ Avarice or Stain,
Shou’d debafe himfelf in this high Station $
That Perfon fo mean,
For fuch curfed Gain,
Shou’d be flain by the Hand of a Mafon.

To all juft and faithful Mafins.

MASONS SONGS. 157

XL. SONG,

I

*Tis Mafonry unites Mankind,

To gen’rous Actions forms the Soul ;
In friendly Converfe all conjvin’d,
One Spirit animates the whole.

II.
Where-e’er afpiring Domes arife,
Where-evcr facred Altars ftand ;
Thofe Altars blaze unto the Skies,
Thofe Domes proclaim the Mafon’s Hand.

NI.
As Paffion rough the Soul difguife,
Till Science cultivates the Mind ;
So the rude Stone unthapen lies,
Till by the Mafon’s Art refin’d.

IV.
Tho’ ftill our chief Concera and Care,
Be to deferve a Brother’s Name ;
Yet ever mindful of the Fair,
Their kindeft Influence we claim.

V.
Let Wretches at our Manhood rail ;
But they who once our Order prove,
Will own that we who build fo well,
With equal Energy can love,
Sing

4 Choice COLLECTION of
VI.
Sing Brethren then the Craft divine,
(Beft Band of focial Joy and Mirth);

With choral Sound and cheerful Wine,
Proclaim its Virtues o’er the Earth.

XLIL CONG.

By Brother Alexander Kennedy, Shoolmatter.

I.
Once I was blind and cou’d not fee,
And all was‘dark around ;
But Providence did pity me,
And foon a Friend I found ;
Thro’ fecret Paths my Friend me led;
Such Paths as Bablers never tread.

Il.
All Stumbling Blocks he took away,
That I might walk fecure ;
And brought me long e’er Break of Day,
To Wifdom’s Temple-Door ;
‘Where there we both Admittance found,
To myftic Paths on hallow’d Ground.

Il.
Tho’ haughty in my bold Attempt,
Bleft Thoughts did me alarm ;
Which hinted I was not exempt
(If rafh) from double Harm ;
Which quickly ftopt my rifing Pride,
And made me truft more to my Guide.

In

MASONS SONGS.

IV.

In folemn Pace I was led up,
And pafs’d thro’ the bright Dome,
But foon I was obliged to ftop,
Till I myfelf made known,
Then round in ancient Form was brought,
For to obtain that which I foughe.

V.

With humble Heart in proper Form,
T life d with Good- Wi!" =;
And found, iuftead of Noife and Storm,
That ail was hufh’d and ftill ;
And foon a heav’nly Sound did hear,
That quite difpell’d all Doubt and Fear.

VI.

The Guardian of this myftic Charm,
In fhining Jewels dreft ;
Said, that } need fear no Harm,
If faithful was my Breaft ;
For tho’ to Rogues he was fevere,
No Harm an honeft Man need fear.

VII.
Bright Wifdom from his awful Throne,
Bid Darknefs to withdraw ;
No fooner faid but it was done,
And then——Great Things I faw ;
But what they were I now won’t tell,
But fafely in my Breaft fhall dwell.

4

Then

160 A Choice CoLtection of

VIII.

Then round and round me did he tie,
An ancient noble Charm ;

Which future Darknefs will defy,
And ward off Cowans Harm ;

With Inftruments in Number three,

To learn the Art of GromeETRY.

XLT. SONG.
By “the foregoing Hand.

I.
Attend loving Brethren and to me give Ear,
Our Work being ended let’s lay afide Care ;
Let Mirth and Good-Humour our Senfes regale,
And-mind that our Secrets we never reveal,
And mind, &ec,

Il.

With leave of his Worfhip that here fills the Chair,
Who governs our Actions by Compafs and Square 5
We'll fing a few Verfes in Mafonry’s Praife,

Not fond of Ambition we look for no Bays,

Not fond, &c.

Ill.

Our ancient Grand-Mafter, infpir’d by the Lorn,
On holy Moriab, as in Scripture declar’d,

The ftupendious Structure began for to frame,

In the Month call’d Zif, and forth Year of his Reign,

In the, Ge.
With

MASONS SONGS. 1614

IV.

With Level and Square the Foundation began,
In Length fixty Cubits, Breadth nineteen and one,
Here Mafonry fhin’d above all othe: Arts,
So fublime the great Secret the Artift imparts.
So Sublime, &c.
Vv.
Old Hiram of Tyre King David's great Friend,
Did Fir, Pine, and Cedar from Lebanon. fend
To build the Sanétorum by Mafonry Skill,
Subfequent unto the great Architedct’s Will.
Subfequent, &c.
VI.
One hundred and fifty-three thoufand fix hundred
Employ’d for the Temple, we find they were number’d ;
With Crafts many thoufands and Bearers of Loads,
And Matters fix hundred the Text does RECOF,
And Matters, &e.
VII.
Who form’d themfelves into Lodges they fay,
Some Eaft and fome Weft, fome North and South Way,
In Love, Truth and Juftice go fuccefsfully on,
In all well govern’d Kingdoms that’s under the Sun, &c.
In all, &ec.
VIII.
Now let the brifk Bumper go merrily round,
May our worthy Mafter in Honour abound,
May his inftructive Precepts to Virtue us move
To live like true Brethren in Friendihip and Love,

To live, €e.
Y Let

163 A Choice CoLtecTion of

IX.
Let Moderns and Critics with impious Rage,
Amufe the vain Town and againft us engage ;
Let Prichard and’s Followers Apoftates profane
With falfe Tenets puzzle each lethargic Brain,
With falfe, &c.

X.
All Health to our Brethren of e’ery Degree,
Difpers’d round the Globe, or Land, or by Sea;
Preferve them ye Powers their Virtues improve,

‘When we part on the Level we may all meet above,
When we, &c,

XLI. SONG.
By Brother ‘fobn Fackfon, S. G.W.

*
See in the Eaft the Mafter plac’d
How graceful unto us the Sight ;
His Wardens juft he doth intruft,
His noble Orders to fet right.
Where-e’er he lift, his Deacons ftraightway run,
To fee the Lodge well tyl’d and Work begun,

II.
Like Tyre’s Sons we then purfue
The noble Science we profefs,
_ Each Mafon to his Calling true
Down to the loweft from the beft
Square, plum, and level we do all maintain,
Emblems of Juftice are and hall remain,

King

MASONS SONGS, 163

Ill.
King Solomon the Great Mafon
Honour unto the Craft did raife,
The Tyrian Prince and Widow’s Son:
Let e’ery Brother jointly praife
The Memory of all the Three,
And toaft their Names in Glaffes charg’d full high,

XLIV. SONG.
By Brother ‘fobn Cartwright of Salford in Lancafbire.
Tune. Smile Britannia.

I.

Attend, attend the Strains

Ye Mafons free, whilft I

To celebrate your Fame,

Your Virtues found on high ;
Accepted Mafons, free and bold,
Will never live the Dupes to Gold.

Il.
Great Solomon the King,
Great Architect of Fame ;
Of whom all Coafts did ring,
Rever’d a Mafon’s Name :
_ Like him ; accepted, free, and bold,
True Wifdom we prefer to Gold.

Y 2 Since

164

A Choice COLLECTION of

Ill,
Since him the great and wife
Of every Age and Clime,
With Fame that never dies,
Purfued the Art fublime ;
Infpir’d by Eleav’n, juft and free,
Have honour’d much our Myftery.

IV.
The glorious Paths of thofe,
With Heav’n-born Wifdom crown’d ;
We every Day difclofe,
And tread on facred Ground ;
A Mafon, righteous, juft, and free,
Or elfe not worthy Mafonry.

XLV. SONG.
By the foregoing Hand.
Tune. The Bonny Broom.

I,

To Mafonry your Voices raife,
Ye Brethren of the Craft ;
To that, and our Great Mafter’s Praife,
Let Bumpers now be quaff’d :
True Friendfhip, Love, and Concord join’d,
Poffefs a Mafon’s Heart ;
Thofe Virtues beautify the Mind,
And ftill adorn the Art.
CcCHPUS

MASONS SONGS, 165

CHORUS.

Hail, all hail, my Brethren dear,
All hail to ye alway ;

Regard the Art while ye have Life,
Revere it every Day.

Il.
Whilft thus in Unity we join,
Our Hearts ftill good and true;
Infpir’d by the Grace divine,
And no bafe Ends in View:

We friendly meet, ourfelves employ,
To improve the fruitful Mind ;
With Bleffings which can never cloy,

But dignify Mankind.

Chor. Hail, all hail, &c.

Il.
No flinty Hearts amongft us are,
We're generous and kind ;
The needy Man our Fortune fhares,
If him we worthy find :
Our Charity from Eaft to Weft,
To each worthy Object we
Diffufe, as is the great Beheft,
To every Man that’s free.

Chor. Hail, all hail, &c.

IV.
Thus blefs’d and bleffing well we know,
Our Joys can never end ;
For long as vital Spirits flow,
A Mafon finds a Friend.
Then

166 A Choice COLLECTION of

Then join your Hearts and Tongues with mine,
Our glorious Art to praife ;

Difcreetly take the generous Wine,
Let Reafon rule your Ways.

Chor. Hail, all hail, &c.

XLVI.
An Ode by the fame Hand.

RECITATIVE.

Blefe’d be the Day that gave to ime,
‘The Secrets of Free-Mafonry ;

In that alone m’ Ambition’s plac’d,
In that alone let me be grac’d ;

No greater Title let me bear,

Than what’s pertaining to the Square.

AIR.

Tho’ envious Mortals vainly try,
On us to caft Abfurdity,
We laugh at all their Spleen ;
The levell’d Man, the upright Heart,
Shall ftill adorn our glorious Art,
Nor mind their vile Chagrin :
The ermin’d Robe, the rev’rend Crozier too, ©
Have prov’d us noble, honeft, juft, and true.

CHORUS.

In vain then let prejudic’d: Mortals declare
Their Hate of us Matons, we’re truly fincere ;

It

MASONS SONGS. 167

If for that they difpife us, their Folly they prove,
For a Mafon’s grand Maxim is brotherly Love ;
But yet, after all, if they’d fain be thought wife,
Let ’em enter the Lodge, and we’ll open their Eyes.

XLVI. SONG.
By Brother Alexander Dixon.

I.
How blefs’d are we from Ignorance free’d
And the bafe Notions of Mankind,
Here every virtuous moral Deed
Inftructs and fortifies the Mind ;
Hail! Ancient hallow’d folemn Ground,
Where Light and Mafonry I found.

II.
Hence vile Detractors from us fly,
Far to the gloomy Shades of Night
Like Owls that hate the Mid-day Sky,
And fink with envy from its Light ;
With them o’er Graves and Ruins rot,
For hating Knowledge you know not.

Ill.

When we affemble on a Hill,

Or in due Form upon the Plain ;
Our Mafter doth with learned Skili
The facred Plan and Work explain:
No bufy Eye, nor Cowan’s Ear,
Can our grand Myft’ry fee or hear

168

1 Choice CoLLECTION of

IV.
Our Table deck’d with fhining Truth,
Sweet Emblems that elate the Heart ;
While each attentive lift’ning Youth
Burns to perform his worthy Part.
Refolving with religious Care,
To live by Compafs, Rule, and Square.

V.

Our Mafter watching in the Eaft,
The golden Streaks of rifing Sun ;
To fee his Men at Labour plac’d
Who all like willing Crafts doth run:
Oh! May his Wifdom ever be,
Honour to us and Mafonry.

VI.

Not far from him as Gnomon true,
Beauty ftands with watchful Eye,
Whofe chearful Voice our Spirits renew,
And each his Labour doth lay by :

His kind refrefhing Office ftill,

Infpires each Craft in Mafon’s Skill.

VII.

See in the Weft our Oblong’s Length,

The brave Corinthian Pillar ftands

The Lodge’s Friend and greateft Strength,
Rewarding Crafts with liberal Hands ;
Sure this our Lodge muft lafting be,
Supported by thefe Columns three.

As

MASONS SONGS. 169

VIII.

As Bees from Flowers Honey brings,

Sweet Treafure to their Mafter’s Store ;

So Mafons do all facred Things,

And Wonders from the diftant Shores ;

To enrich the Lodge with Wifdom’s Light,
Where babling Folly’s loft in Night.

Ix,

Each Roman Chief did proudly view
Their Temples rifing to the Sky,
And as they Nations did fubdue,
They rais’d triumphal Arches high ;
Which got us Mafons fuch a Name,
As vies with mighty Ce/ar’s Fame.

X.

* The Kings who rais’d Diana’s Columns,
With Royal Art, bv fkilful tiands ;

As Priefts recorded i: tieir Volumes.
And Poets fung to dittant Lands ;

Th’ adoring World that did them fee,
Forgot the enfhrin’d Deity,

XI.

Such is our Boaft, my Brethren dear,
Fellows to Kings and Princes too,
The Mafter’s Gift——was proud to wear,
As now the Great and Noble do;
The Great, the Noble, and the Sage,
Masons rever’d from Age to Age.
Z CHORUS.

* The Temple of Diana, at Ephefus.

170

A Choice CoLLEcTION of

CAO RUS:

Then to each Brother in Diftrefs,
Throughout the Nations Parts or Climes,
Charge Brethren to his quick Redrefs,
As Mafons did in ancient Times;

From Want and Hardhhips fet them free,
Blefs’d with Health and Mafonry.

Nor once forget the lovely Fair,
Divinely made of Adam’s bone ;

Whofe heav’nly Looks can banifh Care,
And eafe the fighing Lovers Moan ;

To them whofe foft Enjoyment brings
Us Heroes, Architects, and Kings.

XLVII. SON G.
By Brother E——— P

| Cees
Come fill up a Bumper, and let it go round,
Let Mirth and good Fellowfhip always abound ;
And let the World fee,
That Free-Mafonry,
Doth teach honeft Hearts to be jovial and free.

II.
Our Lodge now compos’d of honeft free Hearts,
Our Mafter moft freely his Secrets imparts ;
And fo we improve,
In Knowledge and Love,
By Help from our mighty Grand-Matfter above.

MASONS SONGS, 171

1008
Let Honour and Friend‘hip eternally reign,
Let each Brother Mafon the Truth fo maintain ;
That all may agree,
That Free-Mafonry,
Doth teach honeft Hearts to be jovial and free.

IV.

In Mirth and good Fellowfhip we will agree,
For none are more bleft or more happy than we,
And thus we’ll endure,
While our Actions are pure,
Kind Heaven thofe Bleffings to us doth infure.

XLIX. SONG.

Tune. Rule Britannia.

1.
Urania fing the Art divine,
Beauty, Strength, and Wifdom, grace each Line ;
Soar higher than Fove’s fam’d Bird can go,
Tho’ out of Sight his Flight’s too low ;
Boaft Ubiquerians from this your Pedigree,
But we from Jove take Mafonry.

II.
When the great Architect defign’d
Brooding Nature’s Plan, and made Mankind ;
Then he ordain’d the Mafon’s Orders fair,
For Mafonry was all his Care;

Z 2 By

172 A Choice Corirction of

By Omnijfcience and Free-Mafonry,
The jarring El:ments he made agree.

hii.
The Almighty, by Mafonry, did {cheme
His holy Dwelling-Place, and Heav’n did name;
Made many Maniions, which he fupply’d with Light,
Proceeding from his Effence bright,
With fhining Stars adorn’d the vaulted Skies;
To raife our Wonder and Surprife.

IV.
By Mafonry, this ftupendious Ball
He pois’d on Geometry, and meafur’d all
With Lines Eaft and Weft ; alfo from North to South,
This fpacious Lodge he meafur’d out ;
And adorned with precious Jewels three,
As ufeful Lights in Mafonry.

V.

To rule the Day the Almighty made the Sun,
To rule the Night he alfo made the Moon ;
And God-like Adam, a Mafter-Mafon free,
To rule and teach Pofterity ;

Sanctity of Reafon, and Majefty of Thought,
Amongft Free-Mafons fhould be fought.

VI.
In the Deluge where Mortals loft their Lives,
God fav’d for worthy Maions and their Wives ;
And in the Ark great Noah a Lodge did hold,
Shem and Faphet his Wardens we are told ;
And Ham

MASONS SONGS, 173

And Ham as Tyler, he order’d to fecure,
From all their Wives the fecret Door *.

Vil.
When J/rael’s Sons were held in Slavery,
God fent his Word and Sign to fet them free ;
Nightly by Fire, and in a Cloud by Day,
He pav’d his lov’d Free-Mafons Way ;
Thro’ the Red-Sea, with wond’rous Myftery,
From Pharoab’s Yoke he fet them free.

Vill.

On Horeb’s Mount great Mo/es did ftand,

With Warden’s Twain and Rod of God in Hand ;
Devoutly pray’d by Word and Sign to Heav’n,
While to his Deputy, Conqueft was giv’n ;

When on Mount Nebo he faw the Land and died,
Febovab did his Time provide.

IX.

The World’s great Wonders, Mankind agree,
Their Beauties owe to the Art of Mafonry ;
Epbefus Temple, the Walls of Babylon,
And Labyrinths wond’rous Works unknown ;
The Pyramids, Maufoleum, and fam'd Colofus high,
And Olimpius greeting the azure Sky.
By

* And fo foon as ever the Day began to break, Noah ftood up
towards the Body of Adam; and before the Lord, he and his Sons,
Shem, Ham, and Fapheth, and Noah, prayed, &%c. And the Wo-
men anfwered, from another Part of the Ark, Amex, LORD.—
Vide Caten. Arab. C. xxv. fol. 56. b.

174 A Choice CoLLECTION of

x.

By God’s Command and Free-Mafonry,

The Temple had mott exact Symmetry ;

In Orders rais’d by Hiram’s mighty Art,

From Nature’s rude Materials ftart ;

The World’s Wonders before were deem’d but fevens
?Till this grand Fabric made them even.

XI.
Come charge, charge your Glaffes fpeedily,
To all true Brothers fkilled in Mafonry ;
Likewife the King, long happy may he reign,
Old England’s Glory to maintain ;
In Order ftand, you know the ancient Charge,
Pay due Refpect to mighty GEORGE.

L.
An O D E.

I.

Wake the Lute and quivering Strings,
Myftic Truths Urania brings ;
Friendly Vifitant to thee,

We owe the Depths of Mafonry :
Faireft of the Virgin Choir,

Warbling to the golden Lyre ;
Welcome here, thy Art prevail,

Hail divine Urania hail.

Here,

MASONS SONGS. 175

If.

Here, in Friendfhip’s facred Bower,
Thy downy wing’d and fmiling Hour ;
Mirth invites, and focial Song,
Namelefs M yfteries among :

Crown the Bowl, and fill the Glafs,

To ev’ry Virtue, ev’ry Grace ;

To the Brotherhood refound

Health, and let it thrice go round.

Il.

We reftore the Times of old,

The blooming glorious Age of Gold;
As the new Creation free,

Bleft with gay Eupbrofne :

We with godlike Science talk,

And with fair 4ffrea walk ;

Innocence adorns the Day,

Brighter than the Smiles of May.

VI.

Pour the rofy Wine again,

Wake a louder, louder Strain ;
Rapid Zephyrs, as ye fly,

Waft our Voices to the Sky :
While we celebrate the nine,

And the Wonders of the Trine.
While the Angels fing above,

As we below, of Peace and Love.

SONG

176

A Choice CoLLection of

LI SONG.
By Brother E ——~ P ——;
I

Hail facred Art, by Heav’n defign’d

A gracious Bleffing for all Mankind ;
Peace, Joy, and Love, thou doft beftow,
On us thy Votaries below.

II.
Bright Wifdom’s Footfteps here we trace,
From Solomon that Prince of Peace ;
Whofe glorious Maxims we ftill hold,
More precious than rich Opbir’s Gold.

Il.
His heav’nly Proverbs to us tell,
How we on Earth fhould ever dwell ;
In Harmony and focial Love,
To emulate the Bleft above.

IV.
Now having Wifdom for our Guide,
By its fweet Precepts we'll abide ;
Envy and Fiatred we'll difpel,
Nor wrathful Fool with us hall dwell.

¥;
Vain, empty Grandeur, fhall not find
Its Dwelling in a Mafon’s Mind ;
A Mafon who is true and wife,
Its glitt’ring Pomp always defpife.

Hu-

MASONS SONGS.

VI.
Humility, Love, Joy, and Peace,
Within his Mind fhall find their Place ;
Virtue and Wifdom thus combin’d,
Shall decorate the Mafon’s Mind.

LVI. SONG.
June. GOD fave the Kine;

1.

Hail! Masonry divine,
Glory of Ages fhine,

Long may’ft thou hold ;
Where-e’er thy Lodges ftand,
May they have great Command,
And always grace the Land,

Thou Art divine.

Il.
Great Fabricks ftill arife,
And touch the azure Skies,
Great are thy Schemes ;
Thy noble Orders are
MatchJefs beyond Compare,
No Art with thee can fhare,
Thou Ast divine.

Aa

877

Hiram

178 A Choice CoLLectTion of

Il,
Hiram the Architect,
Did all the Craft direct,
How they fhould build ;
Solomon, great I/rael’s King,
Did mighty Bleffings bring,
And left us Room to fing,
Hail! Royal Arr.

LIT. SONG.

I.
Let Mafons be merry each Night when they meet,
And always each other moft lovingly greet,
Let Envy and Difcord be funk in the Deep
By fuch as are able great Secrets to keep, ;
Let all the World gaze on our Art with Surprize,
They’re all in the dark till we open their Eyes.
Il.
Whoever is known to act on the Square,
And likewife well fkill’d in our Secrets raré:
Are always refpeéted whether wealthy or poor,
And ne’er yet was carelefs of Matters that’s pure.
Their Aétions are bright and their Lives fpent in Lovey
At length will be happy in the Grand Lodge above.
Hi.
We are Brothers to Princes and -Fellows:to Kings,
Our Fame thro’ the World continually rings ;
As we lovingly meet fo we lovingly part,
‘No Mafon did ever bear Malice at Heart;
The Fool that’s conceited we’ll never defpife,
Let him come to the Lodge and we’ll make him more wife.

The

MASONS SONGS.

IV.
The Sanctum Sanctorum by Mafons was fram’d,
And all the fine Works which the Temple contain’d,
By Hiram’s Contrivance, the Pride of my Song,
The Noife of a Tool was not heard along ;
And the Number of Mafons that round it did move,
By him were directed, infpir’d from above.

LIV. SON G.

I.
If Unity be good in every Degree,
What can be compar’d to thatof Mafonry ;
In Unity we meet and in Unity we part ;
Let every Mafon, Chorus hail, mighty Art,
Let every, &e.
IL
The Vulgar often murmurs at our noble Art
Becaufe the great Arcanum we don’t to them impart ;

179

In Ignorance let them live and in Ignorance let them die,

Re filent and fecret let every Mafon cry,
Be filent, ec.

Il.

Let a Bumper be crown’d unto the Art of Mafonry,
And to each jovial Brother that is a Mafon free ;
We act upon the Square, on the Level we’ll depart,
Let every Mafon fing, hail glorious Art.

Let every, &e.

Aaz LV. Song.

189 A Choice Correction of

LV. SONG.
June. The Miller of Mansfield.

I,
How happy a Mafon whofe Bofom ftill flows
With Friendfhip, and ever mof cheerfully goes 5
The Effects of the Myfteries lodg’d in his Breaft,
Myfteries rever’d and by Princes poffefs’d.
Our Friends and our Bottle we beft can enjoy,
No Rancour or Envy our Quiet annoy,
Our Plum, Line, and Compafs, our Square and our Tools
Dirc& all our A@tions in Virtue’s fair Rules.

Il.
To Mars and to Venus we're equally true,
Our ‘learts can enliven, our Arms can fubdue ;
Let the Enciny tell, and the Ladies declare
No Clafs or Profeffion with Mafons compare 5
To give a fond Luftre we ne’er need aCreft,
Since Honour and Virtue remain in our Breaft,
We'll charm the rude World when we clap, laugh and fing,
If fo happy a Mafon, fay who'd be a King.

‘LVI. SONG.
June. Rule Britannia.

I.
When Mafonry by Heavn’s Defign
‘Did enter firft into great Hiram’s Brain,
A Choir of Angels did rejoice,
And this Chorus fung united Voite, Fail
ai

MASONS SONGS. 8s

Hail! you happy, happy Sons that be
Brothers of Free-Mafonry.

II.
Great Hiram he did then repair
And went to work with Rule and Square,
With Plum and Level to his eternal Fame,
He did the glorious Temple frame,
Hail you happy, €c.

When Solomon beheld the fame,
He then fet forth great Hiram’s Fame:
Oh ! excellent Mafon! he in Surprize did fay,
‘Above all Arts you bear the Sway,
Hail you happy, &&c.
IV.
Now to great Hiram’s Memory
Let’s fill a Glafs moft chearfully,
St. Fobm (including) who the Light did bring,
And likewife Gzorce our gracious King,
Hail you happy, &e.
Vv.
Next charge unto our Mafter Grand
And to each lovely fair one round the Laad,
Ourfeives including, fo let the Health go round
With a Clap to make the Lodge refound.
Hail &e.

LVI. SONG.
Tune. Hail Mafonry, €&c.
I

Let worthy Brethren all combine

For to adorn our myftic Art,
Sa

182

A Choice COLLECTION of

So as the Craft may ever fhine

And cheer each faithful Brother’s Heart ;
Then Brethren all in Chorus fing,
Profper the Craft and blefs the King,

Il.
We level’d, plum’d, and fquar’d, aright
The five noble Orders upright ftands, .
Wifdom and Strength with Beauty’s Heigth,
The Wonder of the World commands ;
Then Brethren all, &c. .

Il.
Ye Fools and Cowans all who plot
For to obtain our Myftery,
Ye ftrive in Vain attempt it not
Such Creatures never fhall be free;
Then Brethren all, &c.

IV.
The Wife, the Noble, Good, and Great,
Can only be accepted here ;
The Knave or Fool, tho” deck’d in State,
Shall ne’er approach the Matfter’s Chair,
Then Brethren all, &c.

Vv.
Now fill your Glaffes, charge them high,
Let our Grand-Matfter’s Health go round ;
And let each here o’er-flow with Joy,
And Jove and Unity abound.
Then Brethren all, &e.

LIX

. Song

MASONS SONGS. 183

LIX. SONG.
Tune. The Firft of Auguft.

I.
With cérdial Hearts let’s drink a Health,
To every faithful Brother ;
Whofe candid Hearts, fecure whilft Breath,
Are faithful to each other :
Whofe precious Jewels are fo rare,
Likewife their Hearts fo framed are,
And level’d with the trueft Square,
That Nature can difcover.

II.
As great a Man as this Land,
Or in any other Nation ;
Wou’d take a Brother by the Hand,
And greet him in his Station :
Neither King nor Prince, tho’ e’er fo great,
Or any Emperor of State,
But with great Candour wou’d relate,
To every faithful Brother.

II.
The World thall ftill remain in Pain,
And at our Secrets wonder ;
No Cowan fhall it e’er obtain,
Tho’ all their Lives they ponder :
Still aiming at the chiefeft White,
In which Free-Mafons take Delight,
They never can obtain the Ligh,
The’ they ipend their Lives in Wonder.

King

184 4A Choice COLLECTION of

IV.

King Solomon, the Great and Wife,
He was a faithful Brother ;
Free-Mafonry wou'd not defpife,
No Secrets he’d difcover :
But he was always frank and free,
Profeffing fuch Sincerity,
To all of that Fraternity,
He lov’d them ’bove all other.

Vv

Come let us build on frm Ground,
Still aiding of each other ;
And lay a Foundation that’s moft found,
That no Arts-Man can difcover :
Nor ever fhall revealed be,
But to bright Men in Mafonry,
~ Here is to them where-e’er they be,
I’m their faithful Brother.

VI.

Come let us join our Hearts and Hands,
In this moft glorious Manner ;
And to each other firmly ftand,
Under King Ge:rge’s Banner :
That God may blefs him flill I pray,
And over his Enemies bear the Sway,
And for ever win the Day,
And crown his Days with Honour.

SONG

MASONS SONGS, 185

LIX. SON G.

E
Whoever wants Wifdom, muft with fome Delight,
Read, ponder, and pore, Noon, Morning, and Night;
Mutt turn over Volumes of gigantic Size,
Enlighten his Mind tho’ he puts out his Eyes,
Derry down, &c.

II.

If a General wou’d know how to mufter his Men,
By Thoufands, by Hundreds, by Fifties, by Ten;
Or level his Siege on high Caftle or Town,

He mutt borrow his Precepts from Men of Renown.

Derry down, &e.

Ill.

Wou’d a wry-fac’d Phyfician or Parfon excel,
In preaching or giving a fanctified Spell ;
He firft muft read Galen and Tillotfon thro’
E’er he gets Credentials or Bufinefs to do.

Derry down, &e.

IV.
But thefe are all Follies, Free-Mafons can prove,
In the Lodge they find Knowledge, fair Virtue, and Love,
Without deaf’ning their Ears, without blinding their Eyes,
They find the compendious Way to be wife.

Derry down, &e. -

Bb SONG

186

A Chotce Cottection of

LX. SONG,

L
Come ye Elves that be,
Come follow, follow me;
All you that Guards have been
Without, and ferv’d within :
Sing, let Joy thro’ us refound,
For all this Lodge is facred Ground.

II.
Guides too, that Fairies are,
. Come five by five prepare ;
Come bring frefh Oil with Speed,
Your dying Lamps to feed :

All trim’d in new and glitt’ring Light,
To welcome Garments that are white.
Ill.

Come Seraphs too, that be

Bright Rulers, three by three ;

Attend on me your Queen,

Two Handmaids led between:
Whilft all around this Heath I name,
Shall make the hollow Sounds proclaim.

IV.
Whilft Sylvans and fylvan I.oves,
O’er Mountains and in Groves ;
With brighter Gems and fprightly Dames,
Of Fountains and of Flames :
With joyful Noife of. Hands and Feet,
Shall echo and the Sound repeat,

Whilft

MASONS SONGS. 187

¥,

Whilft we who fing and love,

And live in Springs above ;

Defcend, defcend, do we,

With Mafons to be free :
Where Springs of Wine revive each Face,
And Streams of Milk flow round the Place.

VI.
Whilft Cherubs guatd the Door,
With flaming Sword before ;
We thro’ the Key-hole creep,
And there unfeen we peep:
O’er all their Jewels fkip and leap,
And trip it, trip it, Step by Step.

VII.

Or as upon the Green,

We Fairies turn unfeen,

So here we make a Ring,

While merry Mafons fing :
Around their Crowns we whirl apace,
And not one fingle Hair mifplace.

VO.
And down from thence we jump,
All with a filent Thump ;
None hear our Feet rebound,
Round, round the Table, round :
Nor fees us whilft we nimbly pafs,
Thrice round the Rim of ev’ry Glafs.

Bb2 But

188 A Choice Cottection of

IX.
But if any Crumbs withal,
Down from their Table fall ;
With greedy Mirth we eat,
No Honey is fo fweet :
And when they drop it from their Thumb,
We catch it fupernaculum.

t ¢

Now as for Mafonry,
Altho’ we are not free ;
In Lodges we have been,
And all their Signs have feen:
Yet fuch Love to the Craft we bear,
Their Secrets we will ne’er declare.

ey

PRO-

oo CORR PRI ECR ROR EDR E
Bs PAK, z
Se a eo eceteses

REEEPEEEE DEERE EELS EEE TEES EES ESSE EEE EP EEE PEPE ET

PROLOGU ES,

AN D

EPILOGUES.

A PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Griffith, at the Theatre-Royal, &c.

ia to delight to humanize the Mind,

The favage World in focial Ties to bind ;

To make the moral Virtues all appear

Improv’d and ufeful, foften’d from fevere ;

If thefe demand the Tribute of your Praife,

The Teacher’s Honour or the Poets Lays ;

How do we view ’em all compris’d in Thee,
Thrice honour’d and myfterious Masonry ;

By Thee ereéted, fpacious Domes arife,

And Spires afcending glitter in the Skies ;

The wond’rous Whole by heav’nly Art is crown’d,
And Order in Diverfity is found ;

Thro’ fuch a Length of Ages, ftill how fair,

How bright, how blooming, do thy Looks appear ;

190 PROLOGUES,

And ftill fhall bloom. Time, as it glides away,
Fears for its own, before Thine fhall decay ;
The Ufe of Accents from Thy Aid is thrown,
Thou form’ft a filent Language of Thy own;
Difdain’ft that Records fhould contain Thy Art,
And only Jiv’ft within the faithful Heart ——
Behold where Kings and a long fhining Train
Of garter’d Heroes wait upon thy Reign, f
And boaft no Honour but a Mafon’s Name.
Still in the Dark let the Unknowing Stray ;

No matter what they judge, or what they fay,
Still may thy myftic Secrets be conceal’d,

And only toa Brother be reveal’d.

A PROLOGUE.

Asa wild Rake that courts a Virgin fair,

And tries in vain her Virtue to eninare :

Tho’ what he cails his Heav’n he may obtain

By putting on the matrimonial Chain.

At length enrag’d to find the ftill is chafte

Her modeft Fame malicioufly would blaft ;

So fome at our Fraternity do rail,

Becaufe our Secrets we fo well conceal,

And curfe the Sentry with the flaming Sword,

That keeps Eve-droppers from the Mafon Word ;

Tho’ rightly introduc’d all true Men may

Obtain the Secret in a lawful Way,

They’d have us counter to our Honour run ;

Do what they muft blame us for when done;
And

PROLOGUES,. 1g!

Blinded with Anger, Heighth of Folly fhow,

By railing at the Thing they do not know.

Not fo the Affembly of the Scottifs Kirk,

Their Wifdoms went a wifer Way to work:

When they were told that Mafons practis’d Charms,
Invok’d the Dee’l and rais’d tempeftuous Storms, ©
Two of their‘Body prudently they fent

To learn what cou’d by Mafonry be meant.
Admitted to the Lodge and treated well,

At their Return the Affembly hop’d they’d tell.

We fay nea mere than this (they both reply’d)

Do what we've done and ye'll be fatisfy’d.

And when they find their teazing will not do,

A PROLOGUE.

As fome crack’d Chemift of projecting Brain,
Much for Difcovery, but more for Gain ;
With Toil, inceffant Labours, Puffs and Blows
In Search of fomething Nature won’t difclofe.
At length his Crucibles and Meafures broke,
His fancy’d Gain evaporate in Smoak.

So fome prefumptuous ftill attempt to trace
The guarded Symbol of our ancient Race,
Enwrapp’d in venerable Gloom it lies,

And mocks all Sight but of a Mafon’s Eyes ,
Like the fam’d Stream enriching Egypé’s Shore,
All feel its Ufe—but few its Source explore.
All Ages ftill muft owe, and every Land
Their Pride and Safety to the Mafons Hand.
Whether for gorgeous Domes renown’d afar,
Or Ramparts ftrong to ftem the Rage of War;

192 PROLOGUES.

All we behold in Earth or circling Air,

Proclaims the Power of Compafs’s and Square.
The Heaven taught Science Queen of Arts appears,
Eludes the Ruft of Time, and Wafte of Years. .
Thro’ Form and Matter are her Laws difplay’d,
Her Rules the fame by which the World was made.
Whatever Virtue grace the focial Name

Thofe we profefs on thofe we found our Fame;
Wifely the Lodge !ooks down on tinfel State,
Where only to be good is to be. great.

Such Souls by Inftinét to each other turn
Demand Alliance and in Friendfhip burns

No fhallow Schemes, no Stratagems nor Arts _
Can break the Cement that unites their Hearts,
Then let pale Envy rage and every Name

Of Fools miftaken Infamy for Fame;

Such have all Countries and all Ages borne,

And fuch all Countries and all Ages fcorn ;
Glorious the Temple of the fylvan Queen,

Pride of the World at Epbefus was feen

A witlefs Wretch the Prichard of thofe Days,
Stranger to Virtue and unknown to Praife,
Crooked of Soul and fond of any Name,
Confign’d the noble Monument to Flame

Vain Madman! if fo thinking to deftroy

The Art which cannot but with Nature die.

Still with the Craft, ftill fhall his Name furvive,
And in our Glory his Difgrace fhall live ;

While his Cowans no more Admittance gain

T han Epberaimites at Fordan’s Paffage flain.

A PRO-

PROLOGUES. 193

A PROLOGUE.

You’ve feen me oft in Gold and Ermin dreft,

And wearing fhort liv’d Honours on my Breaft
But now the honourable Badge I wear

Gives an indellible high Character :

And thus by our Grand Mafter am I fent

To tell you what by Mafonry is meant.

If all the focia) Virtues of the Mind

If an extenfive Love to all Mankind ;

If hofpitable Welcome to a Gueft,

And fpeedy Charity to the Diftrefs’d ;

If due Regard to Liberty and Laws,

Zeal for our King and for our Country’s Caufe ;

If thefe are Principles deferving Fame,

Let Masons then enjoy the Praife they claim :
Nay more, though War deftroy’s what Mafons build,
E’er to a Peace inglorious we would yield ;

Our Squares and Trowels into Swords we’ll turn,
And make our Foes the Wars they menace mourn 5
For their Contempt we'll no vain Boafter fpare,
Unlefs by Chance we meet a Mason there,

Spoken by a BROTHER.
While Others fing of Wars and martial Feats,
Of bloody Battles and of fam’d Retreats;
A more noble Subject fhall my Fancy raife
And Mafonry alone fhall claim my Praife :
Hail! Mafonry, thou Royal Art divine,
B'amelefs may I aproach thy facred Shrine;

Cc Thy

194 PROLOGUES.

Thy radiant Beauties let me there admire

And warm my Heart with thy celeftial Fire :
Ye wilful Blind, {eek not your own Difgrace,
Be {ure you come not near the hallowed Place,
For fear to late your Rafhnefs you deplore

And Terrors feel by you unthought before.
With Joy my faithful Brethren here I {ce
Joining their Hearts in Love and Unity ;

Still ftriving each other to excell

In focial Virtues and in doing well:

No party Jars no pojitic Debate,

Which often Wrath excites and Feuds create ;
No impious Talk no fleering Jefts nor Brawls
Was ever heard within our peaceful Walls.
Here in harmonious Concert friendly join

The Prince, the Soldier, Tradefman, and Divine,
And to each other mutual Help afford ;

The fioneft Farmer and the noble Lord.
Freedom and Mirth attend the cheertul Bow!,
Refrefh the Spirits and enlarge the Soul ;

The Cordial we with Moderation Ule,

For Temperance admits of no Abufe ;
Prudence we praife and Fortitude commend,
Tojuftice always and her Friends a Friend:
The fcoffing Tribe the Shame of daim’s Race,
Deride thofe Myfteries which they cannot trace ;
Profane Solemnitics they never faw,

And lying Libels to them are law ;

The Book of Mafonry they may in vain explore,
And turn myfterious Pages o’er and o’er 5
Hoping the great Arcanum to attain,

But endleis their Toil and fruitlefs all their Pain:

They

EPILOGUES. 195

They may as well for Heat to Greenland go,
Or in the torrid Regions feck for Snow,
The royal Craft the fcoffing Tribe detpife,
And veils their Secrets from unlawful Eyes.

An EPILOGU E,
Spoken by Mrs. TouRMonD a Mafon’s Wife.

With what malicious Joy, e’er I knew better,
Have I been wont the Mafons to be-fpatter ;
How greedily have I believ’d each Lie
Contriv’d againft that fam’d Society ;
With many more complain’d—’twas very hard,
Women fhould from their Secrets be debarr’d.
When Kings and Statefmen to our Sex reveal
Important Bufinefs which they fhould conceal,
That beautequs Ladies by their Sparks ador’d
Never cou’d wheedle out the Mafons Word ;
And oft their Favours have beftow’d in vain,
Nor cou’d one Secret for another gain :
I thought unable to explain the Matter,
Each Mafon fure mut be a Woman-hater:
With fudden Fear and Difmal Horror ftruck,
I heard my Spoufe was to fubfcribe the Book.
By all our Loves ] begg’d he wou’d forbear ;
Upon my Knees I wept and tore my Hair:
But when I found him fixt, how I behav’d,
I thought him lof, and like a Fury rav’d,
Ces Be-

196 EPILOGUES,

Believ’d he would for ever be undone

By fome ftrange Operation undergone.

When he came back [ found a Change ’tis true,

But fuch a Change as did his Youth renew :

With rofy Cheeks and fmiling Grace he came,

And fparkling Eyes tnat fpoke a Bridegroom’s Flame.
Ye married Ladies ’tis a happy Life,

Believe mes. that of a Freeman’s Wife.

Tho’ they conceal the Secrets of their Friends,

In Love and Truth they make us full Amends.

An EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs). BELLAMY.

Well, here I’m come to let you knqw my Thoughts;
Nay, ben’t alarm’d, I'll not attack your Faults;
Alike be fafe, the Cuckold and the Wit,

The Cuckold-Maker and the folemn Cit.

I’m in 0041 Humour and am come to prattle,
Han’t I a tdead well turn’d, d’ye think, to rattle,
But to clear up the Point and to be free,

What think you is my Subjeét, Masonry :

Tho’ I’m afraid as Lawyers Cafes clear

My learn’d Debate will leave you as you were 5
But I’m a Woman—ané when I fay that,

You know we'll talk—altho’ we know not what:
What think you Ladies an’t it- very hard

That we fhould from this Secret be debarr’d.
How comes it that the fofter Hour of love,

To wheedle out this Secret fruitlefs prove ; t
For we can wheedle when we hope to move.

What

EPILOGUES. 197

‘What can it mean why all this mighty Pother,
Thefe myftic Signs and folemn calling, Brother ;
That we are qualify’d in Signs are known,

We can keep Secrets too, but they’re our own.
When my good Man went firft to be a Mafon,
Tho’ I refolv’d to put the fmoother Face on:
Yet to fpeak truly, I began to fear

He muft fome dreadful Operation bear ;

But he return’d to fatisfy each Doubt,

And brought Home ev’ry thing he carried out:
Nay came improv’d, for on his Face appear’d
A pleafing Smile that ev’ry Scruple clear’d,
Such added Complaifance, fo much Good-nature,
So much, fo ftrangely alter’d for the better ;
That to increafe the mutual dear Delight!
Wou’d he were made a Mason ev'ry Night.

EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. HOR TON,

Where are thefe Hydra’s, let me vent my Spleen ;
Are thefe Free-Mafons? Blefs me! thefe are Men!
And young and brifk too: I expected Monfters,
Brutes more prodigious than Itz/ian Songfters.
Lord, how Report will lie, how vain’s this Pother ;
Thefe look like Sparks who only love each other. | [ Jronically.
Let eafy Faiths on fuch grofs Tales rely,

*Tis falfe by Rules of Phyfiognomy, i

I'll ne’er believe it, poz, unlefs I try.

In proper Time and Place, there’s little Doubt

But one might find their wond’rous Secrets out ;

he

198 EPILOGUES.

I fhrewdly guefs, egad, for all their Shynefs,
They’d render Signs and Tokens too of Kindnefs ;
If any Truth in what I here ob{crve is,

They'll quit ten Brothers for one Sifter’s Service :
But hold wild Fancy, Whither haft thou ftray’d ?
‘Where Man’s concern’d, alas, how frail’s a Maid ;
I’m come to ftorm, to fcold, to rail, to rate,

And fee the Accufer’s turn’d the Advocate.

Say to what Merits might I not pretend,

Who, tho’ no Sifter, do yet prove your Friend :
Wou’d Beauty thus but in vour Caufe appear,
*Twere fomething, Sirs, co ve accepted there: [Shews theBoxes.
Ladies, be gracious to the myftic Arts,

And kindly take the gen’rous Mafons Parts ;

Let no loquacious Fop your Joys partake,

He fues for telling, not for kiffing Sake :

Firm to their Truit, us: faithful Craft conceal ;
They cry no Roaft-Meat, fare they ne’er fo well;
No tell-tale Sneer fhall rasfe the conscious Bluth,
The loyal Brother’s Word is alwa::-——hufh.
What tho’ they quote old So/omon’s Decree,

And vainly boaft that thro’ the World they’re free ;
With Eafe you’!] humble the prefumptuous Braves,
One kind Regard makes all thefe Freemen Slaves.

An EPILOGUE.

Well, Heavens be prais’d, the mighty Secret’s out;
The Secret that has made fo ftrange a Rout :

This Moment I was taught behind the Scenes,
What every Word, and Sign, and Token means ;

A charm-

EPILOG UtE'S. 199

A charming Secret, but I muft conceal it
If Time, at nine Months end, does not reveal it :
What monftrous-horrid Lies do fome Folks tell us,
Why Mafons, Ladies, are quite clever Fellows ,
They’re Lovers of our Sex, as I can witnefs,
And ne’er act contrary to * mortal Fitnefs :
If any of ye doubt it, try the Mafons,
They'll not deceive your largeit Expectations »
Let no mifgrounded Apprehenfions feize ye,
They won’t do any: Thing that can difpleate ye ;
They’re able Workmen, and compleatly fkill’d in
The trueft Arts and Myfteries of Building ;
They’ll build ap Families, and, as moft fit is,
Not only will ereé&t but people Cities ;
They’I!l fill as well as fabricate your Houfes,
And propagate a Race of ftrong-built Spoufes.
If fuch their Gifts; fuch, Ladies, is their Merit,
So great their Skill, and Strength, and Life, and Spirit ;
What female Heart can be fo very hard,
As to refufe them their deferv’d Reward.
Once, on a Time (as Heathen Story fay)
Two Mafon-Gods to Troy Town tock their Way :
Arriv’d, and hir’d to work, to work they fell ;
Hard was their Tafk, but executed well :
With more than human Strength, thefe heav’nly Powers
Rais’d the impregnable Dardanian Towers ;
Thofe Towers which long fecur’d the Trcjan Dames,
From Grecian Ravifhers and Grecian Flames :
Gratis they did it, whatfoe’er was done ;
Wrong’d of their Pay by King Laomedon :

Bafe

* Alluding to Chubs’s Eflay——fo intitleJ.

200 EPILOGUES.

Bafe fordid Soul, of Princes the Difgrace ;

But Heav’n his Guilt aveng’d upon his Race :
Moft juftly did his Zrey at length expire,
Reduc’d to Afhes by vindictive Fire.

Ladies, this Story’s written for your Learning ;
Let Trey’s Example fright you all from burning ;
Let it, this Truth in every Breatt infpire,

That every Workman’s worthy of his Hire ;
But fure fuch Virtue in the prefent Age is,

None will defraud the Brethren of their Wages ;
None will tranfgrefs the Laws of Common-Senfe,
Which give both Sexes due Benevolence :

A Mafon’s full Reward then do not grudge,
Since every Mafon is your humble Drudge.

Solomon's

SOLOMON’s TEMPLE,

AN
ORATORIO,
As it was perform’d
At Philharmonic-Room, in Fi/hamble-Street, Dublin,

For the Benefit of fick and diftrefs’d

FREE-MASON S.

The Words by Mr. ‘fames Eyre Weeks.
The Mufic compos’d by Mr. Richard Broadway,

Organiit of St. Patri. :’s Catheural.

Dramatis Perjonz.
Solomon, the Grand- Matter.
High Prieft.

Hiram, the Workman.

Uriel, Angel of the Sun,
Sheba, Queen of the South.
Chorus of Priefts and Nobles.

SOLOMON.
Recitative.
Conven’d we’re met,—chief Oracle of Heav’n,
To whom the facred Myfterics are given;
We're met to bid a fplendid Fabric rife,
Worthy the mighty Ruler of the Skies.
Dd High

202 SOLOMON'’s TEMPLE,

High Prieft.
And lo! where Urie/, Angel of the Sun,
Arrives to fee the mighty Bufinefs done.

Air.

Behold he comes upon the Wings of Light,
And with his funny Veftments clears the Sight.

U RE EWL.
Recitative.
The Lord fupreme, Grand-Mafter of the Skies,
Who bid Creation from a Chaos rife ;

The Rules of Architecture firft engrav’d,
On Adam’s Heart.

Chorus of Priefts and Nobles.

To Heav’ns high Architect, all Praife,
All Gratitude, be given ;

Who deign’d the human Soul to raife,
By Secrets ‘prung from Heav’n.

SOLOMON.
Recitative,
Adam, well vers’d in Arts,
Gave to his Sons the Plum and Line;
By Mafonry fage Tubal-Cain,
To the deep Organ tun’d the Strain.

Mir.
And while he fwell’d the melting Note,
On high the filver Concord float.

High

wn ORATORIO. 203
High Prieft.

Recitative accompanied.
Upon the Surface of the Waves,
(When God a mighty Deluge pours)
Noab a chofen Remnant itaves,
And laid the Ark’s ftupendious Floors.

URTEL
Air.

Hark from on high, the Mafon- Word !
* David, my Servant, fhall not build
* A Lodge for Heav’n’s all-fov’reign Lord,
© Since Blood and War have ftain’d his Shield ;
* That for our Deputy, his Son
© We have referv’d. Prince Solumon. Da. Capo

Chorus of Priefts and Nobles.

Sound great] EH OVAH’s Praife!
Who bid young Solcmon the Temple raife.

SOLOMON.
Recitative.
So grand a Struéture fhall we raife,
That Men fhall wonder! Angels giz:!
By Art divine it fhall be rear’d,
Nor fhall the Hammer’s Noife be heard.

Chorus.

Sound great JEH OVAH’s Praife,
Who bid King Sclcmon the ‘Vemple raife.

D2 Urici.

204,

SOLOMON'’s TEMPLE,

U RIE OL.
Recitative.
To plan the mighty Dome,
Hiram, the Mafter-M::fon’s come.

Sir by Uriel.
We know thee by thy Apron white,
We know thee by thy Trowel bright,
Well fkilled in Mafonry ;
We know thee by thy Jewel’s Blaze,
Thy manly Walk and Air ;
Inftruéted thou the Lodge fhalt raife,
Let all for Work prepare.

HIRAM.
Air.
Not like Badel’s haughty Building,
Shall our greater Lodge be fram’d ;
That to hideous Jargon yielding,
Juftly was a Babel nam’d ;
There Confufion all o’er-bearing,
Neither Sign nor Word they knew ;
We our Work with Order fquaring,
Each Proportion fhall be true.

SOLOMON.
Recitative.
Cedars which fince Creation grew,
Fall of themfelves to grace the Dome ;
All Lebanon, as if fhe knew
The great Occafion, bo is come.

Uriel.

Mn ORATORIO, Rog

URIEL.
Air.
Behold my Brethren of the Sky,
The Work begins worthy an Angel’s Eye:

Chorus of Priafts and Nobles.

Be prefent all ye heavenly Hoft ;
The Work begins, the Lord defrays the Coft.

AoC: -T II.
MESSENGER.
Recitative.

Behold, attended by a num’rous Train,
Queen of the South, fair Sheba greets thy Reign!
Jn Admiration of thy Wifdom, fhe

Comes to prefent the bended Knee.

SOLOMON to HIRAM.

Receive her with a fair Salute,
Such as with Majefty may fuit.

HIRAM.
Air.
When Allegiance bids obey,
We with Pleafure own its Sway.

Enter SHE B A, attended.

Obedient to faperior Greatnefs, fee
Our Scepter hails thy mightier Majefty.

Sheba,

206

SOLOMON'’s TEMPLE,

SHEBA.
4ir.

Thus Phebe, Queen of Shade and Night,

Owning the Sun’s fuperior Rays ;
With feebdler Glory, leffer Light,
Attends the Triumph of his Blaze :
Oh, all excelling Prince, receive
"Lhe Tribute due to fuch a King ;
Not the Gift, but Will, believe ;
Take the Heart, not what we bring.

SOLOMON.
Recitative.
Let Meafures foftly fweet,
Illuftrious Sheba’s Prefence greet.

SOLOMON.
“ir.

Tune the Lute and ftring the Lyre,
Equal to the Fair we fing ;
Who can fee and not admire,
Sheba, Confort for a King :
Enliv’ning Wit and Beauty join,
Melting Senfe and graceful Air;
Here united Powers combine,
To make her brighteft of the Fair.

SOLOMON.
Recitative.

Hitram, our Brother and our Friend,
Do thou the Queen with me attend.

[Da Capo.

[Da Capo.

SCENE

4n ORATORIO. 207

SCENE II.

A View of the TEMPLE.
High Prief.

Recitative.
Sacred to Heav’n, behold the Dome appears ;
Lo, what auguft Solemnity it wears ;

Angels themfelves have deign’d to deck the Frame,
And beauteous Sheba fhall report its Fame.

Air.
When the Queen of the South fhall return,
To the Climes which acknowledge her Sway ;
Where the Sun’s warmer Beams fiercely burn,
The Princefs with Tranfport fhall fay ;
Well worthy my Journey, I’ve feen
A Monarch both graceful and wife,
Deferving the Love of a Queen ;
And a Temple well worthy the Skies. [Da Capo.

Chorus.
Open ye Gates, receive a Queen who thares,

With equal Senfe, your Happinefs and Cares,
HIRAM.

Recitative.

Of Riches much, but more of Wifdom fee s
Proportion’d Workmanhhip, and Mafonry.

Hiram.

208

Sheba.

Solomon.

Sheba.

SOLOMON’ss TEMPLE,

HIRAM.
Air.
Oh, charming Sheba, there behold
What maffy Stores of burnifh’d Gold,
Yet richer is our Art ;
Not all the orient Gems that fhine,
Nor Treafurers of rich Opdir’s Mine,
Excel the Mafon’s Heart :
True to the Fair he honours, more
Than glitt’ring Gems or brighteft Ore,
The plighted Pledge of Love:
To ev’ry Tie of Honour bound,

In Love and Friendfhip conftant found,

And favour’d from above,

SOLOMON and SHEBA.
Duet.

One Gem beyond the reft I fee,
And charming Solomen is he.

One Gem beyond the reft I fee,

Oh, thou furpaffing all Men wife.

Solomon. And thine excelling Womens Eyes.

Faireft of fair ones, thou are fhe.

liiran.

4n ORATORIO. 209

HIRAM.
Recitative.
Wifdom and beauty doth combine ;
Our art to raife, our hearts to join,
Chorus.

Give to Mafonry the prize,

‘Where the faireft chufe the wife ;
Beauty ftill thou’d wifdom love ;

Beauty and order reign above.
