THE GEOMETRY OF RENÉ DESCARTES
Translated from the French and Latin by David Eugene Smith and Marcia L. Latham. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company, 1925. (With facsimile of the 1637 first edition.)
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier geometryofrenede0000davi_t0j4.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THE GEOMETRY OF RENE DESCARTES

*

Preface

If a mathematician were asked to name the great epoch-making
works in his science, he might well hesitate in his decision concerning
the product of the nineteenth century; he might even hesitate with
respect to the eighteenth century ; but as to the product of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, and particularly as to the works of the
Greeks in classical times, he would probably have very definite views.
He would certainly include the works of Euclid, Archimedes, and
Apollonius among the products of the Greek civilization, while among
those which contributed to the great renaissance of mathematics in the
seventeenth century he would as certainly include La Géométrie of
Descartes and the Principia of Newton.

But it is one of the curious facts in the study of historical eaitesial
that although we have long had the works of Euclid, Archimedes,
Apollonius, and Newton in English, the epoch-making treatise of Des-
cartes has never been printed in our language, or, if so, only in some
obscure and long-since-forgotten edition. Written originally in French,
it was soon after translated into Latin by Van Schooten, and this was
long held to be sufficient for any scholars who might care to follow
the work of Descartes in the first printed treatise that ever appeared
on analytic geometry. At present it is doubtful if many mathemati-
cians read the work in Latin; indeed, it is doubtful if many except the
French scholars consult it very often in the original language in which
it appeared. But certainly a work of this kind ought to be easily access-
ible to American and British students of the history of mathematics,
and in a language with which they are entirely familiar.

On this account, The Open Court Publishing Company has agreed
with the translators that the work should appear in English, and with
such notes as may add to the ease with which it will be read. To this
organization the translators are indebted for the publication of the
book, a labor of love on its part as well as on theirs.

As to the translation itself, an attempt has been made to give the
meaning of the original in simple English rather than to add to ‘the dif-
ficulty of the reader by making it a verbatim reproduction. It is
believed that the student will welcome this policy, being content to go
to the original in case a stricter translation is needed. One of the
translators having used chiefly the Latin edition of Van Schooten, and
the other the original French edition, it is believed that the meaning
which Descartes had in mind has been adequately preserved.

Table of Contents

BOOK I

PROBLEMS THE CONSTRUCTION OF WHICH REQUIRES ONLY STRAIGHT
LINES AND CIRCLES

How the calculations of arithmetic are related to the ‘operations of geometry.. 297
How multiplication, division, and the extraction of square root are performed

Seomiet nical ye n...i% 6 Scion 4 4 suo ty eae eee oie oe ee fecal rie ner ed ee See 293
How: we usevarithmetic symbols insgeometryee. secs eee eee ae 299
How we use equations in solying problems..>...-2.....«---.+---se eee ene 300
Plane* problems: and itheirssolutionmmns sas areca eteeise ie eae 302
Example:from\Pappus. se vote c sees ace; Cee oe erie oe Sea eee 304
Solutioncof the problemboh Pappuse.. cn. oxierameeae lee eee ee 307
How we should choose the terms in arriving at the equation in this case...... 310

How we find that this problem is plane when not more than five lines are given 313

1Jt should be recalled that the first edition of this work appeared as a kind of
appendix to the Discours de la Methode, and hence began on page 297. For con-
venience of reference, the original paging has been retained in the facsimile. A
new folio number, appropriate to the present edition, will also be found at the foot
of each page. For convenience of reference to the original, this table of contents
follows the paging of the 1637 edition.

vi

4

TABLE

Des matieres de la
Gee boo eM BE IR Chee:

Liure Premter.

DES PROBLESMES QU’ON PEUT
conftruire fans y employer que des cercles &
des lignes droites.

OMMENT Le calcul d Arithmetique fe Yapporte aux ope-

rations de Geometric. 297

Comment fe font Geometriquement la Multiplication , la

Dinifion, & Vextrattion de la racine quarree. 298

Comment on peut vfer de chiffres en Geometrie. 299
Comment il faut venir aux Equations qui feruent a refoudre les pro-
ble(me. 300
Quels font les problefmes plans; Et comment sls fe refoluent. 302
Excmple tive de Pappu. 304
Refponfe ala queftion de Pappus. 307

Coment on dost pofer les termes pour venir al Equation en cet exéple.310
Kkk Com

BOOK II

On THE NATURE OF CURVED LINES

What curved linescare admitted im geometry. - = o.- 4-0-2 seme ee eeteietee ate 315
The method of distinguishing all curved lines of certain classes, and of know-

ing the ratios connecting their points on-certain straight lines.......... 319
There follows the explanation of the problem of Pappus mentioned in the pre-

Ceding’ BOOK) Ai isc a sacar stra roca: see ere eterna ee a gaara rar ene ares 323
Solution of this problem for the case of only three or four lines............. 324
Demonstration on this) -solutionma- mee. ecieaceeieiee eee eee Ca Meare a)
Plane and solid loci and the method of finding them...............-..-.----. 334
The first and simplest of all the curves needed in solving the ancient problem

for the ‘caserotsiive dines arn qre seem enies naeite ns «eae cee eS
Geometric curves that can be described by finding a number of their points... 340
Those which ‘can be-described cwithya strink, «006.00. cin. 6 tein eee nee 340

To find the properties of curves it is necessary to know the relation of their
points to points on certain straight lines, and the method of drawing

other lines which cut them in all these points at right angles........... 341
General method for finding straight lines which cut given curves and make

right “angles: with theta ios mets tixisscte rors ateye cverdol Si gree eee eee eee 342
Example of this operation in the case of an ellipse and of a parabola of the

second Class eect kee heen pe Bee ie e-cie cla + ORIN ale ees 343
Another example in the case of an oval of the second class................- 344
Example of the construction of this problem in the case of the conchoid...... 351
Explanation of four new classes of ovals which enter into optics............. 352
The properties of these ovals relating to reflection and refraction............ BkYy/
Demonstration of theses properties wersrteieci-cictct ee trae ita eine 360

Vili

TABLE.

Comment on trcane que ce proble{me cft plan lor{qu'sl n'eft point propofé
en plus de 5 lignes. oie

Difcours Second.

DE LA NATURE DES LIGNES
COURBES.,

Velles font les lignes courbes qu'on pent receuosr en Geometrie. 315
La facon de diftinguer toutes ces lignes courbes ew certains genres:
Et de connoiftre le rapport qu ont tous lenrs poins a ceux des lignes
dvoites. 319
Suite del explication de la queftion dé Pappus mife an lure preeedent..
323.
Solution de cete queftion quand elle weft propoj ed quen 3 on 4 lignes,
324.
Demonftration de cete folution. g32
Quels font les liewx plans & folides & la facon deles trouner tous. 334
Quelle eff la premiere & la plus fimple de toutes les lignes courbes qus
feruent alaqueftion des anciens quand elle eft propojee encing lignes.
335:
Quelles font les lignes courbes qu'on defcrst en tronuant plufieurs de leurs

poins qui penuent eftre recenes en Geometrie. 340
Quelles font anffy celles qu on defcrit auec une chorde,qui penuent y eftre
veceues. 40

Que pour trouuer toutes les proprietez des lignes courbes , il fuffit de {ca-
noir le rapport qu ont tous leurs poins a ceux des lignes droites,; C& la
facon de tirer a autres lignes quiles coupent en tous ces poins 4 angles

droits. 341
Facon generale pour trouner des lignes droites qui couppent les courbes
donnees,on leurs contingentes a angles droits. 342
Exemple de cete operation en vne Ellipfe: Et en une parabsle aa fecond
geure. 343
eAutre exemple en une onale du fecond genre. 344
Exemple de la confiruttion de ce probleme en la conchorde. 354

Explication de 4 nonucaux genres d’Ouales qui fernent al Optique, 352
Les proprieter de ces Owales touchant les veflensons & les refrattions,

Cpe
Demonffration de ces proprietez. 360

(em

1x

TABLE OF CONTENTS

How it is possible to make a lens as convex or concave as we wish, in one of
its surfaces, which shall cause to converge in a given point all the rays
which proceed from another given point......---+++eeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 363

How it is possible to make a lens which operates like the preceding and such
that the convexity of one of its surfaces shall have a given ratio to the
convexity or concavity of the other.......-..+essee cere e eee e cece cece 366

How it is possible to apply what has been said here concerning curved lines
described on a plane surface to those which are described in a space of
three dimensions, or on a curved surface........--..eeee seer ese eee ees 368

BOOK III

On THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOLID OR SUPERSOLID PROBLEMS

On those curves which can be used in the construction of every problem..... 369
Example relating to the finding of several mean proportionals............... 370
On}the:nature of equations... <.... 202. seen Oe ee eee ee eee 371
How many: roots each equation can havevw.ss.. eee le eee ee 372
What: are ‘false «roots 2.0 icfosd.¢ <tonsoe ea les +e eect ON Sater te ite ree eet eee teeta 372
How it is possible to lower the degree of an equation when one of the roots

Cie 3000), | ee eR ARE SEE none nis Saseo ccs asec oeeeeS 372
How to determine if any given quantity is a root..............-.eeeeeeeeeee 373
How many true roots an equation may have......- 1-0 =s ee eee ee 373
How the false roots may become true, and the true roots false:............... 373
How to increase or decrease the roots of an equation..................-+-5- 374
That by increasing the true roots we decrease the false ones, and vice versa.. 375
Howto remove the second term of an ‘equation. actus ee eee 376
How to make the false roots true without making the true ones false......... BYAfE
How: to fillall the places of an equations sess entre serene eerie eee 378
How to multiply’ or divide the roots of an’ equation. 1. ome eer 379
How to eliminate the fractions in an equation............-..eeeseuceceesses 379
How to make the known quantity of any term of an equation equal to any

@iven quantity... 3.0 0 deb owidhpatars micn cee cinta cle pel ane cre eerie ene 380

De La GEOMETRIE.

Comment on peut faire un verre autant conuexe on concaue en l'une de
fes fuperficies, qu on voudra, quivaffemblea un point donne tous les
rayons qat-vienent d’vn autre point donne. 353
(Comment on en pent faire un qus face le mefme , ex que la connexite de
lone de fes fuperficies ait la proportion donneé auec la conuexité on
concanité de l'autre, 3-56,
Comment on peut rapporter tout ce quiaefte dit des lignes conrbes de-
Serites (ur une faperficie plate,a celles qui fe defcrinent dans vn efpace

qui a 3 dimenfions, oubien [ur une fuperficie courbe. 368
Liure Troifie(me

DE LA CONSTRUCTION DES
problefmes folides, ou plufque folides.

D E quelles lignes courbes on pent fe fernir en la conftruttion de chaf-

que problefme. 369
Exemple touchant l'inuention de plufiewrs moyenes proportionelles. 37¢
De lanature des Equations. 37!
Combien il peut y anotr de racines en chaque Equation, 372
-Quelles font les fauffes racines. yee
Comment on peut diminuer le nombre des dimenfions d'une Equation,

lor{qu'on connoift quelqu’une de fes ratines. 372
Comment on peut examiner [i quelque quantité donnee eft la valeur
d'unevacine. 373

Combien il peut y anoir de vrayes racines enchafque Equation. 373
Comment ou fit que les fauffes racines denienent vrayes , & les vrayes
_  fanffes. 373

Comment on pent augmenter on diminuér les racines d'uneE quation. 374
Quen augmentant ainfi les vrayes racines on diminué les fanffes , 0” ate

contratre, 375
Comment on peut ofter le fecond terme d'une Equation. 376
(omment on fait que les fauffes racines denienent vrayes fans que les

ura yes denienent fauffes. 377

(comment on fait que toutes les places a’ uneEquation foient remplies 378
(omment on peut multiplier ow disifer les racines d'une Equation. 379
(omment on ofte les nombres rompus d’une Equation, 379
(Comment on rend laquantité connuc del’vn des termes d'une Equation

efgale atelle autre qu'on veut. 380
Kkk 2 Que

xi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

That both the true and the false roots may be real or imaginary............. 380
The reduction of cubic equations when the problem is plane...............-. 380
The method of dividing an equation by a binomial which contains a root..... 381
Problems which are solid when the equation is cubic................-.se000: 383
The reduction of equations of the fourth degree when the problem is plane.
Solid: problems. shccc dnst wea derece tte a tiete 2th ocelot eee Pe ue 383
Example showing the use of these reductionS.............202seeeeeeeeeeeees 387
General rule for reducing equations above the fourth degree................. 389
General method for constructing all solid problems which reduce to an equa-
tion of the third or the fourth degrees cn cele eee 1a: ele eatin eerie 389
The finding of two mean) proportionala yess cinerea: oeeee nite eter 395
The t£isection ‘of anvaneles. ao same eee eric eee ee ee ee eee eee 396
That all solid problems can be reduced to these two constructions............. 397
The method of expressing all the roots of cubic equations and hence of all
equations extending to the fourth degree...............0. ce eeeeeeeee 400

Why solid problems cannot be constructed without conic sections, nor those
problems which are more complex without other lines that are also more

COMPLE Ae es.as ee otsaee eeterste eee oiete So ttelc: Sistas a) cre a ee en 401
General method for constructing all problems which require equations of de-

gree not higher than thevsixth. ns aes oe serena & eeieel ee eee 402
The findingyof four mean proportionalsenes «ess scene ae ae ee eee teers 411

Xii

Tasre. De LA GEomeETRt«eE.

Que les racines tant vrayes que fauffes pennent eftre reelles o imaginai-
1eSe 80
La reduélion des Equations cubiques lor{que le proble(me eff plan. Wy
La facon de dinifer une Equation par un binome qui contient [a racine.
3h,
Quels proble(mes ont folides lor[que Equation eff cubique. 383
La reduttion des Equations qui ont quatre dimenfions lor{qne le problef-
me est plan, Et quels (ont venx qui (ont (olides. 383
Exemple de lvfage de ces reductions. 387
Regle generale pour reduive toutes les Equations qui palfent le quarvé de
guarre. 389
Facon generale pour conftruive tous les proble{mes folides reduits a une
Equation de trots ow quatre dimenjions.

; 389
L’inuenticn de deux moyenes propor tionelles, 395
La dinifion de langle en trots, 396

Que tous les problefmes filides fe pennent veduive aces deux conftru-
étions. 207

La facon dexprimer la valeur de toutes les racines des Equations cubi-
ques: Et en fuite de toutes celles qui ne montent que in(ques an quar-
ré de quatre. 400
Pourquoy les proble{mes folides ne peunent eftre conftruits fans les [e~
élions coniques, ny ceux qui (ont plus compofes fans quelques autres
lignes plus compfees. aot
Facon generale pour conftrucre tous les proble[mes reduits a une Equa-
tion qui n'a point plus de fix dimenjions.

402

L’inuention de quatre moyenes proportionelles. Bee
ul:

Les

xili

«
_

ig

_
7
a
ae

Mie

.

bOOKGE IR ow

The Geometry of Reneé Descartes
BOOK I

PROBLEMS THE CONSTRUCTION OF WHICH REQUIRES ONLY STRAIGHT

LINES AND CIRCLES

NY problem in geometry can easily be reduced to such terms that
a knowledge of the lengths of certain straight lines is sufficient
for its construction.” Just as arithmetic consists of only four or five
operations, namely, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and the
extraction of roots, which may be considered a kind of division, so in
geometry, tofind required lines it is merely necessary to add or subtract
other lines; or else, taking one line which I shall call unity in order to
relate it as closely as possible to numbers,” and which can in general be
chosen arbitrarily, and having given two other lines, to find a fourth
line which shall be to one of the given lines as the other is to unity
(which is the same as multiplication) ; or, again, to find a fourth line
which is to one of the given lines as unity is to the other (which is
equivalent to division) ; or, finally, to find one, two, or several mean
proportionals between unity and some other line (which is the same
a] Large collections of problems of this nature are contained in the following
works: Vincenzo Riccati and Girolamo Saladino, [nstitutiones Analyticae, Bologna,
1765 ; Maria Gaetana Agnesi, Istituzioni Analitiche, Milan, 1748; Claude Rabuel,
Commentaires sur la Géométrie de M. Descartes, Lyons, 1730 (hereafter referred
to as Rabuel) > and other books of the same period or earlier.
_ Van Schooten, in his Latin edition of 1683, has this note: “Per unitatem
intellige lineam quandam determinatam, qua ad quamvis reliquarum linearum talem
relationem habeat, qualem unitas ad certum aliquem numerum.” Geometria a

Renato Des Cartes, una cum notis Florimondi de Beaune, opera atque studio

Francisci & Schooten, Amsterdam, 1683, p. 165 (hereafter referred to as Van
Schooten).

In general, the translation runs page for page with the facing original. On
account of figures and footnotes, however, this plan is occasionally varied, but not
in such a way as to cause the reader any serious inconvenience.

2

Per puinrn pent
LA

Gee OrM-E «lk. 1-E.

LIVRE PREMIER.

Des problefmes qu'on peut conftruire [ans
_y employer que des cercles ey des
tenes drottes.

7 peuuent facilement reduire atels termes,
Zé qu’il n’eft befoin par apres que de connoi-
B, {tre la longeur de quelques lignes droites,

43 pour les conftruire. |
toute’ Anthmetique n’eft compofée, que comme
de quatre ou cing operations, qui font !’Addition, la'¢ calcul
Souftraction, la Multiplication, la Diuifion, & I Extra- thmeti-
tion des racines, qu’on peut prendre pour vne efpece 1° ©

de Diuifion : Ainfi n’at’on autre chofe a faire en Geo- mee
metrie touchant les lignes qu'on cherche, pour les pre- 20"5°
parer aeftre connués, que leur en adioufter d’autres , ou ue.
en ofter, Oubien en ayant vne, que 1e nommeray I’vnité.
pour la rapporter d’autant mieux aux nombres , & qui
peutordinairement eftre pnife a difcretion, puis en ayant
encore deux autres, en trouuer vne quatriefme, qui foit
al’vne de ces deux, comme autre eft al’vnitd, ce quieft
le mefme que la Multiplication ; oubien en trouuer yne
quatriefme, qui foit al’vne de cesdeux , comme I’ynité

Pp eft

3

298 La GEOMETRIE.

eft l'autre, ce qui eft le mefme que la Diuifion; ou enfin
trouuer vne,ou deux ,ou plufieurs moyennes proportion-
nelles entre ’vnité, & quelque autre ligne; ce quieftle
mef{me que tirer la racine quarrée, on cubique,&c. Etie
ne craindray pas d'introduire ces termes d’Arithmeti-
que en la Geometrie , affin de me rendre plus intel-
ligibile.

La Multi-

Soit par exemple
plication. P P

ABP’vnité, & qu'il fail-
le multiplier BD par
B C, ie n’ay qu’aioindre
les poins A & C, puis ti-
rer DEparalleleaC A,
& BEeft le produit de
. cete Multiplication.

La Divi- Oubiensil faut divifer BE par BD, ayant ioint les
oe poins E & D, ie tire AC parallele a DE, & BC eftle

pExrra. Produit de cete diuifion.

Gtion dela Ou s'il faut tirer la racine
racine I

ne quarree de GH , ie luy ad-
loufte en ligne droite FG,
qui eft ’'vnite, & diuifant FH
notGerun H en deux parties efgales au
point K, du centre K ie tire
le cercle FIH, puis efleuant du point G vne ligne droite
iufques 4 I,a angles droits fur FH, c’eft GI laracine
cherchée. Ie ne dis rien icy de la racine cubique, ny des
autres, a caufe que i’enparleray plus commodement cy
. aprés,

Commet ‘ 5 f A Z
on. peur Mais fouuent onn’a pas befoin de tracer ainfi ces li-
gne

D A

FIRST BOOK

as extracting the square root, cube root, etc., of the given line.“ And
I shall not hesitate to introduce these arithmetical terms into geometry,
for the sake of greater clearness.

For example, let AB be taken as unity, and let it be required
to multiply BD by BC. I have only to join the points A and C, and
draw DE parallel to CA; then BE is the product of BD and BC.

If it be required to divide BE by BD, I join E and D, and draw AC
parallel to DE; then BC is the result of the division.

If the square root of GH is desired, I add, along the same
straight line, FG equal to unity; then,. bisecting FH at K, I describe
the circle FIH about K as a center, and draw from G a perpendicular
and extend it to I, and GI is the required root. I do not speak here of
cube root, or other roots, since I shall speak more conveniently of them
later.

Often it is not necessary thus to draw the lines on paper, but it is
sufficient to designate each by a single letter. Thus, to add the lines
BD and GH, I call one a and the other b, and write a+ b. Then a —b
will indicate that b is subtracted from a; ab that a is multiplied by b;

a

z that a is divided by b; aa or a? that a is multiplied by itself ; a® that
this result is multiplied by a, and so on, indefinitely.“ Again, if I wish
to extract the square root of a?+b?, I write \/a’+0?; if I wish to

extract the cube root of a*’—b*+ab?, I write ~/a'—b*®+ab?, and sim-
ilarly for other roots." Here it must be observed that by a?, b%, and
similar expressions, I ordinarily mean only simple lines, which, how-
ever, I name squares, cubes, etc., so that I may make use of the terms
employed in algebra.”

1 While in arithmetic the only exact roots obtainable are those of perfect
powers, in geometry a length can be found which will represent exactly the square
root of a given line, even though this line be not commensurable with unity. Of
other roots, Descartes speaks later.

4] Descartes uses a, at, a5, a®, and so on, to represent the respective powers
of a, but he uses both aa and a? without distinction. For example, he often has

3a?
aabb, but he also uses 4b2°

1 Descartes writes: C.a? — 6°+ a6. See original, page 299, line 9.

(I At the time this was written, a? was commonly considered to mean the sur-
face of a square whose side is a, and b8 to mean the volume of a cube whose side
is b; while 54, b®, ... were unintelligible as geometric forms. Descartes here says
that a2 does not have this meaning, but means the line obtained by constructing a
third proportional to 1 and a, and so on.

5

GEOMETRY

It should also be noted that all parts of a single line should always
be expressed by the same number of dimensions, provided unity is not
determined by the conditions of the problem. Thus, a* contains as
many dimensions as ab? or b’, these being the component parts of the

line which I have called ~/a°—b*-++ab’. It is not, however, the same
thing when unity is determined, because unity can always be under-
stood, even where there are too many or too few dimensions; thus, if
it be required to extract the cube root of a*b? — b, we must consider the
quantity ab? divided once by unity, and the quantity b multiplied twice
by unity.” .

Finally, so that we may be sure to remember the names of these lines,
a separate list should always be made as often as names are assigned
or changed. For example, we may write, AB—1, that is AB is equal
to 1;"" GH—=a, BD —b, and so on.

If, then, we wish to solve any problem, we first suppose the solution
already effected,” and give names to all the lines that seem needful for
its construction,—to those that are unknown as well as to those that
are known." Then, making no distinction between known and unknown
lines, we must unravel the difficulty in any way that shows most natur-

(l Descartes seems to say that each term must be of the third degree, and that
therefore we must conceive of both a2b2 and b as reduced to the proper dimension.

1 Van Schooten adds “seu unitati,” p. 3. Descartes writes, AB201. He
seems to have been the first to use this symbol. Among the few writers who fol-
lowed him, was Hudde (1633-1704). It is very commonly supposed that 00 is a
ligature representing the first two letters (or diphthong) of “square.” See, for
example, M. Aubry’s note in W. W. R. Ball’s Recréations Mathématiques et Prob-
lemes des Temps Anciens et Modernes, French edition, Paris, 1909, Part III, p. 164.

"1 This plan, as is well known, goes back to Plato. It appears in the work of
Pappus as follows: “In analysis we suppose that which is required to be already
obtained, and consider its connections and antecedents, going back until we reach -
either something already known (given in the hypothesis), or else some fundamen-
tal principle (axiom or postulate) of mathematics.” Pappi Alexandrini Collectiones
quae supersunt e libris manu scriptis edidit Latina interpellatione et commentariis
instruxit Fredericus Hultsch, Berlin, 1876-1878; vol. II, p. 635 (hereafter referred
to as Pappus). See also Commandinus, Pappi Alexandrini Mathematicae Collec-
tiones, Bologna, 1588, with later editions.

_ Pappus of Alexandria was a Greek mathematician who lived about 300 A.D.
His most important work is a mathematical treatise in eight books, of which the
first and part of the second are lost. This was made known to modern scholars
by Commandinus. The work exerted a happy influence on the revival of geometry
in the seventeenth century. Pappus was not himself a mathematician of the first
rank, but he preserved for the world many extracts or analyses of lost works, and
by his commentaries added to their interest.

™l Rabuel calls attention to the use of a, b, c,... for known, and x, Nee pnale
for unknown quantities (p. 20).

Livre PREMIER. 299

gnes furle papier, & ilfuffift de les defigner par quelques -. ge
lettres, chafcune par vne feule. Comme pour adioufter chiffiesen
laligne B DaGH, ie nomme l'vnea &/ autre b,& efcris riers

a-+ b; Eta-- b,pour fouftraire bd’ a; Et ab,pour ites mul-
tiplier ’vne par l'autre; Et *, pour diuifer a par; Et aa,

2 ae 3
ou a, pour multipliera par foy mefme ; Eta, pour le
multiplier encore vne fois par 4, &ainfi a l'infini ; Et

ue a: 2 2
V a+b, pour tires la racine quarrée d’a +4, Et

7 3 3 3
V C.a--b 4-05}, pour tirerla racine cubique d’a --6
-+-abb, & ainfides autres.

z

Ouilefta remarquer que par a ou 5 ‘ou femblables,
ie ne congoy ordinairement que des lignes toutes fim--
ples, encore que pour me feruir des noms vfités en! Al-
gebre, ie les nomme des quarres ou des cubes, &c.

Ileftauffy a remarquer que toutes les parties d’vne
mefmeligne,fe doiuent ordinairement exprimer par aus
tant de dimenfions |’vne que l'autre, lorfque I’vnitén’eft

3
point déterminde enla queftion, comme icy a2 en cone

tient autant qu’ abb ou 4 ‘dont fe compofe la ligne que

ay nommée VC. a-- b+ abb: mais que ce n’eft
pas de mefime lorfque I’vnité eft déeterminée , a caufe
qu'elle peut eftre foufentendue par tout ou ily a trop ou
trop peude dimenfions: comme s'il faut tirer la racine
cubique de aabb--b, il faut penfer que la quantité
aabb eft diuifée vne fois par l'vnite, & que l'autre quan-

tité b eft multiplide deux fois parla mefme.
: Ppa Au

7

che La GEOMETRIE.

Au refte affin de ne pas manquer a fe fauuenir des
noms de ces lignes, il en faut toufiours faire vn regiftre
fepar¢ , 4 mefure qu’on-les pofe ou qu’on les change,
efcriuant parexemple.

ABxux1, ceftadire,A Befgal a tr.

GHoa

BUeay i 222c-

Cemmét Ainfi voulant refoudre quelque problefme, on doit d’a-
a bord le confiderercomme defia fait, & donner des noms
Equatiés a toutes les lignes, quifemblent neceffaires pour le con-
ee ftruire , auffy bien acelles qui font inconnueés , qu’aux
foudre les autres, Puis fans confiderer aucune difference entre ces

ae Me lignes connués, & inconnués , on doit parcounr Ja diih-
culté, felon ordre qui monftre le plus naturellement
de tous en qu'elle forte elles dependent mutuellement.
les vnes des autres, iufques a ce qu’on ait trouue moyen
‘d’exprimer vne mefme quantitéen deux fagons: ce qui
fenomme vne Equation; carlestermes de I'vne de ces
deux fagons font efgaux aceux de l'autre. Et on doir
trouuer autant de telles Equations,qu’ona fuppof¢ de li-
gnes, quieftorentinconnués. Oubien s‘ilnes’en trouue
pas tant, & que nonobftant on n’omette rien de ce qui eft
defireen la queftion,cela tefmoigne qu'elle n’eft pas en-
tierement determin¢e. Et lors on peut prendre a difcre-
tion des lignes connués , pour toutes lesinconnués auf
qu’elles ne correfpond aucune Equation. Aprés cela sil
enrefte encore plufieurs , il fe faut feruir par ordre de
chafcune des Equations qui reftent auffy , foit en la con-
fiderant toute feule,foit en la comparant auec les autres,
pour expliquer chafcune de ces lignes inconnués, & faire

ainfi

FIRST BOOK

ally the relations between these lines, until we find it possible to express
a single quantity in two ways.” This will constitute an equation, since
the terms of one of these two expressions are together equal to the
terms of the other.

We must find as many such equations as there are supposed to be
unknown lines ;™ but if, after considering everything involved, so many
cannot be found, it is evident that the question is not entirely deter-
mined. In such a case we may choose arbitrarily lines of known length
for each unknown line to which there corresponds no equation."

If there are several equations, we must use each in order, either con-
sidering it alone or comparing it with the others, so as to obtain a value
for each of the unknown lines; and so we must combine them until
there remains a single unknown line™ which is equal to some known
line, or whose square, cube, fourth power, fifth power, sixth power,
etc., is equal to the sum or difference of two or more quantities," one
of which is known, while the others consist of mean proportionals
between unity and this square, or cube, or fourth power, etc., multiplied
by other known lines. I may express this as follows:

ta

4§—az®—c? zd‘, etc.

That is, z, which I take for the unknown quantity, is equal to D; or,
the square of z is equal to the square of b diminished by a multiplied
by z; or, the cube of z is equal to a multiplied by the square of z, plus
the square of b multiplied by z, diminished by the cube of c; and sim-
ilarly for the others.

{I That is, we must solve the resulting simultaneous equations.

"1 Van Schooten (p. 149) gives two problems to illustrate this statement. Of
these, the first is as follows: Given a line segment AB containing any point C,

required to produce AB to D so that the rectangle AD.DB shall be equal to the
ae OnlCD em Heslcts AG=c, CB band BD=2. Then AD= at+tb+xz,

and CD=6b-+ x, whence ax + be +42 = b?+2b4+2%? and x=

a—b-

©] Rabuel adds this note: “We may say that every indeterminate problem is an
infinity of determinate problems, or that every problem is determined either by
itself or by him who constructs it” (p. 21).

M4] That is, a line represented by +, v2, x3, x4, v... :

851 Tn the older French, “le quarré, ou le cube, ou le quarré de quarré, ou le sur-
solide, ou le quarré de cube &c.,” as seen on page 11 (original page 302).

9

GEOMETRY

Thus, all the unknown quantities can be expressed in terms of a sin-
gle quantity,“” whenever the problem can be constructed by means of
circles and straight lines, or by conic sections, or even by some other
curve of degree not greater than the third or fourth.

But I shall not stop to explain this in more detail, because I should
deprive you of the pleasure of mastering it yourself, as well as of the
advantage of training your mind by working over it, which is in my
opinion the principal benefit to be derived from this science. Because,
I find nothing here so difficult that it cannot be worked out by any one
at all familiar with ordinary geometry and with algebra, who will con-
sider carefully all that is set forth in this treatise."

"1 See line 20 on the opposite page.
"1 Literally, “Only one or two degrees greater.”

"81Tn the Introduction to the 1637 edition of La Géométrie, Descartes made
the following remark: “In my previous writings I have tried to make my mean-
ing clear to everybody; but I doubt if this treatise will be read by anyone not
familiar with the books on geometry, and so I have thought it superfluous to repeat
demonstrations contained in them.” See.Ocuvres de Descartes, edited by Charles
Adam and Paul Tannery, Paris, 1897-1910, vol. VI, p. 368. In a letter written
to Mersenne in 1637 Descartes says: “I do not enjoy speaking in praise of myself,
but since few people can understand my geometry, and since you wish me to
give you my opinion of it, I think it well to say that it is all I could hope for,
and that in La Dioptrique and Les Météores, I have only tried to persuade people
that my method is better than the ordinary one. I have proved this in my geom-
etry, for in the beginning I have solved a question which, according to Pappus,
could not be solved by any of the ancient geometers.

“Moreover, what I have given in the second book on the nature and properties
of curved lines, and the method of examining them, is, it seems to me, as far
beyond the treatment in the ordinary geometry, as the rhetoric of Cicero is beyond
the a, b, c of children... .

“As to the suggestion that what I have written could easily have been gotten
from Vieta, the very fact that my treatise is hard to understand is due to my
attempt to put nothing in it that I believed to be known either by him or by any
one else. . . . I begin the rules of my algebra with what Vieta wrote at the
very end of his book, De emendatione acquationum. . . . Thus, I begin where
he left off.” Oeuvres de Descartes, publiées par Victor Cousin, Paris, 1824, Vol.
VI, p. 294 (hereafter referred to as Cousin).

In another letter to Mersenne, written April 20, 1646, Descartes writes as
follows: “I have omitted a number of things that might have made it (the geom-
etry) clearer, but I did this intentionally, and would not have it otherwise. The
only suggestions that have been made concerning changes in it are in regard to
rendering it clearer to readers, but most of these are so malicious that I am com-
pletely disgusted with them.” Cousin, Vol. IX, p. 553.

In a letter to the Princess Elizabeth, Descartes says: “In the solution of a
geometrical problem I take care, as far as possible, to use as lines of reference
parallel lines or lines at right angles; and I use no theorems except those which
assert that the sides of similar triangles are proportional, and that in a right
triangle the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the
sides. I do not hesitate to introduce several unknown quantities, so as to reduce the

question to such terms that it shall depend only on these two theorems.” Cousin,
Vol. IX, p. 143.

10

Livre PREMIER. Aghs
ainfien les demeflant, qu’il n'en demeure qu'vne feule,
efgalea quelque autre, qui foit connué , oubien dont le
quarré, oule cube, ou le quarréde quarreé, oule furfoli-
de, oule quarré de cube, &c. foit efgal a ce, qui fe pro-
duift par l'addition, ou fouftraction de deux ou plufieurs
autres.quantites , dont |’vne foit connué , & les autres
foient compofées de quelques moyennes proportion=
nelles entre l’vnitd, 8& ce quarré, ou cube , ou quarrd de
quarre, &c. multiplices pard’autres connués. Ce que i’e-
{cris en cete forte.

z 20 b. ou

2.00 -- azx-+bb, ou
x20 +a x +bbz- c. ou
3

4

x 20 ax o- oxted, SZC,

C’efta dire, x, que ie prens pour la quantitd inconnué,
eft efgaléad, oule quarré de x eft efgal-au quarré de 6
moins a@ multipli¢ par x. ou le cube de ¢ eft efgala a
multipli¢’ par le quarrede x plus le quarré de 4 multiplied
parzmoinslecubedec. & ainfi des autres.

Et on peut tonfiours reduire ainfi toutes les quantités
inconnués 4 vne feule, lorfque le Problefme fe peut con-
ftruire par descercles & des lignes droites, ou auffy par
des fections coniques,ou mefme par quelque autreligne
qui ae foit que d'vn ou deux degrés plus compofée. Mais.
ie ne m’areffe point a expliquer cecy plus en detail ya
caufe que ie vous ofterois le plaifir de l'apprendre de
vous mefine, & I'vtilité de cultiuer voftre efprit en vous
y-exerceant, qui eft a mon auis la principale, qu’on puifle

Pp tirer:

11

he La GEOMETRIE.
urerdecetefcience. Aufly queien yremarque rien de
fi difficile, que ceux qui feront vn peu verfes en la Geo-
metrie commune, & enl Algebre, & qui prendront gar-
deatout ce quieft ence traitd, ne puiffent trouver.

C’e ft pourquoy ie me contenteray icy de vous auer-
tir, que pourvd qu’en demeflant ces Equations on ne
manque point afeferuir detoutesles diuifions, qui fe-
ront poffibles, on aura infalliblement les plus fimples
termes, aufquels la queftion puiffe eftre reduite.

Ouse Et que fielle peut eftre refolue par Ja Geometrie ordi-

problef- naire, c’eftadire, en ne fe feruant que de lignes droites

mes PS 8 circulaires tracées fur vnefuperficie plate, lorfque la
derniere Equation aura efté entierement démedflee,iln’y
reftera tout au plus qu’vn quarreinconnu, efgal a ce qui
fe produift de P Addition, ou fouftraction de fa racine
multipli¢e par quelque quantitéconnue , & de quelque
autre quantité auffy connue

Com- —_ Et lors cere racine, ouligne inconnue fe trouue ayfe-
ment ils

fe refole Ment. Car fivay par exemple

uent. e

on xDax-+bb
ey ie fais le triangle rectan-
gle N LM, dont Ie co-
{téL M eft efgal a b ra-
cine quarrée de Ja quan-
ef tité connue 46, & I'au-
cee m treL Neft $a, lamoi-
_ tié de lautre quantité
connue, quieftoit multipli¢e par x que ie fuppofe eftre la
ligne inconnue, puis prolongeant M N labaze de ce tri-

an gle,

FIRST BOOK

I shall therefore content myself with the statement that if the stu-
dent, in solving these equations, does not fail to make use of division
wherever possible, he will surely reach the simplest terms to which
the problem can be reduced.

And if it can be solved by ordinary geometry, that is, by the use of
straight lines and circles traced on a plane surface," when the last
equation shall have been entirely solved there will remain at most only
the square of an unknown quantity, equal to the product of its root
by some known quantity, increased or diminished by some other quan-
tity also known.™! Then this root or unknown line can easily be found.
For example, if I have z*— az + b?,™ I construct a right triangle NLM
with one side LM, equal to b, the square root of the known quan-
tity b?, and the other side, LN, equal to $a, that is, to half the
other known quantity which was multiplied by z, which I supposed to
be the unknown line. Then prolonging MN, the hypotenuse™ of this
triangle, to O, so that NO is equal to NL, the whole line OM is the
required line z. This is expressed in the following way :™

ee 1 a4 5
2 ak °

But if I have y? ——ay-t b?, where y is the quantity whose value
is desired, I construct the same right triangle NLM, and on the hypote-

G91 For a discussion of the possibility of constructions by the compasses and
straight edge, see Jacob Steiner, Die geometrischen Constructionen ausgefihrt
mittelst der geraden Linie und eines festen Kreises, Berlin, 1833. For briefer
treatments, consult Enriques, Fragen der Elementar- Geometrie, Leipzig, 1907;
Klein, Problems in Elementary Geometry, trans. by Beman and Smith, Boston,
1897; Weber und Wellstein, Encyklopadie der Elementaren Geometrie, Leipzig,
1907. The work by Mascheroni, La geometria del compasso, Pavia, 1797, is inter-
esting and well known.

(1 That is, an expression of the form z22=az+b. “Esgal a ce qui se produit
de 1’Addition, ou soustraction de sa racine multiplée par quelque quantité connue,
& de quelque autre quantité aussy connue,” as it appears in line 14, opposite page.

1] Descartes proposes to show how a quadratic may be solved geometrically.

1 Descartes says “prolongeant MN la baze de ce triangle,” because the hypote-
nuse was commonly taken as the base in earlier times.

1 From the figure OM.PM=LM’. If OM=z, PM=z—a, and since
LM =), we have z (:—a) = b? or 22 =az+b2. Again, MN = afbar +82, whence
OM = z=ON+MN= sat Nie —a?+ 2, Descartes ignores the second root, which

is negative.

13

GEOMETRY

nuse MN lay off NP equal to NL, and the remainder PM is y, the
desired root. Thus I have

ee a ET

In the same way, if I had
ioe GI,

PM would be +? and I should have

1 il
a eg Sage 2
| patito oy

and so for other cases.

Finally, if I have z? = az—b?, I make NL equal to $a and LM equal
to b as before; then, instead of joining the points M and N, I
draw MOR parallel to LN, and with N as a center describe a circle
through L cutting MOR in the points Q and R;; then g, the line sought,
is either MO or MR, for in this case it can be expressed in two ways,
namely :™

and

“ Since MR.MO=LM/?, then if R=s, we have MO =ae— 2) and so
s(a—s)=b? or s?=as—b?. :
If, instead of this, MQ =, then MR=a— sg, and again, s? = ag — b?. Further-
more, letting O be the mid-point of QR,
i
MQ=OM—0Q= ya— 4/4 gp
w 4 ?

and
MR=MO+OR= otal a? —b2
2) 4 :
Descartes here gives both roots, since both are positive. If MR is tangent to the
; on i 4 2 i
circle, ‘that is, 1f/6 = 2% the roots will be equal; while if b > > 4, the line MR

will not meet the circle and both roots will be imaginary. Also, since RM.QM=LM’,
2,2, = b?, and RM+QM= 2 rea,

14

Livre PREMIER. ee:
angle, infquesa O, en forte qu’N O foit efgale aNL,
latoute OM eft ala ligne cherchée. Et elle s’exprime
en cete forte

zoLa+ Vpaar Ob

Que fiiayyys0 -- ay + bb, & qu’y foit la quantiteé
qu’ilfauttrouuer , ie fais le mefine triangle rectangle
NLM, &defabaze M N iofte N Pefgalea NL, &le
refte P M eft y la racine cherchée. De fagon que iay

De ctgle s -aa-+-bb, Ettout de mefme fi i’a-
uois i 1 - ax cea b. PM fora: - & jaurois

x 0 Vaart aac bb: &ainfi des autres.
Enfin fi i’ay

R X00 az--bb:

ie fais NL efgalea $a, & LM
efgale 44 céme deuat, puis,au lieu
N deioindre les poins MN, ie tire
M QR paralleleaL N. & ducen-
tre NparL ayant defcrit vn cer-
cle qui la couppe aux poins Q &
Z ee ay apligneachéerchee x eff MO;
oubie M R, car ence cas elle s’ex-
prime en deux fagons,afcauoirz 20 5a+- V jaa--bb,

&%UWF4-V ¥ “Laa--bb.

Et file cer cle, qui ayant fon centre au point N, paffe
par le point L, ne couppe ny ne touche la ligne droite
M QR, iln’y aaucune racine enl’Equation , de fagon
qu’on peut affurer que la conftruction du problefme
propofé eft impoffible. re

hes

304 La GEOMETRIE.

Au refte ces mefmes racines fe peuvent trouver par
vne infinité d’autresmoyens , & i’ay feulement veulu
mettre ceux cy, comme fort fimples, aitin de faire voir
qu’on peut conftruire touslesProblefmes de la Geome-
trie ordinairte, fans faire autre chofe que le peu qui eft
compris dans les quatre figures quei'ayexpliquées. Ce
queienecroy pas quelesanciens ayent remarqné. car
autrement ilsn’euffent pas prisla peined’en efcrire tant
de gros|liures, ou le feul ordre de leurs propofitions nous
fait connoiftre qu’ils n’ont point eu Javraye methode
pour les trouver toutes, mais qu’ils ont feulement ramaf-
fécelles qu’ils ont rencontrees.

reper Et on le peut voir auffy fort clairement de ce que Pap-

Pappus. Pusamis aucommencement de fon feptiefme liure, ou
apres seftre arefté quelque tems a denombrer tout ce
quiauoit eft¢ efcrit en Geometrie par ceux qui l’auoient
precede, il parleenfind vne queftion , quildit que ny
Euclide, ny Apollonius, ny aucun autre n’auoient fceu
entierement refoudre. & voycy fes mots.

Te cite Quem autem dicit ( Apollonius) in tertio libro locum ad

plutoft la ' \

verfionla- £7eS, 8 quatuor lineas ab Euclide perfettum noneffe , neque

meen apfe perficere poterat , neque aliquis alius:: fed neque pau-

affin que lulumquidaddereits , que Euchdes [cripfit,per ea tantum

ee conica , queufque ad Euclidis tempora premonftrata

plus ayfe- funt, &e,

os Et vn peu apres ilexplique ainfi qu’elle eft cete que-
ftion,

At locus adtres, 8 quatuor lineas , in quo ( Apollonzus)
magnifice fetattat, 8 oftentat,nulla habita gratiaet , qué
Prius fertpferat , efthujufmodt. Si pofitione daté tribus

rechis

16

FIRST BOOK

And if the circle described about N and passing through L neither
cuts nor touches the line MOR, the equation has no root, so that we
may say that the construction of the problem is impossible.

These same roots can be found by many other methods ;™! I have
given these very simple ones to show that it is possible to construct
all the problems of ordinary geometry by doing no more than the little
covered in the four figures that I have explained.” This is one thing
which I believe the ancient mathematicians did not observe, for other-
wise they would not have put so much labor into writing so many books
in which the very sequence of the propositions shows that they did not
have a sure method of finding all,"! but rather gathered together those
propositions on which they had happened by accident.

This is also evident from what Pappus has done in the beginning of
his seventh book, where, after devoting considerable space to an
enumeration of the books on geometry written by his predecessors,™
he finally refers to a question which he says that neither Euclid nor
Apollonius nor any one else had been able to solve completely ;™’ and
these are his words:

“Quem autem dicit (Apollonius) in tertio libro locum ad tres, &
quatuor lineas ab Euclide perfectum non esse, neque ipse perficere
poterat, neque aliquis alius; sed neque paululum quid addere iis, que

@] For interesting contraction, see Rabuel, p. 23, et seq.
1 Tt will be seen that Descartes considers only three types of the quadratic

9

2 a

equation in z, namely, s?++az— b?=0, 2? —az— b?=0, and 2? —az +h? =
It thus appears that he has not been able to free himself from the old traditions
to the extent of generalizing the meaning of the coefficients, — as negative and
fractional as well as positive. He does not consider the type s?+az+b?=0,
because it has no positive roots.

[7] “Owils n’ont point eu la vraye methode pour les trouuer toutes.”

2] See Note [9]. :

1 See Pappus, Vol. II, p. 637. Pappus here gives a list of books that treat
of analysis, in the following words: “Illorum librorum, quibus de loco, ‘avahvopevos
sive resoluto agitur, ordo hic est. Euclidis datorum liber unus, Apollonii de pro-
portionis sectione libri duo, de spatii sectione duo, de sectione determinata duo, de
tactionibus duo, Euclidis porismatum libri tres, Apollonii inclinationum libri duo,
eiusdem locorum planorum duo, conicorum octo, Aristaei locorum solidorum libri
duo.” See also the Commandinus edition of Pappus, 1660 edition, pp. 240-252.

Pl For the history of this problem, see Zeuthen: Die Lehre von den Kegel-
schnitten im Alterthum, Copenhagen, 1886. Also, Adam and Tannery, Oeuvres de
Descartes, vol. 6, p. 723.

17

GEOMETRY

Euclides scripsit, per ea tantum conica, que usque ad Euclidis tempora
premonstrata sunt, Sc.”

A little farther on, he states the question as follows:

“At locus ad tres, & quatuor lineas, in quo (Apollonius) magnifice
se jactat, & ostentat, nulla habita gratia ei, qui prius scripserat, est
hujusmodi.™ Si positione datis tribus rectis lineis ab uno & eodem
puncto, ad tres lineas in datis angulis recte linee ducantur, & data sit
proportio rectanguli contenti duabus ductis ad quadratum relique:
punctum contingit positione datum solidum locum, hoc est wnam ex
tribus conicis sectionibus. Et si ad quatuor rectas lineas positione datas
in datis angulis linee ducantur; & rectanguli duabus ductis contenti ad
contentum duabus reliquis proportio data sit; similiter punctum datum
coni sectionem positione continget. Si quidem igitur ad duas tantum
locus planus ostensus est. Quod si ad plures quam quatuor, punctum
continget locos non adhuc cognitos, sed lineas tantum dictas; quales
autem sint, vel quam habeant proprietatem, non constat: earum unam,
neque primam, & que manifestissima videtur, composuerunt osten-
dentes utilem esse. Propositiones autem ipsarum he sunt.

“Si ab aliquo puncto ad positione datas rectas lineas quinque ducantur
recte linee in datis angulis, & data sit proportio solidi parallelepipedi
rectanguli, quod tribus ductis lineis continetur ad solidum parallelepipe-
dum rectangulum, quod continetur reliquis duabus, & data quapiam
linea, punctum positione datam lineam continget. Si autem ad sex, &
data sit proportio solidi tribus lincis contenti ad solidum, quod tribus
reliquis continetur; rursus punctum continget positione datam lineam.
Quod si ad plures quam sex, non adhuc habent dicere, an data sit pro-
portio cujuspiam contenti quatuor lineis ad id quod reliquis continetur,

I Pappus, Vol. II, pp. 677, et seq., Commandinus edition of 1660, p. 251.
Literally, “Moreover, he (Apollonius) says that the problem of the locus related
to three or four lines was not entirely solved by Euclid, and that neither he him-
self, nor any one else has been able to solve’it completely, nor were they able to
add anything at all to those things which Euclid had written, by means of the
conic sections only which had been demonstrated before Euclid.” Descartes arrived
at the solution of this problem four years before the publication of his geometry,
after spending five or six weeks on it. See his letters, Cousin, Vol. VI, p. 294,
and Vol. VI, p. 224.

1 Given as follows in the edition of Pappus by Hultsch, previously quoted:
“Sed hic ad tres et quatuor lineas locus quo magnopere gloriatur simul addens ei
qui conscripserit gratiam habendam esse, sic se habet.”

18

Livr—E PREMIER. 305
reétts liners ab uno & eodem puntte, ad tres lineas in datis an-
gulis rethe linee ducantur, 8 data fit proportio reftanguli
contenti duabus dultis ad quadratum relique: punflum cone
tingit pofittone datum folidum locum , hoc eft unam ex tribus
contcis fettiontbus. Et fi ad quatuor rettas lineas pofitione
datas.in datis angulis linee ducantur; & rettanguli duabus
duétis contentt ad contentum duabus reliquis proportio data
fit: fimiliter punttum datum coni feétionem pofitione contin-
get. Stquidemigitur ad duas tantum locus planus often[us
eft. Quodfiad plures quam quatuor, punttum continget le-
cos non adhuc cognitos, fed lineastantum dittas ; quales au-
tem fint, vel quam habeant proprietatem, non conftat: earum
unam, neque primam, & que manifeftiffima videtur, compo-
[uerunt oftendentes utilem efve. propofitiones autemipfarum
he funt.

St ab aliquo puntto ad pofitione datas reitas lineas quin-

que ducantur rete linee in datts angulis , 3 data fit propor-
tio (alidt parallelepipedt rectangult, quod tribus duffcs lines
continetur ad folidum parallelepipedum rettangulum , quod
continetur reliquis duabus, 6 data quapiam linea, puntlum
pofitione datam lineam continget. Siautemad [ex , 3 data
fit proportio folidi tribus linets contenti ad folidam, quod
tribus reliquis continetur; rur[us punttum continget pofitione
datam lineam. Quod fiad plures quam fex, non adhuc habent
dicere,an data fit proportio cuiu/pid contentt quatuor liners
ad id quod reliquiscontinetur, quoniam non eft aliquid cone
tentum pluribus quam tribus dimenfionibus.

Ouie vous prie de remarquer en paffant , que le fcru-
pule, que faifoient les anciens d’vfer des termes del’A-
rithmetique en la Geometrie, quine pouuoit proceder,

Og que

19

306 La GEOMETRIEE.

que de ce qu’ils ne voyoient pas affés clairement leur
rapport, caufoit beaucoup d’obfcurite, & d’embaras, eR
la facon dontils s‘expliquoient. car Pappus pourfuit en
ceteforte. :

Acquiefiunt autem his , qui paulo ante talia interpretate
funt. neque unum aliquo patto comprehen fibile fignificantes
quod his continetur.Licebit auté per coniunétas proportiones
hac, 8 dicere, 8 demonftrare univer[ein ditizs proportionr-
bus, atque hisinhuncmodum. St ab aliquo punéto ad pofi-
tione datas reftas linéas ducantur-rette linew in datis angu-
lis, & data fit proportzo contuncta ex ea, quam habet una du-
flarumadunam, © alteraadalteram,& aliaadaliam,& re«
liquaad datam lineam, fi fint feptem; fiverootie,, 8 reliqua
ad reliquam: punitum continget pofitione datds lineas. Et
fimiliter quotcumque fint impares vel pares multitudine;
cum hac, ut dixt,loco ad quatuor lineas re[pandeant, nullum
¢oitur pofwerant tta ut linea nota fit, Sc.

La queftion donc qui auoit efté commencee a refou-
drepar Euclide, 8 pourfuiuie par-Apollonius, fans avoir
eftéacheu¢e par perfonne, eftoit telle. Ayant trois on
quatre ou plus grand nombre de lignes droites donnees
par pofition, premierement on demande-yn point, du-
quel on puiffe tirerautant d'autres lignes droites,vne fur
chafcune des données, qui-fagent auec elles des angles
donnés, & que le rectangle contenu en deux de celles,
qui feront ainfi tirées d’vyn mefme point, ait la-propor-
tion donnéeauec le quarré de la troifiefme, s'il n’yena
que trois; oubien auec le rectangle des deux autres, s’il y
ena quatre;oubien, s'il y ena cing, que le parallelepipede
compofede trois aitla proportion donnée auec. le paral.

lelepipede

20

FIRST BOOK

quoniam non est aliquid contentum pluribus quam tribus dimensioni-
bus.

Here I beg you to observe in passing that the considerations that
forced ancient writers to use arithmetical terms in geometry, thus mak- ~
ing it impossible for them to proceed beyond a point where they could
see clearly the relation between the two subjects, caused much obscur-
ity and embarrassment, in their attempts at explanation.

Pappus proceeds as follows:

“Acquiescunt autem his, qui paulo ante talia interpretati sunt; neque
unum aliquo pacto comprehensibile significantes quod his continetur.
Licebit autem per conjunctas proportiones hec, & dicere & demonstrare
universe in dictis proportionibus, atque his in hunc modum. Si ab
aliquo puncto ad positione datas rectas lineas ducantur recte linee in
datis angulis, & data sit proportio conjuncta ex ea, quam habet una
ductarum ad unam, & altera ad alteram, & alia ad aliam, & reliqua ad
datam lineam, si sint septem; si vero octo, & reliqua ad reliquam:
punctum continget positione datas lineas. Et similiter quotcumque sint

&1 This may be somewhat freely translated as follows: “The problem of the
locus related to three or. four lines, about which he (Apollonius) boasts so proudly,
giving no credit to the writer who has preceded him, is of this nature: If three
straight lines are given in position, and if straight lines be drawn from one and
the same point, making given angles with the three given lines; and if there be
given the ratio of the rectangle contained by two of the lines so drawn to the
square:of the other, the point lies on a solid locus given in position, namely, one
of the three conic sections.

“Again, if lines be drawn making given angles with four straight lines given
in position, and if the rectangle of two of the lines so drawn bears a given ratio
to the rectangle of the other two; then, in like manner, the point lies on a conic
section given in position. It has been shown that to only two lines there corre-
sponds a plane locus. But if there be given more than four lines, the point gen-
erates loci not known up to the present time (that is, impossible to determine by
common methods), but merely called ‘lines’. It is not clear what they are, or
what their properties. One of them, not the first but the most manifest, has been
examined, and this has proved to be helpful. (Paul Tannery, in the Oeuvres de
Descartes, differs with Descartes in his translation of Pappus. He translates as
follows: Et on n’a fait la synthese d’ aucune de ces lignes, ni montré qu'elle servit
pour ces lieux, pas méme pour celle qui semblerait la premiére et la plus indiquée.)
These, however, are the propositions concerning them,

“If from any point straight lines be drawn making given angles with five
straight lines given in position, and if the solid rectangular parallelepiped contained
by three of the lines so drawn bears a given ratio to the solid rectangular paral-
lelepiped contained by the other two and any given line whatever, the point lies
on a ‘line’ given in position. Again, if there be six lines, and if the solid con-
tained by three of the lines bears a given ratio to the solid ’ contained by the other
three lines, the point also lies on a ‘line’ given in position. But if there be more
than six lines, we cannot say whether a ratio of something contained by four
lines is given to that which is contained by the rest, since there is no figure of
more than three dimensions.”

21

GEOMETRY

impares vel pares multitudine, cum haec, ut dix, loco ad quatuor lineas
respondeant, nullum igitur posuerunt ita ut linea nota sit, ore

The question, then, the solution of which was begun by Euclid and
‘earried farther by Apollonius, but was completed by no one, is this:

Having three, four or more lines given in position, it is first required
to find a point from which as many other lines may be drawn, each
making a given angle with one of the given lines, so that the rectangle
of two of the lines so drawn shall bear a given ratio to the square of
the third (if there be only three) ; or to the rectangle of the other two
(if there be four), or again, that the parallelepiped™ constructed upon
three shall bear a given ratio to that upon the other two and any given
line (if there be five), or to the parallelepiped upon the other three (if
there be six) ; or (if there be seven) that the product obtained by mul-
tiplying four of them together shall bear a given ratio to the product
of the other three, or (if there be eight) that the product of four of
them shall bear a given ratio to the product of the other four. Thus
_ the question admits of extension to any number of lines.

Then, since there is always an infinite number of different points
satisfying these requirements, it is also required to discover and trace
the curve containing all such points.” Pappus says that when there
are only three or four lines given, this line is one of the three conic
sections, but he does not undertake to determine, describe, or explain
the nature of the line required’ when the question involves a greater
number of lines. He only adds that the ancients recognized one of
them which they had shown to be useful, and which seemed the sim-

"1 This rather obscure passage may be translated as follows: “For in this are
agreed those who formerly interpreted these things (that the dimensions of a
figure cannot exceed three) in that they maintain that a figure that is contained by
these lines is not comprehensible in any way. This is permissible, however, both
to say and to demonstrate generally by this kind of proportion, and in this man-
ner: If from any point straight lines be drawn making given angles with straight
lines given in position; and if there be given a ratio compounded of them, that
is the ratio that one of the lines drawn has to one, the second has to a second,
the third to a third, and so on to the given line if there be seven lines, or, if there
be eight lines, of the last to a last, the point lies on the lines that are given in
position. And similarly, whatever may be the odd or even number, since these,
as I have said, correspond in position to the four lines; therefore they have not
set forth any method so that a line may be known.” The meaning of the passage
appears from that which follows in the text.

nis That is, continued product.

o oat is here that the essential feature of the work of Descartes may be said
to begin, ;
"I See line 19 on the opposite page.

22

Livre PREMIER. 307,
lelepipede compofe des deux quireftent, &d’yne autre
lignedonnée. Ous’ily enafix, que le parallelepipede
copofé de trois ait la proportion donnée auecle paralle-
lepipede destroisautres. Ous'ily ena fept,que ce qui fe
produift lor{qu’on en multiplic quatrefvne par l'autre,
ait la raifon donnée auec ce qui fe produift par la multi-
plication des trois autres, & encore d’yne autre ligne
donnée; Ous'ilyenahuit, que le produit de la multi-
plication de quatreait la proportion donnée auec le-pro-
duit des quatre autres. Et ainfi cete queftion fe peut
eftendre a tout autre nombre de lignes, Puis a caufe qu'il
y 2 toufiours vneinfinitéde diuers poins qui peuuent fa-
tisfaire ace qui eft icy demand¢, il-eft auffy requis de
connoiftre, & de tracer Jaligne,dans laquelle ils doiuent
tousfetrouuer. & Pappus dit que lorfqu’il n’y a que
trois ou quatre lignes droites données, c’eft en vne des
trois fections coniques. mais iln’entreprend point de la
determiner, nyde 1a defcrire. non plus que d'expli-
quer celles ou tous ces poins fe doivent trouuer, lorfque
la queftion eft propofee en vn plus grand nombre de li-
ones. Seulement ilaioufte que les anciens en auoient
imagind vne qu'ilsmonftroient y eftrevtile , mais qui
fembloit la plus manifefte, 8& qui n’eftoit pas toutefois la
premiere. Ce qui m’adonn¢ occafion d’effayer fi pat la
methode dontie me fers on peut aller auffy loin qu’ils
ont efte.

Et premierementiay connu que cete queftion n’eftant Refponfe
propofee qu’en trois, ou quatre,oucinglignes , on peut shan
toufiours trouuerles poins cherches par la Geometrie Pappus
fimple; c’eft a dire en ne fe feruant que dela reigle &-du

Qt compas,

23

308 La GEOMETRIE,

compas, ny ne faifant autre chofe, que ce qui adefiaefté
dit; excepte feulement lorfqu’il ya cinq lignes données,.
fi elles fonttoutes paralleles. Auquel cas, comme aufly
lorfque la queftion eft propofee en fix,ou 7, ou 8, ou 9
lignes, on peuttoufiours trouver les poins cherchés par
la Geometrie.des folides ; c’eft a dire en y employart
quelqu’vne destrois fections coniques. Excepte feule-
ment lorfqu'ily aneuf lignes donnees, fielles font toutes
paralleles. Auquelcas derechef, & encore en ro,11,12,
ou 13 lignes on peut trouuer les poins cherches par Je
moyen d’vne ligne courbe qui foit d’vn degre plus com-
pofée que les feétions coniques, Except¢ en treize fiel-
les font toutes paralleles, auquelcas, & en quatorze, rs,
16, & 17 ily faudra employer vne ligne courbe encore
d’va degre plus compofée que la precedente. & ainfi
aVinfini.

Puis tay trouud aufly, que lorfqu’il nya quetrois ou
quatre lignes données, les poins cherchés fe rencontrent
tous , non feulement en I’yne des trois fections coni-
ques , mais quelquefois auffy en la circonference d’yn
cercle, ou en yneligne droite. Et.que lorfqu’'il y ena
cing, ou fix, oufept, ouhuit, tous ces poins fe rencon-
trent en quelque vne des lignes, qui font d’vn degré plus
compofees que les fections coniques , & ileftimpoffible
d’enimaginer aucune qui ne foit vtile a cete queftion,
mais ils penuent aufly derechefferencontrerenvne fe-
ction conique, ou envacercle, ou en vne ligne droite.
Et sily enaneuf, ou x0,ou1t, ourz2, ces poins fe ren-
contrent en vne ligne, quine peut eftre que d’vn degrd
plus compofée que les precedentes; mais toutes celles

qui
24

FIRST BOOK

plest, and yet was not the most important." This led me to try to find
out whether, by my own method, I could go as far as they had gone.™

First, I discovered that if the question be proposed for only three,
four, or five lines, the required points can be found by elementary
geometry, that is, by the use of the ruler and compasses only, and the
application of those principles that I have already explained, except
in the case of five parallel lines. In this case, and in the cases where
there are six, seven, eight, or nine given lines, the required points can
always be found by means of the geometry of solid loci," that is, by
using some one of the three conic sections. Here, again, there is an
exception in the case of nine parallel lines. For this and the cases of
ten, eleven, twelve, or thirteen given lines, the required points may be
found by means of a curve of degree next higher than that of the conic
sections. Again, the case of thirteen parallel lines must be excluded,
for which, as well as for the cases of fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, and
seventeen lines, a curve of degree next higher than the preceding must
be used; and so on indefinitely.

Next, I have found that when only three or four lines are given, the
required points lie not only all on one of the conic sections but some-
times on the circumference of a circle or even on a straight line.™

When there are five, six, seven, or eight lines, the required points
lie on a curve of degree next higher than the conic sections, and it is
impossible to imagine such a curve that may not satisfy the conditions
of the problem; but the required points may possibly lie on a conic
section, a circle, or a straight line. ‘If there are nine, ten, eleven, or
twelve lines, the required curve is only one degree higher than the pre-
ceding, but any such curve may meet the requirements, and so on to
infinity.

181 See lines 5-10 from the foot of page 23.

1 Descartes gives here a brief summary of his solution, which he amplifies
later.

&] This term was commonly applied by mathematicians of the seventeenth cen-
tury to the three conic sections, while the straight line and circle were called plane
loci, and other curves linear loci. See Fermat, /sagoge ad Locos Planos et Solidos,
Toulouse, 1679.

J) Degenerate or limiting forms of the conic sections.

25

GEOMETRY

Finally, the first and simplest curve after the conic sections is the
one generated by the intersection of a parabola with a straight line in
a way to be described presently.

I believe that I have in this way completely accomplished what
Pappus tells us the ancients sought to do, and I will try to give the
demonstration in a few words, for I am already wearied by so much
writing.

Let AB, AD, EF, GH, ... be any number of straight lines
“I and let it be required to find a point C, from which
straight lines CB, CD, CF, CH, ... can be drawn, making given angles
CBA, CDA, CFE, CHG, ... respectively, with the given lines, and

given in position,

1 Tt should be noted that these lines are given in position but not in length.
They thus become lines of reference or codrdinate axes, and accordingly they
play a very important part in the development of analytic geometry. In this con-
nection we may quote as follows: “Among the predecessors of Descartes we
reckon, besides Apollonius, especially Wieta, Oresme, Cavalieri, Roberval, and
Fermat, the last the most distinguished in this field; but nowhere, even by Fermat,
had any attempt been made to refer several curves of different orders simultane-
ously to one system of codrdinates, which at most possessed special significance
for one of the curves. It is exactly this thing which Descartes systematically
accomplished.” Karl Fink, A Brief History of Mathematics, trans. by Beman and
Smith, Chicago, 1903, p. 229.

Heath calls attention to the fact that “the essential difference between the
Greek and the modern method is that the Greeks did not direct their efforts to
making the fixed lines of a figure as few as possible, but rather to expressing
their equations between areas in as short and simple a form as possible.” For fur-
ther discussion see D. E. Smith, History of Mathematics, Boston, 1923-25, Vol. II,
pp. 316-331 (hereafter referred to as Smith).

26

Livre PREMIER. ae
qui font d’vn degré plus compofees y peuuent fernir, &
ainfi a l’infini.

Au reftela premiere, & Ia plus fimple de toutes aprés
les fections coniques , eft celle qu’on peut defcrire par
l'interfection d’vne Parabole, 8 d’vne ligne droite, enla
facon qui fera tantoft expliqude. En forte que ie penfe
auoir entierement fatisfait a ceque Pappus nous dit auoir
eftéchetchéen cecy parles anciens. 8& ie tafcheray d’en
mettre la demonftration en peu de mots.car il m’ennuie
defia d’en tant efcrire.

Soient AB, A D, EF, GH, &c. plufieurs lignes don-
nees par pofition, & qu'il faille trouuer vn point, comme
C, duquel ayant tire d’autres lignes droites fur les don-
nées, comme CB,C D, CF, & CH, en forte que les
anglesCBA,CDA, CFE, CHG, &c, foient donnés,

Qq3 &

27

bps La GEOMETRIE.

* & que ce quieft produit parla multiplication d’vne par-
tic deces lignes, foit efgal a ce qui eft produit parla mul-
tiplication des autres, oubien qu'ils ayent quelque autre
proportion donnée, car cela ne rend point la queftion
plus difficile. :

Commét Premierement ie fuppofe la chofe comme defia faite,
cease & pour me demeiler de la cofufion de toutes ces; lignes,
termes je confidere Fynedes données, & l’vne de celles qu'il
Pe a Pe, faut trouuer, parexemple A B, & C B, comme les prin-
quation cipales, & aufquelles ie tafche de rapporter ainfi toutes
encet ' . .
exemple, les autres. Que le fegment de laligne A B, quieftentre

les poins A & B, foitnommé x. & que BC foit nommeé
y. & que toutes les autres lignes données foient prolon-
ades, iufques ace qu’elles couppent ces deux, auffy pro-
longées s'il eft befoin, & fi elles ne leur font point paral-
leles. comme vous voyes icy qu’elles couppent la ligne
A Bauxpoins A, E,G, & BC auxpoinsR,S,T. Puis a
caufeque tous les angles dutriangle ARB font données,
la proportion, qui eft entre les coftés A B, & BR, eft auf-

fy donnée, & ie lapofe comme de x2, defagonqu AB
eftant «, R Bferi a & latouteC R fera y +- = a caufe
que le point Btombe entre C & R; car fiR tomboit en-
treC & B,C Rferoit y-- 3 & fi Ctomboit entreB & R,
CR feroit -- y +=: Tout de mefme les trois angles

du triangle D R C font donnes, & par confequent aufly
la proportion quieft entre les coftés CR, & CD, que ie

pofe comme de 7a ¢; de fagon que C Reftant y+ =
CD

28

FIRST BOOK

such that the product of certain of them is equal to the product of the
rest, or at least such that these two products shall have a given ratio,
for this condition does not make the problem any more difficult.

First, I suppose the thing done, and since so many lines are confus-
ing, I may simplify matters by considering one of the given lines and
one of those to be drawn (as, for example, AB and BC) as the prin-
cipal lines, to which I shall try to refer all the others. Call the segment
of the line AB between A and B, +, and call BC, y. Produce all the
other given lines to meet these two (also produced if necessary) pro-
vided none is parallel to either of the principal lines. Thus, in the
figure, the given lines cut AB in the points A, E, G, and cut BC in the
points R, S, T.

Now, since all the angles of the triangle ARB are known," the ratio
between the sides AB and BR is known." If we let AB: BR=2-b,

b : :
since AB — x, we have RB = = ; and since B lies between C and R™,

bx

we have CR=y-+—. (When R lies between C and B, CR is equal

bx ’ , bx
Soars Ta and when C lies between B and R, CR is equal to— y + ay )

[46]

Again, the three angles of the triangle DRC are known,™ and there-

fore the ratio between the sides CR and CD is determined. Calling this

: : bx Cy Was 2
ratio 2c, since CR—y-+ —, we have CD= eee We Then, since
a

3g?

8] Since BC cuts AB and AD under given angles.

1 Since the ratio of the sines of the opposite angles is known.
1 Tn this particular figure, of course.

(1 Since CB and CD cut AD under given angles.

29

GEOMETRY

the lines AB, AD, and EF are given in position, the distance from A
to Eis known. If we call this distance k, then EB =k + +; although
EB —k—v- when B lies between E and A, and E=—k-+ 4 when E
lies between A and B. Now the angles of the triangle ESB being
given, the ratio of BE to BS is known. We may call this ratio z-:d.

b Tk + a. -
hens 3 Si eerie aqatal (GS) PATO When S lies between B

ap ak as
gz

and C we have CS = , and when C lies between B and S

— 4) ak ae
Z

we have CS = The angles of the triangle FSC are

known, and hence, also the ratio of CS to CF, or g:e. Therefore,
ezy + dek 4. dex
— alee ag mee

Also, in triangle BGT, the ratio of BG to BT, or ¢:f, is known. There-

CF Likewise, AG or / is given, and BG=I—vz.

Hee ' ier
fore, BT — and Cie ete In triangle TCH, the ratio
say + fel —Sgx

2
Z

of TC to CH, or z:g, is known,“ whence CH =

1 We have
CS= KBs

dk+dx
ae z

_sytdi-+as

and similarly for the other cases considered below.

The translation covers the first eight lines on the original page 312 (page 32
of this edition.

“I Tt should be noted that each ratio assumed has g as antecedent.

30

Livre PREMIER, Brr

CD fera D4 — =. Apres cela pourceque les lignes AB,
AD, &E F fom Monies par pofition, ladiftance qui eft
entre les poins A & E eft auflydonnée, & fi onlanom-
me K, onaura E Befgalak-~x; maisce feroit k-- x, fi
le point Btomboit entre E & A;& -- R4- x, fiE tomboit
entre A & B. Et pourceque les angles dutriangle ESB
font tous donnés, la proportionde BE a BS eft aufly
donnée, & ie la pofe comme 22d , fibienque BS eft

— xz zee
, & latoute.CS eft aio

Ty-- 3 -ax

; mais ce-feroit

jfile point S tomboitentreB & C;& ce feroit

ae dk dx
ee fi Ctomboit entre B:& S. De plus les

trois angles du triangle F S Cfont donnes, & en fuite-la
PFCs
31

ah La GEOMETRIE.

proportion de CSACF, quifoitcomme dezae, &la
toute C Ffera a . En mefme fagon AG

que ienomme /eft donnée, KBGeft -- x, & a caufe
dutriangle BG T laproportion de BG 2 BT eff aufly

aa fos
donnée, quifoit comme de za f. &B Tfera ae » OC
CT x» 2 puisderechef la proportion de TCa

xz

C Heftdonnce , acaufedutriangle T CH, & lapofant

: mgty Efgl-- fgx
comme de.7a'7,0naura CH 20 =e

Et ainfi vous voyés, qu’entel nombre de lignes don-
Nées par pofition qu’on puiffe auoir, toutes les lignes ti-
rées deffus du point Caangles donne fuiuant la teneur
de la queftion , fe peuuent toufiours exprimer chafcune
par trois termes, dontl’vn eft compofe de la quantité in-.
connue y, multiplide , ou diuifee par quelque autre
connue; & lautre de la quantité inconnue x, aufly mul-
tiplice ou diuifee par quelque autre.connué , & le trofief-
me d’vne quantité toute connué. Excepté¢ feulement fi
elles font paralleles; oubienalaligne AB , auquel cas le
terme compoféde la quantitd x feranul ; oubienalali-
gne CB, auquel cas celuy qui eft compoféde la quantité
y {era nul; ainfi qu’ileft trop manifefte pour que ie m’are-
ftealexpliquer. Etpourlesfignes-+, &--, qui fe ioi-
gnent a cestermes, ils.peuuent eftre changes en toutes
les faconsimaginables.

Puis vous voyésauffy, que muitipliant plofieurs de
ceslignes!’vne par lautre, les quantités x &y, qui fe
trouuent dans le produit, n’y peanent auoir que chafcu-
ne autant de dimenfions, qu'ily aeu delignes, al'expli-

cation
32

FIRST BOOK

And thus you see that, no matter how many lines are given in posi-
tion, the length of any such line through C making given angles with
these lines can always be expressed by three terms, one of which con-
sists of the unknown quantity y multiplied or divided by some known
quantity ; another consisting of the unknown quantity + multiplied or
divided by some other known quantity; and the third consisting of a
known quantity." An exception must be made in the case where the
given lines are parallel either to AB (when the term containing + van-
ishes), or to CB (when the term containing y vanishes). This case is

[50]

too simple to require further explanation. The signs of the terms

may be either + or — in every conceivable combination.™

You also see that in the product of any number of these lines the
degree of any term containing + or y will not be greater than the num-
ber of lines (expressed by means of x and y) whose product is found.
Thus, no term will be of degree higher than the second if two lines
be multiplied together, nor of degree higher than the third, if there be
three lines, and so on to infinity.

{1 That is, an expression of the form ar+by-+c, where a, b, c, are any real
positive or negative quantities, integral or fractional (not zero, since this exception
is considered later).

1 The following problem will serve as a very simple illustration: Given three
parallel lines AB, CD, EF, so placed that AB is distant 4 units from CD, and CD
is distant 3 units from EF; required to find a point P such that if PL, PM, PN

P
INS
(oe ey
(ar
be drawn through P, making angles of 90°, 45°, 30°, respectively, with the
parallels. Then PM’= PL.PN. Z <r.
Let PR = y, then PN = 2y, PM = V2(y+3), PU ven line — PNReL
we have [ A 2(9 +3)] _— 2y(y +7), whence y= 9. Therefore, the point P lies on

the line XY parallel to EF and at a distance of 9 units from it. Cf. Rabuel, p. 79.
(1 Depending, of course, upon the relative positions of the given lines.

> om

33

GEOMETRY

Furthermore, to determine the point C, but one condition is needed,
namely, that the product of a certain number of lines shall be equal to,
or (what is quite as simple), shall bear a given ratio to the product of
certain other lines. Since this condition can be expressed by a single
equation in two unknown quantities,“ we may give any value we please
to either x or y and find the value of the other from this equation. It
is obvious that when not more than five lines are given, the quantity +,
which is not used to express the first of the lines can never be of degree
higher than the second.™

Assigning a value to y, we have +*--+axr-+b*, and therefore +

can be found with ruler and compasses, by a method already explained.™

If then we should take successively an infinite number of different
values for the line y, we should obtain an infinite number of values for
the line +, and therefore an infinity of different points, such as C, by
means of which the required curve could be drawn.

This method can be used when the problem concerns six or more
lines, if some of them are parallel to either AB or BC, in which case

I That is, an indeterminate equation. “De plus, 4 cause que pour determiner
le point C, il n’y a qu’une seule condition qui soit requise, 4 scavoir que ce qui est
produit par la multiplication d’un certain nombre de ces lignes soit égal, ou (ce qui
n’est de rien plus mal-aisé) ait la proportion donnee, a ce qui est produit par la
multiplication des autres; on peut prendre a discretion l’une des deux quantitez
inconnués + ou 4, & chercher l’autre par cette Equation.” Such variations in the
texts of different editions are of no moment, but are occasionally introduced as
matters of interest.

1 Since the product of three lines bears a given ratio to the product of two
others and a given line, no term can be of higher degree than the third, and there-
fore, than the second in x.

I See pages 13, et seq.

34

LivRE PREMIER. a5
cation defquelles elles feruent , qui ont eft¢ ainfi multi-
plices: enforte qu’elles n’auront iamais plus de deux di-
menfions, en ce qui ne fera produit que par la multipli-
cation de deux lignes; ny plus detrois , ence quine fera
produit que par la multiplicationdetrois, & ainfialin-
fini. :
De plus, a caufe que pour determiner Je point C, il Somme:
n’yaquvne feule condition qui foit requife , afgauoir que ce
que ce qui eft produit parla multiplication d’vn certain ieglee
nombre deces lignes foit efgal, ou (cequi weft de rien plan, lort-
plus malayfe) ait la proportion donnée , a ce quieft pro- ag “
duit parla multiplication des autres; onpeut prendre a pares,
difcretion l’vne des deux quantitdsinconnues xouy, & : ect
chercher l'autre par cete Equation. en laquelle il eft eui-
dent que lorfque la queftion n’eft point propofée en plus
de cing lignes, la quantitéx quine fert point a l’expref-
fion dela premiere peut toufiours n’y auoir que deux di-
menfions. defacon que prenant vne quantité connué
pour y, ilnereftera que x #50 + ou--ax--ou--bb. &
ainfi on pourra trouuer Ja quantitd x auec la reigle &le
compas, en lafacontantoft expliquée. Mefme prenant
fucceffiuement infinies diuerfes grandeurs pour la ligne
ys onen trounera auffy infinies pourla ligne x,8ainfion
aura vneinfinitéde diuers poins , tels que celuy qui eft
marqué C, par le moyen defquels on defcrira la ligne
courbe demandee.
Ife peut faire auffy, la queftion eftant propofee en fix,
ou plus grand nombre de lignes; s'ily en a entre les don-
nées, qui foient paralleles a BA, ou BC, quel’vne des
deux quantités « ou y n’ait que deux dimenfions en
Rr I’ Equa-

35

314 La. GEOMETRIE

|’ Equation, & ainfi qu’on puiffe trouuuer le point C auec
la reigle & le compas. Mais aucontraire fi elles font toa-
tesparalleles , encore que la queftion ne foit propofée
qu’en cing lignes, ce point C ne pourra ainfi eftre trou-
ud, a caufe que la quantité « ne fe trouuant point en tou-
te l’Equation, il ne fera plus permis de prendre vne quan
tité connué pour celle qui eft nommeey , mais ce fera
elle qu’il faudra chercher. Et pource quelle aura trois di-
menfions, on ne lapourra trouver qu’en tirant la racine
d’vne Equation cubique. cequine fe peut generalement
faire {ans qu’on y employe pour le moins vne fection co-
nique. Et encore quil y ait iufques a neuf lignes don-
nées, pourviiqu’elles ne foient point toutes paralleles, on
peut tonfionrs faire quel’Equation ne monte que iufques
au quarréde quarré, au moyen dequoy on Ia peut aufly
toufiours refoudre par les fections coniques, en la facon
quei‘expliqueray cyapres. Et encore-qu’il y enait iuf-
ques atreize ,on peut toufiours faire qu'elle ne monte
que iufques au quarré de cube. en fuite de quoy on la
peut refondre parle moyen d’vneligne , qui-n’eft que
d’vn degrdplus compofée que les feGtions coniques, en
la fagon que i’expliquerayaufly cy aprés. Et cecy eftla
premiere partie de ceque i’auois icy ademonftrer, mais
auant que ie paffe ala feconde il eft befoin que ie die

quelque chofe en general de la nature. des lignes cour-
bes.

LA

FIRST BOOK

either x or y will be of only the second degree in the equation, so that
the point C can be found with ruler and compasses.

On the other hand, if the given lines are all parallel even though a
question should be proposed involving only five lines, the point C can-
not be found in this way. For, since the quantity + does not occur at
all in the equation, it is no longer allowable to give a known value to y.
It is then necessary to find the value of y." And since the term in y
will now be of the third degree, its value can be found only by finding
the root of a cubic equation, which cannot in general be done without
the use of one of the conic sections."

And furthermore, if not more than nine lines are given, not all of
them being parallel, the equation can always be so expressed as to be
of degree not higher than the fourth. Such equations can always be
solved by means of the conic sections in a way that I shall presently
explain.

Again, if there are not more than thirteen lines, an equation of degree
not higher than the sixth can be employed, which admits of solution by
means of a curve just one degree higher than the conic sections by a
method to be explained presently.™

This completes the first part of what I have to demonstrate here, but
it is necessary, before passing to the second part, to make some general

statements concerning the nature of curved lines.

1 That is, to solve the equation for y.

1 See page 84.

"I See page 107.

8] This line of reasoning may be extended indefinitely. Briefly, it means that
for every two lines introduced the equation becomes one degree higher and the
curve becomes correspondingly more complex.

37

= 7
7
"iy ie
7
.
a
i
.:
ad a
’ ’
=
g all
ie |
A
;
f
=
;
‘
>, “
d
ern
1
»
'
4 2
¥:
.
is .
f
ae :
4

BOOK so: COND

Geometry
BOOK II

ON THE NATURE OF CURVED LINES

HE ancients were familiar with the fact that the problems of geom-

etry may be divided into three classes, namely, plane, solid, and linear
problems." This is equivalent to saying that some problems require
only circles and straight lines for their construction, while others
require a conic section and still others require more complex curves.
I am surprised, however, that they did not go further, and distinguish
between different degrees of these more complex curves, nor do I see
why they called the latter mechanical, rather than geometrical."
If we say that they are called mechanical because some sort of instru-
ment" has to be used to describe them, then we must, to be consistent,

1 Cf. Pappus, Vol. I, p. 55, Proposition 5, Book III: “The ancients consid-
ered three classes of geometric problems, which they called plane, solid, and linear.
Those which can be solved by means of straight lines and circumferences of circles
are called plane problems, since the lines or curves by which they are solved have
their origin in a plane. But problems whose solutions are obtained by the use of
one or more of the conic sections are called solid problems, for the surfaces of solid
figures (conical surfaces) have to be used. There remains a third class which is
called linear because other ‘lines’ than those I have just described, having diverse
and more involved origins, are required for their construction. Such lines are the
spirals, the quadratrix, the conchoid, and the cissoid, all of which have many impor-
tant properties.” See also Pappus, Vol. I, p. 271.

l Rabuel (p. 92) suggests dividing problems into classes, the first class to
include all problems that can be constructed by means of straight lines, that is,
curves whose equations are of the first degree; the second, those that require curves
whose equations are of the second degree, namely, the circle and the conic sec-
tions, and so on.

Cf. Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire Raisonné des Sciences, des Arts et des
Metiers, par une Société de gens de lettres, mis en ordre et publiées par M. Diderot,
et quant a la Partie Mathematique par M. d'Alembert, Lausanne and Berne, .1780.
In substance as follows: “Mechanical is a mathematical term designating a con-
struction not geometric, that is, that cannot be accomplished by geometric curves.
Such are constructions depending upon the quadrature of the circle.

The term, mechanical curve, was used by Descartes to designate a curve that
cannot be expressed by an algebraic equation.” Leibniz and others call them
transcendental.

(1 “Machine,”

40

LivRE SECOND. 315
LA

Cee Om Vin leah TB

LIVRE SECOND.

De la nature des henes courbes.

| S$ anciens ont fort bien remarqué , qu’entre les
Problefmes de Geometrie, les vns font plans , les au- Quelles
tres folides,& les autreslineaires, c’eft a dire, que les vns Tae ;
peuuent eftre conftruits., -ennetragant que des lignes courbes
droites, & descercles; au lieu que les autres ne le peu- eee
uent eftre, qu’on n’y employe pour le moins quelque fe- cevoir en
ction conique ; nienfin Jes autres , qu’onn’y employe ae
quelque autre ligne plus compofée. Mais ie m’eftonne
de ce qu’ilsn’ont point outre cela diftingué diuers de-
grés entre ces lignes plus compofées , & ie ne {caurois
comprendre pourquoy ils les ont nommées mechani-
ques, plutoft que Geometriques. Carde dire que gait
efte, a caufe qu'il eft befoin de fe feruir de quelque ma-
chine pour lesdefcrire, il faudroit reietter par mefme
taifonles cercles & les lignes droites;vi qu’onne les de-
{crit fur le papier qu’auec vn compas, & vne reigle, qu’on
peut auffy nommer des machines. Ce n’eft pas non plus,
acaufe que les inftrumens, qui feruenta les tracer,eftant
plus compofes que lareigle & lecompas , ne peuvent
eftre fiinftes; car il faudroit pour cete raifon les reietter
des Mechaniques, ow la iufteffe des ouurages qui fortent
delamaineftdefirde, plutoft quedelaGeometrie , ou
c’eft feulement la iufteffe du raifonnemet qu’onrecher-
: Rr 2 che,

41

316 La GEOMETRIE.

che, & qui peut fans doute eftre anfly parfaite touchant
ceslignes , que touchant Jes autres. Ie ne diray pas aufly,
gue ce foit a caufe quils n’ont pas voulu augmenter le
nombre deleurs demandes., 8& qu/ils fe font contentés
qu’on leur accordaft,, qu’ils puffent ioindre deux poins
donnés par vneligne droite , &defcrire yn cercle d’vn
centre donné, qui paffaft par vn point donne. carils n’ont
point fait de fcrupule de fuppofer outre cela,pour traiter
des feGtions coniques , qu'on puft coupper tout céne
donné par vnplandonné. &ciln’eft befoin de tien fup-
pofer pour tracer toutes les lignes courbes, queie pre-
tensicy d’introduire; finon qué deux ou plufieurs lignes
puiffent eftre meués l’vne par l’autre , & que leurs inter-
fections én marquent d’autres ; ce quine me paroift en
rien plusdifficile. ILeft vray qu’ilsn’ont pas aufly entie-
rement receules fedtions coniques en leur Geometrie,
& ie ne veux pasentreprendre dechanger les noms qui
ont eftéapproaues par l’vfage; mais il eft, ce me femble,
tresclair , que prenant comme on fait pour Geometri-
que ce quieft precis & exact , & pour Mechanique
ce quinel’eft pas ; & confiderant la Geometrie comme
vne fcience, qui enfeigne generalement a connoiftre les
mefures de tous les cors, on n’en doit pas plutoft exclure
les lignes les plus compofees que les plus fimples, pourvé
qu’on les puiffeimaginer eftre defcrites par vn mouue-
ment continu, ou par plufieurs quis’entrefuiuent & dont
les derniersfoient entierement regles par ceux qui les
precedent. carpar ce moyen on peut toufiours avoir
vne connoiffance exacte de leur mefure. Mais peuteftre
que ce quiaempefché les anciens Geometres de rege-

uolr
42

SECOND BOOK

reject circles and straight lines, since these cannot be described on
paper without the use of compasses and a ruler, which may also be
termed instruments. It is not because the other instruments, being
more complicated than the ruler and compasses, are therefore less
accurate, for if this were so they would have to be excluded from
mechanics, in which accuracy of construction is even more important
than in geometry. In the latter, exactness of reasoning alone™! is
sought, and this can surely be as thorough with reference to such lines
as to simpler ones.™ I cannot believe, either, that it was because they
did not wish to make more than two postulates, namely, (1) a straight
line can be drawn between any two points, and (2) about a given center
a circle can be described passing through a given point. In their treat-

ment of the conic sections they did not hesitate to introduce the assump-
tion that any given cone can be cut by a given plane. Now to treat all
the curves which I mean to introduce here, only one additional assump-
tion is necessary, namely, two or more lines can be moved, one upon
the other, determining by their intersection other curves. This seems
to me in no way more difficult."

It is true that the conic sections were never freely received into
ancient geometry," and I do not care to undertake to change names
confirmed by usage; nevertheless, it seems very clear to me that if we
make the usual assumption that geometry is precise and exact, while
mechanics is not ;°" and if we think of geometry as the science which
furnishes a general knowledge of the measurement of all bodies, then
we have no more right to exclude the more complex curves than the
simpler ones, provided they can be conceived of as described by a con-
tinuous motion or by several successive motions, each motion being
completely determined by those which precede; for in this way an exact
knowledge of the magnitude of each is always obtainable.

[3] An interesting question of modern education is here raised, namely, to what
extent we should insist upon accuracy of construction even in elementary geometry.

(1 Not only ancient writers but later ones, up to the time of Descartes, made
the same distinction; for example, Vieta. Descartes’s view has been universally
accepted since his time.

| That is, in no way less obvious than the other postulates.

(6) Because the ancients did not believe that the so-called constructions of the
conic sections on a plane surface could be exact.

(71 Since it is not possible to construct an ideal line, plane, and so on.

43

GEOMETRY

Probably the real explanation of the refusal of ancient geometers to
accept curves more complex than the conic sections lies in the fact that
the first curves to which their attention was attracted happened to be
the spiral, the quadratrix,"" and similar curves, which really do
belong only to mechanics, and are not among those curves that I think
should be included here, since they must be conceived of as described
by two separate movements whose relation does not admit of exact
determination. Yet they afterwards examined the conchoid,™ the
cissoid,™ and a few others which should be accepted ; but not knowing
much about their properties they took no more account of these than
of the others. Again, it may have been that, knowing as they did only

a little about the conic sections,™

and being still ignorant of many of
the possibilities of the ruler and compasses, they dared not yet attack
a matter of still greater difficulty. I hope that hereafter those who are
clever enough to make use of the geometric methods herein suggested
will find no great difficulty in applying them to plane or solid problems.
I therefore think it proper to suggest to such a more extended line of
investigation which will furnish abundant opportunities for practice.
Consider the lines AB, AD, AF, and so forth (page 46), which we
may suppose to be described by means of the instrument YZ. This
instrument consists of several rulers hinged together in such a way that
YZ being placed along the line AN the angle XYZ can be increased or
decreased in size, and when its sides are together the points B, C, D,
E, F, G, H, all coincide with A; but as the size of the angle is increased,
"I See Heath, History of Greek Mathematics (hereafter referred to as Heath),
Cambridge, 2 vols., 1921. Also Cantor, Vorlesungen tiber Geschichte der Mathe-

matik, Leipzig, Vol. I (2), ». 263, and Vol. II (1), pp. 765 and 781 (hereafter
referred to as Cantor).

(1 See Heath, I, 225; Smith, Vol. II, pp. 300, 305.

1 See Heath, I, 235, 238; Smith, Vol. II, p. 298.

[1 See Heath, I, 264; Smith, Vol. II, p. 314.

™1 They really knew much more than would be inferred from this statement.

In this connection, see Taylor, Ancient and Modern Geometry of Conics, Cam-
bridge, 1881.

Livre SEconp. 317

uoir celles qui eftoient plus compofees que les fections
coniques, c’eft que les premieres qu’ils ont confiderées,
ayant par hafard eft¢ la Spirale, la Quadratrice , & fem-
blables , quin’appartienent veritablement qu’aux Me-
chaniques, & nefont point dunombre de celles que ie
penfe deuoir icy eftre receues, a caufe qu’on les imagine
defcrites par deux monuemens fepares, & qui n’ont en-
tre eux aucun raport qu’on puiffe mefurer exactement,
bienqu’ils ayent apres examiné la Conchoide, Ia Ciffoi-
de, & quelque peu d’autres quien font, toutefoisacau-
fe qu’ils n’ont peuteftre pas affes remarqué leurs pro-
prietés , ils n’en ont pas fait plus d’eftat que des premie-
res. Oubienc’eftquevoyant , qu’ilsne connoiffoient
encore , que peu de chofes touchant les fectionsconi-
ques, & quilleur enreftoit mefme beaucoup, touchant
ce quife peut faire auec la reigle & lecompas , quils
ignoroient, ils ont creu ne deuoir point entamer de ma-
tiere plus difficile. Mais pourceque i’efpere que d’orena-
uant ceux qui auront l’adreffe de fe feruir du calculGeo-
metrique icy propofe, ne trouueront pas affés dequoy
s’arefter tonchant les problefmes plans, ou folides; ie
croy qu'il eft a propos que ie lesinuite a d'autres re-

cherches , ot ils ne manquerant tamais d’exercice.
Voycsles lignesAB,A D, AF, & femblables que te
fuppofe auoir efté defcrites par Payde de l'inftrument
Y Z, qui eft compofe de plufieurs reigles tellement ioin-
tes, que celle qui eft marquee Y Z eftant areftée fur la
ligne A N,on peut ouurir & fermer!'angle XY Z; & que
lorfquileft tout fermé , les poins B, C, D, F, G, H font
tous affemblés au point A ; mais qua mefure qu’on
Rr 3 louure,

45

318 La GEOMETRIE-

Louure, la reigleB C, qui eft iointe a angles droits auec
XY au point B, pouffevers.Z lareigle CD, qui coule
fur Y Z en faifant toufiours des angles droits auec elle, 8
C Dpouffe D E, qui coule tout de mefme fur Y X en de-
meurant parallele a B C,D E pouffle EF,E F poufleF G,
cellecy pouffeG H. & onen peut conceuoir vne infinité
dautres’, qui fe pouffent confequutiuement en mefme
fagon, & dont les vnes facent toufiours les mefmes an-
gles auec Y X, & les autres auec Y Z. Or pendant qu’on
ouureainfiPangle X Y Z,le point B defcritlaligne AB,
quieftvncercle, &les autres poins D,F,H, ou fe font
les interfections des autresreigles , defcriuent d’autres
lienes courbes AD, AF, AH, dont les dernieres font
par ordre plus cépofees que la premiere, & cellecy plus
que le cercle. mais iene voy pas ce qui peut empefcher,

qu’onne concoiueauffy nettement , & aufly diftincte-
ment la defcription de cete premiere, que du cercle, ou

du
46

SECOND BOOK

the ruler BC, fastened at right angles to XY at the point B, pushes
toward Z the ruler CD which slides along YZ always at right angles.
In like manner, CD pushes DE which slides along YX always parallel
to BC; DE pushes EF; EF pushes FG; FG pushes GH, and so on.
Thus we may imagine an infinity of rulers, each pushing another, half
of them making equal angles with YX and the rest with YZ.

Now as the angle XYZ is increased the point B describes the curve
AB, which is a circle; while the intersections of the other rulers,
namely, the points D, F, H describe other curves, AD, AF, AH, of
which the latter are more complex than the first and this more complex
than the circle. Nevertheless I see no reason why the description of
the first™ cannot be conceived as clearly and distinctly as that of the
circle, or at least as that of the conic sections; or why that of the sec-
ond, third," or any other that can be thus described, cannot be as
clearly conceived of as the first; and therefore I see no reason why
they should not be used in the same way in the solution of geometric

problems.™

3] That is, AD.
(1 That is, AF and AH.

(1 The equations of these curves may be obtained as follows: (1) Let
2

ene va —— ee Oe Ol) ae Die erethen s-es7— 45 a, Whence: 2 — =.
Also z2=+2-+ y?; therefore the equation of AD is r*=a?(x2+y?). (2) Let
ie Vi ey Bay OE ay | YR ree hen, 332 ary DD, whence
oe
YD=—. Also
&

xt x3

x: YD=—=YD: YC, whence Sg hie ag
Bury Deny C= iC. sanand theretore
ax = (3). OL iss Ae
Zz 2 is
Also, 22 = +2+y?. Thus we get, as the equation of AF,

ay
ae = 72+ y?, or x8 = a? (4x2 +y?)8,

a?

(3) In the same way, it can be shown that the equation of AH is

wt? = a? (x2 + y2)5,
See Rabuel, p. 107.
47

GEOMETRY

I could give here several other ways of tracing and conceiving a
series of curved lines, each curve more complex than any preceding
one, but I think the best way to group together all such curves and
then classify them in order, is by recognizing the fact that all points of
those curves which we may call “geometric,” that is, those which admit
of precise and exact measurement, must bear a definite relation to
all points of a straight line, and that this relation must be expressed by
means of a single equation.™ If this equation contains no term of
higher degree than the rectangle of two unknown quantities, or the
square of one, the curve belongs to the first and simplest class," which
contains only the circle, the parabola, the hyperbola, and the ellipse;
but when the equation contains one or more terms of the third or fourth

[80]

degree™ in one or both of the two unknown quantities™ (for it

requires two unknown quantities to express the relation between two
points) the curve belongs to the second class; and if the equation con-
tains a term of the fifth or sixth degree in either or both of the unknown
quantities the curve belongs to the third class, and so on indefinitely.

9] “Qui seroient de plus en plus composées par degrez a l’infini.” The French

quotations in the footnotes show a few variants in style in different editions.

") That is, a relation exactly known, as, for example, that between two straight
lines in distinction to that between a straight line and a curve, unless the length
of the curve is known.

I Tt will be recognized at once that this statement contains the fundamental
concept of analytic geometry.

1 “T)y premier & plus simple genre,” an expression not now recognized. As
now understood, the order or degree of a plane curve is the greatest number of
points in which it can be cut by any arbitrary line, while the class is the greatest
number of tangents that can be drawn to it from any arbitrary point in the plane.

1 Grouped together because an equation of the fourth degree can always be
transformed into one of the third degree.

‘I Thus Descartes includes such terms as xy, x22, . . as well as 3, y4

48

Livre Seconp. 319
du moins que des fections coniques; ny ce qui peut em-
pefcher, qu’on ne concoiue la feconde, & la troifiefme,
& toutes les autres, qu’on peut defcrire , aufly bien que
lapremiere ; ny par confequent qu’on ne les recoiue
toutes en mefme fagon, pour feruir aux {peculations de
Geometrie.
Ie pourrois mettre icy plufieurs autres moyens pour La facon
tracer & congeuoir deslignes courbes, qui feroient de “* “!i-

; ; : guer tou-
plus en plus compofées par degrés a Linfini. mais pourtes les li-
comprendre enfemble toutes celles, quifont en la natu- Peo
re , &les diftinguer par ordre encertains genres ; ie ne certains
{cache rien de meilleur que de dire que tous les poins, de eae
celles qu’on peut nommer Geometriques , c’eft a dire noiftre Ie
qui tombent fous quelque mefure precife & exacte, Oba cte
neceffairement quelque rapport a tous les poins dine gees
ligne droite, qui peut eftre exprimd par quelque equa-ceux des
tion, entous par vnemefme, Et que lorfque cete equaz Hse
tion ne monte que iufques au rectangle de deux quanti-
tésindeterminées, oubien au quarré.d’vne mefme,, la li-
gne courbe eft du premier & plus fimple genre, dans le~
quelil ny aquelé cercle, la parabole, l’hyperbole , &
VEllipfe qui foient comprifes, mais que lorfque l’equa-
tion monteiufques ala trois ou quatriefme dimenfion
des deux, ou de l’vne des deux quantités indeterminées,
car il en faut deux pour expliquer icy le rapport d’vn
point a vn autre, elle eft du fecond:& que lorfque l’equa-
tion monte iufques a la 5 ou fixiefme dimenfion, elle
eft dutroifiefme; & ainfidesautres a]infini.

Comme fiie veux fcauoir de quel genre eft la ligne
EC, quei'imagine eftre defcrite par FinterfeGtion de la’

reigle-

49

320 La GEOMETRIE.

reigle GL, & du plan rectiligne C N KL, dontle cofté
K Neftindefiniement prolongéversC , & qui eftant
meu furle plan de deffous en ligne droite, c’efta dire en
telle forte que fon diametre K L fe trouue toufiours ap-
plique fur quelque endroit delaligne B.A prolongee de
part & d’autre, fait mounoir circulairement cete reigle
GL autour du point G,a caufe quelle luy eft tellement
iointe quelle paffe toufiours par le point L- Ie choifis
vne ligne droite,commeA B,pour rapportera fes diuers
poins tousceux decete ligne courbe EC, &en cete li-
gne A Biechoifis vn point, comme A, pour commencer
par luy cecalcul. Ie dis que ie choifis &I’vn & l'autre, a
caufe qu'il eft libre de les prendre tels qu’on veult. car
encore qu'il y ait beaucoup de choix pour rendre l’equa-
tion plus courte, & plusayfée; toutefoisen quelle facon
qu'on les prene, on peut toufiours faire que la ligne pa-
roifle de mefme genre, ainfi quil eft ayfé a demonftrer,

Apres
50

SECOND BOOK

Suppose the curve EC to be described by the intersection of
the ruler GL and the rectilinear plane figure CNKL, whose side
KN is produced indefinitely in the direction of C, and which, being
moved in the same plane in such a way that its side“? KL always coin-
cides with some part of the line BA (produced in both directions),
imparts to the ruler GL a rotary motion about G (the ruler being
hinged to the figure CNKL at L).™ If I wish to find out to what
class this curve belongs, I choose a straight line, as AB, to which to
refer all its points, and in AB I choose a point A at which to begin the
investigation." I say “choose this and that,” because we are free to
choose what we will, for, while it is necessary to use care in the choice
in order to make the equation as short and simple as possible, yet no
matter what line I should take instead of AB the curve would always
prove to be of the same class, a fact easily demonstrated.™

(871 “T)iametre.”

(1 The instrument thus consists of three parts, (1) a ruler AK of indefinite
length, fixed in a plane; (2) a ruler GL, also of indefinite length, fastened to a
pivot, G, in the same plane, but not on AK; and (3) a rectilinear figure BKC, the
side KC being indefinitely long, to which the ruler GL is hinged at L, and which
is made to slide along the ruler GL.

(®] That is, Descartes uses the point A as origin, and the line AB as axis of
abscissas. He uses parallel ordinates, but does not draw the axis of ordinates.

(5) That is, the nature of a curve is not affected by a transformation of

coordinates.

51

GEOMETRY

Then I take on the curve an arbitrary point, as C, at which we will
suppose the instrument applied to describe the curve. Then I draw
through C the line CB parallel to GA. Since CB and BA are unknown
and indeterminate quantities, I shall call one of them y and the other +.
To the relation between these quantities I must consider also the known
quantities which determine the description of the curve, as GA, which
I shall call a; KL, which I shall call b; and NL parallel to GA, which
I shall call c. Then I say that as NL is to LK, or as ¢ is to b, so CB, or

y, is to BK, which is therefore equal to : y. Then BL is equal te
eh, and AL is equal to + + Sy —b. Moreover, as CB is to LB,
that is, as y is to : y—b, so AG or a is to LA or P- y—b. Multi-
plying the second by the third, we get ay —ab equal to

y+ : i eg of

which is obtained by multiplying the first by the last. Therefore, the
required equation is

i cx
hier k fesceng oo” Jo yh Sar

oe

Civre Seconp, 321

Apres cela prenant vn point a difcretion dans Jacourbe,
comme C, fur lequel ie fuppofe que l’inftrument qui fert
ala defcrire eft appliqué, ie tire de ce point C- la ligne
C BparalleleaG A, & pourceque CB & BA font deux
quantitds indetermindes & inconnués , ie les nomme
I'vney &lautrex. maisaffin de trouuer le rapport de
Tyneal’autre; ie confidere auffy les quantités connués
qui determinent la defcription de cete ligne courbe,
commeG A que ienomme 2, KL que ie nommed, &
N LparalleleaG A queienomme ¢. puis ie dis, comme
N LeftaLK,oucad, ainfiCB,ouy, eftaBK, qui eft

par confequent “y: &B Left y--b, & A Leftx+
ee y --b. de plus comme C BeftaL B, ouya ~ yan, ainfi
a,0ouG A, efté LA, oux ey --b, de fagon que mul-
st tipliant

53

Uno La GEOMETRIE
; . ab
tipliant lafeconde par la troifrefme on produit —y-- ab,
b ™ Pen ¢
qui eft efgaleaxy-+—yy -- by qui fe produiten multi-

pliant la premiere par la derniere. 8 ainfi equation qu'il
falloittrouuer eft

yy DO cy-- Fyray~ at.
de laquelle on-connoift quelaligne EC eft da premier
genre , comme en effect elle n’eft autre qu'vne Hy-
perbole.

Que fien l'inftrument gui fert a la-defcrire on fait
qu’au lieu dela ligne droite CN K, ce {oit cete Hyper-
bole, ou quelque autre ligne courbe du premier genre,
quitermine le plan C NKL, linterfection de cete ligne
& delareigle G L defcrira, aulieu de !Hyperbole EC,
viie autre ligne courbe, qui feradu fecond genre. Com-
me fiC N Keft vucercle, dont L foit lé centre , on de-
{crirala premiere Conthoide des anciens ; & fi ceft vne
Parabole dont le diametre foit K B, oridefcrira la ligne
courbe, que jay tantoft dit eftre la premiere, & laplus
fimple pour la queftion dePappus,lorf{qu’il n’y aque cing
lignes droites donnees par pofition. Mais fiau lieu d’vne
de ceslignes courbes du premier genre , c’en eft vne da
fecond, quiterminele planC N KL, onen defcrira par
fon moyen vne du troifiefme, ou fi c’en eff yne du troifi-
cfme, onren défcrira vne du quatriefme, &ainfia Yinfini.
comme il eft fort ayféa connoiftrepar lecalcul. Et en
quelque autre facon, qu’on imagine la defcription d’vne
ligne courbe , pourviiqu’elle foit du nombre de celles
queienomme Geometriques , on pourra tonfiourstrou-

uer
54

SECOND BOOK

From this equation we see that the curve EC belongs to the first class,
it being, in fact, a hyperbola.“

If in the instrument used to describe the curve we substitute for the
rectilinear figure CNK this hyperbola or some other curve of the first
class lying in the plane CNKL, the intersection of this curve with the
ruler GL will describe, instead of the hyperbola EC, another curve,
which will be of the second class.

Thus, if CNK be a circle having its center at L, we shall describe
the first conchoid of the ancients," while if we use a parabola having
KB as axis we shall describe the curve which, as I have already said,
is the first and simplest of the curves required in the problem of Pappus,
that is, the one which furnishes the solution when five lines are given
in position."

(1 Cf. Briot and Bouquet, Elements of Analytical Geometry of Two Dimen-
sions, trans. by J. H. Boyd, New York, 1896, p. 143.

The two branches of the curve are determined by the position of the triangle
CNKL with respect to the directrix AB. See Rabuel, p. 119

Van Schooten, p. 171, gives the following construction and proof: Produce
AG to D, making DG=EA. Since E is a point of the curve obtained when
GL coincides with GA, L with A, and C with N, then EA=NL. Draw DF
parallel to KC. Now let GCE be a hyperbola through E whose asymptotes
are DF and FA. To prove that this hyperbola is the curve given by the instru-
ment described above, produce BC to cut DF in I, and draw DH parallel to AF

meeting BC in H. Then KL: LN=DH: HI. But DH= AB=sz, so we may
CX CH, Cx

ei IB=ate—-—, IC=ate—7— ;
But in any hyperbola IC.BC = DE.EA, whence we have (a+c— = —y)y=ae,

write b: c=x: HI, whence HI = —

or y? = cy —S* + ay —ae. But this is the equation obtained above, which is

therefore the equation of a hyperbola whose asymptotes are AF and FD.

Van Schooten, p. 172, describes another similar instrument: Given a ruler
AB pivoted at A, ‘and another BD hinged to AB at B. Let AB rotate about A
so that D moves along LK; then the curve generated by any point E of BE will
be an ellipse whose semi-major axis is AB-+BE and whose semi-minor axis is
AB— BE.

(1 See notes 59 and 70.

8] For a discussion of the elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic conchoids see
Rabuel, pp. 123, 124. Pe

GEOMETRY

If, instead of one of these curves of the first class, there be used a
curve of the second class lying in the plane CNKL, a curve of the third
class will be described ; while if one of the third class be used, one of
the fourth class will be obtained, and so on to infinity." These state-
ments are easily proved by actual calculation.

Thus, no matter how we conceive a curve to be described, provided
it be one of those which I have called geometric, it is always possible
to find in this manner an equation determining all its points. Now I
shall place curves whose equations are of the fourth degree in the same
class with those whose equations are of the third degree; and those
whose equations are of the sixth degree™ in the same class with those
whose equations are of the fifth degree™ and similarly for the rest.
This classification is based upon the fact that there is a general rule for
reducing to a cubic any equation of the fourth degree, and to an equa-
tion of the fifth degree™ any equation of the sixth degree, so that the
latter in each case need not be considered any more complex than the
former.

It should be observed, however, with regard to the curves of any
one class, that while many of them are equally complex so that they
may be employed to determine the same points and construct the same
problems, yet there are certain simpler ones whose usefulness is more
limited. Thus, among the curves of the first class, besides the ellipse,
the hyperbola, and the parabola, which are equally complex, there is
also found the circle, which is evidently a simpler curve; while among
those of the second class we find the common conchoid, which is
described by means of the circle, and some others which, though less

‘1 Rabuel (p. 125), illustrates this, substituting for the curve CNKL the semi-
cubical parabola, and showing that the resulting equation is of the fifth degree,
and therefore, according to Descartes, of the third class. Rabuel also gives (p. 119),
a general method for finding the curve, no matter what figure is used for CNKL.
Let GA=o, KL=b, AB=4, CB=y and KB =: thensLB=e2—pb and
AL=s+tz—b. Now GA: AL=CB: BL, or a: %+2—b == 9) zie
xy — by +ab

a—y ;

This value of z is independent of the nature of the figure CNKL. But given
any figure CNKL it is possible to obtain a second value for zg from the nature of
the curve. Equating these values of z we get the equation of the curve.

®1“Celles dont l’équation monte au quarré de cube.”

4 “Celles dont elle ne monte qu’au sursolide.”

1 “Au sursolide.”

whence z=

56 X

Livre SECOND. a3

wer vne equation peur determiner tous fes poins en cere
forte.

Au refte ie mets les lignes courbes qui font monter
cete equation iufques au quarrede quarré , au mefme
genre que celles qui ne la font monter que iufques au
cube. & cellesdontl’equation monte au quarré de cu-
be,au mefine genre que celles dont elle ne monte qu’au
furfolide. & ainfidesautres. Dontlaraifoneft, qu’ily a
reigle generale pour reduire au cube toutes les difiicul-
t¢s-qui vont au quarréde quarré , & au furfolide toutes
celles qui vont au quarré de cube, de fagon qu’on ne les
doit point eftimer plus compofees. ‘

Mais il eft aremarquer qu’entre les lignes de chafque
genre, encore que la plus part foient efgalement compo-
fées , en forte quelles peuuent feruir a déterminer les
mefmes poins, & conftruire les mefmes problefmes ,il y
ena toutefoisanffy quelques vnes, qui font plus fimples,
& qui n'ont pas tant d’eftendue en leur puiffance. com-
meentre celles du premier genre outrelEllipfe l’Hyper-
bole & la Parabole qui font efgalement compofeées ,le
cercle y eftaufly compris, qui manifeftement eft plus
fimple: & entre celles du fecond genre ily ala Conchoi-
de vulgaire, qui afon origineducercle, & il y ena en-
core quelques autres, qui bien. qu’elles n’ayent pas tant
@eftendue que la plus part de celles du mefme genre,
ne peuuent toutefois eftre mifes dans Je premier. ~

Or apres auoir ainfi reduit toutes les lignes courbes a remotes
certains genres, il m’eft ayfé de pourfuiure en Ja de- tion dela
monftration de la refponfe, quei’ay tantoftfaite a la que- bapa

de Pappus
ftion de Pappus. Car premierement ayant fait voir cy mifau

liure pree

Sf2 deffus, cedenr

324 EA GEOMETRIE.
deffus , quelorfqu’il n’y a que trois ou 4 li gnes droites
données, l’equation qui ferta determiner les poins cher-
chés, ne monte quciufques au quarre; il eft euident, que
la ligne courbe ou fe trouuent ces poins , eft neceffaire-
ment quelqu’vne de cefles du premier genre:a caufe que
cete mefine equation explique le rapport , qu ont tous
les poins des lignes du premier genre a ccux d vne ligne
droite. Et que lorfqu’il n’y a point plus de 8 lignes droi-
tesdonnées , cete equationne monte que iufques au
quarre de quarrd toutau plus, & que par confequent la
ligne chercheene peut eftre que dufecond genre, ou au
deffous.Et que lorfqu’iln’y a point plus de 12 lignes don-
nées , Fequation ne monte que iufques au quarré de cu-
be, & que par confequent la ligne cherchee n’eft que du
troifiefme genre, ouaudeffous. &ainfi des autres. Et
mefmeacaufe que la pofition deslignes droites données
peut varier en toutes fortes, & parconfequent faire cha-
ger tantles quantités connués, queles fignes + & -- de
l’equation, en toutes les fagons imaginables ; il eft eui-
dent qu’'iln’ya aucune ligne courbe du premier genre,
quine foit vtilea cete queftion, quand elle eft propofee
en 4 lignes droites; ny aucune du fecond qui n y foit vti-
le, quand elle eft propofee en huit ; ny du troifiefme,
quand elle eft propofde en douze: & ainfi desautres. En
forte qu’iln’y a pas yneligne courbe quitombe fous le
Solution Calcul & puiffe eftre receiieenGeometrie , quin’y foit
itiet vtile pour quelque nombre de lignes.
ee Maisil faut icy plus particulierement queie determi-
poe ne, & donne la facon de trouuer Ia ligne cherchee , qui
aver} ferten chafque cas, lorfqu’il nya que 3 ou 4 lignes droi-
gnes.. tes
58

SECOND BOOK

complicated™ than many curves of the same class, cannot be placed
in the first class.

Having now made a general classification of curves, it is easy for me
to demonstrate the solution which I have already given of the prob-
lem of Pappus. For, first, I have shown that when there are only three
or four lines the equation which serves to determine the required
points™ is of the second degree. It follows that the curve containing
these points must belong to the first class, since such an equation
expresses the relation between all points of curves of Class I and all
points of a fixed straight line. When there are not more than eight
given lines the equation is at most a biquadratic, and therefore the
resulting curve belongs to Class II or Class I. When there are not
more than twelve given lines, the equation is of the sixth degree or
lower, and therefore the required curve belongs to Class III or a lower
class, and so on for other cases.

Now, since each of the given lines may have any conceivable posi-
tion, and since any change in the position of a line produces a corre-
sponding change in the values of the known quantities as well as in
the signs + and — of the equation, it is clear that there is no curve
of Class I that may not furnish a solution of this problem when it
relates to four lines, and that there is no curve of Class II that may not
furnish a solution when the problem relates to eight lines, none of
Class III when it relates to twelve lines, etc. It follows that there is
no geometric curve whose equation can be obtained that.may not be
used for some number of lines.”

It is now necessary to determine more particularly and to give the
method of finding the curve required in each case, for only three or

1“Das tant d’étendué.” Cf. Rabuel, p. 113. “Pas tant d’étendue en leur
puissance.”

1 Various methods of tracing curves were used by writers of the seventeenth
century. Among these there were not only the usual method of plotting a curve
from its equation and that of using strings, pegs, etc., as in the popular construc-
tion of the ellipse, but also the method of using jointed rulers and that of using
one curve from which to derive another, as for example the usual method of
describing the cissoid. Cf. Rabuel, p. 138.

1 That is, the equation of the required locus.

1 “Fn sorte qu'il n’y a pas une ligne courbe qui tombe sous le calcul & puisse
étre receué en Geometrie, qui n’y soit utile pour quelque nombre de lignes.”

59

GEOMETRY
four given lines. This investigation will show that Class I contains
only the circle and the three conic sertcne!

Consider again the four lines AB, AD, EF, and GH, given before,
and let it be required to find the locus generated by a point
C, such that, if four lines CB, CD, CF, and CH be drawn through it
making given angles with the given lines, the product of CB and CF
is equal to the product of CD and CH. This is equivalent to saying
that if

CB=y,
cp = ee,
CF 2) a al “bh See

Z

and

‘le == sy + fol—fgx
Ze ‘

then the equation is

y? _(¢fgls — dekz*)y — (deg? + cfgz—bcgz) xy + bef glx — bcfgx?
ez* —cgz* ;

60

Livre SEconp. SB
tesdonnees, 8 on verra par mef{me moyen que le pre-
mier genre des lignes courbes n’en contient aucunes au-
tres, queles trois feCtions coniques, & le cercle,

Reprenonsles 4lignes AB, AD, EF, & GH don-
nees cy deffus, & qu'il faille-trouver vne autre ligne , en
laquelleilfe rencontre vne infinite de poins tels que C,
duquel ayanttireles 4.lignes CB, CD,C F,& CH,a
angles données, fur les données, CB multipli¢e parC F,
produift une fomme efgalea C D, multipli¢e par CH.

ceft a dire ayant fait CB 2 y,C Dx BUS E 7 Like

Zz%

hdek bdex, &fgl-- fx), ~
C Fo UES E RE CH 20 EEE pequatid eft
--dekxx \  --dexex b befglx }
Bf5 hw cfglz hy -- of gzx v --befgxx
bcgxzx
CXRRX -- CYR.
Sing / au

61

326 La GEOMETRIE.

au moins en fuppofant e zplus grand que ¢ g.car s'il eftoit
moindre, il faudroit changer tous les fignes 4+- & --. Et
fila quantité y fe trouuoit nulle, ou moindre que rienen
cete equation, lorfqu’on afuppofd le point C en l’angle
DAG, il faudroit le fappofer aufly enl’angle DAE, ou
EAR,ouRAG, enchangeantles lignes + &-- felon
qu'il feroit requisa cet effe&. Er fien toutes ces 4 po-
fitions la valeur d’y fe trouuoit nulle , la queftion feroit
impoflible au cas:propofé. Mais fuppofons la icy eftre

poffible, & pour en abregéerlestermes, au lieu des quan-
. , fglz--dehxz : :
tites ——---= efcriuons 2m, & au lieu de
CUn- COR
dexzmucfgz--bcgr

- 2% *
efcriuons —; & ainfi nous au-

TOTES
rons
21% hbcfglx -- bcfgxx dont la raci-
II PANY SO ees ae
CR CEL
ne.eft
nx T _ rmnx  nnaxxekbcfelx --bcfgxx,
YO Men mH MN ene wire Sota ya ee
| CU CLL
8¢ derechefpour abreger , au lieu de
2mn — bcfgl ; eae nn --bcfg¢
--— |. “+> — efcriuonso,& au lieu de- a

ee
e%-CeZX vf € --Cgz%

; p Be P
efcriuons =. car ces quantités eftant toutes donnees,
nons les pouuons nommer comme il nous plaift. &
ainfi nous auons
ee ce ed SE
a P Cae fee
y Om Geb V mm -+ ox-- “xx, quidoit eftrela
longeur dela ligne BC, en laiflant A B, ou x indeter-
mince.
62

SECOND BOOK

It is here assumed that ez is greater than cg; otherwise the signs +
and — must all be changed." If y is zero or less than nothing in this
equation,” the point C being supposed to lie within the angle DAG,
then-C must be supposed to lie within one of the angles DAE, EAR,
or RAG, and the signs must be changed to produce this result. If for
each of these four positions y is equal to zero, then the problem admits
of no solution in the case proposed.

Let us suppose the solution possible, and to shorten the work let us

ctlgz — dekz*

dez? —
r ; Baa cineiend of la EE aL
—cgz zZ

e2° — cgz*

write 2 instead of
ez

Then we have
bcf gla — bef gx?
e2* — cgz?

’

2
y? = 2my — “= xy
of which the root™ is

NX 3 2 4-2 iz 2
yom—= 4+ fm __ 2mnx 1 n 2 AN Beige
5 z ez® —cgz

2mn bcfgl
z of es? 18 2

equal to o, and

Again, for the sake of brevity, put —

2 b

n c P ie :

= — Ne equal to ~; for these quantities being given, we can
Z é3° — Cgz TL

[100}

represent them in any way we please. Then we have

yom—~ x + afm? tox 2x8
z wa
This must give the length of the line BC, leaving AB or + undeter-

&] When eg is greater than cg, then ez* — cgz? is positive and its square root
is therefore real.

®] Descartes uses “moindre que rien” for “negative.”

1] Descartes mentions here only one root; of course the other root would fur-
nish a second locus.

100] Tn a letter to Mersenne (Cousin, Vol. VII, p. 157), Descartes says: “In
regard to the problem of Pappus, I have given only the construction and demon-
stration without putting in all the analysis; . . . in other words, I have given the
construction as architects build structures, giving the specifications and leaving
the actual manual labor to carpenters and masons.”

63

GEOMETRY

mined. Since the problem relates to only three or four lines, it is obvi-
ous that we shall always have such terms, although some of them may
vanish and the signs may all vary."™

After this, I make KI equal and parallel to BA, and cutting off on
BC a segment BK equal to m (since the expression for BC contains
+m; if this were —m, I should have drawn IK on the other side of
AB,°™ while if m were zero, I would not have drawn IK at all). Then

I draw IL so that IK : KL =z: n; that is, so that if IK is equal to x,

KL is equal to 4. In the same way I know the ratio of KL to IL,
which I may call »:a, so that if KL is equal to = 4, IL is equal tu
x, I take the point K between L and C, since the equation contains
as = a if this were + <x, T should take L between K and C ;°! while if

n
7% were equal to zero, I should not draw IL.

This being done, there remains the expression

LCs am! + 0% + z Ep
m
from which to construct LC. It is clear that if this were zero the point

Gel Having obtained the value of BC algebraically, Descartes now proceeds to
construct the length BC geometrically, term by term. He considers 8C equal to
BK+KL+LC, which is equal to BK —LK+LC which in turn is equal to

n
Ls a +4)m2+ pre oe
& m

Gl That is, take I on CB produced.
Ml That is, on KB produced. C is not yet determined.

64

LIvrRE SECOND. 327

minée. Et ileft euident que la queftion n’eftant pro-
pofée qu’en trois ou quatre lignes, on peut toufiours
auoirdetels termes. excepté que quelques vns d’eux
penuenteftrenuls, & queles fignes1- & -- peuuent di-
uerfement eftrechangés.

Aprés celaie fais KI efgale & parallele aB A, en forte
qu'elle couppe de B Cla partie BK efgale a'm ; 4 caufe
quil y aicy +m; &.ie l’aurois adiouftee entirant cete
ligneIK dePautre coftd, sil y auoit eu--m; &ienel’au-
rois point dutouttiree, fi la quantite m eufteftd nulle,
Puisietire auffyI L, en forte que laligne IKeftaKL,
comme Zeftan. ceft adire que IK eftantx, KL eft

2 is , é . * ee ] 6
hen t par meime Moy e€nie Cconnois au y a proportion

qui

65

329 La GEOMETRITE.
quieftentreK L, & I L, que ie pofe comme entre n & a:

fibienque K Leftant geal Left Po Et ie fais que le
9: . %

point K foit entre L & C, acaufe quily aicy -- = 4;
aA n

au lieu que iaurois mis LentreK & C,fiveuffe eu+ ke

& ien’euffe point tirécete ligne IL, fi xeutft efténulle.
Orcela fait,ilne merefte plus pour laligne LC, que
Vm mb ox Ps x. doiiievoy

que siils eftoient nuls, ce point C fe trouueroit en Ia li-
gne droite IL; 8& que s’ils eftoient tels que laracine s’en

cestermes, L C 50

pufttirer,c’efta dire que mm &S x x eftant marques
d’vn mefime figne +- ou--, 00 fuft efgala 4p m, ou bien

que les termes m m 8£0 x,0U 0x gx xx fuffent nuls, ce
point C fe trouueroit en yne autre ligne droite qui ne fe-
roit pas plus malayfée a trouver qu’ IL. Mais lorfque
celan’‘eft pas, ce point C eft toufiours enl’une des trois
feGions coniques , ou en vn cercle , dont I’vn des dia.
metres eftenla ligne IL,& laligneL C eftI’vne de cel-
les qui s’appliquent par ordre 4 ce diametre; ou au con-
traire L C eft parallele au diametre , auquel celle qui eft
en laligne I L eft appliquée par ordre. A {gavoir file ter-
me cf «x, eft nul cete fettionconique eft yne Parabole,
& s‘ileft marqué du figne +- , c’eft vne Hyperbole; &
enfin s'il eftmarque du figne -- c’eft vne Ellipfe. Excepté
feulement fila quantité aam eft efgale a pzz & que)’an-
gle 1LC foit droit : auquel cas on 4 yncercleau lieu

d’vne
66

SECOND BOOK

C would lie on the straight line IL ;" that if it were a perfect square,

that is if m? and £ +* were both +" and o? was equal to 4pm, or if

joe : F
m and ox, or ox and «°, were zero, then the point C would lie on

another straight line, whose position could be determined as easily
asithatof 11.0"

If none of these exceptional cases occur," the point C always lies
on one of the three conic sections, or on a circle having its diameter
in the line IL and having LC a line applied in order to this diameter,"
or, on the other hand, having LC parallel to a diameter and IL applied
in order.

In particular, if the term Ee is zero, the conic section is a parabola ;
if it is preceded by a plus sign, it is a hyperbola; and, finally, if it is

preceded by a minus sign, it is an ellipse.“’ An exception occurs when

: f n
Ho] The equation of IL is y= m— of
6°] There is considerable diversity in the treatment of this sentence in differ-

ent editions. The Latin edition of 1683 has “Hoc est, ut, mm & ex signo +
notalis.” The French edition, Paris, 1705, has “C’est a dire que mm et Pax étant

marquez d’un méme signe + ou —.” Rabuel gives “C’est a dire que mm and
P xx étant marquez d’un méme signe +.” He adds the following note: “Il y a
dans les Editions Francoises de Leyde, 1637, et de Paris, 1705, ‘un meme signe -+
ou —’, ce qui est une faute d’impression.” The French edition, Paris, 1886, has
“Etant marqués d’un meme signe + ou —.”

2°] Note the difficulty in generalization experienced even by Descartes. Cf.
Briot and Bouquet, p. 72.

M1] “Nfais lorsque cela n’est pas.” In each case the equation giving the value
of y is linear in x and y, and therefore represents a straight line. If the quantity

under the radical sign and =e are both zero, the line is parallel to AB. If the

quantity under the radical sign and m are both zero, C lies in AL.

285] “An ordinate.” The equivalent of “ordination application” was used in the
16th century translation of Apollonius. Hutton’s Mathematical Dictionary, 1796,
gives “applicate,” ‘Ordinate applicate,” was also used.

4°] Cf, Briot and Bouquet, p. 143.

67

GEOMETRY

[110]

a?m is equal to pz? and the angle ILC is a right angle," in which case

we get a circle instead of an ellipse.”

. ° . pi ; O02
If the conic section is a parabola, its latus rectum is equal to = and

its axis always lies along the line IL." To find its vertex, N, make

2
IN equal to , so that the point I lies between L and N if m? is posi-

tive and ox is positive; and L lies between I and N if m? is posi-
tive and ox negative; and N lies between I and L if m? is negative and
ox positive. It is impossible that m* should be negative when the terms
are arranged as above. Finally, if m? is equal to zero, the points N and
I must coincide. It is thus easy to determine this parabola, according
to the first problem of the first book of Apollonius™”.
If, however, the required locus is a circle, an ellipse, or a hyper-

bola," the point M, the center of the figure, must first be found. This

1 Rabuel (p. 167) adds “If a2m— pz? or if m=p the hyperbola is equi-
lateral.”

1] In this case the triangle ILK is a right triangle, whence IK? = LE -41C 7
but by hypothesis IL: IK: KL=a: g: n; then a2+n2?=2?. Now the equa-
tion of the curve is

n
y= m— Fal m+ 02-2 2,

and therefore the term in x? is

; a : é tt?
and if a?m = pz?, then oS, and this term in #2 becomes Or wtaat.
Therefore, the coefficients of +2 and y? are unity and the locus is a circle.
This may be seen as follows: From the figure, and by the nature of the

parabola LC?= LN.p and LN=IL+IN. Let IN=¢9; then since IL = Sass we
2
a
- have IN=—«t¢ and LC =y—mt=z; whence (y—mt2x)2= (x+¢)p.
144 #

But (y—m+ a =m?+ox from the equation of the parabola; therefore
a
sth t+op= m?+ ox, Equating coefficients, we have S: p=0% p= oe. op = m?;
¢ 2 = m2; b= ; :

Pa aes a ee

Ofna

™ 4 pollonit Pergacii idi i ipzi

Pergaew Quae Graece exstant edidit I. L. Heiberg, Leipzig, 1891.
Vol. i r 159, Liber I, Prop. LII. Hereafter referred to as Apollonius. This
may a reely translated as follows: To describe in a plane a parabola, having
given the parameter, the vertex, and the angle between an ordinate and the corre-
Us abscissa.

entral conics are thus grouped together by D i 1

( I y Descartes, the circle bein

treated as a special form of the ellipse, but being mentioned separately in all case

68

Livre SECOND. 329

d’vne Ellipfe. Que fi cete feGtion eft vne Parabole , fon
coftd droit eft efgal 4— “4 & fondiametre eft toufiours en.
laligne IL. & pour trouver le pains N, qui en eft le

fommet, il faut faireIN efgale a ~~ & que le point I
foit entreL & N, files termes font +- m m-- 0 x; oubien
que le point L foie entre I & N, sils font -- mm -- 0%;
oubien il faudroit qu’N fuft entre I & L, s'il y auoit
--mm-t+-ox. Mais il ne peut iamais y -auoir
-- mm, en la facon.queies termes onticy efté pofes. Et
enfin le point N feroit le mefme que le point I fi la quan-
tité mmeltoit nulle. Au moyen dequoy il eft aylé de
trouuer cete Patabole parle r*.Problefme du 1°. liure

d’A pollonius.
: et Que

69

330 LA GEOMETRIE,

Que filaligne demadee eft vn cercle,ou vne ellipfe,ou
yne Hyperbole, ilfaut premierement chercherle point
M, quieneftle centre, & qui eft toufiours en la ligne

40m h
droite 1L, ouonle trouve en prenant ->{ pour IM. en

forte que fila quantité o eft nulle,ce centre eft iuftement
au point I. Et fila ligne cherchee eft vn cercle, ou vne
Ellipfe; on doit prendre le point M dumefme cofte que
le point L, au refpe& du point J, lorfqu’on a + ox, &
Jorfqu’on a -- 0%, 0n le doit prendre de l'autre. Mais
tout au contraire en l' Hyperbole, fiona -- ox, ce centre
M doit eftre versL; &fiona-t+ ox, il doit eftredel’au-
tre coftd, Aprés cela le coftd droit dela figure doit eftre
ves oe lorfqu’on a ++ m_m, & que la ligne
cherchee eft vn cercle, ou vne Ellipfe ; oubien lorfqu’on
a--mm, & que c’eft vne Hyperbole. & il doit eftre

ES CH rh Ppa
i Sc BES. ligne cherchée eftant vn cercle,
ah aa - :

ou vne Ellipfe, on 4-4 mm; oubien fi eftant ¢ne Hyper-
bole & la quantitéoo eftant plus grande que 4 mp, on a
++ mm. Que fi laquantitémm eft nulle, ce coftdé droit

eft & &fioxeft anileilet 7 “mes, Puis. pour le cofté
traverfant; il faut trouver yne ligne ; qui foita ce cofté
droit, come aameftap zz,afcauoir fice cofte droit eft

a eS
if primer: le traverfant eft Y reas — aa
Et entousces casle diametre de la fection eft enla ligne
IM, &L Ceftl'vnedecelles qui luy eft appliquee par
ordre. Sibienque faifant M N efgale ala moitiédn cofté

travers

70

SECOND BOOK

will always lie on the line IL and may be found by taking IM equal to
aom [115]
2pz

is a circle or an ellipse, M and L must lie on the same side of I when
the term ox is positive and on opposite sides when ow is negative. On
the other hand, in the case of the hyperbola, M and L lie on the same
side of I when o- is negative and on opposite sides when o- is positive.

The latus rectum of the figure must be

If o is equal to zero M coincides with I. If the required locus

if m? is positive and the locus is a circle or an ellipse, or if m? is nega-
tive and the locus is a hyperbola. It must be

if the required locus is a circle or an ellipse and m? is negative, or if it
is an hyperbola and o? is greater than 4mp, m? being positive.

F , = Oe : F
But if m? is equal to zero, the latus rectum is = ; and if oz is equal to

zero", it is

Re pe?
a?

For the corresponding diameter a line must be found which bears
am Toes :
the ratio rr to the latus rectum; that is, if the latus rectum is

ee i Amps?
a? a?

ea ai ' Aa2m?
pe? Ie p32? 2
In every case, the diameter of the section lies along IM, and LC is one
of its lines applied in order.“ It is thus evident that, by making MN
equal to half the diameter and taking N and L on the same side of M,

the diameter is

M81 Cf, Briot and Bouquet, p. 156.
[8] Some editions give, incorrectly, ox for oz.
[471 See note 108.

71

GEOMETRY

the point N will be the vertex of this diameter." It is then a simple
matter to determine the curve, according to the second and third prob-
lems of the first book of Apollonius."™

When the locus is a hyperbola" and m? is positive, if 0” is equal to
zero or less than 4pm we must draw the line MOP from the center M
parallel to LC, and draw CP parallel to LM, and take MO equal to

x q om
i = a
4p
while if ox is equal to zero, MO must be taken equal to m. Then con-

sidering O as the vertex of this hyperbola, the diameter being OP and
the line applied in order being CP, its latus rectum is

- thatmt = ate? ne
Qs od Ps

x 4m? on
re

™ Tf the equation contains —m2 and +x, then »? must be greater than
4mp, otherwise the problem is impossible.
™1 Cf, Apollonius, Vol. I, p. 173, Lib. I, Prop. LV: To describe a hyperbola,
given the axis, the vertex, the parameter, and the angle between the axes. Also
see Prop. LVI: To describe an ellipse, etc.
1 Cf. Letters of Descartes, Cousin, Vol. VIII, p. 142.
G2 “Coté traversant.”

and its diameter"™ is

72

Livre SECOND 331
trauerfant & le prenant du mefime cofté du point M,
quieftle point L, onale point N pour le fommet de ce
diametre en fuite dequoy il eft ay{¢de trouuer la fection
parle fecond & 3 prob. du r«, liu. d’Apollonius-

Mais quand cete fection eftant vne Hyperbole, on a
-+ mm; & que la quantité 0 o eft nulle ou plus petite que
4p m,on doit tirer du centre M laligne M OP parallele a
LC,xCP parallele aLM: & faire MO efgale a

i

70 11) == oe oubien la faire efgale a mfila quantité ox
eftnulle. Puis confiderer le point O, comele fommet
de cete Hyperbole; dont le diametreeftOP, & CP la
It 2 ligne

73

332 La GEOMETRIE.
ligne quiluy eft appliquée par ordre, & fon coftédroireft.

Do ae PRS TE . 2
Vv ad+m4 _atoo m3 rial ' bom.
i &” sefoncoftdtranersat eft ” 4mm- or
Exceptequand ow eft nulle.car alors le cofté droit efp
2a a UWP 973 ° - s
Sra? &letrauerfant eft 2m. &ainfi it eft ayfé de la

trouuer par le 3.prob.da 1°". liu. 7 Apollonius.
Demon

fusion  Ltles demonftrations de tout cecy font euidentes.car
detoutce compofant yn efpace des quantites que iay affigneées
cee pour le cofte droit, & Je trauerfant, & pour le fegment
expliqué, du diametre NL, ou OP, fuiuat lateneur del’r1 du 12, &
du x3 *theorefines du x, liured’Apollonius, on trouuera
tous les mefmes termes dont eft compofé lé quarrée. de-
laligneC P,ouC L,qui eft appliquee par ordrea ce dia-
metre. .Comme en cet exemple oftant! M, qui-eft

ap deNM, qui eft = i eo-hampsiny IN, a laquel-

le aiouftant IL, qui eft = ~x, lay NE yqui eft — z wer ‘ ee
So 0.-+ 4.m.p ,. 8 cecy eftant. multipli¢ par.

ay, o-4mp, quieft le coftédroit de la figure, il vient
eV 090-4 mp "2 00-F 4 mp nes stoue WONT:

' pourle rectangle. duquel il faut ofter vn efpace qui foi:
au quarr¢de N L.commele cof droit eft au trauerfanit.

ALOMm

& ce ae de N L eft ex “See 2
“a AR OOM TE aam;
+ ——_ rer ——— 2 V 00.4 -4mp -b ihpecee Gime
Ahomrn
°°" APP RE.

74

SECOND BOOK
An exception must be made when o- is equal to zero, in which case the
a? 2
pee
curve can be determined in accordance with the third problem of the
first book of Apollonius.

latus rectum is and the diameter is 27. From these data the

[122]

The demonstrations of the above statements are all very simple, for,
forming the product™ of the quantities given above as latus rectum,
diameter, and segment of the diameter NL or OP, by the methods of
Theorems 11, 12, and 13 of the first book of Apollonius, the result will
contain exactly the terms which express the square of the line CP or
CL, which is an ordinate of this diameter.

. aom
In this case take IM or Boz from NM or from its equal

am
2pz

Vo?-+4mp.

To the remainder IN add IL or <x, and we have

a aom am

Multiplying this by
- Vo?+4mp,
the latus rectum of the curve, we get
SS 5 a eee 2
x No*-4mp—F, Not +4mp+ +2m?

for the rectangle, from which is to be subtracted a rectangle which is
to the square of NI as the latus rectum is to the diameter. The square
of NL is

a? a’om am @om* am" a*om* era

ee Gat aad * Vor Imp + Dphgh ae pe ~ pie

021 See note 113.
0251 “Composant un espace.”

GEOMETRY

Divide this by a2m and multiply the quotient by pz’, since these terms
express the ratio between the diameter and the latus rectum. The result is

2
a Eee 6 Vo? + 4p + er = Bp mo + 4mp + m?.

This quantity being subtracted from the rectangle previously obtained,
we get

CL =m pox—F at.

It follows that CL is an ordinate of an ellipse or circle applied to NL,
the segment of the axis.

Suppose all the given quantities expressed numerically, as EA=3,
AG=5, AB=BR,BS= BE, GB=BT, cb=5 CR, CF=2CS, CH=

+ CT, the angle ABR—60° ; and let CB. CF—=CD.CH. All these quan-

ties must be known if the problem is to be entirely determined. Now
let ABs, and CB=y. By the method given above we shall obtain

v=2y—axyt+Sa—x?;
al
pape yh par—Se%)

whence BK must be equal to 1, and KL must be equal to one-half KI;
and since the angle IKL = angle ABR = 60° and angle KIL (which is
one-half angle KIB or one-half angle IKL) is 30°, the angle ILK is a
right angle. Since IK=AB=x%, KL=3x er and the quantity

4? whence

oes by z above is 1, we have RAS m=1, 0o=4, ee
IM=, | — Oe A 19.
{= ay and since am (which is 2) 3 is equal to pz”, and

Etvre Seconp. 333
BAaAOMM™ a eae A EP
~—pee V 00 4mp quil fant divifer paraam &

multiplier par pxx,acaufe que ces termes expliquent la
proportion qui eft entre le cofté trauerfant & le droit, &

. ° P eee a ee rae 00m
il RG Gem XY oo-- amp + ae
Sv 00-+- 4m p--mm.cequ'll faut ofter da rectangle
precedent, & on trouue mm-t-ox -- £ xx pour le quar-

réde CL, qui par confequent eft vne ligne appliquée
par ordre dans vne Ellipfe,ou dans vn cercle,aufegment.
du diametreN L.

Et fion vent expliquer toutes les quantitds donnees:
parnombres, en faifant parexemple EA 203, AG2;5,
ABxBR,BS21BE,GB» BT,CDx»iCR,CE
o2CS, CH2;CT, & quel’angle ABR foit de 60
degrés, & enfin que le rectangle des deux CB, & CF,
foit efgal au rectangle des deux autres C D 8& CH; caril
faut auoir toutes ces chofes affin que la queftion foit.en-
tierement determinée.. & avec cela fuppofant A B 2 x;
& C B20 y, ontrouwue par la fagon cy: deffus expliquée
yy 2 2¥ o- XY 5% XN KY DI EK +
Wie 4nian: fi bienqueB.K-doit:eftre 1, & KL
doit eftre la moiti¢de KI, & pourceque Pangle IK L
ou ABReft de sodegrés, & KIL qui eft la moitiede
KIBoulKL, de30,1 LKeftdroit. Et pourceque IK
ou A Beftnommex,KLeft 5x, & [Left xv i, & la
guantitd qui eftoit tantoft’ nommee x eft'r, celle qui
eftoit a eft / 4, celle quieftoit meft 1, celle quieftoit o
eft 4, &ecellequieftoit p eft },de fagon qu’on a Y '¢

Aes pour.

77

Quels

font les
lieux
plans, &
folides: &
la facon
de les
{rouuer.

334 LA GEOMETRIE.

pourIM, & 7% '2% pour N M, & pourceque aam qui
eft3 efticy efgala pxx & quel’ angle I LCeftdroit, on
trouue que la ligne courbe NC eft vn cercle. Et on
peut facilement examiner tousles autres cas en mefme
forte.

Aurefte acaufe que les equations, qui ne montent
que iufques au-quarré, font toutes comprifes en ce que ie
viens d’expliquer; non feulement le problefme des an-
ciens en 3 & 4 lignes eft icy entierement acheué; mais

-auffy tout ce qui appartient 4 ce qu’ils nommoient la

compofition des lieux folides ; & par confequent auffy a
celle des lieux plans, a caufe qu’ils font compris dans les
folides. Carceslieux ne font autre chofe, finon que lors
qu'il eft queftion de tronuer quelque point auquel il

manque
78

SECOND BOOK

the angle ILC is a right angle, it follows that the curve NC is a circle.
A similar treatment of any of the other cases offers no difficulty.

Since all equations of degree not higher than the second are included
in the discussion just given, not only is the problem of the ancients
relating to three or four lines completely solved, but also the whole
problem of what they called the composition of solid loci, and conse-
quently that of plane loci, since they are included under solid loci.“”
For the solution of any one of these problems of loci is nothing more
than the finding of a point for whose complete determination one con-

G24] Since plane loci are degenerate cases of solid loci. The case in which
neither +? nor y? but only ry occurs, and the case in which a constant term occurs,
are omitted by Descartes. The various kinds of solid loci represented by the equa-

p

Mm

2
. n nN .
tion: yis= aan = — SE cE Nes m? + ox +x may be summarized as follows:

Zz x
2

P nN >
(1) If all the terms of the right member are zero except BE the equation repre-

sents an hyperbola referred to its asymptotes. (2) If = is not present, there are
several cases, as follows: (a) If the quantity under the radical sign is zero or a
perfect square, the equation represents a straight line; (b) If this quantity is not
a perfect square and if i = 0, the equation represents a parabola; (c) If it is

2

= x” is negative, the equation represents a circle or an

not a perfect square and if

ellipse; (d) If i x? is positive, the equation represents a hyperbola. Rabuel, p. 248.
HL

79

GEOMETRY

dition is wanting, the other conditions being such that (as in this exam-
ple) all the points of a single line will satisfy them. If the line is
straight or circular, it is said to be a plane locus; but if it is a parabola.
a hyperbola, or an ellipse, it is called a solid locus. In every such case
an equation can be obtained containing two unknown quantities and
entirely analogous to those found above. If the curve upon which the
required point lies is of higher degree than the conic sections, it may

[225]

be called in the same way a supersolid locus,”™ and so on for other
cases. If two conditions for the determination of the point are lacking,
the locus of the point is a surface, which may be plane, spherical, or
more complex. The ancients attempted nothing beyond the composition
of solid loci, and it would appear that the sole aim of Apollonius in his
treatise on the conic sections was the solution of problems of solid loci.

I have shown, further, that what I have termed the first class of
curves contains no others besides the circle, the parabola, the hyperbola,

and the ellipse. This is what I undertook to prove.

025) “TJn lieu sursolide.”

80

LIvRE SECOND. 335
manquevne condition pour eftre entierement determi-
né,ainfi qu'il arrine encete exemple,tous les poins d‘vne
mefme ligne peuuent eftre pris pour celuy qui eft de-
mandé. Etficete ligneeft droite,ou circulaire , onla
nommevniieu plan. Mais fic’eft vne parabole , ou vne
hyperbole, ou vnecllipfe, onlanomme vn lieu folide. Et
toutefois & quantes que cela eft, on peut venira vne E-
quation qui contient deux quantités inconnués, & eft
pareillea quelqu’vne de celles que ie viens de refoudre,

Que fila ligne quidetermine ainfile point cherché, eft
d’vn degrd plus compofee que les fections coniques , on
la peut nommer, en mefme facon , vn lieu furfolide, &
ainfides autres. Ets’il manquedeux conditions a la de-
termination de ce point, le lieu ou il fe trouue eft vne fu-
petficie, laquelle peut eftre tout de mefmeou plate, ou
fpherique , ou plus compofee. Mais le plus haut but
qu’ayent eules anciens en cete matiere a eftd de parue-
niralacompofition des lieux folides:*Et il femble que
tout ce qu Apollonius a efcrit des fections coniques n’a
eftéqu’a deffein de la chercher. Peace
De plus on voit icy que ceque iay pris pourle premier aie
genredes lignes courbes,n’en. peut comprendre aucunes ae fim-
autres que le cercle, la parabole, Uhyperbole, & lellipfe. ie
qui eft tout ce quei’auois entrepris de prouuer. lignes
Que fila queftion des anciens eft propofee en cing li- see
ones, quifoient toutes paralleles ; ileft euident que le uenten la
point cherch¢feratoufiours en vne ligne droite. Mais fi tn"

des an-

elle eft propofee en cing lignes, dont ily en ait quatre cms dbs
qui foient paralleles , & quela cinquiefme les couppe aen nee

angles droits, & mefme que toutes les lignes tirées ala genes
cing Ve

POINE goes.

81

536 La GEOMETRIE.

point cherch¢les rencontrent aufly a angles droits , &
enfin que le parallelepipede compofé de trois. deslignes
ainfitirées fur trois de celles qui font paralleles,foit efgal
au parallelepipede compofé des deux lignes tirées l’'yne
fur la quatriefme de celles qui font paralleles & l'autre
fur celle quiles couppe a angles droits, & d’yne troifief-
me ligne donnée. ce qui eft ce femble le plus fim-
ple cas qu'on puiffe imaginer apres le precedent ; le
point cherché fera en la ligne courbe, quieft defcrite
par le mouuement d’yne parabole en Iafagon cy deffus
expliquee.

cr)
2)

Soient
82

SECOND BOOK

If the problem of the ancients be proposed concerning five lines, all
parallel, the required point will evidently always lie on a straight line.
Suppose it be proposed concerning five lines with the following condi-
tions :

(1) Four of these lines parallel and the fifth perpendicular to each
of the others ,

(2) The lines drawn from the required point to meet the given lines
at right angles;

(3) The parallelepiped" composed of the three lines drawn to meet
three of the parallel lines must be equal to that composed of three lines,
namely, the one drawn to meet the fourth parallel, the one drawn to
meet the perpendicular, and a certain given line.

This is, with the exception of the preceding one, the simplest pos-
sible case. The point required will lie on a curve generated by the
motion of a parabola in the following way:

[26] That is, the product of the numerical measures of these lines.

83

GEOMETRY

Let the required lines be AB, IH, ED, GF, and GA, and
let it be required to find the point C, such that if CB, CF, CD, CH, and
CM be drawn perpendicular respectively to the given lines, the paral-
lelepiped of the three lines CF, CD, and CH shall be equal to that of
the other two, CB and CM, and a third line AI. Let CB=y, CM=z,
AI or AE or GE=a; whence if C lies between AB and DE, we have
CF—2a—y, CD=a—y, and CH=y-+a. Multiplying these three to-
gether we get y°®—2ay?—a’y-+-2a* equal to the product of the other
three, namely to ary.

I shall consider next the curve CEG, which I imagine to be described
by the intersection of the parabola CKN (which is made to move so
that its axis KL always lies along the straight line AB) with the ruler
GL (which rotates about the point G in such a way that it constantly
lies in the plane of the parabola and passes through the point L). I
take KL equal to a and let the principal parameter, that is, the par-
ameter corresponding to the axis of the given parabola, be also equal to .
a, and let GA=2a, CB or MA=y, CM or AB=+. Since the triangles
GMC and CBL are similar, GM (or 2a—y) is to MC (or x) as CB

<7
2a—y

(or y) is to BL, which is therefore equal to Since KL is a, BK

xy 2a’ —ay—x.
2a—y ee a ;
of the axis of the parabola, BK is to BC (its ordinate) as BC is to a
(the latus rectum), whence we get y*®—2ay?—a*y-+-2a°—arry, and there-
fore C is the required point.

is a— Finally, since this same BK is a segment

84

Livre SEconD, 337
Soient par exemple les lignes cherchées AB,IH,ED,
GF,&GA. & quondemandele point C, en forte que
tirant CB, CF, C D, CH, &C Maangles droits fur Jes
données, le parallelepipede des trois CF, CD, & CH
foit efgal a celuy des 2 autres CB, & CM, &d’vyne troi-
fiefme quifoitAI. IepofeCBsvy. CM-20~x. Al, ou
AE, ou GE a,de fagon quele point C eftant entre les
lignes AB, &DE, lay CF 902¢a--9,C Dva-- xy &
CHx Be +a & Suen ces trois I’yne par l'autre,

iay y Ae ial aay-+sa  elal au produit des trois
autres quiefta xy. Aprés celaieconfidere laligne cour-
be CEG, quei‘imagine eftre defcrite par l’interfeGtion,

dela Terabele CKN, qu'on fait mouuoir en telle forte
que fon diametre K Left toufiours fur la ligne droite
AB, &delareigle G L quitourne cependant autour du
point G en telfe forte quelle paffe toufiours dans le plan
decete Parabole parle point L. EtiefaisK L a, &le
coftd droit principal, c’eft a dire celuy qui fe rapporte a
Yaiffieu de cete parabole, aufly efgalaa, & GA W24, &
CBouMAxy, & C MouA Bx x. Puis a caufe des
triangles femblablesGMC & CBL,GM quieft2a aos
efta MC quieft x, comme CB quiefty, eftaBL quiet

ce ia as : e & Et pourceque LK efta, BK eft a

ey sss
meas ,oubien — : Et enfin pourceque ce mef-

meB K eftant vn one du diametre de la Parabole,
eftaBCquiluy eft appliquée par ordre, comme cel-
fecyeft au cofté droit qui eft a, le calcul monttre que

ye2zayy-- aay + 24, eft es aaxy. & par confes
quent

85

»

338 La GEOMETRIE,

quent que le point C eft celuy quieftoitdemandé. Etil
peut eftre pris en tel endroir de la ligne CEG qu’on ve-
uille choifir, ou auffy en fon adiointe ¢ E G ¢ qui fe de-
fcrit en mefme fagon,excepté quele fommet de laPara.-
bole eft tourné vers l'autre cofté , ou enfin en leurs con-
trepofees N Io, 21 O,qui font defcrites par linterfection
que fait la ligne G L en l'autre cofté de la Parabole
KN.
Or encore que les paralleles données AB, 1H, ED,
& G Ene fuffent point efgalement distantes, & que G A.
ne les couppaft pointaangles droits, ny anfly les lignes
tir€es

86

SECOND BOOK

The point C can be taken on any part of the curve CEG or of its
adjunct cEGc, which is described in the same way as the former, except
that the vertex of the parabola is turned in the opposite direction; or
it may lie on their counterparts”! NIo and nIO, which are generated
by the intersection of the line GL with the other branch of the para-
bola KN.

Again, suppose that the given parallel lines AB, IH, ED, and GF are
not equally distant from one another and are not perpendicular to GA,
and that the lines through C are oblique to the given lines. In this case
the point C will not always lie on a curve of just the same nature. This

may even occur when no two of the given lines are parallel.

D1 “Bry leurs contreposées.”

87

GEOMETRY

Next, suppose that we have four parallel lines, and a fifth line cutting
them, such that the parallelepiped of three lines drawn through the
point C (one to the cutting line and two to two of the parallel lines)
is equal to the parallelepiped of two lines drawn through C to meet the
other two parallels respectively and another given line. In this case

e=l namely, a

the required point lies on a curve of different nature,
curve such that, all the ordinates to its axis being equal to the ordinates
of a conic section, the segments of the axis between the vertex and
the ordinates" bear the same ratio to a certain given line that this
line bears to the segments of the axis of the conic section having equal
ordinates."
I cannot say that this curve is less simple than the preceding ; indeed,
I have always thought the former should be considered first, since its
description and the determination of its equation are somewhat easier.
I shall not stop to consider in detail the curves corresponding to the
other cases, for I have not undertaken to give a complete discussion of
the subject ; and having explained the method of determining an infinite
number of points lying on any curve, I think I have furnished a way
to describe them.
It is worthy of note that there is a great difference between this
method” in which the curve is traced by finding several points upon
"51 The general equation of this curve is ary —a«xy2-+2a24 = a?2y —ay?.
Rabuel, p. 270.
o1 That is, the abscissas of points on the curve.
G1 The thought, expressed in modern phraseology, is as follows: The curve is
of such nature that the abscissa of any point on it is a third proportional to the
abscissa of a point on a conic section whose ordinate is the same as that of the

given point, and a given line. Cf. Rabuel, pp. 270, et seq.
"1 That is, the method of analytic geometry.

Livre SECOND. 339
tirées du point C verselles, ce point C ne laifferoit pas
de fe trouver toufiours en vne ligne courbe, qui feroit
decete mefmenature. Erils'y peut aufly trouver quel-
quefois, encore qu’aucune des lignes données ne foient
paralleles. Mais fi lorfquily ena 4 ainfi paralleles, & vne
cinquiefme qui les trauerfe: & que le parallelepipede de
troisdes lignes tirées du point cherché, I'vne fur cete
cinquiefme, & les 2 autres fur 2 de celles qui font paral-
leles; foit efgalaceluy , des deux tirées fur les deux au-
tres paralleles , & d’vne autre ligne donnée. Ce point
cherch¢eften vne ligne courbe d’vne autre nature, a
{cauoir en yne qui eft telle, que toutesles lignes droites
appliquees par ordre a fon diametre eftant efgales a cel-
les d'yne fection conique, les fegmens de ce diametre,
qui font eptre le fommet 8 ces lignes , ont mefme pro-
portion a vne certaine ligne donnée, que cete ligne don-
néc'a aux fegmens du diametre de la fection conique,
aufquels les pareilles lignes font appliquees par ordre. Et
ie ne {gaurois veritablement dire que cete ligne foit
moins fimple que la precedente, laquelle iay creu toute-
fois deuoir prendre pour la premiere , a caufe que la de-
feription , & le calcul en font en quelque fagon plus
faciles.

Pour les kgnes qui ericnea aux autres cas, iene m/are-
fteray point ales diftinguer par efpeces. car ie n’ay pas
entreprisdediretout ; & ayant expliqué la fagonde
trouuer yne infinite de poins par ou elles paffent, ic penfe
auoir affés donné le moyen de les defcrire.

Mefme ileft a propos de remarquer, qu'il ya grande
difference entre cete fagon de trouver plufieurs poins

Ward: pour

89

340 Ea GEOMETRIE.
Quelles

fontles pourtracer vne ligne courbe, & celle dont on fefert pour
igess ta fpirale, & {es femblables. car par cete derniere on ne
qu'on de trouue pasindifferément tous les poins dé la ligne qu’or
ee ey cherche, maisfeulement ceux qui peuuent eftre deter-

plufcurs minds par quelque metfure plus fimple , que celle qui eft
Seeat requife pour lacompofer, & ainfi a proprement parler
peuuent onne trouve paswnde fes poins. c’eft a dire-pas vn de
fe ceux quiluy font tellement propres, qu’ils ne puiffent
Geome- eftre trouucs que par elle: Au lieu qu’ilny a aucun point
a dans Jes lignes qurferuent a la queftion propofée, quine
fe puiffe rencontrer entre ceux qui fe determinent par la
facontantoft expliquee. Et pourceque cete fagon de
tracer une ligne courbe, en trouvant indifferément plu-
fieurs de fes poins , ne s’eftend qu’a celles qui peuuent
auffy eftre defcrites par vn mounement regulier & con-
tinu, on ne ladoit pas entierement reietter dela Geo-
metrie.
Oe ally Et onn’en doit pas reietter non plus, celle ou onfe
cles fert d’vn fil, ou d’vne chorde repli¢e, pour determiner
By ohaiee Fegalite ou la difference de deux ou plufieurs lignes
Aa re droites quipeuuent eftre tirees de chafque point de la
peunenc COUrbe qu’oncherche; a certains autres poins , ou fur
tie certaines autres lignes a certains angles. ainfi que nous
auons fait en la Dioptrique pour expliquer lEllipfe &
VHyperbole. car encore qu’on n'y puiffe regeuoir au-
cunes lignes qui femblenta des chordés , c’eft a dire qui
deuienent tantoft droites & tantoft courbes, acaufe que
laproportion, qui eft entre les droites & les courbes,
n’eftant pas connué, & mefmeie croy ne le pouuant eftre

par les hommes, onne pourroit rien-conclure de 1a qui
fuft

90

“SECOND BOOK

it, and that used for the spiral and similar curves." In the latter not
any point of the required curve may be found at pleasure, but only such
points as can be determined by a process simpler than that required for
the composition of the curve. Therefore, strictly speaking, we do not
find any one of its points, that is, not any one of those which are so
peculiarly points of this curve that they cannot be found except by
means of it. On the other hand, there is no point on these curves which
supplies a solution for the proposed problem that cannot be determined
by the method I have given.

But the fact that this method of tracing a curve by determining a
number of its points taken at random applies only to curves that can
be generated by a regular and continuous motion does not justify its
exclusion from geometry. Nor should we reject the method" in which
a string or loop of thread is used to determine the equality or difference
of two or more straight lines drawn from each point of the required
or making fixed angles with certain

curve to certain other points,"

other lines. We have used this method in “La epinduea
discussion of the ellipse and the hyperbola.

On the other hand, geometry should not include lines that are like
strings, in that they are sometimes straight and sometimes curved, since |
the ratios between straight and curved lines are not known, and I
believe cannot be discovered by human minds,"
clusion based upon such ratios can be accepted as rigorous and exact.

eee sinc the

and therefore no con-

032] That is, transcendental curves, called by Descartes “mechanical” curves.

[31 Cf the familiar “mechanical descriptions” of the conic sections.

034) As for example, the foci, in the description of the ellipse.

§5] This work was published at Leyden in 1637, together with Descartes’s
Discours de la Methode.

136) This is of course concerned with the problem of the rectification of
curves. See Cantor, Vol. II (1), pp. 794 and 807, and especially p. 778. This
statement, “ne pouvant étre par les hommes” is a very noteworthy one, coming as
it does from a philosopher like Descartes. On the philosophical question involved,
consult such writers as Bertrand Russell.

91

GEOMETRY

Nevertheless, since strings can be used in these constructions only to
determine lines whose lengths are known, they need not be wholly
excluded.

When the relation between all points of a curve and all points of a
straight line is known," in the way I have already explained, it is easy
to find the relation between the points of the curve and all other given
points and lines; and from these relations to find its diameters, axes,
center and other lines" or points which have especial significance for
this curve, and thence to conceive various ways of describing the curve,
and to choose the easiest.

By this method alone it is then possible to find out all that can be
determined about the magnitude of their areas,“ and there is no need
for further explanation from me.

ns] Expressed by means of the equation of the curve.
[5] For example, the equations of tangents, normals, etc.

91 For the history of the quadrature of curves, consult Cantor, Vol. II Lye
pp. 758, et seq., Smith, History, Vol. II, p. 302.

92

LCrvre SEconp. 541
fuft exact &affuré. Toutefoisa caufe qu’om ne.fé fert
de chordes en ces conftructions , que pour determiner
des lignes droites, dont on connoift parfaitement la lon-
geur, celane doit point faire qu’on les reiette.

Ordecela feul qu’on {gait le rapport , qu’ont tous les Que pour
poins d’vne ligne courbe a tous ceux d’yne ligne droite, tours
f et eae toutes les.
en la fagon queiay expliquee, ileft ayfé de trouuer aufly proprie-
le rapport qu’ils ont a tousles autres poins, & lignes don- Shae
‘nees: & en fuite de connoiftre les diametres , les aiffieux, ret:
les centres, & autres lignes , ou poins > 2 qui chafque li- 4. fauoi.
gne courbe aura quelque rapport plus particulier , oule rappore
aes os ave f u’ont
plus fimple, qu’aux autres :. & ainfi d imaginer diuers doucleurs
moyens pour lesdefcrire, & d’enchoifirles plus faciles, point
5 ceux ae
Et mefme.on peut auffy par cela feul trouuer quaft tOUt lignes :
cequi peuteftre determing touchant la grandeur de I’e- pais z
. ° e . a
{pace quelles comprenent, fans qu'il foit befoin que:i’en decirer
donne plus d’ouuerture. - Et enfin pour cequi eft'detou-{ ate
tes les autres proprietés qu’on peut attribuer anx lignes qu: les
ll ' d di se gato couppent
courbes, elles ne dependent que de Ia grandeur des an- REN
gles qu’elles font anec quelques autrés lignes. Mais lor ces aes!
qu'on peuttirer deslignes droites quiles couppent aan- qrae
gles droits, aux poins ouelles font rencontrées par celx
lesauec qui elles font les angles qu’on veur mefu rer, ow,
ceque ie prensicy pour le mefme, qui-couppent -leurs:
contingentes, la grandeur de ces angles reft pas plus
malayfée a trouver, gue s'ils eftoient com pris entre deux
lignes droite s. C’eftpourquoy ie croyray auoir mis-isy
tout ce quieft requis pour ‘les: elemens des lignes cour-
bes, lorfque i’auray generalement donné la fagon deti-

rer des lignes droites, qui-tombent a angles droits fur
Vv.3 tels
93

ste La GEOMETRIE.
tels deleurs poins qu’on voudra choifir, Et Yofe dire
quec’eft cecy le problefme le plus vtile, & le plus gene-
ralnon feulement queic fcache, mais mefme que raye
jamais defiré de fgauoir en Geometrie.

yacoe Soit C E
generale ;

our la ligne courbe,
Medlignes & qu'il faille ti-
droitess rer yne ligne
1coup- .

nae ee A ™M P G droite par le
Boiss) point C, qui fa-

‘ouleurs Ce auec elle desangles droits. Ie fuppofe la chofe defia
contia- faite, & que la lignecherchéeeftC P, laquelle ie pro-
Sagled * Jongeiufques at point P, ou elle rencontre Ia ligne droi-
droits. te G A, que ie fuppofe eftre celle aux poins de laquelle
on rapporte tous ceux dela ligne C E: en forte que fai-
fantM A ouC By, & CM, ou BA», iay quelque
equation, qui explique le rapport, qui eft entre x &y.
PuisiefaisP Coos, &PAtv, ouP M Dv-y, &a
caufe du triangle rectangle PMC iayss, qui eft l2 quar-
ré de la baze efgal a xx euv--2vy—+yy, qui font
les quarrés des deux coftds. ceft a dire iay x 2
V 55--DU-+ 209-94, oubien y 20 v—+- V $8--%%,80
parle anoyen de cete equation, i’ofte de l'autre equa.
tion qui m’explique le rapport qu’ont tous les poins de la
courbe C Eaceux dela droite G A,I’vne des deux quan-
tités indeterminées x ou y. ce qui eft ayfé a faire en
mettant partout / ss--vv—+2vy-- yy au lieu d’x, &
le quarré de cete fomme au lieu d’x x, & fom cube au lieu

3
dx, &ainfi desautres, ficeftx queie veuilleofter; ou-
bien

94

SECOND BOOK

Finally, all other properties of curves depend only on the angles
which these curves make with other lines. But the angle formed by
two intersecting curves can be as easily measured as the angle between
two straight lines, provided that a straight line can be drawn making
right angles with one of these curves at its point of intersection with
the other." This is my reason for believing that I shall have given
here a sufficient introduction to the study of curves when I have given
a general method of drawing a straight line making right angles with
a curve at an arbitrarily chosen point upon it. And I dare say that
this is not only the most useful and most general problem in geometry
that I know, but even that I have ever desired to know.

Let CE be the given curve, and let it be required to draw
through C a straight line making right angles with CE. Suppose the
problem solved, and let the required line be CP. Produce CP to meet
the straight line GA, to whose points the points of CE are to be
related.“ Then, let MA—CB=y; and CM—BA=-s. An equation
niust be found expressing the relation between x and y.“ I let PC=s,
PA=v, whence PM=v—y. Since PMC is a right triangle, we see that
s*, the square of the hypotenuse, is equal to +7°-++-v’—2vy-+-y’, the sum

of the squares of the two sides. That is to say, x= Vs?—v?4 2vy—y”
or y=v+Vs?—2?. By means of these last two equations, I can elimi-
nate one of the two quantities + and y from the equation expressing
the relation between the points of the curve CE and those of the straight
line GA. If x is to be eliminated, this may easily be done by replacing

x wherever it occurs by vs?—v?+2vy—y”, x? by the square of this ex-
pression, +* by its cube, etc., while if y is to be eliminated, y must be

replaced by v+ Vs’?—2”, and y”, 9’, .. . by the square of this expres-

_ 4] That is, the angle between two curves is defined as the angle between the

normals to the curve at the point of intersection.
[41 That is, the line GA is taken as one of the coordinate axes.
441 This will be the equation of the curve. See also the figure on page 97.

95

SECOND BOOK

sion, its cube, and so on. The result will be an equation in only one

unknown quantity, ¥ or y.
For example, if CE is an ellipse, MA the segment of its

axis of which CM is an ordinate, r its latus rectum, and q its trans-
verse axis," then by Theorem 13, Book I, of Apollonius," we have

Pay. Eliminating x’ the resulting equation is

_
fd ev ay a or y+

gry —2quy+gu'—9s* _¢
q--F ;

In this case it is better to consider the whole as constituting a single
expression than as consisting of two equal parts."

If CE be the curve generated by the motion of a parabola (see pages
47, et seq.) already discussed, and if we represent GA by b, KL by c,
and the parameter of the axis KL of the parabola by d, the equation

8) “Te trayersant.”

44 Apollonius, p. 49: “Si conus per axem plano secatur autem alio quoque
plano, quod cum utroque latere trianguli per axem posita concurrit, sed neque basi
coni parallelum ducitur neque e contrario et si planum, in quo est basis coni,
planumque secans concurrunt in recta perpendiculari aut ad basim trianguli per
axem positi aut ad eam productam quelibet recta, que a sectione coni communi
sectioni planorum parallela ducitur ad diametrum sectiones sumpta quadrata equalis
erit spatio adplicato recte cuidam, ad quam diametrus sectionis rationem habet,
quam habet quadratum rectz a vertice coni diametro sectionis parallele ducte usque
ad basim trianguli ad rectangulum comprehensum rectis ab ea ad latera trianguli
abscissis, latitudinem rectam ab ea e diametro ad verticem sectionis abscissam et
figura deficiens simili similiterque posita rectangulo a diametro parametroque com-
prehenso; vocetur autem talis sectio ellipsis.” Cf, Apollonius of Perga, edited by
Sir T. L. Heath, Cambridge, 1896, p. 11.

™5] That is, to transpose all the terms to the left member.

96

Livre SECOND, 343
bien fic’efty, en mettant enfonlieu+- Ws s-- 0% , 8
le quarré, ou le cube, &c. de cete fomme, au lieu d’y y,ou

y ‘ac. De facon qu'il refte toufiours aprés cela vne equa-
tion, enlaquelleilny aplus qu’vne feule quantite inde-
terminée, x,ou y. .

Comme fi CE eft vne Ellipfe , & que M A foit le
fegment de fon diametre, auquel C M foit appliquée par
ordre, & quiait rpour fon cofte droit , & q pour le tra-
uverfant,ona parle 13 th..
du r liu. d’Apollonius.

ef >
weDTY--TYY, d’on
oftant xx, il refte ss--

= vu-bavy-yy = 8) ry yy
oubien,

ats o° OSS we: ; A
vy call DEAE eae efgalarien. caril e& mieux en

cetendroit de confiderer ainfi enfemble route la. fom-
me ,. que d’en faire vne partie efgale al’autre.

x out de mefme fi C
' Eeftla ligne courbe
i defcrite par le mou-
uement d’yne Parabole

en la fagon cy deffus.
“lB expliquee, & gu’onait
pofé bpour GA, eponr
KL, & d pour le cofté:
droit di diametreK L
A enjaparabole:l’equatid
qui explique le rapport
qui

97

344 LA GEOMETRIE.
‘quicitentrex &y,ehty —byy— cdy-+-bcd--dxy 0~

dot oftant x , ona y -- byy--cdy + bed-+dy
VY ss--vu-2vy--yy. &remetrant en ordre ces
termes parle moyen de Jamultiplication, il vient

26a 4 \ +-2bbed
: ‘aslyt ti} fasted}, = ighaen --2bccddy bbbccddyvo.
hddvu
Etainfides autres.

Mefme encore que les poins de Ia ligne courbe ne fe
rapportaffent pas en la facoti queiay ditte a ceux d’vne
digne droite, mais en toute autre qu’on {cauroit i imagi-
ner, onne laiffe pas de pouuoir toufiours auoir vne telle
equation.’ Comme fiC Eeftvneligne, qui ait telrap-
port aux trois poins F, G, & A, queleslignes droites ti-
rées de chafcun de fes poins comme C siufques au point
F, furpaffent la ligne F A d’vne Ae qui ait certaine

proportio don-
née a vne autre
quantité dont
GA furpaffe les
G lignes  tirées

des mefmes
poinsiufquesaG. FaifonsG A205, AF 26, & prenant
a difcretionle point C dans lacourbe, que la quantité
dont CE furpaffe FA, foit a celle dont GA furpaffe
GC, commédae, en forte que fi cete quantité qui eft

E Ned
F A M.S

indetermin¢e fenomme x,FC eft c-+ x,&GC eft b -- 5 ae
PuispofantM A xy, G Mefth-- y, & FM eft e+-y, &

a caufe du triangle rectangle CMG, oftant le quarré
de

98

SECOND BOOK

expressing the relation between x and y is y3—by? eee = 0.
Eliminating +, we have

y— by —cdy + bcd + dy Vs2—v? +2vy—y?=0.

Arranging the terms according to the powers of y by squaring,“ this
becomes

y°—2by°+ (b?—2cd+d?) y*+ (4bcd—2d?v) y?
+ (c?d’—d?s*+-d’v? —2b*cd) y? —2bc?d?y-+-b?c?a?—0,

and so for the other cases. If the points of the curve are not related
to those of a straight line in the way explained, but are related in some
other way,'"” such an equation can always be found.

Let CE be a curve which is so related to the points F, G, and A,
that a straight line drawn from any point on it, as C, to F exceeds
the line FA by a quantity which bears a given ratio to the excess of GA
over the line drawn from the point C to G."““ Let GA=b, AF=c, and
taking an arbitrary point C on the curve let the quantity by which CF
exceeds FA be to the quantity by which GA exceeds GC as d is to e.
Then if we let z represent the undetermined quantity, FC—c+<z and

GC=5—"2z. Let MA=y, GM=4—y, and FM=c+y. Since CMG is a

right triangle, taking the square of GM from the square of GC we have

f49] “Fn remettant en ordre ces termes par moyen de la multiplication.”
M47] “fais en toute autre qu’on saurait imaginer.”
48) That is the ratio of CF —FA to GA— CG is a constant.

99

GEOMETRY

‘ 26 . :
left the square of CM, or GoW at Dby—y, Again, taking the

square of FM from the square of FC we have the square of CM
expressed in another way, namely : z?-+-2cz—2cy—y’. These two expres-
sions being equal they will yield the value of y or MA, which is

d?z?-2cd?z—e?z*+ 2bdez
2bd?+-2cd?

Substituting this value for y in the expression for the square of CM,
we have

bd?s? cere! abed'z—2bedez 1s

Cee bd?-tcd?

If now we suppose the line PC to meet the curve at right angles at C,
and let PC—s and PA=v as before, PM is equal to v—y; and since
PCM is a right triangle, we have s?—v?2vy—y* for the square of
CM. Substituting for y its value, and equating the values of the square
of CM, we have

pp 4 tbed!2— 2bcde2— 2cd*v2— 2bdeve — bd?s' + bd*v* —cd?s? +ed"v" _ 4
bd? +ce’'+ev—d?v
for the required equation.

Such an equation having been found"™” it is to be used, not to deter-
mine +, y, or z, which are known, since the point C is given, but to
find v or s, which determine the required point P. With this in view,
observe that if the point P fulfills the required conditions, the circle
about P as center and passing through the point C will touch but not
cut the curve CE; but if this point P be ever so little nearer to or far-
ther from A than it should be, this circle must cut the curve not only.

™ Three such equations have been found by Descartes, namely those for the
ellipse, the parabolic conchoid, and the curve just described.

100

Livre SECOND. 345
de G M du quarréde G C, onale quarr¢de C M, qui eft

et

2be
Ma gi 2by--yy. puis oftant le quarreé de F M

du quarréde F C, ona encore le quarréde C M en d’au-
tres termes, a {gauoir 7x 4-202%--2cy--yy, & cester-

mes eftant efgaux aux precedens , ilsfone connoiftre y,

ddzz mh 2 cddz -- cex% 2 bdez, gts
ouM A, qui ely veda & fubftituant ce-

te fomme au lieu d’y dans le quarréde C M, ontrouue
qu il s'‘exprime en ces termes.
bddzz % ceexz i 2 beddz -- 2 bedex
bddoe (dd ee ee ars

Puis fuppofant que la ligne droite PC rencontre fa
courbe aangles droits au point C, & faifant PC 205, &
P Asov comme deuant, PMeftu--y ; & a caufe du
trfangle rectangle PC M,onass-- vu + 2vy--yy pour
le quarré de C M, ouderechefayant au lieu d’y fubftitud
_lafomme quiluy eft efgale, il vient

2 bcddz--2 bcdex-- 2 cdduz~--r2bdevz -- bddss % bdduy -- oe,
Ae bdd Hc hcee =eeu--ddv
-- eddss & cddvv. 59 9 pour Pequation que nous cherchions.

Oraprés qu’onatrouuevnetelleequation , au lieu
des’en feruir pour connoiftre les quantites «,ouy, ou z,
qui font defia données, puifquele point C eft donné, on
ladoit employer atrouuery, ous, gui determinent le
point P, quieft demande. Et acet effedt il faut confide-
rer,que fice point P eft tel qu’on le defire, le cercle dont
ilfera le centre, 8& qui paffera parle point C, y touchera
laligne courbe G E, fans lacoupper: mais que fi ce point
P, eft tant foit peu plus proche, ou plus efloigné du point.

a A,quil

101

346 La GEOMETRIE.
A, qu’il ne doit, ce cercle couppera la courbe , non feu-
lementau point C, mais aufly neceflairement en quel-
que autre. Puisilfautauffy confiderer, que lorfque ce
cercle couppe la ligne courbe CE, l’equation par laquel-
le on cherche la quantité x,ouy, ou quelque autre fem-
blable, enfuppofant P A & PC eftreconnués, contient
neceffairement deux racines, qui font inefgales. Car par
exemple fice cercle couppe la courbe aux poins C & &,
ayant tire E Q parallele a CM, les noms des quantités
indeterminées x 8 y, conuiendront auffy bien aux lignes
EQ, &QA, qua CM, & MA;; puis PE eft efgale a
PC, acaufe ducercle, fi bien que cherchant les lignes
EQ & QA, par PE &
PA qu'on fuppofe com-
me donneés , on aura la
mefme equation , que fi
on cherchoit C M &
ae Wee \" MA par PC,PA. d’ou
LSet \\ il fuit euidemment, que la
as 2 valeurd’x, ou d’y, ou de
telle autre quantité qu’on aura fuppofee , fera double en
cete equation, c’eftadirequ’il y aura deux racines inef—
gales entreelles; & dont I’yne feraCM, autre EQ, fi
c’eft x qu’oncherche; oubienl’vne fera MA, & l'autre
QA,ficefty. &ainfi des autres. Il eft vray que fi le
point Ene fe trouue pas du mefme cofté de la courbe
que le point C; il n’y aura que I’vne de ces deux racines
qui foit vraye, & V’autre fera renuerfec, ou moindre que
rien: mais plus ces deux poins, C, & E, font prochesl’vn
de l’autre, moins ilya de differenceentreces deux raci-
nes;

102

SECOND BOOK

at C but also in another point. Now if this circle cuts CE, the equation
involving + and y as unknown quantities (supposing PA and PC
known) must have two unequal roots. Suppose, for example, that
the circle cuts the curve in the points C and E.. Draw EQ paral-
lel to CM. Then + and y may be used to represent EQ and QA respec-
tively in just the same way as they were used to represent CM
and MA; since PE is equal to PC (being radii of the same circle),
if we seek EQ and QA (supposing PE and PA given) we shall get the
same equation that we should obtain by seeking CM and MA (suppos-
ing PC and PA given). It follows that the value of +, or y, or any
other such quantity, will be two-fold in this equation, that is, the equa-
tion will have two unequal roots. If the value of + be required, one of
these roots will be CM and the other EQ; while if y be required, one
root will be MA and the other QA. It is true that if E is not on the
same side of the curve as C, only one of these will be a true root, the
other being drawn in the opposite direction, or less than nothing." The
nearer together the points C and E are taken however, the less differ-

Heol “Ft autre sera renversée ou moindre que rien.”

103

GEOMETRY

ence there is between the roots ; and when the points coincide, the roots
are exactly equal, that is to say, the circle through C will touch the
curve CE at the point C without cutting it.

Furthermore, it is to be observed that when an equation has two
equal roots, its left-hand member must be similar in form to the expres-
sion obtained by multiplying by itself the difference between the
unknown quantity and a known quantity equal to it;"’ and then, if the
resulting expression is not of as high a degree as the original equation,
multiplying it by another expression which will make it of the same
degree. This last step makes the two expressions correspond term by
term.

For example, I say that the first equation found in the present dis-

[152]

cussion," namely

gry —2qvy+ qu —_ gs’
=f

y+

must be of the same form as the expression obtained by making e—y
and multiplying y—e by itself, that is, as y?—2ey+e?. We may then
compare the two expressions term by term, thus: Since the first term,
uss) QTV—2qvy

y?, is the same in each, the second term, , of the first is

equal to —2ey, the second term of the second; whence, solving for v,
a! ;

or PA, we have v=e— Bote 7; or, Since we have assumed e equal to y,

ie
ab NEE ry. In the same way, we can find s from the third term,

M1 That is, the left-hand member will be the square of the binomial +—a
when + =a.

HI See page 96. The original has “first equation,” not “first member of the
equation.”

5] That is, the second term in y.

104

LivRE SECOND. 347
nes, & enfin elles font entierement efgales, s’ils font tous
deuxioins en vn; c’eftadire file cercle,qui paffe parC,
y touchela courbe C E fans la coupper.

De plus il faut confiderer, que lorfqu’ily a deux raci-
nes efgales en vne equation, elle a neceffairement la
mefine forme,que fion multiplie par foy mefme la quan-
tite qu’on y fuppofe eftre inconnué moins la quantité
connue qui luyeft efgale, 8 qu’apres cela fi cete derniere
fommie n’a pas tant de dimenfions que Ia precedente,
onla multiplie par vne autre fomme qui en ait autant
quilloy en manque; affin quill puiffe y auoir feparement
equationentre chafcundestermesdel’yne , & chafcun
destermes de l'autre,

Comme par exemple ie dis quelapremiere equation
trouuce cy deffus, afgauoir

Mgry--19vVy RqQuv--gss “ A
y ie a pee doit auoir lamefme forme que

celle qui fe produift en faifant e efgalay, 8& multipliant
y ~~ epar foy mefme,d’oi il vient yy -- 27 + ee, en forte
qu’on peut comparer feparement chafcun de leurs ter-
mes, & dire que puifque le premier qui efty y eft toutle
mefmeeénl’vnequenlautre, le fecond qui eft enl’vne
qty--2 _ Up
ie
erent la quantite v qui eft la ligne PA, ond

eft efgal au fecod deLautre qui eft -- 2¢ y ou

£ ; oes
Ue Te 3r, oubie
a caufe que nous auons
fuppofé eefgalay ,oha

vy GIS ey aH
Xx 2 ainfi

105

348 La GEOMETRIE.

ainfi on. pourroit trouuer s par le troifiefme terme
ee 20 -——"— mais pourceque la quantite’ v determine
q--

affés le point P,qui eft le feul que nous.cher chions,onn’a
pas befoin de paffer outre.

‘Tout de mefme la feconde equation trouudée cy def=
furs, a {gauoir,

oer ayy ‘ --rbbced
*--2b bb} tia bed b mh coddQ yy a becddy wbbecdd.
y ey Ld de Pe eine Coe seg Bethe Le
hddvu
doit auoir mefme forme, quela fomme quife produift
sai on multiplie j tant - eepar

y freee hr + k, quieft
3 4y é
| ah eee ent peer by atk by Liraks:
fee, heel weegg

defagon quede ces deux equations i’entire fix autres,
quiferuent a connoiftre les fix quantiteés f| ¢, hb, k,v,& 52
Dot ileft fortayfé a entendre, que de quelque genre,
que puiffe eftrela ligne courbe propofée , il vient tou-
fiours par cete fagon de proceder autant d’equations,
quonett obligé de fuppofer de quantitds , qui-font in-
connues. Mais pour demeiler par ordre ces equations,
& trouuer enfinla quantitév, qui eft la feule dont ona
befoin, & 4 loccafion de laquelle oncherche les autres:
Ilfaut premierement parle fecond terme chercher f, la
premiere des, quantites inconnués de la derniere fom-
me, & ontrouue [0 2e-- 2.
Puis par le dernier il faut chercher 44a derniere des
quantites BLS delamefmefomme, & on trouue
Re

Puls

106

SECOND BOOK

qu —qs*
2 miggar a but since v completely determines P, which is all that is
required, it is not necessary to go further."

In the same way, the second equation found above," namely,

y° —2by?+ (6? —2cd+a") y' + (4dcd—2d?v) y*
led —26 cbse as )y? Pied y+hed’,

must have the same form as the expression obtained by multiplying

y’—2ey-e* by y*+fy+g’y? hey kt,
that is, as

y(f—Ze )y°+ (g?—2ef-e*) y*-+ (hi —2eg?+-e?f)
+ (k*—2eh>+-e*g?) y?+ (e?h?—2ek*) yte7k!.

From these two equations, six others may be obtained, which serve to
determine the six quantities f, g, h, k, v, and s. It is easily seen that
to whatever class the given curve may belong, this method will always
furnish just as many equations as we necessarily have unknown quan-
tities. In order to solve these equations, and ultimately to find v, which
is the only value really wanted (the others being used only as means
of finding v), we first determine f, the first unknown in the above
expression, from the second term. Thus, f=2e—2b. Then in the last
terms we can find k, the last unknown in the same expression, from

11 That is, to construct PC we may lay off AP =v and join P,and C. If
instead we use the value of e, taking C as center and a radius CP =e, we con-
struct an arc cutting AG in P, and join P and C. Rabuel, p. 309. To apply

Descartes’s method to the circle, for example, it is only necessary to observe that
all parameters and diameters are equal, that is, g—= 7; and therefore the equation

} I=+ diameter. That is, the normal passes
through the center and is a radius of the circle. Rabuel, p. 313.
4951 See page 99. As before, Descartes uses “second equation” for “first mem-

ber of the second equation.”

vay—Zy4+5r becomes v =

107

GEOMETRY

2-242
which k*= ue ae . From the third term we get the second quantity

g’=3e?—4be—2cd+b*+d’.

From the next to the last term we get h, the next to the last quantity,

which is“
ja 20d abd
ae awe

In the same way we should proceed in this order, until the last quantity
is found.
Then from the corresponding term (here the fourth) we may find
v, and we have
22) Roe, be. meee he he ee”
dh gh tg aot tied Meas marae
or putting y for its equal e, we get

2y> — 3by?—b*y ey 2bc Be
= gh a gaa ay Bey ae

for the length of AP.

[©] Found from.

108

Livre SECOND. 349
Puispar le troifiefme terme il faut chercher gla feconde
quantitd, &onagg 2 3 ¢e--4 be--2 cd bb-+-dd.

Puis par le penultiefme il faut chercher 4 la penultiefme

2bbccdad 2 becdd .
a Etainfi il fau-

droit continuer fuiuant ce mefme ordre iufques a la der-
niere, s'il y en auoit d’auantage en cete fomme; carc’eft
chofe qu’on peut toufiours faire en mefme facon.

Puis parle terme qui fuit ence mefme ordre, qui eft
icy le quatriefine, il faut chercher la quantitd v, &on a

quantité, qui eft h* 20

ze3 3bee bbe r¢8¢ 2bc bee bbe
Ey Md Me peed tEhnGao @ its aecicaey.

ou mettanty au lieud’e quiluyeftefgalon a
25 3 byy bby 26y6 ‘2b¢ bcc bbec.

Seis df ddd el he td oo py ee yt
pourlalgne A P, :
Et ainftla troifiefme equation, qui eft
KX 3 XX-

109

350 La GEOMETRIE.

h2beddxz-- abedex--2cdduz--rbdevsz -- bddss Lbddvv-
XX bdd hceeheev-

oo d da ’ j
: = fence’ alamefine forme que
== Vv

gxe-2fx+f, en fuppofant fefgal az, fi bienque il

y a derechef equation entre --2f, ou--2%, &

merbcdd--r.bcde--r1cddv--rbdev. 4, . ;
aT hdd ce see d ou ow connoift que

bcdd--bcdew bddz %& ceez

a quantite vet —(ijgbdencex eddy
C’eft pourquoy
compofant la
ligne A P, de
ae cete fomme ef-
F A M P G gale a wv dont
toutesles quan-
tités font connués, & tirant du point Painfitrouué, vne
ligne droite vers C, elle y couppe Ia courbe CE a an-
gles droits. qui eft ce qu'il falloit faire. Et ie ne voy rien
quiempefche, qu’onn’eftende.ce problefme en mefme
facona toutes les lignes courbes, quitombent{ous quel-

que calcul Geometrique.

Mefme ileft aremarquer touchant Ia derniere fom-
me, qu'on prent a difcretion, pour remplir le nombre
des dimenfionsdel’autrefomme , lorfqu’il y enman-
que , comme nous auons pris tantoft
yt fyi teeg yy hi y+ kts que les fignes + &
y peuuent eftre fuppofes tels, qu’on veut, fans que la li-
gnev, ou AP, fe rrouuediuerfe pour cela, comme vous
pourres ayfement voir par experience. car s'il falloit que
ie m/areftaffea demonftrertous les theorefmes dont ie

fais

110

SECOND BOOK

Again, the third" equation, namely,

2bcd* 2 —2bcdez —2cd? vz —2bdevz—ba?s 4+ ba? v*’—cd? 3? +-cd?v*
ba? +c +euv—a?v ;

24

is of the same form as 2?—2fs+/? where f=z, so that —2f or —2z
must be equal to
2bcd® — 2bcde —2cd*v — 2bdev
ba? +ce +e vu—d?v i
whence
bca® — bcde+ bd? 2z+ce*z
- ca’ + bde—e'z+a°z

Therefore, if we take AP equal to the above value of v, all the
terms of which are known, and join the point P thus determined
to C, this line will cut the curve CE at right angles, which was required.
I see no reason why this solution should not apply to every curve to
which the methods of geometry are applicable."™

It should be observed regarding the expression taken arbitrarily to
raise the original product to the required degree, as we just now took

PIP EY TIERS,
that the signs + and — may be chosen at will, without producing dif-

ferent values of v or AP." This is easily found to be the case, but if
I should stop to demonstrate every theorem I use, it would require a

O71 First member of the third equation.
5] Tet us apply this method to the problem of constructing a normal to a para-
bola at a given point. As before, s2=2#2+v?—2vy+y?. If we take as the

equation of the parabola +2 = ry, and substitute, we have
sorytv?—2vyty? or y2?+(r—2v)ytv?—s?=0.
Comparing this with y?—2cey+e2=0, we have r—2v=—2e; v?—s*=e*;

=p +e. Sihilton (ee as 4). Let AM=y, and v=AP;_ then

AM — AP = MP = one-half the parameter. Rabuel, p. 314.

[91 Tt will be observed that Descartes did not consider a coefficient, as a, in the
general sense of a positive or a negative quantity, but that he always wrote the
sign intended. In this sentence, however, he suggests some generalization.

111

GEOMETRY

much larger volume than I wish to write. I desire rather to tell you
in passing that this method, of which you have here an example, of sup-
posing two equations to be of the same form in order to compare them
term by term and so to obtain several equations from one, will apply
to an infinity of other problems and is not the least important feature
of my general method."”

I shall not give the constructions for the required tangents and nor-
mals in connection with the method just explained, since it is always
easy to find them, although it often requires some ingenuity to get short

and simple methods of construction.

60] The method may be used to draw a normal to a curve from a given point,
to draw a tangent to a curve from a point without, and to discover points of
inflexion, maxima, and minima. Compare Descartes’s Letters, Cousin, Vol. VI,
p. 421. As an illustration, let it be required to find a point of inflexion on the
first cubical parabola. Its equation is y3=a?r. Assume that D is a point of
inflexion, and let CD=y, AC= 4, PA=s, and AE=r. Since triangle PAE is

seg : x =
similar to triangle PCD we have aoa whence + = Ay
Ca Senn r

Substituting in
the equation of the curve, we have yi TS +075 =0. But if D is a point of

inflexion this equation must have three equal_roots, since at a point of inflexion
there are three coincident points of section. Compare the equation with

y3 — 3ey? + 3e?2y — e® = 0.

Then 3e2=0 ande=0. But e=y, and therefore y= 0. Therefore the point of
inflexion is (0, 0). Rabuel, p. 321.

NO, Bo
=;
| \o
cl €
cA Pp

It will be of interest to compare the method of drawing tangents given by
Fermat in Methodus ad disquirendam maximam et minimam, Toulouse, 1679,
which is as follows: It is required to draw a tangent to the parabola BD from a

. . BC?
point O without. From the nature of the parabola ee ee since O is without the
Ol

. . . BC? CE? CE?
curve. But by similar triangles hel — Se Therefore aah Ne Let CBe=a
OF am DI” Tk? ;

Cl=e, ad CD =a; then Dla gee ant Se ee eee
d—e~ (a—e)?’
de? — 2ade > — a2e.
Dividing by e, we have de —2ad >—a?. Now if the line BO b
the curve, the point B and O coincide, dene Gad ee and OP ane
2ad = a? and a= 2d in length. That is CE—2CD.

112

Livre SECOND. 35x
fais quelque mention, ie ferois contraint d’efcrire vn vo-
lume beaucoup plus gros que ie ne defire. Maisie veux
bien en paffant vous auertir que l’inuention de fuppofer
deux equations de mefme forme, pour comparer fepa-
rementtouslestermes del’vnea ceux del’autre, & ainfi
en faire naiftre plufieurs d’vnefeule , dont vous aues vik
icy vnexemple, peut feruir a vne infinité d’autres Pro-
blefmes, & n’eft pas l’vne des moindres- de la methode
dontie me fers.
Ien’adioufte point les conftructions, par lefquelles on
peut defcrire les contingentes ou les perpendiculaires
cherchées, en fuite du calcul queie viensd’expliquer, a
caufe qu’il eft toufiours ayféde les tronuer: Bienque-fou-
vent on ait befoin d’vn peu d’adrefle, pour les rendre
courtes & fimples.
Comme par exemple, fD Ceft lapremigre conchoi- g,empic
de des anciens, dela con-
dont A foit le po- ite
le, & BH la regle: eee
a cone
en forte que tou- choide.
tes les lignes droi-
tes qui regardent
vers A, & font
comprifes entrela
courbe CD, & la
droiteBH , com-
me DB & CE, foient efgales: Et qu’on veuille trouuer
la ligne C G qui la couppe au point C a angles droits.
On pourroit en cherchant, dans la ligne BH, le point
par ot cetc ligne.C G doit paffer , felon la methode icy
expli-

113

Explica-
tion de 4
nouuc-
aux gen-
res d O-
uales, qui
feruenta
1 Opti-
que,

352 La GEOMETRIE.

expliquée, sengager dans vn calcul autant ou plus Jong
qu’aucun des precedens:Et tou tefois la conftrudtion, qui
deuroit aprés en eftre deduite , eft fort imple. Car ilne
faut queprendre C Fenlalignedroite CA, & la faire
efgale ACH qui eft perpendiculaire fur HB: puis du
point Ftirer F G, parallele a BA, & efgalea EA: au
moyen de quoy ona le point G, par lequel doit paffer
C Gla ligne cherchée.

Au refte affin que vous {cachi¢es que la confideration
des lignes conrbes icy propofée n’eft pas fans vfage, &
qu’elles ont diuerfes proprietés, quine cedent en rien a
celles des fections coniques,ie veux encore adiouftericy
l’ex plication de certaines Ouales, que vous verres eftre
tres vtiles pour la Theorie dela Catoptrique , & dela
Dioptrique. Voycy la facon dontieles defcris.

Premierement ayant tiré les lignes droites FA, &
AR, quis’entrecouppentau point A, fans qu'il importe
a quels angles, ie prens enl’vne le point F a difcretion
cefta dire plus ou moins efloigné du point A felon que

ie
114

SECOND BOOK

Given, for example, CD, the first conchoid of the ancients (see page
113). Let A be its pole and BH the ruler, so that the segments of all
straight lines, as CE and DB, converging toward A and _ included
between the curve CD and the straight line BH are equal. Let it be
required to find a line CG normal to the curve at the point C. In try-
ing to find the point on BH through which CG must pass (according
to the method just explained), we would involve ourselves in a calcula-
tion as long as, or longer than any of those just given, and yet the
resulting construction would be very simple. For we need only take
CF on CA equal to CH, the perpendicular to BH; then through F
draw FG parallel to BA and equal to EA, thus determining the point
G, through which the required line CG must pass.

To show that a consideration of these curves is not without its use,
and that they have diverse properties of no less importance than those
of the conic sections I shall add a discussion of certain ovals which you
will find very useful in the theory of catoptrics and dioptrics. They

LG)

GEOMETRY

may be described in the following way: Drawing the two straight lines
FA and AR (p. 114) intersecting at A under any angle, I choose arbi-
trarily a point F on one of them (more or less distant from A accord-
ing as the oval is to be large or small). With F as center I describe a
circle cutting FA at a point a little beyond A, as at the point 5. I then
draw the straight line 56" cutting AR at 6, so that A6 is less than AS,
and so that A6 is to A5 in any given ratio, as, for example, that which

measures the refraction,”

if the oval is to be used for dioptrics. This
being done, I take an arbitrary point G in the line FA on the same side
as the point 5, so that AF is to GA in any given ratio. Next, along the

line A6 I lay off RA equal to GA, and with G as center and a radius
i equal to R6 I describe a circle. This circle will cut the first one in two
points 1, 1,°% through which the first of the required ovals must pass.

Next, with F as center I describe a circle which cuts FA~as little
nearer to or farther from A than the point 5, as, for example, at the
point 7. I then draw 78 parallel to 56 and with G as center and a radius
equal to R8 I describe another circle. This circle will cut the one
through 7 in the points 1, 1° which are points of the same oval. We
can thus find as many points as may be desired, by drawing lines paral-
lel to 78 and describing circles with F and G as centers.

[1 The confusion resulting from the use of Arabic figures to designate points
is here apparent.

hI That is, the ratio corresponding to the index of refraction.

Bel “Au point 1.”

Bel “Au point 1.”

116

Livre SEconp. 353
ie veux faire ces Ouales plus ou moins grandes, &dece
point Rcomme centre ie defcris vncercle , qui paffe
quelque peu au dela du point A, comme par le point 5,
puis de ce point sie tirela ligne droite 56, qui couppe
J'autre au point 6, en forte qu’ A 6 foit moindre qu’ A 5,
felontelle proportion donnée qu’on veut, a fgauoir fe-
lon celle qui mefure les Refractions fi on s’en veut fer-
uir pour la Dioptrique. Aprés celaie prens auffy le point
G, enlaligne F A,du coftéou eft le point 5, a difcretion,
c’eft a dire en faifant que leslignes AF &GA ont entre
elles telle proportion donnée qu’on veut. Puis ie fais
R A efgaleaG A enla ligne A 6. &ducentre G defcri-
uant vn cercle, dont le rayon foit efgal 4 Ro, il couppe
{autre cercle de part & d’autre au point 1, qui eftl’'vnde
ceux par ot doit paffer la premiere des Ouales cher-
chées. Puisderechef du centre F ie defcris yn cercle,
qui paffe vn peu audega, ouau dela du point 5, comme
parle point 7, & ayant tird la ligne droite 7 8 parallele a
56, ducentre G ie defcris vnautrecercle, dont le rayon
eft efgalala ligne R8. & ce cercle couppe celuy qui
paffe par le point 7 au point 1, quieft encore I'vn de ceux
delamefme Ouale. Et ainfi on en peut trouuer au-
tant d'autres qu’on voudra , en tirant derechef d’au-
tres lignes paralleles a 7 8, & d’autres cercles des centres
PeiseG:

Pour la feconde Ouale iln’ya point de difference, fi-
non qu’aulieud’ A Rilfaurde lautrecofté du point A
prendre A S efgala A G, & que le rayon du cercle de-
{crit du centre G, pour coupper celuy qui eft defcric du
centre F & qui paffe~par le point 5, foit efgal a la

Yy ligne
117

354 La GEOMETRIE

ligne S 6; ou qu'il foit efgala S 8, fic’eft pour coupper
eeluy qui paffe par le point 7. & ainfi des autres, au
moyen dequoy ces cercles sentrecouppent aux poins
marqués 2, 2, qui font ceux'de cete feconde Ouale
Aza.

Pour latroifiefme, & la quatriefme, au lieu dela ligne
A Gil faut prendre A H de lautre cofté du point A, a
{cauoir du mefme qu’eft le,point F. Erilya icy de plus
a obferuer que cete ligne A H doit eftre plus grande que
AF: laquelle peut mefme eftre nulle , en forte que le
point F ferencontre ot eftle point A, en ladefcription
detoutescesouales. Aprescela les lignes AR, & AS
eftant efgalesa AH , pour defcrire la troifiefme ouale
A3Y,iefaisvncercle du centre H, dont Je rayon eft

efgal
118

SECOND BOOK

In the construction of the second oval the only difference is
that instead of AR we must take AS on the other side of A, equal
to AG, and that the radius of the circle about G cutting the circle about

F’ and passing through 5 must be equal to the line S6: or if it is to cut
the circle through 7 it must be equal to S8, and so on. In this way the

circles intersect in the points 2, 2, which are points of this second oval
VD, S

To construct the third and fourth ovals (see page 121), instead of
AG I take AH on the other side of A, that is, on the same side as F.
It should be observed that this line AH must be greater than AF, which
in any of these ovals may even be zero, in which case F and A coincide.
Then, taking AR and AS each equal to AH, to describe the third oval,

119

GEOMETRY

A3Y, I draw a circle about H as center with a radius equal to S6 and
cutting in the point 3 the circle about F passing through 5, and another
with a radius equal to S8 cutting the circle through 7 in the point also

marked 3, and so on.
Finally, for the fourth oval, I draw circles about H as center with

radii equal to R6, R8, and so oni, and cutting the other circles in the

points marked 4.°™!

08] Ty all four ovals AF and AR or AF-and AS intersect at A under any
angle. F may coincide with A, and otherwise its distance from A determines the
size of the oval. The ratio A5 : A6 is determined by the index of refraction of
the material used. In the first two ovals, if A does not coincide with F it lies
between F and G, and the ratio AF : AG is arbitrary. In the last two, if F does
not coincide with A it lies between A and H, and the ratio AF : AH is arbitrary.
In the first oval AR = AG and the points R, 6, 8 are on the same side of A. In
the second oval AS = AG and S is on the opposite side of A from 6, 8. In the
third oval AS = AH and S is on the opposite side of A from 6, 8. In the fourth
oval AR =AH and R, 6, 8 are on the same side of A. Rabuel, p. 342.

120

Livre SEconp, : 3595

efgal a S 6, quicouppe au point 3 celuy du centre PF, qui
paffe par le point 5; & vnautre dontle rayon eft efgala
S8,quicouppe celuy qui paffe parle point 7, au point
aufly marque 3; &ainfi des autres. Enfin pour la derniere

ouale

356 La GEOMETRIE

oualeie fais des cerclesdu centre H , dont les rayons
font efgaux aux lignes R 6,R8, & femblables , qui coup-
pent les autres cetcles aux poins marques 4.

On pourroit encore trouuer vne infinité d’autres
moyens pour defcrire ces mefmes ouales. comme par
exemple, on peut tracer lapremiere AV, lorfqu’on fup-
pofe leslignes FA & AG eftre efgales, fi on diuife la
toute F Gau point L, en forte que F L foitaLG, com-

.

.
.
*.

meAs2A 6. c’efta dire qu’elles ayent la proportion
qui mefure les refractions. Puis ayant diuifé A L en deux
partiesefgales au point K, qu’on face tourner vne reigle,
commeF E, autour du point F, enpreffant da doigt C,
la chorde E C, qui eftant attachée au bout de cete reigle
vers E, fe replie de C vers K, puis de K derechef versC,
& deC vers G, oufon autre bout foit atraché , en forte
que la longeur de cete chorde foit compofée de celle
deslignesG A plusA Lplus FE moins AF. & ce fera
le mouuement du point C, quidefcrira cete ouale , a
limitation de cequia cft¢dit en la Dioptriq; de l Ellipfe,
‘ &

122

SECOND BOOK

There are many other ways of describing these same ovals.. For
example, the first one, AV (provided we assume FA and AG
equal) might be traced as follows: Divide the line FG at L so that
FL : LG=A5: A6, that is, in the ratio corresponding to the index
of refraction. Then bisecting AL at K, turn a ruler FE about the
point F, pressing with the finger at C the cord EC, which, being
attached at E to the end of the ruler, passes from C to K and then
back to C and from C to G, where its other end is fastened. Thus the
entire length of the cord is composed of GA+AL-+FE—AF, and the
point C will describe the first oval in a way similar to that in which the

123

GEOMETRY

[166]

ellipse and hyperbola are described in La Dioptrique. But I cannot
give any further attention to this subject.

Athough these ovals seem to be of almost the same nature, they
nevertheless belong to four different classes, each containing an infinity
of sub-classes, each of which in turn contains as many different kinds
as does the class of ellipses or of hyperbolas; the sub-classes depend-
ing upon the value of the ratio of A5 to A6. Then, as the ratio of AF
to AG, or of AF to AH changes, the ovals of each sub-class change in
kind, and the length of AG or AH determines the size of the oval."

If A5 is equal to A6, the ovals of the first and third classes become
straight lines; while among those of the second class we have all pos-
sible hyperbolas, and among those of the fourth all possible ellipses.""

In the case of each oval it is necessary further to consider two por-
tions having different properties. In the first oval the portion toward
A (see page 114) causes rays passing through the air from F to con-
verge towards G upon meeting the convex surface 1Al of a lens
whose index of refraction, according to dioptrics, determines such
ratios as that of AS to A6, by means of which the oval is described.

°°] See the notes on pages 10, 55, 112.

sl Compare the changes in the ellipse and hyperbola as the ratio of the length
of the transverse axis to the distance between the foci changes.

495) These theorems may be proved as follows: (1) Given the first oval, with
A5= Aé: then RA= GAY FR = FS; GP=]R6=AR— RO— GA 45.— Go
Therefore FP+GP—=F5+G5. That is, the point P lies on the straight line FG.
(2) Given the second oval, with A5—=A6; then F2=F5=FA+A5;
G2= S6= SA+ A6 = SA+A5; G2—F2 =SA—FA=GA—FA=C, There-

fore 2 lies on a hyperbola whose foci are F and G, and whose transverse axis is

GA—FA. The proof for the third oval is analogous to (1) and that for the
fourth to (2).

It may be noted that the first oval is the same curve as that described on
page 98. For FP=F5, whence FP—AF=A5, and AR=AG; GP=R6;
AG— GP=A6. If then A5 : A6=d: e we have, as before,

FP—AF > AG— GP=d = ¢.

124

LivRE SECOND. 357
& del’Hyperbole. mais ‘ie ne veux point m’arefter plus
long tems fur ce fuiet.

Or encore que toutes ces oualesfemblent eftre quafi
de mefine nature,elles font neanmoins de 4 diuers gen-
res, chafcun defquels contient fous foy vne infinitd d’au-
tres genres, quiderechef contienent chafcun autant de
diuerfesefpeces, que fait le genre des Ellipfes, ou celuy
des Hyperboles. Car felon que la proportion, qui eften-
tre leslignes A s, A6, oufemblables, eft differente ; le
genre fubalterne de ces ouales eft different. Puis felon
que la proportion, qui eft entre les lignes A F, & AG,ou
AH, eft changee, les ovales de chafque genre fubalter-
ne changentd’efpece. Et felonqu’ A G,ou A Heft plus
ou moins grande, elles font diuerfes en grandeur. Et fi
leslignes A 5 & Ac fontefgales, au lieudesouales du
premier genreoudutroifiefme, onne defcrit que des
lignes droites; mais au lieu de celles du fecond on atou-
tesles Hyperboles poffibles; 8 aulieu de celles du der-
nier toutes les Ellipfes.

Outre cela en chafcune de cesouales il fant confiderer Lcs pro-
deux parties, quiont dinerfes proprietés ; a {cavoir en la Picts 4
premiere, la partie qui eft vers A, fait que les rayons, qui touchanc
eftant dans l’air vienent du point F, fe retouruent tous 7"
vers le point G, lorfqu’ils rencontrent la fuperficie con- !es refra-
uexe d’yn verre, dont la fuperficieeft 1 A 1, & dans le.”
quel lesrefractions fe font telles , que fuiuant ce qui a
efté dic en la Dioptrique, elles peuuent toutes eftre me-
furees parlapropertion , qui eft entreles lignes A 5 &

A 6,ou femblables, par layde defquelles ona defcrit cete
ouale,
VAG Mais

125

358 La GEOMETRIE-

Mais la partie, quieft vers V, fait que les rayons qui
vienent du point G fe reflefchiroienttons vers F, silsy
rencontroient la fuperficie concaue d’vyn mifoir, dont la
figure fut 1 V1, & qui fuft de telle matiere qu'il di-
minuaft la force de ces rayons,felon la proportion qui eft
entreleslignesA5 & A6: Cardecequiaefté demon-
ftrd en la Dioptrique, il eft euident que cela pofé, les an-
glesde la reflexion feroient inefgaus, auffy bien que font

ceux de la refraction, & pourroient eftre mefurds en
mefme forte.

En la feconde ouale la partie 2 A 2 fert encore pour les
reflexions dont on fuppofe les angles eftre inefgaux. car
eftant enla fuperficie d’vyn miroir compofé de mefme
matiere quele precedent, elle feroit tellement reflefchir
tous les rayons, qui viendroient du point G, qu’ils fem-
bleroient apres eftre reflefchis venirdu point F. Et il
eftaremarquer, quayant fait la ligne A G beaucoup

plus
126

SECOND BOOK

But the portion toward V causes all rays coming from G to converge
toward F when they strike the concave surface of a mirror of the
shape of 1V1 and of such material that it diminishes the velocity of
these rays in the ratio of A5 to A6, for it is proved in dioptrics that in
this case the angles of reflection will be unequal as well as the angles
of refraction, and can be measured in the same way.

Now consider the second oval. Here, toe, the portion 2A2 (see
page 118) serves for reflections of which the angles may be assumed
unequal. For if the surface of a mirror of the same material as in the
case of the first oval be of this form, it will reflect all rays from G,
making them seem to come from F. Observe, too, that if the line AG

127

GEOMETRY

is considerably greater than AF, such a mirror will be convex in the
center (toward A) and concave at each end; for such a curve would
be heart-shaped rather than oval. The other part, X2, is useful for
refracting lenses; rays which pass through the air toward F are re-
fracted by a lens whose surface has this form.

The third oval is of use only for refraction, and causes rays travel-
ing through the air toward F (page 121) to move through tlie glass
toward H, after they have passed through the surface whose form is
A3Y3, which is convex throughout except toward A, where it is slightly
concave, so that this curve is also heart-shaped. The difference between
the two parts of this oval is that the one part is nearer F and farther
from H, while the other is nearer H and farther from F.

Similarly, the last of these ovals is useful only in the case of reflec- ‘
tion. Its effect is to make all rays coming from H (see the second
figure on page 121) and meeting the concave surface of a mirror of
the same material as those previously discussed, and of the form
A4Z4, converge towards F after reflection.

The points F, G and H may be called the “burning points” of
these ovals, to correspond to those of the ellipse and hyperbola, and
they are so named in dioptrics.

I have not mentioned several other kinds of reflection and refraction
that are effected" by these ovals ; for being merely reverse or opposite

effects they are easily deduced.
[1 That is, the foci, from the Latin focus, “hearth.’ The word focus was
first used in the geometric sense by Kepler, Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena, Frank-

fort, 1604. Chap. 4, Sect. 4.
B71 “Reglées.”

128

Livre SECOND. 359
plus grande que AF, ce miroir feroit conuexe au milieu,
vers A, & concaue aux extrémitez: car telle eft la figure
decete ligne, qui en cela reprefente plutoft vn coeur
qu’vne ouale,

Maisfonautre partie X 2 fert pour les refractions, &
fait que les rayons, qui eftant dans l’air tendent vers F,fe
detournent vers G, en trauerfant fa fuperficie d’yn ver-
re, qui enait la figure.

Latroifiefme oualefert toute aux refractions, & fait
queles rayons, qui eftant dans Vaiftendent versie ie
vont rendre vers H dansle verre, aprés qu’ils ont trauer-
{é fa fuperficie, dont la figure eft A 3 Y 3,. qui eft conue-
xe par tout,excepté vers A ot elle eft vn peuconcaue,en
forte qu’elle ala figure d’vn coeur aufly bien que la pre-
cedente. Et ladifference quieftentre les deux parties
de cete ouale, confifte en ce que le point F eft plus pro-
che de l’vne , que neft le point H; & quil eft plus
efloignéde lautre, que ce mefme point H.

En mefme fagonladerniere ouale fert toute aux re-
flexions, & fait que files rayons, qui vienent du point H,
rencontroient la fuperficie concaue d’vn miroir de mef-
me matiere queles precedens, & dont lafigure fuft A 4
Za, ilsfe reflefchiroient tous vers F.

De fagon qu’on peut nommer lespoins F, & G, oa
les poins bruflans de ces ouales, al’exemple de ceux des
Ellipfes, & des Hyperboles , qui ont eft¢ ainfi nommés
enla Dioptrique.

Y’omets quantité d’autres refractions, & reflexions,
qui font reiglées par ces mefmes ouales : car n’eftant
que les conuerfes, on.les contraires de celles cy, cles en

peuuent:
129

350 La GEOMETRIE,.
Demoa- peuvent facilement eftre deduites. Mais il ne faut pas
apes que i’omette la demonftrationde ceque iay dit. &acet
prietés de effect, prenons par exemple le point C a difcretion en la

Salitet premiere partie de la premiere de ces ouales ; puis tirons

les refle- la ligne droite
eet O°. oan cP. qui coup-
Gions, pela courbe au
7 point C a an-
= eS = gles droits, ce-
‘qui ef facile

par le problefme precedent ; Car prenant 4 pour AG, ¢
pour A-F, ¢-- z pourFC; & fuppofant que la propor-
tion qui eft entre d8&e, que ie prendray icy toufiours
pour celle qui mefure les refractions du verre propofe,
defigneaufly.celle qui eft entreles lignes A5, & A6, ou
femblables, qui ont ferui pour defcrire cete ouale,ce qui

donned “5% pour G C:-ontrouue quelaligne A Peft

Ee eae ainfi qu’ila efté monftre cy deffus.
De plus du point P ayant tiréP Q a angles droits far fa
droite F C, & P N auffy a angles droits fur G C,confide-
rons que fiP Qefta PN, comme deft Re, ceft a dire,
comme les lignes qui mefurent les refractions du verre
conuexe A C, le rayon qui vient du point F au point C,
doit tellement s’y courber en entrant dans ce verre, qu'il
saille rendre aprés vers G: ainfi qu’il eft tres ewident de
cequiaefté dit énla Dioptrique. Puis enfin voyons par
le calcul, s‘ileft vray, queP Q foit 4 PN ; comme d eft
ae. Les triangles re@anglesP QF, & C MF font fem-

blables,

130

SECOND BOOK

I must not, however, fail to prove the statements already made. For
this purpose, take any point C on the first part of the first oval, and
draw the straight line CP normal to the curve at C. This can be done
by the method given above,” as follows:

Let AG=b, AF=c, FC=c+-z. Suppose the ratio of d to e, which
I always take here to measure the refractive power of the lens under
consideration, to represent the ratio of AS to A6 or similar lines used

to describe the oval. Then

G

GC=6— Z

a,

whence
wee bcd® —bcde+ bd? 2+cez
- bde+cd?+d*2z—e2

[172]

From P draw PQ perpendicular to FC, and PN perpendicular to GC.

Now if PQ’: PN=d: e, that is, if PQ: PN is equal to the same

ratio as that between the lines which measure the refraction of the

convex glass AC, then a ray passing from F to C must be refracted

toward G upon entering the glass. This follows at once from dioptrics.
1 See page 115.

573] Here PQ is the sine of the angle of incidence and PN is the sine of the
angle of refraction. The ray FC is reflected along CG.

131

GEOMETRY

Now let us determine by calculation if it be true that PQ : PN=d : e.

The right triangles. POF and CMF are similar, whence it follows that

CF: CM=FP: PQ,and?!:““_po, Again, the right triangles

CF
PNG and CMG are similar, and therefore was om = PN, Now since

the multiplication or division of two terms of a ratio by the same num-

ber does not alter the ratio, if ap : Stewed: e, then, dividing

each term of the first ratio by CM and multiplying each by both CF
and CG, we have FP.CG: GP.CF=d: e. Now by construction,

bcd?— bcde+bd?z+ce*s

BE eo cad?+bde—e’z1d’z ’
or eM ag Bs SI AS
~ ¢d°+bde—e?z+a?z ’
and é
CG=b——2z.
Then

b?cd?-+-bc*d?-+-b?d*z +bcd?z—bcdes—c*dez—bdes?—cdez?

Te cd? bde—e*z+-d2z
Then
bcd? —bcde+bad?z+-ce?z
cs he cd?+bde—e*st+d's ’
or

Gpa de rbede—be*s—ce*s
~ ¢d?+bde—e?st+d?s ’
and CF=c-+<. So that

b’cde-+-be*de--b*dez-+-bedes—bce*zs—c*e*z— be®s? —ce2z?

GP CKh= ia Bilt Ade EPCS HI
ca?+bdé—e*z+d?z

132

Livre SEconp, 361
blables; d’ot il fuit que C Fefta CM, commeF P efta
PQ, &parconfequent que gee eftant roultipli¢e par
CM, & diuifde par CF, eft efgale aPQ. Tout de mef-
me les triangles rectanglesP NG, & CMG font fem-
blables; d’od il fuit que G P, multipliée parC M, & diui-
fee parC G, eftefgaleaP N. Puisa caufe que les mul-
tiplications, ou diuifions, qui fe font de deux quantités
par vne mefime, ne changent point la proportion qui eft
entre elles; fi F P multipli¢e par CM; & diuifee par C F,
efta G P multiplide aufly. par C M .& diuifee par.C G,;
comme d eft 4 e, en diuifant I’vne se1l’autre de ‘ces. deux
fommes par C M’*, - puis les multipliant toutes deux par
CF, & derechefpar C G,ilrefte F P multiplide par CG, |
qui doit eftre a G P multipli¢e par C F, comme d eftae
Or par laconftruction F P eft c™ api ciae:

bedd Yu ccdd yu bddz la is cd cddx.
oubien F P 20 24d pccdd &CG eft
bdesys cdd ye ddx-- ee eeu

b -- < x-fibienque multipliant F P par CG il vient

bhedd wu becdd yu bbddz mu beddz -- bedex, -- ccdex -- bdexa »- cdexy.

bde ™® cdd E ddz -- ee ee%
- bcdd & bcde -- bddz -- cee,
Puis G P eft 6 5755, odd dde--ce,  OUbien

bbde  bede -- beex ~- ceex,

GP 2 “bde re cdd pddz -- eex & C Fett ¢+- 43

fibienque multipliant G P par CE, il vient

bbede tk becde -- beeex - - cceex bbdel bedez-- beexx -- Cee.
bde-rs cdd Fu ddz --eex

Et pourcequela premiere de ces fommes diuifce par d,
eft la mefme que la feconde diuifée par e, il eft manifefte,
que F P multiplice par C G eft a G P multiplice par CF,

ZZ ceft

133

362 Ia GEOMETRIE.
c'éftadire que PQefta PN, commed efta e, qui eft
tout ce qu'il falloit demonftrer. oe

Et fgachés , que cete mefme demonftration s’eftend
a tout cequi a eftd dit des autres refractions ou refle-
xions, qui fe font dans lesouales propofées; fans qu'il y
faille changer aucune chofe , que les fignes + &*-- du
calcul. c’eft pourquoy chafcunles peut ayfement exa-
miner de foymefme, fans qu'il foit befoin que ie m’y
arefte.

‘Mais il faut maintenent, queie fatisface a ce que lay
omis en la Dioptrique,lorf{qu’apres auoir remarqué.qu’il
peut y anoir des verres de plufieurs dinerfes figures , qui
facent aufly bien I’'vn que autre, que les rayons venans
d’yn mefme point del’obiet, s’affemblent tous en vn au-
tre point apres les auoir trauerfes. & qu’entre ces verres,
ceux quifont fort conuexes d’un cofté, & concaues de
l'autre, ont plus deforce pour brufler, que ceux qui font.
efgalement conuexes des deux coftds. au lieu que tout
au contraire ces derniers font les meilleurs pour leslune-
tes. ie me fats contente d’expliquer ceux, que i’ay cri
eftre lesmeilleurs pour la prattique,en fuppofant la diffi-
cultd que les artifans penuent auoir a les tailler. C’eft
pourquoy,affin qu'il ne refte rien a fouhaiter touchant la
theorie de cete fcience, ie doy expliquer encore icy Ia fi-
gure des verres, quiayant l’yne de leurs fuperficies au-
tant conuexe, ou concaue, qu’onvoudra, ne laiffent pas
de faire que tous les rayons , qui vienent vers eux d’vn
mefme point , ou paralleles,, s’afemblent aprés en yn
mefme point ; & celle des verres qui font le femblable,
eftant efgalement conuexesdes deux coftés , onbien la

conue-

134

SECOND BOOK

The first of these products divided by d is equal to the second divided
by e,. whence it follows that PQ: PN—FP.CG: GP.CF=d: e
which was to be proved. This proof may be made to hold for the
reflecting and refracting properties of any one of these ovals, by proper
changes of the signs plus and minus; and as each can be investigated
by the reader, there is no need for further discussion here."™

It now becomes necessary. for me to supplement the statements made
in my Dioptrique™” to the effect that lenses of various forms serve
equally well to cause rays coming from the same point and passing
through them to converge to another point ; and that among such lenses
those which are convex on one side and concave on the other are more
powerful burning-glasses than those which are convex on both sides;
while, on the other hand, the latter make the better telescopes.“ I
shall describe and explain only those which I believe to have the great-
est practical value, taking into consideration the difficulties of cutting.
To complete the theory of the subject, I shall now have to describe

878] To obtain the equation of the first oval we may proceed as follows: Let
Ab==¢7 AG=b; KC= ¢-- 2) GE=6— ea Let CM=x, AM=y. FM=c-+9;
GM =b—y. Draw PC normal to the curve at any point C. Let AP=v. Then

CF’= CM?+ FM”. Also, c2+2cs+22 = 42+c2+2cy+y2, whence
2=—cetV ete t2cyt+y?.
Also, CG?= CM?+ GM’, whence

pe— 22 e+ fe ==" +b? — 2by 41 y.

Substituting in this equation the value of z obtained above, squaring, and simplify-
ing, we obtain:

[ (d2? — 02) x2 + (d2 —e2) y2— 2(e2e+ Bapazceeba |
= 4e2(bd+ec)?2(x? +c2+2cy+y2). Rabuel, p. 348.

O74] Descartes: La Dioptrique, published with Discours de la Methode, Leyden,
1637. See also Cousin, vol. III, p. 401.

O75] “T wnetes.” The laws of reflection were familiar to the geometers of the
Platonic school, and burning-glasses, in.the form of spherical glass shells filled with
water, or balls of rock crystal are discussed by Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxvi, 67 (25)
and xxxvii, 10. Ptolemy, in his treatise on Optics, discussed reflection, refraction,
and plane and concave mirrors.

135

GEOMETRY

again the form of lens which has one side of any desired degree of con-
vexity or concavity, and which makes all the rays that are parallel or
that come from a single point converge after passing through it; and
also the form of lens having the same effect but being equally convex
on both sides, or such that the convexity of one of its surfaces bears a
given ratio to that of the other.

In the first place, let G, Y, C, and- F be given points, such
that rays coming from G or parallel to GA converge at F after
passing through a concave lens. Let Y be the center of the inner sur-
face of this lens and C its edge, and let the chord CMC be given, and
also the altitude of the arc CYC. First we must determine which of
these ovals can be used for a lens that will cause rays passing through
it in the direction of H (a point as yet undetermined) to converge
toward F after leaving it.

There is no change in the direction of rays by means of reflection or
refraction which cannot be effected by at least one of these ovals; and
it is easily seen that this particular result can be obtained by using either
part of the third oval, marked 3A3 or 3Y3 (see page 121), or
the part of the second oval marked 2X2 (see page 118). Since

the same method applied to each of these, we may in each case take Y

136

Livre SECOND, 363

conuexitéde l'yne de leurs fuperficies ayant la propor-
tion donnéea celle de l’autre.

Pofons pour le premier cas, que lespoins G,Y, C, & F S° pa
eftant données, les rayons qui vienent du point G, oubien faire va
qui font parallelesa GA fe doivent affembler au point n° on
F, aprés auoir trauerfé vn verre ficoncaue, qu’ Y eftant uexe ou
fe milien de fa fuperficie interieure, Peveretmice en foit rune

au point C,enforte que la chorde CMC, &lafleche defes {a

Y Mdel’arc CY C, font donnces. La queftion va 1a,! ices
que premierement il faut confiderer , de laquelle des routs
ouales expliquees, la fuperficie du verre Y C, doit auoir ere
Ja figure, pour faire que tous les rayons, qui eftant de-%" Tone
dans tendent vers vn mefme point, comme vers H, qui: soueles
n’elt pas encore connu, s‘aillent rendre vers vn autre, a one
fcauoirversF, aprdésen eftre fortis, Cariln’y a aucun nent d’vn
effect touchant le rapport des rayons changé par refle- sont
xion, ou refraction d’vn pointa vn autre , quine puiffe donné.
eftre caufé par quelqu’vne de ces ouales. & on voit
ayfement que cetuycy le peut eftre par la partie de la
troifiefme Ouale, quia tantoft efté marquee 3 A 3, ou
par celle de lamefme, quiaefté marquee 3 Y 3, ou enfin
par lapartie de la feconde quiaeftémarquée 2X2. Et
pourceque ces trois tombent icy fous mefme calcul, on-_
doit tant pour l’vne, que pour l’autre prendre Y pour

Lie leur

137

364 La GEOMETRIE.

leur fommet, C pour |’vn des poins de leur circonferen-
ce, & Fpour!’ynde leurs poins bruflans ; apres quoy il
nerefte plus a chercher que le point H, qui doit eftre
Vautre point bruflant. Et onle trouve en confiderant,
que la difference, qui eft entre les lignes FY & F C,doit
eftre acelle, qui eft entre les lignes H ¥Y & H C,comme
deftae, ceftadire,comme la plus grande des lignes qui
mefurent les refractions du verre propofé eft ala moin-
dre, ainfi qu’on peut voir manifeftement de Ia defcri-
ption deces ouales. Et pourceque Jes lignes FY & FC
font donnees, leur difference l’eft auffy , & en fuite celle
qui eftentre H ¥Y & HC; pourceque la proportion qut
eft entre ces deux differences eft donnée. Et de plus a
caufe que Y Meft donnée, la difference qui eft entre
MH,&H C,left auffy; & enfin pourceque C M eft don-
nee, ilne refte plus qu’a trouver M H le cofte du triangle

rectangle C MH, donton a Fautre cofté CM, &ona
anfly la difference qui eft entre CHlabaze, & MHle
coftédemandé. d’ot il éft ayfédeletrouuer. car fion
prent & pourl’excés de C H fur MH, & z pour lalongeur

2B

delaligne C M, on aura + z&pour MH. Et apres
auoir ainfi le point H, s'il fetroune plus loin du point Y,
| que

138

SECOND BOOK

(see pages 137 and 138), as the vertex, C as a point on the curve,"
and F as one of the foci. It then remains to determine H, the other
focus. This may be found by considering that the difference between
FY and FC is to the difference between HY and HC as d is to e¢; that
is, as the longer of the lines measuring the refractive power of the lens
is to the shorter, as is evident from the manner of describing the ovals.

Since the lines FY and FC are given we know their difference ; and
then, since the ratio of the two differences is known, we know the dif-
ference between HY and HC.

Again, since YM is known, we know the difference between MH
and HC, and therefore CM. It remains to find MH, the side of the
right triangle CMH. The other side of this triangle, CM, is known,
and also the difference between the hypotenuse, CH and the required
side, MH. We can therefore easily determine MH as follows:

Let k=CH—MH and x=CM; then a 3 p=MH, which deter-
mines the position of the point H.

O61 “Circonference.”

139

GEOMETRY

If HY is greater than HF, the curve CY must be the first part of
the third class of oval, which has already been designated by 3A3.

But suppose that HY is less than FY. This includes two cases:
In the first, HY exceeds HF by such an amount that the ratio
of their difference to the whole line FY is greater than the ratio of e,
the smaller of the two lines that represent the refractive power, to d,
the larger; that is, if HF—c, and HY=c-++h, then dh is greater than
2ce+eh. In this case CY must be the second part 3Y3 of the same
oval of the third class.

In the second case dh is less than or equal to 2ce+-eh, and CY is the
second part 2X2 of the oval of the second class.

Finally, if the points H and F coincide, FY = FC and the curve
YC is a circle.

It is also necessary to determine CAC, the other surface of the lens.
If we suppose the rays falling on it to be parallel, this will be an ellipse
having H as one of its foci, and the form is easily determined. If,
however, we suppose the rays to come from the point G, the lens must
have the form of the first part of an oval of the first class, the two foci
of which are G and H and which passes through the point C. The
point A is seen to be its vertex from the fact that the excess of GC
over GA is to the excess of HA over HC as d is to e. For if k repre-
sents the difference between CH and HM, and + represents AM, then
a—k will represent the difference between AH and CH; and if g repre-
sents the difference between GC and GM, which are given, g+ 4

140

Livre SECOND. 365
que neneft le point F, laligne C Y doit eftre la premie-
re partie del’ouale du troifiefme genre, quia tantoft efté
nommee 3 A 3: Mais fiH Y eft moindre que F Y, oubien
elle furpafle HF de tant, que leur difference eft plus
grande a raifon de la toute F Y, que neft e la moindre
des lignes qui mefurent Ies refractions comparée auecd
la plus grande, c’eft a dire que faifant H F 50 c, &
HY 2c +h, dheft plus grande que 2¢e-4-eh, & lors
CY doit eftre la feconde partie de la mefme ouale du
troifie{me genre, quia tantoft efténomee 3 Y 3;Onbien
dheftefgale, ou moindre que 2 ce-teh» & lors CY
doit eftre la feconde partie de l’ouale du fecond genre
quia cy deffusefténommee 2 X 2. Et enfin file point H
eftle mefme que le point F,ce qui n’arriue que lorfque
FY &F Cfontefgales cete ligne Y C eft vn cercle.

Aprés celail faut chercher C A C Lautre fuperficie de
ce verre, qui doit eftre yne Ellipfe, dont H foit le point
bruflantefi on fuppofe quelesrayons qui tombent deffus
foiét paralleles; & lors il eft ay{é de la trouuer. Mais fion
fuppofe qu’ils vienét du pointG, ce doit eftre la premiere
partie d’vne ouale du premier genre, dont les deux poins
bruflans foiet G & H, & qui paffe par le point C:d’ot on
trouue le point A pour le fommet de cete ouale,en confi-
derat,que G Cdoit eftre plus grade que GA,d’vne quan-
tite, quifoit a celle dont. H A furpaffe H C,comme dae.
car ayant pris pour la mittecence, qui eftentreCH,&H
M, fi on fuppofe x pour A M,on aura, -- , pour la diffe-
rence qui eftentre A H, & CH; puis ff on prent g pour
celle, quieft entre G C, &GM, qui font données, on
aurag-+ pour celle, qui eft entre GC, & GA; &

ins pour-

141

366 La GEOMETRIE.

Commét pourceque cetederniere g++ x eft alautre x-- &, com-
on peut oe gek
fairevn mmedeft ae, on a ge-texndx --dk, oubien —[—;

verre, qui

aitle mef pour la ligne x, ou AM , par laquelle on determine le

ace are point A qui eftoit chercheé.
ptecedét, © Pofons maintenent pour!l’autre cas , qu’on ne donn¢

& que la ; ; :
conuexi- que les poins G C, & F, auecla proportion qui eft entre

aii les lignes AM, & Y M, & qu'il faille trouuerla figure du

perficies verre AC Y, quiface quetousles rayons, qui vienent
eye du point G s’affemblent au point F.
donnée § Onpeut derechef icy fe feruir de deux ouales dont

ates I'vne, AC, aitG & H pour fes poins braflans, & l'autre,

CY, ait F& H pour les fiens.Et pour les trouuer,premie-
rement fuppofant le point H qui eft commun atoutes
deux eftre connu, ie cherche A M par les trois poins
G,C,H,en la fagon tout maintenent expliqueée,a {cauoir
preuant £pourla difference, quieftentreC H, & HM,
& g pour celle quieftentreG C, & GM: & ACeftant

la premiere partie de ’Quale du premier genre , iay
e kdk
: - ; pour A M: puisie cherche auffy MY par les trois

poinsF, C,H, enforte que CY foit la premiere partie
d'vne ouale du troifiefme genre; & prenant y pourM Y,
&

142

SECOND BOOK
will represent the difference between GC and GA; and since

g+x :.*+—k=—d: e, we have ge+er—dx«—dk, or AMe pee ree

d—e’

which enables us to determine the required point A.

Again, suppose that only the points G, C, and F are given, together
with the ratio of AM to YM; and let it be required to determine the
form of the lens ACY which causes all the rays coming from the point
G to converge to F.

In this case, we can use two ovals, AC and CY, with foci Gand H,
and F and H respectively. To determine these. let us suppose first
that H, the focus common to both, is known. Then AM is determined
by the three points G, C, and H in the way just now explained; that is
if k represents the difference between CH and HM, and g the differ-
ence between GC and GM, and if AC be the first part of the oval of the

dk
first class, we have am=2",

We may then find MY by means of the three points F, C, and H.
If CY is the first part of an oval of the third class and we take y for
MY and f for the difference between CF and FM, we have.the dif-

143

GEOMETRY

ference between CF and FY equal to f+y; then let the difference
between CH and HM equal k, and the difference between CH and HY
equal k-+-y. Now k-+y : f+-y==e : d, since the oval is of the third class,
whence Mee ee getse
d—e ee
follows that on whichever side the point H may lie, the ratio of the
line AY to the excess of GC-+-CF over GF is always equal to the ratio
of e, the smaller of the two lines representing the refractive power of

the glass, to d—e, the difference of these two lines, which gives a very

, whence it

Therefore, AM+MY=AY=

interesting theorem."

The line AY being found, it must be divided in the proper ratio into
AM and MY, and since M is known the points A and Y, and finally
the point H, may be found by the preceding problem. We must first
find whether the line AM thus found is greater than, equal to, or less
ge
d—e
third class, as they have been considered here. If it is smaller, CY
must be the first part of an oval of the first class and AC the first part

than

. If it is greater, AC must be the first part of one of the

O71 “Qui est un assez beau théoréme.”

144

Livre SECOND. 367
& fpour la difference, qui eft entre CF, & FM, i’ay
fry; pour celle qui eft entre C F, & F Y: puis ayant de-
fia pour celle qui eftentre CH, &H M,iay 4 -+-y pour
celle qui eft entre C H,.& HY, que ie {cay deuoir eftre
af—a-ycommee eftad, acaufe del’Ouale du troifiefme

, <- . fe--dk, : °
genre, dollietrouue que y ou MY eft —— puis io1-

--e
gnant enfemble les deux quantités trouuees pour A M, &

. kek se Serta .
MY, ie trouue’ ef pour latoute A Y; D’ou il fuir que

de quelque cofte que foit fuppofele point H, cete ligne
AY eft toufiours compofée d’vne quantité, qui eft a cel-
le dont les deux enfembleG C, & CF furpaffent la tou-
te GF,Commee, la moindre des deux lignes qui feruent
amefurer les refractions du verre propofe, eftad--e, la
difference qui eftentre ces deux lignes; cequieft vnaf-
fésbeautheorefme. Or ayant ainfi latoute AY, illa
faut couper felon 1a proportion que doiuent auoir fes
parties A M & MY; aumoyende quoy pource qu'on a
defia le point M, ontrouue auffy les poins A & Y; &en
fuite le point H, par le problefme precedent. Mais au-

parauant il faut regarder,filaligne A M ainfi trouuee eft

plus grande que : = ou plus petite, ouefgale. Car fi elle

eft plus grande,on apprent de la que lacourbe A C doit
eftre la premiere partie d’vne ouale du premier genre; &
CY lapremiere d’vne du troifiefme, ainfi qu’elles ont
efté icy f{uppofées: au lieu que fielle eft plus petite, cela
monftre que c’eft C Y, qui doit eftrela premiere partie
d’vne ouale dupremier genre, & que AC doit eftre la
premiere d’vne du troifiefine : Enfinfi.AM eft efgale a

ge,
we id

d-e

145

368 La GEOMETRIE.

in les deux courbes A C & CY dotuent eftre deux hy-

perboles.

On pourroit eftendre ces deux problefmes a vne infi-
nité d'autres cas, que ie ne m’arefte pas a deduire,a caufe
quils n’ont eu aucun vfage en la Dioptrique.

On pourroit aufly paffer outre, & dire, lorf{que I’vne
des fuperficies duverre eft donnée , pouruti qu’elle ne
foit quetoute plate, ou compofeée de feétions coniques,
oudecercles; commenton doit faire fon autre fuperfi-
cie, afin qu’il tranfmette tous les rayons d’vn point don-
n¢, avnautre poinraufly donné. car ce n’eft rien de plus
difficile que ceque ie viens d’expliquer ; ou plutoft ceft
chofe beaucoup plus facile, 4 caufeque le chemin en eft
ouvert. Maisiayme mieux, que d’autres le cherchent,
affinque s'ils ont encore vn peu de peine a Je trouuer, ce-
laleur face d’autant plus eftimer l’innention des chofes
qui fonticy demonferces.

Commer, Aurefte.ie n’ay parle en tout cecy, que des lignes cour-
onpeur bes, qn’on peut defcrire fur vne fuperficie plate; mais il
ae eft ay{é de rapporter ceque ien ay dit, 4 toutes celles
eftédic qu'on f{gauroit imaginer eftre formees , par le mouue-
Hee > ment regulier des poins dé quelque cors, dans vn efpace
conrbes quia trois dimenfions. A fcgauoir en tirant deux perpen-
farvne iculaires,de chafcun des poins de la ligne courbe qu’on
ae veut confiderer, fur deux plans quis’entrecouppent a an-
celles gar Gles droits, l’vne farl’vn, & l'autre fur l'autre. car les ex-
iedelcr-'“tremités de ces perpendiculaires defcrinent deux autres

u€écdas vn

Spend lignes courbes, vne fur chafcun de ces plans, defquelles
menfions, OH peut, en la facon cy deflus expliquée, determiner tous

les

146

SECOND BOOK

of one of the third class. Finally, if AM is equal to ra

AC and CY must both be hyperbolas.

These two problems can be extended to an infinity of other cases
which I will not stop to deduce, since they have no practical value in
dioptrics.

I might go farther and show how, if one surface of a lens is given
and is neither entirely plane nor composed of conic sections or circles,
the other surface can be so determined as to transmit all the rays from
a given point to another point, also given. This is no more difficult
than the problems I have just explained ; indeed, it is much easier since
the way is now open; | prefer, however, to leave this for others to
work out, to the end that they may appreciate the more highly the dis-
covery of those things here demonstrated, through having themselves
to meet some difficulties.

In all this discussion I have considered only curves that can be
described upon a plane surface, but my remarks can easily be made to
apply to all those curves which can be conceived of as generated by the
regular movement of the points of a body in three-dimensional space."™!
This can be done by dropping perpendiculars from each point of the
curve under consideration upon two planes intersecting at right angles,
for the ends of these perpendiculars will describe two other curves, one
in each of the two planes, all points of which may be determined in the
way already explained, and all of which may be related to those of a
straight line common to the two planes; and by means of these the
points of the three-dimensional curve will be entirely determined.

, the curves
e”

"751 This is the hint which Descartes gives of the possibility of the extension of
his theory to solid geometry. This extension was effected largely by Parent (1666-
1716), Clairaut (1713-1765), and Van Schooten (d. 1661).

147

GEOMETRY

We can even draw a straight line at right angles to this curve at a
given point, simply by drawing a straight line in each plane normal to
the curve lying in that plane at the foot of the perpendicular drawn
from the given point of the three-dimensional curve to that plane and
then drawing two other planes, each passing through one of the straight
lines and perpendicular to the plane containing it; the intersection of
these two planes will be the required normal.

And so I think I have omitted nothing essential to an understanding

of curved lines.

148

a,

Livre SECOND. 36°
les poins, &les rapporter aceuxdelaligne droite , qu
eft commune a ces deux plans, au moyen dequoy ceux
de la courbe, qui a trois dimenfions , font entierement
determines. Mefme fion veuttirer vne ligne droite,qui
couppe cete courbe au point donne a anglesdroits : il
taut feulement tirer deux autres lignes droites dans les
deux plans, vne en chafcun, qui couppent aangles droits
les deux lignes courbes, qui y font, aux deux poins, ou
tombent les perpendiculaires qui vienent de ce point
donné. car ayant efleuddeux autres plans, vn fur chaf-
eune de ces lignes droites, quicouppea angles droits le
plan ot elle eft, on aura l’interfection de ces deux plans
pourlaligne droite cherchée. Et ainfi ie penfe n‘auoir
rien omis des elemens, qui font neceffaires pour la con-
noiffance des lignes courbes.

149

,

THIRD

BOOK

Geometry
BOOK III

ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOLID AND SUPERSOLID PROBLEMS

HILE it is true that every curve which can be described by a con-
tinuous motion should be recognized in geometry, this does not
mean that we should use at random the first one that we meet in
the construction of a given problem. We should always choose with

152

Ley ,\

GE OPMaE aR lek.
LIVRE TROISIESME.

De la conftruttion des Proble(mes , qui
font Solides, ou plufque Soldes,

De quel-

Ncore quetoutes les lignes courbes, qui peuuent !«s lignes
courbes

| Shee defcrites par quelque mouuement regulier, on peut
doiuent eftre receués en la Geometrie , ce n’eft pas a di- " rath

re qu'il foit permis de fe feruir indifferemment de la pre- ftrudion
x A , Oo: 5 de chafq;
miere quife rencontre, pout la conftruction de chafque vr tice!

A aa pro- me.

153

Exemple
touchant
Vinuentid
de plu.
fieurs
moyénes
propro-
tionelles,

37.0 La GEOMETRIE.

problefme: mais ilfaut auoirfoin de choifir toufiours la
plus fimple , par laquelle il foit poffible de le refoudre.
Et mefme il eftaremarquer, que par les plus fimples on
ne doit pas feulement entendre celles, qui pcuuent le
plus ayfement eftre defcrites, ny celles qui rendent la
conftruction, ou la demonftration du Problefme propo-
{é plus facile, mais principalement celles, qui font du
plus fimple genre, qui puiffe feruir a determiner la quan-
tite qui eft cherchée..

A ON SEEN, G\ N
Comme par exemple ie ne croy pas, qu'il y ait aucu-
ne facon plus facile, pour trouuer autant de moyennes
proportionnelles, qu’on veut, ny dont la demonftration
foit plus euidente, que d’y employer les lignes courbes,
qui fe defcriuent par l'inftrument X Y Z cy deffus expli-
qué. Carvoulant trouuer deux moyennes proportion-
nelles entre Y A 8 Y E, ilne faut que defcrire vn cercle,
dont lediametre foit Y E; & pource que ce cercle coup-

pe

154

THIRD BOOK

care the simplest curve that can be used in the solution of a problem,
but it should be noted that the simplest means not merely the one most
easily described, nor the one that leads to the easiest demonstration or
construction of the problem, but rather the one of the simplest class
that can be used to determine the required quantity.

For example, there is, I believe, no easier method of finding any num-

"I nor one whose demonstration is clearer,

ber of mean proportionals,
than the one which employs the curves described by the instrument
XYZ, previously explained." Thus, if two mean proportionals
between YA and YE be required, it is only necessary to describe

[1 For the history of this problem, see Heath, History, Vol. I, p. 244, et seq.
581 See page 46.

155

GEOMETRY

a circle upon YE as diameter cutting the curve AD in D, and YD is
then one of the required mean proportionals. The demonstration
becomes obvious as soon as the instrument is applied to YD, since YA
(or YB) is to YC as YC isto YDas YDistow ie

Similarly, to find four mean proportionals between YA and YG, or
six between YA and YN, it is only necessary to draw the circle YFG,
which determines by its intersection with AF the line YF, one of the
four mean proportionals; or the circle YHN, which determines by its
intersection with AH the line YH, one of the six mean proportionals,
and so on.

But the curve AD is of the second class, while it is possible to find
two mean proportionals by the use of the conic sections, which are

ps1]

curves of the first class. Again, four or six mean proportionals can

be found by curves of lower classes than AF and AH respectively. It
would therefore be a geometric error to use these curves. On the other
hand, it would be a blunder to try vainly to construct a problem by
means of a class of lines simpler than its nature allows."

Before giving the rules for the avoidance of both these errors, some
general statements must be made concerning the nature of equations.
An equation consists of several terms, some known and some unknown,
some of which are together equal to the rest; or rather, all of which
taken together are equal to nothing; for this is often the best form to_
consider,"

US Tf we let + and y represent the two mean proportionals between a and b we
havea: *=%:y=¥y: b, whence s2?=ay: y2=bx, and xy=ab. Therefore
x and y may be found by determining the intersections of two parabolas or of a
parabola and a hyperbola.

"1 Cf. Pappus, Book IV, Prop. 31, Vol. I, p. 273. See also Guisnée, A pplica-
tion de l’Algébre a la Géométrie, Paris, 1733, p. 28, and L’Hospital, Traité Analy-
tique des Sections Coniques, Paris, 1707, p. 400.

U") The advantage of this arrangement had been recognized by several writers
before Descartes.

156

Livre TRoISsIESME. 37!
pela courbe A Dau point D, Y D eft’vne des moyennes
proportionnelles cherchées. Dontla demonftration fe
voit aPogil par Ja feule application de cet inftrument fur
laligne Y D. carcomme Y A, ou YB, quiluy eftefgale
eftaY C; ainiY CeftaYD;&YDa YE.

Tonrdetmefme pour trouver quatre moyennes pro-
portionelles entre Y A & Y G; ou pour entrouuer fix en-
treYA & YN, ilne faut que tracer le cercle Y F G, qui
couppant A F aupoint F, determinelaligne droite Y F,
qui eft l’vne de ces quatre proportionnelles; on YH N,
qui couppant A Hau point H, determine Y H I’vne des
fix, & ainfi des autres.

Mais pourceque la ligne courbe AD eft du fecond
genre, & qu'on peut trouver deux moyenes proportio-
nelles par les fections coniques, qui font dupremier ; &
auffy pourcequ’on peut trouuer quatre ou fix moyenes
proportionelles, par des lignes quine font pas de genres
ficompofés, que font A F, & AH, ce feroit vne.fauteen
Geometrie que de les y employer. Et c’eft vne faute
aufly dautre cofté de fe trauailler inutilement a vouloir
conftruire quelque problefme par vn genre de lignes
plus fimple, que fa nature ne permet.

Or affin que ie puiffe icy donner quelques reigles, De la na.
pour euiterl’vne & l'autre de ces deux fautes, il faut que Eq mere
ie die quelque chofe en general dela nature des Equa-
tions,c’eft a dire des fommes compof¢es de plufieurs tér-
mes partie connus, & partie inconnus, dont les vns font
efgaux aux autres, ou plutoft qui confiderds tous enfem-
ble font efgauxarien. carce ferafouuent le meilleur de
les confiderer en cete forte,

Aaa 2 Scachés

157

372 La GEOMETRIE.
tie Scachés done qu’en chafque Equation, autant que

auoit de fa quantit¢é inconnue ade dimenfions , autant peut ily
cet auoir de diuerfes racines, c’eft a dire de valeurs de cete
Equatio, quantité. car par exemple fion fuppofe x efgale a 2; ou-
bien x-- 2 efgala rien ; & derechef x 203; oubien
x. -- 3 200;en multipliant ces deux equations x -- 2200,
& x --3 900, !vneparl’autre, onaura xx--sx-+6 0,
oubien x x 00 5 x-- 6, quieft vne Equation en laquelle la
quantité « vaut 2 & tout enfemble vaut 3. Que fi dere-
chef on fait «+- 4 20 0, & qu’on multiplie cete fomme par
XX--§X+6 Wo, ON aura X= oXX 126% --24.00,
qui eft vne autre Equation en laquelle x ayant trois di-
menfions a aufly trois valeurs, qui font 2, 3, &4.
Ques J ais fouuentil arriue, que quelques vnes de ces raci-
fauffes ra- Nes font fauffes , ou moindres que rien. comme fion
cines. — fuppofe que xdefigne auffy le defaut d’vne quantit¢,
quifoit s,ona%—+-s500 , qui eftant multipli¢e par
Hime OK KX + 26K --24 Do fait
4-2 GX ee TOK K+ 106K--120 DO
pour vne equation en laquelle il y a quatre racines , a
{gauoir trois vrayes qui font 2, 3, 4, &vne fauffe qui
eft 5.
Capea,  Bton voit evidemment de cecy, que la fomme d'vne
Sacre equation, qui contient plafieurs racines, peut toufiours
des di. ftre diuifee par vn binéme compofe de la quantité in-
menfions connué moins la valeur de l’vne des vrayes racines , la-

d’yne. E-

quation quelle que ce foit; ou plus la valeur de I’vne des fauffés.
lorlqv'en Au moyen de quoy on diminue d’autant fes dimen-
quel. __ fions.

quvecde Et reciproquement que fi la fomme d’vne equation

nes. ne
158

THIRD BOOK

Every equation can have” as many distinct roots (values of the
unknown quantity): as the number of dimensions of the unknown
quantity in the equation."! Suppose, for example, = 2 or r—2 —0,
and again, 3, or r—3—=0. Multiplying together the two equa-
tions  —2 —0 and s—3 —0, we have #?—5x+6—0, or x? = 54r—6.
This is an equation in which + has the value 2 and at the same time"
« has the value 3. If we next make r—4—O and multiply this by
#?—5x*+6—=0, we have +?—91°+26r—24 —0 another equation, in
which +, having three dimensions, has also three values, namely, 2, 3,
and 4.

It often happens, however, that some of the roots are false" or less
than nothing. Thus, if we suppose + to represent the defect” of a quan-
tity 5, we have +5 —0 which, multiplied by +?—92#?+-267r—24 —0,
yields +*—42°—192?+ 1061%—120 = 0, an equation having four roots,
namely three true roots, 2, 3, and 4, and one false root, 5."

It is evident from the above that the sum™” of an equation having
several roots is always divisible by a binomial consisting of the unknown
quantity diminished by the value of one of the true roots, or plus the
value of one of the false roots. In this way," the degree of an equa-
tion can be lowered.

On the other hand, if the sum of the terms of an equation™™” is not
divisible by a binomial consisting of the unknown quantity plus or

[187]

[192]

©81 Tt is worthy of note that Descartes writes “can have” (“peut-il y avoir”),
not “must have,” since he is considering only real positive roots.

185] That is. as the number denoting the degree of the equation.

Mss] “Tout ensemble,”’—not quite the modern idea.

Ms] “Racines fausses,” a term formerly used for “negative roots.” Fibonacci,
for example, does not admit negative quantities as roots of an equation. Scritti de
Leonardo Pisano, published by Boncompagni, Rome, 1857. Cardan recognizes
them, but calls them “estimationes false” or “fictee,” and attaches no special sig-
nificance to them. See Cardan, Ars Magna, Nurnberg, 1545, p. 2. Stifel called
them “Numeri absurdi,” as also in Rudolff’s Coss, 1545. }

BPSie detaut, lt 2==—5, —5 1S the “defect” of 5, that is, the remainder
when 5 is subtracted from zero.

"891 That is, three positive roots, 2, 3, and 4, and one negative root, — 5.

2°] “Somme,” the left member when the right member is zero; that is, what
we represent by f(#) in the equation f(1)=0.

2°11 That is. by performing the division.

21 “Si la somme d’un équation.”

159

THIRD BOOK

minus some other quantity, then this latter quantity is not a root of the
equation. Thus the" above equation +*—41*—192°-+ 106r%—120 — 0
is divisible by x—2, +—3, x—4 and x-+5,"" but is not divisible by +
plus or minus any other quantity. Therefore the equation can have
only the four roots, 2, 3, 4, and 5."°! We can determine also the num-
ber of true and false roots that any equation can have, as follows:
An equation can have as many true roots as it contains changes of sign,
from + to — or from — to +; and as many false roots as the num-
ber of times two + signs or two — signs are found in succession.
Thus, in the last equation, since ++* is followed by —4*, giving a
change of sign from + to —, and —192° is followed by +106x and
+106% by —120, giving two more changes, we know there are three
true roots ; and since —4.° is followed by —192° there is one false root.
It is also easy to transform an equation so that all the roots that
were false shall become true roots, and all those that were true shall
become false. This is done by changing the signs of the second, fourth,
0°91 First member of the equation. Descartes always speaks of dividing the
equation.
"I Incorrectly given as +—5 in some editions.

51 Where 5 would now be written — 5. Descartes neither states nor explicitly
assumes the fundamental theorem of algebra, namely, that every equation has at
least one root. :

°l This is the well known “Descartes’s Rule of Signs.” It was known how-
ever, before his time, for Harriot had given it in his Artis analyticae praxis, Lon-
don, 1631. Cantor says Descartes may have learned it from Cardan’s writings,

but was the first to state it as a general rule. See Cantor, Vol. II(1) pp. 496
and 725.

160

Livre TROISIESME, 373

oe ate: ° Cc ra
ne peut eftre diuifee par vn binéme compofé de la quan- , Eee

titéinconnue + ou -- quelque autre quantité , cela tef- ome
moigne que cete autre quantité n’eft la valeur. d’aucune qeansie
de fesracines. Comme cete derniere Hak

Nten 4 Kee LO XK + 106 %--120 D0 leur d’yne
peut bien eftre.diuifée., par x -- 2, & par x-- 3, &par
x--4, & parx-+-5; mais non point par x -- ou-- aucu-
ne autre quantité. cequi monftre quelle ne peut auoir
que les quatre racines 2,3,4,& 5.

On connoift aufly de cecy combien il peut y auoirde Combien
vrayesracines, & combien de fauffes en chafque Equa- ay
tion. A fcanoirily en peut auoir autant de vrayes, que vryss

: : ; racines en

les fignes +- & --s'y trouuent de fois eftre changés 5 8 chafque
autant de fanffes qu’ils’y trouue de fois deux fignes --, Equatio.
ou deux fignes -- quis’entrefuiuent. Comme en la der-
niere,a caufe qu’aprés 4- xtilya-- 4.x, quieftvn chan-
gement du figne + en--, & aprés-- 19 xxilyast 106%,
& apres -+ 106 xilya-- 120 qui font encore deux autres
changemens, onconnoift qu’'l ya trois vrayes racines; &
vne fauffe,a caufe que les deux fignes --,de 4 «3,8 19 xx,
s‘entrefuiuent.

De plusileftayféde faire en vne mefme Equation, cément
que toutes les racines qui eftoient faufles deuienent on fait
vrayes, & par mefme moyen que toutes celles qui eftoiée #74
vray es deuienent fauffes : a {gauoir en changeant tous a
les fignes +- ou -- qui font en la feconde , en la ea
quatriefme , en la fixiefme , ou autres places qui fe device

defignent par les nombres pairs , fans changer ceux les vrayes
de la premiere , de la troifiefme, de la cinquiefme *""**
& femblables qui fe defignent par les nombres

Aaa 3 impairs.

161

374 La GEOMETRIE.
impairs. Comme fi au lieu de
“ee ut-- 4x) -- 1g NX 4 106X -- 120 DO
on efcrit
xt + 4x -- 19 NH -- 106% -- 12000
ona yne Equation en-laquelle il n’y a qu'vne vraye ra-
cine, qui eft 5, &troisfauffes qui font 2, 3, & 4.
cee Que fi fans connoiftre la valeur des racines d'vne E-
augmen- quation, GD la veut augmenter, ou diminuer de quelque
eel quantité connué, ilne fant qu’au lieu du terme inconnu
lesracines en {uppofer vn.autre, qui foit plus ou moins grand de ce-
a te mefime quantité, & le fubftituer par tout en la place
fansles du premier.
ihe, ~=—-/s Comme fion veut augmenter de 3 la racine de cete
Equation
Kt 4K en hONN--TO6 X-- 120 DO
il faut prendre, au lieud’x , & penfer que cete quantite
yeftplus grande qu’x de3, enforte que y -- 5 eft efgal
ax, &aulieud’x x, ilfaut mettre le quarré d’y--.3 qui
eftyy-- 6y + 9 &aulieud’x * il faut mettre fon cube
qui efty’-- 9yy-r a7y-- 27, &enfinaulieud’ x + ilfaut
mettre fon quarré de quarréquieft y+-- 12y '-++ 54 yy
--1o8y-+ 81. Etainfidefcriuant la fomme precedente
en fubftituant par tout yau lieu d’x ona
y ta-12yi-ry4yy-- 108 y+ BE
+ 47> -- 36yy 108 y-- 108
<< 99 Y Pay ee ed
-- 106- 1-318
-- 120

yin ky Le eee 200
oubien

162

THIRD BOOK

sixth, and all even terms, leaving unchanged the signs of the first, third,
fifth, and other odd terms. Thus, if instead of

+4+*—417°—192°+1067%—120 = 0

we write
+4*+4+'3— 19x?—106%—120 — 0

we get an equation having one true root, 5, and three false roots, 2, 3,
and 4,07 .

If the roots of an equation are unknown and it be desired to increase
or diminish each of these roots by some known number, we must sub-
stitute for the unknown quantity throughout the equation, another
quantity greater or less by the given number. Thus, if it be desired
to increase by 3 the value of each root of the equation

a*+41°—192?—1067—120 = 0

put y in the place of x, and let y exceed x by 3, so that y—3 = +. Then

for +? put the square of y—3, or y?—6y+9; for +* put its cube,

5? —9y?127y—27; and for +* put its fourth power,” or
yi—12y?+54y?—108y+81.:

Substituting these values in the above equation, and combining, we have
yt — 12y? + 54y? — 108y + 81

4 Ay? — 36y? + 108y — 108
— 19y? + 114y — 171

— 106y + 318
—120 _
ye Sy oy By Oo
or y—8y?—y+8 zi);

[71 Tn absolute value.
181 “Son quarré de quarré,” that is, its fourth power.

119] Descartes wrote this y*—8y?— y?2+8y * 20 0, indicating by a star the
absence of a term in a complete polynomial.

163

GEOMETRY

whose true root is now 8 instead of 5, since it has been increased by 3.
If, on the other hand, it is desired to diminish by 3 the roots of the
same equation, we must put y+3 = x andy?+6y+9 = +, and so on.
so that instead of #* + 44° — 191? — 106% — 120 =0, we have

yt + 12y? + 54y? + 108y + 81
+ 4y% + 36y? + 108y + 108
— lO 114y — 171
— 106y — 318
— 120

yt + 16y? + 71y?— 4y —420—0.

It should be observed that increasing the true roots of an equation
diminishes” the false roots by the same amount; and on the contrary
diminishing the true roots increases the false roots; while diminishing
either a true or a false root by a quantity equal to it makes the root
zero; and diminishing it by a quantity greater than the root renders

a true root false or a false root true.”

Thus by increasing the true
root 5 by 3, we diminish each of the false roots, so that the root pre- .
viously 4 is now only 1, the root previously 3 is zero, and the root
previously 2 is now a true root, equal to 1, since —2+3—-+1. This

explains why the equation y’—8 y?—y+8 —0 has only three roots,

°1Tn absolute value.
1 For example, the false root 5 diminished by 7 means —(5 —7)—= +2.

164

Livre TROISIESME, 375
oubieny'-- 8 yy.-1y-+-8 Wo,
ott la vrayeracine qui eftoit s eft maintenant 8, acaufe
du nombre trois quiluy eft aioufté.

Que fi on veut au contraire diminuer de trois laraci-
ne de cete mefine Equation , il faut faire y-+ 3 20x
eyyt y+ 90M xx. & ainfi des autres de facon
qu’au lieu de

KA 4 wo LO NK -- 106K 2-120 10
on met
Weta 2y2 tS Ay yt 108 yt 8

+ 4yi +36 yy 108 y+ 108

BOIL) AGERE ae ta
-- 106y e- 318

-- 120

yt bys F711 yy. gy --420 D0.

Ec ilefta remarquer qu’en augmentant les vrayes ra- Quen
cines d’vne Equation, on diminue les fauffes de la mef- ere
me quantitd; ou au contraire en diminuant les vrayes,on (yes
augmente les fauffes. Et que fion diminue foit les vnes diminue
foit les autres, d’vne quantité qui leur foit efgale, elles a eae
deuienent nulles, & que ficeft d’vne quantité qui les fur- contraire.
paffe, devrayes elles deuienent fauffes, ou de fauffes
vrayes. Comme icy en augmentant de 3 la vraye racine
qui eftoit 5, on adiminué de 3 chafcune des faufles , en
forte que celle quieftoit 4 heft plus qu’r, & celle qui
eftoit 3 eft nulle, & celle quieitoit 2 eft deuenue vraye
& eftr,a caufe que -- 2 +3 fait-t 1. c’eft pourquoy
en cete Equation y' -- 8yy--1y-+ 8 sooilny a plus que

. 3 racines, entre lefquelles il y en a deux qui font vrayes,
1.&

165

Cément
on peut
ofter le
fecond
terme
dvneE-
quation.

3Z° La GEOMETRIE.

1, & 8, & vne fauffe qui eft auffy1. & en cete autre
y*t+16yi+7I1yy --4 ¥-- 420 D0

iln’y enaqu’vne vraye quieft 2, acaufe que + 5 --3 fait

+2, &trois fauffes quifont 5,6, &7.

Or par cete fagon de changer la valeur desracines
fans les connoiftre, on peut faire deux chofes, qui auront
cy apres quelque vfage: la premiere eft qu’on peut tou-
fiours ofter le fecond terme del’Equation qu'on exami-
ne, a {cauoir en diminuant les vrayes racines, de la quan-
tité connué de ce fecond terme diuif¢e par le nombre
des dimenfions du premier, fil’vn de ces deux termes
eftant marquédu figne +-,! autre eft marqué du figne--;
oubien enl’augmentant dela mefme quantite’, silsont
tous deux le figne -+-, ou tous deux le figne--. Comme
pour ofter le fecond terme dela derniere Equatio qui eft

yt 6y + 71yy--4y-- 420500
ayant dinif€ 16 par 4, acaufedes 4 dimenfians du terme
y +, il vient derechef 4, c’eft pourquoy ie fais x -- 4 20y,
& vefcris

Rt 16 23 4° 96 xx o~ 256% 1 256

16% '-- 192 224-768 x--1024

F7IZR-~ $68 X-+1136

“me 42+ 16

-- 420

gy" * --a5%%--60 9x -- 36 Wo,
oulavraye racine qui eftoit 2, eft 6, a caufe qu'elle eft
augmentée de 4; cles fauffes qui eftoient 5, 6, &7,ne
font plus que 1,2, 83, a caufe qu’elles font diminuees
chafcune de 4.
Tout

166

.,e ere

THIRD BOOK

two of them, 1 and 8, being true roots, and the third, also 1, being false;
while the other equation y*—16y?--71y?—4y—420 —0 has only one
true root, 2, since +5—3 = +2, and three false roots, 5, 6, and 7.

Now this method of transforming the roots of an equation without
determining their values yields two results which will prove useful:
First, we can always remove the second term of an equation by dimin-
ishing its true roots by the known quantity of the second term divided
by the number of dimensions of the first term, if these two terms have
opposite signs; or, if they have like signs, by increasing the roots by
the same quantity." Thus, to remove the second term of the equation
y*+16y8+71y?—4y—420 = 0 I divide 16 by 4 (the exponent of y in
y*), the quotient being 4. I then make z—4 — y and write

zt— 162? 963? — 2562+ 256
4+ 1623 — 192? + 7682 — 1024
4 7122 — 5682 + 1136

— 4sz+ 16
2 Me — 420
= — 2527— 60z— 36=—0.

The true root of this equation which was 2 is now 6, since it has been
increased by 4, and the false roots, 5, 6, and 7, are only 1, 2, and 3,

9] That is, by diminishing the roots by a quantity equal to the coefficient of
the second term divided by the exponent of the highest power of +, with the oppo-
site sign.

167

GEOMETRY

since each has been diminished by 4. Similarly, to remove the second

: 1
terms of «*—2ax+ (2a?—c?) «?—2a°x+a* —0; since 24-4 — hop ihs

if :
must put z+,a=+x and write

3 . i
4 2 238 edge: ee 3 =A
g + 2az = et Ton hig t# + yee
Soe 1
229 Os 4
— 2az —3az—ja2—- 4a
2 Di oe 1 4
+2a@2+2a@2+ 54
: 5 me
fe Se ee = ee
+
=2yee ae
+ @
5

aly : x : Je
aGe fa ee eS 3 9) gir Se eee
zZ +(5u ag )z =a" ae") +764 —4ee =0

Having found the value of s, that of x is found by adding aa Second,

by increasing the roots by a quantity greater than any of the false

3] we make all the roots true. When this is done, there will be

roots
no two consecutive + or — terms; and further, the known quantity
of the third term will be greater than the square of half that of the
second term. This can be done even when the false roots are unknown,
since approximate values can always be obtained for them and the roots
can then be increased by a quantity as large as or larger than is
required. Thus, given,

8] Tn absolute value.

168

Livre TROISIESME. 377
Tout de mefime fi on veut ofter le fecond terme de

a4
xtenzans F248 wXenw 2A} X +-a4+Do,

pourceque diuifant 2 @ par qil vient 4 a; il faut faire
y+ 540+ 8&efcrire
X++2azi+haazz+tasyz+iza‘
“W2AR? m 30axx% -Fa' x tat
T2a@axx--2a5 = that
“C6 = a6C --Faace

--24a3 --4+
4 *
* 1
hn: PF 24d x x--4? goat De

-- C6 ate ~- faace
& fion trowue apres la valeurde z, en Iuyadiouftant £ ¢

on aura cellede ~. Cémene
Lafeconde chofe, qui aura cy apres quelque vfage, onahets
alre €
eft, qu’on peut toufiours en avgmentant la valeur des ah
les fauffes

vrayes racines, d’vne quantité qui foit plus grande que i kek
eft celle d’aucune des fauffes, faire qu’elles deuienent d'yne
toutes vrayes,en forte qu'il n'y ait point deux fignes ++, Equation
ou.deux fignes -- quis’entrefuiuent, & outre cela quela weayes,
quantité connué du troifiefme terme foit plus grande, ta :
que le quarrédela moitiede celle du fecond. (Car en- aoe
core que cela fe face , lorfque ces fauffes racines font
inconnués, ileft ayféneanmoins deiuger a peu pre. de

lear grandeur, &de prendre vne quantite, quiles fur-

paffe d’autant, ou deplus, qu'il n’eft requis acet effect.
Comme fiona

Bbb =

169

on

378 La GEOMETRIE.
Bo ee Canad he 6m xb-- ERE L296 H5% -- 7776 BE DE.
en faifant y -- 6 # 90 *, on trouuera

ys- Tym omn 4-- 4320 shee “ide ne] YY 4665625) y Hr 46656 m6

o> 3047 HH 360 23 -- 2160 n4 % 6480n5 -- 777676
“= 64n hh 144 23 -- 1296 n¢ Hh ft84 25 Q -- 77766
% 36 m3 -- 648%) oh 3888954 -- 777625

-- 216 nt Heorsgum >] -- 7776n6

J x s59kn 7) -- 77767 €

yS-- 35 wy SHsognn yt - 3780 23 yt ijstz0 m* y*-- 27216 Moy - D2.

Comene
on faic
que tou-
tes les
places
d'vne E-
vation
oient
renplics.

Ouil.eft manifefte, que so4.nn, qui eft la quantité
connué dutroifiefme terme eft plus gtande, quele quar-
réde 35 #, quieft la moitiéde celle du fecond. Et il n’y
4 point de cas, pour lequella quantire, donton augmen-
teles vrayesracines, ait befoina cet effec, d’eftre plus
grande, a proportion de celles qui font donndes , que
pour cetuy cy.

Mais acaufe que le dernier terme s’y trouue nul, fion
ne defire pas que cela foir, il faut encore augmenter tant
foit peu la valeurdesracines ; Etcene fcavroit eftre de
fi peu, que ce ne foit affes pour cet effect. Non plus que
lorfqu’on veutaccroiftre le nombre des dimenfions de
quelque Equation, & faire que toutes les places de fes
termes foient remplies. Comme fiaulieude x 5 ****
~-6 90 0, on veut auoir vne Equation, en laquelle la
quantit¢inconnue ait fix dimenfions, & dont aucun des
termes ne foit nul, il faut premierement pour

x. * Seep cop eciire

oe Oe en Gee ae
puisayant fait y --@ 20, on aura
¥€ - Gayl hisaay*-- r.0 a; yshisatyy-- Cary hae
--bypab 0
Quileft manifefte que tant petite que la quantitd a foit
{fuppofée

170

THIRD BOOK

4+ nv —6n? 44+ 36n?.7? —216n*x?+ 1296n'4—7776n® — 0,

make y—6n = x and we have,

y° —36n) y+-540n?) y*—4320n*} y?+19440n4) y2—46656n") y+46656n°
+ nS — 30n?} + 360n'| — 2160n*| + 6480n5| — 7776n°
— 6n*) + 144n®( — 1296n*s + 5184n5| — 7776n*

+ 36n*} — 648n*| + 3888n°( — 7776n°

— 216n*) + 2592n*| — 7776n*

+ 1296n*) — 7776n°

— 7776n°

y’—35ny®> +504n2y* —3780n"y? +15120nty? —27216n*y —0.

Now it is evident that 504n?, the known quantity’ of the third term,

; ao ate :
is larger than (3 ») ; that is, than the square of half that of the sec-

ond term; and there is no case for which the true roots need be in-
creased by a quantity larger in proportion to those given than for this
one.

If it is undesirable to have the last term zero, as in this case, the
roots must be increased just a little more, yet not too little, for the pur-
pose. Similarly if it is desired to raise the degree of an equation, and
also to have all its terms present, as if instead of +°—b —0, we wish
an equation of the sixth degree with no term zero, first, for «° — b= 0
write +°— bx —0, and letting y —a— +4 we have

y®—6ay® + 15a?y* —20a*y* + 15a*ty?— (6a°-+-b) y+a°-+-ab = 0.

It is evident that, however small the quantity a, every term of this equa-

tion must be present.

1 T. e., the coefficient.

171

GEOMETRY

We can also multiply or divide all the roots of an equation by a
given quantity, without first determining their values. To do this, sup-
pose the unknown quantity when multiplied or divided by the given
number to be equal to a second unknown quantity. Then multiply or
divide the known quantity of the second term by the given quantity,
that in the third term by the square of the given quantity, that in the
fourth term by its cube, and so-on, to the end.

This device is useful in changing fractional terms of an equation to
whole numbers, and often! in rationalizing the terms. Thus, given

26 8

P—V3 2H aes p= =U, let there be required another equation
cal vii gs

in which all the terms are expressed in rational numbers. Let y= ¥3

and multiply the second term by 3, the third by 3, and the last by

26 8 * :
92-9 =0. Next let it be

required to replace this equation by another in which the known quanti-

313. The resulting equation is y®—3y?+

ties are expressed only by whole numbers. Let s=—3y. Multiplying
)
3 bys: 2 by 9, and 4 by 27, we have

s'—9zs*+-26s—24 — 0.

The roots of this equation are 2, 3, and 4; and hence the roots of the

™s! But not always. Compare the case mentioned on page 175.

Livre TrotsiesmeE, 379

fuppofee toutes les places de l’Equation ne laiffent pas
d’eftre remplies.

De pluson peut, fans connoiftre la valeur des vrayes Commét

: ? . a en's on peu
racines d’vne Equation, les multiplier , ou divifer tou- multi-
tes, partelle quantité connué quon veut. Cequi fe fait Pitt

: See * . a. ,  diuifer les
en fuppofant que la quantitd inconnué eftant multiplice, racines

udiuifee, par celle qui doit multiplier, ou divifer les #"5'*s

© ee, par celle qui doit multiplier, ou diui sees
racines, eft efgalea quelque autre. Puis multipliant, ou ftre-
diuvifant la quantite connué du fecond terme, par cete
mefme qui doit multiplier, ou diuiferles racines ; & pat
fon quarré, celle dutroifiefme,; & par fon cube, celle du
quatriefme, & ainfiiufques au dernier. Ce qui peut fer- Comin,
uir pour reduire a des nombres entiers & rationaux, les|es nom-

. nD m-
fractions, ou fouuent auffy les nombres fours , qui fe sae nine
trouuent dans les termes des Equations. Comme fi on a Fqoation

Ki-- ¥ 3 RR THe zbvz D0, tiers.
& qu’on veuille en auoir vne autre en fa place, dont tous
lestermes s expriment par des nombresrationaux; il faut
fuppofer y 0x 7 3, & multiplier par 73 la quantité
connué du fecond terme, quieft auffy /3, 8 par fon
quarré qui eft 3 celle dutroifiefme qui eft 28, & par fon
cube qui eft 37 3celledu dernier, quieft 33, ,ce qui
fait

i 9e6 58

Us Ob Kaus Bs ey Tae
Puis fionen veut auoirencore vne autre en la placede
celle cy, dont les quantites connués ne s’expriment que
par des nombres entiers; il faut fuppofer x 20 3 y , & mul-
tipliant ; par3, 3° parg, & 3 par27 on trouue

¥} == 9% %X-+ 26 %*-24.00 9, Oli les racines eftant 2,3,
& 4, on connoift de la que celles de l'autre d’auparauant

Bbb 2 eftoient

173

380 La GEOMETRIE.
eftoient 3,1, & 4, & que celles de la premiere eftoient

VY gf

V3, 3) 3,tc et 3.

ec Cete operation peut auffy ferurr pour rendre la quan-
onrendia ,

quantié tité connué de quelqu’undes termes del'Equatio efgale
rere a quelque autre donnée, comme fi ayant
* .-$6$x-+-ci ve

des ter- x

mesd'vne Cn veut auoir en fa place vne autre Equation, en laquel-
Equation

efvalea le Ja quantité connué, du terme qui occupe la troifiefme
telle autre

ont place,a {cauoit celle qui eft icy 4, foit 3a a,il faut fuppo.

yeut. pase

fery 20 — puisefcrirey** -- 3aay + V3 De.
Que les = Aurrefte tant les vrayesracines quelesfauffes ne font
mary. pastoufiours reelles, mais quelquefois feulementimagi-
yesque naires; c’eft adire qu'on peut bien toufiours en imaginer
ee autant que iay dit en chafque Equation; mais qu’tl.n’y a
rae quelquefois aucune quantité, qui correfponde a celles
imaginai- qu'on imagine. comme encore qu’on en puiffe imagi-
Ai nertroisencelle cy, ¥' --6**-+-13x--loDoe, ilny
enatoutefois qu’yne reelle, qui eft 2, & pour les deux
autres, quoy qu’on les augmente, ou diminue, ou multi-
plie enlafagon que ie viens d’expliguer, on ne {cauroit
les rendre autres qu'imaginaires.

Lardu- Or quand pour trouuer la conftruction de quelque

Stion des j ; j

Equatid problefme,on vient a vne Equation, en laquelle la quan-

cubiques tite inconnué a trois dimenfions ; premierement fi les

orique le = on s ; :

Bat quantites connués , quiy font » Contienent quelques

moet nombres rompus, illes faut reduire a d'autres entiers, par

plan. ee ae ni; > :
Ia multiplication tantoft expliquée , Et s‘ils en contie-
nentdefours , il faut auffy lesreduire ad’autres ratio-

naux, autant qu’ll fera poffible,tant par cete mefme mul-
tiplication,

174

AON

eee) ed

THIRD BOOK

; ; 2 4
preceding equation are 3° 1 and 3? and those of the first equation are

2 te a a
9 V3, 4 V3, and V3.

This method can also be used to make the known quantity of any
term equal to a given quantity. Thus, given the equation

—b?rtc*? — 0,

let it be required to write an equation in which the coefficient of the
third term,” namely b?, shall be replaced by 3a. Let

3a’
As 6 F-
and we have
te
y—3a'y 4 3EE V3 =p)

Neither the true nor the false roots are always real; sometimes
they are imaginary ;“” that is, while we can always conceive of as many
roots for each equation as I have already assigned,’ yet there is not
always a definite quantity corresponding to each root so conceived of.
Thus, while we may conceive of the equation +*—6#°+131—10 —0
as having three roots, yet there is only one real root, 2, while the other
two, however we may increase, diminish, or multiply them in accord-
ance with the rules just laid down, remain always imaginary.

When the construction of a problem involves the solution of an
equation in which the unknown quantity has three dimensions,” the
following steps must be taken:

First, if the equation contains some fractional coefficients,” change
them to whole numbers by the method explained above; if it con-

[210]

4) Descartes wrote this equation + * —bbxr+c* 20 0, the star showing, as
explained on page 163, that a term is missing. Hence, he speaks of —b*x as the
third term.

11 “fais quelqucfois seulement imaginaires.” This is a rather interesting
classification, signifying that we may have positive and negative roots that are
imaginary. The use of the word “imaginary” in this sense begins here.

8] This seems to indicate that Descartes realized the fact that an equation of
the nth degree has exactly n roots. Cf. Cantor, Vol. II(1), p. 724.

1 That is, a cubic equation.

(2101 “Nombres rompues,” the “numeri fracti” of the medieval Latin writers and
“numeri rotti” of the Italians. The expression “broken numbers” was often used
by early English writers. ae: ne

I That is, transform the equation into one having integral coefficients.

175

GEOMETRY

tains surds, change them as far as possible into rational numbers, either
by multiplication or by one of several other methods easy enough to
find. Second, by examining in order all the factors of the last term,
determine whether the left member of the equation is divisible” by a
binomial consisting of the unknown quantity plus or minus any one of
these factors. If it is, the problem is plane, that is, it can be constructed
by means of the ruler and compasses; for either the known quantity
of the binomial is the required root’ or else, having divided the left
member of the equation by the binomial, the quotient is of the second
degree, and from this quotient the root can be found as explained in
the first book."

Given, for example, y°—8y*—124y?—64 = 0." The last term, 64,
is divisible by 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64; therefore we must find whether
the left member is divisible by y?—1, y?+1, y?—2, y?+2, y?—4, and
soon. We shall find that it is divisible by y?—16 as follows:

+y%— 8y* — 124y? — 64=—0

— yh Byf gt

MNES 16y* — 128y?
—16 — 16

+ y+ 8+ 4=0

16

Beginning with the last term, I divide —64 by —16 which gives +4;

’

write this in the quotient; multiply +4 by +-y? which gives +4y? and

1 “Qui divise toute la somme.”

(=I That is, the root that satisfies the conditions of the problem.
M41 See page 13.

S] Descartes considers this equation as a function of y?.

176

__,

Livre TROISISEME. 38x
tiplication, que par diuers autres moyens, qui font affés
facitesatrouuer. Puis examinant par ordre toutes les
quantités , qui peuuent diuifer fans fraction le dernier
terme, il faut voir, fi quelqu’vne d’elles, iointe auec la
quantit¢inconnue parle figne + ou --, peut compofer
vn binome , qui diuife toute lafomme; & fi cela eftle
Problefmeeft plan , c’eft adireil peut eftre conftruit
auec la reigle & de compas ; Car oubien la quantité
connué dece binofme eft la racine cherchee ; oubien
Equation eftant diuifee par luy , fe reduift a deux di-
menfions, en forte qu’on en peut trouner apresla racine,
par ce quia efte dit au premier liure.

Par exemple fiona
¥ Sar By 4 -- 1E4Y ~~ 6400.
le dernier terme , quieft 64, peut eftre diuifd fans fra-
ction par 1, 2, 4, 8,16, 32, & 64; C’eft pourquoy il faut
examiner par ordre fi cete Equation ne peut point
eftre diuifee par quelqu’vn des binomes , yy -- 1 ou .
YY Lyy--2ouyy +2, yy -- 4 &c.&on trouve qu’el-
le peut l’eftre par y y 16, encete forte.
+ yS-- Byt--124 yy ~- 64 DO
a eh wl £8 i het

-- 16
@ -- 16 y*t--128 yy
16 16
sie Set Bye i 4) 500.
Ie commence par le dernier terme, & diuife -- 64 par Z eae
-- 16, ce qui fait -+ 4, que i’ef{cris dans le quotient , pris vacEqua-
ie multiplie “+ 4par-F y y,ce qui fait +- 4 iy yc eft pour-yn bing.
ay oN ze ae sixy me qui
quoy?efcris--4 yy en lafomme, qu'il fant diuifer.car ily Boles
Bbb 3 faut-racine.

177

——

382 La GEOMETRIE.«

fauctoufiours efcrire le figne + ou -- tour comtraire a
celuy que produift la multiplication. & ioignant -- 124 yy
auec -- 4yy, iay-- 128 yy, queie diuife derechef par -- 16,
8 iay + $8 yy, pour mettre dans le quotient & en le mul-
tipliant par yy,iay -- 8 y +,pour ioindre auec leterme qu'il
faut diuifer, quieftaufly -- 8 y+, & ces deux enfemble
font-- 169+, queie diuife par --16, ce qui fait +ry*
pour Ie quotient, 8& -- 1 y , pourioindre auec --ry«, ce-
qui fair 0, & monftre que Ja diuifion eft acheuce. Mais
s'il eftoit refté quelque quantité, oubien qa’on n’euft pit
diuifer fans fraction quelqu’vn des termes precedens, on
euft par la reconnu, quelle ne pouuoit eftre faire.

aay.
Tout de mefme fion ay 6 * **y 7 **yy--244¢ Da,
-- 206 he Ie ee

le dernier terme fe peut diuifer fans fraGtion par

a, aa, aa-tcc,a* + ace, & femblables. Mais il n’y ena
que deux qu’onait befoin deconfiderer , a {Gauoir aa &
aa + cc;car les autres donnant plus ou moins de dimen-
fions dans le quotient, qu’il n’yen aen la quantité con-
nué du penultiefme terme, empefcheroient que la diui-
fionnes’y puftfaire. Etnotes, queieneconte icy les
dimenfions d’y*, que pour trois, a caufe quil ny a point
d’y:,nyd’y}, nyd’yentoutela fomme. Or en exami-
nant le bindme yy -- aa=ce 20 0,on trouue que Ia diuifion

fe peut faire par luy encete forte.
aa -- at ~- 4?

6 a
HY EN yt wayyatene 00,
we 8-7-2 44 = -- At ates
ieee J ce -- AACE -- AA-- 66

-- AAC --AA-- C6

24a at
“eyes rh aa 66 Anes Ce-

178

THIRD BOOK

write in the dividend (for the opposite sign from that obtained by the
multiplication must always be used). Adding —124y? and —4y? I
have —128y. Dividing this by —16 I have +8y? in the quotient, and
multiplying by y? I have —8y* to be added to the corresponding term,
—8y*, in the dividend. This gives —16y* which divided by —16 yields
++ * in the quotient and —y* to be added to +-y* which gives zero, and
shows that the division is finished.

If, however, there is a remainder, or if any modified term is not
exactly divisible by 16, then it is clear that the binomial is not a
divisor.”

Similarly, given

the last term is divisible by a, a’, a?+-c?, a*’+-ac*, and so on, but only
two of these need be considered, namely a? and a?-+-c?._ The others give
a term in the quotient of lower or higher degree than the known quan-
tity of the next to the last term, and thus render the division impos-
sible.”” Note that I am here considering y*® as of the third degree,
since there are no terms in y®, y®, or y. Trying the binomial

y? — (i's 0
we find that the division can be performed as follows:

+y7°+ a\| 4-at |,
sty ots +4 (F% —2ale | =p
Deel age a le a ares

a
a iy a

Epad sats
i, —av—? —v-—-¢-
+ y4 + 2a? | 5+ a4 (i
— 2hF +e 5=%

16] This is evidently a modified form of our modern “synthetic division,” the
basis of our “Remainder Theorem,” and of Horner’s Method of solving numerical
equations, a method known to the Chinese in the thirteenth century. See Cantor,
Vol. II(1), pp. 279 and 287. See also Smith and Mikami, History of Japanese
Mathematics, Chicago, 1914; Smith, I, ghee

71 This is not a general rule.

179

GEOMETRY

This shows that a?++c? is the required root, which can easily be proved
by multiplication.
But when no binomial divisor of the proposed equation can be found,

™] and it is then

it is certain that the problem depending upon it is solid,
as great a mistake to try to construct it by using only circles and straight
lines as it is to use the conic sections to construct a problem requiring
only circles; for any evidence of ignorance may be termed a mistake.

Again, given an equation in which the unknown quantity has four
dimensions." After removing any surds or fractions, see if a binomial
having one term a factor of the last term of the expression will divide
the left member. If stich a binomial can be found, either the known

&1 after the division is

quantity of the binomial is the required root, or,
performed, the resulting equation, which is of only three dimensions,
must be treated in the same way. If no such binomial can be found,
we must increase or diminish the roots so as to remove the second term,
in the way already explained, and then reduce it to another of the third

degree, in the following manner: Instead of

KY pe? + qe tr=—0
write
y® & 2py* + (p? + 4r)y? — g?=0.™

8] That is, that it involves a conic or some higher curve.

G8] A biquadratic equation.

=I “Fither, or,” as in the original. It is like saying that the root of +2—a?=0-
is either =a or + = —a.

=) Descartes wrote substantially “Instead of

, + xt* prx.qx.r 2 0
write
+ y® .2py* + (pp.4r) xy — aq 20 0.”

The symbolism is characteristic of Descartes.

180

Livre TRolsiesme. 383

Ce qui monftre que la racine cherchee eftaa--ce.
Et la preuue eneft ayféea faire par la multiplication.

Mais lorfqu’on ne trouue aucun bindme, qui puiffe Quels
ainfi diuifer route lafomme de I’Equation propofee, il Sa
eft certain que le Problefme qui en depend eft folide. Et eS
ce n’eft pas vne moindre faute apres cela, de tafcher ale zai
conftruire fans y employer que des cercles & des lignes ere sf
droites, que ce feroit d’employer des fections coniques 1
a conftruire ceux aufquels onn’a befoin que de cercles.
car enfin tout ce qui te{moigne quelque ignorance s’ap-

pele faute.

; eh nS
Que fion avne Equation dont fa quantité inconnué , . 4...

ait quatre dimenfions, il faut en mefine fagon, aprés en ion des
auoir oftéles nombres fours, & rompus, s‘ily en a, voir fi F°* a
on pourra trouuer quelque bindme, qui diuife toute Ia ont fer
fomme, enle compofant del’vne des quantités, qui di- ine¢ons,
uifent fans fragtion ledernier terme. Et fi onentrouue StS
vn, oubien ja quantiteconnue de ce bindme eft laracine aera

; 2 , Saat . lan. Ee
; uifion, ilne r n Plan.
cherchde; on du moins apres cete diuifion, efte e Bice

PEquation, que troisdimenfions , en fuite dequoy il ceux qui
faut derechef l’examiner enlamefme forte. Mais lorf- ae tue
qu’ilnefetrouue point de tel binéme , il faut en au-
gmentant, ou diminuant la valeur de Ia racine, ofter le
fecond termedelafomme , en Ia fagon tantoft expli-
quée. Etapréslareduire.a yneautre , qui ne contie-

ne que trois dimenfions- Cequi fe fait en cete forte.
; = *
Auliende+-x+ .pxx.gx.r Do,

ilfaut-efcrire + y%2pys*lP yy - 9q Wo.
Et pour les fignes -- ou -- que iay omis, sil y a
eu

181

384 La GEOMETRIE.
eu + pen laprecedente Equation, il faut mettre en cel-
lecy +-2p,ous'ilyaeu -p, ilfaut mettre-- 2p. & au
contraire s'ily aeu + 7, ilfaut mettre --47, ou s‘ilyaeu
--r, il faut mettre-+ 47. & foit qu'il y ait eu ++ 7, on
-- g, il faut toufiours mettre -- 9q,8& +- pp. au moins fi
onfuppofe que x*+, & y * font marques du fignes +,
car ce feroit tout le contraire fi on y fuppofoir le fi-
ene --.

Parexemplefion a-+ x + *--4.xx-=,8 «+ 35 D0
il faut efcrire en fon licuy* -- 8 y* -- 1247 y--64 200. Car
la quantité que iay, nommeée p eftant -- 4, il faut mettre
--8 y*pour2 py* &celle, queiay nommee reftant 35,
ilfaut mettre ae yy, Ceft a dire -- r24 yy, au lien de
Fit yy. & enfin g eftant 8, il faut mettre -- 64, pour -- gq.
Toutdemefme au lieude + x **--17 xx-- 20 X-- 6 00.
il faut e{crire ey 6-34 44+ 31597 400 D0,
Car 24 eft double de 17, & 313 en eft le quarré ioint au
quadruple de, & 400 eftle quarré de 20.

Tout de mefme auffy au lieu de
e+ aa a) +5304

: ;
ris A. a cow accr--Laace ao,
Il faut efcrire :
--a*
6 aa == a> --24a4¢¢000
A -=-2 £6 y pct yy --Aact 2

Carpet +$0a--ce, & pp, eftfa*-- aace + ¢*,&4r

eft -- $a*-+ aacc, & enfin -- qq eft--a*-- 2 arce --dac +.
Apres que Equation eft ainfi reduite a trois dimen-
fions, il faut chercher la valeur d’yy par la methode defia
expliquee; Er fi celle ne peut eftre trouuee , onn’a point
befoin

182

4,

THIRD BOOK

For the ambiguous™ sign put +2 in the second expression if +p
occurs in the first ; but if —p occurs in the first, write —2p in the sec-
ond; and on the contrary, put —4r if +r, and +4r if —r occurs; but
whether the first expression contains +q or —q we always write —q’
and ++? in the second, provided that x* and y® have the sign + ; other-
wise, we write +g? and —p2. For example, given
a* — 47? — 84 +35=—0
replace it by
y® — 8y* — 124y? — 64—0.

For since p= —4, we replace 2py* by —8y*t; and since r—=35, we
replace (p’—4r)y? by (16—140)4? or —124y?; and since g =8, we
replace —q? by —64.
Similarly, instead of
a* — 172%? — 20% —6=—0
we must write
y® — 34y* + 313y? — 400 —0,

for 34 is twice 17, and 313 is the square of 17 increased by four times 6,
and 400 is the square of 20.
In the same way, instead of

+44(Fa—2)P— (a +ac)e—Fat— Fare =0,

we must write
y + (a? — 2c?) 4 + (A — at) y* — a’ — 2at2 — a4 = 0;
for
1

Ate 5
p= Th ee a a cde a

And, finally, le oe
— q = —_—— —— .

When the equation has been reduced to three dimensions, the value
of y? is found by the method already explained. If this cannot be

: Abe Ly eet
(221 Descartes wrote “pour les signes -+ ou — que j’ai omis.

183

GEOMETRY

done it is useless to pursue the question further, for it follows ineVit-
ably that the problem is solid. If, however, the value of y* can be
found, we can by means of it separate the preceding equation into two
others, each of the second degree, whose roots will be the same as
those of the original equation. Instead of + 4#* + pa? + qr +r—0O0,
write the two equations

1

sh oe ees

ang +2rtyxtZytsprs =0.

' ‘ ; Lae ;
For the ambiguous signs write + oP in each new equation, when f
me ‘ a : ’ F
has a positive sign, and — oP when / has a negative sign, but write

+ > when we have — yx, and a when we have + yx, provided g has

a positive sign, and the opposite when q has a negative sign. It is then -
‘easy to determine all the roots of the proposed equation, and conse-
quently to construct the problem of which it contains the solution, by
the exclusive use of circles and straight lines. For example, writing
y® — 34y* + 313y? — 400 = 0 instead of x* — 174? — 20% —6—0 we
find that y? = 16; then, instead of the original equation

+ xt — 1727 — 20x —6=0

write the two equations + #7 — 4% —3=—0 and +4°+47 +2—0.

1
For, y = 4, — y? = 8, 6 =17, 7 = 20, and therefore

ree eal q
3 @ ae :

and Lapin ved q
ie a Hibs mite

184

Livre TRoistEesme, 385
befoin de paffer outre, car il fuit de la infalliblement,
quee problefme eft folide. Mais fion 1a trouve , on
peut diuifer par fon moyen !a precedente Equation en
deuxantres ,enchafcune defquelles la quantité incon-
nué n aura que deux dimenfions, 8 dont les racines fe-
ront les mef{mes que les ficnes. termite au lieu. de

roms ile caer ee ey COD
il faut efcrire ces deux autres
“tx--yx-syy.zp. s 20 0, &
xe ey xb yy tp. 20 0..
Et pour les fignes -- & -- que iay omis, s*ilya+- pen
l’Equation precedente, il faut mettre + 4 en chafcune
de celles 30 &--$p,silyaen l'autre -- p. B. ais il faut

mettre -- .en celle olily a--y x; & nos encelle ot il
ya-+yx, lorfqu'ily a-- genlapremiere. Et au con-

7
traire sly a-- q, ilfaut mettre-- ~, en celle. ott il y a

ony x; & aed celleotilya--yx. Enfuite dequoy
il eft ayfé de connoiftretoutes les racines de l’Equation
propofée, & par confequent de conftruire le problefme,
dont elle contient la folution, fans y employer que des
cercles, 8 deslignes droites.

Par exemplea caufe que faifant

yo --34y* + 313 yy- 400 50 0, pour
#17 Kx--20K--6 0, ONtrouue que yy eft 16, on-

doii au lieu de cete Equation
Het * an 17 KN 20K -- 20K -- 6 D0, efcrire ces deux
Ccc autres

185

386 LA°"GEOMETRIE.

autres ++ xx--4.at-- 3.200. Ett ax 4x200,
cary eft 4, zyy elt8, pelt 17, & 4 eft 20, de fagonque
ayy > 3 p-- fait - 3,8 +Syy --=p +} fait + 2. Et
tirantlesracines de ces deux Equations, ontrouue tou-
tes les mefmes , que fionles tiroitdecelle ot eft x*, a
{cauoir on en trouue vne vraye, quieft Y 7 + 2,& trois
fauffes, quifont / 7--2,2-- ¥ 2, &2-- 2.

Ainfi ayant «*-- 4 xx -- 8 «+ 35 20 0,pourceque laracine

dey §--8.y*-- 124 yy “+ 64 500, eft derechef 16, il faut
efcrire

xx 4x § 0, 8xX-+4AN+7DO.

: a Ie: 4
Car icy - yy -- 3p -- pia 55.00 Saya
fait7. Et pourcequ’on netrouue aucune racine, ny
vraye, ny fauffe ,en ces deux dernieres Equations , on
connoift de la que les quatre de Equation dont.elles
procedent font imaginaires; & que le Problefme, pour
lequelonla trouuée, eftplande fanature ; mais qu'il
ne fcauroit en aucune fagon eftre conftruit,a caufe que
les quantités données ne peuuent fe ioindre.
Tout de me{me ayant
+-$aa --a3\ -+ s$a'
4H . ; 46
% an) 66 [eae tee lt
pourcequ’on trouue #a-t cc pour yy, il fant efcrire
gz -- Vaatooxt+iaa-- taVaat ce wo, &
gx-+- Vaatcoxzt+iaat av aatcewo.

Car y eft Yaa -+- cc, & + Ey + fp eitpaa, & 7
eta faa-+-cc, D’odonconnoift que la valeurde z
eft.

186

THIRD BOOK

Obtaining the roots of these two equations, we get the same results as
if we had obtained the roots of the equation containing +*, namely, one
true root, V7 + 2,and three false ones, V7 = 2,2+ V2, and2— v2.
Again, given +*—417?—8r+35 —0, we have y°—8y*—124y?—64 = 0,
and since the root of the latter equation is 16, we must write
—4r+5 =O and +7?+4%+7 —0. For in this case,

ta SOG
te) I Nite ie ee
and Ly one ee ae
Seo Bie as

Now these two equations have no roots either true or false," whence
we know that the four roots of the original equation are imaginary ;
and that the problem whose solution depends upon this equation is
plane, but that its construction is impossible, because the given quanti-
ties cannot be united.”

Similarly, given

a+ (Fe —_ 2) 2— (a3 + ac*?)z2+ oat — Ta’? =0,
since we have found y? = a? + c?, we must write
2— Ve + eet 5 ae a Va2+2=0,
and

2+Ve+e2+ Sat = ava +2 =0.

[5] That is, all its roots are imaginary. ;
24] That is, the given quantities cannot be taken together in the same problem.

187

GEOMETRY

1 3 ioe!
For y= Va?+¢ and Set 5 p= 4% and 5, =34 Va?+¢*, then

we have

or

Lat aoe 1 1 1 >) 2
z=y Va +¢ J = at petyzeNva +c.

Now we already have z+ a = x, and therefore x, the quantity in

the search for which we have performed all these operations, is

a : ot fies eye hee ; a?+ ; avnet+e.

To emphasize the value of this rule, I shall apply it to a problem.
Given the square AD and the line BN, to prolong the side AC to E, so
that EF, laid off from E on EB, shall be equal to NB.

Pappus showed that if BD is produced to G, so that DG = DN, and
a circle is described on BG as diameter, the required point E will be
the intersection of the straight line AC (produced) with the circum-
ference of this circle.“

Those not familiar with this construction would not be likely to dis-
cover it, and if they applied the method suggested here they would
never think of taking DG for the unknown quantity rather than CF
or FD, since either of these would much more easily lead to an equa-

@8] Pappus Lib. VII, Prop. 72, Vol. II, p. 783. The following is in substance
the proof given by Pappus. He first gives an elaborate proof of the following
lemma: Given a square ABCD, and E a point in AC produced, EG perpendicular
to BE at E, meeting BD produced in G, and F the point of intersection of BE and
CD. Then CD? ++ FE? =DG.? Then he proceeds as follows: By the construc
tion given in the problem, DN*=BD?+ BN’. By the lemma, DG?=CD*+ FE’.
By construction, BD = CD and DG=DN. Therefore, FE = BN.

188

Livre TROISIESME 385

~ 2 eanaenee a
ett Yaa cc-b V --L ga ro + hay aa +e

oubien 3 Y aa + ce ~V Jaa + ete bay aatee,
Et pourceque nous auions fait cy deffus x -+ Las0x,
nous apprenons que la quantitéx, pour la connoiflance
de laquelle nous auons fait toutes ces Operations, eft

--hat V yaa bcc. V tcowkaathaY aa + 66.

3 |

Mais afin qu’on puiffe mieux connoiftre I'vtilité de ietebee

cete reigle il faut que ie applique a quelq; Problefine. ee re

Sile quarré A D, & Ia ligne B N eftant donnés, il fant “""°"*
prolonger le cofte’A C iufquesa E, en forte qa’E F,tirée
d’E versB, foit efgale a NB. On apprent de Pappus,
qu’ayant premierement prolongé B D iufques a G,en
forte que DG foit efgale 4D N, & ayant defcrit vn cer-
cle dont le diametre foit BG , fion prolonge la ligne
droite A C, elle rencontreralacirconference de ce cer-
cle au point E, qu’ondemandoit. Maispour ceux qui ne
fcauroiet point cete coftruction elle feroit aflés difficile
4 rencotrer, & en la cherchat par la methode icy propo-
{ée, ilsne s’aviferoiet iamais de predre DG pour la qua-
titéinconnué, maisplutoft CF, ou FD, acaufe que ce
Ccc2 font

189

388 La GEOMETRIE.

font elles quiconduifent le plus ayfement al/Equatio: &
lorsils en trouueroiét vnequine feroit pas facile a deme-
flet, fans la reigle que ie viens d’expliquer. Car pofant a
pour BD ouC D,&¢ pour EF , & x pour DF, onaCFE
20 a--x,8¢ come C F oua--*,eft aF Eouc,ainfiF D ou x,

cx : 4
efta BF, quiparconfequent eft ——. Puisacaufe du tri-

angle rectangle B D F, dont les coftés font I’vn « & Vau-
tre a, leurs quarrés, qui font xx -+- aa, font efgaux ace-

COXX

luy de la baze, quieft [77 3;, de fagon que multi-
pliant le tout par xx-—-2ax-taa,on trouue que E-
quation eft x *--2a4 > +2 a@xx--243K--a* Dee,
oubien x*-- 24x} fal ux--2aix-tra*oe. Eton
connoift par les reigles precedentes,que fa racine, qui
eft lalongeur delaligne DF, eft a-+- Y La atts C

a
me V sco Laat yay aat ce,

Que fion pofoit BF, ou CE, ou BE pour la quantitd
imconnué, on viendroit derechefa ye Equation, en Ia-
quelleil y auroit 4 dimenfions, mais qui feroit plas ayfée
adémefler, & ony viendroit affes ayfement ; au lieu. que
fic’eftoit D G qu’on fuppofaft , on viendroit beaucoup
plus difficilement a "Equation, mais auffy elle feroit tres
fimple. Cequeie mets icy pour vous auertir, que lorf
que le Problefme propofen’eft point folide, fi enle cher-
chant par vn chemin on vient avne Equation fort com.
pofee,on peut ordinairement venira yneplusfimple, en
le cherchant par vn autre.

Ie pourrois encore aioufter diverfes reigles pour dé-
mefler les Equations, qui vont.au Cube , ou au Quarre

de

190

THIRD BOOK

tion. They would thus get an equation which could not easily be solved
without the rule which I have just explained.

For, putting a for BD or CD, c for EF and x for DF, we have
CF — a—zx, and, since CF is to FE as FD is to BF, we have

a—x:c=—-+:BF,

whence BF —=—“*

en Now, in the right triangle BDF whose sides are

+ and a, x°--a’, the sum of their squares, is equal to the square of the
242 :

hypotenuse, which is — Multiplying both sides by

4°—2ax+a?

«’—2ax+a
we get the equation,
4*—2ax°+-207?4?—2a?x+at = cx,
aS ie
4+*—2ax>-+ (2a?—c?) «?—2a*x+a*t = 0,

and by the preceding rule we know that its root, which is the length of
the line DF, is

1 1 1 aha 1 Tite
= +afee 2 E 2 2 2 ,
aoe ee rh Gem ptt yeNa te

If, on the other hand, we consider BF, CE, or BE as the unknown
quantity, we obtain an equation of the fourth degree, but much easier

[226]

to solve, and quite simply obtained.

Again, if DG were used, the equation would be much more difficult
to obtain, but its solution would be very simple. I state this simply to
warn you that, when the proposed problem is not solid, if one method
of attack yields a very complicated equation a much simpler one can
usually be found by some other method.

9 Taking BF as the unknown quantity, the resulting equation is
xt + 2cx? + (c2 — 2a”) x? — 2a2cx — 2c? = 0.

Rabuel, p. 487.

191

GEOMETRY

I might add several different rules for the solution of cubic and
biquadratic equations but they would be superfluous, since the con-
struction of any plane problem can be found by means of those already
given.

I could also add rules for equations of the fifth, sixth, and higher
degrees, but I. prefer to consider them all together and to state the
following general rule:

First, try to put the given equation into the form of an equation
of the same degree obtained by multiplying together two others, each
of a lower degree. If, after all possible ways of doing this have been
tried, none has been sucessful, then it is certain that the given equation
cannot be reduced to a simpler one; and, consequently, if it is of the
third or fourth degree, the problem depending upon it is solid; if of
the fifth or sixth, the problem is one degree more complex, and so
on. I have also omitted here the demonstration of most of my state-
ments, because they seem to me so easy that if you take the trouble
to examine them systematically the demonstrations will present them-
selves to you and it will be of much more value to you to learn them
in that way than by reading them.

192

os

Livre TROIFSTtESME. 389
de quarre, mais elles feroient fuperflués; car lorfque les
Problefmes font plans ,onen peut toufiours trouuer la
conftruction par celles cy,

Te pourrois auffy en adioufter d autres pour les Equa- Regle
tions qui montent iufques au furfolide, ou au Quarré de eee
cube, ou au dela, mais i’ayme mieux les comprendre duireles
toutes en vne, & dire en general, que lorfqu’on atafché fae ;
de les reduire a mefme forme, que celles d’antant de di- ‘ent le
menfions, quivienent dela multiplication de deux au- cae
tresquien ont moins, & qu’ayant dénombré tous les
moyens, par lefquels cete multiplication eft poffible, la
chofe n’a pi fucceder par aucun, on doit s’affurer qu’el-
lesne {gauroient eftre reduites a de plus fimples. En for-
te que fila quantité inconnué a 3 on 4 dimenfions,le Pro-
blef{me pour lequel-on Ia cherche eft folide; & fielle ena
5,00 6,il eft d’vn degré plus-compofe; & ainfi des autres.

Aurefte i’ay omis icy les demonftrations de la plus
part de ce que iay dit a caufe qu’elles m’ont fembl¢ fi fa-
ciles, que pourviique vous prenies Ja peine d’examiner
methodiquement fiiay failly, elles fe prefenteront a vous
d’elles mefme: & il feraplus vtile de les apprendre ence-
te facon, qu’enleslifant. ae

Or quand oneft affurd, que le Problefine propofé eft serie”
folide , foit que l’Equation par laquelle on le cherche ae
monte au quarré de quarré, foit qu elle ne monte QUE tous les
jufques au cube, on peut toufiours en trouuer la racine aor
par I'vne des trois fections coniques , laquelle que ce foit des, te-
ou mefme par quelque partie del’'vned'elles, tant petite et
qu'elle puiffe eftre; en ne fe feruat au refte que de lignes quatié de
droites,&¢decercles. Mais ie me contenteray icy de HHeeicehs

Cccs3 donner menfons.

193

390 La GEOMETRIE.

donner vne reigle generale pourles trouuer toutes par le
moyend’yne Parabole, a caufe qu'elle eft en quelque fa-
gon la plus fimple.

Premierement il faut ofter le fecond terme de l’Equa-
tion propofee, s’il n’eft defia nul, & ainfi la reduire a tel-
le forme, x3 20". ap x.aaq, filaquantite inconnué n’a
que trois dimenfions; oubien atelle, 7*20*. apzz. aaqz,
a+7,fi elle en a quatre;oubienen prenant 4 pour I'ynité,
a telle, x °20". pz. 4, Katelle
R190". PRR. qRs Te

adr-r——

licae prem r ee ae

Apres

194

THIRD BOOK

Now, when it is clear that the proposed problem is solid, whether
the equation upon which its solution depends is of the fourth degree or
only of the third, its roots can always be found by any one of the three
conic sections, or even by some part of one of them, however small,
together with only circles and straight lines. I shall content myself
with giving here a general rule for finding them all by means of a para-
bola, since that is in some respects the simplest of these curves.

First, remove the second term of the proposed equation, if this is not
already zero, thus reducing it to the form 2? = +apzg+a°q, if the given
equation is of the third degree, or 2* = +apg?a°qz+a"'r, if it is of the
fourth degree. By choosing a as the unit, the former may be written

195

GEOMETRY

2° == +pze+q and the latter 2* = +p2?+qze+r. Suppose that the para-
bola FAG (pages 194-198) is already described; let ACDKL be
its axis, a, or 1 which equals 2AC, its latus rectum (C being within the
parabola), and A its vertex. Lay off CD equal to $p so that the points
D and A lie on the same side of C if the equation contains +) and on
opposite sides if it contains —p. Then at the point D (or, if p =O, at
C), erect DE perpendicular to CD, so that DE is equal to 4q,
and about E as center with AE as radius describe the circle FG, if the
given equation is a cubic, that is, if r is zero.

196

Livre TrRotsiesme, $91

Apres cela fuppofant quela Parabole FAG eft defia
defcrite, & que fon aiffieu eft AC DKL, & que fon co-
{té droit eft 2, our, dont A Ceftlamoiti¢, & enfin que
Fe point C eft au dedans de cete Parabole, & que A eneft
le fommet, I! faut faire C Doo 4p, & laprendre du mef
me cofté, yu'eft le point A auregard du point C, s’il ya
fp enl Equation; mais s‘il y a-- pil faut la prendre de
autre cofte. Et du point D, oubien, fila quantité

peftoit nulle,du point Cil faut efleuer vne ligne a an-
gles droits infques aE, en forte qu'elle foit efgale a3 q.

Et enfin du centre E il faut defcrire le cercle FG, soe

197

392 La GEOMETRIE.

le demidiametre foit
AE, fi Equation
n'eft que cubique, en
forte que fa quanti-
tér foit nulle. Mais
quand il ya + ril
faut dans cete ligne
A E prolongéee, pren-
dre d’'vn cofté AR
efgale ar, & de l'autre
AS efgale au cofté
droit de la Parabole
quieft 1, & ayantde-

{crit vn cercle dont le diametre foit R S, il faut faire AH

198

perpediculaire fur
AE, laquelle A H
rencontre ce cer-
cleR HS au point
H, qui eft celuy par
ot. l’autre cercle
FHG doit pafier.
Et quandily a -- 7
il faut aprés auoir
ainfi trouue laligne
AH, infcrire AT,
qui luy foit efgale,
dans vn autre cer-
cle, dont A Efoit
le diametre, 8& lors
ceft par le point T,

que

THIRD BOOK

If the equation contains + 7, on one side of AE produced, lay off
AR equal to r, and on the other side lay off AS equal to the latus
rectum of the parabola, that is, to 1, and describe a circle on RS as
diameter. Then if AH is drawn perpendicular to AE it will meet the
circle RHS in the point H, through which the other circle FHG must
pass.

If the equation contains —~yr, construct a circle upon AE as
diameter and in it inscribe AI, a line equal to AH; then the first

circle must pass through the point I.

[1 That is, draw a chord equal to AH.

199

GEOMETRY

Now the circle FG can cut or touch the parabola in 1, 2, 3, or 4
points; and if perpendiculars are drawn from these points upon the
axis they will represent all the roots of the equation, both true and
false. If the quantity q is positive the true roots will be those perpen-
diculars, such as FL, on the same side of the parabola, as E,"™ the
center of the circle; while the others, as GK, will be the false roots.
On the other hand, if qg is negative, the true roots will be those on the
opposite side, and the false or negative roots“ will be those on the
same side as E, the center of the circle. If the circle neither cuts noi
touches the parabola at any point, it is an indication that the equation
has neither a true nor a false root, but that all the roots are imagi-
natya |

This rule is evidently as general and complete as could possibly be
desired. Its demonstration is also very easy. If the line GK thus con-
structed be represented by z, then AK is 2”, since by the nature of the
parabola, GK is the mean proportional between AK and the latus rec-
tum, which is 1. Then if AC or 3, and CD or 4f, be subtracted from

AK, the remainder is DK or EM, which is equal to 22—3p—4 of which
the square is

eae i 1
= poe Ph ge 2 ae
+ 4 4
; 1
And since DE=KM= 2% the whole line GM Sp. 8 g, and the square

1 :
of GM equals 2?+gz+ 42° Adding these two squares we have

(heats tt RE Pee a
lie Mig Choi Roget! hanno f= 6

("I That is, on the same side of the axis of the parabola.

1 “Tes fausses ou moindres que rien.” This is the first time Descartes has
directly used this synonym.

91 Tt may be noted that Descartes considers the cubic as a quartic having zero
as one of its roots. Therefore, the circle always cuts the parabola at the vertex.
It must then cut it in another point, since the cubic must have one real root. It
may or may not cut it in two other points. It may cut it in two coincident points
at the vertex, in which case the equation reduces to a quadratic.

200

Livre TROISIESME, 393
que doit paffer FIG le premier cercle cherchd. Orce
cercle F G peut coupper, ou toucher la Parabole enr,
OU 2, OU 3, OU 4 poins, defquels tirant des perpendiculai-
res {ur laiffieu, on atoutes les racines de l’Equation tant
vrayes, que fauffes. A fcauoir fila quantite’g eft marquee
du figne +, les vrayes racines feront celles de ces per-
pendiculaires , qui fe tronueront du mefmecofteé dela
parabole, que Ele centreducercle, comme FL ; &les
autres, comme GK, feront fauffes: Mais au contraire fi
cete quantite q eft marquee du figne -- les vrayes feront
cellesdelantrecofté; & les fauffes, ou moindres que
rien feront du cofté ou eft E le centre du cercle. Eten-
fin fice cercle ne ccuppe,ny ne touche la Parabole en au-
cun point, cela tef{moigne qu'il n’y a aucune racine ny
vraye ny fauffe en l’Equation , & qu’elles fonttoutes
imaginaires. En forte que cete reigle eft la plus genera-
le , & la plus accomplie quill foit poffible de fou-
haiter.

Et la demonftration en eft fort ayfee. Car fi la ligne

G K, trouuée par cete conftruction , fenomme x, AK
’ fera xz, acaufedelaParabole , en laquelle GK doit
eftre moyene proportionelle, entre A K, & le coftdé droit
qui eft 1. puis fide AKrofte AC, quieft;, & CD qui
eft }p, ilrefte D K, on EM, quieft 7z-- zp-- 3, dont le
quarre eft

ta peya-xxd-tpp-+ p+. &Kacaufe queDE, ou
KM eft} q, latouteG Meftz-+ 34, dont le quarré eft
gx qx qq, &affemblant ces deux quarrés, ona
eer ae Fg ai tall al ee

Ddd pour

201

394 La GEOMETRIE.

pour le quarrede laligneG E, acaufe qu'elle eft la baze
dutriangle rectangle EMG.

Maisacaufe que cete mefme ligne GE eft le demi-
diametre du cercle FG, elle fe peut encore expliquer en
d'autres termes,a f{cauoir E D eftant 74, & AD eftant
gpt+ZEAck Y 44q+2 pp-F 3 p+ gacaufe de I’an-
gledroit ADE, puis HA cftant moyene proportionelle
entre A S quieft: & AR quieft r,elle eft Yn &acau-
fede rangle drotEA Be le quarréde HE, on EG eft
399+ 3PP +: a “i- 4 +1: fibienque il y a Equation

entre

202

THIRD BOOK
for the square of GE, since GE is the hypotenuse of the right triangle
EMG. —

But GE is the radius of the circle FG and can therefore be expressed

in another way. For since ED —4q, and AD—4 p+ i, and ADE is
a right angle, we have

il 1 1 if
EA= 2 2

Then, since HA is the mean proportional between AS or 1 and AR or r,

EVA Vr; and since EAH is aright angle, the square of HE or of EGis

lean een eT

and we can form an equation from this expression and the one already

203

GEOMETRY
obtained. This equation will be of the form 2* = pz*—qz--r, and there-
fore the line GK, or 2, is the root of this equation, which was to be
proved. If you will apply this method in all the other cases, with the
proper changes of sign, you will be convinced of its usefulness, without
my writing anything further about it.

Let us apply it to the problem of finding two mean proportionals

between the lines a and q. It is evident that if we represent one of the

2 ee

‘ ° 2 Zz Zz
mean proportionals by 2, then a:z=z:—- =~ :-,. Thus we have an
a a

3
equation between g and namely, 2=a’g.

Describe the parabola FAG with its axis along AC, and with
AC equal to 4a, that is, to half the latus rectum. Then erect CE
equal to 4 q and perpendicular to AC at C, and describe the circle AF

204

LivRE TROISIESME, 395
entre cete fomme & la precedente. cequieft le mefme
que %* 20" pxx--q x-+ r. & par confequent Ia ligne trou-
uee GK quia efté nommee zeft la racine de cete Equa-
tion. ainfi qu'il falloit demonftrer. Et fi vous appliqués
ce mefme calcul a tous les autres cas de cete reigle, en
changeant les fignes -++ & -- felon l’occafion , vous y
trouueres voftre conte en mefme forte, fans qu'il foit be-
tfoin que ie m’y arefte.

Sion veut donc fuiuant cete reigle trouuer deux mos
yennes proportionelles entre les lignes @ & 9g; chafcun
{Gait que pofant z pourl'yne, comme a ett az, ainfi

23

za 8 = 4 — ,defagonqu’il y a Equationentre g & Liinuen-

Set Sd an? tion de
ere. deux mo-
i= Ceft adire, x3 20* *aaq.Etla Parabole F AG eftant yenespro-

portio-

Ddd 2 de- nelles,

205

396 La GEOMETRIE.

defcrite, auec la partie de fon aiflieu A C, quieft 5 ala
moitiédu cofté droit ; il faut du point C efleuer la per-
pendiculaire C E efgalea 4 7, &¢ducentre E, parA, de-
fcriuant le cercle A F, ontrouue FL, & LA, pour les
deux moyennes cherchees.

ba facon, , Pout de mefme fi on veut dinifer l’'angle NOP, ou-
dedivifer bienl’arc, ou portion decercle N QT P, en trois par-
sas ae ties efgales; faifant N O 20 1, pourle rayon du cercle, &
. N Pq, pour la fubtendue de l’arc donnd, & NQwz,
pour Ja fubtendue du tiers de cet are ; Equation

vient,
2330*3z--q. Car ayant tiré les lignes NQ, OQ,
OT; & faifant QS parallelea TO, on voit que comme
N OeftaN Q, ainfiN QaQR,& QRaRS; en forte
que

206

THIRD BOOK

about E as center, passing through A. Then FL and LA are the
required mean proportionals.™

Again, let it be required to divide the angle NOP, or rather,
the circular arc NOTP, into three equal parts. Let NO=1 be
the radius of the circle, NP = q be the chord subtending the given arc,
and NQ —z be the chord subtending one-third of that arc; then the
equation is 2* —3z—gq. For, drawing NQ, OQ and OT, and drawing
QS parallel to TO, it is obvious that NO is to NQ as NQ is to OR as
QR is to RS. Since NO = 1 and NO =z, then OR = 2? and RS =2';
and since NP or q lacks only RS or 2° of being three times NQ or 2, we
have g = 3z—2° or 2? = 3zg—q.™!

Describe the parabola FAG so that CA, one-half its latus rectum,

al
shall be equal to <3 take CD= Saad the perpendicular DE= 5 9

then describe the circle FAgG about E as center, passing through A.
This circle cuts the parabola in three points, F, g, and G, besides the
vertex, A. This shows that the given equation has three roots, namely,
the two true roots, GK and gk, and one false root, FL. The smaller

1] This may be shown as follows: Draw FM _ to EC; let FL=z. From
the nature of the parabola, FL’=a . AL; AL=*, EC?+CA’=EA’; EM’+FM’

ee 2 hes 1 pga we
=EF’; EA=4+° +; EM’=(EC — FL)?= G 7-2) » FM’=CL’= (AL—AC)?

4
3 OW aan UR 2 EF=EA
= (=-4) 3 EF = aaniy thd qgeteti—z ar = But =A.
a
5 g eng 2 Ai 2 a
ye i IE a as Fhe

whence 23 = a7.
21 / NOQ is measured by arc NQ;
ZQNS is measured by 4 arc QP or arc NQ;
ZSOR— LOOT is measured by arc QT or NQ;
PZOON = NOR —,ZOSR:

OR = 5? oho = Let OT cut NP at M.
Nie 2NR+MR= 2NOQ+MR
= 2NOQ+MS—RS
= 2NQ+QT—RS
= 3NO — RS.
Or q= 32 — 2°.
Raptss & oa g being on the opposite side of the axis from E, and F being on the
same side.

207

GEOMETRY

of the two roots, gk, must be taken as the length of the required line
NO, for the other root, GK, is equal to NV, the chord subtended by
one-third the arc VNP,' which, together with the are NOP consti-
tutes the circle; and the false root, FL, is equal to the sum of QN and
NV, as may easily be shown.”

It is unnecessary for me to give other examples here, for all prob-
lems that are only solid can be reduced to such forms as not to require
this rule for their construction except when they involve the finding
of two mean proportionals or the trisection of an angle. This will be
obvious if it is noted that the most difficult of these problems can be

@4] For proof, see Rabuel, page 535.

Let AB=bs EBs=MR= m= NLS ee AK SE ARH so Ao
KG=y; kg=z, FL=v.Then GM=y+c, gm=ste, FN=v—c, GK’=a.AK,

res 2 br 2
at=y", t=, gh =a. Ak, =e, SS, FL? =a. AL, ar=v?, r=,
a

yy
ME=AB—AK=6— —
a

2 a Lz. a
mE= 6 — EN= _ a6 EG? =EM’?+ MG
BA’? =AB?+ BE”

aoe Fen}, 2 4
EG =p Zt 2eyte
2ab = Ur ieet ey : 2ab =|" ere
2

y8+2a%e+a2%y  s8+2a2e+a2z
=e
2a?c = 22y + ay?

Similarly,
2a2c — vy — vy?
ey + ay? = vy — vy? v—2=vytey
hae dae v=yte [Pe
Rabuel, p. 540. paces

208

Livre TroistesmMe. 397
que N O eftant 1,& N Qeftant x,QReft xz, & R Sett
x': Eta caufe qu’ils’en faut feulement RS, ou z', que la
ligne NP, qui eft g, ne foit triplede N Q, quieft x, on
aq 503 x%-- x oubien,

25903 2-9.

Puis la Parabole F A G eftant defcrite , & C A la moi-
ti¢éde fon cofté droit principal eftant$, fion prent CD
50 3, & laperpendiculaire DE 204.7, & que du centre E,
par A, ondefcriue le cercle F A gG, ilcouppe cete Pa-
rabole aux troispoins F, g,& G, fans conter le point A.
qui eneft le fommet. Ce qui monftre qu’ily a trois raci-
nesen cete Equation, a fganoirlesdeuxG K,& gk, qui
font vrayes; & latroifiefme qui eft fauffe, 4 fcauoir F L.
Etdeces deuxvrayes c’eft gk la plus petite qu’il faut
prendre pourla ligne N Q qui eftoit cherch¢e. Car l’au-
treGK, eftefgalea N V, lafubtendue de la troifiefme
partie del’arc N V P, quiauec l’autre arc N QP acheue
lecercle. Et lafauffe F L eft efgale aces deux enfemble
QN & NV, ainfi quil eft ayf{éa voir parle calcul.

I] feroit fuperflus que iem/areftaffe a donner icy d’au- Que toes
tres exemples; car tous les Problefmes qui ne font que piece
folides fe peuvent reduirea tel point, qu’on n'a aucun be- eee A
foin de cete reigle pour les conftruire finon entant qu’el- reduirea
le fert atrouuer deux moyennes proportionelles,oubien foneee
a diuifer vn angle en trois partiesefgalés. Ainfi que vous tions.
connoiftres en confiderant, que leurs difficultés peuuent
toufiours eftre comprifes en des Equations, quine mon-
tent que infque au quarré de quarré, ou aucube : Et que
toutes celles qui montent au quarré de quarré, fe redui-
fent au quarré, parle moyen de quelques autres , qui ne

Ddd 3 montent

209

398 La GEOMETRIE.
montent que infques au cube: Et enfin qu’on peut-ofter
le fecond terme de celles cy. En forte qu’iln’y ena point
quine fe puiffereduirea quelq; vne de ces trois formes.
XFIT PX 4.
ROE prt gq.
ADO" PX J.
Or fionaz'c0*.-pz-+ q, lareigle dont Cardan at-
tribue l'inuention a vy»nommeé Scipio Ferreus , nous ap-
prent que la racine eft,

V Cig V5qq+ Sep) WV CRS HY gg igp

Comme auffy lorfqu’ona 73 30*-+pz+q, & que le

quarrddela moiti¢ du dernier terme eft plus grand que

Je cube du tiers de la quantit¢ connué du penultiefme,
vne pareille reigle nous apprent que la racine eft,

C+egt aq BP + V C+ hq 499?

D’oi il paroift qu’on peut conftruire tous les Problef-

mes, dont les didicultés fe reduifent al’vne de ces deux

formes, fans auoir befoin des feCtions coniques pour au-

tre chofe, que pour tirer les racines cubiques de quel-

ques quantité, donnees, ceft a dire, pour trouuer deux

moyennes proportionelles entre ces quantités & I’vnite.

Puis fionay} 290 *-+ px+q, & que le quarré de Ia

moitié du dernier terme nefoit point plus grand que le

cube du tiers de la quantitéconnué du penultiefme, en

fuppofant le cercle N QP V,dont le demidiametre NO

foit 7} p, c'eftadire la moyenne proportionelle entre

le tiers dela quantité donnée p & I'vnitd; & fuppofane

auffy la ligne N P iufcrite dans ce cercle qui foit “
Celt

210

THIRD BOOK

expressed by equations of the third or fourth degree; that all equa-
tions of the fourth degree can be reduced to quadratic equations by
means of other equations not exceeding the third degree; and finally,
that the second terms of these equations can be removed; so that every
such equation can be reduced to one of the following forms:

f= —pe7-4 2 == Ped a— +pe—g
Now, if we have 2* — —pz-+q, the rule, attributed by Cardan™" to one
Scipio Ferreus, gives us the root

a ci Seay ‘| : ciel ee
PE VeetEe - gota et ee
Similarly, when we have 2? = -+pz+q where the square of half the

last term is greater than the cube of one-third the coefficient of the
next to the last term, the corresponding rule gives us the root

e+ ft dps s4/pe- tee ieee

It is now clear that all problems of which the equations can be
reduced to either of these two forms can be constructed without the
use of the conic sections except to extract the cube roots of certain
known quantities, which process is equivalent to finding two mean pro-
portionals between such a quantity and unity. Again, if we have
2°=-+pz+q, where the square of half the last term is not greater
than the cube of one-third the coefficient of the next to the last term,

describe the circle NOPV with radius NO equal to we p, that is to
the mean proportional between unity and one-third the known quantity
p. Then take NP = ef that is, such that NP is to q, the other known

(6) Cardan; Liber X, Cap. XI, fol. 29: “Scipio Ferreus Bononiensis iam annis
ab hinc triginta ferme capitulum hoc inuenit, tradidit uero Anthonio Marie Flor-
ido Veneto, qui ci in certamen cii Nicolao Tartalea Brixellense aliquando uenisset,
occasionem dedit, ut Nocolaus inuenerit & ipse, qui cum nobis rogantibus tradidis-
ser, suppressa demonstratione, freti hoc auxilio, demonstrationem queliuimus,
eamque in modos, quod diffcillimum fuit, redactam sic subjecimus.”

See also Cantor, Vol. Il (1), p. 444; Smith, Vol. IT, p. 462.

(2371 Descartes wrote this:

— =
Soa Renae ; BNE 99+ 5h.

PAU

GEOMETRY

quantity, as 1 is to 3 p, and inscribe NP in the circle. Divide each of

the two arcs NOP and NVP into three equal parts, and the required
root is the sum of NO, the chord subtending one-third the first arc, and
NV, the chord subtending one-third of the second arc.”

Finally, suppose that we have z* = pz—q. Construct the circle NOPV

whose radius NO is equal to,/ 1p, and let NP, equal to “2, be in-

scribed in this circle; then NQ, the chord of one-third the arc NOP,
will be the first of the required roots, and NV, the chord of one-third
the other arc, will be the second.

An exception must be made in the case in which the square of half
the last term is greater than the cube of one-third the coefficient of the
next to the last term; for then the line NP cannot be inscribed in
the circle, since it is longer than the diameter. In this case, the two

@51 Tt may be noted that the equation 23 = 3z— q may be obtained from the
equation 2? = 3z+q by transforming the latter into an equation whose roots have
the opposite signs. Then the true roots of s?=3z—q are the false roots of
23 = 3z-+q and vice-versa. Therefore FL =NQ+NP is now the true root.

2°91 The so-called irreducible case.

212

LivrE TROISIESME. 399

Qads

Cefta dire quifoit a l'autre quantité donnée g comme
I'ynitéeft au tiers de p; il ne faut que dinifer chafcun des
deuxarcs N Q P & NV Pentrois patties efgales, 8con
aura N Q, la fubtendue dutiers de I’vn, & N V la fub-
tendue du tiers de l’autre, quiiointes enfemble compo-
feront la racine cherchee.

Enfin fiona z3 20*p x--q , en fuppofant derechef Ie

cercle NQ PY, dont lerayon N O foit ¥ +p, & Vinfcri-

te NPfoit - , NQlafubtendué du tiers de l’'arc NQP fe-

ral’yne des racinescherchées, & NV la fubtendue du
tiersde l'autre arc feral’autre. Aumoinsfi le quarré de
Ja moiti¢ du dernier terme, n’eft point plus grand, que le
cube dutiers de la quantité connué du penultiefme. car
sileftoit plus grand,la ligne N Pne pourroit eftre in{cri-
tedanslecercle , acaufe quelleferoit plus longue que

fondiametre: Ce quiferoit caufe que lesdeux vrayes ra-
cines

213

a hie ILA GEOMETRIE,
cines decete Equation ne feroient qu’imaginaires , &
qu'ilny en auroit de reelles que Ia fauffe, qui foiuant Ta

reigle de Cardan feroit,
4 1 Me + f
Y Cig 4 V baq~ bpp + V C44 ~ VE qq-S".
ae Aurefte ileft a remarquer que cete fagon d’exprimer
pate? la valeur des racines par le rapport qu’elles ont aux co-
utes les {tés de certains cubes dont il n’y a}quele contenu qu’on

toutes les

are connoiffe, n’eft en rien plusintelligible, ny plus fimple,
quations que de les exprimer par le rapport qu’elles ont aux fub-
Pa tendnés de certains arcs, ouportionsde cercles , dont
de toures fe tripleeftdonnd. En forte que toutes celles ace Equa-
celles, qui tions cubiques qui ne peuuent eftre exprimées par les

tentque reiples de Cardan, le peuuent eftre autant ou plus claire-
iufquesau

quarré de ment parla fagonicy propafce.

gare Car fi par exemple , on penfe connoiftre la racine de
cete Equation, 320 * -- qz-+p. a caufe qu’on feait
qu’elleeft compofee de deux lignes. ‘dont I'vne eft le
cofté d’vn cube, duquel le contenu eft $ g, adionft¢ au
cofté d’vn quarré , duquel derechef le contenu eft
Eqq-- 3p}; Eclautre eft le cofteéd’vn autre cube, dont
fe contenu eftla difference , oe ve entre $9,& ie coftd
dece quarre ‘dont le contenu eft 4 9q -- =¢ p+, quieft tout’
ce qu’on en apprent par lareigle A Cardan, Il ny apojnt
de doute qu on ne connoiffe autant ou plas diftinéte-
ment la racine de celle cy, 3°50* + 9-- p, enla confi-
derantinfcrite dans vncercle, dont le demidiametre eft

VY tp, & {cachant qu'elle y eft la fubtendué d’vn arc’

dont le triple apour fafubtendue s Mefme ces ter-

mes

214

THIRD BOOK

.

roots that were true are merely imaginary, and the only real root is the
one previously false, which according to Cardan’s rule is

Furthermore it should be remarked that this method of expressing the
roots by means of the relations which they bear to the sides of certain

cubes whose contents only are known™"” is in no respect clearer or
simpler than the method of expressing them by means of the relations
which they bear to the chords of certain arcs (or portions of circles),
when arcs three times as long are known. And the roots of the cubic
equations which cannot be solved by Cardan’s method can be expressed
as clearly as any others, or more clearly than the others, by the method
given here.

For example, grant that we may consider a root of the equation
2° = —qz+p known, because we know that it is the sum of two lines

of which one is the side of a cube whose volunie ne qg increased by the

, : 1 ; ;
side of a square whose area 1s _ a7, and the other is the side of

ey
a2

; oe iL :
another cube whose volume is the difference between | q and the side

of a square whose area is ; Gg 27 EY Fs This is as much knowledge of

the roots as is furnished by Cardan’s method. There is no doubt that
the value of the root of the equation 2* —+qz—p is quite as well
known and as clearly conceived when it is considered as the length of a

: ‘ 4 1 ;
chord inscribed in a circle of radius , 5? and subtending an arc that

is one-third the arc subtended by a chord of length 4

[4] Descartes here makes use of the geometrical conception of finding the cube

root of a given quantity.

215

GEOMETRY

Indeed, these terms are much less complicated than the others, and
they might be made even more concise by the use of some particular

[242] :

feet is used to

symbol to express such chords,” just as the symbol ¥ _
represent the side of a cube.

By methods similar to those already explained, we can express the
roots of any biquadratic equation, and there seems to me nothing fur-
ther to be desired in the matter; for by their very nature these roots
cannot be expressed in simpler terms, nor can they be determined by
any constuction that is at the same time easier and more general.

It is true that I have not yet stated my grounds for daring to declare
a thing possible or impossible, but if it is remembered that in the method
I use all problems which present themselves to geometers reduce to a
single type, namely, to the question of finding the values of the roots
of an equation, it will be clear that a list can be made of all the ways of
finding the roots, and that it will then be easy to prove our method the
simplest and most general. Solid problems in particular cannot, as I
have already said, be constructed without the use of a curve more com-
plex than the circle. This follows at once from the fact that they all
reduce to two constructions, namely, to one in which two mean pro-

é [eet] This is another indication of the tendency of Descartes’s age toward sym-
bolism. This suggestion was never adopted.

(1 In Descartes’s notation, }/ C.

~

216

LivRE TROISISEME. 401

mes font beaucoup moins embaraffés que les autres , &
ils fe trouueront beaucoup plus cours fi on veut vfer de
quelque chiffre particulier pour exprimer ces fubten-
dués, ainfiqu’on fait duchiffre /C: pour exprimer le
cofté des cubes.

Et on peut auffy en fuite de cecy exprimer les racines

de toutes les Equations qui montent iufques au quarrd
de quarreé, par les reigles cy deffus expliquées. En forte
queie ne {cache rien de plus a defirer en cete matiere.
Car enfin la nature de ces racines ne permet pas qu’on
les exprime entermes plus fimples, ny qu’on les deter-
mine par aucune conftruction qui foit enfemble plus ge-
nerale & plus facile.

Il eft vray que ie nay pas encore dit fur quelles raifons Pour-
ie me fonde, pour ofer ainfi affurer, fi vne chofe eft pofli- atte
ble, ouneleft pas. Mais fion prent garde comment, par ee foli-
lamethode dont ieme fers, tout ce qui tombe fous la Sauna
confideration des Geometres, fe reduift a vn mefme Bachar ©
genre de Problefmes , qui eft de chercher la valeur des Ganatees
racines de quelque Equation ; on iugera bien qu’iln’eft es
pasmalayfd de faire vn dénombrement de toutes les vo- ny ceux
yespar lefquelles onles peut trouver, qui foit faffifant che
~ pour demonftrer qu’on a choifi la plus generale, & la plus pots fans
fimple. Et particulicrement pour cequi eft des Problef- pao:
mes folides, que ay dit ne pouuoireftre conftruis, fans gnes plus
qu’on y employe ‘quelque ligne plus compofée que la fées!
circulaire, c’eft chofe qu’on peut affés trouuer, de ce
qu’ilsfe reduifent tous adeux conftructions ; en I'vne
defquelles il faut auoir tout enfembleles deux poins,qui
determinent deux moyenes propotrtionelles entre deux

Eee lignes

217

402 La GEOMETRIE.

lignes donnees; en l'autre les deux poins , qui diuifent
en trois parties efgales vn arc donné: Car d’autant que la
courbure du cercle ne depend , que d’vn fimple rapport
de toutes fes parties, au point qui eneft le centre ; on ne
peut auffy s’en feruir qu a determiner vn feu] point entre
deux extremes,comme atrouver vne moyenne propor-
tionelle entre deux lignes droitcs données, ou diuifer en
deux vn arc donnée: Au lieu que la courbure des fections
coniques, dependant toufioursde deux diuerfes chofes,
peut aufly feruir a determiner deux poins differens.

Mais pour cete mefme raifonil eft impoffible , qu’au-
cundes Problefmes qui font d’vn degré plus compofes
que les folides, & qui prefuppofent l’inuention de quatre
moyennes proportionelles,ou la diuifion d’vn angle en
cing parties efgales, puiffent eftre conftruits paraucune
des feGtions coniques. C’eft pourquoy ie croyray faire en
cecy tout le mieux qui fe puiffe, fi ie donne vnereigle ge-
nerale pour les conftruire, en yemployant la ligne cour-
be qui fe defcrit par linterfectio d’vne Parabole & d’vne
ligne droite en lafagon cy deffus expliquée. car i’ofe af-
furer qu’'ilny ena point de plus fimpleen la nature, qui
puiffe feruirace mefme effect ; & vous aués vi comme
elle fuit immediatement les fections coniques, en cete
queftion tant cherchée par lesanciens, dont lafolution
enfeigne par ordre toutes les lignes courbes, qui doivent

‘Facony, eftre receués en Geometrie.
are Vousfgaues defiacomment, lorfqu’on cherche les

pourcon-

ftivire Quantités qui font requifes pour la conftruction de ces

tous les

abies Problefmes, on les peut toufiours reduire a quelque E-

mes Te quation, qui ne monte que iufques au quarrd¢ de cube, ou
UICS a

au
218

THIRD BOOK

portionals are to be found between two given lines, and one in which
two points are to be found which divide a given arc into three equal
parts. Inasmuch as the curvature of a circle depends only upon a sim-
ple relation between the center and all points on the circumference, the
circle can only be used to determine a single point between two
extremes, as, for example, to find one mean proportional between two
given lines or to bisect a given arc; while, on the other hand, since
the curvature of the conic sections always depends upon two different

[243]

things, it can be used to determine two different points.

For a similar reason, it is impossible that any problem of degree more
complex than the solid, involving the finding of four mean proportion-
als or the division of an angle into five equal parts, can be constructed
by the use of one of the conic sections.

I therefore believe that I shall have accomplished all that is possible
when I have given a general rule for constructing problems by means
of the curve described by the intersection of a parabola and a straight
line, as previously explained ;™’ for I am convinced that there is noth-
ing of a simpler nature that will serve this purpose. You have seen,
too, that this curve directly follows the conic sections in that question
to which the ancients devoted so much attention, and whose solution
presents in order all the curves that should be received into geometry.

[8] As for example, the distance of any point from the two foci. Descartes
does not say “all points on the circumference,” but “toutes ses parties.”
21 See page 84.

219

GEOMETRY

When quantities required for the construction of these problems are
to be found, you already know how an equation can always be formed
that is of no higher degree than the fifth or sixth. You also know how
by increasing the roots of this equation we can make them all true, and
at the same time have the coefficient of the third term greater than the
square of half that of the second term. Also, if it is not higher than
the fifth degree it can always be changed into an equation of the sixth
degree in which every term is present.

Now to overcome all these difficulties by means of a single rule, I
shall consider all these directions applied and the equation thereby
reduced to the form:

y— py’ +ay*—ry®-+sy?—ty+u = 0

in which q is greater than the square of $ p.

220

Livre TROISIESME. 403

aufurfolide. Puis vousf{gaucésaufly comment, enaug- ynekgua.
mentant la valeur desracines de cete Equation, on peut tion qui
tonfiours faire qu’elles deuienent toutes vrayes, 8 auec plus de.
cela que la quatité connué du troifiefme terme foit plus ® 4

‘ clions.
grande quele quarré de la moiti¢ de celle du fecond:Et
enfin comment, fi ellene monte que iufquesau furfoli-
de, onla peut hanffer iufques au quarré de cube; & fai-
te quela place d’aucun de fes termes ne manque d’eftre
remplie. Or affin que toutes les difficultés , dontil eft
icy queftion, puiffent eftre refolués par vne mefme rei-
gle, ie defire qu’on face toutes ces chofes, & par ce
moyen qu’on les reduife toufiours a yne Equation de
telle forme,
yoa-py' tay *--ry ir syyerLty-- Udo,
& en laquelle la quantité nommee g foit plus grande
quele quarré de la moitiéde celle qui eft nommée p.

Fee 2 Puis

221

404 La GEOMETRIE.

Puis ayant fait a
ligne B K indefi-
niement longue
des deux cofte;
& du point B
ayant tird la per-
pendiculaire AB,
dontla longueur
foir$ p;il faut dans
vn plan feparé de-
{crire wne Para-
bole , comme G
D F dont Ie cofté
droit principalfoit

t
Vit Yo é PP,
que ie nommeray
2 pour abreger.
Apré cela il faut
pofer Je plan dans
lequel eft cete Parabole fir celuy ou font les lignes AB &
BK, en forte que fonaiffieu D E fe rencontre iuftement
au deffus de la ligne droite BK: Er ayant pris la par-
tie de cet aiffien, qui eft entre les poins E & D, efgale a
2Vv
pa? 5
en telle fagon qu’eftantaufly appliquée fur le point A
du plan de deffous , elle demeure toufiours iointe a ces
deux poins, pendant qu’on hauffera ou baiffera la Para-

bole

il faut appliquer fur ce point E vne longue reigle,

220

THIRD BOOK

Produce BK indefinitely in both directions, and at B draw

[245]

AB perpendicular to BK and equal to $/. In a separate plane
describe the parabola CDF whose principal parameter is

Ace i +2

which we shall represent by 1

Now place the plane containing the parabola on that containing the
lines AB and BK, in such a way that the axis DE of the parabola falls

along the line BK. Take a point E such that DE = oye and place a

ruler so as to connect this point E and the point A vs the lower plane.
Hold the ruler so that it always connects these points, and slide the
parabola up or down, keeping its axis always along BK. Then the

[3] This does not mean in a fixed plane intersecting the first, but, for exam-
ple, on another piece of paper.

223

GEOMETRY

point C, the intersection of the parabola and the ruler, will describe
the curve ACN, which is to be used in the construction of the proposed
problem. ae

Having thus described the curve, take a point L in the line BK on the

ae
concave side of the parabola, and such that BL = DE= ae ; then lay

t
off on BK, toward B, LH equal to sale and from H draw HI

perpendicular to LH and on the same side as the curve ACN. Take
HI equal to

aE icieliees a
nw An? WV u

which we may, for the sake of brevity, set equal to — Join L andI, and
: Ww

describe the circle LPI on LI as diameter; then inscribe in this circle

the line LP equal to “ stpNu, Finally, describe the circle PCN about
7

2
I as center and passing through P. This circle will cut or touch the

curve ACN in as many points as the equation has roots; and hence the
perpendiculars CG, NR, QO, and so on, dropped from these points
upon BK, will be the required roots. This rule never fails nor does it
admit of any exceptions.

For if the quantity s were so large in proportion to the others, p, q,
r, t, u, that the line LP was greater than the diameter of the circle

224

Livre TROISIESME, 405
bole tout le long de laligne BK, furlaquelle fon aiffieu
eft appliqué au moyen dequoy/’interfection de cete Pa-
rabole, & de cete reigle, qui fe fera au point C , defcrira
laligne courbe A CN, quieft celle dont nous avons be-
foinde nous feruir pour la conftruction da Problefme
propofé. Car apres qu’élle eftainfi defcrite, fi on prent
le point L en la ligne B K, ducofté vers lequeleftrourné
lefommet de la Parabole, & qu’on face BL efgale x D

E, ceft adirea a Puis du point L , versB , quon
prene en la mefme ligne BK , la ligne LH, efgale 4
Wai & que di point H ainfitrouud, on tire 4 angles
droits, du cofte qu’eft la courbe ACN, laligneHI,

dontla I foit 4 gui pour
ont la longeurloit [> 7 Tivo qui pour abreger

fera nommée =: Et apres, ayant ioint lespoins L & I,
qu’on defcriuele cercle L PI, dont IE foit le diametre;.
& qu'on infcriue en ce cercle la ligne LP dont Ja lon-
V supVy

nie

geur foit : Puis enfin du centre I, parle point P

ainfitrouué, qu’on defcriue lecercleP CN. Ce cercle
couppera ou touchera laligne courbe ACN, enautant
de ppins qu’ily aura de racines en |’Equation : Enforte
que les perpendiculaires tirées de ces poins fur laligne
BK,commeC G, N R, QO, & femblables, feront les
racinescherchees. Sans quily ait aucune exception ny
aucun deffaut encetereigle. Car fi la quantité » cftoit
fi grande, 4 proportion des autres, 7, 7,4, & v, que lali-
ene LP fe trouuaft plus grande quele diametre ducer-.
Eee 3 cle

225

426 La GEOMETRIE.

cleI L,en forte quelle n’y puft eftre infcrite, il ny auroit
aucune racine enl‘Equation propofee qui_ne fuft imagi«
naire: Non plus que file cercle I P eftoit fi petit, qu’'ilne
coupaft la courbe AC Nenaucunpoint. Etilla peut
couper en fix differens , ainfi qu'il peut y auoir fix
diuerfes racines en!’Equation. Mais lorfqu’il la coupe
enmoins , cela tefmoigne qu'il y a quelaues vnes de
ces racines qui font efgales entre elles , oubien qui ne
font qu imaginaires.

Que

226

THIRD BOOK

LI," so that LP could not be inscribed in it, every root of the pro-
posed equation would be imaginary ; and the same would be true if the
circle IP“? were so small that it did not cut the curve ACN at any
point. The circle IP will in general cut the curve ACN in six differ-
ent points, so that the equation can have six distinct roots." But if
it cuts it in fewer points, this indicates that some of the roots are equal
or else imaginary.

IT hat is, the circle IPL, of which the diameter is t, page 222.°
2] That is, the circle PCN.

8] The points determining these roots must be points of intersection of the
circle with the main branch of the curve obtained, that is, of the branch ACN.

227

GEOMETRY

If, however, this method of tracing the curve ACN by the transla-
tion of a parabola seems to you awkward, there are many other ways
of describing it. We might take AB and BL as before (page 226), and
BK equal to the latus rectum of the parabola, and describe the semi-
circle KST with its center in BK and cutting AB in some point S.
Then from the point T where it ends, take TV toward K equal to BL
and join S and V. Draw AC through A parallel to SV, and draw SC
through S parallel to BK; then C, the intersection of AC and SC will
be one point of the required curve. In this way we can find as many
points of the curve as may be desired.

228

LivRE TROISIESME, 40?
Que fila'fagon de tracer la ligne A C N par le moune-
ment d’vne Parabole vous femble incommode, ileft ay-
f{éde trouuer plufieurs autres moyens pour la defcrire.
Comme fiayant les mefmes quantites que deuant pour
AB &BL;& la mefme pour B K,qu’onauoit pofée pour
le coftedroit principal de la Parabole,omdefcrit le demi-
cercle KS T dont le centre foirpris a difcretion dansla
ligne BK, en forte qu’il couppe quelq; part laligne A B,
- comme au point S, & que du point T, ouil finift,on pre-
ne vers K la ligne T V, efgale a BL; puis ayant tiré la li-
gne SV, qu’onen tire vne autre , qui luy foit parallele,
par le point A, comme A C; & qu’on en tire aufly vne
autre par S,qui foit paralleleaB K, commeS C; le point
C, ou ces deux paralleles fe rencontrent,feral’vn de ceux
delaligne courbe cherchée. Et onen peut trouuer , en
mefme forte,autant d’autres qu onen defire.

229

498 La GEOMETRIE.

Or la demonftration de tout cecy eft affes facile. cat
appliquant lareigle A E auec la Parabole E_D,fur le point
C; commeil eft certain qu’elles peuvent y eftre appli-
quéesenfemble , puifque ce point C eften lacourbe
ACN, quieft defcrite par leur interfection ; fi C G fe

nomme y,G Dfera 2 , a caufe que le cofté droit, qui
eftn,efta CG,comme CGaG D.& oftant. DE_, quieft

2Vu

ae de GD, oni”. = pourG E. Puis a caufe que
A BeftaBE, comme
CGeftaGE,; AB

eftant$p, BE eft
Fe ea
27 SMa S

Et tout de mefme
en fuppofant que le
point Cdelacourbe @
eftétrouué par linter-
fectid des lignes droi-
tes, SC parallele 4 B
K, & AC parallele a
SV. SB quieftefgale
aCG, efty: & BK
eftant efgale au cofté
droit de la Parabole,
que iay nommé z, B

yy
Teft=. car comme

KBeftaBS, ainiBS
eh a-B TL. 7 Ferry.
eftant

230

THIRD BOOK

The demonstration of all this is very simple. Place the ruler AE
and the parabola FD so that both pass through the point C. This can
always be done, since C lies on the curve ACN which is described by

the intersection of the parabola and the ruler. If we let CG =y, GD
2

will equal -, since the latus rectum n is to CG as CG is to GD. Then
7

bale PAD
n pn
Since AB is to BE as CG is to GE, and AB is equal to 3p, therefore

Vue

DE= 2 ae and subtracting DE from GD we have GE=

Bree 4:
2n ny

by the intersection of the line SC, which is parallel to BK, and
AC, which is parallel to SV. Let SB=CG=y, and BK =n, the

Now let C be a point on the curve generated

2
latus rectum of the parabola. Then BT = for KB is to BS as BS is
nu

Pail

GEOMETRY

2
Vi ve ie BY Le Vue Also SB
pn n pn

is to BV as AB is to BE, whence BE =o = te as before. It is evi-

to BT, and since TV= BL= :

dent, therefore, that one and the same curve is described by these two
methods.

Furthermore, BL = DE, and therefore DL = BE; also LH = Pay
2nvu
and DL= by a Nu
2n ny
Py t
therefore. DH=LH eon ee

2n ny 2nvu-

[]

Also, since GD= =

8

: :
27 ny 2nv u n

which may be written

1 t =

—y3+ ter 9 Ve = Vu

OY 8 a a AB a
ny

and the square of GH is equal to

1 t t e
¥—py+ (4? qe) (2 Vu + ah ( —p Vu ttt
ny?

Whatever point of the curve is taken as C, whether toward N or
toward Q, it will always be possible to express the square of the seg-
ment of BH between the point H and the foot of the perpendicular
from C to BH in these same terms connected by these same signs.

232

LIvVRE apc eee G29

eftant la mefme que BL , c’eft a dire~ - > BV eft
2Vvu

2_.— eat Sea amen ae a BE, qui

eft par confequent |= ee = comme devant, d’oii on voit

que c’eft vne mefme ligne courbe qui fe defcrit en ces

deux fagons.

_ Apréscela, pourcequeB L & DE font efgales, D » &

BE le font anffy: de fagon qu’adiouftat LH, quieft—-~
a DL, quiet - i
oF ae en oftant G D , qui eft =

2% ny 2nVvu 2

AG

,on 4 la toute DH , qui eft

5 7 pas 2 ae VY “9 .
onaGH, qui eft Pee Ppteivave -- 7 Ceque i’efcris
ty
par ordre en cete forte G H 20 -- Pr spy -V%

ny

Etle pba !deG H eft,
y= py seo 2 20. byte
ae “pp res Ve. AR vse 40 =

Et en quelque autre Anat oit de cete ligne courbe qu'on
veuille imaginer le point C, comme vers N, ou vers Q,
ontrouueratoufiours que le quarr é de la ligne droite,

quieft entre le point H & celuy ot tombe la. _perpendicu-
laire du point C fur BH, peut eftreexpriméen ces mef-
mestermes, & auec les mefmes fignes -i- &- pi

panel Helene, & LH eftant =D Teach

ge ey cane del angle droit IH. L; & LP eftat
n+ er ?
Fff VY

233

410 LA GEOMETRIE.

an nn ?

Poa eT penne

Y mm tt s pVvvu
<3} iasv “oe 77 om » & Caufe auffy de langle

droit! PL. Pais ayant fait C M perpendiculaire furl H,
I Meftladifference quieft entrelH, & HMou CG,

A m2
cefta dire entre -

nn?

& y , en forte que fon quarr¢é

Ly 73 1m 3
eft toufiours —, -- a + yy, qui eftant ofté du quarre
de

234

THIRD BOOK

; m t
Again, IH= eee TARE whence

,

Te e

m
4n?u

+
4

2
since the angle IHL is a right angle; and since

and the angle IPL is a right angle,

m a S| pvu
IC=IP= ms a ane ee Bere

Now draw CM perpendicular to IH, and

IM=HI-HM=HI-CG="4-3;

+y”.

2

a7 2

whence the square of IM is a” — ay
Wt

235

GEOMETRY

Taking this from the square of IC there remains the square of CM, or

MT Ge
Ay ee ee n pa Al

and this is equal to the square of GH, previously found. This may be

written
2

; t
—nyt4+2my—pvVuy—sy+ = y’.

n>?
Now, putting

t 1
a pe y*--gyt— ar

for n’y*, and

<= t
342Vu 4a,
(ase “uy 5 oe st

for 2my*, and multiplying both members by n*y*, we have

LS an pt Pe ook
t—p+ (qe ~se)y+(2 Vie + +(e —pvVu )p —ty+u

2Vu

equals

ay mis pt ets ) 2
(Gee Slot (rte Vr + Aye s—pvu )y’,

y—py+qyt—ry’+sy?—ty+u = 0,
whence it appears that the lines CG, NR, QO, etc., are the roots of this
equation.

or

If then it be desired to find four mean proportionals between the
lines a and b, if we let x be the first, the equation is #®5—a*b —O or
a+*—atby —0. Let y—a— 4, and we get

y®—6ay>+ 15a?y*—20a' y*+ 15a*ty?— (6a5+atb) yta°+a'b —0,
Therefore, we must take AB = 3a, and BK, the latus rectum of the

236

LivRE TROISIESME, 411

i Tia Say Aba A il
deIC, il refte —— we ne ny,

un

pourle quarréde CM, qui eft efgal au quarre'de G H de-
fiatrouné. Oubien en faifant que cete fomme foit diui-
{ee comme l'autre par nn yy, ona

--any*--zmy} — pY v yy --syy + = yy. Puis
munyy
remettant = TG Hae PP y ve, POUL uny 15) Oe
ry'--2 Vou y so Fy i, pour2my*: & multipliane
I'vne & l'autre fomme par nn yy, on a

y See py o rot i ee aa aunie ty -+¥v

appt ate JE a
efgala
IND Oe ot -pV v

oe Virie 2, ae ty S VY

a
= Rijyb eee ak aL eee
C’eft adire quona,
Ste py’ + ayt--ry? +syy--tyt+ vo,
D’ou il paroift queles lignes C G, NR, QO, & fembla-
bles font lesracines de cete Equation, qui eft ce qu'il fal-
loit demonftrer.

Ainfidonc fion veut trounet quatre moyennes pro-
portionellesentreleslignesa & 6, ayant pofé x pour la
premiere , l'Equation eft x5****-- a+b 200 oubien
yo **** a+b x* 00. Et taifanty -- a0 xil vient
yo 6 ay'H15 aayt--20@ yi tyatyy 6") by Ec 0,
C’eft pourquoy il faut prendre 3 4 pour Ja ligne AB, &

YV/ 643 aah ’
—— -+ 6 zapour BK, ou le cofte droit de la Pa-

V aamab
Fff 2 rabole

237

4Al2 La GEOMETRIE.

rabole queiay nommé x. 8) Y 44+ ab pour D E ou
BL. Et aprésauoir defcrit la ligne courbe AC N fur

oe ; 6a} -aab
la mefure de ces trois, tl faut faire LH , 20 ~===
23 Vaare ab.
101 Ga 2 re iatpyath
+-— VY aa-+- ab —=—
& HE oT aie Vanes, & LP xo

V i5a%e Gas Vaapal
ay

au point I paffera par le point P ainfi trouve, couppera la

courbe aux deux poins C&N ; defquels ayant tire les

perdendiculaires NR & CG, fila moindre, NR, eft

oftée delaplus grande, CG, lerefte fera, «, la premiere

des quatre moyennes proportionelles cherchees.

Ileft ayfé en mefme fagon de diuifer vn angle en cing
parties efgales, & d'infcrire vne figure d’vnze ou treze
coftes efgaux dans vn cercle, & de trouver vne infinite
d’autres exemples de cete reigle.

Tontefoisileft a remarquer, qu’en plufieurs de ces
exemples, ilpeut arriuer que le cercle couppe fi obli-
quement la parabole du fecond genre; que le point de
leur interfection foit difficile a reconnoiftre: & ainfi que
cete conftruction ne foit pas commode pour Ia pratique.
A quoy il feroit ayféde remedier en compofant d'autres
regles, Alimitation de cellecy., comme on en peut
compofer de mille fortes,

Car le cercle qui ayant fon centre

Mais mondeffein n’eft pas de faire vn gros liure, &
ie tafche plutoft de comprendre beaucoup en peu de
mots: comme on iugera peuteftre que iay fait , fion con-
fidere, quayantreduit 4 vne mefme: conftruction tous

les

238

THIRD BOOK

parabola must be

which I shall call m, and DE or BL will be

LE Va?-+ab.
37
Then having described the curve ACN, we must have
3 2
ee eee
2n Va2+ab
and
4 3
HI= e+ Byala ie 18a gees
on? v a+ab
and

Les - a 152?-+ 60 Va? +ab.

For the circle about I as center will pass through the point P thus
found, and cut the curve in the two points C and N. If we draw the
perpendiculars' NR and CG, and subtract NR, the smaller, from CG,
the greater, the remainder will be x, the first of the four required mean
proportionals." .
This method applies as well to the division of an angle into five equal
parts, the inscription of a regular polygon of eleven or thirteen sides
in a circle, and an infinity of other problems. It should be remarked,
however, that in many of these problems it may happen that the circle
cuts the parabola of the second class so obliquely®” that it is hard to
determine the exact point of intersection. In such cases this construc-
tion is not of practical value.” The difficulty could easily be overcome
by forming other rules analogous to these, which might be done in a

thousand different ways.

[29] The two roots of the above equation in y are NR and CG. But we know
that a is one of the roots of this equation, and therefore NR, the shorter length,
must be a, and CG must be y. Then r= y—a—=CG—NR, the first of the
required mean proportionals. Rabuel, p. 580.

("1 That is, makes so small an angle with it.

(511 This is especially noticeable when there are six real positive roots.

239

GEOMETRY

But it is not my purpose to write a large book. I am trying rather
to include much in a few words, as will perhaps be inferred from what
‘I have done, if it is considered that, while reducing to a single construc-
tion all the problems of one class, I have at the same time given a
method of transforming them into an infinity of others, and thus of
solving each in an infinite number of ways; that, furthermore, having
constructed all plane problems by the cutting of a circle by a straight
line, and all solid problems by the cutting of a circle by a parabola ; and,
finally, all that are but one degree more complex by cutting a circle by
a curve but one degree higher than the parabola, it is only necessary to
follow the same general method to construct all problems, more and
more complex, ad infinitum; for in the case of a mathematical progres-
sion, whenever the first two or three terms are given, it is easy to find
the rest.

I hope that posterity will judge me kindly, not only as to the things
which I have explained, but also as to those which I have intentionally
omitted so as to leave to others the pleasure of discovery.

[THE END]

240

Livre TROISIESME, 413

les Problefmes d’yn mefme genre, iay tout enfemble
donné¢ la fagon delesreduire 2vne infinité d’autres di-
uerfes; & ainfide refoudre chafcun deux en yne infinité
de fagons. Puis outre cela qu’ayant conftruit tous ceux
qui font plans, encoupant d’yn cercle yne ligne droite,
& tousceux qui font folides , en coupant anfly d’vn cer-
cle yne Parabole; & enfin tous ceux qui font d’vn degré
plus compofes, encoupant tout de mefme d’vn cercle
vne ligne quin’eft que d’vn degre plus compofee que la
Parabole;.ilne faut que fuiure la mefme voye pour con-
ftruire tous ceux qui font plus compofesalinfini. Car en
matiere de progreflions Mathematiques, lorfqu’ona les
deux outrois premiers termes, il n’eft. pas malayfé de
trouuerlesautres. Etiefpere que nos-neueux me fcau-
ront gré, non feulement des chofés que iay icy expli-
queées ; mais auffy de celles que iay omifes volontaire-
rement , affin de leur laiffer le plaifir de les inuenter..

241

P Ar grace & priuilege du Roy tres chre-
ftien ileft permis al Autheur du liure in-
titulé Difcours dela Methode €§c. plus la Dio-
ptrique,les Meteores,ex la Geometrie exc. dele
faire imprimer en telle part que bon luy fem-
blera dedans & dehors le royaume de France,
& ce pendant le terme de dix annees confe-
quutiues, a conter du iour qu'il fera parache-
uc dimprimer, fans quaucun autre que le li-
braire qu'il aura choifi le puifle imprimer, ou
faire imprimer,en tout ny en partie, fous quel-
que pretexte ou deguifement que ce puiffe
eftre, ny en vendre ou debiter d’autre impref-
fion quedecelle quiaura efte faite par {a per-
miffion,a peine de mil liures d’amande, con-
fifcation de tous les exemplaires &c. Ainfi
qu il eft plus amplement declare dans les let-
tres donnees a Paris le 4 iour de May 1637. fi-
gnees pat le Roy en fon confeil Ceberet &
feellees du grand fceau de cireiaune fur fimple
queue.

|b Autheur a permis 2 Jan Maire marchand
libraire a Leyde, d'imprimer le dit liure & de
iouir du dit priuilege pour letems & aux con-
ditions entre eux accordeés,

Achené d tmprimer le 8. iour de Iuin 1637.
242

By THE GRACE AND PRIVILEGE of the very Christian King, it is per-
mitted to the author of the book entitled Discourse on Method, etc.,
together with Dioptrics, Meteorology, and Geometry, etc., to have
printed wherever he wishes, within or without the Kingdom of France,
and dtring the period of ten consecutive years, beginning on the day
when the printing is completed, without any publisher (except the one
whom he selects) printing it, or causing it to be printed, under any pre-
text or disguise, or selling or delivering any other impression except
that which has been allowed, under penalty of a fine of a thousand
livres, the confiscation of all the copies, etc. This is more fully set forth
in the letters given at Paris, on the fourth day of May, 1637, signed
by the King and his counsel, Ceberet, and sealed with the great seal of
yellow wax on a simple ribbon.

The author has given permission to Jan Maire, bookseller at Leyden,
to print the said book and enjoy the said privilege for the time and
under the conditions agreed upon between them.

The printing is completed the eighth day of June, 1637.

243

INDEX

The numbers refer to the pages of the present edition, not to those at the top

of the facsimiles.

PAGE
PAIDSCIS Sameer tete Aereiy sal vate recta ovens \s 88
INGENTA OE SRE ies oh A AS ae 10, 17
JANSSEN IN IST Cho ee an A ee oe a
PMlemibebty oe}. le. Rey di ciecasa crac oe 40
Angles division Of..., +... 219, 239

Apollonius. ...17-22, 26, 68, 72, 75, 96

PASI cate meemen wie et eo setee eters: eisia re 67
Arithmetic and geometry........ Z
ASRS — SA a aR irs oo OE ton Bea 95
IBEW OLE” NAUE Nee See nes ore eee 6
Beaune, cheeses. s+ ewaiewrse OOREEL, BAU
Petniareae Wie WW isstete a. o2< Cole cetine 13, 26
Biquadratic equation.195 seq., 216 seq.
Boncomparninn. ose cers sce 159
BOtmdiet ey fen. 6 a ove ere.ste ene «rors 55) 67, 71
OVC rar MePENS, cio cis cerns sargteislesraes 0
Bio une Onea heisro ens cee os bey Gye, fal
Cantor, M.44, 91, 92, 160, 175, 179, 211
Gandanna tiem (Gi; OF Js )ieccee cele

Sa eS SIREN eee ee 159, 160, 211, 215
MO ALOMERECS Mute Gie's, + oie esis. hie esta ae 115
(Garvalicr tie Eaters: «corsair tres. on 26
GS OI pee eautee oreo ohercreeras eves isysieas 44
(CIEE Ei cies inl Ca eee chee tomer 147
GlASSHOMECULVES wie sivcis cca we eee 48, 56
EOMMANGINIS ek ays ces ee ere 6, 17, 19
Complex curves ........... 43, 48, 56
Gomchoidteer ccc scns ess 44, 55, 113
GOnICRSECHIONG ays «cera since tema 44
Coordinates, transformation of.. 51

PAGE

Cousitin Viece es 1ON19) 63; 725 112. 135
Cubic equation ..... 195 seq., 208 seq.
Curved. lineSy readies ouch Sees 40
iD? Alembertarlia leu lenesctte weranits 40
Widerots: Ditmarasekicdtenks eto 40
PA DiopttiGs resent (15 24135
Diivisiotaieg sof cynic oie. 9 oe visio tecn sar 2
Einricueserlt an demtaresscctne «6 ci cee 13
Deeb, Gheelll Vhoaggoqpsacdec 6
IDepheMOnaN? We), AAKORies aA oagosoaLt 96

245

Equations. 13, 34, 37, 156, 159, 192, 195
Equations, transformation of....

See Se bbs CRO ar ee 163, 164, 166
Htclhidesprtteccsis aesnicire crs 17; 195922
False (negative) roots....... 159, 200
erinatsePs carsirscetiealstee: 25; 2Oy;nlae
Hihomaceiqn Wecemicteteisiss se ostcais aes 159
Eoiinkc Keen sos ciate ocors Tiles sia diaerethe 26
HOCUS Meare at «1s Canoe sicprererecmere 128
Fundamental theorem .......... 160
Geometric curves ...aenseessse 40, 48
GuisnGee sais 0...» Semana tat sets 156
Etatriot,, L. -<. .\< erent ia mere 160
Eleathy oe) Last... crete 26, 44, 96, 155
Heiberg). J,’ L...cetemetnitenae ts 68
Elorner's Methodaipeeeemene ret: 179
Hultsch;. FE. .dceeeeeeereeern ac: 6, 19

PAGE
Ebtgttom,, Goat sister stotosrs feast cateperete 67
Imaginary) roots melee: 175 le7
[irreducinle scubicuedae eatin. 212
Keepers: Jace ecru ect cere, nates 128
Releity erecta ae tants steptotetese 13
bisa Kp Wee aaatacoon an oonc 40
(hen'SeSiaucten tame a eee cote 124-147
IceonaLdombisano mes aeeeern ies 159
Waklospitalon Geekee As Genser eats 156
Toet, plane and solidws.. eee ee 79
WMascheroiilsmenricis cee.sece 13
Mechanical icutvesee erence 40, 91
Mean proportionals...... 47, 155, 219
Miersennes Miatrtimi. smi fares cee 10, 63
IMakkarmats ? Ys. Setar oles «1 scsiaysister ee Aa
INE DATOS! Taleo Glia eureac icin. Sy 127-136
IMialEiplicattonecerr-r seit ole ers 238
Negative numbers ........... 63, 111
Normals "<5 seme nee eres 112
Oxndersolvcurves mama cece 48
Ordinate: (j. :e een coer s ee 67, 88
Orestes NGF satan tere cee 26
Ovalis® ceca cinerea 116-131, 143
Bappus: aes. cheate we on ten yee ers
6, 17, 19, 21, 26, 40, 59, 63, 156, 188
Pappus, problem of........ 195 21563
Barent, + Avior weet taineere. tates 147
Platarna:. eetactun see eee 6
Lil Wot gs RERINERS ram Eine on hn, cou sac 135
Rolyeons recularm seme mae 239
Inrobleniesolving acme me cenn mts 6
Ptolemy; “Crear aan cnet tne 135
Ouadratic equation j.cs.ecs. ws 13, 34
Ouadtatrix ame Gea ene eee 44

246

PAGE

107, 111, 112, 120, 135, 191, 208, 239

Remainder Theorem |. ..--s- oan 179
Riccatt) Va sccnsaiee ae oe ee oe 2
Roberval, Gee PB: Adeaan mee eres 26
RGOtS:* as hsteewandemer ne eee 5
Roots increased or diminished... 163
Roots multiplied or divided...... 172
Rudolph, “Ch G5 serene ee oer 159
Rule of Signs (equations)...... 160
Russell Bat see eee 91
Saladino:\G.) eee sae eecee eee f2
Scipio, Ferreus i comeaceer eceare 211
Signs, Rule of (equations)...... 160
Smith, D. E....13, 26, 44, 92, 179, 211
Solid analytic geometry......... 147
Spirals (3cehe.- eee a5
Steiner ta] Soe cecse aces eee 13
Stifell? Ms. ooo nck sass oe 159
Supersolids (sursolids)....56, 80, 152
Symbolisni=s ee eee 5, 6, 175, 180
Synthetic idivision “oo. accesses 179
Tangents” (eascts os cent eee 112
Tannery; Pewaukee seer 10) ae
Tartaglia, (Nawyasek seer eee vali
‘Taylor, CarisG. =. sock ince 44
Three-dimensional space ....... 147
Transcendental curves ......... 91

Transformation of roots....164, 166

True“roots o2.4rs «coe eee 159
Van Schooten, F....... 250.9) Oo aa
VWietasch. coe eta acaeee 10, 26, 43
‘Webersf Ela ae. ue recon ern eee 13
Wellsteiny «Je. aan cree eee 13
Zetithen, Ht Gan eeenen ent 17
