is 


& 


a 


ilitie 
mers 


b 
0 


AMVED 


eim 
It 


am S 
0 


of 


OF § 


ADISCO 
LEN 


e 
e 
3 


a5 
> > 


DISCOV 


 NET.ENT 


DICVLOVS 


. 


4 


elihoode, bur the flat 


ing« 
j Z 
the 


d counterfaytii 
Kath, Wr 
er with 


i 
de 


Daris 


y 
vy 


on 


the 

preten 

‘hylhas 
Coup 


= 
| 4 > 
“tae =". 4 
: 


. 


> 
\ 
a ~ | 
» 
2 
4 
¢ 
4 
a» 
> 
| 


*. 


was blind and dumb, both jpake and |awe: all the people (it is {aid ) were: 
amafcd, and |aid, is nat this that fonue of Damd? And ypon thelame, 


how the ward and workes of god haue bene from time to time n 


dl Har{net his chaplaineand Examiner: whofe labour day andnight— 


_ they applyedand abufed theire wit and authority, to perfwade this 
- to the world, and to this end haue they publifheda booke called a= 


them to prifon, and to be beaten with rods:. whereypon they were 


the world in hand that allis but connterfeyting and notorious cofe- 


DISCOVERY, - 


by Mojes did thofe forcerers Launes and Iambres rife vp,and fet 
with all their diuelifh arte and power. VVhen theholy ghofte. 


fell vpon the Apoftles in the forme ot clouen tongues like fire, euct 


fore, caft intoan inward prifon or dungeon: and theire feete made faft in, 
the ftockes. Vhen there was brought to Chrift Icfusgne 
diwl, blind, and dumbe, and that be had healed bim, [o that bee which’ i 


math. 2.245 


worke wrought vpon an other at an other time,the multitud marucil~ 
ed faying , The like was neuer in Hrael, But the Phares refitted asi 


- other workes of his, fo both thefe and faid: he cafteth ont dinels, thro- 
— ugh Beclzebub the prince of diuels, Ina word, the mockinges and {cour 


gings, the banifhments, the bonds and imprifonments, the puttingey = 
to death of Chrift lefus, the Prophets, and his Apoftles doe teftity, 


fted. Euen fo it is now: God hauing wrought diuers rare and greate 
workes, there haue bene {ome found to withftand them: and to bear 


nage. Among theie the cheif are D. Bancroft B. of London and Samua 


it hath bene for the {pace almoft of two yeares: and in that time naue’ 


Difcowrie, But as Paule faithof Lannes and lambres that withflood | 
fes,and of certaine men m his time-of corrupt mindes,reprobat concrng 
ang the faith,which did then the truth:euen fo 8c thefamefaylofi Ff 
thefe men: They /hall prenaile no longer, for thew madnes {hall beenidens 
Fynto all men, as theivsallawas,’ 

..Hereynto ferueth as the former treatife, whereinthetruthisde 


_ tlared, and thefe. workes publifhed and made knownéto the worldy 


. or the declaration of the truth, isa eonvictjon of the falfhioed ) fo 


shetreatife following: wherein the’ DISC OF ERY 1s fully I cruftans 


ae 


{w r 


s inall ages there haue bene fome which haue painfaid the | 
| doétrins of god reuealed in his word, folikewuetherehauenog, 
wanted {uch as haue refifted the works which he hath wrought befor 
of thofe which were eye & earewitnelies thereot, there werelome. 455 
| that mocked them, faying that they were full of newe wyne. The A- 
poftle Paxle hauing caft the diuell out of the her maifters. . 
were offended therewith: caught bum Sylas hisaflociate,and drew, . 
them before the maieftrates:;who vpon theire jncenfinge, commaundd, 


fwered andthe euill name rayled vp, and. giuen.out epainfte th 
parts of that bocke)taken away. £nd when the lord fhall yer further” 
+> the manjfeftation of thefe workes,.dildlofing that whidr is 
now coutred, and making that knowne which nowig hyd, which 
doubt not but in due time he will: Zhen will ther filthines and 
be eutdent indede..And for our further afjurance crein, we mayremem= 
ber, it is written Thon( Lorde) mifchisf and wrong,that thow 
maift take it mto thine handes. And agame:There is nothing hyd that 


ifai.20.34. 
nark.4,22- 


not beopcned: neyther is there afecret but that it fballcowetolight And 
_ againe to this purpofe it is faid bythe Apoftle: Some mens finnes ave 
before band, and goc bcfore vnto iudgment: but fome mens followe 
after. Likewife,alfo the good workes are mansfift before hands they that 
are otherwife cannot be hyd. wherby itis playne that howfoenet the fi= 
mines of fome men are for a time in this world-vnknowne, ashauinge 
bene committed in fecret and inthe darknefle, yet the Lorde:in his 
time will bring them to light, and manifeft them to the werld: and: 
onthe other fide, though the goodworkes of fomebenotforatime: 
flaunders of fome mamfef? andknowne totheworldto - 
be fach, yet it hall not alwates be foe, they fhallnotalwayesbehyd, 
but in an other time god will reueale them,to be thatindedethey are.) 
It is in the fecond place to. be obferued, that asfathanhathener. 
vied by his inftruments to refiftthe doétrines 8& workeeof podsthat, 
thereby he might kepe god from his glory and prayfe;and man'from 
beleuing and profiting by them: fo the. principall meanes awherby 
hath preuayled inall times, hath bene theflaunderingofthofewhom 
the Lord hath therein vied as inftruments: for the old ferpentknow > 
eth fullwell, that the credit & goodnameofmen being taken away 
be the doétrines they teach:neuer fo true and wholfome, & the 
‘4 wherein they were vied neuer {o profitable and tobe admired, they 
will not be receaued, Neither is fe ignorant hereof that: ler 
er be never fo manifeftly or palpably f alfe, yet the werldavill: beleve 
and away with it as currant, if once itbe rayfed'vp & 
abroad; for he knoweth that there is not-onewile | 
who vfeth to confider of a thing. and heare what canbefaideofboth: 
fydes, before he imbrace it as atruth: and that the foohfb will 
thinge Henee tt isthatinthefe cajes it ishis and cheife labour to 


raile vp and 


nd {pread abroad fanders, By this-meanes he prevailed aganft. 
Paule ftirring yp fome to affisme that he was 4 peftilent fellowe, a 
 werof [edition thavhe {ubuerted the fate. of the world: and wis anenemy 
“tothe flate(as we fpake pow of doing = 
of Cafer, Yea of Chrift dhe dinellby hieitGeuments gave it § 


- 
> 
3 
é 
2 
# 7 
i 
i 
é 
owt 


Gut, that be was then fo a Comimer: 
diucletbrongh rbe prince af By'the fame meanes shat quncient, 
flaunderer, and:aceufer'of the, ‘bréthefen day arid night, both to god 
and men, who thereby all the world, Vath hitherta mighte 
ly prévayled againft the workes of god wee fpeake of: fpreadmge a- 
broade that Adore and I; elpecially my felfe: are Deceanors, 


Impobers, coxoning marchants, that Thaue taught fome (iknowenct 
yct howe many) to counterfeyt. But'as S. Pande 
the afore{aide accufations, was nither feditious nor traytor, butone 
that practifed and ranghrthe contrary: and Chrift wasno Deceater 
but onein whofe tongue was found uo guile, neither cafte out deuilles, ~~" ‘ 
by theprince of diuels, but came to defray the works of the diuell, 
fowein lik miner notwithfanditig that we are thus accufedtobede, 
 ceiuers & cofoners,and Iknowe not what,and my felfrohauetaught 
Somersandothers tocounterfeyt: yet it fhall by gods grace appeare’ 
by thefegquell, shat we are’no fach'men’indeede, andthat my felfeis 
not (Ithankegod) guilty ofany fuch abomynation, as mine aduer- _ 
faryes moftyniuftly lay vpon me. where by the way wemaylearne 
thus much, that it isnot inough for one'to be accufed, fortheninno= 
cency it felfe (Chrift lefus'l meane) fhould not goe vncondemned, 
Therefore as in allother acculations and euill reportes ofour néigh= 
bours brought vnro our eares, fo in this’ concerning Somers and mee . ‘Ne 
y 
e wherof 


Thinkeft thou (Chriftian Reader) that forrather 
Malker comminge thus t6 play*his’ 


ur 


| 

| 

| 

| 

This cafting- out of diuels $s faith difconered to be but bes 
Conteyning two principall parts 4 and a diuell, oncfhift 
Be to of theftage;that be might not be biffed at of allthewold 
| as:that tocalt-out a-dinel, is nofuch ¢reat matter, as male account of 

 beinge byt tt non miracahim, of awnder,and. 
ooth,that behaueth tidiculoully m thevery entrance 
waichty a matter: or that _higiment is to 
2,with his colours.of thetovike. 
& depofitions: leat you fhould & tkefe works 


Daneus opal. 


6 ADETECTION GF, S. HARSNETS 


your comfort, But toconie'to the point: $\H. is very ignorant ifhe 
canot fee a difference Se miraculumn tur by miraud 
is ment only athing admiratione dignum worthy. admir at ion,or to be 


_ admired, of which number who knoweth.not ther be many works wh 


Auguli.liber 3. 
de crimita, 


394.26. 


_itto be miraculum 4 myracle, Now if it fo fall out that the Difcoucrers § 
procedings be anfwerable to his begining: his booke to his epiltle,8e | 


4< 


play, but of bis owne inward and fecret corruption (alwell mallice as 
ignorance) which no doubt he greatly defireth fhoulde be couered, 


ich be not miraculous, Ther was {rgal caufe then why.e fhould {port 
himfeife therewith and call it heere /bift, 4 miferabic fifi, and 
after 4 fly filly [hift, {einge Angultinc, and after him Danays amano 


great learning, put an apparant difference betwene mirum Sc miracu- 


lum,a wonder, 4 miracle.According to whofe iedgments may well 
terme that eieétion of fpirits we {peake of, mirum a wonder and deny 


his dealing concerning the matter of fact, to this in matter of doct- 
rine: then may his booke be rightly called 4 Difcoucryeynot of 4 pare 


But let vs heare what he faith further againft this /s/ly /bift of mine. - 
What dull conceites (faith he) 


ff, and to tell the people there was no inft caule they {hould beleene , that 


our Sauiour was the fonne of God: in doing [uch mighty miracles among 


them: the cheif one whereof was cafting out of dinels: byreajon that action 


_ was but mirandum, et-non mitaculum, afrange thing for Jilly people 


Ip my apelogie | 


to-wonder at, and nota myracle, toinforcethem to belene. 
The Dalconerer might haue remembred that. doe not affirme. 


that the cafting out of diuels performed by Chrift, was by fafting 8¢ 


prayer,and fo wiranda, et non miracula: but the contrary( euen there © 


where I treate hereof) to both thefe.7o caf owt diuels (fay by 


fo as one #0 fooner commaundeth the {pirit to goe out, but forthwith be de- 
partcth as Chrift and bis Apoftles did, not only a myracle, but of then 
the greatoft: butby the meanes of prayer and falling to dryue out Satbany 


they ferued rather to the magnifying thereof,Now ifthe Difcouercr 
_ could proug, that.Chrift did caft a | 
prayer, or yet his Apoftles, then indeede for as. much as I houlce all | 


or rather to intreat Chrift (to whome all power is ginenin beauen and 
earth)to caft Sathan forth,3s mirandum, non miraculum. 

Had thefe words of mine bene.fpoken to the Fharifes could thofe 
dull conceyted Ralers of the Ieweshaue thence taken-occafion to haue 
depraued our Sauiour his cafting out of diuels” Sure one wold thinke. 


wicked (pirits by faftinge and 


_ eiection performed by them.to be miraculous.and yet. houlde that st 


isno myracle, when Sathan is.expelled by.prayer and fatting,he {ho 
-ulleconuineemee othertife he doth bur tryfle and abule his Rea- 


rulers of the Lewes, that they | 
could not fee this fly {ally fbift, to acprane the miracles of our Samour 


— 
~" 
2 
x 
nate” 
‘ez 
Az 
fj 
* 
> 
4 
| 
< a 
— as 


‘in my name they [hall caft out dyne 


his owne falfe and corrupt dealinge.and fearinge Jeaft that ' 
be deferyed and come one day vo phe thought it wifdome to con- 
_cealehis name: who can tell alfo how the chriftian magiftrat will take . 

this, when ke fhall perceiue how greatly God is difhonored hereby 
~ and fee the intollerable iniurie that is done firft and cheifely to the 
- Lord himfeliewho hath wrought thefe greate workes,and to whom 

“ greate glory and ‘nea is due for the fame:fecondly to thofe whom 


and of others that 


mifcheif, and caft for the worft;, 
Tine to thé Bifhop of London, bur whither he alone, or his lord 5 hee. 


Ton.Some thinke the booke to bet 


der in caufing him 'to fpend his houres in fuch vayrie ydle and ¥npro 
fitable difcourfe as coricerneth hothinge the matter in queltion ney- 

‘Hee procedeth. There is a place faith hee in the laf? of Matk. 
wherein they mightely pleafe themfelues, and taking it as a vod of defence 
‘to mayntayne their caufc, it prouesin handling a ferpent that denonreth 
‘them vp, the wordes are thefe: Thefe jenes fballfollowe them that belene 

and jhall fpeake wath néwe 


thertoucheth his aduerfary any thing 


~” Thisis ameere flaunder for it isas farre from mee and ever 
was from alleadging this {cripture in my defence, as it 1s from tak- 
inge vpon me to worke myracles, and I will as foone doe the one,as 
the other. Howe this fcripture isto be vnderftood of fvch as had the © 


-myraculous faith, I haue fhewed before againtt Thyreus and the pa- 


pifts peruerting it to their difpotieffinge of diuels: and that it can- 
not be vnderftood of sil belewers as he expoundeth it. ie 
But to procede.In fteede of the author his name, wee haue in 
the end’of the Epiftle thefe twoo letters §.H.fo that men may onely 
geffe who bath made the di/coueric. V Vere the truth on the difcoue-_ 


fide,he woulde fure in playne and full letters haue fett ro hisnam 
~-withont ftaggeringe,and thereby intimated thus much, Looke what 
-haue fayd of counte fe shete and by Darrell or any other; I fuch a 


one-am ready to iuftifie the/ame but the djfconerer priuie to 
at woulde 


God( amonge others)hath vfed herein,and thofe vpon whom thefe 
workes were wrought,takinge away the good name both of all thofe 

name,as mnch as in him lyeth,befices the 
ereuious and caufeleffe moleftation of many fubiets in the land.and 
the wrong doune to them both in their fubftance and good naines In 


this refpest alfo there is caufe why the Difconerer fhoulde fert dewne 


two letters, rather then his name: for it is good polli¢yto.preuent a 


There is no doubt but that S.H. ftandfor Samucll Havfnet c ap. 


haue difcouered this: age there is the queft- 
the Bifhops owne doing: and ma- 


at 
Zz 
‘ 
ed = 
4 
4 
ak 
> 
‘ 
| 
| ' 
* 4 | 
; 
: 
; 
“> 
+ ¢ 
“4 
= 


pag. 14. 


 Tofephs brethren conceaueamifle of his {peaches and aStions?Tothe 


quainted with euery quirkand corner of this caufe, chathath mana~ 
1aifjioners, bat the whole land alfo as much as in him lyeth, thai all 4 
bur counterfeyting and knauery: but how truly he and his chapline 4 


partly appeare by the premiffes, and will (1 truft)more fully be made 


words ix [bortly you [bali bane the true flory come forth of thofe 7.48 Las 


not theirvpon, that I loryed Sec.for many haue mife conceaued the — 


thought,and faid ynto him, that he was com 


8 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNTS 
ny thenke itto be the ioyme worke of them both. Ot Hafnct Lthink 
mea doubdtnot conlideringe the two firft lettersofhisname be fub- 
-feribed. As rouchinge his Lord and maifter itis probable, teeing the 7 
booke is commonly called the Bilhop of Londons booke, 8¢ that all ,, q 
or part of it was made by anhigh Covniffioner as the Bifhopis, 


asappeareth by thefe words: author of the breif narration to drawe 


VS peraduenture from dealing with 24, Darrell: nowe other Commiffi- 


ener inno teaton can it poflibly be .For the Bifhop of Londouitisthat 
hath depofed and examyned I know nothow many, and that is ace 


ged this matter, that hath perfwaded not only the reft of the bigh Co 


fay fo, and what reward they both deferue at the hands of god, and 
men, for all the greate paines they haue taken in this bebatic, dooth 


manifeltbythatwhichfolloweth _ 
THE FIRST BOOKE, 

The nomber of fuch per[ons as are {aid to haue bene difpoffeffed, 

by M. Darrels meanes. 
evowing into fome final credit with the [rmpler fort: became ve 
ry peart proud Somtinng to thas purpofe be confeffzth fome 
did glory fomwhat i the action of cafting forth awelsc.ndalt 
tle ater ‘I here are added in the end of the biftory of the boy of Burton they ie 


cabire that with vnclcane [pirsts, and allfeauen deliured 

as one time by this man, meaning 21. Darrell as he himfelf confe(feth, 
Hereby the Defcouerer laboreth to perfivade the worlde that I 

did glory in the cafting out of diuels as is playne by thefe words: whet 
a4. Darrell tooke vppon him after thes bis fecond exployt, it may be furmy 
ed by cloryng inthefwf, 
_ Tothe firft of thefe I anfwere that I haue not altogither fo 
pofed, as appeareth by page 277, of the Dijcoucry.But.admit it were 
{9, and that fome haue fo thought of me as is fayde, yer it followeth 


{beaches & aStions of men. when Eliah Dauids eldeft brother, heard 
the words of Dawid concernninge thekillinge of Golizh he theirvpon 


de and the malice of bis hearte:and yet. it was nothinge fo. How oft 


fecond I anfwer,that beinge examjned by the B.of L.yponmy oath, 


a 
| 
4} 
3 
4 
4 
4 
$ 
pag: 3- 
} 
j ‘ 


could | an{wer otherwif without periury<T hefe words ailo 
We we mutt remember are not mine but the printers,as I tould the Bybsp 
7) at my examynation, & at the fame time condemed them greatly (both 
which the Ds{conercr Lwarrant you concealeth) how then doe they er 


DE Darrell being fent for into Lancafbire by one M1. Starchy dhfpoffeffed inthe pag. x. 
Matgaret Hardman; Elianoy Hardman: Ellen Byrom 
ad lane Afbton. And inthe end of the difconery.the Difcomerer hath 


_ whither I cheught thar by thefe. wordes.:this man,. with the ref were 
ment my felte:4 an{wered aftirmatiuely., And it being playnethathe 
did meane me, (for who els had to doe with Darling! the7 in'.Lanca 


cee my an{wer ynto them argue my glorying in the actio of calting forth de 
me cissLet the Difconercr tram his argumet & it may be be wil be afham 
edotit, Moreouer were it that 1 did glory fomwhat toomuch berem the 
me fame maketh not againft the caufe, butargueth only my corruption, 


thele wordes: theje notable exployts'of Darrells, conceruing D1ary- 
Comper, Katheryn Wright the boy of Burton: and William Somers fome- 
thing might. be added of bis pretended difpoffefjing thefeanen (fo often mem. 


ti0ned)in Lancalhire, out of one 24, Mores examynation and confeffyon- 
touching that matter: bis fayd examynation is in the Registersoffice to 


ber Comiffioners, And if any will take the paynesto pervje 


was as vayne ridiculous as with.any of the others... 


 VVeheare of M. Mores dealing and_ mine, about the: (preten= 


We held with them therein, bu 


ded) of 7. Lancafbire and in general] termes of the cour 
tfrom_thefefirft words vnto Jait._ 
me we heare not what they for their parts did, faue what is intimated by: 3 
thefe atorelaid words; fo as the reader know eth not well what to 


me of thinke of them, of whom notithftandinge there is oft mention. 
made, and whither he fhould account them counterfeyts, yea. or 


defire therefore to knowe of the Bifhop of. London Har[nct what 
theire iadementsof thefe feauen whither they,.counterfeyted a.pol-’, 
ieflion or were indeede. pofleffed: for one of thefe fure they did, 
caufe they handled fo like to thofe that are. poffefled, both , 
during the time of their trouble (or fo fayned) andat the time and 
inftant of their delierance (or difiembled deliuerance) eucry one.of 
| them crying aloud, being rent fore, and lyinge as dead, or feeminge . 
foto be, which are the fignes of difpoffeifion;, Yea afteralloas wees, 
 haue heard in the tory, either the vnclehne spirits beg gone cut,re 


turned vpenthem all, feeking to reenter into them againe, arcord= 
ing to the Scriptures, or fome fuch thing they fayned, Thefe thinges 

confidered, it cannot be denyed but that either they were 


} 
Aig 
* 
- 
| 
> 
> 
| 
& 
| 
‘ 
| 
| 
7 
4 , 
finde th 4 4 4 
> 
Mey 
~ 
ha 
3 
> 
| 


effed, or diffenibled a poffeflion. YF poffeffed: it is to be hoped that 
they are now difpoflefied, confidering the fignes of difpofleffion men 
tioned in the golpell were heard and feene at the time. and inftanrof’ 
their amendment, and fince that very time, (being thteeyeares _ 
patt)they haue continued free from being vexed by Sathan,as before . 
they wefe, one excepted that is repoffefied. ‘The returne alfo ofthe 
{pirits doth confirme their eieétion. Yf thus it goe & haue gon with - 
the 7.1m Lanca/bire: then we {ee men may be pofleffed in thefe dayes 
} and difpofleffed, yea that the greateft part of the perfons controuer= 
ted were fo indeede, and did not faigne fo to be'as is pretended. 
_._ Afthey counterfeyted, why was not 4, Starchy and fome other 
_ about them, being fo many, fetched to London by Purfeuants or war 
‘ants, as wellasfundry from Noctingham about Somers,& divers out 


iy 
‘ 


{ Of Staffordjbire about Thomas Darling? And why was thereno com- 
} miffion directed to fome in Lancajbire, for the better oer: into 
this counterfeyting, and fifting of thofe counterfeyts(if fuch they be) 


being 7. as wellas oneinto Dardy/bire, an other into Lecefterfbrre, 8c 
3.014, (I take it ) to Nottingbam, for the finding out of the counter 
f feyting of thofe foure there? Yf thefe haue counterfeyted with Somers 
| _and Darling, why were not they or fome of them fetched vp and re- 
i Ceyued into the Bifbop of Londons houfe, and by his Lordfbip and §, 
Harfnet depofed and examined about their counterfeyting, as well as 
| Somers an Darling their fellowe counterfeyts were’ for marke what 
the Difcomerer himfelf faith in the end of this chapter: touching al’thefe. 


(fasing thoft in Lancafbire) examynatiés hane bene taken, as wellby the 
eanfelfions of the parties, 25 by otber circoamflances, it doth playnbye 
that all which was done berwixt M. Darrell andthem was mer 
by counterfeyted, 1 demaund now why thefe Lancafbire perfonswereo= 
E mitted? why their examinations were not taken, and they tried what 


confeffions they would haue made, as well as Scmers. Darling. Kath: 


Wright, and M. Couper. if thefe likewife meerely connterfeyted Surely 
methinketh that if thefe 7. were ccunterfeits, the Byfbop and Harfnct 
| doe hereby greatly preiudice the caufe they hauein hand, andthem 
felues. for admit one or two of them were obftinate, and would 
confeffe a counterf eytinge, yet it may be fome ofthemweuld: There 
§ are fundry of them, dnd they are not all fure made ofone moulde. [9 


Some of them alfo very yong, and it is likely they wold tel the truth 

moreouer it cannot be that the Bifhop and Hafner raking fuch great 

_ “and Tong paynes about two veares, day and ni-bt, to find out 4.co- 
| unterfeyts, would have paffec by a number of cou nrerfeytes, fo 
cate a pray as this was, if fo be they were ts. And much 
eile would they hauefought out one fingle counisi fey: Kuch. | 
by 


* 
4 - 
> 
ben 
6) 
4 
| | 
4 
» 
| 
4 
4 
py 
in i 
> 
| 
i 
iS F 
| 
= 


aed her-Cwith dendrye others) 


fo that wehaue not 4, but 11, counterfeyts, confidering dealt with 


forget himielf to mention my (pretended) difpoflefling of 4. only 


ect: much like to an vnwile 


© and Hafnct inthis whole firft Chapter of theirs, and in very manye 
7% ~ places of cher booke: otherwife all that heare therof willlaugh at thé, 
and their doting partiallity, that would be fo hot and {weat fomuch 
about-4. and let 7. of the fame counterfeyt condition pafle & efcape 
vntouched. Furthermore, if thefe 7, haue likewile counterfeyted, 
=  defireto knowe.of the Difcoscrer who taught them fo to doe, & that 
_ hemake him knowneto the world,as he hath done the teacher of the 
other foure, for why fhould we not think that they, likewi‘e had an ijn 
ftracor, {pecially feing 5. of the.7.were very feytsas 
admirable & hard to be done as thofe ofthe 4? my felf(we heare)ich- 
led. Somers Darling Kath: Wright and Mary Coupe,endfeingethe 
wetehandled alike to thele 4. countaliey and that I dealt with ; 


for counterfeyting 14, yeares palt, and letall thele alone wath theyre 
couuterteyting about three yeares agoe, if thefe were counterfeyrs as 
-wellasdhe (1s pretcended to be} Againe if thofe 7.haue counterteited 
me = thele 7. as wellas the other 4. Why 1S there no mention made (not 
ralty) ofmy frandulent practsfes and procedmes concern 
sug tne prettnded and difpoffeffion ot thefe 7, nor any word vied 
tcacing therevnto, as well as ot Somers Thomas Darling 8< the 
eucnin partculer and byname? Surely the Difconerer did great-~ 
tygleof hisbooke, andi the firlt chapter of the booke where- 
| an he ereateth of she number of [uch perfons as ave [ard to bane bene dilpe 
feed by ny meanesto name 11. Befides if thofe haue 
_-iguny then they are the greateft part of the counterfeyts, and haue 
not at-ali bene deait with tor their counterfeyting,it is playne that the 
and Hay{act hauebut flightly fhuffoled flubbered ouer the 
builuer who.not firft fitting downe and cafting with himfelf what his 
OH - houfe will coft him, falleth of building: but perceiuing after he hath 
builded. while, thathe.is not able to fyaith that he began, isconftr- 
# ayned.to giue ouer his building, whervpon all that behold it begin to 
= mock him: or that foolish man which vnawares buildeth his houle y- 
Be magon the fands, but afterwards perceiuing the fame to be no fure fau- : 
s-ndation, ceafeth to build any further; for. this caufe I aduifethem.et 
«ther to confefle the truth & giue glory to.god,or els for fhame.to pro 4 
~ ~ ceedeonin finding out more counterfeyts, and add tothe 4. they : 
 - haue already thole 7. for all elenen were handled alike: and their con 4 
7% :-dition the fame, yea fomuch is in effect acknowledged by the 


+ 


4 12 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNTS 
the 7, aswell asthe other 4. andthat 3. of the 4: were helpedby the 


fame meanes, viz. by prayer and fafting, or diflembled the fame with — 
thele, it is in all reafon likely, that if I inftructed the 4: to counterfeit 

then Ihaue done the like to the 7. in:Laucafbire allo: but confidering 
J} am not acculed thereof, and if1, were Ltrutt they would cleareme 


themielues: it is to be thought thar this ‘notivithftandinge, I am free , 


from teaching ohn Starchy Anne Starchy, and the other's, who he is _ 
then that inftruSted them, it would be knowne.Joha and c4nne Star 
chy with the reft would be depofed and examined by the L. Bifhop of © 
i London, and made to tell who it was, what his name is, that beinge 
_ knowne the world might be better fatiffied as touching their counter © 
feyting, and he whofoeuerhe is, partake with mem punifh- 
ment, feing he hath committed the like or the fame fault. Laftly if Jo. 
and Anne Starchy: Magaret Hardman Elianor Hardmanesc. be cou 
nterfeytes, why arethey not punifhed for counterfeyting, confider- _ 
ing it is a faule deferuing very and nottobetolle 
rated or borne with in any; much lefle whé fo'many confpire & ‘ioyn 
togither in committing thisfaide abomination. Thus you fee (Chrift — 
ian Reader) in what {traits the Byjbop and his Chapline haue brought 


¢ 


i themfelues on which hand foeuer they turne them, whither to the | 
4 right or left. If they fay the 7. in Lancafhive were poflefled, then wee 
i - _ heare what followeththervpon: if they affirmethey counterfeyteda _ 


i poffeffion, (and the one of thefeas is. afore fhewed it is very ‘certaine 
fleneeisbeft they did) we {ee they are littleor nothing holpen thereby: the onlye — 
phere antweare thinge I feare is that they will not be drawne to returne any anfwer 

‘wichout abran- hereynto at all: though I haue multiplyed my wordes, and enlarged 

penne, and thereby wold prouokethemtherevnto. 

Afbtonis {ince fallen into the handes of certaine Seminary pree 
and bath bene carryed by them vp and downe that country to fundyy 

recujants boufes(as certaine ydle men were wont to carry puppets) andby 

cunning counterfeiting of certaine fits Cr flaying of hirfelf by the fccret dive 
cticns of the [aid preifts, [be hath gotten god knoweth what:they by fisch lew. 
dues haue wonne great crecht, but-bi Maiefties fubiects: bane in'the meane 

Thus itis Lane Afbton being with fix other difpoffefled as wee 
i haue heard, was after (embracing the popith religion) repoffeffed,& 

therevpon fellinto the hands of certaine’ preifts; who haue earryed 

i her yp and downe the country, exarcifing and adiuring the diuell in. 

: ho re favor to, her after their manner. Now I | demaund of the Bifbop of London why : 

thefe.Seminarie preifts haue not bene itr'all this time committed to 
prifon and punifhed as well as 27. More-and my felfe, for befides that 


they are preifts, it isacknowledged (anditismofttrve) that thereby. 


| 
* 
an eo 
iat 
j 
q 
tee 
A 
q 
B 
& 
¥ 
> 
’ 
v4 
4 
4 
Wet 
my 
x 
3 


hir maieffies fibiects bane bine foamefully absifed; end farther it isTaid 


that fhee ftayeth berfelf Poon their feerec whereby itfhoulde 


feme(if one may beleue the Difcouercy)that thefe preifts hauetau ghte 

her to cotiterfyt, at leaftin part, why alfo'isnot this notorious couter | 

teyt punithed, that hath had principal hand inthis abufing of bit ma” 

 icltics batitimay be fhe is no counterfeit, forit is fade’ that 
through the of the gotten wes what: 
7 Imagime that it is the doing of fome tricks, or as is faide heerethe cou | 

nterfeyting of certaine fits whether fhe will or not as Couper is 
"brought forth. depofing, that certaine fpeaches of mine (principally) . 
and of certaine women, togither with her experience of the fignes of © 

pofleffion in her brother, made her to doe that which neuer thiseght 


to bauc done, and this whether fhe would or no, fo as fhe could not re 


frayne: no maruaile then though fhe haue not bene punifhed forcoy 


nterfeyting, and this is the very reafon why of 11 .counterfeyts (aS _ 
{ome call them)none haue bene punifhed for counterfeyting:no not © 
Be Somers: who ifit were fo was an horrible blafphemer, and otherwife — 


The occafton why Darrells dealing with Somerswas 
..M. Darrell by vertue of ber for -caufes eccle= pag 9 
fiaficall being fent for, appeared beforetbe L. Archbifbop of Canterbury 
and others at Lambeth: from whence he was committed to prifon,byrefon 
of his abfurd and vntrnc(but yet very confident) affertions: gruing therby 
tft occalto to fufpect, that he washut a couterfeyt:eg order wastakenfor. 
© the further examination of that caufe, according to the vfuall courfeby the — 
lawes of the Realme, in {uch cafes heiffae whereof was ; that. 
vpon the bearing of M. Darrell, and the depofnions againft him in 
 conrt, before the L. Archbifbop of Canterbury; the L. Bijbop of London, 
bethe faidM, Darrell was bythe full aereement of theawhole court, 
condemned fur counterfeyt: and together with M. More (bis companyon) 
whataoke-vpon him to inftefy the Darrell; bad. otherwife eveathy mif= 
bchaned bimfelf) they were both of them depofed from ‘the mimptery, and co’ 
mitted ta clofe prifon, there to remayne vntill. order were taken for theive 
 “Alllaffirmed at mycommitment was,that Somers had not coun- 
terfited: Let men nowe iudge,whether:that 
ther foto commited'to prifon for herely,éc 
other herefy (1 then vttered not).Aenétfor teaching Som.to counter 
feit:which fact was not thé in queftidjno notvntil amonthafter Thad’ * 
bene in prifon:yea by words; (which be that 

| Bg. 


| > 
| a 
’ 
4 
OF HF 2 CHAPTE 
> 
<> 
— 
+ 
e+ - 


it appeareth chat was not fent.to.prilon; tor the fame. caule I haue 


te. 
4 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
committed to prijon by talon. of and vatruce afjertions: 


benelo long dereyned in prifon viz, teaching to countesteyte,. 3. Let 
men iudge, whither-tor this confident. affcrtign Ldeferued to be cam. 


mitted 10 prifon. what order mwas taken and agreed ypon by fome in fee. 
eret,S whither the felte fame that after, put in, executio I knows 


not: bur that in the.examination of this caufe there wasa proceding 
according to the vfuall courfe of this Realmein {uch cafes promded how. 
foeuer the Ds/coucrerin generall termes affirmeth.it, yet he maketh 
not the fame to appeare in the particulers, Sir Ds/coucrer you affirm 
indeede that I was iudicially proceeded again{i by due, courfe oflawe 
and ordinary practife of the high commiflion court,.according to the 
lawes in that behalf prouided. 1 pray you thereiore anfwer mee... ; 

Firft whether doe you knowe, that it is the y{uall courfe.and.or. 
dinary practife of that court to deny. the coppy of articles,or anfwers 
somen convented into. that court, whenas vypon their oathes::they; 
hauc fully directiy anfwered vnro.alj fuch.ote:: zgatoryes,as hane 


bene objected againft them? And it trisbe the cue comrfe & orlinag 
ry practife of that court: whether coe you knowe the fame,to be ac 


Item whether doe you knowe, that it isthe v{tall courfe, and 
ordinary practife. of that court, touching the, any wit 
neffes again{t a Defendant, to fend forth commiitivners into the.co, 
untry, and to authorife any other perfons to be commutlioners,. then 
fuch only, as hir Maiefty by her letters patents vnder the. C:reai feale 
of England, hath appoyntedhigh commiflioners?And this be the 
due courfe & ordinary practile of that court, whether do youknow 
the fame to be according to the lawsin.that behalfe prouided? . .... 
Item whither doe you know, that it isthe vfuall courfe and ordi 

nary prattife of that court, that the Commiffioners, or other.depu- 
ted by them,fhould menace witnefles calied before them(as you your 


felfe did) with imprifonment, bring: 


4 bringing vp to London 
burning of their feete, or with fome other kinde,o | 
| 


they depofe not to their humour.and contentment: And if it be.foe 
whether doe'you know the fame to be.according .to. the lawsin that 
- Item whither doe'you knowe, that it is the v{uall courle & ordi 
nary practife ofthat court, to examine witnefles.againft the defend- 
ant, without giuing him notice of the.time.and: place of their produc. 
tion, and fo co haue them{fwome 4bfentia partis And if this be 
the vfuall courfe and ordinary prastife of that:court, whether. do you 
the fame ta be according the.Jawes.im that bechalfe pro- 


te 


a 
i 


> 
H 
t 
4 
Ge 
> 
it 
I 
Big 
Tt 
4 
4] 
© 
4 
. 
BS 
+ 
3 
: Sed ; rig 
4 
i 
fi 
3 
‘ 
oY 
7 
a 
a 
¥ é , 


faine tobe according to the lawes in that behalf provided” 
"°° Item whether doe you knowe, that it is the vfuall courfe & ordi 
9} nary pra:tife of that court, not to fuffer the defendant to minifter In- 


4 ‘ 


: 


°- Item whether doe you knowe; thatit isthe vfuall courfe ordi 
defendant; as no authority to depofitiotis ‘as you Sir Difco 
suerer did'at London) And ifit be fo then whether doe knowethe 


terrogatoryes againft the witnefles produced againft him: And ifit 


T® befo. then whether doe you knowe the fame tobe according to the 


lawes in that behalf prouided? 
ITtemwhitherdoe youknowe &c,that the defendant, whether 
® hebe an adulterer, an inceftuous perfon, or periured perfon&c, for 


a | the dearing ofhis innocency touchinge the cryme obiected, benot 
fuffered to produce witnefles, and to haue them examyned of his 


he behalfe? And if this betheordinary practifeof that court, whether 
doe you knowe the fameto be accordinge to the lawesin that be- 
Item whether doe you know, that it is etc. To denye fuch as are 


accufed of adulterie,inceft, periurye ,etc,to haue theyre prodtors 8 
© Aduocates to pleade and defende their caufe’ And if it be fo,then 


7) whether doe youknowe that the fame is accordinge to the lawes in 
Item whether doe you know, that it is etc.to condemne 


any per 


fonas puiltie of any offence obiected againft him , vnder the mouth 
“7 of two witneffes at the leaft,and them alfo to be {uch againft whom 
_® by the ecclefiaftical lawes no exception maye be taken?And it this be 
thecourfe of that court, whether doe you know the fame to be accor 


dinge to the lawesin that behalfe prouided? 


And whether this be according to the ecclefiafti 
calllawesin that behalfe prouided? 


Item whether doe you know,that it is etc.to deny vnto the defen 


dant the fight of the depofitions of fuch witnefesyas are produced 8 


examined againft him? And if it be, whether is the fame accordinge 


tothelawesinthatbehalfe prouided, 
Item whether &¢.to commita minifter of the gofpell, or any 
ther man to prifon without bayle or mainprife, only for abfurd and 
vntrue, though confident a[fertions? andifit be,whetherdo you know 
the fame to be according to the laws in that behalf prouided? 


em whether doe you know, that it is ect.that foctus criminis,be 
admitted fora witneffe againfthim, whom none but himfelfecan ac- 
ee cule?And ifit be the ordinary practife of that court,then alfo whether 
=histeftimony of neceffitie muft be inffar duorum teflymoniorum omni 


to 


2 
ia 
~ 
| 
: 
| 
a ome, 
| 
‘ 
ty 
| 
iy 
| 
4 
A 
me, 
é 
i 


doe you knowe, tha itis she. courte OF 


~dinary pa-tile of thiar court, to proccede againit, offendors m caules 
Andit itbe, whether knowe the fame .to be acor 


i\demnation of anye 


the ecclefialticall lawes of her Maielties kingdome? And 


Trem whether doe you knowe, that it is the vfuall courle, 
dinary practife of that court, to pronounce any finall fentence, or de ie 
finitiue indgment of condemnation for any offence to be committed. 
by the defendant? otherwile ‘th en by publiguc reading of the fame fe 
tence in writing by of the Commitlioners themielues, the other 
his aflociats by their confents approuing the fame: And ifit be foe: 
whether doe you knowethe fame to bee accordinge to the lawesin 

And where addeth, that the s[Jue thereof was,that’ 


was by thejnil azrement-of the open court condemned for a counterfeytte; 
and tocether with M.More depofed from the mimfkery, and committed ta. 
lofe pryfon,there tovemaine yntillordey were taken for our further punn~ 


 Idemaurnd of him who was prefent at this hearing: firfte whe« 
= ther I vfedany continued {peach then, faue one¢: and whether in the 
' | fame I was not cut of. 2. whether being charged to teach Somers and. 
| 


_M. Cooper hisfilter, Kath: Wright and Tho. Darling, I {pake any thing 
inimy owne defence concerning the 3, laft, one word or two excep= 
ted, concerning Kath: Wright, which rayfed yp collorin this Di/eose 

| ver, 3. whether Tb: Darling being in the court by the 2i/bop of L.com, 

i _ Maundement, was heard to fay any thing touching my teachinge of 

i him, or his own counterfeyting, ornot counterfey ting: yea whether; 

| euer he or aay other affirmed that I taught. him to counterfeyte.4,. 

| whereas the depofitions againft mee were heard then to {peak their 

| their fill, fo the depofitions(of the 17, by th el2, 

ag which are for mee, were heard to {peake at all, either then or at any. 

ee other time before, though I haue oft and inftantly defired the fame. _ 

GR s. whether euer any one of my witneffes,(who haue hundredes.to. 

clare mi) were heard -to {peake either in court, or countre before’ 

a ae comminioners, 6. whether if it be as 7 {erne to intimate by thefe my-. 

demaunds, this heaing he fpeaketh of was likewile accordinge to the . 

conr{e by the lawes of the Realine in {uch cafes prouidedyoaor not. 


Trem, whether Sec. to proceede to the co 
4 ifit beswhe- 
ther doe you knowe the fame to be according. to. the lawes inthatbe | 
it 

if 

it 

the depolttwns againli me open Cour 

if 

th 

P 

{ 


_ LYING DISCOVERY. 


| . (ure) they fhould be punifhed as well as we, and notall the ftrypes 
| Jaidvpon M. Mores back and myne, And where it is faide, that I was 
bythe full agreement of the open court condemned for a counterfeyt, it is 
varruc. Neither was that orany other definitiue fentence giuen of 


Pe is) were forthwith after in the open court fulpended, and commaun 


7 And fohaue we done(faue that we haue not bene all this while dofe 
- EE prifoners) wayting when we fhall be heard according to the Queens 


done, nor word faide. 


deny them ix the gofpell. Then {olloweth his confutation, Indeede if 
OM. Darvells crecht were as.good in faying, that So: was poffelfed, that 
bybisand bis fellowes meaneshe was difpoffeffed: as the knangelfts and 


poftles ought to be, when they tell vs of diners that were poffeffed in Chr 
time, then thew faid.collections were pertinent. Otherwile manye falfe 
from timeto time, haning deluded the people with hipoa'ify, and 


blemifbed: but let them rayleon. 


«<< felt) then are thefe theircollections very pertinent though Darréls cre 
7) © &tnor his fellowes, be any way to be compared with the a 
sand eApoffles: neither are fasd actions of ow Saniour and bis Apoftles 
gmany fort blemifhed by thele wordeés, as this man no man 
colleHing: but a man would thinke rather that they be 
which will not receaue the poffeffiou-and difpoffeffion contended for 
 _ notwithftanding it hath fo great confirmation from the. golpell But 
det them(faith he)rayle on.Is nox heere very perylous raylinge well. If 
_ there be not heere, yet el(where there is, wheteby they fhew ofwhat 


‘Cr 


| 


7.wherehefaith for furcher pumfbment, Lalke of 
whether this be according to the lawes of the Reale, that we the accel 
me faries (if there were any counterfeyting) fhall thus haue punifhment 
svpon punifhment, and the counterfeyts (iffuch they were) norany 
..ot them, be punithed at all: as if all the iniquity, were in teachingeto 
7 . counterfeyt, and none in learning and practifing the fame: otherwife 


some. Inthe end we being commaunded to ftand afide(as the manner 
ded to clofe prifon there toremayne till we fhould beare further from the 


a | © fawes, and be either acquit ed or condemne d. More then this was | 


They Somers was not poffelfed, but did counterfcyt 


g ( aith the preface) doe by confequence deny the the foucraignty of our Sani 
| vs in that action. And one of the written pamphlets: to deny the work of 


- the dinels and Godin the difpoffe{fion of So: may fecme to be after aforte 


presence of calling forth divels, st is a (ugecftion of Sathan for any to colecé 
therely the {aid acisons of our Samour: and lis Apoftles, aveinany 


Somers were poffefled and difpoffeffed(as truftis ‘madethahi- 


{pirit they are. And this he doth by ferting downe many rayling fen- 
tences({o termed by him)which are feattered here and ther through — 


‘s 
. 
: 
4 
& 
> 
‘ 
4 
5 
| 
a | 
Bee | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
“Rie: 
yA 
| 
5 


- or any wdicyall of proceeding. Agayne, their proceedings bane bene 
indie, contrary to the royall commaundement of ber Maiclty, her lawes 


and lawfull liberties of ber loyall [ubie&s,and agayne bis indges became 


“beede, leaft they be found enen fighters 
frends 


18 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 

out the Naration and Preface tomy -4pollogye: Some of which! 

will repeate, but of the fhortelt for breuity fake. oo 
M. Datrell hitherto could not obteyne fomuch as patient aucience 


parties, pleaders, and accufers: agayne M. Darrell and M. More are 
now we for giuing teffimony to the truth. agayne let men beware 
an crediting fallerumomrs againft thofe holy men of cod, who doe nowe.cr 
hereafter fuffer in this holy caufe, Agayne I would them that 
flaunder this worke, and perfecute the jeruants of got without caufe to tak, a 
of this caufe doe vfe:lee 


Thus we fee what rayling the 


_-vsnow confider, what and {coffing(to let others goe)this ma 


A Patorne of | 
Harfhents and 
his Lord, and 


an aduerfary to the caufe, and great frend to counterfeiting doth vfe: 

that fo comparing the rayling i canal may the better difcerne of 
it, and of thefe raylers. 
This cafting out of dinels is difcoucred to bebut'apure play, contayninge 
two principal parts of a yyce and a diuell, let them with all thew inelyngs 


Matters fobriety drine out 2 melancholike [pirit, out of any poore foule in Bedlam . Thus 


much for a tafte of diuel driners lecerdemayne:open the curtaine and fee the 
puppets play Darrell is thought by fome to be fuch a one that if bee met 


_ with the diuell, be was able to curb him If ™: Darrell will be aright Ex 
orcift after the currant fafbion among the lefwits: if be want the faith of do= 


Open thine eyes 


good ree- 


der aud let thy 
confience be 
Judge whois 
theRayler, 


ing myracles, be may caft his capp at them meaning diuels. when Somers: 
was ch{poffeffed, the deuill was fbroncdly dveffed, he was for/ooth fo extream 

bytormentcd by the fafting, prayers, and preaching of M.D arell andthe 

reff, as he hadno leafure to fay what he doe, or what be would do, QUE 


rudely without taking any leaue of them departed. The diuell was trickt 


with their conceaued prayers. One dinell would baue bene mad at the name 
_ f Prefbyter, an other at the ficht of a minifter that will not fubfcribe, an 


other to hauc [cene men fit or fland at the communion. And whoe knoweth 
whether in time, the naming of a pre[bitery would not bane had the vertue 
of A relique, as well to caft out a diuell, as to difclofe him. If their {ch 
allers be of the neve cut: they ory, they wallowe, they foame, and foew the 


fienes mentioned inthe § criptures. There Exoresfts for want of worke are 


driuen to thei [bifts, and like Tinkers walke vp and downe {rom place to 
pl ace, feeking to T wo points ferued his turne inftead of inghng 
flicks, heere ss fat and loofe as the Egyptian liftcth. If ibe vefemblances of 


Darrells prathifes to Pedlcrs be not fit: then as youremember Somers and 
Da rell collucing together, thinke vpon the pretty feates betwixt Bankes 
and his borfe. So fkilfull a catt is Darrell in bunting Darlings menfe-here 
ynto 


; 
>. 
‘ 
ok 
hes 
t 
> 
Laas 
> 
@ 
+4 
a 
» 
3 
= 
4 
| 
> 
é 
i 
‘ 
ig 
4 
$ 
' 
* 


vnto add that he calleth vs dinel {lincers, Impofters, iuglers, abfurde 
mates cofoning marchants, falfeknaues, 
A great deale more there is of this ftampe:. yeathe whole boke 
-V® from the tirft leafe to the laft, is written in fuch {coffing and raylinge 
7% characters, that it might feme rather to haue bene compiled by Nath 
FP Palquil, or forme Interlude-maker, then any other of fobriety & iud 
pment. But the {tile is f{utable to the matter. And to returne vnto 
HF the former rayling, vied by fuch as contend againft counterfeyting, 
We and for Som: pofleffion: Let vs fee what he inferreth 8 concludeth 
FF thervpon. Firft,that my frends in fo doing fhew themfelues to be but 
TE children, which it is a fhame for growne mento be: and that in thefe 
wordes Thefe are children indeede’ to what rypenes in rayling thinke you 
they will srowe, by the time they be men? To be perrilous children eué | 
VE the children of the diuell: and this he doth out of Iames It is true (faith 
he) Thereis a wif[dome whofe children by their outward appearance they pag.12. 
may be well accounted. Of which wildomeS.. lames peaking faith. If yee 
hauc bitter enuying and firife in your hartes reiayce not, neither be lyars 4 
cainft the truth, for this wifdome de[cendeth not from aboue, but is-earthly 
Tanfwerhim, and vpon occafion ofhis owne rayling and 
Fring, retort this {cripture ypon him thus, If it bea truth (as it ismoft 
true) that Som, Kath: Wright, and Darling were poflefled and. difpol = 
f{elfed, that neither they: nor Mary ‘Couper: counterfeyted, Pro.13.2 $e 
‘my felfe haue taught them no fuch thing: which this Dsfconerer cor.13°8.4 
echeth and linacitlech for as a matter of truth, then for-afmuch as he 
«  Whath bitter enuying and ftrife in his harte for the falfhood ( whereof 
S. Lames {peaketh, as the wordes following, doe fhewe: for contentio 


for the truth is lawfull and commendable) as appeareth, by hisitcongue 


4 


and pen, andis 4 lyar acainft: the truth: It muft of neceflitye-therefore 
MM be, euen by the teltimony of the {pirit of god, that thisDi/coverer and 
{uch as he, are the children of this earthly, and wifdame: 
out ofhis owne mouth then let this man be1udged. 


* 


Darrells frendes bane fete out the pretended 
The Dj/c.telleth vs of certainie counnterfeyts,as of a maid of Gheffer 
of one Mildred the bale danghfter of. Alice- Norvincton:of a Dytch man 
with fome others..£rzo concludeth he, Somers is a counterfeyt,8¢,that 
fuperexcellent wonder which M. Darrels fauouvers, .euen thofe of the oucr- 


worne Confiftoryan faction magnifye fomuch is a-counterfeyt. and lewde 
Confidering 


+544 
J 
. 


5 


m 


~ Ne 


a 


A DETECTION OF S: HARSNETS 
Confideringe this very obi¢étion is anfwered,and the abfurditis 

tiereoi iaewed in the narration, this man whoa taketh vpon him to 

confute that faide treatife, fhoulde rather haue fhewed the weaknes 

of the narrators antwer to this {ayd obiection if fo he could:then haue_ 

taken vp that ftale obiection agayne, The varrator hath here tofore F 

 ahiwered this argument thus:this followcth not for we may with as good 
yealon faye many not counterfeited, therfore Somers did not counters | 


the anfwer to 


ehe s-cbieion, fest 2 there could neucr any man counterfeit {uch thinges as Som in truth | 


bath done,Hereunto ladd,that Somers counterfeitinge followeth not 
here upon,except thele thinges withall be true. firft that this maide of 7 
Chejicr Mildred the Dutchman ct.counterfeited.Secondly that Som.8& 
they carried themfelues alyke:for if Sommer's.were handled after a dif 7 
terent mannertrom them,what letteth,that he might beno counter- [7 
feite.although they had counterfeyted“Before then this argpumente a 

be otany torce;the Di/c.muft thewe:that thofe Englyb and Dutch fol 
kes he mentioneth,had a variable fwellinge runninge all alonge their 4) 
bodyes.and fo.of the reft of the rare accidentes whereof concerninge > = 
Som.we haue hearde:neither of which he hath perfourmed:And then | 

_ alfo it followeth only probably.A gaine, if this be a good reafon,then | 

_ 4s this alfo:J.N.publythed a booke ftuffed full of vntruthes.wherevp || 
on it was called alegend of lyes:therfore, 5. H. the publyfher of this 

Moreouer it is certaine that all thofe the Di/c.here {etteth down | 
for counterfeits,did not counterfei ycal thinke none of them the| 
maya of Kent excepted, For the mayd of Cheffer,it-is well knowen and 
to many, that fhee counterfeited not. And howe doth he proue the @ 
Diichman,(concerninge whofe poffeffion and difpoffeflion there isa 
booke printed, to haue diffembled<forfooth Samuel Har/nct fayth fo 
a fubftantiall proofe,and worthy argument fure.He himielfe confefl- 

eth that the Maior of maydftone(a towne in Kent) Nicelias V ander{ch- i 
eure (the minifter of the duch church there(and Iobn Stikelbowe, with dy-\ am 
uers others did fub{cyibe to that pamphelet ashe pleafeth to cal the boke| 
atorefaide. The queftion and doubt nowe is whether we fhall beleue) @ 
this fingle man, and fuch alfo as we fhal heare, or thefe other which! 
Knowe not how niany more. After this mannerhe proueth the reft he ae 

_ pameth to haue counterfeited. Although thefe had counterfeited it 
_ taketh nothing againft vs,as hath bene fhewed:yet who thar is wile 
willbeleue this mans report (for other proofe haue we none,) that 

they counterfeited, feeing he doth intimateno leffe by Throckmn- 

ortons children, whole vexation ‘by Satan was fo and notor- 

—us¢for marke what isf aye pes. 9 3.moreoucr be had hearde and read 


¢ Som who fuerly fudied the arte of counterfeitinge ) fom 
| part 


if 
| 
| 
us 
if 
it 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


parte of a Very ridsculus booke concerning one M.Throg 


movtons children 
ppofed so havc bene bewitched by woman of W arbayle (wherby he faye 
shat be learued forse pointe, and was not ignorant as fst occafson jaucd,te 
a{cribe what be lift to witches.And this againe the Di/c celieth vs.in the 
perfon of Somers. 
is affirmed that Som. Larned fome points from M. Throge 
mortons children, they therefore it is to be thought did counterfeit,tor 
7% from whome are counterfeyt trickes to be learned but from counter 


feyts, and fuch as haue that {killin thofe, worthy feyts, asthey can. 
actthem themfelues¢ And in particuler itis {aid, that from them hee 


pag-9.7s 


7 >that would fayne haue the world deeme thefe for counterfeyts,(tho- 
ugh forfhamehe dare not fay fo) confidering whofe children they. 
Hy) Were, the nomber 5. the tyme: they were afflicted, aboue.3. yeares, 
Oe their age being fome of them.about 9. or-1.0. yeares ould, thedun- 
impoflible thinges to be. counterfeyted. donne.in appearance by 
them. as:thcirefupernaturall felling in-their bodyes, 8c. their 
> ernaturall ftrength, knowledge, whereby it came to paffe (to let o- 
> ther things poe) that one of them(M. Loaneby name) foretould sat 
there fhould be twelue of them which |bould. be bewitched in that. boufe in ine 
one fort or other and named them.all, being all-weomen kind, and feruants booke thi.:. 
the bonfe, berfel€ andher fifters fyne of the nnmber, all which pro- 
afterwards very true, for they had all then feucrall excifs, andmyft of 
them afflictedinthe fame fort and manner as thefe fine fiers mere:8 fur- 
thermore that thofe ferssants that came in thei places, for the parte 

me of them were afflicted in the lke fort as the other, far the {pace of two years 

togcather: and that befides ewo of and M.lame 


ashe doth likewife by. Starchyeschildren.in Lancafbsre. He nowe 


f bearned to what nee efi to witches: Viz. as they had donne betore 
7 Chim. Agayne the Di/: denyeth that they,were besitched: for if they 
if [were but /uppofed.to be-bewsuched;. then were they not, bewitched in- 
~ deede. Ana yet itis manifeltby many of their {peaches.and actions 
(mentioned m the printed: booke concerning the witches of 
Specially by, their cxying ont-vpon Albce Samuel the witch, they. feem- 
ir ed lo to be,And thertore:if they were not bewitched & vexed by the 
Deuill they counterfeized. In a worde looke ito the printed booke 
and you fhalifynde, that if they: were:not. vexed with vncleane. {pi- 
0) tits, they were moftnotorious counterfeyts, and fuch as before them 
nouer were, but faith the they. were not bewitched or tormente 
ed with-euill {pirits: contederating with or woman, 
there abouts ergo conclude I counterfeyts,and{o indeede the Dif-: 
vp cowcrer meaneth: yet he thought it beft and moft for his {afety becaul | 
he | am they.were the children ofan Efquier, not to fay {a in playde tearmes: 


(2%: ADETESTION OF S. HARSNTS 


tom were at the Affifes at Huntinetar feene of the IndecandTiffices in 
futh wittieles torimented, molt pitifully And lafly- 
Alice ether with Her hurband-and daughter)-was 
ly found guilty by the lury of bewitching them, but -belides did her . 


(ole at her egecution conteffe that jbce had bewitched them, and fente 
to torment thee enlidering (I fay) thele thinges, and that» 
uine their bewitdihg atid éxation by the Diuell were at large deh- 
before the and therefore vpon-oath: and after publifhed 
tothe world, and knowne*(as it appeareth) to the Difconercr, what 
} a {hamefull thinge is it; and intollerable imimry donne to thofe gen- 
tletvonien; ‘arid their parénts*yea to the Iurorsand Iuftices thatcon 
demned the witches, and proclayme to all men, 
that they counterfeyzede ‘Atid me thinketh-one fhould not deale 
i thus, and that aduifedly, except he thought that there were no witc=_ 
, hes; nor diuels,‘or atleaftthat the diuels haue no power to torment 
in their bodyes. But he that will nothauethefe be bewitch=. 


eds but counterfeyts,; (from whofe:counterfeytine Som: learned fome.: 
ofhis tricks; and{e.not-all ofthem fronrme) lethim tell me.in-good 
 earneftin his reply (if he be not afhamed to.make any reply what he 
 thinketh of the Izy/or hisman of Huntinzton, tor feeing he was in all 
_ refpetts handled as the five children were, it is to be thought that if. 
they not bewitched nor vexed by the diuell, bur did. counterfeit, 
it was folikewife with he was handled alike to them, and 
i therfore theircondition alike, appeareth by the enidence of the fayd_ 
Izylo(vpon his oath) gaue, which isfet downe in the booke entitu- 
1 The Arraignment and execution of the witches of Warboyfe: in thef 
wordes followinge .Then the laylor of Huntington cauc this enidence:that 
amanof bis. finding mother samucll very varuly whilesfbe was prifoncr,at 
time chaynedher toa bed-poaft wherefore nat long. after his man fel ficke 
and in all yefpet?s was handled as the forenamed children were, with hea-- 
ning vp and downe of his body, faking his armes, and head, hauing 
«(more in bimin bis fitts, then any two men had,cryine out of mother 
Samuel, fayine that fhe did bewitch him: and thus remaynine in this extr 
cougfe of fecknessabout ov 6, dayes after dyed. it fall out fo 
that he fay that thisman counterfeytedtoo, and learned {0 to do of 
TLrogmortons children(as\Som, did in part) I thinke all that heare 
of it will laugh at his folly, And heere we may obferue how the Dif 
to prooue Som, acounterfeyt, beareth vs in hand, firft, that Tho.Dar 
ding, Kath, Wight, Coupe, andshe 7.in Lancafbive were counter= 
feyts, Secondly the of Chefler, Mildred cc. Ina worde, that 


4 


— 


24 
4 
» > 
| 
| 
| 
= 
4 


LYING DISCOVERY. “23 


vexed indeede' by the diuell, on this fide and beyond the feas,among 

vs and the papilts were counterfeyts, «zo (iaith he) Sosnci's connterfey 

ted. And this is, bis mayne and generall argument, The antecedent 
or firft parte whereof I deny, and doe defire the Bifbop and S. H.to 
prouethat,and then I will giue them the conclufian, and all they 
For-afinuch as™M. Darvells frends doc fo oft alleadee Tertullian, § 
S. Ambrofe. Auten. $. Chrifofiome, with Profper ut 28 
not amilfe to heave what Kemnitius (writing againft the counfcll of Trent) 
[ith of this point, Exorciftas ct. They bane tran{formed their Exorcifts m 
to magical Inchanters, In times paft it was a peculiar enift to caft out di- 
Oe cls out of mens bodycs by the voyce of man, and power of god. And the 
fame guift continued inthe church in the times of S Cypryan, S. Ambrofe 
S. Anguftine, S. Chrifoftome, and of Profper: Obfefli in templum addu- 
cebantur, et {zepe communibus ecclefiz precibus liberabantur: The po 
were brought into the church, and were often-times delinered by the 
common prayers of the church: peftea illud demum &c, Put afterwards 


Be be)that euift ceafed. Darrell hance againe obteynedit, let him 


The Dif, perceyuing that befides the holy fcriptures, the aume. 
ent fathers are not only for poffeffion in thefe dayes, 1 meane‘fynce 
(@) myracles ceafed, but alfo for difpoffeffion by earneft prayer: thought. 
Wy good to make fhewe of this, that the teftimonyes we alleadge out of 
my the auntient writers are peruerted, & make not for vsat all:& why? 
7% Lanfwere,Peter Marter as greate a diuine ashe,(to let others goe)af- 
-@ firmeth the contrary,as before we haue hearde, where is now this ar- 
gumente,yf I fhoulde fayeno morezbut for our better fatiffaftion, 
let vs confider what Keminitins fayth,and How trulye. The fame guifigy _ 10.1.8. 
fayth he (meaning that powerouer vncleane fpirits,giuen by Chrifts 3,15. 
his Apoftles )continucd in the church in che times of Taw iullia Ciprian Luk-9.1- 
Howe can this be fo,feinge to caft out diuels as 
the Apoftles did&c.by aworde is a miracle, & that miracles were cea 
| fed be fore theretymes?we may remember that when and to whom 
this peculiar caft dinels out of the badycs of men was giuen,then 
and to the fame perfons was there withall giuen,to heale euery fick- 
neffe and euery difeafe.for afmuch then as Tertullian Ciprian,.Ambrof 
not the guyft to. heale {yckneffes 
and difeafes,to giue fight to the sicoducell can not therfore be that 
thefe fathers had this Apoffolicall guift, as Kemmitins affirmeth,& the 
Dif. woulde haue it.yea the thinge it felfe fheweth the contrary,and 
Keinnitins (8 the Dif with him Jouerthroweth him feife.in his owne 


$ 
& 
. 
| 
La 
; ; 
‘ 
~~ 
e 


24 ADETECTION OF §, HARSNET 
wordes'The p be) were brought into the church in the times of 
 shofe fathers and were often tsmes delincred by the common prayers of the 
notby my the Apottles caft out Satan thusfor rather hauinge au- 
thoritie ouer the diuils,commaundd them in the name of lelus to go 
forth,and immediatly they departed ? yfthele fathers.bad the. fame 
__gnifte wyth the Apoftles,as is here affirmed,why did they not vic it in | 
the fame manner, and with like fuccefle that they did, I meane ,the ” 
prefentand{pedy’ dellynerance of tlie partie poflefled? but caft Sa- 
thant out after another maner,with more longer delay,greater helpe | 
then euer the Apoftles did or had<For howelocuer thereisnot men © 
tion made in the {criptnresjofall thofe the Apoftles difpoffelled by | 
fatr, yer by infallible reafons taken out of them, it is cleare, that the 4 
Apoftles didnot deliuer ariy that were pofleft by the common pryers ef 
the chur che as iris here fatd of thefe aunciét fathers, They hada more 
readie and eafie way to driue out the yncleane {pirit of what kinde fo § 
Luk 92.  eueritwas.ct.by a worde, yeafometimes lefie fufficed. which as it 
didmore fet forth their authoritie and power ouer wicked {pirits, fo 
Of satan by praier,efpetially beinge aflifted therin by others.{tcan not 
thefeforebe that the A voftles at any ‘time difpoffeffe fathan by the 
praiers of thé church as is here'affirmed,and that truly,of thofe 


ates; Nowe what doth thefe thinges argue but this, that howefoes 


ver the fame expulfid of Diuels out of mens bodyes continued in the [7% 
churche,and was in the times of TertalhanC iprian Ambrofe Chrifoftoms 
ec.yet the Apofolicall power ouer Diuels,was before tho‘etimes 
ne,and no man then guifted with that power:Ifin thefe dehucran= © 
ces by the publick praicrs of the church whereof Kemninins fpeaketh ‘Yer — 
tullian Ciprian ct. had any pecular guilt as it is herefayde: Idemaund 
ofthe Di/.(for Kemnitius is dead, and he is of his iudgment otherwif 
he would nothauealleadged him) firft, whar this guift was, for the We 
the fame that the Apoftles had( notwithftanding they both fay it) it 
is cleare it was not. 2. why rather orie of thefe fhould haue a guift in 
cafting out diuels, then the people or any of them that ioyned with 
them m fuch expulfyon, feeing the meanes whereby Sathan was caft 
out was prayer, and that the —_ prefent, prayed & intreted god 
in this behalfe, as well as thefe their leaders, and their prayers were 
not in vayne, but as well preuailed with god, asthe fupplycations & 
interceflions of their minifters: for what though percafe the prayers 
_ of thefeholye men were more feruent, and by confeguent auayled 
more with god, then the requefts made by any priuate chriftan: fhall 
we therfore afcribe fuch expullié of the diuell to one perticular man, 
and therewithallI knowe not what {peciall ouift therein? what is this 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
+ 
& 
* 
3% 
Be 
| 
: 
fit 
4 
« 
| 
j 
a 
«a 


é 


jac dv 3 


in effete make thie ptiiers of the reftof gods people 


we 
Us 


~ then the Difc,will haue nothinge to faie againft difpoffeffion in thefe 
9) ° daics,he «i! bring vs yet the error at leaft of one man:& that he faith 


fo it is inoughe (torfooth, becaufe he was otherwife greatly learned 


howe proueth the out of the holy icriptures: which fe- 


7} inge ke doth not,nor I truft can not, it isbetaufe there ig no light in 


phim, yet wylely muft we obferue here what Kemnitins error is, leait 


4 

Ag 


gainit whome he writ )whole exorcifts chalenge {uch a guift,where vp 
om on.as did thé Apoftles,io.doe they adivre or charge the fpirits to goe’ 
they adi 


tharextrordinarie and miraculus kinde of eieétion, of fathan,which 
ued only in the charche whiles other mira~: 


+ 


petuall. viz.by prayer,or prater and faftinge. By this méeanes and;af- 


2 


| men may not nowe in this our time be difpoffeffed by prayer,or pra 
 crand faftinge as wellas when Tertullian Ciprian, Ambrofe Chrifot 
ome, Auguftine and Profper liued,z feinge that in their dayes miracles 
were ceafed,and an end put to them aswell asnowe: and that thefe 
f° fathers had no more a guifte to worke miracles, then M: More & my 
1: {elfe,;whome God hath pleafed (amonge others) to vie in the lyke 
work. Thele queftions I defire the Difc.to anlwer, and Iwill expeée 

\@ it at his handes if euer he replie:excepte he be contente in plaine Sc 

y) ° expreffe termes to yelde to this truthe.And thus we fee that rather 


(. we thoulde doe iniurye euen to the deade. Herein he faid then very 
that she Silt and very fitly alfo againft the Papift,(a- 


1f,8.20, 


ers ar 


| 
aSipeaches {poken mm the ayere,and beatir 
deth’nor?. 3.{einge by the Dif-owne fecret contellion,men.were 
me felled in Fertullizn Ciprian,egct.theré dayes, why not now?4:Seempge 
in |): inthe dayes of thefe auncient fathers,men were dilpofletied and'Sa- 
he | tan caft ove by the prayers of the faithfull. why maye not men be dif- 
a- poficifed nowe vpon the viinge of the fame meanes? were the 
| =ersof gods people then mightie with god to the expellinge of Sath 
 anandare they ofno force nowe?or rather is it impoflible fhou 
preuayle fo nowe,and in thefe our dayes,as the Dif; becaule Kem 
nitius. faith lo, will needes haue In aworde, what letteth it that | 
re 
fo ¢ 
it 
fo aha 
4 
be 
fe 
if 
it 
h | 7% that be rooke thes ous? to continue ih the church yntill and in the a- 
forefaid fathers tines. 2 in that he thought (as.it feemeth )that there” 
d isnocaftinge out of Diuels now,becaus that euift is ceafed for belides 
| 
d fore 
» ter this manner the aboue named fathers ih. ther tinies catt out | 
s and not by any peculyar and miraculus guift beftowed vponthem,+ 
continuinge in the church yntill dayes. And thus ate or 


+ 


26° DETECTION OF S:>HARSNETS 
euil {pirits forth at this.daye.and whereas he fcornefully addeth 
“TEM Darel! baue acdine obtainedit, meaning that peculiar guift to 
ont Dinel,which the Apoftles had: ier him makeanuch of w:lingood 
earheft anfwere,that as Ihaueno fuch nor yet any {petiall 
herein aboue the leaft of my brethren or private chriftianfonenher 
euer did I from the firft time that 1 dealt in the difpoffeflinge of at a 
arrogat any peculiar guift to my felfe.buthauefrom time totime 
the de ‘arr fromime.as I could both with my tongue and pen.2 
by the carriage’of my felfe in this action Thaue fhewed no leffe, and 
herein may alimen be confirmed as by my whole treatife before con 
cerninge difpoffeffion:fo by that is here atorefaide: Greatly then are 
they to blame,which charge me with challenging [ knowe not what. 
How MDarrell | OF THE 4- ‘CHAPTER, 
ismadeafite 24. Danvell cid of bis owne accord (after be was (ent for by M. 
2. Starchy) acquaint one M, More with the 
then many o- ter, and obteyned him to be his compannyon in 
Hauing fhewed the feuerali occafions of that chriftian dutye 
performed.to Kath, Wright andTb, Darling, but corruptly. he proce-° 
deth in the fame vaine to the reft: & in the third place tellethvshow =~ 
it came to pafle that 24. More, and my felfe wentto thofe in Lanca- 
foie. VVhere he faith, that I went wpon the fending for by M.Deeand | 
M. Starchy, he is deceaued. Fora meflenger comming vntomefro 
thefe, Irefufled to goe, & returned that foranfwer. Aboutfomelo. | 
weekes after( I thinking to have heard no more of it ) came an other 
a letter from M. Starchy, wherein he was ymportu- 
nate with me, befeeching me euen for gods loue to {ee his diftrefled 
children, and an other from M. Tames 4fhton a luftice of peace there 
by, declaring the manner of their handling, & requefting my pajries 
to.come ynto them. The next-day (being the exercife 5 
dela zouch where then dwelt) I made. rhis knowne to fundry. 
chers, in number about 16, Their refoluticn was, that I fhould. doe : 
well to goe, and withall they thought itfit (vpon the motionof one | 
of them,not of myne nor it M.Mores)that one of the company fhould =] 
goewith me, to.this end principally, shat ifit thotld pleafe God to 
_. profper vsin that we went about, the (ame ypon our retutne, and re 
porte might ftand and be confirmed in the mouth oftwo witnefles. 
And heereof there be many witnefles. And then I wentnot vpon 24, 
Dee his letter, fa neither did I of my owne accord acquaint M1. More(in 
perticuliar) with the matter as the Difc, pretendeth.And therefore he 


4 
; 
| 
ica 
a 
i 
it 
|! 
| 
2 
| 
ile 
i 
2 
alt! 
AG 
a, 


le 


fing it, Mifires Gray the prynted booke 
concerning Th.Darling, and of the aduice there {pecifyed that I gus 
at. 


fhe if you will write a lett@ vnto him, I will ioyne.therein,ana fub- 
{cribe my nameynto it. Vpon this.a letter was framed by one S37 E- 
yans(as they call him) ind by my fifter in lawe, the tennor 
Brother Darrell after moft barty manner ec. ‘Thefe ave not only of 
amy felf to rcqueft-you, but alfo all the whole towne of Nott, wi llcth 
» M. Strilley to take fomuch paymes as to come vsto a yonge man 
for as by the letter bereinclofed, we think he is d of fome ersll (pyri: 
- [9 which they hearing of that good guift that the lord bath einen vou and WYO | 
mightely by you, we cencr ally craue-your prefence and afpiftance 
> Bs, which we will do to the vtermoft of or powers. Thele aretherfore 
5 | guscft syort to take the paynes to come with as much expedition as poff bly yee 
and thus the lord be with you afift and keepe you now and 
Vader this letter were fubferibed thefe fewe lynes following, which 
: | they mentby the former wordes, the letter here inchfed, conteyninge 
the {peciall thinges which induced them to thinkethat heewas pof- 

mannnet of taking is thus: fomctimes it isin one place,fometime 
_in an other: and when we charge it in the name of the father to anoyde. it 
tormenteth and he {kriketh and cryeth, and after he is able to [peake, 
he faith he aid not [krike,.A nd he [aiththe fe eet likens fies, 
a moufe, [ometimes a dooce, and it pafwadeth him ta [payle bimf[elfe, and 
shee that pray far bim,and with other tke perfmafits to him abage of 


ter. But he proceedeth on, to, the o¢calion of my going to Somers. 
| By che tune that So, had his fits Durrell was of [ome name: and - 
 befides hauing a filter in lawe Nottingham, one ip Wallis, foe was 
tongue-tycd, what aman her brother. was: and therevpon being vrged | 
by certaine weomen, be writt to M, Darrell 4 letter importing (fash 
. |" tres Gray) that the Lady Zouch, foe her[elf, and, diners otber gentlwomene 
rvegucfted him to come oncr to fee. the faidSomers. 
Nextto the name I had, the tisslll rattle (forfooth) of my in 
_ 1 lawe,and her letter importing as is heere {pecitied, occalioned my go 
"ing to Somers. But the truth is this, After So, had bene about a mon- 
seth very ftrangely and greuoufly afflited, and thatin fuch extraor-. 
dinary manner,.as therevpon he was fufpected to_haue an_euill{pirit 
had afifter in lawe dwellingein Nottingham. Heere-vponfheewas. 
by  fent for, requefted to write ynto me, for my fpeedy repaire to Som, 
+) Sherefufed, faying that I would not comevpon her writing, but faid 


fyne cloathes, aadto make him richer then any of the townt, 


if he will but one fortnightdetbim alone, 
VVith this letter cameanother to the effect aforefaide from 


the boyes paftor: when peruling this fub{cription, Ifounde 
diuers fignes of poticilion, whereof {ome are mentionedin the 
pell, others ihad obferuedin experience? and queftioning with the _ | 7% 


meflinger, heard befides ofhisfoming, cafting into the fyer, extraor 


f aduifed them to vie the meanes of fafting and prayer for his dely=_ 
uerance from Sathan: but therein I faid they were to{pare‘me, for di. 


‘mers reafons I rendred them, and to craue the affiftance of others of |” 
ereater guiftes and neerer them then I was. Heerevpon they did wrt 
ght pretently to 24. Jobn Ircton, and M. lohn Browne:the one beinge | 
then from home, the other in his anfwer aduifed them tofendforme . € 


becaufe of the experience I had aboue others. (belides he ireton 


mieane wrote to me to the fame end) vpoy this Mawr hisletter 


was procured and fent to me, vpon the receipt whereof Iwent. For . 
thus truly I thought, that forafmuch as fundrye of the inhabitants of 


83d Nottingham and among them his maifter, his paftor, togeather with — 


thé magiftrate who were interefled in the boy, called and defired my . 
poere aduice and afliftance, it was my part and duty to goe, and to. . 
ycalde them my beft affiftance, contrary ro that [-had purpofed.and 
written before, as being called of pod to that worke: and hereabout; , 
conlulted alfo with two godly & learned men-then in .</bby: who 
were cué fo alfo perfwaded,and whofe allowance I had in that I did, . 
I went not then to So, ypon my ster i lawes bare letter, neither doth | 
the fame ymport as the Difc. vnder the name of another reparteth: | 
but being inftantly requefted by (uch as you heare: and if §. {tand’ 
for Samuell Har{net as all men fuspofe and wherof there is no ‘doubt - 
then knoweth he the moft of thefe thinges as well as I: yea almofte~ 
no man better: fot befides that he hath heard(vndoubtedly) of thefe 
fevierall letters (24. Ireton his excepted) many times: he may,remem=_ 
bet, thathe being acommiflioner, among ‘other intergatorves,they’ 
had one concerning the occafion of my comminge to Not, and that: 
Miftres Gray and M: William Lang ford among others bein: ¢épofed 
and interrogated thereabouts, anfwered that M. Maior thar then was, 
(viz. M. Peter Clarke’) did.write-yntc me to that end, and that ther-_ 
vpon I came:‘bendifig their {peach to the faid M. Clarke who was pre 
fent, as being'‘a commiflioner, Indeede this part of their -depofitions: 
was not fer dawne among the reftas I was fhortly after credibly in- 

| formed 


dinary itrength I returned in aniwer that chofe thinges being true 
that they in their letter, and. their meflenger more at largerelacedvn | 
to me, the boy was vndoubtedly pofleffed with the diuell: andwithal-. 7 


= : 
A 4 » 
4 
i- 
J 
| 
| 
4}, 
: 
~. 
} 
BY 
Ne 
$ 
my 
at 
» 
; 
are 
q 4 
mi 
Bart 
4 
Ty as 
Bait 
bit 
| 
HE 
¥3 
4 
Bur 
uit: 
i 
ty 


LYING DISCOVERY. 29 
formed. And now jet othersiudg of 1.Harfacts dealinghetein, 
Itis by the way to be oblerued tnat the Dif ,himieite (althoughia 
his {cofting vaine,contelleth that / ran not of my felte to Som.nor any. 


Me of the reit out bane bene fought vnto: trom whence a probable arguin~. 
may be drawne, that 4 aidnot teach him to counterteyt norany 
of the other, For it Zhad fo done tor gayning glory to my feif in atet. 
ned dilpotlei{ing of him: furely (after io much: paynes taken for 
@ dry yeares together) J would inall likelihood haue winded my ielfe 
by tome oda practite and deuite or other into that action, otherwile 
what had his counterteyting bene to me, or would haue advantaged 
mee more then an other? true faith the Dif. and theretore very.cun- 
. | ningly you did fo. For Som, hath depofed that thele wordes you faid 
vnto hum in parke: He alo (meaning my felte ) tould me, faith 
Som. that be bauing afifter in lawe sn. Nottingham; one M, Wallys, I co- P2g-8.6. 
nojooncr name him when I foould be thought to be poffefjed, but that 
(PD prefently aud the rather by his {ifters meanes, befbould be sent for to come 
{| vato me, 1 bis our faid meeting in the parke is hereatter ouerthrowne 
therby it is manifeft that no fuch {peach was there vttered by me, 


Bur it is ftrengthned by Ednond Garland's depofition: 


went Jnot at the firft fending for, being efpecially {fo folemnly 
by ameffenger of purpofe, bringmg withhim a horfefor mee to’ 
 tyde on (to make fureJ tho 

9% a letter as we heare, arid an other befides from 21. Aldridge? But not 
withftanding' this] fate ftill,and not only fo,but returned befyds 
ananfwer as wherevpon they write to two others as is aforfatd either 
© of whofe affiftance had they of Nott .obteyned, wehadneuerheard” 


mes, when Som, hath in his pretended fits vfed thefe words; Darrell,Darrel 


Davell, Ifthe deponent meane of the firft fending. for me, that hede 84 


pofeth is falfe: if of the latter J yeald vnto it: but howloeuer he mean’ 


>) and others take it, it:mattereth not, becaufe it is playne by the premi#* 


“® {es that J went not to Som. vponhis naming me, but vpon other oc= 
_ > cafion, whereby the falfhood of Som, depofition doth farther appeate 
and Garland; alfo if werefpeé the end wherevnto it ferueth, more= 
ouer had there bene any fuch compact betwene Som. and me, why 


fente 


uld come, as fome percafe thought} fudy 


any thing of my teaching to counterfeyt.who-can now inreafon yma 


pine that therewas any {uch compatt? could befure that I fhoulde 
¢ the fecond time intreated, hauing alfo denyed in twoe feuerall let-. 
ters to deale in that action” Indeede it fo fell out by the prouidence 
of god(who had thereynto appointed me) burin‘refpest of men by. 
chance. For thus it was, One of the Eile of Huntineton’smen, M aiff. 
Hoult by name, beisgat Nottingham, the Mair touldehim of a 


> 
a 
‘ 
= 
© 
> bene pre Ail 
ig 
{ 
4 
| 
4, 
a 
a 
re 
ay 
‘a 
> 
> 
‘ 
2 


30  ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


pofe he had to write by him to his Lord, to be ameane to me ,to com 
vnto them toa boy greatly diftreffed. M. Hoult anfwered, that he th- 
eugnt thatneede nor, for thar hisowneletterto mie woulde futryce 
and preuaile fo farr with me, his place confidered, Andherevpon the 
Said jerrer was made, and fent by him, who was prefently to come to * 
to bis Lord, remayning there, where my felte alfo dwelt-atthe 
delivery whereof he made this knowne vnto me, Andthusmuch tou 
ching the occalion of my going to Som, wherein through the ynrea- 
fonablenefie-and wrefting of my aduerfary, I haue bene forced to 


Hawinge begun the fludie of the law he perceued therein fuch greate. 
corrusption,as he game himfelfe to the fludie of dininitée :that {0 he mighte 
ferue god andktpeagood comcience, 
The vfe of this isto alienate the affe&tions of thofe which be of 
this calling from me,and there withall from the cauf it felfe.But God 
_ is my witneffe that I neuer affirmed. any fuch thinge, neither did the 
dame euer enter into my thought. The commo lawes I hold and ever 
did fince I ftudied them,to be grounded vpon-the-lawe of god and 
seafon,& to be of neceffarie and fingular ule inthe common wealth 
fo farr am I and euer was from condemninge the ftudie of them, farr 
therefore was that from me,the Dc. here fuggefteth. Only this ig 
true,that when the Lorde (whohad longebetore purpofed to im= 
ploye me otherwife, andin the ftudye ofan other aw,)diddrawme 
another waye,by layinge his hande vpon me;in caufinge a {trange 8 
extraordinary {lugeifhnes to fall me, being a ftudent co” 
mmon lawes ) euen then when Lwas motft free and far from the fam” 
- Ithus thought with my felfe, and it may be I have fome times vied*™ 
wordes to this effeét,that without all contradi&ticn it were much be 
tter for me,to{pende my, dayes and {trength in the Rudie of the dé” 
uine then,humane lawe,and to be occupied and labour or worke vp 
on the foules of men, endeuouringe theire eternall faluation:then'a-" 
- bout the landes and goods.of men and rightinge of the wronge, don 
them therein which only concerneth this momentary 
_ eacheth not to the bodies of men ,much lefleto therefoules:The | 
welfare and faluation of which next to the gloryofgodisonlywor- 
thy to be fought and laboured forall other thingesbeinge mere tryf- 
les in comparifon thereof. Befides ly of the afore 
fayd hande of God,vpon me,and of the continuance of my very rare 
{lugesthnes (the lyke whereto I thinke.hath bene feldome founde in ° 
any, notwithftandinge my earneft {triuing againft the fame, began 
tofeare leaft I did kick againft the prickes; and imagine that the lord ° 
wouldey femy feruice in fome other thinge and placemein an 


| 
| 
AME 
| 
ay 
ii 
i 
3 
4 : 
5 | 
« 
Tat 
re 
2 
wit 
ar? 
| 
‘Beta 
nf 
ay 
t 
"3 
a 
“ag 
‘ 
Ai 4 
Bul 3 
> 


,.But-one thing is reported of M. Darrell, which paffeth the and 


other ftandinge. And this ( I fpeake the truth in Chrift,and lye not) 

caufed me to ate 

law of man to the law of God,& not any corruption 

His frend forectteth bimfclfin affirming that M, Darvells life bath 


the fame that 


bene fo fearched into, for truc it is that dilicent cave was had and comma- ais 


undement ginen accordingly, that touching bis conuer{ation, other wife th 
A 
uid not any one point be inquired into: neither was trere, as by the at?sin 


record it may appeare, and as it is fuppofed.M. Darrell will himfelfe con . 


feffe. 


< Noverily, I am (0 farr from confeffine this, that I am fully affa-- 


ange my minde, and tranflate from the 
1 


to his pretended courfe of cafting out dinells there 


red of the contrary. I haue bene very credibly informed of a ferching- 


after the life I led at Cambridge, and by page 9s. it appeareth that vp 


pon fome inquiry, information hath bene giuen, How I behaued my, 


felfe at z/bby and at Nottingham the Dif. himfelfe may remember, 
that he and an other Commiffioner depofed and examyned one Web 
his wife of Nottingham( at whofe houfe at my firft comming I made 
my abode for a fewe dayes) wherevpon and what moued her to inter 
tayne me, what {peaches in fecret pafled betwene her and me, what 
words I vttered in the prayers I vied while I was there, or to this ef- 
fect, and not concerning my cafting ont diuclls or Som, counterfeiting 
or not counterfeyting, concerning which fhe could fay the leaft of a 
thoufand: And hobo as this fact of the D:f- was contrary to the 
commaundement giuen him, and that herein he and his fellowe com- 
miffioners went beyond the boundes of their commiffion, and that 
the thing he did is in it felfe moft intollerable,I defire all mento confi 


der of it, {pecially thofe that be in authority. But what hath the Dif. 
 inall his fearching found out? I alke of him whofe oxe or I haue 


taken,or to whom I haue done wrong” ifhe cantell lethim.neere-_ 


after declar e yt. 


maketh it probable (you may not doubt ) that God hath geuen him an ¢{- 


7) peciall crace aboue all other Exorcifts,now a dayes to expe dl diuels. For the 


that after a fort, be bath forfaken lands, and all fer Chrifts fakes 


which being an <Apoftolicall refolution, why [bould not he bane that cuifte 


sraunted ynto hime: Indcede one is as true asthe other, 


The reafon why ithath bene faid as is heere repored is, becanfe » 


for a preaching miniftery fake, and fo for Chrift and his gofpell fake,T 
changed my habitation: and'when I dwelt in my owne houfe, & vpo. . 


my owne land, in my natiu country, among my kinffolkes and acque 


ayntance, to my full contentment and hartes delight for the thinges 


of 


pap. 2 6, 


4 
F 
i -¢ 
‘ 
3 
* 
4 
< 

— 
« 
> 
i 
a 
tis tie 
Bars 
; 
- 
Ry 
tq 
as 
we 
4 4 
i 
By 
a 


tion omen - 


19.21. 


tearke.3.34. 
marke.8.3 4, 


Luke.14.26.! 


J 


2 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
of this life, I ( through the grace of god) left all thefe re. my loffe, Se 
pitched my tent in an other coat, and hereof 1 am not alhaned. «ind 


why might not he who knew this to be true, fay asis atorelaides this 


the Ly. icorneth, being one of thele that will neither enter into the 
kiagdome of heauen, nor futter thofe that would, He teemeth by his 


feorntull fpeaches tollowing, to thinke that there 1s no fur/aking of be 


ufc, land, and all to followe brit, but where one feileth huuic, sanae, 


and all he poileileth and gineth the mony to the poore, accoruing to. 
the {peach, ot Chrift to the yong man in the golpell, of uss watt be per 


fect, ell that thon baft, and vine st to the poore. bur to let this eror gue, 


what meaneth the Dy. to call this an -4o/folicall refolution< 


feme the aniwer giuc by Peetcer concerning himleit, felowe “poitis, 
Bebould we bawue tovfaken all followed thee, But the Dic. noult snowe: 


that all this refolution to for/ake all and fallswe Chrift is nut proper and: 


peculyar to the .4pofties, but commonto them with ail chrittians,y ea 


this refolution is io general, as he that is not relolueu to tonak hu ule: 


land, yeaand his owne life alfo, and all to followe Cit ana his gof 
pell, (#) ss not worthy of Chrift, and cannot be his difciple. i nas tath 
our Sauiour,(#) whvfoeucr will followe mee, let hum for ake bumfeif, that: 


is,refolue with himielfe,or be willing and ready to lole or jay uowne- 


bis life for my [ake whenfoeuer I fhall call him there-vnto, which bee 


mutt dayly expe<t: much more houfe and land and all things belids: 
and againe, sf any man come tomec, and hate not his father, and mother, 


and wife, and clildren, and brethren and fifters, yea and his ovne life 
be cannot be my difciple, And here-vpon ymediatly after, he compa-' 
reth him that is not refolute and, ready to forfake life and all, and to" 
endure whatioeuer perfecutions can befall him for Chritt’s fake, and 


yet profefle himfelfe to be Chrift’s, to a rath and fooli/b man, that 
ginneth, to builde, but is not able to make an end, and to an vnadui_ 
led Ang, going to warre againft an other, who will neither fend embaf 
fage and defive peace, neither yet is able to meete him that commeth 
again{t him: and then concludeth thefame thus: fo Likewi/e whofocucr 

be be of you, that forfaketh not. all that he hath, he cannot be my difciple, 
Yea obferue I befeech you heere, how by the next wordes tollowing . 
thele of Peter(whervpon it muft needs be the Dif-gathereth thisye/.~ 

lution of forfaking all, to be 4poffolicall) this is manifeftly conuinced. 
For when Chrift had vpon occafié of Leeter’s words, tould him & the 
other of his difciples,what reward they which had thus forfaken all & 

followed him fhould haue, that they /bould fit yppon twelue thrones 
tsucige the twelue tribes of there he theweth that neither this for 
faking of all,nor reward,is proper to them his Apoftles,but common 


to others, laying: 4nd whofoener [ball forfake howfes,or 
or 


zg 

4 

bry} 

| 
a4 
| | x 
HEE 
| 

3 

| 

“4 4499 

| 
| 
| 
| | 

; { 

| 

| 

‘ 

| 
ae 
» 
* 
y 
4 
in 
4 
| 
4 
Hale 
| 
st i€ | 


ounte’dfmé, But 1defire'all 
amdnot to giué éaré to this his! Falfe fer repor "FUE IUIS.- 
it hat after cervattie fh 
therevof fe'yeares') to ma {elfeand 
4 htaine, my: can 
| familie, hauinee én? But itis as tie, that prefently, with the | 
enioneye tooke a farine i bie- dele axouchand bought. fome, 
| {Lore of ‘flieep es kine 


| gion and ineto' 


LYING DIsc OVERY, 33, 
or father wife, or cbild¥én; or lands, my. [ake, bee 
[ball receane an hundred fould more; and inberite cuerlafting lif life. As 
it Chrift lefus had taid, not only you my Apoftles, but whofoeuer 
{hall forfake all to followe mec, {hall haue the tame recompence of re- 
you. And this is exprelily ‘fet downe by the 3. Enangelifts, §.28. 


which argueth a preater ignorancé in the Dif? From'this refolytion to. 
forfake boule, and a ‘flr Chrifts fake. which I would be forry 


had not: he conéladeth me to haue or to pretend to haue the Apopos 
call guift, meaning, the fame puitt to calt our diuells and power o- By this worthy 
uer viicleane {pirits, which the apoftles had, And marke what he ad- che Deleon 
deth, Indeede one is 25 true as the other, fay who fhoulde knowe kid/ey.cranmers 
better then he, the one is more trué.then the other, and that the late sore 
Di/. to many thoufand (4) martyrs in former ages, who had not OQ— needs hays rhe. 
ly this refolution, but did indeede forfake hon(e, all yeathcire 
owne liues for Chrifts (ake: were they all -4poffles,and indewed with deuills, vecaufe 
that 4poftolicall guift, by a worde to caft ont and b rconfequ- has 
ent to worke other miracles? Thus we fee that whiles the Dy in'moc gofpll fake. 
kage blundereth out Apoftolicall refolution, and. 4poftoliicall g euilt, he 
deliuereth doctrines rather Apoftaticall then 
as: canin no forte drawrie Ror with their 
“writ 


«fit noate of one that can Cat AP out” di ‘pee [b [ball 


inge it isnot fo, ter 


which my father Mow | 
iid n able of. the annyall, 


appertay ninge, 
fetbingerare well 
knowne 


tO the fhayritenahic Ou enld 


* 
=> 
re 
_ 
4 
J 
> 
> 
% 
jar, 
41 
4 
Nw 
+; 
4 
| % 
— 


 ADETECTION OF S:HARSNETS 


| 
knowne to. many, Ieis-plaine then'that! neither fouldemy Jandto. 
that end the.Di/c.pretendeth,neither being iould did line vpon the me.” 
ney,that is, let it forth to vfurie as vfurers doe.1 am fory thus to trou _ ‘ 
ble the world.with the readinge.of my. privat affaires,but thatthe = 
vnrefonableneffe of the aduerlarieand his fclanderoustongue doeth = 
ghere-vnto entorce me, in the iuft defence ofmine owne innocencie, 
Bur hath not the Difc.here faithfully keprehis promile, inthathe 
{aide he would not meddle with my life:or is he not.taken tardie, in 


How Darrell knewe Som. andthe refty 


M. Darrell affirmeth that Chrift did not wdeyne any meanes to know 
“who was poffeffed in the apofils time: but left that to be difcerned by the ma 
ner of theire fits, and foframing bis indement accordingly, be faith: that 
me the only meanes wherchy now men are dofcerncad to be poffeffed, are: the fig. 
ges which are mentioned in thefeviptures. 
Tal ws "IT neither doe nor did fay that the Apoftles did by no other way. 


a Or meanes difcerne who were poffeffed, then by the manner of their. 
a | Vexation by fathan, which he calleth heere the manner of their fits, tot 
: eacsa6,16. it may be that fome times they knewe fomuch by fome prefent and_ 
| extraordinary guift, and {ort is likely thar Paule knew the Pytboneffe 
tobe poffeffed, and therefore I faide that the only. meanes whereby; 
ROW are difcerned crc. but thisisit fay, that, Chrilt. dd nat\or~, 
dey? any [uch meanes, for then we fhoulde haue it in the Scriptures, 
“Saind fuch orditiance there I dare be bould to fay we haue none, Belids, 
what neede Chrift to haue ordeyned any other. meanes for the difce, 
efnine' of the poffelfed, feeing by their manner of handling in theyre. 
fits it was fo mahifeft, and a Aicale {o ealy, tobe knowne, that the'co- 


Bee stion people, yea euen the fimple women could difcerne thereof, as 
tie fhewed? y but faith the Dif there is fuch an ordi 
nance: for in the 1. to the Cor. Chap. 12..among other guifts, there. 

is mention of one, called difcretio {pivitunm, the. dbfcerning, of {pivites: 

which faith the Dif was a meafure of gods (pirit to betwixt.coun. 

terfeyts, and fuch as were fcfed. But we muft knowe that the 
&vesan holy ghoftmeanerh hereby an other manner of guift. (4) Beware (la. 
ith Chrilt}of falfe prophets, which come to-you in fbeepes cloathing byt inz, 

wardly are rauening wolues. And againe * there foall arife falfe.C briftes, 
and falfe prophets, and [hall ereatelienes. and wonders, fothat yf it 

| were poffible they fhould deceaue the very elf, And $. Paule {peaketh 


Of (>) falfe Apoftles which were deceipsfull workgis, wranfforming them 


if 


4 
a 
4 
t 


 felues 


| 
P 
i] 
H 
ahi 
: 
| 
77 
nt 
‘ 
“bly 
4 
‘ 
2 4 
4 
. 
Bel 
f. 
4 | 
J 
| 
H 
a 
‘ 
Bath 
> 
1 
THY 
4 
° 
4 


felues into the Apoftles of Chrift:. and of Satban bis minifiersy tranfforme 

ing themfelues as thoneh they were the minmiflersof reghteoufness And 

faith thus: Dearly beloued, beleue not enery but try the 
whether they are of vod: for many fal{e prophets are gone ontinto this world, 

. Allthefe beare the world inhand that they the {pirit of god; and: 
-teach the truth, or true and only way to faluation, whereby they de- -: | 
® ceaue many, and yet it isnot fo. He now thatisin-abled of god to di * am 
® {cerne the falfe prophets, and falfe Chrifts, from the true, and put dif *°"""*" 
ference betwene the [pirit of truth, and * the {pirit of error: he fay 
7% and all they haue this guift, called the dsjcerning of {pirits: which is com 
. 9 mon toall the eleét. But he that herein hath an excellency and fharp.. 

_ 9 nes to difcerne the fame aboue others, may fitly be faid, and I thinke 

- | moft properly, to haue this guift, In this guift Peter (as it is proba- 

ble) excelled Fhilip in dilcerning of Symon Magus. This guift they 

alfo may be faid to haue, which:can beft difcerne betwene thofe who - 
¥@ though they preach the truth, yet they mingle the fame with vayne 11im.t, 4.& 4. 


and vnprofitable doctrines(which Pasle calleth fables,prophane ould 
wyues fables, prophane cr vaine bablings,fols{b vnlearned queftions 3.ritus. 
7 bidding vs to fay fuch doétrines, to put away fuch, to anayd fach, and 
20 feperate our felnes from fuch teachers: ) and thofe which be good and: 
profitable ynto men, the wholefome words of our,Lord lefus Chri, the: 
cottrines which be according'to codlynes, Thisisit thatthe {pirit of god. 
meaneth by the difcerning of /pirits, and nota guift of god's 
whereby to difcerne betwene counterfeyts, and fuch as were indecde 
which neuer any dreamed of before the Difconerer. Andno 
= maruaile, For there isno fuch difficulty to difcerne betwenecount=_ 
erfeytsand the poffefled indeede. VVhofoeuer looketh into the gof 
7 pell and confidereth of the manner of their vexation by Sathan,; who 
atethere {aide to haue bene pofleffed may eafily knowe whenoneis 
 poffefléd. No phifitian.can {0 eafily and furely difcerne the difeafe of 
by pulfe, vryne, and other: tignes:.as a chriftian man-of vn 
derftanding, may by the fignes of Sathan.his poffetiing one, difcerne 
of poffeffion, And reafon will teach: men to difcerne of counterfey- 
ting viz. whether thofe thinges they.behould can poffibly come ey= 
Iisalforo beoblerued that the Dif; {peaketh of the time paft, 


a 
‘a 
é 


and not of the time prefent: sould be knowne ({aith ise) what that 
WAS; he doth not fay, what that euittis, and againe, a euift to 
difcerne betwixt counterfeyts, andjuch-as WERE. pofefed, hefaithnot = 
fuch asare poffefled: whereby it isplayne thatin his opynionthis gu 
ift whereofhefpeaketh is gone, fo that none is now-ableto difcerne 
betweneacounterfeyt, and one poffefled: Howe'isit then 


‘ | 
| 
“ 
» 
| 
| 
| 
iad 
& 
4 
i 
4.2 


300 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS ip 

Dif, taketh it vpon him to iudge that Somers and thereft be coun- 

terteyts. V Vhat fooles doth the L)i/: make of men? and whata difit- 

cult thing is it forlooth to iudge in tnis cale? Surely he thinketh that. 

none can be now poflefled, and then no maruaile though his euift be 

withered, for to fay (men at this day being potletied) chat nonecan | 

defcerne, whither they counterteyte or no, 1t istoo abfurd to fpeake. 

OF CHATTER 6. 

Of M. Darrell’s knowledge. who fent the dinell 

ae into Somers and the reft. . 

page.36, All the diuels that M. Darrell bath hetherto encountred, werefent 

by witches (4s it feemeth ) into his patiens. Whether witches can fende dt-: 

nels into men or weomen ( as many dot pretend) is a among thofe. 

that write of [uch matters: and the learneder and founder fort doe holde'tbe 

againft whome Thyrens oppofeth bimfclfe, and with ThyreusM 

aye i. | 

It is the Lorde(if we fpeake properly) that {endeth diuels into 

men, Shall we receawe good at the handes of God (‘aith lob ) and not ree 

ceaue cull? meaning, the euill of punifhment,And the Prophet Amos | 

Shal ther be euil in acitty eo the Lord hath not done it? That then I mean . 

and aflirme is this: that Sathan bein3 fent th and{o permitted, 77 

to enter into one, as fometimes he was into Darling Somers &c.the. 7 

diuell being thus fent, ftirreth vp the corrupt affections of fome,with . © 

whome (.as I may fay ) he hath {ome familiarity, and Jaboreth to brig | || 

them to hate that fame perfo,and in that hatred,after their accuftom. (J 

ed manner, by him or his miniftery to be reuenged of the party.And | 

whereas without this, he is to enter into and poilefle the faid perfon, » 

and will: yet taketh he oft this courfe, that thereby:-he may draw men - 

to {ynne, which jis the very,worke and labour ofthis handes, and.(-as 

by, his practife it fhould feeme) to:fhame and. punifhment withall: 

notonly with our,afflicted perfons, but others allo; as oné 

Hexifon. of Burnham vipe, ( concerninge whofe vexation by Sathan 

there isa booke printed) M. Thrigmortons children, with fundrye 

more, either poflefled, or otherwife vexed by him, the diuell fo orde: : 

ted the matter, as that the party, or partyes,-wheme,hehad before!; 
{titred vp to ioyne with him inthe aftli@ihg of them, he difcourred 

and made knowne to the worlde: and thiswee may well thinke hée:: 

coth to this !econd end,: becaule it is his mariner’ to-bring one firftito.« 

fynne, and the fynne being perfected, to chaften them to fhame and | 

punithment, ashe did by Iudes,neither is it to any purpofe to. obiedt 

that witches are Very limple folkes, and know not wWhatbelongeth to - 

potleilion: fortharthey not the fpirit therevnto, but {peake | 


“ 
~ 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
q 
| 
i | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
f 
i! | 
| 
e 
| 
f 
: 
| 
| 
+ 
Hi 
| 
if 
3 


LYING DISCOVERY, 
only to their {pirit or familiar, of tormenting the party: whome they 
hate, ( as appeareth by their confeilions ) the diuesi ot his owne ac- 
cord entfiny into the parton tobe poiiene d, vncowvhich. tact and fer 
uice the hunielt hath ideeac appoynted him, and where. the 
taith that the (carneder and founder doc holde that witches cannst 
find dincls ito men, he vaderttand not by that he caileth fending, 
1s atorelaide, he taith nothing againit me, nor to the matter: bur itio 
as { ymagine he doth, then demaund of him, who 1 know.content- 
eth heerein with thefe greate learned men; why witches and their ta 
miliar \pirits may not aiwell agree togither in this {peciall cafe ag in o- 
thers where Sathan killeth men, or beatts, or ftrangely vexeth them 
by externall operation, which we call witcheryes? {eeinge, all is 
meerely a tormenting ot the body by Sathan, the diflerence lying in 
the manner of it, which I trutt is by the witch left to the will and di- 
{cretion of the diuell¢ as this latter we all knowe is confirmed: by the 
conteflions of thoufands of witches and. that in all. ages from time ta: 
* time, jo is this other alfo by the confeflion of fome.Yea but faith the: 
Dy. to obiect the confeilion of the witchesis to no purpofe, and is: 
already aniwered by the former leatned: men. His words be thefe>- 
And touching the confeffion of the watches: themfclues: that may be lefte. 
wellinough to {uch learned men as hauc written {uffrciently of tt. PAR 
 —_Idetire now to know of the Difconerer who haue made anfwer to 
| the confeffions of the witches themfelues; but they thathould: that there: 
are no witches as Wicrus and Scot, wwhich thefoand and learned men: 
he here {peaketh of, tor thefe men.maintayning this falfe position that’ 
there bene witches, muft needes anfwer to the confeffion of the witches 
them/elucs: which euery one would obie&: And this faith he thefeler= 
my nedimen haue done/ufficsently: whereby itis playne that this man is 
of the fame opinyon with,them. But he thoughtit wifdome hot to 
fay fo in playne termes, leafthe fhould prouoke the reuerent I 
omy of the fand againft him, for that fo faying he made them guilgg of ine. , 
Lt istobe remembred that howfoeuer in plaine and expreffe 
 wordes the Dj/c.doth,tiot aftirme, that none can intheffe dayesbe. 
 dilpoffetied ,yet in effect he doth it vnder the name of Keamiius:So 
albeithedoe not faye thatnene can be now.poffefied with diuels, 
©} yetconfideringe his conert carriage of him-felfe there-in , not once 
stantinge( I warrant you ) in all his greate volume any fuch thinge, 
@ and that he will haue all the poflefled perfons among vs and the Pa- 
piftes alfo counterfgits,as appeareth by this his firft bookes who can 
| colecture any other,but that he holdeth,that none can be at this day 
poflefied ¢Inlike-forte I fay he:doth here by witches, not plainly de=_ 


‘a 
- 
» 
' 
» 
y 
ia 
ty 
x 
A 
* 


oo 


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
pe yinge any fuch to be,but fecretly infinuatinge as much to the reader 
Thus wee fee he doth deny( but couertly difpoffeflion of diuels.2. 

fieffion with diuels. 3:all compact with diuels to the hurt ofothers 
fhe procede but one ftepe further, it wil be couertly to the denial of - 
dinels. VV ell this !darebe boulde to fay of the Difc. whofoeuerhe 
it he:that howfoeuer he profeffe that he beleueth in god,and that there 

ft are diuells,yet by this very worke of his,( this Di/conerie.I meane(he 


denyethboth. 


ARE POSSESSED, 

| 2 Alyce Goodriz of Staphenhill Darbifbir a called 
in the likeneffe of 4 doege,partie colored,red and wlhite,did [ende 
Pag, 37; the [ame to torment ;Thomas Darling:the feanen in Lancafbire were ( as 
ae it femeth ) poffeffed by the meanes of one Edmond Hartley, and a little af- 


p64" ter: But Thomas Darlinges veniall {inne exceded the roft. for hemee- 


sine Alice Goodvigein a coppice,did let an efcape ( as the book tearmeth it 
which fhee takinge to be. done in’ her contempt, vfed thee wordes,Gip with 
chife and fart with a bel, Iwill goe to beauen thou [halt goe to bet. 
Howfoeuer the Di/c. derideth this reported in the booke: of 
1 Darlinge. and no maruell, feeinge he is perfwaded that there are no 
witches: yet there is in reafon (how ftrange. and incredible fo euer 
it feeme to carnall reafon ) to perfwade vs te receiue it for a trueth, 
i - for firft we haue Alice Goodrice the witch confeflinge this of her felfe 

ia and that fundrie times 2. the circumftances mentioned in her confef 


fion are true.ypon fuch a day fayd fhe, I met Dariinge,in fuch a place 


ei or wood called the coppice and the boy leting an efeape,as the booke’ 
Hy rermeth it,I miftaking the boy for one Shervats boy, who had before. 
rh - broken mea bafket of egges vied thefe wordes:Gip with 4 mifcheife 
esc.and there with-all bad my Minnie goe and torment him:whoaf= 


ter returninge vnto me,faid he haddone foe, Confideringe now that 

it is very true and knowne fo to be to others, that this Afcemet Dar= 

Gingevpon the daye and inthe place named, that Darlinge then and 
ue their did,and Sherr.ts boy alfo before,as is here {pecifyedjand that fhe 
-¥fed thefe wordes aforefaid, and laftly that the very fame night 
ing began to be ficke and fo continued worfe and worfe, vntill it was 
as euidentas the daylight at noone, that he was tormented by the di 
uell: who ( I fay ) confideriug thefe things, can in reafon otherwife 
thinke, but that fhee faith truly concernine her fending of her Minny 
to torment Daxhng. As then itis certaine, yea fo certaine as without 

blufhing it cannot be denyed, that Dardinze was tormented by the di 
foit is hereby very playne that Goodvige did thereab 


a 
| 
4 
74x 
* 
r f 
q 
‘TAR 
Bi 
> 
os 
AS 
4 
ks 
| 
= 
4 
Ly 
7 
ty 
| 
& 
- 
t 


LYING DISCOVERY. _ 39 
confederate with her familiar {pirit, Moreouer in that we reade the 
like of others we are thereby to be confirmed herein. 4/ice Samutll 


generally receaued for truth, as the Di. himfelfe dareth not deny it, 


« though fayne he would, as appeareth' by his nibling at them. 7 this 
now were true, that Alice Samucll faith of herfelfe: why fhoulde not 
® the like confefled by Alice Goodrige of herfelf, be alfo true¢ And yf 


the one of thefe ftrengthened efpecially by fundry circumftances we 


7 can all of vsbeleiue: why fhould we not credite the other allo, confir 


med by as many, yea more and as {trong circumftances as the other? 


But what is it that offendeth the Dif fomuchand maketh the con- 
feflion of Goodrige {o incredible, yea ridiculous ynto him? doth 
@ this offend him, that fhee fent her familiar {pirit to goe and torment 
-himéor this, that fhe was fo malitious and cruell vpon fo {mall occaft 
7 on? or this, that her {pirit was in the forme of a dogge? or this, that 
7 her fpirit had a name, (viz. Minny ) agreed vpon I meane betwixt 
9y them? or this, that the deuill did yfually ( as it fhould feeme ) appear 
voto her like a little dogge? or rather all thefe, and efpecially that any 
man or woman fhould fe 

and thus compatt or confederate with the diuell? Leaft thefe fhould 
be as ftombling blockes in our way, asit fhoulde feeme they are in 
the Difconerers: let. vs add to that is aforefaide, thefe twoe thynges, 
 Firft, that this laft, which is the ftrangeft and indeede all in all, is ac- 
We cording to the fcriptures: and that fome of thefe reft haue likewife in 


aue fuch familiarity 8& entercourfe of fj 


this 5%: rafe or manner of {peach is vfed, Yee /ball not (faith Dfofes) re- 
gard them that w:rke with fpiriis, Andagaine if any turne after fuch as 


 worke with {pirits, The fecond thing to be obferued is, that not onlye 


Alice 


 awitch of ¥arboyfeconfefled (as is fet downe in the printed booke ) the: Araignmée 
that thee fent her {pirit called Pluck, to M1. Throgmortons children, and & execution of 
YY willed bim to coe and torment them, And that they were tormented by 
©} the diuell, cuen ¢. of his daughters, it is notorioufly knowne, aud fo 


the witches of 
warboyle. 


© the generall, though not in the particuler, confirmation from the ho- 
® ly {criptures; for by them it playnly appeareth, that among the fonns 
(ie and daughters of men, there are fome which haue famuliarity with di i 
uels, have {peach and compact with them about this and that a“tion. 
+ Heerevnto ferueth that in the firft of Samuell: where the witch chat 
Saule repayred vnto, is faid to haue 2 familiar (pit, And in that the 
 diuell at her call, appeared vnto Saulein the likenes of Samuell, and 
9 had {peach with him: what fhould let vsto thinke, that if not always 
9) yet fomtimes, and when fhe would, the diuell appeared vnto her in 
this or that forme and had {peach with her?Furthermore in that thef 
are laid to worke with [pirits, we are thereby to learne that thediuell 
m and they confederate in the fame workes, and therefore (no doubt) F£¥%1923™ 


= 
£ 
4 
* 
| 
‘on | 
| 
| 
. 
4 
| 
4 
= 
xs 
= 
oy 
é 
| 
| 
i 
Ses 
& 
4 
| 
* 
. 
é 
N 
| 
| 
=. 
2 


> 


ADETECTION OF S, HARSNETS 
_Alie Samuellbut thoufands other haue conteffed the like, as Krange 
and incredible as thele of Alice Goodrige, and the truth of the fame. 7 


_ of people, ( witches I meane ) haue receaued the punifhment due to. . 
fuch maletactors, Neither dia this Ace Goodrige eicape vnpunifhed: 


a luttice of peace, tound guilty thereof by the iury, and by my Lord | 
Anderjon advadged to ymprifonment, where fince ihe dyed. Nor yet 
Edmond Hartley who atter hie was found guilty by the tury, Was_ad- 
-iudged by the ludge ro death,and accordingly executed. Now if this 


take the we can, he doth thereby condemne, ludge, Luftice, 8 
of fimplicity; and he is the only man (forfooth ) thathath had 


" treatife from which I fhould learne forfooth all my fkill,came to light 


haue bene confirmed by many circumttances, wherevpon th ele kind 7 


bar was for this very fact andno other committed to Darby gayle by 


concerning Alice Govdrige and Darlyng which was the very euidence & 


giuen at Darby againit her,be a meere ieft 8 ridiculous matter as the a 
Difsmaketh it, and thatindeed there was no fuch thinge,(this Dar- 
ling being as 21, H.x{net would haue it avery counterteyt boy,andin 


that refpect allo the cafe nothing {fo in truth) who {eeth not, that to 


a true and thorough infight into this matter, VY this man be 
in the Premumnire that hath fo directly and publiquely impeached the 
judgment giueri by the Queenes luttices again{t the faide Alkce tor 3 
bewitching of Darling, {pecially fentence beinge giuen heerein, lde= 
lirethe reuerend Indges of the Common Lawes of England( who 
can belt iudge heereot, and whome it cheifly concerneth celiberately 
to confider. And ifit fall dut fo that he be not in cafe of Premunire yet 
fure it is fuch, and fo notorious an abufe, as they Ltruftin theire wil- 7 
domes wil lee redreffed. 

V Vhere in this chapter the Dj/c, calleth Thirens my Maifter 

in this whole firft booke of his femeth to match ys together, as mai- 
fter and.{chol'er: and in many places doth pretende as thoughIhad 3 
learned L.knowe not what from him-furely he greatly forgetshimfelf Ti 

for wel he knoweth that in other do(trines,I diflentalitlemore from | 

the Je/uite and the reft of that generation then he,for all hisglofe and 

faire thew in this his booke,and therfore it is very vnlikly that I flro- 
uld fothroughly agree withhim inthe doétrines of pofleflion and 
difpofleffion,as viually the mafter and {choller doe.neither can he be 

ignorance here-of,who is fo well ftudied in T hireus,that T hircus his 


an.1 598. which was.after all our To. perfonswere difpofleffed, and 
the faide booke not to be had in E nelande, yntill after I was in in the 
Gatehoufe (that I knowe of) and therfore it cannot be that I learn 
ed any thinge for my pra‘tile hitherto from him, except I wente be 
yond the feas ynto him,ana had it from his owne mouth,But I mar- 


4 
3 
i 
| 
| 
| 
ny ie i 
84 
4 
4 
iy 
ii 
1% 
— 
ae 
4} 
| 
hy 
} 


4 to {well greatly. 


? 
A 


ones: why may we not well thinke,that as god in mercy left and ordey 


nell where this firft booke of the fiue had bene, if Thiveus booke had 
not come to the Dj/¢,handes,before this Difconerie came from them: 
for whofoeuer hath read T hireus,may eafily fee,how that as wind fil-. 
leth abladder, and fo maketh it bigg, which in it felfe is little'fo hath 


Thyreus treatile of Demoniakes made the firft booke of the 


CHAP. 8. 
Of the meanes alleaced by M. Darrell andorhers, 

whereby men are difpoffelfed. - 

ordinary meanes ordtyned to continue inthe church for the cating. 
out of dinells M. Darrell maketh to be very ancitnt, For be faith; thas 
hath bene in the church fince the fallof Adam. 
__ Seing this meanes hath not only continued inthe Churchfince, — 
Chrifts time, but was before, as may be collected out of the * Scrip- 


tures, and that we reade not of the firft ordeyning of any fuch mea- aet,t9. “+ 


ned meanes in nature, for the curing of the naturall difeafes and in- 
firmityes of mensbodyes, eueri from the time mans body was fub- 
aectivnto them: {fo he did appoynt this{upernaturall meanes,forthe 
healing of this fupernaturall difeafe, from the time it alfowasfubiet 

thervnto,which is the fall of 4dam.But faith the Dif. | Heevein Darrell 
bath no great certainty, for he confefjeth that there is no mention in the olde 

seftament, of the inftitutton of that meanes, And fo. of likelihood men were 

poffeffed from time to time during she {pace almoft of 4000. yeares, God 
bimfelf hauing ordeyned no wayes to curethem, Out of my own. mouth 
and confeffion,he pretendeth to conuince me, But marke how vnikil: 


fully he doth it. Darrell himfelf confeffetb, that theres no mention in the 


A-@ 


Ee olde teffament of this meancs, which he faith hath bene in the church fynce 
4000. yeares, god ordeyned no may to.cure them. He fhould haue 


inferred of my aid confeffion, men therefore being pofleffed about 
4000, Yeates god writings Jef no {pecyall or peculiar meanes all. 
that time for 1¢ curinge of them, but inftead therof heconcludeth. _ = 


asweheare. But let vs take the argumentas he himlelfe hathframed 


It: In the olde teftament there is no mention of this meanes or medicyne. to: 

cure the poffeffed. Therefore from Adam to Chri thers mas no [uch meaus, 

or medicine ordeyned of cod to heale them. 1 -an{wer, thetthe argument. 
followeth not, as may appeare by that which followeth. In the olde 


_teftament there is no mention of {peciall means or medicines to cure. 
feuers, or other difeafes, therefore God hath ordeyned. no meanes, 
medicines to heale men fo difeafed. And heere Imight. proceede.. 
to athoufand inftances, The réaton why this confequéce isnot good 


| 
a 
y 
et | | 
- 
7 
€ 
4, 
OQ 
? 
| 
r 
ay, 
y 
| 
, 
‘ei 
| 
~ 
a 
< 
k= 2 


> 
. 
= 
| 
| 
a 
a5 
Fé. 
‘+ 
a 
| 
| 
Piss 
— 
tt 
7 
7 
: 
pie 
| 


a 


10,16" 


=z 
Sam.28.6. 


Thyreus pars3 


. fathers, befides by the (cripture of the old teftament,as by his proph-_ 


wayes of cafting out diuctlsin the olde Tcfaiment, iam vetuftate, finon. . 


_ , to beate the ayre, & not to cifpute, Thus he may as well conuince’ 


is, Bécaufe many yea althoft infinyte thinges are decreed-in the for. 
cet and seternail counfell of god, and knowne foto be of man, which * 
arétiot fet dowrie in his reveaied will: fo that although there be noor | 

and prayer mentioned in the ould teftament, yet notwithftandynge 
the fame might well be a meanes ordeyned of god for the curinge of 
fuch, Secondly, we may affure our felues that god reucaled many of 
his ordinances to them which liued vnder the lawe, whichwerenot 
fer downein the {cripture’ of the olde teftament: becaufe howfoeuee 
now to vs vnder the gofpell, and in the lat dayes * god fpeakcth only. 

bis fonne, bidding vs * heave him in his word * and miniftery, fo, 
as at this day for our information in rhe Lordes willand pleafur with 
man, we areto goe to the holy fcriptures only, andthe minifters of 
Chrift deliueringe tliat which from them they haue receiued;..yet, 
at fundry times andin diners manners god [pake in the olde times to ovr. 


ets; by dréames and,vifions,and by vrim: well therefore might pray 
er and fafting be, not only the ordinarice of god for the caltinge of — 
Sathiaty out of the bodyes of men, but reucaled andmade known 
_ fach to the Church of god theo, albeit the fame were notmen=. 
tioned mi the oldteftament, From this argument the Dif: :procedeth | 
to afecond, wherein alfo there is as little art: taken from the teftimes 
ny of Thyrexs, and thathe doth in thelewordes 


But in fayine thatthe [ame meanes doe continye nowe in the church, 
before the cominine of Chriff: that his the 


| 
exatcifts, will condemne as an ervor in him. For one of them [asth, that the. : 


alia de aufa antiquatz funt, et, abolite, «5 bang growne in cdot. Age, ae 


Behold’his confuration. Surely this man-wasbarrayné of atgue 
méhts, otherwile he would neuer haue run to Thyreus for fo ablurd a 
orit 46 this 1s, to conuince me with. Ifhe'had produced the 
ny ofan antient father or latewriter he had {aid fomething: and yet - 
it had bene argumentum in-artificiale, anargument wherein were no.art 
at dll; efpecially in a inatter of religion, which is to be decided by the — 
holy feriptates: and’ not by the writings and opynionsjofmen. Bug 
forthe convincing ofme a minifter of the gofpell, to produce the fay _ 
ing of Thyrensa lefuite and fuch as hath neither fap nor favour init,, 


mein not fo fewe as an hundred feuerall'points of doStrine, asthend 
betoffacraments, the prefence of Chrift in the bread. and wvne, &c, 
whetein tieTefuite from ‘that which I with the chnrch of 


| 
| | 
| 
4 
| 
il 
if 
i 
44 


'M, Darrell boldeth thatin the Apofiles time, there smere two fortes: 
or kyndes of cafting ont diucls, the one ordinary, which was the 
before the comming of Chrift: viz. fapting and prayry, and the * 


-or inary, viz. commaunding of Sathan to depart im the uame of Chr 


OP this Jatter kinde of eieStiom of Sathan there is no qus jon, 
doubt is whether the tirft was in the churchin the Apoftlestime 
and that refteth to be difcuffed. Seeinge wee reade of acaftinge out 


— barr. of the time future, or that which afterwardes fhouldb 


not dilpoffeffe the diuells as ft) where] 
inde of eieéction of vn- 


ben thi bey [halk be yor indges,. B aith 


math. 12.29% 


Which interrogation is inimuated,. 


dotie; whether 
commaundigis 


riff approx 
by the {piri 
wnderftarg 
uill by theth in the of fetus 


- 


shenwas done or in vie: ) and that after this manner the Apoftles did. 

IB cleane fpirits, viz. by prayer or prayer and falting, was in the church — 
in Age es time. And this is confirmed by thelewordes of our | 

Tut) coe your children caft.the 

zebub or by the fpirie of god?’ 
doé they itnot by the {pirit of god@ for you fay not ofthem. neither 

will faye, that that they doe, is done by the diuell: therefore thatis, 

becaufeyou fay that your children caft out diuels by the irit of god- 

whérein indeede you fay truly: and in the meane 
| dicin end fo of the like aétions,donebythe, 
finger, give acontrary judgment, which isa moft ynrighteous | 
thing, they /balbe your tyes: that isin the day of iudgment 

uty againft you: according to which teftimony, god iudge you, 
| itis now to by whome and by what was 
the A poltles, or fome: other which'had fro. Chriff 
power with them ouer vncleane and {fo by 
to depart in his name, or by fome other kynd 
men, and an other manner: Firft then we are to knowe that. 

by thofe areheere called.your children, meaning Jewes which. 
in Chrift’s tine calf out diuels, cannot be ynderftood coniurers, be- _ 

thele: for can Sathan crine ont Sathan? but [pecially, for that Ch 

| 


* 


i 

4 
; 


48-8 Chrift, fo alfa for that they could not indure that the people fhold 


makeg,29. by prayer, or prayer.and fafting, confidering thofe wordés: “our Sa- 


4a” ADETECGTION OF S. HARSNETS 
thefe their children the Pharifes confefled to caft diuells forth by the. 
powerof ood; But thisas'they denyéd to ‘Chrift, foitcahnotbe but 
math.to. they Woluld'deny the fame alfo to all of his houfhould;& to who 
{Sever thatfhoutd playnely and direfly in his name, and by any pos 
wer fecéatied from him taftforth Sathan: for the is nat'aboue 
bis mailer, nor the feruanc'abone bis Lord. is enough for the difciple to 
his maifter is, and the [eruant as the lord. Uf they called the maiter of 
the boule Beclzebub, bow much more them of bis bonjbolde? And as the ph i 
atifes becaufe of theire éxtreame mallice againft Chrift, which muft 
needes extend it felfe to his difciples, could not but be farrfromthe 
pprouing and comimending of any greate worke done in the name 
béleeue in bim, but when any myrace was done that might caufe or’ 
héfpé forward fame, they were readyeto burft for anger, That’ 
tliis Seneration of vypers then, whd excommunicated the blind man 
| for bearing witnefle to the work that Chrift had wrought vpon him, 9% 
anid ordeyned that if any man did confelf? that be was Chrift, he [boulde be 
excomunicate out of the Symavoeue: who togither to putLaza- 
lefus: would acknowledge that worke'to be done by adeuyne 
power, (and fo allowe and commend it ) which was done in the nie 
and power of Iefus Chrift, and was very effectuall to bring the Tewes 
t beleue in Chrift, as they did here of this of diuells 
fotmed by rheir children, as a thing euen impoflible. For theie two 
reafonis it catinot be, that they who are faide here. to caf out dynelles, 
were either of the Apoftles or 7. dilci:tes of Chrift, or any other im 
that by power communicated fom Chrift did ia the extraordinarye, Iam 
manner caft forth wicked fpirits. If therfore eury {pirits were caftour i 
ef (ome in the Apoftles time, and not by the oe ». Sr by any oe; 
thers after that-extradrdinary tnatiher the Apoltles «. by com= 
maunding of Sathati to depart in the name of CAfift ‘Tefus, as 


we 


~ 


y. 


is 


is manifelt; maft it not needes be, thatthen thete was an. 


other manner of eiection'befides that extraordinary vied>y tae A- | 
poftles and difciples of Chrift and why may we not fay, that.it was 

The former of thele Cahene writingevpon this vet place, 

not only attirme, but alfo confirme.and proue out.of the 
Galvini humo. and tothe}atter he doth very, much inclyne; alshough he doe: 


notfully auoudsthefame. 

Exhos coruin quidam a thee hildre.foe take for the children of. 
ti, 


* 


4 


apbole nation: anc fame thinke that che Apoftles were fo called. Oxhers. 


{ 
6 
j 
ft 
at 
oft 
> 
| 
{ 
i} 
| 
4 
; 
4 
* 


referr sherm te the olde Prophets, But I doubt not but that be vadefianil- 
cih the Exorcifts of whome then there were many among thelewes, pe 
g¢ 


pearesh by the 19. chapter of the Acks, for it 15 lekely that they did is ic 
no better of the difciples of Chrift, then of the maificr. And prefently af- 
ter {peaking of the originall of thefe Ex rciffs he faith this: feers pa 
yt snnrcato Dei numine, daemones fugarent crc. may be, that by 
calling ypon the name of god ( that is by prayer ) did caft out diuells 
and the pzople haute bad experience of [uch power of zod, did rafbly ordeyn 
visto them{ clues an ordinary function, 
Bur the Difc.laboreth to confute,firft by producing M.More his 
contrary 1adgmente.l aniwere,that M.More and my feifc are fellowe 
Mm minniiters,and that the fame is no more a conuittion of my opinion 
then mine ofhis. And what although we diffent not only here in,but 
in fome other points allo concerning the doétrine controuerted,whi 
the warrant you feteth our and purfueth to the vttermolt 
are we not men and fubie<t vnto error as well as others?And is it {uch 
arare matterto fee rwo differ aboute the interpretation of the lame 
place of {cripture“aid of {uch vie,as the fame (forfooth ) muft needs 
b: publifhed to the worlde?furely nothinge leife. But this vlewee 
make of it, that the lame confidered,it isnot likely there wasa_ 
ny lurch deuife or confederacie as the Difc.affirmeth in the 1 ¢.page of res 
his Di{couerse.His wordes be thef. Of the[e prenmufes it 
nive anger them, if any [bould collet? ,that all likeliboode fecinge neither. 
by learninge nor [ufficient argumentes, they coulde heretofore prewasle, for 
she [cttinge vp of conceits, they thouzht to [upp ly: there 
wants therein, by this of catinge,out dinels.ln pretlinge the diffe-' 
rence in opinions betwixt vs,theDi/c.ouerthroweth the 
here {peaketh of,more then he was aware. Secondly, he goeth about 
to conuince me.by two arguments of his owne:the tirft where of is 
downe in thele wordes.T0 bold with M:Davrell,that there was 
ordinarie meanesto'cat ont diuels in Chrifts time,dith devrogat much 
the honor of bis miracles in cafting out fatan.1 anfvere,no:no more,then 
Me to hould that there was then an ordinarie meanes to heale other dif- 
eales and infirmities of mans body,doth derrogat from the of bis. 
miracles.in healinge perfons fo difeafed or afe:ted, but here of he gi - 
wcth areafon:for the infidel might hase furmiled, that Chrift bad done 
by the ovdinarie meancs baringe vfed the [ame (ecretly there 
knowledge, The vnbeleuing Iewes coulde no more furmife thus,then 
in hiscuringe of naturall difeafes,that he did the fame by natural 
meanes,or medicines fecretly applied vnto them before. And neither 
of thefecoulde they in ‘any reafonio muchas furmile, confideringe 
Ys. the infinit number he healed;and that imme diatly, fo foone as fav, 


44 A DETECTION. OF S:HARSNETS. 
them, yea often times before.vpon the touching of thehem ofhisgre | 


-rnent. His feconde argument followeth .moreoucr st maye aroue the exe 
tneanes to be fuperfiuous: there beinge then mca 
“‘nes,and that of [ach facillitte,as will after appeave.no. for the exsuition 
of fatan by the extraordinarie meanes.ct.by a worde,fo as Cirdtno | 
fooner fpake.or the Apoftles in his name,but the euil {pirit went out: 
did moft manefeftly and palpablie (as 1 may faye ) {ett torth,or pub | 
lifh and preache to al men,the dietie of Chrift Iefus:which the ordina. 
fie by callinge vpon the name of God,did not,2, The extraordinary 
and miraculus eie<ction by a worde, oe fome times by thevery fha- 
dowe of one,fo guifted,or kerchetefs or handkercheifs carried from 
fuch,argued a far greater power-and authoritie ouer vncleane {pirits 
and fo did more commende and dignifie fuch perfons and there mi 
niftrie,then the eiection by the ordinarte meanes, extraordinary: 
therefore, was not /uperfluons but of finguler vfe, notwithftandinge 
there was then an ordinarie meanes. Neither is the ordinarie,ot {uch 
facillitie as the Di/c.imagimeth.|s it {o eafie a thinge to pray,or to be 
fo affeéted with the milerie of an other,as to fende vplighes or gro 
nes to the Lord in their behalfe¢Indede to babble or to vie the er: | 
of our lippes for our felues or othersis an eafie matter,comm6 to the 
prophaneft that fiue:but to labour inwardly in our {pirits,or to offer: 
vp a fpirituall feruice acceptable to God in Chrift, or as the Prophet ' 
Dasid aith,to lift vp onr barts togod,with fighes and groanes forour 
- felues or others,they beinge faft glued to the earth,and naturally gi ' 
viento looke thyther,is a verie vneafie hard and difficult chinge:and 
far more vneafie to continue and holde out any time therein: & hard ‘ 
 Jieft of all can wee be contented,and thatifor the good of an-other, 
te waine our felues fora daye from meate and drinke,and all other - 
comfortes of this life:Our profits and pleafures, aft liCtinge & humb- 
linge our {oules together ther with. That this is nota matter of fuch : 
facillitie as the Difc.affirmeth, lamentable and dayly experience doth 
fhewe.But if we will {peake of a facillitie, in caftinge out deuils, then 
muft we goeto Chrift & his Apoftles,who no fooner (pake the word 
but it was donne,yea fom times with more facillitie then aworde ,as | 
Darrell confeffing the neceffity of fayth in the [aid ordinary mea 
nes, faith: that neither the fatth of done myractes, nor the iuffifyine 
as-thercin nccefjary: but that the temporary, or hiftoricall faith fuffice. 
It being bere obsckted, that an bifforicall faith {ufficine,( as is before expre 


ffed and rhat the prayer and fafing in [uch as bane bit that faith cannot 
pleafegod: +t will al that-the ordinary meanes whrch- Chriff hath left. 
his church ont of dinels as. ts a 


accept 


t 
4 
ae 
peg. $4. 
i. 
| 
> 
‘lars 
ry 
at 
i 
| 
a a 
$e 
: 
5 ‘ 
lian 
025.30 
hy 
af 
4 
| 
ae 
q 
f 
i} 
ps-4s 
* 
| 
. 
ay 


ympleade him athouland umes. Surely one wolde thinke this argu< 
ment tolloweth not. Zhe prayer and fafiing of {uch Aas haue only the 


ny {pirituall bleffing: therefore not to the cafting ont of [athan, or obteminge 
of corporall benefit: and [o by confequence, wee haue ameanes tocaft 
dinceis, sf this be onc, which is nit acceptable or pleafing vnto god. YF 
Difc. reply that he doth:not fo vncerftand the Antccedent, or firlt 


be prayer and faftine of fuch oe. god to the obtcyninge of 
any bleffing, ( that is {o tarr preuaile with god ) ctherwife he conclu- 
ceth nothing. Now this is falfe. For the prayers and humiliation of 
» the wicked,may auayle with god to the obteyning of acorporall be< 
| nefit, and remouig of a temporall iudgment from himfelfe or an o- 
| ther, and{uch is poffeffion, and deliuerance therefrom: albeit the fae ; k:nges 31.3% 


butoutwardly and not in {oundnetie and fyncerity of hart, did there= 
m@ = by.efcape not only himfelfe, but his fonn alfo that punifhment which 
otherwife had certainly ouertaken them both. Thon fhalt not(faith the exodus 22. 216 


ment for bis fhgn: wherein {ball he fleepe? the refire when he cryeth vnto me 
| I will beare him: for 1 am Shallwe thinke now that god hea-. 
» 9 reth not the prayers or cryest 

fend forth to theJord out of the anguif 
uoulnes of their.oppreflion, except they be fuch as be indewed with. 


bythe lorde? Ifthe ftranger, widdowe, fatherleffe ‘childe that feareth 
my name, calland cry-unto.me; more generallve, 


DISCOVERY 
acceptable toalmighty god: 21. Darrell anfwereth, that the confequence 
ts not 200d, and fo that poynt lyeth. 


And fo he anfwereth againe, andagaine wilh ifthe Difecfholde 


or all or bifforicall faith, cannot pleafe vod in Chriff, to the cb:cyninge of a 


part of this argument, as I fet it downe, then I ment not to deny the’ 
argument, neither dce | now, but the Antecedent, which mult be this 


is not effectuall to procure a {pirituall blefling, as the remiflion of {ins 27-29- 
and.fuch like. hab fafting and humblinge himfelfe, though it were 


lord by Mofes ) doe iniury to aflranger, neither oppreffe him: yee fhall nosive's 2 3- 
trouble any widdowe, nor childe: if thow vex or trouble fuch, 
fohe call and ery vnto me, I wiil furely heere his ary. And a little after: if 

thow take thy neighbours rayment to pledge, thow fhaltrefforeit vnto him. 

before the fonne goe downe: fir that 1s his cowering only, and this is his gar’ 


at the ftranger, widdowe; fatherlefie, 
ith of their foules, and gre 


a iuftifyine faith? fod forbid. For howfoeuer it is certatne that in thes: 


' and in fuch like cafes the eares of the lord are open to fuch, & theire: 
moft auailable with god-yet are they nor fhut againft {inners 
But god heareth them thus to deliuerthem from the 
on they are in, and to take vengeance of their oppreffors), Ari it fs to: 
becbferued that we haue no fuch limitation here: Is:it not thus fade: 


any or whatoener, being iniaried, or appreer 


» 
? 
| 
| 
i 
aa 
4 A 


 ADETECTION.OF S.HARSNETS 
fed, cal. ard cry wato mee will [urely bea'e. Thus then itis, God 
hearetac fighings and aryes xc. that wicked men in their mileryes,or 
imaninent daunger.cuercot doe lend forth vnto hum, and deliueret 
them, as the creacor ready to ihew mercy to his creature, which ale. 
¢ tough as alimaor he abhorreth, with his prayers and ail his facrifices, 
yet as nis creature he loucta, and hath compailion of, ipecially in mis 
fery, as appeareth by the places of icripture aboue writen: where 


pfaime i45.9- 


cc. this is fet downe for areafon, why he wiiliurely heare the oppreiled | 
a ‘6 ftraager, widdowe, fatherleile dec. for l am mecr cifselh: allo by that fay. 
ing ot Dauid: The.lord ts to all, And herein we ‘bail beturther con 
firmed, if we calltominde, how the Jorde in reipect of our creation 
calleth him(elf our * father, and vsin the fame retpect his /onues aad | 
dsuzhters: well theretore may go 1heare nis cnildren by creation, in 
amiatcer percavninge to this lire, fecing aifo in the thinges of this lite 
he aboundanuy gratious vnto them: But concerainge thelfe 
30.28, that istocome, orforicuall bleilings inheauealy things, itis0mar 
yaile though heheare them not ac ail, but only hislouncs by alope, 
‘sion, conlidering he will beftowe no iuch * treafures vpoa then, 
ghar Iefus Chriit maketh no*‘ interceilion for tiem: ia whoine only 
and for whole mediation, fuch requeits areacceptedot god. 
023-45: Bat another point may not be lest ajlecpe, Darieli j ath: hat the [aid 
place of Math, 17.20, that the faith there mentioacd, 15 to be wnder{toode 
_ b0.b2 the faith of ding miracles: That the Apijties were veprowed far thepre 
weaknes in that faith: And that rf the fame bad bene jtrange enough, they. 
bawe caft aut the wicked/pwit sn ibat Chapter, verfe 215. 
without prayer or faltine: whereby it followcto( for ought svat dull men ca 
difcerne) that Darrell boulding (46 0s befare. mentioned) that place of 
Scripture to be a [eeret & dinance for the continuance of fating 
4s the meanes to c4t out diwells, and that therein by fasch wacerjtood the. 
faith of dng miracles: ( whieh if it had bene fhrong enonzh sn the Apaffles 
prayer and fafting had bene juperfluous) it will fallowe st is thouzht, that 
the biitericall faith will nat ferue bis turne, but that st minft be the fasth of 
ding wpiracles: which mouft be vader for the faith that is regnired of ne 
cffity, when chere is mecde te caf ont dinclls.So as tf he want that, hemay 
( 63: bis ovens cal} his capp at them. 
, Marke (Good Reader) hie noate of attention, or preface before 
my a-lertion: bt ether poynt may not-b: loft afleepe: and after his co- 
le tion th: of 4 capp, ynagine his owneinto the 
avre, and you {aail fee the manmarueyloully tryamphing: fo tharei 
ther now furehehath the victory, S¢ that he hath gotallo oucofmy 
-awne wordes, or els he will neuer haue ic: The aFirmed was, 
that mentioned Math, 7. 20.4: ¢2.62 of wee 


las 


— 
~~ 
- 


A 


- 
— 


a! 
4 
| 
| 


¥ 


/ 


SV 
faitorand beercot gauetwe reatons;whichrare heete likewifefet 
woe, /perc- latch cae Lyfe, faliowcthy tat Dur. haldenve 
place of to be ajectect jor toc of and” 
pia AS ore. aniver,s tharalirhat le interretii was 


“aiid very titly coile-ted, it L held che-placehe tpeaxeth of 


17, contayne initthe ordinance we¢ipeakeot: But ail mens 
knowe that itis not 17. verje 20. which were molt abturd: But» 

21, tacie wordes:. This kinde eacth not out, but by prayer and 
fajting. Yea tne Difc. bimlelfconieiteth cneiame,but the teate before? 
tais, page 43. i busin.aword welee.his coilection and boattinge to” | 
be neereiy m vayne, Yertor our better vnderitanding and turther™ 

aniwer, we mult remember: that rwo kindes of expuiiion of tathatr 
are heere {poxen of: one extraordinary, wherein the miraculous 


is required, verle 20. and aa other by an ordiaary meanes,-Viz.praier: 


or prayer and faiting, verie 21, and here howioeuer the: iuttityinge -. 
faich is to be wished, and is belt: yet the faith temporal, orhittorical. 


ordmary meanes, which {tandeth not fomuch in the of the per=* 
fon'therein vied, as in the mercye of god obteyned, man viinge the 
meanes which to that end he hath ordeyned, And as this faith may*. 
fuffice, ioit fhould teeme that ic hatla-or fhall: for we reade that in 

the day ot the lorde, fome workers of iniquity thallfay tor themferas\ 


may lattice, for the expelling of iathanatter. this manner, or by the 


le 


lord hane we not imthy name ons dinels? why fhould we 


this ot Iwdzs only and fuch ashe, who by.aword calt our diuells,feing® 
that manner of eiection continued fo {mall atime in the chureh: And™ 
not as wellofthe fonnes of Sceus? (and {uchas they )whoitis prox 
bable caft out diueils by the ordinary meanes, where-with they tad 
mixed fome adiuraticns, ( where. vpon they were called Exorc#fes 
added thereto in that and tormer time when ail things almoftewere™ 
corrupted, and as it is very likely vpen fome imitation of the-preph=\ 


ets, who had (no do udt) catt out diuels by adiuring of conmmaund=4 


IAS LH 


ing the fpirits out in rhe name of the lorde:.as the papifts: does 


in the ymication of Chrift and his Apoftles:-both of theayfersS 


geting they hadnot receaued any fuch.power ouervncleane if? 


and therefore fhould haue refrayned from. cammauniing 


iuring them. True it is that they were far irom,.eatting the eu {pirit 


out ofthe man mentioned Acts 19. the became 


they ehtred vpor that where-vnto. they were neg at.all called of soa: >: 
for not contented with that manner of eiéction they had:foraverive:* 


vied, becaufe it fhewed no fuch authority over divells sastharpert se! 


med by the Apoftles, and by confequent.did © 
lonuch torthe people, which was the only thing they defredathey 


| temype 


| 
+ & 
q | . ~ 
] 
{ 


Pe 


-dinary, as the extraordinary manner? and out of the body, as well as. 


obiest as( I thinke ) we can obiect elle, that god hea- 


the worldly gouernours,, the princes of the darknes of this world, avaink [ps 


fore vpon, to take vnto them the whole armour of god that they may 
‘be able to refift fo ftrong an enemy, and hauing finifbed all things fad 


Yeading, interpreting, & applying of the holy {criptures ferue to ftré 


dinell fledfaft in the faith. 3. to ftirr vp whatfoeuer guift of praver isin 
vs, or feruency therein, and to worke the true humbling of vs vnder 
the mighty hand of god. But admit we hould readine & expoundig 


“not there: vpon which the from thence colle&-eth viz. that wee 
‘mage the fignes of the meanes cr caufes of dilpffffion, Did we 
» euer hould the reading and preaching of the word, to be fignes of no 
“feflion? furely no: for thele fignes are nothing elle but the fearefull 


ADETECTION OF'’S: HARSNETS 
tempted to caltessill {parits outiof fundrv. ix the name of the lord Iefusne, 
maruaile therefore though they had no better fuccefle therein, albeit: 
they percafe after an other manner, | meanethe ordinarye meanes, 
both before & after that difpofleffed diuers. And why deth thisfeme, 
fo ftrange and incredible to fome, as I known itdoth? why maynot. § 
a wicked man be as well an inftrument to caft out diuells after the or- 


the foule of mancfeig efpecially this latter is a far more worthy work, ° 
teth not the prayers of fuch,nor regardeth their humiliations: that ig 
an{wered already. 
Ther powerfull preaching is annexed for a meanes to prayer and fafte 
ing. Wherevxto may word of God (as the ffory |aith) which 
the diuells (forfooth) could not indure to heare, but would be gone. And(o | 
you fee them fall into the popi/h follies, makinge the fignes of poffeffion 
the meanes and caufes of difpoffeffion. 
_ _VVee doe not, neither ever did affirme, that thefe are the mee 
‘anes ordeyned of god for the caftinge of fathan out of the bodyes of 
men, for we doubt not but that without the vfinge of either of thefe 
he may be expelled, as it was in the dilpofleffion of Kath, Wrignt and 
‘Darling Yet notwithftanding we thinke that in this faid worke theris 
good and holy vfe thereof, Firft, becaufe in this cafe, men wreffle not 
againtt flefb and bloud, but again} principallityes and powers, and acainft 


‘vituall msckednefje- which are in the high places: \t ftandeth them there- 


fat. Now part, yeaa principall part of this armour, is the word of 204, 


—euen the [word of the [pivit: And herein we haue our bleffed Sauioure 


for an example to imitate, who when the deuill in an extraordinarye. 
and vifible manner appeared vnto him, {peaking alfo vnto him, he re 
fifted and ouercame him by the word of god. Secondly, becaufe the 


ethen our faith, whereof there is neede: for refi? ([aith S. Peter ) the 


of the word of god were meanes of cifpoffeffion, yet that followeth 


effets 


( 


— 
| 
ed 
; 
‘ 
+4 
Pe. 
ea 
5 
Ge 
403 
he 
| 
| a 
. 
> 
Cpa, » 39, 
| 
“ff 
at E 
| 
gat 
1 14 
4 
if 
| 


il 


effets and operations which fathan beinge within the-body’of. 


fendeth forth: in which nomber to place the worde of god and preaq 
ching thereof, isa moft fottifh and impious hinge: and fimple men 


though webe, yet! truft wee were neuer fo ablurd: which beinge fog 


the collection isnot worthafirave, 
But faith he, 15 moff appar ant by M. Mores conceite, who thinketh 


LHYCS, the truc di{cerning of thofe who are pi 


t appeareth that M. More doth not tay. aitogither fo, as ishere 


mentioned. But be it graunted: doth he thertore make prayer afigne 
of poffeflion? 2g fo one & the fame thing, a figne of meaneg 
or caufe of cifpoffeffione Behould how the Difc. argueth, By prayer 4 
man may dilcerne of thofe that are poffefjed: ergo, prayer is a figne of pof= 


Jeffion. Ut this be a good argument then are thefe allo: By the guifte 


called the difcerning of fpirits, the Apoftles trulye difcerned of thofe 


_ that were poffefled, as the Di/c. affirmeth pag. 28. go, that guift is 


afigne of poffeflion, By the knowledge of the fignes of fathan poffef 
fing one, mentioned in the gofpell, wee may tale difcerne of thofe 
that are poflefled: ego, that knowledge is afigne of pofleflion, And 
{0 the Apoftles were peffeffed, & all indued with this laid knowledg 
for where the proper figne of a thing is, there is alfo for certainty the 
thing fignifyec thereby. Aga:ne, by good fkill in phifick, one may tru 
lye difcerne of a feuer: therefore fkill m is afigne ofa feuer. 


“Thus to reafon doth very ill beefeme 4 batcheller of artes, much more 


a batcheller and Doctor of divinity. But this much worfe: profeffed de- 


“uines to charge falfly ( and that in print ) a preacher of the gofpell, to - 


ould, that prayer is a fi 


~ 


OF CHAP: 9. 


Of the fignes whereby M. Darrell ex others doe difcerne (as they 


fay) when [athanis 


Darvells ienorance maketh him (as it feemeth in this point confident. 
He is peremptory, that becaufe it is [aide in the [criptures: that the [pivits..of 
’ the lunatike, when be was caft out of him did cry and rent him fore, ¢> that 
bs lay as one dead: that therefore thefe three are infallable [ianes appointed 
of God to knowe whrn one ws difpoffffed, Nay rather then fayle bee will be 
content with one of them, as in brs dealing with Thomas Darlinge beereaf= 
on Thoulde thefe three for fienes whacby.to kniwe 
when one is difpoffeffed, as fignifying the egreffe-of the (pirite, Thane 
before declared: it remayneth therefore only that I anfwer. to thole 
cbieStions the maketh againft them. The wherofis this: 


V Vhere-vp 


Same 


prayer more neceffary, then the fignics of pofffjicn mentioned in the 


iene of pof]‘{fton, wheré-vpon followeth, that al 
which pray are poflefied. 


: 


‘ 
‘ 
~ 
7 
~ 
b 
2 
; 
(- > 
‘ 
~ 
“= 
a 
| 


| 


eA. 


- 
by 


| ADETECTION OF 5. HARSNETS- 
cai counter-eyt, thatis, doe to any one ot them, 
‘Much coanterfeyt then all. For the holy gnoit 
Snotofa naturall cry, fencforth by mans voyce or power, tae ike wip 
erevnto 20.orter man May viter and lo counterteyt: But ofa {uper- 
“natural cry, tent torch by alupernaturail power, meane, the di 
tor itis taid, the wacleane fpirite crycd with 4 loud vxyce and cams 
out of Wem: in like forte it is faid, the wacleane tare bin: Nowe ong 
‘wou i thinke that both the hand and tongue of man were too fhorg 
to pertorme that is done by the diuell, [ris belides {aid of the potleis. 
‘fed childe mentioned Mark. 9. that when the [pirit was gene out of hints, 
be was 28 one dead, in formuch that. many [aidve 1 dead, meaninge that . 
howlceuer hé was not indeede deads, but had lite remayning in him, 
_ yet he was in aii things like to a deace body, without any appearance, 
of lite, ftarke and ftir, the pulfes not beating, nor taxing breath &c,,. 
fike to a man in afwound. in whome although there be lite, yet no™ 
fuch thing appeareth to be, Even fo it was with the diipoileifed child, . 
where-vgoi the people which thronged about him tookehim to be. 
deade. Nowe this lewd knaue cannot eafily nor yet pollibly comsterfeys 
Howioeuer then, were our 10. difpotletfed perlons counterteites, as. 
the Difc. will haue them, there crying, renting, and fayning tolyeas. 
dead, an other as lewde might eafily counterteyt: yet to lay that one, 
May counterfeyt rb: crying, renting fore, and lyne desde, meatioed 
ae in the gofpell, and caufled by the diuell, is both apiurd 3<impious, 
His fecond odie‘tion is ferdowne in thele wordes .M .Darell confef- 
fing, that in the Apostles times, [ome [pivits were cat out mire eaftly then 


others, might in realon thaught, that thofe that went out fo 


> 


marke 1.26.. 


yers3 


fo ercurully tormnt the parties at their calting out, ae there did, 
i rue, not Ly tov ment at theire ont, As the did, 
therefore not eresou/ly torment at all, and {o of the other lignes. This. 


followeth not, as euery childemay fe. Two malefa:tors are whipped 


(ymagine) for oneand the fame fale, by two feuerall tormentors: the | 
one being beaten by the more cruel! man, hath 40. {tripes: the other 
by him that is leffe cruelihath but 20. By this reafon now ofthe Dif. 
this fatter was not beaten atall, for he was not beaten fo as. 
_ the other was. 

| His third obie tion followeth: ud fomewat itts that althoued 
there ave diucrs mentioned in the [criptures, to hauc bene difpof}Jed by our 
Sautrur and by his Apoajtles: yet tt is (aid of none but of the lunatick. 
Atark. 9. that when Sathan departed, the [pirit either cryed, or vente him» 
fore, or that they lay as dead. To make therefore {uch particularities in one, , 
general rule to ail, greatly the weahnes of bis 


“ 


] 
+7 
24 
74 
i 
434 
] 
| 
#3 
ii 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
& 4 
ey 
be? 
~ 
* 
ai 
a 
if 
i 
| 
| 
> im 
a 


LYING DISCOVERY. 

‘The Difc. is greatly deceaued,for of an other Mark, 1: Ca man and 
Mot achilde; asthe Awsatike was Mark, 9. ) itis faid, that when hewas 

difpofletled, the wuclcane {pirit tare him, and ‘that he tare or rent him puts e 

fore appeareth by Luke 4. where the fame ftory is {et down. Secondly’ vers.y- 

it is written, that be cryed with « loude voyce, and came outofbim, 

And in the 8. of the -4&s, that the vncleane [pirits crying with aloude 
woyce, came out of many that were poffeffed, And in that this is not {aide 
heere. of a particuler perfon, as Mark 1. ¢7 9, but of many, it is ther= 
by playne, that it was an viuall thing with tke {pirits, to fend forth or 


eaule loude cryes, when they went out of thofe they poffefjed. Thus hath the 
in faying that zone but the lunatick Mark 9. either cryedor was 
rent.fore, vttered yn-awares a manifeft yntruth, and ‘therein fhewed- 


no greate learning or iudgment, who vpbraydeth others with sgno= 

rance, weaknes, and want of iudement. VVe readenot indeede in cue 

ry place where mention is made of cafting out diulls, of thefe 3. eff= 

ects, that they a-yed, were rent fore, and lay as deade, but only in the 9, 

of Mark: nor in any place befides, that they in that cafe were for a fea 

fon as déad,yand had the Dife. {aid ¢ither of thefe, he had faid trulye: 

yet notwithftanding it is very probable that thus it went with the dif 

polleffed generally: for in the 17. of Math. and 9. of Luke where the 

difpoffetfion of the /unatick childe is fet downe, there is no mention 

neither of crying * nor renting, nor lying as dead, yet by the 9. of Mark vers.r8. 

it is cleare that when the diuel went out of him he cryed,was rente fore, ¥*5 43° 
andlay as deade. Inthe 4. of Luke we reade of the difpoffeffion of one In tuke.cherels 
of Capcrnaum, whome Chrift met in'the fynagogue, but we heareno mention of rent — 
thing of any onde crye that then was fent forth, yet by the 1. of charis tob 
Verie 26, where the fame myracle is recorded itis playne there was vnderltoode jof 
fuch a cry: for it isfaid, the wncleane fpirit cryed with aloud voyce. In the time 
that there isthen no more mention in the gofpell of thefe call /ignes not after that Ie 
of ds{poffeffion, itis not becaufe they which were difpoffeffed, did not 
ery, neither were forervent, nor lay for afeafon as deade, at the going out maunded him 
of the fpirit, but only the anatike Marke 9. whereof fewe will doubt, to gos forch. & 


thefe places compared ‘and confidered with that of the 4s: But 


that the holy Evangchffs labouring after breuity doe (vfually) reportyegrette. 


? 


only the faid greare workes with forme fewve circumftances, aS OUE OF 
whome the diuell was caft, where and {pecially by whome & inwhat . 
manner it was done viz: by the word or commaundement of Chrift: 

without defcriding at large the’ manner of fathans vexing the fayde 7 
party, either while he held his poffeffion, or when he went forth, the | 

9: of Marke only excepted, where both thefe are performed: & ther~_ 

fore it is that el{-where we reade not of all the 3. fignes, and not be-. 

eaufe other difpoflefied perfons did not when the f{pitit went 


a 
£. 
q 
| 
| 
| 
| 
af 
a® 
owt | 
4 


A DETECTION -OF §. HARSNETS 


‘out, bet only he: And. where the Dic: faith fayle 
will be content with any one of them: Lan{wer that howfoeuer F thinke 
thele 3: fignes were viually heard and feene in the egrefle of thé. {pi-: 
gits,yet it may be not alwayes, but lemetimes two or percafe one did 
fuffice to fignify the fame, and yet are not the other there‘ore ittvaie’ 
beeau‘e the more fignes the more we are confirmed ‘in the difpoffef- 
fion of one: for why may not this as welibe true of thelipnesof dif 
‘poffeffion as of pofleflion¢ where all the fignes arenot required bur 
fome of many.may fuflice, as hath bene fhewed before:.yeawhat ‘8. 
if we fhould {ee one bowed togttber, fo ashe couldnot lift vp himfelf,, 
feritisvery a8 the * poffefled woman was Luke 13.,might wenot well thence'ga 
likelye hee was ther ( efpecially if we perceived that it was not naturall ) that he'had 
_ a {pirit caufing the infirmity of body, and that he was fo bound by fa 
than? And yer this is but effect or operation of fathan: fo but 
‘one figne of poffeffion. And why one figne may not fufficeto fignify 
the {pirits going out of aman, as well asthis being in the body of ma 
I for my part doe not fee neither doe I think that the Dic, can fhew 
any reafon. And although be it one, or more, there is finguler v{e of 
the figne or fignes, to fonif e: the egrefle, asI haue fhewed before) 
treating thereof: Yet are the ign es of difpoffeflion of nofuch abfolut 
Neceffity, as the fignes of pofleffion are, as might eafilye be fhewed: 
And therefore I will not deny but that one may be difpoffefled,..and 
none of thefefignes appeare, which. is more: the health and eafe of 
the party from ali former vexation by the diuell, declaring his deliue 
rance from the diuell, as itis in naturall difeafes: yet 1 think it fallethy 
| —_ out thus very feldome if ever, for the reafons formerly giuen by me, 
de Damon.cap. Viderftand me of the cieétion of fathan by the finger of God, & 
of his voluntary eereffe asis inthe papacy, which may well alter the’ 
cafe. And fo is Thyrens fully aniwered faying, non raro fit vt [piritas de: 
Scendant, nullis [ui difceffiss poft (¢ datis (rants. It 4s often [cene that [athax’ 
departeth, leaning no fienes of bis going: which the Difc. in the ende of 
this Chapter obieSteth out 
~- From thefe fignes he proceedeth to certayne-other, which my: 
felfe haue obferued in experience, whereof we haue heard before, i8e: 
faith that it may not be omitted of whomel haue learned them; eucn of 
Thyreus forfooth. But how can this poffibly be:true? feing Phyreur tre’ 
_ tile dedamoniacis, from which by my handes thefe counterfeyts fhold: 
haue receaued their direftions concerninge the fignes; came not ta: 
3 England yntill the yeare 1 ¢98. they faffring or doingethelame, the’ 
one of then I meane Darling 1 ¢9 and the other viz. the in 
cafbwe 1596,2 How greatly alfo in this: refpect did the Dc. forgett’. 


- 


4 
Fe 
4 


“gn the fate, fee alfo [aide, that then Sathan 


‘ie world, that I bane learned all my {kile (fotfooth), 
eflion, of Thyrens the Jefuitc, and in the fame booke every where al= 
leadge him to confute me: whereby appeareth that Thyrews and I dif 


fent in 1udgment as much almoft as two can diflent about the doftrie. 
queftion: 8 therefore it is very valikely that bawe learned] know 


hint. eth to obie& againft the fienes heard 
and feneat the difpoffeflion of the parties controuerted as followeth, 


The that Dar.and M, More had, that fathan 


pad left lane Afbton, was her owne wordes, viz. when rifing from ber fit, 
foe {aid be-is gone, he 1s gone, 1 am well, 1 thank god And hauing wept 

parted from ber. So as 
— we hane anewefigne of Sathans. going out of one: viz, the wepinge 
gid 4 hat M. More hath faid no fuch thing, as the truth is, fo it is pro 
bable heereby; for that the D:/c.in the margent hath notnoted the 
article and page, as his viuall manner is in other places, which if be 
eould haue done, he woulde neuer have omitted, And truly for my 
‘owne part ( god is my witneffe ) I neuer {aid fo, yea it was farr from. 
me, much lefle did I depofe fo, as the Dz/c. affirmeth, yea what need 
it, {ccing befides her moft extreame tormentes at that time, I ( with 
many more) fawe her lye as cead fora feafon: which had I forgotten 
asit is not like!y, yet thereof the ftory of the 7.in Lancafhirewritten 
by M. Dickons ( one of the coppies whereof I had ) would haue. put 
me in minde: 1, heereofalfo I was neuer depofed nor examyned, no 
nor-yet concerning the 7, in Lancafbire, faue the firlt time I was befor 
the Bifhope a worde or two, concerning them all in general, as whe= 


ther I had not feene them before M. Starchy writ ynto me, and whe-~ _ 
ther M. More had not bene there before he went with me. V.Vherby. 


appeareth the corrupt dealing of the Difconerer, who inthe margent. 
hath Davell ad art. 17 pag. 14.4, And whereas in the Lancaflure {tory 
penned by'M., Dickons, from whence (and not from. M. More nor 
me } the Dic. hath both this and a ‘great deale more in this {aid cha, 
pter, and elfwhere {cattered heere and there, there is mention of her 


increafe of torment (whichas I conceaue is ment by thofe words Mar} 


9. rent fore). where-vpon thefe wordes are vied: Now in thss time they 


all eveéned to fee how pitifully [he was tormented: 8 togither with: 


that he heete-mentioneth this,-vir. (be was into atraunce, and lay 


as one deade fora mbsle: héhath of purpo’e omitted. both. thefe: that 
foche might weaken that itis faide by me concerninge the fignes of 


difpoffeffton; and withall bring.the reader ignorant hereof, to ft ufpek 


ot. 


h-r difpoffeffion, and togither with hers all the reft. To which.purr, te 


pofe he proceedethto the of dthe; 
| gn es 


4 4a > 
| 
4 
J 
' 
] 
: 
4 > 
> 


‘ 
f 


. ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS | 
ah gnes thereof: wheFeithe dealéth more playnlic and leffe corruptly, 
efpecially in that-he tellerh-in the argu 
vshadthe fame: not from M: Mores depolitions mint, the 

Byrom laidethat at ber venertingsy after fier bad as. 
half da felee she {pirit cam: xp faons-ber betty 
bret, thence to her followeth the hiftory before, 
was ynfaucry. Heere the Lefuites frinche. And befidesthe 
sufallable noate {sg nes af 
. for dead is beere confuted, for this party was.reuined 
This obie&tion arifeth onlye of the mifplacinge of one worde 
which the writer of this ftory.22. Dickons didvn awates::which being 
Placed in his right place the obiection is ealily anlwered:- for wheras 
This word tha thus jet downe, M. Byrom [a:d (a) that at her rowerting; after‘foce 
is wrong fette.. bad lyeu as dead halfe a houre, felt she [pirit come yp Sxvit ihoulde 
» bene thus: Margaret Byram [ayd at. ber reucrting; after foe bad lye 

. dead halfe an houre, that she felt the [pirit come yp orc. Neither can'the 

Tirlte in any fence or reafon be alcrybed to Margaret Byrort, -asthey 

mult needes if we take the wordes as they ave by the porte 

fhe knew not how long fhe lay dead, no morethena deade 
But very fitly they belong to the writer of the ftory, as appea 

—dethby the right placing of the word that. From Margaret Byromhe 


,, proceedeth to the other fixe, and out of the Laucafbire ftory, fetterh 
., downe at large the feuerall fhapes that the euill {pirits ( -as itfhoulde 
"feeme ) caufed prefently vpon their egreffe from them, and préfen- 
» t€¢ themlelues into theire eyes, asif they had gone forth of them in « 

@ued with fuch bodyes: and there-vpon playeth vppon Darlyices. 
And all thisto make their d ilpoffeflion odious or ridiculous if 
~ hecould, whereas indeede it confirmeth the fame: But he faith neter 

word oftheir moft extrame torments, for xentin ‘fore, 
: bude: their lying all 6° as if theyhad bene ftarke. cade; Which in the 
“‘faide ftory are likewile fer downe with their feuerall circamiftaunces: 
Thiele thinges he thought good to omitt: 
pate y, againft all the fignes of difpoffeffion; and therein the 
hg pofleffion of our Demoutacks, confirmed by the.fignes thereof, hee 
_btingeth in Thyreus, faying: Sicuti pro voluntate [ua Gc, As wicked 
may att pleat thefefiencs, fo they may [Gewe them, iad 


Thyreusesp, witbltanding keepe their p anlwer Thyréus and sraunte 


this of the lignes which Spiritus ab Exorettis coathi 
the [pirits compelled by the Exorcifts cine,as the putting ont of acan 


-? 


4 Qr 
= 


4 
wi 
4 
at uk 
Bis 
= 
rae 
4 
& 
s 
4 
th 
| 
ib 
t 
~ 


ke, the breaking of a quarry sn the and like ridice- 
~ lous fignes, it is moit true: the lignes allo which of their owne accord 
they giue, as the fenfible and viliple ( as may lay ) going outin {uch 
lortaswe heare, vonnting ore. doubrnot burt they may at these 
_ sed pleafure omit: but that they may /bew-thens and keepe ther pofefjion. 
e{peciaily the lignes mentioned in the golpell, as the Le/wite wu 
it, and that alio after the meanes 1s vied aright, which god hath ore 
deyned for the calting out of diuells I deny: tor it cannac be that god 
_ willfaffer the {pirites thus to delude & mock his people, which ihall 
be heereabouts occupied in faith and obedience to his owne ordin- 
ance: wherein as the wicked {pirits would delight exceedingly, thus 
( Imeane ) to diflemble an egrefle, in handling the petfons potletled 
in fuch manner as {ome times they did when they wente out ofmen, 
and elpecially at the time we {peake of, fo woulde they vfe the fame 
full often: yea I crult if it were {0, ‘S¢ left to their’ pleafwre, and that the 
diuelis were not in this cafe ouer ruled & brydled by that ouer & alle 
rulig had of god, all Eneland fhold haue heard of it before this. Againe 
were it thus that the {pirits might giue thefe figns && tarrie in men, or 
that the {pirits might omitt all the tignes meétioed in the whé 
they goe forth ot men,we could not know that the poflefled were dif 
potietied as hath bene fhewed,but muft needes ftand iu doubr therof 
at leaft for a time, & that time wherin we are affected with the works 
of god,if euer: whereby it would come to pafle, that when this won- 
_ dertull worke of god fholde at any time be wrought, the lord fhould 
neither be hartely prayfed; for the fame, and receaue that glory that 
otherwife would be giuen him,nor man receaue found profit therby, 
And it is a wonderfuil thing to confider how ready the papifts are te. 
affirme that their Exores/?s can & doe compell the !pirits to giue fuck 
fignes as they pleafeof their departure,and neuer once thinke of gods. 
_ eompellinge them to giue the fignes mentioned inhis word at their 
 epretle, for the aflurance of his people, that they are gone out, whe 
without tae fame cannot poffibie knowe {omuch,nor of his reftrayn- 
— ing them to fhewe the {aid fignes whé yet they remaine within them.. 
OFM. Dar, and M, Mores conceit: that Sathan being out. 
_ of one, doth prefently after fecke to him. 
Darrell like akinde frende, had newer to deate with thedifpof) fi 
on of any: but for bis care thereiz,be may be thought to bane delerwed gteat 
commendation. For his pet {wafions to [uch fill hane.bene,that they foould 
reall dilizence and circum|p Chion, that fathan didnot againe reenter ma 
bo thes, This his perpr wation hath ener bene drawne from a pof ition, whicle 
Pifly bosldeth: that Sathan beinze expelled oust of man, doth fecke pree 


Na 


4 
> 
. 
A 
~ 
- 
> 
< 
. 
a 
é 
4 | 


ADETEEHION -OF-B.HARSNETS 
Sepily to cine: grid thas it 4 very hard 
matter to wi thffan hin, ry reafon his 


iltyes, alluring them by prom 
and cerrifying of them by thrcatuings. Anda little after: hes 


of Sathansjecking to xcenter, velycth vpon a mctaphoricall place 
When the yncleane fpivit (faith Chrift ts gone ont of 4 man, be walk 
eth throughout dry places. fecking rel}, and fyndeth none. hen bef, aith, I 
_., will¥eturne into mine boufe, from whence | came: and when he ts come, be , 
at findeth it empty, fwept, and carni{bed. Then he gocth, aketh ynto bine . 
featucn other fpirits worfe then himfelf, and they enter in, aud dwell there: . 
and the end of that man 1s worfe then the begining .Encn [o {hall it be with . 
veneration. This place of {cripture is indeede metaphoricall as ap- 
peareth by thefe wordes, een jo it (ball be with thes wicked gencration: . 
aud is yfed by our Sauiour, to illuftrate and playnly fer forth the mi 
ferable ( future ) eftate of the Jewes, ifthey continued in their finns... 
The metaphore is this, As it is with a man which hath an vncleane {pi- 
rit caft out of him, if notwithftandinge that great mercy of god recey 
ued, hecontinue in, or returne to his former finnes, whereby it coe : 
to paffe that the diuell returning and feeking to enter into him again, . 
doe indeede enter in, which he certainly will, ifhe finde his old puef 
fuch, and that with feauen other fpirits worfe then himfelfe, the end . 
of that man fhall be worfe then his begining, miferable therefore and _ 
yt fearefull, euen fo thall it be with this people of the Iewes, who being - 
in their bloud and filthynes, god wafhed and clenfed and made them 
Bxodus.s9.4. his peculiar people, and * cheif treafure aboue allpeople, fo as they were 
the lordes portion and Lacob the lot of his inheritance, and hath * carryed 
vpon eagles winges, being fo tender ouer them, that * he that tex- . 
ait heth thers, toucheth the apple of bis eye, and * bath committed to them hs . 
sracles, fo as * to them apperteyneth the adoption, and the glory, and the , 
openants, andthe giuing of the lawe, and the feruice of god, and the proms. 
Ses: if this people now hauing bene made partaker of thefe and many , 
other vnfpeakable mercies of god, fhall rerurne to their former filth le! 
nee for their intollerable ynthankfulnes their laft eftate fhall be very. . 
miferable, and worfe then their firft: which {cripture as our fathers be’. 
fore vs, fo we at this day fee fulfilled before our eyes, in that asitwas 
faid to Cain,they are caft out fré their owne land,which flowed with — 
inylke and honney, and are vagabonds and runagates in the earth, 8 
fo their eftate farr worfe, euen feauen folde worfe, then euer before. - 
¥rom this {cripture I collect thefe things. Firft and cheifly, that the . 
divell beinge caft out of men, feeketh to enter agavneinto them. 2, 
That he defirerh the recouery of that pray he hath loft, (that is the~ 
pofleding againe of the {aid party ),aboue many other prayes, 3. th 


‘ 
% 


: 
& 
_* 
me 3 
~ 


of fitine, and otherwife can notig: That thiscafe the pncleane 
eftitérh not in alorié) But with More and Worle: diet the erid Gr 
eftare'of uch be then thei firft; Nowe what though thig 
feripture be vfed by the Lord as 4. smetaphor or fimilitude to 
an other thing: may we not therefore gather thefe things from henceg_ oa 
or is there no truth ( trrow we ) in the metaphors themieluesvfed by | 
our Sauiour? the [alt (faith Chrift ) bane loft bis [anow,, it is good 
ndthine: men doe not light a canclle and put it vnder a bufbell, but on aca- 
dlefiick, and it giueth light vnto all that arein the houfe. * The 
of is like ynto leanen, which a woman taketh and hydeth 1m three?” 
pecks of meale, till all be leaucned. \n like manner, S. Paule* 4 little. 
leanen leaucncth the whole lump. * Goe to the pifmire O fluceard, ( fayth: 
Salomon ) bebould ha’ wayes, fhe prepareth ha meate inthe (ommer, & ga. 
shireth ber foocte in the hurucft. He that goeth ypon coalrs, his feetefball be- 


Thefe are metaphors and ‘yet in them and athoufand mote in ho= 
ly {eripture, there is a certaine and vndoubted truth. That is fayde_ 
hecre of going vpon coales, of the Pifmire, leauen, and the reft with in=_ 
finite more of the like kinde, is very true, notwith{tanding the fame~ 
ipoken, yea let the Difc. fhew but one metaphor in alt” 


is metaphorically in ale 
the {criptures, wherein there is not a certaine and yndoubted truth: - 

how can it then poffibly be that this fpoken of the vncleane fpivit come... 
out of aman, fhould bevntrue, becaufe itis metaphorical? That this 
is {poken metaphortcally,hindreth not at all the truth therof.Andwher * 
asthe pretendeth as though I did only rely vpon the metaphor 
ricall place, and had no other proofe, for that I fo confidently affirme> 
as touching the of the diuell, and fecking to'enter ag aine into 

ont of whome he 2s gon, he is deceaued: for amofte pregnante proofe 

hereof there is( as hath bene.already fhewed) in the 9. of Markwhere 

Chrift Iefus being about to caft the diuell out of one, and knowinge 

the aforefaid metapbore to be moft true, and that the yncleane [pivit be=" 

sno gone out of man will ‘returne, and (ccke to enter into the fame man a= 

gaine, forbiddeth him fo to doe, I meane, the reentring or repoffeflig* 

ofthe {aid party, it may be therather becaufe he was a child: charge. 

thee sith fe 10 the {pirite) come out of bim, and cnter no more into.bi, vers 

Albeit then one'teftimony of the Lord: aboundantly fuf-*: 


fice, yet behould'a double reftimony of his for the further confirmig 


of ¥s in this truth: why then doth ‘this (ceme ‘fome ftrange or newe 
odrine, or odd only eto *the Difc. but to manye other 


that abhorre the ‘counterfeytityg ke contendeth for, feeinge it bath’ | 

Sach watratit, and is fo the fcriptures me think 


~ 
7 
~ 
73 


~ 


fe ADEYECTIONOFS.HARSNETS 
_ Oth if belides we looked into the nature of the diuell and how he ui 
atfe:ted bath rowardes god and maa, this ihould not leemete 


itrange athing.. Among wicked men he tnat vniuitly potletiech an 
ther mans houte, if it fo fall out thathe joofe the polietfion thereof, 


“yet will he not prefently giue ouer all cdayme thereto, and iecke no 
‘maoreatter the enioying of it: buc ifby {trong hand, briberv:, or any 


other violent or deceipttull meanes, he can compaile the poileflion a 
gaine, he will {urely doe it: if he obteyne it nor, yet it 1s cleare he will 
doc his belt indeuor, As this is generally true, 10 {pecially itit be a 


tampruons houfe, and {uch as wherein the viurper taketh great pleas 
fure to dweii in, and he alfo one of great authority, and hating dead 
ly, the right owner thereof, Euen fo and much more wicked and ma 


lignant {pirits ( which are principallityes and powers ) being as viur- 
pers caft out ot the bodyes of men, the glorious temples for the holy 
shott to dwell in: dee feke by all poflibie meanes to enter into them 
againe, and repofleflethem, V Veall knowe and contetle, that fathé, 
being cait out of the foule of man, which he poffeffeth folong aswe. 
continue the children of difobedience, he doth more egerly belett it, 


' . and feeke the repoffefling of it, then euer he did before: and this bes. 


fides that the holy {cripture teacheth vs, cuery conuert knoweth te. 
be true in hisowne experience. Nowe why fhould not the fame {pi-_ 
nttake the fame courfe prefently after his ciection out of that other. 
part of maa, his body I meane: feing not only the fcriptures, but the 
parties likewile fo difpoffefled out ot their owne experience fignifye 
che fame vnto vs? This confidered there was iuft caute I thinke to per — 


Jwade the perfons dilpoffeffed as I did, and is fet downe before. And 


{mall caufe is there for the Difc. to condemne thereafon ( among O- 
thers ) of the diligence and circum|pection required of them: viz. be- 
caule of the wnfpeakable fisbtilty of their aduer{ary the dinell: which 


it felfe, both in his deceit{ull and alluring promifes, and terrifying 


threats: for who knoweth not that by how much more fubtle the ene~ 
my 1S, and we {imple, by fo much the more diligent and cucum|pe? 
we had neede tobe, leatt otherwife by his cunning and our negligéce 
circumuent vs: Neither is any well-inttructe Chriftian ignorant 
heereot, that the diuell ordinarily, if not alwayes, preuayleth and o- 
wercometh vs, either by promifes or threates, Shartore it fhalbe our 
wildome & cheif meanes of fafery,to have a vigilant eye to eyther of 
thefe. Thus may the Dic, fe how palpably he erreth, who (as it may 
feeme ) with his popijb or Iefusticall Exorciffs ( whome in the feconde 
place he produceth againft vs) houldeth that thofe {pivites which are 


_ once call out of men, fecundo eoldem ingredi, et vexare non pofivne: 
amines cnter the fecond time imta-the fame men, and wex them, And yet 


behold 


- 
> 


co 
behoulde how he boaftech asif the Vadoubiedly 
~oFhis fide, andas if he had -anlwered all tharaien hatieto fay 
‘awordes, Viz. that the {ctiptare gore ‘metaphoricall place. 
Brit M2 Darrell (iaith he). aed be better 
promided in’ thes How. Dar, pronidedhe nowe {eerh: 
«And by that time S. H. is prouided for obiections, Ttruft Dar, wall 
«be fufficiently prouided for anfwers ynto them, And thus much for 
anfiverto the obiections made again{t my opinions, which fomtimés 
‘I deliuerédté the B, ot London, uttle thinking that thefame fhoulde 
have bene publithed tothe worlde, It remayneth that proceede. to 
the nratrer of fact charged againft mee: in which two poynts the 


ouery contifteth. 


_ OF CHAP, 11. 
How thofe that tooke xpon them to caft out dincls doe eet theme 
work, and of thew denifes to comer thewlewdnes 
The Exercifts of bath kines for wance of worke ave drinen to theyre 
_ piftes: und like tinkers walke vp and downe from place to place feeking te. 
be imployed. pag. 
Obferue heere not fomuch the Di/c. rayling, as his contrariety 
thwarting of himfelfe: for page 22. he himfelfe faith and confefleth, ; 
that when Kath. Wright was troubled, fhe was by one M. Bereffardes.. 
aduice fent taM Dar, at Man{feild, and to one M Beckinghams to becons 
Sorted, or cured of her infirmity, And concerning the occalion of my de _ 
aling with Th. Darling thus: The certaimty hereof that M, Walkedew 
( the boyes erandfather ) hearing how M. Dar-had helped K. Wright, pre 
enred bins to come to Burton, to Darling: from him he peoceedeth - 
tothofe in Lancalbire: When the 7. in Lancafbire were troubled M.Star 
ky; and M, Dee refalued vpon him, and writ their feweral letters vnto him 
fer bus repayre into Lancabire: And laftly as touching the occafion of pag,2g. 
my going to Somers, he faith: that * afifler inlawe at Nott: 
Miftres Wallys, [be writ vnto me, vequelting me to come oner to [ee the. 
[aid Somers: Herevpon he addeth and collesteth (and thattrimlye) 
thus: Hetherto it may appeare, how M. Dar. bath beue fought vate... 
-Yf this his-colletion with the premiles be true, ( otherwife he is 
greatly to blame to publifh them to the world, and that for certayne 
truthes.) how can this allo be true, that like tinker lwalked pp and 
aowne exc. Itis one thing to be fonght ynto, andan other ta [eeke for 


worke, and to be ymphyed. And thus is the Difconerer conuynced by 


his Difcouery: and let this fuffice for anfver and refutation of his t#-_ 
ir matter of (ome difficulty to difcomer their fbifts and fleightes te 
tht thy ba many: and by tein experience doe manage them 


7 
. 
4 


‘ 


ana 

ry! 


-felues to be poffiffed, and others alfo with them: wherevpont 


62 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


fo cr sftely. Diuers of them are heere fet dowue, and the reft may be fupply 
_ ed peradueniure by fome heeresfter, Sometimes they make chiyce of fome 
fuch bayes or wenches, as they thinke are fit for thew purpofe, whome they 


procure by many promifes and allurencnts, to Keope their counfell, and te 
‘be (25 they tearme it) aduifed by them. 


The Difc. and So. heereafter reli vs, haw for his counterfeitinge 
1 * promifed him he /hould ncucr want whilclt I lined, 2, * that fo do- 
ing disbted vot to procure him areleafe from his maijier: that befides 
Jallured him by giuinge him firft xij. pence, and after that an other 
xij. pence, but we heare nothing of the promiles I made either Kath. 
Wrizht, or Th, Darling, or Mary Cooper: nor yet how thefe, or thofe 
in Lancafbire were allured to counter{eyte, But I conceaue how it is, - 
Theie were not fit [chollers to diffemble and collude with me as Som, was 
and others of that kinde, but counterfeyts of an other kinde, fuch as 
I did not confederate or couenant with, asI did with Somers: but at 


my comming to their fayned difpofleffion, found ill at cafe, troubled ey- 


ther in their flomack with choller or fleame, or in their belly with erypinges 


or collick, or in thew beade or ioynts with aches or numneffe: and vppon 


certaine {peaches vied by me areformed Exorcist began them 
ey(pore 
foules ) ynawares acted they knew not how the fignes of poffeflyon 
and difpofle(ion. Did euer one reade any thing more abfurde then 
this? It mav be we fhall heereafter heare that which is as abfurd of Sse 
mers: but otherwile we feldome or neuer reade the like fottifh and ri- 
diculous ftuff, as the Difc. hath for 8. leaves togither, from page 61. 
a the ende ofhis firft booke. But he procedeth in his childe-ifh 
taie 

And thefe are commonly of the poorer fort, either the children or ferudts, 
of {uch perfons, .1s the Exoratfts doe well know, to be of their ovwnc fampey 
and well «ff towards them. 

Heerethe Difc, greatly forgate himfelfe for albeit fome of our 
‘Demonracks were pore, yet was not Th. Darlie of the porer fort, much 
leffe M. Stavkies chilcren, whofe fonne is to inherite land worth (as I 
‘take it ) {ome hundreds of pounds by the yeare. But he worfe forgat 
himfelfe in that which followeth: for how could we know the parents 
er mailers offuch tobe well affetled towards vs, whome weeneuer 
Knew or {awe in the face, before we dealt in the difpoffeffion of the 
perfons pofleffe 1: as they are ready to teftify, and one inreafon may 
well imagine of NT. Stariyand 4". Byroms mother, feing we dwelt 
about ¢o myles afunder.He addeth that we them to be of onre 
‘owne frampe: what he measeth hereby ( becau‘e thee wordes are fom. 
what cbfcure ) we may perceaue by that heere following, fer downe 
pac. 69: 


* 

» 

‘ 

aq 

79. i. 
ag a7 oo. 

af 

4 

 peg.€3, 

| 
| 
6 
i 3° 
| 
| 
| 

| 
| @az,65, 

4 

if 
; 
| 


LYING DISCOVERY. 63 
page 69. you obferue alittle wondcr:\t will hardly be foewed, the 


any of thes forte hauc bene found, but either in the houfe: of Recufants,er of 
{uch as hawe on the othcr fide pretended fome xcale, for they know nut what 
reformation. Heerein allo the Di/c. was greatlye deceaued, tor itis 


wellknown that the parents and maifier of the perfons poffefied,were 
not Recufants, and for xeale after reformation they were fo farr from 
that, as vndoubtedly they know not what that reformation he {pea- 
keth of meant, no not any of them, Darlings frendes excepted. Thus 
you heare of what /famp they were, whofe children or feruants coun- 
terfeyted, asthe D:/c, tearmeth theire vexation by fathan: whereby 


it is manifeft of what (famp we are, that dealt in the dilpoficilinge of © 


thefe counterfeytes: which alfo in the fame place he ceclareth more at 
large: Befides it falleth out among ft vs: that they who haue taken yppon 
them, to baue caft out dinells, bane ftill bene men of that bumour, as being 
forfooth more purc then thereft of thew brethren where by the way fir 
we may learne, who is more pure then the reff of brs brethbyin that is in 
playne termes 4 puritane: not heas allmen imagine, who challengeth 
fome purity to himfelfe aboue other men, but he who ts of the ‘ bumour 
of reformation: more playnlie: be that hath fome xeale for reformation. Yf 
the caufe be thus, as it is cleare it is, there isno caufe why thele pur1- 
tanes (as they callthem ) fhould be hated, defpifed, abhorred, and fo 
fhamefully intreated, as they were rather dogges, then men. It is a 
good thing ( and deferuing loue and reuerence ) to defire the refor- 
mation of that which isamufe in church, or perfon: a better & more 
pleafing to god, to feeke and labour after it, fo it be done aright and 
_in due order: and beft of all and highly accepted before god to be ear 
Neft and yealus therein. But admit that thefe men feeke after the re- 
formation of tho‘e things which be notamifle, and neede not there- 
fore to be reformed: in particuler, admit that it was Jawfull for men 
t0 reépe carnal] things, of thofe congregations where they fowe not 
Apirituall thinges: to eate of the milke of the flock, though they feede 
not the tlock: for thefe kind of * fouldiers to haue wages, albeit they 
goe nota warfare, and that it were notthe Lords ordinance that 
they only which preach the gofpell, fhould line of the gofpell: and that nece]~ 
fity Lyeth not vpon euery minifter to preach the gofpeil, bat that the rea 
ding thereof fufficeth, and that men may liue of the gofpel, although 
they be notable to preach the gofpell, or i€they be ab!e, preach little 
or notatall, or not.to the people from wheme for their faid preachig 
fake they receaue their maintenance’ alfo that weamen mav baptife, 
in the cafe of danger er neceffity as they call it,&e. Admirthis I fay, 


; 


vet notwithftanding forafmuch as thofe whom men call ;wittans,dce 


fecke the reformation fthefe things, and others of the fame kin Je in 


pag:é9. 


2 tim.2.3, 
1 cor, 6.14; 16, 


> 
, 
‘ es wf 
ss 
. 
» 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 

a xeale of god, as is hereby manifeft, in that for thiscaufe they doe & © 

are ready to forlake father and mother, wife and children, houfe and 

_~ and, liberty with all the comforts of this lite, yea life it {elte if god cal 

_ them therevnto: and are contented in and during this lite to be of all 

men the moft miferable: there is {mall caule why the Dzfconerer and: 

the world with him, fhould hate, {corne, 8 fo contemptibly vfe them 

_as if they were the oficowring of the jworld, and refule of the people, 

S$, Paulein the 9. to the Roma. calleth God to witneffe to his confcsence, 

that he had great and continuall [orrowe in his heart, and thas 
ane be would wij himfelfe to be fepcrated from god, for his brethren that were 
bis kinlmen according to the flefb, and in the begining ofthe Chapter 
follwing, he vfeth thefe wordes: Brethren my harts defire and prayer to 
eod for they might be faned,his realo therof 
bcave them record, that they haue the xeale of God but not ablordinge to 
knowledee If Paule were thus affected towards the lewes,who were fo 

_ exceedingly violent and outragious in whatfoeuer they went about 
in their blynde asat large appeareth by the {tory of the 

ofthe 4poffles. becaule they hadin them « xeale of god: woulde hee, 
were he now liuing among vs, be fo affected as the moft are, towards 

as they are rearmed, inwhome itis manifeft there is.a 
xcale of god, be it that it were not according to knowledg ¢ feing they 
doe nothing in their {aid xeale in a tumultuous, but all peaceable man 
ner: as by prayer togod, and humble petition to her Maieftye the 
beade, and the body of this Realme met and ioyned togither in Par 

- liament? either would S, Paule ( trowe wee ) call thefe men in {corne 

as the Dz/c. doth: * men of the onerworne confiforianfaction, men of the 

__ bumour of reformation, men more pure then the rcft_of their brethren, that 

puritanes: or with others precifrans phantallicall men: coc. yea of Sa- 
than S.sthanifts as my felfhaue heard them called: becaufe of theyre 
me admit it werea blinde yea'e: who for the blinde zeale that the 
ewes had, called them fo louingly Srethren? It isnot potlible: 
As from fome thinges which might be obferued, fo from thefe two 
places, and fome- other, efpecially that, page 1. (where vpon cer- 
-taine worthy premifes he colleXeth, that in all likelshood, (cing neither 
| by learning nor fufficient arguments, they of the over-wrne Confifforian 
pag.ts.3 faction could heerctofore prenayle, for the fetting vp of their prefbyteryall 
conceyts, they thousht to fupply their wants theran, by this demfe of caffi, 

_ ont druells:) It may very probably be gathered,that the thinge which 
hath vexed the Dec. and mace him fweate fomuch about counter- 
feyting, isnot the counter‘eyting, and teaching to counterfeyt a pof 
feflion: nor his hatred and abomination to finne, and in particulerzo 
this detefable coufenage: but his hatred again{t the inftrumentes 

which 


vers. 


re 


H a 
| | 2 
| 


DISCOVERY, 


which god vfed in thefe great workes of his: whome, together witk | 


all of the fame /famp, as trom his foule he hath of long hated, fo here- 


by was the fame mightely increafed, in that thele kinde of men howl - 
be thouzht to bane [uch intere/t in Chrift lefus, as that at their (falfly tere 


verball prayers, and hypocritical faftings, he [ould as it were 


bly defcende from heanen, and tread downe Sathan vnder thew feete, 


‘Lhisfaid the Narrator before the came forth, cannot be tndyred, 


whereby we may le he coniectured aright. And mark what he there- 
yponout of the Apoftle addeth: But god hath chofen the foolile thinges 
of the world to confound the wile, and the weak¢ thinges of the worlde to 


_eonfound the mghty, As if he had faid:in that the Lord hath vfed in 


thefe rare and great workes of his, {uch weake and contemptible mé, 
we fhould rather confidering the lordes manner of dealing, be confir 
med thereby in thele workes, & further aflured that they are of god 
then kept from beleuing andembracingthefame. 
Thefe ave not dealt with but there muft be a creat affemb!y gathered 
socither sn one corner or other: all of them {uch perfons, as they knowe to be peg. 
sheir frendes, or at the lealt as their [aid frends doe bring with them, and | 
ave thought fit to be peruerted. <n 
The falfhood of this is heereby manifeft, in that M. More and ? 
knewe not thofe perfons in Lancafbire who ioyned with vs in prayer 
to god forthe cating out of Sathan of the perlons pollefled, as they 
ean yet one of theinbeing meert {trarigers t6 them 
alland they to vs: and at Nort. allo they were generally vnknowne | 
to me neither was their any chéyce made by fome of our frendes, and Atthe difpeffe 
procuring of men to come,(asis well knowne to them that did come pane pte 
who werenota few ) as the Difc. faggefteth: Befides this partly are wereprefeate- 
ueth, that (were thefea counterfeytinge indeede) thefe our Jayde 
were confederates therein,-which I think hardly any’ will fa- °°" 
wour, It is maruaile that the Di/c, affirmed’ not likewife that all thofe 
which haue feene Somers, Darling and the 7,in Lancafbire in their(pre 


tended) fitts, were not my frends (fo: fhould Ihaue fome Roare of 


frends: ) or at leaft that my frendes he {peaketh of did bring them, or 


procure them to come, knowing them to be fiuch as were like to be per 
uerted, for this he might as triily haué affirmed ‘as theother: 8& this 
had berie to fome purpofé ‘ineééde; whereas the other is to none. It 
is {trange therefore that he {trayned not himfelfe a little further: but 
though hé doe it not heere, yet he faith fomething elf-where bendig 
this way: for {peaking of the 12. Commiffioners, Re hath thes words 
| 
that they arenot to be impeached, fomuch for their want of wildom, as 
for their blynding the eye thereof, by their prepofterous affections, they held - 
with M<: Darrell. ¥fnow the principalleye witnefles of Som, fitts for 
wifdoine 


pag. 308,. 


\ 


" 4 : ‘ 
¢ 
j 


¢s ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
‘wildomé, learning, and authority were thus affected towasdesnieg, 
well may it be that the reft.alfo were: And if by my frends 1 could-pro 
are thefe perlonsto feeSo. inhis fitts, who albeit for theire wifdome 
they were not eafily tobe deceyued, yet becaufe of their prepoferous 
affections were fittto be perwerted, much more by the {aide frends of 

myne might I procuremeaner perfons to feehim, morefitto be pets 
~ werted then they.And thisis to be fuppofed of the reft of our Demes 

iacks, viz. that the principalland other witnefles of their 

vexation were likewile blynded all, and euery_ 
ofthem with prepofferous affection, 

which no man(iure)will bee- es 

Jeue, the Difc,excepted; 


end of she Firf Boke. 


of 


~ 
- 
é 
4 * 


Fie 


Dar. intercowfe with So. by ftarts at Afbby, from about” 
the yeare 1592 1597. for bis infiruction how to 

This my fuppofed guiltynes is prooued two wayes, firft by. Somers 
-acculing me to haue taught him: Secondly, by-circumftances arguin 
th€ fame: depofed by diuers witnefles, In the accufation we are to cl 
Serue firft, the acculer: fecondly the accufation it felfe, laftly the cir- 

contirming the fame ( asis pretended depofed by o- 
"The acculer is William Somers, ayong man about the age of 22. 
‘yeares; who firft is knowne to bea notorious and infamous lyar: for 


4: 


if 


= 


Je 
2 
€ 
‘ 
j 
Re 
7 
; hy i 
Et 
eat 
4 
? 
be 
j 
4 
; 
4 
u 
£ 
th & 
Spi 
‘ 
$ 


‘G 
> 
4 
it 
= 
4 
| 
ty 
4 
3 
‘ 
t 
3 
3 
, 
. 


LYING. DISCOVERY 04, 
4.times bath he varyed with that double'and falfe tonswedftis: tore 
tines affirming,'at other times denying all counterfeytme: and 
ty of thefe times openly, and to an infinite nomber of men22; By his 

owne confeltion he hath and if that were 

{o, prophaned the holy exercife of prayer and fafting! antistherfore 

- molt vileand abominable, 3. Yf he haue counterteyted, heis'a moft 

horrible blafphemer: hauing fometimes faid there is no god: and fome- wrered- 
times vied thele wordes, I sam * I am Chriff; as is depofed, 4. He 
is a forfworne wretch: for he hath fworne both wayes, that hee hath 
counterfeyted, aad that he hath not counterfeyted: yea with an exe- 
«ration, betaken himfelfe to‘ the dittell ifguer he counterfeyted: he & executed, for” 
needes thereforebe' forfworne. In regard eereof I an‘wer that 
forafmuch as ther is only one witneflinge againft me, Iought not dig uities as this 
therevpon without further proofe, neither by the « Jawe of god, nor pas Arista ie 
by the ciuill lawe, be held and adiudgedas guilty. 2. I haue to all the tewde peimed® 
articles framed againft me out of his accufation, anfwered negatiuely boy thould be 
end me thinketh were I a private man, in régarde of my educatdon, andmuch made 
yeares, and life, I fhould be credited rather then Somers: much more ofby the Bie. 
being a minifter of Chrift Iefus and preacher of his gofpell. 3. Beltdes © 8°"! **” 
my owne oath and seer 9 againft this {ingle accufer, * learned An £ 

and graue deuines haue offered to be my compurgators: which by ~ Deities 

the ciuill lawe-( acearding to-which Iam to be iudged-)-dothaboun -tohn8.17.> 
dantly fuffice foe my purgation:’ pa owne without theires ig 
fufficient. 4.1 take exception againit his teftimony in regard of his , tim. s.19, 
vnworthynes, which appeareth by the premifes. Andbecaufe of this 

J atirme, that there is no body teftifying againft me the crime Jayde — Bere 
to my charge: for there is none but Somers (as by that which follow-MRoberr Evin 


eth is. made.euident,) and he in all lawe is nullus nowitnelle, 
Difconerer, pag.2 44. 


London much more finceeily in this: matterthenT. 


The Difc. faith of him, that he bath dealt fince his cxdimynation at oe 


Admit then Som. were not fuch and {fo vile cs we heare, but 28 
the Difc. it may be will haueit, a yong man of good reporte: admitt 
dikewife that not only he but others aio ioyned togither with him in. 
the accufation, yet notwithftanding’ for-afmuch asthe accufation it 
felfis moft falfe, as we fhall Keare, all will make’ nothinge to proove. 

my guiltynes, And fo from theaccufer Jet'vs proceede to the accufa- 
About 4 quarter of a yeare beforemy departure ( faith So.) FanM, 
The. Grayes, (ith whomel then dwelt at Lanol-ey Abbey in Ley efter 


| [hire 


68 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNE 

[ens ome day to Ajbay de la Zouch ( being 4.0 

) vine accafion of bufyncs. At what time Lwith 

what hay- ing into an (a) alehoufe, found there M. Darrel, whoine 

es were & but (0) playing the wage, and [brewd bay with my conspanisrorsy M, 
Darrell d:parted out of the boule, and at the dore viatulh came forth 
wiac Alshoufe. chen be torke me apatt, af hed me my nana’, where l wae bor ne, with 
I dvoelt, Alis( be further ) art pretty and my 
oftie cheifeor Lkuewe thy father, and am forrye to jec thee 12 meane @ 
themamonge for yas (imply apparrelled, cucn as mcanly alinyf as could bc, Hee 


wiom [ hare 


line 40/0 promifed to bring me out of the towne, and to tell me fomethings, whers. 


readie(an effect) a7 of would be ruled by him, Ifbauld not be drinen to gue [o bar asd did 
but be able to mainteyne my felfe as long ax I lined, l had di{patched 
to Aishoules, my busynes, Tretorned homeward, and found M, rell ot jrom the 
he Place where I left him, talking with (c) two or three flrangers, about one 
eotpell.  Katheryne Wright whome he faid he had of an vncleance [pryt, 
be had ended bis communication with tiem, he went with me alung 
hieplaveinthe #2 the frecte in my way homeward: and as we were going togither, £ baw 
wing oncr=beard Some of his [peaches with the faide firang es, afked 
hauencither What they ment: he aufweredme with along [peach concerning the 
nanesnorfir- of K. and touldmethe manner of her pitts oc. as there follows. 
PP chen the bonne eth: where is fet downe at large our firlt (pretended meeting) or ace 
Burnomaruel with the occafion thereof, the allurements I vied to pers 
tig 8 — ge wade him to counterfeyte, and the acting of certayne trickes by my 
on 
Tanfwer before the Lord, and asI thall anfwer it at the dreades 
full day ofiudgment, that I neuer (tomy knowledge ) fawe Wilham 
Somers before the 5. of Nouember 97. which was but two dayesbe 
fore his dilpoffeffion, and that was alfo vpon earneft intreaty made 
bythe ( then) of Nottingham and by fundry others: much 
leffe then had I for certaine yeares before 97. diuers and fecret me= 
tings with him, and confederated with him, ashe accufethme. 
Secondly, anfwer, that forafmuch as Somers was gone from 1. 
Grayes before the time he affirmeth our firft meeting or acquaintace 
began: it cannot therefore poffibly: be, that this his faid accufation is’ 
| truce. About Midfommer 1598, I being by the B. of London depofed | 
and examyned, it wasarticulated againft me, that about’ 4. yeares 
(then) palt, as I was talking with two or three ftrangersin A/bhy cd 
cerning K. Wright, W. So. came to vs, and that leauing them, I went 
with him onthe way homewards, perfivadinge him to counterfeyt, a 
pofleflion as K. had done. The fame was read and charged 
gaint mein Michelmas tearme followinge at before my 
Lord 


» 
— 


A 


: 


‘ m4 
> 
¥. 


> 


LYING DISCOVERY, 


Lord 
ell, 


¢ 
priuy counfell, And this was done in the prefence of aboue an hun- 


dred. Then orat that time (as we fee ) our firft acquaintance begam ~* 


Auno 1594, now fixe yeates paft: but So. accufation being fynce by 
. the Dife. refyned, and caft into a newe mould, becaule of an Apologse 
of mine made after this, he is now faid to haue bene acquainted wita 
me from abiut the yeare 1592. whereby the Difc. hath gayned two 
yeares, which ftandeth him in finguler {teade. for take the accufation 
as it was at the firft, and is in the article, and continued long charged 


again{t me, as in equity we ought, the Dic. and Som, are manifettly 


conuinced by the difcowery itielfe,forby pages 94. and 9s. it appea 
reth, that it isnow. about eight yeares fince Som, went from Masfer 
Graycs, and the accufations being in his firft frame, itis little more 
then fixe yeares fince Somers and I were firlt acquainted, ashe affir- 
meth: lo that Som. fhould haue bene gone from M. Grayes, about 2. 
(0) yeares after the Di/c, accompt, before he and I were acquainted, 


+’ 


and fome other of her Maieftyes mofte honorable’ 


(o)o ores. 
mendacem 


and therefore the accufation falfe. Blame not then the for. this 


alteration of the time, for had helet it goe as it was framed at the firfk, 
either he muft haue let that point of my -4pollogse alone, or els haue 
cleane ouerthrowne himfelfe and all: now whether of them foeuer he 
had done, it had bene againft himfelfe, and the latter fhamed him for 
euer, It was wifdome then ( I trow ) with a dafh of his - to preués 


all, which was by writing the figure of2. inftead of the figure of 4, & 


chaunging 94, into 92. But let vs take the time of our firlt acquain- 
tance to be, notas So, hath affirmed, butas the Difc, now reporteth 


it; ( for [feeno. remedy ) yet by the ai/conery it {elfe it willappeare, - 
that the accufation is falfe herein: for by page 94. it is playn ( as forth ‘ 


with we fhall heare ) that So. went from M. Grayes aboue 7. yeares 


before the dsfcoucry came forth, and the Difc, himfelfe confefleth.chat 


it was then but 7. yeares fynce wee were acquaynted, for from 92." 
(which is faid to be the firft time of our acquaintance, ifwewere ac~ . 


Fae i fo foone ) vntill 99. arebut 7, yeares: and befides Somers 


aith that we met togither about 4 quarter of a ycare & pag. 80. twelue 


or thirteene weekes before he went from M. Grayes. By the défcosery it 
felfe therefore it is manifelt, that hecould not come to meat bby 


from M. Thomas Grayes at Langley abb+y a quarter of 4 ycare before 
his departure thence, as both here and page 82.isby Somers inhisaccu 


fation affirmed. whereby it is euident that the Dife. inhis difcoucry 


hath playnly difcouered.my inocency, togeather with So. & hisown 

falfhood and corruption. And thisis the fecond time the Difcomerr 
1s conuinced by his difconery: And if heereby my innocency and the _ 
falfhood of So.accufation appeare: How would it fhine andbecleare ~ 


4 
> 
= 


 ABDETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
“if vpon a commiffion graunted I fhould make proofe that it isaboue 
To. yeares fince his departure from Langley abbey; whereof Lam ve- 

ry fare, and how orwhich way it will forthwithappeere 
~—-Tewillmot heipe him to fay thathe doth not dyrectlye affirme 
 thatwe became acquaynted 92. but about 92. for this worde about: 
a mutt haue relation to the time after 92 . viz. 93 .and notto the tine 
bat before, becanfehe faith in the next’ wordes followinge, that I became 
acquainted with So. at Afhby about’ or 6. yeares paff, meaninge from 
98.whichis all one asif hehad {aid from 92. or 93. whereas other- 
wife he fhould haue faid, about 6. or 7. yeares paft. 

Againft this the Di/é. obiecteth as followeth: Where M. Darrell 


ai. eid faith ( viz. in my Apollogy ) that it is 9 yeares or thereabouts fince Som, 
— Ut __- pent from M. Grayes, if that were true, he bad [aid fomewhat, for the clea 
vine therefore of this: Gray and Mifireffe Gray being interroza 
ted 23. OFob. 1598. how lone it. was fince So. left their feruice: the one 
faith: more then sixe yeares palt: and the other about fixe yeares as they 
member. But there is fome better certainty to bolt out the truth heerein. So. 
| bound prentife (as M. Dar. confeffeth ) with Thomas Porter, about a 
emnonneth or fine weekes after he was dif{charged of M. Brackenburyes fer 
and So. [arth that he remayned little above a quarter of 4 yeare ( 1f fa 
bong ) with Brackenbury: and it will be confeffed, that he went from 
ll ae M, Grayes to dwell with M. Brackenbury: fo as if we can fynde when 
Som. was bound vrentice, it will appcare bow long it is fince be dwelte at 
oft M. Grayes, Now the Indenture it felfe whereby he was bounde, beareth 
eT ae date the feauenth of May in the 35 .yeare of her Maiefty: wher by it is mani 
the premifes beine true, that it is not yet feauen yeares fince Som. dwek 
with M, Gray, which coutvowlerh M. Dar.nynewares, 
ea _ . The premiffes being true, that he faith is not therhy manife? :for if we 
— __» add to the date of the Indenture, the monneth or 5. weekes arid gua’ 
1% ter of a yeare he {peaketh of, itis likely to be full 7. yeates, and aswell 
more as lefle,yeathe premifles being true, it is mamifef that his not 
| ii yet 7. peares (viz. at the time the oi/rouery came forth ) is talfe: for if 
at were more then 6. yeares in OGober 1598. fince So, departure from 
ii M..Grayes: muft rt not needes be more then 7. yeares in November 
i 159). which was the time wherein the di/conery firft fawe the light? 


And this isthe third time the Difcouerer is conuinced by his owne 
chifconery, neyther doe the premiffss, being true, controle my 9. 
for they being true, notwithftatidine depofed truly: and 
did Miftreffe Grav, her memory faylinge her forthe prefent. They 

thought as it may {eenze, that they would make fure to fyeare 
ani 


: 
" 


Tee %,. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
‘ 
‘Bie 
a 4 ‘ 


_ and to keepe them within their boundes, and no. maruaile feing nor 
-withftanding that (as I was credibly informed ) the B: of Landoa 


faid to M. Gray when he thus. depofed, that he had forfwvorne him- , 


~ felfe: offering to lay hima bundred-pounds that it wasnot6. yeares 
-. ince So. left his feruice, albeit M. Graybeing ready to lay with hin, 
 heafter refuted: and not only this, but threatned him and Miftrefje 


Gray likewife to fend them to prifon, what would he have done, or 


leaft {aid, if they had gone as far as truly they might? Had they de 


pofed that it was nt 7. yeates, or that it was mot eight, or mat 9. years. 
patt, their depolitions being true, that I faid of 9. yeares muft needes 
haue bene falfe, but we fee they haue depofed otherwife: and I truft 
it they {hould now be depofed thereof, after they haue better confi- 


_ dered of the matter their depofitions woulde not controule but con- 
firme Darrells 9: yeares, But admit it were but 7. yeares.{ yea fome- 


whatleffe ) from the time of So. departure from M. Grayes, vntill 


the time 1 writ my apology, which was in October 98. it had bene all 
one and as much for the clearinge of mee, as ifit had bere 9. or 19, 


yeares from the time he went thence, becaufe thereby it had bene e- 


uident he was gone from Langley zbbey before our pretended mee- | 


ting fhould begin: which is fufficient for me, yea although wee take 


the time of our firft yp to beginin the yeare 92. or as the 


Dijc. after affirmeth, about ¢. or 6. yeares paft from 98, much more. if 


we take it as it was at the firft layd out in writing againft me: for if 
So, were gone trom 27. Grayes 7. yeates before the yeare 98. which 


was 4uno 91. then wasnot he there 92. vhereby we may fee had the 
Dif. controuled my 9.ycares:it would not auayle him for the proouing 


of my euiltineffe. And if the Dz/c. will heerein faye any thing to the 


purpofe, ( otherwife he may in this poyntbe hereafter fylent ) hee 
muft leane my 9. yeares, and proue that So, was at 71. Grayes at, Lang 


ley Abby inthe yeare 92. ashe and Somers affirme: which I thinke 
he ‘hall finde as ympoffible for him to doe, as to prooue So. a counter 
feyt. Andwhenhe hath performed this ( if it proue poflible ) yet is 
he neuer awhit the nearer my teachingofhim, _ tas 
And where in this account of the Djfc. he faith So. was bounde 
prentice as (M:Darvell confeffeth ) with Thomas Porter, about a moneth 
or fyne weekes after he was difcharged of M. Brackenburyes feruice: ob- 


ferue I befeech you his cunning: for he pretendeth‘to the reacer as — 
though that were graunted by me fora truth: whereas that which I 
confeffe is this, that Somers was bovnd prentifeto Thomas Porter, and the 


very placing of my confeffionin the middeft of thefe wordes doth 


ymply as much, an {not that he was bound to him foure cr 


weckes after be came fron M: Brackibucyts: which knew to be 


e 

4 

| 

h 

f 

| | | 


ADETECTION OF S.“HARSNETS 
But fo let chat.goe: the and Som:rs in thele and the words 
lowing betore mentioned haue vttered 3. vatruthes, cuch asmany |. 
asthere be feuerall! points deliuered: For firlt belides that Som. was 
about 6, weekes with Porter betore he was bound, as Porzer and his 
wife are ready to witneile, he was (as | oiter.allo to proue ) aiter he - 
came from M. Brackenbury at his mothers houle in Nostengham tilt 
lick tor certaitie weekes, after in health betore he went to sorter, In 
the whole as I coniecture by that which tolloweth, about halta yeare | 
before he was bound prentife, 2. ( as fhortly we thali heare ) beinge 
Brackcnburyes bay, he remayned at Bell hallinthe County of 
fro the featt of Peuticoff in the yeare 9 1.vnuil the fealt of Michael 
e Archangei & from thence he went to his maitters houte at Holme 
not far from Newark vppon Trent: where alfo he remayned for a fea 
fon, befides the time he was M, Brackenbaryes boy betore he came to 
Bell hall, which as I thmke was about a yeare, This Som. calleth /ttle 
aboue 4 quarter , and becaule he had not lyed heere enough, the vy. 
-addeth sf long. 3 Somers being taught by M.Grayes ichoolemaitter 
and not ableasit fhould feeme to imdure the correction which was 
due vnto him, ranaway from M. Grayes home to Nottingham, wher 
likewife he continued a feafon, before he went to M. Brackenburyes, 
but how long I know not. It well mot then be confiffed, but denyed,-ex 
itbe by Somers and the Dijcouerer( who {pare nor to deliuer any: 
thinge for truth be it neuer fo falle ) that be went ( witha ttrayghte 
foote ) fin Maier Grayes to dwell with M. Brackenbury. we haue’ 
heard before, that the Dic. bis premiffes beyng true, yet that heinter= 
reth vpon them is falfe, viz. that it ismor yet.7. yeares fince Somers’ 
dwelt with M. Gray: how much more then the premifles being falle? 
{o that both conclufion and premifles be falfe and deceitfull, like to 
the authors and inuentors of them. 
Andwhere the Difcouerer vpon occafion of thefe wordes: of 
miyne in my -Zpologye: Somers was gone from M.Grays 5. yeares before 
onr pretended meeting, hath thefe wordes: If M. Darrell meane theyr 
firft meeting at Abby, itis a palpable vntruth, to fay, that Somers was 
gone from M. Grayes fine yeares before that time: ‘bbe vaderftand theire 
Lalt mecting in the parke, he was gone indeede from M. Graycs aboue three: 
“graves before that time, but not fyue: 
He remember, that I vfed thofe wordes for the conuyn- 
cing of the acculation then layde out in fundry articles againit mé, 
wherein our firit meeting was faide to be about 6. yeares now palt, 
and that ! truft would proue ng vntruth, if Ifhould be put to my tri . 
ail 


\ 


4 
Pa 
. 
+ 
bist 
| ry. 
é 
+? 
Jeg 
t 4 
| 
te 
+ 
tal 
big 
af 
i} 
| 
Bina 
5 
| 
7 
| 


all: and not of the accufation now in prynt, wherein our arquaintice 
is {tretched about two yeares further, which is as much the Dyfc, as 


Som. accujation, and a miierable compound, as 1 may fay- 2; Admit - 


I had bene mi{-intormed, it had bene a tault in them trom whomel 


receaued that information, and an other in me to {pteadit abroade, - 


(although with no purpofe of printing it ) yet nothing auayleabie to 
proueme guiltyot teaching So. to counterieyt. | 
- And whereas Somers iaith in his acculation, that dwellinge at Ad. 
Grayes at Langley abbey, he came from thence to me at Ajbby de la xouch 
( being foure or fywe myles diftant-) vpon forme occafyon, where 1 taught 
him to counterteyt, and that fundry times as appeareth by page 82. 
wherevpon it is to be intended that I dwelt then at A/bay, asi haue 
for diuers yeares: this alfo ( itis euident ) ts talle, in that he was gone 
from M, Grayes before I came to dwell at 4/bby. for trom thence he 
went about Io, yeares paft, and it was but 7. yeares vpon the feafte 
day of S, Mychaell the archaungell laft (1 meane Anno 99, )fynce I 
went to. ¢/bby: fo he was gone about 3. yeares betore 4 came thither 
or indeede euer {awe Ajhby. This vrged by me heeretofore inmy 
Apollogy, the Difc. femeth to conuince in thefe words following, 
Difcouerer. 

Somers affirmeth (faith Darrell) that when he repayred to met) be 


taught, he came from one M. Grayes of Langley, with whome he faith he re: Po 


then dwelt, to Afbhy where I then dwelt, as he affirmeth: and in a parke. 
there we met. In which wordes there are foure wntrutbes. Faft, Som. doth 
not that ever he repayred ynto him to be taught, but that beingewih 
him he was taught by 
VWhether Somers as is pretended came to me at 4/bby with 
intent to be tanght and to that ende, or no, it mattereth not, for the © 
Gueftion is, whither euer we met at whither he was taught 
by me or no. Now andagainft this meeting and teaching at -4/bdy,_ 
both in my Apologye & here I bend my felfe,and thus 1 reafon:He 


was gone from M. Grayes before I came to Afbby, & whi leg Fedwelt ° 
at 4/bby heremayned notat M. Grays: Itcannot therfore be that 


Som. dwelling with M. Gray cameto me dwelling ome foure or fy ue 


myles diftant at 4/bby as he affirmeth. And where the Difco. trifleth 
about the ende Somers fer before himfette in comming vnto. me, fure- ~ 


ly if there were any fuch meeting at A/bhy, and teaching thereto cou 
nterfeyt,as Somers and the Difcow-rer pretend, contidering it is layde, 


that * after our acquaintance began arid-agreement about counterfey- 
tine, he met me three ov foure times Abby: one woulde thinke that. _ 


he came to receaue. fomeneweinftrpAion from me, orto haue the 
ould 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
ould renewed: for wherefore elfe came he vnto me? It is not faide ae. 
ny where that I went to him, or fought him out at Langley abbye or 
~+el-where, or yetin Abby, but that he * founde me in an alchoufein 
Ajfbby, and (a)met me three or foure times in Afbby. And againe (b) I 
went to Afbby, and enquiring for Darrell, found bimin ahoufe by the 
feboole ncere the Church-yard. Haning met with him, he walked with me 
into the feldesexc, And againe (c) I tooke Afbby in my way of pur pofe to 
fee 2. Darrell whome I found there: 1s itnow credible that be {houlde 
come thus of purpofe to me at A/bby, being come a3 and feeke af- 
terme, when he hath found me and we met, I prefently fall of teache 
ing him, and he of learning, and yet he come to no {uch ende¢ I: he 
‘had fayde thus of our firft meeting it had bene another matter, but 
toaffirme thathe neuer vepayred vnto me to be taught,had there bene 
any fuch repayring and teaching, muft needes be in the iudgment of 
allmen very yntrue. Yea it is contrary to pag. 84. with 8¢. Thus is 
the Difcoucrer conuinced the fourth tyme by his owne difconery: and 
pretending to fhew my vntruthes is himfelfe fallen into an vntrath, 
were there any truth in my.teaching Somers to counterfeyt, which he 
contendeth for. But let ys proceede to his fecond vntruth, 
Difcouerer. | 
Secondly the tymes of So. repayring to. Darrell were not whilelt be 
. dwelt with. Gray: but afterwardes when he was run away from bis 
mailtey Thomas Porter of Nott. for Somers only layeth to M. Darr. charge 
that on atime when he dwelt at M. Gray he met him the [aid Darrell by 
chance at Afbby, was then by him. an 
| 
Contrary to this are thefe wordes page 82. Al/o the [aide Somers 
afirmeth that after bis former acquaintance begun with M. Darrell and 
while be till remayned with M, Gray he met M. Darveil three or foure 
times in Afbby And continuing his {peach concerning our meetinge 
at Afbby, whiles Somers remayned with M. Grayat Langley abbcy, he 
adceth this further: at other times ![o the [aid M. Darrell did kindelye 
Salute me: and {o proceedeth the Difcomercr (as there appeareth) to 
tion Somers departure from M. Grayes to M. Brackenburyes, & how 
_ fhortly after he was with him, he fell acounterfeyting and pra‘tifing 
thefe feyts of actiuity, which of me he had learned at 4/hby, whiles 
he was at M. Grayes. VVhereby it is playne if the Difcenerer fay tru 
ly page 82. that we met more then one time at whileff Somers 
dwelt at Grayes, which iscontrary to that is heereaffirmed. 
T hus the fift time the Difcoucrer_ is confuted by his difcouer-vés 
and ifhe fpeake the truth page 82. ( otherwife he is to blame to pub- 
) he fpeaketh heere vntruly: and fo in conevn- 


‘ 


= 

~4 


ay 


~ 
- = San 
= 
he 


> 


pag Se. 
paa.d2, 
4. 
6-93- 
i> 82 
| if | 


LYING DISCOVERY, - ~ 
me of an yntruth, he himfelte.is found with an other yntruth, 
Thirdly Somers doth not affirme that M. Davrell dwelt then at Afbe= 
by, when he droe/t at M.Grayes and mett him in Afbby they might meet 
shere togither though M. Darrell did not dwell there. | Pic 
Beit that inthe article layde out in writing again{t me, itis not 


| exprefly faide, that I dwelt then at Afbby, yet conlidering it is fayde 


that he came fundry times to. me'at A/bhy before he went from M. 
Grayes, we haue heard in realon it isto be fo intended, and the fame 


was to be vnderftood, which is all one as ifit had bene exprefled, for 


howfoeuer Somers might meete me by chance at .4/hdy the firft time 
he was ¢ as they fay ) inftructed by me, ( and yet this is very incredi 
ble that we fhould not only ftumble one vpon an other in an alehoufe 


but agree fo quickly of our match, and fallfo roundly to our worke 


euen at the firft dafh ) yet that by chance thushe fhould meete me af= 
ter at Afbby three or foure times and at other times alfo before he wente 
from M. Grayes, as is abouelaide, I not dwelling at Afhby but zo. 
myles of and aboue; he alfo dwelling foure or fyu¢myles of, and in 
fubie&tion to an other, is ( almoft ) as vnlikely, as that a blynde man 
fhoulde catch anhare witha taber, as it isin the prouerbe: forit is 
not fayd either by Som, or the Difc, that I appoynted him to meete - 


me at Ajbby, we dwellinge both ofvs elfwhere: for that had bene 
‘as abfurd, confidering the places of our aboades, as prefently willap 


peare. VVe may therefore affure our felues that the reafon why it is 


mentioned fo carefully and purpofely, firft in So. accufation, then in 
the circumftances confirming the fame, that Langley abbcy and Afb pag $0.& $7, 


by were foure or fyue myles diffant, isbecaufe men might there-vppon 


-conieture that I dwelling A/bdy, and he no further of, might well 
-infome probabillity and likelihood meete in A/bby. and that diuers 
times, and in the parke which ftandeth betwene them both: whereas 
had it bene confeffed that I dwelt not there but twenty myles from 
the place, had I fay the accufation bene fo framed, and the place ofmy 
dwelling alfo named, it had bene made thereby 1m all indifferent més 


iudements not only very vnlikely to be true, but alfo incre-dible, as 


may appeare by that which heere followeth, 


“Tam ableto proue by amtultitude of witneffes that from the 


time eft the Vniuerfity of Cambridge which is about eightene years 


paft, vntill wentto A/bby, I dwelreither at M.n/feild in Sheerrood, 


_ or Bulwell avillage three myles diftant from Nott. faue that I was at 


London a ftudent of the common lawes of this land, almofte a yeare, 
which was about fifreene yeares:palt,: now Langley abbey with thele 


tivo townes are north-wardes from Afbby and the grouindes belong- 
ing to the Abbey, M, Grayes demeaneslyevery neare the Figh way 


from 


pag93, waa 


£ 
4 
‘ 
= ~ 
> 
te 
; 
« 


A DETECTION. OF S. HARSNETS 
frora both the fayd townes to 4/bby,the wayes meeting thirteene of 
stourtcene myles before you come at Ajbdy, lot.sat trom which of 
places'locuer of my aboade I went, (‘as from the one of them I 
iti dwelt not at Ajbby ) [mutt necues palfleby M. Grays nouf 
suwhece: So, dwelling was; when was of A(bby4. or 5. myles, 
zowhach confidered, who can be io grotle as once to ynvagine that we 
would appomt and thatfondry tinies,Zjbby to be the place wherein 
» Bocon.uit and doe our tricks: a maa would thinke, that had Sy, and I 
» Metas he aTirmerh, loms parte of the grounds belonging to Langley 
(there being elpecially trees & bathes, as well as in 4(bby park) 
«ad bene fater and more for our eae: forfo much laboure beltowed 
aa-vayne might I ac leat haue faued. Contidering alfo it is {aide that 
2 we metin .4/b4y towne, and fo in the uiew of others and that often, 
wherein mvit needesbe great daunger lealt one day it fhould make 
to the deferying of vsana * bring vs 62th in danger of banging: 
owas the moit vameete place of a thoufand we might haue agreed vpo 
mads of. moftrrue the Difc. iaith, that dwelt noe 
at A/bby, ( bacindede at Maz/feild) when So. dwelte at M. Grayes, 
| neither will any man deny, bucthat we might bane mett there tovither 
| did nat then dwell there: bat that the accufation was thus fra- 
| med againit me at the firlt (according to which I framed my Apolozy 
48 as failz,as this is true,what fault then was committed by me: herein 
imyApolocie? yet if we will beleue the Dijc.when he {peaketh vn tru 
lysby huis faving it may be gathered that | did dwel at [bby whe Som: 
(dwelt at M,Grayes:for he reckoning page 94. & 95. how long it was 
trom the time that Som. went from M.Grayesthath thele words: [tis | 
“not yet 7.yeareslince Som.dwele with M. Gray:& reckoning on theo 
therfid in the pag following, how long Udwelt at Ajboy,he vifeth thele 
words: which ycares being layd togither,doe amount ta aboue eight yeares 
» aud a halfe. Yt tole two {peaches or accounts of his be true, (which | 
vnder colour of truth he publifheth ta the world)by the hisowne 
teftimony when Somers dwelt at M: Grayes, Ldwelt at Abby, and 
( therfore he mieht well haue Jer this third yneruth of mine alane.And 
this is the fixe tume the D:/conerer is convinced by his difcouery. How - 
{yeuer it be wherher I then dwelt thire or not there( as it greatly mat 
-ereth not) the Dic, is eaken in an other vntruth and contradi-tion, 
yeain the verye fameleafe, a3 by his difcomcry is turcher difcouered 
Sumersfalfhoodand his owne, 
Fourthbywhercas 1. Dar. faith(if he meane plainlic,) that So. affirm- 
th theive mecting.in the parke to hase bene whilfie be dwelt at M1. Grayzs: 
beds therin oveatly decancd, For thive {aide meeting there was little abone 


| 
ght 
3 
he 
q rx 
bia 
‘ 
; $i: 
‘ 4 | 
= 
H 
pe 
} 
li 
| i | 
ita: 
og 
pis 
| 
Bink» 


— 


LYING DISCOVERY... 


aycare before bis pretended dilpoffelfion at Nortingham, 
-  Ivisfaid page 80. that when we were fir acquaynted and agtee 
edof this match; whieh is fuppofed to be diuers yeares before the Jat 
"ter meeting here {poken of, Lacted his tricks ynto him, Now this mee 
-ting Leuer tooke to be ment in 4/bby parke.Butfeeing wemett mot 
there then, as the truth is: and the Di/c. himfelfe contefleth, and yee: 
_notwithitanding met then fomewhere, as the Dic. and So, affirme, 
- Idefire them both to bethinke them and agree of the place, where I 
- taught and he learned at ourfift acquaintance,and to difcouer that in 
the-next difcouery, for the better ftrengthening of their wreecthed-Sc 
milerable-accufation: forin parke we heare it was not, and'no 
‘other place of our'meeting hath hitherto, bene named, the -4lehonfe 
and {bby ftreetes excepted, in neither of which places it is cleare 
by theire owne.wordes page 8 . that I ated not his tricks vnto him. 
VVhere I affirme in my apologye,that st 1 but 6, yeares fence 1 


went to. Afbbie, the Difc, indeuoreth to perlwade the world that when 
~he publifhed*his dj/couerie it was about 10, yeares: and this 


ther witruth ¢ forfooth’) of mine. His words be thele: 
| If the information ginen be true, he doth herein forgett bimJelfe. For 
reported that be diwtle one Perrincs boule in Albby about ane ycave (faith he)your 
one Hollandes about 5. yeares,and lafily William Swin- 
fons about a-yeare and abalfe: which being layd togither, do? there were any | 
about eight yeares and a balfe. wherevnto ( if M. Darrell doe not fiill con- a) ae 
tinue his family there, but bath dwelt fince a year or tw at Nottingbam) p cual om 
that time alfofince he departed thence, may alfobe added, . confcience, ie _| 


(faith be )that dwelt but by whome Sir 


is this reported, or is it {imply your owne forged deuifes That 
_ the report and information of my dwelling eight yeares cx 4 balfe at Affe 

by (if there were any fuch ) is veterly falfe,yea in the Dz/comcrers own 
-_conicience; it may appeare by that which heere followeth.. : 


Fwent to dwell at. abby can ealily and {ufficiencly proue) 
vpon the feaft day of Saint Mychaell tharchangell 92. and my Apolo— 
‘gy I madefince my departure from A/bby about the fame time of the 
_-yeare 99/How is it then poffible, that I fhould. divell there 8. yeares 
a halfe“and that herein I faid truly inmy4pology the Difcomerer 
himfelfe cannot be ignorant: for pagec4. hethaketh mention: of a 
te{timoniall from Nottingham ( he-fhouldshaue added alfo.from Manf 
foldcand Bulwell.for the inhabitants of thefe three townes ioyned to 
2) and of an other from 


"gether in one and the felfe fame teftimonyall 


= 
~ 
4 
‘ - 
‘ 
-* 
‘ 
\ 
° 
4 


- 


Afbby, haningfomerobi dames ofthe cheifi ofthdferownes 
bed, forthe witnelling. of.miy aod behauiourduring the fpace ofiny'| 
<wbyhisfole! abpade ba syasabout.46,. yeares, which with: 
when other writings the By of London * iniuridufly: tooke away frorn\ 

emifioners thold being prifoner inthe And inthe 
certify that for the {pace almof} of fixe yeares together; duringe which: 
time he hath dwels beere in Afhby he bath ined among vs-in very good 
"porte, behauing limfelfeencry way as became his profeffion;- and the gofpel - 
of Chyiff, And this they offer (.being:aboue 30. m:nomber’):to tefti= 
fy further, if it thall pleafe authority to callthem therevnto. Nowe if’ 
“my dwelling in Abby (asthe Difc. vpon a:falle 
had bene eight yeares and a halfe, is it credible, that fo many honeft 
inhabitants, purpoling to giue a true teftimonyall of my behauioure 
during all thetime of myne aboade with them; would. haue:diminifh’” 
more then two yeares and a halfe of my -continuance:at fhbye’ 
“feing efpecially they voluntarily offer toteltify that they 


> 


“fered Ynto, vpon their corporall.oathes:,and thatthe thing I defired 
(as I can proue ) was nota teftimonyall conterning my Vahesioara; of 
-. .... butastouching the time of my aboade with them.’ Isnot thisDiftos- 
then ( his owne con{cience witnelling the fame ):a Difcouerers 
feporter, or an informer ofa fhameleffe yntruth? for is itnot fhana® 
Feffe thing that he fhould publifhand make fhewe to. the world, thar: 


yeares in any one houfe of any one particuler mans in A Bat 
may be he had his szformation from William Somers, who hath infore 


of eate credit,{uch as he receaueth before the othes of aboue’ 
‘thirty. why fhould henot then beleiuehim herein(ifhe bethe infor- 
mer )betore the report of aboue 30. others? But let vsheare Somers 
speake in owne perfon, and proceedein his accufation, 

Within 12. or weekes ( as Vthinke) after my acanaintanee 
with. M.Gray placed m: with one Mt, A nthony Brackenbsaye 

to Kecpe ccre-sine filuer conucyes; with whome after Ubadremayned 


om dwel at leat 8. yeares and 4 halfe, himfelfeknowinge ihe 
Is thee information ( wee ) where-vpon he affirs: 
meth this, to be compared for nomber and credit, with the aforefaide: 
information tothe contrary? But I defire to know of the Dije. 
whome he had his information. Surely from none in -4/bby, forthe: 
| ‘Inhabitants generally ofthat towne know that I neither dwelte fixe?” 
yeares nor fixe dayes in 2 houleof Hollands: vea thathe had 
| 4 ‘med him in many other worthy things. and whofe teftimany with.‘ 

| 
| | | 
| 
Bink. 


| 4 in that’ towne, 


pone Grayes in fhire,. and feraant’ with M, Brack 


of thefe aiflruttions that ML Darrell had me. 

to be fickes 1 foamed atthe mouth: I fpemeble | 
shough L bad ane [a by the’ Fe of 1 did 


as well, as could, fuch fats bad ronldime® that bios 


Katheryne Wright did How ‘best sts st 


that time my ¥ForM. Br ackenbyrie and 4. Randall Barton: 
bis brother, beine ver ily perfwaded that I was but a counterfeyt, that’ 
I had difemble da all ihat Thad done; I was turnedoyt of foun were 

home to Nottingham to my mother: wath whome' after I had remayned 


4 


tould vs how and what I taught him. 

~~ our firft greeting, and now he telleth how sd where he putt a 

prathfe ‘fundey of thefe infiruction’; with the ill: fuccefle which: followed’ 
vpor that his forwardnes, in thathe would be doing before he was © 
‘his. rafts maifier: made him I warrant “you take timeenough 

before he did his feyts the {econd time. That’ this‘s falfe and come: 
out of the. with the former, and ftom the fame author, the: 

diuell. I meane, the fathby of lyes, is hereby manifeft, in that he! was"* 


4 


re in before the’ that he’ ahd T'aré faide 
to “acqaainted togither:- For we hat 


heard befor¢ out af page 78. that we became acquanted abate 


\1'592, and out of page 79. about fine or fixe yeares pa before 
‘98, Now Tean by oath prowe that from thé feaft of Penticoaft 
Wilbiim Somers then M Anthony boy, remaytied at the: ” 
mannour/houfe of £ei/hall in the coutity of Pizorn, virillthe fealte’ 
of §. Mychaell tharchangell,and from thence went to his faid maifter 
his houfe-at a towne called Holme.How long before thistime he had 
bene M boyI yetknow not; but that he tan away 
Grays home to Nossinehanrand there continued a time before he’ 

went to.M.. Brackenbury is  certaine. Yt then So: was gotihe from | 
Gray 91. syeal take itinthe ‘yeare9o. if not before, which is 9. or 


10, yeares patt, how couldehe ipoffibly-beM. Grayesboy, and res 


mayning with, him-in hisferuice at: Langley abbey, come to mée from 
except he had retorned to M. Grayes againe after he had bene 
with M. Brackenbury, which is thanifélt ke did nor By page 
and neither So. nor the Dsftouerer evret | And whee he: 


he I think ie his {iill, and 
mAs 


ot 


4 
‘4 
4 
4 
| 
on 4 
& 
‘ = 
. 
3 
| 
| 
<=. 
« 
~ 
| 


af 


- 3 
< 


wet 


pag.83. 


pag.8 4.84. 


with ewo or three for his more fatetye, ani with ma 
Brackenbury vo his {aid mother, aad this was th 


Wordes to mak 
baddealing with himas fallo weth. 


doe well info doing, becaufe that feeing of pis fitts, I might 


went +4 Burton, where J [awe Daclinzs.but perceyning thut a create 
_ winder of people cause likexpife to fee hun, and fearing that [ome of them 
might knowe me, L returned to Afbby, not flaying to fee D arling i: airy 


SH 


wad turned ont wnt the trath is, that. be 
(tran zely hinted, vexedindeede by fathan, I verily thi 
shen poileifed, and thereby a continual trouble to M. Brackenbury), 
2was fromthence feat home to his ayother aid th 
pater, ato. 


ting he yled, and the manner of his ont of eraice, 4 Hus 
for aniwer to the firlt patt of Samzrs acca ation, conteyninge oure 
firft acqaayntance and. agreement about counterfeyting: wherein A 
«ther be diuers other abfurd thiigs( which tor brewity faxe & pareli! Or 
that they are vaworthy the anivernag Lom yt) this is one, chat 


ck$ for his ber. 


tioning my téachins of hin,-atd actiagof cercaine tri 


ter in{truction, we heare noi of where this fhould be 
formed: for the Difcouerer telleth vs that our mectinge in 4, 
parke was not till aboue 3. yeares aiter this, and other place is neither 
sheere nor ellwhere named. This dealitg is much like to his, that ac 
cufing one before the iudgmen {eat of robbery, naeth not aay plag 
where hé thouldbe robbed, But let vs proceede to gar third pret en, 
ded meeting, for the fecond meeting which is faide to be vppon 
running from bis maifter and in his way going to conteingsh 
only a few wordes betwixt vs concerning: counter teynug, without ae 
forel wil omytit. Vhere:firlt wil fet downs the Difcawerer hig 
omakea way therevnta, & then So. his pwac, 

his [econd running from bis. maifter, and after he had: Temaye 
ned in Effex.a good part of a yeare, tithe was weary, be returning homes 
wards azaine towards Nottingham with better hope thea befareyto 
bis yeares sthoyght it conuenient in his bomewards to take Afbby it 


A 


bis way, of purpole ta.fec M. Darrell, he found there as be faith 


Vpon my comming at that time to 2. Darrell, he afkedme where I 


had benc:.whither Iwas goinge, and whether L bad attempted .to 
any of bis. dp wbome I anfwcred According. te bis queftions: 


that I had no comucnient time, otherwilfe then when I mas alone any 
of thofe things: then he tould mee many things of the bay of. Burton. wher 
locwing my felfeto haue defire to poe and fee him, M. Dar. faid 


the better leayne to.dae. theme my felfe afterwards: being thus. incouragedst 


» 
| 
3 
| 
| 
7 
| 
| 
| 
| 
. 


a 


fur thevea[on Left which M. Darrell nos-well appreming, {aid 


‘that Lintght wll imouch haue fiaid to bane feene fome of them, becaufe 
was not tkely that any sherc bould hate knowne me: | hen vpon feme fur 
occafion of [peaches betwixt vs; M, Darrell deliuered me in wrt 
ine, she partusuler fitts, which the faid Vhomas Darling lately bad, and 
did atl the moff of them bimfelfe before me, we two being in the parke toge 
gher alone, by Ajbby. As thas time alfo M. Davreil delinered mee 
writing, certaine fiones and ceftsves, which were to be vfed, be faid, to [ig 


fondyy kindes of finnes: which geftures be did- likewife bim|elfe tx 


the place before mentioned. Then tolloweth the acting of certayne 
feates on his part:and after thathe thus procedeth, Thefe things thus 8 


tould M. Darrell that ¥ment to returncto coulde gett my 
Selfereleafed from my maiffer, and he approuing my purpofe thevin, fayde 


shat when the time ferued 1 might well put all she former things in practife 


| there with good effec?: and that in fo doing he doubted not, to procure mee 
arelea{ from my maifter.He al{o tould mse,that be hauing a fifter in law ie 
Not, on Miftris Wallys I could no foner name ber whi'\ foould be thought — 
be poffeffed, but that prefetly, co the rather by bis {sfters meaes he foonld 
be fent for to come vnto me.co jo we departed. And thus farSo.{quoth the 
for the profe of all she former particulers,wherwith Darr. # charged 


Darrell, | 


_ Asin the two former ( pretended ) meetings, fo in this thirde, — 
meither Som, nor the Di(c.:doe tellvsin what yeare of the Lorde, or 
of the Queene we met, which I defire'the Reader to obferue. They __ 

not belike what yeare to name, leaft thereby they fhould 

_aduantage themfelues. Before we heard of no place wherel fhoulde _ 

-giue thefe worthy inftructions: neither then; nornow doeweheare — 

of the certaine time wherin this fhould be done: which dealing is like 

tohis that accufing one to haue robbed him, can neither name place 

_ wherehe robbed him, nor the time when: which accufation if it (ho- 

wld be'receaued, as it is far from any Iudge, fo it woulde peraduen- 

- ture troubleone were he neuer fo innocent, to cleare himfelfe there- 

ef, But as before out ofthe Difc. and Ss wordes, vttered elfwhere 

and to an other ende, I'haue, will they nill they, founde out aboute 
what time ourfirft pretended meeting and acquaintance fhoulde be- 

- gin, though not the 1uft time, and thereby cleared my felfe, & fhews 
ed the falfhood of his accufation, even fo I truft to doe heere. In the 
pace before Viz. 83. it is faide that the fecomed time Somers rann from 
bis maifter, was about a yeare and a balfe before he fell to bis prattifes ‘at 


Nottingham: and heere it is faide, that thes bis [econd running and 


Fi 


bis fits. At my comming back to MD arrell be demaunded of tite 
whither bad feene the boy in'any of lis fitter G an{wored that Thad mas 


| 
| 
| 
| 
q 


_ADETECTION ‘Of’ S;HARSNETS 
after he hadremaynedin acaod part of a yearey we met in Aybbyr 
ake in his return from Efjex to Nottingham. Now to:his laid practsfes: 
he fell at Nots. in O&tober -4nno 97. {o that by So. and the Dife. faye 
ing, this our meeting in the parke was in the yeare 96. And this the: 
Difc. page 94. ( though to an other ende ).confeffeth, faying: There 
meeting 1n the parke was little aboue before his pretended 
fion at Nottingham: but this his di{pof}?{fion pretended (as he tearmeta 
it) wasvpon the 7.of Nouember 97. therefore this our meetinge: 
mutt be ( if there were any fuch ) by the Difconereis owne confeflyom:. 
in or about October.96, which potlibly cannot be fo: for that at this. 
faide meeting So, faith that I ould him many thines of the boy of Burtox'. 
and aduifed himto coe and[ee him, wherevppon he went to Burton, and 
(awe Thomas Darling &c. astis aforelaide: than | delinered vnto hin sw: 
writing the particuler fitts which the [aide Darling lately had ore. now. 
thefe things cannot poflibly be true, ( and fo the accufation is notori_ 
oufly falfe ) becaufe Darling wasnat at that time poffefled, but difpof 
fefled, and deliuered from fathan andhis vexation, aboute halfe a 
yeare before this time, anda yeareand ahalfe before Somers difpofl- 


; 


effion as in the begining of his fift booke is made manifeft. 


Onc faith he)Thomas Darling dwelling at Burtonypon Trent, 6¢ 
gining to be fickin February 1.595. did afterwards take vpon him to dif= 
Semble cevtaine tricks: wherein continuing till the wecke before Whitfon- 
syde following, be was deemed by M Darrell to be poffiffed, and the next 
Gay after ( asst +3 pretended) was From which time he conts- 
nued well, by the yh of about eight dayes, and.then bemme at the {choole 
be fell againe to certaine tricks aud perfeueredin them by flarts two dayer 
whileft st was pretended that fathan fought to repel him. But [yace he 
hath left thofe pracisfes. This appeareth allo by the firft and fecond pas. 
ges of his booke. | 2 
If Darling were recovered and well, ‘fo continuing ( or lefte bis, 
praciifes ) at the time the Difc.mentioneth, as the truth is, and Som... 
difpoffefled ypon the 7. of Noucmber 97. how canthat which is heere . 
reported be true? Sothat the D//c,hath aeaine in his Difcouery difce 
ucred my innocency, and the falfhood of himfelfe and Sa accufation. . 
And this is the feauenth tyme. the Difcoucrer is conuynced by his. 
__ Mereouer where the Dz/c..and Som: affirme, that in his reterne 
to Notungham, after his fecondyunnine from bis maifter, cr a little aboue 
ayeare before his pretended diff poll wee mett in Ajbby parke and 
that thereI taught him: Iam able and offer to prooue by fuadrve 
| witnefles 


; 
é 


‘ 


7 
é 
4 
f 
| 
| 
ig 
«972.265. 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Pe 
| 
| 
if 
| 
| 
i 
i; 
i 
| 
j 
‘git 


wittieffes, that So, after his fecond vagary or running away from his’ 
maifter, was returned againe to Nott. to his fayd maifter and there. 


continued with him aboue two yeares and a quarter before his difpof 
fe(fion. How can the then or accufation be true. 


And wheras he faith, that I deduered unto him in writing the para 


giculer fits which Darling ( then ) had, and againe, that I delisered vnta 


in writing certaine and geltures, I demaund whatis become 
of this writing,and why myne own hand isnot brought forth again{t 
me. It may be that Som. tare it in peeces after firfthe had written the 
{ame ina Sententia Pueriles, ashe didby thewritinghehad at our pag 82, 
firft meeting, and hath lofte this booke alfo with the other. O that 
thele things be achnodum puerilia, and muft needes {mell (& be laugh 
ed at ) in the iudgment of the wife, yea it was well for {ome they wer 
no worle, | 
The Difc.addeth: And thus far Som. for the proofe of all the former 


particulars, wherewith M. Darrell is charged, proof fure but. 


futable to the reft, Imaruaile that the Difc. isnot afhamed, to acco- 

unt So, teftimony 4 proofe, and much more to produce his teftimony re 
fo oft, I thinke (2) 40. times at the leaft, and for the prouinge of fo 

many feuerall things as he doth: he being a notorious lyar, a periured | 
perfon, in a word as infamous and vile a youth as Jiueth I thinke this 

daye vpon the face of the earth , Notwithftandinge faith the Difco- 

ucrer. (2) the confeffion of Som. ts of greate moment, And is it {o 
VVhy So. hath faid there #5 90 (r) ged, & vied theie wordes, I am god what then? yes 


and (a) Chrift, as is depofed: Bluth then and be afhamed ( O thou Phy Meuldnoe = 


man ) of thofe fpeaches. Befides, Som. hath faid and fworne that he be admitted a- 


did not counterfeyt. If his wordes be of fuch credit with the gaint Beret, 


fome few others(for with few or none that are wile and godly [hope 
they benot ) why fhould not his wordes fealed at other tymes with 
oathes and execrations be of like vallewe And why. doth the Difco, 
or any other rather beleeue So. affirming he counterfeyted, then de- 


-nying the fame? fring, bebe asoft denyed, as affirmed 
that he counterfeyted, an 


| that he hath alfo varyed fomuch with that" 
double and. falfe tongue of his, euen 4. times, and therefore is not to © 

be beleeued in any thing he faith, nor his teftimo: y to be admitted ps 87, 
in any court of record. Yea but faith the Difc. Som. confeffion es not fo 

bare as M. Darrell pretendeth, but is frengthened with many carcumilan- 

ces ( d:pofed by many ) as doe argue the fame in all likelyhood to be true, 

yea many of them togither with the bayes oath, are very pregnant proofes 
th:reof, page 106, And thufmuch concerning the accufation, now we 

to the circumftances soniyrminge (asis pretended ) 


\ 


7 
>. 
: *, 
an 


She firkt circum 
§=Kance alleadg- 
edtoconiirme 


$o. accufation 


2.circum- 
ftauce 

3.circum- 
ftince. 
6pag-375 
«the 4. &.§.cire 
Sumit ance. 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


confefed by M. Gray and Miffrefje Gray, and byM. Dae 
bimfelfe, that So. develt with M. Gray at Lanzley, within 4. or 5. miles 
of. Ajbby de la xouch: and did run on raids as Mary Houlden faith, 
2..Mé. Darrell pearing So. defcribe the {cituation of Afbby, did thereby 
well perceane, that he had bene at Ajbhy, So as there no smpedsment im 
shat rc/pe# why be might not mecte M. Darreel there as 13 depofed. ; 
3. As zs allo confeffed to be true, that Se. going to dwell with M. Brack, 
enbip-y left certaine bookes at M. Grayes. 
_ Likewife that Som. was bound a prentife with Thom.Porter and 
that he ranne twife from him 1s acknowledged to be true by M. Dar. hime 
felfe. and fo the [aid So, bad fufficient opportunity to goe to Afbby, and te 

salke with M. Dar. at [uch times, as vpon his cath be hath deliwed, 
- Darrell, | 
By thefe and fuch like circumftances, had Somers charged any 


_ other with teaching him, the fame perfon might as well ( and indeed 


as truly) be proued guilty thereof as I, For inftance: Admit So. had 
accufed S, Har{net infteade of I. Dar. and that the accufation were | 
thus: About eight yeares paft I dwelling at Langley Abbey with M, 
Tho. Graye and going on errands now to -4/bby a market town there 
by, now to Loughorrow an other , mett onatime one M. Ha{net at 
4/bby, and there the faid M. me to counterfeyte 
to be poffeffed with the diuell, which he faid! ealily learne, Se 
he would teach me: promifing me that if therein I would be ruled by 
him he would take me into his owne feruice, and‘ maintain me while 
liued.herevpon we went into A/bby parke , andbeing there M. Ha 
7/net the better to teach me did aét diuers tricks, for gnafhinge with 
his teeth, he knocked his own teeth togither divers tines, for fomig, - 
he rolled his tongue in his mouth, and then put out fome little fpittlé _ 
betwixt his lippes, and faid that I might foone learne to doe it better, 
by rolling a {tone in my month, but {pecially ifIcoulde gett alittle 
foape to vie at {uch times: ( Sc. as followeth page 81.) and becaufe . 
we were to depart farr one from an other for my better remembrance 
he gaue me directions in writing, charginge me to make away the — 
writing, which I did after I hadwrit the famein a Sententie Pueriles, 
which booke I left at M: Grayes. Now about 12. or 13. weekes(as | 
I thinke ) after my firft acquaintagce with M. Harfnet: M. Gray pla- 
ced me with one M. Anthony Brackenburyto keepe certaine fyluer | 
hayred connyes: with whom after E had remayned about fix or feaué 
weekes, I began to putin pratifefundry of thofe inftru&tions that 
M. Hai/net had giuen me,&c, as before we haue heard out of page 
83. Heerevpon being turned out of feruice I went home to Nis 
4m 


f 


| 
% 
| 
2: 
elt? 
} : 
‘ 
i 
| 
ba oF 
bik 
| 
Hi 
- 
4 P 
? 
ij 
| 


‘ 


lism & was bound prentice firft to Tho.Porter of Nostandafterwithe i 
Barber in Eaj/t Smythferld in London: where beingel repayred toM. 
Har/uct at his chamber in the 2, ot Londons houle, made knowne 

to him my yllfucceffe: who tould me that he muft further infuse  . 

me, atid that he might the more fafely and conueniently doe it, hee 

faid he would procure his Lord to agree with my maifterformyyeas 5 
res, and to receaue me into his houle. aand afterIl fhouldbehisman, 
as he had before promifed me, and then he woulde teach meein his Bilt 


chamber: and accordingly he did fo, 
| Now if S. H.arfnet thall deny this, and fay that here is nothinge 
But Sv. bare acculation: I will out ofhis mouth returneagain{t hime 
that the accufation 7s not fo bare as he pretendeth, but uw firengthened with 
civcumftances as doe argue the (ame in all likelihood to be true: yea 
bayde togither with fome other that might be added, are pregnant proofes: 
shereof: tor firft it is manifeft that So. dwelt with M. Gray, S did rag. 
on errands as Mary Holden faith. 2. Som. hath bene at Ajbdy: So as. 
tliere isno ympediment in this refpeét why he might not meete Sa. 
Hai net there, ashe chargeth him. 3. So. dwelt with 24. Brackenbury 
4. Som. going to dwell with 24. Brackenbury left certaine bookes at 
M. Grayes. 5. So. being at M, Brackenburyes did counterfeyt, was. 
therefore turned out of feruice, as is faid page 81. 6. So. was bounde » 
prentife with 7o.Porter,and did goe after to London,7.beingithere he 
was bound prentice with a barber in Eaft-Smythfeild. 8. He was front 
thence receaued by the B.of London into his houfe,agreeing with hig 
maifter for his yeares, and it may well be this wasby S. H. procures 
ment. 9, being in the B. houfe So. was often in pyar{net his chame 
ber, and they two alone. 10, So. was S. Harfnets man, and had maine . 
tenance from him. Thefixe firft of thefe circumftancesthe Difc. tel= - 
feth vs is true, and the foure laft he knoweth to be true: and yet the 
accufation I truft he will fay is falfe. The circumftances then of an ace 
eufatian ( vayne and tryfling ones I meane as bethefe ) may betrue,. 
and the accufation very falfe. Notwithftanding then the truth of the 
Difc, circumftances precedent and fubfequent, yet the acculation of 
my teaching of Somers to counterfeyt, may be ( and indeede is ) moftno — 
torioufly falfe, And heereby is difcouered the vanitye and lightueffe _ 
of the Diftouerers filly Se fottith circumffances, which may afweliferue 
for the appeaching ofhimfelfe or any other, asofme againftwhome = 
they are brought. Sothat I fhall not neede to {pend anv more tiMe pag 88. 
mm refuting that which refuteth it felfin the iudgment of the wile. 


ance 
Difcouerer. tance, 


= 6. Soners prathifed at M. Brackenburyes fits, ashe hat af 
wards as Nottingham, wherevpon Brackenbury did difch him 
Vi | 


LYING DISCOVERY... @. 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 

From his fernice, as Som. hath affirmed. 
Darrell. 


‘ This is anfwered before. 2.50. fitts at Nott, were not counter 
feyted but done by the diuell: ergo So. counterteyted noi at M. Bras | 
ckenburies, but was then pofleffed, for it is faide, that hss fitts at shea 

two places were alske. 


the D1}couerer. 
So. in his fits at Nott. and before 24. Dar. comming thither, did 
game bim the aid Dar.dincr{e times. 
Darrell. 


___ deny not but that he named me, before I was the fecond time 
for by the letter: but the1)s/c, muft proue that he named 
ene before the firlt fending for me, when to one of the letters for my 
sepayre to So. {ft Wallys my filter in lawe fubfcribed her name, 
and that the faid naming of me, was the occafion of my fending for. 
otherwife this naming me ftrengtheneth not So. accufation as is plain 
by page 86. mentioned before in the very laft words of So. accufatio 
And aa as hitherto the Dz/c. hath not done, fo neither fhall he be 
able to performe: as may appeare by that I heeretofore haue reported 
concerning the true occafion of my going to Som, which I can eafilye 

~proue. 
ind But admit it were otherwife then I affirme, yet feing it was noe 
Som. but the diuellby bis tongue that named me, it argueth rather 
the fubtlety of the diuell at that time laying the foundation of that by 

ilding he fince hath erected, then my te aching him to counterfeyt. 
Difcouerer. 
8.M.Darell tould Robert Cooper the boyes fatber in that sf he 
would carefully looke to Somers, he fbould not loofe a penny by him: which 
forteth with that depofed by Somers: How if he would be ruled by M.Dar- 
he [bould not want: And the fasour 1s increafed by that which M.DarreB 
bim|{clfe confeffeth. viz. that be was a meanes with forse others to bane a 
colle&ion made for the veleife of the faid Cooper, bwt indeede thre were 


Iwoe. 
| Darrell. 
Beit that Cooper hauethus depofed, for weheare not what hee 
Bath depofed. only the Ds/c. faith fo, Be it alfo graunted that Thaue 
eonfeficd as is heere faide, thogh itbe otherwife: why might I not 
baue vied words to this effect to Cooper, and what had I therein fayd 
All befeeming mee? Confidering the poverty of Cooper and the greate 
eharge, and continual] hindrance Somers was tohim and his familye” 
‘day and night for fome weekes, beefides the great trouble and dif- | 
quictnes he put him and his vnto, It is true there were two colle“ti- 


‘ 


| 
4 
Li i 
| $24. 9 
| ‘ghee 3 
» 
a > 
ii 
| 
7 
Bina 
Bias 


LYING DISCOVERY, 37 
ens, but neither of them in the name of Somersburofthe paore: The 
firft of them was at the priuate faft ‘helde at Som. difpofleifion: The 
fecond at a publique faft kept at Nott. Thefe collections all mé I tru 
will allow of. But wasthe monney at thefe times collected gyuen to 
Somers or not a penny: or yet was all or moft of it giuen forhis re- 
leife to Cooper his father inlawe” nothing leffe. The monney recea- 
ued at the firft collection vas part of it giulen to the poore of Notting=. 
bam, and part to Thomas Porter So. onthe becaufe of the loffe he had 
fuffered,.and the charge he had bene at through Somers afflition for 
the {pace of aboue a moneth before: as M. Aldred 24. Wilham Lange 
ford with fome others can witneffe. That which was giuen at the {e- 
cond and publique faft was diftributed by the M4awr, whereof fome 
he gaue to the poore of that town, and fome to Cooper, partly becaufe 
of the charge and trouble he had bene at whiles Somers remayned with 
him, —_ for the cloathing of him, who {carfly had any to couer his 
vakednes. And how doth this confirme his accufation, 8& proue that 
{taught him to counterfeyt asthe Difc. affirmeth? The lying boy sr 
faith in his accufation that I promifed him if he would be ruled by mee, paa.81, 
be (hould be able to’maintayne Lim felfe as long as he lined: and again that 
be (bould neuer want whileft he lined: If this were the principall ende of 
bis counterfeyting as is pretended, why ( when he had counterfeited 
and done his feates ) did neyther he demaunde, nor! giue him any 
thing? But let the Dsfc. and Som. fay what they pleafe, for there tone - 
es are their owne, and, they lordes ouer them: the deede fheweth 
that he hath lived and bene farr better maynteyned, fince he faide he 
écunterfeyted, then whiles he did counterfeyt, as the Difc. tearmeth 
his poffeffion,. fo asthe diuell may feeme to haue kept promife with pag,89.& 166s 
him hitherto alluring him thus: thou bad bettcr [ay thou was a counter= “y,. a col 
feyt, and line like a man, then to haue nothinee: for {thou fbalt [ay thon fance. « 
wal? not a counterfeyt, and goe into the cleargyes hand thon fbalt baué noe 


bought out the yeares of bis apprentifbip, proued by my own (a 
feffion, which is thts: gaue my word to Somers bis maifter, that he fbould oni 
she Di/touerste 


hauc 3. fbillings 4. pencetovelcafe bim of his apprentifbip, which after 
atre 


Heere thefe things are to be remembred:1. that Igane my word 
as is heere faid, if So, father in lawe did not (4)pav him by fuchacay 
which he not performing as I thought verily he would: I was in con- 
fence bound to pav, becauf of my promife. 2. I did this & indeed 
cefired that So,might bercleafed ofhis yeares, becaule Tho, 


> 
a 
et 
a 
a 
> 


pag.96.' 


the10. circum 


; 
a 

4 

uk 


the next coile-tion tor the poore 6.s 8.d, of it, defiring me to take 
thac vatil, the next collztion following, and that thea fhouid hawe 


7 
> weer 


mailter was a fidier, which trade of life we all know 1s much abufed...: 
3. Porter bemgbelidesa weauer, had kept him {till ia his feruices: fo - 
that he would ymployed him only to-the trade of weauing. 
all fais was knowne to divers, ant to whatende ic was done: whence. 
it that‘ l paying the afotelaide - the- Main tentmee. at 


the other moytie. And wien that came i had of M. - Fillian Lange 
ford though not all, yet 3.s. 4.d. the other.3.s. 4.d I went without; 
tor that trouble about Sxmers grew then vpoa mee: And this ts all tie 
buying yfed, aifo 1s faid to be the other ead of his cowaterfey- 
ting: be releafed ( quoth So. from my maiter_ according as M. Davee 
bad yomifed m?, did began the courje that M. Darr. bad wilbed mete: 
A likely thing that he who knew !o ready away, %& ofthe: 
two much berter, [ meane to rusnc away bis master, wouide - to” 
that faid end counterfeyt to be poffeit withthe diuell, 2. Itisto be’ 
confidered, what I did for him in this behalfe, when be had performs 


-.-ed the condition on his part: euen that is heere aforelaide, which ™ 


aut nothing, | 
10. Miffrefje Wallys according to™M. Darrells former wordes, did 
fend for M. Dar. to come him. 

| Darrell, 


__ This is anfwered before: where we muft obferue that this circurm 
fiance with the 4, next precedent, haue bene purpofly inferted in the 
acculation,becaule being either in part true, or leming fo to be to the 
ynwile & inconliderat, the accufation it felfe might therby feeme to: 
be true, and from them receaue fome confirmation: whereas were all 
of them moft true, and in the whole as they arenot, yet notwith{ta- 
ding the accufation (as touching the life of it, 1 meane my teachings 

‘him to counterfeyt ) might be moft falfe, as in deede it 1s: which but 
for breuity fake I would here haue made very playn. And thus much 
for anfwver to the circumffances alleadged by the Di(c. for theftreng- 
thening of So. accufation: now followe other circumftances generally. 
arouing (uch a compact, 


ee There are heerewithall befides fee downe by the Difc. certayne 

Rance. «rguinge circumf{tances generally areuime [uch a compaé?:.as firft that I fom 


other of my adberentes at an Inne or Tauerne interteyned him with good 


cheare. 
Being atfupper with diuers preachers at the figne of the caftle, 


Som, 


¢ 


th 
1 
De 
$6 
pas 
ad 
rs 
4 
4 
i 
if 
= 
4 
| | | 
ii 
3 
wi 
. 
‘ ‘ 


~ Somers came in, and one of the company, not my felfe; willed him ta - 
fit downe and to take part with ys, which accordingly he did, As bee © 
fore the would haue the reader imagine that 1 was analehoule 
haunter, fo here a haunter of tauernes,but he hath two certificats ¢o 
_ ¢erning my life and conuerfation, with about 2.00. handes fublcribed, 
- thar telleth him itis otherwile, whereby his finnehereinis made the _ 
Difcoucrer. 
when So. was accufed to bewitched one, M. Dar. dealt with 
the Mazor of Nott, that he micht be bayled, 
It fhall be heereafter fhewed, that this is falfe: But why might & 
not well haue done fo, had I bene then at Nott, as Iwas abfent’teing — 
it is manifeft (as in his place will apeare ) he was innocent of the mur 
ther for which he was imprifoned, and fo hardlye intreated through 
the mallice of fome?And,how doth that conclud the compaé? of coune 
terfeyting betwixt vs two? or what lodgick call you this? a5 
3. while? M. Darrell was at Nottingham he bad{cerets conference 


Darrell. 
~~ T neuer had fpeach with him in priuate yntill about 9, weekesaf- 
ter his difpofleffion, neither is there any thing depofed to the contra os 
ry, (no not by Sa, himfelfe ) arid that wasto my remembrance only = 
once,as I haue depofed,the occafion wherofI can fhew, & vpo-hisfa 33 

in lawe Robert Coopers requeft I did it, But be it. diners times. why 
might I not lawfully fpeake with him apart? I thinke in fome refpeét 
better then others both in regard of his former affliction, and the dan 
get he was in aboue others, and that he was one ouer whofe foule I 
was by my calling to watch. Yfthis be agood circumftaunce againft 
me, it will likewile be of fome ftrength againft fome others in Nott, 
whome I could name, who talked with him apartas well as I,and of- 
ter too,efpecially meeting with the other citcumfiances: as,that they 
knew him, dwelt in the fame towne with him, fo as they sight hase 
Sufficient opportunity to meete togitber,. were oft with him, with many cir= 
cumftances more as {trong ag thefe, obiected againft me, Burl will 
fhew wherein this is defectiue, whereby the weaknes of 
it may yet better-appeare. Yf they which haue depofed to our fecret Gp 
diners conferences had gone a little further, and faid that they harkning + 
~ heard me commend him for doing fuch a trick well, and fuch a feate Bae 
excellently well, fo as my felfe could not haue betteredit, or to fome an 
fuch purpofe; thenhad there binea circumftaunce indeede, euen a 


© 


at 
- 
+ 
} 
> 
~ ~ 


DETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


he did nothinge prefumption, whereypon it might well hane bene preiumed, & pros 

bably concluded that Lhad taught him, fo that So, had (t) dene no- 

ingindeedea- thin; but thathe .mighthaue learned andacted. But take the circum. 

mgerepatient. {tance as itis, of my bare talking with him, and it is of no validity at 

4. So. was fallen at iary with M. Dar. he writ vnto bim thas: 

peg.vo.theg all things that I did were counterfeyt, pray_you let it pap’, for the mare 

yo meddle in it, the more chf{credit it wal be for you:webich doth argue ther 
was [ome pack berwene them, . 


Darrell. 
Theta wasthis, He faid thathe had counterfeyted: I denyed 
and eainfaide the fame, Now in this /ettey Sathan by his inftrument 
did goe about to perfwade me to ceafe to contend again{ft counter- _ 
feyting, thatis, for the Lorde and his worke: and thus the truth is, - 
that haue counterfeyted, and it ts to your difcredit that-you hane bene de= 
ceaued by mee, but much mare difcredit will it be for you, if you meddle 
further in it: gine oner therefore your contending acainft my counterfeiting , 
But fuppofe that So. ment as the Di/..pretendeth, that there had bene 
Some packing betwixt vs concerning counterfeyting, and that he had ex 
prefled his meaninge in playne wordes: the fame had not made mee 
guilty of teaching him, except Somers bare accufation did fuffice ther. 
4 to, and then had the matter bene long fince ont of controuerfy, and 
the Difc. might well haue faued a great deale of labour. And heeréby 
Avdeuidente the way note the wifdome of the D3/c. that will ftrengthen So. accu~ 
fignethacthe fation, by Somers letter, that is (a) Somers by Somers, 2, Let vsheere. 
Obferue, how that notwithftandinge th folly hee fheweth 
pleunfullinhis a ge the extreaine y he 
| proofes. heerein and in the reft of his circumffances, yea generally in all that he 
7 faith throughout all the difcouery, vet alas many by hislyesand very 
fables, haue bene drawne from beleeuing the workes of god, to giue 
eare to his flaunders and foolery, and to iuftifye the wicked, and 
condemne the iuft, which are haynousfynnesbeeforetheLorde. 
weath,18.6.7 Vell it needes be that offenfes come, but wo be to that man (fayth 
: Chrilt) Ly whome the offence commeth, it were better for bim that a mill~ 
flone were hanged about bis neck, and that he were drowned in the depth — 
of the | 


pag-91. The falfhood and vanity of his fift circum ftance of turning my cop 

py 4s touching the witch, pretended by me to bane [ent her [piritt into Som. 
relying only vppon the Di/c. bare report, I for breuiry omit, referr- 
ing the Reader for his fatiffaStion therein to the beginning of the to _- 
fy concerning Somers, 


— 


“ie 


‘ 
WT 
te) 
Tia 
» 22 
33 
| 
q 
: 
4 
+ 
ae 
‘33 
> 
re 
43 
7 
* 
2 
d 
im 
4 
be 
q 
— 
aig 
4 
¢ 4 
he 
= 


- 


OF CHAP.2. & 3. 


dift 


| 
| 
i 
| 
4 
¥ 
| | | 


LYING DISCOVERY, ae 
Difcow. | 
OF M.Darrells prinate divections to So. whilffe be was at Not. with 
him, how be Jbould from time to be hane bimfelfein hus couterfeting: pag.99- 
| ifco. 
In this 2. Chapter So.chargheth me that comming to Not. vpon 
the ¢. of Nouember,the tvo next morninges beinge the 6 and 7. of 
Nouember,I came vnto him and had certaine {peaches with him pri- 
uatlye,as touchinge the afting of his fitts vpon the day of his difpof- - 
feilion, the faid 7 day of Nouember:and alfo what he fhoulde doein © 
his remouall(& vpon the very motion therof)from the houfe where 
he was,to the place where the faft appoynted was held for his difpof- pag.100. 
fing, which Jaft part of his accufation ts fett downe in thefe wordes af- 
ter many other..4nd even fo faid Dar. (the fecond morning being the 
7 of Nowember) the like order fhal be taken thee this morning. Anone 
one fhallbe {ent to fee sf thou be readie: at what time thou [halt (bewe thy 
felfe to be much troubled in thy fitts: vpon frempication wherof,fixe or (euen* 
[hall come to bringe thee vpon there fhoulders, whom thou maifte ercat'ye 
| trouble in thew carriag of thee, by jlvughng with them, as others that were 
pofeljed did:.and as though the dinell had compelled thee fo to doe, being ve= 
ry loth to come to fo godly an exercife. Shortly aftet 1. Darrels departure, 
allthinges were done accordingly. One Langford was [ent to fee sf I were 
readic’ at whofe comming I did make (bewe of my greateft fitsin an 
et manner ,Ther vpon the (aide Lane forde veturning to M1. Darr. by and by — 
feuen came to carrie me, whom (I thinke) very much trouble wher. 
it was cinen out, that I was {o beavie inmy fitts,as feuen was [carfe 
able to carrie me. 


If this accufation were indeede true,who fecth not,how eafiea- 
matter it were by found and’infallible teftimonies to manifeft the 
truth thereof. For as certaine nights and dayes, before my comminge 
to Nott. this pretended counterfeyte had diuers perfons of honeft re 
port abidinge with him, partly by realon of his greuous and lamen- 
table affliction,and.partly to preferue him from deftroying himnfelfe, 
which by asmanye wayes as he could, hee attempted to haue done, 
(which areueth alfo that’he was no counterfcit,but indeed really poff 
elled, for what counterteite, did euer feeke willingly by all meanes to 
murther himfelfe} {o after my comming to Nott.vntill his difpoffeffi- 
on, he had much more company with him then before, both day & 
night,{o that he neuer beinge by himfelfe alone after my comminge, - 
it not poflible that I fhould haue tuch, and fo longe triuate conferée 
with him as is here pretended And if | could not be with him, & con- 
ferr with him in an inuifible manner, how commeth it to pafle that fo 

many 


. 
> 
7 
7 


. ADETECTION OFS. HARSNETS 
many eye witneflesbeing prefent, ther is not one produced to prowe — 
thiserujerence? or did I at my comminge put alltorth of there place 
where he remained, and where we had conference: why then are not 
ome of them produced, fworne and examined to depofe this theire — 
thrultynge out? fythence by the rules and maximes ot the ecclefialti- 
calllawe, by which I ought to haue bene ludged,onus probands tncum 
| bit agenti fine accufanti,and that afore fine accufatore non probante, abe 
foluendus eft reus: Lappeale to all the doctors of the Ciuilllawe, whee 
ther the teftimonye of S».being as him(elfe confefleth a counterfeyt, 
beinge /ocius criminis obieé#i, being avagarant runagate fromhis M, 
_ fhould in this cale be a good teftimonye to proue this priwat conferée 
yea orno. Bur to let theire opinion paffe touchinge this poynt: am 
readie, and able by fundy credible and honeft perfons in whofe com- 
Iremayned thole two morninges, to make good 
,proofe,that I was neither of thefe morninges with Som. at all, neither 
eePted wherein 2lone,nor yet with others (a) If then Somers was neither of thefe two 
one the latter of mornings priuatly by himielfe alone: If alio as wel by fuch perfonsas 
corre 108 were at that time with him beinge nota few, as by fuch perfons with 
theraifembled whom I remained in aplace far diftant from Som.lodging,I be able to 
nagicint Sty om proue,my felfe not to haue bene prefent,but all to gether abfent, fro 
ane. forhis de- the partie with whom this pretended primate conference fhould be:Let 
‘lierancefrom the reader Iudee whether thefe two falfe witnefles Som. I meane & 
— _ the Difc.the one principall the other aceeflary as graund confederats 
and con(pirators again{ft the good name of an Innocent, be not wore 
thely ofall good mento be exploded andhifledat, | 
Yeabut quoththe confefeth [orswhat which 
to the confirmation of this his [econd conference with Somers: For 
beinge depoled he acknowledged,that he fent William Langford that 
morning to take order for the pref ct bringing of So.to Smales houfe,co that 
M. Lanzforde brouzht. him word, that as foone as he {peake of the boyes 


: 


ve 
> 


‘  remouinec, he was prefently caft into afore fit. -Ind againe, in his hiftorie 
tl he hath thefe words: The boy was brought by 6 or 7 Prong men,who had 
all of them-cnough to doc, to bringe him to the next connenient and {eemlye 

Yoome, to theplace of his aboade. 
iB My confeffion tehdeth nothing to the confirmation of any fuch pre 
tended conference:For what though I {ent Langford, that ¥.Lang 


ford did bring me word et: and that he was brought by 6 or 7 doth this 
proue that ypon the 6 and 7 of Nouember in the mornineg,| had {peach 
priuatlye with Somers? marke the Difc:argument. 
Dwell dothe confeffe that thefe and thele thinges were done by 


7 


2 
# 

a 


~ 


f 
4 
4 


sbout 
_ Langford confefleth thefethingestobetrue: 


Naw if this argument hold not againit ford why fhould,it 
_holde againft me? Idenye not that it fell out as ishere faide with Se, 


4 


and deceit he vfeth in fetting downe So.accufation, 
¢ For the preferuinge of {ome from beinge thus be guiled by this 


therefore Darrell had priuate-conferenee with Somers 
counterfeiting which argument if it be good, why then nor this 


~ 


therefore Langford bad priuat conference with Somers thes 


vpon the motion toremone him,and in theremouing of him, but that 
‘ypon the 7 of Nouember 97, ( or yet at any other time) directed 
or aduiled himfoto doe I deny, which faé& beinge thus denyed the 
meth or proueth thus: 5%. did thus and thus, (as appeareth 
_by Darrels owne depofition,and his hiftorie)ergo Dar .inftructed him 
fo to doe. If thisbe a good argumente, itisaverie eafie matter to 
_proue that I haue taught So.to counterfeyte:and had So, accufed the 
di{c.as he hath done me, and he but fent 21.,Langford or fome other 
to fe that he was remoued, left that fhould be to doe when the people 
were aflembled:I could with great facilitie;proue him guiltie of teach 
ing him+to counterfeite. And here we may {ee what the dic. proueth 
or confirmeth by this his worthy confirmation:and how herein(asof- 


ten elfe where) he buifieth himfelfe to proue that whieh is er willbe 
graunted,and omiteth that which is by me.denyed:2.we muftheere - 


vnderftand,that the di/c.knowing thefe things to be true,hath 
ed them among So. lyes,therby hoping to-dazel the eyes of men, and 


deceiue the fimple, or over haltie and vnaduifed reader: who feeing . 


thefe thinges, being agreat part of his accufation to be true,may ther- 
vpon imagine that the reft is likewife true. And this is the maine fal 


deceauour.we mutt knowe, that when one 1s accufed of a matter capt 
tallor ctiminall, to proue the accufed guiltie, it is not fufficient: that 
certaine circumftances or perticulers contayned in the accy{ation be 
‘true: for it isan. eafie matter for him that careth not withthe difeo. 


— how foolith and ridiculous, befides falfe,ithe accufation be, to frame 
fuch an accufation,(admit of high treafon)as fhalbe true in 19.circunt, 


ftances or {euerall pointes of the accufation, and very falfein the 20, 


being the treafonable ator intent it felfe,as may eafily be coniectur- | 


ed by the inftance giuen before concerninge S. Ha (net. Even fot 8 
in 50. whole accufation, and this parte therof, wherin notwithftand- 
ing fundrie circumftances (not materiall) are true, vet that wherof.t 


am accufed,vz.tcaching of him to counterfeite, 18 palpablie falfe,and 
nor yet produced that probablie mizht comfirme the ~~ 


thinge prou 


ad 3 
* 
>. 
."} 


a4 


> 


“trier 


— 


95 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


ame, And thus haue I anfweared the accu,Ztion of Som. or principal 


points therof,concerning my teaching him to counterfeite and tru 
the falfhood of it is made euidente to all men.Let vsnow proceedto. 
the circum|tances, thatis, certaine {peaches of myne, whereby allo the 
difc. will proue that I haue {choled Somers.where by the way we muft 
obferue, that the accufation beinge falfe, (wherof I thinke hardly any 
chriftia that hath read the premiies doth once doubt)no circumftices 
canever make it true. In this refpect it is a thinge needlesto any 
more wordes about them. Yet that my innocencie may be the more. 
manifeft,and left in not anfwering them,fome fhould imagine that! 
werenot able to anfwere, I will fay fomthing to them, but with what 
breuitie I can, Leauing So.who hath fo accuftomed his tongue to it 
ing,that he {earflye vetereth a true worde in all that followeth, to th 
cif{c.to beleiue hislyes: who calleth falfhood truth,’ar d truth falfhod, 
The firft circumftance prouing(as is pretended) my inftructing 
him, is fer downe in thefe wordes. 
| -.Dar.bauing nener feene Som. (as he pretendeth) did affirme, that he 
was certainlye poffeffed by a wicked fpivite, vpon the rude report of a fimple 
man,one Hugh Wilj{on,and vpon a letter receaued by wilfon from bis fifter 
tn law mifivis W allis.This 4.Dar.confeffeth in thefe wordes. Being certifi= 
edin my/fifters letter and by the meffengers further fpeaches, of the manner 
of So. fits:I did [end them worde, that thofe shinges being truche was poffe 
‘effedyand thisI didbeforelfawe Somers, 
VVee muft knowe that other proofe the Di/c, hath not of this his 
eircumftance,then thismy confeflion:and it is apparant that my con 
feflion proueth it not:for in the circumftance it is,that I [aide So. was 
etrtainly poffeffed,and I write vncertainly and yndoubtedly therof, as 
a@Ppeareth by my wordes. And confideringe that in theletter (which 
is fett downe before )there are diuers fignes of pofleflion mentioned, 
and that Hugh Wilfon tolde me further of So.foaming,of his extrao r= 
dinary {trength, caftinge into the fire, with other fignes of fathan his 
pofleffinge man, mentioned in the gofpell, as Ican proue: and that 
where the proper figne or fignes of a thing is,there is the thing figni- 
fyed thereby: why might I not well write I acknowledge 
did¢and what did I therin ill befeeming me? And bow abfurdly doth 
this conclude my mnftru‘tinge of So. to counterfeite? Let the reader 
sy amb the argument, and he will eafilie grope and finde out the 


Difcoucrer 


Darrell faide,that be purposed to haue a faft for 
thas 


| 
| the z.circum 
P2g 
art 9. 
36 
| 
tance 
| 108, 


shat he doubted not of good [wr ce{[e,hy that meanes to procure the boyes dem 
lucraunce, Heerevpon the collecteth as followeth. This M. 
confident bragging that he doubted not of good {ucceffe,as it avgueth his ig 
norance:/o the fame being toyned to hrs rafb credulitie,doth make it proba= 
ble that eyther be had layde bis plotte with the boye before, or els that be 
kacwe very wll,hovwe by his cunninge to drawe one the boy for the ferninge 
of bis turne ashe binfelfe bf, 
Darrell, 
_ VVhat and how great my confidence in this cafe is, and wherev 
on the fame is grounded, appeareth els where, where I treate of the: 
_meanes of difpoffeffion. But marke how the Di/c.argueth thervpon: 
Darrell doubted not of good fucceffc, ergo itis probable that be had plot 
ted before with the boy about.counterferting, or elfe knewe very well ct. 
By this reafon had 24. or 24. Browne, who were writ vnto, and 
good fucceffe a falt beine vfed for bis affirmed: they 
had with or elfe et. Againe if this 
be a good circumftance,& that out of it one may probablie conclude 
as you heare,then.can I tell and proue to the D2/c. who taught the 7. 
in Lancafbire for I am fure he will haue them counterfeites too.Sure 
ly M.More, For when hewent and came into Lancajbyc, he was vee 
ry coufident of cood faces iva {aft being vfed for there his 
senorance and rafb credulitie concerninge there delimerance equal to 
mine as touching So. this alfo he did ait to others,as I knowe he 
will confefle:therefore he either had layde his plotte with them before, or 
elfe be knewe very well how by bis cunming to drawe them on for the feru- 
ing of bis turne,as bebim{elfe The abfurditie ot the{Dz/c.firt collects 
on concerning my. plotting with Somers to.counterfeite, becaule vpon 
iuft occafion I writ that he was poffefled, with fuch a caution as you 
haue heard, euery. child may efpie::and furelie his fecond colleStionis 
no leff abfurd.for how could I knowe 8 that very weil that he woulde 
be drawne on by me to counterfeite, before'l had {peach with him or 
vet did fee him? It might be for any thinge Iknewe to the contrary, 
hauing then neuer feene him,that if the boy was not pofleffed,yet he 
was otherwife greuiouflve aflicted (whervpon the letters & mefien- 
ger came vnto me ) and fo would haue {male lift to ferue my turne a- 
-gaine,were it not fo, yet percafe he was not apt to doe fuch rare feits 
asin that cafe are requifite, Moreouer, admittinge both thefe to fall 
out patte ashe would haue it, yet how could I knowe betore I fete 
eve of So. that he would be willing to-counterfeite a poiteflion with 
the diuil,and that he was altogether graceles,for otherwife he neither 
would nor durft commit fuch an abomination... 


we 


‘ 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ADETESTION OF S. HARSNETS 
The cheifet meanes whereby M. Dur.didfeduce the people, and 
pig 108. ninglye injruct So, withont fufpition in any that b:leiued bin, were theft 
tw falfe croundes,(wherof in the firft book) vx. that thofe 
ed, hau: there fitts no vfe of there fenfes or faculties of there mindes,and 
that whatfoeser they either doe or fay at [uch times, it is not they but Sa- 
than that doth bath fay and doe it. 
| Darrell 
Howfoeuer the Dic. doth not onely here but(I knowe not how 
oft) els where as pag. 30.69.1111. 289. 305, prattle and florifh with 
emnptie words as though thele were the two principall and falje grounds 
wherby I am laid to haue bewitched all the beholders: wee mutt firft 
Knowe that ke proueth northe former of thefe  whereto I will fir 
anlwere) no not fo much as by a falfe witnes, For his 4 witnefles here 
following,and two pag 11 1.doeonly depof that I faide $2, was fenc 
in his fits,and thofe two ae.306.that I faide the fame by Kat. 
Wright: which ioyned to th er proue not that Ifaid thofe who are 
pag 3% are fenceleife, or as he faith elfe where and meaneth heete (4) 
whsfocuer ts poffeffed,is im his fittsalrogether fencleffe'z. Thaue vpon my 
oath denyed,that I faid this of So.vz. at the ti ‘ticulated againtt 
; 0.v%, at the times articulated again{ 
pag 289. me:atanothertyme! deny that affirmed Kath. Wright was fencles, 
"This isthe eiphe aNd a thrid time being here about depofed, anfweared thus: (4) I 
time the Difeosa' Yeleruc that Tho, Diarlinze not'his feaces or memorie in bis fits:but 
ver isconuinces « that Satan miobt fo of der the matter yas that he either had or might 
haue had his fences in bis fitts. And farelye I mutt needs thinke{o, 
except Iwere fo groffe as to imagine, that fathan being entered in- 
_toman,is bound (as I may fay) hand and fote to depriue euery fuch 
 perfon of ther fences,and-cannot otherwife doe:and fecondly fhould 
‘much forgét my felfe; who haue in experience feene thé conttary in 
Byrom,lane Ajbton,and alfo in. Somers, as haue fhewed 
betore, where I treate of the fignes of poffeflion. For this reafon con 
firmed by fome experience, I amas far as any other from faying that 
the Difc.fo oft inculcateth and fathereth upon me, vz. that whofoener 
‘ts poffeffed is altogether fencles in all there fits, yet notwithftandinge 
hould that the poffeffed ordinarily are fencles in theire fitts,not 
ly becaufe my felfe and others haue obferued this in experirence, but 
{pecially becate the fame may be probablie colle ted out of the ferip 
 tares. Fordidnot the deuill depriue them/(at leaft) of {ome of theire 
mak 5,5. fences,, whom he made both blind and deafe? wherevpon the {pirite 
_ was called by Chrift Tefus(d)-4tea/e [piriteanid may we not well thinke 
that they werewithoitt feeline, who ftooke themfelues with ftones? 
end feeinge the fame men were deprived of the faculties of there mindes, 


both 


~ 

» 


} 
| 
a% 


ail 


Tudge and Iuftices. 


fed: and truly it 1 an eafye matter to fhewe, that the /unatick wanted 


4 


| LYING DISCOVERY, $3 
both of their ynderftanding and memmy (for it is playne by the context 
thatthey were (4) ont of their right myndec ) haue wee not then good 
caufe to iudge that they were depryued of all thew fences internall & ex + ii 
ternall? And thatthus it went not alwayes withthem, but in theyre Luk 3.5. 


45s, that is in the time of their vexation by Sathan, may be gathered 


cut of the 8. Marke, where it is faid of one of them, infteade of both 
that being often bound with fetters and chaynes he brake them: and then it 
was, that 1n4n could tame him, and made bis aboade( naked ) in the 


mountaynes and ovaues, and firoke hinfelfe with (tones, fo as there were 


other times viz. when they were out of their fitts, when he liued and 
conuerfed among men, cloathed & in his right mynd. Arfd that not 
only thefe, but generally the poflefled in Chrifts time were ordinari- 

ly for the time of their without their fences, we may probablye 

thinke, becaufe ir is euident that they had not their vnderftandynge: | 
otherwile they would neuer haue cryed out (m) what hane wee to doe (m)enark 1.2.43 
with thee, O Icfus of Naxarcth? art thors come to andthat 


only thefe but many poflefled with diuells vfed thele kynd of {peach- 


appeareth by Atarke 1. 34, Thus we fee that one of thefe which. 


the Dijc. calleth my filfe grounds wherewith he chargeth me to haue 
feduced the people, and (a) ingling flicks wherevppon my Legerdemayne 
(ashe calleth it ) did confit, is warranted by theholy {criptures. Bee- 


fides, this hath bene obferued and reported of fome, who it fhoulde — 
_feeme were voffefled. In an hiftory printed 86. concerning the ff lic P 39 


tions of Margaret He) on of Burnham V pe in Norfolke, and the fpeach the — 
[pivit bad with 01 Robinfon minifter at the fame place, it ts faide that fhe 
was of all fences both internall and externall, to the iudement of tho[cthat 
were prefent, vtterly depryned, and in.an other place [bee comming to 7 
vadlerfianding cryed exc, And in the booke printed of the bewitchinge of 
M. Robert Throckmortons 5. daughters, who as I take it were pofleiied, 

it is reported that they were depryued of all vfe of thes fences duringe 
their fitts, and that they could neither [ee, beare, nor feele any body: and to. 
this effe&t there are (cattered very many {peaches throughout the faid 


- booke: yea it is playne there that two of thefe gentleweomen, Mifiris 


Toane and Miffres lane had not theire fences in theire fitts before the 
And where the Difc. by way of preuention hath thefe wordes: The veils 
lunatick in the {criptures was bis fits dombc, but it canna be fhewed 


that he wanted thevef} of his fences: 


He feeth now more may be fhewed by other perfons then poffel- 


one of the external! fences he {peaketh not of, viz. hearing: for Chrift mnrke 9'3@. 


in healing the linatick fayd: Thou dombe and deafe {pivitt I charge thee 


¥ 

4 
> 


. 
~~ 


+ 
= 
> 


mark's 
anath.8. 3 Ie 
mark 1.2 5+ 
mark 1.3 4° 
Enk 4.44. 
Liber queft, 13. 


§.28. 
mark 5.4. 
3.15. 


90 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


come out of him: now the {pirit was thus called of the effect, becaufehe 
made the /unatick dumbe and deafe. Indeede if {peaking be one of the 
externall fences, as the Dic. it fhould feeme will have it, fo as there 
arenot ¢ but6. externall fences, I will not fay that the pofleffed are 
or were in Chrifts time depryued in their fitts of all their fences: for it - 
is cleare all were not poffefled with dumbe {pirits as this Lunatickwas, 
And this concerning the firft of thefe grounds. 
Difcoucrer, 
My fecond fuppofed falfe grounde is, that what[oener the poffeffed 
dee ov f.xy at [uch times, viz. in their fitts, st is not they, but Sathan that 


doth both fay and due it, 
Darrell. | 


_ That the diueil vfeth the tongue of thofe he poffeffeth, & fpeak 
eth by them it is manifeft by thefe {criprures among others(u)what 2 _— 
thy name? Leeyon: for we ave many. (a) And the diucll befought him,fay 
ang: If thou yg out, (uffer vs to goc into the bearde of fmyne. (p) Honld 
thy peace and come out of bim. (h) Hee cuft out many dinells, and fuffered 
not the dinells to fay that.tbey kncw him. (i) And dinells came out of ma- 

ty, Crying, and faying, thou art that Chrift that fonne of God, Heerevpon 
Auguftine affirmeth, Diabolum eius lingua vti, wn cuius corpus intraut: 
that thecdinell vfeth his tongue, into whofe bodye heis entved: yea inthe 
manifold {peaches of the poffeffed mentioned in the gofpell, we reade. 
not of any one which was not vttered by the diuell, It is cleare then 
that often if not alwayes in the fitts of the pofleffed, Sathan {peaketh 
and not they. And as the yncleane {piritts vfe the tongues of them in 
whome they are, and fpeake what they will by them, fo doe they allo 
vfe the other parts or members of their bodyes to performe other ace 
tions: as their feete to goe with their hands, to {mite with,&c. fo the. 
diuells went with the feete of the men poflefled with the legyon, and 
carryed them into the mountaynes and graues, went with the fanie. 
feete (q) out of the craues very feirce, and with the mens hands offered 
vyolence no doubt to diuers, /o that no man micht goe by that way: (1). 
plucked the chayns afunder, and brake the fetters in peeces, wherwith they — 
were bound: and flroke them with their owne handces-with ffanes. And 
generally it is faide of others, that (s} when the yncleane [pivits [awe Ie- 
Sus, they fell dovone befure him. Befides, the parties pofleffed we treat of 
haue confidently affirmed from time to time their fitts being ended, 
that they knewe not any thing they during thofe tymes {pake or did, 
and vet did many ations, and for the moft part neuer cea‘ed prating: 
yea fome of thofe in Lancafbire,continued 3. dayes and 3. nights, and 
did the workes they were accuftomeéd vnto as well and as readilye as 
eucr, fpakeas freely as at other times, and yetknew nothinge more 


Q F 
4, 


| 
4 
3 
| 
= 


orleffe, of that they had faid or done all that timé, not of any thinge- 
that had bene {poken or done to them. And of M: T hrodkenoartons chil 


dren in like fort affected, it is written thus: when it pleafed god to Areaione- 
ney them of thew fit ts, they neither knew what they had ‘faid, neyther yet Imiment aud exectt 
~ what fort they bad bene deale withall, as heereafter flall be delivered in par 


ticuley. And as thisis reported of the .daughters generally and par=. 
ticularly, {0 the fame is faid of 7: fersantesimthe houf* afflicted mift of 
thom in the fame fort and mannpr in thele words: and when'they were out 
of their fitts, ther knew-no more then the childven what cither they had don 
or (aid, Did not now thele {peaches and actions, yea whatloeuer in 


their fitts thefe faide and did come from the diuell, by whome they _ 


were at the fame time otherwilewexed, and or 
haue we not iuftcaufe to beleue'theni thus ‘affirming; when we fee i¢ 
manifeft, that fome' things are vitered by them, which: paffeth theire 
knowledge, and reach, and done which are impofiible to be done by 
them? And feeing it is euident that whatfoeuer thefe perfons poffefl= 
ed faid and did in their fittes, the fame! was {poken:and done not. by 
them but by the dyuell, and that{omuchis manifeft by the feriprures 
in part, though not in the whole: whymaynot'l for my owne-parte 
thinke or be of opynion, that what[ocacr the poficffed doe or fay ( ordina 
tily ) for the time of their fitts, at 1s not they; Lut Sarban that doth both fay 
and doe it, as the Difc. chargeth me (‘bur peremprtcrily .to af- 
firme’ And’yet the Dic, proueth not thus mach as nowe voluntarily 
I fay, but onely that I haue {aid to this effect in ‘particular, conceriig 
So. and Katheryne Wright. And thus muchas touchinge my féconde 
fuppofed falfe ground, and ingling flickwherevpon my lecerdemayne did 
GAC 


“Now let vs confider what the of 


thele two fuppofed falfe kirft, thaethereby vhd fe-°°. 
duce the people,and draw them to thinke and fay, that:the:perfons con ‘i 
trouerted were pofleffed. Alas poore filly foules, which were.{o'ea‘ily 
by thefe few wordes of myne feduced & blynded. V.Vhy burall were 
not hereby fedueed, and drawne to thinke and giuedimtinfpeachthat = 
thele Were poflefled, for fundry weekes before {pale wordes, 


(adniite did'fpeake them:) or-yet ever fawe So: Dalings Katheryne 
Wright, many thought and laid ( as I can proue ) that they were pof- 


felled, wherevpon there was aramour thereof im thole quarters: who 


now; or what {peach (educed thofe people? 


Secondly, thaeby? conninely [ufpition in any 


that beleeued in me. Vf inftrustedithele counterfeyts,it was (ugh 


acunning & fetret inftrit ‘tion (Tirol) my. faid Tehollerstiad 
to haue bene rather erowne men, then-boyes and little damfedis: But 


how 


tion of the wit- 
ches of warboys 


pag 1o8.as 1s 
before men 


| 


how can thisbe, leing ‘allthe:counterfeytes, had their Jeflons attheire 
fyngers endes, fome about a Woucth, fome a quarter of a yeare,fome 
two yeares before? andagainit this the faith not any thing {aue. 
about So. Belides ifthisbea good reafon to proue my initruéting of . 
So. why dothhenor wie thefameto prone thereby my teachinge of 
the 7. in Lantafbive? whichhowfoeuer he would haue the worlde to 
thinke is true, yer forfhame he dare not publifhit to the world. Laft. 
ly, this being a good.argument of onehis teaching to counterfeyte, 
the Dic. fhail doe welbto inquire after him who faid as much here- 
tofore of M. Throckmortons children( and of others) as I concernynge 
So. Darling arid Kath: Wight yea the very fame. with me, that being 
found out:he might be pumbhed :fet:lach inftru&ion as well as I. For 
albeit 1t be fome yeares dince luch inffructrgz,and counterfeyting was, 
Emeane of children yet is little, more then halt 
long asitis finceKuth, Wrichts counterfeyting and my teachinge of 
her,-and therefore may mvely better bé inquired inte, then this other . 
fastdane driyveares before. And: thus the hayinge. made a 
to that which félloweths:and layd this-as his toundation, where- 
vpon his whole! Dsfeonery-refteth,..as whofoeuer hath read & obfer- 
ued that worthy worke cannot but fee, he proceedeth to build there- 
proportionably to the rotrenand.worfe then fandy-yea ridicue 
tous: foundation; to the ouerthrowing and cafting downe whereof. | 
-alfo willprocede; and fo come to therreft of the Di/covera's circumnftane 
ees; he procedeth toproue my teaching of Somers to, coun- 


“7 


4 


» 


ab  Mpom the afore{iaid bare yelation of Filfon ancl before he bad the | 
ftance Seene$ 0. Dar, word by him ta Nott. that Somers'was in his (its 
Darrell at his coumning to So. to Nott. faidhe was pofefjed bear 
itance  behadfeene bin in anyfite, efpecially fuch afytt as might noteafilye be 
The 5.circum- Daur; ypon his fir[t consming- Som, affumed, that it was 
his fits; but she dard by him. grannt, what 
circum: M, Dar. the firjt night of his comming vnto the bay affivmed an. the 
pag 11. prefence of the fard bay, that he-was in bis fites fenceleffe, falie. t 
_ the 7.circum- Mi Dar. fpecifiyed the fame mgbt in. the prefence of 
‘thers; the manner of fittssas the poffeffed bad the, [criptures, and 
gcircume whith were ashe fatd) iz Kath. Wrights thé boy of Burtom, it 
aid the feauen in Laneafbire. whatofthis? 
M. Dar. then [aid tothe perfous prefent in the heareing of Som. 


4 ~ 
. “a 
- 
| 
> 


LYING DISCOVERY, 


be the [aid So. would doe the like. falfe. or. 
-M.Dar, tould them in So. hearing, that be the faid So.wasnotfo much . 
woubled for bis ovwne finnes,as for the fynnes of the people, or of the inbabs~ “rr, 
M.Da. affirmed in the prefence of the boys that fathan aid vfe. to P78 
focw by geflures in thofe that were poffe{jed, the particuler [innes that ¥aig~ The 10 circuma _ 
ned 1n thofe places wherethey dwelt. taife. 
Dar. affirmed in she bearing of So, and: prefence of many, that he wes 
vily thought the diuell would doe the like in So. and declare by frenes gef The 1.circame 


bares the jinnes of Nott. and of others, fale. | ftanc ¢. 
So, acting thofe geliures, M.Dar. did expound them very learnedlye, roa | 
tv this or that fiane that raigned in Nott. falfe. 


next day (being Sonday) M, Dar. comming to So. vfed the like pag 116. 
{peaches then inthe prefence of others that he haddone onernight: viz. that 
So. was in bis fitts fale, 
Dar. did take vpon him to foretell many things that woulde hap- 
pen the day appoynted for the faft: as that they fbould fee very firang thing: , Pag 
that Sathan would wonderfully torment the boy, and-that hedoubted not ~ 
but that they (bould perceaue by the figncs of poffé{fion and difpoffeffion,that 
y was palfeffed, aud that then be (houlde be delinered from Sathan, 
Dar. the day of the faft affirmed in bis forman, that they fbould e+ 
uidently perceaue by the fignes of poffeffion, that So. was pofféffed, and by pag-t240 
the fignes of difpoffeffion that So.fhould be ci[poffe[fed, if cod woulde: and 
comming ta intreate of the particu/ar frones of pof]efJion, and fo of difpoffe{= 
fion, be v{ed fuch paves, as that the boy had lealure to theminordr 
as he named them. ihe latter,part of this circumftance is falfe: Iris pro 
uedby So. depofitiononly, | 
In the declaring of thele {peaches depofed by many, conteyninge 
in them fo many cireumffances, confifteth my ixftrutting of. So. by [pea 
king to others im bis bearing, thofe things which | ment that-he [bould prace 
_ afe: wherein I dealt fo cunning ly as that albeit I bad nener feene him at 
Afbhy, nor dealt with him prinatly at Nott, yet this [aide comfe which I 
held with him there, and with thofe that came to {ce bim in bis fitts, was fo 
contryned as might eafily informe So. what be had to doe, and did ince C de 
blynce and mifleade many of the people, 
an{wer generally to thefe and ail the former circtemffances: fir ‘eenal 
that all thefe nite ne with the reft of the depofitions in the Difco cA to the 
wary. were taken by Commiffioners chofen and appointed by them SHumfancess. 
Which are againft me, I not being fuffered to ioyne with them there- 
in: neichér Thad nor could gett any coppy of th or 


& 
| 
| 
] 
| 
] 
| 
| 
f 


94 A DETECTION‘ OF S. HARSNETS 


™ 


‘Commiflicn graunted for me, tore-exdmyne thele witnefies. Now 
. thelephaceedings are cohtrary to the Queenes lawes, and the ordi- 
Darypractite of the hi eh Commifiton court; and for that caufe (had 
\Inothing elle to fay thele ( with the other depolitions 
in the D2{conery ) are of no force, neither prouing any thing,nor yet 
‘bhefe Commiffioners were and are my mortalt cnemyes, & 
 therefore'very pattiali, one of themlelues alfo 21. William Gregory by 
name, being their clarke or notary; And asit cannot ( almoft ) other 
wile be, fo P am able to proue,; that they haue carryéd themfelues ve. 
ry corruptly in thée.execution of theire feuerall Commiffions: And 
therefore in all equity and indifferency, the things heere and through 
the Di/couery depofed.areto be more then {ufpected, euen to be 
Taftirme that many of thefe circ snffances are falfe, and offerte 
_ bring’at leaft an hundred witnefles ( if fo many were needefull ) to de 
| pofe 
coy s.antweare, hadioyned in:thefe Commiffions, and that-all 
Were truewhich is-depofed: I affirme that. thefe cixcumffances are to 
weake and inlufficient ro prone that, J taught. brn to counterfeyt fappo- 
fing he were a counterfeyt: for if we will proue a thing in controuerfy 
or matter crimimall by ances, as.they muft be diuers,. fo they 
mutt be ftrong, euery one probably concluding that whervnto they | 
ferue, bearing the name and nature of a prefumption, as we very well 
call it: the etimology of which worde'teacheth, that the. prefumption 
beirig true, it is thence to be prefumed,and in all likelihood thought; 
that that is true whereof it is a prefumption And thus dimers prefump 
tions meeting togither, being fo many probable arguments, ({pecially_ 
hauing re{pet to the other preiumptions ) they make among them 4 
found and fubftantia'l proofe, and neceffarily conclude thar .u hereof 
they are prefumptions, As for example, and for the better vnderftan- | 
ding thereof: Let vs ymagine that in Grayes Inne feildes 7. S. a gentle. 
man of Grayes Inne is flayne;no body being eye witneffe thereof, fo 
that J. S_being deade,and none prefent at the murther, the murthe- 
rer isto be founde out by circum(fances, or notatall. Ifagainft J. N. 
being apprehended vpon fufpition,it fhonld be obiected, phat he was 
of Grayes Inne as wellas 7. S. thathe knew him well, and was acquaiA 
ted with him, and the place alfo where /. §. was flayne, that hee was 
feene walking with him the day before in the city, that he was known 
to be ofgreate vallour, and therefore able to performe fuch a fact, & 
that...e was his owne, and to goewherhe wouldat his pleature; and | 
fo had (neff cient opportumity to go¢ and fight with him ard flay him: thef 
| 


gy s.anfive 


xz 


‘ 
| 
- a 


LYING DISCOVERY.) 


(I fay). and au hundred more fach, are not auaileable 


proue/..N, guilty of the laid murcher: fornotwithitanding thele cir= 
cumffances vere true, and many more of this kinde, 7. N, might: 
be asinnocent and free from the murther as the babe in the wombe?’ 
yea by fugh like circwm/fances a thouland feuerall perfons might be es 


well condemned as /, N.And if in this cale vpon the aforefaide or no: 


ftronger aluttice of peace fhould commit J, N. to pii- 
fon, the Iury finde him guilty of murthering J, S. the ludge pronoun’ 
ce fentence of him,and he therevpon be (a) executed, woulde not 
all men that fhould heare thereof wonder at it? and fay with one con 
fent: Surely the gentleman was innocent for any thinge that appea- 
red to the contrary. But ifagainft J. N.it fhould be giuen in euidence, 
that the fame morning J. S. was flayne, they two fallingiout; challen+ 
eed one the other, naming time and place, where and when, after 7S, 
was killed, that fhortly atrer the murther committed, he wasfeene 
comming from the faide place {prinkled with bloua, that his fworce 
was bloudy, and his dagger found where this murther was done: by 
thefe and fuch like crcumfances or prefumptions, itwas 2s manifeft 
he flew him as if there hadbenefome prelentat the murther. And: 
matke.I pray, how every of thefe circumftances and iuch like which 
we very aptly call prefumprions, do probably conclude J. N. to have — 


this murther, yeathe leaft end weekeft of them the other pre- 


fumptions confidered therewith: which theformer circumflances doe 
not atall. Even fo itis in the matter of teaching to cuntafeyt, where- 
of] being accufed, the Li/c. would prene me guilty by cxcsanftances: 
but they being.all of the fame kinde with the firfi of the aferefaid ar- 


mmf ances alleacged againkt J. N. that is iuolous,vayne,end ridicv= 


lous, not one of them ceferuing the name of a prefumpticn, doe not 
proue me guilty of fuch inftrugiionyno more then the firft aboue nas 
med prooue I. N, guilty ofmutthering].S. 

That thefe are fuch frivolous arcumflances wallappeare to him 
that flanding in dcubt thereof fhail marke how hand{cmly they cen- 
clude my of So. to countafryt, wherev nro they ferne 2s cir= 


cuinflances, and otherwife doe their maifter the D ifcoucrer no feruice 
at cl]. As thus for example: Darrell before he faw Somers [aid he was pof 
if the fione sof pof}iffion were {rene in him as he was informed: it is 
probable tha fore that Dar. taneht bim to countafeyt a Acaine, 
Dav. aftivmed that it was not So, that [pake in his fitts, but the dineli by 
bivn It is therefore probable that Dar. So. to counterfcyt. Dar. 

affirmed in the of So. that ke-was in~his fitts fenceleffe, itis to be 
prelumed therefore that he taucht him to counterfeyt. Dar. jaid (for foe 

the Dift, and his falfe witnelfes tell vs) thas Si. was not fomuch troub- 


led 


Thisismy cafe, _ 


= 
j 
> 
> 
4 
; 
> 


96 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS | | 
bed for bis ovenc finnes, as for the finnes of the people: ergo he taucht him — 
tocownterfey:. lfthus we fhould goe through the Di/c.. civcumftances 

and weigh chem in the ballance of reafon, we fhall fynde them as light 
- or lighter then vanity it feife. Truly I thinke fince the worlde was 
made, there were neuer more vaine, ydle, and fottifh carcumffaunces 
obiected again!t any man liuing. 
Mys.and is, that if there were a poffibilliey of coun 
terfeyting, as there is not, and thefe circumitances were a little 
ger in appearance then they are: yet in this cafe of teaching So. I'can 
not be proved guilty by circumftaunces, forhow can it poflibly bee 
made true by any that [haue taught So. to counterfeyt, 
fo long ashe cannot tell where nor in what piace I taught him, nor 
wheat" can afly action be done, but there is a place and time wherein 
and when the fame is done?Euen foit is in this my [chooling of Somers. 

Haue I taught So,to'counterfeyt? Ideligeto know where and when. 
In 4/bby parke ( for other place as yet there isnot any named ) 
haue fhewed it cannot be, and itis as cleare as the day light at noone, 
where then? It would be knowne: So. heereof cannot be ignorant ~ 
if there were any fuch thing performed, Let him then tell the place 
where, the weekes, monethes, or yeares wherein the fame was doing 
with other circumftances therevnto apperteyning,. If this So. cannot 

~ doe (as hitherto he"hathnot truly andmen may well thinke he can- 
not, for if he could he had done it before this ) we may be moft affu- 
red it-ts becauf there was never any fuch inftructing ofhim, It isnot 

ii this our cafe as it is in murther and {uch like offences, Som. isnot 
deade, but aliue, he is not abfent and to feeke, but at hand, neyther 
can he but know that whic defire he fhould make knowne, if any 
fuch thing be. And vntill thisbe done-by So, the aforefeid circum/tan 

ces and athoufand fuch more are not fufficient, or any whit atall auai 

leable to prooue me guilty ‘ofteachinge him to counteffeyt. yea to 

what purzofe are my circumftances in this cafe of ours, except this I 

fpeake of be firft performed? truly to noneat all: except it be to da- 

zell mens eyes, and fo to keepe them from feeing that which other- 
wile they could not but fee moft clearly. If Som. had once done this 

{peake of, and fo asI were not able to conuince him, then indeede 

there would be fome vie of circumftances to ftrenethen his acculation. 

They had neede alfo to be very ftrong ones, confidering the ynwor 
thynes of the accufer, and the rare and wonderfull feyts I hold teach 

him.But that being not done, I maruaile how any man of reafon and 
iudgment, fhould hould me guilty vpon thofe aforefaid poore and. 

For where the faith that did (6 cunningly Som. by 


beaking 


fwre are 
7 
Fe 
ae 
i 
? 
| 
| 
> 
bs | 


ae” 


LYING: DISCOVERY 
[peaking ta others in his hearing thyfe things that 1 meant he fboulde pract- 
ic, as tat albert neuer jecne him at Abby, nor dealt with ban pri- 
watly at Nott, yet the caurfe that Ubad held with bun there was fo contry— ment of the 
ay it might cafrly injorme So. vepat he bad to doc itis mott ablurde.’ 
For who can be fo voyde of reafon aso thinke, that I coula no foos 
ner lpeake of the iignes of pofleflion mentioned in the golpell, as to- 
ming, calting into me fyer,excraordinary f{trength-ecr. and of othere 
very adairabie tey ts, as ofa greate felling in the body,and of a lit- 
tle tweliing to run along the body betwene the fleth and the {kyn, of 
making the armes and legges heauy as yron, of retorting the tongue 
into the throat, fa-as no part of it cquld be feene in the mouth, of in- 
during the pricking with pynnes,and keeping in the bloud fo as none 
not a drop thouldiilue at rhe places pricked;, with many more {uch 
like: but that So. prefently could and did therévpon doe the fame? 
Was there euer fo nimbie a boy and fe-apr'a {choller heard of beefore 
{ince the world began? It is no maruaile then though the Difc. terme 
hin an apt fcholler, So. faith ke being aa apt [choller for M. Darrell to 
practije vpan,hearing by M. Dar. {peaches what was to be done at bis han pap 136; 
acs hid exc, all that were prefent were much amazed, | 
But admite this were poflible, as me thiaketh none ihould fay fo 
nelides the Dafe. yet out of queftion it is impéffible, that the fpeach- 
és to others at Nott;in So heaving vpon the fiftof Nouember 
efter, before which time my voyce was_not hearde in the prefence of 
So, :thould inftruét So, in thofe things he pra;tifed for,the tpace of 4. 
(a)weekes at the leaft before tine: which being atid witkall ma 
and notorioufly knowne, confirmed: allo by the depofitions of (a) how cinthe 
the 17, That So. or the diuell did the very fame things before the ¢. me were — 
ot Nouember and my comming to him at Nort: which he did after 
wherevppon I was fent forand requefted to come;'it cannot be thar 
So, was inftructed of me by {peaking ta others in' his heayine thinges 
that ment he foould prattife: Betfides, itis acainte ‘Cominon fence’ 
fhould inftruct him after this manner, if that were “true that’. 
the Dife, and So, affirme to be trae, I meane that I had cbene {choline a 
cthim beefore at Abby, and allo infirat bed bins ‘at Nott. For 
he hauing bee ¢ as they fay fouire or yeares léarhing his tricks" 
and having had them alio in writing from’ me} he edulde inor 
be to learne'thern when hethoulde ast them. A caine jt had bene ex-. 
treame folly or rather madnes in vs both, that having fo long time Se 
opportunity to teach and learne in, could finde outnone, but deferr 
che very inftane they were to be pratifed. 
Thus the himlelfe may fee. that his 


4 


‘albeit, i 

they be many,/are too weake and infi ficient to proue 


. 
2 
. of 
= 
_ 


98 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


of his counterfeyt, and therefore 5», accufation muft doe the deede, 
~ or elfe it will not he:which (as appeareth by the premiffes )is palpable 
The;.chap.con faiie, hauing neither face nor poflibillity of truth in it. The beft way’ 
then for the Dijcoucrer, meane the Bifh. of London and.S amucll Harf 
cumftaunce.and %¢t is, to confetie the truth and publifh it, and fo giue glory to god: 
feeing the falfhood of this Di/coucry is nowe made manifeft in the 
an eyes of the Sunne, 


OF CHAP. 4. ok 

Dilcoucrer. SE 
Of 24. Dar. cunning inflrudting Somers, by {peaking to others ix bis 
pag 127- hearinge of Sathans fecking to repoffeffé him: aud of the acting of certayne 


tricks under a coucrlet. 
__. Inthe former parte of this chapter the Difc. telleth vs ofa fece 
ond or new cofenage, viz. So. counterfeytinge of arepoffcfion: and after | 
what manner I inftru&ted him we heare in the title of the chapter. 
This cofenage the Di/c. pretendeth to proue by two {peaches of mine 
the one isthat I fhould affirmeto my Auditory a the bearing of Som. - 
that for a certainty Sathan would fecke the {aid So. and pree 
weayle ag amft him except he were mightely withflood by faith The other 
that affirmed the night he was dilpoffeffed in the bearing of So. diners 
others, that [athan returned the [ame nicht he was difpoffeffed out of cert- 
aine in Lancafbwe,and that fo returning he appcared vnto them in certayne 
VVhen the hath proued me guilty‘of the firft cofenage, 
myf elfe will yeald the fecond: & vntill he haue performed that which 
yet he hath not, none that is wile, will regard what he faith, concer- 
prs this new cofonage, ashe termeth So. repoffeffion. 2. All or moft 
of that Ihaue given before in anfwer to the aforefaid circumf auncesy 
ferueth alfo for anfwer ynto this, 3. Seeing betwene So. difpoffeftion. 
and repoffeffion ( which was about thirteene weekes ) he and had 


a 


| fecvet conference togither diucrs times,as the Di(c. telleth vs, and that for 
page-90 she inftructing of him to difleemble a repoffeffion, it had bene fufficié 
ent,to haue ina worde or two at one of thefe our fecret confirences to 
haue bd him fall apaine to his former tricks, and fay withall that the 
diuell did {eeke to enter into him: fo'that this inftructinge of him dy: 
4 {peaking to others in his heavinge nede not, And one woulde think, that 
were there any fuch new coftnave, 1 would rather have giuen him his 
dire“tion concerning the fame apart, then before diuers others. 4. So. 
was then repofleffed, as now at this prifentheis, 
__ Thereafons that moue me to thinke that is indeede repol- 
a {effed are thele. 1, becaufe about 12. or 13. weekes after his difpot- 


ie, 
4 ! 
i 
4 
i 


Py 

i 
| 
; 
; 
; 
t 
; 

4 
£ 

| 
t 
' 


DYING DISCOVERY ope 
feflion, I (among diuers others) fawein him thefignes. of poffeflions 
euen all the fame I did before, and beheld bim handled after the yery 
fame manner he was the time of his firft trouble: and therefore if thé 
pofletied, he is 1o now, and if euer. he was pofleffed, then and for the mark.y.25.; 

_{ame caufe he is againe pofleffed, 2, The {cripture telleth vs, that the ™-12*43" 
yacleane [pirite being gon out xf man, doth not only returneand fecke 
to enter into his faid boufe. indeede enter and poflefie the faid 
party, ifreturning be fiude him cmpty, j wept, and.garnifbed, that is rea- 

_ dy and prepared to interteyne.his oulde gueaft the diuell, which is 
when the party is vncleane and liueth in {inne, for an vncleane perfon 
isa receptacle for the foule {pirit: but out. of whome the ceuell 
was caft, is and hath bene fuch, asis manifelt byhisabominablelving 
in denying the worke of God. wrought vpon himy his-falfeaccufinge 
of the innocent,.iayned with greate obftinacye.and.ympudencie, his 
periury, and other greuous and open fynnes.of his: It muft. needes_ 
therefore be that So.is repoflefled, 3. There is fomethinge in reafon 
to confirme vs herein: in that from time ft. time So. hath bene doing iid : 
in fecrett, and offered. fometimes,openlye to.doe his tricks, as fome 
callthem. After he had faid thefecend time that he had counterfey- 
ted, and was asfree from being vexed by fathan, and as farr from all . 
appearance of pofleffignas now he.is, he,(as is notorioufly knownes 

_and the Dijc. himfelfe confefleth, hewed, his tricks before my L. 
devfon, and diners others, 1m fome extraordimary, fort. Atone of my exa+ 
minations betore the;B, of Loudon,M. Barker:ragilter to the high co 
miflion, and another gentleman being prefent, So. vppon occafion of 
fome wordes vttered-by. me, would, haue bene doinge his tricks, and 
had vndoubtedly but that the Zi/bop rebuked him for it, and pre‘ent 
lv for feare thereof fent him.away. It fhould feeme that the Bifhopt ad 
feene him. doe his tricks before that time, yea percafe. often, otherwif 
he would have beneas glad.for the further. fatiffyinge of himfelfe to 

haue feene his feyts,. asfome there prefent. At. Lambeth vppon whit- 
fon-eue, in open court So..offered to. doe histricks, and had not the 
B, of London {aid, it was to no purpofe, becaufe M. More and I wolde 
fay, it was not he, but the diuell that did them, he had without quef- 
tion fallen to:‘his worke, Neither. can we in rea‘on thinke, that the’e 
were bare affers or. wordes, he not beinge. able to performe any fuch 
thing, confidering ( to omyt other times.) he or the diuell did indeed 
fome of his trickes beefore my L.. ./uder[on, and therefore. the one of 
them both can an isready to doe them, when So, will, accorcinge 
to the covenant paffed berwene them. Confidering then S». (ot rather 
the divell} is domgnow and then as we heare, and that fuch feytes as 

the eye-witnefles thereof confeile,none befides.him can doe the 

at 


nt 
<= 
q 
if 


i 


3 

‘ 
3 

Be 

a) 

sé 

4% 


Inke 11.23. 


we 


108 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
_atid the cheife of theni; diatifithe boy did nor fay he counterfeyted, 
and ceale to due the tricks when he ts biaden, he fhould'veril y think 
that he did them by the diuelt: ‘may not this well atrer the premiiles 
contirare vs in his pofletfion? whether So. was packe beyond the feas 
by tome chat knew he was poffetfed, and teared leatt that woulde one 
day appeate, or went of his owne accord about fome great bulynes of 
his.owne,let other men iullge- as'alfo why it will not be graunted that 
the meanes may be'vied which the (u} worde of god directeth vs vn- 
to for the dilcouery of Sathan, whome we ate boulde to aifirme lure 
+ And where fome men can hardly with any patience indure to 
heareof this repoffeffion, becaufeno iuchthing appeareth: they mutt 
know that Sathan doth and hath Jong laboured to obfcure the worke 
of god wrought vppon So.& to annihilace it, if it were poffible,that fo 
god might goe without the glory and prayfe which would be gyuer 
im in the acknowledgment thereof,and man lole the profit he wolde 
offuch arare worke of god. Lo this end and for the better brin 
ging of this to paile, the dideu(hauing recouered So. and entred into 
nis the body of So! agayne ) indeuored by himfelfe and’his ity 
f{trumeats threatning and promiling, to drawehim to‘deny the work 
of God,-and affirme that he counterfeted, and therewithall couenari- 
ted with So to helpe bim to doe airy thing that he would take in hand,mea 
ning thofe thinges thathé had the ume of his poflef lion he’ 
cale being thusjand bein’ the'worke that the hath in had, 
itis not ymagined that Sathan beitrs= in So. fhouide torment 
him, and fo make it appeare that he is there: for thushe fhoulde be 
azainft himfelfe, and ouerturne all‘he had done and hath in hande.’ | 
Yi the diuel] haumg drawne So. ( after that he was againe entred in- 
to him) to fay he counterfeyted ihoulde vexe him) and fent forth't “ 
fame etfeSts he did before he thus affirmed; cafing‘a verye gteate 
{welling in his belly, an other ‘and much fefle to rer alone his bodye 
_betwene the flefh and the {kyn, depryuing him ofall fence, fo as_be- 
ing prickt deepe with pynnes, he woulde not ftyrr, nor bloud flue, 
_ retorting his tongue into his throate, cauling him to foame excefliu- 
dy, to be ( in appearance ) of fapernarurailftrength, and knowledge, 
catting him ihto the fyre without being burnt &c! and that daylre: 
what would it aduantage' the divell for $2. to fay and {weare he coun- 
terfeyted, when the deede euery houre done by himlelfe fhewed the - 
contrary? and where had bene my teaching to counterfeyt? and the. 
impriféning the innocent? how wou!d alfo the children of men haue 
bene generally Kept from beeleeuing the worke of god_ and maenify- 
inge him for it, and not only fo, but infeade thereof brought to re- 
| | .. 


He? 
| 
og} 
gay 
| 
t 
| 


— 


the'fpacéof fome yeares abltaynéfrom tb 


1G DISCOVER! Ay tor. 


ceaue a falfe and. vile’ report againft his {eraant,. and that which is far. 
worle againtt the worke itfeite. Howfoeug t the diuell is ‘natural. 


ly care vexe atid whole bodyes he is iS, “and. t, 


ws ¥ 


fende forth fuck as dlieate, ‘and ofdinatily e doth 10: yet. we. 


may beaflared that whet he feéth | itt is more for. is aduantage to 


frayne, ( asitis in this our tale'to draw thoufands to ff ynne, | then to. 
rorment one fole body ) he’being‘in man will not thewe ehimfelfe and 
make that knowne, but lurke and lye cloafe as I mi fay) ike afub. 
tle ferpent, and as he 

_V Ve hate hearde’beftre in rhe ‘ory, that for the'f fpace fit’ 
night or thereabouts fathan did ithdrave himfelfe from + vexing John, 
Starky,and Anne Starky for certaine dayés,infomuch ; as their parents. 


with others did verilye thinke at the firlt when M. Mare and I came; 


to Cleworth, had be well; atid no‘ wicl ced {pitites within; 
them: yea we hatte’had'¢s i ‘ace! thereof ever 1 ‘Somers; who: after. 
he had giuertit fort counter fey ted? anid t herewith continued. 
as well and free fron all appearance’ of} ion, as at this prefene he» 
doth, for the {pace of 4; or’s:-we@kes, was fearofully tormented by 
the diuell, before'the Commiffioners, and man other 
{o continued ‘about't yes,( if the vew.o that came yn 

vatill thé thered theiifelues, di YP) 
againe for céunterfey ng, dtooke hint the’ fecond time their. 
cultody;in whale hads’ he wasno fooher,but prefetly he was(as they 


thought) well,and’no diuell ( for! in him: and -{fo 


nedias they ‘thinke ntill this da aniendm 

onc the reaforn of Sathans for ase abe inh him 

we werewile? Now'l Géfite td t not 


clleth, as for'the {pace of fome ‘Thus welec. 
well confiderddwe may perc that IDLE 
bene or'yetbe!( fo all things: continue as they at th 
wncleanie {pirit! entred ivith |féquen worfe then 


vex him at all; then in corners, before fuch in mas 


ner, as he thinkeeh 
neare, for what faith the(éripta Be tbe man armed Keeveth 
the things iat he 


Teeth: ic to. make for} the? phoulding 
ofc iterfey ting, hich he ob 


in peace’ This is firlt to be ynd- 


er of corporal poffefion, as is byt the thereof. “ 


< 


Now 


ath ray Hedy; VP»: atid {pread far math.r2 29. 


F 
a 
- 
é 
2 
d 
E 
oe 


4 ~ 


4 
° 


- 


marth.12.45. 
11.26. 


of the worke, and peace o 


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


? 


Now did'ever the trong armed man poflefle a houle more quietlye, 
theit He doth So. bis bou/é or when no manrrefifteth that vfurp- 
ef wheh So, himielfe and fome fuch as are rulers in the church & co- 


 midh Wealth, yea and too many others, are for this vniutt poffeffor,. 


for counterfeyting, and teachingito counterfcyt: andno manalmoftina 
zeale of god and his siory rifeth vp againit him. As then the repoffef 
fion of $0. is according to that which is foretoulde vs by the holy {crip 
tures: cuenfo inthis lurking offathan, and being «at peace with Somers, 
we fee the {cripture likewile fultiiled, Neither doe 1. doubr, but that if 
any zealous for the Lorde of hoafts, {halt procure fuch order to beta 
Ken, that the meanes m 2 bey vied for the difpofleflinge of this vfur- 
per, and fo ChriftTefus the fronger come vppon this flrong man, he thal 
be {poyled of his houle, the armourewherein he trafted taken from 
him, and his fpoyles deuided: andwe therein allo {ee the {cripture ful 
filled beefore our eyes, we defire that a trydll heereof-may be made, 
thar fo happely if rio other Way an end may be put to this controuer- 
fie, To deny this. were very hard, and iniurious to the manifeftation. — 

é thofe which contend abut it. If 1 had only. 


é entre aril deel 
felled, is worle th 


tle, 2, The antithefis. 


both the Exan els | erife, norin,the futures: 


_caufe they will dwell there: that is, touch they be caft out, returning 
they fhall and will recouer the partye, and gett him anon againe into 


nowne Som. poflefled, and not to have bene beclides, di{poflefied, 
| fhould hae bene leffe confident in this prefentpofleffion,: for whyd- 
fhould hatie doubted leaft Sathan peradaetitore, had leaue.from god, 
to poffeffe him only. fora feafon, which time being expired he might, 
remayne theré ho longer, albeit no meanes.was vied for hisexpulfion. 
and againtt this I fyride in holy fcripture, Bur of the repoflel 
(ion of one,1 am otherwife perlwaded: becaule itis laid &ethat ofboth 
the Fre Which {peak ofthe conditio of the repoflesfed.thar the, 
or oppofition betwene fuft and laf? fate, confirmeth this-expolition; 
for by cflate we are to vnderftande the condition of the poffefled 
from the time fathan entreth into man, vntill the time of his cieCtion, 
and by ffate,t thinke his like conditio of being poffefled, but after. 
: eieRion: wherby it may welbe diftiguifhed fro.the former, & rightly 
be called fiat, hauing refpect to the other and liké effat going bee 
| fore. And this /aft condition of one poffefled, whichis that we call repo 
feffion, is faide to be the wer(e: firft, becaufe into fuch the fame {pirit:. 
which was there before is entred. with [eaucn worle then himfelfe, 2. be 


whome there ts an vacleane fpiritt: but it followeth net therevpon that 


"LYING DISCOVE 


fons poffeffed out of whome the vncleane {pirit was neuer caft: confe 
dering theire great vnthankfullnes, for fo finguler and fencible mer~ 
cy of god beftowed vppon them, and that notwithftanding the Lord 


hauing corrected them for their finnes by the diuell. and after deliue- 
red them out of his handes, yet they returne to theirefinnesagayne>, 
without which ‘one cannot be repoffeffed. This] fay confideredit is, 


iuft with god, to deliuer them ypp.to the full poffeffion of the diuell, 
or diuells, or at leaft to fome further poffeffion and intereft inthem 


_ As for the B. of Londons objection, that So. bawing remaymed 4 
ytare in bishoufe, bath gone to the all that. time, and therecarrycd 
bim/elfe as orderly a3. any other of his famely, and likewife in bes prayers: 


at bome.as M, Har[net ( quoth he ) can witneffe: itis eafilye aniwered 5. 
for we reade in the 1. of Marke, that at Capea there was in the 
nagooue aman in wheme thie was vnc 
fame man had bene there who can tell¢ and quietly (no doubt) hee. 
carried himfelfe there, otherwile that bad; hene no place for him, In- 
deede he cryéd out ‘when he fawe lefus, but this [all that were poffel- 
fed did wherefoeuer they met him, {fo that faid exclamation was not 
a of his being in the Synagogue, but becaufe of Chrift his being 
‘VVhere I fay that So. is now,poffefied, not meane that 


their poffeffion, Andtruly no maruaile though the eftateoftherepo. = ©. 
{lefled be fuch as we heare, and far worfe then the eftate ofthofeper= 


eane {piit: and how oft the 


~ 


the diuell is forcertaynty at the very infant, when! fo fpeake in the pottefed 


body of Sitrs for as.he may be there, fo at that prefent: may hee be 
without him, as I fuppofe: but I mean that Sathan bath leauefrom god. 
to.enter into that body of bts, and torment it, which he is denyed to doe 


by others, which letteth not but that he may or doth gee forth 5, 


times, and come ih againe at his pleafure, And this I conceatiegene math. 4 24 and 


what itisto be. 


rally of the poffeffed, and Sathan his being within them, fortis like chp 816-74. 


ly that the divell doth with thofe he entreth into as the father of the - 


Lunatick faith, concerninge his dealinge with his chylde,(a) Andilee 
( quoth he) a [pivit taketh him, and [uddenly he cryeth and he tearcth him 
that he foameth, and hardly departeth from him, when he hath brufed him: 


Thefe are faide.in the Scriptures to be (b) poffefed with the dinell, mea 


ning touching their bodyes, which in this cafe is called his honfe: for 
concerning their foules they are no more nor otherwile poflefled thé - 


alwayes in it: Ewen fo it is thinke) betweenc fathan and his houfe, 
that is the body he poffeffeth. Indeede he is faid to be poffefled, in 


12.29 440 


¥ 


Others, now aman is poffeffed of hts houfe, although he remayre not 2 


¥ 
+ 
é 
= 
Sp. 
= 
¥ 
wi 
£ 
fo 
a: 
e 
4 
~ 
2 
| | 
~ > 


\ 
lat A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


the firicis alwayes ia the man, 8 neuer out ofhim.Yea except nowy, 


ons other fhoulde zoe ino the body ofthe poiletied;, 
atter, the once polleifion gf tlie body of maa, whichis, 
Sit inalt needeés be chat (piric goeth out fométines:, for, 
* porflible, thar tie {pirit fhoulde vicer thsie thinges- 
exserience feene oft to doe by the tongue of the party poill-. 
the fpeacires and aStions {poken and done elfe where, at or a= 
boat the(ame'inftant they arefpoxen add done. And thus much 
After this So, denifed 


— 
AS 


now tricks vader conerlett, vpon this occajion.- 
Lying vppon his bed with a conerlet him, he by chance he 
fome his brdy, wn ws [upoafed to be in a fits, 
aad therefore fencelef]?. veherevpan he the [aid M. Dav. came tt out, that 
wis thé diucll, made tht mtion-vnder the comcrlete: which was [uch 
to Som as he ceafed nyt tofeede that errar: Likewife (fayth 
Lying in my bed, did fometimes fillip with my fingers & 
tocs, aguinft the bed [ides and feete: and this was afcribedta M. 
bane bene done bythedell. 
«That which heere depoteth ig confirmed by the 
a 


is? 
politions 


‘ of divers, The very knocking atthat ti 1 was thore,((aith M, Hallam). 
was one of bis toes, [Hipping dayne from the other: the vayce of 4.. 


kuacks were heard togither in manner of a chyme, quoth M. Crauen, 

__ back. George Richardion Tosching the liken: [Jes of | thuges. 

in bed, wonder thereof, at ane time wink: 

was there, it was the bryes foote. Edmund Garland thus. Catchin OA. | 

time at that which {ame the cliathes, cott boulde of itand 

caft vp the cloathes, to fer what had in my hand, it flippea from me, 

. Ebceleene it was the boyes priny members. Againe I hearing Aknocking at. 

thebedsfeete; catched the by the toes, which I perecaucd ta. bane mathe. : 


the former knocking. M. Aldted'this., the rapping in M, 


was notbine elf¢, but the tapping of one of bis.nayles. vpon an other. M.Pat- 
Zi he tapping W.15 the fillippine of his fy ng ors ov fo th to 
WWVeheare what So. and his witneffes lay, let vsnow hear what . 
was depofed before the 12, Commiflioners. 


M, Aldridge. This examinat [ith that he anding in the hall head: 

preate knockine 1n the parlour where theboy lay, ard luddenlyherujbed in , 
where be found the bry alone in his bed, lying with his face vypwards bis. , 

fit, with drawne awry crhis.cyes , faring as though they would. 
flarted out of bishead. And kneling downe to prayer be b-ard the kno 
chine againe wader bis as he thought: andin the wader the coun - 

lee 


pag. 134 
ae 
Lg 
P28 23 
| 
| 
Darrel] 
| | 
Narration 
QCD.2. 
| 


LYING 


lett, be fawe the forme, aud jbape as it were of fyue kishngs: 
wiew of the cyt, Aind againe this examinate the bedclogth 
feete to mone, and lespe, the of an ‘alpen tree, wit 
thewynde. 

loane Pye {aith that diners times foce bad heard clappin in his bed, 
As though it had bene the clap ping of ';. bandes, that feene 
nition the bed, as » it bed Sene'the Creepin of 3. Sy 
and dyners others hate indenared to of, but neuer ce ould, for | 
when they attempted the (dine, it bath vanifbed, bis handes and feete | 
furring to their fights and that at other times, [hee bath beard at his bedds 
fete a Knocking, as though it were vader the bed to their 

E lizabeed Milward (dith, that' [bee bearde a thismpin 
bis bed, and (bee parting ber thto bis bed, felt the ke 
[hee shought ) at bollow place aboue the chef ap bis 
[bee ts{loce wens dowonse the flayres being fo featfull a foce 
fray abowe with bir. 

M. Pare (ayth, be bearde a thumping, or kinocking i in the 
bed in chee dlplaces a at and! be parting into 


* 


ing yppon eit was 4 heer eit meas enen 
and at that mowing of of bis hands ) {en-. 
bly felt Jomithing the cloathe aint his pare 
Darrell, 
Dife, telleth vs, his owne of his 
culling, and of his own fifting and examynation, and lome,ofthem of . 
his owne ftampe and. affection, whofe depolitions alfo ate 
by his owne felfe, de ie nge more: or leff eas he pleafeth,) faye: 4 


but i in his whole Di co“ery, weh earenot of the fe otlier depot tiones, 
E, z de 


q ad 
770 

an very full manner, And this Examynat taking apay. bis hand, fam the, 
cloathes fetele [oftly,clowne, like a bladder bens blown ful of winde. 


ttiquing 'ynder thehandes of many, as if 


ang, fhould be So, feete, or bis toes, er fingers, or pryuic mem 


106 . ADETEQTION.OF.S.HARSNETS 


dépofed and examy ned by other manner of perfons then, himfelfe, 
nd fellowe Difcouerer belike thinketh thus to 
of thefeablurd and ‘ridiculous depofitions of ] know not whom, 


takenas it were behinde accloath by {uch as are partyes; and no indif- 


ferent Commiffioners, are a {lender conuiction of the depolitions of 
thefe other fyue heere fpecifyed, fo grauely, iuditially and orderlye 
doné ltr the Difc. heereafter then comuince that which they haue de 
pofed for yatill that bedone, and thele 5. proued periured: Ircan- 
not pofliblie be ( as euery childe may {ee ) ia that or thofe thinges — 

which moted tnder the couerlett, feene and looked vppon as they mo 
ued or crépt vp and downe the,bed from place to place, ftirringe and 
ing vndet thehande ; they had bene whelpes, kyt 
dings. ratts, or fuch like lyuing creatures, fometimes alfo vanifhinge 
vnder mens handes, when fecling them they beeganso clafpe theyre 
handes &c. as before, hearde likewife to make athum ping oF ei) 
: or this’ 
wockine be cauled by hisfyncer shruft vnder bis thigh, or by the fillpe 
aipof bis Pngers, or by one of bis toes, [yyppinge downe from the otber, ot 
by the filiipping of one toe with -an other vppon the bed, or yet by the tap- 


_» pang of one of bis nayles ypon an other. For (to omyt that which contey-_ | 


ned in thefe fyue laft depofitions offereth it felfe to the confideration 
of euery one, )it is notorioufly knowne to the inhabitants of Notting 
bam that his mouing knocking vndey the conerlétt, contirtaed tenne’ 
dayes and nights, by. times or. rather. more, and that So. was vfuallye. 
helde by fome, armes & legs, his armes allo ( he being in his cloaths ) 


_on the day time aboue the coueringe, and feldome or neuer vnderit. 
| And this js( in part } confirmed by M. Grayes depofition. I fentat 
‘he Lying opon bed,being belde by Sondyy porfons: at bis fete, and 


allo 
at his beade Agayne as before wee hane his feete heere and 


them. How could then this motion and knocking be made by his bande 


or feete? 2. Som. on the day time was alwayes in his cloathes:it came: 
not then( furely )from the tapping of one of bis tro nayles one ypon an # 
ther. 3, Neyther in the night when So. was in his naked bed could the 
kvocking or either from the flipping downe ofhis toes. 

om the other, or his finger thruft vnder his thigh, or the nilippinge. 
of his toes or fingers, or tapping of one of his toe nayles upon an’ 0-" 
ther, becaule of the loudnes thereof: for faith Elizcbeth Milmarde,! 
hearde the knocking as went down the fayrs, being fo fearefull, asl 
not tay aboue with him. Aldride,( (peaking ofian other time, 


and when he was in an other howle ) Panding in the haulel heard deve 


the parlor th by ly. thjs which 


* 


ips 
ae 
pe 4 
3 
thi 
J 
i 
a | 
é 
| | 
q 
2 
f 
t 
| 
| 
| | 
4 
‘BE 
| 
a 
5 
7 
j 


dejirous exc. And George Richardfon after this manner: Touching 


OfM; Dar cunning initructing of Somers, by [peaking to 


LYING DISCOVERY, ° 167: 
depofeth, there are a great number of witneffes ready to depofe, 
Itisto be obferued that M.Hallams depolition beginneth thus. 
Haning hearde of many wonders, of certain hiichines inSo, bedd, 1 was 


she likencfjes of kitlings mowing in So. bedd, 1 hane hearde much wonder 
sher caf and at one tyme e>c. wher eby It is playne that either there was 
fome very rare accident, or feeming fo to be, which we, may be affu- 
red did drawe many to’ behould him: And beefides at this time M. 
Ha/lam and M Freeman ( becaufe his kinfwoman was now appeached 

to bea witch, for this accident, and the Di[conery of certaine perfons | 


_ for witches, began, continued and ended togither )gaueit out that . 


So. was a counterfeyt,.V Vhich two things conlidered, and that by-rea » 
fon of the latter the moft that came Vnto him had an efpeciall eye to . 


-counterfeyting, how fimple, and what filly foules muft they needes - 


be, that were thus deluded by the tipping and tapping. flipping, c fil . 
lipping of aboyes toes and fingers? But as in other things{o in this par 
ticular, the Difc. will not only ut out their eyes who behelde Somers , 
troubles, and depriue them J¢ their fences I meane theirfeeling, ahd 


hearinge, but alfo of theiré reafonand  ynderftanding, as if they. had 


_ bene fooles or naturals,or more like vnto bruitebeafts then men.And 


bis hearing [uch things, as he ment he (bould prachife 
in the deteéFing of witches. 
After 1. Dar. brought him on to an other matter concerning the de- 


tetting of witches, affirming to diners in the of Somers, that it was 37° 
ordinary with thofe that were lately difpoffeffe L 
So. would doe the like. Thefe things M. Dar. denyeth, 


to dete? witches, and-that 


arrell. 


Ag beforethe Difc. hath tould vs that] inftruéted So. in his prac 


tifes from the 5, of Nouember vntill the 7. 2. to diflemble arepoffef 


‘fion. 3. certayne tricks vnder a couerlett, by {peaking to others in Som, 
bearing: fo heere he faith the fame concerning the detecting of witches: 
that Linftruéted him therein, by [peaking to others in Ins heavine’ Hence 
it commeth that both in thefe feveral! inftru@ions and cofenages mé~ 


tioned by the Dsfcomerer, and the depofitions prouing the fame, and 


namely this touching witches, we haue crdinarily fome of thefeclau 


fes, in the prefence of Somers. in the boyes prefence, the boy bejug prefents, fee fora tft her 


Somers being prefent, in the prefence of the boy, M. Dar. affirmedyto,thofe °'P°8** 343! 


that were with the boy, in the bearing of Scmers, before Scmasege. And + 
thofe with fuch are moft materyall, and fuch as might not 


be 


— 
x 
a 
. 
4 
> 


ou 


A 


» 


~ 
t 


Me 


108 A DETECTION-OF S: HARSNETS 
be omitted, for then my cunning infrutting, and. depolitions concer= 
ning tlic fame doe fall to the grounde, Diu euer any lince the worlde. 
was made publith to the world for truth and in good earnelt, {io ablurd 


_. and ridicuious ftuff, as this is of my inftruCting So. by jpcaking to.otbers 
in bis hearing, what would haue him to does Phe lpeatéeth ofs: 


tea of wonders, hé may well let this go anong one ot them, for I am" 
it isa mattet to be wondred at were it true, that Darrelland. 
Somers {houldagree togither about counterfeyting a poileilion, difpo 
feffion &c, which are not very ealy to be counterte yted, meete toge . 
ther thereabout for the {pace of 4. or 5. yeares, haue inftructionsin — 
writing pale betwene them, after comming to dwell at the fame to-. 
wnt e meete often in Dar. chamber alone, and. etien then. when thele 
counterfeyt tricks were doing, and yet notwith{tanding defer ali ther 
inftrusting and learning yntill the very time came that So. {hould do’ 
his teytesbetore others. Oné woulde thinke that men woulde rather 
hifle at thefe things then beleeue them: but by lamentable experience . 
we leeit is otherwife: wherein the folly ofman, aad how eafily hee is. 
mifled andféducep, doth cuidentlyappeare, 
George Richardjan depofeth thus, One Atififje Wallis and others. 
did talke in the roame where So, lay, of [uch perfons as were (uf[pecbed to be. 
witcbes, before beth: = 


By this depofition of the Dic. ownewitneffe as.I may 


therforendt by him not to be denyéd for {ure teltimony this fupe 


pofediaftruStion of myné¢ is very much weakened, for itis verye vn= 
likely that I did inftruct him to detect, witches, feeing J did not dy=— 


_ rect him what perfons he. fhoulde name for witches, as appeareth by: 


this depofition, which ymplyeth that he had fuch direction only from 


and the refthad not come in the nick, as I may fay?or comminge had 


named thefe per/ous [ulpetted to be witchestorit. they hadinamed — 


his hearing? /Fall thele things had not fallen out tbushand patt as the 


“fay, where had then bene this detec#ting of witches it mult needs 


be that ‘eyther this cofenage never bene, or. Som. had atleaft nae. 
fried other perfons, But it may be that Miftre/fe Wallys at. lealtif not; 
she others had corifederated with me about my. teachinge. Sv. to couns; 

terfeyt, and there are thefe circumftances to ftrengthen it. 1. Shee is; 


my wifes filter. 2 . when it was fhe was'not tongsar-tyed what aman ber 
brother wats. writ a letter me to come ouer and Som-.. 


4. we heart what wordes thee vttered (if we may.beeleue George Rie. 
fweating) and that in So. bearing. Confidering thefe circum; 
ftatices furely the did greatly forgete himfelfe for elfe vndoubr- 

da 


D:[conercr. 
m pay 138. 
| | Darrell, 
them, yet had not io done zy tie roome where Somers lay, that is not 


edly when it was, he woulde haue depofed and examyned Mifisffe 
wallys sboutthismatter. 


__M. Dar. (faith Robert Cooper ) defired the Maior to make inquirye 
shrongh the towne, sf any per[on could charge any of the pretended 1 sama 


The Maior did fo nothing being fayd to diners of their cha 


rges, they were all {ett at faningtwo, 

I faid that the faid deteéting of certayne perfons for witches was 
done by Sathan,andas.he might therein {peake truth to an euill end, 


~ fo being the father oflyes, there wasmore caufe to fufpect him of ly- 


ing: and therefore whofoeuer.fhould there-vpon hold & report thena 


(or any of them ) to be witches without fome proofe had therof from 


men, fhould iniure them in their good name. & fin againft god.For 
whereas So. was very {trangely and greuoufly handled at the bringing 


and carrying away of the detected perfons, and fo oft as that was don 
-where-vpon percale fome fufpected them to be witches: we muft 


_ member that this alfo‘was done by the diuell (as by the manner of ig - 


it did appeare ) thereforenot to be regarded, who were they, or fom 


ofthem, moft tree from witchcraft, yet might haue done fo, thereby 


to haue drawne the innocent to punifhment, and man to condemne 
& flaunder the righteous. Heere-vpon affirmed; that if any could 
teftify any thing againft chem concerning witchcraft, it were wel they 


did it. And I hearde that witnefled again{t them yea almoft all of thé, 


before they were had to the mapiftrate, that for my own part I did & 


Rill doe fufpect them generally to befuch as worke with {piritsy and 
that Freeman, Widdow Higgit; Widdow Boote, Groues, Millyeent — 
Horflay, and So, aunt:( whofe name:I know not} arefuch Ihaue 


doubt, and chinke I could: make proofe of thofe facts ofitheires, 
would make it manifeftto others, And hee reby it isplayne thatit-is 


vntrue the Dyfé. faith, that the parties Somers. were theree 
by reputed for witches:for thus it was: Prefently yppon the detection, p2z 


matters of fa&t cametolight; firft»priuatly, then openly ic the towrie 
hall, which lay hid vneill then, and there-vpon were they reputed for 
witches. yea it is well: knowne to the inhabitants of Nott. that When 
thele of the cowne of Nott..were openly before the magiftrates of the 
faid towne for fufpition of witchcraft, there was not‘a word vfed 
€erning the detection: widdow Higeitwas reputed.a witch, for divers 
fats wherein it muft needes be that the diuell and fhe did confpire to 


gether, and efpecially for murthering thechilde of one Bingham . 


Natt. whereof he openly accufed her in the towne hall: So 4hceFre 


man Was reputed a witth for matter of fat, {pecially alittle after: the ~— 


) de 


109 


pag 14% 


a 
4 
2 Com. 
2 
> 
a 
> 
i 


ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


deteStion,vpon fufpition of murthering the childe of Mary C 
ter vnto Somers, wherevpon fhe was condemned by ( 
_ of willful] murther, and it is ftrangé that any Iury 
toacquite herthereot. Thus might I proceede to the reft, faue that. 
none of them were charged with taking away the life of any. Yealere 
all men iudge of Mallicent Horflayes owne confetlion: who beinge by 

M. Perk yns luftice of peace examyned, and denyinge that euer thee 

hurt any body, acknowledged that fhe had helped divers 
(forfooth) by good prayers, whereof fhe then faid one. 


culd be founde 


Difcouerer. 


But this deuife of Dar. concerning the dete of witches is almofte 


Laide afle 
wee [ball heave no more of it. 


.and againe deceipt of Dar.is fo 


as it is fuppofed 
‘Darrell. | 


ifclofe the ac- 


It is a practife of Sathan and no denife of myne to d 
quaintance he hath with fome of his familiars. This hath bene feene _ 
beefides in Tho. Darling and the 7, in Lancafbire, in Marearet Hery- 
fon,( of whome beefore ) M. Throckwnortons children, & many others, 
And where the fuppofeth we jhall heave wo'more of this, furely we 
shad not ifhe had not given caufe thereof: and before I ende; Imuft 
once againe tell him and all men, that it was not So. but the ditell by 
his tongue, that deteczed the witches, For firft it isnot likely that he 
coulde haue difclofed fo many, 2. As Sathan.was during this Difcone 
ryfenfibly about So. body. vnder the coueringito our fight, hearing, 
and feeling, (as is aforelaid) fo was he alfo fenfibly vexing him inhis 
body, as was manifeft to the great multitade: that darin 
beheld him: In probability therefore mi 
gueand other inftruments of fpeach, although that be very rare and 
-extraordinaty, as well as perform other thitigs as rare, yea tore raré 
“about him. and alfo moleft him in his body; 8 forme other parts thet 
.of? 3. He knew nothing more or leffe of the infinite {peaches he thett 
vttered, and namely of his caliing for and naming certaine perforis to 
be witches, as himfelfe then affirmed, when thetewas fome beleuing — 
of him, and in reafon to leade others to beleeue him, as wilappeare 
‘by the reafon following. 4. whiles he was difcouer , 
he vttered thofe thinges which. paffed his knowteds 


e that tyme 


tnor the diuell vle his ton 


thefe perfons, 
ge and vnider- 


ftanding: For now it was that he expounded the Creed by the {pace 
ofan howre: when Alice Freeman and widdowe Hiesit were fearched 
by diuers weamen, a good way fron his fathers hou'e, he tould ther _ 
“of even as they were fearching, and that 4/ice Freeman had amark of 
fuch a fhoulder, and the other nane found of her, which was even fo. 


WVYVhen M4ilkicent Horflay was had before the abouenamed 21, Per 


> 
“ 
142. 
= 
| 
i 
ai 
> 
4 


4.ors. myles diftant from Nott. hetould the verytime fhe was 
anyned, the words fhe then vfed:for herfelfe, and of the {tripping 
fearching of her. In like forthe.tould:of the {peaches and attions of 
her fitter a myle of Nort. euert when the fame fell out. And were it: 
‘ not to auoyde tedyoufnes, much more of this kinde might heere be: 
faid, Seeing thenit is cleare, that thefe {peaches were-vttered by the 
diuell: why fhould we not thinke that the other {peaches, which con 
cerned and accompanyed she fame, & were vttered as it were with 
the fame breath, camefromthefamefpirit? = 
OFM. Dar. courfe, from about December 
| the fourteenth of lanunary, whileft Somers refufed todif= 
| femble any longer. 9910 JUC 
M. Dar. bent his chesfe force to perj wade his anditorye,that [athan 
would lurke ac about one (out of whome be had bene caft) fuffering 
the party to be well for a good {fpace; but that he was verily per[waded, that 
Sathan would not giue lim ouer, vatill in the end he bad repoffeffed him. — 


pagr4s ) 


About 8.weekes after the time the Di/conerer. heere {peakethof, Darrel. 


and after Somersjhad giuen it forth that ke counterfeyted,I did open 
lye affirme, that Somers had not counterfeyted,and 2. that he was 
rerofieffed, and that it came from the fubtlety of fathan then lurking 
in him, that he vexed him not, but I woulde haue bene afhamed, to 
haue faideyAhat Sathan would lurke fometimes about one, ov that Sathan 
would not gine So. oucr vntil be bad him, as the Difc. chatgeth 
me. to haue done:but proueth none.of them not fo much as by a falle 
witnes, no not by So.owne teftimony ,who ftadeth him in great ftead 
at other times for the proofe of many worthy things. But that which 
the Di/¢, faith heere, he thwarteth and ouerthroweth elfe-where. for 
heere from the.7. of December vntill the 3 4. of lanuary, he will haue me 
pratling to my auchtory that Sathan lurketh fometimes about one, 8 that 
fathan-wold not rue ower vntillin the end he had repiffiffed Somers, in the 
~ whole Cha ter following alfo affirming, that he began to be repoflef 

fed 14, of January: and in page 127. he telleth vs that So. 
[uppofed repoffeffion was about the 21. of November: lf Theld and gaue 
it out about the 2.1. of that So. was repoffeffed, it isnot cre 
dible that I fhould from the 7s 0f December till the 14.0; lannaryiangie 
as the Dijc, affirmeth. And thisis the 9, tyme that the Difcomerer is 

ibe Aut hor of the Narration writeth thre Sa M 


retayned preacher im Nott, that populous townes bauit.g b i q 


pag 147 


3 
% 
- 
4 
> 
. 


A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS 
fetled preacher there beforethis time, fince the begining of her maieflyes vas 

gue. kyther M, Aldridg or bis companion are in danger of an bard impus 

tation: except it may be thus bolpe” M. Aldride vicar of S. Maryes in 

Nott.wheras this fellow peraduenture accounteth neyther perfons nor vicars 

nor any that bear »for preachers: the tobe chofen 


by the parrifo, as M. Dar. was, 18 the preacher ( forfooth ) that muft bean 


The Narrator denyeth not, that they haue had a preacher, but — 
no {etled preacher, or {tandinge mynifteric, for that M. /dridg hath 
flocks or congregations beelidesto attend vppon as well as that, whe 
ereby it hath come to paffe, that his people of Nott. haue hearde his 
voyce oft times but once ina monneth, fometimes fildome: which - 

many befides the Narator account nofetled miniftery, 

How So. about the 14. of lanuary fell again to the 

tayn fitts, wherein he continued at times, till about the24, 
of Febauary, & how M. Da’. pretended that he was 
Dar. pent about 4. or ¢.-weckes ( next going before the 14. of 
me nuary) in preaching, and reniling ust that belde So. for atounterfeyt. 
Had Icarryed my felfe in the pulpitt and worke ofithe ‘miriifte 
’ ry, as the Difc. beareth the world in hand, I hadbene more fytt and 
worthy to haue {itt at the plow tayle, and guided it, then in the'chiait 
of Chrift Iefus, and to haue bene a guide’ to his people. I publifhed 
the worke of god, prefently after the difpofleffion of Somers 8 thet 
did ( as in duty I ought) make mention openly of So. and at othef 
simes I deny that ever I mentioned:him)faue that ahoutia quarter of 
ayeare after his difpofleffion, and after hefaydhe couhterfeyted,'I 
{pake againft that curfed confeffion of his, and againft them that'wo« 
ld haue bim to bea counterfeyt. And this I did twife, once ‘vppon 
the Lordes day tomy owne people, & anothertime notlong after 
to them and others come out of the coaltsthereabouts met togither 
at afaft.. At this lattertime alfo Iremember, I vfed afew wordes con: 
cerniuge his rerofleffion. And whereas the Dic, faith in the chapter’ 
beforethat I preached at Nott, about that time, viz. fron about the 7. 
Pg 545. of December to the 14., of lanuary 6.0r 7. feymons, vopon the 43. 44. 
— 45. verfes vppon the 12. of Mathew,concerninge fathans returne toveenter 
he faith untruly: for they'were preached in Nouember, two of rhem 
@fahe 8. and 9. dayes of this moneth, and fo on: forwardes‘on 


4 
4 
‘ait | 
; 
ag 
the bel | 
| 4 


preached thele then, 60k 

ritual puligiliep, and thatinboph thelc,+ 
habit ans ati 


bis very volikelys (ring was pteachinge of this 
ung, naturall men, not lauormeg.of 

thy preaching, and aduiedmero, preach ot /aue- 


aquarterot ayeare alter 
law ( thagdo they rautiese 


but Gas often). d py. 


ownenlening. 
thez, were pb {pie 


FEDGES £0, i 
‘thedpirit, the fome diflike to 
fayinge 


{cripturey they mendes 


that they were came: thexe:bur 


theie7. 


th they kitked. withothé heeleagaintt me 
preuming to initruct shiew teacher, and.to direct sheir.guide'( like ep 
the icholler, thee fhantd sakd yppanbim ca 


cole By 


My farher in. lav faith 502)\ rectamed ab 


is: 


_oufly knowne to the inhabitants: of Thaue fhewed be-~ 
thatat thefirft collection made.atis difpoffetlion; -his ‘father 
hadneuera penny, and at but-pare thereof,» gs gale 
- And erenot by ‘my theahes; 
Kling tothe people at the diffoluing 


of reall Somers 


flattering {peaches to draw him therevnto: for.if Rab. Coopet thé boys: 


tather m haue depofed as affirmeth, kehath. 


was abbyt 


plealyage 


compregatic-n £0 be mind- 
fullof the I did. Neyther douktbutthatthée 
knoweth thisgo be very yea few better;& yet behold he publith 
eth it fér wath to the world. Porwho.can thinke but th at he kash tk- 
_anyned the:boyhis father in law thereabouts: firfbin-hope tohaueat 
confirmedsby his depefition, if any-duch thing, happely hadbene; 
‘thouchit-thould proue otherwile, yer hoping eithenby 


Pag 


= 


M M. Dar. mcanes the fore of twenty nobles or ther: in 
and charge, when was pretended fis 


4 
4 
y 
x 
> 
P 
ww 
~ 
a: 
>. 
< 
¢ 
% 


ADETECTION OF /SHARSNETS 


ries in other thine: sdépoled as falfly as So, hath Bee 

‘Beeides it is very Ekely-that the Dic: bath had 
‘eycher Mi: Freeman, William from . 

‘whome t learnée the “certay eerein, Fort Maior gine. 

So lew that which he bad and ifit were:20 
nobles, from him be receaued it, who can’ witriefle thet Ineuer {pake 

-wied the fame: fo that‘were that true which is falf 


eudthat in'Lowe bad20. nobles, yer it made not againft me, 


nothinge of this 20. 
onlyfrom Somers, not 2 {tion among t titude of. cepe 
fitions confirini Gore isnot | 


fore “frends bane efibim 

posmts of this whole of them 

Lae Yorke 

pine fbi eds at 


Bri sdfinuch of 


bon as the didi his: difpoffeffion. 1 am fully pevfmaded 

shove of ( meaning'M: in Browne 
12, Commiffioners, a very reuerend and learnt ‘Yhewonlde 
vpon hisoath { for the booke was prefently.called . 
fo fooneas any-appeared before the B. of London ): So. was dif 
Did M. toe dworkeof God 
which he regardetha little hore 
that 'So. ffefled: Fraly ithad bene very ftrange if he fhoulde 
frend to the whatfoeuer he is to me, in fayinge-that be didnot dil 
femble, that be was poffeffed;:and.that it was thediwell 
that prancks in bis body, asthe Tife termeth.them. 
thar be did thinkthat be was dilpoff-{Jed,or to this effect. And for M. 


j 


4 

ig 

| 

Be 

; 

if 

| 

at 

| 
» 

4 

# | 

at | 
‘ 
| on 
| 
| 
77 
t 
AF 
4 

| 

fj 

’ 

Bet 

a 

~~ 


come was he kept by the Bifhop Sat 
amyned, aboutnothinge, burm all likelihood t 
Browne & M. Brinley were,}& that of the faid Jepofitions or.anfvers 

ofhis to the famearticles, we heare nothingin 


a great {choller likewile & Commiflioner, who togitherwith 
Browne Brinfley was depoled.andexamyned: ofwhofean 
fversalfo and what he 


The fecret teQimor 
alfo by theire (peaches. 
_willregarde more then ali 


Voorn M. Da. 


b 


ence, throuch 
bcit has 
be heat 

of fin 


ported, fo the credit of the reporter, with.other circumftaunces-and prou-24-t$- 
none of thofe ones which will belent emery thine. 2. M. Iveton.was 
notonly and heard of the ftrange and fearefull-operationseffa-. 
than, in and vppon the body of Somers, but was alfa an eye witnefle. 

thereof, the daye of the. commiffion, he beinge-onge of the Commi-_ 


And hereby, as partly alfo in that M. Ireton being the B. of London 
depofed, concerning So. counterfeyting, pofleflion, dilpofiefion, Se. 
repofleffion, as well as the two former; ( forhe camenot (fure) to. 


London, dwelling an hondred-mylesof for nothinge, neither beinge. 


kelihooc the very fame that. M. 


fitions, itis avery ealy thing. for men to 


thmketh of Som, Far had.therebene but a} for the Ds/c.'pu fe 


witnefle hath {aid to counterfeiting 
ard repofleflion wehearencta = 
fthele 4. foreuerentdeuines, ando- 
reachine that So. was thercamas 


» 


ot not, his poffeffion,. 


t a 


> 


gn before. M.Dar. fill 


. 


tehath not left me nor'yet the caufe. For he: hath depofedthar 
fully per[waded that So. was pol that beis fullyperfwaded he was. | 
d, 3. that though he be not fo fully pafwaded. of bis repoffeffinn, 4 
be doth thnk fo, meaning-of thetime prefent, becauleforanythings; 
knew ,fathan atter his repofletfing of So.might percalebe depattadss 
BB wile was he to tell vs that M. Ireron bis incomyent= 
bss facilluty in belewing thoje things which were tould bim-ab 3 
es fill did rely that if things which 
true, then thus and this. F cM, 1s knowmas. tobe 
arning, fo of great wifdome,.and therefore asitis {aid 
srouerbes) will confider before he bclene: as the things re 
flioriers, fo that this filly eualionof the Dic. 
ill the world fhould haueheard of it. Lhe famemay belaydbyM.F : 


\ 
| “pag 


2? 
‘ 
4 
4 
> 
4 
q 
‘ 


agaimt the di!poffe Gonj 


316 A DETECTION OF S,HARSNET§ 
“vemaynedin all bis 
‘This is amanifelt ¥atruth, tor che next day after] firk Gidehe 
was repotiefled, and before I preached to, 1 went to -Z/bay, wher 
my remayned ;and betore returned { being the taterdayfoj. 


lowing ) he was had to S. Toanes, and tatd’ he counterteyted; Whether 


i neither did nor mightrepayre vnto him, ONE exceps 


ted when the Maar was prelent. and atter the ot latvvad o¢ 
fore the 12. Commiffioners, [was with him only the next mornings 


‘with diuers mintite rs at Edmund Garlands noute, aeparting pretently 


home to .4jbby, trom whote haul: he was departed, d¢ with the Jog 
turned to his vomyt, I meane hisforMgr conieliion OF ceunterteys 
ing, which he had ‘ditclaymed tox berore'l returned to Nos, 


that he affirmeth? why thus #:and'then tie may be 


Tt might grcatly be inaruayled what eftimation credit M.D ar gob 
by thos neve forgery of Sa, pretended Howbeit many of the wiler 


fort, that were not pol} fed swith the giddy humonre of nonetryes ¢ comereld 


forfooth with xeale & fighings )-did lauzh this to [cornests they cia thereh, 
"The wifer fort the Difc. calleth thole which did langh to feorne’ the 
wotke of god . Of fach /corners the world was neuer without fome: 
-when/a far greater worke then this we treate of,and more wonderfull . 
was wrought, and that ymediatly by the Lorde himfelte, whereof we 
“Feade in the 2. of the itis mocked. Yhere is agenera: 


“Mon and euer will be, that fitteth 1 the feate of the fcornfull. Bur, who 
are thole wife men he fpeaketh of? forfooth M. Walton Arch-deacon- 
Darbybire, and M. Sales officiall: both nonrefydents, and the iat- 
_ tora man.of no learning, and as little wifdome and government: He 
 woulde neuér elle 
- leader in the fetting vp of a may-pole the laft fommer, with pypinge, 
“and dancing, and that vppon the Lerdes day: Our ofthe miniftery 
of thefe wife men, M..P eter Clarke Mavor then-of Natt, MiFremart 
and the other Nuott.. Commiffioners. For beefides thefe there were | 
fearflye any(fome papifts excepted) which were knowne to wag 


haue credibly hearde ). haue bené the 


the oases againft the worke of-god, the multitude not only-ackno- 
Muedging it: but reioycinge in it, and magnyage the name of god, | 
And in the miniftery none were knowne Lie for counterieyting 


Sonaers but the tivo for. 


vpon occafvon that Felton did rife 
you tant... aid ri VP and phat openly againit the 


manifell 


| 
; 
i+ 
{both the! tly prot D 
| i and both theie I can dyrettly prouc. But how doth the Dijc. prooue | 
ure it Sa lve. — 
| 
| 
| 
4 
j 
' 
| | 
| 
| 
; 
> 


_ manifelt worke of god, after one publique meeting about Sém, there 

was an other at the lame time agreed vpon. V V hen the appoynted 

day was come, there were mett togither many miniiters and learned 

_men,ail which were tof potletii0,& no ma heard to {peake a word for 

countertey ting, this arch. deacon and ofticiall excepted. Now ali thef 
the Difc, accounceth to be men poffcfjed though norwith diuells, yet. 

with che giddy humour of noneltyes, .v Vell my brethren, itis farr better 
to be one of the fouly/h of this world, and for that tolly to’ be laughed at 
enu icorned, then orthe wile, &*¢ princes of this world, & for the fame 

to be /anghed at by hum that dwelleth heanen, and of the lord tobe bad 


the Comunitlioners after all this contention, he renouncéd °counter- 
" feyting, and contelled it to be the finger of god, as both M. Exington 8 
M. loon Strelley with others can witnetle: and whether at that time he 
allo werenotpaffiffed with the giddy humour of noueltyes, comered ‘with 


So. grew weary of this bts [aid relap{e,after be bad continued therein ae 


get out of M, Ldarrel! fingers,and be at $,Loanes, And againe inthe next 
teafe: Cooper fignified to.fome of the Aldéimen, what So. bad ‘vito 
him touching bis defire that.he msght.remayne withhim; that forat the 
Inthefe wordesthe Dif. telleth vs how So. by the: meanes 6f 
Cooper, got himfelfe from his jfather. in lawes houfe to Sy loanes. 
“The reaion mouiug him there-vnto was, that being weary of courl~ 
_terfeyting through his long continuance therein, viz. for 6. weekes 


togither, he could not teli how to gine ouer his diffembling; 
m me. To helpe himielte therefore.in this ftraight, he bethought hi 
of this courfe we heare.of..For anfwer. herevnto; firft the Dife. doth 

proue that So. was the cau‘e of his going to 5. loanes,)no not ‘by 

So, depofition, but onlye faith fo him felfe. By the depofition of | 
4 Lobn Cooper page 177. the contrary doth appeare, as we fhall prelent- 
ly heare. 3. we may hereby coniecture how falle chisis, in that 
isaboute in Nott. whether vagrant and ydie perfons are fent and 
keptvery ftraight toworke, beings feverely. ifehey fayle 

therein. Now who can thinke that So, whe had jrunn away, firitfrom 
Grayes, and after twile from Tho. Porter, wasa yong fydler fing 

me boy, had alfo playd the counterfeit boy as the Difc. faith, fir ft at 
then at fhould offer voluntarily :bis néck 


derifyon, But delire to know of the Difc.( who canfo well-difcern : cor.2.6, 


ipirits ) with what {pirit M, Walton was poflefled,-when beefore 


fixe weckes, [aid to lobn Cooper that be fbould be quyet ifbe might 


ae 


e. 


. 
i 
/ 
> 
~* 
ae, 
7 
- 
wf 
a, 
. 
. 


76 


he crew weary. A molt ridiculous thing, all circumftances well confy- 
_ dered, which IHeaue to the Reader to bethinke him of, Yea but i 

Dic. is of an other mynde: for marke what he telleth vs, and that ve 
ry folernnly in an other place. 


perfs 


118 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


the yoake, (I meane of toy!efome labour ) and his back to the rodof 


correGtion. And wherefore fhoulde he doe this? becaufe ( forfooth) 
-otherwife he coulde not be quyct, es gett himfclfe out of my fingers, but 
mutt noedes will he nill he continue his counterfeyting, whereofalas . 


If any fawth be doe {urmife thefe prattifes to be improbable, as beinge 
much {ubieG to daneer,in that the [ard parties that are fo cunningly drawn 


on in thofe courfes, may vpon many occafions detc&? them: they muft know 


that the[e fellowes are well enough furmfbed in that bchalfe. For 
onecft the Papiffes, it were fufficient to bringe a [u[pition of berefye, that 
foould but doubt that one were not pof}:ffcd, xf preifts the con 
prary. And we fee amongft- our felues how hardly it 1s indured, that our 

pretended Excarcifts are called into qucftion, but be st that the worft [bould 
fall out: yer.they haue [uch rules, as if you will allow them, they ave fafe 
enough. Bile any doe once fallinto their handes, ov yealde themfelues vnto 
peattifes, they can neuer bervidd from them by any meanesy fo long 


as they Aare worke vpon them, 


_ :Confidering thefe wordes of the Dz/¢. and that he faith that cou 
Mterfeytes can nener-be vid by any mcanes from their tcachers fo longe'as 
they are pleafed to worke vpon them: it isno maruaile though Som. were 
glad to get himfelfe euen to S, Toaues ( the worft place for his eafe of 
a thoufand ) that fo he might vidhimfelfe of me; but rather a maruell 


“that he could fo beridofme. feeing the Dic. faith that fuch {chollers 


gan neuer be vid of their maifters, no not by any meanes, If this be true 
SH; how came it to paffe that So. rid bimfelfe out of my bandes once 
-before when he was ‘weary of counterfeyting, as now he is faide to be? 
‘So. (quoth®the Difc. ) beginning to be werie of counterfeyting , for onght 
that 21. Dar. could doe, altogitber refufed to continue bis difcmbling comf 
any longer: and fo made no fhew of any of bis pranks for the {pace of $, wee 
kes. And agayne: So. growing weary of bis diffimulation, contrary to Dat 
waltons gaue ouer all bis tricks praétifes. And this he proveth 
fubftantially by So. teftimony .Hereof (faith he So. in thes fore. About 
the begining of December, 1 did grow very weary of all my former prath- 
(es, and did wholly leane them, contrary to M. Dar. good liking 
who endenored to perfwad me fll to continue in them: but he could not pree 
nayle with me fo farr. Here by the way we fee that the D:fconercr is cO* 
trary to himfelfe, Andthisisthe 10. time that the D:fconerer is cone 


_ winced by his owne Difcouery. But I vould know (1 fav ) of the Dif 


why So, could not as well gett bim/felfethis latter time ou: of my 


4 
‘ 
. 
| 
4 
i 
att 
¢ 
> 
2 
if 
| Sts 
: 
auf.s. 
i 
ia 


without the conueying of himfelte to Joaues, as well as before: O- 
thers will thinke thongh the Dafc. be of an other minde, thatwere it 
fo that I had taught So. to counterfeyt, as he will haue it, and he had 
but in fecret tould me, that being weary of counterfeyting, he wolde 
counterfeyt no more, and rather therr fo he would diicouer all, I wo- 
ulde haue bene willing enough to haueyid my felfe of him,c if nedes 
I mutt bufy my felfe in this worthy artshave rather fought out anewe 
- {choller, then haue troubled my felfe with’ cne fo lazy, fo waywarde, 
wauering, and peruerfe, wherein ‘alfo was fuch danger. For howfoes 
counterfeyt, though the counterfeyt bewray all, fo Jong.as the 
affirmes the contrary, if we may beleene the Dilechcnse: yetZtruft he 
will not fay the fame of the minifters of Chrift Jefus amongevs, and 
yet he doth fay fomthing bending that way. Moreouer, if Som. faide 
thus to Cooper and went by his owne procurement to this faid end to 
Toanes: why wherrhe Was'come thither did Cooper threaten to whip 
him, if he would not leaue his tricks, as Cooper himfelfe confefled vp- 
pon his oath to the 1 2, Commiffioners? but more for the conuincing 
of this followeth forthwith. And where the Difc. pretendeth that So, 
grew weary of bes velapfe meaning counterfeyting tq be repofleflec, be 
caule be had continued therein abont fixe weckes he is therein greatly ce 
_ceaued, for it was but two weekes, ‘So. began.to be repoflefl edat or 
about the time of his ymprifonment, as appeareth by the beginninge 
_ of this chapter page 49. but that was not about the 14. of January, 
as the Di(c. faith in the atgument of this chapter and So, alfo a little af 
ter, but the 14. of February as 1 can praue by many witnefle, & the 
24.of February he went to S. Ioanes, as is confeffed, where hee was 
bie guyet, and confeffed his diffimulation. By thisthat hath 
ne faid we may partly fee, that So. remoued not himfelfe for the ca- 
ufe heere alledged, to S. Ioanrs, but they ineed caufed this removall 
whome Sathan vfed ashis inftrements to get from the boy that cur- 
fed confeflion of counterfeyring which foone after he was there hee 
_ Made, the meanes firft being vied, which ferued there-vnto: viz. pro 
mifes and threats, asheereatter will appear. And tho'€ were our Not= 
singham Commiffioners, who him to be carried thither 

greatly againft the boyes and his parents will, ynder coul- 

Jourto fynde out fome counterfeytinge, whereit 

as manifeft as the daye-light atnoon, 
that'therewasno poffibillity of 
counterfeytinge. 


The end ofthe [cond Boke, 


‘ 
. 
2 
> 
‘ 
4 


A DETECTION. OF S, HARSNETS 


Somers confelcd bis at Toanesin Notting- 
as foune as he was out of M. Dar. 
Concerning the occasion of So. remouing fram his father in lawes 


t0.S. loanes in Nott. place where the paore are fett to worke ) 
per the keeper there depot thus. Being oftintimes with So, in his fits, 
diligently beboulding the courfe of his carriage in them: | grew very 
pitious that he did but diffemble,and there vppon w.ts well content, to haut, 
the tuition of him, to make tryall of the matter: the rather, for thatthe 


bo yes kzpers and frendes that were him, were willing to pleale him in, 


The trite occafion or rather caule of Somers remouing, was 


ther the former, whereof I haue {poken, nor yet this latter heremen, 


tioned, but firft and cheifly the mallice of M... Frceman. Alderman,be, 


caui¢ his kinfwoman,Allice Freeman .was by,So. dete-ted fora witch, 


which could not ftay it felfein accufing So. vniultfly of witchcraft, &. 


imprifoning him, & after vppon bayle byndinge him ouer to anfwer 


it at the Affifes,but proceeded S&.neuer.gaue ouer vntill So.confefied, 
that he had counterfeyted,he hoping therby.as itfhould re~ 


couer the ood name of his kinfwoman,and pactly to dilgrace: and fo. 


confequen tly, to be reuenged of me, whome, in regarde of that difco; . 


uery and the counterfeyting he then ftrove for and I gaynfaid,.he ha’ 


ted-extreamely, fo as at the Jength he couldnot indure to come toi 
the shurch, when I exerciled my miniftery 2. the mallice of M, Grew 
gory the towne clarke (a popt {h mate) againft. che work of god, thagi 
is the di‘poffeffion of Somers andithis becay fe, of his religion, being, its 
hart a papi, as is plgyn, in rhat for the.{pace, ofeleuen yearesbetoret 


ke had not receaued the lordes fu per. Now, the papifts Se their.adhe | 


> 


rents( albeit the learneder forte of then doe a reall pol- 


by vs, This forfooth they will haue peculiar to their own {ynagogues 


to their own portuffe,to their owne Te rozamus,maibled prayers, pto 


ceflions,coniurings,& ceremonyes,as elfe-wher hath bene 


/ 
\ 


fefiion and difpoffetfion of Sathan in and out.of.the bodyesaf men) 
cannot yer ih patience indure that any,fuch worke fhould be wrought 
mn our church ahd by our miniftery by fafting and: prayer performed 


| 
Thi 
ii 
4 fic 
7 
peg ( 
a 
4 
to 
20 
bd 
bet 
y 
fe 
| 
a 
| 


fhewed. To thefe came M, Morey an Alderman one alfo reputed to be 


yn{ound and popifh thele three did draw with them 1, Hart. 4ldr= ° 
manand M. Clarke then Masor a man very eafy becauie of his {impli 
city to be mifled: which ¢, aflembled in the townehall, fentfor me, — 


fisnifying vato me, that they purpofed to take So.andcomithim to 
tne caltody of two honneft men, becaufe they fufpected him to coun 


terfeyt, which accordingly they did 3 dayes after: fauethat the men . 
they prouided to be So. keepers namely lohn Cooper deiNich. Shepherd 


were icarlely honnelt and of good name aswe lhall heare hereafter: 


The day after that So. came to S. loanes, he did counterfeyt bimfelf? 
( faith Nicholas Shepherd ) to be in a fet, becaufe (4s 1 think) certain wee 
men were come thither vato him to {ce bins. who did greatly bemoaue bim: 
wherevppon remonmg the [aid weomen from him, tould whilefi bée~ 
was in brs tricks in lohn prefence: that if he 
rile | would fet fuch a payre of knip-knaps vpon him as 
therevpon So.did pre ently rife, eft his [aia tricks, &z had 
wo more fits, whileft he continued there, being the {pace almoft of 4 monneth.. 

day quaintancerpith bim,( be vppom 

my promife that | would be his frend, and procué bim fauow fromM.Ma _ 
sor 8c bs brethren) did comfele vuto me, that all hebad done tn the 


The next day 1 falling into fome better ac 


of bis former tricks, were but counterfeyted, and [aid, that when | woulde. 


I (hould fee all bis [aid tricks, and bow be did them. The fame day I tonld 
lohn Cooper, what So. had confeffed ynto me, and willed bim that when 


hey were in bed togither, be foould talke with him thereof, fayinge, that ¥ 


verily thought; he would confeffé all vnto bim at larce. And accordingly it 
fell out, For as lobn Cooper hath depofed, So. tould him, that all the tricks 
he bad done in his [aid poffe(fion and repoffeffion were all of them cowntere 


feted, 
true that is faid here of aft that So, had before. cer= 


taine weomen, and is as true that the fame day or day before ‘he had. 

an other in the garden before M. Freeman and fome other: vpon the 

ight whereof, becaufé of his greudus beating of himfelf, with hisface 

groueling and tongue thruft into the moulds, & foming, 
i 


che cknefle, aud 
this was prefehtly bruited throughout Notringham. If So. were weary 


hethe faid M. Freeman affirmed, that he had the falling 


of bis relapfe or pretending to be that is of counterfeyting, 


vnto Cooper, that his defire was to be at loanes, and that fo at thé pagrs2.&17% | 


lenoth he might be quiet and giae ouer his counterfeyting, as ts faid in 


of his tric 


this very page, and in the leafe before: why did he fall to ‘the doinge Sy 
sagaine after he wasat S. Itis ablurd to fay 


Dil coucrer 
8 
a 
| 
| 
. 
e 


UDPTECTION OF S. HARSNETS 

| did thus, becanfe theapeomen did bemone bim for the wcomen being 
4 remoned or as Cooper depoleth pace 193. putout of the, boufe,and lode 
parted, be was bos tricks: cannot therefore, be that. he did at 
a ie this time his tricks becaufe of the weomen: neither becaufihe — 
mentooke fome pleafureto behold him,and for that.caufe himfelt in 
4 ne the actinge of them. Neither can it be that Shepbeavd and Cooper did 


threae bim, thar the weomé or’ any other might fee, that they could 
make him leaue his tricks, and ali his knauery.: feeinge the weomen 
were gonehome,.and they two alane with Som. in his fit, when they 
did'threaten him. Moreouor, itis confefled that So. at S.m 
Shit, being threatned by Couper to. be whipped, and by Shepheard to be pin 
pag.t93- with a paive of knipknaps did therevpon prefently lcane brs tricks and 
See then pad no more fits, whilelt he was at §. Iaanes: therefore be that 
Difio.crofferh & $0, left his counterfcyting, becaufe he erew (2) weary thereof, and did 
of himfelte goe to S. foanes tobe (a) quyet; and thathe confeffed lo- 
es: coun- much to Cooper before he came to S. Joanes as the Dijc. affirmeth page 
.and 178. And thisisthe 11.time the Difcou-rer is conuinced | 
feare,how then, —_-, WV Ve are befades to cbferue heere, fir that this confeffion of 
oie be grow We counterfeyting was got, by one Nich. Shepheard, and Iobx Cooper.two 
did voluntarily Very diffolute andinfamous men. 1 remember in acertificate made 
_Feurehimfelic by one of Nott. to the 4rch- bifhop of York, wherevnto many of the 
we" cheif of Nore. fub{ribed, there were thefe wordes vfed concerninge 
_ thele Lone men, that they were two (0) rakefhammes, the better of them 
basing bene twife (0) araigned, 2. that thele were fir inftrumentes for 
cughagunft Sathan to worke by, 3. that Som. confeffion of counterfeytinge was 


4 


‘not voluntary, but extorted & by threats compaffed. 
Difcomoer 


The 26. of February being Sonday, So. was defivous to.goe to the 
church, and tould him that if hefbould fo doe, then fall agaie toone of 
pag.193- bes ould tricks, the people wold be much troubled. Wherevpon (quoth So) 
you know what baue confeffed*ynto vou, and I will giue you my band 
and doe promife you faithfully thad 1 will not then fall into any fit. And/t 
E went tothe church with him, both in the forenoone and in the afternomt, 
Nic.Hheppeards be kept bis promife with me. 


; 


By this depofition of She: beards, itis playne that votwithftand- 

102 Som. con‘eflion and fhew of counterfeytinge. yet the deponetl 

_ did not baftily beleue him, but made fome doubt & ftaggeringe # 

dealt at his counterteyting: or elfe why fhould he vfe thefe or Fach like 
words: if y ujhbould fall azain into one of ould tricks, the people 


be much troubled 8c. hence allo it was, that both Shepheard & On 


» » 2 
> 
4 


all the time he was at S. Loazes, were euer both or one of them at his 


elbow, giuing their diligent attendance vppon this counterfeyt where 
-f{oeuer he was in church or elle-where, asis well knowne to the inha- ‘ 


birants of Nort. In that likewife the Maior with the _4/dermen afore- 


-faid, and Gregoryhired this couple of honneft. men, and gaue them 


their wages, to wayt atan inch yppon Somers and that not only vntill 
he had confefled he counterfeyted, but after allo for the {pace,of a mo 


—neth, allone as ifhe bad denyed that he diffembled, and ftood to the 


truth & prefent poffeffion, in which ftate whofoeuer is, it is verye re- 
uifite he haue a keeper cr keepers, becaule of the danger he isin. to 


be deftroyed by the diuell: it argueth that they alfo doubted he was 


no counterfeyt, notwith{tanding his confeffion fulpectinge the truth 
How M: Darrell deals with So. for the reuocation. of bis fz 
confeffion that be bad diffembled. 

Difcouercr. 


M. Dar. was chases by her joners to hane foug hr pag 185. 
‘ayn So. from bis jae bane fuck 
Dar. perceaned that 


many wayes to haue wit | 
ynto it that he was againe, when M. 
So. by rio pryuate mcanes that be could fe would be drawne &c. 


__, Here isawhole chapter confumied, and many words vied about 


that he counterfeited,his 
im thereof: neither is any more cepples a 


___ My meaning was that the peop 
ting ofthe worke of god wrought vpon Somers, woulde no doubt re- 
ceaue thereby great profit, wherof many thovgh notall, through this 
lve of bis, and curfed confeffion of counterfeyting are deprived and 


Rot only fo, but thereby drawne to receaue a falfe report and euilnie 


againft the worke of god, and by confequent againft the Lordehim— 


lord 


LYING DISCOVERY, ~ 


- 


ought 


. 


86. 


Darrell 

1ulf nothing. | once and only once vied a few worces to Se. whyles 
he remayned at S. Tones, and that in the prefence of the Maror & fom | 
others, réprouing him of the haynous {inne he had committed, and 
the creat he had 

own confcience acculing 
gainft me. And what her | | : 
Not, andindutywasboundtodoe? =, 
Iconfeffed being examyned that. So. in [ying inthe whole 
cf his former: fits diffcmbled, lyed therein erencufly acainfibisowne 
confcience, to. the of god;-and hurt of bis chaxch Therevpon faith 

the Difcoucrer, Conjider-the gentle xeale of benefiting the church, by bis fa 
culty and [kill m caffine out diuclls. 

ite, and to iuftity the wicked, whico 1s an abomynation br 


124 A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS ‘S 
lord. And this tendeth tothe difbonour of god, and hurt of his church or 
OF CHAP. 3. 
How ™. Dar. deuifed two or three [bifts, to haue awryded So, 
coufe/jion, that be had 
Difcouerer. 
Being examyned Iconfefled, that I bad {aid at fometimes, that 
So. affirmine that be counterfeyted, was 4 confirmation that he was repoffe 


Darrell, 
My reafon is, becaufe the fame, inioyned with his obftinacy is a 
certaine argument that be is empry wept and garm{bed, and therefore 
if he were poflefled and difpotiefied, he is repotfeffed, 
Mh. Dar. breathed out bis fecond oracle (which is my fecond fhift te 
auoyd So. confeffion ) faying that it was no maruaile though he coulde doe 
bis fits confidering that he had more deuslls in. bim then Scfore, Hereof 2. 
Dar hath not bene examyned, becaufe it was one of the interogatoryes whe 
rynto he vefufed to an[ wer. For true itis that after that he had bene exa» 
* myned diners times about this matter,he found bimfelfe [0 perplexed, as that 
he refufed to be any further exaimyned, [aying that his con[cience was troue 
bled , that he had an{wered formuch already. wherein he is uot greatlye 
to be be blamed. For although a lyar muft haue a good memory, yet by ma 
ny croffe queftions, heymay be taken (bort, as it hath happened to him sn ma 


| Darrell 
Heerein appeareth manifeftly the mallice,craft and peruerfle wreft 
inge ofthis ‘Difcouerer:, For as I knewe not what the interrogatoryes 
were to an{wer vito, fo did I not therefore refufe becauf I was 
taken [hort as he would haue it, of for that I was not able. fufficiently 
to an{iwer them, neither Ithanke god was I therefore in my/elf perplex 
or my con{cience troubled,but for that hauing yealdedto fomuchbe 
tore as men with any modefty or confcience could requireatmyha> 
nds, yéa to more, and hauing anfwered already to, no leffe I thinke 
then to 190. or 200. interroeatoryes, 1 perceaued euidently by Jamen | 
table experience, that my faid anfwering albeit it were by oath, did 
not atali he!pe to purge or cleare me as an innocent, and to put. 
ende to the coritrouerfy, whereynto the Lord hath fanétifved an oth 
and which was the thing I expe‘ted, and hoped for: yeathat this was 
not the fcope and drift of this my examynation and multitude of In- 
_terrogatoryes ( howfoeuer the B. of London did fo pretend) but,to- 
entrap me cunningly, ifhappely they could, & to make me my owne 
ape 


4 
ah: 
ip 
| 
HAR, 
i 
4 
pag 187. 
it 
math.12.43. 
i’ 
. 
138. 
| 
| 
H | 
| 
j 
| 
3 
j 


_ appeacher and acevfer, when they were wholly dectitute. of other me 
anes te prove that which they did fo eagerly and earneftly ftryue to 
-boult out again{ft me,namely this counterfeiting as now is manifeft to 
all men,a thing that neither by the law of god nor man Iwas bound © 
- -ynto, if [ had bene guilty, as heauen and earth is my witneffe I was 
not, Secondly I retafed to depofe any further, hecaufe manye of the 
interrogatoryes were moft vayne childifh and ridiculous, as miay ap 
peare by the Dz/conery it {elfe, elpecially if we confider, that from the 
my guilrynefle was in part to be gathered, For this caufealfo Icon- | 
felled was greiued(8& as I tak it iuttly pteiued) in my foule to aniwer 
any further vp6 my oth,8&¢ to call to witneffe the gloryous & fearfull 
name of the Lorde, ¢ whereat eaery Chrifltian ought in reuerence to 
tremble ) to fuch bale, tryflinge, and ridiculous things aswerethen — 
propoanded ynto me without end or lymitation, (which Iperceiued 
by former experience)as being not worthy to be cofirmed by the tef- 
timony of gods moft gloriousname. Butalas 1knew not what the ar 
ticles were vntill I was {worne: and at the firlt time I was beefore the 
_ Bifbopto be examyned, I yealded to anfwer to thole thinges which 
_ fhould concerne my dealing with Ss. or any of the perfons whome I 
had affirmed were poffeffed: which I did for the further confirmation 
my innocency, and for auoydinge of that {ufpition which I feared 
would haue rifen vpon my denyall to haue anlwered.-And ‘at the tim 
of this refufall to an{wer, t {fpake to this effect to the Bybop as partly 
- -appeareth by the wordes heere mentioned. Now where the Di/c. pre 


_tendeth that I am contrary to my felfein many particulars, Idemaund | 


of him, why he hath nor noted and recorded thofe my particulars con 
trarietyes, or at leaft piuen forme talt thereof. It may be he.hath refer 


them to his next volume. or malitious inue¢tiue againft Durrell, 


_becaufe peraduenture there is fuch a heape of them that they cannot 
 wellbe contayned in this Difcouery of his without tedioufneffe to the 
Reader: Indeede as the Difc. orderth the matter there be many con- 
traditions betwixt his deponents and me: But the queftiou & doubt 
_ is firft, whither he hath produced both their depofitions and mine tru 

ly orno: Secondly, ifhe haue done fo, then whether I haue depofed - 
~ truly, or they whofe depofitions haue bene obteyned and compaffed 


_. for themoft part by threates or a. lurements as I offer andam able to 
_ prooue to thofe that are in authority if 1 may betherevnto admitted: 


- ‘notwithftanding I finde it not mentioned throughout his whole Dif 
couery, in what one pafticuler thing I am contrary to my felfe, wher- 
_ofto the wile and,vnpartiail Reader Ileaue the confideration, as alfo 
the manifould contrarietves or particuler things wherein the 1 i/- 

cowever is contrary to him{felfe in his Difconery: in nomber 3 5, which 


~ 
- 
ey 
ti = 
ip 
> 
q 
‘ 
: 5 


Pe 

al 


y 
. 


bi 

6pagig2. 

5 + 
Be 
} 


mouth: 
placesin/his Difconery: and to fhew how I haue either ignorantly mif- 


ions follow. newer knew ( [aith Shepheard ) of any promifes made to 
' fon promifed, that if he would declare the truth, he would be cood vnto him 
belpe him to afernice in London. Indeed confeffe, that in one of the 
Boyes fits at S. loanes | threatncd to haue a payre of psncers to pinch bim by 
toes, if he vfed thefe tricks. And lobn Cooper t 


certayne fits, wherevpon the [aid 


- of that I haue affirmed. If 50, teftimony be true ( elle fare the Difco. 


2 A DETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
‘in their propper places I haue noted, and to iudge himof his oWfie - 


ing the Difeonererin his next treatife, -to reconcile thofe 


taken him, or malitioufly peruerted his words: or elfe hold his peace 


-altogither; and by his fylence proclaime to all men the falfhood he 


hath hitherto maynteyned: for that he will confeffe the truth, & ‘thie 


himfelfe to giue glory to god, ( which for him werca bappy thinge ) 


thereof there is little orno hope. 


OOF. CHAP: 4. 

HowM. Dar. and his frends to So. confeffion did 
falfly report, that be was induced therevnto ky promfes 
“shredtnings and inchantments 
Among t manly wayes whereby men are corrupted; and induced ts 


alfly, allurements by f-syre promsfes; and threatmnges hawe not'the 


force: which being very well to M. Dar. and bis good frendes, 
they thought it might carry [ome good probabillity, and [crue for a fhift; to 
gine it out: that So. was fo wrought and drawne to affirme, that he bad dif 
(embled, bow vntraly they bane charged bim herein; the depofitions fol 
(asthe Difc. faith ) depofeth, that he was not induced by any pros 
mifes {oto confef}e, but did it willinely. And M. Hurt, M. Yackfon, M. 


er M. Gregory teftify, that be did of bis own free will with 


compulfion anyways. bemen'that were cheifly fufpettedto have delt with 
So. as heere it 2s [uppofed, were lohn Cooper and Nicholas Shepheard-whofe 


the boy, to confefje that be had counterfeyted: but 1 remember that M.Xack, 


not know any 
shat perfwaded So. to cone himfelfe to be a difjembler. Againe So, (after 
bis comming to S loanes) did pretend bimfelfe within a day or two to haut 
Zooper, putting at one time fundry wiyuts 
ethe laid So. did fall into one of rhe 


out of the houfe, ( at whofe commine. 


faid fits ) and then giuine him ome wordcs of corretFion, viz. threatninee 


to whip bim, he the [aid So. prefently roe vp. By neither of theis depofitions 
can it be colleéted, that they threatned the bay ta fay be had ‘diffembled, or 


thereby he-was induced (0 to affirme, 


_- And heere is all the Dic. proofe of that he faith, and difproofé 


would 


“in 
it} Th 
, 
3 
4 
' 
& 
| 
pag 192- 
193- 
| 
. 
+ 
A 
lan 
t 


LYING DISCOVERY. 32 
| 


4 


woulde not rely fomuch vpon him, nor produce him ashe doth eueri 
hand while, for the proofe in a manner of euery particular thing, whe 
-sewith it pleafeth him thus falfly and iniurioufly to charge-me-) that 
which he hath teltifyed concerninge ‘this poynte istobe regarded, 
which heere followeth. After.So. had for the fpace of a moneth, even 
_ during that time he remayned at S, Ioanes, faid he counterfeyted, he 
_was brought before the.12..Commiffioners,} affirming the 
till being calt into fundry fits, and vexed anew by fathan ( wherin the 
_ deede it felfe fhewed the contrary) he acknowledged to the Commif- 
fioners, that he did not diflemble, Thus faying ( viz. that he diflem- 
bled not ) and peng tormented by the ‘iuell he continued 1o.days 
_atone Ed,Garlands houfe, in which time hewas alked by Garland 
_ and others then prefent why he had counterfeyted, feing it was other 
wife’ He anfwered, and after fet it downe with his owne hande wri- 
ting, (which. is yet to be feene ) thus: Beinge.atS. loanes theve came 
_-ynto me a thing like vnto a dog, and [aid vuto me exc. And Nicholas 
pheard[aid, and if lwere in a fitt azaine, he woulde fetch apaire of knype 
knaps and a rope, and be would make me confefje, ( meaning thathe was 
acounterfeyt ) hang me, And Cooper and Shepherd faid, and 
if I would fay, that | was a counterfeyt, that M. Maior and the Aldermen | 
would ciue meten pound, and \ fbould fet vp any trade that would, and. 
Thad better to fay that was a counterfeyt cr liue like a man,then tohane 
_ nothing. For if Ufbould [ay that1 was not a counterfeyt, and goe into the 
cleareyes hands Ufbouldhauenothing 
If this anfwer and-hand writing be true'( and it is greatly confirm 4444, 
ed by Shepheards depofition and made manifeft to be true in part) this 
_ poynt is cleared and it thereby euident that So. was induced by promifes 
and threatnings to fay he counterfeyted. 2, This appearethbythe a= 
forelaid depofitions,for howfoeuer the former:deponents being pod- | 
~ Ieffe men, not fearing an cath, deny the promife, which doubtles they 
from the Maior and fome of the:.4/dermen made knownevnto him 
(for as I remember M. Lack/on Alderman as uch in 
the town hall in theJhearing of many, but faid they did it in pollicye, 
to drawe the boy.on ) leaft they fhould bring fome difgrace vponthe go? ang 
{aid Maior and Aldermen, yet Shepheard welee maketh mention of a | 
promife, if he would declare the truth, that is, confeffe that he had coun= 
terfeyted: for he had not vntill that day-affirmed that hedid notcon | 
Nterfeyt, which if they had. accounted for truth, that he had declared. 
 Ynto them alreadye, A promife then viz, to be good him &e was 
made to So. ifhe would. confifle a. counterfeyting, called heere the — 
truth. And page 179. Shepheard depofeth thus: So. my promie 
shat would be his frend, and procure him fanour from M, Maior es his: 


brethern 


& 
4 
| 
| 
| 
| 


> 


ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
brethren did confeffe me,that all he bad done in the courfe of bis forme 
tracks were but counterfeyted, whether now there was any promife made 

toSo. by Shepheard and he induced thereby to fay be countcrfeyted, Let 


the difcreete Reader iudge, as alfo whether this deponent ot the Dic, 
and for counterfeyting, be not forfworne. 


But that by threatnings he was induced to fay be diffembled itis by their 
~ depofitions euident, For So. being in one of his tits, the one of them 
contefleth that he threatnedto whip hrm, the other to pinch him with 4 pa- 
_ gre of pincers, if be vfed any more of thofe trycks that is counterfeit tricks; 
the leauing of which and neuer vfing them after wards as it is confeffed he 
did yponthele threats, carrieth with it in reafona fecret or ftillcon- 
_ feffion of counterfeytinge. which I fay was fought and aymed atin 
thete threats. This furtheir appeareth by Saepheardes depofition men- 
p3gt78. tioned a little before: The day after ((aith he) that came to S, loans 
be did counterfeyt himfelfe to be sn a fit, wherevpon I touldbim while ke 
was in his tricks that if he would not leaue and rife vp would fert fuch 
payre of Rnipknaps vppon him: as [bould make bun to rue it: and therevpos 
So. did rife and left his faid tricks, and had no more fits, whileft be 
continued there, being the {pace almoft of 4 moneth, Heere we fee that Sh- 
epbeard{weareth that So. connterfeyted, and that beinge fo perfwaded 
he threatned him if be would not leane his counterfeyting > now let euery 
one iudge, whether itis not likely that with the of hiscos 
-genterfeyting he fought not for a confe/fion of counterfeyting. wee are t0 
obferue heere that. Shepheard threatned So. with 4 payre of Kaspknaps if 
be were in a fit againe according to So, anfwer 8¢ writinge, which may 
well induce vs to beleeue So. in the reft he hath vtrered with the lie 
breath, and namely that Shepheard laid be would make bim confeffe, that 
he counterfeyted or elfe hang him, with the roape thatthe threatned t0 
_ fetch with his paire of knipknaps. 3. Speaking of this his threatning it is 
faid, that therevpon So. left bis tricks, and had no more fits. The tie when 
So. made this confeffion isto be marked. Ie was prefentlye after this 
threatning and promifing, and not before. Thefe things confidered 
nnotbe denyed but that Sv.by promifes threats w.1s induced to.aff 
_ that he had yer at the leaft, that in my -4polloey I did not fall) 
_vepwt hereof asthe Difc.. in theargument of this Chapter affirmeth 
but according to the truth: My wordes are thefe: For the obteymme i 
this confeffion, Cooper and Shepheard ( two molt lewd andleuell difpofed pt 
fons ) threatned him the one to whip him, the other.to pinch him with a pay 
pincers, as appeareth both by So. confelfton, and their ovone vppn thi 
oathes before the 12, Commiffioners: vpon occafion of thefe wordes and 
~-, for the difprouing whereof this chapter was compiled by the Difcom 
Yer, 
dill 


Pat 
ae 


J 
be 
‘* 


g 


Soe 
q 


$ 
q 
$ 
> 
t 
| 


& & ee 


rz 


LYING’ DBCOVERY. 


Difcoucrer,. 


¢ 


But byM, Dar, owne rule, im that so. being in. afitbeard their fayd 
shreatning peaches, and vifing vp had no move fits, whileft be was at S 
nes, to be apparaut that he wasadiffembler, 
| Darrell 
My rule letteth not but that So. being ina fit might beare: for 
hould that nowlecuer thofe in whome are vncleane {pirits, be in their 
tits ordinarily depriued.ot their fences, yet not alwayes, nor at all ties 
but is then and to oft otherwile, as the {pirit fhall fee it make for his 
aduantage, which J attirme of this fit, and every other that’ So. hath 
had ( {pecially ) lunce that tame, and hath {till doubt not in fecret be< 
foretome, if at be fo that in theiefitshe doth heare. Burhowdoththe 
Dic. prooue that do. did heare their threatning [peaches in the fitthee — | 
mennoneth¢ furely'not.at all.lt istonopurpole to faythathefemed 
to beare by that which'he did prefently vpon their threatnings for they 
with their teete, to ttrike with their handes, andtof{peake, whennot 
they but the diuell pesformeth thef 
out of the feriptures: euen fo they feemeto beare,whentheybeavenot 
fits tora moneth: we muft vnderitand,that he which did theletrickes 


Pag 


(as the Dife.prophanly calleth them} could as calily putanendeynto 


them,'and would readily doc it, when he fawe itmake:forhisaduan= 
tage, that is, the perfwading of the world; thar So.had:counterfeited 
whatand how greatly the'diuell payneth by this cunning trickoPhis = 
aboue the reft he hath done in So: body,eueryonemaynowfee,and 
we that haue benethuslong prifonersdoefeele, 

‘Lhatwhich the Dife,addeth conceming forcery,charming andanyn 
ting,of So. is falle fabulous Scflaunderdus: neither myfelfenoranyof - 
my frends ‘cuer dreamed; that through thele of any’ of thele Som. was 

cuer induced or compelled ty [ay had diffembled, as the affir 

meth, but proueth not rior newér wilbe able tuftly to proue:only thi¥pagigg 


Tt was: Soinie in Nott. fufpestedleatt whilesSo. remayned ‘at S* Loanes 


there were that foughe the cafting of the diuell ‘our of So, that couns 


‘ 


terfeyted prayerand falting, but fometimesby coniuration,at 


ee 


“Other tithe by ‘ari gyitment wherewith Gregorya reputed papift ca’ 


bled him to be annoynted. Ir is faid by the Ds/é. and’ depofed: by his 
Witnefle. Shepheard and: Cooper that by M. Gregoryes appointment, this 


was him to mak bir more nimuble'to bes wicks:yea but 
Itfhouldfeeme that it had an other odd'quallity“init, for when Shep= 


bea gaue fome of this oyntment to’ Mary Cooper, Som. [ifter ) to an~ 
ber finger as by-his depolicion appeareth, hefaid that fhe — 


= 
t 
f 
if 
4, 
ae 
: 


ga 


a3 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
haue no more fits, what this oyntment was, and whereit was had, whé 
ther of M. Gregory himfeife, or by his appoyntment of the Apothece: 
_ Fy, doth not appeare in the depofitions, in which poynt is to beno- 
ted the couert & clofe carriage of both the deponents. eo 
OF CHAP: 5. 
— OFM. Dar. vidiculous pretence, that So. was induced by the divellin 
forme of black dog ge and an affe, to fay he bad 
But heereof we thall not neede to doubt, how ridiceslous foencr. it 
{eeme to the Difc. if we can per{wade our felues of the truth of comers 
former an{wer and hand-writing wherevpon it relyeth, and is groun- 
ded, His wordesbethefe. 
2) yfSomers be Being at $Loanes, there came vnto me a thine like vnto a (0) dog, 
aman of ome Jaid vnto me: And if I would confent vnto him and fay that lwas a conne 
aren be would gine me abace. of gould, and if would not, be wold mak, 
ticall with M. mse be hanged, orel{e he wold teare me in peeces. And if I woulde I Sooulde 
any thing that I would cake in hand, and he would come so mee lyke 
Darrell. why are mouse, and would helpe.me. And there Came tome 4 thing like Aan (a) affe 
prey not as kine and {aid if would not [ay that was counterfeyt, he would calt me into 
Bim in this poy- the well,and fo weit Away. 


nt, when he {pea VVe fh f, if wee 
“a et Ve fhall be the better perfwaded of the truth heereof, if w 


singe of Darredl. firft remember that which by experience hath bene.found true, that it 


yea the caufe it is Sathans v{vall manner to appeare invifible. fhapes to.them he po’ 
alfo, felleth, and that So, wasnow pofleffed..2, that So.in‘his fitts heefore 
reth. the Commiffioners {aid (as it were in the throate) 4 black dogg a dog 
a doge a dogg, iterating the famevery oft and {peaking at that time no 

Thyreus chape. thinge elfe in his fitts. 3. that three of the Commiflioners faw a black 
@.5.c: cap.7.6. doge ( in appearance.) about the bay arta bufy, about his 
face, and none other. Now it enu/d.net be but had.it bene a dogg ins 
déede, fome others alfo fhould haue feene him, there beinge fo.many 
_ thronging about him, yea furely one or other would haue dryuen him 
away, either for the fafetye.of the boy, orthat they might.the better 
haue feene, whereof euery one was fo defirous: and wold neuer bave 
indured him to haue chopt at his face; as a water-dogee ata ducksles 
it was {aid by fome.of good credit he.did, 4...whefe, this thinge 
blacke dogve that is the diuel]; promifed to helpe Som, in any thinge -be 
would take in hand, mening, to doe thofe thineshe formerly had done 
in him, becaufe So. faying he counterfeyted ( vpon which condition 
he made him this promife), might the rather,be beleened to counter 
feyt, itis manife ft that, therein.this writing is trae, forxhat ever finee 

~  he'made that confeffion vntill this day, So. when be wil doth his 


| \LYING DISCOVERY, rT 
fuch as hone can doe, and therefore we may be. affured th is thi ng i kes bi 
a mon{e doth. helpebim, and whermhe will, he /eaueth .purteth an 
ynto them, as though, had-done all, and nor this mouje. 5, Thats: 
the fecond or latter part of this.writing al{o is true, as is before fhew-" 
ed, Now thefe fyne things being true, as indegde they are, J {eenor, 
why any fhouk? doubt of the truth of this wring: which beinge trues 
it is manifelt that So. mas induced by the n-forme of ablack dogges 
aud an affe, to fy. hebad difjembled: and then isnot this Darcls ridi- 


M.Dar.bathfalfly affirmed,that So. was induced to fayhebad 
difjembled, . fur feare of hanging: whereas be falling intohis fits be- 
the commiffioners at Nott, (vpon a former compad?) the 
—— feare of hanging was one of the cheifefl caufes, that hee 

affirmed, that he had not dfjembled, 

There ts added a fixt inducement, viz, the feare of hanging: be being; 
flandercd to hane bewitched one Stivland to death..For the clearing therfore, Pg 19 
of this vutruth: So, befire bath depofed, that one caufe why about the 14. 
day of January 1597.be fell againe to thofefitts, ( whercvpon M. Darrell 
affivmed that be was re ) was thes: iz. be feare of (uch dauneers 
atberwafe might hane {allen into, by reafon of the{aid accufation, cd 
certine. bis bewitching, of Starland to death... o pit 


snot this like to be well cleared by So. depofition? But 
to let that goe, and to deliver heerein thetruth. So. beinge charged 
with felony and for the fame imprifoned, as is confefled pape t49.we ) 
all know that at the aflifes he was to be arraigned and therefore in dan 
er of hanging, I defire now to know, how $0..could be freed fré this | | 
danger, by falling into TheDifc. telleth vs. for that ther 
he fhould be fureto be defended vpkeld.ly M. Dar bes frends: 
fo far forth as they were able them{clues, or by.any otha meanes that they 
could procure on hts belalf why but Dar.co bu frends had they bene wil 
ling & defirous,were not able to deliver him tr6 the danger he was in, 
and keepe him from histryall, {pecially the matter.beine in the hands - 
of Dar. and Sa. greate acverfaryes: neitl er yet did Tor anye-of my 
frends attempt anye {ach thinge. asthe, Mazor with the .4ldamen and 
town clarke know full well: whereby it is playne thet as we were vna- 
ble, fo we defired not to keepe him frem his tryal]: J his therefore can. 
be no reafon of So. xeturning to bis old byas of diffimutaticn. YeaT delire 
the Dye, heereafter ro fhew, how poffible So. falling again into bys for 
mer fits could any w ay. helpe to deliuer him‘elfe from thefufpition of 


Asnot this li 


q 
7 
, 
‘ 
‘ 
= 


nzz ADETECTION) OF S.HARSNETS _ 
witchcra/t being the thing that’broupht him withinthe danger of hangs, 
ing. Lam very ture itwas the onlye way-to‘bime. him fo be condems 
nedtor a witch addi{o to the'gallowes: and thefetors wee may be lure 
not Somers; but that being: retarned: and ente- 
rmg into hishoule-azanié, fell to. bis olde by 4s; tor thasit was: The 
ME: aid M- Gregory, ‘hauing contends 
abouc wéskesybut not preuay ling, 'it-{o fell 
out, thatovesterland-of Snenton'necre Nott. haning bene. one day- in the 
markett at Nott. fell chere fick, whervof be dyed, but before imhis feckneffe 
fasd (as his wife and otiers affirmed} that So, had trode vpon his beele, whe 
he was thefaid market; antl bad certainly bewitched bun, as.appea 
reeth by-page ‘Herevppon it was bruited throughout Nottine- 
ham that’ S», was aiwiteh; and riot poffeiled, and fo all ‘that He had bee 
fore done, orfuffered;taine from himfelfe, and his familyar {pirit. 
‘Thisramour {preading it {elfe; the matter was inquired into, toud 
out that he dyed (as the philitian faith) of 4 baffard plurify, in his ra- 
uing laying ag is atorefaid, which is confe fled page 1.49. ‘his wife allo 


vathrming, thatthe would'not for any thing fay that So. had bewitche 


ed her hu(band. Heerevpfon the aforefaid ramor fuddenly vanithed 
andcame tonaught. Bue M. Fremanand M. Gregory comming from 


Londonabont ten dayes after, reniued the fame, and of iuit nothinge 


made a haynous'matter, and would ‘needes haue So.to 
Freeman got to his owne Sterlands wife, and fome of her neigh 
bours, and fo wrought them that’ the poore wite & her neighboures 
faid forthwith after openly in the towne hall fomudch;, as ‘wherevppon 
for the bewitching Sterlandher liufband to death; was imprifoned 
and they bound to giue ewidence againit him at the’ next affiles, And 
heereof So2was'norignorante, bein? a matter notorioufly Kngwne to 
the mhabitants of Note. Fhus wee fee How’ Sc. Cairie to be ig feare 
danger of hanging, anid by whofe ‘meanes'or procurement.. what wa’ 
now to be dohe by Somers or what was‘the fafeft courfe’ for him to 
take, whereby to free himfelfe from the daunger he'was in, 8& toate 
his life? Surely to fay and ftand to it that he: counterfeyred in ‘aif that 
he had done before: for who would then accufe‘him of witcheraft, ‘or 
eare to fuch accafation” If ie would affirme that ‘he himfelfedid 
all’by art ity diffémulation, no bady would had 
‘dived or {pirit, or any'thing to doe with fpitir or familiar, this (T'fa 


‘Som might thus thinke with ‘himfelfe-* M? Freeman and’ M: Gregory 

‘who would fayne hane me'to'be a counterfeyt: are they whoéhaue 

caufed me to be accufed 0‘ witchcraft, and they are able to 'take'that of 

_ der with M, Adaior, and rhe other 4 ermen they’ {pecially 
wil 


ir 
be 
if 
Tet 
4 
& 
| 
Te. 
¢ 
~*~ 
if 
bs 
if 
4 
AE 
i 
4 | 


LYING DISCOVERY. 134 
with them heerein and deliring the fame, that this matter fhall pro- 
-ceede no turcner, as be arraigned atthe atliles, nor fo- 
much as bruaghc to my tryail, wail theretore fay counterfeyted, & 
{o pieaie thein ail. cand in thistort might So, by affirming that he aif- 
fermnied very well tree himieite trom tae danger he wasin, and 
his lite, yea and thus it teli out, For he contetiing tirtt to his keepers, 
then to the Mazor and didermen by a that hencucr bad 
d:ucll nov [piit,and that all be had done in the courfe of bis former trickes, 
were but conntorfeyted, faying that when they would, they (houldfce all bts 
fart tricks and bow be did them: 8 that for wuches cy witcherycs, be had 
delinered bis mynde to bis keepers: neuer heard more ot his bewitchinge 
of sterland to death, the Maur and Aldermen with the town clark {mo- 
thering all, {o as the indge neuer heard thereof, nor So. feene once to 
{tand within the barre among other feilons.On the other fide had So, 
ftood to the truth, and had neuer acknowledged any counterteyting, 
for any thing.man could lee, he had bene as certaynlye arraigned of 
witchcraft, as he was accuied and ymprifoned for the fame, sterlands 
wife and her neighbours had giuen eaidence againit him, and fuch ‘a 
Jury ({ traft) cailed out to haue gone on him, as it may be wold haue 
found him guiity, as well as one at the {ame aflifes, that tound -4/hce 
Freeman not guilty of murthering or bewitching to death the childe 
of Mary Couper lilter to Somers. V Vhether So. now were drawne to [ay 
be had diffembled, for feare of hanging, as | aftirme, or the feare of hangig 

caused hum to fail to bes olde courte of d:{Jimulation, as the Difc. afirmeth 
jet the Keader iudge. But the Dic. proceedeth yet a hetle further in 
the proofe of that he atfirmethY” 
Difcouerer. 
Beefides after that So. vpon that occa{ton, and [ome others, fell to brs 
_ old tricks, be continned in them about [rx weeks, and did not make bis shf- 
Simulation publiquely knowne, jor all that time, and till his comminge to 
S. loanes. So as it is apparant, that So. for feave of ibanging, fell againe to 
So. continued only about'ten dayestepoffelfed, which isheere ter 
med, a falling to brs old ivicks, and not-6, weekes, before he made hus dif 
fimulation knowne: Itis true that he did notfay that he di/fembled, till 
bis comming to S. loanes, and truly no maruayle, feeing he was crawne 
by other meanes beefides this of bewitching Sterland, to that cont‘elli 
on of his, viz. by threats and promifes, vied partly by fathan, partly by 
bis inftruments, and all of chem after his comming to S_oanes But 
how doth this prone much leffe euidently or apparantly prooue chat 
Which the Difc. inferreth therewpon, viz. that So. for feare of banginge 

M 


pag 200, 


pag 19) 


> 
: 
‘ 


pig 199. 


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
fcll againe ta his diffimulation? art 


Difconerer. : 
Affivedly (quoth the Difc. ) this fellow through his acquaintance 
with [athar ( it oould fecme ) 1s growne to cxtraordinaye & ump 
tuaus biuidn not foaming to fay any thing that may ferue hes turne 
V Vherher this latrer parte may be truly fard of himfelfe, and he 


be iudged cut of his owne mouth, let him chat hath hearde ys both 


{peake iudge, 
Difcoucrer. 
S$. fell ints his fits before the Commnffioners at Nott. yppon a former 

compat?, and for feare of banging ( chafiy ) then affirmed, that he bad not 

dif} mblod. This 15 by deerecs made manifcft vnto you. 

| Darrell 
But how? by So. depofitions, which are ftrengthened by the de 

pofiticns of others. thefe latter I will for a feafon {pare, and wee will 

a what So faith the principall deponent heere,as alfo throughout 


_the 2. 3. and 4. bookes of the Difcouery, ; 


Concerning the firft So. depofeth thus. Tt being knovene, that 1 was to 
appeare before the Commiffioners, Nich. Shepheard, and others moued me, 
that whcn | fhould come before them, 1 {bould shew [ome of my tricks in fuch 
manner and forme as | had before done them, co not rife againe vntill M. 
Maior fhonld call me, that thereby ((ay they ).1t may plainly appeare to the 
Commiffioners, that vehatfoener thou haft.donc before was done of thine own 


accord, cr meerely counterfeyted,. This counfell being agreeable toM. Ma 


iors defire ( as Iwas informed ) did willingly yeald vnto it. 
_ Now for tne fecond poynt, lett So. proceede,vpon the [aid agreement, 1 ape 
pearing ( [aith So: before the Commiffioners, and after [ome [peaches had 


with me (Ly fome of them ) fell downe and playd diners of my tricks: as lL; 


was accuftomed to doe in my pretended fitts. T here | continued tumbling & 
atting my tricks for a long time, fill expe€ting when M.Maior woulde call 


me. whileft l was thus tumbling, two did prick me with pynnes: one in the 


hand, and an other in the lege, which although I felt moft fencibly, yet Len 
duved it, becaufe 1 fiill wayted, that M. Maior {hiuld call me, bur be for 


getting [o to doe, & \ being no longer able to continve in that fort, 1 did rif 


xp my Jelfe, as was wont to the end of other my diffimbled fits. 
atrell, 

VVhether there was any compaé? betwene the Maior and Somers 

it mattereth not, If there were not, their fin is at the dore & willon¢ 
day finde them out that haue fo depofed. If there were. it came doub 
tlefle from the fubile ty of the diuell, who hauing for fundry abe 
| before 


it 
44 
; 
20). 
= 
az 200 
P35 
Pg 208- 
j 


LYING DISCOVERY. | 136 
beefore lurked in Somers (that {ohe might the better rayfe vp the ¢. 

yiiiname of counterteyung of the greate worke of god ) and beinge 
by the appoyntment or commaundement of god (as isto be fuppo- 
feo ) at this time ro maniteft hinielfe, thought ti.ereby to helpe him- 
felte, and periwace the world {till notwithitanding this his dilcouery, 
that So. was acounterfeyt. If any demauna why inould the Lord com 
maun d the {pirit to difcouer himfelie? I aniwer, t} at is a fecret & on- 
ly knowne to the lorce: yet it may be,becan‘e the Lord hauinge fore 
appointed a mighty and wonderfull oppolition againft his manifeft 
worke, he would haue folemne witnefles firft thereof, for the further 
ftrengthening of thofe who fhould beeleue his worke, and makinge — 
thofe the more, yea out of meafure inexcufable, who fhould refift 8 
ficht againft it, percafe alfo and partlyeto ftrengthen and incourage 
his feruants whome he would efpecially vie not only in bearinge wit- 
neflerto the poffeffion and difpoffeffion, but alfo to the repoffeffion 
of Somers, laft the worlde would not indure to heare of: and to 
put them in hope (‘or their further incouraging therein ) that as then 
after (athan had withdrawne and hid himfelfetcr a time, wherevpon 
there was greate contention, whether the boy were pofleffed or coun 
terfeyted, the Lord did difcouer the {pirit to the manifeftation of the 
truth, and that beefore folemne witnefles, fo one day. after an other 
manner of contention, I meane farr greater, and before more folemn 
witnefles, of greater authority, god would vncafe that fubtill fpirit 8 
deceauer of the world, to the full manifeftation of the truth, and his 
owne glory, whether then I fay there was any fuch compaé? as is heere 
Mentionec or no, it mattereth not, neither whether So. were afrayde 
of banging: but the matter indeede to be confidered by vs is, whether 
So.did thofe ftrange things whereof the Commiflioners were ey wit 
nefles, as So. and the Difc. affirme, or the:diuellasweaffirme. 
Commiffioners with fundry others of account and good 
credit doe know, that beefore them Som. wallowed to and fro on the 

_ chamber floar, or fwiftly rowled with his body ftretched out tothe 
full length, in very ftrang andadmirab!e ( yea! may truly fay ) in fu~ 
pernaturall manner, 2. That he lay before them with his body {wel= 
led preatly. 3. His intralls were fhot vp and downe along in hisbody, 

 muchlike to the fhooting of a weauers fhittle_ 4. greate violence was: 

offered vnto him, thereby to make try all ifhe had any feelinge, and’ | 

Namely he was pricked with pynns in hand and legg, whereathe ftir- a 

red no more thena ftock. ¢. being oricked and that deepe, not 2 drop" 

ofbloud iffued out. This pricking with pynn:s, and the induringe » : 

thereof So. himfelfewe fee confeffeth, fo it may be he did, thenhor | 

fuing of bloud , and the Difc. thought good to keepe that back: Asie = 


} 
J 


437. ADETECTION OFS. HARSNETS 


_howioeuet I ipeake this by coniectare only, yet this I am fure ofthat 
So. being pricked did not bleede at ail. His nand was held vp beetore 
the Cous.aititoners, tie piace red where he had bene pricked, but the 

Akyn vas couga tne teemed to be there gathered, & 
Feady to ipiing out, yet neither did nor could, becaule the {kyn was 
whoie. and yet behould M. lobn Suellcy by name, not only pricked 
hin deepe, aunolt halte an inch deepe, (as M. George Smale ( who 

thes itvod ouer the boy ) depofed fince tothe ot London, as allo 
nv bioud uilaed ) but beelides itirred vp and downe, of purpole 
to make nin ttire and bioud ufue, but neither would be, Yt now Som, 

( or aay ot the jonnes of 444m) canivy art fo order the matter, that 
he can indure to be pricked with pynnes, arid neuer ftirr thereat, nor 
bloudiidue, wailow, iwell, and thoote his intraills, then I deny not but 
that might haue diffembled:beefore the Commiffioners: otherwile 
it mutt needes be, that chele things came trom the diuell, and fo he 
did not counterteyt: except the D/c. will put outthe eyes, not only 
of the Commiifioners, but of many others alfo. 


Moreouer, if So, asa counterfeyt did then fhew his own trickes, 
and the end thereof,and of the compa? with the Maier was that therby 
st might playnly appeare to the Commiffioncrs that whatfoener he had done 
before, dane of bts owne accorde, meerly counterfeyted, or as M.Fre 
man hath depoted, to fati fy the company of his counterfeyting, and the 
Maior, all men, why when he had /bewed them and wasalked 
bythe commutlioners werefore he fell did he anfwer that a 
quale came one bis ftomack,and ina worde fo as by his aniwers it was 
evident that either he could not, or would nor tellofany thing that 
e'ther be (an appearance) had done, or was done vnto him by others 

For this was not the way to /ats/fy the company of his counterfeyting,whs 
ich is {aide to bethe end why he then dic his prancks, but to induce 
meh to beleeue the contrary, So. is produced by the D,/c, anlwernge 
this obie<tion in thele wordes. ing 

When Vbad thus ended thefe prancks, the Commiffioners afked mee 
whether thad bene troubled with any fitt, [yrce came into that place bee 
fore them, or had felt any burt done vnto a2fwerd and dfter affir 
med von {peaches that had not diffmbled. And beinge beere dee 
maunded ( qaoth the Dit.) why he fo anfwered, hefaith thus. 
bileft 1 was in my pretended fit, hearde many reioycingly fay, that 

now it was milf playns that | was vtter very [barpe word's 4 

gaint thofe who had ziuen it out, that was bat a diffomble, Befeds 1 
to that eyther ooninn ws altred, who fully per wa- 


ded before (45 thought ) had altogither diffembled: ‘ev elfe 


\ 


Ft 
a: 
Thy 
4 
4 
pag 101. 
7? 
nt 
pag 203. 
ig 


LYING DISCOVERY. 138 


durft not [peake bis mynde therern, call ine , feing the reff of the commif= 
fwoncrs , and many others fo confident indeed, that 1 was repof}:{fed. 
thermore alfo then feared M. Markbams. and one laques wor des, 
with/undry others, would proue true: who the fame morning ouernight 
bad soula me, that sf were found to be a diffembler, mus be hanged: whe 
reas quath laques, of then appedre that thow art not 4 difjembler,ther can 
no lawe nor Ludee hurt thee, thefere{pects  thanghtit the fafelt way far 
my Jelfe, yeald for that tiyse to their owmors,and to anfwer as befurc w 
exprefjed, that not diffembled. 
_ Darrell. | 
For our better vnderftanding of the iugling and deceipt heere 
vied, we mutt know that euenas do, was facing ic out to the Commi 
flioners, that hie had counterfeyted, and yet retuling to counterfeit fo 
againe, he was vyolently caftdowne, the {pirit then trifling exceding« 
ly:io framing his countenance, && toying with his armes and leggs asa 
mail in carnaul reaion would haue verily thought that he counterfey- 
ted. nothing being done but that might eafily be done by any, Our 
heipe was thus, that being pulled by the eares and hayre of the heade 
as i they ihovid haue haue bene plucked of, and therewithall his head 
bearen © to thie floar; aca mercitali man would {carily doe to a dogg 
yet he ftirted not not at ail therat, nor at the pricking of him with pin 
nes, neyther did any bloud itiue at the places pricked. * eds 
Lhistitt ended, he beinge alked by the Commiflioners what 
hee had done difo what otherS-had ‘done’ to him, hee coulde tell of 
hothinge, one ofthe coméuflioners afkinge’ him; whether heswere 
not pricked of One of histhandes with a pynne,he anlwered yes hou!d 
‘idge forth the wronge hand: whereby thole that were prelent per- 
ceaued, that he weuid gladly haue vetered thofe things that had in. 
that fit befallen him, it poflibly he could, thar‘fo ftill hee might haue 
pérlwaded nieg that he/had formerly’ diifermbled. Laftly beinge de- 
maunded whether he had countretfeted,hean{wered with a’braten face 
as before the'faid fit that he Had counterfeyted Forthwith he was car=_ 
ryed away by his keepers and prefently after elfe-where in the towne 
fearefully tor mented by tlie diuell, whereof: when ty dings was brou- | 
the Commiffioners, viz. that now So. was very fearfully hand 
led, fome commattided that he fiould be brought back againe,which 
being done accordingly, keno fooner appeared beefore them, but he 
was in a‘itt, and {6 proceeded from fitt to fire) till he had had fundry, 
the {pirit in thefe vexirig him indeede, and pes his rage & malice | 
againft man, and notin fubtilty as he didar the firft, ve 
VVhere now the Li/c, affirmeth, that So, linge in the fittshe had 
at the firft, whien he was. pricked. with pytines, and out of-which the 


at 
re 
‘ 
43 
J | 
Q 
| 


13) ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


Maior fhou!d haue called him, did vpon good deliberatien(forfooth) 
change his mynde, and accordinge thereto the fite beinge ended, 
fay to the Commutlioners that be had not it is vntrue, tor 
then be affirmed the contrary, that h: had aifjembled, as the Commi 
ffoners with fundry others can teftify: And if So. did fay to the Com 
mitioners, that he had not diffimbled which I doe notremember, it 
was a‘ter he was fent for the iecond time, and vpon the fearefull vex- 
ation he then indured thick and threetoulie by Sathan which helpeth 
not the Difc, at all: for notwithftanding that were fo, yet this that So, 
and the doe tell ys, is falfe. i 
Secondly it is to be obferued how the Difcoucrer proueth.that 
Somers thus changed his mynde lyinge in his fit: whySamers (oc) faith 
oe {o,neither can this be otherwife prooued’ Alfo how he prooueth that 
og = <i Somers atthe end of this faide fit, (0) affirmed that he had not difjem- 
found of fuch a- bled: it: and there is not fomuch as a falie witnefle 
curit- ling it, fo that the truth hereof refteth only and barely vpo 
So. crecit} which Ithinke ts long agoe fhamefuily crackt, and fhiuered 
both with wife men and with fooles. 3. were So. credit better then’ tt 
is, yet the tale which is touldvs, is fo vofauery or rather fo abfurd, & 
fencelefle, that me thinketh it ismore then ftrange that any man of 
ome, and iudgment fhould euer harken vnto it, or embrace it as 
a trutn. | 
For marke I pray you: heere is a paltry boy brought in dely- 
berating and confulting, as if he were a graue man of greate delibera 
tion and aduifement. And when I pray you and at what inftant mutt 
this graue deliberation of his be, forfooth euen then. when he was do 
ing of his rare fayts, and others vfing their pleafure towards him: one 
violently beating his heade to the floar, and plucking him bv the hait 
"and eares full foundly, an other pricking him in the hand'with a pyn,a 
third in the leg: & he in danger to be fo further dealt with, 8 to haue 
the like hard meafure offered him: he knew not by how many, mee 
_thinketh that by meanes heereof his thoughts fhould haue bene dra 
wne an other way, partly to the tricks he had in hand, partly to his 
payne and partly taken vp about the prefent denger and likelihoodhe | 
was in of induring yet more payne, and by reafon hereof fo perplex 
and interupted, as that he could hardly haue fallen into fo graue‘a con 
fulration with hinfelfe: and{o orderlye alfo haue proceeded therein 
from one poyntto an other, from the firft & weakeft reafon that mo- 
ued him, to the fecond & ftronger, and from thence to the third and 
moft forcible ofall, 
_ Ofall feafons this fure mu? needes be the moft vnfic and vn* 
feafonable {eafon for Somers to debate deliberate and confult in: shit : 


23 
ti 
| 
| 
| 
} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
x > 
4 


LYING DISCOVERY, 
ther doe I thinke that this plot and teuice of Som. and the Difconcrer 
had eny fapp cr watt in it ar ail, to n ake this ccnfultaticn detern.y nas 
ticn and reicluticn to be in the midceft or curing the time of his pre 
tenced fitts. there wculc be no ‘auor in this. Yet had it benea litle 
more prcbable if they had fayd, 1 he fit being enced and paft, or whi- 
left he flooe Leefore the con nuflx ners, bethinking himiclte what an 
(wer to make: but take the tale as itis celivered vs, viz. whilti he was 
ww bis ft, and | thinke he is {carfly w eli in his witts that wil! beleue it, ~ 
4. The third and mayn reafcn Jeading him therevnto was (for= 
{coth) the feare of hangmg, ariling of this fpeach, that be found to 
be a diffembler he be hanged. Ee itthat the'e wordes were fpoken 
n-uft Jo. therefore needes be in fuch a greate per plexity and feare of 
bangmg, as if the very naming therecf were {ufticient to make him qu 
Alas poorefimple boye, belike he thought that euetyeworde 
was ablowe. But wherefore doe! call him (imple. whe delaberatinge 
and difcuffinge of matters before he refoluec what te dée thev eth 
fo mgch witt? where now ¥ as ali his ingeny e anc ceepe coniultaticn, 
that feared banging becaule of his cif) mbline¢ doth not everye childe 


know that forcculerege a men cat. not by ‘our lawes be hangea, but 228 293: 


is otherwile to be punifhed? 
And if herein he were ignorante, and that none ofhis frendes 
of themfelues.woulce haue toulde him fo mnch, yet he might eafily 


by enquiry haue learned fomuch: But how proueth the Dafcomercr that 


thefe very wordes of threatning were Vfed¢ Ey the teftimcny of So- 
mers, and Nich. Shepheard & lobu Cooper bis keepers, three moft vyle 
and wicked men. 
Secondlye. we may obferue how the teftimonye of thefetwo 
witneffes ( tor the third is an accuser anc a} arty doe preue the fame, 
If it be proued (quoth M. N avrkham) that thow art a counterfcyt, thow de 
ferucft to be hanged: Thus depofeth Sie anc Cooper thus M.. Mar 
kham [aid to So. that if be were found to be a diffcmbler he mufl be hanged. 
Againe Shephrard thus: One Lagues [aid to So. m the heaving of ne, and 
of Cooper, that if he were proued to be a counterfeyt he mult be hanged 
And Cooper depofeth after this manner, Cre laques tould the boy, that 
if he did-counterfeyt be would be banged: Cencerning M, Markham bis 
{peach, the one.d.pofeth defcradf, the other thow muf! be hanged 
and the one fweareth lagues laid be muff theother be wonld bc hanged: 
Heereby it appeareth that the‘e are ‘al’e witneffes being fo variable 8z 
_ diffonantone from an other: Finally, take Shepheards wordes ccncer- 
‘ning M. Atarkham, and Coopers conczming lagues and there was 


pag 204 


é 
« 
= > 
; 
| 
> 
y 


whe 


4 
4 
3 
4 


141 ADETECTION OFS. HARSNETS 
caufe why 52, fhould be afrayd ofhanginge: and letle why the Difcon, 
{hould breake torth into thefe wordes: 1 bss ws threatning G& terrify~ 
ing indeede, able to fbaken the confiancye of 4 fironger man: wherein 
the Vi/c. hath relation co the other feare that So, had of banging, whe 
reot he {peaketh in the begininge of this chapter, as though torfooth 
this feare far {urpatfed that. But euery childe may fee the contrary, %& 
the Di/c. vayne boaiting: for deedes farr patle wordes; And Lam veri 
fure, that hada ftronger man then So. bene accufed of felony, 8 tor 
the fame bene impriloned, as So. was, as the Di/c. himfelfe contetleth, 
Which cauled the /eare of hangeng in So, mentioned before: though ne 
uer io innocent, yet fomtimes he woulde haue feared the loile of his 
life: and fo would no mah of vnderftandinge in this cale, though he 
were guilty of counterteyting, as So. was not, And thus much for an- 

CHAP. 7, 


* 


How So- w.ts perfwacded by threatmings and promifes, to baut'conti« 
med his diffimulation, after be had bene before the Commiffioners at Nott, 
till M. Dav, might acaine 
-VVhy might not fome perlwade So. hauing confeffed the truth 
wha'is this ph therein to concnue, and to take heede of (a) returning with the dog 
oF hun to His Vonyte? And what-did they therein ill befeeming them? Thé 
nucius diutimu- mult remember that he hath not yet prooued So. chs fJimulation, 
As for the threatnines and promifes the Dijc. prateth of, he that will 
vouch ate them the reading, canaot but fee, that they deferue rathet 
_ ~The ludges commingeto Nott. be the [aid So. being fent for beefare the 
Ander[on confeffed at larze, how he bad diffembled, and there fhewinge 
bis tricks before bis Lordfbip  diuers others, in fome extraordinary forte, 

40 thofe that had not feene him beefore, be prefently farted vp, vpon his Lo. 
bidding bim to arrife, and{bew:d himfelfe to be as well as he was before. 
I doe in all reuerence counfell & adueife my Lord Anderfon and 
‘whofoeuer heereto fore haue feene, or heereatter fhall fee So. doe bs 
tricks, or rather the diuell his tricks in him, to turne away theyre eye 
fro.n So, failing downe, and arrifinge at a call, tothe things atted bes 
fore them, Che which albeit they be eafy to be counterfeyted in com- 
-parifon of the rare effects the {pirit fometimes fent forth in Somers a 


3 


4 

4 

| 
| 


let them be wy examyned, sapleney found to be fuch, as can- 
not be done by any. humane or and agillity,: 8¢ sher- 
come from a fupernacurall power, which isthe diuel, 
As tor So. falling downe and riling at the beck of man, that:commerh 
from the tubuecy of the ipirit thereby biyndeing the eyes of men, and 
inducing them to thinke, that icisnothe, but so, that doth the feyts, 
for we mult remember that by the-holy icripturevit playrie, that a 
wicked {piri poiicing one, as he doth naw Somerss hath the ouerra- 
ling ot the body and partes thereot, at his pleafure, as the {pirit of ma | 
hath waen therefore the diueil will, ( and he will when heeeth it to 
for his aduantage ) he can afweil and.doth asreadily caftdown 
the body of Somers andrayfe it wp.againe, asany of vs can doe by ours 
Againe he chat doth thole things/ meane the {upernaturell ‘accidents 
men beheld in Somers lying on tne ground, canas ealily throw downe 
Somers and raite hun vp, or put an ende to his fitts, vpon the word or 
commauad ofa man, that lo Somers may tayie vp himfelfe: VVe may 
heereallo remember, how fome of tholein Lascafbire; continued 3. 
dayes and nights in afit, in. which time:t is :certaine\they did manye 
thinges the {peaches of others, and yet itwashotthey bucthe’dys 

The Difconerer faith, that Somers (bewed his wicks infomeextraw 
dinary fort, itis very true: for the fpirit tryflediand:tayed exceding= 
» Which extraordinarilye ‘he. had done: betore; {pecially exceeded 
omucia therein as thea;he did,.2, Ie was that none 
of the fonnes af Adam can doe the like,’ But-the Di/coverer thold haue 
done well, and to the better {atilFyinge of the Reader, ifhe had tould 
vs the particuler tricks he at that time did, as of the {wellinge he had — 
then in his body; though nothinge {9 bigge as in former: times; of t this would 


the exceeding waight othisilege Se arme of all che 


Somer's ) Lhane bene very well I thank god pag 305 


Since whichtime ( [ayth Very wei 
notwithtanding 20. Darrell did then bath {ince dimers times af ined, 


Heisnot, nor fince hath bene better; themhe was for Se 
kesbeefore, after which: it appearedthat he was not verye well, but 
was indeede poffeffed: with the’ (o doubt not notwith= 
Randinge this fappofed well, and very well being of his; but: that he 
is {0 fill, and thar’in due time, god will make it manyfelt’to all 


O 2 > be 
‘ 


> 
, 


of them coulde erne 
once reach vnto Come religion, they of an other (0) 


143 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


OF thedepofitiones takenin'M: Dar. beebalfe at Nott. and bow 


ypomthe examynation of bis ovine witneffes, it falleth outithat 


_ «the bodily of So. in bis fitts, were not extraordie 
hecommifjion wus procured; expedited the March 1 
wood E(quier; bigh Sherif}, Sir lohn Byron Kmight, lobn Stanbop, Robert 
pag 308. Markham, Richard Perkens Efquires, Peter Clarke Mayor of Nottengham, 
Myles Leigh Official, lobnIveton, lobn Browne, Robert Euineton, and 


Thomas Boulter, preachers, men fortheirfifficiency, wt 18 tine 


pery meete to haue.deale in a fare greater, The gentlemen areveryt 
0) of what na- Well Knowme to be fit goucrnonrs; and ave agréate fay in thife Of the 
tee, that nether y where they dwell. Uf the examynation of a matter of bt 


dminift- 
ers of preatlear. bene committed vnto them, or any other of a lower degree, concernin 


i | ming. nor woor- the good and peace of their country, they bad bene within thé compas of then 
ated would.no doube with all fufficiondy' bane dilchirged tht 


of fudiiciency all But thebipocisica U fleighaes of in marcérs: that 


Viterly ouerthrow,Se, counterfeyting) and previe it asimpof ible for 
So. by ant tochaue done thofe things he have done; if he be a 
fembler, as it is for him to walke vpon the to goe to Roome on 
a day, and that the faid fitions doe receavie forne credit from the 


e 
“sf 


as it were befare the eyes of his:Reader, andto:put fome 


ting im this rolle, and maketh them vp 1 2:is nomber: Secondiye, al 


well in regard of theire partiallity: branded as before in thefe wordes” 
By sheir prepofereus 


wordes: They beld not theinfelues withimcompas of theeopne-elemente:* 
Conceming the firlt we mufkknow thar thefe areon|y'butthe words 
_ and florithesof the Difc. andthat indeede and in truth ther is no 
master, all the cheif of them (one only excepted ) being meere {tran 


fufficiency and worthynefle of the Commiffioners them'ehies by who 
‘they were taken; thoughtitgood pollicy firftand afore: alléhines; 


'{cruple and doubt in his mynde whether thefe were the very Commif. 
fioners indeede, as 1 and my frends doe beare the world inhand, and 
‘yet he knoweth full weil (and no man better then he ) that they were. 
the very fame: only.M: Jobn Walton Archdeacon of Darlnjbire is wan- 


low thefe to be the men, then forfooth he excepteth againft them, as 


thy. beld with Mi Darrell, vepard of 
the in/ufficiency of the gentlemen, dofely implyed & marked inthele 


pers 


.- 
F 
a 
ut 
: 
d 
} | 
| 
4; 
iF 
he 
) 
i% 


LYING DISCOVERY. = 44% 
gers ynito me, and two of the other my great aduerfaryes, nay Imay 
rruly fay, that I didnot know any liuing that cid more deadlye hate 
me then M. Walton, As touching their{vfficiency, albeit in other thi- 
ngs the Difc. we fee doth furely acknowledg it, yet in this prefent cafe 
of counterfeyting he hatha is! 
not well know what they did: 


for why alas poore gentlemen they did 


not (forfooth) keepe themfelues within the compafle of thetr owne elco 


ment, Matke heere good Reader: Peter Clarke, Richard Hurt, Anchw 
Tack fon, Richard Morey, and William Freeman, Aldermen of NottinghZ, 
Sanuell Mafon gent, Willsam Gregory Towneeclarke, and Sumuell Harf 
nett the Difcoserer: wherof the moft are tradef-men, andfome verye 
{imple men, did nat exceede their bounds, went not beyonce theyre 

| eompaffe, but helde themfelues within theire element in the execution 
of their feuerall comiffions: But the aforefaid gentlemen that had this 

_ matter in examination before ( notwithftandinge the gentlemen be 
of greate wildome.and fufficiency ) did by the cenfure of the Difc, o~ 

uerfhoote themfelues and wentbeyond their element; 


4 ftrange thing: But it may.be that S.. Harjnet, ifnone of hisfellowe. 


Commiffioners,. hath 


that fpeciall whereof he fpeaketh page 28. 


which in his learning he calleth the gusft of difcerning fpirits: whichis a 


meafure of gods [pivit, to difcerne betwixt counterfeyts, anc! [uch as-were in 
deede poffeffed: which none of the other hath: yf he haue fo, yett: mee 
thinketh thele other commiffioners fhould at leaft be abletotell whee 
ther So. being prickt with pynnes before their eves, ftirred thereat or 
no: and whether any bloud iffued out: whether his body {welled &c, 


palle of their element. 


i 


And concerning alfa the witneJes themfelues much mioht be 


poled to be true ( which M. Dar. bad taueht them ) viz. that whatfoeucr 


it may rather, be maruayled, thattbey depofed ne (a) more, then blamed 


pray you the ynconcionable proceeding of this Difcoue- 
rer: Firft in his preamble to the depofitions, femthing he faith to exte- 
nuate the pinaen of the commiffioners.then for the excufe of the wit- 
neffes he telleth-vg that the witnefles alfo tonceauce well of me, or were 


likewife prepofteron|lye affected towardes mee: and thence alfo it came 
that they depofed in this manner as they did: what a thing is eae 


aunce and wype at them, as ifthey did 


and this (with fuch like) in this cafe fufficed, and is fure within the 6~ 


for their excufe, They hauing conceaued well of M. Darrell, coulde not ea» 209 

fly fs pe Any trechery in bim. And to fay the truth thefe grounds pref upe | 

didtnot forferea- 

be did or (pake in bis fites it was not.So. but the divell that did {peak it: re 
more, focmers 

counterfeited aa 


haueit, 


] 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| | 
Darrell, 


145, 


AOE 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
aiinoft all men should thus aitect and loue me: whom others fomudc 


detelt and abhor? The Commiifioners they through their prepofterous 


affections to mehad their eye of wijdome dlynded: 1o as they like 
mien as they were, held with Ldarrell, beleuing that Som. had not dil. 


fembied whereas the wijer fort belewed Somers, Che witnetfes (beinge | 


noietle then 17.) conceased {o well of meas for the atfection they bore 
me (if the Di/c, jay true ) they purpofely forlweare themfelues: for f 
to thofe things which vpon their oathes they did avow, they did de» 
pote not for tnat they faw and felt any fuch rare and impollible things 
in So. as they depoled: but vpon fome partiall and corrupt affection to 
wardes me: then can itnot be denyed but that they did Hatly periure 
themielues; which if ic were fo the being a minifter ot the gol- 
pell, might haue bene better occupyed a great deale to haue difplay 
ed their corruption and agrauated their iynne, then thus to haue plea 
ded in their defence and excule. An other thinge whereby the witnel- 
{es vere drouen to depote as they did, was { faith the Dic.) a talle & 
deceipttull ground they had :reccaued from M. Darrell wsx. ‘that was 
not Somers, but the dincll that did [pake all in his fits: Vo this ankwer 
that notwithf{tanding any {peach they heard from me they themifelues 
could well enough teil what they heard felt or faw in Somers: my {pe 
ach could not (iure) put out their eyes or depriue them of theire {ene 
ces and feeling, whither the things were {poken or done by So.orby 


the diuell, that was nothing to them. Moreouer, almoft all the wit 
__-neffes depoted to thofe things which they partly felt, and partly awe, 


beefore they heard my voyce at Nott. as appeareth by the depofitions 
no of mine could either fo bleare and dazell their eyes ot 
bewitch and benumme their fences to make them quite voyd of fence 


Wellin conclufion the Di{c, doth heerevpon tellvs chat st may rather 


be maruayled they depofed no more, then they blamed that they depofed fp 
much: what a fencelefle {peach is this, and how illbefeming any that 
profefleth him(elfe to be achriftian much more a minifter of the go 
pell. From hence the Difc, to the end of this'‘Chapter fetteth downe 
the retra¢ations of fandry of the deponents? yea he beareth the world 
in hand, that they haue all of them retracted all that before thefe'com 
miilioners they had formerly depofed: Mowét isa fynne and fhame 
for any to retra‘t that which he hath beefore abfolutely aduisedly and 


| _¥pon good ground affirmed vpon his oath. But a greater fyune and 


fhame it is to iuttify men in fo doing, Secondly among thele retracti- 


_ ons there be fome, ( as'forthwith will appeare ) which 


take vpon them to be cenfurers and reprouers of mens faults haue no 
reproofe 


them(elues, ifthe Di/c. report their depofitions truely: 
Now whatan abomynartion is this, that a Bifbop & this Chaylayne who 


abe 
| 
- pag 2086 
> 
‘ 209 
| 
= 
‘ 


ow. 


LYING DISCOVERY, 


146 


reproofe for. the Seriured, nay be fo farr from dealing fo with offen- | 


dors of thatniaiure that they rather maruayle that they areno more 
But one thing concerning our witnefjesin hand, ts worthy of a confre 
devation: that the moft of thefe that were examyned, were: but [ymple per= 
fons, eo [uch 25 had not bene paft twije or thrice with the boy, in all the tim 
of bis trouble, Som ( hauing threefcore ready) would haue producd bis cheif 
wineffes firft, but peraduenture it was thought pollicy to lay the 
Athirdeand again{t our witneffesis, that 
ttey were fimple men. I anfwer, fome of them were gentlemen of wor 
fhip, others gentlemen by office, 4. preachers. Ina word none of thé 
are accounted by fuch as beft knowe them, to be more (imple then.o- 
ther men: yea I ‘dare be bould to fay not any of the 17. deponents be 
fo fimple’as fome that I could name of the latter Commiffioners, wh< 


ich isa fhame forfome, and difgrace of their commiflion. The 4. ex» 


ception is, 7bey bad not bene paft twife or thrice with the bay. It ismofk 
vntrue, for fundry of them had bene oft with him in his fits, {ome al- 
moft dayly with him for the {pace of amonneth beefore, and one was 
continually in the fame houfe with him day and night..And where he 
obiecteth that I bauing So. ready, it had bene fit f fhould fff bane pro 
duced my cheif winielite we muft vnderftand that the commiflioners 
fitting two dayes togither and calling for fome to proouenowe this, 


bure 


We ? = 
4 Molen t 


now that, one while this ympoffible thinge to be counterfeyted, ano= 


ther while {uch other matter as in their wifdomes they thought good 
I was conftrayned to fend in fuch as were then at hand, Buthow ka 
weth the Dic. that thefe are not my cheif witnefles? He that. aduile 
ly confidereth of their depofitions, will finde that they haue. depoled 
materially againft counterfeyting, and fo much as the worlde isnot, a- 
ble to anfwer, much lefle the Dj/e..with all the helpe he‘hath from his 
miferable fhiftings, wreaftings ‘and ‘re- examynations. ‘Againe 
were any omytted, Which coulde more materially and fully 
this {uppofed counterfeyting, then doth this caufe and worke of Gos 
fufteyne the more loffe, and isto the D:/c more aduantage: be 
welltherefore haue helde a peace and contented himfelfe with, that 


which is already depofed. But in all.likelihood he would heere-vpon 


erfwade his reader, that the things depofed are of no momentat all, 
ut eafily auoyded and wypeéd away, with awett finger. But alas this 


is harder for him then he ymagineth: It is beyond the comprrle ofall 


his learning and wit, as may appearé by that which he hath done . 


P 


os 
> 
| 
| 
+. 
} 
« 


ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


dy: for hauing heerein labored what he can by fuch®countenanceand 
authority as he could poffibly procure, yea and prefied euery thinge 
to the vttermoft, yet in the ende after all his fweating, canualing and 
adoo, hath he proued tuft nothing in the accovnt of any man of wif 
dome and 1mdgment: as I truft will ymediatlye appeare vopon the 
_ view of the examynations themfelues. Had he not better then haue fit 
: ftill, and winked at theie depofitions, or {moothly paffed by them, as he 
doth by diuers other things, as if he had not feene them, then thus to | 
haue ftrvgled and ftriuen like a birde in the lyme, to the vtter difgre 
ace and ouerthrowe.of himfelfe andthe pretended counterfeytinge 
he fo :earneftly ftryueth for. And thus mach for anfwer to his oo 
_ and glauering preface:-Now to proceed to the examininge of the Dif. 
re-cxamynations. T hat this mav be done the more throughly & exact. 
ly, I will firft fet downe the firft depofitions of thofe whome the Dic. 
hath re-examyned, ( where he either hath not donne it at all, or elfe 
but in part ) and {o comparing theire former and latter depofitions or 
¥e-examynations togither, wee thall playnlye fee what thofe witnefles 
haue retratted or qualyfied, and how worthely and fubftantrally this 
Difc. conuinceth the depofitions of the 17, taken by the aboue named 
Robart Aldridge clarke viccar of S. Maryes in Nott. fworne cy exa 
Narration dep 2 myned, faith: that he comming to Somers vpon thur[day the 
3. of Nouember (as be thinketh) he found bim lying vpon a.bea, no bedde 
cloathes lying bim, but only his nofe: and fawe a thing runninge vpp 
bes right lege tothe quantity of 4 mouje, and be calling nto god by praycr, 
ymedrathe it remoned out of the right leeg into the left, bis hand 
thevevpon, imediatly it remoued into brs belly, where it did [well to a verye 
create twife fo bye 48 bis body as hethinketh, and from thence in 
to bis breft, there it was the bignes of his from thence into hts neck 
cr from thence vnder his care, where it remayned in the byenes of a french 
waluutt, not chaneing bis former cullor, and fovemayned there for the {pace 
of a.quarter of an boure. 
this examynate further faith: thathe beard ina range bollowe. 
woyce, that he was bis, and this examynat anfwering [aid that be 
was gods: that he bad made a promife vnto godin baptif me tobe htt, 
then the voyce an{werrd, that he was god Chrift cr akinge, cx that be ms 


de baptifme, and that he made lum his by a mew couenant. = 
This examynate alfo further faith, that the [aid So. bad fuch fire. 
ength, as fine men had much advo to keepe him downe, duringe which time. 
he exceeded in fwelling, fkrikine roar ingice yelling very fearelully, 
— of his teeth, <> foaminge at his mouth, And alfo faith that jlandinge in the 
balk be beard knocking in the parlor where the y lay, 


if 
a 


LYING DISCOVERY, 148 
he ruftedin, wherabe found the boy alone in his bed, lying with bis face > 
wards wn bis fit, with his mouth drawne awry, c& bis eycs ftaving, as tho- 
neh they would baue ftarted out of bis bead. Andknecling dovwne to praier 
heard the knocking agayne wnder his knees ashe thought, .And in the bedd 
ynder the conerlet he [awe.the forme <7 [bape, as it weve of fine kythnges in 
quantity, ta the view of bis eye. And acayne this examinate [awe the bed= 
cloathes at the feete moout, <> leape as the leaues of an Afpen tree 
foaken with the wynde, 

_ Now followeth the Dj{c. re-examynation of this deponent. 
| Difcouerer, 
Aldridee being alked, why heretofore he bad affwmed, that be per 
ceaned, whilelt So. was acting his tricks, the formes as it were of kitlines, 
ynder the couerlet that lay vpon him, the [aid couerlett being betwixte his 
eyes cy them, rather then the formes of whelpes, of conneyes, of rattsorc.an ™ — 
fweretb, this ke my fo affirming did proceede of this crc. becaufe1 haue 
beard beefore, that certayn witches had [pirits in formes of kitlines, oo thofe 
formes then came to. my minde. And agayne doe not very well know, that 
amans fences may b: deceaued. Befides l-was then very greatlye afraydes 
which ts 4 great meanes to deceaue 4 mans fences: being a mighty paf]yon, 
that will procure many ymacinations, C7 caule to thinke that which 
is bvt little to be greate, that which flandeth, to moue: cr that to be, which 
isnot. Whereby canfelfe (my great feare confidered) that 1 might bede- 
ceaucd, in affwmine many things, concerning the particularities of the [aid 
So. fitts: and I verily thinke it may be true, that So..affurmeth, of making 
cevtaine motions with bis fingers wnder the [aid couerlett, cy of bis knocking 
the bedjtock, whileft was praying by his bedfide. 
M, Aldridge being re-examyned .denyeth not, that. be the 
formes or [bapes as tt were of 5. kithngs in quantity vnder the coucclet wher’ 
So. lay: but only fheweth, why he rather tearmed or compared the fa 
ide formes to ksthngs, then to other fuch like liuing creatures, as whelps 

conucys, ratts Zc. occafyoned therevnto_ by the interrogatory propo- 4 
unded vnto him, except we gather the fame out of the laftwordesof | 4 

his-depofition. Butbe it for feare, or through the cunning of his exa- ; 

myner he was drawne vnawares to retract that he had before concer- 
ning this poynt depofed: wasthere therefore no fuch fupernaturall ac | 

cident ynder the couerlet, as the Défe.woulde haue men heerevppon a 

to collet? why befides this deponent,, there haue 4, others depofed | 

to this rare accident, ashath bene declared beefore, whereof twoe at 4 

thelealtviz M. Tb. Gray and loane Pyehaue bene likewife re- exa- 

myned thereabouts, but we heare neither of retra tion, nor yet of gu 

alification thereof, whereof we may re(t affur ed that they 

aTirme 


‘ 
4 
d 
. be 


147 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
dy: for hauing heerein labored what he can by fuch®countenanceand — 
authority ashe could poffibly procure, yea and prefied euery thinge 
to the vttermoft, yet in the ende after all his fweating, canualing and 
adoo, hath he proued iuft nothing in the accovnt of any man of wif 
dome and 1dgment: as I truft will ymediatlye appeare vopon the 
view of the examynations themfelues. Had he not better then haue fit 
ftill, and winked at thele depofitions, or {moothly paffed by them, as he 
doth by diuers other things, as if he had not feene them, then thus to | 
haue ftrvgled and ftriuen like a birde in the lyme, to the vtter difgre 
ace and ouerthrowe.of himfelfe andthe pretended counterfeytinge 
he fo :earneftly ftryueth for. And thus mach for anfwer to his o- 
and glauering preface: Now to proceed to the examininge of the 7 
re-cxamynations. | hat this mav be done the more throughly & exact. 
ly, I will firft fee downe the firft depofitions of thofe whome the Dic. 
hath re-examyned, ( where he either hath not donne it at all, or elfe 
but in part ) and fo comparing theire former and latter depofitions or 
¥e-exdmynations togither, wee fhall playnlye fee what thofe witnefles 
haue retracted or qualyfied, and how worthely and fubftantrally this 
Difc. conuinceth the depofitions of the 17, taken by the aboue named 
Robart Aldridge clarke viccar of S. Maryes in Nott. fworne cr exe 
Narration dep 2 myned, [aith: that firft he comming to W. Somers vpon thur[day being the 
3. of Nonember (as be thinketh) he found bim lying vpon 4bec, no bedde 
cloathes lying ypon but only bus oofe: and awe a thing runninge pp 
bis right lege tothe quantity of 4 mufe, and be calling vnto god by prayct, 
ymedtatlie it remoned out of the riebs leeg into the loft, laying bis hand 
therevpon, imechatly it remoued into brs belly, where it did [well to a verye 
create twife fo bye 2s bis body as hethinketh, and from thence in 
to his breft, c there it was the bienes of bis fit, cx from thence into hrs neck 
ex from thence vynder his eare, where it remayned in the byenes of a french 
waluutt, not chaneing bis former cullor, and fo remayned there for the [pace 
And this examynate further faith: thathe beard in.a frange bollow- 
woyce, that he w.ts bis, and this examynat anfwering [aid that be lyedy 
was gods: that he had made a proms[e godin baptif me to be hiss 
then the voyce an{wered, that he was god Chrift cr akinge, ox that be mas 
de bapti{me, and that he made him his by 4 new couenant. ; 


This examynate alfo further faith, that the aid So, bad {uch fire 
ength, as fine men had much advo to keepe hime downe, duringe which tune. 
he exceeded in fwelling, {krikine roaringics yelling very fearelully,gnafbig 
of his teeth, <x foaminge at his mouth, And a\fo faith that jlandinge in the 


ball betrd knocking in the parlr where the bry lay, fudde 


- ‘ 


- 
‘ 
g 
a 
a 
3 
t 
33 
Waid 
2 
2% 
‘ 4 
Bs 
q 
ro 
od 
€ 
3 
4 
er 
| 
ty 
4 4 4 
% 
4 
‘ 
mia) 
: 
Eby 
r 
: 
ig 
“| 
g 
in 
4 
, = 
4a 
| 
a: 
a 
> + > 
+ 
| 
@ 
| 
| 


as 


| 
‘ 
‘ 


LYING DISCOVERY, 148 
he rufted in, wherabe found the boy alone in his bed, lying with his face vpe 
wards wn bis fit, with bis mouth drawne awry, co his eycs Raving, as t 
uch they would baue flarted out of bis head. Andknecling downe to praicr 
hea’d the knocking agayne vnder his knees ashe thought, .And in the bedd 
ynder the couerlet he [awe the forme <x fbape, as it weve of fine kythnges in 
quantity, to the view of bis eye. And azayne this examinate [awe the bed= 
cloathes at the feete moout, leapeas the leaues of an.Afpen tree 
foaken with the mynde. 
Now followeth the Dic. re-examynation of this deponent. 

| Difcouerer, 
M. Aldridge being alked, why heer etofore he bad affiwmed, that he per 
ceaned, whileft So.was acting his tricks, the formes as it. were of kitlines, 
ynder the couerlet that lay vpon bim, the [aid couerlert being betwixte his : 
eyes Cx them, rather then the formes of whelpes, of conneyes, of rattsérc.an ™ — 
fweretb, thir ke my fo affirming did proceede of this crc. becaufe 1 baue 
beard before, that certayn witches bad [pirits in formes of kitlines, cx thofe 
formes then came to my minde, And agayne I doe not very well know, that 
amans fences may b: deceaued. Befides l-was then very preatlye afraydes 
which 1s 4 great meanes to deceaue 4 mans fences: being a mighty 
that will procurc many ymacinations, 7 caule 4man to thinke that which 
is byt little to be greate, that which ftandeth, to moue: cr that tobe, which 
is not. Whereby conte (fe (my great feare confidered) that 1 might bede- 
ceaucd, in affwmine many things, concerning the particularities of the [id 
So. fitts: and verily thinke it may be true, that So..affumeth, of making 
certaine motions with bis fingers wnder the [aid couerlett, cy of bis knocking 
again{t the bedjtock, whileft I was praying by his bedfide. 

M, Aldridge being re-examyned .denyeth not, that. be [awe the. 
formes or [bapes as st were of y. kithngs in quantity wnder the coucrlet wher 
So. lay: but only fheweth, why he rather tearmed or compared the fa 
ide formes to kithngs, thento other fuch like liuing creatures, as whelps 
councys, ratts @c. occafyoned therevnto_ by the interrogatory propo- 

undedvnto him, except we gather the fame out of the laftwordesof | 
his depofition. Butbe it for feare, or through the cunning of his exa- ; i 
myner he was drawne vnawares to retract that he had before concer- 
ning this poyne depofed: wasthere therefore no fuch fupernaturall ac 
cident vnder the couerlet, as the Dé/c,.woulde haue men heerevppon Be 
to collet? why befides this deponent,. there haue 4, others cepofed : 

_ tothis rare accident, as hath bene declared beefore, whereof twoe at a 

thelealtviz M. Th. Gray and Toane Pyehaue bene likewife re-exa- 
myned thereabouts, but we heare neither of retra ‘tion, nor yet of gs 

a:ification thereof, wheseof we may reft alfured that they iherated 


* 
\ 
g 


hings20 


> 


40 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
affirmed the fame againé ¥pon their re-examyriation ’ Shall nowe the. 
reit be periured, (as neédes they mutt if there were no {vch accident) 
becaute of the traylry of one. Furthermore, doth this prooue that M. 
Aldridge hath retracted or qualified all that he depoted at the firft, as 
the Dic. would heerevppon infinuate, & haue the worlde be~ 
leue? who feeth*it not to be otherwife? Yea toralmuch as in reafon it 
cannot be but thathe was further re-examyned, and that we heare of 
no fuch gualificatzons, it is thereby euident thathe didnot fomuchas 
quality that he had formerly depofed, concerning the running, varya- 


ble {welling, & his fapernaturall itrength. ‘I heretore. thofe two impo- 


fibilityés remayne ftrll prowed and vnretratted by M, oath, 
and fo confequently ynanfweréd & vnguoyded by the Difcomerer 
Whereas Tho. Hayes depoferh before the L. Arch- 


trch-Bifbopp of Yorks Com 
miffioners'at Nott. that he [awe fome thing runn out of W_So. lege into the 
other, ex thence forthwith intg bis belly, [welling the [ame: snfomuch that 
the [aime was Aen when the [ame departed thence,be 
faw it playnlyin his throate; im Vis tongue, and wn his cheeke, neere to-lis 
cdre-réote, to the of the yolk of an cog, whieh be taking betwene 
his fingers; found the {ame to be tn [ofttes like the yolk of an egge: Being re- 
the yolk of 40 cp bis throate of che [ame. quantity: further then lis’ 
throat cx his fact, could not nor did fee 2: So, hing in bis cloathes, But 
[awe a flarring ruin dowine his bref, into bis leg ees, without any vifinge 
quantity, that I could difcerne, (auing in his bells the bay at that time he 
ang on Ins backfomwhatbended, 
{welling and running of fomthinge in So. body, is one.of the cheife 
Sapernarurall attions or pafjions, (‘for the Apotlogy it feemeth knewe not, 
to call them ) that M. Dar. the Narrator doc injift vpon, for the 
proofe that So. was poffeffed. But if they were no other, then M. Hayes vpon 
bis examynation hath depofed: there was no ereate flrangenes them. 
[uppofed that'M.' Dar. will be very angry , to the[é fupernaturall run 
mings fo extemmated: But be' content, for it is very agreeable to bis 
See you how this man tryumpheth béefore the victory, yéa bee 
fore his aduerfary once meete him in the feilds, I may very well fay to. 


Sexamyned, he [aith thus: a [welling mn bis. cheeke, to the quantitye of 


+ 
> 


him, as fayd to Benhadad: Let not him that givdeth bis 


boaft bim|clfe 2s be that put-eth it of, To proue that So. hath not coun- 
terfeyted, among fund ry Other actions or paflions to the nomber of 
20 atth euery of which is /upernaturall, that is {uch asneither 
an come from nature, nor art compaffe, I account the running & oe 
riable 


£ 
| 
é 
pag 212 
Tho.Hayes 
4 
ae 
| | 
| 
4 


LYING DISCOVERY. 
riable [welling whicn So. had, to be one of the chefelt: So. (ay 1) had 
aj welling betweene hus flefh & {kynne of a variable bignefie, iniom 
part ot his body of the bignofle ot an egge, in fome other bigger, fome 
lele, {wiftly ranning vp and downe along his body, fometimes mak- 
ing a ttay tora quarter ofan howre ana fometimes lefle, in this or 
tiat parc ot the body. It was ieee and feit ( to let other parts goe) in 
his toote, and to remoue from toe toe, and in his torehead, d& other 
partes ot hig face: his care rootes. yea inhis very tongue, and which 


ome 


1s mot of all, to thruft out his eyes extraordinarily biggea blackneile - 


being fundry times vpon them for the prefent, Belides, beinge in the 
one arme it would be forthwith in the other, and fo of his legges, and 
whenit made any tay in legg or arme, as oft it did, then and duringe 


that time the fame member was as heauy and inflexible as if ithad ben 


iron, ‘hat fuch a {welling there was | prowe by the depofitions of 11, 

haue hearde already, namelye M,  4ldridge, and™, Hayes 

both preachers; the reft followe. | 

Hynds fwora examyned {aith, that at bis comming vnto the 
(aid So. be did fee a [welling in his neck the bigneffe of a great walluutt, 
and from thence it remoued into the bone of bis check, and there was to the 
bigneff of a great bafell nut: and from thence it removed into bis eye & the 

Ry of bis ey waxed black, and becaufe this examynat had beard before 

that be the fayd So. did counterfeyt, be did lay bus hand vpon the [aid fwel- 

Lng vpon the cheek bone, which [welling did tremble like an alpen leafe in 

a calm winde, op was viry oft, but in that place did not charge his natu- 

vallcullor, 

_ Tho. Welfeyld fworne and examyned (aith, that vpon funday at ni~ 
ht ocing the 6 .of Nouember, he [aw So: haning a creat {welling vader his 
eft care, to the bigneffe of a wallautt, and from thence it remoued into the 

eye, where it femed. not [o create, but caufed a great blacknes in his eye and 

vpon that this examynat boyd his hand and felt 4 certain mouing, and his 
ty changed into his natur ail cullor ymediatly: and fa changed 8. times be» 
twene 3. and 6, aclockin the morning. 

loane Py {worn and examyned/asth, that So. being in his fits, foe hath 


narration dep. ; 


narration dop.4 


[ene af welling in bis feet, which remoued from tac to toe, and foto bis lego, narration dep.§ ” 


and from thence in his body to to the byenes of 4 3. penny wiute loaf’ und fo 
to bis thro.t to the bienes of avatt, and vader his car ta the bioneffe of a wal 
nut, and in his eye Bros the a blacke clocke, and [orem sued) from place to 
place, which this examinate and others haue fenfible (eene, and felt. 
William Langford fworne and examined [aith, that vpon the 7 of No 
vember the [aid So: being extreamly tarmented,and toyled, and bis buttons 
therewith opened, be [awe a rvisinge or welling, in the bottome of bts bellie, 


s 


mbich to his mowed the closbes: and bis oreft aad famake beinge 


Narration 


ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


bare he far vifiblie the famerifing, or (welling in bienefft of agoofe or 

4 balpeny white loafe, affend vp to bis breft and fo to ins throate. 

narr.dep.12. ESterlley fworne andexamined [aith, thathe [awe a little thinge to 
in diners parts of bis bacdy,fwelling the bsye,and rifinge into feucral - 

partes of the face,to the bignes of 4 crab or wallnut. jaa 

| Kichard Met fworne and examined [aith, that on fonday at night bee 

marr. dep.13. the 6 of Noucmber,he came, to the fard So. to watch with him about ) 

| of the clocke at night, and found with him 21. W efi feild,and others, and be 

twene 3. and 5 clacke in the moyninge heard avoice faying that he would 

haue his right eye: and then he would bis left cye, the vayce being as he 

thinketh contr ary to bis natural voyce: And this examinate further faith, 

that a day or two before, and [undrie other times this examinate did [ce a- 

Swelling in bis avmes and legs, they being naked to the bienes of a walluut, 

andYemoning from place to place into bis body, and that be felt it in his bel 

ly to the bignes of a 6 .browne loafe, and that st was fo heard that be could 

not preffe st downe with his hand which this examinate af}ayed to doe,by 

putting bishand vnderthe bed clothes. 

I Pare sworne and examined [aith,that he [awe W. Som. lie groneling 
ypan his face vpon the bed, anda cert aine [welling or rifine vnder his clote 

hes to the bignes of a moufe: which remooned from place to place, to diucrs 
partes of bis body. 


‘I Clarke {[worne and examined [aith,that the clothes being taken off W 
Som be fawe in bis breaft being in his fire, afwelling or rifinge to the bige 
nes of avatte,which this cxaminate tooke hold of: and found it as foft to his 
fecling as adowne pillowe,and he thinking to hold st faft,it prefently avoyd 
ed,and then the boy laid it was gone downe into his lege. And this exami. 
nate {aith, that be [awe bim at [undric times when diuers of his members, — 


nar, der.16, 

\ 

as bis legos, armes, and others were inflexible, and excceding heauie,about, 

t 

( 

( 

| 

| 


NAtUre, as yron. | 
Hunt fworne and examined [aith,that he did [ce a thing in 
aat.dep.r7. tothe bignes of a wallnut,runnine in the of the [aid So. about bis 


facc;forbead, and eyes,and fo run about bis face to his eare. ; 
That So.then had fuch a variable[welling as! affirme,fuch as area 
fonable man will chinke,¥”.S0 could not counterfeite, or commaund 
torune alonge in his body at his pleafure, euery on may fee that will 
not willfaliy be blyndfold himfelfe:neither can it be otherwife,except 
thefe 11 .witnefles be periured,and with them fome others, who haue 
| ae fince depofed the fame.Now the. Difc. thinketh to wipe all this awaye 
ee | and to blind the eyes of the world, with producinge the examination 
iz of on of the 1 1.deponents,and hoafteth as though he had amlwered 
a) throughlie and paid me home as touching this /welline,to my fhames 
and proueth yea as he fuppofcth that [will be very angie, to bane thele 


cl 
n 
d 
t 
a 
1 
1 
a 


LYING DISCOVERY. 
_fupernaturall fwellings fo extennated. The Difc. fure taketh meétobea 
verye impatient man, or els this thought woulde neuer haue entred » 
mto his hart. yet ke fhall fee that I wil anlwere him without any great 
choller. And firft | affirme that 24. Tho. Hayes being reexamined, hath 
not retreacted that which before he depofed, nor yet quallified the " 
fame,except the Difc. counteth this a quallification, as I fuppofe he 
doth that W.So.did then Lye in his clothes,which in truth is a very for- 
rie one,or rather non at all-feeing in:his depofition before he had faid 
that he {aw was vpon all [aints day:and it is well knowne that Sem.had 
his clothes on the day time: ‘And this for another, that the boy did at 
| that time Lye on his backe, fomvbat bended.which wordes if they be 21. 
Hayes his. I thinke he was contented to be ftowe them on the Difco: 
and his fellow commiffioners,fo to be ridd of them-yet notwithftand. 
ing he depofetk vpon his reexamination, that he had a fwellinge in bis 
bclly, but in other words. Indeede 1 confefle theire is:fome difference 
in words betwene his firft and laft examination,and no maruel/ there 
pafling a yeare betwene them and mote, and that,the commuflioners 
at this latter examination thirlted after {ome difference, contrarieti¢, 
retractation,cr qualification, framing their interrogatories according- 
lie, they are the fame in fubftance-fauing that in the firft this /welling 
isvreeda little further, he depoflinge that it was in bis cheeke nere the 
earevoot,and in his tongme:and in the care roote, and tongue are O- 
mitted:which was through 11. Hayes his forgetfulnes,or els the Difco. 
hath purpofly omitteth‘or conceiled them,as not feruing his purpofe, 
2, Letvs take this examination at the huckfters hand, and as the Dif. . 
hath produced it,and we {hall find theiris {male caufe why he fhoulde “"** 
fo boaftingly fay,that ther was no great flrangnes in the fweling Isitnot 
very ftrange to fee no at his owne will and pleafure, make « {welling 
in his throat to the quantitie of the yelke of an egge,which Tho. Hayes being 
reexamined depofeth? 3-But admit 24. Hayes had vpon his reexamina- 
tion denyed all that he had before depofed,fhal that preiudice the de 
pofitions ofthe other 10% orwere they therfore periured heerein, 
becaufe he was periured? Itis manifeft by the Dzf{conerie that?7. l- 
dridge Rich. Mee;loane Pye,and W. Hunt, who haue likewife depofed 
to this (upernaturall [welling, were alfo reexamined, but we heare not 
a word what thefe faid vpon their(a) reexamynations to this /welfg: 1 warrante yow 
one may therby imagine that they haue neither retracted,nor qualift- 0 
ed the fame. The conftancie now of thefe 4 witnefles,doe much more pairell. 
confirme this welling to haue bene in So. body, thentheretraciation 
of one fole witneffe, doth weakeri the fame, if ithad bene fo that he?****"* 
had alltogeather retracted that, which he had before depofed, as he 
hath not, The Dif addeth the depofition of 21,Craven. I 


anf. 


> 
é 
| 
| 
| 
| 
‘ 
i 


194 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS- 


what his faid depofition doth in this chapter of reexaminations: and 
why he is fect amonge the reexaminate, iecing he was none of the 17, 
firit deponentes, nor euer examined belore. it thouldjeeme by this 
and fome.orher fuch like depolitions of his,that he was one readie to 
helpe the Déjc, ata pinch, when he itood in neede of a depolition for 
his purpole. And here we may note the cunning dealing of the Dic, 
who to make Davrell, feeme the more odious ald to heipe out this 
pretended counterfeiting, (which cannot ftand without fly¢and 
tilthy fhitts) amonge his reexaminants toilteth in this examinante of 
his owne cuiling,2,4 an{weare, that his laid depofition is both verye 
falfe and ridiculous, feruing the Dijc. not fo much to convince or ex. 
tenuat thefe supernatural runnings, (which he doth forfooth wonder. 
full foundly before)but to make way to a pretty ieft of his,wherwith 
he defiered beiike to delight his reader, 24. Darrell (quoth he) doe nat 
bere (ay, that the denill [kipped out of the bayes thigh into bis pocket, and 
turncd himfelfe: into a pare of gloues: the dinill may rather be thought to 
haue rune vp and dovone in bis owne cofewsing pate,then the bayes bodye. 
In like forte and to the end aforelaid,he bringeth in Jobn Wig gen, who 
was neuer fivorne and examined befdre, yetjthe Ds/c. placeth himin 
_ the ranke of the ailedgeth So.authentical tc- 
_ ftimony, which neuer faileth him: and therevpon inferteth thele wor 
des of his owne, 3 a 
Difcouerer | 
Bejides he (meaining So.) Likwifeferteth drwne how he did make th 
{aid motions that femseth to rune in his body, in the{c.words:I did mone fi 
the caife of my leg ¢,then my knebone which motion of the knee, well likwife 
make a motion or rifing in the thigh. Alfo by drawing and (topping of my 
wind, my belly wonld fire and |bew a kind of [welling The bunch as they 
tearmed it about my chef, was by the thrufting out of my brealt. Likewile 
my fecret {welling did make the end of my windpipe to mooue, and to [hew 
greater then tt is. 12 4int,my mooning of my Iawes one bunch was 
easly made tn the fide of my cheke ncave my care..And about the middle of 
of my cheke, with the end of my tonge thruft ag ainft it, the[e motions by pra 
I would make a very faft on after another, fo as there might eaflye 
{eeme to be running 1 my body of [ome thing, from place to place. 
arrell, 
« Idefire euery on to confider whethrr any of the children of men,ad- 
mitt ther had bene no other fj welling or motions then this beaft con- 
eifeth,can mak thele motions here {pecified,wha can mone the calfeof 
brs lege, without mouing or fhaking his whole legge? and fo I might 
proceed on to fome other mtions,2.. wher pretence is madethac (om 
Jjwellings yore mate by So, bis tomaue specially in his face; aafweeres 


* 


| pag 208. 

4 
pas 207. 

| 

4 

| | 


nd 


LYING DISCOVERY, | 

‘that his tongue couldnot make that {welling wnder his'earé root, much 
tetfe that which was in his forbead, and leait of all thurft' out his eyes. — 
and caufe, ablacknes of them.But I demaund how he made that /few//- 

ing in his fete, vema yuing from toe, to toe; it was not with his tonge {ure 


The Dif. procedeth. Fesrthermore,one Rich,Mee did depofe before the 15 
{aid Commi ffioners, that he bad (ene W. Somers fland,and turne bis face di- Richard Mee. 


of a Cabves tongur, 02900. 


if 


Rich: feucrall thinigs, non of which 


uls 
to 
Is 
id | = 
of rectly OAckWAYa, Not mouing bts.body, and that 1s Cyes were ds greatas 
bealts eyes,and that bis tone ue would be thurft out of lns bead, to the bienes 
But let vi jeewhat the fara Mee hath depofed, bis reexamination, 
Wher as I bene conctined, tofay and (ware, as 1s before expreffed, hy 
was is ([aith lie) thatthe the (aid So.turnett hts face good way 
tewards bis {boulder,eg not otberyif likwif my meaning was,s,that bis 
eyes were fomwbat zagline outsbut other wife no move then ordinary. And | 
thirdly my wis, and 1; that by'reafon it was-candle ight when I 
4 troubles, before him: bis tonguc being thrult out, it feemed lomwmbat 
- bigger,then of'S0. bad bene well Ifbould baue thought it to bene, 
can’ be done by art, as appeareth by hrs depotition in print: 
now being reexdmied & ther’ all,hé hath only minfed that 
he faid ot the bignes of tyes of bis face direHly 
backward: which'we regard not atallas beig of no fuck momét:doth 
the Di(co, thinke by this of his, that he hath anfweated all thize 
| Bich. Bree he hath nothitig leffe. 
Mee his reexamiriation {heeweth fome lictle frailtie, but overthtow- 
ces confidered) doth rather his former depofiti6, then his 
qualification weaker it:And this'l fay of 
‘likwife of foane Pye: whofe depofition contayning init 14. impoffible 
things to be dante by So:or any fonne of Adam, the Difeanfweateth, Toane Pye, 
with telling vs fhe was reexamined, and of her qualifyns de herre _ 
-exainatio one?a flole impollibility of the 1 4, But he muft know(as pag 216 
is aforaide)that belides thefe hawe not retiatted theire' firlt 
cns, fuadrie others alfo togeather with them haue depofed the fame 
their retractation, much thefe fory ‘quialifications 
of Can not'conuince or'difprote: we may againé ob- 
che deceiteof the Dife.who mentioning fearelye the’ To. part of 
| Bb. Mee and20,0F foane Pies depofitions, pretendeth to theignoka 


 ADETECTION OF S,HARSNETS 


nte reader,as though he had fer downe all that they at the firft time 
depofed: with their full anfwears at their reexaminations. Befides the 
HenryNuffey, formers, the Dic, produceth Hem y Nuffey Rich. Newton and Wil, 
vente Hunt:who hauing before depofed, the two firlt to Som. [peaking with 
pag 214 & 247. his month wide open,the third with bis mouth [hut clofe:being reexami 
ned, Hem-y Nuffey hath qualified,the other two retracted or denied, 
that the had betore depofed, if the Ds/c.haue fer downe their reéxa- 
minations truly: This periurie of theirs,the Difc. calleth the gualiftine 

of their former depofitions, x interpretations of their meaning. But if men 
_may be admitted fo to expound theire owne wordes, we fhall neuer 
haue any periured,nor punifhed for periurie to the end of theworld: 
_notwith{tanding I an{weare:Seeing the Commiflioners that examin 
ed,did(as I am/informed and doe verilie beleiue)threaten their exam 
gnats fometimes with hauing them before the L. of Londou,fomtimes 
with imprilonment, & before their eyes commaunded Hemry Butler 
_ by name to prifon:it is no maruell though amonge many, forme fraile 
_men were found, that wouldrather relent either in part or in whole, 
from that which in their confciencs they knew to be true,then hazard 


pag 211, 


trouble. Stronger men then they haue done as much in the like cafe: 


_ another manner of man then any of our examinats; for feare denyed 
that he knew the. Lord; and’ that.with: an oath, or execration. Ir isno 


this.2.Let the very enimyes Aidge whether voluntarie oathes, wher 
ponents theirby, .or oathes.compaffed partlie with flaterie and othet 


flye knowne) be more like to be true.3.. Thofe which haue relented 


fo)and therfore 


| sear cleare the caufe from counterfeting:and that we difiremay be anfwer 
voemacuill ed:offering to.make vp the‘number of thefe few pety reuolters(2 
get wl coppie of 3.excepted, )with 2 fupplie and advantage if we may be fuffered 4.it 
them, as by law ig to be fuppofed that if the reexaminations were (0) feene,it would 
prouldhaue appeare that more is confirmed,then extenuated. 


4 D3 


fitions, taken.at Nott. whervpon st was theuzht good robanue the 


parant. 


and in danger themfelues they knewe not to what punifhment and 
we all know how fhatnfully tharnotable Apoftle of our faviour Péter 
Rtrange thinge then for our reexaminats (weake and infirme men as 
they were) to haue fhruncke and relented, had it bene further then 

no profite or feare'of evillin the world wasliketo come ynto the de- 
ccuninge dealinge, -partlye. with terrors and threats ( as is notoriow. 


are but few, andican not therfore in any reafon preiudice that which 
the reft being many haue depofed:which is abundandlye fufficient to 


Thefe veere the cheifepaynts; which feemed.moft trang in the faid depo 


neffes examined, Aud how they qualifie theiv former words, you fee it Apo 


| 
if 
; 
4 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


LYING DISCOVERY. 


Thefe (faith he) were the .the runing fwelling,fpeak. 


jing with bis month wide open,at other times clofe (but, the turning of hu 
backward, hes eyes ning as great as bealt eyes, and of 
the bignes of 4 Cales tongue,b1s body doubled,bss head betwene hi teges: 
for not on more then thele hath the Difc.named.! anfwere,that ther 
are fundrie other poynts befides,and amonge thole fome not inferiour 
to thent, which the D;/co. doth not once name of touch in this his 
Chapter of reexaminations,much leffe returne an anfwer vnto them: 
In the [aid aque taken at Nottingham,it was alfo depofed. 
1. That fomtimes his legges,fomtimes his armes,were heavie and 
inflexible like yron.depofed by _Tobn Strelley, artic. 12, Toane Pye 
2.That ¥. So.had {uch extraordinarie ftrength, that fomtimes 3. 
4.5.6 or more were {carfe able to rule him.depofed by Rob..4ldride 


Richa,d Mee avt.13, William Langford, artic.9. 

3. when 4.,0F g. fturgled with him, (fometimes for an hower toge 
ther)fo as they were thraughlie wearied, he did not {weate,pante, or 
change colour. depofed by Wil, Langford art.9, Richard Mee arti. 


33, Pood artic. 11. 


4. He wallowed, gnafhed with his teeth and foamed at his mouth 


exceffiulie depofed by Robert Aldride artic.2. Wn. Aldred art. 
Strelley art.12. Rich,Mee Will.Lancford arti.9. — 
g-His face and mouth fearefully diftorted,one lippe towardes one 
eare,another towards another:depofed by VVilkam Aldred arti.5. 
Ioane Pye arti.€. Richard Mee artic. 
_ 6.His body plucked round vpon an 


ther, halfea yard hie. depofedby Pye, artic.6, 


7: Being caft into the fire(where he laye with his hand inthe fire 


not burned) fomtimes againft the walls & iron barrs of the chimney, 
with great violence,he receiued no apperance of hurt at all. depofed 
by Joane Pye art.6.°. Strelleyart.tz. Rich.Meeart,13. 


8.He told of diuers things done in his abfence, without notice pi- 
ven by ahy perfon, depoledd by Elizabeth Milward art.14, Joane 


9. Inhis fits ftrange {melles were in the place where he lay, fome 


artic.6 Richard Mee, arte. 
10.A ftrarige knocking perciued about his bed, in hisfitts: both 


times like brim{tone,{omtimes very fweete. depofed by loane Pye 


> 


his fete & hands being held vnmoueable.depofed by Rvb Alared 


at.2, Toane Pyeart. 6. Eliza.Milward at.t4. lobn Part 5. 


avtic.2. Pye, art.6. lohn ood, art. 11. Strelley,art. 2 


an heape like a browne loafe: 
fo rowled,he was caft vp like a ball from the bed 3 or 4 timesto get. 


ay 
eid 
| 
™ 


A DETE@TION OF S..HARSNETS 


hideoafly, fomtimes likeg Bull, beares fiwine,and 


‘in almale Yoyce vnpoffible to be counterféited:depoled by. Milan 
Langford arts.9. Robert Aldrdg arts.2,  Rych.Mece 
 12,Hislegge would be crooked with his talles, and coulde-not be 
ftrightened, depofed by Rich. Mee art.13. Tho.Haies arti. 
13. In his fires his pulfes and temples did not beate, depol¢dby 
‘WV illiam Langford, a Chivurgian 
14.His eyes was blacke and chaunged colour in his fites, depoled 
by VVilkam Hinde ati.3. Tho. VV etfeild arti'4, Mee art.13. 
“1s. He lay for an hower as one dead.cold as Ice, his face andhan 
“des'blacke,no breath being perceiued to come from him, depofed by 
Noane Pye avt.6, 
Thefe poynts, are contained in she aforefaid depofitions and feemed 


- wer either the Bifbop or his Chaplaine doe fleade for the 
the-muft needs returne vs anfweré vnto thele ot-els theydoe but tile 


fay nothing Sécondly,he fhall doe well to make known to the world, 


‘what M.aldridge,M, Hayes, Rich. Mee,loane' Pye, and the other reex 
‘aminats did fay beinge reexamined to the other paynts they hadbe- 
fore depofed, In the-meane {eafon euery child may {ee,that the Dif 
hath not performed that he profeffeth to doe in the title’ of this chap 


* ter.vz. to makeit playne, that ypon the reexamination of my owne wit 
mefjes (ashe calleth them) it falleth out, that the bodily at#sons of So. i 


| 


on 


‘his fitts, were not extraardinarie, {ecing he hath not fo much as named 


(c) neither was (c) 15. ofthem, and if fhould graunt him that thofe bodily actions 


them, fee. So.which he mentioneth,were not extraordinary (fot 


the to make it manifeft and apparant to the world that it was 
of all the fuppof polible tor Somers. to,haue counterteited.. | 


ed counterteit- And wher 
ing. 


eas it pleafeth him fo {peake fo indefinitly, and to faye 


that The [aide witneffes were examined,clofly and. cuningly theirby im- 


‘plicing as ifthey had bene all examined, & {o it feemeth would faine 
haue his teader conceiue and be perfwaded,whéreypon allo: (doubt- 
_Tes).it cometh to paffe, that. he neuer.mentioneth neither the num- 
ber of the firft depanents, nor of the reexaminats: we are to vnder- 
ftand,that vpon the.20. of March 97. before the 12. Commniffionets 
Mentioned the begining of this chapter, there were 17, withefies 
examined, whofe names are 3 
principall thinges they depofed, Synce which time. there aue ete 
- fundrie ofthe faid deponents by the Dif. and oth 
examined: but how many Iknowe not, and elfe mentionet! 
onely bur feauen.vith cheir qualifications:thinkinge by this 


frang,as wel! as the former mentioned by the Difconerer,and 


fert downe before: with the 


ther of his colleges! 


or 


a 
| 4 
‘= 
‘ 
| | 
‘ 
it 
ae 


& 


LYING DISCOVERY, ........ 159 
vizard of a reexa nination,-though he bring ia but aifew, and of the 
meaneft of the thinges depoled, iuppretling and filencing the reft of 
the rare accidents depofed, together with many deponents,to carrie 
away the caule asit were in acloud,and to dazel mens eyes and make 
them beleeue, that all the depofitions (woerin Land my. fellowes doe fo 
greatlee sribumph)are tully antwered,contutedsand ouerthrowne. But 
we muftnot torgett, that of the 17. tenne of theni Haue either not 
bene reexamined at all,or els being reexamined haue refifted all their 
temptationes,threats,and allurements,and doe through gods mercy 
itedta{t and the of which wit- )for befides 
nelles¢with aany.more)(a)this truth, meaine,the smpoffibibitie of So- 
ners counterfeiting doth relye and ftand fo lure, isnot by the By 


able to remoue it: Forif in the mouth of 2:or 3.witneffes atruth by his commitlio: 

the ordinance of god is to ftand, and everie controuerfie to be defid evade 

ed: how much more then is this truth to ftand fteadfaft, and con which haue wit- 
trouerfie to be ended,eyen by the Lords owné ordinance,» 


mouth of cen times 3 .witnefies or theire!: to be 


o 
; 
ey 
= 


& by the lat chapter, in the eyes of any vnpartiall and indifferent 


ludge, were ther nothing els faid, nor to be faid, then theirisallready, 


faid: I thinke it thallbe wifdome to vfe few words more concerninge 


the fame. Befides, I am afrayd the reader is wearye in turnings over er 
fuch patched and rediculous f{tuffe as this, when my felfe am not litle: a 
Steiued to fee my time (which ought to be more pretious to me thé. 
the gold of ophir) thus vainly and idlie confumed, in turnninge and 

rakinge vp fuch filthy and vnfaurie dunge, and were itnot that lam 

pervade that the Lord hath called me heerevnto, both for.the de~: 
fence of mine ownt innocency,and {peciallye the fetting forth of that. 
wonderfull worke of his, which wretched & vngodly men doelecke . 
by allmeanesto deface, I would in thar regard haue buryed all ~ {ie 


he impoflibilitie of Som. counterfeising beinge manifeflt enough | 
é 
{- 
¢s 
i¢ 
re 


1469 +ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


ence longe agoe.For thefe caufes (moft chriftian reader)albeit I pur 
pofe(by thy patierice 8 gods affiftarice)to make the cale more cleare 
and playne vato thee inthat which remaineth to be anfwered of the 
obiections & furmitles of the Di/couerer: yet will I theirin be as brefe 
as poflible I can,and as thelvnreafonablenes of the aduerfarie wil giue 
me leaue:the rather in that whatfoeuer he coineth and breatheth out 
again{t theicaufe rather then me heereafter, cometh out of the very 
fame forge and fhope withthe former, wherof I am content to make 
thy felfe Tadge inthepervfall, 
OF CHAP.1, 
Difcourer, 
How M.D laboured from time to time,to make thofe thinges that So, 
did,ex were but very tayes,to be both flrang extraordinary. 

V Vhether the thinges depofed to be done by Som.(done indede 

by the Diuell) were very tyes and nothing ftrange and extrawdinay 

in them:and further whether the things done by So. were fuch ashe 
.» did or could:doe of himfelfe. and fo argue a counterfeitinge, or whe- 
» ther the did paffe his reach, {kill, and power and fo argue a fupernatu 
rall power,namly the power of the diuell within him, let the chriftian 
reader himfelfe ludge by my anfwere to the laft chapter. 

OF CHAP.z. 
| Difcoucrer 

How M. Dar. wosld not fuffer_asscre as he could any to deale with 

Sv.in his fatts,to try whether he were fenfelef or diffembled. | 
Darrell. 

The ground of this chapter isthis affertion fathered vppon.me: 
vz. that Som.or whofoeuer is poffeffed is fenfeleffe in all theire fites: 
wherevnee Hraue fiafficiently anfweted in my anfwere to the 3. cha 
ter of the =.booke. 


 HowM.Da@’. indeuoured to excufe So. when be was taken [hort, and 
did [uch toyes,as did arouc him fuffictently to be a counterfeit. 
_ obiected that his foaming came from a peece tof blacke.lead 
he had in his mouth.I put ¢ faith Somers ) a peece of blacke lead into my 
mouth that therby might in abundant manner, 
arrell, 
It is true that one atime he had a litle blacke lead in his mouth,but 
(as I verily take it)he did not then foame,as partly appeareth by Ed- 
mond Garlands depfition, (following) who was then prefent; But be 
itthat he did: his foaming came not, nor was becaufe of the {aid 8 


\ 


| 
| 
pag.225. 
| 
| 
4 
| 
pag -3 3° 
j 
Bu 
if 
if Ie 
| 


lead:for then another puting blacke lead into his mouth, fhall theirby 
be made able to foame allo which I thinke non of vnderftandinge will 
affirme-and triall therof may foone be made: 3. we {peake of 4 foming 
in the time of his firft poffeffion,now oe and then foaming, fpe 
cially in great abundance the day of his difpoileflion: and this blacke 
lead from whence his foaming fhould come,he had onely once in his 


~mouth,when he was at Garlands houfe,as is plaine by the depofitions _ 


concerning the fame,which was almoft 20.weekes after the foaming 


wee {peake off. Now although blacke lead may peradventure haue | 


fuch an odd myfticall qualitie asis pretended, yet it could not (fure) 
_caufe him to foame,fo long and fo many weekes before he had it. For 
theiris no body that depofeh to any dlacke lead: then and if he had 
had any we fhould no doubt haue heard of it-nay So, himfelfe depof 
ethno fuch thinge: but by this depofition we may rather coniecture, 
that if the diuell caufed‘not his foamine, but himfelfe, then it came by 
volling a ftone or [oape in bis mouth, for {o faith he I taught him to doe, 
that he might the better foame, But how doth the Dic. proue that So. 
foaming came of blacke lead? befides'So. teftimonie, by.the the tefti- 
monie: by the depofitions'of two witnefles. Iz one fitte 1 [aw W: Som. 
(faith Edmond Carland) froath at the movth very much, {0 as the foame 


in bis mouth. He doth not fay, and at the fame time,vz.that he foam- 
ed, I found a peece et:but,and at one time I found et: meaninge, another 
time, So that by this depofition ‘it fhould feeme, that Somers foamed 
notwhen the Slicke lad was’ in bis mouth. From hence then we can 
no more conclude that So. foaming came from this peece of blacke lead 
iu bis mouth, then from the morfels of bread, and gobbetes of flefhe, 

which he likwife hath had in his mouth. But George Richardfon depof 


eth more fully:In fit be foamed (faith he) excedingly, and bercing a- : 


kind of eratine of [ome what betwixt bis teeth, tould Garland the bayes kee. 
per: wherypon Garland taking bim by the beatre of the head, and \ by bis 


mouth, we fbooke out of bis mouth a of blackelead, 
I will not ftand heare to fhew the fafhod of mans depofition, but 


onely I afke,what and if So.inftead of the black lead,had in his mouth 


a ftone,or pine’ had the fame caufed his foaming both at that time, 8 


lorge before?For I doubt not but that either of thefe hath as well that 


vertue and workinge quallitie in it as blacke lead hath: lam trulye a- 
fhamed to ve fo many wordes a bout that which defcrueth rather to. 
be laughed at, then anlwered: but the folly of thefe who beleeiuinge | 
this haue in good earneft obiested it againft me, as a matter of Mo- 


thus farr conftrained me, OF 


‘LYING DISCOVERY. _ 


— dovone into bis'necke: and at on time found a peece of blacke lead Pag 2330 


7 
> 
4 
3 
. 
| 


362 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


Fw contrary toM:Darr: a/jertion, Somer, bad bis fenfes and vndete 
flanding bis jitts. | 
Darrell: 


In my an{were to the 8 chap: of my 2 booke,I haue fhewed, that 

thowlocuer Sathan doth (ao doubt)ordinarilie depriue thoie he pof- 

_ feifeth in their fites, of their internall and externail fenfes, yet not all 

‘wayes,but can and doth by his flyghts fo order the matter,as that the 

poflefledhaue many times their ienies & wnderftanding in as good 

meaiure as thofe that are not potleiled, a thinge that I haue allwayes 

held, ana neuer fence | came to any iudgment affirmed the contrarie, 

Vnieile thertore the 13#/c, had proued tnat So: in all bis fits baa his per 

jences and vnderjt anding vhich he neither doth nor by any pof. 

libilitie can doe) helaith nothing at all againit my affertion, but fight 

eth with his owne fhadow, & confureth atorgerie of his owne,which 

Of the notions and knockinges which were beard and fene about Somers 

pag 23%. bas fitts,that they were donc and made by bimfelfe, and were not as M: 
Darr, bath veportedextraordinaree or [upernaturall. — 

"This is anfwered before in my anfweare to the 4.chap: of thefes 
cond booke:and many in aword be an{weared againe: that ail that is: 
their and here obiected is fallfe,abfurde,and ridiculous, as hath alireay 


dyebenefhewcd. 
_.OFCHAP:6 


Somers cafting him|elfe into the fire,was voluntary, and no extta- 
ordinary matter,as M.Darrell hath pretended, — | 


Becaufe the words of cafting into the fire quoth So.) doth feme to import 
much:Fir(t Lfay,chat the fires in my Miftris boule, and then after wards ws 
my father in laws,were but very [inaleymade of flat coales,and fo compal}~ 
éd at the ends and foreparte with barrs of iron,. that except I fhould haut 
thruft my felfe betwixt the [ayd barves, and the wall, or. had thruft my 
fucers betwixt the barrs,] could not in any wile baue ca} my felfe into the” 
fr e: But I conf effe that M: Dar. hauing told me out of S. Marke,aud like 
wije hauing firaightlie warned {uch as keept me in my [uppofed fitts, that 
they (bould be very carfull tolooe vuto did cali my felfenow then 
into the Chitmnzy, vpon the yrons or grates. prem 
| Darrell, 
| 


\ 
OF CHAP 
4 
| 
A 
; 
¢ 


ALYING: DISCOVERY, * 
Concerning this poynt Pre hath depofed thus On 4llbalow 
even at nosne, or thew abouts 1 with [undry otbers, being with VVilliam 
Somers be was 4 chan'e about yards from the fire fide,sand {ud 
dinly was calt towards the farc, bis lighting ypon the ivon that keept 
vp the fe, aid one of brs bands in the fire: and they being 3 or 4. taking 
bun vp to {ase bims from burning ,they could not [et him in the chawe again: 
for bis leogs were fo bowed as they all could not ftreight them, and be fo 
Keavie,as- they could {carce itt him, and that neither his bead,haive, nor 4 
ny part of bis body was burt or burned by the fire. Lees eet 
ind M. lobn Streffey after this manner :He was on 2fudden calf in 

to the five in the prefetce of all: and {uddenly taken out without any burt to 
him by the fire,bemg of waight as aforefaide. 
And Kich.2ee thus: And the [aid Som. would be violently caft into the 47-13. 
the fire, ftanding from the frre a yarde and halfe off and none of bis clothes. 

Let now the reader chufe,whether he will beleiue this beaft of Eng= 
land,or thefe 3.vpon their oathes,and many other affirming,and rea 
dic to depofe the fame, and mote then this, And where he faith, thar I 
fraightly warned fach as keept him that they fhould be carfull to leoke va 
to him: how can this pafible be true, feeinge he was caftintothefire, 
before (a) [came to Nottingham as appeareth by the depofition of 
Toune Pye which alfo HughWilfon made knowne vnto me at Afbbye, that plead for 
when he came to me their for my repiare to So. at Nott.ashe andfom °”"**» 
of my owne familie can witnes, And where he confeffeth, that he caf 
bimfelfe vpon the yrons or g¥ats:it fhould feeme that as the fics were ve 
ry (mall (tor tooth made of flate coales, fo the yrons or grates by me 
therof were not hoat neither,els the would fure haue burnt him, 

Ouer and befides So.depofition the Di/c.produceth two others- 
wherof one depofeth that ona time he clapt hes buttockes vpon the fires 
the other,that he fell downe with his fooulders on thefyre. 
- Buthe was oft caft into the fire, fo that bis being caft at two 
times as is faide, if that were {o, letteth not but that at other times he 
might be fo caft,as that {ome hare part of his body laye in the fire:yea 
direstly depofed by Joane Pye of one time, and before the Bifbop 
of Landon (as 1 take it) by Edm. Garland of another time and place, 
that his bare hand laye in the fire,and for fomelittle {pace as appear= 
eth by the circumftances, and yet was not burned. And ther are {un~ 
drie ready to depofe,that at another time and place in the prefence of 
many,he was throwne on his face into the middeft of a hoat & great 
_fyre, his face bareinge downe the hoat coales that lyinge thus with 2- 

nine cap on his head Couper his fifter {natched at him, plucke 
away 


narration dey 


feueral] Alwood. 


4 
4 
= 
| 
] 
| 
4 
| 
3 
= 


244 


truth, 


found him often of eafie firength, 


VVhy this leteth not but that at {ome other times in fome of his 
fitts, he was of extraordinarie frreucth: And this I doubt not but that 
Garland did at the fame time depofe, though we here nothing of it. 


164 ADETECTIONOFS.HARSNETS 
away the cap,and left face and barehead in the fyre:And yet behould 
no face burned,nor heaire finged thereby, 


OF CHAP.7. 
Difcoucrer” 


Of So pretended Areneth and weight in his fitts,that contrary to 
and hu frends reports, ther was nothing extraordinarse sn them. 


So. fay Thad fuch extraordinarie and fupernaturall ftrength, that 3 
fomtimes 4, ¢. 6, or moe, were {carce able to rule him, though they 
had him at great advantag: as lying flatt vpon the ground,or ya a 
bed, (yeaa lowe trundle bed) or tyed faft to a chaire 3. men for an 
houre or their abouts ftriuing with him, though they {wet and were 


in a manner breathles,and theirby forced to piue place to others: yet 


did henot fo much as chang bis colowr,or pant, nay he was {carcel 


(c) anfwere this ceiued to draw his winde,as is depofed ergo, So.is No (c) countericite, 
argumenc or els | 


ycald ro the 


For no man can adde to his ftrength by counterfeiting. 
Difcourer 
The Dic. now telleth vs that his flrength was not extraordinary, 


And he proueth it firft by So, ridiculous depofition,then bythe depo 


fitions of 7. others, 
Somtimes {aith Ed.Garlanda man that hath had great triall of Som, 
fupernatuarll ftrength) Somers firength was but ordinarie And againe,l 


arrell 


Yea his very words infinuat no lefle. The other fixe depofe that they 


aparte prowing his flrength, found it to be but ordinarie. 1 doe not fay nei 
ther ever did, that So, in all his fitts was of extraordinarie firength, for 


then indeede Garland and the other fixe had depofed materially: but 
of fuch ftrength in fome of them he was without all queftion and co 


tradiction. He foamed we faye, he wallowed we fay, he was caft into. 
the fyre we fay,etc .Yeawee fay not that he foamed, or wallowed, he 
was caft into the fire inall and every of his fittes,but that in fome of 
them and at fundrie trmes he was evidently feene to be thus ftrangiy® « 
and extraordinarily vifited.And prefuppofe that vpon the appreFen= 
tion of alewde p@rfon for fome fellonious aéte,3 or 4. honeft fubftan 


tia/j men fhould bring in euidence,that fuch a day and time they fav 
the partie breakinge vp his neighbours houfe and takinge awav his 
enods-were not this euidence fufficient in Jaw and reafon to convince 
the fellon, becaufe that atfome other time or times, cther his geod 


frends 


a 
‘ | 
| 
i 4 
| 
‘ 
| 
{ 


LYING DISCOVERY, és 
frendes did fee him fitting in his chaire and reading ofa booke’ For d 
this is truly the Di/c. manner of reafoninge in this cafe,to bleare the 
eyes of the world with, and to proue this counterfeiting if he coulde, . 
Somtinpes (forfooth) Somers firength was but ordinarse:and Somtimes or 
often (faith another) I fossnd him but of eafie frength: ergo Som. firength 
was not extrsordinarte,as Darrell affirmeth, In like manner he arguet 
before:one a time faith on, Som.clapt bis buttocks on the fire:another,he 
fell downe with his {boulders on the fire,ergo So.was neuer caft into the fire, 
bis face,or bare bands being in the fore,and be not burned. 
So. knowledge in bis fits was not extraordinarie as ™M.Dar. and bis frendes 
fal/lye pretended: neither could he [peake Grecke, Hebrew, or Latine, 
otherwifethenhehadlearned, 
That his kesowledee was extraordinarie,l truft it is elswhere in the hi- 
ftorie made manifeft, Againtt it nothing is obiected worthy the anfwe 
ring. But alas poore Somers himfelfe) who neuer fayleth the Di/c.ata_ 
inch) he good foule like an honeft youth is as euery hand whyle fo 
ere brought vpon the ftage to patch out this defperat caufe, andto 
 depofe now wheras to thisendI haue that he (a. 
boy {carcely vnderftanding one article of the Creeddid expound the. : 
Creed by the {pace ofan houre togeither or their abouts,(athing ac- 
knowledged by two of the Disconerers owne witnefles) this is hand- 
fomly fhad owed, glozed vpon and daubed ouer in thefe words: that. 
he was in fome fort enabled fo to dee, by reafon that almoft enery minifter, 
that came vnto.bim,bad interpreted the Articles of the Creed diners times . 
yato him. It had bene good and a moft equall and indifferent courfe 
(feeing So. isknowne to be an impudent lying wretch) for the ftreng. 
_ thening of this glozing depofition, fo vnlikly to be true, to hanehad. 
thefe minifters knowne, and ther names, that did thus enad/e and in-_ 
frat Som. inthe articles of the Creede: or at leaft the depofitions of. 
fom e of thofe who were then prefent would then haue bene raken. It 
had bene no heard matter for the Commiflioners to haue fifted out: 
this the taking of the depofitions, :f it had pleafed them,feeing. 
it is depofed(you fee)that thef Asiniffers baue interpreted bim the, 
articles of the Creed diuers times and that in the time of this his trouble . 
he was fe Jome or neuer alone, But admitt that fuch a courfe wereta+.. 
Ken by I know not how many sminiffers vi'itinge him in his ficknes,(a. _ 
thing that I fuppofe no man of vnderftanding will eafily beleiue) vet. 
it isa queftion whether So. were of himfelfe able to Jay vp fo much;. 
as fomtimes he delivered, “OF 


< 


: 


one: pa 


pg. 25 6. 


could nener (ee any thing 


away per(waded that'he was djcounterfeite, and that he 


There w 2s impoffibility in’ So. fites as 01. Dar.and bis frendes bane 


166 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS- 


This the Dif. proueth by no leife then 10,depofitions. Now I 
coniider without feare (faith Robert Couper) what thinges the bay did in 
bis sitts:4 thinke aiy other of his nimblenes and capacitie may doe the lke, 


Robert Coaper being prefent at So. difpofleflion,with teares confef 
ed his ines before vs ali,being fome 1 50. If at that time he though 
So. counterfeited,then thole teares of his and conteflion were hipocri 
ticall, [he truth is that oppreffed with feare, vpon the fearefull tight 
he then beheld, he fhed thole teares and made that confeflion: as the 


men of Ephe/us_did vpon.the report only of the like worke of Satan; 


but being now without that feare, as himfelfe confefleth, his mind or — 
judgment as it fhoulde feeme is cleane altered, as by this and other 


wasoft (quoth George Richardfon} with the boy in bis fittes, and 

George Richardfon pag 2 33 .depoieth that he faw So. in aficte, wher. 
in he foamed exceedingly. Now I thinke he can not do the like,though 
he put a peace of blacke lead into his mouth to helpe him,as he faith 
So. then did. And where he faith he was oft with him, I {pppofe his oft 
times, verenot aboue2or3 times, 
Seeing So. in his fitts( faith M.Aldred)the of Nouember,beauinge 
vp his belly, drawing his mouth towards his eares: fevuching,et, I departed 
hat he was did nothing, but 

that a boy naughtely di[pofed might doeaswellashe, = 

__ But] would faine know what M. Aldred did thinke vpon the 7 
of Nowe mber,vpon which day he preached at So. difpoffeffion, and. 
in his prayer confeffed his finnes with teares, on which morningallo 
he faid to fome, that the {aid night his fleepe departed from him, vp- 


that he behel@ the euening before in Som. asalfo what he thought 
Of Som, when he was firlt depofed before the 12. Commiffioners.It 


may be their are many.thoufands in this kingdome which fomtimes: 

thought So.to be acounterferte: who now fee 8 confeffe thatit is vnpo- 

fible it thould be fo: this therfore is nothivg to the purpofe nor at 


| OF CHAP.9. 
Darrell 
| 
pag256 
| 
| 
. 
4 
| 
i 


LYING DISCOVERY. “15 
gain‘t me that 44, Aldred hath depoled. For albeit the.¢ of Nouem- 
per he ipeaxeca of ne might lage chofe few actions of the boy to 
becouncerreite, yet this ietteth nuc but that ac other times borh atter 
_andbetore vpon the fight of otoer more itrange and fe arefullacci- 
dencs,he mignt of au other mind, And thus(bar for breuities fake) 
could d parciculerly aa.weare and avoyde all thele depofitions of the 
I neuer did [ec any thing that So. did,to make me to thinke that it was Alovw thatal 
fupernaturall:tatch Nich. iSbepheard, and M. Craven, I didnot fee him 
dx: any thing which another boy might not eafilie haus performed.And M. vz. 
Fotter,1 /aw nothing but it might be counterfeited.and M Pare:I could rs fawe &c. no 
not percensc aby sovdinary thing to be donc by the boy, but what any o 
ther might well haue done:And M V Vallis, I could not perctsue anyfuch ‘hey are allwee 
firangues inthe thinges Law the boy doe,and Lames Alwaod: the'$ tise. therfore 
of Nuuember at nicht:| objerued that any body nanughtily difpofed, might honeft men in 
baue dine the {aime, And lattly faith Rich. Newton: Incsser Jaw Somers 
any that ef bis yeares mighh cafe doe. Soma chem alls 
Becaufe thefe men were either blind,or feeing would not fee,fhall ™* 
wee thertore put out theeyes of others, of the 17. depofed firlt, and etc 
of fundrie others depoled lince: as alfo of hundreds befides readie to 
depole the fame, if they were. thervnto called by authoritie? Allmen 
are not like to Peter and Iohn who laid vnto the faces of the hie prifts 2.4.20 
and Elders, that obey could not but fpeake the things which 
heard,2 wher almoftal thef 10 witnefles which faw So.in many fits 
depofe, that they shemfelues could do the like, others,that anybody might — 
doe the fame, yeacajily: how canit be but that they beperiured if they 
haue fo depofed indeede? for their be almoft 30 which haue depofed 
to about2o thinges impoflible to naturall or artificiall 
pores Befids,by the depofitions of So.8¢ others depofed &examined 
y the B: and the Di/c, and alledged in this booke ro proue counter 
feiting, and fo by the Ds/comerie it felfe, it is manifeft, that it isnot fo 
very eafie a matter for one, much leffe for anybody naushtily di[pofed, 
to doe the fame Sa.did. Seven came to carrie me ((aith Somers) whom, as ¥ 
thinke,I did very much trouble: wherevpon it was ginen out, thet I was fo 
heaviec in my fittes as7 were [carce ableto carie me. By this reporte it 
fhould feeme that 7 .could-hardly carry him,not becaufe of his ftrug | | 
ling, and yet euery boyecan not fo ftruggle, but for the exceedinge — 
great weaight of his body(which is by fome depofed) whervpon this'P"*" 
repore did rife. It is alfo confefled and depofed, that he made hus belly: 
to fell and did hide bis tongue ve fo as no parcell of it could be 


et 
ar. 
=. 


23-5 
pag 2! 
pag 23 
pag 159. 


233- 


3 

pay 

» 

ef 


259. 
Rob.Cooper 


168 ADETECTION OF HARSNETS 


with a candle, for not longe before and in the prefence of the Maior 


with fome so others, his mouth was by 12 perfons or their aboutes 
looked into with a candle,but no tongue nor parcell therof was their 
to be feene, faue the roote in his throate: Againe, Som:tbruft bis tonge 
backwarde into bis throate,{peake bis month wyde open, pricked with 
pinnes, endured it, foamed exceecingly, that the foame van downe on both 
the fides of bis mouth,and about his chinne,cr-roaped downe into bis necke: 
Thefe thinges (confefled by the Difco. himfelfe and the frendes of 
counterfeiting,yea depofed by his owne deponents,) can not any bo 


dy uauchtely difpofed eafily hereby it is euidét that 76 body can 


by art doe the like, and theirfore So: hath not counterfeited. Let the 
Difc.then and frendes of counterfeiting be iudged out of there owne 
mouthes, And this is the 12 .time the Difcoucrer is cranny his 
D:fconery, Before we haue hearde that the Difc.in his Di{conerie hath 
difcouered my innocencye: & heere we playnly fee that he hath done 
as much for the caufe it felfe. Yfnow hereby the impoffibilitie of So, 
counterfeitiug doe appeare:how much more,when herevnto we fhall 
add the rare and fupernaturall accidents mentioned in my an{weare 
to the laft chapter of the third booke. ! 
Dif couerer 


Whether thefe depofisions will fatiffie 21. Dar. and bis frends, it may 


be doubted, but to any veafonable men they will be [ufficient, to she 
vanitie of the fore[aid pretended impofibilities. 


The Difc. may now be out of doubt, that thefe his oo doe | 
a 


Darrell 


tiffie I truft 


not /ati/fie me, as alfo why:neither doe they or can they 
any reafonable men, but mult needes appeare vnto them to be as gene 
rally vaine 8¢ friuolous,fo moft of them manifeftly falfe, & the depo 


néts plainly periured,if they hane fo depofed. Farr therfore are they 


from (bewing any vameic in the afore[aid impofthibties, witnefled by 


cloud of witneffes. And thus is this {uppofed vamitie of the aforelaid 
impo f]ibilities quite ouerthrowne,& made lighter then vanitie it felfe, 


OF CHAP. to: 


How contrarie to Dar.and bis frends affertions,W" So. was account= 
ed by many in Nottingham. for a diffembler, from the tame that he begane 


his practifes there, vntill be confeffed the fame bimfelje. 
Di{couerer 


This he proueth by fundrie depofitions.One depofeth,! told Me 
Another, I did verilie 


Dar.it wes rcported, that the boy d 


thinke that he did but diffemble. A third, many fill hold opinion, that the 
bay did diffemle- A fourth,] thinke that So. diffembled: and thus doe 3-_ 


‘Darrell. 


moe depole, 


| 
| 
| 
| | 
if 
4 
} 
| | 3 
4 
Barnard 


The people of the lewes faid of Chrift, that be was agletton and 4 
drinker of wine, and that he had a diuill: yea the pharifes faid of him, 


that he was aconiurer, out denils, through Belxebub the Frince of 


deuils. And yet behold there was neuer any thinge more falfe.Many, 
yea generally all the people of the Jewes did thinke and report, that 


the difciples cid fieale Ielus away by night, whiles the foulders flecpt: and 1 


warrant you, had the hie presffs, (who rayfed vp this Naunder of the 


math.11.19. 
Iohn 7.20. 


math, 9.34.and 


12.24. 


math.28 313.55 


refurrection-of Chrift) fent forth Commiffioners, enow would have 


depofed the fame.and yet loe exceeding falfe:yea not only fo,but ab- 
horring to common fenfe, For what more abfurd and fenfeles thinge 
can be yttered,then that which the fouldires affirmed that while they 
reept, bis difciples him away?y f Chrit was gone while the fouldiers 
fleept,as they reported,and was generally beleeued, 4 monge the Icwes 
how knewe the fouldiers that the difciples ftole him away? and whe- 
ther he raifed vp himfelfe, and went away yea or no, as his difciples 
affirmed?T hus we fee theris nothing fo falfe and abfurd, {pecially if it 
be againft the glory of god,and the good of his church, but if Sathan 
Ofice gette any to giue it out in {fpeach, many will beleiue it, and re- 
se it. Even fo albeit it be palpable falfe, abhorring ftom reafon and 
enfe and vtterly impoflible to be true,that Som. did counterfeit, yet 
not withf{tanding 1t may be beleiued, reported, and depofed by ma- 
ny. Soin confiderate and fooli/b is man to beleine euery thing. \This the 


old ferpent hath in long experience knowne to be true, & that therby 


yea by nothing more he hath mm all ages preuailed greatly againft the 


Lord, and his fervants. Otherwife he would neuer ipread abroade fo 


prou.14.16. 


manifeft flaunders as ynceflantly he doth. And as generally in other , 


cafes he doth thus without faile, & ever will:/o hath‘he done in thefe | 


perticuler workes of god, whereof my felfe haue bene a witnes.Kath. 
efently the deuill raifad vp 


Wright wasno fooner difpoffeffed, but 
one Beckingham an old man in the miniftrie,and a kinde of preacher, 
_ to fay that the had the falling ficknes: and yet the man neuer faw her 
--vatill her difpoffeffion. Darling being difpoffeffed, Sathan ftirred vp. 
one Edward Baker to fay that he counterfeited,and others to report 
that he was helped by awitch of Staphenbil. when the 7.in Laucafbire 


were deliuered from Sathan, the papifts gaue it out and {pread ita- 


broad that I wasa Coniurer, in fo much as 24. Dickons writtinge vn- 


tome thereofjaduifed me to come to Manchefter, ard onenly inthe 


pulpit to cleare my felfe of that flaunder. Neither doe I doubt but 
that the fameis noyfed among them vntill this day. For fince my im 


prifonment 7 vnderftand by writing,that they report their.that [did 
put the deuill into them all, the very fame words alfo haue fondry of 
them faid to my face in prifon, And they pariftes at they Ci:irke open 


ly and a loud haue called my beloued brother 22. Azore, who ioyned 


“ 
> 
7 
j 


math.11.78. 


but alas thefe 


men were out of 


them owne eie- 
ment. 


pag.150.0151. 


Pag 


170 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


wich mie in the fame worke, (and in regard theirof hath bene my fel 
low 10 bonds) Corer in like iorte whea the deuill was catt out of 
had {ome at hand to fay shat he counterteired:yea,ceafed not 
vniiil by himfelfeand his mitruments, he had not onely drawne the 
boy (vpon whom the worke was wrought) to fay that he counterfet 
ed:bui chat the lame might be more probabie: and the rather beleius 
ed, to aifirme befides that taught him fo.t0 doe: yea lect vs aflure 
our iciues that if Sacan ihould be driven oat of thowfands hereafter, 
againit euery fuch worke of god, & for the.ob{curing ot it,he would 
ratie vp & {pread abroad one flaunder or other:otherwile god fhould 
goe with the giorie due to him, and man make his beft profit therof, 
without any refiftance by Yathan,which is not poflible,except in fom 
{peciall caie, and tor a cartaine it pleafe the lord to chaine him 
vp. Be itthen as the Dic. faith, (though in this chapter, of his there 
be much voerath)that So was accounted by many its Nott, for a diffemy 
bler:it doth no more proue So.to be 4 diffcmsbler, then the account and 
report of the people of the ewes proueth that Joba the baptilt bad 
denill,yea that Chrilt wasa g/stton and drincker of wine,that he ou 
deuils by the prince of deuils and that he had.a-denill: In a miagter of te 
ligion or concerning god.or his feruants, vox pepaliis not(as we.com. 
monly faye) vox often,.if not tor the moft parte, 
Yet indeede the people or multitude,faid not from time to time,nor: 


yct at any time, that Sg. counterfeited, as the Difc. affirmeth,but the, 
contrary, Butlet ys frame and therby a.litle betrer obferue the Dic: 


argument, therby to fee hosy fubfkantialliehe proueth Som. to have: 
counterfeited, It mas reported, one:1 thinke, I verily thinke (lay 
thers) that So. dd counterfeit,ergo So.counterfeited. Behold the Difc.de 
monttration./f this be agood.argument,then this alfo:many reporte 
that So. did not 

then thefe deponents haue fo depofed:as namely21.reton,M: Browne 
M. Evington, Brinjley, preachers of the gofpell: ergoSo,. didnot. 
counterfeite. Thus alfo I can proue that So. was polleffed, for they 
forefaid preachers haue depofed that they shinke fo. Yea what is their. 
{o falfe,that one may not(in appearance) proue, or fo true that he can 
not difproue by this kind ‘of argument? many theske and vrattle of 
the fyre of purgatorie, ergo etc. [he leweswho are not afew tbhinkty 


and verily thipke,an fay to this day,that the Meffiasis not yet comes 
ergo. The D:/co. maybe afhamed thus to difpute. But this fhamles 
kinde of arguing,doth welfut with the caufe he hath inhand. Newer- 


theleffe / anfwere particularly to the cheifelt of thele depofitions. - 
Difcouerer 


I did M.Aldced) im mybart,that hedid bus diff*ble: 


eit, and fome of better iudgment aud credite 


% 
i 
{ 
>. 
| 
> 
» a 
s 
‘ 
iJ 
4 
; 
if 
d 


LYING. DISCOVERY, =.4 in 
haue heard befove how greatly 24. affected with 
that he beheld in So. the 6, of +t tare dom at night,and the day ofhis. 
difpoflettion, whither for breuities fake I-referr the reader:io as it can 
-not poflible be true that is heere depofed, And if 1, Aldred haue 


affirmed this vpon his oath,his depotition is Rot to be regarded, 
Difcoucrer Pag! 


perecined (guoth M.Leigh) that he was preven 
be Somers, could {peake no language but bee for: 


comberfeite, and fo almayes bite, 
Darrell 


I anfweare 21. Leighythat this is afory argument afid 
onto: of Sons 
could {peake no language but engl{b. For theirbemany (no 
doub) which be fomwhat ftragly handled, that-can ipeal 
no other language bus-englib, 8 yet areno Neither doth 
it hence follow that he nad mo‘dewill in bim:exce Legh'can proue. 
this; that whofocuer is poffeffed-and hath a-deuillin him {peak 
uers Languages: then:indede lie faith fomethinge. doubt 
but thatthe conti ofall Languages:but it followeth not their 
vponthat beinge in man, he'theirforewill fpeake the faid fanguages;. 
or {ome of them; at the becke alfo and pleaiure of this or that man 
déemany thinges, that he willnot doe, No 
bar the deuill ia So, god permitting) could haue donea’ 
““thouland thinges- whereby it fhould as 
_he-bad bene in Somers,as by Speaking latin,orgreeke, 
whereofhe didnot one: and yetitfollowe 


OF CHAP: 
How mM. Darrell touchinge his dealing with she by 
doth relye upon a and foolif booke,that oft the bays: 

Aad M:Dar. coeff be real or at the bet 


wit 
A 
4 
‘ 
‘ 
~ 
d 
. 
cz 
a. & 
‘ 
3 
4 


ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS | 
dimers occafions, as beercafter fall appeare, that: funclrié poymtes 
chante test vhtrue: which with the will 
Difé betbought,that 24. Darr. writteth falfly, when be telleth vs that a gredre 
Be reafonech fo world depofe the [aide booke to be (c) true, if they might be called 
che fubltance & = The Difc. hauingevfed many wordes to {male purpofe and nor 
yer Sultye worthy the anfwearing,to proue the printed booke concerninge Dare 
Bance. ‘Ging to be 4 falfe and foolifb booke, commeth in the third and lait place 

gothatwhichhe thinketh to be moft materiall, namely, my owne 
_ confeflion; in that I acknowledge fundrie poyntes in st tc be ‘wntrue. and 
thefe he fheweth in the chapter followinge to be three-But we mug 
ynderftand they are matters of circumftance, and chat I doe mot sufi: 
fre the booke in every circumftance, but the c to be erue int fubfianct, 
by pag.266, Now marke good reader how the Di/c.ar- 
-gueth: Thebooke concerning Darling és vntrue in [ome pryntet, the 
fore in all,er ergo the whole booke 1s falfe, Hath he his fences thinke you, 
that gropeth not the grofines of this argument? Now, whereas it 
feeme that I was in fault in that I did not correcte the booke in the 
faide poyntes that were amifle,feeing I read it ouer before it went to the 
pre/r, the very truth is, that ina wraps which I retarned togeathet 
‘with the booke to M: Iobn Denifon the publither theirof, I did 
downe the fumme of that I fpeake to Darling 8 his frends,defiering 
that that beinge theeruth might be publifhed, 8 chat the other lines 
which were penned (and now printed) wherein thefe faid vntruthes 
arecontayned, might be left out. Am I now in fault, becaufe thele 
things were not accordingly reformed? Touchinge the other poynt, 
to witt my affirminge, that many are readie to depofe the [aid booketo 
be true, though I my felfe (forfooth) acknowledg it to be falfe: marke _ 
I praye thee (good reader) the deceitfull dealinge of the Difcoserm: 
how he purpofly leaueth out the {peciall wordes that fhould cleare_ 
the cale,vz.for the fubftance of st.1 fayd in my Apologie, the booke printe 
ed for the {ubftance of st, bath bene offered to be confirmed by the oathet 
of 4 2rcat many: aprincipall pare whereof we {ee he omitteth:wth- 
out which: omifiion he ‘could neuerhawe made (as enery-ehild may 
fee) this goodly flowrith, and: theirfore it muft needes be that the 
fame was wittingly and aduifedly done by him, which‘ aggravaterh 
- his fault theirin: whereas I meant then and doe meane ftill, that the 
 fubftantiall poyntes theirof that make againft counterfeiting,are true 
and iuftifiable. For confirmation wherof we muft know; that M. Deni 
fon. whé hecameto the B. of London to be examined about the fame 
Master, brought ia writings the names of a preat many 


é 


ii 
eet, 
; 
5 
€ 
> 
ar 
' 
} 
3 
4 
| 
j f 
} 
| 
| 
} 
: | 
| 
| 
i 


waa 


[uth thing by rhe people 
fpecialiie of So. when his name was almoft at the higheit? 


40. who offered to etothe 


haue bene admitted: neither deubt thathe made thisknowne 


Of 4. Darrells ‘vafones affirminge Thomas Darling.to be polfefjed, 
and of bis cunning inflruting bim, to bchaue hinfelfe days 
Thas mattor of Darlings was fo acceptableymto Darrellhaumee 
bene out of worke from the pretend ed of Katherine wright, pag x70. 
for about 9. or ten.yeares, as that bunfelfe wnto ie fomwmbat grofly. 


_ Thisheproueth by the depofition of Robert Toone,who depofeth 
that he reLetinge to other eanicioal my felfe, the manner of the boyes 
anfmered,that my opinion was the boy he. 
was of epinion crc. ergo.a worthy argument fure. In the 22 pagethe 
bath thefe. words: The certaintee heercof is that M. Walkeden the 
boyes eranfather bereing. how 1.Darvell had belped Kath. Wright,procur 
ed bien to. conse to Burton,to belpe Darling. lf now the DifeApeake true 
ty as indeed he doth (though he feldome fault that wav) then every 
one may fee that Darrell did not thraft orintrud binfelfe into this ach 


_m,muchles fomewSat groflye as the Difc. affirmeth,being theireynto 
tequefted and prox ed 


by the boyes grandfather MJ alkeden.And 
thus is the Ds{couerer convinced the 1 3° time by his owne Difconery. 
_ And where he faith that the afore aid preachers vpon my perfwa pag!27"- 
tion, refolued together with me er diuers other miniffers of afafttobehad » 
at Burton for Darlings and indeuoreth to pronethe fame. 


by Ieffe Bees depofition:1 anfweare thathad we done fo,wehaddone — 
whereof we neede tobe afhamed; bur the truth is we had 


hot a word about that,as M.Hsldcr{bam and M. More with the reft of 


Difeourr 


denied the fame,and that for thcfe two reafons: vx. far aveydine.the nateof 
vine glorie, and that the people through myne abfence might bekept from 


dferibinge any enift to me incafting out dewils.1n whichhesfecond 
veafon st may | 


obferued: firft bis conceite, that the desill the next daye 
would be caf out: then it appeareth that be had vfed great-vauntes of the 
of Kath. Wright,or otherwife, whyfoould be bane fufpetted 4 

Avaine if this werent afbifting reafon, bree 
came it to paffe,that be was prefent as the difpoffeffinge of the 7. in Lanca=— 


Dar 


Being carmel lye insrcated (faith M. Darrell) for my wrefence at the faft 


= 
d 
€ mi 


~ 
* — . 
‘ 
~ 


“2 

4 
ul + | 
a 
H 

| 

if 


277. 


mm, Anfwearet 


174 A DETECTION: OF S. HARSNETS | 
VVhat my conceite(asthe tearmeth it;heerein is,and where 
vpon grounded, appeareth by that J have laid in my 
ing of the meanes of difpofletlion. Kor an{weae to the fecona thinge 
heere obiected againft me, Ionaly put the chriftian reader m mince, 
that the people of the Ieweswould haue made Chrilt aking, and she. 
people of Liftra with sheire presft would bane facrificed vnto the Apofitesy — 
Barnabas and Paul, as godes come downe vnto them tn the lskenes of men: 
and yet itis certaine that Chrift and thele his Apoftls were farr from 
feekinge or defiring any Such thing. To the third J an{weare,that bea 
inge priuieto the great good I fometime had receiued in beinge an 
eye witnes. of thisnotable worke of god, and priued in this relpecte 
for my abfence heere {poken ofje(peciallye after the boyes:difpofleffi 
on:I theirvpon thought aud determined. with my felfe, it like occafi« 
on afterward fhouldbe offered of my prefence,norto with draw.my._ 


(cife-as I did any more, therreby to loofe the benefite of that good 


which the Lord mmercy. might atfoord me by being prefent and ar 


eyeswitnes at thefe 8& fuch like deliuerances: albeit in the two former 
re(pectes, or for the two reafonsaforelaid, 1 after my felfe defired & 


could rather hane wifhed to haue bene ablent then prefent.And that: 


heerein I {peake thetruth,;and lyenot,god ismy witness, 
Howbeitsif bebadbenefo.carefull to haueavoyded the nove of ‘vane’ 
gloric as he pretendeth,he would nener baue [uffered the wordes b:fore men’ 
tioned of the diucll,touching bis praying,as falt as they did,that weve with 
Darlinge,tohaue bes handes:for their by be feemerb fo eredy of 
commendatio ts vathei contented to vecesue-st from 
Had I bene the publifherof chat booke the Dsfe.might thenwith’ 
fome better coulour haue framed this malicious collection againtt' 
me 2 .thofe words are not fo much fett downe for the matter of thé, 
as for the maner of their deliuerie,vz. with hts mouth wide open:which_ 
thing impoffible to be counterfeited, will the fooner be beleiued whé: 
itisnot onely declared that the Loy [pake with his. mouth myde open, 
bur allo {pecified what words he fo vetered:and inthis refpecte thet: 
was good and tuft caule of publifhinge them. 3° Theire is {mall caufe’ 
why any fhould commend me, or conceiue well of me in regard of — 
this {peach, feeing it was {poken by che father of lyes, andtherefore | 


greatlye to be fulpected of falfhode, excepte my felfe had publifhed 


the booke: for my pervfinge of it was knowne onely to fome 3.0r4. 


ij 
it 
ij 
i} 
| 
= 
4 
4,4 
‘ 
f 
‘ 
pe ors. 
.4 
. 


175 


avoyde tedi 
the reader tor fvil 
_ Another thing that the Djjc; troubl 


aynes to pervfe thof 


his 
the 


‘trom Sathan then fuch as thee? Su the hai bene in, 
thatage,and prefent at thele holy divine {peacheS, he wou! 


“LYING DISCOVERY, 
-fonght to reenter tuto bin, and of foe other bis vntrue affertions.concane , 
ing the fittes, and of bis cunning dealinge Lkews{e with thas be 
arre 
From page;=85.vntill 230,the Difcs. purfueth his owne thadows 
Isbouring with many wordes to convince me of thar I neuer affirm- 
ed. v2, 1 pat. arling in all bis fistes was altogether fenceles:,this Lhaug, 
fhewed before in my anfweare to this generall charge; wherevnto to 
| fame thinge,| referre 
he obiecteth | 
where aboutes.he beltoweth many nes,even from the page 
page 293. is, that I fhould affirme, that st:was Sathan onely (asl did. 
shinke) that vjed the words thofe dsalogues mentioned in the faid books, 
be the Satan tran|forming himfelfe into an angell uch times, 
warrant you) firlt by producinge.the boy The 
be doth mot beleruefo..1 hen'by the deposition of Jeffe Bee a adler, who 
Gith: shat whofocner [o, doth lye sn fo affiraing. There reafon 
is,becaule of the godly he mentioned in she déalogues. 1 hen 
andin’ the third and place the Di/c. himfelfe. telleth vs, that for 
the fame reafon he thinketh that it can not be that the faideidsalogues, 
came from deuill: his wordes be thele; If any. mau willtakethe. 
caches, which Ieffe Bee bath fashered vpon the bay. 
[pall finde them to hardly be found 
avaine wn any (lorse that ener was be afcribed to Satban, 
IfnowI can thew out ofahiftory of good credite again{t which. 
theire can no. exception be taken, as holy wordes ‘and.as vnlikely to. 
come from Sathan, as thole mentioned in the dialogues, to haue yet. 
neuerthe/es bene vetered by Sathan,then I hope the Dsf..will yeeld, ; 
that the holines of thofe {peaches doth not Jere, but that the fame not, 
withftandinge they, might, ptoceede from the diuellVVeread them 
the-diviné ftorie,that the Temptor (aide vnto Chritkjit. yal, mask 1.240 
lead ging {criprure (all the wordes whereof be holy.): 
And oftem thus: of the woft bigh god. And kuow 
thee what thou art, even the boly one of god. VV hat wordes I praye you 
be efe“} and what wordes more to come’ 


t76 ADETECTION, HARSNETS 


4 


hauie thought they came from Sathan, Even fo likewite I muze what 
the B. and $: would haue fayd,if they hadibene' by, hen thar 
teftimonie and comniendation was piuen by the Paw! & 
Las, whereofwe read in the actés. The/e men (faith he) are the fervantes: 
of the moft hich god, which fbew, vnto.you the way of falvation, VVhat, 
wordes almoft could be delinered more vnlikely to proceede from _ 
the diuill, that aduerfarie of miankinde; then thefe? for being true, a. 
man at the firft bath might imagine, that if the wete the {peaches of 
the euill {pirit, then fare he was not vnwilling that men fhould be faw 
_ ed:wherasthe old ferpent ment theirby to hinder, and 
hinder the faluation of men, I-meane the inhabitantes of Philspps 


spps: for: 
by oft cryinge out in that manner ashe did, he moued and ‘occafion 
ed S.Pgul to forth of her'whom he poffeffed,and others vp- 
<>, faSte of the Apoltle, and Si/ara prophet into pri- 
fons 8 fo ordered the matter chat vpon’ their inlarementthey depart’ 
ed the citie-whichno queftion wasithe thing Sathan aymed atin the" 
exampiesot the holy {cripture we m conclude, that the. 
wicked heere did! at fortie evill practile 
owloeuer the y iudge otherwile, and hisdeponent: 
Bee pbecaufe of ge fea coe inthe dialogues, 
Darrell being changed,that fince the tims of the pretended difpoffelfe- 
of Darling jhe had ey lodged the bay at bis hone: 
and that lea his packing dnd-diffimulation might happen to be des: 
ed aswell as the boyes: he did vfe this,or the like per[wafton in effecte 
wnto him: yx. that continuc conftant, and not fuffer bimfelfeby. 
any allycrment to be drawen to fay, that he bad aiffembled inbis former 
fites,and that he was neyer piffeljed with any wicked [pirit..And his ano 
te this: one night Uentertained the [aid Darknge in my ‘boule at 
Afbby: and veft be denieth: but Darling himfelfe depofeth it. haut! 
bene with M. Darrell (faith be)dimers times, fometimes at Burton once 
Apleby,once at Packineton,at feucrall exercifes: from whence I went bom 
with M.Darrell to Ajbby,and upped that night with 
“did lye shat night at 04, Darrells. T bath: 
had fome communication with me,and bath willed me at fometimes that l 
fbould be conftant,andfticke to the truth, meaning; that I foould uot [uff , 
felfe to be drawento affirme that 1 was not poffe{fed: but that I had dif 
—fembled in all my (ayd fittes, and fo confequentlye, that God 


| 
| 
| 
| 
i] 
5} 
bs, 
: 


. Heere is greatadoe and much prattle packing di[jimulation,. 


_ and 1 knowe not what, and of the feare forfooth that was on my be=. 
halfe leaft the {ame fhould be-deteSted: but if the Iudge fhould call. 
for the evidence to.prooue this,then come in nothing but 2.poore Sx. 
filye circumftances or prelumptions: either of which if the be of force 
to proue any thing,muft needes probablie conclude this faid packing .. 
The firtt circumftance and argument of his is this. Since the pretended 
of Darling, Darrell bath cherifbed, entertained, and lodged - 
Darlng:it is probable theirfore that Darrell taught Darling to coun’ 
terfeite apoffeffion:and that at fuch time or times ther was fome pack 
ing betwene them about the ary of the faid di Jimulation. The. 
antccedent or former, parte of his reafon the Dsfco, pretendeth to. 
proue both by my. owne depofition. and.Datinges, but he doth not. 
it fully: for in it he th of my cherifbing Darling, as if 
he had bene my darling indeede, or as if I had bene {ome folter fa- 
ther vnto him,but proueth no fuch thinge, but onely the bare lodg- 
inge of him one night onely: and truely.1 doe not remember that e~ 
uer he did eate one crumme of bread in my houfle in hislife, Bur ad: 
mitte he had {upped with me as well as lodged with me,. and ftayed . 
with mealonger time,not that night onely,but divers nightes, what. 
of all chat? admiittinge the antecedent to be true(as it is falie)yet how | 
- doth the confequent and ithange together by M.Har/netes logike? . 
many haue both eaten and lodged with me, whom I neuer packed ‘out 
nor confulred with about 4 The fecond. cire. 4 
cumftance is, Deel willed Darling to be conflant and fiicke tothe 
truth,and not Suffer bimfelfe to be dravene to affivime that be had diffemled: gen 
I woldbe loth to blot paper or ftand long in anfwering and. refuting ) 
eyes and to behold the vanitie of it,and withall the fhifting jpacherie. 
of this who pretendeth forfooth and would faine hane the 4 
worldeto thirike that thele wordes of mine were vfed to darlnge at 
mine owne howfe at 4/bbie and that darling hath !o depofed;& ther 
. fore I depofinge the flat contrarie,mutt needes be foriworne, Now ‘ 
this cunninge insinuation ofhis.isclofely.8< darkely butyet malitie, 
oully thus vp in thele wordes of hisithe reff darrel denieth: implyinge. 


therein as if I fimplyeand-ablolutely denyed all she reff which(to make: 

‘the cafe plaine and:apparant vnto reader)Idoenor,idoe 

not dimye that euer I vfed any fuch{peachesto Darlinge atall,Bue 

that I vfed any fuch {peaches to him in my houfe at 4/bbre th 
Tlodged him there,or{pake.any wordsvnto him, to thar. 

Sthat which I denyed oath,and agayne;nay hane.vPr 


> 
4 
j 
— 
» 


‘ 
F 
4 
phe 
, 
> 
‘= 
‘ 
4 
; i@ 
4 
tJ 
i 
4 
ik 
4 42 
ig 
4 


fuori, mentioned in the fersptures,wherby Darlinge might learnt, 


| 
> oF 
ed 
af 
t 
4 
2 
* 
4 
? 
= 
he 
» 
— 
4 
a 
+ 
a 
H 
4 
af 
4 
‘ % 
7 
| 


378 A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 
onmy oath tothe Bof London confeffed, that I {aid to Darling eas 

whereby him depofed, But where when?m the Gathou/é after this 
Darling hadbene in the Bybops houle for fandry weekes together,’ 
and fundry meanesvied,yea and by your Jeauenone of the beft(c). 
to haue drawen him with Sammers( for the ftrengtheninge of Som. 
mers contetfion of counterfeitinge)to faye and confefle that hehad 

counterfeited:as threatning,and imprifonment -in the Bibops houle, 
forging and deliueringe ot iettersto Darlinge as come from me,and 
shervpon requiringe .and obtaining anfweres from him to the fame’ 
letters, athinge not denied by the B. of London him felfe in. open 
Court.In like torte Darlinge depoted that I {aid thus to him (as here 
is {pecified)at the Gatehouse after his departure from the Byfbop,and 
Rot at.4/boy:the contrary where vnto he is redy to depole. Now’ 
where the by his wrefting and writhing, alreringe and keeping: 

backe parte of our depofitions intimateth,that one of vs mutt nedes 
be periured; 8 that in his chriftian and charitable intendement muft 
nedes be Darrell. The truth is(and {o it will appeare )that in our dee. 
pofitions at large we depofed one and the fame thinge 1 etfect, our 
dep ofitions ftrengthening and contitmingione another and not diff’ 


perie dealing:the Di/¢.maketh often {hewes of periurie and cont’ ari-’ 
eties where none is. If you willhaue any more ‘circumftances, they 
: are fet downe a lyttle before in the Difcouerye and dog here followe, 
g.circumttance Diprell no foomer (aw the biye in afitt but prefensly he affirmed bin 


P3g272- be poffffed.’ 


“Darrell tolde them in Dar linges bearing of Karherin wricht,, who 
paning bene poffifed was troubled in [uch fort,as Darlyng was, 
s . Dar -repeated the boyes beareing what were the figns both of polf- 


what be was to act ate the next day when be was be difpofefie 

é Darrell the boye: freindes to baue a far bis pretended ds 
poffigjion told them thas that kynde of [pivit was.not caft out but by praye 

Darrell haying eppaynted the fayd faft,be foretolde to thofe that were 
prefent in Darlings they fbould (ee‘che dewill caft bim into 
yfbould Beare the dewill [peaKe in bim, wherby. 


ry Prange that 
the mycht learne'whate be wasto attethatdaye, 
Darrell affirmed that Darling was [enceles al bis fits, 
Dairell affermed that whatfoeuer Darlinge feemed to doe or fpeake ia 
P2g.289- fitsit was mothe,burSathan, 
Thife circum antes art all of them''th'a manner falfe 
And maliciousfo weakly ptoncd aud [3 Toerifhly and abfirdly applyed,as 4 


enting or crofling one‘another And by ‘thefe kind of fleight’s and flip=" 


= . 
f 
‘ 
‘ 
% 


man of 8 conicience e orblath at 
them:tor autwere thertore chemunbreve aad hiow'ab~ 
fardly they prowe my teaching:of feyte ' the! 
reader voce my former aniwere to tictame aileaged 
ne ,tn Sonwncrs his caleto that btauglit 
or the Di/e.being(as it ihould feeme )batraine ‘and delticare of 
prooies,is torced. you ice: to flye to his forater atid to’bor. 
rowe tas fame wepons wherwith hedid folaye abaat hinr hig 
cale. why then thould not pide’ him’the repelle ‘aid’ dride ‘him 
back with the very fame of defence lvied before, where itt 
his tuccetle Lhope will be no better then it'was, But'l would’ faine 
knowe and bdemaundof the 
did ewer atfirine that taughce titi thie 
lurely:no’ then we hgue of icone 


Darrells tif: And againé:D 
foure 


3c. 


Was 
ticles bith’ 


at 


iting ag,burt neuer confell q 
depoechand ed the fame the L. to Hay 
face 


pag296.! 
Wael OF YOUDS pas 
Phe in'a manner fole thittg, the alleadgethfor ‘Darrell 
proofe oF D iam: {ert dawne be 
fore bie siuely Darang. never made any 
Such Thus it was, S, examuninge Darligg ona time 
Her{nce his did Bid hitn at the lower, end of 
| ins berwene his anlweares.ana ti 


A 
face, 2; But gdatitehe had made aconfelfion: {eeing 


Id NOL) gs thts (a6 hi to-the 
pofee IFT of feailtse (oould [ay Heere not be forgotten 


with nd MAS, for the Ipace ofamoneth in the 


Tength ‘of fray] t utg 


Men fometimes of arent a res. ant riper iud ment, haue in fuch. 
cafe ber tou eafily ‘at 


DEFECTION OF '$)HARSNETS 


itis evident 
tpodbe 


Darking ayoug {tripling of thofe céder 8 vnfettled yeares was-deal 


Fe tches: 
cr. 


fayning Somers 


a2 fent ff 


of yeares: ‘ofa 


hinyi which they ibeinge not ableby. any 
and difpairing theirof as.it Jhouldfeeme, 


ed to thrartle im,and i threatened tg him, # he would not con- 
fefle Darrells Foddes.. di 


ich: hes Chapling withall 
wears dayly.and boy ta 


feait, when they, two were 
accordinglye, ibut in fisch 


vile ex. and. thenprefently 
© as Somers they.tes 
tumed him.our of, 


ne Bettinge, of a confeffion of counter fest 

kept {0 fer freight, 
andes, no.not histnother, 


fheewinge of im, 


ofe Menton 
Hon 


if poffibl the could. at Darling aboy 
bei thu: layde : at for hadia 


bene Foregrae’ 


te .affirme that which i is 


and errorious, How eafil ig awea oy be periert: 


aécord con 


ednot to prowe coult 
were done or fuffered by hinh'wh ich no Poll be cout ter 


reg he diffe emble 


feeirig it th inges 


feited: whence may be’ drawrie“dn' uriavoy datsle argurhent to craze 
the ¢redite of him and Somn's’and'of the eft of the : fuppofed coun- 


terfeités: 


F Of no matt’ or féportinge an impoMbilitie, of 


he 
fe } 
| 
1 
ta» 
| 


and Mary Cooper, confefle & report: impoffibilities of themfelues, in 
Evga they ought not to be credited. 
Now-concerning :this Darline(to pafe by fundrie othet frange 
e‘tions or rather paffions of bis, he oft:timesin aday in hisfittes,;bad 
e great {welling in his body, by reafon whereof diuers times the but~ 
tons of his dublete did bruft off, and his.aglet holees: breake, albeit 
they were purpofly made and fett on: the ftronger. 2, He beinge:but 
of 1 3.yeares of age was of that ftrength that two {trong men coulde 
not hold hi downe or rule hirn,a thing impoflibleto be couterfeired:: 
for no man can add: to his {trength by.counterfeiting: 3. In his traces 
he vetered fundrie continued {peaches with his mouth wyde open,as 
appeareth by the booke.that is printed of him, 4. hisarmes, & shoul- 
der bones , were in many. of his fites thruft out of ioynt,feene & tele 
fandrie timesiby -diuers, ‘Now. befide the paine and anguith of the 
doyntes. 8 fenowes in this cale,] would faine knowe for my Jearning, 
how tris poflible fora! man to put. his bones out of ioynte and ina 
gaine at. his pleafure, and then immediatly ufe and occupy hisarmes 
in as good plight.as,if no {uch thinge had happened. wnto,him. Yf M. 
Difcoucrer with, his {weet lewell Somers.can with all theit nimble- 
nes, packinge, and dexteritie, but deuife to counterfeite fuch prettie 
trickes.as thefé,. then, indeede the fay fomethinge to Darrell, and for 
Furthermore. .4iice Goodridge the witch fundrie times confefleds, | 


bodye,and bidding her minty to goe and doe the like to. the 


tofaie and publith thus confidently thar Darling counterfryted, what’ 
is it els,but prefumtuofly to condémne bothIury andludge esther 


that ihe mufaking ling tor one rat 4 boy, {ent ber jarmilear. 

or [perit in the lsknes of a dog (partie colouredredde and white,called Min 

od to torment him.in his body, and that fhe had caufed hig vexarion 

ANC ¢ nd ins of ih Trained ali ing 

belides the childe was moft fearefully tormented,in and through all 

the partes of his bodye,he was much troubled.with vonmiting & with 

often provocations therevnto, as yf he had f{triuen and ftrained ro aor 

vomit and could not.» It is alfo to be remembred, that fhee named 

the time when , the place where, the occation wherevpon, and the 

wordes fhe vled when fhe fente the deuill to torment him,as appea- 

reth in the 26. page of the printed booke,Herevpon 4/yce Goodricig 

was committed to Darbyegaole,indited and arraigned,zndfounde 

guiltie thereof, and by my Lord 4ndefonfentence giuen vpon her to 

wherefince fhe died. Thefe confidered, 


Bijb»p hath, and a coppie of the latter,as takeie. 
0 all thofe to whom it doth or may appertaine, wee whofe names 


sie of Darby, who lone before that time, had bene fufpetted for 


had bine Sh:v-att) and tormente him in all the partes of his 


482 ADETECTION-OF S. HARSNETS 


of iniuftice or fimplicitie, or both, And thefe thinges are fo notori 
ufiy knowen to aii the Cuntrye; that an hundred fucifl Dit 


coucryes as this,are not able once.to:bringe them(I meane theimpolli 


dilites afore-faide) into doubre or queitionthere. For the turther 
confirmation where-of, we are ready to proue and auerrethe fame — 
bythe oathe of many fufficient witnefles,and there-by makeit molt 


_euident and playne tothe world, that ss 1s impuffible that: Darlnge 
fooulde be 4 conuterfeit In the meane feafon we may}remember that 
two Iufisces of peace and quorum and aboue fortye ot the inhabirantes 


of Barton ney ghbours there-vato,which were eye wyinctfes of Dat 
dinges vexations‘haue ynder theire handes in wwoo ‘feuerall teftimoe 


niaiswitnelled,that bis fitts,torments,or betakinges, were fuch and 


pernaturall; asthey are fully perfwwaded no pofjib le ‘able to couns 


terfeiterand for this and fome‘other reatons are per adediand doe 


rily thinke that Darknec did not diffemble: as appeareth by the tenure. 


of their letters teftimoniall here tollowinge.'1 he former whereof the 


vnder veritten, of peace, and guirom within. the coantes of 
Stafford, and Darby, amongelt others fend greceing . whereas we haw? bine 
requeied and defied to certifie our knowledges, concerninge the (hraunge 


handling or betakeing of one Thomas Darlinge, of late ly handled 


and tormented,and that in flrang maaner 28 ves wonderfully to 


hold, (whereof we weare eye witnelJes therfore for the better 


good tofientfic, that we are per[waded,and doe verily thinke,that the farde 
ThomasDarlire, did not difemblesor counterfest in any thofe his fittes, ov’ 
Strange betakinges, and the caufes or reafons which mon: vs [oto thinks 


Fir(t for that the manner of shofe bis fictes,torments, or betakeinges, weare 


of all thofe that ave defirous to know the truth in that tl ar though 


Such, and fupernaturall as we are fully perfwaded, no mans ble 
for 


able to counterfeite the like And alfo for that their was one AliteGtod= 
deridge, the wife of one Oliuer Goodderidge, of Stapenbill, within the coun 


wit che, 
and being for that caufebroug bt before vs, did vpon her examination be- 


fore vs confelfe that did miftake the [aid Tho. Darling,and thinehtit, 


bad bine one Shervatte a boy who had done her fome wronge (4s [be 


called it Minnie, and bad it goe after the [aid Darling (ehinking zt 


badde 


doz cevetourned to her againe, andtowld her he had done as [bet 


ne her | 
aad moreoucr we hane bine informed by fome of eood cr-ditt to'vs well 

that the faid Alice Gooddevidge did confeffe that foe did call her 
( for fo foe rearmed it) which was(as fo faid) in liknes of a little dog: 
an 


wich 


> 
3 
| 
‘ 
| 
~ 
5 


‘LYING DISCOVERY, 


bate him and foce did confefe shat. awe 
tht [aid little dog ge, brat once; that came ber inghe C 


whether [bee was committed for the {aid fate, andjbe being fayde 
Gaole, w.ts brought before the and Gaole deliuerie; and 
defered [asd 00 be good to her would 
nencr doe {a any more.in veftinonse wher-of we berevnto: 


fon cnt in the countse of Staff ocbers 


banc bene requefted, and 
franz baadlng or Ge raking, of one Tho: Darling of lave grieuoufly 


ines [uch, «nd jo Supernatural are ne 
man is able to comncerfeit the bke tor 
Alice Gooddridge Ta the effe? in the afore [asd 
their ypan this Alice Goodridge bein bronght befor'e.the dine of 4 
and Gaole deliner was ‘by dewe of lawe then convicted of the fame 
fatt, in teflemany wher pasée herevato fever ally fubfevibed 
dated at Burton aforelaide thfifte daye Ottaber..t 598. 
Peter minifter at Burton. Grainger. 
eee H. Blackwall urner VV,wo odcocke 


Deb ebanke. Bridgett: 'E.Hudfonne .T,Dutton” R.watfon 
Horbyne. R:Baker A.Clarke 'E.Goodcole R. Taylor Simplon 


T Hatten the Burton. T.Haften the younger R. 


Hayes \ w. Harrefen ITaylor, R:Shentert, H-wackfeild. Ri Fenton | 


Saunders, Alfoppe: ‘R’Teals. w.Clarke. T. Stanly. R. 


LHenworthe’ R.Bradlye’ Raphe Teate.: 
“A 3 Thus 


der written, afpoell vefiames and snbabitantes: towne Bor | 


“3 


4, 23 


| 
ly 80 be | 
Juz fall shat.are dejserons to Know the trate me Oeballe base 
shought to that we are verily thinke, that 
she | side (ho. Darling did not or comacerfeite Of thaofe bis 
fittcs,or betakemges, And the canfes or reafons which mone vi fo te | 
shake be masay, whereof for avxyding of over techous matter; we will onely 
herein alledee fame few,(2s namely) farft for that we haneknowne the 
Th». Darling from hea childbood to be of an aiid: 


+ 
» 
if 


292. 


_ mepinto moode and figure,and proued the propofition,vz.what/ 


ADETECTIO 


Thus we {ee that 


oke. of Darling, an 
che reft of this 


is force in that 


h 


‘itiones 
Ligh 


after be had continued d vwhilein 
depofitions following 


s{comerer 


fembler,as it neaye appeare byt 


. Thisis his other argument to proue Darling'a The 
fame he-vied proue a counterfeite.A worthy 
one it is fure and in effect the fame with this:indny [uppofed and gaut 
ont, that Paull was 4 God:therfore he is a God.T hus we fee 
blafphemous corcla‘ion would followe vpon an Antecedem,if 
itwere true.when the Dic. hath pur this.argament of his(denyed by 


derlinges vexation by Sathan is neg. 
sonhirmed. by the oathes ofmenas Sensers is: Yor by the teltemonie 
of many witnefles of good credit, who render realonge 
; counterfeitynge. Henowe that is(o filthye. as to beleiue this 
i{conercy vpon his bare reporte without any proofe or reafon of 
Daalingss counterfeiting before the teftimonye of fo manye alleagin; 
fuch effetuallreafons asainit counterfeytinge:let him be fylthye 
and yetmore filthye. The matter contained in thefe_ teftimoni- 
_ als makinge again{t Darlines coounterfeisinge,t haue fufficiently pref 
fed and vrged before in my —4pologse wherevnto. the Difc. rerurneth 
mo manner of anfwere at all,and yet beareth the world in hand, that 
: he hath difpatched and wiped away all.  Thefe thinges which make 
(o ftrongly againtt cosnterfeiting .are likewile .fect che 
re the principall hinges ‘in'it to. be ob 
by Sathan : againft thefe therfore and 
courle he hath taken,wherevnto he faith not a worde:and not haue 
pailed by shete, aif be fare Rede 
NILE. Petic Bee! ‘tha nav eafely OF Kea 
thewe ofa counterfeited.as sthe {[peches vt 
of a Catt, Dragan; «Beare 
et. which though Bam afluFed that Darang aid NOL yet 
it is euident that it isno harde matter to counterfeite and ere 
the fame and more, if one were {0 lewdly giuen:and the world w ca 
filie be drawen to beleiue a practice in fach {malland flighte matters 
asthefe. swhen it neither /will nor can beleue thefe ithinges here mé- 
tioned to be counterfeited.And thys islaid open and difeouer ed the 
Latlyse is be objerued,than.D 
: 


of Pag gba thar is,she (esting vp of the Pre{biteriall 


“Rot rconfeff that the had diflembled: as thee affirmed forthwith after 


in io, affirminge flee 


out in [peech is: will de yelde the 
couclufion,and religne him the acknowledg both Som- 
mers and. Darlinge to be counterfeites, this maye fuffice ‘for .. 


These is 


avi 
tendinge to caff out Dewils, but what this caufe thei be,thavis.a'fe- _ 
cret forfooth, we hall heare more of that another time, for the pre- 
f, aA at a. ereate importance. lt is to 
fore and: prefumed that he meaneth the fame caulewhich he {peak 
difci contended-for by fome. VVhere- 
ifcipline ome. vnto we aniwerer 
Kathberin Wright being examined coufelfeth in the 
Com, of ber pretended py and of ber tytts both.b,- 
[bee did that to. be was 
wot this conf onfe from this poore & fim plessaide (which is 
eDi bath to -proue Kathayn. Wri 
muft know,that the Commiffioners(who were alee owne by the B. r 
of London for the fame purpofe the prefident on principal whereof for 
footh was $.Hay Difc.)kept ber with shétwo halfe dayes. and 
efaidtime to: burne ber fete iffhee would 


ee came from commiflioners, -bewaylinge ;her {aide periurie. 
nd herein. Ha{net. a commiflioner was a princigall agent, Bue 


te it granted that this her confeflion.was volontarie, and not extore 


sas thecontrarye ismanifelt,. Yet eth fhe not to 
es to aue ne 
done’ 


2 
| 
- 
| 


4 


 fansher farher an kewe would hane faller to bis, 


ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 
atthough afpirie done by her telfe which the poffiblye coulde not dee. Bor right, 
cannotbefeic in acrtyts did iwell excedipglie in her body. necke, hence. it cat 
£0 Palle that the. weate daylye with her petttcoaie flackelaced.to the 
ing vp dowa dengih of one bande: {omethange allo was fenciblye feltcto ftir vp & 
com of extraordinarie and {upernaturall itrength,anaof {uch exce 
L.liiuaers dinge waight ,that 5. ttrongemen by reafon of her waighte (the not 
M. Ber-(jird de- or itriglingeat al} could (carcelye 
albeit ine were chen but ot tome, 16.or 17. yeatesof age. To theif | 
in, ,Berfjora “Maye add this. one pretie of the deull, which 1 dee not fee hoy 
nuwithitand- it could potlibly.be counserteite.she being at one 21.Edwarde Berd. 
to deinke,burt could take none: M. Bere ford ium 
mouge che felfe came and called for held her 
the drihckeilpirted vp out of tbe peice to the roofe oF the 
| hi cour fe foc (he hath helde,froms she time foe beg an it, 
racic,yt you wil the of ‘her cxannnation. 1 4,yeares: partes 
Ly .becanfé by that occafonmuch made and for that (he jared 
my L, ‘that sf {be had |bewed bey felfe to hawe bene perfeétly for any [ 


of her life, from the age of! 7, vntill about30, theirby.depriueiny her. 
felfe of many, if not of all che comforts of this life,as locietie, marriage 
who can now in any reafon thinke, that a younge damfeil to my 
Zemembrance of a comely feature and detirous enough(if 
not to much)of the plealures of chis life, would wittingly,and willing — 
ly depriue her ielfe of them all, and that for fo many yearestogethery — 

and to fuch an end as heere is pretended: I deny not that K. Wrie bt 

hath depoled that this was the reafon ofher countetieitiige; Buel 

crult Har/net did thervntoby his flyghtes and deuifes draw het 
entice her. Neuerthtleswho of vnderitandinge will beleiue eyther 
hich fecing there weremore-cafie aad honelt wayes to haue 
woyded le hard vfage of her father in'lawe, (eo fach faze) then 
Wice,or coupling her lelfetolome in honeft mariage: And truly I can 
‘Mot bac maraile; chat fhe bath not bene all this while wearie and dou 
ble wearie of counterfeiting and had her fheé hath 
_ continued foil ong it'the pra tile of it. Itis fomethinge that in 
this time her hath “not bene efpied nor found 
the caine With’his fellow con niihoners. But this 


P-g- 2 


. 
| 

— 

5 


defived about three dayes after “fea reuiew:and then 
of bis con{cience as he jaied in dels 
thisforte:Pheras being examined. vpon the fudden of a fat? done twelue 
yeares paftyl haue faicd that I did the [ame as there it is expreffedin a blid 
Zeale smcaning a foolijh and indifcrete imitation of the. Prophet and A. 
poltle due now proto that hauinge called my felfe better to minde by con 
Seringe with my wife who was then prefent, and by better deliberration 
the fame,that I verily beleine I did not the [aid fat e,to the ende there 
petrified: for that I newer dreamed at that time of working any miracle, 
neither didlooke for her deliner ance from Sathan,but {be besng at that time 
verte varulic I didit to kepe her cdowne,there being allo at that time ano- 
ther vpon fome part of her,and vpon me that we mightthe rather keepe her 


LYING DISCOVERY. “487 
eth althe reft,that after fo longe coumterfeitinge about 14. yeare 


‘continuance: iis isnot yet punatthed at al/ for her {aide counterfeis 
ung, nor 24, Sommers neitner,nor any of the relt, Oh faith the Difc- 
Concerminge right, when jhe was examined (be profed-d, 


that thenceforth would become 4ncwe wansn,and leaue al ber farmer 


Xhisthen belike i: fatiffaction fufficiente for allher 


councerteting. As good a fariffaction are the like wordes vttered by 
a notorious any other malefastors:& yet neuer 


theles they are punifhed by the chriftian magiftrat, & fo ought tobe 


CHAP.7. 


Of 24 Darrells procedinges with Katherin Wright or ber pr etended 


But there was another ne vfed,a s Ka. Wrighte.b ath | dep ofe d in 


thefe wordes, One fashion of M. Darrell in my pretended ds[poffeifion at 


Lye my bellye, faysng that be woulde by fo lyinge 


‘prefje the Lisuell out of me.W hen this firange fafbwon was obictied to M. 


‘itin thisjarte.L batinge read in the [criptures,bow Elias and Saint Paul 


ering the truthsbe fet bis minde 


dowue And thus at the length, yo his perfecte anfwere wherein 


pag 300, 


itis to be feared that he bath made boulde with his oath.For where as at — 


the thirde time he [aith he was taken vpn the [udden, when he made 
bis firfl anfwere,that femeth not to be true, for that his faide lying vpon 
her was nz fooner mentisned vito him, but be affirmed that he laaked far 
it,and had two examples for bis excufe therein, 


Durell: Ah quoth looked for thts,ana then framed bis anlwere ynto 
them felues alonge on [ome that weare tn thew recouery te 
,and beinze 4 younge ydent.in dininiti, not paft feure or 25. yeares 
of ze,| didin a blinde xeale(as I thinke)lie ypon the faied Ka, Wright as 
it is After wardes this his [aied were beinge vepeated as the 4 
manner ts,be did thus amend it viz.1 he: Ke. Wrighte, 
but nyt vpon ber bellie,ai bcleue. Chis quallification beinze alowed of, be 


1890 AD ETFCTION CF SLEAFSNETS 


I defire thee(good reader) with patience to heare & with wifdometa 


confider of thar which is here thus cunninglie & malitioufly publifh 
ed againft me.I am charged thou {eeft, with counterfeiting, and haue 


bene thus long imprifoned,toffed and turmoiled, examined and reex. 


amined for teaching to counterfeit:but the proofe of this fayling,and 
$.Har[net and his Maffer both comming fhort of this their purpofe 8 
intent, to their greife-and not being able for their liues with ail there 
ae king,and miferable fhifts,to convince me of this finne, 
then the 


.terly to fhame me,and difgrace me foreuer vz. To make the world be 


leiue that am avitious and yncleane perfon, their withall clofly im- 


plyinge and perfwadinge men yf they could:that Darrell who makes 


no confcience of fo foule a finne as that of vacleannes,will neuer make 


bones at {o {tnale atnatter as for glorie to teach men to counterfeit: & 
heerein lyeth the ftrength and force ofall this foule batterie again 


me, in that one finneis apte enough to drawe on another, But iff 


were fuch a otte indeede as they would {0 faine haue me feeme tobe, 
vz.cither a dronekard or aléhoufe haunter with Somers,as before is in 
finuated: or an vncleane pérfon of vachaft behawior with K. Wright as 
het e is infinuated, and more playnly by that marginall note, pag. 37. 
D wwrels luff:1 doubt not,but they would haue bene able after all their 


ne and inquirie into my former life,to haue made fome better 


proofe theireofthen they haue. 


~ Now before I entér‘into the anfwere of fuch particulars as are here 
thus vniuftlye charged vpon miy head, to wype away all ieloufie and 


fafprtion which may happely enter into the conceipte of too manya 
inft me; I doe here vnfeinedly proteft in the prefence of God and 


‘ 


may be affured hereby, in that this {aid lysing were their prefent,and 


eye withefles rheirof,my-owne wyfe with other weomen,and for that 


another mari alfo, Edward Loades by name lay together with me vp* 
on her: all or moft of which wirnefles be yet liveynge, and readie to 
beare witnes herevnto, if they might be admitted: with one of which 


at the leaft, the wife of Hemry Croffe of Man! feild, $. Harfnet had {pes 


ach at Man/ffeild, as he with his fellow commiffioners returned from 
examining: K.Wrieht, but what fhee witneffed we heare nor, onely 


my felfe heard that he receiued fuch anfweare from her, and found 


ber [9 backwarde from affirminge that he would haue had — he 


ye to another fhifte(a fluttifh one) thinkinge theirby vt- 


is Angels, that in allthis my dealinge with Kat. Mrizht, not 
thanké God){o much as an vneleane thought:neither didI/yeon her 
in fach mariner as Elias 8 Paul fomtimes did in the reftoringe ‘of two 
to life, nor yet,in imitation of them: all which I direQly depofed be- 
fore the Bijbop. And that theire was no vncleannes in atte, euery one 


| 
: 
~ 


-encement, or the Dj/c, in this triumphant fort to pubii{h and pro- 


threatned to haue her before the B. of London,and with imprilonmét — 
their. his being fo,and my conticience being cleere even coram tribu- 
nai, 1 may the bolder good reader craue thy patience to heare my | 


further anfweare to the particulars as followeth. 
Being by the Bs/bop of London examined concerning thisLyinge 


J fayd that I did not wellremember wherefore [ did it ,and no mar~ 
uell,being to long fince it was done,about 14 yeares,and a thing not 


worthy the remembring“notwithftanding the Bibop prefling meto 
an immediatan{were,would needes haue me fay {omething V Vhere 
vpon to fariffie hisimportunacy,I tould him that for the prefent Z 
did thinke or imagin that I did it in fome childifh,foo lifh,and vngil-_ 
crete imitaion of the Prophet and Apoftle:For quoth I vnto him I 
was then young and had ftudied diuinitie bvt a while,and therefore | 
it may be di fall into fuch an error and childith parte. But after my 
departure entring into amore ferious confideraton of the matter & . 
hauing my memorie alfo holpen and releiued by other meanes. Ire- _ 
turned with al the conuenient fpeed I could not 3.dzyes after as the 
Di(c.faith,but footie, ahd craued thar my fayd anfwere might be. 
corrected ,for that Thad much miftaken the matter. VVhere-vpon 


' being depofed apaine, I'affirmed as the truth was,that I didnot lye 


on her in imitation of the prophet Apoftle,wherof I rendred 3.re_ 
fons. Two of them are mentioned bv the Di/c-himfelfe,but the third | 
& principal he hath after his vfaal manner craftely omitted, leaft the 
reader fhould happely lyght on that might tend to my clearing. The 
reafon was this If Thad done fo as Eas and the .4poffledid, Then no 
doubt I fhould haue laied my mouth vpon her mouth my eyes vpon 
her eyes & my handes vpon her hands,&c.wheras there was no tuch 
thing don neither can be imagined to be-for thé I wold haue layen on 
herin one ofher trances, )[eeing fhee had many )and not in a fytt & 
fuch a fitewherein aboue all other fhe was worft to be ruled'nay it 
can not in any reafon be conceiued that I intended any fuch thinge 


confidering Edwarde Loades (a man yet lyuing )ioyned with me in 


that Lyine.This I did fay vpou my oath ,andcan preue parte of it 
by witnefles . notwithftauding all this my firft anfwere was not cor-. 


Ye‘ted,wherein(as I arn informed) I am dealt with contrary to Lawe 
-_equitie and Juftice; but yet not contrary to the vfuall dealing of the 


Eifhop and his Chapline, Albe it ther] freely confeffe that in the facte 
done fo Jonge fince I was very vndifcreete, and in my anfwveare ypon 
™y examination noleffe rafh and vnaduifed: yet the cale beinge no 
otherwife then we heare, their was fmale caufe why either it fhoulde. 
be obieted avainft me before the iudgment feate,or that o¢7o' Bar~ 
low fhould haue it vp as it were vpon a {tage,im C ambrigeat the come 


clane 


374 
‘ 
4 
‘4 
. 


A DETECTION OF S, HARSNETS 


claime it to the world,therby to make Darrell an odious & infamous’ 
perion: as if he dhould tye vpon a woman in bealtly manner, orels 
toolithly prelumpruouily doe itin lmitatio of or Paul:which 
as | haue protelted is moitt talie, But fuppole this latcer weare true; 
yet feeing it was done fo many yeares fince, when I was littie better 
tien a chiidin vnderitandinge,and that now beinge of riper yeares 
ain as farr trom approuing tneirof, or practifinge the like as any man 
whatfoeuer,it muit needesbe rake it,and cannot be exculed to bein 
the higneit degree of mailice, and the hardeit mea‘ure ot reuenge,ig 
this delpighttul opprobrious manner to obiett it againtt me, And 
yet when they haue ail done & itrained aud racked tits folly or vn- 
dilcrete parte of mine to the vttermolt, it will be found te weaketo 
proue or convince me of that which they would fo fayne (yea rather 
then their liues tind me guiltie ott.vz.¥.bis teaching the ait of notorious 
counterfeiting. wnat doth my fuppoled lyinge on KW right (if it were 
trae,as itis falteyheipe and furtter them mm this their plea and accufa 
tion againit me¢ furely nor one tote atall,but onely to eale their o> 
-mokes,and wreake their mallice.And this makes me remember a re- 
port of the old Earle of Survie, who being araigned and cailed before 
the Commitfioners tor Hehe Treafon, it was among other thinges.al- 
leadged againft him by jome then in authoritie,that he had very dif 
orderly broken the glafle windowes in Cheapjide. whervnto the Earle 
made an{weate:what¢doe you call me hither for Hich treafon and doe.ym 
alleadee vate me the follies of my youth’ Even thus(good reader)fareth 
it with me at this in{tant. I haue bene called hither by the High Come 
mifjion, and haue endured thus long trouble and imprifonment, not 
for any trifle or triflinge matter ific fhould be true,but for {uch avile 
and fhamfull pra:tife,as deferueth rather the feuere fcourge or rigour 
of iuttice, and my-felfe to be madezva fearefull example and {pectacle 
to pofteritie, then to haue any booke or any fuch baulinge difcourl 
as the Dic, hath writter-and publifhed againft me. And yet we lee 
when they come to proue this hainous matter again{t me, then th 
fali co tell me (as thefe men did by the Ear/:) of my breakinge of sla 
meane of my lying on K. Wright: which fat as my {elfe 
do not approue of but codemne as very vndifcretly done, fo they fot 
their partes may make much ofir, but it will little avayle them to 
prone me guiltie of teaching K. Wright to counterfeit a polfeffion and dif 
pf} fJion of the denill,. 
That which pleafeth the Dz/conerer to tearme my qualificatio,1s 
nothing leffe, but onely an an{weare to certayne words of the article 
which at the firft readinge of the B. (ifhe readthem) I marked not 
well, containing inica Serv and dire ‘t an{weare to that which was 
not aniwered before. wherein yet the Ds/c, after wonted 


7 
> 
eg 
| | 


4 


LYING DISCOVERY, - "Jeg 
hath left-out parte and the beft parte on Darrels behalfe,vz. thefe wor 
didlye ber fide,{be lyine on ber fide,and this(as my aniweré to. 
article wiil witnes)! depofed ar the fame time when I fayd my Ly- perad veué 
was imitation of the prophet,es did( vz. far the prefent )thinke:wher would hen 
ot as 1 was not then very lure, fo had I aduiledly confidered thereof, ong 
and better remembered my felfe,[ had prelently and in the fanse mow theirfore no reg 
ment corré-ted chat fallesmmagination of mine, wherein | fo much 


wronged my felfe. Now as the Wale. hath omitted part of my depo- dowue, 


fition, Lo(che better to peice vp his patcheric,) hath he added fome 


thiage ot nis owne,vz.as I aud.againe, I verily beleine, which 
woris becauie the argue a dowbting,the Ui/c.hath inferted,as though 
had itoode in of thole thinges,wherof I am and was very fure 
and out of all Neither would Lhaue protefted fo confidentlye 
here confeiled,and then come in after wards with I beleine.I verily 
cleime, | 
VVinen I fayd 44 I Looked for this. didnot meane fuch a fylthy 
andridicuias depolition as ishere meationed,or fuch an article as 
thea was read vato me much worle then the depolition:but being ex 
anined conceraingé Ks. Wright, Tlooked to heare of myfaid fying and 


tv examined thereofandthat the world fhould beborne in hande 


it was ia an vicieane delre,and thervato inded inclined the arti~ 
cle. Phe reacon whereof was becaaleZ knew. Sathan would bringe to 


light and ipreadabroade, this rath aad wodifcret of mine, if god | 


did permicnim, aud that the fame through the greate foll of man 
and prones ro-beleue any thing reported rhovgh neuer fo falle, efves 


tially again{t a preacher and minifter of the word, wouldtendtomy - 
reproach, and not reft there,but thorough the falle perlwation there= 
of,keepe many {rom beleuing theworkes of God whereinthe Lord 
vled meas aninftrument among others This greiuingmeinwat 
diy in my foule, and in that my greite thefe wordes burltingeforth, — 


I bolde with my o4th, 


the Difc.wold faine here vpon interr, that 


becaule Efayd chat I was cxanined vpon the fodaine.To this I anfwere — 
and itis true,that 1 was om the fodaine examined of this facke,and yetlo- 


ked forthe [ame,after that the Bijb»p began to examin meas touching 


Ke Wvight:for before he came to this article,therewere diuersother 
articles propofed.vato me concerning this laid Katherin,aboutthe 
me.In whichinterim 


which the B:bap was a good [pace in examining me.] 
Looked. to heare of that which aow the wor! ta fee (through the 
charitie of this chaplaine and his good Afaifter)thus infamoufly hea- 


reth,As touching’ this depofition of Ka V/rights, he is veriefinple 
that knoweth not who taught or perfwaded her io to depoleand thar 


itcame not of her felte,iffo be thee haue fa depofed. 


= 


| 
| 
| 
| 
|| 
> 
| } 
>. 
“ 
; 
4 
dife | 
> > 


A DETECTION OF §. HARSNETS. 
 Wefeethat Ka VV right wa: difpoffe{jed, but not by the ordinarse meg 
pag 30s. (of Chrift appoynted:and Darrel mult be 
Thaue fhewed els where thatDeuils are or may be caft out by 
prayer,or by prayer amd falting, according to the kind of {pirit wher 
_ with the partie is poflefled: and thar this is the ordinance of Crrift.K 
VV right then being by prayerdi{pofleffed,was healed by the ordinary 
meanes, as wel as thofe which be deliuered ftom Sathan by faft inge 
and praier: and rhereforenot by miracle. 
It being obieEed to M .Darell by her maiefties Commiffioners ,that 
peg. Auowing the [aied Kathtvin VVright to diffemble in ber pretended fites 
at Manffeild, bad privat conference with ber, and taught her how to order 
ber felfe in the manner of ber counterfeiting, wherby he encouraged her in 
that her lewd cour[e,-be doth deny it, but thereofKa. VV right depofeth 
a? thus:M. Darrell after his coming to me at* Manffeild, did rel and teach 
2  _ medlone, bow tonfe andorder my felfeinmyfites. 
Ethen dwelt to right faied this for feare leaft her feete fhould haue bene 


des,ico behelped burned. 2, K.VVright came to Man([feild bvt two dayes before her 
which'time fhe had bene for many weekes 'hand- 
ben, d after a ftrange and preiuous manner,euen ‘after the fame mannet 
as fhee was at arid after at VV bittington vpon her repoflefit- 
paz. os. iS Evident by pag. 305. where vpon fhee was firlt had to one 

p chen fure cheire shy a coniurer,to be holpen yf it might be, and after by the appoynt _ 
My orm ment of the now Ladie Bowes, then Miftres Fovliam to Chcfterfeild 
apofiefionbe- market rownethereby, whether by her meanesalforepared fundrye 
is D¢ighbourminifters, which feing her in divers fits, falpected her to 
 Gsife,neitheris be poffefled ,wherevpon the fame was bruted in thofe quarters ,and 
sheiame depol this was before fhe came to Manffeilde as the aforefaid Ladie with ma 


ed by the 3 wit- | 
nefics, buzone. MY Others can witnes.It can not be then(were K. VVright acounterfit 


ly chis.shat fhort that I did teach ber at Manffeild feing whether fhe couterfeited,or was 


poffeffed, it was lo with her lone before fhe was ferbyM Bere[forde to 
was as Manffeild, before which time God he knoweth ,I neuer faw her,neith 
et ex doth Ka VVright nor yet the’ Dife.fay any thing to the contratie. 3. 

manner aecording Lwas faith Ka .V Vriebt when 1 parted from Darrell in the very'[ame 
formes fees that came to Manffeild. And forthe ftrégthening* hereof are pro 
mult befo,be- dticed the depofitons of three. wherevpon the Difc. (raz 305)concla | 
caufethewas deth thus: By which conference of the tims tt appeareth direEtly that 


Wright was not at all in any fortereleiued by M Darrell. And in 


| 
rs 
et } 
| 
| 
¢ 
; 
i 
é 


LYING DISCOVERY. 
place thus..4ud this courfe [ber conf bath held from'the sime {be. 
began it vntill the time almoft of thes ber examination, vZ.about 1 4 4 
yeares, This confydered I delire to know of the Di/couerer,wherefore I _ 
did teach Ka. Wright to counterfeit, }f to glorye in the difpoffeffion of 
her, as is to be intended, for the gayne of one peny is not layed to my 
charge:-how cometh it to pafle,that Ka Wright fayned nother felfe to 
be di!poffeffed, & fo continued well euer after that I with others vied 
prayer in her behalfe, but not withftanding the prayers vied to. the 
end to make fhew that fhe was therby. difpoilefled,anda fecret a gree~ 
ment theirof beiwene vs,if the Dsfc.fay truly, yet continued the very 
fame, counterfeiting a poffeffion after in like manner as before? This 
tended to the fhame of me her mafter, and not to my prayle: all the 
gloriehad bene m the fained difpofleffion,whervnto the diflemblinge. - 
of apoffeffion onely ferued, (if their had bene any fuch iniquitie) and — 
theirefore would in no cafe haue bene omitted.who can be fo grofle as 
cnce to imagine that I did teach K. Wright to counterfeit a poffeffion, 
and giue herno inftruGtion concerning the diflembling of a difpoffef 
fions{peciallie feeinge I did affirme and beare the world in hand that 
fhee was difpofleffed vpon the prayers vfed by my felfe & others? 
what in common fence would K. Wrights fayninge to be poflefied ad- 
vantag me?Had K. VVright diflembled to haue had the ceuillcaft our _ 
of her by me,and then muft fhe haue remained well,afterIpretended 
to difpoffeffe her, in carnall reafon ther was fomrhing to haueinduced 
me theirvnto, but their was nothing in reafon to leade me to perlwad 
and teach her to counterfeite onely to bepoffeffed with the deuill,and 
the fam for many yeares to diflemble. As this could not procure mein 
particular the prayfe ofmen, and tobe reputed to have fome rare and 
odd gifte in caftine out dewils,but rather the contrary,all things well con 
fidered: foneither in generall could it further the fetting vp of the Pre 
(byteriall conceites: feeing heerewas no deuill caftout by a Prefbiteriall 
man,to commend him} & his conceits to the world.Andthisisthe14. 
time the Difconerer is convinced and fhamed by his owne D)sfconery. hae 
is to be remembred,that K. wright fetting downe the caufe of 
her diffimulation forfooth, doth not mention any profiteorbenifite 
fheefhould receive from me, or that I did beare her fo in hand, but 
mentioneth the hard vfage of ker father in lawelohn Mekin,in beating 
byufing her very fore'to deliuer her felfe from which fhe fell of eountér- 
ing: wherevnto the Dife. addeth, adefve to lue-at cafe, and to be pag 297 2398 
much made of by her parentes: If thefe were the reafons or caufes of K. ae ae 
Wrichrs di as K.V Vright and the D7/c.tell vs:then fhe did 
not diffimble for Darvels fake, not fcr anv profite or benefite fhe was 
toreceiue fom him.And this is the 1 5. time that the Di/conerer iscon_ 
yinceg 


« 
f 


Pot 


A 
*y 
; 
“3 
| 
| 
} 
7 


195 ADETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


winced by his Diéf/comry: except youwill fay thefe were not the onely 
$4) we cad notin any realon thinke,tee 
nennet Vright nor Dijco.(who betwene them | cralt haug 
@mutted nome) haue named any othercanfe, 
riauinge that wnich is {aid ro proue K, VV right 4 coms 
serfeste,ana my lelfe ta bawe taught her,che reft in this chapter beinge of 
leile moment / omit,as not worthy the anlwearinge, and {o willpros 
to Mary Cooper the fourth counterfeste, 
Darrels proceedings with Cooper athe {after of willsams Somers 
COMCYEY. 
24.Cooper faith thus: many ssmes M. Darrell would call me ynte 
| bi a ione, | being 1 my fathers boufe, and tell me that be doubted, that | 
995-8316 sould promcsn tun: to be aad theirfore bad me looke vnto it. His 
pariscular [peaches with ber were nothing elfe, but cunninge 
pus Mary Cooper in mind, that {be might countefete [uch matcer,and (9 
tookeic. Hereurto allo that aprertasmeth, which {be depafeth thus: often 
simmes beard M, Darrell {ay before my pretended cusines,thas it was the deo 
wils cu'tomsc, when be had one i a bo more 
of she farsc familie Lkzwije.T ass (as arguinge too plainly bes cunning pack- 
ing) M, Darrell denyeth: but st fors:whas slrengthened by Somers 
in shis bebalfe: beforessme (fasth be) that fell againe into this courfe, 
orc. Furthermore wliles the (aide\May Cooper meditating 2s it jeem- 
eth vpn M. Darrels former [pcaches,st fell out that child of bers died alite 
tle before Chriftimss: which [be tooke [o heavilic,ce it made ber as foce [faith 
sndced and truly cuill at ca{e,and fomwhat wake: where certaine\wto 
encn ad others in the tovpne, comming me,tould mee aith foce) shat 
was wai{e, then I knewe my felfe to be: and that | would be as evill asmy 
brother william was. Thefe wordes added to M. Darrells former [peaches 
that he doubted (be would prowe to be paffzfed, and that Sathan was not 
content with onein « familie, together with ber experience of the fienes of 
Pol] ijjton, which foe bad feene in ber brother, and often beard of M. Darrell, — 
amade per (4 [bee [aith) to doe that which foe newer thought tohaue dont: 
that 13, (4: (be addeth)to tamble and toffe, to talke idely, and to laugh. 


In this laf chapter of the Difconery, the Dif¢. telleth vs of the cous 
terieitinge of one Mary Cooper of Nottingham, wifeof Robert Corper 
the youager,and iifter to William Somers, and of my teachinge Of het 
or cunninge and fradulent praifes vied to the faid end, And thish: 
proueth by her depofirion, ftrengthened by Somers depofition. other. 
proofe hath henone, Shecounterfeitedapoffeffion. Androtheend 

the might ve desmed by the world to be pofleffed, thee did tumbler 


4 
és 
4 
" 


é 
7 


bled wieh itrange fights and vilions 
thiage now and then {peaking to her,and by fome circnm 
‘hisiaightbemade probable. 
certaine that on the daye fhe was handled after a ftrange 
fires,and that by courfe er carne with her brocher Somers 
for he noto 


eye, fhe begane 


3.Iathefe fires the {peake very much,wherof the knewe nothing 
efter, and that this is true, it might be made very prob 


sof, talke sdely, and lauzh. Surely thele thinzes areeafily done, nei 


ghee need thee to haue any helpe to teach her taem,or to haue vied 
“aly great canning cheirin, but of her {elie without me, fhe was.able 
to naue tumbled dec. And were not they wile people trow ye, 


vpon the doinge of tholetoyes would deeme her to be pollefled?we 
matt knowe tacn ( and may in reafon affure’ our felues) that were 
Mary Cooper a couaterteite, to maxe shew tneitof the did fomething 
clic befides tumble and toffc,tatke sdely and laugh; yea by the words of 
the Dy¢, io much may be coniectured, in tharhe faith Mary Coopers 


experieiec of the fignes of which jc had feene sn her brother, and 


‘often pcard of mrynade whence it is to be gathered, thatdheto 
be chougat co be.poileiled with the deuill as well as her broth 
did councerieite .oine (at leat) of the ignes. of Somers 
her brother nad to the laid end. donebetore-her.“Let vs 

coniider what counterteit trickes {he did, and whether they be fiche 


ner, Let vs then ([fay) 


i couid teach, aad ihe learne and prattile,,. 


She couftantiy affirmed viually in the nightes {he wastrow 


. 


nded his fites, but prefently in the ewinkling of an 
1¢ hers,and when fhe ended, immediatly beganehe: 8 
thus they did though they werein feuerall roomes. : 


5 


¢ nothing 
by diuers 


* 


fome of her fites fhe was of that ftrength that 4. or s.coulde 


fcarflye rule her. 


in{tant they were done. 
her fites fhe was in the Iudgment of men without 


As to her brother, fo to her, alittle thinge in appearance was done to 
make trial theirof, which notwithtandinge vadoubtedly will fuffice 
theirvnto, And that was this: her little finger was bended withall 
the force of a maninward, fo.as prefently after it {welled much, and 
"great payne had the theirof many dayes.after-yet theirat ftirred fhe 
of 
a her belly was in the mideft as it were deuided, and rayfed vp c 


. 8.Out of her belly was fenfibly heard akinde of whupping, alfo a 


yand namely ofj4/ice Freman: fons 


was offapernataral kuowledge, tellinge of diuers thinges 
dane agood way of her, and chat at the 
ted 


wid 
, 
> 
x 
; 
3 
4 
; 
= 
é 
< 
* 
: 
| 
Ks 


197 


noyfe much like to the whurring ofacatt. 


gy. her bellye on the fudden fwelled, and was in eftimation of the 


bignes ofa woman fomewhat more then haife gone with child: and 
fo continued beinge litlle or not at all bigger, about a quarter of a 
yeare. 2. This {welling would fuddenly begone, & after alittle while 


be their againe: 3. V pon and ‘duringe this {welling fhe felt | 


(as it were quicke)ftirr within her. whervpon fhe thought efpecialh 


at the firft, that fhe was with child,'and now & then alfo through her _ 
great fimplicitie fhe fo hoped a great while after: 8c yet alwayes from 


the bepininge the faid, that that firring was nothing hke ro that fhe 
féle‘within her when before fhe was with-child.Afrer fhe had thus co 
tinued about 3,0r 14. weekes, fhe fell atraueling; fo'as midwife 
ter midwifeand neighbour weomen were called in and fent for,wher 
in(as 1 was credibly informed)it went thus with her. At the begining 
ofhertrauile, her belly was about the bipnes aforefaid and foft: the 

mext day very bigg, but foft: not long after very bigg,and hard;asif 
“fhe had bene-indeede with child, and at the poynte of deliuetance: 
fometimes alfo the was very gaunt,hauinge her belly leffe then a wo 
‘Mans ordinarily is. Moreover,a ftirringe or movinge was fometimes 
feene and felt in very ftrange and admirable manner, as if therre fad 


bene fome quicke thinge caufinge it; ‘but fo'as no fubftance could be 


felt:and this was in fandrie partes of her body, as about her ftomaké, 
‘aboue her breftes,and in her arme or fhoulder. And this rare accidé 
together with this ftrange alteration in her belly, from little to great, 
and from great to little,from foft to harde, 8 from harde to foft, was 


‘duringe the time of her trauell, which was for 2. or 3. daves, as I re- 
‘member. She liad the paynes of a woman in trauill: and in danger of 
death,as many women in trauell:in fo much as they which were with 


ford, the was in althinges like to a woman in trauell, differing onely 
heerein from others,in that they bring forth fomethinge, either line 
inge & reafonable creature,or fome vntimely birth:but fhe nothinge 
-atall, neither then nor after: trauell after trauell, and nothinge but 


‘Rrauelinge, and one would haue thought for a childe, for their were 


all the fignes and forrunners of a child, and yet behold no childe was 

brought forth,nor yet any thing elfe. That iffued from her,which ne 
‘wer was knowne or heard of to come from any woman, but where a 
child was either brought or their to be brought mto the world: and 
yet loe no child. Befides thefe things which fhe had in common with 


other weomen, which weomen can te!l it is impoffible to counterfeit, 
anda fhame for men to fay fo: fhe had this i> {pecialland properto 


ber felfe that lumpesof fiefh came from her, and that which beinge 
gs carrie 


ther defpayririge of her life, caufed the bell to be toledforher.Ina- - 


DETECTION OF 5. HARSNETS | 
3 
| | 
=) 
| 
3 
: 2 
if 
| 
; 
nd 
> 
© 
+ 


@ 


~Yeathe Dic. himielfe confefferh (be bad ré 


_ earried to the Phifition, he faid ehat it it came from! nature,it was not 


= for her to liue. Heerewas abloudie counterfeitinge, if you 
knewe all,.as the weomen which were at this trauell can tell better. 


then I, V Vhiles thele thinges,and prefently after thefe thinges were 


done, fhe notwithftanding did rife out of her bed,& go vp & downe 
the houfe, into the chaniber, and neither keept bed nor houfe for all 
her traueling: which had coft her it may be her life if this her trauel- 
inge had bene naturall,- and not extraordinarie and {upernaturall, In 
her brefts alfo fhe had fometimes water,and fometimes milke,It was 


a prittie peece of cunning to convaye now milke now water, into her 


breftes,and fuch.asfewe weomen can doe the like: and yet thiswe fe 
is but the leaft‘ofia.many ‘ofher faytes. Isnot this aftrange kinde of 
traueling,and ftrangechilde‘{ure that this woman wenewith?lt may 


uered of this childe, After all thistrauelinge I haue feene this woman 
with her belly of abignes fomewhat more then ordinarie, and within 
halfe a quarter‘ofan hovre and lefle; to bigg to my Eudgment and o- 
thers,as a woman great with childand readie tobe deliuered. 
_ As rhe fumme of this being examined by the B. of London con- 
cerning Mary Cooper, I {ert downe in wri gating: (whereof I readpare 
to the Bibop he refufing to heare the reft) affirminge vpon my oath 
fome of the fame to be true of my owne knowledg, and that the reft 
was crediblie informed and did beleiue to be true:fo offer now to 
thofe that be in authoritie to make profe heereof by many witnefles. 
in her body where 
by [be verily thought her felfe to be with child. And a little after he pro= 
duceth 24. Cooper depofiing thus: wh¢ Gray and the reff of ber co 


pany(vz.the other weomen defired.to come to her trauell)came about 
faying and reporting ,that-I [bould be delinered of fome mmnftvous thing, 


Heereby it appeareth not onely that 2/ary Cooper traniled, asis afore 
faid, but alfo that in the fame it went with her very extraordinarilie: 
wherevpon the weomen their prefent,looked not that the fayd AZary 
fhould haue bene deliuered of a childe,but of forme monfler: and trulye 
no maruelithe premiflesconfidered, 
VVe heare what 21. Cooper hath counterfeited, & what I haue taught 
her, if a counterfeite the be. But how did I teach her’For footh I faid 
vnto her J doubted (be would prone to be paff-fJed: and that Sathan was 
not content with one in a familse, This latter [peach faith the Difconerer, 
(which no wife man will belaiue).r gueth toa playnly his cuning packing. 
Did ever man reade uch ridiculous ftuffe as this? Doth irnot de= 
ferue rather to be hiffed at,then anfweredé Frame the arguinent S. H. 
Darrell fayd to Mary Cooper be daubted or thought [be was pofj 


be it will prouefo in the end-when this woman fhall come to be deli- 


Pag 317% 


pag 318. 


* 
~ 
, 
> 
= 
» 
3 
j an 
é 
& 
i 
& 
| 
i 
5 
Bs 
= 
< 
= 
| 
& 
@ 
$= 
fe 
§ 
- 
4 Sets 
a 


pag 335 


399 ADETECTION OFS. HARSNETS 


Zi beirfore he-tanghe Mary eaper to-commterfeite 4 By the fame | 
Keaion certaine women and others in Nottisgbam which gocinge to | 
Mary Cooper fayd, foe would be as evill ts ber brother was, taught bere 
counterfest. Kor heereby they ment /be would be polfe(t as Somers was, 
which 1s more. then that Heerevpon the aicribeth 


her counterfeitinge partiy to them and this lpeach of theirs: bathow 


fottiihiy be doth it, and how abfurdly he realoneth here againit them 
and me,let every child iudge.A boy may ice that were we deceiued, 
and Mary Cooper not poileit, this {peach argueth our fimpiicitie, 
-but no iniguitie as the No ieile zrotle is this, 
that. Mary Cooper and dwelling, the ame towne, deliring in 


“my lelte that Mary Cooper thould .couatetteite, andthe willinge on 


her part to pertorme the fame, as the Ds/c.pretendech, yet dweilinge 
in the iame towne and hauing lundrie times ipeach rogether, neitiet 


the euér had word ofcountericiting, but onely vied ipeas 


-ches as you heare: which were. caning protec? (farfooth) to put her im 
mind of counterfeiting. Heere was an. ape fcholler trow, that need no 
further initruction in lo difficule -a matter; then to haue a tew fotye 
wordes({uch as you heare)caft forth,which might put her in minde on 


lye of that fhee thouid doe, Her brothér was ‘good at learninge his 


eites, if you will beleiue the Diféowerer, but dhe farr furpatletn 
But Mary Cooper in. the depoiition proceedeth,' 
Which laughing, Uvesuld fonsecimes haut refrayned, but could not, 
by reafon of the peoples fools ip aches that were prefent. This laughing and 
fleeving forme would thinke to be but a {male matter:but confidcr what M, 


inf 


Darrell gathercth of st. 1 affirmed faith be in Mary Goopers that 


ber lavebing and fleeringe countenance was (uch as'l bad feencin others 


pulfzd. Againe I bane fayd that her laughter in ber fits did proceed from 


Concerning this laughing, wordes I {pake as touch inge 
the fame, this wemuft ynderftand: that for certaine weekes 
Mary Cooper was about heraforefaid trancline,and Sathan moftbu- 
fie about her, fhe’ was giuen {9 to /eughing, that thee no foaner look- 
ed of any body but fhee would Lesh or [inile, neither could the ab 


the deuill, 


ftaine as the faid,and no doubt truly: Now I feeing this coaitenance 


in ner fometimes.and hearing of it by-others,and perceiuing evidéts 


dy at the fame time the worke of Sathan vpon her, S¢calling to mind 


the ficeringe countenance and /anebing not onely of K. right; but 


of 3.0f the 7. in Lencajbiré, and withall confidering thar {ach an 
ete Xe might well proceed from the deuill who by his nature is giué 


% 
| 4 
> 
Pag 3 
[ 
4 
yi 
‘ 
7 
| 
| 


alcrioiaze 1a a manner ailto nature, /aying was with childe (be 


_ fome externall operation of his, And this I therfore did,that I might 


“nether living creature,nor yet vntimely birch. VVas [ not then(trow” 


{LYING DISCOVERY. 
toall vanitie,and might well caufe fuch a vaine Slight com 
renance; did cell her, that that her Lexehing or {milinge came no donbe 
frou the dewl!, And this {aide theirby to haue drawne her to hase 
turned her eye to god, correcting her tor her finne,by the minifterie - 
ot Sathan, 

Difcouerer.. 

Againe the faid Mary Cooper beine thus deemed to be troubled with pag 
Satan, it fell out that bejides ber {aydgreife and weaknes {be bad alfa 
[ome ( wellinge in ber body, whereby jbe verily thought ber felfc to be wsth 
child, And otber wife what{oener (bs pretended outward (bew,(be nether 
had {uifered nor felt 2s {be hath depofed any thing in the world, Again? 
ber opinsou of being with child, M. Darrell oppofed bimfelfe as much as be 
could, ML. Darrell (faith laboured to breag me from iny perfw4j9n of 
being with cord, ay often [aying, that it was no child, but {uch 4 child ae 
god every good body from, 


A perceiuing this fimple woman to be euer looking to nature, 8¢ 


4 


trijted,and be baped for ail this oe was with child: L{ecinge her to doe 
this, as ig the manner of vs ali almoft to looke and gaze onely vpon: 
the meanes, or iecoad caule of our troubles,and to goe no further, 
aad being molt aifo that heerein (he was greatly deceiued:labor’ 
ed to deawe her tron that fond, foolifh, and abfard conceit ofhers, 
which kept her froin profitinge by that affliction: and indeuouringe 
this, aifared her that fhe was not with child, and that thele thinges 
came not trom nature,but from a fupernaturall power, 8 fomthing a’ 
boue nature,which was the deuil:eicher inwardly polletling her, wher: 
vnro [rather inclined, yea ina manner wholly: or being without by 


theirby che better drawe her to looke from earth to heaven:to god £ 
meane the authour of her affliction, and his extraordinarie hand vp- 
on her, afflistinge her in her body by the minifterye of Sathan; as I 
tould her:that fo the might be the more'throughly affe ted, 8 
bled vader that ludement,and'the Lord izdgings her. YF the had’ 
Propet with childe and brought forth one not long atter,then it had: 
thewed fome fimplicitie in me; butnotargued my teschinge of ber tos 
counterfeste,if tach fhe were, and then if thoie wordes had bene caft im 
my teeth, Icouldlefe haus bla ned 'thent. But behoid more thea 
her halfe after the felt fomt=thing ftirr within her, thought fhe 
ad bene guick with child,as weom> callit, fhe browzht asthig forth, 


blame tofay asl did?that fhe was not with child,itisnow mas: 


. 
“= 
> 
¥ 
? 
| 
| 
| 
ay 
a 
a 
| 
> 
4 
a re 
» 
; 
> 
= 
i 
‘ 
ip? 
— 
Fs 
~ 
q 
4 


A DETECTION OF S. HARSNETS 


nifeft, theitin:then/ faid truly, and for that one would thinke ¥ de. 
ferued not to be blaméd. Yet yow fee I am,which puteth m¢ in mind. 
of the prouerbe we haue: truth may be blamed, but it fhall never be. 
fhamed. And what if I fhould vfe the orher {peach againe: God 
every woman from [uch a childe? I thinke their is neuer.agood 
woman in England, but if | {hould fay fo tn her hearenge,would fay 
in her hart,Amen to it:ynderftand me ycu mnft conditionally . Bur 
this that followeth I defire the reader carefully to obferue. As 
The Difc.confeffleth that Mary Cooper had greife and weakenes,al- 
fo 4 [welling in ber body,and alittle before it is faid, that at her coun- 
terfeite trauell fhe was indecde and truly enill at cafe, and (omewhat 
weakc, wherevpon ccvtaine weomen comming ynto heryz.to her trauellerc 
Of Somcrs(in effet) he eonfefleth, that he had 4 difcafe in his boc'y by 
wating: Of Darling that he felt indeede at the fir [ome pricksnestn bis. 
leg ees, and that be vomited, and was fomewhat evill at cafe and of Kath, 
Wright, that the erowinge to fome weakenes, began 30 be troubled with a 
knee of [welling in her body, occafioned (as fince foe hath learned) by fome 
ge of vnknowne to diuers weomen.Heereby 1t appeat 
eth that al) thefe counterfeites.did not all theire feaites, but that fom. 
of them came from nature: fo that nature & craft may feeme to haue 
con{pired and traueled together to bringe forth thefe counterfeites; 
yea every of them without exception. V Vhat, were they all /:cke and | 
euill at eafe, S. H.¢ Sure they bad not otherwife bene fitte perfons to 
haue made counterfeits off:and belike the better to make femblance 
of counterfeiting, they were to haue fome helpe from nature, which 
they could nothaue fromarte. But what might that be which was | 
naturall,and which they could not doe by arte? 4 {welling in the body. 


why, bu: Waliam Somers did counterfeit this /wcNing, as appeareth. 
by pag. 1 81.and24 3.where he telleth vsalfo ful abfurdly how hedid. 
the fame. The other counterfeits then ned not to haue run to nzture 
far-the doinge of this tricke. But if they were all of them indecd and 
truly cvill at cale,as the Difc. and they themfelues fay,and that truly: 
it is ftrangethat they fhould haue any harte to counterfeite:alfo that - 
Heine ficke and weake they were.able to fhew forth fuch ftrength,and 
fuch admirable and manifold faytes, as is mamifeft they or the deuill 
did, And this is the fixteneth time the Dijcoucrer is canvinced by his. 
owne 1)ifcovery. | 

When Miftris Graye faith Mary Cooper and thercf of ber companye . 

came about me, and reportinge shat I foould be delinered of [ome 
—monfirons thing, laughed hartely at their foily: and this my langhinge 

shey termed my fitc, and would cry out now Lord bleffe ber, foeisin afore 


fitte 


4 

! 

380. 
pag-295- 

i 

pag 29% 

| 

| 

Pag 
a Ad | | 


LYING DISCOVERY. 190 


and the move I Linghed they more they cryed: Lord hawe mercy pon ber, 
fret invaflvang fitt, befides when I had laughed till my harte was jure at 
than, becaule ny was [pent with langhing, then would the whole 

company of women, namely Diiflris Gray, and the vel ary ont lord bi: ffe 


bir ,lord blffe ber, Lord fofus hane mercy vpon bir ,now [he 13 in a trauce. 


Darrell 
after /be had continued fo many weckes in apperance fhe feil of tranel 
ing, wherevpcn dwers neiphbcur weomen(& among them Miflres 
Cray) being fift requefted (accordinge to the cuftome) cameto her 
faid travel, and how it went with her theirm very extraordinarily, in 
ic n:uch as they weomen prefent theirat conceiued /be would hane 
bene deliuercd of fome monfirous thing, as is here contetied. I he Dic. 
now telleth vs in the perion and depofition of Atary Cooper,(which I 
know ke would haue men beleue to be true)that fhe did nothingbue 
laugh, and this lancking they tamed ba fitt: were not thele wile v eo- 
nen,which feeing awemen cnely /angh, cid thesrvpon thinke that 


{he was in trauel,end not cnely fo, but smagincd that fhe would be delia 


of fome monfier,end theirvpen vnto the lad to baue mercy on 
ker? Againe itis fayce, that Mary Cooper was indeed ard truly ewill at 
cafe: ¥r 1s incredible ther: that beinge /:cke,fhe fhould thus exceece in 
laughing Surely if Calplurnius were alive of «hem the-F oet faith,ple- 


no vedet Calphurnins ore, and fhould reace this ridiculous depefitron, 


ke would not cnely /angh with open mouth therat,but as it is {aychere 
of Mary Coopcr, laugh till bes hartewere fore. Bad not the Dye. folde 
himfelfe,to all irpudencie and fhemele's gaynfaying the rruth,weuld 
he euer hate affirmed, much lefle rublifred to theworld, that Vary 
Cooper did at her traueile whereof we haue hatde,noth inge but lan gl? 
But as the Di, doth here extenvate or rather make tu 


of Mary Cooper, atthe time of her fuppofed trance, fo hath Le dote 
the like before(to his vttetrrc ft) his Difconery:by oi er 
as ftrange and greiucus hich the euil {pirites in Somers, Dar 
ling, anc Katherine Wrielt {ent forth: and this is <Ecve allthirces to 


be obferued by tke reader, for keerein principally lyeth bis ceceite. 
Secondly,as leere he coth this tefces impicufly,very cbftrdh and 


in ridiculcus mat.ner,fo viually kefcre For mftarce: Sonurs fav cid 
foame excefliuely:itistroe gue th the anc Fis ceperertes,but it 


was when he kad blackt lead in bis n nil Ge. 
You heave in this dey of tun wenerticr of the Ineges, nl it t 


fitte 


(fit.The which theire foolifo wonderinge made me lauch more and more: 


« VVehauekeardbefore of Mary Cooper being with cbild,and that 


notkinge of 
the rare and greuous effeGies,w hich Lathan wrevght vpen the Lody 


Pes ¥e 


gate 


* 
= 
§ 
| 
' 
nm 
4 
i 
i =~ 
i 
| 
Hy 
= 
i 
+ 
| 
: 


sah gi 


f 


ay 


ty 


200 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


remember vuto you,what very Fiange and malitious prachife was 
der taken, to baue procured the death of apore woman one Alice Freman, 
vpon pretence that [be was a witch. This Alice Freeman was one of thofe 
whom Somers bad named for witches and alied to M. Freeman an Als 
derman and luftice of peace in Nottingham. it [aid (but wntruly) by 


of M.Darrels frendes,that before the deteChing of Alice Freeman for 


witch, it was nat reported in Nottingham, that Somers was 4 difjembler, 


shewby inferring that the offence takea by her detection the caufe tbat 
rayfed vp-a flaunder for [oath of Sommers diffsmulation, The was,te 
charge the fayd prove woman Alice Froeman, to hawe bewitche/ to death 
she child of Mary Cooper: and that [be likewife was the caufe of the [ayde 
Martes trouble and vexstion, as baueing bewitched ber in like manner, 
which conceite being thruft into Mary Coopers bead,fbe was arraigned:M, 


Darrell was one amonzt diners that ganz in evidence again{t the woman, 


grounding himfelfe much vpon Somers devecting of her for 4 witchicr mat 
ters profecuted azazn{t her, as had not the ludzes in their wifdome 
difcorned jomypbat,it 1 verily thouzhc,the poore woman( being found gut 
sie by the great had bene condemned to death 
| Darrell 7 
Seeing the Difc. will ialtifie Alice Freeman,and together with het 
Kinfmao M. Freeman haue her to bea very innocent, & to haue bene, 
without caufe through the mallice (forfoth) of {ome acculed of witch 
crafte,let vs therfore fee what may be fayd concerning her: not that f 
will charg her with witchcraft,but that we may fee, fhe is not alroge- 
ther fo free from all fufpition of witchcraft as the Difco, and her kinf> 
man pretend: and that there was iuft caule ofthe proceedinges vied 
againit her.In the beginning of December 97. prefently after the dif 
soueric of this Freeman among other perfons for a witch,by Se, 
mers or rather by che deuill vfinge his tongue, the the laid hice com, 
ming into the houte of R»bert Cooper, father in law to Somers andto | 
Navy Covper his filter, fome angrie wordes the fayd Mary gaue her, 
callinge her 4 witch. The night following (but how it came to pafle I 
know not) Mary Cooper felt a ftiring within her belly, as if their were 


foe quicke thinge, her belly {welling (which was fenfible to others) 


and the other preuous vexations wherof we haue heard before grow 
ing ypon her by little and little. this firving M. Aldidze hath 
fhs2rue to bc indifferently well,and [o doth continuc: 
be coimplayneth, that (bz hath a kind of ftarring in her belly, But it 
Alce Freeman together wither familiar {pirit caufed Mary Coopers‘ 
ftrange and fearerull vexations, then tt was thought that her mallice. 


did not {taye ir felfe there, but reached to her onely child,that fo fhee 


mizht be fursher reyeaged of her: and herevpon this fufpition did 


4 
3 
7 
4 
~ 
o* 


LYING DISCOVERY, tor 
rile. About 10. dayes after the former iarre'in a fairemonefhinie eve 
ninge, tice Freeman went from her owne houleto Rebert Cooper his 
houte, One leciage her: and maruclinge to fee her trudg fo fatt,thae 
could fo ill (beige avery ougly, old, lame woman,)doe it, followed 
whoct toote atter ner,and dogged her. V Yhen fhe was cometo thea 
forelaid houte,he did not forthwith knocke at the dore,as the man- 
‘ner of well meaning people is: but peepes firftat the chinckesiof the 
doore, thea went ihe co the window;and thus fhe continued playing | 
at bo-peepe a good while,and yet fhe isno child but a well aged wo- 
man. sit lengcn ihe elpied the honeft man which had -followed after 
her, aad then ihe full re and heneftlie fell a knockinge. Into 
the houie the commeth. Mary Cooper hadthen:a litle childe ttanding 
_at her knee in health and playinge, udisce Freman defired tolight'a- 
candle, but Robert Cooper denyed her, and alkedher why fhe cameto 
that houfe,wnich of all other was by the A4sior forbidden her. Away 
-goech ihe without lighting her candle,andas the went ouer the thre 
ihold, che child which even now was fo welland merry ,begane to bs 
ficke,and fell a ferighinge and (ckreamuinge, and{o continued. fortwo 
— Some queftions might be heere alked, which if they were fully 
an(wered, would remoue tome fcruple which remayneth inmany 
_ as, wherefore fhe went {o (0 hattilie thether, and being come peeped 
chat manner?wherefore to light a candle-at that houle, rather 
then anothef? It being the onely houfe which was by the magi@rate 
forbidden her: there beinge befides fo many houles, Fknow not how 
‘Many betwixt her houfe aad Coopers: Coopers houfe alfo ftandinge out. 
of the ftreete,a good {pace into the churchyarde, Moreover, to what 
_end :he weat;to light a candle, 3 how that contradiction of hers may 
be falved’ To fo ne the fay 4, fhe went with a candle from home,only 
to light it,and fo to return’ hoare:and this heranfweare was approw 
ed by the magiltrates of Nottingham,and yet can not be true the pre 
miles célidered,befids that which followeth ouertkroweth the fanse. 
To ochers that fhe had loft pinnes in the churchyard,8 would haue 
lighted her candle at Cp2pers houfe tiding ia the churchyard to haue 
found fome of them, for it is od des fhe had not found thernall,to loc 
other this q bzing afked her, fhe anlweared fhehadlof 2d. 
in che churchyard, and that the defired to find, But it may behe that 
-purfued her,found that which fhe loft.he would be examined therof: 
-butwe firftiknow,what the loft: whether mony, or pinnes. Itis 
-aquettion allo, whether fhe:went of purpofe and made | alte tolofe 
fomthing, that after fhe might be occupied in fecking that fhe neuter 
loft. It weuld be demaunded alfo, why being denied to light her 


} 
On 
“4 
ke 
— 
5 
aye 
of 
Pi 
i 
at, 
4 
x 
> 
= 
| 
- 
- 
> 
“~ 
% 
e 


200 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


remember vuto you,what 4 very frange and malitions practife was 
) wer taken, to bane procured the death of apore woman one Alsce Fremsan, 
vpon pretence that [be was a witch. This Alsce Freeman was one of thofe 
whom Somers bad named for witches, and to M. Freeman an Ale 
derman and Luftice of peace in Nottincham. it {aid (but vntruly) by 
Some of M.Darrels frendes that befare the deteChing of Alice Freeman for 
witch,it was nat reported in Nottingham, that Somers was 4 diffembler, 
shewby inferring that the offence takea by her detection ywas the caufe tbat 
rayfed vp-a flaunder for footh of So:mers diffsmulation, The practife was,te 
charge the fayd woman Alice Froeman, to hawe to death 
she child of Mary Cooper: and that {be was the caupt of the [ayde 
Mates trouble and vexation, as baucing bewitched her m like manner. 
which conceite being thruft into Mary Coopers bead,fbe was avvsigned:M, 
Darrell was one among diners that ganz in evidence the womans 
grounding himfelfe much vpon Somers detecting of ber for 4 witch: mat 
ters profecuted azatnit her, as bad not the Ludzes in their wifdome 
difccrned jomwbat,it 1s verily thouzhe,the poore woman( being found gut 


»~ 


sie by the great engusft bene condemned so death 

| | Darrell 
Seeing the Dic, will iaktifie Freeman, and together with het 
Kinfmao M. Freeman haue her to bea very innocent, 3c to haue bene 
without caufe through the mallice (forfoth) of {ome accufed of witch 
crafte,let vs therfore ee what may be fayd concerning her: not that I 
will charg her with witchcraft,but that we may fee, fhe is not alroge- 
ther fo free from all fufpition of witchcraft as the Difco. and her kinf> 
man pretend: and thar there was iuft caule ofthe proceedinges vied 
againit her.In the beginning of December 97. prefently after the dif’ 
souerie of this lice Freeman among other perfons for a witch,by Se. 
mers or rather by che deuill vfinge his tongue, fhe the laid Alice com; 
ming into the houte of Raber Cooper, father in law to Somers andto | 
Mary Covper his filter, fome angrie wordes the fayd Mary gaue her, 
callinge her 4 witch. The night following (but how it came to pafle 
know not) Mary Cooper felt a ftiring within her belly, as if their were 

_fome quicke thinge, her belly {welling (which was fenfible to others) 
and the other greuous vexations wherof we haue heard before grow 
ing ypon her by lictle and little. To this M. Aldridge hath 
Poled:altr wards to bc indifferently well,and [o doth continuc: 
exety [be coimplayneth, that (be hath a kind of fturring in her belly, 
Alce Freeman tggether wither familiar {pirit caafed Mary Coopers 

| ftrange and fearetull vexations, then ft was thought that her mallice — 

not (Kaye ir felfe there,but reached to her onely child,that fo fhee 

might befursher reyenged of her: and herevpon this fufpition did 


* 
> 


LYING DISCOVERY, tot 
rile, About dayes after the former iarre:in a fairemone fhirie cue 
ninge, dice Freeman went trom her owne houleto Rebert Cooper his 
houte, One leciage her: and maruelinge to fee her trudg fo fatt,that 
could fo ill (beinge avery ougly, old, lame woman,)doe it, followed 
whott toote atter ncr,and dogged her. V Vhen fhe was come to thea 
forelaid houte,the did not forthwith knocke at the dore,as the man- 
‘ner ot well meaning people is: but peepes firltat the chinckes of the 
doore, thea went ine to the window;and thus fhe continued playing | 
at bo-peepe a good while,and yet fhe is no child but'a well aged wo- 
man. sit lengcn the elpied the honeft man which had -followed after 
her, aad then the full re and heneftlie fella knockinge. Into 
the houie dhe commeth, Mary Cooper had'then:a litle childe ttandiae 
her knee in health and playinge, udice Fremandefired tolighta- 
candle, bur Robert Cooper denyed her; and alkedtrer why fhe cameto 
that houfe,wnich of ali other was by the A4aior forbidden her. Away 
-goech the without lighting her candle,and.as the went ouer the thre 
thoild, the child which even now was fo 
ficke,and fell. a ferighinge and (ckreamun rtwo 
~— Some queftions might be heere alked, which if re fully 
an(wered, would remoue tome fcruple which remayneth ftlll inmany 
_as, wherefore the went fo fo hattilie thether, and being come peeped 
ateer chat manner?wherefore to light a candle at that houle, rather 
then anothef? It being the onely houfe which was by the magifrate 
forbidden her: there beinge belides fo many houfes, F know not how 
‘Many betwixt her houle and Coopers: Coopers houfe alfo ftandinge out 
of he ftreete,a good {pace into the churchyarde, Moreover, to what 
:he went;to light a candle, how that contradiction of hers may 
be falved’ To fo.ne the fay 4, fhe went with a candle from home,only 
to light it,and to returns’ hoare:and this her'anfweare was approw 
ed by the magiftrates of Nottingham,and yet can not be true the pre 
milles cotidered,beiids that which followeth ouertkroweth the fame. 
To others that the had loft pinnes in the churchyard, 8 would haue 
lighted her candle at Coopers houfe (tidin it che churchyard to haue 
found fome of them, for it is od Jes fhe had nor found thermall,to. loc | 
Other this bzing afked her, fhe aalweared fhe had lof 2d. 
in che churchyard, and that the defired to find. Buti may be he that 
purfued her, found that which fh: lolt.he would be examined cherofs 
butwe mutt firftiknow,what the loft: whether mony, or pinnes. [tis 
a queftion alfo, whether fhe:went of purpofe and made alte to lofe 
fomthing, that after fhe might be occupied in fecking that fhe neuer 
loft.It would be demaunded alfo, why being denied to light her “le 5 


; 
te 
4 
‘ 
4 
Z 
‘ 
be 
> 
Ai 
‘ 
+ 
¥ 
A 
% 
= 
> 
y 
e = 
| 
| 
get 
= 
& 
* 


20% ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


die there» fhe went nat toranother houfe toilight it,that fo fhe migh, 
dhdue gone about the feekinge of that whatfoeuer it was fhe defired 
49 much to finde. Surely ‘either fhe had loft nothing, or elfe fhe grew 
cateles ofthat fhehad cared fo much for newly before: for fhe went 
sprefently to:another houle,and a little while after home, without-+ree 
furningtothe churchyarde, 
here another fulpitious.matter again her,concerning 
One Géorge Spencer,by whofe meanes. m_al probabillirie . coulde 
-fhew;but that to.anend, he was{o greiuoully aftlicted,that.ve 
many were him,and longe after continu- 
eed 'troubled:in his bodye :after a: ftraunge.and vnnaturall manner. 
aipretie pranck the playdiafter both thefe. fhe cam on 
a@timecintothe houfe.of aman in: Nottingham whole. name | haue 
oforgotten‘who carrieth. 4qnamte vp and down the.cuntrie:his wife 
_welcumed her with fome fhreud wordes: for there be few in Notting 
whidvloue not her roomie better then her company, fhee clafped her 
chufband-about the neck onbacke;and de a ftrange kinde of fa< 
olution. Fhe fame dayesthe man.went forth -with his. betdes. on his 
backe* when he was gone forwarde about a mile or two.in .a fayre 
@uénigrene fwerde waye,backwarde fell he and brake his bottles, 8 
«there laye allthe mans .4qwavite.Back he.comes for new bottles: ge 
‘more aquavite:when he came at the very fame-place again, it fel ont 
him iuft as before. If this was long of Alice. Fremans imbracinge 
shim,the poore man] dare faye had as liue fhe had fo kindly imbraced 
vanother as him; for the loving falutation if] fay it. came from thence, 
 feathedhim 4.:nobles. cometh the fecond time.& after they 


ca 


ther.of this kinde, before Somersfaide fhe had acatt.. 


oe fhe was as wel as might be.and this wasas itis faide‘and {ome o 


Thefethings moued fome to fufpect Freman of witchoraft. 
and though not all yet parte’of this was ineuidence again(t her: 8¢ 
Not Somers detecting of her for awitch, whereof there was no {peach be- 
__ + fore the ludge and being done by the lying {pirit was theirfore to be 
held Horifalfe 8 flaunderous,or at left to be fufpected,except.evidét 
be had from men. And heereof had M.Freman 
herckinfman well confidered he would neuer haue laboured fo much . 
by himfelfe and his frendes, I meane his fellowe to 


\ 


‘two were ‘mace freindeshe and his botties Cicaped well. haue hee 
ard of more {uch like tories of lice Freman, as of one which falling 
out with her as fhe was at meate ,had lyke tO haue bene:choake d, 8 

seontinued handled in that ftrange manner in her throate,as I neuer 
hearde of the like before,and that for the {pace of howres or there 
| abouts:euen yntill.Z/ice and -fhee were made cater-coulins,and then 


LYING DISCOVERY. | 203 
haue proued Somers a counterfeite,therby to recouer(as he thouga:) 
the good name of his kinfwoman; Seeing the ns of her witch- | 
‘crafce relyed not atall of ber for 4.witch,but of mat- 
ters of fact to be proved againft her: and that were Somers a counter- 
feite, which he hath thirfted {oj much after, the fame woulde not 
‘free her from the faid fupition, The Ds/c.parenthelisvz.but yutrs 
y, is vntrue my frendes {aid very true, if we ynderftand them of the 
‘time after Somers difpoffeffion, as they (no doubt) meant, Itis well 
knowne to the inhabitantes of Nott, that before the detcéfing of Alice: 
‘Freman for a witch,Somers was not reported in Not, to be a difjembler:ne 
ther produceth the Pie. any things. to the contrary:onely himfelie 
faith the contrary: whole teftimonie! thinke no man will regard. But 
to returne agaihe ynto Mary,Cooper,the Dife, proceedeth, 
Aldridge depofeth thus..4fterwardes (be grew to be indifferently 
‘well, and fo doth continue:onely [be complayneth, that {be bath a kinde of 
flirring 12 her belly: (wherevnto the’ Difco. addeth).and not otherwife 
troubled, then ibappeneth ont with other weomen, 
 ‘Ttis firft to bé obferued, that parte of M. Aldridge depofition is 
thefe wordes muft needes haue 
relation to fome before, wherein fomething was {aid concerning her 
evilnes;-an@ for the confirmation of that I haue to that end before de 
liueted: but the Difc, thought good to {mother all that, as makeinge 
not for him,but againft him:and this is vfuall with him.2.It is depof- 
ed that fhe hath « ffirring in ber belly,(according to that I haue before 
aftirmed)and confeffed.that fhe is troubled as other women are vpon.oce 
cafion: then fare there was fomethinge befides her laughing, which fo 
affeted'the women'‘met at her aforefaidetrauaile. 
 - The authour of the Breife Narration writeth in this forte: what goodly 
Paffe they (meaninge the Dsfcouerer and his fellow Commitlioners } 
bane returned,time and mallice will make knowne vnto vs. 7 he fluffefuch 
as it 18. (vileindeed his Maifterfbippe may be pleajed now to pervje: and 
‘theirby reape fome profite, if be vead it with ns greater mallice then 
Narrator(I dare faye)was ncither Prophet nor the fonne of 
aProphet,and yerherein hedid foretel that which after cam to pale 
The that .§.Harfaet andhis fellowe commitfioners haue rctur- 
_nedhim felfe-confefeth is vile indede and {ure fo itis,yeaas w/e Tam 
perfwaded,as euer was fince Enoland. was anaticn, for what 


pag 3326 


iy +. 
Age 
st <j 
A « 
all 
te 
a 
6) 
at 
< 
* 
vd 
. 
a 
- 
> 
> 
a: 
‘ 
‘ 
> 
% 
7 
4 
: 
|| 


204 ADETECTION OF S.HARSNETS 


¥ 


is that uffebut an heape of falfe, foolifh,ridiculus,and abfurde thinges 
witnelfed vpon the oathes of men, ioine tew depolitions excepte d, 
Baris this all doth make chis fue vilefnu hereby is made 
more vile, in that this wile was compatled by the cunning 
§wations, and threates of the commiilioners, men for the preieat 
and this a:te in authoritie,and tuch as thold rather haue done their 
indeuours to hauepreferued then drawen the deponents to periurye, 
Butishere all7no the fluffe returned and publyihed to the worlde is 
made more vile by the O:fcoucrer, his additions, detractions, and al 


terations:being therby made tare worle then at the firlt it was del) 
 uered, But is this all that maketh this ¢uffe vilecno no: all this 
: hath bene compatled and produced not againit man,but againit the 


Lordehimfelfe:nat (indeede)co tinde our any cosssserfeiting and tea- 
chinge to cousterfeite whereot there 1s no more gueltion or doubr to 
be made,then whether it be daye lightat noone in the fayrelt fun. 
fhine daye in {omer:but to ob{cure the workes.of god, and to keepe 
his peopte from beleuing them to be fuch:becaule they were brougne 
to pafle by fuch as the 13./Conerer delpilech and hareth ,and would 
taine haue al men to hate and defpife, And this is it that maketh thig 


fiuffe out of meafure vile, execrable, and abominable in the fight of 


god,and therefore ought {o to be reputed of all his people. Yea if we 
the inhabicantes of England be the lords people or inheritance as we 
profeffe:we can not bur fo account hereof, 8¢ will therfore by al good 
meanes accordinge to our places further thire punifhment: and oug 
vice Godes,which are here on earth in Gods fteade,will take ven- 
gance of thefe traitors Sc rebels again(t God, for this vafpeakable dif 
honor done to him,and this treaton or rebellion of theires,in takinge 
parte with fathan his enemie, (the God and prince of this worlde, 
who in tone extraordinary manner is rifen vp againft thefe workes 
of God )againft the Lorde himfelfe, Yf it be faid by fome in authori 
tie,that if it may be made to appeare that thele thinges ate true,they 
willnot endure them,but feuerely pvnnith thefe commiflioners:] in 


Edoe not fay of all hu nillitie offer to make profe ot theie chinges, and generally of 


every perticnlar 
Becan ei miy 


whatfoeuer [ haue fet downe in this my A pollogie or detence of the 


befoins wicneff workes of Gad,and of my lelfe:and if herein I fayle I refufeno pun- 


es wiil fiyie co 
Wwiines thacta 


nithaient. In the meane fealon it is to be remembred, whereof thefe 


haow co vetrue Worthy com ni‘lioners exanained {uch as were by them depofed -fure 


& hwe former- 
dy 


vy for the moft parte of fuch thinges as might ferue to proue theire 
oolith,abfurd and ridiculus circa m/tances: and to thisend vfualy they 
devoled them concerning the ipeaches that I fhould veter ia the beam 
rinz(Forfooth) er prefence of Som. And how long before fhould I haue 
{fpoken thefe thinges? aboutea yeare: yeafome of them abaut 14. | 
yeares then paft.were not here good memories that could remem=- 


é 
3 
3 
£ 
a 


‘Be the very they hearde fo loap 


oathes of men,whether Som. had or no, { 


dition, the cotrary oily pore pri 
wag with this fole it” be (and. I would bevforrie ate 


that my felfe being depoled downwith his coin 


“LYING DISGOVERY, sof 


little or nothing concerning them,and being not worthy she remems 
bring: yea the 1aft ume they were {poken ,and that io pevtect:inthe maffe o 
ly as they nede not to this claule fia as they remember or we fe 
to this erfect, One would thinke it had bene ficter men thould | 
bene examined concerning the a-tions of Som then of my [peaches, this wordeors, 
and of the itrange and extraordinane thinges they hadéeencany effete 
it happely they nad fene any,as the 12, firit 
thereby only it would be made manifelt: and-out of cog 
it be 
ie ted that here of they did depofe'fuch as were*examined by the 12 
Commiitfioners: I anfwere and confetfe that'they indeed.by di 
vers of them :but the 'Di/c. hath keptback: andburied ome 
of chem affirmed the fe¢onde their oathes,and in 
ner ail that the reft then depoled, as 1s made manireit by my :anlwere 
to the 8.chaptcr of the 3.bo0ke. fo that the 
by,only the Dift ismade fintuil,. Stig 
Concetninge def ofitions pablihed ithe worlde vnder:.nby 
Pane, titis is mult Khowe? thachowfocuer forsne iabitinge of 
thein théy'be mine} yetmany ofthedy as: they be! produced) by: rhe 
Die.’ are nor mine fome he hath fathered vpon me,{hauing depoled 4 
ny (uch thinge; nor yet newer beité examined thereof:others. he what doubefully 


corrupted, fomtinres'adging, ‘fomtines or keeping -backthak wordes 
politrons on'the the litte with: fet hi 
owne dé on ‘the other fyde, he rhaketts the did. 
world of periuric'whetenontis. Now this periary heameanend tol rer wherhe plea 


me :for Tami but on¢,and the Dif. produ ordinarily: 3.064. mod 


or nore dépofitig che’conitrary ¢ hor diuersto bebeleued be cainiy: & where. 

foré ohe?l anfwer,,tiot ala in PaulAdanas edchere ton 

the’ wath the Elders and and knowmnoe hdwe times 

many lewes befides before theiudgmene feate,andwoitld 

no doubt haue¢ depofed, thathe was a eftslent fellow, and 4 maucr of fe 
oner aifiemed:8c yet the truch 


were not)in this our prefent cafe. And here itisnotto. be:for 


miflion after, his inter gatories being framed-according tothe things 
I had formerlie depofed: there endewoured by threats andother 
wife to drawe many of thole whieh cathe befote: itv arrd hisfellowe 
commiffionersté depofe'the contrary to thar formerlydepolt 


‘ 
= 
gs. 
| 
le 
lek: 
Me 
we 
= 
| 
‘ 
yx 
: 
>. 
¢ 
> 
hs 
4 
4 . 


came from charitie as the Difcoucrer pretédeth,or from n sce which 
he deniethsas it belongeth to god the fearcher of the hartes to inudge, 
ivis no hard thinge for man to conieéture.For as out of theabun-_ 
dance ofehehart the mouth (peak 


% 


| 


A DET EETION: OF S. HARSNETS 


‘{ooth)fo Notorious a periured perfon)to the great preife (alas)of 
foules and trouble of theire the niokt of themnog 
much depofinge willingly that which they knew'to be true,as what 


the their willes would haue them to depofe, perfwad. 
true, faying, I truft, Darrell bimfeife bath confeffed 3 st ypon bie 
oath crc. when had depoted otherwife, and that the lame ware falfe, 


my-felfe doe afluredly knowe, and am able and offer tomaké di- 


ce& profe theirof by fome of there depofitions,and of many of them 
could by the: (power of reafon. thew fame, and would bt for bre 


witie fake. 
| Phe ve; thet the reader thal! reape fome profit by his. 
beread st with no greater malice then st was written, 


he profiz tin ftead woe ng God for the greate workes he 


hidbromet right and holy vie o his works wher 


report of the fame:and to iuftifie the wicked,and condetmne 
the righteous, which 1 is an abomination before the Lord. And looke 
whatrewardis due to:him that fendeth forth fuch curfed fruite, that 


the expecte and in iuftice.is to recetue‘at the handes 
oftheichriftian agiftrate, for all the p he hath taken. For 


ith not nature. verb: vs that the labourer is worthy ofhis 
dreafgn this, that the hire or reward fhould be proportiona- 
thedabour or paynes man. taketh’ VVhether this corrupt and 


uffes and whether, Difcouery derected now 
fhamfull, and lying treatife, 


eth,fo the hand writeth. 


Blombeit peraduenture,. when he hath better conft 


sreatife, be wil not be fo peremtovie: Otherwif> he bath beve. 


chthe | 
¢8.doth he challeng me after his {coff 


Asin thefe wordes; the very valia antly chal 


manner, t at L per adventyre be better, prouided hereafter: ‘and 


a it. were convenict allo I farrnifbed my with fome profs. 
_ This chalenge confideted there i is {male caufe why any fhould be of- 
fended with me for anfwering 


the producing the beft 
profes Lhaue, for the prouinge that William Somexs, the 7.in Lanca- 
{bire,Thomas Davling;and Katherine Wright were ‘indecd with de 


of at large wehaue heard Pitcher, to receiue an evill name & falfe 
and vile 


ideved the contentes 


4 
a- 
a 
| 
| 
; 
es 
2% 
e 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
] 
| 
* 
2 


_ in] have delinered thetruth,as I truft it is manifeft by this and my o 
ther treatife, me thinketh no chriftian thould be ifpleafed therwithy. 


principall witnes of thefe workes,and called aifo to fuffer for them: If 
S.H,had publithed-a flaunderous and teprochfull booke.again{t me, 


take which barneth with five and br imfton which ts the fecond death. 
“Fhefcope and drift ofall that hath bene faide concerninge bot 


LYING DISCOVERY. 


itbeforbarhere 


4 


ly affirmed by the Difcowercr, 8 fome others, And if 


but rather retoyce in this publifhing & manifeftation of theie workes 
of god,and remouing of the blocke that lyeth im the way,hindering. 
the Lordes people from magnifiyng of him for them,and profitinge 
by them.Can the child of God be offended with that which tendeth. 
wo thepravieand glorie of God bis father? or the louer of the truth, 
with the contendinge tor the truth, and conviction of the falfhood? 
Haue I committed. any thinge herein but that which in dewtie I did 
owe vnto God,and could not without {inne haue Jeft vaperformed? 
The Prophet Ieremiah complayneth that the people in his time bad ler-9.5. 
no comrage for the truth. Had-not I bene guiltie of this finne, and bad | 
net this — reached it felfe to-me, it bafe and vile man publiklye 
defacing the truth and-workes of God, fhould not as pubiikly haue 
maintayned the fame,and fhewed fome courage for the truth, beinge a 


‘meerly concerning my owne perfon,andnot againit the or 2 
this hisDs{couery concerning my teaching to counterfeit is,1 could bau 
bene contented: in filence to haue pafled by it: and yet a good name 


is a pretious thinge, aboue filucr and sould, and {uch as one would be 


and bringe 


-H. and to sufisfie the works 


¥ 


20 lofe; or fuffer to be taken.from him: butto fee S..H.flaunder 
vp an euil] name of the workesof God,,and{preadthe 
farr and neare:and for feare of defire of libertie, 
or other carnall re{fpect not to gayniay S 
_ of God again{t him'‘andell gainfayers,was a poynt of preat cowardli- 


nes, and:ll:befeeminge the: fouldier of lefus Chrift: and indeedto 


< 
th. 


the caufe and my felfeis,that the mouthes of allmenbeing ftopped, 
and the worke of God beinge <cknowledged: The Lord may haue eS 


- bis plovieand prayfe, and man receiue his profite theirby. Secondly, 
-thatminecowne innocency 
noronly(being reftored to our minifterie and peop! 
tie forourbodyes,but alfo for our toneues:& they which have cauf- 


and fellow prifonners appearinge, we may 


vs, beinge minifters to the congregations we belonge, andrayled vp 
this vikeflaunder ofthe great and rere worke of Ged pad fince {x eat 


feare man,moreshen God.Such fearful ones [hal bane choy 


ed to vphold and maintaine it heinge on foot, and theirin fought a- — 
‘getnlt God and his glorie,and the good of his le may be inquir- 


>, 
La 4 
: 
A hse 
te 
= 4 
FA 
<= 
> 
3 
+ 
| 
Wee. 
4, 
10.22,2. 
| 
£ 
ye 
pe 
- 
- 
P.».. 
as 
a: 
— 
aby. 
c 
= 
4 
ig 
‘ 
b 
. 
x 
A 
toe 


- 1.Sam,2.30. 


Oe 
inquired after: and being found out dele with as the entmies of God! " 


atid his church, and -receiue-theire recompence of rewarde, The’ 
goodnes of the cauile, the intoilerabie :niurie dune to-vs the feruants: 
and umbailadors of the.Lord ot noites, cry aloud and fhirll varo 
the lonnes of men, 1 meane the honorable and in higa place and au- 
shoritie,tor a ipeacie execution theirot, ihe lawes aito of our 
aad tae aachoritie which trom her moit exctlient Maicitie is deriu<, 
ed toiuch,cail fornoleile, Quretrutt theirtore. and moit humble 
pitcation ro: our mortail Gods is: that they would tender the cauie 
of the immortaii God. Yea be now zealous it euer, ye Princes 3¢ Lud 

ges of the earch,and tutfernor'Gods caule to be thas duthonored 


groden vnder the teete of mene nember and forget not this faying 


Mary Cooper 


excepted. 


ofthe Lord that honor mel will & they that 
pife me be-d2/pifed > It them you our-nodles' aad honorabie 


_ fonags deiire to be right honorable indeed, be you carefuilto nonor 


the Lord,in takinge mayataining this cauie 3¢ worke of his. 
And thus hauinge ended my ipeacn co man, 1 convert my {peach 
tothee Lord;wao aone and beit kaowelt ali caings, and inco thy ba 

fomeasmy beit' yea my onely ‘belowed make iny mone, aad poure 


Otit;my complaint day and night. It Lbe gautie of that which 1s layd 


to my charge-if Lnaue contederated with Darling, Kacherine, 
Wreebt,or Cooper: [Feuer eyeof them to my knowledge 
of chem before'they were puileifed,as I conceiue of tieit caie: 
thenilet me not onely'be madera tauzhing ttocke,and by-word vnto, 
alf ‘Men, as of laré L hate bene yaro manye, and this of mine 
regiltred to my perpetitall infante: bur raie chou Lord my na.ne ale 
fo out of the booke of life, aad giue me my portioa with hipocrites, 
Bur if tbe otherwiie and according to that haue fayd,thenlet the: 
righteduines of the iult deliver him, accordinge to thy promis. Arie: 


Lord;mayntaine thy caufe,cleare the worke thou hafte done 


‘people éompatle thee about: fakes therfore andthat 
ghaayand taule the'Magiltrates to rebuke thefounes 


_ by thy owne finger. A wake alfo and ttaad vp I befeech thee for my 


defence. Thou hatte called me ,oucatd (ete: meon this worke, and 
grattoully dire:ted and affifted me theirin: thou Hat opened the eye 
of my vnderftanding to {ee into this trath,and haft not forfaken me: 
‘pod along fi T praye thee with me my: Lordand God, and neuer 
Jeaue thé parfuité of thy owneWorke,and defence of vs thy teruants 
votillthe crath’ herein be manifett. So fhall the congregation of the 


ghettioye and thankigiuinng may abound,rebuke thou 


‘ a 


= 
& 
as 
* 
; 
* 
4 
2 
> 
“ad 
i 
> 
4 


_ How thole that toke vpon them to caft out deuils, do get 
of their deaifes to couer their t.pag.61. 


Tie he of fuch perfons'as dre to haue betie 
ae occalion why Darrels dealinge with Somers was ime 
queftionat Lambeth.Chap. =. 3, 


iiow M. Darrels treiades haue fete out the pretetided difpole 
of V Villiam Somers Chap. 3. - 


How Barrell is made a fitter inftrument to caft out 
eifed, 


34. 
Of M Darrels knowledgexvho fent the desillinto the 


many other.Chap.4. ~ 
M.,Darreil knew V Villiam Somers and the refk tobep 
C 


ref{t. Chap, 6. 


Of the'caulés  pretended,why men are poffefled.Chap.7. pag.38._ 
Of the meanes alledged by M:Datrel and others, men are 


pag.41. 
Of the fignes whereby M. Darrell and others, doe difcerne(as they 
fay) when SathanisexpelledChap.9. 
Ot M. Darrell 8& M. Mores conceite,that Sathanibeinge ca 
-one,doth prefently, after feeke to repofleile him. Chap. §7- 


The Contences of the Second Broke Anfweared. 


Of Darrels intercourfe with Somers by artesat Alhby, froma. 


yeare.t 592. vnuill 1 597. for ig ction, how to 
{émble hinifelfe to be poffeifed.Chap.t. pag.66 


_OfM.Darrels privat diteCtions to Somers,whilel he wasat Notcin 


gham with him, how he fhauld from time to time behaue himfelfe 
“in his counterfeiting. Chap. “pag 92. 


M. Darrels inftructing « of fecking to others in 


8, thofe thitiges which he meant Kus he fhould practife from the 
Nouem. when he came vato-him, vatil the eauenth of the 


the day of his pretended difpoffeifion. Cha. 3 3<Pag 


Of M. Daitels cuning inftructing of Somers, dy fp to others 
in his hearing of Sathans feeking to repoffeife hone and of the ate. 


ing of certaine.trickes vader couerlet, feauenth of - 


-uember,vntill about the xxi.of the fame.Chap “pag 98. 


Of 21. Darrels canning inftru ting of to.others 
in his hearing (uch shinges, as he ment he fhould practile inthe de=-: 


testing of witches, from about the xxi.of Nouember, yntil about 


the vit.of December.Chap. 5. 


Of MM, Darrelscourfe, fr the vii. of Decem. yntil the 


of whileft So, refuted ro diffemble ary loger C.6 


4 
4 7 
- 
a4 
—— 
* 
* 
~ 
+ 
4 
* 
r 
- 
= 
- 
7 <4 
a ee 
<3 * 
\ 
d 
<7 
i = 
4 
* 
» 
* 
me, 1 
4 a 
4 ty 
Be 
4 
at 
sil 
a * 
Yet 
‘ 
e 


certaine fits, wherin he continued at times, tii about the xxilié, of Fe 
bow 21, Dar. preteded that he was repoflefled C.7.p.1 
2 contentes of the Third Bocke, »  Aufwear' 
How Somers confefled his-diffirnu/aticn ar Tohns in | 
fooreas hewas cur of N. Darrels.difpofiticn Chap.1. 120, 

| How .Dartell dealt with Somers.for the reuocation of his {aid 


feffion, that he had diflersbled.Chap.z. . pag.123, 
How M. Darrell deuifed two cr three fhifts to kaue avoiced Somers 
confeffion thathehaddiflembled Chap.3. pag.124 


How M. Darrell & his frends to difcredit Somers cenfeflion did fal 

flyre rt, that he was induced theirvnto by promifles, threatings, 
& inchantments Chap.4. pag 126, 

OfM. Dartels ridiculous pretence, that Somers was inducec by the 
deuill in forme of a blacke dogge & an Affe, to fay he had diflembe 
Chap: 5 pag 130. 

How. M. Darrell hath falfly affirmed, that VV, Somers was induced 
to fay he had diflembled,for feare of han Bing: wheras he falling in- 
to his fits before the at lottingham, (vpon afore 
“ner compatt) the feate ofhanginge was one of the cheifeft can{es, 
ehathe then affirmed,that he had Chas 6.pagi2zi. 


Sometswas perfwaded by threatninges, and promiffes to 
continued his he 


the commifli- 
onergat vorill M Darrell againe difpoffefie 
him Chap.7. pagi4qi. 

Ofthe depofitions taken in Darrel behalfe.at Nott.& bow 


on theree xamination of his owne witneffes, it falleth out: thatthe — 
bodily ations of Somers in his fits, were not extrorcinary,as. they | 
bene mifteported Chap.8. Pg 
The Contentes of the Fourth Boake Anh weared, 
Darrell laboured from time to to make thofe thinges 
thar Somers did, (and were but very toy yes) to be thought, both 
— ‘fkrang and extraordinarie Chap.r pag 
24Darrel would not luffer,(as néare as he could)any todeale 
‘with Somers in his figs,to try whether he were fencles or diflembled 
‘Chap pag 160 
‘How M Darrel to when ke was taken 
floret, and did fuch toyesas did argue: him fufficiently to be but 
counterfeit Chap.3: pag 160:. 
contrary Darrels affertion, Somershad his fences and¥n 
derftanding in his fits Chap.4: pap 162. 
motions and which were heard and {cere about 4 
Somers i in his that they were dene and made 
Were 


f 


k 
> 
= 
> 
| 
| 
| 
| 


How Somers aafting hin-felfe into the fire: was 
extraoid-nary mattet.as Darrelihath pretended Ca, 6.papié2. 
‘Ci Somers pretended ftreneth & weight inhis fits, that contraty to 
Darrels ana his trendes reports, their was nothing extraordinary 

Somers knowledge in his fits was not extraordinary,asM Pastel Be 


pes 


his frends haue faifly pretended.neik€r could be cake Greekhe, he 
brw or Latine, otherwile then he had learned Chap.8: pag165, 


T heir was no impoffibilitie m Somers fits,as M Darrell & his 
baue faifly pretended Chap.9. | pag 166; 
‘How contrary toM WDarrels & his frends aflertions, w. Somers w as 
accounted by many in Nott, for a diflembler,from the time thathe — 

begane hig prattifes their,vneil he confefled the fame himfeife Ca.t 
The contentes of the Fift Booke Anfweared. 
How M Darrel credite touching his dealinge with the boy of Bur- 
a falfe & toohfh booke that was pvblithed of 


. ton, doth relie vpon 


+ the faidboyes pretended pofleflion 8 difpoffion Chap 1. pag 171, 
OfM Darrels raftnes in affirming Themas Darling to 


_& of hiscunning inftrugtig him, him how to behauehimieltevpon _ 


concerning the bo fh 
__him,that he fhould neuer confeffe his diflimulatign Ca4:pag 17.5: 
Darling confeflechhisowne difimulation:Chap.s. pag 179. 
Abreife of K. Wrights confeffion, touching the beginnmg of her diffi 


the day of his 


Jarrels practifes with Darling to pretend that Sathan 
{cught to reenter into him, 8 of fome otlrer his yntrue aflertions, 
es fites, and of his ant dealing likwife with 


mulation, & of the reafons that moued her [0 to dee Ca G.pag 
Of M.Darrels procedingés with Katherine right, fot her pretend~ 


and 
4 + % 
4 


ed difpofleffion.Chap.7. peg.1 87. 


Barrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper,th 


| pas. 39s. 
| Faultes efcaped 
pag 8. fheaches for fpeaches,p,14 high comiflieners for cOmiffioners, pa. 19 to be for 


tobep.2c.fnbfcyibe for fabferibeb. which know for with] knowe p.2 for 


denum ib.did etc, by for was:by,p,26 aud then for as then,p.36-chafien forhaftern.45 


but che for but this the,p 47.is it for its p. §4,deftendant for difcedant, , us niore 


for as we!l more p 77 yeare‘o9. foryeare 98, p 95. vndoubtedly for 97. 
done at has handes for dene & ex; at his handes not yneil for bad yneil, 
p 128 indced forinduced,p. 142,had dose for had not done, p. 1 4 3: Sherwoed furTho- 


rold P.146.could move,for cculd make nore p. 148, edfer:ch ed, p 


167.6 tor & may-p-164 vea 


fay,for bne trifle & Jay ib of mans fc) of this i 
d faif'y. ito Le they haus fo denoted 


wee for yet wi p. 167, depoiedindesd for depotes 


> 

‘ 


ag 164. 


ded cifpoffion Chap,2; pag 173. 


- 


not as! atrel. hath repostec,extraorcinary of 


3 
- 


f 


a 
« *&, "Recs 
¥ 
‘ 
é ad ~~ 
- » 
* 
? 
) 
ar 
‘an 
o 
KAP 
7 
ll 
~ 
4 
>. 
a 
% 
4 
. 
~ 
= 
> 
> 
‘ 


me 


Blow the: of f fe againe to othe 


eertaine fits, wherin he continued at times, til about the xxiii, ofFe 


buaric,& how Dar. preteded thar he was repoflefled C. 7 I 


The contentes of the Third Bac ke, weared, 


-as foore as hewas cur of Darrels.difpofiicn Chap. 2g 120. 


How Darrell dealt with Somers.for the reuocation of his {aid 


feffion,thathehad diflembled.Chap.z. . pag.123. 
How M. Darrell deuifed two cr three fhitst to avoiced Somers 
confeflion thathehaddiflembled Chap.3. pag.124 
‘How M.Darrell & his frends to difcredit Somers cenfeflion did fa 


How Somers confefled his diffinulaticn ar Iohns in Nottingham, 


report, that he was induced theirvnto by promiffes, threatings, 


&/inchantments Chap.4. pag 126, 
OfM. Darrels ridiculous pretence, that Somers was inducec by the 


deuill in forme ofa blacke dogge & an Affe, to fay he had diffemb-. 
Chap: 5 


How M.Dartell hath affirmed, that Somers 


to fay he had diflembled, for feare of hanging: wheras be falling in- 
to his fits before the Commiffioners at Ronin 


“mer compaét) the feate ofhanginge was oneo 


the cheifeft canfes, 


130. 


tingham, ( vpen afore 


that he then affirmed,that he had not diflembled Chap.6,pag 131. 


Hot by threatninges, tomifles to have 
continued his diffimulation, after he had re the commifli- 


t N Darrell difpofflefle 
varill M Darre might agane pofl 


Ofthe di taken in M Darrels behalfe.at Nott. & bow ¥ 
on Sires xamination of his owne witneffes, it falleth out: thatt 


The of the Fourth Booke _Anfweared, 
How 91 Darrell laboured from time ro rime, to make thofe thin 


BY 


‘ftrange and Chap. peg 160 


ae 160 
M Darrel indeuowred to exalt AV ke. raken 
floet, and did fuch toyes as did argue him fufficiently to be but a+ 
counterfeit Chap. 3: pag 


_ contrary Darrels alfertion, Somers had his fences andvn 


derftanding in his fits Chap.4: pap 162. 
Ofthe motions and which were heard and feene about 
in his that they were dene and made by hin, felfe, 


inges 
‘that Somers did, (and were but very toyes) t to be thought bath 


re. 
« 


pagi4!. 


bodily aftions of Somers in his firs, were not extrorcin 2a. they gg 
‘Daue bene mifteported Chap,.8. 143. 


How Darrel! would not (as néareas he could)any todeale 
bi Somers in his figs,to try whether he were fencles or diflembled 


é 
. 
awe 
4 
t 4 
> 
> 
4 = 
\ 
ine 
fe 
=. 
» 
a 
4 
be 
t 
‘ 
a. 
J 
ate 
“ 
= 
RE 
4 e 
a 
i ; 


nay 


were not as‘: M Darrell hath reported, exttacrcinary of 


How Somers aafting hin-felfe into the fire: wasveltntane. smc 
extraoid nary matiet.as Ai Darrelihath pretended Ca, 

‘Ci Somers pretended ftrength & eight in bis fits, that contrat, to » 


Darrels ana his trendes reports,their was nothing extraordinary 
in them Chap,7: 
. Somers knowledge in his fies was not extraordinary,asM Darncil8e a 


his frends haue falfly pretended.neit€r could be ‘pcake Greehe, he 
brw or Latine, otherwife then he had learned Chap.8: pag 165. 
T heir was no impoeffibilitie Somers fits,as M Darrell & his hends 
baue faifly pretended Chap.9. 166: 
‘How contrary toM WDarrels & his frends aflertions, w. Somers w as _ 
accounted by many in Nott. for a diflembier,from the time thathe— 
begane hig practifes their,vntil he confefled the fame himfcife Ca.t0 


The contentes of the Fift Booke Anfweared. | 
~ How M Darrel. credite touching his dealinge with theboy of Bur- 
. ton, doth relie vpon a falfe & toolfh booke that was pybihed of » 

- + the faid boyes pretended pofleffion & difpoflion Chap 1. pag 171, 

Dasrels raft-nes in affirming Thomas Darling tobe pofiefled, 
of hiscunning him, him how to behauehimieltevpon 

her 


_ the day ofhis pretended cifpofiton Chap,2; pagi73. 
_ OfM Darrels further praétifes with Darling to pretend that sathan 
fought to reenter into him, & of fome otlrer his yntrue affertions, 
concerning the boyes fites, and of his ikwifewith 
__him,that he fhould neuer confeffe his diflimulaticn Ca4:pag 1753 
Darling confeflecbhisowne difimulation:Chap.s. ._pag179, 
Abreife of K. Wrights confeflion,téuching the beginnmg otherdifli - 
mulation, & of the reafons that moued her {0 to doe Ca 6. pap 5, 
 OfM.Darrels procedingés with Katherine #tight,fot her pretend- 
Barrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper, the fifter of Vaili- 


pag 8.fbeaches for fpeaches,p,14 comiffioners for cGmiflioners, pa. 19 to be for 2, 
bep.2c.fnbfcyibe for fubferibeab.which for with1 knowe for | 
denum ib.did etc, by for was:by,p,26 aud then for as then,p-36-chafien for hafterin..4 5 
but che for but this the,p 47.is it for itus p. §4,defeendant fordifcedant, p.7- , us 
as we!l more p 77 yeare foryeare 98, p 95. vndoubtedly for 97. 
done at his handes for dene & ex; at his handes not vntil for rts), 
p 428 indced forinduced,p. 14 2,had dese for had not done, p. 3 4 3: Sherwoed furTho- 
rold P.146,could more,fer could make more p. 148, edfer:ch ed, p tme 
fay,for bne trifle & Say ib of mans fcr of this o 6:.& nary fer & 


wee for yet we,p. 167, depotedindesd for depofe faify. iifo Le they haus fo deroicd 


> 
. 
\ 
§ 
7 
4 
4 
: 
~ 
¥ 
20 
¥ 
| 


hes 


ri 
“> 


‘ 
, de +3 
4 
+ 


& 


4 


j ‘ 4 
. 
~ 
- 
> 
% 
> 
= 
. 
rey 
: 
aq 
~ 
. 
- 
Bee 
’ 
wie 
A 
. 
= 
4 
. 
: 
‘ 
2 
“4 
% 
» 


4 


- > - 
> 
~4 


<<. 


Va 
4 
; 
4 
‘ 
~ 


— 
a 
‘ 
~ ~ ff 4 
é 
¥ 
&, 
a 
: 
a 
i 
‘ 
‘i. 
o % 


~ >, ‘ , . 


$ 
A, 
> 
. 
Wg 
a 
\ 
= 


> 
\ 
2 
} 
‘ 
a 
. 
a? 
~ 
i 
‘ 


baad 
> 


| 3 
>. 
4 
‘ 
« — ~ 
j 

‘ 

- 

~ a 
¢ 

¥ 

. ‘ . Be 

« - N 

ry 

‘ 


} 
i ‘ y 
4 
‘ 


~ 
e 
~ yf 
. 
) 
q 
+ 
ry &. 6 
"4 
‘ 
¥ ‘ 
‘ 
) 
‘ 4 
4 
ox 
: 
* 
‘ 
J 
- 
‘ 
; 
4 
‘ 
i 
\ 


ae 


ay 


3 


x 
af 
. 
iu 
AT ~ 5 
4 


