The Dragon in China and Japan
Marinus Willem de Visser, 1913
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of de Visser's 1913 study of the dragon in Chinese and Japanese lore — the cryptozoology canon's great dragon compendium. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/cu31924021444728). This 1913 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

a


sehen.


oe


4;


oats tye


tees


eae at


tity 4
Sets
fey


a
a


Sobel yes


rey ? : tote,
rer. 2 ay fie o8 AS SRE pe acs bap be em ges pee yar oe oe, fad nie sie.
pee , ee pe ee : : ; *. : ;
faeree
F Pact ages


SL Ral green ae Sts
ait 4 Rh!
LR Bok


ay th
ee


4
S


Es
* om


i ‘ phokrer se Ses
ee Pie hell rages Sapa a a Tm Ar : . ae)


aa ee


ale


sey
ak
ae:


Sante orton acm opm AO
So ect tee te oe ets
aed


ap


Garnell University Dibeaxt
Sthara, New York


CHARLES WILLIAM WASON


COLLECTION
CHINA AND THE CHINESE


THE GIFT OF
CHARLES WILLIAM WASON
CLASS OF 1876
1918


Digitized by Microsoft®


h Uni
830 .D7V83


Pe


This book was digitized by Microsoft Corporation in
cooperation with Cornell University Libraries, 2007.
You may use and print this copy in limited quantity
for your personal purposes, but may not distribute or
provide access fo it (or modified or partial versions of if)
for revenue-generating or other commercial purposes.


Digitized by Microsoft®


Cornell University


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


THE DRAGON
IN CHINA AND JAPAN


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


PREFACE.


The student of Chinese and Japanese religion and folklore
soon discovers the mighty influence of Indian thought upon the
Far-Eastern mind. Buddhism introduced a great number of Indian,
not especially Buddhist, conceptions and legends, clad in a Bud-
dhist garb, into the eastern countries. In China Taoism was
ready to gratefully take up these foreign elements which in
many respects resembled its own ideas or were of the same
nature. In this way the store of ancient Chinese legends was
not only largely enriched, but they were also mixed up with the
Indian fables. The same process took place in Japan, when
Buddhism, after having conquered Korea, in the sixth century
of our era reached Dai Nippon’s shores. Before a hundred years
had elapsed the Japanese mind got imbued with foreign ideas,
partly Chinese, partly Indian. To the mixture of these two
elements a third one, consisting of the original Japanese concep-
tions, was added, and a very intricate complex was formed.
Whoever studies the Japanese legends has the difficult task of
analysing this complex into its parts. - ~

No mythical creature is more familiar to Far-Eastern art and
literature than the dragon. It is interesting to observe how in
Japan three different kinds of dragons, originating from India,
China and Japan, are to be found side by side. To the super-
ficial observer they all belong to one and the same class of rain
bestowing, thunder and storm arousing gods of the water, but
a careful examination teaches us that they are different from
each other.

The Indian serpent-shaped Naga was identified in China with
the four- legged Chinese dragon, because both were divine inhabi-
tants of seas and rivers, and givers~of rain. It is no wonder that
the Japanese in this blending of Chinese-and Indian ideas recog-
nized their own serpent or dragon-shaped gods of rivers and
‘mountains, to whom they used to pray for rain in times of
drought. Thus the ancient legends of three countries were com-
bined, and~features of the one were used to adorn the other.
In order to throw light upon these facts we must examine the


Digitized by Microsoft®


!


;


VI PREFACE,


Buddhist ideas concerning the Nagas which came from India to
the East. Being not acquainted with the Sanscrit language, we
have to refer to the works of European scholars and to trans-
lations, in order to explain the western elements found in Chinese
and Japanese dragon legends. This being our only aim with
regard to the Nagas, we will deal with een only by way of

introduction. pcan rari 7


———In-the First Book we have systematically arranged the most


interesting quotations concerning the dragon in China, selected
from the enormous number of passages on this divine animal
found in Chinese literature from the remotest ages down to
modern times. In order to give the original conceptions we did
not quote the numerous poems on the dragon, because the latter,
although based upon those conceptions, enlarged them in their
own poetical way. The Second Book treats of the dragon in
Japan, considered in the light of the facts given by the Introduc-
tion and Book I.

I avail myself of this opportunity to express my hearty thanks
to Professor Ds Groot, whose kind assistance enabled me to
largely extend the Chinese part of this paper. Not only was his
very rich and interesting library at my disposal, but he himself
was an invaluable guide to me through the labyrinth of many
a difficult Chinese passage. Moreover, from the very beginning
his splendid works, especially the Religious System of China,
formed the basis of my studies in Chinese and Japanese religion
and folklore.

I also tender my best thanks to Professor Speyer, who with
great kindness gave me most valuable information concerning
the Nagas, and to Miss E. Scumipr, who kindly put her know-
ledge and time at my disposal in undertaking the weary labour
of perusing the manuscript and correcting its language.


Leiden. M. W. ve Visser.


Digitized by Microsoft®


chp con con war
ee


COP GP COP? COR cor
oe, © DOR


$1.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.


THE NAGA IN BUDDHISM, WITH REGARD TO HIS:
IDENTIFICATION WITH THE CHINESE DRAGON.


The Naga according to European scholars

The Naga according to some translated texts .
The Naga as a giver of rain.

Sttras recited in rain ceremonies


BOOK I.


THE DRAGON IN CHINA.


CHAPTER I.
THE DRAGON IN THE CHINESE CLASSICS.


. Yih king .
. Shu king .
« dt Bhs

. Cheu li

_ rh.


CHAPTER It.


DIVINATION AND GEOMANCY.


Lucky omens


Digitized by Microsoft®


35
39
39
40
41


43


Vill


§ 2.


CONTENTS.


Bad omens . en ee er ee
A. Fighting dragons . ee. fs , . 45
B. Dead dragons . . ee ; - oe . 49
C. Dragons appearing at a (irae ® spent. a tele. se 50
D. Dragons appearing in wrong places. . a ee 54


§ 3. Dragon-horses
§ 4. Geomancy


§ 1.
§ 2.
§ 3.
§ 4.
§ 5.-
§ (6.
§ 7%.
§ 8.
§ 9.
oe
§ 1


i.
§ 13.


§ 15.


§ 15.
§ 16.
§ 17.


§ 18.


CHAPTER III.
GENERAL INFORMATION.


Enormous light-giving mountain gods.

Nature of the dragons.

What dragons like and dislike - :

Shape of the dragons

Male and female dragons .

Different kinds “ oc .

Kiao lung (BE

Rearing and see dragons .

Dragons ridden by sien, or drawing these cars ‘of pads a holy 10 men.

Dragon-boats . .

. “Dragon-tail-road” and other words contented ith the deacon.

Dragon-gate

Dragon’s dens.

Dragon herds .

Dragon’s pearls

Dragon’s eggs. ‘

Dragon’s bones, skins, ‘tooth, anne, peeing, fiverds ‘placantas
and foetus, used as medicines

Dragon’s blood, fat and saliva .


CHAPTER IY.
ORNAMENTS.


Symbols of Imperial dignity and fertilizing rain, represented
on garments, honorary gates, coffins etc. .


. Nine different kinds of dragons, used as ornaments
. Ornaments used by Wu-ist priests and mediums
. The dragons and the ball .


CHAPTER V.


CAUSING RAIN, THUNDER AND STORM.


. The gods of thunder, clouds and rain . ‘
. Violent rains accompanied by heavy winds and fhunderstorms,
. Rain magic and prayers.


Digitized by Microsoft®


Page
45


56
59


62
63.
67
70
vi


72


76
82
83
83
85
86
87
87
88
88


90
96


99
101
102
103


1b9


111
113


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VI.


EMPERORS CONNECTED WITH DRAGONS.


Hwang Ti rode on a dragon . if

Yao and Kao ‘'T'su were sons of dragons .

Shun was visited by a yellow dragon .

Yti drove in a carriage drawn by dragons, and was ssinted
by a ying lung . , ‘

Ming Hwang’s vessel was moved forward by a dragon

Two yellow dragons threatened to upset Yii’s vessel. .

Shi Hwang died on account of having killed a dragon .


ae ie aes


iminip mupcmnca
roe


CHAPTER VII.
TRANSFORMATIONS.


The dragon’s transformations are unlimited .
Appearing as old men or -beautiful women
Appearing as fishes ‘
Appearing as snakes, dogs or rats :

A cow transformed into a dragon
Appearing as objects. . . . .


Dr CG? Gr CO LP COP
OR we bp


CHAPTER VIII.
THE INDIAN NAGA IN CHINA.


Reborn as a dragon .

Ponds inhabited by Dragon- tne
Temples of Dragon-kings
Palaces of Dragon-kings.


hr cop UP cor
ee Oe


BOOK Il.
THE DRAGON IN JAPAN.


CHAPTER I.


IX


Page


122
123
123


123
124
124
124


126
126
127
129
129
130


THE ORIGINAL JAPANESE DRAGON-GODS OF RIVERS, SEAS AND MOUNTAINS.


§ 1. Okami.
§ 2. Yamatsumi and ‘Milan.
§ 3. Watatsumi


Digitized by Microsoft®


135
136
137


Gr LP SP


COP CO? La SR SR LR Gar Lh Lr wan


CO? Lr Sa


COP. CP wr GP cor cor


a ate ae


THE CHINESE DRAGON AND THE DRAGON-HORSE AS OMENS IN JAPAN.


ok bo ps


SHON ATA WN


. The eight Dragon-kings
. A Buddhist dragon’s suicide .
. Conclusions . eit


CONTENTS.


Mizuchi, the rivergods


Oho-watatsumi, the sea-god .

Want .

The jewels of vod ani ‘elit ,

Take-iwa Tatsu no Mikoto, the acy god af a ‘quured pond
in Higo province Gaze . eS Sm


. An Emperor's dragon-tail


CHAPTER II.


Flying dragon as the horse of a ghost or a sien


Dragon-horses


Carriage of a ghost ae fhvong ihe 3 air ‘= sight dnawons,
A dragon appears as a good omen . by a sie tae og


CHAPTER III.


CAUSING RAIN.


Shinto gods

Horses offered to Shinto gods

Buddhism wins field.

The Sacred Spring Park . ;

The “Dragon-hole” on Mount Murobu

Reborn as a rain-giving dragon. :

Buddhist priests dominating the oo

Dragon-women in ponds F :

Stirring up the dragons by iheowing's iron or ° filth into thet ponds.

A dragon engraved on an incense pot believed to cause rain.
Pine trees cause clouds to rise and rain to fall


CHAPTER IV.
THE INDIAN NAGA IN JAPAN.


The Dragon-kings revere Buddha’s Law. é

Dragons appear at the dedication of Buddhist temples ‘

Dragons living in ponds or lakes, Seer near Buddhist shrines.

Reborn as dragons . : oy

Dragon-kings of the sea ohedle the course of reals in Ponte
to obtain special Buddhist treasures as offerings .

The “jewel which grants all desires” (cintamani).


Digitized by Microsoft®


Page
137
139
139
142


143
145


146
147
150
150.


152
156
158
159
168
170
171
172
174


175
176
177
177


179
180
181
184


187
189


CONTENTS.
§ 8. The Dragon-gods of the inner and outer seas .
§ 9. Dragon-palaces
§ 10. Dragons connected with Buddhist snieoie:
§ 11. Hight dragons ridden through the sky by a Buddhist deity
§ 12. Curses wrought by dragons swe
§ 13. Relics of dragons preserved in Buddhist temples ‘
§ 14. The “Dragon-flower-meeting”


CHAPTER VY.


XI
Page
190
191
193
194
194
195
196


CHINESE AND INDIAN DRAGONS IDENTIFIED OR CONNECTED WITH ANCIENT


JAPANESE DEITIES.


§ 1. Sagara the Dragon-king, the Yamato no orochi, Antoku Tenno
and the Kusanagi sword. ‘

§ 2. The Thunder-god caught by Salata. and ‘identified with a
Dragon-king .

§ 3. Watatsumi no kami, the. Sen: “ol, sdentitied saith a Dragon: king.

§ 4. The dragon-hole in the Gion shrine. :

§ 5. The dragon-snake offered by the Sea-god to ‘the Bile dustns ‘

§ 6. A dragon-snake as a tree-sprite on Koya san Gea a

§ 7. The “Heavenly Dragon’s Well” at the Suwa shrine .

§ 8. Kurikara Myo-0, the dragon-shaped mountain-god .


CHAPTER VI.
THE DRAGON-LANTERN.


Dengyo Daishi’s image of Yakushi Nyorai .

Kobo Daishi’s spirit. dy ee oak

Jigen Daishi’s spirit.

“Dragon-lantern pine trees” : .

Tide-stones connected with davon eae :

The Mountain-light and the Dragon-lantern of Gammelkaman
in Etchti province. . . ,

Kwannon’s dragon-lantern at “‘Ryttkofi. F .

Tomyo-dake, Kumano Gongen at Nogami, Kwanyail ae Waite
kura and Zenkwoji at Nagano

The light of Yotsukura :

The lights of Ushijima, [shidozen and Kurihara ;

Ignes fatui in general. The dragon-lantern is the aly one
which arises from the sea and flies to the mountains


POE Co Bo


LR Cor won DN Tn LP LR Sh Gh Sp war
aon


mS HY
moe


CHAPTER VII.
THE CHINESE DRAGON’S EGGS IN JAPAN.


§ 1. The dragon-fetus remains in the egg for three thousand years,
§ 2. Dragons born from beautiful stones picked up in the mountains.
§ 3. Thunderstones


Digitized by Microsoft®


197


199
201
202
202
202
203
204


205
206
207
207
209


210
210


211
211
212


213


215
216
219


XII CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VIII.


THE TATSUMAKI (jE 4), OR “DRAGON’S ROLL”.


§ 1. Dragons which ascended to heaven .
§ 2. Tatsumaki in Yedo .
§ 3. Tatsumaki on the sea . : hoe.
§ 4. Snakes rise as dragons up to ihe dlonda gt IS. Wak Ga,
CHAPTER IX,
JAPANESE, CHINESE AND INDIAN DRAGONS IN GEOGRAPHICAL,
TEMPLE AND PRIEST NAMES,
§ 1. The Japanese dragon (fatsu) . . . .
§ 2. The Chinese and Indian dragons Cy or ry)
A. Names of mountains ; :
~ B. Names of springs, waterfalls oe rivers .
C. Names of islands, valleys and places
D. Names of Buddhist temples..
KE. Names of Buddhist priests .
CHAPTER X.
CONCLUSIONS .


Digitized by Microsoft®


Page
220
221
222
224


225
227
227
228
228
229
230


231


INTRODUCTION,


THE NAGA IN BUDDHISM, WITH REGARD TO HIS IDENTIFICATION WITH
THE CHINESE DRAGON.


§ 1. The Naga according to European scholars.


In order to learn the Buddhist conceptions on the Naga’s nature,
and the reasons why the Chinese identified this serpent with
their four-legged dragon, we have to consult the works of some
authorities on Buddhism: Kern, Harpy, Grttnwepet and others.
For the Naga, known in the Far East, is clad in a Buddhist garb,
and the legends about him which became popular in China and
Japan were all imbued with Buddhism. Kerry, in his Mistory of
Indian Buddhism?, states that the Nagas occupy the eighth rank
in the system of the world, after the Buddhas, Pratyekabuddhas,
Arhats, Devas, Brahmas, Gandharvas and Garudas, and before
the Yakshas, Kumbhandas (goblins), Asuras (demons), Raksasas-
(giants), Pretas (ghosts, spectres) and the inhabitants of hell.
“They are water spirits, represented as a rule in human shapes,
with a crown of serpents on their heads”. And in his Manual
of Indian Buddhism* we read that they are “snake-like beings,
resembling clouds”. As to the enumeration of the beings, this is
different in some other texts, as we learn from a note in the
same Manual?. In the initial phrase of all the Avadanas
Buddha is said to be worshipped by men, Devas, Nagas,
Yakshas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas‘*. These are,
however, not exactly the “Eight classes” often mentioned in Chi-
nese and Japanese Buddhist works. These are Devas, Nagas,
Yakshas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas °.


1 Histoire du Bouddhisme dans ?Inde, Annales du Musée Guimet, Bibl. d’études,
X et XJ, Vol. I, p. 340 (295). 2 P. 59 seq. 3 P. 60, note 1.

4 Lton Freer, Avadana-cataka, Annales du Musée Guimet XVIII, p. 2.

5 The phrase “Devas, Nagas and (the remaining of the) eight classes” ( RK bE AN
Tp) is very often found in the Chinese stitras. Epkins (Chinese Buddhism, p. 217)
says: “Beings inferior to the Devas are called collectively the ‘Eight classes”. This is
a mistake, for, as Erre, (Sanscr.-Chin. dict. s.v. Naga, p. 103) rightly explains, the

Verh, Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XIII, N° 2. 1


Digitized by Microsoft®


2


Harvy's Manual of Buddhism! gives the following details con-


____ cerning the Nagas. cade reside in the loka (world) under


See ies that support Meru, and in the waters of the
world of men. They have the shape~of the spectacle-snake, with
/ the-extended hood (coluber naga); but many actions are attri-


. / buted-to them that can only be done by- one possessing the
human form. They are demi-gods, and have many enjoyments;


|


|


_-of a formidable character”. With regard to Mount Meru Harpy


and they are usually represented as being favourable to Buddha and
his adherents; -but when their“wrath is roused, their opposition is


says: “The summit is the abode of Sekra (Qakra), the regent or
chief of the dewaloka called Tawutisa (Trayastrimg¢at) ; and around
it are four mansions, 5000 yojanas in size, inhabited by nagas,
garundas, khumbandas, and yakas”?. In describing the dewa-
lokas he says: “The palace of Virzpaksha is on the west. His


Devas also belong to the Eight classes. But according to ErrEL, the ancient Chinese


phrase speaks of “‘Nagas, Devas and (others of) the eight classes (HE K AN Fp). I
never found them enumerated in this order in the Chinese sutras, for the Devas were
always placed before the Nagas. Moreover, in the jatakas and avadanas the Devas
always precede the Nagas in the often repeated order of beings. In the “‘SUtra on the
original vow of the Bodhisattva Kshitigarbha” (Naxso’s Catalogue, nr 1003, translated
from Sanscrit into Chinese at the end of the seventh century), p. 2b, the terms


K HE pis mh. “Devas, Nagas, Demons and Spirits”, and RK BE NK Th. “Devas
Nagas, and (the remaining of) the Eight Classes’, are met side by side. I often found
the phrase Tenryt hachibu in Japanese works. This is, of course, the logical order, as
the Devas are of higher rank in the system of the world than the Nagas and there-
fore ought to be mentioned before the latter. The fact that the Devas belong to the
eight classes is stated in the Ta-Ming san-tsang fah shu, ‘Numbers (i.e. numerical
terms and phrases) of the Law of the Tripitaka, collected under the Great Ming dynasty”’


(Nanso, nr 1621), Ch. 33, p. 13 sq., s. v. A Hh: where they are enumerated as


Devas, Nagas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas.
There is, however, a second phrase, namely “Men, Devas and (the remaining of) the


Eight Classes”, XN 2 NK ie which we find in the Sutralamkara gastra (NANJO,
nr 1182, Great Japanese Trip. of Leiden, Ch. X, p. 4a and b), in two passages where the
Buddhas Cakyamuni and Maitreya are said to honour Mahakacyapa “before men, Devas
and (the remaining of) the eight classes”. Huper (Sutralamkara, nr 56, pp. 278 seq.)
translates: ‘Les huit classes des Devas’, but the Devas are not divided into eight
classes and the character XK (men) belongs, of course, to the same sentence and not to


the preceding one. Men precede Devas when the different beings are enumerated, and
the initial phrase of the Avadanas gives us their names: Men, Devas, Nagas, Yakshas,
Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas (cf. also HupeEr, |.1., pp. 462 seq.; CHAVANNEs,
Cing cents contes et apologues extraits du Tripitaka chinois (1910), Vol. III, p. 61).

If the former phrase actually is found sometimes in ancient Chinese books in the
wrong form given by Epkins, the Nagas being placed before the Devas (I think I saw
it once also in a Japanese work), this mistake must have risen from blending the for-
mer phrase with the latter, which mentions the Devas in the second place.


Digitized by Microsoft®


3


attendants are the Nagas, a kela-laksha.in number, who have
red garments, hold a sword and shield of coral, and are mounted
on red horses” '.

Grinwepet ’) states that the attributes of this Viriipaksha, one
of the four lokapalas or Guardians of the World, also called
the “Four Great Kings” (Caturmaharajas), are a caitya (a sanc-
tuary) or a jewel in the form of a caitya in the right, and a
serpent in the left hand.

Before Gautama’s attainment of Buddhahood a Naga king,
Kala by name, became aware of the approaching event by the
sound the Bodhisattva’s golden vessel produced when striking
against the vessels of the three last Buddhas in Kala’s abode.
For they all had, like Siddhartha, flung their golden bowls into
the river °.

As we shall see below, the Naga king Mucilinda, who lived
in the lake of this name, by his coils and hoods sheltered the
Lord from wind and rain for seven days. The Indian artists often
represented the Buddha sitting under Mucilinda’s extended hoods.

Not always, however, were the Naga kings so full of reverence
towards the Buddha; but in the end, of course, even the most
obstinate one was converted. Nandopananda, e.g., tried to prevent
the Lord’s return from the Tushita heaven to the earth, but: was
conquered by Maudgalyayana in the shape of a Garuda, and
was then instructed by the Buddha himself *. When the Master
had delivered a sitra in one of the heavenly paradises, the Devas
and Nagas came forward and said: “We will henceforth protect
correct doctrine” ®. After Buddha's death the Naga kings struggled
with the kings of the Devas and eight kings of India to obtain
a share in Buddha’s relics *, and got one third, and Ashoka gave
Nanda a hair of Buddha’s moustaches, while he threatened to
destroy his kingdom if he refused. Nanda erected a pagoda of
rock crystal for it on Mount Sumeru ’.

According to Northern Buddhism Nagarjuna (+ 150 A.D.), the
‘founder of the Mahayana doctrine, was instructed by Nagas in
the sea, who showed him unknown books and gave him his
most important work, the Prajia paramita, with which he returned


1 P. 24,

2 Mythologie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei, p. 181.

3 Kern, Manual, p. 19; Hist. du Bouddhisme dans l’Inde, Vol, I, p. 70 (64) (there
he is called “roi du monde souterrain”).

4 Harpy, 1.1, pp. 302 seq.

5 Epxiys, |.1., p. 39. 6 Enpxins, 1.1, p. 58.

7 Ibidem, p. 59.


Digitized by Microsoft®


4


to India. For this reason his name, originally Arjuna, was changed
into Nagarjuna ', and he is represented in art with seven Nagas
over his head *.

The Mahayana school knows a long list of Naga kings, among
whom the eight so-called “Great Naga kings” are the following:
Nanda (called Nagaraja, the “King of the Nagas”), Upananda,
Sagara, Vasuki, Takshaka, Balavin, Anavatapta and Utpala’.
These eight are often mentioned in Chinese and Japanese legends
as “the eight Dragon-kings”, /\ ##f IE, and were said to have
been among Buddha's audience, with their retinues, while he
delivered the instructions contained in the “Sitra of the Lotus
of the Good Law” (Saddharma Pundarika sitra, Hokkekyo, }
ae AK) *.

The Nagas are divided into four castes, just like men, and
form whole states. “They are”, says GrinweEpen °, “the Lords of
the Earth more than any one else, and send, when having been
insulted, drought, bad crops, diseases and pestilence among
mankind”.

With regard to the Nagas in Indian art we have an excellent
guide in Grtnwepew’s Buddhistische Kunst in Indien. After having
stated that the Vedas not yet mention them °, but that they
belong to the Indian popular belief, extended afterwards by the
official brahmanic religion, he further remarks that they often
penetrated in human shape into the Master’s neighbourhood and
even tried to be taken up among his followers, as we see on a
relief of Gandhara (p. 102, Fig. 47; the Naga’s true shape was
detected in his sleep). For this reason one of the questions put,
even to-day, to those who wish to be taken up into the Order
is: “Are you perhaps a Naga?’ There are three ways in which
the Indian Buddhist art has represented the Nagas. First: fully
human, on the head an Uraeus-like snake, coming out of the


4 Translated into Lung-shu, HE Kit: or Dragon-tree; cf. EpKINs, p. 230; EIvTEL,
1]., p. 103. We find the name Nagarjuna in the Kathasaritsagara, Ch. XLI, Tawney’s
translation, Vol. J, p. 376: a minister, ‘twho knew the use of all drugs and by making
an elixir rendered himself and king Chirayus (Long-lived) free from old-age, and long-
lived”.

2 GRiNWEDEL, 1.1, pp. 30 seqq., p. 46.

3 GRUNWEDEL, 1.1, pp. 190 seq.

4 Harpy, LL, p. 245.

5 LL, p. 187.

6 Cf. L. von Scunogver, Indiens Literatur und Cultur (1887), p. 377: “Im Rigveda
sind dieselben (die Schlangengétter) ganz unbekannt, in Yajurveda aber finden wir be-


Digitized by Microsoft®


5


neck and often provided with several heads. This form has been
taken up in Tibet, China: and Japan‘. Secondly : common ser-
pents, and thirdly: a combination of both, i.e. snakes of which
the upper part of the body looks human, snake’s heads appearing
sbove their human heads; the lower part of the body entirely
snake-like*. The first mentioned shape is to be seen in Fig. 5
(p. 29), a relief representing Nagas worshipping a small stipa
on a throne, and in Fig. 103 (p. 103), where a Garuda in the
shape of an enormous eagle is flying upwards with a Nagi (Naga
woman) in his claws, and biting the long snake which comes
out of the woman’s neck. A pillar figure of the sttpa of Bharhut
represents Cakravaka, the Naga king, standing on a rock in the
water, with five snake’s heads in his neck, while snakes are
visible in holes of the rock * Once, when Nagas appeared before
Buddha in order to listen to his words, he ordered Vajrapani to
protect them against the attacks of their enemies, the Garudas.
An Indian relief shows us these Nagas, the Naga king Elapatra
and his consort, standing in the water, with snakes upon
their heads, and worshipping Buddha, while in the background
Vajrapani is brandishing his sceptre against the expected Garudas.
This Vajrapani’s main function is, according to Grinweput, to
give rain, and as a raingod he is the protector of the rain giving
snake-gods, the Nagas *.

Foucuer’s very interesting paper on the Great Miracle of the
Buddha at Qravasti® repeately mentions the Naga kings Nanda
and Upananda, represented at the base of the Buddha’s lotus
seat. At the request of King Prasenajit the Buddha wrought
two miracles: walking through the air in different attitudes he
alternately emitted flames and waves from the upper or lower
part of his body, and, secondly, he preached the Law after having
multiplied himself innumerable times, up to the sky and in all
directions. According to the Divyavadana the Buddha, after having
completed the first miracle, conceived a wordly idea, which was
immediately executed by the gods. Brahma and Qakra placed
themselves at the Buddha’s right and left side, and the Naga


1 Cf. p. 114, Fig. 57, a Japanese picture, after Chinese model, representing Buddha’s
Nirvana. Among the lamenting creatures, which surround the Master’s body, also Naga
kings with snakes above their heads are to be seen.

2 Cf. GRUNWEDEL, Myth. des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei, p. 89, Fig. 73.

3 GRUNWEDEL, Buddh. in Tibet und der Mongolei, p. 15.

4 L1, p. 160.

5 Fouonsn, Le grand miracle du Buddha a Cravasti, Journal Asiatique, Série X,
Tome XIII, pp. 1—78.


Digitized by Microsoft®


6


kings Nanda and Upananda (who were said so have bathed the
new-born Buddha and to have played a part in many episodes
of his life) created an enormous, magnificent lotus upon which
the Master sat down. Then the Buddha by means of his magic >
power created a great number of Buddhas, seated on lotuses or
standing, walking, lying, over his head, up to the highest heavens,
and on all sides. This scene is recognized by Foucuer on several
Indian monuments. Often the two Naga kings are seen under or
on both sides of the lotus created by themselves. They are
represented supporting the lotus in a kneeling attitude, entirely
human but with five serpents over their heads’, or with human
upper bodies and scaly serpent tails *.

In the Jatakas the Nagas are always described as enormous ser-
pents; sometimes, however, they appear in later Indian (i. e. Graeco-
Buddhist) art as real dragons, although with the upper part of
the body human. So we see them on a relief from Gandhara’,
worshipping Buddha’s almsbowl, in the shape of big water-dragons,
scaled and winged, with two horse-legs, the upper part of the
body human. Most remarkable is a picture‘ which represents
Garudas fighting with Nagas before the preaching saint Subhitti.
The Nagas are depicted there in all their three forms: common
snakes, guarding jewels; human beings with four snakes in their
necks; and winged sea-dragons, the upper part of the body
human, but with a horned, ox-like head, the lower part of the
body that of a coiling dragon. Here w
snake of ancient India, and | the four-legge ed Chinese dravon,


a= ciecinnc hee


§ 2. The Naga according to some translated Buddhist texts.


After having referred to European scholars with respect to the
Naga in Buddhism, we may compare their results with some
translated Indian texts. Being not acquainted with the Sanscrit
language, we thankfully make use of these translations in order
to illustrate the Buddhist dragon tales of China and Japan; for,
as I stated already in the Preface, this is the only aim of this
Introduction.


Professor Cowgi’s® translation of the Jataka, the canonical


1 Pp. 19, 48 seq., fig. 3, a sculpture of the rock-temples of Ajanta; cf. pp. 64 Seq.,
fig. 11; pp. 74 seq., fig. 16, with two Nagis; pp. 58 seq., fig. 8.

2 P. 56 seq., fig. 7 (Gealpione from Magadha).

3 GRrUNweEDEL, Buddh. Kunst in Indien, p. 20, fig. 10.

4 GrinweveL, Buddh. in Tibet und der Mongolei, p. 189, fig. 160.


Digitized by Microsoft®


7


Pali text, made up of those marvellous stories of the Buddha's
former births, told by himself, contains seven tales which are -
vivid pictures of the great magic power of the Nagas, especially
of their kings, of the splendour of their palaces, and, on the
other hand, of their helplessness against their deadly enemies, the
Garudas '. The Nagas are semi-divine serpents which very often
assume human shapes and whose kings live with their retinues
in the utmost: luxury in their magnificent abodes at the bottom
of the sea or in rivers or lakes. When leaving the Naga world
they are in constant danger of being grasped and killed by the
gigantic semi-divine birds, the Garudas, which also change them-
selves into men. Buddhism has, in its usual way, declared both
Nagas and Garudas, mighty figures of the Hindu world of gods
and demons, to be the obedient servants of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas
and saints, and to have an open ear for their teachings *. In the
same way Northern Buddhism adopted the gods of the countries
where it introduced itself and made them protectors of its doctrine
instead of its antagonists.

Sometimes * we read that the Buddha, in a previous existence,
succeeded in reconciling even such bitter enemies as a Naga
and a Garuda king. He himself was sometimes born as a mighty
Naga king. Thus he reigned as King Campeyya in his “jewelled
pavillion” in the river Campa’*, as King Samkhapala in the lake
of this name°, and as King Bhiridatta in the sacred river
Yamuna". In all these three cases he desired to be reborn in
the world of men, and in order to attain this aim left his palace
on fastdays and lay down on the top of an ant heap, observing
the fast and offering his magnificent snake body to the passers-by.


4 Vol. Il, p. 10, Book II, nr 154, the Uraga-Jataka; Vol. III, p. 174, Book VI, nr
386, the Kharaputta-Jataka; Vol. IV, p. 281, Book XV, nr 506, the Campeyya-Jataka ;
Vol. V, p. 42, Book XVI, nr 518, the Pandara-Jataka; Vol. V, p. 84, Book XVII, nr
524, the Sarhkhapala-Jataka; Vol. VI, p. 80, Book XXII, nr 543, the Bhuridatta-Jataka ;
and Vol. VI, p. 126, Book XXII, nr 545, the Vidhurapandita-Jataka.

2 In Japan these birds have been identified with the Tengu; comp. my treatise on
the Tengu, Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. XXXVI, Part. II,
pp. 25—98.

3 Cf. CHAVANNES, Contes et apologues, nr 343 (Vol. II, p. 288), where a Garuda does
not grasp a Naga who has fled into the house of an ascetic on a small island in the
sea; cf. Vol. III, p. 82, where a wicked Naga king is forced by an Arhat to go away,
and Vol. I, nr 154, p. 423, where the Buddha converts a very evil Naga, whom innu-
merable Arhats could not convert.

4 Vol. Il, p. 10, nr 154.

5 Vol. IV, 281, Book XV, nr 506.

6 Vol. V, p. 84, Book XVII, nr 524.

7 Vol. VI, pp. 80—113, Book XXII, nr 543,


Digitized by Microsoft®


8


Patiently he underwent the most terrible tortures, without using
his enormous power against the puny rogues who caused him
so much pain. As Samkhapala he was freed by a passing mer-
chant, whom he thereupon treated as a guest in his palace for
a whole year, and who afterwards became an ascetic. In the two
other cases, however, he fell into the hands of a snake-charmer,
who by means of magical herbs, which he spit upon him, and
by virtue of the “charm which commands all things of sense”,
as well as by squeezing and crushing, weakened the royal snake,
and putting him in his basket carried him off to villages and
towns, where he made him dance before the public. In both
legends the Bodhisattva is just performing before the King of
Benares, when he is released on account of the appearance of
another Naga, Sumana, his queen, or Sudassana, his brother '.

In the shape of a Garuda-king we find the Bodhisattva in
another tale*, where he finds out the secret way by which the
Nagas often succeed in conquering and killing the Garudas,
namely by swallowing big stones and thus making themselves
so heavy that their assailants, striving to lift them up, drop
down dead in the midst of the stream of water, flowing out of
the Naga’s widely opened mouths. Pandara, a Naga king, was
foolish enough to trust an ascetic, whom both he and the Garuda
used to visit and honour, and told him at his repeated request
the valuable secret of the Naga tribe. The treacherous ascetic
revealed it at once to the Bodhisattva, who now succeeded in
capturing Pandara himself by seizing him by the tail and holding
him upside down, so that he disgorged the stones he had swallowed
and was an easy prey. Moved by Pandara’s lamentations,
however, he released him and they became friends, whereupon
they went together to the perfidious ascetic. The Naga king
caused this fellow’s head to split into seven pieces and the man
himself to be swallowed by the earth and to be reborn in the
Avici hell.

In the Kharaputta-jataka°® we read about a Naga king who
was nearly killed by boys, when seeking food on earth, but was
saved out of their hands by Senaka, king of Benares. We do
not read what made the mighty Naga so powerless against those
children; for there was apparently no question of fasting as in


1 A similar tale is to be found in Cuavannes’s Contes et apologues extraits du
Tripitaka chinois, Vol. I, pp. 189 sqq., nr 50.
2 Vol. V, pp. 42 seqq., Book XVI, nr 518.


Digitized by Microsoft®


' 9


the above mentioned legends of the Bodhisattva. He went back
to the Naga world and from there brought many jewels as a
present to the King, at the same time appointing one of his
numberless Naga girls to be near the King and to protect him.
He gave him also a charm by means of which he would always
be able to find the girl, if he did not see her, and afterwards
presented him with another charm, giving knowledge of all
sounds, so that he understood the voices even of ants'. So we
find the Naga king not only in the possession of numberless
jewels and beautiful girls, but also of mighty charms, bestowing
supernatural vision and hearing. The palaces of the Naga kings
are always described as extremely splendid, abounding with gold
and silver and precious stones, and the Naga women, when
appearing in human shape, were beautiful beyond description.
But the whole race was terribly quick-tempered, which made
them, considering their deadly poison and their great magic
power, very dangerous creatures?. Even the breath of their
nostrils was sufficient to kill a man, as we read in the above
mentioned Kharaputta-jataka, where the Naga king, angry be-
cause the girl whom he had appointed to protect King Senaka,
came back to the Naga world, falsely complaining that the King
had struck her because she did not do his bidding, at once sent
four Naga youths to destroy Senaka in his bedroom by the
breath of their nostrils.

Often we find stories of men staying as guests in some Naga
king’s palace and enjoying all its luxury, sometimes for seven
days *, sometimes even for a whole year *. The most interesting
of all the Naga tales is the Bhiridatta-jataka °, We read there
about “the Naga world beneath the ocean” °, and about the Naga
palace “beneath the Yamuna’s sacred stream” ', but at the same
time the Naga maidens, frightened by the Alambayana spell, a
serpent spell obtained from a Garuda-king*, “sank into the
earth”, and the “jewel of luck’ °®, which “grants all desires” ”,
when falling on the ground “went through it and was lost in


4 In nr 112 of Cuavannes’ Contes et Apologues (Vol. II, p. 382) a Naga king causes
a king to understand all animals,

2 Vol. VI, p. 82, Book XXII, nr 543.

3 Vol. IV, p. 281, Book XV, nr 506.

4 Vol. V, p. 84, Book XVII, nr 524. In nrs 94 and 207 of CHAVANNES’ Contes et
Apologues (Vol. I, p. 358, Vol. II, p. 87) an Arhat daily flies with his bed to the
palace of a Naga king, where he receives food.

5 Vol. VI, pp. 80—143, Book XXII, nr 543.

6 P. 80. 7 P. 107. 8 Pp. 93, 95.

9 P. 91. 40 P. 94,


Digitized by Microsoft®


10


the Naga world”'. So we see that whatever belongs to that
world can disappear into the earth and needs not enter the
water, because both are the Nagas’ domain”. The “jewel which
grants all desires”, which was guarded by the Naga maidens
but forgotten in their terror for the Garuda spell, is nothing but
the “Nyo-i hoju”, 4n & # Ek, mentioned in the Chinese and
Japanese legends. The same story teaches us that children of
men and Nagi (Naga women) are “of a watery nature”, and
cannot stand sunshine or wind, but are happiest when playing
in the water °*.

So far the Jatakas of Cowst1’s edition. It is a strange fact
that in all these tales no mention is made of the Naga’s nature
of god of clouds and rain, although this is the main reason why
the Chinese identified him with their dragon. In the legends,
translated from the Chinese Tripitaka by Cuavannzs *, however,
so much stress is laid on the rain giving capacity of the Naga,
that we need not doubt as to its predominance in Northern
Buddhism.

From the Lalita vistara® we learn that in the fifth week after
reaching perfect Enlightenment the Buddha went to lake Muci-
linda, and the Naga king of the same name, who resided there,
came out of the water and with his coils and hoods shielded
the Lord from the rain for seven days, whereafter he assumed
the shape of a youth and worshipped the Great Being. In the
Mahavagga*® the name of the lake and the Naga king is Muca-
linda, and “in order to protect the Lord against the cold and
the humidity, he seven times surrounded him with his coils and
extended his hood over him”. According to Harpy’ “in the sixth
week, he went to the lake Muchalinda, where he remained at


~


4 P. 97.

2 Cf. Harpy, Manual of Buddhism, p. 163, where king Bimbisara, hearing that
a mysterious being (the Bodhisattva) was seen, is said to have ordered his courtiers to
watch him when he should leave the town. “If he be a demon, he will vanish; if he
be a deva, he will ascend into the sky; if a Naga, he will descend into the earth”.

3 P. 82.

4 Cing cents contes et apologues extraits du Tripitaka chinois (1910).

5 Ch. XXII; Cuavannes also refers to the Yoga sutra, Sect. III, 18, 19 and 49; cf.
Kern, Manual of Indian Buddhism, pp. 21 seq.; OLDENBERG, Buddha, p. 136. In
painting and sculpture the Buddha is frequently sitting under the extended hood of
the Naga (Harpy, Manual of Buddhism, p. 182; GRUNWEDEL, Mythologie des Buddhis-
mus in Tibet und der Mongolei, p. 110, Fig. 87 and 88).

6 I, 3, quoted by Kern, Histoire du Bouddhisme dans lV’ Inde, Annales du Musée


Quimat VY at VIT Val To on 8A (72\


Digitized by Microsoft®


(

11
the foot of a midella tree. At that time rain began to fall,
which continued for seven days, without intermission, in all the
four continents. The naga Muchalinda having ascended to the
surface of the lake, saw the darkness produced by the storm;
and in order to shelter Budha from the rain and wind, and
protect him from flies, mosquitoes, and other insects, he spread
over him his extended hood, which served the purpose of a canopy”.

It is highly interesting to compare with these passages the
version of the same legend, found in the Chinese Tripitaka’.
There he is said to have gone to Mucilinda’s river (not lake)
immediately after having reached Enlightenment. While he was
sitting under a tree, his brilliant light penetrated into the Naga’s
palace, just as in former times his three predecessors of this kalpa
had spread their light, sitting on the same spot. The Naga, delighted
to see the new Buddha’s light, arose from the water, and, sur-
rounding the Lord with seven coils, covered him with his seven
heads (not hoods). “The Naga, delighted, caused wind and rain for
seven days and nights’. All that time the Lord sat motionless,
protected by the royal snake, the first of all animals to be con-
verted. This legend is to be found in the Luh-tu tsih king,* ur
143 of Nawnso’s Catalogue, translated by Sene-nwvi*, who died
A.D. 280°.

The same work contains many jatakas, in which the Nagas are
frequently mentioned, sometimes in company with (akra, Brahma,
the four devarajas and the gods of the earth®. One day, when
the Bodhisattva and Ananda were Nagas in order to complete


4 Cuavannes, 1.]., Vol. I, Ch. VI, p. 275 sqq., nr 76; Tokyo ed. of the Tripitaka
(1880—1885), VI, 5, pp. 82 sq.; great Japan. ed., in Leiden and in the India Office,
“Ch. VI, pp. 15 sqq.


2 HE SE AW OB Ee 27. Curavannes translates: “Pour s’amuser,


le naga déchatna le vent et la pluie”. I should prefer: “The Naga, delighted, caused
wind and rain”. He was delighted because he could shelter the Lord from the wind
and rain caused by himself. He did not think of amusing himself. But the main point
of the question is the fact that the Naga in this version is said to have caused the
wind and the rain himself, while the other versions only state that there was wind
and rain.

3 jE 46 RK, “Collected sutras on the six Paramitis”. CHAVANNES first thought


that these sutras had been collected by Senc-Hwut himself (Vol. I, p. 1, note 1), but
afterwards felt inclined to believe that it is a translation of one sanscrit text


(Introd., p. III). 4 fi er.


5 Nr 680 of Nawnso’s Catalogue, partly translated by BEAL under the title of ‘“Ro-
mantic legend of Sakya Buddha”, does not contain this legend.

6 Cf. Cuavannes, |.l., Vol. I, Chap. V, pp. 160 sq., nrs 43 and 44; Trip. VJ, 5, p.
69; great Jap. ed. of Leiden, nr 143, Ch. V, pp. 5a, 6a,


Digitized by Microsoft®


12


the expiation of their former evil deeds, “expanding their
majestic spirit, they made heaven and earth shake; they raised the
clouds and caused the rain to fall” '. And when Devadatta was a
terrible Naga, “he expanded all his force; lightning and thunder
flashed and rattled” *.

The Kiu tsah p'i-yii king *, “Old (version of the) Samyuktava-
dana siitra” (miscellaneous metaphors), translated in the third
century A.D. by the same Sznc-awur (Nanso’s Catalogue, nr. 1359)
in some of its apologues mentions the Nagas as bringers of rain.
Such a being by its rain made the dike, along which a gramanera
carried his master’s rice, so slippery that the man repeatedly
tumbled down and dropped the rice into the mud. His master
summoned the Naga, who in the shape of an old man prostrated
himself before the Arhat and invited him to dine in his palace
all the days of his life. The Arhat accepted this offer and daily
flew with his bed to the Naga’s palace, after having entered
abstract contemplation. But his pupil, anxious to know from
where his master had got the splendid rice grains which he
discovered in his almsbowl, hid himself under the bed and
clinging to one of its feet arrived with the Arhat at the Naga’s
abode. The latter, his wife and the whole crowd of beautiful
women respectfully saluted the cramana and the gramanera, but
the latter was warned by his master not to forget, that he, the
cramanera himself, was a must higher being than the Naga,
notwithstanding all the latter’s treasures and beautiful women.
“The Naga’, said he, “has to endure three kinds of sufferings:
his delicious food turns into toads as soon as he takes it into
his mouth; his beautiful women, as well as he himself, change
into serpents when he tries to embrace them; on his back he
has scales lying in a reverse direction, and when sand and
pebbles enter between them, he suffers pains which pierce his
heart. Therefore do not envy him”. The pupil, however, did not
answer; day and night he thought of the Naga and forgot to
eat. He fell ill, died and was reborn as the Naga’s son, still more
terrible than his father, but after death became a man again ‘.


1 ay Ht Bu mh \E RK Bh Hh , = K€ fy . Great Jap. ed. of Leiden, nr


143, Ch. V, p. 19b; Cuavannes, Vol. I, Ch. V, p. 181, nr 48; Trip. VI, 5, p. 74.


2 HE Li] S a we We 7] ge . Great Jap. ed. of Leiden, nr 143, Ch. VI, p.


27a; CHAvANNES, Vol. I, Ch. VI, p. 254, nr 70; Trip. VI, 5, p. 78.


3 Ee SB kK.


4 Cuavannes, |.l., Vol. I, nr 94, pp. 358 sqq. (Trip. XIX, 7, p. 19; great Jap. ed. of


Digitized by Microsoft®


13


Another time the Buddha’s disciples are compared to a great
Naga who liked to give rain to the earth, but, fearing that the
latter might not be able to bear the weight of the water,
decided to make the rain fall into the sea’.

In the Tsah p‘i-yii king?, a work from the Korean Tripitaka,
not to be found in Nanyd’s Catalogue (for nr 1368, which bears
the same title, is a different work) we find the following Naga
tales. A Naga ascended to the sky and caused abundant rains to
fall: for the devas they brought the seven precious things, for
mankind fertilizing water, and for the hungry demons a great
fire which burned the whole of their bodies *.

Another Naga who by means of a single drop of water could
give rain to one or two or three kingdoms, nay to the whole
Jambudvipa, placed it in the great sea that it might not dry up*.

An exorcist of Nagas went with his pitcher full of water to
the pond of such a being and by his magic formulae surrounded
the Naga with fire. As the water of the pitcher was the only
refuge the serpent could find, it changed into a very small
animal and entered the pitcher °.

Here we see the Nagas not only as rain gods, but also as
beings wholly dependent on the presence of water and much
afraid of fire, just like the dragons in many Chinese and Japanese
legends.

With regard to the precious pearls in the possession of the
Nagas as gods of the waters, we may mention a tale to be
found in the Mo ho seng chi liih® or “Discipline of the Maha-
samghikas” (nango, ur 1119), translated in 416 by BuppHasHapRa
and Fan-nien '. There we read about a Naga who wore a necklace
of pearls, which he liked so much that he preferred it to his
friendship towards a hermit. The latter, daily tortured by the
Naga’s coils, wound around his body, succeeded in getting rid


4 Li, Vol. I, nr 138, p. 410 (Trip. XIX, 7, p. 24).
2 Hie BE PR Ke, cf. Cuavannes, |.l., Vol. II, p. 1, note 4. Both this work and


the Chung king chwen tsah pvi-yi king, SR KK ee Kitt i Pee aK (Nanso, nr


4366) are said to be compiled by the bbiksu Tao Liou, we. but are probably
two different editions of his work; KumArasiva seems to have translated Tao Liou’s


work in 401 A.D.
3 Cuavannzs, |.]., Vol. I, nr 167, p. 23 (Trip. XIX, 7, p. 3).
4 LL, Vol. Il, nr 193, p. 63 (Trip. XIX, 7, p. 8).
5 Ll, Vol. HU, nr 179, p. 42 (Trip. XIX, 7, p. 5).


6 a { mn #45. Mahasamghika vinaya.


7 Nawnao, Catal., App. I, nrs 42 and 45.
¢


Digitized by Microsoft®


14


of him only by asking him for the precious necklace '. Also the
Chinese dragons were said to have pearls at their throats.

The Avadana-cataka, a hundred legends translated from the
Sanskrit by Lion Frer? contain a few passages concerning the
Nagas. The most important one is the 91 legend *, where
Suparni, the king of birds, is said to have seized from the ocean
a little Naga, which after having been devoured was reborn as
Subhiiti and by following the Buddha’s teachings reached Arhatship.
He remembered to have had five hundred rebirths among the
Nagas on account of a long row of wicked thoughts in previous
existences. Now he used his supernatural power to convert both
Nagas and Garudas by protecting the former against five hundred
Garudas and the latter against a gigantic Naga, which he caused
to appear. In this way the law of love was taught them, and
they followed his teachings.

In another legend * a Brahman is said to have been reborn as
a Naga because he had broken his fast; seven times a day a
rain of burning sand came down upon him till he succeeded in
keeping a special fast. Then, after having died with abstinence
of food, he was reborn in the Trayastrimgat heaven.

In a third passage * Viritipaksha, one of the four guardians of
the world, who reigns on the West side of Mount Meru, is said
to be surrounded by Nagas (his subjects, who live in the West).

Finally, the Nagas are mentioned among the divine beings
who came to worship the Buddha: Cakra, the king of the gods,
Vigvakarma and the four great kings surrounded by Devas,
Nagas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and Kumbhandas°; another time
they are enumerated as follows: Devas, Nagas, Yakshas, Asuras,
Garudas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas *.

In Acvacnoga’s Siétralamkara*®, translated into French from
Kumarasiva’s chinese version by Epovarp Huser, the Nagas are
often mentioned. “When the great Naga causes the rain to fall,
the ocean alone can receive the latter; in the same way the


1 Cuavannes, 1.]., Vol. II, nr 355, p. 319 (Trip. XV, 8, p. 44).

2 Annales du Musée Guimet, Tome XVIII (1891).

3 Pp. 366 sq. 4 Nr 59, pp. 227 sqq. 5 Nr 19, p. 83.

6 Nr 12, pp. 57 sq. 7 Nr 17, p. 77.

8 Kumarajiva translated this collection of tales about A.D. 440; the original sanskrit
text is lost, except some fragments, which, according to Huser, show that Kumarajiva
not always understood the text. HusBer’s translation is based upon the Toxyo edition


of the Tripitaka (XIX, 4). It is nr 1482 of Nanso’s Catal
Cat = in as aes a 2 L=1_ sonal a gai ai eae K HE ie


Digitized by Microsoft®


15


Samgha (alone) can receive the great rain of the Law”'. When
a merchant, Kotikarna by name, visited a town of pretas, these
hungry demons uttered a long complaint, which contains the
following verse: “When on the mountains and valleys the Heavenly
Dragons (the Nagas) cause the sweet dew to descend, this changes
into bubbling fire and spouts upon our bodies” *. “Elapatra the
Nagaraja, having violated the commandments by maltreating the
leaves of a tree, after death fell among the Nagas, and none of
the Buddhas has predicted the time when he shall be able to
leave them” °.

“The tears (of those who, on hearing the Law of the twelve
Nidanas, are moved by pity and weep with compassion) can
entirely destroy the Naga Vasuki who exhales a violent poison’’‘.

“The Rakgasas and the Picacas, the evil Nagas and even the
robbers dare not oppose the words of the Buddha” °.

An evil Naga guarded a big tree which stood in a large pond,
and killed all those who took a branch or a leaf from it. When
the bhikgsus came to hew down the tree in order to build a
sttipa, the people and a brahman warned them not to do so on
account of the danger, but the bhiksus answered: “With regard
to the poisonous Naga, you, brahman, glorify yourself. But we
rely upon the Naga of men (the Buddha), and, placing our trust
in Him, glorify ourselves..... Among all the poisonous Nagas,
for this Naga king you show yourself full of respectful thoughts.
The Buddha is sweet and calm, He is the King of all beings,
it is Him whom we revere, the Perfect one, the Bhagavat. Who
‘would be able to subdue the poisonous Naga, if not the Buddha’s
disciples?” Then they cut down the tree, and, to the astonish-
ment of the brahman, no clouds, no thunder, no miraculous signs
bore witness to the Naga’s wrath, as had formerly been the case
even when one leaf of his tree was taken by a human hand °.
The brahman, after having uttered his amazement and anger,


1 Ch. I, nr 3, p. 30; great Jap. Tripitaka of Leiden, nr 1182, Ch. I, p. 19:


BE tn K HE i
me He BE SEES
HR (8 DK Bn He
HE ZAHM.


2 Ch. IV, nr 40, p. 100; great Jap. Trip. of Leiden, nr 1182, Ch. IV, p. 3a.

3 Ch. Ill, nr 14, p. 64; great Jap. Trip. of Leiden, Ch. III, p. 2a.

4 Ch. VII, nr 45, p. 215; great Jap. Trip. of Leiden, Ch. VIII, p. 2a.

5 Ch. IX, nr 52, p. 255; great Jap. Trip. of Leiden, Ch. 1X, p. 6a.

6 Ch. XV, nr 80, p. 447; great Jap. Trip. of Leiden, nr 1182, Ch. XV, p. 21a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


16


because he thought that they had used magic incantations, fell
asleep, and in a dream was addressed as follows by the Naga:
“Be not angry; what they did was done to show me their vene-
ration. They have neither despised nor wounded me, for my
body supports the stiipa; moreover, the tree has become a
beam of the stiipa, and I can protect it; the stiipa of the Daca-
bala, of the Exalted one, should I ever have been able to protect
it (if not in this way)?... There was still another reason, why
I had not sufficient power (to resist the Buddha). I am going
to tell you this reason, listen attentively: Taksaka, the Naga
king, came here in person and took possession of this tree;
could I protect it? Hlapatra, the Naga king, himself came to
this spot with Vaicramana: was my power sufficient to resist
those Devas and Nagas, full of majesty?’ When the Brahman
awoke, he became a monk.

This remarkable story shows us the Naga as an inhabitant of
a pond, but at the same time as a tree demon, in which function
we often found the serpent in Chinese and Japanese tales, but
never in Indian Naga legends. As a rain and thunder god he is
said to produce clouds and thunder when he is angry. Taksaka
and Elapatra are mentioned here as the mightiest of the Naga
kings, and Vaigramana, the guardian of the North, king of the
Yakshas, is probably confounded with Virtipaksha, the guardian
of the West, king of the Nagas. The whole legend is a typical
specimen of the way in which Buddhism subdued the other cults.

After having learned the Niaga’s nature from these Buddhist
writings which made him known in China and Japan, we may
venture one step into another direction, in turning to the Katha-
saritsagara or “Ocean of the streams of story”. This “largest and
most interesting collection” of tales was composed by the Kashmi-
rian court poet Somaprva, “one of the most illustrious Indian
poets” ', in the eleventh century of our era’*, but the original
collection, its source, entitled the Brhatkatha, is must older, and,
according to Prof. Spryer’*, “must have been arranged in that
period of Indian history, when Buddhism exercised its sway over
the Hindoo mind side by side with Caivism and so many other
manifold varieties of sectarian and local creeds, rites and theoso-
phies”. “The main story and a large number of the episodes are


4 Cf. Spryer, Studies about the Kathasaritsigara, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke
Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Afd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks, Deel
VIII, n° 5 (4908); p. 2.


Digitized by Microsoft®


17


(aiva tales, as was to be expected from the supposed first narra-
tor being no other than the Supreme God Qiva himself” '. Next
to legends of the Buddhists even mythological narrations from
the Vedic age are to be found in this work, smaller collections
being incorporated into it 2. Among the great number of interesting
legends, contained in the Kathasaritsagara, translated by Tawney
(1880—1884), there are several in which the Nagas play a more
or less important part.

The first thing which strikes us is the total absence of passages
devoted to their capacity of giving rain. Combining this with
the same observation made above with regard to the jatakas
of Cowen1’s edition, we feel inclined to believe that this part of
the Nagas’ nature has been particularly developed by the Northern
Buddhists. The original conceptions regarding these semidivine
serpents, living in the water or under the earth, seem to have
attributed to them the power of raising clouds and thunder, and
of appearing as clouds themselves, but not as rain giving beings.
It is, of course, a very obvious conclusion that cloud gods pro-
duce rain, but it seems that this idea, which made them the
benefactors of mankind, first rose in the minds of the adherents
of the Mahayana school. According to the original ideas, on the
contrary, they seem to have only given vent to their anger in
terrifying mankind by means of dense clouds, thunder and earth-
quakes. Highly interesting in this respect is the following story,
to be found in the Kathasaritsagara *.

In the Vindhya forest in the northern quarter there was a
solitary acoka tree, and under it, in a lake, stood the great
palace of a mighty Naga king, Paravataksha by name, who obtained
a matchless sword from the war of the gods and the Asuras.
In order to get this sword an ascetic, assisted by a prince and
his followers, threw enchanted mustard-seed upon the water,
thus clearing it from the dust which concealed it, and began to
offer an oblation with snake-subduing spells. ‘And he conquered
by the power of his spells the impediments, such as earthquakes,
clouds, and so on. Then there came out from that acoka tree a
heavenly nymph, as it were, murmuring spells. with the tinkling
of her jewelled ornaments, and approaching the ascetic she pierced
his soul with a sidelong glance of love. And then the ascetic
lost his self-command and forgot his spells; and the shapely fair
one, embracing him, flung from his hand the vessel of oblation.


1 Ibidem. 2 Tbidem.
3 Ch. LXX, Vol. II, p. 149 sq.
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl XIII, N°. 2. 2


Digitized by Microsoft®


18


And then the snake Paravataksha had gained his opportunity,
and he came out from that palace like the dense cloud of the day
of doom. Then the heavenly nymph vanished, and the ascetic
beholding the snake terrible with flaming eyes, roaring horribly’,
died of a broken heart. When he was destroyed, the snake lay
aside his awful form, and cursed Mrigankadatta (the prince) and
his followers, for helping the ascetic, in the following words:
‘Since you did what was quite unnecessary after all coming here
with this man, you shall for a certain time be separated from
one another’. Then the snake disappeared, and all of them at
the same time had their eyes dimmed with darkness, and were
deprived of the power of hearing sounds. And they immediately
went in different directions, separated from one another by the
power of the curse, though they kept looking for one another
and calling to one another”.

Nagas injuring the crops are mentioned in another passage,
where Svayamprabha, queen of the Asuras residing in Patala
land, “makes herself surety (to king Merudhvaja) that the Nagas
shall not injure the crops’*. The seven Patalas are the nether-
world *, the “home of the serpent race below the earth’ 4, but
also the Asuras, “who escaped from the slaughter in the great
fight long ago between the gods and asuras”, had fled to Patala®
and lived there. As to the Nagas having their abode in Patala
land, we may-refer to the following passages of the Kathasarit-
sagara. “On the extreme shore he set up a pillar of victory,
looking like the king of the serpents emerging from the world
below to crave immunity for Patala”®. “Do you not remember
how he went to Patala and there married the daughter of a
Naga, whose name was Suripa?”’*? When Kadri and Vinata, two
wives of Kagyapa, had a dispute as to the colour of the Sun’s
horses, they made an agreement that the one that was wrong
should become a slave to the other. Kadri, the mother of the
snakes, induced her sons to defile the horses of the Sun by
spitting venom over them; thus they looked black instead of
white, and Vinata, the mother of Garuda, king of birds, was
conquered by this trick and made Kadri’s slave. When Garuda
came to release her, the snakes asked the nectar from the sea
of milk, which the gods had begun to churn, as a substitute,


1 This is probably thunder and lightning.


2 Ch. CXIX, Vol. Il, p. 554. 3 Vol. II, p. 549, note 4,
4 Vol. T n. 485. note 3. KR Ch CYVITT Walt Tr . non


Digitized by Microsoft®


19


and Garuda went to the sea of milk and displayed his great
power in order to obtain the nectar. “Then the god Vishnu,
pleased with his might, deigned to say to him: ‘I am pleased
with you, choose a boon’. Then Garuda, angry because his mother
was made a slave, asked a boon from Vishnu — ‘May the snakes
become my food’”. Vishnu consented, and Garuda, after having
obtained the nectar, promiséd Indra to enable him to take it
away before the snakes should have consumed it. He put the
nectar on a bed of Kuga grass and invited the snakes to take
it there after having released his mother. They did so, and
Garuda departed with Vinata, but when the snakes were about
to take the nectar, Indra swooped down and carried off the vessel.
“Then the snakes in despair licked that bed of Darbha grass,
thinking that there might be a drop of spilt nectar on it, but
the effect was that their tongues were split, and they became
double-tongued for nothing. What but ridicule can ever be the
portion of the over-greedy? Then the snakes did not obtain the
nectar of immortality, and their enemy Garuda, on the strength
of Vishnu’s boon, began to swoop down and devour them. And
this he did again and again. And while he was thus attacking
them, the snakes in Patala were dead with fear, the females
miscarried, and the whole serpent race was well-nigh destroyed.
And Vasuki the king of the snakes, seeing him there every day,
considered that the serpent world was ruined at one blow: then,
after reflecting, he preferred a petition to that Garuda of
irresistible might, and made this agreement with him — ‘I will
send you every day one snake to eat, O king of birds, on the
hill that rises out of the sand of the sea. But you must not act
so foolishly as to enter Patiala, for by the destruction of the
serpent world your own object will be baffled’. When Vasuki said
this to him, Garuda consented, and began to eat every day in
this place one snake sent by him: and in this way innumerable
serpents have met their death here”. Thus spoke a snake, whose
turn it was to be devoured by Garuda, to Jimttavahana, “the
compassionate incarnation of a Bodhisattva” ', son of Jimitaketu,
the king of the Vidyadharas on Mount Himavat. And Jimita-
vahana, “that treasure-house of compassion, considered that he
had gained an opportunity of offering himself up to save the
snake’s life. He ascended the stone of execution and was carried
off by Garuda who began to devour him on the peak of the
mountain’. At that moment a rain of flowers fell from Heaven,


4 Vol. I, p. 174


Digitized by Microsoft®


20


and Garuda stopped eating, but was requested by Jimitavahana
himself to go on. Then the snake on whose behalf he sacrificed
his life, arrived and cried from far; “Stop, stop, Garuda, he is
not a snake, I am the snake meant for you”. Garuda was much
grieved and was about to enter the fire to purify himself from
guilt, but following Jimititavahana’s advice determined never
again to eat snakes, and to make revive those which he had
killed. The goddess Gauri by raining nectar on Jimutavahana
made him safe and sound, and Garuda brought the nectar of
immortality from heaven and sprinkled it along the whole shore
of the sea. “That made all the snakes there (whose bones were
lying there) rise up alive, and then that forest, crowded with
the numerous tribe of snakes, appeared like Patala come to behold
Jimiitavahana, having lost its previous dread of Garuda” 1.

Patala-land, the seven under-worlds, one of which was called
Rasatala” (sometimes equivalent to Patala)°, was inhabited by
Nagas, Asuras, Daityas and Danavas (two classes of demons
opposed to the gods and identified with the Asuras). There were
temples of the gods (Civa*, Durga *®, the’ Fire-god °), worshipped
by the demons. As to its entrances, these are described as moun-
tain caverns‘ or “openings in the water” *; or wonderful flagstaffs
rising out of the sea with banners on them showed the way
thither ®. Sometimes human kings were allowed to visit this
Fairy land. Chandraprabha e. g., after having offered to Civa and
Rudra, with his queen and his ministers, with Siddharta at their
head, entered an opening in the water pointed out by Maya, and
after travelling a long distance, arrived there }°, And king Chan-
dasinha with Sattvagila plunged into the sea and following the
sinking flagstaff reached a splendid city ''. Also king Yacahketu,
after diving into the sea, suddenly beheld a magnificent city,
with palaces of precious stones and gardens and tanks and wishing-
trees that granted every desire, and beautiful maidens '*. This
agrees with the description of the Naga palaces which we found
in the Jatakas.

A temple of Vasuki, the king of the snakes, is mentioned in the


1 Ch. XXII, Vol. I, pp. 182 sqq.; cf. Ch. XO, Vol. II, pp. 312 sqq.

2 Vol. I, p. 447; Tl, 544. 3 I, 185, note 4.

4 Il, 198, in the form of Hatakecvara. We read on p. 109 of the Sang hyang
Kamahayanikan, an interesting old-Javanese text translated by J. Kats, that Igvara,
Brahma and Vishnu by order of Vairocana filled heaven with gods, the earth with men,


and the netherworld (Patala) with Nagas. 5 Il, 267. . 6 TL, 547,
7 I, 446. “There are on this earth many openings leading to the lower regions”,
IT. 197. 8 T. 447. 9 IT. 99 ANT AAT 4A TY aen


Digitized by Microsoft®


21


same work'. There was a festive procession in his honour, and
great crowds worshipped him. His idol stood in the shrine, which
was full of long wreaths of flowers like serpents, “and which
therefore resembled the abyss of Patala”. To the South of the
temple there was a large lake sacred to Vasuki, “studded with
red lotusses, resembling the concentrated gleams of the brilliance
of the jewels on snakes’ crests; and encircled with blue lotusses,
which seemed like clouds of smoke from the fire of snake poison;
overhung with trees, that seemed to be worshipping with their
flowers blown down by the wind”.

Other passages relate about Nagas assuming human shapes ?,
either to escape Garuda (who in this work is always mentioned
as one being), or to embrace a Nagi. In the former case Garuda
himself persecuted the Naga in human form, in the latter the
snake-god, discovering that he was deceived by his wife during
his sleep, “discharged fire from his mouth, and reduced them
both (her lover and herself) to ashes”.


§ 3. The Naga as a giver of rain.


We have seen above that the Naga’s capacity of raising clouds
and thunder when his anger was aroused was cleverly converted
by the Mahayana school into the highly beneficient power of
giving rain to the thirsty earth. In this way these fearful ser-
pents by the influence of Buddha’s Law had become blessers of
mankind. It is clear that in this garb they were readily identi-
fied with the Chinese dragons, which were also blessing, rain
giving gods of the water.

The four classes into which the Mahaydnists divided the
Nagas were:

1. Heavenly Nagas (FK #fi), who guard the Heavenly Palace
aud carry it so that it does not fall.

2, Divine Nagas (wil) #f), who benefit mankind by causing the
clouds to rise and the rain to fall.

3. Earthly Nagas (34 #E), who drain off rivers (remove the
obstructions) and open sluices (outlets).


4 Ch. LXXIV, Vol. II, p. 225. Vasuki is also mentioned Vol. I, p. 32, where
Kirtisena, his brother’s son, is said to have married Crutartha, the daughter of a
Brahman. His daughter Ratnaprabha is mentioned Vol. I, p. 544. He cursed a Naga
king who had fled from battle, Vol. II, p. 171. The serpent Vasuki served as a rope
with which to whirl round mount Mandara, when the sea was churned and produced
Gri or Lakshmi, Vol. II, p. 568, note 4,

2 Ch. LXI, Vol. II, p. 54; Ch. LXIV, Vol. Il, p. 98.


Digitized by Microsoft®


22 .


4. Nagas who are lying hidden (4k Ja FE), guarding the trea-
suries of the “Kings of the Wheel” (ii -E , Cakravarti-rajas)
and blessing mankind’.

The Taiheiki?, a Japanese work, relates an Indian tale in
which a Dragon (i.e. Naga) king is said to have caused rain. A
sien ({l], the Chinese equivalent for a wonder-working ascetic),
annoyed by this, caught all big and small dragons of the inner
and outer seas, and shut them up in a rock. Owing to their
absence not a drop of rain fell for a long time, and the crops
were spoiled by the heavy drought. Then the king, moved with
compassion for his people, asked his advisers how this ascetic’s
power could be broken and the dragons let loose. The answer
was, that a beautiful woman could seduce him and thus put a
stop to his magic capacity. So the King despatched the greatest
beauty of his harem to the cottage of the ascetic, who immediately
fell in love with her and, losing his supernatural power, became
an common man and died. The dragons, no longer under his
influence, flew away to the sky, and caused the winds to blow
and the rain to fall.

A passage from Jin-Cu‘au'’s Buddhist Kosmos *, dealing with the
Naga kings, and translated by Beat in his Catena of Buddhist
scriptures from the Chinese*, mentions four siitras, one of which,
the Mahamegha siitra, shall be treated below in § 4. As to the
Lau-Tdn(?) sitra, the title of which is not explained by Bzat,
so that we know neither the Chinese characters nor the Sanscrit
equivalent, this siitra is said there to contain the following passage:
“To the North of Mount Sumeru, under the waters of the Great
Sea, is the Palace of Sagara Nagaraja, in length and breadth


4 Cf the Japanese Buddhist dictionary Bukkyo iroha jiten, 4B Be Vv 4 yy
i Hit, written in 1901 (sec. ed. 1904) by Mivna Kenstixe, == fff Fit Hy, Vol.


Tl, p. 56 sv. HE: the Chinese work Ts‘ien k‘ioh kit léi shu, “i HE KG KA ES :
written in the Ming dynasty by Cu‘ren Jen-sin, bei ‘1 By. The same Chinese work
enumerates as follows the three sorrows ( FB) of the Indian dragons:
1. Hot winds and hot sand, which burn their skin, flesh and bones.
2, Sudden violent winds, which blow away the palaces of the dragons and ‘make
them lose their treasures, clothes, etc., so that they can no longer hide their shapes.
3. Golden-winged bird-kings (Garuda kings) who enter the dragons’ palaces and
devour their children.


2 Fx AP Zp, written about 1382, Ch. XXXVI, p. 6
3 Fah-kai-on-lih-to (OE SA, Fah-kai is Dharmadhiitu).


Digitized by Microsoft®


23


80000 ydjanas; it is surrounded by precious walls, a beautiful
railing, garden and parks, adorned with every species of decora-
tion”. This Sagara, one of the eight Great Naga kings mentioned
above, apparently obtained the principal rank among the rain
bestowing Nagas of the sea, worshipped by the Northern Buddhists.

From the Saddharma smrtyupasthana sutra’, which Brat,
without giving the Chinese title, wrongly calls Saddharma Prakasa
_ sasana sutra, but which I found in Nawnso’s Catalogue sub nr
679, Braz quotes the following passage: “Down in the depths
of the Great Sea 1000 yojanas is a city named Hi-loh, its length
and breadth 3000 ydjanas; it is occupied by Nagarajas. There
are two sorts of Nagarajas: 1. Those who practise the Law of
Buddha; 2. Those who do not do so. The first protect the world;
the second are opposed to it. Where the good Nagas dwell it
never rains hot sand, but the wicked Nagas are subject to this
plague, and their palaces and followers are all burned up. Whenever
men obey the Law, and cherish their parents, and support and
feed the Shamans, then the good Nagarajas are able to acquire
increased power, so that they can cause a small fertilizing rain
to fall, by which the five sorts of grain are perfected~in colour,
scent, and taste.... If, on the contrary, men are disobedient to
the Law, do not reverence their parents, do not cherish the
Brahmans and Shamans, then the power of the wicked dragons
increases, and just the opposite effects follow; every possible
calamity happens to the fruits of the earth and to the lives
of men”.

Finally, the Buddhavatansaka mahavaipulya siétra® contains a
large number of interesting passages with regard to the Nagas
as gods of clouds and rain. Brar translates as follows: “In the
midst of the Palace of the Naga-raja Sagara there are four pre-
cious gems, from which are produced ‘all the gems of the Ocean.
Here also is the Palace of Jambuketu, the Naga-raja’s eldest son;
also the palace of Vasuki Naga-raja, and eighty myriads of other
Dragons, each having his separate palace”.

«There are five sorts of Dragons: 1. Serpent-dragons; 2. Lizard-
dragons; 3. Fish-dragons; 4. Elephant-dragons; Toad-dragons”’.


1 EE a BB 4K (Nawso, nr 679).
2 Nanso, nrs 87 and 88: K Ff iz HE fe bi33 aK, litt. Mahavaipulya Bud-


dhavatarmsaka sutra; nr 87 is translated by BUDDHABHADRA (a B, who worked
A. D. 398—421, cf. Nanyo, Appendix Il, nr 42, p. 399) and others; nr 88 is a later
and fuller translation by CixsHananpa, A.D, 695—699.


—


Digitized by Microsoft®


24


“Sagara Naga-raja, assuming the appearance of Maheshvara,
exerting his great strength, mightily assists all sentient creatures.
His influence extends from the four continents up to the Para-
nirmita Vacavartin Heaven. He spreads out the clouds diversified
with every colour, excites the varied brightness of the lightning,
causes the changing peals of thunder, raises propitious breezes,
distils fertilizing showers. But though this Naga-raja is well affected
towards men, the good principles which prevail in the world
are the real source of propitious rain falling. Again it is said
that Anavatapta Naga-raja raises the widespreading vapoury clouds
which cover Jambudvipa and distil soft and nourishing rain,
causing- the various herbs and grains to spring up and flourish,
and the fountains and rivers to swell with refreshing streams”.

Beside in this passage translated by Braz the same siitra often
mentions Sagara and the other Naga-kings as givers of rain. In
the Chinese translation of the end of the seventh century A. D.
(Nanso, nr 88) we read e.g.: “Further, there are innumerable
Great Naga-kings, called Virtpaksha, Sagara, ete. etc...., who
by raising the clouds and diffusing the rain put an end to the
vexations caused to all living beings by burning heat’ '.

“When the Great Sea-Naga-king (Sagara) sends down the rain,
He (the Enlightened One) can separately count the drops, and
in one thought make out (their number)” *. :

Comparisons especially, mostly in stanzas, of the rain-giving
Naga kings to Buddha and his Law, are very numerous °.

“The Saprenie Naga king Sagara, when raising the clouds-
covers the whole earth and distributes the rain over all places,
and in his heart there is but one thought — so do also the
Buddhas, the Kings of the Law: great clouds of compassion
spread everywhere, and, on behalf of all those who practise
religious austerities, rain down on each and on all without
distinction” ‘.

“Like Anavatapta Nagaraja sends down the rain everywhere
on Jambudvipa and thus can cause all the plants and trees to
shoot up and grow, and it (the rain) does not come forth from
his body but from his heart — in the same way also the


1 7A eR KE EP A EL
a SUR Th WSS ooh FR AB A AB TB BA . On. 1, p.


18a, b. 2 Ch. XV, p. 180.
3 Cf. Ch. XV, p. 240; XVII, 19a; XXXVIII, 225; XLII, 6b, 150; LI, 41b; Lil, 18;
Lil, 8b; LXXX, 22a,


Digitized by Microsoft®


25


beautiful words of the Buddhas everywhere rain upon the Universe
(Dharmadhatu)” '.
Thus this siitra is a striking evidence of the great blessing


power attributed by Northern Buddhism to the Naga kings as
givers of rain.


§ 4. Sutras recited in rain ceremonies.


The most important of the siitras, recited by the Northern
Buddhists for causing rain in times of drought, is the Maha-
megha sutra, “The Stitra of the Great Cloud’. Nanso’s Catalogue
of the Buddhist Tripitaka contains four Chinese translations of
this text: nrs 186—188, and 970. The titles of the translations
are a little different from one another’, but the original work
is the same. JNanacupra translated it first between A.D. 557
and 581 (or 187), and a second time between A.D. 589 and
618 (mr 186). In A.D. 585 another translation was made by
Narenprayacgas (nr 188). Nr 970, which has the same Chinese
title as nr 188, is a later translation. The Sanskrit text still
exists, and an extract of it is given by Benpaz, in the Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society’; this agrees with nr 186, while
Bear, in his Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese, gives
an abstract of nr 188. According to Dre Groot‘ the siitra was
translated by AmocHavasra, the second patriarch of the Yoga
school in China, disciple of Vasrazoput (the first patriarch of the
same school, who in 719 arrived in China). This is apparently
nr 970 of Nanso’s Catalogue, designated as “a later translation”.

From Benpaut’s extract we learn that the contents of the
Mahamegha sitra are as follows. “On one occasion the Venerable
One dwelt in the palace of the Snake-Kings Nanda and Upananda,
in the summer pavillion of the circle of mighty clouds filled with


4 Ch. LI, p. 410.
2 Nr 186: Apt ae, K wil oe K EES an ii RK, “Mahavaipulya Great Cloud
sutra, for asking rain”:


Nr 187: K = ag i aK, “Great Cloud stitra for asking rain”.


Nr 188: KK EE iii ag iv RK, “Great Cloud-wheel’stitra for asking rain’. On
p. 41b of the Chinese text we find the name of the Tathagata “Great Cloud- wheel”.
BENDALL (p. 303) translates “great cloud-circle”, but it is wheel.


Nr 970: same title as nr 188.
3 New Series, Vol. XII (1880), pp. 286 sq.
4, Le Code du Mahayana en Chine, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, Deel I, n° 2 (1893), Ch. VIII, pp. 148 sqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


26


precious gems and jewels, accompanied by a mighty assemblage
of bhikshus, and by a mighty assemblage of bodhisattvas, and a
mighty host of kings, to wit, Nanda the Snake King, and Upa-
nanda (here follows ‘a list of 185 snakes)', attended, I say, by
84 hundreds of thousands of millions of krores of snakes assem-
bled and seated together’. All the Nagas saluted the Lord, bending
their clasped hands towards him, whereupon they stood on one
side and made supplications. “Let us worship, let us reverence,
esteem, honour the samudras (infinite numbers) of Bodhisattvas...
riding upon the sea-clouds, immeasurable and innumerable, with
samudras of cloud-bodies”. Then the “Great Supreme King of
Snakes” asks: “How, O Venerable One, may all the troubles of
all the snakes subside; (and how) may they (thus) gladdened and
blessed, send forth rain-torrents here, seasonably for Jambudvipa;
make all grasses, bushes, herbs, forest-trees to grow; produce
all corn; give rise to all juices, whereby the men of Jambudvipa
may become blessed?” The Master answers, that all the troubles
of the Nagas may subside and they may be reborn in the
Brahma-world by exercising charity. Further, they must put into
action the Sarvasukhandada dharani, and repeat the names of the
Tathagatas, “whose families and races are sprung from the one
hair-tip of Vairocana, speedy producers of happiness [consisting of]
a circle of clouds”. Here follows a large number of names of
Tathagatas, among which in the Chinese text” such are found
as: “Tathagata who stores up the great clouds” *, “Tathagata the
displaying of whose nature sends forth the clouds” *, “Tathagata
who holds in his hands (and directs) the clouds and the rain’, ©
“Great raiser of the clouds’ *, “Great disperser of wind and


1 Among these Naga-kings the Chinese text gives names as: Moon-cloud, Sea-cloud,
Great Cloud-receptacle (store-house), Naga-king who sends down the rain, Naga-king of


Clouds and Rain, Great Rain, King of Clouds, etc. CF =e 7 yaa Ee A K = Tek :
MM WY BEE. ih BEE. KW, SE FF). On p. 2a of nr 188 we


find the Naga-king Kumbhira (Crocodile) (> ay wee BE + ), Le., as BeaL (Catena,

p. 423) rightly remarks, the well-known god Kompira of Japan. When at the Restau-

ration the Shintoists reclaimed all their temples from the Buddhists, they wrongly

declared Kompira to be an obscure Shinto deity, called Kotohira, and thus took possession

of all the shrines of this Naga-king, the protector of sailors and of those who travel on sea.
2 P. 411 sq.


3 Ha Ke EB hn 3K.
4 BE SL En ae de 2K. © fe FE WY Bn JR.


Digitized by Microsoft®


27


clouds” !, “Great cloud wheel’? ete. “By the utterance of these
names of Tathagatas, O snake-king, all woes of all snakes are
set at rest, and [though] fraught with ills they create here in
Jambudvipa showers in season and for a season, and make all
grass, shrubs, herbs, forest-trees, and corn to grow’. At the
request of the Naga king the Buddha utters a Dharani called
Mahakarunodbhava, “which causes rain in time of drought and
checks excessive rain”, and invokes the Nagas: “O mighty snakes,
bring rain here by the appointment of the truth of all Devas,
hail! By the appointment of the truth of Brahma, rain here in
Jambudvipa, hail!”

Then follow prescriptions for the Great Cloud-circle (or wheel)
rite. “He who desires a mighty rain must perform this rite in
an open space, overspread by a blue canopy, shaded by a blue ban-
ner, on a clear spot of earth; (being) a prophet of the Law,
seated on a blue seat, fasting according to the ashtanga, with
well-washed limbs, clad in pure raiment, anointed with fragrant
odour, wearing the three white stripes, he must recite it for a
day and night continuously facing the east; he must place four
full vessels, filled with pure blue water, after prayers to the
Tathagatas also, according to his power, an oblation, and flowers
and odours; then the prophet of the Law, after having painted
towards the four quarters with liquid cow-dung on a reed, in
the eastern quarter three hastas high must depict the snake-king
called Tricirshaka (Three-crested), with cow-dung: in the southern
quarter him called Pancagirshaka (Five-crested) five hastas high ;
in the western, seven hastas high, Saptacirshaka (Seven-crested) ;
in the northern, Navacirshaka (Nine-crested), nine hastas high.....
Afterwards, at a season of drought, he shall recite this chapter,
‘The Great-cloud-circle’, for one day or for two, until it needs
shall rain seven nights”.

Then by numerous invocations the snake kings are summoned.
On p. 309 we read that this “Whirlwind” chapter, also called
“The Heart of all Serpents” must be recited by the prophet of the
Law, after three snake kings with their retinues having been
painted with cow-dung for thrice seven days uninterruptedly:
a triple-crested one in the Hast, a seven-crested one in the West,


(KR BS i R.
2 XK Ba ii Wy ae _ Cf. the name of the sutra itself: “Great Cloud wheel sttra


for asking rain”, translated by Nano into, “Stitra on asking rain of the Great
Cloudwheel”.


% Digitized by Microsoft®


28


and a nine-crested one in the North. “A blue canopy and blue
dress, blue banner (are to be used) and all the offering is to be
made blue”. “The cloud-monarchs too must be depicted, emitting
a shower, and rubbing against one another; at the end masses
of rain-birds and lightning are to be painted”, and offerings of
parched rice, fish, flesh and honey-food without curds must be
made. After all these preparatory measures the prophet of the
Law, pure and clad in pure raiment, must recite this “Whirlwind”
chapter, “the Heart of Snakes”.

Brat ' gives a short abstract of this stitra (nr 188), as he found
it in the Chinese Tripitaka. Of the great Naga kings enumerated
in the beginning the third one is Sagara’, the principal sea god
of Chinese Buddhists, who often called him simply “The Sea-
dragon-king’. By this name he is also indicated in the titles of
the two siitras nrs 456 and 457 of Nango’s Catalogue *. The fourth
Niga king, Anavatapta*, was well-known in Japan, as we will
see below®. To him nr 437 of Nanso’s Catalogue is devoted
(translated A. D. 308) °% In the fifth place the Naga king Manasvin?
is mentioned. Then follows Varuna*, the Naga king, different
from the deity of this name, called in China the Deva of the
Water °, which name reminds us of the famous Suitengz '° of Tokyo.
Professor Spryrr had the kindness to point out to me that in
the Mahavastu '', where the Buddha blesses Bhallika and Trapusa,
among the protectors of the West Viripaksha, the. Nagas and
Varuna are mentioned. As to Viriipaksha, one of the four guar-
dians of the world, he is the sovereign of all the Nagas. Varuna,
the Brahmanic god of heaven, is at the same time the regent


4 A catena of Buddhist scriptures from the Chinese (1871), p. 419 sqq.
2 The first and second are Nanda and Upananda, Sagara is written ee Ain we _


ef. EITeL, Sanskrit-Chinese dictionary, s. v. (there wrongly ye instead of 2B).
3 Nr 456: 4B Bt HE. BE FE #, “Buddhabhashita Sagara Nagaraja sutra”.


Nr 457: bia a a. BE + at, ie EN RK, “Siitra on the Seal of the Law,
spoken by Buddha for the sake of the Naga-king Sagara”..
4 [al OB YEE ZB.
5 Book II, Ch. Ill, § 4.
6 Anavatapta nagaraja pariprkkha stitra. The Chinese title is quite different.
7 j= AK Hy. Cf. Hiren, 1.1. s.v. Manasa, where Manasvin is wrongly said to be


the tutelary deity of lake Manasarovara (in Tibet identified with lake Anavatapta, cf.
Kawaeucul, Three years in Tibet, Ch. XXVI, pp, 139 sqq.).-


8 EE IB. 9 KR. 10 KR.


Digitized by Microsoft®


29


of the sea, and, as one of the eight Lokapalas, guardian of the
West '. It is remarkable that there were apparently two beings
of the same name, both deities of the water and of the West,
Varuna the deva and Varuna the Naga king.

After Takshaka?, Dhrtarashtra* and Vasuki*, of whom the first
and the third both belong to the eight great Naga kings of
Northern Buddhism*, Mucilinda®, also called Mahamucilinda,
who, as we have seen above, protected Cakyamuni during the
seven days of meditation, and Llapatra’*, who consulted the
Buddha about rebirth in a higher sphere, are enumerated, followed
by 176 others.

The same Naga kings, except Mucilinda and Elapatra, are
mentioned in the so-called Anumantrana, an invocation of the
Nagas found in the Bower MS. from Mingai, about which R.
Morris * writes the following: “As regards to the contents of the
MS., fol. 3 apparently contains a charm which is intended to
force the Nagas or snake-deities to send rain. The mutilated
line 1 enumerates, it would seem, various plants which are to be
used as ingredients for an oblation. Line 2 gives the Mantra for
the oblation..... The end of line 2 and the following lines to
the end of the page contain the so-called Anumantrana, a further
invocation of the snake-deities, intended to propitiate them by a
declaration of the worshipper’s friendly relations with various
individual Nagas. This snake-charm, which appears to be Buddhistic,
was probably composed in Southern India. For it mentions ‘the
district on the banks of the Gola’, i.e. the Godavari..... The
language of this piece is the incorrect Sanskrit, mixed with Prakrit
forms, which is common in the Buddhist works of the early cen-
turies of our era, as well as in the Buddhist and Jaina inscrip-
tions of the same period”.

Morris compares the list of names found in the Anumantrana,


4 Cf. Erres, 1.1. s.v.
2 fH K in.
3 té BA fi) HE ; BEAL calls him Ditaraksha, but Morris writes Dhritarashtra
(Dhrtarastra).
BCH:
5 See above p. 4, cf. pp. 20, 24, 23.
6 Fy ie BE BE.
7 +t aE we Hf} (Elapatna).


8 Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1891—3, pp. 63-seqq., Notes and queries by the
Rev. R. Morris, nr 44. Cf. the Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde des Morgenlandes,


Vol. V, nr 2.


es


Digitized by Microsoft®


30


each time preceded by the words “1 keep friendship with”, with
those mentioned in the Great Cloud-wheel Rain-asking sutra in
Brau’s Catena, those found in the Saddharma Pundarika siitra
and those of Southern Buddhism. Nanda and Upananda, Anava-
tapta, Takshaka, Dhrtarashtra and Virtpaksha are mentioned in
all these lists, Sagara (wrongly called Samharaka in the Mingai
MS.) in the three former, as well as Vasuki, while Varuna and
Manasvin are not found in the Lotus and in Southern Buddhism.
Further, the MS. gives several other names, as Nairavana, Krshna,
Gautamaka, Mani, Dandapada etc. Dhrtarashtra and Virtipaksha
are the regents of the East and the West, and also Naga kings;
as to Nairavana, this is, according to Morris, perhaps Vaicravana,
the regent of the North. Krshna and Gautamaka are mentioned
in the Divyavadana as two Naga kings.

Prof. De Groot! gives a very interesting description of the
whole rain ceremony, as it is performed in Chinese Buddhist
monasteries in times of drought, by order of the authorities or
of influential laymen. An altar is erected, mostly in the court-yard
before the great temple of the Triratna, but sometimes at the
foot of the mountain on which the monastery is situated; there
a Kwan-yin temple is often appointed for these ceremonies and
for the prayers for rain, sent up by the mandarins and the
people. Once or twice Dz Groor saw a shrine dedicated to Sagara
Nagaraja, the special sea-god of the Chinese Buddhists; it was
opened only in time of drought.

The altar corresponds with the prescriptions of the sutra,
mentioned above* On the gates of the four sides dragons are
painted, two on each, with their heads turned to the inside.
The cow dung of the Hindus is replaced in China by a yellow
reddish clay, which is used for adorning the platform inside the
enclosure. The estrade upon this platform is covered with blue
silk, as well as the tables for the siitras, utensils, offerings, and
the chairs of the performing monks, of whom the leader looks
to the East, the others to the North and South.

According to Dr Groot, the colour blue is chosen in China
because this is the colour of the East, from where the rain must
come; this quarter is represented by the Azure Dragon, the highest
in rank among all the dragons. We have seen, however, that


41 Code du Mahayana en Chine, Ch. VIII, pp. 148 sqq.
2 Cf. also nr 177 of the Supplement of the Tripitaka (third volume of bundle 3),
p. 380b: fe SE Re ait RA HEF HE, “Doctrine concerning the altar for nravine far


Digitized by Microsoft®


31


the original sutra already prescribed to use the blue colour and
to face the East. Moreover, the Azure Dragon has nothing to
do with Buddhism. The Chinese Buddhists only copy an ancient
Indian rite. Indra, the raingod, is the patron of the East, and
Indra-colour is nila, dark blue or rather blue-black, the regular
epitheton of the rain clouds’, If the priest had not to face the
East but the West, this would agree with the fact that the
Nagas were said to live in the Western quarter and that in India
the West corresponds with the blue colour., Facing the East,
however, seems to point to an old rain ceremony in which Indra
was invoked to raise the blue-black clouds.

On the eastern, southern, western and northern tables tablets
are placed on which the principal dragons of these quarters,
whose Indian names are mentioned above, are painted, with
three, five, seven and nine heads instead of the crests or hoods
of the Nagas. Often other tablets representing attendants of these
great dragons stand at their sides. All the dragons have waves
at their feet and clouds above their heads. Finally, twenty eight
black poles with long blue flags, each with a burning oil lamp
between four flower vases filled with fresh flowers, represent the
twenty eight constellations. We find these twenty eight blue
banners mentioned on p. 21a of the Chinese text of the siitra
(Nanso, nr 186); Benpatz’s translation of the Sanscrit text, however,
speaks only of one blue banner *. De Groor explains the fact that
all the poles are black by the connection of this colour with the
North, with Yin and the water ®. This may be right, as the siitra
itself does not mention the colour of the poles, so that the Chi-
nese in this respect could follow their own ideas.

In the morning of the first day of the ceremonies the leading
priest with the abbot and the highest authorities of the monastery
offer incense in the great temple of the Triratna, and, while the
dharanis of Kwan-yin are recited, the temple and the rain altar
are purified by sprinkling pure water upon them (as amtta).
Now the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, dragon-kings and saints may
descend upon the altar without contaminating themselves. The
leading monk and the abbot rise from their seats and offer incense ;
at the same time the choir thrice sings a lamentation about the


4 Professor SpeyeR had the kindness of pointing this out to me. One of the many
passages where a blue-black colour is mentioned is Mahabharata, Book III, 16, 13.


2 Pp. 303, 309.
3 Black horses were the principal offerings to the rain gods of Japan, see below,


Book II, Ch. Ill, § 2.


Digitized by Microsoft®


32 -


drought and a prayer for rain, followed by an invocation of the
Triratna. Then some moments of profound silence allow the offi-
ciating monk to sink into dhyana and to see by his mental eyes
the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, dragon-kings and saints descending
and listening to the prayers. On awakening he orders to recite
seven times the dharani of the “Light-king of the Great Wheel”
(i. e. the sun), in order to correct the mistakes which might be
made in the ritual. Thereupon the monks invoke by name all
the 187 Naga kings mentioned in the siitra and thrice recite the
first kind of dharanis, given by the Buddha to these kings
according to the same holy text. These magic formulae are accom-
panied by the sound of vajra bells, and followed by a terrible
noise of drums and cymbals in order to make them more power-
ful. Then follows the invocation of all the 54 rain-giving Tatha-
gatas, enumerated: in the siitra, each monk having a small incense-
burner in his hand, which they also used in invoking the Naga
kings. After a second dhyana of the leading monk having rendered
efficacious the second kind of dharani, given by the Buddha and
recited by the monks in the same way as the former, the cere-
mony is closed by expressing the hope that the rain may soon
come, sent by the Triratna and the dragon kings. A little later,
in the course of the forenoon, the offerings, placed on the altar,
are solemnly presented to the dragons, and songs and prayers
are sent up to them, as well as to the Triratna and all the devas.
Often a paper figure of one of the Taoistic “Celestial Generals”,
with a written request for rain in his hand, is burned, that he
may take it to Heaven.

In the afternoon the leading monk with the abbot and as
many other monks as they want take their seats upon the altar
and recite the Great-Cloud-Wheel siitra. All these ceremonies are
daily repeated till it rains sufficiently. If the drought lasts too
long, Kwan-yin’s dharanis and prayers for rain are continued
night and day, small groups of monks relieving one another in
all the buildings of the monastery. The main point of the ceremony
is the purity of the altar and of the priests themselves; for the
drought, like all calamities caused by some crime of men, can only
be stopped by pure ceremonies performed by pure priests. Especially
because they never eat animal food, the monks are religiously
cleaner and therefore much more able to make rain than laymen.

As to the ceremonies for stopping too abundant rains, called

“praying for good weather”', these are described by Dz Groor


Digitized by Microsoft®


33


in the same chapter. The same siitra may be used, because it
has the power of ruling the rain, but these ceremonies are seldom
performed on such an extensive scale. As a rule a yellow paper
.tablet with an invocation of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who
reside above the rays of the sun and are mentioned in the
“Sttra of the vajra brilliant flames (the beams of the sun), which
puts a stop to wind and rain”'’, is erected in the hall of the
Triratna and offerings are made to them. Then Kwan-yin is
invoked and this Bodhisattva’s dharanis are recited, or those of
the “Medicine-Master, Tathagata of the Ju-li (one of the sapta-
ratna, probably the bluish precious stone called vaidirya) light” 2,
i.e. the sunlight, and the latter's name is invoked a thousand
times. De Groor explains this Medicine-Master to be the oriental
Sun, who cures Nature and drives away all illnesses caused by
the demons of Darkness. His cult, the counterpart of that of
Amitabha, the occidental Sun, is based upon a siitra, which we
find mentioned in Nanso’s Catalogue sub nr 171°. This Tathagata
is the well-known Yakushi Nyorai of Japan. It is quite clear
that he is considered to be most powerful in causing the rains
to stop and refreshing the earth by his rays. Thereupon (akya-
muni, the Buddhas who are above the brilliant flames, and all
the Nagas are supplicated to grant good weather, and besides
the two former the Medicine-Master and Kwan-yin are each
invoked thrice in kneeling attitude. Finally, the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha are, as always, praised as the refuge of all. The
same ceremonies are repeated by other monks till the rain stops,
and then a larger number of them for the last time celebrates
the rites as a sign of gratitude and satisfaction.

In Japan, which in summer time has much more to suffer from


1 > Fil] SE A TE J BS ARE.

2 Be BES HA OE Hn 3K. oo

3 ee fii ER Fei + au ae AS ia WY il KK, Bheshajyaguru vaidurya-
prabhisa Tathagata purvapranidhana guna sutra, “Sutra on the merits and virtue of
the original vow of the Medicine-Master, the Tathagata Vaidurya light; translated by
Hiien Tsano, A.D. 650. Cf. nrs 170, 172, 173. According to Naxyo, nrs 170, 171 and
472 are later translations of the twelfth Sitra of nr 167; the main title of this work is
4B aie K ie TH WH FL WK , Buddhabhashita mahibhishekarddhidharani stitra,
“Sttra on the divine dharani of the Great washing of the top of the head (baptism),
spoken by Buddha”. This is apparently the Kanjo-kyo, Te TH Rg, “Sutra on the
washing of the top of the head”, recited in the fifth month of A.D. 880 in the Sacred
Spring Park at Kyoto, for stopping the abundant rains (Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXXVI,
p-. 541).

Verh, Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XIII, N° 2. 3


U
Digitized by Microsoft®


34


continuous and heavy rains than China, ceremonies for stopping
rain are frequently mentioned in the annals, as we shall see
below}. But also rain prayers were very frequent, and the Bud-
dhist priests eagerly took advantage of the opportunity to surpass
the Shintdists and extend their sphere of influence. Thus the
Great-Cloud-Wheel siitra (Nanso, nr 188), mentioned above, was
recited by fifteen Buddhist priests in the Sacred Spring park
(Shinsen-en) at Kyoto, in the sixth month of the year 875 of our
era”. At the same time sixty other priests in the Taikyokuden,
one of the buildings of the Imperial Palace, recited parts of the
Mahaprajiaparamita sitra*, which is very often mentioned in the
Japanese annals as having been partly read in rain ceremonies ‘).
Sometimes also the Vajra-prajiaparamita sitra® was used. In the
fifth month of A.D. 880 the Kanjé-kyo°, “Stitra on washing the
top. of the head (baptism)”, was recited in the Sacred Spring park
for stopping the abundant rains.

Also in China other siitras are used in rain ceremonies, e. g.
the Vajra-prajnaparamita sitra, the Buddhabhashita Sagara Naga-
raja stra’, “Siitra on the Sea-dragon-king (i.e. Sagara), spoken
by Buddha”, ete. This is logical, for, as De Groor® remarks,
according to the 39th commandment of the Mahayana code all
punishments for crimes committed — and drought is such a
punishment — are to be taken away by reciting the sitras and
vinayas of the Mahayana.


4 Book IJ, Ch. IIT.
2 Cf. below, Book II, Ch. HI, § 3; Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXVII, p. 444.


3 Kk ee 2 KK, Mahaprajia sutra; Nanso’s Catalogue, nr 4, gives the full


title: K Ree 5 We ve i Bz £K, and states that it was translated in A.D.


659 by the famous pilgrim Hten Tsane.

4 Of. Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XX, p. 335 (sixth month, 871); Ch. XXIII, p. 372, (fifth
month, 873); Ch. XXV, p. 386 (second month, 874); Ch. XXXII, p. 466 (seventh month,
877); Ch. XXXVII, p. 543 (sixth month, 880).

5 > Fl) SE ERK ; Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXIII, p. 372; Nanso, nrs 10—12,


6 PE JE @K, sco above, p. 33, note 3; Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXXVII, p. 544;
Nanyo, nr 167.


7 434 ae nie Ke Nanso, nr 456; translated A.D. 265—316. Cf. nr 457:
a By if: HE at ie EN AK, “Sutra on the Seal of the Law spoken by


Buddha for the sake of Sagara Nagaraja”. These stitras were spoken in Sagara’s palace
at the bottom of the sea. ;
8 L.1, p. 156; cf. p. 72.


Digitized by Microsoft®


BOOK I.
THE DRAGON IN CHINA.


CHAPTER I.


THE DRAGON IN THE CHINESE CLASSICS.
§ 1. Yih king.


The oldest Chinese work which mentions the dragon is the
Yih King’. We read there the following explanation of the lowest
line of the first of the diagrams, which corresponds with Heaven:
“First, nine: a dragon hidden in the water is useless” *, According
to the commentators the meaning of this sentence is that the
lowest line of this diagram, representing the dragon lying in the
deep, is a sign that it is not the time for active doing. Therefore
Leek *® translates: “In the first (or lowest) line, undivided (we
see its subject as) the dragon lying hid (in the deep). It is not
the time for active doing”. This translation is more explicative
than true, for the text simply gives the words: “First, nine: a
dragon hidden in the water is useless”. As to the word nine, this
is explained by the commentary entitled “ Traditions of Cheng’ 4
to mean the “fullness of Yang”, because it is three times three,
i.e. a multiplication of the undividable number which represents
Yang. As the undivided strokes of the diagrams are symbols of
Yang and the divided ones of Yin, the meaning of the two first
words of the sentence is, as Lrees translates, that the lowest
line is undivided. The characters 7 FA, however, do not mean:
“it is not the time for active doing”, but simply: “useless” >. The
dragon, symbolized by the lines of the diagram of Heaven, be-
cause he is the Yang creature xar’ sEoynv, is represented by the


1 Book qin SAAS Dr FB. on. 1, Eb BG -
2 30 Ju. 4 #ED AA. 3 Section I, p. 57. 4 fe fa.


5 Prof. De Groot kindly pointed out to me the simple and clear meaning of this
and the following sentences.


Digitized by Microsoft®


36


lowest line as still lying in the depth of the waters. In this
condition the heavenly giver of fertilizing rains is still useless
to mankind. This must be the original meaning of these words,
but the diviners concluded from this usélessness of the hidden
dragon that one had to abstain from active doing.

The second line of the same didgram’ is explained by the Yih
king as follows: “Nine, second; a dragon is seen in the rice fields ;
advantage; a great man will be seen” '. Laer translates: “It will
be advantageous to meet with the great man”. Although this
translation follows the commentators, the meaning is clearer if
we divide the sentence as we have done above. The appearance
of a dragon in the rice fields gives advantage, i.e. the fertilizing
rain gives good crops. The original meaning of the character Fil},
which consists of rice and a knife, is apparently harvest, which
was, of course, identical to advantage. Further, “a great man
will be seen”. Here we see the dragon representing great (espe-
cially holy) men, who are as full of Yang as the dragon himself.
Even in those olden times his appearance apparently was con-
sidered to be an omen of the birth of great and holy men,
especially of Emperors, the holiest men on earth.

In the third line the dragon is not mentioned, but in the
fourth we read that he is “perhaps leaping in the pool” (but not
yet rising above the surface). “There will be no evil (44)’?. The
word evil seems to be more logical in a divinatory sentence
than “mistake”.

The fifth line is described as “A flying dragon in the sky;
advantage; a great man will be seen” *. It is, of course, of the
utmost benefit to mankind, if the rain-bringing dragon is soaring
in the sky. At the same time it is an omen of the appearance
of a great man.

Finally, the topmost line is explained as “The dragon exceeding
the proper limits (i.e. flying too high). There will be regret’ 4.
The simplest explanation of these words is that, if a dragon flies
too high, he is too far from the earth to return and the rain
does not reach it, a reason of regret to himself and to mankind.
At the same time the great man, symbolized by the dragon,
repents all exaggeration on his part.


172, RHEE. A. RKA, .
2 APY mK SE. eK.
: Wu E.R EK. A. KA.


a. ab


Digitized by Microsoft®


37


The Yeh king goes on as follows: “The number nine is used (in
this diagram). If a herd of dragons is seen divesting themselves of
their heads, this means good fortune’ *).

The lowest line of the second diagram, which represents Earth
(SH, Kw‘'un), is explained as “Dragons fighting in the open field;
their blood is dark (not purple, as Luceu translated) and yellow” *.
Apparently a thunderstorm, with dark and yellow clouds flying
through the sky, is described in this way. For in a passage of
Appendix V of the Yih king’, ascribed to Confucius, we read:
“Kien (Heaven) is a horse, Kwun (Earth) is a cow, Chen (Thunder)
as a dragon” *. And, again, in the same Appendix®: “Chen is
thunder, is a dragon, is dark and yellow” °. The same diagram
represents also Spring and the Eastern quarter, which are identi-
fied with the Azure Dragon’.

In Ch. 11 (p. 2) of the Veh king the words “A hehe lying in
the deep is useless” are illustrated by * Yang is below’ *, which
means: “The Sun is under the horizon, i.e. the dragon lying in
the deep is as useless as the sun under the horizon.

In the same chapter (same page) we read: “A dragon is seen
in the rice fields; blessing power ( fifi) is spread everywhere” °). This
is a clear explanation of the word advantage.in the above passage
on the fifth line of the first diagram.

As to the “Dragons fighting in the open field”, in this chapter
these words are followed by: “Their way (tao) is exhausted” ',
i.e. their blessing actions are completed to the last. As rain is~
the blessing conferred upon mankind by the dragons, this sen-
tence may easily be explained by the fact that in a thunderstorm,
when the dragons fight in the sky, the rain comes down in
torrents.


1A. RMA. A
2 LX. MRSS. Ee Ht.


3 Shwoh-kwa chw'en, git £h {i (Ch. 17), p. 12. Lega, Appendix V, p. 429,
Chapter VIII, 12.


4 8 Fy AG. dh Bm OF. tH


5 Ch. 17; Lace, p. 430, Ch. XI, ae


‘RBH. BE. BL


: Ch De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. I, p. K Ill, p. 964, 987.


i EZ) FA. We Ze TE th.
> SL HE 22 BI fH ti 7 th .
10 WE RR EF. Ha He th.


Digitized by Microsoft®


38


‘An Appendix of the Yih king' says: “The hibernating of dragons
and snakes is done in order to preserve thewr bodies” *, Here we see
dragons and snakes being closely connected and regarded as
belonging to the same kind of animals. Also in later times the
same fact is to be observed.

On considering the above passages of the Yih king we arrive
& the conclusion that the ideas on the dragon prevailing in
China at the present day are just the same as those of the remotest

times. It is a water animal, akin to the snake, which uses to
sleep in pools during winter and arises in spring. It is the god
of thunder, who brings good crops when he appears in the
rice fields (as rain) or in the sky (as dark and yellow clouds),
in other words, when he makes the rain fertilize the ground.
But when he flies too high and cannot return, the thirsty earth
must wait in vain for his blessings, and sorrow prevails. As this
beneficient being is full of Yang, it symbolizes those among men
who are fullest of Light, namely great men, and its appearance
is considered to be an omen of their coming, i.e. of their birth.
In the first place the greatest and fullest of Yang among them
all, the Emperor, is, of course, symbolized by the dragon. He is,
indeed, the representative of Imperial power, as we shall see
later on.

When black and yellow clouds covered the sky, and thunder
and lightning raged, the ancient Chinese said, like those of to-day :
“The dragons are fighting; look at their blood spreading over
the sky”. And at the same time the heavenly dragons caused
the rain to pour down upon the grateful earth.

Even when the dragons were only leaping in their pools, no
calamity was to be feared, and when a herd of them, even head-
less, was seen in the sky, this was a felicitous sign. Winter,
when they hibernate and sleep in pools, is the dry season in
China. But in spring, in the third of the twenty four seasons
into which the year was divided even in olden times, the
“Resurrection of the hibernating animals”* takes place, and it
begins to rain a little. In the “beginning of summer” ‘, however,
i.e. in the first of the six summer seasons, “the winds arrive


4 ee ee PR (a (Ch. XV), p. 41.
2 HEREC BUT Ah.


3 4 ee. “Resurrection of hibernating animals”, is the name of this season; cf.
De Groot, |.]., Vol. III, p. 968.


Digitized by Microsoft®


39


and the dragons ascend to the sky”, for this is the time when
the abundant rains come down, a blessing to mankind.


§ 2. Shu king.


In the Shu king? we read the following words of the Emperor
Shun to Yu: “I wish to see the emblematic figures of the an-
cients: the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountain, the dragon,
and the variegated animals (pheasants) which are depicted (on
the upper sacrificial yarment of the Emperor)”. So we see that
even in the early times of Shun’s predecessors, i.e. in the days
of Hwang Ti (who is said to have reigned in the 27th century
B.C.) and Yao, the dragon belonged to the six symbolic figures
painted on the upper garment of the Emperor. This was, no
doubt, due to its blessing power as rain-giving god of thunder
and clouds. :


§ 3. Li ki.


The Li ki* says: “What is called the four ling (Si)? The
unicorn, the phoenix, the tortoise and the dragon, they are called
the four ling. As the dragon is considered to be a domestic
animal, fishes and sturgeons do not flee away” *. Couvreur trans-
lates ling by: “animaux qui donnent des présages”, but it has a
stronger meaning, as we may learn from Dz Groor’s Religious
System *®. Therefore I should prefer to translate it by “spiritual
beings”. The effective operation of the tsing ($j) or vital spirit
of these four creatures is, indeed, enormously strong, and there-
fore they may be justly called “the four spiritual animals par -
excellence”. It is no wonder that their appearance was considered to.


re Yih wéi, By he " i £p Be quoted in the famous encyclopaedia entitled


Kin ting ku kin tu shu tsih ching, ER cE ns 4 | = 6 MK (published in


4725, cf. De Groot, 1.1. Vol. I, Introd. p. XXI), which we henceforth. shall quote as


T.S.; Sect. 45 ih. Ch. 127, He Th me p. 5b: i BOW mE


Ft K.- : =
2] RMA SR, H. A. Be, OW, BE Se
043 er. Sect. ya] fB. Yih Tsih; Leaes, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. Il, Part


II, Book IV, § 4, p. 58.
3 Ch. VII, Li un, ne E » art. 3, nr 10: Couvreur, Li ki, Vol. I, p. 524.


4 fe OB. RAGHEB COR RHEURE.
we fA AF ie. 5 Vol. IY, p. 12


Digitized by Microsoft®


|
|


40


be an omen, but this was only the conséquence of their “spirituality”.

Tn art. 4 of the same Chapter of the Zi ki', where the halcyon
days of the holy emperors of antiquity are described, we read:
“The male and female phoenixes, and the male and female
unicorns were all in the marshes beyond the city ‘walls; the
tortoise and the dragon were in the ponds of the Imperial
Palace” ?, i. e. the four ling were all in the neighbourhood,
spreading their blessings over the Palace and the country.

Further, in another passage of the Li ki, also devoted to the
ancient sovereigns *, the following words are to be found: “They
(the monarchs of old) chose (litt. followed, accommodated them-
selves to) felicitous places in order to make sacrifices to the
Emperor of Heaven in the suburbs. The sacrifices ascended and
reached Heaven. Then phoenixes descended, and tortoises and
dragons arrived” +.

Finally; in the first, second and third months of spring’, “the
Emperor ascends his carriage adorned with bells, drawn by
azure dragons ° and carrying a blue banner (ff, 4%, adorned with
- dragons joined’)”. The azure dragon is, as we stated above, the
symbol of Spring, the season when “thunder. resounds, lightning
begins to flash, and the hibernating animals all move, open their
doors (i.e. come out of their chrysalides) and begin to come out’’®.


a


§ 4, Cheu 1i.


We cae seen the dragon mentioned in the Shu king among
the twelve symbolic ornaments of the ancient sacrificial robe of


4 Couvrevr, p. 536, nr 16.


_ 2 Jal Be BB 2 AM, ME


3 Ch. VII, Li ki, ne Be, art. 2; nr 12; Couvreur, Vol. - p. 563.


‘AR ELUATAM. FARK. MAAK,
HE 1 .

5 Lt ki, Ch. XXI, Yueh ling, FY 4, “Monthly Precepts”; Couvreur, I, Ch. IV, pp.
332 (first month), 340 (second month), 347 (third month): K F- agers Fe it


Be. BABE. MO HF


6 Horses higher than eight ch‘ih, i.e. 41.60 meter, were called dragons (Couvreur,
I, p. 333).


7 Cheu li, Jl ne Section Ch‘un kwan, Fe BEB: “Spring officials”, s. v. | ee
Szé shang; Ch. XXVII, p. 24, gives the names of the nine banners ruled by the Szé


shang, “Banner rulers”. “Dragons joined form the h%, ix (the second banner)”,


BE HE Tht Wir


Digitized by Microsoft®


4]


the Emperor. Further, the Cheu li has taught us (above p. 40,
note 7) that the banner called 2%, ii, was adorned with dragons
joined (i.e. twisted about each other). The same work! states the
following: “In general as tsieh® (official tablets) of the envoys of
the Empire, in mountainous countries tiger tablets are used, in
plain countries tablets painted with human figures, and in watery
countries dragon tablets. The tablets are all made of metal’ *. It
is clear why the ornaments of these official tablets were divided
in this way. For, as the commentator Caine K‘ane-cu‘ine remarks
on this passage, “in the mountains are many tigers, in the plains
many men, and in the waters many dragons’*. Thus the dragon
symbolized the water.

A third passage of the Cheu i*, which treats of the Winter
officials, says that, in painting and embroidering, “Water is repre-
sented by means of dragons” °. Caao P‘un’s’ commentary explains
these words as follows: “The dragon is a divine being in the
water. If one represents water without representing dragons,
there is nothing to show the divinity of its phenomena’ *. As
to Caine K*ane-cu'ine, he simply states: “The dragon is a water
creature; it is (depicted or embroidered) on clothes” °.


§ 5.11.


A dragon banner is mentioned in the J hk", where Imperial
hunting parties are described. We read there: “In the frontier


4 Section Ti kwan, Hh BE s.v. chang tsieh, ps fill » Ch. XIV, p. 39.

2 fil .

SLAM SHH UA. LA.
AAR ih. Ae th.

4+P oh. WSR. PSA. BoE.

5 Section Tung kwan, x > Ch. XLII, x L au % = Ae (painting and


embroidering) 3 Hy , 4 Fr ffi, p. 50. 6 KWH. |


7 tf ya a commentator of the Sung dynasty. Although only his family name
is mentioned, and there was another commentator of the same family name, namely
CHao Kw*ane, isl fz. of the T'ang dynasty, probably we have here to do with
the former.


8 HE ak AH ih by. SE aOR EE Ha AR A J SS tS


9 HE KW. HER.
10 42% Gl, Sect. SE St ne BU Ch. X, p. 48a: FA A. AE rH,


HE Hitt .


Digitized by Microsoft®


a ft
yaa


42


regions: when a tiger is hit: dragon banner’. This is, at least,
probably the meaning of the very short text. Caine K‘ane-cn‘ine
explains it as follows: “‘In the frontier regions’ (Fi is used
here for 4%) means shooting with the rulers of néighbouring
countries. They paint a dragon on the banner'; moreover it is
a variegated pattern. ‘Full silk’ forms the banner” *. In hunting
parties with foreign rulers probably a signal was given with this
dragon banner when a tiger (the dragon’s deadly enemy) was shot.

The ancient texts referred to in this chapter are short, but
sufficient to give us the main conceptions of old China with
regard to the dragon. He was in those early days, just like now,
the god of water, thunder, clouds and rain, the harbinger of
blessings, and the symbol of holy men. As the Emperors are the
holy beings on earth, the idea of the dragon being the symbol
of Imperial power is based upon this ancient conception.

For the sake of clearness the further texts will be treated in
separate chapters according to the kind of information they give.
In each chapter, however, chronological order will be observed.


1 he. chen, according to Wetuis WILLIAMS, Dict. s.v. p. 44: “a silken banner of,


a nar oer plain and triangular”.


2 RT. a Be 258 WF St AHERN. Hh.
Bt a a if (Hi BA. tung poh, was, according to Cuine K‘ane-cu‘na, in the


same work, Ch. XXVII, p. 24b, ‘deep red, in accordance with the main colour of the
Cheu dynasty”). -


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER II.
DIVINATION.
§ 1. Lucky omens.


The birth of great sages and Emperors was preceded by the
appearance of deapons and phopnizes, In the night of Confucius’
birth (B.C. 551) two azure dragons descended from the sky “and
came to his mother’s _ house.She. saw them in her dream and
gave birth to the great sage'. The biography of the Emperor
Wu *, the famous man of the Han dynasty (B.C. 140—87), con-
tains the following passage in regard to his birth: “The Emperor
Hiao Wu of the Han dynasty was the son of the Emperor King.
Before he was born the Emperor King dreamt that a red hog
descended from the clouds and straightly. entered the Ch‘ing fang
koh (Exalted Fragance Corridor). The Emperor King awoke and
sat down under the corridor. Actually there was a red dragon.
It was like fog and in coming darkened the doors and windows.
When the Imperial harem went to. look (what was happening),
there was above the corridor a cinnabar coloured vapour which
increased enormously and rose. After the vapour had dispersed
they saw a red dragon coiling and revolving between the rafters.
The Emperor King called a diviner, the Old Yao by name, and
asked him about the matter. The old man said: ‘This is a lucky
omen. This corridor certainly will produce a man who shall rule
the world. He shall expel the barbarians and thus bring with
him lucky omens. Therefore he shall be the most glorious ruler
of the Liu family. But it (may mean) also a great prodigy’.
The Emperor King ordered the Imperial Consort Wang to move
to the Exalted Fragrance Corridor, wishing thereby to act in
accordance with Old Yao’s words. Thereupon he changed the


4 Shih i ki, # 34 BU. written by Wane Kia, =F FA, probably in the 4th


century; Ch, III, JA ia +E: p. 4b,


2 Wu Ti néi chwen, “Inner traditions on the Emperor Wu”, nee if Ay 4 .
ascribed to the famous historiographer Pan Ku, $}F [ij] . who died A.D. 92; p, 4a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


44


name of the corridor into J lan’ tien, ‘Hall of the Florishing
Orchid’'. After more than ten days the Emperor King dreamt
that a divine woman held up the sun in both her hands and
gave it to the Consort Wang. She swallowed it, and after fourteen
months gave birth to the Emperor Wu. The Emperor King said:
‘I dreamt that a red vapour changed into a red dragon. The
diviners considered this to be a lucky omen; (therefore) he (the
new-born son) niust be called Lucky (47h)’”.

One of the ten lucky signs which were seen in the course of
one day under the reign of Yao, one of the five holy Emperors
of ancient times, was a dragon which appeared in the pond of
his palace ?.

~ The appearance of yellow or azure dragons, often mentioned
in the annals *, was nearly always considered to be a very good
omen. Only if they came untimely or on wrong places they were
harbingers of evil, as we shall see below. They were mostly seen
in the night, spreading a brilliant light all over the neighbour-
hood. Such a nightly apparition illuminated the palace of Kung
Sun-shuh‘* under the reign of the Emperor Kwang Wu (25—57
A.D.). The former considered it such a good omen, that in 25
A.D. he proclaimed himself Emperor of Shu (White Emperor)
and changed the name of the era into Lung-Hing’, “Dragon’s
rise” °. A black, horned dragon was seen one night by Li Kwang *,
who lived in the fourth century A. D. Its glittering eyes illumi-
nated the whole vicinity, so that the huge monster was visible
till it was enveloped by clouds which gathered from all sides.
The next morning traces of its scales were to be seen over a
distance of five miles, but soon were wiped out by the heavy


4 The orchid being the symbol of harmony, because the Shi king compares the
dwelling together in harmony of brothers with the smell of orchids, the new name of
the corridor was still more felicitous than the former.


2 Shuh i ki, lt #2 aU: written by Jen Fane, 4: Wy: in the earlier part of


the 6th century: zB EA. — H + Ht. HAIL BK.
A BIER, mip BE OL POE. co. hop. 4
3 Cf. T.S., Ch. 128, BE Bh. #E Be —. p. 70, 8a, 9; Ch..129, 4A EE


pp. 1 sq. ;

4 2 HH it. > HE

6 Tung kwan han ki, Ft BH yee AE, Ch. XXII, written in 107 A.D. by Liu
Cun, i) ¥), and continued in 172 A.D. by Ts‘at Yune, Be fs, .


7 FA X-%. cf. Gives. Chin. Bioar. Dict. s.v.. nv. BKK sa. Tn 296 he tank the ctwle


Digitized by Microsoft®


45


rains. Then one of Lit Kwang's attendants said to him: “A dragon
is a divine animal and an omen of a man’s rise to the position
of a ruler. So you will attain this rank”. On hearing this, Li
Kwang was very much rejoiced; and actually he became a ruler
after some time'. The dragons being such important omens, it
is no wonder that Imperial proclamations often were issued on
account of their appearance °.

Finaly, we may quote a divinatory work * which says: ‘When
the beginning rise of an Emperor or King is about to take place,
a dragon appears in the Yellow River or in the Loh. All examine
his head: if the head is black, men are correct; if white, the
Earth is correct; if red, Heaven is correct” ‘.


§ 2. Bad omens.
A. Fighting dragons.


From olden times high floods, tempests and thunderstorms
have been ascribed by the Chinese to dragons fighting in rivers
or in the air. Although, according to the Yih king®, “the tao
of dragons, fighting in the open field, is exhausted”, i. e. their
blessing power makes the rain pour down in torrents, on the
other hand such severe thunderstorms often cause much damage
and calamities. Therefore, however welcome a dragon fight in
the air might be in times of drought, in ordinary circumstances
the threatening armies in the sky were looked at with great
fright. Moreover, the people believed the damage produced by
dragon fights in rivers or in the air to be not limited to the
actual calamities of the present, but to extend itself to the near
future, in other words, they were considered to be very bad


—_—


4 Pao P'oh-tszé, Ke Ah ee written by Kou Hone, B YE, in the fourth cen-


tury; Ah $i Ch. IV ( fp BB).


2 The Emperor-Wen of the Han dynasty e.g. did so in B.C. 165, Books of the
Early Han Dynasty, 54 if aN aU Ch. IV; comp. the Emperor Siien’s proclama-
tion in the summer of B.C. 52 (ibidem, a if a 8U,. Ch. VII, p. 14a.


3 The Yih htien tsoh tu, $Y We, We RE, quoted in the T.S., Sect. Br ith,
ch. 130, BE BK, FE Bf. p- 22.
1 Ei MR BHR. GRE. RHA


TE, AS AWE, OA RIE.


5 See above, p. 37.


Digitized by Microsoft®


46


omens, foreboding inundations, disorder, war, nay even the
dynasty’s fall. As gods of water, clouds and rain they caused
high floods by their fights, and as representatives of the Imperial
power their victory or defeat meant rebellion, war, and even the
fall of the reigning House.

According to the Tso chw‘en' a high flood was ascribed to
dragons fighting in a pool in the nineteenth year of the reign
of Chao, Duke of Lu (523 B.C.). “There were great floods in
Ch‘ing; and [some] dragons fought in the pool of Wei, outside
the She gate. The people asked leave to sacrifice to them; but
Tsze-ch‘an refused it, saying: “When we fight, the dragons do
not look at us. Why should we look at them, when they are
fighting? If we offer a deprecatory sacrifice to them, they will
leave their abodes. If we do not seek the dragons, they also will
not seek us”. Then the matter was given up.

The Yih lin® says: “If six dragons have angry fight with one
another under an embankment, and the azure or yellow dragons
do not conquer, the travellers will meet hardships and trouble” *.
As we have seen above, the azure and yellow dragons especially
were harbingers of felicity; so their defeat was a sign of coming
trouble, probably caused by inundations.

In regard to impending war and ruin we may quote the follo-
wing passages from the Histories.

In the Books of the Sui dynasty* we read: “In the Liang dynasty
(A. D. 502—557), in the second year of the T‘ien kien era (508),
there were dragons fighting in a pool in Northern Liang province.
They squirted fog over a distance of:some miles. As to the evils
of dragons and snakes the Hung fan wu hing chw‘en® says: ‘These
are trouble and damage of dragons and beasts. That which be-
longs to Heaven is symbol of the Ruler. If the Heavenly breath
is injured, and the Tao of the Ruler is wounded, also the dragons
are injured. Their fights are symbols of weapons and shields’.


1 LeaGe, Chinese Classics, Vol. V, Part II, pp. 674 sq. (Book X, year XIX).

2 By A , a work on divination, quoted by the T. S., Ch. 130, HE Gb Rite RK, p. 3a.
3K HE FE AR RAR RR. te AE

Key 3, Ch. XXII, nr 18, Fh. FF im ; as p. 17a.


5 yk 0 hh 4 4 . cf. Dr Groot, Vol. V, p. 494, note 1: “A work based on


a section of the Shu king entitled Hung fan or The Great Plan. It seems to have
been held in great esteem in the sixth century as an expositor of prognostics. It was
then composed of eleven chapters, with a commentarv bv Liu Hiano. en that it mnet


&


Digitized by Microsoft®


Aq


Kine Fane! says in his Yih fei hew? («Flying observations on
divination”): ‘When the hearts of the multitude are not quiet,
dragon fights are the bad omens thereof’*. At that time the
Emperor for the first time ascended the throne, and there was
a riot of Ch‘en Poh-chi and Liu Li-lien. Danger and fear prevailed
in the empire”. .

The same annals‘ contain the following passage: “In the sixth
month of the fifth year of the P‘u t‘ung era (524 A.D.) dragons
fought in the pond of the King of K‘th o (%). They went west-
ward as far as Kien ling ch‘ing. In the places they passed all
the trees were broken. The divination was the same as in the
second year of the T‘ien kien era (503 A. D.), namely that their
passing Kien ling and the trees being broken indicated that there
would be calamity of war for the dynasty, and that it was a
sign that the Imperial tombs would be destroyed. At that time
the Emperor considered the holding of discussions to be his only
task, and did not think of ploughing. His fighting generals were
careless, his soldiers idle, and the Tao of the Ruler was injured.
Therefore there was the corresponding fact of the dragons’. evil.
The Emperor did uot at all become conscious (of the danger).
In the first year of the T’ai Tsing era (547 A.D.) there was
again a dragon fight in the waters of Li cheu. The waves seethed
and bubbled up, and clouds and fog assembled from all sides.
White dragons were seen running to the South, followed by
black dragons. That year Heu King came with troops to
submit, and the Emperor accepted his submission without taking
precautions. The people of the realm were all frightened, and
suddenly rebellion arose. The Emperor in consequence thereof
had a sad death’.”He died in 549, and eight years later the
Liang dynasty came to an end.

In A. D. 579 a black dragon was killed by a red one. Moreover,
in the same year there was a fight of a white dragon with a
black one, the result of which was that the white one ascended


1 p= FR a famous diviner of the first century of our era, author of the Yih


chw*en, By 48 (cf. De Groor, Rel. Syst., Vol. 1V, p. 204) and of the Yih yao, BB i
(cf. below, Bad omens, D.).


2 AH tk.

SER CMB BH. ROMA CK KAS, A
BO. WHE. RRR CAH. RHARK
A, RO RB. MIRE Bl.


4 Same chapter, section and page.
a


Digitized by Microsoft®


48


to the sky and the black one fell on the earth and died*. As.
black was the colour of the Later (i.e. Northern) Cheu dynasty,
these dragon fights. were forebodings of its approaching fall, which
actually took place two years later.

As to inundations announced beforehand by dragon fights, we
may refer to the History of the Sung dynasty?, where we read
that in the fifth year of the K‘ien Tao era (A. D. 1169) such a
battle in the air was seen amidst a heavy thunderstorm. “Two
dragons fled and pearls like carriage wheels fell down on the
ground, where they were found by herdsboys. In the following
years inundations afflicted the country”.

Sometimes dragon fights are mentioned not as omens, but only
as causing heavy storms which destroyed a large number of
houses and government buildings and killed hundreds of people,
carrying them into the air together with their domestic animals,
trees and tiles, over a length of more than ten miles. Such a
storm raged in the fourth month of the ninth year of the Hwang
t‘ung era (1149) above the Yt lin river in Li cheu®.

Devastation caused by lightning was believed to be the result
of sacred fire, sent by Heaven to stop dragon fights. “In the
fifth month of the year yih-wei (probably 1295) on a place near
the lake at I hing, all of a sudden there were two dragons which
twisting around each other and fighting both fell into the lake.
Their length had no sharp limits. In a short space of time a
heavy wind came riding on the water, which reached a height
of more than a chang (ten ch‘ih or feet). Then there fell from
the sky more than ten fire balls, having the size of houses of
ten divisions. The two dragons immediately ascended (to the sky),
for Heaven, afraid that they might cause calamity, sent out


sacred fire to drive them away. Supposed that Heaven had been
a little remiss for a moment, then within a hundred miles
everything would have turned into gigantic torrents. When I
recently passed by boat the Peachgarden of Teh Ts‘ing, those


4 Wang Shao chw‘en, TE a {i , “Biography of Wang Shao”, Books of the Sui
dynasty, Ch. LXIX, Al {i . nr 34, p. 2a.

2 Sect. Hh FF aR (Ch O07: BEBE ZEA ae
BR WE Bl TF 2 U8 A, De HB NY — BE AP BE, BR BE Hi,
RHC. AEM RA KK.


3 Kin shi, >» a, History of the Kin Dynasty (A.D. 1206—1368), Ch. ‘XXIII,


ae es . —_ ss Fr. ~


Digitized by Microsoft®


49


paddy fields were all scorched and black, some tens of acres in
all. Then we moored the boat to the bank and asked those
villagers (for the reason). They said: ‘Yesterday noon there was
a big dragon which fell from the sky. Immediately he was burned
by terrestial fire and flew away. For that what the dragons fear
is fire’”’'.


B. Dead dragons.


When dragons, wounded in a battle, tumbled: down and died,
this was believed to be a very bad omen. The Books of the Han
dynasty” relate the following: “On the day jen-tszé of the sixth
month of the seventh year of the Yen-hi era (A. D. 164), under
the Emperor Hwan, there was a dragon which died on Mount
Yé Wang in Ho néi (one of the districts of that time). Its length
was about some tens of chang. Siang K‘iai was of the following
opinion: ‘Taking into consideration that the dragon is a felicitous.
symbol of an Emperor or King, and that the Yih lun ta jen says:
“In the T'ien-feng era (A.D. 14—19) there was a dead dragon |
in the Hwang-shan palace. The Han troops killed Mang (i. e. the
Emperor Wang Mang, killed in A. D. 22), and Shi Tsu (i.e. Kwang
Wu, the first Emperor of the Eastern Han dynasty) rose again
(ascended the throne, in A.D. 25)”, this omen must be a sign
of change (of the dynasty)’. In the 25th year of the Kien-ngan
era (A.D. 220) the Emperor Wen of the Wéi dynasty replaced
the House of Han” *.

1 Kwei sin tsah shih, HS ae Rite ak (cf. DE i Rel. Syst. Vol. 1, p. 399: ‘
“a collection of miscellanies written by Cheu Miu, Ae. in the earlier part of the


fourteenth century), quoted T. &., Sect. @r ga, Ch. 130, HE ih AE =
p 8: Z, Fe we He A ee He a SH A — HE Nd A
De. HE. AA AE OK ra KR ih
MA KM. Amt ee +e. AR me. KH
Bem t+. KRKRER MUKA SC. EPR
Aa Geen HB Re. RB A ME a
CHARGE, La. BAKA WE
BAZ. EEA A BE BOK i BS TD BS EN HG Hh LK PT
mR. BHC HRA KE.


2 Shuh Han shu, Ch. XVII, Sect. Fy 47, nv 5, BE WE BE, p. 20.


3 fl it HE KABA HEF oS El A


Verh, Kon. Akad. y. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XII, N° 2
Digitized by Microsoft®


50


In the fifth year of the Kien-teh era (A. D. 576), under the
Later Cheu dynasty, a black dragon fell from the sky and died.
The dragon is the symbol of the Ruler, black was the colour
of the dynasty, and falling and dying is a most unlucky omen '.
So it was a foreboding of the-Emperor’s death, which happened
two years later (A. D. 578), and of the dynasty’s fall (A. D. 581),
which was announced also by the dragon fights mentioned above.


C. Dragons appearing at wrong times.


When dragons appeared at wrong times, they were forebodings
of evil instead of omens of felicity. The time is wrong for a
-dragon to appear, when the Son of Heaven himself does not
walk in the Tao, thus throwing into disorder both the Tao of
Heaven and men. So did the Emperor K‘ung Kiah of the ancient .
Hia dynasty, twenty centuries before Christ. Szz-ma Ts‘Inn? says
the following about this monarch: “The Emperor K‘ung Kiah
having ascended the Throne, loved the matters of the kwéi and
the shen and was disorderly (in his behaviour, i.e. he disturbed
the Tao). As the virtue of the House of the Hia rulers was
declining, the feudal lords rebelled against it. Heaven sent down
two dragons, a female and a male. K‘ung Kiah could not feed
them; he had not yet found the Dragon-rearer Family *. T'ang
of Tao (i.e. the House of the Emperor Yao) having declined,
one of his descendants was Liu Léi, who from the Dragon-rearer
family learned to tame dragons, in order to serve K‘ung Kiah.
K‘ung Kiah bestowed upon him the family name of Yu-lung 4


KikeTRt+ Li RUB KES Bit Ems

am A. FR JBL HE pe UL et A E.R ee FR it TE

ae WAKA. BEKO RPRN
HR.

41 Books of the Sui dynasty, Sect. Fr 4F ae: eA Jil 32 (8 oh. 4E poe

HERR SW. HA CR. BAP mw . Bein.

Te A ee HE


2 Historical Records, Ch. II, B aK AE: Jap. ed. with commentaries and notes,


Bi ab Ea HK (NN B FAL), Vol. 1, Ch. I, p. 240, Cf. CHavannes’ translation,


Vol. I, p. 168.


3 Hwan-lung shi, E HE K F


7 Pha eee


Digitized by Microsoft®


5]


(Dragon-ruler), and he received the succession of Shi Wéi. The
first of the dragons, the female, died, (whereupon) he took it
and gave it the Emperor to eat. As His Majesty ordered to seek
(the dragon), Liu Léi got afraid and fled. K‘ung Kiah died, and
his son, the Emperor Kao, ascended the Throne” '.

A different form of the same legend, according to which K‘ung
Kiah was presented by the Emperor of Heaven with two teams
of dragons, which were reared by Liu Léi till one of them died
and was given as food to His Majesty, is to be found in a passage
of the Tso chw‘en, which we will partly quote in Chapter IV § 8,
in regard to the Dragon-rearer family having been invested with
this name by the Emperor Shun. As to our present subject,
however, i.e. the evil omen of dragons appearing at a time
when the Tao is violated, we may refer to another passage of
the Historical Records, where the fall of the Hia dynasty, is
apparently brought into connection with the appearance of two
dragons. We read there the following. “In the third year (of his
reign) (B.C. 779), King Yiu fell deeply in love with Pao Szé?.
Pao Szé gave birth to a son, Poh Fub, and King Yiu wished to
degrade the Crownprince. The mother of the Crownprince was
the daughter of the Marquis of Chen and was queen. Afterwards,
when King Yiu had got Pao Szé and loved her, he wished to
degrade Queen Chen and at the same time send away the Crown-
prince I Kiu, (in order to) make Pao 8zé queen and Poh Fuh Crown-
prince. The great astrologer of Cheu, Poh Yang‘, after having
read the historical records, said: “(The House of) Cheu is lost”.

Now follows the explanation why the astrologer had such
pessimistic views. Caavannes* points out that the following is
borrowed from the Kwok yit®, one of the many works used by


Tl FE BL. 2 a KR
PRM. FRE HE ie RERER ERE
; pie Big HER Ne
=


eel nae 7L FA
2 HE i. wa


4 Les Mémoires Historiques de Se-ma Ts‘ien, Vol. I, p. 284, cf Introduction, Chap.
Ill, pp. CXLVII, sqq.

5 [ae aE, “Discourses concerning the States”, often called the “Exterior Com-
mentary” on the Ch‘un ts‘iu, and ascribed to the author of the Tso chw*‘en.


Digitized by Microsoft®


52


Szz-ma Ts‘ten. “In olden times, when the rulers of the Hia dynasty
were declining (in virtue and power), there were two divine
dragons which stopped at the palace of the Emperor and said:
‘We are two rulers of Pao’. The Emperor ttied to find out by
divination whether he should kill them, send them away or keep
them, but to none of these questions he received a favourable
answer. When he cast lots, however, as to the question whether
he should request (the dragons) to give him their foam to store
it away, the answer was favourable. Then a piece of cloth was
spread and a written communication was offered to them. The
dragons disappeared and their foam remained; it was put in a
case and stored away. When the Hia dynasty was lost, this case
was transmitted to (the House of) Yin; when (the House of).
Yin was lost, it was transmitted again.to (the House of) Cheu:
During these three dynasties no one dared open it; but at the
end of the reign of King Li it was opened and looked into. The
foam flew through the palace and could not be removed. King
Li ordered his wives to undress and to raise cries in unison
(naked) against the foam. ‘The foam changed into a black lizard!
and in this form entered the rear departments of the palace (the
female departments). A young concubine of the seraglio, who had
reached the age when one loses his milk-teeth (seven years),
met it. When she had reached the age when young girls put a
hair-pin in her hair (i.e. the age of fifteen, when they get
marriageable), she was pregnant. Without having a husband she
gave birth to a child, which she abandoned with fright. At the
time of King Stien (King Li’s son) a little girl sung, saying: ‘A
bow of wild mulberry wood and a quiver of reed are sure to
destroy the dynasty of Cheu’. King Stien heard this, and as
there were a married couple who sold these utensils, he ordered
them to be seized and put to death. They escaped and being
on the road saw lying there the child which the young con-
cubine of the seraglio had just abandoned. They heard it
crying in the night, pitied it and took it up. The man and his
wife then fled to (the land of) Pao. The people of Pao, having
committed some crime, asked for (permission to) present to the
King the girl whom, the young concubine had abandoned, in
order to atone therewith for their misdeed. (Thus) the girl came
from Pao, and this became Pao Szé. In the third year of King
Yiu’s reign the King went to the seraglio, saw Pao Szé and fell


41 K fe hiten yuen. CHAVANNES (p. 282, note 5) remarks that yen, which means


Digitized by Microsoft®


53


in love with her. She gave birth to a son, Poh Fuh. Finally the
King degraded Queen Chen and the Crownprince, and made Pao
Szé queen and Poh Fuh crownprince. The Great: Astrologer Poh Yang
said: “The misfortune is complete; there is no help for it’”. Then
we read that the Emperor, who by all manner of devices tried
to make the woman laugh, did not succeed until by a false sign
of an enemy’s attack he caused the lords to come up in great
haste. This made Pao Szé burst into laughter, but it was the
cause of the King’s death and the ruin of the dynasty, for when
the enemy actually came, the lords, whom the King had deluded
several times by false alarms, did not come to the rescue. Thus
the King was killed, Pao Szé was taken prisoner, and the treasures
of the House of Cheu were all taken by force. Japanese legends
teHl us that Pao Szé was reborn in the twelfth century as
Tamamo no mae, the Emperor Konoe or Toba’s concubine, who
changed into a fox'.

It is clear that in the above passages the dragons were harbingers
of evil, because the Emperors did. not walk in the Tao.

In A.D. 553 a dragon was seen ascending near the Imperial
Palace, and the next year a huge black serpent rose from the
Palace moat to the sky, spreading a dazzling light and followed
by a small snake. Calamity was predicted on account of these
apparitions, and the Emperor tried to avert the evil by offerings
of money’, magic, Buddhist prayers and philanthropy; but it
was all in vain, for at the end of the same year he was killed’.

The History of the Liao dynasty* says: “[In the first year of
the T‘ien-hien era (A. D. 926)] the Emperor (T‘ai-Tsu, 907—926)
stopped at Fu-yi-fu and did not take any precautions. That
evening a big star fell before his tent, and on the day sin-szé,
when he captured the castle of Tan-tszé, the Emperor saw a
yellow dragon coiling and winding, about one mile in length.
The brightness of its light blinded the eye; it entered the Imperial


4 Of. my treatise on “The Fox and the Badger in Japanese Folklore”, Transactions
of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. XXXVI, Part 3, pp. 51 sqq.
2 The dragons are fond of money, comp. the Japanese work Seiyuki, Py SH aU,


(written by TacutBana NANKEI, 1% Pa] BR, in 1795—1797), Zoku Teikoku Bunko,
Vol. XX, Ch. II, p. 259. This has perhaps something to do with their liking for the
vital spirit of copper (cf. below, Book I, Ch. TIT, § 3).


3 History of the South (Nanshi, e2] , written by YEN SHEU, JE =o who
lived in the first half of the seventh century A.D.), Ch. VIII (Ha aL. “PR ).


4, Liao shi, Bg FH, (906—1168), Sect. K mH. AK HE. “Fe. Tai-Tsu pen ki,


“Fundamental history of (the Emperor) T‘ai-Tsu”, Ch. II, p. 6a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


54


lodging house. There was a purple, black vapour which hid the
sky, remained the whole day, and then dispersed. That very day
the Emperor died” '.

Sometimes a dragon’s appearance was a sign of impending
calamity in the form of inundations. Such was the case in A. D.
967, according to the Books of the Sung dynasty. We read there
the following: “In the summer of the fifth year of the K‘ien-teh
era (967) it rained in the capital, and a black dragon appeared.
Its tail was on the border of the clouds, and it flew from North-
west to Southeast. The diviners explained it to be (an omen of)
big floods. The next year in twenty four prefectures the water
destroyed the ricefields and the houses” *.


D. Dragons appearing in wrong places.


If a dragon, symbol of Imperial power, is born in a commoner’s
house or comes out of his well, this is a very bad omen for the
dynasty, the Emperor pérsonally, or one of his feudal lords, for
it means degradation from the highest dignity to a common
state, and death of the ruler or of one of his representatives.

The Books of the Tsin dynasty* contain the following passage:
“Under the reign of Sun Hao of the Wu dynasty (the fourth
and last Emperor of that dynasty, A. D. 242—283), in the T‘ien-
ts‘eh era (A.D. 275—276), a dragon was hatched in (the house
of) a family in Ch‘ang-sha, and ate the chickens. Kine Fane® says
in his Y7h yao*: ‘If a dragon is hatched in a man’s house, a


ARS


TREN LAR. BIKER WE
TW ELH REE. RB. REE,
AA Be RR i H 79 wk. 2 AE fii.
, Sung-shu (A.D. 960—1279), Sect. Fr FF a. :
ERR, AHR. BEE. A
Ww. AEA RK. WEN Mt Ke


Soy oi


at. BH o o SH


cy BF as ae


Med ee


(A.D. 265—420), Ch. XXIX, nr 19, Sect. He FP FR, Pr. p. 24a
(ke 2 BS.


5 p= iE} , the famous diviner of the first century before our era, mentioned above,
p. 47, note 4.
6 FL te


Digitized by Microsoft®


5d


king will become a commoner’. Afterwards Hao submitted to
Chin (the Chin dynasty) }.

In the same section of this wore we read the following.
“Under the Emperor Ming of the Wei dynasty (A. D. 227-—239),
in the first year of the Ts‘ing-lung era (233), on the day kiah-
shen of the first month, a blue dragon appeared in a well at
Mo-p‘o (a place) in the suburbs. If only a lucky omen rises
at a wrong time, it becomes an evil. How much more is this
the case, when it (the dragon) is in straits in a well! This is
not a felicitous omen!* It was wrong that Wei on account of
it changed the name of the era. Yu Pao says: ‘From the end of
the reign ef the Emperor Ming under the Wei dynasty the
appearances of blue and yellow dragons were signs corresponding
with the fall and rise of its rulers. As to the fate of the land
of Wei, blue is the colour of wood and yet it does not conquer
metal; it was a sign of yellow getting the throne and blue losing
it. The frequent appearance of blue dragons means that the
virtue of the sovereign and the fate of the dynasty are in inner
conflict with each other *. Therefore Kao Kwei Hiang Kung*
(Tsao Mao, A. D. 241—260, who in 254 became the fourth
Emperor of the Wei dynasty) was utterly defeated in war.’”

“According to Liv Hiane’s ° explanation the dragon, the symbol
of dignity, when being imprisoned in a well means calamity
consisting in a feudal lord being about to be secretly seized.
In the Wei dynasty there was no dragon which was not in a
well. It was an omen of the oppressive measures of those men
who occupied the highest ranks‘. The poem on the ‘Dragon lying
in the deep’, written by Kao Kwei Hiang Kung, has this meaning”.

The Books of the Early Han dynasty® relate the following. “In


1 SE TR AG Fe OE PL A Be bb A ER A BE.
By HRA HE FLA BR OE AE A. Ee IE

2 28 FE, Ch. XXIX, or 19, He FF AR, LE p. 23> (HERE SC BE).

3 A aig SL FE WF SY PR WK BE. Oe A PE OE Be TF ZR
‘HES ASA A AM Kee.

5 ha BB.

6 23) i] (B. C, 80—9), a famous author and minister, cf. GILEs, Biogr. Dict., p.
501, nr. 1800.


TRAMREHEAMAHHHAHAMwHS
wid tts, HG ti HE BER ESE ae E938 Hl SO.


8 Ch. XXVII, Sect. Fr FF ie nr 7,


Digitized by Microsoft®


56


the second year of the reign of the Emperor Hwei (B.C. 193),
in the morning of the hwei-yiu day .of the first month, there
were two dragons which appeared in a well at Li-wen-ling (a
village), east of the palace of Lan-ling. They were seen till the
evening of the yih-hai day; then they went away. Liu Hiang is
of the following opinion: ‘If a dragon, a symbol of dignity, is
in straits in the well of a commoner, this means calamity consisting
in a feudal lord being about to be secretly seized’'. Afterwards
the Empress-Dowager Lt secretly killed Ch'u, the king of San
Chao ?, and also Li was finally murdered. Kina-rane says in his
Yih chw‘en®: ‘When those who have virtue meet injuries (i.e.
are put to death), the bad omens of this are that dragons appear
in wells’. Further, he says: ‘In cases of execution or violent cruelty
black dragons come out of wells’”’. *

The “Biography of Chang Wen-piao of Ch'u’’ ® gives the following
tale. “When Wen-piao was going to plot his rebellion and, still
being engaged in preparing it, had not yet settled (his plans), one of
his followers dreamt at night that a dragon was coiling above
Wen-piao’s chin. Wen-piao was very much rejoiced and said: ”
‘This is Heaven’s appointment’ (to the Throne, i.e. it is a sign
that I shall ascend the Throne). Then he settled his plans, raised
troops, and was defeated. Men of knowledge said: ‘As the dragon
is a divine being and yet came out of his chin, this was an omen
that calamity should be at work and that his shen (soul) should
go away’”.° Here again the dragon appeared in a wrong place.


§ 3. Dragon horses.


The Li ki" says: “The Ho (river) sent forth the horse with


12) Dw HE AR i A ASE RR oh BF
7A Me $e


2 Cf. Gites, Ll. p. 553, nr 1442, s.v. Lit How: “To make the throne secure, she
poisoned the Prince of Chao, another son of the late Emperor by a concubine”.


3 Fh fe.

‘HBACA, AME MR LI. LA,
479 Til 3% HR AR HE HE FE.

5 Fa PE AC FS fh, quoted T.S. Ch. 129, HE Hh AL Ox, p. 14a.
Seer cal rn eRe cere
Ik th.


7 Leace, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXVII, Book VII (Li yun), Sect. IV, nr 16,
p. 392. Couvreur, Li ki, Vol. I, p. 536: Ypy HH iB A.


Digitized by Microsoft®


57

the map (on his back)”. This was the “River Map” from which
Fuh-Hi fashioned the eight kwa (/\ $p), the diagrams used in
divination. The Shu king' mentions this map among the precious
objects preserved at the Court in B.C. 1079. Lecax®? treats of it
in his Introduction to the Yi king with regard to the well-known -
passage of an Appendix of this Classic’, running as follows:
“The Ho gave forth the scheme or map, and the Lo gave
forth the writing, (both of) which the sages copied”. According
to one of the commentators on the Yih king “the water of
the Ho sent forth a dragon horse; on its back there was
curly hair, like a map of starry dots. The water of the Lo
sent forth a divine tortoise; on its back there were riven veins,
like writing of character pictures” *. This conception, apparently
based upon the above passage of the Zi ki, became common in
later times, and the San ts‘at fu hwui*® gives a picture of this
dragon horse. As to the appendix of the Y2h-king°, quoted by
Szr-Ma Cuene in the “Annals of the three sovereigns’, there neither
the river nor the horse are mentioned, but it is simply stated
that Fuh-Hi was the first to trace the eight diagrams.

In the Shui ying tu* the following description of a dragon
horse is given: “It is a benevolent horse, the vital spirit of river
water. Its height is eight ch‘ih five ts‘un; its neck is long, and
its body is covered with scales. It has wings at its shanks, and
its hair hangs down its sides. Its cry consists of nine tones, and
it walks on the water without sinking. It appears at the time
of famous sovereigns”. This reminds us of the description given


-


4 Leeae, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. III, Shu king, Part V, Book XXII, p. 239.
2 Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XVI, Introduction, pp. 14 sqq.


3 Appendix III, Sect. I, Ch. 11, § 73; Leacr, |.l., p. 374; Ch. V, BR ae F fH,
4 Sp. ab: ay Nal. A

4 jay aR FH HWE HS. A eG, a Sl.
He i is. AD YC, eH il SE

5 =7 ial &. written by Wane K4, UF at the time of the Ming


dynasty.
6 we By Ch. XV, p. 4, Leaae’s translation, p. 382.


7 San-hwang pen-ki, = =A aK #E ( 744 Ba aU): by il 5 == p. 1b;


CHAVANNES’ translation, Vol. I, p. 6.
8 Fig Ke kal» written before the Ch‘en dynasty (A.D. 557—589) by Sun Jeu-cut,
roy


Hh x fi and quoted in the T‘ien chung ki, RK A ab (written under the
Ming dynasty by Cu‘en Yao-wen, [if 72 47), Ch. LV.


Digitized by Microsoft®


58


by K‘une Neay-xwou! in his commentary on the Shu king?, which
runs as follows: “A dragon horse is the vital spirit of Heaven
and Earth. As a being its shape consists of a horse’s body, yet
it has dragon scales. Therefore it is called ‘dragon horse’. Its
height is eight ch‘th five ts‘un. A true dragon horse has wings
at its sides and walks upon the water without sinking. If a
holy man is on the throne it comes out of the midst of the
Ming river, carrying a map on its back” ’.

The Tung kien ts‘ten pien wai kit, which refers to this passage,
says: “At the time of T‘ai Hao (i.e. Fuh-Hi) there was a lucky
omen consisting of a dragon horse which carried a map on its
back and came out of the Ho river. Therefore in giving titles
to the officials he began to arrange them by means of the dragon,
and called them ‘Dragon-officers’”®. As to these titles we read
in the Annals of the Three sovereigns®: “He (Fuh-Hi) had the
lucky omen of a dragon; by means of the dragon he arranged
the officials and called them ‘Dragon-officers’”. The Tso-chw*‘en ?
gives the same matter in an extensive passage regarding the
titles of the officials of the first Emperors.. ~

The T<ai-p‘ing yii-lan* describes a dragon horse which appeared


4 FL Xe [etl » 4 famous scholar in the reign of the Han emperor Wu (B. C,


440—85), who in B.C. 97 transcribed the ancient tablets discovered in the wall of the
house of the Confucian family, and made a commentary on the whole. Cf. LEGGE’s
Introduction to his translation of the Shu king, Sacred books of the East, Vol. III, p. 8.


2 Sect. JZ (iy; quoted in the T.S., Sect. Br jh , Ch. 128, BE i LB —,


p. 1


b.

3 HE Hy HK Mh ta. aE tO i HE BR te
2 HES. AAR EY. A, BS AK OK i mh
fe tL, Ala i mi CHR.

4 i gp iN aa Ah AL “Extra writings” belonging to the ‘‘Preceding part” of
the Tszé-chi tSung kien kang-muh, Fy “Ga i ope a3 =| , “A chronological survey
of the Mirror of History, composed to assist Government”, an imperial edition of 1707,
based upon the Tszé-chi tung kien written by Scé-ma Kwang, ri & 3: , between


1065 and 1084. It consists of three parts: Jj }fj. from Yao’s time to B.C. 402;
the main work (B.C. 402—A.D. 960); and the Supplement (A. D. 960—1367).


5 Bl i 6 a HE HE De Al BE Bi
6 P. 2a; Cuavannes, Vol. I, p. 7: AL BE Bin ie 4 3e BE Am


7 Book X, year XVII (47th year of Duke Chao); Lraar, Chinese Classics, Vol. V,
Part II, pp. 666 sq.

8 Tk F vil  , “The Work of Imperial Autopsy of the T‘ai p‘ing period”,
composed by an Imperial committee of thirteen scholars under the presidency of the


fe Mie es e } A aces At me eo oak MN MOM Alea NE AR Ot Ne ee tee


Digitized by Microsoft®


59


in A.D. 741 and was considered to be a good omen for the
Emperor. It was spotted blue and red, and covered with scales.
Its mane resembled that of a dragon, and its neighing was like
the tone of a flute. It could cover three hundred. miles. Its
mother was a common horse which had become pregnant by
drinking water from a river in which it was bathed. This agrees
with the statement of the Shui ying tu quoted above about the
dragon horse being the vital spirit of river water. The same
horse is described as follows in another work of much later
date ': “A horse with dragon scales, the tail of a huge serpent,
frizzy hair, round eyes and:a fleshy crest”. When the Emperor
fled from the capital to the West, this horse entered a river,
changed into a’ dragon and swam away. ;

Another dragon horse, which appeared in A.D. 622, had a
scaly dragon’s body, spotted with five colours, and a horse’s head
with two white horns. In its mouth it carried an object about
three or four ch‘ih long. This horse was seen on ariver, marching
about a hundred steps on the surface of the water, looking about
and then disappearing °.

Finally, we may refer to a passage of the Shih i hi*, where
we read that the Emperor Muh of the Cheu dynasty in the
thirty second year of his reign drove around. the world in a
carriage, drawn by eight winged dragon horses *.


§ 4. Geomancy.


The so-called fung-shui (jg 7, “wind and water”) is a
geomantical system, prevalent throughout China from olden
times down to the present age. The tiger and the dragon, the
gods of wind and water, are the keystones of this doctrine. I
deem it superfluous to treat of it in extenso, because Professor


Introd. p. X, this cyclopedia contains only what the Emperor (Tsai Tsung) reserved for
direct publication, whereas the T“ai-p‘ing kwang ki, I p ia aU , “Ample Writings
of the T‘ai-p‘ing period”, republished about 1566, consists merely of such parts of it
as were ejected by the Emperor. Ch. 435, quoting the Siien shih chi, ‘a Re ie
written in the ninth century by Cuane Tux, ifs in:


4 The Yuen kien lei han, rin $b A rey written in 1710 by Caane Yine,


ie BL, and others; Ch. 433.


2 Tai-p'ing yit-lan, Ch. 435.
3 $4 3H AU. written in A.D. 357 by Wane Kia, E Ea; Ch. Il, p. ta.


4 ERAGE CR... HAR A


Digitized by Microsoft®


60


Dr Groor' has given already a full account of its origin, elements,
meaning and influence. “It is”, says he, “a quasi-scientific system,
supposed to teach men where and how to build graves, temples
and dwellings, in order that the dead, the gods and the living
may be located therein exclusively, or as far as possible, under
the auspicious influences of Nature” * The dragon plays a most
important part in this system, being “the chief spirit of water
and rain” °®, and at the same time representing one of the four
quarters of heaven (i.e. the East, called the Azure Dragon *, and
the first of the seasons, spring)®. “The word Dragon comprises
the high grounds in general, and the water-streams which have
their sources therein or wind their way through them. Hence
it is that books on Fung-shui commonly commence with a bulky
set of dissertations, comprised under the heading: ‘Rules concerning
the Dragon’ (#£ ji), in reality dealing with the doctrines about
the situation and contours of mountains and hills and the direction
of water-courses”’ °.

Finally, we may quote the following passage from the same
work’: “Amoy is unanimously declared by all the wise men of
the town to be indebted for its prosperity to two knolls flanking
the inner harbour, and vulgarly styled Hé-t‘ad soa” (J% 3A [L]),
or “Tiger-head Hill’, and Ling-t‘aéd soa” (#E 3A [lJ), or ‘Dragon-
head Hill’. The latter, which is situated on the opposite shore,
on the islet of Kulangsu, is crowned with huge boulders poised
in a fantastic manner, upon which professors have had several
blocks of granite arranged for the purpose of helping the imagination
to discover the outlines of a dragon on the spot. The costs of
these improvements were borne by some well-to-do citizens,
anxious to promote their own prosperity and that of their fellow
townsmen”. A “Dragon’s head Mountain” is mentioned in the
Sin shi San Tsin ki*, where we read the following: “The Dragon’s
head Mountain is 60 miles long; its head enters the water of
the Wei (a large.tributary of the Yellow River), its tail reaches
the Fan river. The height of its head is 20 chang, the tail goes


1 Religious System of China, Vol. III, Ch. XII, pp. 935—1056.

2 P. 935. 3 P. 949.

4 P, 949. The four quarters are called: the Azure Dragon (East), the Red or Ver-
milion Bird (South), the White Tiger (West) and the Black Tortoise (North) (Dr
Groot, 1.l., Vol. I, p. 316).

5 P, 951. 6 Ibidem. 7 Pp. 959 seq.


8 a2) K= as #0,’ “Annals of the three Ts‘in states written by Sin”, quoted


Digitized by Microsoft®


61


gradually down to a height of five or six chang. It is said that
in olden times there was a strange dragon which came from the
southern side of the mountain in order to drink the water of
the Wei. The course it followed shaped itself into a mountain
of clay, and therefore (the mountain) was called after it” '.

As we shall see below? also in Japan a great number of
names of mountains point to the same ideas concerning the
connection between mountains and dragons.


| aieaaeaiaiaiaaes


- Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER III.
GENERAL INFORMATION.


§ 1. Enormous light-giving mountain gods.


The Shan hai king' describes the god of Mount Chung as
follows: “The god of Mount Chung is called ‘Enlightener of the
Darkness’. By looking (i.e. by opening his eyes) he creates day-
light, and by closing his eyes he creates night. By blowing he
makes winter, by exhaling he makes summer. He neither eats
nor drinks nor does he rest. His breath causes wind. His length is
a thousand miles. He is in the East of Wu-ki (‘Without bowels’).
As a living being, he has a human face, the body of a snake
and a red colour. He lives'at the foot of Mount Chung”. The
commentator Kwon P‘ox® explains this passage in the following
words: “‘Enlightener’ is a dragon; he enlightens the nine yin
(darknesses, i.e. the nine points of the compass at the opposite,
dark side of the earth, which is a flat disk; these nine points are
North, South, East, West, North-east, North-west, South-east,
South-west, and the Centre)”. According to the Hwai nan tszé it
is “a god with a human face and a dragon’s body, but without
legs’ 3,

We may quote here a passage from the T*ung ming ki+, a
work of the beginning of our era, to which Dx Groor® refers
as follows: “The Z‘ung ming ki says, that in the year 99 before
our era the emperor Wu convoked a meeting of magicians and


4 yy HE HK a very old classic, Sect. Ha Ah At K (nr 8), p. 1b: $H iy
ae en A a a |
BQ. KFKARKA. BBM FRR. EMR S
a HBA ke Yoke. BUD,
2 Bh Sa (who died in A. D. 322; author of the Shan hai king tu tsan, thy
4 De ee ae
3 aw A i Hi Fi HR AE Quoted in the commentary 1.1.


4 Wal 4 SH. Ch. II.


Digitized by Microsoft®


63


learned men, at which Tung Fang-soh spoke as follows: ‘I made
a journey to the north pole, and came to a mountain planted
with fire, which neither the sun, nor the moon ever illumines,
but which is lighted to its uttermost bounds by a blue dragon
by means of a torch which it holds in its jaws’’’’.

The dragon being full of Yang, it is quite logical that he
should diffose light, as we have also seen above (Ch. II, § 1, p. 44).
The Yih lin? says: “A black dragon, vomits light and makes
Darkness (Yin) turn into Light (Yang)”.


§ 2. Nature of the dragons.


In Kwan Cuune’s philosophical work entitled Kwan tszé?, “The
philosopher Kwan”, we read the following: “Those who, hidden
in the dark, can live or die, are shi (2, a plant the stalks of
which are used in divination), tortoises and dragons. The tortoise
is born in the water; she is caused to disclose (what she knows)
in the fire, and then becomes the first of all creatures, the


regulator of calamity and felicity. A dragon in the water covers
himself with five colours. Therefore ha iso cod-tderic IE de
‘desires to -become-small; he assumes a shape resembling that of
a silkworm, and if he desires to become big, he lies hidden in
the world. If he desires to ascend, he strives towards the clouds,
and if he desires to descend, he enters a deep well. He whose
transformations are not limited by days, and whose ascending
and descending are not limited by time, is called a god (shen)”.
The philosopher Han Fer1* says: “Ah, a dragon, as being an


1 Ap RESIS KVR WS Pte.
2 #, Pk an old divinatory oe quoted T.S., Sect. & ih» Ch. 130, HE ih
Rite EK p. 3a. na)


3 4h -F-, ascribed to Kwan Cuune, 4B 4th, who died in B.C. 645. Ch. XV, p.


4 or 90, 7K Mi Ais 1K Te) AE TF i Ae ae Fl BE Zt

Kk. BEF RF ERB 5c . Fe id is IE

Bi He fH. BC. Hb HU) 4 en BE aK Bi
PF. RKREMAFER. KEMAT RR.
H. ER AR ae. BeOS mh.

Han Fei tszé, ie JE -- (4th century B. C.), Ch. IV, nr 12, at iE p. 9a:

HCR MBER. REK PAS

R. BAR RSCBMDEA.


FS oth on. REE St ne a
RAR


Digitized by Microsoft®


A fatwa


64


animal, is so mild, that one may approach him (be familiar with
him, i.e. tame him) and ride on him. But under his throat he
has scales, lying in a reverse direction, one ch‘ih (foot) in diameter.
If a man touches them, the dragon is sure to kill him”.

The Classics have taught us that the dragon belongs to the
four creatures that have the most ling (HR), ie. whose shen
manifests itself in the most powerful way. The ’Rh ya yih' goes
further and states that the dragon possesses the most ling of all
creatures. According to the Shui ying fu? “the yellow dragon is
the quintessence of shen, and the chief of the four dragons. If a
king does not drain off ponds and lakes, their water can penetrate
into deep pools, and the yellow dragons, following their nature,
swim in ponds and lakes”.

Lt Pun-wer® relates the following: “Confucius said: ‘A dragon
(Jung) eats what is pure and moves about in what is pure*. A
chi (#4) eats what is pure and moves about in what is muddy.
A fish eats what is muddy and moves about in what is muddy.
Now I, in ascending do not reach the dragon (i.e. I am not
such a high being as the dragon), and in descending do not
reach the fishes (i.e. I am not such a low creature as the fishes);
I am (like) the ch2’”.

Hwar NAN Tsze*> goes as far as to declare the dragon
_to be the origin of all creatures, as Toe ae a
following passage: “All creatures, tures, winged, hairy, scaly and


1 Be v3 Ha, the Appendix to the ’Rh ya (a vocabulary probably dating from
pre-Christian times, cf. De Groot, Rel. es I, p. 302), “a broad elaboration of this ‘old
dictionary by the hand of Lo Yuen, Ye ae who flourished in the latter half of the


42th century.” (De Groot, 1.1. IV, p. fg Section Je BE: Py z 2B Be % th.
2 Siti fe \a ail, written before the Ch‘en dynasty (A.D. 557— 589) by Sun Jev-cul,
BSA a 2 SM ta BE. Yellow Dragon: a BE mh ZH DY HE
Lh. EKA, KSA I, Be SR ih
ie Hh YB.
3 re > es J, the reputed father of Shi Hwang, the founder of the Ts‘in dynasty
(B.C. 249—206), in his work entitled: Lii-shi ch‘un-ts‘iu, Hz) K aR RK, “Annals


of Lit”, Section Sh ie.
4 HE BF vis i de F ie.
5 HE 22] F-: “The philosopher of Hwai-nan”, i.e. Liu Nean, 4) Ze, (who died


Digitized by Microsoft®


, 65


mailed, find their origin in the dragon’. The yii-kia (AW 5)
produced—the fying dragon, the Sying dragon gave birth to the
phoenixes, and after them the lwan-niao (#% |B; ) and all birds,
in general the winged beings, were born successively. The mao-tuh
(6 HB, “hairy calf”) produced the ying-lung (}fé #f), the ying-
lung gave birth to the ien-ma (#4 FG), and afterwards the £%-lin
( Hat HE) and all quadrupeds, in general the hairy beings, were born
successively. The kiai-lin (Fp @) produced the kiao-lung (WE HE),
the kiao-lung gave birth to the kwun-keng ( fai ffi), and aRarwanie
the kien-sié (#4 46) and all fishes, in general the scaly beings,
were born successively. The kiai-t'an (4} #8) produced the sien-
lung ( Ft, HE), the sien-lung gave birth is the yuen-yuen (Ft FE.

“original tortoise”) and afterwards the ling-kwei (gm ff, “divine
power manifesting tortoise’) and all tortoises, in general the
mailed beings were born successively”. The same author says
that “mankind cannot see the dragons rise; wind and rain assist
them to ascend to a great: height” *.

The 7a tai li ki* states that “the essence of the scaly animals
is called dragon”, and that “the dragon does not ascend if there
is no wind”.

In the Historical Records* we read a quotation from Chwang
iszé®, where Confucius after having talked with Lao tszé says:
“As to the dragon, we cannot understand his riding on wind
and clouds and his ascending to the aby To-day I saw Lao tszé;
is he not like the dragon?”

According to the P% ya° none of the animals is so wise as
the dragon. His blessing power is not a false one. He can be


1 By, AEA. i BR HE
2 Ch, XVII, ge AK alll. Cf Ch. 1X, = 45 alll : “The ying-lung ascends


riding on the clouds”.
8 kK Ry ne aU compiled by Tar Tex, RY fil, under the reign of the Emperor


Suen of the Han dynasty (B.C. 73—49); Ch. V, ‘& -F- FE [B], p. 7: AE aah
CMHA...... EMH.

4 Oh. XU, Be HE HY BE Bi) AB v.20: BR PAE BE OK Ae J HE
KAEMLA. SFA REF. HED.

5 Of -F- (4th cent. B.C), Section KK Yi» Ch. UL.

6 $A HE. composed by Lux TIEN, Bae fp (14042—1102); Ch. I, yee fal. nr 4
(BE). 1: Bh AE. HE SH ES.


Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl XII, N°. 2. 5


Digitized by Microsoft®


66


smaller than small, bigger than big, higher than
than low. ing to the Yih king, Kien (i, the
ok ee ee and Kw‘un
(tt) by means of the horse rules the Earth; the dragon is a
heavenly kind of being, the horse an earthly one”

Li Tao-yuen ', in his commentary on the Shui a states that
the expression ‘fishes and dragons consider the autumn days as
night’ means that “at the autumnal equinoctium the dragons
descend and then hibernate and sleep in pools”.

The °Rh ya yih® quotes the following passage from a work of
Wane Fvu* : «When rain is to be expected, the dragons scream


and_ their voices are like the sound made by striking copper
basins. Their saliva can ee all iets of--perfume. Their


selves of the ‘douds in order ie cover their. bodies. _Therefore
they are invisible. At the present day on rivers vs Smee


are sometimes people who seé one claw and the tail (of a dragon),
but “the head is not io Ge Seoul Gammel, ater the Tearth
month, the dragons divide the régi emselves and
-each_of them Se hie tanita tsb ie reser Shy thie
a distance of a couple of-acres_there-may—be quite different
weather, rain and. a-clear "_sky. Further, there are often heavy


ri: ee nS = |
AK, HY B45 ab. HE OWL. BARA.


4 ces + OT FU> who lived under the Northern Wei dynasty (A. D. 386—536), quoted


in the P% ya, Ch. I, nv 4 (HE), p. Qa: HE Wk H FB RK. ze Ft
KOM URR A. ROKR REP,
2 Sect. ke HE: quoted in the T. S., Sect. 5 inh, Ch. 127, HE Th Fe %,
p. 6b: HS Ai AU WAS, HE RE hn SE Sl AY. HE Ae BE Se aH HE oe
Ree LALURHS RRA. Aw
eA REO NARS. CRRA. BO
LEHI SAR M KMS i ye
A. LBZRMW READ. MIS RM. A HE
th. HE LK Be ALK A, fet ER 3 YK
eS A BE in HR DK


3 = iy who lived at the time of the Han dynasty. He is the author of the
Tsien fu lun, YR = = Se but this passage is apparently quoted from another of


Digitized by Microsoft®


67


rains, and those who speak about these rains say: ‘Fine moistening
rain is heavenly rain, violent rain is dragon rain’. Dragon fire
and human fire are opposite. If dragon fire comes into contact
with wetness it flames, and if it meets water it burns. If one
drives it away by means of fire, it stops burning and its flames
are extinguished”.

The P% ya' states the same fact with regard to the dragon
fire, referring to the Nez ten, and in the same passage says the


following*: “The dragons are also born from eggs, When_they
intend to hatch, the male dragon’s cry makes the wind rise, and J
thie seule aeagon's Gey miekea she wind late) and Wa ae
—char anges....... According to popular belief the dragon’s vital


“spirit lies in his eyes, for this is the case because he is deaf.
The “Discussions on the spontaneous—phenomena of Yin and
Yang’ * say: ‘The Ui-lung’s* pupils see a mustard plant or a straw
at a distance of a hundred miles’. Further they say ‘A dragon
can make (litt. change) water, a man can make fire’. Further:
‘A dragon does not see stones, a man does not see the wind,
fishes do not see the water, -demons—do—not—see—the~earth*—

Sun Cu‘on 18zz° says: ‘Kao Tsu (probably the Emperor of the Han
dynasty, who reigned B.C. 206—159) drove in a dragon carriage,
Kwang Wu (who reigned A. D. opiate drove in a tiger
carriage’ ”’.


§ 3. What dragons like and dislike.


The °Rh ya yih, in the passage of Wane Fu above mentioned,
says: “As to his character as a being the dragon’s nature is
rough and fierce; yet he is afraid of iron and likes precious


1 Ob. 1 RE ff) or 1 GED: v.20: PY LZ HE IS FE AS TH I
AAR F& AR it BK.
2 Ibidem, p. ta, 2a: HE Wp ON AE, AB HL HE AE EJ, de ES TS
al 1 JL 40. ++ Ga. HMA A. BHR eR
A ih. came ei El Be we CAE Sd A it
SF. LAL. EAR SK A a OK. AE HO,
AR SR, FR ok, SOR SL. ROA
fi) HE SE Bh iD JR


3 The same work is quoted in the Pen-ts‘ao kang- utile Ch. 43, p. 40, with the
title: Yin-yang pien-kwa lun, “Discussions on the phenomena of Yin and Yang”. The
fact that it is quoted in the P% ya proves that it dates from the eleventh century or earlier.


4 Bee HE ‘ 5 A famous poet of the 4th century A. D.


Digitized by Microsoft®


»


o o Ot


68


stones and k‘ung-ts‘ing', and is fond of roasted swallow flesh.
Therefore persons who have eaten swallows must not cross the
sea. Further he (Wang Fu) says: “The kiao-lung* is afraid of
leaves of the Melia Azedetach *, and of five-coloured silk thread.
Therefore from the time of the Han dynasty (down to the present
day) those who offered to K*ih Yuen* took five-coloured silk ~
thread and with this tied together the leaves of the Melia
Azederach. Among the ancients there were the Dragon-rearer ®
and the Dragon-ruler® families, who ruled the dragons only by
means of their knowledge of what they desired and disliked” *.
The Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh*, the famous standard work on Natural
History and Materia Medica, written in the latter half of the
15th century by Lr Sui-cnzn®,-says: “The small writings (essays)


contain the following. The dragon’ 8 mpl is rough and fierce,


e is afraid of iron, of the wang plant '°, of


(roaste roastec) St swallows.


4 pss FA i.e. the Yin-shih, [2 Ay the “Stone of Darkness”.
be


2 We HE.
3 f' , ‘a tree bearing lilac flowers, the ‘Melia Azederach’ or ‘pride of India’; the
phoenix likes it, but the dragon abhors it” (WELLS WILLIAMS, Chin. Dict., p: 536, s. v.)


4 Kt Ji, ie. Keun Piva, ii B, a minister of the state of Ch‘u (A), who
lived about B.C. 344, the maker of the famous poem entitled Li sao, Bite ER. As his


royal master would not follow his advise, he drowned himself in the Poh lo river. Every
year, at the 5th of the 5th month, the anniversary of his death is celebrated and little
dumplings wrapped in leaves are offered to him and eaten in his memory. Cf. DE GRoor,


Fétes annuelles & Emoui, Vol. I, pp. 343 sqq. The Japanese Tango no sekku, i
/f- 7) fii ‘| , the “Exact moment of the opposition” (of Yin against Yang, i.e. the
summer solstitium, with which it formerly must have been identical) is originally the
same festival. It is a dragon -festival, at which the dragons by sympathetic magic in
the form of dragon-boat races are called up to give fertilizing rains. The story about
K‘tih Yuen is apparently a later explanation of this ancient festival.


5 Hwan-lung, E HE. Cf. above, p. 50.
6 Yi-lung, Fi) HE . Cf. above, p. 50. :


7 He PE ih Th. i He BL Be ER AR. Th BE
Ay eS RIE HHL. LS, AH Fe PR BE He.
a ee AEG.
Fe HE Gi HE RK. GE WA EE GR HB tH FAT
a ff ; “Collectanea of Plants”. h Tp Ch. 43, p. 4.

y


=p.


+ 4h St we
Pee


annan bean nat mantinnod in tha Chinaca diatinnaviag of Wrorro VWlre era acer


=
>


Digitized by Microsoft®


69


centipedes ', of the leaves of the lien tree (Melia Aze ;
of five-cotoured—sitk thread. e those who have eaten


rain) use the wang plant, and those who offer to Ktih Yuen use
leaves of the Melia Azederach and coloured silk thread, wrapping
dumplings in them which they throw into the river. Also when
i particulars
reds” *.

ec ae eset RAS gems remind us of the Indian dragons; the
pearls of the sea were, of course, in India as well as in China
and Japan, considered to be in the special possession of the
dragon-shaped sea-gods. As to the sung-ts‘ing, this is explained
to be a hollow stone with water inside, or the vital spirit (47,
tsing) of copper. Swallows are also mentioned as food of the
shen Cg)? *, The same~ particulars are to be found in the Nan
pu sin shu *, where we read that the dragons are afraid of wax,
-and_that_their_fat makes silk_garments impermeable to water.


In regard to the dragons’ fear of iron we- may mention a


use_iron, 1 ae ke ostir-up the dragons (636 ‘cause them to make


GILEs and CouvreuR, but found in the Japanese dictionary entitled Kanwa daijiten,
pen Fu K ss Hh , p. £232, where we read: “Ty bd, mo, a special kind of plant
resembling nat BE (“swallow-oats”, also called karasu-mugi, avena fatua), minogome -
ee to BRINKLEY’s dict. “‘Beckmania erucaeformis”); its grains are used as food”.
The fal k@, is described there as a special kind of plant with a red stalk and white
flowers. Its leaves resemble those of the ¥E aot (hollyhock; Wetts WILLIAMS, p. 487:
“the sunflower; a term for some malvaceous plants, as the Malva, Althea, and Hibiscus;
it also includes other large leaved plants”)”. The A A. kang-ts‘ao, is described by


We ts Wittrams (Dict. p. 319, s.v.) as “a trailing plant, vitis ficifolia, which bears
white flowers and small grapes that are said to remove stupidity”. But the Pen-ts‘ao


kang-muh gives re not fal 7
4 Pe wy, wu-kung.
2 LPR. HARE PRE. ARB, Bie


A RAR OM HE. ROR. KAS
# ai FA
i


v]


Vas ’ FARR. Sh ok BOA FAL, PA HE AY
Bw, Se ee ARE BRAMAN. BA
HE BO BEE SB ML.

3

4

Ch


oh , written by Ts‘ten Yin, 438 Fy in the later Sung dynasty;


Digitized by Microsoft®


70


legefid to be found in the Ten chung ki', where we read the
following. In A. D. 762 the dike of a river was broken, and
each time when the repairs were nearly finished, it broke again.
At last somebody told that in the time of the Emperor Wu of
the Liang dynasty (who reigned from A.D. 502 to 549) in a
similar case thousands of pounds of iron were buried under the
dike, whereupon the work could be completed. On hearing these
words the superintendent of the work ordered to do the same,
and lo! the thundering noise under the ground was no longer
heard on the spot where the iron was laid, but gradually went
away, and the dike was soon repaired. “The reason may be”,
says the author, “that the eyes of the dragons are hurt by the
pungent nature ou taste) of iron or F gon, and that they flee
to protect their eyes”. a


ae ~


§ 4. Shape of the dragons.


Wane Fu’ says: “The people paint the dragon's shape with a
horse’s head and a snake’s tail. Further, there are expressions as
‘three joints’ and ‘nine resemblances’ (of the dragon), to wit:
from head to shoulder, from shoulder to breast, from breast to
tail. These are the joints; as to the ni
the following: his horns


en called “ehh met ee
as neo UE a 7 he e cannot_ascend to the sky”.


The P% ya* states that “the dragon’s 81 scales form a number
Ne


4 See above, p. 57, note 8; Ch. LVI.
2 About this author see above, p. 66, note 3; this passage, quoted in the ’Rh ya


yih, Sect. J EF (T.S., Ch. 127, HE hes. p. 6b), is not to be found in
Wane Fo’s To‘ien fu lun. {it 46 & FE 2 uf & =] be “ XA =
PAWC RI HORA PERE Bee. eam
Fh. AWS BOWE, AOR. ROR, A,
BW. BEDE. ROE. BOR. AO. A
Aw. BARA. HERR A RE SER.

3 Ch 1 CRE Bis or 4 HED: fa: He A. + — i Fu x


WR ool FA ae . e Aw ret . 8. cho - Moe


Digitized by Microsoft®


V1


consisting of nine times nine. Nine is Yang. The carp’s 36 scales
_form_a number consisting of six times six. Six is Yin".

In the Yang kuh man luh' we read: “The dragon has five
fingers”.

Finally, the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh® teaches us that “a dragon has
whiskers at the sides of his mouth and a bright pearl under his
chin; under his throat he has scales lying in a reversed direction;
upon his head he has a broad eminence called in writing ch‘th
muh; if a dragon has no ch‘th muh, he cannot ascend to the sky.
His breath turns into clouds, and then can change into water
and into fire (rain and lightning)”........ “The Shih tien: says:
‘When dragons copulate they change into two small snakes’ ”.


§ 5. Male and female dragons.


i en male and female dra i i
as follows: “The male dragon’s horn_i iting, concave,


steep; it is strong a e top, but becomes very thin below.
The female dragon has a straight nose, a round mane, thin scal scales
and a strong tail’ *.

The Shing i ki* relates of a painter, who was very skilled in
painting dragons, but whose work one day was critisized by a
man arid a woman. They said that he did not distinguish male
from female dragons, although they were different in reality.
When he got angry and asked them how they knew this, they


1 WA AE Yeh BR. Sect. PEE. quoted in the T.S., Sect. @r #4, Ch. 127, BF
Ab He FF P80: HE Te te.

2 ch. 43, GR —, RE ete: OR BT
LR RAW. BLAM U KARA. ERR
At HR AE FE KK . way Sx SE PL HE SEK TL AE BBO...
FE BE ZEW St — Ob hE,


3 Kwang poh wuh chi, 4 +i By re an “Enlarged Poh whu chi” of later
times (1607), by TuNG Sze-cHaNG, Jf iy pfs (Cf. Wvute, p. 187). The Poh wuh chi


itself is a work of Cuanc Hwa, Be He who lived in the fourth century, at the time
of the Tsin dynasty (A. D. 265—420). This passage is quoted in the Wakan sansat


ru, Ch, XLV, 676: HEE ME $8. ARE DAY AY EE Te BE A.
SBR, Il x BA. Hk Ae th.
4 Fe FE Fp, written by Cuane Kiin-rane, 9S a Jy, in the Sung dynasty


(960—1280).


Digitized by Microsoft®


72


answered that they were dragons themselves and were willing
to show him their shapes, whereupon they changed into a male
and a female dragon.


§ 6. Different kinds of dragons.


The Shuh i ki! says: “A water snake (7X JiR, shui yuen) after
five hundred years changes into a kiao ( #8), a kiao after a thousand
years changes into a lung (Ef), a lung after five hundred years


changes into a kioh-lung (44 #£, “horned dragon”) and after a
thousand years into a ying-lung (fe HE)”.
Quite different, however, is, as we have seen above (p. 65), Liv
Nean’s statement in his work entitled Hwai nan tszé*, according to
which the “j/lying dragons’ are the offspring of the bird yii-kia?
(“the winged barbel”; this is the reason, says the commentary
to this passage, why these dragons have wings); the ying-lung are
the issue of a quadruped called poate *; the kiao-lung are the issue
of a fish called kiai-lin *; the sien-lung ° are the issue of a mailed beast
called kiai-an'; and the Kiih-lung® are produced by a sea plant
called hai-lii®. When the yellow dragon, born from yellow gold a
thousand years old, antar-a-teey place, a yellow spring dasies
, and if from this spring some icles ese become
-a yellow cloud. In the same way blue springs and blue clouds
originate: from- blue. dragons born -from—blue-gold-eight hundred
_years old; red, white and black springs and clouds from red,
white and black dragons born~-from~gold-of the-same_—colours, a
thousand __ years old. —
The Poh ya" gives the following definition of the principal


1 jit He ZU, written by Jen Fane, 4. Hf, in the sixth century A.D. (another
work of the same name dates from 1701), Ch. Fy p. 6a: I ye nA AF: Av,
Ee eee A ee A ee
4b Fai HE HE

2 Ch. IV, WH FB zi. 3 WE.

4 =e PB, “hairy calf”. 5 4p &R.

0 Fe HE. in

8 RHE. i FD.


40 RK, fine dust.


11 HEE TE» Sect. HE Gt. Ch. X, p. 6b: 7A Bh AL Be HE 7


He Mee eH 4 Cl dl “ea fur 44, Cl hei “eb Alfhanah tha Dass 4.€


Digitized by Microsoft®


73


dragons: “If a dragon has scales, he is called kiao-lung; if wings,
ying-lung (fé HE); if a horn, kiu-lung (HL FE); and if he has
no horn, he is called ch‘i-/ung (bE HE)”. In the Japanese Buddhist
dictionary entitled Bukkyd iroha jiten' we find the same enume-
ration with the additon of a fifth class, the p‘an-lung (4% HE),
“coiled dragon”, which does not yet ascend to heaven. This
dragon is also mentioned in the Fung yen, where we read:
“Dragons which do not yet ascend to heaven are called p‘an-lung”.

In the same passage of the aforesaid Japanese dictionary


another divisi ly :_ crow-dragons,
snake-dragons, toad-dragons, horse-dragons - *, This


enumeration is to be fo i lhist work, the Sii-men
isang king*, where we read that from these five classes that of —
the snake-dragons is the principal one; they are the “right kind


“of dragon”. ;

ge to the Wen-tszé tsih-lioh® the ch'i-lung (sei ¥)° is
red, white and green, and the kiu-lung (bl HE) is blue. The ki
is mentioned several times in the Pao Ptoh-iszeé': “If a pond
inhabited by fishes and gavials is drained off, the divine A‘ go
away’*’. “As to the flying to the sky of the kiu of the pools,


kang-muh, Ch. 43, fk a —, p. 6b, s.v. kiao-lung, quotes the text in this form


(without saying that it is borrowed from the Poh ya), the original text of the Poh ya
gives different characters for the names of the two last dragons. These characters are


not to be found in the dictionaries, being the 205th radical under the 140th, and


B combined with Be: but the pronunciation added to them is hiu (Bo FB) and


ont (Spy 3.
4 See above, Introd., p. 22, note 1; Vol. II, p. 56, s.v. HE .-


2 + —s “Local Terms”, according to De Groot (Rel. Syst. Vol. III, p. 1073) *
“a small vocabulary composed by Yane Hiune, B HE, an ethical philosopher and


statesman who died in A.D. 18.” Ch. XII, p. 7a: HE Bit K bE aH Zz ee HE.
3 BBE. PERE. MUR BE. IG RE. fi Bs wert, shetung,


hia-ma-lung, ma-lung, and yi-lung.


4 Al ae (Sumeru) Dek RK, quoted in the Ts‘ien-k‘ioh kit léi shu, ype He 72


za: | =, a cyclopaedia compiled in 1632 by Cu‘en Jen-siuy, [ist - B- Cf. WYLIE,
Notes on Chinese literature (2nd ed.), p. 187.


5 54 + 4B BE, a vocabulary quoted in the Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p. 675.
6 Cf. below, Ch. V (Ornaments).


7 Fay Aip F-. written by Kon Huna, B vk , in the 4th century A.D.
eb Rs ob 1 or 9.368 BR Os AE Ze BL


Digitized by Microsoft®


74


this is his union with the clouds” '. “The ts‘uc A°u (‘kingfisher-
Kiw’) has no wings and yet flies upwards to the sky” ’. “Place
the shape (i.e. an image of this dragon) in a tray, and the
kingfisher-£%w (shall) descend in a dark vapoury haze” *. The .
last sentence points to sympathetic magic which we shall mention
below (this Book, Ch. VI).

The Shui ying t‘u* says that the yellow dragon is the head of
the four dragons, t 3 of divine manifesting power®
that he can become big and small, appear,and disappear.in a


‘moment; the vital spirit of water. The azure


ae ee ee dragons as good or bad omens
_and givers of light or rain are mentioned above.

The legend about the ying-lung, the winged’ dragon, which
after having killed the rebel Chi Yiu (the first to raise rebellion
in B.C. 2637) could not return to the Southern peak where he
used to live, for which reason afterwards often drought prevailed,
will be given below (Ch. VI).

A nine-headed, eighteen-tailed dragon is mentioned in a passage
of the Lang hiien ki®, referred to by Dt Groor’. There a Taoist
doctor is said to have recited this spell: “I came from the East
and found a pond on the road; in its water lived a venerable
dragon with nine heads and eighteen tails. I asked what it fed
on; it ate nothing but fever-demons”.

Further, we read about the “little stone-dragon”, or “little
mountain-dragon”, also called ‘“spring-dragon”*, the Japanese


1 Ibidem, nr 11 (ft BR), p. 28a: JH WM CRREEBS H


th, , 2. S. Sect. & die» Ch. 130, p. 4a, where this passage is quoted,. gives ye
instead of Fe , which would mean: “this is a flight of stairs formed by the clouds
and vapours”. But in the Pao P‘oh-tszé itself we read ica ‘


2 Sh FR, Ch. I, nr 38 (4 PRR), p. 29a: 32 WL, fe 3h KOK.

3 Ab Fe, Ch. IV, nr 30 ( RF BE), p. 3b: RRP BRB BL
MRL.

4 Hig Kz ae see above p. 64, note 2; quoted in the Tien chung ki, th
AU,» Ch. LV.

5 iH Sat 3H

6 FEB Ie au , “a collection of tales and legends, in three chapters, ascribed to one


I SuHI-cHEN, tft tH: x, who lived under the Yuen dynasty (Lang hiien is the Land


of Bliss)” (DE Groot, Rel. Syst. Vol. IV, p. 105).
7 Rel. Syst., Vol. VI, p. 1053.


Digitized by Microsoft®


75


tokage or imori (lizard), which is born between stones in the
mountains and has got the name of “little dragon” because it
was (and is) believed to cause hail by its breath and to give
rain to those who prayed to it'.

The connection between the snake and the dragon is evident
from the description of the so-called ‘eng-shé, 4 We, a wingless
serpent, “which can cause the clouds to rise, and, riding upon
them, can_fly a thonsand miles. It can change into a dragon.
Although there are malee—and—females, they do not -gopminte.
Their cry forbode gnancy”*, And Koa Hone® states that
“tortoises turn into tigers and snakes into dragons”. In the
Yiu-yang tsah tsu* we read:. “Dragons and snakes are considered
by the learned class to be related”.

The gavial® also belongs to the dragons. The Pen-ts‘ao kang-
muh° describes it as follows: “There are numerous ‘gavials in
rivers and lakes. They resemble the class of the ling-l*, and
their length is one or two chang. Both their backs and tails are

_ covered with scales. By exhalin can. nd cause


ram, It is a kind of dragon. They live in deep holes and can
fly only horizontally, not vertically. Their cries are like the


iy BE F-; or ts‘iten-lung, ae HE. Cf. WELLS WiLLtams, Chin.-Eng. Dict., pp. 803
and 1095: “The insect ( FH ) that changes (#): a small eft or chameleon common in


Hukwang, also called i=J HE or grass-dragon”’,


1 Pen-tsao kang-muh, Sect. fhe ff . or 4 (HE). Ch: 43, p. 12a: lig wy HE
Wa. ak a. OT. BRT SH.


2 Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, quoted in the Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p. 682. In Ch.
43, p. 40 of the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh the text is a little different: “The t“eng-shé
changes into a dragon. This divine snake can ride upon the clouds and fly about over
a thousand miles. If it is heard, (this means) pregnancy. This is borrowed from the
Pien-kwa lun (i.e. the Yin-Yang pien-kwa lun, mentioned above, p. 67). Further,
the Pao P‘oh-tszé says: ‘The t‘eng-shé do not copulate’.”


3 Pao P'oh-tszt, Py fy, Oh. 1(g F}).

4 fui) iB te AY], written in the ninth century by Twan CH‘ING-sHIH, Be KK
FU, quoted T.S., Ch. 130. Sect. Br Hh BE BR HE BY, p. 40: BE Bd ee
Bil Ty BL BE -


5 fe. ef. WELLS Wittrams, |.1., p. 912, s.v. “A large triton, gavial, or water
lizard, found to the South of China, ten feet long, of whose hard skin drumheads are
made; its gruff voice is heard at night and indicates rain”. About gavials acting as
demons, cf. De Groot, Rel, Syst. of China, Vol, V, pp. 625 sq.

6 Ch. 43, p. 8a; cf. Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p. 675,


7 fis fale, pangolins.


Digitized by Microsoft®


76


sound of a drum, and when they cry at night, this is called ‘the
Se
About the shen (§), a huge clam, the same work' says the
following: “It is a “‘wnil of kiao (#&). Its shape also resembles
that of_a snake, but it is larger. It has a horn like a dragon,
a red mane, and the scales under its ‘loins are all lying in a
reversed direction. It eats. young swallows. When exhaling its
breath assumes the form of towers and castles, which are seen
when it is about to rain, and are called ‘clam-towers’’, or
‘sea-markets’*. Of its fat, mixed with wax, candles are made,
which one may smell at a distance of about a hundred steps.
Also in the flames of these candles the shapes of towers and
steeples are to be seen. Lua Tren [the author of the P% ya, who
lived during the reign of the Emperor Hwui Tsung (1101—1126)]
says: ‘If a kiao copulates with a tortoise, they produce a tortoise,
and when with a pheasant, a clam (shen) is produced’”’.


§ 7. Kiao lung (4 HE ).


The Shan hai king* describes the kiao as follows: “(Out of the
Tao Kwo mountains) water comes forth in waves and flows to
the South, where it flows into-the sea. In this water there are
‘tiger-kiao’. Their shapes consist of the body of a fish and the
tail of a snake. Their voices are like those of mandarin ducks.
Those who eat them, have no boils, and they (i.e. their flesh)
may be used to cure piles”. In three other passages® of the
same ancient work many kzao are said to live in special ee
rivulets.

According to the Yang yii king, “Classic on the rearing of
fishes” °, “if there are fully 360 fishes, the iao lung is made
their chief, and leading the fishes flies away”.


4 Ch. 43, p. 7a. Cf. Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p. 675.


2 Shen leu, Fe RE, i. e.. mirages. 3 iE Th -

4) Sect. By [Ly #K. Ch. I, p. BN sain ae oe mm
Weer se. HARK. HRA HH. #
BME EE. RAB. TUR.

5 Sect. FH [Lf ¥K, Ch. XV, quoted T.S., Sect. Qe Hh, Ch. 132, WS BR at


ye p. 2a.


6 FS fil RK. ac By anata T.S. LL: ff m= BAF, Hi) Be


Digitized by Microsoft®


77


From the ancient Taoist treatise designated by the name of
Wen tszé' we learn the following. “As to him who accumulates
the virtue of the Tao, phoenixes fly in his court-yard, k‘i-lin
roam about in his suburbs, and siao-lung house in his pond”.
Further, we read there: “On the highest tops of the mountains
clouds and rain arise, and in the deepest depths of the water
kiao-lung are born” *.

Kwan tszé* says: “The kiao-lung is the god of the water
animals. If he rides on the water, his soul is in full vigour, but
when he loses water (if he is deprived of it), his soul declines.
Therefore I (or they) say: ‘If a kiao-lung gets water, his soul
can be in full vigour’”. The same philosopher states that “when
people drain marshes and catch fish, the kiao-lung do not dwell
in those pools” 4.

Also Hwai nan tszé* mentions the kiao-lung with the following
words: “The kzao-lung lie hidden and sleep in pools, and yet
their eggs break up (i.e. the young ones come out of them) on
the hills”. The commentator remarks: “The kiao-lung lay their
eggs on hills and hide in pools. Their eggs get life spontaneously” °.

K‘ta Yuen’, the famous nobleman and poet of Ts‘u, who was
banished by king Hwai towards the end of the fourth century
B.C. and about 299 B.C. composed his celebrated poem entitled
Li Sao*, in the ninth section of this poem describes his journey
to the mysterious K‘wan-lun mountains in the West, in a car


(KF, BGM: BREEAM RE, OH
HSB, RHE TH YA.

2 fb fi fi: UI eH im Be. KER hi
HE AE HG .

8. ES im: leery He F KB
WH ae, FoF AR i UE. Be AD. BE 4% A it PY at


Fr


ce BY LE SS
5 Sect. fe BH] Co-X, po: HEE HE GR HE HL OR A) BS.
0 WEE FL Pt DY Ta AR A, EON 2


7 qi A. who drowned himself: in the Poh-lo river in Hu-nan province, and whose
~


death is commemorated every year on the fifth day of the fifth month (the Festival
of the Dragon Boats, cf. above, p. 68, note 4, and below, this Chapter, § 10).


8 fife HAR, “Dissipation of Sorrows”; Ch‘w ts'2é, A BRE, Ch. IL. Cf. Lecce, The
Li Sao poem and its author, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, January, July and
October 1895.


Digitized by Microsoft®


18


in the form of a phoenix, drawn by a team of four dtu (BL)
In the thirteenth section, when proceeding along the Red river,
he says: “I motioned with my hand to the kiao-lung to bridge
over the ford’.2 At that time his car was drawn by “flying
dragons”. *

The Ja tai li ki* instructs us that the siao-lung is considered
to be the head of the 360 scaly animals, and that “if water
accumulates and becomes a river, the kiao-lung is born”. §

The Poh wuh chi® says: “If a man has eaten swallows [comp.
this chapter, § 3, p. 68], he must not enter the water; (for if
he does so), he will be swallowed by a kiao-lung”.

In the above texts, except in those of the Shan hai king, the
words kiao and lung are combined to one term. The Shan hai
king, however, speaks of the kiao only, and so do a large number
of other works, which distinguish the diao from the Jung. Neither _
in the Shan hai king, nor in the Li ki", which says: “(In the
last month of summer) the inspector of fishing is ordered to kill
the kiao”’, these water animals are mentioned as divine creatures.
The commentator of the former work, Kwon P‘ou *, however,
states the following: “The kiao resembles a snake. It has four
legs, and is akin to the Jung’.° As we have seen above '°, the
Shuh i ki remarks that a water snake (shui-yuen), when five
hundred years old, changes into a kzao, and a diao after a thousand
years becomes a lung.


1 EE WLW Fe BE A, Locos, 11, pp. 844, 855, stanza 47.
2 foe WE BE WA YA vat AB | Leoce, 1.1, pp. 846, 863, stanza 89.
3 Fi poe "aa mits BE 4 . LEGGE, ibidem, stanza 86,
4 Ke BY gE FB (ist cont. Bc.) Ch. xu, nv 81, $4 Ay Gz. p 7: AT BR
ZR=HATMMMBZE.
5 Ch. VII, nr 64, ey Bh, p. 7a: FR 7k ee II, BEBE 4E BB.


6 {8h Wy a -, @ little work written by Cuanc Hwa, ie Hf , a Minister of
State, who lived in the fourth eee (cf. above, p. 71, note 3): A & Hh rt A


A A AK. Fe BR HE Ait H .
7 Sect. Ff 4}. Book IV, Ch. IV, nr 6: (2 IS SAL) a Wf Bi He BR


CouvreuR, Li ki, Vol. I, p. 367.


8 By 3 (A. D., 276—324), the famous Taoistic author and poet, who edited the
*Rh ya and the Shan hai king.


9 WEY hE, Pe EB.


Digitized by Microsoft®


79


The Shih i ki' (4th century) tells us that the Emperor Chao
of the Han dynasty (B.C. 86—74), when angling in the Wei river,
“caught a white kiao, three chang long, which resembled a big
snake, but had no scaly armour. The Emperor said: ‘This is not
_a lucky omen’, and ordered the Ta kwan to make a condiment
of it. Its flesh was purple, its bones were blue, and its taste was
very savoury and pleasant’.

The ancient Chinese apparently considered the kiao — some
four-legged water animal — to be a common, dangerous creature,
but afterwards it was believed to be akin to the dragon and
called a dragon itself. Thus it became the principal god of rivers
and brooks.
~ According to the Shuh i ki? “old tiger-fishes become kiao”, and
the author of the Yiu-yang tsah-tsu* instructs us that * when
fishes weigh two thousand kin (catty) they become /zao”. Another
work, however, the Yuh hu ts‘ing hwa*, states that eggs left by
snakes or pheasants, when having been a thousand years in the
ground, become vao.

The P% ya® describes this animal as follows: “The kzao belongs
to the same kind as the Jung. Its shape resembles that of a
snake and yet it has four legs and a thin neck. Around its neck
it has a white necklace. The big siao are several spans thick.
They are born from eggs. Their eyebrows are united (2%), reason
why they are called kiao (#)”.

The Mih koh hwui si®° says: “The kiao’s shape is like that of
a snake, and its head is like that of a tiger. Its length reaches
several chang. Many of them live in rivulets and pools and under
rock caves. Their voices are like the bellowing of a cow. When
people walk on the shore or in the valleys of brooks, they are


1 P38 BU. Ch. Vi, p. 30.

2 pt 2 ae (sixth century), Ch. fF, p. 190: RARBE#RRM.
3 Quoted T.S. Sect. @r #h, Ch. 132, WY BN Me Be, vp. 10: fA =F
4 ey ae if in quoted ibidem, p. 2a.

5 Sv. HY, Ch. 1, p. 9a: WS HE PB th. WR We i Pe
S. WMA. KARE. OA. BRK CR.


6 A ya fi JR, according to De vinous (Rel. Syst. Vol. V, p. 864, note 2) “a
work in ten chapters by P‘enG SHIne, BY FE , of the eleventh century’, quoted in


the T.S., Sect. & igh Ch. 132, Wye aK Rte BX, p. 10.


Digitized by Microsoft®


80


troubled by the xiao. When they see a man, they first surround
him with stinking saliva, and after having made him tumble
into the water they suck his blood under his armpits. When he
has no blood left, they stop sucking”.

In the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh' Li Sui-cuzn quotes the following
passage from the P°é& yuen kwang cheu ki?: “The kiao is over a
chang long. It resembles a snake but has four feet and its shape
is broader, resembling the beam of a railing. It has a small head
and a thin neck. At its neck it has white tassels (a white
necklace *), The upper part of its breast is reddish brown, the
upper part of its back is spotted with blue, the sides of its ribs
(flanks) are like brocade. Its tail has a fleshy ring. Big zao are
several span thick, and their eggs are also larger (than those of
other kiao). They can lead fishes anfl fly. If people catch turtles,
the kiao can escape”.

As messengers from the River Lord (jay 4), the god of the
Yellow River, the dao are mentioned in a story to be found in
the Poh wuh chi (8rd century) 4. This god wished to deprive an
official, who crossed the river’ with a jade badge of office, of
this precious object, and sent two kiao to seize the vessel. But
both were killed by the audacious: man, who after having thrice
crossed the river threw the badge into the water as a present
to the River Lord, who danced with joy and took it home.

‘Transformations of siao into human shapes are the subjects of
several tales. The Wu ki* tells the following: “Under the Emperor
Ta Ti of the Wu dynasty (A. D. 228—251), in the seventh month
of the third year of the Chih-wu era (A.D. 240), there was a
certain Wang Shuh who gathered medicinal herbs on T‘ien Tai
mountain. At the hottest time of the day he took a rest under
a bridge, when suddenly he saw a little blue boy, over a foot
long, in the brook. The boy held a blue rush in his hand and
rode on a red carp. The fish straightly entered a cloud and
disappeared little by little. After a good while Shuh climbed
upon a high mountain top and looked to all four sides. He saw
wind and clouds arising above the sea, and in a moment a
thunderstorm broke forth. Suddenly it was about to reach Shuh,
who terrified hid himself in a hollow tree. When the sky cleared
up, he again saw the red carp on which the boy rode and the


ee ae > 38 al BH AB
3 RR, probably the same as Ee or fe. 4 Ch. VII, p. 3a.
KR DE So aantad in tha TQ Gant AN BR on 1900 Gh WY OBE OEE La


Digitized by Microsoft®


81


little boy returning and entering the brook. It was a black kiao!”

In the Sheu shen heu ki! we read about a kiao, who in the
shape of a man, about twenty years old, came to a farmer’s
cottage. He rode on a white horse, under a state umbrella, and
was escorted by four followers, all dressed in yellow robes. “They
came from the East and arriving at the gate they called: ‘Child
of Yin (the little son of the farmer, thirteen years old, who was
alone at home), we come to sit down for a little while and rest’.
Thus they entered the house and sat down on a couch in the
lower part of the court-yard. One of them grasped the umbrella
and turned it upside down. Yin’s child looked at their clothes
and saw that they were entirely without a seam. The horse was
spotted with five colours and looked as if it had a scaly armour
and no hair. In a moment a rainy vapour -came, whereupon the
man mounted the horse and rode away. Turning and looking
back he said to the child: ‘Tomorrow I must come again’. Yin’s
child looked where they went and saw them treading the air,
turning westwards and gradually ascending. In a moment cloudy
vapours assembled from all sides and the daylight was darkened
by them. The next day a heavy rain came violently down; the
water gushed over mountains and valleys, hills and ravines were
overflown. When it was about to overflow the cottage of Yin’s
child he suddenly saw a big kiao, over three chang long, which
with its windings protectingly covered the cottage”.

The revenge of a kiao, transformed into a girl, is told in the
I yuen*, A man who had hit a kiao with an arrow met a crying
girl with the same arrow in her hand. When he asked her what
this meant, she said that she came to return to him the burning
pain it had caused her, after which she gave him the arrow and
disappeared. Before he reached his house he got a hot fever and
died on the road.

The passages mentioned above clearly show that the siao,
just as the Jung, were believed to assume human shapes and to
cause rain and thunderstorm. This is not astonishing, for we
have seen that the kiao were called /ung themselves.


4 +8. mip ee) 2, written by Ts‘ao Tsien, [4 YE, in the fifth century. Ch. X,
p. 4. The Sheu shen ki, +8 jh ZU. was written by Yo Pao, + eg , (or Kan Pao,
ss # ) in the first decades of the fourth century.


2 Pi, written by Liu Kine-snvs, 32) dee ABL. in the first half of the fifth
century; quoted T.S., 1.1, Ch. 132, Rh a p. 2d.
Verh, Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Di, XIU, N° 2. 6


Digitized by Microsoft®


82


§ 8. Rearing and taming dragons.


In Chapter II (pp. 50 sqq.) we have referred to the Historical
Records with regard to the Emperor K‘ung Kiah of the Hia
dynasty, in whose service Liu Léi tamed two dragons, sent down
by Heaven. This Liu Léi had learned the art from the Dragon-
rearer family, and he himself obtained the family name of Yi
lung, *“Dragon-ruler”. : |
_ The so chw'en' gives the same legend in the following
passage: “In autumn (of the 29th year of Chao kung, i.e. Chao,
duke of Lu, who reigned B.C. 541—509) a dragon appeared: in
the suburbs of Kiang. Wéi Hien tszé asked Ts‘ai Mih saying: ‘I
have heard that none of the animals is the dragon’s equal in
-knowledge, and that for this reason the dragon cannot be caught
alive. Can we believe that it is right to ascribe this (his not
being caught alive) to his knowledge “Mih replicd:~“Men- really
do not. know; it is not that the dragon is really knowing. The
ancients kept dragons; therefore the State had a Dragon-rearer
family (Hwan-lung shi”) and a Dragon-ruler family (Yi-lung shi*y’.
Hien tszé said: ‘I too have heard about those two families, but
I do not know their origin; what is it said to be?’ The answer
was: ‘In olden times there was Shuh Ngan of Liu, who had a
distant descendant called Tung Fu, very fond of dragons and able
to. find out ‘their tastes and likings, so as to supply them with
drink and meat. Many dragons sought refuge with him and he
reared the dragons according to their nature in order to serve
the Emperor Shun, who gave him the surname of Tung, and the
family name of Hwan-lung (Dragon-rearer). He was [also] invested
with [the principality of] Tsung-chw‘en, and the family of
Tsung I is of his posterity. Thus in the time of the Emperor
Shun, and for generations after, dragons were reared. We come
[then] to K‘ung Kiah of the Hia dynasty, who was so obedient
and acceptable to the Emperor of Heaven, that the latter gave
him riding dragons, two, a male and a female, from the Hwang-ho,
and two from the Han river. K‘ung Kiah could not feed them,
and had not yet found [members of the] Hwan lung family.
T‘ao T‘ang (Yao)'s family having declined, one of his descendants
was Liu Léi, who learned the art of rearing dragons from the
‘Dragon-rearer’ family. With this he undertook to serve K‘ung


’ 4° Leger, Chinese Classics, Vol. V, pp. 729 sqq.; Book X, year XXIX, par. 4: a


a0 4a VAR eet 9 4h WAH or.


Digitized by Microsoft®


83


Kiah and could give the dragons drink and food. The Emperor
praised him and gave him the family name of Dragon-ruler
(Yt-lung)”.


§ 9. Dragons ridden by sien, or drawing the cars
of gods and holy men.


The “Traditions on the Files of Immortals”, Lieh sien chw‘en',
repeatedly mention sien who rode away on dragons through the
air. We often read also of flying dragons or ying-lung drawing
the cars of gods or holy men. As we shall see below (Ch. VID,
Hwang Ti rode on a dragon, and Yu's carriage was drawn by
two of these divine animals. In the Zz Sao, quoted above’,
K‘tih Yuen’s car was drawn by four £%w or by flying dragons.
The Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty (B. C. 140-86) once ascended
the Yen ling tower and after the second night watch saw Si
wang mu, the. “Royal Mother of the West”, arriving in a carriage
of purple clouds, drawn by nine-coloured, spotted dragons °*.
These ideas are, of course, closely connected with those about
dragon-horses, winged and scaly horses of extraordinary size,
treated above in Ch. I], § 3, pp. 56 sqq.


§ 10. Dragon-boats.


Dragon-boats are mentioned in the Hwai nan tszé*, where ff
these ships are called “dragon-boatsand) yih-heads” (jE Fy at 4).
This is explained as follows by the commentator: “Dragon-boats


are big ships adorned with carved dragon-ornaments (4); the
Wis Tig Calpe of wheat tthe
ips”. WxLLs tiams> describes the yih as “a—ki
of seabird hat “flies high, whose figure is gaily painted on the
sterns of junks, to denote their swift sailing; the descriptions


are contradictory, but its picture rudely resembles a heron”.
On these boats, which were used by the Emperors for pleasure


4 4) ily 4s , written in the first century before our era by the famous philoso-


pher Liu Hane, 2] [A ; quoted T. S., Sect. & igh, Ch. 134, Ah Hy PP. 1a,


9b. Cf. the Shen sien ch‘wen, “Traditions on the divine sien”, quoted ibidem, p. 3a.


% This chapter, § 7, p. 77, note &
3 Han Wu-ti nei ch‘wen (attributed to Pan Ku, but probably written in the 3rd


century), quoted ibidem, p. 3a: = + zz FE we = z 4 Kis Ju ff, BE HE.


4 About 140 B,C.; Ch. VII (7X OK).
5 Chin. Engl. Dict. p. 1092, s.v. yih.


Digitized by Microsoft®


: 84


trips, on which occasions music was made on board, the bird
was painted, not to denote their swift sailing, but to suppress
the water-gods, if we may believe the commentary to a pasSage
of the Wen siien'. It seems that the ships Tepresented dragons
with yih-heads, and that the ‘ dragon- ornaments’ were the
dragon’s scales, ae on the sides of the vessels.

The Japanese courtiers of the eleventh century, however, who
wanted to imitate all the customs prevailing at the Chinese court,
did not understand the words of the Hwai nan tszé and had two
kinds of ships made ahs they called in one term: “ Dragon-
heads (and) Vih-heads”, #E BA it F4, “ Rydto-gekisu”. The combi-
nation of these two cer reminds us of the term “ shishi-komainu’’s
used at the Japanese Court in the same age to denote the images of
the lion and the unicorn, not separately but as one name for
both together *. ‘Therefore I would be inclined to think that the
term yéto-gekisu originally denoted one kind of ships, adorned
with a dragon-head in front and a yih-head behind, if a passage
of the Jikkinsho® did not state that on the occasion of a pleasure
trip in the Emperor Shirakawa’s time (1072—1086), “Koresue
played the finte on board of the ‘dragon-head’, but there was
no flute playing on board of the ‘yih-head’”. As to Murasaxt
Suixisu’s Diary*, where we read that the new ships were very
beautiful, and the Hamamatsu Chinagon Monogatari ®, these works
of the beginning and the middle of the eleventh century, as well
as the Kigwa monogatari® (about 1100), which states that the
Emperor made a pleasure trip with “rydtd-gekisu”’, seem to speak
of one kind of ships. The Kagakusha', however, which dates


1 al BE Sect. py Big rat. compiled in the first half of the sixth century of
our era by Sr1ao T‘one, 7a we quoted in. the Kokushi daijiten, Bil K ay


HHL, p. 2338, s. v. bE BA inte a py, Ryjiizu (mistake instead of ry6td) gekisu
no fune.

2 Cf. my treatise on “The Dog and the Cat in Japanese Superstition”, Transactions
of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. XXXVII, Part I, pp. 54—62.


3 + Hl] 42>, written shortly after 1252; Ch. X, K. T. K, Vol. XV, p. 823.
4 Written from 1008 to 1010; Gunsho ruiju, nr 324, Vol. XI, p. 594.
; aux 7 pk a5
5 YA A rH mS Wy GE, written by Sucawara Konyo (73° JR % p's
daughter (born in} 1008), consort of Fustwara No Tosuimitsu (Be 3, who died in
4058); Ch. I. ;


6 Bk af py 3z ay Ch. XX (Fi Fi), K. T. K. Vol. XV, p. 1344; Ch. VII, p. 1078.
7 oR oh. 4B. written in 1444 by the Buddhist priest Suaxu no Harrorsu,


32 mb Mh: ch. BE Bt.


Digitized by Microsoft®


85


from 1444, says: “‘Dragon-head’ and ‘Yih-head’ are two different
names of. ships”, which agrees with the words of the Jikkinsho'.

These Chinese ships are different from the “dragon-boats” used
in China on the fifth day of the fifth month at the water festival.
The latter are real boats used in regatta’s, or fancy dragon-boats,
carried through the streets and burned at the sea-shore as sub-
stitutes which take away all evil influences. No doubt Dz Groot’s ?
explanation of this festival, as being based on sympathetic magic,
is right. As we shall see below’, the Chinese used to make clay
dragons to cause rain. In the same way their dragon-boat-races
are certainly intended to represent fighting dragons, in order to
cause a real dragon fight, which is always accompanied by heavy
rains. The dragon-boats carried through .the streets may also
serve to cause rain, although they are at the same time considered
to be substitutes.

As to the enormous dragon, made of linen, bamboo and paper,
and carried in procession through the streets on the 15th of the
first month, a red ball being carried in front of him, this was
formerly explained by Dz Groot? as an imitation of the Azure
Dragon, the head of which (a star) in remotest ages in the
beginning of spring rose and set at the same time as the sun
(the fiery ball), as if it persecuted this celestial globe and finally
succeeded in swallowing it®. As to his later explanation con-
cerning the thunder, belched out by the dragon, we may refer to
this Book, Ch. [IV (Ornaments), § 4.


§ 11, “Dragon-tail-road” and other words connected with the dragon.


The “Dragon-tail-road”, #E Fe 34, Lung-wéi-tao, was the road
ascending straight southward to the Shé yuen tien, & 7c BY,
a building belonging to the Chinese Emperor’s palace. Along this
road the visitors came to be received in audience (4 [fy ) by
His Majesty, who always faced the South (4% [f). In imitation
the road before the Taikyokuden, a building belonging to the


1 Cf. the Nambako, if YH YT, written by Oxamoro Yasuraxa, fit] IN ty: zz,
who lived 1798—1878; Ch. II, "Tsi Hyakka setsurin, Vol. eS aS —, p. 636.


2 Fétes annuelles & Emoui, Vol. I, pp. 372 sqq.

3 This Book, Ch. VI (causing rain).

4 Fétes annuelles, Vol. I, p. 369.

5 Cf. Scutecrt, Uranographie Chinoise, pp. 55 sqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


86


Japanese Palace, was also called Rywbido, “Dragon-tail-road” '.

Other words borrowed from China are the following: Ryzteki,
He 4, “dragon-flute”; ryubin, #E A. “dragon’s whiskers”, a
mat woven from rush’; according to the Pao P‘oh-tszé (Sect.
S& pH, Ch. IV, nr 17) it is the name of a kind of grass produced
by the whiskers of the dragon ridden by Hwang Ti. The officials
who could not ascend the dragon got hold of its whiskers, but by
their weight pulled them out. Where the whiskers fell down,
the “Dragon’s whiskers herb” shot up (cf. below, Book I, Ch.
VI; § 1); ryutan, #E BB, pronounced rinds, “Dragon’s liver”, a
species of gentian; three of these flowers, together with five sasa
(HE. a kind of small bamboo), formed the badge of the Minamoto
Family (sasa-rindo). *


§ 12. Dragon-gate.


| ‘The Sin shi San Ts‘in ki! says: “Lung men (iE FA, “Dragon-
gate”) is another name for Ho tsin (yay VE, “Ford of the Hwang
Ho”). Several thousand he-Dragon-


ate without being able to ascend it (i.e. to swim against the
“Garet) Tose whith suzadin-ssending it become. dragons;
those whic main fishes”
sh changing into a dragon. is represented on the altar
table of the Yuh-Fuh-tien in the Fah-yti temple on P‘u t‘o shan
(Borrscuvann, Die Baukunst und religiise Kultur, der Chinesen,
Vol. I, p. 65), and dragons trying to grasp the mysterious fiery
“pearl”, which is hanging in the Dragon-gate, are seen in the
same temple (l.1, pp. 46, 87, cf. below, Book I, Ch. IV, § 4).
As we shall see below (Book II, Ch. XI, § 2, B), there are
in Japan several Dragon-gate waterfalls, and also, in the province
of Kii, a Dragon-gate mountain. The latter reminds us. of the ©


Lung-men mountain between the rivers I and Lo, not far from
the confluence of these rivers. °


ee Rytian zuihitsu, pi) & SF. Gi bs =e, written in 1819 by Kurtuara SHINJU (Nopumitsv),
BS 4S Se: ch. 1x; faite setsurin, Vol. #3 Po —., p. 488.

2 Ra. lin; Kokushi daijiten, p. 2338, s. v. ryubin.

3 Ryuan: zuihitsu, }.1., pp. 485 sq.


4 2 K = aU: written by a certain SiN, 2 quoted T. S, Sect. &
ih» Ch. 128, HE GR AE SH —, p. 130: fey EE REP. AK
SRE PAB Bk ® $ £. 7 HE BL Hh.


RAMe Oe en ee


Digitized by Microsoft®


87


§ 13. Dragon’s dens.


We read in the Sheu shen heu ki': “On mount K‘in in’ Wu--
ch‘ang (in Hu-kwang province) there was a dragon’s den. Whenever.
the inhabitants saw a divine kw (#1) fly out of and into the
den, the year was dry, but when they prayed to this dragon
it rained”.

Another dragon’s den is mentioned in the Cheh-kiang t‘ung-chi,
“General Memoirs concerning Cheh-kiang”,? where we read:
“On mount Pien in Hu-cheu there is a Yellow Dragon's Cavern.
At the top there is a spring which dashes forth from the cave,
called the ‘Golden Well spring’; the cave is also ‘called the
‘Golden Well cave’. The cavern is so deep that one cannot see
its end. At the time of the Liang dynasty a yellow dragon
appeared in it. For this reason King Yueh of Wu erected a shrine
in order to sacrifice to the dragon”. Another dragon’s den,
mentioned in the Kwah i chi, will be treated below in connection
with the Indian Naga-kings (Ch. TX).


§ 14. Dragon herds.


According to the Shih cheu ki* herds of dragons assemble at
Fang chang island in the centre of the Eastern sea. The Luh i
ki* relates about a so-called “Blue smoke temple” situated on
an island: During several days a cloud of smoke hung above the
sanctuary. Suddenly one morning the waves leapt up violently,
a herd of dragons appeared at the surface and entered the Han
river. The big ones were several chang long, the small ones over
a chang. Some were yellow, others black, red, white or blue, and


1 oR WL Ee. A A LT
Bec eli.

2 a YL 3H ae = (cf. Wruin, 1.1, p. 45: 16th century, revised 1684 and 1736), quoted
T.S,, 11. Ch. 199, ff Hy —., p. 130: rai WOR Wy AR ia FE Yel 1A
AW . Ge, OSH. OR ER
SHE REE AAM. REA Uae.


3 + pi BU, . written in the Han dynasty; p. 9a.


4 Be Bea Five “Writings on Recorded Wonders”, written by To Kwano- “Tix, a
Taoist priest who lived in the latter part of the ninth century (cf. De Groot, Rel.
Syst, Vol. V, p. 630, note 2), quoted T.S. 1.1. Ch. 129, AL y= =, p. 14a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


88 :


they resembled cows, horses, donkeys or sheep. Forming a row
of fifty they followed one another into the mouth of the Han
river; then they returned to the temple. So they went to and
back several miles, sometimes hidden sometimes visible. This
lasted for three days and then stopped.


§ 15. Dragon’s pearls.


According to Chwang iszé' a “pearl of a thousand pieces of
gold (ts‘ien kin)” is certainly to be found in a pool of nine layers.
(i.e. very deep) under the throat of a Ui-lwng or “horse-dragon”.
The Shuh i ki? (sixth century) states that so-called -pearl
are spit out by dragons, like snake-pearls b é In the Lung.
ching luh*® we read about a dragon which in the shape of a
little child was playing with three pearls before the entrance of
his den. When a man approached he fled into the cavern and,
reassuming his dragon form, put the pearls in hig left ear. The
man cut off the ear, in order to take possession of the pearls,.
but they vanished together with the dragon himself. -

Another legend‘ tells us about a man who was very fond of
wine and from a female sien in the mountains obtained a pearl
which she said to be kept by the dragons in their mouths in
order to replace wine. :

Dr Groor* mentions “Thunder-pearls” (#@ Bf, ldi-chu), “which
dragons have dropped from their mouths, and which may thoroughly
illuminate a whole house during the night”. “Perhaps”, says
De Groot, “these objects may be the relics of an age of stone”.


§ 16. Dragon’s eggs.


Dragon’s eggs are beautiful stones picked_up in the mountains


or at the riverside, and ‘preserved till they split amidst thunder,


1 se KFS CARD EAH SH i ERE
AiR.

ach. Fp. 30: JL PR A HE SK, BE Pr mk ye, ie Be a pay
nk .


3 HE YR Be. written in the T'ang dynasty by Liv Tsune-yoen, fii) = st:
Ch. II. :


4 Lang hiten ki, Hy Ie a, (see above p. 74, note 6), Ch. rH :


Digitized by Microsoft®


rate” Aragon
appears in the form of a very small snake, or water-lizard, which
grows larger and larger’ in a few moments.’ An old woman, who

“had-fotnd five such eggs in the grass, took the little snakes to
the river and let them go, whereupon the dragons gave her the
faculty of foretelling the future. This “Dragon-mother”, as the
people called her, because, when she was washing clothes in the
river, fishes (the subjects of the dragons) used to dance before
her, became so famous on account of her true prophecies, that
even the Emperor wished to consult her. She died, however, on
her way to the capital, and was buried on the eastern bank of
the river; but the dragons made a violent storm arise and trans-
ferred the grave to the opposite side of the stream. ?

The same story is told in the Nan yueh chi*, but there the
dragons are said to-have several times drawn back the ship by
which the old woman against her will was transported to the
capital. At last the plan was given up for fear of the dragons.
According to the Kwah i chi* there is always much wind and
rain near the Dragon-mother’s grave; then people say: “The
dragons wash the grave”.

In: the Shan-si tung-chi® we read about a dragon-woman who
jumped out of a big egg, found at the side of a pool. She gave
wealth to the house where she lived, but at last she ran away
and in the form of a snake disappeared into the crack of a rock
in the mountains.

The author of the Mung ki pih fan°® says that he often saw
a dragon’s egg, preserved in a case in the Kin shan monastery
in Jun cheu (an old name for Chin-kiang-fu in Kiang-su). It
resembled a hen’s egg, but it was much larger. Its weight was


4 Tai-p*ing kwang ki, Ch. 424; Lang hiten ki, Ch. Bs Kwéi-sin tsah-shih suh-


tsih, ys 3 Rte Sef 4 46, written by Cnev Min, iil BB , who lived in the


second half of the thirteenth and in the beginning of the fourteenth century; Ch. aS ‘
p. 23. 2 T‘ai-p‘ing kwang ki, ibidem.


3 By aby GE. quoted T.S., 11, Ch. 128, ff BE —, p. da.
4 T.8., Ch. 130, p. 7a.


5 {ly pa HA quoted T.S., Ch. 134, Ah Ag» P- 17a.


6 os we = BK written about the middle of the eleventh century by Cu‘EN


Kwon, WK Ba (cf. BRETSCHNEIDER, Botanicon Sinicum, Journal of the North-China


branch of ‘the Royal Asiatic Society, 1881, New series, Nr XVI, Part I, pp. 137, 173,
nr 510).


Digitized by Microsoft®


90


very small, and it gave a hollow sound. This egg had been foun’
in the Tien shing era (1023—1032) in the midst of the Grea
River, and by Imperial order had been presented to the monastery
That very year, however, a great flood washed away a larg
number of houses near by, and the people ascribed this to th
dragon’s egg.

According to a work of the sixteenth century! of our era th
dragon’s eggs are found in times of heavy rains. Further, w
read there that in 1469 a fisherman picked up a big egg, a
large as a human head, five-coloured, the lower end pointed anc
the upper round. If one shook it, there was a sound as of wate
inside the egg, which was very heavy and luke-warm. Thi
people worshipped it, looking upon it as a supernatural thing
A diviner declared it to be a dragon’s egg.


#11. ragon’s bones, ski 8, brains,livers; a


Among the nine ingredients of. spectre-killing pills, mentionec
by Dz Groor?, we find “Dragon’s bones”, “certain fossil bones
+6 be found in the shops of leading apothecaries”. There is, indeed
an extensive medical literature on the curative power of these
bones, which are probably remains of prehistoric animals.

The Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh* is, as in all medical matters, the best
source of our knowledge about these bones and the use made o!
them by the Chinese physicians. According to some of the authors
referred to by Li Sur-cnen, the learned author of this medical
standard work, dragon’s bones are cast-off skins of living dragons
for these animals are said to cast off not only their skins. bul
also their bones; according to others they are the remains o}
dead dragons. Li Sui-caxen, on comparing all the different views
and tales, arrives at the conclusion that the dragon, although a
divine HEINE, ‘certainly dies like other animals, and that the
Pen king *, one of his principal sources, is right in declaring the
dragon’s bones to belong to dead dragons.


1 Suh ee hien tung kao, ae Bl ii #, written by Wane Ku, TE br
who obtained official rank in 1561; Ch. 224.
2 Rel. Syst., Vol. VI, p. 1087.


3 Sect. fk fff, Ch. 43, p, 4 saq.


i AS AK. Under this abbreviated title the Shen Nung Pen ts‘ao-king, “Classica


work on Medicines of (the Emperor) Shen Nung”’, the oldest medical work, is quotec
in the Pen-ts‘ao kana-muh. The work itself is lost. Cf. BRETSCHNEIDER. Botanicor


Digitized by Microsoft®


91


As to the places where they are found, the Ming i pich luh}
says: “They come from (litt. are produced in) the valleys of Tsin
land (Shansi province) and from spots where dead dragons are
lying in caverns on the steep water banks in Tai Shan. They are
gathered at indefinite times” *. “Nowadays”, says the same author,
“many bones are exported from the centre of Liang, Yih and
Pa (Sz’'-ch‘wen province)”. ®

Ler H1ao* remarks: “Those from Yen chen, Tsang cheu and
T‘ai yuen are the best. Among these bones those which are thin
and have broad veins are of female dragons, those which are
coarse and have narrow veins belong to male ones. Those which
have five colours are the best, the white and the yellow ones
belong to the middle kind, and the black ones are of the most
inferior quality. As a rule those with veins lengthwise running
are not DUES, and those which have been gathered by women
are useless.”

In Wu P'v’s® opinion the blue and white ones are good, and
Su Kune® says: “At the present day all (the bones) come from
Tsin land. The fresh and hard ones are not good; those bearing


five colours are good. The blue, yellow, reds —-white-and-black
“=eHes-ais0 according to their GaISaE vorreepomd—witir the viscera,

as the five chih (felicitous plants), the five crystals (shih ying)

and the five kinds of mineral bole (shih chi)’. The meaning of
the last sentence is the following. The five colours (blue, white,


red, black and yellow) correspond to the five viscera (liver, lungs,


—_


1 fy Be $f written by Tsao Hune-xine, [MJ Bd, =a (451 -536). Cf. DE
Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. I, p. 274; BRETSCHNEIDER, LJ., p. 42; Gites, Bibliogr. Dict.,
p. 718,,s.v.: “one of the most celebrated adepts in the mysteries of Taoism”. Quoted
in the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, 1.1, p. 10.


2 AE Hb I AP De De AL dee aR Ee EE BR


3 Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, ibidem: AZ Hi Yh gS * 64, rH
4 G BY, the author of the chi lun, DAal KR mi: who lived A. D, 420—477.


Cf. BRETSCHNEIDER, 1.1, p. 41, nr 6: “A treatise in 3 books, explaining the medical
virtues of 300 drugs and. giving directions for the preparation of medicines’. Quoted
in the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, 1.1.

5 Ri an the author of the Wu shi Pen-ts‘ao, ue K AK ¥A. written in the
first half of the third century. Quoted ibidem. Cf. Bretscunerver, 1|.1., p. 40, nr 5.

6 RS who with 23 other scholars in the middle of the seventh century A. D.


ayy >
eeped and completed the T‘ang Pen-ts‘ao, j= A 5 A, thence called ihe Tang Sin
Pen-ts‘ao, Fy $r A ¥., “New Pen-ts‘ao of the T'ang”. Cf. BRETSCHNEIDER, |. 1, p.


44, nv 11. Quoted in the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, ibidem.


Digitized by Microsoft®


92
heart, kidneys and spleen) and to the so-called mansions (gall,
small and great intestines, bladder and stomach), as we learn


from the list given by Dr Groor, Rel. Syst. Vol. IV, p. 26. For_
this reason probably the use of the dragon's bones as medicines


was different accordin ; regard tothe colour


of the organ to be cured

“~The preparation of the bones is described as follows by Lz
Hao. “For using dragon’s bones first cook odorous plants; bathe
the bones twice in hot water, pound them to powder and put
this in bags of gaze. Take a couple of young swallows and, after
having taken out their intestines and stomach, put the bags in
the swallows and hang them over a well. After one night take
the bags out of the swallows, rub the powder and mix it into
medicines for strengthening the kidneys. The efficacy of such. a
medicine is as it were divine!” } In Li Sai-cuxun’s * time, however,
they were only roasted on the fire till they were red and then
rubbed to powder, or fresh bones were used. In the same passage
“he refers to an author of the Sung dynasty *, who says that the
bones are to be soakéd in spirits for one night, then dried on
the fire and rubbed to powder. Further, according to Cun K‘trn *,
some are a little poisonous, and (in preparing and using them)
fishes and iron utensils are to be avoided (dragons dislike iron,
cf. above, this chapter, § 3, pp. 67 sqq.).


As to the illnesses cured by means of dragon’s bones, their
ie SO ae el om age


of f babies, boils. in _the bowels and atte ee paralysis of


nose or ears is stanped” y er of dragon's bones into


1 Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, 1.1., p. 2a: 6 &A. A RAE 3t A
Bw BARE. HO RASC. AF EL Ee
Bit, BRA A, BH LL Ha, aA
i SSR, HL 2k Hanh

atbidem: jr fit Ty 25 1 A a OD. I A EA.


3 CuHen YUEN-TSING, ig Tt ia author of the Shi lin kwang ki, es ik ji4
ab (cf. De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. I, p. 713; BReTscHNetpER, 1.1., p. 186, nr 749).


Quoted in the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, ibidem.


4 bai fe. author of the Yoh sing pen-ts‘ao, eh PE a A, in the first. half


of the seventh century A. D. (cf. BRETSCHNEIDER, | 1., p. 44, nr 10). Quoted ibidem,


Digitized by Microsoft®


93


them, and, when dried on the fire and ground, they are also
used against navel abscesses of babies. In short, the strong Yang
_power of these bones makes, of course, the Yin demons which
have comfortably established themselves in the human body take
~t0 their heels as soon a8 medicine, prepared from the bones, arrives '.
part from the medical works we may mention the following
passages. The Shuh i ki? (6th century) says: “According to
tradition a dragon, when a thousand years old, casts off his
bones in the mountains. Now there are dragon mounds, out of
which dragon brains are taken”. We read in the same work:
“In P‘u-ning district (Kwantung province) there is a ‘Dragon-
burial islet’. The elders say: ‘The dragons have cast off their
bones on this islet. There are at the present day still many
dragon's bones’. Thus on mountains and hills, on hillocks and
cavernous cliffs, on all places where the dragons raise clouds and
rain, dragon’s bones are found. There are many of them in the
ground, sometimes deep, sometimes near to the surface; teeth,
bones, spines and feet, all are there. The big ones are some tens
of chang or fully ten chang long, the small ones only one or
two chvh or three or four ¢ts‘un. The bodies are all complete.
As they had been gathered, I saw them”. ®
At the time of the T‘ang dynasty the tribute of the land of
Ho-tung principality, Ho-chung department, in Ho-tung province,
partly consisted of dragon’s bones. +


1 T.S., Sect. <r gh, Ch. 127, HE Oh et Hp. 9; Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, .1.,
p. 2 sq.


2 Ch. Il, p. da: fa BEF 4E A oe WU ah A. A BE
PH TH ae J

3 oF RR A HE EN. RET. HERE RE. +
MS HE. RU A we SE A RE A wk
aK. SEL WPA CHR. Ke
FH RAK NSRB—-——R KREWMtT. RFE
A 5B : = | RH FL rae We read the same in the Mao t‘ing koh hwa,
PS BE HR written by Hwane Hiv-run, Fay fC Z@. in the Sung dynasty;


Ch. IX (quoted T.S., L.1, Ch. 430, id ge =, p. 7b), where it is said by a man,
who sold dragon’s bones, teeth, horns, heads and spines on the market. “Some of
them”, said he, “are five-coloured, others white like floss silk; some have withered or
rotten in the long course of the years”.


4 New Books of the T'ang dynasty, rr Fe, Ch. XXXIX, nr 29, Hh JH ie:


Jey ESE. yey FH OF, Jay BE BMP, p. 4 (anno 760 A.D).


-.


‘’


o


Digitized by Microsoft®


94


Li Cao! says in his Kwoh shi pu (“Commentary to the Dynastic
Histories”)?: “ When the spring water comes and the fishes ascend
the Dragon-gate (comp. above, this chapter, § 12, p. 86), there are a
great many of cast-off bones, which are gathered by the people
to make medicines from them. Some of them are five-coloured.
The Dragon-gate is Tsin land, which agrees with the statement
of the Pen king (comp. above). Are the dragon’s bones perhaps
the bones of these fishes?” Su Sune*, who quotes this passage,
instructs us that in his time these bones were found in many
districts of Ho tung province.

Another work of the eleventh century * tells us about a man

who in a dark night saw a branch of a tree which spread a bril-
liant light. He broke it off and used it as a torch. The next
morning he discovered that the light was due to a cast-off skin
of a dragon, in size resembling a new shell of a cicada, and
consisting of head, horns, claws, and tail. Inside it was hollow,
yet it was solid, and when he knocked against it, it produced a
sound like precious stones. The brightness of its light blinded
the eye, and-in the dark it was a shining torch. He preserved
it as a treasure in his house.

The strong light spread by the cast-off dragon’s skins is, of
course, due to the strong Yang power of the dragons.

In 1553, when, the water being very low, a dragon’s skeleton
was discovered on a small island in a river, the people were
all very anxious to get one of the bones. °

Also dragon’s teeth were considered to be a good medicine. The
Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh® quotes St Car-Ts s a rule


1 RE,


2 a op aH » written in the beginning of the ninth century. T.S., 1.1., Ch. 127,


se “‘ A, author ‘of the Sin i siang fah yao, Hr mE RR ie we, an astronomic


work written at the close of the eleventh century (cf. Wvy.iz, p. 107); quoted ibidem.

4 The Chun chu ki wen, Es er AL fal. ten chapters of miscellanies written by
Ho WEI, Ay jer who lived in the eleventh eons (cf. DE. Groot, Rel. Syst. Vol.
si p. 1410); Ch. II, p. 44.


5 Shang han lun tiao pien, Es ge i es HF. written in 1589 by Fane Yru-
oun, Jp Af Bes St 2 HE.
6 L.1., p. 4a.
7 aa 2 re a famous physician who lived in the second half of the sixth cen-
tury, author of the Lei kung yoh tui, ie rN ooh a (cf. BRETSOHNEIDER, 1..1., p.


nA _ eS aed = J Z wm oF as ee


Digitized by Microsoft®


95
they are good when getting (i. e. being mixed with) jen-tsan
(ginseng) and cow-yellow (cow-bezoar), but they fear (i.e. it is
not good to mix or prepare them with) gypsum and iron utensils”.
The illnesses which are cured by means of dragon’s teeth are


enumerated as follows in the Shen Nung Pen-ts‘ao king’: “Beings
that kill the vital spirit; when adults have spasms or epileptic


fits, convulsions or madness, when they run as madmen and their _
breath is tied under their heart, so that they cannot breathe


(i.e. when they are asthmatic); further, the five (kinds of) fits
andthe twetve (kinds of) convulsions of babies”.

According to CHen K‘ten’ they “quiet the heart and calm
down the souls (the hwun and the p‘oh)”. Coen Jun-nwa * declares
them to cure head-ache, melancholy, hot fever, madness, and
(possession of) Awe: and mez (demons). They also cure liver diseases,
for “as the hwun which is stored away in the liver can change
itself, those whose Awun is erring about and is not fixed are
cured by means of dragon’s teeth”. * Li Sui-cnzn gives the fol-
lowing explanation: “Because the dragon is the god of the Eastern
quarter, his bones, horns and teeth all conquer Tver diseases” >.


Dragon’ s Lorne. are used_for enn ee ae


Der S ees were eine to_stop panliorer and the liver


of this divine animal, sometimes of a living one, aie meabed


by some physicians in difficult.cases, Sometimes a royal patient
for this reason even ordered to kill the dragon of a pond, which


used to hear the people’s prayers for rain in times of drought


4° Quoted ibidem: Rx ts Wy, Kk A € JB as 1 TA FR 4¥ #£
AOD ee SOR HE tig A. bd eX


2 Quoted ibidem: $i XN, a rad AF . ‘About the Awun and the poh see DE
Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, Part. I, Ch. I, pp. 4 sqq., p. 23.


3 [sie H if, who lived in the Sung dynasty and wrote the King yen fang,


KK ba Ff (BRETSCHNEIDER, 1.1., p. 164, nr 338). Guoted 4uidenis 1G KA pil
TE Fh We


-4 Hé Snus-wet, at A Th who lived in the time of the Sung dynasty and
wrote the Pen shi fang, As Ee Ff (BRETSCHNEIDER, 1.1., p. 179, nr 588). Quoted
ibidem: AF Jat BE AE SAL. de SEWER EH a CUE.

5 Ll: BES Re Sil, eH SE.


6 Pen-ts‘aa kang- -muh, 1.1, p. 4b.
7 Tao HUNG-KING, quoted ibidem. The “brain of a dragon a thousand years old” is
mentioned among a huridred medicines in the Shuh i ki, Ch. II, p. 5a.°


Digitized by Microsoft®


96


and guarded the castle of the prince. That very day a terrible
thunderstorm broke forth and the dragon flew away; the castle,
no longer guarded by its tutelary god, soon fell a prey to the
enemy who stormed and destroyed it like in former days’.
Another time we read about a dragon which by the mighty
charm of a Taoist doctor was forced to descend into a jar of
water. After having cut out the liver of the living animal he
gave it a patient, the wife of a prefect, to eat, and she recovered *.

Placentae oelus of dragens, found: in Pa and Shuh (Sz’-ch‘wen
province), were said to cure diseases of the blood and those of
women after delivery.® 99 =~
aa alana Bo

§ 18. Dragon’s blood, fat and saliva.


The Yiu-yang tsah tsu* says: “When dragon’s blood enters the
earth it becomes hu-poh, amber.

As to dragon’s fat, we learn from the Shih i ki* that a tower,
lighted by means of it, spread such a brilliant light that it was
seen at a distance of a hundred miles. This light was said by
some people to be a lucky omen and was worshipped by them
from far. The wick was made of “fire-washed cloth” (asbestos
cloth which can be cleaned by fire), twined into a rope.

_ With regard to the dragon’s saliva we read the following in
the Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh*: “Wane Kr" says: ‘From the saliva spit
out by dragon is made’. Li Sui-cuzn (the author hiim-
self) says: ‘Dragon’s saliva is seldom used as a medicine; it is
only mixed into perfumes. It is said that it can bind camphor


4 Mih Koh hwui si, & xe if Ee , written in the eleventh century by P‘ene
SHING, w fe (cf. De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, p. 864, note 2). Quoted T.S., Sect.


Be ih, Ch. 130, $F BE =, p. 30.


2 Chao yé ts‘ien tsai, i] Ey Sy R. “Record of all matters relating to the Court


and abroad”, ascribed to CHANG SHOH, ARR, who probably lived in the first half
‘e Pp y


’


of the 8th century. T.S., Sect. jl Fi, Ch. 306, quoted by De Groor, Rel. Syst.,


Vol. VI, p. 1034, note 4.
3 Pen-tsao kang-muh, 1.1., p. 5a.


4 Pa BB HE AM (ninth century), Ch. XI ( BE At), p. 6b: BE yf A Hb
oy HE 3H °
5 # 3H BU, (fourth century), Ch. X, Sect. Ff ne ily ) p. 3b.


6 L. 1, p. 5a.
7 VE 43% , a celebrated physician of the 16th-century, author of the Pen-ts‘ao hui-


1. tHe AWARE pen 5 4 we aN


Digitized by Microsoft®


97


and musk for several tens of years without evaporating.
Further, it is said that, when it is burned, a blue smoke floats
‘through the air. ........ Last spring the saliva spit out by
a herd of dragons appeared floating (on the sea). The abori-
gines gathered, obtained and sold it, each time for two thousand
copper coins.”

The Yiu hwan ki wen' instructs us that the most precious of
all perfumes is dragon’s spittle, and that the inhabitants of Ta-
shih land used to watch the vapours arising for half a year or
even two or three years from the same spot of the sea. When they
vanished, this was a token that the dragons which had been
sleeping there all the time had gone away. Then the people went
to the spot in order to gather the saliva of those dragons. Accor-
ding to another explanation, found in the same passage, the
dragons lived in whirlpools in the open sea. The spittle which
they emitted was hardened by the sun, and these hard pieces
were blown ashore by the wind. When fresh it was white, gradually
it became purple, and finally black (amber, generally considered
to be the excrements of cachalots, i. e. sperm whales, is yellowish).

This perfume reminds us of the “Dragon-fight perfume”,
mentioned in the Tsu ting shi yuen?, which is said to be pro-
duced by fighting dragons. One pill of it makes a large cloud of
perfume arise.

According to the Lang hiien ki? the Emperor Shun used the
saliva of a purple dragon as ink in writing the names of holy
ministers on tablets of jade, those of sages on tablets of gold
and those of talentful ministers on tablets of quartz-crystal; those
of ordinary ministers were written with ordinary ink on tablets
of wood. In order to obtain the saliva he ordered Yu Hu to rear
a purple dragon. The latter daily made the animal drop saliva
by holding a swallow, which he had cooked (the favourite food
of the dragons, cf. above, p. 68) before it without immediately
giving it to eat. This made the dragon’s mouth water, and
a large quantity of saliva dripped down. Then Yu Hu filled
a vessel with it, whereupon he gave the swallow to the


4 Ni ra AE Fal , written by Cane Sut-nan, Be Ti: > in the Sung dynasty;


Ch. VII; quoted T.S., 1.1, Ch. 130, 46 BR, p. 5a.
2 ih jie wy Bu: quoted in the Japanese Buddhist dictionary entitled Bukkyo
iroha jilen, Vol. Il, p. 63, s.v. Ryt-t, 7 [BH


3 FBG He BE» written by 1 Sur-cnen, 4Ft tH: 3B. in the Yuen dynasty; T. S.
l1., Ch. 131, p. 10.
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R, Dl XIII, N° 2. q


Digitized by Microsoft®


98


dragon. In this way he daily got one koh (a gill) of saliva,
which was mixed with hwui shih ($4 $F, the “Herb of the Sten”,
{il] Hi). In the time of Yao this herb grew before the audientve
hall. It wore flowers in all four seasons. If one rabbed its fruit
and mixed it with a purple dragon’s saliva, a liquid of a
genuine red colour was produced, which penetrated into gold
and jade and thus could be used in writing names on the tablets
mentioned above.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER IV.


ORNAMENTS.


§ 1.8 ial dignity and fertilizing rain, r ted
on garments, honorary gates, coffins etc.
A


As we have seen above (Ch. I, § 2, p. 39), the Shu king states


that the dragon ee to the sonnei figures depicted_o
the upper sacrifi arme
It is not to be ace pee at that this diving giver of rain, at


the same time symbol of a good sovereign and his blissful
government, should be represented among the Imperial ornaments.
“The so-called shah (34) are described by De Groor' as square
boards of wood covered with white linen, with handles five feet.
Tong, which in ancient —times were carried_behind_the funeral
cars_of grandees, and were planted inside the pit when the coffin
had been lowered into the grave. These shah _displayed_the_rank
_of the grandees by emblematical_figures.‘The Kien-lung edition
of the Three Rituals suggests that the two shah which the Son
of Heaven had in addition to the six of a feudal prince, were
painted with a dragon, the characteristic symbol of the imperial
dignity” *. i
_ Four pedestals_of the quinquepartite decorative gate at the
Imperial Ming tombs—‘display, on every face, an Imperial Dragon,
soaring in the midst-ofthe-wsual emblems accompanying—this—
divine distributor of fructifying rains, namely clouds and stars” *.
“ahe shaft of each (of the-fonr-columns-in the prolongation of
the erie e wiyitiel git a yigutie Adon, cology eet
Ming Tombs) is sculptured with a gigantic dragon, coiling itself ~~~


around it as if climbing the skies” +.


With regard—te—henorary—gates. De Groot remarks that the
tablet placed perpendicularly underneath their highest roof,


4 Rel. Syst., Vol. I, pp. 185 sqq.

2 P. 187, fig. 20, a picture of a shah adorned with a dragon.

3 De Groot, 1.1., Vol. III, p. 1193, plate XL. Z
4 P. 1194.


Digitized by Microsoft®


1002


displaying the characters 7f) [j , “By Imperial Decree”, or #2 |G,
“By decree of the Holy One”, is supported by a couple of dragons,
“the symbols of the blessed reign of the Son of Heaven” '.


- The azure dragon, symbol of quarter in ancient


_ China, wa be seen on the left side of nus of grandees in _
_ the Han dynasty, while on the right side a white tiger represented_


the West. We learn this from a passage of oks of the
~Early Han dynasty ?, quoted by Ds Groor*, who also refers to


J the Books of the Later Han Dynasty ‘, which state tha
‘imperial coffins “used to be decorated and painted with a sun,


“a moon, a-bird;-atortoise, a dragon and a tiger”. This was also


the case in T'ang dynasty ® At the present day the use of omma-_
mental dragons is not limited to the funerals of Emperors or
grandees, but also common SSOpISTTS-aIIGHEL by enjoy thair
Dlessing power. “On the front curtain * (of the catafalque) are’ a
couple of dragons rising out of the waves, surrounded by clouds
and with a sun between them; the back displays a tiger or
unicorn, the top exhibits dragons, sundry ornamental flowers,
and figures representing clouds. Thanks to these clouds and to
the dragons which produce the same in their quality of watergods,
the greatest blessings which the Universe can bestow, viz. ferti-
lizing rains causing crops to grow and so giving food, raiment
and wealth, surround the dead” *. The grave-clothes for women
in Amoy, called “dragon-petticoat” *, “dragon-mantle”®, and _
“clouds-mantilla”’ '°, are adorned with embroidered dragons amidst
clouds, bats, phenixes, stags, tortoises and cranes, emblems of
‘Tertilizing_rains, old-age, joy, pecuniary profits-and-happiness"".
The Li ki™ says that at the great sacrifice to the Duke of
Chao in the last month of summer “the ruler (of Lu), in his
dragon-figured robe and cap with pendants, stood at the eastern


\


\

4 Rel, Syst., Vol. Ill, p. 4201. 2 Ch. 93.

3 Vol. I, pp. 315 sq., cf. Vol. II, p. 699. 4 Ch. 16, p. 2.

5 T.S., Sect. ne 4# , Ch. 56; De Groot, 1.1., Vol. I, p. 317.

6 According to the Li ki (Ch, 58, p. 39, quoted by De Groot, Vol. I, p. 182) in
ancient times on the side curtains of the catafalque of a Ruler dragons were depicted.
Cf. DE Groot, 1.1., p. 183, Fig. 18.

7 Der Groot, Vol. I, p. 181.


8 is 4B bong-kin. 9 IE 7A, béng-6.
10 Bs ip. hé-poe.
41 De Groot, Vol I, p. 53, Fig. HI, IV and V.


42 Couvreur, Li ki, Vol. 1, p. 732, Chap. XII, Ming Tang wei, HA Ww DL,
“pana. Ee Ae EB ke TE Ue pecan Gaannd Ranke Wal VVUNT n 99


Digitized by Microsoft®


° 101


steps”. A little further’ we read: “For ‘ladles they (the rulers
of Lu) had that of Hia, with the handle ending in a dragon’s
head” and “they had the music-stand of Hia, with its face-board
and posts, on which dragons were carved” ?; “they had knee-
covers of Cheu, with dragons” °.


- i “Sy


< § . Nine di inds of dragons, used as ornaments. —


A well-known work of the end of the sixteenth century, the


Wuh tsah tsu*, informs us about the > nine different _young of the
Are USE ng to their


nature. The p‘u-lao*, dragons which like to er represented
on the tops of bells, serving as handles. The szé-niu°, which like _
music, are used to adorn musical_instruments. The ch‘i-wen "
which like swallowing, are placed on both ends of the ridgepoles
of ro z all evil influences). The chao-fung *, Tion-like


beast ich_ like precipices, are placed on the four corners of


Toots. The ai-hwa°, which like to kill, serve as ornaments of
Sword-grips—The hi-pi°, which have the shape-of-the-ch%i-lung',


and are fond_of literature, are represented on the sides of grave-
monuments. The p%-han ”, which like litigation, are placed over
‘prison gates (in order to keep guard). The swan-i'", which like-
to_sit down, are represented upon the ba dhist_ idols


(under the Buddhas’ or Bodhisattvas’ feet). The pa-hia", finally,


__big tortoises which like to carry heavy objects, are placed under
_grave-monuments,? _


4 Couvreur, 1.1, p. 736, § 20: mem AS. B BAW EH A} . ‘Lecce,


IL, p. 35.


2 Couvrsur, 1.1, p. 739, § 26: BS pe & BE BE fe , Lecer, 1.1, p. 37.
3 Couvreur, 1.1. p. 740, § 29: al HE Bz, Leacg, J.1., p. 38.
at. Rite AW], written about 1592 by Sié Cuao-cnr, nt EE; 7H} 3
ine. 6p AE. 7 BW).
8 wi] IA. 9 WE 10 Jat
41 be GE, represented in the T. S., Sect. es ih» Ch. 127, and in the Wakan sansai
.zue, Ch. XLV, p. 674. Cf. De Groor, Rel. Syst., Vol. III, p. 1142, Fig. 37, a ch‘i (or li)


ihe, carved in the border crowning a sepulchral tablet of stone. It is mentioned al-


ready in the third century before our era (in the Lii-shi ch‘un-ts‘iu), and described
in the Shwoh wen as a yellow animal, resembling a dragon, or as a hornless dragon.


12 BE FP. 13 FB%i. oa


15 The same facts are to be found in the Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p. 674,
and are further explained in the dictionary entitled Ching tszé t‘ung QE + i,


Digitized by Microsoft®


102 ;


Further, the same author enumerates nine other kinds of
dragons — there are so many, says he, because the dragon’s nature
is very lewd, so that he copulates with all animals ' —, which
are represented as ornaments of different objects or buildings
according to their liking prisons, water, the rank smell of newly
caught fish or newly killed meat, wind and rain, ornaments,
smoke, shutting the mouth (used for adorning key-holes), standing
on steep places (placed on roofs), and fire.


§ 3. Ornaments used by Wu-ist priests and mediums.


Dr Groort’s description of the religious dress of the Wu-ist
priests (the sai kong’ of Amoy) contains the following passage.
“On the left and right (of the pile of mountains, representing
the continent of the world, embroidered on the back of the
principal vestment of the sai kong), a large dragon rises high


above the billows, in an eae ere oe eee
towards the contin eee Sas ye ee eee
“rains, and are therefore sur? y go read figures whic

and some which resemble spirals and denote


aroun ck, sti 0 ascendiny dragons which are
belching out_a ball, probably representing thunder


A similar, secondary vestment of a sai kong is adorned with


“an oblong piece of blue silk, embroidered with two dragons
which 4,
“It is then obvious, that the sacerdotal dress of the sat kong
is a magical dress. The priest, who wears it, i
_the_power of the Order of the World itself, and thus enabled
_to_restorethat—Order_whenever, by means of sacrifiees-and magi-
es ceremonies, he is averting unseasonable and calamitousevents,  .


~sach_as_drought, untimely aad superabundant, rainfall, or eclipses,


Besides, since the Tao is the mightiest power against the demon


XY SE aS HST: p. 60; written in the Tsing dynasty by Yao WEN-yING, Ex Bl Fe ).


In many respects the Japanese lave followed these Chinese rules of ornamentation.

4 According to the same work (Ch. IX), a cross-breed of a dragon ad a cow is a lin
( He. a female unicorn); that of a dragon ad a pig is an elephant; and if a dragon
copulates with a horse, a dragon-horse (cf. above, pp. 56 sqq.) is born.

2 fn A. 3 Rel. Syst. VI, p. 1265, Plate XVIII


Digitized by Microsoft®


103


world, the vestment endows: the wearer with irresistable exor-
cising power” '.

On the so-called “embroidered belly”,? a piece of red cloth
or silk, suspended on the stomach of the hi téng*, the “divining
youths” used as mediums, possessed by gods, “two dragons are
stitched with gold thread; for dragons are emblems of imperial
dignity, and consequently also those of the Emperor of Heaven,
in whose employ the indwelling spirit of the ki tong is, as well
as all other shen” *.

“The Ai (KL, an instrument for spirit- mtn) of a fashionable
club is as a rule clad in red silk or broadcloth, on which dragons
are stitched with gold thread; for it is clear that, having to
harbour so often the spirit of a god, the instrument deserves,
just as well as his image, to wear the dress of divinity, which
is a mantle embroidered with the said imperial animals. Of such
a ki°of higher order, the end below the vertex is also nicely
carved and gilded, representing the head and scaly neck of a
dragon or snake” °.

_ “Tf the litter (of a ki téng deity, whose image is carried about
in it) is fitted out completely, there are inserted behind the back
five thin staffs, to each of which a triangular flag is fastened,
embroidered with the emblem of imperal dignity, viz. an ascending
dragon which vomits a ball”.


§ 4. The dragons and the ball.


As to the ball, “belched out by the two dragons”’, this reminds
us at once of the Dragon festival on the 15th day of the first
month; the ball carried in front of the dragon on that day might
be also explained in the same way, i.e. as thunder belched out
by the dragon, and not as the sun, pursued by him. This fact
was orally pointed out to me by Prof. Dz Groor himself’. The |
ball between the two dragons is often delineated as a spiral, and
in an ancient charm represented in Koa Hune’s Pao P'oh-tsz&
(1%th section) “a spiral denotes the rolling of thunder from
which issues a flash of lightning’”*. “In the sign expressing
lightning, the projecting stroke signifies the flash; therefore its
effect as a charm is indefinitely increased by lengthening that


3 aL.


~ © Sap:
a


De Gndamp lol Vol. VI, p. 1275.
L.L, p. 4297. 6 L.1, p. 1316.
See above, this Book, Ch. IV, § 10. 8 Rel. Syst., VI, p. 1036, Fig. 3.


Digitized by Microsoft®


104


stroke so that it looks like a spiral which at the same time
represents the rolling of thunder”. '

This theory agrees with Hirta’s explanation of the “ Triquetrum ”
in connection with the dragon in Chinese and Japanese orna-
ments *. Hirra identifies the “Triquetrum”, i.e. the well-known
three-comma-shaped figure, the Japanese mitsu-tomoe, with the
ancient spiral, representing thunder, and gives a Japanese picture
of the thundergod with his drums, all emitting flames and adorned
with the mitsu-timoe. But this ornament is not at all limited to
the drums of the thundergod*®; it is, on the contrary, very
. frequently seen even on the drums beaten by children at the Nichiren
festival in October. At many Japanese temple festivals which have
no connection whatever with the thundergod or the dragon, the
same ornament is seen on lanterns and flags. Hirta explains its
frequent appearance on tiles as a means of warding off lightning,
based on the rule “similia similibus”. This is contrary to the use of.
“sympathetic magic”, very common in the Far East *, according
to which the symbol of thunder would not avert thunder but
attract it, thus destroying and driving away evil influences.
Apparently both ideas are found side by side, for images of
dragons were used to attract them, thus causing rain and thunder,
but at the same time the thundergod of Mount Atago (with
whom Shogun. Jizd was identified as Atago Gongen) was wor-
shipped as the principal protector against fire. But the symbol
of thunder on the tiles may also serve to drive away all evil
influences from the buildings, like the dragons represented on
both ends of the ridgepoles, mentioned above (p. 101).

Hirta gives a picture from a Japanese work on ornaments,
entitled Nairyu kira ga ésa, but the ancient Chinese ‘Triquetrums”,
nrs 23, 25, 26, 27, are different from the Japanese forms, as the
former have a circle in the centre and five or eight comma’s,
all placed separately, and turned towards the centre (except in
nr 23, where they issue from the centre), while the latter consist
of two or three black comma’s interlaced with white and often
united in the centre. Yet the turning motion is evident in all,


4 L.1, p. 1040.

2, Chinesische Studien, Vol. I, pp. 234 sqq. (Verhandlungen der Berl. Anthr. Ges.,
Sitzung vom 22 Juni 1889), “Ueber den Maander und das Triquetrum in der chinesischen
und japanischen Ornamentik”.


3 It is not represented on his drums in the picture of the Wakan sansai zue, Ch,
Ill, p. 44.


naw onan


Digitized by Microsoft®


105


and the more I reflect upon it, the more I feel inclined to accept
Hiera’s explanation of the mitsu-tomoe and futatsu-tomoe (two
comma’s) as the rolling thunder. Its frequent appearance on
lanterns, flags, tiles, and, in olden times, on the tomo or
leather shield worn around the wrist by archers, and its frequent
use as a badge of arms may be explained by its magic power,
averting evil and, in some cases, bringing fertilizing rains. I
formerly believed it to be the Yang and Yin symbol, the third
comma being the Jai. Kih (fx fm, the primordium, from which
Yang and Yin emanate). This primordium,. which in China is repre-
sented by the whole figure, should by mistake have been represented
by the Japanese by means ofa third comma‘. Yang and Yin, Light
and Darkness, however, are represented by one white and one black
figure, somewhat resembling comma’s and forming together a circle.
It would be very strange if the ancient Japanese, who closely
imitated the Chinese models, had altered this symbol in such a
way that its fundamental meaning got lost; for replacing the
two white and black comma’s with two or three black ones
would have had this effect. Moreover, in Japanese divination, based
on the Chinese diagrams, the original Chinese symbol of Yang
and Yin is always used and placed in the midst of the eight
diagrams. Thus the futatsu-tomoe and mitsu-tomoe are apparently
quite different from this symbol, and Hirra rightly identifies
them with the ancient Chinese spiral, representing thunder.
Moreover, I found the same explanation of the tomoe in the
Japanese work Shiojirt?, which gives a picture of two kinds of
spirals, ancient symbols of thunder and clouds. Finally, on Japanese
prints the dragon ist often accompanied by a huge spiral, repre-
senting the thunderstorm caused by him.

Is the ball, so often seen in connection with the dragon, and
often represented as a spiral emitting flames or as a ball upon
which something like a spiral is delineated, identical with the
spiral, denoting thunder? Hirata and De Groot suppose so. The
latter, considering the dragon’s nature of a thundergod, arrived at
the conclusion that the dragon must belch out the ball instead of
swallowing it, for why should he, who causes thunder, persecute
it and try to swallow it? Hirta® speaks about a dragon which
with his claw is putting the thunder into rotation. This is,


4 Cf. FLorenz, Jap. Mythologie, p. 78, note 7.


2 a Fil», written by Amano Nopuxace, RK By 4B er: who lived 1660—1733;


new edition (1907), Ch. XXXI, p. 497,
3 L.L p. 233,


Digitized by Microsoft®


106


however, not the ordinary way of representing the dragon with
the ball or spiral. Zwo dragons flying with open mouths towards
a ball or spiral between them — this is the most frequent and
apparently the most ancient representation. The artists, especially
those of later times, often varied this subject, so that we some-
times see more than two dragons rushing upon one ball, or one
dragon trying to swallow it or having caught it with his claw;
sometimes there are even two balls and only one dragon.
But nowhere they make the impression of belching out the ball;
their whole attitude, on the contrary, indicates their eagerness
in trying to catch and swallow it. Moreover, how can two dragons
belch out one ball? And the dragon of the festival constantly
follows the ball with his mouth, apparently in order to swallow
it. Yet I was inclined to accept Dz Groor’s theory, although it
was very difficult to make it agree with the eager attitude of
the dragons, when Mr Kramp had the kindness of pointing out
to me his own opinion on this subject. After having drawn my
attention to Hirtu’s paper, mentioned above, he showed me a
little Chinese picture, represented in Buacxer’s Chats on Oriental
China (London, 1908), on p. 54, where we see two dragons,
rushing upon a fiery, spiral-shaped ball, under which the following
characters are to be read: ff my HH Fl, “A couple of dragons ©
facing the moon”. The moon! These were the first written
characters I ever saw with regard to this interesting subject,
for the sea of texts concerning the dragon, ancient and modern,
did not give a single word. Leaving aside the character i,
which is apparently not well chosen to denote the aggressive
attitude of the dragons, we have only to consider the character F.

Would it be absurd to represent dragons trying to swallow
the moon? Not in the least, for the dragons are, as we have
seen above, the clouds, and the ancient Chinese may easily have
fancied that these dragons, quickly approaching and covering the
moon, actually devoured it. When they did so, the fertilizing
rain soon trickled down upon the thirsty earth, a great blessing
to mankind. For this reason they might be represented so often
trying to swallow the moon, namely as a symbol of fertilizing
rains. Owing to the close connection between the moon and the
water, the moon, having been swallowed by the dragon, might
have been believed to strengthen the rain-giving power of the
latter. The dragon of the festival, persecuting the moon, might
be carried along the streets in order to cause rain by sympa-
thetic magic.


Digitized by Microsoft®


107

The Chinese themselves, however, mostly call the ball a “pre-
cious pearl”. We find it explained in this way in Borrscumann’s
highly interesting work on P'u fo shan', where a gilt ball of
glass is said to hang from the centre of the roof of the Great
Hall of the Buddhist temple Fa(h)-yu-sze (#5 Wj =, «Temple
of the Rain of the Law”), while eight dragons, carved around
the surrounding “hanging pillars’, eagerly stretch their claws
towards the “pearl of perfection” *. This term sounds Buddhistic
and is appropriate to the Buddhist surroundings, as well as the
number eight of the dragons, which is, indeed, fixed by the
form of the roof, but is also found on the staircase of the Yu(h)-
fo(h)-tien (p. 57). Dragons trying to seize a fiery “pearl’’ which
is hanging in a gate (the Dragon-gate, cf. above, p. 86) are
represented twice in the same temple (pp. 46, 87). Leaving
aside Borrscumann’s fantastic ideas about the “dragons playing
with the pearl” (p. 43), we may be sure that the Chinese
Buddhists, identifying the dragon with the Naga, also identified
the ball with their cintamani or precious pearl which grants all
desires. The question rises: “Was the ball originally also a pearl,
not of Buddhism but of Taoism?”

Mr Kramp pointed out to me, that the character £ , combined
from jewel and moon, though not found in the dictionaries of
Weis Wituams, Gites or Covuvreur, is given in the K‘ang-hi
dictionary. I found it also in the Japanese lexicon entitled
Kanwa daijiten (p. 852), explained as a “divine pearl” (ji! Bk), and
with the Japanese-Chinese pronunciations getsw, gwachi. This is
evidently based upon the K‘ang-hi dictionary, where we read s. v.:


ff BR UY), = Al. ih BE th, . The same pronunciation and meaning
are given in the lexicon entitled 7szé-wei. This sacred yueh pearb


probably dues its holiness to its connection with the ; moon, for
the second part of the character $H may not only form the
phonetic element, but it may indicate that this is “the pearl of
the moon”, as there is also a “pearl of the bright moon”
(WY A Bk, Covvrzur’s Dictionary s. v. Ff ). It is possible that


in the little sentence mentioned above: ff mm HY A, the last


‘character has taken the place of the fuller form $f, in which
case the two dragons would be said to “face the moon-pearl”’.


4 Ernst BorrscHMann, Die Baukunst und religiése Kultur der Chinesen. Band I:
P% to. shan.

2 Dragons and pearl: pp. 18, 35, 57, 59, 77, 124. One dragon with the pearl in
his claw, other dragons flying from both sides to the spot, p. 35.


Digitized by Microsoft®


108


Difficult points in the moon theory are the red colour of the
ball and its spiral-shaped form. If it is a pearl, however, repre-
senting the moon or at least closely connected with it, the red
colour may mean the lustre of this brilliant, fiery gem, which
in the temple on P‘u t‘o shan, mentioned above, is represented
by a glass ball covered with gold. The red ball, carried by the
Dragon girl in the Hall of the Law of the same temple (Borrscx-
MANN, 1.1., p. 122, nr 7) is evidently also a pearl. The spiral is
much used in delineating the sacred pearls of Buddhism, so that
it might have served also to design those of Taoism; although
I must acknowledge that the spiral of the Buddhist pearl goes
upwards, while the spiral of the dragon is flat.

We know the close connection of dragons and pearls in both
religions. This connection is quite logical, for the masters of the
sea are, of course, the possessors and guardians of its treasures.
When the clouds approached and covered the moon, the ancient
Chinese may have thought that the dragons had seized and
swallowed this pearl, more brilliant than all their pearls of the sea.

These are, however, all mere suppositions. The only facts we
know are: the eager attitude of the dragons, ready to grasp and
swallow the ball; the ideas of the Chinese themselves as to the
ball being the moon or a pearl; the existence of a kind of sacred
“moon-pearl”’; the red colour of the ball, its emitting flames and
its spiral-like form. As the three last facts are in favour of the
thunder theory, I should be inclined to prefer the latter. Yet Iam
convinced that the dragons do not belch owt the thunder. If their
trying to grasp or swallow the thunder could be explained, I
should immediately accept the theory concerning the thunder-
spiral, especially on account of the flames it emits. But I do not
see the reason why the god of thunder should persecute thunder
itself. Therefore, after having given the above facts that the
reader may take them into consideration, I feel obliged to say:

“non liquet”.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER V.


CAUSING RAIN, THUNDER AND STORM.


§ 1. ds of thunder, clouds and rain.


The Classics have taught us that the dragon is thunder, and
at the same time that he is a water animal, akin to the snake,
sleeping in pools during winter and arising in spring. When
autumn comes with its dry weather, the dragon descends and
dives into the water to remain there till spring arrives again.
When in the first.month of the year now and then thunderclaps
were heard and a little rain came down, the ancients were
convinced that this was the work of the dragons, who in the
form of dark clouds appeared in the sky. If our interpretation
of the words of the Yeh king is right, the “advantage” given
by them when they were seen soaring over the rice fields, and
the “blessing power then, spreal by them everywhere”, was
nothing but the fertilizing rain they poured down upon the earth.
In later texts, at any rate, we have seen them clearly qualified
as the gods of clouds and rain, whose breath turned into clouds '
and whose power manifested itself in heavy rains. Kon Hune ?,
e.g., in the Pao Poh tszé states the following: “If on a yin day
there is in the mountains a being who calls himself a “forester”,
it is a tiger,..... and if on a ch‘en day a being calls himself
“ Rain-master”, it is a dragon..... If one only knows these their
animal names, they cannot do him any harm’. The tiger, indeed,
is the god of the mountains and woods, as the dragon is the


divinity of water and rain.


4 Cf the "Rh ya yih, quoting Wane Fu, above, Book I, Ch. IIT, § 2, p. 66;
Han Yo, H& AJ, (A.D. 768-824), quoted T.S., Sect. er igh, Ch. 127, p. 8b, says


the same: HE ie a4 si =.


2 Ch. IV, Sect. ¥% Oe quoted by De Groor, Rel. Syst., Vol. V, p. 601: [I]


Ht AOA BA ESR th. Be OA Bi HE
4h... 4 Ft Ey OOF BE Fs Ft.


Digitized by Microsoft®


110


According to the Kwoh yii', Confucius stated that “apparitions
QR, “strange beings”) in the water are called lung (ff) and
wang-siang (fj) ¥F), while apparitions between trees and rocks


are called khwei (s#8) and wang-liang (Hq kj)". As to these chwer,
we learn from De Groot”, who quotes the Shwoh wen* and the
Shan hai king *, that this is a class of one-legged beasts or dragons
with human countenances, which were fancied in ancient China
to be amphibious and to cause wind and rain. The Shan hai king,
as quoted by Ds Groor, describes them as follows: “In the
Eastern seas is a Land of rolling Waves, extending seaward over
seven thousand miles. There certain animals live, shaped as
cows with blue bodies, but hornless and one-legged. Whenever
they leave or enter the waters, winds are sure to blow, and
rains to fall. Their glare is that of the sun and the moon, their
voice is that. of thunder. They are named kshwei. Hwang the
emperor caught some and made drums of their hides, which,
when beaten wich bones of the ‘thunderbeast’, resounded over
a distance of five hundred miles, and thus struck, the world
under heaven with awe”. “In this description”, says Ds Groot,
“we immediately recognize the /ung or Dragon, China’s god of
Water and Rain”.

Further, De Groor® quotes the Tszé puh yii*, which states the
following: “There are three species of drought-causing pah ( 54 Mt).
Some are like quadrupeds; an other ‘kind are transformations of
kiang shi ({ JP, corpse-spectres), and both these species are
able to produce drought and stop wind and rain. But the princi-
pal, superior drought-demons, called’ koh (or koh-tsze, #4. 4% -F-),
cause still more damage; they resemble men but are ‘taller, and
have one eye on the top of the lead. They devour dragons, and
all the Rain-masters (fj fii) fear them much, for when they


4 aa , ascribed to Tso K‘iu-mine, EE Bp HF , the alleged author of the Tso
chwen. Ch. V, @ oe quoted by De Groot, Rel. Syst. Vol. V, p. 495: gE fal
ZAG CEA BM oh, Kk CMA HER.

21.1, pp. 496 sq. :

3 ae a a dictionary composed in the first century of our era by Ht SHEN,


af TB; Ch. V, 2.


Tt
4 Ch. XIV, K FE HE KK. p. 60.
5 Rel. Syst., Vol. V, p. 764.
6 -F- aS Ee. , written in the second half of the 18th century by Sur YurN,


[ke [F9-~ Sunnlement Ch TT


Digitized by Microsoft®


111


(the koh) see clouds arise, they raise their heads and disperse
them (the clouds) in all directions by blowing, the sun thus
increasing in intensity. No man can conquer them. Some say,
that when it is Heaven's will that there shall be a drought, the
vapours of the becks ({L] Ji <Z 3%) condense and become these
demons. When the latter suddenly vanish, it will rain”.

The term “Rain-master” (yii-shi, ij fii) for dragon is also
mentioned by Wu Suvn'. The Japanese applied it especially to
one of their dragon-shaped river gods, most famous for his rain
bestowing power ?.


"Ascending deagons—oause—rain, but if they descend from the
Se at Hee ee oe “Various divi-
nations of farmers” *, when dlack dragons descend this means
drought or at least not much rain, hence a proverb says: ,Many
dragons much drought”. The The descending of white dragons, however,


was explained to be a sure ire sign of coming rain,


§ 2. Violent rains accompanied by heavy winds |
and thunderstorms.


In a passage from the History of the Sung dynasty, mentioned
above* with regard to the dragon omens, the appearance of a
black dragon above the capital was said to be-an omen of big

~ floods which in the next year destroyed the fields and houses in

Qf prefectures. We also read there that a dragon;-which-in the —

“fourth month of the sixth year of the K’ai Pao era (973) rose_
from_a_well, caused violent rains to destroy a large number of _
houses and trees and—sweep—away the inhabitants. And in the
ixt of the next year, when the tower of a castle gate.
was_ struck by lightning, this accident is described as follows:
“In Ti cheu there fell a fire from the air upon the tower of
the Northern gate of the castle.. There was a creature which
embraced the eastern oe It had the shape of a dragon and


1 us BL (A. D. 947—1002), avfamous scholar, placed upon the commissions which
produced the T‘ai-p’ing yi lan and the Wen yuen ying hwa, and author of the Shi
léi fu, EA KA Hot (GILES, Biogr. Dict., nr 2345); Lung-fu, BE Fit. T.S., same
section, Ch. 127, p. 11a. :

2 See below, Book II, Ch. III.


3 HW Be Rite 5: Tien kia tsah chen, T.S., same section, Ch. 130, p. 6d.


4 Ch. th FF A: see above, p. 54.


Digitized by Microsoft®


112


a golden colour; its legs were about three ch‘ih long, and its
breath smelled very bad. In the morning, when people looked
for it, there were on the upper part of the wall thirty six smoky
stains, the traces of. claws”.

Such traces were also seen, much to the astonishment of the
people, after a heavy storm accompanied by thunder, which lifted
up the tablet of a gate and threw it down at some distance,
destroying one of the characters of the inscription. !

Another time a white dragon brought heavy wind and rain.
The sky was black and it was pitchdark. More than five hundred
houses were destroyed; big trees were uprooted and lifted up
into the air, from where they fell down quite broken. ?

According to the Yiu-yang tsah tsu*, wind, rain and thunder
were caused by a dragon, which in the shape of a white reptile
had wound itself around one of the legs of a horse, when this
was bathed in a river. The creature had coiled itself so tightly,
that the horse lost much blood when the monster was loosened.
The general who possessed the horse took the reptile and pre-
served it in a box. One day some guests advised him to examine
its nature by means of water. It was laid in a hollow, dug in
the earth, and some water was sprinkled over it. After a little
while the animal began to wriggle and seemed to grow. In the
hollow a well bubbled up, and all of a sudden a black vapour
like incense smoke rose and went straight out of the eaves. The
crowd beyond was afraid and ran home, convinced that it was
a dragon. But before they were some miles away suddenly the
wind arose, the rain come down, and several heavy thunderclaps
were heard.

Especially the whirlwinds, called in Japan “tatsu-maki” or
“dragon-rolls” *, which form waterspouts and carry heavy objects
into the air, were looked upon as dragons winding their way to
the sky amidst thunder and rain. Holes in the ground, due to
volcanic eruptions and emitting smoke, were thought to .be the


4 Lao hioh ngan pih ki, + Sh. ia = aU. according to De Groot (Rel. Syst.,
Vol. IV, p. 220, note 1) ‘‘a collection of notices on miscellaneous subjects, in ten chap-
ters, by Luu Yiu, [ae HE, also named Wu-Kwan, ¥ Ba a high officer who lived
from 1125—1209”. T.S., same section, Ch. 130, p. 7b.

2 Choh keng luh, WO EE Be, by Tsao Tsunc-1, [iy 2 42%, alias Kiv-cnna, ©
Ju BK. published in 1366 (cf. DE Groot, 1.]., Vol. 1V, p. 346). T.S., same section,
Ch. 130, p. 10a.


3 Yiu-yang tsah tsu, Ch, XV (3 FA Sp OD), p. 2a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


113


spots from where dragons which had been lying in the earth
had dashed forth and flown to heaven. !

Two boys, born from the marriage of a man with a dragon
who first assumed the shape of a snake and then of a woman,
suddenly caused a heavy thunderstorm to arise, changed into
dragons and flew away. ”

When in the year 1156 a thunderstorm raged and darkness
prevailed, suddenly a cry was heard over an extent of several
miles, which repeated itself for more than a month. The people
ascribed it to the dragon of a neighbouring pond. *

Another time a little snake, which crept out of a small crack
of the unplastered wall of a house, became bigger and bigger,
changed into a dragon and flew away amidst storm and rain. *

How a kiao brought heavy rains and inundations was seen
above *, as well as the fact that tempests often were ascribed
to dragons fighting in the air. °


§ 3. Rain magic and prayers.


The dragon being the god of rain, from remote ages his images


were used in times of drought in order to cause_him to ascend
by sympathetic magic. The Shan hat king‘ says: “In the north-
eastern corner of-the-Great-Desert (Ta hwang) there is a moun-
tain called Hiung-li earth mound; a ying lung (according to the
commentator a winged dragon *) inhabited its southern extremity.


4 Cf. the I kien chi, RR BX Re written in the twelfth century by Hung Mat,
yk 3 T.S., same section, Ch. 130, p. 9b; Lung ch‘ing luh, GE HR BK (Wy ug,
p. 197: “A record of incidents during the earlier part of the T'ang, professing to be
written by Liv TsuNnG-YUEN, Ao st: of that dynasty. It is generally understood,
however, that it is a spurious production of Wane Cutn, - $F. of the 12th cen-
tury”); Ch. I.

2 Hoh lin yuh lu, He Hk *# Fem written by Lo Ta-Kina,  2¢e K Ky alias
KING-LUN, c= ia , who probably lived in the 12th century (cf. De Groot, Rel. Syst.,


Vol. IV, p. 251, note 1). T.S., same section, Ch. 131, p. 16a.
8 Kiang-si t‘ung-chi, quoted T.S., same section, Cb. 130, p. 60.


4 Fei siteh luh, a = RK quoted T.S, same section, Ch. 130, p. 12a.


5 Book I, Ch. Ill, § 7, p. 81.
6 Book I, Ch. II, § 2, A, p. 48.


7 Sect. Ke FE HA RK. ch. x1v, p. 6d: KE HAG BS A
4A) 22 + BB. HE OH
ak, eT S, PHRBRCROAAR.


8 Cf. above, this Book, Ch. IV, § 6, p. 72 sqq.
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XII, N° 2. 8


Digitized by Microsoft®


114


After having killed Ch‘i Yiu (the first rebel) and Kw‘a Fu(?), he
(the dragon) could not ascend again, and for this reason often
drought prevails on earth. In time of drought an image of a
ying lung is made and then a heavy rain is obtained”. The com-
mentator Kwon P‘on’ (A. D. 276—824) adds: “The earthen dragons
of the present day find their origin in this” ?.

Wane Cu‘une® of the Later Han dynasty, who in his work
entitled Lun Heng* severely criticises the superstitions of his
time, refers to Tone Cuune-suu’s* following statement: “At the


° —_—
rain_sacrificesin spring and autumn earthen dragons are set up
in_order The idea of this_is this


means clouds_and dragons are caused to come. The Yih king
says: ‘Clouds follow thevdragon, wind follows the tiger’. They —


_are invited to-come—by-means of their likenesses, therefore-when_
ee es
and clouds and rain arrive on their_own account’

Also the Lii shi ch°un-ts‘iu® states that “by means of dragons
rain is made”, and Liv Nean’ says: “Earthen dragons cause the
rain to come”. According to a commentary on this passage “the
Emperor T‘ang (the founder of the Shang dynasty, B.C. 1766)
in time of drought made an earthen dragon in order to symbolize
the dragon being followed by the clouds” ’. “The du Jheh
in_the land of Chu”, says Wane Cu‘una®, “liked dragons and had

_“them—painted_on_all_his walls and trays, certainty considering _


1 BR.

2S HEA.

3 TE FE (A. D. 27-97). 4 Be 6G.

5 fee rf af. who lived in the second century B, C., author of the Ch‘un-ts‘iu
fan lu, oi AK es ee T.S., same section, Ch. 127, BE Th Be Bh tw, p- 3b:
Bb at HH, SK CBPREEUBH. RRS
WR. AA, LRH. MEE. MR SC. eet
HE. EGR. ZW.

6 Ha) K # BK (last half of third century B. = Ch. XX, under the heading
#3 Ki.

7 Hwai nan tszé, Ch. IV, dh FB Fil: + BE RG ;

weve pete + te

9 98 BE ORE HE. tet BE AR a ey a HE eR TH


Digitized by Microsoft®


115


their pictures to be like real dragons. Thus there was always
rain (i.e. there never was a drought) in the countr oT This duke”.

In the Supplement of the Books of the Han Dynasty' a
description is given of the ceremonies performed when praying
for rain; an extensive commentary explains the words: “The
underlings raise the earthen dragons”. In the first place the
passage from the Shan hai king, mentioned above, is quoted,
and Kwon P‘ou’s commentary with regard to the earthen dragons
of his days. Then follows a long description of rain ceremonies
found in the Ch‘un-istu fan lu? of Tune Cuuna-suu, the author
of the second century B.C. quoted above.

In this passage the rain ceremonies of spring, summer, the
last month of summer, autumn and winter/ are described. The
details all agree with the Taoistic system, pointed out by
De Groot in his Religious System®, ahd wu-ist priests were the
performers of the rites. In the ceremonies of spring, summer,
the last month of summer, autumn—and winter accordingly the
eastern, southern (twice), western ail Honan cae ee


ae and villages are mentioned, ne the co lours_of the-silken


tla ee


were Azure, red,. yollow, white ond. BGK: Puvther, the the numbers
eight, seven, five, nine and six were used with regard to the
square altars erected at the five different ceremonies and to the
tanks in which shrimps or frogs were placed, as well as to the
days during which the different preparations were made +.
As_to—the—carthen—dragons, mentioned in this description, the


days on which they were made, their sizes, colours, numbers,


the directions in which they were placed_and the sides on_which-


they stood, as well as the colours of the robes of th
brandished an ete em, numbers and ages of the.


former, all agreed with the same Taoisti


“On kiah_and wh days > Gn snoring)—one


1 UR Ho pts A Bb EE

2 # RR %K FB. Ch. XVI, nv 74 (He BN)» pp. 3—6.

3 Vol. I, p. 3417; Vol. IV, p. 26.

4 Prayers took place on a day of the Water Ci H ); it was forbidden to cut


down famous trees or trees of the wood; the sacrifices consisted of cocks and pigs,
three years old; further, the people roasted pig tails, buried human bones, opened
mountain pools, burned firewood, etc., “in order to open Yin (the water) and close


Yang (the sun)” ( | en FA B p. 4b); for the same reason men were forbidden
to visit markets.


SMU HRA WMH. RAK, BR, BA


Digitized by Microsoft®


116


eight chang, is made-and stands - in the centre; seven small one
each four ¢ chang long, are made (and placed) on the east sid
_They are all directed towards the Hust, with a distance of eig
ch‘th between each other. Hight little boys, who all have observe
religious abstinence for three days and are clad in blue robe
_brandish the dragons. The Tien—seh—/u+—(Superintendent .
harvesting), who also for three days has observed religiot
abstinence and is clad in blue robes, erects them”. —

In the ee big re
dragon was made, seven chang long, and placed in the centr
while six small dragons, each three chang five ch‘ih long, stoc
on the south’ side; they were all directed to the south, with
distan ft ween each other. Seven fullgrown mei
who for three days had observed religi Stinence and wei
clad in red robes, brandi é dragons, and the Szé kung s¢
fu? ' (Superintenden of works), who likewise for three daj
“had observed religious abstinence and was clad in red robe
erected them.
___When-the—mountains and hills - were prayed to in the la
month of summer, on wu and szé days, one big yellow dragon
jive chang long, was placed in the centre, and four? small one:
long two chang five ch‘ih, stood on the south side; they wer
all directed to the South, with a distance of jive ch‘ih betwee
each other. Five elders, after three days religious abstinence, an
clad in yellow robes, brandished the dragons, and five men (co
a senior *) in yellow robes erected them.
= . . . .

In autumn, on keng and sin days, one big white dragon wa
made, nine chang long, and placed in the centre; eight sma
ones, long four chang five ch‘ih, were placed on the west side
They were all directed to the West, and the distance betwee
them was nine ch‘ih; nine old unmarried men (or widowers '
in white robes brandished them, and the Szé& ma® (Inspector
horses), also clad in white garments, erected them.


Eet.SRYUK RRA FRA HAMEAR
PBANA, FBHjAALRBKMHES. BPSK
HR Be

1K. 2 Wat.


3 The main text wrongly says five, but the quotation gives the right namber of fou:
4 The main text gives “five men”, the quotation “a senior”, x & -


Digitized by Microsoft®


— 117


Finally, in winter, when prayers were made to famous moun-
tains, one big black dragon, made on jen and kwéi days, and six
chang long, was placed in the centre, and five small ones, each
three chang long, stood on the north side; they were all directed
to the North and the distance between them was six ch‘ih. Six
old men, all clad in black robes, brandished the dragon, and a
wéi' (military officer), also wearing black garments, erected them?

In the ceremonies, used for stopping rain, no dragons are
mentioned. We learn from the Swng-ch‘ao shi shih® that in the
Sung dynasty the same magic was performed; the dragons were
sprinkled with water, and, after the ceremony, thrown into the
water.

De Groot * treats of this custom in order to show that, this kind of -


rain magic being very common in ancient China, the dragon
processions on the 15th day of The Hist-uunth-and the dragon
_boats on the fifth day of the fifth month may be easily explained
in these way. He aD rete torr preg Tom the Tiv-yng


tsah tsu°, where a Buddhist priest, who in the K‘ai-yuen era
(A. D. 713—%742) was ordered by the Emperor to pray for rain,
said that he wanted a utensil engraved with the figure of a
dragon. Nothing of the kind could be found, till after two or
three days an old mirror, the handle of which had the form of
a dragon, was discovered in the Emperor’s store-house. The priest
took it into the chapel and prayed; and behold, that very evening
the rain poured down!

The same sympathetic magic is mentioned in the Pih ki man
chi®, where a mirror, adorned on the backside with a “coiled
dragon”, p‘an lung, #¥ HE, is said to have been worshipped
(rather used in a magical way) in order to cause rain‘.


1 fet

2 The Shen-nung k‘iu-yi shu, mh = He iw Ze, quoted: in the Koh chi king,
yuen, RS RX $A ii , an extensive cyclopaedia compiled by Cu‘en YUEN-LUNG, Bai
IL HE, and published in 1735, Ch. LV, Sect. wr iy: p. 5a, gives the same with
less details.

3 7 af] es =e quoted in the same chapter of the Ch‘un-ts‘iu fan lu, nr 75


pp. 6 seq.; cf. the same chapter, section and page of the Koh chi king yuen.
4 Fétes annuelles a Emoui, Vol. I, pp. 375 sqq. 5 Ch. Il.


6 #8 Re ve ie written in the Sung dynasty by Wane Cuon, EF JX). T.S.,


same section, Ch. 131, p. 410.
7 With regard to painted dragons being as powerful as real ones we may refer to


the Yun kih ts‘ih ts‘ien, = Re +4 a Taoistic work of the end of the 10th


Digitized by Microsoft®


118


-The aim of this magic was to force the dragons to follow their
images and to ascend from their pools. It is no wonder that
sometimes drastic measures were taken to cause them to obey
this human command, when it failed to have success. Thus in
the tenth century of our era the head of two districts did not
hesitate to have an earthen dragon flogged in order to force the
unwilling dragons to oul and he was right, for that very
day a sufficient rain came down '.

As we have seen above, also Buddhist priests used images of
dragons in making rain. It is again a story from the K‘ai-yuen
era, to be found in the same work’, which teaches us how they
sometimes employed them to stop rain. An Indian bonze was
requested by the Emperor to put a stop to the incessant rains,
caused by one of his Chinese colleagues, who by order of the
sovereign had prayed for rain and had fulfilled, his task with so
much success that several people were drowned in consequence
of the inundations. The Indian priest made five or six dragons
of clay, placed them in water and scolded them in his mother-tongue.
Then he took them out of the water and laid them somewhere
else, laughing loudly. After a little while the rain stopped. The
meaning of this magic was apparently different from the ancient
Chinese ideas. By placing the dragons in their element, the water,
he gave them life, just like a Buddhist priest of the fourth
century did with a dead dragon which he had dug up. The latter,
however, after having thus made the dragon revive, by means
of incantations caused him to ascend to the sky and put a stop
to a heavy drought. * His Indian colleague of the K‘ai-yuen era,
on the contrary, with a scornful laugh removed the dragons after
having given them life, in order to cause their counterparts to
go away also. We may compare this with several instances of a


or the beginning of the 11th century (cf. De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, p. 74), where
we read about a dragon painted on a wall, with a well before it, which was prayed
to for rain by people from far and near, and used to hear their prayings. Once in a
time of drought a drunken fellow had the audacity to rail at the dragon. He cried
over the balustrade of the well: ‘If Heaven sends a drought like this, what is the use
of you?”, and with a big stone hit one of the painted dragon’s feet. The mark was
still visible in the author’s time. When the man came home he suddenly got an un-
bearable pain in his foot. Although he sent a messenger to burn incense before the
dragon and to apologize, it was all in vain, and he died within a few days. T.S., same
Section, Ch. 129, p. 110.


1 History of the five Dynasties, fy AR Bi (907—960); Koh chi king yuen, 1.1..
2 Yiu-yang tsah tsu, Ch. III.


3 Tai-p‘ing yi lan, Ch. 930. The same priest by his prayers caused two white
dragons to descend and to pour down rain over a district. of a thousand miles.


Digitized by Microsoft®


119


similar magic, mentioned by Frazer in his Golden Bough'. We
read there of plagues, caused by vermin, scorpions or serpents,
which were stopped by burying or removing the images of these
noxious creatures.

A .curious prescription for making rain is given in the Yiu-
yang tsah tsu*, where we read the following: “Take four water-
lizards, and after having filled two earthen jugs with water, put
two of the lizards in each. Then cover the jugs with wooden
covers, place them on two different quiet spots, prepare seats
before and behind them, and burn incense. If you then have
more than ten boys, ten years old or younger, day and night
incessantly strike pate jars with small green bamboo sticks, it
certainly will.rain”. This advice was followed, and after one day
and two nights the rain came down. “Tradition says”, adds the
author, “that dragons and water-lizards belong to the same species’.
The idea of annoying the dragons by noise and thus stirring
them up is also to be found in Japan, where, as we shall see
below *, the Court: officials made music and danced on a dragon
boat on the pond of the Sacred-Spring-Park, in order to force
the dragon to arise and give rain.

Another way of making rain is to arouse the dragons’ anger
by throwing poisonous plants *, or ashes°*, or pieces of wood, or
stones °, or tiger bones’ — the tiger being the dragon’s deadly
enemy — into their pools, or by pulling a tiger’s head by means


4 Vol. Il (sec. ed.), pp. 426 sq. Cf Vol. I, pp. 9 sqq.; making rain by magical means,
I, pp. 82—114.

2 Ch. XI (ninth century).

3 Ch. V. It reminds us of the enormous bronze drums, decorated with frogs, the
demons of rain, which probably were beaten by the Man tribes in the South of China,
when drought prevailed. Cf. De Groot, Die -antiken Bronzepauken im Ostindischen
Archipel und auf dem Festlande von Siidostasien, Mitth. des Seminars f. Orient. Spr.
zu Berlin, Jahrg. IV, Abth. I, pp. 76—113.

4 Tai-p‘ing yi lan, Ch. 930.


5 Weng yuen hien chi, B Wi IBS a quoted in the Japanese work Shobutsu


ruizan, bia wy A B., Section HE.
6 -Mao ting koh hwa, Pp =P ya aa quoted T.S., same section, Ch. 130, p. 8a:


“If one throws a piece ‘of wood or a stone into the dragon pond, this at once causes
black vapours to arise, followed by thunder and lightning, rain and hail”. On clear days
the surface of the water of this pond was five-coloured, a sign of a dragon’s dwelling.
In time of drought offerings were made and prayers said to him.


7 Chen chu chw'en, yy ER fy, written by Cx‘en Kial-KuNe, et ii BH: in the
Ming dynasty; Ch. I.


é


Digitized by Microsoft®


120


of a rope through a river inhabited by a dragon '. As we shall
see below’, the Japanese, following the same methods, threw
horse dung, old sandals and other dirty things into dragon-ponds,
or stirred the dragons up by means of iron utensils or metal-
shaving, for, as we saw above’, these animals were believed to
detest and fear iron.

The Wu tsah tsu* describes the remarkable way in which the
people o_lung-nan_ganead_rain. As dragons are very lewd and
fond of women, a naked woman a lated on. 2 ale i ai
in order to attract a dragon. As soon as there came one and flew
‘around her, he was. _magically prevented from approaching her,
so.that_his anger was aroused _and_heavy rains came down. The
same work’ says that in the beginning of summer the dragons
are divided, so that each of them has his special territory, which
he does not exceed. This is the reason_why in summer time it
“Yains very much at one place and not at all a little further on.

Apart from these m means—of-stirring up the—dragons—we-often
read about prayers recited to them, that they might give fertilizing
vaing, This wae Sune Ta sirines or at ponds inhabited by dragons,
or at the entrances of their dens. The Mao ting koh hwa, e.g.,


mentions a Dragon-woman’s shrine, dedicated to a female dragon
which in A.D. 740 appeared in a dream and promised to give


1 Shang shu ku shih, fa = we =& written in the ninth century by Lr Cu‘ou,


As fa “In the South, when there is a long drought, a tiger’s head bone is tied
at a long rope and thrown into the water on a spot where a dragon is living. Then
several men pull in an irregular way. Suddenly clouds arise from the middle of the
pond, and thereupon also rain comes down. The dragon being the tiger’s enemy, even


the latter’s dried bones still stir up the dragon like this”. ez] rH JN A ell YU
Fe i SR OR BA, Be HE AA ok, 8 Be A HH HE.
4% Ol Se ke aE. A IP BE. RE We th. Me A


Bh Bh an JEL, Cf Kwah i chi (13th cent.), quoted T.S., same section, Ch. 130,
p. 7a: In the Shun-hi era (1174—1190) a tiger bone, attached to a long rope, was let
down in a ‘‘White dragon’s pond”, near a “White dragon's den” before a Buddhist
temple. Soon it rained, and as they were slow in pulling the bone out of the pond, a
severe thunderstorm menaced the government office, but stopped when the bone was
removed.

The date shows that we have here a’ passage from the Hien ch°wang kwah i chi,


BA GS 5 2G RH? written by Lu Yina-Lune, @ Ke ii , who lived about the


middle of the thirteenth century (cf. De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. 1V, p. 347, note 4),
and not with the Kwah i chi, written in the second half of the eleventh century by


Cuane Sui-cuine, pF Biff VE, alias.Pou-1, DR Sf (De Groor, 1.1., 1V, p. 210, note 1).


2 Book II, Ch. II. 3 Book I, Ch. Ill, § 3, pp. 67 sqq.
4 Fe. BE A (Ming-dynasty), Ch. TX, 5 Ch. IX,


Digitized by Microsoft®


121


rain whenever prayers were made to her in time of drought’.
And in the Sheu shen ki we read of a sick dragon, which in
consequence of prayers recited before his den, gave a badly
smelling rain, which would have spoiled the crops, if a diviner
had not discovered it in time and cured the dragon at the latter's
request. Thereupon a fertilizing rain fell and a very clear spring
dashed forth from a rock ?.


§ 4. Buddhist rain ceremonies.


“


In the Introduction (§ 4, pp. 25 sqq.) we have dealt with the
Buddhist rain ceremonies prescribed in the Mahamegha sitra and
those described by Ds Groor in his Code du Mahayana. As we
“will see below (Book II, Ch. III), also in Japan the Buddhist
priests gradually conquered this field, formerly the domain of
the Shintoists. They used the same siitras as the Chinese Buddhists.
The latter had a good time in the T’ang dynasty, when sometimes,
as we read in the 7uh i chi*, eleven hundred Buddhist priests
read siitras in order to cause rain. As to these ceremonies we
may refer the reader to the Introduction.


1 Ch. 130, p. 2a. 2 Ch. VI; cf. Ch. X.


3 fay Fe HA» ascribed to Lr Yiu, a Ye» ov Li Kane, 4 JU» of the T’ang
dynasty. T.S., same section, Ch. 134, p. 100.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER VI.


~
EMPERORS CONNECT DRAGONS.


§ 1. Hwang Ti rode on a dragon.


The dragon being the symbol of the Empei d_his blissfi
reign, a large number of legendspoint to the close connectic


between this divine animal and the Son of Heaven. In the fir:
‘place, of course, the holy Emperors of the oldest times a
mentioned in this respect.

The Historical Records: contain the following passage. “TI
Emperor Hwang gathered copper of Mount Sheu and cast
tripod at the foot of Mount King. When the tripod was read)
there was a dragon which dropping its whiskers came down t
meet Hwang Ti. The latter ascended the dragon and rode on i
after which the ministers did the same, more then seventy me
in all. Then the dragon ascended and flew away. The remainin
lower ministers had no opportunity to climb upon the dragor
and all at a time got hold of its whiskers, which (by their weight
were pulled out and fell down”.

According to the Ku kin chu® Hwang Ti was melting cinnaba
(in order to prepare the liquor of immortality) in the Tsoh ye
mountains, when he became a sien and rode on a dragon to th
sky. When the ministers clung to the animal’s whiskers, th
whiskers fell down. To the question whether they produced th
so called “Dragon’s whiskers herb” the answer is given that thi
is a false tradition caused by the other name of the same herl
“Red clouds herb”. The same monarch made a winged drago
(ying lung) attack and ward off the troops of the rebel Chi Yiu


4 Sect. $} ye #E, Ch. XXVIII, nr 6, p. 30a (CHAVANNES, Mémoires Historique
Vol. If, a

2 44 7-£ , written about the middle of the 4th century by Ts‘ur Pao, #¢ %
(cf. Wy1iE, p. 159, De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, p. 84, note 1), quoted T.S, Se


Be ih, Ch. 130, HE Gh HE ER. p. 4b.


3 Shan hai.king, Sect. XVIH, nr 44, K Fit bin HK, p. 6b: Bamboo Anna
“cht sf shu ki sil 3 = au, 4F ), Ch. I, Lecer, Chinese Classics, Vol. II, Part


Digitized by Microsoft®


123


§ 2. Yao and Kao Tsu were sons of dragons.


The Emperor Yao was said _ to be the son of a red dragon,
who came to ig mother, heading_on his back the-inserption
You also receive Heaven’s protection”. Darkness and wind arose
on all sides, and the dragon touched her, whereupon she became


pregnant—and after 14-months gave birth to Yao in-Tan—tng".
Toitar i . C. 206-—195), the


founder of the Han dynasty. Tai kong, his father, saw a kiao
lung above his wife amidst thunder and lightning and black
darkness, while she was asleep on the bank of a lange pond:
She dreamt that she had intercourse with a god, and afterwards
gave birth to Kao Tsu. This Emperor, who was very fond of
wine, was always protected by a dragon, when he was drunk’.


ae § 3. shun was visited by a yellow dragon.


The Emperor Shun ’s famous successor, was visited by a
yellow_dragon ich_came i


armour the inscription: “Shun shall ascend _the Throne” was
visible *. As we have the same holy sovereign insti-


tuted_the “ ily”’, whose members had the task
of rearing dragons for the Emperor. _


—o


f


§ 4. Yii drove in a carriage drawn by dragons, and was assisted
by a ying lung.


Yu, the celebrated founder of the Hia dynasty, drove in a
carriage drawn by two dragons, which had descended in his
court-yard, because with him the virtuous power of Hia was at
its highest point *+* When he had completed the regulation of the
waters, blue dragons stopped in the suburbs of the capital °.
According to a later tradition a ying lung assisted Yt at the
work by marking the ground with its tail°.


4 Bamboo Annals, Ch. II, Leaer, 1.1., p. 142.


2 Historical Records, Ch. VIII Ga mel) p. 2; CHavannes, |.1., Vol. II, pp. 325 sq.
3 Yuh fu shui tu, 44 Fi fel; T.S., same section, Ch. 128, AE Ea cae
p. 2b. 4 Poh wuh chi, Ch. II, p. 2a.


5 Bamboo Annals, Ch. Ill, Leace, 1.1, p. 147: FR HE Ik FM.


6 San tsai iu hwui, = nn e, in the Wakan sansai zue, Ch. XLV, p.


675. According to the Bamboo Annals (Ch. II, |. 1.) the spirit of the Ho river, a man
with a fish body, gave him a chart of the Ho,


Digitized by Microsoft®


124


§ 5. Ming Hwang’s vessel was moved forward by a dragon.


Also in later times dragons were said to assist Emperors, as
was the case in the Tien pao era (742—755), when a small
dragon arose from a pond the evening before the Emperor Ming
Hwang, conquered by the rebel Ngan Luh-shan, left the capital
and fled to the South. The dragon went in the same direction
and, when the Emperor crossed a river, the animal appeared in
the water and carried the ship forward on its back. His Majesty,
deeply moved by the dragon’s loyalty, thanked it and gave
it wine’.


. § 6. Two yellow dragons threatened to upset Yii's vessel.


Sometimes, however, the dragons of rivers and seas caused
trouble even to Emperors. Thus two yellow dragons threatened
to upset Yu's vessel by taking it on its back, when His Majesty
crossed the Yang-tszé -kiang; but Yu, not in the least frightened,
laughed and said: “I received my appointment from Heaven
and do my utmost to nourish men. To be born is the course of
nature; to die is by Heaven's decree. Why be troubled by the
dragons?” The dragons, on hearing these words, fled, dragging
their tails *. ,


§ 7. Shi Hwang died on account of having killed a dragon.


Another Emperor was severely punished for having killed a
dragon. This was Shi Hwang, the founder of the Ts‘in dynasty
(246—210 B.C.), who was so anxious to have a long life, that
he was highly rejoiced when two sien came, pretending to know


1 Ts‘é-liu shi kiu wen, R Aa) K £ Fay» written in the Tfang dynasty by
Li TEH-yi, AS iif i. In the same way the vessel of Wu Suh, king of Wu and


Yueh (i.e. Tstien Liu, A.D. 854—932), which in 909 ran on a rock and could not
advance, was carried forward by two dragons, amidst heavy rain, thunder and lightning


(Shih-kwoh Ch'un-ts‘iu, + te HK: written in the latter half of the 417th
century by Wu Jey-cu‘en, us AF: BE according to De Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV,
p- 327,. “a rather apocryphical history” (of ten small states which existed between the
Tang and Sung dynasties) (Wyte, p. 41). T.S., same section, Ch. 129, AE Le a
p. 14a.

aes ae Annals, Ch, III, Leen, 1.1., p. 118; cf, Hwai nan tszé, Ch. VII, i
mth hl on a


Digitized by Microsoft®


125
how to seek the life-prolonging herb'. After having been favoured


with high dignities and salaries, they set sail with a crowd of.


six thousand girls and boys, not older than fifteen years, to seek
the island of the blessed?, but although they sought for it a
long time, it was all in vain. The sien, who were afraid of
punishment on account of their lies, now invented a new scheme.
On returning to the Court they advised the Emperor to go on
board himself and set out with a large army. Again the foolish
monarch believed them, and put to sea with not less than three
millions of soldiers, who made a terrible noise by crying in
chorus and beating drums (in order to frighten the sea-gods and
thus be able to reach the island of the blessed). The dragon-god,
aroused by the din, appeared at the surface of the sea in the
shape of an enormous shark, five hundred ch‘th (feet) long, with
a head like that of a lion. He was immediately surrounded by
the fleet and killed with poisonous arrows, so that his blood
coloured the sea over a distance of ten thousand miles. That
night the Emperor dreamt that he had a battle with the dragon-
god; and the next day he fell ill and died within seven days *.


4 Cf. DE Groot, Rel. Syst. of China, Vol. IV, pp. 307 seqq.: the chi, 2 , a branched
fungus, which was said to grow on the isle of Tsu in the Eastern Ocean. According
to the Shih cheu ki (-F pi 8U,: “Description of the Ten Islands”, “an account of


fabulous countries which were believed to exist in several regions beyond the oceans,
probably written in the earlier part of the Christian era” [Dr Groot, 1.1, Vol. I, p.
272]) the Emperor heard about the existence of this herb on the Tsu island from a
Taoist ascetic philosopher, and then sent an envoy to the island with five hundred
young people of both sexes. They put to sea to seek the island, but never came back.


2 Peng Lai, ¥ AK “fairy land, an elysium far from man’s abode; some regard
it as denoting Kyishu in Japan” (WELLs WiLLiams, Chin.-Eng. Dict., p. 661 s. v.).
3 This version of the tale is to be found in the Taiheiki, Kk a 4U, > Ch. XXVI,


pp. 115 seqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


Jf


CHAPTER VII.
TRANSFORMATIONS.


§ 1. The dragon’s transformations are unlimited.


From Kwan tzé and the P% ya, quoted above', we have learned
that the_dragen’stransformations are unlimited. Therefore it is
no wonder that Chinese literature abounds with stories about
dragons which had assumed the shape of men, animals or objects.
When they transformed themselves into human beings, they
__mostly appeared -as-old_men or beautiful women ; the latter remind
us of the Naga maidens of Indian tales. Sometimes fishes, which,
when being cooked, spread a five-coloured light, or spoke with
human voices, were recognized to be dragons; but also quadrupeds,
as dogs, rats or cows, sometimes proved to be the temporary
shapes of these divine animals. Snakes, of course, closely akin to
the dragons, often served them as metamorphoses to hide their
real nature, and new-born dragons were said to creep out of the
eggs in this form. Finally, trunks of trees or other objects floating
in the water sometimes suddenly resumed their real dragon shapes.
One passage * says that dragons can always transform themselves
except at the time of their birth, when they sleep, or when
they are angry or lustful, but this stands alone among the
innumerable other statements with regard to their nature and
capacities.


§ 2. Appearing as old men or beautiful women.


As to their appearing as old men we may refer to the Siien
shih chi*, where a yellow dragon is said to have come to a house


1 Pp. 63 and 65.
2 Chen chu chw'en, y PR By (cf. above, pp. 119, note 7), quoted T. S., same


section, Ch. 130, HE ah Rte EK: p. 6b.


3 fe Es 7K. written by Coane Tun, BE ZB, in the ninth century. Quoted


Digitized by Microsoft®


127


in the mountains in the shape of an old man with a yellow robe.
The Kwang-sin-fu chi! contains a story about a wu-sorcerer, who
in the beginning of the Sung dynasty was praying for rain above
a well, when he fell into it in trying to catch the white cow horn
on which he had blown and which suddenly dropped out of his
hands. At the bottom of the well he saw a majestic old man,
sitting in a tower in the water, with the horn in his hands.
This was the dragon of the well, who for this time allowed him
to return and gave him back the horn on condition that he
never should make noise near the well again. But at the next
drought the man forgot his promise and blew on the horn above
the well like before. This was too much for the dragon, who
made both horn and man tumble into the water, and this time
the sorcerer was drowned. Afterwards he appeared to one of the
villagers in a dream and at his advice a shrine was erected in honour
of the dragon, who thenceforward heard their prayers for rain.

Also the Yiu-yang tsah tsu? mentions dragons which assumed
the shapes of old men, as well as of beautiful women*. Liv
Tsune-yuen* tells how a dragon which was punished by the
Emperor of Heaven fell down upon the earth in the shape of a
woman, spreading a brilliant light. She had to stay there for
seven days, and then, after having drunk some water, her breath
became a cloudy vapour, she changed into a white dragon, and
flew up to Heaven.


§ 3. Appearing as fishes.


Transformations of dragons into fishes are to be found as well


1 B 4H Vay ie “Memoirs of the department of Kwang-sin (in Kiang-si pro-
vince)”, quoted T.S. 1.1. p. 16a.

2 Ch. II and VI; T.S., same section, Ch. 431, BE mi Ah > p. 12a.

3 Ch. VI.

4 pip — It (A. D. 773—819), one of the most celebrated poets and essayists of
the T'ang dynasty. a4 BE ae T.S., same section, Ch. 127, aie D4 —, p. 8b.
Another punishment of a dragon is mentioned-in the Yun sien tsah ki (= ily Kitt
aU about which work Dre Groot (Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, p. 289) says: “Ten chapters
of miscellanies of doubtful authenticity, ascribed to one T‘une Cut, his ee. of whom
nothing is known but the name. More likely, perhaps, the author was the learned
Wane Cum, =F $F also named SING-CHI, PE al , who flourished in the middle


part of the 12th century”), where a disobedient dragon is said to have had his ears cut
off by Heaven’s punishment; the blood which dripped upon the earth produced a plum


tree with fleshy fruits without kernels. T. S., same section, Ch. 129, # wy —., p. 12a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


- 128


in the Dynastic Histories' as in books of tales and legends like
the Lang hiien ki? (Yuen dynasty) and even in a geographical
work as the Yih tung chi*, where we read about a white eel
which was caught by some villagers. They were about to cook
it when an old man said: “This is a dragon from the Siang
River. I am afraid of calamity.” But the others considered this
to be foolish prattle and did not listen to his words. The next
day the whole village collapsed.

In the Shwoh yuen* a white dragon is said to have assumed
the shape of a fish and to have been hit with an arrow in its
eye by a fisherman. The dragon accused the man before the
Emperor of Heaven, but the latter remarked that it was his
own fault because he had been foolish enough to change himself
into a fish. The fisherman was not to be blamed for having
treated him like other fishes. This story is often referred to in
Japanese literature, e.g. in the Zoku kojidan*, where the fish is
said to have fallen into the fisherman’s net, and to have lodged
a complaint with the Dragon king (an Indian conception, cf. the
Introduction and the next chapter), who gave him a similar
answer and advised him not to do such a foolish thing again.
In the Taiheiki® Nitta Yoshisada, who died in battle, is compared
to the dragon of this legend, which, instead of hiding itself in
the depths of a pool, came to a shallow place and was caught
in the net.

As we have seen above’, fishes were believed to become dragons
when they succeeded. in ascending the Dragon-gate (apparently
a waterfall), and that old tiger-fishes or fishes weighing two
thousand kin became kiao *.


4 Books of the Tsin dynasty, 4) {i Ch. VI, ie Ere i (the fish spread a


five-coloured light when being cooked).
2 Ch. I (the fish spoke with a human Voice).


3 — Oe ne ie’ “Memoirs concerning the whole Empire” (1647); T.S., same section,


Ch. 129, FE BR #E Hy =, p. 130.


4 ae Pe written by Liv Hianc, 4] [A] (who lived B.C. 80—9), the famous
author of the Lieh sien chw‘en (Fal iy 88); Sect. Bh.


5 ae ns Lo aR Ch. II, Gunsho ruijii, Vol. XVII, p. 664.

6 Ch. XX, p. 9a. The same comparison is to be found in Ch. XXXI, p. 12, of the
same work.

7 Book I, Ch. Ill, § 12, p. 86.

8 Book I, Ch. Ill, § 7, p. 79.


Digitized by Microsoft®


129


§ 4. Appearing as snakes, dogs, or rats.


The Poh mung so yen’ relates about a child which in the
T’ong-kwang era (923-926) met a white snake on the,road, tied
it with a rope and swayed its head to and fro till it fell down.
Tn a moment a thunderstorm arose and the child was carried into
the air, where it was struck by lightning and dropped dead on the
ground. On its back vermilion writing was to be read, announcing
that Heaven had punished it for having killed a Celestial dragon.

Two dragons in the shape of mao dogs (3 3fy), ridden through
the air by sven, are mentioned in the Lieh sien chw‘en?. A sien
_ brought them to a diviner, more than 100 years old, and invited
him to ride on them together with an old woman. According
to the Lang hiien ki* two guardian gods of a cave palace were
dragons. The Kiang-si ftung-chi* speaks about a very deep
“Dragon-rearing pond” near the castle of Kwang ch‘ang district
in Kien chang fu, inhabited by a dragon. Over the pond there
was a stone tray, in which remains of food were always laid
for the animal, which used to change into a black dog and eat
the food. This pond was still there in the author’s time, and a
“Dragon-well temple” had been built on the spot.

In the seventh year of the Kia-yiu era (1062) an enormous
white rat was. seen smelling the sacrificial dishes offered in the
temple on the Great White Mountain in Fu fung district (Shen-si
province), a mountain with much ling, i.e. where the divine
power of its god as clearly manifested itself in hearing the
prayers of the believers as was the case on the Japanese moun-
tain of the same name (Hakusan). Old people declared the rat,
which only smelled the dishes but did not eat them, to be a dragon °.


§ 5. A cow transformed into a dragon.


The author of the Awai-ngan-fu chi® tells us how a cow


4 fy a A = , ascribed to Sun Kwane- -HIEN, JR % a ,also called MENG-WEN,


=z Bl a high official under the founder of the Sung dynasty (T‘ai tsu, 960—976)
(cf. DE Groot, Rel. Syst. Vol. V, p. 527, note 2). T.S., same section, Ch. 129, p. 14a.
2 T.S., same section, Ch. 131, p. 2b. 3 Quoted ibidem, p. 30.
4 T.S., same section, Ch. 129, p. 120.


5 Tung-p‘o chi-lin, cu yy ie HK» desultory notes by Su Tunc-P‘0, bad HE Up ,

e. Su SHIH, fk ix a famous poet who lived 1036—1101; T.S., same section, Ch,
130, p. 4a. :

6 YE Fe VRE 7A) “Memoirs concerning Hwai-ngan-fu (in the prov. of Kiang-su);


T.S., ibidem, p. 120, .
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl, XIU, N° 2. 9
Digitized by Microsoft®


130


became a dragon. A rich farmer who possessed a large herd of
cattle one night dreamt that one of his cows said to him: “I
have become a dragon and have fought with the dragon of the
Sang-kt lake, but without conquering him. You must bind
small knives upon my horns’. The next day he discovered that
an extremely big cow of the herd had scales under its belly.
When he had attached knives to its horns, the cow conquered
the other dragon, which was wounded at the eye and retired
into its lake. The cow itself became the dragon of the Great
Lake. Down to the author's time those who. passed this lake
avoided the character 4. (cow), and those who passed the
Sang- ka lake avoided the character f# (blind of one or both
eyes); otherwise suddenly a storm burst forth and big waves arose.


§ 6. Appearing as objects.


With regard to objects which proved to be dragons we may
refer to the J yuen', where we read how a man while fishing
in a river found a shuttle and took it home. After a short while
the utensil, which he had hung on the wall, changed into a red
dragon and ascended to the sky amidst thunder and rain.
A dragon which had assumed the shape of a tree growing
under water is mentioned in the Shuh i ki% A woman who
touched this tree when going into the water in order to catch
some fish, became pregnant and gave birth to ten male children.
Afterwards, when the dragon appeared in his real form above
the water, nine of the boys ran away in fright, but the tenth
climbed upon his dragon-shaped father’s neck and in later years
became the king of the land*. The same work tells us about a
girl in the Palace,’ under the Hia dynasty, who changed into a
fearful dragon and then, reassuming her human form, became a
very beautiful woman, who devoured men *.

In the Books of the Tsin dynasty® an astrologer is said to have
discovered the vital spirits (4) of two precious swords among
the stars, and pointed out the spot where they were buried.


4 Ch. I, p. 2. The same work gives a tale about a big piece of drift wood, which
broke the vessel of a man who seized it, turned into a dragon and swam off.


2 jit He a (see above, p. 72, note 1), Ch, 2s p. 160.
3 Cf. above, Book I, Ch. VI, p. 123.


4 Ch. [| p. 4a.
mR al AB ooh oVI BE AE AB OT hece ewnrds. ‘which tnrned inta a mala and a


Digitized by Microsoft®


131


There a stone box was dug up, from which a brilliant light
shone; -but as soon as the swords were taken out of the box
their spirits in the sky were extinguished. On one of the swords
the characters #f Ht, lung-ts‘iien, “Dragon-spring”, on the other
Tk faf, “ai-o, were written. According to the astrologer such
supernatural swords could not remain for a long time in human
hands. Actually one of them soon disappeared, and the other
one afterwards jumped by itself out of its sheath into a river,
which its owner was crossing. When it was sought, nothing was
found except two dragons, two or three chang long, wound
together and emitting a brilliant light which illuminated the
water. Then they vanished, raising turbulent waves by their
violent movements. Evidently the swords had changed into dragons
and were united again.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER VIII.


THE INDIAN NAGA IN CHINA.


§ 1. Reborn as a dragon.


' With regard to the Indian dragon (Naga) in China we may
refer to the Introduction and to the following legends.

Buddhist reincarnation into a dragon was said to have been
the fate of the Emperor Wu's Consort K‘ih (first half of the
sixth century A.D.), who was so jealous that she was reborn
as a dragon which lived in a well inside the exclosure of the
Palace and frightened her husband in his dreams. When he was
in love with some woman, the water of the well was violently
disturbed. In order to appease the spirit, the Emperor had a
palace built over the well and all kinds of clothes and utensils
put there, as if she were still a human being; and he never
married again '.


§ 2. Ponds inhabited by Dragon-Kings.


According to another Buddhist legend? a Dragon-King, who
lived in a palace at the bottom of a pond called Kwun ming
chv*, appeared as an old man to a hermit who lived in the
neighbourhood, and besought this man to save his life, as a
Buddhist priest, under pretext of praying for rain by order of
the Emperor, made the water of his pond decrease more and
more, in order to kill him (the dragon) and to use his brain in
preparing some medicine. The hermit advised the dragon to go
Sun Sze-mon *, who was studying in the mountains in order to
become a sien. When the dragon did so, this man promised to


1 History of the South (Bg Bi , Nan-shi), \a ia FAI {8 , f.


2 Yiu-yang tsah tsu (ninth century), Ch, V (T.S., 1.1, Ah a p. 11a).


3 Et BH Wh.


Digitized by Microsoft®


133


save him on condition that he should teach him the way of
preparing. the three thousand kinds of medicine to be found in
the Dragon-Palace at the bottom of the pond. The dragon accepted
the condition, whereupon the water of the pond rose more and
more, and the bonze died with anger and shame. The dragon
kept his promise, and thus Sun Szi-mou obtained the Knowsedce
preserved in his famous medical work, entitled 7s‘ien kin fang '.

Other ponds inhabited by Dragon-Kings are mentioned in the.
Loh-yang kia-lan ki? and in the Po-chi kwoh chw‘en*, but these
were in foreign, western countries. Sacrifices were made to them;
to the latter by the passers-by (there were three ponds, in the.
biggest of which lived the Dragon-King himself, in the next his
consort and in the smallest his child) because otherwise they
were sure to be troubled by wind and snow. The former pond
was near a Buddhist monastery in the West of Wu-yih land,
and ‘the king of the land prayed to the dragon and threw gold
and jade into the pond. When these precious objects were washed
out of the pond he ordered the monks to take them.


§ 3. Temples of Dragon-Kings.


A “Dragon-rearing well” * in a “Dragon-King’s temple” ’ was.
said to be inhabited by a dragon. Nobody dared draw water
from this well, because if. one did so strange things happened,
and the person who had ventured to thus arouse the dragon’s
anger fell ill°.

Another temple of a Dragon-King on a mountain, near a white
dragon’s pond and (on the top of the mountain) a dragon’s den
are mentioned in the Kwah 71 chi’. In time of drought the
peasants used to pray before the cavern, which always contained
water in spring and summer, and when they took this water


4 F- & Fi: Dragon’s pearls were called -f- & BR cf. above, Ch. III, § 15, p. 88.
2 we GB Ain Be AU, 2ccording to Wvytre (p. 55) “a descriptive detail of the
various Buddhist establishments in Loh-yang, the metropolis during the N. Wéi; written
by Yano Hien-cut, ne 5 Paar an officer of that dynasty”; it was written in the
— century (DE Groot, Rel. Syst., Vol. I, p. 344). T.S., same section, Ch. 131, ee 5a.


3 ye Fu el a 1. quoted T.S., same section, Ch. 129, p. 40.
4 ZB we H. 5 He E ii.


6 Mih koh hwui si (41th cent.), T.S., same section, Ch. 130, p. 3b.
7 AA FE OG Ra cf De Groor, Rel. Syst., Vol. IV, p. 240, note +. This must be the


later work of this name, dating from the thirteenth century (cf. above, p..120, rote’),
as the Shun-hi era (1474—1190) is mentioned. T.S., 1.1, Ch. 130, p. 7a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


134


and worshipped it, abundant rains came down. Near to the same
spot was the Dragon-mother’s grave, mentioned above '.


§ 4. Palaces of Dragon-Kings.


A Dragon-King’s Palace is mentioned in the Luh 7 ki?.-
According to a tradition among the sailors it was situated under
a small island about five or six days navigating from Su-cheu
(in Kiang-su province). Even when there was no wind, the waves
were so high there that no vessel dared approach it directly.
At every high tide, however, when the water overflowed the
island and the high waves were not to be seen, the ships could
pass there. At night a red light was seen from afar above the
water on this spot, bright like sunlight, which extended over--
more than a hundred miles square and reached the sky.

The Wuh tsah tsu* describes the same island, but, without
mentioning the light, says that it lies above the water, red like
the sun. Although no human being dared approach it, a sound.
was heard on the island as if some thousands of men were busy
there cutting and transporting trees. On clear nights one could
see that all the trees on the mountains were felled. It was said
that this was done for building the Dragon-King’s abode. Evidently
the Taoistic ideas concerning the island of the blessed, the land
of the sien, are confounded here with the Indian conceptions
with regard to the Naga palaces.

Finally, we may quote a passage from the TJ ai-p‘ing yi-lan ‘+,
where a magistrate is said to have often received in his house
a beautiful dragon-woman, who each time arrived in a magnifi-
cent carriage, accompanied. by female postilions. In his former
existence he had promised to marry her, and now he kept his
word and finally disappeared with her. The people said that he
had gone to the Dragon-Palace ‘and had become a “ water-sien”


(7K fil).


41 Book I, Ch. III, § 16, p. 89.


2 EK Bea aU (ninth century, see above, p. 87, note 4). T.S. same section, Ch.
129, p. 14a.
_ 83 hh Rite 3H (about 1592), in a passage translated into Japanese in the Heishoku


wakumonchin , Fe We my | y, written in 1710 by Kosima Fuxyi, Be he
mS De and printed in 1737, referred to by INovE Enryo, Yokwaigaku kogi, Vol. Il,


Ch. XXVII (#RE es" 41] JHB), p. 123 sa.


4. Ch. 424,


Digitized by Microsoft®


BOOK II.
THE DRAGON IN JAPAN.


CHAPTER I.


THE ORIGINAL JAPANESE DRAGON-GODS OF RIVERS, SEAS AND MOUNTAINS.


When treating of the Japanese dragon legends we have first
of all to consider the original beliefs of the natives, and to
separate these from the conceptions imported from India and
China. In the oldest annals the dragons are mentioned in various
ways, but mostly as water-gods, serpent- or dragon-shaped.


§ 1. Okami.


In the Nihongi'! we read that Izanagi, when his consort Izanami
had died by giving birth to the fire-god Kaguzuchi, cut this child
into three pieces each of which became a god. The blood which
trickled from the upper part of the sword changed into three
gods: Kura-okami (fj #2), Kura-yama-tsumi ( Fi) UL fii) and Kura-
mitsu-ha (fa FA #). Professor Fiorenz gives in his “/apanische
Mythologie” * extensive notes on these three gods. Kura, says he,
is explained as “abyss, valley, cleft”, although the meaning of
the character is “dark”. The second character, ee, which in
Fiorenz’s note 26 consists of the characters indicating rain and
dragon, but in the Japanese text (K. T. K. 1, 18) is a combination
of the upper part of the character pm with dragon, is explained


1 Ch. I, K.T.K. Vol. J, p. 13: 78 $i BA ETP RAW. BA
Ba Ese A A UL wee, HK OA PY HR KT. K. is Kohushi taikei, ae


K cae a modern edition of old historical and legendary works, which we quote as
K.T.K. Of the same kind are the Shiseki shiran (BH #& 4B FS) and the Gunsho


ruijy ( Hi BS A HE) (1795), while the Hyakka setsurin ( i=] Be aft, AK) cone


tains a great number of works of the Tokugawa period.
2 P. 46.


Digitized by Microsoft®


”


136


s “dragon”; in the Bungo Fudoki' the characters PE #8, “snake-
dragon”, are read “okami”. This and the later ideas about Kura-
okami show that this divinity is a dragon or snake. He is the
deity of rain and snow, and in the Manydshu (2, 19) he is said
to have been prayed to for snow. The Lngishiki states that this
god Okami had Shinto temples in all provinces. In a variant?
we read that one of the three gods who came forth from the
three pieces of Kaguzuchi’s body was Taka-okami. This name is
explained by one of the commentators as “the dragon-god residing
on the mountains”, in distinction from Kura-okami, “the dragon-
god of the valleys”. °

The passage of the Bungo Fudoki referred to by Fiorgnz says
that in the village Kutami in Naori district there was a well,
out of which water was scooped for the Emperor Keiké (71—130
A.D.) (not Suinin, as Fiorenz says), when he visited the place.
Then a snake-dragon (hp #8 He: okami, appeared, whereupon the
Emperor said: “This water is certainly dirty (4usaz). Scooping
water from it should not be allowed’. Therefore the well got
the name of Kiisa-izumi.


§ 2. Yamatsumi and Mitsuha.


As to the second god mentioned in the Nzhongi, Kura-yama-
tsumt, his name means: “Lord of the Dark Mountains’’, but one
of the commentators explains it as: “Mountain-snake” (yama-
tsu[ 32 ]-mi). The name of the third divinity, Kura-mitsu-ha, is
perhaps to be translated: “ Dark-water-snake”’, or “ Valley-water-
snake” +, Frorenz thinks that this god is identical with Mitsuha
no Me in the preceding text (Ch. I, p. 11), although the latter
is a female deity. There we read that Izanami, when dying in
consequence of the fire-god’s birth, gave birth to the earth-
goddess Hani-yama-bime and the water-goddess Muitsu-ha no Me


(aK wih Fe) HR A). Fuorunz® devotes an interesting note to the


HEL 4% Jal + aE: written in 713; Gunsho iy Vol. XVII, nr ei p- 1126.
2 A ale Ch. I, p. 16; Fiorenz, 1.1. p. 63: ey ge we :


8 According to Aston (Shinto, p. 153) it is simply “O Kami”, “August god”, so
that the names Kura o kami and Taka o kami should mean ‘God of the valleys” and
“God of the heights’. But in my opinion FLorENz’s arguments are right,

-4 Fuorenz translates: ‘dunkler Wasserdrache” (dark water-dragon), but in note 29
the word ha is explained as “snake”, not “dragon”. Cf. my treatise on the Snake in
Jap. superstition, Ch. II, A, 2 (Serpent-shaped gods of the water), pp. 43 sqq., Mitt,
des Seminars f. Orient. Sprachen zu Berlin, Jahrg. XIV, Abt. I.


Digitized by Microsoft®


137 “


latter, and quotes the Wamyasha', which by mistake identifies
Mi-tsu-ha with the Chinese wang-liang, {9 ij, instead of with
the wang-siang, fa] ¥. We read in De Groor'’s Religious System
of China® that “the Chinese authors generally do not take the
trouble to distinguish between these two terms (wang-liang and
wang-siang)”. Wang-siang, says De Groor’, are water-ghosts, as
well as the dung, or dragons, and he refers to Yt Pao’s Sheu
shen ki*, where a wang-siang is described “as looking like “a
child of three years with red eyes, a black complexion, big ears
and long arms with red claws”.

A Japanese commentator explains mitsu-ha as “Water-snake”
(7K Yt HE), and quotes several names and words in which ha
means “snake”; if this is true, Mitsuha no Me is “Female Water-
snake”. Another commentary, however, explains the word ha
as AE, “to produce”, so that the name of the goddess would
be: “The Woman who produces the water”. FLorenz does not
know which explanation is right, nor can I decide.


§ 3. Watatsumi.


In another passage of the Nzhongi® Izanami and Izanagi are
said to have given birth to “gods of the sea’, called “ Watatsumi
no Mikoto” (A> Fx #7), or, as in Ch. III, p. 76 (Jimmu Tennd),
HE. 7 , “little boys” or “boys of the sea”. The Chinese characters
with which this name is written agree with Yt Pao’s above-
mentioned description of the wang-siang as little children; these
terms are apparently identical with “sea-gods”, i ji}. Frorenz
explains the name “ Wata-tsu-mi” as “Lords of the sea”, wata
being an old word for sea, and mi a kind of honorific epithet.
The same commentator, however, who saw in Mitsuha no Me a
“Female Water-snake”, considers Watu-tsu-mi to be “Snakes: of
the Sea”, mz being an old word for snake. It is not impossible
that he is right, and that the old Japanese sea-gods were snakes
or dragons.


§ 4. Mizuchi, the river-gods.


The name of the river-gods, “mizuchi”, or “water-fathers”,


1 $y, written by Minamoto No Surracav, Ji NE who lived 941 — 983,


.2 Vol. V, Ch. Ill, p. 524. 3 Ibidem.
4 Ch. XII. See above, p. 81, note 1.


5 Ch. I, p. 12; Frorenz, 1.l., Ch. IV, p. 39; X HE iy i ee Be »p oy Oi :


Digitized by Microsoft®


138


which is found in Ch. XI of the Méhongi', is written with
the character , ku, which means a horned dragon ?. Aston 3
says: “The River-Gods have no individual names. They are called
generally midzu-chi or water-father. Japanese dictionaries describe
the mzdzu-chi as an animal of the dragon species with four legs.
Hepsuen, in his Japanese- -English Dictionary, calls it a large
water-snake. The difference is not material. The dragon- “kings of
Chinese myth (of whom Toyotamahiko is an echo) are in India
the Naga Raja, or cobra- “kings”. After having stated that River-
gods are prayed to for rain in time of drought, Aston gives a
translation of the above-mentioned interesting passage of the
Nithongi, which we may quote in extenso:

“A. D. 379 (67th year of the Emperor Nintoku). This year,
at a fork of the River Kahashima, in the ceritral division of
the Province of Kibi, there was a great water-dragon (mizucht)
which harassed the people. Now when travellers were passing
that place on their journey, they were sure to be affected
by its poison, so that many died. Hereupon Agatamori, the
ancestor of the Omi of ,Kasa, a- man of fierce temper and of
great bodily strength, stood over the pool of the river-fork and
flung into the water three whole calabashes, saying: ‘Thou art
continually belching up poison and therewithal plaguing travellers.
I will kill thee, thou water-dragon (iL). If thou canst sink these
calabashes, then will I take myself away, but if thou canst not sink
them, then will I cut thy body to pieces’. Now the water-dragon
changed itself into a deer and tried to draw down the calabashes,
but the calabashes would not sink. So with upraised sword he
entered the water and slew the water-dragon. He further sought
out the water-dragon’s fellows. Now the tribe of all the water-
dragons filled a cave in the bottom of the pool. He slew them
every one, and the water of the river became changed to blood.
Therefore that water was called the pool of Agatamori’ +.

Aston also refers to another passage of the Nihongi (Ch. XI,
p- 197), where we read about a similar experiment with two
calabasses, by which a man who was to be offered to a river-god
saved his life. It was in the eleventh year of the Emperor
Nintoku’s reign (A. D. 323), and the Emperor had dreamt that
a god pointed out to him two men, who had to be sacrificed to
the god of the Northern river, in order to enable the people to
complete the embankment, which gave way in two places. One


1.K.T.K., Vol. I, p. 209. 2 See above, p. 73.


Digitized by Microsoft®


139


of them plunged into the water and died, whereupon one of the
parts of the embankment could be completed. The other man,
however, showed the god’s powerlessness by means of the cala-
bashes which he (the god) could not submerge; and the remaining
part of the embankment was made without the loss of this
man’s life. From this passage we learn that in ancient times
human sacrifices were made to the dragon- shaped river-gods.


§ 5. Oho-watatsumi, the sea-god.


Finally we must mention the sea-god Oho-wata-tsu-mi no Mikoto,
in whose name we again find the term “Sea-lord” or “Sea-snake”,
spoken of in the preceding text. He is also called Toyo-tama
hiko no Mikoto (“Abundant-Pearl-Prince”’), and his daughter's
name is “Toyo-tama-bime” (“Abundant-Pearl-Princess, #2 i #1).
This god had his magnificent palace at the bottom of the sea,
apd when his daughter announced him that she had seen reflected
in the well before the gate the face of a beautiful youth who was
sitting in the cassia tree close by, he received Hiko-hohodemi —
for this was the youth — in a hospitable way. Afterwards the
guest married the princess and lived in the palace for three
years. Then, however, he returned to the earth (according to the
Kojiki on the back of a wani, Fl fi, one fathom long) and was
followed by his consort, for whom he had built a “parturition-
house’ on the seashore. She begged him not to look at her
while she was giving birth, but.he was too curious and peeped
in, whereupon he saw that his wife had become a wani (Kojiki),
or dragon (Nihongi). Angry and ashamed she abandoned her
child, Jimmu Tenno’s father, and returned to the Sea-god’s
palace '.


§ 6. Wani.


The word wani, which is written either phonetically (Fi ##)
or with the character f{#, indicating a crocodile, is found once
more in Chapter I of the MNihongi (p. 40). We read there:
“Further it is said that Koto-shiro-nushi no kami changed him-
self into a bear-wani, eight fathoms long (ya-hiro no kuma-wani,


4 Nihongi, Ch. II, pp. 62 seqq.; Kaiki, , #2 4-6, jit ALP, KT.
Vol. VII, p. 59: AU, IN a Fl yc if “8 ‘al ZB BE , Nihongi, p. 63: Av,
B BE: p. 66 (a variant): AV, 3 N ay K Ae a (wani) 6] 4a] 3a ab


Digitized by Microsoft®


140


WN = Ae fF). The epithet “bear” means “strong as a bear” !
As tin word wani, one version of the Hohodemi legend? says
that the sea-princess became a wani, and according to another
version she changed into a dragon; in the former the same words
are used as in the above-mentioned passage about Koto-shiro-
nushi no kami: “Toyotama-bime changed into a big bear-wanz,
eight fathoms long, which crept about’. Aston’, in a note to
this passage, supposes that the word want is not a Japanese,
but a Korean word, wang-i, -which should simply mean: king.
FLorenz* agrees with him, and they base their opinion upon the
fact that the legend has strong Chinese features. Although the
Indian notions about the Naiga-kings related above (Introduction)
are easily to be recognized in the Japanese legend, yet I think we
must not go as far as to consider the whole story western, nor
have we the right to suspect the old word wani on account of
the fact that a part of the legend is of foreign origin. Why
should the ancient Japanese or Koreans have called these sea-
monsters “kings”, omitting the word “dragon”, which is the
most important part of the combined term “dragon-king”? And
if the full term were used in Korea, certainly the Japanese
would not have taken up only its last part. In my opinion the
wani is an old Japanese dragon- or serpent-shaped sea-god, and
the legend is an ancient Japanese tale, dressed in an Indian
garb by later generations. The oldest version probably related
how Hohodemi went to the sea-god, married his daughter and
obtained from him the two jewels of ebb and flood, or some
other means to punish his brother by nearly drowning him;
afterwards, when having returned to the earth, he built the
parturition-house, -and breaking his promise of not looking at
his wife when she was giving birth, saw that she had changed
into a wani, i.e. an enormous sea-monster. As to the pearls,
although mysterious jewels are very common in the Indian tales
about the Naga-kings, it is possible that also Japanese sea-gods
were believed to possess them, as the sea conceals so many treasures
in her depths; but it may also be an Indian conception. When
later generations got acquainted with the Chinese and Indian
dragons, they identified their wanz with the latter, and embellished
their old legends with features, borrowed from the Indian Naga
tales. The magnificent palace is of Indian origin, and, as Asron®


“4 Frorenz, 1.1., p. 148, note 89. 2 Nihongi, Ch. U, p. 66.
3 Nihongi, Vol. I, p. 61, note 3. 41.1. p. 148, note 89.


Digitized by Microsoft®


141
points ont, the castle gate and the (cassia) tree before it, as
well as the well which serves as a mirror, form a combination
not unknown to European folklore. Europe probably also got
them from India, the cradle of Western and Eastern legends.

After having written this I got acquainted with the interesting
fact, pointed out by F. W. K. Muzizr', that a similar myth is
to be found as well on the Kei islands as in the Minahassa.
The resemblance of several features of this myth with the
Japanese one is so striking, that we may be sure that the latter
is of Indonesian origin. Probably the foreign invaders, who in
prehistoric times conquered Japan, came from Indonesia and
brought this myth with them. In the Kei version the man who
had lost the hook, lent to him by his brother, enters the clouds
in a boat and at last finds the hook in the throat of a fish. In
the Minahassa legend, however, he dives into the sea and arrives
at a village at the bottom of the water. There he discovers the
hook in the throat of a girl, and is brought home on the back
of a big fish. And like Hohodemi punished his brother by nearly
drowning him by means of the jewel of flood-tide, so the hero
of the Minahassa legend by his prayers caused the rain to come
down in torrents upon his evil friend. In Japan Buddhist influence
evidently has changed the village in the sea into the palace of
a Dragon king, but in the older version the sea-god and his
daughter have kept their original shapes of want, probably a
kind of crocodiles, as the Chinese character indicates. An old
painting of Sensai Eitaku, reproduced by Mtzier, shows Hoho-
demi returning home on the back of a crocodile. [t is quite
possible that the form of this Indonesian myth introduced into
Japan spoke about crocodiles, and that the vague conception of
these animals was retained under the old name of wani, which
may be an Indonesian word.

On p. 149 of the same work Aston says: “There can be little
doubt that the wani is really the Chinese dragon. It is frequently
so represented in Japanese pictures. I have before me a print
which shows Toyotama-hiko and his daughter with dragons’ heads
appearing over their human ones. This shows that he was conceived
of not only as a Lord of Dragons, but as a dragon himself. .
In Japanese myth the serpent or dragon is almost always asso-


4 Mythe der Kei-Insulaner und Verwandtes, Zeitschrift fir Ethnologie, Vol. XXV
(1893), pp. 533 sqq. Dr H. H. Juyneott kindly pointed out to me the existence of these
Kei and Minahassa myths and Dr MULLER’s interesting article. Cf. Kern, in the periodi-
cal entitled “Bijdragen tot de taal-, Jand en volkenkunde van Ned. Indié”, 1893, P. 504;
JuyNBOLL, ibidem, 1894, p. 712, note 4.


Digitized by Microsoft®


142


ciated with water in some of its forms”. He gives the print on
the same page, and we see at once that we are here not so
much on Chinese, as on Indian territory. In the Introduction (pp.
4 sq.) I have referred to. Grinwepen’s description of the dragon in
Indian art, so that I need not explain that “the dragon’s heads
appearing over the human one” form quite an Indian motive,
transferred to China and from there to Korea and Japan. As the
sea-god in his magnificent palace was an Indian conception,
Japanese art represented him, of course, in an Indian. way. This
is, however, no proof that the wani originally was identical with
the Naga, or with the Chinese-Indian dragon-kings.


§ 7. The jewels of flood and ebb.


In regard to the jewels of flood-tide and ebb-tide we may
refer to the Mizu kagami', which contains a legend apparently
made in imitation of the Hiko-Hohodemi tale in the Kojiki and
the Nzhong:. It runs as follows. In the year 200, when the
Empress Jingo (200—269) arrived in Korea, she took some sea
water in her hand and prayed from far to the god of Kashima
(in Hitachi) and Kasuga (Takemikazuchi, who had a famous old
temple at Kashima and another on the hill of Kasuga at Nara,
under the name of Kasuga-daimydjin; the latter was, however,
not built before 710). Then came the gods of Kasuga and Sumiyoshi
and Suwa, clad in armour and with helmets on their heads, to the
Empress’s ship. Kasuga sent the Great God (Daimydjin) of Kawa-
kami? as a messenger to the Dragon-palace (jf ‘bi, ryaigi) at
the bottom of the sea, and this mighty river-god took the “pearl
of ebb” and the “pearl of flood” from the Great Dragon-king
Sagara? and brought them with him to the surface. While the
Korean warships were put up in battle array, the pearl of ebb,
thrown into the sea, made the water suddenly dry up‘. Then
the king of Koma entered the sea-bed with his troops in order
to destroy the Japanese fleet; but as soon as he did so the god
of Kawakami, following Kasuga’s order, threw the pearl of flood


1 9K GH. ch. fb, ip yy. K. T. K. Vol. XVII, p. 354; written in the second
half of the twelfth century.


2 yey A oe the ‘“Rain-Master” CRY Bit ), see below, Ch. IV.


3 tb a HE also mentioned in the Fuso ryakki, Shomu Tenno, K.T.K. Vol. VI,
p. 564, He is one of the eight Great Dragon-Kings, cf. above, p. 4. °


4 - EOF vb oR A BE FPR PRD - DRDO


Digitized by Microsoft®


143


into the sea, and behold, all of a sudden the water rose tremendously
and filled the whole sea-bed. The frightened troops all prayed
for their lives, for the water. covered even the whole of Koma
land. Then the pearl of ebb was thrown into the sea again, and
the water sank. So the Empress by Kasuga’s assistance conquered
the enemy’s army without shedding a single drop of blood, and
obtained three ships laden with tributes and treasures from the
king of Koma.

In the Nihongi' we read that.in the second year of the Emperor
Chuai’s reign (A. D. 193) the Empress Jingo found in the sea a
nyo-i-tama (hn ¥X A), a “jewel which grants all desires” (cintamant).
About such jewels the Indian Naga tales have taught us above °.
FLorenz observes in a note to this passage *, that the Usa no miya
engi * states that the Empress obtained two jewels from the Dragon-
palace, the “kan-ju” and the “manju”, the above-mentioned ebb
and flood-jewels, and that this. book describes them as being
about five sun long, the former white and the latter blue.


§ 8. Take-iwa Tatsu no Mikoto, the dragon-god of a sacred
pond in Higo province.


The Sandai jitsuroku® mentions a Japanese dragon in the
following passage. “In Jogwan 6 (A.D. 864), on the 26th day
of the 12th month, the Dazaifu (x 34 ff, the Government of
Tsukushi, i. e. the present Kytsht, which had its seat in Chikuzen)
reported to the Emperor the following facts: ‘In Higo province,
Aso district, in the sacred pond of Take-iwa Tatsu no Mikoto
(fat 8 FE Gz), “The Dragon-god of the Strong Rock”, a god of
the upper second rank and the fifth Order of Merit (3), kun),
in the night of the third of the tenth month of last year [i. e.
the same year 864, because this would be “last year’ at the
time when the Emperor received the letter] a sound was heard
and a shaking motion observed. The water of the pond leapt up
into the air and fell down in the East and West; that wich fell
in Eastern direction spread like a long strip of cloth, about ten
cho broad. The colour of the water was like that of shoyu (red);
it stuck to plants and trees, and even after ten days its. traces


1 Ch. Vill, p. 156: A A BG Bin BRK HH,


2 Introd., p. 10. 3 L.1, pp. 222, note 13.
4 Usa Hachiman no miya engi, FF dk N Wis = HK 7tE; copied by Usa Jucr,
F 4k Ht BK, in 1335.


5 = AR =I ER, written in 910; K.T.K., Vol. IV, Ch. IX, p. 167.


Digitized by Microsoft®


144


had not yet vanished. Further, in the same night one of the
three stone gods, about 4 jo high, which from olden times had
stood on the mountain peak of Hime-gami (the “Female Deity”’),
was broken. The officials of the Dazaifu, having practised tortoise
divination, positively declared that these occurrences were omens
of (litt. corresponded with) calamity of water [7k J#, sui-eki,
litt. “water-pestilence’; in the following text, however, hei-eki,
“war-pestilence”’, is said to have been predicted by the diviners]’’'.

On the tenth day of the second month of the following year
(865 A.D.) the Emperor issued a proclamation *, in which he
said that the aforesaid evil omens were due to his own bad
reign and that he therefore thenceforth would earnestly pray to
the gods and reign better than before. He said that the water
of the sacred pond spoken of by the Dazaifu never increased
even if it rained excessively, nor decreased even in times of
drought (litt. excessive sunshine)*, and that divination had made
out that the sudden throwing up of its water was an omen of
war*, He was much grieved, he said, but hoped to stop these
bad influences by reigning better than before. And seven days
later > he despatched two messengers to the Imperial mausolea
at Yamashina and made them read there a written message to
his ancestor Tenji Tennd, by which he communicated the whole
matter to him and besought him to ward off this calamity.

Of so much importance were the “Dragon-god of the strong
Rock” and his sacred pond. It is the first time that we meet
the word tatsu used separately, in the sense of dragon (in the
Nihongi only to be found in the name Tatsuta, “Dragon-field’’),
and we may be sure that we meet here with a very old Japanese
dragon-divinity. The same pond is mentioned in the Nzhon koki®,
but without the name of the god to whom it belonged. We
read there in a proclamation of the Emperor Kwammu in the
year 796 A.D. the following: “The Dazaifu has reported that in


Ke FRC Ge Ka. A KR SR.


Ch. X, p. 173.
HE WT TE. ETC i OR
meme. RBA. 5 Ch. X, p. 174

H As 4% $f written in 841; Ch. V, K.T.K. Vol. III, p. 2: KE Wag
F. KA MAM LAM. Re WB. &
FL EHR. i hE eK — + OR.


ao fF, WN =


Digitized by Microsoft®


145


Higo province, Aso district, there is in the mountains a water
(numa, Ys not only a swamp, but a water bigger than a pond
and smaller than a lake) which is called “The Sacred Pond”
(ji Sie Yh, Shinreichc). For many years past even in times of
large floods or heavy droughts the water of that pond did not
rise nor fall. Now, however, it has, without any reason, decreased
more than twenty jo. According to the diviners this means cala-
-mnity of drought (4 #¥, kan-eki, litt. ‘pestilence of drought’)”'.
In 840 it fell 40 jo’, and the Emperor ordered the people by
proclamation to pray for averting this bad: omen *.


§ 9. An Emperor’s dragon-tail.


In the Aindsho* a funny explication is given of the use of the
word bird ( Fe #~) in the sense of dotad ( jaj Hs, “same body”).
According to some people, says the writer, this is due to the fact
that the Emperor. Ojin (270—310, the Empress Jingo’s son,
deified as Hachiman in 712) had a dragon’s tail, because he
was a descendant of the sea-god (Jimmu Tennd, his ancestor, being
the grandson of the sea-god’s daughter *). In order to hide this
tail he invented the swso or skirt. One day, however, when he
left the room, the tail was still inside when a lady-in-waiting
shut the sliding-doors and pinched the tail between them. Then
the Emperor exclaimed: “Birya”, “(I am) a tailed dragon”.
Afterwards this word biryz was changed into 6diré with the
meaning of “same body’, because the Emperor had meant to
say that what was between the door was also belonging to his
body (!). The author of the “Aindsho believes the legend of Ojin
Tenno’s dragon’s tail, because, says he, Toyotamabime’s son
Ugaya-fuki-aezu no Mikoto married his own aunt, also a daughter
of the sea-god, a younger sister of his mother, called Tamayori-
hime, with whom he begot four sons, the youngest of whom
was Jimmu Tennd. Therefore in his opinion it is quite possible
that Jimmu’s descendants had dragon-tails!


4 The same thing is to be found in the Nihon isshi, A AS Bi BB, Ch. IV and
Xl, K.T. K. Vol. VI, pp. 39 and 363.
2 Shoku Nihon koki, 48 H aA 5A #E > written in 869; Ch. IX, K.T.K. Vol.


Ul, p. 285.
3 Same work, Ch. IX, p. 288. Cf. Ch. X, p. 293.


4 kK BS By an encyclopaedia written in 1446 by the Buddhist priest Gyoao,
45 FR; Ch. VII, nr 24, p. 19. 5 See above, p. 139.


Verh. Kon. Akad. v Wetensch. (Afd. Le(terk.) N. R. Dl XIII, N°. 2. 10
Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER II.
THE CHINESE DRAGON .AND THE DRAGON-HORSE AS OMENS IN JAPAN.


In China the dragon often and the dragon-horse always belong,
as we have stated above', to the very good omens. The Japanese,
who have altogether embraced the opinions of the Chinese upon
the subject of forebodings, did not hesitate to believe in the
truth of their assertions also in regard to the appearance of
dragons.


§ 1. Flying dragon as horse of a ghost or a sien.


The Chinese dragon, flying through the air, is mentioned in
the Nihongi*, where we read: “On the first day of the fifth
month of the first year of the Empress Saimei’s reign (655) there
appeared in the sky a man riding on a dragon. In shape he
resembled a Chinese, and he wore a blue (broad-rimmed bamboo)
hat (covered with) oiled silk. Galloping from Katsuragi peak he
disappeared into the Ikoma mountains; at noon he galloped away
from the top of Sumi no e (Sumiyoshi, #£ 7) ’s Pine-tree Peak
in a western direction”.

The usd ryakki*® gives the same legend and adds: “The people
of that time said: ‘It is the soul of Soga Toyora no O-omi
Emishi”. This was a famous minister who had died in A.D. 645,
son of Umako and grandson of Iname, the first protectors of
Buddhism; Iname had erected the first Buddhist temple, Kogenji
or Katsuragi-dera, which was destroyed in 645 at the fall of the
Soga family. Although it is not stated in the text of the Nihongi,
probably the appearance of this dragon, as horse of a sien*, in
the beginning of the Empress’s reign was a very good omen, as


1 Book I, Ch. II, pp. 43—59. 2 Ch. XXVI, p. 457.
3 + Es Be ZU. written about 1150 by the Buddhist priest Kwo-rn, =A '
tanabann af abn famnenn Onn. FE WW Val VT wn BAR Oh 1


Digitized by Microsoft®


147


well as that of the yellow dragon ,which was seen ascending
from the northwestern mountains to the sky in A. D. 887, at the
Emperor Uda’s accession to the Throne’.


§ 2. Dragon-horses.


In the Nihongi® we read: “The Emperor (Kotoku Tenn, in
the sixth year of his reign, i. e. 650) said: ‘When a holy
sovereign appears in the world and reigns the empire, Heaven
in correspondence therewith gives good omens. In olden times,
under the reign of the monarchs of the Western country (China),
Ch‘eng Wang of the Cheu dynasty and Ming Ti of the Han dynasty
[in reality of the Tsin dynasty], white pheasants appeared. Under
the reign of the Japanese Emperor Honda (Ojin Tenno, 270—310
A. D.) a white raven nestled in the Palace, and in the time of
the Emperor Osazaki (Nintoku Tennd, 311—399° A.D.) a dragon-
horse (HEAR, ryz-me, or tatsu no wma)* appeared in the West.
Thus from olden times down till the present day there are many
instances of the appearance of lucky omens in correspondence
with the presence of virtuous men”.

Also the Engishiki* enumerates the dragon-horse among the
lucky omens (jff Hi): It is called there a “divine horse” (jill 5),
and. is described as follows: “It has a long neck and wings at
its sides. When it treads upon the water it does not sink”’®.
The dragon is mentioned in the same list, with the following
description borrowed from China: “He has five colours and walks
(or flies) about; he can make himself invisible or visible, small
or big”.

The Shoku Nihongi*® and the Shoku Nihon koki* quote Chinese


te xe ryakki, Ch. XXII, p. 637: Ey) t2 2 AA A we fh uly Hh tt
aie me EE A ETS me, FE HG Zw HE
y 7


3 See above, pp. 56 sqq.
4 HE Ee sh “Ceremonies of the Engi era” (901—922), written in 927 by
[=]


Fusrwara No ToxintRaA and Tabara (BR ii He 2p and iB =F); Ch. XXI,
Section V4 MR OP, K.T.K. Vol. XII, p. 653: ji GER. Sw
LAR. KA.)


5 Cf. the Shui ying t‘u, above p. 57.
6 eA AS ZB. written in 797; Ch. IX, K.T.K. Vol. I, p. 145: “The Hiao


king, Sect. “Covenants of assisting gods”, says: ‘When the Son of Heaven is obedient


Digitized by Microsoft®


148


expressions in regard to tortoises and dragons appearing as signs
of the reign of a good emperor.

The Nehon Sandai jitsuroku' compares a cloudy vapour, which
hung under the sun on the 27th day of the ‘th month ot
A.D. 888, with a dragon-horse, and states that in A. D. 885 the
“dragon-star” (# HL) appeared twice *, reason why the name
of the era was changed (apparently it was considered a bad
omen), as the Emperor informed to the people in a proclamation,
and Gwangyo 9 was replaced by Ninna 1. —

In the Konjaku. monogatari* we find a much mutilated passage
about a dragon-horse which flew through the air in Shomu
Tenno’s time (724-749).

The Masu kagami* mentions the dragon- shove only in regard
to its capacity of crossing broad rivers. In 1221, when Hojo
Yoshitoki marched from Kamakura to Kyoto against the Emperor
Juntoku, the rivers Fujigawa and Tenrytgawa (KK # Jil,
“Celestial Dragon-River”) were swollen by the rains to such a
degree, “that even a dragon-horse could not have crossed them”.

An interesting passage with regard to the dragon-horse is found
in the Zaiheiki®, where such an excellent horse® is said to
have been presented by Enya Takasada to the Emperor Godaigo
(1818-1339). His Majesty praised it highly, and said that it
was certainly a “Heavenly horse” (temma, FE fB). At his question
whether the fact that such a horse had appeared during his reign,
was a good or a bad omen, the answer of the courtiers was, that it
was an extremely lucky sign, due to His Majesty’s own virtues.
As phoenixes appeared at the Chinese Emperor Shun’s time


to his parents, celestial dragons descend and terrestrial tortoises appenr’. R (# OK


ii! ZA. KF AF. SW KE Wee J Si HY .). cf. above, pp.


38, 40, 43 sq.
7 es iS BB at. without ae 869; Ch. XVIII, K.T.K. Vol. TH, p. 404.


1AA= AR: EF HB. written in 901; Ch. XLIV, K..T. K. Vol. IV, p. 607.


Cf. the Fuso ryakhi, Ch. XX, K.T. K. Vol. VI, p. 616.
: ms XLV, p. 657,


Ee Wy Be. written by Mivamoro No Taxaxunt, Wit [Be [& . who lived
100440717, i.e. Un DatnaGon; Ch. XI, K.T. K. Vol. XVI, p. 546. wy


A ier $5 written in 14340—1350; Ch. I, K-T.K. Vol. XVII, p. 1042.


5 Ik 2p ap, written about 1382; Ch. XII, p. 4.


6 Excellent horses were often called ‘flying dragons” Gis HE. féi.lung) by the
Chinese, cf. the . Nikon Pitas! Ch. XII, K.T.K. lil, p. 48, and. the Shoku Nihon SOE),


Aare or omow oat


Digitized by Microsoft®


149


(supposed to have reigned B.C, 2255— 2205), and a kilin in the
age of Confucius, so this heavenly horse was an excellent omen for
the period, foreboding at the same time the Emperor's long
reign and life, and the glory of Buddhism. They further related
how at the time of a Chinese Emperor, Muh Wang of the Cheu
dynasty, eight heavenly horses had appeared, all having different
names, and how the Emperor, drawn by them all, had visited every
place of the world '. So all those present congratulated Godaigo
with his horse, except Fujiwara no Fujifusa. When his opinion
was asked, he declared to be convinced that it was not a good
omen, and he too referred to Chinese examples to confirm his
statement. The houses of two Emperors of the Han dynasty,
Wen and Kwang Wu, who had refused such presents, had had
a long and lucky reign, he said, while that of Muh, who had
used the eight heavenly horses, had soon declined. Those horses
were only a metamorphosis of the Fang constellation (f§, the
eleventh of the zodiacal constellations), and an omen of the fall
of the Cheu dynasty. Godaigo, on hearing these words, was
angry and put a stop to the festivities of the day. Not believing
Fujifusa’s pessimistic prediction he accepted the horse, and a
few years later (1336) the great schism of the Southern and
Northern Courts seemed to prove the truth of Fujifusa’s words.
The same work? relates how the Emperor Godaigo gave the
aforesaid dragon-horse to Nitta Yoshisada, when he despatched
him to Owari province (1335). It was expected to cover the
distance, which would have required four or five days with an
ordinary horse, in half a day, so that he could be back in Kyoto
that very evening. In a few hours he arrived in Omi province,
but there the animal suddenly died, which was, of course, a very
evil foreboding.
Finally, we may mention a dragon-horse which certainly was
not a harbinger of evil, namely that on which the Empress Jingo
after her Consort Chiiai’s death (200 A.D.) flew through the air
to Sugiyama at Ikeda, Buzen province, where she prayed to the
gods for assistance with respect to her expedition against Korea.
Then the Four Deva Kings, with eight white flags (Hachiman,
A\ i) in their hands, descended from Heaven *.


4 Cf. above, p. 59.

2 Ch. XIV, p. 14. .

3 Sansha takusen ryakusho, —= it aE a Be Hh; author unknown; the year
Keian 3 (1650) is mentioned as date of the epilogue. Zoku zoku gunsho ruiju, Vol. 1,
p- 741.


. Digitized by Microsoft®


150


*


§ 3. Carriage of a ghost drawn through the air by eight dragons.


In connection with the same Emperor a third tale in the
Taiheiki ! may be mentioned. Omori Morinaga, who had conquered
Godaigo’s loyal general, Kusunoki Masashige (1336), one evening
saw the latter’s ghost appearing in the garden and trying to
deprive him of his sword. He questioned the spirit by whom
he was accompanied, whereupon Masashige answered that the
Emperor Godaigo, that Emperor’s son Prince Morinaga (killed at
Kamakura in 1335) and Nitta Yoshisada had come with him.
‘ Omori lighted a torch and, looking upwards, discovered in a big
cloud twenty demons carrying on their shoulders the Imperial
sedan-chair; then followed the Prince in a carriage drawn by
eight dragons*, and Yoshisada rode in front with more than
three thousand horsemen. This reminds us of a sentence in the
Gempet seisuckt*, a quotation from the Ba-iku-kyo *, which says
that “in heaven a horse is made into a dragon and among men
a dragon is made into a horse’”*. The number eight is stereo-
typical in these legends about dragons ridden by kings or gods,
or drawing their carriages. So we read about a Buddhistic god
with twelve faces and forty two arms brandishing swords and
lances, and riding eight dragons in the air amidst rain and wind °.


§ 4. A dragon appears as a good omen.


The Kanden jihitsu? describes a dragon which was seen under
a bridge near Unawa village, Harima province, at the foot of
Mount Shiko. It was seven shaku long, had one horn, hands
and feet, and its body had the colour of leaves of a tree tinged
with a golden lustre. It was a beautiful animal, exactly like the
red dragons on pictures. When the villagers descended from the


4 Ch. XXII, p. 3.
2HRK-A ORR E. ARK B TRS BK
Yin 7.


3 Ch. XXXVII, p. 982.


4 5 Al RE.
SRKEAVH TBE. A= NRT BH.


6 See below, Ch. IV, Tatheiki, Ch. XII, p. 90.
7 Ea Hg R , written by the same author who wrote the Kanden kohitsu,


Digitized by Microsoft®


151


bridge and stroked its horn, it was not afraid or angry, but
apparently rejoiced. Afterwards the skin of this divine dragon
was found near by, on the other side of the river. “This was
not an evil dragon or a poisonous snake, but probably a lucky
omen of a good reign. The fact that the crop of that very
autumn was good, was brought into connection with the appearance
of the dragon, which was (therefore) said to be a venerable
being” '.


4 Hyakka ‘setsurin, Vol. 489 “RL —, Ch. IV, p. 172. The Gwadan keiroku, fins


i Ott ji) (written in 1775 by Nakayama Koyo, 4 We jal B, Uyakka setsurin,
3 ol. IE Pf, p- 419) speaks about the officials appointed in ancient China for rearing


Silke (cf. above, Book I, Ch. III, § 8, p. 82), which were not real dragons but horses;
further, it treats of dragon pictures.


Another work of the Hyakka setsurin (Konyo manroku, B iB vis BK written


in 1763 by Aoxt Konvo, 8 A iB. Hyakka setsurin, Vol. JF ., p. 880)
mentions dragon-bones (cf. above, Book I, Ch. Il, § 17, pp. 90 sqq). A Dutchman, ‘to
whom the author, Aoxt, showed such a bone, declared it to be a stone, in agreement
with a Chinese work. +


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER III.
CAUSING RAIN.
§ 1. Shinto gods.


The ancient annals of Japan very frequently speak of heavy
droughts which threatened the country with hunger and misery.
They were considered to be punishments, or at any rate plagues,
from the gods, which could only be stopped by earnest prayers
and offerings to the same divinities. The old, dragon-shaped
river-gods (the “river-uncles”, jal 4f{, awa no kami) especially,
from olden times believed to be the givers of rain, were besought
not to withhold their blessings any longer from, the parched
and suffering land.

The Nihongt' tells us that in the first year of the Emperor
Kogyoku’s reign (642) there was a long drought which could
not be stopped by the Shinto priests. In Aston’s translation this
passage runs as follows: “25th day. The Ministers conversed with
one another, saying: — ‘In accordance with the teachings of
the village hafuri [Shinto priests], there have been in some
places horses and cattle killed as a sacrifice to the Gods of the
various (Shinto) shrines, in others frequent changes of the market-
places [both old Chinese customs’], or prayers to the River-gods.
None of these practices have had hitherto any good result’.
Then Soga no Oho-omi [Iruka, the last of the Soga’s, who was
killed in 645, together with his father Emishi; all the Soga’s,
Iname, Umako, Emishi and Iruka, were mighty ministers and
great protectors of Buddhism] answered and said: — ‘The
Mahayana Sutra ought to be read by way of extract? in the
temples, our sins repented of, as Buddha teaches, and thus with
humility rain should be prayed for’”.


4 Ch. XXIV, K.T.K. Vol. I, p. 410.
2 Cf. Aston’s note to this passage (Nihongi, Vol. II, p. 174, note 4), aud FLORENz’s
note 3 ee, Japanische Annalen, Book XXII—XXX, sec. ed., p. 75).


3 ith Ae’ tendoku; Aston, p. 175, note 1: “the reading of passages of a book to


Digitized by Microsoft®


153


“27th day. In the South Court of the Great Temple, the images
of Buddha and of the Bosatsu (Bodhisattvas), and the images
of the four Deva Kings, were magnificently adorned. A multi-
tude of priests, by humble request, read the Mahayana Sitra.
On this occasion Soga no Oho-omi held a censer in his hands,
and having burnt incense in it, put up a prayer”.

“28th day. A slight rain fell”.

“29th day. The prayers for rain being unsuccessful, the reading
of the Stitra was discontinued”.

“8th month, Ist day. The Emperor made a progress to the
river-source of Minabuchi. Here he knelt down and prayed,
worshipping towards the four quarters, and looking up to Heaven
[Chinese style, as the Buddhist prayers had been without result].
Straightway there was thunder and a great rain, which eventually
fell for five days, and plentifully bedewed the Empire. [One
writing has: —- ‘For five days there was continuous rain, and the
nine grains ripened’]. Hereupon the peasantry throughout the
Empire cried with one voice: ‘Bansai’, and said: ‘An Emperor
of exceeding virtue’”’.

Among the eighty five Shinto shrines to which messengers
were despatched by the Court to pray for rain, the Engishiki !
mentions several river and water-deities, e.g. the gods of
Kibune*® and Nibu no kawakami*, but also the Wind-gods of
Tatsuta *, the Thunder-god of Kamo’ and many others. The
Nihongi® repeatedly uses the same words in regard to these
prayers, namely: “The Emperor sent daibu (Ki, officials of
a high rank) as envoys to the different Shintd temples in order
to pray for rain; he also despatched messengers to pray to the
‘god O-imi of Hirose and to the Wind-gods of Tutsuta (#E HA,
‘Dragonfield’)”. Was it accidental that the Wind-gods, who appeared
to be also givers of rain, had their shrine at a place called


4 Ch. I (pif a =, FB ae AS), KT. K. Vol. XU, p. 142: pp py ni
RNA HEE.

2 Ft 7h i ik — (Ob We BB).

3 PAE I E(B LAM),

4 HE k= He.

5 i Pe Hi) rk — HB .

6 Ch. XXX, p, 565: AKA. HHT TM. LA
5 il AC Bm SCE FA


Digitized by Microsoft®


154


“Dragon-field”? The word tatsu, dragon, is, as far as I know, not
found in the Nihongi, except in this name, but the fact that
_ the ancient Japanese had such a word indicates that they them-
selves knew a kind of dragons before they were taught by
Koreans and Chinese about the existence of the Chinese dragons.
They identified these tatsw with the lung (#f), and, as we have
seen above (p. 138), wrote the name of their “water-fathers”,
mizuchi, with the character #L,, Aiu (the horned dragon), while
the word okami was written by means of a character, partly
consisting of rain and dragon.

Their dragons were kami, gods ', who lived in rivers and seas,
valleys and mountains (in rivulets, lakes and ponds), bestowing
rain on their worshippers. That those river-gods could also cause
wind we learn from the above quoted passage of the Nihong?®,
where the god of the Northern river is said to have made a
whirlwind arise in order to submerge the calabashes. So the
three kinds of dragons, to be found in Japan, original Japanese,
Chinese and Indian, all have one feature in common, i.e. the
faculty of causing rain; while the winds belong to the dominion
of the former two.

The Shoku Nihongi® states that in 715 the Emperor Gwammei
sent messengers to pray for rain to “famous mountains and large
rivers” (4% [1] 7 Jil), whereupon the rain came down in torrents
within a few days. It is remarkable that he at the same time
established religious festivals in the two great Buddhist temples
of Nara, Kofukuji and Horyiji, and despatched messengers to
the different Shintd temples with nusa (#£ Ht, offerings of hemp.
and bark-fibre *). We often observe this dualism in the measures
taken by the Emperors to stop drought or too much rain, |
especially in later times, when Buddhism became more and more
powerful °.


1 Sarow, The Revival of pure Shinto, Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan,
App. Vol. III 4, p. 43; Aston, Shinto, p. 9.

2 Ch. XI, p. 197, 3 Ch. VI, K.T.K. Vol. II, p. 92.

4 Cf. Aston, Shinto, pp. 213 seqq.

5 Cf. Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. V, K.T.K. Vol. IV, pp. 87 seq.: “On the fifteenth day
the Emperor sent messengers to the Seven temples of Famous Shinto gods near the
capital in order to offer nusa and to pray for rain...... On the sixteenth he invited
priests of all the great Buddhist temples, 60 men, to come to the Palace and read
there the Dai Hannya kyo (Mahaprajiiaparamita sitra) by way of extract; this was
limited to a space of three days; it is a prayer for sweet rain (in the text three


moanthe ie written: if thie is richt the meaning mnet. he thatthis sutra in nravine far


Digitized by Microsoft®


155


The Shinto gods who were believed to cause rain were also
considered to be able to put a stop to it, and we often read
of prayers offered to them to that effect. In times of drought
mostly messengers were despatched to the different rain-bestowing
gods within the so-called gokinai (7, 4% fy), the five provinces
adjoining the capital, i.e. Yamashiro, Yamato, Kawachi, Izumi
and Settsu'. The most powerful in this respect was apparently
the river-god of Nibu kawakami (J} AE JI| E ji!) mentioned
in the Engishiki? among the ten temples of Yoshino district,
Yamato province. Not only hemp and fibre were offered to this
river-god, but occasionally also a black horse in order to cause
him to give rain*. His dragon-shape is evident from the term
“Rain-master” (fj fit, U-sk’, by which he was often designated
in imitation of the Chinese dragons‘, and which appears to have


Al is a misprint for H ). On the eighteenth day it thundered, and a little rain


slightly moistened (the earth). On the nineteenth there was an earthquake, and the
slight rain forthwith stopped. The reading of the sutra was prolonged for two days
more, because a good, moistening rain had not yet been obtained”.

1 Shoku Nihongi, Ch. VII, XI, XXXVIL, K.T.K. Vol. II, pp. 103, 187, 676.

2 Ch. IX, K.T.K. Vol. XIII, p. 291.


3 Shoku Nihongi, Ch. XXXIX, p. 739: yx pel 5B iN J} He J i ry d
wr 8 tH, , Nihon Koki, Ch. XVI, K.T.K. Vol. UI, p. 82. Engishiki, Ch. II,


K.T.K. Vol. XIII, p. 144.
4 Cf. above, Book I, Ch. V, pp. 109 sqq. We find this term passim in the Shoku Nihon


koki (K.T.K. Vol. WI, p. 281: fff Bi) 18 FR GS PY YS. “The Rain-Masters


suddenly ran on the four seas’ (i.e. it rained over the whole country; p. 287: Fs


#2 JE & be PR FF AE JI EG Bim WE Fe Pe LE “The higher
order of the principal fifth rank was conferred upon the Rain-Master, god of Nibu
kawakami, who (hitherto) possessed the lower order of the principal fifth rank”; p.
300 (then he was raised to the lower order of the secondary fourth rank); p. 313
(prayers for rain having been made at the temple of the same Rain-Master by an
Imperial envoy, that very evening the rain came down); p. 397 (nusa were offered to
him in order to cause him to stop the continuous rains); p. 402: “Nusa and silk were
offered to the upper and lower shrines of Matsuo and Kamo, and to ‘the shrines of
Kibune and the Rain-Master, in order to pray for a sweet rain’; in the Sandai.
jitsuroku, K.T.K. Vol. IV, p. 44: nusa and a blue (i.e. dark) horse offered to the Rain-
Master of Nibu kawakami, in order to stop, the continuous rains; p. 395: nusa offered
with the same purpose; p. 465: the same god raised to the principal third rank, and
a black horse offered to him in order to cause rain; etc.; and in the Nihon isshi,
K.T.K. Vol. VI, Ch. XVIII, p. 184: nusa offered to the Rain-Master, to stop the rain;
Ch. XXVI, p. 270: elevated to the secondary fifth rank and prayed to for rain; Ch..
XXVII, p. 285: a black horse offered to him and prayed to for rain; p. 286: nusa
offered; Ch. XXXI, p. 334: nusa and a horse offered, for stopping the continuous rains;
p. 337: nusa offered and prayers made for rain; Ch. XXXVII, p. 412: nusa and a
white horse from the Imperial stables offered in order to cause the Rain-Master to stop


the abundant rains.


Digitized by Microsoft®


156


' been given to him as special title. He was also prayed to for
stopping wind an rain!

‘The Kimpisho? states that Court nobles had the care of the
offerings sent by the Emperor to the Nibu and Kibune shrines
in order to pray for rain or to cause the dragon-gods to put a
stop to continuous rains. These nobles, however, did not go there
themselves, but despatched officials of the Jingikwan, or, on
special occasions, Court officials (kurabito). There were sixteen
Shinto shrines the gods, of which were worshipped for the purpose
of causing or stopping rain, namely the seven “Upper shrines”
(those of Ise, Iwashimizu, Kamo, Matsuo, Hirano, Inari and
Kasuga), and further those of Oharano, Yamato Ishigami, Hirose
and Tatsuta, Sumiyoshi, Nibu.and Kibune*.

Finally, in Buzen province, Kamige district, there was in the
sorcalled Tatsu no fuchi (EQ) if), or “Dragon's Pool”, an
originally Japanese dragon, who was famous. for bestowing rain
upon those who prayed to him *. And in Echizen province, Sakai
district, there is still nowadays a Shinto shrine of Kokurya Myojin,

HE WA omih, “the Black Dragon-god”, on the bank of the
Kuzuryt-gawa, Ju BH HE J\| or “River of the Nine-headed Dragon”,
also called Kokuryt-gawa, or “Black Dragon’s Flood”. If one
prays there for rain, his prayer is certainly heard°.


§ 2. Horses offered to Shinto gods.


With regard to the horses offered to the rain-gods, we may
refer to another passage °, where we read that in 838 white horses
were offered twice to the god of Kibune ( 7fj iif), on Mount
Kurama near Kyoto, another famous rain-god, and to the afore-


1 Shoku Nihon koki, Ch. VIII, p. 247.
2 2k ib 5 a work written in the Kenryaku era (1211—1212) by the Emperor
“JontoKu; Gunsho ruiju, Vol. XVI, nr 467, Ch. as , pp. 1072 seq. See below, Ch. V, § 4.


a Enh. AR Km, KRG Bi. Re
fe. AAR. Th.


4 Buzenkokushi, Bt hi ie written in 1865 by Taxapa Yosuiouixa, mw


HW # ir; Ch. TW, FF. p. at.
5 Nihon shiikyo fuzokushi (written in 1902, see below, Ch. III, § 12), p. 325,
6 Shoku Nihon koki, Ch. VII, p. 247: “Nusa, silk and a white horse were offered


tn 42 wea AE Wiheann and ta tha Dain Mantaw wad af NMihw baeraleawi. thin ann Anne


Digitized by Microsoft®


157


said “Rain-Master’, in order to stop the rain. The ‘offering to
the latter of a blue (i.e. dark coloured) horse in 859 (for stop-
ping rain) and of a white one in 875 and 883 is stated in the
Sandai jitsuroku', while black horses were twice offered to the
same god in 877, as well as in 880 and 8852. It is no wonder
that the Emperor repeatedly elevated this mighty river-god to
a higher rank *. The Kimpishd*, a work written in the Kenryaku
era (1211—1212) bij the Emperor Junroxv, says that, when at that
time officials of the Jingikwan, the Department of Shintd Rites
and Ceremonies, went to the shrines of Nibu (the “Rain-Master’’)
and Kibune, in order’to pray for rain or to beseech these gods
to stop the too abundant rains, they took a sacred horse with
them from the Imperial stables, and when Kurabito (kurddo, or
kurando, Jp A, officials of the kurddo-dokoro, which had the
care. of the Imperial decrees). went to those temples, one of the
Emperor’s ordinary horses or one taken from the stables of the
retired Emperor was deemed sufficient. In case of stopping rain
a red horse, and when rain was required a white horse was
offered, for the colour red was avoided in praying for rain. The


_4 Ch. Ill, p. 41. “From the fifth month to the present month (the eighth) it had
rained continuously, so that messengers were sent to the shrine of the Rain-Master of
Nibu kawakami in Yamato province, and nusa and a blue horse etc. were presented
to him; this-was done in order to supplicate him to stop the rain”. Ch. XXVII, p.
446: nusa and a. white. horse offered to the god of Nibu kawakami to cause him to
stop the rain. Ch: XLIV, p. 606: nusa offered to the shrines of Ise, Kamo, Matsuo,
Inari, Kibune and Nibu kawakami, and to- the last also a white horse, on account. of
the heavy rains and the bad omens.

2 Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXXI, p. 464: a black horse offered to the god of Nibu
kawakami, and nusa to the god of Kibune, with prayers for rain. Ch. XXXI, p. 465:
the gdd of Nibu kawakami raised to the principal third rank, nusa and a black horse
offered to him, and prayers said for rain. Ch. XXXVII, p. 543: nusa offered to-thé
gods of eleven Shinto shrines (Kamo and others) and prayers said for rain; but a black
horse added to the offerings sent to the temple of Nibu kawakami. Ch. XLVIII, p.
666: nusa and a black horse offered to the Rain-Master-god of Nibu kawakami.

3 Comp. the above notes. Shoku Nihon koki, Ch. IX, pp. 287, 300 ete.


4 Hk Fi, Ph; Gunsho ruijz, Vol. XVI, nv 467, Ch. RR, pp. 1072 seq : Wh aK
aI gt Ai oar Damier eek Bags
BH. AGMARLS, HERES HG. Raw
Bex. Ik WHE. it Eth. HE 70 Fi) aE HR SK
OTR. ERG th... BK, ii
WEE LWA EH. MALAY KK, OWE,
IEW HE.


Digitized by Microsoft®


158.


Engishiki', ou the contrary, states that in the Engi era (901—922)
a white horse was offered in the former case, a black one in
the latter. This may have varied at different times; red (or
blue, i.e. dark coloured), black and white were at any rate the
colours, of which red was limited to cases in which the stopping
of rain was prayed for.


§ .3 Buddhism wins field.


Especially in the last of the six oldest Japanese Standard -
Histories (the Rikkokushi, >, jal HA), i. e. the Sandat jitsuroku
(written in 910), we see the Buddhist priests, gradually prevailing
in their struggle against the Shintoists. Whereas formerly in times
of drought there was only one way of averting this evil, namely
praying and offering to the Shinto rain-gods, and among them
especially to the dragon-shaped river-gods, now the Emperors
began to employ Buddhistic assistance at the same time, or
sometimes even without addressing the Shinto deities.

It is most characteristic that in the seventh month of 877,
when such a heavy drought prevailed that the Prime Minister,
Fujiwara no Mototsune, tendered his resignation because he con-
sidered it a sign of his bad government, nothing was said about
prayers or offerings to Shinto gods”. The Emperor did not accept
Mototsune’s resignation, and ascribed the drought to a curse of
the Empress Jingd’s mausoleum at Tatanami (#)§ FJ) in Yamato,
whither he accordingly sent messengers to investigate the matter.
They reported that a stag had been cut to pieces and eaten,
and that peasants had cut down three hundred and thirty two
trees near the mausolea; the guilty officials were punished; but
the drought continued. Then one hundred Buddhist priests were
summoned’to the Shishinden (a building of the Palace) and there
read the Daihannya (Mahaprajiaparamita) siitra for three days;
this was the siitra to be read in autumn, but at the same time
used in causing rain. After two days a thunderstorm arose, and
clouds covered the sky. A slight rain fell, but this was not suffi-
cient, so that the sitra reading was prolonged for two days and_
the Ni-d ({£ =f) siitra was read. The next day even the water
of the pond in the Shinsenen, or Sacred Spring Park (see below,
§ 4), was required to drain the rice-fields; in one day and one
night the pond was quite dry. Then the Emperor sent messengers


4 Quoted ibidem.


Digitized by Microsoft®


159


to Jingo’s mausoleum, in order to apologize for the cutting of
the trees and the killing of the stag. Sutras were read there for
five days without any result whatever, and some of the bonzes
were so ashamed that they stole away. One of them, however,
the well-known high-priest Dento Daihoshi |, gave the advice to
have one of his pupils try his magic art of making rain by means
of tantras. Then the latter was summoned, and was clever enough
to take a limit of five days. The next day an earthquake and
a thunderstorm announced the good result of the tantras, the
rain poured down for three days, and there was great joy in the
Palace and in the land.

Two years before, in 875, messengers were despatched to fifteen
great Buddhist temples, and the Daihannya siitra was read in
order to obtain rain *. Sixty Buddhist priests read the same holy
text in the Taikyokuden (a building of the Palace), and fifteen
others recited the Daiwnrin seiu kyo (Fx Wea Zp WY KK, “Great

, Cloud-wheel Rainpraying sutra”)? in the above mentioned park
Shinsenen. High officials went to the Imperial mausoleum at
Fukakusa and, apologizing for the evil that might have been
done, they prayed for benevolence, for the Jingikwan, the
Department of Shinto rites and ceremonies, had declared the
drought to be a curse on account of the cutting of trees at this


mausoleum.


§ 4. The Sacred Spring Park.


The Shinsenen (jill 4 Ht, “Sacred Spring Park”) was an impor-
tant place in the days of old, and it is mentioned innumerable
times in the ancient annals, from the Nihon koki down to the
Fuso ryakki. The ways in which it is spoken of, however, are
quite different. In the older works the Emperors are said to have
visited it many times for their amusement, to see westlers étc.,
but in the Sandai jitsuroku it appears to have become the place
where Buddhist services were held in order to obtain rain. Besides
in 875 we read about such a ceremony in 877, when Dento
Daihdshi, the same who a month later recommended his pupil
for making rain by means of tantras*, went to the park at the
head of twenty one other Buddhist priests, and, practising the
method of reciting the “Sitra of the golden-winged bird-king”


1 4 WE k HE fifi; of. Fuso ryakhi, Ch. XX, K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 598.


2 Ch. XXVII, pp. 414 seq. .
3 This is the Mahaimegha sutra, treated in the Introduction, § 4, pp. 25 sqq.


4 See above, § 3, this page.


Digitized by Microsoft®


160


(no doubt the Garuda, to frighten the dragon and make him
ascend) ', prayed for rain. The next day another high-priest, the
Risshi Enju, and a high member of the Board of Ceremonies,
Tachibana Ason, were sent by the Emperor to the Daibutsu of
Todaiji at Nara, in order to pray there for three days; yet it
was all in vain. Then the river-god of Kako? in Hitachi province
and Karo* in Inaba were elevated to higher ranks, and messengers
were sent to all the Imperial mausolea-with the announcement —
that the nengd (name of the era) was changed (from Jogwan to
Gwangyd, a means of averting the continuation of the evil, i.e.
the drought). Then followed what is told above (§ 3). It is
interesting to observe how the assistance of the ancient Shinto
deities was not called in before the Buddhist priests had proved
to be unable to cause rain, and even then no prayers or offerings
took place, as formerly, but the gods were only elevated to higher
ranks, and the change of the nengd was only announced to the
Imperial ancestors.

It was the pondi in the park which made the Buddhists choose
it for their rain-prayers. We read in the Sanda jitsuroku ® that
on the 23th day of the 6th month of 875 A.D., when all the
performances of the Buddhist priests, related above °, had only
caused a slight, insufficient rain to fall, an old man said: “In
. the pond of the Sacred Spring Park there is a divine dragon.
Formerly in times of heavy drought the water of this pond was
let out and the pond was dried up; bells and drums were beaten,
aud when (the dragon) answered (the request), it thundered and
rained. This is sure to have a good result”. Then the Emperor.
despatched high officials to the park and had the water let out.


4 See above, Introd. p. 7; cf. Book I, Ch. V, § 3, p. 119.
2 Yay YT. mh (yay YT. (“rivers”) is in China the Hwang-ho and the Yang-tszé


. kiang). 3 Ai -


4 Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXXI, P. 465.


5-Ch. XXVII, p. 445: t#F A. ih erg rt
ERB, KA, TR A
eH Wf . i HR he th. wR


a FAR NE


Digitized by Microsoft®


161


Other officials, the Court musicians, took place on a dragon-boat
(BE J}, a boat with a dragon-shaped prow, see above, Book I,
pp. 83 sqq.) and beat bells and drums, sang and danced,
so that their voices “made heaven shake”. The next day it
thundered and rained a little, but after a short while the sky
became clear again, and outside of Kyoto the dust was only
moistened a little. On the 25th the result was the same, and
on the 26th the officials, who incessantly, night and day, had
been making music on the pond, were praised by the Emperor
and were allowed to stop the work.

From this passage we learn that the dragon of the pond in
the Sacred Spring Park was originally not an Indian Naga,
introduced by the Buddhists, but a Chinese, perhaps a Japanese,
dragon, which formerly used to be forced to ascend and to make
rain by depriving him of his element, the water, or by stirring
him up by a terrible noise, according to the Chinese methods
described above'. The Buddhist priests identified this dragon
with an Indian Naga-king, whom they caused to give rain by
reading sutras. In the seventh century, however, the Chinese
ideas prevailed at the Japanese Court, and the Emperor himself
sometimes proceeded to a river, and, kneeling and bowing to the
four quarters of the compass, prayed to Heaven in the Chinese way.
Then it shundered and continuous rains made the crops thrive *.

In 875 the old Chinese methods of causing rain apparently
had sunk into oblivion at the Japanese Court, but were tried
again when the old man turned the attention of the Courtiers
to them, because the siitras failed to have any effect.

Like the Shintd dragon-gods the dragon in the Sacred Spring
Park was believed not only to be able to make rain, but also
to posses the faculty of stopping it, if it was pouring too abundantly.
Thus in 880 a Buddhist priest recited the Kwancho (Pz JA.
washing the head, baptism) s#ra there for three days, in order
to stop the rain *.

Also the Nihon kiryaku* contains several passages relating to
Buddhist rain-prayers in the park. In 972 the so-called “Law
(method) of the Rain-praying-sitra” (Seiukyd-ho, He RY #E HE,
i;e. the doctrine of the Mahamegha sitra, cf. above, pp. 25 sqq.)


4 Book I, Ch. V, § 3, p. 119; cf. the Chinese legend concerning the Emperor Shi
Hwang, whose soldiers made a terrible noise to frighten the dragon god (Book I, Ch.
VI, § 7, p. 125).

2 Fuso ryakki, Ch. 1V, K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 508, the Emperor Kwogyoku in 642.

3 Sandai jitsuroku, Ch. XXXVII, p. 541.


4A AS #E ZZ, witten after 1036, K.T.K. Vol. V.


Verh. Kon. Akad. vy. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XIII, N° 2, 11
Digitized by Microsoft®


162


was practised there for nine days with a splendid result, as well
as in 982, 985 and 1018".

When leaving the Annals and turning to the legendary works,
we obtain the following information. The Konjaku monogatari®
relates how in a time of heavy drought the Emperor ordered
Koso Daisni (774—835) to cause rain, and the saint for seven
days practised the Doctrine of the Rain-praying-sitra. in the
Sacred Spring Park. Then there appeared on the right side of
the altar a snake’, five shaku long, carrying a little gold-coloured
snake, about five sun in length, and after a while both disappeared
into the pond. Only four of the twenty priests who were sitting
in a row could see the apparition. One of these elected ones
asked what it meant, whereupon another answered that the
appearance of the Indian dragon-king Zennyo, # 4H, who lived
in India in the Anavatapta* pond and was now living in the
pond of the Sacred Spring Park, was a sign that the doctrine
would be successful. And really, a dark cloud rose up in the
Northwest, and soon the rain was pouring down. Thenceforth,
whenever drought prevailed, the same doctrine was practised in
the park, and never in vain. ;

The Kojidan* states that this event occurred in the year 824.
According to this work the Buddhist priest Shubin (4 #<)
requested the Emperor to be allowed to practise the Rain-prayer-
doctrine himself instead of Kikai (Kobo Daishi), as he was as much
experienced in such matters as the latter. This was granted,
and he succeeded in causing thunder and rain in Kyoto, but
not beyond Higashi yama. Then Kobo Daishi was ordered to
make it rain over the whole of the country, which he promised
to do within seven days. This limit, however, expired, and the
“sky was still cloudless as before. The saint, absorbed in medi-
tation (samadhi), arrived at the conclusion that Shubin, his rival,


4 Second Part, Ch. VI, p. 940; Ch. VII, p. 975; Ch. VIII, p. 986; Ch. XIII, p. 1415;
at the same time, in 1018, the “Five Dragons Festival”, hh HE RR, took place.


9 K.T.K. Vol. XVI, Ch. XIV, nr 44, pp. 842 sq.
3 Here we find the snake form of the Naga; in the Sandai jitsuroku and the
Kojidan the god is called a dragon.


4 Bay fre 3 AW , translated into it },. Buddhist works mention a female
Naga, called ae ee Zennyo, “Virtuous Woman”; but the same Naga is represented


as a man with a dragon’s tail, standing on the clouds, in a picture of the ninth century,
in Kongobu-ji on Koya-san (Kokkwa, Nr 227, Pl. I). Two other pictures representing
this Naga, also on Koya-san, have not yet been described. Cf. Petrucci, Les documents
de la Mission Chavannes, Revue de l'Université de Bruxelles, Avril—Mai 1910, pp, 495 sq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


163


had caught all the dragons and shut them up in a water-pitcher
by means of magical formulae (tantras). This was the reason
why his (Kobo's) own prayers were in vain. He decided, however,
not to abandon his hope, and continued to recite the siitra.
During the night of the second day he said: “In this pond is a
dragon, called Zennyo, who pities mankind. To him I have prayed,
and now I see him rising out of the midst of the lake, gold-
coloured, about eight sun long, seated on the head of another
dragon, eight shaku in length”. This was reported to the Emperor,
who soon sent a messenger with offerings for the Dragon-King.
And when the seven days of the new vow had expired, a heavy
thunderstorm broke forth and a torrent of rain came down all
over the country, so that. the water of the pond overflowed the
altar. As a reward for having saved the people from starvation,
Kukai was elevated to the rank of Shdsdzu, bishop '.

The Tatheiki? gives another version of the same legend. After
having stated that the park was laid out in the time of the
’ Emperor Kwammu (781—806) in imitation of the Ling yiu
(See fH] ), the park of the Chinese Emperor Wen, of the Cheu
dynasty, the author informs us that the same Japanese monarch
(who built the Palace at Kyoto, the new capital which he
founded and made his residence in 794), had two Buddhist
monasteries built, on the East and West sides of the Sujaku
gate, called Toji and Seiji, “the Eastern and the Western
Monastery”. The former was under the direction of Kobo Daishi,
who had to guard the Emperor’s rank, the latter stood under
Bishop Shubin, who had to protect His Majesty’s body. After
Kobo Daishi’s return from China, Shubin, who had been the
great man during Kobo’s absence, was cast into the shade by
his rival. The Emperor, who had been in great admiration for
Shubin’s miraculous magic power, now considered Kobo his
superior. This was more than the ambitious Shubin could bear;
he fostered a deep hatred against his sovereign as well as against
his rival, and in order to revenge himself on the former he
caught all the dragon-gods of the inner and outer seas by means
of the power of his tantras, and shut them up in a water-pitcher.
In this way he caused the terrible drought about which we read
in the Konjaku monogatari and Kojidan; it lasted fully three
months and made the people suffer immensely. Then Kobo Daishi
reported to the Emperor that there. was only one dragon, a


4 The same legend is to be found in the Genko Shakusho, Ch. I, K.T.K. Vol,
XIV, p. 654. 2 Ch. XII, pp. 11 seqg.


Digitized by Microsoft®


164


Bodhisattva of higher rank than Shubin, namely the Dragon-
king Zennyo of the Anavatapta pond! in Northern India, who
was not in Shubin’s power. Immediately a pond was dug before
the Palace and filled with pure water, whereupon Kobo invited
the Dragon-king to come and live there. And behold, a gold-
coloured dragon,. eight sun long, appeared, seated on the head
of a snake, more than nine shaku in length, and entered the
pond. When Kobo had reported this lucky news, the Emperor
sent a messenger wich all kinds of offerings in order to worship
the Dragon-king. The result was marvellous, for soon it rained
for three days all over the Empire. Since that day the Shingon
sect flourished more and more, and Kobo Daishi was highly
revered by high and low. In vain Shubin worshipped Gundari ®
and the Yakshas, to destroy his enemy, for as soon as Kobo heard
this, he began to worship Dai Itoku Myo-d°, and there was a
violent struggle in the air between these two parties. “In order
to make Shubin careless, Kobo caused the rumour of his’ own
death to be spread, which created great sorrow among all classes
of the people, but great joy in his enemy’s heart. As Kobo had
expected, Shubin broke down his altar and stopped worshipping
the demons, but at the same moment Kobo’s power struck him
and he fell dead on the floor. His monastery soon decayed and
disappeared, and Toji’s glory increased yearly. Kobo made a
dragon of so-called chigaya (Imperata arundinacea, a kind of
reed) and placed it upon an altar*. Then he promised to the
selected crowd which had assembled, that he would cause the
real dragon to stay in the park and protect the country by his
doctrine, while the Dragon-king of reed would become a big
- dragon and go to the Anavatapta pond in India. According to
another tradition the reed dragon ascended to the sky and flew
away in an eastern direction, but stopped in Owari province, at
Atsuta’s famous Shinto shrine, a lucky foreboding of the spreading
of Buddha’s Law to the East. Kobo said: “When this Dragon-
king (i.e. the real one) goes to another country, the pond will
dry up, the land will be waste and the world will be in poverty..
Then my priests (the Shingon priests) must pray to the Dragon-
king to stay, and thus save the country”.

So we know that the Buddhist priests, ordered by the different


4A HE YH, - 2 iz ys Fl], King of the Yakshas.
3 ya fits AF = identified with Yamantaka, a manifestation of a as
“Destroyer of Yama”. d


Digitized by Microsoft®


165


Emperors to pray in the park for rain or for stopping rain,
always belonged to the Shingon sect.

The Kojidan' relates how in 1016 Bishop Shinkaku (3 #)
prayed for rain in the park and had a splendid success within
a few hours, after a very long and heavy drought. The Naidaijin,
one of the Ministers, had sent him a message to warn him that
he would be derided by the world if he failed, but the bishop
answered that it was not for himself, but for the people’s sake
that he would try. And behold, on the hour of the sheep dark
clouds arose, a heavy thunderstorm burst forth and the rain fell
down in torrents.

In the Gempei seisuiki® we read that in 1179 the “Secret
Doctrine of the Rain-prayer-sitra”’ was practised in vain in the
Sacred Spring Park, nor had the prayers of other powerful priests
any effect, till at last a secret tune, played on a biwa at the
shrine of Sumiyoshi, caused a continuous and heavy rain to fall
down. According to the Hyakurenshé*, the same sutra was read
in the park in the years 1215 and 1224; and the Genko Shakusho 4
relates the same thing about the year 1082.

The Zoku kojidan® mentions a two-storied gate on the south-
side of the park, which was destroyed by the “Dragon of the
Sacred Spring”, who in Fujiwara no Saneyori’s time (899-—970)
entered this gate in the shape of a beautiful man. He sat down,
and when he was asked from where he came, he answered that
he lived in the West and had passed the gate on his way to
another place. Then he disappeared, and at the same time the
sky became dark and a terrible thunderstorm arose. Tradition
said that the Buddhist bishop Genkwa was just reciting the
Rain-prayer-sutra in the park, when the gate was destroyed.

The Kimpisho® tells us that in case of drought the Court-
officials had first of all the task of cleaning the Sacred Spring
Park. Then they were ordered by the Emperor to go to the


4 Ch. Il, K.T.K. Vol. XV, p. 80.
2 A 2p JS bai 8, ‘Record of the rise and fall of the Minamoto and Taira
[PA
Families”, written by an unknown author about 1250; Ch. XVIII, p. 474.
3 Ey Sif 4b. written after 1259, Ch. XII and XIII, K.T.K. Vol. XIV, pp. 195
and 1212.
4 5G er Fe a, written before 1346 by the Buddhist priest Smen, fifj GR,


Ch. X, K.T.K. Vol. XIV, p, 813.
5 ies ns es BR: probably written at the end of the thirteenth century, Ch. II,


Gunsho ruiju, nr 487, Vol. XVII, p. 657.
6 Cf. above, p. 156, note 2; Gunsho ruiju, Vol. XVI, nr 467, Ch. aS » p. 1073.


Digitized by Microsoft®


166


park with some servants in order to sprinkle water on the
stones near the pond (this was, of course, a kind of sympathetic
magic) and to ery with loud voices the following words: “Give
rain, o Sea-dragon-king” '. This was the custom in the author’s
time, but not before that age. When this ceremony had no
success within seven days, other Court-officials took their place.
When their work was crowned with success, 1.e. when it rained,
they reported this to the Emperor and obtained food and clothes
as a reward, whereupon they danced in the court-yard or at the
entrance of the Palace. As to other rites, the Kimpishd mentions
the praying for rain at the Imperial tombs’, and the reading
of stitras in the Taikyokuden, a building of the Palace’, or in
the seven great Buddhist temples of Nara (Todaiji, Kofukuji,
Genkoji, Daianji, Yakushiji, Seidaiji and Horyaji), or in the
different Shints temples. In the Buddhist shrines the Seukyd,
i.e. the Mahamegha sitra+, in the Shinto sanctuaries the Kongo-
hannya-kyd, i. e. the Vajra-prajaaparamita ‘sitra®, were recited.
Sometimes, for instance in the Owa era (961—963), the Great
Bear was worshipped in the Sacred Spring Park, in oar to
obtain rain.

An interesting legend is told about the Dragon of. the Sacred
Spring Park in the Tazheiki*®. Although it has nothing to do
with rain, we may mention this tale here in connection with
the other stories concerning the same dragon. It runs as follows. —
In 1335 the Emperor Godaigo was invited by the Dainagon
Saionji Kimmune, one of the Fujiwara, to come to his house in
order to see a new bathroom. This invitation was given with
the intention to kill His Majesty, who would have stepped upon
a loose board of the floor and dropped down upon a row of
swords, put upright with the points upwards. Fortunately the
Emperor was saved by the dragon of the pond in the park, who
in the night before he intended to go to the fatal house appeared
to him in a dream in the shape of a woman, clad in a red
hakama and light-coloured garments. She said to him: “Before
you are tigers and wolves, behind you brown and spotted bears.
Do not go to-morrow”. At his question as to who she was, she
answered that she had lived for many years in the Sacred Spring
Park. Then she went away. When the Emperor awoke, he


4 Apparently the legend concerning the Anavatapta pond was forgotten, otherwise
they would not have called him a sea-dragon,

2 Cf. above, p. 158 sq. 3 Cf. above, ibidem.

4 Cf. above, ibidem, and p. 162. 5 Cf. above, p. 34 (NANJO, nrs 10—12).


Digitized by Microsoft®


167


thought his dream very strange, but, as he had promised to go
to Saionji’s house, he decided to keep his word. On his way
thither, however, he went to the park and prayed to the
Dragon-god. And lo! all of a sudden the water of the pond was
disturbed, and the waves violently struck the bank, although
there was no wind. This agreed so strikingly with his dream,
that he did not proceed on his way, but meditated as to what
to do, whereupon Kimishige Chiinagon came to warn his Imperial
Master against Saionji’s treacherous intentions, about which he
had heard that very morning. So Godaigo returned to the Palace,
and Saionji was banished to Izumo, which he never reached
because he was killed on the road.

The Kimpisho' states the following: “In 1211 the Onydshi
( (2 G fii, Court diviners) held the festival called Goryisai (f.


BE 3), the ‘Five Dragons Festival’, also named ‘Amagoi no
matsuri’ (32 2%), or ‘Rain-praying festival”. For three days the
onyoshi fasted and kept indoors (i.e. in a temple within the
park); the Emperor, however, [did not share the festival, for he]
ate fish and offered no clothes or mirrors. Sitras read in the
‘Dragon-hole’ (FE Ft, Ryi-ketsu) were also very successful, or
those read in the Sacred Spring Park, or offerings made to Surten
(9K HK, ‘Water-Deva’, explained by the commentator as ‘ Tembu
no kami’, ‘God of the Heavenly Department’), when several
persons read these siitras or made these offerings”.

As to the “Five Dragons Festival” *, we read in the Fusé
ryakki® that this was celebrated in 904, on the eighth day of
the seventh month, when a heavy drought prevailed. The Emperor
then. ordered the Onyoéryo (the Department of Divination) to
celebrate this festival in Kitayama, a mountain near Kyoto, at a
place called Janigwatsu kokko. As no Buddhist priests, but the
onydshi were the leaders of this ceremony, it was apparently
not practised in honour of Nagas but of Chinese dragons.

The author of the Juzheiki* complains that at his time (about
1382) the park was in a deplorable condition on account of the
war, and he supposes that this must be very disagreeable for
_ the Dragon-god, who perhaps had left the place because there


4 L.J., Ch. ?f, p. 1072.
2 Cf. above, p. 162, note 1.


3 Ch, XXIII, K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 669: Fa a] K HER 4h (Gi KE BR.
RaW +o AAA. BRE.


4 Ch. XIl, p. 18a.


Digitized by Microsoft®


168


was very little water in the pond. As to the Rain-prayer-sitra,
i.e. the Mahamegha sutra, this was still in his days considered a
powerful means for obtaining rain.

Before leaving this subject we may observe that, according to
the Kokushi daijiten', the park was repeatedly destroyed and
restored, but that the pond is still there, and on a small island
in the midst of it there are two chapels, one dedicated to Zennyo,
the Dragon-king, the other to Benten. So this dragon, identified
with an Indian Naga, has bestowed rain ep Japan for eleven
hundred years!


§ 5. The “Dragon-hole” on Mount Murobu.


The above-mentioned Dragon-hole (Ryi-ketsu, FE Ft), where
sitras were read in order to cause rain, is spoken of in the
Kojidan*, where we read the following details.

The Dragon-hole on Mount Murobu’, in Yamato province, is
the abode of the Dragon-King Zentatsu ( #4 33, Sudatta? Sudar-
cana?*), who first lived in the Sarusawa’® pond at Nara. In olden
times, when a harlot had drowned herself in the latter pond,
the Dragon-King fled to Mount Kasuga, where he lived till the
corpse of a man of low standing was thrown into his pond.
Then he fied again and established himself on Mount Murdbu,
where the Buddhist bishop Kenkei observed his religious austerities.
Another priest, Nittai by name, who for many years cherished
the wish of seeing and worshipping the Dragon-King’s venerable
shape, entered the hole in order to seek him. The entrance was
pitchdark, but after having penetrated into the inner part of the
hole, he arrived at a splendid palace under a blue sky. Through
an opening of a window-blind (sudare), made of pearls, which
was moved by the wind, he saw a part of the Hokkekyd, the
Saddharma Pundarika sitra, lying on a jewel table. Then he
heard a voice asking him who he was, and when he mentioned
his name and the reason of his entering the hole, the Dragon- |
King (for he was the invisible speaker) said: “Here you cannot


4 Bil K ge HH, “Great Dictionary of Japanese History” (1908), p. 1338
s. v. Shinsenen, 2 Ch. V, K.T.K. Vol. XV, p. 119.


3 af AE IL.
4 Dr Nanso had the kindness to point out to me, that ae 3 may be Sudatta,


but that there is no Dragon-king of this name; Sudarcana, however, is found in the
list of the Naga-rajas.
x Ade a iL -


Digitized by Microsoft®


(169 —


see me. Leave this hole and you will meet me at a distance of
about 3 cho from the entrance”. So Nittai left the hole and
actually beheld the Dragon-king, who arose out of the ground,
wearing a robe and a cap, and disappeared after having been
worshipped by the priest. The latter built a Shinté temple on
the spot and erected an image of the Dragon-king, which was
still there at the author’s time (in the beginning of the thirteenth
century). Sutras were read at this shrine when people prayed
for rain; and when the Dragon-king lent a willing ear to the
prayers, a dark cloud hung over the hole. This cloud spread
over the whole sky and the rain came down. !

So tells the Kojidan; and it strikes us at once thata Buddhist
priest erected a Shinto shrine in honour of the Naga. The legend
was apparently invented by the Buddhists to convert this dragon-
hole, which probably was the abode of one of the mountain
dragons of old Japan mentioned above ’, into a place of Buddhist
sanctity. They changed the old Shintd cult into a Naga worship,
without going, however, as far as to replace the Shintd shrine
with a Buddhist temple. The Ry#ketsu-jinja, the “Shinto-shrine of
the Dragon-hole”’, was afterwards called the Ry#-d-sha, or Dragon-
king’s temple, and was famous for the rain bestowing power of
its dragon-god. °

The same dragon is called Zennyo (3 &, “The Good Woman”,
comp. the Zennyo, ## #7, in the Sacred Spring Park, identified
with Anavatapta *), instead of Zentatsu, in the Genkd Shakusho 5,
where the Buddhist priest Ringa*, who died in 1150, is said to
have been so powerful that, when he prayed for rain, Zennyo,
the Dragon-king, appeared. The same work states that the Bud-
dhist priest Keien'’ lived for a thousand days as a hermit near
the Dragon-hole on Mount Murobu. On his way from there to
another place he crossed a bridge over a river, when suddenly


1 ASE Pr cat. BAM EM. FARES.
RWC A RRRARRSREE. ARMS
WAC LARD. wih EMM KR LA


2 Pp. 135 sqq.
3 Cf. Yosurpa Toco (= FH HE fI)’s Geographical Lewicon (Dai Nihon chimei


jisho, K H as wh 4 Be 3), Vol. I, p. 286, s.v.


4 See above, p. 162.
5 Ch. Xi. K.T.K. Vol. XIV, p. 828.


6 HK A: 7 Be [Ei]. who lived 1143—1293.


Digitized by Microsoft®


170


a lady, noble looking and beautifully dressed, came and, without
showing her face, politely asked him for the mudra (mystic finger-
charm) used to become at once a Buddha. At-his question as to
who she was, she answered: “I am the Dragon Zennyo”. Then
he taught her the mudra, whereupon she said: “This is exactly
the same mudra as that of the seven former Buddhas”; and
when the priest requested her to show him her face, she replied:
“My shape is so terrible that no man can look upon it. Yet I
cannot refuse your wish”. Thereupon she rose into the air and
stretched out the little finger of her right hand. It proved to be
a claw, more than ten shaku long, which spread a five-coloured
light. Then she vanished at once. !

A dragon of the same name (Zennyo) was said to live in the
Zennyo ryi-0 chi? or “Dragon-king Zennyo’s pond” near the
“Chapel of the thirty Guardian-gods”* on a mountain-peak in
‘ Kawachi province, Ishikawa district, called Tomyo-dake or “Lan-
tern-peak” on account of a Dragon-lantern which was seen
there *, and in a lake on Mount Washio, in the same province,
Kawachi district (now Naka-Kawachi), near a Shinto temple. On
both these places he was prayed to for rain with much success °.


§ 6. Reborn as a rain-giving dragon.


In the Kojidan® we read about Bishop Gonkyi, of Kwazan,
to whom in the midst of a dense cloud a sacred dragon appeared
together. with the priest Shokyi'’, of the Western pagoda *, on
Hieizan. This dragon was the “real shape” of Gobyo (if) Jaq)
Daishi, i.e. Bishop Jie °, which Gonkyi had often prayed to see.
When he asked why the priest was in the dragon-god’s company,
he was informed that Shokyi would become a relative of this
god (i.e. a dragon). As soon as Gonkyii awoke, he sent a
messenger to the Sait6 monastery in order to inquire after
Shikyi’s health. On hearing that the priest had been ill for


4 Genko Shakusho, Ch. XII, p. 840.
2 3 oe HE EW.
3 Sanju banshin dé, —= ss ay mh w ‘


4 Yuko meisho ryaku, YE Fy iy PX, written in 1697 by Ryo-zr, JT aR,
Ch. IV, p. 59.
5 Ibidem, Ch, IV, p. 51. 6 Ch. III, pp. 69 sq.


7 PE sie. 8 Saits, py.


9 Bk 2% TK AM, Jie Daishi, a famous Tendai priest who lived 912—985 and


Digitized by Microsoft®


171


more than ten days, he visited the patient and told him about
the dream. Shékyii shed tears with joy, for now he was sure
that his prayer to become a relative of Gobyé Daishi would be
fulfilled. After his death he was buried near the latter's tomb.
In a time of drought the Daihannya hyd, i.e. the Mahaprajna-
paramita sitra (cf above, p. 34) was recited there in order to
avert the calamity, when suddenly a little snake appeared on
the stone floor of the tomb, crept slowly behind Shodkyi’'s grave
and entered it. A small cloud of smoke arose from the grave
to the sky, and, spreading gradually, filled the air, till it became
a big cloud; then a thunderstorm raged and heavy rains rejoiced
the thirsty earth.

A little further ' we read that Bishop Jie, at the time of his
being abbot (zasu, Jj 3) of Hieizan, in somebody’s dream was
said to be a metamorphosis of Utpala, one of the eight Great
Dragon-kings ?. .


§ 7. Buddhist priests dominating the dragons.


The Kojidan* mentions the remarkable answer given by Bishop
Jokai* to the Emperor when the latter expressed his admiration
for the priest’s power, because it had rained violently for a
couple of hours after Jdkai had been praying for two days.
“Your Majesty”, said he, “this is not my rain, and I cannot
accept any reward for it. My rain, however, will arise to-morrow
from the Northwest and come down. Then you may reward me”.
And actually the next day the clouds came from the Northwest,
and it rained for three days.

A master in calling up and dominating the dragon-gods was
also the Buddhist priest Jokwan°, who in the Engi era (901—922)
freed the country from a terrible drought by causing the dragons
to move about amidst thunder and rain®. The same bonze
conquered a poisonous dragon on Hieizan. There was on this
mountain a rock in the shape of an open dragon’s mouth, and
the monks who lived near by in Saito’, and especially in a
monastery called Senju-in*, all died soon. At last is was made

(


4 Ch. III, p. 70.
2 See above, p. 4, and below, Ch. IV. 3 Ch. Il, p. 83.


4 hE iE. 5 if i.
6 Uji shi monogatari, - "ie a ja Py a. written 1213—41218; Ch. II,
K.T.K. Vol. XII, pp. 34 seq.


7g BE. SF BE.


Digitized by Microsoft®


~


172


out that the rock was the cause of their death, and since that
time it was called the “Poisonous-Dragon-rock” '. Nobody: would
live there any more, and Saito and Senju-in became quite
deserted and fell to ruins. Then Jokwan went to the place and
prayed for seven days and nights before the rock. In the last
night the sky became cloudy and there was a terrible movement
in the air, while Hieizan was covered with clouds. After a while,
however, it cleared up, and behold! the rock had disappeared
and only some rubbish was left. Thenceforth it was safe to live
in Saito, and Jokwan’s name was kept in grateful memory and
admiration by the monks of the mountain stil] in the author’s
days. Apparently the poisonous dragon had left the place in
consequence of the prayers which were also in times of drought
so powerful in stirring up the dragons and the clouds *.

According to the Fusd ryakki*, on the 2\th day of the second
month of 1065 the priests of Hieizan assembled in the Kamo
temple at Kyoto, where they prayed for rain and recited the
Ni-d sitra. Then a little snake appeared and spit out some
vapour before the sanctuary, whereupon a little rain fell down.

The Gempei seisuiki* relates that in 1174 such a heavy drought
prevailed that the rivers dried up and the fields could not be
cultivated. Then a priest of Hieizan, Choken® by name, who
had the rank of Gonshosozu*, in order to assist the peasants
wrote a letter to the Dragon-gods and read it aloud, looking up
to the sky. In this letter he reproved and instructed the dragons,
at the same time imploring them to make it rain. Heavenly
men (gods) and dragon-gods, he wrote, ought not to be ashamed
to remedy a wrong they had done, and therefore they, the
dragons, had to cause a “sweet rain” (+ fy) to fall and to
put a stop to this terrible drought. The dragons listened to
these words and gave continuous rains, so that both Emperor
and people were filled with admiration for Choken’s power and
with devotion for Buddha’s Law.


§ 8. Dragon-women in ponds.


The Sansha kidan* contains the following legends. In the


1 Dokuryt no iwa, FE HE ft aes 2 Uji shui monogatari, 1.1.
3 Ch. XXIX, K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 807. 4 Ch. Ill, Teikoku Bunko, Vol. V, 69.


5 Oe = : 6 usta Ap {er ae “Vice-bishop”.


7 = Ph 2 FH, written in 1764 by Horra Baxusur, $i FA BX 7K; Ch. 1,


Digitized by Microsoft®


1%3


neighbourhood of seven ponds in the mountains of Enuma, a
district of Kaga province, many strange things happened. There
were people who said that they had heard there the voices of several
hundreds of men in the midst of the night, and that they had
seen these men lighting torches upon the ponds. Anglers had
seen the water rising without any visible reason, and the more
they retreated, the higher the water rose, till they at last
stopped angling and fied home as fast as their legs could carry
them. When looking back at a distance of one or two cho from
the ponds, they saw a silver-dragon (48 ff) in the shape of
a boy (ginryti no warabegata, Hx F~) appearing above the water.
There was a road between these ponds, from where sometimes
a huge face dashed forth; and one night it was as if men were
fighting there.

In times of drought the people worshipped these ponds and
there prayed for rain. One day a little girl was found there by
the inhabitants of a neighbouring monastery. They took her
home and educated her, but after twelve years she constantly
uttered the wish to make a pilgrimage to Ise, and although she
received the answer that this did not agree with the law of the
empire (as she was a woman), she persisted in speaking about
it. At last her foster-fathers gave in, secretly hired a sedan-chair
and let her go to Ise. She went off gladly, but when she came
at a lake, she said: “This must be my lake, take me to the
bank”, and when the sedan-chair carriers did so, she alighted,
adjusted her clothes and said: “I am well acquainted here; you
can go home”. Then with her beautiful garments on she jumped
into the water and disappeared in the deep. She was a beautiful
girl, but her face was long (a sign of something unnatural ').
Although the author does not state it, this was apparently a
female dragon, temporarily transformed into a girl.

Another dragon-woman lived in the so-called Rope-pond (Nawa
ga ike, #48 7? yt) in Etch province. This was a pond in the
mountains, about two ri in diameter. Heavy storms and rains often
raged in this vicinity, when everywhere around splendid weather
prevailed. Down to the author’s time the dragon-woman was said
to live in the pond and to cause its never drying up; and his con-
temporaries still ascribed to her a great influence on the weather *.


4 Bewitching women are often described as having extraordinarily long faces. Cf.
Sanshii kidan, Ch. I, p. 673, where a gigantic woman with a huge face is supposed


to be a fox or a tanuki, at any rate the vital spirit Cp of an old creature.
2 Ibidem, Ch. V, p. 839.


Digitized by Microsoft®


174

A similar pond is spoken of in the Sanshi kidan kohen'. An
evil snake (akuja, He he) was believed to have there her abode
and to commit all kinds of strange things. When one stood on
the bank of the pond and looked over the water, such a dreary
wind was blowing, that most people fled home. If one prayed
there for rain, his prayer was usually heard. The author was in
doubt whether a terrible looking woman, who one night appeared
on a neighbouring bridge to a man returning from a festival in
a slightly tipsy condition, was the snake of the pond or a trans-
formed wind-tanuki*. She stood on the balustrade of the bridge,
binding up her hair and laughing loudly with open mouth, so
that all her black teeth were visible. Her malicious face was
square and very ugly, and it seemed as if she had but one leg.
When people approached with torches, she flew away. Another
time she attacked a man who had also enjoyed a good cup of
sake and who was on his way home in the dead of night. She
flung him from the road into the grass and then disappeared,
but the poor fellow was ill for a whole month. As the water of
the pond was flowing around the village and under this bridge,
it is possible, says Horra, that the woman was the snake of the
pond, although her body, which she moved so easily in flying
away, did not remind one of a dragon-snake (7H #%) (which
always wants a cloud as vehicle). The name of the pond,
“Shiroshiito (Fy if A.) no ike”, or “Pond of the White and
Ugly Person”, had perhaps something to do with the transfor-
mation of the snake into an ugly woman.


§ 9. Stirring up the dragons by throwing iron or filth
into their ponds.


If an iron utensil was thrown into the Rope-pond, mentioned
in § 8, suddenly darkness covered the land and a hurricane
devastated the ricefields. For this reason the villagers strictly
forbade other people to approach the pond without a special reason.
It was said that greedy merchants, who had bought rice, threw
metal shavings into the pond in order to cause storm and rain,
which would destroy the crop and thus make the price of the
rice run up*. This way of stirring up the dragons by means of


1 = Sh) Fy BK ZB Hj. witten in 1779 by the same author; Ch. V, p. 952.


2- Jil JHE, kaze-danuki, cf. my treatise on “The Fox and Badger in Japanese
Folklavo” Trancaetinne af the Aciatie Sociaty af Tanan Val YYYVET Dart TIT n 402


Digitized by Microsoft®


1%5


iron which they disliked very much was borrowed from China,
as we have seen above!; it was practised also at the “Pond of
the Ugly Woman”, mentioned in the Sanshi kidan kohen (above,
§ 8), where within a day after one had thrown metal shavings
into the pond certainly a heavy storm arose and the rain came
down in torrents.

We may compare with this a passage of the Matsunoya hikki?,
where we read that the inhabitants of Tsukui-agata® (district),
Sagami province, used to throw horse dung, old sandals and
other filth into a pond in the neighbouring Toyama, when
drought prevailed. After having done this they rapidly fled for
fear of the angry dragon, which certainly arose, causing a terrible
hurricane and heavy rains. As we have stated above *, the idea
of causing rain by arousing the dragons’ anger is quite Chinese.

It was certainly also a pond, inhabited by a dragon or a
snake, which we’find mentioned on p. 653 of the Sansha kidan
(Ch. I). In summer, when the people wanted rain, they went
thither, cut a mackerel to pieces and threw these into the
mountain pond, at the same time praying for rain. If they did
so, their prayer was always heard, and the rain came down at
once. This seems to be an offering to the dragon, but it might
be another way of stirring him up by ill-treating one of his
subjects, the fishes, before his eyes.


§ 10. A dragon engraved on an incense pot believed to cause rain.
Pine trees cause clouds to rise and rain to fall.


The dragon was so much connected with rain, that even an
incense pot, decorated with a “cloud-dragon”, wnrya (32 RE),
was supposed to be the reason why it always rained on the
day of an Inari festival. This pot was preserved among the
precious objects of a temple, dedicated to the Rice-goddess, but
was hidden when the suspicion rose that it caused the annoying
rain on Inari’s day °. This appeared, however, not to be the case,
for the rain poured down as well after this measure as before.


4 Book I, Ch. V, § 3, pp. 119 sq., cf pp. 67 sqq. a
2 4 E& SK Zp, written by Taxapa Tomousvo, yey FE} Bil FF, who livea
4782—1847; Ch. 109, p. 23 (new printed edition, Vol. Ill, p. 411).


».
8 EA HR.
4& Pp. 119 sq. ;
5 Comp. above, p. 117, where we have read about an old mirror with a dragon-


shaped handle, used in China as a magical instrument for causing the dragons to give


rain.


Digitized by Microsoft®


176


as soon as the day arrived, fixed for the dances of children,
clad in festive dresses in honour of Inari. On the days’ devoted
to Sannd, Suwa and Tada Hachiman the weather was all right,
but Inari’s festival was always spoiled by rain. At last the reason
was found out. The boards of the stage, on which the dances
were performed, were made of the wood of some sacred pine
trees which had belonged to a neighbouring Shinto temple but
were sold by the villagers at a time of pecuniary distress. The man
who bought these trees placed them in the compound of the
Tnari temple, and as the wood was very strong, it was used in
building the stage for the sacred dances of this sanctuary. Now
it struck the people that every time when this timber was used
(such stages are always temporarily built, and broken down after
the festival), and the sun shone upon the boards, it. began to
rain. On -account of this fact a messenger was despatched to
the village whence the wood had come, in order to make inquiries
as to the trees in question. The man came back with the news
that the two woodcutters who had-_cut those trees had died within
a few days in a state of madness, as if they were. possessed by
some evil spirit. This confirmed the people’s opinion as to these
pine trees being the cause of the rain at Inari’s festival; there-
fore they took them away and laid them near the worshipping-
hall (instead of using the wood for building the dancing stage).
They said: “We have heard that in China, in olden times, under
the reign of the Emperor Shi Hwan, of the Ts‘in dynasty (B.C.
246—210), a pine tree suddenly became a big tree and kept off
the rain. How is it that these pine trees are causing rain nowadays ?
Tt is said that pine trees, being covered with a scaly armour,
change into dragons when they become old. This may be the
-reason why they always had the miraculous power of calling
up the clouds and the rain”. Thus spoke the people, and they
all admired the wonderful influence of the pine trees. '


§ 11. The eight Dragon-kings.
A Shinto(!) temple, dedicated to the eight Dragon-kings, is
Prise in the Seki no akikaze*. The author of this work


1 Sanshu kidan, Ch. IT, p. 712.


2 BA PD IK JR. written by Stmaxawa Raxvo, FY Jil 6 #R » “The merry


old man of Shirakawa” (i.e. Matsupatra SADANOBU, yA op ‘sE 4B » who lived


Digitized by Microsoft®


177


prayed there for rain himself, and his prayer was heard. Then
he ordered the villagers to repair the shrine. Afterwards, when
the sluices of heaven were opened too long, he successfully
prayed to the dragons again, this time for stopping the rain.


§ 12. A Buddhist dragon’s suicide,


The Nihon shukyo fuzokushi gives an old tradition explaining
the names of three Buddhist temples in Shimosa province. In
730 A.D., when the priest Shaku-myo by order of the Emperor
prayed for rain, he had a splendid success, and at the same
time a dragon appeared in the air, who cut his own body into
three parts and died. The middle part fell in Imba district,
where the temple called Ryzfukuji, E iii 3¢, or “Shrine of the
Dragon’s Belly”, is to be found. The tail came down in Katori
district (also in Shimosa), and caused the shrine Ryzbiji (BE FB 3F,
“Temple of the Dragon’s Tail”) to be built, while the head
descended on the spot where the aforesaid priest had been praying
and where still nowadays the name of the sanctuary, Ryzkakuji,
HE #4 3¢, or “Temple of the Dragon’s Horn” (at Sakai village,
Shimohabu district) reminds the believers of the dragon of old.

A similar legend is to be found in the Yaho meisho ryaku *,
where the Shasekishi? is quoted. A blue dragon, on having heard
a priest explaining Buddha’s Law, was so full of emotion that
his body divided itself into three parts. Where the head came
down, Ryatoji, “the Temple of the Dragon’s Head”, was built
(at Nara); in another place in Nara, where the dragon’s tail
fell down, Rywtbiji was erected; and his trunk gave origin to
the name of Ryifukuji, also in the old capital, the only one of
the three shrines which still existed in Muju’s time (i.e. in the
beginning of the fourteenth century).


§ 13. Conclusions.


The passages, referred to in this chapter, have clearly taught
us that there were from ancient times in Japan three methods
of causing or stopping rain. The oldest, probably originally


1g AS — ae I re written in 1902 by Kato Kumarcud, jf ra
AR — BB. p. 247.


2 Ch. Ill, p. 54. Cf. above p. 170, note 4.
8 ty Ay 4p, written by the Buddhist priest Must, fff fE , who died in 1342.


Verh, Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XII, N° 2, 12
Digitized by Microsoft®


178


Japanese, although at the same time Chinese, way was offering
white or black or red horses to the dragon-shaped river-gods
(red horses only for stopping rain). Then followed the Chinese
custom of the Emperor's praying to the four quarters of Heaven,
and the, also quite Chinese, idea of stirring up the dragons by
great noise (as was done by the Court officials in 877 on the
pond of the Sacred Spring Park). The same thought is found in
the custom, prevalent in much later times, of throwing iron
into a dragon’s pond. The snake, and therefore also the dragon,
which is considered to belong to the same species, is believed to
hate and fear iron very strongly’, and many a mighty serpent is
said to have been killed or driven away by means of a single needle.
Therefore, when iron is thrown into a pond, inhabited by a
dragon, this rain-god is sure to get angry and to arise from his
abode to the sky, which is in a moment covered with clouds.
Then the dragon gives vent to his anger in a terrible thunder-
storm accompanied by heavy rains, and the aim of the person
who threw the iron utensil or the metal shavings into the pond,
is reached.

The third way of causing rain, i.e. the Buddhist method,
started from an opposite point of view. Instead of making the
dragons rise by annoying them, the Buddhist priests recited
sitras which made such an impression upon the devout minds
of the Nagas, that they at once used to assist mankind and to
liberate the people from the terrible sufferings caused by a long
drought. Sometimes a siitra was read concerning the Garuda-
kings, the deadly and much dreaded enemies of the Nagas,
probably in order to make the latter feel quite dependent on
Buddha’s mighty protection. As Buddhism flourished more and
more, this kind of rain-prayer soon became by far predominant
in Japan. In the eighteenth century, however, the Chinese methods
of stirring up the dragons seem to have revived. Nowadays, when
in the seventh and eighth months a continuous drought prevails
and the peasants anxiously look up to the sky, fearing that the
crops may be spoiled, they often go about in processions, beating
drums and making noise, just as the Court-officials did in the
year 877 A.D. So deeply rooted are the old Chinese ideas in the
minds of the people.


“4 Cf. above, pp. 67 sqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER IV.
THE INDIAN NAGA IN JAPAN.


As we have seen above', the Indian Naga legends served
already in the time of the Nzhongi, i.e. in the beginning of the
eighth century, to embellish the old tales concerning the Japanese
sea-gods. The magnificent palace of Oho-watatsumi no Mikoto
at the bottom of the sea, and the “Jewel which grants all
desires” of the Empress Jingo left no doubt about their Indian
origin. It is no wonder then, that the more Buddha's Law
flourished in Japan, the more the original Japanese sea and
river-gods had to give way to the Indian conquerors; therefore
most of the dragons, mentioned in later works, are Nagas. In
Chapter III we have seen that the rain-prayers, first offered
exclusively to different Shinto gods, especially to the dragon-
shaped river-deities, from the ninth century were also addressed
to the Nagas. In times of drought the Buddhist priests were
more and more looked upon by the Emperors as the most powerful
rescuers of the country, and large crowds of Shingon priests recited
their siitras in the Palace as well as at the Dragon pond of the
Sacred Spring Park, in order to cause the Nagas to make it rain
all over the country.

As to the legends, referred to in this Chapter, many of them,
although relating to Nagas, at the same time have Chinese
features. This is quite clear, for it was via China that all the
Indian tales came to Japan. Moreover, many originally Japanese
dragons, to which Chinese legends were applied, were afterwards
identified with Nagas, so that a blending of ideas was the result.


§ 4. The Dragon-kings revere Buddha’s Law.


The Sandai jitsuroku? (901 A.D.) quotes a written supplication
of the Lord of Harima, Sugawara no Koreyoshi (812—880), to


4 Book II, Ch. I, §§ 5 and 6, pp. 139 sqq. : P
20. Vip 8 HO, EB AEE RR. BR
R il z AR , Another text gives ER instead of Be then it would. mean: “The


Dragon-kings transpose the precious stones of the water regions”.


Digitized by Microsoft®


180.


the Great Buddha of Nara (in 861), in which we read these
words: “You give motion to the Darkness and the Light; the
Dragon-kings retreat into the depths of the water regions, and
the stars spread all over the sky (i.e. by the influence of your
Law)”. In the same supplication ' we find the well-known term
“Ryajin hachibu”, FE wih /\ Bh, “Dragons, Spirits, (or Dragon-
gods), and (other beings of) the eight departments”, a variant of
Tenrya hachibu, Fe RE /\ Bh, or Ryzten hachibu, HE K NWN BH °.

The Shasekishi* (before 1312 A.D.) refers to a siitra entitled
Shinchikwan-kyo *, where we read: “If one wears only one Buddhist
sacerdotal robe, he can cross the sea without being annoyed by
poisonous dragons’. So great is the reverence, even of these
dangerous creatures, for Buddha and his believers.


§ 2. Dragons appear at the dedication of Buddhist temples.


The Fusd ryakki® (about 1150 A.D.) relates how in 596, when
the Buddhist temple called Hokoji® was dedicated at Nara, a
purple cloud descended from the sky and covered the pagoda as
well as the Buddha. hall; then the cloud became five-coloured and
assumed the shape of a dragon or phoenix, or of a man or an
animal. After a while it vanished in a western direction *.

A work of much later date, the Yaho meisho ryaku*® (1697),
contains a legend about a Buddhist temple named Unryizan,
“Cloud-dragon-shrine”, in Fuwa district, Mino province. When
the: abbot Rytshi®, who lived 1307—13888, was erecting this
sanctuary, on the day of his starting the work a dragon appeared
with a pearl in its mouth, a very good sign indeed. For this
reason he called the mountain Ryzshiho, “Dragon-pearl-peak’’
(HE Ee ZB). When the temple was ready, a rain of flowers fell
from heaven.


P. 85.
Cf. above, Introd., § 1, pp. 4 sq., note 5.


Ch. VI, co p. 17. See above, p. 177, note 3.


WO Hh BL HK


Ch. Ill, K.T,K. Vol. Vi, p. 497.


RS
oS TH. 6. HE A I A. eae


ch. Vi, p. 47. See above, p. 170, note 4.


aon owr ONE


Digitized by Microsoft®


181


§ 3. Dragons living in ponds or lakes, mostly near Buddhist shrines.


' In the history of Shitenns-ji, the “Monastery of the Four
Deva-kings”, the Buddhist monastery built by Shotoku Taishi
at Namba (the present Osaka), we read that in the compound
of one of the buildings of this monastery, called Keiden-in, there
was a deep pond, named Koryochi ! , In which a blue dragon was
supposed to live *.

At a distance of 36 cho from the feiniie of Hakusan Gongen,
“The Manifestation of Mount Hakusan” (the Buddhist name of
the ancient Shintd god of this holy mountain, which lies on the
frontiers of Mino, Hida, Echizen and Kaga provinces) there was,
according to the Kojidan* (1210—1220 A. D.), a sacred pond
called Mikuriya no ike, or “August Kitchen Pond”. All the
Dragon-kings were said to assemble there and to prepare their
food (i #§, Luyo, food for offerings). Human beings could not
approach it, for as soon as they had the audacity of doing so,
a violent thunderstorm burst forth and killed the culprits‘. Yet
two holy men prayed to Hakusan Gongen to allow them to scoop a
little. water out of this pond. Another priest, who heard this, stayed
for thirty seven days in the temple, continually repeating the
same prayer. Then he went to the bank of the pond and earnestly
practised the kuyd-hd or “food-offering-method”. The sky was
clear and there was no thunder or rain to drive him away. No
sooner, however, did he scoop a little water into a pitcher, than
his mind became confused and he felt as if he were dying. Yet
he was able to return home after having concentrated his thoughts..
Sick people who drank this water or rubbed themselves with it,
were sure to be cured by the power of Buddha’s Law.

The Uji shai monogatari® (1218—1218) contains a tale about
a young Buddhist priest who lived in the Nara period (719—784)
and made the following practical joke. On the bank of the Sarusawa
pond (near the Kofuku temple) he put up a placard, announcing
that on a special day and hour a dragon would arise from the


1 Bb. RRR. A Ree eb


2 Fuso ryakki, Ch. Ill, p. 495.
3 Ch. V, K.T.K. Vol. XV, p. 119.


«EEL BP Wb A HEA OR 6 Mt
KKH SARAAT HE. SERA
Ba
Ch. XI,


K.T.K. Vol. XVII, p. 225. See above, p. 171, note 6.


K
aM
5


Digitized by Microsoft®


182


pond. As the passers-by, who read this, all believed it, on the
indicated day an immense crowd flocked together from Yamato,
Kawachi, Izumi and Settsu provinces, in order to see the miracle.
The priest himself, standing at the gate of the Kofuku temple,
was highly amused by the success of his joke and laughed in
his sleeve when seeing the crowd on the tiptoe of expectation.
When the evening fell and no dragon appeared, they all went
home greatly disappointed.

The Gempei seisuki' (about 1250) tells us how in 717 A.D. the
Zen priest Shinyu was invited by an unknown goddess, who said
to have always protected the Emperor and the people, to come
to the top of Mount Hakusan, in order to worship there her
“real shape’. When he went there, and prayed near the pond
on the mountain, at the same time uttering incantations (£ajz)
and making three sacred mudras (mystic finger-distortions), there
arose from the midst of the pond an enormous nine-headed,
serpent-shaped dragon. The priest, however, declared that this
was not the deity’s real shape, and increased the power of his
mantras (magical formulae), till he at last beheld the augush
form of the Eleven-faced Kwannon.

When connecting this legend with the passage of the Kojidan,
referred to above, we may easily conjecture that the sacred pond
on Mount Hakusan had been from olden times the abode of an
original Japanese dragon, which gave rise to different Buddhist
dragon legends in regard to this pond.

In the Genko Shakusho® (before 1346) we read that the day
before the priest Jitsuhan’s?* arrival at Daigoji (in Kyoto), Genkaku ‘,
the abbot of this monastery, saw in a dream a blue dragon
arising from the pond in the garden, lifting up his head and
spouting clear water from its mouth. As he understood the
meaning of this dream, the abbot the next morning ordered his
pupils to clean the monastery thoroughly in order to graciously
receive the venerable pupil, who actually arrived.

In a much later work, the Sansha kidan hkohen® (1779), we find.
the following particulars about an old woman who could cure
all kinds of diseases. She was believed to be possessed by the god
of the neighbouring ‘pond, be it a river-otter (kawa-oso,. 7X FR),
or a dragon-snake (7 #e). She was a strange, poor old woman,


4 Ch. XXXIX, p. 742. See above, p. a note 2.
2 Ch. XIII, p. 853. '


3 it a. 4 fae St.


Digitized by Microsoft®


183


who ate nothing but boiled flour, and refused to accept money
from her patients. Her fame was so great, that hundreds of
people came from far and near to obtain some medicine from
her. And queer medicine it was, for in reality it was nothing at
all. After a patient had told her his complaint, she went inside,
put a rush mat upon her head, and after having thus meditated
for a while she came out of the house and gave an imaginary
medicine to the patient, saying: “Here are doses for seven days.
Only if you believe in me and think that you swallow medicine,
it certainly shall have a good effect. If it has no result within
seven days, you must come back”. If the person followed her
advice, he actually recovered. It was no wonder that the patients
flocked together from all quarters. As she was busy from morning
till night, she distributed charms, with “Namu Amida Butsu”
or something of the kind written on them and marked with her
stamp, instead of keeping the longer procedure which she had
followed in the beginning. If anybody tried to deceive her, she
immediately discovered this. She was such a wonderful being,
that there were people who proposed to buy her for seven
hundred ryo (from the villagers?) and to take her to the capital,
but this was prevented by the authorities. Her strange food gave
rise to the suspicion as to her being possessed by a tanuki,
especially because she used to eat with her face hidden in the
vessel. Others supposed her to be the mother of Ho-kun (fi #,
Lord Salted Fish [?]), or the wife of the “Great King with the
straw sandals’', i.e. one of the Ni-o*. But the physician of the
place was of another opinion. He said to Horra, the author of
the Sanshi kidan kéhen: “This old woman is assisted by some
water-demon. I have often heard the villagers tell that she
‘purifies herself’ *, as she calls it, twice a day, going into the
pond and repeatedly diving under water, so that even her
head is not visible. After having spoken with several patients
she washes her head with well water, and if her head is not
wet, she cannot see her patients. She certainly is a creature
connected with the pond, be it a river-otter or a dragon-snake.
Some thirty or forty years ago, when her husband was still
alive, one winter there came a Buddhist nun and lodged in their
house, who washed clothes and served not only for herself but
also for others. Thenceforth she stayed there every month for


et KE. S0-ai tai-o.
Se


i
2 42 3 Ya BET OV, hori wo toru.


Digitized by Microsoft®


184


three or four days, and then went home. At last the man,
warned by a neighbour, watched her from the upper story of
the latter’s house, and saw her coming out of his house. After
having walked some distance in human shape, she was trans-
formed into a line of white vapour (FJ $@), flew to the pond,
and disappeared under the water. The man, very much frightened
by this sight, went to a neighbouring Buddhist temple and
requested the priest to recite prayers on his behalf. Moreover,
he pasted holy Buddhist texts and charms on the walls of his.
house, in order to avert the evil. This was sufficient, for the
nun never returned. Within a couple of years, however, the man
died, and now, after more than thirty years, again such strange
things happen in the same house. Probably the old woman is
possessed by the Master (3:, nushz) of the pond’. So spoke the
physician, no doubt jealous of the woman on account of her
medical fame, but at the same time clearly expressing the
superstitious ideas of the people. The term “dragon-snake” seems
to indicate the Naga, a serpent identified with a dragon; more-
over, Buddhism plays a predominant part in this story.

Before the Restoration a so-called “Dragon-god festival” (Rywin-
sai, #E jilh 2) used to be yearly celebrated by the priest of
the Gongen shrine at Hakone, the well-known mountain village
in Sagami province. Three hundred thirty three go (4)) of “red
rice” (sekthan), in a new wooden rice bowl, were offered to the
Dragon-god of Hakone lake in the following way. The Buddhist
priest (now Ieyasu's shrine belongs to Shints) went in a boat to
the middle of the lake and there placed the bowl on the water,
whereupon the boat went on, neither the priest nor the boatmen
looking back. Then they heard a sound as of a whirlpool on the
spot where the offering had been made, and the bowl disappeared
under the water '.


§ 4. Reborn as dragons.


In the Tatheiki? (about 1382) we read the following legend.
The second son of the Emperor Godaigo, Prince Takanaga, also
called Ichi no Miya, who had been banished to Hata in Tosa
province, longed so much for his consort, who had remained in
Kyoto, that he despatched his faithful vassal, Hada no Takebumi,


1 Nihon ahiaheyo flizokw shi, A KS a Be UA 1B aK + (written in 1902), p. 218.


Digitized by Microsoft®


185


to the capital in order to take her to his place of exile. When
the latter was on his way to Tosa with the lady, and they were
waiting for a propitious wind at Ama ga saki in Settsu province,
there was a samurai, Matsuura Goro by name, who fell in love
with the beautiful woman, stole her and after having taken her
on board his ship, set sail at once. No sooner had Takebumi
perceived this trick, than he called the vessel back with a loud
voice, but the only answer he received was an outrageous laughter,
and the vessel pursued its course. Then poor Takebumi, at his
wit’s end, said: “To-day I will become a dragon-god at. the
bottom of the sea, and check that ship’. With these words he
disemboweled himself and jumped into the sea. There is a well-
known whirlpool, called Uwa no Naruto, the “Sounding door
(i.e. eddy) of Uwa’, between Shikoku and Awaji, which was said
to be the Eastern Gate of the Dragon-palace. It was there that
Takebumi’s revenge revealed itself in a terrible way, for the vessel,
caught by the eddy, was turned about for three days, and in
vain all kinds of precious things, as bows and swords and clothes,
were flung into the sea as “offerings to the Dragon-god. Then
the crew arrived at the conclusion that the dragon wanted the
woman herself, and Matsuura was about to throw her into the
furious waves, when a Buddhist priest advised him not to arouse
the Dragon-god’s anger by making to him a human offering
which he, the dragon, certainly disliked, being a pure being and
a believer in Buddha. It is better, said the priest, to recite
siitras and pray. So the whole crew prayed to Kwannon, and lo!
there appeared on the waves Takebumi’s spirit, still beckoning
the vessel as he had done before his death, and preceded by
several retainers on horseback. Although there often happened
inysterious things on that spot, this time it was certainly
Takebumi’s angry soul which caused the calamity. Therefore they
placed the woman, together with one sailor, in a small boat,
hoping to ‘satisfy the ghost in this way and to get rid of her
without causing her death. As soon as they had done this, the
ship was at once driven out of the whirlpool and disappeared
in a western direction; it was never heard of again. As to the
lady, she safely arrived at an island, where she was kindly
received by the inhabitants, and where she remained for the rest
of her life, not daring to run the risk of being stolen again. _

In the Fuse lake ah Etcha province, so tells us Horra, the
author of the Sansha kidan and the Sanshu kidan kohen', a


4 Ch. VII, pp. 988 seqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


186 -


disappointed lover was said to have drowned himself, and his
passion (3 4%, shanen) was believed to have condensed into
the form of a white dragon (with other words, his soul, on
account of its passionate condition at the time of his death,
was reincarnated in a dragon). This was in Horta’s days
(eighteenth century) an old tale, and the lake had become ten times
narrower than before, so that the dragon was no longer supposed
to live in the water, but in a so-called “dragon-hole” (rya-hutsu,
HE ##) under the ground, where “dragon-vapours”, or “dragon-
breath”, (j# 4%) used to rise as a sign of the demon’s presence
(these are Chinese ideas). In the beginning of the Anei era
(1772—1780) people who crossed a neighbouring ferry of the
river which flows into the lake, saw a long, white monster
swimming from the lake into the river mouth. When it was
at the bottom of the- stream the water became quite white.
Sometimes the dragon showed his snow-white back, but not his
head or tail. Some people, who had seen his head, which seldom
was visible, said that it was square. After having enjoyed himself
in swimming along the coast for one day, he disappeared.
This dragon was said to have lived in that vicinity for a long
time, and as he was called “the white man” (Fy 34, shiro-otoko),
Horra supposes him to be the same person who once drowned
himself and took this shape after having been deceived by his
sweetheart, “the white girl’, and was afterwards living under
the ground because the lake had become too narrow. As he could
not immerse the ‘land and destroy the fields, he from time to
time simply made an excursion to the neighbouring sea coast.
At the same ferry there was a creature called “shiga”, which
stretched itself and checked the boats when the snow began to
melt; this was also some “breath” ($<), probably, says Horta,
the same “dragon-breath” which was examined by a wonder-
fully daring man during the Keichd era ae aa, according
to the work entitled “Chagwaiden” '.

According to a modern work, the Nihon coe Sizoku shi
mentioned above’, there is in Kasahara village, Totomi province,
a pond called “Sakura ga ike”, “Cherry-tree Pond’. It is the
abode of a huge dragon, to whom those who have a special wish
pray on the middle day of higan (4% FE, “yonder shore”, a
period of seven days in either equinox; the middle day is the


1 rH Rh i (time and author?).
2 P. 117, note 1; p. 204,


Digitized by Microsoft®


187


equinoctial day), at the same time making an offering to him
consisting of a bucket of hard boiled rice (kowameshi, i RK,
i.e. sekihan, He HK, “red rice”, rice boiled with red beans), which
they cause to float on the water. If they afterwards find the
bucket empty, this is a sign that the dragon has eaten the rice,
accepting the offering and hearing the prayer, but if the rice is
still in the bucket, the prayer will not be fulfilled. This dragon
is the reincarnation of the Buddhist priest Genko, Jp Ga Tendai


priest of Hieizan, teacher of Honen shonin, }& 4k, who lived
1132—1212. Genko wished to become a dragon, because his life
was too short to obtain a sufficient knowledge of Buddha’s
doctrine. One day he heard from one of his disciples that the
above mentioned pond was an excellent place for a dragon to
live in. Then he sat down in religious meditation (samadhi), put
one drop of water in his hand, by means of which he made
clouds and rain, and flew through the air to the pond. There
he died in meditation, and when his disciple came and called
him, an enormous dragon appeared above the water and wept.
At the pupil’s request he assumed his former human shape and
talked with him for a long time.

We may make mention here of an old legend, to be found in
the Gukwanshd', which told that Inoue no Naishinnd, the Imperial
Princess Inoue, daughter of the Emperor Shomu and Consort of
the Emperor Konin, had become a dragon even before her death.
She was accused of having practised wu- -ku, J AK #8, a Chinese
magic art exercised by means of small reptiles and inssets = 10
ander to have her son made Crownprince. For this reason she
was imprisoned in a hole in 772 by order of the Prime Minister
Fujiwara no Momokawa, and three years later both she and her
son died. According to popular tradition, however, she had turned
into a dragon even before her death.


§ 5. Dragon-kings of the sea check the course of vessels in order
to obtain special Buddhist treasures as offerings.


The Fuso ryakki* (1150) relates the following legend concerning
the abbot Dosho (34 H%),. who went to China in 651 and,


1 Bh $F fp, probably written by Bishop Ji-ux, 3 |], who died in 1225;
K.T.K. Vol. XIV, Ch. VI; p. 597.
2 Cf. De Groot, Religious System of China, Vol. V, Ch. II, pp. 826 seqq.
3 Ch. IV, K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 544.


Digitized by Microsoft®


188


when he returned to Japan, obtained from Hien Tsang, the
famous pilgrim who went to India in 629 and returned in 645,
besides a relic of Buddha and sitras a small kettle for preparing
medicines. Htien Tsang had brought this kettle with him from
India and said that it was of the utmost value, because all
diseases could be cured by means of the medicines cooked in it.
This proved to be true, for one of Déshd’s companions, who fell
ill before they left China, was cured at once thanks to this
marvellous utensil. On their way to Japan, in the midst of the
ocean, the ship suddenly stopped and did not move for seven
days, while wind and waves were raging around it in a terrible
way. Then a diviner said: “There is something on board which
is wanted by the Sea-god. I think it is the kettle”. First the
abbot refused to give up his treasure, and said that there was
no reason why the Dragon-king should ask for it. But when the
others, afraid for their lives, urgently begged him to follow the
diviner’s advice, the priest gave in and threw the kettle into
the sea. Immediately the storm and the waves abated, the ship
could continue its course, and soon they arrived in Japan.
Apparently the Dragon-king had actually wanted the offering of
the: sacred kettle.

The Konjaku monogatari' describes how a Prime Minister, who
for his king transported a precious Buddha image across the sea,
was overtaken by a terrible storm. It was in vain that he threw
all kinds of precious things into the sea, the Dragon-king appa-
rently wanted something else. At last the minister understood
what would appease him, and, praying for his life, he offered
the pearl from between the eyebrows. of the Buddha image.
The Dragon-king stretched out his hand and took the pearl,
whereupon the storm calmed down. Although this danger was
over, the minister, who was convinced that he would be decapi-
tated when he confessed to his sovereign the loss of the
pearl, wept bitterly and besought the Dragon to returm the
treasure. Then the Sea-god appeared to him in a dream and
promised to restore the pearl to him, if he would stop the nine
tortures which were inflicted upon the dragons. Rejoiced the
man awoke and, addressing the sea, answered that he was willing
to free the dragons from their tortures by copying and offering
holy Buddhist texts. And when he had done so, the Dragon-king
kept his promise and returned the pearl; but it had lost its
lustre. The Sea-god again appeared to the minister ina dream


4 Ch. XI, K.T.K. Vol. XVI, pp. 571 seq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


189


and said that the pearl had freed him from the tortures of the


serpent-road (th 34), but that the Kongd-hannya-kyo ( Vajra-
prajiaparamita sutra, cf. above, p. 34), which he had copied on
his (the dragon’s) behalf, had Deen still more powerful, as it had
removed all his sufferings.


§ 6. The “jewel which grants all desires” (cintamani).


There lived in Northern India a Buddhist abbot, “Buddha's
vow” ' by name, who for the sake of mankind sought the “ Precious
pearl which grants all desires”. He went on board a ship and,
when in the midst of the sea, by Buddha’s power called up the
Dragon-king. After having bound him by means of mystic for-
mulae (tantras), he required the pearl from him, whereupon the
dragon, unable to escape, took the pearl from his- head and
prepared to hand it over to the priest. The latter stretched out
his left hand, at the same time making the “sword-sign”, a
mudra (mystic finger-twisting), with his right hand. The Dragon-
king, however, said: “In former times, when the Dragon-king
Sagara’s daughter gave a precious pearl to Cakyamuni, the latter
received it with folded hands; why should a pupil of the Buddha
accept it with one hand?” Then the priest folded his hands,
giving up the mudra, and was about to take the pearl, when
the Dragon-king, no longer suppressed by the mystic sign, freed
himself from his bands and ascended to the sky, leaving the
abbot behind with empty hands, and destroying his boat. The
only man who was saved was the priest himself. Aiterwards. the
same abbot met Bodhidharma *, the patriarch, who came across
the sea from Southern India (in 526), and together they om
to Japan’s.


§ 7, The eight Dragon-kings.


At the time of Bishop Jie® being head-abbot.(zasu, JR =)
of Hieizan, somebody saw in a dream seven of the eight Great


4 Af #r | Bussei.
2 m vA # ER myer’ hoju, cintamani, comp. above, p. 10.
3 ye He FA Baramon, the “Wall-gazing Brahman”.


4 Fusd ryakki, $e oe (ShOmu Tennd), K.T.K. Vol. VI, p. 564.
5 Jie lived 912—985, cf. above, Book II, Ch. III, § 6, p. 170, note 9,


Digitized by Microsoft®


190


Dragon-kings ' crossing a large sea in ships; on the eighth vessel
no dragon was to be seen. When the man asked the reason of
this Dragon-king’s absence, he received the answer that the absent
dragon was at present head-abbot of Hieizan. Evidently Jie was
a metamorphosis of Utpala?, the last of the eight Dragon-kings.
That a dragon was his “real shape’? we have seen above’.

In the Tatheiki* an exile on Sado island prays to different gods
to make a ship approach his lonely place. Among these deities
are: “Gongen (Manifestations), Kongo doji (Vajra kumara),
Tenrya (Heavenly Dragons), Yasha (Yakshas), and the eight
Great Dragon-kings” °. Apparently the Nagas last-mentioned were
considered to be different. from the Heavenly Dragons, which
formed one of the four classes of Nagas, mentioned above °.. The
eight Dragon-kings probably belonged to the second class of
Nagas, the “Divine Dragons” (il #f).


§ 8. The Dragon-gods of the inner and outer seas.


The Gempei seisuiki? says that Fujiwara no Yasuyori, banished
to the island called Kikai ga shima, invoked the compassion of
“the dragon-gods of the inner and outer seas, and (the other
beings of) the eight departments” *. The same expression, i. e.
“dragon-gods of the inner and outer seas”, is found in the
Tatheiki®, where we read how in the year 1333 Nitta Yoshisada,
Godaigo’s faithful general, invoked them. He was marching towards
Kamakura io order to punish the Shikken Hojo Takatoki, and
when he arrived. at. Inamurazaki, a cape between Enoshima and
Kamakura, he prayed to the “Dragon-gods of the inner and
outer seas” to make the sea retreat, that he might be able to
pass with his troops along the shore and thus easily reach
‘Kamakura. They apparently heard his prayer, for that night the
tide suddenly became so. low, that Takatoki’s ships could not
approach the coast, and the arrows of his soldiers could not
reach Nitta’s troops, which marched along the dry shore straight


4 Cf. above, Introd., § 1, p. 4.


2 os ok we HE BE: Uhachira Ryt-o.
3 Book II, Ch. III, § 6, p. 170.

4 Ch. Il, p. 9a.
5
6


HH DS MBF KR RAK BEE.


Introd., § 3, p. 24. 7 Ch. VU, p. 183.


8 Py iy. Af Hi HE mh AN Th. Cf. above, Introd.; § 1, pp. 1 sq., note 5.


9 Ch. X, p. 7b.


Digitized by Microsoft®


‘191


to Kamakura. There they forced their way into the town and
caused Takatoki to disembowel himself.


§ 9. Dragon-palaces.


According to the Genkod Shakusho' the Chinese bonze Kien
Chen’, when crossing the sea on his way to Japan, was invited
by a dragon-god to come to his palace and preach for him’®.
After having complied with the request the priest continued his
journey and at last (in 762) arrived in Kyushi (then called
Dazaifu).

The famous legend concerning Tawara Toda, which is found
in the Honchéd kwaidan koji*, is a blending of Chinese and Indian
ideas. It runs as follows. In the Hidesato temple, a Shinto shrine
near the Seta bridge in Omi province, Tawara Toda*, “Rice
bag Toda”, is worshipped together with Suzfushin°, the “God of
the Water Department”. If one takes a centipede (mukade) to
this shrine,-the animal immediately dies for the following reason.
In olden times, when Fujiwara no Hidesato (who lived in the
first half of the tenth century) crossed the bridge, a big serpent
lay across it. The hero, however, was not at all afraid, and
calmly stepped over the monster which at once disappeared into
the water and returned in the shape of a beautiful woman. Two
thousand years, she said, she had lived under this bridge, but
never -had she seen such a brave man as he. For this reason
she requested him to destroy her enemy, a huge centipede ‘,
which had killed her sons and grandsons. Hidesato promised
her to do so and, armed with a bow and arrows, awaited the
centipede on the bridge. There came from the top of Mikami
yama two enormous lights, as big as the light of two hundred
torches. These were the centipede’s eyes, and Hidesato sent three
arrows in that direction, whereupon the lights were extinguished


4 Ch. I, K.T.K. Vol. XIV, p. 642.


2 Spe i» Kanshin.


3 The text says only: “he went to the Dragon-palace”, but the commentator explains
the reason why he did this.

4 aS af] pet aR Hx EH , written in 1711 by the Buddhist priest Koxo, Jes Jak ;
Ch. I, nr 16, p. 29.

5 AR HR Ik. 6 AK iF mi.

-7 The centipede is, according to Chinese belief, the snake's deadly enemy, whose
ability in killing snakes is so great, that it is considered to be an excellent charm
against them, and used in order to cure diseases caused by ‘u-sorcery, oe DE Groot,
Religious System of China, Vol. V, pp. 863 seqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


192


and the monster died. The dragon woman, filled with joy and
gratitude, took the hero with her to the splendid Dragon-palace,
where she regaled him with delicious dishes and rewarded him
with a piece of silk, a sword, an armour, a temple bell and a
bag (tawara) of rice. She said, that there would always be silk
left as long as he lived, however much he might cut from it;
and the bag of rice would never be empty '. As to the temple
bell, this was the most precious treasure of the Dragon-palace..

After his return to the world of men Hidesato offered the
bell to Miidera, the famous Buddhist monastery near Otsu in
Omi province. One day a priest of Hieizan stole it, but as it did
not produce any sound but the words: “I wish to go back to
Miidera”, he angrily threw it into the valley, where it was found
and taken back to Miidera by the monks of this monastery.
Then. a small snake appeared and, stroking the cracks of the
bell with its tail, made them vanish at once, so that the precious
object was uninjured as before.

The Taiheiki?, which also tells Tawara Toda’s legend, says that
the bell was stolen during the war between Miidera and Hieizan,
when the former monastery was on fire, and that it fell to
pieces in the valley, but was restored by the snake in one night.
The snake was probably the dragon woman herself or a messenger
from the Dragon-palace. In the version of the Tazheiki the serpent
which Hidesato met on the bridge did not change into a woman,
but into a strange small ian; it was the Dragon-king himself.
On account of the miraculous rice bag the hero was thenceforth
called Tawara Toda, “Rice bag Toda” *.

The Yuahé meisho ryaku (1697), * mentions a Buddhist priest,
Nanzd by name, who lived in the Enkyi era (1069—1073) and
who for three years prayed in the temple of Kumano Gongen


4 In a later version of the legend he got a box of white wood, three or four sun
square, called debebako, HH K #i , “Rice supplying box”. This was put above the


ceiling, and if one placed a rice box beneath and pointed at the box above, saying:
“Rice for to-morrow for so many persons”, the next morning certainly such a quantity
of rice was in the box beneath. This miraculous box remained in the family for many
generations, and retained the same faculty of giving rice, till it was taken down to be
cleaned and by mistake was dropped on the stones in the garden. Then it broke, and
a dead little white snake fell out of it. After that no rice was provided any more, but
the box and the snake are still preserved by the family.
2 Ch. XV, p. 5.


3 In reality the name Tawara was written Hy i: not ER - Tawara, a Jo


is the name ofa noble family at Aki- -(Bungo province), and of a place in Mikawa.
4 Ch. X, p. 39; see above, p. 170, note 4. This passage | is quoted in the Nihon
‘shiikyo fuzoku shi (1902), p. 247.


Digitized by Microsoft®


193


for a long life, that he might be able to thoroughly study
Buddha’s doctrine. At last he learned by a divine revelation in
a dream that, if he went to a large, deep lake on Mount Koto-
wake, on the frontiers of Hitachi and Mutsu provinces, he would
become a dragon and have a very long life. Highly rejoiced at
the success of his prayers he followed the god's advice and took
up his abode in a hole near the lake, where he spent his days
in reading siitras and leading a strictly ascetic life. But a female
dragon, who daily visited him in the shape of a beautiful woman,
in order to hear him reciting the sitras, fell in love with him
and invited him to go with her to the dragon-palace at the
bottom of the lake. He followed her, carrying eight siitra rolls,
and forthwith lived with the woman in the luxurious mansion,
where he changed into an eight-headed dragon (on account of
the eight sitra rolls). His voice is often heard, reciting the siitras
in the lake. About three ri from this spot there is another lake
on Nuka ga take, which formerly was inhabited by a nine-headed
male dragon. This was the above-mentioned dragon-woman’s
husband, and when his place was taken by his eight-headed rival
(the transformed priest), he went to the other lake and had a
fight with the obtruder, but was beaten and killed. For this
reason no longer a dragon lives in the lake of Nuka ga take.
Finally, we may refer to a name, formerly given to the seastar
on account of its resemblance to the common spools for winding
thread on, i.e. Rytgu no itomaki, “spool of the Dragon-palace”’'!.


§ 10. Dragons connected with Buddhist priests.


The Genké Shakusho says that a blue dragon appeared to the
Tendai priest Eisai (4% py), when he in 1168 ascended the
Chinese T’aj (7G) mountain, the holy ground of the Tendai sect”.

In the same work we read how the Dragon-king Kwo-taku
( § #) announced in a dream to the Chinese teacher of Fang-
Ngan (Fy 4) and Enji ([B] Ry, i.e. the Japanese priest Ben-en,
2% |[B]), that these two pupils were now ready to become priests.
In consequence of this dream the master sent the latter back
to Japan, in order that he might preach the Law there ®.

A third legend found in this work speaks of a daughter of
the Emperor Sujaku (930—946), who went mad and, clad in


4 Intei zakko, $4 fz Rit yo Ch. IV, written by Kiramura SHINsETsu, #.


ZB et 48 fil 4783-1856); Myakka setsurin, 4 Ph —., p. 520.
2 Ch. Il, K.T.K. Vol. XIV, p. 658. 3 Ch. VIL, p. 747.
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl XIII, N°. 2. 13


Digitized by Microsoft®


194


scanty garments, visited the cottage of a Buddhist hermit, to
beseech him to hold incantations on her behalf (i.e. to exorcise
the evil spirit which was possessing her). The hermit agreed and
the Princess returned home. In the middle of the night she
(i.e. the evil spirit within her) suddenly exclaimed: “Help, help!
a dragon is about to cut my throat with a sword, and a boy is
tying me with a rope!” The ladies in waiting were very much
frightened, but the next morning the patient was cured. A dragon
and an angel, invoked by the priest’s incantations, had driven
out the evil demon '.


§ 41. Hight dragons ridden through the sky by a Buddhist deity.


The Taiheiki® describes the vision of a man who passed the
night praying before the Outer Shrine (Gegi) at Ise. He saw a
gigantic god with twelve faces and forty two arms, brandishing
swords and lances and riding eight dragons through the air
amidst rain and wind, at the head of many others who drove
in carriages above the clouds. They came from all sides, two or-
three thousand in all, in carriages or on horseback, while a
brilliant palace, made of precious stones and silver, glittered in
the sky.


§ 12. Curses wrought by dragons.


The Shinchomonshi*® mentions curses of dragons in the fol-
lowing passages. “An old tradition said that the guardian-god of
the Ryimon temple‘, a Buddhist sanctuary especially devoted
to the religious services for the deceased relatives of Mr Mogami
Gengoro, in Dewa province, was a dragon. One day the stone
wall of this shrine had fallen to ruins, and a large number of
men were working there together and had piled up stones, when
a snake, about six or seven inches long, appeared from under
the stones, was pursued and killed. Those who had killed her,
became at once giddy and died on the spot; the others, who
had only pursued her, were ill for about fifty or sixty days.
The body of this snake, tradition says, is now in the Keiyo
temple opposite Asakiisa in Yedo”.


4 Ch. XI, p. 822. 2 Ch. XII, p. 98.
3 Hr 5A zi 46, written by an unknown author about 1700; Zoku Teikoku


bunko, Vol. XLVII, Ch. IX, p. 126.
4 BE FA FF, “Dragon-gate temple”.


Digitized by Microsoft® ~


195


No less severe was the curse of another snake-shaped dragon.
The house of the head. of a village called “Ryd no tke” or
“Dragon’s pond”, in Uma district, Iyo province, was said to be
built on a pool, inhabited by a dragon in remote ages. A pond
in the garden, three or four shaku square, which was the
remainder of this pool, was never dry, not even in times of drought.
On the 15th day of the 7th month (Ullambana, the Bon-festival
for the dead) of the year 1688 the villagers were dancing (the
“bon-odort”, or “bon-dance’’) in this garden and making such a
noise, that it lasted a.while before they heard the master of
the house crying for help. When they ran into the room, they
found him standing in the dark, holding an animal by the throat
which had swallowed one of the arms of his child, about eight
years old. They cut the beast to pieces, but it became larger and
larger and at last filled the whole room. It appeared to be an
enormous serpent, yet it had evidently entered the house through
a very small opening, only sufficient for an earthworm. Upon
the sand of the pond a trace was visible, only a thin line,
which showed that the dragon had crept out of the pond in the
shape of an earthworm. The curse of the monster soon followed
in a terrible way, for the whole family, more than seventy
persons, died one after the other, except one blind minstrel who
escaped this fate and told the story afterwards’.

A man whose ship knocked against a huge snake, thirteen
ken long, killed the monster with his sword, and, in order to
escape its curse, cut its trunk ‘into three pieces, buried these
together with the head, and had masses said for the animal’s
soul. But this was all in vain, for thirteen years later, on the
same day of the same month, nay even at the same hour, he
exclaimed: “J drink water”, was choked and died. The people
were convinced that his death was caused by the snake. This
water-serpent was, of course, a dragon’.


§ 13. Relics of dragons preserved in Buddhist temples.


At Noda, in Mikawa province, there is a Buddhist shrine called
Senry#-in, or “Spring-dragon-temple” (Jt #E [é), where three
dragon’s scales are preserved. Before the temple was built, its
founder, Morin Shonin, preached there every night, and each


4 Ch. IX, p. 128. The same legend is to be found in the Yamato kwai-i-hi (Kk
Fi Pe at. written by an unknown author in 1708), Ch. Il, p. 130.
2 Ch. IV, p. 48. é


Digitized by Microsoft®


196


time a beautiful woman came to listen, till she finally assumed.
her original shape, that of a huge serpent, which jumped into a
pond near by and disappeared. The priest, who pitied the creature,
filled up the pond and built a temple over it. Three scales, le
by the dragon, are preserved in the sanctuary.'.

One of the treasures of another Buddhist shrine, called Ryizgenji,
or “Dragon-spring-temple” (#£ jf 3f:), in Hagi village, Mikawa
province, is the tooth of a “hidden dragon” (7% ff, senryit),
subdued by the priest Shitei *.


§ 14. The “Dragon-flower-meeting”.


In Miura Kensoxe’s Bukhyo iroha jiten®, s. v. Rytge-e, HE He @ ,
or “Dragon-flower-meeting”, we read that, when Maitreya shall
“forsake the world and find the truth of Buddha”, he shall
assemble a large crowd and expound his doctrine. All the trees
on earth shall then assume the shapes of golden dragons and
shall open their flowers. This is the meaning of the name of the
religious meeting, mentioned above.


1 Nihon shikyo fiuzoku shi (1902), p. 197.
2 Ibidem.
_ 3 Vol. II, p. 63; cf. above, Introd., § 3, p. 22, note 4.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER V.


CHINESE AND INDIAN DRAGONS IDENTIFIED OR CONNECTED WITH
ANCIENT JAPANESE DEITIES.


The Chinese and Indian ideas on dragons having so thoroughly
pervaded the Japanese mind as we have seen in the preceding
chapters, it is not astonishing that many an ancient Shintd god
was identified or connected with them. Sea-gods or serpent-shaped
mountain-deities were especially liable to be considered in this
light, and the thirteenth and later centuries did not hesitate to
explain old legends of the gods in their own way, making abundant
use of the words “Dragon-god” and ,Dragon-king”. The following
passages are specimens of this tendency.


§ 1. Sagara, the Dragon-king, the Yamato no orochi, Antoku Tenno
and the Kusanagi sword.


The Gukwanshd' (before 1225) tells us that Jtszkushima no
Myojin (x & 7 8A ip, the goddess of the island Itsitkushima
in the Inland sea) was according to tradition a Dragon-king’s
daughter, reborn as Antoku Tenno, the unhappy .Emperor
who was drowned in his seventh year in the battle of Dan-
no-ura (1185). His grandmother, Nii-no-ama, Kiyomori’s widow,
jumped over board with the little Emperor, when she saw that
the battle was lost. So the Dragon-king’s daughter returned to
her father.

Details of this legend are found in the Gempez seisuiki* (about
1250), which relates that this goddess was a grandchild of
Amaterasu, the Sun-goddess, and the daughter of the Dragon-
king Sagara*. The same work gives, in another passage *, the


4 Ch. V, K.T.K, Vol. XIV, p. 533, About the Gukwansho cf. above, p. 187, note 4

2 Ch. XII, Teikoku Bunko, Vol. V, p. 323.

3 ye ap we, Shakatsura, i.e. Sagara, one of the eight Great Dragon-kings. Cf.
above Introd., § 1, p. 4; Book II, Ch. IV, § 6, p. 189. According to E1reL, Handbook
of Chinese Buddhism, Sagara’s daughter, eight years old, became a Buddha under
‘Mafijucri’s tuition. ‘4 Ch, XLIV, p. 1458.


Digitized by Microsoft®


198


reason why the dragon was reborn as Antoku Tennd. The retired
Emperor Go-Shirakawa, thus we read there, sought in vain the
Kusanagi sword', one of the three treasures of the Imperial
family, which Susanowo no Mikoto had found in the tail of the
eight-headed serpent Yamato no orochi. After having prayed for
seven days in the temple of Kamo, he received a divine revelation
in a dream, to the effect that the sword was to be found at
the bottom of the sea at Dan-no-ura, and that two female divers
of that place, Oimatsu and Wakamatsu, a mother and her
daughter, were to be ordered to seek it. In consequence of this
dream Yoshitsune was despatched to Dan-no-ura, and the two
women were told to dive for the sword. They obeyed and
remained under water for a whole day (!) Then they returned
to the surface, and the mother said that down there was a very
strange place, which she could not enter without Buddha's powerful
assistance; therefore she wanted the Nyohd-kyo*, a siitra, to be
copied and wound around her body. Immediately a large number
of venerable priests assembled and copied the sttra; the woman
wound this round her body and dived again. This time it lasted
no less than one day and one night before she came up, without
the sword. Yoshitsune asked her what she had seen, but she
answered that she could tell only the Emperor himself. So he
took her to Kysto, where she reported the following to the
Emperor. She had entered the gate of a magnificent building,
apparently the Dragon-king’s palace, and when she had told that
she came as a messenger from the Emperor of Japan, to ask for
the precious sword, two women led her into the garden, to an
old pine tree, where from under a half-raised blind (sudare) she
could look into a room. There she saw a big serpent, twenty
shaku long, with a sword in its mouth and a child of seven or
eight years within its coils. The monster’s eyes were large and
glittered like the sun and the moon, and its red tongue incessantly
moved up and down. The serpent said to the woman: “Tell the
Emperor, that this sword does not belong to Japan, but to the
Dragon-palace. My second son®, driven out of my palace on
account of some evil deed, changed into the eight-headed serpent
of the head-waters of the River Hi in Izumo (the Yamato no
orochi), and was killed by Susanowo, who took the sword out of
the snake’s tail and gave it to Amaterasu. Under the reign of
the Emperor Keiko (71—130 A.D.), when Prince Yamato-dake


1 Kusanagi no tsurugi, i=) Wee GN. 2 an 7 AK.


3 In the other versions of the legend it was his daughter.


Digitized by Microsoft®


199


subjected the barbarians, Amaterasu handed over the sword to
Utsuki no miya', who gave it to the Prince. Then my second
son assumed the shape of a big snake, ten shaku long, and lay
down in Yamato-dake’s way at the foot of Ibukiyama (in Omi
province), in order to frighten the Prince and take backthe sword.
The Prince, however, was not afraid of the snake and stepped
over it, thus frustrating my son’s design®. Finally, the latter
reincarnated himself as the Emperor Antoku and jumped into
the sea with the sword, which he returned to me. This child
here is my son in his human shape, and the sword which I am
holding in my mouth is the one you ask for. But I cannot give
it to the Emperor’. On receiving this message, Go Shirakawa
was very much distressed and thought the precious object was
lost. This was, however, not the case, for the real sword was
preserved in the Great Shrine (Daijingti) at Ise, and Antoku’s
sword was only a counterfeit. How strange that the Dragon-god
did not know this!

Another legend in a different way connected the Kusanagi
sword with a Dragon-king. In 674 A.D. a Korean bonze stole
the sword from the Shinto temple at Atsuta in Owari province,
and hid it under his mantle. But a dark cloud descended before
the shrine, took the treasure and placed it back into the sanctuary.
Then the priest, after praying there for a hundred days, again
stole the sword and fled to Omi province. Once more the black
cloud appeared, deprived the thief of his prey and flew away
with it an eastern direction (to Atsuta). A third time the theft
seemed to be crowned with success, for the priest had succeeded
in secretly carrying the sword on board a ship bound for Korea,
when a severe storm arose and checked the vessel in its course.
In despair the Korean threw the sword into the sea, and the
Dragon-king took it and returned it to Atsuta °.


§ 2. The Thunder-god caught by Sukaru and identified with a
Dragon-king.


In the Gempei seiswiki* we find the following remarkable story.


1 33 et. According to the ordinary legend Amaterasu gave the sword to her
grandson Ninigi. Yamato-dake used it afterwards against the barbarians, and after his
death it was placed in the Shinto temple of Atsuta in Owari province.

2 Cf. Nihongi, Ch. VII, K.T.K. Vol. J, p. 148: The god of Mount Ibuki took the
shape of a great serpent, but the Prince strode over it and passed on. Then the god
“raised up the clouds and made an icy rain to fall” (Aston, Nihongi, Vol. I, p. 209).

3 Gempei seisuiki, Ch. XLIV, pp. 1157 seq.

' & Ch. XVII, p. 454, under. the heading: “How Sukaru caught the Thunder”.


Digitized by Microsoft®


200


“At the time of the Emperor Yaryaku (the twenty second Emperor,
457—479), there was an important vassal of His Majesty, Oshibe
Sukaru by name. One day when this man entered the palace of
Hatsuse Asakura and the apartments of the Emperor, who was
staying there, the latter was just in intimate intercourse with
the Empress. As just then a thunderstorm was raging, the
monarch, for shame at having been surprised, ordered Sukaru,
in order to get rid of him, to invite the roaring thunder (to
the palace). The vassal, on having received the Imperial command,
left the palace and rode on horseback from the road of Abe no
Yamada to Toyora-dera, looking up to the sky and crying:
‘Thou, Thunder-god who art roaring in the sky, His Majesty
commands thee to fall down’. The thunder, however, continued
going away and making the air resound with its echoes. Then
Sukaru again set spurs to his horse and exclaimed: ‘Although
thou art a Thunder-god, thou art roaring in the air of Japan.
How shouldst thou be able to disobey the Emperor’s order?’
Then with a loud noise the Dragon-king returned and dropped
on the earth between Toyora-dera and lioka. Sukaru at once
called Shinto priests, caused them to place the Dragon-god in a
sedan-chair, and returned to the palace. When he reported the
_ matter to the Emperor, the Thunder erected his scales, stared
with eyes dilating and watched the Palace, while his radiance
illuminated the whole building. This spectacle frightened His
Majesty, and, after having made all kinds of offerings to the
Thunder-god, he quickly sent him back to the spot where he
had fallen down. This spot is now called ‘The Thunder's Hill’
(Ikazuchi no oka)”.

This is a very old legend, found in the Nihongi and the Rya-
i-ki. The version of the Nihongi' is as follows: — “In the seventh
year of the Emperor Yaryaku’s reign (468), on the third day of
the seventh month, His Majesty said to Oshibe no Sukaru, Minister
of State (Muraji, ji): ‘I wish to see the shape of the god of
Mimoro hill (Mimoro no oka, also called Mount Mimoro). As you
excel others in strength, you shall go and after having caught
him yourself, you must bring him here’. Sukaru answered: ‘I
will try to do so’, and ascending Mimoro hill he caught a big
serpent (Fx hg), which he showed to the Emperor. As the latter
had not practised religious abstinence (in honour of the god),


1 Ch. XIV, p. 242. Cf Aston’s translation (Nihongi, Vol. I, p. 347), where the


name is written “Sukaru Chihisako Beno Muraji”. In the Gempei seisuiki (Ch. XVII,
p. 451), however, at the sidg of the characters ap -F- ib is written in kana: Oshibe.


Digitized by Microsoft®


201


the deity’s thunder rolled and his eyes flashed. The Emperor
was frightened, covered his eyes and did not look upon the god,
but hid himself in the interior of the Palace and ordered the
snake to be released on the hill. For this reason the Emperor
altered the deity’s name into ‘Ikazuchi’ (‘Thunderbolt’)”.

As to the Ryo-i-ki', this gives the same details as the Gempei
seisuiki, which apparently borrowed the legend from it. Instead
of “Dragon-king”, or “Dragon-god”, however, the ancient work
simply calls the deity “Thunder-god” ( ¢& ji), which shows that
the identification of this divinity with a Dragon-king dates from
later times. The author of the Gempei seisuiki, translating the
old text into modern Japanese, followed the ideas of his age,
and, changing the word “Thunder-god”, which he once retained,
the two other times into “Dragon-king” and “Dragon-god’’, he
added the words: “erected his scales and dilated his eyes’. The
fact that the Nihongi spoke of a serpent-shaped mountain god
made the identification with a dragon quite logical. The author
of the Gempei seisurki omitted the last part of the legend, which
in the Ryé-i-ki runs as follows: “Afterwards, when Sukaru had
died, the Emperor by decree ordered to delay the funeral for
seven days and seven nights. He praised his loyalty and had his
tomb made on the same spot where the Thunder had fallen
down. Over the grave he erected a stone monument with the
following inscription: ‘This is the Thunder-catcher Sukaru’s tomb’.
The Thunder, angry at this insult, came down with a loud roar
and trampled upon the stone monument, but while he was
smashing it, he was seized (by Sukaru’s ghost). When the Emperor
heard this, he released the Thunder, who was not dead, but,
being quite perplexed, remained there for seven days and seven
nights. The Emperor ordered another stone monument to be
erected with the following inscription: ‘This is the tomb of
Sukaru, who in life-time and after death caught the Thunder’.
This is the reason why at the time of the old capital (i. e. Suiko
Tennd’s capital, Owarida no miya, »)\ 44 fy By; the Empress
Suiko reigned 593—628) this spot was called ‘lhunder-hill’”.


§ 3. Watatsumi no kami, the Sea-god, identified with a Dragon-king.


A similar alteration of an old text by the author of the Gempet
seisuikt is to be found in the legend about Prince Yamato-dake,


4 fie 2 3p, written by the Buddhist priest Keigar about 750- A. D. Ch. I,
Gunsho ruifi, nr 447, Vol. XVI, p. 23.
Digitized by Microsoft®


202


who, when his ship was tossed about by wind and waves on its
way from Musashi to Kazusa province, was saved by his talented
concubine Otdto Tashibana hime, who jumped into the sea in
order to sacrifice herself on behalf of the Prince to the Dragon-
god, and thus appeased the turbulent waves’. This legend is
borrowed. from the ihongi?, but there we read only about
Watatsumi no kami®, the “God of the Sea’ ( #ff jij).


§ 4. The dragon-hole in the Gion shrine.


A dragon’s hole in a Shintd temple is mentioned by the Zoku
kojidan *. This hole was said to be in the hoden (“treasure-hall”,
where the shintai or “god-bodies” of the gods are, preserved) of
the Gion shrine at Kyoto. In 1221, when the temple was destroyed
by fire, Nashimoto, the Buddhist head-abbot (zasu) of Hieizan,
tried to measure the depth of the hole, but even at a depth of
fifty jo (five hundred shaku) the bottom was not yet reached.


§ 5. The dragon-snake offered by the Sea-god to the Sada shrine.


The Shokoku ryindan * says the following: “In the Shinto
temple of Sada, in Akika district, Izamo province, worship is
performed in several ways. Between .the eleventh and the fifteenth
day of the tenth month there comes from the open sea a small
snake, about one shaku long, floating on the waves and approaching
the shore. It is a beautiful, gold-coloured animal, called dragon-
snake (ff we, ryzja). The priest of the shrine, after having
purified himself, goes to the beach and awaits the snake, which
he carries, coiled up upon some seaweeds, to the temple. It is a
present from the Sea-god to the shrine”.


§ 6. A dragon-snake as a tree-sprite on Koya san.


Another tale in the same work® refers to a serpent- shaped
tree-sprite, the spirit of a willow called ja-yanagi, WE Pi, or
“snake-willow”, on Koya san. This was a big serpent or dragon,


1 Ch. XLIV. p. 1157. 2 Ch. VII, KT. K, Vol. I, p. 146,

3 Cf. above, a oe Chap. I, § 3, p. 137.

4 at ns ak i aA probably written at the end of the thirteenth or in the be-
ginning of edges Pagan Ch. IV, Gunsho ruiji, nr 487, Vol. XVII, p. 684.

5 BK Bl FA A, B&R. written in 1746 by Kixvoxa Senryo, ay Fa Wh hes


Ch. I, Zoku Teikoku ci Vol. XX, p. 879.
6 Ch. I, p. 894.


Digitized by Microsoft®


203


which from remote ages lived on this sacred mountain, till it was
forced by Kobo Daishi to retreat to a spot about half a mile
distant. He made the demon promise to do so by causing poisonous
snakes to appear on his (the demon’s) body, so that he suffered
immensely and at once was willing to go away. Thenceforth
Kobo Daishi forbade to bring flutes on the mountain, for fear
that the sound of a flute, by its resembling a dragon’s cry,
might attract the serpent and cause it to return to its former
abode. This’ was told by one of the monks to Hideyoshi, when
the latter, staying as a pilgrim on the mountain, had ordered
a famous nod-actor, whom he had taken with him, to give a
performance. The monk warned him, not to arouse the dragon
by flute playing, but Hideyoshi langhed at him. But no sooner
had the tones of the flute resounded on the mountain, than
dark clouds arose in the clear sky and covered the earth. A
severe thunderstorm shook mountains and valleys, trees were
uprooted and the rain poured down in torrents. Hideyoshi,
frightened by these terrible signs of the dragon’s presence, fled
from the monastery and took shelter in a small house at the
foot of the mountain. When about two hours had elapsed, the
tempest abated, but Hideyoshi’s unbelief in Kobo's wisdom was
cured for ever.


§ 7. The “Heavenly Dragon’s Well” at the Suwa shrine.


According to the Honché zokugenshi', one of the seven wonders
of the famous Shinto shrine of Suwa-Myojn, at the Suwa lake
(30 5H Ws], Suwa-ko), where the Tenryt-gawa (FE HE Jil, “Hea-
venly Dragon River”) takes its rise, is the Tenryu no ido, or
“Heavenly Dragon's Well” (3K #E 7 JF). There was always
water dripping from the overhanging roof of the temple into
this well, which phenomenon was apparently ascribed to a dragon.
When Kublai Khan’s Armada attacked Japan, the God of Suwa
flew in the shape of a long, five-coloured cloud, having the
resemblance of a serpent, from the lake to the West, in order
to assist the Japanese against the foreign invaders °.

In the neighbourhood of the same “Heavenly Dragon River”,


4 IN ia] RB RK, written in 1746 by Kucvoka Senryo, aA Fe) A ae
(also called Brian, FC [L]), Ch. I, p. 19, quoted in the Shiojiri, Rigg 7.» written


in 1749 by ZANSETSUSHA SoKYt, if; = a4 # R, Ch. IL.


2 Taiheiki, Ch. XXXIX, p. 12.
Digitized by Microsoft®


204


in Totomi ‘province, a big dragon’s head was preserved in a
Buddhist temple called Zuda-dera (BA [i~ 3). It was taken to
Yedo and there shown to the people. The river’s name was said
to have originated from the presence of this dragon '.


§ 8. Kurikara Myo-o, the dragon-shaped mountain-god.


Another Shinto shrine, the temple of Kurikara Myo-0, {A Hi
3m Ae BY =, is dedicated to a dragon-shaped mountain-god, who
is said to live in a waterfall on Mount Oyama in Sagami province.
As the Nihon shikyo fizoku shi? (1902) tells us, in olden times
the Buddhist priest Ryoben was preaching there one day, when
a violent thunderstorm suddenly arose and the water in the
hollow, excavated by the cataract, was heavily disturbed. A huge
dragon came forth from it and said ‘to the priest: “I am the
guardian-god of this mountain. After having heard your sermon,
IT wish to serve Buddha”. Then Rydben worshipped the dragon,
and afterwards as little Shintd shrine was built on the spot and
dedicated to the dragon, which was called by the Buddhist name
“Kurikara Myo-3”, “Kurikara, the Light-King” (i.e. Vidya-raja,
the word Light being used in the sense of (mystic) Knowledge,
Vidya).

This was apparently an original Japanese dragon-shaped moun-
tain-god, who was identified by the Buddhists with Fudd Myd-3’s
dragon-shape; the Shintd shrine, however, remained his sanctuary.
Kurikara is, as we read in Mivra’s Bukkyod iroha jiten®, Fudo
Mys-o’s “Samaya” (= B HR) shape, a black dragon coiled
around a sword.


4 Shiojiri, Ch. IT, p. 411. 2 P. U4,
3 Vol. Ill, p. 57, s.v. Kurikara; ef. below, Ch. VI, § 10.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER VI.
THE DRAGON-LANTERN.


Among the many ignes fatui of Japan the Dragon-lantern
(Ryo, BE RE) occupies an important place. It mostly rises
from the sea and flies from there to the mountains, where it is
seen hanging in some special old pine or cryptomeria tree before
a (mostly Buddhist) temple. Old pine trees especially are famous
in respect to these mysterious lights, which are evidently offerings
sent by the dragons of the sea to the deities or Buddhas or
Bodhisattvas worshipped in the shrines. There is an enormous
number of legends telling of the Dragon-lanterns appearing along
the mountainous coasts of Japan. In order to make clear the
people’s ideas on this point, however, it may be sufficient to
refer to a few passages, because they closely resemble one
another, and the same conceptions lie at the bottom of them all.

The old annals do not speak of the Dragon-lantern, nor do
we find any mention made of it in other books before the
fourteenth century.


§ 1. Dengyo Daishi’s image of Yakushi Nyorai.


The Kigegawa Yakushi engi! says the following: “The image
of Yakushi Nyorai in Jokwoji (also called Shoryizan, 7F HE Ly,
“Blue Dragon monastery”), in Katsushika district, Shimosa
province, is made by Dengyo Daishi*. When Jikaku Daishi
stayed in Asakusa-dera (the famous Kwannon temple in Asakusa,
the well-known district of Yedo), an old man with grey hair
appeared to him and said: ‘In the North-east there is a holy


3 K as mu pn ti ea ri written in 1327 by the Buddhist priest Gisun.


ES ¥if], Gunsho ruija, Vol. XV, nr 442, p. 637.
2 ges ee KK fifi (767822), the founder of the Tendai sect in Japan.
3 we K fifi (794864), in 854 appointed head (zasu) of the Tendai sect.


Digitized by Microsoft®


206


place, where I have dedicated a miraculous image made by
Dengyo Daishi’. Thereupon the man disappeared, and Jikaku went
outside and looked towards the North-east. Suddenly a lucky
cloud (iq SZ, zwi-un, a cloud of a lucky colour) arose, and in it
a blue dragon was visible. Then the Daishi secretly left the
temple and went in search of this blue dragon, till he arrived
at the cottage (where the above-mentioned old man had lived
as a hermit and had obtained the image). There he worshipped ~
the image and saw the blue dragon, which was still there.
Jikaku turned himself to the lucky cloud and addressed the
dragon as follows: ‘I wish to say a few words to you, you sacred
dragon, listen to me. I want to built a temple here, which you
must guard and protect. from calamity. From this moment I
appoint you guardian-god of the shrine’. When the Daishi had
finished speaking, the dragon, which had listened motionless,
with his head bent down in reverence, disappeared. The priest
considered this to be a good sign, and called the sanctuary
‘Blue Dragon temple’. Up till this day from time to time a
dragon-lantern appears there as a wonderful, lucky omen, probably
in consequence of the above facts (i.e. because the blue dragon
is the temple’s guardian-god)”.

The Edo meisho ki‘ tells us that from olden times many
pilgrims went up to this temple, which is also called Jokwaji
(ft 3 3. “Temple of the Pure Light”), to worship the dragon-
lantern, which was sure to arise before the image of Yakushi Nyorai
on the eighth day of every month, and on New-Year’s morning.


§ 2. Kobo Daishi’s spirit.


In the Tomioka Hachiman shaki, “History of the Shintd temple
of Hachiman of Tomioka” *, we read that in 1628 Kobo Daishi’s
ghost appeared in a dream to a Shingon priest and ordered all
the priests of his sect in Kwanté, except the heads of Koya and
Sekigaku, to assemble in Hitaijima (in Yedo). They obeyed the
saint’s command and preached sermons for ninety days at a
stretch. At the same time they erected a temple, dedicated to


1jL B® Ff 8G. written by Asar Ry0-1, is Ft J a, who lived


4639—1709, and printed in 1662; Ch. IH, p. 19.


21H Bl AV BA fk BL voted by Konmmana Broan, EE AM


(1793—1870), in his Ryu-an zuthitsu, pp & bs #, written in 1819, Hyakka
setsurin, Vol. ie aS =, p. 487.


Digitized by Microsoft®


2U4


Kobo Daishi’s soul (Mikage-do), and since that time a dragon-
lantern arose before this shrine.


§ 3. Jigen Daishi’s spirit.


The Jigen Daishi den', the biography of Jigen Daishi, i.e. the
Buddhist bishop Tenkai?, who was greatly revered by Ieyasu,
and who died in 1648, contains the following tale. — “In the
evening of the second day of the eleventh month of the twentieth
year of the Kwanei era (1643) a special service was held (for
Jigen’s soul) in the Sembakita temple (in Musashi), when a
dragon-lantern rose from a well and hung on the top of a
cryptomeria tree at the southern front of the kyakuden (“reception-
hall” of the temple). Priests and laymen stared at the light with
astonishment, and paid worship to it. Immediately a fast runner
was despatched as a messenger to the Nikko temple, in order
to proclaim the news, and everybody was filled with admiration
(for Jigen’s holiness, for his soul was evidently believed to be
connected with the light, like that of Kobo Daishi in the prece-
ding legend)” *.


§ 4. “Dragon-lantern pine trees”.


Very frequently mention is made of so-called “Dragon-lantern
pine trees” (Rywtd no matsu, ¥E AS), which stood before
Buddhist temples, and in the branches of which a dragon-lantern
_ was said to arise regularly. Now and then we read of such trees
standing near Shinto shrines, but by far the greatest part of the
passages concerning them, as well as those concerning the dragon-
lantern in general, relate to Buddhist sanctuaries.

Before the chapel of Monju (Mafjugri), called Monjudo
(30 Bf ), at Ama no hashidate (one of the Nihon sankei, the.
three most beautiful places of Japan) in Yosa district, Tango
province, situated near the so-called. Kuze no to, or Kire-to, there
stood a “dragon-lantern pine tree”. At midnight of the sixteenth


1 Be RA Bit 1. 2 ie.

3 Curiously rationalistic at the side of these passages sound the following words of
the Ensei meibutsu kohot ( 8 py By a aH iH» Ch. VIII), quoted on the
same page of the Rytian zuihitsw: —“The ‘Devil-lights’ (Airin, pil yy) and Dragon-
lanterns which appear above swamps, pools, broad plains, mountain temples, grave-
yards etc. are ‘zwavelstofgas’ coming forth from rotten animals and plants’. The word


“gwavelstofgas”, written in kana, is a Dutch word and must be “zwavelwaterstofgas”,


i.e. hydrogen sulphide.


Digitized by Microsoft®


208


day of every month there appeared from the northeastern sea
a dragon-lantern, which flew to this tree; and in the night of
the sixteenth day of the first, fifth and ninth months another
light, called the “Heavenly Lantern” (Tenia, FE WK) descended
from the sky. Also a third light, the so-called “Jse no go 16”,
or “August Light of Ise”, which is mentioned in the Yaho meisho
ryaku (1697), where it is said to be named Shinto (ji) RR, the
“Sacred Light’) and to be made by the divinity of the Daijingt
at Ise (Amaterasu), was visible on this spot. The image of the
Bodhisattva Mafijugri (Monju Bosatsu), which was worshipped
there, was said to be of Indian origin and to have come out
of the sea.

The same temple is referred to in the Kw zdédanshi*, where
we read the following particulars concerning the light: — “It
comes from a deep spot in the sea, two cho from the “Broken
Door” (Kire- to) of Hashidate, where the Gate of the Dragon-
palace is said to be. When the weather is fine and wind and
waves are calm, it goes from Kire-to to the Monju shrine. Unbe-
lieving people cannot see it, or, if they see it, they think it to be
the light of some fisherman. It stops on the top of a high pine tree
which stands about 20 ken south of the Monjudo. After half an hour
or shorter it is extinguished. From time to time a little boy is
seen on the top of the tree, carrying the lamp which is called
Tendo, FR KY, “Heavenly Lantern” (this word may also be written
KF ig, Tendo, “Heavenly boy”). Formerly this boy (an angel)
often appeared, but now rarely”.

The Nihon shakyo fuzoku shi* (1902) mentions an old “Dragon-
lantern pine tree” which still stands near a Shinto temple called
Uhara jinja (3 Ji yh tk), in Karida village, Kyoto district,
Buzen province. There Toyotama-bime, the Sea-god’s daughter,
in the shape of a dragon gave birth to a son‘, and at the same
time a light (a dragon- lantern) came flying from the sea and
hung in the same pinetree °.


1 we XIII, p. ay About this work see above, p. 170, note 4.

2 4 #e Rie BR SB, “Collection of all kinds of strange tales”, written by “the
son of Nakamura, on of Buzen”, in the Tembun era (1532—1554) (cf. Matsunoya
hikki, Ch. Ill, p. 4, and the work itself, Ch. IJ, p- 15, where the author states that
his father, Nakamura, Lord of Buzen, lived in the Bummei era (1469—1486).

3 P. 436. 4 Cf. above, Book II, Ch. I, § 5, p. 139.

_5 Cf. the Buzen kokushi, BEL Pay [BQ as. written in 1865 by Taxapa Yosuicurxa,
=a We = ir. who does not call the light a dragon-lantern, but states that it
appeared even in his days.


Digitized by Microsoft®


209


We may mention here another Shintd shrine, the Shirahige
jinja (EA #% iif rk) in Shiga district, Omi province, where a
dragon-lantern was said to enter the worshipping hall (haiden)
from time to time, instead of hanging in a pine tree'; and the
Jogit (e ¥#), a Shinto temple in Tsuruga, Echizen province,
where every New-year’s night such a light arose in a “Dragon-
lantern pine tree” which stood in the temple garden *.

Before the Buddhist chapel of Kasai Yakushi (4 $f 3 Be eit
situated on a mountain north of Okayama, in Bizen province,
there stood a “Dragon-lantern pine tree”. Every night, especially
in summer time, will-o’-the-wisps were seen there °*.


§ 5. Tide-stones connected with dragon-lanterns.


On the top of Kaneyama, a mountain very near the above-
mentioned chapel of Kasai Yakushi, there was a big stone with
a hole in it, about one shaku square. When tide was high, this
hole was filled with water, and at low tide it was dry *.

It seems that such stones were considered to be connected
with the dragons who sent the dragon-lanterns, for also on the
Sata promontory, in Hata district, Tosa province (30 ri west of
Kochi) there was at the same period (1746) the so-called Ushio-
ishi’ (38] 4G) or *Tide-stone”, a concave stone, filled with water
at high tide and- empty at ebb time, while on the same spot,
near the Shinto temple of Ashizuri no Myojin (BE Re 7 BA ih),
a dragon-lantern used to appear from the sea simultaneously
with the descent from the sky of a Heavenly Light (Tenia,
WK). The latter was one of the seven wonders of the place.
Another of these wonders was a dragon-horse, which used to
come at the hour of the ox (1—3 a.m.) and to eat the small
bamboo, which for this reason gradually died out in the vicinity
of the temple). .

The connection between the tide-stones and the dragons at once
reminds us of the legends concerning TFoyotama-hiko, the Sea-god,
who gave the. tide-jewel. to Hiko-hohodemi °, and- concerning the
Tonys ings, who was assisted by the ‘gods of Kasuga and


“4 Yuho meisho Fyaku (1697), Ch. VI, p. 16.
2 Toryuki kohen (see below, p. 210, note 2), p. 113.
3 Honcho zokugenshi (1746, cf. above, Book. II, Ch.. V, § 7, p. 203, note 1), Ch.
IV, p. 40. _.. 4 Ibidem.
“5 Shokoku rijindan (1746, see above, p. 202, note 5), Ch. I, Section VI, P. 998,
6 See above, Book Il, Ch. I, § 6, p. 140.
Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl. XII, N° 2. 14


Digitized by Microsoft®


210


Kawakami by means of the jewels of low and high tide, taken
from Sagara, the Dragon-king '.


§ 6. The Mountain-light and the Dragon-lantern of Gammokuzan
in Etchu province.


The Toyuki kohen® states the following about a temple of the
Zen sect in Niikawa district, Etcht province, called Gammokuzan
(H& A Ly) or Sakkwazan. When this shrine was opened by its
founder, the priest Daitetsu, a pupil of Dogen (3% 7¢, Shoyo
Daishi, 1200—1253), the Mountain-god and a Dragon-god assisted
and performed all kinds of miracles. Still in the author’s time
(second half of the eighteenth century) yearly on the 13th day
of the 7th month (probably the date of the opening of the
shrine) two lights appeared on the top of a pine tree in the
. temple garden. One of these lights (that of the Mountain-god)
came flying from the summit of Mount Tateyama, the other
(that of the Dragon-god) rose up from the sea, and both stopped
on the pine tree. They were called the Mountain-light and the
Dragon-lantern (Santé, Rywto), and were seen every year by, the
people of the neighbourhood. “Although”, says Tacnipana NanxET,
“there are many cases of dragon-lanterns coming out of the sea,
they rarely appear simultaneously and on the same pine tree
with a mountain-light, as is the case at this temple”.


§ 7. Kwannon’s dragon-lantern at Rytkoji.


On Itozaki yama, in Kchizen province, Hannan (the present
Sakai) district, there is a Buddhist temple called Ryzkoji (7
i, 3, “Dragon’s rise-temple”), which was built by a Chinese
priest who came from China on the back of an enormous tortoise,
carrying a precious Kwannon image. When approaching the coast
the tortoise emitted a strong light, and the fishermen, seeing
this, went out to meet it and carried the image ashore. A temple
was dedicated to this Kwannon, and every night a blue dragon
appeared there in a so-called “Dragon-lantern pine tree”, carrying
a light in honour of the deity. When he appeared, there was
always a large number of holy priests, clad in magnificent robes,


4 See above, Book II, Ch. I, § 7, p. 142.


2 pu Nid au eA oo written in 1797 by TacHtBaNa NANKEr, 1G e2] Rs


(4752—1805), Zoku Teikoku bunko, Vol. XX (Kiko bunshii, AL, 47 Bl 46), p. 113.


Digitized by Microsoft®


211


making heavenly music in the air. The priests could see them,
but the ordinary people could only hear their music '.


§ 8. Tomyo-dake, Kumano Gongen at Nogami, Kwomyodji at
Kamakura and Zenkwoji at Nagano.


Sometimes a mountain peak is called after a dragon-lantern,
as e.g. the Tomyo-dake (i BA Fk), or “Light-Peak”, in Kawachi
province, Ishikawa district (the present Minami Kawachi district),
where such a light appeared at Kokidera, a Buddhist temple, the
guardian-god of which was the Shintd mountain-deity Iwabune
Myojin *.

In the last night of the year, at the hour of the ox (I—3a.m.,),
a dragon-lantern used to be seen near the shrine of Kumano
Gongen at Nogami village, Suwo province, while at the same
time another “sacred light” (shinkwa, ji JX) came flying, swift
like an arrow, from the neighbouring “Dragon-mouth Mountain”.
While worshipping these lights the villagers entered upon the-
New year *.

Another dragon-lantern was said to arise yearly from the sea
to the clouds in the vicinity of Kwomyoji (3 Hf 3), the “Shrine
of Brilliant Light” in Kamakura in two nights during the temple
festival which lasted ten days*. And from the 14th to the 16th
of the 7th month a similar light flew up from the Saikawa, a
river in Shinano province, and, jumping from tree top to tree
top it alighted on the south-western gable of the main building
of Zenkwoji, the famous Buddhist sanctuary at Nagano 5.


§ 9. The light of Yotsukura.


A celebrated dragon-lantern was that of Yotsukura, a village
on the coast of Hitachi province. It is described as a glittering
fire ball, fully one shaku in diameter, and spreading a very clear
light. Fishermen explained this (as well as all other so-called
dragon-lanterns) to be a mass of flying insects born upon the
water, which dispersed and disappeared as soon as they heard
people approaching. Therefore they never appeared in storm and
rain (because they were afraid of noise). “Sometimes”’, they said,
“these insects cluster into one mass, which is seen hanging on


4 Yuho meisho ryaku, Ch. V, p. 16.

2 Ibidem, Ch. IV, p. 59.

3 Shokoku rijindan, Ch. III, Section VI, pp. 928 seq.

4 Tbidem. 5 Honcho zokugenshi, Ch. Ill, p. 8.


Digitized by Microsoft®


212


the top of a high tree or on the eaves of a temple, and which
looks like.a ball of fire. The so-called shiranu-bi (J FAK,
“unknown fire’) is the same '.

More details about the Yotsukura light are to be found in the
To-6 kiko, which says that it moves, floating on the water,
from the sea along the Kamado river up to the valley brooks.
At the foot of Mount Akai-dake it flies up and is soon seen
hanging between the branches of big cryptomerias, till it disappears
into the depths of the wood, continually followed by other lights,
in an endless row, from evening till daybreak. In bright moonshine
the lights are small, but in dark nights they are big like fire-
flies or torches. A strange thing is that they are only visible
from the so-called Enseki (Swallow-stone) on-a projecting part
of the mountain. The author calls it inkwa (fk, Yin-fire),
an expression borrowed from Chinese books, and Dean it
with the “Sacred Lights” (ji #&) and the “Cold Flames” (ER RR)
mentioned by Chinese authors.


§ 10. The lights of Ushijima, Ishidozan and Kurikara.


In the last night of the year — a time when many dragon-,
lanterns were said to appear, as the above legends have taught
us — three strange lights used to arise from differents spots.
near the island Ushijima and to join into one mass which flew
to the “Dragon-lantern pine tree” of Asahizan Jonichiji, a Bud-
dhist temple at Himi, a little place in Etcht province, Himi
district, and seen hanging between its branches °.

It was also a dragon-lantern which the Buddhist priest Nansan
saw on an old pine tree, when he crossed Mount Ishidozan in
the year 806; Amida Nyorai appeared there, seated on a wonderful
cloud. Nansan built a Buddhist temple on the spot and placed
Amida Nyorai’s image in it. Four centuries later, when the
Emperor Juntoku (1211—1221) went to Sado province and his
ship was tossed on the waves by a severe storm, all of a sudden
a eee arose in the South on the same spot and served:


1 Oshii-banashi, R Hl] YR BB AR. Onchishosho (GH Jot AE AE), vol. XI,


p. 50, 52,


2 HF Ra AE 4F > written in 1760 oo NAGAKUBO GENSHU, fe N 4%: 4 ER,
and quoted by Kurimara Ryu-an, 3 BE. ea ps (14793—4870) in his Ryw-an


cuihitsu, fi) & 2 a By ee, written in 1819;"Hyakka setsurin, Vol. iS f —, , p. 487.


3 Sanshi hidan kohen (1779) (cf. above, p. 174, note 1), Ch. VII, p. 990.


Digitized by Microsoft®


213


as a beacon to the Imperial ship, which safely reached the coast '.

In the Kurikara? mountains, which form the boundary between
Etcha and Kaga, there was a Shingon temple called Chorakuji
or Kurikara-san, with an image of Fudd Myo-6. This sanctuary
was miraculous beyond description, and famous for its wonderful
“Mountain-lights” and “Dragon-lanterns” *.


§ 11. Ignes fatui in general. The dragon-lantern is the only one
which arises from the sea and flies to the mountains.


Not only in regard to the dragon-lantern, but also in other respects
especially old pine trees were famous for their ignes fatui.
So we read of the “gold-fire pine tree” on the road from Komatsu
to Kanazawa, where phosphorescent light, the so-called *rinkwa”
(BE IK), or abou" (<> 4K, gold-fire) was seen to fly up and
down. This fire, however, did not come from the sea, like the
dragon- lantern, but was ascribed to the fact that formerly criminals
used to be beheaded under this tree, whose blood, penetrating
into the ground, had become so-called “ki-rin” (BL JE) or
«demon’s fire”; or some one had in great anger committed
suicide on this spot, and “the fire of his heart made the pine
tree burn” ‘.

The idea of blood causing these mysterious lights is borrowed
from China; we read in Dz Groor'’s Religious ae of China®
that blood, identified with the tsing Kt (4 SX), the breath or

yang soul possessed by vital energy, especially the blood of men
' killed by weapons, and that of horses and cows, forms ignes fatui.
They are soul-flames, especially to be seen on battle-fields. The
identification of blood and soul is not only a Chinese conception °,
but is also found among some Indian tribes of North America,
as we learn from Frazer’s Golden Bough’. As to China, there
the ignes fatui were believed to be produced especially by old
trees and old blood®.

Also demons were considered to cause will-o’-the-wisps, as the
names “ki-rin’? and “oni-bi” (BA 4), “demon-fire”, clearly show.
Moreover, old bewitching animals, like tanusi and mujina, were


Sanshu kidan (1764) (cf. p. 172, note 7), Ch. IV, p. 815.

Cf. above, Ch. V, § 8, p. 204: Kurikara Myo-0, the dragon-shaped Fudo Myo-0.
Sanshii kidan, Ch. V, p. 835 (santo, ryuto, Wy RE BE IRE ).

Ibidem, Ch. II, p. 713; ‘‘Hachiman’s gold-fire”.

Vol. IV, p. 80, 6 De Groot, |.1., Vol. I, pp. 217, 268, note 2.
Vol. I (second edition), p. 353. :

De Groot, |.1., Vol. IV, p. 80.


OwWtr wpe


Digitized by Microsoft®


214


notorious in this respect’. Besides tanuki-bi, kitsune-bi (badger
and fox-fire) and oni-bi, the ignes fatui were called inkwa (2K,
or Yin-fire, Fire of Darkness), kumo no hi (dy] 7 4, spider-fire),
kaigetsu no hi (H% AL 7 3%, sea-moon-fire’, susuke ando (WE 4F XY
sooty lantern) *, or bozu-bi (4% FE YX, monk’s fire) *.

Not: always, however, are demons ’°, or old animals, or dragons
believed to cause the Jack-o'-lanterns, nor are these only con-
sidered to be angry souls of the dead°, for also Buddhas and
Shintd gods may. be the producers of these wonderful “ burari-62”,
or “dangling lights’. Amida Nyorai himself, as we have seen
above’, appeared with the dragon-lantern on Ishiddzan, and the
name Butsu-to (4 &), or “Buddha’s lights”, is sufficient evidence
of this belief. As to the Shintd gods, we may mention the ignes
fatui near Gofuku village in Etchi, which were said to be caused
by the jealous spirit of the goddess Fukura-hime no Mikoto,
whose consort, the. god Noto-hiko, during her absence took a
second wife, whereupon she pelted his temple with stones *. And
in the year 1770 the god Sannd made a sacred light (ji ,
shintd) appear in the dead of night in the worshipping-hall of
his temple in Sebamachi, at the western mouth of the Nami-
kawa; after two nights he stopped it in consequence of offerings
made to him and kagura dances performed in his honour °.

So we see that there is a great variety of ignes fatui in Japan.
The dragon-lantern, however, is the only one which arises from
the sea and flies to the mountains; all the others start and
remain in the woods, or fly from there to the sea coast, where
they sometimes fall into the water '’. The reason for this diffe-
rence is clear: the dragon-lantern is believed to be an offering
sent by the dragons. of the sea to the deities, Buddhas or
Bodhisattvas in the mountains, while the other lights, on the con-
trary, are ascribed to these divine beings themselves, or to demons,
animals or spirits of the dead, all of which have their abodes in
the mountains and woods or on the grassy plains of the battle-fields.


1 Cf. my treatise on “The Fox and the Badger in Japanese Folklore, Transactions
of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. XXXVI, Part. IIT, pp. 154 seq., 156.
2 Sanshi kidan kohen, Ch. VI, pp. 955 seq.


3 Ibidem. 4 Sanshu kidan, Ch. III, p. 752.

5 Mami, JRE WR, ef. Sanshii kidan, Ch. Il, p. 770.

6 Sanshi kidan, Ch. I, p. 664; Ch, V, p. 840. 7 P. 242.

8 Sanshit kidan, Ch. V, p. 840. 9 Sanshu kidan kohen, Ch. VIII, p. 1001.


10 Cf. Sanshti kidan kohen, Ch. VI, p. 956: a fisher catches them in his net, but
the numberles small lights escape through the mazes, fly- up, and join into one massive
ball of ‘fire which soars away through the air; perhaps, says the author, was it a
transformation of old blood.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER VII.
THE CHINESE DRAGON'S EGGS IN JAPAN.


§ 1. The dragon-fetus remains in the egg for three thousand years.


Jn the sixteenth century of our era a Japanese author ' spoke
of an old (certainly Chinese) tradition, according to which a dragon’s
fetus lives during a thousand years in the sea, for a thousand
years in the mountains and, after having been among men (‘in
a village”, says the text) for the same long period, it finally is
born, becomes a dragon and ascends to the sky *. During these
three thousand years the fetus lives as a very small snake within
a stone, the dragon’s egg, which is first lying at the bottom of
the sea, then comes to the mountains (how it got there is not
explained), where after a thousand years it is picked up by
somebody who carries it home and preserves it on account of
its beautiful colours, or uses it as an ink-stone (suzuri, Jil). As
it invariably has the remarkable peculiarity of constantly pro-
ducing water (the dragon’s element), it is a very convenient
ink-stone indeed *. But woe him who possesses such a stone at
the end of the millennial period which the fetus must pass
among mankind, for then the stone splits, and a small snake
creeps out of it, which in a few moments becomes larger and
larger, and with a terrible noise forces its way to the sky,
smashing the roof amid thunder and lightning, and ascending in
a dark cloud. The little reptile has become an enormous four-
legged dragon, which leaves the narrow abodes of men and frees
himself in this terrific way.


41 Kii zddanshu (1532—1554) (cf. above, p. 208, note 2), Ch. III, p. 16.
2, Cf. above, Book I, Ch. III, § 16, pp. 88 sqq.


3 In the Hyakka setsurin (Vol. ae aS —., p. 487) we find the following names


of ink-stones: Rywringetsu-ken, bE fh A Ai or “Dragon-scales-moon-inkstone”,
and Rywbi-ken, BE BB i “Dragon’s tail-inkstone”,


Digitized by Microsoft®


216


§ 2. Dragons born from beautiful stones picked up in the mountains.


A remarkable ink-stone was preserved in olden times, says
the Ki zédanshi', in a Zen monastery at Kanagawa, Musashi
province. Drops of water were constantly dripping out of this
stone, but nobody understood the reason of this strange pheno-
menon. Once upon a time, on a very hot summer day, when
the monks were sitting together in a cool room, all of a sudden
the ink-stone split of its own accord, and a small worm, about
2 bu (0.24 inches) long, crept out of it. The monks were about
to kill the beast, but the head-priest forbade them to do so, and
carefully carried it on a fan to the garden, where he put-it into
the lotus pond. All the monks followed him, and while they
were looking at the worm, they saw with astonishment how the
little creature, drawing together and stretching its body, grew
larger and larger. In a great fright they ran back into the house,
but even there they soon felt themselves no longer safe, for the
sky, hitherto quite clear, at once was covered with clouds, thunder
and lightning raged, and a pitch-black darkness filled the garden
and enwrapped the building. Then they all fled away through
the gate and saw from far how the dragon in an immense cloud
ascended to the sky, first his head, then his four-legged body,
and finally his enormous tail. When he had disappeared, the
clouds dispersed and the sky became clear as before. The garden,
the pond and the building, however, were all in a terrible con-
dition. In the mean time people from the neighbouring villages
came to the rescue, thinking that the monastery was on fire.

A writer of the eighteenth century, Kiucn1 Srxire:*, relates
the same accident as having happened in Kanazawa (instead of
Kanagawa). Further, he mentions a round stone which was picked
up by a boy in the mountains near Sammon, in Omi province.
As water was constantly trickling out of this stone, the boy
used it in later years to wet his ink-slab. After fifty years, when
he had attained the rank of Archbishop —- the stone apparently
had brought him prosperity — the curious object split and a
dragon arose to the sky, after breaking through the ceiling and
the roof. The stone existed still in Sexirei’s time, and in the
middle of it there was a hole of the size of a bean.


4 Ch. V, p. 4.


2 K iy G ms, who lived 1722—4801, in the Unkonshi kohen, = WE a oe


B oe “Records on cloud-roots continued”, written in 1779; Ch. IT, p. ar The first
volume of this work (zempen) appeared in 1772, and the third (sampen) in 1804.


Digitized by Microsoft®


217


A’ similar dragon's ege was used by a Buddhist priest in
Moriyama, Omi province, in 1774, for grinding his tea, till the
dragon was born and ascended, leaving a round hole in the
middle of the stone '.

In another case such an egg was recognized before by a great
scholar, thoroughly versed in Chinese literature, the famous [rd
Jinsat’®, who warned a Court-noble, telling him that a magnifi-
cent stone, square and five-coloured, in the nobleman’s possession
was a dragon’s egg, and that he had better throw it away in
some lonely spot. The man followed the scholar’s advice, and
built a little Shintd shrine in the open field outside the capital,
in which he placed. the stone. A few years afterwards the shrine
was smashed by the dragon which ascended to heaven. This
stone was a so-called ryishd-seki, HE AE 4, or “Dragon produ-
cing stone” *.

The name of “dragon-horse- stone” (ryu-me-seki, HE BR 4) was
given to another remarkable stone, white as crystal and as big
as the palm of the hand, which was lying on the desk of a
samurai in Hizen province. In its centre a moving creature was
visible, and the stone moved by itself from one side of the desk
to the other. One day the man placed a tea cup filled with water
on the desk, and when he came back the cup was empty. The
next day he made the same experiment with a big bowl, and
while he was talking with some friends in the next room, they
heard a noise as of wind and waves. At once they went to look
what the matter was, and discovered a lizard (tokage, 4G rad *F-;
litt. “little stone-dragon”) running from the bowl to the stone,
which it entered *.

Two “snake-producing stones” (shd-ja-seki, AE WE 4 )° were
found in a hole at Kyoto in 1762, and in 1780 a “golden snake
stone” (¢> HE 4) was picked up in the mountains by a child.
Water was constantly flowing out of it, till it was cooked and
the dragon inside was killed. Then it was split and the dead
body: of a little gold-coloured snake was found in it®.

Although they were not dragon’s eggs, we may mention here
two stones which were believed to be connected with dragons.
One of them was a big stone lying in a hollow excavated by a
waterfall near Kayao village, Inukami district, Omi. province,


4 Ibidem. 2 RR {EZ WE, a kangakusha who lived 1626—1705.
3 Unkonshi kohen, Ch. Il, p. 8. 4 Vbidem, Ch. II, p. 10. a“
5 Ibidem, Ch. Il, p. 12. 6 Ibidem, Ch. III, p. 7. Be


Digitized by Microsoft®


218


which was said to belong to the Dragon-god of the place and
was called “Dragon-god-stone” (7E ih 4, Ryujin-seki) by the
villagers. In the Kyoho era (1716—17835) five or six men came
to the neighbouring villages and asked the inhabitants to sell
them woman’s hair in order to make a rope by means of which
they might carry the stone as an offering to the Dragon-god of
Seta. A short time afterwards the stone actually disappeared,
but it was much too heavy to have been carried away by human
hands (probably the men in question were transformed dragons) '.
The second stone, which was black and about three shaku long,
lay in a garden and was said to cause even a clear summer
sky to become cloudy in a moment, when it was touched by
somebody. In 1764 the stone was no longer outside, but within
the castle, so that the experiment could not be made any more.
“Perhaps”, says Horra, the author of the Sanshu hkidan, “it is a
so-called ‘cloud-root’ (SE fb, un-kon)” *.

We find the following details in the Shdsan chomon kishu (1849) *
The abbot of a Shingon monastery had a so-called dragon-gem
(HE 7 FE, ryt no tama), which was considered to be an un-
commonly precious object. On cloudy days it became moist at
once, and when it rained it was quite wet. In reality it was
not a dragon-gem, but a dragon’s egg (ry# no tamago, HE 7 Sf).
Such eggs are hatched amid thunderstorm and rain; then they
destroy even palaces and uproot big trees, and it is therefore
advisable to throw them away before-hand on a lonely spot in
the mountains. The abbot, however, deemed it not necessary to
take this precaution with the dragon’s egg in his possession,
because it was dead. “Thirty years ago’, he said, “the egg
became moist as soon as the weather was a little cloudy, and
its luster was magnificent; but as it afterwards did not show
moistness any more even on rainy days, nor grew any longer,
it is evidently dead”. Mrvosai SHdsan (the author) himself went
to the monastery to see this wonderful egg, and gives a picture
of it.(p. 573), which shows the dragon-fetus inside. Its dimen-
sions were: length, 4 sun, 8 bu; breadth, 4 sun, 6 bu; it was
like a “diamond-natured thunder-axe-stone” (7k Gf HE GA,
gyoku-shitsu rai-fu-seki, called by the people Tengu no- ono,


4 Ibidem, Ch. II, p. 43.
2 Sanshi kidan, Ch. 1V, p. 788.


3 74 Ly Se Bal ay SA. written in 1849 by Suosan sar suunn, AA [Ly Hp


= 3 A Zoku Teikoku bunko, Vol. XLVII, Kinsei kidan zenshu. Ch. IV, pp. 572 seqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


219


K 4) 7 $, or “Tengu-axe”), but it seemed to be still harder
and sharper than these. Its colour was red, tinged with bluish
grey, just like the thunder-axe-stones, but its lustre was more
like that of glass than is the case with the latter. There were
some spots on the egg, which Saosan considered to be dirt left
on it by the dragon which produced it.


é


§ 3. Thunder-stones.


In the same monastery there was a so-called “ thunder-jewel”
(8 7 =B, rai no tama, or f§ Kk, rai-gyoku), which in 1796
had fallen from the sky during a heavy thunderstorm, when the
lightning struck a spot near Haseda. Its colour was white, tinged
with a slight bluish grey, just like cornelian or marble. Such
thunderstones were called “thunder-awes” (raifu, FR 4), “ thunder-


knives” (FR JJ, raito), “thunder-hammers” (rai tsui, $A HR), “thun-
der-blocks” (& Fi, raitan), “thunder-rings” (9 Bg, raikwan),


“thunder-pearls” (fq Yk, raishu), “thunder-pillars” (RR, rai-
ketsu), “thunder-ink” (raiboku, fy gs), “thunder-swords’ (raiken,


€h fl), “thunder-pins” (raisan, 4 $4), and so on. They are found
in spots struck by lightning. The black ones are thunder-axes,
those which are white, tinged with blue, are thunder-rings, the
purple ones, tinged with red, are thunder-pins. If it is neither
stone nor earth, but a lump as of lacquer, it is thunder-ink. The
above-mentioned specimen was, in SHodsan’s opinion, a kind of
thunder-pear! '.

We learn from this passage that the prehistoric stone weapons
and utensils were considered by the Chinese (for all these names
were borrowed from Chinese works), and in imitation thereof by
the Japanese, as thunderbolts; this is the same conception which
we find everywhere among primitive peoples. Also meteors, of
course, are believed to have been thrown by lightning upon the
earth, or to’ be fallen stars. As to the dragon, his connection
with rain and thunder is evidently supposed to begin long before
his birth and to show itself in a terrible way as soon as he is born.


4 Cf. pe Groot, Religious System of China, Vol. V, p. 866, where the “thunderbolt
stones” (Be Be Hit)» “thunder-nodules” ( FR , ef. the FR of the Japanese text)


are said to be believed to remove the effects of ku-poison. On the next page pr Groot
mentions’ thunder-hammers, thunder-awls, thunder-axes (supposed to have been used
by the God of Thunder to split up things), thunder-rings (lost by that god) and
thunder-pearls,


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER VIII.


THE TATSUMAKI (Pf ¥F), on “DRAGON'S ROLL”.


The works of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries explain
the heavy whirlwinds which cause the so-called . water-spouts
and in a moment destroy the products. of human hands’ or
whatever they may light upon, to be the work of dragons ascen-
ding to heaven. Accordingly » ‘the enormous columns of water,
thrown, up into the air by these whirlwinds, are called “éatsu-
maki” or “dragon's rolls”.


§ 1. Dragons which ascended to heaven.


Apart from the fatswmaki we may refer to two passages in
the Yuho. meisho ryaku (1697) where Graigons are said to have
ascended to the sky. The first passage’ treats of the name of
Tatsuta, the place where the Wind-god was worshipped from
times immemorial, which name it ascribes to the fact that a
dragon arose to heaven there. It was the Thunder-god himself,
who in the shape of a boy had fallen down on Tatsuta yama
(Higuri district, Yamato province), thirty or forty cho south-west
from Nara. A peasant adopted the child and educated it, and
from that time wind and rain were very favourable to that
special village. Afterwards the child changed into a dragon and
flew to the sky.

The second passage ° explains the name of Sennin-zuka (lj
A. YR, or “sien’s grave”) in Narumi village, Aichi district,
Owari .province, to be the spot where in remote ages a Chinese
sien (sennin),, who floating on a tree had arrived on this shore,
lived for a long time till he finally became a dragon and rose
to heaven. His soul was worshipped in the “Heavenly Dragon’s
shrine” (Zenryz no miya, FR RE Hy), erected close to the spot
where he had lived.


4 Ch. Il, p. 15. 2 Cf. above, Book II, Gh. III, § 4, p. 153.
3 Ch. VIII, p. 47. :


Digitized by Microsoft®


221


The Wakan sansai zue (1713)1 describes how on lake Biwa a
man saw a little snake, about one shaku long, which came
swimming to the shore, climbed upon the water-rushes, danced
about, came down again and swam about on the surface of the
water, whereupon it several times repeated the same movements.
Gradually the snake became longer and longer, till it reached
the length of about one jd (10 shaku); then it ascended to the
sky, which in the meantime was covered with black clouds. It
became pitchdark, so that only the dragon’s tail was visible,
and a shower of rain fell down till the dragon had entered the
sky, which then became as clear as before. “The climbing upon
the rushes and dancing about”, says the author, “was probably a
preparatory exercise for ascending to ,heaven”’.


§ 2. Tatsumaki in Yedo *.


The Ichiwa ichigen® makes mention of a tatswmaki which in
1785 arose in the vicinity of the Detached Palace in Shiba
district, in the Yedo bay, and destroyed the roofs of many houses
in Kyobashi and Nihonbashi districts; at the same time a heavy
rain came down and it became pitch-dark.

In the Kwansei era (1789—1800) there was in Yedo a Buddhist
priest who went about and ‘predicted that soon a dragon was
to ascend to heaven in a heavy tempest, reason why he advised
the people to stay indoors. When a samurai asked him how he
knew this beforehand, the priest answered: “I know this from
experience. Always when the sky has been clear fer a long time
and it suddenly begins ‘to rain, as is now the case, a dragon
ascends”. “Are you perhaps the dragon yourself? ?” asked the
samurai, and when the priest answered in the affirmative, he
requested him to rise to the sky at once. “I cannot do so”
replied the bonze, “because I have no water’. “No water?”
exclaimed the other, ‘there is plenty of water in the river near
by “That is of no use to me’, remarked the priest, “for that
is flowing water and what I want is heavenly water. (rain)”.
“Well, then I will give you some rainwater’, said the samurai,


4 Ch. XLV (BE hE Bp), p- 673.


2 1 use the old way of Lauseliie’ this name uate of “Edo” , because the name
of Yedo has become | familiar to all readers of the older works on Japan. -..


3— a — a =, written by Ora Beta Ik Hy. a Hh (11825 Ch.


XL, p. 41.


Digitized by Microsoft®


222


and he gave him a bottle of ink-stone water (used for wetting
the suzuri). The priest took it and went away rejoiced, declaring
that he now would mount to the sky. Actually a few days later
a violent thunderstorm suddenly broke forth, accompanied by
heavy rains and wind. When it abated, the trees and the grass
had become quite black. The samurai alone knew the reason
thereof: it was the ink-water which he had given to the priest,
who had used this in rising to the clouds. The author of the
Miyakawasha mampitsu' heard this tale from the samurai’s son,
to whom his father had told it.

In 1744 a tidal wave which destroyed a little Shinto shrine
near Yedo bay, as well as several houses and trees in Yedo,
killing a large number of people, was ascribed to a dragon *.

Another tatsumaki happened in the Temmei era (1781—1788),
when a dragon arose from the famous Shinobazu pond in Ueno
(Yedo). A black cloud arose from the pond and destroyed the
houses in the vicinity. This is stated by Ocawa Kznvo? in his
Jinchédan *, who adds that such a dragon often ascends on
summer days in the seas of Sado, Echigo and Etchi provinces.
“Then there descends”, he says, “a black cloud from the sky,
and the water of the sea, as a reversed waterfall, rises whirling
about and joins the cloud. Tradition says that a dragon passes .
from the water into the cloud... On considering the fact that
a dragon rose from the Shinobazu pond we arrive at the con-
clusion that dragons lie at the bottom even of small ponds and
that the water, according to the weather, rises and a cloud
comes down, so that heaven and earth come into connection
and the dragon can ascend to the sky”.


§ 3. Tatsumaki on the sea.


In 1796 four fisherboats sank and the crews all perished when
‘pursuing a whale in the sea near Kashima no ura in Hitachi
province. They were caught by a “dragon’s roll’? which all of a


4 et Jil te vi x, written in 1858 by Mryaxawa SEIuN, et Jul neg Si ;


Ch. V, p. 13.


2 Mado no susami, 3X ) ZA tke ES written by Mavsuzaxt GyosHin, AB
Way BE FA (1681-1753), Onchi sosho, Vol. VII, p. 130.


3 yh Jil BAe.


4 fee ig Be written in 1814; Onchi sdsho, Vol. IX, p. 12.


Digitized by Microsoft®


223


sudden covered the sky with dark clouds and made the surface
of the sea quite black '.

In the Shésan chomon kisha* a sea-otter which rose up from
the sea into a black cloud and ascended to the sky, is said to
have done so in the same way as the “dragon-snakes” use to
fly to heaven. The incident is described as follows. In a clear
sky suddenly a black cloud appeared which in-a moment covered
the sea. A heavy storm stirred up the waves and raised the sand,
the rain fell down in torrents and the mountains shook. A hunter
saw a mysterious creature rise from the sea into the cloud and
fly to the sky. At once with a thundering noise the cloud came
straight in the hunter’s direction, and he saw a dazzling light
in the middle of it. When he hit the cloud with a bullet, it
was dissolved, the rain stopped and the storm abated. A few
days later a big sea-otter was found dying on the shore, with
the bullet in its eye.

On the next page the author quotes the Koji inensha*, which
states that in the sea of Iwami fishes ascend to the sky and
become “fish-dragons” (#4 #/), and in a note we find the remark
that “there. are several thousands of dragons, messengers of the
divine sennin (jip {jlj), and among these are ‘fish-dragons’ and


‘otter-dragons’ (#4 BE, datsu-ryz), which can assume all kinds
of shapes”’ 4.

A curious way of driving away a tatsumaki is described in
the Yahisai sakki*, A. dark cloud came down upon a vessel sailing
from Yedo in a western direction, and the sailors were afraid


4 Hitoyo-banashi, “Tales of one night”, written in 1810 by Maxt Boxusen, A
das PE 5 Ch. I, p. 9.

2 Ch. II, p. 460; concerning this work cf. above p. 218, note 3.

3 HL wy Al RK 46, by an unknown author; probably a work of the Tokugawa
period.

4 A “dog-dragon” Fay BED: a kind of mole, which, living under the ground,


haunted houses and devoured old women, is spoken of in the Sanshu kidan (Ch. II,
pp. 732 seqq., cf. Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. XXXVII, Part J,


p. 32); and “gold-dragons” (> HE) were, together with “spiritual foxes” (SK AK)
shown to the public by a sorcerer in Kyoto (Sanshii kidan, Oh. IV, p. 824)..In Ch.
Ill (p. 517) of the Shosan chomon kishé we read that big snakes (especially the so-
called senja, ib HE, or uwabami), and also small snakes, are a kind ef dragons
which cause rain and wind and ascend to the sky. Snakes all belong to the species dragon.

5 AR 35 ie 4 8U,, written by MinaGawa KIEN, te Jil yt rae who lived
1733—1807; quoted in the Toywki, HE ME aU: written in 1795 by TacHIBANA NANKEL


1% BS BR; Kohen, BB $a Ch. UI, Zoku, Teikoku Bunko, Vol. XX, p. 129.


Digitized by Microsoft®


224


that a dragon was about to lift up the ship and carry it to the
sky. In order to scare the dragon away they all cut off their
hair and burned it. And behold, the terrible smell was apparently
too much for the dragon, for the. cloud at once dispersed.

-Dragons are fond of money '. One day, when 'a tatsumaki was
raging, an empty string of cash fell down; the coins had evidently
been taken off by the dragon which had then thrown the string
away. Another time a ship with much money on board was
attacked by dragons in the form of a fearful storm. It foundered,
and all efforts to raise the box of money from the bottom of
the sea were frustrated by the greedy dragons which caused a
storm to arise each time when human hands tried to deprive
them of their prey ’. _


§ 4. Snakes rise as dragons up to the clouds.


A strange tale is found in the Fude no ‘susabi® concerning a
woman who had a severe headache on a day when a violent
thunderstorm broke forth. During the tempest a little snake
came out of her head, fled away through the door and ascended
to the sky in a black cloud which suddenly came down.

The Mimi-bukuro* relates a legend of a big snake, which lived
under the verandah of a house and was daily fed, by the inmates.
If a girl who was waiting in vain for a husband gave food to this
snake and prayed to it, her prayer was heard and she soon was
married. One day, in the third: month of the second year of the
Temmei era (1782), the animal crept upon the verandah and
lay there as if it were ill. While the man and his wife were
carefully nursing it, clouds arose and it rained continuously.
The snake raised its head and looked up to the sky, when a
cloud descended upon the garden. Then the animal stretched its
body and in a heavy rain ascended to the sky.


4 Cf. above Book I, Ch. III, § 3, p. 69, with regard to the dragon’s liking for the
vital spirit of copper.
'9 Saiyuki, py Nig aU: written in 1797 by the same author as the. nen (cf.
ie p. 993, note 5), Ch. II, p.-259.
ff SHE, ‘Pencil sports”, written by Kwan Cuasan, if U. » who lived
1747-1827; Hyabks setsurin, Vol. TE E. p. 177.


"% a= gS, written in 1815 by Fonwana Monunosu, iz iT T KB Shidaikisho,
yg Kg BE, av 4, p14, Ch, 1.


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER IX.


JAPANESE, CHINESE AND INDIAN DRAGONS IN GEOGRAPHICAL,
TEMPLE AND PRIEST NAMES.


In the preceding chapters we often have: mentioned mountains
and temples called after a dragon which was said to live there
or to have appeared at the time when the temple was built.
There are a large number of similar names to be found throughout
Japan, which are given in Yosuipa Toeo’s Dai Nihon chimei jisho,
or “Geographical Leaicon of Japan”'. The following details are
derived from this work.


§ 1. The Japanese dragon (tatsu).


Tatsu no kuchi, or “Dragon's mouth” (RE or fe 1) is a
- very frequent name. 7 is e.g. given to a hot spring in Nomi
district, Kaga province * , to a little waterfall in Kojimachi district,
Tokyo *, to a hill in Kamakura district, Sagami province *, to a
dike in Kuji district, Hitachi province ®, am to two mountains
in Bizen and Rikuzen provinces®. On the hill of this name in
Kamakura district criminals were put to death during the Kama-
kura period, and it is famous on account of the legend concerning
Nichiren’s miracle, whose life was saved because the sword refused
to cut off his holy head. Tradition said that a hill was formed
by the dead body of a dragon whose mouth was on this spot
and who in olden times had inhabited a large lake near by‘.
Even in the Anei era (1772—1780) a five-headed dragon was
worshipped there in a little Shinto shrine *, and still nowadays
a “Shinto temple of the Dragon’s Mouth” (Tatsu no kuchi no sha,


KH As 3h i Git - Te HA HE AIL. published in 1907.


1

2 P. 1912. 4 P, 2715.
5 P. 3731. ; a oh and 4208.

7


Enoshima engi, wr. & cd dt (time and author unknown), quoted by Yosuipa,
1.1, p. 2715. _ 7
8 Nichiren chigwasan, H Si et ig =. quoted ibidem.


Verh. Kon. Akad. v. Wetenseb (fd. hotterk) Ni Ry Bly XIII, N° 2. 15


226


HE 1 jit) is to be found on this spot, while a Buddhist shrine
of the Nichiren sect, called Rywko-dera (7 (1 3), proves how
the Buddhists adopted the old belief '. On the afore-said mountain
in Rikuzen a big rock in the shape of a dragon’s head is worshipped
in a Shinto temple, called “Tatsu no kuchi jinja”, or “Shrine of
the Dragon’s mouth”. ?

Tatsu ga hana*® («Dragon's nose”) is the name of a cliff in
Omi province, Sakata district, Tatsu-kushi * (“Dragon’s skewer’’)
that of a rock in Tosa province, Hataya district. Tatsu-yama ®
(“Dragon-mountains”) are found in Harima, Innan district, and
in Owari, Higashi Kasugai district; a Tatsu-ko-yama® (“Little
dragon-mountain”) is mentioned in Hitachi, Taga district, and
Tatsu-zaki' (“Dragon’s capes”), in Shimozuke, Sarushima district,
and in Iwashiro, Ishikawa district. In Mutsu province, Higashi
Tsugaru district, we find a Tatsu-bama-zaki* (“Dragon-beach-cape’’),
also called Tatsubi-zaki°® (“Dragon’s flight-cape”), and in Shinano,
Saku district, a Tatsu-oka'® (“Dragon-mound”). Further, a Tatsu-
no" (“Dragon-field”), also called Tatsu no ichi'? (“Dragon-market’’)
is to be found in Shinano, Ina district, and another Tatsu no ichi
in Yamato, Soe no kami district, where a Shintd-god, Tatsu no
ichi Myojin, is worshipped. In Harima, Iiho (or Iho) district,
there is a Tatsu-no'* with an old castle of this name, built by
Nitta Yoshisada in 1334. Finally, we find villages called Tatsuta '4
(Dragon-ricefield) in Higo province, Akutaku district, and in
Yamato, Ikoma district. Near the latter place is the well-known
ancient Shinto shrine called Tatsuta jinja °, which is dedicated
.to the Wind-god and where prayers are offered up for wind and
rain. Also a Mount Tatsuta'’, in the same vicinity, may be
mentioned, as well as a river, called TYatsuta-gawa'. On the
afore-said Tatsu-yama in Owari stood an old Buddhist temple of


Yosuipa, p, 2745. 2 Yosuipa, p. 4208.
a 4 HE HB. p. 1364.
BE (Lp, pp. 861 and 2279. 6 REF Uy, p. 3743.


BE way or fie wey pp. 3445 and 3848,

HE YR wy». 4750, 9 HE TG wey.

10 FE fi, p. 2434. 11 Be HF, p. 2364.
12 HE af. 13 HE HY, p. 894.


14 FF FA]. pp. 1671 and 299.
15 Cf. above, Book II, Ch. HI, § 4, p. 153, and Book II, Ch. VIII, 1 § 4, p. 220.
416 P. 230. 17 P. 228.


ao nN oO WS


Digitized by Microsoft®


227


the Tendai sect, called “Ryasenji! (‘Dragon-spring-temple”), which
was said to have been built by a Dragon-king in one night; the
original Japanese dragon-god of the mountain was probably
identified with a Naga by the Tendai priests. On the “ Dragon's
cape” in Iwashiro there is a waterfall (the favourite abode of
dragons), and a Bodhi-tree is evidence of Buddhist domination
in later times.

By far the greater part of these names is found in Central
Japan, and they are rare in the South and the North?


§ 2, The Chinese and Indian dragons (ryt or ryo).
A. Names of mountains.


The mountains are called Ryz-zan or Ryd-zan* (in Iwashiro
and Uzen; near the latter is a place called “Sacred Tail” *, which
probably means a dragon's tail®; Ryz ga mine® (“Dragon's peak”,
in Higo, resembling a lying dragon, and in Hida); Ryz no (or ga)
saki" (“Dragon's cape”, with a Buddhist. “Blue Dragon temple”,
Seiryaji*, in Tosa, and another, in the vicinity of which is a
Buddhist shrine called Kinryiji®, or “Gold-dragon-temple”, in
Hitachi); Ryz (or Ryo) ga take (“Dragon’s peak”, in Ise and
Uzen); Rytzu-zaki'' (“Dragon's head cape”, in Tosa); Ryzten-
yama'* (“Dragon-Deva mountain”, in Bizen); Ryw-d-zan* (“Dragon-
king’s mountain, in Bichi, with a little Shinto shrine '*, dedicated
to the Hight Great Dragon-kings, on the top, and two others
in Kawachi and Sanuki). A Ry#-d-take ’ (“Dragon-king’s peak”)
is found in Chikuzen, and a Ryji-zé-san'® (*Dragon’s claw-


1 WE Jt fs. p. 2272.


2 As to personal names, these are seldom connected with tatsu, except the three
following: Tatsu (HE ), Tatsuki (HE FR , Dragon’s tree) and Talsuzane (BE @,
Dragon’s seed).


3 BE LL. pp. 49 and 4393.
jill FB. Kan-o. 5 Cf. above, Book II, Ch. Ill, § 12, p. 177.


4
6 BE WA, pp. 1721 and 2234.
7 HE ray pp. 4358, 3574.

8


i He 9 & HE SF.
10 FE RR pp. 606, 4444. M4 BE BA lly» p. 1353.


42 BE IK LL, p. 912. 13 RF IE [1], pp. 959, 311 and 1256.


14 Cf. above, Book II, Ch. Ill, § 12, p. 476.


45 FE TE Fk. p. 1452. 16 BE fl [Ly p- 4455.


Digitized by Microsoft®


228


mountain”) in Suruga, with a temple of Ryi-zo Gongen',
“Manifestation of Ryi-zo”, “Dragon’s receptacle (womb)”, the
Buddhist name given to the, probably dragon-shaped, mountain-
god. Near Ryw-oka? (“Dragon’s hill”) village, in Igo province,
there is a mountain where in olden times a Buddhist priest is
said to have successfully prayed for rain. In Hitachi there is
on Ryzjinsan’ (*Dragon-god’s mountain”) an old Shinto shrine of
a Dragon-god, and in Kii we find a Ryamon-zan* (“Dragon-
gate-mountain’”’).


B. Names of springs, waterfalls and rivers.


A hot spring in Kii, famous for its curative powers, is called
the “Spring of the Dragon-god” (Ryzjin-sen) *. In Osumi, Yamato
and Higo we find “Dragon-gate waterfalls” (Rywmon-daki)°, and
in Shimozuke a “Dragon’s head waterfall” (Rytzu-daki)'. The
ancient Chinese considered the dragon to be so closely connected
with waterfalls that they indicated these by means of the character,
“dragon”, combined with the radical “water” (#2). Rivers called
after dragons are the Ryige-gawa* (“Dragon-flower river’, also
pronounced Tatsu-bana-gawa) in Kawachi, the Tenryu-gawa®
(“Heavenly Dragon’s river”) in Shinano and Totomi, and the
Ryikan-gawa (*Dragon’s rest river’) in Tokyo.


C. Names of islands, valleys and places.


Two “Dragon’s islands” (yi ga shima, or Ryii-shima)'' may
be mentioned, one in Echigo, the other in Awa; and a “Dragon-
king’s valley” (Ryi#-d-danz)"’, in Buzen. Also place names as


1 HE Sek te ch; deities of the same name are worshipped in two Shinto temples,
in Uzen and Kii (pp. 4455 and 754).

2 te fia] , p. 1295.

3 BE mp (ly. v- 3619.

4 FE PA LL. p. 701; of above, Book I, Ch. 1V, § 12, p. 194.

5 RE jill Bye. p. 739.

6 WE FY JAB. pp. 1781, 290, 1652; cf. above, Book Il, 1.

7 EF BA YR. p. 3517. 8 iE He JI. p. 327.

9 FE RE Jil. pp. 2361, 2505, cf. above, Book I, Ch. V, § 7, p. 203.
10 HE BR Jil. p- 2886. 11 BE ES, pp. 2073, 3144.

12 HE IE A. p. 148. \


Digitized by Microsoft®


229


Ryt-mai' (“Dragon’s dance’), in Kozuke; Ryi-d2 (“Dragon-king”’),
in Buzen and Kai; Rya-toku*® (<Dragon’s virtue”), in Chikuzen;
Ryit-ge* (“Dragon’s flower”), in Omi, and Ryd-ge* (“Dragon's
hair”) in Ugo, are evidence of the Chinese and Indian dragon’s
great popularity in Japan.


D. Names of Buddhist temples.


Among the names of Buddhist temples connected with the dragon
Ryiizoj.° («“Dragon’s receptacle (womb) (or hiding) temple”), Ryw-
senji' (“Dragon’s spring temple”), Ryuzkaji* (“Dragon’s rise temple”)
and Ryémonji® (“Dragon’s gate temple’) are the most frequent.
Further, we find temples of the Dragon’s horn (Ryzkakuji"),
belly (Rytfukuji"), mouth (Ryko) and head ( Ryotoj’*).
Moreover, mention is made of temples of the Dragon’s cloud
(Rytunji™), pool (Ryzenji® and Ryztanji'’), sea (Ryukai-in"),
valley (Ryzkeiji*), spring (Ryagenji*), river (Ryusenji >), palace
(Ryugiji*'), canopy (Ryagaiji”), flower (Ryuzgej), treasure (Ryi-
haji*), felicity (Ryufukuji”), rest (Ryzanji*® and Rydonji”*),


1 FE 4RE, p. 3370.

2 HE AE. pp. 1418, 2443. 3. RE fi, p. 1454.

4 HE fe, p. 496. 5 WE SE. p. 4597.

6 HE Jak SF - 7 PE SR SP. 8 HE HF.
9 HE PA ae. 10 BE 4 Ap, in Shimosa, p. 3235.

11 FE J SF. in Shimosa, p. 3244, cf. above, Book IH, Ch. HI, p. 177.

12 HE [1 af. in Sagami, p. 2745. 13 YE BA Sf. in Ucen, p. 4509.
14 ff Se aie. in Iwami and Shinano, pp. 1072, 2431.

15 BE Jal Sf. in Mosashi, p. 118. 16 3 YE SF. in Omi, p. 2488.

47 ie itt [S. in Mikawa and Shimozuke, pp. 2316, 3350.

18 YE YA Sf, in Kazusa, p. 3176. 19 7H YR Sf. in Rikuzen, p. 4205.
20 HE JI ae =e, in Yamato, p. 305. 21 JE eg Sf, in Chikuzen, p. 1505.


92 gH BE Se, in Yamato, p. 262.


25 rad ia 3 =f, in Suwo, p. 1172.


# +, in Yamato, p. 103.


HE
97 HE ‘= FF ( be) in Musashi and Iwashiro, pp. 3034, 3870.


a


Digitized by Microsoft®


230


prosperity (Ryutayi'), correctness (Ryushd-in*), majesty (Ryi-
gonji*), a. 8.0.


E. Names of Buddhist priests.


Buddhist priests often have similar names; especially Ryazan 4
(“Dragon’s mountain”) and Ryzsha° (“Dragon’s islet’) are frequent.
Further, we find Rywsui® («“Dragon’s water”), Ryusen' (“Dragon’s
river”), Ryataki*® (Dragon’s waterfall), Ryiéchi® (“Dragon’s pond”),
Ryji-en® and Ryusha'' («Dragon's pool”), Rydshin ? (“Dragon’s
depth”), Ryasho'* (“Dragon's islet”), Ryden’ (“Dragon's rice-field”),
Ryito'* (“Dragon’s ascending”), Ryuwho'® (*Dragon’s peak’’), Ryabi'?
(“Dragon’s tail”), Ryamin * (“Dragon’s sleep”), a.s.o0. The large
number of the names referred to in this chapter is strong evidence
of a fact which also the legends have taught us, i.e. of the
great popularity of all three kinds of dragons, Japanese, Chinese
and Indian, in old Japan.


4 BE ae = in Mino, p. 2205. 2


BE YE ae in Shimosa, p. 3229.

3 HE ears a, in Uzen, p. 4504 4 BE ly 5 Pag aN
6 HE ok. 7 : Ml 8 BE 9 ey hy
Hi > WES.


=

M9
Out Or
&

ot
ae BE BS 5
Ha Me

=
ms ww
Ovar oor
ES HES


Digitized by Microsoft®


CHAPTER X.


CoNCLUSIONS.


The preceding chapters have shown once more how great
China’s influence was upon Japanese legend and superstition
from the beginning of the spreading of Chinese civilisation in
the Land of the Rising Sun until the present day. We have
also seen how Buddha’s powerful doctrine brought the Indian
Nagas to the Far-Eastern seas and rivers and ponds, as it peopled
the Japanése mountains and woods with their deadly enemies,
the Garudas. The idea of serpent-shaped semi-divine kings, living
in great luxury in their magnificent palaces at the bottom of
the water, was strange to the Chinese and Japanese minds; but
the faculty of these beings of assuming human shapes and
bestowing rain upon the thirsty earth, as well as their nature
of water-gods, formed the links between the Nagas of India and
the dragons of China and Japan. The Chinese Buddhists identified
the Indian serpents. with the four-legged dragons of China, and
this blending of ideas was easily introduced into the minds of
the Japanese people, which did not hesitate to associate their
own, mostly serpent-shaped, gods of rivers and mountains with
the Western deities of the same kind. eee

In the Introduction we have seen that the Nagas were, as a
rule, favourably disposed towards Buddhism, but that they were
dangerous creatures on account of their quick temper, deadly
poison and great magic power. They possessed numberless jewels
and mighty charms, which they bestowed upon those to whom
they were grateful and who often stayed for a while in the splendid
Naga palaces at the bottom of ponds, or rivers, or seas. The

“Mahayana school speaks of eight Great Dragon-kings, mightier
than the others, one of whom, Sagara, was well-known as a
bestower of rain. The rain-giving faculty of the Nagas, which is
not mentioned in the Jatakas, was apparently more emphasized
in Northern than in Southern Buddhism. According to the original
conceptions these semi-divine serpents, who had their abode in
Patiala land, beneath the earth, could raise clouds and thunder or


Digitized by Microsoft®


232


appear as clouds themselves to terrify mankind. Northern Bud-
dhism, however, made these frightful beings the rain-giving
benefactors of men, to whom prayers for rain were sent up by
means of special ceremonies. These rites were performed also in
China and Japan. As to the division of the Nagas into four
castes: “Heavenly, Divine, Earthly and Hidden Nagas”, this is
probably also a Northern feature, for I did not find it mentioned
anywhere in the Jatakas. Indian Buddhist art represents the
Nagas as serpents, or as men or women with snakes coming
out of their necks and rising over their heads, or as snake-
tailed beings with human upper bodies and snakes appearing
above their heads. Hot winds and hot sand, sudden violent
storms and Garuda-kings are what the Nagas fear most. When
strictly observing Buddhist fasting, they may be reborn as men.

In Book I we have stated how the oldest Chinese books spoke
of dragons in divination, as ornaments of clothes, and as river-
gods who caused high floods by their fights. As they belonged
to the four ling (“spiritual beings”), full of Yang (Light), they
were omens of the birth of great men, especially of emperors,
and of felicity in general, like the dragon-horses, but also of
death and ruin, when they were seen fighting, or when their
dead bodies were found, or when they appeared at wrong times
or in wrong places. The Emperors were not only called dragons
and compared to them, but were sometimes even considered to
be their offspring, or to have them in their service. The dragons
ascended to the sky, riding on winds and clouds, and were ridden
by the sen, or they descended into the deepest wells. Their
transformations were limitless. They could become small like
silkworms or so big that they covered the world'. Their wisdom
excelled that of all other animals, and their blessing power was
great. Next to these ideas, which made them the favourite sub-
jects of poets and artists, a great many lower conceptions are
found, prevalent among the people from olden times.

The principal water-god is the kiao-lung, the scaly dragon;
other important dragons are the ying-lung (which has wings),
the £%u-lung (which has a horn) and the ch‘t-lung (which is blue
and has no horn). Then, there are several other kinds of dragons,
but all of them:are afraid of iron, the wang plant, centipedes, the
leaves of the melia azederach, and five-coloured silk-thread, while
their principal) enemies are tigers and the demons of drought


4 This must be the meaning of Kwan 1szk ’s words (quoted on p. 63), instead of
the obscure “lies hidden in the world”.


Digitized by Microsoft®


233


who devour them. They are fond of beautiful gems, hollow stones
with water inside (or the vital spirit of copper) and swallow-
flesh. Male and female dragons are different in shape. As the
dragon is very lewd, he copulates with all kinds of animals
and in this way produces nine different classes of young, which
according to their nature are represented as ornaments.

Causing rain is the Chinese dragon’s most important function,
and he is compelled to do so by mankind by several magical
means, especially by making clay images of dragons (and laying
them in water), or by throwing poisonous plants or bones of the
tiger (his deadly enemy) into his pools, or by annoying him by
a terrible noise, or by using utensils adorned with dragons when
praying for rain. The dragons are called the “Rain-Masters”,
and rain is prayed for in front of their holes.

They transform themselves into old men, beautiful women,
and fishes, or sometimes assume the shapes of trees and objects,
as e.g. swords. They have a pearl under their throats or in
their mouths. As to their evgs, these. are beautiful stones to
be found in the mountains or at the riverside; water is con-
stantly dripping from these stones till they split and a small
snake appears, which in a very short time grows larger and
larger and in the form of a dragon ascends to the sky amid
thunder, rain and darkness. Hurricanes and whirlwinds are all
ascribed to ascending dragons. Their bones are considered to be
a very. efficient medicine and their spittle is the most precious
of perfumes; their cast-off skins spread a brilliant light. Dragon-
boats were pleasure-vessels of the Emperors, which had the shape
of a dragon and the head of a yih bird; quite different, however,
are the dragon-boats of the water festival of the fifth day of the
fifth month, which are probably intended as sympathetic magic to
obtain rain. As to Buddhism, this introduced into China legends
concerning tranformation into dragons after death, Dragon-kings
and palaces, a. s. 0.

The first chapter of Book II, in which I treated of the original
Japanese dragon, mentioned no later dates than the tenth cen-
tury (Engishiki). Even the eighth century adorned her legends
with Chinese and Indian features, as we saw in the tale of

-Toyotama-bime and Hiko-hohodemi. This was very easily done
because the Japanese sea and river-gods, having the shape of a
dragon or a serpent, resembled the Chinese dung or the Indian
Nagas. It is no wonder that the simple, rain-bestowing Japanese
gods of rivers and seas, mountains and valleys, owing to their
shapes were identified with and superseded by the similar but


Digitized by Microsoft®


234


more fantastic Chinese and Indian gods of water and rain. The
“water-fathers” (mizucht), dragon-shaped river-gods who, just like
the Chinese dragons, hindered men when constructing embankments
but were pacified by human sacrifices instead of, as in China,
being driven away by iron, soon had to give way to the Rain-
masters and Dragon-kings of the West. Gradually foreign elements
were added to the ancient legends, and their original form became
hardly recognizable.

The second chapter shows how all the Chinese conceptions in
regard to the appearance of dragons and dragon-horses as omens
were embraced by the Japanese, and preserved by them from
the ninth century down to the nineteenth.

In the third chapter the dragon’s main function is treated of,
i.e. the bestowing of rain upon mankind. Among the eighty five
Shinto shrines to which in times of drought messengers were
despatched by the Court, there were many dragon-shaped river-
deities. As to the offerings made to the Shinto river-gods for
obtaining rain or for causing them to stop a too abundant
supply of heavenly water, these were hemp and fibre, black,
white or red horses (the latter only for stopping rain). Yet, even
the Emperors of. as early an age as the eighth century did no
longer sufficiently believe in the power of these gods, for at the
same time Buddhist rites. were performed in the three great
temples of Nara. In the ninth century, especially, the Buddhist
priests got more and more influence, also in this respect, and
the famous “Sacred Spring Park” in Kyoto became their special
territory for praying for rain. Kobo Daishi declared the pond in
this park to be inhabited by an Indian dragon, and sutras were
recited on its banks by crowds of bonzes, sometimes to pray to
the Dragon-king, sometimes to threaten him with persecution
by his deadly enemy, the Garuda. If they had no success, however,
the ancient river-gods enjoyed a temporary triumph and were
elevated to higher ranks. But short was their glory, for soon
the mighty foreign invaders prevailed once more. Hither the
Chinese dragon which had to be aroused by sounding bells and
drums, by singing and dancing on a dragon-boat on the pond
in the Sacred Spring Park (or by being deprived of his element,
the water), or the Indian Naga-king, were the gods from whom
the blessing of rain was expected by the Court. The clever monk
Kikai (Kobo Daishi) knew how to conquer his adversaries, not
only the Shintdists, but also his rivals among the Buddhist
priests. This was experienced by the mightiest of his colleagues,
Shibin, the abbot of the “Western Monastery”. Besides prayers,


Digitized by Microsoft®


235


incantations and the recital of siitras a magical image of the
dragon (which reminds us of the clay dragons of the Chinese)
was used by Kikai, who strived to spread his doctrine by the
extraordinarily impressive art of making rain. And his success
was marvellous.

Further, we have seen how during the thirteenth century in
times of drought the Buddhist “Five Dragons Festival’ was
celebrated in the same Sacred Spring Park or somewhere else,
or siitras were recited before the Dragon-hole on Mount Murobu
in Yamato, in order to cause the Dragon-king who lived there,
to give rain. The remarkable fact that a Buddhist priest was
said to have erected on this spot a Shinto shrine for the Indian
dragon seems to indicate that the Naga had taken the place of
a Shinto dragon, a mountain god believed to live in the hole
from ancient times. In the same century horses were still offered
by the Emperors to the famous rain-gods of Nibu (the “ Rain-
Master”) and Kibune, white ones to obtain, and red ones to stop
rain. And the Court officials themselves went to the Sacred Spring
Park and prayed to the “Sea-dragon-king”, at the same time
performing “sympathetic magic” by sprinkling water on the
stones near the pond. Numerous were the miracles wrought by
Buddhist priests in forcing the dragons to obey their will. In
later times, however, especially in the eighteenth century, we see
the Chinese ways of making rain gain ground again. The Chinese
conception of arousing the anger of these rain-gods by making
noise or by throwing iron utensils or metal shaving or dirty
things into their ponds and thus causing them to ascend and
cause rain, was different from the Shinto idea of praying and
offering to the river-gods, as well as from the Buddhistic way
of persuading or forcing the dragons to benefit mankind by
abundant rains. As I remarked above', the Chinese methods,
which got the upper hand in later ages, are still prevalent among
the Japanese country folks of the present day.

The fourth chapter gave the Japanese legends concerning
Indian Nagas (Dragon-kings). As the Indian tales reached Nippon
via China and Korea, it is quite logical that their Japanese
imitations showed many Chinese features. Among the eight Great
Dragon-kings Sagara, who was believed to reside in a splendid
palace at the bottom of the sea, is the most frequently mentioned.
Like other Dragon-kings he possesses the “Precious pearl which
grants all desires” (cintamani). During storms the sailors tried


4 Book JI, Ch. III, § 13, p. 178.


Digitized by Microsoft®


236


to pacify the Dragon-kings by throwing all kinds of precious
objects into the sea, and succeeded if the object which these
water-gods wanted was offered in time. Ponds, especially moun-
tain ponds, were very often believed to be the abodes of Dragon-
kings, who probably in many cases had’ taken the place of
ancient Japanese dragon-shaped gods. Sometimes one of the eight
kings incarnated himself as some famous Buddhist high-priest,
or the spirit of a man became a dragon-god. The temple bell
of Miidera is said to have been obtained by Tawara Toda in a
Dragon-palace. Azure dragons (a Chinese feature) were often said
to have appeared on the occasion of the establishment of Bud-
dhist temples and to have thenceforth been the guardian-gods
of these shrines '. Sometimes dragon-relics, as for example a few
scales or a tooth, were preserved among the treasures of a
Buddhist sanctuary. Finally, eight- and nine-headed dragons were
spoken of as the inhabitants of mountain lakes, being sometimes
reincarnations of Buddhist priests; and down till the Restoration
offerings of rice were made by Buddhist priests to the dragons
of some of those lakes.

The mighty influence of the Indian and Chinese ideas concerning
this subject upon the Japanese mind is also shown by the
way in which these conceptions were applied to ancient Shinto
gods. In Chapter V some specimens of this have been given,
which were found in books of the thirteenth and eighteenth
centuries. In the former the eight-headed serpent, called Yamato
no orochi and killed by Susanowo, as well as the unhappy young
Emperor Antoku who was drowned in the battle of Dan-no-ura
(1185) and whose spirit is said to be the Shintd god Suitengi,
are identified with the goddess of Itsukushima, the daughter
of the Dragon-king Sagara!-And the precious Kusanagi sword,
found in the eight-headed serpent’s tail, belonged to this king’s
Dragon-palace, or, according to another legend, was carefully
guarded by a Dragon-king and brought back to the Atsuta
shrine, from where it had been stolen. The Thunder-god, accor-
ding to an old legend caught by Sukaru, was called a “Dragon-
king” by the author of the Gempei seisuiki (thirteenth century),
which was all the more plausible because the version of the
Nihongi spoke of a huge serpent. Further, several old Shinto
shrines, where probably from olden times snake-. or dragon-shaped
gods were worshipped, in later times, in the eighteenth century,
were considered to have connection with Chinese or Indian


1 Cf. above, Book II, Ch. VI, pp. 205 sqq.


Digitized by Microsoft®


237


dragons, and even old tree-spirits in snake-form were called
dragons and said to cause thunderstorms.

The Dragon-lantern, tveated of in the sixth chapter, was not
mentioned in works dating before the fourteenth century. It
always rose from the sea, and was mostly a sign of a dragon-
shaped sea-god’s protection of, and reverence towards, a Buddhist
temple or, in a few cases, of a Shinto sanctuary. The Chinese
“azure dragon” was often mentioned in these tales, and sometimes
was said to have been seen carrying the lantern, which nearly
always descended upon some old pine-tree standing near the shrine,
and hung between its branches. These “dragon-lantern pine-trees”’
remind us of the Chinese ideas of old trees producing ignes fatui.

The “Dragon’s eggs”, beautiful stones picked up in the moun-
tains, out of which constantly water dripped and which for this
reason were often used as ink-stones, were dangerous treasures
indeed. For sooner or later they split, and a little snake crept
out of them, which in a few minutes increased in size and
finally ascended to the sky as a dragon, breaking through the
roof and causing a terrible thunderstorm. Book J, Ch. III, § 16,
in connection with Book II, Chapter VII, have shown that this
is a Chinese conception, introduced into Japan, where it was
prevalent from the sixteenth century down to the nineteenth.

Very popular was also the idea of whirlwinds and waterspouts
being caused by ascending dragons, winding their way to heaven.
We find this both in China and Japan, in the latter country
especially from the seventeenth century until the present day.
The Japanese name “tatsu-maki” perhaps indicates that it was not
borrowed from China; but on the other hand the fact that we did
not find it mentioned in works before the seventeenth century
causes me to think that the general inclination of these later ages
towards Chinese conceptions, which we observed also in the methods
of making rain, may have caused the spreading of this idea too.

Finally, in the ninth chapter, the geographical names were
evidence of the original Japanese dragon having been worshipped
mostly in Central Japan, and of the popularity of the Chinese
and Indian dragons throughout the Empire. The large number
of names of Buddhist temples and priests, connected with
the Indian dragon, showed the important part played by the
Naga in Japanese Buddhism.

Herewith 1 conclude this treatise on the dragon in the Far Kast,
in the hope that it may throw light upon his complicate nature of
Indian, Chinese and Japanese god of water, thunder, rain and wind.


Digitized by Microsoft®


INDEX


of the Chinese translations of siitras, vinayas and abhidharmas,
mentioned in the Introduction. The numbers placed
within brackets are those of Nanyod’s Catalogue of
the Buddhist Tripitaka; the other figures denote
the pages of this treatise.


Ching-fah nien-ch‘u king (679), 23.
Chung king chwen tsah p‘i-yit king (1366), 13.


Fuh-shwoh hai-lung-wang king (456), 28.

Fuh-shwoh ta-fang-teng ta-yun ts‘ing-yi king (186), 25.
Fuh-shwoh ta-kwan-ting shen-cheu king (467), 33.

Fuh wéi hai-lung-wang shwoh fah-yin king (457), 28.


Kin-kang kwang-yen chi-fung-yi king, 33.
Kin-kang pan-joh-po-lo-mih king (10—12), 34.
Kia tsah p‘i-yii king (1359), 12.


d
Mo-ho-seng-chi Iuh (4119), 43.


Ta-chwang-yen king lun (4182), 14.
Ta-fang-kwang fuh-hwa-yen king (87 sq.), 23.
Ta-pan-joh-po-lo-mih-to king (1), 34.
Ta-yun-lun ts‘ing-yii king (188), 25.

Ta-yun ts‘ing-yii king (187), 25.

Tsah p‘i-yi king (1368), 13.


Yoh-shi liu-li-kwang: jii-lai pen-yuen kung-teh king (171), 33.


Digitized by Microsoft®


INDEX


of the Chinese works quoted in this treatise, and the pages
where particulars about them, or their titles in
Chinese characters, are given.


T.S. = K‘in-ting ku-kin t‘u-shu tsih-ch‘ing (p. 39).


Chao yé ts‘ien tsai, 96. Kwang poh wuh chi, 71.
Cheh-kiang t‘ung-chi, 87. Kwang-sin-fu chi, 127.

Chen chu chw‘en, 119. Kwéi-sin tsah-shih, 49.

Cheu li, 40. Kwéi-sin tsah-shih suh-tsih, 89.
Ching tszé t‘ung, 101. Kwoh shi pu, 94.

Choh, keng luh, 112. Kwoh yi, 110.


Chuh shu ki nien, 122.
Chung king chwen tsah p‘i-yi king, 13. Lang hiten ki, 74.


Chtu Chang Wen-piao chw‘en, 56. Lao hioh ngan pih ki, 112.
Chun chu ki wen, 94. Léi kung yao tui, 94.
Ch‘un-ts‘iu fan lu, 4115. Liao shi, 53.
Chwang tszé, 65. Li ki, 39.
Li sao, 77.
Fang yen, 73. Lieh sien chw‘en, 83.
Féi stieh luh, 113. Loh-yang kia-lan ki, 133.
Lii-shi Ch‘un-ts‘iu, 64.
Han Féi tszé, 63. Luh i ki, 87.
Han shu, 45. Lun Heng, 114.
Han Wu Ti néi chw‘en, 83. Lung ch‘ing luh, 143.
Hien ch‘wang kwah i chi, 120. Lung fu, 41411.
Hoh lin yuh lu, 113.
Hung fan wu hing chw‘en, 46. Mao ting k‘oh hwa, 93.
Hwai nan tszé, 64. Mih k‘oh hwui si, 79.
Hwai-ngan-fu chi, 129. Ming i pieh luh, 91.


Mung k‘i pih é‘an, 89.
I kien chi, 143.
I li, 44. Nan pu sin shu, 69.
Nan shi, 132.

Nan yueh chi, 89.
Néi tien, 67.


I ynen, 81.


Kiang-si t‘ung-chi, 143.


Kin shi, 48.

King yen fang, 95. Pao P‘oh-tszé, 45.
K‘in-ting ku-kin t‘u-shu tsih-ch‘ing, 39. Pao chi Jun, 94.

Koh chi king yuen, 117. Pen shi fang, 95.

Ku kin chu, 122. Pen-ts‘ao kang-muh, 68.
Kwah i chi, 120. Pen-ts‘ao hui-pien, 96.


Kwan tszé, 63. P‘éi yuen kwang cheu ki, 80.


Digitized by Microsoft®


240


Pih ki man chi, 117. T'ang Pen-ts‘ao, 91.
Pi ya, 65. T'ang Sin Pen-ts‘ao, 91.
Po-chi kwoh chw‘en, 133. ; Tien chung ki, 57.
Poh mung so yen, 129. T‘ien kia tsah chen, 141.
Poh wuh chi, 74. Tsah p‘i-yii king, 43.
Poh ya, 72. Ts‘ien fu lun, 66.
Tsien koh ki 1éi shu, 73.
*Rh ya, 64. Tsien kin fang, 133.
*Rh ya yih, 64, Tsin shu, 54.
Tso chw‘en, 82.
San hwang pen-ki, 57. Tsu ting shi yuen, 97.
San-ts‘ai tSu-hwui, 57. Ts‘zé-liu shi kiu wen, 124.
Shan hai king, 62. Tszé puh yi, 110.
Shan hai king tcu tsan, 62. Tuh i chi, 124.
Shan-si t‘ung-chi, 89. Tung kwan han ki, 44.
Shang han lun t‘iao pien, 94. Tung-p‘o chi-lin, 129.
Shang shu ku shih, 120. Tung kien ts‘ien pien wai ki, 58.
Sheu shen ki, 814. Teung ming ki, 62.
Sheu shen heu ki, 81.
Shen sien chw‘en, 83, Wen siien, 84,
Shen-Nung k‘iu-yit shu, 417. Wen tszé, 77.
Shen-Nung Pen-ts‘ao king, 90. Wen-tszé tsih-lioh, 73.
Shi ki, 50. Weng yuen hien chi, 119.
Shi ]éi fu, 141. Wen yuen ying hwa, 111.
Shi lin kwan ki, 92. Wu ki, 80.
Shih i ki, 43. Wu shi Pen-ts‘ao, 91.
Shih cheu ki, 125. Wu Ti néi chw‘en, 43. cf. 83.
Shih-kwoh Ch‘un-ts‘iu, 124. Wuh tsah tsu, 120.
Shing i ki, 71.
Shu king, 39.. Yang kuh man luh, 714.
Shuh i ki, 44. Yang yii king, 76.
Shuh Han shu, 115. Yoh sing pen-ts‘ao, 92.
Shui king, 66. Yih chw‘en, 47.
Shui ying t‘u, 57. Yih féi heu, 47,
Shwoh yuen, 128. Yib king, 35.
Shwoh wen, 110. Yih ken tsoh tu, 45.
Sin-shi San Ts‘in ki, 60. Yih lin, 63.
Sin T’ang shu, 93. Yih tSung chi, 128.
Siien shih chi, 59. Yih wéi, 39.
Sii-men ts‘ang king, 73. Yih yao, 54.
Suh wen hien tung k‘ao, 90. Yiu hwan ki wen, 97.
Sui shu, 46. Yin-yang pien-kwa lin, 67.
Sung-ch‘ao shi shih, 117. Yiu-yang tsah tsu, 75.
Sung shu, 54. Yuen kien ]éi han, 59.
Yuh fu shui t'u, 123.
Ta tai li ki, 65. . Yuh hu ts‘ing hwa, 79.
T‘ai-p'ing kwang-ki, 59. Yun kih ts‘ih ts‘ien, 117.
Tai-p‘ing yi-lan, 58. Yun sien tsah ki, 127.


Digitized by Microsoft®


INDEX


of the Japanese works quoted in this treatise, and the pages
where particulars about them, or their titles in
Chinese characters, are given.


K. T, K. = Kokushi taikei, 135.


Ainosho, 145, Kagakushu, 84.

, Kanden jihitsu, 150.
Ba-iku-kyo, 150. Kanden kohitsu, 150.
Bukkyo iroha jiten, 22. Kanwa daijiten, 69.

Bungo Fidoki, 136. Kigegawa Yakushi engi, 205.
Buzen kokushi, 156. Kii zodansht, 208.

Kimpisho, 156.
Dai Nihon chimei jisho, 169. Kojidan, 162.

Koji inensht, 223.
Edo meisho ki, 206. Kojiki, 139.
Eigwa monogatari, 84. Kokushi daijiten, 84.
Engishiki, 147. Kokushi taikei (K. T. K.), 135.
Enoshima engi, 225. Konjaku monogatari, 148.
Ensei meibutsu kohdi, 207. Konyo manroku, 151.
Fude no susabi, 224. : Mado no susami, 222.
Fuso ryakki, 146. Manyoshi, 136.

Masu kagami, 148.
Gempei seisuiki, 165. Matsu-no-ya hikki, 175.
Genko Shakusho, 165. Mimi-bukuro, 224.
‘Gukwansho, 187. Miyakawasha mampitsu, 222.
Gunsho ruiju, 135. Mizu kagami, 142.
Gwadan keiroku, 151. Murasaki Shikibu nikki, 84.
Hamamatsu Chinagon monogatari, &4. Nambako, 85.
Heishoku wakumonchin, 134. Nichiren chugwasan, 225.
Hitoyo-banashi, 223. Nihon sandai jitsuroku, 148.
Honcho kwaidan koji, 191. Nihongi, 139.
Honcho zokugenshi, 203. Nihon isshi, 145.
Hyakka setsurin, 135. Nihon kiryaku, 164.
Hyakurensho, 165. Nihon koki, 144.

Nihon shukyo fazoku shi, 177.
Ichiwa ichigen, 221.
Intei zakko, 193. Oshi-banashi, 212.
Jigen Daishi den, 207. Ryo-i-ki, 204.
Jikkinsho, 84. Ryw-an zuihitsu, 86.
Jinchodan, 222. :


Verh. Kon, Akad. v. Wetensch. (Afd. Letterk.) N. R. Dl XII, N°. 2.
Digitized by Microsoft®


Saiyuki, 224,


Sandai jitsuroku (Nihon s.j.), 148.


Sansha takusen ryakusho, 149,
Sanshu kidan, 172. i‘
Sanshi kidan kohen, 174.
Seki no akikaze, 176.
Shasekishu, 177.
Shinchomonshu, 194,
Shiojiri, 105.

Shiseki shtran, 135.
Shobutsu ruizan, 119.
Shokoku rijindan, 202.
Shoku Nihongi, 147.

Shoku Nihon koki, 145.
Shosan chomon. kishii, 218.


Taiheiki, 22, 148.
Tomioka Hachiman shaki, 206.


24


©
a


To-0 kiko, 212.
Toytiki kohen, 210.
Toyuki, 223.


Uji shai monogatari, 174.
Unkonshi kohen, 216.


Usa Hachiman no miya engi, 143.


Wakan sansai zue, 123.
Wamyodsho, 137.


Yamato kwai-i-ki, 195,


_Yokwaigaku kogi, 134.


Yithisai sakki, 223.
Yiho meisho ryaku, 170,


Zoku kojidan, 165,


Digitized by Microsoft®


ERRATA.


22, note 3: Fah hai, read Fah hai.
63, lme 6 from beneath: he lies hidden in the world,
read: he hides (covers) the world.
91, note 4: Pao chi lun, read Pao chi lun.
93, » 4: $y AR, read sr fr BE.
119, , 3: Ch. V, read pp. 160 sq.
136, line 1: Fudoki, read Fidoki.
148, note 5: 910, read 901.
148, , 7: #0, read #.


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Digitized by Microsoft®


Aa
is ae
toe


aft
Se
*


SRR ese Ay
ne
Ne Fat) a ARP DSF
re ie od NEN: vo Hf
a
ares


¢
rae


Tele *
Selele: i
aaa


53


ae


aa
sete


Ost


101,


7s


‘ esis


ves


teh


ian phe ot


im
i


eer
