Individualism Old and New (John Dewey, 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/individualismold0000dewe_n3a0). Dewey's diagnosis of the lost individual in corporate America and the case for a new individualism.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

school of Theology at Clar


II


TINT li


The Library


~ SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


INDIVIDUALISM |
OLD AND NEW |


~1HM
i By JOHN DEWEY


MINTON, BALCH & COMPANY
NEW YORK 1930


HOOL OF THE


SC


ONT


AT CLAREM


R.. FRANK 8«56 -


PREFATORY NOTE


I aM oOBLIGED to the courtesy of the editors of
The New Republic for permission to use material
that originally appeared in the columns of that
journal and which is now incorporated in con-
nection with considerable new matter, in this
volume. It is a pleasure to acknowledge my par-
ticular indebtedness to Mr. Daniel Mebane, the


- treasurer of The New Republic, for valuable


suggestions and assistance.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


I THE HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF


eu ““AMERICA’ —BY FORMULA .


Ill THE UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


~ iV THE LOST INDIVIDUAL . 5 . .


ay TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM *
VI CAPITALISTIC OR PUBLIC SOCIALISM


VII THE CRISIS IN CULTURE : ° 5


~ VIII INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY le .


PAGE


19
35
51
74
101
121
146


ve
heat yt “8


REN Ser Phe
og uo


INDIVIDUALISM
OLD AND NEW


CHAPTER I


THE HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST
ITSELF


Ir Is BECOMING a commonplace to say that in
thought and feeling, or at least in the language
in which they are expressed, we are living in some
bygone century, anywhere from the thirteenth


to the eighteenth, although physically and_ex-
ternally we belong to the twentieth century. In
such a contradictory condition, it is not surpris-


ing that a report of American life, such as is con-
tained, for example, in “Middletown,” should
frequently refer to a “bewildered” or “confused”
state of mind as characteristic of us.
Anthropologically speaking, we are living in a
money culture. Its cult and rites dominate. “The
money medium of exchange and the cluster of
activities associated with its acquisition dras-
tically condition the other activities of the peo-
9


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


ple.” This, of course, is as it should be; people
have to make a living, do they not? And for what
should they work if not for money, and how
should they get goods and enjoyments if not by
buying them with money—thus enabling some-
one else to make more money, and in the end to
start shops and factories to give employment to
still others, so that they can make more money
to enable other people to make more money by
selling goods—and so on indefinitely. So far, all
is for the best in the best of all possible cultures:
oun eee ee


And if the culture pattern works out so that
society is divided into two classes, the working
group and the business (including professional)
group, with two and a half times as many in
the former as in the latter, and with the chief
ambition of parents in the former class that
their children should climb into the latter, that
is doubtless because American life offers such
unparalleled opportunities for each individual to
prosper according to his virtues. If few workers
know what they are making or the meaning of
what they do, and still fewer know what becomes

10


HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF


of the work of their hands—in the largest indus-
try of Middletown perhaps one-tenth of one per
cent of the product is consumed locally—this is
doubtless because we have so perfected our sys-
tem of distribution that the whole country is one. |
And if the mass of workers live in constant fear
of loss of their jobs, this is doubtless because our
- spirit of progress, manifest in change of fashions,
invention of new machines and power of over-
production, keeps everything on the move. Our
reward of industry and thrift is so accurately
adjusted to individual ability that it is natural


and proper that the work ook


with dread to the age of fifty or fifty-five, when
they will be laid on the shelf.


All this we take for granted; it is treated as an
inevitable part of our social system. To dwell on
the dark side of it is to blaspheme against our
religion of prosperity. But it is a system that


ealls for a hard and strenuous phi If one

looks at what we do and what happens, and then

expects to find a theory of life that harmonizes

with the actual situation, he will be shocked by

the contradiction he comes upon. For the situ-
11


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


ation calls for assertion of complete economic
determinism. We live as if economic forces _de-


termined the growth and decay of institutions
and settled the fate of individuals, Liberty be-
comes a well-nigh obsolete term; we start, go,
and stop at the signal of a vast industrial ma-
chine. Again, the actual system would seem to
imply a pretty definitely materialistic scheme of


value. Worth i ed by ability to :


own or to get ahead in a competitive pecuniary
race, “Within the privacy of shabby or ambitious


houses, marriage, birth, child-rearing, death, and
the personal immensities of family life go for-
ward. However, it is not so much these func-
tional urgencies of life that determine how
favorable this physical necessity shall be, but the
extraneous detail of how much money the father


earns.” The philosophy appropriate to such a
situation is ituation is that of of struggle for existence and
survival of the e of the economically fit. One would ex-


pect the current theory of life, if it reflects the

actual situation, to be the most drastic Darwin-

ism. And, finally, one would anticipate that the

personal traits most prized would be clear-

sighted vision of personal advantage and resolute
12


HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF


ambition to secure it at any human cost. Senti-
ment and sympathy would be at the lowest dis-
count.

It is unnecessary to say that the current view
of life in Middletown, in Anytown, is nothing of
_ this sort. Nothing gives us Americans the horrors
more than to hear that some misguided creature
_ in some low part of the earth preaches what we
practice—and practice much more efficiently
than anyone else—namely, economic determin-
ism. Our whole theory is that man plans and
uses machines for his own humane and moral
fe msticed of being borne wherever the
machine carries him, Instead of materialism, our
idealism is probably the loudest and most fre-
quently professed philosophy the world has ever
heard. We praise even our most successful men,
not for their ruthless and self-centered energy in
getting ahead, but because of their love of
flowers, children, and dogs, or their kindness to
aged relatives. Anyone who frankly urges a
’ selfish creed of life is everywhere frowned upon.
Along with the disappearance of the home, and
the multiplication of divorce in one generation
by six hundred per cent, there is the most abun-

13


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


dant and most sentimental glorification of the
sacredness of home and the beauties of constant


love that history can record. We are surcharged
with altruism and bursting with desire to “serve”
others.

These are only a few of the obvious contradic-
tions between our institutions and practice on
one hand, and our creeds and theories on the
other, contradictions which a survey of any of our
Middletowns reveals. It is not surprising that
the inhabitants of these towns are bewildered,
uneasy, restless, always seeking something new
and different, only to find, as a rule, the same old
thing in a new dress. It may all be summed up,
perhaps, by saying that nowhere in the world at


any time has religion been so thoroughly respect-
able as with us, and so nearly totally disconnected


from life. I hesitate to dwell on the revelation
that this book gives of “religious” life in Middle-
town. The glorification of religion as setting the
final seal of approval on pecuniary success, and


supplying the active motive to more energetic
struggle for such success, and the adoption by


the churches of the latest devices of the movies
and the advertiser, approach too close to the ob-
14


HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF


scene. Schooling is developed to the point where
more pupils reach the high school than in other
lands; and one-half of the pupils in the last years
of the high school think that the first chapters of
the Hebrew Scriptures give a more accurate ac-
count of the origin and early history of man than
does science, and only one-fifth actively dissent.
If the investigation had been made when a con-
tain questionnaire was distributed among our
school children, it is likely that the usual percent-
age of youth would have recorded their belief
that Harding was the greatest man in the world.
In another way, the whole story is told in brief
when one contrasts what is actually happening to
family life and the complete secularization of
daily activities with a statement from the pulpit


that “the three notable words in the English lan-
guage are mother, home and heaven,” a remark


that would certainly pass unquestioned in any
representative American audience.


It makes little difference whether one selects
important or trivial aspects of the contradiction
between our life as we outwardly live it and our
thoughts and feelings—or what we at least say

15


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


are our beliefs and sentiments. The significant
question is: What is the cause of this split and
contradiction? There are those, of course, who
attribute it to the fact that people being, gen-
erally speaking, morons and boobs, they must be
expected to act out the parts to which they are
assigned. The “explanation” does not take us
very far, even if one accepts it. The particular
forms that the alleged boobery takes are left
quite unaccounted for. And the more one knows
of history, the more one comes to believe that
traditions and_ institutions count more than
native capacity or incapacity in explaining
things. It is evident enough that the rapid indus-
trialization of our civilization took us unawares.


Being mentally and morally unprepared, our
older creeds have become ingrowing; the more
we depart from them in fact, the more loudly
we proclaim them. In effect we treat them as
magic formule. By repeating them often enough
we hope to ward off the evils of the new situation,
or at least to prevent ourselves from seeing them
—and this latter function is ably performed by
our nominal beliefs.

With an enormous command of instrumentali-

16


HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF


ties, with possession of a secure technology, we


glorify the past, and legalize and idealize the
status guo, instead of seriously asking how we
are to employ the means at our disposal so as to
form _an_ equitable _and_ stable society. This is
our great abdication. It explains how and why
we are a house divided against itself. Our tradi-
tion, our heritage, is itself double. It contains
in itself the ideal of equality of opportunity and
of freedom for all, without regard to birth and
status, as a condition for the effective realization
of that equality. This ideal and endeavor in its
behalf once constituted our essential American-
ism; that which was prized as the note of a new
world. It is the genuinely spiritual element of
our tradition. No one can truthfully say that it
has entirely disappeared. But its promise of a
new moral and religious outlook has not been
attained. It has not become the well-spring of a
new intellectual consensus; it is not (even uncon-
- sciously) the vital source of any distinctive and
shared philosophy. It directs our politics only
spasmodically, and while it has generously pro-
vided schools it does not control their aims or
their methods.


17


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


Meanwhile our institutions embody another
and older tradition. Industry and_business_con-
ducted for money profit are nothing new; they
are not the product of our own age and culture;
they come to us from a long past. But the inven-
tion of the machine has given them a power and
scope they never had in the past from which they


derive. Our law and politics and the incidents
of human association depend upon a novel com-
bination of the machine and money, and the re-
sult is the pecuniary culture characteristic of our
civilization. The spiritual factor of our tradition,
equal opportunity and free association and inter-
communication, is obscured and crowded out. In-
stead of the development of individualities which


it prophetically set forth, there is a perversion of


the whole ideal of individualism _ to conform to
the practices of a pecuniary culture. It has be-
come the source and justification of inequalities
and oppressions. Hence our compromises, and
the conflicts in which aims and standards are
confused beyond recognition.


18


CHarpTteErR II


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


WE HAVE HEARD a good deal of late years of


class-consciousness. The phrase “nation-con-
scious” does _not happen to_be current, but
present-day nationalism is an exacerbated ex-


pression of it in fact. A still more recent mani-
festation might be called “culture-consciousness”
or “civilization-consciousness.” Like class-con-
sciousness and nationalism, it assumes an in-
vidious form; it_is an exponent—and a. coeffi-
cient—of conflict between groups. The war and
its consequences may not have produced in our
own country a consciousness of “Americanism”
as a distinctive mode of civilization, but they have
definitely had that effect among the intellectual
élite of Europe.

Americanism as a form of culture did not ex-
ist, before the war, for Kuropeans. Now it does
exist and as a menace, In reaction and as a pro-

19


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


test, there is developing, at least among literary
folk, the consciousness of a culture which is dis-
tinctively European, something which is precious
and whose very existence is threatened by an in-
vasion of a new form of barbarism issuing from
the United States. Acute hostility to a powerful
alien influence is taking the place of complacent
ignoring of what was felt to be negligible. It
would take a wider knowledge than mine to list
even the titles of books and articles coming
yearly from the presses of Kurope whose burden
is the threat of “America” to the traditional cul-
ture of Europe. |

~ I am not concerned here with the European
side of the matter. Most social unifications come
about in response to external pressure. The same
is likely to be true of a United States of Europe.
If the ideal is approximated in reality, it will
probably be as a_protective reaction to the eco-
nomic and financial hegemony of the United
States of America. The result would probably
be a good thing for Europe, and thus unwit-
tingly we should serve one good purpose, inter-
nationally speaking. But it is, in the end, no
great consolation to know that in losing our own

20


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


soul we have been a means of helping save the
soul of someone else. Just what is the America


whose picture is forming in the minds of Euro-


pean critics?


Some of the writers are ignorant as well as
bitter. These may be neglected. Others are in-
telligent, as well informed as any foreigner can
be about a foreign country, and not devoid of
sympathy. Moreover, their judgments agree not
only with one another but with the protests of
native-born dissenters. For convenience and be-
cause of the straightforward intelligence of its
author, I take as a point of departure the de-
scription of the American type of mind and char-
acter presented by Mueller Freienfels.* His
treatment is the fairer because he understands
by “American” a type of mind that is develop-
ing, from like causes, all over the world, and
which would have emerged in time in Europe,
even if there were no geographical America, al-
though its development in the rest of the world

* “Mysteries of the Soul,” translated from the German by


Bernard Miall; New York, Knopf, 1929. It may be well to add,
in view of the title, that there is nothing occult nor obscurantist


about the book. By “soul” is meant “the manifold living reciprocal


reactions between the self andi the universe.


21


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


has been accelerated and intensified by the influ-
ence of this country.

As far as any actual American is true to the
type that is proclaimed to be the American, he
should be thrilled by the picture that is drawn
of him. For we are told that the type is a genu-
ine mutation in the history of culture; that it is
new, the product of the last century, and that
it is stamped with success. It is transforming the
external conditions, of life and thereby reacting
on the psychical content of life; it is assimilating
other types of itself and recoining them. No
world-conquest, whether that of Rome or Chris-
tendom, compares with that of “Americanism”
in extent or effectiveness. If success and quan-
tity are in fact the standards of the “American,”
here are admissions that will content his soul.
From the standpoint of the type depicted, he
is approved; and what do adverse criticisms
matter?

But either the type is not yet so definitely fixed
as is represented, or else there are individual
Americans who deviate from type. For there are
many who will have reserves in their admira-
tion of the picture that is presented. Of course

22


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


the dissenters may be, as the European critics
say, impotent sports, fish out of water and
affected with nostalgia for the European tradi-
tion. Nevertheless, it is worth while to raise the
question as to whether the American type, sup-
posing there is to be one, has as yet taken on
definitive form. First, however, what are alleged
to be the characteristics of the type?

Fundamentally, they spring from impersonal-
ity. The roots of the intellect are unconscious
and vital, in instincts and emotions. In America,
we are told, this subconsciousness is disregarded ;
it is suppressed or is subordinated to conscious
rationality, which means that it is adapted to the
needs and conditions of the external world. We
have “intellect,” but distinctly in the Bergsonian
sense; mind attuned to the conditions of action
upon matter, upon the world. Our emotional life
is quick, excitable, undiscriminating, lacking in
individuality and in direction by intellectual life.
Hence the “externality and superficiality of the
American soul’; it has no ultimate inner unity
and uniqueness—no true personality.

The marks and signs of this “impersonaliza-
tion” of the human soul are quantification of

23


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


life, with its attendant disregard of quality; its
mechanization and the almost universal habit of
esteeming technique as an end, not as a means,
so that organic and intellectual life is also “ra-
tionalized”’; and, finally, standardization. Differ-
ences and distinctions are ignored and overrid-
den; agreement, similarity, is the ideal. There is
not only absence of social discrimination but of
intellectual; critical thinking is conspicuous by
its absence. Our pronounced trait is mass sug-
gestibility. The adaptability and flexibility that
we display in our practical intelligence when
dealing with external conditions have found
their way into our souls. Homogeneity of
thought and emotion has become an ideal.


Quantification, mechanization and standardi-
zation: these are then the marks of the Ameri-
canization that is conquering the world. They
have their good side; external conditions and the
standard of living are undoubtedly improved.
But their effects are not limited to these mat-
ters; they have invaded mind and character, and
subdued the soul to their own dye. The criticism
is familiar; it is so much the burden of our own

24


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


critics that one is never quite sure how much of
the picture of foreign critics is drawn from direct
observation and how much from native novels
and essays that are not complacent with the
American scene. This fact does not detract from
the force of the indictment; it rather adds to it,
and raises the more insistently the question of
what our life means.

I shall not deny the existence of these charac-
teristics, nor of the manifold evils of superficial-
ism and externalism that result in the produc-
tion of intellectual and moral mediocrity. In the
main these traits exist and they characterize
American life and are already beginning to
dominate that of other countries. But their im-
port is another thing than their existence. Muel-
ler Freienfels is intelligent enough to acknowl-
edge that they are transitional rather than final.
He recognizes that the forces are so intrinsic that
it is foolish to rebel against them and lament the
past. “The question is how we are to pass
through them and transcend them.” It is this note
which distinguishes his appraisal from so many
others.

In reply to the question, one may at least say

25


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


that we are still in an early stage of the transi-
tion, Anything that is at most but a hundred
years old has hardly had time to disclose its
meaning in the slow secular processes of human
history. And it may be questioned whether even
our author has not sometimes succumbed to the
weakness of lesser critics in treating the pass-
ing symptoms as inherent characters. I do not
have in mind here an “optimistic” appeal to fu-
ture time and its possibilities. I rather wish to
raise the question as to how many of the defects
and evils that are supposed to belong to the pres-
ent order are in fact projections into it of a de-
parting past order.

Strength, power, is always relative, not abso-
lute. Conquest is an exhibition of weakness in
the conquered as well as of strength in the con-
queror. Transitions are out of something as well
as into something; they reveal a past as well as
project a future. There must have been some-
thing profoundly awry in the quality, spiritual-
ity, and individualized variety of the past, or they
would not have succumbed as readily as we are
told they are doing to the quantification, mech-
anization and standardization of the present.

26


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


And the defective and perverse elements have
certainly not been displaced. They survive in the
present. Present conditions give these factors an
opportunity to disclose themselves. They are not
now kept under and out of sight. Their overt
manifestation is not a cheering spectacle. But
as long as they did not show themselves on a
scale large enough to attract notice, they could
not be dealt with. I wonder very much whether
many of the things that are objected to in the
present scene—and justly so—are not in fact
revelations of what the older type of culture cov-
ered up, and whether their perceptible presence
is not to be credited rather than debited to the
forces that are now active.


It is possible of course to argue—as Keyser-
ling for example seems to do—that the new or
American order signifies simply that the animal
instincts of man have been released, while the
older European tradition kept them in disci-
plined subjection to something higher, called
with pleasing vagueness “spirituality.” The sus-
picion that suppression is not solution is not con-
fined to America. Undue and indiscriminate

27


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


greediness in the presence of accessible food may
be a symptom of previous starvation rather than
an inevitable exhibition of the old Adam. A cul-
ture whose tradition rests on depreciation of the
flesh and on making a sharp difference between
body and mind, instinct and reason, practice and
theory, may have wrought corruption of flesh
and degeneration of spirit. It would take a de-
gree of wisdom no one possesses to tell just what,
in the undesirable features of the present, is a
reflection of an old but not as yet transformed
system of life and thought, and how much is a
genuine product of the new forces.

One thing seems to be reasonably certain. The
prized and vaunted “individuality” of European
culture that is threatened by the leveling stand-
ardization and uniformity of the American type
was a very limited affair. If one were to retort
in kind, one could ask how much share in it was
had by the peasant and proletarian. And it is
much more than a retort to say that a peasantry
and proletariat which has been released from
intellectual bondage will for a time have its
revenge. Because there is no magic in democ-
racy to confer immediately the power of critical

28


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


discrimination upon the masses who have been
outside any intellectual movement, and who have
taken their morals and their religion from an
external authority above them—an authority
which science is destroying—it does not follow
that the ineptitude of the many is the creation
of democracy.

Take one instance—the present interest in
technique, and the domination of the “American
type” by technique. It will hardly be argued, I
suppose, that the mere absence of technique—
intelligent means and methods for securing re-
sults—is itself a mark of an intrinsically desir-
able civilization. Nor is it surprising that the
discovery of the actuality and potentiality of
technique in all branches of human life should
have an immediately intoxicating effect. What is
called the American mentality is characterized
by this discovery, and by the exaggerations that
come with the abruptness of the discovery. There
is much to be said against quantification and
standardization. But the discovery of competent
technique stands on a different level. The world
has not suffered from absence of ideals and spir-
itual aims anywhere nearly as much as it has suf-

29


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


fered from absence of means for realizing the
ends which it has prized in a literary and senti-
mental way. Technique is still a novelty in most
matters, and like most novelties is played with
for a while on its own account. But it will be used
for ends beyond itself some time; and I think
that interest in technique is precisely the thing
which is most promising in our civilization, the
thing which in the end will break down devotion
to external standardization and the mass-quan-
tity ideal. For its application has not gone far
as yet; and interest in it is still largely vicarious,
being that, so to say, of the spectator rather than
of naturalization in use. In the end, technique
can only signify emancipation of individuality,
and emancipation on a broader scale than has
obtained in the past.

In his most hopeful anticipation of a future to
which we may be moving, Freienfels calls at-
tention to the fact that the impoverishment of
the individual is accompanied, even now, by an
enrichment of community resources. Collectively,
present society, he says, is marked by a power
over nature and by intellectual resource and
power exceeding that of the classic Athenian and

30


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


the man of the Renaissance. Why is it that this
collective enrichment does not operate to elevate
correspondingly the life of individuals? This
question he does not ask, Failure to consider it
constitutes to my mind the chief failure of critics
whether foreign or native. Our materialism, our
_ devotion to money making and to having a good
time, are not things by themselves. They are the
- product of the fact that we live in a money cul-
ture; of the fact that our technique and tech-
nology are controlled by interest in private
profit. There lies the serious and fundamental
defect of our civilization, the source of the sec-
ondary and induced evils to which so much atten-
tion is given. Critics are dealing with symptoms
and effects. The evasion of fundamental eco-
nomic causes by critics both foreign and native
seems to me to be an indication of the prevalence
of the old European tradition, with its disregard
for the body, material things, and practical con-
cerns. The development of the American type,
-in the sense of the critics, is an expression of the
fact that we have retained this tradition and the
economic system of private gain on which it is
based, while at the same time we have made an
31


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


independent development of industry and tech-
nology that is nothing short of revolutionary.
When our critics deal with this issue instead of
avoiding it there will be something really do-
ing.

Until the issue is met, the confusion of a civili-
zation divided against itself will persist. The
mass development, which our European critics
tell us has submerged individuality, is the prod-
uct of a machine age; in some form it will follow
in all countries from the extension of a machine
technology. Its immediate effect has been, with-
out doubt, a subjection of certain types of in-
dividuality. As far as individuality is associated
with aristocracy of the historic type, the exten-
sion of the machine age will presumably be hos-
tile to individuality in its traditional sense all
over the world. But the strictures of our Euro-
pean critics only define the issue touched — |
in the previous chapter. The problem of con
structing a new 1 t_with the
objective conditions under which we live is the


deepest problem of our times.
There are two “solutions” that fail to solve.


One of these is the method of avoidance. This
32 |


“AMERICA”—BY FORMULA


course is taken as far as it is assumed that the
only valid type of individuality is that which
holds over from the ages that anteceded machine
technology and the democratic society it creates.
The course that is complementary to the method
of escape springs from assumption that the pres-
ent situation is final; that it presents something


inherently ultimate and fixed. Only as it is


treated as transitive and moving, as m 1
be dealt with in shaping a later outcome O
that is, as it is treated as a


of any solution genuine and relevant. We may
well take the formula advanced by European
critics as a means of developing our conscious-
ness of some of the conditions of the problem. So
regarded, the problem is seen to be essentially
that of creation of a new individualism as sig-
nificant for modern conditions as the old individ-
ualism at its best was for its day and place. The
first step in further definition of this problem is
realization of the collective age which we have
already entered. When that is apprehended, the


issue will define itself as utilization_of the reali-


ties of a corporate civilization to validate and


embody the distinctive moral element in the
83


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW
American version of individualism: Equality and


freedom expressed not merely externally and po-


litically but through 1_ personal participation in
the development of a shared culture.


34


CuHoarpTter III


THE UNITED STATES, INCORPO-
RATED


It was not long ago that it was fashionable
for both American and foreign observers of our
national scene to sum up the phenomena of our
social life under the title of “individualism.”
Some treated this alleged individualism as our
distinctive achievement; some critics held that it
was the source of our backwardness, the mark of
a relatively uncivilized estate. To-day both inter-
pretations seem equally inept and outmoded. In-
dividualism is still carried on our banners and
attempts are made to use it as a war cry, espe-
cially when it is desired to defeat governmental
regulation of any form of industry previously
exempt from legal control. Even in high quar-
ters, rugged individualism is praised as the glory
of American life. But such words have little rela-
tion to the moving facts of that life.

35


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


There is no word which adequately expresses
what is taking place. “Socialism” has too specific
political and economic associations to be appro-
priate. “Collectivism” is more neutral, but it, too,
is a party-word rather than a descriptive term.
Perhaps the constantly increasing role of corpo-
rations in our economic life gives a clue to a fit-
ting name. The word may be used in a wider
sense than is conveyed by its technical legal
meaning. We may then say that the United


States has steadily moved from an earlier_pio-
neer individualism to_a condition of dominant
corporateness. The influence business corpora-
tions exercise in determining present industrial
and economic activities is both a cause and a
symbol of the tendency to combination in all
phases of life. Associations tightly or loosely or-
ganized more and more define the opportunities,
the choices and the actions of individuals.

I have said that the growth of legal corpora-
tions in manufacturing, transportation, distribu-
tion and finance is symbolic of the development
of ‘corporateness)) in all phases of life. The era
of trust-busting/is an almost forgotten age. Not
only are big mergers the order of the day, but

36


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


popular sentiment now looks upon (them with
pride rather than with fear.(Size is our current
measure of greatness in this as in other matters.
It is not necessary to ask whether the opportu-
nity for speculative manipulation for the sake
_ of private gain, or increased public service at a
lower cost, is the dominant motive. Personal mo-
_ tives hardly count(as) productive causes:in’ com-
parison with impersonal forces. Mass production


and_mass distribution inevitably follow in the
wake of an epoch of steam and electricity. These


have created a common market, the parts_of
which are held together by intercommunication
and interdependence; ‘distance i is eliminated, and
the tempo of action enormou . Ag-
gregated capital and concentrated control are
the eopremiporary, responses.

ols needed) but the movement
cannot_be Grrested d_ by (legislation. Witness the


condition of nearly innocuous deguetude of the
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. Newspapers, manu-
- facturing plants, utilities supplying light, power
and local transportation, banks, retail stores,


theaters and the movies, have all joined in the «” :


movement toward integration) General Motors,
37


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


the American Telegraph and Telephone Com-
pany, United States Steel, the rapid growth of
chain-store systems, combinations of radio com-
panies (with companies controlling theaters all
over the country, are familiar facts. Railway con-
solidations (have been Slowed up’ by politics and
internal difficulties, but few persons doubt that
they, t too, are coming. The_political control of
the future to_be effective(must_ take a _~
instead of negative(form)

For the forces at work in this movement are
too vast and complex ‘to cease operation at the
behest of legislation. Aside from direct evasions
of laws, there are many legal methods of carry-
ing the movement forward. Interlocking direc-
torates, interpurchase of stocks by individuals
and corporations, grouping into holding com-
panies, investing companies with enough hold-
ings to sway policies, effect the same end as do
direct mergers. It was stated at a recent conven-
tion of bankers that eighty per cent of the capi-
talization of all the banks of the country is
now in the hands of twelve financial concerns.
It is efident that virtual control of the other
twenty per cent, except for negligible institu-

38


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


tions having only local importance, automatically
ensues. :

An economist could multiply instances and
give them a more precise form. But I am not an
economist, and the facts in any case are too
well known to need detailed rehearsal. For my
purpose is only to indicate the bearing of the
development of these corporations upon the
change of social life from an individual to a
corporate affair. Reactions to the change are
psychological, professional, political; they affect
the working ideas, beliefs and conduct of all
of us.

The sad decline of the farmer cannot be under-


stood except in the light of the industrialization
of the country which is coincident with its “cor-


porization.” The government is now going to
try to do for the collectivizing of the agricultur-
ists the sort of thing that business acumen has
already done—temporarily against the desire of
the government—for manufactures and trans-
portation. The plight of the uncombined and un-
integrated is proof of the extent to which the
country is controlled by the corporate idea. So-
ciologists who concern themselves with rural life
39


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


are now chiefly occupied with pointing out the
influence of urban districts—that is, of those
where industrial organization predominates—
upon the determination of conditions in country
districts.

There are other decays which tell the same
story. The old-type artisan, trained by individ-
ual apprenticeship for skilled individual work,
is disappearing. Mass production by men massed
together to operate machines with their minute
divisions of labor, is putting him out of business.
In many cases, a few weeks at a machine give
about all the education—or rather training—that
is needed, Mass production causes a kind of mass
education in which individual capacity and skill
are submerged. While the artisan becomes more
of a mechanic and less of an artist, those who
are still called artists either put themselves, as
writers and designers, at the disposal of organ-
ized business, or are pushed out to the edge as
eccentric bohemians. The artist remains, one may
say, as a surviving individual force, but the es-
teem in which the calling is socially held in this
country measures the degree of his force. The

status of the artist in any form of social life af-
40


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


fords a fair measure of the state of its culture.
The inorganic position of the artist in American
life to-day is convincing evidence of what hap-
pens to the isolated individual who lives in a
society growing corporate.
Attention has recently been called to a new
phenomenon in human culture:—the business
mind, having its own conversation and language,
its own interests, its own intimate groupings in
which men of this mind, in their collective capac-
ity, determine the tone of society at large as well
as the government of industrial society, and have
more political influence than the government it-
self. I am not concerned here with their political
power. The fact significant for present discussion
is that we now have, although without formal
or legal status, a mental and moral corporateness
for which history affords no parallel. Our in-
digenous heroes are the Fords and Edisons who
typify this mind to the public. Critics may
find amusement in ridiculing Rotarians, Ki-
wanians and Lions, but the latter can well afford
to disregard the ridicule because they are repre-
sentatives of the dominant corporate mentality.
Nowhere is the decline of the old-fashioned
Al


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


individual and individualism more marked than
in leisure life, in amusements and sports. Our


colleges only follow the movement of the day
when they make athletics an organized business,
aroused_and conducted_under paid directors in
the spirit of pure collectivism. The formation of


theater chains is at once the cause and the effect
of the destruction of the older independent life
of leisure carried on in separate homes. The
radio, the movies, the motor car, all make for
a common and aggregate mental and emotional
life. With technical exceptions, to be found in
special publications and in some portion of all
newspapers, the press is the organ of amusement
for a hurried leisure time, and it reflects and
carries further the formation of mental collec-
tivism by massed methods. Crime, too, is assum-
ing a new form; it is organized and corporate.
Our apartments and our subways are signs of
the invasion and decline of privacy. Private
“rights” have almost ceased to have a definable


meaning. We live exposed to the greatest flood
of mass suggestion that any people has ever ex-


perienced. The need for united action, and the
supposed need of integrated opinion and senti-
42


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


ment, are met by organized propaganda and ad-
vertising. The publicity agent is perhaps the
most significant symbol of our present social life.
There are individuals who resist; but, for a time
_at least, sentiment can be manufactured by mass
_ methods for almost any person or any cause.


These things are not said to be deplored, nor
even in order to weigh their merits and demerits.
They are merely reported as indications of the
nature of our social scene, of the extent to which
it is formed and directed by corporate and collec-
tive factors toward collective ends. Coincident
with these changes in mentality and prestige are
basic, if hardly acknowledged, changes in the
ideas by which life is interpreted. Industry,
again, provides the striking symbols.

What has become of the old-fashioned ideal of
thrift? Societies for the promotion of savings
among the young were much hurt in their feel-
- ings when Henry Ford urged a free scale of
expenditures instead of a close scale of personal
savings. But his recommendation was in line with
all the economic tendencies of the day. Speeded-
up mass production demands increased buying.

43


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


It is promoted by advertising on a vast scale, by
instalment selling, by agents skilled in breaking
down sales resistance. Hence buying becomes
an economic “duty” which is as consonant with
the present epoch as thrift was with the period
of individualism. For the industrial mechanism
depends upon maintaining some kind of an
equilibrium between production and consump-
tion. If the equilibrium is disturbed, the whole
social structure is affected and prosperity ceases
to have a meaning. Replacement and extension
of capital are indeed more required than they
ever were. But the savings of individuals, as such,
are petty and inadequate to the task. New capi-
tal is chiefly supplied by the surplus earnings
of big corporate organizations, and it becomes
meaningless to tell individual buyers that indus-
try can be kept going only by their abstinence
from the enjoyments of consumption. The old
plea for “sacrifice” loses its force. In effect, the
individual is told that by indulging in the en-
joyment of free purchasing he performs his eco-
nomic duty, transferring his surplus income to
the corporate store where it can be most effec-
tively used. Virtue departs from mere thrift.
44


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


The corresponding change in the ruling con-
ceptions of the older economic theory is, of


course, the obligation upon employers to pay
high wages. Growing consumption through in-


creased expenditure that effects a still greater


amount of production cannot be maintained un-


less consumers have the wherewithal. The con-
sumption demand of the well-to-do is limited;
and their number is limited. Purchase of luxu-
ries by this class has, indeed, become a necessity
rather than a vice, since it helps to keep moving
the wheels of industry and commerce. Luxury
may still be condemned as a vice, just as old
habits still show themselves in approving thrift
as a virtue. But the condemnation is almost an
idle beating of the air, because it goes contrary
to the movement of industry and trade. In any
case, however, there is a definite limit to the con-
sumption of luxuries, as well as of what used.
to be called necessary commodities, on the part
of the wealthy. The demands that make produc-
tion and distribution “going concerns” must
come from the mass of the people, that is, from
workers and those in subordinate salaried posi-


tions. Hence the “new economy” based on_ the
A5


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


idea of the identity of high wages with industrial
prosperity.


It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to measure
the full import of this revaluation of those con-
cepts of saving and low wages which were basic
in the older doctrine. If it merely expressed a
change in abstract economic theory, its signifi-
cance would not be great. But the change in
theory is itself a reflex of a social change which
is hardly less than revolutionary. I do not mean
that I think that the “new economy” is firmly
established as a fact, or that the endless chain
of speeding up mass consumption in order to
speed up production is either endless or entirely
logical. But certain changes do not go backward.
Those who have enjoyed high wages and a higher
standard of consumption will not be content to
return to a lower level. A new condition has
been created with which we shall have to reckon
constantly in the future. Depressions and slumps
will come, but they can never be treated in the
future m the casual and fatalistic way in which
they have been accepted in the past. They will
appear abnormal instead of normal, and society,
including the industrial captains, will have to

46


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


assume a responsibility from which it and they
were previously exempt. The gospel of general
prosperity in this life will have to meet tests to
which that of salvation in the next world, as_a


: compensation for the miseries of this one, was


- not subjected. “Prosperity” is not such an as-


sured fact in 1930 as it seemed to many to be


in the earlier part of 1929. The slump or the


;


depression makes the problem caused by the
growth of corporate industry and finance the


more acute. An excess income of eight billions


a year will only aggravate the economic situa-
tion unless it can find outlet in productive chan-


nels, It cannot do this unless consumption is sus-
tained. This cannot happen unless organization
and control extend from production and distri-
bution to consumption. The alternatives seem to
be either a definite expansion of social corporate-
ness to include the average consumer or else


- economic suffering on a vast scale.


ie x


i T have said that the instances cited of the reac-


tion of the growing corporateness of society upon


social mind and habit were not given in order to
be either deplored or approved. They are set
47


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


forth only to call out the picture of the decline of
an individualistic philosophy of life, and the for-
mation of a collectivistic scheme of interdepend-
ence, which finds its way into every cranny of
life, personal, intellectual, emotional, affecting
leisure as well as work, morals as well as eco-
nomics. But because the purpose was to indicate
the decay of the older conceptions, although they
are still those that are most loudly and vocally
professed, the illustrations given inevitably em-
phasize those features of growing standardiza-
tion and mass uniformity which critics justly de-
plore. It would be unfair, accordingly, to leave
the impression that these traits are the whole of
the story of the “corporization” of American life.

The things which are criticized are the outward
signs of an inner movement toward _ integration
on a scale never known before. “Socialization”’ is


not wholly a eulogistic term nor a desirable proc-
ess. It involves danger to some precious values;


it involves a threat of danger to some things

which we should not readily lose. But in spite of

much cant which is talked about “service” and

“social responsibility,” it marks the beginning of

a new era of integration. What its ultimate pos-
48


UNITED STATES, INCORPORATED


sibilities are, and to what extent these possibili-
ties will be realized, is for the future to tell. The


need of the present is to apprehend the fact that,
for better or worse, we are living in a corporate
age,

It is of the nature of society as of life to
_ contain a balance of opposed forces. Actions
and reactions are ultimately equal and counter-


part. At present the “socialization” is largely
mechanical and quantitative. The system is kept


in a kind of precarious balance by the movement
toward lawless and reckless overstimulation


among individuals. If the chaos and th -


nism are to generate a mind and soul, an inte-
grated personality, it will have to be an intelli-


gence, a sentiment and an individuality of a new
type.

Meanwhile, the lawlessness and irregularity
(and I have in mind not so much outward crimi-
nality as emotional instability and intellectual
confusion) and the uniform standardization are
two sides of the same emerging corporate so-
ciety. Hence only in an external sense does so-
ciety maintain a balance. When the corporate-
ness becomes internal, when, that is, it is realized

49


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


in thought and purpose, it will become qualita-
tive. In this change, law will be realized not as
a rule arbitrarily imposed from without but as
the relations which hold individuals together.
The balance of the individual and the social will
be organic. The emotions will be aroused and
satisfied in the course of normal living, not in
abrupt deviations to secure the fulfillment which
is denied them in a situation which is so incom-
plete that it cannot be admitted into the affec-
tions and yet is so pervasive that it cannot be
escaped: a situation which defines an individual
divided within himself.


50


}


CuHarpterR IV


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


‘THE DEVELOPMENT OF a civilization that is out-
wardly corporate—or rapidly becoming so—has
been accompanied by a submergence of the indi-
vidual. Just how far this is true of the individ-
ual’s opportunities in action, how far initiative
and choice in what an individual does are re-
stricted by the economic forces that make for
consolidation, I shall not attempt to say. It is
arguable that there has been a diminution of the
range of decision and activity for the many along
with exaggeration of opportunity of personal ex-
pression for the few. It may be contended that


_ no one class in the past has the power now pos-


sessed by an industrial oligarchy. On the other


hand, it may be held that this power of the few


a is, with respect to genuine individuality, spe-
cious; that those outwardly in control are in


reality as much carried by forces external to
51


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


themselves as are the many; that in fact these
forces impel them into a common mold to such
an extent that individuality is suppressed.
What is here meant by “the lost individual’
is, however, so irrelevant to this question that it
is not necessary to decide between the two views.
For by it is meant a moral and intellectual fact
which is vhich is independent of any manifestation o of any manifestation _of
power in action. The significant thing is that the
loyalties which once held individuals, which gave
them support, direction, and unity of outlook on
life, have well-nigh disappeared. In consequence,
individuals are confused and bewildered. It


would be difficult to find in history an epoch as
lacking in solid _and_assured_objects of belief
and approved ends of action as is the present.
Stability_of individuality is dependent _upop
stable objects to which allegiance firmly attaches


itself. There are, of course, those who are still
militantly fundamentalist in religious and social
creed. But their very clamor is evidence that the
tide is set against them. For the others, tradi-
tional objects of loyalty have become hollow or
are openly repudiated, and they drift without
sure anchorage. Individuals vibrate between a
52


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


past that is intellectually too empty to give sta-
bility and a present that is too diversely crowded
and chaotic to afford balance or direction to ideas
and emotion.


Assured _and integrated individuality is the
product of definite social relationships and_pub-


licly acknowledged functions. Judged by this
standard, even those who seem to be in control,
and to carry the expression of their special in-
dividual abilities to a high pitch, are submerged.
They may be captains of finance and_ industry,
but until there is some consensus of belief as to
the meaning of finance and industry in civiliza-
tion as a whole, they cannot be captains of their
own souls—their beliefs and aims. They exercise
leadership surreptitiously and, as it were, absent-
mindedly. They lead, but it is under cover of
impersonal and_ socially undirected economic
forces. Their reward is found not in what they
do, in their social office and function, but in a
deflection of social consequences to private gain.
They receive the acclaim and command the envy
and admiration of the crowd, but the crowd is
also composed of private individuals who are
equally lost to a sense of social bearings and uses.
53


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


The explanation is found in the fact that while
the actions promote corporate and collective re-
sults, these results are outside their intent and
irrelevant to that reward of satisfaction which
comes from a sense of social fulfillment. To
themselves and to others, their business is private
and its outcome is private profit. No complete
satisfaction is possible where such a split exists.
Hence the absence of a sense of social value is
made up for by an exacerbated acceleration of
the activities that increase private advantage and
power. One cannot look into the inner conscious-
ness of his fellows; but if there is any general
degree of inner contentment on the part of those
who form our pecuniary oligarchy, the evidence
is sadly lacking. As for the many, they are im-
pelled hither and yon by forces beyond their
control,


The most marked trait _of present life, eco-
nomically speaking, is insecurity, It is tragic that
millions of men desirous of working should be


recurrently out of employment; aside from cycli-


cal depressions there is a standing army at all

times who have no regular work. We have not

any adequate information as to the number of
54


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


these persons. But the ignorance even as to num-
bers is slight compared with our inability to
grasp the psychological and moral consequences
of the precarious condition in which vast multi-


tudes live. Insecurity cuts deeper and extends
more widely than bare unemployment. Fear of


loss of work, dread of the oncomin :
create anxiety and eat into self-respect in a way
that impairs personal dignity. Where fears
abound, courageous and robust individuality is
undermined. The vast development of techno-
logical resources that might bring security in its
train has actually brought a new mode of insecu-
rity, as mechanization displaces labor. The merg-
ers and consolidations that mark a corporate age
are beginning to bring uncertainty into the eco-
nomic lives of the higher salaried class, and that
tendency is only just in its early stage. Realiza-
tion that honest and industrious pursuit of a
calling or business will not guarantee any stable
level of life lessens respect for work and stirs
large numbers to take a chance of some adven-V
_ titious way of getting the wealth that will make

security possible: witness the orgies of the stock-

_ market in recent days.
ye 55


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW
The unrest, impatience, irritation and_hurry


that are so marked in American life are inevita-
ble accompaniments of a situation in which in-
dividuals do not find support and contentment in
the fact that they are sustaining and sustained


members of a social whole. They are evidence,
psychologically, of abnormality, and it is as idle
to seek for their explanation within the deliber-
ate intent of individuals as it is futile to think
that they can be got rid of by hortatory moral
appeal. Only an acute maladjustment between
individuals and the social conditions under which
they live can account for such widespread patho-


logical phenomena. Feverish love of anything as
long as it is a change which is distracting, im-


patience, unsettlement, nervous discontentment,
and desire for excitement, are not native to hu-
man nature. 'They are so abnormal as to demand
explanation in some deep-seated cause.

I should explain a seeming hypocrisy on the
same ground. We are not consciously insincere
in our professions of devotion to ideals of “serv-
ice”; they mean something. Neither the Rotarian
nor the big business enterprise uses the term

merely as a cloak for “putting something over”
56


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


which makes for pecuniary gain. But the lady
doth protest too much. The wide currency of
such professions testifies to a sense of a social
function of business which is expressed in words
because it is so lacking in fact, and yet which is
felt to be rightfully there. If our external com
binations in industrial activity were reflected in
organic integrations of the desires, purposes and
satisfactions of individuals, the verbal protesta-
tions would disappear, because social utility
would be a matter of course.

Some persons hold that a genuine mental coun-
terpart of the outward social scheme is actually


forming. Our prevailing mentality, our “ideol-
ogy, is said to be that of the “business mind”


which has become so deplorably pervasive. Are
not the prevailing standards of value those
derived from pecuniary success and economic
prosperity? Were the answer unqualifiedly in
the affirmative, we should have to admit that our
outer civilization is attaining an inner culture
which corresponds to it, however much we might
disesteem the quality of that culture. The objec-
tion that such a condition is impossible, since man
cannot live by bread, by material prosperity,
57


jf
J


{
:


|


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


alone, is tempting, but it may be said to beg the
question. The conclusive answer is that the busi-
ness mind is not itself unified. It is divided within
itself and must remain so as long as the results
of industry as the determining force in life are
corporate and collective while its animating mo-


tives _and and _ compensations are so unmitigatedly


/ private. srivate. A unified mind, even of the business


| type, can_ come into being only when conscious


intent and consummation are in harmony with
consequences actually effected. This statement


‘expresses conditions so psychologically assured


that it may be termed a law of mental integrity.
Proof of the existence of the split is found in the
fact that while there is much planning of future
development with a view to dividends within
large business corporations, there is no corre-
sponding coérdinated planning of social devel-
opment.

The growth of corporateness is arbitrarily re-
stricted. Hence it operates to limit individuality,
to put burdens on it, to confuse and submerge
it. It crowds more out than it incorporates in an
ordered and secure life. It has made rural dis-
tricts stagnant while bringing excess and restless

58


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


movement to the city. The restriction of cor-
porateness lies in the fact that it remains on the
cash level. Men are brought together on the one
side by investment in the same joint stock com-
pany, and on the other hand by the fact that the
machine compels mass production in order that
investors may get their profits. The results affect
all society in all its phases. But they are as
inorganic as the ultimate human motives that
operate are private and egoistic. An economic
individualism of motives and aims underlies our
present corporate mechanisms, and_ undoes. the
individual.

The loss of individuality is conspicuous in the
economic region because our civilization is so
predominantly a business civilization. But the
fact is even more obvious when we turn to the
political scene. It would be a waste of words to


bs expatiate on the meaninglessness of present po-


litical platforms, parties and issues. The old-time
_ slogans are still reiterated, and to a few these
- words still seem to have a real meaning. But it
- is too evident to need argument that on the whole
: our politics, as far as they are not covertly ma-
‘nipulated in behalf of the pecuniary advantage
y 59


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


of groups, are in a state of confusion; issues are
improvised from week to week with a constant
shift of allegiance. It is impossible for individ-
uals to find themselves politically with surety and
efficiency under such conditions. Political apathy
broken by recurrent sensations and spasms is
the natural outcome.

The lack of secure objects of allegiance, with-
out which individuals are lost, is especially strik-
ing in the case of the liberal. The liberalism of
the past was characterized by the possession of
a definite intellectual creed and program; that
was its distinction from conservative parties
which needed no formulated outlook beyond de-
fense of things as they were. In contrast, liberals
operated on the basis of a thought-out social
philosophy, a theory of politics sufficiently defi-
nite and coherent to be easily translated into a
program of policies to be pursued. Liberalism_


to-day is hardly more than a temper of mind,

vaguely called forward-looking, but quite un-

certain as to where to look and what to look foy-

ward to. For many individuals, as well as in its

social results, this fact is hardly less than a

tragedy. The tragedy may be unconscious for the
60


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


mass, but they show its reality in their aimless
drift, while the more thoughtful are consciously
disturbed. For human nature is self-possessed

I do not think it is fantastic to connect our
excited and rapacious nationalism with the situ-
ation in which corporateness has gone so far as
to detach individuals from their old local ties and
allegiances but not far enough to give them a new
center and order of life. The most militaristic of
nations secures the loyalty of its subjects not by
physical. force but through the power of ideas
and emotions. It cultivates ideals of loyalty, of
solidarity, and common devotion to a common
cause. Modern industry, technology and com-
merce have created modern nations in their ex-


ternal form, Armies and navies exist to- protect
commerce, to make secure the control of raw ma-


terials, and to command markets. Men would not
sacrifice their lives for the purpose of securing
economic gain for a few if the conditions pre-
sented themselves to their minds in this bald fash-
ion. But the balked demand for genuine coépera-
tiveness and reciprocal solidarity in daily life


finds an outlet in nationalistic sentiment. Men
61


x


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


have a pathetic instinct toward the adventure of
living and struggling together; if the daily com-
munity does not feed this impulse, the romantic
imagination pictures a grandiose nation in which
all are one. If the simple duties of peace do not
establish a common life, the emotions are mobi-
lized in the service of a war that will supply its
temporary simulation.

I have thus far made no reference to what
many persons would consider the most serious


and the most overtly evident of all the modes —
of loss of secure objects of loyalty—religion, It
is probably easy to exaggerate the extent of the
decadence of religion in an outward sense, church
membership, church-going and so on. But it is
hardly possible to overstate its decline as a a vitally
integrative and directive force in men’s thought
and sentiments, Whether even in the ages of the
past that are called religious, religion was itself
the actively central force that it is sometimes
said to have been may be doubted. But it cannot
be doubted that it was the symbol of the existence
of conditions and forces that gave unity and a
center to men’s views of life. It at least gathered —
together in weighty and shared symbols a sense —

62


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


of the objects to which men were so attached as
to have support and stay in their outlook on life.

Religion does not now effect this result. The
divorce of church and state has been followed by
that_of religion and society. Wherever religion
has not become a merely private indulgence, it
has become at best a matter of sects and denomi-
nations divided from one another by doctrinal
differences, and united internally by tenets that
have a merely historical origin, and a purely
metaphysical or else ritualistic meaning. There
is no such bond of social unity as once united
Greeks, Romans, Hebrews, and Catholic medi-
eval Europe. There are those who realize what is
portended by the loss of religion as an integrat-
ing bond. Many of them despair of its recovery
through the development of social values to
which the imagination and sentiments of indi-
viduals can attach themselves with intensity.
They wish to reverse the operation and to form
the social bond of unity and of allegiance by re-
generation of the isolated individual soul.

Aside from the fact that there is no consensus
as to what a new religious attitude is to center
itself about, the injunction puts the cart before

63


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW
the horse. Religion is not so much a root of unity


as it is its flower or fruit. The very attempt to
secure integration for the individual, and through
him for society, by means of a deliberate and
conscious cultivation of religion, is itself proof
of how far the individual has become lost through
detachment from acknowledged social values. It
is no wonder that when the appeal does not take
the form of dogmatic fundamentalism, it tends
to terminate in either some form of esoteric oc-
cultism or private estheticism. The sense of


wholeness which is urged as the essence of reli-
ean cE LOCC


gion can be built up and sustained only through


membership in a society which has attained a
degree of unity. The attempt to cultivate it first


in individuals and then extend it to form an or-
ganically unified society is fantasy. Indulgence
in this fantasy infects such interpretations of
American life as are found, to take one signal
example, in Waldo Frank’s * “The Rediscovery


* After a brilliant exposition of the dissolution of the European
synthesis, he goes on to say “man’s need of order and his making
of order are his science, his art, his religion; and these are all to
be referred to the initial sense of order called the self,’ quite
oblivious of the fact that this doctrine of the primacy of the self
is precisely a reaction of the romantic and subjective age to the
oe he has depicted, having its meaning only in that dis- —
solution.


64


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


of America.” It marks a manner of yearning
and not a principle of construction.

For the idea that the outward scene is chaotic
because of the machine, which is a principle of
chaos, and that it will remain so until individuals
reinstitute wholeness within themselves, simply
reverses the true state of things. The outward
scene, if not fully organized, is relatively so in
the corporateness which the machine and _ its


technology have produced; the inner man is the
jungle which can be subdued to order only as the
forces _of organization at work in externals are
reflected in corresponding patterns of thought,


imagination and emotion. The sick cannot heal
themselves by means of their disease, and dis-
integrated individuals can achieve unity only as
the dominant energies of community life are in-
corporated to form their minds. If these energies
were, in reality, mere strivings for private pecu-
niary gain, the case would indeed be hopeless.
But they are constituted by a collective art of
technology, which individuals merely deflect to
their private ends. There are the beginnings of
an objective order through which individuals
may get their bearings.
65


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


Conspicuous signs of the disintegration of in-
dividuality due to failure to reconstruct the self
so as to meet the realities of present social life
have not been mentioned. In a census that was
taken among leaders of opinion concerning the
urgency of present social problems, the state of
law, the courts, lawlessness and criminality stood
at the head of the list, and by a considerable
distance. We are even more emphatically than
when Kipling wrote the words, the people that
make “the laws they flout, and flout the laws they
make.” We combine an ardor unparalleled in his-
tory for “passing” laws with a casual and delib-
erate disregard for them when they are on the


statute books. We believe—to judge by our leg-
islative_actions—that_we can create morals by


law_ (witness the prohibition amendment for an
instance on a large scale) and neglect the fact
that all laws except those which regulate tech-
nical procedures are registrations of existing so-
cial customs and their attendant moral habits
and purposes. I can, however, only think of this
phenomenon as a symptom, not as a cause. It is
a natural expression of a period in which changes
in the structure of society have dissolved old
66


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


bonds and allegiances, We attempt to make good
this social relaxation and dissolution by legal
enactments, while the actual disintegration dis-
closes itself in the lawlessness which reveals the
artificial character of this method of securing so-
cial integrity.

Volumes could be formed by collecting articles
and editorials written about relaxation of tradi-
tional moral codes. A movement has caught pub-
lic attention, which, having for some obscure rea-


son assumed the name “humanism,” proposes
restraint and moderation, exercised i


higher volition of individuals, as the solution of


our ills. It finds that naturalism as practiced by
artists and mechanism as taught by philosophers
who take their clew from natural science, have
broken down the inner laws and imperatives
which can alone bring order and loyalty. I should
be glad to be able to believe that artists and in-
tellectuals have any such power in their hands;
if they had, after using it to bring evil to society,
they might change face and bring healing to it.
But a sense of fact, together with a sense of
humor, forbids the acceptance of any such belief.


Literary persons and academic thinkers are now,
67


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


more than ever, effects, not causes. They reflect
and voice the disintegration which new modes of


living, produced by new forms of industry and
commerce, have introduced. They give witness
to the unreality that has overtaken traditional
codes in the face of the impact of new forces;
indirectly, they proclaim the need of some new
synthesis. But this synthesis can be humanistic
only as the new conditions are themselves taken
into account and are converted into the instru-
mentalities of a free and humane life. I_see no


Lewes See


way to “restrain” or turn back the industrial
revolution and its consequences, In the absence
of such a restraint (which would be efficacious if
only it could occur), the urging of some inner
restraint through the exercise of the higher per-
sonal will, whatever that may be, is itself only a
futile echo of just the old individualism that has
so completely broken down.

There are many phases of life which illustrate
to anyone who chooses to think in terms of reali-
ties instead of words the utter irrelevance of the
proposed remedy to actual conditions. One might
take the present estate of amusements, of the
movies, the radio, and organized vicarious sport,

68


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


and ask just how this powerful eruption in which
the resources of technology are employed for
economic profit is to be met by the application
of the inner frein or brake. Perhaps the most
striking instance is found in the disintegration
due to changes in family life and sex morale. It
was not deliberate human intention that under-
mined the traditional household as the center of
industry and education and as the focus of moral
training; that sapped the older institution of en-
during marriage. To ask the individuals who


suffer the consequences of the general undermin-
ing and sapping to put _an end to the conse-
quences _by acts of personal volition is merely
to profess faith in moral magic. Recovery of


individuals capable of stable and effective self-
control can be had only as there is first a humbler
exercise of will to observe existing social reali-
ties and to direct them according to their own
potentialities.


Instances of the flux in which individuals are
loosened from the ties that once gave order and
support to their lives are glaring. They are in-
deed so glaring that they blind our eyes to the

69


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


causes which produce them. Individuals are


groping their way through situations which they
do not direct and which do not give them direc-


tion. The beliefs and ideals that are uppermost
in their consciousness are not relevant to the
society in which they outwardly act and which
constantly reacts upon them. Their conscious
ideas and standards are inherited from an age
that has passed away; their minds, as far as
consciously entertained principles and methods
of interpretation are concerned, are at odds with
actual conditions. This profound split is the
cause of distraction and bewilderment.


Individuals will refind themselves only as their
ideas and ideals are brought into harmony with
the . realities 0 of the_age in which they act. The
task of att attaining this harmony is not an easy
one. But it is more negative than it seems. If we
could inhibit the principles and standards that
are merely traditional, if we could slough off the
opinions that have no living relationship to the
situations in which we live, the unavowed forces
that now work upon us unconsciously but unre-
mittingly would have a chance to build minds
after their own pattern, and individuals might,

70


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


in consequence, find themselves in possession of
objects to which imagination and emotion would
stably attach themselves.

I do not mean, however, that the process of
rebuilding can go on automatically. Discrimina-
tion is required in order to detect the beliefs and
institutions that dominate merely because of cus-
tom and inertia, and in order to discover the
moving realities of the present. Intelligence must
distinguish, for example, the tendencies of the
technology which produce the new corporateness
from those inheritances proceeding out of the
individualism of an earlier epoch which arrest
and divide the operation of the new dynamics.
It is difficult for us to conceive of individualism
except in terms of stereotypes derived from for-
mer centuries. Individualism has been identified
with ideas of initiative and invention that are
bound up with private and exclusive economic
gain. As long as this conception possesses our
minds, the ideal of harmonizing our thought and
desire with the realities of present social condi-
tions will be interpreted to mean accommoda-
tion and surrender. It will even be understood to
signify rationalization of the evils of existing

71


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


society. A stable recovery of individuality waits
upon an elimination of the older economic _and


political individualism, an elimination which will
liberate imagination and endeavor for the task
of making corporate society contribute to the
free culture of its members, Only by economic
revision can the sound element in the older indi-
vidualism—equality of opportunity—be made a
reality.

It is the part of wisdom to note the double
meaning of such ideas as “acceptance.” There is
an acceptance that is of the intellect; it signifies
facing facts for what they are. There is r
acceptance that is of the emotions and will; that
involves commitment of desire and effort. So far
are the two from being identical that acceptance
in the first sense is the precondition of all intelli-
gent refusal of acceptance in the second sense.
There is a prophetic aspect to all observation; we
can perceive the meaning of what exists only as
we forecast the consequences it entails. When a
situation is as confused and divided within itself
as is the present social estate, choice is implicated
in observation. As one perceives different tenden-
cies and different possible consequences, prefer-

72


THE LOST INDIVIDUAL


ence inevitably goes out to one or the other. Be-


cause acknowledgment in thought brings with i
intelligent discrimination and ice, it]


step out of confusion, the first step in forming
those objects of significant allegiance out of
which stable and efficacious individuality may
grow. It might even perform the miracle of ren-
dering conservatism relevant and thoughtful. It
certainly is the prerequisite of an anchored
liberalism,


73


CHAPTER V
TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM |


QUR MATERIAL CULTURE, as anthropologists -
would call it, is verging upon the collective and
corporate. Our _moral culture, along with our


ideology, is, on the other hand
with ideal and values of an inc ideal and values of an individualism derived


from the _prescientific, pretechnological age.
Its spiritual roots are found in medieval religion,


which asserted the ultimate nature of the indi-
vidual soul and centered the drama of life about
the destiny of that soul. Its institutional and
legal concepts were framed in the feudal period.

This moral and philosophical individualism
anteceded. the rise of modern industry and the
era of the machine. It was the context in which
the latter operated. The apparent subordination
of the individual to established institutions often
conceals from recognition the vital existence of
a deep-seated individualism. But the fact that

74


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


the controlling institution was the Church should
remind us that in ultimate intent it existed to
secure the salvation of the individual. That this
individual was conceived as a soul, and that the
end served by the institution was deferred to
another and everlasting life conceal from con-
_ temporary realization the underlying individu-
alism. In its own time, its substance consisted in
just this eternal spiritual character of the per-
sonal soul; the power of the established institu-
tions proceeded from their being the necessary
means of accomplishing the supreme end of the
individual.

The early phase of the industrial revolution
wrought a great transformation. It gave a secu-
lar and worldly turn to the career of the indi-
vidual, and it liquefied the static property con-
cepts of feudalism by the shift of emphasis from
agriculture to manufacturing. Still, the idea per-
sisted that property and reward were intrinsi-
cally individual. There were, it is true, incom-
patible elements in the earlier and later versions
of individualism. But a fusion of individual capi-
talism, of natural rights, and of morals founded
in strictly individual traits and values remained,

75


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


under the influence of Protestantism, the domi-
nant intellectual synthesis.

The basis of this synthesis was destroyed, how-
ever, by the later development of the industrial
system, which brought about the merging of per-
sonal capacity, effort and work into collective
wholes. Meanwhile, the control of natural ener-
gies eliminated time and distance, so that action
once adapted to local conditions was swallowed
up in complex undertakings of indefinite extent.
Yet the older mental equipment remained after
its causes and foundations had disappeared. This,
fundamentally, is the inner division out of which
spring our present confusion and insincerities.

The earlier economic individualism had a defi-
nite creed and function. It sought to release from
legal restrictions man’s wants and his efforts to
satisfy those wants. It believed that such eman-
cipation would stimulate latent energy into
action, would automatically assign individual
ability to the work for which it was suited, would
cause it to perform that work under stimulus of
the advantage to be gained, and would secure for
capacity and enterprise the reward and position
to which they were entitled. At the same time,

76


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


individual energy and savings would be serving
the needs of others, and thus promoting the gen-
eral welfare and effecting a general harmony of
interests.
_ We have gone a Iong way since this philosophy
- was formulated. To-day, the most stalwart de-
fenders of this type of individualism do not ven-
_ ture to repeat its optimistic assertions. At most,
they are content to proclaim its consistency with
unchanging human nature—which is said to be
moved to effort only by the hope of personal
gain—and to paint dire pictures of the inevitable
consequences of change to any other régime.
They ascribe all the material benefits of our
present civilization to this individualism—as if
machines were made by the desire for money
profit, not by impersonal science; and as if they
were driven by money alone, and not by elec-
tricity and steam under the direction of a col-
lective technology.

In America, the older individualism assumed
a romantic form. It was hardly necessary to elab-
orate a theory which equated personal gain with
social advance. The demands of the practical
situation called for the initiative, enterprise and

77


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


vigor of individuals in all immediate work that
urgently asked for doing, and their operation
furthered the national life. The spirit of the time
is expressed by Dr. Crothers, whose words Mr.
Sims has appropriately taken for part of the
text of his “Adventurous America’:


“Tf you would understand the driving
power of America, you must understand ‘the
divers discontented and impatient young men’
who in each generation have found an outlet
for their energy. . . . The noises which dis-
turb you are not the cries of an angry prole-
tariat, but are the shouts of eager young peo-
ple who are finding new opportunities. .. .
They represent to-day the enthusiasm of a new
generation. They represent the Oregons and
Californias toward which sturdy pioneers are
moving undisturbed by obstacles. This is what
the social unrest means in America.”


If that is: - an echo of the echo of a voice of
long ago, I du not know what it is. I do not, in-
deed, hear the noises of an angry proletariat;
but I should suppose the sounds heard are the
murmurs of lost opportunities, along with the

78


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


din of machinery, motor cars and speakeasies, by
which the murmurs of discontent are drowned,
rather than shouts of eagerness for adventurous
opportunity.

The European version of the older individual-
ism had its value and temporal justification be-
_ cause the new technology needed liberation, from
vexatious legal restrictions. Machine industry
was itself in a pioneer condition, and those who
carried it forward against obstacles of lethargy,
skepticism and political obstruction were deserv-
ing of special reward. Moreover, accumulation
of capital was thought of in terms of enterprises
that to-day would be petty; there was no dream
of the time when it would reach such a mass
that it would determine the legal and political


order. Poverty had previously been accepted as a
dispensation of nature that was inevitable. The


new industry promised a way out, at least to
those possessed of energy and will to save and


accumulate. But_there was no anticipation of_a


time when the development of machine tech-
nology would afford the materia i -


sonable ease and comfort and of extensive leisure _


for all.
79


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


The shift that makes the older individualism
a dying echo is more marked as well as more
rapid in this country. Where is the wilderness
which now beckons creative energy and affords
untold opportunity to initiative and vigor?
Where is the pioneer who goes forth rejoicing,
even in the midst of privation, to its conquest?
The wilderness exists in the movie and the novel;
and the children of the pioneers, who live in the
midst of surroundings artificially made over by
the machine, enjoy pioneer life idly in the vica-
rious film. I see little social unrest which is the
straining of energy for outlet in action; I find
rather the protest against a weakening of vigor
and a_sapping of energy that emanate from the
absence of constructive opportunity; and I see a
confusion that is an expression of the inability to
find a secure and morally rewarding place in a
troubled and tangled economic scene.


Because of the bankruptcy of the older indi-
vidualism, those who are aware of the break-
down often speak and argue as if individualism
were itself done and over with. I do not suppose
that those who regard socialism and individual-

80


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


ism as antithetical really mean that individuality
is going to die out or that it is not something
intrinsically precious. But in speaking as if the
only individualism were the local episode of the
last two centuries, they play into the hands of
those who would keep it alive in order to serve
their own ends, and they slur over the chief
problem—that of remaking society to serve the
growth of a new type of individu » new type of individual. T There are
many who believe that socialism of some form
is needed to realize individual initiative and se-
curity on a wide scale. They are concerned about
the restriction of power and freedom to a few
in the present régime, and they think that col-
lective social control is necessary, at least for a
time, in order to achieve its advantages for all.
But they too often seem to assume that the result
will be merely an extension of the earlier indi-
vidualism to the many.

Such thinking treats individualism as if it
were something static, having a uniform content.
It ignores the fact that the mental and moral
structure of individuals, the pattern _of_ their.
desires and purposes, change with every great
change in social constitution, Individuals who

81


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


are not bound together in associations, whether


domestic, economic, religious, political, artistic
or educational, are. monstrosities. It is absurd to
suppose that the ties which hold them together


are merely external and do not react into men-
tality and character, producing the framework


of personal disposition.
The tragedy of the “lost individual” is due to


the fact that while individuals are now caught
up into a vast complex of associations, there is no
harmonious and coherent reflection of the import
of these connections into the imaginative and
emotional outlook on life. This fact is of course
due in turn to the absence of harmony within the
state of society. There is an undoubted circle.
But it is a vicious circle only as far as men
decline to accept—in the intellectual, observing
and inquiring spirit defined in the previous chap-
ter—the realities of the social estate, and be-
cause of this refusal either surrender to the divi-
sion or seek to save their individuality by escape
or sheer emotional revolt. The habit of opposing
the corporate and collective to the individual
tends to the persistent continuation of the con-
fusion and uncertainty. It distracts attention
82


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


from the crucial issue: How shall the individual
refind himself in an unprecedentedly new social
situation, and what qualities will the new indi-
vidualism exhibit?


That the problem is not merely one of extend-
ing to all individuals the traits of economic initia-
tive, opportunity and enterprise; that it is one
of forming a new psychological and moral type,
is suggested by the great pressure now brought
to bear to effect conformity and standardization
of American opinion. Why should regimenta-
tion, the erection of an average struck from the
opinions of large masses into regulative norms,
and in general the domination of quantity over
quality, be so characteristic of present American
life? I see but one fundamental explanation. The
individual cannot remain intellectually a vacuum.
If his ideas and beliefs are not the spontaneous
function of a communal life in which he shares,
a seeming censensus will be secured as a substi-
tute by artificial and mechanical means. In the
absence of mentality that is congruous with the
new social corporateness that is coming into
being, there is a desperate effort to fill the void

83


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


by external agencies which obtain a factitious
agreement.

In consequence, our uniformity of thought is
much more superficial than it seems to be. The
standardization is deplorable, but one might al-
most say that one of the reasons it is deplorable
is because it does not go deep. It goes far enough
to effect suppression of original quality of
thought, but not far enough to achieve enduring
unity. Its superficial character is evident in its
instability. All agreement of thought obtained
by external means, by repression and intimida-
tion, however subtle, and by calculated propa-
ganda and publicity, is of necessity superficial;
and whatever_is superficial is in continual flux.
The methods employed produce mass credulity,
and this jumps from one thing to another ac-
cording to the dominant suggestions of the day.
We think and feel alike—but only for a month
or a season, Then comes some other sensational
event or personage to exercise a hypnotizing uni-
formity of response. At a given time, taken in
cross-section, conformity is the rule. In a time
span, taken longitudinally, instability and flux
dominate. . . . I suppose there are others who

84


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


have a feeling of irritation at such terms as
“radio-conscious” and “air-minded,” now so fre-
quently forced upon us. I do not think the irri-
tation is wholly due to linguistic causes. It testi-
fies to a half-conscious sense of the external ways
in which our minds are formed and swayed and
of the superficiality and inconsistency of the
result.

There are, I suppose, those who fancy that the
emphasis which I put upon the corporateness of
existing society in the United States is in effect,
even if not in the writer’s conscious intent, a plea
for greater conformity than now exists. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Identification of
society with a level, whatever it be, high as well
as low, of uniformity is just another evidence
of that distraction because of which the individ-


ual is lost. Society is of course but the relations
of individuals to one another in this form and


that. And all relations are interactions, not fixed

molds. The particular interactions that compose

a human society include the give and take of

participation, of a sharing that increases, that

expands and deepens, the capacity and signifi-

cance of the interacting factors. Conformity is a
85


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


name for the absence of vital interplay; the ar-
rest and benumbing of communication. As I
have been trying to say, it is the artificial substi-
tute used to hold men together in lack of asso-
ciations that are incorporated into inner dis-
positions of thought and desire. I often wonder
what meaning is given to the term “society” by
those who oppose it to the intimacies of personal
intercourse, such as those of friendship. Presum-
ably they have in their minds a picture of rigid
institutions or some set and external organiza-
tion. But an institution that is other tha


structure of human contact_and_intercourse_is
a fossil of some past society; organization, as in
any living organism, is the codperative consensus
of multitudes of cells, each living in exchange


with others.
I should suppose that the more intelligent of


those who wield the publicity agencies which pro-
duce conformity would be disturbed at beholding
their own success. I can easily understand that
they should have a cynical sense of their ability
to obtain the results they want at a given time;
but I should think they would fear that like-
mindedness might, at a critical juncture, veer in
86


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


an unexpected direction and turn with equal
unanimity against the things and interests it has
been manipulated to support. Crowd psychology
is dangerous in its instability. To rely upon it
for permanent support is playing with a fire
that may get out of control. Conformity is en-
duringly effective when it is a spontaneous and
largely unconscious manifestation of the agree-
ments that spring from genuine communal life.
An_artificially induced uniformity of thought
and sentiment is a symptom of an inner void.
Not all of it that now exists is intentionally pro-
duced; it is not the result of deliberate manipu-
lation. But it is, on the other hand, the result of
causes so external as to be accidental and pre-
carious.

The “j oining”’ habit of the average American,
and his excessive sociability, may well have an
explanation like that of conformity. They, too,


testify_to nature’s abhorrence of that _vacuum_


which the passing of the older individualism has.
produced. We should not be so averse to solitude


if we had, when we were alone, the companion-

ship of communal thought built into our mental

habits. In the absence of this communion, there
87


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


is the need for reinforcement by external con-


tact. Our sociability is largely an effort to find
substitutes for that normal consciousness of con-


nection and union that proceeds from being a
sustained and sustaining member of a social


whole.


Just as the new individualism cannot be
achieved by extending the benefits of the older
economic individualism to more persons, so it
cannot be obtained by a further development of
generosity, good will and altruism. Such traits
are desirable, but they are also more or less con-
stant expressions of human nature. There is
much in the present situation that stimulates
them to active operation. They are probably
more marked features of American life than of
that of any other civilization at any time. Our
charity and philanthropy are partly the mani-
festation of an uneasy conscience. As such a


manifestation, they testify to a realization that a


régime of industry carried on for private gain
does not satisfy the full human nature of even
those who profit by it. The impulse and need


which the existing economic régime chokes,
88


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


through preventing its articulated expression,
find outlet in actions that acknowledge a social
responsibility which the system as a system de-
nies. Hence the development of philanthropic
measures is not only compensatory to a stifling
of human nature undergone in business, but it is
in a way prophetic. Construction is better than
relief; prevention than cure. Activities by way
of relief of poverty and its attendant mental
strains and physical ills—and our philanthropic
activities including even the endowment of edu-
cational institutions have their ultimate causes
in the existence of economic insecurity and dis-
tress—suggest, in dim forecast, a society in which
daily occupations and relationships will give in-
dependence and substantial living to all normal
individuals who share in its ongoings, reserving
relief for extraordinary emergencies. One does
not need to reflect upon the personal motives of
great philanthropists to see in what they do an
emphatic record of the breakdown of our existin
economic organization.

For the chief obstacle to the creation of a type
of individual whose pattern of thought and desire
is enduringly marked by consensus with others,

89


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


and in whom sociability is one with codperation
in all regular human associations, is ‘the) persist-
ence of. that feature of the earlier individualism
which defines! ‘industry and commerce by ideas of
private pecuniary profit. Why, once more, is
there such zeal for standardized likeness? It is
not, I imagine, because conformity for its own
sake appears to be a great boon. It is rather be-
cause a certain kind of conformity gives defense
and protection/to the pecuniary features of our
present régime. The foreground may be filled
with depiction of the horror of change, and with
clamor for law and order and the support of
the Constitution. But behind there is desire for
perpetuation of that_régime which defines indi-


vidual initiative and_ ability by success in con-


ducting business so as to make money.
It is not too much to say that the whole signifi-


cance of the older individualism has now shrunk
_to a pecuniary scale and measure. The virtues
that are supposed to attend rugged individualism |
may be vocally provlaimed, but it takes no great
insight to see that what is cherished is measured
by its connection with those activities that make
for success in business conducted for personal
90


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


gain. Hence, the irony of the gospel of “individ-


ualism” in business conjoined with suppression
of individuality in thought and-speech. One can-


not imagine a bitterer comment on any professed
individualism than that it subordinates the only
creative individuality—that of mind—to the
maintenance of a régime which gives the few an
opportunity for being shrewd in the manage-
ment of monetary business.

It is claimed, of course, that the individualism
of economic self-seeking, even if it has not pro-
duced the adjustment of ability and reward and
the harmony of interests earlier predicted, has
given us the advantage of material prosperity.
It is not needful to raise here the question of
how far that material prosperity extends. For it
is not true; (that) its moving cause is pecuniary
individualism. That has been the cause of some
great fortunes, but not of national wealth; it
counts in the process of distribution, but not in
ultimate creation. Scientific insight taking effect
in machine technology has been the great_pro-
ductive force. For the most part, economic indi-
vidualism interpreted.as energy and enterprise
devoted to private profit, has been an adjunct,

91


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


often a parasitical one, to the movement of tech-
nical and scientific forces.

The scene in which individuality is created
has been transformed. The pioneer, such as is
depicted in the quotation from Crothers, had
no great need for any ideas beyond those that
sprang up in the immediate tasks in which he
was engaged. His intellectual problems grew out
of struggle with the forces of physical nature.
The wilderness was a reality and it had to be sub-
dued. The type of character that evolved was
strong and hardy, often picturesque, and some-
times heroic. Individuality was a reality because
it corresponded to conditions. Irrelevant tradi-
tional ideas in religion and morals were carried
along, but they were reduced to a size where
they did no harm; indeed, they could easily be
interpreted in such a way as to be a reinforce-
ment to the sturdy and a consolation to the weak
and failing.

But it is no longer a physical wilderness that
has to be wrestled with. Our problems grow out
of social conditions: they concern human rela-
tions rather than man’s direct relationship to


physical nature. The adventure of the individual,


92


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


if there is to be any venturing of individuality
and not a relapse into the deadness of complac-
ency or of despairing discontent, is an unsubdued
social frontier. The issues cannot be met with
ideas improvised for the occasion. The problems
to be solved are general, not local. They concern
complex forces that are at work throughout the
whole country, not those limited to an immediate
and almost face-to-face environment. Traditional
ideas are more than irrelevant. They are an en-
cumbrance; they are the chief obstacle to the for-
- mation of a new individuality integrated within
itself and with a liberated function in the society
wherein it exists. A new individualism can be
achieved only through the controlled use of all
the resources of the science and technology that_
have mastered the physical forces of nature.
They are not controlled now in any funda-
mental sense. Rather do they control us. They
are indeed physically controlled. Every factory,
power-house and railway system testifies to the
fact that we have attained this measure of con-
trol. But control of power through the machine
is not control of the machine itself. Control of
the energies of nature by science is not controlled
93


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


use of science. We are not even approaching a
climax of control; we are hardly at its feeble
beginnings. For_control_is_ relative to _conse-
quences, ends, values; and we do not manage,
we hardly have commenced to dream of manag-
ing, physical power for the sake of projected
purposes and prospective goods. The machine
took us unawares and unprepared. Instead of
forming new purposes commensurate with its
potentialities, we accordingly tried to make it
the servant of aims that were the expression of
an age when mastery of natural energies on any |
large scale was the fantasy of magic. As Clar-
ence Ayres has said: “Our industrial revolution
began, as some historians say, with half a dozen
technical improvements in the textile industry;
and it took us a century to realize that anything
of moment had happened to us beyond the ob-
vious improvement of spinning and weaving.”

I do not say that the aims and values of the
earlier day were petty in themselves. But they
are almost inconceivably petty in comparison
with the means now at our command—if we had
an imagination large enough to encompass their
potential uses. They are worse than petty; they

94


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


are confusing and distracting when men are con-
fronted with the physical instrumentalities and
agencies which, in the lack of comprehensive pur-
pose and concerted planning, work blindly and
carry us drifting hither and yon. I cannot obtain
intellectual, moral or esthetic satisfaction from
the professed philosophy which animates Bol-
shevik Russia. But I am sure that the future
historian of our times will combine admiration
of those who had the imagination first to see that
the resources of technology might be directed
by organized planning to serve chosen ends with
astonishment at the intellectual and moral hebe-
tude of other peoples who were technically so
much further advanced.

There is no greater sign of the paralysis of
the imagination which custom and involvement
in immediate detail can induce than the belief,
sedulously propagated by some who pride them-


A ee ee
=


_the source of our troubles, Of course immense
potential resources impose responsibility, and it
has yet to be demonstrated whether human ca-

_ pacity can rise to utilization of the opportunities
which the machine and technology have opened


95


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW
to us. But it is hard to think of anything more


childish than the animism that puts the blame on
machinery. For machinery means an undreamed-
of reservoir of power. If we have harnessed this
power to the dollar rather than to the liberation
and enrichment of human life, it is because we
have been content to stay within the bounds of
traditional aims and values although we are in
possession of a revolutionary transforming in-
strument. Repetition of the older credo of indi-
vidualism is but the evidence of contentment


within these bonds. I for one think it is incredible |


that this particular form of confession of infe-
riority will endure very much longer. When we
begin to ask what can be done with the machine
for the creation and fulfillment of values corre-
sponding to its potency and begin organized
planning to effect these goods, a new individual
correlative to the realities of the age in which we
live will also begin to take form.

Revolt against the machine as the author of
social evils usually has an esthetic origin. A more
intellectual and quasi-philosophic reaction finds
natural science to be their source; or if not
science itself (which is allowed to be all very well

96


ee


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


if it keeps its appropriate humble place) then
the attitude of those who depend upon science
as an organ of vision and light. Contempt for


nature _is understandable, at least_historically;
even though it seems both intellectually petty
and morally ungracious to feel contempt for the
matrix of our being and the inescapable condi-


tion of our lives. But that men should fear and’
dislike the method of approach to nature I do
not find understandable. The eye sees many foul
things and the arm and hand do many cruel
things. Yet the fanatic who would pluck out the
eye and cut off the arm is recognized for what
he is. Science, one may say, is but the extension
of our natural organs of approach to nature.
And I do not mean merely an extension in quan-
titative range and penetration, as a microscope
multiplies the capacity of the unaided eye, but an
extension of insight and understanding through
bringing relationships and interactions into view.
Since we must in any case approach nature in
some fashion and by some path—if only that of
death—I confess my total inability to under-
stand those who object to an intelligently con-
trolled approach—for that is what science is.
97


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


The only way in which I can obtain any sym-
pathetic realization of their attitude is by recall-
ing that there have been those who have pro-
fessed adoration of science—writing it with a
capital S—; those who have thought of it not as
a method of approach but as a kind of self-en-
closed entity and end in itself, a new theology
of self-sufficient authoritatively revealed inher-
ent and absolute Truth. It would, however, seem
simpler to correct their misapprehension than
first to share it and then to reverse their worship


into condemnation. The opposite of intelligent
method, It is a curious state of mind which finds
pleasure in setting forth the “limits of science.”
For the intrinsic limit_of knowledge is simply
ignorance; and the point in extolling ignorance
is not clear except when expressed by those who
profit by keeping others in ignorance. There is
of course an extrinsic limit of science. But that
limitation lies in the ineptitude of those who put
it to use; its removal lies in rectification of its
use, not in abuse of the thing used.


This reference to science and technology is


relevant because they are the forces of present
98


TOWARD A NEW INDIVIDUALISM


life which are finally significant. It is through
employing them with understanding of their
possible import that a new individualism, con-
sonant with the realities of the present age, may
be brought into operative being. There are many
levels and many elements in both the individual
and his relations. Neither can be comprehended
nor dealt with in mass. Discriminative sensitiv-
ity, selection, is imperative. Art is the fruit of
such selection when it is given objective effect.
The art which our times needs in order to create
a new type of individuality is the art which, being
sensitive to the technology and science that are
the moving forces of our time, will envisage the
expansive, the social, culture which they may be
made to serve. I am not anxious to depict the
form which this emergent individualism will as-
sume. Indeed, I do not see how it can be de-
scribed until more progress has been made in its
production, But such progress will not be initi-
ated until we cease opposing the socially cor-
porate to the individual, and until we develop a
constructively imaginative observation of the role
of science and technology in actual society. The
greatest obstacle to that vision is, I repeat, the
99


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


perpetuation of the older individualism now re-


_ duced, as I have said, to the utilization of science


f and technology for ends of private pecuniary
gain. I sometimes wonder if those who are con-


\* scious of present ills but who direct their blows
of criticism at everything except this obstacle are
not stirred by motives which they unconsciously
prefer to keep below consciousness,


100


CHAPTER VI


CAPITALISTIC OR PUBLIC
SOCIALISM?


I oNcE HEARD a distinguished lawyer say
that the earlier American ideas about individual
initiative and enterprise could be recovered by
an amendment of a few lines to the federal Con-
stitution. The amendment would prohibit all
joint stock enterprises and permit only individ-
ual liability to have a legal status. He was, I
think, the only unadulterated Jeffersonian
Democrat I have ever met. He was also logical.
He did not delude himself into supposing that
the pioneer gospel of personal initiative, enter-
prise, energy and reward could be maintained in
an era of aggregated corporate capital, of mass
production and distribution, of impersonal own-
ership and of ownership divorced from manage-
ment. Our political life, however, continues to
ignore the change that has taken place except

101


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


as circumstances force it to take account of it in
sporadic matters.

The myth is still current that socialism desires
to use political means in order to divide wealth
equally among all individuals, and that it is con-
sequently opposed to the development of trusts,
mergers and consolidated business in general. It


is regarded, in other words, as a kind of arith-
metically fractionized individualism. This notion


of socialism is of the sort that would naturally
be entertained by those who cannot get away
from the inherent conception of the individual
as an isolated and independent unit. In reality,
Karl Marx was the prophet of just the period
of economic consolidation. If his ghost hovers
above the American scene, it must find legitimate
satisfaction in our fulfillment of his predictions.

In these predictions, however, Marx reasoned
too much from psychological economic premises
and depended too little upon technological -
causes—the application of science to steam, elec-
tricity and chemical processes. That is to say, he
argued to an undue extent from an alleged con-
stant appropriation by capitalists of all surplus
values created by the workers—surplus being

102


SOCIALISM


defined as anything above the minimum needed
for their continued subsistence. He had no con-
ception, moreover, of the capacity of expanding
industry to develop new inventions so as to de-
velop new wants, new forms of wealth, new oc-
cupations; nor did he imagine that the intellec-
tual ability of the employing class would be
equal to seeing the need for sustaining consum-
ing power by high wages in order to keep up
production and its profits. This explains why
his prediction of a revolution in political control,
caused by the general misery of the masses and
resulting in the establishment of a socialistic
society, has not been realized in this country.
Nevertheless, the issue which he raised—the rela-
tion of the economic structure to political oper-
ations—is one that actively persists.

Indeed, it forms the only basis of present polit-
ical questions. An intelligent and experienced
observer of affairs at Washington has said that


all political questions which he has heard_dis-


cussed in Washington come back ultimately to
problems connected with the distribution of _in-


come. Wealth, property and the processes of
manufacturing and distribution—down to retail
103


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


trade through the chain system—can hardly be
socialized in outward effect without a political
repercussion. It constitutes an ultimate issue
which must be faced by new or existing political
parties. There is still enough vitality in the older
individualism to offer a very serious handicap to
any party or program which calls itself by the
name of Socialism. But in the long run, the real-
ities of the situation will exercise control over the
connotations which, for historical reasons, cling
to a word. In view of this fact, the fortunes of
a party called by a given name are insignificant.


In one important sense, the fundamental char-
acter of the economic question is not ignored in


present politics. The dominant party _has_offi-
cially constituted itself the guardian of prosper-


ity; it has gone further and offered itself _as the
author of prosperity. It has insinuated itself in


that guise into the imagination of a sufficient
number of citizens and voters so that it owes its
continuing denomination to its identification


with prosperity. Our presidential elections are
upon the whole determined by fear. Hundreds of


thousands of citizens who vote independently or
104


SOCIALISM


for Democratic candidates at local elections and
in off-year congressional elections regularly vote
the Republican ticket every four years. They do
so because of a vague but influential dread lest
a monkey-wrench be thrown into the economic
_ and financial machine. The dread is as general
among the workers as among small traders and
_ storekeepers. It is basically the asset that keeps
the dominant party in office. Our whole indus-
trial scheme is so complex, so delicately interde-
pendent in its varied parts, so responsive to a
multitude of subtle influences, that it seems defi-
nitely better to the mass of voters to endure the
ills they may already suffer rather than take the
chance of disturbing industry. Even in the elec-
tion of 1928, in spite of both the liquor and the
Catholic issue, this was, I believe the determin-
ing factor.

Moreover, the fact that Hoover offered him-
self to the popular imagination as a man pos-
sessed of the engineer’s rather than the politi-
cian’s mind was a great force. Engineering has
accomplished great things; its triumphs are
everywhere in evidence. The miracles that it has
wrought have given it the prestige of magical

105


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


wonder-working. A people sick of politicians felt
in some half-conscious way that the mind, ex-
perience, and gifts of an engineer would bring
healing and order into our political life. It is im-
possible to present statistics as to the exact force
of the factors mentioned. Judgment on the two
points, especially the latter, must remain a mat-
ter of opinion. But the identification of the Re-
publican party with the maintenance of prosper-
ity cannot be denied, and the desire for the en-
gineer in politics is general enough to be at least
symptomatic.

Prosperity is largely a state of mind, and _be-
lief in it is even more so. It follows that skep-
ticism about its extent is of little importance
when the mental tide runs with the idea. AI-
though figures can be quoted to show how spotty
it is, and how inequitably its economic conditions
are distributed, they are all to no avail. What
difference does it make that eleven thousand peo-
ple, having each an annual income of over


$100,000, appropriated in 1927 about one-

twenty-fifth of the net national income? What

good does it do to cite official figures showing

that only twenty per cent of the income of the
106


SOCIALISM


favored eleven thousand came from salaries and
from profits of the businesses they were person-
ally engaged in, while the remaining eighty per
cent was derived from investments, speculative
profits, rent, etc.? That the total earnings of


eight million wage workers should be only four
times the amount of what the income-tax returns
_ frankly call the “unearned” income of the eleven
thousand millionaires goes almost without notice.


Moreover, income from investments in corporate
aggregations increases at the expense of that
coming from enterprises personally managed.
For anyone to call attention to this discrepancy
is considered an aspersion on our rugged indi-
vidualism and an attempt to stir up class feel-
ing. Meanwhile, the income-tax returns for 1928
show that in seven years the number of persons
having an annual income of more than $1,000,-
000 has increased from sixty-seven to almost five |
hundred, twenty-four of whom had incomes of
_ over $10,000,000 each.

Nevertheless, the assumption of guardianship
of prosperity by a political party means the as-
sumption of responsibility, and in the long run
the ruling economic-political combination will be

107


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


held to account. The overlords will have to do
something to make good. This fact seems to me
to be the center of the future political situation.
Discussion of the prospective political develop-
ment in connection with corporate industry may
at least start from the fact that the industries
which used to be regarded as staple, as the foun-
dations of sound economy, are depressed. The
plight of agriculture, of the coal and textile in-
dustries, is well known. The era of great railway
expansion has come to a close; the building
trades have a fluctuating career. The counterpart
of this fact is that the now flourishing industries
are those connected with and derived from new
technical developments. Without the rapid
growth in the manufacture and sale of automo-
biles, radios, airplanes, etc.; without the rapid
development of new uses for electricity and su-
per-power, prosperity in the last few years would
hardly have been even a state of mind. Economic
stimulus has come largely from these new uses
for capital and labor; surplus funds drawn from
them have kept the stock market and other forms
of business actively going. At the same time,
these newer developments have accelerated the
108


SOCIALISM


accumulation and concentration of super-for-
tunes.

These facts seem to suggest the issue of
future politics. The fact of depression has al-
ready influenced political action in legislation
and administration, What will happen when in-
dustries now new become in turn overcapitalized,
and consumption does not keep up in proportion
to investment in them; when they, too, have an
excess capacity of production? There are now,


it is estimated, eight billions of surplus savings
a year, and the amount is increasing. Where is


this capital to find its outlet? Diversion into the
stock market gives temporary relief, but the re-
sulting inflation is a “cure” which creates a new
disease. If it goes into the expansion of industrial
plants, how long will it be before they, too, “over-
produce’? The future seems to hold in store an
extension of political control in the social inter-
est. We already have the Interstate Commerce
Commission, the Federal Reserve Board, and
now the Farm Relief Board—a socialistic un-
dertaking on a large scale sponsored by the party
of individualism, The probabilities seem to favor
the creation of more such boards in the future, in
109


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


spite of all concomitant denunciations of bureau-
cracy and proclamations that individualism is
the source of our national prosperity.

The tariff question, too, is undergoing a
change. Now, it is the older industries which,
being depressed, clamor for relief. The “infant”
industries are those which are indifferent, and
which, with their growing interest in export
trade, are likely to become increasingly indiffer-
ent or hostile. The alignment of political parties
has not indeed been affected so far by economic
changes—beyond the formation of insurgent
blocs within the old parties. But this fact only
conceals from view the greater fact that, under
cover of the old parties, legislation and adminis-
tration have taken on new functions due to the
impact of trade and finance. The most striking
example, of course, is the effort to use govern-
mental agencies and large public funds to put
agriculture on a parity with other forms of in-
dustry. The case is the more significant because
the farmers form the part of the population that
has remained most faithful to the old individual-
istic philosophy, and because the movement is
definitely directed to bringing them within the

110


SOCIALISM


scope of collective and corporate action. The
policy of using public works to alleviate unem-
ployment in times of depression is another, if
lesser, sign of the direction which political actio
is taking.

The question of whether and how far the
hewer industries will follow the cycle of the older
- and now depressed ones, becoming overcapital-
ized, overproductive in capacity and overcharged
with carrying costs, is, of course, a speculative
one. The negative side of the argument demands,
however, considerable optimism. It is at least
reasonably certain that if depression sets in with
_ them, the process of public intervention and pub-
lic control will be repeated. And in any case,
nothing can permanently exclude political action
with reference to old age and unemployment.
The scandalous absence even of public inquiry
and statistics is emphasized at present by the
displacement of workers through technical de-
- velopments, and by the lowering, because of
speeded-up processes, of the age-limit at which
workers can be profitably employed. Unemploy-


ment, on the scale at which it now “normally”


exists—to say nothing of its extent during cyclic
111


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


periods of depression—is a confession of the
breakdown of unregulated individualistic indus-


try conducted for private profit. Coal miners and
even farmers may go unheeded, but not so the
industrial city workers, One of the first signs of
the reawakening of an aggressive labor move-
ment will be the raising of the unemployment
problem to a political issue. The outcome of this
will be a further extension of public control.
Political prophecy is a risky affair and I would
not venture into details. But large and basic eco-
nomic currents cannot be ignored for any great
length of time, and they are working in one
direction. There are many indications that the


reactionary tendencies which have controlled
American politics are coming to a term. The
inequitable distribution of income will bring to
the fore the use of taxing power to effect redis-


tribution by means of larger taxation of swollen _


income and by heavier death duties on large for- —


tunes. The scandal of private appropriation of


socially produced. values in unused land cannot


forever remain unconcealed. The situation in

world production and commerce is giving “pro-

tection and free trade” totally new meanings.
112


4


SOCIALISM


The connection of municipal mismanagement
and corruption with special favors to big eco-
nomic interests, and the connection of the alli-
ance thus formed with crime, are becoming more
generally recognized. Local labor bodies are get-
ting more and more discontented with the policy
of political abstention and with the farce of
working through parties controlled by adverse
interests. The movement is cumulative and in-
cludes convergence to a common head of many
now isolated factors. When a focus is reached,
economic issues will be openly and not merely


covertly political. The problem of social control
of industry and the use of governmental agencies


for constructive social ends will become the
avowed center of political struggle.
A chapter is devoted to the political phase of
the situation not because it is supposed the place
of definitely political action in the resolution of
_ the present split in life is fundamental. But it is
7 accessory. A certain amount of specific change in
4 legislation and administration is required in
order to supply the conditions under which other
changes may take place in nonpolitical ways.
Moreover, the psychological effect of law and
; 113


» SS


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


political discussion is enormous. Political action
provides large-scale models that react into the
formation of ideas and ideals about all social mat-
ters. One sure way in which the individual who
is politically lost, because of the loss of objects to
which his loyalties can attach themselves, could
recover a composed mind, would be by apprehen-
sion of the realities of industry and finance as
they function in public and political life. Political
apathy such as has marked our thought for many
years past is due fundamentally to mental con-
fusion arising from lack of consciousness of
any vital connection between politics and daily
affairs. The parties have been eager accomplices
in maintaining the confusion and unreality. To
know where things are going and why they are
is to have the material out of which stable objects
of purpose and loyalty may be formed. To per-
ceive clearly the actual movement of events is to
be on the road to intellectual clarity and order.


ee


The chief value of political reference is that


politics so well exemplify the existing social con-
fusion and its causes. The various expressions of


public control to which, reference has been made —


have taken place sporadically and in response
114 .


SOCIALISM


to the pressure of distressed groups so large
that their voting power demanded attention.
They have been improvised to meet special occa-
sions. They have not been adopted as parts of
any general social policy. Consequently their real
import has not been considered; they have been
treated as episodic exceptions. We live politically
from hand to mouth. Corporate forces are strong
enough to secure attention and action now and
then, when some emergency forces them upon us,
but acknowledgment of them does not inspire
consecutive policy. On the other hand, the older
individualism is still sufficiently ingrained to ob-
tain allegiance in confused sentiment and in vo-
cal utterance. It persists to such an extent that
we can maintain the illusion that it regulates our
political thought and behavior. In actuality, ap-
peal to it serves to perpetuate the current disor-
ganization in which financial and industrial
power, corporately organized, can deflect eco-
nomic consequences away from the advantage of
the many to serve the privilege of the few.

I know of no recent event so politically inter-
esting as President Hoover’s calling of industrial
conferences after the stock-market crash of 1929.

115


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


It is indicative of many things, some of them
actual, some of them dimly and ambiguously pos-
sible. It testifies to the disturbance created when
the prospect of an industrial depression faces a
party and administration that have assumed
responsibility for prosperity through having
claimed credit for it. It testifies to the import of
the crowd psychology of suggestion and cre-


dulity in American life. Christian Science rules
American thought in business affairs; if we can


be led to think that certain things do not exist,
they perforce have not happened. These confer-
ences also give evidence of our_national habit of


planlessness in social affairs, of locking the barn


door after the horse has been stolen. For nothing
was done until after a crash which every econ-
omist—except those hopelessly committed to
the doctrine of a “new economic era”—knew was
certain to happen, however uncertain they may
have been as to its time.

The more ambiguous meaning of these confer-


nA.


ences is connected with future developments. It —


is clear that one of their functions was to add up.
columns of figures to imposing totals, with a view
to their effect on the public imagination. Will


116


SOCIALISM


there be more than a psychological and arith-
metical outcome? A hopeful soul may take it as
the beginning of a real application of the engi-
neering mind to social life in its economic phase.
He may persuade himself that it is the com-
mencement of the acceptance of social respon-
sibility on a large scale by American industrial-
ists, financiers and politicians. He may envisage
a permanent Economic Council finally growing
out of the holding of a series of conferences, a
council which shall take upon itself a planned
coordination of industrial, development. He may
be optimistic enough to anticipate a time when
representatives of labor will meet on equal terms,
not for the sake of obtaining a pledge to abstain
from efforts to obtain a rise of wages and from
strikes, but as an integral factor in maintaining
a planned regulation of the bases of national
welfare.


The issue is still in the future and uncertain.
What is not uncertain is that any such move
would, if carried through, mark the acknowl-
edged end of the old social and political epoch

117


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


and its dominant philosophy. It would be in ac-
cord with the spirit of American life if the move-
ment were undertaken by voluntary agreement
and endeavor rather than by governmental co-
ercion. There is that much enduring truth in our
individualism. But the outcome would surely
involve the introduction of social responsibility
into our business system to such an extent that
the doom of an exclusively pecuniary-profit in-
dustry would follow. A coordinating and direc-
tive council in which captains of industry and
finance would meet with representatives of labor
and public officials to plan the regulation of in-
dustrial activity would signify that we had en-
tered constructively and voluntarily upon the
road which Soviet Russia is traveling with so
much attendant destruction and coercion. While,
as I have already said, political action is not
basic, concentration of attention upon real and
_vital issues such as attend the public control of
industry and finance for the sake of social values
would have vast intellectual and emotional re-
verberations. No phase of our culture would |
remain unaffected. Politics is a means, not an
end. But thought of it as a means will ] Oo
118


SOCIALISM
thought of the ends it should serve. It will in-


duce consideration of the ways in which a wor-
thy and rich life for all may be achieved. In so
doing, it will restore directive aims and be a sig-
nificant step forward in the recovery of a unified
individuality.

I have tried to make a brief survey of the pos-
sibilities of the political situation in general, and
not to make either a plea or a prophecy of special
political alignments. But any kind of political re-
generation within or without the present parties
demands first of all a frank intellectual recog-
nition of present tendencies. In a society so rap-
idly becoming corporate, there is need of asso-
ciated thought to take account of the realities
of the situation and to frame policies in the social
interest. Only then can organized action in behalf
of the social interest be made a reality,, We are in


for some kind of socialism, call it by whatever
name we please, and no matter what it will be
called when it is realized. Economic determin-
ism is now a fact, not a theory. But there is a dif-
ference and a choice between a blind, chaotic and
unplanned determinism, issuing from business
conducted for pecuniary profit, and the deter-
119


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


mination of a socially planned and ordered _de-
velopment. It is the difference and the choice be-


tween _a socialism that is public and one that is


capitalistic.


120


ae
er


CuHoarTterR VII


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


Discussion OF THE state and prospects of
American culture abounds. But “culture” is
an ambiguous word. With respect to one of its
meanings I see no ground for pessimism. Inter-
est _in art, science and philosophy is not on the
wane; the contrary is the case. There may have
been individuals superior in achievement in the
past; but I do not know of any time in our his-
tory when so many persons were actively con-
cerned, both as producers and as appreciators,
with these culminating aspects of civilization.


There is a more lively and more widespread. in-


terest in erest in ideas, in critical discussion, in all that


_ forms an intellectual life than ever before. Any-


one who can look back over a span of thirty or


forty years must be conscious of the difference


that a generation has produced. And the move-


ment is going forward, not backward.
a 121


ies


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


About culture in the sense of cultivation of a
number of persons, a number on the increase
rather than the decrease, I find no ground for
any great solicitude. But “culture” has another


meaning. It denotes the type of emotion and
thought that is characteristic of a people and


epoch as a poch_as a whole, an organic i an organic i intellectual and and
moral quality. Without raising the ambiguous
question of aristocracy, one can say without fear
of denial that a high degree of personal cultiva-
tion at the top of society can coexist with a low
and unworthy state of culture as a pervasive
manifestation of social life. The marvelous
achievement of the novel, music and the drama
in the Russia of the Czar’s day sufficiently illus-
trates what is meant. Nor is preoccupation with
commerce and wealth an insuperable bar to a
flourishing culture. One may cite the fact that
the highest phase of Dutch painting came ina _
time of just such expansion. And so it was with
the Periclean, Augustan and Elizabethan ages. _
Excellence of personal cultivation has often, and
perhaps usually, been coincident with the politi-
cal and economic dominance of a few and with
periods of material expansion.
122


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


I see no reason why we in the United States
should not also have golden ages of literature
and science. But we are given to looking at this
and that “age” marked with great names and
great productivity, while forgetting to ask about
the roots of the efflorescence. Might it not be
argued that the very transitoriness of the glory
of these ages proves that its causes were sporadic
and accidental? And in any case, a question must
be raised as to the growth of native culture in
our own country. The idea of democracy is
doubtless as ambiguous as is that of aristocracy.
But we cannot evade a basic issue. Unless an
avowedly democratic people and an undeniably
industrial time can achieve something more than
an “age” of high personal cultivation, there is
something deeply defective in its culture. Such
an age would be American in a topographical
sense, not in a spiritual one.

This fact gives significance to the question so


often raised as to whether the l ch-


anistic forces of the machine age are to crush
the higher life. In one sense I find, as I have


already said, no special danger. Poets, painters,
novelists, dramatists, philosophers, scientists, are
123


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


sure to appear and to find an appreciative audi-
ence. But the unique fact about our own civiliza-
tion is that if it is to achieve and manifest a char-
acteristic culture, it must develop, not on top of
an industrial and political substructure, but out
of our material civilization itself. It will come by
turning a machine age into a significantly new
habit of mind and sentiment, or it will not come
at all. A cultivation of a class that externally
adorns a material civilization will at most merely
repeat the sort of thing that has transiently hap-
pened many times before.

The question, then, is not merely a quantita-
tive one. It is not a matter of an increased num-
ber of persons who will take part in the creation
and enjoyment of art and science. It is a qualita-
tive question. Can_a material, industrial civiliza-
tion be converted _into_ a distinctive agency for
liberating the minds and refining the emotions of — :
all who take part in it? The cultural question is P
a political and economic one before it is a defi- :
nitely cultural one. 4

It is a commonplace that the problem of the
relation of mechanistic and industrial civiliza-
tion to culture is the deepest and most urgent

124


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


problem of our day. If interpreters are correct
in saying that “Americanization” is becoming
universal, it is a problem of the world and not
just of our own country—although it is first
acutely experienced here. It raises issues of the
widest philosophic import. The question of the
relation of man and nature, of mind and matter,
assumes its vital significance in this context. A
“humanism” that separates man from nature will
envisage a radically different solution of the in-.
dustrial and economic perplexities of the age
than the humanism entertained by those who find
no uncrossable gulf or fixed gap. The former
will inevitably look backward for direction; it
will strive for a cultivated élite supported on the
backs of toiling masses. The latter will have to
face the question of whether work itself can be-
come an instrument of culture and_of how the


masses can share freely in a life enriched in im-
agination and_esthetic enjoyment. This task is


set not because of sentimental “humanitarian-
ism,” but as the necessary conclusion of the in-
tellectual conviction that while man belongs in
nature and mind is connected with matter, hu-


oul and its collective intelligence are the
125


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


means by which nature is guided to new possi-

Many European critics openly judge Ameri-
can life from the standpoint of a dualism of the
spiritual and material, and deplore the primacy
of the physical as fatal to any culture. They fail
to see the depth and range of our_problem, which
is that of n making the material an active instru-
ment in the creation of the life of ideas and art.
Many ; American critics of the present scene are
engaged in devising modes of escape. Some flee
to Paris or Florence; others take flight in their
imagination to India, Athens, the middle ages
or the American age of Emerson, Thoreau and
Melville. Flight is solution by evasion. Return to
a dualism consisting of a massive substratum of
the material upon which are erected spiritually
ornamented facades is flatly impossible, except
upon the penalty of the spiritual disenfranchise-
ment of those permanently condemned to toil
mechanically at the machine.

That the cultural problem must be reached
through economic roads is testified to by our edu-
cational system. No nation has ever been so ac-
tively committed to universal schooling as are the

126


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


people of the United States. But what is our sys-
tem for? What ends does it serve? That it gives
opportunity to many who would otherwise lack
_ it is undeniable. It is also the agency of impor-
_tant welding and fusing processes. These are con-
. ditions of creation of a mind that will constitute
a distinctive type of culture. But they are con-
- ditions only. If our public-school system merely
turns out efficient industrial fodder and citizen-
ship fodder in a state controlled by pecuniary
industry, as other schools in other nations have
turned out efficient cannon fodder, it is not help-
ing to solve the problem of building up a dis-
tinctive American culture; it is only aggravating
the problem. That which prevents the schools
from doing their educational work freely is pre-
cisely the pressure—for the most part indirect,
to be sure—of domination by the money-motif
of our economic régime. The subject is too large


to deal with here. But_the distinguishing trait


of the American student body in our higher

tal seclusion; there is, in their schooling, little

free and disinterested concern with the under-
127


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


lying social problems of our civilization. Other
typical evidence is found in the training of engi-
neers. Thorstein Veblen—and many others have
since repeated his idea—pointed out the strategic
position occupied by the engineer in our indus-
trial and technological activity. Engineering —
schools give excellent technical training. Where
is the school that pays systematic attention to
the potential social function of the engineering
profession ?

I refer to the schools in connection with this
problem of American culture because they are
the formal agencies for producing those mental
attitudes, those modes of feeling and thinking,
which are the essence of a distinctive culture. But
they are not the ultimate formative force. Social
institutions, the trend of occupations, the pattern
of social arrangements, are the finally controlling
influences in shaping minds. The immaturity
nurtured in schools is carried over into life. If we
Americans manifest, as compared with those of
other countries who have had the benefits of
higher schooling, a kind of infantilism, it is be-
cause our own schooling so largely evades serious
consideration of the deeper issues of social life;

128


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


for it is only through induction into realities that
mind can be matured. Consequently the effective


education, that which really leaves a stamp on
character and thought, is obtained when gradu-
_ ates come to take their part in the activities of
an adult society which put exaggerated emphasis
_ upon business and the results of business success.
Such an education is at best extremely one-sided;
it operates to create the specialized “business
mind,” and this, in turn, is manifested in leisure
as well as in business itself. The one-sidedness
is accentuated because of the tragic irrelevancy
of prior schooling to the controlling realities of
social life. There is little preparation to induce
either hardy resistance, discriminating criticism,
or the vision and desire to direct economic forces
in new channels.

If, then, I select education for special notice,
it is because education—in the broad sense of
formation of fundamental attitudes of imagina-
tion, desire and thinking—is strictly correlative
with culture in its inclusive social sense. It is be-
cause the educative influence of economic and po-
litical institutions is, in the last analysis, even
more important than their immediate economic

129


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


consequences. The mental poverty that_comes
from one-sided distortion of mind is ultimately ©
more significant than poverty in material goods.


To make this assertion is not to gloss over the
material harshness that exists. It is rather to —
point out that under present conditions these —
material results cannot be separated from de-
velopment of mind and character. Destitution
on the one side and wealth on the other are fac-
tors in the determination of that psychological
and moral constitution which is the source and
the measure of attained culture. I can think of
nothing more childishly futile, for example, than
the attempt to bring “art” and esthetic enjoy-
ment externally to the multitudes who work in
the ugliest surroundings and who leave their
ugly factories only to go through depressing
streets to eat, sleep and carry on their domestic
occupations in grimy, sordid homes. The interest
of the younger generation in art and esthetic
matters is a hopeful sign of the growth of cul-
ture in its narrower sense. But it will readily
turn into an escape mechanism unless it develops
into an alert interest in the conditions which de-
termine the esthetic environment of the vast mul-
130


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


titudes who now live, work and play in surround-
ings that perforce degrade their tastes and that
unconsciously educate them into desire for any
kind of enjoyment as long as it is cheap and
“exciting.”


It is the work of sociologists, psychologists,
- novelists, dramatists and poets to exhibit the con-
sequences of our present economic régime upon
taste, desire, satisfaction and standards of value.
An article like this cannot do a work which re-
quires many volumes. But a paragraph suffices
to call attention to one central fact. Most of those


who are engaged in the outward work of produc-
tion_and_ distribution of economic commodities
have no share—imaginative, intellectual, emo-
tional—in directing the activities in which they
physically participate.


It was remarked in an earlier chapter that
there is definite restriction placed upon existing
corporateness. It is found in the fact that eco-
nomic associations are fixed in ways which ex-
clude most of the workers in them from taking
part in their management. The subordination of


the enterprises to pecuniary profit reacts to make


131


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


the workers “hands” only. Their hearts and
brains are not engaged. They execute plans
which they do not form, and of whose meaning
and intent they are ignorant—beyond the fact
that these plans make a profit for others and
secure a wage for themselves. To set forth the
consequences of this fact upon the experience
and the minds of uncounted multitudes would
again require volumes. But there is an undeni-
able limitation of opportunities; and_minds are
warped, frustrated, unnourished by their activ-
ities—the ultimate source of all constant nurture
of the spirit. The philosopher’s idea of a com-
plete separation of mind and body is realized in
thousands of industrial workers, and the result
is a depressed body and an empty and distorted
mind.

There are instances, here and there, of the in-
tellectual and moral effects which accrue when
workers can employ their feelings and imagina-
tions as well as their muscles in what they do.
But it is still impossible to foresee in detail what
would happen if a system of codperative control
of industry were generally substituted for the
present system of exclusion. There would be an

132


=
yi
'
Ke

f


,
4


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


enormous liberation of mind, and the mind thus
set free would have constant direction and nour-
ishment. Desire for related knowledge, physical
and social, would be created and rewarded; ini-
tiative and responsibility would be demanded
~ and achieved. One may not, perhaps, be entitled
to predict that an efflorescence of a distinctive
‘social culture would immediately result. But one
can say without hesitation that we shall attain
only the personal cultivation of a class, and not
a characteristic American culture, unless this


condition is fulfilled. It is impossible for a highly
industrialized society to attain a widespread high
excellence of mind when multitudes are excluded
in their daily occupations. The contradiction is


so great and so pervasive that a favorable issue
is hopeless. We must wrest our general culture
from an industrialized civilization; and this fact
signifies that industry must itself become a pri-
mary educative and cultural force for those en-
- gaged in it. The conception that natural science
somehow sets a limit to freedom, subjecting men
to fixed necessities, is not an intrinsic product of
science. Just as with the popular notion that art
133


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


is a luxury, whose proper abode is the museum
and gallery, the notion of literary persons (in-
cluding some philosophers) that science is an op-
pression due to the material structure of nature,
is ultimately a reflex of the social conditions un-
der which science is applied so as to reach only a
pecuniary fruition. Knowledge takes effect in
machinery and in the minds of technical direc-
tors, but not in the thoughts of those who tend
the machines. The alleged fatalism of science is
in reality the fatalism of the pecuniary order in
which science is employed.

If I have emphasized the effect upon the wage
workers, it is not because the consequences are
not equally marked with respect to the few who


now enjoy the material emoluments of the sys- —


tem and monopolize its management and con-


trol. There will doubtless always be leaders, those
who will have the more active and leading share


in the intellectual direction of great industrial


undertakings. But as long as the direction_is


more concerned with pecuniary profit than wit


social utility, the resulting intellectual and mora]


development will be one-sided and warped. An


inevitable result of a codperatively shared con- (


134


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


trol of industry would be the recognition of final
use or consumption as the criterion of valuation,
decision and direction. When the point of view
of consumption is supreme in industry, the lat-
ter will be socialized, and I see no way of secur-
ing its genuine socialization save as industry is
viewed and conducted from the standpoint of the
user and enjoyer of services and commodities.
For then human values will control economic
values. Moreover, as long as means are kept
separate from human ends (the consequences
produced in human living), “values in use” will
be so dominated by exchange or sale values that
the former will be interpreted by means of the
latter. In other words, there is now no inherent
criterion for consumption-values. “Wealth,” as
Ruskin so vehemently pointed out, includes as
much illth as well-being. When values in use are
the ends of industry they will receive a scrutiny
and criticism for which there is no foundation at
present, save external moralizing and exhorta-
tion. Production for private profit signifies that
any kind of consumption will be stimulated that
leads to private gain.


There can be no stable and balanced -


135


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


ment of mind and character apart from the as-


sumption of responsibility. In an industrialized
society, that responsibility must for the most part


be associated with industry, since it will grow in-
directly out of industry even for those not en-
gaged in it. The wider and fuller the sense of
social consequences—that is, of the effect on the
life-experience of the consumer—the deeper and
surer, the more stable, is the intelligence of those
who have the foremost place in the direction of
industry. A society saturated with industrialism
may evolve a class of highly cultivated persons
in the traditional sense of cultivation, But there
will be something thin and meager about even
this meed of cultivation if it evolves in isolation
from the main currents of action in which
thought and desire are engaged. As long as im-
agination is concerned primarily with obtaining
pecuniary success and enjoying its material re-
sults, the type of culture will conform to these
standards.


Everywhere and at all times the development


of = and its cultural products have been ¢ con-


nate with the channels in i x
oe applied. This fact defines the problem of


136


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


creating a culture that will be characteristically
our own. Escape from industrialism on the
ground that it is unesthetic and brutal can win
only a superficial and restricted success of es-
teem. It is a silly caricature to interpret such
statements as meaning that science should devote
itself directly to solving industrial problems, or
that poetry and painting should find their mate-
rial in machines and in machine processes. The
question is not one of idealizing present condi-
tions in esthetic treatment, but of discovering
and trying to realize the conditions under which
vital esthetic production and esthetic apprecia-
tion may take place on a generous social scale.
And similarly for science; it is not in the least
a matter of considering this and that particu-
lar practical application to be squeezed out of
science: we have a great deal of that sort of thing
already. It is a question of acknowledgment on
the part of scientific inquirers of intellectual re-
sponsibility; of admitting into their conscious-
ness a perception of what science has actually
done, through its counterpart technologies, in
making the world and life what they are. This
perception would bear fruit by raising the ques-
137


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


tion of what science can do in making a different
sort of world and society. Such a science would


be at the opposite pole to science conceived as
merely a means to special industrial ends. It
would, indeed, include in its scope all the techno-
logical aspects of the latter, but it would also be
concerned with control of their social effects. A
humane society would use scientific method, and
intelligence with its best equipment, to bring
about human consequences. Such a society would
meet the demand for a science that is humanistic,
and not just physical and technical. “Solutions”
of the problem of the relation of the material and
the spiritual, of the ideal and the actual, are
merely conceptual and at best prophetic unless
material conditions are idealized by contributing
to cultural consequences. Science is a potential
tool of such a liberating spiritualization; the arts,
including that of social control, are its fruition.


TI do not hold, I think, an exaggerated opinion
of the influence that is wielded by so-called “intel-
lectuals”—philosophers, professional and other-
wise, critics, writers and professional persons
in general having interests beyond their immedi-

138


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


ate callings. But their present position is not a
measure of their possibilities. For they are now
intellectually dispersed and divided; this fact is
one aspect of what I have called “the lost indi-
vidual.” This internal dissolution is necessarily
accompanied by a weak social efficacy. The chaos
is due, more than to anything else, to mental
withdrawal, to the failure to face the realities of
industrialized society. Whether the ultimate in-
fluence of the distinctively intellectual or reflec-
tive groups is to be great or small, an initial


move is theirs. A consciously directed _critical
consideration of the state of present society in its
causes and consequences is a pre-condition of
proj ection of constructive ideas. To be effective,


the movement must be organized. But this re-
quirement does not demand the creation of a
formal organization; it does demand that a sense
of the need and opportunity should possess a
sufficiently large number of minds. If it does, the
results of their inquiries will converge to a com-
mon issue.

This point of view is sometimes represented as
a virtual appeal to those primarily engaged in in-
quiry and reflection to desert their studies, libra-

139


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


ries, and laboratories and engage in works of
social reform. That representation is a carica-
ture. It is not the abandonment of thinking and
inquiry that is asked for, but more thinking and
more significant inquiry. This “more” is equiva-
lent to a conscious direction of thought and in-
quiry, and direction can be had only by a real-
ization of problems in the rank of their urgency.
The “clerk” and secretary once occupied, if we
may trust history, places of great influence if
not of honor. In a society of military and politi-
cal leaders who were illiterate, they must have
done much of the thinking and negotiating for
which the names of the great now receive credit.
The intellectuals of the present are their de-
scendants. Outwardly they have been emanci-
pated and have an independent position formerly
lacking. Whether their actual efficacy has been
correspondingly increased may be doubted. In
some degree, they have attained their liberty in
direct ratio to their distance from the scenes of
action. A more intimate connection would not
signify, I repeat, a surrender of the business of
thought, even speculative thought, for the sake
of getting busy at some so-called practical mat-
140


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


ter. Rather would it signify a focussing of
thought and intensifying of its quality by bring-
ing it into relation with issues of stupendous
meaning.

I am suspiciou ect_a hier-


archy of values: their results generally prove to
be inapplicable and abstract. But_there is at
every time _a hierarchy of problems, for there are


some issues which underlie and condition others.
No one person is going to evolve a constructive
solution for the problem of humanizing indus-
trial civilization, of making it and its technology
a servant of human life—a problem which is once
more equivalent, for us, to that of creating a
genuine culture. But general guidance of serious
intellectual endeavor by a consciousness of the
problem would enable at least one group of in-
dividuals to recover a social function and so re-
find themselves. And recovery by those with spe-
cial intellectual gifts and equipment from their
enforced social defection is at least a first step in
a more general reconstruction that will bring in-
tegration out of disorder.
Accordingly, I do not wish my remarks about
escape and withdrawal to be interpreted as if
141


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


they were directed at any special group of per-
sons. The flight of particular individuals is symp-
tomatic of the seclusion of existing science,
intelligence and art. The personal gap which, gen-
erally speaking, isolates the intellectual worker
from the wage earner is symbolic and typical of
a deep division of functions. This division is the
split between theory and practice in actual oper-
ation. The effects of the split are as fatal to cul-
ture on the one side as on the other. It signifies
that what we call our culture will continue to be,
and in increased measure, a survival of inherited
European traditions, and that it will not be indig-
enous. And if it is true, as some hold, that with
the extension of machine technology and indus-
trialism the whole world is becoming “American-
ized,” then the creation of an indigenous culture
is no disservice to the traditional European
springs of our spiritual life. It will signify, not
ingratitude, but the effort to repay a debt.


The solution of the crisis in culture is identical
with the recovery of composed, effective and cre-
ative individuality. The harmony of individual
mind with the realities of a civilization made out-

142


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


wardly corporate by an industry based on tech-
nology does not signify that individual minds
will be passively molded by existing social condi-
tions as if the latter were fixed and static. When
the patterns that form individuality of thought
and desire are in line with actuating social forces,
that individuality will be released for creative
effort. Originality and uniqueness are not op-
posed to social nurture; they are saved by it from
eccentricity and escape. The positive and con-
structive energy of individuals, as manifested in
the remaking and redirection of social forces and
conditions, is itself a social necessity. A new cul-
ture expressing the possibilities immanent in a
machine and material civilization will release
whatever is distinctive and potentially creative
in individuals, and individuals thus freed will
be the constant makers of a continuously new
society.

It was said in an earlier chapter that “accept-
ance’ of conditions has two very different mean-
ings. To this statement may now be added the
consideration that “conditions” are always mov-


ing; they are always in transition to something


else. The important question is whether _intelli-
143


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW
gence, whether observation and reflection, inter-


venes and becomes a directive factor in the tran-
sition. The moment it does intervene, conditions
become conditions of forecasting consequences;
when these consequences present themselves in
thought, preference and volition, planning and
determination, come into play. To foresee conse-


quences_of existing conditions is to surrender
neutrality and drift; it is to take sides in behalf


of the consequences that are preferred. The cul-
tural consequences that our industrial system now
produces have no finality about them. When they
are observed and are related discriminatingly to
their causes, they become conditions for plan-
ning, desiring, choosing. Discriminating inquiry
will disclose what part of present results is the
outcome of the technological factors at work and
what part is due to a legal and economic system
which it is within the power of man to modify
and transform. It is indeed foolish to assume —
that an industrial civilization will somehow auto- _
matically, from its own inner impetus, produce -
a new culture. But it is a lazy abdication of re-
sponsibility which assumes that a genuine culture -
can be achieved except first by an active and alert

144


THE CRISIS IN CULTURE


intellectual recognition of the realities of an in-
dustrial age, and then by planning to use them
in behalf of a significantly human life. To charge
that those who urge intellectual acknowledg-
ment or acceptance as the first necessary step
stop at this point, and thus end with an optimis-
tic rationalization of the present as if it were
final, is a misconstruction that indicates a desire
to shirk responsibility for undertaking the task
of reconstruction and direction. Or else it waits
upon a miracle to beget the culture which is
desired by all serious minds.


145


CuHarpTterR VIII


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


IN THE FOREGOING chapters, I have attempted


to portray the split between the idea of the in-
dividual inherited from the past and the realities


of a situation that _is becoming increasingly
corporate. Some of the effects produced on


living individuality by this division have been
indicated. I have urged that individuality will
again become integral and vital when it creates a
frame for itself by attention to the scene in which
it must perforce exist and develop. It is likely
that many persons will regard my statement of
the problem as a commonplace. Others will de-
plore my failure to offer a detailed solution and
a definite picture of just what an individual
would be if he were in harmony with the realities
of American civilization. Still others will think
that a disease has been described as a remedy ;
that the articles are an indiscriminate praise of
146


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


technological science and of a corporate indus-
trial civilization; that they are an effort to boost
upon the bandwagon those reluctant to climb.

I have indeed attempted analysis, rather than
either a condemnation of the evils of present so-
ciety or a recommendation of fixed ends and
ideals for their cure. For I think that serious
minds are pretty well agreed as to both evils and
ideals—as long as both are taken in general


terms, Condemnation is too often only a way of
displaying superiority; it speaks from outside


the scene; it discloses symptoms but not causes.
It is impotent to produce; it can only reproduce


its own kind. As for ideals, all agree that we
want the good life, and that the good life involves
freedom and a taste that is trained to appreciate
the honorable, the true and the beautiful. But as


long as we limit ourselves to generalities, the
phrases that express ideals may be transferred
from conservative to radical or vice versa, and
nobody will be the wiser. For, without analysis,
they do not descend into the actual scene nor
concern themselves with the generative condi-
tions of realization of ideals.

There is danger in the reiteration of eternal

147


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


verities and ultimate spiritualities. Our sense of
the actual is dulled, and we are led to think that


in dwelling upon ideal goals we have somehow
transcended existing evils. Ideals express possi-
bilities; but they are genuine ideals only in so far


as they are possibilities of what is now moving.


Imagination can set them free from their encum-
brances and project them as a guide in attention
to what now exists. But, save as they are related
to actualities, they are pictures in a dream.

I have, then, ventured to suppose that analysis
of present conditions is of primary importance.
Analysis of even a casual kind discloses that
these conditions are not fixed. To accept them
intellectually is to perceive that they are in flux.
Their movement is not destined to a single end.
Many outcomes may be projected, and the move-
ment may be directed by many courses to many


chosen goals, once conditions have been recog-


nized for what they are. By becoming conscious


of their movements and by active participation —
in their currents, we may guide them to some
preferred possibility. In this interaction, individ- —


uals attain an integrated being. The individual
who intelligently and actively partakes in a per-
148


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


ception that is a first step in conscious choice is
never so isolated as to be lost nor so quiescent
as to be suppressed.


One of the main difficulties in understanding
the present and apprehending its human possi-
bilities is the persistence of stereotypes of spir-
itual life which were formed in old and alien
cultures. In static societies—those which the in-
dustrial revolution has doomed—acquiescence
had a meaning, and so had the projection of fixed
ideals. Things were so relatively settled that
there was something to acquiesce in, and goals
and ideals could be imagined that were as fixed in
their way as existing conditions in theirs. The
medieval legal system could define “just” prices
and wages, for the definition was a formulation
of what was customary in the local community;
it operated merely to prevent exorbitant devia-
tions. It could prescribe a system of definite du-
ties for all relations, for there was a hierarchical
order, and occasions for the exercise of duty fell
within an established and hence known order.
Communities were local; they did not merge,
overlap and interact in all kinds of subtle and

149


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


hidden ways. A common church was the guardian }


and administrator of spiritual and ideal truth,
and its theoretical authority had direct channels
for making itself felt in the practical details of
life. Spiritual realities might have their locus in
the next world, but this after-world was inti-
mately tied into all the affairs of this world by an
institution existing here and now.

To-day there are no patterns sufficiently en-
during to provide anything stable in which to
acquiesce, and there is no material out of which
to frame final and all-inclusive ends. There is, on
the other hand, such constant change that acqui-
escence is but a series of interrupted spasms, and
the outcome is mere drifting. In such a situation,
fixed and comprehensive goals are but irrelevant
dreams, while acquiescence is not a policy but its
abnegation.

Again, the machine is condemned wholesale
because it is seen through the eyes of a spiritual-
ity that belonged to another state of culture.
Present evil consequences are treated as if they
were eternally necessary, because they cannot be
made consistent with the ideals of another age.
In reality, a machine age is a challenge to gen-

150


EO


y


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


erate new conceptions of the ideal and the spir-
itual. Ferrero has said that machines “are the
barbarians of modern times, which have de-
stroyed the fairest works of ancient civilization.”


But_even_the barbarians were _not_immutably
barbarous; they, too, were bearers of directive


movement, and in time they wrought out a civil-
ization that had its own measure of fairness and
beauty.

Most attacks on the mechanistic character of
science are caused by the survival of philosophies
and religions formed when nature was the grim


foe of man. The possibility of the present, and


therefore its problem

science, nature may become the friend ad ally
of man. I have rarely seen an attack on science
as hostile to humanism which did not rest upon
a conception of nature formed long before there
was any science. That there is much at any time
in environing nature which is indifferent and hos-
tile to human values is obvious to any serious
mind. When natural knowledge was hardly ex-
istent, control of nature was impossible. Without
power of control, there was no recourse save to
build places of refuge in which man could live

151


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


in imagination, although not in fact. There is no
need to deny the grace and beauty of some of
these constructions. But when their imaginary
character is once made apparent, it is futile to
suppose that men can go on living and sustaining
life by them. When they are appealed to for sup-
port, the possibilities of the present are not per-
ceived, and its constructive potentialities remain
unutilized.

In reading many of the literary appreciations
of science, one would gather that until the rise of
modern science, men had not been aware that liv-
ing in nature entails death and renders fortune
precarious and uncertain; “science” is even
treated as if it were responsible for the revelation
of the fact that nature is often a foe of human
interests and goods. But the very nature of the
creeds that men have entertained in the past and
of the rites they have practiced is proof that men
were overwhelmingly conscious of this fact. If
they had not been, they would not have resorted


to magic, miracles, myth and the consolations —


and compensations of another world and life. As

long as these things were sincerely believed in,

dualism, anti-naturalism, had a meaning, for the
152


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


“other world” was then a reality. To surrender
the belief and retain the dualism is temporarily
possible for bewildered minds. It is a condition
which it is impossible to maintain permanently.
The alternative is to accept what science tells us
of the world in which we live and to resolve to use
the agencies it puts within our power to render
nature more amenable to human desire and more
contributory to human good. “Naturalism” is a
word with all kinds of meanings. But a natural-
ism which perceives that man with his habits, in-


stitutions, desires, thoughts, aspirations, ideals
and struggles, is within nature, an integral part
of it, has the philosophical foundation and the
practical inspiration for effort to employ nature
as an ally of human ideals and goods such as no
dualism can possibly provide.


There are those who welcome science provided
it remain “pure’’; they see that as a pursuit and
contemplated object it is an addition to the en-
joyed meaning of life. But they feel that its ap-
plications in mechanical inventions are the cause
of many of the troubles of modern society. Un-
doubtedly these applications have brought new
modes of unloveliness and suffering. I shall not

153


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


attempt the impossible task of trying to strike a
net balance of ills and enjJoyments between the
days before and after the practical use of science.
The significant point is that application is still
restricted. It touches our dealings with things
but not with one another. We use scientific
method in directing physical but not human
energies. Consideration of the full application of
science must accordingly be prophetic rather
than a record of what has already taken place.
Such prophecy is not however without founda-
tion. Even as things are there is a movement in
science which foreshadows, if its inherent prom-
ise be carried out, a more humane age. For it
looks forward to a time when all individuals may
share in the discoveries and thoughts of others,
to the liberation and enrichment of their own
experience.


No scientific inquirer can keep what he finds
to_himself or turn it to merely private account
without losing his scientific_standing. Every-
thing discovered belongs to the community of
workers, Every new idea and theory has to be
submitted to this community for confirmation
and test. There is an expanding community of

154


ye ee Ce ee ae ag Se


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


cooperative effort and of truth. It is true enough
that these traits are now limited to small groups
having a somewhat technical activity. But the ex-
istence of such groups reveals a possibility of the
present—one of the many possibilities that are a
challenge to expansion, and not a ground for re-
treat and contraction.

Suppose that what now happens in limited cir-
cles were extended and generalized. Would the
outcome be oppression or emancipation? Inquiry


is a challenge, not a passive conformity; applica-
tion is a means of growth, not of repression. The


general adoption of the scientific attitude in hu-
man affairs would mean nothing less than a revo-
lutionary change in morals, religion, politics and
industry. The fact that we have limited its use
so largely to technical matters is not a reproach
private ends and who strive to defeat its social
application for fear of destructive effects upon
their power and profit. A vision of a day in which
the natural sciences and the technologies that
flow from them are used as servants of a humane
life constitutes the imagination that is relevant
to our own time. A humanism that flees from
155


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


science as an enemy denies the means by which
a liberal humanism might become a reality.


The scientific attitude is experimental as well


as intrinsically communicative. If it were gen-
erally applied, it would liberate us from the


heavy burden imposed by dogmas and external
standards. Experimental method is something
other than the use of blow-pipes, retorts and re-
agents. It is the foe of every belief that permits
habit and wont to dominate invention and dis-
covery, and ready-made system to override veri-


fiable fact. Constant revision is the work of ex-
perimental inquiry. By revision of knowledge
and ideas, power to effect transformation is given


us., This attitude, once incarnated in the individ-
ual mind, would find an operative outlet. If dog-
mas and institutions tremble when a new idea
appears, this shiver is nothing to what would
happen if the idea were armed with the means
for the continuous discovery of new truth and
the criticism of old belief. To “acquiesce” in
science is dangerous only for those who would
maintain affairs in the existing social order un-
changed because of lazy habit or self-interest.
For the scientific attitude demands faithfulness
156


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


to_whatever is discovered and_ steadfastness in


adhering to new truth.

The “given” which science calls upon us to ac-
cept is not fixed; it is in process. A_chemist does
not study the elements in order to bow down be-
fore them; ability to produce transformations is
the outcome. It is said, and truly, that we are
now oppressed by the weight of science. But
why? Some allowance has to be made, of course,
for the time it takes to learn the uses of new
means and to appropriate their potentialities.
When these means are as radically new as is ex-
perimental science, the time required is corre-
spondingly long. But aside from this fact, the
multiplication of means and materials is an in
crease of opportunities and purposes. It marks
a release of individuality for affections and deeds
more congenial to its own nature. Even the de-
rided bathtub has its individual uses; an individ-
ual is not perforce degraded because he has the
chance to keep himself clean. The radio will
make for standardization and regimentation
only as long as individuals refuse to exercise the
selective reaction that is theirs. The enemy is not
ee Py ie lack of the il

157


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


use them as instruments for achieving preferred
possibilities. Imagine a society free from pecuni-


ary domination, and it becomes self-evident that
material commodities are invitations to individ-
ual taste and choice, and occasions for individual
growth. If human beings are not strong and
steadfast enough to accept the invitation and
take advantage of the proffered occasion, let us
put the blame where it belongs.

There is at least this much truth in economic
determinism. Industry is not outside of human
life, but within it. The genteel tradition shuts its
eyes to this fact; emotionally and intellectually
it pushes industry and its material phase out into
a region remote from human values. To stop with
mere emotional rejection and moral condemna-
tion of industry and trade as materialistic is to
leave them in this inhuman region where they
operate as the instruments of those who employ
them for private ends. Exclusion of this sort is
an accomplice of the forces that keep things in
the saddle. There is a subterranean partnership
between those who employ the existing economic
order for selfish pecuniary gain and those who
turn their backs upon it in the interest of per-

158


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


sonal complacency, private dignity, and_ irre-
sponsibility.

Every occupation leaves its impress on indi-
vidual character and modifies the outlook on life
of those who carry it on. No one questions this
fact as respects wage-earners tied to the machine,
or business men who devote themselves to pecuni-
ary manipulations. Callings may have their roots
in innate impulses of human nature but their
pursuit does not merely “express” these im-
pulses, leaving them unaltered; their pursuit
determines intellectual horizons, precipitates
knowledge and ideas, shapes desire and interest.
This influence operates in the case of those who
set up fine art, science, or religion as ends in
themselves, isolated from radiation and expan-
sion into other concerns (such radiation being
what “application” signifies) as much as in the
case of those who engage in industry. The alter-
natives are lack of application with consequent
narrowing and overspecialization, and applica-
tion with enlargement and increase of liberality.
The narrowing in the case of industry pursued
apart from social ends is evident to all thought-
ful persons. Intellectual and literary folks who

159


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


conceive themselves devoted to pursuit of pure
truth and uncontaminated beauty too readily
overlook the fact that a similar narrowing and
hardening takes place in them. Their goods are
more refined, but they are also engaged in acqui-
sition; unless they are concerned with use, with
expansive interactions, they too become monopo-


lists of capital. And the monopolization of spir-
itual capital may in the end be more harmful
than that of material capital.


The destructive effect _of science upon beliefs
long cherished_and values once prized _is, and


quite naturally so, a great cause of dread of
science and its applications in life. 'The law of in-


ertia holds of the ima ination and its loyalties as


truly as of physical things. I do not suppose that
it is possible to turn suddenly from these nega-


tive effects to possible positive and constructive
ones. But as long as we refuse to make an effort
to change the direction in which imagination
looks at the world, as long as we remain unwill-
ing to reéxamine old standards and values,
science will continue to wear its negative aspect.
Take_science (including its application to the
machine) for what it is, and we shall begin to


160


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY
envisage it as a potential creator of new values _


and ends. We shall have an intimation, on a wide
and generous scale, of the release, the increased
initiative, independence and inventiveness, which
_science now brings in its own specialized fields to
_ the individual scientist. It will be seen as a means

of originality and individual variation. Even to
_ those sciences which delight in calling themselves
“pure,” there is a significant lesson in the instinct
that leads us to speak of Newton’s and Kinstein’s
law.


Because the free workin ind_i
the greatest joys open to man, the scientific atti-


tude, incorporated in individual mind, is some-
thing which adds enormously to one’s ry oyment


of existence. The delights of thinking, of inquiry,


are not widely enjoyed at the present time. But
the few who experi ould hardly ex-


change them for other pleasures. Yet they are
now as restricted in quality as they are in the
‘number of those who share them. That is to say,
as long as “scientific” thinking confines itself to
technical fields, it lacks full scope and varied ma-
terial. Its subject-matter is technical in the de-
gree in which application in human life is shut
161


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


out. The mind that is hampered by fear lest
something old hing old and precious be destroye ed_is the
mind that experiences fear of science. He who
has this fear cannot find reward and peace in the
discovery of new truths and the projection of
new ideals. He does not walk the earth freely,
because he is obsessed by the need of protecting
some private possession of belief and taste. For
the love of private possessions is not confined to


material goods.
It is a property of science to find its oppor-
tunities in problems, in questions. Since knowing


is Inquiring, perplexities and difficulties are the
meat on which it thrives. The disparities and con-
flicts that give rise to problems are not some-
thing to be dreaded, something to be endured
with whatever hardihood one can command; they
are things to be grappled with. Each of us ex-
periences these difficulties in the sphere of his
personal relations, whether in his more immedi-
ate contacts or in the wider associations conven-
tionally called “society.” At present, personal
frictions are one of the chief causes of suffering.
I do not say all suffering would disappear with
the incorporation of scientific method into indi-
162


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


vidual disposition; but I do say that it is now im-
mensely increased by our disinclination to treat
these frictions as problems to be dealt with in-
tellectually. The distress that comes from being
driven in upon ourselves would be largely re-
lieved; it would in part be converted into the en-
joyment that attends the free working of mind,
if we took them as occasions for the exercise of
thought, as problems having an objective direc-
tion and outlet.


We all experience, as I have said, the perplexi-
ties that arise in the intimacies of personal inter-
course. The more remote relations of society also
present their troubles. There is much talk of “so-
cial problems.” But we rarely treat them as prob-
lems in the intellectual sense of that word. They
are thought of as “evils” needing correction; as
naughty or diabolic things to be “reformed.” Our
preoccupation with these ideas is proof of how
far we are from taking the scientific attitude. I
do not say that the attitude of the physician who
regards his patient as a “beautiful case” is wholly
ideal. But it is more wholesome and more prom,
ising than the persistence of the prescientific

163


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


habit of anxious concerns with evils and their
reform. The current way of treating criminality
and criminals is, for example, reminiscent of the
way in which diseases were once thought of and
dealt with. Their origin was once believed to be
moral and personal; some enemy, diabolic or
human, was thought to have injected some alien
substance or force into the person who was ailing.
The possibility of effective treatment began
when diseases were regarded as having an intrin-
sic origin in interactions of the organism and its
natural environment. We are only just begin-
ning to think of criminality as an equally intrin-
sic manifestation of interactions between an indi-
vidual and the social environment. With respect
to it, and with respect to so many other evils, we
persist in thinking and acting in prescientific
“moral” terms. This prescientific conception of
“evil” is probably the greatest barrier that exists
to that real reform which is identical with con-
structive remaking.

Because science starts with questions and in-
quiries it is fatal to all social system-making and
programs of fixed ends. In_spite of the bank-
ruptcy of past systems of belief, it is hard to sur-


164


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


render our faith in system and in some wholesale
belief. We continually reason as if the difficulty


were in the particular system that has failed and
as if we were on the point of now finally hitting
upon one that is true as all the others were false.
The real trouble is with the attitude of depend-
ence upon any of them. Scientific method would
teach us to break up, to inquire definitely and
with particularity, to seek solutions in the terms
of concrete problems as they arise. It is not easy
to imagine the difference which would follow
from the shift of thought to discrimination and
analysis. Wholesale _creeds_and_all - inclusive


ideals are im j e of actual situa-


tions ; for doing always means the doing of some:
thing in particular. They_are worse than impo-
tent. They conduce to blind and vague emotional
states in which credulity is at home, and where
action, following the lead of overpowering emo-
tion, is easily manipulated by the self-seekers
who have kept their heads and wits. Nothing
would conduce more, for example, to the elimi-
nation of war than the substitution of specifi
analysis of its causes for the wholesale love o
“liberty, humanity, justice and civilization.”
165


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


All of these considerations would lead to the


conclusion that depression of the individual is —


the individual’s own liability, were it not for the
time it takes for a new principle to make its way
deeply into individual mind on a large scale. But
as time goes on, the responsibility becomes an
individual one. For individuality is nexpugnable
and it is of its nature to assert itself. The first
move in recovery of an integrated individual is
accordingly with the individual himself. In what-
ever occupation he finds himself and whatever
interest concerns him, he is himself and no other,
and he lives in situations that are in some respect
flexible and plastic.

We are given to thinking of society in large
and vague ways. We should forget “society” and
think of law, industry, religion, medicine, poli-
tics, art, education, philosophy—and think of
them in the plural. For points of contact are not
the same for any two persons and hence the ques-
tions which the interests and occupations pose
are never twice the same. There is no contact so


——


immutable that it will not yield at some point.


All these callings and concerns are the avenues
through which the world acts upon us and we
166


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


upon the world. There is no society at large,
no business in general. Harmony with conditions
is not a single and monotonous uniformity, but a
diversified affair requiring individual attack.


Individuality is inexpugnable because _it is
a manner of distinctive sensitivity, selection,


_ choice, response and _ utilization of conditions.
For this reason, if for no other, it is impossible
to develop integrated individuality by any all-
embracing system or program. No individual can
make the determination for anyone else; nor can
he make it for himself all at once and forever.
A native manner of selection gives direction and
continuity, but definite expression is found in
changing occasions and varied forms. The selec-
tive choice and use of conditions have to be con-
tinually made and remade. Since we live in a
moving world and change with our interactions


in it, every act produces a new perspective that
demands a new exercise of preference. If, in the


long run, an individual remains lost, it is because
he has chosen irresponsibility; and if he remains
wholly depressed, it is because he has chosen the


course of easy parasitism.
Acquiescence, in the sense of drifting, is not


167


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


ye ae ey rs


something to be achieved; it is something to_be ;


overcome, something that is “natural” in the
sense of being easy. But it assumes a multitude
of forms, and Rotarian applause for present con-
ditions is only one of these forms. A different
form of submission consists in abandoning the
values of a new civilization for those of the past.
To assume the uniform of some dead culture is
only another means of regimentation. True inte-
gration is to be found in relevancy to the present,
in active response to conditions as they present
themselves, in the effort to make them over ac-
cording to some consciously chosen possibility.


Individuality is at first spontaneous and_up-
shaped; it is a potentiality, a capacity of develop-
ment. Even so, it is a unique manner of acting
in and with a world of objects and persons. It is
not something complete in itself, like a closet in a
house or a secret drawer in a desk, filled with
treasures that are waiting to be bestowed on the
world. Since individuality is a distinctive way of
feeling the impacts of the world and of showing
a preferential bias in response to these impacts,
it develops into shape and form only through
interaction with actual conditions; it is no more

168


‘ah


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


complete in itself than is a painter’s tube of paint
without relation to a canvas. The work of art is
the truly individual thing; and it is the result of
the interaction of paint and canvas through the
medium of the artist’s distinctive vision and
power. In its determination, the potential indi-
viduality of the artist takes on visible and endur-
ing form. The imposition of individuality as
something made in advance always gives evi-
dence of a mannerism, not of a manner. For the
latter is something original and creative; some-
thing formed in the very process of creation of
other things,


The future is always unpredictable. Ideals, in-


cluding that of a new and effective individuality,
must themselves be framed out of the possibilities
of existing conditions, even if these be the con-
ditions that constitute a corporate and industrial
age. The ideals take shape and gain a content
as they operate in remaking conditions. We may,


in order to have continuity of direction, plan a
program of action in anticipation of occasions as
they emerge. But a program of ends and ideals


if kept apart from sensitive and flexible method
169 nk


INDIVIDUALISM—OLD AND NEW


becomes an encumbrance. For its hard and rigid
character assumes a fixed world and a static in-
dividual; and neither of these things exists. Lt


implies that we can prophesy the future—an at-
tempt which terminates, as someone has said, ii in


rophesying th in its redu ion.

The same Emerson who said that “society is
everywhere in conspiracy against its members”
also said, and in the same essay, “accept the place
the divine Providence has found for you, the so-
ciety of your contemporaries, the connection of
events.” Now, when events are taken in discon-
nection and considered apart from the interac-
tions due to the selecting individual, they con-
spire against individuality. So does society when
it is accepted as something already fixed in in-
stitutions. But “the connection of events,’ and
“the society of your contemporaries” as formed
of moving and multiple associations, are the only
means by which the possibilities of individuality
can be realized.


Psychiatrists have shown how many disrup-
tions and dissipations of the individual are due tc
his withdrawal from reality into a merely inner


world. There are, however, many subtle forms of
; 170


INDIVIDUALITY IN OUR DAY


retreat, some of which are erected into systems
of philosophy and are glorifi -


ture. “It is in vain,” said Emerson, “that we look
for genius to reiterate its miracles in the old arts;
it is its instinct to find beauty and holiness in
new and necessary facts, in the field and road-
side, in the shop and mill.” To gain an integrated
individuality, each of us needs to cultivate his
own garden. But there is no fence about this gar-
den: it is no sharply marked-off enclosure. Our
garden is the world, in the angle at which it
touches our own manner of being. By accepting
the corporate and industrial world in which we
live, and by thus fulfilling the precondition for
interaction with it, we, who are also parts of the|


moving present, create ourselves as we create es


unknown future.


171
THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMONT, ‘CALIF.


A3/]


2d11


IM Dewey, John, 1859-1952.


36 Individualism, old and new, by John Dewey. New Y
yy Minton, Balch & company, 1930.


5p.1,9-171p. 20¢me


1. Individualism. 2. U. S—Soe. condit. 38. U. S.—Civilizatio
I, Title,


HM136.D4 [917.38] 323.4 30—2
ccst/sk
Library of Congress (52t22,


ees
wp ane Rabecatoh teed bere

ne Serr ekerte ran bene Ge

oie een Sle ntas 5


wa <ceny nea


eas Esk


cnoaiteats
