The Child and the Curriculum (John Dewey, 1902)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/childcurriculum00dewe_0). Dewey's classic reconciliation of the child and the curriculum in progressive education.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

The  price  of  this  book  (HspeM^mc

GArRilT^F-)  IS  $ _ _  .  ORDERS

LEFT  WITH  “ORDER  CLERK"  WILL  BE  GIVEN
PROMPT  ATTENTION  AND  THE  BOOK  WILL

BE  FORWARDED  AT  THE  CLOSE  OF  THE
CONVENTION.


Contributions  to  Education

Number  V


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO

FOUNDED  BY  JOHN  D.  ROCKEFELLER


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  EDUCATION

Number  V


The  Child
AND  THE  Curriculum


BY

JOHN  DEWEY


SOMETIME  PROFESSOR  AND  HEAD  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  PHILOSOPHY
AND  DIRECTOR  OF  THE  SCHOOL  OF  EDUCATION  IN
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO
PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  IN  COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY


CHICAGO

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  PRESS

1909


LIBRARY  Cr  THE

STUDENT  VOL'JHTLER  MOVEMENT  FOR  FORETN  mZZlO'iS-
COO  Lexington  Avenue,  New  Vobx  City.


Copyright  1902  By
The  University  of  Chicago


Published  September  1902
Second  Impression  February  1905
Third  Impression  July  1906
Fourth  Impression  January  1908
Fifth  Impression  September  1909


Composed  and  Printed  By
The  University  of  Chicago  Press
Chicago,  Illinois,  U.  S.  A.


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


I

-  s


f;<fC  <

I  •:

-  V


Digitized  by  the  internet  Archive
in  2019  with  funding  from
Columbia  University  Libraries


https://archive.org/details/childcurriculumOOdewe_0


THE  CHILD  AND  THE  CUR¬
RICULUM.


Profound  differences  in  theory  are  never
gratuitous  or  invented.  They  grow  out  of  con¬
flicting  elements  in  a  genuine  problem  —  a
problem  which  is  genuine  just  because  the
elements,  taken  as  they  stand,  are  conflicting.
Any  significant  problem  involves  conditions
that  for  the  moment  contradict  each  other.
Solution  comes  only  by  getting  away  from  the
meaning  of  terms  that  is  already  fixed  upon
and  coming  to  see  the  conditions  from  another
point  of  view,  and  hence  in  a  fresh  light.  But
this  reconstruction  means  travail  of  thought.
Easier  than  thinking  with  surrender  of  already
formed  ideas  and  detachment  from  facts  al¬
ready  learned,  is  just  to  stick  by  what  is  already
said,  looking  about  for  something  with  which
to  buttress  it  against  attack.

Thus  sects  arise  ;  schools  of  opinion.  Each
selects  that  set  of  conditions  that  appeal  to  it ;
and  then  erects  them  into  a  complete  and  inde¬
pendent  truth,  instead  of  treating  them  as  a
factor  in  a  problem,  needing  adjustment.

The  fundamental  factors  in  the  educative


7


8


The  Child  and  the  Curficulum


process  are  an  immature,  undeveloped  being  ;
and  certain  social  aims,  meanings,  values  incar¬
nate  in  the  matured  experience  of  the  adult.
The  educative  process  is  the  due  interaction
of  these  forces.  Such  a  conception  of  each
in  relation  to  the  other  as  facilitates  completest
and  freest  interaction  is  the  essence  of  educa¬
tional  theory.

But  here  comes  the  effort  of  thought.  It  is
easier  to  see  the  conditions  in  their  separate¬
ness,  to  insist  upon  one  at  the  expense  of
the  other,  to  make  antagonists  of  them,  than
to  discover  a  reality  to  which  each  belongs.
The  easy  thing  is  to  seize  upon  something  in
the  nature  of  the  child,  or  upon  something  in
the  developed  consciousness  of  the  adult,  and
insist  upon  that  as  the  key  to  the  whole  prob¬
lem.  When  this  happens  a  really  serious  prac¬
tical  problem  —  that  of  interaction — is  trans¬
formed  into  an  unreal,  and  hence  insoluble,
theoretic  problem.  Instead  of  seeing  the  edu¬
cative  steadily  and  as  a  whole,  we  see  conflict¬
ing  terms.  We  get  the  case  of  the  child  vs.
the  curriculum  ;  of  the  individual  nature  vs.
social  culture.  Below  all  other  divisions  in
pedagogic  opinion  lies  this  opposition.

The  child  lives  in  a  somewhat  narrow  world
of  personal  contacts.  Things  hardly  come
within  his  experience  unless  they  touch,  inti-


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


9


mately  and  obviously,  his  own  well-being,  or
that  of  his  family  and  friends.  His  world  is  a
world  of  persons  with  their  personal  interests,
rather  than  a  realm  of  facts  and  laws.  Not
truth,  in  the  sense  of  conformity  to  external  fact,
but  affection  and  sympathy,  is  its  keynote.  As
against  this,  the  course  of  study  met  in  the
school  presents  material  stretching  back  indefi¬
nitely  in  time,  and  extending  outward  indefi¬
nitely  into  space.  The  child  is  taken  out  of  his
familiar  physical  environment,  hardly  more  than
a  square  mile  or  so  in  area,  into  the  wide  world
—  yes,  and  even  to  the  bounds  of  the  solar
system.  His  little  span  of  personal  memory
and  tradition  is  overlaid  with  the  long  centuries
of  the  history  of  all  peoples.

Again,  the  child’s  life  is  an  integral,  a  total
one.  He  passes  quickly  and  readily  from  one
topic  to  another,  as  from  one  spot  to  another,
but  is  not  conscious  of  transition  or  break.
There  is  no  conscious  isolation,  hardly  con¬
scious  distinction.  The  things  that  occupy
him  are  held  together  by  the  unity  of  the  per¬
sonal  and  social  interests  which  his  life  carries
along.  Whatever  is  uppermost  in  his  mind
constitutes  to  him,  for  the  time  being,  the
whole  universe.  That  universe  is  fluid  and
fluent ;  its  contents  dissolve  and  re-form  with
amazing  rapidity.  But,  after  all,  it  is  the  child’s


lO


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


own  world.  It  has  the  unity  and  complete¬
ness  of  his  own  life.  He  goes  to  school,  and
various  studies  divide  and  fractionize  the  world
for  him.  Geography  selects,  it  abstracts  and
analyzes  one  set  of  facts,  and  from  one  particu¬
lar  point  of  view.  Arithmetic  is  anotiier  divi¬
sion,  grammar  another  department,  and  so  on
indefinitely.

Again,  in  school  each  of  these  subjects  is
classified.  Facts  are  torn  away  from  their
original  place  in  experience  and  rearranged
with  reference  to  some  general  principle.  Clas¬
sification  is  not  a  matter  of  child  experience ;
things  do  not  come  to  the  individual  pigeon¬
holed.  The  vital  ties  of  affection,  the  connect-
ing  bonds  of  activity,  hold  together  the  variety
of  his  personal  experiences.  The  adult  mind
is  so  familiar  with  the  notion  'of  logically
ordered  facts  that  it  does  not  recognize  —  it
cannot  realize — the  amount  of  separating  and
reformulating  which  the  facts  of  direct  experi¬
ence  have  to  undergo  before  they  can  appear
as  a  “study,”  or  branch  of  learning.  A  prin¬
ciple,  for  the  intellect,  has  had  to  be  dis¬
tinguished  and  defined  ;  facts  have  had  to
be  interpreted  in  relation  to  this  principle,
not  as  they  are  in  themselves.  They  have
had  to  be  regathered  about  a  new  center
which  is  wholly  abstract  and  ideal.  All  this


The  Child  and  the  Cufficttinm


1 1


means  a  development  of  a  special  intellectual
interest.  It  means  ability  to  view  facts  impar¬
tially  and  objectively;  that  is,  without  refer¬
ence  to  their  place  and  meaning  in  one’s  own
experience.  It  means  capacity  to  analyze  and
to  synthesize.  It  means  highly  matured  intel¬
lectual  habits  and  the  command  of  a  definite
technique  and  apparatus  of  scientific  inquiry.
The  studies  as  classified  are  the  product,  in  a
word,  of  the  science  of  the  ages,  not  of  the
experience  of  the  child.

These  apparent  deviations  and  differences
between  child  and  curriculum  might  be  almost
indefinitely  widened.  But  we  have  here  suffi¬
ciently  fundamental  divergences :  first,  the
narrow  but  personal  world  of  the  child  against
the  impersonal  but  infinitely  extended  world
of  space  and  time;  second,  the  unity,  the
single  whole-heartedness  of  the  child’s  life,
and  the  specializations  and  divisions  of  the
curriculum ;  third,  an  abstract  principle  of
logical  classification  and  arrangement,  and  the
practical  and  emotional  bonds  of  child  life.

From  these  elements  of  conflict  grow  up
different  educational  sects.  One  school  fixes
its  attention  upon  the  importance  of  the  sub¬
ject-matter  of  the  curriculum  as  compared
with  the  contents  of  the  child’s  own  expe¬
rience.  It  is  as  if  they  said  :  Is  life  petty,


12


The  Child  and  the  Curriculnm


narrow,  and  crude  ?  Then  studies  reveal  the
great,  wide  universe  with  all  its  fulness  and
complexity  of  meaning.  Is  the  life  of  the
child  egoistic,  self-centered,  impulsive?  Then
in  these  studies  is  found  an  objective  universe
of  truth,  law,  and  order.  Is  his  experience
confused,  vague,  uncertain,  at  the  mercy  of  the
moment’s  caprice  and  circumstance  ?  Then
studies  introduce  a  world  arranged  on  the
basis  of  eternal  and  general  truth ;  a  world
where  all  is  measured  and  defined.  Hence
the  moral :  ignore  and  minimize  the  child’s
individual  peculiarities,  whims,  and  experi¬
ences.  They  are  what  we  need  to  get  away
from.  They  are  to  be  obscured  or  eliminated.
As  educators  our  work  is  precisely  to  substi¬
tute  for  these  superficial  and  casual  affairs
stable  and  well-ordered  realities ;  and  these
are  found  in  studies  and  lessons.

Subdivide  each  topic  into  studies ;  each
study  into  lessons ;  each  lesson  into  specific
facts  and  formulae.  Let  the  child  proceed
step  by  step  to  master  each  one  of  these  sepa¬
rate  parts,  and  at  last  he  will  have  covered
the  entire  ground.  The  road  which  looks  so
long  when  viewed  in  its  entirety,  is  easily
traveled,  considered  as  a  series  of  particular
steps.  Thus  emphasis  is  put  upon  the  logical
subdivisions  and  consecutions  of  the  subject-


The  Child  and  the  Currictilum


13


matter.  Problems  of  instruction  are  problems
of  procuring  texts  giving  logical  parts  and
sequences,  and  of  presenting  these  portions  in
class  in  a  similar  definite  and  graded  way.
Subject-matter  furnishes  the  end,  and  it  deter¬
mines  method.  The  child  is  simply  the  imma¬
ture  being  who  is  to  be  matured  ;  he  is  the
superficial  being  who  is  to  be  deepened;  his  is
narrow  experience  which  is  to  be  widened.  It
is  his  to  receive,  to  accept.  His  part  is  ful¬
filled  when  he  is  ductile  and  docile.

Not  so,  says  the  other  sect.  The  child  is  the
starting-point,  the  center,  and  the  end.  His
development,  his  growth,  is  the  ideal.  It  alone
furnishes  the  standard.  To  the  growth  of  the
child  all  studies  are  subservient ;  they  are  in¬
struments  valued  as  they  serve  the  needs  of
growth.  Personality,  character,  is  more  than
subject-matter.  Not  knowledge  or  informa¬
tion,  but  self-realization,  is  the  goal.  To  pos¬
sess  all  the  world  of  knowledge  and  lose  one’s
own  self  is  as  awful  a  fate  in  education  as
in  religion.  Moreover,  subject-matter  never
can  be  got  into  the  child  from  without.
Learning  is  active.  It  involves  reaching  out
of  the  mind.  It  involves  organic  assimilation
starting  from  within.  Literally,  we  must  take
our  stand  with  the  child  and  our  departure  from
him.  It  is  he  and  not  the  subject-matter  which


14


The  Child  and  the  Cnrficulnm


determines  both  quality  and  quantity  of  learn¬
ing.

The  only  significant  method  is  the  method
of  the  mind  as  it  reaches  out  and  assimilates.
Subject-matter  is  but  spiritual  food,  possible
nutritive  material.  It  cannot  digest  itself;  it
cannot  of  its  own  accord  turn  into  bone  and
muscle  and  blood.  The  source  of  whatever  is
dead,  mechanical,  and  formal  in  schools  is
found  precisely  in  the  subordination  of  the  life
and  experience  of  the  child  to  the  curriculum.
It  is  because  of  this  that  “study”  has  become
a  synonym  for  what  is  irksome,  and  a  lesson
identical  with  a  task.

This  fundamental  opposition  of  child  and
curriculum  set  up  by  these  two  modes  of  doc¬
trine  can  be  duplicated  in  a  series  of  other
terms.  “  Discipline  ”  is  the  watchword  of  those
who  magnify  the  course  of  study;  “interest”
that  of  those  who  blazon  “The  Child”  upon
their  banner.  The  standpoint  of  the  former  is
logical ;  that  of  the  latter  psychological.  The
first  emphasizes  the  necessity  of  adequate  train¬
ing  and  scholarship  on  the  part  of  the  teacher ;
the  latter  that  of  need  of  sympathy  with  the
child,  and  knowledge  of  his  natural  instincts.
“  Guidance  and  control  ”  are  the  catchwords  of
one  school;  “freedom  and  initiative”  of  the
other.  Law  is  asserted  here  ;  spontaneity  pro-


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


15


claimed  there.  The  old,  the  conservation  of
what  has  been  achieved  in  the  pain  and  toil  of
the  ages,  is  dear  to  the  one ;  the  new,  change,
progress,  wins  the  affection  of  the  other.  In¬
ertness  and  routine,  chaos  and  anarchism,  are
accusations  bandied  back  and  forth.  Neglect
of  the  sacred  authority  of  duty  is  charged  by
one  side,  only  to  be  met  by  counter-charges  of
suppression  of  individuality  through  tyrannical
despotism.

Such  oppositions  are  rarely  carried  to  their
logical  conclusion.  Common-sense  recoils  at
the  extreme  character  of  these  results.  They
are  left  to  theorists,  while  common-sense
vibrates  back  and  forward  in  a  maze  of  incon¬
sistent  compromise.  The  need  of  getting
theory  and  practical  common-sense  into  closer
connection  suggests  a  return  to  our  original
thesis  :  that  we  have  here  conditions  which  are
necessarily  related  to  each  other  in  the  educa¬
tive  process,  since  this  is  precisely  one  of
interaction  and  adjustment.

What,  then,  is  the  problem  ?  It  is  just  to
get  rid  of  the  prejudicial  notion  that  there  is
some  gap  in  kind  (as  distinct  from  degree)
between  the  child’s  experience  and  the  various
forms  of  subject-matter  that  make  up  the  course
of  study.  From  the  side  of  the  child,  it  is  a
question  of  seeing  how  his  experience  already


i6


The  Child  and  the  Curficttlum


contains  within  itself  elements  —  facts  and
truths  —  of  just  the  same  sort  as  those  entering
into  the  formulated  study;  and,  what  is  of
more  importance,  of  how  it  contains  within
itself  the  attitudes,  the  motives,  and  the  inter¬
ests  which  have  operated  in  developing  and
organizing  the  subject-matter  to  the  plane
which  it  now  occupies.  From  the  side  of  the
studies,  it  is  a  question  of  interpreting  them  as
outgrowths  of  forces  operating  in  the  child’s
life,  and  of  discovering  the  steps  that  inter¬
vene  between  the  child’s  present  experience
and  their  richer  maturity.

Abandon  the  notion  of  subject-matter  as
something  fixed  and  ready-made  in  itself,  out¬
side  the  child’s  experience ;  cease  thinking  of
the  child’s  experience  as  also  something  hard
and  fast ;  see  it  as  something  fluent,  embry¬
onic,  vital ;  and  we  realize  that  the  child  and
the  curriculum  are  simpl)^  two  limits  which
define  a  single  process.  Just  as  two  points
define  a  straight  line,  so  the  present  stand¬
point  of  the  child  and  the  facts  and  truths  of
studies  define  instruction.  It  is  continuous
reconstruction,  moving  from  the  child’s  pres¬
ent  experience  out  into  that  represented  by
the  organized  bodies  of  truth  that  we  call
studies.

On  the  face  of  it,  the  various  studies,  arith-


The  Child  and  the  Cufficulum


17


metic,  geography,  language,  botany,  etc.,  are
themselves  experience — they  are  that  of  the
race.  They  embody  the  cumulative  outcome
of  the  efforts,  the  strivings,  and  successes  of
the  human  race  generation  after  generation.
They  present  this,  not  as  a  mere  accumulation,
not  as  a  miscellaneous  heap  of  separate  bits  of
experience,  but  in  some  organized  and  sys¬
tematized  way  —  that  is,  as  reflectively  formu¬
lated.

Hence,  the  facts  and  truths  that  enter  into
the  child’s  present  experience,  and  those  con¬
tained  in  the  subject-matter  of  studies,  are
the  initial  and  final  terms  of  one  reality.  To
oppose  one  to  the  other  is  to  oppose  the  in¬
fancy  and  maturity  of  the  same  growing  life  ;
it  is  to  set  the  moving  tendency  and  the  final
result  of  the  same  process  over  against  each
other  ;  it  is  to  hold  that  the  nature  and  the
destiny  of  the  child  war  with  each  other.

If  such  be  the  case,  the  problem  of  the  rela¬
tion  of  the  child  and  the  curriculum  presents
itself  in  this  guise  :  Of  what  use,  education¬
ally  speaking,  is  it  to  be  able  to  see  the  end  in
the  beginning  ?  How  does  it  assist  us  in
dealing  with  the  early  stages  of  growth  to  be
able  to  anticipate  its  later  phases  ?  The  studies,
as  we  have  agreed,  represent  the  possibilities
of  development  inherent  in  the  child’s  immedi-


i8


The  Child  and  the  Corricultim


ate  crude  experience.  But,  after  all,  they  are
not  parts  of  that  present  and  immediate  life.
Why,  then,  or  how,  make  account  of  them  ?

Asking  such  a  question  suggests  its  own
answer.  To  see  the  outcome  is  to  know  in
what  direction  the  present  experience  is  mov¬
ing,  provided  it  move  normally  and  soundly.
The  far-away  point,  which  is  of  no  significance
to  us  simply  as  far  away,  becomes  of  huge
importance  the  moment  we  take  it  as  defining
a  present  direction  of  movement.  Taken  in
this  way  it  is  no  remote  and  distant  result  to
be  achieved,  but  a  guiding  method  in  dealing
with  the  present.  The  systematized  and  de¬
fined  experience  of  the  adult  mind,  in  other
words,  is  of  value  to  us  in  interpreting  the
child’s  life  as  it  immediately  shows  itself,  and
in  passing  on  to  guidance  or  direction.

Let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  these  two
ideas  :  interpretation  and  guidance.  The
child’s  present  experience  is  in  no  way  self-
explanatory.  It  is  not  final,  but  transitional.
It  is  nothing  complete  in  itself,  but  just  a  sign
or  index  of  certain  growth-tendencies.  As
long  as  we  confine  our  gaze  to  what  the  child
here  and  now  puts  forth,  we  are  confused  and
misled.  We  cannot  read  its  meaning.  Ex¬
treme  depreciations  of  the  child  morally  and
intellectually,  and  sentimental  idealizations  of


The  Child  and  the  Curficnlum


19


him,  have  their  root  in  a  common  fallacy.
Both  spring  from  taking  stages  of  a  growth
or  movement  as  something  cut  off  and  fixed.
The  first  fails  to  see  the  promise  contained  in
feelings  and  deeds  which,  taken  by  them¬
selves,  are  unpromising  and  repellant  ;  the
second  fails  to  see  that  even  the  most  pleas¬
ing  and  beautiful  exhibitions  are  but  signs,
and  that  they  begin  to  spoil  and  rot  the
moment  they  are  treated  as  achievements.

What  we  need  is  something  which  will  en¬
able  us  to  interpret,  to  appraise,  the  elements  in
the  child's  present  puttings  forth  and  fallings
away,  his  exhibitions  of  power  and  weakness,
in  the  light  of  some  larger  growth-process  in
which  they  have  their  place.  Only  in  this  way
can  we  discriminate.  If  we  isolate  the  child’s
present  inclinations,  purposes,  and  experiences
from  the  place  they  occupy  and  the  part  they
have  to  perform  in  a  developing  experience,
all  stand  upon  the  same  level ;  all  alike  are
equally  good  and  equally  bad.  But  in  the
movement  of  life  different  elements  stand  upon
different  planes  of  value.  Some  of  the  child’s
deeds  are  symptoms  of  a  waning  tendency;
they  are  survivals  in  functioning  of  an  organ
which  has  done  its  part  and  is  passing  out  of
vital  use.  To  give  positive  attention  to  such
qualities  is  to  arrest  development  upon  a  lower


20


The  Child  and  the  Cufficulnm


level.  It  is  systematically  to  maintain  a  rudi¬
mentary  phase  of  growth.  Other  activities  are
signs  of  a  culminating  power  and  interest ;  to
them  applies  the  maxim  of  striking  while  the
iron  is  hot.  As  regards  them,  it  is  perhaps
a  matter  of  now  or  never.  Selected,  utilized,
emphasized,  they  may  mark  a  turning-point  for
good  in  the  child’s  whole  career  ;  neglected,  an
opportunity  goes,  never  to  be  recalled.  Other
acts  and  feelings  are  prophetic  ;  they  represent
the  dawning  of  flickering  light  that  will  shine
steadily  only  in  the  far  future.  As  regards
them  there  is  little  at  present  to  do  but  give
them  fair  and  full  chance,  waiting  for  the  fu¬
ture  for  definite  direction.

Just  as,  upon  the  whole,  it  was  the  weakness
of  the  “old  education”  that  it  made  invidious
comparisons  between  the  immaturity  of  the
child  and  the  maturity  of  the  adult,  regarding
the  former  as  something  to  be  got  away  from
as  soon  as  possible  and  as  much  as  possible ;
so  it  is  the  danger  of  the  “new  education”
that  it  regard  the  child’s  present  powers  and
interests  as  something  finally  significant  in
themselves.  In  truth,  his  learnings  and  achieve¬
ments  are  fluid  and  moving.  They  change
from  day  to  day  and  from  hour  to  hour.

It  will  do  harm  if  child-study  leave  in  the
popular  mind  the  impression  that  a  child  of  a


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


2  I


given  age  has  a  positive  equipment  of  purposes
and  interests  to  be  cultivated  just  as  they  stand.
Interests  in  reality  are  but  attitudes  toward  pos¬
sible  experiences ;  they  are  not  achievements  ;
their  worth  is  in  the  leverage  they  afford,  not
in  the  accomplishment  they  represent.  To
take  the  phenomena  presented  at  a  given  age
as  in  any  way  self-explanatory  or  self-con¬
tained  is  inevitably  to  result  in  indulgence
and  spoiling.  Any  power,  whether  of  child  or
adult,  is  indulged  when  it  is  taken  on  its  given
and  present  level  in  consciousness.  Its  genu¬
ine  meaning  is  in  the  propulsion  it  affords
toward  a  higher  level.  It  is  just  something  to
do  with.  Appealing  to  the  interest  upon  the
present  plane  means  excitation  ;  it  means  play¬
ing  with  a  power  so  as  continually  to  stir  it  up
without  directing  it  toward  definite  achieve¬
ment.  Continuous  initiation,  continuous  start¬
ing  of  activities  that  do  not  arrive,  is,  for  all
practical  purposes,  as  bad  as  the  continual  re¬
pression  of  initiative  in  conformity  with  sup¬
posed  interests  of  some  more  perfect  thought
or  will.  It  is  as  if  the  child  were  forever  tast¬
ing  and  never  eating ;  always  having  his  palate
tickled  upon  the  emotional  side,  but  never
getting  the  organic  satisfaction  that  comes
only  with  digestion  of  food  and  transforma¬
tion  of  it  into  working  power.


22


The  Child  and  the  Cufficultim


As  against  such  a  view,  the  subject-matter
of  science  and  history  and  art  serves  to  reveal
the  real  child  to  us.  We  do  not  know  the
meaning  either  of  his  tendencies  or  of  his  per¬
formances  excepting  as  we  take  them  as  ger¬
minating  seed,  or  opening  bud,  of  some  fruit
to  be  borne.  The  whole  world  of  visual
nature  is  all  too  small  an  answer  to  the  problem
of  the  meaning  of  the  child’s  instinct  for  light
and  form.  The  entire  science  of  physics  is
none  too  much  to  interpret  adequately  to  us
what  is  involved  in  some  simple  demand  of  the
child  for  explanation  of  some  casual  change
that  has  attracted  his  attention.  The  art  of
Rafael  or  of  Corot  is  none  too  much  to  enable
us  to  value  the  impulses  stirring  in  the  child
when  he  draws  and  daubs.

So  much  for  the  use  of  the  subject-matter  in
interpretation.  Its  further  employment  in
direction  or  guidance  is  but  an  expansion  of
the  same  thought.  To  interpret  the  fact  is  to
see  it  in  its  vital  movement,  to  see  it  in  its  re¬
lation  to  growth.  But  to  view  it  as  a  part  of
a  normal  growth  is  to  secure  the  basis  for
guiding  it.  Guidance  is  not  external  imposi¬
tion.  It  is  freeing  the  life-process  for  its  own  most
adequate  fulfilmeiit.  What  was  said  about
disregard  of  the  child’s  present  experience  be¬
cause  of  its  remoteness  from  mature  experi-


The  Child  and  the  Cufriculum


23


ence  ;  and  of  the  sentimental  idealization  of
the  child’s  naive  caprices  and  performances,
may  be  repeated  here  with  slightly  altered
phrase.  There  are  those  who  see  no  alterna¬
tive  between  forcing  the  child  from  without,  or
leaving  him  entirely  alone.  Seeing  no  alter¬
native,  some  choose  one  mode,  some  another.
Both  fall  into  the  same  fundamental  error.
Both  fail  to  see  that  development  is  a  definite
process,  having  its  own  law  which  can  be  ful¬
filled  only  when  adequate  and  normal  condi¬
tions  are  provided.  Really  to  interpret  the
child’s  present  crude  impulses  in  counting,
measuring,  and  arranging  things  in  rhythmic
series,  involves  mathematical  scholarship  —
a  knowledge  of  the  mathematical  formulae  and
relations  which  have,  in  the  history  of  the  race,
grown  out  of  just  such  crude  beginnings.  To
see  the  whole  history  of  development  which
intervenes  between  these  two  terms  is  simply
to  see  what  step  the  child  needs  to  take  just
here  and  now  ;  to  what  use  he  needs  to  put  his
blind  impulse  in  order  that  it  may  get  clarity
and  gain  force.

If,  once  more,  the  “  old  education  ”  tended
to  ignore  the  dynamic  quality,  the  developing
force  inherent  in  the  child’s  present  experi¬
ence,  and  therefore  to  assume  that  direction
and  control  were  just  matters  of  arbitrarily


24


The  Child  and  the  Cufficttltim


putting  the  child  in  a  given  path  and  compel¬
ling  him  to  walk  there,  the  “  new  education”
is  in  danger  of  taking  the  idea  of  development
in  altogether  too  formal  and  empty  a  way.
The  child  is  expected  to  “develop”  this  or
that  fact  or  truth  out  of  his  own  mind.  He  is
told  to  think. things  out,  or  work  things  out
for  himself,  without  being  supplied  any  of
the  environing  conditions  which  are  requisite
to  start  and  guide  thought.  Nothing  can  be
developed  from  nothing ;  nothing  but  the
crude  can  be  developed  out  of  the  crude  —
and  this  is  what  surely  happens  when  we  throw
the  child  back  upon  his  achieved  self  as  a
finality,  and  invite  him  to  spin  new  truths  of
nature  or  of  conduct  out  of  that.  It  is  cer¬
tainly  as  futile  to  expect  a  child  to  evolve  a
universe  out  of  his  own  mere  mind  as  it  is  for
a  philosopher  to  attempt  that  task.  Develop¬
ment  does  not  mean  just  getting  something
out  of  the  mind.  It  is  a  development  of  ex¬
perience  and  into  experience  that  is  really
wanted.  And  this  is  impossible  save  as  just
that  educative  medium  is  provided  which  will
enable  the  powers  and  interests  that  have  been
selected  as  valuable  to  function.  They  must
operate,  and  how  they  operate  will  depend
almost  entirely  upon  the  stimuli  which  sur¬
round  them,  and  the  material  upon  which  they


The  Child  and  the  Curricultim


25


exercise  themselves.  The  problem  of  direction
is  thus  the  problem  of  selecting  appropriate
stimuli  for  instincts  and  impulses  which  it  is
desired  to  employ  in  the  gaining  of  new  expe¬
rience.  What  new  experiences  are  desirable,
and  thus  what  stimuli  are  needed,  it  is  impossi¬
ble  to  tell  except  as  there  is  some  comprehen¬
sion  of  the  development  which  is  aimed  at  ;
except,  in  a  word,  as  the  adult  knowledge  is
drawn  upon  as  revealing  the  possible  career
open  to  the  child.

It  may  be  of  use  to  distinguish  and  to  relate
to  each  other  the  logical  and  the  psychological
aspects  of  experience — the  former  standing
for  subject-matter  in  itself,  the  latter  for  it  in
relation  to  the  child.  A  psychological  state¬
ment  of  experience  follows  its  actual  growth ;
it  is  historic  ;  it  notes  steps  actually  taken,  the
uncertain  and  tortuous,  as  well  as  the  efficient
and  successful.  The  logical  point  of  view,  on
the  other  hand,  assumes  that  the  development

I

has  reached  a  certain  positive  stage  of  fulfil¬
ment.  It  neglects  the  process  and  considers
the  outcome.  It  summarizes  and  arranges,
and  thus  separates  the  achieved  results  from
the  actual  steps  by  which  they  were  forthcom¬
ing  in  the  first  instance.  We  may  compare  the
difference  between  the  logical  and  the  psycho¬
logical  to  the  difference  between  the  notes


26


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


which  an  explorer  makes  in  a  new  country,
blazing  a  trail  and  finding  his  way  along  as
best  he  may,  and  the  finished  map  that  is  con¬
structed  after  the  country  has  been  thoroughly
explored.  The  two  are  mutually  dependent.
Without  the  more  or  less  accidental  and  devious
paths  traced  by  the  explorer  there  would  be
no  facts  which  could  be  utilized  in  the  making
of  the  complete  and  related  chart.  But  no
one  would  get  the  benefit  of  the  explorer’s
trip  if  it  was  not  compared  and  checked  up
with  similar  wanderings  undertaken  by  others;
unless  the  new  geographical  facts  learned,  the
streams  crossed,  the  mountains  climbed,  etc.,
were  viewed,  not  as  mere  incidents  in  the
journey  of  the  particular  traveler,  but  (quite
apart  from  the  individual  explorer’s  life)  in
relation  to  other  similar  facts  already  known.
The  map  orders  individual  experiences,  connect¬
ing  them  with  one  another  irrespective  of  the
local  and  temporal  circumstances  and  acci¬
dents  of  their  original  discovery.

Of  what  use  is  this  formulated  statement  of
experience?  Of  what  use  is  the  map?

Well,  we  may  first  tell  what  the  map  is  not.
The  map  is  not  a  substitute  for  a  personal
experience.  The  map  does  not  take  the  place  of
an  actual  journey.  The  logically  formulated
material  of  a  science  or  branch  of  learning,  of


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


27


a  study,  is  no  substitute  for  the  having  of
individual  experiences.  The  mathematical
formula  for  a  falling  body  does  not  take
the  place  of  personal  contact  and  immediate
individual  experience  with  the  falling  thing.
But  the  map,  a  summary,  an  arranged  and
orderly  view  of  previous  experiences,  serves
as  a  guide  to  future  experience ;  it  gives
direction ;  it  facilitates  control ;  ‘it  econo¬
mizes  effort,  preventing  useless  wandering,
and  pointing  out  the  paths  which  lead  most
quickly  and  most  certainly  to  a  desired
result.  Through  the  map  every  new  trav¬
eler  may  get  for  his  own  journey  the  bene¬
fits  of  the  results  of  others’  explorations  with¬
out  the  waste  of  energy  and  loss  of  time
involved  in  their  wanderings  —  wanderings
which  he  himself  would  be  obliged  to  repeat
were  it  not  for  just  the  assistance  of  the  objec¬
tive  and  generalized  record  of  their  perform¬
ances.  That  which  we  call  a  science  or  study
puts  the  net  product  of  past  experience  in  the
form  which  makes  it  most  available  for  the
future.  It  represents  a  capitalization  which
may  at  once  be  turned  to  interest.  It  econo¬
mizes  the  workings  of  the  mind  in  every  way.
Memory  is  less  taxed  because  the  facts  are
grouped  together  about  some  common  princi¬
ple,  instead  of  being  connected  solely  with  the


28


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


varying  incidents  of  their  original  discovery.
Observation  is  assisted ;  we  know  what  to  look
for  and  where  to  look.  It  is  the  difference
between  looking  for  a  needle  in  a  haystack,
and  searching  for  a  given  paper  in  a  well-
arranged  cabinet.  Reasoning  is  directed,
because  there  is  a  certain  general  path  or  line
laid  out  along  which  ideas  naturally  march,
instead  of  moving  from  one  chance  association
to  another.

There  is,  then,  nothing  final  about  a  logical
rendering  of  experience.  Its  value  is  not  con¬
tained  in  itself ;  its  significance  is  that  of
standpoint,  outlook,  method.  It  intervenes
between  thb  more  casual,  tentative,  and  round¬
about  experiences  of  the  past,  and  more  con¬
trolled  and  orderly  experiences  of  the  future.
It  gives  past  experience  in  that  net  form
which  renders  it  most  available  and  most  sig¬
nificant,  most  fecund  for  future  experience.
The  abstractions,  generalizations,  and  classifi¬
cations  which  it  introduces  all  have  prospective
meaning.

The  formulated  result  is  then  not  to  be  op¬
posed  to  the  process  of  growth.  The  logical
is  not  set  over  against  the  psychological.  The
surveyed  and  arranged  result  occupies  a  crit¬
ical  position  in  the  process  of  growth.  It
marks  a  turning-point.  It  shows  how  we  may


The  Child  and  the  Ctirrictilum


29


get  the  benefit  of  past  effort  in  controlling
future  endeavor.  In  the  largest  sense  the  log¬
ical  standpoint  is  itself  psychological ;  it  has
its  meaning  as  a  point  in  the  development  of
experience,  and  its  justification  is  in  its  func¬
tioning  in  the  future  growth  which  it  insures.

Hence  the  need  of  reinstating  into  experi¬
ence  the  subject-matter  of  the  studies,  or
branches  of  learning.  It  must  be  restored  to
the  experience  from  which  it  has  been  ab¬
stracted.  It  needs  to  be  psychologized ;  turned
over,  translated  into  the  immediate  and  indi¬
vidual  experiencing  within  which  it  has  its
origin  and  significance.

Every  study  or  subject  thus  has  two  as¬
pects  :  one  for  the  scientist  as  a  scientist;  the
other  for  the  teacher  as  a  teacher.  These  two
aspects  are  in  no  sense  opposed  or  conflicting.
But  neither  are  they  immediately  identical.
For  the  scientist,  the  subject-matter  represents
simply  a  given  body  of  truth  to  be  employed
in  locating  new  problems,  instituting  new  re¬
searches,  and  carrying  them  through  to  a  veri¬
fied  outcome.  To  him  the  subject-matter  or
the  science  is  self-contained.  He  refers  vari¬
ous  portions  of  it  to  each  other ;  he  connects
new  facts  with  it.  He  is  not,  as  a  scientist,
called  upon  to  travel  outside  its  particular
bounds  ;  if  he  does,  it  is  only  to  get  more  facts


30


The  Child  and  the  Cufficttlum


of  the  same  general  sort.  The  problem  of
the  teacher  is  a  different  one.  As  a  teacher
he  is  not  concerned  with  adding  new  facts  to
the  science  he  teaches ;  in  propounding  new
hypotheses  or  in  verifying  them.  He  is  con¬
cerned  with  the  subject-matter  of  the  science
as  representing  a  given  stage  and  phase  of  the  de¬
velopment  of  experience.  His  problem  is  that
of  inducing  a  vital  and  personal  experiencing.
Hence,  what  concerns  him,  as  teacher,  is  the
ways  in  which  that  subject  may  become  a  part
of  experience  ;  what  there  is  in  the  child’s
present  that  is  usable  with  reference  to  it;  how
such  elements  are  to  be  used  ;  how  his  own
knowledge  of  the  subject-matter  may  assist  in
interpreting  the  child’s  needs  and  doings,  and
determine  the  medium  in  which  the  child
should  be  placed  in  order  that  his  growth  may
be  properly  directed.  He  is  concerned,  not
with  the  subject-matter  as  such,  but  with  the
subject-matter  as  a  related  factor  in  a  total
and  growing  experience.  Thus  to  see  it  is  to
psychologize  it.

It  is  the  failure  to  keep  in  mind  the  double  as¬
pect  of  subject-matter  which  causes  the  curric¬
ulum  and  child  to  be  set  over  against  each  other
as  described  in  our  early  pages.  The  subject-
matter,  just  as  it  is  for  the  scientist,  has  no  direct
relationship  to  the  child’s  present  experience.


The  Child  and  the  Curricultim


31


It  stands  outside  of  it.  The  danger  here  is  not
a  merely  theoretical  one.  We  are  practically
threatened  on  all  sides.  Text-book  and  teacher
vie  with  each  other  in  presenting  to  the  child
the  subject-matter  as  it  stands  to  the  specialist.
Such  modification  and  revision  as  it  undergoes
are  a  mere  elimination  of  certain  scientific  diffi¬
culties,  and  the  general  reduction  to  a  lower
intellectual  level.  The  material  is  not  trans¬
lated  into  life-terms,  but  is  directly  offered  as
a  substitute  for,  or  an  external  annex  to,  the
child’s  present  life.

Three  typical  evils  result :  In  the  first  place,
the  lack  of  any  organic  connection  with  what
the  child  has  already  seen  and  felt  and  loved
makes  the  material  purely  formal  and  symbolic.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  impossible  to
value  too  highly  the  formal  and  the  symbolic.
The  genuine  form,  the  real  symbol,  serve  as
methods  in  the  holding  and  discovery  of  truth.
They  are  tools  by  which  the  individual  pushes
out  most  surely  and  widely  into  unexplored
areas.  They  are  means  by  which  he  brings
to  bear  whatever  of  reality  he  has  succeeded
in  gaining  in  past  searchings.  But  this  hap¬
pens  only  when  the  symbol  really  symbol¬
izes —  when  it  stands  for  and  sums  up  in  short¬
hand  actual  experiences  which  the  individual
has  already  gone  through.  A  symbol  which  is


32


The  Child  and  the  Curricultim


induced  from  without,  which  has  not  been  led
up  to  in  preliminary  activities,  is,  as  we  say,
a  bare  or  mere  symbol ;  it  is  dead  and  barren.
Now,  any  fact,  whether  of  arithmetic,  or  geog¬
raphy,  or  grammar,  which  is  not  led  up  to  and
into  out  of  something  which  has  previously
occupied  a  significant  position  in  the  child’s
life  for  its  own  sake,  is  forced  into  this  posi¬
tion.  It  is  not  a  reality,  but  just  the  sign  of  a
reality  which  might  be  experienced  if  certain
conditions  were  fulfilled.  But  the  abrupt  pres¬
entation  of  the  fact  as  something  known  by
others,  and  requiring  only  to  be  studied  and
learned  by  the  child,  rules  out  such  conditions  of
fulfilment.  It  condemns  the  fact  to  be  a  hiero¬
glyph  :  it  would  mean  something  if  one  only
had  the  key.  The  clue  being  lacking,  it  re¬
mains  an  idle  curiosity,  to  fret  and  obstruct  the
mind,  a  dead  weight  to  burden  it.

The  second  evil  in  this  external  presentation
is  lack  of  motivation.  There  are  not  only  no
facts  or  truths  which  have  been  previously  felt
as  such  with  which  to  appropriate  and  assimilate
the  new,  but  there  is  no  craving,  no  need,  no
demand.  When  the  subject-matter  has  been
psychologized,  that  is,  viewed  as  an  outgrowth
of  present  tendencies  and  activities,  it  is  easy
to  locate  in  the  present  some  obstacle,  intel¬
lectual,  practical,  or  ethical,  which  can  be


The  Child  and  the  Cufficulum


33


handled  more  adequately  if  the  truth  in  ques-
tion  be  mastered.  This  need  supplies  motive
for  the  learning.  An  end  which  is  the  child’s
own  carries  him  on  to  possess  the  means  of  its
accomplishment.  But  when  material  is  directly
supplied  in  the  form  of  a  lesson  to  be  learned
as  a  lesson,  the  connecting  links  of  need  and
aim  are  conspicuous  for  their  absence.  What
we  mean  by  the  mechanical  and  dead  in  instruc¬
tion  is  a  result  of  this  lack  of  motivation.
The  organic  and  vital  mean  interaction  —  they
mean  play  of  mental  demand  and  material
supply.

The  third  evil  is  that  even  the  most  scientific
matter,  arranged  in  most  logical  fashion,  loses
this  quality,  when  presented  in  external,  ready¬
made  fashion,  by  the  time  it  gets  to  the  child.
It  has  to  undergo  some  modification  in  order
to  shut  out  some  phases  too  hard  to  grasp,  and
to  reduce  some  of  the  attendant  difficulties.
What  happens  ?  Those  things  which  are  most
significant  to  the  scientific  man,  and  most
valuable  in  the  logic  of  actual  inquiry  and
classification,  drop  out.  The  really  thought-
provoking  character  is  obscured,  and  the
organizing  function  disappears.  Or,  as  we
commonly  say,  the  child’s  reasoning  powers,
the  faculty  of  abstraction  and  generalization,
are  not  adequately  developed.  So  the  subject-


34


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


matter  is  evacuated  of  its  logical  value,  and,
though  it  is  what  it  is  only  from  the  logical
standpoint,  is  presented  as  stuff  only  for
“  memory.”  This  is  the  contradiction  :  the  child
gets  the  advantage  neither  of  the  adult  logical
formulation,  nor  of  his  own  native  competencies
of  apprehension  and  response.  Hence  the
logic  of  the  child  is  hampered  and  mortified,
and  we  are  almost  fortunate  if  he  does  not  get
actual  non-science,  flat  and  commonplace
residua  of  what  was  gaining  scientific  vitality
a  generation  or  two  ago  —  degenerate  reminis¬
cence  of  what  someone  else  once  formulated
on  the  basis  of  the  experience  that  some  further
person  had,  once  upon  a  time,  experienced.

The  train  of  evils  does  not  cease.  It  is  all
too  common  for  opposed  erroneous  theories  to
play  straight  into  each  other’s  hands.  Psycho¬
logical  considerations  may  be  slurred  or  shoved
one  side ;  they  cannot  be  crowded  out.  Put
out  of  the  door,  they  come  back  through  the
window.  Somehow  and  somewhere  motive
must  be  appealed  to,  connection  must  be
established  between  the  mind  and  its  material.
There  is  no  question  of  getting  along  without
this  bond  of  connection ;  the  only  question  is
whether  it  be  such  as  grows  out  of  the  material
itself  in  relation  to  the  mind,  or  be  imported
and  hitched  on  from  some  outside  source.  If


The  Child  and  the  Ctifficulum


35


the  subject-matter  of  the  lessons  be  such  as  to
have  an  appropriate  place  within  the  expanding
consciousness  of  the  child,  if  it  grows  out  of
his  own  past  doings,  thinkings,  and  sufferings,
and  grows  into  application  in  further  achieve¬
ments  and  receptivities,  then  no  device  or  trick
of  method  has  to  be  resorted  to  in  order  to
enlist  “interest.”  The  psychologized  is  of
interest — that  is,  it  is  placed  in  the  whole  of
conscious  life  so  that  it  shares  the  worth  of
that  life.  But  the  externally  presented
material,  that,  conceived  and  generated  in
standpoints  and  attitudes  remote  from  the  child,
and  developed  in  motives  alien  to  him,  has  no
such  place  of  its  own.  Hence  the  recourse
to  adventitious  leverage  to  push  it  in,  to
factitious  drill  to  drive  it  in,  to  artificial  bribe
to  lure  it  in.

Three  aspects  of  this  recourse  to  outside
ways  for  giving  the  subject-matter  some  psy¬
chological  meaning  may  be  worth  mentioning.
Familiarity  breeds  contempt,  but  it  also  breeds
something  like  affection.  We  get  used  to  the
chains  we  wear,  and  we  miss  them  when
removed.  ’Tis  an  old  story  that  through
custom  we  finally  embrace  what  at  first  wore
a  hideous  mien.  Unpleasant,  because  mean¬
ingless,  activities  may  get  agreeable  if  long
enough  persisted  in.  It  is  possible  for  the  mind


36


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


to  develop  interest  m  a  routine  or  mechanical  proce¬
dure,  if  conditions  are  continually  supplied  which
demafid  that  mode  of  operation  and  preclude  any
other  sort.  I  frequently  hear  dulling  devices
and  empty  exercises  defended  and  extolled
because  “the  children  take  such  an  ‘interest’
in  them.”  Yes,  that  is  the  worst  of  it ;  the
mind,  shut  out  from  worthy  employ  and  miss¬
ing  the  taste  of  adequate  performance,  comes
down  to  the  level  of  that  which  is  left  to  it  to
know  and  do,  and  perforce  takes  an  interest
in  a  cabined  and  cramped  experience.  To  find
satisfaction  in  its  own  exercise  is  the  normal
law  of  mind,  and  if  large  and  meaningful  busi¬
ness  for  the  mind  be  denied,  it  tries  to  content
itself  with  the  formal  movements  that  remain
to  it  —  and  too  often  succeeds,  save  in  those
cases  of  more  intense  activity  which  cannot
accommodate  themselves,  and  that  make  up
the  unruly  and  declassi  of  our  school  product.
An  interest  in  the  formal  apprehension  of  sym¬
bols  and  in  their  memorized  reproduction
becomes  in  many  pupils  a  substitute  for  the
original  and  vital  interest  in  reality ;  and  all
because,  the  subject-matter  of  the  course  of
study  being  out  of  relation  to  the  concrete
mind  of  the  individual,  some  substitute  bond
to  hold  it  in  some  kind  of  working  relation  to
the  mind  must  be  discovered  and  elaborated.


The  Child  and  the  Cttfriculum


37


The  second  substitute  for  living  motivation
in  the  subject-matter  is  that  of  contrast-effects  ;
the  material  of  the  lesson  is  rendered  interest¬
ing,  if  not  in  itself,  at  least  in  contrast  with
some  alternative  experience.  To  learn  the
lesson  is  more  interesting  than  to  take  a  scold¬
ing,  be  held  up  to  general  ridicule,  stay  after
school,  receive  degradingly  low  marks,  or  fail
to  be  promoted.  And  very  much  of  what
goes  by  the  name  of  “discipline,”  and  prides
itself  upon  opposing  the  doctrines  of  a  soft
pedagogy  and  upon  upholding  the  banner  of
effort  and  duty,  is  nothing  more  or  less  than
just  this  appeal  to  “interest”  in  its  obverse
aspect  —  to  fear,  to  dislike  of  various  kinds  of
physical,  social,  and  personal  pain.  The  sub¬
ject-matter  does  not  appeal ;  it  cannot  appeal ;
it  lacks  origin  and  bearing  in  a  growing  experi¬
ence.  So  the  appeal  is  to  the  thousand  and
one  outside  and  irrelevant  agencies  which  may
serve  to  throw,  by  sheer  rebuff  and  rebound,
the  mind  back  upon  the  material  from  which  it
is  constantly  wandering.

Human  nature  being  what  it  is,  however,  it
tends  to  seek  its  motivation  in  the  agree¬
able  rather  than  in  the  disagreeable,  in  direct
pleasure  rather  than  in  alternative  pain.  And
so  has  come  up  the  modern  theory  and  prac¬
tice  of  the  “interesting,”  in  the  false  sense  of


38


The  Child  and  the  Cufficultim


that  term.  The  material  is  still  left ;  so  far  as
its  own  characteristics  are  concerned,  just  ma¬
terial  externally  selected  and  formulated.  It
is  still  just  so  much  geography  and  arithmetic
and  grammar  study;  not  so  much  potentiality
of  child-experience  with  regard  to  language,
earth,  and  numbered  and  measured  reality.
Hence  the  difficulty  of  bringing  the  mind  to
bear  upon  it ;  hence  its  repulsiveness ;  the
tendency  for  attention  to  wander;  for  other
acts  and  images  to  crowd  in  and  expel  the
lesson.  The  legitimate  way  out  is  to  trans¬
form  the  material ;  to  psychologize  it — that  is,
once  more,  to  take  it  and  to  develop  it  within
the  range  and  scope  of  the  child’s  life.  But  it  is
easier  and  simpler  to  leave  it  as  it  is,  and  then
by  trick  of  method  to  arouse  interest,  to  make
it  interesting ;  to  cover  it  with  sugar-coating ;
to  conceal  its  barrenness  by  intermediate  and
unrelated  material ;  and  finally,  as  it  were,  to
get  the  child  to  swallow  and  digest  the  unpal¬
atable  morsel  while  he  is  enjoying  tasting
something  quite  different.  But  alas  for  the
analogy!  Mental  assimilation  is  a  matter  of
consciousness;  and  if  the  attention  has  not
been  playing  upon  the  actual  material,  that  has
not  been  apprehended,  nor  worked  into  faculty.

How,  then,  stands  the  case  of  Child  vs.  Cur-
irculum  ?  What  shall  the  verdict  be  ?  The


The  Child  and  the  Curriculum


39


radical  fallacy  in  the  original  pleadings  with
which  we  set  out  is  the  supposition  that  we
have  no  choice  save  either  to  leave  the  child  to
his  own  unguided  spontaneity  or  to  inspire
direction  upon  him  from  without.  Action  is
response  ;  it  is  adaptation,  adjustment.  There  is
no  such  thing  as  sheer  self-activity  possible  —
because  all  activity  takes  place  in  a  medium,  in
a  situation,  and  with  reference  to  its  conditions.
But,  again,  no  such  thing  as  imposition  of  truth
from  without,  as  insertion  of  truth  from  with¬
out,  is  possible.  All  depends  upon  the  activity
which  the  mind  itself  undergoes  in  responding
to  what  is  presented  from  without.  Now,  the
value  of  the  formulated  wealth  of  knowledge
that  makes  up  the  course  of  study  is  that  it  may
enable  the  educator  to  determine  the  environment
of  the  child,  and  thus  by  indirection  to  direct.
Its  primary  value,  its  primary  indication,  is
for  the  teacher,  not  for  the  child.  It  says  to
the  teacher:  Such  and  such  are  the  capacities,
the  fulfilments,  in  truth  and  beauty  and  beha¬
vior,  open  to  these  children.  Now  see  to  it
that  day  by  day  the  conditions  are  such  that
their  own  activities  move  inevitably  in  this
direction,  toward  such  culmination  of  them¬
selves.  Let  the  child’s  nature  fulfil  its  own
destiny,  revealed  to  you  in  whatever  of  science


40


The  Child  and  the  Currictilum


and  art  and  industry  the  world  now  holds  as
its  own.

The  case  is  of  Child.  It  is  his  present
powers  which  are  to  assert  themselves ;  his
present  capacities  which  are  to  be  exercised ;
his  present  attitudes  which  are  to  be  realized.
But  save  as  the  teacher  knows,  knows  wisely
and  thoroughly,  the  race-experience  which  is
embodied  in  that  thing  we  call  the  Curriculum,
the  teacher  knows  neither  what  the  present
power,  capacity,  or  attitude  is,  nor  yet  how
it  is  to  be  asserted,  exercised,  and  realized.


V  k-'tiS~-~~-'ZZ  ''C~  V -Si,  ,;?r,

M  Jw  •*■  ^  'r  '"■v„  'ii  ^  ,' -


«•  tia  f  •  V  -y^Vtt  .ft J  '*■'‘<1''  i  -^'^■'  *  V  ^^~ii


.  V  ^  vT


^;.'i^|^l  fl—A  ,,  I-'


— — .S-'-  ,  -TT'.'--.-  »

r


<r^&  s'  V>.  vT  .■>  „  t  cLi  '♦'-*^'0'^!t.  ■^  ^''?  " »  S


.  “■  ■  *A;=:^S#--i:»''';kis:


V,


‘  'LC-  I^  ■*  S.  ^  v“  hS.’^

/^‘ a^  V  ^ V  r-^  .  ^rSv*=.-


^  -li,  *>
