A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics (Dhammasangani)
=========================================================
A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics (Dhammasangani), translated by C. A. F. Rhys Davids (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1900), public domain. The pioneering English rendering of the first book of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.


Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.


About Google Book Search


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/


ORIENTAL TRANSLATION FUND.

NEW SERIES.

Volume XII.


A BUDDHIST MANUAL

OK

PSYCHOLOGICAL ETHICS

OF THE FOURTH CENTURY B.C.


BEING

Jl translation, non) make for tfje grt^t time, from tl>o
Original ^ali ,

OF THE

FIRST BOOK IN THE ABHIDHAMMA BITAKA


ENTITLED

DHAMMA-SANGANI

(COMPENDIUM OF STATES OB PHENOMENA).


Hfflitb Tntrobuctors jessag and notes '

BY

CAROLINE A. F. RHYS DAVIDS, M.A.,

Fellow of University College, London.


PRINTED AND PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF THE
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY;

AND SOLD AT

22, ALBEMARLE STREET, LONDON.

1900.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



EDWARD T. STURDY,

BY

WHOSE GENEROUS ASSISTANCE
THE EDITION OF THE COMMENTARY
HAS BEEN RENDERED ACCESSIBLE TO SCHOLARS,

AN1>

A TRANSLATION OF THE TEXT TO READERS GENERALLY.

THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED

WITH THE CORDIAL REGARD OF HIS FRIEND,

THE TRANSLATOR.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


ERRATA.


P. 5, for ope£(f, read bptliQ.

P. 13, for citt’ ekaggata, read cittass’ ekaggata (bis).

P. 23, for k a y a - p a s s a d d h i, read kayappassaddhi.

P. 44, for p a r i p • p h a r a t i, read parippharati.

P. 57, for Aruppaj hana, read Aruppajjhana (bis).

P. 58, for - v i 1 a s a, read - v i 1 a s a.

P. 68, for v i m o k k h a ip read vimokklio.

P. 132, for s a n t i r a n a, read santirana (bis).

Pp. 149, 150, for ahftatavindriyaip, read ahftatavindriyarp
P. 158, for thftnaip, read than a ip.

P. 165, for arupino, read arupino.

P. 166, for Atthakatha, read Atthakatha.

P. 174, for samudlranaip, read samud Ira n a ip.

P. 175, for attabhavo, read attabhavo.

,, divide indriyesu from guttadvaro.

P. 183, forsumukkhapakamil, read snmukliapakka in a.

,, for ‘ long,* short, read ‘long,’ ‘short.’

P. 185, for sakkhusamphassajo, read sukhasampliassajo.
P. 199, for kaya-pasado, read kayappasado.

P. 201, for sneho, read sin eh o.

P. 241, for patitthanaip, read pa tit th ana ip.

P. 242 note 1 , for Mil 317 read Mil 313.

P. 250, for Atthakatha, read Atthakatha.

P. 252, for t h a n a ip, read t h a n a pi.

pp. 264, 265, from §§ [1015] to [1019] the questions are wrongly numbered.
P. 280, for - 1 a n h a, read • t a n h a.

P. 294, for tatkagato, read tatkagato.

„ for aramnianaip, read arammanaip.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



‘ Yaiji kiftci dhamniaiu abhijaftfta
ajjhattaip athavapi bahiddha.’

SrrrA Nii'ata, 917.


* Api khvaham avuso imasmiiu yeva vyamamatte kalevare saftftiiphi sa-
niauake lokarp pafihapemi . .

Samyctta NikJya, i. 62; = A., ii. 48.


4 Kullupamaiji vo bhikkhave ajiinantehi dhammil pi vo jishatabbii, pag-eva
adhannua.’


Majjhima Nikhaya, i. 185.


4 Der Buddhismus ist die einzige, eigentlich positivistische Religion die
uns die Geachichte zeigt.’

Nietzsche.


4 We shall find that every important philosophical reformation, after a time
of too highly strained metaphysical dogmatism or unsatisfying scepticism,
has been begun by some man who saw the necessity of looking deeper into the
mental roust itution . '

(r. Ckoom Robertson.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



CONTENTS.


PACK

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY xv

I. The Manual and the History of Psychology. II. The Date of the
Manual (p. xviii). III. On the Commentaries and the Importance
of the Atthasalini (p. xx). IY. On the Method and Argument of
the Manual (p. xxvi). V. On the Chief Subject of Inquiry —
Dhamma (p. xxxii). VI. On the Inquiry into Rupain and the
Buddhist Theory of Sense (p. xli.). VII. On the Buddhist Philo-
sophy of Mind and Theory of Intellection (p. lxiii.). VIII. On the
Buddhist Notions of 4 Good, Bad, and Indeterminate ’ (p. lxxxii.).

BOOK I.

THE GENESIS OF THOUGHTS (Cittuppada-kandam).

PART I.

GOOD STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

CHAPTER I.

The Eight Main Types of Thought relating to the Sensuous

Universe (Kama vacar a- at tha-m ahacitt ani) ... 1

CHAPTER II.

Good in relation to the Universe of Form (rupavacara-

kusalam) ... ... ... ... ... ... 43

Methods for inducing Jh&na: I. The Eight Artifices. II. The
Stations of Mastery (p. 58). III. The Three First Deliver-
ances (p. 63). IV. The Four Jhanas of the Sublime Abodes
(p. 65). V. The Jhana of Foul Things (p. 69).

CHAPTER III.

Good in relation to the Universe of the Formless (arupSva-
cara-kusala m). The Four Jhanas connected with Form-
less Existence (c a 1 1 a r i arupaj jhanani) ... ... 71


ed by CjOCK^Ic



X


CHAPTER IV.

Degrees of Efficacy in Good relating to the Three Realms
CHAPTER V.

Thought engaged upon the Higher Ideal (lokuttaram
cittam)

I. The First Path. II. The Second Path (p. 95). IIL The
Third Path (p. 96). TV. The Fourth Path (p. 97).

PART II.

BAD STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

CHAPTER VI.

The Twelve Bad Thoughts (d v a d a 8 a akusalacitt&ni) ...

PART III.

INDETERMINATE STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

CHAPTER I.

On Effect, or Result (v i p a k o)

A. Good Karma. B. Bad Karma (p. 151).

CHAPTER II.

Action-thoughts (k i r i y a)


Introductory


BOOK II.

FORM (r upakandam).


CHAPTER I.

Exposition of Form under Single Concepts (ekaka-niddeso)
CHAPTER II.

Categories of Form under Dual aspects — positive and negative
(duvidhena rupasangaho)

CHAPTER III.

Categories of Form under Triple Aspects. Exposition of the
Triplets


CHAPTER IV.

Categories of Form under Fourfold Aspects . . .


PACK

76

82

98

123

156

165

168

172

220

232


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XI


CHAPTER Y.

PAGE

Category of Form under a Fivefold Aspect ... ... ... 241

CHAPTER VI.

Category of Form under a Sixfold Aspect ... ... ... 244

CHAPTER VII.

Category of Form under a Sevenfold Aspect .. . ... ... 245

CHAPTER VIII.

Category of Form under an Eightfold Aspect ... ... 246

CHAPTER IX.

Category of Form under a Ninefold Aspect ... ... ... 247

CHAPTER X.

Category of Form under a Tenfold Aspect ... ... ... 248

CHAPTER XI.

Category of Form under an Elevenfold Aspect ... ... 249


BOOK III.

THE DIVISION ENTITLED ‘ELIMINATION’ (nikkhepa-
k a n d a m).

PART I.

CHAPTER I.

The Group of Triplets (t i k a m) ... ... ... ... 250

CHAPTER II.

The Group on Cause (hetu-gocchakam) ... ... 274

CHAPTER III.

The Short Intermediate Set of Pairs (c u 1 a n t a r a - d uk am) ... 288
CHAPTER IV.

The Intoxicant Group (a 8 a v a - g o c c h a k a m) ... ... 291

CHAPTER V.

The Group of the Fetters (s a ii ti o j a n a - g o c c h a k a in) ... 297


ed by CjjOCK^Ic



Xll


CHAPTER VI.

PAGE

The Group of the Ties (ganth a- goechakam) ... ... 304

CHAPTER VII.

The Group of the Floods (ogha - goechakam) ... ... 308

CHAPTER VIII.

The Group of the Bonds (yoga -goechakam) ... ... 309

CHAPTER IX.

The Group of the Hindrances (nl varan a- goechakam) ... 310

CHAPTER X.

The Group on Contagion (par a mas a- goc ch aka in) ... 316

CHAPTER XI.

The Great Intermediate Set of Pairs (mahantara-dukam) 318
CHAPTER XII.

The Group on Grasping (upadana-gocchakam) ... ... 323

CHAPTER XIII.

The Group on the Corruptions (kilesa-gocchaka ni) . . . 327

CHAPTER XIV.

The Supplementary Set of Pairs (pi^hidukain) ... ... 331


PART II.

The Suttanta Pairs of Terms (s u 1 1 a n t i k a - d u k a m) ... 338

APPENDIX I.

On the Supplementary Digest appended to the Dhamma-Sangani,
and entitled, in the Commentary, the Atthakatha-
kandam or Atthuddh&ro ... ... ... 360

APPENDIX II.

On the term Uncompounded Element (asankhata dhatu) 367
Indexes... ... ... ... ... ... ... 370


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



ABBREVIATIONS.


1. BUDDHIST CANONICAL BOOKS

A . — A nguttara-Nikay a.

C. — Cullavagga.

D. — Dlgha-Nikaya.

Dhp. — Dhammapada.

Dh. K. — Dhatu-Katha.

Dh. S. — Dhamma-Sangani.

Jat. — Jataka.

K. — Siamese (Kambodian) edition of the text.

K. V. — Katha Vatthu.

M . — M aj j hima-N ik&y a.

M. P. S. — Maha-Parinibbana Sutta (Childers).

P. P.— Puggala-Pafifiatti.

S. — Samyutta-Nikaya.

S. N. — Sutta* Nipata.

Yin. — Vinaya.

2. OTHER BOOKS.

Abh. S. — Abhidhammattha-Sangaha.

Asl. — AtthasalinT.

I)iv. — Divyavadana.

P. T. S.— Journal of the Pali Text Society.

J. R. A. S.^— Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.

M. B. V. — Maha Bodhi Vansa.

Mah.— Maha Vansa.

Mil. — Milinda Panho.

S. B. E. — Sacred Books of the East.

Sum. — Sumangala-Vilasini.

Vis. M. — Visuddhi Magga.

TBy ‘printed text,’ or simply ‘text,’ is always meant the edition
published in 1885 by the Pali Text Society, unless otherwise stated.]


ed by CjOCK^Ic



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.


I.

The Manual and the History of Psychology.

If the tombs of Egypt or the ruins of Greece itself were
to give up, among their dead that are now and again being
restored to us, a copy of some manual with which the
young Socrates was put through the mill of current
academic doctrine, the discovery would be hailed, especially
by scholars of historical insight, as a contribution of
peculiar interest. The contents would no doubt yield no
new matter of philosophic tradition. But they would
certainly teach something respecting such points as pre-
Aristotelian logical methods, and the procedure followed
in one or more schools for rendering students conversant
with the concepts in psychology, ethics and metaphysic
accepted or debated by the culture of the age.

Readers whose sympathies are not confined to the shores
of the Mediterranean and iEgean seas will feel a stir of
interest, similar in kind if fainter in degree, on becoming
more closely acquainted with the Buddhist text -book
entitled Dhamma-Sangani. The English edition of the
Pali text, prepared for the Pali Text Society by Professor
Dr. Ed. Muller, and published fifteen years ago, has so
far failed to elicit any critical discussion among Pali
scholars. A cursory inspection may have revealed little
but what seemed dry, prolix and sterile. Such was, at


ed by CjOCK^Ic


XVI


least, the verdict of a younger worker, now, alas ! no more, 1
Closer study of the work will, I believe, prove less un-
grateful, more especially if the conception of it as a
student’s manual be kept well in view. The method of
the book is explicative, deductive ; its object was, not to add
to the Dhamma, but to unfold the orthodox import of
terms in use among the body of the faithful, and, by
organizing and systematizing the aggregate of doctrinal
concepts, to render the learner’s intellect both clear and
efficient.

Even a superficial inspection of the Manual should yield
great promise to anyone interested in the history of
psychology. When upwards of six years ago my attention
was first drawn to it, and the desirability of a translation
pointed out by Professor Rhys Davids, I was at once
attracted by the amount of psychological material embedded
in its pages. Buddhist philosophy is ethical first and last.
This is beyond dispute. But among ethical systems there is
a world of difference in the degree of importance attached to
the psychological prolegomena of ethics. In ethical problems
we are on a basis of psychology, depending for our material
largely upon the psychology of conation or will, 2 with its
co-efficients of feeling and intelligence. And in the
history of human ideas, in so far as it clusters about those
problems, we find this dependence either made prominent
or slurred over. Treated superficially, if suggestively and
picturesquely, in Plato, the nature and functions of that
faculty in man, whereby he is constituted an ethical and
political ‘animal,’ are by Aristotle analyzed at length.
But the Buddhists were, in a way, more advanced in the

1 H. C. Warren, ‘ Buddhism in Translations,’ xviii. Cf.
Kern, ‘ Indian Buddhism,’ p. 3.

2 Cf. G. C. Robertson, ‘Elements of General Philosophy,’
pp. 191, 197 ; ‘ Philosophical Remains,’ p. 3 ; A. Bain,
‘Moral Science’ — ‘The Psychological Data of Ethics.’
‘Every ethical system involves a psychology of conduct,
and depends for its development upon its idea of what
conduct actually is ’ (C. Douglas, ‘ The Philosophy of
J. S. Mill,’ p. 251).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


xvu


psychology of their ethics than Aristotle — in a way, that
is, which would now be called scientific. Rejecting the
assumption of a psyche and of its higher manifestations
or nofis, they were content to resolve the consciousness of
the Ethical Man, as they found it, into a complex continuum
of subjective phenomena. They analyzed this continuum,
as we might, exposing it, as it were, by transverse section.
But their treatment was genetic. The distinguishable
groups of dhamma — of states or mental psychoses —

‘ arise ’ in every case in consciousness, in obedience to certain
laws of causation, physical and moral 1 — that is, ultimately,
as the outcome of antecedent states of consciousness. There
is no exact equivalent in Pali, any more than there is in
Aristotle, for the relatively modem term ‘ consciousness,’
yet is the psychological standpoint of the Buddhist philo-
sophy virtually as thoroughgoing in its perceptual basis
as that of Berkeley. It was not solipsism any more than
Berkeley’s immaterialism was solipsistic. It postulated
other percipients 2 3 * as Berkeley did, together with, not a
Divine cause or source of percepts, but the implicit Monism
of early thought veiled by a deliberate Agnosticism. And just
as Berkeley, approaching philosophical questions through
psychology, ‘ was the first man to begin a perfectly
scientific doctrine of sense-perception as a psychologist,’ 8
so Buddhism, from a quite early stage of its development,
set itself to analyze and classify mental processes witlP
remarkable insight and sagacity. And on the results of,
that psychological analysis it sought to base the whole'
rationale of its practical doctrine and discipline. From
studying the processes of attention, and the nature of
sensation, the range and depth of feeling and the plasticity
of the will in desire and in control, it organized its system
of personal self-culture.


1 Utuandkamma.

2 Cf e.g . below, p. 272 [1045].

3 G. C. Robertson, op. cit., p. 154.

b


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XV1U


Germany has already a history of psychology half com-
pleted on the old lines of the assumed monopoly of ancient
thought by a small area of the inhabited world. England
has not yet got so far. Is it too much to hope that, when
such a work is put forth, the greater labour of a wider and
juster initiative will have been undertaken, and the develop-
ment of early psychological thought in the East have been
assigned its due place in this branch of historical research ?

II.

The Date of the Manual .

We can fortunately fix the date of the Dhamma- San-
gani within a limit that, for an Indian book, may be
considered narrow. Its aim is to systematize or formulate
certain doctrines, or at least to enumerate and define a
number of scattered terms or categories of terms, occurring
in the great books of dialogues and sundry discourse
entitled the Nikayas of the Sutta Pitaka. The whole
point of view, psychological and philosophical, adopted in
them is, in our Manual, taken for granted. The technical
terms used in them are used in it as if its hearers, subse-
quently its readers, would at once recognise them. No one
acquainted with those books, and with the Dhamma-
Sangani, will hesitate in placing the latter, in point of
time, after the Nikayas.

On the other hand, the kind of questions raised in our
Manual are on a different plane altogether from those
raised in the third book in the Abhidhamma Pitaka, viz.,
the Katha Vatthu, which we know to have been composed
by Tissa at Patna, in the middle of the third century b.c. 1
The Dhamma- Sangani does not attempt to deal with any
such advanced opinions and highly-elaborated points of
doctrine as are put forward by those supposed opponents of
the orthodox philosophy who are the interlocutors in the
Katha Yatthu. It remains altogether, or almost alto-
gether, at the old standpoint of the Nikayas as regards

1 AtthasalinI, p. 8 ; Maha Bodhi Vansa, p. 110.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XIX


doctrine, differing only in method of treatment. The
Katha Vatthu raises new questions belonging to a later
stage in the development of the faith.

The Dhamma-Sangani is therefore younger than the
Nikayas, and older than the Katha Yatthu. If we date
it half-way between the two, that is, during the first third
of the fourth century b.c. (contemporary, therefore, with
the childhood of Aristotle, b. 384), we shall be on the safe
side. But I am disposed to thiijk that the interval between
the completion of the Nikayas and the compilation of the
Dhamma-Sangani is less than that between the latter
work and the Katha Vatthu ; and that our manual should
therefore be dated rather at the middle than at the end of
the fourth century b.c., or even earlier. However that
may be, it is important for the historian of psychology to
remember that the ideas it systematizes are, of course,
older. Practically all of them go back to the time of the
Buddha himself. Some of them are older still.

The history of the text of our Manual belongs to that of
the canonical texts taken collectively. There are, however,
two interesting references to it, apart from the general
narrative, in the Maha Vansa, which show, at least, that
the Dhamma-Sangani was by no means laid on the shelf
among later Buddhists. King Kassapa V. of Ceylon (a.d.
929-939) had a copy of it engraved on gold plates studded
with jewels, and took it in procession with great honour to
a vihara he had built, and there offered flowers to it. 1
Another King of Ceylon, Yijaya Bahu I. (a.d. 1065-1120),
shut himself up every morning for a time against his
people in the beautiful Hall of Exhortation, and there made
a translation of the Dhamma-Sangani, no doubt from Pali
into Sinhalese. 2

I can testify to the seriousness of the task, and feel a
keen sympathy with my royal predecessor, and envy withal
for his proximity in time and place to the seat of orthodox
tradition. Nothing, unfortunately, is now known, so far


1 Mah., ch. 1., vers. 50, 51, 56. 2 Ibid., ch. lxx., ver. 17.

b 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XX


as I have been able to ascertain, of this work, in which
the translator was very likely aided by the best scholarship
of the day, and which might have saved me from many a
doubt and difficulty.

in.

On the Commentaries and the Importance of the
A tthasdlim .

It will be seen from Appendix I. that the last part of the
text of our Manual is a supplement added to it by way of
commentary, or rather of interpretation and digest. It is,
perhaps, not surprising that so much of this kind of
material has survived within the four corners of the
Pitakas. We have the Old Commentary embedded in the
Vinaya, and the Parivara added as a sort of supple-
mentary examination paper to it. Then there is the
Niddesa, a whole book of commentary, on texts now
included in the Sutta Nipata, and there are passages
clearly of a commentarial nature scattered through the
Nikayas. Lastly, there is the interesting fragment of
commentary tacked on to the Dhamma-Sangani itself
(below, p. 357). As these older incorporated commentaries
are varied both in form and in method, it is evident that
commentary of different kinds had a very early beginning.
And the probability is very great that the tradition is not
so far wrong, when it tells us that commentaries on all the
principal canonical books were handed down in schools of
the Order abng with the texts themselves.

This is not to maintain that all of the Commentaries
were so handed down in all the schools, nor that each of
them was exactly the same in each of the schools where it
was taught. But wherever Commentaries were so handed
down, tradition tells us that they were compiled, and subse-
quently written, in the dialect of the district where the
school was situated. From two places, one in India and
the other in Ceylon, we have works purporting to give in
Pali the substance of such ancient traditional comment as
had been handed down in the local vernacular. One of


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXI


these is the Atthasalinl, Buddhaghosa’s reconstruction, in
Pali, of the Commentary on our present work, as handed
down in Sinhalese at the school of the Great Monastery,
the Maha Vihara at Anuradhapura in Ceylon.

The Maha Vansa, indeed, saya (p. 251) that he wrote
this work at Gaya, in North India, before he came to
Anuradhapura. This, however, must be a mistake, if it
refers to the work as we have it. For in that work he
frequently quotes from and refers to another work which
he certainly wrote after his arrival in Ceylon, namely, the
N Visuddhi Magga, and once or twice he refers to the
Samanta Pasadika, which he also wrote in Ceylon.

The Sadhamma Sangaha 1 has two apparently incon-
sistent statements which suggest a solution. The first is
that he wrote, at the Vihara at Gaya, a work called the
‘Uprising of Knowledge’ Cftanodaya), and a Commentary
on the Dhamma-Sangani, called the Atthasalinl, and began
to write one on the Parittas. Then it was that he was urged
to go, and actually did go, to Ceylon to obtain better materials
for his work. The second is that, after he had arrived
there and had written seven other works, he then wrote the
Atthasalinl. When the same author makes two such state-
ments as these, and in close conjunction, he may well mean
to say that a work already written in the one place was
revised or rewritten in the other.

Dhamma Kitti, the author of the Sadhamma Sangaha,
adds the interesting fact that, in revising his Atthasalinl,
Buddhaghosa relied, not on the Maha Atthakatha in
Sinhalese, but on another Commentary in that language
called the Maha Paccari.

We know, namely, that at the time when Buddhaghosa
wrote — that is, in the early part of the fifth century a.d. —
the Commentaries handed down in the schools had been, at
various times and places, already put together into treatises
and written books in the native dialects. And we know
the names of several of those then existing. These are :

1 Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1888, pp. 58, 56.


:ed by


Google



XXII


1. The Commentary of the dwellers in the * North
Minster * — the Uttara Vihara — at Anuradhapura. 1

2. The Mula-, or Maha-Atthakatha, or simply ‘ The
Atthakatha,’ of the dwellers in the ‘Great Minster’ — the
Maha Vihara — also at Anuradhapura, 2

3. The Andha-Atthakatha, handed down at Kaneipura
(Congevaram), in South India.

4. The Maha Paccari, or Great Baft, said to be so called
from its having been composed on a raft somewhere in
Ceylon. 3

5. The Kurunda Atthakatha, so called because it was
composed at the Kurundavelu Vihara in Ceylon. 4

6. The Sankhepa Atthakatha or Short Commentary,
which, as being mentioned together with the Andha Com-
mentary, 5 may possibly be also South Indian.

Buddhaghosa himself says in the introductory verses to
the AtthasalinI : 6

‘ I will set forth, ( rejoicing in what I reveal, the explana-
tion of the meaning of that Abhidhamma as it was chanted
forth by Maha Kassapa and the rest (at the first Council),
and re-chanted later (at the second Council) by the Arahats,
and by Mahinda brought to this wondrous isle and turned
into the language of the dwellers therein. Rejecting now
the tongue of the men of Tambapanni 7 and turning it into
that pure tongue which harmonizes with the texts [I will
set it forth] showing the opinion of the dwellers in the
Great Minster, undefiled by and unmixed with the views of


1 J. P. T. S., 1882, pp. 115, 116. English in Tumour’s
Maha Vansa, pp. xxxvii, xxxviii.

2 Sum. 180, 182 ; Sadhamma Sangaha, 55 ; M. B. V.
184-136.

3 Papanca Sudani on M. ii. 13 ; Sadhamma Sangaha, 55.

4 Sadhamma Sangaha, 55.

6 Vijesinha in the J. R. A. S., 1870 (vol. v., New Series),
p. 298.

6 Asl., p. 1, ver. 18 et seq.

7 Taprobane = Ceylon.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


XX111


the sects, and adducing also what ought to be adduced from
the Nikayas and the Commentaries.’ 1

It would be most interesting if the book as we have it
had been written at Gaya in North India, or even if we
could discriminate between the portion there written and
the additions or alterations made in Ceylon. But this we
can no longer hope to do. The numerous stories of Ceylon
Theras occurring in the book are almost certainly due to
the author’s residence in Ceylon. And we cannot be certain
that these and the reference to his own book, written in
Ceylon, are the only additions. We cannot, therefore, take
the opinions expressed in the book as evidence of Buddhist
opinion as held in Gaya. That may, in great part, be so.
But we cannot tell in which part.

In the course of his work Buddhaghosa quotes often
from the Nikayas without mentioning the source of his
quotations ; and also from the Vibhanga 2 and the Maha
Pakarana 3 (that is, the Patthana), giving their names.
Besides these Pitaka texts, he quotes or refers to the follow-
ing authorities :

1. His own Samanta Pasadika, e.g ., pp. 97, 98.

2. His own Yisuddhi Magga, pp. 168, 188, 186, 187

(twice), 190, 198. 4 *

3. The Maha Atthakatha, pp. 80, 86, 107.

4. The Atthakathacariya, pp. 85, 123, 217.

5. The Atthakatha, pp. 108, 113, 188, 267, 318.

6. The Atthakatha’s, pp. 99, 188.

7. The Agamatthakatha’s, p. 86. 6

1 Agamatthakathasu, perhaps ‘from the commen-
taries on the Nikayas.’ See note 5 below.

2 For instance, pp. 165-170, 176, 178.

8 For instance, pp. 7, 9, 87, 212, 409.

4 The apparent references at pp. 195, 196 are not to the

book.

6 The reading in the printed text is agamanatthaka-
thasu. But this is not intelligible. And as we have
agamatthakathasu at p. 2, ver. 17, it is probable we
must so read also here, where the meaning clearly is 4 in
the commentaries on the Nikayas.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXXV


8. Acariyanam samanatthakatha, p. 90.

9. Porana, pp. 84, 111, 291, 299, 818.

^ 10. The Thera (that is Nagasena), pp. 112, 121, 122.

11. Nagasenatthera, p. 114.

12. Ayasma Nagasena, p. 119.

13. Ayasma Nagasenatthera, p. 142.

14. Thera Nagasena, p. 120.

15. Dlgha-bhanaka, pp. 151, 899 (cf. p. 407).

16. Majjhima-bhanaka, p. 420.

17. Vitanda-vadi, pp. 8, 90, 92, 241.

18. Petaka, possibly Petakopadesa, p. 165.

I do not claim to have exhausted the passages in the
Atthasalinl quoted from these authorities, or to be able to
define precisely each work — what, for instance, is the dis-
tinction between 5 and 6, and whether 4 was not identical
with either. Nor is it clear who were the Porana or
Ancients, though it seems likely, from the passages quoted,
""that they were Buddhist thinkers of an earlier age, but of a
later date than that of our Manual, inasmuch as one of the
citations shows that the ‘Door-theory’ of cognition was
already developed (see below, p. lxviii., etc.). From the
distinct references to 3 and to 7, it seems possible that the
so-called ‘ Great Commentary ’ (3) dealt not so much with
any particular book, or group of books, as with the doctrines
of the Pitakas in general.

The foregoing notes may prove useful when the times
are ready for a full inquiry into the history of the Buddhist
Commentaries. 1 With respect to the extent to which the
Atthasalinl itself has been quoted in the following pages, it
may be judged that the scholastic teaching of eight centuries
later is a very fallacious guide in the interpretation of
original doctrines, and that we should but darken counsel

1 I may add that a Tika, or sub-commentary on the
Atthasalinl, written by a Siamese scholar, Kanakitti, of
unknown date, was edited in Sinhalese characters by Koda-
goda Pafinasekhara of Kalutara, in Ceylon, and published
there in 1890.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXV


if we sought light on Aristotle from mediaeval exegesis of
the age of Duns Scotus.

Without admitting that the course of Buddhist and that
of Western culture coincide sufficiently to warrant such a
parallel, it may readily be granted that Buddhaghosa must
not be accepted en bloc . The distance between the con-
structive genius of Gotama and his apostles as compared
with the succeeding ages of epigoni needs no depreciatory
criticism on the labours of the exegesists to make itself felt
forcibly enough. Buddhaghosa’s philology is doubtless
crude, and he is apt to leave cruces unexplained, concern-
ing which an Occidental is most in the dark . 1 Nevertheless,
to me his work is not only highly suggestive, but also a mine
of historic interest. To put it aside is to lose the historical
perspective of the course of Buddhist philosophy. It is to
regard the age of Gotama and of his early Church as consti-
tuting a wondrous * freak ’ in the evolution of human ideas,
instead of watching to see how the philosophical tradition
implanted in that Church^itself based on earlier culture)
had in the lapse of centuries been carefully handed down by
the schools of Theras, the while the folklore that did duty
for natural science had more or less fossilized, and the study
of the conscious processes of the mind had been elaborated.

This is, however, a point of view that demands a fuller
examination than can here be given it. I will now only
maintain that it is even more suggestive to have at hand
the best tradition of the Buddhist schools at the fulness of
their maturity for the understanding of a work like the
Dhamma-Sangani than for the study of the Dialogues.
Our manual is itself a book of reference to earlier books,
and presents us with many terms and formulae taken out of
that setting of occasion and of discourse enshrined in which
we meet them in the Nikayas. The great scholar who
comments on them had those Nikayas, both as to letter and
spirit, well pigeon-holed in memory, and cherished both


1 Cf. Dr. Neumann in ‘Die Beden Gotamo Buddhos, .
p. xv et seq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXVI


with the most reverent loyalty. That this is so, as well as
the fact that we are bred on a culture so different in mould
and methods (let alone the circumstances of its develop-
ment) from that inherited by him, must lend his interpreta-
tions an importance and a suggestiveness far greater than
that which the writings of any Christian commentator on
the Greek philosophy can possess for us.

IV.

On the Method and Argument of the Manual .

The title given to my translation is not in any way a
faithful rendering of the canonical name of the Manual.
This is admitted on my title-page. There is nothing very
intelligible for us in the expression * Compendium of States,’
or 4 Compendium of Phenomena.’ Whether the Buddhist
might find it so or not, there is for him at all events a
strong and ancient association of ideas attaching to the
title Dhamma-Sangani which for us is entirely non-
existent. I have therefore let go the letter, in order to
indicate what appears to me the real import of the work.
Namely, that it is, in the first place, a manual or text-book,
and not a treatise or disquisition, elaborated and rendered
attractive and edifying after the manner of most of the
Sutta Pitaka. And then, that its subject is ethics, but
that the inquiry is conducted from a psychological stand-
point, and, indeed, is in great part an analysis of the psycho-
logical and psycho-physical data of ethics.

I do not mean to assert that the work was compiled
solely for academic use. No such specialized function is
assigned it in the Commentary. Buddhaghosa only main-
tains that, together with the rest of the Abhidhamma, 1 it
was the ipsissima verba of the Buddha, not attempting to
upset the mythical tradition that it was the special mode
he adopted in teaching the doctrine to the 4 hosts of devas
come from all parts of the sixteen world-systems, he having

1 But including the Matika only of the later Katha Yatthu.
Cf. 4 Dialogues of the Buddha,’ p. xi ; Asl., p. 1.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


xxvii


placed his mother (re-incarnate as a devl) at their head
because of the glory of her wisdom.’ 1 Whether this myth
had grown up to account for the formal, unpicturesque
style of the Abhidhamma, on the ground that the devas
were above the need of illustration and rhetoric of an \
earthly kind, I do not know. The Commentary fre-
quently refers to the peculiar difference in style from that
employed in the Suttanta as consisting in the Abhidhamma
being nippariyaya-desan a — teaching which is not
accompanied by explanation or disquisition. 2 And the
definition it gives, at the outset, of the term Abhidhamma
shows that this Pitaka, and a fortiori theDhamma-Sangani,
was considered as a subject of study more advanced than
! the other Pitakas, and intended to serve as the complement
and crown of the learner’s earlier courses. 3 Acquaintance
with the doctrine is, as I have said, taken for granted.
The object is not so much to extend knowledge as to ensure
mutual consistency in the intension of ethical notions, and
to systematize and formulate the theories and practical
mechanism of intellectual and moral progress scattered in
profusion throughout the Suttantas. 4

It is interesting to note the methods adopted to carry
out this object. The work was in the first instance incul-
cated by way of oral teaching respecting a quantity of
matter which had been already learnt in the same way.
And the memory, no longer borne along by the interest of

1 Asl., p. 1.

2 E.g., Asl. 403. The meaning of this expression is
illustrated by its use on p. 317 of the Cy. : na nip par i-
yayena dlgham rupayatanam; Le., ‘that which is
long (or short) is only inferentially a visual object.’

3 Asl., p. 2. Translated by Mr. A. C. Taylor, J. E. A. S.,
1894.

4 Professor Edmond Hardy, in his Introduction to the fifth
volume of the Anguttara Nikaya, expresses the belief that
the Dhamma-Sangani is ‘entirely dependent upon the
Anguttara.’ For my part, I have found no reason to limit

^the manual’s dependence on the Suttantas to anyone book.
Buddhaghosa does not specially connect the two works.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xxvrn


narrative or by the thread of an argument, had to be
assisted by other devices. First of these is the catechetical
method. Questions, according to Buddhist analysis, are
put on five several grounds : l

to throw light on what is not known ;
to compare what one knows with the knowledge of
others ;

to clear up doubts ;

to get the premises in an argument granted ; 2
to give a starting-point from which to set out the
content of a statement.

The last is selected as the special motive of the catechiz-
ing here resorted to. It is literally the wish to discourse
or expound (kathetu kamyata), but the meaning is
more clearly brought out by the familiar formula quoted,
viz. : * Four in number, brethren, are these Advances in
Mindfulness. Now which are the Four?’ Thus it was
held that the questions in the Manual are analytic or
explicative, having the object of unfolding and thereby of
delimitating the implications of a mass of notions which a
study of the Suttantas, if unaided, might leave insufficiently
co-ordinated in the mind.

And the memory, helped by the interrogative stimulus,
was yet further assisted by the symmetrical form of both
question and answer, as well as by the generic uniformity
in the matter of the questions. Throughout Book I., in the
case of each inquiry which opens up a new subject, the
answer is set out on a definite plan called uddesa — ex-
position — and is rounded off invariably by the appana,
or emphatic summing up : * all these (whatever they may
stand for on other occasions or in other systems) on this
occasion =x.' The uddesa is succeeded by the n i d -
desa — de-position — i.c., analytical question and answer
on the details of the expository statement. This is indicated
formally by the initial adverb t a 1 1 h a — what here (in this

1 Asl. 55, 56 ; cf. Sum. 68.

2 A favourite method in the Dialogues. The Cy. quotes
as an instance M. i. 282.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXIX


connexion) is a . . b . . c ? Again, the work is in great part
planned with careful regard to logical relation. The
Buddhists had not elaborated the intellectual vehicle of
genus and species, as the Greeks did, hence they had not
the convenience of a logic of Definition. There is scarcely
an answer in any of these Niddesas but may perhaps be
judged to suffer in precision and lucidity from lack of it.
They substitute for definition proper what J. S. Mill might
have called predication of equipollent terms — in other
words, the method of the dictionary. In this way precision
of meaning is not to be expected, since nearly all so-called
synonyms do but mutually overlap in meaning without
coinciding ; and hence the only way to ensure no part of
the connotation being left out is to lump together a number
of approximate equivalents, and gather that the term in
question is defined by such properties as the aggregate
possesses in common. If this is the rationale of the
Buddhist method, the inclusion, in the answer, of the very
term which is to be defined becomes no longer the fallacy
it is in Western logic. Indeed, where there is no pursuit
of exact science, nor of sciences involving ‘ physical division,*
but only a system of research into the intangible products
and processes of mind and character, involving aspects and
phases, Le., logical division, I am not sure that a good case
might not be made out for Buddhist method. It is less
rigid, and lends itself better, perhaps, to a field of thought
where * a difference in aspects is a difference in things.* 1

However that may be, the absence of a development of
the relation of Particular and Universal, of One and All, is
met by a great attention to degree of Plurality. Number
plays a great part in Buddhist classes and categories. 2
Whether this was inherited from a more ancient lore, such
as Pythagoras is said to have drawn from, or whether this
feature was artificially developed for mnemonic purposes, I
do not know. Probably there is truth in both alternatives.

1 Professor J. Ward, Ency. Brit., 9th ed., 1 Psychology.*

2 Cf. especially, not only Book II. of this work, but also
the whole of the Anguttara.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXX


But of all numbers none plays so great a part in aiding
methodological coherency and logical consistency as that of
duality. I refer of course especially to its application in
the case of the correlatives, Positive and Negative.

Throughout most of Book II. the learner is greatly aided
by being questioned on positive terms and their opposites,
taken simply and also in combination with other similarly
dichotomized pairs. The opposite is not always a con-
tradictory. Room is then left in the * universe of discourse *
for a third class, which in its turn comes into question.
Thus the whole of Book I. is a development of the triplet
of questions with which Book III. begins (a-kusalam
being really the Contrary of kusalam, though formally
its Contradictory) : What is A ? What is B ? What is
(ab), i.e. f non-^4 and non-B ? In Book III. there is no
obvious ground of logic or method for the serial order or
limits observed in the ‘ Clusters * or Groups, and the inter-
polated sets of * Pairs * of miscellaneous questions. Never-
theless a uniform method of catechizing characterizes the
former.

Finally, there is, in the way of mnemonic and intellectual
aid, the simplifying and unifying effect attained by causing
all the questions (exclusive of sub-inquiries) to refer to the
one category of d h a m m a .

There is, it is true, a whole Book of questions re-
ferring to rupam, but this constitutes a very much
elaborated sub-inquiry on * form * as one sub-species of a
species of dhamma — rupino dhamma, as distin-
guished from all the rest, which are a-rupino
dhamma. This will appear more clearly if the argu-
ment of the work is very concisely stated.

Those who can consult the text will see that the
M a t i k a, or table of subjects of all the questions (which
I have not held it useful to reproduce), refers exclusively
to Book III. Book III. in fact contains the entire work
considered as an inquiry (not necessarily exhaustive) into
the concrete, or, as one might say, the applied ethics of
Buddhism. In it many if not all fundamental concepts


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXXI


are taken as already defined and granted. Hence Books I.
and II. are introductory and, as it were, of the nature of
inquiry into data. Book II. is psycho-physical; Book I.
is psychological. Together they constitute a very elaborate
development, and again a sub-development, of the first
triplet of questions in Book III., viz.: dhamma which
are good, Lc ., make good karma, those which are bad, and
those which make no karma (the indeterminates). Now, of
these last some are simply and solely results 1 of good or
bad dhamma, and some are not so, but are states of
mind and expressions of mind entailing no moral result
(on the agent ). 2 * Some again, while making no karma, are
of neither of these two species, but are dhamma which
might be called either unmoral (r up am ), 8 or else super -
moral (uncompounded element or Nirvana ). 4 These are
held to constitute a third and fourth species of the third
class of dhamma called indeterminate. But the former of
the two alone receives detailed and systematic treatment.

Hence the whole manual is shown to be, as it professes
to be, a compendium, or, more literally, a co-enumeration
of dhamma.

The method of treatment or procedure termed Abhi-
dhamma (for Abhidhamma is treatment rather than matter)
is, according to the Matika, held to end at the end of
the chapter entitled Pitthi-dukam or Supplementary
Set of Pairs. The last thirty-seven pairs of questions 6 and
answers, on the other hand, are entitled Suttantika-
dukam. They are of a miscellaneous character, and are
in many cases not logically opposed. Buddhaghosa has
nothing to say by way of explaining their inclusion, nor
the principle determining their choice or number. Nor is
it easy to deduce any explanation from the nature or the
treatment of them. The name Suttantika may mean
that they are pairs of terms met with in the Dialogues, or


1 Book I., Part III., ch. i. 2 Ibid., ch. ii.

3 Book II. 4 Appendix II.

6 §§ 1296 - 1866 .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXX11


in all the four Nikayas. This is true and verifiable. But
I for one cannot venture to predicate anything further
respecting them.

Y.

On the Chief Subject of Inquiry — D hamma .

If I have called Buddhist ethics psychological, especially
as the subject is treated in this work, it is much in the same
way in which I should call Plato’s psychology ethical.
Neither the founders of Buddhism nor of Platonic Socratism
had elaborated any organic system of psychology or of
ethics respectively. Yet it is hardly overstating the case
for either school of thought to say that whereas the latter
psychologized from an ethical standpoint, the former built
their ethical doctrine on a basis of psychological principles.
For whatever the far-reaching term d h a m in o may in
our manual have precisely signified to the early Buddhists,
it invariably elicits, throughout Book I., a reply in terms
of subjective consciousness. The discussion in the Com-
mentary, which I have reproduced below, p. 2, note 8,
on dhammarammanam, leaves it practically beyond
doubt that dhammo, when thus related to mano, is
as a visual object to visual perception — is, namely, mental
object in general. It thus is shown to be equivalent to
Herbart’s Vorstellung, to Locke’s idea — ‘ whatsoever is the
immediate object of perception, thought or understanding ’
— and to Professor Ward’s * presentation.’ 1

The dhamma in question always prove to be, whatever
their ethical value, factors of c i 1 1 a m used evidently in its
widest sense, i.e., concrete mental process or state. Again,
the analysis of rupam in Book II., as a species of ‘ in-
determinate ’ d h a m m a , is almost wholly a study in the
phenomena of sensation and of the human organism as
sentient. Finally, in Book III. the questions on various
dhamma are for the most part answered in terms of the
four mental skandhas, of the cittani dealt with in
Book I., and of the springs of action as shown in their

1 ‘ Ency. Brit.,’ 9th ed., art. ‘Psychology.’


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXX1U


effect on will. Thus the whole inquiry in its most
generalized expression comes practically to this: Given
man as a moral being, what do we find to be the content
of his consciousness ?

Now this term dhammo is, as readers are already
aware, susceptible of more than one interpretation. Even
when used for the body of ethical doctrine it was applied
with varying extension, i.e. 9 either to the whole doctrine, or
to the Suttantas as opposed to Vinaya and Abhidhamma,
or to the doctrine of the Four Truths only. But whatever
in this connexion is the denotation, the connotation is easy
to fix. That this is not the case where the term has, so to
speak, a secular or * profane * meaning is seen in the various
renderings and discussions of it. 1 The late H. C. Warren
in particular has described the difficulties, first of deter-
mining what the word, in this or that connexion, was
intended to convey, and then of discovering any word or
words adequate to serve as equivalent to it. One step
towards a solution may be made if we can get at a Buddhist
survey of the meanings of dhammo from the Buddhists’
own philosophical point of view. And this we are now
enabled to do in consequence of the editing of the Attha-
salini. In it we read Buddhaghosa’s analysis of the term,
the various meanings it conveyed to Buddhists of the fifth
century a.d., and his judgment, which would be held as
authoritative, of the special significance it possessed in
the questions of the Dhamma - sangani. ‘ The word
dhammo,’ runs the passage (p. 88), ‘is met with [as
meaning] doctrine (p a r i y a 1 1 i), condition or cause
(hetu), virtue or good quality (guno), absence of essence
or of living soul (nissatta-nijjivat a),’ etc. Illustra-
tive texts are then given of each meaning, those referring
to the last being the beginning of the answer in our Manual

1 Cf. 9 e.g., Oldenberg, ‘Buddha,’ etc., 3rd ed., p. 290;
Warren, ‘Buddhism in Translations,’ pp. 116, 864; Kern,
‘Indian Buddhism,’ p. 51, n. 3; Neumann, ‘Beden des\
Gotamo,’ pp. 13, 28, 91; Gogerly, ‘Ceylon Friend,* 1874,

p. 21.

c*


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xxxiv


numbered [121] : ‘ Now at that time there are states ’ ; and,
further, the passage from the Satipanhanasutta 1 : ‘Con-
cerning dhammas he abides watchful over dhammas.’ And
it is with the fourth and last-named meaning of d h a m m o
that the term is said to be used in the questions of the
Manual. Again, a little later (p. 40), he gives a more
positive expression to this particular meaning by saying
that d h a m m o, so employed, signifies * that which has the
mark of bearing its nature’ (or character or condition —
sabhavadharano). This to us somewhat obscure
characterization may very likely, in view of the context,
mean that dhammo as phenomenon is without sub-
stratum, is not a quality cohering in a substance. ‘Pheno-
menon ’ is certainly our nearest equivalent to the negative
definition of nissatta-nijjlvam, and this is actually
the rendering given to dhammo (when employed in this
sense in the Sutta just quoted) by Dr. Neumann : ‘Da wacht
ein Monch bei den Erscheinungen. . . If I have used
states, or states of consciousness, instead of phenomena,
it is merely because, in the modern tradition of British
psychology, ‘ states of consciousness * is exactly equivalent
to such phenomena as are mental, or at least conscious.
And, further, because this use of 4 states * has been taken up
into that psychological tradition on the very same grounds
as prompted this Buddhist interpretation of d h a m m a —
the ground of non-committal, not to say negation, with
respect to any psychical substance or entity.

That we have, in this country pre-eminently, gone to
work after the manner of electrical science with respect to
its subject-matter, and psychologized without a psyche, is,
of course due to the influence of Hume. In selecting a
term so characteristic of the British tradition as ‘ states *
of mind or consciousness, I am not concerned to justify its
use in the face of a tendency to substitute terms more
expressive of a dynamic conception of mental operations, 0
or of otherwise altered standpoints. The Buddhists seem

1 D. (suttanta 22) ; M. i. 61.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXXV


to have held, as our psychology has held, that for purposes
of analysis it was justifiable to break up the mental con-
tinuum of the moral individuality into this or that congeries
of states or mental phenomena. In and through these
they sought to trace the working of moral causation. To
look beneath or behind them for a * thing in itself ’ they
held to be a dangerous superstition. With Goethe they
said : * Suche nichts hinter den Phanomenen ; sie selbst
sind die Lehre !’ And in view of this coincidence of impli-
cation and emphasis, * states of mind ’ or * of conscious-
ness ’ seemed best to fit dhamma when the reply was
made in terms of mental phenomena.

In the book on Form, the standpoint is no doubt shifted
to a relatively more objective consideration of the moral
being and his contact with a world considered as external.
But then the word dhamma (and my rendering of it) is
also superseded by r u p a m .

It is only when we come to the more synthetic matter of
Book III. that dhamma strains the scope of the term I
have selected if ‘ states ’ be taken as strictly states of mind
or of consciousness. It is true that the Buddhist view of
things so far resembles the Berkeleian that all phenomena,
or things or sequences or elements, or however else we may
render dhamma, may be regarded as in the last resort
* states of mind.’ This in its turn may seem a straining
of the significance which the term possessed for early Bud-
dhists in a more general inquiry such as that of Book III.
Yet consider the definitions of dhamma, worthy of
Berkeley himself, on p. 272 [1044-45].

The difficulty lay in the choice of another term, and none
being satisfactory, I retained, for want of a better, the
same rendering, which is, after all, indefinite enough to
admit of its connoting other congeries of things or aspects
beside consciousness.

The fundamental importance in Buddhist philosophy of
this Phenomenalism or Non-substantialism as a protest
against the prevailing Animism, which, beginning with pro-
jecting the self into objects, elaborated that projected self

c 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic


XXXVI


into noumenal substance, has by this time been more or "
less admitted. The testimony of the canonical books leaves
no doubt on the matter, from Gotama’s first sermon to his
first converts, 1 and his first Dialogue in the * Long Collec-
tion,* to the first book of the Katha Vatthu. 2 There are
other episodes in the books where the belief in a permanent
spiritual essence is, together with a number of other specu-
lations, waived aside as subjects calculated to waste time
and energy. But in the portions referred to the doctrine
of repudiation is more positive, and may be summed up in
one of the refrains of the Majjhima Nikaya : S u h n a m
idam attena va attaniyena v a t i — Void is this of
soul or of aught of the nature of soul ! 3 The force of the
often repeated * This is not mine, this is not I, this is not
my Self,* is not intended to make directly for goodness but
for truth and insight. * And since neither self nor aught
belonging to self, brethren, can really and truly be accepted,
is not the heretical position which holds : — This is the
world and this is the self, and I shall continue to be in the
future, permanent, immutable, eternal, of a nature that
knows no change, yea, I shall abide to eternity ! — is not
this simply and entirely a doctrine of fools ?’ 4

And now that the later or scholastic doctrine, as shown
in the writings of the greatest of the Buddhist scholastics,
becomes accessible, it is seen how carefully and conscien-
tiously this anti-substantialist position had been cherished 1
and upheld. Half-way to the age of the Commentators,
the Milinda-panho places the question of soul- theory
at the head of the problems discussed. Then turning to
Buddhaghosa we find the emphatic negation of the Suman-
gala YilasinI (p. 194) : — 1 Of aught within called self which
looks forward or looks around, &c., there is none !’ matched


1 S. ii. 66-8 ; also in Maha Vagga, i. 6, 38-47.

2 Cf. Rhys Davids* ‘ American Lectures,* pp. 39, 40.

3 Or ‘self* (attena). M. i. 297 ; ii. 263 (lege sunfiam);

cf. S. iv. 54; and K. V. 67, 579. Cf. the ‘Emptiness-con—
cept,’ below, p. 33. 4 M. i. 138.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXXV11


in the Atthasalinl, not only by the above-given definition
of dhamina’s, but also by the equally or even more
emphatic affirmation respecting them, given in my note 1
to p. 83 : — * There is no permanent entity or self which
acquires the states . . . these are to be understood pheno-
menally (sabhavatthena). There is no other essence
or existence or personality or individual whatever.’ Again,
attention is drawn in the notes to his often-reiterated com-
ment that when a disposition or emotion is referred to
cittam, e.g.y nandlrago cittassa, 1 the repudiation
of an ego is thereby implied. Once more, the thoughts
and acts which are tainted with ‘ Asavas ’ or with corrup-
tions are said to be so in virtue of their being centred in
the soul or self, 2 and those which have attained that * ideal
Better,’ and have no ‘beyond’ (an-uttara) are inter-
preted as having transcended or rejected the soul or self. 3

To appreciate the relative consistency with which the
Buddhists tried to govern their philosophy, both in subject
and in treatment, in accordance with this fundamental
principle, we must open a book of Western psychology,
more or less contemporary, such as the ‘ De Anima,’ and
note the sharply contrasted position taken up at the outset.

‘The object of our inquiry,’ Aristotle says in his opening
sentences, ‘ is to study and ascertain the nature and essence
of the Psyche, as well as its accidents. ... It may be well
to distinguish . . . the genus to which the Psyche belongs,
and determine what it is . . . whether it is a some-
thing and an essence, or quantity, or quality . . . whether
it is among entities in potentiality, or whether rather it is
a reality. . . . Now, the knowledge of anything in itself
seems to be useful towards a right conception of the causes
of the accidents in substances. . . . But the knowledge
of the accidents contributes largely in its turn towards
knowing what the thing essentially is. . . . Thus the


1 P. 277, n. 2 ; also pp. 129, note 1 ; 298, note 8, &c. ;
and cf. p. 175, p. 1. See also on d h a t u, p. lxxvii.

2 P. 294, n. 7 ; 827, n. 1. 8 P. 886, n. 2.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XXXV1U


essence is the proper beginning for every demonstra-
tion. . . .*

The whole standpoint which the Buddhists brought into
question, and decided to be untenable as a basis of sound
doctrine, is here accepted and taken as granted. A
phenomenon, or series of phenomena, is, on being held up
for investigation, immediately and unhesitatingly looked
upon under one of two aspects : either it must be a sub-
stance, essence, reality, or it belongs to one of those nine
other ‘Categories’ — quantity, quality, etc. — which con-
stitute the phenomenon an attribute or group of attributes v
cohering in a substance.

It is true that Aristotle was too progressive and original
a thinker to stop here. In his theory of mind as eZSo<? or
* form,’ in itself mere potentiality, but becoming actuality
as implicate in, and as energizing body, he endeavoured to
transform the animism of current standpoints into a more \
rational conception. And in applying his theory he goes
far virtually to resolve mind into phenomenal process ( De
An ., III., chaps, vii., viii.). But he did not, or would not,
wrench himself radically out of the primitive soil and plant
his thought on a fresh basis, as the Buddhist dared to
do. Hence Greek thought abode, for all his rationalizing,
saturated with substantialist methods, till it was found
acceptable by and was brought up into an ecclesiastical
philosophy which, from its Patristic stage, had inherited a
tradition steeped in animistic standpoints.

Modem science, however, has been gradually training
the popular mind to a phenomenalistic point of view, and
joining hands in psychology with the anti- substantialist
tradition of Hume. So that the way is being paved for a
more general appreciation of the earnest effort made by
Buddhism — an effort stupendous and astonishing if we con-
sider its date and the forces against it — to sever the growth
of philosophic and religious thought from its ancestral
stem and rear it in a purely rational soil.

But the philosophic elaboration of soul-theory into Sub-
stantialism is complicated and streqgthened by a deeply


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xxxix


important factor, on which I have already touched. This
factor is the exploitation by philosophy, not of a primitive
Weltanschauung , but of a fundamental fact in intellectual
procedure and intellectual economy. I refer to the process
of assimilating an indefinite number of particular impres-
sions, on the ground of a common resemblance, into a
‘ generic idea * or general notion, and of referring to each
assimilated product by means of a common name. Every
act of cognition, of coming-to-know anything, is reducible
to this compound function of discerning the particular and
of assimilating it into something relatively general. And
this process, in its most abstract terms, is cognizing Unity
in Diversity, the One through and beneath the Many.

Now no one, even slightly conversant with the history of
philosophy, can have failed to note the connexion there has
ever been set up between the concept of substratum and
phenomena on the one hand, and that of the One and the
Many on the other. They have become blended together,
though they spring from distinct roots. And so essential,
in every advance made by the intellect to extend knowledge
and to reorganize its acquisitions, is the co-ordinating and
economizing efficacy of this faculty of generalizing, that
its alliance with any other deep-rooted traditional product
of mind must prove a mighty stay. A fact in the growth
of religious and of philosophic thought which so springs out
of the very working and growth of thought in general as
this tendency to unify, must seem to rest on unshakeable
foundations.

And when this implicit logic of intellectual procedure,
this subsuming the particular under the general, has been
rendered explicit in a formal system of definition and pre-
dication and syllogism, such as was worked out by the
Greeks, the breach of alliance becomes much harder. For
the progress in positive knowledge, as organized by the
logical methods, is brought into harmony with progress in
religious and philosophic thought.

This advance in the West is still in force, except in
so far as psychological advance, and scientific progress


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xl


generally, tell on the traditional logic and philosophy.
Psychological analysis, for instance, shows that we mky
confuse the effective registration of our knowledge with the
actual disposition of the originals. That is to say, this
perceiving and judging, by way of generalizing and unifying,^
is the only way by which we are able to master the infinite
diversities and approximate uniformities of phenomena.
Through such procedure great results are attained. Con-
ceptions are widened and deepened. Laws are discovered
and then taken up under more general laws. Knowledge
groups all phenomena under a few aspects of all but
supreme generality. Unification of knowledge is every- "
where considered as the ideal aim of intellect.

But, after all, this is only the ideal method and economy
of intellect. The stenographers ideal is to compress re-
corded matter into the fewest symbols by which he can
reproduce faithfully. The ideal of the phonograph is to
reproduce without the intermediacy of an economical pro-
cess. Limitations of time and faculty constrain us to be-
come mental stenographers. Whatever be our vifew as to
the reality fdl an external wdrld outside our perception of it,
psychology teaches us to distinguish our fetches of abstrac-
tion and generalization for what they are psychologically —
i.e ., for effective mental shorthand — whatever they may
represent besides. The logical form of Universal in term
and in proposition is as much a token of our weakness in
realizing the Particular as of our strength in constructing
what is at best an abstract and hypothetical whole. * The
philosophical concept of the One is pregnant with powerful
associations. To what extent is it simply as a mathematical
symbol in a hypothetical cosmos of carefully selected data,
whence the infinite concrete is eliminated lest it ‘should
flow in over us n and overwhelm us ?

Now, the Buddhistic phenomenalism had also both the
one and the other member of this great alliance of

1 Infra , p. 851: ‘Yam . . . papaka akusala dhamma
anvassaveyy um. *


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xli


Noumenon and Unity to contend with. But the alliance
had, so far at least as we know or can infer, not yet been
welded together by a logical organon, or by any develop-
ment in inductive science. Gotama and his apostles were
conversant with the best culture of their age, yet when
they shape their discourse according to anything we should
call logic, they fall into it rather than wield it after the
conscious fashion of Plato or Aristotle. Nor is there, in
the books, any clear method practised of definition according
to genus and species, or of mutual exclusion among con-
cepts. Thus freer in harness, the Buddhist revolutionary
philosophy may be said to have attempted a relatively less
impracticable task. The development of a science and art
of logic in India, as we know it, was later in time ; and
though Buddhist thinkers helped in that development, it
coincided precisely with the decline of Buddhistic non-
8ubstantialism, with the renascence of Pantheistic thought.

VI, _

On the Inquiry int of Rup a m (Farm) J and the Buddhist
Theory of Sense.

Taking dhamma, then, to mean phenomena considered
as knowledge — in other words, as actually or potentially
states of consciousness — we may next look more closely
into, that which the catechism brings out respecting
rupam (Book II., and § 583) considered as a species of
dhamma. By this procedure we shall best place our-
selves at the threshold, so to speak, of the Buddhist
position, both as to its psychology and its view of things
in general, and be thus better led up to the ethical import
of the questions in the first part.

The entire universe of dhamma is classed with respect
to rupam in questions 1091, 1092 (Book III.). They are
there shown to be either rupino, having form, or
a-rupino, not having form. The positive category
comprises ‘ the four great phenomena (four elements) and
all their derivatives.’ The negative term refers to what


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlii

we should call modes or phases of consciousness, or sub-
jective experience — that is, to ‘the skandhas of feeling,
perception, syntheses and intellect* — as well as to ‘un-
compounded element.* (The skandhas are also ‘elements’
— that is, irreducible but phenomenal factors (see p. 129,
n. 1) — but they are compounds. 1 ) Bupam would thus
appear at first sight to be a name for the external world
or for the Extended universe, as contrasted with the
unextended, mental, psychical or subjective universe.
Personally I do not find, so far, that the Eastern and
Western concepts can be so easily made to coincide. It
will be better before, and indeed without as yet, arriving
at any such conclusive judgment, to inquire into the
application made of the term in the Manual generally.

We find rupam used in three, at least, of the various
meanings assigned to it in the lexicons. It occurs first,
and very frequently, as the general name for the objects
of the sense of sight. It may then stand as simply
rupam (§ 617, ‘this which is visual form,* as opposed
to § 621, etc., ‘ this which is “ sound,” “ odour,” ’ etc.).
More usually it is spoken of as ruparammanam,
object of sight (p. 1), or as rupayatanam, sphere
(province, Gehiet) of sights or of visual form (pp. 172, 183
et seq.). It includes both sensations of colour and lustre and
the complex sensations of form. Used in this connexion,
its specialization is, of course, only due to the psychological
fact that sight is the spokesman and interpreter of all the
senses, so that ‘I see * often stands for ‘ I perceive or dis-
cern through two or more modes of sensation.*

On this point it is worth while pointing out an interesting
flash of psychological discrimination in the Commentary.
It will be noticed, in the various kinds of rupayatanam
enumerated in § 617 (p. 188, n. 9), that, after pure visual
sensations have been instanced, different magnitudes and
forms are added, such as ‘ long, short,* etc. On these


1 C/., e.g ., Dhp. A., p. 413 : ... ‘ all the compounds,
with their divisions of skandhas, elements and spheres.*


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



xliii


Buddhaghosa remarks: ‘Here, inasmuch as we are able
to tell “long,” “short,” etc., by touch, while we cannot
bo discern “blue,” etc., therefore “long,” “short” and
the rest are not visual forms except inferentially (literally,
not visual forms without explanation). A , B , placed in
such a relation to C, D, is only by customary usage spoken
of as something seen * (Asl. 816). 1 This may not bring
ns up to Berkeley, but it is a farther step in that direction
than Aristotle’s mere hint — * There is a movement which is
perceptible both by Touch and Sight ’ — when he is alluding
to magnitudes, etc., being ‘common sensibles,’ i.e., per-
ceptible by more than one sense. 2

To resume : Rupam, in its wider sense (as ‘ all form ’),
may be due to the popular generalization and representa-
tive function of the sense of sight, expressed in Tennyson’s
line:

‘ For knowledge is of things we see . . .’

And thus, even as a philosophical concept, it may, loosely
speaking, have stood for ‘ things seen,’ as contrasted with
the unseen world of dhamma arupino. But this is
by no means an adequate rendering of the term in its more
careful and technical use in the second Book of our Manual.
For, as may there be seen, much of the content of ‘ form ’
is explicitly declared to be invisible. 3

Rupam occurs next, and, with almost equal frequency,
together with its opposite, arupam, to signify those two
other worlds, realms or planes 4 of temporal existence,


1 The symbols are my own adaptation, not a literal
rendering. In the account of the ‘ external senses ’ or
Indriyas given in the (later) Siinkhya text-books, Professor
Garbe points out that the objects of sight are limited to
colour (rupa), exclusive of form (Garbe, ‘Die Sankhya
Philosophic,’ p. 258).

2 ‘ De Anima,’ II. vi.

3 Cf. §§ 597 et seq ., 657, 658, 751, 752, etc.

4 To the employment of ‘universe’ for avacaram
exception may be taken, since the latter term means only
a part of the Oriental cosmos. I admit it calls for apology.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xliv

which Buddhism accepted along with other current
mythology, and which, taken together with the lowest, or
sensuous plane of existence, exhaust the possible modes
of re-birth. These avacaras, or loci of form and
non-form, are described in terms of vague localization
(§§ 1280-85), but it is not easy to realize how far existence
of either sort was conceived with anything like precision.
Including the * upper ’ grades of the world of sensuous
existence, they were more popularly known as heaven or
sagga (svarga), i.e ., the Bright. Their inhabitants
were devas, distinguished into hosts variously named.
Like the heaven of the West or the Near East, they were
located ‘ above.’ Unlike that heaven, life in them was
temporal, not eternal.

But the Dhamma-sangani throws no new light on the
kind of states they were supposed to be. Nor does
Buddhaghosa here figure as an Eastern Dante, essaying
to body out more fully, either dogmatically or as in a
dream, such ineffable oracles as were hinted at by a Paul
‘ caught up to the third heaven . . . whether in the body
or out of the body I cannot tell — God knoweth,’ or the
ecstatic visions of a John in lonely exile. The AtthasalinI
is not free from divagations on matters of equally secondary
importance to the earnest Buddhist. 1 Yet it has nothing


If I have used it throughout Book I., it was because there
the term avacaram seemed more suggestive of the
logician’s term 4 universe of discourse,’ or ‘of thought/
than of any physically conceived actuality. It seemed to
fit De Morgan’s definition of ‘ the universe of a proposi-
tion ’ — ‘ a collection of all objects which are contemplated
as objects about which assertion or denial may take place/
the universe of form, for instance, either as a vague, vast
concept ‘ in ’ time and effort, or as a state of mind, a rapt
abstraction — in either case a ‘ universe of thought ’ for the
time being.

1 Of., e.g ., on a similar subject, Sum. 110. He tells us,
it is true (see below, p. 196, n. 4), that the food of the
gods who inhabited the highest sphere of the sensuous
world was of the maximum degree of refinement, leading


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlv

to tell of a mode of being endowed with rupa, yet with- \
out the kama, or sensuous impulses held to be bound
up with rupa, when the term is used in its wider sense. 1
Nor does it enlighten us on the more impalpable denizens
of a plane of being where rupa itself is not, and for
which no terms seem held appropriate save such as express
high fetches of abstract thought. 2 We must go back, after
all, to the Nikayas for such brief hints as we can find.
We do hear, at least, in the Dlgha Nikaya, of beings in one
of the middle circles of the Form heavens termed Eadiant
(Abhassara), as ‘ made of mind, feeding on joy, radiating
light, traversing the firmament, continuing in beauty.* 8
Were it not that we miss here the unending melody
sounding through each circle of the Western poet’s
Paradise, 4 we might well apply this description to Dante’s
‘ anime liete,’ who, like incandescent spheres :

‘ Fiammando forte, a guisa di comete,

E come cerchi in tempra d’ oriuoli
Si giran.’ ...

Liker to those brilliant visions the heavens of Form seem
to have been than to the ‘ quiet air ’ and ‘ the meadow of
fresh verdure ’ on that slope of Limbo where

‘ Genti v’ eran con occhi tardi e gravi,’

who

perhaps to the inference that in the two superior planes it
was not required.

1 See pp. 168-170: ‘All form is that which is . . .
related, or which belongs to the universe of sense, not to
that of form, or to that of the formless.’

2 See the four Aruppas, pp. 71-75.

3 D. i. 17. Again we read (D. i. 195), that of the three
possible ‘ personalities ’ of current tradition, one was made
of mind, having form, and a complete organism, and one
was without form and made of consciousness, or perception
(arupl safiilamayo).

4 There is no lack of music in some of the lower Indian
heavens. Cf., e.g., M. i. 252, on Sakka the god enjoying the
music in his sensuous paradise. And see Vimana Vatthu,
passim.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlvi

‘ Parlavan rado, con voci soavi.’

Yet the rare, sweet utterances of these devas of Europe,
discoursing with ‘the Master of those who know,’ may
better have accorded with the Buddhist conception of
‘ beings made of mind ’ than the choric dances of the
spheres above.

Among these shadowy beings, however, we are far from
the fully bodied out idea of the ‘ all form ’ and the ‘ skandha
of form ’ of the second and third Books of the Manual.
It may be that the worlds of r u p a and arupa were so
called in popular tradition because in the former, visible,
and in the latter, invisible, beings resided. But whereas
attributes concerning either are ‘sadly to seek,’ there is no
lack of information concerning the attributes of form in the
‘ sensuous universe ’ or kamavacaram. If the list
given of these in the first chapter of Book II. be consulted,
it will be seen that I have not followed the reading of the
P. T. S. edition when it states that all form is kama-
vacaram eva, rupavacaram eva, that is, is both
related to the universe of sense and also to that of form.
The Siamese edition reads kamavacaram eva, na
rupavacaram eva. It may seem at first sight illogical
to say that form is not related to the universe of form.
But the better logic is really on the side of the Siamese.
On page 834 of my translation, 1 it is seen that the
avacaras were mutually exclusive as to their contents*
To belong to the universe of form involved exclusion from
that of sense. But in the inquiry into ‘ all form ’ we are
clearly occupied with facts about this present world >and
about women and men as we know them — in a word, with
the world of sense. Hence the ‘ all form * of Book II. is
clearly not the form of the rupavacaram. It is not
used with the same implications.

Further than this, further than the vague avacara-
geography gathered already from other sources, the Manual
does not bring us, nor the Commentary either.

1 §§ 1281-1284 of the P. T. S.’s edition.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlvii


We come then to r tip am in the sensuous plane of
being, or at least to such portion of that plane as is con-
cerned with human beings : to sabbam rupam and to
its distribution in each human economy, termed rupak-
khandho. Whether taken generally, or under the
more specialized aspect, there seems to be unanimity of
teaching concerning the various manifestations of it. 1
Under it are comprised four ultimate primary, or underiv-
able constituents and twenty-three secondary, dependent or
derived modes. Thus :


No upada
= (a) The Tangible
(i.e., earthy or
solid,
lambent
or fiery,
gaseous
or aerial
elements,
or great
phenomena),
(b) The Fluid
(or moist)
Element.


Ru pam


Upada

= (a) The Five Senses,

(b) The Four Objects of Sense

(excluding Tangibles),

(c) The Three Organic

Faculties.

(i d ) The Two Modes of Intima-
tion,

(e) The Element of Space,

(/) Three Qualities of Form,

( g ) Three Phases in the
Evolution of Form,

(A) Impermanence of Form,

(i) Bodily nutriment.


To enter with any fulness of discussion into this classifi-
cation, so rich in interesting suggestions, would occupy
itself a volume. In an introduction of mere notes I will
offer only a few general considerations.

We are probably first impressed by the psychological
aspect taken of a subject that might seem to lend itself to
purely objective consideration. The main constituents of


1 Cf-, e.g., S. iii. 59, with Dh. S., § 584, and Vis. Mag.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlviii


the material world, classified in the East as we know them
to have been classified, contemporaneously, in the West,
are set down in terms of subjective or conscious experience.
The apo-dhatu is not called explicitly the Intangible ;
virtually, however, it and the other three * Great Pheno-
mena,’ or literally ‘ Great things that have Become,’ 1 are
regarded from the point of view of how they affect us by
way of sense. We might add, how they affect us most
fundamentally by way of sense. In the selection of Touch
among the senses the Indian tradition joins hands with
Demokritus. But of this no more at present.

Again, in the second table, or secondary forms, the same
standpoint is predominant. We have the action and
re-action of sense-object and sense, the distinctive expres-
sions of sex and of personality generally, and the pheno-
mena of organic life, as ‘ sensed ’ or inferred, compre-
hended under the most general terms. Two modes of form
alone are treated objectively: space and food. And of
these, too, the aspect taken has close reference to the
conscious personality. Aka so is really ok a so, room,
or opportunity, for life and movement. Food, though
described as to its varieties in objective terms, is referred
to rather in the abstract sense of nutrition and nutriment
than as nutritive matter . (Cf. p. 203, n. 3.)


1 Better in Greek ra yiyvofieva, or in German die vier
grossen Geicordcnen . How the Buddhist logic exactly
reconciled the anomaly of apodhatu as underived and
yet as inaccessible to that sense which comes into contact
with the underived is not, in the Manual, clearly made out.

In hot water, as the Cy. says, there is -heat, gas, and solid ,
and hence we feel it. Yet by the definition there must be
in fluid a something underived from these three elements.

The Buddhist Sensationalism was opposed to the view
taken in the Upanishad, where the senses are derived from
p r a j fi a (rendered by Prof. Deussen ‘ consciousness ’), an<Ks
again from the World Soul. In the Garbha Up., however,
sight is spoken of as fire. The Buddhist view was subse-
quently again opposed by the Sankhya philosophy, but not
by the Nyaya.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



xlix


Or we may be more especially struck by the curious
selection and classification exercised in regard to the items
of the catalogue of form.

Now, the compilers of this or of any of the canonical
books were not interested in rupam on psychological
grounds as such. Their object was not what we should
term scientific. They were not inquiring into forms, either
as objective existences, or as mental constructions, with
any curiosity respecting the macrocosm, its parts, or its
order. They were not concerned with problems of pri-
mordial v\tj 9 of first causes, or of organic evolution, in the
spirit which has been operative in Western thought from
Thales (claimed by Europe) to Darwin. For them, as for
the leaders of that other rival movement in our own culture,

, the tradition of Socrates and Plato, man was, first and last,
! the subject supremely worth thinking about. And man
^was worth thinking about as a moral being. The physical
universe was the background and accessory, the support and
the ‘fuel* (upadanam), of the evolution of the moral
life. It was necessary to man as ethical (at least during
his sojourn on the physical plane), but it was only in so far
as it affected his ethical life that he could profitably study
it. The Buddhist, like the Socratic view, was that of
primitive man — * What is the good of it ?’ — transformed and
sublimated by the evolution of the moral ideal. The early
questioning : Is such and such good for life-preservation,
for race-preservation, for fun? or is it bad? or is it in-
determinate ? becomes, in evolved ethics : Does it make for
my perfection, for others* perfection, for noblest enjoyment ?
does it make for the contrary ? does it make for neither ?

And the advance in moral evolution which was attempted
by Buddhist philosophy, coming as it did in an age of
metaphysical dogmatism and withal of scepticism, brought
with it the felt need of looking deeper into those data of
mental procedure on which dogmatic speculation and
ethical convictions were alike founded. 1


1 G. Croom Robertson, ‘ Philosophical Remains,’ p. 8.

d


:ed by


Google



1


Viewed in this light, the category of rupam or of
rupakkhandho becomes fairly intelligible, both as to
the selection and classification of subject matter and as to
the standpoint from which it is regarded. As a learner of
ethical doctrine, pursuing either the lower or the higher
ideal, the Buddhist was concerned with the external world
just as far as it directly and inevitably affected his moral
welfare and that of other moral beings, that is to say, of
all conscious animate beings. To this extent did he receive
.instruction concerning it.

In the first place, the great ultimate phenomena of his
physical world were one and the same as the basis of his
own physical being. That had form ; so had this. That
was built up of the four elements; so was this. That
came into being, persisted, then dissolved ; this was his
destiny, too, as a temporary collocation or body, * subject
to erasion, abrasion, dissolution and disintegration.’ 1 And
all that side of life which we call mind or consciousness,
similarly conceived as collocations or aggregates, was bound
up therein and on that did it depend.

Here, then, was a vital kinship, a common basis of
physical being which it behoved the student of man to
recognise and take into account, so as to hold an intelligent
and consistent attitude towards it. The bhikkhu sekho 2 3
* who has not attained, who is aspiring after the unsurpass^
able goal,’ has to know, inter alia , earth, water, flame, air,
each for what it is, both as external and as part of himself s
— must know 4 unity ’ (e k a 1 1 a m) for what it is ; must
indulge in no conceits of fancy (m a m a n ii i) about it or
them, and must so regard them that of him it may one
day be said by the masters : Parinnatam tassa ! —

4 He knows it thoroughly.’

To this point we shall return. That the elements are
considered under the aspect of their tangibility involves


1 D. i. 76, c.g.

2 The brother in orders undergoing training. M. i. 4.

3 M. i., pp. 185, et 8eq.; pp. 421, et seq.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



li


for the Buddhist the further inquiry into the sensitive
agency by which they affect him as tangibles, and so into
the problem of sensation and sense-perception in general.
On this subject the Dhamma-sangani yields a positive and
valuable contribution to our knowledge of the history of
psychology in India in the fourth century b.c. It may
contain no matter additional to that which is reproduced
in Hardy's ‘ Manual of Buddhism ’ (pp. 899-404, 419-428).
But Hardy drew directly from relatively modern sources,
and though it is interesting to see how far and how faith-
fully the original tradition has been kept intact in these
exegetical works, we turn gladly to the stronger attractions
of the first academic formulation of a theory of sense which
ancient India has hitherto preserved for us. There is no
such analysis of sensation — full, sober, positive, so far as
it goes — put forward in any Indian book of an equally
early date. The pre-Buddhistic Upanishads (and those,
too, of later date) yield only poetic adumbrations, sporadic
aphorisms on the work of the senses. The Nyaya doctrine
of pratyaksha or perception, the Jaina Sutras, the
elaboration of the Vedanta and Sankhya doctrines are, of
course, of far later date. It may not, therefore, be uncalled
for if I digress at some length on the Buddhist position in
this matter, and look for parallel theories in the West rather
than in India itself.

The theory of action and reaction between the five
special 1 senses and their several objects is given in
pages 172-190 and 197-200 of my translation. It may be
summarized as follows :


A. The Senses*-

First, a general statement relating each sense in turn
(a) to Nature (the four elements), ( b ) to the individual


. 1 They are called ‘ special ’ in modern psychology to dis-
tinguish them from organic, general or systemic sense,
which works without specially adapted peripheral organs.

d 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lii


organism, and affirming its invisibility and its power of
impact.

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process, in each
case, into

(a) A personal agency or apparatus capable of reacting
to an impact not itself ;

(b) An impingeing * form,’ or form producing an impact
of one specific kind ;

(c) Impact between (a) and ( b ) ;

(< d ) Eesultant modification of the mental continuum,
viz. : in the first place, contact (of a specific sort) ; then,
hedonistic result, or intellectual result, or, presumably,
both. The modification is twice stated in each case,
emphasis being laid on the mutual impact, first as causing
the modification, then as constituting the object of attention
in the modified consciousness of the person affected.

B. The Sense-objects.

First, a general statement, relating each kind of sense-
object in turn to Nature, describing some of the typical
varieties, and affirming its invisibility, except in the case
of visual objects, 1 and its power of producing impact. 2

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process in each
case as under A, but, as it were, from the side of the
sense-object, thus :

(a) A mode of form or sense-object, capable of producing
impact on a special apparatus of the individual organism ;


1 This insistence on the invisibility of all the senses, as
well as on that of all sense-objects except sights or visual
forms, is to me only explicable on the ground that rupain
recurring in each question and each answer, and signifying,
whatever else it meant, in popular idiom, things seen , it
was necessary, in philosophic usage, to indicate that the
term, though referring to sense, did not , with one exception,
connote things seen. Thus, even solid and fiery objects
were, qua tangibles, not visible. They were not visible to
the kayo, or skin-sensibility. They spelt visible only to
the eye.

2 See p. 183, n. 1.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



(6) The impact of that apparatus ;

(c) The reaction or complementary impact of the sense-
object ;

(d) Resultant modification of the mental continuum,
viz. : in the first place, contact (of a specific sort) ; then
hedonistic result, or intellectual result, or, presumably,
both. The modification is twice stated, in each case
emphasis being laid on the mutual impact, first as causing
the modification, then as constituting the object of attention
in the modified consciousness thus affected.

If we, for purposes of comparison, consult Greek views
on sense-perception before Aristotle — say, down to b.c. 850
— we shall find nothing to equal this for sobriety, con-
sistency and thoroughness. The surviving fragments of
Empedoklean writings on the subject read beside it like
airy fancies ; nor do the intact utterances of Plato bring us
anything more scientific. Very possibly in Demokritus we
might have found its match, had we more of him than a
few quotations. And there is reason to surmise as much,
or even more, in the case of Alkmaeon.

Let me not, however, be understood to be reading into
the Buddhist theory more than is actually there. In its
sober, analytical prose, it is no less archaic, naive, and
inadequate as explanation than any pre-Aristotelian theory
of the Greeks. The comment of Dr. Siebeck on Empedokles
applies equally to it : 1 ‘It sufficed him to have indicated
the possibility of the external world penetrating the sense-
organs, as though this were tantamount to an explanation
of sensation. The whole working out of his theory is an
attempt to translate in terms of a detailed and consecutive
physiological process the primitive, naive view of cognition.’
Theory of this calibre was, in Greece, divided between
impact (Alkmaeon, Empedokles, with respect to sight , Demo-
kritus, Plato, who, to impact, adds a commingling of sense
and object) and access (efflux and pore theory of Empe-
dokles) as the essential part of the process. The Buddhist

1 * Geschichte der Psychologic, ’ i. 107.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



liv


explanation confines itself to impact. 1 But neither East
nor West, with the possible exception of Alkmaeon, had yet
gripped the notion of a conducting medium. In Aristotle
all is changed. ‘Eidola* which collide, and ‘aporrhoae’
which penetrate, have been thrown aside for an examination
into ‘metaxu.’ And we find the point of view similarly
shifted in Buddhaghosa’s time, though how long before
him this advance had been made we do not know. Nor
was there, in the earlier thought of East or West, any
clear dualistic distinction drawn between mind and matter,
between physical (and physiological) motion or stimulus
on the one hand, and consequent or concomitant mental
modification on the other, in an act of sense-perception.
The Greek explanations are what would now be called
materialistic. The Buddhist description may be inter-
preted either way. It is true that in the Milinda-paiiho,
written some three or four centuries later than our Manual,
the action and reaction of sense and sense-object are com-
pared in realistic metaphor to the clash of two cymbals
and the butting of two goats. 2 3 * But, being metaphorical,
this account brings us really no further. The West, while
it retained the phraseology characterizing the earlier theory
of sense, ceased to imply any direct physical impact or
contact when speaking of being ‘ struck ’ by sights, sounds,
or ideas. How far, and how early, was this also the case
in the East ?

The very fact that the Buddhist theory, with all its
analytical and symmetrical fulness of exposition, yields so
very abstract and schematic a result leaves the way open to
surmise that, even in the time of our Manual, the process
of sense impression was not materialistically conceived. 8


1 Access comes later into prominence with the develop-
ment of the ‘ Door- theory.’ See following section.

2 * Milindapanho,’ p. 60. S.B.E., vol. xxxv., pp. 92, 98.

Cf. below, p. 5, n. 2.

3 Note 2, p. 175, below, suggests the eye, in the case of

sight. If so, in what shape did the object get there ?


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lv

We are not told, for instance, where the mutual impact
takes place, nor with what a distant object impinges. And
if dbamma are conceived, as in the Manual, as actual
or potential states of consciousness, and rupam is con-
ceived as a species of dhamma, it follows that both the
r up am, which is ‘ external * and comes into contact with
the rupam which is ‘of the self/ and also this latter
rupam are regarded in the light of the two mental factors
necessary to constitute an act of sensory consciousness,
actual or potential.

Such may have been the psychological aspect adumbrated,
groped after — not to go further — in the Dhamma-sangani
itself. That the traditional interpretation of this impact-
theory grew psychological with the progress of culture in
the schools of Buddhism seems to be indicated by such a
comment in the AtthasalinI as : ‘ strikes (impinges) on form
is a term for the eye ( i.e ., the visual sense) being receptive
of the object of consciousness.' 1 This seems to be a clear
attempt to resolve the old metaphor, or, it may be, the
old physical concept, into terms of subjective experience.
Again, when alluding to the simile of the cymbals and the
rams, we are told by Buddhaghosa to interpret ‘ eye * by
‘ visual cognition,’ and to take the * concussion ’ in the sense
of function . 2 Once more, he tells us that when feeling
arises through contact, the real causal antecedent is mental,
though apparently external. 3

Without pursuing this problem further, we cannot leave
the subject of sense and sensation without a word of com-
ment and comparison on the prominence given in the
Buddhist theory to the notion of ‘ contact ’ and the sense
of touch. As with us, both terms are from the same stem.
But p h a s s o (contact), on the one hand, is generalized to
include all receptive experience, sensory as well as idea-


1 Asl. 309. Cakkhum arammanam sampaticcha-
yamanam eva rupamhi patihanhati nama.

2 Ibid . 108: ‘kiccatthen’ eva.

3 See below, p. 5, n. 2.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lvi


tional, 1 and to represent the essential antecedent and con-
dition of all feeling (or sensation = vedana). On the
other hand, phusati, photthabbam (to touch, the
tangible) are specialized to express the activity of one of
the senses. Now, the functioning of the tactile sense
(termed body-sensibility or simply body, kayo, pp. 181,
182) is described in precisely the same terms as each of the
other four senses. Nevertheless, it is plain, from the sig-
nificant application of the term tangible, or object of touch,
alluded to already — let alone the use of * contact ’ in a wider
sense — that the Buddhists regarded Touch as giving us
knowledge of things * without ’ in a more fundamental way
than the other senses could. By the table of the contents
of rupam given above, we have seen that it is only
through Touch that a knowledge of the underived elements
of the world of sense could be obtained, the fluid or moist
element alone excepted. This interesting point in the
psychology of early Buddhism may possibly be formulated
somewhere in the Abhidhamma Pitaka. I should feel
more hopeful in this respect had the compilers been, in the
first instance, not ethical thinkers, but impelled by the
scientific curiosity of a Demokritus. The latter, as is well
known, regarded all sensation as either bare touch or
developments of touch — a view borne out to a great extent
by modern biological research. This was, perhaps a corol-
lary of his atomistic philosophy. Yet that Demokritus
was no mere deductive system-spinner, but an inductive
observer, is shown in the surviving quotation of his
dictum, that we should proceed, in our inferences, ‘ from
phenomena to that which is not manifest.’ Now, as the
Buddhist view of rupam calls three of the four elements
* underived ’ and ‘ the tangible,’ while it calls the senses
and all other sense-objects * derived from that tangible ’
and from fluid, one might almost claim that their position
with respect to Touch was in effect parallel to that of
Demokritus. The Commentary does not assist us to any

1 See below, p. 4, n. 2.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lvii

clear conclusion on this matter. But, in addition to the
remark quoted above, in which visual magnitudes are pro-
nounced to be really tactile sensations, it has one interest-
ing illustration of our proverb, ‘ Seeing is believing, but
Touch is the real thing.* It likens the four senses, exclud-
ing touch, to four balls of cotton-wool, intervening between
hammer and four anvils ( i.e ., Upadarupam, or derived
form, without and within) and deadening the impact. But
in Touch, hammer smites through wool, getting at the bare
anvil. 1

Further considerations on the Buddhist theory of
sense, taking us beyond bare sensation to the working
up of such material into concrete acts of perception, I
propose to consider briefly in the following section. The
remaining heads of the rupa-skandha are very concisely
treated in the niddesa answers (pp. 190-197), and, save
in the significance of their selection, call for no special
treatment.

It is not quite clear why senses and sense-objects should
be followed by three indriyas — by three only and just
these three. The senses themselves are often termed
indriyas, and not only in Buddhism. In the indriyas of
sex, however, and the phenomena of nutrition, the rupa -
skandha, in both the self and other selves, is certainly
catalogued under two aspects as general and as impressive
as that of sense. In fact, the whole organism as modi-
fiable by the ‘ s a b b a in rupam* without, may be said
to be summed up under these three aspects. They fit
fairly well into our division of the receptive side of the
organism, considered, psychophysically, as general and
special sensibility. From his ethical standpoint the learner
did well to take the life in which he shared into account
under its impressive aspects of sense, sex and nutrition.
And this not only in so far as he was receptive. The very
term indriyam, which is best paralleled by the Greek
hivaiu?, or faculty — i.e., ‘powers in us, and in all other

1 Asl. 268; below, p. 127, n. 1.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lviii


things, by which we do as we do 91 — and which is inter-
preted to this effect by Buddhaghosa , 1 2 * * * * * points to the active,
self-expressive side of existence. Both as recipient, then,
and as agent, the learner of the Dharma had to acquire
and maintain a certain attitude with respect to these aspects
of the rupa-skandha.

The same considerations apply to the next two kinds of
r u p a m , with which we may bracket the next after them.
The two modes of * intimation * or self-expression exhaust
the active side of life as such, constituting, as one might
say, a world of sub-derivative or tertiary form, and calling
quite especially for modification by theory and practice
(dassanena ca bhavanaya ca). And the element
of space, strange as it looks, at first sight, to find it listed just
here, was of account for the Buddhist only as a necessary
datum or postulate for his sentient and active life. The
vacua of the body, as well as its plena , had to be reckoned
in with the rupa-skandha ; likewise the space without by
which bodies were delimitated, and which, yielding room
for movement, afforded us the three dimensions . 8

The grounds for excluding space from the four elements
and for calling it derived remain in obscurity. In the
Maha Rahulovada-Sutta (cited below) it is ranked imme-
diately after, and apparently as co-ordinate with, the
other four. And it was so ranked, oftener than not, by
Indian thought generally. Yet in another Sutta of the
same Nikaya — the Maha Hatthipadopama- Sutta — Sariputta


1 Republic, v. 477. 2 Asl., p. 119 and passim.

8 See below, p. 194, n. 1 ; also M. i. 423. In the former

passage space is described as if external to the organism ;
in the latter Gotama admonishes his son respecting the

internal aka so.

On the interesting point put forward by Professor von

Schroeder of a connexion between aka 9 a and the Pytha-

gorean o\/ca?, see Professor Garbe in the Vienna Oriental
Journal , xiii., Nro. 4 (1899). The former scholar refers to
the ranking of space as a fifth element, as a schwankend

uberlieferte Bezeichnung . It was so for Buddhism.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lix

describes four elements, leaving out aka so. Eliminated
for some reason from the Underived, when the Dhamma-
sangani was compiled, it was logically necessary to include
it under Derived Bupam. That it was so included because
it was held to be a mental construction, or a ‘ pure form of
intuition,’ is scarcely tenable.

And yet the next seven items of derived form are
apparently to be accepted rather as concepts or aspects of
form than as objective properties or ‘primary qualities'
of it. Be that as it may, all the seven are so many
common facts about rupam, both as ‘sabbam’ and
as skandha. The Three Qualities 1 indicated the ideal
efficiency for moral ends to which the rupa-skandha, or
any form serving such an end, should be brought. The
Three Phases in the organic evolution of form and the great
fact of Impermanence applied everywhere and always to
all form. And as such all had to be borne in mind, all
had to co-operate in shaping theory and practice.

Concerning, lastly, the aharo, or support, of the rupa-
skandha, the hygiene and ethics of diet are held worthy of
rational discussion in the Sutta Pitaka. 2

We have now gone with more or less details into the
divisions of rupam in the ‘sensuous universe,’ with a
view of seeing how far it coincided with any general
philosophical concept in use among ourselves. For me it
does not fit well with any, and the vague term ‘form,’
implicated as it is, like rupam, with ‘things we see,* is
perhaps the most serviceable. Its inclusion of faculties
and abstract notions as integral factors prevent its
coinciding with ‘ matter,’ or ‘ the Extended,’ or ‘ the
External World.’ If we turn to the list of attributes given
in Chapter I. of Book II., rupam appears as pre-
eminently the unmoral (as to both cause and effect) and
the non-mental. It was ‘ favourable ’ to immoral states, as
the chief constituent of a world that had to be mastered


1 Lightness, plasticity, wieldiness, pp. 194, 195.

2 C/., e.g., M. i., Suttas 54, 55, 65, 66, 70.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lx


and transcended by moral culture, but the immoral
states exploiting it were of the other four skandhas. It
included the phenomena of sense, but rather on their
physical pre-mental side than as full-fledged facts of con-
sciousness. And it was sharply distinguished, as a con-
stituent ‘collocation’ or ‘aggregate’ (skandha, rasi), in
the total aggregate of the individual organism from the
three collocations called cetasika (feelings, perceptions,
syntheses), and from that called citta (intellect, thought,
cognition). The attabhavo, or personality, minus all
mental and moral characteristics, is rupam.

As such it is one with all rupam not of its own com-
position. It is ‘ in touch ’ with the general impersonal
rupam, as well as with the mental and moral con-
stituents of other personalities by way of their r u p a m . i
That this intercommunication was held to be possibly on
the basis, and in virtue oij this common structure was
probably as implicit in the Buddhist doctrine as it was
explicit in many of the early Greek philosophers. It is
not impossible that some open allusions to ‘like being
known by like* may be discovered in the Pitakas as a
consciously held and deliberately stated principle or ground
of the impressibility of the sentient organism. No such
statement occurs in our Manual. But the phrase, recurring
in the case of each of the special senses, ‘derived from
the four Great Phenomena,* may not have been inserted
without this implication. Without further evidence, how~
ever, I should not be inclined to attach philosophical signi-
ficance in this direction to it. But on the one hand w©
have an interesting hint in the Commentary that such a
principle was held by early Buddhists. ‘ Where there is
difference of kind (or creature), we read, 1 there is no
sensory stimulus. According to the Ancients, “Sensory
stimulus is of similar kinds, not of different kinds.” ’


1 Asl. 313. Bhuta visese hi sati pasiido va na uppajjati.
‘ Samananam bhutanam hi pasado, na visamananan ti’
Porana.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxi

And again : * The solid, both within and without, becomes
the condition of the sense of touch in the laying hold of the
object of perception — in discerning the tangible.’ 1 It is
true that Buddhaghosa is discoursing, not on this question,
but on what would now be called the specific energy, or
specialized functioning, of nerve. Nevertheless, it seems
inferable from the quotations that the principle was estab-
lished. And we know also how widely accepted (and also
contested) 2 this same principle — 'H y vaxrts tov ofioLov rq 5
ofioi a) — was in Greece, from Empedokles to Plato and to
Plotinus, 3 thinkers, all of them, who were affected, through
Pythagorism or elsewise, by the East. The vivid description
by Buddhaghosa (cf. below, pp. 178-174) of the presence in
the seat of vision of the four elements is very suggestive of
Plato’s account of sight in the 4 * Timaeus,’ where the prin-
ciple is admitted.

Whether as a principle, or merely as an empirical fact,
the oneness of man’s rupaskandha with the sabbam rupam
without was thoroughly admitted, and carefully taught as
orthodox doctrine. And with regard to this kinship, I
repeat, a certain philosophical attitude, both theoretical
and practical, was inculcated as generally binding. That
attitude is, in one of the Majjhima discourses, 4 led up to
and defined as follows : All good states (dhamma) what-
ever are included in the Four Noble Truths concerning 111. 6
Now the First Noble Truth unfolds the nature of 111 : that
it lies in using the five skandhas for Grasping. 6 And the


1 Ibid., 815. Ajjhattika-bahira pathavl etassa kaya-
pasadassa arammanagahane . . . photthabbajanane pac-
cayo hoti.

2 Cf. Aristotle's discussion, De An., i. 2, 5.

3 Cf. the passage, Enn. i. 6, 9, reproduced by Gothe :
ov yap hv 7rd)7roT€ elSev 6<f>0a\fi6 s fjXiou rjXiociSrjs prj
yeyevrj fievo<;.

4 M. i. 184, et 8eq. 6 See below, p. 276.

6 Ibid., p. 328. I have retained the meaning of 4 Grasp-

ing ’ as dictated by Buddhaghosa for the group of the Four
Kinds of Grasping. Dr. Neumann renders upadanak-


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxii


first of the five is that of rupam. Now rupam com-
prises the four Great Phenomena and all their derivatives.
And the first of the four is Earth (the solid element). Then
the solid within y or ‘ belonging to the self,’ is catalogued,
with the injunction that it is to be regarded as it really is
with right wisdom (yathabhutam sammapannaya
datthabba m). And this means that— while recognizing
his kinship with the element to the full — the good student
should not identify himself with it so as to see in it a
permanent unchanging substance as which he should
persist amid transient phenomena. He was to reflect,
‘This is not mine, it is not I, it is not the soul of me!’
‘ It is void of a Self.’ 1 And so for the other three elements.
In their mightiest manifestations — in the earthquake as in
the flood, in conflagration as in tempest — they are but
temporal, phenomenal; subject to change and decay.
Much more is this true of them when collocated in the
human organism. So far from losing himself in his
meditation in the All, in Nature, in ‘ cosmic emotion ’ of
any kind, he had to realize that the rupam in which he
participated was but one of the five factors of that life
which, in so far as it engulfed and mastered him and bore
him drifting along, was the great 111, the source of pain
and delusion. From each of those five factors he had to
detach himself in thought, and attain that position of
mastery and emancipation whereby alone the true, the
Ideal Self could emerge — temporary as a phenomenal


khandho by element of the impulse to live (Lebenstrieb ;
an expression doubtlessly prompted by Schopenhauer’s
philosophy). It would be very desirable to learn from the
Papafica - Sudani (Buddhaghosa’s ‘ Commentary on the
Majjhima Nikaya), whether the Commentator interprets
the t^rm to the same effect in both passages. Dhamma-
dinna, the woman-apostle, explains upadanam, used with
a similar context, as meaning ‘ passionate desire in the five
skandhas-of-grasping.’ (M. i. 300.)

1 See above, p. xxxvi, where the context leaves no doubt
as to what the reflection is meant to emphasize.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxiii


collocation, eternal by its ethical aspiration/ And the
practical result of cultivating i this earth-like culture 1 and
the rest, as Gotama called it in teaching his son, was that
€ the mind was no longer entranced by the consideration of
things as affecting him pleasantly or disagreeably,’ 1 but
‘ the disinterestedness which is based on that which is good
was established.’ 2 4 And he thereat is glad ’ — and rightly
bo — 4 for thus far he has wrought a great work !’

These seem to me some of the more essential features in
the Buddhist Dharma concerning Rupam.


VII.

On the Buddhist Philosophy of Mind and Theory oj
Intellection.

It would have been the greatest possible gain to our
knowledge of the extent to which Buddhism had developed
any clear psychological data for its ethics, had it occurred
to the compilers of the Dhamma-Sangani to introduce an
analysis of the other four skandhas parallel to that of the
skandha of form. It is true that the whole work, except the
book on r u p a m, is an inquiry into arupino dhamma,
conceived for the most part as mental phenomena, but
there is no separate treatment of them divided up as such.
Some glimpses we obtain incidentally, most of which have
been pointed out in the footnotes to the translation. And
it may prove useful to summarize briefly such contribution
as may lie therein to the psychology of Buddhism.

And, first, it is very difficult to say to what extent, if at
all, such psychological matter as we find is distinctively
and originally Buddhist, or how much was merely adopted
from contemporary culture and incorporated with the
Dharma. Into this problem I do not here propose to
inquire farther. If there be any originality, any new
departure in the psychology scattered about the Nikayas, it
is more likely to be in aspect and treatment than in new


2 M. i. 186.


:ed by


Google


1 M. i. 428, 424.



lxiv


matter. Buddhism preached a doctrine of regenerate
personality, to be sought after and developed by and out
of the personal resources of the individual through a system
of intellectual self-culture. Thrown back upon himself, he
developed introspection, the study of consciousness. But,
again, his doctrine imposed on him the study of psychical
states without the psyche. Nature without and nature
within met, acted and reacted, and the result told on the
organism in a natural, orderly, necessary way. 1 But there
was no one adjusting the machinery. 2 The Buddhist
might have approved of Leibniz’s amendment of Locke’s
* Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu * in
the additional phrase ‘ nisi ipse intellectus.’ But he would
not thereby have exalted vififtanam, cittam, or mano
to any hypostatic permanence as prior or as immanent.
He would only admit the priority of intellect to particular
sensations as a natural order, obtaining among the pheno-
menal factors of any given act of cognition.

Psychological earnestness, then, and psychological in-
quiry into mental phenomena, coexisting apart from, and
in opposition to, the usual assumption of a psychical
entity: such are the only distinctively Buddhist features
which may, in the absence of more positive evidence than
we yet possess, be claimed in such analysis of mind as
appears in Buddhist ethics.

Of the results of this earnest spirit of inquiry into mental
phenomena, in so far as they may be detached from ethical
doctrine, and assigned their due place in the history of
human ideas, it will be impossible, for several years, to
prepare any adequate treatment. Much of the Abhi-
dhamma Pitaka, and even some of the Sutta Pitaka, still
remains unedited.

Of the former collection nothing has been translated with
the exception of the attempt in this volume. And, since
Buddhist psychology has an evolution to show covering
nearly a thousand years, we have to await fresh materials

1 Cf. Mil. 57-61. 2 Sum. 194.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


lxv

from the yet unedited works of Buddhaghosa, the Buddhist
Sanskrit texts, and such works as the Netti-pakarana,
Professor Hardy’s edition of which is now in the press.
Meanwhile there is an increasing store of accessible
material which might be sifted by the historical in-
vestigator.

There are, for instance, in the Dhamma-Sangani several
passages suggesting that Buddhist scholars, in con-
templating the consciousness or personality as affected by
phenomena considered as external, were keenly alive to the
distinction between the happening of the expected and the
happening of the unexpected, between instinctive reaction
of the mind and the organism generally, on occasion of
sense, and the deliberate confronting of external phenomena
with a carefully adjusted intelligence. Modern psychology
has largely occupied itself with this distinction, and with
the problems of consciousness and subconsciousness, of
volition and of memory, involved in it. The subject of
attention, involuntary and voluntary, figures prominently
in the psychological literature of the last two decades.
But it is not till the centuries of post- Aristotelian and of
neo-Platonic thought that we see the distinction emerging
in Western psychology contemporaneously with the develop-
ment of the notion of consciousness. 1

In the history of Buddhist thought, too, the distinction
does not appear to have become explicitly and consciously
made till the age of, or previous to, the writing of the great
Commentaries (fifth century). A corresponding explicitness
in the notion of consciousness and self-consciousness, or at
least in the use of some equivalent terms, has yet to be
traced. 2 * Buddhism is so emphatically a philosophy, both
in theory and practice, of the conscious will, with all that
this involves of attention and concentration, that we hardly


1 Cf. Siebeck, op. cit., ii., pp. 200, 858, 888.

2 In the Maha Nidana Sutta Gotama discourses on sibi

consdre by way of nama-rupa. See in Grimblot’s 4 Sept

Suttas,* p. 255.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxvi


look to find terms discriminating such notions from among
other mental characteristics. We are reminded instead of
Matthew Arnold's well-known remark that as, at Soli, no
one spoke of solecisms, so in England we had to import the
term Philistine.

But, whereas it is the Atthasalini, written from the
standpoint of a later elaboration of thought, that makes
explicit what it holds to be the intention of the classic
manual, the latter work lends itself without straining to
such interpretation. I pass over Buddhaghosa’s comments
on the limitations and the movements of attention repro-
duced below, pp. 198, n. 2, 200, n. 1, as derived very possibly
from thought nearer to his own times. Again, with re-
spect to the residual unspecified factors in good and bad
thoughts — the * or-whatever-other-states n — among which
the Commentator names, as a constant, qianasikara, or
attention — this specifying may be considered as later
elaboration. But when the Commentary refers the curious
alternative emphasis in the description of the sensory act 1 2
to just this distinction between a percipient who is pre-
/ pared or unprepared for the stimulus, it seems possible
that he is indeed giving us the original interpretation.


1 See below p. 5, n. 1 ; also Asl., pp. 168, 250, etc. The
definition given of manasikara in the ‘ ye-va-panaka ’
passage of the Commentary (p. 188) is difficult to grasp
fully, partly because, here and there, the reading seems
doubtful in accuracy, partly because of the terms of the
later Buddhist psychology employed, which it would first
be necessary to discuss. But I gather that manasikara
may be set going in the first, middle, or last stage of an
act of cognition — i.e., on the arammanam or initial
presentation, the vlthi (or avajjanam), and the
j a van am; that in this connexion it is concerned with
the first of the three ; that it involves memory, association
of the presentation with [mental] ‘ associates,’ and con-
fronting the presentation. And that it is a constructive
and directing activity of mind, being compared to a
charioteer.

2 Below, p. 176, nn. 1, 2.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxvii

Again, the remarkable distinction drawn, in the case of
every type of good or of bad thoughts, ‘relating to the
sensuous universe/ i.e., to the average moral consciousness,
between thoughts which are prompted by a conscious
motive, 1 and such as are not, seems to me to indicate a
groping after the distinction between instinctive or spon-
taneous intellection, on the one hand, and deliberate,
purposive, or motivated thought on the other.

Taken in isolation, there is insufficient material here to
establish this alternative state of mind as a dominant
feature in Buddhist psychology. Taken in conjunction
with the general mental attitude and intellectual culture
involved in Buddhist ethical doctrine and continually in-
culcated in the canonical books, and emphasized as it is
by later writings, the position gains in significance. The
doctrine of karma, inherited and adopted from earlier and
contemporary thought, never made the Buddhist fatalistic.
He recognised the tremendous vis a tergo expressed in our
doggerel :

‘ For ’tis their nature to.’

But he had unlimited faith in the saving power of nurture.
He faced the grim realities of life with candour, and
tolerated no mask. This honesty, to which we usually add
a mistaken view of the course of thought and action he
prescribed in consequence of the honesty, gains him the
name of Pessimist. But the hope that was in him of
what might be done to better nature through nurture,
even in this present life, by human effort and goodwill,
reveals him as a strong Optimist with an unshaken ideal of
the joy springing from things made perfect. He even tried
to ‘ pitchfork nature ’ in one or two respects, though
opposed to asceticism generally — simply to make the Joy


1 Cf. below, p. 84, n. 1. The thoughts which are not
called sasankharena are by the Cy. ruled as being
a - sankharena, though not explicitly said to be so
(Asl. 71).

* 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxviii


more easily attainable by those who dared to * come out. 9
And this regenerating nurture resolves itself, theoretically,
into a power of discrimination ; practically, into an exercise
of selection. The individual learner, pervious by way of
his * fivefold door * to an inflooding tide of impressions
penetrating to the sixth door of the co-ordinating ‘ mind, 9
was to regulate the natural alertness of reception and per-
ception by the special kind of attention termed yon iso
manasikara, or thorough attention, and by the clear-
eyed insight referred to already as yathabhutam
sammappafifiaya datthabbam, or the higher
wisdom of regarding ‘ things as in themselves they really
are 9 — to adopt Matthew Arnold’s term. The stream of
phenomena, whether of social life, of nature, or of his
own social and organic growth, was not so much to be
ignored by him as to be marked, measured and classed
according to the criteria of one who has chosen * to follow
his own uttermost,’ 1 and has recognised the power of that
^ stream to imperil his enterprise, and its lack of power to
give an equivalent satisfaction. 2 * The often-recurring sub-
ject of sati-sampajaniiam, or that ‘mindful and
aware’ attitude, which evokes satire in robust, if super-
ficial, criticism, is the expansion and ethical application of
this psychological state of prepared and pre-ad justed sens©
or voluntary attention. 8 The student was not to be taken
by surprise — ‘evil states of covetousness and repining
flowing in over him dwelling unprepared 9 — until he had

‘ . . . The nobler mastery learned
Where inward vision over impulse reigns.’ 4

1 Settham upanamam udeti . . . attano uttarim bhajetha
(A. i. 126).

2 Cj\ M. i. 85-90 on kamanam assadan ca adinavafi ca
nissaranam ca . . . yathabhutam pajanitva.

8 See below on guarding the door of the senses,
pp. 850-858. Also note on D. i. 70 in * Dialogues of th©
Buddha,’ p. 81.

4 George Eliot, ‘Brother and Sister. 9


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxix


Then indeed he might dwell at ease, strong in his
emancipation.

Step by step with his progress in the cultivation of
attention, he was also practising himself in that faculty of
selection which it were perhaps more accurate not to
distinguish from attention. Alertness is never long, and,
indeed, never strictly, attending to anything and every-
thing at once. We are reminded of Condillac’s definition
of attention as only an ‘exclusive sensation.’ From the
multitude of excitations flowing in upon us, one is, more
or less frequently, selected, 1 the rest being, for a time,
either wholly excluded or perceived subconsciously. And
this selective instinct, varying in strength, appears, not only
in connexion with sense-impressions, but also in our more
persisting tendencies and interests, as well as in a general
disposition to concentration or to distraction.

Buddhism, in its earnest and hopeful system of self-
culture, set itself strenuously against a distrait habit of
mind, calling it tatra-tatrabhinandinl 2 — ‘the
there-and-there-dalliance,’ as it were of the butterfly. And
it adopted and adapted that discipline in concentration
(samadhi), both physical and psychical, both perceptual
and conceptual, for which India is unsurpassed. But it
appreciated the special practice of rapt absorbed concen-
trated thought called Dhyana or Jhana, not as an end in
itself, but as a symbol and vehicle of that habit of selec-
tion and Bmgle-minded effort which governed ‘ life accord-
ing to the Higher Ideal.’ It did not hold with the robust
creed, which gropes, it may be, after a yet stronger ideal :

‘ Greift nur hinein ins voile Menschenleben,

Und wo Ihr’s packt, da ist es interessant ?’

‘Full life’ of the actual sort, viewed from the Buddhist
standpoint, was too much compact of Vanity Fair, shambles


1 Cf. Hoffding’s criticism of Condillac in ‘Outlines of
Psychology’ (London, 1891), p. 120.

2 M. i. 299.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxx

and cemetery, to be worth the plunge. It had, on the
other hand, great faith in experimenting on nature by a
judicious pruning of everything it judged might wreck or
hinder the evolution of a life of finer, higher quality . If
we, admitting this intention, look on the frequent injunc-
tions respecting what ‘was to be put away’ (paha-
tabbam) 1 from the life of each disciple, whether by
insight or by culture, whether by gentle or by forcible
restraint, 2 * * * not as so much mere self-mortification and
crippling of energy, but as expressions of selective culture
for the better ‘forcing* of somewhat tender growths, we
may, if we still would criticise, appraise more sym-
pathetically.

If I have dwelt at some length on a side of Buddhist
psychological ethics which is not thrown into obvious relief
in our Manual, it was because I wished to connect that
side with the specially characteristic feature in Buddhist
psychology where it approximates to the trend of our
own modern tradition. There, on the one hand, we
have a philosophy manifestly looking deeper into the
mental constitution than any other in the East, and giving
especial heed to just those mental activities — attention
and feeling, conation and choice — which seem most to
imply a subject, or subjective unity who attends, feels,
wills and chooses. And yet this same philosophy is
emphatically one that attempts to ‘ extrude the Ego.’ If,
on the other hand, we leap over upwards of 2,000 years
and consider one of the most notable contributions to our
national psychology, we find that its two most salient
features are a revival of the admission of an Ego or
Subject of mental states, which had been practically
extruded, and a theory of the ultimate nature of mental pro-
cedure set out entirely in terms of attention and feeling. 8

1 See, e.g., below, p. 256 et seq.

2 Cf. the Sabbasava Sutta and passim, M. i., especially

the Vitakkasanthana Sutta.

8 I refer to Professor Ward’s ‘Psychology/ Ency. Brit.,

9th ed.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxi

And yet the divergence between the two conclusions,
widely removed though they are by time and space, is not
so sharp as at first appears. The modern thinker, while
he finds it more honest not to suppress the fact that all
psychologists, not excepting Hume, do, implicitly or ex-
plicitly, assume the conception of ‘ a mind * or conscious ^
subject, is careful to ‘ extrude ’ metaphysical dogma. That
everything mental is referred to a Self or Subject is, for
him, a psychological conception which may be kept as free
from the metaphysical conception of a soul, mind-atom,
or mind-stuff as is that of the individual organism in
biology. In much the same way the Buddhists were content
to adopt the term attabhavo (self-hood or personality
— for which Buddhaghosa half apologizes 1 ) — ajjhat-
tikam (belonging to the self, subjective 2 * * ) and the like,
as well as to speak of citt am, mano and viiifianam
where we might say * mind.’ It is true that by the two
former terms they meant the totality of the five skandhas,
that is to say, both mind and body, but this is not the case
with the three last named. And if there was one thing
which moved the Master to quit his wonted serenity and
wield the lash of scorn and upbraiding, and his followers
to use emphatic repudiation, it was just the reading into
this convenient generalization of mind or personality that
‘ metaphysical conception of a soul, mind-atom, or mind-
stuff,’ which is put aside by the modern psychologist.

And I believe that the jealous way in which the
Buddhists guarded their doctrine in this matter arose, not
from the wish to assimilate mind to matter, or the whole
personality to a machine, but from the too great danger
that lay in the unchecked use of atta, 8 ahankara,
attabhavo, even as a mere psychological datum, in that
it afforded a foothold to the prevailing animism. They


1 See below, p. 175, n. 1. 2 Ibid., p. 207, n. 1.

8 Svayam (this one) is nearly always substituted for

atta as a nominative, the latter term usually appearing

in oblique cases.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxii


were as Protestants in regard to the crucifix. They re-
membered with Ste. Beuve : * La sauvagerie est toujours
la a deux pas, et, d&s qu’on lache pied, elle recommence.’

What, then, was their view of mind, as merely pheno-
menal, in relation to the rupa-skandha or non-mental part
of the human individual? We have considered their
doctrine of external phenomena impingeing on and modi-
fying the internal or personal rupam by way of sense.
Have we any clue to their theory of the propagation of
the modifications, alleged in their statement 1 to take place
in relation to those factors of personality which were
arupino, and not derived from material elements — the
elements (d h a t u’s), namely, or skandhas of feeling, per-
ception, syntheses and intellect? How did they regard
that process of co-ordination by which, taking sensuous ex-
perience as the more obvious starting-point in mental experi-
ence, sensations are classed and made to cohere into groups
or percepts, and are revived as memories, and are further
co-ordinated into concepts or abstract ideas ? And finally,
and at back of all this, who feels, or attends, or wills ?

Now the Dhamma-Sangani does not place questions of
this kind in the mouth of the catechist. In so far as it is
psychological (not psycho-physical or ethical), it is so
^ strictly phenomenological , that its treatment is restricted to
the analysis of certain broadly defined states of mind, felt
or inferred to have arisen in consequence of certain other
mental states as conditions. There is no reference any-
where to a ‘ subjective factor ’ or agent ivlio has the
( cittam or thought, with all its associated factors of
attention, feeling, conception and volition. Even in the
case of Jhana, where it is dealing with more active modes
of regulated attention, involving a maximum of constructive
thought with a minimum of receptive sense, the agent, as
conscious subject , is kept in the background. The inflexion
of the verb 2 alone implies a given personal agent, and the


1 See answers in §§ 600, 604, etc.

2 Bhaveti, viharati (cultivates, abides); p. 43 et seq.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxiii


Commentary even feels it incumbent to point him out. It
is this psychologizing without a psyche that impressed me ^
from the first, and seemed to bring the work, for all its
remoteness in other respects, nearer to our own Experiential
school of and since Locke, than anything we find in Greek
traditions.

It is true that each of the four formless skandhas is
defined or described, and this is done in connexion with
the very first question of the book. But the answers are
given, not in terms of respective function or of mutual
relation, but of either synonyms, or of modes or constituent
parts. For instance, feeling (vedana) is resolved into
three modes, 1 perception ( san n a ) is taken as practically
self-evident and not really described at all, 2 the syntheses
(sankhara) are resolved into modes or factors, intellect
(vinnanam) is described by synonyms.

Again, whereas the skandhas are enumerated in the
order in which, I believe, they are unvaryingly met with,
there is nothing, in text or Commentary, from which we
can infer that this order corresponds to any theory of
genetic procedure in an act of cognition. In other words,
we are not shown that feeling calls up perception, or that
the sankharas are a necessary link in the evolution of
perception into conception or reasoning. 3 If we can infer


1 See pp. 3-9, 27-29.

2 It is on the other hand described with some fulness in
the Cy. See my note s.v.

3 <?/. the argument by Dr. Neumann, ‘ Buddhistische
Anthologie,’ xxiii, xxiv. If I have rendered sankhara by
‘ syntheses,’ it is not because I see any coincidence between
the Buddhist notion and the Kantian Synthesis der Wahrneh -
mungen. Still less am I persuaded that Unterscheidungen
is a virtually equivalent term. Like the ‘ confections ’ of
Professor Rhys Davids and the ‘ Gestaltungen ’ of Professor
Oldenberg, I use syntheses simply as, more or less, an
etymological equivalent, and wait for more light. I may
here add that I have used intellection and cognition inter-
changeably as comprehending the whole process of knowing,
or coming to know.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxiv


anything in the nature of causal succession at all, it is such
that the order of the skandhas as enumerated is upset.
Thus, taking the first answer (and that is typical for the
whole of Book I. when new ground is broken into) : a
certain sense -impression evokes, through * contact,’ a
complex state of mind or psychosis called a thought or
c i 1 1 a m . Bom of this contact and the ‘ appropriate *
c i 1 1 a m , now (t.e., in answer 3) called, in terms of its
synonym, representative intellection (manovinnana-
dhatu), feeling, we are told, is engendered. Perception
is called up likewise and, apparently, simultaneously. So
is ‘ thinking * (cetana ) — of the sankhara-skandha. And
‘ associated with ’ the c i 1 1 a m come all the rest of the
constituent dhammas, both sankharas, as well as specific
modes 1 or different aspects 2 3 of the feeling and the thought
already specified. In a word, we get contact evoking the
fifth skandha, and, as the common co-ordinate resultant,
the genesis or excitement of the other three. This is
entirely in keeping with the many passages in the Nikayas,
where the concussion of sense and object are said to result
in vinnanam =cittam = the fifth skandha. ‘Eye,’ for
instance, and ‘ form,’ in mutual ‘ contact,’ result in ‘ visual
cognition.*

In the causal chain of that ancient formula, the
Paticca-samuppada, 8 on the other hand, we find
quite another order of genesis, sankharas inducing cogni-
tion or thought, and contact alone inducing feeling. This
mysterious old rune must not further complicate our
problem. I merely allude to it as not in the least support-
^ ing the view that the order of statement, in the skandhas,
^ implies order of happening. What we may more surely
gather from the canon is that, as our own psychological
thought has now conceived it, 4 the, let us say, given


1 E.g. f ease.

2 E.g., the ‘ faculties * of mind (ideation) and of pleasure.

3 Given below on p. 348 [1336].

4 Professor Ward, op. cit .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxv

individual ‘ attends to or cognizes ( v i j a n a t i ) changes
in the sensory continuum, and is, in consequence, either
pleased or pained* (or has neutral feeling). And, further,
in any and every degree of conscious’ or subconscious mood
or disposition, he may be shown to be experiencing a
number of 'associated states,’ as enumerated. All this
is in our Manual called a cittuppada — a genesis of
thought.

Of thought or of thinking. There seems to be a breadth
and looseness of implication about c i 1 1 a m fairly parallel
to the popular vagueness of the English term. It is true
that the Commentary does not sanction the interpretation
of contact and all the rest (I refer to the type given in the
first answer) as so many attributes of the thought which
‘has arisen.’ The sun rising, it says, is not different from
its fiery glory, etc., arising. But the cittam arising is a
mere expression to fix the occasion for the induction of the
whole concrete psychosis, and connotes no more and no
less than it does as a particular constituent of that
complex. 1

This is a useful hint. On the other hand, when we
consider the synonymous terms for cittam, given in
answer 6, and compare the various characteristics of these
terms scattered through the Commentary, we find a con-
siderable wealth of content and an inclusion of process and
product similar to that of our ‘ thought.’ For example,
‘cittam means mental object or presentation (aram-
manam); that is to say, he thinks ; that is to say, he
attends to a thought.’ 2 Hence my translation might well

1 Asl. 118. I gather, however, that the adjective ceta-
sikam had a wider and a narrower denotation. In the
former it meant ‘ not bodily,’ as on p. 6. In the latter it
served to distinguish three of the incorporeal skandhas
from the fourth, t.e., cittam, as on pp. 265, 818 — citta-
cetasika dhamma. Or are we to take the Commentator’s
use of kayikam here to refer to those three skandhas, as
is often the case (p. 48, n. 8) ? Hardly, since this makes
the two meanings of cetasikam self-contradictory.

2 Ibid . 68.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxvi


have run : When a good thought . . . has arisen ... as
the object of this or that sense, etc. Again, cittam is
defined as a process of connecting (sandhanam) the
last (things) as they keep arising in consciousness with
that which preceded them. 1 Further, it is a co-ordinating,
relating, or synthesizing (sandahanam); 2 and, again,
it has the property of initiative action (pure carikam).
For, when the sense-impression gets to the ‘ door ’ of the
senses, cittam confronts it before the rest of the mental
congeries. 3 The sensations are, by cittam, wrought up
into that concrete stream of consciousness which they
evoke.

Here we have cittam covering both thinking and
thought or idea. When we turn to its synonym or quasi-
synonym m a n o we find, so far as I can discover, that only
activity, or else spring, source or nidus of activity, is the
aspect taken. The faculty of ideation (manindriya m),
for instance, 4 while expressly declared to be an equivalent
(vevacanam) of cittam, and, like it, to be that which
attends or cognizes (vijanati),is also called a measuring
the mental object — declared above to be c i 1 1 a m. 5 In a
later passage (ibid., 129), it is assigned the function of accept-
ing, receiving, analogous, perhaps, to our technical expres-
sion ‘assimilating* (s ampaticchanam). In thus
appraising or approving, it has all sensory objects for its
field, as well as its more especial province of dhammas. 6
These, when thus distinguished, I take to mean ideas,
including images and general notions. And it is probably


1 Asl., pp. 112, 118.

2 Cf. the characteristic — samvidahanam — of cetana
in my note, p. 8.

8 The figure of the city-guardian, given in Mil. 62, is
quoted by the Cy.

4 See below, p. 18, and Asl. 128.

5 It is at the same time said to result in (establishing)
fact or conformity (tathabhavo), and to succeed sense-
perception as such.

6 See p. 2, n. 8.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxvii


only in order to distinguish between mind in this abstract
functioning and mind as cognition in its most comprehensive
sense that we see the two terms held apart in the sentence :
‘Cittam cognizes the dhammas which are the objects of
mano, just as it cognizes the visual forms, etc., which are
the objects of the senses.’ 1

When cittam is thus occupied with the abstract func-
tioning of mano 2 — when, that is, we are reflecting on past
experience, in memory or ratiocination — then the more
specific term is, I gather, not cittam, but manovin-
fianam (corresponding to cakkhuvifiiianam, etc.).
This, in the Commentarial psychology, certainly stands
for a further stage, a higher * power ’ of intellection, for
* representative cognition,’ its specific activity being distin-
guished as judging or deciding (santiranam), and as
fixing or determining (votthappanam).

The affix dhatu, whether appended to mano or to
manovinnanam, probably stands for a slight distinc-
tion in aspect of the intellectual process. It may be intended
to indicate either of these two stages as an irreducible
element, a psychological ultimate, an activity regarded as its
own spring or source or basis. Adopted from without by
Buddhism, it seems to have been jealously guarded from
noumenal implications by the orthodox. Buddhaghosa,
indeed, seems to substitute the warning against its abuse
for the reason why it had come to be used. According to
him, the various lists of dhammas (e.g., in the first answer),
when considered under the aspect of phenomena, of ‘ empti-
ness,’ of non-essence, may be grouped as together forming
two classes of dhatu. 3 Moreover, each special sense can
be so considered (cakkhu-dhatu, etc. ; see pp. 214, 215),


1 Asl., p 112.

2 Cf. the expression suddha-manodvaro in my note,
p. 8. And on what follows, cf. pp. 129, 182, nn.

3 Viz., manovififiana-dhatu and dham ma-dhat u
see Asl. 153, and below, p. 26, n. 2. The term ‘ element ’
is similarly used in our own psychology.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxviii


and so may each kind of sense-object. For, with respect
to sense, or the apprehension of form, they are so many
phenomenal ultimates — the two terms, so to speak, in each
sensory relation.

How far d h a t u corresponds to v a 1 1 h u — how far the
one is a psychological, the other a physical conception 1
of source or base — is not easily determined. But it is
interesting to note that the Commentator only alludes to a v
basis of thought (cittassa vatthu), that is, to the
heart (hadaya- vatthu), when the catechizing is in
terms of mano-dhatu. 2 * His only comment on * heart/
when it is included in the description of cittam (answer
[6]), is to say that, whereas it stands for cittam, it
simply represents the inwardness (intimity) of thought.*
But in the subsequent comment he has a remark of great
interest, namely, that the ‘ heart-basis ’ is the place whither
all the * door-objects ’ come, and where they are assimilated,
or received into unity. In this matter the Buddhist
philosophy carries on the old Upanishad lore about the
heart, just as Aristotle elaborated the dictum of Empedokles,
that perception and reasoning were carried on in ‘ the
blood round the heart.’

1 Cf. below, pp. 214, 215, with 209-211.

2 Asl. 264 ; below, p. 129, fn.

8 Asl. 140: * Heart = thought (Hadayan ti cittam).
In the passage — “ I will either tear out your mind or break
your heart ” — the heart in the breast is spoken of. In the
passage (M. i. 32) — “ Methinks he planes with a heart that
knows heart” (like an expert)! — the mind is meant. In
the passage — “The vakkam is the heart” — the basis of
heart is meant. But here cittam is spoken of as heart in
the sense of inwardness (abbhantaram).’ It is interest-
ing to note that, in enumerating the rupaskandha in the
Visuddhi Magga, Buddhaghosa’s sole departure from con-
formity with the Dhamma-Sangani is the inclusion of
hadaya-vatthu after ‘ vitality .’

The other term, 4 that which is clear’ (pan da ram), is
an ethical metaphor. The mind is said to be naturally
pure, but defiled by incoming corruptions. ( Cf. A. i.,

p. 10.)


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxix


It is possible that this ancient and widely-received
tradition of the heart (rather than the brain, for instance)
as the seat of the soul or the mind is latent in the question
put by Mahakotthito, a member of the Order, to Sariputta,
the leading apostle : l ‘ Inasmuch as these five indriyas
(senses) are, in province and in gratification, mutually
independent, what process of reference is there, 2 and who is
it that is gratified by them in common V So apparently
thinks Dr. Neumann, who renders Sariputta’s answer —
4 The mind (mano )* — by Her z. This association must,
however, not be pressed. For in another version of this
dialogue more recently edited, Gotama himself being the
person consulted, his interlocutor goes on to ask : What is
the pa tisaranam of mano — of recollection (sati) —
of emancipation — of Nirvana? 8 So that the meaning of
the first question may simply be that as emancipation looks
to , or makes for Nirvana, and recollection or mindfulness
for emancipation, and ideation or thinking refers or looks


1 M. i. 295.

2 Kim patisaranam. The word is a crux, and may
bear more than one meaning. Cf Yinaya Texts (S. B. E.
xvii.), ii., p. 864, n. ; ‘ Dialogues of the Buddha,* i.,
p. 122, n. Dr. Neumann renders it by Hort f following
Childers.

It is worthy of note that, in connexion with the heresy of
identifying the self with the physical organism generally ^
(below, p. 259), the Cy. makes no allusion to heart, or
other part of the rupam, in connexion with views (2)
or (4). These apparently resembled Augustine’s belief:
the soul is wholly present both in the entire body and in
each part of it. With regard to view (3), is it possible
that Plotinus heard it at Alexandria, or on his Eastern
trip? For he, too, held that the body was ‘in the soul,’^ x
permeated by it as air is by fire (Enn. iv.). Buddhaghosa’s
illustrative metaphor is ‘as a flower being “ in” its own
perfume.’ I regret that space fails me to reproduce his
analysis of these twenty soul-hypotheses.

8 S. v., p. 218. In the replies mano is referred to
Sati, sati to vimutti, and this to Nirvana.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxx

to memory, 1 so sensation depends on thinking, on mental
construction (to become effective as knowledge).

It is, indeed, far more likely that Buddhist teaching
made little of and passed lightly over this question of a
physical basis of thought or mind. It was too closely
involved with the animistic point of view — how closely we
may see, for instance, in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.
When King Milinda puts a similar question respecting the
subject of sensations, 2 3 he does so from so obviously
animistic a standpoint that the sage, instead of discussing
mano, or heart, with him, argues against any one central
subjective factor whatever, and resolves the process of
cognition into a number of 4 connate * activities. The
method itself of ranking mental activity as though it were
a sixth kind of sense seems to point in the same direction,
and reminds us of Hume’s contention, that when he tried
to 4 catch himself ’ he always 4 tumbled on some particular
perception.’ Indeed it was, in words attributed to Gotama
himself, the lesser blunder in the average man to call
4 this four-elementish body ’ his soul than to identify the
self with 4 what is called c i 1 1 a m , that is, mano, that
is, vifinanam.* For whereas the body was a colloca-
tion that might hold together for many years, 4 mind, by
day and by night is ever arising as one thing, ceasing as
another !* 8

Impermanence of conscious phenomena was one of the
two grounds of the Buddhist attack. So far it was on all
fours with Hume. The other ground was the presence of
law, or necessary sequence in mental procedure. The Soul
was conceived as an entity, not only above change , an
absolute constant, but also as an entirely free agent . Both

1 Cf. the interesting inquiry into the various modes of
association in remembering , given in Mil., pp. 78, 79, and
77, 78.

2 Mil. 54. He calls it vedagu (knower), and, when
cross-examined, abbhantare jivo (the living principle
within).

3 S. ii., pp. 94-96.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxi


grounds, be it noted, are laid down on psychological
evidence — on the testimony of consciousness. And both
grounds were put forward by Gotama in his very first
sermon. 1 The standard formula for the latter only is
reproduced in our Manual. 2 * And it is interesting to see
the same argument clothed in fresh dress in the dialogue
with Milinda referred to above. The point made is this :
that if any one of the skandhas could be identified with a
self or soul, it would, as not subject to the conditions of
phenomena, act through any other faculty it chose. It
would be a principle, not only of the nature of what we
should call will, but also of genuine free will. 8 Soul and
Free Will, for the Buddhist, stand or fall together. But,
he said, what we actually find is no such free agency. We
only find certain organs (doors), with definite functions,
natural sequence, the line of least resistance and associa-
tion. 4 Hence we conclude there is no transcendent
‘ knower ’ about us.

Here I must leave the Buddhist philosophy of mind and
theory of intellection. We are only at the threshold of its
problems, and it is hence not strange if we find them as
baffling as, let us say, our own confused usage of many
psychological terms — feeling, will, mind — about which we
ourselves greatly differ, would prove to an inquiring
Buddhist. If I have not attempted to go into the crux of
the sankhara-skandha, it is because neither the Manual
nor its Commentary brings us any nearer to a satisfactory
hypothesis. For future discussion, however, the frequent
enumerations of that skandha’s content, varying with
every changing mood, should prove pertinent. In every
direction there is very much to be done. And each addition
to the texts edited brings new light. Nor can philosophic
interest fail in the long-run to accumulate about a system

1 Vin. i. 14; = M. i. 188, 800; S. iii. 66; cf iv. 84.

2 P. 257 et seq .

8 Cf the writer’s article on the Vedalla Suttas, J. B. A. S.,

April, 1894. 4 Mil., loc. cit .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



of thought which at that early time of day took up a task
requiring such vigour and audacity — the task, namely, of
opposing the prevailing metaphysic, not because problems
of mind did not appeal to the founders of that system, but
because further analysis of mind seemed to reveal a realm ^
of law-governed phenomenal sequence for which the ready
hypothesis of an unconditioned permanent Self super gram -
maticam was too cheap a solution,

VIII.

On the Buddhist Notions of ‘ Good , Bad , and Indeterminate

By way of dhamma, rupam and cittam, by
way of Buddhist phenomenology and psychology, we come
at last to the ethical purport of the questions in the
Manual. Given a human being known to us by way of
these phenomenal states, what is implied when we say that
some of them are good, some bad, others neither ?

The Dhamma-Sangani does not, to our loss be it said,
define any one of these concepts. All it does is to show
us the content of a number of * thoughts ’ known as one
or the other of these three species of dhamma. In a sub-
sequent passage (pp. 345-348) it uses the substantival form
of ‘ good * (kusalata; another form is k o s a 1 1 a m) in
the sense of skill or proficiency as applied to various kinds
of insight, theoretical or practical.

Now if we turn to the later expression of old tradition in the
Commentaries, we find, on the one hand, an analysis of the
meaning of ‘good’; on the other, the rejection of precisely
that sense of skill, and of that alone out of four possible
meanings, with respect to * good ’ as used in Book I.

K u s a 1 a m , 'we read, 1 may mean (a) wholesome,

(b) virtuous, ( c ) skilful, ( d ) felicific, or productive of happy
result. The illustrations make these clear statements
clearer. E.g. of (a), from the Dasaratha Jataka: ‘ Is it good
for you, sir, is it wholesome ?’ 2 Of ( b ) ‘ What, sir, is good

1 Asl. 38.

2 The two adjectives are kusalam, anamayam.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxiii


behaviour in act? Sire, it is conduct that is blameless
(a n a v a j j o).’ Of (c) ‘ You are good at knowing all about
the make of a chariot.’ 1 Again: ‘The four girl-pupils
are good at singing and dancipg.’ Of (d) ‘Good states,
brethren, are acquired through good karma having been
wrought and stored up.’

Of these four, (c) is alone ruled out as not applicable to
the eight types of good thoughts constituting dhamma
k u s a 1 a . In so far, then, as we suffer the Buddhist
culture of the fifth century to interpret the canon for us,
‘good,’ in the earlier ethics, meant that which insures
soundness, physical and moral, as well as that which is
felicific.

The further question immediately suggests itself, whether
Buddhism held that these two attributes were at bottom
identical. Are certain ‘ states ’ intrinsically good, i.e.,
virtuous and right, independently of their results ? Or is
‘ good,’ in the long-run at least, felicitous result, and only
on that account so called? Are Buddhists, in a word,
Intuitionists, or are they Utilitarians? Or is not a
decidedly eclectic standpoint revealed in the comprehensive
interpretation given of kusalam?

These are, however, somewhat modern — I am tempted to
say, somewhat British — distinctions to seek in an ancient
theory of morals. They do not appear to have troubled
Buddhism, early or late. The Buddhist might possibly
have replied that he could not conceive of any thought,
word, or deed as being intrinsically good and yet bad in its
results, and that the distinction drawn by the Commentator
was simply one of aspects.

If pressed, however, we can almost imagine the Buddhist
well content with the relative or dependent good of Utili-
tarianism, so closely is his ethics bound up with cause
and effect. Good, for him, is good with respect to karma
— that is, to pleasurable effect or eudcemonia.

With respect to the supremely good effect, to arahatship

1 Cf. M. ii. 94.

/ 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxiv


or Nirvana, he might, it is true, have admitted a difference,
namely, that this state was absolutely good, and not good
because of its results. It was the supreme Result or Fruit,
and there was 4 no beyond.’ But then he did not rank
Nirvana exactly in the category of good, and precisely for
this reason, that in it moral causation culminated and
ceased. He spoke of it as Indeterminate, as without
result — as a Freedom, rather than as a Good.

He would not then have fallen in with Aristotle’s
definition of Good in terms of aim , viz., as 4 that at which
everything aims.' Good was rather the means lyy and icith
which we aim. But that at which we aim is, in all lower
quests, Sukham, in the one high quest, Vimutti
(emancipation), or Nirvana.

Nor must the substitution of these two last terms for
that well-being, that well-ness, 4 to ev %qv,' which is the
etymological equivalent pf sukham, 1 be taken as in-
dicating the limit of the consistent Hedonism or Eudae-
monism of the Buddhist. For he did not scruple to speak
of these two also (Emancipation and Nirvana) in terms
of pleasurable feeling. Gotama attaining his supreme
enlightenment beneath the Bo-tree is said to have
4 experienced Emancipation-bliss ’ (vimutti-sukha-
patisamvedi). 2 And to King Milinda the Sage
emphatically declares Nirvana to be ‘absolute (or entire)
happiness’ (ekanta- sukham). 8 And we know, too,
that Buddhism defined all right conduct and the sufficient
motive for it in terms of escape from ill (dukkham, the
antithesis of sukham) or suffering. Here then again
their psychological proclivity is manifested. They analyzed
feeling, or subjective experience, into three modes :
sukham, dukkham, adukkham-asukham. And
in Good and Bad they saw, not ends or positions of attain-
ment, but the vehicles or agencies, or, to speak less in
abstractions, the characteristic mark of those kinds of

1 Cf. p. 12, n. 8. 2 Yin. i. 2, 3, quoted Jat. i. 77.

8 Mil. 818.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxv


conduct, by which well-being or ill- being might re-
spectively be entailed.

The Buddhist, then, was a Hedonist, and hence, whether
he himself would have admitted it or not, his morality was
dependent, or, in the phrase of British ethics, utilitarian,
and not intuitionist. Hedonist, let us say, rather than
eudaemonistic, because of the more subjective (psycho-
logical) import of the former term. And he found the
word sukham good enough to cover the whole ground of
desirability, from satisfaction in connexion with sense —
compare Buddhaghosa’s traveller refreshed obtaining both
joy and ease 1 — up to the ineffable * Content * of Nirvana. 2
He did not find in it the inadequacy that some moral
philosophers have found in our ‘ Pleasure.’ His ethical
system was so emphatically a study of consequences — of
karma and vipaka (effect of karma)— of Beeing in every
phenomenon a reaping of some previous sowing — that the
notion of good became for him inevitably bound up with
result. As my late master used to say {ex cathedrd) :
If you bring forward consequences — how acts by way of
result affect self and others — you must come to feeling.
Thence pleasure becomes prominent. And did not folk
suffer loose, lower associations to affect their judgment,
there would be no objection to Hedonism. For pleasures
are of all ranks, up to that of a good conscience.*

A reflection may here suggest itself to readers in this
country who have, at the feet of Spencer, Bain, and Leslie
Stephen, learnt to Bee, behind Nature’s device of Pleasur-
able Feeling, the conservation of the species — ‘ quantity
of life, measured in breadth as well as in length ’ — as the
more fundamental determinant of that which, in the long-
run, becomes the end of conduct. Namely, that there
seems a strange contradiction in a philosophic position
which is content to find, in the avoidance of pairr and
the quest of pleasurable feeling, its fundamental spring of


1 Below, p. 12, n. 8.

2 Santutthi. See p. 858, n. 2.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxvi


moral action while, at the same time, it says of life — apart
from which it admits no feeling to be possible — that the
attainment of its last phase is the one supremely happy
event. 1 Pleasurable feeling, from the evolutionists stand-
point, means, and is in order to, the increase, ‘intensive
and extensive,* of life. Yet to the Hedonistic Buddhist,
the dissolution of the conditions of renewed existence is a
happy event, t.e., an event that causes pleasurable feeling
in the thoughtful spectator.

I believe that the modem ethics of evolution would have
profoundly interested the early Buddhists, who after their
sort and their age were themselves evolutionists. And I
believe, too, that they would have arisen from a discussion
with our thinkers on this subject as stanch Buddhists and
as stanch Hedonists as they had sat down. I admit that
with respect to the desirableness of life taken quantitatively,
and in two dimensions, they were frankly pessimistic. As
I have already suggested, 2 * and have put forward elsewhere. 8
to prize mere quantity of living stood by Gotama con-
demned as ignoble, as stupid, as a mortal bondage, as one
of the four Asavas or Intoxicants. 4 The weary, heart-
rending tragedies immanent in the life of the world he
recognised and accepted as honestly and fully as the
deepest pessimist. The complexities, the distractions, the
burdens, the dogging sorrow, the haunting fear of its
approaching tread, inevitable for life lived in participation
of all that the human organism naturally calls for, and
human society puts forward as desirable — all this he judged
too heavy to be borne, not, indeed, by lay followers, but by
those who should devote themselves to the higher life. To
these he looked to exemplify and propagate and transmit


1 Cf. 9 e.g. 9 M. P. S. 62 ; Maha Sudassana-sutta, S. B. E.
xi. 240, 289.

2 See above, pp. lxix, lxx.

8 In an article ‘On the Will in Buddhism/ J. B. A. S.,
January, 1898.

4 Cf. below, p. 290 et seq.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxvii


his doctrine. Theirs it was to lift the world to higher
standpoints and nobler issues. Life in its fulness they at
least could not afford to cultivate.

But if we take life of a certain quality where selective
economy, making for a certain object, cuts off some lines
of growth but forces others on — then Buddhism, so far
from 4 negating the will to live * that kind of life, pro-
nounced it fair and lovely beyond all non-being, beyond all
after-being. If final death, as it believed, followed inevit-
ably on the fullest fruition of it, it was not this that made
such life desirable. Final dissolution was accepted as
welcome, not for its own sake, but as a corollary, so to
speak, of the solved problem of emancipation. It merely
signified that unhealthy moral conditions had wholly passed
away.

Keeping in view, then, the notion of Good in thought,
word and deed, as a means entailing various kinds of
felicific result, we may see in Book I. of our Manual, first,
the kind of conscious experience arising apart from syste-
matic effort to obtain any such specific result, but which
was bound, none the less, to lead to hedonistic consequences,
pleasant or unpleasant (pp. 1-42). Next, we see a certain
felicific result deliberately aimed at through self-cultivation
in modes of consciousness called Good (pp. 48-97). And,
incidentally, we learn something of the procedure adopted
in that systematic culture.

The Commentary leaves us no room to doubt whether or
not the phase rupupapattiya maggam bhaveti
(‘ that he may attain to the heavens of Form he cultivates
the way thereto ’) refers to a flight of imaginative power
merely. 4 Form = the r u p a-b h a v o,’ or mode of existence
so called. 4 Attainment =nibbatti, jati, safijati’ —
all being terms for birth and re-birth. 1 So for the attaining
to the Formless heavens. Through the mighty engine of
4 good states,’ induced and sustained, directed and developed


1 Asl. 162. See below, pp. 48 et seq.> 71 et aeq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxviii


by intelligence and self-control, it was held that the student
might modify his own destiny beyond this life, and insure,
or at least promote, his chances of a happy future. The
special culture or exercise required in either case was that
called Jhana, or rapt contemplation, the psychology of
which, when adequately investigated, will one day evoke
considerable interest. There was first intense attention by
way of ‘,an exclusive sensation,’ 1 to be entered upon only
when all other activity was relaxed to the utmost, short of
checking in any way the higher mental functions. After a
time the sensation practically ceases. The wearied sense
gives out. Change, indispensable to consciousness, has
been eliminated ; and we have realized, at all events since
Hobbes wrote, how idem semper sentire et non sentire ad
idem recidunt. Then comes the play of the ‘ after-image,’
and then the emergence of the mental image, of purely
ideational or representative construction. This will be, not
of the sense-object first considered, but some attenuated
abstraction of one of its qualities. And this serves as a
background and a barrier against all further invasion of
sense-impressions for the time being. To him thus purged
and prepared there comes, through subconscious persist-
ence, a reinstatement of some concept, associated with feeling
and conation (i.e., with desire or aspiration), which he had
selected for preliminary meditation. And this conception
he now proceeds by a sort of psychical involution to raise
to a higher power, realizing it more fully, deepening its
import, expanding its application.

Such seems to have been the Kasina method according
to the description in the Yisuddhi Magga, chap, iv., 2 but
there were several methods, some of which, the method,
e.g., of respiration, are not given in our Manual. Of the
thoughts for meditation, only a few occur in the Dhamma-


1 See above, p. lxix.

2 Translated in Warren’s ‘Buddhism in Translations,’
p. 298 et seq. Cf. below, Book I., Part I., chap. ii. Cf. also
Rhys Davids’ ‘ Yogavacara’s Manual,* Introduction.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



lxxxix


Sangani, such as the ‘ Sublime Abodes ’ of thought — love,
pity, etc. But in the former work we find numerous lists
for exercise in the contemplative life, with or without the
rapt musing called Jhana. 1

In the exercises calculated to bring out re-birth in the
world of Form, it was chiefly necessary to ponder on things
of this life in such a way as to get rid of all appetite and
impulse in connexion with them, and to cultivate an attitude
of the purest disinterestedness towards all worldly attrac-
tions. If the Formless sphere were the object of aspiration,
it was then necessary, by the severest fetches of abstraction,
to eliminate not only all sense-impression, but also all
sensory images whatever, and to endeavour to realize con-
ditions and relations other than those obtaining in actual
experience. 2 Thus, in either method a foretaste of the
mode of re-becoming aspired after was attempted.

But besides and beyond the sort of moral consciousness
characterizing these exercises which were calculated to
promote a virtuous and happy existence in any one of the
three worlds, there were the special conditions of intellect
and emotion termed lok’uttaram cittam. 3 Those
exercises were open to the lay pupil and the bhikkhu
alike. There was nothing especially 4 * * * 8 holy,’ nothing
esoteric, about the practice of Jhana. The diligent upa-
saka or upasika, pursuing a temporary course of such
religious and philosophic discipline as the rising schools of


1 J. P. T. S., 1891-1898. Synopsis of the Vis. Mag.,
Parts H and III.

2 In translating the formula of the Third Aruppa or

meditation on Nothingness, I might have drawn attention

to Kant’s development of the concept of None or Nothing,

in the Kritik der reinen Vernunft (end of Div. i. of Transc.
Logic). Some great adepts were credited with the power of

actually partaking in other existences while yet in this,
notably Maha Moggallana (e.g., M. i).

Gotama tells of another in the Kevaddha Sutta (D. i.
215), but tells it as a myth.

8 P. 82 et seq. Cf. n. 2 on p. 81.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xc

Buddhism afforded, might be expected to avail himself or
herself of it more or less. But those ‘ good ’ dhammas
alluded to were those which characterized the Four Paths,
or Four Stages of the way, to the full ‘ emancipation 9 of
Nirvana. If I have rendered lokuttaram cittam by
‘ thought engaged upon the higher ideal ’ instead of select-
ing a term more literally accurate, it is because there is,
in a way, less of the ‘ supramundane ’ or 4 transcendent,'
as we usually understand these expressions, about this
cittam than about the aspiring moods described above*
For this sort of consciousness was that of the man or
woman who regarded not heaven nor re-birth, but one
thing only, as 4 needful ' : the full and perfect efflorescence
of mind and character to be brought about, if it might be,
here and now.

The Dhamma-Sangani never quits its severely dry and
formal style to descant on the characteristics and methods
of that progress to the Ideal, every step in which is else-
where said to be loftier and sweeter than the last, with
a wealth of eulogy besides that might be quoted. Edifying
discourse it left to the Suttanta Books. But no rhetoric
could more effectively describe the separateness and un-
compromising other-ness of that higher quest than the one
word A-pariyapanna m — Unincluded — by which refer-
ence is made to it in Book III.

Yet for all this world of difference in the quo vadis of
aspiration, there is a great deal of common ground covered
by the moral consciousness in each case, as the respective
expositions show. That of the Arahat in %pe differs only in
two sets of additional features conferring greater richness
of content, and in the loftier quality of other features not
in themselves additional.

This quality is due to the mental awakening or enlighten-
ment of sambodhi. And the added factors are three
constituents of the Noble Eightfold Path of conduct (which
are, more obviously, modes of overt activity than of con-
sciousness) and the progressive stages in the attainment of


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xci

the sublime knowledge or insight termed afifia. 1 2 Our
Western languages are scarcely rich enough to ring the
changes on the words signifying 4 to know ’ as those of
India did on j n a and v i d, d r s and pas. Our religious
ideals have tended to be emotional in excess of our intel-
lectual enthusiasm. ‘ Absence of dulness ’ has not ranked
with us as a cardinal virtue or fundamental cause of good.
Hence it is difficult to reproduce the Pali so as to give im-
pressiveness to a term like a fi fi a as compared with the mere
nana m, 2 usually implying less advanced insight, with which
the 4 first type of good thought ’ is said to be associated.

But I must pass on. As a compilation dealing with
positive culture, undertaken for a positive end, it is only
consistent that the Manual should deal briefly with the
subject of bad states of consciousness. It is true that
akusalam, as a means leading to unhappy result, was
not conceived as negatively as its logical form might lead
as to suppose. Bad karma was a 4 piling up,’ no less than
its opposite. Nevertheless, to a great extent, the difference
between bad types of thought and good is described in
terms of the contradictories, of the factors in the one kind
and in the other. Nor are the negatives always on the
side of evil. The three cardinal sources of misery are
positive in form. And the five * Path-factors ’ go to
constitute what might have been called the Base Eightfold
Path.

We come, finally, to the third ethical category of
a-vyakatam, the Inexplicit or Indeterminate. The
subject is difficult if interesting, bringing us as it does
within closer range of the Buddhist view of moral causa-
tion. The hall-mark of Indeterminate thought is said to
be ‘absence of result’ 3 — that is, of pleasant or painful
result. And there are said to be four species of such


1 Viz, : Anafifiat’annassamltindriyam, annin-

driyam, afifiatavindriyam. Pp. 86, 96, 97, 150. Cf.
Dh. K. 58.

2 Contra , cf. M. i., 184. 8 Asl. 89.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xcu


thought: (1) Vipako, or thought which is a result;
(2) K i r i y a , or consciousness leading to no result ;
(8) form, as outside moral causation ; (4) uncompounded
element (or, in later records, Nirvana), as above or beyond
the further efficacy of moral causation.

Of these four, the third has been dealt with already ; the
fourth I cannot discuss here and now. 1 It is conceivable
that the earlier Buddhists considered their summun bonurn
a subject too ineffably sublime and mysterious for logical
and analytical discussion. Two instances, at least, occur
to me in the Nikayas, 2 where the talk was cut short, in the
one case by Gotama himself, in the other by the woman-
apostle Dhammadinna, when the interlocutor brought up
Nirvana for discussion of this sort. This is possibly the
reason why, in a work like our Manual, the concept is pre-
sented — in all but the commentarial appendixes — under
the quasi-metaphysical term ‘ uncompounded element.’ It
is classed here as a species of Indeterminate, because,
although it was the outcome of the utmost carrying power
of good karma, it could, as a state of mind and character,
itself work no good effect for that individual mind and
character. These represented pure effect. The Arahat
could afford to live wholly on withdrawn capital and to use
it up. His conduct, speech and thought are, of course,
necessarily ‘ good,’ but good with no ‘ heaping - up ’
potency.

Of the other two Indeterminates, it is not easy to say
whether they represent aspects only of states considered
with respect to moral efficacy, or whether they represent
divisions in a more rigid and artificial view of moral causa-
tion than we should, at the present day, be prepared to
maintain. To explain: every thought, word and deed
(morally considered) is for us at once the effect of certain
antecedents, and the cause, or part of the cause, of sub-
sequent manifestations of character. It is a link, both
held and holding. But in vipako we have dhammas


1 See Appendix II. 2 S. v. 218 ; M. i. 804.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



xciii


considered, with respect to cause, merely as effects; in
kiriya 1 we have dhammas considered, with respect to
effect, as having none . And the fact that both are divided
off from Good and Bad — that is to say, from conduct or
consciousness considered as causally effective — and are
called Indeterminate, seems to point, not to aspects only,
but to that artificial view alluded to. Yet in this matter I
confess to the greater wisdom of imitating the angels,
rather than rushing in with the fools. Life presented
itself to the Buddhist much as the Surrey heath appeared
to the watchful eyes of a Darwin — as a teeming soil,
a khettam, 2 where swarmed the seeds of previous
karmas waiting for 4 room,’ for opportunity to come to
effect. And in considering the seed as potential effect, they
were not, to that extent, concerned with that seed as
capable of producing, not only its own flower and fruit, but
other seed in its turn.

However that may have been, one thing is clear, and
for us suggestive. Moral experience as result pure and
simple was not in itself uninteresting to the Buddhists.
In dealing with good and bad dhammas, they show us a
field of the struggle for moral life, the sowing of potential
well-being or of ill. But in the Avyakatas we are either
outside the struggle and concerned with the unmoral
Rupam, or we walk among the sheaves of harvest.
From the Western standpoint the struggle covers the
whole field of temporal life. Good and bad * war in the
members * even of its Arahats. The ideal of the Buddhist,
held as realizable under temporal conditions, was to walk


1 I am indebted to the Rev. Suriyagoda Sumangala, of
Ratmalane, Ceylon, for information very kindly given con-
cerning the term kiriya or kriya. He defines it as
‘action ineffective as to result,’ and kiriya-cittam as
‘mind in relation to action ineffective as to result.’ He
adds a full analysis of the various modes of kiriya
taught by Buddhists at the present day.

2 4 Origin of Species,’ p. 56. A. i. 228, 224. Cf. Asl. 860.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



XC1V


among his sheaves 'beyond the Good and the Bad / 1 The
Good consisted in giving hostages to the future. His ideal
was to be releasing them, and, in a span of final, but
glorious existence, to be tasting of the finest fruit of living
— the peace of insight, the joy of emancipation. This was
life supremely worth living, for

' leben heisst

In Freiheit leben und mit freiem Geist !’ 2

The Good, to take his own metaphor, was as a raft bearing
him across the stream of danger. After that he was to
leave it and go on. 'And ye, brethren, learn by the
parable of the raft that ye must put away good conditions,
let alone bad / 3

It is not easy for us, who have learnt from Plato to call
our Absolute the Good and our Ideal a mmmuW bonum, to
sympathize really with this moral standpoint. Critics see
in it an aspiration towards moral stultification and self-
complacent egoism.

Yes, there is little fear but that in the long-run fuller
knowledge will bring deeper insight into what in Buddhism
is really worthy of admiration for all time. If it is now
accused of weakening the concept of individuality by reject-
ing soul, and, at the same time, of fostering egoistic morality,
it is just possible that criticism is here at fault. On the
ruins of the animistic view, Buddhism had to reconstruct a
new personality, wholly phenomenal, impermanent, law-
determined, yet none the less able, and alone able, by
indomitable faith and will, to work out a personal salva-
tion, a personal perfection. Bearing this in mind and
surveying the history of its altruistic missionary labours,
we cannot rashly cast egoistic morality at it to much effect.
Nor has it much to fear from charges of stultification,
quietism, pessimism and the like. We are misled to a


1 Nietzsche on Buddhism in 'Der Antichrist/

2 A. Pfungst, ' An Giordano Bruno/

3 See the third quotation, p. vii.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



xcv


certain extent herein by the very thoroughness of its
methods of getting at the moral life by way of psychical
training. We see, as in our Manual, and other canonical
records, elaborate systems for analyzing and cultivating the
intellectual faculties, the will and feeling, and we take
these as substitutes for overt moral activity, as ends when
they are but means. And if the Dhamma-Sangani seems
to some calculated to foster introspective thought to a
morbid extent, it must not be forgotten that it is not
Buddhist philosophy alone which teaches that, for all the
natural tendency to spend and be spent in efforts to cope,
by thought and achievement, with the world without, ‘ it is
in this little fathom-long mortal frame with its thinkings
and its notions that the world * 1 itself and the whole problem
of its misery and of the victory over it lies hid.


If I have succeeded to any extent in connecting the
contents of this Manual with the rest of the Buddhist
Pitakas, it is because I had at my disposal the mass of
material accumulated in my husband’s MS. Pali dictionary.
Besides this, the selection of material for Sections II. and
III. of my Introduction is his work. Besides this I owe
him a debt of gratitude indefinitely great for advice and
criticism generally.


1 See second quotation, p. vii.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[BOOK I.

THE GENESIS OF THOUGHTS
(Cittuppada-kandam).


PART I.—GOOD STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

Chapter I.

The Eight Main Types of Thought relating to the
Sensuous Universe (Kamavacara-attha-mahacit-
tani).] 1

I.

[1] Which are the states that are good ? 2

When a good thought concerning the sensuous uni-
verse 3 has arisen, which is accompanied by happiness and
associated with knowledge, 4 and has as its object a

1 The brackets enclosing this and all other headings
indicate that the latter have been transposed from the
position they occupy in the text. There each heading
stands at the end of its section.

2 See Introduction. 3 Ibid.

4 Kana-sampayuttam. According to the Cy., a good
thought deserves to be thus distinguished on three grounds :
from the karma it produces, from the maturity of the
faculties it involves, and from the remoteness of mental
and moral infirmity which it implies (Asl. 76). Sam-
payuttam — lit., con -yoked — is, in the Kathavatthu,
quoted by the Cy. (p. 42), described as including the
following relations (between one * state * and another) :
concomitant (sahagata), connate (sahajata), contiguous

1


ed by CjOCK^Ic



2


sight, 1 a sound, a smell, a taste, a touch, 2 a [mental] state, 3
or what not, 4 then there is

(i) contact (§ 2),

(ii) feeling (§ 8),


(samsattha), having a common origin (ekuppada), a
common cessation (ekanirodha), a common basis or
embodiment (ekavatthuka),a common object of attention
(ekarammana). In the present work the term is sub-
sequently rendered by ‘connected/ c.</., in § 1007, etc. The
preceding adjectival phrase, somanassa-sahagatam,
which I have rendered ‘accompanied by happiness/ is
virtually declared by the Cy. to be here equivalent to
somanassa-sampayuttam, inasmuch as it is to be
interpreted in its fullest intension. Of its five distinguish-
able shades of meaning, the one here selected is that of
‘conjoined’ (samsattham). And of the four distinguish-
able connotations of ‘conjoined,* the one here selected is
that of ‘connate.’ Hence ‘accompanied by’ means here
‘connate.’ And further, inasmuch as the concomitance is
not between two corporeal phenomena, or between a
corporeal and an incorporeal phenomenon, it is of that
persistent and thoroughgoing kind — persisting beyond the
common origin — which is described under the word
‘ associated.’

Thus far the intricate Buddhaghosa. But I have yet to
discover any attempt to analyze the laws governing the
process of association between mental states, such as we
first find in Aristotle.

On ‘ happiness/ see §§ 10, 18.

1 Ruparammanam, saddarammanam, etc., i.e .,
either as a present sensation or as a representative image
relating to the past or future ; in the language of Hume,
as an impression or as an idea ; in the more comprehensive
German term, as Vorstellung (Asl. 71). See Introduc-
tion.

2 Literally, an object that is tangible — the standard
Pali term.

3 Dhammurammanam — the ‘object/ that is, of re-
presentative imagination or ideation (mano, cittam,
Asl., 71), just as a thing seen is the object of sight,
Buddhaghosa rejects the opinion that a dhammaram-
manamis something outside the range of the senses, and
cites M. i. 295, where Sariputta declares that, whereas


ed by CjOCK^Ic



3


(iii) perception (§ 4),

(iv) thinking (§ 5),

(v) thought (§ 6),

(vi) conception (§ 7),

(vii) discursive thought (§8),

(viii) joy (§ 9),

(ix) ease (§ 10),

(x) self-collectedness (§ 11),

(xi) the faculty of faith (§ 12),

(xii) the faculty of energy (§ 18),

(xiii) the faculty of mindfulness (§ 14),
(xiv) the faculty of concentration (§ 15),

(xv) the faculty of wisdom (§ 16),


each sense has its specific field, the mano has all these
five fields as its scope. At the moment when an object
enters * the door of the eye * or other sense, it enters also
( the door of the ideating faculty causing the consciousness,
or one’s being, to vibrate (bhavangacalanassa paccayo
hoti), just as the alighting bird, at the same moment,
strikes the bough and casts a shadow (ibid. 72). — As we
might say, presentative cognition is invariably accompanied
by representative cognition. — Then, in the course of the
l mental undulations arising through this disturbance by !
1 way of sense impact, one of these eight psychoses termed
Mahacittani may emerge. ‘But in pure representative
cognition (suddha-manodvare) there is no process of
sensory stimulation/ as when we recall past sense-experi-
ence. — The process of representation is illustrated in detail,
and completes an interesting essay in ancient psychology.
In the case of seeing, hearing, and smell, past pleasant
sensations are described as being simply revived during a
subsequent state of repose. In the case of taste and touch,
it is present disagreeable sensations which suggest certain
contrasted experience in the past. But the commentator
is not here interested in ‘ association by contrast ’ as such.

4 Lit., ‘ or whatever [object the thought] is about/ The
gist of the somewhat obscure comment is that, while no
new class of objects is here to be understood over and
above those of present or past sensations, there is no serial
or numerical order in which these become material for
thought.

1—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



4


(xvi) the faculty of ideation (§ 17),

(xvii) the faculty of happiness (§ 18),

(xviii) the faculty of vitality (§ 19) ;

(xix) right views (§ 20),

(xx) right intention (§ 21),

(xxi) right endeavour (§ 22),

(xxii) right mindfulness (§ 28),

(xxiii) right concentration (§ 24) ;

(xxiv) the power of faith (§ 25),

(xxv) the power of energy (§ 26),

(xxvi) the power of mindfulness (§ 27),

(xxvii) the power of concentration (§ 28),

(xxviii) the power of wisdom (§ 29),

(xxix) the power of conscientiousness (§ 80),

(xxx) the power of the fear of blame (§ 81) ;

(xxxi) absence of lust (§ 82),

(xxxii) absence of hate (§ 83),

(xxxiii) absence of dulness (§ 34) ;

(xxxiv) absence of covetousness (§ 85),

(xxxv) absence of malice (§ 36),

(xxxvi) right views 1 * * (§ 87);

(xxxvii) conscientiousness (§ 88),

(xxxviii) fear of blame (§ 89) ;

(xxxix, xl) serenity in sense and thought (§§ 40, 41),
(xli, xlii) lightness in sense and thought (§§ 42, 43),
(xliii, xliv) plasticity in sense and thought (§§ 44, 45),
(xlv, xlvi) facility in sense and thought (§§ 46, 47),
(xlvii, xlviii) fitness in sense and thought (§§ 48, 49),

(xlix, 1) directness in sense and thought (§§ 50, 51) ;
(li) mindfulness (§ 52),

(lii) intelligence (§ 53)

(liii) quiet (§54)

1 According to Buddhaghosa the 4 states ’ numbered

xxxiv-vi are considered as equivalents of those numbered

xxxi-iii respectively, but as taken under another aspect.

In the prior enumeration the threefold 4 root of good ’ is
set out ; in the latter, reference to the 4 path of karma ’ is
understood (Asl. 129).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



(liv) insight (§ 55),

(lv) grasp (§ 56),

(lvi) balance (§ 57).

Now these — or whatever other incorporeal, causally in-
duced states 1 there are on that occasion — these are states
that are good.

[2] What on that occasion is contact (p h a s s o) ? 2

1 Nine other states, according to the Cy., are here im-
plied as factors in this psychosis, viz., desire (or conation,
or volition, chando), resolve (adhimokkho), attention
(manasikaro), equanimity (tatramaj jhattata), pity
(karuna), sympathy (mudita), abstinence from evil con-
duct in act, speech, and mode of livelihood. And the
opening words of this and similar supplementary clauses
in the text are coined into a technical term — ye-va-
panaka, ‘the or- whatever * [states], — to signify such
groups.

The Cy. then ‘ defines * the nine : desire, qualified as
orthodox desire (dhammacha ndo), to distinguish it from
ethically undesirable desire (cf. § 1097, etc.), is the wish to
act, the stretching forth the hand of the mind (cf. ope £«?)
to grasp the object in idea. Resolve is steadfastness,
decision, the being unshaken as a pillar. Attention is
movement, direction of the mind, confronting the object.
Equanimity — lit., the mean (medium) state— is the being
borne along evenly, without defect or excess, without
partiality. Pity and sympathy are described in § 258 et
seq. The last three give those three factors of the Eight-
fold Path unrepresented in the analysis of the thought
(Asl. 182, 188).

It is not without interest to note that in this supple-
mentary category all the purely psychological states are
wholly, or at least mainly, volitional or emotional.

2 Touch or contact must be understood in a very general
sense, as the outcome of three conditions : an impingeing
sentient organ, an impingeing agency conceived as external
to the sentient organ, and impact or collision. The similes
in Mil. 60 of the rams and the cymbals are quoted in the
Cy. The eye and its object are the usual illustration, but
the representative imagination (mano or cittam) and its
object are included as proceeding by way of contact, only
without impact (sanghattanam). The real causal con-
nexion in every case — so I understand the, to me, obscurely


ed by CjOCK^Ic



6


The contact which on that occasion is touching, the
being brought into contact, the state of having been
brought into touch with — this is the contact that there
then is.

[8] What on that occasion is feeling (vedana) 9 1
The mental pleasure, the mental ease, which, on that
occasion, is born of contact with the appropriate element of
representative intellection ; 2 the pleasurable, easeful sensa-


worded comment to say (Asl. 109) — is mental, even though
we speak of an external agency, just as when lac melts
with heat we speak of hot coals as the cause, though the
heat is in the lac’s own tissue.

‘ Contact ’ is given priority of place, as standing for the
inception of the thought, and as being the sine qud non of
all the allied states, conditioning them much as the roof-
tree of a storied house supports all the other combinations
of material (ibid. 107).

1 Vedana is a term of very general import, meaning
sentience or reaction, bodily or mental, on contact or im-
pression. Sensation is scarcely so loyal a rendering as
feeling, for though vedana is often qualified as ‘born of the
contact * in sense-activity, it is always defined generally as
consisting of the three species — pleasure (happiness), pain
(ill), and neutral feeling — a hedonistic aspect to which the
term ‘feeling’ is alone adequate. Moreover, it covers
representative feeling.

This general psychical aspect of vedana, as distinct from
sensations localized bodily — e.g ., toothache — is probably
emphasized by the term ‘mental’ (cetasikam) in the
answer. The Cy. points out that by this expression
( = cittanissitattam) ‘bodily pleasure is eliminated’
(Asl. 189). It also illustrates the general scope of
vedana by the simile of a cook who, after preparing a
number of dishes for his lord, tastes each critically to test
them, the lord partaking of whichever he pleases. The
cook represents all the associated states in the thought-
complex, each functioning in one specific way. Vedana,
the master, ‘ enjoys the essence (taste) of the object ’ as a
whole.

2 Taj ja-manovinnanadhatu. Tajj a is paraphrased
by anucchavika, sarupa. Cf. A. i. 207; S. iv. 215;
M. i. 190, 191 ; Mil. 58. On the remainder of the corn-


ed by Google



7


tion which is bom of contact with thought; 1 the pleasurable,
easeful feeling which is bom of contact with thought — this
is the feeling that there then is.

[4] What on that occasion is perception (sanna)? 2

The perception, the perceiving, the state of having per- ,
ceived which on that occasion is bom of contact with the


pound term, see § 6. And on the hedonistic expressions in
the answer, see § 10.

1 Ceto- samphassajam . . . vedayitam. The latter
term (experience) is, more literally, that which is felt, das
Empfundene. Ceto, c it tarn are used interchangeably
in the Cy. on these terms (see § 6). The ‘contact ’ is that
between idea or object and thought, or the ideating agency,
conceived as analogous to the impact between sense-organ
and sense-object. In consequence of this contact or pre-
sentation, emotional affection arises in consciousness.

2 The apparently capricious way in which the intension
of the term sanna is varied in the Pitakas makes it difficult
to assign any one adequate English rendering. In the
Mahavedalla Sutta (M. i. 298) and elsewhere (cf Mil. 61)
it is explained as the relatively simple form of intellection
or cognition which consists in the discernment, recognition,
assimilation of sensations — e.g., of colours, as ‘ blue,’ etc. —
the process termed in modern English psychology sense-
perception, except that it is not quite clear that, in Buddhist
psychology, as in English, the perception is made only on
occasion of sense-stimulation. The answer, indeed, in our
§ 4 alludes to representative activity only. In the Maha-
parinibbana Sutta, however (cf. A. v. 105), safina stands
for the intellectual realization of a number of highly
complex concepts, such as impermanence, non-substan-
tiality, etc. In the Potthapada Sutta (D. i. 180-187), again,
the s a ft ft a discussed is clearly what we should call con-
sciousness, whether as opposed to the unconsciousness of
trance, or as the raw material of ft an am, or as conceivably
distinct from the soul or Ego. Lastly, in a more popular
sense the term is used (notably in the Jatakas and in
commentators’ similes) for sign, mark, or token.

Here, if we follow the Cy. (Asl. 110), sanna means simply
that sense-perception which discerns, recognises and gives
class-reference to (upatthita-visaya), the impressions
of sense. Its procedure is likened to the carpenter’s recog-
nition of certain woods by the mark he had made on each ;


ed by CjOCK^Ic



8


appropriate element of representative intellection — this
is the perception that there then is.

[5] What on that occasion is thinking (cetana)? 1

The thinking, the cogitating, the reflection, which is bom
of contact with the appropriate element of representative
intellection — this is the thinking that there then is.

[6] What on that occasion is thought (cittam) ?

to the treasurer’s specifying certain articles of jewelry by
the ticket on each ; to the wild animal’s discernment in the
scarecrow of the work of man. The essence of sanha is
said to be recognition by way of a mark. In this notion of
mark and marking lies such continuity of thought as may
be claimed for the various uses of the term. The bare fact
of consciousness means ability to discriminate — that is, to
mark. To mark is to perceive. And the ideas or concepts
of ‘ impermanence,’ ‘ impurity,’ and the like, were so many
acts of marking, though of a highly ‘ re-representative *
character. Safina, no less than cittam (see Intro-
duction), and ‘thought,’ stands for both faculty and any
act or product of that faculty. And it is even objectified
so far as to signify further the result of any such act —
that is, in its connotation of mark or sign.

It is, I believe, when connoting the more specific sense
of faculty, or of skandha, that it may safely be rendered by
‘ perception ’ or ‘ marking,’ and may be taken to mean the
relatively ‘ superficial,’ ‘transient’ (Asl. 110, 111) play of
cognition when concerned with objects of sense. In ch. xiv.
of the Yisuddhi Magga — in a passage the late Henry C.
Warren was good enough to transcribe for me — sanha is
in this way, and this way only, distinguished from vinna-
nam and pah ha. The latter terms stand for cognition at
(as we might say) a relatively higher and a still higher
power, in virtue of the greater depth and complexity of tho
concepts they were exercised about (see §§ 6, 16).

1 There is no more difficult problem in interpreting the
Dhamma Sangani than to get at the grounds on which its
compilers, and subsequently its commentator, saw fit to set
out mutually independent descriptions of terms etymologi-
cally so identical as cetana and cittam. The only
parallel that suggests itself to me is the distinction drawn,
during a long period in British philosophy, between ‘ reason-
ing ’ and ‘ reason ’ — that is, between deductive inference and
the nous, or noetic function. Both pairs of terms are quite


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



9


The thought which on that occasion is ideation, mind,
heart, that which is clear, ideation as the sphere of mind,
the faculty of mind, intellection, the skandhaof intellec-
tion, the appropriate element of representative intellection
— this is the thought that there then is.


popular in form. Compare, e.g ., in the Nidana-katha
(Jat. i. 74), Buddha’s reply to Mara : ‘ I have here no con-
scious (or intelligent) witness. . . . Let this . . . earth, un-
conscious though it be, be witness. . . . Sacetano koci
sakkhl, etc. . . . ayam acetanapi . . . pathavl sak-
khlti.* Again, in A. i., p. 224, the import seems simple
and quite untechnical: ‘Their thoughts (cetana) and
hopes (lit., thinking and hoping) are fixed on lower things.’
Hence I have kept to terms popular in form. This does
not justify the use of terms so undifferentiated as ‘thinking’
and ‘ thought * ; yet I have returned to them, after essaying
half a dozen substitutes, for various reasons. They show
the close connection between the Buddhist pair of terms,
instead of obscuring it ; they are equally popular and vague
in form and extension ; the import of cetana has much in
common with a psychological account of thinking ; no term
misfits cittam less than ‘thought,’ unless it be ‘heart,’
on which see Introduction. It is unfortunate that Buddha-
ghosa does not give a comparative analysis of the two, as he
does in the case of vitakka-vicara and piti-sukham.
Under cetana he expatiates in forcible similes, describing it
as a process of activity and toil, and as a co-ordinating, order-
ing function. He likens it to an energetic farmer, bustling
about his fifty-five labourers (the fifty-five co-constituents
in the thought-complex) to get in the harvest ; to a senior
apprentice at the carpenter’s, working himself and supervis-
ing the tasks of the others ; to the leader of a warrior band,
fighting and inciting. To these notions the definition of
Nagasena (Mil. 61) only adds that of preparing (abhisan-
kharanam), the other qualifying term being merely a
denominative form (as if we should say ‘ thinkifying ’).

In so far, then, as ‘ thinking ’ connotes representative,
co-ordinative intellection, it coincides with cetana. In its
narrower, technical sense of intellection by way of general
notions, it does not (see Introduction). Any way, to call it
‘ thinking ’ is sufficiently indefinite, and does not preclude
the rendering of it elsewhere by such terms as ‘ reflecting,’
‘ cogitating,’ ‘ considering,* etc. But the problem has still


ed by CjOCK^Ic



10


[7] What on that occasion is conception (vitakko) 7 1

The ratiocination, the conception, which on that occasion
is the disposition, 2 the fixation, the focussing, 3 the applica-

to be solved of how it is related to such terms as safina,
cittam, and vinnanam. With regard to skandha, it is
classed, not with cittam, but under the sankhara-
skandha, § 62.

Cittam, together with the terms in which it is de-
scribed, is discussed in my Introduction.

1 Vitakko and vicaro is another pair of terms which it
is hard to fit with any one pair of English words. It is very
possible that academic teaching came to attach a more preg-
nant and specialized import to them than was conveyed in
popular and purely ethical usage. Cf. M. i., Suttas xix.
and xx., where vitakka would be adequately rendered by
ideas, notions, or thoughts. In Asl. 114, 115, on the other
hand ( cf Mil. 62, 68), the relation of the two to cittam
and to each other is set out with much metaphor, if with
too little psychological grasp. Yitakko is distinctively
mental procedure at the inception of a train of thought, the
deliberate movement of voluntary attention. As a king
ascends to his palace leaning on the arm of favourite or
relative, so thought ascends to its object depending upon the
conceptive act (vitakko; Asl. 114). Other metaphorical
attributes are its impingeing upon, circum-impingeing upon
(paryahanam), the object, and, again, bringing it near.
Hence in selecting ‘ conception * in preference to ‘reasoning/
by which vitakko has often been translated, I wished to
bring out this grasping, constructive, reaching-out act of the
mind, this incipient fetch of the imagination, elaborated in
the Buddhist scholastic analysis of the term ; but I had no
wish to read our own logical or psychological import of con-
ception as intellection by way of general notions, or the like,
into the Eastern tradition. Yet just as conception may be
so used as to include ‘reasoning* or ‘ratiocination,* so
vitakko is, in the reply, described by takko, the term used
for ratiocinative procedure, argument, or logic {cf. I>. i.
12, 21). ‘What,’ asks the Cy., ‘does one reason about
(takkesi) ? About a pot, a cart, the distance of anything.
Well, vitakko is a stronger reasoning.*

2 On ‘ disposition,* ‘ right intention,’ see § 21.

3 Appana vyappanii, the latter an intensive form of

the former (Asl. 142, 148). In the ‘ Yogavacara’s Manual *
(p. xi and passim) appana denotes the dawn of the desired


ed by CjOCK^Ic



11


tion of the mind, 1 right intention — this is the conception
that there then is.

[8] What on that occasion is discursive thought
(viearo) ? 2

The process, the sustained procedure (viearo), the
progress and access [of the mind] which on that occasion
is the [continuous] adjusting and focussing of thought 8 —
this is the discursive thought that there then is.

[9] What on that occasion is joy (plti)


concept during the practice of regulated meditation. Bud-
dhaghosa defines it thus: — ekaggam cittam arammane
appenti.

1 Cetaso abhiniropana == arammane cittam . . .
patitthapeti (ibid.)

2 Vicar o, as compared with vitakko, was used to express
the movement and maintenance of the voluntary thought-
continuum, as distinguished from the initiative grappling
with the subject of reflection. Examining in detail, as com-
pared with grasping the whole, is also read into it by com-
mentators (Asl. 114). It is a pounding up (anumajja-
nam), as well as a linking together. Metaphors are
multiplied, to show its relation to vitakko. It is as the
reverberation of the beaten drum or bell is to the beating;
as the planing movement of the bird’s wings after the
initial upsoaring; as the buzzing of the bee when it has
alighted on the lotus; as the scouring of the dirty bowl
when clutched; as the manipulating hand of the potter,
vitakko being represented by the hand which holds the
clay to the wheel, and so on. ‘ Investigation ’ would well
represent the sustained activity ; ‘ analysis,’ the cogitation in
details ; ‘ discursive thought ’ gives some of the import of
both, without introducing modern and Western implications.

3 Like the adjusting of bow and arrow. ‘Focussing’ is
anupekkhamano.

4 Plti, as distinguished from sukham, is explicitly ex-
cluded from the skandha of feeling, considered as the
irreducible hedonic constituent, and referred to the
composite psychoses of the sankhara skandha. It con-
notes emotion, as distinct from bare feeling ; that is to say,
plti is a complex psychical phenomenon, implying a
‘ central psycho-physical origin ’ and a widely diffused
* somatic resonance \(cf. Sully, ‘ The Human Mind,’ ii. 56).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



12


The joy which on that occasion is gladness, rejoicing at,
rejoicing over, mirth and merriment, felicity, 1 exultation,
transport of mind 2 — this is the joy that there then is.

[10] What on that occasion is ease (sukham) ? 8


It arises out of a present idea, and suffuses the whole
being. By Buddhaghosa’s day it was divided into five
species : the thrill of joy, just causing ‘ the flesh to creep ’ ;
the flash of joy, like lightning ; the flood of joy, like the
breakers on a sea-shore; ecstasy or transport, in which
the subject could float in the air ; and overwhelming
suffusing joy (Asl. 115, 116). Instances are related of the
fourth species (ubbega-piti), the inspiring idea being
‘Buddha rammanam , (see also Yisuddhi Magga, ch. iv.;

‘ Yogavacara’s Manual,’ vii.). The same word (ubbego) is
used to describe the anguish or trembling over guilt
discovered. See below, § 81 n.

1 Yitti, meaning literally, as the Cy. points out,
prosperity, wealth, and used here by analogy as a state
conditioned by a source of pleasure. ‘ Happiness arises to
him who is joyful through his joy, as it arises to the
wealthy through his rice-possessions.’ (Asl. 148.)

2 Attamanata cittassa. Buddhaghosa, who did not
know the true etymology of this term, is ready as ever with
a guess : attano man at a, or mentality of one’s self, not
of another, subjective experience. If I am pained or
pleased, that is peculiarly my affair (ibid.). Psychologically
it is interesting to note that he is prepared to find this
intimate, subjective reference in a state of intense feeling.

‘ Feeling is subjective experience par excellence . . . our
feelings . . . are all our own.* (Sully, ‘ The Human
Mind,’ ii. 2 ; G. C. Robertson, ‘ Elements of Psychology,*
185-188.)

3 To contrast plti with sukham, Buddhaghosa draws
a charming picture of the traveller who, fordone with
journeying through a desert, hears with joy of a pool in a
grove, and with joy comes upon it, and who, on drinking,
bathing, and resting in the shade is filled with ease.
Sukham, it is true, is not bare quiescence ; it is positive,
pleasurable feeling, and may have active concomitants; its
‘ essence ’ is expansion or increase (upabruhanam). But
just as dukkham means, not so much pain as ill-being or
misery, so does sukham mean well-being or sane and
sound caenaesthesis. And as ‘ joy ’ is the satisfaction of


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



18


The mental pleasure, the mental ease which on that
occasion is the pleasant, easeful experience born of contact
with thought, the pleasant, easeful feeling born of contact
with thought — this is the ease that there then is.

[11] What on that occasion is self-collectedness (cittass’
e k a g g a t a)

The stability, solidity, absorbed steadfastness of thought 2
which on that occasion is the absence of distraction.


gaining (potentially or actually) what we desire, so is ‘ease’
the enjoyment of the flavour (French, savour er) of what
we have gained (Asl. 117). See further § 60. 1 Mental
ease* (cetasikam sukham) is perhaps more correctly
somanassam, rendered (§ 1, etc.) by 4 happiness,’
sukham being sometimes distinguished as bodily (kayikam)
only. See S. v. 209.

1 4 Citt’ ekag gat a, the one-peaked condition of mind,
is a name for concentration (samadhi),’ says the Cy.
(p. 118). And accordingly, whereas under § 15 it gives
no further description of samadhi, it here applies to
citt’ ekaggata the metaphors used in Mil. 88 to illustrate
samadhi, viz., the centre part of a tent-shaped hut, and a
chieftain leading his army. It then adds that 4 this
samadhi, which is called self-collectedness, has, as its
characteristic mark, the absence of wandering, of distrac-
tion ; as its essence, the binding together of the states of
mind that arise with it, as water binds the lather of soap ;
and as its concomitants, calmness, or wisdom — for it is
said, 44 he who is at peace he understands, he sees things as
they really are ” — and ease. The steadfastness of thought
is likened to the steadiness of a lamp-flame in a windless
place.* See 4 Yogavacara’s Manual,’ p. xxvi.

2 These three cognate terms are in the text cittassa
thiti santhiti avatthiti. According to the Cy. (p. 148),
the standing unshaken in or on the object (arammane)
connoted by thiti is modified by the prefix sam to imply
kneading together (sampindetva) the associated states in
the object, and by the prefix ava to imply the being im-
mersed in the object. The last metaphor is in Buddhist
doctrine held applicable to four good and three bad states —
faith, mindfulness, concentration ( = self-collectedness) and
wisdom; craving, speculation and ignorance, but most of
all to self-collectedness.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



14


balance, 1 imperturbed mental procedure, quiet, 2 the faculty
and the power of concentration, right concentration — this
is the self-collectedness that there then is.

[12] What on that occasion is the faculty of faith
(saddhindriyam)? 8

1 The faith which on that occasion is a trusting in, the
! professing confidence in, 4 the sense of assurance, faith, 6


1 Avisaharo, avikkhepo (v. § 57). Distraction and
loss of equilibrium are attributed to the presence of ‘ excite-
ment and perplexity ’ (§§ 425, 429 ; Asl. 144).

2 Samatho. Distinguished as of three species : mental
calm (so used here) ; legal pacification, or settlement ;
calm in all the sanskaras, by which, according to the Cy.
(144), is meant the peace of Nirvana.

3 On ‘ faculty,’ see Introduction.

Faith is characterized and illustrated in the same terms
and approximately the same similes as are used in Mil.,
pp. 84-60. That is to say, it is shown to be a state of
mind where the absence of perplexity sets free aspiration
and energy. It is described as trust in the Buddha and
his system. There is, however, no dwelling just here on
any terminus ad quern , as St. Paul did in speaking of
‘ the prize for the mark of the high calling,’ etc., towards
which he pressed in ardent faith. There is, rather, an
insistence on that self-confidence born of conviction of the
soundness of one’s methods and efforts which is, as it were,
an aspect of faith as a vis a tergo. In the simile of the
stream, the Cy. differs from Trenckner’s version of the
Milinda to the extent of making the folk afraid to cross
because of alligators and other monsters, till the hero takes
his sword and plunges in. See the note on ‘ faith * in the
translation of Mil. i. 56.

4 I.e., in the Buddha, the Doctrine and the Order.
Buddhaghosa is only interested in making the etymology
bear on ethics, and compares the ‘downward plunge’ of
confidence (o-kappana) in the attitude of faith to the
‘ sinking ’ in ‘ mindfulness,’ the ‘ grounded stand ’ in ‘ con-
centration,’ and the ‘ sounding ’ penetration of ‘ wisdom ’
Asl. 144, 145).

6 The Cy. puts forward an alternative explanation of the
repetition in the description of this and following com-
pounds of the first term of the compound, viz., ‘ faith.*


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



15


faith as a faculty and as a power — this is the faith that
there then is.

[18] What on that occasion is the faculty of energy
(viriyindriyam)? 1

The mental inception 2 of energy which there is on that
occasion, the striving and the onward effort, the exertion


According to the former, it is the method of Abhidamma
to set out in isolation the adjectival part of a compound on
which the substantival part depends: faith-faculty = faith
(faculty of). According to the latter, the identity between
the two abstractions, faith and faith-faculty, is brought
out. The case of woman and attribute of femininity, it
remarks, is different. (This may be a groping after the
distinction between concrete and abstract.)

1 Viriyam is by Euddhaghosa connected with (a) vlra,
the dynamic effectiveness which is the essence of the genus
‘hero* (vlro), ( b ) iriya, vibrating movement. He charac-
terizes it by the two notions, ‘ supporting ’ and ‘ grasping
at, 1 or ‘stretching forward* (paggaho), and, again, by
‘exerting* (ussahanam). Cf. Mil. 86; Sum. Vil. 68.
And he cites the same similes as nppear in the Milinda.
He seems to have wished, as modern psychologists have
done, to account for the two modes of conscious effort :
Resistance and Free Energy. But he also emphasizes the
fact that the energy in question is mental, not bodily
(pp. 120 et 8eq. 9 145).

2 Arambho (cf. arammanam), overt action as distin-
guished from inaction, hence action at its inception, is dis-
tinguished by the Cy. as having six different implications,
according as there is reference to karma, to a fault com-
mitted, to slaying or injury, or to action as such (k iriya),
or energy as such.

I do not pretend that the four following pairs of words
fit those in the text exactly. They are mere approximations.
‘Endeavour* is vayamo, the term representing ‘energy’
in the Noble Eightfold Path. ‘Unfaltering’ effort
(asithila-parakkamata) is the attitude of one who has
made the characteristic Buddhist vow: Verily may skin
and nerve and bone dry up and wither, or ever I stay my
energy, so long as I have not attained whatsoever by
human vigour, energy, and effort is attainable ! (M. i. 480).
The desire sustained — lit., not cast down — is that felt on
an occasion for making good karma.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



1G


and endeavour, the zeal and ardour, the vigour and forti-
tude, the state of unfaltering effort, the state of sustained
desire, the state of unflinching endurance, the solid grip of
the burden, energy, energy as faculty and as power, right
endeavour — this is the energy that there then is.

[14] What on that occasion is the faculty of mindfulness
(satindriyam) 2 1

The mindfulness which on that occasion is recollecting,
calling back to mind ; the mindfulness 2 which is remember-
ing, bearing in mind, the opposite of superficiality 8 and
of obliviousness ; mindfulness as faculty ^mindfulness as \
power, right mindfulness— this is the faculty of mindfulness
that there then is.


1 Buddhaghosa’s comment on sati, in which he closely
follows and enlarges on the account in Mil. 87, 88, shows
that the traditional conception of that aspect of conscious-
ness had much in common with the Western modern theory

v of conscience or moral sense. Sati appears under the
metaphor of an inward mentor, discriminating between
good and bad and prompting choice. Hardy went so far
as to render it by ‘ conscience,’ but this slurs over the in-
teresting divergencies between Eastern and Western
thought. The former is quite unmystical on the subject of
sati. It takes the psychological process of representative
functioning (without bringing out the distinction between
bare memory and judgment), and presents the same under
an ethical aspect. See also under hiri, §80; and the
notion as described in ‘ Questions of Milinda,’ 88, n. 2.

2 The three fold mention of sati in the reply {cf § 12)
agrees with K., but not with Puggala Pannatti (p. 25). It
is not noticed by the Cy.

3 Apilapanata. The Atthasiilinl solves the problem pre-
sented by this term (see Milinda (S.B.E.), vol. i., p. 58, n: 2)
by deriving it from pilavati, to float, and interprets: —
* not floating on the surface like pumpkins and pots on the
water,’ sati entering into and plunging down into the
object of thought. Cf. § 11, n. 2 ; § 12, n. 2, in which
connection the term is again used. The positive form occurs
infra, § 1849. P. P. has (a) vilapanata (21, 25). (Asl. 147;
cf 405.) I should have rendered the word by ‘ profundity,’


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



17


[15] What on that occasion is the faculty of concentra-
tion (samadhindriyam)? 1

Answer as for 1 self-collectedness,’ § 11.

[16] What on that occasion is the faculty of wisdom
(panfiindriyam)? 2


had I not preferred to bring out the negative form of the
original.

1 Buddhaghosa’s etymology — ‘ arammane cittam
samma adhiy^ti, thapeti ti* — is no doubt incorrect,
sam-a-dha being the sounder analysis; nevertheless,
he brings out that voluntary and deliberate adjustment of
the attention with a view to sustained mental effort which
is connoted bysamadhi (Asl. 122).

2 To fit the term pafina with its approximate European
equivalent is one of the cruces of Buddhist philosophy. I
have tried in turn reason, intellect, insight, science, under-
standing, and knowledge. All of these have been, and are,
used in the literature of philosophy with varying shades
of connotation, according as the sense to be conveyed is
popular and vague, psychological and precise, or transcen-
dental and — passez-moi le mot — having precise vague-
ness. And each of them might, with one implication or
another, represent panna. The main difficulty in choice
lay in determining whether, to the Buddhist, panna stood
for mental function, or for the aggregate product of certain
mental functioning, or for both. When all the allusions to
pafina in the Sutta Pitaka have been collated, a final trans-
lation may become possible. Here it must suffice to quote
two. In M. i. 292, he who has panna (pannava) is
declared in virtue thereof to understand (pajanati) the
nature of the phenomenon of pain or ill (the Four Noble
Truths). In D. i. 124 Gotama asks : What is this panna ?
and himself sets out its content as consisting in certain
intellectual attainments, viz., the Jhanas, insight into the
nature of impermanence, the mental image of one’s self, the
power of Iddhi, the cosmic Ear, insight into other minds, into
one’s own past lives, the cosmic Eye, and the elimination of
all vitiating tendencies. Buddhaghosa also (Vis. M., ch. xiv.)
distinguishes panna from safina and vifinana. He
describes it as adequate to discern not only what these ean,
viz., sense-objects and the Three Marks (impermanence,
pain, and non-substantiality) respectively, but also the

2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



18


The wisdom which there is on that occasion is under-
standing, search, research, searching the Truth, 1 discern-
ment, discrimination, differentiation, erudition, proficiency,
subtlety, criticism, reflection, analysis, breadth, 2 sagacity, 3
leading, 1 insight, intelligence, incitement ; 6 wisdom as
faculty, wisdom as power, wisdom as a sword, 6 wisdom as
a height, 7 wisdom as light, 8 wisdom as glory, 9 wisdom as
splendour, 10 wisdom as a precious stone ; the absence of
dulness, searching the Truth, 11 right views — this is the
wisdom that there then is.

[17] What on that occasion is the faculty of ideation
(representative imagination, manindriyam)?

Answer as for ‘ thought ’ (c i 1 1 a m), § 6.


Path. For him, then, it might be called intellect ‘ at a
higher power.’ And in Gotama’s reply, all those attain-
ments are described in terms of intellectual process.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the term did not stand for
bare mental process of a certain degree of complexity ,
but that it also implied mental process as cultivated in
accordance with a certain system of concepts objectively
valid for all Buddhist adepts. Hence, I think it best to
reject such terms as reason, intellect, and understanding,
and to choose wisdom, or science, or knowledge, or philo-
sophy. Only they must be understood in this connexion
as implying the body of learning as assimilated and applied
by the intellect of a given individual. See further under
nanam (Introduction) and vij ja (§ 1296).

1 7.e., the doctrines of the ‘ Four Truths ’ (Asl. 147). Cf.
Mil. 83.

2 Wisdom compared to the breadth and amplitude of the
earth (Asl. 147, 148).

8 Hedha. The Cy. explains the specific wisdom of this
term to lie in ‘ slaying ’ vice, or else in ‘ grasping and
bearing’ (148).

4 Parinayika. 6 Literally, a goad.

6 ‘ For the slaying of vices ’ (Asl. 148 ; cf Jat. iv. 174).

7 ‘ In the sense of something lofty ’ (ibid. ; cf. Dhp. v.
28 = Mil. 387).

8 Ang. ii. 139. 9 Ibid. 10 Ibid.

11 Repeated by way of antithesis to ‘ dulness ’ (Asl. 148).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



19


[18] What on that occasion is the faculty of pleasure
(somanassindriyam)?

Answer as for ‘ ease ’ (sukha m), § 10.

[19] What on that occasion is the faculty of vitality
(j I vitindr iy am)?

The persistence of these incorporeal states, their sub-
sistence, going on, their being kept going on, their progress,
continuance, preservation, life, life as faculty 1 — this is the
faculty of vitality that there then is. 2

[20] What on that occasion are right views (samma-
d i 1 1 h i ) ? 3

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of wisdom/ § 16.

[21] What on that occasion is right intention (samma-
sankappo)? 4

Answer as for 1 conception,’ § 7.

[22] What on that occasion is right endeavour (samma-
v a y a m o) ?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of energy/ § 18.

[23] What on that occasion is right -mindfulness
(sammasati)?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of mindfulness/ § 14.

[24] What on that occasion is right concentration
(sammasamadhi) ?

Answer as for * self-collectedness/ §11.

1 In the text, hoti before i dam is probably an error.

2 This answer is exceptional in the omission of tasmim
samaye (‘ on that occasion ’) at the beginning of the sen-
tence. Cf. §§ 82, 295, 441. The reason of its omission is
probably that in the presence of life, by which the com-
plex of dhammas is sustained as lotuses by water, or as an
infant by its nurse (Asl. 124), there is nothing contingent
on the ethical quality (good, bad, or indeterminate) of the
given complex.

3 For a discussion of the term ditthi, see § 1003. On
these five factors of the Path see Introduction.

4 Sankappo is by the Cy. especially identified with the
expression cetaso abhiniropana, application of the
mind, the disposition or adjustment of attention, that on
which the heart is set, hence aspiration, intention, purpose,
design.

2—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



20


[25] What on that occasion is the power of faith
(saddhabalam)?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of faith/ § 12.

[26] What on that occasion is the power of energy
(vi riyabalam)?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of energy/ § 18.

[27] What on that occasion is the power of mindfulness
(satibalam)?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of mindfulness/ § 14.

[28] What on that occasion is the power of concentra-
tion (samadhibalam)?

Answer as for ‘self-collectedness/ § 11.

[29] What on that occasion is the power of wisdom
(paiifiabalam)?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of wisdom/ § 16.

[80] What on that occasion is the power of conscientious-
ness (h i r i b a 1 a m) ? l

1 Hiri and ottappam, as analyzed by Buddhaghosa, pre-
sent points of considerable ethical interest. Taken together
they give us the emotional and conative aspect of the modern
notion of conscience, just as sati represents it on its in-
tellectual side. The former term ‘ is equivalent to shame
(lajja)/ the latter to ‘anguish (ubbego) over evil-doing.’
Hiri has its source within; ottappam springs from with-
out. Hiri is autonomous (attadhipati) ; ottappam,
heteronomous, influenced by society (lokadhipati). The
former is established on shame ; the latter on dread. The
former is marked by consistency ; the latter by discernment
of the danger and fearsomeness of error. The subjective
source of hiri is fourfold, viz., the idea of what is due to
one’s birth, age, worth and education. Thus, one having
hiri will think, ‘Only mean folk (fishers, etc.), children,
poor wretches, the blind and ignorant, would do such an
act/ and he refrains. The external source of ottappam
is the idea that ‘ the body of the faithful will blame you/
and hence one refrains. If a man have hiri, he is, as
said the Buddha, his own best master. To one who is
sensitive by way of ottappam, the masters of the faith
are the best guides (Asl. 126).

In a supplementary paragraph (p. 127) the ‘ marks ’
(consistency, etc.) are thus explained : In hiri one reflects


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



21


The feeling of conscientious scruple 1 which there is on
that occasion when scruples ought to be felt, conscientious
scruple at attaining to bad and evil states — this is the power
of conscientiousness that there then is.

[81] What on that occasion is the power of the fear of
blame (ottappabalam)?

The sense of guilt, 2 which there is on that occasion,
where a sense of guilt ought to be felt, a sense of guilt at
attaining to bad and evil states — this is the fear of blame
that there then is.

[82] What on that occasion is the absence of lust
(alobho)?

The absence of lust, of lusting, of lustfulness, which
there is on that occasion, the absence of infatuation, the
feeling and being infatuated, the absence of covetousness,
that absence of lust which is the root of good 3 — this is
the absence of lust that there then is.

[83] What on that occasion is the absence of hate
(a d o s o) ?


on the worth of one’s birth, one’s teacher, one’s estate, and
one’s fellow-students. In ottappam one feels dread at
self-reproach, the blame of others, chastisement, and re-
tribution in another life.

1 Hiriyati, paraphrased by jigucchati (Asl. 149 ;
D. i. 174 ; M. i. 78).

2 Ottappati, paraphrased by ubbego (Asl. 124).

3 I.e.j the fundamental condition, the cause of goodness.
On ‘covetousness’ and ‘infatuation,’ see §§ 85, 1059.
Alobho and its two co-ordinate virtues, the threefold
‘ root ’ of goodness, lose all their force in English negatives,
but to a Buddhist convey doubtless as much impressive-
ness, as much of positive import, as the negative ‘ immor-
tality’ does to the Christian. Alobho, e.g., involves
active altruism; a do so, active sympathy; am oho, a life
of culture (see § 34, n.). I do not know any positive terms
meet to represent them.

The * mark ’ of the first is absence of greed, or of adhe-
sion, as a drop of water runs off a lotus leaf. Its essence
is independence, like that of the emancipated bhikshu
(Asl. 127).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



22


The absence of hate, of hating, 1 of hatred, which there
is on that occasion, the absence of malice, of spleen, 2 the
absence of hate which is the root of good — this is the
absence of hate that there then is.

[34] What on that occasion is the absence of dulness
(a m o h o) ?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of wisdom/ § 16. 8

[35] What on that occasion is the absence of covetous-
ness (a n a b h i j j h a) ?

Answer as for the ‘ absence of lust,’ § 32. 4

[36] What on that occasion is the absence of malice
(avy apado) ? 6

Answer as for the ‘ absence of hate/ § 33.

[37] What on that occasion are right views (sam-
m ad it t hi)? 6

Answer as for the ‘faculty of wisdom/ § 16.


1 K. reads adusana, adusitattam. The ‘mark* of
a do so is said to be absence of churlishness and crossness
(see § 1060); its essence the suppression of annoyance
and fever ; its immediate result is loveliness — like the full
moon (Asl. 127).

2 ‘ The opposite of the pain felt when one is angry *
(Asl. 150).

8 Buddhaghosa expatiates at some length on the excel-
lencies of the fundamental trinity of Buddhist virtue. To
take a few only: alobho (1) involves health, ado so (2)
youth (hate ages quickly), am oho (3) long life (through
prudence). (1) tends to material good through generosity
(cf ‘he that soweth plenteously/ etc.) ; (2) to the acquisition
of friends, won and held by love ; (3) to self-development.
(1) leads to life in the devaloka, (2) to life in the Brahma-
loka, (3) to Arahatship. (1) gives insight into imperma-
nence, and, conversely, (2) and (3) into the other two marks
(‘ pain ' and ‘ non- substantiality/ respectively).

4 Abhijjha and lobho are synonymous. See §§ 1059
and 1136, where abhijjha stands for lobho.

5 Described (Asl. 129) as the being void of any wish to
destroy welfare of others, bodily or mental, their advantages
in this or other worlds, or their good reputation.

6 Cf. § 1 (xxxvi), footnote.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



23


[38] What on that occasion is conscientiousness (h i r i) ?

Answer as for the ‘ power of conscientiousness,* § 80.

[39] What on that occasion is the fear of blame
(ottappam) ?

Answer as for the ‘ power of the fear of blame,’ § 81.

[40] What on that occasion is repose of sense (k a y a -
passaddhi)? 1

The serenity, 2 3 the composure which there is on that
occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity of
the skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses — this
is the serenity of sense that there then is.

[41] What on that occasion is serenity of thought
(cittapassaddhi)?

The serenity, the composure which there is on that
occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity
of the skandha of intellect — this is the serenity of thought
that there then is.

[42] What on that occasion is buoyancy 8 of sense
(kayalahuta)?

The buoyancy which there is on that occasion, the alert-
ness in varying, 4 5 the absence of sluggishness 6 and inertia,
in the skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses — this
is the buoyancy of sense that there then is.

[43] What on that occasion is buoyancy of thought
(cittalahuta)?


1 On the meaning of kayo see Introduction.

2 Passaddhi is described as a state free from pain —
where pain is allayed and suppressed ; where tremor or
unquiet is replaced by ‘ coolness * — the opposite to the
states called kilesas, especially excitement (§ 1229).
Cf. D. i. 73 ; M. i. 37.

3 Literally, lightness, described as the opposite of heavi-
ness, sluggishness and the rigidity of stolidity and stupor
(§ H85).

4 ‘The capacity of changing quickly* (Asl. 150). Cf
Childers’ Dictionary, s.v. parivatti.

5 Bead adandhanata. K. reads adandhata, but

adandhanata in § 43 and § 639.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



24


The buoyancy, etc. (as in § 42), in the skandha of in-
tellect — this is the buoyancy of thought that there then is.

[44] What on that occasion is plasticity of sense (kaya-
muduta)? 1

The plasticity which there is on that occasion, the
suavity, smoothness, absence of rigidity, in the skandhas
of feeling, perception and syntheses — this is the plasticity
of sense that there then is.

[45] What on that occasion is plasticity of thought
(cittamuduta)?

The plasticity which, etc. (as in § 44), in the skandha
of intellect — this is the plasticity of thought that there
then is.

[46] What on that occasion is wieldiness 2 of sense
(k a y a k a m m a n h a t a) ?

The wieldiness which there is on that occasion, the
tractableness, the pliancy, of the skandhas of feeling, per-
ception and syntheses— this is the wieldiness of sense that
then is.

[47] What on that occasion is wieldiness of though
(cittakammaiinata)?

The wieldiness, etc. (as in § 46), of the skandha of
intellect — this is the wieldiness of thought that there
then is.

[48] What on that occasion is fitness 3 of sense (kaya-
paguiinata)?

The fitness which there is on that occasion, the com-
petence, the efficient state of the skandhas of feeling,
perception and syntheses — this is the fitness of sense that
there then is.


1 The suppression of stiffness and resistance, or oppug-
nancy ; the attitude antithetical to that belonging to the
kilesas of opinionativeness and conceit.

2 Kammaiiiiata, literally workableness, or serviceable-
ness — for good action (Asl. 151), by which one ‘ succeeds in
constructing objects of thought’ (ibid. 180).

3 The antithesis to illness and diffidence (ibid. 131).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



25


[49] What on that occasion is fitness of thought (citta-
pagunnata)?

The fitness, etc. {as in § 48), of the skandha of in-
tellect — this is the fitness of thought that there then is.

[50] What on that occasion is rectitude 1 of sense
(kayujjukata)?

The straightness which there is on that occasion, the
rectitude, without deflection, twist or crookedness, of the
skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses — this is the
directness of sense that there then is.

[51] What on that occasion is rectitude of thought
(c i 1 1 u j ju k a t a) ?

The straightness, etc. (as in § 50), of the skandha of
intellect — this is the rectitude of thought that there
then is.

[52] What on that occasion is mindfulness (s a t i) ?

Answer as for the ‘ faculty of mindfulness,’ § 14.

[53] What on that occasion is intelligence (sam-
pa j anfiam) ? 2

Answer as for ‘ wisdom,’ § 16.

[54] What on that occasion is quiet (s a m a t h o) ?

Answer as for ‘self-collectedness,’ § 11.

[55] What on that occasion is insight (vipassana)?

Answer as for ‘ wisdom,’ § 16.

[56] What on that occasion is grasp (p a g g a h o) ?

Answer as for the ‘faculty of energy,’ § 18.

[57] What on that occasion is balance (avikkhepo)? 3


1 Defined as the antithesis of crookedness, deception
(may a) and craftiness (Asl. 131).

2 Or comprehension ; to know anything according to its
usefulness, its expediency, its scope, and to know it clearly.
Named as approximately equivalent to ‘ wisdom,’ the Cy.
assigns to it as well the characteristics of mindfulness
{ibid.). Cf. the frequent twin qualification of sati-sam-
pajano — e.g., M. i. 274.

3 ‘The opposite of excitement or fluster’ (Asl. ibid.).
Literally, ‘the absence of wavering’ (or vacillation or
unsteadiness).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



26


Answer as for € self-collectedness, * § 11.

These, or whatever other 1 2 incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that
are good.

Here ends the delimitation of terms (Pada-bhajani-
yam).

End of the First Portion for Recitation.

[Summary of the constituents of the First Type of
Thought (sangahavaram or kotthasavara m).] *

[58] Now, on that occasion
the skandhas are four,
the spheres (a y a t a n a n i) are two,
the elements (dhatuyo) are two,
the nutriments (a h a r a) are three,
the faculties (indriyani) are eight,
the Jhana is fivefold,
the Path is fivefold,
the powers (b a 1 a n i) are seven,
the causes (h e t \\) are three ;


1 See above, p. o.

2 The constituent dhammas of the first of the eight
schemata of ‘good thoughts’ (cittangani) are now
rehearsed with reference to class and number. The motive
probably was to aid the student either to a conspectus of
the psychosis in question, or mnemonically. Thus, if the
constituent factors of the thought be regarded under the
aspect of classified aggregates (rasatthena, or khandhat-
thena), they all fall under four heads. All that do not
belong to the skajj^bag^°f feeling, perception, or intellect,
come under the sansfcara-skandha. Regarded under the
aspect of collocation or conjuncture (ay a tan am), they all
fall under two heads, corresponding to the fourth, and to
the first, second, and third, of those four skandhas re-
spectively. Regarded under the aspect of phenomena, of
non-noihnena (sabhavatthena, suniiatatthena, nis-
sattatthena), they all fall under two heads, corre-
sponding to the two preceding. We then come to partial
aspects.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



27


contact,

feeling,

perception, * are each single [factors] ;
thinking,
thought,
the skandhas of
feeling,

perception, are eac ij g j j e [f ac t or s] ;

syntheses,

intellect,

the sphere of ideation (man a-'
yatanam),
the faculty of ideation,
the element of representative in-
tellection (m a n o v i h ii a n a - are each single
dhatu), [factors],

the sphere of a (representative)
state,

the element of a (representative)
state,

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.

[59] What on that occasion are the four skandhas ?

The skandhas of feeling, perception, syntheses and in-
tellection.

[60] (L) What on that occasion is the skandha of feeling?

The mental pleasure, the mental ease, which there is

on that occasion, 1 the pleasurable, easeful sensation which
is born of contact with thought, the pleasant, easeful

1 The omission in both this and the next answer of the
phrase, used in §§ 8 and 4 — ‘ born of contact with the
appropriate element of representative intellection * — is not
noticed in the Cy. K. draws attention to it in a footnote,
not at this passage, but at §§ 108-110. The omission is
probably accidental.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



28


feeling born of contact with thought — this is the skandha
of feeling that there then is (§§ 8, 10, 18).

[61] (ii.) What on that occasion is the skandha of per-
ception ?

The perception, the perceiving, the state of having per-
ceived, which there is on that occasion — this is the skandha
of perception that there then is (§ 4).

[62] (iii.) What on that occasion is the skandha of
syntheses

(i) Contact,

(ii) thinking,

(iii) conception,

(iv) discursive thought,

(v) joy,

(vi) self-collectedness,

(vii) the faculty of faith,

(viii) the faculty of energy,

(ix) the faculty of mindfulness,

(x) the faculty of concentration,

(xi) the faculty of wisdom,

(xii) the faculty of vitality,

(xiii) right views,

(xiv) right intention,

(xv) right endeavour,

(xvi) right mindfulness,

(xvii) right concentration,

(xviii) the power of faith,

(xix) the power of energy,

(xx) the power of mindfulness,

(xxi) the power of concentration,

(xxii) the power of wisdom,

(xxiii) the power of conscientiousness,

(xxiv) the power of the fear of blame,

(xxv) absence of lust,

(xxvi) absence of hate,

(xxvii) absence of dulness,

1 See Introduction.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



29


(xxviii) absence of covetousness,

(xxix) absence of malice,

(xxx) right views,

(xxxi) conscientiousness,

(xxxii) the fear of blame,

(xxxiii) serenity of sense,

(xxxiv) serenity of thought,

(xxxv) buoyancy of sense,

(xxxvi) buoyancy of thought,

(xxxvii) plasticity of sense,

(xxxviii) plasticity of thought,

(xxxix) wieldiness of sense,

(xl) wieldiness of thought,

(xli) fitness of sense,

(xlii) fitness of thought,

(xliii) rectitude of sense,

(xliv) rectitude of thought,

(xlv) mindfulness,

(xlvi) intelligence,

(xlvii) quiet,

(xlviii) insight,

(xlix) grasp,

(1) balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas
of feeling, perception and intellection — these are the
skandha of syntheses.

[68] (iv.) What on that occasion is the skandha of in-
tellect ?

The thought which on that occasion is ideation, mind,
the heart, that which is clear, ideation as the sphere of
mind, as the faculty of mind, the skandha of intellect, the
appropriate element of representative intellection — this is
the skandha of intellect that there then is (§ 6).

These on that occasion are the four skandhas.

[64] What on that occasion are the two spheres *?

The sphere of ideation, the sphere of (mental) states.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



30


[65] What on that occasion is the sphere of ideation
(manayatanam)?

Answer as for ‘ thought/ § 6, and for the * skandha of
intellection/ § 63.

[66] What on that occasion is the sphere of (mental)
states (dhammayatanam)?

The skandhas of feeling, perception, syntheses — this is
on that occasion the sphere of (mental) states.

These are on that occasion the two spheres.

[67] What on that occasion are the two elements ?

The element of representative intellection, the element
of (mental) states.

[68] What on that occasion is the element of repre-
sentative intellection (m a n o v i n ii a n a d h a t u) ?

Answer as for ‘ thought/ § 6 ; cf §§ 63, 65.

[69] What on that occasion is the element of (mental)
states (dhammadhatu)?

The skandhas of feeling, of perception, of syntheses—
these are on that occasion the element of (mental) states.

These are on that occasion the two elements.

[70] What on that occasion are the three nutriments? 1

The nutriment of contact, the nutriment of representa-
tive cogitation, the nutriment of intellection.

[71] What on that occasion is the nutriment of contact
(phassaharo)?


1 These three incorporeal nutriments or foods, together
with the fourth or corporeal food, are given in the Sutta
Pitaka: M. i. 261 ; S. ii. 11. In the A. they are not
classified under the Gatukka Nipata ; but in the Dasaka
Nipata (A. v. 136) ten species of aharo are named, which
have no reference to the four. E.g., ‘ appropriate action is
the aharo of health.’ Buddhaghosa, dwelling on the ety-
mology, calls them not so much conditions as supplementary
casual * adducts’ (a-har). Given, e.g., a living individual,
adduce contact, and you get feeling ; adduce cogitation, and
you get the three ‘ becomings ’ (in the universe of sense,
etc.) ; adduce intellect, and you get conception and name-
and-form (Asl. 153).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



8]


Answer as for ‘ contact/ § 2.

[72] What on that occasion is the nutriment of repre-
sentative cogitation (manosahcetanaharo)?

The thinking, the cogitating, the reflection which there
is on that occasion — this is the representative cogitation
that there then is.

[78] What on that occasion is the nutriment of intellec-
tion (vinnanaharo)?

Ansiver as for the ‘skandha of intellection/ § 63.

These on that occasion are the three nutriments.

[74] What on that occasion are the eight faculties ?

The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, concentra-
tion, wisdom, ideation, happiness, vitality.

[75-82] What on that occasion is the faculty of faith . . .
vitality ?

Ansiver8 as in §§ 12-19 respectively .

These on that occasion are the eight faculties.

[88] What on that occasion is the fivefold Jhana
(pancangikam jhana m)?

Conception, discursive thought, joy, ease, self-collected-
ness.

[84-88] What on that occasion is conception . . . self-
collectedness ?

Answers as in §§ 7-11 respectively .

This on that occasion is the fivefold Jhana.

[89] What on that occasion is the fivefold Path (p a ii -
cangiko maggo)?

Right views, right intention, right endeavour, right
mindfulness, right concentration.

[90-94] What on that occasion are right views ... is
. . . right concentration ?

Answers as in §§ 20-24 respectively .

This on that occasion is the fivefold Path.

[95] What on that occasion are the seven powers ?


ed by CjOCK^Ic



82


The power of faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration,
wisdom, conscientiousness, the fear of blame.

[96-102] What on that occasion is the power of faith
. . . the fear of blame ?

Answers as in §§ 25-81 respectively .

These on that occasion are the seven powers.

[108] What on that occasion are the three causes (t a y o
h e t u) ?

The absence of lust, of hate, and of dulness.

[104-106] What on that occasion is the absence of lust
. . . dulness?

Answers as in §§ 82-84 respectively .

These are on that occasion the three causes.

[107] What on that occasion is contact . . .

[108] feeling . . .

[109] perception . . .

[110] thinking . . .

[111] thought . . .

[112] the skandha of feeling . . .

[118] the skandha of perception . . .

[114] the skandha of syntheses . . .

[115] the skandha of intellection . . .

[116] the sphere of ideation . . .

[117] the faculty of ideation . . .

[118] the element of ideational intellection . . .

[119] the sphere of (mental) states . . .

[120] the element of (mental) states,
regarded as a single factor ?

Answers as in 2-6, 60-68, 65, 65, 65, 66, 66, respec-
tively .

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that
are good.

[Here ends] the Summary [of the constituents of the
First Main Type of Good Thoughts].


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



88


[The ‘Emptiness’ Section (sunnatavaro)]. 1 * 3

{121] Now, at that time there are

states (distinguishable constituents of the
‘ thought ’),

skandhas, powers,

spheres, causes,

elements, contact,

nutriments, feeling,

faculties, perception,

Jhana, thinking,

the Path, thought,

the skandha of feeling,
the skandha of perception,
the skandha of syntheses,
the skandha of intellect,
the sphere of ideation,
the faculty of ideation,
the element of representative intellection,
the sphere of [mental] states,
the element of [mental] states.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.


1 On the significance of the term ‘ emptiness,* see
Introduction ; cf. § 844. The significance of this section
in the student’s course of study seems to have consisted
simply in this : That the interest being withdrawn from the
nature and numbers of the particular constituents in each
of the species of mental activity to which the thought-
complex is reducible, emphasis is laid on the principle that
\ this same thought-complex is an aggregate or combination
\of such phenomenal factors, and nothing more . ‘There
are states of consciousness* (dhamma honti); that is

(Asl. 155), ‘there is no permanent entity or self which \
acquires the states.’ ‘The states are to be understood
phenomenally. There is no other being or existence or
person or individual whatever.’

3


ed by CjOCK^Ic



34


[122] What on that occasion are states ?

The skandhas of feeling, of perception, of syntheses, of
intellection.

[123] What on that occasion are skandhas?

Answer as in § 59.

[124-145] Similar questions are then put respecting
* spheres,’ ‘ elements,* and so on through the list of con -
stituent species . The answers are identical with those given
to similar questions in the previous ‘ Summary,* viz., in
§§ 64, 67, 70, 74, 83, 89, 95, 103, and 107-120.

[Here ends] the ‘ Emptiness * Section.

[Here ends] the First Main Type of Good Thoughts.


H.

[146] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen by the prompting of a conscious motive, 1 a


1 Sasankharena. Buddhaghosa’s explanation of the
term is ^terse and explicit. Sa = co-, sankharo = com-
pound, is here used in the sense of concomitant with spring,
motive, means, or cause (ussaho, payogo, upayo,
paccayo-gahanam). For instance, a bhikshu dwelling
in the neighbourhood of a vihara is inclined, when duty
calls him to sweep the terrace round the sthupa, wait on
the elders, or listen to the Dhamma, to find the way too far,
and shirk attendance. Second thoughts, as to the impro-
priety of not going, induce him to go. These are prompted
either by his own conscience (attano va payogena),
or by the exhortation of another who, showing the dis-
advantage in shirking, and the profit in attending, says,
‘ Come, do it !’ And the ‘ good thought,’ i.e. t of course, the
resolve to go, is said ‘to have arisen by way of a concomitant
motive, by way of the taking hold of a cause.* Asl. 156.

This explanation is not discrepant with that of sasank-
hariko, given to Childers by Yijesinha Mudliar. He


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


85


thought which is accompanied by pleasure, associated with
knowledge, and having, as its object, a sight, a sound, a
smell, a taste, a touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then
there is contact, feeling, etc. 1 [here follows the list of ‘ states 9
dealt with in §§ 1-145 and constituting the First Thought ] —
these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good. . • •

[Here ends] the Second Thought. 2


III.

[147] Which are the states that are good?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen accompanied by pleasure, disconnected with
knowledge, and having as its object, a sight, a sound, a


was not, I take it, so bad a Buddhist as to mean that an
asankharikam cittam was a thought in and for
itself spontaneous, i.e. 9 uncaused. He would mean only
that the subject of the thought experienced it without
being conscious of its mental antecedent as such , without
paccaya-gahanam. In a cittam sasankharena, on
the other hand, the thought presents itself in consciousness
together with its mental conditions. In the Abhidham-
mattha-Sangaha the terms used in a similar connexion are
asankharikam and sasankharikam. J. P. T. S., 1884,
p. 1 et seq . Cf. Warren, ‘ Buddhism in Translations,* 490.

1 In the text (§ 146), at the omitted repetitions indicated
by * . . . p e . . .* reference is made to § 147. More cor-
rectly reference should be made to § 1. The second type-
thought is in all respects (including Summary and ‘Empti-
ness * Section) identical with the first (Asl. 156), with the
sole exception of the additional implication * by the prompt-
ing of a conscious motive.* With the same exception the
fourth, sixth, and eighth type- thoughts are identical with
the third, fifth, and seventh respectively. Hence the
reference in § 159 of the text should have been to § 157.

2 K. reads Dutiyam Cittam, and so on for the
eight.

8—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



86


smell, a taste, a touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then
there is


contact,
feeling,
perception,
thinking,
thought,
the faculty of
faith,
energy,
mindfulness,


conception,
discursive thought,

joy>

ease,

self-collectedness ;

concentration,

ideation,

happiness,


vitality ;

right intention, 1 right mindfulness,

right endeavour, right concentration ;

the power of

faith, concentration,

energy, conscientiousness,

mindfulness, the fear of blame ;

absence of lust,
absence of hate,
absence of covetousness,
absence of malice ;
conscientiousness,
fear of blame ;

serenity, wieldiness,

buoyancy, fitness,

plasticity, rectitude,

both of sense and thought ;
mindfulness, grasp,

quiet, balance.


1 Sammaditthi should have been here omitted in the
text, just as it is rightly omitted at the place of ifcs second
mention between avyapado and hiri. Its absence from
the third type of thought is involved in the qualifying
phrase ‘disconnected with knowledge/ just as ‘wisdom,’
* insight/ etc., are. Cf K. In 147a the Path is said to be
fourfold only.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



37


These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.


[Summary, cf. § 58 et seq.]

[147a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are seven, 1
the Jhana is fivefold,
the Path is fourfold,
the powers are six, 2
the causes are two, 3
contact, etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

* * * * * *

[148] What on that occasion is the skandha of syntheses ?

The content of the sanskdr a- skandha is the same as in the
First Type of Thowjht , § 62, 4 with the following omissions :

4 The faculty of wisdom/

4 right views/

4 the power of wisdom/

4 the absence of dulness/

4 intelligence/

4 insight.’


1 That of 4 wisdom ’ being omitted.

2 See preceding note.

3 4 Absence of dulness ’ being omitted.

4 In the text the reader is referred to § 62 without
reservation, and is thereby landed in inconsistencies.
K. enumerates the content of the skandha in full, omitting
all those factors which are incompatible with a thought
divorced from knowledge. I have thought it sufficient to
name only these excluded factors.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



88


These are omitted as incompatible ivith the quality * discon-
nected with knowledge.*

******

These, or whatever other incorporeal, etc.

******

[Here ends] the Third Type of Thought. 1
IV.

[149] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen by the prompting of a conscious motive, a
thought which is accompanied by happiness, disconnected
with knowledge, and having as its object a sight, a sound,
a smell, a taste, a touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then
there is contact, etc. [continue as in § 147] — these, or what-
ever other incorporeal, causally induced states there are on
that occasion — these are states that are good. . . . 2

******

[Here ends] the Fourth Thought.


1 Placed erroneously in the text after § 147.

2 So K. The text, by omitting not only the repetitions,
but also the essentially distinctive factor sasankharena,
renders the insertion of the ‘ Fourth Thought * quite un-
intelligible.

Buddhaghosa gives a different illustration of this type of
thought in harmony with its resemblance to and difference
from the former cittam sasankharena, viz.: in its
involving a pleasurable state of mind, but not any great
understanding or discernment. Such is the thought of
little boys, who, when their parents duck their heads to
make them worship at a cetiya, willingly comply, though
doing so without intelligent conviction. Asl. 156.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



39


V.

[150] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, 1 associated
with knowledge, and having as its object a sight, a sound,
a smell, a taste, a touch, a [mental] state, or what not,
then there is contact, etc. [continue as in § 1, but for 1 joy *
and 1 happiness * substitute ‘ equanimity ’ (upekkha), and
for ‘ the faculty of happiness * substitute ‘ the faculty of
disinterestedness ’]. 2

[151] What on that occasion is contact ?

Answer as in % 2.

[152] What on that occasion is feeling ?

The mental [condition] neither pleasant nor unpleasant,
which, on that occasion, is bom of contact with the appro-
priate element of representative intellection ; the sensation,
bom of contact with thought, which is neither easeful nor
painful ; the feeling, bom of contact with thought, which is
neither easeful nor painful — this is the feeling that there
then is.

******

[Continue as in §§ 4-8.]

[158] What on that occasion is disinterestedness ? 3

Answer as in preceding reply, omitting the phrase * bom


1 Upekkha. ‘This is impartiality (lit., middleness) in
connexion with the object of thought, and implies a dis-
criminative knowledge’ (Asl. 157). Cf its significance in
the cultivation of Jhana, § 165. In the Jhana that may
arise in connexion with the first type of thought, which is
concomitant with ‘ joy ’ and ‘ ease,’ it is replaced by ‘ self-
collectedne88.’ See § 83.

2 Here, again, the excision, in the text, of practically the
whole answer, and the reference to § 156, where the sixth
thought is differentiated from this, the fifth thought, by
the quality sasankharena, quite obscures the classifica-
tion adopted in the original.

3 Substituted for ‘joy * and ‘ ease, ’ §§ 9, 10.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



40


of contact with the appropriate element of representative
intellection.’


[ Continue as in §§ 11-17.]

[154] What on that occasion is the faculty of dis-
interestedness ?

Answer as in preceding reply . Continue as in §§ 19-57.

[Summary.]

[154a] Now, on that occasion
the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are eight,
the Jhana is fourfold, 1
the Path is fivefold,
the powers are seven,
the causes are three,
contact,

etc., etc. [cf. § 58],

the sphere of mental states is a single factor,
the element of mental states is a single factor.
These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good. ...

[Continue as in §§ 59-61.]

[155] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?


1 Consisting presumably in ‘ conception,’ ‘ discursive
thought,’ ‘disinterestedness* (superseding ‘joy* and ‘ease*),
and ‘ self-collectedness.’ Cf. § 83. The last-named atti-
tude of mind does not usually figure in the Pitakas as the
culminating (or other) stage of Jhana (cf. § 160 et seq.). In
the Abhidhammattha-Sangaha, however, it does occur as
such, and side by side also with ‘ disinterestedness.’
J. P. T. S., 1884, p. 3.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



41


Answer as in § 62, omitting ‘joy.’ 1

******

[Continue as in the Summary and 1 Emptiness * Section
of the First Type of Thought .]

[Here ends] the Fifth Type of Thought.]


VI.

[156] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, associated
with knowledge, prompted by a conscious motive, and
having, as its object, a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,
a touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then there is
contact, etc.

* ❖ * * * *

[ Continue as in the Fifth Type of Thought.]

❖ * # ❖ * *

[Here ends] the Sixth Type of Thought.

YH.

[157] Which are the states that are good?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, disconnected
with knowledge, and having, as its object, a sight, a sound,
a smell, a taste, a touch, a [mental] state, or what not,
then there is contact, etc. . . .

******

[Continue as in the Third Type of Thought , substituting
4 disinterestedness * for * joy * and ‘ ease/ the ‘ faculty of dis-
interestedness * for that of * happiness/ and ‘ fourfold * for
‘fivefold Jhana.’ 2 ]

* * * * * *


1 K. gives the skandha in full, omitting ‘joy/ joy and
upekkha being mutually exclusive.

2 Sanindriyam in the text should be manindriyam.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



42


[Summary.]

[157a] Now, on tfiat occasion

the skandhas are four,
etc., etc.

[ Continue as in the Third Type of Thought , substituting
‘ fourfold ’ for ‘ fivefold Jhana.’]

******

[158] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

The content of this skandha is the same as in the Third
Type of Thought (see § 148), with the further omission of

‘joy.’

* * * * * *

[Continue as in the First Type of Thought .]

* * * * * *

[Here ends] the Seventh Type of Thought.

VIII.

[159] Which are the states that are good?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, disconnected
with knowledge, prompted by a conscious motive, and
having, as its object, a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,
a touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then there is
contact, etc.

* * * * * *

[Continue as in the Seventh Type of Thought.]

£ sjs i|: ❖

[Here ends] the Eighth Type of Thought.

[End of Chapter I. on] the Eight Main Types of Thought
concerning the Sensuous Universe.

(Here ends the Second Portion for Recitation.)


:ed by CjOO^IC



48


Chapter II.

[Good in relation to the Universe of Form (rupa-
vacara-kusala m).

Methods for inducing Jhdna.

I.

The Eight Artifices (atthakasina m).

1. The Earth Artifice (pathavikasinam).

(a) The Fourfold System of Jhdna (catukkanayo).]

[160] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, 1 he 2
cultivates the way thereto, aloof from sensuous appetites,
aloof from evil ideas, 3 and so, by earth-gazing, enters 4 into

1 See Introduction.

* The subject of these states of consciousness.

3 Vivicc’ eva kamehi, vivicca akusalehi dham-
mehi. Lit., ‘having separated one’s self, having become
without, having departed from’ (Asl. 164). That is to say
— again according to the Cy. (ibid .) — from the objects of
sensual desires, and from the desires themselves, respec-
tively (vatthukama, kilesakama. Childers’ Dictionary,
8. r. kamo). The former phrase (vivicc’ eva kamehi)
includes the whole psychological realm of sense-presentation
(kayo, or the three skandhas of feeling, perception and
sanskaras) ; the latter, dhammehi, referring to the realm
of ideation (cittam) only.

The Cy. repudiates the idea that the emphatic enclitic
eva, occurring only in the former of the two phrases,
renders the latter less important, and quotes, in support,
the opening words of the Cula-sihanada Discourse (M. i. 68).

4 Pathavikasinam. The first of the Karmasthana


ed by CjOCK^Ic



44


and abides in 1 the First Jhana (the first rapt meditation) ,
wherein conception works and thought discursive, 2 which is
born of solitude, 3 and full of joy 4 and ease — then the
contact, the feeling . . . the grasp, the balance, which
arise in him, or whatever other 6 incorporeal, causally
induced states that there are on that occasion — these are
states that are good.

******


methods, or quasi-hypnotic devices for attaining to temporary
rapt oblivion of the outer world. The percept of the circle
of mould induces the vivid image (nimittam), and there-
upon Jhana supervenes.

1 I.e. % sustains the mood indefinitely. The Cy. quotes
the Vibhanga as paraphrasing the term by the same
expressions, ‘going on,* etc., as are used to describe above
(§ 19) the * faculty of vitality.*

2 Savitakkam savicaram. Leaving the negative
essential conditions of Jhana, we pass to the positive
features (Asl. 166). The meditation progresses by means
of these two in particular, as a tree does by its flowers and
fruit. According to the Vibhanga, they reveal the deter-
mined resolves of the individual student (puggaladhit-
thana). (Ibid.)

3 According to the Cy., the solitude is rather moral than
physical, and means ‘born in the seclusion which the
student creates by thrusting from his heart the five
hindrances (ibid. ; infra , § 1152). According as it is said in
the Petaka (? Petakopadesa), concentration opposes sensual
desire; joy opposes malice; conception, or the onset of
intellect, opposes stolidity and torpor ; ease opposes excite-
ment and worry ; discursive thought opposes perplexity or
doubt (Asl. 165). See D. i. 78, where the hindrances are
explicitly mentioned in connection with Jhana; also the
notes in Rhys Davids* * Dialogues of the Buddha,* I., p. 84.

4 I.e., joy of the fifth species, pharana-plti (Asl. 166),
§ 9 ; also compare the passage just referred to, D. i. 78,
See above, so imam eva kayam . . . abhisandeti . . .
parip -pharati.

6 These are said to be the four first — desire, etc. — of the
nine named above, p. 5, n. 1 (Asl. 168).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



45


Continue as in the First Type of Thought relating to the
sensuous universe , including the Summary and ‘ Emptiness ’
divisions. 1


[161] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, suppressing the working of
conception and of thought discursive, and so, by earth-
gazing, enters into and abides in the Second Jhana (the
second rapt meditation), which is self-evolved, 2 born of con-
centration, full of joy and ease, in that, set free from the
working of conception and of thought discursive, the mind


1 So the Cy. (ibid.). In the text, therefore, the reader
should have been referred, not to (147), but to (1). K
indicates the elision simply by a ... pe ... at the
point corresponding to the comma before ‘ or whatever . . .’
in my translation, followed by ‘ime dhamma kusala.’

1 am inclined, however, to think that the detailed
catechism as to the nature of the various dhammas, such
as occurs at §§ 2-57, is not to be understood as included in
the passage elided, either here or in the remaining Jhanas.
K. does not repeat the . . . pe . . . cited above at the
corresponding point in the three remaining Jhanas, where
the Summary is not elided, but given. Nor does it give
the . . . pe . . . which stands in the text, in §§ 168,
165, before Tasmim kho pana samaye. Similarly it
omits the . . . pe . . . given in the text at the corre-
sponding points in the formulae for the ‘five-fold Jhana,’
§ 168 et seq.

2 Ajjhattam, i.e. 9 according to the Cy. (169), attano
jatam, attasantane nibbattam; according to the
Vibhanga, paccattam. It is not quite clear to me what
is the special force of the term in just this Jhana, unless it
be that the ‘earth-gazing* is not now continued — the
individual becoming more rapt from external determinants
of consciousness, more susceptible to purely subjective
conditions.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



46


grows calm and sure, 1 dwelling on high 2 — then the contact,
the feeling, the perception, the thinking, the thought, the
joy, the ease, the self-collectedness, the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, ideation, happi-
ness, and vitality, the right views, 3 right endeavour, . . . 4
the grasp, the balance that arises — these, or whatever other
incorporeal, causally induced states that there are on that
occasion — these are states that are good.


1 Sampasadanam, tranquillizing, paraphrased in the
Cy. (ibid.) by saddha, assurance or faith (above, § 12).
It is a term for Jhana itself, blent as it is with the whole
contemplative discipline, ‘just as cloth steeped in purple
is “purple” * — to adapt the commentator’s simile to our
idiom. The following word cetaso, ‘of the mind,’ may be
taken either with this term, or with that next after it,
ekodibhavam (ibid.).

2 In the text read ekodibhavam. Buddhaghosa’s
comments on this expression contain the original of the
Thera Subhuti’s quotation given in Childers. The substance
of them is that the ceto (intellect, mind, heart), no longer
overwhelmed or encumbered by vitakko and vicaro, rises
up slowly pre-eminent (eko = settho or asahayo) in its
meditative concentration, or samadhi, this term being
synonymous with ekodibhavam (Samadhiss’ etam
adhivacanam). The discursive intellection of the First
Jhana, troubling the ceto, as waves rendering water turgid,
has in the Second Jhana sunk to rest. And this uplifting
is said (the commentator emphasizes) of ceto, and not of
an individual entity, nor of a living soul (na sattassa
na jivassa). See Morris’s note, J. P. T. S., 1885, p. 32.

3 Sammasankappo is here, its usual order of place,
omitted. It involves vitakko; see § 7.

4 The reference in the text to § 157 cannot be right.
The subject has not yet banished pleasurable emotion, and
attained to the calm of disinterestedness ; nor is his state
of mind ‘disconnected with knowledge.’ The type of
thought, as to its remaining components, is still the first,
i.e., that of § 1.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



47


[Summary.]

[161a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are eight,
the Jhana is threefpld, 1
the Path is fourfold, 2
the powers are seven,
the causes are three,
contact counts as a single factor,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 58 et seq .]

******

[162] What on that occasion is the skandha of syntheses?
Contact, joy,

thinking, self-collectedness ;

the faculties of

faith, concentration,

energy, wisdom,

mindfulness, vitality ;

right views,
right endeavour,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 62 et seq. 3 ]


1 Cf. § 83. ‘ Conception ’ and ‘ discursive thought * are

now suppressed.

2 Cf. § 89. ‘ Eight intention,’ as involving ‘ conception,’

is now suppressed. The mind is no longer occupied with
overt activities concerned with this life. See p. 46, n. 8.

3 Including, presumably, the 4 Emptiness ’ Section, as in
the case of the First Jhana.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



48


[168] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and further, through the waning
of all passion for joy, 1 holds himself unbiassed, 2 the while,
mindful and self-possessed, 8 he experiences in his sense-con-
sciousness 4 that ease whereof the Noble Ones 6 declare : ‘ He
that is unbiassed and watchful dwelleth at ease ’ — and so,
by earth-gazing, enters into and abides in the Third Jhana
— then the contact, the feeling, the perception, the thinking,
the thought, the ease, the self-collectedness, the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, 6 concentration, wisdom, ideation,
happiness and vitality, the right views, right endea-
vour, 7 etc. . . . the grasp, the balance that arises 8 — these,
or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
that there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.


1 Pltiya ca viraga, ‘meaning either distaste for joy
or the transcending of it.* The ca indicates the progressive
continuity from the preceding to the present Jhana (Asl. 171).

2 Upekkhako, or disinterested. He looks on from the
standpoint of one who has arrived, says the Cy. (172). As
we might say :

‘ E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem/

Buddhaghosa expatiates here on the ten kinds of upek-
kha enumerated in Hardy, ‘Man. Buddhism/ 505.

3 Sampajano. Intelligently aware of his own pro-
cedure.

4 Kayo, see Introduction ; supra , p. 48, n. 8.

5 See infra , § 1003, n. 6.

6 Omitted in the text, but not so in K. The context
requires its insertion.

7 Sammasati, inserted in the text, but not in the right
order, is of course required by the context, but is, here and
in K., assumed in the ‘ etc/

8 § 157, to which the reader is referred in the text, is
obviously wrong. § 1 would be nearer the mark.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



49


[Summary.]

[163a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are eight,
the Jhana is twofold, 1
the Path is fourfold, 2
the powers are seven,
the causes are three,
contact counts as a single factor,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in % 58.]

******

[164] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses?

Contact,
thinking,
self-collectedness ;
the faculties of

faith, concentration,

energy, wisdom,

mindfulness, vitality ;

right views, right endeavour,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 62.]

******


1 ‘ Ease ’ remains and ‘ self-collectedness.’

2 Cf. § 161 ft n. 2.


4


ed by CjOCK^Ic



50


[165] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, by the putting away of
ease and by the putting away of ill, by the passing away
~^of the happiness and of the misery 1 he was wont to feel, he
thus, by earth-gazing, enters into and abides in the Fourth
Jhana (the fourth rapt meditation) of that utter purity
of mindfulness which comes of disinterestedness, 2 where
no ease is felt nor any ill — then the contact, the feeling,
the perception, the thinking, the thought, the disinterested-
ness, the self-collectedness, the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, ideation, disinterested-


1 ‘Ease’ and ‘ill/ according to the Cy., are kayikam,
or relating to the three skandhas of feeling, etc. — relating
to sense-consciousness. ‘ Happiness ’ and * misery ’(soman-
assam, domanassam) relate to the intellect, or ideational
consciousness. ‘ Happiness * is the last of these to be trans-
cended ; the others have been expelled in the course of the
previous stages of Jhana (Asl. 175, 176). But all four are
here enumerated, as if all were only in this Fourth Jhana
transcended, in order to show more clearly, by the method
of exhaustive elimination, what is the subtle and elusive
nature of that third species of feeling termed ‘neutral’
(adukkham-asukha), or ‘disinterested’ (upekkha) —
the zero point, or line, as we should say, of hedonic
quantity. The Cy. then gives the simile of selecting heads
of cattle by elimination of the rest of the herd, which
Hardy cites (ibid., 177 ; East. Monachism, 270).

2 Upekkha-satiparisuddhim. According to the
Vibhanga, the mindfulness that is made pure stands for
all the other elements present in consciousness, which have
also been brought into clear relief, as it were, by the calm
medium of equanimity. The simile is then adduced, given
also in Hardy (op. cit. % 271), of the moon by day and by
night. Upekkha is latent in consciousness in the other
stages of Jhana, but rendered colourless by the radiance
of intellectual and emotional exercise, as the crescent moon
during the day, though present in the sky, is dimmed by
the sun’s splendour (Asl. 178).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



51


ness and vitality, the right views, the right endeavour,
etc. . . .

[Continue as in § 168.]
******

[Summary.]

[165a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are eight,
the Jhana is twofold, 1
the Path is fourfold,
the powers are seven,
the causes are three,
contact counts as a single factor,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 58, etc.]

******

[166] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Answer as in § 164. 2

******

[Here ends] the Fourfold System of Jhana.


1 Namely, ‘ disinterestedness ’ and * self-collectedness *
(Ad. 179). Else one would have looked to find ekangi-
kam Jhanam.

2 The printed text omits satindriyam, though it is
explicitly required by the context. K. gives it.


4—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



52


(b) The Fivefold System of Jhana (p a n c ak a n a y o).] 1

[167] The First Jhdna. Question and answer as in the
fourfold course , § 160.

[168] Which are the states that are good ?

WTien, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and so, by earth-gazing, enters
into and abides in the Second Jhana (the second rapt medi-
tation) wherein is no working of conception, but only of
thought discursive — which is born of concentration, and is
full of joy and ease — then the contact, the feeling, the per-
ception, the thinking, the thought, the discursive inquiry,
the joy, the ease, the self-collectedness, etc. . . .

[Continue as for the Second Jhdna in § 161.]
[Summary.]

[168a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are eight,


1 Jhana is usually alluded to in the Pitakas in the four-
fold order. The fivefold division is obtained by the suc-
cessive, instead of simultaneous, elimination of vitakko
and vicaro. According to the Cy., it was optional to the
teacher, after the example of the Buddha, to use either at
his discretion, adapting himself to the particular mental
state of his pupils, or having a view to the effectve flow
of his discourse. A passage is quoted from the Pitakas —
probably S. iv. 863 or i. 299, n. 2 (cf K. V. 413 ; Mil 837)
— where s am ad hi is distinguished as (1) having vitakko
and vicaro, (2) having only the latter, (8) having neither.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



58


the Jhana is fourfold,
the Path is fourfold,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

******

[169] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact, thinking, discursive thought, joy, etc. ...

[Continue as in § 162.]
******

[170-175] The Third, Fourth and Fifth Jhanas.

[These are identical in formulation with the Second , Third
and Fourth Jhanas of the Fourfold System . Questions and
ansioers as in §§ 161-166.]

[Here ends] the Fivefold System of Jhana.


[(c) The Four Modes of Progress (catasso pati-
pad a).] 1


1 It has been seen that, before the several stages of
Jhana could be attained to, the student had to purge and
discipline himself in specific ways— elimination of all
attention to mundane matters, elimination of discursive
cogitation, and so on. The special stage of Jhana super-
vened after each act of self-control and intensified ab-
straction. In these processes there was an earlier and a
subsequent stage called — at least in the later books —
u pa car a and appana respectively. The effective cogni-
tion linking these two was an exercise of panna which,
in the text, is known as abhiiina (‘ intuition ’), probably
the intuitive or subconscious fetch of the mind to compass
the desired appana, or conception. Now, whether the
preparatory abstraction was easy or difficult, and whether
the constructive generalizing effort was sluggish or vigorous,
depended on the moral temperament and the mental ability


ed by CjOCK^Ic



54


[176] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, aloof from sensuous appetites,
aloof from evil ideas, and so, by earth-gazing, enters into
and abides in the First Jhana . . . progress being painful
and intuition sluggish — then the contact 1 . . . the balance
that arises — these . . . are states that are good.

[177] 2 . . . [«r] when ... he ... so enters into and
abides in the First Jhana . . . progress being painful, but
intuition quick . . .

[178] . . . [or] when ... he ... so enters into and

abides in the First Jhana . . . progress being easy, but

intuition sluggish . . .

[179] . . . [or] when ... he ... so enters into and

abides in the First Jhana . . . progress being easy and

intuition quick — then the contact, etc. . . . the balance
that arises — these . . . are states that are good.


respectively of the individual student (Asl. 182-184). See
the double explanation in A. ii. 149-152, where the swift-
ness or sluggishness of intuition in both accounts depends
on the acuteness or flabbiness of the five faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom. The ease or
difficulty in self-abstraction depends, in the first explana-
tion, on whether the student is by nature passionate,
malignant, dull, or the reverse of these three. In the
second account progress is painful if he have filled his
consciousness with the disciplinary concepts of the Foul
Things (vide below, § 263), Disgust with the World, Im-
permanence and Death ; easy if he simply work out the
Four Jhtinas.

On the varying import of abhinna (which occurs in
no other connexion in the present work), see * Dialogues
of the Buddha/ i. 62. On upacara and appana, see
‘ Yogavacara’s Manual,’ p. xi. We shall probably learn more
about the whole procedure when the Yisuddhi Magga and
the Vibhanga are edited.

1 Cf.il.

2 The same question is to be understood as repeated in
each section.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



55


[180] These four combinations are repeated in the case of
the 2nd to the 4tli Jhdnas on the Fourfold System , and of the
2nd to the 5th on the Fivefold System .

[Here end] the Four Modes of Progress.

[(d) The Four Objects of Thought (cattari aram-
manani).] 1

[181] Which are the states that are good?

"When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and so, aloof from sensuous
appetites, aloof from evil ideas, by earth-gazing, enters into
and abides in the First Jhana (the first rapt meditation),
wherein conception works and thought discursive, which
is born of solitude, and is full of joy and ease, but which
is limited, and has a limited object of thought — then the
contact 2 . . . the balance that arises — these . . . are states
that are good.

[182] . . . [or] when . . . the First Jhana 3 ... is
limited, but has an object of thought capable of infinite
extension . . .

[188] . . . [or] when . . . the First Jhana ... is
capable of infinite extension, but has a limited object of
thought . . .

[184] . . . [or] when . . . the First Jhana ... is
capable of infinite extension, and has an object of thought
capable of infinite extension — then the contact, etc. . . .
the balance that arises, these . . . are states that are good.

1 That is to say, the percepts or concepts on which the
student, in seeking to induce Jhana, fixes his attention are
here classified as having the potentiality to induce a weak
or a lofty mood of rapt contemplation. Buddhaghosa
describes the former kind of object as having the shallow-
ness of a mere basket or dish (Asl. 184). See also below,

1019-1024.

2 Cf. § 1.

3 In the following condensed passages the question and
answer in the text respectively coincides with and com-
mences like the precedent given in § 181.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



56


[185] These four combinations are repeated in the case of
the 2nd to the 4 th Jhdnas on the Fourfold System , and of the
1st to the 5th 1 Jhdnas on the Fivefold System .

[Here end] the Four Objects of Thought.


[(e) ( = c and d) The Sixteenfold Combination (solasak-
khattukam).]

[186] Which are the states that are good?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, aloof from sensuous appetites,


aloof from evil ideas, and so
and abides in the first Jhana
where progress is pain-
ful and intuition sluggish,


, by earth-gazing, enters into

which is limited, and has a
limited object of thought . . .

[187] . . . [or] which is
limited, but has an object
of thought capable of in-
finite extension . . .

[188] . . . [or] which is
capable of infinite extension,
but has a limited object of
thought . . .

[189] . . . [or] which is
capable of infinite extension,
and has an object of thought
capable of infinite extension


[190] . . . [or] where pro-
gress is painful, but intuition
is quick,


' which is limited, and has a
limited object of thought . . .

[191] . . [or] . . . etc.

[Continue for §§ 191-198
, as in §§ 187-189.]


1 In the text, § 185, after pathamam jhanam read
. . . pe . . . paiicamam jhanam. So K. Cf § 180.
Again, after avikkhepo hoti supply . . . pe . . .


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



57


[194] . . . [or] where pro- which is limited, 1 and has
gress is easy, but intuition a limited object of thought
sluggish, • • •


[195] . . . [or] . . . etc.

[Continue for §§ 195-197
> as above.]

[198] . . . [or] where pro- which is limited, and has a
gress is easy and intuition limited object of thought . . .
quick,

i [199] [( Continue for §§ 199-
l 201 as above.]

[202] [These sixteen combinations are repeated in the case
of the 2nd to the 4th Jhdnas on the Fourfold System , and of
the 1st to the 5th Jhdnas on the Fivefold System.]


[Here ends] the Sixteenfold Combination.


[2. The Remaining Seven Artifices which may also be
developed in sixteenfold combination (atthakasinam
solasakkhattukam).] 2


1 In the text supply parittam before parittaram-
manam.

2 The first artifice for the induction of Jhana having
been that of earth-gazing (see above, passim). In the
Sutta Pitaka — viz., in the Maha Sakuludayi-Sutta (M. ii.,
p. 14), and in the Jhana Yagga (A. i. 41) — ten kasinas are
enumerated, those omitted in the Dhammasangani being
the kasinas of intellection (v in flan a) and space (akasa).
The fact of the omission and the nature of the two omitted
kasinas are commented on by Buddhaghosa (Asl. 186).
He explains the omission of the former by its being
identical with the second of the four Aruppajhanani
given in §§ 265-268, and that of the latter through its
ambiguity. For either it amounts to the ‘ yellow ’ kasina
(sun-lit space), or it amounts to the first Aruppa jhana
(§ 265). The Ceylon tradition has ten kasinas also, but
admits aloka (light) instead of vifinana. And it includes
yet another quasi-kasina in the shape of a bhuta-kasina,
or the four elements taken collectively, after each has been


ed by CjOCK^Ic



58


[208] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, aloof from sensuous appetites,
aloof from evil ideas, and so, by the artifice of
water . . .
fire . . .
air . . .
blue-black . . .
yellow . . .
red . . .
white . . .

enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . . then the
contact, etc., that arises — these . . . are states that are
good.

[Here ends] the Sixteenfold Combination in the case of
the seven remaining artifices for induction.

pi.

The Stations of Mastery 1 (a b h i b h a y a t a n a n i) .

1. ‘ Forms as Limited ’ (rupani p a r i 1 1 a n i) .

(a and b) Fourfold and Fivefold Jhana.]

[204] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he

separately dwelt upon. See ‘ Yogavacara’s Manual, 1896/
pp. 48-52.

1 Eight ‘ stations * or ‘ positions of mastery ’ are given
in the Maha-parinibbana-Sutta (pp. 28, 29 ; see S. B. E.
xi. 49, 50, and in A. iv. 305), but the formulae of the first
four differ slightly from those in our text. The Cy. draws
attention to this discrepancy (Asl. 189). In the Suttanta
the aesthetic aspect of the objects perceived is taken into
account in all four stations, the specific difference replacing
it in two of them being the conscious dwelling on some
part of one’s own bodily frame orrupaskandha. In the
Dhammasangani this consciousness is excluded from all the
stations. To teach by way of its inclusion and exclusion
is called ‘ merely a jeu d' esprit in the Master’s discourse *
(desana-vilasa-mattam eva). See following note.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



59


cultivates the way thereto, and, unconscious of any part
of his corporeal self, 1 but seeing external objects to be
limited, gets the mastery over them with the thought *1
know, I see!* 2 and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof
from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana,
etc. . . . then the contact, etc., that arises — these . . . are
states that are good.

[205] [Repeat in the case of the 2nd to the \th Jhdna on
the Fourfold System , and of the 2nd to the 5th Jhdna on the
Fivefold System .]

[(c) The Four Modes of Progress.]

[206-210] Repeat the four combinations of progress as
painful or easy, and of intuition as sluggish or quick set
out in §§ 176-180, substituting for 6 earth - gazing ’ the
Mastery -formula just stated .


1 Ajjhattam arupasanili (=na rupasanni). This
rendering is in accordance with Buddhaghosa’s comments
(Asl. 188, 189, 191). The student, either because he has
tried and failed, or because he did not wish to try, has not
induced Jhana by way of fixing attention on his own hair
or the rest. Cf. the Maha Bahulovada-Sutta (M. i. 62),
where the individual’s rupa-skandha is fully set forth with
reference to the four elements, ajjhattika pathavld-
hatu, etc., beginning with ‘ hair ’ and the rest. Cj. § 248 n.

2 The external objects in question are contemplated on
the kasina system (Asl. 188). And just as a man of
vigorous digestion bolts a spoonful of rice, so the aspirant
after sublime truth swiftly and easily transcends the initial
act of external perception when the object is insignificant,
and brings forth the desiderated concept (appana). The
judgments by which he registers the consciousness of in-
tellectual mastery have reference, according to Buddhaghosa,
to past experience of enlightenment, and indicate simply
a recognition, or, in terms of syllogism, a minor premise
identified. But he states that, in the Sinhalese commentary
on the Nikayas, they are interpreted as implying a present
access of new light, a fresh moral attainment, gained after
the thinker transcends perceptual consciousness {ibid.).


:ed by


Google


60


[(d) The Two Objects of Thought.]

[211-218] Repeat , substituting for ‘ earth - gazing * the
Mastery foi-mula, § 181, where the Jhdna ‘is limited, and
has a limited object of thought/ and § 188, where the Jhdna
‘ is capable of infinite extension, but has a limited object of
thought/ 1

[(e = t* and d) The Eightfold Combination (atthak-
khattuka m.] 2

[214-221] Repeat , with the same substitution , §§ 186, 188,
190, 192, 194, 196, 198, and 200 of the Sixteenfold Com-
bination .

[222] Repeat these 9 eight combinations in the case of each
of the remaining Jhdnas.

[2. ‘Forms as limited and as beautiful or ugly* s
(rupiini parittani suvanna-dubbannani).


1 The ‘ objects of thought’ are here the kasinas, essentially
discerned to be ‘ limited ’ or insignificant. Hence two, not
four varieties ; and hence eight, not sixteen combinations.
The term appamanam connoting merely a relative , not
an absolute infinitude, there is only a difference of degree
in the depth, purifying efficacy, or what not, of the Jhana
attained to. The same illustrative figure is accordingly
used, varied in degree. The gourmand , discontented with
a small dish of rice, demands more and more. So the
aspirant (now nanuttaro, not ilanuttariko), aiming
at perfect self-concentration, refuses to call that infinite
which seems so (ibid.).

2 So K.

8 The general aesthetic designations of suvannam and
dubbanam are in the Cy. paraphrased by parisuddham
and its negative. Just as the limited nature of visible
things was held to be an efficacious consideration for con-
ceptual efforts, and the notion of ‘infinite* helpful for
dulness, so the beautiful and the ugly were prescribed for
inimical conduct and for indulgence in passion respectively.
The appropriateness of it all is said to be discussed in the
Cariya-niddesa of the Yisuddhi Magga (Asl. 189).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


61


(a) and ( b )]

[228] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, unconscious of any part
of his corporeal self, but seeing external objects to be
limited, and to be beautiful or ugly, gets the mastery over
them with the thought, ‘I know, I see!’ and so, aloof
from sensuous appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into
and abides in the First Jhana, etc. . . . then the contact,
etc., that arises — these . . . are states that are good.

[224] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas.

Develop in eightfold combination.

[8. ‘ Forms as infinite '(rupani appamanan i). 1
(a) and (6)]

[225] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, unconscious of any part
of his corporeal self, but seeing external objects to be
infinite, gets the mastery over them with the thought,
‘I know, I see!’ and so, aloof from sensuous appetites,
etc.

[Continue as in § 204.]

[226] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas.

[(c) The Four Modes of Progress.]

[227-281] Repeat §§ 206-210, substituting ‘infinite* for
‘ limited.*


1 See note on §§ 211-218. Taken in order, Buddha-
ghosa’s comment there reproduced applies to that part of
the text. According to the context, it might better apply
here, where the external forms or kasina-objects are now
contemplated as ‘ infinite.* The reflection, however, applies
to either passage.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



62


[(d) The Two Objects of Thought.]

[282-284] Repeat , with the same sud>stitution as in ( c) r
§§ 211-218.

[(e = c and d) The Eightfold Combination.]

[285-242] Develop , with the same substitution as in ( c ) and
( d ), after the manner of §§ 187, 189, and so on to § 201.

[248] Repeat these eight combinations in the case of each oft
the remaining Jhanas .

[4. * Forms as infinite and as beautiful or ugly ’ (r u p a n i
appamanani suvann a-d ubbannani).

(a) and ( b )]

[244] Repeat § 228, substituting ‘infinite* for ‘limited.’

[245] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas.

Develop in eightfold combination.

[5. ‘ Forms as blue-black,* etc. (rupani nllan i). 1


1 It is well known that it is as difficult to determine
the range of colour indicated by nil am as to decide the
colour-value of the word yXav/cos. Like the latter term,
nllam may originally have referred more to lustre than
to tinge, meaning darkly lustrous, jetty, or nigrescent.
Any way, it is not plausible to render the term by ‘ blue ’
when one is referred to human hair or bile (pit tarn) as
instances of it in the human body. See note 2 to § 248.
In Jat. iii. 188 hair-dye or hair-wash is called nlliyam —
much, perhaps, as we speak of ‘ blacking * or ‘ russet polish *
for shoes. This implies that the colour called nllam
was, if not the usual, at least the desiderated colour of
human hair.

If it were what we understand by a typical blue, the
term would be applied to sky and sea, or the violet band
of the rainbow, which is, I believe, never the case. Pos-
sibly our own colour- parallels in these respects are a
modern development. Cft Havelock Ellis in Contemporary
Review 9 vol. lxix., p. 727. Modem Hindu colour-terms are,
I am told, largely of Persian origin.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



63


(«)]

. [246] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, unconscious of any part
of his corporeal self, but seeing external objects which
are blue-black, blue-black in colour, blue-black in visible
expanse, 1 blue-black in luminousness, gets the mastery over
them with the thought, ‘ I know, I see !’ and so, aloof from
sensuous appetites, etc.

[Continue as in § 204.]
******

[6-8. ‘ Forms as yellow,’ etc. (r n p a n i p 1 1 a n i).

[247] Repeat § 246, substituting for * blue-black, blue-black
in colour,’ etc., ‘ yellow,’ ‘ red,’ and 1 white ’ 2 3 * * * * successively .

Develop these Stations of Mastery in the Sixteenfold
Combination.


[in.

The Three First Deliverances (tlni vimokkhan i. 8 ]

1 .

[248] When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, conscious of his bodily


1 Nilanidassanam, indicating, according to the Cy.
(190), a uniform sheet of blue without break. The colours
in this and following sections may reside in a flower, a
piece of cloth, or some other basis.

2 The remaining three English colour-names may match
the Pali terms as loosely as in the previous case. Cf.
S. B. E. xi., loc. cit. In the Sutta there translated in-
stances of the colours are given, and, curiously enough,
‘ white ’ is illustrated, not by milk, or the distant Himalaya
snows, but by the morning star.

3 Followed by four more of the Eight Deliverances in

the next chapter, §§ 265-268. The eighth alone is not

given in the present work. See Maha Parinibbana Sutta,

p. 30; A. iv. 806. According to the Cy. (190), the term

‘deliverance’ (vimokkham, or adhimuccanam) is used


ed by CjOCK^Ic



64


form, 1 sees bodily forms, and so, aloof from sensuous
appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and abides in
the First Jhana, etc. . . . then the contact, etc., which
arises, these . . . are states that are good.

2 .

[249] When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, unconscious of his cor-
poreal self, sees external bodily forms, and so, aloof from
sensuous appetites, etc.

[Continue as in preceding section.]

8 .

[250] When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, with the thought,

* How fair it is !’ 2 aloof from sensuous appetites, etc.

to denote the being set free from ‘ adverse conditions ’ and
their seductive fascinations, so that the attention is sus-
tained with all the detachment and confidence that the
child feels who is borne on his father’s hip, his little limbs
dangling, their clutch unneeded.

1 Rupi. Judging by the Cy. (190), this is equivalent
to aj jhattam rupasaiifil— that is, to the opposite of the
term ‘unconscious of any part of his corporeal self,’ the
attitude prescribed in the Stations of Mastery, supra ,

§ 204 et seq. The parikammam selected is ‘one’s own
hair and the rest.’ If a nlla-parikammam is sought,
attention is fixed on the hair or bile (pit t am) or the pupil
of the eye. If the induction is to be by way of yellow, fat
or skin may be taken ; if red, flesh, blood, or the tongue,
or the palms of the hands or feet, etc. ; if white, the teeth,
nails, or white of the eye. At the same time ‘he sees
external bodily forms in the nlla or other kasina with the
Jhdna-vision ’ (jhiinacakkhuna passati).

How this dual effort of intense attention was effected I
do not pretend to understand, but Buddhaghosa more than
once refers us for a more detailed account to the Yisuddhi
Magga.

2 That is to say, says the Cy. (191), not the conscious
acquirement of the concept (appana), but the consciousness


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



65


[Continue as in the first Deliverance .]

These three Deliverances may also be developed in
Sixteenfold Combination.


[IV.

The Four Jhanas of the Sublime Abodes (cattari
brahmaviharajhanan i). 1

1. Love (metta).

(a) Fourfold Jhana.]

[251] Which are the states that are good?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he

of the perfection or purity of colour or lustre in the par-
ticular kasina is here meant. (The reading should, of
course, be subhan ti.) And this aesthetic consciousness
is declared by Buddhaghosa to quicken the sense of emanci-
pation from morally adverse conditions analogously to that
perception of moral beauty which may be felt in the Sublime
Abodes of the following sections. According to the Pati-
sambhida-magga, here quoted, when, on pervading the
whole world with heart of love, pity, etc., all feeling of
aversion from living beings is rooted out, the student is
struck with the glory of the idea, and works his deliver-
ance.

1 On these four great exercises, see Bhys Davids, S. B. E.
xi. 201, n. ; and on their emancipating efficacy, M. i. 38.
Buddhaghosa again refers the reader to his Visuddhi Magga
for a more detailed commentary (vide chap, ix., and cf.
Hardy, ‘Eastern Monachism,’ p. 248 et seq.). The four
are set out here only under the * Suddhika ’ formulae — that
is, under heads (a) and ( b ). But (c), or the Modes of
Progress, as well as (d) and (e), are understood to follow
in each case (Asl. 192). The object of thought (a ram-
man am) in this connexion will be ‘limited’ if the student
dwells in love, etc., on but a restricted number of beings ;

‘ infinite * if his heart embrace vast numbers.

The commentator has not a little to say in the present
work, however, on the nature and mutual relations of the
‘ Abodes * (pp. 193-195). First, the characteristics of each

5


ed by CjOCK^Ic



66


cultivates the way thereto, and so, aloof from sensuous
appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the
First Jhana (the first rapt meditation), wherein conception


are fully set forth, together with their false manifestation
(vipatti). Clinging (sinehasambhavo) is the vipatti
of love, the essential mark of which is the carrying on of
beneficent conduct, etc. Tears and the like are less truly
characteristic of pity than is the bearing and relieving the
woes of others. Laughter and the like are less genuine
expressions of sympathy (mudita, which is strictly
<T\r/x ai P 0<T v V7 l> Mitfreude) than is appreciation of what
others have achieved. And there is a condition of dis-
interestedness (upekkha) which is prompted by ignorance,
and not by that insight into the karma of mankind which
can avail to calm the passions.

He next designates the four antisocial attitudes which
are to be extirpated by these ethical disciplines, taken in
order — ill-will (vyapado), cruelty (vihesa), aversion
(arati), and passion (rago) — and shows how each virtue
has also a second vice opposed to it. This he terms its near
enemy, as being less directly assailed by it than its ethical
opposite, the latter resembling an enemy who has to lurk
afar in the jungle and the hills. Love and vengeful conduct
cannot coexist. To prevail in this respect, let love be de-
veloped fearlessly. But where love and its object have too
much in common, love is threatened by lust. On this side
let love be guarded well. Again, the near enemy to pity,
more insidious than cruelty, is the self-pity pining for what
one has not got or has lost— a low, profane melancholy.
And the corresponding worldly happiness in what one has,
or in consequence of obliviousness as to what one has lost,
lies in wait to stifle appreciation of the good fortune of
others. Lastly, there is the unintelligent indifference of
the worldling who has not triumphed over limitations
nor mastered cause and effect, being unable to transcend
external things.

The remainder of his remarks are occupied w r ith the
necessary ethical sequence in the four Abodes, and the
importance of observing method in their cultivation, and
finally with their other technical appellation of Appa-
m anii a, or Infinitudes. In this connexion he repeats the
touching illustration given in Hardy (op. cit., 249) of the


ed by CjOCK^Ic



67


worts and thought discursive, which is born of solitude,
is full of joy and ease, and is accompanied by Love — then
the contact, etc. . . . [? continue as in § 1] . . . the balance
that arises — these . . . are states that are good.

[252] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, suppressing the working of
conception and of thought discursive, and so, by earth-
gazing, enters into and abides in the Second Jhana (the
second rapt meditation), which is self-evolved, born of con-
centration, is full of joy and ease, in that, set free . . . the
mind grows calm and sure, dwelling on high — and which is
accompanied by Love— then the contact, etc.

[Continue as in the foregoing .]

[253] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and further, through the waning
of all passion for joy, holds himself unbiassed, the while,
mindful and self-possessed, he experiences in his sense-con-
sciousness that ease whereof the Noble Ones declare : ‘ He


mother and her four children. Her desire for the growth
of the infant is as Metta; for the recovery of the sick
child as Karuna; for the maintenance of the gifts dis-
played by the youth as Mudita; while her care not to
hinder the career of her grown-up son is as Upekkha.

It may be remarked, by the way, that when Hardy, with
a foreigner’s want of mudita, calumniates the Buddhist
mendicant (p. 250) as one who thinks about the virtues
of solidarity without practising them, he quite forgets that
these exercises are but preparations of the will for that
ministering to the intellectual needs of others to which the
recluse’s life was largely devoted, and the importance of
which the Western, in his zeal for material forms of
charity, does not even now appreciate at its real value.
And Buddhism did not believe in giving the rein to good
impulses unregulated by intellectual control.

5—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



that is unbiassed and watchful dwelleth at ease * — and so,
by earth-gazing, enters into and abides in the Third Jhana,
which is accompanied by Love 1 — then, etc.

[Continue as in the foregoing .]

(b) Fivefold Jhana.

[254-257] Repeat question and answers in §§ 167, 168,
170, 172, adding in each answer , as in the foregoing section ,

4 and which is accompanied by Love.’ 2

2. Pity (karuna).

[258, 259] Repeat question and answers in the preceding
sections (a) and (6), but substituting in each case ‘ and which
is accompanied by Pity 1 for the clause on Love.

3. Sympathy (mudita).

[260, 261] Repeat question and answers in the preceding
two sections , but substituting in each case ‘and which is
accompanied by Sympathy * for the clause on Pity.

4. Disinterestedness (upekkha).

[262] When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, by the putting away of
ease and by the putting away of ill, by the passing away
of the happiness and of the misery he was wont to feel, he
thus, by earth-gazing, enters into and abides in the Fourth
Jhana (the fourth rapt meditation) of that utter purity
of mindfulness which comes of disinterestedness, where no
ease is felt nor any ill, and which is accompanied by Dis-
interestedness — then the contact, etc.

[Continue as in § 165.]


1 Love necessarily involves happiness (somanassam
= cetasikam sukham, § 10, n.), hence it cannot be
cultivated by way of the Fourth — or, under (b), Fifth —
Jhana.

2 Omitting the Fifth Jhana. See preceding note.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



69


The Four Jhanas of the Sublime Abodes may be de-
veloped in Sixteen Combinations.


[V.

The Jhana of Foul Things (a s u b h a-j h a n a m.)]

[263] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and so, aloof from sensuous
appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and abides in
the First Jhana, wherein, etc. . . . and which is accom-
panied by the idea of a bloated corpse 1 . . .

[or] [264] of a discoloured corpse . . .

[or] of a festering corpse . . .

[or] of a corpse with cracked skin . . .

[or] of a corpse gnawn and mangled . . .

[or] of a corpse cut to pieces . . .

[or] of a corpse mutilated and cut in pieces . . .
[or] of a bloody corpse . . .

[or] of a corpse infested with worms . . .

[or] of a skeleton . . .

then the contact . . . the balance which arises — these . . .
are states that are good. 2


1 The formula of the First Jhana is understood to be
repeated in the case of each of the ten Asubhas, but of the
First only. For, in the words of the Cy. (p. 199), ‘just
as on a swiftly-flowing river a boat can only be steadied
by the power of the rudder, so from the weakness (dubba-
latta) of the idea (in this case) the mind can only be
steadied in its abstraction by the power of conceptual
activity (vitakko).’ And this activity is dispensed with
after the First Jhana.

2 For a more detailed account of this peculiar form of
moral discipline, the reader is again referred to the Visuddhi
Magga (chap. vi.). Hardy (‘ East. Mon.’), who quotes largely
from the Sinhalese commentary on the Visuddhi Magga,
may also be consulted (p. 247 et seq.). In the Satipat-
thana Sutta (D. 22. Cf. Warren, ‘ Buddhism in Translat-


ed by Google



70

The Jhana of Foul Things may be developed in Sixteen
Combinations.

[Here ends the Chapter on] Good in relation to the
Universe of Form.


tion/ p. 358 et seq . ; and M.I. 58) a system of nine Asubha-
meditations is set out in terms somewhat different. In
S. v. (pp. 129-131) five of the Asubhas, beginning with ‘ the
skeleton * meditation, are prescribed in connexion with the
sambhojjhangas of mindfulness and disinterestedness.
And the same five are given in the Jhana Vagga of A. i. 42
(cf. A. iii. 328). The ten here given are said in the Cy.
(pp. 197-199) to be prescribed for such as were proved to be
passionately affected by the beauty of the body — of the figure,
skin, odour, firmness or continuity, plumpness, limbs and
extremities, symmetry, adornment, identifying self with the
body, or complacency in the possession of it (?kaye
mamattam ; cf. S. N. 951), and teeth respectively. A dead
body is not essential to this kind of mind-culture, the Cy.
citing the cases of those Theras who obtained the requisite
Jhana by the glimpse of a person’s teeth, or by the sight of
a rajah on his elephant. The essential procedure lay in
getting a clear and courageous grasp of the transience of
any living organism.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


[Chapter III.


Good in relation to the Universe of the Formless
(arupavacara-kusala m).

The Four Jhanas connected with Formless Existence
(c attar iarii pa j j hanan i). 1

1. The Sphere of Unbounded Space (akasananca-
y a tan am).]

[265] Which are the states that are good ?


1 These often appear in the Nikayas as the fourth to the
seventh of the Eight Vimokhas or Deliverances (cf. §§ 248-
250 ; Maha Par. Sutta, p. 80 ; A. iv. 806). Though treated
of in the Yisuddhi Magga (chap. iii. ), Buddhaghosa only
makes comparison with the account of them given in the
Vibhanga. In S. iii. 287, and frequently in the Majjhima,
they occur in immediate sequence to the four Jhanas
without any collective title, and not as concomitants of the
Fourth Jhana. There, too, the formulae also have this slight
variation from those in the present work, that the conscious
attainment of each stage of abstraction is expressed by a
brief proposition of identification, e.g., ananto akaso ti
. . . n’atthi kificl ti (It is boundless space! . . . There
is nothing whatever !). The Cy. explains this by a curious
quibble which is incidentally of interest (p. 204). It was
the wish of the Buddha to carry out, as in previous pro-
cedure so in this, the study of the Four Objects of Thought
[arammanani; see above, passim, under (d)]. And the
first of these is that one’s object is ‘ limited.’ But if the
student, in attaining to an undifferentiated consciousness
of unbounded space, realize its nature by the, so to speak,
exclamatory thought, ‘ It is boundless !’ he cannot logically
proceed to consider it as limited. If I interpret Buddha-


ed by CjOCK^Ic



72


When, that he may attain to the Formless heavens,
he cultivates the way thereto, and so, by passing wholly
beyond all consciousness of form, by the dying out of the
consciousness of sensory reaction, 1 by turning the attention
from any consciousness of the manifold, 2 he enters into
and abides in that rapt meditation which is accompanied
by the consciousness of a sphere of unbounded space —


ghosa aright, an interesting significance is hereby added to
these parenthetical exclamations, which are not unfrequent
in Buddhist philosophy. They seem to imply an act of
conscious recognition.

1 The student is to withdraw all interest in and attention
to the world of nip a, to cease so entirely to differentiate
the plenum of external phenomena (including his own form)
which impinge on his senses, that sensations cease, or
resolve themselves into a homogeneous sense of extended
vacuum. Patigho, rendered by sensory reaction, is ex- -
plained to be sight-perception, sound-perception, smell, taste,
and touch-perception. ‘ Thought is (here) not sustained
by way of the five doors ’ (Asl. 201, 202). Hardest of all
was it to abstract all attention from sounds. Alara Kalama,
one of Gotama’s teachers, and proficient in these rapt states,
at least so far as the sixth Vimokha (M. i. 164), was credited
with the power of becoming so absorbed that he failed to
see or hear hundreds of carts passing near him (Asl. 202).
On the psycho-physiological use of patigho, see the theory
of sense in the book on form, infra , § 597 et seq.

2 Nanattasannanam amanasikara. On the latter
term, see above, p. 5, n. 1. Nanattam is of rare occur-
rence in the Nikayas; but see M. i. 8, where, in a series
of concepts, it follows ‘ unity ’ and precedes * the whole ’
(Neumann renders by Vielheit ); also S. iv. 113, 114,
where it is explained to refer to the various kinds of sensa-
tion, the corresponding v in nan a, and the resulting feeling.

In the Yibhanga, quoted by Buddhaghosa (p. 202), it is
explained to mean cognition of the mutual diversity or
dissimilarity (annamaniiam a sadis a) of nature in the
eight kinds of good thoughts, the twelve bad thoughts
(below, § 365), as well as in those ideas of good and bad
results which are taken next to these. For cittani,
however, sauna is substituted, possibly limiting the appli-
cation of the discernment of diversity to the sensuous basis


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



73


even the Fourth Jhana, to gain which 1 all sense of ease
must have been put away, and all sense of ill must have
been put away, and there must have been a dying out of
the happiness and misery he was wont to feel — (the rapt
meditation) which is imbued with disinterestedness, and
where no ease is felt nor any ill, but only the perfect
/ purity that comes of mindfulness and disinterestedness —
then the contact, etc. ...[</.§ 165] the balance that
arises, these . . . are states that are good.

[2. The Sphere of Infinite Intellection (vinnananca-
y a t a n a m). 2 ]

[266] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the Formless heavens, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, having passed 3 wholly
beyond the sphere of boundless space, enters into and
abides in that rapt meditation which is accompanied by the


of all those ‘ thoughts.’ The context, nevertheless, seems
to point to a certain general, abstract, ‘ re-representative ’
import in sanna as here applied. It is said to be the
consciousness of one who is occupied with manodhatu or
with manovinnanadhatu — with, let us say, representa-
tive or with re-representative cognition — with ideas or with
cognition of those ideas. The ideation in this case is about
sensuous phenomena as manifold, and the abstract nature
of it lies, of course, in considering their diversity as such.

1 In the text the formula of the Fourth Jhana remains
unaltered (cf. § 165). But it is sandwiched between the
cumbrous adjectival compounds referring to space and to
disinterestedness. Hence some modification was necessary
to avoid uncouthness of diction.

2 Strictly vinnananancayatanam. The usually elided
syllable (rulhi-saddo) is noticed in the Cy. (205).

8 K., here and in the two following replies, has the gerund
samatikkamma, following the usage in the Nikayas (see,
e.g. 9 D., M. P. S., 30; M. i. 174, 209; S. iii. 237, 238;
A. iv. 306). Buddhaghosa apparently reads samatik-
kama (205), as is the unvarying case in the first only of
these four arupajjhanas.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



74


consciousness of a sphere of infinite intellection 1 — even the
Fourth Jhana, to gain which all sense of ease must have
been put away, etc.

[Continue as in previous section.]

[8. The Sphere of Nothingness (akificannayata-
n a m).]

[267] Which are the states that are good?

When, that he may attain to the Formless heavens,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, having passed wholly
beyond the sphere of infinite intellection, enters into and
abides in that rapt meditation which is accompanied by the
consciousness of a sphere of nothingness — even the Fourth
Jhana, to gain which all sense of ease must have been put
away, etc.

[Continue as in § 265.]

[4. The Sphere where there is neither Perception nor
Non-perception (neva-sanna-nasanfiayatanam).]

[268] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the Formless heavens,
he cultivates the way thereto, and, having passed wholly
beyond the sphere of nothingness, enters into and abides
in that rapt meditation which is accompanied by the con-
sciousness of a sphere where there is neither perception
nor non-perception 2 — even the Fourth Jhana, to gain which
all sense of ease must have been put away, etc.

[Continue as in § 265.]


1 The only explanation given of a term on which one
would gladly have heard Buddhaghosa expatiate is, ‘ There
is no end for him in respect to that which has to be cogi-
tated’ (lit., minded; manasikatabba-vasena) (Asl. 205).
On the next stage, too (§ 267), no light at all is thrown

(p. 206).

2 Buddhaghosa explains this mental state as the cultiva-
tion of the functioning of the subtle residuum of conscious


ed by CjOCK^Ic



75


The Four Jhanas connected with Formless Existence
may be developed in sixteen combinations.


syntheses (sankharavasesa-sukhuma-bhavam). In
so far as perception (presumably understood as being wholly
introspective) has become incapable of effective functioning
(patu-safina-kiccam), the state is non-perceptual. In so
far as those faint, fine conscious reactions are maintained,
the state is ‘not non-perceptual/ This oscillation about
a zero-point in consciousness is illustrated by the similes
quoted (not from this Cy.) by Hardy (op. cit., 264), namely,
of the bowl containing just so much oil as suffices for
cleansing purposes, but no* to be poured out ; also, of the
little pool, sufficient to wet the feet, but too shallow for a
bathe. Both oil and water exist, or do not exist, according
to what action can be taken with respect to them. The
Cy. adds that this liminal point obtains not only in sanna,
but also in feeling, thought, and contact (208). The study
of the ‘ threshold ’ of consciousness, and of the supra- and
sub-liminal grades clustering about it, is familiar enough
to the investigator in psychophysics. What is unfamiliar
to us is the exploitation of the borderland of consciousness
in the interests of ethical growth. Leibnitz might have
found in the neva-sanna-nasannayatanam, had he
had opportunity, the inspiration for his theory of petites
perceptions .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter IV.

Degrees of Efficacy in Good relating to the Three
Realms.

1. Good in relation to the Universe of Sense (kama-
vacarakusalam).]

[269] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen, which is (I.) accompanied by happiness and
associated with knowledge — a thought which is
of inferior, or
of medium, or
of superlative efficacy, 1
or the dominant influence in which is
desire, or
energy, or


1 The effective power or karma of all the foregoing
thoughts and exercises to modify the individual^ existence
in one universe or another for good seems to have been,
for practical purposes, distinguished under three grades of
efficacy. So I gather, at least, from the comment on this
curious section (pp. 211, 212) : ‘ “ inferior ” (hlnam) must
be understood to mean paltry in respect of heaping up.’
‘ Heaping up * is in later books almost always associated
with karma. Meaning to toil, more specifically to dig up,
pile up, it is used to express the metaphorical notion of
ever accumulating merit or demerit constituting the indi-
vidual’s potentiality in the way of rebirth. Cf. Mil. 109 ;
also below, § 1059, n. 9, on ‘ she who toils.* The Patthana
may throw more light on the subject (Asl., ibid.).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


77


[another] thought, or
investigation ; x

or the dominant influence in which is
desire of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;
or the dominant influence in which is
energy of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;
or the dominant influence in which is
[another] thought of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;


1 An explanation is also needed, it seems to me, for this
association of the Four Iddhipadas (M. i. 108 ; A. iii. 82 ;
S. v. 264-266) with this special aspect of karma ; for they
lead to Arahatship rather than to rebirth in some other
plane. The Cy. only states that when anyone, in the act
of accumulating, relinquishes desire or the rest, 4 that * is
called inferior [in efficacy]; that when these four states
are moderately or superlatively efficacious they are called
accordingly ; and that 4 when anyone has accumulated,
having made desire (chan do), i.e., the wishing- to-do, his
sovereign, chief and leader,’ then the procedure is said to
be under the dominant influence of desire. So for the
other three.

It is to be regretted that the Cy. does not discuss the
term vlmamsa (investigation), or the propriety of its
position in this series of four. It would be interesting to
have learnt its psychological import in relation tovitakko
and vicaro. There is a suggestion of dual symmetry
about the series: as chando is to viriyam (conation
passing into action), so is cittam (the idea) to the dis-
cursive re-representative intellection of vlmamsa. I have
rendered cittadhipateyyam by the influence of another
thought in accordance with the Cy. (218), where it is said
to be an associated thought, or states associated with the
original 4 good thought.’

There is another brief comment on the adhipateyyas
below, § 1084, n. 2.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



78


or the dominant influence in which is
investigation of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy, 1

then the contact . . . the balance that arises — these . . .
are states that are good.

[270] Which are the states that are good ?

When a good thought concerning the sensuous universe
has arisen which is (II.) accompanied by happiness,
associated with knowledge, and prompted by a conscious
motive . . .

or (III.) accompanied by happiness, and disconnected with
knowledge . . .

or (IV.) accompanied by happiness, disconnected with
knowledge, and prompted by a conscious motive . . .
or (V.) accompanied by disinterestedness, and associated
with knowledge . . .

or (VI.) accompanied by disinterestedness, associated with
knowledge, and prompted by a conscious motive . . .
or (VII.) accompanied by disinterestedness, and discon-
nected with knowledge . . .

or (VIII.) accompanied by disinterestedness, disconnected
with knowledge, and prompted by a conscious motive— a
thought which is of inferior . . .
or of medium . . .
or of superlative efficacy . . .


1 The tabulated form adopted in this and following
replies is intended not only to facilitate a conspectus of
the system, but also to indicate the elision in the Pah
(expressed by . . . pe . . . ) of the repetition of the
unvarying framework of the reply before and after each
tabulated term. The Roman numerals in this and the
next reply refer to the original statement of the 'Eight
Main Types of Thought’ in Chapter I. Apparently the
sensuous basis of the arammanamof each thought is not
intended to be here rehearsed.


:ed by


Google



79


or the dominant influence in which is
desire, or
energy, or
another thought ;

or the dominant influence in which is
desire of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;
or the dominant influence in which is
energy of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;
or the dominant influence in which is
[another] thought of inferior,

of medium, or
of superlative efficacy ;

then the contact . . . the balance that arises — these . . .
are states that are good. 1

2. Good in relation to the Universe of Form.

[271] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form, he
cultivates the way thereto, and, aloof from sensuous appe-
tites, aloof from evil ideas, by earth-gazing enters into and
abides in the First Jhana (the first rapt meditation) . . .
which is

of inferior,
or of medium,
or of superlative efficacy ;


1 In accordance with the usual procedure in the Dhamma
Sangani, when combining several subjects in one sentence,
the final details apply only to the last subject in the
series. Hence ‘investigation* is omitted in connexion
with Thought VIII., because, presumably, the latter is
‘disconnected with knowledge.* And it would likewise have
been omitted in connexion with Thoughts III., IV. and VII.,
but not in connexion with the others.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



80


or the dominant influence in which is
desire, or
energy, or
a thought, or
investigation ;

or the dominant influence in which is

desire . . . energy ... a thought . . . investigation
of inferior,
of medium,

or of superlative efficacy —

then the contact . . . the balance that arises — these . . .
are states that are good.


[272] Repeat in the case of the other Jhdnas , both of
(a) and (b).

8. Good in relation to the Formless Universe.

[278] Which are the states that are good ?

When, that he may attain to the Formless heavens, he
cultivates the way thereto, and so, by passing wholly beyond
all consciousness of form, by the dying out of the conscious-
ness of sensory reaction, by turning the attention from any
consciousness of the manifold, he enters into and abides
in that rapt meditation which is accompanied by the con-
sciousness of a sphere of unbounded space — even into the
Fourth Jhana, to gain which all sense of ease must have
been put away, etc.— (the rapt meditation) where there is
neither ill nor ease, but only the perfect purity that comes
of mindfulness and disinterestedness, and which is of
inferior . . .
medium . . .

or superlative efficacy ...
or the dominant influence in which is
desire . . .
or energy . . .
or a thought . . .
or investigation . . .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



81


or the dominant influence in which is

desire . . . energy ... a thought . . . investigation
of inferior . . .
medium . . .
superlative efficacy —

then the contact . . . the balance that arises — these . . .
are states that are good.

[274-276] Here follow the three remaining * Jhanas con-
nected with Formless Existence/ each modified by the
characterised enumerated in the foregoing answer . Cf
§§ 266-268. 1


1 In § 275 the text inadvertently omits majjhimam
. . . pe . . . panltam . . . pe . . . before vimam-
sadhipateyyam.


<)


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter V.

Thought engaged upon the Higher Ideal (lokuttaram
c i 1 1 a m).

I. The First Path (pathamo magg o .) 1

The Twenty Great Methods (visati mahanaya).

1. Rapt Meditation (jhanam).

(i.) The Four Modes of Progress in Purification (sud-
d h i k a-p a t i p a d a).]

[277] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth 2 — and when, that he

1 That is to say, the first stage of the way or course
of life leading to Arahatship or Nirvana. In the answers,
bhumi (Stage) is substituted for Path. And the ‘First
Bhumi * is declared in the Cy. (pp. 214, 215) to be equiva-
lent to the first-fruits (or fruition) of recluseship (cf. D. i.,
second sutta); in other words, to the fruit of sotapatti,
or of ‘ conversion,’ as it has been termed.

2 The special kind of Jhana which he who has turned
his back on the three lower ideals of life in the worlds of
sense, form, or the formless, and has set his face steadfastly
toward Arahatship, must ‘ practise, bring forth and develop,’
is described by Buddhaghosa as being ekacittakkhani-
kam appana-jhan'am — rapt meditation on a concept
induced by the momentary flash of a thought (cf. K. V.,
pp. 620, 458) — and by the text itself as niyyanikam
apacayagamim. The former of these two last terms
is thus commented upon : ‘ It is a going forth (down from)
the world, from the cycle of rebirth. Or, there is a going


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



83


may attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, 1 and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof
from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana,
wherein conception works and thought discursive, which is
bom of solitude, is full of joy and ease, progress thereto
being difficult and intuition sluggish — then there is contact,
feeling, perception, thinking, thought, conception, discursive
thought, joy, ease, self-collectedness, the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, ideation, hap-
piness, vitality, and the faculty of believing , 4 I shall come
to know the unknotvn,* 2 right views, right intention, right
speech , right action , right livelihood , s right endeavour, right


forth by means of it. The man who is filled with it, com-
prehending 111, goes forth, putting away the uprising (of
111) goes forth, realizing the cessation (of 111) goes forth,
cultivating the path (leading to that cessation) goes forth.’
And the latter term : This is not like that heaping together
and multiplying of rebirth effected by the good which
belongs to the three worlds of being. This is even as a
man who, having heaped up a stockade eighteen cubits
high, should afterwards take a great hammer and set to
work to pull down and demolish his work. For so it, too,
sets about pulling down and demolishing that potency for
rebirth heaped up by the three-world-good, by bringing
about a deficiency in the causes thereof

1 Ditthigatani, lit. resorting to views. All traditions
or speculations adhered to either without evidence or on in-
sufficient evidence, such as are implied in the states called
‘theory of individuality, perplexity, and the contagion of
mere rule and ritual’ (Asl. 214; infra , §§ 1002-1005).

2 The italics show those constituents of consciousness
wherein this Jhana differs from that mentioned in § 160,
the constituents of which are identical with those of the
First Type of Good Thought, § 1.

3 These three factors of the 4 Eightfold Path,’ which were
not explicitly included in the Eight Types of Good Thoughts,
were, according to the Cy., included implicitly in the 4 or-
whatever-states.’ See above, p. 5, n. 1. Here the Cy. only
remarks that, whereas these three are now 4 included in the
Pali ’ because the Eightfold Path has Nirvana for its goal,

6—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



84


mindfulness, right concentration; the powers of faith,
energy, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, conscientious-
ness, the fear of blame ; the absence of lust, hate, dulness,
covetousness and malice, right views, conscientiousness, the
fear of blame, serenity, lightness, plasticity, facility, fitness
and directness in both sense and thought, mindfulness,
intelligence, quiet, insight, grasp and balance.

Now these — or whatever other incorporeal, causally
induced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are good.

[278-282] 1 Contact/ ‘feeling/ ‘perception/ ‘thinking/
and ‘ thought * are described as in §§ 2-6.

[283] What on that occasion is conception ?

The ratiocination, the conception, which on that occasion
is the disposition, the fixation, the focussing, the application
of the mind, right intention, ‘ Path-component/ ‘ contained
in the Path * 1 — ■ this is the conception that there then is.

[284] ‘ Discursive thought ’ is described as in § 8.

[285] What on that occasion is joy?

The joy which on that occasion is gladness, rejoicing
at, rejoicing over, mirth, merriment, felicity, exultation,
transport of heart, the joy which is a factor in the Great
Awakening 2 — this is the joy that there then is.

‘ pity ’ and ‘ sympathy ’ are not included because they have
living beings for their object, and not Nirvana.

1 The Path being the ‘ Eightfold Path/ ‘ conception ’
(vitakko) is reckoned as included in it, in virtue of its
being approximately equivalent to ‘ intention * (sankappo).

2 Pit i-samboj jhango. The seven Sambojjhangas are
enumerated in A. iv. 23 ; S. v. 110, 111 ; and also in
Mil. 840, where they are termed ‘ the jewel of the seven-
fold wisdom of the Arahats.’ On the state called sam-
bodhi, see Rhys Davids, ‘Dialogues of the Buddha/ i.,
pp. 190-192. It is in the Cy. (217) described as the harmony
of its seven constituent states, and as forming the opposite
to the detrimental compound consisting of the accumula-
tions of adhesion (llnam) and excitement, indulgence in
the pleasures and satiety of sensuality, and addiction to the
speculations of Nihilism and Etemalism (below, § 1003).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


85


[286] ‘ Ease * is described as in § 10.

[287] What on that occasion is self-collectedness ?

The stability, solidity, absorbed steadfastness of thought
which on that occasion is the absence of distraction,
balance, unperturbed mental procedure, quiet, the faculty
and the power of concentration, right concentration, the
concentration which is a factor in the Great Awakening,
a ‘Path-component/ ‘contained in the Path' — this is the
conception that there then is.

[288] ‘ Faith * is described as in § 12.

[289] What on that occasion is the faculty of energy ?

The mental inception of energy which there is on that

occasion, the striving and the onward effort, the exertion
and endeavour, the zeal and ardour, the vigour and forti-
tude, the state of unfaltering effort, the state of sustained
desire, the state of unflinching endurance, the solid grip of
the burden, energy, energy as faculty and as power, right
energy, the energy which is a factor in the Great Awaken-
ing, a Path-component, contained in the Path — this is the
energy that there then is.

[290] What on that occasion is the faculty of mindful-
ness?

The mindfulness which on that occasion is recollecting,
calling back to mind the mindfulness 1 which is remember-
ing, bearing in mind, the opposite of superficiality and of
obliviousness ; mindfulness, mindfulness as faculty and as
power, right mindfulness, the mindfulness which is a factor
in the Great Awakening, a Path-component, contained in
the Path — this is the mindfulness that there then is.

[291] ‘ Concentration ’ is described in the same tains as
‘ self-collectedness, ’ § 287.


The verb bujjhati is thus paraphrased: He arises from
the slumber of vice, or discerns the four Noble Truths, or
realizes Nirvana.

1 Sati, repeated as in § 14, has dropped out of the
printed text. K. repeats it.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



86


[292] What on that occasion is the faculty of wisdom ?

The wisdom which there is on that occasion is under-
standing, search, research, searching the Truth, discern-
ment, discrimination, differentiation, erudition, proficiency,
subtlety, criticism, reflection, analysis, breadth, sagacity,
leading, insight, intelligence, incitement, wisdom as faculty
and as power, wisdom as a sword, as a height, as light, as
glory, as splendour, as a precious stone; the absence of
dulness, searching the Truth, right views, that searching
the Truth which is a factor in the Great Awakening, 1 a
Path-component, contained in the Path — this is the wisdom
that there then is.

[298-295] The faculties of ‘ideation/ ‘happiness/ and
‘ vitality * are described as in §§ 17-19.

[296] What on that occasion is the faculty of be-
lieving, * I shall come to know the unknown * (a n a n n a-
tanfiassamltindriyam)? 2

The wisdom that makes for the realization of those
Truths 3 that are unrealized, uncomprehended, unattained


1 Under the name of Dhammavicayo, searching the
truth, or doctrine, or religion.

2 According to Buddhaghosa (216), the inspiring sense
of assurance that dawns upon the earnest, uncompromising
student that he will come to know the doctrine of the great
truths — that Ambrosial Way unknown in the cycle of
worldly pursuits and consequences where the goal is not
ambrosial — is to him as the upspringing of a new faculty
or moral principle.

3 Tesam dhammanam . . . sacchikiriyaya pafifia,
etc., which may more literally be rendered the wisdom (or
understanding, etc.) of, for, or from, the realization of,
etc. ‘ Bringing right opposite the eyes * is the paraphrase
(Asl. 218). The student while ‘ in the First Path ’ learns
the full import of those concise formulae known as the
Four Noble Truths, which the Buddha set forth in his first
authoritative utterance. Previously he will have had mere
second-hand knowledge of them ; and as one coming to a
dwelling out of his usual beat, and receiving fresh garland
and raiment and food, realizes that he is encountering new


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



87


to, undiscemed, unknown — the wisdom that is understand-
ing, search, research, searching the Truth, etc.

[Continue as in § 292.]

[297] What on that occasion are right views ?

Answer as for 4 wisdom/ § 292.

[298] 4 Right intention * is described in the same terms as
4 conception/ § 288.

[299] What on that occasion is right speech (samma-
v a c a) ?

To renounce on that occasion, abstain and refrain from,
and feel averse to, the four errors of speech, 1 to leave them
uncommitted and undone, to incur no guilt, nor to trespass
nor transgress with respect to them, to destroy the causeway
leading to them 2 — right speech, a Path-component, contained
in the Path — this is the right speech that there then is.

[800] What on that occasion is right action (samma-
kammanto)?

To renounce on that occasion, abstain and refrain from,
and feel averse to, the three errors of conduct, 3 to leave them
uncommitted and undone, to incur no guilt, nor to trespass
nor transgress with respect to them, to destroy the causeway
leading to them — right conduct, a Path-component, contained
in the Path — this is the right conduct that there then is.

[801] What on that occasion is right livelihood (samma-
a j I v o) ?

To renounce on that occasion, abstain and refrain from,
and feel averse to, wrong modes of livelihood, to leave them


experiences, so are these truths, not known hitherto by
him, spoken of as 4 unknown ’ (Asl. 218).

1 That is, lying, slander, rude speech and frivolous talk.
See the Cula Slla, e.g., in D. i. 4.

2 Set ugh at o, i.e., the cause or condition of evil speak-
ing — namely, lust, hate and dulness (Asl. 219). The
metaphor occurs in A. i. 220, 221, 261 ; ii. 145, 146.

3 That is, murder (of any living thing), theft and un-
chastity. D. i. 4.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



88


unpractised and undone, to incur no guilt, nor to trespass
nor transgress with respect to them, to destroy the cause-
way leading to them — right livelihood, a Path-component,
contained in the Path — this is the right livelihood that
there then is.

[802-304] 4 Right endeavour/ ‘ right mindfulness,’ ‘ right
concentration/ 1 are described as in §§ 289-291.

[305-311] The ‘powers’ of ‘faith/ ‘energy/ ‘mindful-
ness,’ ‘ concentration ’ and 4 wisdom ’ are described as in
§§ 288-292; those of ‘conscientiousness’ and ‘the fear of
blame ’ as in §§ 30, 31.

[312-319] ‘ The absence of lust ’ and 4 the absence of
hate ’ are described as in §§ 32, 88 ; ‘ the absence of dulness ’
as in § 309 (‘ wisdom *) ; ‘ the absence of covetousness ’ and
‘the absence of malice’ are described as in §§ 35, 36;
‘conscientiousness’ and ‘the fear of blame 'as in §§ 38,
89 ; ‘ right views ’ as in § 292 or 309 (‘ wisdom ’).

[320] What on that occasion is serenity of sense ?

The serenity, the composure which there is on that
occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity
of the skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses, the
serenity which is a factor in the Great Awakening — this
is the serenity of sense that there then is.

[321] What on that occasion is serenity of thought ?

The serenity, the composure which there is on that

occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity
of the skandha of intellect, the serenity which is a factor
in the Great Awakening — this is the serenity of thought
that there then is.

[322-331] The remaining five attributes characterizing both
sense and thotight ( on that occasion’: — ‘buoyancy/ ‘plas-
ticity,’ etc. — are described as in §§ 42-51.

[332-337] * Mindfulness,’ 1 intelligence,’ ‘ quiet,’ ‘ insight,’
‘grasp’ and ‘balance’ are described as in §§ 290, 292
(‘ wisdom ’), 291, 292, 289 (‘ energy ’) and 291 respectively .


1 Samadhi, before samboj jhango, has dropped out
of the printed text.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



89


These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.

[Summary.]

[887a] Now at that time

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are nine,
the Jhana is fivefold,
the Path is eightfold,
the powers are seven,
the causes are three,
contact, \
feeling,

perception, 'r are each single [factors] ;
thinking,
thought,
the skandhas of
feeling,
perception,
syntheses,
intellect,
the sphere of ideation,
the faculty of ideation,
the element of representative in-
tellection, are each single

the sphere of a [representative] [factors],
state,

the element of a [representative]
state,

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
good.

******



ed by CjjOCK^Ic



90


[Here the questions and answers concerning the first two
of the four skandhas enumerated are to he understood to
follow as in §§ 59-61.]

[888] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking, 1
conception,
discursive thought,

joy,

self-collectedness,
the faculties of

faith, concentration,

energy, wisdom,

mindfulness, vitality,

believing 1 1 shall come to know the unknown
right views, right livelihood,

right intention, right endeavour,

right speech, right mindfulness,

right action, right concentration ;

the seven powers ; 2
the absence of

lust, hate and dulness ;
the absence of

covetousness and malice,
right views ;

conscientiousness, the fear of blame ;
serenity, wieldiness,

buoyancy, fitness,

plasticity, directness

of sense and thought ;
mindfulness and intelligence ;
quiet and insight ;
grasp and balance.

1 The printed text has vedana instead of cetana, which
is obviously wrong.

2 These are set out in the original as in § 277.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



91


These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas
of feeling, perception and intellect — these are the skandha
of syntheses.

******

[Questions on the remaining items in the ‘ Summary * are
understood to follow.]

[840] 1 Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth — and when, that he
may attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress thereto being difficult, but intuition quick . . .

[or] [841] . . . progress thereto being easy, but intuition
sluggish . . .

[or] [842] . . . progress thereto being easy and intuition
quick — then the contact . . . the balance that arises —
these . . . are states that are good.

[843] Repeat the Four Modes in the case of the 2nd to the
4th Jhana on the Fourfold System , and of the 1st to the 5th
Jhana on the Fivefold System.

[Here end] the Modes of Progress in Purification.

[(ii.) The Section on Emptiness (sunnata m). 2 ]

(a and h.)

[344] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the

1 The answer marked [339] in the text is merely a repeti-
tion of lokuttara-jhanam as dukkhapatipadam dan-
dhabhinnam, i.e., of the first ‘ Mode of Progress ’ given in
[277]. I have therefore omitted it. No repetition is noticed
in this connexion by the Cy. K. has no such repetition.

2 Called in the Cy. (221) suniiata-varo, with the sub-
sections suddhika-sunnatri, or ‘Emptiness applied to


ed by CjOCK^Ic



92


rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth — and when, that be
may attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana,
wherein conception works and thought discursive, which
is born of solitude, is full of joy and ease, and which is
Empty — then the contact . . . the balance that arises —
these . . . are states that are good.

[845] Repeat the 2nd to the 4 th Jhanas on the Fourfold
System , and the 1st to the 5th on the Fivefold System , tcith
the addition in each case of the phrase ‘ and which is Empty/

[Here ends] the ‘ Emptiness * Section.

the purification-formula,’ i.e., the group marked (a and 5),
and suniiata-patipada, or ‘the Modes of Progress taken
in connexion with Emptiness,’ i.c., the group marked (c).

On the technical term ‘ emptiness,* see above, § 121, and
Rhys Davids, ‘ Yogavacara’s Manual,’ pp. xxvii, xxviii. Of
the three ‘ riddles ’ there discussed — ‘ the empty, the aimless
and the signless’ — only the first two are here prescribed
for cultivation. Buddhaghosa argues on the subject at
some length (Asl. 221-225). He explains that the three
terms are so many names for the way to the Ideal
(lokuttara-maggo), each throwing a special aspect of
it into greater relief than the other two, while yet no
advance can be made without all three concepts. The
advent of the Path as a conscious ideal is especially char-
acterized by insight into the fact that the sanskaras are
void of a permanent soul, and of all that conduces to happi-
ness. The virtue or quality of the Path, again, is wholly
empty of lust, hate and dulness. So also is its object,
namely, Nirvana. But the chief import of ‘ empty * is said
to relate to the fact first named — the nonentity of any
substratum or soul in anything. The ‘aimless’ applies
chiefly to the insight into dukkham, or the nature of pain
or ill. All aspiration or hankering after sanskaras withers
up under the penetration of such insight. By it, too, the
path of the Ideal becomes revealed. The third ‘riddle,’
the ‘signless’ — i.e., the path conceived as free from the
three signs or false tenets of Permanence, Sorrow and Soul
— comes up for meditation later (§§ 506, 511, etc.).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



98


[(c) The Modes of Progress, with * Emptiness * as the
Basis (sunnat a-m u 1 a k a-p a t i p a d a).]

[846] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal . . .
and when, that he may attain to the First Stage, he . . .
enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . . progress
thereto being difficult and intuition sluggish, the method
being the concept of Emptiness — then the contact . . .
the balance that arises — these . . . are states that are
good.

[847-849] Repeat the same formula , substituting in suc-
cession the three remaining Modes of Progress (§§ 176-179),
with the addition in each case of the phrase ‘the method
being the concept of Emptiness.’

[350] Repeat the same formula , substituting in succession
the remaining Jhdnas on the Fourfold System and those on
the Fivefold System , and applying in each case the Four
Modes of Progress , with the additional phrase on ‘ Empti-
ness.’


[(ii.) The Aimless (appanihitam).

(a and b)]. 1

[351] WTiich are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal . . .
and when, that he may attain to the First Stage, he . . .
enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . . which is
born of solitude, is full of joy and ease, and which is
Aimless — then the contact . . . the balance that arises —
these . . . are states that are good.

[352] Repeat the same formula , substituting the remaining
three , and the five Jhdnas in succession , with the addition in
each case of the phrase ‘ and which is Aimless.’

1 As in the foregoing, the Cy. (ibid.) co-ordinates this,
and the following section, with the two on ‘emptiness,’
calling (a and b) suddhika-appanihita, and the next
group appanihita-patipada.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



94


[(c) The Modes of Progress, with Aimlessness as the
Basis (appanihit a-m u 1 a k a-p a t i p a d a).]

[353] When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal
. . . and when, that he may attain to the First Stage of
it, he . . . enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish, the
method being the concept of Aimlessness — then the contact
. . . the balance that arises — these . . . are states that
are good.

[854-356] Repeat the same formula , substituting in suc-
cession the three remaining Modes of Progress , with the
addition in each case of the phrase * the method being the
concept of Aimlessness.*

[357] Repeat the same formula 9 substituting in succession
the remaining three , and the Jive Jhdnas , and applying in
each case the Four Modes of Progress , with the additional
phrase on ‘ Aimlessness.*

[2-20. The Remaining Nineteen Great Methods.]

[858] Which are the states that are good ?

Here follow nineteen concepts , each of which can be sul>-
stituted for 1 the Jhana of the Higher Ideal * in the preceding
81 answers [§§ 277-857], as a vehicle in training the mind
for Arahatship . They are as follows :

2. The Path of the Higher Ideal.

8. The Advance in Mindfulness 1 toward the Higher

Ideal.

4. The System of Right Efforts 2 toward the Higher

Ideal.

5. The Series of Mystic Potencies 3 applied to the Higher

Ideal.

6. The Faculty relating to the Higher Ideal.

7. The Power relating to the Higher Ideal.


1 Satipatthana. M. i. 56.

2 Sammappadhana. See below, § 1867.

8 Iddhipada. See above, § 278 et seq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



95


8. The Great Awakening to the Higher Ideal.

9. The Truth of the Higher Ideal.

10. The Peace 1 of the Higher Ideal.

11. The Doctrine of the Higher Ideal.

12. The Skandha related to the Higher Ideal.

13. The Sphere of the Higher Ideal.

14. The Element of the Higher Ideal.

15. The Nutriment of the Higher Ideal.

16. Contact with the Higher Ideal.

17. Feeling relating to the Higher Ideal.

18. Perception relating to the Higher Ideal.

19. Thinking relating to the Higher Ideal.

20. Thought relating to the Higher Ideal.

[The Dominant Influences in the Modes of Progress
(adhipati).]

[359] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal
. . . and when, that he may attain to the First Stage,
he . . . enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is painful and intuition sluggish, and the
dominant influence in which is desire, energy, a thought,
or investigation, then the contact . . . the balance that
arises — these are states that are good.

[360] Repeat this formula, in the case of the remaining
three and five Jhdnas.

[361] Repeat the foregoing [§§ 359, 360] in the case of
each of the nineteen remaining ‘ Great Methods.’

[Here ends] the First Path.

II. The Second Path.

[362] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth — and when, that he may

1 Samatho. See above, § 54.


ed by CjOO^lC



96


attain to the Second Stage, he has diminished the strength
of sensual passions and of malice, 1 and so, aloof from
sensuous appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and
abides in the First Jhana . . . progress whereto is difficult
and intuition sluggish — then the contact . . . the faculty
of knowledge made perfect 2 . . . the balance that arises —
these . . . are states that are good.

******

[Here ends] the Second Path.

III. The Third Path.

[868] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth — and when, that he
may attain to the Third Stage, he has put away the
entire residuum of sensual passions and of malice, 3 and so.


1 Cf. D. i. 156 and M. P. S. 16, 17. It is striking that
here and in the following answer no diminution of moho
(dulness) is included. df., however, below, § 1184. Ignor-
ance ( = dulness) is only really conquered in the Fourth Path.
The diminution is described (Asl. 288) as coming to pass
in two ways : vicious dispositions arise occasionally and no
longer habitually, and when they do arise it is with an
attenuated intensity. They are like the sparse blades of
grass in a newly-mown field, and like a flimsy membrane
or a fly’s wing.

2 Cf. § 296. The faith and hope of the Sotapatti, or
student of the First Path, while struggling with the limita-
tions of his stage of knowledge (fiatamariyadam, the
Cy. calls them, p. 289), are now rewarded by his attain-
ment, as a SakadagamI, of that deepening philosophic
insight into the full implication of the ‘Four Truths’
termed a fin a, or knowledge par excellence , and applied,
in Buddhist writings, only to evolving or evolved Arahat-
ship. Cf. below, § 555.

3 These, which the Cy., in connexion with the Second
Path, termed collectively kilesa, are now referred to as
safifiojanani. See § 1229 et seq. and § 1118 ct seq.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



97


aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters
into and abides in the First Jhana . . . progress whereto
is difficult and intuition sluggish — then the contact . . .
the faculty of knowledge made perfect . . . the balance
that arises — these . . . states that are good.

[Here ends] the Third Path.


IV. The Fourth Path.

[864] Which are the states that are good ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain the Fourth Stage, he has put away absolutely and
entirely all passion for Form, all passion for the Formless,
all conceit, excitement and ignorance, and so, aloof from
sensuous appetites, aloof from evil ideas, enters into and
abides in the First Jhana . . . progress whereto is difficult
and intuition sluggish — then the contact . . . the faculty of
knowledge made perfect . . . the balance that arises — these
. . . are states that are good.

[864a] What on that occasion is the faculty of knowledge
made perfect (annindr iy am)?

The wisdom that makes for the realization of those
truths that have been realized, comprehended, attained
to, discerned and known — the wisdom that is understand-
ing, search, research, searching the Truth, etc.

[Continue as in § 292.]
******

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion, these are states that are
good.

[Here ends] the Fourth Path.

[Here ends] Thought engaged upon the Higher Ideal.

7


ed by CjOCK^Ic



98


[PART II. — BAD STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

Chapter VI.

The Twelve Bad Thoughts (dvadasa akusalacit-
t ani).]

I.

[865] Which are the states that are bad ? L

When a bad thought has arisen, which is accompanied
by happiness, and associated with views and opinions, 1 2 3 * and
has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, 8 a touch,
a [mental] state, or what not, then there is
contact,
feeling,
perception,
thinking,
thought,
conception,
discursive thought,

joy,


1 In this connexion those constituents of the twelve
thoughts which in themselves are ethically neutral are to
be understood as unchanged in the connotation assigned
them in connexion with good thoughts. There being for
bad thoughts no other sphere of existence save the sensuous
universe, this is to be understood throughout (Asl. 247).

2 Ditthigata-sampayuttam. Cf. p. 88, n. 1, with

§§ 881, i008.

3 Rasarammanam va is inadvertently omitted in the

printed text.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



99


ease,

self-collectedness ; l
the faculties of
energy,

concentration, 2 3 * * * *
ideation,
happiness,
vitality ;
wrong views,
wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
lust, covetousness,

dulness, 8 wrong views,

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame,


1 See following note.

2 Concentration of mind is essential to the higher life
of Buddhism ; nevertheless, so far is it from constituting
excellence, that it is also an essential to effective evil-doing.
If the mind be undistracted, says Buddhaghosa, the
murderer’s knife does not miss, the theft does not mis-
carry, and by a mind of single intent (lit., of one taste)
evil conduct is carried out (Asl. 248). Cf. the Hebrew
idiom rendered by ‘the heart being set* — to do good or
evil (Eccles. viii. 11 ; Ps. lxxviii. 8).

3 Hate (doso) and malice (vyapado) do not find a place
among the factors of Bad Thoughts (corresponding to the
place occupied by their opposites in the Good Thoughts,

§ 1) till we come to the last four types of bad thoughts.

Whereas these are accompanied by melancholy (doma-

nassam), the subject of the first and the following three

types of thought is a cheerful sinner. Joy, ease, happiness,
were held to be incompatible with hate.

7—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



100


quiet,

grasp, 1

balance.

Now, these — or whatever other incorporeal, causally
induced states that there are on that occasion — these are
states that are bad. 2

[866-870] What on that occasion is contact . . . feeling
. . . perception . . . thinking . . . thought?

Answers as in §§ 2-6 respectively .

[871] What on that occasion is conception ?

Answer as in § 7, substituting 4 wrong intention ’ (m i c-
chasankappo) for* right intention.*

[872-874] What on that occasion is discursive thought
. . . joy . . . ease?

Answers as in §§ 8-10 respectively .

[875] What on that occasion is self-collectedness ?

Answer as in § 11, substituting ‘ wrong concentration ’ jor

4 right concentration.’

[876] What on that occasion is the faculty of energy ?

Answer as in § 18, substituting 4 wrong endeavour ’ for

4 right endeavour.*

[877] What on that occasion is the faculty of concentra-
tion?

Answer as in § 375.

1 Vipassana (insight) has been erroneously included
in the text. Moral insight was as incompatible with im-
moral thoughts to the Buddhist as it was to Socrates and
Plato. Hence also ‘wisdom’ and ‘mindfulness’ are ex-
cluded, as well as ‘ faith.’ The Cy. rules that the followers
of heretical dogmas and mere opinion can have but a
spurious faith in their teachers, can only be mindful of
bad thoughts, and can only cultivate deceit and delusion.
Nor can there possibly be that sixfold efficiency of sense
and thought which is concomitant with good thoughts (§§40-
51). Asl. 249.

2 Kusala in the text is, of course, a slip. There are
in all these Bad Thoughts ten ‘ whatever-other ’ states :
desire, resolve, attention, conceit, envy (issa, or read
iccha, longing), meanness, stolidity, torpor, excitement,
worry (Asl. 250). See above, p. 5, n. 1.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



101


[378-380] What on that occasion is the faculty of idea-
tion . . . happiness . . . vitality?

Answers as in §§ 17-19 respectively .

[381] What on that occasion are wrong views (miccha-
d i 1. 1 h i) ? l

The views which on that occasion are a walking in
opinion, the jungle of opinion, 2 the wilderness of opinion,*
the puppet-show of opinion, 4 the scuffling of opinion, 6 the
Fetter of opinion, 6 the grip 7 and tenacity 8 of it, the inclina-
tion towards it, 9 the being infected by it, a by-path, a wrong
road, wrongness, the ‘fording place,’ 10 shiftiness of grasp
— these are the wrong views that there then are.


1 Micchaditthi is defined in the Cy. (p. 248) as aya-
thavadassanam, seeing things as they are not. (On
ditthi, see § 1003, n.) Sixty-two kinds of this perverted
vision, or ill-grounded speculation are distinguished in the
Brahmajala Sutta (D. i.), all of them being theories of
existence, and are alluded to by the commentator (p. 252).
Cf. Rhys Davids, ‘ American Lectures,’ p. 27 et seq.

2 Because of the difficulty of getting out of it, as out of
a grass, forest, or mountain jungle (Asl., ibid.).

3 Because of the danger and fearsomeness of indulging
in such opinions, as of a desert beset with robbers and
snakes, barren of water or food (ibid.).

4 Buddhaghosa does not derive this term from visukam,
but from visu-kayikam = antithetically constituted — i.e. 9
to sammaditthi.

6 The disorder and struggle through some being Annihila-
tionists, some Eternalists, etc. (Asl. 253).

6 See § 1113.

7 The obsession by some object of thought, like the grip
of a crocodile (Asl. 253).

8 The text of the Cy. reads patitthaho for patiggaho.
K., however, reads patiggaho.

9 I.e. 9 towards the fallacious opinion of Permanence, etc.
(Asl. 253).

10 Titthayatanam. It is impossible to get an English
equivalent for this metaphor, which literally means only
a standing-place, but which is usually, in its first intention,
associated with a shallow river-strand or seashore, and, in


ed by CjOCK^Ic



102


[882-884] What on that occasion is wrong intention . .
wrong endeavour . . . wrong concentration ?

Answers as in §§ 871, 876, 875 respectively .

[885, 886] What on that occasion is the power of energy
. . . the power of concentration ?

Answers as in §§ 888, 884 respectively .

[887] What on that occasion is the power of uncon-
scientiousness (ahirikabalam)?

The absence which there is on that occasion of any
feeling of conscientious scruple when scruples ought to be
felt, the absence of conscientious scruple at attaining to
bad and evil states — this is the power of unconscientious-
ness that there then is.

[888] What on that occasion is the power of disregard
of blame (anottappabalam)?

The absence which there is on that occasion of any sense
of guilt where a sense of guilt ought to be felt, the absence 1
of a sense of guilt at attaining to bad and evil states — this
is the power of disregard of blame that there then is.

[889] What on that occasion is lust ?

The lust, lusting, lustfulness which there is on that
occasion, the infatuation, the feeling and being infatuated,
the covetousness, the lust that is the root of badness — this
is the lust that there then is.

[890] What on that occasion is dulness ?

The lack of knowledge, of vision, which there is on that
occasion ; the lack of co-ordination, of judgment, of wake-
fulness, 2 of penetration; the inability to comprehend, to
grasp thoroughly; the inability to compare, to consider.


its second, with sectarian speculative beliefs and the teach-
ing of them. Buddhaghosa himself gives an alternative
connotation : (a) ‘ where the foolish, in the course of their
gyrations (? i.e., samsara) cross over’; (b) the region or
home of sectarians (titthiya). Cf. the use of the term
in M. i. 488.

1 N a has here dropped out of the printed text.

2 Sambodho. Cf § 285.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



108


to demonstrate; the folly, the childishness, the lack of
intelligence; the dulness that is vagueness, obfuscation,
ignorance, the Flood 1 of ignorance, the Bond of ignorance,
the bias of ignorance, the obsession of ignorance, the
barrier of ignorance ; the dulness that is the root of bad-
ness — this the dulness that there then is.

[891-897] What on that occasion is covetousness . . .
are wrong views ... is unconscientiousness . . . dis-
regard of blame . . . quiet . . . grasp . . . balance ?

Answers as in §§ 889, 881, 887, 888, 875, 876, and, again,
375 respectively .

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion — these are states that are bad.

[Summary.]

[397a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are five,
the Jhana is fivefold,
the Path is fourfold,
the powers are four,
the causes are two, 2
contact, ) are each single [factors] ;
etc. ) etc.

[ Continue as in § 58.]

$ * ❖ # * *


1 On ignorance as a Flood and as a Bond, see below,
§§ 1151, 1151a.

Whereas the mark (lakkhanam) of lust is the seizing
on an object in idea, it is the essence (raso) of dulness to
cover up the real nature of that object, with the result that
the attention devoted to it is of a superficial nature (ayo-
ni8o). Asl. 249.

2 Namely, ‘ lust 1 and ‘ dulness.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



104


[B98] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,

joy.

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
vitality ;
wrong views,
wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
lust, covetousness,

dulness ; wrong views ;

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
quiet,
grasp,
balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas
of feeling, perception and intellect — these are the skandha
of syntheses.

[Continue as in § 58.]

X' * v v <|!

n.

[899] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied


:ed by CjOO^IC



105


by pleasure, associated with views and opinions, and
prompted by a conscious motive, 1 and which has as its
object a sight ... or what not, then there is contact . . .
balance . . .

[Continue as in the First Thought , § 865.]

III.

[400] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by happiness and disconnected with views and opinions,
and which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a
taste, a touch, or what not, then there is contact, etc.

[Continue as in the first Bad Thought , but omitting the
single, tioice enumerated item ‘ wrong views.*] 2

[Summary.]

[400al Now, at that time

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,


1 The Cy. instances the case of a young man who, being
refused the hand of the daughter of some false doctrinaire
on the ground of his being of a different communion, is
prompted by his affections to frequent the church of the
girl’s people and to adopt their views, thus gaining his
reward (Asl. 255).

2 Somanassindriyam, bracketed in the text, must,
of course, be included. The Cy. instances the frame of
mind of those who are indulging in ‘worldly pleasures,’
such as public sports and dances, and at village festivals
(natasamaj jadini). Cfi ‘Dialogues of the . Buddha,’
I., p. 7, n. 4.

It is difficult to interpret the concisely and obscurely
worded double illustration given in the Cy. (p. 257) of this
type of thought. The same circumstances are supposed
as in the Third Thought, with the added low-class delights
of horse-play and vulgar curiosity.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



106


the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are five,
the Jhana is fivefold,
the Path is threefold,
etc., etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

* * * * * ❖

[401] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Anstver as in % 398, omitting ‘wrong views.’


IY.

[402] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by pleasure, disconnected with views and opinions, and
prompted by a conscious motive, and which has as its
object a sight ... or what not, then there is contact . . .
balance . . .

[Continue as in the Third Thought , § 400.]


[403] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by disinterestedness, and associated with views and opinions,
and has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, a
touch, a [mental] state, or what not, then there is
contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

perception, discursive thought,

thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy,


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



107


concentration,
ideation ;
disinterestedness,
vitality ;
wrong views,
wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
lust, covetousness,

dulness ; wrong views ;

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame,
composure,
grasp,
balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
bad.


[404-407] Questions and answers on ‘contact,’ ‘feeling/
‘ disinterestedness/ and * the faculty of disinterestedness *
identical with those in §§ 151-154.


[Summary.]

[407a] Now, at that time

the skandhas are four,
etc.,

the faculties are five,
the Jhana is fourfold, 1


1 Cf. § 154a.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



108


the Path is fourfold,
etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

* $ * *r *

[408] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,
self-collectedness,
etc.

[Continue as in § 898, ‘joy* having been omitted as
incompatible with ‘ disinterestedness.’]

* * # * * $


VI.

[409] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by disinterestedness, associated with views and opinions,
and prompted by a conscious motive, and which has as its
object a sight ... or what not, then there is contact, etc.

[ Continue as in Thought F.]


VII.

[410] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by disinterestedness, and disconnected with views and
opinions, and which has as its object a sight ... or what
not, then there is contact, etc.

[Continue as in Thought F., omitting ‘ wrong views.’]
******


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Summary.]

[410a] Now at that time

the skandhas are tour,
etc.,

the faculties are five,
the Jhana is fourfold,
the Path is threefold,
etc.

[Continue as in § 897a.]
******

[411] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Answer as in § 898, omitting both ‘joy* and ‘wrong
views.’

# •;« A' * *


vm.

[412] Which are the states that are bad ?

Answer as in Thought VII., with the additional j actor,
inserted as in Thoughts II., IV., VI., of * prompted by a
conscious motive.’ 1


IX.

[418] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by melancholy and associated with repugnance, 2 and which
has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, a touch,
a mental state, or what not, then there is
contact,
feeling,
perception,


1 The Cy. gives no illustrations of this or the three pre-
ceding types of thought.

2 Pa tig ho, used (§ 1060) to describe do so, and again
(§ 597 et seq.) in connexion with sense-stimulation, as
‘ reaction.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



110


thinking,
thought,
conception,
discursive thought,
distress,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
ideation,
melancholy,
vitality ;

wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
hate,
dulness ;
malice ;

unconscientiousness,

disregard of blame,

quiet,

grasp,

balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
bad.

[414] The question and answer on ‘ contact,’ § 2.

[415] What on that occasion is feeling ?

The mental pain, the mental distress (dukkham),
which, on that occasion, is born of contact with the appro-
priate element of representative intellection; the painful,
distressful sensation which is born of contact with thought ;


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


Ill


the painful, distressful feeling which is bom of contact with
thought — this is the distress that there then is.

[416, 417] What on that occasion is distress (d u k k h a m)
. . . the faculty of melancholy (domanassindriyam)?

Answers as for ‘feeling’ in § 415, omitting ‘with the
appropriate element of representative intellection.’

* ❖ * # * *

[418] What on that occasion is hate ?

The hate, hating, hatred which on that occasion is a
disordered temper, the getting upset, 1 opposition, hostility,
churlishness, 2 abruptness, 8 disgust of heart — this is the
hate that there then is.

[419] What on that occasion is malice ?

Answer as for * hate.’

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion — these are states that are bad.


1 Vyapatti, vyapajjana. Cf. § 1060, n. 5. Here
the comment is pakatibhava-vijahanatthena = throw-
ing off a normal state (Asl. 258). ‘Like gruel that has
gone bad ’ (Sum., 1. 211).

2 Candikkam. See J. P. T. S., 1891, p. 17 ; P. P. ii. 1
( = ii. 11). Smp. 297. Morris thinks candifctam is the
right spelling. I incline to hold that the lectio difficilior
is more likely to be correct. The Gy. in four passages
spells with kk. K., by an oversight, has candittam in
the present passage, but kk in §§ 1060, 1814.

8 Asuropo. Refers, according to the Cy. (258), to the
broken utterance of a man in a rage.

It is not a little curious that such constituents as ‘ self-
collectedness,* ‘quiet’ and ‘balance’ should not be found
incompatible with hate as described above. ‘Concentra-
tion ’ is less incompatible, and it must be remembered that
all three states are described in the same terms. Hence,
if one stands, the others cannot fall. But see under
Thoughts X. and XII.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



112


[Summary.]

[419a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
etc.,

the faculties are five,
the Jhana is fourfold,
the Path is threefold,
the powers are four,
the causes are two, 1
etc.

[Continue as in §§ 58-61.]


[420] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,
self-collectedness ;

, the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
vitality ;

wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
hate,
dulness ;


1 Namely, doso and moho.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



113


malice ;

unconscientiousness,

disregard of blame,

quiet,

grasp,

balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas
of feeling, perception and intellect — these are the skandha
of syntheses.

* * + * * *


X.

[421] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by melancholy, associated with repugnance, and prompted
by a conscious motive, and which has as its object a sight
. . . or what not, then there is contact, etc.

[Continue as in Thought IX.]

* * * * * *


XI.

[422] Which are the states that are bad ?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by disinterestedness and associated with perplexity, and
which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,
a touch, a mental state, or what not, then there is

contact,

feeling,

perception,

thinking,

thought,

conception,

8


ed by CjOCK^Ic



114


discursive thought,
disinterestedness,
self-collectedness ;
the faculties of

energy, disinterestedness,

ideation, vitality ;

wrong intention,
wrong endeavour ;
the powers of
energy,

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
perplexity ;
dulness ;

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame,
grasp.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
bad.

[428] What on that occasion is contact ?

The usual formula.


[424] What on that occasion is self-collectedness ?

The sustaining of thought which there is on that occa-
sion 1 — this is the self-collectedness that there then is.

******


1 Buddhaghosa says on this passage (Asl. 259): ‘Inas-
much as this weak form of thought has only the capacity
of keeping going, or persisting (pavatti' thitimatta-
kam’), none of the other features of ‘ self-collectedness *
are here applied to it. It is clear, therefore, that the
‘. . . pe . . .’ after thiti in the text is a mistake.
And cf K. ‘ Concentration/ it will be noticed, as well as
‘ quiet* and ‘ balance/ are entirely omitted.


:ed by


Google


115


[425] What on that occasion is perplexity (vici-
kiccha)? 1

The doubt, the hesitating, the dubiety, which on that

1 It is tempting to render vicikiccha by ‘doubt.* It
would not be incorrect to do so. The dual state of mind
which is the etymological basis of d&u-bt is shown in two
of the terms selected to describe the word. Again, the
objects of vicikiccha, as given in § 1004, are those to
which the term ‘doubt,’ in its ethico-religious sense, might
well be applied. But there are features in which the
Buddhist attitude of vicikiccha does not coincide with
doubt as usually understood in the West. Doubt is
the contrary of belief, confidence, or faith. Now, the
approximate equivalents of the latter — saddha and
pas ado — are not alluded to in the answer, as they might
be, for the purpose of contrast. Again, though this by
itself is also no adequate ground for not matching the
two terms in question, the etymology of the words is very
different. There is nothing of the dual, divided state of
mind in the structure of vicikiccha as there is in that
of ‘doubt.’ Cikit is the desiderative or frequentative of
cit, to think; vi, the prefix, indicating either intensive or
distracted thinking. Thus, the etymology of the Indian
word lays stress on the dynamic rather than the static,
on the stress of intellection rather than the suspense of
inconclusiveness. When the term recurs (§ 1004), Buddha-
ghosa refers it to kiccho — to ‘ the fatigue incurred through
inability to come to a decision ’ — a position nearer, psycho-
logically, to ‘ perplexity ’ than to ‘ doubt.’ It is quite true
that, on etymological ground, neither is kankha a match
for our term ‘doubt.’ Kanks is to desire. The word
would seem to give the emotional and volitional comple-
ment of the intellectual state implied in vicikiccha, the
longing to escape into certainty and decision attendant on
the anxious thinking. Kankha, however, is not one of
any important category of ethical terms, as is vicikiccha;
besides, its secondary meaning — namely, of a matter sub
judice, or of the state of mind connected therewith (see Jat.
i. 165 ; M. i. 147) — seems to have superseded the primary
meaning, which is retained in akankhati (cf. Akan-
kheyya Sutta, M. i. 83). Hence, it can be fairly well
rendered by ‘ doubt.* I do not, then, pretend that ‘ per-

8—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



116


occasion is puzzlement, 1 perplexity; distraction, standing
at cross-roads; 2 collapse, 3 uncertainty of grasp; evasion,
hesitation; 4 incapacity of grasping thoroughly, 6 stiffness
of mind, 6 mental scarifying 7 — this is the perplexity that
there then is.

******


plexity’ is etymologically the equivalent of vicikiccha,
but I use it (1) to guard against a too facile assimilation
of the latter to the implications of * doubt ’ as used by us,
and (2) to throw emphasis on the * mortal coil ’ and tangle
of thought in one who, on whatever grounds, is sceptically
disposed.

1 Yimati, almost an exact parallel to vicikiccha, con-
noting as it does either intense or distraught mind-action.

2 Dvelhakam, dvedhapatho. Here we get to the
etymological idea in our own ‘doubt.* The Cy. has, for
the one, ‘ to be swayed or shaken to and fro ’ ; for the
other, ‘ as a path branching in two, this being an obstacle
to attainment * (259).

3 Samsayo, the etymological equivalent of ‘collapse.*
To succumb to one*s inability to be persistently carrying
on such problems as, Is this permanent or impermanent ?
etc., says the Cy. (ibid.).

4 Asappana, parisappana. According to the Cy.,
these mean, respectively, ‘ to relinquish * (or slip down
from — osakkati; cf. Trenckner’s ‘Miscellany/ p. 60)
‘an object of thought through inability to come to a
decision,’ and ‘to slip* (or run — sappati [vide sarp])
‘ about on all sides from inability to plunge in.* Asl. 260.

6 Apariyogahana, employed to describe moho. See
§ 390.

6 I should not have hesitated to adopt, for thambhi-
tattam, chambhitattam (vacillation), the alternate
reading in the Cy. (Asl. 260), were it not that the latter
paraphrases the term by saying ‘the meaning is a con-
dition of denseness (or rigidity, thaddho). For when per-
plexity arises, one makes one’s mind stiff (stubborn, dense,
thaddham).’ K. also reads thambhitattam. Both
terms, however, though opposed in connotation, are derived
from the root stambh, to prop; and both are used to

7 See note on p. 117.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


117


[Summary.]

[425a] Now, at that time

the skandhas are lour,
etc.,

the faculties are four,
the Jhana is fourfold,
the Path is twofold,
the powers are three,
the cause is one, 1
etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

******

[426] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,
self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy,
vitality ;


describe the gaseous element, which, though it is vacil-
lating, holds solids apart. See below, § 965. There is the
further comment (Asl., ibid.) that, * in respect of certainty,
inability to cann/ on the idea in the mind is meant.’ Vici-
kiccha, then, though it implies active racking of the
brain, impedes progress in effective thinking, and results
in a mental condition akin to the denseness and apariyo-
gahana of moho.

7 Manovilekho. ‘When perplexity arises, seizing the
object of thought, it scratches the mind, as it were ’ (ibid.).
When the term is used to describe kukkuccam, or worry
(§ 1160), it is illustrated in the Cy. by the scaling of a
copper pot with an awl (araggam). Asl. 884.

1 Namely, moho.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



118


wrong intention,
wrong endeavour ;
the powers of
energy,

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
perplexity,
dulness ;

unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame,
grasp. 1

Or whatever other, etc.

[Continue as in § 420.]


XII.

[427] Which are the states that are bad?

When a bad thought has arisen which is accompanied
by disinterestedness and associated with excitement, and
which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,
a touch, a mental state, or what not, then there is
contact,
feeling,
perception,
thinking,
thought,
conception,
discursive thought,
disinterestedness,
self-collectedness,
the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
ideation,


1 On the omission of * balance,’ cf. below, § 429, n.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



119


disinterestedness,
vitality ;
wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
excitement ;
dulness ;

unconscientiousness,

disregard of blame,

quiet,

grasp,

balance.

These, or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
bad.

[428] Usual question and answer on ‘ contact.’
******

[429] What on that occasion is excitement (uddhac-
cam)?

The excitement of mind which on that occasion is dis-
quietude, agitation of heart, turmoil of mind — this is the
excitement that there then is. 1

******


1 Yam cittassa uddhaccam avupasamo, cetaso
vikkhepo, bhantattam cittassa — idam vuccati
uddhaccam. It seems clear that, whether or no ud-
dhaccam can elsewhere be rendered by terms indicative
of a puffed-up state of mind (see Rhys Davids, ‘ Buddhism,’
p. 109; Warren, ‘Buddhism in Translations,’ p. 865 ; Neu-
mann, ‘ Die Reden,’ etc., I passim), the specific meaning in
this connexion (Tattha katamam uddhaccam) is the
antithesis of vupasamo, and the equivalent of vikkhepo,


ed by CjOCK^Ic



120


[429a] Now, at that time

the skandhas are four,
etc.,

the faculties are five,


both of which are expressions about the meaning of which
there is little or no uncertainty. In Sanskrit auddhatya
is only found twice in later works, one of them Buddhist
(v. Bothl. and Both., s.v.), and there means wrestling,
a word used by ourselves for certain agitated, perfervid
mental states. That the term should be yoked with kuk-
kuccam (worry) in the Nlvaranas (see §§ 1158-1160; and
cf. the cognate meaning in another allied pair, thina-
middham, §§ 1155-1157) goes far to rob it of implica-
tions of vanity or self-righteousness. (In ‘Dialogues of
the Buddha,’ i. 82, the former pair are rendered ‘ flurry
and worry.’) Buddhaghosa gives little help; but he dis-
tinguishes uddhaccam, as a struggling over one object of
thought (ekarammane vipphandati), from perplexity
as a struggling over dwer^objects of thought. The Bud-
dhists were apparently seeking for terms to describe a state
of mind antithetical to that conveyed by the designation
thlnamiddham — stolidity and torpor. In the latter
there is excessive stability — the immobility not of a finely-
adjusted balance of faculties and values, but of an inert
mass. In the former (uddhacca-kukkuccam) there is
a want of equilibrium and adjustment. From some cause
or another the individual is stirred up, agitated, fussed ;
in American idiom, ‘rattled.’

What I have rendered ‘turmoil’ (bhantattam; more
literally, wavering, rolling, staggering) Buddhaghosa calls
vibhanti-bhavo ( sic lege), bhantayana-bhantagon-
adlnam viya (Asl. 260).

Whatever the exact meaning of uddhaccam may be,
there is enough to show that it is in great part antithetical
to some of the other constituents enumerated under the
Bad Thought in question — at least, when these are taken
in their full intention. I refer to the approximately
synonymous group : ‘ self-collectedness,’ ‘ concentration/
‘quiet* and ‘balance.’ The last, indeed (avikkhepo),
is a contradiction in terms to the phrase which describes
uddhaccam as cetaso vikkhepo! The text actually
omits it, but this is through mere inadvertence (cf. § 430).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



121


the Jhana is fourfold,
the Path is threefold,
the powers are four,
the cause is one,
etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

******


It is given in K., and the Cy. explicitly states (p. 260) that
there are twenty-eight constituents enumerated, fourteen
of them being described in terms of one or other of the
other fourteen. (If the reader will compare § 427 with
the corresponding descriptions given in §§ 2-57, he will
prove this to be correct.) Nor is there a word to comment
on, or explain away any apparent incongruity in the in-
clusion. There is only a short discussion, alluded to
already, on the relation of uddhaccam and vicikiccha.
Thoughts XI. and XII., as departing from the symmetrical
procedure of I. to IX., are said to be miscellaneous items,
and to be concerned with persistent attending to the idea
(arammane pavattanaka-cittani). And just as, if a
round gem and a tetragonal gem be sent rolling down an
inclined plane, the former’s motion is uniform, while that
of the latter is from one position of rest to another, so
vicikiccha connotes a continual working of thought,
while uddhaccam works on one given basis at a time.

There being, then, as it would appear, this fairly close
analogy between ‘ perplexity * and ‘ excitement/ it is fair
to assume that ‘ self-collectedness * and its synonyms are
to be understood in Thought XII., as present in the feeble
degree to which they, or at least the first of them, is
present in Thought XL (see § 424, n.). The compilers
were thus between two fires as to their logic. Either
avikkhepo must go to admit of the use of vikkhepo —
in which case the synonyms of avikkhepo (samadhi,
etc.) must go too — or it and its synonyms must be re-
tained with a highly attenuated import. Possibly the
subject was conceived as agitated on some one point only,
but calm as to things in general.


:ed by


Google



122


[480] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,
self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
vitality ;
wrong intention,
wrong endeavour,
wrong concentration ;
the powers of
energy,
concentration,
unconscientiousness,
disregard of blame ;
excitement ;
dulness ;

unconscientiousness,

disregard of blame,

quiet,

grasp,

balance.

Or whatever other, etc.

[ Continue as in § 62.]

******

[Here end] the Twelve Bad Thoughts.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


[PART III.— INDETERMINATE STATES OF CONSCIOUS -

NESS}


Chapter I.

On Effect, or Result (vipako).

A. Good Karma.

1. In the sensuous universe.

(a) The Five Modes of Cognition considered as effects of
good (kusalavipakani panca-vinfianani).]

(i.) [431] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of good karma 1 2 having been wrought,
having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous
universe, visual cognition has arisen, accompanied by dis-
interestedness, 3 and having as its object something seen,
then there is

contact, thinking,

feeling, thought,

perception, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;


1 Dhamma avyakata. The term and its treatment
are discussed in my Introduction. Cf. Vis. Magga, ch. xiv.

2 Kammam; literally, action, work, deed.

3 In this and the two following sections (2 and 3)
upekkha is apparently used as a psychological term only,
without ethical implication, and signifies simply neutral
feeling.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



124


the faculties of

ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

These, or whatever other 1 incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
indeterminate.

[432] Question and answer on ‘ contact * as above , passim .

[433] What on that occasion is feeling ?

The mental [condition], neither pleasant nor unpleasant,
which on that occasion is bom of contact with the appro-
priate element of visual cognition ; the sensation, bom of
contact with thought, which is neither easeful nor painful ;
the feeling, born of contact with thought, which is neither
easeful nor painful — this is the feeling that there then is.

[434] What on that occasion is perception ?

The perception, the perceiving, the state of having per-
ceived, which on that occasion is born of contact with the
appropriate element of visual cognition — this is the per-
ception that there then is.

[435] What on that occasion is thinking ?

The thinking, the cogitating, the reflection which on
that occasion is born of contact with the appropriate
element of visual cognition — this is the thinking that there
then is.

[436] What on that occasion is thought ?

The thought which on that occasion is ideation, mind,
heart, that which is clear, ideation as the sphere of mind,
the faculty of ideation, intellect, the skandha of intellect,
the appropriate element of visual cognition — this is the
thought that there then is.

[437] What on that occasion is disinterestedness ?

Answer as for ‘ feeling,’ § 436, omitting the phrase ‘ which

is bom of contact with the appropriate element of visual
cognition.’


1 There will be but one of these, viz., attention (Asl. 262).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



125


[488] What on that occasion is self-collectedness ?

The persistence of thought 1 which there is on that
occasion — this is the self-collectedness that there then is.

[439] What on that occasion is the faculty of ideation ?

Answer as for ‘ thought/ § 436.

[440] What on that occasion is the faculty of dis-
interestedness ?

Answer as in § 487.

[441] What on that occasion is the faculty of vitality ?

Answer as in % 19.

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion — these are the states that are
indeterminate.

[Summary.]

[441a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are three, 2
contact counts as a single factor,
etc.

[ Continue as in § 58],


1 In the text omit . . . pe . . . after thiti, as in § 424,
and for the same reason (Asl. 262).

2 Jhana and the Path, says the Cy. (262), are not in-
cluded in the summary ; and why ? Jhana at its extremity
has conception (vitakko), and the Path at it 9 extremity
has cause (hetu). Hence, it is not consistent to include
Jhana in a thought that has no conceptual activity, or the
Path, when the thought is not causally effective.

This remark throws a little light on to the problem of
indeterminate states. In vitakko the mind is working
towards an end good or bad ; in the Path the first factor
(right views) is synonymous with ‘absence of dulness,
which is the cause or root of good (§ 1054). Neither
vitakko nor amoho is, therefore, a possible constituent
in a cognition which is inefficacious to produce good or bad
karma.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



126


the faculty of ideation counts as a single factor,
the element of visual cognition counts as a single factor,
the sphere of [mental] states counts as a single factor,
etc.


[Continue as in § 58.]

******

[442] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
self-collectedness,
the faculty of vitality,

or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states there
are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas of feeling,
perception and intellect — these are the skandha of syn-
theses.


******

(ii.-v.) [443] Which are the states that are indeter-
minate?

When, as the result of good karma having been wrought,
having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous
universe,

auditory cognition,
olfactory cognition, or
gustatory cognition

has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, and having
as its object

a sound,
a smell, or
a taste

respectively ... or

cognition of body


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


127


has arisen, accompanied by ease, and having as its object
something tangible, 1

then there is

contact, thinking,

feeling, 2 thought,

perception, ease,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of

ideation,

ease,

vitality.

Now, these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally
induced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.

[444] Question and answer on ‘ contact * as above , passim .

[445] What on that occasion is feeling?

The bodily pleasure, the bodily ease, which on that
occasion is bom of the appropriate element of the cog-
nition of body; the pleasurable, easeful sensation which

1 Or ‘ a touch * (i?. p. 2, n. 2). The view that the cogni-
tion of something tangible has a positive hedonic concomit-
ant — pleasant or, if the karma be bad (§ 556), unpleasant —
as compared with the neutral feeling attending other kinds
of sense-cognition (under the given circumstances), is of
psychological interest. And the comment it evokes is not
less so. Touch, or body-sensibility, is, the Cy. explains
(268), the one sense through which the four elements with-
out and within the individual come into direct contact. Other
cognition is secondary, inasmuch as the other senses are
derived (up ad a). They are as balls of cotton- wool on four
anvils, deadening the impact of the hammer. In touch the
wool is beaten through, and the reaction is stronger. Cf.
this with the theory of sense below, §§ 596-682. Neverthe-
less, the ease or the distress is so faintly marked, that the
cognition remains ‘ indeterminate.’

The constituent states, contact, etc., refer only to the
last-named species of cognition. In the case of the other
four ‘disinterestedness’ would have to be substituted for
‘ ease.’

2 Ye dan a has dropped out of the printed text.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



128


is bom of contact with the body ; the pleasurable, easeful
feeling which is born of contact with the body — this is the
feeling that there then is.

[446] What on that occasion is perception ?

The perception, the perceiving, the state of having
perceived, which on that occasion is bom of contact with
appropriate element of the cognition of body — this is the
perception that there then is.

[447] What on that occasion is thinking ?

The thinking, the cogitating, the reflection, which on that
occasion is born of contact with the appropriate element
of the cognition of body — this is the thinking that there
then is.

[448] What on that occasion is thought ?

The thought which on that occasion is ideation, mind,
heart, that which is clear ; ideation as the sphere of mind,
the faculty of ideation, intellect, the skandha of intellect,
the appropriate element of the cognition of body — this is
the thought that there then is.

[449] What on that occasion is ease ?

The bodily pleasure, the bodily ease which on that occa-
sion is the pleasant, easeful sensation bom of contact with
the body ; the pleasant, easeful feeling born of contact with
the body — this is the ease that there then is.

[450-458] What on that occasion is self-collectedness 1
. . . the faculty of ideation 2 . . . of ease . . . of vitality?

Answers as in §§ 438, 448, 449 and 441 respectively .

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion — these are states that are in-
determinate.


1 In § 450 omit ... pe ... in the text after thiti.

2 In § 451 supply kaya- before vinnanadhatu. The
state manindriyam is, it is true, one of representative
cognition only, but it is occupied, under the given circum-
stances, with a kaya-vifinanam. The ‘door of mano*
has as its object any or all of the objects of the five Benses.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



129


[Summary.]

[453a] Now, on that occasion

the skandhas are four,
etc.

[ Continue as in § 441a, substituting ‘ the element of the

cognition of body 'for * the element of visual cognition.’]
******

[454] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

A nswer as in % 442.

******

[(b) Good (karma) taking effect in ideation (kusalavi-
paka manodhatu).]

[455] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of good karma having been wrought,

having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous
universe, an element of ideation 1 * * * * * * * 9 has arisen, accompanied
by disinterestedness, and having as its object a sight, a
sound, a smell, a taste, something tangible, or what not,
then there is

contact, thought,

feeling, conception ,

1 Once more the Cy. points out (263) the significance
of the affix -dhatu (element), as meaning the absence of
entity (nissatta), the ‘emptiness’ or phenomenal char-
acter of the ideational faculty. Cf. above, p. 33, n. The
characteristics of mano are here set out. See Introduc-

tion (Theory of Intellection). The theory of a sensorium
commune here alluded to is practically identical with that

adopted by Aristotle in the ‘De Sensu.’ ‘The basis (or

site, vatthu) of this kind of thought is a constant, namely,
the heart ; the objects of the “ doors ” (or of the idea-door)

are not constants. Whereas they come in one after
another, this is the locus (thanam), which has the function
of receiving them into unity’ (ekasampaticchana-

kiccam).

The process of cognition is completed by manovinnti-

nadhatu (see below).

9


ed by CjOCK^Ic



180


perception, discursive thought,

thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

These, or whatever other 1 incorporeal, causally induced
states there are on that occasion — these are states that are
indeterminate.

[456] Question and answer on ‘ contact ’ as above , passim .

[457] What on that occasion is feeling?

The mental [condition], neither pleasant nor unpleasant,
which on that occasion is born of contact with the appro-
priate element of ideation ; the sensation, born of contact
with thought, which is neither easeful nor painful; the
feeling, born of contact with thought, which is neither
easeful nor painful — this is the feeling that there then is.

[458-460] What on that occasion is perception . , .
thinking . . . thought?

Answers as in §§ 446-448, substituting ‘element of idea-
tion 'for ‘element of the cognition of body.’

[461] What on that occasion is conception ?

The ratiocination, the conceiving which on that occasion
is the disposition, the fixation, the focussing, the application
of the mind 2 — this is the conception that there then is.

[462] What on that occasion is discursive thought ?

The process, the sustained procedure, the progress and

access [of the mind] which on that occasion is the con-
tinuous adjusting and directing of thought — this is the
discursive thought that there then is.

1 These (Asl. 264) include two others, resolve and atten-
tion. Cf above, p. 5, n. 1.

2 Inasmuch, says the Cy. (264), as this thought is neither
good nor bad (in its effect), intention (sankappo) 9 either right
or wrong, is not included in the connotation of its component
vitakko. Cf §§ 7 and 371, also p. 125, n. 2.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



131


[463-467] What on that occasion is disinterestedness
. . . self-collectedness . • . the faculty of ideation . . .
of disinterestedness ... of vitality?

Answers as in §§ 437, 438, 460, 440, 1 441 respectively .

[Summary.]

[467a] Now, on that occasion
the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are three,
contact counts as a single factor,
etc.


[Continue as in § 58.]

the faculty of ideation counts as a single factor,
the element of ideation counts as a single factor,
etc.

******

[468] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact, discursive thought,

thinking, self-collectedness,

conception, the faculty of vitality.

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas of
feeling, perception and intellect — these are the skandha of
syntheses.

* ❖ * * * *


1 The references given in the text will prove, on examina-
tion, to be for the most part misleading.


9—2


ed by CjOO^lC



132


(c) Good (karma) taking effect in representative intellec-
tion (kusala-vipaka mano vifiiian adhatu).


(i.) When accompanied by happiness .

[469] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of good karma having been wrought,
having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous
universe, an element of representative cognition 1 has
arisen, accompanied by happiness and having as its object


1 The function of the manovihnanadhatu is dis-
cussed in the Introduction (Theory of Intellection). As a
resultant state, it is here said (Asl. 264), when ‘accom-
panied by happiness/ to eventuate in two sets of circum-
stances : ‘ Standing in the doors of the five senses, it
accomplishes the task (or function, kiccam) of deciding
(santlrana) as to that idea (or percept) which the element
of ideation, just expired, received on the expiry of that
sense-cognition which constituted the result of good karma.’
Again: ‘When the action of the six doors (senses and
ideation) results in a more impressive idea, this becomes
what is called the idea’ (tad-arammanam), i.e., ‘the
object of the impulse ’ (j a van am), and the element of
representative cognition is drawn away to fix itself on that
object. So a vessel crossing a strong current avails to
turn the latter aside for a moment, though its natural
course is a flowing downward. The normal flow of the
intellect is, so to speak, down the stream of the individual
life (bhavangam ev’ otarati). And it is this normal
functioning of the intellect which alone is here taken into
account.

The further stage of cognition immediately preceding
any outgoing or conative impulse such as seems to be
meant by the word j a van am (cf. Sum. 194; Abh. S.
iii. 3) — I allude to that of ‘ establishing * (or full assimila-
tion, as we might say — votthappanam) — is not here
explicitly mentioned. But it is probably implied in the
phrase santlranadi, ‘deciding and the rest * And it is
discussed a few pages further on (Asl. 269, 272).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



188


a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, something tangible, the
idea [of any of these], or what not, then there is
contact, conception,

feeling, discursive thought,

perception, joy,

thinking, ease,

thought, self-collectedness ;

the faculties of

ideation,

happiness,

vitality.

These, or whatever other, etc.

[ Continue as in % 455.]


[470-482] These thirteen constituent states are described
as in §§ 2-11 and 17-19, with the exception of ‘conception *
(v i t a k k o) and ‘ self-collectedness ’ (c i 1 1 a s s’ e k a g-
gata), which are described xvith the restricted connotation
used in §§ 461, 464.


[Summary.]

[482a] Identical with § 467a, but ‘ the element of repre-
sentative cognition’ (manovinnanadhatu) must be
substituted for ‘the element of ideation.’ 1

******

[488] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses?

Contact, discursive thought,

thinking, joy,

conception, self-collectedness ;

the faculty of vitality.

Or whatever incorporeal, causally induced states there
are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas of feeling,

1 The reference to [58] in the text is again incorrect, for
there is to be no rehearsal of either Jhana or Path. Cf
p. 125, n. 2, and Asl. 264.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



134


perception and intellect — these are the skandha of syn-
theses.

❖ * * <s *

(ii.) When accompanied by disinterestedness .

[484] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of good karma having been wrought,
having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous
universe, an element of representative cognition 1 has
arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness, and having as
its object a sight, etc. (c/. above, § 469] . . . then there is
contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

perception, discursive thought,

. thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of

ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

These, or whatever other, etc.

[Continue as in § 469.]

1 This sort of resultant cognition is said to take effect
or occur on five sorts of occasions: (i.) The conception
of infirm offspring, viz., blind, deaf, imbecile or insane,
hermaphrodite or neuter; (ii.) during the span of one
individual lifetime (b ha van gam); (iii.) in the decision
(santlranam) respecting an idea where the object causes
neither pleasure nor pain ; (iv.) when the ‘ that-object ’
(tadarammanam) of absorbing impressiveness arises
(cf. § 469, n.) ; (v.) when death opens the way to renewed
existence (cuti). It will be seen that these five correspond
to the first, second, tenth, thirteenth and fourteenth occa-
sion on which vinnanas occur, according to the Visuddhi
Magga (chap. xiv. ; see Warren’s ‘ Table of Contents/

J. P. T. S., 1891-98, p. 180). It is possible that the
absence of explanatory matter in our Cy. is due to the
existence of a full treatment by Buddhaghosa in the former \
earlier work.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



135


[485-496] These thirteen states are described as in the
foregoing section (i.), except that the questions and answers
on ‘ feeling ’ and ‘ disinterestedness,’ as given in §§ 152-154,
must be substituted for those on ‘feeling,’ ‘joy,’ and the
‘faculty of happiness’ given in §§ 471, 477, and 481.
‘ Ease ’ is omitted .


[Summary.]

[496a] Terms identical with those in § 482a.

******

[497] The skandha of syntheses is identical with the content
stated in § 488, but with the omission of ‘ joy.’

******


[(d) The Eight Main Types of Results (attha m a h a-
vipaka).]

[498] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?
When, as the result of good karma having been wrought,
having been stored up in connexion with the sensuous uni-
verse, an element of representative cognition has arisen,

(i.) accompanied by happiness and associated with know-
ledge . . .

(ii.) accompanied by happiness, associated with know-
ledge, and prompted by a conscious motive . . .

(iii.) accompanied by happiness and disconnected with
knowledge . . .

(iv.) accompanied by happiness, disconnected with know-
ledge, and prompted by a conscious motive . . .

(v.) accompanied by disinterestedness and associated
with knowledge . . .

(vi.) accompanied by disinterestedness, associated with
knowledge, and prompted by a conscious motive . . .

(vii.) accompanied by disinterestedness and disconnected
with knowledge . . .

(viii.) accompanied by disinterestedness, disconnected


ed by CjOCK^Ic



136


with knowledge, and prompted by a conscious motive, and
having as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,
something tangible, or what not, then there is contact 1
. . . balance. These, or whatever other incorporeal,
causally induced states there are on that occasion — these
are states that are indeterminate.

[498a] That absence of lust which is the root of in-
determinateness . . . that absence of hate which is the
root of indeterminateness . . . that absence of dulness
which is the root of indeterminateness . . . these are
states that are indeterminate. 2


[2. In the universe of Form.]

[499] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of Form,
he cultivates the way thereto, and aloof from sensuous
appetites, etc., 3 enters into and abides in the First Jhana
. . . then there is contact, etc. 4 * * * 8 Now, these . . . are
states that are good. But when, as the result of just this


1 It is difficult in the present stage of knowledge respect-
ing the Buddhist (academic) theory of the Indeterminate
and of Yipako to supply any safe reference for the elided
states here supposed to be rehearsed. The following section
(see note) seems to indicate that at least three more states
than those enumerated in the kinds of indeterminates just
discussed are to be included, namely, the absence of lust,
of hate, and of dulness. But the Cy. is not at all lucid
(pp. 265, 266), and breaks away into a long rambling dis-
cussion on casuistical views respecting vipako.

2 This highly elliptical paragraph, in which I have

supplied the third ‘ root,’ inadvertently omitted in the text,

but required by the context (see above, §§ 32-34; K.,

Asl. 267, 268), is presumably intended to show wherein

the niddesa, or descriptive exposition of certain of the

constituent states of each of the Eight Types of Result
differ from those given in each of the corresponding Eight
Types of Good Thoughts (S§ 1-159).

8 See § 160. 4 Continue as in § 160.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



187


good karma having been wrought, having been stored up
in connexion with the universe of Form, he, aloof from
sensuous appetites, etc., enters into and abides in the First
Jhana . . . then there is contact, etc. And these . . .
are states that are indeterminate.

[500] Repeat , substituting the formula of the remaining
Jhanos on the Fourfold System , and of all the Jhdnas on the
Fivefold System .


[8. In the universe of the Formless.]

[501] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, that he may attain to the heavens of the Form-
less, he cultivates the way thereto, and so, by passing
wholly beyond all consciousness of form, by the dying out
of the consciousness of sensory reaction, by turning the
attention from any consciousness of the manifold, he enters
> into and abides in that frame of mind which is accom-
panied by the consciousness of a sphere of unbounded
space — even the Fourth Jhana, to gain which all sense of
ease must have been put away, etc. [ continue as in § 265] —
then the contact . . . the balance that arises, these . . .
are states that are good. 1

But when, as the result of just this good karma having
been wrought, having been stored up in connexion with the
universe of the Formless, he, by passing wholly beyond all
consciousness of form, by the dying out of the conscious-
ness of sensory reaction, by turning the attention from
any consciousness of the manifold, enters into and abides
in that rapt meditation which is accompanied by the
consciousness of a sphere of unbounded space — even the
Fourth Jhana, to gain which all sense of ease must have
been put away, etc. [contimie as above ] . . . then the


1 In the printed text the . . . pe . . . here should be
omitted, as is done in §§ 508, 504. Omit likewise in § 502.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



188


contact 1 . . . the balance that arises, these . . . are states
that are indeterminate.

[502-504] Here follow in succession the other three ‘ Jhanas
connected with Formless Existence’ (§§ 266-268), namely ,
‘ the Sphere of Infinite Intellection,’ ‘ the Sphere of
Nothingness,’ and ‘ the Sphere where there is neither
Perception nor Non-perception,’ each having the Fourth
Jhdna as its ‘result,’ as in the formula stated in § 501.

[4. In the pursuit of the Higher Ideal (lokuttara-
vipako).


I. The First Path.

The Twenty Great Methods.

1. Rapt Meditation .

(i.) The Four Modes of Progress in Purification.]

[505] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana
. . . [continue as in § 277] progress thereto being difficult
and intuition sluggish — then there is contact . . . balance.
Now these . . . are states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated 2 in pursuit of the


1 On the difficulty of determining which constituent
dhammas are to be here understood, see § 498, n.

2 The word ‘karma’ and its proprium , ‘storing up’
(upacitattam), are now superseded respectively by
lokuttaram jhanam and cultivation or practice (bhavi-
tattam) (Asl. 289).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



189


Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is painful, intuition wherein is sluggish,
and which is Empty — then there is contact . . . the faculty
of knowledge made perfect 1 . . . balance. And these . . .
are states that are indeterminate.

[506] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation) whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he
may attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
[continue as in § 277] progress thereto being difficult and
intuition sluggish — then there is contact . . . balance.
Now these . . . are states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is painful, intuition wherein is sluggish,
and which is Signless 2 . . .

[or] [507] {repeating all the foregoing) which is Aimless 3
— then there is contact . . . the faculty of knowledge
made perfect . . . balance. And these . . . are states
that are indeterminate.

[508] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?


1 Cf. above, § 862. No comment is given on the de-
velopment of this faculty, in the case of indeterminate
states, before the First Path is left behind. But the reason
is presumably that, in the quest of the Ideal, the result
implies the attainment of a higher path, or at least of the
‘ fruition ’ of the First Path. The faculty is not expressly
stated in the corresponding passages of §§ 508, 509, either
in the printed text or in K. ; but there can, by the context,
be no doubt that it is to be taken as read.

2 See above, p. 91, n. 2. 3 Ibid .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



140


When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, suppressing the working of conception
and of thought discursive, enters into and abides in the
Second Jhana . . .

[or] ... in the Third Jhana . . .

[or] ... in the Fourth Jhana . . .

[or] . . . [continue in the same way for fivefold Jlidna\
. . . progress whereto is painful and intuition sluggish,
then this constitutes good (karma). 1

But when, as the result [of this or that Jhana the cor-
responding Jhana is attained] progress whereto is painful,
intuition wherein is sluggish,

and which is Empty,

Signless,

[or] Aimless,

then the contact . . . the balance that arises — these . . .
are states that are indeterminate.

[509] Repeat the two foregoing sections , substituting in
order the three remaining Modes of Progress: ‘progress
whereto is painful, but intuition quick,’ ‘ progress whereto
is easy, but intuition sluggish,’ and ‘progress whereto is
easy, and intuition quick’ (§§ 176-180).

[(ii.) The Notion of Emptiness applied to Purification
(suddhika-s u nil at am).]

[510] Which are the states that are indeterminate?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the

rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may

1 The compilers would appear, here and in certain
subsequent answers, to have made an attempt at con-
densation otherwise than by the usual . . . pe . . . This
is, I believe, a very rare instance.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



141


attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana
. . . which is Empty — then there is contact . . . balance.
Now these . . . are states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
which is Empty . . .

[ or ] [511] which is Signless . . .

[or] [512] which is Aimless — then there is contact . . .
balance. And these . . . are states that are indeterminate.

[518] Repeat in the ease of each of the remaining Jh&nas
on the Fourfold System , and of all the Jh&nas on the Five-
fold System .

[(iii.) The Four Modes of Progress taken in connexion
with the Notion of Emptiness (s u n h a t a*-p a t i p a d a).

The First Mode.]

[514] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is painful and intuition sluggish,
and which is Empty,

then there is contact . . . balance. Now these . . . are
states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana
having been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit
of the Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites,

1 Sic lege .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



142


aloof from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First
Jhana . . .

progress whereto is painful and intuition sluggish,
and which is Empty . . .

• • • [ or ] [51 5] which is Signless . . .

• • • [° r ] [516] which is Aimless,

then there is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are
states that are indeterminate.

[517] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas
on the Fourfold System, and of aU the Jhdnas on the Five-
fold System .

[The Second , Third and Fourth Modes.]

[518] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?
When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the

rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
— progress whereto is painful, but intuition quick,
and which is Empty . . .

— progress whereto is easy, but intuition sluggish,
and which is Empty . . .

— progress whereto is easy and intuition quick,
and which is Empty . . .

[Repeat, substituting each of the remaining Jhdnas in the
case of each of the three Modes] . . .
then these constitute good (karma).

But when, as the result [of this or that Jhana in any
the three Modes], he enters into and abides in any of
the Jhanas taken in order, which is in any of the three
Modes,

and which is Empty . . .

. . . [or] which is Signless . . .

. . . [or] which is Aimless,


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



148


then there is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are
states that are indeterminate.

[(iv.) The Notion of Aimlessness applied to Purification
(s u d d h i k a-a p p a n i h i t a m) .]

[519] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, he enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
which is Ajmless,

then there is contact . . . balance. Now these . . . are
states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .

. . . which is Aimless . . .

. . . [or] [520] which is Signless . . .

• • • t 07 ’] [521] which is Empty,
then there is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are
states that are indeterminate.

[522] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas
on the Fourfold System , and of all the Jhdnas on the Five-
fold System .

[(v.) The Four Modes of Progress taken in connexion
with the Notion of Aimlessness (appanihita-pati-
pada).]

[528] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and


ed by CjOCK^Ic



144


opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,
and which is Aimless,

then there is contact . . . balance. Now these ... are
states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the first Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,
and which is Aimless . . .

• • • [<w] [524] which is Signless . . .

. . . [or] [525] which is Empty,
then there is contact . . . balance. And these ... are
states that are indeterminate.

[526] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation) whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, suppressing the working of conception
and of thought discursive, 1 he enters into and abides in
the Second Jhana, or into [any of the remaining Jhanas,
both on the Fourfold and the Fivefold System ] . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,
and which is Aimless,
then this constitutes good (karma).

But when, as the result [of this or that Jhdna the cor-
responding Jhdna is attained ], progress whereto is difficult
and intuition sluggish,

and which is Aimless,

[or] which is Signless , 2


1 For vivicceva kamehi read vitakkavicaranam
vupasama.

2 For appanihitan ti vipako repeated read ani-
mittan ti vipako.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



145


[or] which is Empty , 1

then there is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are
states that are indeterminate.

[527] The Second , Third and Fourth Modes are now
substituted in turn , as was done in § 518.

[The Remaining Nineteen Great Methods.]

[528] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

Here follow nineteen concepts, each of which can be sub-
stituted for * the Jhana of the Higher Ideal ’ in the preceding
exercises (§§ 505-528), the exercise to which they are actually
applied in this paragraph being the ‘ Modes of Progress in
Purification ’ given in §§ 505-509. These nineteen concepts
are enumerated in § 858.

[(vi.) The Modes of Progress in Purification taken in
connexion with the Dominant Influence of Desire (chand-
adhipateyya-suddhik a-p a t i p a d a).] 2

[529] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal

(the rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and
onward, making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that
he may attain to the First Stage, he has put away views
and opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof
from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana
. . . progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,
and the dominant influence in which is Desire — then there
is contact . • . balance. Now these . . . are states that
are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,


1 Sunnatam has been inadvertently omitted from the
text. 2 Omitted in K.


10


ed by CjOCK^Ic



146


— which is Empty . . .

. . . [or] [580] which is Signless 1 . . .

• • • [ or ] [581] which is Aimless,
and the dominant influence in which is Desire — then there
is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are states that
are indeterminate.

[582] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas
on both systems .

[588] Repeat in the case of each of the three remaining
1 Modes of Progress ’ applied to each Jhana.

[(vii.) The Notion of Emptiness applied to Purification, and
taken in connexion with Desire as the Dominant Influence
(chandadhipateyyam suddhika-sufifiatam).] 2

[584] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .

which is Empty, and the dominant influence in which is

Desire — then there is contact . . . balance. Now these
. . . are states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .

which is Empty . . .

• • • [ or ] [535 1 which is Signless . . .

. . . [or] [586] which is Aimless,

and the dominant influence in which is Desire — then there
is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are states that
are indeterminate.

1 Bead in the printed text animittam for appani-

mittam. 2 Omitted in K.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


147


[587] Repeat in the case of each of the remaining Jhdnas
on both systems .

(viii.) 1

[588] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the

rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof froqi
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . • .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish, which
is Empty, and the dominant influence in which is Desire —
then there is contact . . . balance. Now these . . . are
states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish,

— which is Empty . . .

. . . [or] [589] which is Signless 2 . . .

. . . [or] [540] which is Aimless , 3
and the dominant influence in which is Desire — then there
is contact . . . balance. And these . . • are states that
are indeterminate.

[541] Repeat in the case of each remaining Jhana as
passim.

[542] Repeat in the case of each of the three remaining
1 Modes of Progress * applied to each Jhana.


1 No title is appended to this group, but it will be seen
that it is a repetition of group vi. (p. 145), with this addi-
tional feature, that the Jhana which constitutes the Karma
is Empty.

2 Bead animittam for sufliiatam.

3 Omit lokuttaro before phasso.

10—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic


148


(ix.)

[548-546] This group is identical with group vii. [§§
584-587], except that the concept Aimless takes the place oj
the concept Empty, and conversely .


(x.)

[547 - 551] This group is identical with group viii.
[§§ 588-542], except that the concept Aimless takes the place
of the concept Empty, and conversely .

[The Remaining Nineteen Great Methods. 1 ]

[552] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Path of the Higher Ideal, the
Advance in Mindfulness toward the Higher Ideal, the
System of Right Efforts toward the Higher Ideal, etc.
[continue as in % 358, down to 1 Thought relating to the
Higher Ideal ’], whereby there is a going forth and onward,
making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that he may
attain to the First Stage, he has put away views and
opinions, and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish, and the
dominant influence in which is Desire — then there is con-
tact . . . balance. Now these . . . are states that are good.

But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from
evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . .
progress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish, which is

Empty,
or Signless,
or Aimless,

and the dominant influence in which is


1 Cf above, p. 145.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


149


Desire,
or Energy,
or a Thought,
or Investigation,

then there is contact . . . balance. And these . . . are
states that are indeterminate.

[Here ends] Result in the First Path.


[II. — IY. The Remaining Three Paths. Cf. §§ 862-864a.]

[553] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates the Jhana of the Higher Ideal (the
rapt meditation), whereby there is a going forth and
onward, making for the undoing of rebirth, and when, that
he may attain to the Second Stage, he has diminished the
strength of sensual passions and of malice 1 . . . [or] when,
that he may attain to the Third Stage, he has put away
the entire refsiduum of sensual passions and of malice . . .
[or] when, that he may attain to the Fourth Stage, he has
put away absolutely and entirely all passion for Form, all
passion for the Formless, all conceit, excitement, and ignor-
ance — and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from evil
ideas, enters into and abides in the First Jhana . . . pro-
gress whereto is difficult and intuition sluggish, then there
is contact . . . the faculty of knowledge made perfect 2 . . .
balance. Now these . . . are states that are good. 3

1 The passage which occurs here in the printed text, line 8
of the answer, viz*, vivicc’eva . . . down to phasso hoti,
seems to be a corrupt reading, presenting discrepancies
with that symmetry both of construction and elision which
usually marks Pitaka compilation. K. omits the phrase.

2 This term (afinindriyam hoti) is omitted in K.
It belongs, however, to the attainment of the Second Path
(see above, p. 96, n. 2), and is only superseded by the
intellectual climax of ahfiatavindriyam (§ 555). I do
not think, therefore, that it is a wrong reading.

3 Avyakata here in the printed text should of course be
kusala.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



150


But when, as the result of just this good Jhana having
been wrought, having been cultivated in pursuit of the
Higher Ideal, he, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof
from evil ideas, enters into and abides in the First
Jhana • • . progress whereto is difficult and intuition
sluggish, and which is Empty, then there is contact
. . . the faculty of one whose knowledge is made per-
fect . . . balance. And these . . . are states that are
indeterminate.

[554] Question and answer on 1 contact * as above 'passim .

[555] What on that occasion is the faculty of one whose
knowledge is made perfect (aililatavindriyam)? 1 * *

The perfected knowledge, the science, the understanding
of the doctrines of those whose knowledge is made perfect,
their searching, research, searching the Truth; discern-
ment, discrimination, differentiation ; erudition, proficiency,
subtlety ; criticism, reflection, analysis ; breadth, sagacity,
leading; insight, intelligence, incitement; wisdom as
faculty and as power ; wisdom as a sword, as a height,
as light, as glory, as splendour, as a precious stone ; the
absence of dulness, searching the Truth, right views, that
searching the truth which is a factor in the Great Awaken-
ing ; a Path-component, contained in the Path — this is on


1 I am not up to the present aware whether this term
occurs anywhere else in the Three Pitakas. By Buddha-
ghosa (Asl. 291) it is defined as the distinctive ‘ faculty of
the anfiatavl (lit., the holder of things known), of him
who, in the philosophy of the Four Truths, has completed

what was to be done.’ And the ‘ doctrines ’ mentioned in
the answer are defined as the associated or constituent
doctrines, 4 within ’ which the subject has attained pro-
ficiency, or which he has mastered inwardly (sampayutta-

dhammanam . . . thitanam dhammanam abbhan-
tare).

Possibly, however, dhammanam refers to those intel-
lectual states as mastered and controlled by the anil a -
tavin, which are comprised in the answer.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



151


that occasion the faculty of one whose knowledge is made
perfect.

SjC *•* •»' V

Or 1 whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion, these are states that are inde-
terminate.

[Here ends] result in connexion with the Higher Ideal.

[B — Bad Karma. 2 *

(a) The Five Modes of Sense -Cognition.]

[556] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of bad karma having been wrought,
having been stored up, visual cognition has arisen, accom-
panied by disinterestedness and having as its object a
sight . . . auditory cognition has arisen, accompanied by
disinterestedness and having as its object a sound . . .
olfactory cognition has arisen, accompanied by disinter-
estedness and having as its object a smell . . . gustatory
cognition has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness
and having as its object a taste . . . cognition of body has
arisen, accompanied by distress and having as its object
something tangible, then there is


1 Avikkhepo hoti ... pe ... as included in the
printed text, is omitted in K. It is, however, not incorrect,
since a description of constituent states, beginning with
4 contact ’ and ending with 4 balance,’ similar to that given
in §§ 278-887, and only differing by the substitution of
4 the faculty of one whose knowledge is made perfect ’ for
‘ the faculty of believing that I shall come to know the
Unknown,’ is here supposed to be fully rehearsed. As it
stands, however, it is a little misleading.

2 With section B, and its three subdivisions a to c, compare

the co-ordinate results of good karma described above,

§§ 481-468 and 484-497. Under B happy results are out
of the question, the determining antecedents having been
evil.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



152


contact, thinking,

feeling, thought,

perception, distress,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
ideation,
distress,
vitality. 1

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally
induced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.

[557] Question and answer on ‘ contact ’ as above passim.

[558] What on that occasion is feeling ?

The bodily pain, the bodily distress which, on that occa-
sion, is born of contact with the appropriate element of
cognition of body ; the painful, distressful sensation which
is born of contact with the body ; the painful, distressful
feeling which is born of contact with the body — this is the
feeling that there then is.

[559] What on that occasion is distress ?

The bodily pain, the bodily distress which, on that occa-
sion, is the painful, distressful sensation born of contact
with the body; the painful, distressful feeling born of
contact with the body — this is the distress that there
then is.

[560] What on that occasion is the faculty of distress ?

Answer as in § 559.


1 Judging by the corresponding answer respecting good
karma in § 448, the . . . pe . . . here appended in the
printed text is erroneous. K. omits it.

This list and the following sections (557-560) apply to
the last-named mode of sense-cognition, namely, that of
body. In the case of the other modes, ‘ disinterestedness ’
instead of ‘ distress * would occasion to certain questions
different answers.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


158


Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion, these are states that are inde-
terminate.

[Summary.]

[560a] Now at that time

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are three,
contact,
etc.

[Continue as in § 58.]

the faculty of ideation counts as a single factor,
the element of the cognition of body 1 counts as
a single factor.

the sphere of [mental] states counts as a single
factor,
etc.

[Continue as in §§ 58-61.]
******

[561] What on that occasion is the skandha of syntheses ?
Contact, discursive thought,

thinking, self-collectedness ;

conception, the faculty of vitality.

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas of
feeling, perception and intellect — these are the skandha of
syntheses.

******
[Continue as in § 63, etc.]


1 For mano- vinfianadhatu in the printed text read
kaya-vinfianadhatu.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



154


[(b) The Element of Ideation .]

[562] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of bad karma having been wrought,
having been stored up, an element of ideation has arisen,
accompanied by disinterestedness, and having as its object
a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, something tangible or
what not, then there is

contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

perception, discursive thought,

thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of

ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally in-
duced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.

* * ❖ *

[Summary.]

[562a] This, including the description of the appropriate
skandha of syntheses [568], is identical with the correspond-
ing Summary, §§ 467a, 468.

[(c) The Element of Representative Intellection.]

[564] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When, as the result of bad karma having been wrought,
having been stored up, an element of representative in-
tellection has arisen, accompanied by disinterestedness,
and having as its object a sight, etc., 1 or what not, then
there is

contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

_ ” 1 Cf. § 562.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



155


perception, discursive thought,

thinking, self-collectedness ;

the faculties of

ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally in-
duced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.

******

[ Continue as i n §§ 485-496.]

[Summary.]

[564a, 565] This , including the description of the appro-
priate skandha of syntheses, is identical with §§ 496a, 497.

[Here end] the Indeterminates which are the result of
Bad [Karma].


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter II.

Action-thoughts. 1

A. In connexion with the Sensuous Universe.

(a) On occasion of Ideation (kamavacara-kiriya).]

[566] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When an element of ideation of the kind termed kiriya

1 I have borrowed for a title the term kiriya-cittam
from Ash 298. The later form is kriya-cittam (see
Abh. S., p. 2 et seq . ; Bastian’s ‘ Buddhistische Psychologic,’
Anhang). Kiriya is discussed in my Introduction. The
Cy. has the following on the term: ‘Kiriya here means
simply doing (karana-matt am). In all kiriya-thoughts
those in which the stage of javanam is attained are like
wind-blown blossoms, but those in which that stage is not
attained are like blossoms where the tree has been felled,
barren of fruit. But when this or that is kept going in the
performance of function, then there is “ doing ” pure and
simple. Hence the term kiriya is used.’ Now, javanam,
according to Buddhaghosa (Sum. I., 195), is the effective
outcome of an act of cognition, the stage when the mind or
character of the percipient subject is modified (ethically) in
one way or another. But in the species of indeterminate
thoughts termed kiriya there can be no practical out-
come for good or bad, no karma can be set free. Hence
the simile of the sterile blossoms. The Abh. S. gives
also three species of non-causative kriya-thoughts as con-
nected with the sensuous universe — reflection on sense-
impressions, reflection on ideas, and the genesis of mirth
(hasituppada-cittam). These correspond fairly well to
the three given in the Dh. S., if the two modes of representa-
tive intellection be taken in inverted order.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



157


has arisen, 1 which is neither good nor bad nor the result
of karma, which is accompanied by disinterestedness, and
which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste,

something tangible, or what not, then there is

contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

perception, discursive thought,

thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ; 2
the faculties of]

ideation,

disinterestedness,

vitality.

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally in-
duced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.


[Summary.]

[566a] Now, at that time

the skandhas are four,


1 According to the Cy., the ideation which is kiriya
differs from the ideation which is result only in the mode of
its arising (upattitthanam). The latter arises imme-
diately after the act of sense-cognition. The former arises
while sensation is actually proceeding, while the organism
is being turned towards the object (Asl. 294). Again (ibid.),
that the thought is ‘ neither good nor bad ’ means the
absence of that cause of good or of bad which is termed the
root of the one or of the other ; it means the absence of
those conditions of good or of bad which are termed con-
sidering things by way of their causes (yoniso-mana-
sikara), or not so considering them. ‘Nor the result of
karma’ means the absence of the generative cause (jana-
kahetu), known as good or bad (as the case may be).
Asl. 293. The marginal reading in the last sentence is
obviously right.

2 With its minimum connotation, i.e ., as in § 488 and
elsewhere (Asl. 293).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



158


the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are three,
contact,
etc.

******

[567] The skandha of syntheses {as well as the remainder
of the foregoing summai'y) is identical with the coiTesponding
passages in Chapter I., viz., §§ 467a, 468.

* * * * * *


(b) On occasion of Representative Intellection.

1 .

[568] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?
When an element of representative intellection of the kind
termed kiriyd has arisen, which is neither good nor bad nor
the result of karma, which is accompanied by happiness, 1


1 The Cy. (p. 294) pronounces this species of thought
not common to men, but peculiar to the arahat. 1 It is
obtained in the si? doors/ e.g., when an arahat sees a spot
(than am) favourable to one of those prescribed spiritual
wrestlings termed padhanani [sic lege cf. below, § 1866,
(v.)], ‘ by this thought he is gladdened.’ When he comes to
a market-place, ‘ hears the uproar of the bargaining, and
thinks, “ I have done with all this thirst for gain,” by this
thought he is gladdened. When he has made an offering
of fragrant odours or flowers at the shrine, by this thought
he is gladdened. When he is tasting the food he has
received as ordained, and thinks, “Verily I have carried
out the doctrine incumbent upon me,” by this thought he
is gladdened. When he is carrying out minor rules con-
cerning the body, and thinks, “ I have fulfilled the rules
concerning the door of the body,” by this thought he is
gladdened. Such is this kind of intellection when obtained
in connexion with the “fivefold door.” In connexion
with the door of ideation , it arises with reference to the


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



159


and which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell, a
taste, something tangible, or what not, then there is


contact,

feeling,

perception,

thinking,

thought,

the faculties of
energy,
concentration,


conception,
discursive thought,

joy*

ease,

self-collectedness ;

ideation,

happiness,


vitality.

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally
induced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.

[569] Question and answer on ‘ contact ’ as above passim.


[570] What on that occasion is self-collectedness ?

The stability, solidity, absorbed steadfastness of thought
which on that occasion is the absence of distraction, balance,
imperturbed mental procedure, quiet, the faculty and the
power of concentration 1 — this is the self-collectedness that
there then is.

******

[571] What on that occasion is the faculty of energy . . .

[572] of concentration ?

Answers as in § 18 and § 570 respectively .

* * * * * *


past and the future.* As, for instance, when the Buddha
smiled at the recollection of occurrences in certain of his
former births, or, again, when he foresaw this and that.

1 It might have been expected that this ‘power’ as well as
that of ‘ energy ’ would have found a place in the enumera-
tion of the constituent states. The Cy. (p. 295) explains
that ‘ concentration ’ and ‘ energy ’ are not present in full
strength. It follows that no ‘ powers * are included in the
summary.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



160


[Summary,]

[572a] Now at that time

the skandhas are four,
the spheres are two,
the elements are two,
the nutriments are three,
the faculties are five,
contact,
etc.

[Continue as in § 482a.]

[578] What on that occasion is the skandha of syn-
theses ?

Contact,
thinking,
conception,
discursive thought,

joy,

self-collectedness,
the faculties of
energy,
concentration,
vitality.

Or whatever other incorporeal, causally induced states
there are on that occasion, exclusive of the skandhas of
feeling, perception, and intellect — these are the skandha of
syntheses.


2 .

[574] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?
When an element of representative intellection of the
kind termed kiriya has arisen, which is neither good, nor
bad, nor the result of karma, which is accompanied by dis-


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



161


interestedness, 1 * * * * and which has as its object a sight, a
sound, a smell, a taste, something tangible, or what not,
then there is

contact, thought,

feeling, conception,

perception, discursive thought,

thinking, disinterestedness,

self-collectedness ;
the faculties of
energy, ideation,

concentration, disinterestedness,

vitality.

Now these, or whatever other incorporeal, causally in-
duced states there are on that occasion — these are states
that are indeterminate.


[Summary.]

[574a] Identical with 572 a.

V ^ *1* V H*

[575] The sk&ndha of syntheses is identical with that in
§ 578, but 6 joy ’ must be omitted .


3 -

[576] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When an element of representative intellection of the

1 This kind of thought, unlike the last, is, says the Cy.

(295), common to all intelligent (sacittaka) beings; in

fact, there is none such who does not experience it. (The

marginal reading is here evidently the more correct.) If it

arise in connexion with the * five doors,’ it is an act of

establishing ; if in connexion with the door of ideation, it
is an act of reflection. By it the six specific channels of
cognition lay hold of their several objects.

11


ed by CjjOCK^Ic



162


kind termed kiriya has arisen that is neither good, nor bad,
nor the result of karma — (I.) 1 which is accompanied by
happiness and associated with knowledge . . . (II.) which is
accompanied by happiness, associated with knowledge, and
prompted by a conscious motive . . . (III.) which is accom-
panied by happiness and disconnected with knowledge . . .
(IY.) which is accompanied by happiness, disconnected
with knowledge and prompted by a conscious motive . . .
(Y.) which is accompanied by disinterestedness and associ-
ated with knowledge . . . (VI.) which is accompanied by
disinterestedness, associated with knowledge and prompted
by a conscious motive . . . (VII.) which is accompanied
by disinterestedness and disconnected with knowledge . . .
(VIII.) which is accompanied by disinterestedness, discon-
nected with knowledge and prompted by a conscious motive
— and which has as its object a sight, a sound, a smell,
a taste, something tangible, or what not— then there is
contact . . . balance. Now these ... are states that are
indeterminate.

******

[576a] That absence of lust which is the root of the
indeterminate . . .

that absence of hate which is the root of the inde-
terminate . . .

that absence of dulness which is the root of the inde-
terminate . . .

these are states that are indeterminate. 2

******

[B. In connexion with the Universe of Form (rupa-
vacar a-kiriy a).]


1 The Latin numerals refer to the Eight Main Types of
Thought set forth in the first 159 sections of this work. In
this connexion, however, they are no longer effective as
4 good/ i.e., as producing good karma.

2 See above, § 498a.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



168


[577] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates rapt meditation in connexion with the

universe of Form, and of the kind termed kiriyd which is
neither good, nor bad, nor the result of karma, and which is
concerned with easeful living under present conditions 1 —
and so, aloof from sensuous appetites, aloof from evil
ideas, by earth-gazing, enters into and abides in the First
Jhana . . . then there is contact . . . balance. Now
these . . . are states that are indeterminate.

[578] Repeat in the case of each remaining Jhdna on the
Fourfold , and of those on the Fivefold System.


[C. In connexion with the Universe of the Formless
(arupavaca ra-kiriy a).]

[579] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

When he cultivates rapt meditation in connexion with
the universe of the Formless, of the kind termed kiriyd ,
which is neither good, nor bad, nor the result of karma, and
is concerned with easeful living under present conditions —
and when, by passing wholly beyond all consciousness of
form, by the dying out of the consciousness of sensory
reaction, by turning the attention from any consciousness
of the manifold, he enters into and abides in that rapt
meditation which is accompanied by the consciousness of a
sphere of unbounded space — even the Fourth Jhana, to
gain which all sense of ease must have been put away, etc.
. . . then there is contact . . . balance. Now these . . .
are states that are indeterminate.


1 Dittha-dhammasukha-vihdrajn. In this individual ex-
istence (imasmim attabhave), explains the Cy. (296.
On this term, cf below, p. 175, n. 1). In Sum. I., 121 the
paraphrase runs, * that state of existence one happens to
have got. 1 Cf * Dialogues of the Buddha/ I. 50, n. The
passage there commented upon (D. I. 87) is the heresy which
holds that Jhana constituted an equivalent for Nirvana.

11—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



164


[680-582] Here follow , with the same opening formula as
in the foregoing answer, the three remaining € Jhanas con-
nected with Formless Existence.’ See §§ 266-268.
******

[582a] That absence of lust which is the root of the
indeterminate . . . that absence of hate which is the root
of the indeterminate . . . that absence of dulness which is
the root of the indeterminate . . . these . . . are states
that are indeterminate. 1

******

[Here ends] the Division on the Genesis of Thoughts.


1 In K. a footnote is here appended, drawing attention to
the apparent discrepancy in the fact that this passage,
hitherto given under the universe of sense [§§ 498a, 576a],
is here associated with the universe of the Formless. This,
it adds, should be accepted after due deliberation.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


[BOOK II.

Form (rupakandam).

Introductory.]

[588] Which are the states that are indeterminate ? 1

The results of good and bad states taking effect in the
universe of sense, in that of form, in that of the formless
or in [the life] which is Unincluded, 2 and as connected with
the skandhas of feeling, perception, syntheses, and intellect ;*
as well as those states known as kiriya which are neither
good, nor bad, nor the result of karma ; all form, moreover ;


1 The subject of the Ethically Indetermjnajje has not
been exhausted by the inquiry into Vipako*and Kiriya.
It includes two other species: Form (or External Phe-
nomena) and Nirvana (Uncompounded Element). (Asl.
296.) Hence it is that the following inquiry into ‘ Form *
as objective and subjective phenomenon is led up to by a
question connecting it with the foregoing inquiry into the
genesis of ‘ thought,’ which is presented from the point of
view of a-rupino dhamma, or formless (incorporeal)
states of consciousness.

2 Apariyapanna. This term, which is often employed
in Book IIL, and which is intended to convey a sense of
the * apartness ’ of the pursuit of the Highest from all
lower aims, is dealt with below (§ 992).

8 I follow, here as often elsewhere, the punctuation of K.
In this identical answer later on, however, K. is self-incon-
sistent, placing a colon before, and a comma after, the
enumeration of the skandhas. See § 988. One or the other
is probably an inadvertency.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



166


and [finally] Uncompounded Element 1 — these are states
that are indeterminate.

[584] In this connexion what is ‘ all form * (sabbam
rupam) ?

The four great phenomena 2 and that form which is
derived from the four great phenomena — this is what is
called 4 all form.’ 3

[584-594] Here follows the Mdtikd , or table of contents of
the following analysis of Form , considered under quantitative
categories — the usual Buddhist method . That is to say>
Form is considered , first , under a number of single , uncorre-
lated qualities , then under dichotomized qualities , then under


1 Asankhata ca dhatu. This term, which both
Buddhaghosa and the original Atthakatha (see § 1,876 in
printed text of Dh. S.) identify with Nirvana, occurs often
in this connexion with its opposite 4 all form ’ (r. p. 168, n. 8)
in Book III. I do not know whether this, so to speak, cos-
mological conception of the Ethical Ideal occurs in the older
books of the Pitakas, or whether, indeed, the commentators
have not laid upon the physical term more than it was
intended to bear — a connotation that derives perhaps from
the 4 scholastic ’ ages of Buddhism. For example, in
§§ 1016-1018 of the present work, to identify uncompounded
element with Nirvana, just after it has been opposed to the
4 topmost fruit of arahatship,’ would apparently land the
compilers in a grave inconsistency. I have yet to meet with
a passage in the first two Pitaxas which establishes the
identification. In the Milinda-paftho, giving the traditional
doctrine of an age half-way between Pitakas and Com-
mentaries, we can see the theory of Nirvana as the one
asankhatam developing. See pp. 268 seq . Cf also K. V.
817-80.

2 Mahdbhutdni , that is, the four elements, literally, the
things-that-have-become, die grossen Geivordenen , ra 7*71/6-
peva — a far more scientific term than elements or oroixcia.
See further below, §§ 597, 647 et seq .

3 The various implications of the term rwpam , such
as objective phenomena, concrete or compound, the object
of the sense of sight, material existence without sensuous
appetite, etc., are discussed in my Introduction (ii.).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



167


qualities which , taken singly , give inclusion , inclusion under
the opposite, or exclusion from both ; or which, taken in pairs,
afford three combinations . We then get pairs of qualities

taken together, affording four combinations . After that comes
consideration of Foim under more inductive classifications,
e.g., the four elements and, fifthly, their derivatives, and so on,
as given below .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter I.

Exposition of Form under Single Concepts (ekaka-
niddeso).]

[595] All form is that which is
not a cause,

not the concomitant of a cause,

disconnected with cause, 1

conditioned, 2

compound, 3

endowed with form, 4

mundane, 5

co-intoxicant, 6


1 Na hetum eva. On the Commentator’s analysis of
the meanings of 4 cause, 1 see under § 1058. The special
connotation here is that ‘ form * as such is not the ground
or 4 root/ or psychical associate of any moral or immoral
result. Asl. 808. The two following terms are dealt with
under §§ 1074, 1076.

2 Sappaccayam. Cf. § 1083.

8 Sankhatam. This quality is involved in the pre-
ceding quality. See § 1085. See also above, p. 166, n. 1.

4 Rupiyam, or rupam eva. The table of contents
(§ 584) gives the former ; K has here the latter. Either
the one or the other has been omitted from the present
section of the printed text. The Cy. gives the latter term
— Rupam eva ti rupino dhamma, etc. Asl. 804.

6 Lokiyam; the antithesis of lokuttaram. Cf.
§ 1093.

0 Sasavam. See § 1096 et seq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



169


favourable to

the Fetters, 1
the Ties,
the Floods,
the Bonds,
the Hindrances ;
infected, 2

favourable to grasping, 3
belonging to corruption, 4 *
indeterminate,
void of idea, 6

neither feeling, nor perception, nor synthesis,®
disconnected with thought,
neither moral result, nor productive of moral
result, 7

uncorrupted yet belonging to corruption, 8
not that * where conception works and thought
discursive, 9

not that ‘ wherein is no working of conception,
but only of thought discursive,’
void of ‘the working of conception and of
thought discursive,’


1 Sanfiojaniyam, etc. This and the four following
terms are severally discussed in connexion with the ethical
metaphors of Fetters and the rest. See § 1118 et seq.

2 Paramattham. See § 1174 et seq.

3 Upadaniyam. See § 990 and § 1218 et seq .

4 Sankilesikam. See § 998 and § 1229 et seq.

6 Anarammanam, the idea or mental object belonging,
of course, to the arupa-dhammo.

6 Acetasikam. See § 1022.

7 See § 989.

8 See § 994.

9 Na savitakka-savicaram. This and the two
following technical terms mark off ‘ form ’ from the mental
discipline of Jhana, even though Jhana may be practised
for the sake of passing from a sensuous existence to the
‘ universe of Form.’ Cf. §§ 160, 168, 161, and 996-998.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



170


not ‘ accompanied by joy,’
not ‘ accompanied by ease,’
not ‘ accompanied by disinterestedness,’ 1
not something capable of being got rid of
either by insight or by cultivation,
not that the cause of which may be got rid of
either by insight or by cultivation,
neither tending to, nor away from, the
accumulation involving re-birth,
belonging neither to studentship nor to that
which is beyond studentship,
limited, 2 *

related to the universe of sense,
not related to the universe of form, 8
nor to that of the formless,
included,

not of the Unincluded, 4 *
not something entailing inevitable retri-
bution, 6 *

unavailing for (ethical) guidance,
cognizable when apparent 6 by the six modes
of cognition,


1 Cf. §§ 999-1001. These are all mental states,
characterizing the other four skandhas, not the rupak-
khandho. Similarly, the four following doctrinal ex-
pressions are only applicable to mental and moral
categories. Cf. §§ 1007-1118.

2 Parittam. See § 1019.

8 Bead na rupavacaram.

4 See p. 165, n. 2.

6 This and the following term belong to ethical, im-
material categories of thought. See §§ 1028-1080 and
1291 ; also 1288, 1289, and 277.

6 I.e.y remarks the Commentator, when it is present (in
consciousness). ‘ For, strictly speaking, with reference to
visual and other sense-cognition, they ( read na hi tani)

do not cognize the past and future ; that is the function of

representative cognition (manovihfianam) * (Asl. 804).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



171


impermanent, 1
subject to decay.

Such is the category of Form considered by way of single
attributes. 2


1 Aniccam, * inasmuch as, having fallen into this stream
of sense-cognition it (‘ form ’) has become mere flotsam, has
become something gone, something that is not ’ (ibid.). This
shows well the idealist or psychological standpoint of the
Buddhist tradition. Form is impermanent for the individual
perceptive consciousness.

2 The Cy. gives as the reason for there being no cate-
chism on each of the foregoing attributes the fact that there
is no correlated opposite, as in the next category, from which
each term is to be differentiated (Asl. 808). This, in view
of the procedure in Book I., is scarcely adequate. However,
every term is examined in the sequel, as the foregoing notes
will have indicated.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter II.


The Category of Form considered by way of dual
attributes — positive and negative (duvidhena rupa-
sangaho).

‘ There is form which is derived.'] 1

[5961 What is that form which is derived ?

The sphere 2 3 of

vision, smell,

hearing, taste,

body-sensibility ; s

the sphere of

sights, odours,

sounds, tastes ;

the faculties of

femininity, masculinity,

vitality ;


1 This and the following italicised headings are quoted

from the table of contents, § 585, etc. — atthi rupam
upada, and again, atthi rupam no upada. The abla-
tive resembles our idiom ‘ qud derived ’ — form as derived.
In § 584 and in § 597, etc. the gerund up ad ay a is em-
ployed. Depending on, not released from, is the paraphrase
(Asl. 800, 805). * Grounded in * were an approximate

rendering, the literal meaning being ( taking hold of.’

2 Ayatanam. The word means (see my Introduction)
simply ‘ field,’ locus, range, Gebiet.

3 Lit. body. The Upanishads use * skin.’ Cf. our
modern term * skin-sensibility,’ in extension of ‘ touch,’
‘ tactile sense.’ The corresponding objective ‘ sphere of the
tangible ’ is classed among things imderived. See § 647.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



173


intimation

by act,
by speech ;
the element of space ;
buoyancy,
plasticity,
wieldiness,
integration,
maintenance,
decay,

impermanence,
solid nutriment.

[597] What is that form which is the sphere of vision
(cakkhayatanam) ?

The eye, 1 that is to say the sentient organ, 2 derived from

1 Cakkhu, which stands for vision, sense of sight and
eye. ‘ Eye,’ however, is always in the present work to be
understood as the seeing faculty or visual sense, and not as
the physical organ or ‘eye of flesh’ (mamsa-cakkhu).
The Cy. gives an account of the eye, of which the following
is the substance: First the aggregate organism (sasam-
bhara-cakkhu). A ball of flesh fixed in a cavity, bound
by the socket-bone beneath and by the bone of the eyebrow
above, by the angles of the eye at the sides, by the brain
within and by the eyelashes without. There are fourteen
constituents : the four elements, the six attributes dependent
on them, viz., colour, odour, taste, sap of life, form (san-
thanam), and collocation (sambhavo); vitality, nature,
body- sensibility (kayappasado) and the visual sentient
organ. The last four have their source in karma. When
4 the world,’ seeing an obvious extended white object fancies
it perceives the eye, it only perceives the basis (or seat
— vatthu) of the eye. And this ball of flesh, bound to the
brain by nerve-fibres, is white, black and red, and contains
the solid, the liquid, the lambent and the gaseous. It is
white by superfluity of humour, black by superfluity of
bile, red by superfluity of blood, rigid by superfluity of the
solid, exuding by superfluity of the liquid, inflamed by

2 See note on p. 174.



ed by CjjOCK^Ic



174


the Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of tlie
self, 1 invisible and reacting 2 — by which eye, invisible and


superfluity of the lambent, quivering by superfluity of
the gaseous. But that sentient organ (pas ado) which
is there bound, inherent, derived from the four great
principles — this is the visual sense (pasadacakkhu).
Placed in the midst and in the front of the black disc of
the composite eye, the white disc surrounding it ( note that
the iris is either not distinguished or is itself the 4 black
disc ’) and in the circle of vision, in the region where the
forms of adjacent bodies come to appear (tfier e seems here
same omission in the text), it permeates the seven ocular
membranes as sprinkled oil will permeate seven cotton
wicks. And so it stands, aided by the four elements, sus-
taining, binding, maturing, moving (samudlranam) —
like an infant prince and his four nurses, feeding, bathing,
dressing and fanning him — maintained by nutriment both
physical (utu) and mental, protected by the (normal) span
of life, invested with colour, smell, taste and so forth, in
size the measure of a louse’s head — stands duly consti-
tuting itself the door of the seat of visual cognitions, etc.
For as it has been said by the Commander of the Doctrine
(Sariputta) :

The visual sense by which he beholds forms

Is small and delicate, comparable to a louse’s head.

The elaborate architectonics of this paragraph in the
original is a fine effort of the Commentator’s style. I am
not clear to what the 4 etc.’ after 4 cognitions ’ alludes. But
the expression occurs in the description of each sense. Cf.
the description in Hardy, 4 Man. of Buddhism,’ p. 419.

3 Pasado. By selecting this term, continues the Cy.,
he (the Buddha) rejects the other (physical) eye. So far as
I know, the as yet unidentified verses quoted in the previous
note are the only early instance of the word pasado, mean-
ing literally clearness, brightness, serenity, faith, being used
to denote the receptive reacting sense-agency. It is not
easy to divine exactly how the Buddhists came to use the
word in this connexion. It is used co-ordinately for all the
other senses, hence the sensuous signification had nothing
to do with the specific nature of sight (unless this was


1 See note 1 on p. 175. 2 See note 2 on p. 175.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



175


reacting, one 3 has seen, sees, will, or may see form that is
visible and impingeing — this that is sight, the sphere of
sight, the element of vision, the faculty of vision, this that
is ‘a world/ 4 ‘a door/ ‘an ocean/ ‘lucent/ ‘a field/ ‘a

made the Type of all other sensation). Taken causatively
it may conceivably have meant either that which makes
clear — a revealer, as it were (cf. Bothl. and Eoth — prasa-
dana), or that which gratifies or satisfies ( Beruhigen ),
both meanings emphasizing psychological process, rather
than ‘ product * or ‘ seat.’

1 Attabhava-pariyapanno. ‘ The body and the five
skandhas are here termed nature of the self, after the usage
of foolish folk who say, “ This is myself ” ’ (Asl. 808). Thus
the usage of attabhavd was a concession on the part of
the Great Teacher to animistic phraseology.

2 ‘ l.e., impact and reaction are set up in the eye ’ (ibid.).

3 Paraphrased by ay am satto, any given individual
(ibid.).

4 This and the following similes will be quotations of
metaphors applied to the senses in the Sutta Pitaka.
E.g., that of the ‘ empty village ’ occurs in S. iv. 174 —
SunfLo gamo ti kho, bhikkhave, channam ajjhat-
tikanam [? ayatananam] adhivacanam. That of a
‘ door/ which in the age of the Commentaries was the
regular term for sense-organ, is, I believe, seldom used in
the Sutta Pitaka, and then only as a poetical figure, not as
a technical term. Cf, e.g., indriyesuguttadva.ro (D I.,
68, 250). Buddhaghosa simply paraphrases the various
metaphors — ‘world/ by reason of wasting and decay;
‘ door/ by reason of customary resort ; ‘ ocean/ by reason
of its insatiableness ; ‘ lucent/ by reason of its purity ;

‘ field/ by reason of the springing up (growth) of contact,
etc. ; ‘ base/ by reason of its fixed seat ; ‘guide/ ‘guidance/
by reason of its leading the nature-of- the* self showing
agreements and differences ; ‘ hither shore/ by reason of
its being included in the ‘ body of this life ’ (or individu-
ality, sakkayam) ; ‘ empty village/ because it is common
to many, because there is no headman ( i.e ., Ego or soul.
‘ Many ’ must mean the individual considered as an aggre-
gate of constituents.) The metaphors, it will be seen, are
applied equally, with the sole exception of ‘ guide * and
‘ guidance/ to each remaining sense. By the explanation
of these two figures given in the Cy., they should have been


ed by CjOCK^Ic



176


basis/ 1 a guide/ ‘ guidance/ the 1 hither shore/ an ‘ empty
village ' — this is that form which constitutes the sphere of
vision.

[598] What is that form which is the sphere of vision ?
The eye, that is to say the sentient organ, derived from the

four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of the
self, invisible and reacting, and against which eye, invisible
and reacting, form that is visible and impingeing, has
impinged, 1 impinges, will, or may impinge — this that is
sight, the sphere of sight, the constituent element of sight,
etc. [continue as in § 597].

[599] What is that form which is the sphere of vision ?
The eye, that is to say the sentient organ, derived from

the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of
the self, invisible and reacting, which eye, invisible and
reacting, has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge on
form 2 that is visible and impingeing — this that is sight, the
sphere of sight, etc. [continue as in § 597].

[600] What is that form which is the sphere of vision ?
The eye, that is to say the sentient organ, derived from

the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of
the self, invisible and reacting, (i.) depending on which eye,
in consequence of some visible form/ there has arisen,
arises, will, or may arise

visual contact ; 4 . . .


left to stand for each sense. Buddhaghosa, however, is
of course not responsible for the expressions used in the
Pitakas. Yet it is slightly disappointing that he makes no
effort to account for an omission which is not without
psychological justification.

1 In this answer, according to the Cy. (p. 809), in-
voluntary visual sensation is described, as when lightning
flashes on the sight of one not looking for it.

2 Here (Asl. 809) we have voluntary sense-impression
described — the process in the case of one * who, by his own
desire, seeking to look at some object, concentrates his
vision/

8 Cakkhum nissaya, rupam arabbha.

4 Here there should be in the text ... pe ... as in


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



177


(ii.) and depending on which eye, in consequence of some
visible form, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise —
born of that visual contact —

a feeling . . .

[or iii.] a perception . . .

[or iv.] thinking . . .

[or v.] a visual cognition 1 . . .

[further, vi.] depending on 2 which eye, and having a
visible form as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or
may arise

visual contact,

<vii.) and depending on which eye, and having a visible
form as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may
arise, bom of that visual contact,

a feeling . . .

[or viii.] a perception . . .


the corresponding passage for the other four senses. Cf.
note 4. In K. it is also inadvertently omitted here.

1 Cakkhuvifinanam here replaces the fourth mode of
consciousness, cittam, or thought, in the series invariably
stated as aroused by ‘ contact ’ in connexion with the Eight
Types of Thought given in Book I, chap. i. Thinking
(cetana) may stand for a train of ideas set going by the
sensation having no special reference to the visible object
as such. Visual cognition, on the other hand, would take
special account of the thing seen. Or possibly the two are
to be considered as corresponding approximately to process
and product. Cf. what has been said above on both terms,
p. 8, n. 1.

2 Judging by the corresponding passages in §§ 604, 608,
612, 616, by K. and by the comments of Buddhaghosa, I find
that the following passage has been erroneously omitted in
the text before the words cakkhum p’etam: — . . . pe
... yam cakkhum niss ay a ruparammano cakkhu-
samphasso uppajji va uppajjati va uppajjissati
va uppajje va, yam cakkhum nissaya ruparam-
mana cakkhusamphassaj a vedana . . . pe . . .
saniia . . . pe . . . cetana . . . pe . . . cakkhuvin-
nanam uppajji va uppajjati va uppajji va
uppajje va. Cf. also § 620.

12


ed by CjOCK^Ic



178


[or ix.] thinking . . .

[or x.] visual cognition —

this that is sight, the sphere of sight, etc. [continue an in
§ 597]. 1

[601-604] What is that form which is the sphere of
hearing ?

The ear, that is to say the sentient organ, 2 derived from
the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of
the self, invisible and reacting, —

(a) by which ear, invisible and reacting, one has heard,
hears, will, or may hear sound that is invisible and im-
pingeing

(b) against which ear, invisible and reacting, sound that
is invisible and impingeing, has impinged, impinges, will,
or may impinge ; —

(c) which ear, invisible and reacting, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge on sound that is invisible
and impingeing ; —

(d) depending on which ear, in consequence of a sound,
there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise

auditory contact ; . . .

and, depending on which ear, in consequence of a


1 According to the Cy. (810), this reply, when rehearsed
in full, reveals ten distinct answers, each commencing with
the refrain : * The eye, that is to say,* etc., to ‘ self, in-
visible and reacting.’ They may be summarized and
generalized thus: (i.) Sense - impression or contact, as
conditioned by sense-organ and sense-stimulus, (ii.) Re-
sultant feeling, (iii.-v.) Resultant intellectual states,
(vi.) Sense-impression or contact, as conditioned by sense-
organ and idea of sense-object, (vii.-x.) Resultant states as
in (ii.-v). What was precisely the difference between the
processes named as (i.) and (vi.) it is not yet easy to deter-
mine with certainty.

2 This, situated within the cavity of the aggregate
organism of the ear, and well furnished with fine reddish
hairs, is in shape like a little finger-stall (anguli-ve-
thanaka). (Asl. 810.) Cf. Hardy, loc . cit.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


179


sound, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise, bom of
that auditory contact,

a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] auditory cognition ; —

[further] depending on which ear, and having a sound
as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise
auditory contact,

and, depending on which ear, and having a sound as its
object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise, born of
that auditory contact,

a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

. [or] thinking . . .

[or] auditory cognition

this that is hearing, the sphere of hearing, the constituent
element of hearing, the faculty of hearing, this that is 4 a
world,’ 4 a door,’ * an ocean/ 4 lucent/ 4 a field/ 4 a basis/ 1
4 the hither shore/ 4 an empty village ’ — this is that form
which is the sphere of hearing.

[605-608] What is that form which is the sphere of
smell ?

The nose, that is to say the sentient organ, 2 derived from
the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature of
the self, invisible and reacting, —

(a) by which nose, invisible and reacting, one has
smelt, smells, will, or may smell odour that is invisible
and impingeing ; —

(b) against which nose, invisible and reacting, odour
that is invisible and impingeing, has impinged, impinges,
will, or may impinge ; —

1 On the omission of 4 a guide/ etc., see p. 175, n. 4.

2 This is situated 4 inside the cavity of the aggregate
nasal organism, in appearance like a goat’s hoof.’ (Asl. 810).
Cf. Hardy, loc. cit. Probably the hoof is imagined as re-
garded from below.

12—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



180


(c) which nose, invisible and reacting, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge on odour that is invisible
and impingeing ; —

(d) depending on which nose, in consequence of an
odour . . . depending on which nose, and having an
odour as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may
arise

olfactory contact,

and, depending on which nose, in consequence of an
odour . . . depending on which nose, and having an
odour as its object, there has arisen, arises, will or may
arise, born of that olfactory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking ...

[or] olfactory cognition ; —

this that is smell, the sphere, the constituent element, the
faculty, of smell, this that is ‘ a world,’ etc. [continue as in
$ 604].

[609-612] What is that form which is the sphere of
taste?

The tongue, that is to say the sentient organ, 1 derived
from the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature
of the self, invisible and reacting ; —

(a) by which tongue, invisible and reacting, one has
tasted, tastes, will, or may taste sapids that are invisible
and impingeing ; —

(b) against which tongue, invisible and reacting, sapids
that are invisible and impingeing, have impinged, impinge,
will, or may impinge ; —

(c) which tongue, invisible and reacting, has impinged.


1 This is situated ‘ above the middle of the aggregate
gustatory organism, in appearance like the upper side of
the leaf of a lotus.’ (Asl., ibid.) Cf. Hardy, loc . cit.
The palate apparently was not included in the gustatory
apparatus.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


181


impinges, will, or may impinge on sapids that are invisible
and impingeing ; —

(d) depending on which tongue, in consequence of a
sapid . . . depending on which tongue, and having a
sapid as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may
arise

gustatory contact,

and depending on which tongue, in consequence of a
sapid . . . depending on which tongue, and having a
sapid as its object, there has arisen, arises, will, or may
arise, born of that gustatory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception ...

[or] thinking . . .

[or] gustatory cognition ; —

this that is taste, the sphere, the constituent element, the
faculty of taste, this that is ‘ a world,’ etc. [continue as in
§ 604].

[618-616] What is that form which is the sphere of body
[-sensibility] ?

The body, that is to say the sentient organ, 1 derived


1 The sphere of kayo — so runs the comment (Asl. 811)
— is diffused over the whole bodily form just as oil pervades
an entire cotton rag. With the exception of this quality of
relatively undifferentiated organ, the sense is co-ordinate
with the other senses. To the objection that, if the sensitive
surface be indeed so general it would convey confused im-
pressions, it is counter-asserted that, if it were not so
general, tactile impressions could not be adequately differ-
entiated. Strictly speaking the body-sense is both every-
where and not everywhere. Not everywhere to the extent
of being in things as seen or as tasted. We cannot segre-
gate and analyze sensations as we can grains of sand, and
hence qualities are said to coalesce in the object. Never-
theless each mode of sense conveys its specific messages. —
Such seems to me the substance of what I have clothed to
a slight extent in terms of Western psychology. The Corn-


ed by Google



182


from the four Great Phenomena, forming part of the nature
of the self, invisible and reacting ; —

(a) by which body-sensibility, invisible and reacting, one
has touched, touches, will, or may touch the tangible that
is invisible and impingeing ; —

( b ) against which body-sensibility, invisible and reacting,
the tangible, which is invisible and impingeing, has im-
pinged, impinges, will, or may impinge ; —

(c) which body-sensibility, invisible and reacting, has
impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge on the tangible
that is invisible and impingeing ; —

(< d ) depending on which body- sensibility, in consequence
of something tangible . . . depending on which body-
sensibility, and having something tangible as its object,
there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise
tactile contact, 1

and depending on which body-sensibility, in consequence of
something tangible . . . depending on which body-sensi-
bility, and having something tangible as its object, there
has arisen, arises, will, or may arise, bom of that tactile
contact,

a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] tactile cognition ; — 2

this that is body - sensibility, the sphere, constituent
element, faculty of body-sensibility, this that is ‘ a world,’
etc. [continue as in § 604].


mentary is of course tentative and groping, as elsewhere in
its theory of sense ; yet it must not be forgotten that it was
not till about fifty years ago that Ernst Weber’s ‘Der
Tastsinn und das Gemeingefiihl ’ appeared, containing the
positive results of a comparison of different skin-areas from
the standpoint of their varying ability to convey clear or
vague tactile impressions.

1 Literally, body-contact.

2 Literally, cognition of body, so rendered in § 448 seq.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



183


[617] What is that form which is the sphere of [visible]
form ?

The form which, derived from the great principles, is
visible under the appearance of colour and produces
impact 1 — is blue, 2 yellow, red, 3 white, black, 4 crimson, 6
bronze, 6 green-coloured, 7 of the hue of the mango- bud; 8 is
long, short, 9 big, little, circular, oval, square, hexagonal,
octagonal, hekkaidecagonal ; low, high, shady, glowing,
light, dim, dull, frosty, 10 smoky, dusty ; like in colour to the

1 Sappatigham, here paraphrased as producing (jana-
kam) reaction and impact. Asl. 817.

2 Compared to the ummapuppham, or flax-blossom.
Cf. my remark on nil am above, under § 246. Here the
term is illustrated by an azure flower, such as we ourselves
might quote as a type of blue. And yet even here the wide
range and indefiniteness of the word find expression. For
according to Bothl. and Roth, on the authority of Hema-
chandra, uma is applied to night.

3 Like the blossom of Pterospermum acerifolium and
Pentapetro phamicea respectively (ibid.). I give these on
Childers’ authority.

4 Like the morning star and charcoal respectively (ibid.).

5 Like the reddish buds of the Vitex ncgundo and
kanavira trees (ibid.).

6 Hari, omitted in the text, but given in K. and the
Cy. (ibid.). * Whereas, in the verse

Harittacahemavann am kamam sumukkhapa-
kama,

hari is spoken of as golden (suvannam), by its being
elsewhere taken in conjunction with coined gold (jataru-
pam), it is here meant as dark (samam)’ (ibid.). Cf.
Jat. V. 216, sama ti suvanna-sama.

7 The colour of green grass (ibid.).

8 K. and the Cy. read ambankuravannam.

9 See my Introduction, on ‘ long,’ short, as only indirectly
objects of sight. ‘ The foregoing seven visibles are set
forth without reference to any base (vatthu) ; the follow-
ing according to common usage ’ (ibid.).

10 Paraphrased as cloudy and as himam — which may be
frosty, snowy or dewy — respectively. As the allusion is
only to lustre-contrast, the sparkle of hoar-frost is probably
implied.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



184


disc of moon, 1 sun, stars, a mirror, 2 a gem, a shell, a pearl,
a cat’s eye, 8 gold 4 or silver ; 5 or whatever other form there
is which, derived from the four Great Phenomena, is visible
and productive of impact — form which, visible and pro-
ductive of impact, one has seen, sees, will, or may see
with the eye that is invisible and reacting — this which is
visible form, this which is the sphere of visible form, the
constituent element of visible form — this is that form which
is the sphere of visible form.

[618] What is that form which is the sphere of visible
form ?

That form which, derived from the Great Phenomena, is
visible under the appearance of colour and produces impact
. . . 6 on which form, visible and productive of impact, the
eye, invisible and impingeing, has impinged, impinges,
will, or may impinge — this that is visible form, etc. [con-
tinue as in § 617].

[619] What is that form which is the sphere of visible
form?

1 The following terms, says the Cy. (ibid.), illustrate
varieties of lustre. A little gratuitous astronomy is then
thrown in. The orb of the moon, viz., the mansion of
the moon-god, is 49 yojanas in extent, is made of gold
and roofed with silver. That of the sun is 50 yojanas, is
made of gold and roofed with crystal. The constellations,
the mansions of different gods, are 7, 8, or 10 yojanas
in extent, and are made of the seven jewels. Between the
moon below and the sun above is 1 yojana. The con-
stellations take two years in their orbit. They and the sun
go (sic) swiftly, the moon slowly. At times the moon leads,
at times she is behind.

2 Is of bronze (Asl. 818) .

3 Is not a gem ; is the colour of the bamboo (ibid.).

4 ‘ The Master’s colour ’ (ibid.).

[l Under kahapano,/ i.e., silver coin, masakas of
copper, wood, and lac are to be included (ibid.). Quoted
from Yin. iii. 288.

6 In this and the next two answers, according to K., the
list of typical forms given in § 617 is to be rehearsed each
time in full.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


185


That form which, derived from the Great Phenomena, is
visible under the appearance of colour and produces impact
— which form, visible and producing impact, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge on the eye that is invisible
and reacting — this which is visible form, etc. [continue as
in § 617].

[620] What is that form which is the sphere of visible
form?

That form which, derived from the four Great Phenomena,
is visible and produces impact — in consequence of which
form, and depending on the eye, there has arisen, arises,
will, or may arise

visual contact . . .

in consequence of which form and depending on the eye,
there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise, born of that
visual contact,

a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] visual cognition . . .

[further] having which visible form as its object, 1 and
depending on the eye there has arisen, arises, will, or may
arise

visual contact,


1 In the printed text, for ruparammanam read
ruparammano, and, two lines later, ruparammana.
So for the other senses, § 624, etc. I follow the reading in
K., making the word adjectival to sakkhusamphassajo.
and then to vedana, sanna, etc. Cf. the analogous
passage in § 600 (in the passage I have restored to the
text), in § 604, and so on. I confess I do not see what is
gained by shifting cakkhum nissaya, so that by K.’s
reading it is sandwiched between adjective and noun,
beyond the symmetry in these sense-object answers, of
giving precedence everywhere to the object. But this does
not invalidate the reading inK. Arammanam is a term
of mental procedure, not of bare sense-function, such as is
indicated by the relation of rupam:cakkhu.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



186


and, having which visible form as its object, and depending
on the eye, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] visual cognition . . .

this which is visible form, the sphere, the constituent
element of visible form — this is that form which is the
sphere of visible form.

[621] What is that form which is the sphere of sound ?

That sound which is derived from the four Great

Phenomena, is invisible and produces impact, such as the
sound of drums, of tabors, of chank-shells, of tom-toms, of
singing, of music ; l clashing sounds, 2 manual sounds, 3 the
noise of people, 4 5 the sound of the concussion of substances, 6
of wind, 6 of water, 7 sounds human and other than human,
or whatever other sound 8 there is, derived from the Great
Phenomena, invisible and producing impact— such a sound,
invisible and producing impact, as, by the ear, invisible
and reacting, one has heard, hears, will, or may
hear . . .

[622] . . . and on which sound, invisible and producing
impact, the ear, invisible and reacting, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge . . .

[623] . . . which sound, invisible and producing impact,

1 I.e., the sound of lutes and other stringed instruments
(Asl. 819).

2 E.g., of gongs and castanets {ibid.).

3 I.e., of hand-clapping {ibid.).

4 I.e., of a crowd when words and syllables have become
indistinguishable {ibid.).

5 I.e., of trees rubbing against each other, or of the
knocking of blocks {ibid.). Vin. Texts, iii. 213, n.

6 I.e., of wind as wind {ibid.).

7 I.e., either of beaten or flowing water {ibid.).

8 I.e., of splitting reeds, tearing cloth, and the like
{ibid.).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



187


has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge on the ear
that is invisible and reacting . . .

[624] ... in consequence of which sound and depending
on the ear, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise

auditory contact . . .

. . . and 1 . . . born of that auditory contact, .
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] auditory cognition . . .

. . . [further] having a sound as its object and depending
on the ear, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise,
auditory contact,

. . . and . . . born of that auditory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] auditory cognition ;

this that is sound, the sphere and constituent element of
sound — this is that form which is the sphere of sound.

[625] What is that form which is the sphere of odour ?
That odour which is derived from the four Great

Phenomena, is invisible and produces impact, such as the
odour of roots, sap, bark, leaves, dowers, fruit ; verminous
odours, putrid odours, pleasant and unpleasant odours, 2 or

1 Continue as for visible forms in § 620.

2 Sugandho, duggandho — these, says Buddha-
ghosa, namely, desired odour and undesired odour, exhaust
all odour. He predicates the same of good and bad tastes
(sadu, a sadu, § 629). In § 648 we find, classed among
the tangibles, pleasant contact and painful contact. But
we do not find the commentator making the same compre-
hensive claim for hedonistic values in touches as in odours
and tastes. Nor, as we have seen, does the text predicate
anything hedonistically of sight or touch. This is interest-
ing as bringing the psychology of Buddhism, with its
acute if incipient intuition, in ‘ touch * with our modern


ed by CjOCK^Ic



188


whatever other odour there is, derived from the four Great
Phenomena, invisible and producing impact ; such an
odour, invisible and producing impact, as one has smelt,
smells, will, or may smell with the nose, that is invisible
and impingeing . . .

[626] ... on which odour, invisible and producing
impact, the nose, invisible and impingeing, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge . . .

[627] . . . such an odour, invisible and producing impact,
as has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge on the
nose, invisible and reacting . . .

[628] ... in consequence of which odour and depending
on the nose, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise

olfactory contact . . .
and 1 . . . bom of that olfactory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] olfactory cognition . . .

. . . [further] having an odour as its object and depending
on the nose, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise
olfactory contact,

. . . and . . . born of that olfactory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] olfactory cognition ;

psychology. For we say that the more our knowledge of
the external world is built up by a given sense, the more is
that sense connected with neutral feeling. And it is pre-
cisely sight, touch, and hearing that give us most of that
knowledge.

Aristotle remarks, with reference to the sense of smell
only, that our never discriminating an odour without
associating therewith an impression of something painful
or pleasant, seems to reveal the imperfection of this sense
in humans. Imperfect, i.e., in delicacy of discrimination,
touch being herein the most perfect sense (De. An. II. ix.).

1 See § 624, note.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


189


this that is odour, the sphere and constituent element of
odour — this is that form which is the sphere of odours.

[629] What is that form which is the sphere of taste ?

That taste which is derived from the four Great Phe-
nomena, is invisible and produces impact, such as the
taste of roots, stems, bark, leaves, flowers, fruits, of sour,
sweet, 1 bitter, 2 pungent, 3 saline, 4 * alkaline, 6 acrid, 6 astring-
ent, 7 nice and nauseous sapids, 8 or whatever other taste
there is, derived from the four Great Phenomena, invisible
and producing impact — such tastes, invisible and pro-
ducing impact, as with the tongue, invisible and reacting,
one has tasted, tastes, will, or may taste . . .

[680] . . . against which taste, invisible and producing
impact, the tongue, invisible and impingeing, has impinged,
impinges, will, or may impinge . . .

[681] ... a taste which, invisible and producing impact,
has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge on the
tongue, invisible and reacting . . .

[682] ... in consequence of which taste and depending
on the tongue, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise

gustatory contact . . .


1 Buttermilk (takkambilam) is given as a typical
sour sapid, ghee from cow’s milk (gosappi) as the type
of a sweet sapid. But, adds the Cy., sweet added to
Astringent (kasavam) and kept standing will lose all its
sweetness, and so with raw sugar and alkaline substance.
Ghee, however, kept standing, while it loses colour and
smell, does not lose its taste. It therefore is the absolute
sweet (ekanta-madhuram) (Asl. 820).

2 E.g., as nimb-tree fruit (ibid.).

3 E.g., as ginger and pepper (ibid.).

4 E.g., as sea-salt (ibid.).

6 E.g., as the egg-plant (vatinganakatiram), or as
green palm sprouts (cocoanut cabbage) (ibid.).

6 E.g., as the jujube, or the Feronia elephantum, etc. (ibid.).

7 E.g., as the yellow myrobalan (harltakam). I am,
.as before, indebted to Childers’ Dictionary for all this
botanical knowledge.

8 Sadu asadu. See § 625, n. 1.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



190


. . . and 1 . . . born of that gustatory contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] gustatory cognition,

[further] having a taste as its object and depending on the
tongue, there has arisen, arises, will, or may arise
gustatory contact,

. . . and . . . born of that gustatory contact,
a feeling . . .

[o?*] a perception . . .

[or] thinking ...

[or] gustatory cognition ;

this that is taste, the sphere and constituent element of
taste — this is that form which is the sphere of taste. 2

[688] What is that form which is femininity (itthin-
driyam) ?

That which is of the female, feminine in appearance,
feminine in characteristics, in occupation, in deportment,
feminine in condition and being — this is that form which
constitutes femininity. 3


1 See § 624, n.

2 For the sphere of the tangible, see below, § 648.

3 Literally the in dr iy am — the faculty, potentiality of
the female. Under ‘appearance,* which the Cy. (821)
rules to be here the import of lingam ( = santhanam,
cf. Mil. 188, 184), he indicates the physical proportions
in which the woman, generally speaking, differs from the
man — smaller hands, feet, and face, upper trunk less
broad, lower trunk broader. Characteristics (nimittam)
are that by which she is recognisable (sanjananam), both
external bodily marks (no beard, e.g ., nor tusks, which
would seem to include certain animals) and modes of
dressing. Under ‘occupation* (kuttam = kiriya) there
is an allusion to girls’ distinctive amusements — playing
with baskets, pestles [and mortars], and dolls (? literally,
little daughters, dhitalikaya kllanti), and spinning
thread with a mattikavakam, whatever that may be.
Under ‘deportment,’ the ‘absence of breadth’ (avisa-


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



191


[684] What is that form which is masculinity (purisin-
driyam) ?

That which is of the male, masculine in appearance,
masculine in characteristics, in occupation, in deportment,
masculine in condition and being — this is that form which
constitutes masculinity. 1


dam) in women's walking, standing, sitting, lying, and
eating is specified, all these being done more mincingly,
less assertively by women. If a man so deport himself, it
is said of him, ‘He goes like a woman !' The ‘condition
and being ’ of the female, constituting her essential nature,
are ‘ born of karma, and take their source at conception.'
The other female characteristics are evolved by her ‘ poten-
tiality ’ in the course of existence, just as the tree with all
its appurtenances is evolved in time from the seed. This
‘ indriyam' is discernible, not by the eye, but by the mind
(mano. It is an abstract idea). And it is not to the one
sex just what the faculties of sight and so forth are to the
other.

1 The priority of place given to the female is a form of
statement as characteristically Buddhist (not to say Indian)
as that of saying ‘ moon and sun.' Both no doubt have
their source very deep in the history, or prehistory, of
humanity. The Commentator gives the correlative oppo-
sites in describing male characteristics, down to the
‘ swash-buckling and martial air,' which if a woman affect
she is said to ‘ go like a man.’ Boys are said to occupy
themselves with their characteristic games of playing at
carriages and ploughs, and at making sand-banks round
puddles and calling them reservoirs.

He then remarks that these sexual distinctions have
been evolved during the course of life in primeval ages ;
since when, originating by way of conception and, some of
them, in the individual life, it happens that they get inter-
changed. He then quotes cases of hermaphroditism, said
to have occurred in the members of the Order.

He is mindful also, as we might expect, to appreciate
the sex to which he belongs, and makes a curious applica-
tion to it of the doctrine of karma. ‘ Of the two, the male
sex-marks are superior (uttamam), those of the female
inferior (hlnam). Therefore the former disappear by
means of a very bad karma, while the latter are established


ed by CjOCK^Ic



192


[685] What is that form which is vitality (jlvitin-
dr iy am) ?

The persistence of these corporeal states, their sub-
sistence, their going on, their being kept going on, their
progress, continuance, preservation, life, life as faculty —
this is that form which is vitality. 1

[686] What is that form which is bodily intimation
(kayaviniiatti)?

That tension, that intentness, that state of making the
body 2 tense, in response to a thought, whether good, bad,
or indeterminate, on the part of one who advances, or
recedes, or fixes the gaze, or glances around, or retracts an
arm, or stretches it forth — the intimation, the making
known, the state of having made known — this is that form
which constitutes bodily intimation. 8

by a karma indifferently good. The latter, on the other hand,
disappear by means of a karma indifferently bad, while the
former are established by means of a very good karma.
‘ Thus, both disappear by badness and are acquired by
goodness*!

Thus, our Tlommentatdr^pi^ more to Plato’s

position than to that of the typical religious celibate, find-
ing woman not stronger to do evil, but rather the weaker in
heaping up either good or evil.

1 ‘ WhaCtheru is tu sayTTias been said already in con-
nexion with the faculty of vitality as related to incorporeal
(formless) states ’ (Asl. 828. See § 19).

2 Kayo is said to =sariram ; possibly to distinguish it
from kayo as used for ‘ body- sensibility,’ or the tactile
sense (Asl. 824), or again from sense-experience generally
(p. 43, n. 3).

3 Kayavifiiiatti is analyzed in a somewhat rambling
style by the Commentator. The gist of his remarks
amounts, I gather, to the following : In any communication
effected by bodily action — which includes communications
from animals to men, and vice versd — that which is made
known is one’s condition (bhavo) at the time, one’s self
(sayam), and one’s intention (adhippayo); in other
words, the how> the who or what , and the what for . And
this is wrought by a bodily suffusion (vipphandanena).

He then classifies the kinds of thoughts which tend to


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



198


[687] What is that form which is intimation by language
(vaclvin ha tti)?

That speech, voice, enunciation, utterance, noise, making
noises, language as articulate speech, which expresses a
thought whether good, bad, or indeterminate — this is called
language. And that intimation, that making known, the
state of having made known by language — this is that form
which constitutes intimation by language. 1

[688] What is that form which is the element of space
(akasa-dhatu)?

That which is space and belongs to space, is sky and


4 produce an intimation/ no others having this tendency.
They are —

The eight good thoughts relating to the sensuous
universe (§§ 1-159), and

the thought concerning intuition (abhinna c it tarn).
The twelve bad thoughts (§§ 865-430).

The eight great kiriy a -thoughts,
the two limited kiriy a- thoughts,
the one kiriya-thought relating to the universe of
form which has attained to intuition,
making eleven indeterminate thoughts.

Finally he refers us to his theory of ‘Doors’ (dvara-
katha). See my Introduction. (Asl. 323-4.)

1 Vacivinnatti is dealt with verbatim as bodily in-
timation was, ‘ vocal noise ’ being substituted for ‘ bodily
suffusion.’ ‘ Making noises * is to be understood as making
a noise in a variety of ways. ‘ Articulate speech * (lit.,
broken-up speech) is no mere jangle (bhango), but is
vocal utterance so divided as to serve for communication
(Asl. 325).

It is interesting to note in connexion with the problem
as to whether communication or registration of thought is
the historically prior function of language, that Buddha-
ghosa, for all his aptness to draw distinctions, does not
make any allusion here to intimation by language forming
only one of the functions of speech.

Still more curious, as being more germane to this
specific aspect of language, is it that he does not take into
account the oral communication of the registered ideas of
the race.

13


ed by CjOCK^Ic



194


belongs to sky , 1 is vacuum and belongs to vacuum, and is
not in contact 2 with the four Great Phenomena — this is
that form which is the element of space.

[689] What is that form which is lightness of form
(rupassa lahuta )? 3

That lightness of form which is its capacity for changing
easily, its freedom from sluggishness and inertia — this is
that form which is lightness of form.

[640] What is that form which is plasticity of form ?


1 Buddhaghosa’s etymology (Asl. 325) derives aka so
from ‘ unploughed’— what may not be ploughed, cut, or
broken — which recalls Homer’s arpvyero <? aWrjp and arpv-
7 €ttj OdXaaaa as well as the aKapmara 7 reSia of Euripides
(Asl. 826). ‘Sky’ he connects with striking— a gh am,
a-gh attanlyam — what is not strikable.

Aka so, he continues, is that which delimitates, or sets
bounds to forms, environing them and making them mani-
fest. Through it, in forms thus bounded, we get the
notions — hence above, hence below, hence across.

2 Asamphuttham catuhi mahabhutehi. Although
space is in this work treated of apart from the four
elements, and does not, as a rule, count as a fifth element,
in the Pitakas, yet, in the Maha Rahulovada Sutta (M. i.
428), when Gotama is discoursing to his son of the distri-
bution of the elements in the composition of the human
body, he co-ordinates akasadhatu with the four other
dhatus, to all appearance as though it should rank as a
fifth element. In the older Upanishads it is usually co-
ordinated with the four elements, though not, as such, in
a closed list. In the Taittirlya Up., however, it appears
as the one immediate derivative from the Atman ; wind, fire,
water, earth, plants, etc., proceeding, the first from aka 9 a.
the rest, taken in order, from each other.

The word asamphuttham is paraphrased by nijjata-
kam (or n is sat am), and may mean that space does not
commingle with the four elements as they with each other.

‘ Belongs to ’ is, in the Pali, -gat am.

8 Cf. above, §§ 42-47, with this and the two following
answers. Supremely well-dressed hide is given as an
illustration of the plasticity of matter (Asl. 326).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



195


That plasticity of form which is its softness, smoothness,
non-rigidity — this is that form which is plasticity of form.

[641] What is that form which is wieldiness of form ?

That wieldiness of form which is its serviceableness, its

workable condition — this is that form which is wieldiness
of form. 1

[642] What is that form which is the integration (u p a-
c a y o) of form ?

That which is accumulation of form is the integration of
form 2 — this is that form which is the integration of form.

[643] What is that form which is the subsistence of
form (rupassa santati)?

That which is integration of form is the subsistence of
form. This is that form which is the subsistence of form.

[644] What is that form which is the decay of form
(rupassa jarata)?

That decay of form which is ageing, decrepitude, hoari-
ness, wrinkles, the shrinkage in length of days, the hyper-
maturity of faculties — this is that form which is the decay
of form. 3


1 Gold which is suddhanta (? sudhanta, well-blown)
is given as typically ‘wieldy* material (ibid.).

2 Buddhaghosa evidently reads so rupassa upacayo
here (for yo), and in the next section sa rupassa (for ya)
(Asl. 327). This is only adopted by the text in §§ 732,
733. K. reads so and sa.

This and the following section formularize the coming
into being of things. Integration is paraphrased (Asl. 327)
as the cumulative effect of the spheres (ayatananam
acayo) as they are reproduced over and over again. The
import of the term is vaddhi, fulness of growth. Acayo,
or nibbatti, is to upacayo or vaddhi as the welling
up of water in a reservoir by a river’s bank is to the
brimming over of the water, while santati or pavatti
(subsistence or persistence) is as the overflow and running
of the water. All are expressions for the phenomenon of
birth and growth (jatirupassa).

3 This is a stock formula, and occurs at M. i. 49 ; S. ii. 2,
and 42. The Cy. points out (Asl. 328) that the three terms,

13—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



196


[645] What is that form which is the impermanence of
form (rupassa aniccata)?

The destruction, disease, breaking-up, dissolution of
form, the impermanence which is decline — this is that
form which is the impermanence of form. 1

[646] What is that form which is bodily (solid) nutriment
(kabalinkaro aharo)? 2

Boiled rice, sour gruel, flour, fish, flesh, milk, curds,
butter, cheese, tila-oil, cane-syrup, or whatever else 8 there
is in whatever region that by living beings may be eaten,
chewed, swallowed, digested into the juice 4 by which living

* decrepitude,’ etc., show the phenomena that must take
place in the lapse of time ; the last two show the inference
that is to be drawn from them. For just as a flood or a
forest fire can be traced by the appearance of the grass and
trees in its track, so can we infer respecting our life and
faculties by the appearance of teeth, hair and skin.

1 This and the preceding section formularize the waning
and passing away of things. Birth -and-growth, decay and
death are by the Commentator likened to three enemies of
mankind, the first of whom leads him astray into a pit, the
second of whom throws him down, the third of whom cuts
off his head (Asl. 329).

2 Literally, morsel -made food. ‘Bodily’ (or solid)
suffices to distinguish it from the three immaterial nutri-
ments. See p. 30.

8 Under these come roots and fruits. Asl. 830.

4 On this section, where ‘form’ is considered under
the aspect of sustaining growth, etc., the Commentator
gives a brief dissertation where an adumbration of physio-
logical truth is humorously illustrated. Whereas, he says
(Asl. 330-382), food is here first set out in terms of its
embodiment, in o j a we have the evolved essence of it. Now
whereas the former removes risk, the latter is a preserva-
tive. And the risk is this, that when no food is taken, the
karma-born heat within feeds on the walls of the belly,
making the owner cry out, ‘ I am hungry ; give me some-
thing to eat !’ and only setting his intestines free when it
can get external food. The internal heat is likened to a
shadow-demon who, having got the entry into a man’s
shadow, bites his head when hungry so that he cries out.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



197


beings are kept alive — this is that form which is bodily
nutriment.

[All] this is form which is derived.

[End of] the Section on Derivatives. First Portion for
Eecitation in the Division on Form.


[‘ There is form which is not derived 9 (no upada)].

[647] What is that form which is not derived ? l

The sphere of the tangible, the fluid element — this is
that form which is not derived.

[648] What is that form which is the sphere of the
tangible (photthabbayatanam)?

The earthy (solid) element, the lambent (calorific)
element, the gaseous (aerial) element 2 ; the hard and the

When other men come to help, the demon, quitting his
hold, preys on them.

In the case of coarse food, e.g., kudrusa grain, oja is
said to be weak and sustains but a short time, while if a
man drink ghee and the like he wants no other meal the
whole day. Living beings are then classified in an order
of increasing fineness in the food they live on, beginning
with crocodiles, who, they say, swallow pebbles, continuing
with peacocks, hyenas, and elephants, later with other
birds, then with borderers, town- dwellers, kings, and
ending with the Yama and Paranimmitavasavatti gods,
who enjoy food of supreme delicacy.

1 ‘ Just as derived form is derived in such and such a
way and in no other, so, to say it is not derived, is equi-
valent to saying it is not derivable.’ Asl. 833.

Possibly the form of negative here employed (no upada)
is a technical mark of the relatively unethical nature
of this aspect of rupam. An upada, on the other hand,
is used with a philosophical import. Cf. D. i. 17 with
M. i. 148 — anupada vimutto and anupada parinib-
banattham. See also below, §§ 1210 and 1218.

2 In keeping with the general psychological standpoint
of the present work, the things which are not derived Jrom
(have no foothold or support in) other things are considered


ed by CjOCK^Ic



198


soft ; the smooth and the rough ; pleasant (easeful) con-
tact, painful contact; the heavy and the light 1 — such a
tangible, invisible and producing impact, 2 as, with the


under the aspect of sense-percepts. They are tangibles or
intangibles. Element (dhatu) is now substituted for the
collective term used above, namely, great phenomena or
beings (mahabhutani, § 584 et seq. Both terms occur
together in A. i. 222. The latter term may be used to
denote great or wondrous derivatives of the four elements,
great either physically or ethically, as when (Yin. ii. 240)
the ocean and its ‘ great creatures * serve to illustrate the
Dhamma and those wondrous phenomena, the human
beings who by way of it are seeking or have attained Nir-
vana. Dhatu, on the other hand, as the Cy. with un-
flagging ‘ mindfulness * once more points out, indicates
absence of substratum or soul. Asl. 382.

On the essential characters of the four elements, see
below, §§ 962-965, also the following note.

1 The first two and last of these four pairs are so many
aspects or modes of the earth-element (Asl. 332), and are
paraphrased respectively as rigid and non-rigid, polished
and jagged (saw-like), weighty and non-weighty. These
correspond almost exactly to our modern view of the modes
of resistance, i.e., of active touch, or of skin-sensibility with
a co-efficient of muscular sense. The Buddhist view lacks,
as all but recent psychology has lacked, insight into the
presence of the muscular factor ; on the other hand, it is
logically more symmetrical in giving ‘ lightness * where
Dr. Bain, e.g ., gives 1 pressure * — another positive.

Pleasant contact is defined as a tangible which is desired
on account of pleasant feeling ; the opposite, in the case of
painful contact. Each of the three elements furnishes
instances of either : In connexion with solidity there is the
pleasant contact felt when a soft-palmed attendant is doing
massage to one’s feet, and the opposite when his hands are
hard. From ‘ caloric, ’ or the flame-element, we may get
the pleasure of a warming-pan in winter, or the reverse, if
it is applied in summer. From the aerial element, we may
get the pleasure of fanning in summer, or the discomfort
of it in winter. Asl. 332, 833.

2 The Cy. here discusses a point of attention in sense-
perception which is interesting as adumbrating modern


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



199


body-sensibility, invisible and reacting, one has touched,
touches, will, or may touch . . .

[6491 • • • against which tangible, invisible, and pro-
ducing impact, the body-sensibility, invisible and reacting,
has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge . . .

[650] . . . such a tangible, invisible and producing
impact, as has impinged, impinges, will, or may impinge
against the body-sensibility, invisible and reacting . . .

European theories respecting consciousness and subcon-
sciousness (Asl. 333). In a concrete object of sense, the
three modes of the tangible, Le ., the three elements (solid,
hot, airy), may all of them be present. Now do they all
come ‘ at one stroke * into the field of consciousness
(a path am)? They do. Thus come, do they impinge on
the body-sense ? They do. When it has thus made them
a (mental) object, does cognition of body arise at one blow ?
It does not. Why? Thus: Mental objects are made
either by deliberate sensing or by intrusion. (The latter
term — ussado — is more literally extrusion, or prominence,
but either word shows that involuntary, as contrasted with
voluntary attention is meant.) Now when one is de-
liberately testing the hardness or softness of a ball of boiled
rice by pressure, heat and vapour are present, but it is the
solid to which one gives attention. If hot water be tested
by the hand, though there is solid and vaporous (matter),
it is heat that occupies the attention. If one lets the
breeze blow on the body at the window in hot weather,
solid and heat are present, but it is the aerial element that
is attended to. Or take involuntary impressions: If you
stumble, or knock your head against a tree, or bite on a
pebble, heat and wind are present, but the intrusive object
is solid matter. So analogously for walking on something
hot, or being deafened by a hurricane. The three elements
are not apprehended as such at the same instant. And
with regard to the extended surface of the body-sentience,
cognition of body arises only in that spot where the
sentient surface is impinged upon, e.g ., when a shoulder-
wound is bathed (? dressed ; (/. Vin. ii. 115 and Transl.)
with a quill, the kaya-pasado of the shoulder is impinged
upon, or intensified, and there cognition arises. And where
the pasado is most powerfully impressed, there cognition
arises first.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



200


[651] ... in consequence of which tangible and depend-
ing on the body-sensibility, there has arisen, arises, will,
or may arise

bodily contact . . .
and . . . bom of that bodily contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] cognition of body . . .

[further,] having a tangible as its object and depending on
the body(-sensibility), there has arisen, arises, will, or
may arise

bodily contact . . .
and . . . born of that bodily contact,
a feeling . . .

[or] a perception . . .

[or] thinking . . .

[or] cognition of body ;

this that is the tangible, the sphere and element of the
tangible— this is that form which is the sphere of the
tangible. 1

[652] What is that form which is the fluid (aqueous)
element (a p o d h a t u) ?

That which is fluid and belongs to fluid, that which is


1 Buddhaghosa goes on, with reference to the senses
generally, to give a psychological account of the passing
from one group of sensations or ‘ object of thought ’ to
another in terms not far removed from what would now be
used to describe the ‘ movement of attention * (Asl. 334).
We pass from one object to another (a) from deliberate
inclination, or (b) from a sensation of preponderating im-
pressiveness (ajjhasayato va visayadhimattato va).
E.g. f (a) from saluting a shrine, a believer forms the in-
tention of entering to do homage to a statue and contem-
plate the carvings and paintings. ( b ) While contemplating
some vast tope, a man is struck by the sound of music, and
is then affected by flowers and incense brought near.


ed by CjOCK^Ic


201


viscid 1 and belongs to viscous, the cohesiveness of form 2
— this is that form which is the fluid element.

[All] this is that form which is not derived.

[658] What is that form 8 which is the issue of grasping
(upadinnam) F 4


1 Literally, oil (sneho). Cf. the description with that
of akasadhatu, § 638.

2 This is the aspect of the moist or liquid element in
an object compact of several elements. The one essential
‘mark* of apo-dhatu is paggharanam, flowing. See
§ 963. But ‘ cohesiveness of form means the cohering
condition of some concrete in which there is superfluity of
solid * (Asl. 885). For it is] by the cohesive force of the
fluid element that lumps of iron or what not are made
rigid. Similarly in the case of stones, mountains, palms,
tusks, horns, etc.

Hence Buddhaghosa passes on to discuss the mutually
related spheres of the elements and their apparent approxi-
mations to each other, as in viscous things, e.g., or con-
gealed liquid, or boiling water. Corrupt MSS., however,
render parts of the disquisition hard to follow. His con-
clusion is that whereas the elements may vary in their
condition as phenomena, their essential mark never alters,
however latent it may be. And he quotes a yet unedited
sutta (Atthanaparikappa sutta), but which is repeated
in A. i. 222, that it is easier for the four elements to change
their essential character, than for the seeker of Nirvana
(the Noble Student) to alter his high estate (Asl. 336).

3 Here follow the remaining pairs of correlated terms,
making up the categories of form under the Dual Aspect.

4 Literally, ‘ which has been grasped at * or ‘ laid hold
of.’ This and the cognate terms are discussed under the
‘ Group on Grasping,* § 1213 et seq. It is disappointing to
find that, with the exception of two items in the list of
things ‘ grasped at,* or come into being through the action
of karma (the two phrases are approximately equivalent),
the Cy. does not discuss the inclusion of any. One would
have liked to hear, e.g., why, of all sense-objects, sounds
alone are 1 not the issue of grasping ’ (cf. the heresy con-
cerning sound as result [of karma, K. Y. 466], and why the
elements of space and of fluidity may and may not be the


ed by CjOCK^Ic



202


The spheres of sight, hearing, smell, taste, body-sensi-
bility, femininity, masculinity, vitality, or whatever form
there exists through karma having been wrought, whether
it be in the spheres of visible forms, odours, tastes, or the
tangible ; the element of space, the fluid element, the in-
tegration or the subsistence of form, 1 or bodily nutriment —
this is that form which is the issue of grasping.

[654] What is that form which is not the issue of
grasping ?

The sphere of sound, bodily and vocal intimation, light-
ness, plasticity and wieldiness of form, decay and imper-
manence of form, or whatever other form exists which is
not due to karma having been wrought, whether it be in
the sphere of visible forms, smells, tastes, or the tangible ;
the element of space or that of fluidity ; the integration or
the subsistence of form, or bodily nutriment — this is that
form which is not the issue of grasping.

[655] What is that form which is both the issue of
grasping and favourable to grasping (upadinn *u p a d a-
niyam)?

The spheres of the five senses, femininity, masculinity
and vitality, or whatever other form exists through karma
having been wrought, whether it be in the spheres of


issue of grasping, or what they have to do with it in any
way.

Concerning the two items above mentioned, how is it,
asks the Cy. (337), ‘that “ decay and impermanence ” are
classed with respect to what is due, and what is not due
to the performance of karma ? They are classed with
what is not the issue of grasping. That which has sprung
from conditions other than karma is included under “ not
due to the performance of karma. . . .” And as these two
forms arise neither from karma, nor from form-producing
conditions other than karma, they are therefore not classi-
fied with reference to karma. How they are acquired will
become evident later.*

1 For rupasantati read rupassa santati.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



203


visible forms, odours, tastes or the tangible, in the elements
of space or fluidity, in the integration or the subsistence of
form or in bodily nutriment — this is that form which is both
the issue of grasping and favourable to grasping.

[656] What is that form which is not the issue of grasp-
ing, but is favourable to grasping (anupadinn* upada-
niyam)

The sphere of sounds, bodily and vocal intimation, the
lightness, plasticity, wieldiness, decay and impermanence
of form, or whatever other form exists which is not due to
karma having been wrought, whether it be in the sphere
of visible forms, 1 2 smells, tastes, the tangible, in the element
of space or of fluidity, in the integration, or the subsis-
tence of form, or in bodily nutriment — this is that form
which is not the issue of grasping but is favourable to
grasping.

[657] What is that form which is visible?

The sphere of visible forms — this is that form which is
visible.

[658] What is that form which is invisible ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is invisible. 3


1 The privative prefixed to the first half of this dvandva-
compound does not apply to the latter half. A ll form is
upadaniyam — see § 595 and cf. Dh. S. § 1538. Hence to
get, as we do, a positive answer would, if upadaniyam were
to be taken negatively, be a very patent infringement of the
law of contradiction. The distributed negative is given by
anupadinnanupadaniyam as in § 992.

2 I have elided saddayatanam, and, on the next line,
inserted apodhatu, as consistent with § 654. Cf. §§ 747,
750, and K.

3 The answer in § 658 recurs with its elided passage
very often, but it is not. easy to point out the foregoing
answer of which it is an abbreviation. For §§ 653, 655
include ‘visible form,’ ‘which is absurd.’ And they do
not include ‘ sound,’ which is invisible. I suggest that


ed by CjOCK^Ic



204


[659] What is that form which reacts and impinges 1
(sappatigham)?

The spheres of vision, hearing, smell, taste, body-sensi-
bility ; the spheres of visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes,
tangibles — this is that form which reacts and impinges.

[660] What is that form which does not react or
impinge ?

Femininity . . . and bodily nutriment — this is that form
which does not react or impinge.


[661] What is that form which is faculty (indriyam)?

The faculties (or personal potentialities) 2 of vision, hear-
ing, smell, taste, body-sensibility, femininity, masculinity,
vitality — this is that form which is faculty.

[662] What is that form which is not faculty ?

The spheres of visible form . . . and bodily nutriment —
this is that form which is not faculty. 3


§ 596 is referred to, with the implication that ‘ the sphere
of visible form 1 must be omitted. All the other terms in
§ 596, if understood as strictly abstract sensibility or sen-
sation, or as abstract ideas, are inaccessible to sight. Even
in kabalinkaro aharo, it is only the vatthu, or em-
bodiment of the concept of nutriment, that is visible. And
similarly, whereas one’s bodily gestures are visible, the
‘ intimation ’ given is a matter of inference, a mental con-
struction.

1 Both terms have been applied in the detailed theory of
sense given in § 597 et seq.

2 Keeping to § 596 as the norm for these abbreviated
replies, we may assume that these two (§§ 659 and 660)
divide out that answer between them. Impact and reac-
tion, as here understood, belong exclusively to the sphere
of sensation. The term patigho has an emotional and
moral significance elsewhere in this work, # and means re-
pulsion, repugnance. See § 1060.

3 § 596 would seem to be divided also and differently by
the indriyam sections. What is na indriyam, not
having Swajus, are thus the five kinds of sense-objects,
intimation, space, the three modes of form, and the course


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



205


[663] What is that form which is Great Phenomenon
(mahabhutam)?

The sphere of the tangible and the element of fluidity —
this is that form which is Great Phenomenon.

[664] What is that form which is not Great Pheno-
menon ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not Great Phenomenon. 1

[665] What is that form which is intimation (vifinatti)?

Bodily and vocal intimation 2 — this is that form which is

intimation.

[666] What is that form which is not intimation ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not intimation.

[667] What is that form which is sprung from thought
(c i 1 1 a - s a m u 1 1 h a n a m) 3 ?


of the evolving rebirth of form as represented in abstract
idea.

1 This pair of relatives coincides with the first pair of
attributes taken inversely: forms underived and derived
(pp. 172-97).

2 See above, §§ 686, 687. The abbreviated answer con-
cerning the other relative will presumably be the entire
list given in § 596, with the exception of the two modes of
intimation.

3 Cf. below, §§ 1195, 1196, and above, § 636, note.

Here, after being silent over the last ten questions, the

Cy. resumes its parable (p. 337), without, however, throw-
ing much light on these to us obscure distinctions. This
and the next two pairs of questions and answers refer to
form of some kind as brought into relation with an intelli-
gent agent. And the purest instance of this is those groups
of phenomena which are brought into play when the agent
is expressing himself. The expression or intimation itself,
it says, does not spring directly from thought, but it is said
nevertheless to have its source in thought because those
phenomena (of gesture and speech) on which the intima-


ed by CjOCK^Ic



206


Bodily and vocal intimation, or whatever other form
exists that is born of thought, caused by thought, has its
source in thought, whether it be in the sphere of visible
forms, sounds, odours, tastes or tangibles, in the spatial,
or the fluid element, in the lightness, plasticity, wieldiness,
integration or subsistence of form, or in bodily nutriment —
this is that form which is sprung from thought.

[668] What is that form which is not sprung from
thought ?

The sphere of the five senses, femininity, masculinity
and vitality, the decay and the impermanence of form, or
whatever other form exists that is not born of thought,
not caused by thought, does not have its source in thought,
whether it be in the sphere of visible forms, sounds, odours,
tastes, or tangibles, in the spatial or fluid element, in the
lightness, plasticity, wieldiness, integration or subsistence
of form, or in bodily nutriment — this is that form which is
not sprung from thought.

[669] What is that form which comes into being together
with thought (citta-saha-bhu)?

[670] What is that form which does not come into being;
together with thought ?

Answers as in the preceding pair of relatives.

[671] What is that form which is consecutive to
thought (citt’ anuparivatti)?

[672] What is that form which is not consecutive to
thought ?

Answers as in the preceding pair of relatives.

tion depends are immediately prompted by thought, just as
we say that old age and death 4 are * impermanence (in
virtue of their forming part of the content of that idea)*
While there is thought, there is also expression of thought.
But the concomitance stated in § 669 is not to be under-
stood like that arising between thought and feeling and
other mental processes. He is probably referring to the
mental complex indicated above in § 1 and the like.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



207


[673] What is that form which belongs to the self
(aj j h att ikam)? 1

The spheres of the five senses — this is that form which
belongs to the self.

[674] What is that form which is external (to the self —
bahiram)?

The sphere of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . 2 and
bodily nutriment — this is that form which is external (to
the self).

[675] Which is that form which is gross (o 1 a r i k a m) ?

The spheres of the five senses and of the five kinds of

sense-objects — this is that form which is gross.

[676] Which is that form which is subtle (suk-
humam) ?


1 See below, §§ 1044, 1045. It will already have been
noted (p. 59, n. 1.), that ajjhattam, aj jhattikam does
not run on all fours with our modern psychological term
‘ subjective/ or that which belongs to the conscious experi-
ence of the individual. It connotes anything belonging to
an individual organism, physical or mental. Hence, too,
the word ‘ self * must here be understood in no narrow
metaphysical, or even psychological sense, but as equiva-
lent to the concrete person or attabhavo (see above,
p. 175, n. 1). It is used in the sense of all but the last
of the four constituents into which Professor W. James
divides the Self, viz., the material Self (body, clothes,
family, home, property : the Buddhist would only admit
the first item, I fancy), the social Self (recognition from
others), and the spiritual Self (psychic faculties or dis-
positions). (‘Principles of Psychology/ 1892, i. 292-296.)
Only the fourth constituent, the ‘ pure Ego/ was rejected
by Buddhism, as it was, twenty-two centuries later, by
Hume. Cf., however, the apparently more ‘subjective*
use in §§ 161 and 1207.

1 have felt equal reluctance to foist the (relatively)
modern counterpart ‘objective’ on to bahiram or bahid-
dha (see § 1045).

2 Bead in full, this should coincide with the latter part
of § 596, beginning at ‘ the spheres of visible form.’


ed by CjOO^Ic



208


Femininity . . . and bodily nutriment — this is that form
which is subtle. 1

[677] What is that form which is remote (dure)?
Femininity . . . and bodily nutriment — this is that form

which is remote.

[678] What is that form which is near (s a n t i k e) ?

The spheres of the five senses and of the five kinds of

sense-objects — this is that form which is near. 2


1 The Cy., paraphrasing olarikam by thulam, ex-
plains that this has reference to the material embodiment
of sense-objects and to the fact of sensuous impact, suk-
humam connoting the contrary. Under the latter class
we have, according to my assumption (p. 208, n. 3), the
indriyas of sex and vitality, intimation, space, the modes
of form and the nutritive principle in food. The force of
this effort at dichotomy is, to the modern Western mind,
curious and not obvious. It is suggestive of tradition earlier
than the date of the compiling of the Abhidhamma, as
early as the earlier Upanishads — of a time when there
was no definite antithesis between material and immaterial,
extended and unextended. We have seen that the senses,
though ‘invisible/ were conceived as species of ‘form* —
nay, that the later Cy. preserved the tradition of their shape
and size. And I incline to think that just as, in the older
Upanishads, soul was a shadowy, impalpable, but ‘ physi-
cal double of the physical body/ and just as ‘when an
early Greek philosopher speaks of to oi/, he does not mean
Being, but Body’ (Burnet, ‘Early Greek Philosophy/ 27),
so the items in the list divided out in these two answers
are all physical ‘forms/ whether patent, impressive, and
pervading, or latent, fine and mysterious.

2 Dure, the Cy. explains, refers to that which on
account of its being difficult to apprehend or discriminate
cannot be discerned by way of the sensuous impact, whether
it be literally far or near at hand. Conversely, santike
refers to things which are patent to sense, even though they
may be distant. The content of each division agrees with that
of the preceding division, and we see that, whereas the field
of sense-perception is pronounced to be a relatively patent,
as well as gross concern, the essence of sex, vitality, etc..


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


209


[ Basis , (v a 1 1 h u).] 1

[679] What is that form which is the basis of visual con-
tact (cakkhusamphassassa vatthu)?

The sphere of vision — this is that form which is the basis
of visual contact.

[680] What is that form which is not the basis of visual
contact ?

The sphere of hearing . . . 2 and bodily nutriment — this
is that form which is not, etc.


down to the nutritive principle in food, is found to be as
obscure, latent or relatively inaccessible, as it was subtle or
minute. Asl. 887.

1 From § 658 to § 961 the Commentator lapses into
silence, dismissing the reader with the remark that in the
exposition on ‘spheres/ etc. (§§ 695-741), the method of
treatment is more detailed than it was above, and, further,
that the category of triplets (§ 742 et seq.) is easy to
understand. To enable the reader to gather with more
ease the drift of this part of the catechizing, I have in-
serted a few headings to indicate whenever there is a
change in the aspect under which ‘form* is considered.
Thus we have form considered under the aspect of the
basis (vatthu) in the subjective procedure of coming-to-
know, of the object so apprehended, and so forth.

In all the answers, where lacunae occur, except where
otherwise specified, the formula appears to be the answer
of § 596, with one or more terms omitted, and with the
occasional insertion of ‘the sphere of the tangible,* ac-
cording to the sense required by each specific process of
dichotomy.

2 By referring to the standard answer, § 596, it will be
seen that the negatives in the present answer include
‘ visible forms,’ or the objects of the sense of vision. Now,
vatthu means seat, embodiment, or what we might call
physical basis. However, then, the process of sense-stimu-
lation was ultimately conceived, the effective result was
held to take place in the sense-organ (and heart). The
sense-object was defined as the ar a mm an am of the con-
tact. See § 687.

14


ed by CjOCK^Ic



210


[681] What is that form which is the basis of

the feeling „ . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the visual cognition
which is born of visual contact ?

The sphere of vision — this is that form which is the basis
of the . . . visual cognition 1 which is born of visual con-
tact.

[682] What is that form which is not the basis of the . . .
visual cognition born of visual contact ?

The sphere of hearing . . . and bodily nutriment — this
is that form which is not the basis of the . . . visual cogni-
tion bom of visual contact.

[688] What is that form which is the basis of
auditory . . .
olfactory . . .
gustatory . . . 2 * * * * *
bodily

contact ?

The sphere of . . . 8 body-sensibility — this is that form
which is the basis of . . . bodily contact.

[684] What is that form which is not the basis of . . .
bodily contact ?


1 No hiatus appears, in either the English or Siamese
edition of the text, between rupam and cakkhuvin-
nanassa, but by the context the answer is, of course,
understood to deal in turn with all four mental processes
stated in the question. As usual, only the last term gets an
explicit answer. All four processes must also be under-
stood in the lacuna in § 682 and in § 686.

2 Jivha samphassassa has dropped out of the printed

text.

8 Here, of course, understand the spheres of hearing,

smell, and taste, and in the three following lacunae the

corresponding forms of contact. Proceed similarly in the

next two answers.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


211


The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not the basis of . . . bodily contact.

[685] What is that form which is the basis of

the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the . . . cognition of body
that is born of . . . bodily contact ?

The sphere • • . of body-sensibility — this is that form
which is the basis of the . . . cognition of body that is
bom of . . . bodily contact,

[686] What is that form which is not the basis of the . . .
cognition of body bom of . . . bodily contact ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment —this is
that form which is not the basis of the . . . cognition of
body bora, etc.

[Mental object or idea (arammana ip).]

[687] What is that form which is the object in visual
contact ?

The sphere of visible forms — this is that form which is
the object in visual contact.

[688] What is that form which is not the object in visual
contact ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment 1 — this
is that form which is not, etc.

[689] What is that form which is the object in

the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the visual cognition
that is born of visual contact ?

1 I.e., as in § 596, omitting only ‘ the sphere of visible
forms,’ and inserting, presumably, * the sphere of the
tangible.’

14—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



212


The sphere of visible forms — this is that form which is
the object in . . . the visual cognition that is bom of
visual contact.

[690] What is that form which is not 1 the object in the
. . . visual cognition bom of visual contact ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not the object, etc.

[691] What is that form which is the object in

auditory . . .
olfactory . . .
gustatory . . .
bodily

contact ?

The sphere of . . . the tangible — this is that form which
is the object in . . . bodily contact.

[692] What is that form which is not the object in . . .
bodily contact ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment— this is
that form which is not the object in . . . bodily contact

[693] WTiat is that form which is the object in

the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the . . . cognition of body
that is born of . . . bodily contact ?

The sphere of the tangible — this is that form which is the
object in the . . . cognition of body that is born of . . .
bodily contact.


1 The negative particle must be supplied in the printed text.

The lacunae in this and following sentences must be filled
up analogously with those in the preceding group. Thus,
in this question, the three other mental processes named in
the preceding question are to be understood; the answer
will be identical with that in § 596, excluding only ‘ the
sphere of visible forms,’ but inserting * the sphere of the
tangible.’ And so on.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



213


[694] What is that form which is not the object in the
. . . cognition of body that is bom of bodily contact *?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment 1 — this is
that form which is not the object, etc.


[Sphere of sense (a y a t a n a m).]

[695] What is that form which is the sphere of vision ?

The eye, that is to say, the sentient organ which is derived

from the four Great Phenomena . . . this that is * an empty
village ’ — this is that form which is the sphere of vision. 2

[696] What is that form which is not the sphere of vision ?

The sphere of hearing . . . and bodily nutriment — this

is that form which is not the sphere of vision.

[697] What is that form which is the sphere of

hearing . . .
smell . . .
taste . . .
body-sensibility ?

The body, that is to say, the sentient organ which is
derived from the four Great Phenomena . . . this that is
* an empty village ’ — this is that form which is the sphere
of . . . body-sensibility.

[698] What is that form which is not the sphere of . . .
body-sensibility ?

1 I.e ., repeat § 596 (into which * the sphere of the
tangible ’ does not enter).

2 The replies given here and to the four questions con-
densed in § 697 are apparently intended to be those set out
in sets of four expounding the current theory of sense-
reaction, §§ 597-616. Similarly, for the replies to the
questions on sense taken objectively (§§ 699, 701), see
§§ 617-632, 648-651.

The contradictories seem to be described in all four
answers, by a repetition of § 596, with the omission in each
case of the specific item named in the question on the
corresponding positive term, and, presumably, with the
insertion of ‘ the sphere of the tangible.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



214


Tbe sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.

[699] What is that form which is the sphere of visible
forms ?

That form which, derived from the four Great Phenomena,
is visible under the appearance of colour . . . this . . .
which is the constituent element of visible form — this is that
form which is the sphere of visible forms.

[700] What is that form which is not the sphere of visible
forms?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.

[701] What is that form which is the sphere of

sound,

odour,

taste,

the tangible ?

The earthy (solid) element . . . this that is the . . .
element of the tangible — this is that form which is the
sphere of the tangible. 1

[702] What is that form which is not the sphere of . . .
the tangible ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.


[Element (dhatu).]

[703] What is that form which is the element of
vision ?

The sphere of vision — this is that form which is the
element of vision.


1 In the printed text read rupara phottabba-
yatanam. The answer is, of course, the last of the four
several replies, the three first being understood.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



215


[704] What is that form which is not the element of
vision?

The sphere of hearing . . . and bodily nutriment 1 — this
is that form which is not the element of vision.

[705] What is that form which is the element of visible
form?

The sphere of visible form — this is that form which is
the element of visible form.

[706] What is that form which is not the element of
visible form ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.

[707] What is that form which is the element of sound
... of odour ... of taste ... of the tangible ?

The sphere of . . . 2 * * the tangible — this is that form
which is the element of . . . the tangible.

[708] What is that form which is not the element of . . .
the tangible ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not the element of . . . the tangible.

[Faculty (i n d r i y a m).]

[709] What is that form which is the faculty of vision ?

The eye, that is to say, the sentient organ which is

derived from the four Great Phenomena . . . this that is
4 an empty village ’ 8 — this is that form which is the faculty
of vision.

[710] What is that form which is not the faculty of
vision?


1 Here supply the answer in § 596, omitting the first
term, and inserting ‘ the sphere of the tangible.’

2 Here, of course, supply the spheres of the other three

senses.

8 For the full formula, see § 597.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



216


The sphere of hearing . . . and bodily nutriment 1 2 — this
is that form which is not, etc.

[711] What is that form which is the faculty of hearing
. . . smell . . . taste . . . body-sensibility?

The . . .* body, that is to say, the sentient principle,
which is derived from the four Great Phenomena . . . this
that is ‘ an empty village ’ — this is that form which is the
faculty of . . . body-sensibility.

[712] What is that form which is not the faculty of . . ►
body-sensibility ?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.

[718] What is that form which is femininity (lit, the
female faculty or potentiality) 7 s

That which is of the female, feminine in appearance,
characteristics, occupation, and deportment, feminine in
condition and being — this is that form which is femininity.

[718a] What is that form which is not femininity?

The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment— this is
that form which is not, etc. 4 *

[714] What is that form which is masculinity?

That which is of the male, masculine in appearance,
characteristics, occupation, and deportment, masculine in
condition and being — this is that form which is mascu-
linity.

[715] What is that form which is not masculinity?

Answer as in § 718a. 6


1 /.c., answer as in § 596, omitting the first item, and
inserting 4 the sphere of the tangible/

2 See §§ 601, 605, 609, 618. 3 See §§ 688-685.

4 [718a] is inadvertently omitted in the printed text.

6 §§ 718a, 715, and 717 are presumably identical with

£ 596, with the successive omission of the term excluded

by each question, and with the insertion always of 4 the
sphere of the tangible. *


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



217


[716] What is that form which is (the faculty of)
vitality ?

The persistence of these corporeal states, their subsist-
ence, their going on, their being kept going on, their
progress, continuance, preservation, life, life as faculty —
this is that form which is (the faculty of) vitality.

[717] What is that form which is not (the faculty of)
vitality ?

Answer as in § 718a.


[Intimation (vinfiatti).J

[718] What is that form which is bodily intimation ?
Answer as in § 686.

[719] What is that form which is not bodily intimation ?
The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is

that form which is bodily intimation.

[720] What is that form which is vocal intimation?
Answer as in § 687.

[721] What is that form which is not vocal intimation ?
The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is

that form which is not, etc. 1


[Space and Jluul .] 2

[722] What is that form which is the element of
space ?

That which is space and belongs to space, is sky, belongs
to sky, is vacuum, belongs to vacuum, and is not in contact
with the four Great Phenomena — this is that form which
is the element of space.


1 Again, in these two negative categories, § 596 is pre-
sumably followed with corresponding omissions and inser-
tion. See p. 209, note 1.

2 Cf. with §§ 688, 652.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



218


[723] What is that form which is not the element of
space ?

Answer as § 721.

[724] What is that form which is the element of
fluidity?

That which is fluid and belongs to fluid, that which is
viscid and belongs to viscid ; the cohesiveness of form — this
is that form which is the element of fluidity.

[725] What is that form which is not the element of
fluidity ?

Answer as in § 721.


[Modes of form.]

[726] What is that form which is lightness of form ?
That lightness of form which is its capacity for changing

easily, its freedom from sluggishness and inertia — this is
that form which is lightness of form.

[727] What is that form which is not lightness of form ?
The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment —this is

that form which is not lightness of form.

[728-731] Questions on the other two modes of form
‘ plasticity ’ and * wieldiness * are answered by the descrip-
tions given in §§ 640, 641. The corresponding contradictory
terms are described in the same terms as in § 727, rtz. : as
in § 596, with the omissions and insertion as indicated on
p. 216, n. 5.


[Evolution of form.]

[782] What is that form which is the integration of
form?

That which is accumulation of form is the integration
of form — this is that form which is, etc.

[733] What is that form which is not the integration of
form?


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


219


The sphere of vision . . . and bodily nutriment — this is
that form which is not, etc.

[784-737] Questions on the ‘subsistence,* ‘decay,* and
* impermanence * of form and their contradictories are
answered analogously icith those in the group on ‘ Modes
of form,* the three positives being described as in §§ 642-645.


[ Nutrition .]

[740] What is that form which is bodily nutriment?

This is answered as in § 646.

[741] What is that form which is not bodily nutriment ?
The sphere of vision . . . and the impermanence of

form — this is that form which is not bodily nutriment.

Such are the Categories of Form under Dual Aspects.
[End of] the Exposition of the Pairs.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter 111.

Categories of Form under Triple Aspects. Exposition
of the Triplets.] 1

[742-744] What is that form which is
(i.) personal 2 and derived ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and denved ?

The sphere of visible form . . . and bodily nutriment. 3
(iii.) external and not derived ?

The sphere of the tangible and the fluid element.

[745-747] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and the issue of grasping ?

The spheres of the five senses.


1 To lighten the tedium to the reader of looking through
this lengthy analysis of form considered as of the self or of
the not-self taken in combination with the presence or
absence of some other attribute, I have attempted a mode
of grouping the triplets. I have also curtailed each answer
of that constant feature, the concluding affirmation, termed
in the Cy. (p. 55) the appana. Cf. preceding answers.

2 Ajjhattikam. The word ‘ personal ’ corresponds
more strictly perhaps to puggalikam, but it is less
cumbrous than ‘ of/ or * belonging to, the self/ while
it is, at the same time, not an incorrect rendering. See
p. 207, n. 1.

3 This presumably still refers to § 596, which these two
first answers may be held to exhaust between them, with-
out the insertion of ‘ the sphere of the tangible/ which
comes under (iii.). Cf. the preceding chapter.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



221


(ii.) external and the issue of grasping ?

Femininity, masculinity, vitality, or whatever other form
exists through karma having been wrought, whether it be
in the spheres of visible form, odour, taste, or the tangible,
in the spatial or the fluid element, in the integration or
subsistence of form, or in bodily nutriment. 1
(iii.) external and not the issue of grasping ?

The sphere of sound, bodily and vocal intimation, the
lightness, plasticity, wieldiness, decay, and impermanence
of form, or whatever other form exists which is not due to
karma having been wrought, whether it be in the spheres
of visible form, 2 odour, taste, or the tangible, in the spatial
or the fluid element, etc. [continue as in ii.].

[748-750] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and both the issue of grasping and Jaronr-
able to grasping !

(ii.) external and both the issue of grasping and favour-
able to grasping ?

(iii.) external and not the issue of grasping but favourable
to grasping ?

The answers are identical with those in the preceding
triplet 9 taken in order. 3

[751*758] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and invisible ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and visible ?

The sphere of visible form.

(iii.) external and invisible ?

The sphere of sound . . . and bodily nutriment 4


1 Cf §§ 653, 654.

2 Saddayatanam, here repeated in the printed text, is
omitted in K.

8 In § 750 read kammassa before katattfi.

4 Fill up from § 596 as before.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



222


[754-756] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and reacting ( imping eing ) P

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and imping eing f

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

(iii.) external and non-imping eing ? 1 2 *

Sex 8 . . . and bodily nutriment.

[757-759] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and a faculty t

The five faculties of sense.

(ii.) external and a faculty ?

Sex and vitality.

(hi.) external and not a faculty i

The sphere of visible form . . . and bodily nutriment. 4 *

[760-762] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not one of the Great Phenomena ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and belonging to the Great Phenomena ?

The sphere of the tangible and the fluid element. 6
(iii.) external and not one of the Great Phenomena ?

The spheres of the [other four kinds of sense-objects] 6
. . . and bodily nutriment.

[768-765] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not intimation ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and intimation ?

Bodily and vocal intimation. 7


1 See p. 175, n. 2, and p. 188, n. 1.

2 For sappatigham read appatigham.

8 This term is substituted as a convenient abbreviation
for the indriyas of both sexes. Cf. § 596.

4 Supply as before from § 596.

6 See § 647 et seq.

6 Actually ‘of visible form . . .’ See note 1.

7 See §§ 636, 637.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



223


(in.) external and not intimation ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

[766-768] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and sprung from thought ? l

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and sprung from thought ?

Bodily and vocal intimation, or whatever other form
exists which is bom of thought, caused by thought, etc.
[continue as in § 667].

(iii.) external and not sprung from thought !

Sex and vitality, the decay and impermanence of form,
or whatever other form exists which is not born of thought,
caused by thought, etc. [continue as in § 668].

[769-771] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and does not come into being together with
a thought !

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and comes into being together with a
thought ?

Bodily and vocal intimation.

(iii.) external and does not come into being , etc . ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

[772-774] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not consecutive to a thought l
(ii.) external and consecutive to a thought *

(iii.) external and not consecutive to a thought ‘l

The answers are identical with those in the preceding
triplet , taken in order .

[776-777] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and gross P

The spheres of the five senses.

1 See § 667 et seq. 2 See § 676 et seq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



224


(ii.) external and gross ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

(iii.) external and subtle ?

Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.

[778-780] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and near ? l
The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and remote ?

Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.

(iii.) external and near ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

[781-788] What is that form which is

(i.) external and not the basis of visual contact P
The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the basis of visual contact ?

The sphere of vision.

(iii.) personal and not the basis of visual contact ?

The sphere of the other four senses.

[784-786] What is that form which is
(i.) external and not a basis of
the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the visual cognition
that is bom of visual contact !

(ii.) personal and a basis of the feeling 8 . . . the visual
cognition that is born of visual contact ?

(iii.) personal and not a basis of the feeling . . . the
visual cognition that is bom of visual contact ?
Answers identical with those in the preceding triplet .


1 See § 677 et seq . 2 * See § 679 et seq.

3 Concerning the lacunae in this and the following sen-

tences on ‘ basis,’ cf § 681 et seq. and notes.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


225


[787-789] What is that form which is
(i.) external and not a basis of
auditory . . .
olfactory . . .
gustatory . . .
bodily contact i

The spheres of the five kinds of sense objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and a basis of . . . bodily contact J
The spheres of the other four senses respectively.

(iii.) personal and not a basis of . . . bodily contact /

The sphere of . . . vision, hearing, smell, taste.

[790-792] What is that form which is
(i.) external and not a basis of
the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the . . . cognition of body
that is barn of . . . bodily contact !

(ii.) personal and a basis of . . . the cognition of body
that is bom of bodily contact }

(iii.) personal and not a basis of . . . the cognition of
body that is bom of bodily contact !

Answers identical with those in the preceding triplet taken
in order .

[798-795] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the object appi'ehended on occasion
of visual contact }

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and the object apprehended on occasion of
visual contact ?

The sphere of visible form.

(iii.) external and not the object apprehended on occasion
of visual contact ?

The spheres of the other four kinds of sense-objects . . .
And bodily nutriment.

15


ed by CjOCK^Ic



226


[796-798] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not the object of
the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the visual cognition
that is bom of visual contact ?

(ii.) external and the object of . . . visual cognition /
(Hi-) external and not the object of ... . visual cogni-
tion ?

Answers identical with those in the preceding triplet , taken
in order.

[799-801] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the object apprehended on occa-
sion of

auditory . . .
olfactory . . .
gustatory . . .
bodily contact ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and the object apprehended on occasion
of . . . bodily contact ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(iii.) external and not the object apprehended on occasion
of . . . bodily contact ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

[802-804] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not the object of
the feeling . . .
the perception . . .
the thinking . . .
the . . . cognition of body
that is born of . . . bodily contact ?

The spheres of the five senses.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


227


(ii.) external and the object of the . . . cognition of body
that is born of bodily contact ?

The sphere of . . . the tangible.

(iii.) external and not the object of the . . . cognition of
body that is bom , etc .

The spheres of the other four kinds of sense-objects . . .
and bodily nutriment.

[805-807] What is that form which is
(i) external and not the sphere of vision ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the sphere of vision ?

The eye, that is to say the sentient organ which is
derived from the four Great Phenomena . . . this that is
‘ an empty village ’ — this, etc. 1

(iii.) personal and not the sphere of vision ?

The spheres of the other four senses.

[808-810] What is that form which is

(i.) external and not the sphere of hearing 9 smell , taste ,
or body-sensibility ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the sphere of . . . body -sensibility !

The body, that is to say the sentient organ, which is
derived from the Great Phenomena . . . this that is * an
empty village ’ — this, etc.

(iii.) personal and not the sphere of . . . body ’-sensibility ?

The spheres of the other four senses.

[811-818] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the sphere of visible form ?

The spheres of the five senses.


1 For this and similar answers in following triplets see
§ 597 et seq .

15 — 2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



228


(ii.) external and the sphere of visible foi m ?

That form which, derived from the four Great Pheno-
mena, is visible under the appearance of colour . . • this
that is the element of visible form — this, etc. 1

(iii.) external and not the sphere of visible form $

The spheres of the other four kinds of sense-objects . . .
and bodily nutriment.

[814-816] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the sphere of sound , or of odour , or
of taste , or of the tangible ?

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and the sphere of . . . the tangible i
The earthy (solid) element, etc. . . . this that is the
constituent element of the tangible — this, etc. 2

(iii.) external and not the sphere of . . . the tangible f
The spheres of the other four kinds of sense-objects . . .
and bodily nutriment.

[817-819] What is that form which is
(i.) external and not the element of vision ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the element of vision f
The sphere of vision.

(iii.) personal and not the element of vision ?

The other four senses.

[820-822] What is that form which is

(i.) external and not the element of hearing , smell , taste ,
or body -sensibility ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the element of . . . body sensibility ?
The sphere of . . . body-sensibility.


1 See § 617.


2 See § 648.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


229


(iii.) personal and not the element of . . . body-sensi-
bility ?

The spheres of the other four senses.

[828-825] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the element of visible form !

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and the element of visible form ?

The sphere of visible forms.

(iii.) external and not the element of visible form ?

The spheres of the other four kinds of sense-objects . . .
and bodily nutriment.

[826-828] What is that form which is

(i.) personal and not the element of sound , odour , taste
or the tangible !

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and the element of . . . the tangible ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(iii.) external and not the element of ... the tangible ?
The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

[829-881] What is that form which is
(i.) external and not the facidty of vision ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

(ii.) personal and the faculty of vision ?

The sphere of vision.

(iii.) personal and not the faculty of vision ?

The spheres of the other four senses.

[832-834] What is that form which is

(i.) external and not the facidty of hearing , smell , taste,
or body ^sensibility ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



280


(ii.) personal and the faculty of . . . body- sensibility ?

The body, that is to say the sentient organ which is
derived from the four Great Phenomena . . . this that is
4 an empty village ’ — this, etc.

(iii.) personal and not the faculty of .. . body-sensi-
bility ?

The spheres of the other four senses.

[885-887] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not the potentiality of femininity l

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and femininity ?

That which is of the female, female in appearance, etc.
[ continue as in § 688] .

(iii.) external and not femininity ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.

[888-840] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not the potentiality of masculinity f etc .

The questions and answers in this triplet are exactly
analogous with those in the foregoing , § 634 constituting the
answer to (ii).

[841-848] This triplet is on 4 vitality/ and is also exactly
analogous with that on 4 femininity/ § 635 being substituted
in (ii.).

[844-846] What is that form which is
(i.) personal and not bodily intimation l

The spheres of the five senses.

(ii.) external and bodily intimation ?

That tension, intension, tense state of the body, etc.
[continue as in § 636] .

(iii.) external and not bodily intimation ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . . and
bodily nutriment.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



231


[847-849] This triplet is on ‘ vocal intimation/ and similar
to the foregoing , § 637 being quoted as the answer to the
second question.

[850-876] Here follow ten triplets on the presence or
absence , in form that is personal or external . , of the ten follow-
ing attributes — identical with those ending the categories ac-
cording to Pairs (§§ 722-741).

the element of space, the integration of form,

the element of fluidity, the subsistence of form,

the lightness of form, the decay of form,

the plasticity of form, the impermanence of form,

the wieldine88 of form, bodily nutriment.

Questions and answers in each of these triplets are identical
with those in the triplet last set out on i bodily intimation ’
(§§ 844-846), the only varying elements being the specific kind
of form inquired into and its definition in the second answer
of each triplet. Thus the schema of the questions is
(i.) personal and not . . .

(ii.) external and . . .

(iii.) external and not . . .*

Such are the Categories of Form under Threefold Aspects.

[End of] the Exposition of Triplets.

1 There are several omissions in the printed text, break-
ing into the symmetry of the triplets, viz. : question and
answer (iii.) on akasadhatu (following § 851); question
and answer (iii.) on rupassa upacayo (following § 865);
question and answer (L) on rupassa santati (following
§ 865). These, if duly inserted, would bring the number
of questions (and answers) at the end of this chapter up to
879, instead of 876. Had the triplets been grouped as
such, the omissions would not have been possible.


ed by CjjOCK^Ic



[Chapter IV.

Categories of Form under Fourfold Aspects.] 1
[Derivation-^Work of Karma.]

[877-880] What is that form which is
(i.) derived and the issue of grasping ?

The spheres of the five senses ; the potentialities of sex
and vitality, or whatever other form exists through karma
having been wrought, whether it be in the sphere of visible
forms, 2 odours, or tastes, the element of space, the integra-
tion or subsistence of form, or bodily nutriment.

(ii.) derived and not the issue of grasping ?

The sphere of sounds, bodily and vocal intimation, the
lightness, plasticity, and wieldiness of form, or whatever
other form exists which is not due to karma having been


1 The logical method in this division is familiar enough,
namely (where capitals represent positive, and uncials,
negative terms), AB, Ab, aB, ab. The former term in the
pair combined is, with its negative, a relative constant,
there being a series of only six, namely, the concept of
form as derived, as the product of karma, as that which
breeds karma (literally, is karma-isfe or karnwms), as im-
pressing the senses, as faculty, and as one of the elements
(t.e., the opposite of derived, conceived positively). The
latter five of these six are in turn used as the relatively
variable term, with the addition of three others: the
concept of form with respect to grossness or delicacy, to
distance, and to visibility.

2 On sound and karma, see p. 201, n. 4.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



238


wrought, whether it be in the spheres of visible forms,
odours, or tastes, the element of space, the integration or
subsistence of form, or bodily nutriment.

(iii.) underived and the issue of grasping ?

[Form] due to karma having been wrought, which is in
the sphere of the tangible and the fluid element.

(iv.) underived and not the issue of grasping ?

[Form] not due to karma having been wrought, which is
in the sphere of the tangible and the fluid element.

[Derivation^— Production of Karma.]

[881-884] What is that form which is

(i.) derived and both the issue of grasping and favour-
able to it ?

(ii.) derived and not the isme of grasping but favourable
to it ? l 2

(iii.) underived and both the issue of grasping and favour-
able to it 1

(iv.) underived and not the issue of grasping but favour-
able to it f*

The fowr answers are respectively identical with those in
the preceding group .

[Derivation— Impact.]

[885-888] What is that form which is
(i.) derived and impingeing ?

The spheres of the five senses, and of visible form, sound,
odour and taste.

(ii.) derived and non-impingeing ?

Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.

(iii.) underived and impingeing ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(iv.) underived and non-impingeing ?

The fluid element.


1 See § 656, n. 1.

2 Bead na before kammassain the answer.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



234


[Derivation-'-Bulk.]

[889-892] What is that form which is
(i.) derived and gross ?

(ii.) derived and subtle ?

(iii.) underived and gross ?

(iv.) derived and subtle I

Answers respectively identical with those in the preceding
group .

[Derivation — Proximity.]

[893-896] What is that form which is
(i.) derived and remote ?

Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.

(ii.) derived and near /

The spheres of the five senses, and those of visible form,
sound, odour and taste.

(iii.) underived and remote ?

The fluid element.

(iv.) underived and near ?

The sphere of the tangible.

[Work of Karma — Visibility.]

[897-900] What is that form which is
(i.) the issue of grasping and visible ?

The sphere of visible form which is due to karma having
been wrought.

(ii.) the issue of grasping and invisible i

The spheres of the five senses; sex and vitality, or
whatever other form exists through karma having been
wrought, whether it be in the spheres of odour, taste, or
the tangible, the elements of space or fluidity, the integra-
tion or subsistence of form, or bodily nutriment.

(iii.) not the issue of grasping 1 and visible ?

The sphere of visible form which is not due to karma
having been wrought.

1 In the printed text read anupadinnam.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



235


(iv.) not the issue of grasping and imdsible ?

The sphere of sound, bodily and vocal intimation, the
lightness, plasticity, wieldiness of form, the decay, or the
impermanence of form, or whatever other form exists which
is not due to karma having been wrought, whether it be in
the spheres of odour, or of taste, or of the tangible, the
elements of space, or of fluidity, the integration or sub-
sistence of form, or bodily nutriment.

[Work of Karma^Impact.]

[901-904] What is that form which is
(i.) the issue of grasping and impingeing ?

The spheres of the five senses, or whatever other form
exists through karma having been wrought in the spheres
of visible form, odour, taste or the tangible.

(ii.) the issue of grasping and non-imping ring ?

Sex or vitality, or whatever other form exists through
karma having been wrought in the elements of space or
fluidity, in the integration, or subsistence of form, or in
bodily nutriment.

(iii.) not the issue of grasping and impingeing ?

The sphere of sound, or whatever other form exists which
is not due to karma having been wrought in the spheres
of the other four kinds of sense-objects.

(iv.) not the issue of grasping and non-imping eing ?

Bodily and vocal intimation, the lightness, plasticity,
wieldiness, decay, or impermanence of form, or whatever
other form exists which is not due to karma having been
wrought in the elements of space or fluidity, in the integra-
tion or subsistence of form, or in bodily nutriment.

[Work of Karma-^Great Phenomena.]

[905-908] What is that form which is

(i.) the issue of grasping and great phenomenon ?

The sphere of the tangible and the fluid element which
are due to karma having been wrought.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



(ii.) the issue of grasping and not great phenomenon ?

The spheres of the five senses, sex, vitality, or whatever
other form exists through karma having been wrought, in
the element of space, in the integration or subsistence of
form, or in bodily nutriment.

(iii.) not the issue of grasping but great phenomenon ?

The sphere of the tangible and the fluid element which
are not due to karma having been wrought.

(iv.) not the issue of grasping nor great phenomenon !

The sphere of sound, bodily and vocal intimation, the
lightness, plasticity, wieldiness, decay and impermanence
of form, or whatever other form exists which is not due to
karma having been wrought, whether it be in the spheres
of visible form, odour, or taste, in the element of space, in
the integration or subsistence of form, or in bodily nutri-
ment.


[Work of Karma-^Bulk.]

[909-912] What is that form which is
(i.) the issue of grasping and gross ?

(ii.) the issue of grasping and subtle ?

(iii.) not the issue of grasping and gross ?

(iv.) not the issue of grasping and subtle ? 1

Answers respectively identical with the four in the next
preceding group but one (§§ 901-904).

[Work of Karma^Proximity.]

[918-916] What is that form which is
(i.) the issue of grasping and remote ?

(ii.) the issue of grasping and near ?

(iii.) not the issue of grasping and remote ?

(iv.) not the issue of grasping and near ?

Answers identical with those in the preceding group (i.e.,
with those in §§ 901-904), but haring the order of the first and
second answers inverted , as well as that of the third and fourth .

1 In the answer to this question the printed text has
omitted to insert apodhatu. Cf. §§ 892 and 880.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


237


[917-936]

In the next Jive groups of four , form is considered as a
combination of (a) ‘ the issue o! grasping and favourable to
grasping/ and either i visible/ 1 ‘ impingeing/ * a great
phenomenon/ ‘ gross ’ or i remote/ or the opposites of these
five taken successively ; (b) 1 not the issue of grasping, but
favourable to grasping/ and the five above-named attributes
xmd their opposites taken successively. Thus the questions are
analogous to, and the answers identical ivith, those in the jnr-
xeding Jive groups (§§ 897-916).

[Impact-*-Faculty.]

[937-940] What is that form which is
(i.) impingeing and faculty ?

The faculties of the five senses.

(ii.) impingeing and not faculty ?

The five kinds of sense-objects.

(iii.) non-imping eing and faculty ?

Sex and vitality.

(iv.) non-imping ring and not faculty ?

Bodily and vocal intimation . . . and bodily nutriment.

[Impact-^Great Phenomenon.]

1(941-944] What is that form which is
(i.) impingeing and a great phenomenon ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(ii.) impingeing and not a great phenomenon ?

The spheres of visible form, sound, odour and taste.

(iii.) non-impingeing and a great phenomenon ?

The fluid element.

(iv.) non-impingeing and not a great phenomenon ?

Sex . . • and bodily nutriment.


1 In the answer to the first question, § 917, read na before
kammassa.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



238


[Faculty (Potentiality) —Bulk.]

[945-948] What is that form which is
(i.) faculty and gross '

The faculties of the five senses.

(ii.) faculty and subtle t
Sex and vitality.

(iii.) non-faculty and gross l
The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

(iv.) non-faculty and subtle /

Intimation . . . and bodily nutriment.

[Faculty (Potentiality)-^Proximity.]

[949-952] What is that form which is
(i.) faculty and remote ?

Sex and vitality.

(ii.) faculty and near l
The faculties of the five senses.

(iii.) non-faculty and remote ?

Intimation . . . and bodily nutriment.

(iv.) non-faculty and near ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

[Great Phenomenon— Bulk.]

[95B-956] What is that form which is
(i.) a great phenomenon and gross ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(ii.) a great phenomenon and subtle /

The fluid element.

(iii.) not a great phenomenon and gross ?

The spheres of the five senses and of visible form, sound,,
odour and taste.

(iv.) not a great phenomenon and subtle ?

Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



289


[Great Phenomenon-^Proximity.]

[957-960] What is that form which is
(i.) a great phenomenon and remote ?

The fluid element.

(ii.) a great phenomenon and near ?

The sphere of the tangible.

(iii.) not a great phenomenon and remote ?

Sex and vitality.

(iv.) not a great phenomenon and near ?

The spheres of the five senses and of visible form, sound,
odour and taste.

[Form as Seen, Heard, Imagined, Understood.]

[961] (i.) The sphere of visible form is Form Seen,

(ii.) The sphere of sound is Form Heard,

(iii.) The sphere of odour, taste and the tangible
is Form Imagined, 1


1 Mutam. I am under the impression that the first
three members of this group are survivals of an older
tradition, belonging to an age when the five senses had not
been co-ordinated by psychological analysis comparable to
that effected by the earlier Buddhist school, and when
mano and its function, expressed here (in part) by this
old past participle, were more vaguely conceived, in the
Pra?na Upanishad , e.g., which may or may not be older
than the Abhidhamma, either the five senses are grouped
as above under man as, eye and ear, or the last two are
alone held worthy to rank with the divine elements of life.
If it be contended that the former interpretation is not
plausible, it should be remembered that, in the far older
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (i., 5, 8), it is said that by
man a 8 we know when we are touched from behind. It is
as though the tradition were endeavouring to say, Smell,
taste, touching, without the aid either of sight or of hearing,
require a greater effort of inference, of mental construction,
of imagination, to realize the external cause, or potential
concrete mental percept, than either sight or hearing.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



(iv.) All form is Form Cognized by the mind. 1

Such are the Categories of Form under Fourfold Aspects.
[End of] the Groups of Four.


Buddhaghosa, who here resumes his parable (Asl. 338),
paraphrases mutam by munitva janitabbatthena,
and by phusitva pi nauuppattikaranato.

1 Manasa vinnatam, that is, manovifLfLanena ja-
nitabbam. Ibid.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter V.


The Category of Form under a Fivefold Aspect (pancavid-
hena rupasangaho).]

[962-966] What is that form which is
(i.) earth-element (patha vi-dhatu) ?*■

That which is hard, rough, hardness, rigidity, whether it
be of the self, 2 or external, or the issue of grasping, 3 or not
the issue of grasping.


1 The essential mark (lakkhanam) of the earth-element
is given as ‘ hardness ’ (kakkhalattam, Asl., 332). This
may very likely have conveyed to Buddhists what we under-
stand by ‘ solid,* when the implication is density as opposed
to what is liquid or gaseous, and it was tempting to use
solidity in preference to hardness. But the former term is
ambiguous, for it may mean the opposite of plane surface,
and kakkhalattam cannot be strained to mean that.
Again, the opposite of the latter term is neither liquid nor
flat, but soft or pliant. Further, compare its use in de-
scribing gravel or stone-food in Mil. 67, where we should
certainly use ‘hard.’ The other characteristics of patha-
vidhatu are said to be establishing a fulcrum or i rov
a- To>, patitthanam), and accepting (sampaticchanam),
the import of the latter term not being very dear.

2 Ajjhattam. See § 673, note, and § 742, note.

8 In the Commentary, p. 388, where upadinnam is
said to be na kammasamutthanaip eva, the negative
particle must have crept in by some error, that which is
upadinnam being essentially due to karma. See Dh. S.,
§§ 658, 654; Asl., pp. 46, 837 (§ 664), etc. Generally,
says Buddhaghosa, the bony framework of the body (the
most solid part of one’s self, sariratthakam) is here

16


ed by CjOCK^Ic



242


(ii.) fluid-element (apodhatu)?

That which is fluid, belonging to fluid, viscid, belonging
to what is viscid, the cohesiveness of form, whether it be
of the self, or external, or the issue of grasping or not the
issue of grasping. 1

(iii.) flame-element (t e j o d h a t u) ? 2

That which is flame, belonging to flame, heat, belonging
to heat, hot, belonging to what is hot, whether it be of the
self, or, etc. [continue as in preceding ].

(iv.) air-element (vayodhatu)?

That which is air, belongs to air [the fluctuation], the
inflation, 3 of form, whether it be of the self, or, etc.


referred to. For this, while it may, or may not be upa-
dinnam, is said to be wholly the issue of grasping when
signifying that which is taken, laid hold of, infected.

1 See § 652, note. The essential characteristics of
apodhatu are said to be flowing (paggharanam), ex-
pansion or spreading (bruhanam, cj . p. 12, note 8,
Mil 817) and congress (sangaho, Asl., ibid.). The last
term may possibly be an attempt to express what we term,
loosely enough, 4 water always finding its own level.’ The
internal or personal apo is distributed as bile, phlegm,
pus, blood, sweat, serum, tears, and so on. M. i. 42.

2 Never a ggi or fire, in the Buddhist books. The essential
characteristics are said to be (Asl., ibid.) heat, ripening,
maturing (paripacanam) and softening. By the heat
within food and drink are digested. M., loc. cit.

8 The text reads here both chambitattam and tham-
bhitattam, fluctuation (quaking) and inflation. The
former term, however, is not elsewhere in the Atthasalini
applied to vayo; the latter, with the intensive vi-, is
declared to be the characteristic mark of vayo, other
features of the element being onward movement (samu-
dir an am) and downward force (abhinlharam — sic lege.
Cf. D. i. 76; M. i. 119; Asl. 882). Now Buddhaghosa
passes over chambhitattam in silence, but explains
thambhitattam. Again, though this is, of course, not
conclusive, only the single term thambhitattam r li-
pase a seems to be called for by the parallel, bandhanat-
tam rupassa (cohesiveness), in the description of fluidity*
It is significant also that K. omits chambhitattam. On


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



248


(v.) derived ? 1

The spheres of the five senses . . . a ad solid nutriment.

Such is the Category of Form under a Fivefold Aspect.
[End of] the Group of Five.


these grounds taken together, I should be inclined to doubt
the original inclusion of the term. The instance chosen to
illustrate the inflating function characteristic of vayo is
that of the sheaths or stems of lotuses and reeds which are
‘ filled with air,’ or wind (vatapunnani).

1 * Derived ’ (up a da) is the opposite of (i.) to (iv.). See
§§ 647 , 648 .


16—2


ed by CjOO^lC



[Chapter VI.

The Category of Form under a Sixfold Aspect.]

[ 967 ]

(i.) The sphere of visible forms is form cognizable
by sight.

(ii.) The sphere of sounds is form cognizable by
hearing.

(iii.) The sphere of odours is form cognizable by
smell.

(iv.) The sphere of tastes is form cognizable by taste.

(v.) The sphere of the tangible is form cognizable
by body-sensibility.

(vi.) All form is form cognizable by the mind.

Such is the Category of Form under a Sixfold Aspect.

[End of] the Group of Six.


:ed by CjOO^IC



[Chapter VII.

The Category of Form under a Sevenfold Aspect.]

[ 968 ]

(i.) The sphere of visible form is form cognizable
by sight.

(ii.) The sphere of sound is form cognizable by
hearing.

(iii.) The sphere of odour is form cognizable by
smell.

(iv.) The sphere of taste is form cognizable by taste.

(v.) The sphere of the tangible is form cognizable
by body-sensibility.

[ 969 ]

(vi.) The spheres of visible form, sound, odour,
taste, and the tangible are form cognizable
by the element of ideation.

(vii.) All form is form comprehensible by the element
of representative intellection.

Such is the Category of Form under a Sevenfold Aspect.
[End of] the Group of Seven.


ed by CjOO^lC



[Chapter VHL

The Category of Form under an Eightfold Aspect.]


[ 970 ]

(i.) The sphere of visible form is form cognizable
by the eye.

(ii.) The sphere of sound is form cognizable by
the ear.

(iii.) The sphere of odour is form cognizable by the
nose.

(iv.) The sphere of taste is form cognizable by the
tongue.

(v.) Pleasurable agreeable contact obtainable by
touch is form cognizable by the body.

(vi.) Unpleasant disagreeable contact obtainable by
touch is form cognizable by the body.

(vii.) The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects
are form cognizable by ideation.

(viii.) All form is form comprehensible by repre-
sentative intellection.

Such is the Category of Form under an Eightfold Aspect.
[End of] the Group of Eight.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter IX.

The Category of Form under a Ninefold Aspect.]

[971-973] What is that form which is
(i.) the faculty of vision ?

(ii.) the faculty of hearing ?

(iii.) the faculty of smell ?

(iv.) the faculty of taste ?

(v.) the faculty of body-sensibility ?

(vi.) the potentiality of femininity ?

(vii.) the potentiality of masculinity ?

(viii.) the potentiality of vitality ?

The eight answers are those given in the original descrip-
tions of the eight faculties or potentialities enumerated (§§ 597,
601, 605, 609, 613, 633-535).

(ix.) What is that form which is not faculty ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects . . .* and
bodily nutriment.

Such is the Category of Form under a Ninefold Aspect.

[End of] the Group of Nine.

1 That is to say, the remainder of § 596, but omitting, of
course, the three ‘ indriyas * of the sexes and vitality, and
presumably inserting ‘ the element of fluidity * (cf p. 203,
n. 3).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter X.

The Category of Form under a Tenfold Aspect.]

[974, 975] The first eight questions and answers are
identical with the first eight in the preceding group .

[976, 977] What is that form which is
(ix.) not faculty but impingeing ?

The spheres of the five kinds of sense-objects.

(x.) not faculty and non-impingeing ?

Intimation . . and bodily nutriment.

Such is the Category of Form under a Tenfold Aspect.
[End of] the Group of Ten.


1 That is to say, the remainder of § 596, beginning at
bodily intimation, and presumably inserting ‘ the element
of fluidity.*


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter XI.

The Category of Form under an Elevenfold Aspect.]

[978, 979] What is that form which is
(i.) the sphere of vision ?

(ii.) the sphere of hearing ?

(iii.) the sphere of smell ?

(iv.) the sphere of taste ?

(v.) the sphere of body-sensibility ?

(vi.) the sphere of visible form ?

(vii.) the sphere of sound ?

(viii.) the sphere of odour ?

(ix.) the sphere of sapids ?

(x.) the sphere of the tangible ?

Answers as in §§ 597, 601, 605, 609, 618, 617, 621, 625,
629, 649 respectively.

[980]

(xi.) What is that form which is invisible, non-
impingeing, and included in the sphere of
[mental] states? 1
Sex . . . and bodily nutriment.

Such is the Category of Form under an Elevenfold
Aspect.

[End of] the Group of Eleven.

[End of] the Divisions of Form.

[End of] the Eighth Portion for Recitation.

1 Dhammayatana-pariyapannam. For the full
content of the answer, see, as before, the last fourteen
items in § 596.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[BOOK III.

THE DIVISION ENTITLED ‘ELIMINATION’
(n i k k h e p a-k a n d a m). 1


PART I .


Chapter I.


The Group of Triplets (t i k a m) .]

[981] Which are the states that are good ?

The three roots of good (karma), 2 to wit, absence of lust,
absence of hate, absence of dulness; the skandhas of


1 Or rejection. According to the Cy. (844, 345), the various
classes into which the states of the moral consciousness
were distinguished (dhamma-vibhago) are now to be set
forth by a method which, in its greater conciseness, is a
rejection or discarding of the relatively more detailed
exposition (vitthara-desanam) of Book I. ‘Any in-
telligent person can recognise/ for instance, that in the
concise terms in which the answer to question [984] is
couched, the answer to question [1], among others, is
involved. [Relatively to the following Atthakatha, on the
other hand (§ 1368 to end in the printed text), this method
is in its turn less concise, more detailed.

2 By ‘ root * is meant ‘ cause, condition, bringing to pass,
generating, originating, producing.’ And ‘ since there is
no such thing as good detached from a root,’ all good is
hereby included. Asl. 344.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



251


feeling, perception, syntheses and intellect when they are
associated with those three roots ; whatever action, bodily,
vocal and mental, 1 springs from those three roots.

[982] Which are the states that are bad ?

The three roots of bad (karma), to wit, lust, hate,
dulness ; the Corruptions that are united with them ; 2 the
skandhas of feeling, perception, syntheses and intellect
when these are associated with them ; whatever action,
bodily, vocal and mental, springs from them.

[983] Which are the states that are indeterminate ?

The results of good and bad states taking effect in

the worlds of sense, form, or the formless, or in the [life
that is] Unincluded ; 3 the skandhas of feeling, perception,
syntheses and intellect, 4 * those states, moreover, known as
kiriy a- thoughts, 6 which are neither good, nor bad, nor
the results of karma ; lastly, all form and uncompounded
element. 6

[984] Which are the states that are associated with a
feeling of ease ?

The skandhas of perception, syntheses and intellect 7 (the


1 Manokammam, inadvertently omitted in the printed
text. Cf. § 982 and passim.

2 Tad-ekattha ca kilesa. Ekattham is defined
(Asl. 345) as located in one and the same thought by virtue
of a common origin, or in one and the same person , by
virtue of a common exclusion, to wit here, of corrupt or
faulty states. On kilesa, see § 1229 et seq .

3 Apariyapanna. See below, § 992, also § 583.

4 To save much repetition throughout this division,

these four skandhas are henceforward referred to as ‘ the
four skandhas.’

6 Dhamma kiriy a. Cf. § 566 et seq .

6 In the printed text sankhata should be asankhata.

7 The skandha of feeling is in this case the predominating
factor, and not reckoned as merely an associate, or sub-
ordinate adjunct in consciousness. (Tam should be inserted
before sampayutto in the text.)


ed by CjOCK^Ic



252


feeling itself being excepted) are the states associated [with
the consciousness arising] in an ease-yielding soil, 1 whether
it belong to the worlds of sense or of form, or to the life
that is Unincluded.

[985] Which are the states that are associated with
distressful feeling ?

The skandhas of perception, syntheses and intellect (the
feeling itself being excepted) are the states associated [with
the consciousness arising] in a distressful soil belonging to
the sensuous universe.

[986] Which are the states that are associated with
feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant ?

The skandhas of perception, syntheses and intellect (the
feeling itself being excepted) are the states associated [with
the consciousness arising] in a neutral soil, whether it
belong to the worlds of sense, form, or the formless, or to
the life that is Unincluded.

[987] Which are the states that are results ?

The results of good and bad states which take effect in
the worlds of sense, form and the formless, and in the life
that is Unincluded ; [in other words] the four skandhas. 2


1 Sukha-bhumiyam. I have kept to the more literal
rendering of bhumi here, in preference to some such term
as ‘ stage ’ (as in § 277 et seq.) or ‘ source/ because, of
the analogy drawn by the Cy. (p. 846) : — just as by saying
‘ This is a sugar-soil ’ or ‘ a rice-land ’ we mean localities
where these products thrive, so by sukha-bhumi, etc.,
we mean a thought (or state of mind, cittam), which is the
place (or occasion, than am) for the uprising of ease (or
happiness).

2 K. invariably places a colon before that enumeration of
four or more skandhas which is part of the usual procedure
in these triplets. There is nothing explicit in the Cy. to
justify my interpretation by the parenthesis ‘ in other words ’
of the somewhat amorphous construction of the answers
thus punctuated. But I gather from its remarks that, in
these concentrated replies, the skandha-list represents the
preceding half of the answer, in which it occurs, under


ed by CjOCK^Ic



258


[988] Which are the states that involve resultant states ? l

Good and bad states belonging to the worlds of sense,

form and the formless, or to the life that is Unincluded ;
[in other words] the four skandhas.

[989] Which are the states that neither are results, nor
have the quality of involving resultant states ?

Those states concerning action which are neither good,
nor bad, nor the results of karma ; all form, moreover,
and uncompounded element.

[990] Which are the states that are both the issue of
grasping and favourable to it ? 2

The co-Intoxicant s results of good and bad states taking
effect in the worlds of sense, form or the formless ; in
other words, the four skandhas ; such form, moreover, as
is due to karma having been wrought.

[991] Which are the states that are not the issue of
grasping but are favourable to grasping ?

Good and bad co-intoxicant states taking effect in the
worlds of sense, form, or the formless ; in other words, the
four skandhas; those states, moreover, known as kiriya-
thoughts, which are neither good, nor bad, nor the results
of karma; as well as such form as is not due to karma
having been wrought.

[992] Which are the states that are neither the issue of
grasping nor favourable to it ?


another aspect, viz., rasatthena, or that of groups in con-
sciousness. This is realiy the method followed in detail
throughout Book I., but here in mere outline : first a reply
in terms of dh a mm a, then the Summary, which is mainly ,
at least, in terms of skandha. Cf., e.g., §§ 431-441, 441a,
442. Also Asl. 152.

1 Vipakadhamma-dhamma, paraphrased (Asl. 42)
by vipaka-sabhava-dhamma, states having a result-
nature, or quality of result. See above, p. 164.

2 See § 653 et seq .

8 Sasava. See § 1096 et seq .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



254


The Paths that are the Unincluded, 1 and the Fruits of
the Paths, 2 and uncompounded element.

[993] Which are the states that are corrupt and
baneful ? 8

The three roots of bad (karma), to wit, lust, hat©,
dulness ; the Corruptions that are united with them ; the
four skandhas when these are associated with them ; what-
ever action, bodily, vocal and mental, springs from them.

[994] Which are the states that are not corrupt but
baneful ?

Good and indeterminate co-intoxicant states taking effect
in the worlds of sense, form and the formless; in other
words, the Jive 4 skandhas.


1 See p. 165, note 2. The term apariyapanna, when
applied to dhamma and used in an ethico-psychological
sense, is described as here in terms of path, fruit and un-
compounded element. See § 1287. Its positive correlate
is paraphrased, in Asl. 50, by * contained in the threefold
cycle of existence * ( i.e ., the worlds of sense, form, etc.). I
do not know whether apariyapannam with this lofty
significance occurs in either of the older Pitakas. But it
appears in K. V. 507, where it is declared a heresy to hold
that any mere speculative opinion was of the Unincluded,
and where the content of the latter concept is more amply
set forth than in our manual.

2 Bead ca after maggaphalani. The commentator
vindicates the status of the arahat, here alluded to, as
being free from all ‘ grasping * as follows : Although the
skandhas (the temporary being) of the arahat may become
a cause of grasping to those who say, Our mother’s brother,
the Thera ! Our father’s brother, the Thera ! yet there is
no grasping, no infection, attaching to the Paths, the Fruits
and Nirvana. For just as there is no inducement to
mosquitoes to alight on a ball of iron which has been
heated all day, so these Things, by their excessive glory,
do not attract the grasp of craving, pride or false opinion.

3 Or corrupting. See § 1229 (note) et seq.

4 Beginning with the skandha of material form.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



255


[995] Which are the states that are neither corrupt nor
baneful ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths and uncompounded element.


[996] Which are the states ‘wherein conception works
and thought discursive ’?*

The four skandhas (conception and discursive thought
excluded) 1 2 * which are associated 8 [with the consciousness
arising] in a soil favourable to the working of conception
and of discursive thought, whether it belong to the world
of sense or of form, or to the life that is Unincluded.

[997] Which are the states ‘ wherein is no working of
conception but only of thought discursive’? 4 *

The four skandhas (discursive thought excluded) which
are associated [with the consciousness arising] in a soil
favourable to the working, not of conception, but only of
discursive thought, whether it belong to the world of form,
or to the life that is Unincluded.

[998] Which are the states that are ‘ void of the working
of conception and of thought discursive’? 6

The four skandhas which are associated [with the con-
sciousness arising] in a soil void of conception and dis-
cursive thought, whether it belong to the world of sense,
form, or the formless, or to the life that is Unincluded ; all
form, moreover, and uncompounded element.


1 See § 160. Part of the formula for the First Jhana.
The world, universe, or heaven of the Formless is omitted,
being a ‘ soil ’ where these mental processes could not grow.
See §§ 265-268.

2 They would else come under the skandha of syntheses.
See § 62, and p. 251, n. 7.

8 Read tarn before sampayutto.

4 See § 168— a phrase borrowed from the * System of

Fivefold Jhana.*

6 See § 162 et seq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



256


[999] Which are the states that are accompanied by joy?

The four skandhas (joy being excluded) which are asso-
ciated [with the consciousness arising] in a soil yielding joy,
whether it belong to the worlds of sense or form, or to the
life that is Unincluded.

[1000] Which are the states that are accompanied by
ease?

The skandhas of 1 perception, syntheses and intellect
(ease being excluded) which are associated [with the con-
sciousness arising] in an ease-yielding soil, whether it
belong to the worlds of sense or form, or to the life that is
Unincluded.

[1001] Which are the states that are accompanied by
disinterestedness ?

The skandhas of perception, syntheses and intellect (dis-
interestedness being excluded) which are associated [with
the consciousness arising] in a soil favourable to dis-
interestedness, whether it belong to the worlds of form or
the formless, or to the life that is Unincluded.

[1002] Which are the states that are to be put away by
insight ? 2 *


1 ‘ Joy ’ is not counted as a mode of feeling, but as a
4 synthesis * (see p. 11, note 4) ; 4 ease,’ however, and 4 dis-
interestedness * being two of the three modes of feeling,
this skandha ceases to be merely an associated state.

2 Dassanam, lit., seeing or vision. In view of what

can and can not be put away by ‘ insight/ it must be
remembered that the term is here used in the technical

sense it possesses for Buddhist ethics, and means the
mental awakening, or intellectual conversion, by which one
became a sotapatti and entered the First Path — and no
more. Asl. 856, 857 ; 48. It was the vehicle for breaking
the three Fetters named here, and numbered as 4th. 5th and
6th in the list of ten named later (§§ 1113, 1123, note). It
represented a certain vantage-point for mind and heart,
from which the Promised Land of Nirvana was caught sight
of, and the fact of impermanence first discerned (see the
standard passage on this and fiana-dassanam, D. i. 76),


:ed by


Google



257


The three Fetters, 1 to wit, the theory of individuality,
perplexity, and the contagion of mere rule and ritual.

In this connexion

[1008] What is the 4 theory of individuality * ? 2


as well as the futility of Substantialist theories, and the
impotence of a religion of rules and works. Confidence
in the new methods sprang up with the wider vision.
Dassanam was powerless to remove the cosmic processes
of life and mind: the collocations of phenomena, the
evolution of karma, the infinite mystery of the extra-
sensuous (see § 1008 and note). On various ways of attain-
ing this insight, see the interesting Kimsuka Sutta, S. iv. 191.
Relatively to the higher standpoints to be gained it might
rather, says Buddhaghosa, be called no-vision. For even
as a man, bound on some mission to a king, if he saw the
latter pass afar off on his elephant, would say, if questioned,
that he had not seen him, he not having accomplished his
mission, so the convert, though he have caught his first
glimpse of Nirvana, yet because of all he has to do in the
getting rid of evil, is said to have no vision. His knowledge
consists in a contemplation of the Path.

1 On the Fetters, see § 1118 et seq.

2 Sakkaya-ditthi, embodying one of the most dangerous
of all delusions from the Buddhist point of view, is by the
Cy. (p. 848) connected with kayo, the phenomenal com-
pound of five skandhas, and either with sat, in the sense
of (noumenal) being, or with say am, one’s own. Cf S. N.,
verses 950, 951 ; Dhp., verse 867. The latter explanation
— svakaya — is probably correct (vide E. Muller, ‘Pali
Grammar,’ p. 19). 4 Individuality,’ then, stands for this
skandha-complex, which we should now speak of as 4 body
and soul’ (or mind). Both term and theory are discussed
by Dhammadinna in M. i. 299 et seq . (See an article by the
writer in J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 824.) The fourth Upadana,
or 4 Grasping after a theory of soul,’ is described in identical
terms. See § 1217.

Ditthi, which is here rendered by 4 theory/ and which
might with equal propriety be translated by 4 speculation ’
or 4 views ’ — all four terms having a common etymological
basis in the notion of seeing, or things seen— is in the
answer rendered by 4 opinion/ as fitting better that 4 muss
of notions current among the mass of men ’ which in the

17


ed by CjOCK^Ic



258


When in this world 1 the ignorant,* average 8 man who
perceives not the Noble Ones, 4 who comprehends not, nor

case of the puthujjano does service for organized know-
ledge. Gotama might possibly have approved the Platonic
description of Sofa as ‘ something more dusky than know-
ledge, more luminous than ignorance.’ To translate by
‘ heresy ' or * delusion ’ has the disadvantage of necessitating
the use of other terms in the case of sound ditthi, such
as that described, in M. P. S., Bh. I., as ditthi ariya
niyyanika. Cf. below, § 1866.

1 Id ha, a term, as the Cy. says, either of localization,
or of instance in giving instruction; here used in the
former sense, and meaning occurrence in the world.
Asl. 848.

2 Assutava, lit., one who has not heard, i.e., not been
taught, who through lack of investigation, inquiry, acquir-
ing, in such matters as skandhas, elements, spheres, con-
ditions, constituents, meditations, is without proper tradi-
tion and attainment. Ibid.

8 Puthujjano, the common worldling. The Cy. cites
verses distinguishing Vhomme sensuel moyen as either blind
or amiable ; of these the former is here meant. In another
quotation (also as yet unverified) he is described as given
to various common vices, governed by the individuality-
theory, hanging on the lips of various ordinary preachers,
immersed in every kind of re-birth ; complicating life with
various common complexities ; carried away by diverse
vulgar currents; appeased or feverish with various low
sources of gratification or of irritation ; steeped in, greedy
of* entangled in, infatuated with, involved in, sticking to,
held fast and hampered by, the five low pleasures of sense ;
veiled, muffled, shrouded in, closed and cloaked and
covered up by, the five low hindrances (§ 1152 et seq.) ; as
absorbed among the countless folk in the past of low
character and conduct opposed to noble doctrine; or,
finally, as one separate and distinct from those noble folk
who are given to virtue and learning.

4 Ariyanam adassavi, referring either to the Buddhas,
the Pacceka-buddhas and the disciples of the Buddhas, or
to the Buddhas only. Buddhaghosa points out at some
length that the inability to perceive, lit., see, holy persons
is no mere visual shortcoming, but a lack of insight or oi>
intelligent inference. The truly noble, as such, seen with


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



259


is trained according to 1 the doctrine of the Noble Ones,
who perceives not good men, 2 who comprehends not, nor
is trained according to, the doctrine of good men, regards
(1) the self as bodily form, or (2) as having bodily form, or
regards (3) bodily form as being in the self, or (4) the self
as being in bodily form ; 3 or regards (5) the self as feeling,
or (6) as having feeling, or regards (7) feeling as being in
the self, or (8) the self as being in feeling; or regards
(9) the self as perception, or (10) as having perception, or
regards (11) perception as being in the self, or (12) the self
as being in perception ; or regards (18) the self as syntheses,
or (14) as having syntheses, or regards (15) syntheses as
being in the self, or (16) the self as being in syntheses ; or
regards (17) the self as intellect, or (18) as having intellect,
or regards (19) intellect as being in the self, or (20) the self
as being in intellect — then this kind of opinion, this walking
in opinion, this jungle of opinion, wilderness of opinion,


the bodily, or with the ‘ divine * eye, are not really seen/
Their appearance (van no) is apprehended, but not the
area of their noble nature, even as dogs and jackals, etc.,
see them and know them not. Even the personal attendant
of a Thera may not discern the hero in his master, so hard
is it without insight and understanding to discern the
standpoint attained by the saints, or the conditions of true
nobility. ‘ What is to thee this vile body that thou seest,
Yakkali ? He who seeth the Doctrine, he it is who seethe
Me S’ S. iii., p. 120 ; Asl. 850.

1 Avinlto. The Cy. enumerates, with examples, the
five modes of the discipline (vinaya) of self-control, and
of that of renunciation. These are given in Childers, s.v .
vinayo.

2 Sappurisa, meaning Pacceka-buddhas and the disciples
of the Buddhas. (Asl. 849.)

8 These four ‘ views * respecting the relation of each
skandha to a conceivable central entity or atta are dis-
cussed in my Introduction. All, according to the Cy.
(p. 854), are obstacles to the Paths, though not to heaven
(maggavarana na saggavarana), and are overcome
during progress through the First Path.

17—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



260


puppet-show of opinion, scuffling of opinion, this Fetter of
opinion, the grip and tenacity of it, the inclination towards
it, the being infected by it, this by-path, wrong road,
wrongness, this 4 fording-place,’ this shiftiness of grasp —
this is called the theory of individuality.

[1004] What is 4 perplexity * /

To doubt, to be perplexed about, (1) the Master, to
doubt, to be perplexed about, (2) the Doctrine, to doubt, to
be perplexed about, (8) the Order, about (4) the Discipline,
about (5) the past, the future, about both the past and the
future, (6) as to whether there be an assignable cause 1 of
states causally determined — it is this kind of doubt, this
working of^ doubt, this dubiety, puzzlement, perplexity,
distraction r standing at cross-roads ; collapse, uncertainty
of grasp ; evasion, hesitation, incapacity of grasping
thoroughly, stiffness of mind, mental scarifying, that is
called perplexity. 2

[1005] What is the contagion of mere rule and ritual ?

The theory, held by recluses and Brahmins outside our
doctrine, 3 4 that purification is got by rules of moral conduct,
that purification is got by rites, that purification is got by
rules of moral conduct and by rites 4 — this kind of opinion,


1 Ida-paccayata.

2 See § 425. The specific forms of doubt are thus com-
mented on (Asl. 854, 855) : (1) As to whether or no the
Teacher has the 82 major bodily marks, or the 80 minor
bodily marks of a Buddha, or the requisite omniscience
with respect to things past, future and present ; (2) as to
the adequacy of the Paths and their Fruits to lead indeed
to the grand ambrosial Nirvana ; (8) as to whether those
of the Order are indeed at various stages of the path to
salvation, or have rightly won their way so far ; (4) as to
whether the Training is helpful ; (5) as to whether evolu-
tion by way of skandhas, dhatus and ayatanas has held in
the past, or will hold in the future; (6) as to whether
there is a twelve-graded cycle of causation, taking effect
here and now or taking effect at all.

8 Ito bahiddha.

4 I have ventured to adopt a reading differing slightly


ed by CjOCK^Ic



261


this walking in mere opinion, this jungle of opinion, this
wilderness of opinion, this puppet-show of opinion, scuffling
of opinion, Fetter of opinion, the grip and tenacity of it, the
inclination towards it, the being infected by it, this by-path,
wrong road, wrongness, this ‘ fording-place,* this shiftiness
of grasp — this is called the contagion of mere rule and
ritual.

[1006] These three Fetters, and the Corruptions united
with them, 1 and the four skandhas associated with them,
as well as the action, bodily, vocal and mental, springing
from them — these are the states which are to be put away -
by insight. x

[1007] Which are the states that are to be put away by
culture ? 2


from that both of the text and of K. The sense seems to
demand it and the Cy. to imply it. The latter has : S 1 1 e n a
ti goslladina, vatena ti govatadina va ( sic lege),
silabbatena ti tadubhayena, suddhl ti kilesa-
suddhi paramattha-suddhibhutam va nibbanam
eva. But it would not be in accordance with the methods
of the Cy. to quote vatena ti if suddhivatena stood
in the text. (Asl. 855.)

As to the terms goslla, govatam, it is not clear what
were the practices and mode of life followed in the * bovine
morals,’ etc., of those who were called govattika, or in
the ‘canine (? Cynic) practices ’ of the kukkuravattika.
Both are named in M. i. 887. Cf. also Kh. P. Cy., p. 26.

Suddhi, it will be seen, is distinguished as, on the one
hand, the mere renunciation of the Kilesas (see § 1229), on
the other, perfect holiness or Nirvana.

On silabbataparamaso, see Rhys Davids’ ‘ American
Lectures,’ 146.

1 These are said to be chiefly speculation and perplexity
(regarded not as ‘fetters,’ but as plagues or evils), and,
besides these, lust, hate, dulness, pride, stolidity, excite-
ment, unconscientiousness, disregard of blame.

2 Or practice: bhavana, the collective name for the
systematized effort in self-training of the disciple who,
having attained ‘ insight,’ leaves ‘ the principles of the
doctrine * that he may ‘ go on unto perfection ’ (Heb. vi. 1) —


ed by CjOCK^Ic



262


Whatever lust, hate and dulness still remain, and any
corruptions united with them ; the four skandhas that are
associated with them; whatever action, bodily, vocal or
mental, springs from them.

[1008] Which are the states that are to be put away
neither by insight nor by culture?

Good and indeterminate states relating to the worlds of
sense, form or the formless, or to the life that is Unincluded ;
the four skandhas ; all form, moreover, and uncompounded
element. 1

[1009] Which are the states the causes of which are to
be put away by insight ? 2

The three Fetters, to wit, theory of individuality, per-
plexity, contagion of mere rule and ritual

In this connexion

[1010] What is ‘ theory of individuality * ? . . . [ continue
as in §§ 1008-1005]. 8


in other words, travel along the three higher Paths to
Arahatship.

On the ‘powers of bhavana,’ see A. i. 52.

In A. i. 48, the ‘ one thing needful * for the perfecting of
bhavana is said to be kayagata-sati, mindfulness in
what concerns the body, or bodily action.

1 Hence only akusala dhamma, ‘bad states,’ can be
^put away by insight and culture. Nor can even these two

avail in mutual independence, for see §§ 1258, 1260. The
rest of one’s karma goes on accumulating. The good
and the indeterminate, the modes of matter, and Simple
Element : — these cannot cease for any individual until,
according to Buddhaghosa, his abhisankhar a- v innanam
(Asl. 357 ) — his constructing, storing intellect, itself dieso
out with the extinction of his life as Arahat. See Sum.
on the Kevaddha Sutta, D. i. 228 ; ‘ Dialogues of the
Buddha,’ i. 272 et seq.

2 Pahatabba-hetuka, ‘That is, the cause of them
(hetu etesam) is to be put away by insight.’ Asl. 48.

3 Here the reading in the text is obviously corrupt. I
follow that in K., viz. : Tattha katama sakkayaditthi?


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



263


[1010a] These three Fetters, and the Corruptions united
with them, and the four skandhas associated with them, as
well as the action, bodily, vocal and mental, springing from
them — these are the states the causes of which are to be
put away by insight.

[lOlOfc] 1 The three Fetters : — theory of individuality,
perplexity, contagion of mere rule and ritual — are the
states that are to be put away by insight. The lust, hate
and dulness united with them are the causes that are to be
put away by insight. And the Corruptions united with
them, the four skandhas associated with them, and the
action, bodily, vocal and mental, springing from them, are
the states the causes of which are to be put away by insight.

[1011] Which are the states the causes of which are to
be put away by culture ?

Whatever lust, hate and dulness still remain, these are
causes 2 that are to be put away by culture. And the Corrup-
tions united with them, the four skandhas associated with
them, and the action, bodily, vocal and mental, springing
from them — these are states the causes of which are to be
put away by culture.

[1012] Which are the states the causes of which are to
be put away neither by insight, nor by cultivation ?

The afore -mentioned states excepted, all other states,
good, bad and indeterminate, relating to the worlds of
sense, form and the formless, and to the life that is
Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all form,
moreover, and uncompounded element.


. . . pe . . . ayam vuccati sakkayaditthi — and
so on.

1 This paragraph, in which I again follow K., is not
included in the text at all. Nevertheless, Buddhaghosa
comments on it (p. 857).

2 Here again I follow K. in reading pahatabba-hetu for
hetuka. Buddhaghosa quotes the former reading (p. 358),
as referring to the putting away of dulness accompanied by
excitement.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



264


[1018] Which are the states that make for the piling up
[of rebirth] 7 1

Good and bad co-intoxicant states relating to the worlds
of sense, form and the formless; in other words, the four
skandhas.

[1014] Which are the states that make for the undoing
of rebirth ?

The four Paths that are the Unincluded.

[1015] Which are the states that make neither for the
piling up, nor for the undoing of rebirth ?

The results of good and bad states taking effect in the
worlds of sense, form or the formless, or in the life that is
Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; those
states, moreover, known as kiriya-thoughts, which are
neither good nor bad, nor the result of karma ; all form
also and uncompounded element.


[1015] Which are the states that appertain to student-
ship ? 2

The four Paths that are the Unincluded and the three
lowest Fruits of the life of the recluse.

[1016] Which are the states not appertaining to student-
ship?

The topmost fruit 3 — the fruit that is Arahatship.


1 Apacayagamino. On its opposite, see p. 82, note 2.
The latter is tantamount to going to Nirvana. The two
processes are compared to the building up and pulling down
of a wall. Asl. 44.

2 Sekkha, i.e. (Asl. 44), springing up in the three, or in
the seven courses of training (cf. Childers, s.t\). Asekkha
implies that the student or probationer has perfected his
studies and training and is become an adept, an Arahat.
Cf. P. P., p. 14. On the term ‘fruits of the life of the
recluse/ see the Samannaphala Sutta, D. i. 47.

3 Uparitthimam, a term used in P. P. i. 42 et seq
where it is applied to the ‘ Fetters ’ which are put off last.
Cf. below, § 1118, and p. 808. See also p. 166, n. 1.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



265


[1017] Which are the states neither appertaining, nor
not appertaining to studentship ?

The afore-mentioned states excepted, all other states,
good, bad and indeterminate, relating to the worlds of
sense, form and the formless; all form also and uncom-
pounded element.

[1018] Which are the states that are limited

All states, good, bad and indeterminate, which relate to
the universe of sense ; in other words, the jive skandhas.

[1019] Which are the states that have a wider scope ? 1 2

States, good, bad and indeterminate, which relate to the
worlds of form and the formless ; in other words, the four
skandhas.

[1021] Which are the states that are infinite ? 3

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of the
Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1022] Which are the states that have limited objects of
thought ?

Those emotional, perceptual and synthetic states, as
well as those of intellect applied to sense-impressions, 4
which arise in connexion with limited matters.


1 Parittam, understood as involving intellectual and
ethical, as well as physical insignificance — the connotation
of the French term borne. The illustration chosen is that
of a lump of cowdung ! The essential quality is appanu-
bhavata, t.e., of little importance or efficacy generally.
Parittam itself is ranked as an equivalent of the whole
sphere of sense-experience. Asl. 44.

2 Mahaggata, i.e. 9 in respect of ‘the ability to resist
vice, of abundance of good result, of wide extension/ or of
the attainment to a high pitch of will, energy, thought or
wisdom. Ibid .

3 Appamana, or without measure. Asl. 45.

4 This is a long and cumbersome periphrasis for citta-
cetasika dhamma, but a reference to §§ 1187-1190 will
show that such is the content of the term. And Western


ed by CjOCK^Ic



266


[1023] Which are the states that have enlarged 1 objects
of thought ?

Those emotional, perceptual and synthetic states, as
well as those of intellect applied to sense-impressions, which
arise in connexion with matters of wider scope.

[1024] Which are the states that have infinite objects of
thought ?

Those emotional, perceptual and synthetic states, as well
as those of intellect applied to sense-impressions, which
arise in connexion with matters of infinite importance.

[1025] Which are the states that are base ?

The three roots of bad (karma) — lust, hate, dulness —
the Corruptions united with them ; the four skandhas asso-
ciated with them ; the action, bodily, vocal and mental,
springing from them.

[1026] Which are the states that are of medium worth ?

Co-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate, relating
to the worlds of sense, form and the formless; in other
words, the four skandhas.

[1027] Which are the states that are perfected ? 2

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1028] Which are the states the wrongfulness of which
is fixed as to its consequences ? 3

psychology has not suggested to me any more compressed
equivalent. Cf. f however, §§ 1282, 1284. ‘Emotional’
must be taken in its more limited sense, as the adjective to
bare feeling or hedonic consciousness.

1 See § 1021.

2 The three subjects of this triplet of inquiry — dhamma
hina, majjhima, pa nit a — are paraphrased (Asl. 45) as
lam aka (of poor quality, cf. Yin. ii. 76), midway between
this and the third quality, and supramundane or ideal
(lokuttara).

3 Micchattaniyata, thus explained by the Cy. (ibid.) :
‘ Wickedness ’ is that wrongful disposition which, in its


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



267


The five acts that have immediate results, and those
wrong views that are fixed in their consequences. 1

desire for happiness, sees benefit in things baneful and
persists in this perversion. ‘ Fixed in its consequences *
(lit., ‘ reaching down to *) means yielding a result imme-
diately on the disintegration of the skandhas ( i.e. 9 after
death). C/. M. P. 8. 17 : asmi . . . niyato — I am fixed
or sure (as to my future) ; also K. V. 609-612, and P. P. 18:
katamo ca puggalo niyato? The answer to this ques-
tion is practically identical with those given in these
sections. It is the persons (puggala) who are decisively
good and bad that are called anantaraka (incurring
immediate destiny good or bad) instead of the ‘acts* or
the ‘ Paths/ as in the Dh. S.

These five acts, the Cy. says, refer to ‘ matricide, etc./
as though the Abhithanas were here alluded to, whereas
the five usually classed under this name appear to be
murder, theft, impurity, lying and intemperance. Cf.
§§ 1290, 1291. Compare the passage relating to lohitup-
pado, or the wounding of a Buddha, Yin. ii. 198, which is
called an anantarika-kammam. I venture to think
that, in the Mil., p. 25, the phrase kopancanantariya-
kammam karoti is not intended, as the translator infers,
to sum up the five offences previously specified, but is an
allusion to five others, of which matricide was one and
lohituppado another. It only remains to ascertain
whether or not the other three coincide with any other
three of the six Abhithanas.

As to the immediacy of their consequences, whereas,
from the Devadatta incident in the Cullavagga, the outrages
entailed at least some of their retribution in this life, it
will have been seen that, according to Buddhaghosa, the
effect is experienced immediately after the cessation of the
present life. The Cy. goes on : In the case of these acts,
it is impossible for any other conduct to push off the karma
of any one of them, so as to obtain room for the realization
of its own consequences. Neither could the agent effect
this if he were to build a golden sthupa as big as Mt. Sineru,
or a vihara covered with gems and like a world-orb, or if he
filled it with bhikkhus and their Buddha and found them
in the four requisites during a whole lifetime. Asl. 858.

1 The wrong views which are also niyata are specified
in the Cy. as those held by the Anti-causationists (ahetuka-


ed by CjOCK^Ic



268


[1029] Which are the states the righteousness of which
is fixed as to its consequences ? l

The four Paths that are the Unincluded.

[1080] Which are the states that do not entail fixed
consequences ?

The afore-mentioned states excepted, all other states,
good, bad and indeterminate, relating to the worlds of
sense, form and the formless, or to the life that is Unin-
cluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all form,
moreover, and uncompounded element.

[1081] Which are the states that have the Path as their
object of thought ? 2

Those emotional, perceptual and synthetic states, as well
as those of intellect applied to sense-impressions, which
arise in connexion with the Noble Path.

[1082] Which are the states that are causally dependent
upon the Path ? 3


vada, D. i. 53 ; M. i. 407), those who denied the efficacy
of action (akiriya-vada, D. i. 52; M. i. 404, 405), and the
Nihilists (natthika-vada, or uccheda-vada, D. i. 55;
M. i. 401-408). These are past praying for ; more literally
rendered, not a hundred, nor yet a thousand Buddhas would
be able to enlighten them. Ibid.

1 The reading should be sammatta-niyata. Cf.
Asl. 45 ; K. ; K. Y. 609.

2 4 “ Path ” ’ means the quest of Nirvana, or the progress
in the destruction of the Kilesas.’ (Asl. 45.)

3 ‘ Maggahetuka, i.e. y the cause of those (states) in the
sense of conditioning them is the Eightfold Path.* Asl. 45.
Later (p. 359) the Cy. gives the purport of this triad as
follows : i In the first formula the kind of causal conjunc-
tion of the skandhas, in their connexion with the Path by
way of cause, in the sense of condition, is set forth. In
the second, the kind of causal conjunction of the other
parts of the Path with Bight Views, which are a constituent
of the Path and are reckoned as cause (a mo ho ; cf. §§ 16,
34, 1054) ; and in the third, the kind of causal conjunction of
Bight Views with those causes that are operative in the Path,
is set forth.’ Yet in the text it is the causal connexion of the


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



269


[Firstly] the four skandhas when associated with the
stages of the Path as experienced by one who is conversant
with the Path 1 (the stages being excepted).

[Secondly (1088)] the four skandhas when associated
with the right views — these being both Path and Cause —
of one who is conversant with the Path (the right views
being excepted).

[Thirdly] the four skandhas when associated with the
states of freedom from lust, hate and dulness peculiar to
one who is conversant with the Path.

Now, these [last named] states are the * Path-causes ’ ; 2
the former (the skandhas) are those states which are
causally dependent upon the Path.

[1084] Which are the causes that are Path-governed? 8

[Firstly] those emotional, perceptual and synthetic
states, as well as those of intellect applied to sense-
impressions, which in arising make the Noble Path their
governor.

[Secondly] the four skandhas when associated with the
investigation carried on by one who is conversant with the


four skandha^that is predicated about in all three formula.
Does this implicate discrepant versions of the text ?

1 Ariyamaggasamangissa maggangani.

2 In the printed text, after amoho read ime dhamma
magga-hetu. Cf. Cy. 45; K. ; also above, § 1011.

8 Maggadhipatino, i.e. y the Path, having them (those
states) under its control in the sense of maintaining them,
is their governor. Asl. 45. Later (p. 859) we get supple-
mentary remarks showing that the relation of governor (or
sovereign) and governed, in this connexion, resembles that
between Christ and the believer who brings ‘ into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ ’ (2 Cor. x. 5).
All such thoughts or ‘states’ are insignificant (par it t a)
as compared with the one great object of devotion — the
Path, the Fruit, Nirvana. Even to contemplate the
progress of others in the Path, or to have seen the
Tathagata work a double miracle, is not precious to the
student as is his own discernment and realization of what
the Path means to him .


ed by CjOCK^Ic



270


Path, and who is cultivating a way wherein investigation is
the dominant factor. 1

[1085] Which are the states that ‘ have arisen * ?*

Those states that have been bom, have become, have
been gotten, created, re-created, 3 made manifest, — that
have arisen, have come to pass, have happened, have super-
vened, have been caused to arise, are classed together
among the things that have arisen, to wit, form, feeling,
perception, syntheses, intellect.

[1086] Which are the states that have ‘ not arisen ’ ?

Those states that are unborn, have not become, have not
been gotten, nor created, nor re-created, nor made mani-
fest ; that have not arisen nor come to pass ; nor happened,
nor supervened ; that have not been caused to arise, that
are classed together among the things that have not arisen,
to wit, forms, feelings, perceptions, syntheses, intellect.

[1087] Which are the states that are bound to arise? 4


1 The construction in this sentence is obscure. Vimam-
sadhipateyyam is apparently in the nominative case.
The Cy., however (p. 859), substitutes, in quoting, the
instrumental — which only makes the reading obscurer.
Anyway, it proceeds to explain that the term shows a joint
‘ supremacy ’ between the Path and an adhipateyyam to
be only possible (c/. § 269) when the latter is either * in-
vestigation ’ or ‘ energy.* When the latter is ‘ desire ’ or a
‘ thought,’ then the Path yields its sway over the mind to
the adhipateyyam. But when the student makes either
of the former his governing influence, both it and the Path
are his joint governors.

2 Uppanna, i.e ., which from the moment they came
into being, and for as long as they had distinguishable
being, have come to pass and been sustained. Asl. 45.

3 Read nibbatta, abhinibbatta.

4 Uppadino, i.e., ‘will certainly arise, from the fact
that their efficient cause is in part completed’ (Asl. 45).
Later (pp. 860, 861) the potential happening of these
resultant states is declared to be due to the enduring
validity of their conditions (dhuvapaccayatthena),
which cannot fail to produce their effects, even though


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



271


The results of those good and bad states related to the
worlds of sense, form and the formless, or to the life that
is Unincluded, the consequences of which are not yet
matured, 1 to wit, the four skandhas and that form due to
karma having been wrought which will arise.

[1038] Which are the states that are past ?

Those states that are past are extinct, dissolved, 2 changed,
terminated, exterminated ; are past and classed among the
things that are past ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1039] Which are the states that are future ?

The states that are unborn, that have not become, not
been gotten, nor created, nor re-created, nor made mani-
fest ; that have not arisen, nor come to pass, nor happened,
nor supervened ; that have not arrived, and are classed
among the things that have not arrived.

[1040] Which are the things that are present ?

Those states that have been born, have become, have
been gotten, created, re-created, 3 made manifest ; that have
arisen, have come to pass, have supervened, have been
caused to arise; that have arisen over against 4 and are
classed among the things that have so arisen.

[1041-1043] Which are the states that have the past . . .
future . . . present as their object of thought ?

100,000 aeons intervene. The gospel (lit., Path) of the
future Buddha, Metteyya, is anuppanno, but his (or
anyone’s) fruition belongs to the uppadino dhamma.

1 Avipakkavipakanam. Inserted in K., but, as is
stated in that edition, not inserted in the Burmese or the
European text.

2 The printed text reads niruddhangata; the Cy.,

niruddha vigata ; K., niruddha parinata (not

viparinata).

3 Abhinibbatta is omitted in the printed text. Cf.
§ 1085 ; also K.

4 Paccuppanna, the word rendered by ‘present’ in
the question. Cf. our ‘ ob-vious,’ ‘ ob-jective,’ ‘ ob-ject,’ in
its most general psychological sense, as something present
to the subject of the mental * states.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



272


Those emotional, perceptual and synthetic states, as
well as those oi intellect applied to sense-impressions,
which arise in connexion with states that are past . . .
future . . . present. 1

[1044] Which are the states that are personal

Those states which, for this or that being, are of the
self, self-referable, one’s own, 3 individual, the issue of
grasping ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1045] Which are the states that are external ?

Those states which, for this or that other being, 4 for
other individuals, are of the self, self-referable, their own,
individual, the issue of grasping ; 6 in other words, the five
skandhas.

[1046] Which are the states that are personal-external ?

States which are both [personal and external]. 6

[1047-1049] Which are the states that have an object of
thought concerning the self . . . concerning that which is


1 Cf § 1022.

2 On ajjhatta and bahiddha cf §§ 742, 748. The
Cy. distinguishes four varieties in the connotation of
ajjhattam, namely, gocaraj jhattam, niyakajjhat-
tam, ajjhattaj jhattam and visayaj jhattam, two of
which are identical with two of the three meanings cited
by Childers. The specific meaning U3ed here is said to be
the second.

3 For niyata read niyaka.

4 * That is, all beings except one’s self.’ Asl. 861.

6 Upadinna is omitted in the printed text.

6 Tad ubhayam is the curt answer. It is to be
regretted that Buddhaghosa’s fertility in illustration was
not applied to this species of dhamma. Incidentally one
gathers that they alternate between self-reference and \
reference to other selves. For whereas the dhamma in
the first and third questions are said to be either * limited ’
or ‘enlarged * (see §§ 1019-1021), and those in the second
are said to be ‘infinite,* states that are ‘infinite’ are said
‘ not to take as their object that which now relates to the
external, now to the self.’ (Asl. 361, 362.)


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



278


external [to the self] . . . concerning that which is ‘ per-
sonal-external ’ ?

Those emotional, perceptual, synthetic states, as well as
those of intellect applied to sense-impressions, 1 which arise
in connexion with states of the self . . . states that are
external . . . states that are personal-external.

[1050] Which are the states that are both visible and
impingeing ? 2

The sphere of visible form.

[1051] Which are the states that are invisible, but im-
pingeing ?

The spheres of the five senses and the spheres of sound,
odour, taste and the tangible.

[1052] Which are the states that are both invisible and
non-impingeing ?

The four skandhas ; that form, moreover, which, being
invisible and non-impingeing, is yet included in the sphere
of [mental] states ; 8 also uncompounded element.

[End of] the Triplets.


1 Cf. § 1022 et seq.

2 See § 597 et seq ., § 657 et seq.
8 See § 980.


18


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter II.

The Group on Cause (hetu-gocchakain).] 1

I.


[1053] Which are the states that are causes ?
(A) The three causes of good (karma).


1 In connexion with the statement (§ 595) that form is
4 that which is not a cause,’ the Cy. distinguishes, as did
Aristotle, four varieties of cause. The coincidence, how-
ever, scarcely extends beyond the number. Hetu is either
(a) cause as cause (hetu-hetu); (b) cause as condition,
or necessary antecedent ‘wherewithal’ (paccayahetu);

( c ) cause as ultimate or supreme (uttama-hetu) ; and

(d) cause as an attribute held in common (sadharana-

hetu). Asl. 303. These distinctions are shown to be
applied as follows : (a) the trinity of threefold cause given
in § 1053. Here the word is always paraphrased by 4 root,’
root, conversely, standing for productive agent in general
(see the list in note to § 981), and, of course, for moral
agency especially. ( b ) 4 1 have declared, bhikkhu, that

the four great phenomena are the causes, are the condi-
tions of the form-skandha.’ When the paccayo is ma-
terial, it may be said to coincide with Aristotle’s second
formal principle rj v\rj teal to vi roneLfi^vov. Possibly
paccayo was this conception so generalized as to include
the immaterial wherewithal requisite for the effect. Cole-
brooke, however ( 4 Life and Essays,’ ii. 419), said that the
Bauddhas distinguish between hetu as proximate cause
and pratyaya (paccayo) as concurrent occasion,
(c) 4 When good (karma) takes effect, it is the object ulti-
mately or supremely desired ’ — and the opposite, of course,
in the case of bad karma. This may possibly approximate


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



275


(B) The three causes of bad (karma).

(G) The three causes of the indeterminate.

The nine causes operative in the sensuous universe.

The six causes operative in the universe of form.

The six causes operative in the universe of the
formless.

(D) The six causes operative in the life that is the Unin-
cluded.

(A) In this connexion,

[1054] Which are the three causes of good karma ?

The absence of lust, hate and dulness.

In this connexion,

[1055] What is the absence of lust ?

The absence of lust, lusting, lustfulness is the absence
of infatuation, of raving, of passionateness ; the absence of
covetousness, that absence of lust which is the root of good
(karma). 1

[1056] What is the absence of hate ?

The absence of hate, hating, hatred ; love, 2 loving, loving
disposition; 3 tender care, forbearance, considerateness; 4

to Aristotle’s final cause (to ov Zvetca). ( d ) * As the essence
of the elements of earth and water (solid and liquid) are
the condition of sweet or not-sweet, so is ignorance the
common base-element of the syntheses (sanskaras). In
our present connexion the term is said to be used in its
first-named meaning.

1 Cf. § 82. The Pali terms coincide in both answers.
In the following answer, the terms differ considerably from
those in § 38.

2 The printed text has mettam; the Cy. and K read
mettl.

8 ‘ The mental condition of one who is possessed by love,
and through love is loosed from clinging .’ (Asl. 862.). Cf.
note on p. 66.

4 Anudda, anuddayana, anuddayitattam. The
Cy. paraphrases by rakkhati, showing the reference there
is in these terms, usually rendered by ‘ pity,’ ‘ compassion/
to the protective, shielding aspect of altruism and benevo-
lence. Cf its use in C. vii. 8, 18 ; S. ii., p. 218, where it

18—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



276


seeking the general good, 1 compassion; the absence of
malice, of malignity ; that absence of hate which is the
root of good (karma). 2

[1057] What is the absence of dulness?

Knowledge about ill, about the uprising of ill, about the
cessation of ill, and about the way leading to the cessation
of ill ; knowledge about the former things, about the latter
things, about both taken together; knowledge about the
assignable causation of causally determined states — even
that kind of wisdom which is understanding, search, re-
search, searching the Truth, etc. [continue as in § 34].

These are the three causes of good (karma).

(B) In this connexion,

[1058] Which are the three causes of bad (karma) ?

Lust, hate, dulness.

In this connexion,

[1059] What is lust?

That which is

passion (r ago),
infatuation (sarago), 8
fawning (anunayo), 4
compliance (anurodho), 6


is used to express that attitude of forbearance in the
interests of the weaker brethren recommended by St. Paul
to Roman and Corinthian adherents.

1 Hitesita. See C. ix. 5, 7.

2 By all these words ( i.e ., from * love ’ to * compassion T ),
concludes Buddhaghosa, the advance (up a car a) and con-
ception (ap pan a) of love is described. Possibly the pro-
cedure in the induction of Jhana was in his mind in using
these technical terms. Cf. Rhys Davids, * Yogavacara’s
Manual,’ p. xi.

3 ‘Meaning strong rago.’ Asl. 362.

4 This is opposed to patigho or repugnance in Mil. 44 ;
cf. 122 and 322. The comment (Asl. 862) — visayesu
sattanam anunayanat o — may indicate th at the fawning
is by way of pandering to the sensual appetites of others.

6 This is opposed to virodho, pativirodho. See


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



277


delighting in (nandl), 1

taking passionate delight in(nandi-rago), 1

infatuation of mind (cittassa sar ago), 2

longing (iccha),

languishing (muccha),

devouring (aj jhosanam), 3

greed (gedho),

omnivorous greed (paligedho),
cleaving to ( s a n g o ),
a slough (panko), 4
seduction (e j a), 6
trickery (may a), 6
genitrix (j anika), 7


§ 1060. The Cy. (ibid.) paraphrases by kameti. Cf.
S. i. Ill ; K. V. 485.

1 Explained as the recurrence over and over again of
that thirst for some object, the single occurrence of which
constitutes the state called nandl. Asl. 868.

2 Explained as qualifying the * infatuation * already
named by emphasizing the reference to a mental state or
psychosis, and not to any personal entity. Ibid.

8 4 1.e.y grasping by swallowing, by putting a complete

end to.’ Asl. 368, 370. The term is probably formed

from J sa, to bind (or to gain), and usually, by its context,
signifies attachment. Cf. M. i. 109, 498; Mil. 74.
Judging by the Commentary, however, there seems to be
a homonym derived from the root a?, t o eat, similar tojhe
parallel evolution of jhayati, from Vdhya and J ksa.
Cf. Ehys Davids, 4 Dialogues of the Buddha,’ i. 38, note 2.
The passage in A. i. 66, 67, is the only one at present
known to me where the word, occurring as it does in co-
ordination with terms of attachment and also of greed,
may be rendered equally well in either sense.

4 Paraphrased byosldanam. Asl. 863.

5 Paraphrased by akaddhanam, used in the Dhp. Cy.
(p. 412) to illustrate the magnetic power of the love of
treasure and of family. Ibid.

6 Paraphrased byvancanam. Ibid.

7 Because lust causes beings to be reborn on the Wheel
(of life). So for the following epithet As it is written :

Tanha janeti purisam, cittam assa vidhavati.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



278


progenitrix (safijananl),

seamstress (s i b b a n I), 1

she who ensnares (j alini), 2

the river (sarita), 8

she who is poisonous (visattika), 4

the thread (suttam), 6

diffusion (vis at a), 6

she who toils (ayuhani), 7

the consort (dutiya), 8

hankering (pan id hi),


1 The Cy. explains that lob ho sews, or joins beings to
sorrow by way of rebirth, just as a tailor joins one piece of
cloth to another. Ibid .

2 She = tanha, by the suffusion of which the manifold
web of the senses becomes as a net. Ibid.

Yassa jalinl visattika
tanha n’atthi kuhiiici netave.

S. i. 107 ; = Dhp., ver. 180.

8 From the swift current of lobho, or else from its glu-
tinous tenacity, according to the Commentator, who quotes :

Saritani sinehitani ca
somanassani bhavanti jantuno.

Dhp., ver. 841.

4 See above note 2.

6 By reason of its chaining together destruction and
misfortune as jars are arranged on a cord. Asl. 864.

6 * In the sense of spreading out over sensuous objects.’
Ibid.

7 * I.e., she causes beings to toil after (ayuhapeti) this
or that state.* Ibid. On ayuhati, see J. P. T. S., 1885,
pp. 58, 59 ; 1886, pp. 155, 156 ; Mil. 108, 214.

8 Lobho (or tanha) is likened to a dear alter ego, or
wife, or travelling companion. The idea is found in Sutfca
Nipata, verse 740, quoted by the Cy. :

Tanhadutiyo puriso dlgham addhanam sara-
saram

Itthabhavaiinathabhavam samsaram nativat-
tatl ti.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



279


she who leads to renewed existence (b ha va-
ne ttl), 1

the jungle (van am),

the undergrowth ( v a n a t h o ), 2 3

intimacy (santhavo), 8

unctuous affection ( s i n e h o ) ,

affection (apekkha), 4 *

connexion (patibandh u), 6 *

craving (as a),

wanting (asimsana),

cupidity (asimsit a tt am),

craving for visual forms ( r u p a s a , etc.),

craving for sounds,

craving for odours,

craving for tastes,

craving for the tangible,

craving for getting,

craving for wealth,

craving for children,

craving for life,

mumbling (jappa), 6


1 Cy. : Bhavanettl = the cord of existence. For by it
beings are led, as cows by a cord bound about their necks,
wherever they are wanted.

2 The impenetrable, impassable nature of tropical forest
growth often serves to illustrate the dangers of lobho or
tan ha. Cf. Dh., p. 288, quoted in the Cy. Ibid.

3 4 Intimacy is of two kinds : it is either carnal ( i.e ., of
tanha) or friendly. Here the former is meant.’ Asl. 865.

4 4 Alayakaranavasena apekkhatl ti apekkha.

Ibid. The quotation in the Cy. on this word is from the
Mahasudassana Sutta, 229, with which cf. S. iii. 144.

6 4 As being constantly near to living beings there is no
relative (or connexion) like tanha.’ Asl. 365.

6 The four following terms are all variants of jappa.

4 Whenever anything is given to a greedy person, he will
mutter, 44 This is mine, this is mine ! This has been
given me by so-and-so!”’ Asl. 865. K. repeats jappa


ed by CjOCK^Ic



280


mumbling on,
mumbling over,
muttering,
murmuring,

self-indulgence ( 1 o 1 u p p a m ), 1

self-indulging,

intemperateness,

agitation (puncikata), 2

longing for the agreeable (sadhu kamyata), 3

incestuous passion (adhammarago), 4

lawless lust (visamalobho),

appetite (n i k a n t i),

hungering for ( n i k a m a n a),

entreating (patthana),

envying (pihana),

imploring (sampatthana), 6

thirst for sensual indulgence (kamatanha),

thirst for existence (bhavatanha),

thirst for non-existence (vibhavatanha), 6

thirst for form, 7

thirst for formlessness,

thirst for annihilation,

thirst for visible forms, 8


after abhijappana. Cf. C. iv. 14, 26: sakanna-
jappakam.

1 See Jat. i. 340 ; iv. 806. Buddhaghosa derives this
from lumpati. Cf Whitney's ‘Boots,’ etc., where it
appears as the Intensive of lup, but belonging in meaning
to lubh.

2 The excitement or fluster produced by tanha is here,
according to the Cy., likened to that shown by ‘ dogs
wagging their tails ’ (read sunakha) when seeking to find
something. Ibid.

3 The Cy. and K. read sadhu.

4 For a mother, a mother's sister, etc. Asl. 366.

6 I.e.y patthana intensified. Ibid.

6 I.e. t for a state of annihilation. Ibid.

7 I.e., for a state of pure (suddhe) form. Ibid.

8 Before ‘ thirst for sounds ' K. inserts rupatanha for


ed by CjOCK^Ic



281


thirst for sounds,
thirst for smells,
thirst for tastes,
thirst for the tangible,

thirst for mental states (dhammatanha),

a flood (ogh o),

a yoke (yogo),

trammels (gantho),

attachment (upadanam),

obstruction (avaranam),

hindrance (nivaranam),

counterfeiting (chadanam), 1

bondage (bandhanam), 2

depravity (u p a kk i 1 e s o),

faltering (a n u s a y o), 3

pervading (pariyutthanam), 4

a creeper (lata), 6

avarice (ve vie chain), 0

root of pain,

source of pain (dukkhanidanam),

the second time, the rupani craved for here being pre-
sumably 4 sights,* * perceptions of sight,’ as distinguished
from that supersensuous plane of being craved for under
the former rupatanha, and ranking next to the formless
plane. The Cy., on the other hand, only notices between
4 thirst for annihilation * and 4 thirst for sounds,* the word
ditthirago, passion for speculation.

1 So Asl. and K. Cf. Sutta Nip. i. 5, 7-

2 4 on the wheel ’ (of samsara). Ibid .

3 4 Through loss of strength.’ Ibid.

4 I.e., the heart becomes possessed by lust, as a road by
highwaymen. Ibid.

5 . . . lata ubbhijja titfhati. Dhp. 840. Quoted
in the Cy. Greed or lust strangles its victim, as a creeper
strangles a tree.

6 See Sutta Nip. 1088. Buddhaghosa, however, para-
phrases the term as 4 multifarious wants,* Vielhaberei ;
‘vividhani vatthuni icchati.* Ibid. At Asl., p. 875,
he has a different explanation. Cf. S. N. ii., s.v. ve-
viccha.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



282


production of pain (dukkhappabhavo),
Mara’s trap (marapaso),

Mara’s fish-hook (marabalisa m),

Mara’s domain (mar a vi say o),
thirst,

thirst for delight (nandltanha),
the fishing-net of thirst (jalamtanh a), 1
the leash of thirst (gaddulatanh a), 2
the ocean (samuddo), 3
covetousness ( a b h i j j h a), 4 *
the lust that is the root of evil —
this is what is called lust.

[1060] What is hate?

When annoyance springs up at the thought : he has done
me harm, is doing, will do me harm ; he has done harm,
is doing harm, will do harm to someone dear and precious
to me ; he has conferred a benefit, is conferring, will confer a
benefit on someone I dislike and object to ; or when annoy-
ance springs up groundlessly 6 : — all such vexation of spirit,*
resentment, repugnance, hostility; 7 ill-temper, irritation,


1 Spread out like a net over the river. Asl. 867.

2 Cf. J at. ii. 246; iii. 204. Tan ha drags its victims
about as dogs are drawn by a leash (Asl. 367).

8 The thirst of lust is hard to satiate. Ibid. Cf. above,
p. 175, note 4.

4 See § 891.

6< Atthane va pana aghato ti akarane kopo.
E.g. f when one is vexed because it rains too much, or
because it doesn’t rain, or because the sun is too hot, or
not hot enough, or because there is too much or too little
wind, or because one cannot sweep away the Bo-tree-leaves,
or because the wind prevents one from putting on one’s
robe, or because one has fallen over a tree - stump.*
Asl. 867.

6 Cittassa aghato. Aghato is rendered above by
annoyance. The two next terms are patighato and
patigham. The latter is the word used to express action
and reaction in sense-activity. § 597 et seq.

7 Pativirodho. Cf. Mil. 208, 402.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



288


indignation j 1 hate, antipathy, abhorrence ; 2 mental dis-
order, 3 detestation ; 4 * anger, fuming, irascibility ; hate,
hating, hatred ; disorder, getting upset, derangement ;
opposition, hostility ; 6 churlishness, abruptness, disgust of
heart — this is what is called hate.

[1061] What is dulness ?

Lack of knowledge about 111, lack of knowledge about the
uprising of 111, lack of knowledge about the cessation of 111,
lack of knowledge about the way leading to the cessation of
111 ; lack of knowledge about the former things, about the
latter things and about both taken together ; lack of know-
ledge about the assignable causation of causally determined
states — even all that kind of lack of knowledge which is
lack of insight, of understanding, of wakefulness, of en-
lightenment, of penetration, of comprehension, of sounding,
of comparing, of contemplation, of perspicacity ; impurity,
childishness, unintelligence, the dulness that is stupidity,
obtuseness, ignorance, a flood of ignorance, the yoke of
ignorance, the dependence of ignorance, the being possessed
by ignorance, the barrier of ignorance, the dulness that is
the root of evil — this is called dulness. 6

These are the three causes of bad [karma].

(C) In this connexion,

[1062] Which are the three causes of the indeter-
minate ?

The absence of lust, hate and dulness coming to pass as


1 Kopo, pakopo, sampakopo.

2 Padoso, sampadoso.

3 Cittassa vyapatti ; paraphrased as a houlev ersement,
or cataclysm of mind. Vyapatti is used for the wreck-
ing of a ship in Jat. iv. 107. Cf above, § 418.

4 Manopadoso. Cf Jat. iv. 29; M. i. 877, where it
means apparently curse or execration — the original sense of

‘ detesting.’

6 See § 418.

6 According to Asl. 868, this is ‘ thoroughly set out in the
Commentary on the Vibhanga.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



284


the result of good states, or as the indeterminate states
known as k i r i y a-thoughts. 1

[1068] Which are the nine causes operative in the sen-
suous universe (kamavacarahetu)?

The three causes of good [karma], the three causes of
bad [karma], the three causes of indeterminate [states] —
these are the nine.

[1064] Which are the six causes operative in the universe
of form ?

The three causes of good [karma], the three causes of
indeterminate [states] — these are the six.

[1065] Which are the six causes operative in the universe
of the formless ?

The three causes of good [karma], the three causes of
indeterminate [states] — these are the six.

[1066] Which are the six causes operative in the Unin-
cluded ?

The three causes of good [karma], the three causes of
indeterminate [states] — these are the six.

In this connexion,

[1067] Which are the three causes of good [karma] ?

The absence of lust, hate and dulness.

In this connexion,

[1068-1070] WTiat is the absence of lust ... of hate
... of dulness ?

Answers as in §§ 1055-1057, but omitting in § 1056, from
* hatred * to 1 the absence of malice,* exclusively . 2

These are the three causes of good [karma].

(D) In this connexion,


1 Kiriyavyakatesu dhammesu. See above, § 566
et seq . The Cy. here is silent.

2 Ado so has been inadvertently omitted in the text.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



285


[1071] Which are the three causes of indeterminate
[states] ?

The absence of lust, hate and dulness coming to pass as
the effect of good states — these are the three.

These are the six causes operative in the Unincluded.

These are the states which are causes.

[1072] Which are the states that are not causes?

Every state, good, bad and indeterminate, whether
related to the worlds of sense, of form, of the formless, or
to the life that is Unincluded, except the states enumerated
above; in other words, the four skandhas; all form also
and uncompounded element.

[1078] Which are the states that have causes as con-
comitants ? l

1 Sahetuka. The Cy. (p. 47) on this term has : Samp a-
yogato pavattena saha hetuna ti sahetuka, and on
the opposite: ahetukath Tath’eva pavatto n*atthi
etesam hetu ti. This maybe rendered: ‘Sahetuka
means, union in continuance with a cause.* And ‘ ahetuka
means, there is for them no continuance of a cause.* The
sustaining of a cause in concomitance with a given state is
so much harped upon by the Cy. that one is tempted to
surmise that the mediaeval controversy, known by the
formula, Qessante causd cessat et effectus , was not unfami-
liar to Buddhist scholastics. Have we here the categorizing
of certain states, for the maintenance of which, as effects,
the continuance of the cause is required ? In that case the
Buddhist would have agreed (see § 1075, n.) with a modern
logician (J. S. Mill) that, in some cases only, ‘ The con-
tinuance of the condition which produced an effect is
necessary to the continuance of the effect.* The coinci-
dence, however, is extremely doubtful. The Pali even
leaves it vague as to whether the concomitant cause is the
cause of the state in question ; sometimes, indeed, this is
evidently not the case. E.g ., in § 1077 ‘ dulness * is a
hetu-dhammo, but not therefore the cause of the con-
comitant states, lust and hate. The compilers were, as
usual, more interested in the psychology than in the logic
of the matter, and were inquiring into the factors in cases
of mental association.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



286


Those states, to wit, the four skandhas, which have as
concomitant causes the states enumerated above. 1

[1074J Which are the states that have not concomitant
causes ?

Those states, to wit, the four skandhas, all form also,
and uncompounded element, which have not as concomi-
tant causes the states enumerated above.

[1075] Which are the states that are associated with a
cause ? 2

The states, to wit, the four skandhas, which are asso-
ciated with those states enumerated above.

[1076] Which are the states that are nob associated with
a cause ?

The states, to wit, the four skandhas, all form also, and
uncompounded element, which are not associated with the
states enumerated above.

[1077] Which are the states that both are causes and
have causes as their concomitants ?

Lust with dulness is both. Dulness with lust is both.
Hate with dulness is both. Dulness with hate is both. 3

The absence of lust, the absence of hate, the absence of
dulness — these also, taken one with the other, both are
causes and have causes as their concomitants.


1 Tehi dhammehi, i.e., with one or other of the six
causes of good or bad effects. Asl. 868.

2 Hetu-sampayutta. On the import of the term
sampayutto, see p. 1, n. 4. This pair of opposites is
further declared to be not different in meaning from the
preceding pair (atthato nanattam natthi), and the
formulae only differentiated for the purpose of adaptation
to the various dispositions (aj jhasayavasena) of the
hearers. Asl. 48. This coincidence of meaning seems,
however, to be applicable only in the sphere of hetu. In
the next gocchakam, the attribute of asavavippayutta
is allowed to be compatible with the attribute sasava,
§ 1111, and so for subsequent gocchakas.

3 Dulness when accompanied by perplexity and excite-
ment (uddhaccam) is said to be a cause, but to have no
cause as its concomitant. Asl. 868.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


287


[1078] Which are the states that have causes as their
concomitants, but are not causes ?

The states, to wit, the four skandhas, which have as
their concomitant causes those states [enumerated above
as causes], the latter states themselves excepted.

[1079] Which are the states that are both causes and
associated with a cause ?

[1080] Which are the states that are associated with a
cause, but are not causes ?

Answers identical with those in the foregoing pair. 1

[1081] Which are the states that are not causes, but
have a cause as their concomitant ? 2

The states, to wit, the four skandhas, which are not the
causes of those states enumerated above, but which have
any of them as their concomitants.

[1082] Which are the states that are not causes and
have not causes as their concomitants ?

The states, to wit, the four skandhas, all form also, and
uncompounded element, which neither are the causes of
those states enumerated above, nor have any of them as
their concomitants.


1 Cf. § 1075, n. 2.

2 Supplementary questions, says the Cy., dealing with
the na-hetu states. Asl. 47.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter III.


The Short Intermediate Set of Pairs (culantara-
dukam).]

[1083] Which are the states that are conditioned ?*

The five skandhas, to wit, the skandhas of form, feeling,
perception, syntheses and intellect.

[1084] Which are the states that are unconditioned?

‘ And uncompounded element.’ 1 2 *

[1085] Wliich are the states that are compound ?®

Those states which are conditioned.

[1086] Which are the states that are uncompounded ?

That state which is unconditioned.

[1087] Which are the states that have visibility ?

The sphere of [visible] forms.

[1088] Which are the states that have no visibility ?

The spheres of the senses and sense-objects ; the four
skandhas ; that form also which, being neither visible nor
impingeing, is included under [mental] states ; 4 and un-
compounded element.


1 Sappaccaya, = attano nipphadakena, saha
paccayena. Asl. 47.

2 One would have expected the reading tobeasankhata
va dhatu, instead of . . . ca dhatu, given both in the
text and in K. The Cy. has asankhata-dhatum sand-

haya.

8 Sankhata is defined as ‘made, come together by
conditions.’ Asl. 47. 4 See § 1052.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



289


[1089] Which are the states that impinge

The spheres of the senses and sense-objects.

[1090] Which are the states that are non-impingeing ?

The four skandhas ; that form also which, being neither
visible nor impingeing, is included under [mental] states ;
also uncompounded element.

[1091] Which are the states that have [material] form ?*

The four great principles as well as the form that is
derived from the four great phenomena. 8

[1092] Which are the states that have no material form ?

The four skandhas, and uncompounded element.

[1093] Which are the states that are mundane ? 1 2 * 4 *

Co-Intoxicant 6 states, good, bad and indeterminate, re-
lating to the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless,
to wit, the five skandhas.

[1094] Which are the states that are supra-mundane ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1095] Which are the states that are cognizable in one
way, and not cognizable in another way ?

States that are cognizable by sight are not cognizable by
hearing ; conversely, states that are cognizable by hearing
are not cognizable by sight. States that are cognizable by
sight are not cognizable by smell ... by taste ... by
body-sensibility, and conversely.


1 Sappatigha. Cf. § 597, et seq.

2 Rupino, i.e., they have a form which as such is devoid
of discriminative consciousness (avinibhogavasena).
Ash, p. 47, cf. p. 56 ; also Mil. 63 ; M. i. 293.

8 Cf. § 597.

4 Lokiya = bound down to, forming a part of, the circle

(of existence), which for its dissolving and crumbling away
(lujjana palujjana) is called loko. To have got beyond
the world, to be a non-conforming feature in it — in it, but
not of it — is to be lokuttaro. Asl. 47, 48.

6 See § 1103.

19


ed by CjOCK^Ic



290


States that are cognizable by hearing are not cognizable
by smell ... by taste ... by body-sensibility ... by
sight, and conversely.

So for states that are cognizable by smell, by taste, and
by body-sensibility. 1


1 The Cy. meets the question, Why is there no couplet
telling which states are cognizable or not cognizable by
representative cognition or ideation (manovinnanam)?
by the answer, Such a distinction is quite valid, ‘ is not
not- there/ but it is not stated explicitly, because of the
absence of fixing or judging (vavatthanam). ‘ There is
none of this when, for instance, we judge, such and such
things are not cognizable by visual intellection.* See
Asl. 369. Cf. Mil. 87, where this intellectual process is
more clearly set forth. Buddhaghosa’s argument is to me
less clear.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter IV.

The Intoxicant Group (asava-gocchaka m).]

[1096] Which are the states that are Intoxicants? 1
The four Intoxicants, to wit, the Intoxicant of sensuality,


1 ‘ Intoxicant* is but a pis-aller for asavo, no adequate
English equivalent being available (see Rhys Davids,
‘ Dialogues of the Buddha,* i., p. 92, n. 8). The choice of
it here has been determined by Buddhaghosa’s comment.
This is as follows : 'Asava means they flow on to. They
are said to flow ( lege savanti), to circulate about the
senses and the mind. Or, they flow, in respect of mental
states, right up to the elect, in respect of space, right up to
the highest planes of becoming — I mean, their range em-
braces both states and space, this encompassing being
denoted by the prefix a . The Asavas, moreover, are like
liquors (asava), such as spirits, etc., in the sense of that
which may be kept a long time. For, in the world, spirits,
etc., which have been laid down for a long period are called
asavas. And if those spirits for this long storage are
called asavas, these states deserve the name as well. For
it is said : “ The ultimate point of ignorance, brethren,
before which ignorance has not existed, is not manifest’*
[alluding to the asava of ignorance].’ Asl. 48.

From this passage we gather that, to Buddhaghosa, the
word asavo, whatever other implications it may have had,
typified mainly two notions, and these were pervasion and
length of growth of a potential and very potent effect . The
former metaphor — that of a flowing in, upon, and over
— occurs with a cognate verb in the standard descrip-
tion of the guarded avenues of sensation — anvas(s)a-
veyyum (< e.g ., D. i. 70). The latter notion appears in

19—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



292


the Intoxicant of renewed existence, the Intoxicant of specu-
lative opinion, the Intoxicant of ignorance.

In this connexion

[1097] What is the Intoxicant of sensuality ?

That sensual desire, 1 sensual passion, sensual delight.


Subhuti’s opening remark on the term (‘ Abhidhanappadl-
pika-suci,* s.v . Asavo): m&na-purwainad&dayo yendti — that
by which come pride and human madness [or infatuation].
No doubt the term also implied something that tainted,
corrupted, souillissait as it flowed. But this is also part of
the physiological and ethical import of the term I have
selected in translating.

Later (p. 369) the Cy. considers the Intoxicants under
numerical categories, according to the very usual Buddhist
method. Thus, they are One, or undifferentiated, in virtue
of their being, like liquor, long stored up. In the Vinaya
they are treated of as Twofold : — the Intoxicants that have
to be suppressed in this life and those that have to be
eschewed in future lives (see V. iii. 21 ; V., pp. 143, 223).
In the Suttanta, e.g., in the Salayatana- Sutta, they are
distinguished under Three heads, ditthasava being
omitted. (The Sutta referred to is not yet edited, but
r. M. L 55 ; S. iv. 256 ; A. i. 167 ; iii. 414 ; and cf D. i.
84. In the Maha-parinibbana-sutta of the Digha Nikaya,
however, all four Asavas are mentioned (pp. 38, 40).
Hence follows one of three possible conclusions. Either
Buddhaghosa is for once in error, or the edition of the
Sutta last named needs correcting, or it is a later work,
contemporary, it may be, with the Abhidhamma.) In the
passage on * Penetration * (A. iii. 410-417) they are treated
of as leading to Five different forms of rebirth. ‘ In the
Ahuneyya-sutta of the Chakka nipata* ( i.e ., No. lviii.
of that Nipata, A. iii. 387) they are treated of under Six
methods for overcoming them. In the Sabbasava-discourse
(M. i., pp. 7-11) Seven methods are given.

1< Kamachando ti kamasankhato chando na
kattukamyatachando na dhammachando.’ Asl.
370. This carefully-drawn distinction between sensual
desire and an ethically neutral state of bare conation, as
well as the desire after the ideal, bears me out in the argu-
ment I ventured to put forward in J. R A. S., January, 1898,
and which is rediscussed in my Introduction.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



293


sensual craving, sensual fondness, sensual thirst, sensual
fever, sensual languishing, sensual rapacity, which is
excited by the pleasures of the senses 1 — this is called the
Intoxicant of sensuality.

[1098] What is the Intoxicant of renewed existence ?

The desire, the passion for coming into being, delight in
coming into being, craving, fondness for coming into being,
the fever, the yearning, the hungering to come into being,
which is felt concerning rebirths — this is called the In-
toxicant of renewed existence. 2

[1099] What is the Intoxicant of speculative opinion P

To hold that the world is eternal, or that it is not
eternal, 4 infinite or finite; 6 that the living soul is the
body, or that the living soul is a different thing from the


1 Pancakamaguniko rago kamasavo nama (Asl.
369). The Cy. points out that to hanker after the man-
sions of the supreme gods or the wishing-trees of heaven
or the craving for aesthetic luxuries (abharanam) is not
to be confounded with the Intoxicant of sensuality, since
such desires are a step higher than the latter vice. But
they are subsumed under the Tie of covetousness (§ 1136),
and the Lust-cause (§ 1059). Asl. 371, 377.

2 Literally, of becoming. ‘ That which is called bhava-
s a vo is the hoping for re-becoming, the passion connate
with the Eternalist speculation (v. following answer and
§ 1003, n. 2), the craving for the state of Jhana(jhanani-
kanti — sic lege), the passionate desire for re-births in the
planes of form and of formlessness.’ Asl. 369.

3 Ditthasavo, ‘i.e., the sixty-two theories.’ Ibid. See
D. i., Brahmajala Sutta.

4 I.e., to hold that this five-skandha’d affair is permanent,
fixed, a thing for all time — which is the Eternalist theory ;
or that it is annihilated, perishes — which is the Theory of
Total Disintegration. Asl. 370, 371. Cf. §§ 1003, n. 3;
1315-16.

6 Either of these theories is by the Cy. declared to be
compatible with either of those in the preceding clause.
And they are also said to be determined by the nature of
the Jhana practised by the adherent to one or the other.
Asl. 371. See §§ 1317-18.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



294


body j 1 or that he who has won truth 2 exists after death, or
does not exist after death, or both exists and does not exist
after death, or neither exists nor does not exist after death
— this kind of opinion, this walking in opinion, this jungle
of opinion, wilderness of opinion, puppet-show of opinion,
scuffling of opinion, the fetter of opinion, the grip and
tenacity of it, the inclination towards it, the being infected
by it, this by-path, wrong road, wrongness, this ‘ fording-
place,’ this shiftiness of grasp 3 — this is called the Intoxicant
of speculative opinion. Moreover, the Intoxicant of specu-
lation includes all false theories.

[1100] What is the Intoxicant of ignorance t*

Answer as in § 1061 for ‘ dulness.’

These are the states that are Intoxicants.

[1102] 6 Which are the states that are not Intoxicants?

Every state, good, bad and indeterminate, 6 which is not
included in the foregoing (Intoxicants), whether relating to
the worlds of sense, form or the formless, or to the life that
is Unincluded, to wit, the four skandhas ; all form also, and
uncompounded element.

[1108] Which are the states that are co-intoxicant? 7

1 I.e ., that the life (or living soul) is, or is not,
annihilated on the dissolution of the body. Ilrid.

2 Tathagato — in the Cy., satto tathagato nama.
Clearly, therefore, not a reference to the Buddha only. See
Robert Chalmers, ‘ Tathagata,’ J. R. A. S., January, 1898,
pp. 113-115. The four speculations about such a person’s
future existence are named respectively Eternalist, Anni-
hilationist, Semi-eternalist, Eel- wriggling (amaravikkhe-
pika). Ibid., see D. i. 8, §§ 58, 41, 59, 85.

8 See under § 381.

4 In the text, after dukkhudaye annanam, supply
dukkhanirodhe anfianam.

6 ‘ § 1101 ’ is apparently an erroneous interpolation. See
§ 1104, where it appears again and in its right place.

6 In the text read kusalakusalavyakata.

7 Sasava, i.e., states ‘proceeding along with Asavas,’
and which attanam arammanam katva — ‘ have made
the Self their object.’ Asl. 48.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



295


Good, bad and indeterminate states, whether relating to
the worlds of sense, form, or the formless ; in other words,
the five skandhas.

[1104] Which are the states that are not co-intoxicant ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1105] Which are the states that are 1 associated with
Intoxicants ’?

The states which are associated with those [Intoxicant]
states, 1 to wit, the four skandhas.

[1106] Which are the states that are ‘ disconnected with
Intoxicants ’?

The states which are disconnected with those [Intoxi-
cant] states, to wit, the four skandhas ; all form also, and
uncompounded element.

[1107] Which are the states that are both Intoxicants
and co-intoxicant ?

The Intoxicants themselves. 2

[1108] Which are the states that are co-intoxicant, but
not Intoxicants ?

The states which have the foregoing states (§ 1096) as
their concomitants ; that is to say, with the exception of the
Intoxicants, all states whatever, good, bad and indeter-
minate, which are co-intoxicant, whether they relate to
the worlds of sense, of form or of the formless ; in other
words, the five skandhas.


1 Answers of this form, which frequently occur in these
‘ Groups,’ are not the mere repetitions of the question that
they at first sight appear, but are, in logical idiom, analytic,
or explicative propositions. The current term asava-sam-
payutta means or includes these four modes: — kama-
sava-sampayutta, bhavasava-sampayutta, and
so on.

2 When mutally associated. Cf. the following pair of
answers.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



296


[1109] Which are the states that are both Intoxicants
and associated with Intoxicants ?

The Intoxicant of sensuality together with that of ignor-
ance, and conversely. The Intoxicant of renewed existence
together with that of ignorance, and conversely. The
Intoxicant of speculative opinion together with that of
ignorance, and conversely.

[1110] Which are the states that are associated with
Intoxicants but are not Intoxicants ?

The states which are associated with the foregoing states
(§ 1096) — the latter themselves excepted — to wit, the four
skandhas.

[1111] Which are the states that are disconnected with
Intoxicants but co-intoxicant ?

The states which are disconnected with those above-
named states (§ 1096), but which, good, bad, or indeter-
minate, have them as concomitants, whether they belong to
the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless, to wit, the
five skandhas.

[1112] Which are the states that are disconnected with
Intoxicants and are not co -Intoxicant ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of the
Paths and uncompounded element. 1


1 In conclusion the Cy. declares (p. 872) that the In-
toxicant of speculative opinion is put away during one’s
progress through the first (sotapatti) path, the Intoxicant
of sensuality in the third (a nag ami) path, and the In-
toxicants of renewed existence and ignorance in the fourth
(arahatta) path.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter Y.

The Group of the Fetters (sanflojana-gocchaka m).]

[1113] Which are the states that are Fetters?

The ten Fetters, to wit, the Fetter of
sensuality/
repulsion, ^
conceit, ✓
speculative opinion, v
perplexity, v

the contagion of mere rule and ritual,'

the passion for renewed existence, v

envy, '

meanness,

ignorance. 1 * * 4 -'


1 Safinojanani ‘mean the things that bind, that fetter
to the wheel of re-birth, the individual for whom they exist.’

Asl. 48. This list differs in some items from the well-
known dasa safiflo janani occurring so often in the

Suttas, and enumerated in Childers. See Rhys Davids,

4 American Lectures,’ 141 et seq. That that older category
was known to Buddhaghosa may be gathered from his
naming the first three in order as ‘ states which are to be
put away by insight,’ § 1002 et seq . He proffers, however, no
comment on the two lists as such. In M. i. 360-363, eight
states of mind are enumerated and severally designated as
a Fetter and a Hindrance, but they are quite different
from either category habitually understood by these two
titles. Cf. also M. i. 432 ; A. ii. 238 ; Div. S. 533, 553.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



298


In this connexion,

[1114] What is the Fetter of sensual passion ?

That sensual desire, sensual passion, sensual delight,
sensual craving, sensual fondness, sensual fever, sensual
languor, sensual rapacity, which is excited by the pleasures
of the senses — this is called the Fetter of sensuality. 1

[1115] What is the Fetter of repulsion f 2

Answer as for ‘hate,’ § 1060.

[1116] What is the Fetter of conceit t*

1 Cf with § 1097. The single discrepancy is the omission
in $ 1114 of ‘sensual thirst’ (kamapipaso), both in the
P. T. S. text and in K.

2 Patigha-sannojanam, cf §§ 413-421.

3 Mana-saiinojanam — or pride. Conceit is etymo-
logically more exact, though not so in any other respect.
* Lowly ’ is hi n o. Cj. §§ 269, et seq ., 1025. ‘ Loftiness and
haughtiness ’ are unnati, unnamo. * [Flaunting] a flag *
is simply dhajo, the metaphor implying the pretensions
conveyed by raising a flag over one’s self or property, but
answering better to our metaphor of a ‘ flourish of trumpets.*
‘Assumption ’ is sampaggaho. The Cy. (p. 372) hereon
has ukkhipanatthena cittam sampagganhatl ti —
to grasp in the sense of tossing (puffing up) the mind.
Cf slsam ukkhipitva, quoted by Childers, and the
Hebrew figures for arrogance, etc. — lifting up head, horn,
heel, or one’s self on high ; also paggaho, § 56. ‘Desire
of the heart for self-advertisement* is ketukamyata
cittassa. I can only make sense of the Cy. hereon by
altering the punctuation followed in the text. Thus:
Ketu vuccati bahusu dhajesu accuggatadhajo. Mano pi
punappuna uppajjamano aparapare upadaya accuggatat-
thena ketum viyati ketu. Return icchatl ti ketukamyatassa
bhavo ketukamyata. Sii pana cittassa, na attano, tena
vuttam : — ketukamyata cittassa ti. ‘A flag hoisted
above many flags is called a ketu (sign, or standard);
cf. Ramayana i. 19, 16, quoted by Bothl. and Roth). By
ketu is meant the conceit which arising again and again
is like a signal in the sense of something set up on high.
The state of ketu-desire, i.e ., to wish for self-advertise-
ment, is ketukamyata. But this means [a state of]
mind, not of a self-entity, therefore the phrase is desire of
the mind [or heart] for self-advertisement.’


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



299


Conceit at the thought ‘ I am the better man ’; conceit at
the thought ‘I am as good [as they] ’; conceit at the
thought ‘ I am lowly * — all such sort of conceit, overween-
ing, conceitedness, loftiness, haughtiness, flaunting a flag,
assumption, desire of the heart for self-advertisement^this
is called conceit.

[1117] What is the Fetter of speculative opinion ?

Answer as for the ‘ Intoxicant of speculative opinion/
§ 1099, with this supplement : And, with the exception of
the ‘ Fetter of the contagion of mere rule and ritual,’ all
wrong views are included in the Fetter of speculative
opinion.

[1118] What is the Fetter of perplexity ?

Answer as for ‘ perplexity,’ § 1004.

[1119] What is the Fetter of the contagion of mere rule
and ritual ?

Answer as for the ‘contagion of,’ etc., § 1005.

[1120] What is the Fetter of the passion for renewed
existence ?

Answer as for the ‘Intoxicant of renewed existence,’ § 1098.

[1121] What is the Fetter of envy (issasanno-
janam)?

Envy, envying, enviousness — jealousy, the expression
and mood of jealousy at the gifts, the hospitality, the
respect, affection, reverence and worship accruing to others 1
— this is called the Fetter of envy.

[1122] What is the Fetter of meanness (macchari-
safifiojanam)?

The Five Meannesses, to wit, meanness as regards dwell-
ing, families, gifts, reputation, doctrine 2 — all this sort of

1 In other words, discontent and murmuring at the success
of one’s neighbour, and complacency when bad luck over-
takes him 0 Schadenfreude ). Asl. 378. Cf P. P., p. 19.

2 Buddhaghosa is at some pains to distinguish genuine
instances of want of magnanimity from such as are not.
For example, it is macchariyam when a bhikshu, enjoy-
ing the use of a lodging, grudges another a share of it, or
when he grudges another intercourse with his own patrons


ed by CjOCK^Ic



300


meanness, grudging, mean spirit, avarice and ignobleness, 1
niggardliness and want of generosity of heart 2 — this is
called the Fetter of meanness.


and relatives, or gifts from the laiety for his piety, or that
he should enjoy a reputation for physical or moral attrac-
tiveness, or that he should win proficiency in the letter, or
the spirit of doctrine. On the other hand, it is not mac-
chari yam to deprecate the arrival at one's lodging of
quarrelsome persons and the like, or the introduction to
one's own social circle of peace-breakers, or the gifts made
to selfish, miserly brethren instead of to the virtuous. Nor
is it ungenerous in every case to withhold instruction from
an inquirer. Beserve may be employed out of regard
either for the doctrine, or for the inquirer. The latter may
distort the imparted doctrine, or the doctrine may upset
him. Nevertheless, it is an act of doctrinal illiberality to
withhold the doctrine, if the inquirer is not a 4 weak
brother,’ but one likely to prove hostile to ‘our Cause’
(amhakam samayam bhinditum samattho).

There then follows a mythological paragraph on the
unpleasant rebirths awaiting those who err with respect to
any one of these five forms of meanness. Asl. 374, 875.

1 Veviccham kadariyam. These terms are charac-
terized (Asl. 375, 376) as respectively the soft (mudu) and
hard (thaddha) varieties of meanness (cf. Childers, s.r.
thaddho). We might name them the negatively and the
positively anti-social. For the former is the spirit that
says, spreading itself over all its own gettings, ‘ Mine be
it, not another’s!* (§ 1059). The latter (the anariyo)
would even prevent another from giving to others.

2 Katukaficukata aggahitattam cittassa. There
is doubt about the reading of the former term. K. has
katakaficukata, Buddhaghosa katukaficukata. The
term is discussed by Morris, J. P. T. S., 1887, p. 161.
Buddhaghosa’s remark is as follows (Asl. 376): ‘Katu-
kaficuko means that, on seeing a beggar, owing to one’s
styptic (katuko) disp osition, one’s heart narrows or is
bent (aficati — ? ^/anh, or afic) and shrinks up.’ He then,
in offering an alternative explanation, relapses into charac-
teristic etymology, deriving katukaficukata from katac-
chugaho — spoon-helps. When your rice-pot is full to the
brim, one can only take niggling helps with the tip of


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



801


[1123] What is the Fetter of ignorance 1

Answer as for the Intoxicant of ignorance, § 1100.

These are the states that are Fetters.

[1124] Which are the states that are not Fetters ?

Every state, good, bad and indeterminate, which is not
included in the foregoing [ten] states, whether it relates to
the worlds of sense, or of form, or of the formless, or to the
life that is Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ;
all form also, and uncompounded element.

Which are the states that are

[1125] (a) favourable to the Fetters ? l

Co-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate,
relating to the worlds of sense, form, or the formless ; in
other words, the five skandhas.

[1126] ( b ) unfavourable to the Fetters ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of the
Paths, and uncompounded element.

Which are the states that are

[1127] (a) associated with the Fetters?

[1128] (b) disconnected with the Fetters ?

Answers identical with those given to corresponding ques-
tions respecting the ‘ Intoxicants §§ 1105, 1106.

Which are the states that are

[1129] (a) both Fetters and favourable to the Fetters ?


a spoon. And just as the heart of the niggard shrinks, so
too is his body ‘ bent back on itself, thrown back on itself,
obtains no peace * (he quotes from Mil., p. 297). Similarly
aggahitattam cittassa is a holding the heart fast, or
back, preventing its expansion by way of gifts and service
to others.

1 Sannojaniya. So the text and K. The Cy. reads
safinojanlya. But cf. ganthaniya, oghaniya, yoga-
niya, Asl. 49. The Cy. explains the term, which is
literally fetter-ish, as that which benefits the Fetters by
developing them, once their inception has begun. Asl. 48.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



302


The Fetters themselves are both

[1130] (6) favourable to the Fetters but not themselves
Fetters .

The states which are favourable to those [ten] states
afore-named; that is to say, with the exception of the
Fetters themselves, all co-intoxicant states whatever, good,
bad and indeterminate, whether relating to the worlds of
sense, form or the formless; in other words, the five
skandhas.

Which are the states that are

[1131] (a) both Fetters and associated with Fetters ?

The Fetter of sensuality in conjunction with the Fetter
of ignorance, and conversely , is both. So is any one of the
remaining eight Fetters when in conjunction with the Fetter
of ignorance, and conversely .

[1132] (b) associated with the Fetters but not a Fetter $

The states which are associated with those ten states
afore-named, with the exception of the Fetters themselves ;
in other words, the four skandhas.

Which are the states that are

[1133] (a) disconnected with the Fetters yet favourable to
them ?

The states which are disconnected with those afore-
mentioned [ten] states, that is to say, good, bad and
indeterminate states which are co-intoxicant, whether
they relate to the worlds of sense, or of form, or of the
formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1134] (6) disconnected with the Fetters and not favourable
to them ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of the
Paths ; all form also, and uncompounded element. 1


1 In quitting the subject of Fetters, the Cy. declares
(pp. 376, 377) that the Fetters of sensuality and repulsion
are put away during one’s progress through the third
(anagami) path, the Fetter of conceit in the fourth


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



808


(arahatta) path, the Fetters of speculative opinion, per-
plexity, and the contagion of mere rule and ritual, in the
first (sotapatti) path, the Fetter of the passion for
renewed existence in the fourth path, the Fetters of envy
and meanness in the first path, the Fetter of ignorance in
the fourth path. Hence the second path seems, according
to Buddhaghosa, to constitute an interim in the breaking
of Fetters.

The following tables show how far the Dh. S. and its
Cy. agree with the authorities quoted in Childers, s.v.
samyojanam (c/. D. i. 156) :


Dh. S. and Asl.
ditthi

vicikiccha Removed by

silabbata- p a r a - the First Path,
maso


Childers .

'sakkaya-ditthi
vicikiccha
sllabbata-par a-
maso


issa

macchariyam

kamarago

patigho


Removed by f
the Second and^

, Third Paths. I
) Removed by
/the Third Path.


kamarago

patigho


mano

bhavarago

avijja


( Removed by
the Fourth
Path.


ruparago
aruparago
- mano
uddhaccam
.avijja


On the work of the Fourth Path compare Dh. S., § 864,
which is in agreement with the right - hand table. In the
first edition (p. 452) of Dr. Oldenberg’s ‘ Buddha ’ attention
was called to discrepancies in this connexion.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter VI.

The Group of the Ties (gantha-gocchakam).] 1

[1185] Which are the states that are Ties?

The four Ties, to wit, the bodily Tie of covetousness, the
bodily Tie of ill-will, the bodily Tie of the contagion of
mere rule and ritual, the bodily Tie of the inclination to
dogmatize.

In this connexion,

[1186] what is the bodily Tie of covetousness (abh ij j ha
kayagantho)?

Answer as for ‘ lust/ § 1059. 2

[1187] what is the bodily Tie of UUwiU (vyapado
kayagantho) ?

Answer as for ‘ hate,’ § 1060.

[1188] what is the bodily Tie of the contagion of mere
rule and ritual ?

Answer as in § 1005, and , § 1119, for the Fetter so-called .


1 Gantho is defined as that which ties (or knots) or
binds him for whom it exists on to the ‘ circle * of re-birth.
And the term kayagantho (body-tie) is used because the
tying is effected through the body — that is, is got in con-
ception and re-birth. Asl. 49, 877. The Ganthas are
enumerated as in the present answer in S. iv. 59, and are
frequently mentioned collectively, sometimes as Gandhas,
throughout that volume. In the A. (ii. 24) I find only the
general allusion sabba-gantha-pamocano.

2 See also p. 298, n. 1.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


805


[1189] what is the bodily Tie of the inclination to dogma-
tize

* “ The world is eternal ” — this is true, all else is false !
“ The world is not eternal ” — this is true, all else is false !
“ The world is finite ... is infinite ” — this is true, all else
is false ! “ The living soul is the body ... is a different
thing from the body ” — this is true, all else is false ! 41 He

who has won truth exists after death . . . does not exist
after death . . . both exists and does not exist after death
. . . neither exists nor does not exist after death ” — this is
true, all else is false !’ — this kind of opinion, this walking
in opinion, this jungle of opinion, wilderness of opinion,
puppet-show of opinion, scuffling of opinion, this Fetter of
opinion, the grip and tenacity of it, the inclination towards
it, the being infected by it, this by-path, wrong road,
wrongness, this ‘ fording-place/ this shiftiness of grasp —
this is called the bodily Tie of the inclination to dogmatize.

And, excepting only the bodily Tie of the contagion of
mere rule and ritual, all wrong views are included under
the bodily Tie of the inclination to dogmatize.

These are the states which are Ties.

[1140] Which are the states that are not Ties?

Every state, good, bad and indeterminate, which is not
included in the foregoing [four] states, whether it relates
to the worlds of sense or of form, or of the formless, or to
the life that is Unincluded ; in other words, the four
skandhas ; all form also, and uncompounded element.

Which are the states that

[1141] (a) tend to become tied ? 1 2

Good, bad and indeterminate states, relating to the worlds
of sense, of form or of the formless, which are co-intoxicant ;
in other words, the five skandhas.

1 The sole comment on this species of spiritual hindrance
is that it is the standpoint of those who have rejected the
doctrines of the Omniscient. Asl. 877.

2 Ganthaniya. Arammanakaranavasena gan~
thehi ganthitabba ti ganthaniya. Asl. 49.

20


ed by CjOCK^Ic



806


[1142] ( b ) do not tend to become tied t

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of the
Paths, and nncomponnded element.

Which are the states that are

[1148] (a) associated icith the Ties f

The states connected with those four afore-named states ;
in other words, the four skandhas.

[1144] ( b ) disconnected with the Ties i

The states which are disconnected with those [four afore-
named] states ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all form
also, and uncompounded element. 1

Which are the states that

[1145] (a) are themselves Ties and tend to become tied ?

The Ties themselves are both.

[1146] (6) tend to become tied, but are not Ties ?

The states which tend to become tied by those [four
afore-named] states, that is, every state, good, bad and
indeterminate, which is not included in the latter, whether
it relates to the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless ;
in other words, the five skandhas.

Which are the states that are

[1147] (a) Ties themselves, and associated with the Ties f

The bodily Tie of the contagion of mere rule and ritual
in conjunction with the bodily Tie of covetousness, and
conversely , is both. The bodily Tie of the inclination to
dogmatize in conjunction with the bodily Tie of covetous-
ness, and conversely , is both. 2

[1148] (b) associated with the Ties but not Ties ?


1 Sabbaii ca rupam asankhata ca dhatu is
omitted in the text, but occurs in analogous passages
(§§ 1124, 1167) and is given in K.

2 It is not apparent to me why the Tie of ill will
(vyapado) is omitted from these combinations, both in
the text and in K. Buddhaghosa makes no comment.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



807


The states which are associated with the four states afore-
named (the Ties), the latter themselves excepted ; in other
words, the four skandhas.

Which are the states that

[1149] (a) are disconnected with the Ties , hat tend to
become tied ?

The states which are disconnected with the afore-named
states, that is, good, bad and indeterminate states relating
to the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless, which
are co-intoxicant ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1150] ( b ) are disconnected with the Ties and do not tend
to become tied ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of the
Paths, and uncompounded element.


20—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter VII.

The Group of the Floods (ogha-gocchakam).]

[1151] Which are the states that are Floods ?

. . . [ continue as in the Group of Fetters.] 1


1 This and the group in the next chapter are thus indi-
cated to be taken as read, in both the text and E. By the
table of contents, it can be seen that the same system of
catechizing is followed as in the Groups of the Fetters and
the Ties. In S. v., p. 59, may be seen the number and
kind of 4 states * included under Floods or under Bonds, the
contents of either group being identical with the four
Asavas. These are the Flood or Bond of sensuality
(kama), renewed existence (bhava), speculative opinion
(ditthi) and ignorance (avijja). The Atthasalini only
remarks that the Floods are states so called because they
sink him for whom they exist into samsara, while the
Bonds, like the Ties, cham him to the Circle (p. 49). Also
that the adjectives, oghaniya and yoganiya, analogous
to ganthaniya, stand for that which can be engulfed by
Floods and enchained by Bonds respectively.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter VIII.

The Group of the Bonds (yoga-gocchaka m).]

[1151a] Which are the states that are Bonds ?

. . . [continue as in the Group of Fetters].


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter IX.

The Group of the Hindrances (nivarana-goccha-
k am).]

[1152] Which are the states that are Hindrances?

The six Hindrances, to wit, the Hindrance of sensual
desire, the Hindrance of ill will, the Hindrance of stolidity
and torpor, the Hindrance of excitement and worry, the
Hindrance of perplexity, the Hindrance of ignorance. 1

In this connexion

[1158] What is the Hindrance of sensual desire?

Answer as for the * Intoxicant of sensuality,’ § 1097. 2

[1154] What is the Hindrance of ill will ?

Answer as for the ‘ Tie of ill will,’ § 1187.

[1155] What is the Hindrance of stolidity and torpor?

First distinguish between stolidity and torpor. 3


1 In the Sutta Pitaka, the Hindrances form a category of
five, ignorance (avij ja) being excluded. See the descrip-
tion in D. i. 71-74, and cf D. i. 246 ; M. i. 60, 144, 181,
269, 294, etc. ; A. iii. 68 ; S. v. 60, 94-98. This dis-
crepancy is not noticed by Buddhaghosa. See also § 1112,
etc. The Hindrances are to be understood as states which
muffle, enwrap or trammel thought. States, again, which
are nlvaraniya are to be understood analogously to those
which are safifiojanlya. Asl. 49.

2 1 Sensual thirst ’ is again omitted, as in the description
of the corresponding Fetter, § 1114.

8 It is interesting to note that whereas the text calls
thin am (stolidity) a morbid state of the c it tarn and
middham a morbid state of the kayo, Buddhaghosa, in


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



811


In this connexion,

[1156] What is stolidity l

That which is indisposition, 1 unwieldiness 2 of intellect ;
adhering and cohering; clinging, cleaving to, stickiness;
stolidity, that is, a stiffening, a rigidity of the intellect 3 —
this is called stolidity.

[1157] What is torpor ? 4

That which is indisposition and unwieldiness of sense,
a shrouding, enveloping, 6 barricading within 6 ; torpor that

his Cy. on the Digha Nikaya (Sum. 211), speaks of
thinam as citta-gelannam (sickness or affection of
the mind), and of middham as cetasikagelaiinam.
The apparent inconsistency, however, will vanish if the
predominantly psychological standpoint of the Dhamma
Sangani be kept in mind. By kayo, as Buddhaghosa
reminds us (Asl. 878 ; see above, p. 48, n. 3), is meant
4 the three skandhas ' of feeling, perception and syntheses,
that is to say, the three through which we have subjective
experience of bodily states objectively conceived. And
cetasiko is the adjective corresponding to kayo taken
in this sense (§ 1022). Hence stolidity is confined to the
vinnana-skandha, which = cit tarn = (approximately) re-
presentative intellection, while torpor is a corresponding
affection of mind on its presentative and emotional side.

1 Akalyata, equivalent to gilanabhavo, Asl. 877,
where Maha Yibhanga, i. 62, is quoted.

2 See § 47.

3 ‘ The (stolid) mind cannot be maintained in any required
attitude or deportment. It is as inert as a bat hanging
to a tree, or as molasses cleaving to a stick, or as a lump
of butter too stiff for spreading ’ (Asl., ibid.). ‘Attached
to* (llnam) is paraphrased by avippharikataya pati-
kutitam, lit., bent back without expansion, where the
notion, as conceived by the Commentator, has something
akin to katukancukata or niggardliness. See § 1122, n. 2.

4 Middham, derived by the Cy. from medhati (

‘ be fat ') ; there is a cog nate n otion in our ‘ torpor/ cf.
T&prretv, to be sated, and ^/tarp.

6 Onaho, pariyonaho. See Mil. 800; D. i. 246. In
the latter work, the a is short. In the Cy. (Asl. 878) the

6 See note on p. 812.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



812


is sleep, drowsiness ; sleep, 1 slumbering, somnolence — this
is called torpor.

Now this is the stolidity and this is the torpor which are
called ‘ the Hindrance of stolidity and torpor.’ 2
[1159] What is the Hindrance of excitement and worry?
First distinguish between 1 excitement ’ and * worry.’

In this connexion,

[1160] What is excitement P

That excitement of mind which is disquietude, agitation
of heart, turmoil of mind — this is called excitement.

[1161] What is worry ? 4


simile is Enveloping the senses (kayo) as a cloud the
sky.’ In Sum. i. 185 the latter of the two terms is applied
to ‘ covering ’ a drum.

6 Anto-samorodho. The Cy. explains that, as men
cannot get out of an invested city, so dhamma, blockaded
by torpor, cannot get out by expansion or diffusion).

1 There is no comment on this repetition of soppam.

2 The Commentator in his general remarks on this
Hindrance is at pains to point out that for the khlna-
s a vo, or arahat, a periodical torpor or repose has ceased
to engender bad karma. The Buddha allowed an after-
dinner nap, for instance, at certain seasons (see M. i. 249),
as not in itself conducive to a bemuddling of the mind.
So powerful, however, is the Hindrance to the non-adept,
that its influence is not rooted out till the arahat Path is
gained. The arahat is fain to rest his frail body (lit., his
fingernail-kayo), but to him it is as unmoral an act as the
folding up of leaves and blossoms at night. On overcom-
ing torpor see A. iv. 86.

8 See § 429.

4 In its primary meaning kukkuccam is fidgeting, bad
deportment of hands and feet. See Jat. i 119; ii. 142 ;
also Sum. i. 1, 2. Hence mental fidget, the worry of
scruple (lit., * the little sharp stone in a man’s shoe.’
See Skeat’s English Dictionary); the over-sensitive, over-
scrupulous conscience. In the frequent cases of kukkuc-
cam, respecting the keeping of the rules of the Order,
given in the Yinaya — ‘tassa kukkuccam ahosi’ — or
kukkuccayanto — no blame seems to have attached to
the person in question. There was weakness in the anxiety


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



818


Consciousness of what is lawful in something that is un-
lawful; consciousness of what is unlawful in something that
is lawful ; consciousness of what is immoral in something
that is moral ; consciousness of what is moral in something
that is immoral 1 — all this sort of worry, fidgeting, over-
scrupulousness, remorse of conscience, mental scarifying 2
— this is what is called worry.

Now this is the excitement and this is the worry which
are what is called * the Hindrance of excitement and
worry.*

[1162] What is the Hindrance of ignorance ?

Answer as for ‘ dulness,’ § 1061.

[1168] Which are the states that are not Hindrances?

Every state, good, bad and indeterminate, which is not
included in the foregoing [six] states, whether it relates to
the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless, or to the
life that is Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ;
all form also, and uncompounded element.

Which are the states that are

[1164] (a) favourable to the Hindrances P


felt by the non-robust conscience as to the letter of the
law ; on the other hand, there was loyalty to the Master’s
decrees. Even the great Sariputta was not above such
scruples, when, on falling ill at a rest-house, he declined
to take food, in accordance with the 81st Pacittiya rule
(Vin. iv. 70). But Buddhaghosa quotes this as an instance
of praiseworthy scruple, to be distinguished, as ‘ Vinaya-
kukkuccam,* from the after-flush of burning anguish
(anutapo) accompanying the consciousness of having
done amiss, a feeling that is no longer possible for an
arahat. Asl. 884. Cf. below, § 1804.

1 Things lawful (kappiyam) and unlawful are explained
as here referring merely to rules of routine in the Order,
e.g.y to kinds of food, the dinner-hour, etc. By things
moral and immoral (avajjam, etc.) are meant acts of
virtue and of vice. Asl. 883.

2 See p. 117, n. 7.

8 Nivaraniya, to be understood as analogous to
safifiojanlya. Asl. 49.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



814


Co-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate,
whether relating to the worlds of sense, form or the
formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1165] ( b ) unfavourable to the Hindrances f

The Paths that are the Unincluded and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element.

Which are the states that are

[1166] (a) associated with the Hindrances f

[1167] ( b ) disconnected with the Hindrances f

Answers identical with those given to corresponding ques-
tions respecting the Intoxicants , §§ 1105, 1106.

Which are the states that are

[1168] (a) Hindrances themselves and favourable to the
Hindrances ?

The Hindrances themselves are both.

[1169] (b) favourable to the Hindrances , but not themselves
Hindrances ?

The states which are favourable to the Hindrances afore
named; that is to say, with the exception of the Hin-
drances, all co-intoxicant states whatever, good, bad and
indeterminate, whether they relate to the worlds of sense,
form or the formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

Which are the states that are

[1170] (a) both themselves Hindrances and associated with
Hindrances ?

The following pairs are both themselves Hindrances and
associated with Hindrances: Sensual desire in conjunction
with ignorance, and conversely . Ill-will in conjunction
with ignorance, and conversely .

taken successively , in conjunction with
ignorance, and conversely .


stonaity ana torpor,
Excitement,

Worry,

Perplexity,


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



815


Sensual desire,

Ill-will,

Stolidity and torpor, taken successively , in conjunction with
Excitement, ignorance, and conversely .

Worry,

Perplexity,

[1171] (b) associated with Hindrances , but not themselves
Hindrances ?

The states which are associated with the [six afore-
mentioned] states, the latter themselves being excepted ; in
other words, the four skandhas.

Which are the states that are

[1172] (a) disconnected with the Hindrances , but favour-
able to them ?

The states which are disconnected with those [six] states
afore-named, that is to say, co-intoxicant states, good, bad
and indeterminate, whether they relate to the worlds of
sense, form or the formless; in other words, the five
skandhas.

[1178] ( b ) disconnected with the Hindrances and unfavour-
able to them 1

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element. 1


1 Worry and perplexity are discarded in the First Path ;
sensual desire and ill-will in the Third Path; stolidity,
torpor and ignorance in the Fourth. Asl. 884. Insight
into the presence or absence of the (five) Hindrances is
termed, in A. i. 272, manosoceyyam.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter X.*

The Group on Contagion (paramasa-gocchakam).] 1

[1174] Which are the states that are contagious?

The Contagion of speculative opinion.

In this connexion,

[1175] What is the * Contagion of speculative opinion *?
Answer as for the ‘Intoxicant of speculative opinion/
viz . : ‘ To hold that the world is eternal, or that it is not
eternal/ etc. (§ 1099).

[1176] Which are the states that are not a Contagion ?
Answer as in the case of the ‘states that are not Hin-
drances * (§ 1168). 2

[1177, 1178] Which are the states that are

(a) infected ?

( b ) uninfected ?

Answers as in the corresponding answers relating to the
Hindrances (§§ 1164, 1165).


1 The man, according to the Cy. (p. 49), who falls out of
the right attitude toward dhamma, i.e., who loses the
belief in their impermanence, etc., lays himself open to the
infectious touch of speculative views.

2 The one kind of Contagion is always for the sake of
symmetry referred to as plural, e.g ., the states afore-named
(te dhamma thapetva). Asl. 885.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



317


[1179, 1180] Which are the states that are

(a) associated with the Contagion ?

(b) disconnected with the Contagion i

Answers as in the corresponding answers relating to the
Hindrances (§§ 1166, 1167).

[1181, 1182] Which are the states that are

(a) themselves Contagious and infected ?

The Contagion itself is both.

(b) infected hut not Contagious ?

The states which are infected by the states afore-named ;
that is to say, with the exception of the latter, all co-
Intoxicant states whatever, good, bad and indeterminate,
whether they relate to the worlds of sense, form, or the
formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1183, 1184] Which are the states that are

(a) disconnected with the Contagion , yet infected l

(b) disconnected with the Contagion and uninfected ?

Answers as in the corresponding sections on the Hin-
drances (§§ 1172, 1173).


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter XI.


The Great Intermediate Set of Pairs (mahantara-
d uk am).] 1

[1185, 1186] Which are the states that have

(a) a concomitant object of thought f 2
The four skandhas.

( b ) no concomitant object of thought ?

All form, 3 and uncompounded element.

[1187, 1188] Which are the states that are

(a) of the intellect ? 4 *

Cognition applied to sense-impressions ; the element of
ideation and the element of ideational cognition.

(b) not of the intellect ?

The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses ; all
form, moreover, and uncompounded element.

[1189, 1190] Which are the states that are

{a) involved in the life of sense ? 6


1 Cf Chapter III. of this book. The Cy. refrains from
any remarks on the answers in this chapter.

2 ft Q T* ft YY"I TY1 ft n a

8 See p. 169 : ‘ ‘ void of idea/ See K. V. 404.

4 Citta. See § 1022. ‘Cognition applied,* etc., is in
the original cakkhuvihhanam and the rest. When

‘ sense * drops out of account in the following pairs, I have
reverted to the approximately synonymous term ‘ thought.*

6 Cetasika. See § 1022.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



819


The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses.

(b) not involved in the life of sense ?

Intellect and all form and uncomponnded element.

[1191, 1192] Which are the states that are

(a) associated with thought ?

The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses.

(b) disconnected with thought ?

All form and uncompounded element.

(Thought must not be described as associated or dis-
connected with itself.) 1 2 3

[1198, 1194] Which are the states that are

(a) conjoined with thought?*

( b ) detached from thought ?

Answers as in §§ 1191, 1192 respectively .

(Thought must not be described as conjoined with, or
detached from itself.)

[1195, 1196] Which are the states that are

(a) sprung from thought ? 8

The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses;
bodily and vocal intimation ; or whatever other form there
be which is born of thought, caused by thought, sprung
from thought, whether it be in the spheres of sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, 4 * or the tangible, the elements of
space or fluidity, the lightness, plasticity or wieldiness of


1 This refinement in the Buddhist Logic of Terms is
usually expressed by the brief parenthesis governed by
thapetva, excepting. See, e.g ., § 984 et seq.

2 Citta-samsattha. * I.e. 9 in a condition of continuity,
immediate contiguity, with thought.’ Asl. 49. The con-
trary -visamsattha = < not in the condition of continuity,
immediate contiguity, with thought, although proceeding in
unity with it.’ Ibid.

3 Citta-samutthana. Cf § 667.

4 Rasayatanam has been omitted in the text, appar-

ently by inadvertence.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



320


form, the integration or subsistence of form, or bodily
nutriment.

(b) not sprung from thought?

Thought; also every other kind of form, and uncom-
pounded element.

[1197, 1198] Which are the states that

(a) come into being together with thought V-

The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses;
bodily and vocal intimation.

(b) do not come into being together with thought ?

Thought ; also all other kinds of form, 2 * 4 * and uncom-
pounded element.

[1199, 1200] Which are the states that are

(a) consecutive to thought P

(b) not consecutive to thought ?

Answers as in the two foregoing answers respectively .

[1201, 1202] Which are the states that are

(a) conjoined with and sprung from thought ? i

The skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses.

(b) not conjoined with and sprung from thought ? 6
Thought itself ; all form also, and uncompounded

element.


1 Citta-sahabhuno.

2 J.e., except the two modes of intimation, which are
reckoned as * form/ See § 596.

8 Cittanuparivattina.

4 Citta-samsattha-samutthana. The Cy. reads this

and the terms in the two following pairs as dvandva com-
pounds.

6 The negative in the text is not distributed, and the
compound of attributes qualifying ‘ states ’ must be taken
conjunctively. This is borne out by the answer. Cf
§§ 1196, 1198, also p. 204, n. 1.

Saha-bhuno is parsed as saha bhavanti, not bhuta.
Asl. 49.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



821


[1208, 1204] Which are the states that

(a) are conjoined with and sprung from, and that come into
being together with, thought ?

(b) are not such as are conjoined with and sprung from
and as come into being together with thought P

Answers as in the two foregoing answers respectively .

[1205, 1206] Which are the states that are

(a) conjoined with and sprung from and consecutive to
thought ?

(b) not conjoined with, sprung from and consecutive to
thought ?

Answers as in the two foregoing answers .

[1207, 1208] Which are the states that are

(a) of the self ?

The spheres of the five senses and of ideation.

(b) external ?

The spheres of the five objects of sense and of ideas. 1 2

[1209, 1210] Which are the states that are

(a) derived ?

The spheres of the five senses . . . and bodily nutri-
ment. 3

(b) not derived t

The four skandhas, the four great phenomena and un-
compounded element.

[1211-1212] Which are the states that are

(a) the issue of grasping ? 4

Go-Intoxicant good and bad states, whether they relate
to the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless ; in other
words, the four skandhas, and such form as is due to karma
having been wrought.


1 See note 5, p. 820. 2 Dhammayatanam.

s Cf. § 596. 4 See M. i. 190.

21


ed by CjOCK^Ic



822


(b) not the issue of grasping?

Co-Intoxicant good and bad states, whether they relate
to the worlds of sense, of form, or of the formless ; in other
words, the four skandhas; also such k i r i y a-thoughts as
are neither good, nor bad, nor the effects of karma ; the
Paths, moreover, that are the Unincluded and the Fruits
of the Paths, and uncompounded element.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter XII.

The Group on Grasping (u p a d a n a - g o c e h a k a m).]

[1213] Which are the states that have the attribute of
Grasping ? l


1 Up ad an a. This fundamental notion in Buddhist
ethics is in the Cy. (pp. 450 and 385), paraphrased by the
words 4 they take violently, i.e., they take hold with a
strong grasp* (bhusam adiyanti . . . dalhagaham
ganhanti), the prefix upa being credited with augmenta-
tive import as in other terms, such as upayaso and
upakkuttho. This shows that, in so far as Buddha-
ghosa gives the traditional sense, the word, in the Buddhism
of his day, connoted rather the dynamic force of 4 grasping *
than the static condition of ‘attachment* (e.g. 9 Warren,
‘ Buddhism in Translations,’ p. 189 et seq.) or 4 cleaving ’
(Hardy, 4 Manual,* 394). Nor does his comment ratify such
renderings as 4 Hang * or 4 Lebenstrieb 1 (Neumann, 4 Die
Beden Gotamo Buddhos,’ pp. 104, 470). Fausboll’s
‘seizures’ (S. N. in S. B. E., x., p. 138) and Oldenberg’s
‘Ergreifen ’ (‘Buddha,’ 3rd ed., 269), on the other hand,
agree with Buddhaghosa.

The relation of the cognate term upadaniyo to
upa dan am (cf. §§ 655, 881, 1219) is most clearly set
forth in S. iv. 89; there the special senses are termed
upadaniya dhamma, and the passionate desire con-
nected therewith the upadanam. See also S. iv. 258.
Buddhaghosa makes no comment on upadaniyam when,
as in § 1219, it is applied to dhamma; but when it is a
question of rupam . . . upadaniyam (Dh. S., §§ 655,
881), he defines this as ‘ states which are favourable to
(hit a, lit., good for) the Graspings as objects by their

21—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



324


The four Graspings: — the Grasping after sense, the
Grasping after speculative opinion, the Grasping after
mere rule and ritual, the Grasping after a theory of soul.

In this connexion,

[1214] What is the Grasping after sense ?

That sensual desire, sensual passion, sensual delight,
sensual craving, sensual cleaving, sensual fever, sensual
languishing, sensual rapacity, which is excited by the
pleasures of the senses. 1

[1215] What is the Grasping after speculative opinion t

‘ There is no such thing as alms, or sacrifice, or offering ;*
there is neither fruit, nor result of good, or of evil deeds ;
there is no such thing as this world, or the next ; 3 there is
no such thing as mother or father, or beings springing
into birth without them ; 4 there are in the world no
recluses or brahmins who have reached the highest point,
who have attained the height, who, having understood and


being bound up with grasping ; in other words, phenomena
which are the conditions of the mental objects of grasping’
(upadanassa arammana-paccaya-bhutani). Asl. 42.

In the same connexion, rupam upadinnam (Dh. S.,
§ 658) is by Buddhaghosa defined as [states] which have
been got, laid hold of, taken (gahita), by way of fruition —
heaped up by karma having the property of craving. Ibid.
None of the comments explains upadanamin the sense of
fuel, l.e. f as the basis of re-birth ; each of the four Upadanas
is paraphrased simply by to grasp at sense (kamam
upadlyati), at speculation, etc.

1 See § 1114 and § 1097 ; also § 1153.

2 The Cy. explains these negations as merely meaning
that none of the three has an efficacy, any fruition.
Asl. 385.

8 Ignoring any deeper metaphysic that may have here
been implied, the Cy. explains these negations as held by
the inhabitant of another world respecting this, or by an
inhabitant here below respecting another world. Ibid.

4 Beings so born, continues the Cy., he assumes there
are none ; nor have one’s former lives any efficacy over
one’s subsequent parentage.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



825


realized by themselves alone both this world and the next,
make known the same n — all this sort of speculation, this
walking in opinion, wilderness of opinion, puppet-show of
opinion, scuffling of opinion, this Fetter of opinion, the
grip and tenacity of it, the inclination towards it, the being
infected by it, this by-path, wrong road, wrongness, this
* fording-place,’ this shiftiness of grasp 1 2 * — this is what is
called the Grasping after speculative opinion.

And with the exception of the Graspings after mere rule
and ritual and after soul-theory, all wrong views are in-
cluded in the Grasping after speculative opinion.

[1216] What is the Grasping after mere rule and ritual ?

Answer as for the ‘ Contagion of mere rule and ritual,*
§ 1005. 8

[1217] What is the Grasping after soul-theory ?

A nswer as for the * Theory of individuality,* § 1008.

[1218] Which are the states that have not the attribute
of Grasping ?

All other states whatever, good, bad and indeterminate
(except the foregoing), whether they relate to the worlds of
sense, or of form, or of the formless, or to the life that is
Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all form
also and uncompounded element.

[1219] Which are the states that are favourable
Grasping ?

Co-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate


1 Buddhaghosa gives as typical forms of speculation
grasped at, 4 Both the soul (self) and the world are eternal.*
These he calls the purimaditthim uttaraditthim (sic
lege), terms which, whether they mean 4 earlier and subse-
quent heresies,* or ‘Eastern and Northern views,* or both,
are equally interesting. The text, however, selects as a
typical current speculation the views put forward by Ajita
Kesakambali. See D. i. 55 and M. i. 402.

2 Cf § 881.

8 The ‘ bovine morality and practices * noticed above

(§ 1005, n. 8) are again instanced in the Cy. Ibid.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



326


whether they relate to the worlds of sense, form or the
formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

[1220] Which are the states that are not favourable to
Grasping ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths ; and uncompounded element.

[1221-1224] Which are the states that are

(a) associated with Grasping ?

(b) disconnected with Grasping ?

(c) Grasping and also favourable to Grasping ?

(d) favourable to Grasping but not Grasping ?

Answers exactly analogous to those given to corresponding
questions in other Groups , e.g., §§ 1125, 1141, 1164.

[1225-1228] Which are the states that are

(a) both Grasping and associated with Grasping !

The Grasping after speculation in conjunction with that
after sense is both, and conversely .

So is each of the other two Groupings in conjunction with
that after sense, and conversely.

(b) associated with Grasping but not Grasping ?

(c) disconnected with Grasping yet favourable to it t

( d ) disconnected with Grasping and not favourable to it ?

Answers as in the Groups specified above, §§ 1125, 1141,

1164 et seq , 1 * *


1 The First Path disposes of all forms of Grasping save
the first, the extirpation of which is a task not finished till
all the four Paths have been traversed. Asl. 886. Contrast

with this §§ 1178 n., 1184 n., and 1112 n., where in every

case ( sense,’ 4 sensuality * and ‘ sensual desire ’ are in the

Cy. said to succumb in the Third or Anagami’s Path.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter XIII.

The Group on the Corruptions (kilesa-gocchakam).j

[1229] Which are the states that have the attribute of
corruption 9 1


1 On the term kilesa the Cy. is silent. It is true that
the word lies as near to the Buddhist believer as ‘ sin * to
the Christian. As a rule, however, Buddhaghosa is too
Socratic to accept familiar terms without examination. In
this case he has confined his attention to the derivatives.
Incidentally, however — in discussing the meaning of * good *
(above, § 1 ; Asl. 62) — he makes spiritual health to consist
in the absence of kilesa-disease, showing that kilesa was
co-extensive with evil or the absence of moral good. Of
the derivatives, only sankilittha is made to convey the
idea of impurity or foulness (see Childers, s.r. sankileso),
bad butter being so termed (Asl. 319). Elsewhere it is
paraphrased as ‘possessed of sankileso,’ while san-
kilesa (above, §§ 993-995; Asl. 42) is defined in close
agreement with the description of sankle$a in Bothl.
and Both (qualen, belci&tigen) : * the meaning is to trouble,
to torment,* while the corresponding adjective is described
as ‘deserving sankilesa by persistently making self the
object of one’s thoughts . . . the term being an equivalent
for those things which are the conditions (or objects) of
sankilesa.* Corruption or impurity is, however, 1 believe,
approximately what this group of terms represents to modern
Buddhists ; nor have I been able to select an English word
adequate to render them in what seems to have been their
first intention, viz., ‘ torment ’ (caused by moral unsound-
ness). * Bases ’ or vatthuni are states so called because
the Corruptions dwell (vasanti) in the (human) subject


ed by CjOCK^Ic



328


The ten bases of corruption, to wit :

lust, perplexity,

hate, stolidity,

dulness, excitement,

conceit, unconscientiousness,

speculative opinion, disregard of blame.

[1230-1237] In this connexion,

What is lust ? . . . hate ? . . . dulness ? . . . conceit f
. . . speculative opinion ? . . . perplexity l . . . stolidity ?
. . . excitement ? l

Answers as in §§ 1059-1061, 1116-1118, 1156, 1159.

[1238] What is uneonsdentiousness /

The absence of any feeling of conscientious scruple when
scruples ought to be felt; the absence of conscientious
scruple at attaining to bad and evil states. 2

[1239] What is disregard of blame ?

The absence of any sense of guilt where a sense of guilt
ought to be felt, the absence of a sense of guilt at attaining
to bad and evil states.

These are the states which have the attribute of cor-
ruption.

[1240] Which are the states that have not the attribute
of corruption ?

All other states whatever (i.e., all except the afore-named
ten), good, bad and indeterminate, whether they relate to
the worlds of sense, form or the formless, or to the life
that is Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas, all
form also and uncompounded element.

[1241, 1242] Which are the states that are

(a) baneful i


of them as immediate conditions (anantara-paccaya).
Asl. 386.

1 In the answer, vupasamo in the text should be
avupasamo.

2 See §§ 387, 888.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic


329


Go-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate,
whether they relate to the worlds of sense, of form or of
the formless j 1 in other words, the five skandhas.

( b ) harmless ?

The Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits of
the Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1243, 1243a] Which are the states that are

(а) corrupt ?

The three roots of bad (karma), to wit, lust, hate,
dulness, as well as the Corruptions united with them, the
four skandhas associated with them, and the action, bodily,
vocal and mental, springing from them.

(б) not corrupt f

Good and indeterminate states, whether they relate to
the worlds of sense, form, or the formless, or to the life
that is Unincluded; in other words, the four skandhas;
all form also, and uncompounded element. 2

[1244-1247] Which are the states that are
/ (a) associated with the Corruptions i
[ (b) disconnected with the Corruptions i
( (c) both Corruptions and baneful ?

\ (d) baneful but not themselves Corruptions ?

Answers as in the corresponding pairs in the 1 Graspings,*
§§ 1221-1224.

[1248, 1249] Which are the states that are

(a) both Corruptions and corrupt ?

The Corruptions themselves.

(b) corrupt but not themselves Corruptions ?

The states which by those ten states are made corrupt,
the ten themselves excepted ; in other words, the four
skandhas.


1 Aparlyapanna should, of course, be omitted from
the printed text.

2 This section is omitted, apparently inadvertently, in
the printed text. Cf. the Matika.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



880


[1250-1253] Which are the states that are

(a) both Corruptions and associated with Corruptions t
Lust, hate, conceit, speculative opinion, perplexity,

stolidity, excitement, unconscientiousness and disregard of
blame taken severally in conjunction with dulness, and
dulness in conjunction with each of them . Lust, also, in
conjunction with excitement, and conversely, and so for
the remaining eight bases . Lust, also, in conjunction with
unconscientiousness, and conversely , and so for the remain-
ing eight . Lust, also, in conjunction with disregard of
blame, and conversely , and so for the remaining eight. 1

(b) associated with Corruptions but not themselves Cor-
ruptions P

f ( c ) disconnected with Ills but baneful ?

\ ( d ) disconnected with Ills and harmless t
Answers to these three questions as in former groups . See
§§ 1226-1228, 1171-1173, etc. 3


1 It is not very obvious, nor is anv explanation volun-
teered by the Cy., why just the 3ra, 8th, 9th and 10th
Bases of Corruption are selected as the constant of two
factors in this connexion.

2 In the answer, supply ye dhamma after Tehi
dhammehi.

3 The First Path witnesses the overcoming of speculative
opinion and perplexity, the Third Path disposes of hate,
but it requires the Fourth Path to overcome the remaining
seven. Asl. 387.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



[Chapter XIV.

The Supplementary Set of Pairs (pitthidukam).]

[1254] Which are the states that are to be put away by
insight ?

The Three Fetters, to wit : theory of individuality, per-
plexity and the contagion of mere rule and ritual.

[1255-1257] Identical with §§ 1008-1006.

[1258] Which are the states that are not to be put away
by insight ?

All states whatever, good, bad and indeterminate, except
the three afore-mentioned, whether they relate to the worlds
of sense, form or the formless, or to the life that is Unin-
cluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all form also
and un compounded element.

[1259, 1260] Which are the states that are

(a) to be put away by cultivation ?

All the remaining lust, hate and dulness as well as the
Corruptions united with them, the four skandhas associated
with them, and the action, bodily, vocal and mental,
springing from them.

(b) not to be put away by cultivation ?

Answer as far those states which are not to be put away by
insight [§ 1258].

[1261] Which are the states the causes of which are to
be put away by insight ?

The Three Fetters, to wit : theory of individuality, per-
plexity and the contagion of mere rule and ritual.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



832


[1262-1264] Identical with §§ 1003-1006.

[1265] Which are the states the causes of which are not
to be put away by insight ?

Answer as for those * states which are not to be put away
by insight,* § 1258.

[1266, 1267] Which are the states the causes of which
are

(a) to be put away by cultivation ?

All the remaining lust, hate and dulness : these are the
causes that are to be put away 1 by cultivation. And the
Corruptions united with them, the four skandhas associated
with them, and the action, bodily, vocal and mental,
springing from them, are the states the causes of which
are to be put away by cultivation.

(b) not to be put away by cultivation ?

Answer as for the * states which are not to be put away
by cultivation,’ § 1260.

[1268-1271] Which are the states

(a) * wherein conception works * ?

The four skandhas when associated with conception (the
latter not being included), [which springs up] in a soil
wherein conception works, either in the worlds of sense or
form, or in the life that is Unincluded. 2

( b ) * void of the working of conception ’ ?

The four skandhas when springing up in a soil void of
conception, either in the worlds of sense, form or the form-
less, or in the life that is Unincluded ; conception itself
also, and all form and uncompounded element.


1 In the text, for pahatabba-hetuka (first occurrence)
read pahatabba-hetu.

2 Cf this and following pairs with §§ 996-998 and p. 252,
n. 1. See also App. I., pp. 362, 368. In the text, arupa-
vacare should be omitted, and apariyapanne substi-
tuted for pariyapanne.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



888


(c) * wherein works thought discursive ’ ?

(d) 1 void of the working of thought discursive 9 ?

Answers {substituting * discursive thought * for t concep-
tion ’) as in §§ 1268, 1269 respectively .

[1272-1277] Which are the states that are

j ( a ) joyous I 1

[ (b) not joyous 1

(c) accompanied by joy ?

(d) unaccompanied by joy ?

(e) accompanied by ease ?

(f) unaccompanied by ease ?

Answers to each pair of questions analogous to those in
§§ 1268, 1269, * joy * or 1 ease * being substituted in due order
for ‘ conception.’

[1278, 1279] Which are the states that are

(a) accompanied by disinterestedness ?

The three skandhas of perception, syntheses and intellect, 2 * * *
when associated with disinterestedness (the latter not being
included), [which springs up] in a soil congenial to it,
either in the worlds of sense, form or the formless, or in
the life that is Unincluded.

(b) unaccompanied by disinterestedness ?

The four skandhas [when springing up] in a soil uncon-
genial to disinterestedness, either in the worlds of sense or
form, 8 or in the life that is Unincluded ; disinterested-
ness itself also, and all form and uncompounded element.


1 Sappitika. The term is used to qualify sukham,
A. i. 81. How far, if at all, its connotation is distinguish-
able from that of plti-sahagata (§ 1274) I cannot say.

In the answers to the positive terms arupavacare
should be omitted from the printed text. Cf. § 265 et seq.

2 Upekkha (disinterestedness) is a mode of vedana

or feeling, and is therefore not said to be associated with

itself.

8 In the printed text omit arupavacare.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



334


[1281-1287] Which are the states that

(a) relate (belong) to the universe of sense f 1

Take from the waveless deep of woe beneath ap to the
heaven above of the Parinimittavasavatti gods inclusive —
then whatever has there its range, and is therein included,
whether it be skandha, element or sphere 2 — form, feeling,
perception, syntheses, intellect : these are states that relate
(belong) to the universe of sense.

(b) do not relate (belong) to the universe of sense i

The universe of form, that of the formless and the life
that is Unincluded.

(c) relate (belong) to the universe of form ?

Take from the Brahma-world below up to the heaven
above of the Akanittha gods inclusive — then whatever
states, both of sense and intellect, have therein their range
and are therein included, whether they are states of one
who has attained [Jhana having potential good], or of one
in whom [resultant Jhana] has arisen, or of one living
happily under present conditions. 3

(d) do not relate (belong) to the universe of form ?

The universe of sense, that of the formless and the life
that is Unincluded.

(e) relate (belong) to the universe of the formless ?

Take from the entrance among the gods of ‘ the sphere
of infinite space ’ 4 as the lower limit, and up to the entrance


1 Kamavacara. The avacaras are discussed in my
Introduction (vi).

2 Khandha-dhatu-ayatana (cf K.). I take this to be
an adjectival dvandva compound qualifying dhamma, but
the five following terms, the skandhas, to be in apposition
to dhamma.

3 The three terms rendered by the last three peri-
phrases are samapannassa, uppannassa and dittha-
dhammasukhaviharissa. The Cy. (p. 388) explains
them as referring to kusala-jhanam, vipaka-jhanam
and kiriya-jhanam. The subject is further dealt with in
my Introduction (viii).

4 See pp. 71-75.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



885


above among the gods of * the sphere where there is neither
perception nor non-perception * — then whatever states, both
of sense and intellect, have therein their range and are
therein included, whether they are states of one who has
attained [Jhana having potential good], or of one in whom
[resultant Jhana] has arisen, or of one living happily
under present conditions : these are states that relate
(belong) to the universe of the formless.

(/) do not relate {belong) to the universe of the formless ?

The universe of sense, 1 2 that of form, and the life that is
Unincluded.

(g) belong to the Included ?

Co-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate,
whether they relate to the worlds of sense, of form or of
the formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

(fe) belong to the Unincluded ?

The Paths, and the Fruits of the Paths, and uncom-
pounded element.

[1288, 1289] Which are the states by which

(a) there is a going away /*

The four Paths that are the Unincluded.

(b) there is no going away /

All states, good, bad and indeterminate, except those
four, whether they relate to the worlds of sense, form or


1 This is inadvertently omitted in the printed text.

2 Niyyanika. In § 277 et seq . the word has been
rendered ‘ whereby there is a going forth and onward,* the
Cy. leaving it somewhat vaguely defined, and the context,
both in that connexion and this, showing that the expres-
sion imports rather the quest of the Ideal than its attain-
ment. Here the Cy. is briefer and more emphatic (Asl. 50).
The word is said to signify, * They, cutting off the root of
re-birth and making Nirvana their object, go down from
(niyy an ti) that round of transmigration.* The good states
included under the opposite category will be those static
stages of attainment in the upward progress termed the
Fruits of the Paths.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



886


the formless, or to the life that is Unincluded ; in other
words, the four skandhas ; all form also, and uncompounded
element.

[1290, 1291] Which are the states that are

(a) fired in their consequences f 1

The five acts that have immediate results, and those
wrong views that are fixed in their consequences ; the four
Paths also that are the Unincluded.

( b ) not fixed in their consequences ?

Answer as in § 1289.

[1292, 1293] Which are the states that have

(a) something beyond / 2

Go-Intoxicant states, good, bad and indeterminate,
whether they relate to the worlds of sense, of form, or of
the formless ; in other words, the five skandhas.

(b) no ‘ beyond * ?

The four Paths that are the Unincluded, and the Fruits
of the Paths, and uncompounded element.

[1294, 1295] Which are the states that are

(a) concomitant with war P

1 See §§ 1028-1030.

2 Sa-uttara = capable of transcending, of rejecting self
(or soul). Asl. 50. The term is applied to cittam in
D. i. 80. In the an-uttara dhamma this transcending
has been accomplished.

8 Sarana, ‘an equivalent for those passions, etc., over-
come by which beings in divers ways incur weeping and
misery’ . . . ‘ = together with fightings ’ (saha ranehi).
Asl. 50. ‘ Dulness associated with lust is co-warring

(sarano) with lust, or, associated with hate, is co-warring
with hate.’ Asl. 388. One is reminded of the Christian
parallel of ‘ fleshly lusts which war against the soul * and
of r&v r)hovosv to )v orparevofievcop ev rots fieXeaiv vfi&p,
although the concomitance in assault is in this case not
emphasized. In the Therlgatha Subha turns the tables —
‘ wars a good warfare * — by fighting against the sensual
desires hostile to her progress (vv. 358, 360).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



887


The three roots oi bad (karma) : lust, hate and dulness
— and the Corruptions united with them ; the four skandhas
associated with them ; the action, bodily, vocal and mental,
springing from them.

(b) not concomitant with war ?

Good, bad and indeterminate states, whether they relate
to the worlds of sense, form or the formless, or to the life
that is Unincluded ; in other words, the four skandhas ; all
form also, and uncompounded element.


22


ed by CjOCK^Ic



[PART II.

The Suttanta Pairs of Terms (suttantika-dukam).] 1

[1296, 1297] Which are the states that

(a) partake of wisdom ? 2

States which are the associates of wisdom.

(b) paHake of ignorance P

States which are the associates of ignorance.

[1298, 1299] Which are the states that have
(a) the likeness of lightning ? 4


1 This title is discussed in my Introduction.

2 Vlj jabhagino, i.e., “they (the dhamma) partake
(bhajanti) of wisdom by way of association with it, they
rersantur (vattanti) as parts or divisions of wisdom”
(Asl. 50). Of the eight modes of Buddhist vi j j a, viz. : know-
ledge born of insight (vipassanananam), the potency
(iddhi) of the * mental image,’ and the six forms of intuition
(abhiiirla) — the first only is here referred to ( cf D. i.,p. 76
et seq ., and Childers, s.rr.). The reader will remember that
vi j j a is a term borrowed by Buddhist ethics from Brah-
manic doctrine. Cf the expression tisso vijja, p.358.
It is almost equivalent to our ‘ lore.’ Six states are in the
Anguttara (iii. 881) said to be vij ja-bhagiya.

3 Ignorance respecting the Four Truths. Asl. 51.

4 This and the following simile are gone into at some
length (Asl. 888), as follows: Stage 1. The traveller sets
out in the gloom. 2. He loses his way. 8. Lightning
flashes out and illumines. 4. The road is made plain
again. So to the ‘ noble ’ disciple there is : (1) the incep-
tion of insight making for the first (second or third) Paths;
(2) the obliteration of truth by darkness ; (8) the glory of


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



889


The science 1 of the three lowest of the Noble Paths.

(b) the likeness of the thunderbolt '?

The science of the topmost Path, the Path of Arahatship.

[1800, 1801] Which are the states that are

(a) foolish ? 2

Unconscientiousness and disregard of blame. Besides,
all bad states are foolish.

(b) discreet ?

Conscientiousness and fear of blame. Besides, all good
states are discreet.

[1302, 1803] Which are the states that are

(a) dark P

Unconscientiousness and disregard of blame. Besides,
all bad states are dark.

(b) bright?

Conscientiousness and fear of blame. Besides, all good
states are bright.

the Path is revealed ; (4) the Four Truths are made plain.
But in the thunderbolt of the might of Arahatship won we
get the simile of (a) an all -penetrating power, ( b ) the
mystery of its coming. Cf that of the wind as applied to
Regeneration, John iii. 8.

1 Panna, elsewhere rendered ‘wisdom.’ See § 17

and cf. n. 8. ‘ Science ’ is here to be understood, not so

much in its modern sense of organized knowledge and
organized methods of investigation and verification for the
attaining and establishing that knowledge, as in the Platonic
and Aristotelian sense of em<rTtjfMTj y or the intellectual anti-
thesis to opinion.

2 Bala, its opposite being pan (lit a, which partakes of
paiina. See § 16, where the substantival form, pan-
diccam, is rendered ‘erudition,’ and paraphrased (Asl. 147)
as panditassa bhavo, the state of a ivise person, one
who has discernment, discretion, one who has ‘ chosen that
good part ’ as contrasted with the ‘ average sensual person *
or foolish youth. With the answers cf. §§ 80, 31.

3 On kanha and sukka, used with ethical significance,
seeM. i., 389 ; Dhp., ver. 87 ; Mil. 200. {Cf. * Questions of
King Milinda,’ i. 284, n. 2.)

22—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



840


[1804, 1805] Which are the states that

(a) condtice to remorse ? l

Misconduct in act, word and thought. Besides, all bad
states conduce to remorse.

(b) do not conduce to remorse ■

Good conduct in act, word and thought. Besides, no
good states conduce to remorse.

[1806] Which are the states that are synonymous? 2


1 Tapaniya. Whereas we, in ‘remorse,* bring into
relief the ‘ ayen bite of inwyt,* the Buddhist term refers to
the hush of heat when the deed ill done is realized as
such.

2 This and the subjects of the two following questions
are adhivacana, nirutti and pannatti respectively.
The three are said (Asl. 51) to ‘ converge in meaning *
(atthato ninnakarana), though their form is diverse.
In the phrase ‘An increaser of luck is an increaser of
wealth * the terms are mutually delimitated. This is
adhivacanarn. ... In the phrase ‘They construct (or
combine, abhisankharonti), brethren, and are therefore
“ syntheses,** ’ there is a statement of fact together with
the cause, as in discourse (abhilapa). . . . In the phrase
‘ the ratiocination, conception, disposition [of the mind] ’
(see above, § 7), something is set out on this wise or that ;
and this is pannatti.

It seems inferable from the foregoing that by adhiva-
canam a simple equipollence of terms is to be effected.
‘ Is ’ or ‘ are,* in translating, must be understood simply
as = , and not as implying inclusion under a more general
notion. The word occurs at every turn in the Cy., and has
usually been rendered, in these footnotes, ‘ equivalent to.’
Cf. a good instance in Jat. i. 117 ; Div. 491.

The second example and the comment adumbrate what
we mean by explanation. But in the absence of the
context it is not easy to gather much respecting pannatti
from the third passage cited. Coming to the answer
common to all three questions, the Cy. instances as the
things which are classed (sank ha), designated (s a manna),
expressed, and current (voharo) the names ‘I,* ‘ another,*


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



341


That which is an enumeration, that which is a designa-
tion, an expression, a current term, a name, a denomina-
tion, the assigning of a name, an interpretation, a distinc-
tive mark of discourse on this or that state.

[1306a] All states are processes of synonymous nomen-
clature.

[1307] Which are the states that are interpretative ?

Answer as in § 1306.

[1307a] All states are processes of interpretation.

[1308] Which are the states that are expressions ?

Answer as in § 1306.

[1308a] All states are processes of expression.

In this connexion,

[1309] What is name ? l


‘ a man/ 1 cattle/ * Tisso/ ‘ a bed/ * a house/ etc. Name
is fourfold from the point of view of the grounds on which
it is bestowed, viz. : (1) given by general consent on a
special occasion (samaiina-namam), e.g., that of the
first King Mahasammato ; (2) given because of a personal
quality (guna-namara), e.g., versed-in-the- Vinaya ;
(3) given because of a private wish or fancy (kittima-
namam), e.g., naming of an infant; (4) not given; of
primeval origin ; primordially fortuitous (opapatika-
namam), e.g., ‘moon/ ‘earth/ etc. See further § 1309, n.

Processes of nomenclature, etc.—adhivacanapatha,
etc.

There is no being, no compound, concludes the Com-
mentator, that is not somehow nameable. The very trees
in desert and hill country will be named by country-folk.
And if they admit to not knowing the name of any one
kind, it will get the name of the ‘nameless.’ Cf. our
os innominatum , or the Pic Sans-nom, and the like.

‘ Distinctive mark’ is vyanjanam.

1 Here the Cy. makes use of its foregoing classification
of name-kinds to show under which head to rank nama
when distinguished from rupa. Nama must, namely, be
understood as opapatika-name, that is, all its constituents


ed by CjOCK^Ic



342


The four skandhas and uncompounded element.

[1310] What is form?

The four great phenomena and the form which is derived
from them. 1

[1811] What is ignorance ?

Answer as for ‘ dulness,’ § 890 ( omitting ‘ on that
occasion *). 2

[1812] What is the craving for renewed existence ?

Answer as for the ‘Fetter of the passion for renewed
existence,’ § 1120.

[1818] W T hat is speculative opinion about renewed
existence ?

Theories that both soul and world will be re-born, etc.

[1314] What is speculative opinion about existence not
being renewed ?

Theories that both soul and world will not be re-bom,
etc.


must be so understood. Feeling, c./y., when it arises, is
not named on the grounds on which a new individual, or
an ‘artificial kind’ — table, etc. — might be named. ‘One
has not to take a name for it, saying, “Be thou called
feeling !” The name has arisen together with it ’ (p. 892).

‘ Uncompounded element ’ is here spoken of again a
Nirvana. Ibid. See above, p. 166, n. 1.

1 Cf. § 584. The more concise form of question :
tattha katamam ... is now sustained till the end.
Hitherto it has only been used to cross-question the student
on the details of a given answer, on ‘ name,* for instance,
as part of the contents of the preceding answer. Hence
the translation of tattha by * in this connexion * (whatever
the term in question may mean elsewhere). It is not clear,
however, what is the force of tattha in these last fifty- seven
questions, the greater part of the subjects not having
occurred in the foregoing part of the manual.

2 This pair of questions ‘ is included to show * how the
mass of views in the following pairs is ‘ an upgrowth from
the root of the Bound of Be-birth.’ Asl. 892.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



843


[1815] What is the sort of speculation known as

Etemalism ?

That both soul and world are eternal, etc.

[1316] What is the sort of speculation known as

Annihilation ?

That both soul and world will be dissolved, etc.

[1817] What is the sort of speculation known as the
Finite Theory . . . [1818] the Infinite Theory ?

That both soul and world are finite . . . infinite, etc.

[1819] What is the sort of speculation known as the
Theory of Origins . . . [1820] the Theory of the Here-
after?

Theories concerning the ultimate past . . . concerning
futurity.

All this sort of opinion, walking in opinion, jungle of
opinion, wilderness of opinion, puppet-show of opinion,
scuffling of opinion, the Fetter of opinion, the grip and
tenacity of it, the inclination towards it, the being infected
by it, this by-path, wrong road, wrongness, this ‘fording-
place,’ this shiftiness of grasp — this is what is called specula-
tive opinion about renewed existence, and the rest. 1

[1821] What is unconscientiousness? . . . [1822] dis-
regard of blame ?

Answers as for the ninth and tenth ‘bases of corruption,*
§§ 1238, 1239.


1 This, the Ditthi- formula (see §§ 881, 1099), is
appended as well to each of the foregoing answers on
speculative opinions. Of these, the first two (bhava and
vibhava) are, in the Cy. (p. 892), connected with the next
two respectively (cf. § 1099). All the eight are enumerated
and discussed in the Brahmajala Sutta. D. i. 18-40. The
Cy. itself refers to this Sutta in connexion with the last
two theories. See also ‘Dialogues of the Buddha,* i. 26,
n. 3.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



344


[1328] What is conscientiousness ?

The feeling of conscientious scruple when scruples ought
to be felt, conscientious scruple at attaining to bad and evil
states. .

[1324] What is the fear of blame?

The sense of guilt where a sense of guilt ought to be felt,
a sense of guilt at attaining to bad and evil states. 1

[1325] What is contumacy? 2

The being surly, refractious, contumacious when that
which is in accordance with the Law has been said, con-
trariness, captiousness, want of regard, of consideration, of
reverence, of deference. 8

[1326] What is friendship with evil?

To follow after, to frequent the company of, and associate
with, 4 such persons as are unbelievers, immoral, uneducated,
mean-spirited 6 and witless ; 6 to resort to and consort with


1 See §§ 30, 31.

2 Dovacassata. For ‘surly* the Cy. (p. 898) and K.
read dovacassayam.

3 The three first terms in the answer are in the original
simply different forms of the same abstract noun, viz. :
dovacassayam, dovacassiyam, dovacassata. The
fourth term is literally ‘ taking the opposite side.’ The
fifth is literally ‘ gratification in antagonism.* The last is
described as due to a lack of the habit of placing others
before one’s self. Asl. 893. The term in question the Cy.
finally dismisses with the remark that, if persisted in in the
foregoing fashion, it involves the four skandhas, especially
that of syntheses. So for the complex generalizations in
the following questions. They are not relatively simple
states involving one skandha only. (The editing in the
Cy. is here again very unfortunate.)

4 Sevana, nisevana, samsevana. The prefixes,
according to the Cy., merely act as augmentatives.

5 Maccharino; addicted to the five sorts of meanness.
Asl. 394. See § 1122, n.

6 Duppanna.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



845


them, to be devoted to them, enthusiastic about them, 1 and
entangled with them. 2 3

[1827] What is suavity?

The being gentle, tractable, amenable 8 when that which
is in accordance with the Law has been said, the refraining
from contradiction and from captiousness ; the showing
regard and consideration, 4 reverence and deference.

[1828] What is friendship with good ?

To follow after, frequent the company of, and associate
with, such persons as are believers, virtuous, well educated,
generous and intellectual ; to resort to and consort with
them, to be devoted to them, enthusiastic about them,
mixed up with them.

[1829-1382] What is skill in

f (a) the Offences ?

\ ( b ) restoration from the Offences ?

{ (c) the Attainments ?

(d) recovery from the Attainments ?

That skill which is science, understanding, search,
research, etc., 5 6 * when applied to


1 Bhajana, sambhajana, bhatti, sambhatti; all
meaning originally ‘ forming a part of,’ ‘ belonging to.’
But the two former are paraphrased by upasankamana.
In the sense of devotion bhatti does not, I believe, occur
in the Nikayas. Perhaps its oldest appearance with this
import is in Jat. v. 340— where the Cy. gives as equivalent
sin eh o — and in the Svet. Upanishad 6. 28.

2 Tam sampavankata (so K. and the Cy.), i.e.,
entanglement ; lit., hooked along with them — with those
persons, both in thought and deed. Asl. 894.

3 Sovacassayam ( sic lege), sovacassiyam, sova-
cassata.

4 Adariyam, adarata; omitted in the text, but

supplied in K. Cf. § 1325.

6 The passage elided here and in the following sections

is no doubt that in which science (pa nil a) is described,

§16 and passim. On ‘skill ’ or ‘proficiency* (kusalata)
see Introduction viii., on ‘ good.’


ed by CjOCK^Ic



346


{ (a) the Offences termed the Five Groups of Offences
and the Seven Groups of Offences /

( b ) restoration from [the effects of] those Offences ; 2
(c) a case of Attainment 8 where * conception works
and thought discursive/ a case of Attainment
‘ wherein is no working of conception, but only
of thought discursive/ a case of Attainment
‘void of the working of conception and of
thought discursive 1 ;
k ( d ) recovery from those Attainments. 4


1 That is, the group of ‘Apatti’s termed Parajika,
Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Patidesanlya and Duk-
kata offences, and the group which, besides these, includes
Thullaccaya and Dubbhasita offences. Asl. 394;
cf. Vin. v. 91. The scientific procedure is described in the
Cy. a_s -pariccheda-janana-panna.

2 Apatti-vutthana, or rising up from an offence.
Buddhaghosa does not in this connexion explain the term,
but in his Cy. on the passage, found in nearly identical
words at Vin. iii. 112, and iv. 225 (which Cy. is found in
Minay eff, Pat. 69), he uses vutthana as a general term
covering all the three methods (parivasa, manatta,
abbhana) of expiation of, and release from, an offence
committed by a member of the Order. Cf. Childers,
8. v. sanghadiseso ; Vin. v. 118. See also infra , § 1332.

3 The Samapattis, or various stages of self-concentra-
tion, include the Jhanas — as here — and other forms of
s am ad hi, all pre-Buddhistic and all utilized in the body
of Buddhist doctrine and culture. It is noteworthy that
they are not here referred to as only eight in number — see
Childers, s.v. (for that matter, neither do they find a place
in the Atthaka-nipata of the Anguttara). Neither is it
clear that the three Samapattis quoted in the answer
coincide in all respects with the first three stages of five-
fold Jhana. If they do, and if we are to assume that the
term includes more than those three stages, then, by
Subhuti’s inclusion of four Vimokhas, this would give us
nine samapattis. Again, in M. i. 301, a fifth Vimokha — the
last — is spoken of as a Samapatti, this bringing the number
up to ten. Cf. M. i. 398-400.

4 The kind of ability in emerging from (lit, rising out


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



347


[1333] What is proficiency in the Elements ? l

That proficiency which is science, understanding, search,
research, etc., when applied to the eighteen elements,
viz. : sight, visual object and visual cognition, hearing,
sound and auditory cognition, smell, odour and olfactory
cognition, taste, sapid object and gustatory cognition, body-
sensibility, the tangible and tactile cognition, mind, mental
object and representative cognition.

[1334] What is proficiency in attention ? 2

That proficiency in attention which is science, under-
standing, etc., when applied to those elements.

[1335] What is skill in the spheres ? 3

That skill which is science, understanding, etc., when
applied to the twelve spheres, namely, sight and visual
form, hearing and sound, smell and odorous object, taste
and sapid object, body- sensibility and the tangible, mind
and mental object. 4

of -vutthana ; see supra , § 1330) one or another kind of
samadhi is, by the Cy., specified as a predetermination
of the time when the subject wished to arouse himself, and
the carrying out of this act of will — a time stated in terms
of the motions of celestial bodies. ‘ When the moon, sun,
constellations have gone to such and such a position I
shall awake.’ See, on this use of vutthana, M. i. 302 ;
A. iii. 311 ; S. iii. 270. On the modes of Jhana here
specified, see supra , § 160 et seq. Skill in the Attainment
(samapatti) itself is explained as the science of effecting
discernment of the appana or central concept (in Jhana)
as well as of the parikamma or preliminaries.

1 Dhatuyo. The skill in this case is said to comprise
acquisition, attention, hearing and remembering (instruction
being entirely oral) and discrimination. Asl. 395.

2 See p. 5, n. 1. 8 See § 597 et seq.

4 In the last three modes of ability six factors common
to all are distinguished : acquisition, attention, hearing,
comparison (lit., measuring), penetration, contemplation.
Of these, all but the fifth are exercised on mundane objects
of thought ; penetration is concerned with supramundane
matters ; attention and comparison can be exercised about


ed by CjOCK^Ic



348


[1336] What is skill in the ‘ Conditioned Geneses 9 9

Science, understanding, etc., when applied to the
formula : ‘ The syntheses come to pass because of ignor-
ance ; cognition comes to pass because of syntheses ; name
and form come to pass because of cognition ; the sixfold
sphere comes to pass because of name and form ; contact
comes to pass because of the sixfold sphere, feeling because
of contact, craving because of feeling, grasping because of
craving, renewed existence because of grasping, birth
because of renewed existence, old age and death, grief,
lamentation, distress, melancholy and despair come to pass
because of birth. Such is the uprising of this whole mass
of 111.’ 1

[1337, 1338] What is skill in affirming ... in negating
[causal conjuncture]?

Science, understanding, etc., when applied to discern-
ing that, in a given conjuncture, certain states are . . .
are not, the cause and conditions of certain other states. 2

[1339] What is upright?

Uprightness, without deflexion, twist, or crookedness.

[1340] What is soft ?

That which is plasticity, gentleness, smoothness, pliancy,
lowliness of heart. 8


a mixture of both spheres of thought. Asl. 395. (To get
this or any meaning out of the passage in question some
emendation of the Cy. as edited has been necessary.)

1 On this famous formula the Cy. merely remarks that
‘ it will appear in the Yibhanga on the Paticcasamuppada.’
Asl. 395.

2 This species of skill (thanakusalata, atthana-
ku salat a) constituted one of the Ten Powers of the
Buddha. See M. i. 69. The Cy. (p. 395) takes for illus-
tration sense-cognition as a senes of specific results from
specific processes; also cause and effect in the vegetable
kingdom.

3 Ajjavo and maddavo, the terms in this and the
foregoing question, are synonymous with uj(j)ukata and


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



349


[1341] What is patience ?

That patience which is long-suffering, compliance,
absence of rudeness and abruptness, complacency of heart. 1

[1342] What is temperance ?

That which is the absence of excess in deed, in word,
and in deed and word together. 2

Besides, all moral self-restraint is temperance.

[1343] What is amity ? 3

When all such speech as is insolent, 4 disagreeable,
grating, harsh to others, vituperative to others, bordering


muduta, §§ 50, 51, 44, 45. The one additional term —
the last — is paraphrased as ‘ absence of conceit/ Asl. 395.

1 Patience (khanti) is one of the ten Paramitas.
Jat. i., pp. 22, 23. See also A. iii. 254, 255. The last three
synonyms are the opposites of the last three synonyms of
‘hate/ See supra , §§ 418, 1060. Ajjavo, javano,
maddavo, khanti and soraccam are, in A. iii. 248,
given as the dhamma of a thoroughbred horse.

2 Temperance (soraccam) is defined as ‘to be well on
the hither side of wickedness,’ to avoid transgression in the
three kinds in deed, in the four kinds in speech and in
one’s mode of livelihood. See Rhys Davids, ‘ Manual of
Buddhism,’ p. 142. The three transgressions of the mind
are omitted, hence soraccam applies apparently only to
the self-expression of the individual. Asl. 396.

8 Sakhalyam, paraphrased by sammodaka and
mudu. Ibid . Cf. the usual formula for the exchange of
courtesies on greeting, e.r/., M. i. 16.

4 Andaka. This and the following terms occur in
M. L 286. See Morris’s Notes, J. P. T. S., 1884, 1886,
1889. Buddhaghosa’s comment obviates the necessity
either for Kern’s hypothesis that the word, when applied
to speech, should be read as kandaka, or for that of
Morris, that it should be read as candaka. He says
(Asl. 396): Just as in a defective (sadose) tree bosses
(andakani; excrescences, warts) protrude, so through
faultiness, by words of bragging and insolence, are swellings
(andaka) produced.

‘Disagreeable’ (asata) is omitted in the M. i. 286.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



350


upon anger, not conducive to concentration, is put away,
and when all such speech as is innocuous, 1 pleasant to the
ear, 2 affectionate, such as goes to the heart, is urbane, 3
sweet and acceptable to people generally — when speech of
this sort is spoken — polished, friendly and gentle language
— this is what is called amity.

[1344] What is courtesy ?

The two forms of courtesy: hospitality towards bodily
needs and considerateness in matters of doctrine. When
anyone shows courtesy it is in one or other of these two
forms. 4


[1345] What is it to have the door of the faculties un-
guarded


* Grating* = kakkasa = (Asl. ibid.) putika. By a some-
what forced figure grating or rasping speech is compared
to the disagreeable sensation in the ear (so tarn not
kanna!) by the entrance of the crumbling pulverous
tissue of a rotten tree. ‘Vituperative/ etc. (parabhi-
sajjanl) ; as it were, a lurking branch of barbed thorns
wounding the limbs and obstructing passage. Ibid.

1 Innocuous = nela = niddosa. * Asl. 397.

2 I.e. 9 by varied sweetness.

3 Pori, i.e., town-conversation, either because it is full
of good points (gun a), or used by persons of breeding, or
simply urban. For town-dwellers use fitting terms, calling
a father a father and a brother a brother. Ibid.

4 Patisantbaro, both amisena and dhammena, is
discussed at length by Buddhaghosa (Asl. 397-399). He
takes, as usual, the etymology of the term — a spreading
out or diffusion — and shows it as a covering or closing,
through kindness and generosity, of the gap there may be
between the having of the giver and the recipient of his
attentions. Both are supposed to be members of the Order,
and many of the hospitable and polite ministrations
described occur in Vin. ii. 210, 211. See also Mil. 409.

6 Aguttadvarata. This and the contrary attitude in
§ 1347 constitute an important formula in Buddhist doctrine,
and occur in D. i. 70, M. i. 180, 269, etc. It is also quoted
K.V. 426, 464.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



351


When a certain individual 1 sees an object with the eye 2
he is entranced with the general appearance, or in the
details of it. s He does not set himself to restrain that
which might give occasion for wicked states, covetous, de-
jected, to flow in over him, were he to dwell unrestrained
as to the sense of sight. He keeps no watch over his
faculty of sight, nor does he attain to mastery over it. And
so in like manner when he hears a sound with the ear . . .
smells an odour with the nose . . . tastes a sapid with the
tongue . . . feels a tangible with the body . . . recognises
a mental object with the mind, he is entranced with the
general appearance and in the details of it. He does not
set himself to restrain that which might give occasion for
wicked states, covetous, dejected, to flow in over him, were
he to dwell unrestrained as to the mental faculty. He
keeps no watch over the mental faculty, nor does he attain
to mastery over it. That these six faculties should be thus


1 K. omits puggalo, given in the printed text. The
latter omits it in the corresponding answer, § 1347.

2 This is a passage naturally calling for psychological
qualification from the Commentator (Asl. 399, 400). ‘ “Eye ”
stands here for the total efficient cause (karana-vasena),
namely, for that visual cognition which is the generally
accepted form-seeing capacity. As the Ancients have said :
The eye does not see form, not being of the nature of
intellect (cittam) ; the intellect, not being of the nature of
eye, does not see form (the Cy. has here been wrongly
punctuated). One sees with the sense-embodied mind im-
pingeing on the ‘door-object* (dvararammane sam-
ghattanena pasadavatthukena cittena passati),
that is, with the aggregate organism, or apparatus, as
when we say, “ he shoots with the bow.” *

3 On nimittagahl and anuvyanjana gahi, see notes
relating precisely to this passage in D. i. 70, in ‘ Dialogues
of the Buddha,* i. 80. The former term is, in the Attha-
salinl, defined as the act of one who, not content with
simply beholding what is attractive and so forth, or what
is characteristically female or male, grasps at it with
passionate desire.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



852


unguarded, untended, unwatched over, unrestrained, is
what is called having the door of the faculties unguarded.

[1846] What is immoderation in diet? 1

When anyone, through carelessness and without judg-
ment, takes food 2 for purposes of sport, 3 sensual excess,
personal charm and adornment, his insatiableness, im-
moderation, and want of judgment are what is called im-
moderation in diet.

[1347] What is it to have the doors of the faculties
guarded ?

When a certain individual sees an object with the eye
he is not entranced with the general appearance or the
details of it. He sets himself to restrain that which might
give occasion for wicked states, covetous, dejected, to flow
in over him, were he to dwell unrestrained as to the
sense of sight. He keeps watch over this faculty of sight,
and attains to mastery over it. And so in like manner,
when he hears a sound with the ear . . . smells an odour
with the nose . . . tastes a sapid with the tongue . . .
feels a tangible with the body . . . recognises an idea with
the mind, he is not entranced with the general appearance
and the details of it. He sets himself to restrain that
which might give occasion for wicked states, covetous,
dejected, to flow in over him, were he to dwell unrestrained
as to the mental faculty. He keeps watch over the mental
faculty, and attains to mastery over it. That these six
faculties should be thus guarded, tended, watched over,


^hojane amattaniiuta = a sustained indulging
without reflection . . . the ignoring of measure or bounds
therein. Asl. 402.

2 Aharam ‘both edible and potable.’ Asl. 401.

3 Davaya, etc. That is to say, that he may be able to
dance or do acrobatic feats, etc. Or like kings and
courtiers who feed to swell their ‘ pride of life ’ and man-
hood, etc. Asl. 402, 408.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



853


restrained, is what is called having the doors of the faculties
guarded.

[1848] What is moderation in diet ?

When anyone takes food with reflection and judgment,
not for purposes of sport, excess, personal charm and
attractions, but so as to suffice for the sustenance and
preservation of the body, for allaying the pangs [of hunger] 1
and for aiding the practice of the higher life, 2 and thinking
the while, ‘ I shall subdue that which I have been feeling
and shall cause no new feeling to arise, 8 and maintenance
shall be mine, blamelessness also and comfort * — this con-
tent, moderation, judgment in diet is what is called modera-
tion in diet.

[1849] What is forgetfulness ? 4


1 Vihimsuparatiya. Vihimsa = abhutta-paccaya
uppaj janaka-khuda. Asl. 408.

2 Brahmacariyanuggahaya.

3 This formula (as Trenckner terms it, ‘Pali Misc.,’ 74)
of abstemious living occurs M. i. 855 ; S. iv. 104, 176, etc.;
also Mil. 867. The comments in the Asl. reveal a more
specific and less sublime interpretation of the vedana in
question than is taken by the translator of the last-named
passage (Rhys Davids, ‘ Questions of King Milinda,’ ii. 281).
According to the former, puranail ca vedanam is
simply that due to one’s not having dined, and n avail ca
vedanam to one’s having dined too much, or to one’s
having dined. Asl. 408, 404. Psychologically then, the

«ideal state of one relieved of the craving of appetite would
seem to be, not the positive sensations of surfeit or of
having well dined, but the relatively negative state of not-
hungry, not-thirsty. Under ‘comfort’ (phasuviharo =
bhojanisamso) gourmands, who fail to acquire the same,
are described, with some gusto, under five current sobriquets
— ‘Hold, waistcoat!’ ‘Gyrator’ (because unable to rise
after eating), etc. Abstemious procedure is also categorized
otherwise and in detail. Asl. 404.

4 In this answer (describing mutthasaccam) the text
requires some emendation. Anussati should be asati,
and the privative a should of course be dropped in a-
pilapanata, a-sammussanata. K. reads (here only)

23


ed by CjOCK^Ic



854


Unmindfulness, lapse of memory, non-recollection, non-
remembrance, not bearing in mind, superficiality, oblivion.
[1850] What is lack of intelligence ?

Answer as for ‘ ignorance ’ or ‘ dulness,’ § 1811, etc.

[1351] What is mindfulness?

Answer as in § 14, omitting ‘on that occasion.’ 1
[1852] What is intelligence ?

Answer as for ‘ wisdom ’ or ‘ science,’ § 16. And see § 53.

[1353] What is the power of computation ? 2
Answer as for ‘ wisdom,’ § 16.

[1854] What is the power of cultivation ?

That which is the pursuing, the cultivating, the multiply-
ing of good states.

Moreover, the seven factors in the Great Awakening 3 are
the power of cultivation.

[1355] What is composure ?

Answer as for ‘quiet,’ §§ 11, 54. 4
[1356] What is insight ?

Answer as for ‘ insight ’ and ‘ wisdom,’ §§ 55, 16.


pamussanata — not so the Cy. — and repeats asati after
appatissati. See § 14 and footnote.

1 K. reads for asammussanata, appamussanata.
Cf preceding note.

2 Patisankhanabalam. This is not included in any
set of ‘ powers ’ enumerated in the present work (cf. § 1,
etc.), nor does it form part of paniiabalam (§ 29). How-
ever, it is included in the eight very different kinds of
powers given in A. iv. 228, ranking as the specific balam
of the erudite or bahussuto. Cf the use of pati-
sankha in Yin. i. 213. In the present connexion it seems
as a correlative term to have superseded dassanam (in-
sight) ; see above, §§ 1002-1012, 1254-1267.

3 See §§ 285, 287, etc. #

4 In this and the following references the phrase * on that
occasion ’ must be understood to be omitted.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



855


[1357] What is ‘ the mark of composure ’? x

Answer as for * quiet/ § 1857.

[1358] What is * the mark of grasp ’?

Answer as for * grasp * and ‘ energy/ §§ 56, 13.

[1359] What is grasp?

Answer as for ‘ the mark of grasp/ § 1858.

[1360] What is balance ?

Answer as for ‘ balance/ § 57.

[1861] What is moral failure? 1 2 3 4 *

Excess in deed, excess in word, excess in both together.
Moreover, all immorality is moral failure.

[1862] What is theoretic fallacy ? 8

‘ There is no such thing as alms, or sacrifice, or offering;
there is neither fruit, nor result of good or evil deeds ;
there is no such thing as this world or the next ; there is
no such thing as mother, or father, or beings springing
into birth without them ; there are in the world no recluses
or brahmins who have reached the highest point, who have
attained the height, who, having understood and realized
by themselves alone both this world and the next, make
known the same’— all this sort of speculation . . . this is
what is called theoretic fallacy. Moreover, all wrong views
are theoretic fallacies.

[1863] What is moral progress ?

Absence of excess in deed, in word, and in deed and word
together. ,4

[1864] What is progress in theory ?

‘ There is such a thing as alms, sacrifice, and offering ;

. . . fruit, and the result of good and evil deeds ; . . . this

1 Samatha-nimittam. Explained by Tam akaram
gahetva puna pavattetabbassa samathassa ni-
mitta-vasena. Asl. 53.

2 Silavipatti. Cf §§ 1868, 1842.

3 Ditthivipatti. Cf § 1215.

4 Slla-sampada. Cf § 1342.

23—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



856


world and the next ; mother, father and beings springing
into birth without them ; . . . recluses and brahmins who
have reached the highest, who have attained the height,
who having understood and realized by themselves alone
both this world and the other world, make known the
same ’ — all this sort of science, understanding, etc. 1 . . .
this is what is called progress in theory. Moreover, all
right views are progress in theory.

[1865] What is purity in morals?

Absence of excess in deed, in word, and in deed and word
together. 2

[1866] What is purity in theory?

Knowledge of the specific nature of Karma ; 3 knowledge


1 Continue as in § 16

2 Cf. § 1863. Purity in theory would seem to indicate
perfection relative to progress in theory, while in moral
matters a similar distinction does not apparently hold.
The Cy. only explains this want of distinction by saying
that in § 1863 the si la of restraint of the Patimokkha is
alluded to, while in § 1865 visuddhi-slla is spoken of.

3 K. reads here kammassakatam iianam— a curious
phrase. Buddhaghosa, to judge by his exposition, reads
kamma- ssakata-nanam (Asl. 406, 407) or -ssakata-,
or -ssakatam iianam (Asl. 406). The corresponding
adjective to this sakata or s aka tarn occurs in the
passage quoted from the Sutta Pitaka by Nagasena (Mil. i.
45; c/. Rhys Davids’ trans., i. 101, n. 1 ; also Asl. 66),
namely, kammassaka (satta); i.e ., according to the
translator’s view, ‘ having each their own karma.’ As this
passage occurs in the yet inedited 135th Sutta of the Maj-
jhima N., the Papaiica Sudani may prove to have a more lucid
commentary on it than that given in the Atthasalinl. The
latter is to this effect : [This phrase means] the science of
knowing that this karma (or action) is sakam, that karma is
not sakam. In this connexion all bad karma, whether it be
done by one’s self or by another, is not sakam. How so ?
Because it destroys utility and creates disutility. But good
karma, which has the reverse effect, is named sakam.
Just as a man with a full purse in the course of a journey


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



357


of the Truths in their due order; the knowledge of him who
holds the Path ; the knowledge of him who holds the Fruit
of the Path.

(i.) 1 The phrase 4 Now purity of theory * is equivalent to
that science, understanding . . . right theory (views) [de-
scribed above , § 16].

(ii.) In the phrase ‘ And as the struggle of him who holds
certain views/ 2 4 struggle ’ means that inception of energy
etc. [described above , § 18].

may stop at various cities where festivals are going on and,
determining what votive outlay he will make, takes part
accordingly in those festivals as his inclination prompts,
and safely emerges from the jungle, even so do beings who
are established in this knowledge of the sakatam of
karma, when they have heaped up much karma making for
transmigration, safely and at ease attain arahatship, even
to the extent of numbers innumerable.

Now if sakam mean here, as it usually does, 4 one’s
own/ that still seems no explanation of the assertion that
one’s bad actions are not one’s own. And how does the
parable bear out the assertion ?

1 With the foregoing question and answer the catechism
proper of the 4 Dhamma Sangani ’ comes to an end.
There follow eleven sundry phrases or terms, not made
the subject of any part of the catechism, and appended
here in the phraseology of a commentary. They are
severally either referred to some reply in the catechism, or
briefly expounded, and are probablj 7 all culled from the
Sutta Pitaka as technicisms of Buddhist ethics. Very
possibly they form one connected sentence, giving an
eloquent and concise description of the nature of Wisdom
and Emancipation. Buddhaghosa has nothing very en-
lightening on this fraction of ancient commentary included
in the text, but promises an explanation of at least the
division of the subject of ‘agitation’ in the Commentary
on the 4 Vibhanga.’

2 Yatha ditthissa ca padhanam. It is just possible
one should read Yathaditthissa ; K., however, divides
the two words. The Cy. merely remarks that the energy
put forth is intelligent or scientific, and can be applied either
to worldly or to higher things.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



858


(iii.) The phrase ‘ agitation ’ implies dread of birth, dread
of old age, dread of sickness, dread of death.

(iv.) The phrase * occasion of agitation ’ means birth, old'
age, sickness, death.

(v.) The phrase * And the earnest struggle of him who is
agitated ’ refers to [the four Right Struggles] : — When a
bhikkhu brings forth the desire (a) that bad and wicked
states which have not arisen should not arise, ( b ) that bad
and wicked states which have arisen should be put away,

( c ) that good states which have not arisen should arise,

(d) that good states which have arisen should stand firm,
should not get confused, should be frequently practised,
made to abound, cultivated, and perfected — then he uses
endeavour, sets energy a-going, reaches forward in thought
and struggles. 1

(vi.) The phrase ‘ And discontent in good states ’ means
^the longing for higher achievement in one who is dis-
satisfied over the cultivation of good states. 2

(vii.) The phrase ‘ And the not shrinking back in the
struggle ’ means the thorough and persevering and unrest-
ing performance, the absence of stagnation, the unfaltering
volition, the unflinching endurance, 3 the assiduous pursuit,
exercise and repetition which attend the cultivation of good
states.

v 1 See A. ii. 15, 16, 74. It will be seen that the four
modes of will-culture described on p. 15 of A. ii. as the
Sammapadhanani (and quoted in the Dh. S.) are, on
p. 74, termed respectively the Struggles for Self-control,
for Renunciation, for Cultivation (or Development) and for
Preservation. Yet on p. 16 a different connotation is given
to each of these four terms.

2 This and the next phrase (vii.) occur consecutively in
A. i. 50. The progress of sublime discontent in a pious
individual from giving small donations to the Order, then
greater gifts till he personally enters the Order and finally
wins the goal of Arahatship, is briefly described, Asl. 407.
The last attainment gives the winner the title of the
Greatly Content.

8 Cf. § 18.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



359


(viii.) The phrase ‘ Wisdom * means the threefold wisdom,
namely (a) reminiscent knowledge of one’s former births , 1

(b) knowledge of the relapse and renascence of beings,

(c) the knowledge that makes an end of the Intoxicants.

(ix.) The phrase ‘ Emancipation ’ means the twofold

emancipation, namely, (a) detachment of thought, 1 and
(b) Nirvana. 2

(x.) The phrase * knowledge in making an end * means
the knowledge he has who holds the Path.

(xi.) The phrase ‘ knowledge in origins* means the know-
ledge he has who holds the Fruit of the Path.

End of the Division entitled ‘ Elimination.*


1 Cittassa ca adhimutti = vimutti (emancipation).
D. i. 174.

2 This is, I believe, the only passage in the original
Manual where the word occurs. This is interesting in
view of the fact that it occurs in what appears to be an
appendix of original Commentary, and also that the term
occurs so frequently in the old digest which follows in the
text. See Appendix I.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



APPENDIX I.


The Digest, or Condensed Paraphrase of Book III.
(§§ 981-1295), entitled Division of Exposition, or the
Elucidation (a 1 1 h u d d h a r o).

Immediately following the text of the Dhammasangani
itself is a supplement of some 280 questions and answers.
The questions are verbatim those of the ‘ Elimination *
Division, or Book III., taken in order, but without the
cross-questioning on the details of the various lists of
ethical factors or defects, such as the varieties of cause
(hetu), or of the ‘ Intoxicants,* etc. The answers are for
the most part more tersely worded than those in Book III.,
and couched in language more or less different, including
several terms that came into technical use after the earliest
ages of Buddhism.

No distinctive title is assigned to this supplement in the
Manual itself. It is probable that the final announcement
‘Dhamma-sangani-ppakarani samatta’
refers, not to it, but to the entire work. In the ‘ Atthasa-
linl,* however (p. 409 et seq.\ this section is pronounced to
be commentary, not text, and is termed the Atthakatha-
kandam, or expositional division ; and in an earlier
passage it was termed the fourth Y i b h a 1 1 i comprising
the atthuddharo (Asl. 6). The tradition is related that
it is the work of Sariputta, and was compiled by him with
the object of making clearer the contents of the ‘Nik-
khepa-kandam* (Book III., i.e., virtually the whole
Manual) to a pupil who could not otherwise understand it.

This being so, and the answers throwing no new light on


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



861


to the subjects discussed, I have not thought it worth
while to translate them. At the same time, it seemed
advisable to sort out the specific, if not the individual,
differences in diction, so that the reader may lose nothing
that may prove of any value for the history either of the
terms or of the concepts of Buddhism. I have also given
translations of a few answers where the very difference in
the terms used to obtain a virtually equivalent statement
may prove helpful towards understanding the language of
the Manual itself.

In respect of Pali terms used, when there is need of re-
ferring colleotively to the three modes, or worlds of all
rebirth, as well as to that higher life of saintly aspiration,
which is not concerned with rebirth, these four are no
longer distinctively spoken of as the avacaram of this
or that and the Unincluded, but are simply classed together
as ‘ the four bhumis.’

Again, ‘ Nirvana ’(nibbanam) invariably replaces the
term ‘ uncompounded element.’ See Appendix II.

‘Form’ replaces ‘all form* (see § 988 passim ), and
‘ fruits of the life of the recluse ’ the word ‘ fruits of the
Paths.’ (See § 992 passim. 1 ) The latter variation occurs
but once in the Manual itself, viz., at § 1016. 2

Frequent allusion is now made to those ‘ types ’ of good
and bad thoughts distinguished and analyzed by Book I.
They are spoken of, not as c i 1 1 a n i, but ascittuppada,
or genesis of thought, a term occurring only once in the
Manual, viz., as a title. (See above, p. 164.)

The skandhas, so frequently adduced in Book III., are
never mentioned.

The term ‘ co-intoxicant * (s a s a v o), is no longer used
except in the analysis of the Intoxicant Group.

The very frequent use of the ablative in -t o (when the

1 By an error presumably in the MSS., the printed text
has, in § 1597, jhanabalani for samannaphalani.
Cf. K.

2 Printed above by an error as [1015].


ed by CjOCK^Ic



862


Manual would use a substantival adjective — for instance,
kamavacara-kusalato instead of kamavacaram
k u s a 1 a m — betrays the later idiom. The Manual itself
uses this ablative, I believe, but twice, viz., in §§ 1062,
1071 : v i p a k a t o = as, or by way of, result.

The term k i r i y a , so seldom used in the Manual, is

now used extremely often.

* * * * * *

Taking now the three questions respecting (a) good,
(b) bad, and ( c ) indeterminate states, with which Book III.
(§§ 981-988, and for that matter the Manual itself) opens,
we read the following concise replies, taken in order : —

‘ (a) Good in the four planes (bhummisu).

(b) The twelve geneses of bad thought.

1 (c) Result in the four planes; completed indeter-
minates 1 in the three planes ; 2 form also and
Nirvana.’

Now, on referring to the analysis of the twelve Types of
bad states (Book I., Part I., ch. ii.), it will be seen that
these cover the whole question, inasmuch as only one
4 plane * — that of sensuous existence— is involved. Good
and indeterminate dhammas, on the other hand, involve
all four planes, and cannot be answered simply in terms of
the eight types of good thoughts (ch. i.) in the one case,

nor of thought genesis in the other.

* ❖ * * * *

The next triad of questions (Book III., §§ 984-986) is
answered in language which occurs at only one other
passage in the whole work (§ 1268 et seq.), and which is of
a vagueness that makes any equivalent rendering welcome.

‘ States associated with easeful feeling ’ : —

‘ The four geneses of thought accompanied by happiness,
which belong to good (karma) in the sensuous universe.
The four, which belong to bad (karma). The six, which


1 Kiriyavyakatam. See Introduction viii.

2 I.e., excluding that of sense (see Book 1., Part III.,
ch. ii.).


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



363


belong to the results of good (karma) in the sensuous
universe, as well as the five belonging to completed
thought. 1 The threefold and fourfold 2 Jhana relating to
the heavens of Form whether it arise as good (karma),
result (of good karma), or as a completed state. The
threefold and fourfold Jhana relating to the Higher Ideal,
whether it arise as good (karma) or as result. The easeful
feeling herewith arisen is not reckoned in.’

* States associated with distressful feeling —

‘ The two geneses of thought which are accompanied by
melancholy. Cognition of body, which is accompanied by
distress. The distressful feeling herewith arisen is not
reckoned in.*

‘ States associated with neutral feeling —

‘The four geneses of thought accompanied by dis-
interestedness, which belong to good (karma) in the
sensuous universe. The six, which belong to bad (karma).
The ten, which belong to the results of good (karma) in
the sensuous universe. 3 The six, which belong to the
results of bad (karma). 4 * The six, which belong to com-
pleted thought. 6 The fourth Jhana, relating to the heavens
of Form, whether it arise as good (karma), result (of good
karma), or as a completed state. The four Jhanas con-
nected with Formless Existence, 6 whether they arise as good
(karma), result (of good karma), or as completed states.
The Fourth Jhana relating to the Higher Ideal, whether it
arise as good (karma), or as result (of good karma). The
neutral feeling herewith arisen is not reckoned in.

‘ It is not proper to say that these three modes of feeling

1 K. reads kamavacara - kusalassa vipakato ca
kiriyato ca pafica. But reference to §§ 469 and 568
shows that the analysis gives six and five respectively.

2 Excluding the highest Jhana, as incompatible with
‘ easeful feeling.’

8 Bead kamavacara-kusalassa.

4 Four in § 556, one in § 562, one in § 564.

6 Five in § 566, one in § 574.

6 For arupa vacara read aruppa. P. 71 et 8eq.


ed by CjOCK^Ic



364


are associated either with themselves, or with form, or with
Nirvana.’

******

The answers to questions §§ 1007-1012 are (with the excep-
tion of that to 1009) more precise than those there given : —

‘ States which may be put away by insight —

‘ The four geneses of thought which are associated with
views and opinions, the genesis of thought whi6h is accom-
panied by perplexity.’

* States which may be put away by culture [1007] —

‘ The genesis of thought which is accompanied by excite-
ment.

* The four geneses of thought which are accompanied by
lust, but disconnected with views and opinions, also the
two geneses of thought which are accompanied by melan-
choly : — these states may be put away either by insight or
by culture.’

‘ States which may be put away neither by insight nor
by culture —

‘ Good in the four planes ; result in the four planes ;
completed indeterminates in three planes ; form also, and
Nirvana.’

States the causes of which may be put away by insight,
by culture, or by neither are described in the same terms.
Moho (dulness), however, is inexplicitly named as some-
thing the cause of which can be put away by neither.

******

Questions 1022-1024 are answered in quite other terms
than those there used

(a) * States having limited objects of thought —

‘ All result of sensuous existence ; ideation that is com-
pleted action ; representative cognition that is completed
action but not free of causes, 1 and is accompanied by happi-
ness.’

(b) * States having objects of thought of wider scope ’: —

* The sphere of infinite intellect ; the sphere where there

1 Kiriya-hetuka manovifinanadhatu.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



865


is neither perception nor non-perception.* (Cf. §§ 267,
268.)

(c) 4 States having infinite objects of thought :* —

4 The four Paths that are the Unincluded, and the four
Fruits of the life of the recluse.’

4 The four geneses of thought which are disconnected
with knowledge and belong to good (karma) in the universe
of sense, also the four geneses of thought disconnected
with knowledge which are completed acts, and all bad
(karma): — these states may be (a) or ( b) t but not ( c ), and
may not be termed both (a) and (b).

4 [Again,] the four geneses of thought which are associated
with knowledge and belong to good (karma) in the universe
of sense, the four geneses of completed thoughts which are
associated with knowledge, the Fourth Jhana relating to
the universe of form, whether it arise as good (karma), or
as completed thought, and the representative cognition
which is completed and free from the causes and is accom-
panied by disinterestedness: — these states may be (a), or
(6), or (c), but it is not proper to call them (a) and ( b ) and (c).

4 [Lastly] the threefold and fourfold Jhana relating to the
heavens of Form, whether it arise as good (karma), or as
result, or as completed thought, the results of Fourth
Jhana, and the two first Jhanas connected with Formless
existence, viz., the spheres of Infinite Space and of Infinite
Nothingness : — these states it is not proper to call (a) and
(/>) and (c).

Form and Nirvana are without objects of thought.’
******

One more group deserves quoting as giving answers not
in terms of the subject inquired into. This is the two
triads corresponding to §§ 1044-1049. The Atthakatha
has the following :

4 States which are

(a) personal (or subjective),

(b) external,

( c ) personal- external.’

4 With the exception of form which is not bound up with


ed by CjOCK^Ic



866


faculties , 1 all states may be subjective or external or sub-
jective-external. Form which is not bound up with facul-
ties, and Nirvana are both external.’

* States which have

(a) a subjective object of thought,

(b) an external object of thought,

(c) a subjective-external object of thought * : —

‘ (a) The sphere of infinite intellection and the
sphere where there is neither perception
nor non-perception.

* (b) The threefold and fourfold Jhana relating to
the heavens of Form, whether it arise as
good (karma), as result (of good karma), or
as completed thought, also results of Fourth
Jhana, the sphere of infinite space, the
four Paths that are the Unincluded and
the four Fruits of the life of the recluse : —
—these states have an external object of
thought.

‘Excepting form, states, good, bad, and in-
determinate relating to the sensuous uni-
verse, and the Fourth Jhana relating to
the heavens of Form, whether it arise as
good (karma), or as completed thought: —
all these may be either (a), ( b ), or (c).

‘ But it is not proper to say that the sphere of
nothingness is all three.

‘Form and Nirvana are without objects of
thought.’

There is here a point of additional interest.

The second and fourth Aruppajjhanas are shown to
have been conceived as exercises of pure introspection, and
to be devoid of any implications of a World-Beason, or a
macrocosmic Perception, let alone any of the ‘ rapt soul *
being caught up to other spheres.

1 Read, for Manindriyam, Anindriya-baddha-
rupanca. By an oversight this sentence and the next
are printed in the text as if belonging to the previous triad.


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



APPENDIX II.


On that which is predicted about Uncompounded Element
(asankhata d h a t u) in the Dhamma Sangani.

Uncompounded Element is classed as the fourth and last
species of the morally Indeterminate (avyakatam) — in
other words, of that conduct or state of mind which is
not productive of good or bad karma. But it alone,
of those four, does not receive separate and systematic
discussion, as is the case with the other three — Kesult,
K i r i y a , and Form. The following predicates are elicited
incidentally in the course of Book III., which discusses
what may be called Applied Ethics. Again, whereas the
word Nirvana (nibbanam) is always substituted for
asankhata dhatu in that Atthakatha which is appended
as a supplement to the original text, the term * uncom-
pounded element ’ is not identified, in the Dhamma Sangani,
with the ‘ topmost fruit ’ of the Paths, the arahatta-
p h a 1 a m, which is one aspect of the state called Nirvana
(c/. S. iv. 251, 252). The subject therefore seems to
demand further inquiry. It is to facilitate this that the
following results are appended, parallel more or less to the


table on Form, pp. 168-171. Cf. note, p. 166.

Uncompounded element is

indeterminate [983]

neither result nor productive of result [989]

neither the issue of grasping 1 nor favourable

to it 2 [992]

neither corrupt nor baneful [995]


1 Given also in [1212]. 2 Given also in [1220].


ed by CjOCK^Ic



368


‘ void of the working of conception and of
thought discursive ’

to be put away neither by insight nor by
culture

something the causes of which are to be put
away neither by insight nor by culture
that which makes neither for the piling up
nor for the undoing of re- birth
neither appertaining nor not appertaining
to studentship
infinite
perfected

that which does not entail fixed conse-
quences

invisible and non-impingeing
not a cause

without causes as concomitants
not associated with a cause
without material form
supra-mundane
not an Intoxicant
not co-intoxicant
disconnected with the Intoxicants
not a Fetter

unfavourable to the Fetters
disconnected with the Fetters
not a Tie

not that which tends to become tied
disconnected with the Ties


1

2

3

4
6
0

7

8
9


Given also in [1269], [1271].
Given also in [1258] et seq.

In the printed text [1018].
Repeated in [12911.

Repeated in [1088] and [1090].


1082

1112

1134'

1150


combines [1072] and [1074],
repeats [1104] and [*11061.
repeats 1126‘ and
repeats [1142] and


1106

1128 :

1144


[998J 1

[1008]

[1012] 2

[1015]

[1017] 3

[ 1021 ]

[1027]

[1080] 4

[1052] 5

[1072]

[1074]*

[1076]

[1092]

[1094]

[ 1102 ]

[1104]

[1106] 7

[1124]

[1126]

[1128]®

[1141]

[1142]

[1144]®


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



869


not a Hindrance [1168]

disconnected with and unfavourable to the
Hindrances [1173]

not a Contagion [1176]

disconnected with the Contagion and un-
infected [1184]

without concomitant object of thought [1186]

not of the intellect [1188]

not involved in the life of sense [1190]

disconnected with thought [1192]

detached from thought [1194]

not sprung from thought [1196]

not something coming into being together

with thought [1198]

not consecutive to thought [1200]

not derived [1210]

without the attribute of Grasping [1218]

disconnected with Grasping, and not favour-
ing it [1228]

without the attribute of corruption [1240]

harmless [1242]

not corrupt [1248a]

disconnected with the Corruptions, and
harmless [1258]

not joyous [1273]

unaccompanied by j oy [127 5]

unaccompanied by ease [1277]

unaccompanied by disinterestedness [1279]

Unincluded [1287]

that by which there is no going away [1289]

something having no Beyond [1298]

not concomitant with war [1295]

In the Cy. on the Dhatu Katha nibbanam (Nirvana)
is always substituted forasankhato khandho.

THE END.

24


ed by CjOCK^Ic



INDEX OF PALI WORDS.

[n is throughout printed for n.]


Aggi, 242
Aggahitattam, 300
Ajjava, 848
Ajjhatika, 220
Ajjhatta, 45, 207, 241, 272
Ajjh&sayo, 200
Ajjhosana, 277
Anna, 96

Annindriya, 97, 149

Atth&na, 848

Andaka, 849

Attabhavo, 175, 207, lxi

Attamanata, 12

Attaniya, xxxvi

Atta, 294. See Dhatu

Attadhipati, 20

Adhitthana, 44

Adhipati, 20

Adhipateyya, 77, 270

Adhimatta, 200

Adhimuccana, 63

Adhimokkho, 5

Adhivacana, 840

Anannatanna88amltindriya, 86

Anagamin, 297, 802, 326

Anicca, 171

Anutapo, 818

Anuttara, 886

Anudda, 275

Anuddayana, 275

Anunayo, 276

Anumajjana, 11

Anurodho, 276

Anuvyaiijana, 851

Anusati, 351

Apacayagamin, 82

Apariyapanna, 165, 254, 329, 332

Apekkha, 279

Appanihita, 93, 143


Appana, 10, 53, 54, 59, 82, 847,
xxviii

Appamahha, 66
Appamana, 60, 265
Abhijjha, 22, 304
Abhinna, 53, 54, 193, 338
Abhithana, 267
Abhidhamma, xxvii, xxxi
Abhinibbatta, 271
Abhiniropana, 11, 19
Abhinlhara, 242
Abhilapo, 340
Abhisankhara, 262
Arati, 66

Arahatta, 264, 296, 803, 867
Ariyanam adassavin, 258
Ariyo atthangiko maggo, 87
Arupavacara, 332, 333, 363
Avacara, xliv, 334
Avatthiti, 13
Avyakata, 367

Asankhata dhatu, 166, 251, 367
et seq.

Asubha, 70
Assutava, 258

Aka<idhana, 277

AlrSofl vl viii

Akasa-dhatu, 57, 198, 194, 217

Akasanancayatana, 71

Akincannayatana, 74

Aghato, 282

Acayo, 195

Adarata, 845

Adariya, 345

Anantarika, 267

Apatti, 346

Apfttha, 199

Apo dhatu, 201, 208, 286, 242


ed by CjOCK^Ic



871


Amisa, 850

Ayatana, 26, 172, 213, 821, 884
Arambho, 15
Arammana, 55, 209, xli
Aruppa-jhana, 57, 363
Asava, 291 et aeq.

As5, 279
Asimsana, 279

Aharo, 196, 197, 204, 352, lix

Icclia, 100, 277
Iddhipada, 94
Indriya, 204, 215, 247, lvii
Issa, 100, 299

Ujukata, 348

Unnati, 298

IJnnamo, 298

TJtu, 174, xvii

TJddesa, xxviii

Uddhacca, 119, 286

Upakileso, 281

TJpacayo, 195, 231

Upacara, 53, 54

Upacitattam, 138

Upabruhanam, 12

Uparitthima, 264

Upada,' 127, 197, 243

UpadSna, 257, 323, xlix

Upadinna, 201, 234, 241, 272, 324

Upadiiniya, 203, 322

Upekkha, 39, 48, 50, 66, 123, 333

Uppatti, 157

Uppadino, 270

IJbbego, 20

Ussado, 199

Ekaggata, 18, 133 •
Ekacittakkhanika, 82
Ekattha, 251
Ekatta, 1

Ekasampaticchana-kicca, 129
Ekodibhava, 46
Eja, 277

Okappana, 14
Oghaniya, 301
Ogho, 281, 308
Oja, 196
Otarati, 132
Ottappa, 20
Onaho, 311
Opapatika, 341
Olarika, 208
Osldana, 277


I Kakkhalatta, 241
Kakkasa, 350
KatukaHcukata, 300
Kandaka, 349
Kanha, 839
Radariya, 300
Kappiya, 813
Kamma, 282 et seq ., xvii
Kammassakata, 856
Kanina, 5
Kasava, 189
Kasina, 43, 57
Kahapana, 184
Kamavacara, 1, 334
Kayo, 181, 311
Kaya-kammannata, 24
Kaya-passaddhi, 23
Kaya-pagunnata, 24
Kayappasado, 178, 199
Kaya-muduta, 24
Kaya-lahuta, 28
Kaya-vinnatti, 192
Kaya-viniiana, 128
Kaya-viiinana-dhatu, 153
. Kayujjukata, 25
I Kiccara, 132

i Kiriya, 156 et aeq ., 163, 193, 251,
I 334, 362
I Kilesa, 251, 827 et seq.
i Kilesa-kama, 43
Kukkucca, 120, 312.

| Kukkura-vattika, 261
I Kusalata, 345-348
I Ketu-kamyata, 298
Kopo, 283
Khantl, 849
Khuda, 853

Ganthaniya, 301, 305
i Gantbo, 281, 304 et aeq .

Gandho, 187
Gedho, 277
Guttadvarata, 350
Govata, 261
Goslla, 261

Cakkhu, 173

Cakkhu-vinnanam, 177, 210
Candaka, 349
Candikka, 111
Calana, 8

Citta-kammafinata, 24
Citta-cetasika, 265
Citta-pasaddhi, 23
Citta-pagunfiatfi, 25

24—2


ed by CjOCK^Ic



872


Citta-mudutS, 24
Citta-lahuta, 28

Cittam, 8, 9, 811, 318, 351, xxxii, lx

Citt&ni, the eight great, 1, 3

CittujjukatS, 25

Cittekaggata, 13

Cuti, 134

Cetana, 8, 9, 177

Cetaaika, 265, 318, lx

Ceto, 46

Chad an a, 281

Chando, 5, 77, 145 et seq. f 292
Chambitattam, 242

Janika, 277
Jappa, 279
Javana, 132, 156
JalinI, 278
Jlva, 46

Jlvitindriya, 19, 192
Jhana, 43, 51, 52, 53, 293, 834,
361-363

Nana, 856
Nana-dassana, 256
Nana-sampayutta, 1
Nanuppatti, 240

Thana, 129, 157, 158, 252, 848

Takko, 10
Tajja, 6

Tanha, 277, 278, 279
Tathagato, 294
Tattha, 842
Tatramajjhattata, 5
Tadarammanam, 182, 134
Tapaniya, 840
Titthayatana, 101
Tejo, 242
Thambltatta, 242
Thiti, 13

Thinamiddha, 120, 810
Thflla, 208

Davaya, 352

Dassana, 256, 354

Dittha-dhamma-sukha, 168, 884

Ditthi, 257, 258, 293, 325, 342

Dukha, 12, 50

Dutiya, 278

Duppannft, 844

Dure, 208

Dovacassata, 344

Dovacassiyam, 844


Doso, 21, 99, 109
Dhammo, xxxii et seq .
Dhammachando, 5
Dhammarammana, 2
Dhatu, 129, 198, 214, 347
DhTtalika, 190

Nandi, 277
Na^^o, 83

Xanattam, 72, 129
Nama, 341
| Nikanti, 230, 293
Nijjataka, 194
Niddesa, 136, xxviii
NippariySya, xxvii
. Nibbana, 261, 359, 361
i Nimitta, 144, 146, 351, 356
Niyata, 266, 267
! Niyyanika, 82, 335
Nirutti, 340
Nisevana, 342
Nissata, 194
i Nissatta, 26, xxxiii
Nila, 62

, Nlvaranani, 810
Nivarahiya, 810, 313
| Nela, 350

i Nevasahha-nasanna, 74

, Pakopo, 288
Paggaho, 25
Paggharana, 201, 242
( Panko, 277
Paccayo, 274, 828
Paccuppanna, 271
, Panna, 17, 20, 339, 345, 354
1 Pannatti, 340
1 Patighato, 282

Patigho, 72, 109, 183,204,222, 276,
282, 298

' Paticca-samuppada, 848
Padpada, 53, 82, 92, 148
• Patibandhu, 279
Pati-virodho, 276, 283
Patisankhana-bala, 354
j Patisantharo, 850
Patu-sanna, 75
' Pathavi-dhatu, 241
Panidhi, 278
! Panlta, 266
Pandicca, 889
Pandita, 339
Patit thana, 241
Pada-bhajaniyam, 26
Padoso, 283


:ed by CjOO^Ic



Padhana, 158, 858, 859
Parakkamata, 15
Parabhisajjanl, 850
Parimasa, 316, 317
Parikamma, 64, 347
Parinayika, 18
Paritta, 265, 269
Parinibbanam, 197
ParipScana, 242
Pariyatti, xxxiii

Pariy&panna. See ApariySpanna

Pariyahanam, 10

Pariyutthanam, 281

Pariyonaho, 311

Paligedha, 277

Pasado, 173, 174

Pilapanata, 16, 353

Pihana, 280

Plti, 11, 44

Puggala, 44, 267, 351

Puggalika, 220

Puncikata, 280

Puthujjano, 257, 258

Pori, 850

Pharana-plti, 44

Phasso, 5, lv

Phasu-viharo, 853

Bala, 854

Bahiddha, 207, 260, 272
Bala, 339
Bahira, 207
Bujjhati, 84
Brahma-vihara, 65
Bruhana, 242
Bhajana, 345
Bhatti, 345
Bhantattam, 120
Bhandanattam, 242
Bhava, 343
Bhavanga, 3, 132, 134
Bhava-netti, 279
Bhavana, 261

Bhutani, the four Maha, 166, 204
Bhuta-kasina, 57
Bhumi, 82, 252
Bhojana, 352, 853

Magga-hetuka, 268
Maggo, 87 et seq ., 259, 264, 268,
269

Maccharino, 344
Macchariya, 299
Majjhima, 266
Mattannuta, 352


I Mattikavaka, 190
Maddavo, 848
' Madhura, 189
Manata, 12
| Manasikaro, 5
t Manayatana, 27
Manindriya, 17, 41, 128, 366
I Mano, 5, 129
I Mano-kamma, 251
Mano-dvara, 3
Mano-dhatu, 73
Mano-sancetanaharo, 31
Mano-vinnana-dhatu, 6, 27, 73, 129,
132, 153, 364
Mano-vinnana, 170, 240
Mahaggata, 265
Mahantara, 818 et aeq,

Maya, 277
Masaka, 184
Micchatta, 266
1 Middham, 810, 811
MettI, 275
Medha, 18
Muccha, 277
Muttha-sacca, 353
Muta, 239
Mudita, 66
Muduta, 349
Moho, 22, 96, 125

l Ye-va-panaka, 5, lxvi
i Yoganiya, 301
1 Yogo, 281, 309

Basayatana, 319
Baso, 103
Rago, 66, 276
Basatthena, 26, 253
Rupa, xli et seq.

Buparammana, xlii
i Rupayatana, xhi
I Rupavacara, xlvi
| Rupino dhamma, 165, 168
Rupiyam, 168

Lakkhana, 103, 241
Lajja, 20
Lata, 281
Lahuta, 23, 194
Lamaka, 266
Lina, 84, 311
Lokadhipati, 20
Lokiya, 289

Lokuttara, 82, 92, 188 et seq., 266,
i 289, xc


ed by CjOCK^Ic



874


Lobho, 21, 280
Loluppa, 280

Yaci-vinfiatti, 193
Vaiicana. 277
Vaddhi, 195

Vatthu, 129, 173, 204, 209, 327

Vatthukama, 43

Vana, 279

Vanatho, 279

Vavatthana, 290

Vata, 243

Vayo, 243

Vikkhepo, 25, 119-121

Vicaro, 10, 11. 44, 52

Vicikiccha, 121

Vijja-bhagino, 838

Vifmatti, 205, 217

Vifmana, 17, 57, 134, 202, 311

Vinnanancayatana, 78

Vitakko, 10, 44, 52, 69, 84, 125, 130

Vitti, 12

Vinaya, 259

Vinibhoga, 289

Vipatfci, 66, 355

Viparinata, 271

Vipassana, 25, 100, 388

Vipako, 128 et seq ., 135, 258, 384

Vibhava, 848

Vibhago, 250

Vimokkho, 63

Viriya, 14, 20

Virodho, 276

Vilapanata, 16

Vilasa, 58

Vivicca, 43

Visata, 278

Visattika, 278

Yisaya, 7, 200, 276, 282

Yisamsattha, 319

Visuka, i01

Yihimsa, 353

Vihesa, 66

Vimamsa, 77

Vu^thana, 346

Yupasamo, 119

Vethanaka, 178

Vedana, 6, 853

Veviccha, 281, 300

Votthapana, 132

Yoharo, 340

Vyanjana, 341

Vyappana, 10

Vyapatti, 111, 283

Vyapado, 66, 99, 806


I Sa-uttara, 386
Saka, 356, 357
j Sakkfiya, 175, 257, 262
; Saggavarana, 259
t Sankappo, 19, 46, 84, 130
Sankilittha, 327
I Sankileso, 325
I Sankhata, 168, 288
' Sankha, 340
I Sangaho, 241, 242
Sango, 277
Sanghattana, 5, 351
Sacittaka, 161
Sancetana, 31
Safijanana, 190
| Sanjananl, 278
Sannojanani, 96, 297 ct seq.
Sannojaniya, 301
Santhana, 190
| Santhiti, 18
i Safina, 7, 8, 17
| Sati, 16, 20
Satindriya, 51
Satindriya, 51
Satto, 46
Saddha, 14, 47
Santati, 195, 202, 281
Santike, 208
Santirana, 132, 134
Santhavo, 279
Sappurisa, 259
Sabhava, 26, xxxiv
Samajjo, 105
| Samafina, 340
Samatho, 25, 95, 356
j Samadhi, 18, 17, 20, 46, 52
| Samapatti, 346
Samutthana, 205, 241, 319, 320
Samudirana, 174
I Samorodho, 812
Sampakopo, 283
i Sampaggaho, 298
Sampajano, 48
| Sainpajannam, 25
Sampaticchana, 241
I Sampada, 855
( Sampatfchana, 280
( Sampadoso, 283
! Sampayutta, 1, 2, 286
Sampa8adana, 46
Sampindeti, 13
Samphassa, 185, 210
Samphuttha, 194
Sambodho, 102
I Sambojjhanga, 84


ed by CjOO^Ic



875


Sambhajana, 345
Sambhatti, 345
Sambhavo, 173
Sambhara, 173
Sammatta, 268
Sammussanata, 353
Samsattha, 2, 319, 320
Samsevana, 342
Sarana, 336
Sarita, 278
Sariratthaka, 241
Sasankharena, 34
Sahagata, 1, 2
Sahajata, 1
Sahabhu, 320
Sahetuka, 285
Sakhalya, 349
Sata, 349
Sadu, 189

Sadhukamyata, 280
SamaHna, 341, 361
Sasava, 253, 361
Sithila, 15
Sineha, 66, 201
Sda, 356
STlabbata, 261
Sukka, 339


; Sukha, 12, 13, 50, 68
Sutta, 278
Sudhanta, 195
Suddhi, 261

Sunfiata, 26, 33, 91, 92, 141

et 8eq,

1 Suttantika, 338
Suddhika, 143
Suvannam, 60
| Sekkha, 265
Sevana, 342
' Soceyya, 315
Sotapatti, 259, 297, 303
Somanassa, 2, 50, 68, 105
Soracca, 349
Sovacassata, 345
Sovacassayam, 345

Hari, 183
Harltaka, 189
Hasituppada-citta, 156
1 Hitesita, 276
Hima, 183
Hiri, 20
Hina, 266

Hefcu, 168, 263, 274, 285, xxxiii
Hefcuka, 262, 263


ed by CjOCK^Ic



GENERAL INDEX.


Abhidhamma, xviii, xxvi, xxvii, xxxi, xxxiii, 14 n. 5, 208 n. 1
Abhidhammattha-Sangaha, 84 n., 40 n., 156 n.
Abhithanas, the, 266 n. 3
Abruptness, 111, 288

Abstraction, 72 n. 1. See Concentration, and Jhana
Action, 83, 87 ; thoughts so called, 156 et seq. See Kiriya
Adjustment of mind, lxv-lxix, 11, 17 n. 1, 19 n. 4
/Esthetic sense, training through, 64 n. 2
Aggregates, 26 n. 2. See Skandhas
Agitation, 358

Aimless, the, 91 n. 2, 93 et seq., 189 et seq., 148

Air. See Gaseous element

Ajita Kesakambali, 325 n. 1

Alara Kalama, 72 n. 1

Alertness, lxix, 23

Alimentation, 196 n. 4

Alkmseon, liii, liv

Altruism, xciv, 21 n. 8, 275 n. 4

Ambrosial way, 86 n. 2

Amity, 849

Analysis, 11 n. 2, 18

Anguttara Nikaya, xxvii n., xxix n., etc.

Anima, De, xxxvii, xliii, lxi n., 187 n. 2
Animism assailed by Buddhism, xxxv et seq., lxxi et seq. ;
Patristic, xxxviii

Annihilationists, 101 n. 5, 298 n. 4, 294 n. 2, 848
Annoyance, 22 n. 1, 282
Anti-causationists, 267 n. 1
Anuradhapura, xxi, xxii
Appetites, 48 et seq.

Arahat, xc, xeii, xciii, 158 n., 197 n. 2, 254 n. 2, 264 n. 2,
812 n. 2, 858 n. 2


:ed by CjOO^IC



877


Arahatship, Ixxxiji, 22 n. 8, 77 n. 1, 82 nn., 96 n. 2, 166 n.,
261 n. 2, 889, 858 n. 2, 867

Aristotle, psychological thoroughness, xvi; assumption of
substance, xxxvii ; on * common sensibles/ xliii, 129 n.;
in Limbo, xlvi; on sensuous media, liv; on like
knowing like, lxi ; on the good, lxxxiv ; on association,
2 n. ; on the physical basis of thought, lxxviii n. 8,
n. 129 ; on sense-discrimination, 187 n. 2 ; on cause,
274

Arnold, Matthew, lxvi, lxviii

Artifices for inducing Jhana, 48 et seq ., 57 et seq.

Asavas. See Intoxicants

Assimilation, xxxix, lxxvi, 129 n., 182 n., 161 n.

Association, lxxx n. 1, lxxxi, 1 n. 4, 285 n.

Astronomy, 184 n. 1
Attainments, the, 845 et seq .

Attention, importance attached to, lxv et seq . ; sense and
attention, lxvi, lxxv ; thought and attention, lxvi n. ;
definition of, lxvin., 5 n. 1 ; in concentration, 17 n. 1,
64 n. 1, 100 n. 2, 124 n., 180 n. 1, 176 nn. 1, 2, 198
n. 2, 847 ; superficial, 103 n. 1
AtthasalinI, xx-xxvi, jmssim
Augustine, lxxix n. 2
Avarice, 281, 800
Aversion, 65 n. 1

Awakening, the Great, xc, 69 n. 2, 84 et seq., 95

Bad, xlix, lxxxiv, xci, 98 et seq., 251, 262 n. 1
Bain, A., xvi n.

Balance, 25, 110, 111 n. 8, 119 n., 855
Basis, 209, 224, 327 n.

Bastian, 156 n.

Becoming, 30 n. See Universe

Berkeley: his standpoint compared with the Buddhistic,
xvii, xxxv, 171 n. 1

Beyond, or the Ideal, xxxvii, lxxxiv, 336

Blame, fear of, 21, 23, 339, 844 ; disregard of, 102, 328, 889

Blue, 62 n. 1, 183 n. 2

Body, 1, lx, xcv, 192, 208 n. 1, 241 n. 8

Body-sensibility, lvi, 127 n. 1, 172, 181 et seq., 192 n. 2

Bonds, the, 103 n. 1, 169, 809

Bovine morals, 260 n. 4, 325 n. 8

Buddha. See Gotama

Buddhaghosa, xxi et seq . and passim

Buddhist philosophy, ethical character of, xvi; attaches


ed by CjOCK^Ic



878


importance to psychological considerations, ibid., xxxii ;
positive character of its psychology, xvii ; genetic treat-
ment of ditto, ibid. ; history of, xxv ; attitude of, toward
physical universe, lxii
Buoyancy. See Lightness
Burnet, J., 208 n. 1

Calm and sure, 46

Catechetical method, why used, xxviii

Categories, Buddhist, xxix, 166, 291 n. ; Aristotelian, xxxviii

Cat’s eye, 184

Causation, xci et seq. ; chain of, cycle of, lxxiv, 260 n. 2, 848
Cause (moral), xci et seq., 26, 82, 125 n. 2, 168, 250, 262,
268 n. 8, 274 et seq. ; contradictory of, 285 ; as con-
comitant, 285 n. 1
Ceylon, schools in, xix-xxiv

Childers, R. C., Dictionary of Pali, 28 n. 4, and passim

Churlishness, 22 n. 1, 111, 283

Clear (c i 1 1 a m), lxxviii n. 3, 9

Cleaving, 811

* Cloke and hinder,’ 811

Cogitation, 8, 81

Cognition : how used in this book, lxxiii n. 8 ; presentative
and representative, 2 n. 3 ; representative, 16 n. 1, 27,
80, 182, 184 ; involution of, 7 n. 2, 17 n. 2 ; re-repre-
sentative, lxxvii, 7 n. 2, 8 n. 1, 72 n. 2, 77 n. 1, 182 n ,
154, 158 ; five modes of sense-cognition, 123, 151 ;
theory of, lxxii et seq.

Cohesiveness, 201 n. 2
Co-Intoxicant, 294, 861
Colebrooke, 274 n.

Collapse, 116

Collocation, conjuncture, 1, lx, 26 n. 2
Colour-terms, 62 n., 68 n., 183
Commentaries, xx-xxvi
Commentary, the, = AtthasalinI, passim
Compliance, 276
Composure, 354

Compound and single, 166 n., 168, 288

Comprehension, 25 n. 2

Computation, power of, 854

Conation, xvi, 5 n. 1, 77 n. 1, 182 n., 292 n. 2

Conceit, 100 n. 2, 298

Concentration, lxix, 18 nn. 1, 2, 14 n. 4, 17, 19, 20, 44 n. 8,
45 et seq., 60 n. 1, 99 n. 2, 159


:ed by CjOO^IC



879


Conception, lxxxviii, 10, 44, 45, 69 n. 1, 84 n. 1, 125 n. 2,
180 ; in rebirth, 184 n., 169, 255, 804 n. 1
Condition, xxxiii, xciv. See Cause
Conditioned, 288 ; conditioned geneses, 848
Conduct, 87

Conscience ( = s ati plus hiri), 16 n. 1, 20 n. 84 n.
Conscientiousness, 20, 21, 28, 889, 344 ; opposite of, 102,
828, 889

Consciousness, analysis of moral, xvii, xxxiii, xxxv ; evolu-
tion of the notion, lxv ; zero-point of, 74 n. 2
Consistency, xxx, liii, 20 n.

Contact in sensation, lii et seq., 5, 80, 177 et seq., 182, 198
n. 1, 209, 211, 224 et seq.

Contagion, 816 et seq.

Contemplation, lxxxviii
Content, of Nirvana, lxxxv, 858 n. 2
Contumacy, 844
Coolness, 28 n. 2

Co-ordinating faculty, lxxii, Ixxvi, 8 n. 1
Corinthians, II. Ep. to, 269 n. 8
Corruptions, the, 169, 251 et seq., 266, 827 et seq.

Courtesy, 850

Covetousness, 21, 22, 102, 282, 293 n. 1
Craving (t a n h a), 18 n. 2, 842 ; (a s a) 279 et seq.
Crookedness, 25
Cruelty, 65 n. 1

Cultivation, 91 n. 2, 854. See Culture
Culture, Buddhist, in natural philosophy, 1 ; of the human
organism, 1, lvii, 58 n., 59, 64 n. 1, 69 n. 2 ; concepts
of, 17 n. 2; life of, 21 n. 8; methods of, xciv, 58 n. ;
of the will, lxxxviii, 67 n., 261, 881, 858

Dante, xliv et seq.

Darwin, xlix, xciii

Davids, Prof. Rhys, xvi; ‘Buddhism,’ 119 n., 849 n. 2;
* Buddhist Suttas,’ 65 n. 1 ; ‘ Questions of King Milinda,’
16 nn. 1 and 3, 889 n. 3, 353 n. 3, 856 n. 2 ; * American
Lectures,’ xxxvi n., 101 n. 1, 260 n. 4, 297 n. ; * Yoga-
vacara’s Manual,’ lxxxviii n. 2, 10 n. 3, 11 n. 4, 18 n. 1,
53 n., 57 n. 2, 91 n. 2, 276 n. 2 ; * Dialogues of the
Buddha,’ lxviii n. 8, lxxix n. 2, 44 n. 8, 58 n., 84 n. 2,
105 n. 2, 119 n., 168 n., 277 n. 8, 291 n., 848 n.,
851 n. 2
Death, 266 n. 3

Decay, 171, 178, 195 n. 2, 201 n. 4, 219


ed by CjOO^lC



880


Deception, 25 n. 1
Deductive method, lvi, 8 n. 1
Definition, logic of, xxix, xxxix-xli
Delight in, to, 277
Deliverances, the, 68
Demokritus, xlviii, liii, lvi
De Morgan, xliv n.

Derived form, xlvii et seq., 172 n. 1

Desire, as morally sound conation, 5 n. 1, 15 n. 2, 16 ; as
unsound, 48 n. 8, 44 n. 8, 100 n. 2, 292 n. 1 ; as a
dominant influence, 77 n. 1, 145 et seq., 270 n. 1 ;
and doubt, 115 n.

Detachment of thought, 859
Deussen, Prof., xlviii n.

Devas, xxvii, xlv, xlvi
Devouring, 277

Dhammadinna, lxii, xcii, 257 n. 2
Dhamma-Sangani, xviii, passim
Dlgha Nikaya, xxxvi, passim
Discernment, 18
Discipline, 259 n. 1
Discrimination, lxviii, 18, 39 n.

Disinterestedness, lxiii, 89, etc., 48, 50, 68, 123, 170, 838;

spurious, 65 n. 1, 106, 184, 157, 256
Disorder, moral, 111, 288
Distraction, lxix, 116
Dogmatize, inclination to, 805
Dominant influence, 76 et seq., 95, 145 et seq., 270
Door of the faculties, 850 et seq.

Door-theory of cognition, xxiv, liv n., lxviii, lxxviii, 2 n. 8,
129 n., 132 n., 158 n., 161 n.

Doubt, 44 n. 3, 115, 260
Douglas, C., xvi

Dulness, 96 n. 1, 102, 116 n. 6, 262 et seq., 283 ; absence of,
xci, 18, 22, 125 n. 2, 186, 162, 276, 283
Duns Scotus, xxv

Earth, xlvii, 1, lxi, lxiii, 18 n. 2, 197, 241 ; earth-gazing,
48 et seq.

Ease, lxxxiv-lxxxvii, 6, 12, 19, 27, 44, 45, 48, 50, 99 n. 8,
170, 256, 883, 362
Ecclesiastes, 99 n. 2

Ecstasy, of joy, 11 n. 4 ; in contemplation, see Jhana
Education of the Buddhist, xvi. See Culture
Effect. See Result


:ed by CjOCK^Ic



881


Efficacy in good, degrees of, 76 et seq.

Effort, 15, 94

Ego. See Self

Egoism and Buddhism, xciv

Element (d h a t u), lxxvii et seq., 26, 80, 129, 197 n. 2, 214,
228, 847

Elements (the four), xli, xlvii et seq., 1, li, lvi, 166 n. 2,
201 n. 2 ; in the organism, 1, 173 n. 1, 174 et seq . ; and
touch, lv-lvii, 127 n. 1. See Space
Elimination, 58 n. 1, 72 n. 1, 250
Eliot, George, lxviii
Ellis, Havelock, 62 n.

Emancipation, lxxxiv, lxxxvii, xc, 68 n. 8, 857 n. 1, 859
Emotional, 265 n. 4
Empedokles, liii, lxi, lxxviii n. 3

Emptiness-concept, xxxvi, 88, 91 et seq., 129 n., 189 et seq.
Endeavour, 15, 19, 858
Endurance, 16

Energy, 15, 20, 76 et seq., 149, 159 n., 207 n. 1, 858
Envy, 100 n. 2, 299
Equanimity, 5 n. 1

Eternalism, 84 n. 2, 101 n. 5, 298 n. 4, 294 n. 2, 848
Ethics, Buddhist, xvi, xxxii, lxxxii-xcv ; applied, xxx ; as
Pessimistic, lxvii, Ixxxvi, xciv ; as Optimistic, lxvii ;
psychical training in, xciv
Eudeemonia, lxxxiii
Euripides, 194 n. 1
Evasion, 116

Evolution of form, xlvii, lix, 195 ; of sex, 190 n. 8
Excess, 355 ; absence of, ibid.

Excitement, 28 n. 2, 25 n. 3, 84 n. 2, 100 n. 2, 118-120, 812

Experience, xvii, xxxii, 7 n. 1, 18, 270

Experientialism, lxxiii

Explanation, 340 n. 2

Expression, xlviii, 841. See Intimation

External, xlii, 1, lxi, 207, 220 et seq., 272, 821, 865

Faculties, xlvii, lvii et seq., 26, etc., 81, 94, 190 et seq., 204,
215, 222, 229, 287, 247
Failure, moral, 855

Faith, 18 n. 2, 14, 20, 46 n. 1, 85, 115 n. 3, 174 n.

Fallacy, in theory, 855
Fausboll, Prof., 828 n.

Fawning, 276

Feeling, 6, 12 n. 2, 27, 127, 341 n. 1 ; painful, see 111 ;


:ed by


Google



882


neutral, 89, 50 n. 1, 128 □. 3, 124, 127 n. 1, 180,
187 n. 2, 858
Felicity, 12
Femininity, 172, 190

Fetters, the, 101, 169 ; the three, 257, 262 ; the ten, 297

et seq

Fiery (lambent) element, 197 et seq., 242
Fitness, 24, 25

Floods, the, 108 n. 1, 169, 808
Fixed as to consequences, 266, 386

Fluid element, xlvii, xlviii, 197, 200, 201 n. 4, 217 etseq., 242
Food, of devas, xliv n. ; bodily, xlvii, xlviii, lix, 196
Foolish or discreet, 889
Fording place, 101
Forgetfulness, 858

Form (r u pa m), as species of ' states,’ xxx, xli, 165 et seq. ;
as unmoral, xxxi, lix, xciii, 168 n. 1, 169 ; as external
world, xxxv, xlii, xlvii, lx ; as visual object, xlii, xliii,
280 ; as a realm of being, xliii et seq., lx&xix, 43 et seq.,
79, 136, 162, 280, 384 ; as skandha, xlvii et seq., lx ;
exposition of, 168 et seq. ; as non-mental, lix ; as
derived or underived, xlvii, 172 et seq., 197 et seq., 220
et seq., 232 et seq., 243 ; modes, or qualities of, xlvii,
lix, 218 ; evolution of, xlvii, lix, 173, 195 et seq., 218,
342 ; impermanence of, xlvii, lix, 196, 219 ; as limited,
58, 170 ; as infinite, 61 ; as visible or not, lii, 221, 234 ;
as beautiful or ugly, 60-

Formless heavens, Ixxxix, 71 et seq., 80, 137, 163, 334

Foul Things, the, 53 n. ; Jhana of, 69

Freedom. See Emancipation

Friendship with evil, 844 ; with good, 345

Fruit, fruition, 139 n., 166 n., 264, 823 n., 357, 859, 367

Garbe, Prof., xliii n., Iviii n.

Gaseous element, 116 n. 6, 178 n., 197, 242
Gaya, xxi, xxiii

Generalization, metaphysical importance of, xxxix ; as a
psychological pis-aller, xl
Generosity, 22 n. 8, 299

Genesis, of thoughts, lxxv, 1 et seq., 361 et seq. ; of mirth,
156 n.

Genetic treatment, xvii, Ixxii
Goethe, xxxv, lxi n., lxix
Gogerly, xxxiii n.

Gold, 184, 195 n.


:ed by CjOO^IC



883


Good, lxxxii-lxxxiv, lxxxvii, xciii ; causes or roots of, 4 n.,
21, 250 ; the general, 276 ; transcending what is good,
xciv, 858

Gotama, constructive genius, xxv ; non-animistic doctrine,
xxxvi, lxiii, lxxi, lxxx, lxxxi ; defines wisdom, 17 n. 2 ;
on conscience, 20 n. ; methods in teaching, xxvi, 52 n. 1 ,
58 n. ; smiles, 158 n. ; on siesta, 312 n. 2 ; on ecstasy,
Ixxxix n. 2 ; on Nirvana, xcii
Grasp, 25, 116, 855

Grasping, 169, 201 et seq., 220 et seq., 284, 258, 257 n. 2,
821, 823 et seq.

Greed, 21 n. 8, 277
Grimblot, Ixv n.

Grip, of opinion, 101
Gross, 207, 228, 284, 286, 238

Happiness, lxxxiv, 50, 68 n. 1, 78 ; associate of good
thoughts, 1 et seq. ; of bad thoughts, 98 et seq. ; of
indeterminate states, 132, 185, 162
Hardy, Prof. E., xxvii n.,lxv

Hardy, R. Spence, li, 16 n. 1, 48 n. 2, 50 n. 1, 65 n. 1,
69 n. 2, 74 n., 173 n., 828 n.

Hate, 99 n. 8, 111, 262 et seq., 282 ; absence of, 21, 136,
162, 275 ; ageing effect of, 22 n. 3
Hearing, 178

Heart, lxxviii et seq., 8 n. 1, 9

Heaven, the Buddhist, xliv, 259 n. 3 ; of Form, xliv, xlv ;

the Formless. See Formless
Hebrews, Ep. to the, 261 n. 2
Hedonism, lxxxiv et seq.

Hereafter, theory of the, 848
Hermaphrodites in the Order, 191 n.

Hindrances, the, 44 n. 8, 169, 810 et seq.

Hobbes, lxxxviii
Hoffding, Prof. H., lxix n.

Homer, 194 n. 1

Hume, his phenomenalism, xxxiv, xxxviii, lxx et seq., lxxx,
207 n. 1 ; on impressions, etc., 2 n. 1

Iddhi, 17 n. 2. 838 n.

Iddhipadas, Four, 77 n. 1, 94
Idea, lxxvi, 2 nn. 1, 8, 77 n., 821

Ideal, higher, lxxxiv, Ixxxix et seq., xciv, 82 et seq., 91 n. 2,
94, 138, 266 n. 2, 385 n. 2 ; intellectual nature of
Indian, xci


ed by CjOO^lC



884


Ideating faculty (mano), lxviii ; defined, lxxvi, lxxviii et
seq., 2 n. 8, 7 n. 1, 9, 19 ; 27, 29, 80, 72 n. 2, 128 n. 2,
129, 154, 161 n., 170 n. 6, 239 n., 818
Ignorance, 18 n. 2, 103, 274 n., 291 n., 294, 810 n. 1, 888,
842

Ignorant average man, 258

111, lxii, lxxxiv, xci, xcv, 6 n. 1, 12 n. 3, 17 n. 2, 22 n. 3, 50,
82 n. 2, 91 n. 2, 110, 111, 152, 276, 281, 283, 348, 863
Ill-will. See Malice

Image, lxxxviii, 48 n. 4 ; after-image, lxxxviii
Imagination. See Ideating faculty
Impact, in sensation, lii et seq., 5 n. 2, 233, 235
Impartiality, 89 n.

Impermanence, xlvii, lxxx, 17 n. 2, 22 n. 8, 53 n., 69 n. 2,
171, 178. See Form

Impression, sense-, xlviii, lii et seq., 2 n. 1, 178 n. 1
Inception, 15, 857

Independence (a p a r i g g a h o), 21 n. 8
Indeterminate states, xxxi, xxxii, xlix, xci et seq., 128 et seq.,
165, 251

Individuality, xciv, 257
Indriyas. See Faculties
Inertia. See Sluggishness
Infatuation, 102, 276
Infected, 816

Inference, xliii, 8 n. 1 ; in sense-perception, 289 n.

Infinite (appamana m), notion of, 55, 60, 265, 272 n. 6;
(anantavam), 848

Insight, xxxvi, lxviii, 18, 25, 96 n. 2, 100 n. 1, 256 et seq.,
881 et seq., 854
Integration, 178, 195

Intellect, lxiii, lxxxi, 9, 29, 318 ; as a Kasina, 57 n. 2 >
sphere of Infinite, I., 78. And see Cognition
Intellection, 8 n. 1, 81. And see Cognition, Intellect
Intelligence, 18, 25 ; lack of, 854
Intention, 11, 19, 47 n. 2, 84 n. 1, 180 n. 2
Interpretation, 841

Intimation, xlvii, 178, 192 et seq., 217, 222, 280
Intoxicants (a s a v a s), xxxvii, 291 et seq., 359
Introspection, lxiv, xciv, 866
Intuition, 53 n., 54 et seq.

Investigation, 11 n. 2, 77 et seq., 149, 270

Jaina Sutras, li
James, Prof. W., 207 n. 1


:ed by CjOO^IC



885


Jhana, lxix, lxxii, Ixxxvii et seq., 10 n. 8, 17 □. 2, 26, 81,
169 n. 9, 276 n. 2, 882, 846, 863 et seq. ; fourfold, 48
et seq. ; fivefold, 52 et seq., 255 ; in lay-culture, lxxxix ;
for Nirvana, 82 et seq. ; in bad states, 103, 106, 108 et
seq.’, in indeterminate states, 125 n. 2, 188; heresy
concerning, 163 n. ; craving for, 298 n. 2 ; psychology
of, lxxxviii

Joy, Ixvii, 11 et seq., 41 n., 44, 48, 84, 99 n. 8, 170, 256, 883
Kant, lxxiii n. 8, lxxxix n. 2

Karma, and dhamma, xxxi, 362 ; and result, lxxxv, 270 n. 4,
274 n. 1 ; bad karma, xci, 856 n. 2 ; karma and
Nirvana, xcii et seq. ; efficacy in, 76 n. 1 ; as heaping,
piling, xci, 82 n. 2, 138 n. 2, 264 ; karma and the
indeterminates, 128-155, 156-164 ; of sex, 191 n. ; in
sense, 178 n. 1, 201 n. 4 ; in form, 282 et seq. ; and
grasping, 241 n. 8, 828 n. 1 ; roots of, 250 et seq., 266,
284 ; path of, 4 n.

Karmasthana methods. See Artifices
Katha Yatthu, xviii, xix, xxxvi, 1 n.

Kern, Prof, xvi n., xxxiii n., 849 n. 4
Kiriy a- states, xcii, xcii, 156 et seq., 264, 284, 822, 862
Know the Unknown,’ faculty of believing ‘I shall come
to, xci, 88, 86

Knowledge, xci ; associate of good thought, 1 et seq., 78 ;
disconnected with good thought, 85, etc. ; associate of
indeterminate states, 135, 162 ; made perfect, 96, 97,
149 et seq. ; limitations of, 96 n. 2

Language, 198 n.

Law, natural, and soul, lxxxi ; natural, and the phenomeno-
logical self, lxxxii, xciv
Leibnitz, lxiv, 74 n. 2

Life (see Vitality), in quantity and quality, lxix, lxxxv et seq.
Lightness, of mind, 28 ; of form, lvii, lix, 178, 194, 198
Like known by like, lx et seq.

Limited (insignificant), 265. See Form

Livelihood, 88, 87

Locke, xxxii, lxiv, lxxiii

Logic in India, xli, 10 n 1

Logical method, xxix et seq., 232 n. 1, 819 n. 1

Longing, 100 n. 2, 277

Love, 22 n. 8, 65 et seq., 275 ; spurious, 65 n. 1
Lust, 65 n. 1, 102, 262 et seq., 276 et seq. ; absence of, 21,
136, 162, 275

25


ed by CjOO^lC



886


Maha Kassapa, xxii
Maha Vansa, xix, xxi, xxii n.

Mahinda, xxii

Maintenance of form, 178. See Subsistence
Majjhima Nikaya, xxxiv, xxxvi, and passim
Malice, 65 n. 1, 96, 99 n. 8, 806 n. 2 ; absence of, 22
Manifold, the Many, xxxix et seq., lxviii, lxix, 72
Mara, 282

Mark, characteristic, 7 n. 2, 20 n., 21 n., 103 n. 1, 241 ;

the Three Marks, 17 n. 2, 22 n. 8
Masculinity, 172, 191
Meanness, 100 n. 2, 299
Meditation, rapt. See Jhana
Melancholy, 99 n. 3, 109, 863
Memory : how aided, xxvii-xxx, 16, 26 n. 2
Mental, 6 n. 1, 12 n. 8
Methods, the Twenty, 82, 94, 138, 145, 148
Metteyya, 270 n. 4

Milinda-panho, xxxvi, liv, lxxvi n. 8, lxxx, lxxxiv, 5 n. 2,
7 n. 2, 8 n. 1, 14 n. 8, 15 n. 1, 166 n., 190 n. 8, 278 n. 7,
850 n. 4, 356 n. 2
Mill, J. S., xxix, 285 n. 1

Mind. See Ideating faculty, Cognition, and Thought
Mindfulness, lxviii, 13 n. 2, 14 n. 4, 16, 19, 20, 25, 48, 50,
85, 100 n. 2, 261 n. 2, 854 ; advance in, 94
Mirror, 184
Misery, 50

Morris, R., 46 n. 2, 111 n. 2, 849 n. 4
Motive, lxvii, 34, 88 n., 78, 105, 185
Muller, Prof. Dr. Ed., xv
Mumbling of greed, 279

Mundane, 168, 289 ; supra-mundane, xc, 289, 368
Music, in Indian heavens, xlv, 186, 200 n.

Nagasena, xxiv, lxxx
Name, 30 n., 340 n. 2, 841

Nature, external, li, lxii ; human, lxvii ; and nature, ibid.
Near. See Remote

Neumann, Dr. K. E., xxv n., xxxiii n., xxxiv, lxi n., lxxiii n.,
lxxix n. 2, 119 n., 828 n.

Nidana-Katha, 8 n. 1
Nietzsche, xciv

Nihilism, heresy of, 84 n. 2, 267 n. 1. And see Annihila-
tionists

Nirvana, as ‘uncompounded element,’ xxxi, xcii, 166,


:ed by CjOO^IC



887

841 n. 1, 861, 867 et seq. ; aa super-mor&\, xxxi ; as a
species of indeterminate states, lxxxiv, 166 ; as plea-
stxrable feeling, lxxxiv et seq. ; as emancipation, 359 ;
emancipation and Nirvana, lxxix ; way to, paths to, xc,
82 et seq., 91 n. 2, 201 n. 2, 256 n. 2, 260 nn. 2, 4,
268 n. 2, 269 n. 8, 885 n. 2
Noble Ones, the, 48, 258
Noise, 186, 198

Non-sabstantialism, fundamental in Buddhist doctrine,
xxxv, lxxx et seq., 17 n. 2, 22 n. 8, 197 n. 2
Nothingness, sphere of, lxxxix n. 2, 74
Nous, xvii, 8 n. 1
Nutriment of the Ideal, 95

Nutriments, 26, 80, 81; bodily, 178, 196, 204; bodily and
mental, 173 n., 219
Nyaya philosophy, xlviii n., li

Objective, 271 n. 4. See External

Objects of sense, xlvii, lii et seq., 1 et seq., 172 et seq., 188
et seq., 209 n., 211, 225 ; of thought, mental, lxxv, 55
et seq., 60, 65 n. 1, 71 n., 200 n., 211, 225 et seq., 265
et seq., 268, 271 et seq., 818
Obliviousness, 16, 854
Odours, 187 et seq.

Offences, 266 n. 8, 345 et seq.

Oldenberg, Prof., xxxiii n., lxxiii n. 8, 302 n. 1, 323 n.

One, the, xxxix ; alliance of with the concept of Substance,
xxxix-xli

Opinion, 101, 889 n. 1. And see Views, Theory
Order, members of the, 84 n., 67 n. ; rules of the, 812 n. 4,
813 n * 1

■'Opeft?. See Conation

Origins, theory of, 848 ; knowledge in, 859

Pain. See 111, and Distress
Passion, 65 n. 1, 96, 270 et seq.

Path, Noble Eightfold, xc, 4, 5 n. 1, 26, 31, 83, 125 n. 2,
268 n. 3 ; Path-component, 84, 85 ; Path-causes, 269 ;
Path-governed, 269 ; base eightfold, xci, 108, 106, 108
et seq.

Paths, the Four, of Arahatship, 82 et seq., 95 et seq., 188,
149 et seq., 296 n., 802 n, 889, 857
Paticca-samuppada, xxiii, lxxiv, 848
Patience, 349

Patisambhida-Magga, 64 n. 2

25—2


ed by CjOO^lC



388


Patthana, 76 n.

Peace. See Quiet

Perception, lx, lxxii et seq., 7, 28 ; sphere of neither percep-
tion nor non-perception, 74
Perfected, lxvii, 266. See Knowledge
Perplexity, 44 n. 8, 118, 115 et seq., 119 n., 260
Personal (of the self), lxxi, 207, 220 et seq., 241, 272, 821,
865

Personality : how conceived in Buddhism, xxxvii, xlv, lx,
lxxi, 175 n. 1
Petakopadesa, 44 n. 3

Phenomena (the four great), xli, xlviii, lxii, 166, 194,
197 n. 2, 222, 285, 287-289

Phenomenological character of Buddhism, xxxix-xl, lxxii,
lxxx et seq., 26 n. 2, 88 n.

Philosophy, of mind, lxiii et seq.; ethical, see Ethics;
= p a fl fi a, 17 n. 2

Pity, 5 n. 1, 65 n. 1, 68, 83 n. 8 ; self-pity, 65 n. 1
Planes. See Universe

Plasticity, of form, lvii, lix, 178, 194 ; of mind, 24
Plato, ethical rather than psychological, xvi, xxxii ; con-
cerned with man, not external nature, xlix ; on sensa-
tion, liii, lxi ; on faculty, lviii ; on insight, 100 n. 1 ;
on women, 191 n. ; on opinion, 257 n. 2; on the
good, xciv

Play, children’s, 190 n. 8, 191 n. 1

Pleasure. See Ease

Plotinus, lxi, lxxix n. 2

Positive and negative terms, xxx, 172 et seq.

Potencies, mystic. Iddhipada
Potentiality. See Faculties

Powers (an ethical aspect or category), 20, etc., 26, etc.,
81, 94

Practical standpoint of Buddhism, xlix
Presentation, xxxii, lxxv, 7 n. 1
Pride, 298 n.

Progress, Four Modes of, 58 et seq., 59 et seq., 82 et seq.,
91 et seq., 95, 188, 141, 148, 145 ; moral, 855 ; in
theory, ibid.

Psalms, 99 n. 2

Psychological standpoint of Buddhism, xvii, xxxii, xxxv,
xlvii et seq., 197 n. 2
Psychology, history of, xviii, Ixv, lxxxi
Purification, 188, 140, 148, 145, 260
Purity, 856


:ed by


Google



889


Pythagoras, xxix, Ixi

Quiet, 14, 25, 95, 111 n. 8
Quietism, xciv

Reaction, 72 n., 174 et seq., 204, 222; moral repugnance,
109, 276 n. 4, 282 ; specific, of the senses, lxi, 181 n. 1,
206 n. 2, 289

Reality, xxxvii ; phenomenal, lxii

Realization, 86, 97

Reason and reasoning, 8 n. 1

Rebirth, xliii, 48 et seq., 82, 170, 264, 298 n. 2, 861

Recluseship, 82 n. 1, 861

Recognition, in perception, 7 n. 2 ; in Jhana, 59 n. 2. 71 n.
Recollection, lxxx, 16
Rectitude, 25

Reflection, 8 n. 1, 18, 81, 156 n., 161 n.

Remorse, 818, 840

Remote, or near, 208, 224, 284, 286, 288, 289
Renewed existence, 279, 298, 842
Repose, 23
Research, 18

Resistance (impeded energy), 15 n. 1, 198 n. 1
Resolve, 5 n. 1, 100 n. 2, 180 n. 1

Result, lxxxiv et seq., xci et seq., 128 et seq., 185, 252 ; dis-
tinguished from k i r i y a-states, xciii, 157 n.

Rigidity, 23 n. 3, 24, 116, 811

Robertson, G. Croom, xvi n., xvii n., xlix n., lxxxv, 12 n. 2
Root. See Cause

Round of rebirth, 277 n. 7, 804 n. 1, 842 n. 2
Rule and ritual, contagion of mere, 260 ; grasping after
mere, 825

Sadhamma-Sangaha, xxi et seq.

Sagacity, 18

Ste. Beuve, lxxiii

St. Paul, xliv, 14 n. 8, 275 n. 4

Sankhara-skandha. See Skandhas, Syntheses

Sankhya philosophy, xlviii n.

Sariputta, lxxix, 2 n. 8, 178 n., 812 n. 4, 860
Scarifying, mental, 116
Schopenhauer, lxii
Scbroeder, Prof, von, lviii n.

Science (wisdom), 17 n. 2, 889
Scruple, 21, 102, 812 n. 4


ed by CjOO^lC



890


Seclusion, 44 n. 3

Selection, a cardinal principle of Buddhism, Ixviii et seq.
Self, rejected as hypostasis, xxxiv et seq., lxii, lxx et seq.,
xciv, 207 n. 1, 259 ; reconstruction of, on new lines,
lxii, xciv

Self-advertisement, 298 et seq.

Self-collectedness, 13, 19, 85 ; in Jhana, 84 n. 1, 51 n. 1 ;

in wrong-doing, 99, 119 n. ; weak form of, 114, 157
Self-control, 53 n.

Self-evolved, 45
Self-indulgence, 280
Semi-Eternalists, 294 n. 2
Sensation, xxxii, 6
Sensationalism, Buddhist, xlviii

Sense, Buddhist theory of, li et seq., 178 et seq. ; psycho-
logical rather than materialistic, liv et seq. ; universe
of, see Universe
Sense-objects. See Objects

Senses, the five, xlvii, li, 172, etc. ; the six, Ixxx ; speciali-
zation of, lxi, 348 n. 2
Sensual thirst, 298, 298 n. 1, 810 n. 2
Sensuality, 84 n. 2, 294, 824, 826 n.

Serenity, 28, 88, 174 n. 8
Sex, Ivii

Shame, 20 n., 21

Siamese text of the manual, xlvi

Siebeck, Dr., liii, lxv n.

Sight, sense of, 178 et seq. ; object of, xlii, 188 et seq. ;

sight and (ouch, xlii et seq., Ivii, 188 n. 9, 187 n. 2
Signless, 91 n. 2, 189 et seq.

Silver, 184

Skandhas, the five, 257 n. 2, 259, 293 n. 4, 861 ; the four
(mental), xxxii, lxxii et seq., 26 et seq., 170 n. 1, 251
n. 4, 252 n. 2, 257 n. 2, 821 ; the three (sense-con-
sciousness, kayo), 28 et seq., 48 n. 8, 48, 50 n. 1,
810 n. 8, 318
Skill, lxxxii, 345 et seq.

Skin-sensibility, lii n., 172 n.

Sky, 194
Sleep, 812

Smell, sense of, 179 ; objects of, see Odours
Socrates, xlix, 100 n. 1
Soil (mental), 252, 255

Solid, the, xlvii, xlviii n., lxi et seq., 197 et seq , 241 n. 1
Solitude, 44


:ed by CjOO^IC



891


Somatic resonance, 11 n. 4, 192 n. 3
Sorrow. See 111

Sool, xxxiii et seq., 46 n. 2, 825 ; world-soul, xlviii n., 91 n. 2.
See Self

Sound, 186 et seq., 201 n. 4, 282

Space, xlvii, xlviii, lviii, 178, 198, 201 n. 4 ; and oX*a?,
lviii n. ; as a kasina, 57 n. 2 ; sphere of unbounded,
71 ; and fluid, 217 ; three dimensions of, 194 n. 1
Speculation, 257 n. 2. See Theory, Views
Speech, 88, 87, 193

Spheres, 26, 27, 29, 172, 218, 246, 248 et seq., 847
Spleen, 22

Springs of action, xxxii, 84 n.

Stability, 13

Stage, first. See Paths

States of being, mind or consciousness, xxxiv et seq., 33,
84, passim, ; as derived, 821 ; as underived, 821 ; as
having form, 288 ; as visible, 278, 288 ; as impingeing,
2,73, 289 ; as mundane, 288 ; as supra-mundane, 288
Stations of Mastery, 58
Stolidity, 28 n. 8, 100 n. 2, 119 n, 810 et seq.

Struggle, 857 et seq.

Studentship, 170, 264
Suavity, 24, 845

Sub-consciousness, Ixv, Ixxxviii, 198 n. 2
Subha, the Theri, 886 n. 8
Subhuti, 46 n. 2, 291 n , 346 n. 8

Subject of mental states, lxx, lxxii, 34 n. See Personality
Subjective consciousness, xxxii, 12 n. 2, 45 n. 2
Sublime abodes, the four Jhanas of the, lxxxix, 65
Subsistence, 19, 192, 195, 219

Subtle, subtlety, 18, 196 n. 4, 207 et seq., 284, 286, 288
Sully, Prof., 11 n. 4, 12 n. 2
Sumangala, Rev. S., xciii n. 1
Sumangala Vilasini, xxviii n., xxxvi, 163 n.

Superficiality, 16

Sympathy, 5 n. 1, 21 n. 8, 65 n. 1, 68, 88 n. 8
Synonyms (in defining), xxix, 840

Syntheses, Ixxiii, lxxxi, 11 n. 4, 14 n. 2, 28, 87, 47, 49,
74 n. 2, 90, 104, 108, 112, 117, 122, 126, 131, 188, 153,
160

Tangible, the, xlvii, 1, lvi, lxi, 2 n. 2, 127 n. 1, 197 n. 2
Taste, 180 et seq . ; objects of, 189
Tathagata, 269 n. 3, 294 n. 2


:ed by


Google



892


Taylor, Arnold C., xxvii n.

Temperance, 849, 852, 858
Tender care, 275
Thales, xlix

Theory, 257, 298. See Opinion
Thirst, 278, nn. 2, 8, 280 et seq.

Thinking, lxxv, 8

Thought, lxxv ; defined, lxxvi, 8, 82 et seq., 819 ; depending
on memory, lxxix ; discursive, 11, 44, 45, 180, 169,
255 ; sprung from, 205 et seq., 228, 819 ; connate with,
206, 223, 820; consecutive to, 206, 228, 820; con-
joined with, 819 ; associated with, 819
Thoughts, 1 et seq., 8 n. 1, 10 n. 1, 77, 98, 149, 192 n. 3
Ties, the, 169, 804 et seq.

Time, 271

Torpor, 28 n. 8, 100 n. 2, 119 n., 811
Touch, xlii, xliii, xlviii, lvi et seq., 2, 127 n. 1, 183 n. 9,
187 n. 2, 198 n. 1
Transport of mind, 12
Trenckner, 116 n. 4, 858 n. 8
Truth, xxxvi, 95 ; Searching the, 18, 86, 97
Truths, the four, xxxiii, lxi, 17 n. 2, 18 n. 1, 96 n. 2, 857
Turmoil of mind, 119 n.

Types of thought, 1 et seq.

Uncompounded element, xcii, 287. See Nirvana
Understanding, 18

Unincluded, the, xc, 165, 254 et seq., 885
Universals, xxix

Universe, of thought, xliii n. ; the sensuous, xlvi, lix, 1 et
seq., 98 n. 1, 128, 156, 884; the physical, xlix; of
form, see Form as realm of being ; of the formless, see
Formless heavens

Upanishads, xlviii n., li, lxxviii n. 8, lxxx, 172 n., 194 n. 2,
208 n. 1, 289 n., 845 n. 1
Utilitarianism in Buddhism, lxxxiii

Vedanta, li

Vibhanga, xxiii, 44 n. 2, 50 n. 2, 71 n. 1, 72 n. 2, 848
Views, right, 18, 19, 22 ; opinions, 88, 98, 105, 257 n. 2 ;

wrong, 101, 267, 805, 316, 824, 842 et seq., 855
Vijesinha Mudliar, 84 n.

Viscous, 201

Visual object, xxxii, 188 et seq.

Visual perception, xxxii


:ed by CjOO^IC



398


Visual sense, 178 et seq.

Visuddhi Magga, xxi, lxxviii n. 8, Ixxxix, 7 n. 2, 11 n. 4,
17 n. 2, 64 n. 1, 65 n. 1, 69 n. 2, 184 n.

Vitality, xlvii, lvii, 19, 192
Vorstellung, xxxii, 2 n. 1

War, moral, xciii, 886

Ward, Prof. J., xxix n., xxxii, lxx n. 8, lxxiv n. 4
Warren, H. C., xvi n., xxxiii, lxxxviii, 7 n. 2, 34 n, 69 n. 2,
119 n., 184 n., 828 n.

Weber, E. von, 181 n.

Wheel (of life). See Round of Rebirth
Whitney, W. D., 280 n. 1
Wickedness, 266
Wieldiness, lvii, lix, 24, 178, 195

Will, xvi, xvii, xxxiii ; Buddhism and conscious will, lxv ;

free will and soul, lxxxi. See Conation
Wisdom (panna), 18 n. 2, 14 n. 4, 17 et seq., 20, 86,
100 n. 2 ; six factors of, 847 n. 4 ; (v i j j a), 888, 859
Woman, characteristics of, 190 n. 3 ; named first, 191 n. 1 ;
inferior, 191 n. 1

World, xlviii et seq., lxii, xcv ; of the world, 289, 805. See
Mundane

Worlds. See Universe

Worry, 102 n. 2, 117 n. 7, 118 n., 812


BIL1.1KO AND 80N8, PRINTER®, OUILDPORD


ed by CjOCK^Ic
