Report on Spiritualism of the Committee of the London Dialectical Society (London Dialectical Society, 1871)
============================================================================================================
London Dialectical Society — The first major committee report on spiritualism — the Victorian debate's founding document. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (b20424966) — 1873 reprint of 1871 report.

w

'1

22501498974

in  2014


HOW  EEVIEWEKS  AGREE  ON  SPIRITUALISM;  I

AND

EOW  THEY  CRITICISED  THE  DIALECTICAL  REPORT.

With  a  profound  conviction  that  the  gentlemen  who  profess
to  be  public  literary  critics  must,  from  the  very  fact  of  theii-
undertaking  the  duty,  be  thoroughly  competent  to  perform  their
work  with  due  impartiality  and  judgment,  and  that,  as  a  rule,
they  sometimes  read  the  books  which  they  review,  the  publisher
of  the  popular  reprint  of  the  Dialectical  Eeport  respectfully
submits  to  the  public  the  follovsing  extracts  from  criticisms
which  appeared  upon  the  fii'st  edition  of  this  work.

Times.

"In  due  process  of  time,  the  'Report  on  Spiritualism  by  a  Oommittee
of  the  Dialectical  Society '  made  its  appearance,  with  Messrs.  Longmans'
name  on  the  title-page,  and  turned  out  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  farrago
of  impotent  conclusions,  garnished  by  a  mass  of  the  most  monstrous
rubbish  it  has  ever  been  our  misfortime  to  sit  in  judgment  \ipon."

Having  farther  asserted  that  "this  solemn  and  protracted
inqiury  came  to  nothing  after  all,"  the  Times  reviewer  states
how  Ae^  investigated  Spiritualism  for  himself.  He  details  facts
precisely  similar  in  character  to  those  reported  by  the  Committee,
and  proceeds,  with  amusing  egotism,  to  urge  them  upon  the
attention  of  scientists,  on  his  own  individual  authority.  He
expects,  in  short,  the  scientific  world  to  be  more  amenable  to
the  call  of  a  single  anonymous  reviewer  than  to  the  efforts  of
a  body  of  well-known  barristers,  clergymen,  literati,  scientists,
physicians,  sohcitors,  and  merchants,  notwithstanding  that  they
obtained  phenomena  witlioxvt  professional  mediums,  M'hile  he  was
obUged  to  rely  xipon  professional  help.  This  Times  reviewer
narrates  7ns  personal  experiences  in  the  following  manner : —

"Before  writing  upon  this  subject  we  thought  it  our  duty  to  see  with
our  own  eyes  the  actual  development  which  SpirituaKsm  has  attained
here  m  London.   We  accordingly  attended  four  seances,  each  different

2

and  each  remarkable  in  its  way  We  searched  and  re-searched

the  room,  hut  found  nothing  abnormal.  The  furniture  now  became
quite  lively — and  this  in  broad  daylight.  A  chair  jumped  three  or  four
yards  across  the  carpet,  our  hat  fell  at  our  feet,  and  numerous  other
phenomena  occurred,  but  nothing  so  satisfactory  as  the  chair  in  the  dark,
for  then  we  had  fast  hold  of  the  '  mediums,'  whereas  now  they  were
moving  about  the  room,  and,  somehow  or  other,  everything  seemed  to
occur  just  when  we  were  not  looking  and  one  of  them  was  somewhere
behind  us.  But  we  must  confess  the  chair  in  the  dark  fairly  puzzled
us,  and  we  came  away,  very  far  indeed  from  being  Spiritualists,  but
wishing  we  could  spare  time  and  trouble  to  come  again  and  again  till
we  had  sifted  the  whole  matter  to  the  bottom."

The  third  se'ance  attended  by  this  Times  reviewer  is  thus
described,  the  "  John  King  "  referred  to  being  the  spirit  assumed
to  be  in  communication  with  the  circle  : —

"  An  alphabet  of  printed  letters  was  now  laid  on  the  table,  and  we
were  desired  to  think  of  a  name  and  to  pass  a  pencil  along  the  lines  of
letters.  We  thought  of  one,  and  moved  the  pencil  over  the  paper.
Knowing  the  eye  of  the  medium  was  upon  us,  we  tried  our  best  to  move
it  with  the  regularity  of  machinery,  but  <  John  King'  was  too  clever  to
be  eluded ;  he  rapped  at  the  right  letters,  and  spelt  out  the  name.  In
this  way  we  obtained  several  remarkable  answers,  but  in  each  case  the
answer  was  known  to  oui-self,  and  fixed  in  our  mind,  and,  until  some
other  solution  is  demonstrated,  we  must  think  that  the  sagacity  of  the
lady  had  more  to  do  with  it  than  '  John  King.'  One  crucial  test  was
proposed  by  the  medium  herself.  We  were  asked  to  think  of  a  name,
to  fix  it  fiii-mly  in  om-  mind,  to  place  a  pencil  and  paper  under  the  table,
and  to  see  whether  '  John  King '  would  write  it  for  us.  We  thought  of
a  name  the  medium  could  not  possibly  know,  and  waited  in  all  anxiety,
for  this  was  a  test  indeed— a  test  that,  had  it  been  successfully  with-
stood, would  have  proved  conclusively  the  existence  of  something  in
SpuituaHsm  beyond  the  legerdemain  of  the  medium.  We  heard  the
pencil  scratching,  we  cast  what  downward  eye  we  could  towards  the
lady's  feet;  they  seemed  perfectly  still.  The  scratcHng  ceased,  and  wo
picked  up  the  paper.  There  was  some  writing  on  it,  of  about  the  length
of  the  name  we  had  thought  of,  and  the  fii-st  and  last  letters  were


"To  give  a  detailed  account  of  everything  which  occun-ed  would  need
more  space  than  we  can  now  spare.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  the  table  was
made  light  and  heavy  at  our  wish,  that  it  moved  in  every  direction  that
there  were  vibrations  of  the  floor  and  of  our  chairs,  that  on  Mi-.  Home
holding  the  accordion  under  the  table  in  his  right  hand,  and  by  the  end
farthest  from  the  keys,  it  played  a  distinct  tune,  Mr.  Home  s  left  hand
bein-  on  the  table  and  his  feet  so  raised  as  to  be  visible.   All  other

3

hands  were  on  the  table.  At  the  same  time,  and  under  the  same
conditions,  a  small  hand-bell  was  rung  in  different  parts  of  the  space
beneath  the  table.  The  gas  was  now  turned  out,  and  the  two  spirit-
lamps  lit ;  these  gave  a  fair  light.  The  raps  became  louder,  and,  in  the
usual  method,  directed  us  to  take  a  leaf  out  of  the  table.  This  was
done,  when  the  table  appeared  to  float  up  about  eight  inches  off  the
floor,  settling  down  again  in  a  gentle  swaying  manner.  The  thin  wooden
lath  lying  on  the  cloth  was  seen  by  the  whole  party  to  be  in  motion.
It  tilted  up  sideways  and  endways,  and  then  seemed  to  float  backwards
and  forwards.  Holding  our  hand  three  inches,  as  near  as  we  could
guess,  above  the  cloth,  the  lath  rose  three  times;  the  last  time  it
touched  oiu-  hand,  and  directly  afterwards  the  table  jumped  and  shook
violently,  and  loud  raps  seemed  to  come  from  all  parts  of  it  and  of  the
floor.  The  spirit-lamps  were  now  put  out,  and  what  light  there  was
from  a  low  fire  only  just  enabled  us  to  see  white  paper  on  the  table  and
each  other's  positions.  Presently,  Mr.  Home's  and  Miss  Fox's  hands  and
feet  being  in  strict  custody,  we  felt  the  accordion  pressing  against  our
knees.  We  put  our  hand  under  the  table,  when  the  instrument  appeared
to  be  moving  round,  tiU  its  wooden  base  was  placed  between  our  fingers.
In  that  position  we  held  it  with  its  keys  downwards ;  it  seemed  to  be
pushed  up  towards  our  hand,  and  played  a  few  bars.  It  then  stopped,
and  presently  we  felt  the  bell  thrust  between  the  fingers  of  the  same
hand.  Almost  immediately  a  flower  or  sprig  was  put  into  our  fingers,
but  as  we  were  already  holding  in  one  hand  the  accordion  and  the  bell,
the  sprig  was  dropped.  It  was  picked  up  and  again  put  into  our  fingers,
and  as  we  received  it  we  felt  distinctly  the  touch  of  a  large  thumb  and
finger.  We  did  not  let  it  drop  this  time,  and  there  was  immediately  a
succession  of  raps  of  a  loud  and  jubilant  nature.  They  seemed  to  come
from  the  table  in  our  immediate  vicinity.  A  match  was  now  struck,
and  we  di-ew  our  tired  hand  fr-om  under  the  table,  displaying  the  accor-
dion, the  bell,  and  the  sprig.  This  was  the  end  of  the  seance,  for  the
'spirit'  would  do  no  more.  In  the  account  of  it  we  have  omitted
several  experiments  about  which  we  cannot  speak  decidedly.  We  tried
every  test  we  could  think  of.  A  subdued  light,  darkened  as  the  evening
went  on,  was  one  of  the  conditions  we  were  obliged  to  comply  with,  and
while  the  accordion  was  in  our  hand  we  were  desired  to  sit  passive,
though,  as  we  stated,  the  hands  and  feet  of  the  'mediums'  were  in  strict
custody.  Mr.  Home  seemed  to  wish  to  conceal  nothing,  and  gave  us
every  opportunity,  consistent  with  the  above  conditions,  for  satisfying
our  scepticism.  Yet  we  need  hardly  say  that  we  were  unable  to  satisfy
it.  By  his  request  we  got  under  the  table  with  a  lamp  a  great  many
times,  insisted  always  on  seeing  his  hands  and  feet,  or  on  having  them
as  well  as  those  of  Miss  Fox  held  firmly.  As  to  the  hand  with  which
Mr.  Home  held  the  accordion  under  the  table,  all  we  know  is  that  on
one  of  our  sub-mahogany  expeditions  with  the  spirit-lamp,  we  saw  that

4

hand  quite  still,  and  saw  the  accordion  moving  up  and  down,  and  playing
music.  We  heai-d  the  key-notes,  but  the  position  of  the  instrument
prevented  our  seeing  the  keys  moving,  if  they  did  move.  There  was
nothing  during  the  whole  evening  except  the  phenomena  themselves  to
suggest  imposture.  We  tried  our  hest  to  detect  it,  hut  could  find  no
trace  of,  it.  We  searched  Mr.  Home,  and  found  nothing  whatever  upon
him  hut  his  clothes.

"  Yet,  even  vsdth  all  this,  we  are  not  a  Spiritualist,  and  do  not  even
believe  in  a  'Psychic  Force.'  We  remember  and  lay  to  heart  Mr.
Gr.  H.  Lewes's  admirable  maxim,  'Distinguish  between  facts  and
inferences  from  facts.'  We  are  certain  that  the  table  rose  from  the
ground,  that  our  hand  received  a  sprig  under  the  table  from  what  felt
like  another  hand,  but  how  these  things  happened  we  do  not  know.
The  nature  of  the  phenomena  and  of  human  nature  are  such  as  to  force
us  to  suspect  imposture  and  legerdemain  until  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  of
the  true  causes,  whatever  these  may  be."

But  the  most  amusing  part  of  this  Times  review  is  the  fact  that
the  reviewer,  apparently  unconscious  of  the  result  of  his  own
investigations,  cannot  refrain,  in  criticising  the  Eeport,  from
"  running  a-muck  "  against  another  work*  upon  the  subject,  and
with  respect  to  which  he  commits  himself  as  follows  : —

*'  A  volume  now  lying  before  us  may  serve  to  show  how  this  folly
is  spread  throughout  society.  It  was  lent  to  us  by  a  distinguished
Spuitualist,  under  the  solemn  promise  that  we  should  not  divulge  a  single
name  of  those  concerned.  It  consists  of  about  150  pages  of  reports
of  seances,  and  was  privately  printed  by  a  noble  Earl,  who  has  lately
passed  beyond  the  House  of  Lords,  beyond,  also,  we  trust,  the  spirit-
peopled  chairs  and  tables  which  in  his  life-time  he  loved,  not  wisely,  but
too  well.  In  this  book  things  more  marvellous  than  any  we  have  set
down  are  circumstantially  related,  in  a  natural  way,  just  as  though  they
were  ordinary,  everyday  matters  of  fact.  We  shall  not  fatigue  the
reader  by  quoting  any  of  the  accoimts  given,  and,  no  doubt,  he  will  take
our  word  when  we  say  that  they  range  through  every  species  of  '  mani-
festation,' from  prophesyings  downwards.  What  we  more  particulaily
wash  to  observe  is  that  the  attestation  of  fifty  respectable  witnesses
is  placed  hefore  the  title-page.  Among  them  are  a  Dowager  Duchess
and  other  ladies  of  rank,  a  Captain  in  the  Guards,  a  nobleman,  a
Baronet,  a  Member  of  Parliament,  several  officers  of  our  scientific  and
other  corps,  a  barrister,  a  merchant,  and  a  doctor.  Upper  and  upper
middle-class  society  is  represented  in  all  its  grades,  and  by  persons  who,

*  The  work  here  alluded  to  is  evidently  "Bsperiences  in  Spiritualiem,
by  Viscount  Adare ;  with  introductory  remarks  by  the  Earl  of  Dunraven."

5

to  judge  by  the  position  they  hold  and  the  callings  they  follow,  ought
to  he  possessed  of  intelligence  and  ability.  Certainly,  it  is  time  that
a  thorough  and  practical  investigation  cleared  this  cloud  out  of  the
intellectual  sky,  and  the  task  need  not  be  scouted  by  professors  or  other
learned  men,  by  Eoyal  or  other  learned  Societies."

Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"  But  for  the  solemnity  of  the  witnesses,  and  their  tediousness,  their
stories  woidd  read  like  chapters  out  of  a  handbook  of  natural  magic.  It
is  difficult  to  speak  or  think  with  anything  else  than  contemptuous  pain
of  proceedings  such  as  those  described  in  this  Report."

I

Daily  Telegbaph.

"The  evidence  to  which  many  witnesses  set  their  seals  is  certainly
extraordinary.  We  may  be  asked  how  we  can  explain  all  these  things,
and  we  simply  reply  that  we  cannot,  and  that  it  is  not  our  business  to  do
so.  We  are  not  in  presence  of  a  sphinx  that  will  devour  us  if  we  do  not
solve  its  enigmas.  The  fact,  too,  that  some  men,  respectable  in  intellect
and  conversant  with  science,  have  testified  their  faith  in  the  reality  of
the  phenomena,  makes  it  worth  our  while  to  investigate  the  matter  with
keener  eyes  than  if  the  believers  were  all  impulsive  and  unscientific
observers."

Stand  ARB.

"But,  on  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  sjib-committees  do,  it  must  be
admitted,  put  forward  statements,  which,  if  they  could  be  imreservedly
accepted,  would  establish  the  broad  facts  on  which  Spiritualism  is  based.
Perhaps  the  most  common  mistake  made  by  people  who  have  no  strong
belief  or  disbelief  iu  connection  with  this  subject  is  that  of  saying  vaguely
that  they  do  not  believe  in  Spiritualism,  but  that  there  may  be  '  some-
thing in  it.'  If  there  is  anything  whatever  in  it  beyond  impostiu'e  and  -J*
imbecility,  there  is  the  whole  of  another  world  in  it."

Morning  Post.

"  The  Report  which  has  been  published  is  entirely  worthless.  Is  it
not  time  that  this  spirit-worship  ceased?  We  put  the  question  seriously
With  its  renunciation  would  be  swept  away  a  vast  amount  of,  to  say  the
least  of  it,  self-deception."

Daily  News.

"  The  whole  forms  one  of  the  most  curious  volumes  which  have  been
published  for  many  a  day.  Altogether,  the  book  which  we  have  thus
hastily  glanced  over  may  be  regarded  as  an  important  contribution  to  the
literature  of  a  subject  which,  some  day  or  other,  by  the  very  number  of
its  followers,  will  demand  more  extended  investigation."

6

Satubday  Kevib'W.

"Meanwhile  we  can  only  hope  that  this  Eeport  of  the  Dialectical
Society  will  involuntarily  lead,  in  spite  of  the  accumulation  of  pre-
posterous stories  added  to  the  Committee  Reports,  to  discrediting  a
little  further  one  of  the  most  unequivocally  degrading  superstitions  that
have  ever  foimd  currency  amongst  reasonable  beings."

Spectatob.

"  The  volume  is  an  extremely  curious  one.  Few,  however,  could  read
the  mass  of  evidence  collected  in  this  volume,  showing  the  firm  faith  in
the  reality  of  the  alleged  spiritual  phenomena  possessed  by  a  numbei-  of
individuals  of  honourable  and  upright  character,  without  also  agreeing
with  Mr.  Jeffiey's  opinion,  that  the  remarkable  phenomena  witnessed,
some  of  which  had  not  been  traced  to  imposture  or  delusion,  and  the
gathered  testimony  of  respectable  witnesses,  'justify  the  recommendation
of  the  subject  to  further  cautious  mvestigation.' "

LIbdical  Times  and  Gazette.
"The  volume  is  a  very  curious  one,  and  deserving  of  attention  for
several  reasons."

London  INIedical  Jouknal.

"This  is  a  substantial  volume,  and  will  always  be  a  mine  of  informa-
tion on  the  subject  with  which  it  deals.  It  is  one  of  the  most  interest-
in.^  and  curious  books  that  have  ever  been  published,  and  throws  light
up°on  both  sides  of  many  important  psychological  questions.  It  is  by  no
means  heavy  reading,  and  some  of  the  special  papers  by  prominent
persons  are  written  with  a  vigour  and  dash  that  betray  strong  con-
victions."

EXAMINEB.

"It  is  a  bulky  volume,  over  which  the  Spiritualists  will  crow  not
a  Httle."

LiTEBAKY  WOBLD.

"As  le-ards  the  Report  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,  we  must
say,  in  conclusion,  that  it  is  frank  and  overiiowmg  with  facts  real  or
supposititious;  but  the  grand  question  remains ^imanswered  after  aU,  and
the  problem  of  'Spiritualism'  is  stiU  unsolved.

Spibitualist.

«  So  the  Report,  when  it  was  presented,  was  m  favour  of  Spiritualism ;
atthis  unexpected'result  the  Dialectical  Society  took  foght  The  council
ran  away  and  refused  to  publish  it,  leaving  its  Committee  in  the  lurch.

7

Echo.

"  We  must  say  that  the  Oommittee  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  in  spite
of  their  laborious  investigation,  seem  to  have  left  the  whole  question
after  all  veiy  much  where  they  found  it.  We  have  very  often  a  direct
conflict  of  testimony  as  to  what  took  place  in  then-  joint  presence
■between  persons  whose  word  in  any  ordinary  matter  no  man  would  ever
dream  of  doubting.  But  on  one  point  we  have  no  doubt  at  all.  If  there
is  any  truth  in  these  phenomena — and  in  the  teeth  of  the  testimony  of  men
like  Mr.  Wallace,  the  eminent  naturalist,  it  seems  rash  and  presumptuous  to
say  peremptorily  that  there  -  is  none — the  force  that  produces  them,  be
it  what  it  may,  is  as  strictly  a  natural  force  as  gravitation  or  electricity."

Medium.

"This  well-abused  Eeport,  which,  if  it  has  not  made  converts  by  the
score,  has  at  least  started  hundreds  upon  the  road  of  personal  investi-
gation."

Sporting  Times.

"K  I  had  my  way,  a  few  of  the  leading  professional  Spiritualists
should  be  sent  as  rogues  and  vagabonds  to  the  treadmill  for  a  few  weeks.
It  would  do  them  good.  They  are  a  canting,  deceitful,  mischievous  lot.
Some  of  their  dupes  are  contemptibly  stupid — insane,  I  should  say.  There
is  one  old  gentleman  who  believes  cold  boiled  cabbage  and  sago  pudding
to  be  the  greatest  gastronomical  luxury  possible.  Of  course  he  is  a
vegetarian.  Indeed,  most  of  the  Spiritualists  with  whom  I  am
acquainted  are  vegetarians,  teetotallers,  anti-smokers,  anti-vaccinators,
and  I  know  not  what  also.  Perhaps  this  fact  may  help  to  explain  their
othei-wise  iaexplicable  foUy."

SUESCRIBEES'  NAMES.

This  Edition  of  the  Dialecticai,  Eeport  on  Spieitualism
was  published  in  response  to  a  universal  demand  for  a  Cheap
issue  of  the  work.

2364  COPIES

were  subscribed  for  before  the  day  of  publication,
is  the

LIST  OF  PATEON  SUBSCEIBEES.

Tlie  following

COPIES.

16  Sir  Charles  Isham

24  Mr.  J.  P.  Young,  Llanelly

8  E.  H.,  London

8  Mr.  W.  H.  Swepstone,  London

8  Mr.  W.  Volckman,  London

16  Truth  Promoter,  London

8  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,  London

8  Mrs.  MakdougaU  Gregory,  Lon-
don

8  Mr.  T.  Grant,  Maidstone

16  Mr.  Enmore  .Tones,  Norwood

8  Mr.  D.  Eichmond,  Darlington

28  Mr.  J.  Maynard,  for  Marylebone
Association

1  Mrs.  Kerby,  Lewisham

1  Mr.  Fusedale,  London

8  Mr.  E.  T.  Bennett,  Eeigate

8  Lieut-Colonel  Steuart

8  Eev.  W.  E.  Tomlinson,  Eyde

8  Dr.  Gully,  Streatham

16  Mr.  E.  Eedgate,  for  Nottingham

Association

20  Mr.  E.  Foster,  Preston

8  Mr.  C.  T.  Hook,  Eochester

16  J.  B.

8  Mr.  S.  Hocking,  Camborne

15  Mr.  B.  Bradbury,  Morley

8  Mr.  C.  Eeimers,  Manchester

8  Mr.  T.  Eichardson,  Newcastle

10  Mr.  N.  Kilburn,  jun.,  Bishop
Auckland

COPIES.

8    Mr.  J.  Wason,  Birkenhead

8    Miss  Ponder,  Brixton

8    Mr.  W.  Kingdom,  Farnboro'

1    Mr.  E.  Beamish,  Southampton

1    Mrs.  Green,  London
10    Mr.  Ealph  Forster,  Darlington

1    Mr.  J.  Appleby,  Alnwick
28    Mr.  J.  Lord,  Eastrick
IG    Mr.  John  Scott,  Belfast
16    Mr.  G.  E.  Hinde,  Darlington
50    Mr.    T.    Blyton,  for  Dalston

Association
84    Mr.  John  Chapman,  for  Liver-
pool Association  [head

8    Mrs.  F.  A.  Noswortby,  Birken-
32    Mr.  G.  Heppleston,  Huddersfield

8    Mr.  T.  Thelwall,  Hull
24   Mr.   T.  M.    Simkiss,  Wolver-
hampton

8   Mr.    S.    S.   Lingford,  Bishop
Auckland

12   Mr.  J.  Eeedman,  Stamford
8    Mr.  J.  L.  Julyan,  Peterboro'
8    Mr.  W.  A.  Findley,  Burslem

20    Mr.  D.  W.   Weathcrhead,  for
Keighley  Association
1    Mr.  A.  Kyd,  Baden
1    Miss  Douglass,  London
8    Mr.  G.  N.  Strawbridge,  Norwood

10    Mr.  E.  Spencer,  Leyburn
8   Mr.  J.  Herod,  Nottingham

LIST  OP   SUBSOEIBEES— coweinttec?.

coriES

8   Mr.  W.  Vernon,  IJttoseter
35    Mr.  B.  Hawkes,  Birmingham
12   Mr.  Henry  "Whittington,  Man-
chester

8   Mr.  Houghton,  Huddersfield
8   Mr.  P.  Derby,  Northampton
8   Mr.  R.  A.  Wainewright,  London
32   Mr.  E.  Fitton,  for  Manchester
Association
S   Mr.  H.  Bielfeld,  London
16   Mr.  Champernowne,  Kingston
8   Mr.  J.  Brown,  Glasgow
8   Mr.  J.  Hay,  Glasgow
8   Mr.  J.  Swinburne,  London
8   Mrs.  M.,  London
8   Mr.  N.  F.  Daw,  London
1    Mrs.  Barrett,  London
8    Capt.  Copperthwaite,  Malton
8   Mr.  J.  Lamont,  Liverpool
8    Dr.  Lockhart  Eobertson
16   Mr.  T.  Fardon,  jun.,  Maidstone
8   Mr.  J.  Hops,  London
8   Mr.  T.  P.  Barkas,  Newcastle
8   Mr.  J.  B.  Stones,  Blackburn
8   Mr.  T.  Wilson,  Aylesbury
8    Mr.  Dixon,  Kentish  Town
8   Mr.  J.  Webster,  for  Ball's  Pond
Association
•20   Mr.  E.  Pearce,  for  ClerkenweU
Association
8    Mr.  J.  J.  Herfst,  The  Hague
16   Mr.    Broadbent,  for  Sowerby
Bridge  Association
8   Mr.  S.  Howarth,  Huddersfield
8    Dr.  S.  T.  Speer,  London
8    Mr.  J.  Bent,  Loughboro'
8   Mr.  W.  Tebb,  Camden  Town
8   Mr.  S.  Dixon,  Southampton
45   Mr.  Blake,  Newcastle
8   Mr.  J.  Bland,  Hull
24    Mr.  N.  Smith,  Birmingham
16   Mr.  J.  Pearson,  Lye
8   J.  W.  G-.,  London
8   Mr.  E.  Cameron,  Ley  burn
8   Mr.  Millis,  Derby
8   Mr.  W.  Fenton,  Batley
8    Mr.  J.  Hopkins,  Bridgwater
2   Mr.  W.  Soden,  London

COPIES

8  Mr.  E.  Stocks,  Churwell
2    Mr.  F.  Tennyson,  Jersey

I  Mr.  J.  Judd,  Birmingham

8   Mrs.  Butterfield,  Darlington
8    Mr.  W.  Burns,  Nettlehirst

12  Mr.  A.  Dewhirst,  Batley

8   Mr.  W.  T.  Wilson,  King's  Cross
10    Mr.  N.  Crick,  Eusbden
8    Mr.  J.  White,  Shadwell  HaU
8   Eev.  J.  A.  Brinkworth,  Shepton

ton  Mallett
8   Mr.  Lobley,  Crook
8    Mr.  J.  Davies,  Swinton

13  Mr.  G.  Tommy,  Bristol

20   Mr.  J.  Ward,  Northampton
8    Mrs.  Waddell,  Portobello
8    Mr.  H.  J.  Hughes,  Carnarvon

II  Mr.  J.  Wilde,  Hagg's  Lane

15  Mr.  T.  Blinkhorn,  Walsall
36    Mr.  E.  Ashworth,  Halifax

8  Mr.  J.  Heathcock,  Halesowen
13    Major  Owen,  London

20    Mr.  J.  Sutherland,  Burnley

9  Mr.  M.  Armitage,  Batley

16  Mr.  T.  Ousman,  Stoke

8    Mr.  A.  Glendinning,  London
16    Mr.  W.  Whitley,  Bayswater
16    Mr.  J.  Ashman,  Marylebone
8    Mr.  W.  Clarkson,  Selby
8   Dr.  Willing,  Southend
'  1    Mr.  A.  Fountain,  Wisbech
1    Mr.  J.  Eidgway
1    Miss  Dewdney,  Dawlish
8   Mrs.  Lowe,  London
32   Mr.  J.  McEuer,  for  Glasgow
Association
8    Mr.  E.  Brown,  York
8    Mr.  J.  Culpan,  Halifax
12    Mr.  A.  Baldwin,  Belper
8   Mr.  G.  B.  Clark,  for  Edinburgh

Association
8    Mr.  All  wood,  London
8   Mr.  J.  J.  Walker,  London
8    Mr.  J.  Johnson,  Walworth
1    Mrs.  Cowper,  Bournemouth
1    Major  Menars,  Bath
8    Mr.  J.  Hiscocks,  Tisbury
12   Mr.  W.  N.  Armfield,  Pimlico

LIST  or   SVmCUlBmii— continued.

COPIES.

JJr.  Uobson,  Barrow

Q
O

Tlfl"—    Til     TT   11             T  ■  1

Mr.  M.  Hallam,  Jjinooln

Q
O

Tiff"           T       TliT    TV*r     1  T                    TX'  I.J

Mr.  J.  McMuldrow,  Kirkcud-

bright

Q

o

T^..    XT. /~v_l~il  T>_u1>

iJr.  liunter,  Ochil  i'arK

14.

Mr,  H.  Swiro,  Bowling

1

1

M.r.  D.  jyiatoors,  ivuKeei

1

Lady  Helena  Newenbam

Q
O

Mr.  Jdj.  Inornton,  xJraatora

8

Mr.  iratteraon,  Miaalesborouga

o

8

Mr.  SkeJdon,  Urewe

o
O

Major  irliiliips,  JJoUm  nau

o
O

Mr.  J.  Coop,  West  Hougliton

1  o

Mr,  W.  Avery,  Rochdale

o

8

Mr.  B.  E.  Kennedy,  Hampton

Court

o
O

A  TT
A.  M.

lU

Lliss  Derby,  Northampton

8

Mr.  A.  IngliB,  Jilgin

o
O

Mr.  Harrison,  Trinity  College

40

Mr.  W.  b.  U-oabe,  utau

Q
O

jyLr.  wooccon,  ivLue  jjjiiu

o
O

Mr.  It.  Jackson,  W^haley  Bridge

1  o

12

Mr.  R.  Morgan,  W^orcester

3d

Mr.  0.  Lowe,  Birmingham

o

8

Mr.  Wilby,  Leicester

8

Dr.  Sexton,  London

o

8

"  Inquirer,'  Egypt

9

Mr.  J.  Foley,  Birmingham

9

Mr.  Spencer,  London

8

Signer  Damiani,  Naples

8

Mrs.  Tynaall,  iidgbaston

X

1

Mr.  Walwyn,  Clifton

1

Mr.  Geo.  Marsh,  Hastings

24

Eev.  R  ,  London

9

Mr.  W.  Richards,  Pimlioo

9

Mr.  J.  Walton,  Alston

2

Mrs.  Cooper,  Sydenham

COPIES.

8    Mr.  J.  Niren,  West  Hartlepool
8    Mr.  J.  Walter,  Northampton
8    Mr.  J.  Jackson,  Maneheeter
8    Mr.  J.  H.  Entwistle,  Manchester
8    Mr.  A.  Enlenstein,  Mexico
8    Mr.  T.  Atkins,  London
8   Mr.  W.  G-.  Bond,  Londoa

8    Captain  C

8   A  Friend,  Devonport
8   Mr.  C.  W.  Pearce,  Stockwell
18   Mr.  C.  D.  Cazenose,  Strand
4   Mrs.  Parker,  Dundee
1    Mr.    J.    J.    Robinson,  Glass
Houghton

8  Mr.  H.  Smith,  Bradford

12   Mr.  W.  W.  Wilson,  Stockton-
on-Tees

1    Mr.  W.  Clemson,  New  York

9  Messrs.   Garnett  and  Jeavons,

Barrow-in-Furness
24   Mr.  Thos.  Kershaw,  Oldham
8    Mr.  W.  Piatt,  Saughtrees
8    Mrs.  Major  Anderson
8    Mr.  R.  Green,  Ashton
18    Mr.  A.  MacDonald,  Crieff
8    Mr.  J.  C.  Ward,  Haverstock  Hill
8    Dr.  Wilmshurst,  Netting  Hill
8    Mr.  R.  Cooper,  Eastbourne
8   Mr.  W.  Geldard,  Spennymoor
1    Mr.  A.  Tod,  Peebles
8    Mr.  Cogman,  Mile  End
4    Mrs.  Ray,  Brixton
1    Mr.  Jennison,  Wapping
100   Mr.  W.  H.  Terry,  Melbourne
12   Mr.  A.  J.  Davis,  New  York

8   ,  Leeds

9  Mr.  J.  McGeachy,  Glasgow

9  Mr.  R.  Humphreys,  Portmadoo
1   Mrs.  B.

REPORT

ON

SPIRITUALISM,

/

OF

THE  COMMITTEE

OF  THE

TOGETHER  VTLTS.

THE  EVIDENCE,

ORAL  AND  WRITTEN,

AND

A  SELECTION  FROM  THE  CORRESPONDENCE.

Fourth  Thousand.

LONDON:

J.  BURNS,  15,  SOUTHAMPTON  EOW,  HOLBOKN,  W.C.

1873.

\_All  rights  reserved.']

pei>-ted  by  james  bub>'s,
soutiiampto:n'  eow,  holboen,

lOITDON,  'W.C.

\

1

(   iii  )

ADVEETISEMENT.

This  Cheap  Edition  (which  is  printed,  by  permission,  from  the
original  plates)  is  published  to  bring  into  more  general  notice
the  nature  and  result  of  the  test  experiments  of  the  Committee,
and  to  enable  the  public  to  estimate  at  their  true  value  the
criticisms  upon  the  first  edition  of  the  work  which  from  time
to  time  have  appeared  in  the  newspaper  press.

In  these  criticisms  the  actual  experiments  have  been,  as  a  rule,
either  wUfiiUy  suppressed  or  grossly  misrepresented.  But,  as
the  tests  in  question  formed  the  most  significant  portion  of  the
work,  and  have  since  been  corroborated  in  all  essential  particulars
by  many  independent  investigators — some,  too,  of  recognised
scientific  attainments, —  it  is  hoped  that  an  edition  so  inexpensive
as  the  present  will  enable  the  piiblic  to  read  and  judge  foi^
themselves.

The  Eeport  and  Evidence,  now  made  public,  were  presented
to  the  Council  g2  the  Lokbon  Dialectical  Society,  on  the
20th  day  of  July,  1870,  and  were  accepted  in  accordance  with
the  following  Eesolutions  passed  by  the  Council  on  that  occasion : —

(1.)  That  the  Eeport  be  received  and  entered  upon  the
Minutes.  '

(2.)  That  the  thanks  of  the  Council  be  given  to  the  Committee
for  the  indefatigable  way  in  which  they  have  discharged
their  duties.

(3.)  That  the  request  of  the  Committee  that  the  Eeport
be  printed  under  the  authority  of  the  Society,  be  not
acceded  to.

In  consequence  of  the  above  decision,  the  Committee  unani-
mously determined  to  publish  the  Eeport  on  their  own
responsibility,  and  it  is  now  accordingly  submitted  to  the  public.

(    iv  )

APPOINTMENT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

At  a  Meeting  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,  held  on  Wednesday,
the  6th  of  January,  1869,  Mr.  J,  H.  Levy  in  the  Chair,  it  was  resolved  :—

«  That  the  Council  he  requested  to  appoint  a  Committee  in  conformity
■with  Bye-law  VII.,  to  investigate  the  Phenomena  alleged  to  he
Spiritual  Manifestations,  and  to  report  thereon."

{Copy  of  the  Minute  of  the  Cowicil.)
"  At  a  Meeting  of  the  Council  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,
held  on  the  26th  January,  1869,  on  the  Motion  of  Dr.  Edmunds,  a
Committee  was  appointed  in  conformity  with  Bye-law  VII.,  'to
investigate  the  Phenomena  alleged  to  be  Spiritual  Manifestations,
and  to  report  thereon.'  The  Committee  to  consist  of  the  followmg
Memheis : —

H.  G.  Atkinson,  Esq.,  E.G.S.

G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq.
J.  S.  Bergheim,  Esq.,  C.E.

H.  R.  Fox  Bom-ne,  Esq.
Charles  Bradlaugh,  Esq.

G.  Fenton  Cameron,  Esq.,  M.D.
John  Chapman,  Esq.,  M.D.
E,ev.  C.  Maurice  Davies,  D.D.
Charles  R.  Drysdale,  Esq.,  M.D.
D.  H.  Dyte,  Esq.,  M.R.C.S.
Mrs.  D.  H.  Dyte
James  Edmunds,  Esq.,  M.D.
Mrs.  Edmunds
James  Gannon,  Esq.

Grattan  Geary,  Esq.
Robert  Hannah,  Esq.
Jenner  Gale  Hihier,  Esq.
Mrs.  J.  G.  HiUier
Henry  Jeffery,  Esq.
Albert  Kisch,  Esq.,  M.R.C.S.
Joseph  Maurice,  Esq.
Isaac  L.  Meyers,  Esq.

B.  M.  Moss,  Esq.
Robert  Quelch,  Esq.,  C.E.
Thomas  Reed,  Esq.

C.  RusseU  Roberts,  Esq.,  Ph.  D,
WiUiam  Volckman,  Esq.
Horace  S.  Yeomans,  Esq.

Professor  Huxley  and  Mr.  George  Henry  Lowes  to  be  invited  to
co-operate."

Drs.  Chapman  and  Drysdale  and  Mr.  Fox  Bourne  dechned  to  sit,  and
the  foUowing  names  were  subsequently  added  to  the  Committee.

J.  H.  Levy,  Esq.
W.  H.  Swepstone,  Esq.,  Solicitor
Alfred  R.  Wallace,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.

George  Gary,  Esq.,  B.A.
E.  W.  Cox,  Esq.,  Serjeant-at-Law
William  B.  Gower,  Esq.
H.  D.  Jencken,  Esq.,  Barrister-at-
Law

Josiah  Webber,  Esq.

(    V  )

CONTENTS.

  PAGE

EEPOET  OF  THE  COMMITTEE   1

EEPOETS  OF  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  SUB-OOMmTTEES—

Sub-committee  No.  1   . .    . .

7

Sub-committee  No.  4   . .

46

Sub-comLmittee  No.  2   . .    . .

13

Sub-committee  No.  6   . .

47

Sub-committee  No.  3   . .

39

Sub-committee  No.  6   . .

60

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE—

ETidence    of    Mrs.  Emma

E-vidence    of   Mr.  Thomas

109

172

Paper  by  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,

Mr.  Manuel  Eyre      . .     . .

179

M.R.I

115

loo

Evidence  of  J\Ii's.  Honywood

127

Ml-.  Hockley

184

The  Hon.  Mrs.  . .     . .

128

Mr.  D.  D.  Home      . ,    . .

187

m-.  T.  M.  Simldss    . .     . ,

129

Mrs.  Cox

194

]Mr.  Edward  Laman  Blan-

Signor  Damiani

194

133

205

Mr.  J.  MuiTay  Spear. .

135

20b

Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman    . .

137

209

144

Mr.  Eowcroft

Mr.  Enmore  Jones    . .

145

Mr.  Enmore   Jones  (con-

149

211

150

Lord  Lindsay  (continued)  . .

213

150

217

151

Miss  Anna  Blackwell

220

Mr.  Thomas  SbeiTatt

152

222

153

Mr.  Hain  Friswell    . .    . .

223

Ml-.  Cromwell  F.  Varley  . .

157

Mr,  William  Faulkner    . .

226

OOEEESPONDENOE—

Letter  fi'om  Professor  Huxley

229

Letter  from  Mr.  Wm.  Howitt

236

Mr.  George  Hemy  Lewes . .

230

240

Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson

230

242

232

243

233

Mr.  Newton  Crosland

245

Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson      . .

234

Mr.  Eobert  Chambers     . .

246

(    vi  )

CORRESPONDENOE— con^mwed.

PAGE

Letter  from  Mr.  "W.  M.  Wilkin-
son, Statement  enclosed
by  Dr.  Locldiart  Robert-
son   274

Dr.  Charles  Kidd     . .    . .  254

Mr.  Fusedale    255

Ml-.  Edwin  Arnold   ..    ..  258

Mr.  J.  Hawkins  Simpson  . .  259

Mr,  Andrew  Glendinning  260

PAGK

Letter  from  Mr.  George  Henry

Lewes   263

'  Professor  Tyndall     ..    ..  265

Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter       . .  266

Mr.  T.  Adolplius  TroUope^  277

Professor  Huxley     . .     . .  278

Mr.  Charles  Bradlaugh    . .  279

M.  L^onFavre   280

Mrs.  Lsetitia  Lewis  . .    . .  280

COMMIMIOATIONS  FROM  PERSONS  NOT  MEMBERS  OF  THE
COMMITTEE—

Paper  by  Miss  Anna  BladrweU  326
The  Countess  de  Pomar  . .  338

M.  Oamille  Flammarion  . .  349
INIi'.  Bm-ns  355

NOTES  OF  SEANCES  COMMUNICATED  TO  THE  COMMITTEE.

No.

1.  Mrs.  Honywood      . .  359

2.  Mi'S.   Honywood  and
Lord  Lindsay   . .     . .  361

3.  Mrs.  Honywood      . .  363

4.  «        ....  366

No.  5.  The  Hon.  Mi'S.
6.  Mr.  Guppy
7.

9.

MINTJTES  OF  THE  SUB-COMMITTEES—

Sub-Committee  No.

No.

APPENDIX—

Paper  by  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson
Rules  for  conducting  Spirit-circles

INDEX

PROSPECTUS  OF  SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION.
1,IST  OF  WORKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM

369
371
371
372
372

373

392

396
399

403

EEPOKT  OF  TEE  COMMITTEE.

,  Gentlemen,

The  Committee  appointed  by  you  to  in-
vestigate the  phenomena  alleged  to  be  Spiritual
Manifestations,  report  thereon  as  follows : —

Your  Committee  have  held  fifteen  meetings,  at
which  they  received  evidence  from  thirty- three  per-
sons, who  described  phenomena  which,  they  stated,
had  occurred  within  their  own  personal  experience.

Your  Committee  have  received  written  statements
relating  to  the  phenomena  from  thirty-one  persons.

Your  Committee  invited  the  attendance  and
requested  the  co-operation  and  advice  of  scientific
men  who  had  publicly  expressed  opinions,  favourable
or  adverse,  to  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena.

Your  Committee  also  specially  invited  the  atten-
dance of  persons  who  had  publicly  ascribed  the
phenomena  to  imposture  or  delusion.

Your  Committee,  however,  while  successful  in
procuring  the  evidence  of  believers  in  the  phenomena
and  in  their  supernatural  origin,  almost  wholly  failed
to  obtain  evidence  from  those  who  attributed  them
to  fraud  or  delusion.

As  it  appeared  to  your  Committee  to  be  of  the

greatest  importance  that  they  should  investigate  the

phenomena  in  question  by  personal  experiment  and

B

2

REPORT  OF  COMMITTEE.

test,  they  resolved  themselves  into  sub-committees
as  the  best  means  of  doing  so.

Six  Sub-committees  were  accordingly  formed.

All  of  these  have  sent  in  reports,  from  which  it
appears  that  a  large  majority  of  the  members  of  your
Committee  have  become  actual  witnesses  to  several
phases  of  the  phenomena  without  the  aid  or  presence
of  any  professional  medium,  although  the  greater
part  of  them  commenced  their  investigations  in  an
avowedly  sceptical  spirit.

These  reports,  hereto  subjoined,  substantially  cor-
roborate each  other,  and  would  appear  to  establish
the  following  propositions : —

1.  — That  sounds  of  a  very  varied  character,  appa-

rently proceeding  from  articles  of  furniture,  the
floor  and  walls  of  the  room— the  vibrations
accompanying  which  sounds  are  often  distinctly
perceptible  to  the  touch — occur,  without  bemg
produced  by  muscular  action  or  mechanical  con-
trivance.

2.  That  movements  of  heavy  bodies  take  place

without  mechanical  contrivance  of  any  kind  or
adequate  exertion  of  muscular  force  by  the
persons  present,  and  frequently  without  contact
or  connection  with  any  person.

3^  That  these  sounds  and  movements  often  occur  at

the  times  and  in  the  manner  asked  for  by  per-
sons present,  and,  by  means  of  a  simple  code  of
signals,  answer  questions  and  spell  out  coherent
communications.

KEPORT  OF  COMMITTEE.  3

4.  That  the   answers   and   communications  thus

obtained  are,  for  the  most  part,  of  a  common-
place character;  but  facts  are  sometimes  cor-
rectly given  which  are  only  known  to  one  of  the
persons  present.

5.  — That  the  circumstances  under  which  the  pheno-

mena occur  are  variable,  the  most  prominent
fact  being,  that  the  presence  of  certain  persons
seems  necessary  to  their  occurrence,  and  that  of
others  generally  adverse  ;  but  this  difference
does  not  appear  to  depend  upon  any  belief  or
disbelief  concerning  the  phenomena.

6.  — That,  nevertheless,  the  occurrence  of  the  pheno-

mena is  not  insured  by  the  presence  or  absence
of  such  persons  respectively.
The  oral  and  written  evidence  received  by  your
Committee  not  only  testifies  to  phenomena  of  the
same  nature  as  those  witnessed  by  the  sub-com-
mittees, but  to  others  of  a  more  varied  and  extra-
ordinary character.

This  evidence  may  be  briefly  summarized  as
follows : —

1.  — Thirteen  witnesses  state  that  they  have  seen

heavy  bodies — in  some  instances  men — rise
slowly  in  the  air  and  remain  there  for  some  time
without  visible  or  tangible  support.

2.  — Fourteen  witnesses  testify  to  having  seen  hands

or  figures,  not  appertaining  to  any  human  being,
but  life-like  in  appearance  and  mobility,  which
they  have  sometimes  touched  or  even  grasped,

EEPORT  OF  COilMITTEE.

and  which  they  are  therefore  convinced  were
not  the  result  of  imposture  or  ilhision.
Five  witnesses  state  that  they  have  been  touched,
by  some  invisible  agency,  on  various  parts  of
the  body,  and  often  where  requested,  when  the
hands  of  all  present  were  visible.
Thirteen  witnesses  declare  that  they  have  heard
musical  pieces  well  played  upon  instruments
not  manipulated  by  any  ascertainable  agency.
Five  witnesses  state  that  they  have  seen  red-hot
coals  applied  to  the  hands  or  heads  of  several
persons  without  producing  pain  or  scorching;
and  three  witnesses  state  that  they  have  had'
the  same  experiment  made  upon  themselves
with  the  like  immunity.

Eight  witnesses  state  that  they  have  received
precise  uiformation  through  rappings,  writings,
and  in. other  ways,  the  accuracy  of  which  was
imknown  at  the  time  to  themselves  or  to  any
persons  present,  and  which,  on  subsequent  in-
quiry, was  found  to  be  correct.

One  witness  declares  that  he  has  received  a
precise  and  detailed  statement  which,  never-
theless, proved  to  be  entirely  erroneous.

-Three  witnesses  state  that  they  have  been
present  when  drawings,  both  in  pencil  and
colours,  were  produced  in  so  short  a  time,  and
binder  such  conditions,  as  to  render  human
agency  impossible.

-Six  witnesses  declare  that  they,  have  received

RErORT  OF  COMMITTEE.

5

information  of  future  events,  and  that  in  some
cases  the  hour  and  minute  of  their  occurrence
have  been  accurately  foretold,  days  and  even

weeks  before.
In  addition  to  the  above,  evidence  has  been  given
of  trance-speaking,  of  healing,  of  automatic  writmg,
of  the  introduction  of  flowers  and  fruits  into  closed
rooms,  of  voices  in  the  air,  of  visions  in  crystals  and
glasses,  and  of  the  elongation  of  the  human  body.

Many  of  the  witnesses  have  given  their  views  as
to  the  sources  of  these  phenomena.  Some  attribute
them  to  the  agency  of  disembodied  human  beings,
some  to  Satanic  influence,  some  to  psychological
causes,  and  others  to  imposture  or  delusion.

The  literature  of  the  subject  has  also  received  the
attention  of  your  Committee,  and  a  list  of  works  is
appended  for  the  assistance  of  those  who  may  wish
to  pursue  the  subject  further.

In  presenting  their  report,  your  Committee,  taking
into  consideration  the  high  character  and  great  in-
telligence of  many  of  the  witnesses  to  the  more
extraordinary  facts,  the  extent  to  which  their  testi-
mony is  supported  by  the  reports  of  the  sub-com-
mittees, and  the  absence  of  any  proof  of  imposture
or  delusion  as  regards  a  large  portion  of  the  pheno-
mena ;  and  further,  having  regard  to  the  exceptional
character  of  the  phenomena,  the  large  number  of
persons  in  every  grade  of  societ)  and  over  the  whole
civilized  world  who  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  a
belief  in  their  supernatural  origin,  and  to  the  fact

t)

REPORT  OF  COMMITTEE.

that  no  philosophical  explanation  of  them  has  yet
been  arrived  at,  deem  it  incumbent  upon  them  to
state  their  conviction  that  the  subject  is  worthy  of
more  serious  attention  and  careful  investigation  than
it  has  hitherto  received.

Your  Committee  recommend  that  this  Eeport  and
the  Reports  of  the  Sub-committees,  together  with
the  Evidence  and  Correspondence  appended,  be
printed  and  published.

KErORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

7

EEPOETS  OF  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  SUB-
COMMITTEES.

SUB-COMMITTEE  No.  1.

Since  their  appointment  on  the  16th  of  February,
1869,  your  Sub-committee  have  held  forty  meetings
for  the  piu-pose  of  experiment  and  test.

All  of  these  meetings  were  held  at  the  private
residences  of  members  of  the  Committee,  purposely
to  preclude  the  possibility  of  pre-arranged  mechanism
or  contrivance.

The  fiu'niture  of  the  room  in  which  the  experi-
ments were  conducted  was  on  every  occasion  its
accustomed  furniture.

The  tables  were  in  all  cases  heavy  dining  tables,
requiring  a  strong  effort  to  move  them.  The  small-
est of  them  was  5ft.  9in.  long  by  4ft.  wide,  and  the
largest,  9ft.  Sin.  long  and  4^ft.  wide,  and  of  propor-
tionate weight.

The  rooms,  tables,  and  furniture  generally  were
repeatedly  subjected  to  careful  examination  before,
during,  and  after  the  experiments,  to  ascertain  that
no  concealed  machinery,  instrument,  or  other  con-
trivance existed  by  means  of  which  the  sounds  or
movements  hereinafter  mentioned  could  be  caused.

The  experiments  were  conducted  in  the  light  of
gas,  except  on  the  few  occasions  specially  noted  in  the
minutes.

8

REPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

Your  Committee  have  avoided  the  employment  of
professional  or  paid  mediums,  the  mediumship  being
that  of  members  of  your  Sub-committee,  persons  of
good  social  position  and  of  unimpeachable  integrity,
having  no  pecuniary  object  to  serve,  and  nothing  to
gain  by  deception.

Your  Committee  have  held  some  meetings  without
the  presence  of  a  medium  (it  being  understood  that
throughout  this  report  the  word  "  medium  "  is  used
simply  to  designate  an  individual  without  whose
presence  the  iDhenomena  described  eith-er  do  not
occur  at  all,  or  with  greatly  diminished  force  and
frequency),  pui-posely  to  try  if  they  could  produce,
by  any  efforts,  effects  similar  to  those  witnessed
when  a  medium  was  present.     By  no  endeavours
were  they  enabled  to  produce  anything  at  all  resem-
bling the  manifestations  which  took  place  in  the
presence  of  a  medium.

Every  test  that  the  combined  intelligence  of  your
Committee  could  devise  has  been  tried  with  patience
and  perseverance.  The  experiments  were  conducted
under  a  great  variety  of  conditions,  and  ingenuity
has  been  exerted  in  devising  plans  by  which  your
Committee  might  verify  their  observations  and  pre-
clude the  possibility  of  imposture  or  of  delusion.

Your  Committee  have  confined  their  report  to  facts
witnessed  by  them  in  their  collective  capacity,  which
facts  were  loalimhle  to  the  senses,  and  their  reality
caimlle  of  demonstrative  ^roof

Of  the  members  of  your  Sub-committee  about

REPORTS-  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

9

four-ffths  entered  upon  the  investigation  ^'lioUy
sceptical  as  to  the  reality  of  the  alleged  pheno-
mena,  firmly  believing  them  to  be  the  result  either
of  'im:posture  or  of  delusion,  or  of  involuntary  mus-
cular action.    It  was  only  by  irresistible  evidence,
under  conditions  that  precluded  the  possibility  of
either  of  these  solutions,  and  after  trial  and  test
many  times  repeated,  that  the  most  sceptical  of
your  Sub-committee-  were   slowly    and  reluctantly
convuiced  that  the  phenomena  exhibited  in  the  course
of  theu-  protracted  inquiry  were  veritable  facts.

The  result  of  their  long-continued  and  carefully-
conducted  experiments,  after  trial  by  every  detective
test  they  could  devise,  has  been  to  establish  con-
clusively :

First :  That  under  certain  bodily  or  mental
conditions  of  one  or  more  of  the  persons  present,  a
force  is  exhibited  sufficient  to  set  in  motion  heavy
substances,  without  the  employment  of  any  muscular
force,  without  contact  or  material  connection  of  any
Idnd' between  such  substances  and  the  body  of  any

person  present.

Second:  That  this  force  can  cause  sounds  to
proceed,  distinctly  audible  to  all  present,  from  solid
substances  not  in  contact  with,  nor  having  any
visible  or  material  connection  with,  the  body  of  any
person  present,  and  which  sounds  are  proved  to  pro-
ceed from  such  substances  by  the  vibrations  which
are  distinctly  felt  when  they  are  touched.

Third :  That  this  force  is  frequently  directed  by
intelligence.

10  REPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES,

At  thirty-four  out  of  the  forty  meetings  of  your
Committee  some  of  these  phenomena  occurred,

A  description  of  one  experiment,  and  the  manner
of  conducting  it,  will  best  show  the  care  and  caution
with  which  your  Committee  have  pursued  their
investigations.

So  long  as  there  was  contact,  or  even  the  possi-
bility of  contact,  by  the  hands  or  feet,  or  even  by  the
clothes  of  any  person  in  the  room,  with  the  substance
moved  or  sounded,  there  could  be  no  perfect  assurance
that  the  motions  and  sounds  were  not  produced  by
the  person  so  in  contact.  The  following  experiment
was  therefore  tried :

On  an  occasion  when  eleven  members  of  your  Sub-
committee had  been  sitting  round  one  of  the  dining-
tables  above  described  for  forty  minutes,  and  various
motions  and  sounds  had  occurred,  they,  by  way  of
test,  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  to  the  table,  at
about  nine  inches  from  it.  They  all  then  knelt  upon
their  chairs,  placing  their  arms  upon  the  backs  thereof.
In  this  position,  their  feet  were,  of  course,  turned
away  from  the  table,  and  by  no  possibility  could  be
placed  under  it  or  touch  the  floor.  The  hands  of
each  person  were  extended  over  the  table  at  about
four  inches  from  the  surface.  Contact,  therefore,
with  any  part  of  the  table  could  not  take  place  with-
out detection.

In  less  than  a  minute  the  table,  untouched,  moved
four  times;  at  first  about  five  inches  to  one  side,
then  about  twelve  inches  to  the  opposite  side,  and

REPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

11

then,  in  like  manner,  four  inches  and  six  inches
respectively.

The  hands  of  all  present  were  next  placed  on  the
hacks  of  their  chairs,  and  about  a  foot  from  the  table,
which  again  moved,  as  before,  times,  over  spaces
varying  from  four  to  six  inches.  Then  all  the  chairs
were  removed  twelve  inches  from  the  table,  and  each
person  knelt  on  his  chair  as  before,  this  time,  how-
ever, folding  his  hands  behind  his  back,  his  body
being  thus  about  eighteen  inches  from  the  table,  and
having  the  back  of  the  chair  between  himself  and
the  table.  The  table  again  moved  four  times,  in
various  directions.  In  the  course  of  this  conclusive
experiment,  and  in  less  than  half-an-hour,  the  table
thus  moved,  without  contact  or  possibility  of  contact
with  any  person  present,  thirteen  times,  the  move-
ments being  in  different  directions,  and  some  of  them
according  to  the  request  of  various  members  of  your
Sub-committee.

The  table  was  then  carefully  examined,  turned
upside  down  and  taken  to  pieces,  but  nothing  was
discovered  to  account  for  the  phenomena.  The
experiment  was  conducted  throughout  in  the  full
light  of  gas  above  the  table.

Altogether,  your  Sub-committee  have  witnessed
upwards  of  fifty  similar  motions  without  contact  on
eight  different  evenings,  in  the  houses  of  members
of  your  Sub-committee,  the  most  careful  tests  being
applied  on  each  occasion.

In   all   similar   experiments   the   possibility  of

12

RErORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

mechanical  or  other  contrivance  was  further  negatived
by  the  fact  that  the  movements  were  in  various
directions,  now  to  one  side,  then  to  the  other ;  now
up  the  room,  now  doAvn  the  room — motions  that
would  have  required  the  co-operation  of  many
hands  or  feet;  and  these,  from  the  great  size  and
weight  of  the  tables,  could  not  have  been  so  used
without  the  visible  exercise  of  muscular  force.
Every  hand  and  foot  was  plainly  to  be  seen,  and
could  not  have  been  moved  without  instant  de-
tection.

Delusion  was  out  of  the  question.  The  motions
were  in  various  directions,  and  were  witnessed  simul-
taneously by  all  present.  They  were  matters  of
measurement,  and  not  of  opinion  or  of  fancy.

And  they  occurred  so  often,  under  so  many  and
such  various  conditions,  with  such  safeguards  against
error  or  deception,  and  with  such  invariable  results,
as  to  satisfy  the  members  of  your  Sub-committee  by
whoni  the  experiments  were  tried,  wholly  sceptical
as  most  of  them  were  when  they  entered  upon  the
investigation,  that  there  is  a  force  capalle  of  moving
heavy  bodies  without  material  contact,  and  which
force  is  in  some  unknown  manner  dependent  iqwn  the
jjresence  of  human  beings.

Your  Sub-committee  have  not,  collectively,  ob-
tained any  evidence  as  to  the  nature  and  source  of
this  force,  but  simply  as  to  the  fact  of  its  existence.

There  appears  to  your  Committee  to  be  no  ground
for  the  popular  belief  that  the  presence  of  sceptics

BErORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

13

interferes  in  any  manner  Avitli  the  production  or
action  of  the  force.

In  conclusion,  your  Committee  express  their  unani-
mous opinion  that  the  one  important  physical  fact
thus  proved  to  exist,  that  inotiooi  may  he  jproduced  in
solid  bodies  luitJiout  material  contact,  ly  some  hitherto
unrecognised  force  o])erating  within  an  undefined
distance  from  the  human  organism,  and  beyond  the
range  of  muscular  action,  should  be  subjected  to
fm-ther  scientific  examination,  with  a  view  to  ascer-
tain its  true  soiu'ce,  nature,  and  power.

The  notes  of  the  experiments  made  at  each  meet-
ing of  your  Sub -committee  are  appended  to  this
Report. —  Vide  p.  373.

SUB-COMMITTEE  No.-  2.  -

To  THE  Committee  appointed  by  the  London  Dia-
lectical Society  to  investigate  the  Phenomena
alleged  to  be  Spiritual  Manifestations.

Gentlemen,— We,  one  of  the  Sub-committees
appointed  by  you  for  the  purpose-  of  practically
acquainting  ourselves,  if  possible,  with  the  above-
mentioned  phenomena,  beg  leave  to  report  as
follows : — •

1.— That  we  have  held  numerous  meetings  at  the

14

EEPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

houses  of  Messrs.  A         and  B  ,  members

of  your  Sub-committee  and  of  the  Dialectical
Society.

2.  — That  the  said  Messrs.  A         and  B   were

entire  strangers  to  the  manifestations  in  question
and  sceptical  of  the  phenomena  generally,  and
that  no  meetings  in  connection  with  the  subject
had  been  previously  held  in  either  of  their  houses.

3.  — That,  in  addition  to  the  Members  of  your  Sub-

committee, the  wives  of  Messrs.  A   and

B         took  part  at  such  meetings,  as  did  also

Mr.  C  ,  a  brother-in-law  of  one  of  your  Sub-
committee-men.

4.  — That  our  meetings  were  held  without  the  aid  \

or  presence  of  any  professed  mediums  (so-called)
and  under  circumstances  that  precluded  the
possibility  of  trick  or  deception.

5.  — That,  for  the  purpose  of  a  seance,  we  always

assembled  in  the  evening,  and  seated  ourselves
around  a  dining-table,  upon  which  we  lightly
placed  our  hands,  engaging  in  conversation.

6.  — That  the  rooms  in  which  we  so  assembled  were

lighted  by  gas,  and  that  we  usually  commenced
with  a  full  supply  of  light,  which,  if  afterwards
occasionally  reduced,  was  always  sufficient  to
enable  us  to  read  or  write  without  difficulty.

7.  — That  the  phenomena  termed  "  rapping,"  "  table-

rapping,"  and  "table-moving"  occurred  at  our
first,  and  at  many  subsequent  meetings.

8.  — That  the  table-moving  referred  to  was  in  the

EEPOKTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

15

nature  of  heaving,  oscillation,  or  tipping ;  the
table  often  moving  in  any  direction  suggested.
-That,  during  such  movements  our  hands  were
sometimes  removed  from  the  table  altogether
without  abating  the  phenomena,  and  that  at  all
times  we  were  careful  not  to  induce  any  move-
ments by  either  muscular  action  or  pressure.
-That  "  table-moving  "  ceased,  or  nearly  ceased,
after  our  first  few  meetings,  apparently  in  favour
of  the  rapping  phenomena.

-That  the  rappings  in  question  did  not  always
proceed  from  the  table,  but  sometimes  from  the
floor,  the  walls,  and  the  ceiling;  frequently
coming  from  parts  of  the  room  suggested  by
those  present — but  not  always.
-That  the  raps  had  a  soimd  distinctive  and'  dis-
tinguishable, appearing  to  be  in  rather  than  on
the  substance  from  whence  they  proceeded;
sometimes,  however,  they  sounded  like  detona-
tions in  the  air.

—That  when  we  occasionally,  by  way  of  experi-
ment, made  series  of  raps  in  rhythmical  order
upon  the  table,  and  asked  that  the  rhythms
should  be  imitated,  our  requests  were  complied
Avith  by  responsive  raps  exactly  imitating  the
rhythms  prescribed.

—That  our  experience  in  regard  to  the  phenomena
we  witnessed  appears  generally  to  be  corrobora-
tive of  the  statements  of  many  of  the  witnesses
examined  by  you  upon  the  subject,  to  the  extent

16

REPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

that  such  phenomena  have,  or  appear  to  have,  a
basis  of  intelligence.

15.  — That  this  intelligence  was  principally  manifested

(a)  by  replies  more  or  less  pertinent,  and  some-
times most  unexpected  in  their  character,  to  our
spoken  and  audible  questions,  (b)  by  original
communications  made  to  us  as  hereinafter  men-
tioned.

16.  - -That  such  replies  and  communications  weve

made  by  means  of  raps  given  when  the  alpha-
bet was  pointed  to,  letter  by  letter,  or  spoken
by  one  of  the  party — it  having  been  previously
understood  that  three  raps  should  signify  "  yes,"
two  "  doubtful,"  and  one  "  no."  This  arrange-
ment, however,  was  sometimes  altered  by  way
of  test,  but  without  disturbing  the  accuracy  of
the  replies.

17.  — That  through  the  processes  detailed  in  the

foregoing  clause  we  presumably  established
occasional  communication  with  a  number  of
spirits  or  intelligences,  announced  to  be  such
by  themselves,  many  of  whom  stated  they  were
connected  in  various  degrees  of  relationship  to
certain  members  of  our  party,  for  whom  they
professed  a  friendly  regard.

18.  That  such  presumed  spirits  displayed  distinct

individualities,  each  having  a  manner  peculiar
to  itself,  and  rapping  delicately,  emphatically,
or  deliberately,  as  the  case  might  be,  expressing,
as  it  were,  character,  mood,  and  temper.

EEPOETS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

17

19.  — That  wlien  we  attempted  to  shorten  the  process

of  communication  detailed  in  clause  No.  16,  by-
anticipating  words  or  phrases  which  we  thought
were  intended,  we  frequently  found  our  antici-
pations emphatically  negatived  in  favour  of
more  appropriate  expressions  or  of  words  of  a
different  signitication  altogether.  For  illustra-
tions upon  this  point  we  refer  you  to  the  seances
reported  in  clause  No.  39.

20.  — That  intelligence  was  further  manifested  by  the

occasional  dictation  to  us  of  special  conditions
for  our  then  observance,  such,  for  instance,  as
requesting  us  to  sit  in  a  different  order  at  the
table ;  requiring  one  or  more  to  sit  away  from
it;  asking  for  an  increase  or  diminution  of
light,  or  for  the  appointment  of  some  particular
person  to  ask  questions  ;  directing  us  to  link  or
unlink  hands ;  to  be  more  quiet  in  our  conversa-
tion ;  to  avoid  disputation,  &c.

21.  — That  on  our  compliance  with  such  directions

the  manifestations  were  invariably  intensified.

22.  — That  we  are  convinced  of  the  objective  cha-

racter of  the  phenomena  from  finding  that
persons  sceptical,  as  to  the  existence  thereof
invariably  confirmed  our  own  experiences  even
when  suddenly  introduced  during  the  progress
of  a  seance.  As  a  case  in  point,  we  instance
that  when  one  of  our  sittings  was  far  advanced
and  the  phenomena  of  table-moving  and  rap-
ping were  in  full  operation,  we  sent  for  a  neigh-

EEPORTS        SUB- COMMITTEES.

bour  to  witness  them.  He  came  immediately,
the  manifestations  continuing  without  break  or
interruption,  and  presenting  to  him  the  same
aspect  that  they  did  to  ourselves,  notwithstand-
ing that  he  at  any  rate  must  have  been  free
from  any  antecedent  influence,  mesmeric  or
otherwise.

—That  as  a  further  evidence  of  the  objectivity
of  the  phenomena,  we  report  that  manifesta-
tions have  occurred  to  us  spontaneously  upon
occasions  when  we  had  not  assembled  for  the
purpose  of  a  seance,  and  were  not  seated
around  any  table.  We  instance  (1st)  that  one
evening,  when  some  of  the  members  of  your
sub-committee  were  assembled  at  the  house  of

■^Y.  A  ,  not,  however,  with  any  intention

of  then  investigating  the  phenomena,  the  con-
versation turned  upon  a  seance  lately  held  by
some  of  the  members  of  your  general  com-
mittee, at  which  Mrs.  Marshall  had  been  present,
and  when  raps  had  proceeded  from  the  piano-
forte.   While  we  were  discussing  the  genume-
ness  of  these  raps,  the  strings  of  Mr.  A  's
pianoforte  suddenly  and  simultaneously  vibrated,
although  no  person  was  near  the  instrument.
As  these  sounds  were  twice  or  thrice  repeated,
foUowed  by  raps,  and  were  'too  sonorous  to  be
accounted  for  by  any  vibration  of  the  house  or
room,  we  immediately  examined  the  instrumen
internally  and  externally  with  great  care,  but

EEPOKTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

19

■witliout  discovering  any  cause  for  the  sounds
produced ;  and  even  after  such  examination,
raps  proceeded  from  the  instrument  at  intervals
during  the  rest  of  the  evening.  This  was  the
only  occasion  when  phenomena  other  than  "  rap-
ping "  or  "table-moving"  occurred  to  your
sub-committee,  and  we  think  it  right  to  add
that  no  circumstance  of  the  kind  had  ever

before  or  has  since  happened  in  Mr.  A  's

house.     (2nd.)   That  upon  another  occasion
some  time  after  we  had  concluded  a  seance,  and
while  we  were  taking  refreshment,  the  rappings
returned  with  great  vigour,  proceeding  simul-
taneously from  various  parts  of  the  room.  On
asking  the  presumed  intelligences  their  names,
they  informed  us  in  reply  that  they  were  the
spirits  who  had  been  in  communication  with  us
during  the  evening,  and  that  they  were  in  a
happy  and  merry  mood,  and  did  not  care  to
leave  us.    One  of  our  party  jocularly  drank  to
their  health,  and  asked  them  to  respond,  which
they  did  by  volleys  of  raps,  indicative  as  they
informed  us  of  laughter  and  good  fellowship.
Bach  ultimately  bade  us  good  night  by  a  suc-
cession of  raps,  so  to  speak,  in  perspective,  being
at  the  commencement  loud  and  rapid,  but  gradu-
ally diminishing  in  force  and  increasing  in  inter-
val until  out  of  hearing.    These  raps,  we  should
state,  were  more  like  detonations  in  the  air  than
the  result  of  percussion  on  any  hard  substance.

0  2

20

RErORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

24 —That  we  instance  as  furtlier  evidence  of  tlie
spontaneity  of  tlie  phenomena,  tliat  frequently
emphatic  raps  occurred  by  way  of  assent  to,  or
dissent  from,  remarks  made  by  your  Sub-com-
mittee to  each  other.    Thus,  at  a  sitting  during
which  the  raps  had  been  unusually  sonorous  and
fluent,  one  of  the  party  asked  the  presumed
spirit  then  in  communication  to  state  when  he
died,  but  no  answer  was  returned,  notwith-
standing the  question  was  somewhat  persist-
ently repeated.  This  apparently  abrupt  termina-
tion to  the  most  successful  seance  we  had  yet
had,  caused  us  much  surprise,  and  we  were
conversing  upon  the  subject,  when  it  was  re-
marked that  as  the  presumed  inteUigences
claimed  to  be  spiritual,  they  probably  rejected
the  apphcation  of  such  a  term  as  "death"  to
themselves  or  their  state  of  existence,  it  bemg
Hkely  that  of  whatever  import  death  might  be
to  the  body,  it  would,  as  concerning  the  spmt,
be  the  continuation  of  life  under  a  new  form.
Scarcely  had  the  speaker  concluded,  when  loud
raps  again  sounded  from  the  table,  such  bemg
given,  as  we  were  informed,  by  way  of  assent
to  the  remarks  just  made.    Arising  out  of  this,
a  conversation  of  great  interest  took  place  be-
tween  ourselves  and  the  presumed  intelligences.
Death,  we  were  informed  was,  so  _  far  as  the
body  was  concerned,  of  comparatively  trivial
import,  but  as  regarded  the  spirit,  it  was  a  birth

EEPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

21

into  new  experiences  of  existence ;  that  spirit-
life  was  in  every  respect  human ;  that  friendly
intercourse  and  companionship  were  as  common
and  as  pleasurable  in  spirit-life  as  on  earth ;
that  although  spirits  took  great  interest  in
earthly  affairs,  they  had  no  wish  to  return  to
their  former  state  of  existence ;  that  communi-
cation with  earthly  friends  was  pleasurable,  and
desired  by  spirits,  being  intended  as  a  proof  to
the  former  of  the  continuance  of  life,  notwith-
standing bodily  dissolution  ;  that  spirits  claimed
no  prophetic  power.  We  were  further  informed
that  the  two  ladies  in  our  party  were  mediums,
and  that  others  of  our  party  were  mediumistic,
and  might  in  time  develop  into  mediums ;  that
our  seances  would  improve  by  being  held  pe-
riodically and  frequently;  that  they  could  not
state  the  result  of  seances  with  reference  to
health,  or  give  us  any  information  of  invariable
application  as  to  conditions ;  that  disputation
amongst  ourselves  at  a  seance  was  a  disturbing
element,  but  that  they  liked  joking  and  fun  oc-
casionally ;  that  they  knew  the  Dialectical  So-
ciety, and  were  interested  in  its  investigation  of
spiritualism,  but  that  they  did  not  know  whether
such  investigation  would  have  any  good  result.
— That  the  independence  or  objectivity  of  the
intelligence  regulating  the  phenomena  appears
to  be  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  we  have  fre-
quently received  answers  and  communications

■REPORTS  OF  SUB -COMMITTEES.

unexpected  in  their  cliaracter.    For  instance,
we  once  inquired  by  way  of  test  where  a  lady
of  our  acquaintance  then  was,  she  being  at  that
time  in  Bolton.    In  reply,  the  word  "  in"  was
rapped  out,  and  then  the  letter  "  b."    This  so
far  was  satisfactory,  but  as  the  next  letter  given
was  "  e,"  we  regarded  the  answer  as  a  failure.
Going  on,  however,  with  the  alphabet,  "  d "
was  our  next  letter,  and  this  we  were  told  com-
pleted the  sentence.    It  being  then  past  twelve
o'clock  at  night,  the  appositeness  of  the  reply
"in  bed"  excited  some  merriment,  which  was
responded  to  by  a  series  of  raps.    We  then
gave  the  names  of  certain  towns,  and  asked  m
which  one  of  them  the  lady  was  staying.  As
each  town  was  named,  we  got  a  single  negative
rap,  until  we  gave  Bolton,  when  we  immediately
reiceived  the  three  raps  indicative  of  "  Yes."  It
also  happened  at  this  seance  that  while  we  were
sitting  at  a  heavy  dining-table  with  our  hands
linked  (in  compliance  with  a  request  made  to
us  by  one  of  the  presumed  spirits),  one  of  us
asked  another  spirit,  then  in  communication,
whether  it  had  suflacient  power  to  move  the
table.    The  alphabet  was  asked  for,  and  the
words  spelt  out  were  "  unlink  hands."  We
had  scarcely  obeyed  this  instruction  when  the.
table  lurched  round  suddenly,  and  violently
forced  some  of  the  party  out  of  their  chairs.
This  spirit  claimed  to  be  tbat  of  an  acquamt-

EEPOETS  or  SUB-COMMITTEES.

23

ance  who  liad  lately  lost  his  life  by  a  railway
accident  in  America,  and  who,  when  living,  was
of  a  sportive  disposition,  and  fond  of  feats  of
strength.  He  first  annouDced  his  presence  at
our  seances  by  a  somewhat  unparliamentary
term  of  badinage  that  he  and  his  companions
had  been  in  the  habit  of  using  towards  each
other,  and  when  asked  to  which  of  two  friends
of  his  then  present  he  applied  the  term,  an-
swered "both."  He  objected  to  making  ori-
ginal communications,  but  being  urged  for  one, .
at  last  replied  by  giving  the  message,  "  Tell  ray

brother  J          I  have  visited  you,"  it  being

somewhat  singular  that  the  brother  in  question
a  few  days  previously  had  much  ridiculed  the
phenomena.

26.  — That  we,  your  Sub-committee,  did  not  succeed

in  ascertaining  any  specific  conditions  that
would  command  the  production  of  the  phe-
nomena— those  that  appeared  to  be  necessary
on  one  occasion  seeming  to  be  superfluous  on
another,  while  at  many  consecutive  meetings
the  due  observance  by  us  of  all  the  presumed
conditions  within  our  experience  failed  entirely.
Upon  this  subject,  however,  we  submit  the  fol-
lowing clauses  by  way  of  analysis.

27.  — The  phenomena  were  principally  manifested

under  the  conditions  or  circumstances  specified
in  clauses  N"os.  5,  6,  and  20  of  this  Report,  we
having  under  such  conditions  obtained  mani-

EEPORTS  OF  STJB-COMMITTEES.

festations  in  various  rooms  of  the  houses  in
which  we  met  and  at  several  tables,  three  of
the  latter  being  dining-room  tables  of  full  size ;
the  attendance  upon  such  occasions  varying
from  five  to  seven  members.  The  manifesta-
tions appeared  generally  to  be  aided  on  our
part —

{a.)  By  orderliness  in  the  conduct  of  the
seances.

(h.)  By  a  quiet,  but  not  particularly  passive

demeanour  and  conversation.
,  (c.)  By  quietude  in  the  house  in  which  we
assembled,  we  failing  sometimes  to  ob-
tain phenomena  early  in  the  evening,
but  obtaining  them  later,  when  the  ser-
vants  had  retired  and  domestic  noises
had  ceased.
(d.)  By  a  somewhat  moderate   supply  of

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  occasionally  had
powerful  manifestations-when  seated  away
from  the  table-when  observing  no  particular
order  or  ceremony-when  engaged  in  animated
conversation-when  indulging  in  laughter^  and
xnerriment-when  ordinary  household  business
was  in  progress-and,  with  a  full  supply  of

.8  -Thai  sometimes,  without  any  perceivable  change
^  '   of  conditions,  the  manifestations  became  faint
and  rapidly  died  away,  apparently  beyond  re-

EEPOETS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

25

cal,  thus  closing  our  seance  ;  while  upon  otlier
occasions,  witlioufc  any  particular  regard  by  us
to  conditions,  the  manifestations  continued
strong  and  vigorous,  we  ourselves  being  obliged
at  last  to  break  up  the  sittings,  which  usually-
lasted  from  one  hour  to  two  hours  and  a-half.
— That,  as  relating  to  the  subject  of  conditions,
we  have  noted  the  following  facts  : —

{a.)  That  we  invariably  failed  to  obtain  the

phenomena  in  the  dark.
(6.)  That  at  our  few  trials  by  daylight  we
invariably  failed  to   obtain  manifesta-
tions.

(c.)  That  we  invariably   failed  to  obtain
manifestations  without  the  presence  of
the  two  ladies  in  our  party.
(cZ.)  That  our  compliance  with  conditions  dic-
tated to  us  by  the  presumed  spirits  inva-
riably intensified  the  manifestations  at  the
time.    (See  clauses  Nos.  20  and  21.)
— That  we  have  not  discovered  any  conditions
identical  with  those  ordinarily  deemed  necessary
to  the  production  of  the  so-called  electro -biolo-
gic or  mesmeric  phenomena — but  often  the  re-
verse.   Thus  we  may  state : —

(a.)  That  intentness  or  desire  for  the  mani-
festations (as  preparatory  processes)  far
more  frequently  prefaced  failure  than
success,  we  commonly  finding  that  those
seances  were  the  most   successful  at

EEPORTS  OE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

wliicli  the  phenomena  occurred  imme-
diately, or  almost  immediately,  we  seated
ourselves  at  the  table.
(&.)  That,  as  detailed  in  clause  No.  23,  the
phenomena  sometimes  occurred  to  us
spontaneously  and  unsought,
(c).  That  no  influences  existed  at  our  seances
that  impaired  our  powers  of  observa-
tion or  discrimination,  inasmuch  as  the
remembrance  of  each  person  present
thereat  as  to  what  had  taken  place
invariably  accorded  with  the  experience
of  all  the  others,  and  was  further  cor-
roborated by  the  notes  taken  at  the
time,  as  well  as  by  independent  testi-
mony.   (See  clause  No.  22.)
—That  whatever  might  be  the  force  or  power
employed  in  the  manifestations,  or  whatever
the  conditions  under  which  those  manifesta-
tions took  place,  we  frequently  noted  that  there
appeared  to  be  a  desire  to  conserve  or  econo-
mise such  force  or  power  ;  for  example  :—
{a.)  We  rarely  obtained  second  rephes  to
questions  already  answered,  even  when
we  inverted  such  questions  for  the  pur-
pose.

(6.)  The  phraseology  of  communications  was
mostly  succinct,  redundant  words  or
terms  being  seldom,  if  ever,  employed.

(c.)  We  seldom  had  superfluous  or  meaning-

EEPOETS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

27

less  raps,  the  rapping  that  took  place
conveying  either  original  communica-
tions or  answers  to  our  questions.
(d.)  In  order  as  it  were  to  minimise  the
power  or  force  referred  to,  the  presumed
intelligences  sometimes  preferred  to
give  coijcise  answers,  rather  than  to
make  sustained  communications.  For
instance,  we  once  asked,  somewhat  per-
sistently, for  an  original  communication
and  received  as  such  the  words  "  will
answer  any  question  ;  "  the  same  being
a  compliance  with  our  request,  clothed,
however,  in  the  form  of  a  reply.

32.  — That  from  such  observation  of  the  phenomena,

we  have  occasionally  found  it  desirable  as  a
condition  to  success,  not  to  stimulate  or  over-
tax the  rapping ;  while  at  other  times  no  such
precautions  appeared  to  be  necessary  or  were
taken.

33.  — That  from  Good  Friday,  in  March,  1869,  until

the  end  of  the  following  month  of  May,  the
manifestations  presented  themselves  under  the
conditions  assumed  to  be  such  throughout  this
Eeport  at  our  various  meetings,  with  but  few
instances  of  failure.

34.  — That  during  the  following  months  of  June  and

July,  we  continued  our  meetings  as  before ;  but
notwithstanding  that  we  duly  observed  all  the
conditions  assumed  to  be  necessary,  and  that

EEPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

the  two  ladies  of  our  party  were  present,  mani-
festations took  place  upon  two  occasions  only,
and  then  of  a  subdued  ai^d  apparently  weakened
character.

— That  failures  and  successes  alike  took  place,
under  the  same  average  condition  of  health,  of
weather,  and  of  temperature.

—That  from  August,  1869,  to  February,  1870,
inclusive,  your  Sub-committee  held  no  meetings
and  witnessed  no  phenomena,  but  that  on
March  7th,  1870,  the  raps  returned  spontane-
ously, whilst  two  members  of  your  Sub-com-
mittee and  their  wives  were  playing  at  whist,  a
third  lady  (a  stranger  to  the  phenomena)  being
present.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  rubber  a
seance  was  arranged,  when  a  few  questions
were  answered  by  the  presumed  spirit,  but  no
original  communications  were  made.

—That,  as  bearing  upon  the  subject  of  condi-
tions, we  ought,  perhaps,  to  state  that  a
domestic  event  of  what  is  generally  termed  an
interesting  nature,  took  place  with  respect  to
one  of  the  ladies  of  our  party  in  the  month  of
February,  1870,  inasmuch  as  this  may  possibly
afford  some  clue  to  the  failure  of  the  manifesta-
tions during  and  after  the  previous  month  of
June.

—As  further  illustrating  the  foregoing  statements,
your  Committee  think  it  advisable  to  give  a
short  history  of  what  took  place  at  certam  of

EEPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

29

their  sittings,  names,  however,  being  for  ob-
vious reasons  omitted  or  altered,  and  the  terms
spirit  "  or  "  intelhgence  "  being  used  for  the
sake  of  brevity  to  signify  the  power  or  force
through  which  the  various  phenomena  were
produced.  Our  first  sitting  took  place  on  the
evening  of  Good  Friday,  in  1869,  there  being
six  persons  present,  three  of  whom  were  mem-
bers of  the  committee.  After  a  time,  the  table
at  which  we  had  seated  ourselves  (and  which,
we  had,  as  a  preliminary  formality,  carefully  ex-
amined) began  to  move,  at  first  slowly,  but  after-
wards more  quickly.  During  a  pause,  one  of  the
party  exclaimed,  "What  singular  things  the
raps  must  be  !"  immediately  upon  which  we
heard,  as  if  in  response,  two  or  three  faint,  but
perfectly  audible  sounds,  like  the  ticking  of  a
clock,  proceed  fi-om  the  centre  of  the  table.  The
question  was  at  once  asked,  "  Was  a  spirit  pre-
sent ?"  Three  raps.  "  Did  three  raps  mean
*  yes  ?'  "  Several  raps,  as  if  in  acquiescence.
'*  If  the  spirit  meant  to  communicate  with  us,
should  three  raps  mean  *  yes,'  two  *  doubtful,'
and  one  '  no  '  "  "  Yes."  "  Would  the  spirit  tell
us  its  name  through  the  alphabet?"  "Yes."
The  preliminaries  being  thus  settled,  one  of  the
party  was  asked  to  spcj.k  aloud  the  letters.  He
did  so.  "  A,  B,  C,"  up  to  "  W,"  with  which  lat-
ter letter  came  one  of  the  promised  raps.  The
next  letter  was  /. ,  tlien  L,  and  so  on,  until  the

EEPOETS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

word  "  Walter  "  had  been  given.  "  Has  the
spirit  any  other  name  ?"  was  asked.  "  Will  it
tell  ns  what  it  is  ?"  "  T es."  The  same  method
which  had  produced  the  name  "  Walter  "  now
gave  us  the  surname  of  a  gentleman  present.  "  Is

the  spirit  in  any  way  related  to  Mr.  A  ?"  we

inquired.    "  Yes."    "  Will  it  state  in  what  de-
gree ?"    "  Yes."   More  alphabet  work,  letter  by
letter,  and  the  result,  "  Infant  grand."    "  Infant
grandfather?"   somebody  suggested.    The  lu-
dicrousness  of  the  suggestion  caused  us  to  laugh,
in  which  the  spirit  appeared  to  join  by  a  num-
ber of  raps  of  different  degrees  of  intensity.  On
again  with  the  alphabet  to  the  completion  of
the  sentence.    "  Infant  granduncle."  Several
questions  having  been  answered  by  this  spirit,
we  asked  it  for  an   original  communication.
The  raps  continuing,  we  expected  the  letters
now  taken  down  would  form  the  message  we
were  to  receive,  but,  instead  of  such  being  the
case,  the  words  given  were,  "  a  new  spirit,"
and  it  transpired  from  what  subsequently  took
place,  that  a  new  intelKgence  was  in  communi-
cation with  us.     This  spirit  also  answered  a
number  of  questions  as  to  its  name,  and  the
time  when  it  was  in  the  flesh,  &c.,  as,  in  fact,
did  also  other  spirits  upon  subsequent  occa-
sions ;  but  as  these  replies  partook  more  or  less
of  the  same  character,  and  did  not  present
anything  peculiarly  worthy  of  note,  we  have

REPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

31

tliono-ht  it  better  to  confine  our  Report  to  a
sliort  statement  of  what  took  place  at  certain
of  our  sittings  wliere  the  most  marked  manifes-
tations occurred,  -merely  observing  for  your
information,  that  at  the  sittings  in  question
not  less  than  two  of  your  Committee  were
present  with  their  wives,  and  that  the  whole
party  never  consisted  of  less  than  five,  or  more
than  seven  persons.
— At  one  of  our  sittings,  organized  without  pre-
meditation, at  the  close  of  a  musical  evening,  on
the  7th  May,  1869,  a  spirit  came,  who  in  reply
to  our  inquiry  stated  its  name  was  Henry.  As
a  lady  present  had  lost  a  relative  of  that  name,
she  became  impressed  with  the  idea  that  it
was  his  spirit  that  had  visited  us,  and  this  so
afi'ected  her  that  we  found  it  necessary  to  bring
the  sitting  to  a  close.  Two  days  aft.erwards
we  held  a  sitting  in  the  dining-room  of  a
member  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  the  party
consisting  of  five  persons.  For  a  considerable
time  no  manifestations  took  place,  and  we  were
about  to  break  up  the  seance  when  two  or  three
peculiarly  sharp  raps  from  the  centre  of  the
table  induced  us  to  continue  the  sitting.  Upon
this  occasion  our  hostess  was  seated  in  her
usual  place  at  the  head  of  the  table,  having  her
husband  on  her  right,  a  lady  and  gentleman  on
her  left,  and  a  gentleman  opposite  to  her.  The
latter  gentleman,  therefore,  occupied  the  posi-

EEPOETS  OF  BUB-COMMITTEES.

tion  usually  filled  by  tlie  liost  at  the  foot  of  the
table.    The  raps  being  heard,  a  question  was
asked  whether  the  conditions  were  satisfactory.
"No."    "Does  the  spirit  wish  either  of  the
party  to  change  places  ?"    "  Yes."    "  Perhaps,
the  spirit  will  state  who  is  to  move  ?"    "  Yes."
The  gentleman  at  the  foot  of  the  table,  who
had  been  appointed  director  of  this  seance,  now
named  and  pointed  at  each  person  present  in
turn,  commencing  with-  his  right-hand  neigh-
bour.    A  single  rap  was  given  at  each  name
until  the  host's  turn  had  arrived,  when  three
raps  were  heard,  and  ultimately  (acting  under
instructions  from  the  spirit)  the  host  and  the
gentleman  at  the  foot  of  the  table  changed
places,  an  arrangement  which  at  once  placed
the  former  in  the  position  he,  as  master  of  the
house,  ordinarily  occupied.     The  effect  this
alteration  had  upon  the  conditions  was  at  once
apparent;  the  raps  which  had  been  remarkably
clear  and  decided  before,  becoming  now  louder
and  vibrative,  sounding  as  if  the  table,  an  or-
dinary dining  one,  had  been  struck  with  a  small
hammer.    "Will  the  spirit  tell  us  its  name?"
« Yes— HENRY."    When  this  name  was
given,  we  at  once  assumed  that  the  spirit  which
had  visited  us  on  the  occasion  mentioned  above
had  come  to  us  again,  and  as  the  lady  who  had
caused  the  seance  to  be  broken  up  then  was
present  now,  we  feared  lest  this  sitting  also

EEPOBTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

33

might  be  abruptly  terminated.  This,  however,
did  not  turn  out  to  be  the  case.  All  parties  re-
mained  quiescent,  and  the  spirit  was  asked  to
give  the  surname  it  had  been  known  by  on
earth.  It  did  so—"  K  ."  We  had  all  ex-
pected that  the  spirit  would  have  announced
itself  as  the  relative  of  the  lady  referred  to,
but  it  did  not  do  so,  the  name  given  being  that
of  a  step-brother  of  our  hostess  who  had  died
abroad  fourteen  years  previously.  This  spirit
replied  in  the  usual  manner  to  questions  put  to
it  by  the  director  (who  had  never  before  known

or  heard  of  the  existence  of  Henry  K  )

stating  truly  the  name  of  the  place  where  and
the  year  in  which  it  had  left  the  flesh,  such  re-
plies being  given  sharply  and  unhesitatingly  as
if  for  the  purpose  of  identification.  It  then,  as
if  satisfied  that  it  had  done  all  that  could  be  re-
quired in  that  direction,  persistently  declined
to  answer  any  more  questions,  but  intimated
that  it  had  a  communication  to  make.  This
communication  carefully  noted  and  taken  down,
letter  by  letter,  was  as  follows  :— "  I  love  dear

^  christian  name  of  our  hostess)  very

much,  although  I  ne."  At  this  point  our  hos-
tess, remembering,  as  she  informed  us,  that  her
brother  had  been  an  irregular  correspondent,
suggested  "  never  wrote."  "No."  "Perhaps
the  spirit  will  proceed,"  said  the  director.
"  Having  «  n  e  '  of  the  last  word,  we  shall  be

D

EEPOETS  OF  SUB -COMMITTEES.

dad  to  receive  tlie  next  letter."    The  inter-
rupted  sentence  was  resumed — "  glected  her
when  I  was  "— "  Alive  ?"  somebody  suggested.
"No."    "Living?"    "No."    A  rap  clear  and
distinct,  and  strangely  suggestive  of  annoyance
being  experienced  by  the  spirit  at  the  interrup-
tion of  its  communication.    The  director  re-
peated the  sentence  as  far  as  it  had  gone,  and
it  was  at  once  continued  by  the  raps — "on
earth.    She  ought  to  liave  had  a  l  " — "  A
letter,"  suggested  tlie  hostess,  her  mind  evi-
dently dwelling  on  her  brother's  shortcom-
ings as  a  correspondent.    "No."    The  next
letter  rapped  at  was  "  l."    "  We  already  have
l"  said  the  director.     "  The  sentence  as  I

have  it  is,  '  I  love  dear  M          very  much,

although  I  neglected  her  when  I  was  on  earth ;
she  ought  to  have"  had  a  l.'  "    This  interrup-
tion produced  a  series  of  sharp  and  petulant
raps  from  the  spirit,  as  if  it  were  calling  the
speaker  to  order.     "Then  the  spirit  means
double  '  L,'  and  the  sentence  runs,  '  She  ought
to  have  had  all.'  "    "My  property  "  was  next
spelt  out.    "  It  was  money.    X         my  exe-
cutor has  it."    It  can  be  understood  that  a
message  of  this  personal  nature  thus  commu-
nicated surprised  all  present,  the  hostess  in
particular,  who  became  agitated,  but  without
losiDg  her  presence  of  mind.    While  the  name
(a  peculiar  one)  of  the  execuLor  was  bemg

EEPOETS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

35

rapped  out  in  a  clear  and  decisive  manner,
letter  by  letter,  she  evidently  strove  to  recal  it
to  her  memory,  and  in  so  doing  hi5  upon  one  or
two  names  somewhat  similar  to,  but  not  quite
the  same  as  the  name  given  by  the  spirit,  and
which  latter  name  transpired,  upon  reference  to
certain  letters  iii  the  possession  of  the  hostess,
to  be  the  correct  one.  The  following  conver-
sation then  took  place  with  the  spirit,  the  host
himself  putting  the  questions  : — "  Why  have
yoii  made  this  communication  to  us?"  "As
a  jjroof  of  spiritual  existence,  and  a  token

of  my  love  for  M  ."     "Do  you  wish  any

steps  to  be  taken  to  recover  the  money?"
"No;  money  does  not  give  haj)piness."  "Are

you  angry  with  X  for  what  he  has  done  ?  "

"Animosity  does  not  exist  in  spirit-land."
The  spirit  now  intimated  to  us  that  he  was
about  to  depart,  and  bade  us  good  night  in  the
usual  manner,  by  a  series  of  raps,  loud  at  first,
and  gradually  dying  away  into  the  distance. ,
— Youi  Committee  have  since  ascertained  that

Henry  K  resided'  abroad   at   the   place  .

named  to  us,  several  years  previously  to  his
death,  and  that  shortly  after  that  event  hap-
pened, Mr.  X  ,  his  executor,  wrote  to  the

trustees  of  certain  funded  property  in  England
forming  part  of  the  estate  of  the  deceased,  re-
questing them  to  send  him  a  portion  thereof  to
enable  him  to  pay  certain  liabilities,  and  author-

B  2

EEPORTS  OF  SUB- COMMITTEES.

izing  tliem  to  pay  the  balance  to  our  hostess

(then  Miss   )   who  was  the  residuaiy

legatee,  and  who  received  the  same,  but  no-
thing beyond ;  the  statements  of  Mr.  X

upon  the  subject  of  the  liabilities  referred  to
passing  unchallenged,  and  no  account  what-
ever having  been  rendered  by  him  of  his  execu-
torship. Such  being  the  facts  of  the  case,  your
Committee  inquired  whether  any  doubts  had
ever  arisen  in  the  minds  of  the  lady  or  her  hus-
band as  to  the  trustworthiness  of  Mr.  X  ;

but  thev  have  been  informed  that  so  far  from
having  any  suspicion  upon  the  subject,  the  lady
was  at  the  time  so  impressed  with  the  honour-
able conduct  of  the  gentleman  referred  to  (whom,
it  appears,  she  never  saw,  and  from  whom  she
has  not  heard  since),  that  she  transmitted  to
him  when  the  matter  was  settled  a  sum  of
money  (above  £50)  wherewith  to  purchase  on
her  behalf  some  acceptable  article  as  a  present
from  her  to  his  wife  and  family.  "We  are  also
assured  by  the  host  that  when  he  first  became
acquainted  with  his  wife,  and  she  occasionally

spoke  of  Mr.  X  ,  she  always  did  so  with

great  respect,  and  that  nothing  whatever  had
transpired  down  to  the  time  of  the  seance  to
cause  her  to  alter  her  opinion ;  that  with  re-
gard to  himself  he  had  been  perfectly  passive
upon  the  subject  throughout,  and  had  long
since  forgotten  the  fact  that  such  a  person  as

REPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

37

X  bad  been  in  existence ;  that  he  had

never,  in  any  way,  troubled  himself  about  or
investigated  the  position  of  his  wife  under  her
brother's  will,  the  deceased  having  lived  and
died  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe,  and  the
whole  matter  having  been  entirely  closed  some
considerable  time  previous  to  the  marriage  ;
and  that  it  was  only  since  the  communication
in  question  had  been  made  that  he  had  perused
certain  letters  which  were  in  his  wife's  posses-
sion, and  which  had  not  been  looked  at  for
many  years,  and  ascertained  from  them  the
facts  stated  in  this  clause.
— At  another  seance  held  in  the  evening  of  the
2nd  July  last,  six  persons  were  present,  four
of  whom  were  members  of  your  Committee.
During  a  considerable  period  no  manifestation
of  any  phenomena  took  place,  and  it  was  only
after  a  long  interval,  and  when  one  of  the  party
had  left,  that  some  raps  came  of  a  character
different  to  any  we  had  joreviously  heard.  We
several  times  asked  this  spirit  whether  it  would
tell  us  its  name,  and  received  in  reply  two  dull
thuds  from  the  table,  and  it  was  only  after
much  perseverance  that  we  at  last  obtained  an
affirmative  answer,  followed  up  by  heavy  lump-
ish raps  at  the  following  letters.  "JEM
CLARK  E."  "  Would  Jem  Clarke  tell  us
why  he  has  visited  us  ?"  we  asked.  "  No."
"  Would  he  make  any  communication  to  us  ?"

38  REPORTS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

"  No."    "  Would  lie  answer  any  questions  ?"
«  Doubtful."    We  were  discussing  the  question
we  should  next  put,  when  the  lady  in  whose
house  we  were  assembled,  exclaimed  "  Clarke  !
Clarke !  why,  that  is  the  name  of  my  house-
maid, who  is  about  to  leave  me.    Perhaps  the
spirit  is  some  relative  of  hers."    Three  thuds
from  the  table.    "  Have  you  come  to  see  her  ?"
"Yes."     "She  appears  unhappy.     Do  you
know  why  she  is  going  away?"    No  response.
"  Are   you   her  guardian   spirit  ?"     "  Yes.

Perhaps  an  ancestor  of  hers  ?"    Three  more
thuds,  given  as  if  with  diflaculty,  and  Mr.  James
Clarke  had  evidently  left  us.
42.— Before  concluding  this  our  Eeport,  we  deem
,   it  to  be  right  to  state  for  your  information  that
when  we  commenced  our  investigation  your
Committee  consisted  of  three  members  only,
all  of  whom  were  totally  unacquainted  with  the
phenomena   except  by  rumour,  and  that  a
fourth  member  was  subsequently  added  who
had  had  a  previous  acquaintance  with  the  sub-
ject, but  who  did  not  join  our  party  until  the
last  of  our  successful  meetings  in  May.

SUB-COMMITTEE  No.  3.

It  was  proposed  and  arranged  by  your  Sub-com-
mittee  that  its  members  should  meet  regularly  and

REPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

39

piincfcually  from  time  to  time,  and  try  by  tlio  com-
monly prescribed  forms  to  educe  what  is  called
medium  power"  from  amongst  themselves,  or  their
intimate  friends,  who  might  be  invited  to  attend
with  them.

It  was  determined  that  any  unusual  occurrence
which  might  take  place  under  such  conditions  should
be  thoroughly  examined  and  tested,  and  the  result
carefully  noted.

A  primary  condition  of  any  possible  success  from
this  plan,  so  your  Sub-committee  were  informed,
was,  that  all  the  members  should  continue  to  attend
a  certain  number  of  meetings  with  regularity.  But
this  was  found  to  be  impracticable,  chiefly  in  conse-
quence of  the  locality  chosen  for  the  meetings  being
so  far  from  the  homes  of  a  majority  of  the  members.
From  this  circumstance  but  ten  meetings  were  held,
and  the  results  obtained  were  of  less  importance
than  were  some  of  those  which  other  Sub-commit-
tees, more  favourably  placed,  have  had  opportunities
of  witnessing.  Our  members,  however,  have  all
had,  at  various  times,  the  privilege  of  attending  with
one  or  more  of  the  other  Sub-committees,  and  have
thus  been  placed  in  a  position  to  form  larger  and
more  accurate  opinions  than  could  have  been  drawn
from  such  elements  merely  as  were  obtained  in  the
experiments  of  this  Sub-committee.

The  visitors  who  attended  our  meetings,  on  all
occasions  but  one  which  is  specified  in  the  minutes,
were  well-known  to  one  or  more  of  our  members.

40

EEPOHTS  01?  SUB-COMMITTEES.

Two  were  gentlemen  and  three  ladies.  Of  the  gentle-
men, one  is  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,
the  other  is  a  civil  engineer.  Each  attended  on  two
occasions.  The  ladies  are  near  relatives  of  two  of
the  members  of  the  Committee.

We  have  therefore  good  grounds  for  assuming
that  everything  which  has  been  described  as  occur-
ring took  place  in  the  presence  of  ladies  and  gentle-
men of  honest  purposes,  whose  conduct  throughout
the  experiments  was  guided  by  the  most  perfect
good  faith.

Owing,  probably,  to  the  small  number  of  our  sit-
tings, the  development  of  our  "mediumistio  "  power
did  not  proceed  so  far  as  to  enable  us  to  witness
here  such  plain  unquestionable  evidence  of  the  pre-
sence of  strange  forces  as  has  been  manifest  to  the
members  of  some  of  the  other  Sub-committees —
as  in  the  movements  of  heavy  tables  repeatedly
without  contact  of  any  kind.    But  we  have  made
careful  experiments  in  order  to  distinguish  between
the  forces  applied  by  such  contact  as  was  found  to
be  necessary,  and  that  which  would  be  required  to
produce  some  of  the  actual  movements  witnessed,
and  we  find  that  though  the  pressure  exerted  by  a
man's  hands,  as  laid  on  the  table  at  these  seances,
varies  with  every  movement  or  change  of  position,
and  according  to  the  proportion  of  arm-weight  bear-
ing on  it— there  are  tolerably  well-defined  limits  at
which,  in  the  various  attitudes,  conscious  pressure
or  muscular  effort  begins.    Taking  a  very  extreme

EEPORTS  OF  SUB-C0M5IITTEES.

41

and  unusual  case,  in  order  to  give  the  utmost  extent
of  allowance  for  unconscious  pressure,  we  will  sup-
pose tliat  from  fatigue  or  indolence  a  person  assumes
a  listless  attitude,  sitting  forward  on  the  seat  of  his
chair,  and  leaning  heavily  against  the  back  of  it,  his
hands  and  arms  stretched  nearly  horizontally  for-
v/ard,  and  resting  on  the  table  to  about  the  middle
of  the  forearm,  the  muscles  of  the  back  and  shoul-
ders being  entirely  relaxed.  The  "  dead- weight  "
thus  thrown  on  the  table  will  be  nearly  eight
pounds.  In  this  attitude,  probably,  the  largest
amount  of  involuntary  force  is  applied.  If  these
conditions  be  modified  merely  by  sitting  more  up-
right, so  that  the  arms  are  bent  at  the  elbows  to
about  right  angles,  the  pressure  then  becomes  about
4  to  5  lbs.  If  the  muscles  of  the  back  and  shoulders
are  kept  in  a  certain  degree  of  tension,  and  the  arms
drawn  backwards  until  the  wrists  and  hands  only
rest  freely  on  the  table,  the  pressure  then  becomes
about  2  lbs.  This'is  the  attitude  most  commonly
assumed,  so  that  a  pressure  of  2  lbs.  may  be  taken
as  the  usual  amount  of  force  exerted  by  an  attentive
sitter,  though,  when  some  of  the  more  active
"  manifestations "  are  in  progress,  the  pressure
which  each  person  exerts  generally  ranges  down-
wards from  this  to  less  than  an  ounce,  or  to  the
lightest  touch  possible.

These  data  apply  to  a  man  of  ordinary  size  and
weight.  They  will  apply  equally,  or  nearly  so,  to
the  force  which  a  woman  exerts  under  similar  con-

42

EBPOETS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

ditions,  if  one  third  be  deducted  in  all  cases.  Prac-
tically tliey  give  a  sufficiently  exact  indication  of
the  amount  of  force  which  may  be  unconsciously  ex-
erted in  various  ways  by  persons  engaged  in  these
seances.

By  careful  experiments  with  the  smaller  of  the
tables,*  we  have  found  that  the  force  necessary  to
tilt  it'  when  applied  at  the  most  favourable  angle,
viz.,  90°  to  the  legs,  is  nearly  twenty-one  and
a-half  pounds.  But  in  applying  the  force  in  this
direction,  some  obstruction  must  be  placed  on  the
floor  against  the  legs,  otherwise  it  will  slide  and  not
tilt  at  all  at  this  angle.

Even  when  the  force  is  applied  at  45°  the  ten-
dency  is  to  slide  rather  than  to  tHt  or  cant,  to^ en-
sure which  the  angle  must  not  much  exceed  30°,  at
which  the  pressure  necessary  is  about  43i  lbs.  As
will  be  seen,  the  force  necessary  to  tilt  it  from  one
end  is  very  much  greater.

A  man  of  ordinary  strength  standing  at  one  side
of  the  table,  with  his  hands  having  the  necessary  co-
hesion with  the  smooth  surface  of  the  top,  finds  he
can  push  it  along  the  floor  with  tolerable  ease.  To
drag  it  towards  him  is  not  so  easy,  and  he  finds
great  difficulty  in  moving  it  from  right  to  left  m  the
direction  of  its  length.  With  his  hands  placed  m  a
similar  manner  on  the  top  surface  at  one  end,  he
cannot  on  the  smooth  floor  tilt  up^he  opposite  end.

*  See  Minutes,  Sub-committee  No.  3.

EEPOETS  OF  SUB-COMMITTEES.

43

Ifc  was  foimd  that  two  men  could  do  tliis ;  but  tlie
hand  of  a  third  laid  lightly  on  the  opposite  end,
made  it  impossible  even  for  two  to  produce  this
tiltino-  endwise.  In  the  easiest  of  these  imitative
movements,  if  three  other  persons  occupy  the  three
remaining  sides  of  the  table  as  in  the  actual  seance,  the
additional  weight,  though  really  very  small,  is  so
greatly  multiplied  by  leverage  that  it  is  impossible
for  the  one  experimenter  to  produce  some  of  the
movements  without  great  and  evident  exertion,
whilst  others  he  cannot  do  at  all.

Yet,  usually,  during  the  seances  this .  table  moved
in  all  directions — from  side  to  side — from  end  to
end — and  round  and  round — over  a  large  room  with
great  ease  and  smooth  regularity,  as  well  as  with  a
kind  of  rushing  speed — halting  suddenly,  and  as
suddenly  starting  off  again.  The  movements  were
often  made  with  an  ease  and  facility  which  indi-
cated a  large  reserve  of  unexpended  force.  At
other  times,  on  the  contrary,  they  were  so  weak  as
to  be  scarcely  discernible.

In  some  of  the  movements  of  this  table — which
is  without  castors — a  rattling  sound  was  made  as
though  its  legs  were  rapidly  "  making  and  breaking
contact  "  with  the  floor.  An  opinion  was  expressed
that  this  was  probably  caused  by  unconscious  pres-
sure from  the  "  mediums  ;  "  but  our  subsequent  ex-
periments showed  that  when  a  downward  pushing
pressure  was  applied  by  the  hands,  the  table  glided
along  noiselessly,  and  the  rattling  sound  could  be

44

EEPOETS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

exactly  imitated  wlien  we  lifted  a  considerable  por-
tion of  tlie  weiglit  off  tlie  floor,  and  so  dragged  the
table  along,  thus  indicating  that  the  forces  which  in
the  "  seance "  produced  the  noisy  movements  in
question  must  have  been  applied  upwards  and  for-
wards, whilst  it  was  evident  that  the  only  forces
which  could  have  been  applied  by  the  "  mediums  "
must  have  been  directed  downwards  and  forwards.

Probably  the  strongest  exhibition  of  force  through
this  table  occurred  when  two  ladies  were  sitting —
one  at  one  side,  the  other  at  one  end,  and  a  gentle-
man at  the  other  end,  the  side  opposite  the  first
lady  being  vacant,  except  that  Mr.  Meyers  sat  there
to  watch  the  proceedings.  Some  of  the  tilts  under
these  circumstances  were  very  strong — even  violent
— as  though,  when  one  side  had  been  tilted  up  to  a
certain  height,  a  powerful  spring  became  released,
and  the  descent  was  so  sharp,  strong  and  sudden,
that  it  shook  the  strong  floor  of  the  room,  and
could  be  heard  all  over  and  outside  the  house.

Mr.  Meyers,  in  his  Report,  says: — "I  noticed
that  the  table  invariably  tilted  towards  No.  2,  at
times  with  so  much  force,  that,  in  the  position  in
which  I  was  sitting,  I  was  unable  to  prevent  it
rising,  though  I  succeeded  in  modifying  the  vigom-
of  the  tilts."— F?V/<?  p.  394.

The  side  No.  2  was  occupied  by  one  of  the  ladies.
Mr.  Meyers  was  seated  at  the  opposite  side.

As  an  example  of  the  force  exerted  through  the
larger  loo  table,  we  may  refer  to  the  minutes  of

REPOETS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

45

April  8th.  It  would  be  difficult  to  estimate  accu-
rately the  effort  required  to  produce  the  rapid
whirling  movements  described  there.  To  cant  up
this  table— which  weighs  more  than  90  lbs.— until
its  top  touches  the  floor,  and  it  remains  resting
partly  on  the  outer  rim  of  this,  and  on  the  trian-
gular foot-base,  requires  a  considerable  lift ;  but  to
raise  it  just  beyond  this  point,  and  until  it  is  poised
on  the  rim  alone— as  was  twice  done  on  the  evening
referred  to— requires  on  the  smooth  floor  at  the
largest  practicable  angle,  to  prevent  sliding— a  force
of  about  851bs. ;  though  at  right  angles,  and  precau-
tion taken  to  prevent  sliding,  42  lbs.  is  sufficient.

In  the  imitative  experiment  it  was  found  that,
besides  actual  lifting  force,  a  considerable  force  as
well  as  great  care,  was  necessary  to  preserve  the
balance  on  one  point  of  the  rim,  and  to  prevent
swinging  or  rolling  in  its  ascent ;  but  in  the  actual
seance  no  swaying  or  tendency  to  lose  balance  was
at  any  time  felt.

To  slide  this  table — which  is  on  castors — takes  a
force  of  from  1 5  to  20  lbs.,  according  to  the  set  of
the  castors,  or  slight  inequahties  in  the  floor.

None  of  the  experimenters  were  conscious  of  con-
tributing in  any  appreciable  degree,  in  the  produc-
tion of  the  force  thus  shown  to  be  necessary  to  the
effects  witnessed.  All  hands  being  lightly  kept  on
the  top  of  the  table  throughout  the  movements.

Besides  the  evidence  thus  afforded  of  the  presence
of  this  not  generally  recognised  force,  we  believe  we

46

KErORTS  OP  SUC-COMMITTEES.

have  had  in  these  experiments  evidence  of  an  intelli-
gence directing  it — as  in  moving  by  request  in  a
particular  direction — tilting  a  certain  number  of
times  as  required — and  by  tilts  or  taps  spelling  out
words  and  sentences  addressed  to  those  present.

It  will  be  observed  that  it  was  only  when  certain
persons  were  preseut  that  any  evidence  of  this  force
and  intelligence  was  presented.  Two  friends  were
particularly  noticed  as  indispensable.  These  were  a
clergyman  and  the  wife  of  another  clergyman,  both
of  the  Church  of  England.

The  room  in  which  we  held  our  meetings  has  a
smooth  polished  floor,  and  is  28  feet  long  by  22  feet
wide.

These  minute  details  we  have  felt  to  be  necessary,
in  order  that  the  Committee  might  be  made  as  fully
acquainted  as  possible  with  all  the  conditions  and
circumstances  connected  with  the  production  of  the
occurrences  described  in  the  Minutes. — Vide  p.  393.

In  conclnding  our  Report,  we  desire  to  express  to
the  Committee  our  unanimous  conviction  that  the
phenomena  we  have  witnessed  in  the  course  of  these
investigations,  though  comparatively  unimportant,
do  nevertheless  raise  some  most  important  questions
in-science  and  philosoxjhy,  and  deserve  the  fullest
examination  by  capable  and  independent  thinkers.

SVB-COMMITTEE,  No.  4.

Nothing  occurred  in  presence  of  this  Sub-com-
mittee worth  recording.

KEPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMITTEES.

47

SUB-COMMITTEE  No.  5.

The  Committee  appointed  to  meet  Mr.  Home  for  the
purpose  of  investigating  tlie  alleged  Spiritual  phe-
nomena produced  through  his  agency,  report  thereon

as  follows : —

The  first  seance  was  held  on  the  2nd  April,  1869.
The  entire  Committee,  consisting  of  Dr.  Edmunds,
Messrs.  Bergheim,  Bradlaugh,  Dyte  and  Gannon,
were  present,  as  were  also  Lord  Adare,  the  Master

of  (now   Lord)    Lindsay,  General  B   and

Mr.  Jencken.  Previous  to  the  formation  of  the
circle,  Mr.  Home  begged  permission  to  change  his
dress,  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  that  he
had  no  machinery  of  any  kind  concealed  about  his
person.  This  was  accordingly  accomplished  in  the
presence  of  Dr.  Edmunds  and  Mr.  Bergheim,  the
former  reporting  to  the  Committee,  on  his  return,
that  Mr.  Home  possessed  an  extremely  muscular  and
elastic  frame.  The  seance  was  then  held  in  the
dining-room ;  a  table  of  more  than  ordinary  solidity
and  weight  being  used.  At.  the  request  of  Mr.
Home,  Mrs.  Edmunds  consented  to  assist  at  the
seances,  and  attended  all  the  subsequent  meetings.

The  seance  occupied  two  hours  and  twenty  mi-
nutes, and  the  manifestations  were  of  the  most  trifling
character,  consisting  of  a  few  raps  and  slight  move-
ments of  the  table.  The  motion  was  of  the  usual
swaying,  irregular  kind,  and  the  raps  were  very  feeble.
General  B  was  slightly  affected  with  convulsive

48

EEPOETS  OF  SUJJ-COMMITTEES;

movements  in  his  right  arm,  which  he  declared  to  be
beyond  the  control  of  his  will.  A  pencil  was  handed
to  him,  and  his  hand  wrote  some  irregular  characters
which  could  not  be  deciphered  by  any  one  present.
At  the  close  of  the  seance,  and  after  the  departure  of
Mr.  Home  and  the  visitors,  Dr.  Edmunds  demon-
strated that  the  dining-table,  although  large  and
massive,  could  be  easily  moved  by  slight  muscular
exertion.

On  the  9th  April  the  investigation  was  resumed,
Mr.  Home  being  again  accompanied  by  Lord  Adare
and  the  Master  of  Lindsay.  All  the  members  of
the  Committee,  with  the  exception  of  Dr.  Edmunds,
were  present.  Within  half-an-hour  after  the  com-
mencement of  the  seance,  a  few  slight  raps  were
heard  which  seemed  to  come  from  the  spot  were  Mr.
Home  was  sitting.  Messrs.  Bradlaugh  and  Dyte,
were  under  -the  impression  that  they  proceeded  from
the  leg  of  the  table,  and  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Home,
the  former  gentleman  seated  himself  on  the  floor  to
guard  against  the  possibility  of  fraud.  The  table
now  moved  slightly,  in  the  same  manner  as  before,
and  the  raps  continued;  Mr,  Bradlaugh  asserting  that
they  came  from  the  leg  of  the  table,  and  Messrs.
Bergheim,  Home  and  Jencken  maintaining  that  they
were  produced  upon  its  surface.  In  the  course  of
the  evening,  Mr.  Home  seemed  slightly  affected ;  he
started,  exclaimed  "  ah  !  "  and  covered  his  face  with
his  hands.  A  few  minutes  afterwards  the  Master  of
Lindsay  stated  that  he  was  unable  to  move  his  left

REPORTS  OP  SUB-COMMJTTEES.

49

arm,  and  that  the  muscles  were  quite  rigid.  It  was
examined  by  Mr.  Dyte,  but  that  gentleman  was  un-
able to  discover  any  abnormal  symptoms.  The  raps
continued  at  intervals ;  but,  althougli  tlie  sitting  was
prolonged  until  a  quarter  past  ten  o'clock,  no  further
phenomena  of  any  importance  were  observed.

On  Friday,  the  16th,  Mr.  Home  again  met  the
Committee,  accompanied  by  the  Master  of  Lindsay
and  Lord  Adare.  The  "  circle  "  was  formed  at  half-
past  eight  o'clock,  and  the  raps  and  movements  of
the  table  were  again  repeated.  The  raps  were  very
feeble,  and  resembled  the  sounds  produced  by  the
tapping  of  a  finger-nail  on  the  table.  In  reference
to  the  movements.  Dr.  Edmunds  explained  that  the
table  moved  with  remarkable  ease  on  its  castors,  and
could  be  pushed  from  its  position  by  the  exertion  of
a  very  slight  force.

The  fourth  and  last  seance  of  the  Committee
afforded  only  the  most  feeble  phenomena,  and  owing
to  the  subsequent  illness  of  Mr.  Home,  the  investi-
gation was  not  revived.  During  the  inquiry,  Mr.
Home  afforded  every  facility  for  examination,  and
appeared  to  be  anxious  to  further  the  object  which
the  Committee  had  in  view.  It  is  almost  unneces-
sary to  add  that  nothing  occurred  at  any  of  the
meetings  which  could  be  attributed  to  supernatural
causes.  The  members  had  fully  expected  that  they
would  have  witnessed  some  of  the  alleged  extra-
ordinary levitations  of  Mr.  Home,  but  he  explained
at  the  opening  of  the  inquiry  that  the  phenomena

E

50

COMMUNICATIONS  PEOM

produced  througli  his  agency  were  of  uncertain  mani-
festation and  that  he  had  no  power  whatever  to
produce  them  at  will.

The  seances  were  held  in  a  fully  lighted  room.

BUB-COMMITTEE  No.  6.

This  Committee  met  four  times,  but  failed  to
obtain  any  phenomena  that  deserve  to  be  recorded.
On  one  occasion,  a  lady  visitor  brought  with  her
two  little  girls  aged  apparently  about  eight  and  ten
years  respectively,  whom  she  declared  to  be  mediums.
The  children  were  placed  at  a  small  chess-table,
which  they  proceeded  deliberately  to  rock  to  and
fro,  to  their  own  intense  delight,  and  to  the  amuse-
ment of  the  company.

At  no  other  meeting  was  there  even  the  pretence
of  any  spiritual  phenomena.

Farjes  from  51  to  107  contain  jpersoncd  opmions  of
indivichial  members  of  the  Committee,  and  may  be  found
in  the  original  edition,  ^published  by  Longmans  and  Co.,
p'rice  15s.

JOS

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

MINUTES

OF

THE  COMMITTEE.

Tuesday,  2nd  February,  1869.

Tliis  being  the  first  meeting  of  tlie  Comraittee,  tlie  business
was  chiefly  prelim  iaaiy.  Dr.  Edmunds  was  elected  Cbau-man,
and  Mr.  G.  W.  Bennett,  Secretary.  The  letters  from  Professor
Huxley  and  Mr.  George  Henry  Lewes,  signifyiag  the  inability
of  these  gentleman  to  attend  the  inquiry,  were  read  to  the  Com-
mittee ;  and  a  Sub-committee  was  appointed  to  investigate  the
phenomena  alleged  to  be  produced  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home.
It  was  resolved  that  a  letter  should  be  sent  to  the  Daily  Press,
announcing  the  formation  of  the  Committee,  and  requesting  the
co-operation  of  believers  in  SjDiiitualism.

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  letter  that  was  actually  sent : —

To  the  Editor  of  the  .

"  Sir, — Wni  you  allow  me,  through  the  mediimi  of  your  paper,
to  inform  those  of  your  readers  who  are  interested  in  the  above
question,  that  a  committee  has  been  appoiuted  by  the  Council  of
the  London  Dialectical  Society  for  the  purj^ose  of  instituting  a
thorough  and  searching  inquiiy  into  the  so-called  Sjiii-itual  manifes-
tations, with  a  view  of  obtaining  a  satisfactory  elucidation  of  the
phenomena.

"As  the  Committee  have  undertaken  this  task  solely  in  the
interests  of  science  and  free  inquiry,  it  is  hoped  that  many  of  t\\o

SPEECH  or  MRS.  HARDINGE.

109

believers  in  Spii-itualisin  will  recognise  the  advantages  to  be  derived
from  a  careful  and  honest  investigation  of  the  s\ibject;  and  will  be
willmg,  either  by  persor'iil  attendance  at  the  seances,  or  by  forward-
ing any  experiences  or  suggestions  of  theii-  own,  to  assist  the
Committee  in  amving  at  a  sound  and  just  conclusion.
"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir-,

"  Your  obedient  servant,

"G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Hon.  Sec.
"  32a,  George  Street,  Hanover  Square,  W."

Tuesday,  IGth  February,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
This  evening  was  devoted  to  the  reading  of  correspondence,  and
to  the  appointment  of  Sub-committees  for  the  piu-pose  of  practical
investigation.    The  correspondence  and  the  reports  of  the  Sub-
committees are  given  elsewhere.

Tuesday,  16th  March,  1869.
Chaii-man,  Dr.  Edmunds.
The  letters  received  since  the  last  meeting,  having  been  read  by
the  Hon.  Secretary,  the  Chau-man  at  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Cameron,
requested  Mi-s.  Hardinge,  who  was  present,  to  make  a  short  state-
ment to  the  Committee.  Mrs.  Hardinge,  complied  with  this  request
as  follows  : — She  commenced  by  warning  the  Committee  that  the
statement  she  was  about  to  make  would  be  a  somewhat  long
one;  she  would  however  promise,  at  least,  to  be  very  candid.
She  imderstood  that  the  Committee  fully  intended  to  investigate
the  subject  pxiblicly,  and  would  be  prepared  to  make  a  public  re-
port of  the  results  of  their  investigation.  She  was  of  opinion  that
if  the  inquiry  were  properly  conducted,  they  could  come  to  but
one  conclusion,  namely,  a  conviction  of  the  reality  and  spirituality
of  the  phenomena  in  question.  There  were,  however,  some  serious
difficulties  in  their  way,  not  the  least  of  which  was  the  comparative
scarceness  in  England  of  well-developed  mediums.  In  the  "United
States,  whei'e  she  had  lived  for  many  years,  there  was  scarcely  a  single

no

MINUTES  01''  THE  COMMITTEE.

town  where  spii'itual  cii-cles  had  not  been  foi-med  ;  and  the  mediums
might  be  reckoned  by  thousands.  In  London,  though  she  knew
several  non-professional,  sho  knew  but  two  professional  mediums.
The  services  of  these,  however,  might  perhaps  be  enlisted  on  behalf
of  the  Committee.

Her  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  and  character  Of  Spii-itualism
had  been  derived  partly  from  the  statements  of  mediums  and  spirits,
and  partly  from  her  own  personal  observation.  Tlie  facts  were  simply
these  :  For  the  last  21*  years  spirits — disembodied  men  and  women
— had  been  endeavpuring  to  communicate  with  theii-  friends  on  earth,
through  the  agency  of  what  she  might  call  "  vital  magnetism."  The
spirits  state  that  the  principal  difficulties  they  have  had  to  encoun-
ter have  arisen  mainly  from  two  causes.    1.  The  subtle  and  ill-
understood  nature  of  the  magnetic  fluid  used  to  produce  the  phe-
nomena.   2.  The  materialistic  tendencies  of  the  age,  which  operated
to  retard  investigation  and  neutralize  the  demonstrations.    As  in
every  other  science,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  the  conditions
equisite  for  the  production  of  spiritual  phenomena  should  be  care-
fully studied  and  implicitly  complied  with:  and  until  we  were
better  acquainted  with  these  conditions,  we  must  be  prepared  for
many  disappoiatments.    But  it  had  sometimes  been  asked,  "  Why
do  not  the  sjjirits  themselves  state  the  conditions  ]"    The  reason
was  that  there  was  so  little  analogy  between  material  and  spiritual
laws,  that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  establish  a  scientific  system
of  communion  ;  and  it  was  almost  impossible  to  explain  the  many
and  various  conditions  under  which  the  phenomena  occurred.  It
appeared,  hoAvever,  that  the  communication  was  established  some-
what on  the  principle  of  a  galvanic  battery,  requiring  for  its  opera-
tion three  elements,  namely  : — (1).  A  person  called  a  medium.  (2).
A  spii-it  in  magnetic  rappcyrt  with  the  medium.    (3).  A  certain  con-
dition of  the  atmosphere  in  which  to  produce  the  manifestations.  It
was  believed  that  there  were  two  kinds  or  qualities  of  vital  mag-

*  Tlie  31st  March,  1869,  was  the  21st  anniversary  of  the  Eochester
rappings,  which  first,  in  modern  times,  di-ew  attention  to  the  subject  of
Spiritualism.

1

SPEECH  OF  MRS.  HAEDTNGE.

Ill

netism  wliicli  might  be  termed  positive  and  negative.  The  medium
must  be  possessed  of  an  excess  of  the  vital  fluid  of  a  negative  quality;
the  medium  spirits  (for  there  were  medium  and  non-medium  spirits
as  well  as  men)  must  give  oS  an  excess  of  vital  magnetism  of  a  posi-
tive quality ;  so  that  the  medium  and  the  spuit  always  stand  related
to  each  other  as  negative  and  positive;  the  spirit  being  always
positive  in  order  to  be  able  to  produce  phenomena.  Thus  the  two
stand  in  relation  to  each  other  as  the  copper  and  zinc  in  a  galvanic
battery,  whilst  the  atmosphere  represents  the  solution.

The  varieties  of  mediumship  were  very  mimerous,  and  even  in
the  same  mediums  the  power  was  liable  to  constant  change.  (1).
Changes  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  climate,  for  instance,  produced
corresponding  fluctuations  in  the  medium  power.  Extremes  of
heat  and  cold  were  favourable  to  the  manifestations ;  thus  the  in-
habitants of  arctic  and  tropic  regions,  as  well  as  those  who  dwell
in  mountainous  districts,  were  frequently  observed  to  manifest
medium  power  in  a  remarkable  degree.  Mrs.  Hardiage  herself
had  found  her  own  medium  powers  considerably  diminished  in
force  since  quitting  America,  and  so  liable  to  influence  from
change  of  scene  and  climate,  that  a  visit  to  Scotland  would
have  the  efiect  of  increasing  them  again.  Snowy  weather  or
thunder  and  lightning  afibrded  favourable  conditions ;  moist  and
damp  weather  invariably  the  contrary.

(2).  The  human  magnetisms  composing  the  spirit  cii-cle,  above
all  other  elements,  exert  the  most  considerable  influence  on  the
character  of  the  manifestations  ;  thus,  a  strongly  antagonistic  state
of  mind  in  any  one  of  those  forming  the  circle  would  probably,  by
developing  a  positive  influence  towards  the  spirit,  neutralize  the
manifestation.

Iklrs.  Hardinge  then  proceeded  to  state  some  of  her  own  personal
experience.  She  said  that  for  a  long  time  she  was  sceptical  of,  and
even  hostile  to  the  spiritual  faith,  notwithstanding  that  she  had
always  possessed  certain  occult  powers  herself.  She  was  induced
to  attend  one  of  the  seances  of  Miss  Kate  Fox  ;  the  raps  occurred,
but  the  questions  put  by  the  believers  present  were  framed  accord-

112

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

ing  to  so  unscientific  a  method,  and  characterized  by  so  great  a
want  of  precision  and  exactness  that  she  could  not  help  exclaiming,
"  Sm-ely,  this  is  all  humbug  and  absurdity when,  in  this  disposi-
tion of  mind,  she  sat  down  to  the  table  herself,  the  raps  instantly
ceased,  and  she  retired  from  the  seance  even  more  persuaded  of  the
imposture  than  before.

Her  next  seance  was  with  Mr.  Conklin,  of  New  York;  the
result  was  exactly  the  same.  At  last  she  attended  a  seance  with  a
mediimi  who  appeared  to  be  entirely  unaffected  by  the  disposition
of  those  present.  The  manifestations  were  very  remarkable,  and
evidently  denoted  the  presence  of  a  conscious  intelligence ;  in  two
hours  she  was  thoroughly  persuaded  of  the  existence  of  some  occult,
invisible  and  intelligent  agency,  and  though  it  was  only  after  many
months  of  persevering  research  that  she  became  convinced  of  the
truth  of  Spiritualism,  her  scepticism  was  shaken  from  that  seance.

Professor  Hare's  experiences  were  somewhat  similar  ;  he  had  a
strong  opinion  that  the  raps  were  produced  by  muscular  action,  and
this  impression  served  to  neutralize  the  spirit  power ;  for  as  soon
as  he  sat  down  in  a  spicit  circle,  the  raps,  hitherto  very  loud,  would
immediately  cease.  He  at  last  succeeded  in  divesting  himself  of
this  spiiit  of  prejudice,  after  which  the  manifestations  were  in  no
degree  interrupted  by  his  presence.

Any  strong  emotion,  Mrs.  Hardinge  considered,  was  also  detri-
mental to  the  exercise  of  spiritual  power.  Mr.  Conklin,  of  whQm
she  had  previously  spoken,  was  invited  to  attend  a  number  of
seances  at  Washington  with  some  five  or  six  gentlemen,  who  were
evidently  desirous  not  to  be  known.  The  manifestations  were
very  marked  and  decisive,  until  Mi*.  Conklin  discovered  that  one
of  the  gentlemen  present  was  no  other  than  President  Lincoln ;
when  his  anxiety  and  surprise  became  so  great  as  entirely  to  stop
the  manifestations,  which  were  not  again  renewed  till  a  mutual  ex-
planation had  restored  him  to  his  normal  state  of  mind.  Thus,  it
would  seem,  that  any  very  strong  emotion  had  also  the  efiect  of
rendering  the  magnetism  positive,  and  neutralising  the  action  of
the  spirits.

SPEECH  OF  MRS.  HAEDINGE.

113

Doubtless,  there  were  many  other  conditions  which  had  not  yet
been  discovered;  thus  Judge  Parker,  of  Massachusetts,  though
an  enthusiastic  believer  in  Spu-itualism,  brought  to  the  spirit
circle  such  a  peculiar  quality  of  magnetism  as  invariably  to  sus-
pend the  manifestations  wherever  he  appeared.  This  continued
vmtil  a  short  time  before  his  death,  when  some  change  took  place
in  his  physical  system,  and  the  phenomena  were  produced  in  his
presence  with  perfect  freedom.

There  was  another  difficulty  in  the  way  of  such  an  investigation  as
was  proposed  by  the  Committee ;  viz.,  the  very  fact  of  their  being  a
Committee.  Associated  bodies  who  had  entered  upon  this  inquiry
had  almost  invariably  failed  ;  in  fact,  she  knew  of  but  one  society,
the  New  York  Young  Men's  Chi-istian  Association,  that  had  been
successful.  The  reasons  of  their  failure,  she  considered,  were  two  :
(1.)  Their  sense  of  responsibility,  which,  by  producing  positive
magnetism  ,  neutralised  spiiitual  influence.  (2.)  The  materialistic
ti-aiaing  of  scientists  ;  the  effect  of  a  long-continued  course  of
scientific  study  being  to  impel  the  belief  that  nothing  can  be  true
which  may  not  be  subjected  to  material  tests,  and  measiired  by
material  gauges.  These,  Mrs.  Hardinge  proceeded  to  say,  were
not  always  applicable  to  spuitual  phenomena ;  she  instanced  the
phenomena  of  clairvoyance  and  claii-audience,  in  which  the  material
notions  of  time  and  space  appeared  to  be  entii'ely  set  at  naught.
The  laws  of  optics  and  acoustics  ofiered  no  explanation  for  the
phenomena  of  Spiritualism;  the  formulae  of  science,  valuable  as
they  were  in  the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  matter,  were
generally  unavailable  for  an  inquiry  into  the  character  of  Spiritu-
alism. The  Committee  must  carefully  guard  itself  against
attempting  to  dictate  to  Nature,  and  should  rather  accept  the
conditions  as  dictated  by  Nature.

Mi-s.  Hardinge,  in  conclusion,  advised  the  Committee  to  appoint  a
Sub-committee  of  about  twelve  members,  who  should  be  of  receptive
inquiring  dispositions.  She  herself  would  be  glad  to  indicate  those
who  would  be  most  suitable.  (1.)  Let  them  hold  a  series  of  seances
with  the  various  mediiims  obtainable,  through  a  period  of  not  less

I

114

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

than  three  months,  each  member  preparing  a  separate  repox-t,  and
not  comparing  notes  with  the  rest,  until  the  end  of  the  whole  series.
(2.)  Let  them  also  adopt  the  still  better  plan  of  foi-ming  private
circles  at  home  with  their  own  friends,  and  holding  seances  inde-
pendently of  each  other ;  if  they  will  caiuy  out  these  two  sugges-
tions, they  cannot  fail  to  be  convinced  that  the  phenomena  are
genuine,  axid  the  results  of  spiritual  influence.

She  would  xmdei-take  to  say  that  no  seven  persons  would  hold
meetings  regularly  together  without  getting  some  decided  mani-
festations. She  considered  that  about  one  in  every  seven  persons
was  possessed  of  medium  power,  and  that  the  rest  might  develope  it.

Tuesday,  23kd  March,  1869,
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
The  correspondence  having  been  disposed  of,  Mrs.  Hardinge
made  some  fui-ther  remarks  in  continuation  of  her  statement  of
the  preceding  week,  find  concluded  by  expressing  her  vdllingness
to  reply  to  any  questions  that  might  be  put  to  her  by  members  of
the  Committee.  The  foUovdng  questions  were  then  asked  and
answered : —

I.  By  Mr.  Dyte.  "  Can  Mrs.  Hax-dinge  give  us  any  suggestions
as  to  the  best  means  of  detecting  imposture  on  the  part  of  the
mediums  ? "

Mi's.  Hardinge  was  ixnable  to  give  any  specific  information  on
that  point.

II.  "  "Would  manifestations  probably  appear  at  a  seance  of  prac-
tical spiritualists,  conducted  before  twenty  or  thix-ty  spectators
sitting  apax't  from  them,  and,  if  necessary,  in  silence  ?  "

Ans.    "  I  think  not."

III.  By  Mr.  Bennett.  "  Does  the  experience  of  Mrs.  Hardinge
tend  to  confirm  the  statement  of  Lord  Lytton  that  "spii-itual
maixifestations  "  ai-e  more  remax-kable  in  proportion  to  the  amount
of  electricity  in  the  atmosphere  1 "

Ans.    "  Invariably."

lY.  "  Can  Mx's.  Hardinge  refer  the  Committee  to  any  well-

PAPER  BY  MR.  JENOKEN.

115

authenticated  instances  of  spii-it  communications  having  been
made,  which  neither  the  medium  herself,  nor  any  other  person
present,  could  possibly  know,  independently  of  spiritual  influence  1

Ans.  "  There  are  a  large  number  of  such  cases'  given  in  Allan
Putnam's  '  Magic  and  Witchcraft,'  and  Professor  Hare's  '  Spii-itu-
alism  scientifically  demonstrated  1 '  "

V.  By  Mr.  Meyers.  "  Is  it  a  fact  that  spirit  arms  and  hands
have  been  seen  and  felt  ?  "

Mrs.  Hardmge  had  herself  seen  a  spii-it  hand  and  had  felt  it
laid  within  her  own.  Spiiits  became  visible  by  crystalHsing,  as  it
were,  the  magnetic  and  other  emanations  from  those  present,
aroimd  their  own  invisible  spirit  forms.

YI.  JBy  Mr.  Gannon.  "  What  is  vital  magnetism,  and  by  what
scientific  tests  has  it  been  proved  that  human  beings  generated
such  a  force  ^ "

Mrs.  Hardinge  considered  that  science  was  scarcely  sufficiently
advanced  to  enable  her  to  answer  that  question  fully.

VII.  Bij  Mr.  H.  G.  Atkinson.  "  Why  do  you  conclude  that
clairvoyance  is  essentially  of  a  different  character  from  every  other
phenomenon  in  nature— for  instance,  from  the  ordinary  formative
principle  and  the  ordinary  facts  of  mind  and  instinct  ^"

Ans.  "  Because  it  seems  to  amuhilate  what  in  other  branches  of
knowledge  are  absolutely  necessary  conditions  of  thought,  the
notions  of  time  and  space."

A  vote  of  thanks  to  Mrs,  Hardinge  closed  the  proceedings  for
the  evening.

Tuesday,  13th  April,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,  Barrister-at-law,  M.E.I.,  read  the  following
paper  on  "  Spiritualism,  its  Phenomena,  and  the  Laws  that  Regu-
late its  Ox-igin  "  : —

"  In  dealing  with  the  question  of  Spiritualism  we  have  to  combat
several  most  difficult  objections  raised  by  those  who  oppose  our
Aiews.  Firstly,  the  facts  are  denied,  and  the  dreadfidly  tedious  pro-

I  2

116

MINUTIiS  OP  THE  COMMITTEE,

cess  of  establisliing  these  by  instances,  overburdens  tlie  lecturer
until  both  his  strength  and  the  patience  of  the  audience  become
exhausted.  Secondly,  where  the  facts  are  even  allowed,  the  cui
bono  is  thrust  forward  with  unhesitating  urgency,  and  the  lec-
turer finds  himself  driven  upon  gi-ound  quite  foreign  to  a  scientific
mquiiy.  If  the  facts  exist,  I  care  little  for  the  cui  bono  ;  if  true
as  a  fact,  depend  on  it,  they  have  some  use  allowed  them.  I,  for
one,  deny  the  antiquated  theory,  that  whatever  exists  must  be
manifestly  beneficial  to  us  mortals,  and  for  our  special  good,  to
warrant  its  continuance.  The  facts  are  present,  and  there  I  rest
contented ;  if,  however,  I  am  asked  to  foi-m  an  opiuion,  I  would
suggest  that  the  study  of  the  laws  of  differently  constituted  physical
states  that  co-exist  with  this,  to  our  senses,  recognizable  reality,
is  a  vast  subject  for  study,  which  study  necessarily  leads  to  the
knowledge  of  profounder,  deeper  seated  tiaiths,  and  possibly  to
the  more  intimate  recognition  of  our  future  state.  I  may,  assum-
ing this  to  be  my  view,  urge  that  the  study  of  Spiritualism
has  been  beneficial  to  me  iadividually  and,  I  hope,  may  be  so  to  my
fellow-men.  But,  I  repeat,  I  do  not  take  this  stand,  my  ground  is
one  of  fact  and  scientific  inquuy.    And  to  these  I  confine  myself.

"  I  wUl  not  this  evening  tax  yoiu-  patience  with  an  account  of  the
history  of  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  from  the  days  of  the  cele-
brated Rochester  rappings,  to  the  present  hour ;  nor  with  a  nar-
rative of  the  sphritual  teachings  of  the  past ;  these,  you  will  find
recorded  in  William  Howitt's  excellent  work  on  the  History  of
the  Supernatural ;  in  De  Morgan's  work  '  From  Matter  to  Spirit,'
or  Spicer's  book,  entitled,  '  Sight  and  Soimds,'  the  latter  furnish-
ing an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  present  movement.  For  those
who  require  further  information,  I  would  i-ecommend  the  works  of
Judge  Edmonds,  G.  T.  Dexter,  Governor  Talmadge,  A.  J.  Da-\ds,
M.  Homung,  late  secretary  of  the  Berl  in  Magnetic  Association,  or
MM.  Dupotet,  Puysegur,  Deleujze,  Billot,  Kardec ;  all  of  which
the  student  may  consult  with  profit,  and  more  especially  the  valu-
able work  of  Professor  Hai'e.  Sufiice  it  then  if  I  tell  you,  that
upwards  of  500  works  have  been  published  by  different  authors

PAPER  BY  MR.  JENCKEN.

117

upon  Spiritualism  and  its  phenomena,  and  that  periodicals  on  the
subject  are  being  published  in  all  known  languages.

"  I  repeat,  I  will  not  deal  with  these  historical  data,  but  propose
to  confine  myself  to  an  examination  of  the  phenomena ;  and  having
done  this,  will,  with  I  avow,  great  diffidence  on  my  part,  state  my
own  views.  And  thus  premising  I  will  give  you  a  statement  of
facts  j  in  rendering  these,  I  will  endeavour  to  classify  spiritual
phenomena  into  different  groups ;  and  fii'stly,  the  purely  physical
phenomena,  such  as  the  movement  and  raising  ponderable  bodies
without  visible  contact,  and  to  which  class  the  levitations  of  the
body  of  the  medium  belong.  These  levitations  you  will  find  re-
corded as  having  occui-red  as  far  back  as  the  year  1347  : — (see
Spiritual  Magazine,  November,  1868) — and  another  instance  is  cited
as  having  taken  place,  iu  the  year  1697.  On  the  latter  occasion,  a
certain  Margaret  Eule  is  described  as  having  been  raised  to  the
ceUiag  of  her  room ;  and  Goethe  refers  to  the  wonderful  fact  of
levitation  in  his  life  of  Phillipinari.  The  levitations  of  Mr.  Home
are  so  well  known,  that  I  need  not  more  than  allude  to  them —
upwards  of  one  hundred  levitations  have  taken  place  during  his
lifetime,  of  which  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  was  the  carrying  of
his  body  out  of  one  window  of  the  third  floor,  at  Ashley  House,
into  an  adjoiuiug  window;  and  the  lifting  of  his  body  raised  3  or
4  feet  off  the  ground  at  Adare  Manor  for  20  or  30  yards.  As
regards  the  lifting  of  heavy  objects,  these  I  can  testify  to  myself;
I  have  seen  the  semi-grand  at  my  house  raised  horizontally  18
inches  off  the  ground,  and  kept  suspended  in  space  two  or  three
minutes.  I  have  also  witnessed  a  square  table  being  lifted  one
foot  off  the  ground,  no  one  touchiag  or  near  to  it,  at  the  time,  a
friend  present  seated  on  the  cai-pet  and  watching  the  phenomena
all  the  time.  I  have  also  seen  a  table  lifted  clear  over  head,  6  feet
off  the  ground ;  but  what  may  appear  more  remarkable,  I  have
witnessed  an  accordion  suspended  in  space  for  10  or  20  minutes,
-  and  played  by  an  invisible  agency.  But  I  need  not  multiply  the
instances  of  the  moving  and  canying  of  bodies  -without  visible
contact,  these  I  hold  may  be  conceded  as  established  facts.

118

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

"  The  Second  group  of  phenomena  is  that  of  the  producing  of
Eaps,  or  Knocks,  to  which  no  doubt  the  tradition  of  the  Poltergeister
owes  its  origin.  These  telegraphic  signs,  for  such  in  truth  they
are,  need  no  confirmation  on  my  part ;  they  are  so  common,  tliat
thousands  even  in  this  town  have  heard  them,  and  have  also
received  messages  spelt  out  by  these  means : — The  well-known
alphabetical  method  being  usually  employed,  I  have  known
messages  spelt  out  by  the  tilting  of  a  semi-grand  piano  at  my  own
house,  accompanied  by  loud  raps,  no  one  at  the  time  being  in
contact,  or  within  several  feet  of  the  instrument.  I  have  heard
sentences  spelt  out  by  the  strings  of  the  piano  being  stmck  by
invisible  agencies.

"  The  Third  group  of  phenomena  includes  the  uttering  of  words,
sentences,  sounding  of  music,  singing,  and  the  producing  of  sounds
in  imitation  of  birds;  and  these  sounds  produced  without  any
visible  agencies  being  present.  The  most  remarkable  instance  of
this  kind  I  ever  witnessed  was  at  Great  Malvern,  at  the  house  of
Dr.  Gully,  on  which  occasion  I  heard,  as  far  as  I  could  make  out,
three  voices  chanting  a  hymn,  accompanied  by  music  played  on  an
accordion  suspended  in  space,  eight  or  nine  feet  off  the  gi-oimd.

"  At  the  passing  away  of  an  old  servant  of  our  household,  a  strain
of  solemn  music,  at  about  four  in  the  morning,  was,  by  the  nurse
and  servants,  heard  in  the  room  of  the  dying  woman ;  the  music
lasting  fuUy  twenty  minutes.

"  The  Fourth  group  of  phenomena  includes  playing  on  musical
instruments,  the  dra/unng  of  flowers,  figures,  and  writing,  by  direct
spiritual  unseen  agency.  Of  these  facts  innumerable  instances  are
on  record,  and  I  mention  the  books  of  Mr.  B.  Coleman,  and  Baron
Guldenstube  as  valuable  publications  upon  this  phase  of  spiritual
phenomena.  Instances  have  since  multiplied  beyond  numbei*,  and
within  the  last  few  days,  at  Mr.  Child's,  I  am  informed  di-a-svings
have  been  made  by  invisible  agencies.

"  I  have  thus  far  given  an  account  of  the  more  usual  phenomena,
and  will  now  proceed  to  desci-ibe  others  not  less  interesting,  but  of
rarer  occun-ence — and  fiorstly,  the  Fire  Test.    I  have  myself  wit-

PAPEE  BY  MR.  JENCKEN.

119

nessed  the  Fii-e  test  many  times.  I  have  seen  Lord  Adare  hold
in  the  palm  of  his  hand  a  burning  live  coal,  which  Mr.  Home  had
placed  there,  so  hot,  that  the  mere  momentary  contact  with  my
finger  caused  a  burn.  At  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's  a  large  lump  of  burning
coal  was  placed  on  his  head  by  Mi-.  Home ;  and  only  within  these
last  few  days,  a  metal  bell,  heated  to  redness  in  the  fire,  was
placed  on  a  lady's  hand  without  causing  injury.  At  Mrs.  Hen-
ning's  house,  Norwood,  I  have  seen  Mr.  Home  place  his  face  into
the  flames  of  the  grate,  the  flame  points  penetrating  throu.gh  his
hair  without  causing  injury.  Respecting  these  truly  marvellous
Fire  tests,  I  refer  to  the  monthly  journal  '  Human  Nature,'  and  to
the  '  Spii-itual  Magazine'  (1868,  November — December).

"  The  next  class  of  phenomena  are  those  extraordinary  elongations
of  the  medium's  body,  of  which  we  read  in  the  '  History  of  the
Mystics,'  but  until  witnessed  could  scarcely  be  credited.  It  has
been  my  good  fortune  to  witness  the  elongation  and  shortening  of
Mr.  Home's  person  many  times,  and  at  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's,  about
three  months  ago,  Mr.  Home  and  a  Miss  Bertolacci  were  simul-
taneously elongated.  The  elongation  usually  takes  place  from  the
hip,  a  span  wide,  and  on  one  occasion  I  measured  an  extreme
elongation  of  the  body  of  fully  eight  inches.  The  shortening  of
the  body  is  equally  marvellous.  I  have  witnessed  Mr.  Home
shrinking  down  to  about  five  feet :  again,  as  described  in  '  Human
Nature,'  March,  '69,  I  have  measured  the  expansion  and  con-
traction of  the  hand,  arm,  and  leg.  Fortunately  these  expansions
and  conti-actions  have  been  witnessed  by  fifty  people  at  the  very
least,  and  are  now  placed  beyond  doubt.

"  I  wiU  pass  over  the  numerous  phenomena  of  holding  fluids  in
space,  without  vessels  to  contain  them ;  extracting  liquids  from
bottles — which  I  have  witnessed ;  nor  will  I  burden  you  with  a
description  of  the  perfuming  of  water,  or  extracting  the  scent
from  flowers ;  or  the  alcohol  from  spirits  of  wine ;  but  will  pass
to  the  appearance  of  hands,  arms,  and  spirit  forms,  wholly  or  in
part  developed.  Fortunately  within  the  last  few  months  instances
have  repeated  themselves,  so  that  I  could  name  a  score  of  wit-

120

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

nesses,  withm  tlao  circle  of  my  own  fx-iends,  wlio  have  seen  spirit
forms  or  appearances.  As  these  facts  go  far  towards  establishing
the  truth  of  spiritualistic  phenomena,  I  will  with  your  permission
dwell  more  upon  these  manifestations.

"  Spirit  Hands  are  usually  luminous,  and  appear  and  re-appear
all  but  instantaneously.  I  have  once  been  enabled  to  submit  a  spirit
hand  to  pressure.  The  temperature  was,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,
the  same  as  that  of  the  room,  and  the  spii-it  hand  felt  soft,  velvety  j
dissolving  slowly  under  the  greatest  amount  of  pressure  to  which
I  could  submit  it.  I  have,  however,  been  informed  by  friends
that  they  have  seen  spiiit  hands  break  a  stout  piece  of  plank  in
two,  and  that  the  temperature  of  the  hands,  tested  by  a  delicate
thei-mometer,  was  usually  equal  to  that  of  the  room.

"  Spirit  Forms. — They  usually  appear  with  the  head  and  bust
developed  and  vei'y  luminous,  the  outline  i-arely  well  defined,  and
generally  the  form  seems  to  float,  rather  than  to  walk.  These
appearances,  however,  present  very  different  aspects  at  different
times.  I  have  often  urged  upon  my  friends  to  get  some  facts  to
guide  in  ascertaining  the  physical  property  or  character  of  these
forms.  At  a  friend's  hoiise,  some  short  time  ago,  the  spirit  fonn
cast  a  shadow  and  slightly  obscured  the  light  of  the  gas-burner :
again,  at  Ashley  House,  Capt.  Smith  and  others  present,  the  fonn
appeared  qmte  opaque  and  solid.  Only  a  few  weeks  ago,  at
Mr.  S.  0.  Hall's,  a  spirit  form,  very  luminous  in  appearance,  was
seen,  but  the  outline  ill-defined.  The  form  remained  visible  for
three  or  four  minutes,  and  sufficiently  long  for  two  of  those  present
to  make  a  drawing  of  the  same.  I  have  seen  a  spirit  fonn  at  a
seance  held  at  Dr.  Gully's,  September,  1867.  The  form  appeared
luminous — ^the  top  rounded  off.  I  could  not  distinguish  the  features.
The  height  was  middle  sized,  and  the  form  appeared  to  me  like  a
luminous  column  or  cloud.  On  passing  to  my  left,  and  close  to
Dr.  Gully,  I  noticed  that  the  luminosity  of  the  figure  cast  a  glow  of
light  upon  my  friend.  The  form,  as  it  stood  next  to  me,  spoke
sever  al  words,  audible  to  all,  and  then  walked  to  the  fii-eplace  at  the
end  of  the  room ;  the  floor  vibrating  again  to  the  heavy  footstep.

PAPER  BY  MR.  JENOKEN.

121

"  On  the  evening  I  first  attended  a  stance  at  the  Dialectical,  Mr.
Home  and  some  friends  met  later  on  at  Ashley  House ;  on  this
occasion  I  had  more  opportuiuty  of  investigating  the  phenomena  of
spii-itual  appearance.  A  figure  draped,  in  what  appeared  like  a  trans-
parent loose  gauze,  or  veil,  passed  to  and  fro  imaged  on  the  wall,  which
had  become  luminous ;  the  figures  appeared  to  stand  out  in  ill-defined
relief.  This  phenomenon  repeated  itself  over  and  over  again,  the
figiu-e  disappearing  whenever  those  present  became  too  positive  ;  of
this  Mr.  Home,  who  was  in  a  trance  the  whole  time,  warned  us.
When  I  say  too  positive,  I  mean  '  too  intent.'  A  figure  also  deve-
loped itself  next  to  and  above  Mr.  Home,  as  he  stood  half  covered
by  the  curtains  against  the  light  of  the  window ;  but  the  outline  was
so  indistinct  I  could  not  well  discern  its  form.  These  appearances,
or  spiritual  forms,  are  far  more  usually  witnessed  at  secmces  than  is
ordinarily  supposed,  and  I  could  instance  many  more  cases  equally
marked  and  chaxacteristic  as  those  related ;  for  instance,  the  boy
of  Mrs.  Cox,  who  passed  away  some  few  months  ago,  was  seen  by
Lord  Adare,  and  spoke  to  him.  The  housekeeper  at  Ashley  House
has  seen  spirit  forms  at  Ashley  House,  and  recognised  the  face  and
the  voice.  At  my  house,  the  Master  of  Lindsay  observed  the  spirit
form  of  Mr.  Home's  late  wife,  clearly  defined ;  and  what  is  more
remarkable,  the  Master  of  Lindsay  tells  me  that  the  figure
appeared  to  him  in  profile;  whilst  Mr.  Home  noticed  that  the
figui-e  stood  in  full  en/ace  as  it  bent  over  his  bed.

"  But  I  must  not  multiply  instances.  The  inward  seeing  of  spirit
forms  which  only  mediums  or  seers  have  the  power,  is  of  greai,
interest,  and  opens  a  wide  field  for  inquiry.  The  description  of
these  visions,  or  as  I  believe  actual  seeings,  by  the  inward  organ
of  sight,  confirm  in  a  measure,  the  form  and  appearance  of  the  spirit
forms  visible  to  a  number  of  people,  and  such  as  I  have  already
described.  The  forms  seen  vary  in  appearance,  though  as  a  rule
the  seers  described  them  as  enveloped  in  a  semi-luminous  cloud,  the
head  and  shoulders  are  described  as  in  clear  outline ;  or  the  figures
appear  in  shadowy  outline,  though  perfectly  soUd,  and  to  move
about  at  will,  but  so  transparent  that  objects  are  seen  through

«

122  MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

them.  The  forms  vary  from  a  -wliite  luminious  transparency  to  a
darkisli  tint  of  grey  or  brown.  I  liave  seen  these  shadowy  figures,
thoiigh  only  very  exceptionally,  and  not  under  conditions  that
enabled  me  to  institute  a  minuter  investigation.  In  all  these
phenomena,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  determine  what
conditions  favour,  what  conditions  interrupt  theu-  appearance.

"  I  have  now  to  treat  of  the  Identity  of  Spirits,  that  is,  the  evi-
dence that  the  spiritual  beuigs  present,  either  visible  or  communi-
cating by  the  telegraphic  raps,  are  those  of  soul  beings— of  some
one  having  formerly  resided  on  this  earth.    Numerous  instances
are  given  by  different  writers,  but  I  prefer  mentioniag  cases
within  my  own  knowledge,  or  those  of  my  immediate  friends.  In
the  instance  of  the  spirit  form  of  the  boy  of  Mrs.  Cox,  the  voice
and  appearance  was  unmistakably  that  of  the  departed  chUd.  The
spirit  form  seen  by  me  at  Malvern,  I  recognized  by  the  voice,  the
words  spoken,  and  the  meaning  of  those  words.
'    "  At  Mrs.  Henning's  house,  Norwood,  at  a  seance  at  which  Mr.
Home  was  present,  a  comanunication  was  made,  recaUiug  an  event
which  occurred  at  Dr.  EUiotson's,  some  thirty  years  ago.    It  ap-
peared that  Mrs.  Hennings  had  attended  with  a  clairvoyant  cHld,
Ellen  Dawson,  at  Dr.  EUiotson's,  who  behaved  very  abraptly  on
that  occasion.    The  incident  had  even  escaped  Mrs.  Henning's
memory  and  only  was  recalled  to  her  mind  by  the  mentioning  of
the  scene  on  that  evening  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  trance  state,  and  in
which  state  he  personified  the  late  Dr.  EUiotson.

«  ITiave  now  given  you  data  enough  to  enable  you  to  follow  me
in  the  conclusions  I  have  arrived  at.  I  need  not  remind  you  that
the  great  physical  forces  of  nature,  namely,  light,  heat,  motion,
electricity,  chemical  action,  &c.,  are  ascribed  to  unseen  ether  waves:
a  subtile,  all-pervading  cosmic  ether  is  supposed  to  fill  space,  and
the  mere  change  of  the  nature  of  its  vibration  producing  light,  heat,
electricity,  mechanical  motion,  &c.  I  need,  also,  not  remind  you
that  the  undulatory  theory  of  Huyghens,  of  Young,  has  been  corn-
batted  by  Leonard  Euler  and  Mr.  Grove  ;  and  a  molecular  theoiy
substituted,  with  change  of  polaric  position  of  the  final  molecules,

PAPER  BY  MR.  JENOKBN.

123

■n'bicli  are  supposed  to  be  the  ultimate  form  of  matter,  but  wMch
Grove  conceives  conducts  us  to  dynamic  agencies  ;  unless  we  accept
Professor  Huxley's  protoplasms,  or  primary  elementary  fluids,  for
wbat  else  ai-e  bis  elements  1  and  give  to  tbese  an  ever  continuing
permanency.

"  We  bave  tbus  our  great  physicists  driven  to  the  accepting  of
theories  by  -wbicb  tbey  admit  imseen  agencies ;  and  Mr.  Grove  is
quite  rigbt  wben  be  tells  us  tbat  ultimately  we  are  obliged  to  admit
a  dynamic  force  in  light  and  its  con-elates.  If  time  allowed,  I
would  give  you  all  that  has  been  said  on  this  subject.  I  must
to-day  content  myself  by  presuming  on  your  forbearance,  and  repeat
with  the  great  thinkers,  that  the  physical  forces  are  only  compre-
hensible as  the  exponents  of  dynamic,  unseen  agencies.  This
reasoning  takes  me  to  groimd  further  advanced  in  the  direction
I  am  pursuing.  I  ask,  what  are  the  causes  of  these  dynamic  phy-
sical forces ;  those  great  agencies  that  uphold,  in  their  all-potent
grasp,  this  globe  we  live  on  and  all  other  cosmic  bodies  1  I  fui-ther
ask,  whence  arise  the  vital  organic  powers  that  set  the  dead  material
of  Professor  Huxley's  protoplasm  in  motion,  and  create  forms  of
life?  The  ephemeral  existence  of  animal  life  itself  induces  the
question,  for  what  becomes  of  the  vital  powers  of  animals — ^the  soul-
beings  of  men  1  their  numbers  must  be  reckoned  by  myriads  upon
myriads ;  it  matters  not  when,  but  the  day  of  repletion  must  come ;
this  ever  continuing  creation  of  beings  must  ultimately  requii'e
space,  for  space  is,  after  all,  a  terminable  quantity,  and  materialists
pretend  to  teach  us  that  the  theory  of  extinction  and  absorption  of
soul-beings  (with  Hegel  at  their  bead)  after  death  answers  this
question.

"  I  have  no  time  to  combat  their  views,  but  I  put  it  to  them,
whether  they  admit  the  permanency  of  the  material ;  if  they  do,
this  is  my  case :  for,  to  admit  the  everlasting  presence  of  the
material,  and  deny  that  of  the  cause  is  a  contradiction,  self  evident
on  its  very  face.  What,  then,  will  be  asked  is  the  view  I  have
ventured  to  foi-m  for  myself  1  how  is  the  mystery  of  birth,  life  and
death  to  be  explained  ?  what  is  the  cause  of  the  action  of  the

124

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

aynamical  forces  which  physicists  recognize  1  how  do  I  explain
vital  action  and  those  kindred  phenomena  of  mesmerism?  what  do
spiritual  phenomena  disclose  ?  I  wiU,  in  as  few  words  as  possible,
explain  to  you  my  theory.

"  The  material  physical  world,  the  cosmic  bodies— for  the  property
of  light,  proves  that  all  solar  systems  obey  one  common  law  of
physical  force— is  sustained  by  a  very  few  primary,  elementary
laws,  represented  by  primaiy,  elementaiy  or  basic  substances.
.     "  Why,  I  ask  with  Professor  De  Morgan,  should  the  Creator  have
fashioned' only  10  or  20  elements  out  of,  say,  one  million  of  primary
elements,  and  these  few  only  to  be  operative?  or  in  other  words,
am  I  asking  you  to  admit  too  much,  if  I  say  that  it  is  just  possible
many  other  elementary  combinations  may  exist,  creating  a  material
state,  absolutely  independent  of  the  ponderable,  visible  materiaUty
that  surrounds  us?    That  such  may  be  conceived  as  possible,  m.
Grove  tells  us  in  his  work,  'Con-elation  of  Physical  Forces;'  he
says— 'Myi-iads  of  organised  beings  may  exist  imperceptible  to
our  vision,  even  if  we  were  among  them,  and  we  might  be  equally
.  imperceptible  to  them'  (p.  161).    These  different  primary  elemen-
tary states  are  conceivable  by  merely  supposing  primary  elementary
basic  substances  to  exist  of  a  different  character  to  those  that
constitute  the  elementary  basis  of  our  materiality.    Physicists,  and
I  quote  from  Professor  Huxley,  wUl  teU  you  that  certain  primaiy
basic  gaseous  substances  underlie  all  formations  ;  that  their  number
may  be  reduced  to  four.    I  take  theii-  reasoning  one  step  farther,
and  maintain  that  ultimately  only  two  primaiy  substances  will  be
found  to  constitute  the  foundation  of  all  materiality-these  two
substances  constituting  a  dual  state,  in  obedience  to  the  law  of
polarity  that  exists  at  the  base  of  all  creation.    The  manifold  com-
binations of  these  two  primary  basic  elementary  substances  create
the  material,  ponderable,  visible  world.    But  -^ter  .  only  an
exponent  of  a  force-a  dynamic  action  of  a  permanent  law.    I  am
Wwing  fi-om  Faraday,  Tyndall,  Huxley,  for  they  adniit  h
ether  wave  in  treating  of  light,  electricity  &c.  I  thus  reduce  the
physical  world  we  live  in,  this  Panstellar  Pancosmic  world  to  iJie

rAPEB  BY  MB.  JENCKEN.

125

dominion,  I  contend,  of  only  two  primary  polaric  forces-conceiv-
able as  expansion  and  contraction,  central  and  periplieral,  mani-
fested as  ligM  and  gravitation,  oxygen  and  carbon.  If  I  dare  ven-
ture to  enter  upon  tbe  ground  taken  up  by  Professor  Huxley  in
dealing  with  primary  gaseous  substances,-the  dualism  repeating
itself  hi  what  may  be  termed  negative  and  positive,  left  and  right,
male  and  female,— all  natiu-e  manifests  in  the  never-ceasing  systole
and  dyastole  the  great  dual  action  of  these  primary  polaric  laws,
that  underHe  the  surface  play  of  the  phenomenal.

»  These  primary  elementary  substances  correspond  with  other  ele-
mentary primary  substances,  but  which  belong  to  a  diiferent  state  of
materiaUty  to  that  which  has  formed  and  fashioned  the  material
Wd  that  pre-exists  and  co-exists  with  the,  to  us,  visible  and  pon-
derable.   But  each  dual  group  of  primary  elementary  forces  is  so
constituted  that  their  action  encompasses  an  infinitely  extended
world,  in  an  its  boundless  expanse;  or,  in  other  words,  series  of
primal  dual  forces,  represented  by  primary  dual  substances,  co-
existing, intro-existing,  co-operating,  harmonizing  one  with  the
other,  may  be  conceived  to  exist.    I  have  thus  distinctive  grades  of
materiaUties,  bordering  one  on  the  other,  intro-existing  each  with-
in each.    And  in  the  never  ceasing  progress  from  the  primary  dual
source  in  the  divine  essence,  from  gi-ade  to  grade,  the  vital  power
of  the  soul-being  travels  onwards,  mediating  in  its  ascent  and
change  of  condition  in  each  elementary  primary  state  by  what,  in
the  state  we  reside  in,  we  recognize  as  the  foetal  development  and
final  birth  of  the  child.    The  soul-being  of  the  child  pre-exists,  I
maintain,  but  in  a  more  primary  unconscious  condition;  how
constituted,  and  in  what  fonn  we  cannot  with  certainty  tell,  but
thus  much  is  certain,  that  each  vital  power  has  passed  through
earUer  states  of  development,  in  an  ether  form  previous  to  its
obtaining  its  advanced  condition,  suitable  to  its  sojourn  on  earth.
Those  lymbic  preparatory  states  Dr.  Doherty  speaks  of  in  hia
'  Organic  PhUosophy,'  or  the    urelement    of  my  father's  theory

 ^the  pre-existences  of  Leibnitzr— are  to  my  mind  the  only  answer

to  the  mystery  of  birth  of  animals,  as  the  after  existences  are

126

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

the  only  answer  to  tlie  ephemeral  phase  of  life,  the  mystery  of
death.

"  The  fact  of  foetal  development  and  birth,  the  gi-owth  of  all  forms
of  life  from  primary  or  living  gei-minal  matter,  can  only  be  ex-
plained by  a  preparatory  pre-existence.  Professor  Hixxley's  theoiy,
and  the  school  of  continental  materialists,  admit  the  indestructi-
bility of  the  material,  but  deny  the  everlasting  presence  of  its  cause.
Those  primary  centres  of  force  M.  Bascovitz  rightly  substitutes
for  the  idea  of  a  final  molecule  or  primary  fluid.  The  next  ques-
tion to  consider  in  that  of  the  presence  of  an  ether  state,  following
this  state,  bordering  upon  it,  and  into  which  we  pass  after  death.

"  The  soul-being  pre-developes  its  ether  investiture  during  life,
mediating  its  progress  by  the  organism  of  our  bodily  existence ;
pre-developes  until  a  second  farther  advanced  central  state  of  our
soul  becomes  predominant,  and  then  follow  age,  decay  and  final
dissolution  of  the  body.  Our  soul-being  having  expanded,  in  obe-
dience to  fixed  laws  of  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  develop-
ment— ^for  I  contend  that  the  latter  are  organically  represented  by
a  higher  organism — becomes  siuTOunded  by  a  suitable  investiture,
bearing  the  stamp  of  a  higher  or  lower  development,  in  strict  ac-
cordance with  the  advance  gained ;  and  the  presence  of  a  differ-
ently constituted  physical  state  into  which  the  soul-beings  of  men
pass  by  what  we  designate  death,  answei-s  the  questions  put  by
materialists,  what  becomes  of  the  myriads  of  soul-beings  that  pass
away,  not  only  from  this  our  planet,  but  from  the  countless  suns
that  fill  our  cosmic  heavens ;  for  their  analogous  physical  state
justifies  the  conclusion  that  they  too  are  inhabited.  The  presence
of  grades  founded  upon  fundamental  elementary  and  distinctive
dual  primary  principals — corresponding  Avith  other  states  that
precede  and  follow  these,  and  into,  and  from  out  of  which,  the  soul-
being  arises  and  passes  is  the  only  explanation  of  those  most
marvellous  phenomena,  birth  and  death.  But  progress  is  not  only
confined  to  the  human  soul-being;  all  nature  progresses — constantly
changes — and  the  only  constant  are  the  fundamental  laws  that
govern  each  state  of  primary  materiality.

PAPER  BY  MR.  JENCEJEN.

127

"  In  the  Lucide,  the  trance  mecliiim,  the  seer,  spiritual  sight  is
opened ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  soul-being,  even  during  life,  be-
comes self  conscious  of  the  next  state  upon  which  our  present  state
bordei-s,  and  the  eyes  see,  and  what  are  termed  our  spiritual  senses
function,  and  we  become  conscious  that  an  actual  reality  surrounds
us,  independent  of,  and  yet  co-existing  with  the  material  physical
conditions  that  govern  this  world.

"  To  recapitulate.  The  universe  is  not  composed  as  usually  con-
ceived of  only  this  pancosmic  boundless  stellar  world,  in  which
the  megas  and  micros  are,  it  is  true,  equally  marvellous ;  but  this
boundless,  light  indexed  world  constitutes  only  one  of  the  endless
ei-ades  and  distinctive  materialities  in  the  plan  of  the  universe.
Each  plane,  or  grade  reducible  to  two  primary  fundamental  laws ;
the  central  and  peripheral,  expressed  by  two  primary  dual  sub-
stances, out  of  which  are  created,  in  never  ceasing  change,  those
ever  varying  forms  that  surround  us.  And  the  soul-beings  pass
fi-om  one  intro-state  to  another  intro-state,  in  obedience  to  laws  of
their  developement,  in  never  ending  progress  j  mediating  each
state  by  an  organism  fit  to  function  in  each  grade.  "What  sepa-
i-ates  the  soul-being  from  the  surrounding  material,  or  rather  what
constitutes  the  coimecting  link  between  it  and  the  material,  must
be  reserved  for  the  discussion  of  some  future  day.  This  evening  I
have  only  time  to  allude  to  this  question.  I  will  now  conclude
what  I  have  to  tell  you ;  the  subject  is  so  vast ;  I  have  had  to
sacrifice  form  to  my  wish  to  render  all  I  could  say  within  a
short  half-hour's  reading,  and  if  I  have  erred,  I  am  sure  you  will
be  indulgent."

On  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Jencken's  paper,  the  chairman  sugges-
ted the  advisability  of  waiving  all  discussion  thereon,  in  order  that
the  Committee  might  have  an  oppoi-tunity  of  hearing  the  evidence
of  some  other  distinguished  spiritualists  who  were  then  present.
As  this  recommendation  was  found  to  be  in  accordance  with  the
general  feeling  of  the  Committee,  it  was  at  once  adopted.

Mi-s.  Honywood,  in  answer  to  a  request  from  the  chair,  stated
that  she  had  witnessed  some  remarkable  phenomena  at  the  residence

128

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

of  Dr.  Gully,  "  Whilo  sitting  in  a  circle  recently,  the  table  rose,
and  tlie  room  vibrated  to  such,  a  degree  that  an  engineer  who  was
present  declared  that  nothing  but  the  strongest  machinery  would
have  been  sufficient  to  account  for  it.  An  accordion  was  played  in
the  air,  Mr.  Home  holdiag  it  by  one  strap,  and  not  touching  it  in
any  other  way.  The  room  was  fully  lighted.  Thi-ee  or  four  persons,
unknown  to  Mr.  Home,  mentally  wished  for  particular  tunes  and
they  were  played."

The  Hon.  Mrs.    gave  evidence  in.  the  following  words  : —

"  The  most  remarkable  manifestations  I  have  seen,  were  those  of
last  Sunday  eveniag  at  my  house.  "We  were  seated  in  a  partially
darkened  room.  We  first  heard  raps  and  then  saw  a  human  figure
at  the  window.  It  entered  and  several  other  figures  came  trooping
in  after  it.  One  of  them'  waived  its  hands.  The  atmosphere
became  fearfully  cold.  A  figure  which  I  recognised  as  that  of  a
deceased  relative,  came  behind  my  chair,  leaned  over  me,  and
brushed  my  hair  lightly  with  its  hand.  It  seemed  about  eight
feet  high.  Then  approaching  the  Master  of  Lindsay  it  passed
right  through  him,  causing  him  to  shiver  with  cold.  But  the
most  extraordinary  thing  of  all  was  the  laughter.  One  of  us  said
something  and  all  the  spirits  laughed  with  joy.  The  sound  was
indescribably  strange,  and  it  appeared  to  us  as  if  it  came  from  the
ground.    This  was  the  first  time  we  heard  spirit  voices."

In  answer  to  questions  from  members  of  the  Committee  Mrs.

said  :  "  Mr.  Home  was  present  on  this  occasion,  but  I  have  seen

things  when  Mr.  Home  was  not  present.  We  sat  in  a  circle  at
first,  and  were  seven  in  number.  Five  of  the  seven  saw  just  what
I  have  described,  and  the  others  saw  something,  but  not  so  distinctly.
Mr.  Home  said  there  were  nineteen  spirits  in  the  room  at  one
time.  I  could  see  their  eyes— peculiarly  brilliant  ones— looking
at  us.  Mr.  Home  said  to  me,  '  Don't  be  frightened,  there  is  a
spii-it  coming  to  you,'  and  in  a  few  minutes  I  saw  the  bright  eyes
of  the  figure  looking  at  me.  The  figure  was  that  of  a  man,  and
well  defined.  I  could  not  distinguish  the  clothes,  but  there  was  a
peculiar  rustle  like  that  of  sUk.    The  faces  were  not  very  distinct,

EVIDENCE  OP  MR.  SIMKISS.

129

but  Mr.  Home  said  that  he  coiild  see  them.  Mr.  Home  was  then
in  a  trance  condition.  He  walked  about  the  room  during  the
manifestations.

In  answer  to  Mr.  Geary,  it  was  stated  that  Mr.  Home  had  no
previous  access  to  the  room  beyond  having  dined  there.

Mr.  T.  M.  Simkiss,  who  was  the  next  witness  called,  gave  evi-
dence as  follows  : —

«'I  have  been  a  Spii-ituahst  for  nearly  sixteen  years,  and  have
examined  the  various  phases  of  mediumship,  with  all  the  critical
research  of  which  I  am  capable.

"  I  am  not  myself  a  medium  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the
term,  though  I  have  tried  hard  to  become  one.  I  have  tried  in  a
variety  of  ways  to  see,  hear,  or  feel  spirits  myself;  by  sitting
frequently  in  circles  as  passively  as  possible,  by  submitting  myself
to  repeated  mesmeric  manipulations,  and  by  sitting  alone  in  the
dead  of  night  for  many  hoiups  in  a  room  that  was  used  for  some
years  exclusively  for  the  purposes  of  spirits  and  mediums,  and
might  be  considered  to  be  thoroughly  permeated  with  spiritual
magnetism  ;  but  all  with  no  apparent  effect.

"  I  have  never  been  able  to  witness  any  independent  physical
manifestations,  (i.e.  without  contact  of  the  medium,)  which  would
admit  of  efi&cient  testing ;  so  that  I  am  generally  sceptical  as  to
the  reality  of  this  branch  of  Spiritualism.  Though  I  have  not  seen
any  reliable  physical  manifestations,  I  have  witnessed  a  great
munber  of  neurologic  spiritual  manifestations ;  and  after  deducting
the  greatest  possible  percentage  for  mesmerism,  for  imposture,  and
for  hallucination,  there  remains  for  me  no  possible  alternative  but
to  acknowledge  that  some  persons  who  are  physically  dead,  have
still  a  conscious  existence,  and  can,  by  operating  through  the
nervous  systems  of  certain  sensitive  individuals  called  mediums,
give  ixnmistakeable  evidence  of  their  identity.

"I  will  quote  a  few  marked  instances  out  of  a  great  number,  of
which  I  have  had  personal  experience  : — Sixteen  years  ago,  being
in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  in  America,  sceptical  as  to  futui'e  exis-
tence, and  quite  unacquainted  with  Spiritualism,  except  by  report

K

130

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

as  the  last  American  humbug,  I  went  to  see  Heiiry  G-ordon,  a  noted
medium.  The  instant  I  entered  his  room  he  became  entranced,
and  his  body  appeared  to  be  controlled  by  some  intelligent  power
other  than  himself.  He  immediately  extended  his  hand  to  me,
saying  quickly — '  Tom,  how  are  you?  I  am  gkd  to  see  you  here;

I  am  jour  old  friend  Michael  0  .'  After  a  pause, '  I  and  others

have  influenced  you  to  come  here,  so  as  to  give  you  proof  of  immor-
tality, which  you  have  given  over  believing  in.'    Michael  C

was  a  college  friend  of  mine  who  had  been  dead  more  than  three
years.  I  had  then  been  in  America  only  six  days,  and  was  a  com-
plete stranger  to  all  around  me  ;  I  had  never  mentioned  the  name

of  Michael  C         to  any  one  in  America,  nor  had  I  thought  of

him  for  some  weeks  before  that  time.    On  subsequent  occasions,

through  Henry  Gordon,  Michael  C  related  many  incidents  of

a  private  natiue  which  completely  established  his  personality  in
my  mind.

"On  the  next  day  after  my  visit  to  Henry  Gordon,  I  went  to
see  a  lady  who  was  not  a  pubhc  medium,  Mrs.  Chase,  the  wife  of
Dr.  Chase,  one  of  the  Professors  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  CoHege
of  PhUadelphia,  and  who  was  said  to  see  spirits.  On  my  entering
her  drawing-room  she  said—'  Oh!  Doctor,  there  are  several  spirits
come  in  with  this  gentleman  ;  one  is  a  taU,  thin,  young  man,  with
brown  hair,  and  only  a  Httle  whiskers  by  his  ears  ;  he  stoops  and
coughs  very  much,  and  died  of  consumption  ;  but  he  has  abeady
communicated  through  some  other  mecUum.'   This  I  recognised  as

being  a  correct  description  of  Michael  G  .    Mrs.  Chase  then

continued—'  On  the  other  side  of  him  there  is  a  young  girl,  appar-
ently about  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old,  with  very  white  skin  ;
her  hair  appears  to  be  nearly  black  and  hangs  in  ringlets ;  she  has
a  broad  square  forehead  and  square  shoulders  ;  you  knew  her  very
well  when  alive.'  I  could  not  recollect  any  one  answering  to  that
description.  '  She  is  very  merry  and  rather  fond  of  teasuig,  and
is  amused  at  your  not  recollecting  her,  as  you  used  to  know  her  so
weU '  I  was  stiU  perplexed,  and  began  to  think  that  Mrs.  Chase
was  playing  with  my  imagination.    After  a  few  more  tantahzmg

EVIDENCE  OP  MR.  SIMKISS.

131

remarks  I  began  to  get  tired  of  the  affaii-,  when  Mrs.  Chase  said —
'  She  is  now  going  to  say  something  by  which  you  will  know  who
she  is.'  After  a  pause  she  contiaued — '  You  bore  me  to  the  grave.'
This  remai-k,  originated  by  the  sj)irit  herself  as  a  sign  of  recogni-
tion, was  a  perfect  test  to  me.  I  had  never  in  my  life,  up  to  that
time,  been  present  at  the  funeral  of  any  young  gii-l  except  at  that
of  the  one  of  whom  Mrs.  Chase  had  just  given  me  such  a  perfect
description,  both  as  to  her  appearance  and  playfully  teasing  manner,
all  of  which  this  test  brought  fully  back  to  my  mind,  though  I
had  not  thought  of  her  for  at  least  two  years  previous  to  that  time.
She  had  then  been  dead  nine  or  ten  years.

"  For  the  past  thi-ee  years  my  wife  has  been  a  medium.  Constitu-
tionally she  is  quite  healthy,  rather  wiry  and  energetic  than  actually
sti-ong,  with  a  quick  circulation,  strong  nerved,  never  been  subject
to  fits  or  fainting,  almost  insensible  to  fear,  and  of  a  sceptical  turn
of  mind.  She  was  first  entranced  almost  immediately  on  her  sitting
in  a  cu'cle  of  Spiritualists,  to  which  she  went  out  of  curiosity.
Afterwards  she  was  frequently  in  the  unconscious  or  trance  state,
and  easily  possessed  by  spii-its,  who  could  have  full  control  of  her
organisation  for  their  own  peculiar  modes  of  speech  and  gesticula-
tion, and  were  apparently  as  much  at  home  as  if  in  their  own  bodies.
One  spirit  who  at  this  time  very  frequently  possessed  her  was  that
of  a  Scotchman,  who  invariably  spoke  broad  Scotch  through  her,
which  she  is  quite  unable  to  do  in  her  normal  condition.

"  This  trance  state,  unsurpassed  as  it  may  be  for  test  purposes,
is  detrimental  to  the  nervous  system  if  much  persisted  in.  In  the
case  of  my  wife  it  appears  to  have  been  a  transition  stage  that  she
passed  through  as  means  of  developing  her  interior  senses,  so  as  to
enable  her  to  see  and  converse  with  spirits,  without  the  closing  of
any  of  her  external  senses.  She  is  now  as  wide-a-wake  and  fully
conscious  when  seeing  spirits  as  any  person  with  whom  she  is  in
company.  She  not  only  sees  them,  but  occasionally  gives  the  full
names,  both  christian  and  surnames,  of  total  strangers,  and  by  this
means  has  convinced  many  persons  of  the  truth  of  Spiritualism
ajid  immortality,  about  which  they  were  previously  doubtful.

K  2

132

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

"  One  evening,  in  the  midst  of  a  general  conversation,  my  wife
suddenly  said  to  me  '  Here  is  a  spirit  who  says  his  name  is  Father

p  J '  slie  went  on  giving  me  a  correct  description  of  hLs  personal

appearance,  and  told  me  where  and  under  what  cii'oumstances  we
were  previously  acquainted  with  each  other.  A  week  afterwards
I  took  an  opportunity  of  testing  her  with  regard  to  this  spirit.
Seeing  his  photograph  ia  a  shop  were  I  was  making  some  other
purchases,  I  bought  one ;  my  wife  not  being  with  me.  I  aftenvards
caused  her  to  see  it  in  an  accidental  manner,  without  her  having
any  suspicion  of  intention  on  my  part,  by  showing  it  to  another
person.  She  looked  to  see  what  I  was  showing  my  friend,  and  said,
'  Who  is  that  1  I  have  seen  that  face  before.'  '  Don't  you  know  ?
said  I.    She  replied  '  Oh  !  it's  that  spirit  that  I  saw  last  week;  it's

Father  F  ,  what  a  good  likeness  it  is.'

«  On  another  occasion  we  went  by  invitation  to  visit  some  persons
who  were  strangers  to  us ;  during  the  evening  my  wife  described  a
spirit  a  deceased  relative  of  theii'S,  which  description  they  said  was
accui-ate  ;  and  he  gave  Hs  name  as  '  Tommy.'    To  this  I  was  pay-
ing but  little  attention,  not  being  acquainted  with  their  fanuly
connections,  when  my  wife  said  to  me  'Tommy  says  he  used  to
know  you  very  well.'    I  then  inquired  of  the  lady  of  the  house  as
to  the  former  residence  and  business  of  her  uncle,  (the  spmt
Tommy)  and  found  that  he  was  quite  correct ;  I  was  officially
connected  with  him  when  aUve,  and  knew  him  weU,  but  never  had
any  idea  that  he  was  any  relation  to  the  persons  whom  we
were  then  visiting.    Some  six  months  afterwards  she  saw  an  oil
portrait  of  this  person  at  a  house  in  another  part  of  the  coimtry,
and  instantly  recognised  it  as  '  Tommy,'  whom  she  had  seen  on  the
evening  above  mentioned.

"  My  wife  has  given  me  the  names  of  spii'its  of  historical  per-
sonages, many  of  whom  I  am  quite  certain  that  she  had  never  heard
of  and  in  several  cases  that  I  had  never  heard  or  read  of  until  I
se'arched  various  Encyclopaedias  to  find  if  such  persons  had  ever
existed.  One  instance.  That  of  '  Annibale  Carracci,  who  she
said  was  an  Italian  artist.    Not  being  given  to  aitistic  pursuits  or

EVIDENCE  OE  MR.  BLANCHAED.

133

Uterature,  I  did  not  know  of  sucli  a  person]  but  on  looking  out  for
him  in  the  Encycloptedia  I  found  his  name  and  profession  rightly
given.  She  has  con-ectly  described  the  details  of  dress  of  many
ancient  Grecian  and  Roman  spii-its,  such  as  the  tunic,  toga,  sandals,
&c.,  of  which  she  was  previously  quite  ignorant.

"  Into  the  various  ontological  theories  and  speculations,  which
inevitably,  grow  iip  in  the  philosophical  mind  from  the  considera-
tion of  metaphysical  subjects,  or  into  the  theological  paraphernaHa
with  which  ecclesiastical  dogmatism  and  superstition  tave  invested
and  weU  nigh  smothered  the  pure  form  of  '  Man  the  Spirit,'  I
think  it  useless  at  present  to  enter,  as  the  chief  object  of  this
investigation  is  to  elicit  well  authenticated  facts,  and  thoroughly
to  sift  them,  to  see  if  they  can  be  accounted  for  in  any  other  man,
ner  than  by  the  agency  of  departed  human  beiugs.

"  In  my  experience  I  have  met  not  only  with  success,  but  with
very  many  disappointments  ;  and  now  rarely  waste  much  time  upon
the  spirits,  vainly  waiting  for  them  to  communicate ;  for  I  know
that  if  they  choose  to  withhold  themselves,  they  will  not  come  when
we  do  caU,  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  they  will  sometimes  manifest
themselves  at  times  and  in  places  the  most  unexpected.

"  Beyond  solving  the  important  question  '  If  a  man  die  shall  he
live  again'?' — by  the  very  fact  of  spirits  communicating  and  proving
their  identity,  there  is  to  me  little  that  is  consistent  or  reliable  in
what  is  revealed  through  different  mediums.  And  perhaps  this  is
very  wise.  For  if  man  were  led  to  rely  much  upon  spirits  for
advice,  his  own  judgment  and  energy  would  be  in  danger  of  being
weakened  thereby."

In  reply  to  Mr.  D.  H.  Dyte,  Mr.  Simkiss  stated  that  his  wife
was  a  strong,  wiry  woman,  never  subject  to  fits  or  faintings,  and
•possessed  of  strong  nerves,  and  almost  insensible  to  fear.  The
only  peculiarity  about  her  that  he  could  think  of,  was  that  her
circulation  was  imxisually  rapid.

Ml-.  Edward  Laman  Blanchard  was  the  next  witness.  As  he  has
since  committed  to  paper  the  substance  of  his  statement,  it  has  been
thought  best  to  give  his  evidence  in  his  exact  words  as  written  : —

134

m/nutes  op  the  committee.

"  Tlie  deponent  states  tliat  for  -nearly  thirty  years  lie  has  given
his  attention  to  certain  occurrences  which  would  seem  to  be  only
satisfactoi'ily  explained  by  admitting  the  influence  of  those
agencies  usually, — and  as  the  writer  believes,  improperly, — called
'  Supernatural.'

"  That  he  has  a  personal  knowledge  of  facts  which  have
compelled  his  acceptance  of  the  belief  in  a  possibility  of  commu-
nications from  the  unseen  world ;  and  that  he  has  been  an  eye-
witness of  most  of  the  remarkable  physical  manifestations  which
have  been  observed  by  so  many  other  persons  in  this  country,
during  the  last  fifteen  years.

"  That  between  the  years  1858  and  1863  the  deponent  was
frequently  present  at  '  Circles '  formed  for  the  purpose  of  investi-
gating '  Spiritualism,'  and  that  he  has  always  subjected  the
evidence  adduced  to  the  most  rigid  scrutiny,  and  tested  in  every
instance  the  truthfulness  of  the  so-called  '  Mediums '  by  eveiy
expedient  that  common  sense  could  suggest.

"  That  amongst  other  places,  he  pursued  his  inquiries  at  the
rooms  of  Mrs.  Marshall,  and  that  on  these  occasions  he  has  seen
tables  rise  from  the  ground  without  the  slightest  possibility  of
human  agency ;  that  he  has  heard  guitars  played  and  bells  nmg
without  the  least  chance  of  feet,  fingers,  machinery  or  electricity
being  employed  to  produce  the  effect.  That  he  has  repeatedly
seen  'The  Spirit  Hand'  under  circumstances  which  rendered
deception  impossible,  and  that  he  has  frequently  received  at
those  'Circles'  wi-itten  communications  which  could  not  have
been  given  by  any  person  present  in  the  flesh.  Some  of  these
communications  bear  the  signature  of  a  departed  friend,  and  these
signatures,  Avhen  compared  with  the  autograph  of  that  individual
written  before  his  departure  from  earth,  liave  been  by  competent
witnesses  declared  to  be  singularly  identical.  On  one  occasion  the
deponent  has  found  himself  raised  in  a  chair  at  least  six  inches
from  the  groimd  without  such  levitation  being  due  to  mechanical
forces.  Handkerchiefs  knotted  in  a  minute,  heavy  slates  raised  by
the  'Spirit  Hand,'  and  placed  on  the  table,  and  instantaneous

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  SPEAE.

135

writing  on  whitened  glass,  slates,  and  note  paper  are  among  his
familiar  experiences.

"  On  Januaiy  11th,  1862,  the  deponent  in  company  with  Mr.
Cornelius  Pearson  the  artist,  and  Mr.  Thomas  Spencer  the  well-
known  analytical  chemist,  visited  a  'Medium'  named  Foster,  at  14,
Bryanstone  Street.  Names  previously  wi-itten  on  slips  of  paper
and  rolled  up  into  pellets  were  brought  by  each  person,  and  these
names  were  quickly  and  correctly  given  by  '  Raps,'  without  the
possibility  of  '  The  medium  '  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  contents
of  the  paper  slips  beforehand.  On  the  arm  of  '  The  medium '
appeared  in  red  letters  '  WUliam  Blanchard,'  the  name  of  the
deponent's  father,  and  immediately  afterwards  appeared  on  the
palm  of  the  medium's  hand,  the  numbers  '27'  indicating  in  answer
to  a  question  put,  the  exact  number  of  years  which  had  elapsed
since  the  said  William  Blanchard  had  ceased  to  exist  on  earth.
All  this  was  done  very  rapidly,  the  deponent  and  his  friends  being
utterly  unknown  to  the  '  Medium,'  and  the  letters  and  numbers
disappearing  in  the  sight  of  those  present,  without  the  arm  of  the
mediimi  being  withdrawn.

"  The  deponent  fiurther  states  that  he  has  had  the  gratification
of  attending  circles  when  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  was  the  medium,  and
that  he  has  become  perfectly  convinced  of  the  genuine  nature  of  the
phenomena,  occurring  on  those  occasions.  RefeiTing  to  a  brief
paper  entitled  'A  Rap  on  the  Kjiuclcles,'  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine
of  September  1860,  for  a  further  account  of  the  experiences  he  has
had,  the  deponent  would  here  only  record  in  addition  that  he  has
not  detected  trickery  in  one  instance,  although  he  has  reason  to
believe  himself  peculiarly  qualified  for  such  discoveries,  and  that
whatever  agencies  may  be  employed  in  these  '  Manifestations  *
they  are  not  to  be  expired  by  rciei-ring  them  to  imposture  on
the  one  side,  or  hallucination  on  the  other.

"E.  L.  Blanchard.

"April  nth,  1869."

The  Chairman  next  called  upon  Mr.  J,  Murray  Spear,  who
spoke  as  follows  : —

136

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

"  Mr.  Cliairman.  Wlien  I  first  Heard  of  Modem  Spiritualism
I  resolved  I  would  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it,  for  I  had
been  active  in  promoting  temperance,  peace,  freedom,  women's
rights,  and  other  moral,  social  and  religious  movements,  and  they
had  all  cost  me  much  time,  money  and  reputation ;  I  feared  it
might  be  so  if  I  undertook  to  look  into  Spiritualism,  Nevertheless,
I  was  persuaded  to  seat  myself  at  a  table,  and  then,  by  the
alphabet,  the  name  of  my  brother's  wife,  who  had  not  long  before
passed  into  the  spirit  world,  was  given.  Her  name  was  Frances.
None  present  knew  her,  much  less  did  they  know  her  name.  I
was  greatly  perplexed  to  know  how  that  name  got  there,  and  I
ventured  to  examine  the  subject  a  little  further.

"  In  March,  1852,  my  own  hand  was  moved  to  write  thus  : —
'We  wish  you  to  go  to  Abington  and  see  David  Vining.'  I  did
not  know  that  a  person  of  that  name  lived  in  that  town.  Abington
was  twenty  miles  from  Boston,  my  native  city,  where  the  message
was  written.    No  person  was  with  me  at  the  time  of  the  writing,

"I  went  to  Abington  as  directed,  found  a  person  there  bearing  the
name  I  had  written,  and  more,  that  he  was  sick  and  had  not  slept
for  nearly  ten  days  and  nights.  My  hand  was  moved  towards  him.
I  pointed  at  him,  but  did  not  touch  him  :  the  pain  was  all  driven
from  his  system,  and  he  soon  sank  into  a  quiet  sleep.  I  now  per-
ceived two  points  that  claimed  my  attention.  1st.  This  power,  what-
ever it  might  be,  exhibited  intelligence,  for  it  gave  me  the  name
of  a  person  of  whom  I  previously  had  no  knowledge,  and  it  directed
me  to  the  place  where  he  lived.  2nd.  It  exhibited  beneficence;  for
it  sent  me  to  do  the  person  good.

"  From  that  time  I  was  sent  to  many  other  persons  and  places
to  do  similar  acts  of  mercy.  One  lady  had  been  strack  by  Ughtning.
I  was  the  instrament  in  the  hands  of  this  power  of  removing  all
her  pain  in  a  very  short  time.  Evidences  numerous  and  various
crowded  upon  me,  and  I  became  a  believer  in  Modern  Spii-itualism.
Guided  by  this  power,  I  have  travelled  many  hundred  thousand
miles— have  been  sent  into  twenty  of  the  thii-ty-six  of  the  United
States  of  America,  have  crossed  the  Atlantic  Ocean  three  times,

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  COLEMAN.

137

have  visited  many  portions  of  England,  Scotland,  Wales,  and  have
been  repeatedly  sent  on  to  the  Continent.

"  I  may  also  state  that  I  was  sent  by  this  power  to  Hamilton
College  to  give  a  coui-se  of  twelve  lectures  on  geology,  a  subject
about  which  I  then  knew  almost  nothing.  Assisted  and  encouraged
by  a  distinguished  professor  of  that  institution,  the  discourses  were
given,  and  on  being  questioned  as  to  their  value,  the  professor
affirmed  that  I  took  up  the  subject  just  where  the  books  stopped  ;
that  I  did  not  contradict  them,  and  he  declared  he  should  teach  his
pupils  some  things  I  had  taught.

"  Besides  the  discourses  on  geology,  I  have  delivered  many  on
health,  electricity,  agriculture,  magnetism,  ether,  education,  com-
merce, astronomy,  government,  physiology,  &c.,  &c.,  and  with  all
the  above-named  subjects  I  had  but  slight  acquaintance.  A  volume
containing  nearly  seven  hundred  pages  has  been  published,  and
many  thousand  pages  are  now  in  manuscript.

"  I  was  also  set  at  work  to  build  a  machine  with  a  view  of
developing  a  new  motive  power  by  collecting  elements  directly  from
the  atmosphere.  Motion  was  secured  corresponding  to  early  em-
bryonic life.

"  I  have  many  times  imitated  with  marked  exactness  the  auto-
gi-aphs  of  persons.  This  power  aids  me  to  describe  disease  of  body
or  mind,  to  prescribe  for  the  sick,  and  to  delineate  the  characters
of  persons  by  holding  theii-  hand-writing,  or  a  lock  of  hair,  or  by
photogi-aph,  and  very  many  persons  have  been  healed,  assisted  and
comfoi-ted  by  this  power."

The  meeting  was  then  adjourned.

Tuesday,  27th  April,  1869.
Chairman,^Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  of  Upper  Norwood,  gave  evidence  this
evening  in  the  following  words  : —

"  At  the  fii-st  seance  which  I  attended  there  were  fourteen
persons  in  the  room,  seated  round  a  long  dimier  table.  Mr.  Home,
who  Avas  the  medium,  sat  at  one  end,  and  I  at  the  other.  Thi'ough

138

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

tlie  rapping  sounds  sevei-al  messages  were  given  to  different  indi-
viduals of  the  party.  One  inirported  to  be  from- the  spirit  of  an
aunt  of  mine,  wlio  gave  me  lier  name  as  Elizabeth,  and  another
spirit,  also  an  aunt  of  mine,  gave  the  name  of  Haimah.  I  did
not  recognize  the  names — I  had  never  knowi  of  any  avmts  of
those  names ;  but  subsequently  I  wrote  to  my  mother  and  asked
whether  she  recognised  them  as  family  names,  and  she  then  told
what  was  quite  new  to  me,  that  two  sisters  of  my  father  were
named  Elizabeth  and  Hannah,  who  died  before  I  was  boi'n.

"  A  new  accordion,  which  had  been  bought  that  day,  was  lying
upon  the  table  before  Mr.  Home,  and  he  asked  the  spirits  if  they
would  play  upon  it.  The  answer,  by  three  raps,  was  "  yes."  He
then  pulled  it  out  to  its  full  tension,  and  taking  hold  of  the  blank
end,  rested  his  hand  upon  his  knee  below  the  surface  of  the  table,
and  placed  his  left  hand  uioon  the  table  ;  which  (together  with  the
hands  of  all  present)  was  visible.  There  was  a  bright  gas-light
above  oiir  heads.  I  then  asked  the  spirits  to  play  an  aii'  for  me,
and  I  selected  "  Home,  sweet  home,"  which  was  instantly  played
upon  the  accordion  in  the  most  beautiful  style  imaginable.

"  I  was  greatly  surprised  at  this,  and  I  asked  Mr.  Home  how  he
v/as  holding  the  instrument,  and  he  told  me  to  take  a  candle  and
look  for  myself.  I  did  so,  and  found  that  he  was  holding  the
accordion  exactly  as  I  have  described.

"  I  was,  however,  disappointed  at  finding  that  the  instrument  did
not  contiinie  to  play  whilst  I  was  looking  at  it ;  and  after  some
conversation  ^vith  those  present  upon  the  manifestations  we  had
all  witnessed,  I  asked  Mr.  Home  if  he  thought  the  instrament
would  play  in  my  own  hand.  He  asked  the  spiiits,  "  WUl  you
•  play  for  Mr.  Coleman?"  The  reply,  by  three  decided  raps,  was
"  yes."  I  immediately  rose  from  my  seat  to  take  the  accordion,
iaut  Mr.  Home  told  me  to  remain  seated,  and  said  he  would  ask
the  spiiits  to  bring  it  to  me.  He  shortly  afterwards  said  "  they
have  taken  it  from  me  !  "  He  then  placed  liis  right  hand  upon
the  table.  In  a  minute  or  so,  the  accordion  was  pressed  against
my  knee.  I  pushed  my  chair  back  to  make  room  for  it,  when  the

EVIDENCE  OE  MK.  COLEMAN.

139

accordion  steadily  rose  up  above  tlie  table,  and  I  took  it  in  my
hand.  I  then  did  as  IMi".  Home  had  done,  rested  it  upon  my  knee,
requesting  that  it  might  play  for  me  "  Angels  ever  blight  and
fail-."  Immediately  I  felt  that  it  was  strongly  tugged  ;  and  after
being  successively  elongated  and  compressed,  the  required  melody
flowed  forth  with  variations,  whilst  the  insti-ument  remained  in
my  hand.  This  astounding  fact  awakened  my  mind  to  a  thorough
con\-iction  that  a  mysterious  something,  wholly  external  to
JMi-.  Home,  was  concerned  in  the  production  of  the  phenomenon.
I  was  not,  however,  then  prepared  to  believe  that  it  was  a  spiiit
that  produced  it ;  but  from  that  moment  I  was  led  on  to
investigate  the  subject,  and  from  the  variety  and  multiplicity  of
evidence  presented  for  my  observation  within  the  next  few
weeks,  through  Mi-.  Home  and  others,  I  became  thoroughly  con-
vinced of  the  fact  of  spirit  communion.

"  The  seance  above  alluded  to  took  place  at  the  house  of  a  neigh-
bour of  mine,  where  Mr.  Home  was  then  staying  on  a  visit,  about
jfiffceen  years  ago ;  and  in  the  same  house,  on  different  occasions,  I
witnessed  a  great  variety  of  phenomena.  The  most  striking
amongst  them  was  at  the  second  seance  I  attended,  which  took
place  in  quite  an  imexpected  and  casual  manner,  and  hajapened
thus  : — I  was  walking  roiuid  my  neighbour's  garden  one  fine  sum-
mer evening,  when  the  full  moon  was  above  the  horizon  ;  and  Mr.
Home,  who  was  present,  suggested  that  we  should  have  a  '  sitting,'
as  he  felt  impressed  (he  said)  that  something  remarkable  would
occur.  He  had  been  playing  with  the  children  in  the  garden,  who
had  made  for  him  a  wreath  of  flowers,  and  placed  it  upon  his  head.
The  drawing  room  to  which  we  retired  was  level  -with  the  garden ;
the  centre  table  (a  circular  one)  was  cleared  of  books  and  cover,
and  seven  persons,  myself  included,  sat  round  three  parts  of  it,
leaving  the  fourth  part  blank  opposite  to  the  windoAV.  There  was
light  enough  from  the  moon  to  enable  us  to  see  each  other,  as  well
as  every  object  between  us  and  the  window.  I  then  asked  Mr.
Home  to  place  both  his  hands  in  mine,  which  he  did,  and  I  con-
tinued to  hold  them  thus  thi'oughout  the  seance  wluch  followed.

140

MINUTES  03?  THE  COMMITTEE.

After  a  variety  of  tlie  usual  incidents,  Mr.  Home  suddenly  ex-
claimed, '  See,  they  are  taking  the  wreath  off  my  head  !'  and  we
then  all  saw  the  m-eath  floating  slowly  round,  without  any  visible
support.    It  came  up  to  me ;  I  took  it,  ijlaced  it  on  my  own  head,
and  retained  possession  of  it  for  many  weeks  afterwards.  The
table  then  gradually  rose  from  the  grouud,  and  it  became  necessaiy
for  us  all  to  stand  up  ;  it  continued  to  ascend  until  it  touched  the
ceiling,  quite  out  of  the  reach  of  all  excepting  myself,  the  tallest
of  the  party.    It  then  as  gradually  descended  and  resumed  its
original  position,  with  no  more  sound  than  if  it  had  been  a  snow
flake.    A  hand-bell  was  then  placed  upon  the  table,  and  a  hand
and  arm  of  feminine  propoi-tions  were  observed  to  rise  from
beneath  the  blank  side  of  the  table— and,  which,  reaching  towards
the  beU,  took  it  up,  rang  it,  and  carried  it  from  our  sight.    In  an
instant  afterwards,  I  felt  a  hand  patting  my  knee  ;  I  put  my  hand
down,  received  the  bell  and  placed  it  upon  the  table.

"  I  then  asked  to  be  allowed  to  feel  the  hand,  and  putting  my
own  hand  open  beneath  the  table,  I  felt  a  soft  feminine  hand  placed
in  my  own,  which  was  again  slowly  mthdrawn.  It  was  of  a
velvety  softness,  neither  warm  nor  cold.  The  arm  was  draped,  as
we  all  of  us  saw  and  remarked  upon,  in  a  gauze-like  sleeve,  thi-ough
which  the  full  form  of  the  arm  was  distinctly  visibler.

"  Three  or  four  of  the  party  had  rings  on  their  fingers,  and  one
of  them  said,  '  My  ring  has  been  taken  off  my  finger  by  some  one.'
Another  said,  '  so  has  mine  and  four  rings  in  all  were  thus  taken
away.  Presently,  a  hand  presented  itself,  exhibiting  the  four-
rings  upon  its  fingers,  and  then,  inverting  itself,  the  rings  were
scattered  upon  the  table.

"  On  another  occasion,  in  the  same  house,  I  witnessed  the  follow-
in-  wlien  Mr.  Home  was  absent.  I  saw  the  long  dinner-table  rise
up°  supported  only  by  its  two  end  legs,  and  remain  steadHy  poised
at  an  angle  of  forty  or  fifty  degrees.  The  gentleman  of  the  house
then  said  to  me,  'I  will  show  you  my  confidence  in  the  spirit's  in-
telligence and  power.'  He  then  placed  his  hand  fiat  upon  the  floor
and  said,  '  Now,  spia-its,  I  know  you  will  not  hurt  me.    Bring  the

EVlDExN'CE  Oh'  MR.  COLEMAN.

141

table  gently  clown  iijion  my  hand.'  This  was  done,  and  his  hand,
though  pinned  fost  to  the  floor  by  the  weight  of  the  table,  was  not
in  the  least  hm-t.  The  table  was  then  .slightly  eased,  and  he  re-
moved his  hand.

"  Some  years  subsequently  to  the  events  above  narrated,  I  was
staying  at  Malvern  with  my  wife  and  daughter.    We  had  apart-
ments at  the  house  of  Mr.  Willmore,  who  had  a  Avife  and  daughter
likewise  ia  the  house  ;  the  datighter,  a  young  woman  about  twenty-
thi-ee  years  of  age.  There  were  also  in  the  house  two  visitors,  Miss
Lee,  of  Worcester,  and  Mr.  Moore,  of  Halifax.    In  consequence  of
the  statements  made  by  me  respecting  the  phenomena  I  had  wit-
nessed, the  visitors  at  Dr.  Wilson's  Establishment  subscribed  to
bi-ing  to  Malvern  the  Marshalls  from  London  (mediums) ;  and
two  or  three  seances  were  given  at  Malvern  with  them  with  more
or  less  satisfaction.    Willmore,  who  had  been  a  Bath  man  with
Dr.  Gully,  asked  me  if  I  would  be  good  enough  to  let  him  see
somethiag  of  Spiritualism  before  the  mediums  left  the  town.  I
accordingly  requested  the  Marshalls  to  spend  an  hour  or  two  on
the  following  day  (Sunday)  with  Willmore's  family,  who  invited
some  of  then-  neighbours  to  form  a  circle.    I  and  my  family  spent
the  day  out,  and  returned  home  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  at
night ;  when  my  wife  and  daughter  retired  to  bed  and  left  me  in
our  sitting-room.    Shortly  afterwards,  Willmore,  in  great  excite-
ment came  to  me,  and  begged  that  I  would  come  down  stairs
immediately  for  he  did  not  know  what  to  do  ;  he  said,  his  wife,  his
daughter,  and  Miss  Lee  were  all  in  hysterics.    I  followed  him  at
once,  and  upon  entering  the  room,  a  small  tkree-legged  table  met
me  at  the  door,  no  one  touching  it,  and  made  me  a  graceful  bow
as  if  to  say,  "  How  do  you  do  V    One  of  the  females  was  on  the
sofa  screaming,  and  the  others  in  different  parts  of  the  room  throw-
ing themselves  about  in  a  state  of  gi-eat  distress.    I  went  up  to
the  other  end  of  the  room  to  Miss  Lee,  the  table  following  me
and  standing  by  my  side  whilst  I  endeavoured  to  calm  her.    I  had
nearly  succeeded  in  doing  so,  when  the  table  made  a  jump  at  her
and  threw  her  again  into  violent  hysterics  ;  her  screams  were

142

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

spondee!  to  hy  the  other  females.    Matters  looked  so  serious  tliat  I
felt  it  necessary  to  take  a  decided  part  with  the  table,  and  seizing
it  with  both  hands,  I  lifted  it  into  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  said,
'  Now  spirits,  you  have  done  quite  enough,  I  command  you  to
leave  this  place  in  God's  name.'    They  appeared  to  obey  my  in-
junction, for  nothing  further  took  place.    When  the  party  had
calmed  down,  they  told  me  that  they  had  had  a  very  interesting
seance  in  the  afternoon,  at  Avhich  it  was  said,  through  the  table,
that  both  Willmore  and  his  daughter  were  mediums,  which  induced
them  after  supper,  and  long  after  the  Marshalls  had  left,  to  try
whether  they  really  had  any  power  of  mediumsliip  ;  when  to  their
great  surprise  the  table  responded,  gave  truthful  answers  to  many
qiiestions  on  family  matters,  and  at  length  became  so  active  as  to
frighten  them  all,  and  they  assured  me  that  this  had  been  going
on  about  half  an  hour,  chasing  them  into  different  corners  of  the
room,  creating  great  confusion,  and  causing  Mr.  Willmore  to  rush
to  me  for  assistance.

"  I  went  the  first  thing  next  morning  to  Dr.  Gully,  and  told
him  all  the  strange  occurrences  of  the  previous  night  ^vith
Wnimore  and  his  daughter.  At  Dr.  Gully's  request  I  invited
the  WiUmores  to  my  rooms  in  the  evening,  when  we  had  some
very  remarkable  messages  through  the  table  ;  and  I  believe  I  am
right  in  saying  that  this  was  the  first  direct  evidence  Dr.  Gully
had  ever  had  of  spii'it  communion.  He  is  now,  as  is  well  known,
a  firm  believer,  which  he  boldly  and  iindisguisedly  avows.
Dr.  Wilson,  of  Malvern,  also  investigated  the  phenomena  about
the  same  period,  and  became  a  convert  in  consequence.  Both
were  previously  avowed  materialists.

"  A  similar  conversion  was  made  by  me  of  Mr.  Wason,  an  old
friend  of  mine,  who  called  iipon  me  to  express  Ms  surprise  that
'   a  man  of  my  practical  experience  should  give  in  to  such  a  de-
lusion as  Spiritualism.

"  This  was  in  London,  where  Mr.  C  ,  an  engineer  by  pro-
fession, was  temporarily  residing.  He  was  I  knew  a  good  medium,
and  Mr.  Wason,  with  a  friend  of  his,  a  weU-known  London

EVIDENCE  OP  MK.  COLEMAN.

143

barrister,  accompanied  me  to  IMr.  C  'a  rooms.     Daring  our

sitting,  a  message  came  to  Mr.  Wasou  purporting  to  be  from  an
old  friend  of  his.  I  conducted  the  iuquiiy,  knowing  nothing
whatever  of  the  man  or  the  cii-cumstances.

"The  spirit  gave  his  name  (a  very  uncommon  one),  said  he
lived  in  Bristol,  died  in  London,  and  had  held  the  situation  of
cashier  in  a  bank;  and  then,  in  very  earnest  and  well  chosen
language,  exhorted  his  old  friend  to  abandon  his  materialistic
views.  Mr.  Wason,  who  was  affected  to  tears,  recognised  the
man,  admitted  the  truth  of  every  statement,  and  said  that  the
tone  of  the  message  was  precisely  such  as  his  friend  had  been
accustomed  to  addi-ess  to  him  when  they  resided  together  at
Bristol,  twenty-five  years  before.

"From  that  evening  Mr.  Wason  changed  his  views,  and  is  now
a  confirmed  Spiritualist.

"I  have  in  my  possession  several  coloured  drawings,  done
through  the  hands  of  ladies,  M'ho,  I  have  every  reason  to  believe,
have  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the  art.  Two  of  these  were  cbawu
through  Mrs.  Mapes,  the  Avife  of  Professor  Mapes,  the  well  known
chemist  of  New  York.  One  is  an  Ii-is,  and  the  other,  a  collection
of  autumnal  leaves.

«  Good  artists  in  water  colours  declare  they  are  both  very  perfect
(bakings,  and  could  not  be  copied  in  an  ordinary  way  in  less  than
t^^^o  days.  They  were  presented  to  me  by  Professor  Mapes,  who
assured  me  that  both  of  these  pictures  were  commenced  and  finished
in  Httle  more  than  one  hour.  I  have  also  a  number  of  drawings  in
pencU  and  colom-s,  of  birds  and  flowers,  which  were  done  in  my
presence  in  New  York,  without  any  human  agency  whatever,  and
the  time  occupied  in  their  production  varied  from  ten  to  fifteen
seconds  !

"Judge  Edmonds,  Professor  Lyman,  Dr.  Gervais  and  others
were  present  with  me  when  these  drawings  were  made,  and  they
have  certified  by  theb  signatures  endorsed  upon  two  of  the  pic-
tures the  time  and  conditions  as  stated  above."

On  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Coleman's  statement,  Mr.  D.  H.  Dyte

144

MmUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

rose  to  ask  him  if  ho  could  give  the  Committee  any  instances  of
spirit  communications  having  been  made,  conveying  information
not  previously  in  tlie  possession  of  any  one  present  at  the  tune.

Mr.  Coleman  replied  that  he  was  unable  at  the  moment  to
recollect  any  instances  of  the  kind.

Mr.  Seijeant  Cox  remarked,  that  he  had  heard  of  a  woman  who
^  coidd  make  people  believe  that  they  were  tormented  by  a  wasp,
that  they  could  smell  flowers,  &c.,  by  the  mere  exercise  of  her
will.  He  wished  to  ask  Mr.  Coleinan  how  he  could  be  certain  he
was  not  biologised  at  the  time,  and  merely  imagining  these  things.

Mr.  Coleman  said  that  biology  might  explain  some  of  the  phe-
mena,  but  there  were  others  which  it  could  not  possibly  account
for;  such,  for  example,  as  spirit  drawings.  He  had  been  present
at  the  production  of  several  elaborate  crayon  dramngs  in  spaces
of  time,  varying  from  seven  to  ten  seconds.  He  had  himself  pre-
viously marked  the  paper  so  as  to  enable  him  with  certainty  to
identify  it.  These  drawings  were  still  in  his  possession,  and  he
would  be  glad  to  exhibit  them  to  the  Committee.  The  modus
operandi  in  the  production  of  these  spirit  drawings  was  very
remarkable.  Clean  pieces  of  paper,  with  crayons,  &c.,  were  placed
imder  a  table  cloth';  a  rapid  scratching  of  the  paper  was  then
heard,  and  in  a  few  moments  the  crayons  were  heard  to  fall  and
the  drawing  was  complete.  He  would  like  to  know  how  biology
would  account  for  this.

Mr.  Childs,  another  witness,  stated  that  he  had  repeatedly  heard
voices,  sometimes  in  broad  dayhght,  which  could  not  possibly  have
proceeded  from  any  living  being.  He  had  also  frequently  heard
musical  instruments  exquisitely  played,  when  no  human  being
capable  of  such  performance  was  present  in  the  room.  He  had
\\atnessed  many  such  phenomena,  and  could  vouch  for  then*  genuine-
ness. His  evidence  was  corroborated  with  regard  to  one  occasion,
by  Mv.  J.  S.  Bergheim,  a  member  of  the  Committee.

Mr.  John  Jones,  of  Enmore  Park,  Norwood,  then  related  what
ho  had  \\atnessed  last  autumn  at  Stockton  House,  Fleetpond,  where
he  was  on  a  \  isit  \vith  three  of  liis  family.    The  night  \vas  dark,

EVIDENCE  or  MK.  JONES.

145

as  the  moon  had  not  risen,  but  as  there  was  a  conservatory  at  the
side  of  the  drawing-room,  in  which  some  eight  persons  sat  round
the  loo  table,  and  a  window  in  front,  he  could  see  all  in  the  room
distinctly.  As  it  was  unusual  for  Mr.  Home  to  sit  in  a  dark  room
for  physical  phenomena,  he  (Mr.  Jones)  mentally  determined  to
play  the  sceptic.  A  sofa  behind  him  moved  away  from  the  wall  and
passed  in  the  rear  of  his  and  Mr.  Home's  chairs,  no  one  being  near

them.    By  the  sounds  and  raps  it  was  said,  "  Mrs.   ,  rest  on

the  sofa."  She  got  up  and  did  so.  He  (Mi-.  J  ones)  then  saw  the
vacant  chair  rise  in  the  air,  float  over  the  lady,  pass  in  front  of  Mr.
Home  (whose  hands  were  on  the  table)  and  ascend  till  vertically  over
his  (Mr.  Jones's)  head  ;  then  the  chair  descended,  and  the  under
portion  of  the  seat  rested  on  his  head.  On  mentally  declaring
himself  satisfied,  the  chaii-  arose  again,  floated  in  the  air,  and
descended  on  to  the  loo  table.  Mr.  Jones  also  stated  that  at  his
house,  Enmore  Park,  in  a  well-lighted,  large  room,  at  a  circle  of
only  his  own  family  and  the  medium  (all  hands  on  the  loo  table),
he  and  all  his  family  saw  his  aged  mother  and  the  chair  she  sat
on,  rise  in  the  air,  till  her  knees  were  on  a  level  with  the  rim
of  the  table.  He  had,  at  a  previous  sitting,  seen  Mr.  Home  rise
in  the  air,  and  held  his  hands  while  he  was  rising.
The  hour  being  late,  the  meeting  was  then  adjourned.

Tuesday,  11th  Mat,  1869.
Chainnan,  Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr.  J  ones  contiimed  his  evidence  in  the  following  words  : —
"  '  We  have  done  all  we  can  to  convince  you  that  we  live,  and
that  God  is  love.'    Such  was  the  message  collected  from  the  tele-
graphic knocks,  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  last  evening,  at  my
house,  on  a  breakfast  table,  in  a  large  room,  sixteen  feet  by  thirty-
four  ;  the  blinds  being  drawn  down,  and  the  gas  full  lighted.  It
was  in  the  presence  of  the  Norwood  Committee,  who  were  formed  to
investigate  the  phenomena.  The  Committee  consisted  of  two  editors
of  district  newspapers  and  four  other  gentlemen  of  good  standing,
who  had  hitlierto  laughed  and  joked  at  Spii'itualism.    They  frankly

L

1-iG

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

owned  they  were  astonisliecl  at  tlie  results,  tliougli  to  me  tlio  mani-
festations had  appeared  but  of  a  trifling  nature.

"  Perhaps,  if  I  mention  two  or  three  other  instances  they  may
be  interesting,  especially  as  they  are  those  best  adapted  for  show-
ing the  intelligence  of  the  spiritual  power.  One  is  the  playing  of
the  accoi-dion.  I  may  state  I  have  heard  various  instruments
played  upon  by  spiritual  beings.  I  was  speaking  at  the  meeting
of  what  I  had  seen  and  heard  years  ago — that  I  had  seen  the  ac-
cordion play,  and  had  heard  the  most  exquisite  music  played  and
repeated  over  and  over  again,  and  being  very  fond  of  music,  I  was
more  than  delighted.  On  one  occasion  Mr.  Home  had  taken  the
accordion  by  the  rim,  so  that  every  one  could  see  that  there  was  no
communication  made  with  the  keys,  which  perceptibly  moved,  and
the  most  exquisite  music  was  produced.  In  order  to  show  that
Mr.  Home  was  not  imitating  the  music,  and  producing  the  sounds
himself,  a  lady's  hand  was  placed  over  his  mouth.  "While  I  was  so
speaking,  last  evening,  sounds  came  out  of  my  own  accordion — one
I  myself  bought  in  Cheapside— and  the  editor  of  one  of  the  papers
felt  the  keys  of  the  accordion  working  on  the  top  of  his  foot,  and
the  music  was  played  while  no  visible  agency  touched  the  keys.  I
never  was  biologized.  I  have  biologized  others,  and  I  have  mes-
merized others.  I  therefore  feel  that  what  I  saw,  I  saw,  and
what  I  heard,  I  heard,  really  and  truly ;  and  if  you  say  I  was
biologized,  the  friends  I  see  before  me  do  not  exist,  and  the
scene  before  me  is  biological.  Such  were  the  facts  that  took
place  in  a  very  large  room,  between  the  hours  of  8  and  not  later
than  9.30.  I  do  not  care  a  farthing  for  the  phenomenon  unless
I  can  find  with  it  intelligence,  and  I  think  I  obtained  it  in  this

case.

"  And  now  I  will  proceed  to  put  the  matter  more  sytematically.
What  is  the  object  of  this  Committee  ?  I  suppose  it  is  to  ascertain
if  the  alleged  phenomena  be  true,  and  if  so,  whether  they  are  pro-
duced by  persons  in  the  flesh,  binder  conditions  not  yet  known,  or
by  persons  out  of  the  flesh  called  spirits  or  ghosts.  If  the  fii-st  be
found  tme,  there  is  the  natural,  if  the  second,  there  is  the  super-

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  JONES.

147

natural ;  and  tlien  the  acts  registered  in  the  New  Testament  and
classical  liistory  are  no  longer  impossible.

"  I  now  ask  myself  a  second  question  :  "What  is  a  supernatural
beuig  1 — A  person,  in  form,  dimensions  and  intellect,  but  not  in  the
proportion  of  gaseous  substances  in  his  composition,  like  men  in  the
flesh.

"  I  ask  myself  a  thii-d  question  :  What  is  a  mii-acle  1 — An  act
done  by  siipernatural  beings,  that  could  not  be  done  by  men  in  the
flesh.

"  For  twelve  years  before  I  became  aware  of  the  action  of  super-
natural beings,  I  was  engaged  on  the  examination  of  the  emanations
from  men,  stone,  &c.,  and  from  these  examinations  lobtained  startling
results.  These  emanations  were  as  real  as  the  bodies  they  came
from — as  real  as  the  air  we  breathe,  and  which  we  cannot  see.

"  Since  1855  I  have  studied  Spiritualism,  having  attended  seances
and  circles  by  the  score ;  and  bringing  my  previous  knowledge  to
bear,  I  have  had  much  more  enjoyTnent  than  those  who  merely
went  to  see  the  results,  and  I  have  concluded  that  supernatural
beings  exist  around  us,  but  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  we
are  not  qualified  to  see  them.  This  is  all  I  have  to  say  in  connec-
tion with  the  principle.  Now  I  come  to  the  phenomena  themselves.
I  have  to  put  the  question,  what  are  spiritual  manifestations?
The  answer  is,  evidences  of  unseen  life  having  especial  influence
over  us  for  good  or  evil.

"  Having  seen  the  whole  of  the  phenomena,  I  can  give  illustra-
tions— facts  of  my  oAvn  personal  knowledge — on  each  of  the  differ-
ent phases.  The  instances  that  I  will  now  state  transpired  at  my
own  house,  and  an  accoimt  of  them  has  been  printed  and  sent  round
to  some  5',000  clergymen  throughout  the  country.

"  It  was  on  Friday,  July  17th,  1868,  about  10  p.m.

"Picture  to yom-self  my  drawing-room,  16  feet  by  34  feet,  with-
out a  break  or  chandelier.  A  heavy  loo  table,  4J  feet  in  diameter,
ro\md  which  were  ten  chaii-s :  seven  of  them  occupied,  by  Mr.
Home,  my  mother  (83  years  old),  three  grown-up  daughters,  one
son,  and  me.    The  other  three  chaii's  were  vacant,  to  represent  my

L  2

148

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

late  wife,  my  late  daughter  Marion,  and  son  Walter.  I  had  placed
on  my  wife's  cliair  her  last  silk  dress,  bonnet,  and  black  lace  scarf ;
on  my  daughter's  chair,  the  flannel  robe  she  wore  the  day  before
her  passing  away ;  and  on  my  son's  chaii-,  his  neck-tie  and  New
Testament.

"  Is^  Incident. — My  accordion  having  made  sounds  which  read  off
were  '  Hymn  of  Praise  3'  a  mellow,  joyous,  jubilant  voluntary  of
praise  was  brilliantly  played,  exciting  in  us  wonder,  joy  and  thank-
fulness. No  human  hand  touched  the  keys,  but  like  stars  were
seen  moving  tip  and  down  on  the  keys  during  the  hymn  of  praise.

«'  2ncl. — The  accordion,  shortly  after,  when  placed  on  the  table,
gently  rose  in  the  air  about  four  inches,  and  floated  about  thi-ee
feet  round  the  table.

"  2,rd. — The  family  sang  the  hymn  '  What  are  these  arrayed  in
white  ?'  and  then,  my  mother  with  the  chaii-  she  was  sitting  on,
gently  rose  bodily  in  the  air  three  times,  the  last  time  her  knees
were  level  with  the  rim  of  the  loo  table ;  her  hands  were  crossed
on  her  breast.

"  ith.—Kj  late  wife's  bonnet  was  raised  from  the  vacant  chair,
and  carried  opposite,  to  my  youngest  daughter  Edith.

"  Qth. — My  late  wife's  chair,  with  the  dress  on  it,  then  rose  in  the
air,  bent  towards  and  leaned  on  my  mother's  breast.  The  chaii-
returned  or  rather  floated  back  to  its  place.

«  Qth. — ^The  dress  on  the  chair  began  to  move.  It  rose  horizon-
tally like  a  living  substance,  moved  over  to,  and  on  my  mother's
knees,  in  the  sight  of  us  all  :  it  then  passed  to  the  rear  of  Mi-.
Home's  chair.

"  'Jth.—Mj  late  daughter's  chair,  next  mine,  having  on  it  the
flannel  robe  extended  on  the  back  and  seat  of  the  chair,  then  moved
up  closer  to  the  table ;  but  there  not  being  room,  vigorously  pushed
my  chaii-  and  removed  it  a  little  to  one  side,  and  so"  was  ranged
with  the  other  sitters.  We  all  then  sang  a  pai-t  of  her  favoui-ite
hymn,

"  Give  to  the  -winds  your  feai-s,
Hope  and  be  undismayed,  &c."

EVIDENCE  OP  MES.  EOWOEOPT.

149

"  8t7i. — My  spirit  daughter's  chaii-  then  quietly  glided  away  from
the  table,  passed  round  the  rear  of  mine,  came  to  my  left  side
(Ml-.  Home  and  chair  being  carried  to  the  rear  of  the  room),  took
the  vacant  place  at  the  table ;  and  then,  with  an  undulating  motion,
floated  up  off  the  ground  to  a  level  with  the  rim  of  the  loo  table ;
the  accordion  at  the  same  time  playing  a  sweet  gentle  strain  of
music.

"  9th.— The  accoixlion  commenced  and  continued  playing  the  air
well  known  to  teetotallers,  '  Taste  not  the  cup  my  family,  know-
ing the  air  and  the  words,  chimed  in.  We  were  wondering  why
such  a  song  should  be  played — my  son  Arthur  said — "  It  is  an
answer  to  my  mental  question  :  '  Shall  I  give  up  teetotalism,  and
do  as  others  ? '    After  this  advice  I  will  not  take  the  cup."

"  Other  phenomena  took  place,  and  at  last  the  sounds  gave  out,
'  God  bless  you  all.'  We  said  '  Amen — may  God  bless  you.'  Then,
a  jubilant  gush  of  sounds  came  on  the  table  and  aU  ceased.

"  We  as  a  family  then  sang,  '  Praise  God  from  whom  all  bless-
ings flow,' and  the  sitting  closed."

Mr.  J  ones  observed  that  in.  addition  to  seeing  human  beings  rise
from  the  floor  into  the  air,  he  had  on  one  occasion  seen  a  large  loo
table  tremble  like  a  leaf,  rise  gradually  up,  up,  up,  till  it  ascended
as  high  as  the  ceiling,  and  then  gradually  descend,  and  that  in
the  presence  of  six  or  seven  leading  individuals  in  London,  whose
names,  if  mentioned,  would  command  imiversal  respect.

The  Chairman  then  observed  that  he  understood  a  lady  was
present  who  had  seen  the  apparition  of  a  departed  friend.

Mrs.  Rowcroft,  the  lady  referred  to,  then  said  : —

"I  saw,  in  July,  1860,  the  apparition  of  my  husband.  I  was
lying  on  the  sofa,  between  six  and  seven  in  the  evening,  at  the
hotel  where  I  was  staying  at  Cincinnati.  I  was  perfectly  awake,
and  not  thinking  of  my  husband  in  the  least,  when  I  heard  three
knocks  at  the  door.  I  said  '  come  in,'  thinking  it  was  one  of  the
waiters,  and  my  husband,  who  had  been  dead  five  years,  entered,
dressed  in  the  morning  dress  prescribed  for  British  consuls— a  blue
coat  with  VictorLa  buttons,  a  straw-coloured  waistcoat,— and  a  whito

150

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

hat  which  he  always  wore  in  the  summer.  He  had  also  a  walking
stick  with  a  chamois  horn  handle.  I  jumped  up  and  advanced  to
the  middle  of  the  room,  and  he  went  into  the  one  adjoiniiig.  As
soon  as  I  recovered  myself  I  went  in  also  but  saw  nothing."

In  reply  to  a  question  put  by  Mr.  Jeffery  as  to  how  long  the
apparition  was  visible,  Mrs.  Rowcroft  said  she  was  too  much
surprised  to  have  any  idea .  Further  questions  elicited  that  she  had
every  reason  to  believe  her  husband  was  poisoned  on  board  ship  ;
that  the  door  actually  opened  when  she  said  '  come  in,'  and  that
the  door  was  not  open  when  the  apparition  had  disappeared.

Mr.  Borthwick,  now  Lord  Borthwick,  in  reply  to  a  question  put
from  the  Chair  regarding  some  spirit  drawings  that  had  been  pro-
duced in  his  presence,  said  : —

"  I  was  present  when  these  drawings  were  produced.  I  did  not
hear  any  explanation  of  them.  There  were  about  tweh^  or
thii'teen  people  present.  A  table  was  placed  in  the  middle  o?  the
room,  and  we  sat  around  it-a  shawl  was  drawn  around  it  and

tied-the  paper  was  put  into  form  by  Professor  L  and  handed

to  me,  and  I  marked  it.  I  was  then  asked  to  place  the  paper
under  the  table;  on  tHs  being  done,  we  heard  sounds  like  the
scribbling  of  a  pencil  or  brush  upon  paper;  a  stop-watch,  in  the
possession  of  some  one  present,  indicated  that  about  seven  or  nine
seconds  elapsed  from  the  time  when  it  was  placed  under  the  table
until  it  was  brought  out,  wet  with  the  paint  upon  it,  and  handed
to  me.  Mr.  Coleman  retained  some  of  the  papers.  I  have  no
opinion  myself  as  to  how  they  were  done."

The  Chaii-man  then  remarked  to  Mr.  Jones  that  he  beUeved  his
daughter  was  present,  who  could  give  them  an  account  of  what  she
saw  at  Stockton  when  Mr.  Home  was  there.
Miss  Alice  Jones  then  said  : —

"I  was  at  Stockton  at  a  seance  which  took  place  about  eight
o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  Mr.  Home  was  present  with  others.
He  seemed  very  ill,  and  said  the  spirits  were  in  him  and  did  not
understand  him,  and  he  must  go  out  and  get  rid  of  them.  He
went  out  and  walked  up  and  down  the  verandah,  and  we  saw  a

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  BUENS.

151

bright  light  issue  from  him,  upwards,  of  a  conical  shape ;  it  reached
about  half  his  own  length ;  it  looked  very  much  like  phosphorous.
All  the  time  he  was  away  there  were  perfumes  in  the  room — each
had  a  different  perfume — one  eau-de-cologne,  &c.  He  went  out
a"-ain  and  was  carried  across  the  lami,  a  distance  of  over  1 00  feet,  to
a  rhododendron  bed ;  and,  when  he  returned,  all  said  there  was  a
light  down  by  the  bed ;  and  he  said,  '  Yes,  it  is  a  spirit  I  have  left
there.'  Although  it  was  raining,  there  was  no  rain  on  his  coat,
neither  were  his  feet  wet.  He  floated  over  the  verandah,  which
was  about  ten  feet  from  the  lawn,  in  an  upright  position,  and  his
body  seemed  elongated.  He  observed,  as  he  went  out,  that  we
should  all  have  perfumes,  and  we  did.  We  heard  him  walking
on  the  gi-avel  path,  and  yet  his  feet  were  perfectly  dry.

Diu-ing  this  seance  I  felt  and  pressed  the  hand  of  the  spirit  who
was  producing  the  phenomena.

The  Chairman  then  called  upon  Mr.  Burns,  who  said  that  the
mediums  with  which  he  had  chiefly  sat  were  his  wife  and  her
sister.  He  was  away  when  their  mediumship  was  first  developed,
and  they  wrote  and  told  him  of  the  fact.  Being  rather  sceptical
as  to  their  newly-fovmd  power,  he  wrote,  asking  them  to  give  him
a  proof  of  it,  and  they  told  him  that  a  certain  young  lady  had
lived  in  Carlisle,  with  her  father  and  mother,  and  as  he  was  shortly
after  in  Carlisle,  he  made  inquiries  fi'om  the  tax-gatherer  and
found  that  their  statement  was  correct.

Several  questions  were  put  to  Mr,  Burns,  but  they  failed  to
elicit  any  infoi-mation  beyond  the  above  fact,  Mr.  Burns  stating
that  no  one  in  the  family  had  hitherto  known  anything  relative  to
this  yoimg  lady ;  it  was  quite  by  chance  he  was  near  Carlisle ;
he  could  not  tell  the  exact  information  contained  in  the  letter,
but  he  would  try  and  produce  it.

He  further  observed  that  if  Mrs.  Burns  and  her  sister  were  in  a
dark  room  with  others,  they  would  see  light  issuing  from  the
various  heads,  they  could  see  flashes  passing  from  the  brain  of  one
to  that  of  another,  and  could  tell  those  who  were  congenial  to  one
another.     His  wife's  sister  sometimes  went  into  a  trance,  and

152

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

described  accurately  things  at  a  great  distance  Vliicli  slie  had  never
seen.   They  developed  automatic  writing  too ;  these  writings  came
from  the  spirits,  and  were  in  different  styles  of  handwriting,  some
similar  to  that  in  use  on  the  continent  and  other  places.  Some-
times when  Mrs.  Burns  was  observing  what  was  going  on  around,
she  would  sketch  out  a  little  flower ;  she  had  done  a  great  many  of
these,  although  she  had  never  even  heard  the  names  of  the
materials  usually  employed  to  produce  drawings.   Her  sLster  wrote
out  the  names  of  the  materials,  where  she  could  get  them,  and
what  they  would  cost,  and  they  were  obtained.    Mrs.  Burns  drew
flowers  of  various  kinds  in  crayon,  water  colours,  and  oil.  Some-
times she  wished  to  alter  the  sketch,  but  found  herself  ..unable  to
do  so,  and  a  message  came  to  her  sister  that  the  spirits  knew  best,
and  she  must  only  allow  herself  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  in
the  matter.    Mrs.  Biu-ns  was  ill  upstairs,  and  it  crossed  her  mind
as  to  whether  the  spirits  could  help  her.    The  sister,  in  another
room,  was  influenced  to  write  a  prescription  wliich  gave  instant
relief.    Since  that  first  instance  the  medium  has  written  a  number
of  medical  prescriptions.    Thus  on  two  occasions,  when  my  wife
has  been  ill,  the  spirits  have  prescribed  remedies  which  cured  her
as  soon  as  they  were  applied.

One  night  we  were  at  Mrs.  Marshall's ;  I  have  been  there  t^icc,
with  Mrs.  Burns;  we  sat  next  to  Mr.  Jencken;  Mrs.  Burns,  in
the  dark,  saw  a  hand  approaching  her,  but  she  could  see  nothing
in  the  hand,  when  a  voice  called  her  by  name  and  told  her  to  put
out  her  hand,  she  did  so,  and  in  it  was  placed  a  peach,  which  she
gave  to  me.  Mr.  Jencken  held  out  a  small  tambourine,  but  the
spirits  could  not  take  it  away.  Mrs.  Biirns  saw  them  throwing
theii-  influence  over  the  part  Avhere  the  tambourine  was,  but  there
was  something  coming  from  Mr.  Jencken  which  neutralized  their
influence.

The  Chaii-man  then  asked  Mr.  Burns  whether  he  had  any  theory
as  to  whether  the  spii-its  were  matter  or  not?  to  which  Mr  Burns
replied  that  he  did  not  know  what  matter  was.

Mr.  Thomas  Sherratt  then  produced  some  spirit  writings,  and

EVIDENCE  OP  MrSS  HOUGHTON.  153

remarked,  concerning  tliem,  that  they  were  done  in  his  presence  at
a  seance  at  Mrs.  Marshall's,  at  Bayswater,  in  a  fully  lighted
room;  the  paper  was  placed  under  the  table,  with  a  pencil  and
during  the  time  the  writing  was  going  on,  they  could  hear  the
pencil  moving  over  the  paper ;  it  was  a  peculiar  kind  of  paper,
brought  by  himself,  viz.,  lithographing  paper.

Miss  Houghton  then  produced  some  very  interesting  drawings,
done  by  spii'itualistic  agency,  and  made  the  following  statement  :—
"  On  the  20th  of  April,  1867,  we  held  a  seance  for  my  birthday ;
Mrs.  General  Eamsay,  Mrs.  Gregory,  Mrs.  Cromwell  Varley,  Mrs.
Flinders  Pearson,  Miss  ISTockolds,  Miss  Wallace,  and  Miss  Mcholl
(now  Mrs.  Guppy)  being  present  in  addition  to  Mamma  and
myself.    The  doors  and  windows  were  all  closed,  and  we  were  in
complete  darkness,  which  is  incUspensable  for  some  kinds  of  mani-
festations ;  and  at  the  seances  at  our  house,  we  are  always  particu-
larly quiet,  and  as  still  as  possible.    We  had  at  first  some  few
messages,  but  after  a  time,  I  (who  had  been  seated  between  Mrs.
Ramsay  and  Mrs.  Gregory)  was  impressed  to  rise  from  my  chaii-,
and  place  my  hand  on  Mrs.  Ramsay's  shoulder,  so  that  I  was  quite
out  of  the  reacli  of  any  one  in  the  circle.    Suddenly  I  felt  some-
thing on  my  head,  but  I  said  nothing  about  it,  and  Miss  Nicholl
exclaimed,  '  Oh  !  there  is  something  so  bright  on  Miss  Houghton's
head;  do  you  not  all  see  how  it  glitters?'    Well,  some  could  see
it,  and  some  could  not;  so  we  asked  and  obtained  permission  to
have  a  light,  when  we  found  that  the  spirits  had  brought  me  as  a
bii-thday  present  a  lovely  wi-eath  of  everlasting  flowers,  with  which
they  had  crowned  me.    I  have  since  had  a  case  made  for  the
wi-eath,  which  remains  in  my  possession.

"  On  the  3rd  of  October,  1867,  I  went  to  a  dark  seance  at  Miss
NichoU's  own  house,  on  which  occasion  there  were  eighteen  ladies
and  gentlemen  present,  with  all  of  whom  I  am  acquainted.  The  table
was  smaU,  therefore  only  six  sat  at  it,  the  others  being  seated
round  the  room.  I  sat  on  one  side  of  Miss  NichoU  at  the  table,
with  her  father  on  the  other,  and  Mi-s.  Cromwell  Varley  beyond
him.    By  i-aps  the  spirits  desired  me  to  vnsh  for  a  fruit,  and  I

154  MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.  •

cHose  a  banana,  wliicli  tliey  promised  me,  and  then  said,  '  Now  all
may  wish,'  which  they  did,  for  various  fruits,  sometimes  having
their  wishes  negatived,  but  in  most  instances,  agx-eed  to.  The
fruits  were  then  brought  in  the  order  in  which  they  had  been
wished  for.    One  lady  said,  '  Why  do  you  not  ask  for  vegetables  ;
an  onion,  for  instance  V  and  even  as  she  said  it,  the  onion  came
into  her  lap.    I  will  give  you  a  list  of  the  various  things  brought :
a  banana,  two  oranges,  a  bunch  of  white  gi-apes,  a  bunch  of  black
grapes,  a  cluster  of  filberts,  three  Avalnuts,  about  a  dozen  damsons,
a  slice  of  candied  pine  apple,  three  figs,  two  apples,  an  onion,  a
peach,  some  almonds,  four  very  large  grapes,  three  dates,  a  potato,
two  large  pears,  a  pomegranate,  two  crystallised  gi-eengages,  a  pile
of  dried  ciirrants,  a  lemon,  and  a  large  bunch  of  beautiful  raisins,
wHch,  as  well  as  the  figs  and  dates,  were  quite  plump,  as  if  they
had  never  been  packed,  but  had  been  brought  straight  from"  the
drying  gi-ound.

"  I  have  been  present  at  many  seances  with  similar  character-
istics, but  from  these  being  so  strongly  defined,  I  have  selected
■  them  ;  and  the  special  wonder  of  the  second,  is,  that  so  many
persons  should  have  been  present;  but  Mrs.  Guppy's  mediumship
is  so  very  powerful,  and  I  regi'et  very  much  that  she  should  now
be  in  Italy,  so  that  you  cannot  have  the  advantage  of  being  at  any
of  her  seances.

"  I  wm  now  give  some  account  of  how  the  drawings  were  done,
of  which  I  have  brought  the  tracings.  They  are  what  is  termed
cB-ect  drawiiags,  i.  e.,  done  by  the  spirits  themselves,  without  the
agency  of  the  human  hand.
°"  Miss  NichoU  held  a  skonce  at  her  own  house,  on  the  5th  of
December,  1867,  at  which  about  two  dozen  persons  were  present.
There  were  on  the  table  two  sheets  of  cbawing  paper,  a  lead
pencil  a  sable-hair  pencil,  some  water,  and  a  tube  of  water-colour,
Ldder  brown,  some  of  which  Miss  Nicholl  squeezed  mto  a
saucer  After  the  gas  had  been  extinguished,  we  heard  the  sheets
of  paper  (which  from  an  accident  had  been  drenched  with  water),
being  fluttered  about  the  room.    Presently,  one  was  brought  to

EVIDENCE  OF  MISS  HOUGHTON.

155

me,  and  laid  bet-ween  my  Lands,  and  we  heard  it  being  patted  for
some  time,  as  if  to  diy  it.    The  spirits  then  made  me  bold  it
lengthwise  before  me,  with  the  finger  and  thumb  of  each  hand.
We  then  heard  the  brush  dipped  into  the  saucer  of  colour,  and  then
applied  to  the  paper,  the  movements  being  ybij  rapid.    The  paper
was  laid,  for  a  little  while,  flat  on  the  table,  and  I  feared  the  moist
coloiu-  would  be  smeared  j  however,  it  was  lifted  up  and  again
worked  upon.    A  light  was  then  demanded,  and  we  saw  the
sketch  of  '  the  guardian  angel,'  which  was  still  moist.    To  my
surprise,  I  found  that  the  drawing  had  been  done  on  the  side  of  the
paper  next  to  me,  as  if  the  spii-it  executing  it  had  occupied  my
place,  or  been,  as  it  were,  within  me ;  so  that  when  laid  upon  the
table,  it  must  have  had  the  wet  colour  ixpwards,  instead  of  running
the  risk  of  being  spoiled,  as  I  had  feared.    There  was  but  one
colour  on  the  table,  but  a  second  was  employed  in  the  drawing,  so
that  our  spuit  friends  must  have  themselves  supplied  it.

"  At  Mrs.  Guppy's  seance,  March  4th,  1868,  the  first  message
that  was  given  (by  the  alphabet)  was,  '  You  must  undergo  °a
process  of  purification  before  I  can  draw.  I  will  draw  the
emblem  of  Spii-itualism.'  Mrs.  Guppy  and  I  were  then  lavishly
sprinkled  with  perftime,  after  which  we  were  all  desired  to  sing.
Pens  and  ink  were  then  demanded,  and  on  a  sheet  of  letter-paper,
the  corner  of  wHch  was  placed  under  my  hand,  a  drawing  was
executed  of  a  dove,  hovering  over  the  worid,  and  holding  in  its
claws  a  palm  branch,  and  an  olive  branch,  while  i-ays  flow  do^vn
from  it,  as  if  to  enlighten  the  world.  A  message  was  then  given  ;
'  This  seance  is  the  fii-st  of  a  series  of  illustrations  of  passing  through
death  into  life.  I  will  try  to  solve  and  explain  by  drawing  the
poetiy  of  spirit  life.'

"  On  the  next  occasion,  April  6th,  1868,  paper  and  pencils  were
on  the  table,  and  we  soon  heard  our  invisible  friends  at  work.
Then  was  rapped  out  '  Read  Dying  Chiistian  to  his  soul !'  The
question  now  arose  as  to  whence  we  should  obtain  the  book  from
which  to  read  the  poem.  Mrs.  Guppy  said  that  her  father  had
Pope's  Poems  in  Ms  studio,  on  the  gi-ound  floor,  (the  seance  was

156

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

held  on  the  third,  floor,)  and  that  she  had  the  work  at  Hampton
Wick.  Wo  suggested  that  Mr.  Nicholl  should  fetch  his  volume,
but  the  answer  was  in  the  negative.  I  then  felt  a  book  softly-
placed  in  my  hands,  and  '  light '  was  spelled.  The  book  was  Mi-.
Nicholl's,  brought  from  the  studio,  and  the  corner  of  the  page  was
ttirned  down  at  the  ode,  which  I  then  read  as  desired,  the  drawing
being  marvellously  illustrative  of  the  poem  itself,  as  it  represents
the  spirits  rising  -with  rapture  in  its  eyes  from  the  earthly  body,
now  discarded  as  having  been  rendered  useless  by  death.

"  The  following  picture  represents  the  same  spirit  leaving  the
earth,  and  being  greeted  and  welcomed  by  loving  relatives  in  the
spii-it  world,  and  under  it  is  written,  by  the  same  power  that  drew  it,

'  Lendj  lend  yom-  wings,  I  mount,  I  fly :
0  grave,  where  is  your  victory  ?    0  death,  where  is  your  sting  ? '

"  All  these  statements  are  simply  external  manifestations  to
prove  the  fact  of  the  spirits  being  around  us,  to  work  in  any  way
that  they  may  see  will  be  the  most  convincing  ;  but  I  could  cite
numberless  instances  of  their  beneficence,  and  care  of  us  in  the
daily  course  of  life,  most  especially  in  aiding  the  sick  ;  as,  in  my
own  case,  during  the  last  five  years  of  mamma's  life,  they  prescribed
for  her  through  me,  at  any  hour  of  the  day  or  night,  either
allopathically  or  homceopathically,  as  might  be  most  suitable  at  the
moment.  But  to  enter  upon  all  that,  would  take  up  too  much  of
your  time.  I  will,  however,  mention  a  slight  circiunstance,  as
proof  of  the  identity  of  the  spirits,  which  is  of  coiu-se  a  subject  of
vital  importance.

"  On  the  8th  of  December  last,  I  went  into  the  city  on  business,
and,  while  in  the  town,  inquired  which  of  my  spirit  friends  were
accompanying  me,  and  I  found  that  besides  two  of  my  brothers
were  two  cousins.  Now,  my  cousins  in  the  spirit  world  are
exceedingly  numerous,  so  I  had  to  make  several  inquii-ies  before  I
learned  which  they  really  were ;  one  was  a  business-man,  so  I
thought  he  was  with  me  to  aid  in  the  transaction;  the  other  was  a
sister-iivlaw  as  well  as  cousin.  Soon  after  my  retm-n  home,  the
widow  and  two  daughters  of  the  one  cousin  came  to  caU  upon  me,

I

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  VAELE?.

157

so  that  accounted  for  his  liaving  been  drawn  towards  me  on  tliat
day ;  and  when,  later  in  the  afternoon,  I  looked  into  my  book  of
birthdays,  I  found  it  was  that  of  a  niece,  and  for  that  reason  her
mother  had  been  with  me."

The  Committee  then  adjourned.

TuKSDAY,  25th  May,  1869.
Chairman,  Mr.  Henry  Jeffery.

Mr.  Cromwell  F.  Varley  gave  evidence  this  evening  in  th'
following  words  : —

"  I  came  here  under  the  impression  that  I  would  be  put  in  the
witness-box  and  cross-examined ;  and  I,  therefore,  did  not  prepare
any  statement  beforehand.    I  mention  this  in  order  to  explain
any  want  of  order  or  consecutiveness  in  what  I  state.    To  beo-in
then,  I  was  a  sceptic  when  these  matters  first  came  under  my
notice  about  the  year  1850.  That  was  the  time  when  table-rapping
and  table-moving  were  set  down  as  the  results  of  electrical  force.
I  investigated  that  hypothesis,  and  demonstrated  that  it  was
altogether  unfounded — no  electrical  force  could  have  been  thus
applied,   no  electricity  could  be   evolved  from  the  hands  of
uninsulated  human  beiags,   capable  of  moving  one-thousandth
part  of  the  weight  of  the  tables  moved.    I  may  mention  that  I
was  possessed  of  mesmeric  healing  power.    Three  years  after  these
experiments  I  came  to  London  and  made  the  acquaintance  of  the
lady  who  has  since  become  Mrs.  Varley.    She  was  subject  to
nervous  headaches,  and  I  got  the  consent  of  her  parents  to  mes-
merise her,  with  the  view  of  effecting  a  cure.    She  was  only
temporai-ily  reHeved ;  and  one  day,  while  she  was  entranced  on
the  couch,  I  was  thinking  whether  I  could  permanently  cure  her.
She  answered  my  thought.    I  considered  tHs  veiy  strange,  and  I
asked  her— still  mentally — whether  she  was  answering  my  thought;
she  repHed,  "  Yes."  I  then  asked  her  whether  there  were  any
means  by  which  a  permanent  cure  could  be  effected.    She  replied
"  Yes ;  if  you  bring  on  the  fit  out  of  its  proper  coui-se  you  will
disturb  its  harmony,  and  I  shaU  be  cured,"    I  did  so— by  the

158

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

exercise  of  will— and  hj  bringing  on  the  fits  at  intermediate
periods,  she  was  cured  permanently.  Whenever  entranced,  she
had  a  strong  objection  to  being  aroused  out  of  that  state.

To  ascertain  whether  the  influence  could  be  exerted  through
solid  substances,  I  made  transverse  passes  tlirough  folding  doore;
she  ran  out  and  caught  my  hands  to  stop  me.   Another  time  I
made  passes  through  a  brick  wall ;  she  was  instantly  conscious  of
it.    I  relate  these  matters  because  they  may  help  us  to  a  clue  in
relation  to  some  of  the  phenomena  called  spuitual.    A  wall,  it
will  be  seen  was  transparent  to  what  passed  from  my  hand  or
mind.    Some  three  or  four  years  after,  a  chest  disease  of  my
wife's  became  much  aggravated ;  she  became  very  thin,  and  was
supposed  to  be  suffering  from  consumption.    She  could  not  inspire
more  than  seven-eighths  of  a  pint  of  au-,  and  it  was  stated  that  she
would  not  live  more  than  three  months.

"  One  night  she  addressed  me  in  the  thii-d  person,  and  said,
'If  you  are  not  careful  you   will  lose  her.'     I  asked  who?
She  replied,  '  Her,  your  wif e  ! '   I  said,  '  Who  is  now  speaking  ! '
The  reply  was,  in  substance,  'We  are  spirits;  not  one,  but
several.    We  can  cure  her,  if  you  will  observe  what  we  teU
you.   *Thi'ee  ulcers  wHl  form  on  the  chest.      The  first  will
break   in  ten   days   at   thirty-six  minutes  past  five  o'clock.
It  wi:l  be  necessary  that  you  shall  have  such  and  such  reme-
dies at  hand.    No  one  is  to  be  with  you;  their  presence  Avill
excite  her  too  much,  and  you  must  not  inform  her  of  these  com-
munications, for  the  shock  would  kUl  her.'    On  the  tenth  day  I
went  home  early.    I  had  set  my  watch  by  Greenwich  tune.
Exactly  at  5.36  she  screamed  ;  that  happened  which  had  been  pre-
dicted, and  she  was  relieved.    The  second  crisis  was  foretold  thi-ee
weeks',  and  the  thii-d  a  fortnight  before  it  actuaUy  occurred.  The
latter  was  predicted  for  the  day  of  the  annular  ecUpse,  which  was
visible  from  Peterborough.    I  had  promised  to  take  her  to  Peter-
borough, but  I  found  that  the  ulcer  was  to  break  at  a  tnne  when
she  would  be  in  the  train.    The  spii-its,  however,  said  that  it  would
not  do  to  disappoint  her,  and  she  went,  I  takmg  the  remedies  m

"EVIDENCE  OP  MR.  VARLEY.

169

my  pocket.  Half  an  hour  before  the  appointed  time  she  became
ill,  and  precisely  at  the  hour  named  the  ulcer  broke.  I  produced
the  remedies,  much  to  her  surprise,  for  she  Imew  nothing  of  the
prediction.  These  were -my  first  spuitual  experiences.  It  was  not
my  wife,  but  the  spirits  who  told  me  what  to  do,  and  by  acting  on
their  instnictions  she  was  so  restored  that  in  nine  months  her  in-
spii-ation  was  increased  from  a  pint  to  nearly  a  gallon,  and  she
became  quite  stout.  Later,  after  the  birth  of  my  first  son,  I  was
aroused  one  night  by  three  tremendous  raps.  I  thought  there
were  thieves  in  the  house,  and  I  searched  everywhere,  but  found
nothing.  I  then  thought,  '  Can  this  be  what  is  called  Spiritual-
ism V  The  mps  answered  '  Yes ;  go  into  the  next  room  !'  I  did
so,  and  found  the  ni;rse  intoxicated  and  Mrs.  Yarley  rigid,  catalep-
tic.   I  made  cross  passes  and  restored  her.

"These  things  made  me  very  anxious,  and  I  resolved  to  see  if  there
was  any  truth  in  what  was  related  of  Mr.  Home.  I  called  upon
him,  and  told  him  what  I  had  experienced.  He  made  an  appoint-
ment, and  I  went  to  him  with  Mrs.  Varley ;  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,
and  some  two  or  three  others  were  there.  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson
said  that  her  son,  who  was  dead,  was  there.  He  gave  raps.  She
wore  a  white  stomacher,  I  think  it  is  called,  and  it  suddenly  became
inflated  by,  as  she  said,  her  spirit  child.  The  child  was  asked  to
touch  me ;  he  said  he  was  afraid,  but  later  in  the  evening  he  said
that  he  was  no  longer  afraid,  and  my  hands  were  touched  tmder
the  table,  and  my  coat  was  pulled  three  times.  I  said  to  myself,
'  This  is  not  satisfactory,  for  it  is  all  under  the  table.'  Immediately
aftei-wards,  in  answer  to  a  mental  wish,  the  lappel  of  my  coat  was
lifted  three  times  on  the  right  side  and  then  three  times  on  the
left.  I  was  then,  in  answer  to  a  mental  wish,  touched  on  the  knee
and  on  the  shoulder  quite  distiactly  the  desired  number  of  times."

A  Member  of  the  Committee  :  "  "Was  this  in  the  light  ?"

Mr.  Varley  :  "  Yes,  ia  the  light  of  five  gas  burners.  Mrs.  Mil-
ner Gibson  and  Mr.  Home  requested  me  to  make  a  thorough  in-
vestigation, and  to  get  under  the  table  and  apply  any  test.  In  the
com-se  of  the  evening,  very  many  phenomena  presented  themselves ;

I

160  MINUTIiS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

tile  table  was  repeatedly  lifted  off  the  floor,  and  wliile  so  suspended
in  the  air,  it  instantly  moved  in  any  direction  I  wished  it  to  go.

"  Mrs.  Vavley  made  similar  experiments,  and  when  I  was  ob-
serving nnder  the  table,  she  observed  above,

"  These  were  the  first  physical  phenomena  I  saw,  and  they  im-
pressed me,  but  still  I  was  too  much  astonished  to  be  able  to  feel
satisfied.  Foi-tunately,  when  I  got  home,  a  cii-cumstance  occnrred
which  got  rid  of  the  element  of  doubt.  While  alone  in  the  drawing
room,  thinking  intently  on  what  I  had  witnessed,  there  were  raps.
The  next  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Home,  in  which  he
said  '  When  alone  in  your  room  last  night  you  heard  sounds.  I  am
so  iDleased  !'  He  stated  that  the  spirits  had  told  him  they  followed
me,  and  were  enabled  to  produce  sounds.  I  have  the  letter  in  my
possession  now  to  show  that  imagination  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  matter.  The  eye  is  treacherous  and  may  deceive ;  therefore
the  testimony  of  a  single  individual  is  never  conclusive.  It  is  only
when  there  is  corroborative  evidence  that  we  can  be  safe.  The
fact  that  I  had  heard  the  raps  was  confirmed  by  the  letter  of  Home.  I
shall  confine  my  instances  to  cases  in  which  there  was  corroborative
evidence.

"  In  the  winter  of  1864-5  I  was  busy  with  the  Atlantic  cable.
I  left  a  gentleman  at  Birmingham  to  test  the  iron  wire.  He  had
seen  something  of  Spuitualism  but  he  did  not  believe  iu  it.  He
had  had  a  brother  whom  I  had  never  seen  iu  life.  One  night  in
my  room  there  were  a  great  number  of  loud  raps.  When  at
length  I  sat  up  in  bed  I  saw  a  man  in  the  aix-— a  spirit— in  mili-
tary dress.  I  could  see  the  pattern  of  the  paper  on  the  wall
through  him.  Mrs.  Varley  did  not  see  it.  She  was  in  a  pecuUar
state  °and  became  entranced.  The  spirit  spoke  to  me  through
her."

A  gentleman  asked  how  that  was  supposed  to  be  done  t
Mr.  Yarley— "  While  the  person  is  ia  a  trance  the  spiiit  controls
the  body  and  speaks  and  acts  through  the  muscles  and  organs.
He  told  me  his  name,  and  said  that  he  had  seen  his  brother  in
Bii-mingham,  but  that  what  he  had  to  communicate  was  not

EVIDENCE  OF  MK.  VAELET.

161

unrlerstood.  He  asked  me  to  wi-ite  a  message  to  his  brother,
which  I  did,  and  received  an  answer  from  Birmingham,  '  Yes,
I  know  my  brother  has  seen  you,  for  he  came  to  me  and  was  able
to  make  known  as  much.'  The  gentleman,  as  I  said,  was  at  Bir-
mingham, and  I  was  at  Beckenham.

"  This  spii-it  informed  me  that  when  at  school  in  Fi-ance  he
was  stabbed.  This  fact  was  only  known  to  his  eldest  surviving
brother  and  his  mother.  It  had  been  concealed  from  his  father  on
account  of  the  state  of  the  latter's  health.

"  When  I  narrated  this  to  the  siuwivor,  he  turned  very  pale,
and  confirmed  it.

"  In  a  second  case,  my  sister-in-law  had  heart  disease.  Mi's.
Varley  and  I  went  into  the  country  to  see  her,  as  we  feared  for  the
last  time.  I  had  a  night-mare,  and  could  not  move  a  muscle.
While  in  this  state,  I  saw  the  spiiit  of  my  sister-in-law  in  the  room.
I  knew  that  she  was  confined  to  her  bedroom.  She  said,  '  If  you
do  not  move,  you  will  die,'  but  I  could  not  move,  and  she  said,  '  If
you  submit  yoiu'self  to  me,  I  will  frighten  you,  and  you  will  then
be  able  to  move.  At  first  I  objected,  wishing  to  ascertain  more
about  her  spii-it  presence.  When  at  last  I  consented,  my  heart  had
ceased  beating.  I  think  at  first  her  efforts  to  terrify  me  did  not
succeed,  but  when  she  suddenly  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Cromwell,  I  am
flying/  tliat  frightened  me  exceedingly,  and  threw  me  out  of  the
torpid  state,  and  I  awoke  in  the  ordinaiy  way.  My  shouting  had
aroused  Mrs.  Varley ;  we  examine?l  the  door,  and  it  was  still
locked  and  bolted,  and  I  told  my  wife  what  had  happened,  having
noted  the  horn-,  3.45  a.m.,  and  cautioned  her  not  to  mention  the
matter  to  anybody,  but  to  hear  what  was  her  sister's  version
if  she  alluded  to  the  subject.  In  the  morning  she  told  us
that  she  had  passed  a  dreadful  night,  that  she  had  been  ia
our  room  and  gi-eatly  troubled  on  my  account ;  and  that  I  had
been  nearly  dying.  It  was  between  half-past  thi-ee  and  four
A.M.,  when  she  saw  I  was  in  danger.  She  only  succeeded  in
arousing  me  by  exclaiming,  'Oh,  Cromwell,  I  am  dying.'  I
appeared  to  her  to  be  in  a  state  which  otherwise  would  have

M

1G2

MINUTES  or  THE  COMMITTEE.

ended  fatally.  This  was  the  second  case  in  which  there  wei-e
more  witnesses  than  one,  and  I  think  it  may  be  considered  a
second  case  attended  with  reliable  evidence.  There  is  in  additioi?
this  peculiarity  that  we  were  neither  of  us  dead.

A  third  case  I  have,  Avhich  is  remarkable ;  it  occurred  in  1867,
in  New  York.    I  had  an  agreement  with  the  Atlantic  Telegi-aph
Company  relating  to  an  instrument  of  my  invention,  and  as  the
time  came  for  some  payments  to  fall  due,  the  arrangement  was
repudiated.    I  was  in  ignorance,  however,  of  this  determiuation.
I  happened  to  be  unwell,  and  consulted  three  mediums  to  see
whether  they  would  agree.    They  did  in  the  mam.    One  was  a
Mrs.  Manchester ;  amongst  other  things,  she  informed  me  I  was
to  have  some  trouble  about  law  proceedings,  and  in  fact,  she  said
there  were  papers  of  importance  relative  to  the  matter  then  on  their
way  by  the  maU.    This  was  on  Monday,  and  the  following  Wed-
nesday the  maU  ai-rived,  and  I  received  a  packet  of  law  papers  and
an  explanatory  letter  from  my  lawyers,  stating  that  they  would
proceed  to  file  a  bill  in  Chancery  in  consequence  of  the  proceedings
of  the  company,  unless  I  sent  other  instructions  through  the  cable.
It  was  impossible  for  Mrs.  Manchester  to  have  known  anything
abotit  this,  and  for  my  pai-t,  nothing  was  farther  from  my  thoughts
than  a  Chancery  suit.     I  was  an  entire  stranger  to  these  thi-ee
mediums,  and  at  that  time  knew  no  Spiritualists  in  America.

"  I  have  a  fourth  case  in  which  I  was  the  principal  performer.  I
had  been  experimenting  with  earthenware  and  was  attacked  with
spasms  in  the  throat  from  the  ftimes  of  fluoric  acid,  which  I  had  been
using  largely.  I  was  very  ill  indeed,  and  used  to  wake  up  with  con-
traction of  the  throat,  and  I  was  recommended  to'  have  some  sul-
phuric ether  beside  me  to  breathe,  which  would  procure  instant
relief  I  used  this  six  or  eight  times,  but  its  smell  was  so  unpleasant
that  I  eventually  used  chloroform;  I  kept  it  by  my  bed  side,  and
when  I  had  to  take  it,  leant  over  it  in  such  a  maimer  that  when  insen-
sibility supervened,  I  fell  back  and  the  sponge  dropped  do.vn.  One
ni-ht,  however,  I  roUed  on  my  back  retaining  the  sponge,  which
remained  on  my  mouth.    Mrs.  Yarley  was  in  the  room  above

EVIDENCE  OF  ME.  VAELEY.

163

nursing  a  sick  child.  After  a  little  time  I  became  conscious ;  I
saw  my  "wife  upstairs,  and  I  saw  myself  on  my  back  with  the  sponge
to  my  mouth,  but  was  utterly  powerless  to  cause  my  body  to
move.  I  made  by  my  will  a  distinct  impression  on  her  brain  that
I  was  in  danger.  Thus  ai-oused,  she  came  down  and  immediately
removed  the  sponge,  and  was  greatly  alarmed.  I  then  used  my
body  to  speak  to  her,  and  I  said,  '  I  shall  forget  all  about  it  and,
how  this  came  to  pass  vinless  you  remind  me  in  the  morning,  but
be  sure  to  tell  me  what  made  you  come  down  and  I  shall  then  be
able  to  recall  the  circumstance.'  The  following  morning  she  did
so,  but  I  could  not  remember  anything  about  it ;  I  tried  hard  all
day,  however,  and  at  length  I  succeeded  in  remembering  first  a
pai-t  and  ultimately  the  whole.  My  spirit  was  ia  the  room  with
Mi'S.  Yarley  when  I  made  her  conscious  of  my  danger.  That  case
helped  me  to  understand  how  spirits  communicate  :  what  my
spirit  wished  she  saw,  and  Mrs.  Varley  has  had  similar  experiences.
On  one  occasion  she  told  me  whilst  in  a  trance,  '  It  is  not  the
spirits  that  now  speak,  it  is  myself ;  I  make  use  of  my  body  the
same  as  spirits  do  when  they  speak  through  me."

"  I  have  had  another  case  in  1860  j  I  went  to  find  the  first
Atlantic  Cable  ;  when  I  arrived  at  Halifax  my  name  was  tele-
graphed to  New  York.  Mr.  Cyi-iis  Field  telegraphed  the  fact  to
to  St.  John's  and  then  to  Harbour  Grace ;  so  that  when  I  arrived
I  was  very  cordially  received  at  each  place,  and  at  Harbour  Grace
found  there  was  a  supper  prepared.  Some  speeches  followed  and
we  sat  up  late.  I  had  to  catch  the  steamer  that  went  early  the
next  morning  and  was  fearful  of  not  waking  in  time,  btit  I  em-
ployed a  plan  which  had  often  proved  successful  before,  viz.,  that
of  willuig  strongly  that  I  should  wake  at  the  proper  time.  Morn-
ing came  and  I  saw  myself  in  bed  fast  asleep ;  I  tried  to  wake
myself  but  could  not.  After  a  while  I  found  myself  himting
about  for  some  means  of  more  power,  when  I  saw  a  yard  in  which
was  a  large  stack  of  timber  and  two  men  apiDroaching ;  they
ascended  the  stack  of  timber  and  lifted  a  heavy  plank.  It  occurred
to  me  to  make  my  body  di-eam  that  there  was  a  bomb  shell  thi-own

M  2

164  MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

in  front  of  me  wHcli  was  fizzing  at  tlie  touch-liole,  and  when  the
men  threw  the  plank  down  I  made  my  body  dream  that  the  bomb
had  burst  and  cut  open  my  face.    It  woke  me,  but  with  a  clear
recollection  of  the  two  actions — one,  the  intelligent  mind  acting
upon  the  brain  in  the  body,  which  could  be  made  to  believe  any
ridiculous  impression  that  the  former  produced  by  will  power.  I
did  not  allow  a  second  to  elapse  before  I  leapt  out  of  bed,  opened
the  window,  and  there  were  the  yard,  the  timber,  and  the  two  men,
just  as  my  spirit  had  seen  them.    I  had  no  previous  knowledge  at
all  of  the  locality ;  it  was  dark  the  previous  evening  when  I
entered  the  town,  and  I  did  not  even  know  there  was  a  yard  there
at  all.    It  was  evident  I  had  seen  these  things  while  my  body  lay
asleep.    I  could  not  see  the  timber  until  the  window  had  been
opened.     These  are  the  leading  points  I  have  to  confirm  my  belief
in  Spiritualism.  I  have  received  communications  about  my  children.
My  youngest  child  who  was  very  nervous  and  precocious  was  taken
ill,  and  the  doctor  advised  us  to  give  him  no  meat,  but  he  did  not
get  any  better.    Shortly  after,  Mrs.  Yarley  was  entranced,  and  a
spirit  instructed  us  not  to  alter  the  chHd's  original  diet,  to  discon-
tinue the  treatment  adopted  towards  him,  and  to  send  for  a
mesmerist.    This  was  done,  and  the  child  quickly  recovered  under
his  passes.    I  myself  once  had  an  operation  performed  on  a  boH  in
my  face,  and  I  suffered  some  weeks  afterwards  from  neuralgia.  One
night  I  was  informed  that  the  spirits  were  going  to  put  me  to  rest,
and  that  they  were  now  beginning ;  as  I  lay  in  bed  I  suddenly
became  very  hot  and  bru^st  out  into  a  perspiration  and  enjoyed  a  good
ni-ht's  rest.    It  was  about  15  seconds  after  it  had  been  said  '  they
are  now  beginning '  that  I  burst  out  into  a  glow.    The  nem-algia
was  gone  when  I  awoke  next  morning.

"  At  New  York  I  found  several  exceUent  mediums  and  also
some  very  clear-headed  men  who  were  investigating  the  subject,
Dr  Gray,  Mr.  C.  T.  Livermore  the  banker,  Dale  Owen  the
author  of' '  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  another  World,'  and
others,  including  Judge  Edmonds.

"From  these  people  I  obtained  valuable  information,  and  com-

EVIDENCE  01''  MK.  VARLEY.

1G5

menced  a  series  of  experiments  witli  electricity  and  magnetism.
The  medium  was  Miss  Catherine  Fox.

"  It  is  now  more  than  twelve  years  since  I  first  became  ac-
quainted with  spu-itual  phenomena,  and  for  a  long  time  I
endeavoured  to  ascertain  something  definite  about  the  laws
governing  the  production  of  physical  manifestations,  but  up  to
this  time  my  evidence  is  almost  entii-ely  negative.  In  the  absence
of  positive  evidence,  negative  is  useful,  in  limitiug  the  ground  over
which  one  has  to  search,  in  a  measure,  in  the  dark.

"  The  spu-it  who  was  to  co-operate  with  me  was  stated  to  be
Dr.  Franklin.

"  When  I  appeared  the  fii-st  time  with  the  apparatus  at  the
minute  appointed,  I  was  received  with  a  choras  of  raps  such  as
50  hammei-s,  all  striking  rapidly,  could  hardly  produce.

"I  have  scarcely  ever  been  able  to  induce  mediimis,  through
whom  the  physical  phenomena  occur,  to  consent  to  sit  for  accurate
investigation.  In  1867,  Miss  Kate  Fox,  the  weH-known
American  medium,  agreed  to  sit  with  me  in  New  York  during  a
series  of  investigations  into  the  relations  between  the  known
physical  forces  and  the  spiritual.  Miss  Fox,  you  are  doubtless
aware,  is  the  medium  thi-ough  whom  the  modern  spiritual  manifes-
tations were  first  produced  in  the  United  States,  and  through  her
mediumship  the  most  striking  physical  phenomena  I  have  ever  heard
of,  were  witnessed  by  my  friends  Dr.  Gray,  a  leading  physician  in
ISTew  York,  and  by  Mr.  C.  F.  Livermore,  the  banker,  both  of  them
shrewd,  clear-headed  men.

"  During  my  investigations,  Mr.  Livermore  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Townsend  sat  with  us ;  Mr.  Townsend  is  a  New  York  soKcitor,  at
whose  house  the  meetings  of  the  cii-cle  were  held.  A  Grove's
batteiy  of  four  cells,  a  helix  eighteen  inches  in  diameter,  electro-
magnets, and  other  descriptions  of  apparatus  were  procured  by  me.
The  plan  of  action  was  as  follows  :— I  was  to  go  through  a  series
of  experiments,  and  the  intelligences  or  '  spirits  '—as  they  are
usuaUy,  and  I  think  properly  caUed— were  to  nan-ate  what  they
saw,  and  if  possible  to  explain  the  analogies  existing  between  the

166

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

forces  I  was  dealing  witli,  and  those  wMcli  tliey  employ.    We  sat
eight  or  nine  times  for  this  purpose,  but  although  great  efforts
seemed  to  be  made  by  the  spirits  present  to  convey  to  my  mind
what  they  saw,  it  was  unintelligible  to  me.    The  only  positive  re-
sults obtained  were  the  following  :— As  we  sat  in  the  dark,  and
the  manifestations  were  sometimes  violent,  I  had  taken  the  pre-
caution to  place  the  battery  and  keys  on  a  side  table,  and  led  the
wires  from  the  "  keys  "  or  commutators,  to  the  apparatus  on  the
tables  round  wHch  we  sat,  so  that  I  could,  in  the  dark,  perform
the  various  experiments  I  had  ai-ranged  to  try.    Whenever,  by
accident,  my  hands  came  in  contact  with  one  of  the  wires,  without
my  being  aware  which  wii-e  it  was,  I  put  these  questions  :— '  Is  a
current  flowing  through  it]'  and  if  they  said  '  Yes,'  I  asked  '  In
which  dii-ection  does  it  flow  through  my  hand  V   This  expermient
was  repeated,  if  my  memoiy  serves  me  rightly,  not  less  than  ten
times     Each  time,  directly  after  being  informed  of  the  du^ection
of  the  current,  a  light  was  strack,  and  in  every  instance  I  found
we  had  been  correctly  advised,  if  we  assxime  that  the  cuixent  flows
from  the  positive  to  the  negative  pole.

"The  experiments  with  the  helix  were  of  two  kinds  :—Fu-st,
'  What  action  had  the  electriEed  helix  upon  me  when  placed  over
my  head  V    Secondly,  '  When  a  piece  of  iron,  or  a  compass  needle,
was  placed  inside  it,  coiild  the  spirits  eff^ect  the  magnetic  action  of
the  helix  upon  the  iron  or  compass  ]'  Bepeatedly  dtiring  the  inves-
tigations, and  while  we  were  in  the  dark,  I  seized  the  oppoi-tumty
of  placing  the  magnetized  helix  over  my  head,  and  immediately,  on
each  occasion,  the  spirits  requested  me  not  to  do  it  as  it  hurt  me;
nevertheless,  I  could  feel  no  pain  or  sensible  action  myself.  As
no  one  but  myself  was  aware  that  I  intended  to,  or  was  placing,
.   this  helix  over  my  head,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  fact  was
made  known  by  some  means  inexplicable  as  yet  by  orthodox

"The  result  of  my  investigations  in  this  dii-ection  lead  me  to
infer  that  there  are  probably  other  powers  accompanying  electric
and  magnetic  streams,  which  other  powei-s  are  seen  by  the  spmts,

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  VARLEY.

167

and  are  by  them  mistaken  for  the  forces  whicli  we  call  electricity
and  magnetism.  This  is  an  hypothesis  not  hastily  amved  at.
Whenever  a  current  flowed  through  the  helix,  the  spirits  declared
that  they  did  aiigment  and  diminish  the  power  of  the  magnetic  field
at  will.  My  apparatus  showed  no  such  variation  of  power.  They
persisted  in  the  correctness  of  their-  statement  night  after  night,
and  time  after  time.  I  insisted  on  the  contrary,  that  no  action
\asible  to  me  was  produced.  One  evening,  when  carefully  repeat-
ing the  experiments  (my  apparatus  was  not  very  sensitive)  the  idea
occui-red  to  me  to  replace  the  little  compass  needle  with  a  quai-tz
ciystal.  The  spirits  desci-ibed  the  crystal  as  a  fine  magnet,  and
declared  that  they  altered  its  magnetism  at  will.

"IVIrs.  "Varley  can  often  see  similar  light  issuing  alike  from  steel
magnets,  rock  crystals,  and  human  beings,  though  in  the  latter
case  the  luminosity  varies  in  intensity.  Putting  all  these  things
together,  I  think  the  spirits  see  around  magnets  this  light  (which
Baron  Eeichenbach  has  named  Od  force)  and  not  the  magnetic  rays
themselves.

"About  the  existence  of  the  'flames  of  Od'  from  maenets
crystals,  and  human  beings,  I  have  had  abundant  and  conclusive
evidence  from  experiments  with  Mrs.  Varley.

"I  have  used  the  word  'spirits,'  well-knowing  that  the  world  at
large  does  not  believe  that  we  have  any  warranty  for  assuming
that  our  Mends  are  able  to  communicate  with  us,  after  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  material  body.  My  authority  for  asserting  that  the
spii-its  of  kindred  beings  do  visit  us  is  : — 1.  I  have  on  several  occas-
ions distinctly  seen  them.  2.  On  several  occasions  things  known
only  to  myself  and  to  the  deceased  person  puqwrting  to  communi-
cate with  me,  have  been  correctly  stated  while  the  medium  -was
imaware  of  any  of  the  circumstances.  3.  On  several  occasions
things  known  only  to  our  two  selves,  and  which  I  had  entirely  for-
gotten, have  been  recalled  to  my  mind  by  the  communicating
spirit,  therefore  this  could  not  be  a  case  of  mere  thouffht-readinjr.
4.  On  some  occasions,  when  these  communications  have  been  made
to  me,  I  have  put  my  questions  mentally,  Avhile  the  medium — a

168

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

private  lady  in  independent  circumstances — h&s  written  out  tlie
answers,  she  being  quite  unconscious  of  tlie  meaning  of  tlie  com-
munications.   5.  The  time  and  nature  of  coming  events,  unantici-
pated and  unknown  both  to  myself  and  the  medium,  have,  on
more  than  one  occasion,  been  accurately  made  known  to  me  several
days  in  advance.    As  my  invisible  infonnants  told  the  truth
regarding  the  coming  events,  and  also  stated  that  they  were  spii-its,
and  as  no  mortals  in  the  room  had  any  Imowledge  of  some  of  the
facts  they  communicated,  I  see  no  reason  to  disbelieve  them.
Mrs.  Varley  very  frequently  sees  and  recognises  spia-its ;  especially
is  this  the  case  when  she  is  entranced.    She  is  a  very  good  trance
medium,  but  I  have  little  power  over  the  occurrence  of  these
trances  ;  there  is  consequently  nearly  as  much  difficulty  in  investi-
gating through  her  mediumship,  as  there  is  investigating  that
extraordinary,  unexplained  natural  phenomenon— ball-lightning—
which  occurs  in  times  and  places  unexpected,  and  beyond  human
control.

"My  early  religious  education  was  received  from  that  very
naiTOW-minded  sect,  the  Sandimanians  3  their  teachings  wholly
failed  to  satisfy  my  anxiety  about  the  futui-e.  It  was  while
endeavouring  to  get  some  information  regarding  the  relations  be-
tween man  and  the  Deity,  from  some  spirits  who  were  evidently  more
advanced  than  myself,  that  I  received,  unexpectedly,  a  communica-
tion upon  another  subject  wHch  had  puzzled  me  much,  namely,
'  Why  have  not  the  more  intelligent  spiiits  given  us  some  scientific
information  in  advance  of  any  yet  possessed  by  man  V  As  I  think
the  explanation  to  be  sound  and  logical,  I  mention  it  here,  not
asking  you  to  accept  it,  but  to  prepare  you  when  the  same  question
occurs  to  your  own  mind.

"  They  told  me  that  I  myself  had  often  experienced  how  imperfect
words  were  as  a  means  of  communicating  new  ideas ;  that  spirits
in  advance  of  the  great  intelligences  upon  earth  do  not  use  words
in  communicating  with  each  other,  because  they  have  the  power  of
instantly  communicating  the  actual  idea  as  it  exists  in  theii-  own
thought,  to  the  other  spirit;  that  when  they  telegi-aph  to  movUls,

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  VARLEY.

169

even  through  claii-voyant  and  trance  mediums,  who  form  by  far  the
best  channel  for  messages  of  high  intelligence,  they  put  the  thought
into  the  mind  of  the  medium,  for  that  mind  to  translate  into  words,
through  the  mechanism  of  the  brain  and  mouth ;  consequently,  what
we  usually  get  is  a  bad  interpretation  of  a  subject  which  the  trans-
lator does  not  comprehend.

"  The  physical  manifestations,  wonderful  and  useful  though  they
be,  ai-e  generally  believed  by  experienced  Spii-itualists,  to  be  chiefly
produced  by  spii-its  of  a  less  advanced  nature  than  the  average  men
of  civilised  countries ;  of  the  general  truth  of  this  I  entertain  no
doubt.

"I  have  failed  at  present  to  find  a  medium  acquainted  with
science,  and  therefore  capable  of  translating  into  intelligible  lan-
giiage  ideas  of  a  scientific  nature.    This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,
when  we  remember  that  there  are  thii-ty  miUions  of  British  subjects,'
while  there  are  probabljj  not  more  than  a  hundred  known  mediums
in  the  whole  kingdom,  and  very  few  of  these  are  well  developed;  tHs
gives  us  one  pubHcly  known  medium  to  every  300,000  persons.
Out  of  the  thii-ty  milHons,  I  do  not  suppose  there  are  as  many  as
one  thousand  weU  acquainted  with  natural  philosophy,  and  accus-
tomed to  reason  thereon.    If,  then,  but  one  in  thii-ty  thousand  is  a
scientific  investigator,  while  there  is  only  one  medium  to  300,000
persons,  we  can  only  expect  one  scientific  medium  for  each 'ten
generations.    Even  if  we  assumed  that  there  are  10,000  clear-
headed natiu-al  philosophers  in  Great  Britain,  that  would  stUl  only
give  us  one  good  scientific  mecUum  to  a  generation.    When  it  is
further  considered  that  the  majority  of  our  mediums  are  females
who,  from  the  mis-education  of  EngHsh  ladies,  are  rarely  accus-
tomed to  accurate  investigation,  it  is  still  less  to  be  wondered  at
that  so  nttle  advance  has  been  made  in  the  scientific  branch  of  the
subject.

"I  have  now  told  you  about  as  much  as  I  am  able  ;  what  I  have
stated  is  the  tnith,  the  whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  txaith.  It
IS  a  veiy  diflicult  subject.  One  has  almost  no  clue  to  the  nature
of  any  of  these  forces.    What  we  want  is  a  systematic  combined

I

170  MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

effort  to  investigate  the  matter.  I  think  there  is  only  a  small
minority  suitably  educated  to  investigate  such  subjects.  I  have
been  most  careful  to  believe  nothing,  until  unbelief  became
impossible."

On  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Varley's  speech  the  Chairman,  Mr.
Jeffery,  rose  to  thank  him  for  his  valuable  statement.

Mr.  Coleman  said  that  he  would  like  to  know  whether  Mr.  Varley
considered  himself  a  spirit  rapper  ?

Mr.  Varley  did  not  consider  himself  a  spirit  rapper ;  he  could
not  produce  i-aps,  and  did  not  know  the  real  meaning  of  the  tenn
as  used  by  Mr.  Coleman,

Mr.  Jeffery  :  "  Does  Mr.  Varley  accept  the  spiritual  theory  1"

Mr.  Varley  :  "I  firmly  believe  from  the  facts  I  have  alluded  to,
that  we  are  not  oiu-  bodies ;  that  when  we  die  we  exist  just  as
much  as  before,  and  that  under  certain  conditions  we  are  able  to
hold  communication  with  those  on  earth ;  but  I  also  believe  that
many  of  the  phenomena  are  often  caused  by  the  spirits  of  those
whose  bodies  are  present.  The  phenomena  can  neither  be  accoun-
ted for  by  magnetism  nor  electricity.  These  forces  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  phenomena  I  have  alluded  to.  It  is  unfoi-timate
that  the  terms  electricity  and  magnetism  should  have  been  applied
to  these  unknown  forces.  As  to  our  future  existence  I  do
not  think  any  of  us  know  much  about  its  details  after  death,
nearly  all  Spiritualists  concur-  in  believing,  that  the  thinking
part  of  man  forms  in  the  next  life  the  body  ;  that  we  are  thought
beings,  and  that  those  ideas  which  we  originate  in  this  Ufe,
are  permanent  realities  in  the  next.  With  regard  to  electi-icity,
I  believe  that  electricity  is  one  of  the  components  of  matter,
and  that  there  is  an  actual  transmission  through  the  wii-e.  It  has
no  applicable  weight,  no  gravitation.  Light  is  the  vibration  of
cosmical  ether.  As  to  the  nature  of  magnetism,  I  do  not  know
what  it  is  ;  I  havn't  the  ghost  of  an  idea.

"  I  remember  a  case  a  short  time  since  at  my  own  house,  when
a  large  ottoman  pushed  us  aJl  up  in  a  corner  Avithout  any  visible
means  of  locomotion.    Mr.  Home  was  the  medium,  and  while  we

EVIDENCE  OF  ME.  VAELET.

171

■vrere  sitting  roiind  a  table  Mr.  Home  began  to  shiver,  I  looked
over  Ms  shoulder  and  there  was  a  side  table  coming  slowly  up
towards  us.  At  another  time,  at  New  York,  a  party  of  friends
had  been  sitting  at  a  table  for  some  time  when  suddenly  Miss
Catherine  Fox  got  up  and  went  towards  the  door.  Mr.  Livermore
went  and  stood  by  her  and  distinctly  saAv  a  hand,  and  we  all  saw
a  blue  light  come  from  under  her  dress.  I  have  often  seen  these
lights  in  her  presence."

Mr.  Bradlaugh  :  "  WhUe  the  most  interesting  part  of  your
experience  took  place  you  were  in  an  abnormal  state  ?  "

Ml-.  Vaeley  :   "  No,  calm  and  clear.     I  believe  the  mesmeric
ti-ance  and  the  spii-itual  trance  are  produced  by  similar  means,  and
I  believe  the  mesmeric  and  the  spiritual  force  to  be  the  same.
They  are  both  the  action  of  a  spii'it,  and  the  difference  between  the
spiritual  trance  and  the  mesmeric  trance  is,  I  believe,  this':— In  the
mesmeric  trance,  the  mil  that  overpowers  or  entrances  the  patient
is  in  a  human  body.    In  the  spiritual  trance,  that  wHl  which  over-
powers the  patient  is  not  in  a  hviman  body.    I  have  given  much
time  to  the  question  of  the  identification  of  spii-its,  and  in  one
case,  a  medium,  a  lady  in  our  own  locality,  (whom  we  had  never
previously  known,)  sent  to  say  that  a  spirit  wished  to  communicate,
thi'ough  me,  to  his  father,  and  desired  that  I  should  go  to  his
father,  who  was  a  materialist.    This  spirit  was  most  anxious  that
his  father  should  know  that  he  was  not  annihilated— that  there  was
a  '  fiitiu-e  life.'    I  had  known  this  person  while  in  the  body,  and
he  was  a  very  genial  fellow,  but  so  very  untruthful  that  no  depen-
ence  could  be  placed  on  what  he  said.    I  therefore  told  him  that
in  life  he  was  such  a  liar  that  he  must  now  convince  me  that  he
was  the  same  person  by  relating  some  incidents  of  our  lives  which
I  had  forgotten.    He  could  not  think  of  any  at  the  time,  and  I
made  an  appointment  to  meet  him  in  a  few  days.    He  after^vards
narrated  to  me  the  incidents  of  a  boating  excursion  we  had  had  on
the  Thames,  repeating  various  expressions  I  had  used,  and  detail-
ing the  circumstances  attending  them.     He  added  that  he  was  so
bad  on  earth  that  he  had  not  the  confidence  of  his  father,  and  that

172  MINUTES  or  THE  .  COMMITTEE.

lie  could  not  convince  liim  of  liis  identity  as  he  had  me.  Most  of
the  answers  were  written  by  the  lady  before  alluded  to,  my  ques-
tion being  put  mentally."

Mr.  Bradlaugh  :  "I  think  you  have  seen  the  colour  of  the
clothes  of  a  spirit  as  distinctly  as  the  features."

Mr.  Vaeley  :  "  Yes.    I  think  I  see  the  drift  of  that  question,  I
was  very  much  astonished  when  I  saw  a  spiiit  in  a  dress.  I
explain  it  in  this  way ;  all  known  powers  have  to  be  treated  as
solids,  in  regard  to  something ;  a  man  finds  air  not  solid  at  all.
He  can  move  through  it  as  though  it  did  not  exist,  but  when  he
comes  to  an  ironclad  ship  he  is  stopped,  he  cannot  pass  through
the  iron.    Well,  electricity  finds  air  the  most  solid  substance  pos-
sible ;  it  cannot  pass  though  it,  but  it  passes  thi-ovigh  the  ii-onclad
ship  as  though  it  were  not  in  existence.   An  iron  wii-e  is  to  an
electrician  simply  a  hole  bored  through  . a  solid  rock  of  air  so  that
the  electricity  may  pass  freely.    Glass  is  opaque  to  electricity,  but
transparent  to  magnetism.    Thence  we  may  infer  that  everything  is
solid  in  respect  to  something,  and  that  nothing  is  solid  in  respect  to
all  things,  and  therefore  thought,  which  is  power,  may  be  in  some
sort  solid,  so  that  if  you  take  an  old  English  farmer,  for  instance,
he  would  be  ashamed  to  be  seen  without  his  top  boots,  his  coat
with  the  buttons,  and  his  hat.    They  are  part  of  Ms  identity,  he
cannot  think  of  himself  without  them ;  they  form  part  of  his
nature,  and  the  moment  he  leaves  the  body  and  becomes  a  thought
man,  the  thought  boots,  the  thoiight  coat  and  the  thought  hat  form
part  of  his  individuality."

A  vote  of  thanks  to  Mr.  Varley  closed  the  proceedings,  and  the

meeting  adjourned.

Tuesday  8th  June,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr.  Thomas  Shorter  was  examined  this  evening  and  the  follow-
ing is  the  substance  of  the  statement  he  made  :—

"  My  investigations  into  Spiritualism  have  extended  over  a
period  of  about  fifteen  years;  of  late  years,  however,  my  inqumes

EYIDENOE  OF  ME.  SHOETEE.

173

have  been  clii-ectecl  to  its  bearings  on  questions  of  history,
philosophy  and  religion,  rather  than  to  its  phenomena,  as  to  the
genuineness  and  spiritual  origin  of  which  I  have  long  since  satisfied
myself.  As,  however,  it  is  the  facts  of  Spiritualism  with  which,
I  understand  this  committee  is  at  present  chiefly  concerned  I  shall
confine  my  statements  to  these  so  far  as  they  have  come  under  my
own  observation,  and  shall  do  so  ia  the  briefest  terms  possible.
Some  of  the  residts  of  my  earlier  investigations  into  Spii-itualism
were  published  in  the  Yorkshii-e  Spiritual  Telegraph  of  1856  and
1857,  and  re-published  in  a  separate  volume  entitled  "  Confessions
of  a  Truth  Seeker;  " — I  believe  the  fii-st  extended  narrative  of  per-
sonal investigations  into  the  subject  in  this  comitry.    I  have  since
witnessed  many  facts  of  a  kindred  character  to  those  there  related,
as  well  as  others,  but  as  I  have  not  always  noted  .these  with  the
rigid  scrutiny  at  first  employed  when  investigating  their  nature
and  cause,  I  shall  speak  almost  exclusively  of  the  facts  of  my
earlier  experience ;  and  as  I  wish  to  state  them  with  the  utmost
acciu-acy,  I  think  it  will  be  better,  instead  of  speaking  from  recollec-
tion if  the  Committee  will  allow  me,  to  quote  from  my  published
narrative,  written  while  the  events  were  still  fresh  and  vivid  in  my
mind,  and  aided  by  memoranda  taken  at  the  time.   After  detailint^
many  remarkable  incidents  witnessed  in  the  course  of  my  investi-
gations, I  proceed  to  condense  the  results  of  many  obseiwations
and  experiments  into  the  following  paragraphs.

"  I  have  repeatedly  seen  a  table  incline  forward  to  an  angle  of
45  degi-ees,  or  more;  the  candle-lamp,  water-bottle,  inkstand,
pencils,  &c.,  remaining  on  the  table  as  if  they  were  a  part  of  it.
At  other  times,  I  have  seen  the  table  rise  perjjendicularhj  from  the
floor,  oui'  hands  all  resting  on  the  top  of  the  table.  I  have  seen
the  table-cover  drawn  from  under  our  fingers,  and  thrown  upon  the
floor.  Once,  as  the  table  was  moving,  one  person  only  lightly
resting  his  fingers  on  it,  I  jumped  on  the  top,  and,  by  this  novel
mode  of  locomotion,  was  carried  round  the  room.  I  have  seen  a
table,  vntla.  the  medium  (a  delicate  female)  lightly  touching  it  with
the  tips  of  her  fingers,  rise  off  the  floor,  and  answers  telegraphed'

174

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

by  its  movements,  notwitlistancling  tlie  utmost  efforts  of  two  strong
men  to  hold  it  down.    I  have  received  responses  to  questions  by
the  table,  no  one  placing  theii'  hands  upon  it  but  a  child  about  four
years  of  age. '  I  have  more  than  once  seen  the  table  move  without
human  touch  or  contact.    At  the  close  of  one  of  our  meetings  it
was  telegraphed  by  the  table,  without  any  of  us  being  in  contact
-with  it,  that  we  were  to  sing  the  doxology ;  and  as  soon  as  we  had
sung  the  first  note,  the  table  rose  ^vithout  any  of  om-  hands  upon
it,  and  commenced  beatuag  time  lUce  a  baton  in  the  hands  of  a
music-master — keeping  time  to  the  end  much  more  correctly  than
we  did.    I  have  known  the  names  and  ages  of  persons,  the  dates
of  events  of  a  private  and  family  nature,  the  time  and  place  of  the
mortal  decease  of  the  communicating  spirit,  and  many  other  par-
ticulars of  a  like  kind,  correctly  given  by  table-tippings.    I  do  not
pretend  that  such  particulars  were  uniformly  correct ;  but  I  know
that  they  were  frequently  so  ;  and  that,  when  neither  medium  nor
cii'cle  were  previously  cognizant  of  the  facts  so  communicated.

"  At  one  of  the  sittings  of  our  family  cii-cle,  a  gentleman  was
present,  who  had  recently  arrived  in  this  comitiy  from  New
Orleans.  In  reply  to  his  questions,  he  was  told,  through  the  table-
tippings,  the  number  of  years  he  had  lived  there,  and  the  munber
of  weeks  he  had  been  in  England— facts  known  only  to  himself.
The  spirit  communicating  with  him  purpoi-ted  to  be  an  old  fiiend
of  his.  He  gave  the  initials  of  his  name,  and  said,  that  he  died  in
New  Orleans,  ten  years  and  a-half  since ;  all  wHch  particulars  oui-
friend  from  New  Orleans  certified  to  be  correct.

«  I  have  repeartedly  seen  mental  questions  appropriately  answered
by  the  table ;  on  one  occasion,  at  which  about  a  dozen  persons
were  present,  as  a  relative  or  friend  was  mentaUy  asked  for  by  one
and  another,  the  table  darted  from  side  to  side,  towards  the
questioner— as  if  to  assure  him  or  her  of  the  reality  of  the  spirit's
presence;  then  a  munber  of  movements  would  be  made,  corres-
ponding to  the  age  of  the  deceased,  the  time  of  his  or  her  death,
or  other  mental  question-  none  but  questioner  and  correspon-
dent knowing  the  question  untU  after  the  answer  was  given."

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  SHORTEE.

175

"  Concerning  these  facts  I  would  remark — Fii-st,  tliat  tliey  -were
■witnessed  in  tiie  light,  either  by  day-light  or  gas-light,  in  ordinary
■well-lighted  rooms.  Secondly,  that  these  facts  were  witnessed  by
all  present,  who  testified  to  seeing  them  at  the  same  time  and  in  the
same  way.  Thii-dly,  that  no  professional  or  public  medium  was
employed  ;  the  investigations  were  earned  on  by  myself  and  friends
for  our  own  personal  satisfaction,  sometimes  at  their  homes,  some-
times at  my  o-wn,  and  ■with  different  mediums.  Whatever  may  be
the  value  or  significance  of  the  phenomena,  these  circumstances
should,  I  think,  preclude  suspicion  as  to  their  genuineness.  "With
regard  to  one  of  these  phenomena,  in  which,  I  think,  the  Com-
mittee will  be  particularly  interested — the  movements  of  the  table
■without  contact — allow  me  to  relate  an  incident  which  occurred
subsequent  to  the  experiences  related,  and  which  is  still  fresh  in
my  recollection.  We  had  been  holding  a  seance  in  the  dra-wing-
room  of  Dr.  Dixon,  25,  Bedford  Row,  and  had  thoiight  the  seance
was  ended ;  after  a  little  conversation,  the  doctor  began  playing  his
concertina.  On  the  first  note  being  played  the  table  rose  from  the
floor  and  kept  up  a  rhythmical  motion  as  the  tune  went  on,  corres-
ponding to  the  music,  and  which  continued  as  long  as  the  air  was
played.

"  I  have  given  only  a  fraction  of  my  experience  in  Spiritualism
and  have  thouglft  it  best  to  confine  my  evidence  to  the  more  rudi-
mentary phases  of  the  subject ;  but  even  with  these  physical
manifestations  of  spirit  agency,  that  which  seems  to  me  most
noteworthy,  and  to  which  I  would  specially  call  attention,  is  the
evident  intelligence,  foreign  to  ourselves,  associated  -with  the
phenomena.  Before  sitting  down,  I  feel  it  a  duty  to  protest  against
the  phrase  '  Spirit-rapping  '  which  has  to-night  been  used  as  syno-
nymous with  Spiritualism,  and  for  which  a  defence  has  been
attempted.  What  is  thus  called,  is  only  one  of  the  least  of  the
phenomena  of  Spiritualism  ;  and  these  phenomena  are,  as  it  were,
only  the  fringe  of  the  subject, — its  accidents,  not  its  essence, — they
belong  to  its  evidences,  they  are  not  Spiritualism  itself  Spiritualism
is  the  recognition  of  man  as  a  spiritual  being,  who,  even  while  on

176

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

eavtli  can,  under  certain  conditions,  hold  communion  witli  spirits
who  have  left  the  mortal  form.    It  is  therefore  concerned  with  all
facts  which  tend  to  establish  or  confirm  the  belief  in  man's  spiritual
nature  and  continued  life  after  the  death  of  the  body.    It  embraces
all  studies  which  may  throw  light  on  the  nature,  forces,  and  laws
of  the  spiril^world,  and  its  connection  with  the  natural  world  ;  and
on  the  interests,  duties,  and  responsibilities  of  man  as  a  spiritual
and  immoi-tal  being,  related  to  both  worlds.     To  characterise  this
by  such  tei-ms  as  'table-turning'  and  ' spirit-rapping,'  as  if  these
were  either  the  adequate  enumeration  of  its  evidences  or  the  fair
expression  of  its  spirit,  or  anythmg  but  newspaper  slang,  is  either
ignorance  or  impertinence,  and  is  wholly  unworthy  of  a  serious
inquiry  into  the  subject,  such  as  that  in  which  I  understand  this
Committee  to  be  engaged.     It  is  as  insulting  and  offensive  and,  I
may  add,  as  silly  as  it  would  be  to  describe  Christianity  as  'bread-
breaking  '  and  'water-dipping.'    Object  to  Spiritualism  if  you  wdl,
but  at  least  respect  our  rightto  designate  it  by  that  term  which  we
feel  alone  expresses  its  true  character  and  aim."

In  reply  to  questions  from  members  of  the  Committee,  Mi-.
Shorter  said,  "The  table  at  Dr.  Dixon's,  rose  from  four  to  six
inches  from  the  floor,  and  continued  in  motion  several  minutes,  in
fact  until  the  music  ceased  ;  it  was  on  a  clear  Hght  summer
evei^g  3  there  were  seven  persons  present,  and  the  movements  of
the  table  were  distinctly  seen  by  all  of  them,  the  table  bemg  at
least  thi-ee  feet  distant  from  each  of  the  company.    I  have  known
mental  questions  answered  through  the  hand  of  a  medium  by
automatic  writing,  as  well  a.  telegraphed  by  sounds  and  move-
ments    On  one  occasion,  at  Dr.  Dixon's,  eight  or  ten  persons
being  present  (myself  being  one)  each  one  received  in  wi-itmg  an
answer-to  a  mental  question,  and  each  testified  to  the  answer  being
appropriate  and  con-ect.    I  beHeve  that  such  facts  as  these  I  have
^tnessed  are  produced  by  spirits,  that  is,  beings_  differing  fi-om
ourselves  only  in  being  divested  of  mortal  bodies,  bemgs  substantial
but  not  material.    I  am  aware  that  various  theories  and  hypotheses
have  been  put  forward  to  explain  these  facts  as  the  result  of

EVIDENCE  OF  MK.  SHORTER.

177

physical  and  mundane  causes.    I  liavo  most  carefully  examined
these,  and  have  satisfied  myself  of  their  insufficiency.  I  have  in  my
book  related  several  instances  of  the  commimication  of  intelligence
not  known  to  the  medium,  oi-  to  any  one  present  at  the  cii-cle.  I
have  related  the  instance  of  a  friend  who  was  about  to  emisa-ate
and  from  information  received  from  the  emigi>ation  authorities,
expected  to  sail  in  a  week.    It  was  telegi-aphed  through  the  table-
movements  that  he  would  not  sail  for  31  days,  unforeseen  cii-cum-
stances  delayed  his  departure,  and  he  saUed  just  31  days  from  that
time.    On  another  occasion,  I  inqtiired  concerning  a  friend  in.
Australia  of  a  spirit  relative  of  his  who  purported  to  be  present,
and  received  sundry  information  concemijig  him,  which  subse-
quently proved  to  be  correct.    Among  other  things,  I,  as  a  test,
inquii-ed  how  long  it  was  since  my  friend  left  England,  and  was
told  three  years  and  a-half.    I  maintained  it  could  not  be  more  than
three  years,  but  the  spirit  insisted  that  it  was  three  years  and  a-half.
On  inquiry,  I  found  it  was  three  years  and  seven  months  less  one
week;  no  one  present  but  myself  knew  of  the  cii-cumstances
refen-ed  to.    Other  evidence  bearing  upon  this  point  will  be  given
by  my  friend  Mr.  Manuel  Eyre,  and  it  was  with  a  view  of  gettiag
his  evidence  placed  before  the  Committee  rather  than  of  reproducing
my  own,  that  I  have  attended  this  evening."
The  following  qiiestions  were  then  asked : —
Mr.  Jeffery :  " To  what  do  you  attribute  these  phenomena?"
Mr.  Shorter  :  «  I  believe  them  to  be  caused  by  beings  substan-
tial  but  not  material.    Those  who  are  acquainted  with  German'
philosophy  wiU  understand  my  meaning."

Mr.  Dyte  :  "  Can  you  give  us  an  instance  of  an  answer  having
been  given  that  was  not  in  the  mind  of  any  person  present  ?"

Mr.  Shorter  :  "  The  incident  I  have  mentioned  is  such  a  one.
The  gentleman  was  about  to  leave  the  country,  and  asked  how
long  it  would  be  before  he  did  so.  The  table  signified  thirty-one
days.  He  laughed  at  this,  for  it  was  Hs  intention  to  leave
that  very  week.  It  turned  out,  however,  to  be  the  truth ;  some
circumstances  arose  unexpectedly,  and  he  was  detained  exactly  the

178

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

time  named.  Another  time,  I  asked  how  long  a  friend  had  been
away,  and  received  an  iatelligible  answer  which  eventually  proved
correct."

Mr.  Gannon  :  "  Did  the  table  rise  bodily  or  only  on  one  leg  T
Mr.  Shorter  :  "  The  table  rose  completely,  four  or  six  inches
from  the  ground,  and  there  was  no  one  near"?"

Mr.  Manuel  Eyre  was  the  next  witness,  and  spoke  as  under  :—
«  My  experience  has  extended  over  some  sixteen  to  seventeen
years.    My  attention  was  first  attracted,  so  as  to  create  an  interest
in  SpirituaUsm  by  a  lady,  a  friend  of  ours,  in  PhHadelpHa,  Peim-
sylvannia.  United  States.    She  was  an  educated  lady  of  ability
and  position-sister-in-law  of  the  Attorney-General-but  she  was
not  a  believer  in  either  a  God  or  a  futm-e  existence,  and  was  really
unhappy  in  her  non-belief    I,  with  a  few  intimate  friends,  met
her  at  this  time,  not  having  seen  her  for  several  months,  m  Wash-
ington    We  noticed  in  her  a  Hghter,  brighter  expression,  and  a
setmingly  happier  tone  of  mhad.    We  spoke  of  it  after  her  visit  the
next  day     She  called  again,  and  then  brought  up  the  subject  of
SpiiituaUsm.    We  all  began  to  turn  it  and  her  into  ndicule,  and
treated  the  subject  as  low  and  vulgar.  Her  reply  was-I  remember
'  it  as  well  as  if  it  were  only  yesterday-'  Ridicule  is  no  argument,
and  it  is  not  in  keeping  ivith  your  usual  good  senseJ    She  then  went
on  to  say,  '  You  know  what  my  belief  was,  and  that  I  was  really
xniserable  in  that  beHef    I  have  investigated  Spiiituahsm  and
not  only  believe  in  it,  but  it  has  made  me  perfectly  happy  m  the
belief  of  a  future  existence;  and  my  daughter,  whom,  you  know
I  was  training  in  my  former  unbelief,  is  a  changed  gn-1,  and  ^teac
of  being  the  wHful,  ii.-itable  child  she  was,  is  happy  in  the  thought
of  the  future,  is  kind,  attentive  and  considerate  in  her  actions
towards  myself  and  others.'    I  had  no  answer  to  such  facts ;  but
^y  attention  being  thus  drawn  to  the  subject,  I  have  lost  n.  o^^
:'nity  of  investigating  it.    I  have  seen  it  ^^^^^^^f^  ^
not  only  in  many  different  parts  of  America,  but  also  m  this

W  — d,  and  I  may  say,  most  of  these  manifestations,  and

EVIDENCE  OP  MB.  EYEB.

179

generally  the  best  of  them,  have  been  in  jirivate  cii-cles.  Dm-ing
a  visit  to  Buffalo,  New  York,  whilst  at  the  house  of  a  private
gentleman,  during  a  conversation  with  his  wife,  a  piano  (a  large
square  one)  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  drawing  room,  no  one
Avithin  fifteen  feet  of  it,  commenced  moving  up  and  down,  was
raised  entirely  off  the  floor,  coming  down  with  a  force  you  would
think  sufficient  to  break  it,  and  at  the  same  time  music  coming
from  the  piano  as  if  some  competent  performer  was  playing  on

It.    This,  Mrs.  C  afterwards  told  me,  occurred  so  often  that

she  was  afraid  her  piano  would  be  injiu'ed,  and  therefore  begged
the  spirits  to  desist,  which  they  did.

"  I  will  now  relate  a  fact  which,  I  think,  shows  an  intelligence
foreign  to  that  of  the  persons  present  at  the  cii-cle  where  it  occurred.
One  object  of  my  visit  to  this  coimtiy  was  to  obtain  if  possible
the  register  of  the  baptism  of  a  person  bom  in  England,  and  who
died  in  America  a  century  ago.   From  information  given  me,  I  was
led  to  believe  I  would  get  this  in  Yorkshire  or  Cambridgeshii-e.  I
spent  over  three  months  and  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble  but  all
to  no  piu-pose.     I  had  received  from  America  a  spu-it  communica-
tion that  I  would  be  able  to  get  the  information  of  where  this
baptismal  register  was  to  be  found  through  a  medium  in  this
coimtry.    I  tried  through  several  mediums  but  got  nothing  satis-
factory but  the  assurance  I  would  get  it.    I  at  last  received  a
commimication  from    a   spii-it   dii-ecting  me   to   go  to  Mrs.
Marshall.    Being  mistrastful  of  public  mediums  I  detei-mined  to
use  extreme  caution  in  pursuing  my  investigation.    I  went  to
Mrs.  MarshaU   in  the  winter  of   1862.     I  did  not  tell  who
I  was  or  what  I  wanted— sat  down  in  one  corner  of  the  large
room— Mrs.  MarshaU  was  sitting  in  the  other,— this  was  near  the
window.    I  was  conversing  with  Mrs.  Marshall  when  the  table,  a
large,  heavy  round  table,  came  jumping  across  from  the  opposite
side  of  the  room  and  turned  over  into  my  lap  ;  there  was  no  one
near  the  table  and  it  was  in  broad  day-light.     We  then  had  some
communications  by  the  alphabet  through  the  movement  of  the
table.    I  said  nothing  about  the  information  I  wanted,  but  when

N  2

180

MINUTES  OE  THE  COMMITTEE.

leaving  said  I  would  come  again.    I  did  so  in  a  few  days.  Before
leaving  home  I  wi-ote  out  and  numbered  about  a  dozen  questions-
amon-  them  was  the  question,  'Where  can  I  find  the  register  of
the  blptism  I  am  searching  for?'    The  paper  with  the  questions
I  had  folded  and  placed  in  a  stout  envelope  and  closed  it.  When
we  sat  down  to  the  table  I  asked,  after  some  other  questions,  if  the
spii-its  would  answer  the  questions  I  had  written  and  had  m  my
pocket-the  answer,  by  raps,  was  'yes.'    I  asked  if  I  should  lay
the  paper  with  the  questions  on  folded  as  it  was  and  in  the
envelope  on  the  table,  and  the  answer  was  'yes.'     I  took  the
envelope  containing  these  questions  out  of  my  pocket,  and  without
openin-  it,  laid  it  on  the  table.    I  then  took  a  piece  of  paper  and,
as  the  questions  were  answered,-No.  1,  2,  and  so  on,-I  wi-ote
down  the  answers.    When  we  came  to  the  question  where  I  could
•    .et  the  register  of  this  baptism,  the  table  telegraphed  '  Stepney
Church  '  and  at  the  same  time  Mrs.  Marshall,  sen.,  in  her  pecuhar
manner',  blurted  out  '  Stepney.'    Being  at  that  time  a  stranger  in
London,  I  did  not  know  there  was  such  a  place.    I  went  on  with
the  questions  I  had  prepared  and  got  coi-i-ect  answers  to  all  of
them     A  few  day  afterwards  I  went  to  Stepney  Church  and  after
spencUng  some  days  in  searching  I  there  found  the  register  of  the

baptism  as  I  had  been  told.  ^-
■     «  A  somewhat  simUar  instance,  combined  with  a  perception  of
future  incidents,  occurred  some  ten  yeai^s  ago  in  Cleveland,  Ohio.
We  were  at  a  private  cii-cle  of  friends  ;  after  the  raps  and  a  n^-
ber  of  physical  manifestations,  the  question  was  asked  by  Mis
Macready  the  well-known  dramatic  reader,  and  a  lady,  whom  I
^1  sT^;  Mrs.  N— /Whether  they  would  ever  meetagam?
Th  answer,  by  a  spirit  giving  the  name  of  Queenah,  was  7es,

,    n..  n'nclMrs  N  lOiLl  tlmn  he  a  widoio.     The  ^^hoie

Cambe^ell  L.Luc  Asylu:n.  giving  an  "J^^JJ
patients,  one  of  flie  tat  .jnestions  the  phys>e..m  a.ked  M>s.  Macieady

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  EYRE.

181

was,  'Do  yo\i  know  Mrs.  N  ?  slie  says  slie  knew  you  m  America,

and  has  talked  about  you  ever  since  she  heard  you  were  coming.*
Mrs.  Macready  answered,  '  No,  it  is  only  one  of  her  fancies.'  After
the  entertainment  was  over  the  doctor  again  said  to  Mrs.  Macready,

'  Mrs.  N  insists  upon  it  that  you  do  know  her  and  requests  me

to  say  to  you  '  Queenah  ' — '  Cleveland.'  The  meeting  of  ten  years
before  flashed  on  Mrs.  Macready's  mind,  and  as  she  was  greeting  the

patients,  Mrs.  N"  ,  bathed  in  tears,  rushed  up  to  Mrs.  Macready

exclaiming,  '  Don't  you  remember  me,'  and  repeating  over  and  over,

'  Queenah,'—'  Cleveland.'    Mrs.  N  had  lost  her  husband ;  they

had  suffered  gi-eat  revei-ses  of  fortune,  and  she  had  in  consequence
become  insane,  and  this  was  the  meeting  that  had  been  predicted.

"  Another  class  of  spii-it  manifestation  I  have  witnessed  and
which  I  think  worthy  of  your  attention  is  that  of  writing  on  the
skin  ;  the  following  is  an  instance — I  was  at  Wankeegan,  a  village
near  Chicago,  and  whilst  there  visited  a  medium,  a  Mrs.  Seymour.
She  was  a  poor  woman,  a  trance-speaking  medium,  and  during  the
time  she  was  speaking  imder  trance  she  would  hold  out  one  arm,
and  with  the  forefinger  of  the  other  hand  make  a  rapid  motion  as
if  writing,  the  movement  of  the  finger  being  in  the  air  about  a
foot  from  the  arm ;  a  few  minutes  after  and  diu-ing  the  time  sKo
was  stUl  in  trance  she  stripped  up  her  sleeve,  a  loose  hanging  sleeve,
and  there  on  her  arm,  so  distinctly  written  that  it  could  be  read
across  the  room,  was  the  peculiar  signature  of  the  spirit  giving  the
communication.    In  this  instance  it  was  that  of  a  near  relative  of
a  lady  who  accompanied  me ;  the  lady  and  myself  were  strangers
in  the  town  and  utterly  unknown  to  the  medium.    During  the
time  I  was  in  the  neighbourhood  this  medium,  and  especially  this
class  of  phenomena  of  which  she  was  the  subject,  became  so  noto-
rious that  a  committee,  consisting  of  the  mayor,  some  physicians,
and  a  number  of  leading  citizens  of  the  neighbouring  town  of
Milwaukee,  was  appointed  to  investigate  it.     Mrs.  Seymour  ap-
peared before  them  several  times,  but  the  committee  could  not  come
to  any  conclusion  as  to  the  cause  of  the  phenomena  and  broke  up
without  making  a  report."

182

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

The  following  qxiestions  were  asked  relative  to  tlie  above  state-
ment of  Mr.  Eyre.

Mr.  Geary  :  "  Are  you  aware  of  any  cases  of  imposture  in
comiection  with  Spiritualism."

Mr.  Eyre  :  "  Yes,  I  am  aAvare  of  cases  of  imposture."

Mr.  Geary  :  "  Are  there  any  means  by  which  outsiders  can  dis-
tinguish between  the  phenomena  produced  by  imposture  and  those
produced  by  the  spirits."

Mr.  Eyre  :  "  Yes,  they  can  except  in  cases  of  dark  seances.
When  manifestations  are  given  in  the  light,  most  people  can  fiixd
it  out.    In  the  first  place  the  table  tipping  by  spiritual  influence  is
different  and  in  cases  of  imposture  a  jerk  will  be  given  by  the
medium  very  different  from  the  undulating  motion  of  real  Spiritual-
ism.   In  one  case  a  woman,  who  Avas  called  a  '  squatter,'  became  a
medium;  she  moved  into   another  village  farther  west,  and
her  class  of  mediumship  was  this, — she  used  to  have  wiitten
on  her  arm  the  names  of  the  spirits  who  communicated  with  her.
Mrs.  Macready,  myself,  and  a  party  of  friends  went  to  see  her,
and  we  found  her  at  the  wash  tub  ;  presently  she  was  thrown  into
a  trance  and  held  out  her  arm  and  went  on  speaking  and  directly
she  stripped  up  her  arm  and  there  was  the  name  of  Mrs.  Macready's
husband  in  red  letters,  his  own  peculiar  signatiu-e.    There  was  a
committee  formed  at  the  place  to  investigate  it,  and  the  mayor
took  the  chaii-,  but  they  finally  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they
could  make  nothing  of  it.    She  was  a  great  talker  while  in  this
trance  and  was  most  peculiar  in  this  one  respect,  that  the  marks
remained  on  her  arm  for  five  or  ten  minutes.    The  letters  were
raised  as  in  stripes,  and  signatures  of  persons  that  she  had  never
even  heard  of  were  so  written."

Captain  Webber  said  that  he  had  known  letters  to  be  mitten
on  the  arm  and  breast  by  natural  means.

Mr.  Eyre  :  "  In  this  case  the  medium  did  not  touch  her  arm
which  was  covered  by  a  sleeve  while  the  wiiting  was  being  pro-
duced."

Mrs.  HoNYWOOD :  "With  regard  to  tHs  wi-iting  on  the  skin,  if

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  EYEE.  183

done  by  spu-itual  influences,  it  genemlly  disappears  in  about  ten
W"'       ^  n^strument  it  will  last  much

m.  "  Have  you  eve.  lcno.vn  an  impostor  who  has

piactised  on  anyone  for  a  year  and  then  been  discovered  "

tiie."  '''''  ^""^       ^1^°^*^-^  t^at

]Mr.  Levy  said  that  he  had  heard  that  siting  on  the  flesh  in  the
manner  descz.bed  had  been  a  commou  occu-rence  during  the  revival
in  the  north  of  Ireland.  °

Mr.  Lowenthal,  the  next  witness  gave  evidence  as  follows  -

I  have  my  ofiices  xn  Fenchurch-street,  but  I  must  object  to  my  name
appearmg  m  the  papers.  On  one  occasion  I  entex^d  a  rooL t  a
Lydz-opathxc  estabHshment  and  a  gentleman  followed  me,  and  I  was

felt  all  sorts  of  adments.  I  at  once  told  him  to  sit  down  and
commenced  waiting  round  him  making  all  sorts  of  passes  i  Zl
a  mnnber  of  questions  to  him  and  he  told  me  h^  felt  g.^'

A  Member  :  "  That  was  mesmerism  "

m.  LOWE.XHAL  :  "  It  had  nothing  to  do  with  mesmerism  •  all
these  actmns  were  nxvoluntary,  and  were  entirely  spir-itual  I  .^d
not  make  mesmeric  passes  at  all.  My  exertions  were  so  great  t^a^
persons  thought  I  must  ft  11  rlnw^     t      ^  ^  *

gudge.    My  mouth  utters  sounds  t1ip+  T  ^  ■,

-Mch  W  no  meamag  to  me    I  ^  1     T\  ""''^
North  American  tribe    ItT  "
on  the  b,^  Tide.  !h  .  V  ™  """^  ^  8"

7onr  nund  »  '  ^fe^d  on

Mr.  w™..:  "Oh,  not  at  all.    I  apeak  it  with  g™at  fluency.

184

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

But  I  cannot  say  I  liave  ever  spoken  a  language  I  have  never  heard.
These  communications  convey  information  in  the  shape  of  impres-
sions on  the  mind.    I  feel  quite  joyous  while  uttering  them,  as  if
under  a  pleasant  influence.    Sometimes  information  comes  but  the
idea  always  comes  in  my  own  language.    The  words  my  mouth
xitters  come  iaivoluntarily.    I  tave  seen  people  of  standmg  m
society,  and  most  refined,  act  in  as  free  and  unresti-ained  a  manner
as  wild  Indians  in  the  wood,  imitating  the  camp  life  and  the  war
dance,  and  speaking  in  strange  languages.   This  was  done,  I  believe
to  take  the  starch  out  of  them,  so  that  they  might  receive  spmtuul
knowledge.    On  one  occasion  I  was  with  a  man  and  fell  on  bis
lap  and  addressed  him  in  the  most  endearing  language  ;  when  I
recovered  he  explained  that  I  had  given  him  gi-eat  gi-atification  in
personifying  his  dear  sister,  then  in  the  spirit  land,  who,  he  was
sure,  had  controlled  me  at  the  time  to  manifest  her  presence  and
speak  to  him  as  though  she  were  stiU  here."

Mr.  Hockley,  the  next  witness,  spoke  as  follows  :—
"I  have  been  a  spiritualist  for  45  years,  and  have  had  consider-
able experience.    This  is  a  crystal  encircled  with  a  silver  ring,  as
a  proper  crystal  should  be.    It  was  formerly  the  custom  to  engi-ave
the  iL  names  of  God  in  Hebrew  on  this  ring.    I  knew  a  lady
^ho  was  an  admirable  seeress,  and  obtained  some  splendid  axiswei-s
by  means  of  crystals.    The  person  who  has  the  power  of  sea^
notices  first  a  kind  of  mist  in  the  centre  of  the  crystal  and  then
iTessage  or  answer  appears  in  a  kind  of  printed  character.
Thexrwas  no  hesitation,  and  she  spoke  it  all  off  as  though  she  was
reaXg  a  book,  and  as  soon  as  she  had  uttered  the  words  she  saw
tley  belted  ^way  and  fresh  ones  took  their  place.    I  have  30
columns,  containing  upwards  of  12,000  answers  --ed  ^^^^^^
™  which  I  keep  carefuUy  under  lock  and  key.    A  rystal,  if
.  W  used  should  be  dedicated  to  a  spirit.    Some  tmie  ago  I
'l  l:^ettoU..ie^^^^  Bui-ton  by  Earl  Stanhope,  and  he

ethimac^s^^ba^^
:;:^n:;irr--thepersonwhomyouwish

EVIDENCE  OE  ME.  HOCKLEY.

185

to  api^ear,  and  tlie  seer  looks  in  and  describes  all,  and  puts  questions
and  receives  answers.    Lieutenant  Burton  was  greatly  pleased  and
went  away.    One  day  my  seeress  called  liim  into  the  miiTor.  Slie
plainly  recognized  him,  although  dressed  as  an  Arab  and  sunburnt,
and  described  what  he  was  doing.    He  was  quarrelling  with  a  party
of  Bedouins  in  Arabia,  and  speaking  energetically  to  them  in
Ai-abic.    An  old  man  at  last  pulled  out  his  dagger  and  the  Lieu-
tenant his  revolver,  when  up  rode  a  horseman  and  separated  them.
A  long  time  aftei-wards  Lieutenant  Burton  came  to  me,  and  I  told
him  what  she  had  seen,  and  read  the  particulars.     He  assured  me
it  was  con-ect  in  every  particular  and  attached  his  name  to  the
account  I  had  written  down  at  the  time,  to  certify  that  it  was  true.
These  books  are  locked  up  and  nobody  can  see  them ;  and  sometimes,
if  I  repeat  some  previous  question  which  has  escaped  my  memory'
I  am  refen-ed  to  the  book  in  Avhich  it  has  been  previously  answered'
The  seers  are  generaHy  of  the  female  sex,  and  it  is  impossible  to
tell  by  their  personal  appearance  whether  they  have  the  gift  or  not.
I  once  knew  a  seeress  that  weighed  19  stone.    The  only  way  to
tell  whether  a  person  is  a  seer  is  by  trying.    Two  persons  occa-
sionally see  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time.     On  one  occasion  a
lady  was  looking  into  the  crystal,  and  when  the  mist  divided  she  saw
her  husband  in  conversation  with  a  lady,  a  friend  of  hers,  and  then
a  boy  made  his  appearance.    A  frtend  looked  over  her  shoulder  as
she  had  put  it  down  to  rest  her  eyes  and  saw  precisely  the  same
thing.    Although  I  have  had  a  crystal  since  1824,  I  have  never
seen  anything  myself.    My  seeress  was  perfectly  in  a  noi-mal  con-
dition, and  in  full  exercise  of  all  her  faculties,  and  used  to  o-i^e
answers  to  metaphysical  and  other  difficult  questions,  wHch  she
could  not  possibly  understand.    I  have  nearly  1000  volumes  on
occult  sciences.    I  do  not  think  it  has  anything  to  do  with  mes-
merism.   I  put  a  ciystal  in  the  hands  of  a  spiiitualist,  and  she  be-
came qtute  ngid,  and  I  had  to  make  a  pass  before  she  could  see
Some  laches  would  look  five  minutes,  others  ten  minutes,  and  others
fifteen,  before  they  saw  anything,  but  if  it  appeared  to  them  foaoy
It  has  merely  to  be  developed.    The  words  appear  on  the  mii-ror  the

186

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

same  as  they  do  in  a  crystal.  The  girl  sits  in  front  and  you  ask  a
question.  The  answer  appears  on  the  glass  more  in  printing  than
witing,  and  as  she  repeats  the  words  they  disappear.  Only  the
girl  sees  the  writing  on  the  mirror.  Gentlemen  come  to  me  and  say,
'  I  want  to  see  my  guardian  spirit.'  The  girl  sees  and  describes  the
appearance.  It  appears  in  the  same  foi-m  as  in  life.  I  liave  some-
times come  in  the  miixor  in  spite  of  myself — my  double  I  should
call  it, — ^to  my  annoyance.  She  would  say,  '  You  are  in  the  glass
now,'  I  wotild  say,  '  How  am  I  dressed,'  and  she  would  reply,  '  As
you  are  now,'  or  '  As  you  were  last  week,'  as  the  case  might  be ;
and  then  would  follow  a  dialogue,  my  spirit  or  double  talking  to
the  seeress,  while  it  has  also  been  in  the  glass.  White's  Life  of
Swedenborg  embodies  my  views  as  to  this."

A  Member  :  "  This  is  surely  something  more  than  a  double,
there  would  then  be  three.    I  do  not  understand  this."

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  There  is  a  great  deal  more  in  this  than  you  can
iinderstand.  I  do  not  believe  that  I  have  two  spirits,  but  one
soul,  a  body  and  an  atmospheric  spirit  apart  from  my  body,  and
that  my  spirit  is  not  in  me  now  but  with  my  soul,  and  that  it  will
form  the  covering  of  my  soul  in  the  future  state,  but  that  it  may
even  now  occasionally  be  visible  to  others.  On  one  occasion  a
man  appeared  in  the  small  crystal  with  a  book  before  him,  and
she  saw  it  was  splendidly  done  but  too  small  to  read.  I  gave  her  a
powei-fiil  reading  glass  and  she  could  then  read  it,  for  the  glass
increased  the  si2;e."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  "  Are  you  of  opinion  that  this  is  in  any  way
lonnected  with  spirits  ? "

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  Yes."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  "  You  think  the  spii-its  appear  in  the  glass."

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  I  have  no  means  of  telling  whether  the
spirits  are  there.  I  believe  it  is  a  spiritual  manifestation,
because  I  receive  answers  to  questions  which  the  seeress  could  not
fabricate."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox:  "Is  there  any  evidence  that  the  things
seen  are  objective  and  not  subjective  1 "

EVIDENCE  OE  ME.  HOCKLEY.

187

Mr.  Hockley:  "Yes,  the  book  I  alluded  to,  wHcli  was  too
small  to  read ;  when  I  got  the  glass  tho  seeress  could  read  it."

Mr.  Atkinson  :  "  A  book  was  seen ;  was  it  a  real  book,  or  do
you  suppose  it  was  the  spirit  of  the  book  in  the  glass?"

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  Yes,  I  suppose  it  was;  why  shouldn't  I  believe
there  is  a  spirit  to  everything  1  I  believe  that  if  I,  or  any  human
being,  had  forged  a  man's  cheque  and  then  burnt  that  cheque,  it
could  have  been  seen  by  my  seeress."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  "  Supposing  she  had  never  heard  anything
about  itr'

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  It  would  have  been  the  same."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  "  Do  you  think  the  spiiit  is  in  the  glass,  or
in  the  mind  of  the  seer?"

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  I  have  no  means  of  forming  an  opinion."

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  "  Then  why  do  you  believe  that  spirits  have
anything  to  do  Avith  the  matter  ?  "

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  Because  she  speaks  Hebrew  and  languages  of
which  she  knows  nothing,  and  because,  moreover,  events  that  are
taking  place  at  the  very  hour  can  be  brought  up  and  the  cii'cum-
stances  of  their  occmTence  accurately  described."

Dr.  Edmunds  :  "  You  believe  it  is  sj)iritual,  because  nothing
else  will  account  for  it  j  if  I  had  a  cheque  in  my  pocket  now,  could
a  seer  read  it?"

Mr.  Hockley;  "No."

Mr.  Atkinson  :  "  It  could  be  done."

Mr.  Hockley  :  "  Cmikshank  and  others  have  had  a  wrangle
about  the  spii-its  clothes  ;  did  anybody  read  in  Scripture  of  a  spii-it
appealing  without  clothes?  It  is  no  good  twisting  words  into
fantastical  notions,  if  you  want  to  get  at  truth."

Books  and  Crystals,  &c.,  were  produced  and  the  proceedings
terminated.

Tuesday,  22nd  June,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr,  D.  D.  Home,  in  answer  to  a  call  from  the  chair,  said  that  he

188

MlNtJTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

did  not  come  prepared  to  give  evidence;  that  would  be  better
done  by  those  who  had  seen  the  phenomena,  many  of  which  had
occurred  when  he  was  unconscious.  But  he  would  be  very  glad  to
answer  any  questions  that  might  be  put  to  him.

The  Chairman  :  "  Can  you  state  the  conditions  under  wliich
manifestations  take  place  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  You  never  can  tell.  I  have  frequently  sat  with
persons  and  no  phenomena  have  occuiTed  ;  but  when  not  expecting
it,  when  in  another  room,  or  even  sleeping  in  the  bouse,  the  mani-
festations took  place.  I  am,  I  may  say,  extremely  nei-vous,  and
suffer  much  from  ill-health.  I  am  Scotch,  and  second  sight  was
early  developed  in  me.  I  am  not  imaginative  ;  I  am  sceptical,  and
doubt  things  that  take  place  in  liiy  own  presence.  I  tiy  to  forget  ,
all  about  these  things,  for  the  miiid  would  become  partly  diseased
if  it  were  suffered  to  dwell  on  them.  I  therefore  go  to  theatres  and
to  concerts  for  change  of  attention."

The  Chairman  :  "  Will  you  give  us  some  information  relative  to
external  physical  manifestations,  such  as  the  lifting  of  tables  or
persons  1    Do  you  go  into  a  trance  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  Cei-tain  things  only  occur  when  I  am  in  a  ti-ance.
But  the  trance  is  not  necessary  for  all  the  phenomena,  the  only
thing  necessary  is  that  the  people  about  should  be  harmonious.  At
times  I  have  been  awoke  at  night  by  a  presence  in  the  room,  and
then  the  spirits  would  dictate  what  was  being  done  in  another
room.    I  wi'ote  it  down,  and  found  it  always  correct."

Mr.  Bennett  :  "  "What  are  your  sensations  Avhen  in  a  trance  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  I  feel  for  two  or  three  minutes  in  a  dreamy  state,
then  I  become  qtiite  dizzy,  and  then  I  lose  all  consciousness.  When
I  awake  I  find  my  feet  and  limbs  cold,  and  it  is  difficult  to  restore
the  cii'culation.  Wlien  told  of  what  has  taken  place  during  the
trance  it  is  quite  unpleasant  to  me,  and  I  ask  those  present  not  to
tell  me  at  once  when  I  awake.  I  myself  doubt  what  they  tell  nie.
I  have  no  knowledge  on  my  own  part  of  what  occurs  during  tlie
trance.  The  'harmonious'  feeling  is  simply  that  which  you  get  on
going  into  a  room  and  findiiag  all  the  people  present  such  that  you

EVIDENCE  or  MR,  HOME.

189

feel  at  home  at  once.  Manifestations  occur  at  all  times — during  a
tliunclei"storm,  when  I  am  feverish  or  ill,  or  even  suffering  from
hemorrhage  of  the  lungs.  Scepticism  is  not  a  hindrance,  but  an
imsympathetic  person  is.  Sex  has  not  any  influence.  As  for
mediums  they  are  generally  very  nervous.  Since  I  was  born  I  was
never  expected  to  live,  but  I  found  the  manifestations  beneficial  if
not  overdone.  It  is  calming.  At  the  age  of  six  I  was  not  able  to
walk.  I  have  been  given  over  by  Dr.  Louis,  of  Paris.  The  sj)iiits
told  me  I  should  get  better.  At  the  time  of  the  law  suit  with  Mrs.
Lyon  I  had  congestion  of  the  brain.  I  was  paralysed ;  my  memory
left  me.    They  told  me  I  would  get  well  again,  and  I  have  done  so."

]VIr.  Atkinson  asked  witness  the  difference  between  manifesta-
tions in  and  out  of  trance.

Mr.  Home  :  "  In  a  trance  I  see  sjoiiits  connected  with  persons
present.  Those  spirits  take  possession  of  me ;  my  voice  is  Hke
theii-s.  I  have  a  particularly  mobile  face,  as  you  may  see,  and  I
sometimes  take  a  sort  of  identity  with  the  spirits  who  are  in  com-
munication through  me.  I  attribute  the  mobility  of  my  face,  which
is  not  natural,  to  the  spirits.  I  am  most  frequently  in  the  air  when
I  am  awake.  "When  I  am  in  a  trance  I  frequently  take  a  live  coal
in  my  hand.  I  was  sceptical  on  that  point,  and  on  taking  one  in
my  hand  when  awake  I  raised  a  blister.  I  have  never  been  mes-
merised, and  cannot  mesmerise.  I  have  an  exceedingly  soothing
power,  an  exceedingly  gentle  way  of  approaching  any  one,  whether
weU  or  ill,  and  they  like  to  have  me  near  them.  I  may  say  I  am
■exceedingly  sick  after  elongations.  While  in  Paris  I  saw  the
figui'e  of  my  brothei',  then  in  the  ISTorth  Sea.  I  saw  his  fingers
and  toes  fall  off.  Six  months  afterwards  tidins^s  came  of  his  havinsr
been  found  dead  on  the  ice,  his  fingers  and  toes  having  fallen  off
through  the  effects  of  scurvy."

Mr.  Coleman  :  "  Does  Mr.  Home  remember  any  circumstance
happening  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  TroUope  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  I  stayed  in  Mrs.  TroUope's  house  at  Florence."

Mr.  Coleman  :  "  No  ;  I  mean  at  Ealiag  ]  "

Mr.  Home  :  "  I  do  not  remember."

190

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

Ml".  Coleman  said  lie  liad  read  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Trollope,  in
wliicli  slie  said  she  received  almost  daily  evidence  of  the  presejxce
of  the  spii-its  of  her  family,  more  particularly  of  her  children.  He
also  remembered  seeing  Mr.  Home,  while  at  his  house,  lifted  from
his  seat,  carried  into  an  adjoining  room,  brought  back  again,  and
laid  on  the  table.  Mr.  Home  knew  he  was  so,  because  he  asked
for  a  pencil  and  wrote  on  the  ceiling.

Mr.  Home  :  "  Yes,  I  recollect  that  perfectly.  In  the  houses  of
several  people  I  remember  constantly  being  lifted.  On  one  occa-
sion I  was  staying  at  the  chateau  of  M.  Ducosse,  the  Minister  of
Marine.  I  was  then  lifted  half  a  foot  in  the  air.  The  movement
was  so  gentle  that  I  had  not  observed  it  in  the  least.  I  moved
back  from  the  table  to  see  if  it  would  occur  when  I  was  standing.
It  did  occiu".  The  room  was  longer  than  this,  and  I  was  carried  to
the  end  of  the  room.  The  Count  de  Bourmont,  one  of  the  sena-
tors, was  staying  there.  I  had  evening  dress  shoes  on.  He  took
hold  of  the  shoes  when  I  was  in  the  air ;  they  remained  in  his
hand,  and  I  was  carried  iip.  One  Sunday  evening  Lord  Adare  was
told  to  put  flowers  outside  a  window  ;  we  saw  the  flowers  brought
into  the  room  where  we  were.  The  Master  of  Lindsay  was  present
as  well  as  Lord  Adare.  Instead  of  my  body  being  lifted,  the
flowers  were  taken  from  one  window  to  another.  I  do  not  remem-
ber being  taken  out  at  one  window  and  in  another,  for  I  was
unconscious,  but  numbers  witnessed  it.  Once  I  was  elongated  eight
inches.  A  man  was  standing  holding  my  feet.  In  one  case  I  was
laid  on  the  floor,  and  Lord  Adare  had  hold  of  my  head,  and  the
Master  of  Lindsay  of  my  feet.  The  elongations  were  not  confined
to  my  legs,  for  I  seemed  to  gipw  very  much  from  the  waist.  I
have  seen  a  table  lifted  into  the  air  with  eight  men  standing  on  it,
when  there  were  only  two  or  three  other  persons  in  the  room.  I
have  seen  the  windoAv  open  and  shut  at  a  distance  of  seven  or  eight
feet,  and  curtains  drawn  aside,  and,  in  some  cases,  objects  carried
over  our  heads.  In  the  house  of  .Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  a  table
went  up  so  high  in  the  air  that  we  could  not  touch  it.  I  have  seen
a  pencil  lifted  by  a  hand  to  a  paper  and  write,  in  the  presence  of

EVIDENCE  OE  ME,.  HOME.

191

tte  Emperor  Napoleon.  We  were  in  a  large  room — the  Salon
Louis  Quinze.  The  Empress  sat  here,  the  Emperor  there.  The
table  was  moved  to  an  angle  of  more  than  forty-five  degrees.  Then
a  hand  was  seen  to  come.  It  was  a  very  beautifully  formed  hand.
There  were  pencils  on  the  table.  It  lifted,  not  the  one  next  it,  but
one  on  the  far  side.  We  heard  the  sound  of  writing,  and  saw  it
writing  on  note  paper.  The  hand  passed  before  me,  and  went  to
the  Emperor,  and  he  kissed  the  hand.  It  went  to  the  Empress ;
she  withdrew  from  its  touch,  and  the  hand  followed  her.  The
Emperor  said,  '  Do  not  be  frightened,  kiss  it ; '  and  she  then  kissed
it.  It  was  disappearing.  I  said  I  would  like  to  kiss  it.  The  hand
seemed  to  be  like  that  of  a  person  thinking,  and  as  if  it  were  say-
ing', '  Shall  11'  It  came  back  to  me,  and  I  kissed  it.  The  sensation
of  touch  and  pressiu-e  was  that  of  a  natural  hand.  It  was  as  much
a  material  hand  seemingly  as  my  hand  is  now.  The  writing  was
an  autograph  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  I.  The  hand  was  his
-hand,  small  and  beautiful  as  it  is  known  to  have  been.  In  the
house  of  Ml'.  Bergheim  a  smelling-bottle  on  the  table  began  to
tremble,  as  if  some  one  with  a  very  shaky  hand  had  taken  hold  of
it,  and  then  it  began  to  spin  round  on  the  table  ;  it  span  a  minute
at  least.  There  were  three  witnesses  who  saw  that.  I  went  into
a  trance  immediately  afterwards,  and  told  them  that  a  sj)ii-it  named
James  was  present.  I  learnt  afterwards  that  Mr.  James  had  a-
very  shaky  hand.  The  Emperor  of  Russia,  as  well  as  the  Emperor
Napoleon,  have  seen  hands,  and  have  taken  hold  of  them,  when
they  seemed  to  float  away  into  thin  air.  I  have  never  seen  material
substances  brought  into  a  room  when  the  doors  and  windows  were
closed.  Flowers  have  been  brought  in  from  a  parterre,  but  the
spirits  always  asked  for  the  window  to  be  open.  When  other  wit-
nesses were  present  they  have  seen  heads.  One  witness  will
testify  to  having  seen  heads  in  her  lap  at  night.  They  were
luminous  ;  there  was  quite  a  glow  from  them."

Mr.  Meyers  :  "  Do  you  know  of  any  communication  from  the
Emperor  Napoleon  I.  to  the  present  Emperor  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  That  I  should  decline  to  answer.     The  hand  was

192

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

like  alabaster.  I  have  not  seen  the  liand  from  the  box  of  the
Davenport  Brothers,  and  cannot  say  how  these  hands  were  formed."

Mr.  J effery  asked  if  Mr.  Home  could  give  any  infoi-mation  as  to
the  state  and  condition  of  departed  human  beings  1

Mr.  Home  said  that  his  information  led  him  to  the  opinion  that
precisely  as  we  go  to  sleep  here  so  we  awake  in  the  other  world —
Wesleyans  were  "Wesleyans,  Swedenborgians  were  Swedenborgiaus,
Mahometans  were  Mahometans.  The  spiiit  of  a  cei-tain  pacha
who  once  appeared  was  strongly  Mahometan.

Mr.  Dyte  :  "  As  to  future  rewards  and  pimishments  ?  "

Mr.  Home  said  that  bad  spirits  see  the  continuous  results  of  the
Avrong  they  have  done,  and  in  some  cases  have  endeavoured  to  re-
pair it  by  declaring  where  concealed  papers  were.  Spirits  i-etained
or  showed  special  marks  of  identity,  scars,  &c.

The  Chairman  :  "  Suppose  a  man  dies  after  coming  out  of  prison,
will  his  hair  still  be  what  is  vulgarly  called  '  cropped  1 ' "

Mr.  Home  :  "  I  have  never  seen  a  gaol  bird.  But  when  the
Heniy  Clay  was  burnt  in  America  there  was  a  case  in  point.  I
saw  Jackson  Downing  standing  before  me  with  a  deep  scar  on  his
forehead.  I  said,  '  Jackson  Downing  is  lost  ! '  '  No,'  said  Dr.  ,
'  he  is  saved ;  he  swam  on  shore  mth  Mrs.  Downing.'  IMrs.
Downing  was  at  the  hotel,  but  she  became  uneasy  when  she  found
that  her  husband  did  not  appear.  She  said  she  had  seen  him  on
shore  after  he  swam  with  her.  It  was  then  found  that  he  had
swam  out  again  to  assist  some  one,  and  a  mast  falling  overboard
split  his  skull,  just  as  I  saw  it.  The  spirits  obey  a  law  of  progress  ;
some  do  not  appear  now  that  once  did."

The  Chairman  :  "  Do  they  always  retain  a  ghastly  wound  like
that  you  have  just  described  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  No  ;  it  is  merely  shown  as  proof  of  identity  just
as  the  blue  coat  and  brass  buttons  are  shown  in  other  cases."

Mr.  Gannon  :  "  Do  you  ever  see  the  spirits  of  persons  who  ai-e
living  1    Mr.  Yarley  speaks  of  such."

Mr.  Home  :  "  No  ;  that  pertains  to  second  sight,  quite  a  distinct
thing.    Then  I  see  the  individual  himself,  and  not  his  spirit.  A

EVIDENCE  OP  ME.  HOME.

193

deadly  tremor  comes  over  me,  and  there  is  a  film  on  my  eyes,  and
I  not  only  see  persons,  but  hear  conversations  taking  place  at  a
distance."

The  Chairman  :  "  Have  spirits  haii-,  and  eyes,  and  nose,  and  so
forth?"

Mr.  Home  :  "  Yes."

The  Chairman  :  "  Are  the  hair  and  eyes  of  the  same  material,
if  I  may  use  the  term  1"  _

Ml-.  Home  :  " I  do  not  know;  I  never  dissected  them."
The  Chairman  :  "  Ai-e  the  spiiits  male  and  female  1 "
Mr.  Home  :  "  Yes."

The  Chairman  :  "  Have  they  passions  and  affections  ?  "

Ml-.  Home  :  "  They  have."

Dr.  Roberts  :  "  Have  they  children  ? "

Ml-.  Home  :  "  I  think  not."

Mr.  Bennett  :  "  Is  the  human  form  the  usual  form  of  the  spirits  1 "
Ml-.  Home  :  "  Yes."

Ml-.  Levy  :  "  Have  you  seen  the  spirit  of  a  lower  animal — the
spii-it  of  a  dog  for  instance  ? "

Mr.  Home  :  "  No,  but  I  have  seen  something  which  might  have
been,  but  I  could  not  tell  whether  it  was  the  result  of  imagination.
In  my  opinion  there  is  another  stage  of  animal  life,  but  that  is  only
a  theory.    I  have  seen  birds."

The  Chairman  :  "  And  fishes  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "  No,  not  fishes."

The  Chairman  :  "  Have  you  seen  the  apparition  of  an  inanimate
object — such  as  an  inkstand."

Mr.  Home  :  "  No,  the  power  is  limited  to  living  things.  I  have
seen  a  flower,  it  disappeared."

The  Chairman  :  "  Then  if  there  be  an  apparition  of  a  flower,
may  there  be  one  of  a  coarser  vegetable — a  potato  for  example  1 "

Ml-.  Home  :  "  I  have  not  seen  one.  Now  I  recollect  having  seen
a  bottle  appear,  I  think  it  was  a  water-bottle."

Mr.  Home  said  that  Spiritualism  was  either  a  gigantic  imposture
or  a  matter  worthy  of  the  deepest  inquiry,  and  he  hoped  that  the

0

194

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

investigation  would  be  conducted  without  any  attempt  to  throw
ridicule  on  the  affair.  As  for  himself  he  gave  readings  for  his
living ;  he  Avas  only  a  poor  man,  and  his  only  object  was  to  place
before  the  Society  the  results  of  his  experience.

Mr.  VoLCKMAN  :  "  Have  you  effected  cures  1 "

Mr.  Home  :  "I  would  prefer  that  those  who  were  cured  should
answer  that  question."

Mrs.  Cox,  of  Jermyn-street,  was  then  called,  and  she  stated  that
she  had  seen  levitations.  She  saw  Mr.  Home  rise  gi'adually  in  the
ail-,  and  make  a  cross  on  the  ceiling  with  a  pencil.  She  saw  him
caiTied  out  into  the  garden,  as  described  by  Miss  Jones  at  a  former
meeting.  She  had  seen  a  card-table  lifted  on  to  a  table,  and  then
removed  to  a  couch,  no  person  touching  it.  That  was  at  her  own
house  in  Jermyn-street.  She  had  felt  the  spirit  form  of  her  baby,
and  could  believe  she  was  still  nursing  it  in  the  flesh.  She  cor-
roborated Mr.  Home  as  to  the  existence  of  spiiit  hands  and  foi-ms.
She  was  cured  by  a  s^Dirit  touch.  Thirteen  years  ago,  she  had  a
constant  paiu  in  her  side ;  a  spirit-hand  was  placed  on  the  spot,
and  then  went  to  Mr.  Home  for  more  power.  She  then  used  a
decoction  of  hops  by  direction  of  the  spirits,  and  she  was  completely
cured.  She  had  seen  the  accordion  played,  and  the  piano  when
locked  was  played  by  the  spirit  of  her  child.  There  was  a  very
elevated  tone  in  the  instruction  of  the  spirits,  and  she  believed  she
was  a  better  person  under  their  influence.

Signor  G.  Damiani,  then  gave  evidence  as  follows  : —

"  I  am,  comparatively,  a  novice  in  Spiritualism,  having  been
engaged,  altogether,  only  four  years  in  the  investigation  of  its
phenomena  and  the  study  of  its  literature.  I  am  not  a  medium,
nor  have  I  soiight  to  be  developed  into  one ;  b\it  I  have  come  in
contact  with  more  than  one  hundred  of  that  class  (of  whom  only
three  were  professional,  or  paid  mediums),  and  have  assisted  at
more  than  two  hundred  seances  in  England,  France,  and  Italy.  I
am  personally  acquainted  with  many  of  the  leading  spii-itualists  of
Europe,  of  Avhom  I  here  make  bold  to  say  that,  as  a  class,  they  are
certainly  not  inferior  in  intellectual  calibre  to  any  otlier  body  of

jfiVIDENCB  OP  SIGNOR  DAMIANI.  195

scientists  whom  I  have  yet  been  privileged  to  encounter.  Amongst
the  many  phenomena  which  I  might  lay  before  you,  I  will  content
myself  with  the  relation  of  a  few  only,  as  being  sufficient  to  effect-
ually dispose  of  all  the  theories  of  'unconscious  cerebration,'  'mental
aberi-ation,'  '  collective  delusion,'  and  other  woeful  epidemics,  pro-
jDOunded  by  the  advanced  philosophers  of  the  day  in.  order  to
account  for,  and  explain  away,  matters  which  even  tli&y  admit  to
be  somewhat  abnormal  in  their  nature.

"Now  for  facts.  In  the  spring  of  1865  I  was  induced  by  a
friend  to  attend  my  fii-st  seance.  This  I  remember,  took  place  at
No.  13,  Victoria  Place,  Clifton,  the  medium  being  Mrs.  Marshall.
I  had  been,  up  to  that  moment,  an  utter  sceptic  in  spiritual  matters ;
chokeful  of  positivism,  I  conceived  man  to  be  but  a  very  acute
monkey  (simia  gigantis  stupenda,  to  be  scientific),  and  recognised
in  life  only  a  brief  and  somewhat  unsatisfactory  farce.  I  was
however,  at  the  same  time  open  to  conviction, — which  perhaps
was  foolish  in  me.  I  found  assembled  at  this  seance  some  forty
gentlemen,  lawyers,  physicians,  clergymen,  and  journalists,  besides
a  fail-  sprinkling  of  ladies.  A  medical  man,  well  known  in  the
neighbom-hood  of  Bristol,  Dr.  Davey  of  Norwood,  filled  the  chair.
At  first,  I  refused  to  sit  at  the  large  table  whereat  the  manifesta-
tions were  to  take  place,  for  being  what  I  have  now  ceased  to  be,
an  unqualified  believer  in  the  candour  and  ti-uthfulness  of  the
newspaper  press,  I  made  up  my  mind  (cei'tain  journalistic  com-
ments being  fresh  in  my  recollection)  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out  upon
the  medium's  movements.  I  was  thus  occupied  (intentaque  ora
tenebat )  when  sounds  altogether  unlike  anything  in  my  expei-ience,
were  distinctly  heard  by  me  to  proceed  from  the  ceiling,  some  four
yards  as  I  should  judge,  above  the  medium.  These  sounds,
travelling  down  the  wall,  along  the  floor,  and  up  the  claws  and
pillar  of  the  large  round  table,  came  resoimding  in  its  veiy  centre.
This  ought  to  have  convinced  me  at  once  that  the  medium's  toes,  at
least,  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  phenomenon;  but  prejudiced
incredulity  is  so  strong  a  cuii-ass  against  the  sword  of  truth,  that  I
remained  still  watching  the  feet  of  the  medium  under  the  table,  aa

0  2

196

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

a  cat  does  its  prey.    Tlie  Chaiiman  was  the  first  to  commence
conversation  with  our  (supi^osed)  spiritual  visitors.    Shortly  after-
wards it  came  my  turn  to  talk  with  the  spirits.    '  Who  is  there
*  Sister,'  was  rapped  out  in  reply.    '  What  sister  V    '  Marietta.'
'  Don't  know  you  ;  that  is  not  a  family  name ; — are  you  not  mis-
taken'!'   '  No  ;  I  am  your  sister.'    This  was  too  much  :  I  left  the
table  in  disgust.    Still,  those  knocks  procceduag  from  the  ceiling
had  puzzled  me,  and  excited  my  curiosity ;  thei'efore,  when  the
company  dispersed  I  remained  behind,  to  discover,  if  I  could,  the
modus  0]}e7-andi.    I  invited  myself  (the  assurance  of  scei^tics  is
proverbial)  to  take  tea  with  Mrs.  Marshall  and  her  hostess,  after
which  I  begged  to  have  a  private  seance.    '  Now  I  shall  catch  you,'
I  thought.    Sure  enough  the  raps  came  again,  distinct  and  sonorous
as  before.    '  Who  are  you  V    '  Marietta.'    '  Again  !  Why  does  not
a  sister  whom  I  can  remember  comef    *I  will  bring  one;'  and
the  raps  were  now  heard  to  recede,  becomrag  faint  and  fainter
until  lost  in  the  distance.    In  a  few  seconds  a  double  knock,  like
the  trot  of  a  horse,  was  heard  approaching,  striking  the  ceiling,  the
floor,  and  lastly  the  table.     'Who  is  there?'     'Your  sister
Antonietta.'    '  That  is  a  good  guess,'  thought  I.    '  Where  did  you
pass  away  1 '    '  Chieti.'    '  When  1 ' — Thii-ty-foiu-  loud  distinct  raps
succeeded.     Strange — my  sister  so  named  had  certainly  died  at
Chieti  just  thii-ty-four  years  before.    '  tfow  many  brothers  and
sisters  had  you  then  1  Can  you  give  me  theii-  names  1 '  Five  names
(the  real  ones)  all  correctly  spelt  in  Italian  were  given.  Numerous
other  tests  produced  equally  remarkable  results.    I  then  felt  I  was
in  the  presence  of  my  sister.

" '  If  that  is  not  in  truth  my  sister,'  I  thought,  '  then  there  exists
in  nattire  something  more  wondrous  and  mysterious  even  than  the
soul  and  its  immortality.'  What  had  taken  place  at  this,  my  fii'st
seance,  produced  such  an  effect  upon  my  mind  that  I  determined
to  continue  the  investigation  until  I  could  come  finally  to  a
rational  conclusion  upon  the  subject.  During  the  fortnight  of
Mrs.  Marshall's  stay  in  Clifton,  I  frequented  the  seances  daily,
and  on  an  average  for  four  hours  a  day.    Spirit  after  spirit  I

EVIDENCE  OF  SIGNOE  DAMIANI.

197

evoked,  wlio  one  and  all  established  tlieu-  identity  tLrongli  the
most  searching  tests.  Having  been  thus  uniformly  successful,  I
felt  somewhat  pei-plexed  about  Marietta.  Had  I  been  mystified
in  her  case,  and  in  hers  alone  ?  Filially,  I  wrote  to  my  mother,
then  living  in  Sicily,  inquiring  whether,  among  the  nine  children
she  had  borne  and  bui'ied,  there  had  been  one  named  Marietta.
By  return  of  post,  my  brother,  Joseph  Damiani,  architect,  now
residing  at  Palermo,  wrote  as  follows : — '  In  reply  to  yonr  inquiiy,
mother  wishes  me  to  tell  you  that  on  October  2nd,  1821,  she  gave
birth,  at  the  town  of  Messina,  to  a  female  child,  who  came  into
the  world  in  so  weakly  a  condition,  that  the  midwife,  using  her
prerogative  in  such  emergencies,  gave  her  baptism.  Six  hours
after  bii-th  the  child  died,  when  the  midwife  disclosed  the  fact  of
her  having  baptised  the  infant  under  the  name  of  Maria  (the
endearing  diminutive  of  which  is  Marietta).  The  bii-th  and  death
of  this  sister  I  have  verified  by  reference  to  the  family  register.'
You  must  admit,  gentlemen,  that  in  the  above  case  '  unconscious
cerebration  '  has  not  one  leg  to  stand  upon.

"  To  proceed  with  my  testimony.  I  have  been  present  at  seances
when  a  sheet  of  blank  paper  and  a  pencil  have  been  placed  under
the  table,  and  a  few  seconds  afterwards,  these  things  being  picked
up,  sentences  have  been  found  written  on  the  jjaper.  How  do  I
know  that  it  was  not  the  medium's  toes  did  this  1  you  may  ask.
"Well,  I  can  only  reply  that  in  such  case  the  medium  must  indeed
have  possessed  most  extraordinary  toes.

"Whilst  in  Sicily,  quite  recently,  a  most  telling  poem,  two
huncbed  lines  long,  in  the  Sicilian  dialect,  besides  communications
in  German,  French,  Latin,  and  English,  have  been  received  in  my
presence,  the  medium  in  this  case  being  a  singularly  illiterate
person  of  the  ai"tisan  class.

"  I  have  met  in  Clifton  with  a  boy  medium,  between  ten  and
eleven  years  of  age,  who  woidd  write  long  essays  on  spii-itual
philosophy  the  matter  and  maimer  of  these  essays  being  such  as
would  have  been  accepted  from  any  accomplished  writer  of  mature
age  who  was  conversant  with  the  subject.    I  took  the  well-known

198

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

Alessandro  Gavazzi  to  a  seance  witli  this  youthful  medium.  Tlie
acute  23olcmist  put  various  abstruse  metaphysical  and  theological
questions  to  the  medium,  or  rather  to  the  medium's  controlling
spirit,  and  received  replies  so  deep  and  learned  as  to  convince  him
that  it  vas  no  mere  case  of  '  clever  boy.'  This  young  medium —
whose  writings  now  extant  would  fill  a  dozen  volumes — exhibited
a  different  handwriting  for  every  controlling  spirit  by  whom
he  was  dii-ected,  and  wrote  occasionally  in  several  of  the  dead
languages.

"  I  know  another  medium,  aged  fifteen,  also  resident  at  Clifton,
who,  when  under  spirit  influence,  will  give  answers  written  in
rhyme,  so  exceeding  good,  both  as  to  matter  and  style,  as  to
preclude  any  possible  question  in  the  minds  of  those  who  know
him  as  to  their  being  his  own  unassisted  composition.

"  While  in  Paris  a  few  weeks  ago,  I  was  at  several  seances  with
the  '  healing  medium,'  Jacob,  the  ex-Zouave.  I  have  seen  patients
who  entered  the  room  upon  cmtches,  walk  out  of  it  perfectly
ciu-ed.  On  touching  his  patients,  Jacob  invaribly  enumerates  (to
their  great  amazement)  all  the  drugs  they  have  been  taking.
'  Vous  vous  etes  fait  em2)oissoner  avec  de  V opium  et  de  Vaconite,  et
vous  vous  etes  nourri  de  2^orc  sake  et  de  viandes  saignantes,'  I
heard  him  say  on  one  occasion.  '  Oui,  momieur,'  the  sufi["erer
ejaculated.  '  Tesez  vous,  je  ri  ai  j)cis  besoin  que  vous  me  le  dites,
puisqueje  le  sens,'  was  the  curt  rejoinder.

"  When  present  at  seances,  I  have  heard  instraments  sounding
and  playing  in  good  time  and  with  correct  enhannonic  accompani-
ments, whilst,  to  my  own  knowledge,  no  one  in  the  room,  with
the  exception  of  myself,  knew  anything  about  music,  and  it  cer-
tainly was  not  /  that  played  on  these  occasions.

"  I  have  heard  noises,  as  of  sledge-hammers,  on  the  walls  of  a
private  house  in  Clifton,  making  the  whole  building  shake  to  its
foundations.  The  sound  of  footsteps  moving  about  from  one  part
of  the  room  to  another,  I  have  repeatedly  heard  in  open  daylight,
upon  occasions  when  no  one  was  present  in  the  room  with  me,
except  a  seated  medium.    I  have  seen  a  heavy  tabL-  rise  bodily

EVIDENCE  OP  SIGNOE  DAMIANI.

£i-om  the  floor  -when  only  the  medium's  fingers  and  my  own  were
resting  lightly  on  'it,  and  rising  in  such  a  manner,  and  to  such  a
height,  as  to  render  toe  leverage  a  matter  of  i^hysical  imiDossibility.
I  have  often,  when  seated,  been  shifted,  together  with,  the  chair  on
which  I  have  been  sitting,  a  foot  or  more  from  the  table  during  a
seaiice.

"  I  have  seen  a  lady  raised  in  her  chair  at  least  a  clear  foot
from  the  gi-ound,  and  sustained  in  that  position  for  several  seconds,
whilst  no  hands  were  touching  her  or  her  chair — the  medium,
moreover,  being  a  considerable  distance  off.

"  I  have  frequently  held  spirit  hands  (at  all  events,  hands  not
attached  to  any  coiTesponding  body)  in  my  grasp.  The  touch  of
these  hands  differed  so  much  from  that  of  human  hands,  that  I  can
bring  nothing  like  analogy  or  comparison  to  bear  upon  it.  They
were  not  so  warm  as  human  hands,  and  ordinarily  (though  not  in-
variably) were  softer  in  texture.  Their  contact  has  generally  sent
a  thrUl  through  my  frame,  somewhat  resembling  a  slight  electric
shock.  These  hands  would  melt  away  and  dissolve  in  mine.  I
have  often  seen  the  hands.  They  are  generally  beautiful  in  form,
with  tapering  fingers,  such  as  those  Canova  gives  to  his  ideal
nymphs  and  goddesses.  Sometimes  they  present  a  whitish  and
opaque  appearance,  at  other  times  I  have  seen  them  pink  and
transparent.

"  I  have  assisted  at  several  seances  with  the  Davenport  Brothers
—those  men  of  aU  Kving  (except,  perhaps,  Daniel  D.  Home)  the
best  abiised.  On  their  last  visit  to  England  in  1868,  I  happened  to
be  selected  as  one  of  the  persons,  who  were  to  tie  them  to  theii-
seats  in  that  well  known  cabinet  of  theirs.  Immediately  after  they
were  thus  secm-ed,  five  pink  transparent  hands  appeared  ranged
perpendicularly  behind  the  door.  Subsequently  I  placed  my  hand  in
the  small  window  of  the  cabinet,  when  I  felt  each  of  my  five  digits
tightly  grasped  by  a  distinct  hand,  and  while  my  own  was  thus
held  down,  five  or  sis  other  hands  protruded  from  the  hole  above
my  wrist.  On  withdrawing  my  hand  from  the  aperture,  an  arm
came  out  therefrom— an  arm  of  such  enormous  proportions  that,

200

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

had  it  been  composed  of  flesh  and  bone,  it  would,  I  verily  believe,
have  turned  the  scale  (bemg  weighed)  against  the  whole  coi-poreal
substance  of  the  smaller  Davenport.  At  the  sea/nce  I  have  just  men-
tioned, there  were  present,  amongst  others,  Mr.  Goolden  Pemn,  of
Westmoreland  Place,  Camberwell;  Mr.  Bobert  Cooper,  of  The  Ter-
race, Eastbourne,  Sussex;  also  a  celebrated  mesmeric  doctor,  whose
name  has  for  the  moment  escaped  my  recollection.

"I  have  assisted  at  seances  where,  the  windows  being  closed  and
the  doors  locked, /res/i  flowers  have  been  showered  on  the  company
just  previously  to  their  departure.  It  was  at  Baron  Guldenstubbe's,
in  London,  in  the  year  1867,  that  I  first  remember  having  mtnessed
this.  The  flowers  would  have  filled  a  large  basket,  and  the  factof  their
hemg  perfectly  fresh  and  besprinkled  with  dew— the  medium,  Mrs.
Guppy,  nee  Nichol,  having  been  with  us  continuously  for  at  least
two  hours  before  the  seance  commenced— in  itself,  and  apart  from
tJie  lady's  great  respectability,  precludes  any,  the  faintest,  suspicion
of  '  crinoline  mystification,'  or  sleight  of  hand.    I  must  not  omit
mentioning  that,  on  examining  the  flowers,  some  of  which  stiU  re-
main in  my  possession,  we  perceived  that  the  ends  of  the  stems
presented  a  blackened  and  biirnt  appearance.    On  our  asking  the
invisible  intelligences  the  reason  of  this,  we  were  told  that  electri-
city had  been  the  potent  '  nipper  '  employed.

"In  the  year  1866,  at  a  dark  seance  held  at  the  Spii-itual
Lyceum  in  London,  I  distinctly  saw  Miss  Nichol  raised  on  her
chair  from  the  ground  by  some  unseen  agency,  and  placed  on  the
table  round  which  I  and  many  others  were  sitting.  A  gap  in  a
folding  door,  through  which  the  light  flickered,  enabled  me  from
■where  I  sat  to  distinctly  see  her  carried  aloft  through  the  air  with

extreme  swiftness.

"  Another  interesting  series  of  phenomena  coming  under  my
personal  observation  has  been  the  '  voice  seances;  whereat  I  have
heard  and  conversed  with  spirit  voices.  Having  attended  at
several  of  these  seances  with  different  mediums,  and  in  the  presence
of  numerous  investigators,  I  have  for  hours  together  conversed  with
which  could  n^t  on  either  of  these  occasions  have  proceeded

voices

EVIDENCE  OP  SIGNOE  DAMIANI.  201

from  any  living  person  in  the  room  wherein,  for  the  time  being,
■we  were  assembled.  The  voices  vary  in  pitch,  from  the  firm,
vigorous,  declamatory  tone  of  the  stage  to  the  most  shadowy  whis-
per. How  could  I  be  certain,  it  may  be  asked,  that  this  was  not
ventriloquism  1  I  will  give  my  reasons  for  the  faith  that  is  in  me
in  this  behalf  seriatim  : —

"  1st. — Because  three  of  these  voice  mediums  are  personal
acquaintances  of  my  own,  move  in  respectable  society,  and  ninning
imminent  risk  of  detection,  would  have  all  to  lose  and  nothing  to
gain  by  the  stupid  trick  of  imitating  '  sperrits.'

"  2nd. — Because  the  voices  that  have  greeted  me  at  the  houses
of  these  unpaid  mediums  have  also  subsequently  conversed  with
me  at  private  seances  at  Mrs.  Marshall's  and  have  there  exhibited
the  same  peculiarities  as  to  tone,  expression,  pitch,  volume  and  pro-
nimciation,  as  upon  the  former  occasions.

"  3rd — Because  these  voices  have  conversed  with  me  upon  mat-
ters known  to  me  alone,  and  of  a  nature  so  personal  and  private
that  I  am  perfectly  certain  that  no  one  present  at  any  of  the
sea-nces  except  myself  could  by  any  possibility  have  been  cognisant
of  them.

"  4th. — Because  the  voices  have  often  foretold  events  about  to
happen,  which  events  have  invariably  come  to  pass.

"  These  dark  seances  of  which  I  have  spoken,  generally  ended
with  the  appearance  of  blue  or  red  lights  over  the  spectators'
heads,  and  with  the  copious  sprinkling  of  delicious  perfumes.  '  On
me,  even  on  me,  who  now  speak,  descended  violet  odoui-s.'

"  A  few  more  facts  and  I  have  done.  On  Wednesday,  June  23rd,
1869,  having  accidentaHy  met  with  Mr.  Gardner  (a  spii'itualist,  and
contributor  to  a  spiritual  magazine  called  '  Human  Nature,')  he
proposed  introducing  me  to  a  trance  medium,  Mr.  F.  Heme,  of
Great  Coram  Street,  Russell  Square.  I  assenting,  we  went  there
together,  and  having  been  left  alone  with  the  medium,  I  had  a  tete-
cl-tete  seance  with  him.  Mr.  Heme  fell  into  a  trance,  and  whilst  in
this  state  five  voices  spoke  through  him  to  me.  Three  of  these
were  unknown  to  me,  but  the  other  two  I  recognized  immediately,

I

202

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

as  if  tliey  had  spoken  to  me  in  the  flesh.  One  of  them  was  the
voice  of  the  clearest  friend  and  relation  I  ever  possessed.  She
spoke  to  me  of  family  matters,  so  intimate  and,  I  may  say,  sacred
in  their  character,  that  the  supposition  that  Mr.  Heme  (a  man  I
had  never  even  seen  before)  or  anybody  else,  could  by  any  possi-
bility have  known  of  them,  would  be  an  insult  to  my  common  sense
to  entertain  for  one  moment.  On  awakening  from  the  trance,  Mr.
Heme  complained  of  great  pain  in  his  back,  and  observed  that
the  spirit  who  had  just  quitted  him  must  have  so  suffered  during
life.  This  was  perfectly  tme ;  the  dear  friend  to  whom  (I  am
firmly  assured)  I  had  even  then  been  speaking,  did,  from  the  cradle
to  the  grave,  suffer  acute  pain  in  the  three  upper  vertebrae  of  her
spinal  column.

"  I  know  a  lady  in  Bristol  who  was  so  shoi-t-sighted  that  even
with  powerful  glasses,  she  had  great  difiiculty  in  reading  the
largest  print.  Four  years  ago,  she  (having  then  developed  into  a
writing  medium)  was  impelled,  as  she  says,  by  her  mother's  spii-it,
to  write  to  this  effect,  '  Discard  spectacles,  have  faith,  and  you  will
soon  recover  your  sight.'  She  did  so,  and  the  effect  followed
almost  immediately.  I  have  seen  her  frequently  since  engaged,  by
candle-light,  in  delicate  and  minute  embroidery.  This  same  lady
had  her  front  upper  teeth  nearly  foi-ty-five  degi'ees  out  of  the
perpendicular.  In  the  coiu-se  of  a  few  days  after  receiving  a
message  purporting  to  come  from  the  same  spii-it,  her  teeth  became
perfectly  straight,  without  the  intervention  of  a  dentist.  I  have
begged  this  lady  to  allow  me  to  use  her  name' in  connection  with
these  facts,  but  she  has  objected,  assigning  as  a  reason  the  ridi-
culous nature  of  the  last  phenomenon.  I  will  not  be  so  ungallant
as  to  disobey  her,  but  I  will  give  the  names  of  two  or  three  gentle-
men who  ai-e,  like  myself,  pereonally  cognisant  of  the  facts  I  have
above  narrated  : — I  will  mention  Messrs.  Watson,  Blackwcll,  and
John  Seattle,  all  of  Bristol  or  Clifton.

"These  facts  are  only  a  handful  compared  with  those  which  I  have
experienced  during  four  years  of  persistent  investigation.  After
such  evidence,  brought  home  to  me  in  so  extraordinary  a  mamier,

EVIDENCE  OF  SIGNOR  DAMIANI.

203

I  should  desei've  to  fall  from  man's  estate  and  dwindle  into  '  siinia
gigantis  fannosa,'  nay  into  'gorilla  lilipiitiana  shqndissima,^  if  I
still  allowed  a  doubt  to  enter  my  mind  as  to  the  causes  producing
these  effects.  With  regard  to  the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism — a
new  philosophy  indeed,  but  boasting  a  vast  polyglot  literature
■which  for  profundity  and  variety  of  thought  has  no  parallel — I  '
would  refer  the  Committee  to  the  list  of  books  supplied  to  them  by
Mr.  William  Howitt.

"  I  would  earnestly  entreat  of  the  Committtee,  to  become  as  much
as  possible  acquainted  with  the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism,  before
compiling  and  publishing  their  report.  As  to  those  fatally  clever
men  who,  approaching  the  subject  with  a  jaunty  indifference,
after  half  an  hour's  examination  pronounce  it  'a  delusion,'
and  denounce  those  who  believe  in  it  as  '  credulous,' — let  me  re-
mind these  gentlemen  that  the  worst  form  of  credulity  is  a  per-
sistent belief  in  the  non-existence  of  things  which  do  exist.  In  aU
their  diatribes  and  philippics  against  Spiiitualism,  these  persons
have,  in  sooth,  themselves  shown  an  amount  of  credulity  painful
to  consider."

Signor  Damiani  then,  in  answer  to  a  series  of  questions,  said
that  he  had  learned  from  the  spirits  that  there  was  no  distinction
of  rank  in  the  other  world.  It  was  a  regular  republic — a  demo-
cracy. The  longer  we  lived  here  the  riper  were  we  for  the  next ;
and  after  we  left  the  body  we  began  to  progi-ess  for  ever.  Bad  men
have  to  go  through  an  atonement,  suffering  mentally  and  repent-
ing, but  there  was  no  physical  suffering.  The  spirits  were  them-
selves studying  the  question  of  the  Deity,  In  the  next  life  painters
wiU  paint,  sculptors  wiU  make  statues.  They  would  not  fashion
the  spirit  of  marble,  but  (as  he  undei-stood)  spirit  marble.  He
had  not  seen  spirit-horses,  but  he  had  heard  of  them.  Dogs  were
immortal  as  well  as  men.  No  created  living  forms  ever  perished
— not  even  trees.

Mr.  "volckman:   "As  spu-its  eat,  is  there  ever  starvation
amongst  them  1 "

Signor  Damiaki  :  "  Everything  is  there  so  ordered  that  it  is  im-

20-i  MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

possible — or  it  is  not  like  the  disorder  here.  I  have  had  spirit
hands  placed  in  my  own.  They  differ  from  ours  in  not  being  so
warm,  but  some  are  beautiful — pink — transparent.  A  man  is
much  more  beautiful  in  the  spirit.  The  lady  I  spoke  of  in  Clifton, —
whose  teeth  came  out  almost  horizontally, — could  not  close  her  lips;
yet  the  spirits  ia  the  course  of  a  single  night  put  them  straight  and
rendered  them  more  beautiful  in  substance.  That  fact  is  known  to
several,  and  I  can  give  the  secretaiy  the  name  in  confidence."

Mr.  Meyers  :  "  Are  there  any  wicked  spirits'! "

Signer  Damiani  :  "  Yes,  and  lying  spirits.  I  know  a  remark-
able case  in  point  connected  with  Dr.  Livingstone.  You  will
remember  that  for  a  period  of  some  two  years  it  was  supposed  that
Dr.  Livingstone  was  dead.  I  went  to  a  seance  at  Mi"s.  Marshall's
and  I  asked,  'Is  the  spirit  of  Dr.  Livingstone  here"?'  A  spirit
answered,  '  Yes,  I  am  Dr.  Livingstone  ! '  I  then  asked  him  how
he  had  been  killed,  and  he  related  all  the  particulars.  He  said
that  a  native  had  crept  up  behind  him,  and  given  him  a  blow  of  a
club  on  the  back  of  the  head,  and  killed  him  outright  at  once.  I
asked  what  happened  then,  and  the  spirit  said  that  the  savages
boiled  his  body  and  ate  it.  I  said,  '  That  was  horrible  !  You  must
have  been  greatly  horrified  by  your  body  being  boiled  and  eaten.'
He  said,  '  No  ;  I  was  not  horrified  at  it,  for  we  must  all  be  eaten.'
"Well,  as  you  may  imagine,  I  was  greatly  struck  by  this.  I  wrote
out  an  account  of  Livingstone's  death,  and  of  his  body  being  boiled
and  eaten,  and  I  enclosed  it  in  a  paper,  and  gave  it  to  a  gentleman,
with  injunctions  that  he  should  keep  it,  and  only  open  it  when  I
should  tell  him,  on  the  discovery  of  the  fact  of  the  doctor's  fate.
But  we  all  know  that  Livingstone  was  not  killed  at  all,  and  that
the  spii-it  was  simply  lying-"

The  Chairman  :  "  How  can  you  distinguish  between  a  medium
who  is  an  impostor  and  a  spii-it  that  is  a  liar  1 "

Signer  Damiani  :  "  You  cannot  distinguish,  but  in  that  case  it
was  the  spu-it  that  was  lying.  Mrs.  Marshall  would  have  had  no
object  in  telling  me  an  absurd  stoiy  about  Livingstone  being
killed  and  boUed  and  eaten.    And  the  explanation  the  spiiits  gave

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  GLOVEE.

205

^ras  this— 'You  came  here,'  they  said,  'out  of  curiosity,  and  you
found  an  impertinent  sjiii-it,  who  amused  himself  at  your  expense.'
It  was  simply  the  trick  of  a  ragamuffin  spirit."

Mr.  Glover  then  described  various  phenomena  which  he  had
witnessed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home.    He  had  seen  an  accordion
played,  a  table  made  so  light  that  it  could  be  lifted  without  effort,
and  then  made  so  heavy  that  lifting  was  impossible,  &c.    His  arm
was  banged  so  furiously  on  the  table  that  it  ached.    He  took  up  a
pencil,  and  the  spii-it  wrote  the  name  of  his  grandfather.    He  also
wi-ote  a  verse  of  a  hymn  to  God,  to  the  time  of  '  God  save  the
Prince  of  Wales.'    Once,  when  the  air  of  'The  Last  Rose  of
Summer '  was  being  played,  he  said  that  he  thought  the  spirits  ought
not  to  play  a  profane  aii-,  and  immediately  a  most  magnificent  hymn
time,  which  he  had  never  heard  before,  was  played.    He  had  made
a  study  of  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  he  was  in-
formed that  the  Lord  would  come  in  August.    The  spii-its  also
pointed  to  texts  in  the  Bibje.    He  made  a  cross  in  a  circle,  and
asked,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  if  the
communications  were  of  God,  and  the  answer  was  'No\'    He  then
asked  if  they  were  of  the  devU,  and  the  answer  was,  '  Yes  ! '  He
beHeved  Satan  did  it  aU  to  deceive  men."

Mr.  Coleman  :  « If  SpiiitiiaKsm  brings  sceptics  to  believe  in  a
hereafter,  would  you  still  think  it  to  be  demoniacal  1 "

Mr.  Glover  :  "  Yes.  For  the  object  of  the  devil  is  to  get  you
to  deny  the  Atonement.  The  teaching  is  contrary  to  the  Gospel,
and  therefore  it  must  be  from  Satan."

Mr.  Levy  then  drew  the  attention  of  the  Committee  to  three
propositions  contained  in  Mr.  Varley's  letter  to  the  "  Eastern
Post,"  and  said  that  the  spiidtualists  might  usefully  address  them-
selves to  the  possibility  of  establisliing  them.  The  propositions
vrere  briefly— 1st,  that  those  who  have  died  still  exist,  and  can
make  themselves  manifest  to  those  on  earth;  2nd,  that  the  next
stage  of  existence  is  one  of  progress ;  and  3rd,  that  in  the  next
worid  a  man  is  unable  to  conceal  his  true  nature.
The  meeting  was  then  adjourned.

206

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

TuKSDAY,  29x11  June,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmimds.
TTiis  being  simply  a  business  meeting,  no  evidence  wliatever
was  received.

Tuesday,  Gth  July,  18G9.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.

The  acting  Honorary  Seci-etary,  Mr.  I.  L.  Meyers,  read  the  fol-
lowing paper  from  the  Master  of  Lindsay  : —

"  I  first  met  Mr.  Home  at  the  house  of  a  friend  of  Hs  and

mine,  Mrs.  G  ;  and  when  we  left  the  party,  I  asked  Mm  to

come  into  my  rooms,  ui  Grosvenor  Square,  to  smoke  a  cigar,  &c.
As  he  came  iato  the  room  I  heai-d  a  shower  of  raps  run  along  a
beam  that  crosses  the  ceiling.  It  sounded  Hke  the  feet  of  a  flock
of  sheep  beLag  driven  over  boards.  This  was  the  first  thing  of
the  sort  I  had  ever  heard  and,  naturally,  I  was  interested  and
wished  for  more,  but  in  vain ;  nothiirg  more  happened,  and  soon
he  went  away.

"  On  the  Sunday  after,  I  was  asked  by  Mr.  Jencken  to  come  to
his  house  in  Norwood  to  dine,  and  after  to  have  a  seance.  I  went,
and  while  we  were  at  dinner,  in  the  full  day-light,  a  chair  came  up
to  the  table  with  a  rush,  from  about  twelve  feet  distance.  Home
was  very  much  startled  by  this,  and  he  was  so  much  discomposed
that  he  had  to  leave  the  room.  On  his  return,  and  during  his  ab-
sence, we  heard  faint  raps.  We  went  on  eating  our  dinner,  when
suddenly  the  table  began  to  vibrate "  strongly,  and  then  suddenly
rose  Lu  the  air  till  the  top  of  the  table  became  level  with  my  nose
as  I  sat.  I  should  think  that  would  give  an  elevation  of  foui-teen
or  fifteen  iuches.  It  remained  suspended  for  about  thirty  seconds,
and  slowly  sank.  The  table  is,  I  think,  mahogany,  and  about
four  feet  square.  During  the  whole  time  there  were  knocks  in
all  pai-ts  of  the  room.

"  Another  time,  at  Mr.  Jencken's  house,  I  saw  a  crystal  ball,
placed  on  Mr.  Home's  head,  emit  flashes  of  coloured  light,  follow-
ing the  order  of  the  spectrum.    The^crystal  was  spherical,  so  that

EVIDENCE  OF  THE  MASTER  OP  LINDSAY.  207

it  could  not  have  given  prismatic  colours.    After  this  it  changed,
and  we  all  saw  a  view  of  the  sea,  as  if  we  were  looking  down  at
it  from  the  top  of  a  high  cliff.    It  seemed  to  be  the  evening  as
the  sun  was  setting  like  a  globe  of  fire,  lighting  up  a  broad  path  over
the  Httle  waves.    The  moon  was  faintly  visible  in  the  south,  and
as  the  sun  set,  her  power  increased.   We  saw  also  a  few  stars and
suddenly  the  whole  thing  vanished,  like  shutting  the  sHde'of  a
magic  lantern ;  and  the  crystal  was  dead.    This  whole  appearance
lasted  about  ten  minutes  and  pleased  us  very  much,  both  on  account
of  the  cui-ious  nature  of  the  vision,  if  it  may  be  called  such,  and
from  the  really  beautiful  effects  of  light,  &c.,  that  we  had  seen.

"There  were  two  candles  and  a  bright  fire  burning  in  the  room.
We  noticed  that  the  flame  of  these  candles  was  depressed  occasion-
ally as  if  some  gas  had  been  poured  over  them,  and  again  at  other
times  they  would  gain  in  brilliancy.

"  I  saw  a  gi-and  pianoforte  raised  in  the  air  about  foiu-  inches,
without  any  noise;  and  subsequently  the  notes  were  strack,'
although  it  was  locked  and  the  key  taken  away.

"  On  another  occasion  I  saw  Mr.  Home,  in  a  trance,  elongated
eleven  inches.    I  measured  him  standing  up  against  the  waU,  and
marked  the  place;  not  being  satisfied  with  that,  I  put  him  in  the*
midcUe  of  the  room  and  placed  a  candle  in  front  of  him,  so  as  to
throw  a  shadow  on  the  wall,  which  I  also  marked.    When  ho
awoke  I  measured  him  again  in  his  natural  size,  both  dii-ectly  and
by  the  shadow,  and  the  results  were  equal.    I  can  swear  that  he
was  not  off  the  ground  or  standing  on  tiptoe,  as  I  had  full  view  of
liis  feet,  and  moreover,  a  gentleman  present  had  one  of  his  feet
placed  over  Home's  insteps,  one  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  the
other  on  his  side  where  the  false  ribs  come  near  the  hip-bone.

"  That  evening  I  missed  the  last  train  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  and
Had  to  stay  at  Norwood,  and  I  got  a  shakedown  on  a  sofa  in
Home's  room.  I  was  just  going  to  sleep,  when  I  was  roused  by
feelmg  my  pillow  sHpping  from  under  my  head  ;  and  I  could  also
feel,  what  seemed  to  be  a  fist,  or  hand,  under  it,  which  was  pulling
It  away  ;  soon  after  it  ceased.    Then  I  saw  at  the  foot  of  my  sofa,

208

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

a  female  figure,  standing  en  profile  to  me.  I  asked  Home  if  he  saw
anytliing,  and  he  answered,  '  a  woman,  looking  at  me.'  Our  beds
were  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  about  twelve  feet  apart.  I
saw  the  features  perfectly,  and  impressed  them  upon  my  memory.
She  seemed  to  be  dressed  in  a  long  wrap,  going  down  from  the
shoulders,  and  not  gathered  in  at  the  waist.  Home  then  said,  '  it
is  my  wife  j  she  often  comes  to  me.'  And  then  she  seemed  to  fade
away.  Shortly  after,  I  saw  on  my  knee  a  flame  of  fire  about
nine  inches  high ;  I  passed  my  hand  through  it,  but  it  burnt  on,
.above  and  below  it.  Home  turned  in  his  bed,  and  I  looked  at
him,  and  saw  that  his  eyes  were  glowing  with  light.  It  had  a
most  disagreeable  appearance.  The  only  time  since  that  I  have
seen  that  occur,  a  lady  was  very  much  frightened  by  it ;  indeed,  I
felt  uncomfortable  myself  at  it.  The  fiame  which  had  been
flitting  about  me,  now  left  me,  and  crossed  the  room  about  foiir
feet  from  the  ground,  and  reached  the  cui'tains  of  Home's  bed ;
these  proved  no  obsti'uction,  for  the  light  went  right  through  them,
settled  on  his  head,  and  then  went  out ;  and  then  we  went  to
sleep.  There  were  no  shutters,  blinds,  or  curtains  over  the
windows  ;  and  there  was  snow  on  the  ground,  and  a  bright  moon.
It  was  as  lovely  a  night  as  ever  I  saw.  I  have  several  times  since
seen  Mr.  Home  elongated,  but  never,  I  think,  to  such  an  extent  as
that  night.  The  next  morning,  before  I  went  to  London,  I  was
looking  at  some  photogi'aphs,  and  I  I'ecognized  the  face  I  had  seen
in  the  room  upstaii'S  overnight.  I  asked  Mrs.  J encken  who  it  was,
and  she  said  it  was  Home's  wife.  I  have  frequently  seen  Home,
when  in  a  trance,  go  to  the  fii'e  and  take  out  large  red-hot  coals,
and  carry  them  about  ia  his  hands,  put  them  inside  his  shirt,  &c.
Eight  times,  I  myself  have  held  a  red-hot  coal  in  my  hands  without
injury,  when  it  scorched  my  face  on  raising  my  hand.  Once,  I
wished  to  see  if  they  really  would  burn,  and  I  said  so,  and  touched
a  coal  with  the  middle  finger  of  my  right  hand,  and  I  got  a  blister
as  large  as  a  sixpence ;  I  instantly  asked  him  to  give  me  the  coal,
and  I  held  the  part  that  burnt  me,  ia  the  middle  of  my  hand,  for
three  or  four  minutes,  without  the  least  inconvenience.

EVIDENCE  OF  MISS  DOUGLASS.

209

"A  few  weeks  ago,  I  was  at  a  seance  with  eight  others.  Of
these,  seven  held  a  red-hot  coal  without  pain,  and  the  two  others
could  not  bear  the  approach  of  it ;  of  the  seven,  four  were  ladies.
That  same  evening,  Home  went  to  the  piano  and  began  playing
upon  it.  He  caUed  to  us  to  come  and  stand  round  him  and  it.  I
was  next  to  him.  I  had  one  hand  on  his  chair,  and  the  other  on
the  piano  ;  and  while  he  played,  both  his  chair  and  the  piano  rose
about  three  inches  and  then  settled  down  again.

« I  have  not  offered  any  theory  to  account  for  these  phenomena,
as  I  believe  the  Committee  only  wish  to  be  furnished  with  facts
which  have  come  under  my  personal  notice."

In  reply  to  Dr.  Edmunds,  Mrs.  Honywood  said  she  had  never
seen  Home  give  a  live  coal  to  anyone.  He  had  in  her  presence
carried  one  in  a  hand  bell,  and  had  then  placed  the  coal  upon  Ms
hand  on  a  piece  of  paper.  He  afterwards  handed  it  to  Mrs.  HaU
and  another  lady ;  the  paper  was  not  injmed  in  any  way.

Miss  Douglass,  the  next  witness,  corroborated  the  statement  of  the
Master  of  Lindsay.  She  also  had  seen  the  eloogations  and  the  hand-
ling of  Kve  coals ;  this  was  at  Mr.  Home's  own  house  at  Ashley  Place.

Mr.  SwEPSTOifE  :  "  In  reference  to  the  elongations,  how  could
you  be  certain  that  Mr.  Home  was  not  standing  on  tiptoe  ?  "

Miss  Douglass  :  "  He  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room  where
all  could  see."

Captain  Webbee  :  "  From  what  part  of  the  body  did  the  elonga-
tions take  place  ?  "

Miss  Douglass  :  "  I  cannot  tell  you."

Dr.  KiJTG  Chambers  (physician  to  the  Prince  of  Wales):
"  "Were  the  clothes  elongated  as  well  as  the  body  ?  "

A  gentleman  said  a  space  was  visible  between  the  waistcoat  and
trousers.

Miss  Douglass  continued:  "Mr.  Home  held  the  hot  coals  a
long  time  in  his  hand,  till  they  were  nearly  black.  He  then  placed
them  between  his  shirt  and  coat,  and  they  did  not  singe  either.  I
then  touched  them,  at  first  they  scorched  me,  but  immediately
after,  they  felt  cold  like  marble."

P

210

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

In.  answer  to  Mr.  "Wallace,  Miss  Douglass  said  she  had  no  pre-
paration on  her  hands  when  she  touched  the  coals.

Mr.  Eowcroffc  next  gave  evidence ;  he  said  he  had  seen  a  hand
playing  upon  an  accordion  and  apparently  suspended  in  space.
This  was  at  Mr.  Jones's  house,  where  he  met  Mr.  Home,  Mr.
Jones,  with  himself,  a  friend  and  Mr.  Home  sat  at  a  table,  and  in
ten  minutes  raps  came.    The  raps  were  to  the  effect  that  witness
was  a  medium,  and  that  if  he  remained  that  night  "they"  would
develope  his  power  for  him.    The  initials  A.  E.  E.,  were  then
given,  and  on  further  questioning  the  spirits,  the  name  Albert
Edward  Eowcroffc  was  given  in  full.    Mr.  Home  then  held  the
accordion,  and  it  played  most  beautiful  music.    When  the  music
ceased,  the  accordion  left  Mr.  Home's  hand  and  came  under  the
table.    I  said,  "I  see  a  hand;"  the  instrument  then  went  round
the  table  and  came  back  to  Mr.  Home.    Witness  considers  the
agency  on  this  occasion  was  spiritual,  since  no  one  present  could
have  produced  the  phenomenon.    He  continued :  "  That  was  the
first  seance  I  had  ever  witnessed,  but  I  have  since  had  some
further  experience,  and  with  regard  to  messages  conveying  informa-
tion, I  may  say  I  have  a  sister  who  was  coming  from  America ;
I  did  not  know  when  she  would  come,  but  I  asked  the  table  and
the  answer  was,  the  first  week  in  July ;  at  the  time  I  asked  the
table,  she  had  not  then  started ;  the  prediction  was  quite  true."

In  answer  to  Mr.  Grannon,  witness  said  he  knew  July  was  a
favourable  month  for  crossing  the  Atlantic.

Mr.*  Wallace:  "With  reference  to  the  accordion,  was  there
sufficient  light  to  enable  you  to  see  clearly  ?  "

Mr.  EowcEOFT :  "Thei'e  was  plenty  of  light;  six  gas  burners
were  lighted.  I  saw  the  hand  for  about  a  minute  ;  it  accompanied
the  instrument  round  the  chairs.  I  was  the  only  person  who  saw
the  phenomenon,  and  there  were  nine  persons  present.  When
Mr.  Home  held  the  accordion,  I  saw  it  open  and  shut,  and  he
frequently  exclaimed,  '  they  are  pulling,'  and  he  was  obliged  to
exert  considerable  force  against  the  unseen  player.  Mr.  Home's  dis-
engaged hand  was  resting  on  the  table ;  all  present  saw  the  accordion

EVIDEjS^CE  op  MR.  JONES.

211

floating  in  space.  At  Mr.  Jones's  suggestion  we  sang  a  hymn,
the  accordion  gave  the  key  note,  and  after  a  pause  it  accompanied
us.  On  the  same  evening  I  saw  something  Hke  a  hand  creep
between  the  cloth  and  the  table ;  I  felt  the  fingers  distinctly  ;  my
friend  saw  the  shape  also,  and  every  one  present  touched  it."

"With  respect  to  apparitions,  witness  said,  "  I  once  saw  a  form
at  the  foot  of  my  bed ;  a  beautiful  form — a  spii'it."

Sir.  George  Jacob  Holtoake  :  "  Why  do  you  call  it  a  spirit  ?  "

WiTifESS  :  "  Because  I  can  think  of  it  as  nothing  else ;  no  other
person  was  in  the  room,  and  the  door  was  locked.  It  was  opaque ;
I  could  not  see  through  it."

Mr.  Holtoake  :  "  Did  it  stay  long  ?"

"WiTiTESs  :  "  About  two  or  three  minutes."

Mr.  Holtoake  :  "  Did  you  imcover  the  hand  which  crept
between  the  table  and  the  cloth  ?  "

"Witness  :  "  INTo."

Mr.  Holtoake  :  "  "Why  not  ?  "

"Witness  :  "  I  cannot  tell ;  I  was  perfectly  sceptical  when  I
went  to  Mr.  Jones's  only  the  night  before ;  I  was  ridiculing  his
son  for  believing  in  the  phenomena."

Mr.  Jones,  who  was  next  called,  corroborated  the  statement
of  the  last  witness  about  the  accordion.  He  said,  "  I  pitched
the  key-note  of  the  hymn  but  the  spirits  corrected  me,  I  was
half  a  note  under."  He  continued,  "I  once  saw  a  spirit  hand
at  a  seance  which  was  held  in  the  house  of  a  cabinet  minister;
several  persons  of  note  were  present.  The  hand  came  between
the  dress  of  a  lady  who  was  seated  with  us,  and  her  black  lace
fall.  It  was  clear  and  distinct.  The  lady  seemed  to  recognise  the
hand,  for  tears  trickled  down  from  her  eyes  ;  she  said  it  was  that
of  her  late  nephew.  The  room  was  well  lighted.  I  have  fre-
quently seen  forms  like  hands  under  the  table-cloth ;  I  have  felt
them  and,  when  pressed,  they  always  seemed  to  dissolve.  I  have
frequently  been  touched ;  the  touch  is  pecuhar,  like  that  of  a  glove
filled  with  air.  On  one  occasion  I  laid  my  handkerchief  over  my
hand,  it  was  then  pulled,  and  on  looking  I  found  that  a  minute

p  2

212

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

knot  had  been  tied  in  the  comer.  When  I  have  such  phenomena
as  these,  coupled  with  intelligent  and  trustworthy  answers,  I
cannot  but  believe  them  to  be  spiritual.

"  I  have  seen  Mr.  Home's  levitations.  I  saw  him  rise  and  float
horizontally  across  the  window.  We  all  saw  him  clearly.  He
passed  right  across  just  as  a  person  might  float  upon  the  water.
At  my  request  he  was  floated  back  again.  The  window  blinds
were  then  moved  up  and  down  without  any  one  touching  them  ;
this  seemed  to  be  done  to  tone  the  light.  I  may  add  that  all  this
took  place  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Milner  Gibson."

Mr.  Jones  then  produced  a  handkerchief  which  had  been  tied  in
a  knot  by  the  "  spirits."  He  said,  "  The  handkerchief  was  folded
when  I  took  it  from  my  wife's  drawer ;  at  the  seance  that  evening
I  laid  it  down  at  my  feet.  Shortly  after  I  looked  down  and  found
the  handkerchief  gone.  It  was  under  the  centre  of  the  table.  I
took  it  up  and  found  that  it  was  tied  in  a  '  country  girl's  knot.' "

In  continuation  witness  said :  "  I  heard  the  music  Mr.  Eowcroft
referred  to,  and  I  know  no  human  hand  touched  the  accordion.  I
did  not  see  the  spirit  hand.  I  don't  remember  seeing  the  accordion,
but  I  heard  the  music.  I  understand  Mr.  Eowcroft  saw  it,  but  I
did  not."

Dr.  EDMTnros  (to  Mr.  Eowcroft) :  "  Was  the  accordion  in  such
a  position  that  others  could  see  it  ?  "

Mr.  Eowcroft  then  described  the  position  of  the  instrument,
from  which  it  appeared  that  it  was  on  a  level  with  the  table.
Witness  said,  in  continuation  of  his  evidence  :  "My  friend,  Mr.
MUne,  did  not  see  the  hand  though  he  sat  next  me.  It  was  above
the  accordion  and  therefore  higher  than  the  table."

Mr.  HoLTOAKE :  "  If  the  instrument  travelled  round  the  table
all  must  have  seen  it  ?  "

Witness  :  "  Certainly."

Mr.  HoLXOAKE  :  "  But  not  the  hand  ?  "

WiTifESS:  "No."

Mr.  Jones  was  then  recaUed.  He  said :  "  After  exquisite  music
had  been  played,  some  one  suggested  '  God  save  the  Queen.'  It

EXAMINATION  OP  THE  MASTER  OF  LINDSAY.

(that  is,  the  spirit)  said  'yes,'  but  added,  'you  sing,'  referring  to
me.  I  then  sang,  and  it  accompanied  me  exquisitely.  The
instrument,  on  this  occasion,  was  in  Mr.  Home's  hand  close  to  the
ground,  and  I  and  others  saw  it  swaying  up  and  down,

"Home  was  oUiged  to  keep  a  vigorous  hold  on  account  of  the
power  exercised  by  the  spii'its;  his  disengaged  hand  was  on  the
table.    The  accordion  belonged  to  Mr.  Milner  Gibson."^

Mr.  Volckman:  "Did  any  person  see  Mr.  Home's  feet?"

Mr.  JOK33S :  "  I  cannot  say."

Dr.  Ellis  :  "  Does  Mr.  Home  believe  all  this  is  done  under
spiritual  influence  ?  "
Witness:  "Tes."

Mr.  Jones  then  said :  "  I  paid  five  guineas  to  obtain  a  special
sitting  with  the  Davenports.    I  thought  they  wfere  impostors  and
did  my  best  to  discover  the  trick.    We  had  a  dark  sitting.  I
helped  to  tie  the  young  men  and  I  placed  paper  under  their  feet
and  marked  the  shape  of  the  feet  with  a  pencil.    On  the  table  was
a  pUe  of  musical  instruments.    I  had  provided  myself  with  some
phosphorised  oH  which  I  poured  over  them;  my  party  then  held
hands.    The  oH  flared,  and  the  instruments  flew  up  and  round
the  room ;  the  light  from  the  oil  was  sufiicient  for  us  to  see  all
persons  present.    I  asked,  mentally,  to  be  struck  on  the  head  and
was  struck  by  a  guitar  very  powerfidly.    So  far  as  my  experience
went  I  did  not  discover  any  imposture.    The  young  men's  feet
had  not  stirred  a  hair's  breadth."

Mr.  Swepstone  addressing  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  asked  whether
the  elongations  referred  to  in  his  paper  were  in  the  trunk  or  legs
of  the  subject?

The  Master  of  Lindsay  :  "  The  top  of  the  hip  bone  and  the
short  ribs  separate.  In  Home,  they  are  unusually  close  together.
There  was  no  separation  of  the  vertebrae  of  the  spine ;  nor  were
the  elongations  at  aU  like  those  resulting  from  expandiog  the
chest  with  air ;  the  shoulders  did  not  move.  Home  looked  as  if
he  was  pulled  up  by  the  neck ;  the  muscles  seemed  in  a  state  of
tension.    He  stood  firmly  upright  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and

214

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

before  the  elongation  commenced,  I  placed  my  foot  on  his  instep.
I  will  swear  he  never  moved  his  heels  from  the  ground.  When
Home  was  elongated  against  the  wall,  Lord  Adare  placed  his  foot
on  Homo's  instep,  and  I  marked  the  place  on  the  wall,  I  once
saw  him  elongated  horizontally  on  the  ground.  Lord  Adare  was
present.  Home  seemed  to  grow  at  both  ends,  and  pushed  myself
and  Adare  away.

"  I  have  seen  the  levitations,  but  not  in  a  brilliant  light.  Home
on  one  occasion  was  sitting  next  me ;  in  a  few  minutes  he  said,
'  keep  quiet,  I  am  going  up ; '  his  foot  then  came  and  touched  my
shoulder ;  I  then  felt  something  like  velvet  touch  my  cheek,  and
on  looking  up,  was  surprised  to  find  that  he  had  carried  with  him
an  arm  chair,  which  he  held  out  in  his  hand  and  then  floated
round  the  room,  pushing  the  pictiu-es  out  of  their  places  as  he
passed  along  the  walls.  They  were  far  beyond  the  reach  of  a  per-
son standing  on  the  ground.  The  light  was  sufficient  to  enable
mie  to  see  clearly.  I  saw  the  levitations  in  Victoria  Street,  when
Home  floated  out  of  the  window  ;  he  first  went  into  a  trance  and
v\alked  about  uneasily;  he  then  went  into  the  hall ;  whUe  he  was
away,  I  heard  a  voice  whisper  in  my  ear,  '  He  will  go  out  of  one
window  and  in  at  another.'  I  was  alarmed  and  shocked  at  the
idea  of  so  dangerous  an  experiment.  I  told  the  company  what  I
had  heard,  and  we  then  waited  for  Home's  return.  Shortly  after
he  entered  the  room,  I  heard  the  window  go  up,  but  I  could
not  see  it,  for  I  sat  with  my  back  tO'  it.  I,  however,  saw  his
sliadow  on  the  opposite  wall ;  he  went  out  of  the  window  in  a
horizontal  position,  and  I  saw  him  outside  the  other  window  (that  in
tlic  next  room)  floating  in  the  air.  It  was  eighty-five  feet  from  the
ground.  There  was  no  balcony  along  the  windows,  merely  a  strong
oom-se  an  inch  and  a-half  wide  ;  each  windov,-  l-.ad  a  small  plant
stand,  but  there  was  no  connection  between  them.  I  have  no
theory  to  explain  these  things.  I  have  tried  to  find  out  how  they
are  done,  but  the  more  I  studied  them,  the  more  satisfied  was  I
that  they  could  not  be  explained  by  mere  mechanical  trick.  I  have
had  the  fidlest  opportunity  for  investigation.    I  once  saw  Home

EXAMINATION  OF  THE  MASTER  OF  LINDSAY.  215

in  full  light  standing  in  the  air  seventeen  inches  from  the  ground."

Dr.  Edmunds  :  "  Have  you  ever  obtained  any  information  which
could  not  have  been  known  to  the  medium  or  to  any  one  present  ?
I  may  say  I  have  received  scores  of  letters  from  people  who  are
titter  strangers  to  me,  asking  the  Committee  if  our  spiritual  friends
can  assist  them  in  finding  lost  wills,  and  registers  of  birth  and
baptism ;  do  you  know  of  any  facts  of  that  kind  ?  "

The  Master  of  Lindsay  :  "  I  know  of  one  such  fact,  which  I
can  relate  to  you.  A  friend  of  mine  was  very  anxious  to  find  the
will  of  his  grandmother,  who  had  been  dead  forty  years,  but  could
not  even  find  the  certificate  of  her  death.  I  went  with  him  to  the
Marshall's,  and  we  had  a  seance;  we  sat  at  a  table,  and  soon  the
raps  came ;  my  friend  then  asked  his  questions  mentally  ;  he  went
over  the  alphabet  himself,  or  sometimes  I  did  so,  not  knowing
the  question.  We  were  told  the  will  had  been  drawn  by  a  man
named  "William  "Walker,  who  lived  in  "Whitechapel ;  the  name  of
the  street,  and  the  number  of  the  house  were  given.  "We  went  to
"Whitechapel,  found  the  man,  and  subsequently,  through  his  aid,
obtained  a  copy  of  the  draft;  he  was  quite  unknown  to  us,  and
had  not  always  lived  in  that  locality,  for  he  had  once  seen  better
days.  The  medium  could  not  possibly  have  kaown  anything
about  the  matter,  and  even  if  she  had,  her  knowledge  would  have
been  of  no  avail,  as  all  the  questions  wea:e  mental  ones.

Dr.  Edmxfots:  "Have  you  ever  seen  any  apparitions  of  deceased
persons  ?  "

The  Master  of  Lindsay  :  "  "When  I  first  saw  Home,  we  had  a
seance.  I  was  late  for  the  train,  and  stayed  the  night  with  him,
he  gave  me  a  shake-down  on  the  sofa  in  his  room.  There  were  no
curtains  to  the  windows,  and  the  ground  was  covered  with  snow,
the  reflection  from  which  made  objects  in  the  room  distinctly
visible.  After  I  had  been  in  bed  twenty  minutes,  I  heard  raps,
and  my  piUow  went  up  and  down  in  a  cm-ious  manner.  That
might  have  been  the  result  of  imagination ;  a  few  minutes  after,  I
saw  an  apparition  which  seemed  like  a  column  of  vapour  or  an
indistinct  shadow,  which  grew  gradually  into  a  definite  shape,  and

216

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

I  then  saw  the  form  of  a  woman  standing  en  profile  to  me.  She
stood  between  me  and  Home,  I  saw  the  features  plainly,  and
should  have  recognised  them  again  anywhere.  She  seemed  to  be
attired  in  a  long  flowing  gown  which  hung  without  belt  from  the
shoulders.  The  figure  seemed  quite  solid,  I  could  not  see  through
it,  I  spoke  to  Home,  he  said  he  saw  her  distinctly,  and  that  it
was  the  apparition  of  his  late  wife ;  she  often  came  to  him.  She
moved  and  stood  by  his  side.  She  then  walked  to  the  right  of  the
bed  and  rather  behind  it,  but  not  out  of  my  sight,  and  then  slowly
faded  away  like  a  column  of  vapour.  The  next  morning  I  found
an  album,  and  on  looking  over  the  pictures  carelessly,  I  saw  a
photograph  exactly  like  the  figure  I  had  seen,  Mrs,  Jencken  said
it  was  the  likeness  of  the  late  Mrs.  Home,"

Dr.  Edmunds  :  "  Have  you  ever  seen  the  apparitions  of  the
lower-  animals  or  of  trees  ?  "

The  Master  of  Lindsay  :  "  Never.  I  was  once  subject  to  a
singuiar  optical  illusion.  I  used  to  see  the  spectre  of  a  black  dog.
It  seemed  to  glide  along ;  I  never  saw  it  walldng.  1  often  went
np  to  it,  and  sometimes  passed  a  stick  through  it.  It  was  the  result
of  over-work ;  I  was  at  that  time  studying  for  the  army,  and
reading  sixteen  hours  a  day."

Dr.  King  Chambees  :  "  Are  your  family  subject  to  '  second
sight?'"

The  Master  of  Lindsay  :  "  Tes,  such  things  have  been  in  our
family,"

Dr,  Edmunds  :  "  What  do  you  define  '  second  sight '  to  be  ?  "

The  Master  of  Lindsax  :  "  Second  sight  is  an  intuitive  know-
ledge of  an  event  which  is  going  on  at  the  same  moment  in  another
place ;  and  also  of  events  which  wiU  happen.  I  will  give  you  an
illustration,  for  the  authenticity  of  which  I  can  vouch.  A  lady  of
my  acquaintance  married  an  officer  in  the  army,  who  went  out
to  India  before  the  mutiny.  One  night  in  the  drawing  room  she
screamed  and  fainted ;  on  recovering,  she  said  she  saw  her  hus-
band shot.  The  time  was  noted,  and  intelligence  arrived  that  he
had  been  shot  at  the  precise  moment  when  she  saw  the  vision,  I

EVIDENCE  OP  MR.  CHEVALIER.

217

did  not  know  of  this  at  the  time,  but  a  number  of  people  aro
acquainted  witli  the  fact,  and  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  of  its  truth.

"  I  have  never  seen  the  apparition  of  a  tree  or  flower.  I  once
saw  Home  place  a  vase  of  flowers  on  the  window  sill  and  then
move  away,  and  the  flowers  were  cast  into  the  room."

Dr.  Chambers  said  his  object  in  asking  the  question  about
second  sight  was  with  the  ^dew  of  discovering  whether  the
mediums  were  such  persons.

Dr.  Edmiixds  (to  Dr.  Chambers) :  "  Have  you  ever  seen  any
instances  of '  second  sight  ? ' "

Dr.  Chambeks  :  "  I  had  an  uncle  who  used  to  see  figures
frequently ;  and  once  when  my  cousin  was  staying  with  him,  he
(the  cousin)  said  he  saw  a  strange  figure,  a  man  in  the  dress  of
the  time  of  Charles  II.,  but  in  top  boots.  His  father,  miles  away,
saw  the  same  thing  at  the  same  instant.  That  is  the  most
remarkable  case  of  second  sight  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  I
have  no  personal  knowledge  of  such  cases  as  those  mentioned
by  the  Master  of  Lindsay."

Master  of  Lindsat  re-called :  "I  can  give  no  facts  of  prophetic
second  sight."

Mr.  Perrin  stated  that  when  his  sister  died,  a  clergyman,
twenty-foiu"  miles  away,  saw  her  apparition  at  the  precise  moment
of  her  decease."

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

Tuesday,  20Tn  July,  1869.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
Mr.  Chevalier,  who  was  the  first  witness  called,  stated  that  he
had  had  seventeen  years'  experience  of  Spiritualism,  but  it  was
not  till  1866  that  he  commenced  experimenting  on  tables.  He
obtained  the  usual  phenomena,  such  as  raps  and  tiltings  and
answers  to  questions.  On  one  occasion,  the  answer  which  was
given  being  obviously  untrue,  the  witness  peremptorily  inquired
why  a  correct  answer  had  not  been  given,  and  the  spirit  in  reply
said,  "  Because  I  am  Beelzebub."

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

Mr,  Chevalier,  in  continuation,  said,  "  I  continued  my  experi-
ments until  I  heard  of  the  Spiritual  Athenteum,     About  that
time  I  lost  a  child,  and  heard  my  wife  say  she  bad  been  in  cora-
miuiication  with  its  spirit.    I  cautioned  her,  and  yet  was  anxious
to  communicate  also.    I  placed  one  finger  on  the  table  ;  it  moved,
and  the  name  of  the  child  was  given.    It  was  a  Trench  name.  I
told  a  friend  of  mine  what  had  happened,  but  was  laughed  at  by
him  ;  he  however  came,  sceptic  as  he  was,  and  placed  one  hand  on
the  table,  asking  mental  questions,  which  were  all  answered.  He
then  asked  where  my  child  went  to  school,  not  knowing  himself,
and  the  answer  'Eenton'  was  given;   this  also  was  correct.
Frequently  after  this,  I  obtained  manifestations  in  French  and
English,  and  messages  as  a  child  could  send  to  a  parent.    At  my
meals,  I  constantly  rested  my  hand  on  a  small  table,  and  it  seemed  to
join  in  the  conversation.    One  day  the  table  turned  at  right  angles,
and  went  into  the  corner  of  the  room.     I  asked,  '  Are  you  my
child  ? '  but  obtained  no  answer.    I  then  said, '  Are  you  from  God  ? '
but  the  table  was  still  silent.   I  then  said,  '  In  the  name  of  the
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  I  command  you  to  answer,  are  you
from  God  ? '    One  loud  rap,  a  negative,  was  then  given.    '  Do  j^oa
believe,'  said  I,  "that  Christ  died  to  save  us  from  sin?'  The
answer  was  '  No  !'    *  Accursed  spirit,'  said  I,  '  leave  the  room.'
The  table  then  walked  across  the  room,  entered  the  adjoining  one,
and  quickened  its  steps.    It  was  a  small  tripod  table.    It  walked
with  a  side-long  walk.    It  went  to  the  door,  shook  the  handle,  and
I  opened  it.    The  table  then  walked  into  the  passage,  and  I
repeated  the  adjm-ation,  receiving  the  same  answer.    Fully  con-
vinced that  I  was  dealing  with  an  accursed  spirit,  I  opened  the
street-door,  and  the  table  was  immediately  silent ;  no  movement  or
rap  was  heard.    I  returned  alone  to  the  drawing-room,  and  asked
if  there  were  any  spirits  present.    Immediately  I  heard  steps  like
those  of  a  little  child  outside  the  door.    I  opened  it,  and  the  smaU
table  went  into  the  corner  as  before,  just  as  my  child  did  when  I
reproved  it  for  a  fault.     These  manifestations  continued  until  I
used  the  adjuration,  and  I  always  foimd  that  they  changed  or

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  CHEVALIER.

2l9

ceased  when  the  name  of  God  was  mentioned.  One  night,  whou
sitting  alone  in  my  drawing-room,  I  heard  a  noise  at  the  top  of
the  house ;  a  servant  who  had  heard  it,  came  into  the  voom
frightened.  I  went  to  the  nursery,  and  found  that  the  sounds
came  from  a  spot  near  the  bed.  I  pronounced  the  adjuration  and
they  instantly  ceased.  The  same  soimds  were  afterwards  heard
in  the  kitchen,  and  I  succeeded  in  restoring  quiet  as  before.

"Eeflecting  on  these  singular  facts,  I  determined  to  inquire
further  and  really  satisfy  myself  that  the  manifestations  were  what
I  suspected  them  to  be.    I  went  to  Mrs.  Marshall,  and  took  with
me  three  clever  men,  who  were  not  at  all  likely  to  be  deceived.  I
was  quite  imknown;  we  sat  at  a  table,  and  had  a  seance;  Mrs.
Marshall  told  me  the  name  of  my  child.    I  asked  the  spirit  some
questions,  and  then  pronoimced  the  adjuration.    We  all  heard
steps,  which  sounded  as  if  some  one  was  mounting  the  wall ;  in
a  few  seconds  the  sounds  ceased,  and  although  Mrs.  Marshall
challenged  again  and  again,  the  spirits  did  not  answer,  and  she
said  she  could  not  account  for  the  phenomenon.    In  this  case,  I
pronoimced  the  adjm'ation  mentally;  no  person  knew  what  I  had
done.    At  a  seance,  held  at  the  house  of  a  friend  of  mine,  at  which
I  was  pr  >sent,  manifestations  were  obtained,  and  as  I  was  known
to  be  hostile  I  was  entreated  not  to  interfere.    I  sat  for  two
hours  a  passive  spectator.    I  then  asked  the  name  of  the  spirit,
and  it  gave  that  of  my  child.     'In  the  name  of  the  Father,
Son,  and   Holy  Ghost,'  said  I,  'are  you  the   spirit  of  my
chad?'    It  answered  'No!'  and  the  word  'Devil'  was  spelled
out."

Dr.  EninjiTDS :  "  How  were  the  names  spelled  out?  "

Mr.  Chetaliee:  "The  legs  rapped  when  the  alphabet  was
called  over.  Mrs.  Marshall  used  the  alphabet  herself,  and  the
table  rapped  when  her  pencil  came  to  the  letters.  My  opinion  of
these  phenomena  is  that  the  intelligence  which  is  put  in  com-
munication with  us  is  a  fallen  one.  It  is  of  the  devil,  the  prince
of  the  power  of  the  air.  I  beheve  we  commit  the  crime  of  necro-
m?.ncy  when  we  talce  part  in  these  spiritual  seances."

220

MINUTES  OF  Till!:  COMMITTEE.

Dr.  Edmunds:  "AVlio  called  the  alphabet  when  the  answer
'  Beelzebub '  was  given  ?  "
Mr.  Chevalier  :  "  I  did."

Mr.  Beegheim  :  "  It  is  your  belief  in  Christianity  that  makes
you  believe  these  manifestations  are  of  the  devil  ?  "

Mr.  Chevalier  :  "  At  the  Spiritual  Athenajum  I  saw  written
lip  as  a  motto  the  words  'Try  the  spirits.'  I  remembered  the
text  and  did  so,  and  found  that  they  were  not  from  God.  Of
course  I  believe  in  the  New  Testament.  Any  spirit  which  denies
the  atonement  or  does  not  believe  in  the  Trinity  cannot  be  from
God.  When  we  pronounce  the  name  of  God  we  must  mean  what
Saint  John  meant,  the  three  persons  in  one."

By  Dr.  Charles  Maxteice  Davies  :  "I  have  sometimes  refused
to  pronounce  the  adjuration  to  banish  the  spirits  and  end  the
manifestations,  because  it  was  not  clear  that  the  manifestations
in  question  were  really  due  to  spirits."

By  ^Ii-.  GAimoK:  "I  have  never  stopped  them  by  an  effort  of
the  wiU  alone.  I  never  used  the  adjuration  without  stopping  the
manifestations."

Mr  Haik  Eeiswell:  "I  may  say  that  I  can  corroborate  aU
that  has  been  said  by  the  witness  relative  to  the  power  of  the
adjuration  to  stop  the  manifestations."  _  _

The  Countess  de  Pomar  in  reference  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.
ChevaHer  that  a  spirit  wliich  cUd  not  believe  in  Christ  must  be
bad  said  that  it  was  hard  to  suppose  that  good  Mohammedans  _  or
persons  of  other  non^hristian  faiths  should  not  have  good  spn-its.

Miss  Anna  BlackweU  then  spoke.  Her  sister,  she  said,  was
very  incredulous,  and  would  not  believe  in  Spiritualism  in  the
least  Nevertheless,  she  herself  became  what  is  caUed  a  writing
medium.  The  spirit  would  use  her  hand  to  write  what  communi-
cation had  to  be  made.  The  spirits  wro^e  what  was  good  and  bad
One  wanted  to  sign  himself  Satan  and  Beelzebub.  Btvt,  contmued
Miss  BlackweU,  my  sister  did  not  believe  in  the  least  in  the  exist-
ence of  such  a  spirit,  and  she  said,  "  No ;  if  you  are  permitted  o
■    coma  to  me  it  is  not  to  tell  such  outrageous  lies.  K  you  persist  in

EVIDENCE  OP  MISS  BLACKWELL.

221

trying  to  impose  on  me  you  shan't  write."  I  have  been  present
at  many  of  these  little  fights.  She  would  resist  the  spirit,  and
when  she  saw  the  capital  S  of  the  Satan  being  written  she  would
resist,  and  twist  her  hand  about  to  prevent  the  name  being
written.  The  spirit  has  then  written,  "I  liate  you  because  I  can-
not deceive  you  ?  "  I  have  on  some  occasions  heard  beautiful  raps
in  my  drawing-room — in  the  air,  on  the  wall,  on  the  ground — no
one  being  near  the  furnitiu-e.  We  never  begin  without  prayer.
We  say  to  the  spirits  that  wish  to  deceive  us,  "  Dear  spirits,  we
are  all  imperfect ;  we  will  endeavour  to  iDenefit  you  by  our  lights,
in  so  far  as  they  are  superior  to  yours."  Sometimes  they  would
overturji  and  brealc  the  table.  Yet  they  were  rendered  better  by
our  kindness.  We  would  never  dream  of  addressing,  one  as  an
"  Accursed  spirit."  From  one  who  was  very  violent,  and  by  whom
I  have  been  myself  struck,  we  have  received  progressive  messages,
showing  how  he  has  become  better.  They  have  often  sent  its
messages,  saying  "We  are  going  up  higher  now;  we  have  through
yoiu:  help,  broken  the  chains  of  earth;  and  we  leave  you!"  When
my  sister  found  the  S  being  vn-itten,  or  the  great  B  for  Beelzebub,
she  woidd  say,  with  kindness  but  firm-ness,  "Dear  spirit,  you
must  not  deceive ;  it  is  i;iot  for  such  tricks  but  for  a  good  end  that
you  are  permitted  to  come ! "

Dr.  EDinrifDS :  "  How  can  you  distinguish  between  a  spiiit
that  thus  deceives  and'  a  devil — a  mild  devil,  if  I  may  use  the
word?"

Miss  Blackwell  :  "  I  do  not  believe  in  a  special  devil,  but  the
imperfect  spirits  are  all  in  a  manner  devils."

In  answer  to  another  question.  Miss  Blackwell  said  that  she  did
not  believe  in  spirits  travelling  backwards  and  forwards  from
animals  to  man  and  from  man  to  auimaJs.  But  she  considered  that
the  creative  act  which  gave  rise  to  all,  was  such  that  we  progressed
from  gases  to  crystals,  from  animals  to  man.  At  the  same  time
there  was  a  reason  why  one  thing  is  a  cress  and  another  a  flower.

Dr.  Edmunds  :  "  Then  according  to  your  progressive  theory  the
spirit  which  animates  a  man  may  have  once  animated  a  horse  ?"

222

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

Mi3s  Blackavei-l  :  "  No,  that  is  not  so.  A  horse  is  a  horso ;  ifc
is  capable  of  being  taught  to  go  better,  but  it  cannot  learn  niatlie-
matics.  Nevertheless  everything  is  progressive,  and  spirits  that
have  progressed  may  become  purified  and  combined  so  as  to  reach
a  higher  stage."

Mr.  Percival  then  made  a  statement.  His  experience  dated
from  1829  to  1830,  a  period  long  antecedent  to  the  development
of  Spiritualism  in  America.  He  was  an  ofEcer  in  the  Guards,  but
he  felt  very  anxious  about  religious  truth.  He  could  not  reconcile
the  tone  of  Christianity  in  society  Avith  the  tone  of  Christianity
in  the  Bible.  He  went  to  balls  and  pai'ties,  and  never  heard  the
name  of  God  mentioned.  He  determined  to  leave  the  army  and
study  religion — not  necessarily  to  become  a  clergyman,  for  that
should  only  be  in  obedience  to  a  call  from  the  Holy  Ghost.  He
had  heard  in  Ireland  some  excellent  evangelical  teachers,  and  he
wished  to  enter  at  Trinity  College,  but  his  mother  preferred  that
he  should  enter  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  and  he  therefore  knelt
down  by  his  bed  and  prayed  for  guidance.  He  saw  a  vision  of
his  friend  Harrington,  whom  he  had  known  at  Harrow ;  he  was
dressed  in  the  canonical  gown,  and  he  took  down  a  folio  book  from
the  library  shelf  to  show  him.  Well,  he  went  to  Oxford,  and  while
in  doubt  about  two  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  he  asked  his  friend
for  counsel,  and  there  he  saw  Mr.  Harrington  in  canonical  gown,
and  with  all  the  sm-roundings  which  had  been  shown  to  him  in
the  vision.  A  second  time  he  saw  visions  when  going  to  Brussels.
While  passing  through  Canterbury  he  knelt  down  in  the  coach  to
pray  for  guidance  as  to  whether  he  should  go  via  Calais  or  Ostend.
He  saw  three  heads — very  remarkable  ones.  Well,  he  went  by
Margate  and  Ostend,  and  at  Margate  he  saw  two  of  the  heads  of
the  vision.  The  third — one  at  which  he  had  shuddered — was  not
to  be  seen,  but  no  sooner  had  he  got  into  the  cabin  of  the  boat
than  the  person  entered,  and  directly  began  swearing  and  using
the  most  profane  language.  He  saw  various  other  spiiitual
phenomena,  and,  in  consequence  of  what  he  said,  he  was  put  into
a  private  asylum,    In  spite  of  the  doctors  he  got  out,  and  he  had

EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  HAIN  FEISWELL.

223

devoted  himself  to  the  remedying  of  the  abuses  with  which  he  had
become  acquainted.

Mr.  Hain  Peiswell  :  "  I  will  be  very  brief  in  the  statement
which  I  have  to  make,  and  I  will  preface  it  by  a  remark  which
shall  be  still  more  brief.  I  am  a  loose  hanger-on  of  the  Church  of
England,  sceptical  as  to  spiritual  tricks,  and  with  an  inclination
to  Mr.  Chevalier's  theory.  Well,  I  was  once  employed  by  a  cele-
brated journal  to  get  certain  facts ;  1  spent  ten  pounds,  twenty
pounds,  without  getting  them.  Whde  I  was  going  along  by  Mrs.
Marshall's,  I  thought  I  would  look  in,  and  I  entered.  The  table
was  so  crowded  that  I  could  not  get  a  place  at  it,  of  which  I  was
very  glad,  for  I  wanted  to  be  a  spectator  only,  and  I  sat  by  the
fii-e.  The  table  moved  ti-emendously,  and  came  to  me.  There
was  a  paper  written  underneath  it ;  the  words  were  '  Let  the
scribe  come  to  the  table.'  I  sat  at  the  table.  There  was  a  sort  of
cataleptic  seizure  of  those  present,  which  principally  affected  the
ladies.  They  foamed  at  the  mouth  and  shook  each  other.  They
then  began  to  talk  nonsense  and  to  prophesy.  I,  wishing  to  put
a  stop  to  this,  and  feehng  that  it  was  what  the  Apostles  might
have  witnessed,  what  was  described  by  Tertulhan  and  others,  I
put  my  hand  on  the  table  and  said,  'Are  you  the  spirit  who
imposed  on  Ananias,  the  sorcerer  ? '  The  answer  was  '  Tes.'  I
said,  '  In  the  name  of  God  depart — go  away ! '  He  went  away,
and  so  did  the  scribe."

Mr.  BE2f]s-ETT  :  "  Did  you  know  any  of  those  present  ?  "

Mr.  Haik  Feiswell:  "Not  any  except  the  MarshaU's,  to
whom  I  had  paid  many  half-crowns."

Mr.  Beegheim:  "When  you  put  your  hand  on  the  table  you
willed  that  the  manifestations  shoidd  cease  ?  "

Mr.  Hain  Teiswell  :  "  Tes."

Mr.  Beegiieim  :  "Are  you  not  aware  that  manifestations  can
be  stopped  by  the  exercise  of  an  adverse  will  without  any  adjura-
tion?"

Mr.  HAiif  Eeiswell  :  « I  do  not  know.    I  always  used  an
adjuration,  and  I  never  failed  to  stop  the  manifestations."

224

MINUTES  OP  THE  COMMITTEE.

Mr.  Shobteb:  "Is  not  a  passive  condition  necessary  for  the
manifestations  ?  "

Mr.  Hain  FiiiswELL :  "  Tes."

Mr.  Bergheim  said  that  undoubtedly  some  cases  of  supposed
epilepsy  were  cases  of  possession.  He  related  an  instance,  in  which
he  saw  a  shoeblack  seized  in  the  street.  He  sent  away  those  who
surrounded  the  boy  and  said  to  the  spirit,  "  Be  off  with  you ! "  without
using  any  adjuration  whatever,  and  the  boy  instantly  woke  up  well.

Mr.  Hain  Priswell  said  he  always  used  the  name  ot  the  Trinity.

By  Dr.  King  Chambehs  :  "  I  cannot  say  whether  passes  had
been  used  to  produce  the  cataleptic  seizures  at  Mrs.  Marshall's.
I  had  never  Avitnessed  anything  of  exactly  the  same  kind  there
before.  First  one  or  two  persons  began  to  shake,  then  the  move-
ment seemed  to  spread  around  to  all.  I  believe,"  he  continued
"in  diabolical  possession,  because  we  are  told  it  by  our  Lord,  and
the  spirits  then  were  cast  out  by  the  same  means."

Dr.  Edmunds  :  ""We  often  see  in  a  sick  ward  a  hysterical  seizure
of  %ie  patient  followed  by  the  seizure  of  a  number  of  others.  And
if  a  pail  of  water  be  thrown  over  one  it  will  cure  all  the  others.
No  doubt  a  strong  effort  of  the  will  might  similarly  cure  them  all."

Mr.  Hain  Ehiswell  :  "I  never  knew  a  doctor  put  his  hand  on
a  patient  in  a  strong  fit  and  ciu-e  him  by  the  mere  contact.  Some
are  very  clever ;  they  cannot  do  that."

Dr.  Edmunds  :  "  I  believe  medical  men  in  the  room  will  bear
me  out  when  I  say  that  firmness  of  will  on  the  part  of  a  doctor
can  do  this."

Mr.  D.  H.  Dtte  ;  "Tou  put  your  hand  on  the  table  when  you
willed  that  it  should  all  cease  ?  "

Mr.  Hain  Emsweld  :  "  Tes,  I  put  my  hand  gently  on  the  t-able
and  rose  repeating  mentally  the  adjuration."

Mr.  DvTE  :  "Had  the  adjuration  anything  to  do  with  it?"

Mr.  Hain  Ehiswell  :  "As  a  Christian  I  believe  so.  The
governess  of  my  children,  one  of  my  daughters,  and  another
young  lady  have  sat  at  a  table  and  had  raps,  answers  to  fooHsh
questions,  &c.    I  put  a  stop  to  it  all  by  the  use  of  the  adj  uration."

EVIDENCli;  OP  ME.  FAULKNEB.

225

Fbiday,  10th  December,  1869.
Cliaii-man,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.
No  evidence  whatever  was  received  at  this  meeting.

Thursday,  23rd  December,  18G9.
Chairman,  Mr.  H.  G.  Atkinson.

Mr.  William  Faulkner,  surgeon,  of  40,  Endell  Street,  'W.C.,
attended  this  evening  to  give  evidence  resjDecting  certain  magnets,
which,  as  he  had  stated  in  a  letter  to  the  "Standard,"  he  was  in  the
habit  of  supplying  to  people  for  the  production  of  rapping  sounds
at  spiritual  seances.  He  said  that  for  some  years  past  he  had
been  in  the  habit  of  supplying  magnets,  which  were  so  constructed
that -by  pressing  a  small  brass  button,  raps  could  at  all  times  be
produced.  Some  of  these  magnets, — as  for  instance  the  one  which
he  had  brought  with  him,  were  made  for  concealment  about  the
person ;  Avhilst  others  were  constructed  with  a  view  to  their  attach-
ment to  various  articles  of  furniture.  The  magnet  was  connected
by  means  of  wii-es  to  an  electric  battery,  and  other  wires  continued
the  communication  from  the  magnet  to  the  brass  buttons.

Questioned  by  Messrs.  Atkinson,  Bergheim,  and  Wallace,  Mr.
Faulkner  stated  that  he  did  not  think  it  possible  to  construct  any
apparatus  that  would  suffice  to  raise  a  table;  he  had  never  him-
self fitted  up  a  house  with  these  magnets,  and  he  only  knew  of
one  house,  Mr.  Addison's,  that  was  so  fitted  up.  He  also  stated
that  he  had  not  siipplied  any  of  these  magnets  for  two  or  three
years.    The  Committee  then  adjourned.

Thursday,  6th  January,  1870.
Chairman,  Mi-.  Maurice.
This  meeting  was  devoted  to  the  reading  of  correspondence  and
to  the  discussion  of  the  business  arrangements  of  the  Committee.

Friday,  21st  January,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  Jefiery.
No  business  of  importance  was  transacted  at  this  Meeting.

Q

226

MINUTES  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

Thursday,  3rd  February,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.
The  Report  of  Sub-committee  No.  1  was  brought  up,  read,  and
after  some  discussion,  unanimously  adopted.    Mr.  Jeffeiy's  letter
(see  page  90)  was  then  read,  and  the  proceedings  terminated.

Tuesday,  15th  February,  1870.
Chaii-man,  Mr.  A.  R.  "Wallace.
Miss  Blackwell's  paper  on  the  Philosophy  of  Re-incarnation  was
pi'oduced  and  read,  and  an  unanimous  vote  of  thanks  was  passed
upon  her,  Avhich  the  Honorary  Secretary  was  instnicted  to  convey
to  her.

Tuesday,  1st  March,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.
Mr.  Atkinson's  paper  (see  page  104)  was  produced  and  read  at
this  meeting.    The  rest  of  the  evening  was  spent  in  discussing  the
Report  of  the  Committee.

Tuesday,  15th  March,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.
The  question  of  the  Report  occupied  the  entire  attention  of  the
Committee  at  this  meeting.

Tuesday,  5th  April,  1870,
Chairman,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.
The  Reports  of  Sub-committees  Nos.  2  and  3  were  this  evening
brought  up,  read  and  adopted.

Tuesday,  19th  April,  1870.
Chairman,  Dr.  Edmunds.
The  whole  of  this  evening  was  spent  in  discussing  the  question
of  the  General  Report  of  the  Committee.

Tuesday,  10th  May,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  D.  H.  Dyte.
The  consideration  of  the  Report  occupied  the  whole  of  this
evening.

ADOPTION  OP  THE  EEPORT.

227

Tuesday,  24th  May,  1870.
Cliaii-man,  Mr.  II.  D.  Jencken.''

The  question  of  the  General  Report  of  the  Committee  was  again
proceeded  with.  The  Honorary  Secretary  suggested  the  advisa-
bility of  nominating  a  select  Committee  to  prepare  a  draft  Report
for  consideration  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  Committee.  Mr.
Dyte  accordingly  moved  :  "  That  an  Editing  Committee  be  appointed
to  prepare  a  draft  Report  for  presentation  at  the  next  meeting  of
the  Committee  ;  such  Editing  Committee  to  consist  of  Mr.  Serjeant
Cox,  Messrs.  Geary,  Levy,  Volckman,  Wallace,  and  the  Honorary
Secretary."  This  motion,  having  been  seconded  by  Mr.  Maurice,
was  put  from  the  chair  and  carried  unanimously.

The  following  Resolution,  proposed  by  Mr.  Bergheim  and
seconded  by  llr.  Atkinson,  was  also  carried.

"  That  it  be  an  instruction  to  the  Editing  Committee  that  the
Report  be  based  solely  on  the  evidence  before  the  Committee."

The  meeting  was  then  adjourned.

Tuesday,  21st  June,  1870.
Chaii-man,  Dr.  Edmunds.

The  draft  Report  prepared  by  the  Editing  Committee  was
brought  up  and  read  at  this  meeting.  After  some  trifling  verbal
alterations  had  been  suggested  and  accepted,  the  Report  was
adopted  mm.  dis.,  the  Chairman,  however,  announcing  his  inten-
tion to  draw  up  a  separate  Report.

A  Resolution  was  then  adopted  instracting  the  Honorary  Sec-
retary to  forward  a  copy  of  the  Report  to  the  OouncU  of  the
London  Dialectical  Society,  with  a  recommendation  that  it  be
printed  and  published;  and  the  Committee  adjourned.

Monday,   1st  August,  1870.
Chairman,  Mr.  D.  H.  Dyte.
The  reply  of  the  Council  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society  to
the  recommendation  of  the  Committee  was  read  at  this  meeting,
and  the  following  resolution  was  passed  in  consequence

Q  2

228

MINUTES  or  THE  COMMITTEE.

Proposed  by  Dr.  Edmunds,  seconded  by  Mr.  Hannali : —
"  That  the  Eeport  be  referred  to  the  Editing  Committee,  (Messrs.
Bennett,  Cox,  Geary,  Levy,  Volckman  and  Wallace,)  and  that
they  be  requested  to  prepare  it  for  publication,  together  with  any
supplementary  or  counter  reports  that  may  be  received  from
members  of  the  Committee,  and  appending  thereto  the  Reports  of
the  Sub-committees,  and  the  evidence  oral  an-l  verbal  that  has
been  collected  ;  the  entire  work  when  ready  for  publication  to  be
submitted  for  approval  to  the  Committee."

LETTEE  FEOM  PEOFESSOR  HUXLEY.

229

COEEESPONDBNCE.

The  follo-ndng  letters  liave  been  selected  from  the  vast  ntimber
received  by  the  Committee,  either  as  containing  dii-ect  evidence
with  regard  to  the  phenomena  under  consideration ;  or  as  proceed-
ing from  men  whose  acknowledged  position  in  society  renders  of
special  value  the  mere  expression  of  their  opinion  ; —

Professor  Huxley.

"  Sir,  regret  that  I  am,  unable  to  accept  the  invitation  of  the

Council  of  the  Dialectical  Society  to  co-operate  with  a  Committee
for  the  investigation  of  '  Spiritualism and  for  two  reasons.  In
the  first  place,  I  have  no  time  for  such  an  inquiiy,  which  would
involve  much  trouble  and  (unless  it  were  tmlike  all  inquiries  of
that  kind  I  have  known)  much  annoyance.  In  the  second  place,
I  take  no  interest  in  the  subject.  The  only  case  of  '  Spiritualism '
I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  into  for  myself,  was  as
gross  an  imposture  as  ever  came  under  my  notice.  But  supposing
the  phenomena  to  be  genuine — they  do  not  interest  me.  If  any
body  would  endow  me  with  the  faculty  of  listening  to  the  chatter
of  old  women  and  curates  in  the  nearest  cathedral  town,  I  should
decline  the  privilege,  having  better  things  to  do.

"  And  if  the  folk  in  the  spiritual  world  do  not  talk  more  wisely
and  sensibly  than  their  friends  report  them  to  do,  I  put  them  in
the  same  category.

230

COREESrOKDENCE.

"  The  only  good  that  I  cau  seo  in  a  demonstration  of  the  truth
of  '  Spu-itualism '  is  to  furnish  an  additional  argument  against
suicide.  Better  live  a  crossing-sweeper  than  die  and  be  made  to
talk  twaddle  by  a  '  medium '  hu-ed  at  a  guinea  a  seance.

"  I  am,  Sir,  &c.,

"  29th  January,  18C9."  "T.  H.  Huxley."

George  Henry  Lewes.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  shall  not  be  able  to  attend  the  investigation  of
*  Spiritualism ; '  and  in  reference  to  your  question  about  suggestions
would  only  say  that  the  one  hint  needful  is  that  all  present  should
distinguish  between  facts  and  inferences  from  facts.  When  any
man  says  that  phenomena  are  produced  by  no  known  physical  laws,
he  declares  that  he  knows  the  laws  by  which  they  are  produced.

"  Yours,  &c.^

"Tuesday,  2nd  Febraary,  1869."  "  G.  H.  Lewes."

Mr.  "W.  M.  Wilkinson.

"  Oakfield,  Kilburn,  N.W.

"  7th  February,  1869.

"  Sir, — I  have  seen  your  letter  informing  the  public  that  a
committee,  appointed  by  the  Dialectical  Society,  is  about  to
institute  a  thorough  and  searching  '  inquiry  into  so-called  Spiritual
manifestations,  with  a  view  of  obtaining  a  satisfactory  elucidation
of  the  phenomena,'  and  you  ask  believers  '  to  assist  the  Committee
in  arriving  at  a  sound  and  just  conclusion.'

"  I  am  a  believer  in  the  occurrence  of  the  facts,  both  from  my
own  observation,  and  fromf  testimony,  the  latter  mode  being  of
coiu'se  the  more  extensive,  inasmuch  as  it  embraces  the  observa-
tion of  all  those  v.  ho  have  witnessed  the  phenomena  in  all  ages,
down  to  our  own.  Of  coiu-se  the  sum  of  what  all  have  seen,  is
fjreater  immeasurably  than  what  any  one  can  see.  I  consider
testimony  therefore  of  the  first  importance  in  the  matter,  which,  if

LETTEK  EEOM  ME.  -^VILKINSON.

231

it  be  tniG,  cannot,  in  its  very  nature,  be  done  to  order,  and  sub-
mitted to  pre-organized  tests.  Its  laws  are  not  known,  nor  the
conditions  under  which  it  appears.  If  they  were,  and  phenomena
could  be  had  the  moment  you  say  'now  we  are  all  ready,'  they
would  cease  to  be  what  they  evidently  are.

"  The  fii-st  thiag  in  such  an  investigation  is  to  assume  nothing,
not  even  that  a  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  can  '  obtain  a
satisfactory  elucidation  of  the  phenomena.'  JSTo  committee  has  ever
done  so  yet.  A  committee  of  Professors  of  Harvard  University,
amongst  whom  was  Agassiz,  after  having  made  an  examination,
did  not  think  proper  to  publish  their  Eeport,  though  they  had
published  their  intention  to  do  so,  and  were  frequently  and
publicly  asked  for  it.

"  I  do  not  think  a  committee  seeldng  tost  phenomena  will  arrive
at  a  sound  conclusion,  imless  it  also  take  full  cogni2;ance  of  testi-
mony in  books,  and  by  a  personal  examination  of  witnesses  who
will  depose  to  what  they  have  seen.  There  is  an  extensive  array
both  of  written  facts,  and  of  witnesses,  of  the  highest  range  and
value.  The  Committee  might  easily  obtain  the  attendance  of  20,
50,  or  100  witnesses  of  repute  in  literatm-e,  the  sciences,  and  the
professions,  who  will  give  their  testimony.  Testimony  is  aU-im-
portant  if  only  for  this  consideration,  .that  the  Report  of  this  Com-
mittee will,  when  made,  itself  fail  into  the  categoiy  of  testimony ;
and  it  woiild  be  inconsistent  to  claim  a  greater  weight  for  it  than
for  other  testimony  from  a  crediblo  source.  Credible  testimony
has  akeady  been  given  in  many  thousands  of  instances.  Your
Committee  wiU  only  add  one  mere  to  the  list.  If  it  report  in
favoui-  of  the  phenomena,  no  one  will  believe  it ;  and  if  it  report
against,  the  facts  will  still  occur,  as  they  have  done  throughout
recorded  histoiy,  sacred  and  profane.

"The  'phenomena  of  so-called  Bpirittialism '  are  in  fact  a  history
of  the  supernatural  (using  the  word  in  its  common  sense).  That
IS  a  wide  inquiry  for  your  Committco,  and  one  of  supreme  import-
ance. If  their  Report  is  to  have  the  efr;.ct  of  settling  that  gi-eat
question  of  humanity,  I  should  like       know  their  quaMcations

232

COEEESPONDENCB.

for  tlie  post.  You  ouglit  to  liave  at  least  one  of  the  arclibishops
amongst  you,  to  represent  the  religious  side  of  the  question,  with
Professor  De  Morgan  and  Professor  Tyiidall  to  represent  the  pure
and  applied  mathematics,  and  you  should  have  all  history  and
testimony  at  youi-  fingers'  ends.  Otherwise,  I  for  one  shall  hold
myself  at  libei-ty  to  object  to  your  Repoi-t,  whether  it  be  favour-
able or  unfavourable.  '

"  One  thing  is  essential  to  give  your  Peport  even  a  negative
value,  and  that  is  that  you  rigidly  state  all  the  conditions  under
which  each  investigation  takes  place,  because  your  doing  so  may
at  all  events  show  under  what  conditions  spiritual  phenomena  wiU
not  occur.

"  I  hope  you  may  have  more  success  than  I  anticipate ;  and  if
you  follow  the  very  excellent  programme  of  your  Society,  and  can
give  even  this  subject  fair  treatment,  you  wHl  be  entitled  to  the
best  thanks  of  the  community.

"  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

,,  -rn  "W.  M.  Wilkinson."

"  G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq.

Dr.  Davey
"  Noi-thwobds,  Bristol,  7th  Feb.,  1869.
"  Dear  Sir,— It  gives  me  no  small  satisfaction  to  find  that  the
subject  of  SpirituaUsm  is  about  to  be  duly  investigated  by  a  com-
petent tribunal.    I  have  been  engaged  in  the  investigation-the
practical  investigation-of  Spiritualism  smce  the  summer  of  1862
I  have   during  the  past  six  or  seven  years,  attended  scores  of
seances,  have  satisfied  myself  not  only  of  the  mere  abstract  truth  of
SpirituaUsm,  but  of  its  gi-eat  and  maa-veUous  power  for  good,  both
on  moral  and  reUgious  grounds.    The  direct  and  positive  commu-
oiications  vouchsafed  to  me  from  very  many  near  and  dear  relatives
and  friends,  said  to  be  dead,  have  been  of  the  most  pleasing  yet
startling  character,  and  these  have  not  only  removed  whatever
doubts  did  once  belong  to  me,  but  have  convinced  me  of  many
gi-eat  and  solemn  truths  in, regard  to  the  future  of  man  which,

LETTER  FROM  ME.  SHOETEE.

233

anterioi*  to  1862,  were  altogether  ignored  by  me,  and  deemed
scai-cely  worthy  of  the  nursery.

"  Faithfully  yours,
"  G.  W.  Bennett,  Esq."  "  J.  G.  Davey,  M.D."

Mr.  Shorter.

"23,  Russell  Road,  HoUoway,  N.

"Febniaiy  11th,  1869.

"  G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  thank  you  for  your  courteous  letter  of  the
6th  ult.  which  I  regi-et  has  only  just  come  to  hand.  At  the  pre-
sent stage  of  the  inquiry  I  have  but  two  suggestions  to  urge  upon
the  Committee : —

"First.  That  in  iavesfigating  phenomena,  with  the  laws  of
which  (should  the  Committee  decide  such  phenomena  to  be
gemiine)  they  do  not  even  profess  to  be  acquainted,  they  should
confine  themselves  (ia  the  fii-st  instance  at  all  events)  to  simple
observation,  without  attempting  to  dictate  the  conditions  under
which  the  phenomena  shaU,  or  shall  not,  occur.

"  Second.  That  as  it  is  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  whole
body  of  facts  bearing  on  the  case  which .  can  come  under  the  per-
sonal observation  of  the  Committee  or  of  any  Committee,  it  would
be  highly  desii-able  to  obtain  the  evidence  of  persons  of  known
inteUigence  and  veracity,  especiaHy  of  men  of  science,  who  have
preceded  them  in  this  investigation;  and  that  to  this  end  a  letter
of  inquiiy  be  addressed  to  them  requesting  them  to  state  any  facts
in  relation  to  the  subject  which  have  come  under  their  personal
observation.  I  would  more  particularly  suggest  that  such  appHca-
tion  be  made  to  the  following  gentlemen,  whose  addresses  I  append
as  far  as  they  are  known  to  me  :

"CromweU  F.  Varley,  Esq.,  Fleetwood  House,  Beckenham.

"  Professor  De  Morgan,  91,  Adelaide  Eoad,  N.W.

"Dr.  J.  M.  OuUy,  The  Priory,  Great  Malvern.

"Dr.  J.  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  4,  St.  John's  Wood  ViUas,  N.W.

"Dr.  Dixon,  8,  Great  Oi-mond  Street,  W.C.

n

234  OOEEESPONDENCB.

"Newton  Crosland,  Esq.,  Blackheath.

"  William  Howitt,  Esq.,  The  Orchard,  Hare  Greon,  Eater,  SuiTey.

"Robert  Chambers,  Esq.,  St.  Andrew's,  Ediubm-gh.

"H.  D.  Jencken,  Esq.,  Kilmorey  House,  Norwood.

"J.  G.  Crawford,  Esq.,  52,  Gloucester  Crescent,  N.W.

"W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq.,  Oakfield,  Kilburn.

"  Lord  Adare,  5,  Buckingham  Gate.

"The  Master  of  Lindsay,  Grosvenor  Square.
"  This  would  probably  at  present  be  sufficient.  I  must  however
add  that  I  have  held  no  conmiTinication  on  the  subject  with  any
of  the  gentlemen  named  (some  of  whom  are  not  even  personally
known  to  me),  and  that  I  cannot  say  how  far  they  may  have  the
time  and  disposition  to  respond  to  such  an  inquiry,  but  I  think  the
application  would  be  well  worth  making.

"  Tours  respectfully,

"Thomas  Shokter."

Dk.  J.  J.  Garth  Wilkinson.

"  76,  Wimpole  Street,  Cavendish  Square,

"London,  Feb.  12th,  1869.

"Dear  Sir,  I  have  no  suggestions  to  make  with  respect  to

'  SpiritLialism'  that  wiU  afford  any  guidance  to  the  Committee  of
your  valuable  Society,  whose  freedom  and  good  intentions  as  a
social  organ  I  beg  to  tell  you  I  honour.
"  Excepting  one  suggestion  : —

"  I  recommend  you  to  poU  the  Committee,  pro  and  con,  with
any  amount  of  definiteness  you  or  they  think  right,  on  the  geneml
question  of  Spii-itualism,  before  the  deUberations ;  and  then,  again,
after  the  deUberations :  and  thus  ascertain  statisticaUy  wha-t  differ-
ence the  inquiry  has  made.

"  I  liave  long  been  convinced  by  the  experience  of  my  life  as  a
pioneer  in  several  heterodoxies  which  are  rapidly  becoming  ortho-
doxies, that  nearly  all  tnith  is  temperamental  to  us,  or  given  in
the  affections  and  intuitions,  and  that  discussion  and  inquiry  do
little  more  than  feed  temperament.

LETTER  FROM  MR.  HOWITT.

235

^  "To  prove  this,  observe  the  heat  Avith  which  the  driest  abstrac-
tions are  maintained  on  both  sides.  Tliat  heat,  that  affection,  that
indignation  is  the  real  factor  of  the  opinions  on  both  sides.

"I  have  been  a  believer  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  its  nearness
to  the  natural  world,  nearly  all  my  life.  And  the  rareness  of  com-
munication between  the  two  is  to  me  one  of  the  greatest  of
miracles;  a  proof  of  the  economic  wisdom,  the  supreme  manage-
ment, the  extraordinaiy  statesmanship  of  the  Akaighty.  My  whole
soul,  perfectly  unconvincible  by  the  other  side,  knows  this  for  me;
and  floods  me  with  the  power  of  it  every  hour.

"Others  are  built  from  the  opposite  convictions;  and  do  vast
material  good  works  in  consequence.  And  can  wait  to  turn  over
the  next  leaf  till  they  die.  "  Yours  very  faithfully,

"Gabth  Wilkinson."

Mr.  William  Howitt,

"The  Orchard,  Esher,  Feb.  26th,  1869.
"  Dear  Sii-,— On  my  return  from  a  fortnight's  absence,  I  find  on
my  table  a  letter  from  you  on  behalf  of  the  Dialectical  Society,
wishing  for  information  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  in  reference
to  an  investigation  into  its  phenomena,  proposed  to  be  made  by
the  Society.  This  statement  will  explain  the  cause  of  my  silence.
I  reply  to  you  now  at  once.

"I  am  by  no  means  sanguine  of  any  good  result  from  the  in-
quiries of  such  Committees.    Englishmen,  otherwise  well  advanced
in  the  intelligence  of  the  time,  are,  as  it  regards  spir-itualism
twenty  years  behind  the  literary  and  scientific  pubHcs  of  France^
Gei-many,  Switzerland,  and  the  United  States  of  America.  Scores
of  societies  of  those  countries,  and  millions  of  individuals,  have
entered  upon,  and  passed   actively  through   the  investigations
which  you  are  now  commencing,  ten,  fifteen,  and  twenty  yeai'S
ago.     However,   better  late  than  never.     Like  the  'Seven
Sleepers'  and  Rip  van  Winkle,  some  few  of  our  English  men
of  science  and  Hterature  are,  at  length,  waking  up,  to  find  the

236  CORRESPONDENCE.

world  of  uitelligence  abroad  gone  far  a-liead  of  tliem.  Thougli
late,  it  is  still  laudable.    Perhaps,  when  the  Dialectical  Society
has 'determined  the  present  point,  it  wUl  set  on  foot  a  similar
inquiiy  into  the  correctness  of  the  theory  of  the  Copernican
system,  of  that  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  of  the  principle  of
gravitation,  and  of  the  identity  of  lightning  and  electricity ;  for
Spiritualism,  havmg  now  received  the  assent  of  about  twenty  mil-
lions of  people  in  aU  countries,  after  personal  examination,  stands
faii4y  on  the  same  basis  of  fact  that  they  do.    Pray  do  not,  how-
ever, imagine  me  disposed  to  be  satirical.    I  am  simply  asserting
what  appears  to  me  a  most  prominent  and  unavoidable  truth.

"You  ask  me  to  give  you  any  suggestions  which  I  may  think
calculated  to  assist  you  in  your  inquiiy.    Most  mllingly;  but  I
am  afraid  that  it  wiU  be  much  easier  for  me  to  suggest  than  for
you  to  adopt  my  chief  suggestion,  which  is,  to  endeavour  before
opening  your  inquiries,  to  divest  yotu'  minds  of  all  prejudice  on
the  subject.    The  tendency  of  both  phUosophy  and  general  educa-
tion for  more  than  a  centiiry  has  been,  whilst  striving  to  suppress
all  prejudice,  to  create  a  load  of  prejudice  against  everything
spiritual.    Science,  phHosophy,  and  general  opinion  have  assumed,
more  and  more,  a  material  character,  and  in  no  countiy  more  than
in  this     I  must  say  to  you  as  judges  say  to  juries,  '  Gentlemen-
Divest  your  minds  of  all  mere  hearsay  ;  iix  them  only  on  the  evi-
dence '    It  is  not  easy ;  but  tiU  you  have  done  tHs,  you  can  make
no  real  progi'ess  in  your  present  inquiry.    You  may  as  well  expect
the  delicate  flowers  of  youi'  conservatories  to  flourish  m  a  night  s
^a-ost  out  of  doors.    To  produce  correct  results  you  must  estabhsh
the  necessary  conditions.     Now,  if  you  follow  the  example  of
Messrs.  Faraday  and  Tyndall,  and  insist  on  dictating  conditions
on  a  subject  of  wHch  you  are  ignorant,  faHui-e  is  inevitable.  You
must  come  to  the  subject  with  candour,  and  be  wHling  to  study
carefully  the  laws  and  characteristics  of  the  matter  under  consi-
deration.   It  is  from  obecUence  or  disobedience  to  this  prmciple
that  inquii-ies  instituted  by  societies,  or  by  small  compames  of
persons  mth  minds  open  to  the  truth,  have  succeeded  or  failed.

LETTER  FROM  MR.  HOWITT.

237

The  results  of  such  inquii-ies  are,  that  whilst  societies  and  com-
mittees have  retired  generally  from  the  investigation  without
obtaining  positive  fticts,  and,  therefore,  believing  that  no  such
existed,  private  companies  and  individuals  have  obtained  the  most
unquestionable  spiritual  phenomena,  to  the  amount  of  twenty  mil-
lions of  believers.     From  time  to  time,  accordingly,  we  have
learnt  that  Spii-itualism  has  been  demonstrated  undeniably  to  be  a
myth  and  a  delusion ;  that  it  was  dead  and  gone ;  that  the  Daven-
ports and  other  mediums  have  been  proved  impostors,  and  utterly
put  down the  truth  being  all  the  time  that  the  Davenports  re-
mained as  genuine  mediums  as  before,  and  that  spii-itualism  has
gone  forward,  advancing  and  expanding  its  field  of  action,  without
the  least  regard  to  the  failures,  the  falsehoods,  the  misrepresenta-
tions, and  the  malice  of  men.

"  Your  second  Avish  expressed  is,  that  I  would  '  endeavour  to
thi-ow  some  light  on  the  connection  apparently  existing  between
spiritualism  and  animal  magnetism,  or  would  refer  you  to  any
books  other  than  Reichenbach,  Gregoiy,  Feuchtersleben,  Enne-
moser,  Lee,  Ashbui-ner,  myself,  &c.'

"In  referring  you  to  a  few  of  the  leading  works  on  the  subject,
and  especiaUy  to  those  more  particularly  dealing  with  the  con-
nection between  spiritualism  and  magnetism,  I  may  excuse  my-
self entering  on  my  own  views  on  this  subject,  which  would  ■
extend  too  far  the  limits  of  this  letter.

"From  the  fii-st  fact  to  which  I  have  alluded,  that  of  the  very
late  period  at  which  EngHshmen  of  letters  have  entered  on  this
inquiiy,  compared  with  those  of  other  countries,  there  exists  an
extensive  spiritual  Hterature  in  both  America,  France,  Switzer-
land, and  Gei-many.  I  can  for  your  present  purposes  indicate  only
a  veiy  few  of  these  works,  and  those  exclusively  by  scientific  and
learned  writers.

"Amongst  American  works  on  Spii-itualism  you  should  carefully
read  the  Introduction,  by  J udge  Edmonds,  to  '  Spii-itualism'  by  Judge
Edmonds  and  G.  T.  Dexter,  where  you  have  the  experiences  of  an
able  lawyer  testing  evidence  as  he  would  do  in  a  court  of  justice.

238

OOERESPONDENOE.

"  Next,  the  '  Investigations'  of  Professor  Hare,  in  -wliicb,  as  a
great  electrician,  lie  details  Ms  severe  and  long  continued  scrutiny
into  the  nature  of  these  phenomena ;  both  he  and  Judge  Edmonds
having  undertaken  these  inquiries  in  the  full  persuasion  that  they
should  expose  and  put  an  end  to  the  pretensions  of  spiritualism.

"  I  do  not  refer  you  here  to  the  numerous  works  of  A.  J.  Davis,
which,  though  most  remarkable  in  another  point  of  view,  are  not
so  necessary  to  your  purpose.

"  The  '  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World,'  by  the
Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  a  carefully  and  clearly  reasoned  work,
might  be  of  service  to  you.

"  Of  German  works  : —

"  '  Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst '  von  Justinus  Kemei-,  M.D.
"  '  Die  Zwei  Besessener.'

"  '  Die  Somnambiilen  Tische.  Zur  Geschichte  tmd  Erklarungen
dieser  Erscheinung.'

"  Dr.  Kerner  was  a  man  of  profound  science,  and  distinguished
by  his  works  in  different  departments.  His  '  Seeress  of  Prevorst,'
who  was  his  patient,  has  been  tx-anslated  by  Mrs.  Crowe.  The  re-
markable phenomena  recorded  in  this  work  are  especially  valuable,
as  they  have  all  been  so  fully  and  widely  confirmed  by  the  experi-
ences of  spiritualists  of  all  countries  since.

"Next  in  importance  to  these  are  the  inquiries  of  Herr  D.
Hornimg,  the  late  secretary  of  the  Berlin  Magnetic  Association  : —

"  1.  '  Neue  Geheimnisse  des  Tages  durch  Geistes  Magnetismus.'

Leipsic,  1857.  *

"  2.  'Neueste  Erfahrungen  aus  dem  Geisterleben.'  Leipsic,

1858.

"  3.  '  Heinrich  Heine,  der  Unsterbliche ;'  also  a  brief  continua-
tion of  his  inquiries.

"These  works  contain  the  steady  and  persevering  researches
and  experiments  of  Herr  Hornung  and  a  select  body  of  friends
through  a  course  of  years.  Hornung  commenced  the  inquiry  as  a
practical  magnetist,  and  continued  it  with  unwearied  assiduity,
ti-acing  the  phenomena  through  all  their  phases,  and  availing  him-

LETTEK  FKOM  ME.  HOWITT.

239

self  of  the  experiences  of  scientific  men  iii  all  parts  of  Germany,
in  S"svitzerlancl,  France,  and  Italy.

"The  works  of  Gorres,  one  of  the  most  learned  journalists  and
historians  of  Germany,  especially  his  '  Christliche  Mystik,'  abound
with  extraordinaiy  facts,  but  would  requii-e  a  long  time  to  perase
them.

"  In  French  : —

"  The  '  Pneumatologie '  of  the  Marquis  de  Mii-ville.
"  '  Extmits  de  la  Pneumatologie,'  &c.

"  '  Des  Tables  Toumantes ;  du  Surnaturel  en  General  et  des
Esprits,'  of  the  Comte  de  Gasparin.  1854.

Tables  Tournantes' de  Comte  de  Szapary.    1854.  '  '

"  The  works  of  Baron  Dupotet  and  of  Puys^gur.

"  '  Pneumatologie  Positive  et  Experimentale,'  par  le  Baron  de
Guldenstubbe.

"  The  works  of  M.  Segouin,  who  through  magnetism  was  con-
vinced of  the  truth  of  spiritualism.

"  Cahagnet's  '  Arcanes  de  la  Yie  Future  Devoiles,'  and  his  '  Ency-
clopedie  Magnetique  et  Spirituelle.'    4  tom.

"  But,  perhaps,  most  important  of  all  as  regards  your  inquiry,  is
the  correspondence  of  the  two  celebrated  professors  of  magnetism,
MM.  Deleuze  and  Billot,  who,  in  prosecuting  their  magnetic  re-
searches were,  each  unknown  to  the  other,  surprised  by  the  pre-
sence of  spiritual  phenomena  of  the  most  decided  and  varied  kind.
Glimpses  of  an  a/rriere  pensee  in  their  published  works  led  to  an
explanation  between  them,  which  was  published  in  two  volumes,
in  Paris,  in  1836.  I  may  add  the  'Journal  de  I'Ame'  of  Dr!
Roessinger,  of  Geneva,  and  his  'Fragment  sur  I'Electricite  Univer-
selle.'

"  In  Italian  : —

"Consoni's  '  Varieta  Elettro-Magnetico  e  Relativa  Spiegazione.'

"  These  works,  by  men  chiefly  of  scientific  eminence,  are  more
than  can  be  mastered  in  a  short  time— they  are  only  a  sample,
the  rest  are  legion,  spiritual  literature  comprising  many  hundred
volumes ;  for,  as  I  have  said,  your  Society  is  now  entering  on  a

240

COERESPONDENOE.

field  as  new,  wMcli  has  been  traversed  and  reaped  many  years  ago.
And,  after  all,  though  evidently  disembodied  spirits  come  into
contact  with  embodied  ones,  through  the  agency  of  magnetism  and
electricity,  there  is  probably  an  inner  cognate  force  operating  in
the  process,  which,  lite  the  principle  of  life,  lies  too  deep  for  dis-
covery by  any  human  powers.

"  With  my  best  wishes  for  the  successful  prosecution  of  your
proposed  labours,

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  faithfully,

"  William  Howitt."

"  George  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq."

The  E.T.  Hon.  Lord  Lytton.

"Torquay,  Feb.  28th,  1869.

"  Sir, — I  am  honoured  by  yoitr  letter  of  the  25th.

"  I  am  unable  to  ofier  any  suggestions  as  to  a  scientific  exami-
nation of  the  phenomena  which  you  classify  under  the  head  of
'  Spiritualism,'  for  the  data  requisite  to  science  are  not  yet  attain-
able. So  far  as  my  experience  goes,  the  phenomena,  when  freed  from
the  impostures  with  which  their  exhibition  abounds,  and  examined
rationally,  are  traceable  to  material  influences  of  the  natiu'e  of
which  we  are  ignorant.  They  require  certain,  physical  organisa^
tions  or  temperaments  to  produce  them,  and  vary  according  to
those  organisations  or  temperaments.  Hence,  Albertus  Magnus
says,  that  a  man  must  be  born  a  magician,  i.e.,  born  with  certain
physical  idiosyncrasies,  which  no  study  can  acquire.

"  In  those  constitutional  idiosyncrasies,  whether  the  phenomena
exhibited  through  or  by  them  be  classed  under  the  name  of  clair-
voyance, spirit  manifestation,  or  witchcraft,  I  have  invariably
found  a  marked  comparative  preponderance  of  the  electric  fluid ;
and  the  phenomena  are  more  or  less  striking  in  proportion  to  the
electricity  of  the  atmosphere.  Hence  the  most  notable  exhibitions
appear  to  have  been  obtained  in  the  dry  winter  nights  of  New
York.

LETTER  FEOM  LORD  LYTTON.

241

"  I  should  say  that  if  any  number  of  sound  thinking  persons
wish  to  investigate  these  phenomena,  they  should  commence  by
dismissing  all  preconceived  judgments,  and  in  a  temper  utterly
free  from  credulity  j  and,  above  all,  be  very  careful  not  to  jump  to
the  conclusion  that  spirits  of  another  world  are  concerned  in  the
matter.  They  who  adopt  that  opinion  stop  all  genuinely  scien-
tific inquii-y,  and  are  apt  to  be  led  into  very  dangerous  and  mis-
chievous errors  of  conduct.  They  are  deceived  into  believing  that
they  hear  predictions  and  receive  counsels  from  beings  vnsev  than
themselves,  and,  actmg  accordingly,  may  readily  be  duped  into
disgrace  and  ruin.    I  have  known  such  instances.

"  It  is  now  as  in  the  days  of  Medic^val  witchcraft,  in  which
the  supposed  fiends  juggled  and  betrayed  the  invokerj  where
one  truth  is  announced  through  these  abnormal  media,  100  lies
are  uttered;-  people  are,  as  in  dreams,  apt  to  remember  the  truth
and  forget  the  lies.  And  as  to  the  responses  obtained,  emanating
from  wiser  intellects  than  are  vouchsafed  to  the  living,  it  is  no''-
ticeable  that  triviality  and  inanity  are  the  prevalent  characteristics
of  the  revelations,  and  not  one  thought  has  been  put  forth  by  them
which  was  not  in  the  world  before.

"  To  those  who  believe  that  they  are  conferring  with  the  spii-its
of  the  dead,  I  would  only  say,  'Let  them  be  as  rigid  in  theii-
cross-examination  of  these  pretended  souls  departed  as  they  would
be  in  that  of  a  claimant  of  their  property  on  the  gi-ound  of  identity
with  some  heir-at-law  long  missing,'  and  the  communicants  wiU
soon  break  down,  and  be  condemned  as  impostors  by  any  practical
jury-

"The  word  ' Spiritualism '  in  itself  should  not  be  admitted  in
rational  inquiry.  Natural  agencies  are  apparent  in  all  the  phe-
nomena (at  least  so  far  as  I  have  witnessed  them)  ascribed  to
spirits.

"If  matter  be  moved  from  one  end  of  the  room  to  the  other,  it
must  be  by  a  material  agency— though  it  may  be  as  invisible  as  an
electric  or  odic  fluid-and  the  matter  of  a  human  brain  is  always
needed  to  convey  any  impression  to  the  auditor  or  spectator.

E

242

COERESPONDENCB.

"  If  an  inquiiy  were  instituted  on  the  rational  spirit  witli  wliicli
metaphysics,  meclianics,  and  physiology  are  studied,  it  is  possible
that  some  useful  discoveries  may  be  made ;  in  any  other  mode  of
inquiry  my  persuasion  is,  that  the  result  will  be  disappointment  to
real  philosophers,  and  only  conducive  to  the  increase  of  profitless
and  mischievous  superstitions.

"  Your  obedient  servant,

"  Lytton."

Mr.  J.  EWMOEE  JOITES.

"  Sir, — You  are  -welcome  to  use  the  narrative*  published  in  the
"  gpii-itual  Magazine  "  as  to  incidents  that  happened  at  my  house.
As  a  family,  we  are  willing  to  make  a  declaration  before  a  magis-
trate as  to  its  correctness.  My  mother,  who  was  raised  with  her
chair  into  the  air,  is  alive  and  well  (age  84).

"  I  could  not  but  smile  at  the  idea  of  your  Committee  collecting
as  large  a  body  of  facts  as  they  can  get  together,  ancient  and
modern.  Why,  you  would  require  a  wheelbarrow  or  two  to  assist.
The  Bible  is  full  of  facts;  'Plutarch's  Lives'  contain  many  inci-
dents ;  all  the  leading  theological  teachers'  lives  were  governed  by
spirit  direction.  See  their  biographies,  even  after  being  stripped
of  the  mass  of  supernatural  incidents.

"  If  you  obtain  the  nine  volumes  of  '  Spiritual  Telegraph,'  pub-
lished at  New  York  ;  Governor  Talmadge's  appendix  to  Linton's
'  Healing  of  the  Nations ;'  Judge  Edmonds'  '  Introduction '  to  his
book,  'Spii-itualism/  R.  Dale  Owen's  book,  'Footfalls  on  the
Boundary  of  Another  World;'  Redman's  'Mystic  Houi-s,'— you
will  have  such  a  mass  of  evidence  as  will  satisfy  any  extraordinary
committee,  that  phenomena  are  produced  by  invisible  beings,  who
see  us,  see  our  thoughts,  and  as  we  cannot  see  them,  can  check-
mate us,  or  help  us  when  they  lUce  to  take  the  trouble.

 ■  ^

*  [The  naiTative  refen-ed  to  was  recited  by  Mr.  Jones  in  his  vivd
voce  statement  to  the  Committee,  and  wiU  he  found  on  page  147.-
Editorial  Note.^

LETTER  FEOM  DR.  DIXON.

243

"  To  assist  you,  somewhat,  I  send  you  a  copy  of  my  book,
Natural  and  Supernatural.'    The  sections  relating  to  the  super-
natural will  help  you.    The  incidents  marked  and  named  in  a  list
on  inside  of  cover  I  vouch  foi*.

"  Allow  me  to  strongly  recommend  you  to  adopt,  as  a  Committee,
the  only  plan  by  which  you  can  get  at  the  facts  for  yourselves,
especially  if  you  have  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Home.

"  Be  very  watchful.  Be  suspicious,  but  do  not  shoio  it.  Act  as
gentlemen.  Mentally  express  your  suspicions,  if  any,  and  you  will
have  a  visible  answer.  Thus  showing  your  thoughts  are  perceived
by — ^whom  ?  by  intellectual,  intelligent  beings.

"  I  am  Sir,  yours  truly
"J.  Ejj-moee  Jones.
"28th  Feb.  1869.
"  Enmore  Park,  S.  Norwood.
"To  G.  W.  Bennett,  Esq.,  Hon.  Sec."

Dr.  J.  DixoK.

"  8,  Great  Ormond  Street,  W.C.
"March  3rd,  1869.
"  G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq.,  Hon.  Sec.

"  Dialectical  Society.
"  Dear  Sir, — I  acknowledge  the  polite  intimation  of  your  Com-
mittee's object.

"Eor  my  own  part,  I  began  the  process  of  investigation  18  years
ago,  at  45  years  of  age,  and  I  continue  it.  I  am  glad  to  hear  of
others  investigating,  particularly  men  of  the  dialectical  stamp,
although  I  do  not  think  proceeding  by  court  of  inquiry  and
adjudication  is  best.  A  Committee  to  examine  fully  and  impartially
(viz.,  judge  impartially)  implies  such  a  court — a  court  to  decide
whether  that  be  fact  which  is  testified  to  as  fact  by  thousands  of
men  as  sharp  as  the  Committee  itself !

"  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  repudiation  of
testimony  implied  by  the  very  appoiiatment  of  such  a  Committee,

R  2

244

COEEESPONDENOE.

and  that  sucli  repudiation  will  necessarily  extend  itself  to  tlie  testi-
mony of  tlie  Committee  itself.  Should  the  Committee  affirm  cer-
tain facts  in  question,  the  majority  of  your  Society  and  of  outsiders
will,  imless  they  belie  all  precedent,  add  the  Committee  to  their
list  of  '  dupes,'  '  victims,'  '  fools ; '  should  it  not  affirm  the  facts,  it
will  confirm  the  unknowing  in  their  theoretical  denial,  but  it  will
not  make  men  unknow  that  which  they  know.

"  I  see  only  this  dilemma  for  the  Committee,  to  escape  which  there
seems  to  me  only  one  rational  course,  namely,  not  to  pronounce  an
opinion  or  judgment ;  but,  after  stating  the  facts  brought  before
them,  to  conclude  by  recommending  the  Society  to  accept  concur-
rent respectable  testimony  upon' this  subject  as  upon  any  other,
and  to  study  the  facts  individually  for  themselves.

"  I  regard  it,  however,  as  a  sign  ia  the  direction  of  accepting
such  testimony  if  it  is  the  Committee  who,  through  you,  ask  for
personal  experience.

"  For  myself  I  would  willingly  write  mine  in  extenso,  but  my
engagements  do  not  permit,  nor  can  I  send  any  of  those  volumes
of  the  '  Spiiitual  Magazine,'  which  contain  various  narratives  of
my  experience ;  but  I  will  request  your  acceptance,  by  same  post,
of  a  small  volume*  which  contains  a  little  narrative  by  me — you
will  find  it  at  pages  xxiii-xxxii.  The  Committee  may  find  it  as
worthy  of  their  attention  as  any  other  small  thing  which  indicates
a  truth.  In  these  phenomena  I  have  always  attached  importance
to  thought,  feeling,  or  knowledge,  demonstrably  not  belonging  to
the  persons  jjresent  before  our  eyes.

"The  little  work  itself  ('Confessions  of  a  Truth  Seeker')  is
wi-itten  by  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter :  he  was  for  years,  until  his  vision
became  impaii-ed,  secretary  of  the  Working  Men's  College,  and
would  have  brought  his  little  book  out  with  his  name,  but  for
the  office  he  held.  The  book  contains  his  testimony,  which  is
interesting  and  suggestive  to  inquii-ers.  It  was  my  testimony
generally  which  chiefly  induced  him  to  follow  the  subject  to  its

*  [  "  Confessions  of  a  Truth  Seeker,"  g.  v.—mitorial  Note.']

LETTER  OF  ME.  CKOSLAND.

245

final  issue  in  his  mind.  Since  then,  he  has  written  a  valuable
octavo  volume,  '  The  Two  Worlds,'  which  the  Dialectical  Library
should  not  be  without.

"  I  am,  my  Dear  Sir,

"  Yours  very  truly,

"'J.  Dmon."

Mr.  Newton  Crosland.

"  Lynton  Lodge,  Yanbrugh  Park  Eoad,  Blackheath,

"  6th  March,  1869.
"  Dear  Sii-, — I  have  the  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of
yoiu-  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  (by  a  cui'ious  coincidence  dated  on
my  bii-thday.)

"  All  that  I  and  my  wife  kn6w  of  the  facts  of  Spiritualism  is
contained  in  my  essay  on  'Apparitions;'  and  my  wife's  book
entitled  '  Light  in  the  Yalley.'

"  By  being  too  early  in  the  field  in  my  advocacy  of  the  cause  of
Spii-itualism,  I  lost  £600  per  amium.  The  consequence  is,  that  I
am  now  obliged  to  work  hard,  and  I  have  no  time  or  leisure  to
devote  to  teaching  others  a  subject  which  I  consider  profound,
complicated,  instructive,  fascinating,  and  ennobling.  The  facts  of
SpiiituaHsm  are  to  me  as  certain  and  indisj)utable  as  those  of  the
multij)lication  table ;  and  to  be  asked  now-a-days  whether  I  believe
them,  is  almost  as  playfully  irritating  as  to  be  questioned  about  the
grounds  for  my  oiDrtiion  that  12  times  12  make  144.

"  One  caution  however  I  must  give,  and  that  is,  that  the  subject
is  not  to  be  grappled  with  and  mastered  without  the  most  careful,
elaborate,  and  anxious  study.  It  took  me  18  months'  patient
investigation  to  learn  the  simple  elements  of  the  subject.  The
religious  philosophy  which  underlies  and  is  suggested  by  the  outer
phenomena,  is  of  the  choicest  and  most  sterling  value.  It  does
therefore  amuse  me  when  I  hear  clever  people  talk  '  of  arriving  at
conclusions,'  after  a  few  hours'  examination.  Let  us  therefore
take  care  what  path  we  choose  in  ovxr  process  of  investigation.  It

24(5

COEEESPONDENCB.

ought  to  guide  us  to  a  world  of  light  and  beauty ;  but  Ave  may
more  easily  drift  into  a  quagmire  of  dangerous  nonsense.

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  truly,

"  G.  W.  Bennett,  Esq.  "  Newton  Crosland.

"  As  far  as  my  comfort  and  convenience  are  concerned,  I  would
rather  you  asked  me  to  go  through  a  course  of  Mathematics  with
you,  than  a  course  of  Spiritualistic  study.  The  former  would  be
light  in  comparison  with  the  latter."

Mr.  Bobert  Chambers.

"  St.  Andrews,  March  8th,  1869.
('  Sir^ — I'or  any  one  desirous  of  making  the  inquiry  you  speak
of,  I  know  no  book  more  worthy  of  attention  than  Mrs.  De
Morgan's  volume,  '  From  Matter  to  Spirit.'  '  Incidents  of  my  Life,'
by  D.  D.  Home,  is  also  important  for  the  learner.  As  to  the
theory  you  mention*,  I  know  that  it  was  fiilly  embraced  by  the
late  Professor  Gregory.  He  read  a  lecture  on  it  in  Edinburgh
but  I  think  it  never  was  published.  My  own  opinion  is  that
their  identity  will  in  time  be  demonstrated.

"  In  the  present  state  of  science  individual  opinion  goes  no  way.
Every  man  must  examine  and  attain  conviction  for  himself.  It  is
well,  however,  that  new  students  should  be  warned  against  trusting
in  the  dicta,  for  these  are  as  often  false  as  true.

"  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  Servant,

"  K.  Chambers."

"  G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq."

Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson.

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.C.,
"  12th  May,  1869.
"  Dear  Sir,— I  am  not  able  to  attend  your  Committee,  but  in
place  of  my  oral  testimony  I  send  you  a  piece  of  written  evidence
*  [The  magnetic  theory  by  wHch  Professor  Gregoi-y  and  others  have
sought  to  account  for  the '  Spii-ifcual'  phenomena.-JTolc  ly  the  Hon.
Secretary.'}

LETTER  FROM  ME.  WILKINSON.

247

which  I  attest  the  tiiith  of.  As  some  people  place  more  value
upon  testimony  given  under  the  responsibility  of  an  oath,  I  can
refer  you  to  my  sworn  evidence  in  the  Home  and  Lyon  suit,  and
also  to  the  affidavits  of  Mr.  Robert  Chambers,  Gerald  Massey,
Mr.  Cromwell  F.  Varley,  Dr.  Gully,  Mr.  S.  0.  Hall  and  Mrs.  S.
C.  Hall.  These  are  to  be  found  in  the  last  June  number  of  the
'  Spiritual  Magazine,'  along  with  the  testimony  of  Professor  De
Morgan,  and  an  instructive  account  of  how  Spiritualism  is  viewed
by  Professor  Tyndall  and  such  like.  This  number  is  out  of  print,
but  some  of  the  gentlemen  on  your  Committee  no  doubt  have  it.
I  commend  the  sworn  testimony  to  your  consideration.

"  When  your  Committee  has  favoured  us  with  its  report  as  to
the  existence  of  a  spiritiial  world,  and  as  to  whether  there  have
ever  occurred  any  supernatural  phenomena,  I  fear  the  question
will  be  veiy  much  where  it  was  before.  The  public  will  think
you  are  a  set  of  asses  if  you  report  in  favour  of  it,  and  I  shall
think  you  are  not  very  wise  if  you  go  the  other  way.  So  you
have  not  at  all  a  pleasant  task  before  you  if  you  have  the  least
care  for  what  people  think  or  say  of  you.

"  Yours  faithfully,
"  G.  Wheatley  Bennett,  Esq.,  "  W.  M.  Wilkinson."

"  H.  M.  Customs."

[From  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine  "  for  April,  I860.]
"  The  foUowing  illustrations  of  the  physical  manifestations  of
(so-called)  Spiritualism  occurred  in  the  house  of  the  writer  on  the
evenings  of  the  25th  and  26th  February,  1860,  in  the  presence  of
two  of  his  friends  and  of  himself,  through  the  mediumship  of  J.
R.  M.  Squii-e,  Esq.,  of  Boston,  IJ.  S.,  at  present  on  a  visit  in
England.    The  writer  of  this  narrative  solemnly  pledges  his  word
of  honour  to  the  strict  and  literal  accuracy,  and  to  the  careful
sifting  by  himself  and  his  friend,  of  every  statement  contained
therein.    He  has  classified  the  physical  manifestations  which  he
witnessed  on  these  two  occasions,  by  which  they  will  be  more
readily  narrated  than  if  a  strict  chronological  detail  were  given.

248  COEBESPONDENCE.

"1.  Rcqypi'tig — The  raps  on  the  dining  table  wei-e  loud,  frequent,
and  intelligent,  i.  e.  they  responded  to  the  wish  of  the  medium,
imitating  his  raps,  rapping  the  numbers  requested  and  giving
responses  by  the  alphabet  to  questions  put.

"  The  writer  is  positive  that  no  attempt  on  the  part  of  Mr.
Squire,  artifieially  to  produce  such  raps  as  he  heard  would  have
succeeded.

"  2.  Moving  of  Tables. — The  dining  table,  a  large  heavy  oak
table,  5  feet  by  7  feet,  was  frequently  lifted  up  and  moved  about
the  room,  and  this  not  by  any  of  the  four  persons  present.  Again,
a  writing  table  on  which  the  four  witnesses  seated  themselves  was
twice  tUted  over  with  a  strange  unearthly  facility,  and  they
landed  on  the  floor.  These  two  facts,  the  raps  and  movements,
the  writer  is  fully  conscious  can  only  be  received  by  those  who
have  faith  alike  in  his  accuracy  of  statement,  and  in  his  power  of
observation  and  detection  of  fraud.  What  follows  requires  only
faith  in  the  truthfulness  of  his  narrative.

"  3.  Writing  hy  an  unseen  Agent. — Mr.  Squire  held  a  pencil  on
a  sheet  of  paper  with  one  hand  xmder  the  table.  It  was  rapidly
and  audibly  written  on,  and  then  jmlled  forcibly  out  of  his  hand
and  thrown  across  the  room.  On  one  sheet  was  written  the
surname  of  the  writer,  and  on  the  other,  '  0  tarry  thou.'  (On
the  chimneypiece  in  the  dining-room  is  an  illuminated  card  with
the  verse  from  the  Psahn,  '  O  tarry  thou,  the  Lord's  leisure,'  &c.)

"  Farther,  the  'writer  placed  below  the  dining  table,  on  two
occasions,  a  piece  of  blank  paper  and  a  cedar  pencU.  The  fire,
partly  wood,  was  burning  brightly.  The  four  persons  present
formed  a  circle  with  their  hands  on  the  table.  Writing  was
distinctly  heard  on  the  paper.  On  examining  the  paper,  the
word  '  God '  was  three  times  wi-itten  in  a  cramped  hand,  and  on
the  other  occasion  the  writer's  surname.

"  No  one  present  had  the  slightest  chance  of  even  toiiching  the
paper  either  before  or  after  it  was  placed  by  the  writer  under  the
dining  table,

"  4.  Ringi7ig  Bells,  playing  an  Accoi-dion,  breaking  the  Cedar

STATEMENT  BY  DR.  EOBEETSON.

249

Pencil,  d-c,  d-c.—A  small  hand-bell  placed  on  the  paper  under  the
table,  and  the  hands  of  all  four  persons  present  being  all  the  time,
as  before,  held  on  the  table  in  a  circle,  the  bell  was  frequently  and
loudly  rung ;  the  number  of  times  asked  was  rung,  and  the  bell
was  thrown  about  the  room,  and  thrown  on  to  the  table  by  some
unseen  agent.    An  accordion,  similarly  placed  as  the  bell,  was
played  by  no  human  agent  or  poAver,  and  it  was  also  freely  moved
and  played  while  held  in  the  Aviiter's  hand.    The  sensation  thus
produced  resembled  a  bite  of  a  strong  fish  at  a  line.    The  bell  was
tossed  about  and  twisted  and  played  Avith,  as  if  an  ape  had  it  in
his  paw,  and  also  m-apped  up  in  a  pocket  handkerchief  which  was
on  the  gi-ound.    The  cedar  pencil,  on  the  writer  expressing  the
wish,  was  snapped  in  two  and  one  half  thi-own  on  the  table.
The  chaii-s  and  a  book  were  thrown  across  the  room,  faUing  as
lightly  as  if  they  were  an  article  of  clothing.    While  the  bell  was
being  played  with,  the  writer  was  five  times  distinctly  touched  on
the  leg  imder  the  table.    The  sensation  was  most  unpleasant.
m.  Squire  was  also  about  this  time,  as  far  as  the  wiiter  could
judge  in  the  dark  by  the  sound  of  the  voice,  lifted  about  two  feet  °
in  the  air.    THs  was  accompanied  with  marked  tremor  and
nervous  exaltation.

"5.  Lifting  Weight  and  breaking  a  large  Table.— A  heavy
cii-cular  table,  made  of  biixh  and  strongly  constructed,  was  lifted
a  somersault  in  the  aii-  and  thrown  on  the  bed,  the  left  hand  only
of  Ml-.  Squii-e  being  placed  on  the  surface,  his  other  hand  held,  and
his  legs  tied  to  the  chaii^  on  which  he  sat.    The  table  was  After-
wards twice  lifted  on  to  the  head  of  the  writer  and  of  Mr.  Squire.
Only  a  strong  force  applied  at  the  further  side  of  the  ciixular  top
could  have  produced  this  result.    This  force  Mr.  Squire,  as  is
evident  from  his  position  (standing  close  to  the  writer  'at  one
pomt  of  the  cii-cle  ^ith  his  hands  tied,)  could  not  have  exerted.
The  efforts  of  the  writer  to  prevent  this  lifting  of  the  table  had
no  mfluence  on  the  strange  unseen  force  applied  to  lift  the  table
thus  against  his  wish  and  force.

"  At  the  writer's  request,  this  table  was  afterwards  smashed  and

250

COERESPONDENCE,

broken,*  and  one  fragment  tlirown  across  the  room,  the  table  at
the  time  being  held  by  the  writer  and  Mr.  Squire.  Tliis  occurred
in  half  a  minute.  The  writer  has  since  vainly  endeavoured,  with
all  his  sti'ength,  to  break  one  of  the  remaining  legs.  The  one  broken
was  rent  across  the  grain  of  the  wood.  The  noise  of  the  table
thrown  and  knocked  about  by  unseen  agency  on  the  floor,  while
the  writer  held  Mr.  Squire's  hands,  was  really  awful  and  mysterious,
and  it  was  impossible  for  Mr.  Sqviire  to  have  taken  any  part  in
the  operation.

"  6.  Medium  Writing. — The  sudden  seizure  of  the  hand  of  the
medium  with  a  desii'e  to  write,  and  the  writing  itself  require  to  be
seen  to  be  credited.  The  writer  contents  himself  with  adding  to
this  record  three  of  the  messages  thus  written,  and  afterwai-ds,
with  some  difficulty,  spelt  out.  They  do  not  appear  to  him  at  all
worthy  of  the  spiritual  origin  ascribed  to  them  by  Mr.  Squire  and
the  Spiritualists,  still  less  does  he  regard  them  as  a  fraud.  He
feels  satisfied  that  they  were  written  by  Mr.  Squire,  his  hand
tracing  what  his  mind  was  quite  unconscious  of.

"  A. — /  do  not  desire  to  intrude  myself  ujmi  you,  gentlemen,  hut
I  may  be  able  at  some  future  time,  to  add  someiohat  largely  to  your
ideas  upon  this  subject,  and  will  do  so  hereafter.

"  B. — /  am  quite  well  aware  what  a  mind  tinged  with  science
most  requires,  and  I  am  for  one,  quite  proud  to  add,  that  I  have
■^eo'haps  a  high&r  respiect  for  such,  than  my  friend  the  attm-ney,  and

*  The  phenomena  related  in  this  section  were  all  perfoimed  in  the  dark,
with  a  screen  before  the  fii-e  and  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  party,  a
candle  being  from  time  to  time  lighted.  The  hands  of  Mi'.  Squire  were
held  by  the  writer,  who  is  as  positive  as  it  is  possible  for  a  witness  to  be
that  Mr  Squii-e  neither  could  nor  did  aid  or  contribute  to  the  production
of  these  phenomena.

The  writer  is  of  course  aware  of  the  objection,  that  the  da?:k  offered  an
opportunity  for  fraud,  and  that  it  is  faith  in  his  honesty  as  a  witness  and
capacity  as  an  investigator  of  phenomena,  opposed  to  aU  his  previous
prejudices  and  views,  which  must  determine  the  reader  how  far  he  may  be
capable  of  deciding  this  question.  He  is  most  positively  of  opinion  that
such  fraud  was  entii-ely  and  utterly  impossible  and  impracticable.

tl

STATEMENT  BY  DE.  EOBERTSON.  251

so  you  may  incsi  if  we  ever  do  cJiance  to  meet  again,  I  shall  hear
such  need  in  mind.

"  G.~Kind  gentlemen,  tvill  you  alloio  me  to  thanh  yon  far  your
strict  attention,  and  to  regret,  if  I  may,  your  table.  May  a  kind
Providence  guide  and  protect  you  and  keep  you  in  Christ  Jesus.

"  While  these  sheets  are  passing  through  the  press,  the  wi-iter
had  another  opportunity,  on  the  evening  of  the  16th  March,  of
testing  the  trath  of  these  phenomena,  in  the  chambers  of  a  Bams-
ter,  in  the  Temple.  Two  independent  witnesses  and  himself  and
Mr.  Squire  were  present.  Suffice  it  here  to  record,  that  again  the
several  phenomena  of  rapping,  moving  tables,  writing  by  an  unseen
agent,  touch,  linging  of  a  bell,  and  medium  writing  were  repeated
and  subjected  to  the  most  searching  sci-utiny.

The,  writer  can  only  renew  the  expression  of  his  unqualified
belief  that  these  phenomena  were  produced  by  some  unseen  agent,
and  that  it  was  utteriy  out  of  Mr.  Squii-e's  power  to  perfom^
them  by  legerdemain,  had  he  been  so  disposed.  The  wi-iter  may
be  allowed  to  add  his  impression  that  anyone  acquainted  with  Mr.
Squire  would  at  once  acquit  him  of  attempting  such  an  imposture.
Stm  this  is  not  important,  inasmuch  as  the  opportunity  was  not
given  for  such  an  attempt.

"  The  writer  of  the  above  nan-ative  solemnly  re-asserts  the  truth
of  every  incident  detailed,  all  of  which  occurred  in  his  own  house
and  presence,  and  in  that  of  his  friend.    He  can  now  no  more
doubt  the  physical  manifestations  of  (so-called)  Spiritualism  than
he  would  any  other  fact,  as,  for  example,  the  fall  of  the  apple  to
the  ground,  of  which  his  senses  informed  him.    As  stated  above,
there  was  no  place,  or  chance  of  any  legerdemain  or  fraud,  in  these
physical  manifestation.    He  is  aware,  even  from'  recent  experience,
of  the  impossibility  of  convincing  any  one,  by  a  mere  nan-ative,  of
events  apparently  so  out  of  harmony  with  all  our  knowledge  of
the  laws  which  govern  the  physical  worid,  and  he  places  these  facts
on  record  rather  as  an  act  of  justice  due  to  those  whose  similar
statements  he  had  elsewhere  doubted  and  denied,  than  with  either
the  desii-e  or  hope  of  convincing  others.     Yet  he  cannot  doubt

252

COREESPONDENCE.

tlic  ultimate  recognition  of  facts  of  tlie  trutli  of  wliich  he  is  so
tlioronglily  convinced.

"  Admit  tliese  physical  manifestations,  and  a  strange  and  wide
world  of  research  is  opened  to  our  inquiry.  This  field  is  new  to
the  materialist  mind  of  the  last  two  centuries,  which  even  in  the
writings  of  divines  of  the  English  church,  doubts  and  denies  all
spiritual  manifestations  and  agencies,  be  they  good  or  evil.

"  But  to  the  thoughtful  reader  of  the  "Word  of  God  the  recogni-
tion of  spiritual  agencies  is  no  new  doctrine,  nor  is  it  so  to  the
student  of  ecclesiastical  history.     The  writings  of  the  fathei-s
abound  with  statements  of  spiritual  manifestations.  Singularly
enough,  in  the  Apology  of  TertuUian,  we  find  a  reference  to  physical
manifestations  similar  to  those  we  are  here  considering.    In  speak-
ing of  the  Christian  miracles,  he  says  that  they  have  been  imitated
by  persons  who,  by  forming  a  chain  with  their  hands,  obtained  by
means  of  divining  tables  and  chairs,  miraculous  manifestations.  In
the  narrative  in  the  Acts  of  the  damsel  possessed  with  the  spiiit
of  Python  (i.  e.  of  the  oracle  of  Delphi  *)  and  of  the  evil  spii-its  at
the  command  of  the  Jew  exorcists,  in  both  of  which  instances  the
spirits  are  spoken  of  as  a  personality,  and  as  recognizing  the  Lord
Jesus  and  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.    It  is  interesting  to  compare
the  commentary  of  divines  who  admit  the  existence  of  spiritual
agencies  with  that  of  those  who  deny  the  same.    The  painful  efibi-t
of  the  learned  Lardner,  in  his  Credibility  of  the  Gosjiel  histonj,  to
explain  away  the  power  of  that  spirit  of  Python,  which  dwelt  in
the  damsel  of  Philippi,  is  a  curious  illustration  of  how  men  tvnst
the  plain  narrative  of  Holy  Scripture  to  fit  theii-  o^vn  notions  and
theological  tenets.

"  In  siu'veying  this  new  world  of  thought  opened  to  him  by  the

*  The  opinion  of  scholars  is  divided  on  the  qxiestion  of  the  oracle  of
Delphi,  as  to  whether  it  possessed  the  power  of  answermg  questions  relat-
incr  to' the  futm-e,  or  were  merely  a  skilful  contrivance  of  priestcraft.
Cicero's  testunony  is  positive:  "Manet  id  quod  negari  non  potest,  nisi
omnem  historiam  perverterimus,  multis  SEeculis  verax  fuissi  id  oraculum."
Such  was  also  Milton's  ophiion:  "The  oracles  are  dumb,"  &c.,  &c.

STATEMENT  BY  DE.  EOBEKTSON.  253

physical  manifestations  liere  recorded,  the  witer  feels  it  due  to  Lis
position  distinctly  to  state  that  he  does  not  accept  the  interpreta-
tion which  the  American  sect,  terming  themselves  S2oirihialists,
place  on  these  phenomena.    He  does  not  believe  that  the  raps  and
table-tiltings  and  strange  fantastic  freaks  which  he  here  records,
are  the  acts  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  nor  of  their  efforts  to
communicate  with  the  living.  Still  less  is  he  prepared  to  receive  the
doctrine  that  the  trashy  common-place  evangelical  dicta,  enunciated
by  medium  writing  and  raps,  are  communications  from  the  Spirit  of
God,  in  support  of  the  truth  of  revelation.  It  is  his  opinion  that  the
doctrines  of  the  Spiiitualists,  as  set  forth  in  tlieir  American  and
English  wi-itings,  tend,  in  the  few  instances  in  which  they  soar  above
vulgar  credulity,  to  materialist  teaching  of  the  most  objectionable
kind.    It  is  not  the  place  here  to  enter  ijito  this  wide  question  ;
only  in  recording  his  belief  in  the  physical  manifestations  here
related,  the  wi-iter  has  felt  it  due  to  himself,  as  a  member  of  the
Church  of  England,  to  guard  against  the  implication  of  thereby
accepting  the  opinions  of  the  American  professors,  who  have
related  and  theorized  on  such  manifestations.

The  wi-iter  would  in  conclusion  add,  that  the  strange  physical
manifestations  he  has  related,  remind  him  more  of  the  vagaries  of
Puch  in  the  Midsummer's  Night  Bteam,  or  of  the  wild  scene  in  the
Waljmrgisnacht,  in  Faust,  than  of  anything  else.

"At  any  rate,  beHeving  as  he  does,  that  reason  is  the  highest
attribute  of  his  nature,  and  the  reflected  image  of  his  Creator,  the
wi-iter  cannot  accept  as  emanations  from  the  Spii-it,  revelations  of
a  spiiitual  natm-e  inconsistent  with  his  intuitive  conceptions  of
the  nature  and  attributes  of  God.    He  cannot  trace  the  dignity  of
the  divine  power  in  breaking  cedar  pencils  and  tables,  or  ringing
bells,  nor  its  wisdom  in  the  mild  communications  of  the  medium
writings.    He  believes  that  if  God  meant  to  reveal  to  him  that
this  Spii-itualism  was  the  work  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  He  would  not
have  given  His  will  in  the  very  heathenish  oracular  manner  here
recorded.    He  fails  to  see  anything  like  divine  wisdom  or  divine
power  in  these  imreasoning  medium  writings  and  grotesque  pJiysical

254

COREESPONDENCE.

phenomena,  and  lie  desires  the  aid  of  those  better  qualified  than
himself  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  unseen  agency  which  he  here
attests.  His  own  impression  is,  that  the  power  is  similar  to  that
manifested  at  the  delphic  oracle,  and  by  the  ancient  sorcerers  and
magicians,  and  he  believes  that  the  spirit  of  Python,  silenced  by
the  incarnation,  has  revived  with  some  of  its  ancient  power.

"J.  LocKHART  Robertson,  M.D.
{Continmd  in  Appendix:)  "  Hayward's  Heath."

"  I  was  present  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Robertson  when  the  pheno-
mena described  up  to  page  three  took  place,  and  I  verify  the  truth
of  his  narrative.  The  other  person  present  was  Mr.  Critchett,  the
assistant  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  Arts.

"  W.  M,  Wilkinson."

Dr.  Charles  Kidd.

"  Dear  Sir,  I  think  the  Dialectical  Society  has  done  much  good

in  examining  the  so-called  phenomena  of  '  Spiritualism.'  Some
of  the  appearances  are  obviously  of  mesmeric  origin,  some  others
are  due  to  what  we  can  all  recognize  as  the  ji^tit  mal  of  epileptic
and  hysteric  nervous  disorder  (possibly  the  '  possession  by  an  evU
spii-it '  of  the  New  Testament)  the  majority  are  evidently '  subjec-
tive'  phenomena,  as  we  Avitness  them  every  day  in  patients  under
chloroform,  modified  in  a  thousand  ways  by  external  influences,
phrenological  shape  of  the  head,  &c.

"  There  is  much  innocence  amongst  spiritualists  proper  as  to
subjective  and  objective  phenomena,  for  on  my  expressing  my  idea
as  above  to  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Spiritualistic  Society,  not  long
ago,  he  admitted,  or  rather  boasted,  that  he  did  not  know  one  thing
about  the  functions  of  the  brain,  or  in  what  subjective  impressions
differed  from  objective.  Yet  we  have  subjective  impressions  in
dreams.  One  sometimes  is  in  a  hurry  to  pick  up  a  handful  of
sovereigns  off  the  ground  in  a  dream,  yet  we  know  they  only  exist
as  a  subjective  vision.    Need  I  mention  the  fixed  and  almost

LETTER  FEOM  MR.  FUSEDALE.

255

tangible,  solid  realities  that  a  hospital  patient  in  delirium  tremens
points  at,  how  he  of  imagination  '  all  compact '  with  the  poet  and
the  lover  gives  to  aiiy  nothings

'  A  local  habitation  and  a  name.'
But  it  was  vain  to  argue  with  the  chief  recognized  guide  of  the
spiritualists,  who,  editing  and  copying  merely  what  others  told  him,
could  see  no  farther.        "  Believe  me,  very  truly  yours,

"Charles  Kidd,  M.D.

"  Sackville  Street,  Juno  30th.

"  P.S. — You  can  make  a  patient  who  is  partially  under  chloro-
form, dead  asleep  so  to  say,  to  sing  a  song  by  a  particular  external
manipulation  of  the  larynx,  &c.,  as  you  can  give  the  idea  to  a  person
in  a  common  dream  he  is  falling  over  a  cliff  by  placing  him  on  the
dangerous  edge  of  the  bed  with  a  reflex  feeling,  half  instinctive
and  suggestive,  that  he  is  falling  off.  These  are  subjective  impres-
sions brought  about  by  a  second  parby ;  they  are  not  exactly  the
same  as  the  spii'itualistic  revelations,  but  they  go  very  near  them."

Mr.  F.  Fused  ale.

"  8,  Southampton  Row,  Holbom,

"  London,  W.C.,  July  9th,  1869.
"  Dear  Dr.  Edmunds, — Seeing  your  name  in  the  recent  discus-
sion on  spiritual  phenomena,  and  feeling  a  deep  interest  in  the
cause,  I  have  taken  the  libei-ty  of  addressing  you  on  the  subject.
I  may  state  that  I  have  been  acquainted  with  Spiritualism  about
eight  or  nine  years,  and  I  have  seen  the  different  phases  of  the
subject  quite  sufiicient  to  convince  me  of  the  truth  of  it.  But
what  I  wish  to  relate  to  you  took  place  in  ,my  own  family  some
two  or  three  years  ago.  But  let  me  state  that  my  wife  has
possessed  the  power  of  seeing  spirits  for  years  and  does  continue
to  see  them,  although  what  I  am  about  to  relate  to  you  took  place
about  the  time  I  have  before  stated.  I  may  say  that  the  phenom-
enon was  witnessed  by  my  wife,  her  sister,  a  girl  then  about  twelve
years  old,  and  thi-ee  of  my  own  children,  a  boy  about  eleven  and

256

OOERESPONDENCB.

two  givls  about  five  and  eight  years  respectively.  The  commence-
ment of  these  extraordinary  manifestations  began  by  the  moving
of  the  furniture  of  the  bedrooms  at  the  top  of  the  house,  where  we
all  slept.  The  tables,  the  wash-stand,  and  the  looking-gkss  were
constantly  being  moved  about  the  room,  and  the  looking-glass  and
ornaments  were  put  on  the  bed  and  then  put  back  in  their  places
again  without  ever  doing  any  injury  to  them  ;  and  then  began  the
rapping  down  stairs,  on  the  chaii-s  and  tables,  and  all  round  the
rooms  ;  and  then  they  commenced  to  take  any  little  things  of  the
children's  or  my  wife's  and  hide  them  for  a  time  and  then  retui-n
them  again,  and  the  children  and  my  wife  would  see  the  things
they  took,  (in  particular  a  brooch  of  my  wife's),  appear  to  pass
throua-h  solid  substances,  such  as  the  wall  or  the  doors,  when  they
were  taken  from  them ;  and  they  would  take  things  out  of  the
children's  hands,  as  if  in  play,  and  hide  them  and  then  after  a  little
time  return  them  again.

"  After  this  another  phase  began.  They  all  began  to  see  the
spirits ;  and  let  me  state  they  saw  both  good  and  evil  ones  ;  the  good
were  bright  and  the  evil  were  dark.  And  I  believe  I  am  not  going
beyond  the  truth  when  I  state  that  for  six  months  we  never  sat
down  to  meals  without  having  audible  evidence  of  their  presence
by  their  rapping  on  the  table  and  chairs  we  were  sitting  on,  and
they  wo\ild  answer  any  question  asked  them  by  replying  '  yes  '  or
'no '  in  the  usual  way ;  and  they  would  also  shew  the  childi-en
pictiu-es  on  the  wall,  and  they  would  look  in  rapture  on  what  they
saw.  Sometimes  the  scenes  appeared  to  be  scenes  in  distant  lands,
for  they  would  wi-ite  the  nature  of  the  scenery,  and  sometimes
scenes  from  the  spiiit-land.  But  I  omitted  to  mention  that  we
have  four  chHdren  in  the  spirit-life,  the  eldest,  a  girl,  would  at  the
time  I  before  stated  be  about  twelve  years  old,  and  she  appeared
to  be  always  near  them,  for  her  mother,  my  -^vife,  said  she  easily
recognised  her  as  her  child.  My  own  mother  was  constantly  there,
who°I  may  mention,  has  been  in  the  spirit-life  upwards  of  thirty
years.  And  they  all  used  to  shew  them  graphical  scenes  in  a
crystal  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  simply  a  toy  ball  silvered  taken

LETTER  PEOM  ME.  FUSEDALE.

257

from  a  Christmas  tree ;  and  also  tlie  incidents  in  the  Parable  of
the  Prodigal  Son,  as  related  by  our  Lord  in  the  10th  chapter  of
Liike's  Gospel.  I  have  seen  them  so  engaged  (I  mean  the  child-
ren) for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  the  scenes  constantly  changing ;
and  let  me  state  that  I  was  a  little  sceptical  at  first  myself  about
what  they  saw,  but  they  (the  spirit-friends)  told  me  they  would
show  me  a  scene  in  the  crystal  to  convince  me  of  the  truth  of  what
they  said,  Avhich  they  did  by  shewing  me  a  scene  in  the  arctic
regions — a  ship  embedded  in  the  ice,  the  men  on  board,  and  dogs
coming  to  them  on  the  ice — which  scene  the  children  also  saw.
In  the  evening  also,  before  anything  of  the  sort  commenced,  they
wotdd  tell  the  childi-en  what  portion  of  scripture  should  be  read,
and  a  favourite  one  was  the  chapter  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  they
Avould  correct  them  if  they  did  not  read  correctly.  They  would
also  guide  their  hands  to  write  while  sitting  at  the  table,  .merely
with  their  fingers,  without  pencil,  and  if  the  others  sitting  beside
them  would  read  what  they  wrote  they  said  it  appeared  in
illuminated  letters  on  the  table ;  and  my  wife  would  also  see
different  objects  on  the  table.

"  Although  I  have  never  seen  anything  myself  except  what  I
have  before  mentioned,  I  have  had  intelligent  communications
from  the  spirits  by  rappiug  and  the  alphabet,  and  while  we  have
all  been  sittiag  round  the  table  I  have  heard  the  knocking  on  or
under  the  table  as  loud  and  distinct  as  would  require  the  efforts  of
five  or  six  persons  to  produce.    I  have  also  seen  the  chaii-  move
by  request  with  my  little  boy  sitting  on  it,  his  legs  not  beiag  able
to  touch  the  floor,  more  than  half  across  the  room,  while  we  were
seated  round  the  table,  with  a  bright  lamp  burning  at  the  time,
without  any  effort  on  his  part  or  any  human  agency  being  near.
I  could  continue  further  but  think  I  have  stated  sufficient  to  prove
that  what  I  have  stated  are  facts  and  no  trickery  or  imposture,  and
facts  which,  to  my  mind,  convince  me  how  near  we  are  to  the
spirit-land,  and  how  and  with  what  pleasure  our  spirit-friends  like
to  make  their  presence  known  atcd  realised  to  help  us  on  our  jour-
ney to  that  bright  and  better  land,  and  to  prove  by  umnistakable

S

258

COEEESPONDENCE.

evidence  tlie  immortality  of  tlie  soul  and  tlie  eternal  progi-ession
beyond  the  grave,  and  so  to  take  away  tlie  sting  from  death  and  to
rob  the  grave  of  its  victory,  and  to  convince  us  more  of  the  truths
of  Christianity  and  love  of  oiu-  Heavenly  Father.  I  must  apologise
for  trespassing  so  much  upon  your  patience  ;  but  believing  you  to
be  a  searcher  after  truth,  as  I  have  ever  been,  is  the  only  motive
that  has  prompted  me  to  address  you  on  the  subject ;  you  are  at
liberty  to  make  what  use  you  please  of  this  if  you  think  any  good
may  come  from  it,  at  the  same  time,

"  Believe  me  to  remain  yours  tmly,
"  Dr.  Edmimds."  "  F.  Fusedale."

Mr.  Edwin  Arnold.

"  Sidcup  Lodge,  Sidcup,  S.E.,
•     "July  10th,  1869.
"Sir, — have  never  yet  been  able  to  fulfil  my  intention  of
expressiug,  either  by  letter  or  vivd  voce,  my  conclusions  upon  the
question  of  'spiritual  manifestations.'    In  the  first  place  the  gi-eat
'  extent  of  the  subject,  and,  iu  the  next,  my  unceasing  occupations
must  explain  and  apologise  for  this.    Understanding,  however,  that
your  investigations  are  drawing  to  a  close,  I  feel  myself  bound  to
make  some  statement  of  my  opiuion,  since  you  have  included  me
among  yovo-  cited  witnesses  and  siuce  I  have  been  present  at  a  con-
siderable number  of  more  or  less  remarkable  seances.    The  long  and
careful  inquiries  which  your  Committee  seems  to  have  conducted
renders  it  less  important  that  I  should,  as  I  iutended,  recapitulate
my  own  experiences  as  an  observer  of  the  alleged  phenomena.  All
I  desii-e  to  say,  and  all  I  can  say  (without  reservation  and  explana-
tions impossible  in  so  limited  a  space)  is  this  :  that  I  regard  many
of  the  'manifestations'  as  genniue,  xmdeniable,  and  inexplicable  by
any  known  law,  or  any  collusion,  arrangement,  or  deception  of  the
senses ;  and  that  I  conceive  it  to  be  the  duty  and  the  interest  of
men  of  science  and  sense  to  examine  and  prosecute  the  iuquiiy,  as
one  wHch  has  faiidy  passed  from  the  region  of  ridicule.    I  am  not

LETTER  FJROM  MR.  EDWIN  ARNOLD.

259

inclined  to  consider  what  I  hold  the  veritable  phenomena  as  being
in  any  way  supernatural,  but  rather  as  initiatory  demonstrations  of
mental  and  vital  power  not  yet  comprehended  nor  regularly  exer-
cised. "With  reference  to  the  supposed  interpositions  and  actions
of  departed  spit-its,  I  can  see  nothing  against  the  analogy  of  nature
in  this,  but  it  is  not  a  proved  fact  for  me  by  what  I  have  myself
witnessed.  The  statement  to  which  I  am  prepared  to  attach  my
name  is  this :  that  conjoined  with  the  rubbish  of  much  ignorance
and  some  deplorable  folly  and  fraud,  there  is  a  body  of  well-
established  facts  beyond  denial  and  outside  any  existing  philo-
sophical explanation,  which  facts  promise  to  open  a  new  world  of
human  inquiry  and  experience,  are  in  the  highest  degree  interest-
ing, and  tend  to  elevate  ideas  of  the  continuity  of  life,  and  to
reconcile,  perhaps,  the  materialist  and  metaphysician.

"  I  am,  Sir,  faithfully  yours,

"Edwin  Aenold,  M.A."

Mk.  J.  Hawkins  Simpson.

"  July  19th,  1869.

"James  Edmunds,  Esq.,  M.D.,  &c.
"Dear  Sii-,— In  reply  to  yours  of  the  17th  inst.,  I  cannot  (as  I
before  stated)  find  time  to  make  a  written  exposition  to  be  sent  to
you,  nor  can  I  send  my  'notes'  for  inspection,  because  there  are
marginal  columns  containing  personal  remarks,  &c.  I  think  that
it  would  not  be  easy  to  put  into  clearer  or  more  precise  and  dis-
criminating language  than  that  used  in  my  '  notes,'  the  description
of  phenomena  which  I  sifted  with  the  intention,  and  which  would
throw  some  light  on  the  modus  operandi.  When  I  tell  you  that
a  large  landscape  view,  as  carried  in  my  brain,  was  made  perfectly
visible  in  a  spherical  crystal  to  every  one  in  a  dark  room,  although
the  individuals  composing  the  party  occupied  opposite  places  to
each  other,  and  no  one,  except  Mr.  Home,  who  held  the  crystal,
was  within  three  feet  of  the  crystal;  you  will  admit  that  a  field  of
inquiry  is  here  opened  up  which  would  yield  results  increasing  our
knowledge  of  mental  action,  etc.,  etc.

S  2

260

COEEESPONDENCB.

"  Colours  were  similarly  produced,  tliough  I  could  not  gatlier
that  any  brain  then  present  was  the  exciting  cause.  Every  colour
of  the  rainbow  was  given  brilliantly,  especially  the  violet  of  a  veiy
opaque  character,  and  that  (as  was  rapped  out)  '  to  show  the  violet
as  seen  by  disembodied  spii-its.'  I  express  no  opinion  as  to  the
intelligence  which  directs  the  wonderful  phenomena,  those  of  light,
colour,  and  music  being  exquisitely  beautiful,  because  I  am  deter-
mined to  take  nothing  for  granted,  but  I  can  safely  say  that
patient  and  earnest  study  of  the  subject  by  a  disciplined  body
woiild  bring  knowledge  that  would  be  a  blessing  to  mankind.
Dreams,  thought,  education,  memory,  and  the  diseases  or  ills
attending  deviation  from  natural  laws,  would  be  understood  better
by  thousands  of  experiments  made  conscientiously.

"  But  what  patience  is  required  on  the  part  of  observers  and
mediums,  and  what  hesitation  in  making  stray  asseverations.

"  Faithfully  yours,

"  J.  Hawkins  Simpson."

Me.  Andrew  Glendinning,

"  Ivy  Bank,  Port  Glasgow,

"  30th  August,  1869.
"  The  Honorary  Secretary,  Spii-itualism  Committee.
"  Sir — I  understand  you  receive  written  commiraications  bearing
upon  your  late  inquiry  concei-ning  Spiritualism.  If  so,  and  if  it
is  of  any  interest  to  you,  I  will  send  you  particulars  of  a  '  house
haunting '  case  in  Port  Glasgow  which  happened  some  few  years
ago,  and  which  I  investigated  along  with  the  police.

"  I  am,  yours  timly,

"  Andrew  Glendiitning."

[Account  Fmoarded.]

"In  April,  1864,  considerable  excitement  arose  amongst  the
people  resident  in  Scott's  Lape,  Port  Glasgow,  owing  to  noises
which  were  heard  in  an  apartment  occupied  by  Hugh  McCardle,

LETTER  FEOM  ME.  GLEJJDINNING.

261

gardener,  and  his  family.    The  knockinga  -were  heard  almost
nightly  for  about  two  weeks,  and  after  the  rumour  had  spread
through  the  town,  large  numbers  of  men  and  women  assembled  in
the  lane  from  about  seven  o'clock  till  ten  o'clock  every  evening.
The  stair,  lobby  and  apartments  were  often  crowded,  but  the
police  occasionally  passed  through  the  lane  to  ensure  order.  I
visited  the  house  to  investigate  the  matter,  and  obtained  tho
assistance  of  Mr.  James  Fegan,  grocer.    While  waiting  in  the
room  for  the  commencement  of  the  noises,  Police  Sergeant  James
McDonald  and  a  constable  came  in.    I  told  Sergeant  McDonald
my  object,  and,  as  he  was  anxious  to  expose  the  trick — if  such  it
were — he  consented  to  assist  me.    The  knockings  commenced
about  nine  o'clock,  and  continued  for  more  than  an  hour.  The
fii-st  sounds  were  similar  to  what  is  made  by  scratching  on  rough
boards ;  then  knocking,  as  if  made  with  a  heavy  hammer,  on  the
floor,  under  the  bed,  which  was  situated  immediately  above  the
outer  stair.    Sergeant  McDonald  and  I  took  a  candle  and  went
below  the  bed,  exactly  over  the  spot  where  the  sounds  were
proceeding  from.    Mr.  Fegan  stood  in  front  of  the  bed.    J.  F.
Anstrather,  Esq.,  and  a  number  of  persons  were  in  the  room
besides  the  constable.    Being  informed  that  knocks  had  been
given  as  affirmative  or  negative  answers  to  questions,  we  asked  a
good  many  questions,  requesting  that  three  knocks  be  given  for
yes,  and  one  for  no.    The  knocks  were  rapid  and  loud,  and  were
often  given  before  the  question  was  quite  finished.    During  any
pause  in  the  question,  the  knocks  seemed  to  beat  to  the  air,
'  There  is  nae  luck  about  the  house ; '  I  whistled  that  tune,  and
the  knocks  became  still  louder  and  accompanied  my  measure.
I  wHstled  other  airs,  'Let  us  gang  to  Kelvin  grove,  bonnie
lassie,  oh;'  'Scots  wha  hae  wi  Wallace  bled,'  &c.,  &c.,  and,
beginning  always  with  the  second  line,  they  kept  exact  time.

We  asked  some  questions  in  a  low  tone— quite  a  whisper

oui'  position  being  such*  that  no  01x3  could  see  our  lips  moving,
so  as  to  guess  the  nature  of  our  questions ;  but  it  made  no  differ-
ence in  regard  to  the  knocks,    M  ten  o'clock  struck  on  the  town

262

CORRESPONDENCE.

clock,  eacli  stroke  seemed  supplemented  by  a  sound  in  tlie  wall,
above  the  bed.  We  got  a  pickaxe,  and  tore  up  pai-t  of  tlie
flooring  at  the  spot  where  the  knocking  was  going  on ;  the  sounds
shifted  position  for  a  little,  but  at  times  they  were  the  same  as  if  a  *
person  were  hammering  heavily  on  the  edge  of  the  hole  we  had
made  in  the  floor.

"  We  examined  minutely  the  floor,  walls,  ceiling,  &c. ;  we  got
the  children  (who  were  asleep)  out  of  the  bed,  and  lifted  aside  the
bed-clothes,  mattress,  bed-bottom,  and,  in  short,  did  everything  we
could  think  of  to  discover,  if  possible,  the  cause  of  the  knockings ;
others  (amongst  whom  were  police  constables  and  the  superinten-
dent) examiaed  the  lobby,  staircase,  and  cellars;  they  likewise
tried,  by  knocking  on  various  places,  to  produce  similar  soimds,
but  without  the  slightest  success.

(Signed)  "  Andrew  Glendinning,  Port  Glasgow."

"  15th  October,  1866.    The  foregoing  is  abridged  from  letters
written  me  shortly  after  the  occurrences.

(Initialled)  "  A.  G.
"  16th  October,  1866.    We  solemnly  testify  that  the  foregoing
statement  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Andrew  Glendinning,  is  exactly
correct.

I     "  James  McDonald,  late  Sergeant,  Port  Glasgow.

(Signed)  -j        James  Pegan,  grocer,  Port  Glasgow.

"  Port  Glasgow,  16th  October,  1866."

"  We  conscientiously  affirm  that,  besides  the  knockings  which
were  heard  by  many  people  in  the  house  we  lived  in,  in  April,
1864,  and  besides  some  occurrences,  which  were  only  known  to
a  part  of  us,  there  were  various  articles  scattered  about  from  theii-
places,  as  if  thrown  by  some  person,  although  no  one  was  near
where  they  were  thrown  fromj  such  as  small  pieces  of  coal,  broken
crockery,  and  potatoes.  We  also  saw,  at  times,  at  the  back  of  the
bed,  the  appearance  of  a  hand  moving  up  and  down,  and  we
sometimes  tried  to  catch  it,  but  could  not,  for,  (however  quickly
we  reached  out  our  hands)  it  as  quickly  vanished,  and  we  only
felt  cold  air.     And  sometimes,  when  the  hours  were  striking

LETTER  FROM  ME.  GEORGE  HENRY  LEWES.  263

on  tlie  town  clock,  low  knocks  were  made  on  the  inner  partition,
between  the  bed  and  the  jM-ess.  These  tilings  were  seen  and  heard
by  some  of  the  strangers  and  neighbours,  as  well  as  by  ourselves.
And  we  state  solemnly,  that  we  did  not  do  any  of  these  things,
nor  cause,  nor  allow  them  to  be  done,  and  that  we  have  no  idea
whatever  how  to  account  for  them,  as  they  were  all  quite
mysterious  to  us.

"  For  self  and  family,

(Signed)       "Hugh  McCardle.

"Port  Glasgow,  16th  October,  1866."
"  I  have  knoAvn  Hugh  McCardle,  gardener,  for  some  time,  and,
to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief,  he  is  an  honest,  sober,
industrious,  straightfonvard,  tiiithful  man.

(Signed)       "James  Fegan."

Mr.  GrEORGE  Henry  Lewes.

"The  Priory,  21,  North  Bank,

"Regent's  Park,  21st  Dec,  1869.

"  Sii-, — ^Although  my  health  does  not  peiTait  of  my  going  out  in
the  evening,  and  there  are  other  reasons  why  I  should  be  indisposed
to  investigate  the  'spiritualistic'  phenomena  further,  in  their  pre-
sent condition  of  not  having  fairly  extricated  themselves  from  the
suspicions  of  being  due  to  the  unconscious  co-operation  of  the
assistants  when  not  due  to  the  positive  imposture  of  one,  still  I
am  glad  to  hear  the  serious  way  in  which  your  Committee  is
investigating  the  matter ;  and  with  such  men  as  Mr.  Wallace  and
Mr.  Crookes  we  have  a  right  to  expect  some  definite  result.

"  With  regard  to  your  suggestion  that  I  should  name  some  further
tests,  I  can  only  say  that  the  case  should  be  investigated  precisely
as  any  other  case  would  be  by  scientific  men.

"  I.  As  a  commencement,  we  have  phenomena  of  which  we  do
not  knoAv  the  means  of  production.  But  '  spiiitualist '  logic,  by  a
common  fallacy,  confounds  the  cause  we  do  not  know  with  an
iinkno^vn  cause.    If  I  do  not  Imow  the  cause  of  the  patch  on

264

COREESPONDENOE.

bnlklogs'  eyes,  I  am  not  to  conclude  that  the  cause  is  one  lying
outside  the  laws  of  physiology — an  unknown  cause.  In  like  man-
ner, if  I  do  not  know  how  tables  are  turned  and  chairs  leap  in  the
air,  my  ignorance  is  no  warrant  for  the  conclusion  that  the  cause
is  one  lying  outside  the  ordinary  laws  of  physics.  To  know  this,
I  must  positively  know  what  is  the  cause.  The  ordinaiy  laws  of
physics  do  not  explain  the  phenomena !  When  you  trace  the
phenomena  to  their  cause — imposture,  or  expectant  attention,  or
Avhatever  it  may  be — the  ordinary  laws  do  suffice.

"  II.  The  only  certain  fact  then  being  our  ignorance  of  the  means
of  production,  we  have  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  what  those  means
are.  Any  hypothesis  propounded  must  conform  to  two  requisites.
Fii-st,  it  must  explain  the  phenomena ;  secondly,  it  must  be  not
only  a  vera  caitsa,  but  one  proved  to  be  in  oj)eration.

"  Suppose  we  assume  the  force  to  be  'magnetic'  To  justify  this
assumption  we  must  show  that  the  phenomena  are  like  those  of
magnetism,  follow  the  laws  of  magnetism,  are  produceable  by  mag-
netism.   Has  any  one  attempted  to  do  this  1

"  Next  we  must  show  that  magnetism  is  actiially  in  operation.  I
might  propose  as  an  hypothesis  that  the  chair  leaped  in  the  air
because  a  Kobbold  tilted  it  up.  If  a  Kobbold  were  present,  and
if  he  had  the  power,  the  effects  might  follow.  But  you  would  not
believe  in  the  presence  of  a  Kobbold,  because  his  presence  would
enable  you  to  explain  the  phenomena.  What  I  have  said  of  mag-
netism and  Kobbolds,  applies  to  all  other  agents  hyiDotheticaUy
propounded.  No  guess,  however  wild,  need  be  rejected  if  it  ad-
mit of  verification ;  no  guess  that  cannot  be  veriEed  is  worth  a
moment's  attention.

"  The  Committee,  therefore,  is  like  a  man  in  the  presence  of  a
phenomenon  which  is  unlike  all  those  he  has  hitherto  studied.  He
is  ioTiorant  of  the  means  of  its  production,  and  has  to  find  out—
if  he  can — what  they  are.

"In  my  experience,  and  it  has  been  large,  the  means  have
always  been  proved  to  bo  either  deliberate  imposture,  aided  by  the
unconscious  assistance  of  spectators,  or  the  well-known  effects  cf

LETTER  EEOM  PEOPESSOE  TYNDALL.  265

expectant  attention.  In  the  cases  that  I  have  not  investigated,
the  means  may  have  been  other ;  on  these  cases  therefore  I  should
be  silent.

"  Yours  traly,

"Geokge  Henry  Lewes."

Professor  Tyndall,

"  22nd  Dec.  1869.
"  Sir,— You  mention  in  your  note  to  me  three  gentlemen,  two  of
whom  are  personally  known  to  me,  and  for  both  of  whom  I  enter-
tain a  sincere  esteem.

^  "  The  house  of  one  of  these,  namely  Mr.  Wallace,  I  have  already
visited,  and  made  there  the  acquaintance  of  the  lady  who  was  the
reputed  medium  between  Mr.  Wallace  and  the  supernatural.

"  And  if  earnestly  invited  by  Mr.  Crookes,  the  editor  of  the
'Chemical  l^ews,'  to  witness  phenomena  which  in  his  opinion
'tend  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  some  power  (magnetic  or
otherwise)  which  has  not  yet  been  recognized  by  men  of  science,'
I  should  pay  due  respect  to  his  invitation.

"  But  understand  my  position :  more  than  a  year  ago  Mr.  Crom-
well Varley,  who  is,  I  believe,  one  of  the  greatest  modern  spiritual-
ists, did  me  the  favour  to  pay  me  a  visit,  and  he  then  employed  a
comparison  which,  though  flattering  to  my  spiritual  strength
seems  to  mark  me  out  as  unfit  for  spiritual  investigation.  He  said
that  my  presence  at  a  seance  resembled  that  of  a  great  magnet
among  a  number  of  small  ones.  I  throw  all  into  confusion.  Still
he  expressed  a  hope  that  arrangements  might  be  made  to  show  me
the  phenomena,  and  I  expressed  my  willingness  to  witness  such
things  as  Mr.  Varley  might  think  worth  showing  to  me.  I  have
not  smce  been  favoured  by  a  visit  from  Mr.  Varley.

"lam  now  perfectly  willing  to  accept  the  personal  invitation
of  Mr.  Crookes,  should  he  consider  that  he  can  show  me  pheno-
mena of  the  character  you  describe.

"  I  am  sii-,  yom-  obedient  servant,
"  Esq."  »  John  Tyndall."

7)

2GG

CORRESrONDENCE.

Dr.  William  B.  Caupenteu,  V.P.R.S.,  ic.

"  University  of  London,  Burlington  House,  W.
"  December  24tli,  1869.

"  Sii-,— My  time  is  far  too  fully  occupied  by  my  official  duties
and  scientific  pursuits  to  enable  me  to  enter  at  any  length  into  a
statement  of  my  opinions  in  regard  to  the  so-called  spiritual  mani-
festations. But  I  may  state  generally  that  I  have  satisfied  myself
by  personal  investigation  that,  whilst  a  gx-eat  number  of  what  pass
as  such  are  the  results  of  intentional  imposture,  and  many  others
of  self  deception,  there  are  certain  phenomena  which  are  quite
genuine,  and  must  be  considered  as  fair  subjects  of  scientific  study.
My  inquii-ies  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion,  however,  that  the  source
of  these  phenomena  does  not  lie  in  any  communication  ah  extra,
but  that  they  depend  upon  the  subjective  condition  of  the  individual
which  operates  according  to  certain  recognized  physiological  laws.
These  I  expounded  in  an  article  on  mesmerism,  electro  biology,  (fee,
which  I  wrote  for  the  '  Quarterly  Review  '  in  October  1853  ;  and
I  have  not  seen  any  subsequent  reason  for  modifying  the  opinioms
therein  expressed.

"  I  have  since  become  cognizant  of  many  facts,  however,  which
lead  me  to  the  belief  that  the  process  to  which  I  have  given  the
name  '  Unconscious  Cerebration  ' — of  which  you  will  find  an  ac-
count in  the  accompanying  abstract — performs  a  large  pai-t  in  the
production  of  the  phenomena  known  as  spiritualistic.

"I  remain.  Sir,  yom-  obedt.  servant,

"  G.  WTieatley  Bennett,  Esq."       "  William  B.  Carpenter."

[^Abstract  Unclosed.^

"  Man's  conscious  life  essentially  consists  in  an  action  and  re-
action between  his  mind  and  all  that  is  outside  it, — the  7)ie  and  the
not  me.  But  this  action  and  re-action  cannot  take  place,  in  his
jDresent  stage  of  existence,  without  the  intervention  of  a  material
instrument ;  whose  function  it  is  to  bridge  over  the  hiatus  bet^<'een
the  individual  consciousness  and  the  external  world,  and  thus  to

LETTER  PEOM  DE.  CAEPENTEE.

267

bring  them  into  mutual  communication.    So  long,  therefore  as
either  the  mental  or  the  bodily  part  of  man  was  studied  to  the
exclusion  of  the  other,  no  true  progress  could  be  made  in  psycho-
logical science;  and  thus  it  was  that  the  bygone  controversies
between  the  spii-itualists  and  the  materialists,  in  which  the  dis-
putants on  either  side  looked  at  his  composite  nature  from  that  side
only,  were  barren  of  any  other  good  result  than  that  of  bringing
into  view  phenomena  that  might  othei-wise  have  escaped  detection
But  the  psychologist  who  looks  at  his  subject  in  the  light  of  that
more  advanced   philosophy  of  the  present  day  which  re<.ards
matter  merely  as  the  vehicle  of  force,  has  no  difficulty  in  seeing
where  both  sets  of  disputants  were  right  and  both  wx-ong  •  and"
laymg  the  foundations  of  his  science  broad  and  deep  in  the  ^ohole
constitution  of  the  individual  Man  and  his  relations  to  the  world
external  to  him,  aims  to  build  it  up  with  the  materials  furnished
by  experience  of  every  kind,  mental  and  bodily,  normal  and
abnoz-mal,-ignoring  no  fact,  however  strange,  that  can  be  attested -
by  valid  evidence,  and  accepting  none,  however  authoritativelv
sanctioned,  that  wiU  not  stand  the  test  of  thorough  scrutiny

"It  IS  with  the  view  of  promoting  the  advance  of  such  a
Psychology,  that  the  lecturer  desires  to  bring  into  more  distinct
recognition  a  doctrine  which  has  been  familiar  to  the  metaphysi-
cians of  Germany  from  Leibnitz  to  the  present  time,  under  Le
names  'Latent  Thought,'  or  the  '  Preconscious  Activity  of  the
^u^,  and  was  systematically  expounded  ia  this  country  by  Sir
William  Hamilton;  whilst  in  physiological  language,  it  may  be
designated  as  the  'Unconscious  Action  of  the  Brain,'  or  more
strictly,  'Unconscious  Cerebration.' =^    To  himself  it  seems  of

*  Dr.  Laycock,  in  an  able  essay  on  the  "Eeflex  Action"^^^^^^.
pubWd  .n  1844,  brought  together  a  number  of  phenonxena  wMcb  justi
fied  bis  extension  of  the  doctrine  of  reflex  action  from  the  spinal  co  d  to
he  brain,  but  as  be  did  not  di-aw  a  distinction  between  the  reflerael:
of  be  .ensorv  ,anc,Ua  (sensori-motor)  and  that  of  the  cerelr^m
and  did  not  assert  that  either  could  take  place  ^UKout  coJaol'  .  be
was  not  understood  at  the  time  to  affii-m  this  position,  though  ^  ^Z^,

2G8  COERESPONDENOE.

littlo  conseq-vienco  wlietlicr  tlie  doctrine  be  expressed  in  teraiB  of
metaphysics  or  in  terms  of  physiology,  provided  it  be  recognized
as  having  a  positive  scientific  basis.  But  since,  in  the  systems  of
philosophy  loiig  prevalent  in  this  country,  consciousness  has  been
almost  uniformly  talcen  as  the  basis  of  all  strictly  mental  activity,
it  seems  convenient  to  designate  as  functions  of  the  nervous
system  all  those  operations  which  lie  below  that  level.  And  there
is  this  advantage  in  approaching  the  subject  from  the  physiological
side, — that  the  study  of  the  automatic  actions  of  other  parts  of
the  nervous  system  furnishes  a  clue,  by  the  guidance  of  which  we
may  be  led  to  the  scientific  elucidation  of  many  phenomena  that
would  otherwise  remain  obscure  and  meaningless."

Referring  to  a  discourse  delivered  by  him  March  12th,  1852,
"  On  the  Influence  of  Suggestion  in  modifying  and  directing
Mtiscular  Movement  independently  of  Volition,"  Dr.  Carpenter
reminded  his  audience  that  the  doctrine  of  ideo-motor  action
therein  set  forth  had  been  referred  to  by  Professor  Faraday  as
furnishing  an  adequate  scientific  rationale  of  the  phenomena  of
"  table-turning  "  and  "  table-talking,"  which  developed  themselves
epidemically  soon  afterwards.  "  Whilst  the  ordinary  phenomena  of
'  table-talking '  present  a  most  curious  body  of  illustrations  of  that
principle,  cases  have  occasionally  occurred  in  the  experience  of
persons  above  suspicion  of  intentional  deception,  in  which  the
answers  given  by  the  movements  of  the  tables  were  not  only
unknown  to  the  questioners,  but  were  even  contrary  to  their  belief
at  the  time,  and  yet  afterwards  proved  to  be  true.  Such  cases
afford  typical  examples  of  the  doctrine  of  '  Unconscious  Oerebra-

from  his  subsequent  statements  that  lie  certainly  meant  to  do  so.  The
leetm-er,  having  long  previously  taught  the  doctrine  of  the  sensory
ganglia,  and  having  been  convinced  by  Dr.  Laycock's  reasoning  that  it
might  be  extended  to  the  cerebrum,  was  led  by  a  consideration  of  the
anatomical  relations  of  the  cerebrum  to  the  sensory  gangUa  to  beHeve
that  a  succession  of  changes  might  take  place  automaticaUy  in  the  former,
of  which  the  results  only  might  rise  to  consciousness ;  and  to  this  kind  of
activity  he  gave  the  designation  of  "Unconscious  Cerebration."

LETTER  FKOM  DE.  CARPENTEE.

269

tion ; '  for  in  several  of  tliem  it  was  capable  of  being  distinctly
slioNvn,  that  tlie  answers,  although  contrary  to  the  belief  of  the
questioners  at  the  time,  were  true  to  facts  of  which  they  had  been
formerly  cognizant,  but  which  had  vanished  from  their  recollection,
the  residua  of  these  forgotten  impressions  giving  rise  to  cerebral
changes  which  prompted  the  responses  without  any  consciousness
on  the  part  of  the  agents  of  the  latent  springs  of  their  actions."

In  order,  however,  to  present  the  doctrine  in  its  proper  scien-
tific aspect  by  giving  it  a  definite  physiological  basis.  Dr.  Carpenter
recapitulated  what  he  considered  to  be  the  fundamental  doctrines
relating  to  the  (yriginal  or  pt^imary,  and  the  acquired  or  secondary
automatic  actions  of  the  principal  divisions  of  the  cerebro-spinal
centres.    These  may  be  distinguished  as, —

1.  The  Spinal  Cord  (including  the  Medidla  Oblongata )  ;

2.  The  Sensory  Ganglia ;

3.  The  Cereiellum ;

4.  The  Cerebrum.

"Leaving  out  of  consideration  the  cerebellum,  of  which  the
function  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  determined,  and  fixing  our
attention  upon  the  other  centres,  we  find  that  each  of  them,  in
addition  to  its  original  or  primary  automatic  actions,  comes  to  be
the  instrument  of  a  set  of  secondary  automatic  actions,  which,
though  originally  prompted  by  the  will,  and  still  remaining  imder
its  control,  are  habitually  performed  without  any  volitional  agency.

"  Thus  the  primary  function  of  the  spinal  cord  as  an  independent
centre  consists  in  the  performance  of  the  motions  of  respiration  and
swallo%ving,  which  are  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  life  ;  and  in
many  of  the  lower  animals  it  is  certain  that  the  ordinary  move-
ments of  locomotion  have  the  same  primary  automatic  character.
In  man,  however,  the  power  of  performing  these  movements  is
acquired  by  a  process  of  education ;  yet  when  once  the  co-ordination
has  been  established,  the  movements  are  performed  automatically,
— continuing  when  set  going  by  one  act  of  the  will,  until  they  are
checked  by  another  act.  Of  this  we  have  daily  experience  in  the
continuance  of  the  act  of  walking,  whilst  the  attention  is  closely

270

OOEEESPONDENCE.

and  continuously  occupied  upon  an  internal  train  of  thought ;  each
movement  suggesting  the  succeeding  one ;  and  the  repetition  being
thus  indeiinitely  prolonged,  until,  the  attention  being  recalled,  the
automatic  impulse  is  superseded  by  volitional  control.

"The  p'imm'y  automatic  action  of  the  sensory  ganglia,  again,
seems  to  be  chiefly  connected  with  movements  of  protection  ;  as  in
the  sneezing  produced  by  the  application  of  irritants  to  the  nasal
surface,  or  the  closure  of  the  eyelids  at  a  flash  of  light.  But  their
secondarily-axitomatic  agency  may  be  distinctly  traced  in  the  guid-
ance of  the  habitual  movements  of  locomotion  performed  under  the
conditions  previously  stated.  Thus  a  man  in  a  state  of  profound
absti'action  walks  through  a  crowded  street,  without  jostling  his
fellow-passengers  or  bruising  himself  against  lamp-posts ;  and  he
follows  the  line  of  direction  which  is  most  familiar  to  him,  even
though  at  starting  he  had  intended  to  take  some  other.

"  The  influence  of  habitudes  acquired  hy  experience,  which  take
the  place  in  man  of  the  intuitive  capacities  of  the  lower  animals,  is
peculiarly  well  seen  in  that  co-ordination  of  visual  and  tactile
perceptions,  by  which  we  acquire  om-  notions  of  the  forms  and
relations  of  external  objects,  and  regxilate  our  muscular  movements
in  accordance  with  those  notions.  A  bird  just  come  forth  from  the
egg  will  peck  at  an  insect  with  perfect  aim ;  but  an  infant  is  long
in  learning  to  grasp  at  a  bright  object  held  within  its  reach,  being
obviously  unable  in  the  first  instance  either  to  estimate  its  distance,
or  to  combine  the  muscular  actions  needed  for  its  prehension.  And
the  observation  of  numerous  cases  in  which  sight  has  been  fii-st
obtained  after  tactile  familiarity  with  external  objects  had  been
fully  acqtiired,  enables  it  to  be  positively  afiirmed  that  no  object
can  be  immediately  recognized  by  sight  alone,  when  seen  for  the
first  time  under  such  cu-cumstances.*

*  Thus,  in  a  case  published  about  three  years  ag^o  by  Mr.  Critchett,  of  a
young  woman  who  first  obtained  sight  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  it  is  recorded
that  when  a  pair  of  scissors  was  first  held  before  her,  although  she  con-ectly
described  their  shape  and  metallic  lustre,  she  had  not  the  least  idea  of  their
identity  with  the  implement  she  had  been  accustomed  to  handle;  but  when
told  what  it  was,  laughed  at  what  she  called  her  own  stupidity.

LETTER  FROM  DE.  CARPENTER.  271

"This  class  of  facts  is  of  great  importance  in  our  present  iiiquiry;
becausa  we  liave  here  a  distinct  instance  of  the  formation  of  judy-
ments  on  the  basis  of  an  acquired  experience,  by  a  process  of  which,
even  lohenwe  give  our  attention  to  it,  we  are  altogether  unco^iscious.
Thus  when  we  obtain  a  conception  of  solid  form  by  tho  mental
combination  of  two  dissimilar  pictures  in  ths  stereoscope,  that  con-
ception seems  to  be  so  necessary  and  immediate,  that  its  formation
might  be  supposed  to  be  the  result  of  an  original  intuition,  if  avo
had  no  means  of  tracing  out  the  antecedent  stages  of  the  process,
and  of  thus  satisfying  oui-selves  that  it  is  secondary  or  acquired.
The  faculty  to  which  it  is  due  may  be  said  to  be  the  resultant  of
our  whole  previous  training  in  this  dii-ection;  which  not  merely
enables  us  to  recognize  the  forms  and  relations  of  objects  of  which
we  have  some  antecedent  knowledge,  so  that  they  are  in  some
decree  suggested  by  the  single  picture,  but  also  to  create  (so  to
speak)  forms  and  relations  of  which  the  single  picture  gives  us  no
adequate  idea.    The  physiologist  can  scarcely  doubt,  that  as  the
nervous  system,  like  every  other  part  of  the  organism,  groujs  to  the
mode  in  which  it  is  habitually  exercised,  a  direct  channel  of  instru-
mental action  here  comes  to  take  the  place  of  the  circuit  thi-ough
which  the  process  was  originally  performed ;  so  that  the  acquired
intuition  of  man,  in  regard  to  the  forms  and  relations  of  external
objects,  comes  to  be  as  certain  and  direct  as  the  original  intuition
of  the  lower  animals,  whilst  probably  far  exceeding  it  in  complete-
ness and  range.

"  The  relation  of  the  cerebrum,  or  brain  proper,  to  the  spinal  cord  .
and  sensory  ganglia,  can  only  be  properly  studied  by  the  light  of
comparative  anatomy;  and  from  this  we  learn  that  instead  of  being
(as  was  formerly  supposed)  the  centre  of  the  whole  system,  in  dii-ect
connection  with  the  organs  of  sense  and  with  the  muscular  appara-
tus, it  is  a  superadded  organ,  the  development  of  which  seems  to
bear  a  pretty  constant  relation  to  the  degree  in  which  intelligenci>  /
supersedes  instinct  as  a  spring  of  action.    The  ganglionic  matta-:  '
which  is  spread  out  upon  the  surface  of  the  hemispheres,  and  iv
which  theii-  potentiality  resides,  is  connected  with  the  sensory  ti-act

272

OOEEESPONDENOB.

at  their  base  (wliicb  is  the  real  centre  of  convergence  for  the
sensory  nerves  of  tbe  wliole  body)  by  commissural  fibres,  long
since  termed  by  Reil,  with  sagacious  foresight,  'nerves  of  the
internal  senses;'  and  its  anatomical  relation  to  the  sensorium  is
thus  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  the  retina,  which  is  a  ganglionic
expansion  connected  with  the  sensorium  by  the  optic  nerve.  Hence
it  may  fairly  be  surmised  (1)  that,  as  we  only  become  conscioiis  of
visual  impressions  on  the  retina  when  their  influence  has  been
transmitted  to  the  central  sensorium,  so  we  only  become  conscious
of  ideational  changes  in  the  cerebral  hemispheres  when  their  influ-
ence has  been  transmitted  to  the  same  centre ;  (2)  that,  as  visual
changes  may  take  place  in  the  retina  of  which  we  are  xmconscioiis,
either  through  a  temporary  inactivity  of  the  sensorium  (as  in  sleep),
or  through  the  entire  occupation  of  the  attention  in  some  other
direction,  so  may  ideational  changes  take  place  in  the  cerebrum,  of
which  we  may  be  at  the  time  unconscious  for  want  of  receptivity
on  the  part  of  the  sensorium,  but  of  which  the  results  may  at  a
subsequent  time  present  themselves  to  the  consciou.sness  as  ideas
elaborated  by  an  automatic  process  of  which  we  have  no  cognizance.

"That  the  cerebrum,  like  the  nervous  centres  on  which  it  is
super-imposed,  has  an  automatic  activity  of  its  own,  cannot  be
doubted  by  those  who  have  attended  to  the  phenomena  of  somnam-
bulism (whether  natural  or  induced),  in  wHch  the  dii-ecting  and
controlling  power  of  the  will  seems  completely  suspended,  and  the
traias  of  thought  follow  the  lead  either  of  some  dominant  idea  or
of  suggestion  from  without.    There  are  weU-authenticated  cases  in
whicrsuch  automatic  action  has  not  only  evolved  results  that  were
perfect  in  themselves,  but  has  wi-ought  these  out  through  a  shorter
and  more  direct  process  than  had  been  conceived  possible  in  the
waking  state;  the  withdrawal  of  all  distracting  influences  appear-
ing to  favour  that  undisttirbed  action  of  the  mental  mechanism  (if
such  a  phrase  be,  permissible),  which  is  the  condition  most  favour-
able to  the  success  of  the  operation.    But  in  all  such  instances  the
automatic  action  follows  the  course  of  the  habitual  lines  of  thought,
and  expresses  the  result  of  the  Avhole  previous  trainijig  and,

LETTER  FEOM  DR.  CARrENTER.

273

discipline  of  the  mind,  wMcli  has  been  carried  on  under  volitional
direction.  The  lawyer  could  not  thus  have  Avz-itten  in  his  sleep  a
lucid  opinion,  uni-jivelling  the  perplexities  of  a  complicated  case,
if  he  had  not  assiduously  cultivated  the  intellectual  habit  by  which
it  was  elabonxted ;  nor  could  the  mathematician,  in  the  same  state,
have  not  merely  executed  with  perfect  coz'rectness  a  lengthened
computation,  which  had  baffled  him  in  the  waking  state,  but  found
out  a  much  more  direct  means  of  attaining  the  result,  if  his  previous
ti-aining  had  not  been  of  a  kind  to  develop  this  self-acting  power.

"With  such  evidence  that  the  cerebrum  may  work  automatically,
it  may  fm-ther  be  regarded  as  physiologically  probable  (on  the
gi'ounds  ali-eady  stated)  that  such  automatic  action  may  take  place
unconsciously ;  and  facts  which  are  within  the  experience  of  every
one  seem  to  justify  this  conclusion.  Thus,  when  we  have  been
ti-ying  to  recollect  some  name,  phrase,  or  occiuTence,  and,  after
vainly  employing  all  the  expedients  we  can  think  of  for  bringiag
the  desiderated  idea  to  our  minds,  have  abandoned  the  attempt  as
useless,  it  will  often  occur  spontaneously  a  little  while  aftei-wards,
suddenly  flashing  (as  it  were)  before  our  consciousness ;  and  this
although  the  mind  has  been  completely  engrossed  at  the  time  by
some  entirely  different  train  of  thought,  so  that  no  link  of  associa-
tion can  be  detected  whereby  the  result  has  been  knowingly
apprehended.  Now  in  these  cases  it  seems  probable  that  the  train
of  action  we  have  purposely  set  going  in  the  first  instance  has
continued  in  movement  when  we  have  withdrawn  our  attention
from  it,  and  goes  on  all  the  more  regularly  in  consequence  of  that
withcbawal ;  for  experience  shows  that  we  are  much  more  likely
to  recover  the  forgotten  idea  when  we  cease  to  trouble  ourselves
about  it,  than  when  we  go  on  searching  for  it,— just  as  a  rider  who
has  lost  himself  in  some  unknown  region  is  more  Hkely  to  find  his
way  home  by  dropping  the  reins  on  his  horse's  neck,  and  letting
him  take  his  own  course,  than  by  wearying  him.  in  trying  one  road
after  another.

"  The  same  mode  of  action  seems  to  have  a  large  share  in  the
process  of  invention,  whether  ax-tistic,  poetical,  or  mechanical  j  for

T

274

COERESPONDENCE.

nixmeroiis  instances  might  be  cited,  in  wliich,  tlie  object  to  bo
attained  having  been  kejit  before  the  mind  for  some  time  without
any  immediate  result,  that  result  has  suddenly  presented  itself
either  on  first  aAvaking  out  of  sleep,  or  in  the  midst  of  some
entirely  different  occupatioii.  And  it  is  a  common  experience  of
inventors  (whether  artists,  poets,  or  mechanicians)  that  when  they
have  been  brought  to  a  stand  by  some  difficulty,  the  tangle  will  bo
mtsre  likely  to  uni-avel  itself  (so  to  speak)  if  the  attentioii  be  com-
pletely withdrawn  from  it,  than  by  any  amount  of  continued  effort.

"  The  same  api^ears  to  be  true  of  those  acts  of  jvdffment  in
which  a  great  many  opposing  considerations  are  involved,  and  in
which  we  take  time  to  form  our  conclusion.    As  was  well  said  by
Abraham  Tucker'^  of  this  class  of  cases,  '  with  all  om-  care  to
digest  our  materials,  we  cannot  do  it  completely ;  but  after  a
nigbt's  rest,  or  some  recreation,  or  the  mind  beiug  turned  into
some  different  course  of  thinkiug,  slie  finds  they  have  ranged  theiiv-
selves  anew  during  lier  absence,  and  in  such  manner  as  exhibits
almost  at  one  view  all  their  mutual  relations,  dependences  and
consequences — wbich  shows  that  our  organs  do  not  stand  idle  the
moment  we  cease  to  employ  them,  but  contbiue  the  motions  we
p\it  into  them  after  tbey  have  gone  out  of  sight,  thereby  working
tbemselves  to  a  glibness  and  smoothness,  and  falling  into  a  more
regular  and  orderly  posture  thorn  we  could  have  placed  them  with  all
our  skill  and  industry.'    Experience  shows  that  the  soundest
judgments  of  the  well-disciplined  mind  are  thus  formed;  all  the
considerations  which  ought  to  be  taken  iuto  account  beiag  fii-st
duly  brought  before  it,  and  then  left  free  to  an-ange  themselves  by
fijdng  tbe  attention  on  some  otber  occupation;  and  if  time  be
given  for  this  unconscious  balancing,  we  find,  when  w;e  return  to
the  subject,  that  the  direction  in  which  our  minds  gravitate  is
a  surer  guide  than  any  estimate  we  might  have  formed  under
volitional  pressure.

"  This  unconscious  action  of  the  brain,  however,  is  often  exei-ted

*  'Light  of  Natm-e  Pui-sued/  2nd  edition  (1805),  chap.  x.  §  4,  vol.  i.  p.  248.

LETTER  TEOM  DE.  CABPENTEE.

275

in  giving  a  bias  to  our  judgment,  of  wliich  we  may  be  entirely  un-
aware. Almost  every  one  is  thus  influenced  more  or  less  by  the
habits  of  thought  and  feeling  early  impressed  upon  him ;  and  the
judgment  is  especially  liable  to  be  warped  by  these,  when  the  ordi-
nary vigour  of  the  mind  is  depressed  by  physical  or  moral  causes.
This  kind  of  perversion  may  be  so  decided  in  its  evil  eflects,  as  to
lead  to  a  suspicion  of  a  want  of  honesty  or  candour,  which  may  be
totally  unfounded  ;  the  real  soui-ce  of  it  lying  hid  deep  down  in
that  stratum  of  the  mental  constitution,  which  represents  the
results  of  those  early  influences  for  which  the  individual  himself  is
not  responsible.  Thus,  as  Mr.  Lecky  has  shown,  the  doctrine  of
unconscious  cerebration  inculcates  toleration  for  difierences  not
merely  of  belief,  but  of  the  moral  standard.

"  One  of  the  most  fi-equently  recurring  forms  of  unconscious
cerebral  action,  is  that  by  which  what  we  call  '  common  sense '
decides  for  us  in  a  great  variety  of  cases,  in  which  we  do  not  think
it  worth  while  to  submit  the  question  to  a  logical  discussion.
Now  this  '  common  sense  '  is,  so  to  speak,  an  acquired  intuition  ;
being  the  resultant  of  the  whole  previous  activity  of  the  mind,  con-
jointly with  that  of  the  brain  which  is  its  insti-ument.    Its  value
will  consequently  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  training  and  dis-
cipline which  the  intellectual  powers  have  received ;  and  it  may
be  affirmed  without  hesitation,  that  where  those  powers  have  been
originally  good,  and  have  been  thoroughly  well  cultivated  and  exer-
cised, the  '  common  sense '  judgment  is  likely  to  be  even  superior
to  that  which  may  be  worked  out  by  an  elaborate  process  of  reason-
ing, wherein  some  more  acute  reasoner  will  almost  always  be  able
to  find  some  flaw.    Thus  the  '  common  sense  '  decision  of  mankind
in  regard  to  the  existence  of  an  external  world,  is  practically  worth
more  than  all  the  arguments  of  all  the  logicians  who  have  discussed
the  basis  of  our  belief  in  it.

"  If,  then,  it  be  true  that  every  foi-rn  of  intuition,  whether  origi-
nal or  acquired,  is  referable  to  the  ever-flowing  under-current,
which  maybe  designated  as  'unconscious  cerebration'  or  'i^re-
conscious  activity  of  the  soul/  according  as  we  use  the  terms  of

T  2

276

OOERESPONDENCE.

pliysiology  or  of  metaphysics,  the  question  naturally  arises  wliat
power  we  have  of  directing  and  controlling  its  course,  of  strengthen-
ing or  repressing  its  power.

"  We  have  not  that  direct  mastery  over  it,  which  we  can
gain  by  a  determined  exercise  of  the  will  over  our  conscious
activity.  "We  cannot  acquire,  if  we  have  it  not  in  our  oi-iginal
constitution,  the  creative  power  of  genius,  so  as  to  malce  owselves
gi'eat  poets,  artists,  or  musicians ;  nor  can  we  gain  by  practice  that
peculiar  insight  which  characterizes  the  scientific  discoverer  of  the
highest  class,  or  that  ingenuity  which  distinguishes  the  great
mechanical  inventor ;  for  these  gifts  are  of  the  nature  of  instincts,
which  may  be  developed  and  strengthened  by  appropriate  cultiva-
tion, but  which  no  culture  will  of  itself  produce,  any  more  than  it
can  raise  a  crop  of  corn  where  there  has  been  no  seed.

"  Still,  where  we  cannot  create,  we  may  learn  to  admire  the
beautiful,  to  recognize  the  true,  and  to  value  the  good ;  and  this
power  of  appreciation  grows  and  intensifies,  in  proportion  as  it  is
exercised  aright.    The  more  we  fix  our  attention  on  the  highest
ideals  of  art,  and  withdraw  ourselves  from  the  influence  of  those
lower  forms  of  it  which  in  any  way  connect  themselves  with  the
grosser  parts  of  our  nature,  the  more  thorough  will  be  our  intuitive
appreciation  of  what  is  noble  and  elevating,  the  more  thorough
Q\\£  intuitive  distaste  for  all  that  is  mean  and  degrading.    And  so
in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  the  more  faithfully,  strictly,  and  per-
severingly  we  aim  to  disentangle  ourselves  from  all  selfish  aims,
all  conscious  prejudices,  the  more  shall  we  find  ourselves  be-
coming progressively  emancipated  from  those  unconscious  preju-
dices which  cling  around  us  as  results  of  early  misdii-ecton  and
erroneous  habits  of  thought,  and  which  are  more  dangerous  to
our  consistency  than  those  against  which  we  knowingly  put  our-
selves upon  our  guard.    And  so  in  those  judgments  in  regard
to  ourselves  or  others  for  which  we  are  all  daily  appealing  to  the
guidance  of  common  sense,  the  safety  of  that  guidance  will  depend
upon  the  degi-ee  ui  wHch  we  have  habituaUy  aimed  to  cultivate
our  power  of  reasoning  correctly,  to  try  every  question  by  fii-st

LETTER  PROM  MR.  TROLLOPE.  277

principles  rather  than  by  the  dictates  of  a  supposed  temporary
expediency,  and  above  all,  'to  be  just  and  fear  not.'  And  every
course  of  self-discipline  thus  steadily  and  honestly  pursued,  tends
not  merely  to  clear  the  mental  vision  of  the  individual,  but  to
ennoble  the  race  ;  by  developing  that  power  of  immediate  insight,
which,  in  man's  highest  jihase  of  existence,  will  not  only  supersede
the  laborious  operations  of  his  intellect,  but  will  reveal  to  him
truths  and  glories  of  the  unseen,  which  the  intellect  alone  can  see
but  '  as  through  a  glass,  darkly.'

"W,  B.  C."

Mr.  T.  Adolphus  Tkollope.

"  Villino  Trollope,  Florence,

"  29th  December,  1869.
"  Sir— In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  17th,  I  can  only  say  that  I
have  little  or  nothing  to  add  to  those  previous  statements  of  mine,
of  which  you  are  in  possession.    "With  regard  to  the  sittings  with
Mrs.  Guppy,  I  can  only  say  that  the  gi-eatest  watchfulness  on  the
part  of  those  taking  part  in  them  failed  to  detect  any  trace  of
imposture.    The  physical  phenomena  which  took  place  (in  the
dark),  such  as  the  sudden  falling  on  the  table  of  a  large  quantity
of  jonquils,  which  filled  the  whole  room  with  theii-  odour,  were
extraordinaiy,  and,  on  any  common  theory  of  physics,  unaccount-
able.   The  room  in  which  this  took  place  had  been  carefully
examined  by  me,  and  Mrs.  Guppy's  person  had  been  carefully
searched  by  my  wife.    With  regard  to  metaphysical  phenomena,
an  attempt  to  hold  communication  with  intelligences  other  than
those  present  in  the  flesh  was  stated  by  a  lady  to  whom  a
communication  was  addressed  to  have  been  extraordinarily  suc-
cessful and  to  have  been  proved  by  the  event.    In  the  case  of
myself  and  my  wife  aU  such  attempts  resulted  in  total  failure.
I  have  recently  had  a  sitting  with  Dr.  Willis,  of  Boston.  The
physical  manifestations  (in  the  dark)  were  remarkable  and  per-
plexmg.    The  attempts  at  spiritual  communication  were  altogether
failures.

278

COREESPONDENCE.

"  In  short  the  result  of  my  experience  thus  far  is  this,  that  the
physical  phenomena  frequently  produced  are,  in  mcmy  cases,  not
the  result  of  any  sleight  of  hand,  and  that  those  who  have
witnessed  them  with  due  attention  must  be  convinced  that  there
is  no  analogy  between  them  and  the  tricks  of  professed  '  conjurere.'
I  may  also  mention  that  Bosco,  one  of  the  greatest  professors  of
legerdemain  ever  known,  in  a  conversation  with  me  upon  the
subject,  utterly  scouted  the  idea  of  the  possibility  of  such  phe-
nomena as  I  saw  produced  by  Mr.  Home,  being  perfoi-med  by
any  of  the  resources  of  his  art.  To  what  sort  of  agency  these
results  are  to  be  attributed,  I  have  no  idea,  and  give  no  opinion ;
although,  (inasmuch  as  I  consider  that  the  word  '  supematm-al '
involves  a  contradiction  in  terms),  I  hold  that  to  admit  that  the
phenomena  exist,  implies  the  admission  that  they  are  '  natural,'  or
in  accordance  with  sonie  law  of  nature.  "With  regard  to  the
metaphysical  phenomena,  though  I  have  witnessed  many  sti-ange
things,  I  have  never  known  any  that  satisfactorily  excluded  the
2)ossibility  of  mistake  or  imposture.

"  Permit  me  to  add  that  if  you  should  think  fit  to  make  any
public  use  of  this  letter,  I  must  request  that  it  be  piinted,  if  at
all,  in  extenso.

"  I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"  T.  Adolphus  Tkollope."

Pbofessor  Huxley.

"  24,  Abbey  Place,

"Jan.  2nd,  1870.
»■«  Sir^ — I  have  been  unwilling  to  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  18th
Dec,  1869,  hastily,  and  I  therefore  delayed  my  answer  until  my
return  fi-om  a  short  absence  from  London.  ♦

"  If  the  gentlemen  whom  you  mention,  and  for  whose  judgment
and  capacity  I  have  every  respect,  have  not  been  able  in  the  course
of  some  months  to  arrive  at  results  satisfactory  to  themselves  and
capable  of  being  stated  satisfactorily  to  the  scientific  public,  it

LETTER  FROj\[  MR.  BRADLAUGH.

279

would  be  mere  presumption  in  me  to  entertain  the  hope  that  I
should  be  more  successful,  without  a  much  greater  expenditure  of
time  and  trouble.  But  for  the  present  year  my  time  and  energies
are  already  so  fully  preoccupied  that  it  would  be  little  short  of
madness  for  me  to  undertake  an  investigation  of  so  delicate  and
difficult  a  character.  The  only  certain  result  of  which  Avould  be  an
interminable  series  of  attacks  from  the  side  from  which  I  mi<^ht
chance  to  differ.

"  I  hope  that  I  am  perfectly  open  to  conviction  on  this  or  any
other  subject ;  but  I  must  frankly  confess  to  you  that  it  does  not
interest  me  ;  and  that  I  think  that  my  duty  as  a  man  of  science
towards  the  pubKc  may  be  much  better  discharged  by  activity  in
other  directions.

"  I  am,  Sir,

"  Yours  tnily,

"T.  H.  Huxley."

"  G.  W.  Bennett,  Esq."

Me.  Charles  Brablaugh.

"  Tottenham,  April  6th,  1870.
"  Dear  Sii-,— I  regret  to  say  that  at  the  Sub-committee  I  atten-
ded (that  with  Mr.  Home),  although  I  attended  the  whole  of  its
meetings,  I  had  no  reason  to  induce  me  to  concur  in  youi-  report.
Such  movement  and  sound  as  occurred  when  I  was  present  was  of
too  sHght  a  character  to  entitle  one  to  come  to  any  conclusion,
except  that  it  might  have  been  easily  produced  without  extraordin-
aiy  means.  I  absented  myself  from  the  general  meetings  when
the  phenomena,  spoken  to  gravely,  came  witHn  the  range  of  the
impossible,  e.g.,  spii-it  flowers  and  fruits  alleged  to  be  thrown  in  a
medium's  lap.  If  Mr.  Home  had  given  further  stances  I  should
have  attended,  as  he  afforded  the  fullest  facilities  for  investigation.

"  Yoiu'S  truly,

"  Charles  Bradlaugh."

"  0.  W.  Bennett,  Esq."

280

COERESPONDENCE.

M.  Leon  Favre,

"  1,  Place  Viiitimille,  Paris,  13  Juin,  1870.
"  Monsieur, — Votre  Comite  fait  appel  aux  convictions  et  demande
que  tous  ceux  qui  ont  pu  acquerir  la  certitude  des  phcnom^nes
dont  I'observation  occupe  les  esprits  serieux,  viennent  temoigner
de  leur  croyance  en  les  signant  de  leur  nom.

"  Je  m'empresse,  monsieur,  tout  inconnu  que  je  suis,  a  vous
donner  cette  declaration,  qui  est  pour  moi  une  satisfaction  de  con-
science.

"  J'ai  etudie  longuement  minutieusement  et  consciencieusement
les  pHenomenes  spiritualistes.  Non  seulement  je  me  suis  convaincu
de  leur  reality  irrefragable,  mais  j'ai  la  conviction  profonde  qu'ils
sont  produits  par  les  ames  de  ceux  qui  ont  quitte  la  terre,  et — bien
plus — qu'ils  ne  peuvent  ^ti-e  produits  que  par  elles.

"  Je  crois  done  ^  I'existence  d'un  monde  invisible  coii-espondant
au  monde  que  pergoivent  nos  regards.  Je  crois  que  les  habitans
de  ce  monde  sont  pour  la  plupart  les  anciens  babitans  du  globe
terrestre,  et  je  crois  a  la  communication  possible  et  demontree  des
deux  mondes  entr'eux.

"  Je  suis  tout  pret,  monsieur,  a  toutes  les  affirmations  en  ce
genre  que  vous  croirez  utUes  a  la  divulgations  de  la  verit6,  et  vous
prie  d'accepter  I'assurance  de  ma  consideration  bien  fratemelle,

"  L.  Favre  Clavairoz,

"  Monsieur  G.  W.  Bennett,       "  Consul  General  de  France."
"  Secretaire  du  Comite  sur  le  Spiritualisme  de  la
Societe  Dialectique  a  Londres."

Mrs.  L^titia  Lewis.

"  ErcHess  Castle,  Beauly,  Invemessliire,
"November  20tli,  1870.

"  gir^  Having  read  with  mucli  interest  the  articles  in  '  The

Queen,'  on  Spiritualism,  I  forward  to  you  my  personal  experience
on  the  subject  for  tbe  benefit  of  tlie  -Dialectical  Society.  I  must
inform  you  tbat  I  am  not  a  medium  and  had  no  belief  in  spirits

LETTEE  FEOM  MES.  LEWIS.

28]

till  I  became  convinced  almost  against  my  will.  Whilst  residing
at  my  home  in  South  Wales  during  the  spring  of  the  present  yeai°
most  Avonderful  spiritual  manifestations  occurred  spontaneously  to
myself  and  daughter.  The  enclosed  is  a  cojjy  of  a  letter  I  wrote
(to  a  relation  and  a  clergyman)  at  the  time.  I  give  my  name  and
address,  and  also  the  names  of  individuals  concerned,  which  of
course  you  wHl  keep  private.  I  do  so  to  convince  you  of  the
accui-acy  of  the  facts  stated.

"L^TiTiA  Lewis,
"  Of  Stradey,  Carmarthenshii-e."

(Copij  of  a  Letter  sent  by  me  to  a  near  relative,  loho  is  a
Clergyman  in  the  Church  of  England.)

"  My  dear   ,

"  As  I  think  you  are  a  strong-minded  man,  and  considering
you  the  spii-itual  head  of  the  family  (in  the  ecclesiastical  sense  of
the  word),  I  wi-ite  now  to  tell  you  the  sequel  of  the  'spii-itual
manifestations'  that  so  alarmed  me  when  last  here.    I  have  no
belief  in  the  spirits,  but  have  been  incredulous  when  hearing  of
other  people's  faith.    I  wi^ote  to  tell,  at  the  time,  to  many  of  the
family  the  curious  events  here,  so  that  perhaps  you  heard  I  was
obliged  to  change  my  bed-room  as  I  could  get  no  sleep.  When
the  fire  was  out,  such  constant  noises  awoke  me  that  I  was  always
strilcmg  matches,  and  expecting  to  see  some  wild  animal  in  the
room,  so  gi-eat  was  the  rustling  and  shuffling,  as  if  some  uneasy
monster  were  moving  about;  also  a  most  extraordinary  briUiant
light  appeared  on  the  inside  of  the  bed-curtains;  this  light  I  and
several  others  in  the  house  have  seen  at  different  times,  but  not  in
the  same  room.    Many  other  very  odd  events  occurred,  too  numer-
ous to  mention  here,  so  I  will  only  relate  one  or  two  instances  A
candle  was  seen  to  light  itself;  the  valance  of  my  sofa  was  tucked
lip  m  the  most  curious  way  at  night  by  invisible  hands;  my
clothes,  which  were  left  arranged  on  this  sofa,  were  constantly
interfered  .vith,  books  reversed  in  the  most  wonderful  manner

282

COERESPONDENOE.

etc.,  etc.  The  exact  impression  of  a  skeleton's  hand  was  seen  on
the  glass  of  a  book-case  in  this  same  room.

"  I  was  really  glad  to  have  to  visit  my  sister  at  Henbury,  on
the  20th  of  April,  for  there  I  thought  my  rest  would  not  be  dis-
turbed ;  but  to  my  surprise,  very  loud  raps  (twice  during  the  first
night,  and  for  two  nights  after),  came  on  the  doors  and  walls,  which
greatly  alarmed  me,  and  the  clothes,  as  before,  were  interfered
with.    Since  then  nothing  more  has  occurred  to  me.

"  The  first  letter  I  i-eceived  in  Paris,  early  in  May,  from  my
married  daughter  (at  Stradey),  stated  that  the  rapping  had  com-
menced in  her  room  in  the  most  demonstrative  manner,  on  the
wall  and  all  parts  of  the  room — frequently  during  the  day,  but
moi-e  so  at  night.  She  was  nearly  a  week  without  sleep,  and  had
the  courage  to  try  and  talk  in  the  day  with  this  noisy  spiiit,  by
siielling  the  letters  ;  but,  though  the  raps  answered,  she  could  make
out  nothing  by  the  alphabet.  This  continued  for  a  fortnight  or
longer,  the  rapping  becoming  more  vehement.  On  beginning  to
write  one  day,  to  her  great  sui-prise,  fear,  and  wonder,  her  hand
was  forced  to  make  letters  she  could  not  read ;  words  were  formed
but  she  could  not  make  them  out.  This  was  the  first  sentence  she
read  with  difficulty — '  Will  you  begin  to  believe  that  I  am  present  1
My  mind  is  troubled  until  I  have  revealed  my  secret.'  My  daugh-
ter asked,  'Who  are  you?'  'Benj.  Way.'  Then,  at  her  asking
for  the  name  in  full,  '  Benjamin  Way  *  '  was  written.  She  then
asked,  '  Are  you  Uncle  Ben  ?  '  '  Yes,  yes,  dear  child.'  *^Pages  were
written,  and  she  asked  a  great  many  questions ;  these  always
brought  the  reply,  '  You  must  not  tease  me,'  '  Go  to  the  de%al.'
The  spirit  wrote  where  he  came  from;  but  this,  and  other  past
events  in  his  life,  I  decline  to  write.  My  daughter  cried  for  days
and  was  fearfully  frightened.  Her  crying  so  distressed  the  spirit
that  the  raps  followed  her  everywhere  more  and  more,  and  then,  on
writing  again,  it  said,  '  What,  crjdng  again  1  you  pain  me  so,  dear,
dear  cliild,  you  must  forgive  me.'    This  one  communication  I  must

*  B.  Way  is  the  name  of  my  eldest  brother — deceased  several  years
ago — and  the  signature  is  exactly  like  his,  when  living.

LETTER  FEOM  MRS.  LEWIS.

283

write,  as  it  is  so  strange,  and  was  evidently  tlie  cause  of  the  sj^irit's
uneasiness  j  the  subject  being  his  will,  and  where  it  was  to  be  found,
describing  the  place  in  a  great  tin  box.  The  spirit  came  to  me  as
I  was  his  favourite  sister,  and  left  off  troubling  me  as  I  was  so
frightened.  My  daughter,  wisely  trying  to  get  rid  of  this  most
persevering  spu-it,  bade  it  attend  a  seance  which  she  heard  from  her
husband  would  be  given  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Manchester.

The  medium  was  Mrs.  ,  a  minister's  wife,  at  W  .  My

daughter's  husband,  Mr.  M.  , wishing  to  see  some  manifestations

(being  an  unbeliever  in  spii-its),  got  a  friend  to  take  him,  as  he  did
not  know  the  people.  I  must  tell  you  that,  although  my  daughter
had  wi-itten  to  her  husband  of  her  alarm,  she  never  named  the
secret  or  subject  of  the  will ;  only  that  Benjamin  Way's  spiiit  had
divulged  a  secret  among  his  numerous  manifestations  to  her.  The

first  seance  was  very  unsatisfactory.    Mrs.   ,  a  very  delicate

person,  nearly  fainted  from  the  extreme  violence  with  which  her
hand  was  banged  on  the  table,  and  any  further  manifestations  were
impossible,  with  the  exception  of  rapping  and  tables  being  turned.

Some  days  later,  Mr.  M  attended  another  seance.  Questions

were  asked  through  Mrs.   ,  who  was  still  very  weak.  The

spii-it,  when  asked  if  it  was  the  same  that  had  promised  to  meet
him  there,  said,  '  Yes,  and  I  am  here.'  It  then  wrote  its  name,
'  Benj.  Way  ; '  which  was  passing  strange,  as  neither  Mr.  or  Mi-s.

 had  heard  the  name  before.    When  asked  for  proof,  it  drew

a  diagi-am  of  the  tin  box ;  which  was  a  proof  to  my  daughter  that

flie  promise  that  the  spirit  would  attend  at  the  seaoice  at  W

had  been  kept ;  for,  as  I  before  mentioned,  my  daughter  had  not
-  named  the  will  or  tin  box  to  her  husband."

i

Pages  284  to  325,  containing  the  first  portion  of
Miss  BlacJaueWs  Paper,  may  be  found  in  the  original
edition,  published  by  Longmans,  price  15s.

1

326

OOMMUNIOATION  FEOM

CoNOLUSiOK  OP  Miss  Anna  Blackwell's  Papbh.

"The  theoretic  indications  of  the  preceding  pages  explain  the
so-called  '  Spiritual  Phenomena '  as  being  produced,  by  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  spirit-sphere  of  the  earth,  through  their  superior  com-
mand of  the  'fluids'  and  'forces'  that  make  up  the  totality  of
planetary  existence  ;  a  command  which  enables  them  to  bring  to.
bear — 1st,  on  the  objects  around  us,  2ndly,  on  the  invisible
material  elements  contained  in  the  atmosphere,  3rdly,  on  the  fibres
of  the  human  brain  and  nerves — the  subtle  and  powerful  agent
which,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  may  call  the  magneto-vital  or
electro- vital  Sxiid  (although  those  terms  are  very  far  from  express-
ing its  real  natiire),  and  which  is  furnished  jjai-tly  by  the  perisprits
of  the  spirits  themselves,  partly  by  the  atmosphere,  partly  by  the
nervous  system  of  the  human  body;  4thly,  through  their  power  of
'materialising,'  for  a  short  time,  the  substance  of  their  fluidic
corporeality,  and  of  assuming,  or  causing  us  to  perceive,  the
appearance  of  almost  any  lower  form  they  may  wish  to  present  to
lis ;  5thly,  throiigh  the  more  extended  vision  of  the  fluidic  sphere,
which  shows  them  a  wide  range  of  human  actions  and  intentions,
and  thus  enables  them  to  forecast  coming  events  with  more  or  less
correctness,  and,  when  permitted  to  do  so,  to  predict  the  same
with  more  or  less  exactness,  according  to  the  'flexibility'  of  the
organism  of  the  'medium';  6thly,  through  the  radiating  power  of
the  perisp-it,  which  surrounds  each  soul,  whether  incorporated  in
compact  or  in  fluidic  Matter,  Avith  a  sort  of  magnetic  atmosphere,
that  extends  beyond  its  corporeal  envelope,  and  causes  each  of  us
to  exert,  on  everything  around  us,  an  unconscious  influence  whose
quality,  intensity,  and  range  of  action,  are  always  in  con-espondence
■with  our  mental  and  moral  states;  an  explanation  that  also
accounts  for  the  facts  of  sympathy  and  antipathy,  of  presentiments
&c.,  as  well  as  for  the  difliculty  and  uncertainty  attending  tlio
production  of  the  'Spiritual  Phenomena,'  as  being  'manifesta-
tions' of  minds,  wills,  and  means  of  action  (often  very  complicated,)
tliat  are  not  ours,  and  that  not  only  are  not  under  our  control,  but

MISS  ANNA  BLACKWBLL.

327

to  the  production  of  which  the  tension  of  oiii'  mental  fibres,  attend-
ant on  a  strong  desire  for  their  occurrence,  constitutes  a  serious
and  often  insurmountable  impediment.

"  Under  the  first  head  may  be  classed  the  raps  (which  I  have
heard,  hundreds  of  times,  when  alone,  and  busied  with  other
matters;)  displacements  of  objects;  playing  on  musical  instruments
(the  strings  of  the  piano  in  my  drawing-room  have  been  made  to
vibrate  in  cadence,  in  the  light,  in  presence  of  several  persons,
with  no  one  near  it;)  shaking  of  rooms;  increased  or  diminished
weight,  and  floating,  of  bodies;  'spirit-lights';  the  elongation  of
the  human  frame,  through  the  counteraction  or  intensification,  in  a
given  dii-ection,  of  the  cohesive  attraction  that  holds  its  molecules
into  form;  cures,  thi-ough  a  re-arrangement  of  the  molecules  of
diseased  organs;  the  presence  of  real  flowers,  shells,  birds,  or  other
material  objects,  in  closed  rooms ;  and,  in  general,  what  are  usually
termed  'physical  manifestations,'  all  of  which  are  produced  with
jets  or  currents  of  the  magneto-vital  force,  and  also,  in  the  case  of
the  flowers,  &c.,  with  the  aid  of  fluidic  substances  that  are  stated  to
have  the  power  of  intercepting  the  visual  rays,  and  thus  of  hiding,
from  human  eyes,  any  material  object  which  has  been  covered  with
them;  the  objects  so  covered  being  previously  brought  into  the
room,  by  spirits,  and  kept  hidden  imtil,  by  the  removal  of  the
fluidic  covering,  those  objects  are  rendered  visible.    I  attribute  to
the  employment  of  the  force  referred  to,  a  very  violent  blow  I
once  received  from  an  unseen  agent,  sufficiently  severe  to  make
me  m  for  several  days;  heavy  poundings  on  the  walls  and  fm-niture
of  a  room  on  the  ujiper  floor  of  my  house,  that  went  on,  for  many
months,  almost  continuously,  by  night  and  by  day;  the  grouping,
into  a  letter  and  cyphers,  of  some  pins  that  I  had  dropped  upon
a  table  on  leaving  a  room  to  which  I  returned  about  twenty
miimtes  afterwards,  and  into  which  I  am  sure  that  no  human
being  had  entered  during  my  absence,  the  pins  so  placed  conveying
a  message  which  no  human  being  could  have  framed,  and  which
no  one  but  myself  could  have  understood;  the  production,  upon  a
table  in  my  drawing-room,  by  lamplight,  in  presence  of  seven

328

COMMUNICATION  FROM

persons,  all  of  whose  liands  were  in  full  view,  of  scratching  sounds,
as  though  some  one  were  writing  on  its  under-surface  with  the  end
of  a  match,  imitating  writing  so  perfectly,  during  more  than  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  that  we  could  distinguish  the  long  and  short
letters,  the  dotting  of  the  is  and  crossing  of  the  «'«;  on  another
occasion,  in  the  same  room,  in  presence  of  four  persons  who  were
all  standing  a  few  feet  from  the  table,  but  none  of  whom  were
touching  it,  the  production  of  'direct  wi-iting,'  effected,  with  a
slight  scratching  sound,  heard  by  all,  in  a  small  closed  drawer  of
the  same  bare  table,  on  which  a  large  lamp  was  burning,  under
circumstances  which  render  it  absokitely  certain,  for  those  who
were  present,  that  the  writing  was  done  by  spiiit-action,  and  probably
through  a  disintegration  of  particles  of  the  lead  of  a  pencil  that  had
been  placed  in  the  drawer,  a  few  moments  before,  with  some  small
sheets  of  perfectly  blank  paper,  and  the  depositing  of  those  particles
on  the  paper  by  a  process  analogous  to  electi'o-plating;  and  a  gi-eat
variety  of  other  manifestations  of  the  action  of  an  intelligent  extra-
human  power  that  have  occm-red  to  me,  during  many  years,  and
often  in  the  manner  most  convincing  to  oneself,  though  the  least
so  to  others,  viz.,  when  I  have  been  entii'ely  alone.

"  Under  the  second  head  may  be  classed  the  evanescent  appear-
ances of  hands,  faces,  bii'ds,  animals,  flowers,  &c.,  which  are
produced  by  a  condensation,  owi  of  the  atmosphere,  of  the  material
elements  of  those  pseudo-formations,  to  which,  by  the  application
of  the  electro-vital  force  in  modes  not  yet  known  to  us,  spirits  are
able  to  impart  a  temporary  vitality,  but  which,  having  no  soul,  are
without  consciousness  or  lasting  coherence,  and  dissolve  into  then-
oriffiaal  elements  on  the  cessation  of  the  currents  that  detei-mined

their  formation.    Lady  D  ,  assures  me  that  'a  magnificent

white  flower,  as  large  as  a  dinner-plate,  and  -svith  long  purj^le
stamens,'  suddenly  appeared  on  a  chair  close  beside  her,  one  even-
ing, as  she  sat  in  her  drawing-room,  in  company  -with  Mr.  Home;
it  remained  visible  to  them  both,  for  about  two  minutes,  when  'it
melted  into  the  aii'.'  It  was  real,  but  only  for  the  time  of  its  appear-
ance; and  would  no  doubt  have  been  seen  by  any  pei-sons  who

MISS  ANNA  BLACKWELL.

329

miglit  have  been  present.  The  bit  of  cloth,  to  sight  and  touch  exactly
the  same  as  though  woven  of  wool,  which  was  condensed  out  of
the  ail-,  and  then  dissipated,  in  presence  of  Mr.  Livermore  (of
New  York)  and  several  other  persons,  and  the  flowers  Avhich  that
gentleman  has  repeatedly  seen  to  form  in  the  air  and  then  melt
away,are  examples  of  this  same  action.

"  In  the  autumn  of  1867,  I  was  told  by  a  '  medium '  to  whom  I
was  a  total  stranger,  that  I  '  should  see,  in  six  weeks,'  a  beloved
relative  who  had  recently  returned  into  the  spirit-world.  About
sunset  of  the  last  day  of  the  'six  weeks,'  as  I  was  musing,  in  much
sadness,  on  the  non-fulfilment  of  this  promise,  I  'happened'  to  raise
my  eyes  to  one  of  the  folding  windows  of  a  house  opposite  to  the
window  at  which  I  was  sitting,  when  I  saw,  in  the  lower  part  of
the  long  right-hand  pane,  what  looked  exactly  like  a  life-size
daguerreotype  of  the  face  I  had  despaired  of  seeing,  with  the
dingy,  unstable  look  of  the  old  daguerreotypes,  but  a  perfect  like-
ness. As  I  looked  at  it,  it  faded  away,  and  appeared  again  higher
up,  in  the  middle  of  the  pane ;  it  then  faded  away  a  second  time,
and  again  appeared,  in  the  top  of  the  pane,  after  which  it  dis-
appeared altogether.  There  seemed  to  be,  iipon  the  pane,  a  sort  of
dark  iridescence,  out  of  which  the  face  was  evolved  ;  each  appear-
ance lasting  about  eight  seconds,  and  each  being  darker  and  fainter
than  the  preceding  one.  I  believe  this  effect  to  have  been  pro-
duced by  the  application,  to  the  glass,  of  semi-materialised  fluidic
matter,  to  which  the  invisible  operators  were  able  to  impart  the
needful  gradations  of  tone,  at  the  moment  when,  by  acting  on  my
nervous  system,  they  caused  me  to  raise  my  eyes,  involuntarily,  to
the  window.

"  Soon  after  the  death  of  Charles  Dickens,  Mrs.  M;.  G.  was

standing  at  the  door  of  her  Paris  residence,  in  the  Eu.e  de  T  ,

waiting  for  her  daughter  to  come  down  and  to  get  into  the  carriage
before  her,  and  admiring,  meantime,  the  beatitiful  clouding  of  the
toi-toise-shell  handle  of  a  new  parasol  which  she  had  in  her  hand,
when  she  saw  the  face  of  the  lamented  novellist,  for  whom  she  had
much  affection,  looking  out  at  her  from  the  surface  of  the  shell.

330

COMMUNICATION  FROM

The  face  was  small,  but  -with  every  feature  perfectly  distinct ;  and,
as  she  gazed  upon  it,  in  utter  amazement,  the  eyes  moved,  and  tite
mouth  smiled.    I  am  authorized  to  say  that  the  lady  referred  to,
whose  initials  will  be  recognised  by  many,  is  ready  to  answer  any
inquiries  that  may  be  addressed  to  her  in  regard  to  a  'manifesta-
tion' of  spirit-ingenuity  that  must,  I  think,  have  been  effected  by
covering  a  small  part  of  the  shell  with  a  film  of  'materialised '
fluidic  substance,  and  the  execution,  in  this  semi-fluidic  vehicle,  of
a  series  of  changes,  of  re-paintings,  so  to  say,  accomplished  so
rapidly  as  to  create,  to  the  perception  of  the  observer,  the  apparent
movement  of  the  eyes  and  mouth  ;  and  I  think  it  probable  that
other  parties,  had  they  been  present,  would  have  seen  both  the
'phenomena'  jiist  described.

"The  two  following  incidents  come  under  the  third  head.
Early  one  afternoon,  when  searching  for  a  certain  passage  in
the  wi-itings  of  the  most  controverted  of  authors,  I  suddenly
came  upon  a  passage  which,  conversant  as  I  am  with  the  wi-itings
referred  to,  I  had  never  seen.    As  the  passage,  thus  found,  bore
directly  on  the  subject  with  wHch  I  was  busy,  I  was  so  much
delighted  with  my  discovery  that,  after  having  resumed  my  search,
I  turned  back  several  pages  in  order  to  have  another  look  at  it,
found  it,  read  it  again  three  or  four  times,  made  a  brief  memoran-
diim  of  it  ia  my  note-book,  and  again  went  on  with  my  search.
Later  in  the  day,  having  found  the  passage  I  wanted,  I  began  to
look  for  the  one  on  which  I  had  so  un6xpectedly  lighted  ;  but,  to
my  great  surprise,  I  could  not  find  it.    I  spent  all  the  evening,  and
nearly  the  whole  of  the  next  two  days,  in  hunting  for  it,  but  in
vain,  and  it  was  only  when  I  had  thorougUy  ascertained  that  the
writings  referred  to  contained  no  such  passage,  that  I  began  to
perceive  the  fact  of  'glamour'  having  been  wi-ought  upon  my  brain ;
the  very  considerable  modification  of  my  comprehension  of  those
wi-itings,  effected  by  the  gi-eat  number  of  consecutive  readings  of
them  that  I  had  thus  been  led  to  make,  explaining  the  motive  of  the
spii-it-action  wHch,  ly  causing  certai^i  fibres  of  my  brain  to  vibrate
as  they  would  have  been  made  to  vibrate  by  the  sight  of  the  in-inled

MISS  ANNA  BLACKWELL.

331

words  which  I  thought  I  read,  produced,  on  my  consciousness,  an
effect  equivalent  to  that  which  would  have  been  produced  by  the
actual  sight  of  those  words.

"  I  attribute  to  the  same  action  on  the  fibres  of  the  brain  the
appearance  of  a  name  which,  with  my  eyes  open,  I  one  day  saw
written,  seemingly,  in  the  air,  and,  on  another  occasion,  with  my
eyes  shut,  of  a  white  scroll,  across  which  a  pen  moved  slowly,
wi-iting  a  message  which  I  read  as  it  wrote.

"The  appearance  of  spiiits,  ,'in  their  habit  as  they  lived,'  or  in
vague  drapery  which  they  have  not  cared  to  render  distinctly
visible,  is  more  difficult  to  class,  because,  in  some  cases,  though
many  pei-sons  may  be  present  when  they  occur,  they  are  seen  only
by  one  of  them,  and  would  therefore  seem  to  be  subjective ;  while
in  others,  they  are  seen  by  several  persons  at  the  same  time,  and
would  therefore  seem  to  be  objective.    But  it  is  to  be  remarked,  on
the  one  hand,  that  there  can  be  no  reason  why  this  sort  of  sugges-
tion may  not  be  exercised  upon  the  brain  and  nerves  of  several
persons  as  easily  as  upon  those  of  one  person ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  that  the  perception  of  such  appearances,  even  when  merely
subjective,  implies  action,  and,  consequently,  an  agent,  as  the  deter-
mining cause  of  that  subjective  effect.    And  as,  in  some  instances,
the  spirit  thus  seen  has  given  pretty  strong  proof  of  actual  pre-
sence—as in  the  case  of  Mi-.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  who  wi-ites  me
that  he  and  six  other  persons  lately  saw  '  a  beautiful  female  figure,
in  "shining  raiment,"  '  emerge  from  the  wall  of  a  long  draCing-
room,  gHde  onwards  to  where  they  were  sitting,  'drop  into  his
hand  what  proved  to  be  a  rose,'  and  then,  continue  her  gliding
course,  and  disappear  thi-ough  the  wall  at  the  opposite  end  of  the
room— it  is  not  easy  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  these  appearances,
though  sometimes  subjective,  are  sometimes  caused  by  the  actual
bodily  presence  of  those  who  are  able  thus  to  render  themselves
visible  to  us.    And  it  seems  probable  that,  in  the  latter  case,  a
double  action  is  necessary  on  the  part  of  the  spirits,  and  that
they  both  operate  a  partial  'materialization'  of  their  corporeal
envelope,  and  also  exercise  a  determining  action  on  the  percep-

332  COMMUNICATION  VROVL

tive  organs  of  tlie  human  beings  to  whom  they  wish  to  show
themselves.

"  Of  the  many  spirits  whom  I  have  seen,  only  two  have  been
those  of  persons  known  to  me  in  my  present  life  ;  one  of  these  I
have  seen  once,  the  other  I  have  seea  eight  times.

"  One  evening,  on  nearing  the  door  of  my  dressing-room,  I  sud-
denly saw,  just  before  me,  a  little  to  my  left,  what  looked  like  a
dark-haired  man,  in  ordinary  dress,  in  the  act  of  passing  through
the  wall  in  front  of  me.    His  head  was  slightly  thrown  back,  his
eyes  were  raised,  and  his  face  wore  a  sad,  dreamy,  and  fixed
expression.    He  did  not  appear  to  see  either  me  or  the  wall,  into
wHch  he  passed  as  though  it  had  been  buUt  of  vapour.  Spiiits
say  that  the  compact  Matter  of  our  sphere  of  Relation  is  as  im-
perceptible, for  them,  as  the  fluidic  Matter  of  theii-  sphere  is  for
us,  and  that  they  only  become  cognisant  of  it,  and  able  to  act  upon
it,'thi'ough  our  minds  and  organisms  ;  and  such,  certainly,  appeared
to  be  the  case  with  the  spirit  in  question.    On  another  occasion  I
saw,  in  the  same  room,  standing  in  the  air  like  the  'saints  and
'  angels'  in  old  pictures,  a  group  of  eighteen  or  twenty  handsome
young  men,  in  white  tunics,  with  red  belts  and  buskins,  and  '
curious  red  hats,  with  'cream-bowl'  crowns  and  very  broad  biims,
embroidered  with  gold,  and  set  on  so  slantingly  that  the  thin  line
of  gold  on  the  edge  of  the  brims  produced,  round  each  head,  some-
thing like  the  effect  of  a  nimbus.    The  right  hand  of  each  grasped
a  stout  crook,  taller  than  himself,  and  resting  on  the  gi'ound.
They  looked  as  though  they  had  halted  on  a  march  ;  and  the  eyes
of  all  were  fixed  upon  me  with  a  grave,  earnest,  and  rather  friendly
gaze     After  looking  at  them  for  a  few  seconds,  I  put  my  hands  to
my  eyes ;  and  then,  looldng  up  again  to  see  if  they  were  stUl  there,
I  saw  the  same  gi'oup,  but  much  higher  up,  at  a  height,  apparently
far  above  the  ceiling,  and  proportionally  fainter.    This  second
glimpse  was  only  instantaneous;  and  though  I  looked  up,  several
times,  during  the  evening,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  them  agaon,  I  saw
nothing  more  of  my  wHte-vestured  visitants.

«  One  afternoon,  when  my  friend  Lady  W  and  her  daughter

MISS  ANNA  BLAOKWELL.

333

■were  sitting  in  tlieix-  drawing-room,  a  female  figure,  unknown  to
either,  was  seen,  by  both  of  them,  to  cross  tlie  room  and  disappear
through  the  walL

"Recently,  at  a  dimier  party  in  the  Avenue  de  ,  Mrs,  M.  G.,

saw  a  beaiitiful  young  woman,  elegantly  attired  in  white,  walk
thi-ough  the  room,  and  go  out  at  one  of  the  doors.  Surprised  that
she  should  have  gone  through  the  room  without  speaking  or  being
spoken  to,  Mrs.  M.  G.  inquired,  of  the  hostess,  who  was  the
charming  young  lady  that  had  just  passed  by;  when  she  found
that  the  appearance,  which  no  one  else  had  seen  on  that  occasion,
but  which  (as  she  then  learned  for  the  fii'st  time,)  had  often  been
seen  by  other  visitors  and  by  some  of  the  servants,  was  the  spirit
of  a  daughter  of  the  family,  who  had  died,  some  time  before,  under
peculiar  circumstances  that  seemed  to  account  for  her  re-appearing.

"  One  day,  about  two  o'clock  (my  servant  having  gone  out  on  an
errand,  so  that  I  was  alone  in  the  small  detached  house  which  I
occiipy),  I  saw,  on  looking  into  my  garden  from  a  first-floor
window,  a  very  odd-looking,  little  old  woman,  not  more  than  four
feet  high,  covered  from  head  to  foot  with  a  most  singular  hooded
cloak,  of  what  looked  like  nankeen  that  had  been  faded  and  stained
by  sun  and  rain  till  its  original  colour  could  hardly  be  made  out,  just
in  the  act  of  turning,  with  slow  and  heavy  gait,  into  the  little
alley  at  the  side  of  the  house  (with  no  outlet  at  the  farther  end,
where  it  is  shut  in  by  high  walls,)  that  leads  to  the  kitchen-door.
She  was  bent  so  nearly  double  that  I  saw  only  the  top  of  her  head
and  hei-  back  j  but,  as  she  looked  like  a  peasant,  though  in  a  garb
the  like  of  which  I  had  never  seen,  I  took  it  for  granted  that  she
was  carrying  a  heavy  basket  with  something  to  sell,  though  it
struck  me  as  strange  that  she  should  be  carrying  it  in  front  of  her,
instead  of  on  one  side.    As  I  was  just  then  much  pestered  by  vendors
of  poultry,  fruit,  &c.,  who  always  cheated,  and  always  left  the  garden-
door  open,  and  whose  visits  I  was  doing  my  best  to  discourage,  I
at  once  ran  downstairs,  wondering  how  she  could  have  opened  the
garden-door  without  ringing  the  alarm-bell  attached  to  it,  and
wenb  to  the  kitchen,  to  tell  her  that  her  wares  were  not  wanted,

334

COMMUNICATION  FBOM

and  to  request  her  not  to  come  again,  when  to  my  amazement,  I
found  there  was  nobody  there.  The  garden-door  was  shut;  and  no
old  woman  was  to  be  seen.  As  it  was  simply  impossible  that  she
could  either  have  reached  the  kitchen,  or  returned  through  the  garden,
in  the  few  seconds  which  it  took  me  to  reach  the  kitchen-door,  I  had
not  the  least  doubt  that  I  had  seen  a  denizen  of  the  other  world ;
but,  for  various  reasons,  I  did  not  mention  the  matter  to  anyone.

"A  few  months  afterwards,  being  again  alone  in  my  house,  I
again  saw,  at  the  same  hour,  from  the  same  window,  the  same  old
woman,  in  the  same  place,  just  in  the  act,  as  before,  of  turning
into  the  little  alley,  in  the  same  queer  cloak,  with  the  same  heavy
gait,  and  bending  over,  as  I  supposed,  the  same  heavy  basket.
Fully  determined,  this  time,  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  so  strange  a
visitation,  I  sprang  downstau-s,  almost  at  a  single  leap,  and  dashed
out  through  the  front-door  into  the  garden,  arriving,  certainly  in
less  than  ten  seconds,  at  the  angle  of  the  house  where  I  could  see
both  the  garden  and  the  alley  at  a  glance.  Not  a  trace  of  the  old
woman  was  to  be  seen;  the  garden-door,  as  on  the  former  occasion,
was  shut;  and  I  returned  into  the  house  more  than  ever  convinced
that  I  had  seen  a  'spirit.'  But  still  I  did  not  mention  to  any  one
what  had  occurred;  among  other  reasons,  because  I  felt  sure  that,
if  the  house  got  the  reputation  of  being  '  haunted,'  no  servant  would
ever  stay  in  it  alone.

"  The  following  year,  I  had  a  new  servant,  not  previously  known
to  me,  and  who,  being  very  fond  of  gardening,  at  once  took  my
little  garden  into  her  own  hands.  One  day,  after  she  had  been
with  me  a  few  weeks,  she  suddenly  walked  into  the  room  where  I
was  "writing,  pale,  in  a  state  of  gi'eat  excitement  and  bewilderment,
and  informed  me,  in  answer  to  my  repeated  inquii-ies  as  to  what
was  the  matter  with  her,  that  she  had  'seen  a  spii-it.'

"  'I  had  gone  out  into  the  garden,'  she  continued,  '  and  was  just
picking  the  gi'ubs  oflf  the  rose-bushes,  when  I  heard  steps  close
behind  me,  on  the  gravel;  I  turned  round  to  see  who  it  was,  very
much  surprised  that  anybody  could  have  come  in,  as  I  had  not
heard  the  garden-bell  ring;  and  there,  staring  into  my  very  face,

MISS  ANNA  BLACKWELL.

335

■was  a  little  bit  of  an  old  woman,  just  about  so  liigli  (indicating,
with  lier  hand,  about  foui-  feet  from  the  floor,)  sucli  a  queer-looking
old  thing,  covered  all  over  with  the  strangest  old  cloak,  made  of  some
kind  of  nnbleached  cotton,  all  full  of  weather-stains.  She  was  bent
pi-etty  neai'ly  double,  like  this  (again  indicating  by  a  gesture),  with
her  two  hands  leaning  on  a  stick.  She  stared  right  into  my  eyes,
with  a  strange  sort  of  smile,  half  pleased,  half  malicious.  I  was
just  opening  my  mouth  to  ask  her  what  she  wanted,  and  what  she
meant  by  coming  in,  and  standing  there,  in  that  impudent  way,
when  she  seemed  to  go  backwards  into  the  arbour,  and  then,  all  of
a  sudden  she  was  gone !  I  never  thought  of  her  being  anythiiig
else  but  an  old  woman ;  for  how  could  I  think  that  a  spii-it  would
make  a  noise  on  the  gi-avel?  But  when  I  saw  her  go  backwards,
lilce  that,  into  the  arbour,  and  then  disappear,  of  course  I  knew
she  must  be  a  spii'it !'

'•'From  that  time,  for  several  months,  my  servant  saw  'the  old
woman'  repeatedly,  and  at  last  grew  so  used  to  seeing  her  that  she
liked  her  coming,  and  would  go  to  sleep  with  her  sitting  on  the
foot  of  the  bed.  But  I  never  saw  her  again,  although  I  frequently
felt  her  presence ;  and  that  she  came  for  the  servant,  and  not  for
me,  was  indicated  by  her  going,  each  time  that  I  had  seen  her,
towards  the  kitchen-door.    Believing  that  she  could  only  have
been  permitted  to  show  herself  to  us  in  order  that  we  might  help
her  'upwards,'  I  obtained  the  help  of  some  mediumistic  friends,
near  neighbours,  who  came  regularly,  several  times  a  week,  to
assist  in  carrying  on  the  spiiitual  education  of  our  strange  visitor.
We  found,  through  raps  in  the  table,  that  she  had  been  suffering,
for  about  800  years,  the  terrible  spii-it-punishment  of  'darkness,'
for  crimes  committed  by  her  in  a  former  incarnation;  that  my
servant,  then  incarnated  as  her  daughter,  had  taken  part  in  those
ci-imes,  with  which  I,  also,  had  been  indirectly  connected.  Hence
the  necessity  of  our  both  concurring  in  the  attempt  to  give  her  the
truer  ideas  of  the  nature  of  life,  and  of  the  process  of  amendment,
which,  in  the  fluidic  world,  is  the  equivalent  of  light.    At  first  she
was  both  despaii-ing  and  violent,  knocking  the  table  about,  and  refus-

336

COMMUNICATION  FROM

ing  to  listen  to  us.  Bixt  we  persevered,  gradually  got  her  into  a  better
state  of  mind,  and  had,  at  length,  the  satisfaction  of  receiving  her
fare-well  message  of  gratitude  and  happiness,  on  quitting  the  surface
of  the  earth  for  a  higher  region  of  the  spirit-sphere,  there  to  prepare
for  making  a  new  attempt  at  reformation  in  a  new  earthly  life.

"We  obtained  like  results  also  in  the  case  of  some  other
backward  spirits  who  had  been  mixed  up  in  the  same  transactions,
whom  we  had  equally  to  take  in  hand  and  instruct,  and  from  all  of
whom  we  had,  at  length,  farewell  messages  of  thanks  and  rejoicing ;
from  which  time,  the  eoises  in  the  top  of  the  house,  that  had
given  me  so  much  annoyance,  entirely  ceased.

"  Not  the  least  curious  of  the  many  curious  points  involved  in
the  visits  of  'the  old  woman'  (who,  however,  objected  to  being
thus  designated,  and  requested  us  to  call  her  '  Vleha,'  which  she
said  was  her  name  in  her  last  incarnation),  was  her  statement,  in
reply  to  our  inquiry  as  to  what  had  brought  her  to  this  house,  that
she  had  been  drawii  to  it  by  the  approach  of  the  '  sphere '  (peris-
pritic  luminosity  or  radiation)  of  the  servant  wlio  did  not  enter  it
until  tJw  following  year,  and  her  perception  of  which  '  sphere'  she
declared  to  have  been  the  first  ray  of  '  light '  she  had  seen  since
her  return  to  the  spiiit-world.  I  could  give,  from  my  own
experience,  another  instance  of  this  pre-projection  of  'spirit-
spheres,'  even  more  remarkable,  did  space  permit.

"  My  friends,  Mrs.  G.  and  MissB.  were  sitting  together,

one  evening,  in  this  city,  when  the  table  suddenly  rapped  out
'Totty,'  the  pet  name  of  Mrs.  G's.  four-year-old  grandchild,  then
in  London.  '  What !  my  darling  little  Totty,'  exclaimed  Mrs.  G.
in  great  agitation  and  alarm,  'are  you  in  the  spirit-world]'
'  No,'  replied  th.e  raps,  '  Totty's  body  is  asleep ;  and  Totty's  spirit
comes  to  you,  dearest  Grandmamma,  to  beg  you  to,'  &c. the
burden  of  'Totty's'  entreaty  referring  to  a  matter  upon  which
Mrs.  G.  had  been  anxiously  meditating  aU  day,  uncertain  what
course  to  pursue  in  regard  to  it.

"  I  have  several  times,  when  alone,  been  spoken  to  by  spii-its ;
but-except  on  one  occasion,  when  I  was  startled  by  a  seemingly-

MISS  ANNA  BLACKWELL.

337

human  voice,  as  loud  as  tlie  blast  of  a  trumpet,  at  the  moment
when,  in  another  country,  a  great  unlooked-for  sorrow  was  failing,
with  the  suddenness  of  the  thunderbolt,  upon  my  life — oiily  through
the  intenor  hearing  which,  being  occasioned  by  spirit-action  on  the
auditive  nerves,  is  only  '  heard  '  by  the  party  on  whom  this  sort  of
'  glamom" '  is  wi-ought.  But  that  '  hearing,'  even  if  purely  sub-
jective, must  have  been  caused  by  those  who  knew  what  they  were
about ;  for  it  told  me,  and  tmly,  each  time,  of  events  of  vital
importance  to  me,  but  of  which  I  had  no  knowledge,  that  were
then  occurring  hundreds  of  miles  away.

"  On  several  occasions,  and  in  vaiious  ways,  I  have  been
*  warned  '  of  the  death  of  persons  at  a  distance.  One  morning,  on
suddenly  waking,  I  looked  at  my  watch,  and  saw  that  it  was  half-
past  four.  A  short  time  afterwards,  being  stUl  awake,  I  heard  so
tremendous  -a  knock  on  the  (outer)  wall  of  my  room,  that  I  felt
sure  a  near  relative,  then  very  ill,  in  England,  was  passing  away.
At  breakfast,  I  spoke  of  this  knock  to  a  lady  who  was  visiting  me,
and  also  to  my  servant,  and  added,  '  Take  notice,  both  of  you,  that
X  probably  departed,  this  morning,  a  few  minutes  after  half-
past  four.'  Two  hours  afterwards  came  a  telegram,  from  England,
saying  '  X  died  this  morning  at  twenty  minutes  to  five.'

"  Did  space  permit,  I  might  bring  forward  many  more  examples
of  spirit-action  that  have  occurred  in  my  own  experience  or  in  that
of  my  immediate  friends.  But  those  now  adduced,  as  illustrations
of  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  present  paper,  suffice  to  sub-
stantiate the  claim  of  the  Spiritist  Philosophy  to  give  the  key  to
the  '  Phenomena '  yoiu*  Committee  are  examiuing,  and  theii'  noble
initiative  in  regard  to  which  will  confer  endiuing  honour  on  their
names  and  labours,  when  the  clamours  of  Ignorance  and  Pre-
judice, in  reference  to  the  glorious  facts  of  the  Soul's  immortality
and  of  the  intercommunication  between  the  twe  spheres  of  planet-
ary life,  shall  have  died  away  and  been  forgotten.

"  I  am,  Sir,

"  Yours  faithfully,

"  Paris,  July  7th,  1870."  "  Anna  Blackwell."

T

338

COMMUNICATION  FEOM

The  Countess  de  Pomab.  .

"  To  the  Cormnittee  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society  appointed
to  investigate  '  Sjnritualism.'

"  Gentlemen, — Having  been  requested  by  some  members  of
your  Committee  to  fumisli  a  report  of  seances  at  wliicli  I  have
been  present,  I  have  concluded,  after  duly  considering  the  matter,
to  do  so,  upon  condition  of  being  allowed  to  state  my  views  re-
specting the  value  of  spiritual  communications.

"  Seances  are  so  much  alike  in  all  essentials,  that  little  good  can
be  derived  from  repoi-ting  them  unless  we  consider  them  with
reference  to  their  value  as  evidence  of  the  individuality  and
immortality  of  the  soul ;  this  is,  in  fact,  the  true  touchstone  of
their  importance ;  and,  therefore,  I  must,  as  a  preliminary  to  my
report  of  spiritual  experiences,  offer  a  few  considerations  in  regard
to  the  vexed  question  as  to  whether  the  soul  is  material  or  imma-
terial, mortal  or  immortal.

"  In  doing  so,  however,  I  do  not  suppose  that  all  difB.culties  are
to  be  instantly  removed;  on  the  contrary,  I  fully  admit  that
differences  of  opinion  must  be  expected  to  exist,  and  only  ask  the
same  concession  from  those  who  are  opposed  to  my  views.

"  Those  who  argue  that  the  soul  is  material  in  the  sense  of  being
a  manifestation  of  matter  in  action,  must,  in  candour,  confess  that
they  have  a  great  many  difficulties  to  contend  with  in  demonstrat-
ing their  views ;  and  they  should  therefore  admit,  as  I  do,  that,  in
relation  to  all  such  questions,  there  must  be  more  or  less  of  honest
difference  of  opinion,  since  all  men  cannot  see  and  judge  alike  ;  and
each  wHl  judge  according  to  his  capacity  for  judging.  No  one
would  expect  a  mere  peasant  to  understand  the  laws  of  electricity,
as  they  were  understood  by  Faraday;  and  the  same  difference
must  exist  with  well-educated  men,  for  they  are  not  all  on  the
same  level,  and  therefore  they  cannot  see  with  the  same  eyes.

"The  ideas  of  beauty  presented  to  tho  mind  by  the  works  of
Kembrandt,  Rubens,  Titian,  and  MuriUo,  vary  as  widely  as  docs

THE  COUNTESS  DE  POMAE.  339

tlie  style  of  those  gi-eat  painters,  and  the  ajipreciation  of  those  who
contemph^te  them.

"  Some  maintain  that  the  German  Composers  are  the  finest  tho
workl  ever  produced,  others  are  equally  ready  to  do  battle  in  favour
of  the  Italian  School.

"  There  are  men  who,  with  Plato,  would  banish  poets  from  the
republic  of  letters ;  others  believe  them  to  be  the  first  and-  best  of
eduaitors.  Carlyle  sometimes  waxes  furious  when  speaking  of
the  fine  arts,  which  others  believe  to  be  essential  to  the  well-being
of  society.

"  In  like  manner  men  of  equal  integrity  difier  respecting  reli-
gious theories ;  and,  therefore,  the  only  safe  conclusion  to  be
arrived  at  is,  that  human  beings  are  not  capable  of  seeing  alike,
but  that  reasoning  upon  precisely  the  same  evidence  men  will
reach  opposite  conclusions,  and,  consequently,  that  oj)posite  opiaions
must  be  held.

"  This,  however,  can  be  very  easily  accounted  for  by  those  who
maintain  that  our  present  life  is  but  one  of  a  series  of  lives
^ihrough  which  we  musb  pass  in  03?der  to  attain  perfection,  and  in
^each  of  which  we  are  only  capable  of  a  certain  amount  of  growth
and  development.

'•'  Those  who  deny  Spiritualism  as  a  whole,  and  who  believe  the
present  life  to  be  the  all  of  existence,  must  confess  that  they  have
some  difficult  points  to  explain.  For  instance,  what  is  to  be  said
about  memory;  and  its  relation  to  matter  %  It  is  assumed  that  all
our  mental  perceptions  are  inseparably  associated  with  the  brain,
that  what  is  seen  by  the  physical  eye,  is  afterwards  seen  by  the
mental  eye,  both,  however,  being  material ;  in  which  case  it  must
foUow  that  the  impressions  received  are  actually  stamped  upon
material  substance;  so  that  what  men  call  'remembering'  is
literally  nothing  more  than  bringing  out  the  old  mental  photogi-aph
which  has  been  stored  in  the  brain.

"There  is,  however,  a  physiological  difficulty  connected  with
this  assumption.  Physiologists  inform  us  that  the  human  body  is
pei-petually  undergoing  change  ;  that  at  every  instant  of  time,  new

T  2

r

340

COMMUNICATION  PEOM

matter  is  taking  the  place  of  the  old,  and  that  at  short  intei-vals
the  body  is  so  completely  changed  that  not  an  atom  of  its  foi-mer
self  remains.  This  change  too,  and  especially  with  those  who  read
and  think  much,  is  more  active,  they  tell  us,  in  the  brain  than  in
other  parts  of  the  body ;  so  that,  it  is  concluded,  only  a  still  shorter
time  is  needed  to  ensure  a  complete  change  of  the  matter  of  which
the  brain  is  composed.  This  being  the  case,  and  no  physiologist
wUl  dispute  it,  how  can  it  be  accounted  for  that  we  are  capable  of
remembering  events  that  occurred,  and  scenes  we  viewed,  thirty  or
forty  years  ago  1  The  scenes  of  our  childhood  ai'e  still  visible  to
the  mental  eye,  and  the  tones  of  the  mother's  voice  are  still  as
clearly  heard  by  the  mental  ear,  as  they  were  forty  years  before,
when  first  they  sounded  through  the  physical  chambers.

"  Is  it  possible  to  explain  this  fact  by  the  material  theory  ?  To
do  so  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  old  matter,  which  origia-
ally  received  the  impressions,  re-stamped  these  upon  the  new  ;  and
that  this  process  was  repeated  every  time  the  molecules  of  matter
were  changed ;  that  is  to  say,  twelve  or  fifteen  times  ia  a  life-time.

"  But  how  can  this  be  done,  and  we  remain  unconscious  of  the
process  1  If  my  seeing  a  waterfall  with  the  physical  eye  produces
a  mental  picture  I  recall  at  pleasure,  how  can  that  mental  picture
of  the  waterfall  be  stamped  into  my  new  braiu  matter  without  my
beiug  conscious  of  the  act  1  For  the  re-stamping  must  be  necessary
in  all  cases,  even  those  in  which  for  many  years  the  scene  remem-
bered has  not  recurred  to  the  mind ;  and,  obviously,  iu  such  cases
the  ideas  of  things  must  have  passed  from  old  molecules  to  new
ones  without  our  being  in  any  way  conscious  of  the  transaction.

"  Surely  this  is  harder  to  believe  than  is  the  theory,  that  memory
is  a  result  of  the  action  of  a  spiritual  element  in  our  nature,  which
remains  essentially  the  same  during  its  connection  with  the  physical
body,  the  particles  of  which  are  constantly  changing.

"Then  there  is  the  difficulty  of  explaining  how  matter  can  pro-
duce ideas.  Is  it  not  impossible  to  speak  of  ideas  as  of  material
objects'?  Can  we  conceive  of  extension  or  ponderability  in  connec-
tion with  our  thoughts?    To  speak  of  a  pound  of  sorrow,  or  of  an

THE  OOUiilTESS  DE  POMAE.

341

ounce  of  hope,  seems  impossible;  we  cannot  expect  either  music  or
poetiy  from  the  rock  or  the  plant;  yet  both  the  latter  enter  into
the  composition  of  our  mortal  bodies;  and  it  ought  to  be  as  feasible
to  extract  the  former  fz'om  the  earth,  or  from  potatoes,  in  their
natm-al  condition,  as  after  they  have  been  consumed,  if  matter  can
think  and  produce  ideas.

"Of  course  it  will  be  said  that  we  must  not  expect  ideas  from
matter  before  it  becomes  organised;  but  here  agaia  a  difficulty
occiu-s.  It  is  generally  said  by  physiologists,  that  in  chemical
composition  as  in  formation,  no  difference  exists  between  the
brain  of  the  Esquimau,  and  that  of  the  most  highly  cultivated
European.  Theu'  elements  and  their  mode  of  organization  are
the  same ;  and  yet  how  different  are  the  men !  But  would  this  be
the  case,  if  it  were  true  that  matter  produces  ideas?  Should  not
the  same  results  follow  from  the  same  organi^iation?  The  question
cannot  be  one  of  weight,  because  it  is  known  ttat  the  contents  of
the  skull  of  some  Esquimaux  or  Red  Indians  weigh  more  than  do
those  of  some  educated  Europeans.  Plato  is  reported  as  having
had  a  veiy  large  head ;  and  it  has  been  argued  from  this  that  he
was  therefore  more  capable  of  laborious  thought.  It  is  also  said,
that,  from  men  of  small  heads,  we  have  no  right  to  expect  gi-eat
works  of  philosophy  or  art.  But  is  it  not  well  known  that  very
bad  men  have  had  large  heads'?  Look  at  a  collection  of  busts,
from  those  of  bad  Roman  Emperors  down  to  the  modern  murderers,
and  how  many  of  them  are  found  to  have  larger  heads  than  some
who  have  worked  nobly  for  the  elevation  of  the  human  race.

"If  the  quality  of  the  mind  resulted  solely  from  the  size  of  the
brain,  we  should  have  a  right  to  expect  equal  results  from  equal
weights;  this,  however,  is  not  the  case.

"If  space  permitted,  a  legion  of  kindred  difficulties  might  be
suggested ;  enough,  however,  has  been  said  to  prove  that  modesty
should  be  shown  by  Anti-spiritualists,  when  insisting  upon  what
they  are  pleased  to  call  'the  weakness  of  spirit  evidence.'

"But  the  spiritualist  does  not  pretend  that  he  has  no  difficulti&g
to  contend  with ;  on  the  contrary,  he  confesses  them,  and  knows

342

COMMUNICATION  TEOM

tliat  it  is  in  tlie  ratui-e  of  the  case  for  them  to  exist;  the  spiritualist
admits  it  to  be  impossible  for  him  to  show  the  soul,  as  he  can  show
a  physical  organ;  or  to  analyse  it,  as  he  does  gases  and  solids.
But  he  has  a  full  consciousness  of  its  existence;  and  is  sensible  of
the  fact,  that  it  is  spirit  alone  which  can  give  evidence  of  itself.
Soul  alone  can  conceive  of  soul.    Material  bodies  can  only  bo

tested  by  material  agents;  and,  as  the  lesser  cannot  comprehend

the  greater,  it  is  certain  that  self-consciousness  is  the  true  evidence

of  the  soul's  existence.

"HoAV  can  a  child  comprehend  a  man"?    Can  the  lower  nature

comprehend  the  higher?    Does  the  coward  understand  the  hero?

In  like  manner,  it  is  soul  alone  that  can  conceive  of  soul;  and

according  to  their  degTces  of  development,  do  souls  comprehend

each  other  1

"It  is  therefore  but  reasonable  to  accept  the  evidence  of  o\ir  self-
consciousness,  as  we  do  that  of  our  nervous  system;  we  feel  a  pain,
but  cannot  prove  the  fact  to  our  neighbours,  stUl  we  are  sure  of  it,
through  our  self-consciousness.

"We  must  deal  in  a  similar  way  with  the  question  of  immor-
tality; and  it  is  somewhat  cvirions  that  this  question  should  be  de-
bated; since  the  materialists,  thongh  denying  a  future  state  to  the
mind,' are  ready  enough  to  admit  their  beUef,  that  matter  cannot
be  destroyed  ;  this  being  so,  how  can  they  conceive  of  the  destnic-
tion  of  its  properties?    Vitality  may  be  latent  for  ages;  but  supply
the  conditions  necessary  for  the  manifestation,  and  at  once  it
becomes  active.    Seed  found  in  the  hand  of  an  Egyi^ian  munnny
has  been  sown,  and  produced  abundantly,  yet  no  one  doubted  that
the  seed  had  been  enclosed  above  four  thousand  years.  According
to  the  materialist,  this  vitality  is  a  property  of  matter;  and  if  the
materialists  are  right,  so  also  is  consciousness;  why  then,  if  the
former  be  persistent,  may  not  the  latter  be  so  too?    Does  it  not
rather  appear  that  once  developed  it  ought  to  go  on  for  ever?
Nature  wastes  nothing;  but  is  economical  in  the  use  of  her
materials;  why  then  suppose  that  the  atom  will  persist,  but  the
mind  that  studied  it  will  perish;  that  the  earth  will  remam,  but

THE  COUJ^TESS  DE  POMAE.

343

tlie  genius  tliat  solves  its  mysteries  of  flower,  tree,  and  stone,  will
perish?  Does  not  the  consciousness  of  the  superior  value  of  our
inner  selves,  become  evidence  in  favour  of  the  idea,  that  the  higher
natiu-e  wiU  survive  the  changes  of  matter,  and  live  on  in  know-
led'-e  when  the  materials  of  the  physical  frame  will  have  been
re-iucorpoi-ated  with  a  thousand  other  forms'?

"It  is  at  this  point  that  Spiritualism  comes  to  our  aid  by
furnishing  proof  of  the  soul's  immortality.  Unhappily,  however,
so  numerous  are  the  mocking  voices,  it  cannot  obtain  the  unbiassed
learning  its  gi-eat  importance  demands ;  a  consequence  probably
of  its  being  somewhat  in  advance  of  the  age,  and,  to  some  extent,
on  account  of  the  impositions  which  have  been  practised  in  its

name.

"When  it  was  proposed  to  light  London  with  gas,  no  less  a
man  than  Sii-  Walter  Scott  printed  Ms  protest  against  the  ridiculous
attempt  to  light  the  streets  of  a  city  with  smoke.  What  was
reported  by  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  against  Rail-
ways ?  And  who  has  not  heard  of  the  scorn  encountered  by  the
first  advocates  of  Vaccination,  and  of  Oceanic  Telegraphy?  Still
these  discoveries  have  all  made  their  way,  as  Spuitualism  will  do
ere  long,  for  nothing  can  resist  the  collective  evidence  in  its  favour.

"  Nor  is  that  evidence  so  completely  modern  as  many  seem  to
suppose,  for  in  all  history  the  belief  has  prevailed  that  spirits,
having  left  their  mortal  bodies  were  permitted  to  connnunicate
with  those  they  loved,  and  who  were  still  in  the  flesh.  Homer,
Herodotus,  Plato,  Cicero,  &c.,  all  speak  distinctly  as  to  the  belief
«ntertained  by  the  ancient  nations,  and  when  we  read  the  history
of  Saul  and  Samuel  and  the  Witch  of  Endor,  we  cannot  doubt  as
to  what  was  the  belief  of  the  Hebrew  people.

"  In  the  christian  world  the  belief  has  never  failed,  and  this  not
merely  because  it  is  pleasing  to  believe  that  the  dear  ones  dead,
still  take  an  interest  in  our  condition ;  but  because  of  testimony
given  by  so  many  of  the  noblest  and  purest  of  men  and  women,
to  the  fact  that  they  have  been  thus  visited.  From  the  days  of
the  christian  fathers  there  is  an  unbroken  line  of  testimony  to

344

COMMUNICATION  FEOM

tliis  fact,  and  cui-iously  enougla,  it  is  borne  by  men  wlio  are
applauded  for  everything  but  this  belief  in  Spiritualism.  When
they  speak  of  what  they  saw  and  knew,  they  are  rejected ;  but  are
reverently  believed  when  speaking  about  matters  of  speculation.

"  It  is  not  here  denied  that  errors  have  been  mingled  with  the
aforesaid  belief,  but  what  is  contended  for  is  this,  that  when  so
many  millions  of  people,  led  by  thousands  of  eminent  men,  have
believed  themselves  to  be  in  direct  communication  with  the  spirits
of  the  dead,  and  when  the  wisest  of  human  teachers  have  recorded
the  facts  of  theii'  experience,  no  one  can  be  justified  in  denying
these  statements  until  he  has  gained  such  a  knowledge  of  the-
economy  of  the  universe  as  will  entitle  bi'm  to  say  that  all  such
communications  are  impossible.  "We  must  first  know  what  is
possible,  before  saying  that  such  visits  are  impossible.

"  Those  who  developed  the  Telegraphic  systems  cared  nothing
for  the  outsiders  who  said  that  such  a  mode  of  sending  messages
must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  '  impossible.'  Relying  upon
their  o^m  experience,  although  unable  to  understand  the  nature  of
the  phenomena  of  electricity  they  still  went  on,  and  now  we  send
our  messages  round  the  world.

"  In  presence  of  '  so  gimt  a  crowd  of  witnesses,'  it  appears  almost
superfluous  to  speak  of  my  own  experience,  and  yet  I  must  do  so,
for  I  know  by  what,  to  myself,  are  infallible  proofs  of  the  truth,
that  spii'its  do  hold  communication  with  us.  never  doubted  the
immoi'tality  of  the  soul,  so  that  I  did  not  need  confirmation  of  the
fact,  yet  I  gladly  testify  that  it  has  been  given  to  me  and  in  great
abundance.  And  to  shew  that  I  have  not  been  self-deceived,  I
will  mention  one  particular  fact.

"  During  a  period  of  five  months  I  was  a  '  medium,'  and  even
when  sitting  alone,  I  have  frequently  had  communications  so  clear
and  distinct  that  mistake  was  impossible,  for  ideas  have  been  tluis
conveyed  to  me  which  previously  had  no  place  ia  my  mind.

"  This  power  suddenly  quitted  me,  and  it  has  never  returned.
Now  had  it  been  a  case  of  self-deception,  is  it  not  clear  that  it
would  have  continued,  seeing  that  as  far  as  health,  mental  power,

THE  COUNTESS  DE  POMAK.

345

and  belief  in  spii-itual  communications  are  concernod,  I  nnderwent
no  chanofe.

"  Then  again,  I  have  sat  in  my  own  house  -with  personal  friends,
no  other  medium  but  myself  being  present ;  and  the  communica-
tions respecting  departed  relatives  and  friends  were  alike  interest-
ing and  remarkable.  I  have  been  told  of  many  things  about
them  of  which  I  had  no  previous  knowledge,  and  which  the
persons  sitting  with  me  could  not  have  known,  for  the  communica-
tions were  from  those  who  had  died  in  distant  countries,  and  yet
these  proved  to  be  correct ;  many  of  them  have  been  in  Spanish.  All
this  has  occurred  to  me  through  my  own  mediumship.

"  I  have  attended  many  seances,  with  more  or  less  marked
results — and  I  think  it  right  to  mention  that  I  have  sat  several
times  with  Mr.  Home  without  having  a  single  manifestation,  even
when  the  whole  circle  has  been  composed  of  friends  and  Spiiit-
ualists.  At  others,  we  have  obtained  the  most  beautiful  manifesta-
tions through  his  mediumship  ;  we  have  thus  had  messages,
movements  of  inanimate  objects,  and  music,  perfect  in  sentiment
and  expression,  on  the  accordion,  which  has  frequently  played  in
my  hand  when  sitting  near  him.  Of  these  seances  it  will
probably  be  more  interesting  to  mention  one  which,  as  we  were
not  sitting  for  the  purpose,  should  be  called  '  no  seance.'

"  Death  was  in  the  house  ;  and  the  beloved  one  who  had  left  us
was  yet  uncofSned.  I  was  sitting  in  the  library  with  my  son  at
the  tea-table,  and  we  were  sitting  close  togethei",  as  the  sorrow  of
the  hour  rendered  it  natural  we  should  do,  when  Mr.  Home  was
unexpectedly  announced ;  he  had  come  from  a  public  reading,
dressed  as  he  had  been  on  the  platfonn,  and  consequently  with  no
possibility  of  the  machinery  about  him  which  so  many  uiibeHevers
suppose  him  to  carry  concealed.  He  was  quite  unaware  of  the  sad
event  that  had  occurred,  his  first  intention  having  been  merely  to
make  inquiries  at  the  door.  He  drew  a  chair  up  to  the  table  be-
side my  son,  and  affectionately  placed  an  arm  round  liis  waist.

"  Raps  were  heard  almost  immediately,  on  the  table,  on  the  chan-
deliers, and  iu  various  pai-ts  of  the  room ;  we  adopted  the  usual

346

COMMUNICATION  I'EOM

course  of  repeating  the  alphabet,  and  the  messages  spelt  out  were
'joi/,  not  sorrow,'  and  'not  gone  awaij  ;'  directly  after  this,  as  if  in
confirmation  of  the  statement,  the  favourite  seat  of  the  depai-ted,  a
large  arm  chair,  which  was  standing  in  its  usual  place  near  the  win-
dow at  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  moved  in  a  sweep  towards  the
table  at  which  we  were  sitting,  and  came  nearly  round  to  my  side.
Then  a  sofa  moved  across  the  room  in  another  direction;  while
this  was  occurring  we  three  were  still  sitting  at  the  table  from
which  Mr.  Home  had  not  moved  since  he  first  sat  down.

"  In  this  case  there  could  be  no  ocular  delusion.  No  seance  had
been  proposed ;  we  were  not  even  sitting  with  our  hands  on  the
table  as  is  the  custom'  at  seances,  and  the  room  was  well  lighted
with  gas.

"  My  son  was  somewhat  alarmed  at  what  had  occun-ed.  I,  see-
ing the  power  was  so  great,  got  out  an  accordion  which  I  had
purchased  myself  for  these  occasions,  and  which  had  been  twice
changed  at  the  shop  by  me,  it  having  been  pronounced  out  of  tune
by  the  invisible  performers,  who  always  shewed  us  the  fact  by
IDlaying  the  discordant  notes.  I  then  begged  them  to  play  some-
thing in  accordance  with  our  feelings  ;  and  a  very  beautiful  and
solemn  air  was  played,  while  Mr.  Home  held  the  instrument,  which
he  did,  not  only  under  the  table,  but  horizontally  in  the  air,  or
above  his  head,  according  to  the  impulses  they  gave  to  it.  As  they
finished  playing,  it  came  towards  me,  and  Mr.  Home  told  me  to
take  it,  which  I  did,  and  it  then  played  a  favourite  tune  which  I
asked  for,  partly  in  my  hand  and  partly  in  his  as  he  took  it  from
me,  when  the  soimds  had  become  faint  from  my  want  of  power.

"  What  could  I  do  but  believe  the  evidence  of  my  own  senses
corroborated  too  as  that  evidence  has  been  by  so  many  others  %

"  To  multiply  narratives  of  this  kind  is  comparative  useless  ;
were  it  not  so,  I  could  fill  a  large  volume  with  reports  of  remark-
able seances  at  which  I  have  been  present ;  I  prefer  to  add  a  few
remarks  respecting  the  value  of  spii-it  communication,  and  fii'st  as
to  the  curious  fact  that,  to  the  same  question  diflPerent  spii-its  give
various  and  sometimes  contradictory  answers.    This  is  a  stumbling

THE  COUNTESS  DE  POMAK.  347

block  to  many,  but  the  reason  of  the  fact  is  clear  and  not  far  to
seek.  Some  people  suppose  that  when  the  spirit  has  left  the  body
it  is  immediately  enlightened  and  purified,  so  that  it  at  once  learns
all  it  will  ever  know,  and  becomes  perfect.  But  is  that  a  rational
sujiposition  1  Can  it  be  believed  that  immediately  after  death,  the
soul  of  the  illiterate  shoe-black  becomes  all  at  once  as  enlightened  as
the  soul  of  Shakespeare  1  Who  can  imagine  that  the  soul  of  Mrs.
Manning  can  be  changed  instantly  after  death,  so  as  to  become  as
pure  and  holy  as  that  of  Mrs.  Fry  1  In  the  order  of  nature  there
are  no  such  sudden  transfoi-mations,  and  we  have  no  right  to  ex-
pect them  after  death.

"  On  the  contrary,  we  should  expect  that  growth  in  knowledge
and  goodness  will  be  in  the  future  as  gi-adual  as  it  is  in  the  present,
and  if  this  be  so,  we  can  at  once  account  for  the  contradictory
answers  so  frequently  given  by  spirits,  if  one  of  these  has  but  re-
cently left  us,  it  cannot  know  much  more  than  it  knew  while  in  the
flesh,  and  therefore  will  err  when  speaking  of  subjects  it  can  only
fully  understand  Avhen  it  has  reached  a  much  higher  degree  of
knowledge.

"  In  like  manner  the  moral  nature  requires  a  long  period  of  time
to  change  from  bad  to  good ;  so  that  if  a  soul  passes  away  while
steeped*  in  sin  and  falsehood,  it  cannot  all  at  once  become  pure  and
true ;  such  a  sj)irit,  if  called  upon  to  answer  a  question,  is  therefore
as  likely  to  speak  ignorantly  and  falsely  as  it  would  have  been
while  in  the  flesh.  This  we  are  learning  from  our  intercourse  with
the  spii-it-world,  and  we  believe  it  to  be  true  because  it  harmonises
with  what  common-sense  teaches  us  must  be  the  case  in  that  world
as  in  this.  It  wiU  possibly  be  said  that  this  must  cast,  more  or
less,  doubts  on  all  spii-it  communications ;  but  no  spiritist  has  ever
imagined  that  absolute  reliance  is  to  be  placed  in  what  spirits  say.
We  must  always  use  our  own  judgment  in  regard  to  these  commu-
nications, and  take  each  of  them  for  Avhat  it  may  be  worth.

"  All  the  spirits  with  whom  I  have  had  communication  have
invariably  told  me  that  they  do  grow  in  knowledge  and  goodness,
and  this  through  being  re-incarnated;  that  they  return  to  thia

348

COMMUNICATION  FROM

earth  many  times,  as  many  as  are  necessary  for  enabling  them  to
gi-ow  to  iiei'fection,

"This  quite  accords  vrith.  my  own  deep  conviction.  If  I  be
asked  how  long  it  would  take  a  spirit  to  rise  through  the  vaiious
degrees  until  it  is  fitted  for  leaving  this  sphere,  I  could  not  answer,
except  to  say,  there  wiU  be  time  enough  in  eternity  for  the  due
perfection  of  all,  however  imperfect  may  be  their  natures  to-day,
and  in  this  hope  and  conviction  I  rest  content,  quite  certain  that
such  a  thing  as  eternal  punishment  is  altogether  contrary  to  the
great  law  of  God  which  is  written  on  all  His  works — The  law  of
eternal  progress.

"The  sin  we  have  committed,  or  are  inclined  to  commit,  we  shall
sufier  for  until  we  have  thoroughly  purged  it  out  of  our  nature ;
the  wrong  we  have  done,  we  shall  expiate,  and  we  shall  not  come
out  free  till  we  have  paid  the  uttermost  farthing ;  but  we  shall
pay  it,  and  go  gladly  on  our  way  when  we  have  left  it  far  behind
us,  '  always  stretching  forward  towards  the  mark,'  perfect  happi-
ness awaiting  us  as  we  get  further  on  in  our  long  journey,  happi-
ness which  will  really  be  our  own  because  we  shall  have  worked
-  for,  and  earned  it,  and  have  grown  up  to  imderstand,  and  yearn
after  it.  Our  happiness  will  be  to  be  all  good,  all  wise,  all  pure,
'perfect  as  our  Father  is  perfect.'  Can  any  single  life  on  earth,
perfect  us  sufficiently  even  to  compn'ehend  such  perfection  ?  And
yet  the  standard  was  given  !

"In  these  latter  days  science  has  come  to  help  us  on  our  way,
and  show  us  the  weak  points  and  faculties  of  the  old  creeds.  But
lest  we  should  bow  down  before,  and  content  ourselves  with
science  alone,  spiritism  has  come  with  it,  side  by  side,  the  same
discoveries  in  electricity  which  enable  us  to  send  our  thoughts  to
the  other  side  of  the  earth,  were  borne  by  Benjamin  Fraiiklin  to
the  other  side  of  the  grave,  and  also  serve  our  spii'it-fi-iends  to
prodiice  the  little  rap,  that  sends  a  thrill  of  joy  through  our  frame,
as  we  receive  a  telegraphic  message  from  those  who  have  gone
before  us  to  that  bright  shore,  proving  that  we  are  still  loved
and  remembered,  and  that  the  dead  are  not  dead  and  can  never

M.  OAMILLE  FLAMMARION.

349

die;  and  in  tMs  certainty,  I  rest  content,  not  doubting  that  as
time  passes,  spimtism  will  become  triumphant,  and  that  the  noble
doctrine  to  which  it  bears  testimony — that  of  the  re-incarnation —
will  be  received  by  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men;  giving  them
that  peace  and  consolation  which  no  other  doctrine  has  hitherto
succeeded  in  giving  to  humanity.

"M.  DE  Medina  Pomar."

M.  Camille  Flammarion,
Asti-onomer ;  formerly  of  the  Observatory  of  Paris,  Professor  of
Astronomy  of  the  Polytechnic  Association,  Academic  Oflficer  of
the  University  of  France,  Author  of  "  The  Plurality  of  Inhabited
Worlds,"  etc.  etc.

"To  the  honorary  Secretary  of  the  '  S2nritualism  Committee'  of  the
Dialectical  Society  of  London.
"  Cher  Monsieur — Voici  ma  reponse,  que  Mademoiselle  Black-
well  a  ti-aduite  sur  ma  demande  pour  votre  Report,  et  que  je  vous
envoie,  relue  et  dument  approuvee.  Je  souhaite  que  ce  petit
resume  soit  de  quelque  utilite  pour  la  solution  du  problem  qui
vows  occupe.

"  Recevez,  je  vous  prie,  I'expression  de  mes  sentiments  sympa-
thiques  et  devoues.

"  Flammarion."

"  To  G.  W.  Bennett,  Esq.,  Hon.  Sec.  of  the  Spintualism  Committee
of  the  Dialectical  Society.

"  Sir — I  have  to  apologise  for  my  long  delay  in  replying  to  the
inqtiiry  which  your  Committee  has  done  me,  through  you,  the
honour  of  addressing  to  me.  Having  been  travelling  for  several
weeks,  I  have  been,  since  my  return  to  Pai'is,  so  completely  ab-
sorbed by  the  press  of  scientific  business  accumulated  during  my
absence  that  I  have  hitherto  been  unable  to  find  a  moment  for
conferi'ing  with  you  on  the  serious  and  weighty  subject  to  v/hich
your  letter  refers.

350

COMMUNICATION  FROM

"  For  ten  years  past,  I  have  taken  mucli  interest  in  the  so-called
'  Spii-itiial  Phenomena. '  Every  scientific  man  should  say,  with  the  old
Roman  wi'iter,  '  Homo  sum,  et  niJdl  humanum  a  me  alienum  pulo  ; '
hut,  if  it  were  easy,  in  former  times,  to  embrace  at  a  single  glance
the  totality  of  human  knowledge,  that  knowledge  has  already  become
too  complex  to  be  grasped  entirely  by  any  one  mind.  In  regard  to
myself,  I  may  say  that,  from  my  childhood,  Astronomy  has  absorbed
my  nights  and  my  days,  while  the  endeavour  to  popularize,  under  a
literary  form,  the  facts  of  that  most  sublime  of  sciences,  has  equally
absorbed  my  evenings  and  my  mornings.  Such  being  the  case,  I
need  hardly  add  the  avowal  that  I  have  had  but  very  little  time
to  give  to  anything  but  purely  scientific  investigation.  Neverthe-
less, the  occasional  hours  that  I  have  been  able  to  devote,  from
time  to  time,  to  the  attentive  and  imjDai-tial  study  of  the  facts  in
question — such  as  the  movements  of  tables  and  other  objects,  raps
and  other  sounds  occurring  without  any  perceptible  cause,  conver-
sations held  with  inert  objects,  and  the  various  other  phenomena
produced  under  the  influence  of  '  mediums  '—have  led  me  to  a  con-
clusion that  may  be  briefly  summed  up  as  follows  : —

"  Of  those  who  call  themselves  '  mediums '  and  '  spiritists '  a
considerable  number  are  persons  of  limited  intelligence,  incapable
of  bringing  the  experimental  method  to  bear  on  the  investigation
of  this  order  of  phenomena,  and  consequently  are  often  the  dupes
of  their  credulity  or  ignorance  ;  while  others,  of  whom  the  num-
ber is  also  considerable,  are  impostors  whose  moral  sense  has  be-
come so  blunted  by  the  habit  of  fraud  that  they  seem  to  be  in-
capable of  appi<eciating  the  heinousness  of  their  criminal  abuse  of
the  confidence  of  those  who  apply  to  them  for  instruction  or  for
consolation.  And  even  where  the  subject  is  being  investigated
seriously  and  in  good  faith,  the  force  to  which  the  production  of
these  phenomena  is  due  is  so  capricious  in  its  action  that  much
delay  and  disappointment  is  inevitable  in  the  prosecution  of  any
experimental  inquiry  in  regard  to  them.  It  is,  therefore,  no  easy
matter  to  put  aside  the  obstacles  thus  placed  in  the  way  of  the
serious  inquii-er,  to  eliminate  these  sources  of  error,  and  to  get  at

M.  CAMILLE  FLAMMAIilON.

351

genuine  manifestations  of  the  plieuomena  in  question ;  carefully
guarding  one's  own  mind  against  all  error,  all  self-deception,  in
tlie  methodical  and  scrupulous  examination  of  the  order  of  facts
now  under  discussion.    Nevertheless,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm
my  conviction,  based  on  personal  examination  of  the  subject,  that
any  scientific  man  who  declares  the   phenomena  denominated
'magnetic,'  'somnambulic,'  mediiimic,'  and  others  not  yet  ex-
l^lained  by  science,  to  be  '  impossible,'  is  one  who  speaks  without
knowing  what  he  is  talking  about ;  and  also  any  man  accustomed,
by  his  professional  avocations,  to  scientific  observation — provided
that  his  mind  be  not  biassed  by  prc-conceived  opinions,  nor  his
mental  vision  blinded  by  that  opposite  kind  of  illusion,  unhappily
too  common  in  the  learned  world,  which  consists  in  imagining  that
the  laws  of  Nature  are  already  known  to  us,  and  that  everything
which  appeai-s  to  overstep  the  limit  of  our  present  foraiulas  is  im-
possible— may  acquire  a  radical  and  absolute  certainty  of  the  reality
of  the  facts  alluded  to.

"After  an  affirmation  so  categoric,  it  is  hardly  necessary  for
me  to  assure  the  members  of  the  Dialectical  Society  that  I  have
acquii-ed,  through  my  own  observation,  the  absolute  certainty  of
the  reality  of  these  phenomena.  y

"  This  first  point  established,  I  come  to  the  next  point  of  your
inquiry,  viz.,  the  explanation  of  these  phenomena.

"  In  regard  to  this  point,  I  am  not  yet  prepared  to  make  any
positive  affirmation;  for  it  ajipears  to  me  that  we  do  not  yet
possess  aU  the  elements  necessary  for  an  absolute  decision  of  the
question,  and  that  no  one  of  the  hyiiotheses  hitherto  put  forward
on  the  subject  can  be  regarded  as  affording,  of  itself,  and  to  the
exclusion  of  all  others,  a  sufficient  explanation  of  all  the  facts  of
the  case.

"  It  has  been  attempted  to  explain  these  phenomena  by  attribut-
ing them  to  '  imconscious  movements '  on  the  part  of  the  'medium  '
or  the  persons  in  whose  presence  they  occur.  Many  men  whom  I
greatly  esteem,  members  of  the  Institute,  have  adopted  this  theory,
which,  nevertheless,  explains  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  the

352

COMMUNICATION  PEOM

facts  we  arc,  considering,  and  for  the  greater  number  of  which  it
is  utterly  inadequate  to  account.  Another  theory  refers  these
phenomena  to  the  action  of  a  nervous  fluid,  developed  in  a  special
direction.  Another,  again,  refers  them  to  organic  electricity.
Some  observers  have  started  the  theory,  difficult  to  admit,  of  a
collective  hallucination  on  the  part  of  those  who  affii-m  their
perception  of  these  phenomena.  Some  have  attributed  them  to
the  Devil  of  ecclesiastical  tradition ;  others  have  seen  in  them  an
action  of  the  souls  of  the  dead.  My  own  opinion,  so  far,  is  that
several  distinct  forces  are  probably  active  in  the  production  of
these  complex  phenomena.

"  The  scientific  world  in  Prance,  as  elsewhere,  is  far  from  bein"
agreed  in  regard  to  this  subject.  The  geologist  Delarue,  Dr.
Puel,  so  widely  known  as  a  physiologist  and  botanist,  and  many
others,  consider  these  phenomena  to  be  an  effect  of  animal
magnetism.  My  learned  teacher  and  friend,  M.  Babinet,  of  the
Institute,  who  has  endeavoured,  with  M.  E.  Liais,  (now  Dii-ector
of  the  Observatory  of  Brazil,)  and  several  others  of  my  colleagues
of  the  Observatory  of  Paris,  to  ascertain  their  natm-e  and  cause,
is  not  fully  convinced  of  the  intervention  of  spirits  in  then-
production,  though  this  hypothesis,  by  which  alone  certain  cate-
gories of  these  phenomena  would  seem  to  be  explicable,  has  been
adopted  by  many  of  our  most  esteemed  savants  ;  among  others,  by
Dr.  Hoefile,  the  learned  author  of  the  History  of  Chemistry,  and
the  General  Encyclopaidia,  and  by  the  diligent  labourer  in  the
field  of  astronomic  discovery  whose  death  we  have  recently  had  to
deplore,  M.  Hermann  Goldschmidt,  the  discoverer  of  fourteen
planets.  Before,  however,  we  can  admit,  as  proven,  the  hypothesis
which  attributes  the  phenomena  in  question  to  the  agency  of
intelligent  beings  co-existing  with  ourselves  in  connection  with
our  planet,  but  under  physical  conditions  and  in  an  order  of
perceptions  and  activities  difierent  from  ours  (a  possibility  to
which  the  discoveries  in  regard  to  the  rates  of  movement  of
vibrating  bodies  would  seem  to  point),  the  gap  now  existing
between  this  hypothesis  and  certainty  must  be  filled  hy  the

M.  CAMILLE  FLAMMAEION.

353

(liscoveiy  of  the  links  which  are  still  wanting  to  the  completion  of
the  chain  of  evidence  that,  by  revealing  to  us  the  nature  of  the
force,  and  the  mochis  operandi  employed  by  those  intelKgences  for
the  production  of  these  phenomena,  shall  connect  this  hypothesis
with  the  teiTa  finna  of  scientific  demonstration.

"But  although  thus  compelled,  in  the  absence  of  conclusive
data  in  regard  to  the  cause  of  the  so-called  '  Spiritual  Phenomena,'
to  refrain  from  making  any  positive  affirmation  in  regard  to  this
part  of  the  subject,  I  may  add  that  while  the  general  assertion  of
its  spiritual  nature,  on  the  part  of  the  occult  force  which,  within
the  last  quai-ter  of  a  century,  has  thus  manifested  itself  all  over
the  globe,  constitutes  a  feature  of  the  case  which,  from  its  uni-
versality, merits  the  attention  of  the  impartial  investigator— the
histoiy  of  the  human  race,  from  the  earliest  ages,  fui-nishes  in-
stances of  coincidences,  previsions,  and  presentiments  of  wai-nings
experienced  in  certain  critical  moments,  of  apparitions  more  or  less
distinctly  seen,  which  are  stated,  on  evidence  as  ti-ustworthy  as
that  which  we  possess  with  regard  to  any  other  branch  of  histori-
cal tradition,  to  hfive  occurred,  spontaneously,  in  the  experience  of
all  nations,  and  which  may  therefore  be  held  to  strengthen  the
presumption  of  the  possibiHty  of  communication  between  incarnate
and  disincarnate  spii-its.    I  may  also  add  that  my  own  investiga-
tions in  the  fields  of  philosophy  and  of  modem  astronomy  have  led
me  personally,  ^  is  weU  known,  to  the  adoption  of  ideas  in  regard
to  Space  and  Time,  the  plurahty  of  inhabited  worlds,  the  etei^ty
and  ubiquity  of  the  acting  forces  of  the  Universe,  and  the  in-
desti-uctibility  of  souls  as  of  atoms,  which  have  caused  me  to  con-
sider the  immense  panorama  of  Existence  from  a  purely  spiritualistic  '
point  of  view,  in  which  the  everlastingness  of  intelligent  life  is
seen  to  result  from  the  harmonious  succession  of  sidereal  incarna-
tions.   Our  earth  being  one  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  a  province  of
planetary  existence,  and  our  pres:ut  life  being  a  phase  of  our
eternal  duration,  it  appears  only  natural  (the  SMj^ernatural  does  not
exist)  that  there  should  exist  a  permanent  link  between  the
spheres,  the  bodies,  and  the  souls  of  the  universe,  and  therefore

Z

354

KOTES  OP  SEANCES.

altogether  probable  that  the  existence  of  this  link  will  be  demon-
strated, in  course  of  time,  by  the  advance  of  scientific  discovery.

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  over-rate  the  importance  of  the  questions
thus  brought  forward  for  consideration ;  and  I  have  seen  with
lively  satisfaction  the  noble  initiative  which,  tlu-ough  the  forma-
tion of  your  Committee  of  Inquiry,  has  been  taken  by  a  body  of
men  so  justly  eminent  as  the  members  of  the  Dialectical  Society,
in  the  exjierimental  investigation  of  these  deeply  interesting
phenomena.  I  am  most  happy,  therefore,  to  comply  with  the
tenor  of  your  letter,  by  sending  you  the  humble  tribute  of  my
observations  on  the  su.bject  in  question,  and  thus  to  have  the
ojpportunity  of  ofiering  to  your  Society  the  expression  of  my
sincerest  good  wishes  for  the  speedy  elucidation  of  the  mysteries
of  Nature  that  have  not  yet  been  brought  within  the  domain  of
Positive  Science.

"  I  am,  Sir,  Yours  faithfully,

"  Camille  Flammarion,"
"  10,  Eue  des  Moineaux  (Palais  Royal),
Paris.    May  8,  1870."

"  To  the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  investigating

Sjyiritioalisvi.

"  Ladies  and  Gentlemen — I  have  been  desired  by  the  Committee
of  the  London  Dialectical  Society  now  investigating  spiritual
manifestations  to  furnish  them  with  some  account  of  my  experience
therein.  I  do  so  with  pleasure  but  I  omit  details  as  much  as
possible,  as  no  doubt  you  have  been  overwhelmed  with  accounts
of  phenomena  of  common  occurrence.  I  may  state  that  I  have
got  no  power  peculiar  to  mediums,  nor  am  I  conscious  of  spii-itual
existence,  except  through  the  most  palpable  physical  manifesta-
tions; I  am,  therefore,  constitutionally  an  unbeliever  in  such
things,  and  in  all  matters  a  rationalist.  My  personal  presence
at  the  spirit  circle  is  even  an  impediment  to  the  success  of  the
phenomena ;  and  this  and  other  facts  have  led  me  to  the  discoveiy
that  mediumsHp  does  not  depend  on  belief  or  scepticism,  but  upon

MR.  J.  BURNS.

355

organic  conditions  or  temiieramontal  ijeculiarities.  I  am  of  that
physiological  typo  which  is  the  opposite  of  mediumship,  but
Mi's.  Burns  and  her  sisters  are  of  the  purely  mediumisfcic  tem-
perament; on  account  of  which  I  have  had  very  special  ojipor-
tunities  of  becoming  acquainted  with  the  subject,  and  I  now
repoi-t  on  behalf  of  these  ladies  rather  than  for  myself.

"  Mediumsliip,  then,  is  a  natural  faculty  peculiar  to  certain
individuals,  which  the  spii-it  circle  does  not  create,  but  merely
calls  into  exercise.     From  childhood  Mrs.  Burns  has  been  a
meaium,  and  in  the  darkness  of  the  evening  could  perceive  the
odic  emanations  from  graveyards  whUe  yet  a  child,  and  many
yeai-s  before  Spii-itualism  was  heard  of.    About  eight  years  ago,
during  my  prolonged  absence  from  home,  Mrs.  Burns  and  her
sister  Mary  sat  at  the  table,  after  the  manner  of  spiritualists,  and
reacHly  produced  all  the  phenomena.    Their  sister  Caroline  was  also
found  to  be  a  powerful  medium,  and  a  table  would  walk  about  the
room  if  she  simply  placed  her  finger  on  the  top  of  it.    It  would
also  He  down  on  its  side,  or  tm-n  its  legs  up  in  the  aii-  with  its
face^  downwards  if  desired.    We  never  took  the  least  trouble  to
cultivate  these  manifestations,  as  much  more  interesting  pheno-
mena occurred.

"  Spontaneously,  Miss  Maiy  was  found  to  be  a  very  superior
wi-iting  medium.    By  taking  a  pencil  in  her  hand  she  would  vn-ite
automatically  in  response  to  mental  questions.    I  have  seen  her
write  on  different  subjects  with  a  pencil  in  each  hand,  without
giving  any  attention  to  what  she  was  doing.    In  desperate  cases
of^  iUness  we  have  repeatedly  received  medical  prescriptions  in
tins  way,  the  application  of  which  was  of  immediate  benefit.  This
young  lady  also  has  the  faculty  of  conversing  with  spirits,  face  to
face.    A  brother  of  mine,  whom  she  never  saw  and  knew  nothing
about,  thus  appeared  to  her  and  conversed  with  her  a  long  time'^
and  the  description  she  gave  of  him,  and  the  information  he
commimicated,  was  ample  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the  spiiit,
and  of  the  fact  that  there  was  a  spirit  in  the  matter.

"  We  have  also  cultivated  the  trance.    Mi-s.  Burns  has  been  in

Z  2

356

NOTES  OP  SEANCES.

tliis  state  simultaneously  witli  Mrs.  Everitt  and  Mr.  Cogman,
■while  sitting  together  in  seame.  They  met  in  the  spii-itual  state,
and  conversed  and  walked  together.  When  they  returned  to
physical  consciousness,  they  each  gave  the  same  testimony  as  to
theii"  spiritual  experiences.

"  Mrs.  Burns  and  Miss  Maiy  see  spirits  quite  readily  while  in
the  trance.  By  this  means  the  spirits  have  been  seen  scattering
perfumes  in  the  form  of  flowers.  Mrs.  Burns  -will  exclaim  '  There
they  are,  throwing  the  flowers  ! '  and  instantly  a  puff  of  cool  air
and  most  delicious  perfumes  are  experienced.  These  experiments
have  been  repeatedly  verified  at  Mrs.  Everitt's  and  other  cu'cles.
The  spirits  are  also  seen  producing  the  direct  writing,  but  the
details  of  the  process  are  not  very  minutely  observed.  I  was
at  Mr.  Everitt's  house  when  the  spirit  '  John  Watt '  wi-ote
his  name  on  the  ceiling  with  a  pencil.  Mrs.  Burns  and  two
other  clairvoyants  were  present,  and  they  all  described  the
event  at  the  moment  of  its  occm-rence,  and  before  the  light
was  struck.  The  spii'its  are  also  seen  to  move  physical
objects  and  touch  persons  in  the  circle.  Miss  Mary  saw  the  spii-it
take  the  coat  off  Mr.  Eay's  back  while  his  hands  were  tied,  at  the
public  seance  given  by  the  Davenport  brothers.  She  was  also
astonished  at  the  light  which  came  out  of  the  cabinet  while  the
manifestations  were  going  on  inside.  Mrs.  Burns  saw  the  spirits
at  Mr.  Alsop's  circle  carry  a  bible,  upwards  of  eleven  pounds  in
weight,  from  the  sideboard  on  to  the  table.  This  process  of
canying  has  been  observed  many  times.  The  spirits  do  not  put
their  hands  under  objects  when  they  carry  them  ;  they  place  their
fingers  on  the  top  and  seem  to  move  the  objects  by  magnetic
attraction,  in  the  same  manner  as  spiritualists  move  a  table  by
placing  their  fingers  on  the  top  of  it.  "When  the  spii-it  voice  is
heard,  Mrs.  Burns  sees  the  spirit  holding  the  tube  and  carrying
it  about  the  room.  She  has  thus  observed  'John  Watt'  at
Mrs.  Everitt's,  and  '  John  King '  at  the  seances  held  by  Messrs.
Herne  and  "Williams.  She  also  saw  the  spirits  untie  John
Blackburn,  a  medium  from  Halifax,  who  had  been  previously  tied

ME.  J.  BUENS.

367

in  a  most  extraordinary  manner  by  the  spiiit  while  he  was  in  a
ti-ance.  The  rope  was  manipulated  by  the  spirits  by  a  kind  of
magnetic  attraction  proceeding  from  theii-  hands,  and  not  by  the
ordinary  form  of  leverage  with  the  finger  points.

"  We  make  use  of  this  seeing  faculty  as  a  means  of  communion
with  the  spirits.    To  practice  it,  we  retii-e  to  a  darkened  room,
and,  in  a  short  time,  if  the  conditions  are  favoiu^able,  the  spirits
appear  in  groups  in  the  vicinity  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  are
attached.    By  this  means,  persons  now  deceased  have  been  accu-
rately described  by  the  claii-voyants.     The  spiiits  communicate
theii-  information  by  writing  it  in  luminous  scroUs,  which  are
promptly  read.    These  spiiits  are  of  various  historical  periods  and
coimtries,  and  theii-  appearance  is  very  pecuHar.    Sometimes  they
wiite  through  Miss  Mary's  hand  automaticaUy,  and  in  different
styles  and  languages.    On  one  occasion  a  gentleman  translated
one  of  these  communications  :  it  was  in  Spanish,  and  the  spirit
had  described  himself  as  a  Spaniard.    In  the  trance  she  has  also
spoken  in  various  languages.  I  have  had  a  best  of  the  genuineness
of  these  claii-voyant  observations,  which  I  shall  here  detaH.

"  Mi-s.  Bums  and  myself  were  present  at  a  seance  at  Mr.  Mylne's
house,  in  Islington.    A  female  figure  was  minutely  described  by
Mrs.  Burns  as  standing  near  me,  who  said  she  was  related  to  me.
My  family  connections  are  very  few,  so  I  had  no  difficulty  in
recalling  them  all,  and  I  was  obliged  to  deny  that  I  had  ever  had
such  a  relative.    A  few  months  afterwards  I  visited  my  parents
in  Ayrshii-e,  accompanied  by  my  sister-in-law.  Miss  Mary,  who  had
not  been  at  the  skmce  at  Islington.    We  had  a  sitting,  and  she
described  the  same  spiiit  as  standing  between  my  mother  and  my-
self, and  said  that  she  was  a  near  relation  of  mine,  who  was  attracted
to  me  on  account  of  my  Hteraiy  pursuits.    I  replied  that  I  was
cei-tam  there  was  some  mistake,  as  I  could  recall  no  such  person  '
as  having  been  a  member  of  our  family.    As  soon  as  my  mother
heard  the  full  description  of  the  spirit  she  said  it  applied  to  an
only  sister  of  hers  who  died  upwards  of  seventy  years  ago,  and  of
whose  existence  I  had  never  heard.    She  had  been  a  precocious

358

NOTES  OP  SEANCES.

child,  passionately  fond  of  books,  and  died  wLen  quite  young.  As
soon  as  my  mothei*  recognised  this  fact,  the  spirit  was  seen  to  give
manifestations  of  assent  and  pleasure.

"  Mrs.  Burns  sees  spirits  in  attendance  on  public  speakei-s,  and
has  also  observed  them  in  the  theatre,  inspiring  the  leading
characters.  She  perceives  that  they  touch  the  liead,  or  send  down
a  shaft  of  white  light  xipon  it  when  any  striking  thought  or
original  idea  is  to  be  tittered.

"  I  have  not  mentioned  many  cases  of  physical  phenomena  that
have  occui'i-ed  in  our  experience,  as  you  will  doubtlessly  have  been
liberally  supplied  with  such  accounts.

"  The  result  of  my  experience  has  been  to  establish  to  my  mind
^hat  there  are  two  kinds  of  matter — one  peculiar  to  the  physical
world,  and  one  peculiar  to  the  spiiitual  world :

"  That  every  object  has  a  spiritual,  as  well  as  a  physical
condition :

"  That  certain  individuals  give  o&  this  spii-itual  matter  in  such
a  way  as  to  relate  them  peculiarly  to  the  spii-itual  world;  which
constitutes  such  persons  mediums  :

"That  this  spiritualised  form  of  matter  is  that  of  which  the
objective  personality  of  spirits  is  composed  ;  that  it  is  the  link
which  enables  them  to  control  physical  objects  ;  and  also  that  it  is
[he  bond  which  connects  mind  with  matter  in  the  physical
itate.

"  J.  BUKNS.

"  15;  Southampton  Row,

"  London,  W.C.,  21  April,  1871."

MRS.  HONYWOOD.

359

■  NOTES  OF  SEANCES.

[COMMUNICATED  TO  THE  COMMITTEE.]

No.  1. — Mrs.  Honywood.

"  I  sj^ent  the  winter  of  1858 — 9  atlSTaples,  and  made  tlie  acquaint-
ance of  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen  from  the  United  States.  He  sjDoke
to  me  on  tlie  subject  of  table-turning,  raps,  tfec,  and  said  that  he  be-
lieved it  to  be  odile  or  odic  force  ;  be  did  not  then  accept  the  idea  of
spii'it  influence.  He  could  not  doubt  the  fact  of  a  force  at  work,  but  he
thought  it  was  in  its  infancy  and  uncontrollable,  and  hoped  ere  long
to  learn  the  mystery.    He  asked  me  to  his  house,  and  introduced

me  to  an  American  lady,  a  Mrs.  M  ,  a  medium.    After  a

short  acquaiatance  I  invited  the  lady  to  our  apartments  on  the
Chiaja,  and  asked  if  she  would  kindly  sit  at  a  table,  and  let  us  see  the
wonders  of  which  we  had  heard  so  much.  Mrs.  M.  at  once  ac-
ceded, saying  she  was  passive  and  had  no  power  to  produce  or
control  the  manifestations.  We  sat  down,  four  in  number,  at  a
small  table,  placing  our  four  pair  of  hands  flat  on  the  table,  thus
balancing  the  weight  evenly ;  it  soon  began  to  rock,  and  heave,

and  tip.    Mrs.  M          now  told  us  when  the  table  was  balanced

on  three  legs  and  tapped  on  the  floor  with  the  fourth,  to  say  the
alphabet  and  stop  at  the  letter  when  the  fourth  leg  tapped.  We
then  agreed  that  if  the  table  rocked  from  north  to  south,  east  and

360

NOTES  OP  SEANCES.

west  sliould  say  the  alphabet  and  ask  questions,  and  vice  versa,  so
that  the  person  asking  a -question  could  not  by  any  means  or  involun-
tary pressure  influence  the  tips.    Col.W          sat  opposite  Mrs.

M  and  a  niece  of  mine  opposite  me.   After  a  while,  wishing  for

a  decisive  test,  I  asked  if  a  mental  question  could  be  answered,  three
tips  or  taps  from  the  fourth  leg  signifying  yes.    I  thought,  where  is

F.W  ,  a  brother  of  Col.W  's;  (IknewthatCol.W  ,sitting

at  my  right  was  very  anxious  about  his  brother,  for  some  days  ivre-
vious  he  had  told  me  he  had  received  no  letters  by  the  Indian  mail,
and  as  it  was  during  the  mutiny,  he  felt  very  uneasy).  The  reply  was,
'In  his  tent,  before  Lucknow.'    I  then  tliouglit,  'What  is  he

doiugf    '  Lying  down  readiug.'    '  What  is  his  name  ?'    'P  .'

The  Italian  name  was  given.  The  table  was  tipping  from  Col.W

to  Mrs.  M  all  this  time.    I  did  not  know  the  answers  ;  no  one

present  knew  my  thoughts  until  the  name  was  given,  and  the
answers  proved  to  be  correct  so  far  as  the  whereabouts  and  name.
This  convinced  me  there  was  some  truth  in  this  myster'y,  and  I
determined  to  pursue  the  iavestigation  patiently  in  spite  of  all
opposition,  ridicule,  or  difiB.culty,  and  to  arrive  at  the  truth  if
possible.

"  The  mediuni  was  a  stranger  to  us  all,  and  thought  reading
could  not  explain  the  replies.

"  Barbaea  Honywood."

No.  2. — Mrs.  Honywood  akd  Lord  Lindsay.

"I  met  Mr.  Home  at  the  house  of  a  friend  on  the  17th  March,
1869.  We  sat  down  five  in  number  at  a  round  table,  in  the  back
drawing-room.  There  was  an  oil  lamp  on  a  table  in  the  front
room,  and  fires  in  both  gi-ates.  After  a  while  Mr.  Home  became
entranced,  walked  into  the  front  room  and  stood  on  the  hearth
rug.  He  began  to  dance  slowly,  raising  first  one  foot  and  then
the  other,  his  hands  hanging  loosely  as  I  have  read  of  Easterns
and  Indians,  moving  in  time  to  music.  He  then  knelt  down,
rubbing  and  clasping  his  hands  together  in  front  of  the  fire.  I

MRS.  HONYWOOD  AND  LOED  LINDSAY.

861

asked,  'Are  you  a  fire  worsliipperr  He  nodded  and  looked
pleased.  'Are  you  a  Persian?'  He  smiled  and  nodded  assent,
after  which  he  rose  and  placed  four  chairs  in  a  row  near  the  fold-
ins  doors,  sijminff  to  us  to  sit  there.  He  now  went  to  the  table
on  which  stood  the  moderator  lamp  ;  taking  off  the  globe  he  placed
it  on  the  table  and  deliberately  clasjDed  the  chimney  of  the  lamp
with  both  hands ;  then  advancing  to  the  lady  of  the  house  he  asked
her  to  touch  it,  but  she  refused,  knowing  it  was  hot.  .Mr.  Home  said
'  Have  you  no  faith  1  Will  you  not  trust  in  Dan  if  he  says  it  is
cool  1 '  She  replied, '  Certainly,'  and  placed  her  finger  on  the  glass,
exclaiming,  '  Oh,  it  is  not  at  all  hot ! '  This  was  corroborated  by
Lord  Lindsay  and  myself,  who  in  turn  both  laid  our  finger  on  the
glass  several  times  to  test  it.  Mr.  Home  laughed  and  said,  'I
will  make  it  hot  for  you,  old  fellow,'  and  holding  it  towards

Mr.  ,  he  turned,  apparently  addressing  some  one,  and  said  in  a

sad  tone  of  voice,  '  It  is  necessary  to  confirm  the  faith  of  others

that  the  glass  should  be  made  hot  for  him.'  Mr.  now  touched

it,  and  exclaimed,  '  You  have,  indeed,'  shaking  his  hand  and  shew-
ing me  a  red  mark.  So  hot  was  the  glass  when  the  fourth  jDerson
touched  it,  that  it  raised  a  blister,  which  I  saw  some  days  subse-
quently, peeling.  I  leave  it  for  the  scientific  to  determine  how
the  heat  was  re-imparted  to  the  glass,  after  being  withdrawn.

"  Mr.  Home  nowreturned  to  the  fire-place,  and  thrust  the  chimney
into  the  red-hot  coals,  resting  the  end  on  the  top  bar :  he  left  it
there  for  about  four  or  five  minutes,  then  lifting  it  he  clasped  it  in
both  hands,  went  to  the  table,  took  a  lucifer  match  from  a  box,
handing  it  to  the  lady  of  the  house,  desii-ed  her  to  totich  the  glass
— the  match  instantly  ignited  ;  and  having  called  our  attention  to
this  fact,  he  obseiwed,  '  The  tongue  and  lips  are  the  most  sensitive
parts  of  the  body,'  and  thrust  the  heated  glass  into  his  mouth,
applying,  especially,  his  tongue  to  it.  He  once  more  returned  to
the  fire,  and  again  placed  the  chimney  on  the  upper  bar,  the  end  of
the  glass  resting  amidst  the  red  coals.  He  left  it  there  and  walked
about  the  room,  selected  a  small  fern-leaf  from  a  vase  of  flowers,
and  raising  the  chimney,  placed  it  within,  and  replaced  the  chimney

I

362

NOTES  OP  SEANCES.

among  the  coals.  After  a  few  moments  he  told  us  to  observe
very  carefully,  as  the  experiment  would  be  very  pretty.  Mr.  Home
now  held  up  the  glass,  and  we  perceived  the  fern-leaf  within
apparently  on  fii-e.  He  replaced  it  after  a  few  seconds,  and
holding  it  up  again,  exclaimed,  'Is  it  not  pretty?'  The  fern
appeared  red-hot ;  each  little  leaf  edged  with  gold,  yet  flameless,
like  clouds  at  sunset— rich  glowing  crimson  tinged  with  molten
gold.    After  we  had  all  looked  at  it  and  admii-ed  it,  he  advanced

to  Mrs.   ,  and  laughingly  shook  it  out  on  her  muslin  dress.  I

expected  to  see  it  crumble  away;  but  no,  it  was  still  green,  though
dry  and  withered.    Unfortunately  it  was  not  preserved.

"  Again  Mr.  Home  returned  to  the  fire,  and  once  more  placed
the  glass  on  the  coals,  where  he  left  it  and  walked  about  the  room.
Going  to  the  lamp,  he  passed  his  hand  slowly  backwards  and
forwards  through  the  flame,  not  an  inch  from  the  wick ;  returning
to  the  fii-e-place  he  lifted  the  chimney,  and  moving  the  coals  about
with  his  hand,  selected  a  small  flat  red-hot  coal,  and  placed  it
in  the  chimney — shook  it  up  and  down,  and  advancing  to  us,

playfully  said  '  H  here  is  a  present  for  you,'  and  threw  out

the  coal  on  her  muslin  dress.  Catching  it  up  in  dismay,  she  tossed
it  to  Lord  Lindsay,  who,  unable  to  retain  it  in  his  hand,  threw  it
from  palm  to  palm  till  he  reached  the  grate  and  fluno-  it  in.
While  we  were  all  looking  at  the  muslin  dress  and  wondering  that
it  was  neither  soiled  nor  singed,  Mi-.  Home  approached  and  in  a
hurt  tone  of  voice  said  '  No,  no,  you  will  not  find  a  mark ;  did
you  think  that  we  would  hurt  yoiir  dress.'  Mr.  Home  then
selected  a  small  spray  of  white  flower,  and  going  to  the  lamp,
h.e  passed  it  two  or  three  times  through  the  flame,  then
carried  it  to  the  grate  and  held  it  first  in  the  flame  and  then  in
the  smoke  above  the  coals,  moving  it  gently  about.  He  now
brought  it  back  to  us,  asking  us  to  look  at  it  and  smell  it,  calling
our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  flower  did  not  smell  of  smoke,
and  that  it  was  unchanged  by  the  heat  and  flame  of  lamp  and  fire.
He  then  bid  us  notice  that  his  hand  which  held  the  flower  smelt
of  smoke  while  the  flower  remained  uninjured.    Then  addressing

MRS.  HONYWOOD.

2G3

us,  he  said,  *  The  spirit  now  speaking  through  Dan,  and  that  has
enabled  him  to  show  you  these  curious  fire-tests,  in  which  he
hopes  you  have  all  felt  interested,  is  the  spirit  of  an  Asiatic
fii-e-worshipper,  who  was  anxious  to  come  here  to-night  as  he  had
heai-d  of  seances  held  here.  He  now  bids  you  farewell,  as  he  will
return  no  more.'

"  After  this  Mr.  Home  awoke.

"  Barbaea  Honywood."
"  I  was  present  at  this  seance,  and  can  corroborate  the  truth  of
the  above  statement.

"  Lindsay."

No.  3. — Mrs.  Honywood.

"  I  was  kindly  invited  by  a  friend,  on  the  27th  March,  1869
(Easter  Eve),  to  meet  Mr.  D.  D.  Home.  We  sat  round  a  very
heavy,  solid  table,  in  the  centre  of  the  room — five  ladies  and  fou^r
gentlemen.  There  was  a  bright  fire,  a  pair  of  candles  alight  on
the  mantel-piece,  and  the  moon  and  gas-light  streaming  in  at  both
windows.    In  the  second  drawing-room  there  was  a  gas-chandelier

but  no  fire.    Our  host,  Mr.  H  ,  pinned  the  velvet  portiere

together  in  the  centre,  leaving  it  open  like  a  V  in  the  upper
portion.  We  conversed  awhile  quietly;  raps  came  on  the  table
and  floor,  and  vibration  in  the  table  and  on  the  floor  was  felt  by
all  present.  Mr.  Home  passed  into  a  trance,  and  his  chaii-  was
slowly  drawn  back  from  the  table.  He  got  up  and  walked  about
the  room,  then  made  signs  with  a  pocket  handkerchief  to  a  lady  to
blindfold  him.    Taking  up  a  sheet  of  writiag-paper  and  a  pencil,

paper  for  a  few  seconds  at
the  back  of  each  of  our  heads.  He  went  into  the  next  room,  and
opening  the  lower  part  of  the  portiere,  lay  down  on  the  floor.
Soon  we  perceived  shadows  passing  the  upper  part  of  the  portiere,
then  a  cross  passed  slowly  four  times.  It  had  been  taken  off"  a
table,  and  was  waved  backwards  and  forwards  as  high  as  a  man
could  reach.  Mr.  Homo  was  lying  on  the  floor,  in  the  full  gas-
light and  in  the  sight  of  all  present.    He  then  rose  and  presented

364

NOTES  OJP  SEANCES.

tlie  paper  to  a  Spanish  lady  present  (Mr.  Home  is  not  acquainted
with  the  language,  and  had  written  the  message  blindfolded).  He
then  walked  to  the  fire-place,  and  took  out  a  large  coal — the  lower
part  was  red  for  about  an  inch  and  a  half,  and  the  upper  black
and  flaming.  Placing  it  in  a  small  metal  bell  and  concealing  it
with  both  hands,  he  carried  it  off  into  the  next  room,  saying,  as
he  passed  us,  '  Do  not  look  too  much  at  Dan.'  He  moved  about
as  if  uncertain  for  a  while,  then  put  out  the  gas,  and  we  saw  the
red-hot  coal  high  up  ia  the  air  above  the  curtains,  and  finally
heard  it  dropped  into  the  fender.  He  now  returned,  and  placed
the  metal  bell  on  the  fire.  Passing  again  into  the  second  room,  he
began  playing  a  solemn  chant  on  the  piano.  After  a  little  while
he  called  three  ladies  and  two  gentlemen  by  their  names.  In

passing  through  the  curtain,  Mi-s.  H  ran  against  a  small  table,

which  startled  her,  and  a  gentleman  accidentally  trod  on  the
cross  we  had  seen  waved  in  the  air,  which  had  been  afterwards
laid  upon  the  floor.  This  interrupted  and  distui'bed  the  condi-
tions ;  the  gmnd-piano  rose  slightly  and  swayed  from  side  to  side.

"  All  now  returned  to  the  table  for  a  while ;  Mr.  Home  rose,  and
calling  three  ladies,  placed  a  small  table  close  to  the  2^oriiere;
nothing  however  occuri-ed,  and  all  returned  to  the  table.  Mr.
Home  now  took  the  bell  off  the  fire,  where  I  feel  sure  it  had
remained  at  least  ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  Taking  a  sheet  of  paper
from  the  table  he  placed  it  on  his  left  hand  and  put  the  bell  upon

it.    He  asked  Mrs.  H  '  if  she  would  trust  Dan,  and  hold  the

bell  without  fear  1"  she  replied,  'if  you  tell  me  it  will  not  burn
me  I  will  trust  you. '  He  plaqed  the  sheet  of  j)aper  on  her  hand
and  put  the  bell  upon  it  and  she  held  it  for  some  seconds:  an-
other lady  held  it,  after  which  he  put  it  on  the  table-cloth.  Mr.

H          asking  if  it  would  burn  the  cloth,  he  assui-ed  him  it

would  not.    Mr.  H  tried  to  touch  the  handle  of  the  bell  but

it  was  too  hot  to  rest  his  finger  on  it.  Another  gentleman  also
tried  to  touch  it,  but  could  not  endure  the  heat.    I  forgot  to

mention  Mr.  Home  asked  Mr.  L          to  make  the  sign  of  the

cross  upon  the  bell  in  pencil,  at  the  beginning.    Mr.  H  now

MRS.  HONYWOOD.

3G5

extingiiislied  the  candles,  leaving  only  the  bright  fire-light  and
the  moonlight.  Mr.  Home  sat  down  for  a  while  and  awoke  ;  raps
came  on  the  table,  pencil  and  jaaper  were  asked  for  and  were  placed
vinder  the  table,  our  dresses  were  pulled  ;  a  pencil  was  twice  put

into  the  hand  of  the  Spanish  lady;  a  Mrs.  E          asked  for  a

pencil  and  it  was  placed  before  her,  but  disappeared  as  she  put
out  her  hand  to  take  it,  and  was  put  into  the  lady's  hand  next  to
her,  beneath  the  table.  A  chair  now  moved  quickly  up  to  Mr.
Home's  side  by  itself;  he  again  passed  into  a  trance  and  was
drawn  away  from  the  table  and  walked  round  the  room  with  the
bell,  and  althoiigh  the  clapper  did  not  move  we  each  heard  tiny  clear
sounds  on  the  bell  as  he  held  it  near  our  ears.  Mr.  Home  now
went  and  stood  near  the  portiere,  shadows  were  seen,  and  I  saw  a
ball  of  fire,  also  a  long  ray  of  light  pass  the  tipper  part  of  the
curtain  far  above  his  head  and  the  furthest  side  of  the  curtain.

"  We  then  saw  a  face  come  out  from  behind  the  curtain  and
retire  several  times,  as  a  lady  present  was  nervous  and  started,
which  disturbed  it,  and  seemed  to  draw  it,  or  force  it  back.  After
a  few  seconds  it  passed  slowly  across,  backwards  and  forwards,  three
or  four  times.  It  seemed  to  me  an  oval  face  with  a  broad  fore-
head, and  a  close  fitting  cap  with  a  plaited  frill.  I  saw  no  hair,
only  the  forehead  and  brow,  the  eyelids  were  closed,  and  I  ob-
served to  Mr.  H  ,  '  I  could  see  no  eyes.'    Eays  of  light  were

emitted  from  the  cap  like  a  halo — I  could  distinguish  no  nose  or
mouth,  the  face  was  so  luminous,  it  shone  like  the  moon,  the  rays
of  light  fell  obliquely  from  the  brow  and  throat  towards  the
window,  where  the  rays  of  the  real  moon  were  shining  at  the
time  into  the  room.

"  I  could  see  the  outline  of  the  head,  throat,  and  shoulders ;  a

Mr.  H          observed  it  was  the  face  of  a  fresh-coloured,  healthy

old  woman,  and  a  Mr.  L  said  it  was  a  very  old  and  wrinkled

face ;  a  Mrs.  E  said  she  saw  a  luminous  cross  on  the  breast,

and  all  the  eight  persons  present  saw  the  face.

"  Mr.  Home  now  returned  to  the  table  and  awoke  ;  raps  came
again  on  the  table,  and  we  were  all  of  us  touched,  our  silk  dresses

366

NOTES  OF  SEANCES.

rustled  and  gently  pulled;  ray  foot  was  clasped,  and  the  big  toe
bent  gently  down  as  if  by  the  pressure  of  a  thumb  ;  my  foot  was
resting  at  the  time  on  a  claw  of  the  table,  and  three  people  sat
between  me  and  Mr.  Home,  whose  hands  were  visible  on  the
table.  Some  had  their  hands  clasped  underneath  the  table  by
spirit  hands,  and  some  perceived  a  fragrant  scent ;  the  accordion
was  gently  played,  but  the  power  seemed  fading  away,  and  soon

left  us.    Mr.  H          asked  for  one  test  before  concluding  the

seance,  and  asked  that  the  lady's  name,  whose  face  we  had  all  seen,
might  be  given.  Raps  spelt  out :—  It  is  for  ....  ,  the  face  of
his  sister  B  .  .  .  .  The  lady  had  passed  from  earth  about  six
months  before  and  was  blind — which  accounted  for  my  not
being  able  to  see  any  eyes — and  always  wore  a  peculiar  frilled
cap,

"  During  the  whole  evening  we  all  heard  a  loud  rumbling  noise,
as  if  heavy  furniture  were  being  rolled  overhead — there  were  no
rooms  above — and  the  following  evening  at  a  seance  this  explana-
tion was  given  : —  '  That  a  spirit  had  been  very  anxious  to  attract
our  notice,  but  could  not  communicate  that  night.'  On  referring
to  my  friends  present  at  the  above  seance  for  corroboration  of  my

statement,  Mr.  L  adds  :  *  I  was  standing  next  to  Mr.  Home

when  the  grand  piano  was  raised  from  the  ground,  and  I  noticed
that  Mr.  Home's  chair  was  raised  at  the  same  time.  I  should
say  both  were  elevated  about  eight  inches  from  the  floor."

"Barbara  Honywood."

"No  4. — Mrs.  Honywood.

"On  Sunday,  AjDril  the  11th,  1869,  I  dined  with  a  friend

Mrs.  ,  and  met  Mr.  Home,  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  his  cousin,

Mr.  Walter  Lindsay,  Gen.  — —,  and  Capt.  S  .

"  After  dinner  we  sat  at  a  round  table,  and  almost  immediately
heard  raps  on  a  table  in  the  corner  of  the  room ;  they  sounded
like  dripping  water — drip,  drip,  drip.  The  table  was  three  yaixis
distant  from  where  we  sat.  The  room  was  lighted  by  a  dull  fii-e,
and  a  lamp  in  the  back  room.    The  v/indow  was  open,  and  some

MPS.  IIONYWOOD.

367

slioAvy  lamps  outside,  gave  it  all  the  aiipearance  of  moonlight
streaming  in  at  the  window.  The  table  rose  to  a  height  of  two
feet,  and  waved  gently  in  the  air ;  Mr.  Home  soon  passed  into  a

trance,  and  requested  Capt.  S          to  extinguish  the  lamp;  the

back  room  was  only  lighted  by  the  light  from  the  lamps  outside,
and  the  front  room  by  the  fire  which  had  burned  low,  and  only
flickered  up  from  time  to  time.

"  Mr.  Home  walked  over  to  the  open  Avindow  and  stood  there,
his  figure  clearly  defined  by  the  light  outside ;  between  him  and
the  outer  aii-  a  shadow  seemed  to  fall  like  a  veil,  and  gradually  it
assumed  the  form  of  a  head  and  ^  shoulders  advancing  and  re-
treating, the  left  arm  outstretched.    To  me  it  appeared  like  gauze,
now  transparent,  and  again  opaque,  but  never  distinct,  or  material.
Mr.  Home  appeared  to  be  conversing  with  some  one.   All  present,,
but  myself,  now  saw  lights  on  the  piano  and  wall,  and  said  they
were  brilliant  and  beautiful,  and  that  one  light  remained  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour  flickering  in  a  corner  of  the  room.    From  where
I  sat  I  could  not  see  the  piano,  neither  am  I  clairvoyant.  During-
the  evening  I  saw  a  little  flicker  from  time  to  time  on  the  wall,
where  nothing  could  account  for  my  seeing  it  materially;  but  all
the  others  said  they  saw  them  repeatedly,  and  described  them
as  yellow,  blue,  and  red.

"  My  friends  now  said  they  saAv  dark  figures  moving  about,  and
entering  from  the  window.  Mr.  Home  walked  about  the  room
talking  a  good  deal  in  a  low  voice ;  at  last  he  said,  '  It  is  the  anni-
versary of  a  bii-th ; '  and,  at  the  same  moment,  all  but  myself  said
they  saw  a  tall,  dark  figure  approach  the  table,  issuing  from  the
2J(»-tiere  near  us,  and  wave  its  arm.  The  23ortiere  was  pushed  or
bulged  out,  and  some  thought  assumed  the  form  of  an  infant  lying

down.    Capt.  S  then  observed  :  '  The  figure  has  moved  and  it

standing  near  (pointing  to  the  lady  of  the  house),  beneath

his  own  picture.'    '  Yes,'  said  Mr.  Home,  '  it  is  A  ,  and  he

will  appear  again  if  is  not  frightened.'     Mr.  Home  then

resumed  his  place  at  the  table,  and  three  persons  present  observed
that  his  eyes  flashed  like  fire.    The  atmosphere  of  the  room  wa.«

3G8

NOTES  OP  SEANCES.

intensely  cold,  and  made  us  all  shiver.    Mrs.  now  felt  tlie

tall,  dark  figure  aijproach  lier  chair,  lean  on  it,  and  then  stand  on  one

side  of  it — it  was  a  large  and  heavy  ai-m-chair.    Mrs.  now

said  she  saw  the  figure  distinctly.  Capt.  S.,  W.  Lindsay  and  the
Master  of  Lindsay  also  said  they  saw  it,  and  that  it  passed  over  the
chair,  stretched  out  its  arms,  and  stroked  her  hair.    The  Master

of  Lindsay  said  the  eyes  flamed,  and  Capt.  S          observed  to

Mrs.    '  Do  not  be  alarmed,  he  is  coming  round  in  front.'

The  lady  said  the  face  then  appeared  to  come  within  six  inches  of
her  face,  and  the  figure  shut  out  all  else  in  the  room.  She  could
only  see  two  brilliant  eyes  looking  into  hers,  and  a  dark  figure
which  on  passing  away  seemed  to  pass  through  the  Master  of
Lindsay,  who  shivered  from  the  intense  cold.  Gen.  B — —  then
felt  a  form  near  him,  which  some  observed  appeared  tiying  to
place  its  arms  round  him,  and  he  said  the  pressm-e  felt  soft  yet
firm.  Mr.  Home  said  :  '  It  is  J ane — she  wishes  to  take  possession
of  you.'  I  saw  none  of  this — all  appeared  dark ;  and  I  only
repeat  the  observations  made  by  the  others  present.  A  voice  now
whispered  to  me,  '  Good  morning  ! '  at  which  some  one  present
laughed ;  when  the  soimd  was  repeated,  apparently  all  round  the
room,  by  the  invisibles,  near  the  floor,  far  away  but  distinct  and
musical,  lasting  for  about  thirty  seconds.  Lights  on  the  heads  of
several  present  were  observed  ;  a  star  over  the  lady  of  the  house,
and  a  broad  blue  light  across  the  M.  of  Lindsay's  forehead ;  also
red,  blue  and  yellow  lights  above  Gen.  B— — .  Three  or  four  of
the  party  now  said  they  saw  eyes  distinctly.  Mr.  W.  Lindsay  said
there  was  a  large  bright  eye  in  the  centre  of  the  table,  from
whence  other  eyes  appeared  to  emanate  and  approach  and  retreat.
On  asking  Mr.  Home  to  explain  this,  he  replied  :  '  It  is  the  eye  of
your  guardian  angel  that  is  ever  with  you.'  A.  few  moments
later  a  small  work-table  was  moved  up  from  the  furthest  corner  of
the  room  to  where  we  sat :  a  work-box  was  lifted  from  it,  and
placed  in  the  hands  of  the  lady  of  the  house,  and  then  a  paper
knife;  for  the  purpose,  they  said,  of  calming  and  quieting  her.
Her  hand  was  then  softly  pressed,  Home  now  ajipeared  very

THE  HONORABLE  MRS.

3G9

much  agitated,  and  said  :  '  The  spirits  on  all  sides  are  forcing  me
to  repeat  what  they  are  saying.  They  are  most  anxious  to  speak
audibly  themselves,  but  have  not  yet  sufficient  power ;  they  will
still  strive  to  overcome  the  difficulty.'  Mr.  Home  now  said,
'  Listen  to  them  in  the  next  room.'  A  iiistling  sound  was  heard
and  the  patter  of  feet,  as  if  people  were  moving  across  the  floor
and  leaving  the  room.  I  observed  the  windows  carefully,  the  shut-
ters were  closed,  and  I  could  see  the  streak  of  light  thi-ough  the
centre  brightening  and  paling  from  time  to  time  as  the  gas  lights
flared;  and  when  others  said  they  saw  flgures  moving  about,  I  saw
the  whole  streak  of  light  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  shutter  become
hidden,  as  if  a  black  cloud  passed  inside  the  room  and  shut  the  light
out  from  me,  but  at  no  time  could  I  distinguish  any  form  or  posi-
tive figure,  or  see  any  eyes  save  our  own.

"Barbara  Honywood."

No.  5. — The  Kon.  Mrs.

"  From  among  the  many  remarkable  instances  of  spiritual  pheno-
mena which  I  have  witnessed,  I  will  cite  the  following  :  It  was  on

the  evening  of  the  17th  of  March,  and  there  were  five  persons
present.    Mr.  Home,  in  the  trance  state,  walked  to  a  table  on
which  stood  a  moderator  lamp  burning  brightly,  removed  the
glass  globe,  and  then  the  lamp  chimney,  and  brought  it  to  me,
holding  it  firmly  in  his  hands.    I  declined  to  touch  it,  knowing
it  was  burning  hot.    Mr.  Home  then  said,  '  Have  you  no  faithi
it  is  quite  cool.'    I  consented  to  take  hold  of  it,  and  found  to  my
astonishment  that  it  was  hardly  warm ;  another  lady  present  like-
wise felt  it,  and  made  the  same  remark.    Mr.  Home  then  passed
on  to  a  gentleman  of  the  party,  and  before  ofi-ering  him  the  lamp
chimney,  he  said,  in  a  sad,  low  tone  of  voice,  as  if  deprecating
anger,  '  It^  is  necessary  to  confii-m  the  faith  of  others,  that  this
should  be  made  hot  for  you.'    The  gentleman  then  lightly  touched
the  glass  with  one  finger,  and  found  that  it  was  so  burning  hot
that  even  in  those  few  seconds  of  time  it  had  raised  a  blister  on
his  finger,  which  remained  for  three  days  afterwards.    Mr.  Homo

370

NOTES  01"  SEANCES.

tlien  proceeded  to  the  fire,  and  thxnist  the  lamp  glass  into  the
middle  of  the  bui-niiig  coals,  and  after  waiting  and  watching  it  for
five  minutes  he  took  it  out,  and  held  it  tightly  clasped  with  both
hands.  Fetching  a  lucifer  match  from  the  writing  table,  he
brought  it  to  me,  and  desu-ed  me  to  touch  the  glass  with  it.  Of
course  it  instantly  ignited,  owing  to  the  gi-eafc  heat;  and  having
pointed  this  out  carefully  to  all  pi-esent,  Mr.  Home  thrust  the
burning  cliimney  into  his  moiith  and  held  it  there,  observing  at
the  time  that  the  tongue  was  the  most  sensitive  part  of  the  humnin
body.  Not  apparently  satisfied  with  this,  or  thinking  that  he  had
failed  to  shew  us  that  it  was  done  by  supernatural  agency,  he  again
proceeded  to  the  fireplace,  took  out  a  red  hot  coal  and  placed  it  in-
side the  chimney,  then  brought  it  to  me  and  dropi^ed  it  on  to  my
white  muslin  dress,  where  it  remained  for  some  seconds,  as  it  was
so  hot  we  all  feared  to  touch  it.  My  dress,  though  made  of  the
finest  muslin,  was  not  ignited,  and  we  even  failed  to  detect  the
slightest  trace  or  mark  of  any  kind  after  the  closest  examination.
Mr.  Home  remarked  that  we  need  not  be  afraid  as  they  (the
spirits)  would  never  hurt  us.  He  then  took  a  flower,  and  after
breathing  gently  over  it,  passed  it  several  times  through  the  flame
of  the  moderator  lamp  ;  after  shewing  us  that  its  leaves  and  blos-
som were  untouched,  he  took  it  to  the  fire,  and  held  it  in  the
smoke  and  moved  it  gently  about  amongst  the  coals  ;  then  bring-
ing: it  back  again  to  iis,  he  made  us  obsei-ve  that  there  was  no
smell  of  smoke  or  btu-ning  about  it,  and  that  it  was  precisely  in
the  same  state  as  when  he  first  plticked  it.

"  On  other  occasions  I  have  seen  chairs  moved  and  brought
by  invisible  hands  from  the  other  side  of  the  room,  thi-ee  or  four
m\isical  instruments  played  ia  harmony  together  at  one  time,  and
have  likewise  heard  voices,  sometimes  speaking  together  at  an
apparently  great  distance,  and  at  other  times  close  to  me.  But
perhaps  the  most  remarkable  spiritual  manifestation  is  what  is
called  '  direct  drawing.'  Pencils  and  paper  are  placed  either  on
the  table  or  under  it.  and  in  a  few  minutes,  there  will  be  found
something  drawn  or  written  upon  it,    I  have  seen  drawn  most

MR.  GUPPY.

371

beautiful  spiritual  faces,  sometimes  touched  with  a  little  colour,
at  others,  only  a  pencil  sketch.  On  one  occasion  I  placed  a
pencil  and  paper  on  the  table,  and  looking  at  it  ten  minutes  later
I  found  a  complete  programme  of  a  concert  written  out,  wliicli
the  spirits  told  us  they  would  play  in  the  course  of  the  evening ;
and  this  promise  was  faithfully  carried  out,  and  all  the  pieces  of
music  played  in  a  most  masterly  manner  on  different  instruments,
a  viohn,  flute,  piccolo  and  concertina,  all  lying  on  the  table.  I
have  this  piece  of  paper  now  in  my  possession.  I  must  add  that
these  spiritual  drawings,  &c.,  are  best  obtained  when  the  liglits  are
extinguished."

No.  6. — Mr.  Guppy.
Seance  loith  the  Spiritual  Society  of  Florence.
"  The  seance  opened  with  a  message  :  'It  has  been  asked  in  tliis
Society  if  spirits  can  distinguish  colours ;  we  wiU  show  you.'

"  A  noise  was  heard  on  the  table,  and  the  light  showed  a  heap
of  sugar  plums  of  all  colours  mixed  together— about  a  liandful.
Light  put  out  again;  we  heard  rattling;  lighted  the  candle  and
found  the  sugar  plums  all  assorted  in  Httle  heaps  of  separate
colours.

"Saml.  Guppy."

No.  7.— Mr.  Guppy.
Another  Seance  with  the  same  Societt/.
"  The  room,  at  my  request,  had  been  made  very  warm,  as  at  the
previous  seance  we  were  shivering.    Some  of  the  most  eminent
Florentine  Hterati  were  present.     First  came  a  shower  of  fresh
flowers,  which  feU  all  about  the  table  while  Mrs.  Guppy's  hands
were  held.    The  light  was  put  out  again,  and  in  ten  minutes  an
awful  crash  was  heard  on  the  table,  as  if  the  chandelier  had  faUen
down.    On  hghting  the  candle,  we  found  a  large  lump  of  beautiful
ice,  about  a  foot  long  and  one  and  a  half  inches  thick  which  had
faUen  on  the  table  with  such  force  that  it  was  broken.    It  began
to  melt  immediately,  and  was  put  into  a  dish.    This  was  more

372

NOTES  ON  SEANCliS.

than  an  hour  after  the  beginning  of  the  stance,  in  which  time  the
ice  would  have  melted  had  it  been  in  the  room,

"  Saml.  Guppv."

No.  8.— Mr.  GvrvY.
Test  Seance  loitli  Mr.  Adolphus' Trollope,  Mrs.  TroUope,  Mis^
Blaijden  and  Col.  Harveij.

"  First,  the  room  was  searched  by  the  gentlemen  while  Mrs.
Gnppy  was  being  undressed  and  re-dressed  in  tlie  presence  of
Mrs.  Trollope,  c^very  article  of  her  dress  being  closely  examined.

"  We  sat  at  the  table,  Mrs.  Gnppy  firmly  held,  botli  hands,  by  ,
Mr.  Trollope  and  his  wife,  while  Colonel  Harvey  and  Miss  Blayden
held  my  hands  and  touched  Mrs.  Guppy's.  In  about  ten  minutes
all  exclaimed,  '  I  smell  flowers,'  and  a  shower  of  flowers  came.  On
lighting  the  candle  the  whole  of  Mrs.  Guppy's  and  Mr.  Trollope's
hands  and  arms  were  found  covered  with  jonquil  flowers.  The
smeU  was  quite  overpowering.  The  doors  had  been  locked,  the
window  fastened.  Had  a  bunch  of  jonquils  been  in  the  room
before  the  seance  it  would  liave  been  detected  by  the  smelt

"  Saml.  Guppy."

No.  <).— Mr.  Guppy.

"Mrs.  Guppy  went  to  &  seance  at  the  Ambassador's,  Sir  Augustus
Paget ;  present.  Lady  Paget,  Count  and  Countess  Moltld,  and  a
daughter  of  Sir  Digby  Murray.  They  held  Mrs.  Guppy  firmly,
and  asked  for  a  noise ;  and  there  was  a  loud  concussion  on  the
wall,  like  a  gun.    Flowers  were  afterwards  brought.

"  Saml  Guppy."

MINUTES  OF  THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

373

MINUTES

OF  THE

SUB-COMMITTEES.

SUB-COMMITTEE  No.  1.

Experiment  I.

Feby.  2^h,  iS>6g.  Six  members  present.  A  circle  formed.  Private  house.
Medium  non-professional.

All  hands  resting  on  a  square  heavy  dining-table  on  four  legs  with
castors.  For  one  hour  and  a  quarter  no  motion  or  sound.  Two  mem-
bers left  ;  the  four  remaining  sat  for  an  hour.  Phenomena  at  intervals^
1st.  Motions  of  the  fable,  sometuhes  very  gentle,  then  rapid,  and  such  as
would  require,  to  produce  them  voluntarily,  a  great  and  visible  exertion
of  muscular  force.  A  slight  rising  of  the  table  from  the  floor.  This  was
easily  seen  by  all  present  by  reason  of  the  corner  of  the  table  being  close
to  a  writing  table,  one  inch  and  two  thirds  higher,  up  to  the  level  of
which  it  was  raise^  twice.  2ntd.  Sounds.  These  consisted  of  creakings
and'taps.  The  former  were  such  as  would  result  from  efforts  to  move
the  table  by  the  legs  or  from  unequal  strains  applied  to  various  parts  of
It  ;  the  latter  were  such  as  could  only  be  produced  by  distinct  blows  with
a  pencil,  finger  tip,  or  light  hammer.  On  questions  being  asked,  they
were  followed  by  one,  two  or  three  sounds.  During  the  whole  time  the
hands  of  those  present  were  laid  flat  on  the  table  :  the  room  was  well  lighted
with  gas,  and  everything  could  be  distinctly  seen.  At  the  termination
of  the  sitting  there  was  quite  a  volley  of  rkps,  according  to  request  pre-
ferred that  '-Good  night!"  might  thus  be  signified.  Note:  all  present
were  members  of  the  Committee,  and  declare  upon  their  honour  that  none
of  these  motions  or  sounds  were  produced  voluntarily  or  consciously  by

374

MINUTES  OP

themselves.  Moreover  they  have  found,  by  repiatcJ  exp^rimjnt,  that
they  are  not  able  to  produce  similar  sounds  and  motions  when  endeavour-
ing to  do  so.

/  EXPERIMKNr  II.

Feb.  26th.  Conditions  as  before.  Seven  Members  present.  In  about
half  an  hour  the  table  moved  along  the  floor,  but  did  not  rise  as  on  the
former  occasion.  This  or  similar  movements  occurred  three  or  four  times
in  the  course  of  a  sitting  of  about  two  hours'  duration.  The  tappmg  or
other  sounds  were  not  so  distinct  as  on  the  first  evening.

Experiment  III.

March  2nd.  Conditions  as  before.  Five  Members  present.  .  In  a  sitting
of  about  an  hour  and  a  half  no  effects  whatever  were  produced.

Experiment  IV.

March  gth.  Nine  Members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  The
following  phenomena  were  produced  :  xst.  The  members  of  the  circle
standing,  rested  the  tips  of  their  fingers  only  on  the  table.  It  made  a
considerable  movement.  2nd.  Holding  their  hands  a  few  inches  above
the  table,  and  no  one  in  any  way  touching  it,  it  moved  a  distance  of  more
than  a  foot.  3rd.  To  render  the  experiment  absolutely  conclusive,  all
present  stood  clear  away  from  the  table,  and  stretching  out  their  hands
over  it  without  touching  it,  it  again  moved  as  before,  and  about  the  same
distance.  During  this  time,  one  of  the  Committee  was  placed  upon  the
floor  to  look  carefully  beneath  the  table,  while  others  were  placed  outside
to  see  that  no  person  went  near  to  the  table.  In  this  position  it  was
frequently  jnoved,  without  possibility  of  contact  by  any  person  present.
4th.  Whilst  thus  standing  clear  of  the  table,  but  with  the  tips  of  their
fingers  resting  upon  it,  all  at  the  same  moment  raised  their  hands  at  a
given  signal ;  and  on  several  occasions  the  table  jumped  from  the  floor  to
an  elevation  varying  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch.  5th.  All  held  their
hands  close  above  the  table,  but  not  touching  it,  and  then  on  a  word  of
command  raised  them  suddenly,  and  the  table  jumped  as  before.  The
member  lying  on  the  floor,  and  those  placed  outside  the  circle,  were
keenly  watching  as  before,  and  all  observed  the  phenomena  as  described.

It  may  be  observed  that  the  motion  of  the  table,  whether  upward  or
horizontal,  was  not  produced  by  any  sensible  attractive  force  of  the
hands  of  those  present.  The  persons  formmg  the  circle  were  quite
unconscious  of  any  expenditure  of  attractive  force,  but  the  force,  what-
ever it  was,  seemed  to  obey,  to  some  extent,  the  will  of  those  present.

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.  375
Experiment  V.

March  15M.  Smhcc  from  8. 30  to  10  p.m.  Conditions  as  before.  Eight
Members  present.  Sounds  were  heard,  seeming  to  proceed  from  various
p.irts  of  the  table.  They  consisted  chiefly  of  one  or  three  creaks  or  taps.
These  followed  questions  put  by  those  in  the  circle,  but  were  generally
very  faint,  and  in  many  instances  the  questions  were  not  followed  by  any
sounds  whatever.

Experiment  VI.

March  22nd.  Eight  to  ten  p.m.  Conditions  as  before.  SiK  persons  pre-
sjnt.  Sounds  were  audible  soon  after  the  seats  were  taken,  and  lasted  till
the  end  of  the  sitting.  Frequently  they  were  faint,  but  were  always
sufficiently  distinct  to  be  heard  by  all.  For  the  most  part  they  appeared
to  proceed  from  the  floor.  It  being  suggested  that,  in  consequence  of  a
succession  of  five  or  six  raps  following  a  question,  communication  should
be  established  by  means  of  the  alphabet,  it  was  called  by  one  of  the
members  ;  certain  letters,  on  being  called,  were  followed  by  three  distinct
and  quick  tappings.  The  letters  thus  indicated  were  set  down  upon  paper,
and  in  this  manner  the  following  sentence  was  spelled,  "You  stupify
everybody  with  your  nonsense. "  A  request  was  made  that  the  table  be
moved,  but  was  not  complied  with.  At  the  termination  of  the  sitting,  one
of  the  circle  asking  for  an  expression  of  "good  night  "  to  be  conveyed  by
raps  on  the  table,  there  was  quite  a  volley  of  sounds — not  proceeding  from
the  table  but  from  the  floor.

Experiment  VII.
March  2'^th,    Conditions  as  before.    Seven  members  present.    Seance  at
eight  p.m.,  lasting  about  an  hour  and  a  half.    Very  slight  effects  pro-
duced.

Experiment  VIII.
March  Tpth.  Conditions  as  before.  Six  members  present,  and  one
visitor.  Sitting  at  8  p.m.,  lasting  about  two  hours.  A  member  of  the
Committee  having  objected  to  the  assumption  of  one  and  three  sounds
meaning  no  and  yes,  it  was  asked,  "  If  one  sound  means  '  No,'  give  three
raps;"  which  were  immediately  given.  Again  it  was  asked,  "If  three
sounds  are  to  mean  '  Yes,'  let  three  more  raps  be  given  "  ;  and  three  raps
were  immediately  heard.  It  was  thereupon  agreed  that,  in  future  reports,
it  will  only  be  necessary  to  speak  of  answers  being  in  the  negative  or
affirmative,  without  specifying  the  number  of  raps  or  sounds  indicating
such  answers.    That  one  rap  shall  be  taken  and  expressed  as  a  negative,

376

MIXUTES  OF

three  as  an  affirmative,  and  two  as  uncertain  ;  the  sounds  hitherto,  by
this  interpretation,  having  conveyed  intelligible  answers.

A  round  tripod  table,  smaller  and  lighter  than  the  square  table  hitherto
used,  was  employed  for  the  first  experiments.    All  hands  were  placed  on  it
and  every  member  of  the  circle  placed  each  of  his  feet  in  contact  with  thai
of  his  neighbour  on  the  light  and  left.    The  usual  tapping  sounds  were
speedily  produced,  and  when  questions  were  put  the  table  tilted  once  or
thrice  on  one  side,  the  elevation  varying  from  one  to  about  three  inches
It  also  moved  along  the  floor,  but  with  the  hands  resting  on  it.    These  mani-
festations becoming  weaker,    the  circle  was  formed  at  the  square  table
This,  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  moved  along  the  floor,  but  not  without
contact  with  hands,  although  the  experiment  was  tried  more  than  once
But  the  sounds  which  came  from  the  table,  sometimes  during  conversation,
as  if  in  approval  or  dissent  of  the  remarks  made,  and  those  following  the
questions  put  consisted,  not  only  of  gentle  tappings  and  distinct  raps,  but
sometimes  of  heavy  blows ;  and  occasionally,  when  a  physical  manifestation
was  asked  for,  as  that  the  table  might  be  raised,  of  creaking,  cracking,
scratching,  and  other  sounds  quite  indescribable,  coupled  with  a  trembling
or  vibratory  movement  of  the  table.

Five  distinct  raps  following  a  repeatedly  expressed  wish  for  physical
manifestations,  the  alphabet,  as  on  a  former  occasion,  was  used  as  a
means  of  communication,  and  then  the  following  sentence  was  formed,
"  Do  keep  your  mouths  shut  ;  "  another  was  as  follows,  "  This  is  a  grCal
work  ;  it  demands  your  life,  your  soul,  your  all  ;  go  on  friends,  God
prosper  your  work. "

Occasionally,  to  save  time,  when  a  word  was  partly  spelled  out,  a  guess
was  made  at  the  remainder  and  the  question  asked,  "  Is  it  such  a  word?"
The  answer  being  in  the  affirmative  the  word  was  written  down  accord-
ingly. But  in  more  than  one  instance  the  answer  was  in  the  negative,
and  the  supposed  word  only  formed  part  of  another  word.  It  is  to  be  re-
marked that  the  sounds  in  correction  of  the  letters  and  formation  of  the
words  of  the  communications  were  very  sharp,  distinct,  and  regular.
During  the  whole  of  the  time  the  communications  were  being  spelled  out,
every  member  of  the  circle  placed  each  of  his  feet  in  contact  with  that
of  his  neighbour,  and  his  hands  on  the  table.

Experiment  IX.

April  6iA.  Conditions  as  before.  Five  members  present.  Raps  were
heard  proceeding  from  the  table.  The  alphabet  was  proposed,  and  on  in-
quiry it  was  found,  that  a  certain  member  present  was  to  call  the  alpha-
bet.   On  his  doing  so,  the  table  rapped  at  certain  letters  which  were

THE  SUB-COMMITTEKS.

377

written  clown  and  a  sentence  was  thus  spelt,  and  the  communicatioti
caused  considerable  an^usonient.  Other  questions  were  put  and  answered
by  the  usual  signals.  The  raps,  however,  at  times  seemed  to  manifest  the
most  lively  disposition  and  occurred  continually  during  conversation  ;  they
also  distinctly  kept  time  to  music  with  perfect  accuracy.

Experiment  X.

April  lUh.  Conditions  as  before.  Six  members  present.  The  sitting
lasted  about  one  hour  and  a  half.  In  less  than  five  minutes  tapping
sounds  were  heard,  proceeding  from  the  leaf  of  the  table;  at  first  faint,
but  soon  they  became  louder,  and  so  contmued  during  nearly  the  entire
sitting.  During  conversation,  they  were  of  a  sharp,  decided,  and  lively
character,  often  occurring  in  volleys,  and  came  from  different  parts  of  the
table  according  to  request.  There  were  also  motions  of  the  table.  These
consisted:  (i.)  Of  a  rapid  to-and-fro  n-ovement  along  the  floor,  in  one  in-
stance while  only  the  tips  of  the  fingers  were  in  contact  with  the  table.
(2.)  A  peculiar  tremor  of  the  whole  table  followed  by  a  sudden  jerk,  some-
what similar  to  the  jolting  of  a  cart.  (j. )  Tiltings  of  the  table  three  times
on  a  question  being  put,  the  elevation  being  about  half  an  inch.

Experiment  XI.

April  15//2.  Conditions  as  before.  Eight  members  present.  Sitting  at
8  p.m.  Within  five  minutes  tapping  sounds  were  heard  on  the  leaf  of  the
table.  Various  questions,  as  to  order  of  sitting,  &c.,  were  put,  and
answered  by  rappings.  The  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  the  word
"laugh  "  was  spelled  out.  It  was  asked  if  it  was  intended  that  we  should
laugh.  An  affinnative  answer  being  given,  the  members  laughed  ;  upon
which  the  table  made  a  most  vigorous  sound  and  motion  imitative  of  and
responsive  to  the  laughter,  and  so  ludicrous  as  to  cause  a  general  peal  of
real  laughter  to  which  the  table  shook,  and  the  tapping  kept  time  as  an
accompaniment.    The  following  questions  were  then  put  and  answered  by

the  number  of  raps  given  :—"  How  many  children  has  Mrs.   M  ?"

"Four;"  "  Mrs.  W  ?"   "Three;"   "  Mrs.  D  ?"Norap;  "Mrs.

E  ?"  "Five;"  "Mrs.  S  ?"  "Two."    It  was  ascertained,  upon

inquiry,  that  these    replies  were   perfectly  correct,    except  in    the  case

of  Mrs.   E  ,  who  has  only  four  children  living,  but   has  lost  one.

Neither  the  medium  nor  any  person  present,  was  aware  of  all  the  above
numbers,  but  each  number  was  known  to  some  of  them.  The  inquiry  for
a  written  communication  being  responded  to  by  three  raps,  some  sheets
of  paper  with  a  pencil  were  laid  under  the  table,  and  at  the  end  of  the
sitting  examined,  but  no  letter  or  mark  was  found  on  the  paper.    In  order

378

MINUTES  OF

to  test  whether  these  sounds  would  continue  under  different  conditions,
all  sat  at  some  distance  from  the  table,  holding  hands  in  a  circle  round  ii!
But  instead  of  upon  the  table  as  before,  loud  rappings  were  heard  to
proceed  from  various  parts  of  the  floor,  and  from  the  chair  on  which  the
medium  sat  ;  while  some  came  from  the  other  side  of  the  room,  a  distance
of  about  fifteen  feet  from  the  nearest  person.  A  desire  having  been  ex-
pressed for  a  shower  of  raps,  loud  rapping  came  from  every  part
of  the  table  at  once,  producing  an  effect  similar  to  that  of  a  shower
of  hail  falling  upon  it.  The  sounds  throughout  the  evening  were  very
sharp  and  distinct.  It  was  observed  that,  although  during  conversation
the  rappings  are  sometimes  of  a  singularly  lively  character,  yet  when  a
question  is  put  they  cease  instantly,  and  not  one  is  heard  until  the  response
is  given.

  i

Experiment  XII.
April  7.0th.  Eight  persons  present.  Conditions  as  before.  Sitting  a
little  before  8,  lasting  about  two  hours.  Sounds  from  the  table  were  heard
within  ten  minutes.  On  a  song  being  sung  rapping  commenced  imme-
diately. A  lively  air  was  always  accompanied  by  a  spirited  beating  to
time,  the  sounds,  in  harmony  with  the  song  sung,  being  loud  or  soft,  and
following  the  measure  note  by  note,  conveying  as  much  musical  expression
as  such  an  accompaniment  was  capable  of.  The  sounds  were  frequently
accompanied  by  slight  vibratory  or  trembling  motions  of  the  table.  It
was  asked — "  Will  you  answer  a  written  question  by  the  alphabet?"  To
this  the  usual  token  of  assent  was  given.  A  member  of  the  Committee
wrote  on  a  slip  of  paper  :  "  What  is  the  name  of  my  sister?  "  but  what  was
so  written  was  not  disclosed  to  any  person  present.  The  word  Mary
Ann  "  was  spelt.  The  answer  was  not  quite  correct,  it  should  have  been
Marian.  In  order  to  place  beyond  doubt  that  these  sounds  could  in  no
way  be  produced  by  any  person  present,  the  back  of  every  chair  was
turned  to  the  table,  and  at  son-e  distance  from  it,  each  person  kneeling
upon  the  chair  and  resting  his  arms  on  its  back,  with  the  tips  of  his
fingers  only  upon  the  table.

Experiment  XIII.
April  2gth.  Nine  members  present.  Medium  and  conditions  as  before.
In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  table  made  sundry  movements  along
the  floor  with  rappings.  The  sounds  at  first  were  very  softly  given  but
subsequently  became  much  stronger.  They  beat  time  to  the  airs  played
by  a  musical  box,  and  came  from  any  part  of  the  table  requested  by  the
members.    Some  questions  were  put  and  followed  by  raps,  but  more  fre-

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

379

quently  by  tilling  of  the  table  at  its  sides,  ends,  or  corners,  tlie  elevation
being  from  one  to  four  inches.  An  endeavour  was  made  by  those  sitting
near,  to  prevent  the  table  from  rismg,  but  it  resisted  all  their  eflbrts.  The
chair  on  which  the  nieJiiim  was  seated  was  drawn  several  times  over  the
floor.  First  it  moved  backwards  several  feet  ;  then  it  gave  several  tVvists
and  turns,  and  linally  returned  with  the  medium  to  nearly  its  original
position.  The  chair  had  no  castors,  and  moved  quite  noiselessly,  the
medium  appearmg  perfectly  still  and  holding  her  feet  above  the  carpet  ;
so  that  during  the  entire  phenomenon  no  part  of  her  person  or  of  her
dress  touched  the  floor.  There  was  bright  gaslight,  and  the  members  had
a  clear  opportunity  to  •  observe  all  that  occurred  ;  and  all  agreed  that  im-
posture was  impossible.  While  this  was  gomg  on,  a  rappmg  sound  came
continually  from  the  floor  beneath  and  around  the  chair.  It  was  then
suggested  that  trials  should  be  made  if  the  table  would  move  without
contact.  All  present,  including  the  medium,  stood  quite  clear  of  the
table,  holding  their  hands  from  three  to  six  inches  above  it,  and  without
any  way  touching  it.  Observers  were  placed  under  it  to  see  that  it  was
not  touched  there.    Tlie  following  were  the  observations.

J.  The  table  repeatedly  moved  along  the  floor  in  different  directions,
often  taking  that  requested.  Thus,  in  accordance  with  a  desire  expressed
that  it  should  move  from  the  front  to  the  back  room,  it  took  that
direction,  and  on  approaching  the  folding  doors  and  meeting  with  an
obstruction,  turned  as  if  to  avoid  it.

2.  On  a  given  signal  all  raised  their  hands  suddenly,  and  the  table
immediately  sprang  or  jerked  up  from  the  floor  about  one  inch.

3.  Without  any  movement  of  the  hands  the  table  jerked  off  the  floor,
sometimes  at  one  side  or  corner,  sometimes  at  another,  according  to
request,  the  elevation  varying  from  one  to  four  inches.

The  distance  of  the  circle  from  the  table  was  now  considerably  in-
creased, all  standing  about  two  feet  from  it,  and  without  entending  the
hands  towards  it.  The  same  phenomena  were  frequently  repeated.  Once
the  table  jerked  up  on  one  side,  making  a  considerable  forward  movement,
and  again  it  moved  along  the  floor  about  two  feet,  rising  at  one  end  and
causing  some  noise  in  its  fall.  After  a  time,  the  power  appearing  to  fail,
all  approached  the  table,  placing  their  hands  in  contact  with  it.  Then,
on  withdrawing  all  hands  suddenly,  the  same  movements  were  renewed.

During  many  of  these  phenomena,  various  members  of  the  Committee
volunteered  by  turns  to  keep  watch  below  the  table,  whilst  others
standing  round  them  carefully  noted  everything  that  took  place  ;  but  no
one  could  discover  any  visible  agency  in  their  production.

380

MINUTES  OF

Experiment  XIV.

May  i\th.  Nine  members  present.  Place  and  conditions  as  before.
Within  ten  minutes  sharp  snapping  sounds  were  heard,  appearing  to
come  from  the  table.  They  kept  time  with  airs  played  by  a  musical  box
and  with  a  song  sung  for  the  purpose  of  the  experiment,  and  there  were
frequent  inquiries  and  questions.

It  was  indicated  by  rappings  who  should  preside.

In  the  course  of  the  evening  there  were  many  slight  movements  of  the
table,  accompanied  by  creaking  and  tapping  sounds.  Subsequently,
however,  all  stood  quite  clear  of  the  table,  with  hands  extended  two  or
three  inches  over  it,  but  without  in  any  way  touching  it,  and  the  table
made  two  lateral  movements,  rolling  each  time  at  least  six  inches  from
the  place  where  it  stood.

Then  the  experiment,  as  formerly  recorded,  of  raising  the  hands
suddenly  at  a  given  signal,  was  repeated  three  times,  but  without
result.

Ths  chair  on  which  the  medium  sat  was  frequently  drawn  back  from
the  table ;  and  as  she  expressed  a  conviction  that  she  did  nothing  to
cause  these  movements,  at  the  request  of  the  Committee  she  knelt  in  the
chair,  perfectly  motionless,  and  with  hands  extended,  and  it  again  moved,
having  no  castors,  smoothly  along  the  floor,  about  six  inches  from  its
original  position.  No  one  touched  her  or  the  chair  during  this  experiment.
Although  the  tapping  and  other  sounds  were  not  confined  to  one.  part  of
the  table,  they  generally  came  from  that  part  before  the  medium.  It
was,  therefore,  suggested  that  she  should  sit  at  a  distance,  one  of  the
Committee  holding  her  feet,  and  two  others  of  the  Committee  holding  her
hands.  The  sounds,  however,  continued  to  come  as  before,  from  that
part  of  the  table  immediately  facing  her,  contact  by  her  being  thus
rendered  impossible.

A  dark  sitting  being  proposed,  the  gas  was  turned  off  and  a  variety  of
remarkable  phenomena  occurred,  which,  not  being  under  test  conditions,
are  not  reported.

Experiment  XV.

May  nth.  Eight  members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  All  present
sat  at  the  table  in  the  usual  manner  for  about  one  hour  and  a  half.  The
room  was  lit  with  gas  as  usual.  Afterwards,  in  pursuance  of  a  suggestion
by  Professor  Varley,  the  gas  was  turned  out,  and  a  faint  light  thrown  by
two  lanterns,  each  provided  with  a  wax  candle  and  fitted  with  coloured
glass  ;  and  subsequently  the  room  was  made  totally  dark,  but  no  phe-
nomena whatever  were  produced  throughout  the  evening.

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

381

Experiment  XVI.
May  i8M.  The  meeting  was  held  at  the  house  of  another  member
of  the  Committee.  The  table  was  a  large  and  heavy  dining  table.  Twelve
members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  Within  ten  minutes  faint
sounds  were  heard,  proceeding  from  the  table,  which  soon  grew  stronger.
Some  answers  were  given  to  questions.  Music  was  played  on  the  piano-
forte, and  one  piece  was  accompanied  by  tapping  sounds  from  all  parts  of
the  table,  and  another  piece  both  by  tapping  sounds,  vibrations,  and
slight  vertical  movements  of  the  table«at  its  sides,  ends,  and  corners.  The
sounds  and  movements  all  kept  time  with  the  music.  The  same  pheno-
mena also  occurred  when  a  song  was  sung.  During  the  shnce  the  sounds
were  very  equally  distributed,  being  seldom  confined  to  one  part  of  the
table.  On  two  or  three  occasions  the  table  mide  lateral  movements,  but
on  contact  of  the  hands  with  it  being  broken,  no  effect  was  produced.
During  tea,  when  the  business  of  the  meeting  was  concluded,  there  were
several  slight  upward  movements  of  the  corners  of  the  table,  and  the
rapping  sounds  proceeded  loudly  fiom  different  parts  of  it,  and  for  some
time  were  frequent  and  lively.

Experiment  XVII.
May  2Tth,  Twelve  members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  The
usual  tapping  on  the  table  in  answer  to  questions  and  keeping  time
with  music.  An  intimation  being  thus  given  that  a  communication  was
.secured,  the  word  "  dark  "  was  spelled.  It  was  thereupon  decided  to  put
out  the  gas.  The  various  sounds  from  the  table  immediately  increased  in
number  and  intensity.  The  table  tilted  at  different  sides,  moved  along  the
floor  in  various  directions,  lurched  to  and  fro,  and  finally  went  into  the
back  room.  The  hands  of  all  present  were  in  contact,  and  resting  on
the  table.  Nine  of  the  members  affirmed  they  distinctly  saw  luminous
sparks  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  medium.
Some  of  these  were  apparently  phosphorescent  clouds,  and  others  points
or  stars  of  blue  light,  dancing  in  the  air  like  fire-flies.  The  same  luminous
points  appeared  at  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  some  of  those  present,  and
■when  the  hand  was  shaken  these  luminous  drops  were  scattered  from  it
like  drops  of  water,  retaining  their  luminosity  for  some  time  upon  the
objects  on  which  they  fell.

Experiment  XVIII.
yune  1st.    Four  members  present.  at  8  p.m.    No  medium  in  the

room.  Sat  at  the  dining  table  with  hands  resting  on  it  for  about  one
hour.    No  effects  whatever  were  produced,  nor  could  the  slightest  creak-

382

MINUTES  OP

ing  or  rapping  an  the  table  be  detected.  The  members  afterwards
purposely  endeavoured  to  produce  the  sounds  they  had  heard  in  the  pre-
vious experiments,  but  were  unable  to  do  so.

EXPEKIMKNT  XIX.

June  gth.  Eight  members  present.  Seance  at  8  p.  m.  Conditions  as  before.
The  usual  rappmgs  and  tiltings  oscurred.  The  most  interestin-^  fact  this
evening  was,  that  though  the  tapping  sounds  proceeded  fro  n  different
parts  of  the  table,  but  principally  fro«  that  in  front  of  the  medium,  yet
when  she  went  into  the  hall  to  receive  a  message,  they  still  continued  to
come  from  that  part  of  the  table.  The  alphabet  being  repeated  in
accordance  with  the  signal,  "Queer  Pals"  was  spelt  out.  These  words
seemed  to  amuse  and  puzzle  the  meeting  ;  however,  it  was  suggested  they
might  apply  to  the  Christy  Minstrels,  whose  nigger  melodies,  at
St.  George's  Hall,  were  very  clearly  heard  through  the  open  window
of  the  back  room.  At  this  suggestion  the  table  gave  three  considerable
tilts.  "  I  iTiust  ask  for  your  patience  for  a  short  time"  was  next  spelt
out  ;  and  subsequently  another  sentence  was  commenced,  but  the  raps
occurring  without  regard  to  the  letters  called  over,  it  was  not  complete.
Tilting,  lateral,  and  vibratory  movements  of  the  table  occurred  at  frequent
intervals,  one  or  three  tilts  being  generally  given  when  a  question  was
put.

The  manifestations  becoming  weak,  a  dark  seance  was  decided  on,  and
the  gas  turned  out.  Then,  after  a  few  minutes,  loud  knocking,  scratching,
and  other  sounds  proceeded  from  different  parts  of  the  table,  and  were
often  accompanied  by  violent  movements  of  the  table  itself.  .Sometimes
it  rose  at  one  end  about  six  inches,  and  dropped  suddenly,  making  much
noise.  Sometimes,  however,  the  fall  was  very  gradual.  It  also  moved
from  side  to  side,  with  the  legs  at  one  end  raised  above  the  floor,  and  the
part  so  raised  felt  to  the  hands  as  if  floating  in  the  air.  Some  cups  and
saucers  on  the  tea  tray  in  the  centre  of  the  table  rattled  frequently  as  if
they  wei-e  being  overturned  and  struck  against  one  another,  while  the
table  itself  was  perfectly  motionless.  During  the  whole  of  these  pheno-
mena all  the  persons  in  the  room  sat  round  the  table,  the  hands  of  each
one  resting  on  it  and  in  contact  with  that  of  his  neighbour  on  either
side.

Experiment  XX.

June  ijtk.  Six  members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  The  follow-
ing phenomena  occurred.

I.  Sounds  on  the  table  of  many  different  tones,  from  delicate  taps  to

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

383

loud  distinct  raps,  and  appearing  to  come  from  all   parts  of  the  table,
especially  from  the  end  furthest  from  the  medium.

2.  Raps  of  various  degrees  of  loudness  were  also  heard  on  the  floor,
walls,  and  chairs,  and  they  were  frequently  given  at  the  part  requested
by  the  members.  On  four  loud  raps  being  asked  for  as  a  test,  they  were
at  once  given,  appearing  to  come  from  the  part  of  the  table  opposite  to
the  medium  and  far  beyond  her  reach.

3.  Paper  Experiment.  The  medium  held  a  sheet  of  note  paper  at  arm's
length  over  the  table  by  one  of  its  corners,  and  at  request  faint  but
distinct  taps  were  heard  upon  it.  The  other  corners  of  the  paper
were  then  held  by  members  of  the  Committee,  and  the  sounds  were
again  heard  by  all  at  the  table  ;  while  those  who  held  the  paper  felt  the
impact  of  the  invisible  blows.  One  or  more  questions  were  answered  in
this  way  by  three  clear  and  distinctly  audible  taps,  which  had  a  sound
similar  in  character  to  that  produced  by  dropping  water.  This  new  and
curious  phenomenon  occurred  close  under  the  eyes  of  all  present,  without
any  physical  cause  for  it  being  detected.

4.  Rapping  sounds  beat  time  to  a  song,  and  imitated  the  laughter  of  one
of  the  members.

5.  Paper  and  pencil  were  placed  under  the  table  with  a  request  that  it
should  be  written  on  ;  but  shortly  afterwards  the  following  message  was
spelt  out  by  raps  in  the  usual  way  :  "  We  are  not  able  to  write."

6.  A  member  having  previously  written  some  name  on  a   paper,  re-
quested that  it  should  be  spelt  by  raps.    On  going  over  the  alphabet  the
word  "Emily"  was  formed,  and  the  sounds  then  ceased.    "Is  that  all,"
was  asked— "No,"  (by  one  rap).     "Am  I  to  go  on?"— "No."  The
member  then  stated  that  he  had  written  tzvo  names,  of  which  the  first
vi&s  "  Emily."    The  second  was  repeatedly  refused  to  be  given.    He  then
proposed  to  try  another  test,  and  privately  wrote  on  a  slip  of  paper,
which  he  folded  and  held  in  his  hand  unseen  by  the  medium  or  any  person
present.    The  answer  given  was,  ' '  Sister-in-law. "    He  now  showed  the
question  to  the  party  ;  it  was  :  ' '  What  is  the  second  name  of  the  Prince
of  Wales's  eldest  son."    It  was  now  proposed  to  discontinue  the  questions,
which  seemed  to  have  failed,  when  the  questioner  asked  :  is  there  any  con-
nection between  your  answer  and  my  questions  ?  "    To  which  there  came
"Yes."    "Will  you  explain  that  connection  ?"—"  Yes. "    The  member
then  repeated  the  alphabet  again,  and  the  following  sentence  was  spelt.
"  Y01C  tell  who  Emily  is."    {It  is  to  be  particularly  noticed  that  while  these
words  were  being  given,  the  medium  was  conversing  with  another  lady  ;
and  the  member  declares  he  had  no  knowledge  of  what  the  sentence  was
which  was  being  spelled).     The  questioner  at  first,  declined   to    do  as

384

MINUTES  OF

requested;  declaring  that  the  spirits  ought  to  tell  the  name  he  had
written  down  ;  but  on  being  urged  by  the  members  of  the  Committee,  he

stated  that  the  lady  named  "Emily  W  ,"  whose  name  he  had 'first

written  down,  was  his  "sister-in-law."

It  may  be  noticed  that  the  raps  by  which  these  communications  were
spelt  seemed  chiefly  to  come  from  various  parts  of  the  floor  of  the  room,
and  when  any  indistinctness  caused  a  question  as  to  the  correctness  of
any  letter,  the  conflrmation  was  frequently  given  by  very  loud  raps  on
the  table.

Experiment  XXI.

June  2\st.  Seven  members  present.  Place  and  conditions  as  before.  It
was  stated  that  the  medium  could  remain  but  a  short  tims.  Immediately
loud  tapping  sounds  issued  from  the  table  opposite  to  the  place  where  she
was  sitting.  Rapping  sounds  of  different  tone  and  intensity  were
incessant  during  her  presence,  and  continued  for  some  time  after  she  had
gone  from  the  room,  coming  from  the  table  and  various  parts  of  the  floor
and  walls.  The  paper-tapping  experiment  was  agam  tried  with  the  same
result  as  before.  A  small  harmonican  was  held  by  the  medium,  and  it
was  asked  to  be  played  upon.  A  number  of  faint  tapping  sounds  wer^
made  on  the  wooden  frame,  but  no  music  was  produced.  A  small  round
table  was  placed  on  the  floor  inside  a  cylinder  purposely  constructed  so  as
to  preclude  the  possibility  of  contact  of  the  feet  or  legs  with  any  part
of  it.  The  table  thus  protected  gave  out  repeated  raps  m  reply  to  ques-
tions, one  hand  only  being  placed  upon  its  surface.

Raps,  in  conjunction  with  vertical  and  slight  lateral  movements  of  the
large  dining-table,  beat  accurate  time  to  an  air  played  by  a  musical  box.
The  dining-table  moved  along  the  floor  several  inches,  three  times,
without  contact  by  any  person  present.  Movement  of  harmonican  without
contact.  On  the  medium  and  two  other  members  holding  their  hands
above  the  harmonican  without  in  any  way  touching  it,  it  moved  almost
entirely  round  by  successive  jerks  on  the  table  on  which  it  was  placed.
The  dining-table  was  strongly  moved  a  distance  of  six  feet,  the  hands  of
the  members  present  resting  lightly  on  it.

The  medium  left  at  9.  The  phenomena  for  a  time  ceased  ;  but  in  about
15  minutes  after  her  departure  very  distinct  rappings  were  heard  upon
the  floor,  door,  and  table.  Their  character  was  more  that  of  knocking
than  tapping.  Five  raps  were  asked  for  and  given.  Questions  were  then
put  and  the  alphabet  called  over,  but  they  failed  to  elicit  any  intelligent
communication  by  the  ordinary  signals.

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

385

Experiment  XXII.
JuneiWi.  Six  Members  present.  Time  of  sitting,  8  to  9. 30  p.m.  Condi-
tions as  before.  Phenomena :  As  soon  as  the  circle  was  formed,  the  rapping
sounds  came  from  the  table,  close  to  the  member  who  sat  at  the  end
opposite  to  the  medium,  and  distant  from  her  12  feet ;  and,  with  occasional
slight  vertical  movements  of  the  table,  kept  time  to  the  airs  of  the
musical  bo.x.  "Will  you  disclose  your  name?"  was  asked,  and  the
word,  "  Elizabeth  "  was  spelled  ;  but  nobody  present  had  an  acquaintance
with  that  name.  It  was  then  asked,  "What  is  the  best  means  of  pro-
ducing the  phenomena  ? "  The  answer  spelt  was,  "Make  a  circle."  This
was  accordingly  done,  all  present  holding  hands  and  resting  them  on  the
table,  which  then  gave  sundry  movements,  chiefly  lateral,  and  once
rather  suddenly  shifted  its  position  some  five  or  six  feet.  All  present
then  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  towards  the  turned  table,  and
distant  from  it  about  ten  or  twelve  inches,  holdmg  the  hand  of  his
neighbour  on  either  side.  All  hands  were  then  extended  towards  the
table,  but  not  nearer  to  it  than  about  twelve  inches  ;  so  that  there  was
no  possibihty  of  its  being  touched  by  any  person  present.  The  table,
a  heavy  dining  table,  then  rolled  forward  and  backward  slowly  along  the
floor,  with  a  sort  of  labored  movement  or  effort,  four  times';  the  distance
varying  from  three  to  six  inches.  This  experiment  was  subsequently  re-
peated with  similar  results.  A  dark  seance  was  held  for  about  ten
minutes,  the  usual  conditions  being  observed,  but  the  phenomena  were
very  trifling.

Experiment  XXIII.
yitly  c,th.    Five  members  present.    Conditions  as  usual.    The  ordinary
tapping  sounds  from  the  table  occurred,  but  no  phenomena  worth  report-
ing ;  and  the  raps  did  not  continue  beyond  the  first  half-hour,  when  they
ceased  suddenly  and  did  not  return.

Experiment  XXIV.

ytdy  \ith.    Seven  members  present.    Miss  ,  a  young  lady,  was

introduced  as  a  trance  medium.  After  sitting  for  a  short  time,  her  eyes
closed,  and  she  spoke  and  replied  to  questions  as  one  would  in  assuming
different  characters.  There  were  four  of  these  personifications,  but
nothing  transpired  which  in  the  opinion  of  the  Committee  afforded  evi-
dence worth  recording.

Experiment  XXV.
July  \^th.    Seven  members  present.    Conditions  as  before.  Phenomena:

386

MIXUTES  OP

A  few  creaking  and  tapping  sounds  unaccompanied  by  any  intelligible
communication.

It  was  resolved  to  adjourn  the  meeting  for  the  Vacation.

Experiment  XXVI.
Sept.  27M.  Five  members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  The  medium
present  was  Mr.  Morse.  No  rappmg  or  motions  produced.  Mr.  Morse
fell  into  a  trance,  delivered  an  address,  and  answered  some  questions  in
writing,  but  they  were  not  test  questions  and  nothing  satisfactory  was
elicited.

Experiment  XXVII.
October  ^th.  Four  members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  A  few
minutes  after  sitting,  taps  were  heard  proceeding  from  the  table,  and
the  musical  box  being  played,  they  kept  time  to  its  music.  On  the  alpha-
bet being  repeated,  "Table  is  too  large"  was  spelt  out,  and  a  flap  was
accordingly  removed.  It  was  then  signified  that  the  lights  were  to  be
put  out.  The  room  was  then  darkened  and  all  present  joined  hands.
After  a  few  minutes  there  was  a  sound  of  something  falling  upon  the
table  ;  and  on  re-lighting,  it  was  found  that  a  teaspoon  had  been  thrown
a  distance  of  fourteen  inches  from  a  saucer,  which  had  been  left  with  a
few  tea-things  on  the  middle  of  the  table.  During  the  sea}ice,  the  tapping
sounds  from  the  table,  and  others  from  the  floor,  were  very  distinct ;  and
there  were  also  lateral  movements  of  the  table  in  various  directions,  but
not  without  the  ordinary  contact  of  the  hands.

Experiment  XXVIII.

October  \ith.  Seven  members  present.  Conditions  as  before.  The
usual  rappings  were  produced.  The  table  was  moved  seven  or  eight
times.  A  book,  in  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  members,  having  been
audibly  rapped  upon  while  in  his  pocket,  he  was  requested  to  lay  it  on
the  table.  Having  done  so,  there  were  several  distinct  tappings  on  the
cover.  The  book  was  then  suspended  upon  ivory  paper-knives  held  by
two  of  the  members.  In  this  position  there  were  repeated  and  very
distinct  rappings  upon  the  covers  of  the  book.  No  other  phenomena
occurred  requiring  note.

Communication  rapped  out  :  "  Next  Monday  I  will  ring  the  bell  in  the
canvas. "

Experiment  XXIX.
October  iSt/i.    Eight   members  present.    Conditions   as    before.  No

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

soimda  or  movements  of  the  table  occmTed  dm-ing  the  first  horn-  of  sitting-
After  tea,  veiy  loud  and  distinct  blocking,  rapping,  and  scraping  sounds
proceeded  from  all  parts  of  the  table,  and  from  the  floor.  They  beat
time  to  music,  and  intelligent  commimications  were  made  in  the  usual
manner.  The  following  were  spelt  out :  1.  "  Coming  if  we  can."  2.  "Mrs.

 "  (tlie  mediimi)  "  is  too  sensitive  for  us  at  present."

A  cylinder  of  canvas,  thi-ee  feet  in  height,  and  about  two  feet  in
diameter,  was  placed  under  a  small  table,  the  legs  of  which  were  contained
within  it;  inside  the  cylinder  was  a  bell,  resting  on  the  floor.  No  sounds
proceeded  from  the  bell,  but  there  were  repeated  rappings  upon  and
jerldngs  of  the  table.  This  cylinder  precluded  the  possibility  of  contact
with  the  table  by  a  foot  of  any  of  the  persons  present,  during  the  entire
contmuance  of  the  knockings  and  jerldngs  of  the  table.

EXPEBQIENT  XXX.

Oct.  2ofJi.  Five  Members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena:
Knocking,  snapping,  and  rapping  soimds  fi-om  the  back  room,  floor,  and
table;  and  one  member  stated  that  lie  felt  repeated  tappings  on  his
knee.  There  was  the  usual  accompaniment  of  these  soimds  to  songs,  and
some  mtelligent  commimications  were  given  in  the  usual  manner.  The
bell  was  placed  within  the  cylinder  of  canvas,  imder  the  table,  as  de-
scribed in  the  last  experiment,  but  it  was  not  sounded.  It  was  asked
that  "  Cheer  boys,  cheer,"  might  be  rapped  on  the  table.  The  measiu-e  of
that  ail-  was  instantly  and  loulcUy  rapped  upon  it,  the  time  being  kept
very  exactly.

Experiment  XXXI.
Nov.  lst.   Five  Members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  No  phenomena
whatever  oecim-ed,  diu-ing  a  sitting  of  an  hom-  and  a  half.

ExpEimiENT  XXXII.
Nov.  8th.    Six  Members  present.    Conditions  as  usual.    Phenomena :
Eaps,  and  slight  tiltings  of  one  side  of  the  table.  Affirmative  raps  diu-ing
a  stoiy  related  by  one  of  the  members.

EXPERUIENT  XXXIII.
Nov.  15th.  At  the  residence  of  another  of  the  members.  Seven
members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena  :  Knockmg  and  rap-
ping soimds,  and  slight  movements  of  the  table.  The  sounds  generaUy
proceeded  from  the  table  and  floor;  but  in  one  instance,  one  loud  knock
came  fi-om  the  door,  on  a  remark  being  made  in  reference  to  a  member

388

MINUTES  OF

present.  The  following  words  were  foi-med  in  tlie  usual  manner :  "Nux
Vomica,  iDewai'o  of."  It  was  tlien  asked  to  wtom  tMs  applied,  and  the
lady  whoso  name  was  given,  stated  that  she  was  taking  homospathic
medicine,  which  probably  contained  that  di-ug.  It  was  then  asked  what
treatment  she  required,  and  the  reply  rapped  out  was,  "  Heat."  "  Does  she
requii-e  anything  else  ?"  was  asked.  "  Nothing  "  was  spelt  out.  Eaps  were
made  upon  the  table,  in  perfect  time  to  songs  sung.

1st  Experiment— AM  sat  away  from  the  table,  forming  a  circle  rotmd  it
and  holding  hands.  The  sounds,  although  less  distinct,  continued  to
come  from  it,  keeping  time  with  a  song.

2nd  Experiment. — The  medium  placed  each  hand  in  that  of  her  neigh-
bour- on  either  side,  whilst  her  feet  rested  on  the  hands  of  a  third  mem-
ber. The  sounds,  however,  continued  to  proceed  from  the  table  and  floor
as  before.

Experiment  XXXIV.
Nov.  22nd.  At  the  same  house  as  last  week.  Sis  members  present.
Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena :  Eapping  sounds  from  table  and  floor.
A  song  was  sung,  to  which  the  raps  kept  time.  The  presence  of  one  of
the  circle  seemed  to  affect  the  phenomena,  for  the  sounds,  which  before
her  entry  were  very  distinct,  became  very  feeble ;  and  immediately  on
her  quitting  the  circle,  they  again  became  clear  and  distinct.  No  cause
could  be  traced  for  this  effect,  except  that  the  lady  in  question  was  not  in
good  health.

Experiment  XXXV.
Dec.  Itn.  At  the  same  house  as  in  the  last  experiment.  Five  mem-
bers present.  Conditions  as  usual.  The  table  was  a  large  and  heavy
dining  table,  twelve  feet  long  by  five  feet  wide,  and  not  on  castors.
Phenomena:  Eapping  sotrnds  of  various  characters  from  table  and  floor,
and  movements  of  the  table.

Communication  by  raps:  "Have  Tuesday  for  meeting."  Some  one
present  asked  "Why?"  "It  was  the  original  day;  you  will  have  letter
manifestations  ;  get  all  the  old  memhers,  if  possible."

It  may  be  observed,  that  there  had  been  some  conversation  at  the
beginning  of  the  evening,  on  changing  the  day  for  meeting;  but  all
present  who  could  have  known,  afSrmed  that  they  had  forgotten  that
Tuesday  had  been  the  original  day,  until  reminded  of  the  fact  by  the  com-
munication.   The  rapping  sounds  kept  time  to  songs.

Movements  of  the  toMe.-At  fii-st  these  were  sHght,  and  in  a  lateral  dn-ec-
tion    They  then  increased  in  force,  with  a  slight  vertical  movement  at

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

389

one  end,  the  tips  of  the  fingers  only  being  in  contact  with  the  table.  All
hands  were  then  held  within  a  few  inches  of  the  table,  no  one  touching
it,  and  all  standing  up ;  and  it  then  gave  three  horizontal  movements  in
different  directions ;  each  movemant  being  from  three  to  four  inches,  and
occurring  at  intervals  of  about  one  minute.

A  visitor,  who  stated  that  he  was  a  stranger  to  these  phenomena,  sat
under  the  table  for  a  considerable  time  during  the  production  of  the
soimds,  and  said  that  he  distinctly  felt  vibration  of  the  wood  with  which
he  placed  his  hand  or  head  in  contact  when  the  taps  were  heard.  After
tea  the  gas  was  turned  out,  but  the  fire  in  the  grate  prevented  total  dark-
ness. Nothing  then  took  place  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Then  the
table  frequently  and  violently  shifted  its  position,  moving  along  the  floor
in  different  directions,  the  movements  varying  from  one  to  three  feet.
During  the  greater  part  of  these  phenomena,  the  members  stood  up,  with
the  tips  of  theii-  fingers  only  in  contact  with  the  table.

EXPEEIMENT  XXXVI.
Bee.  lith.  At  the  same  house,  with  the  same  table  as  last  week.  Six
members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena :  Eaps  of  varied  tone
and  intensity  from  different  parts  of  the  table.  In  one  instance,  where  a
qiiestion  was  put,  three  sounds  fcillowed,  resembling  blows  on  the  table
with  the  clenched  hand.  The  raps  at  times  proceeded  from  different
parts  of  the  room.  Eapping  sounds  kept  time  to  songs,  and  to  music  on
the  piano.

Sounds  from  table  xvitliout  contact.— Ml  sat  away  from  the  table,  without
in  any  manner  touching  it,  and  the  sounds,  although  somewhat  fainter,
contmued  to  proceed  from  it.  Some  of  the  questions  that  were  asked
were  followed  by  the  usual  affirmative  or  negative  signals,  and  the  foUow-
mg  commumcation  was  also  given,  through  the  hand  of  a  lady  present :
"  WaU  a  little,  you  may  have  somethmy."  Soon  after  there  were  horizontal
movements  of  the  table  in  different  directions,  all  hands  restiun-  on  it
Also  two  or  three  slight  movements,  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch,  without
contact,  every  person  kneeling  on  a  chair,  the  back  of  which  was  placed
about  six  mches  from  and  turned  towards  the  table,  and  all  hands  beino-
held  a  few  inches  above  it-three  gas  lights  above,  so  that  the  slightest
movement  was  visible.  Peculiar  vibratory  movements  of  the  table
iOllowed,  keepmg  time  to  the  measure  of  a  song.

-Er/^mmen^.— Aglass  tumbler,  with  two  finger  rings  near  it,  and  a
pencil  with  a  sheet  of  paper,  which  was  carefully  examined,  and  found
perfectly  free  from  any  mark,  were  placed  on  the  floor  under  the  table  in
view  of  the  circle,  who  carefully  watched  the  proceeding.    Some  li'uie

390

MINUTES  OP

after  the  paper  was  taken  up,  and  found  to  liave  a  mark  resemMing  the
letter  I,  distinctly  pencilled  on  it.  The  glass  and  lings  were  found  as
they  were  placed.

Experiment  XXXVI.

Dec.  22ncl.  Thi'ee  members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena :
Sounds,  and  slight  movements  of  the  table.  Eapping  sounds  commenced
a  few  minutes  after  sitting.  Several  questions  were  put  and  followed  by
the  usual  negative  and  affirmative  signals,  but  no  communication  by  the
alphabet  was  given.  At  the  question,  "  Do  you  know  Mrs.  Sims  ?  "  the
table  vibrated  and  trembled  in  a  remarkable  manner,  and  gave  out  a
shower  of  rapping  sounds.  It  also  jerked  or  jumped  considerably,  when
"Can  you  ring  the  bell?"  was  asked.  The  sounds  varied  a  good  deal  in
tone  and  character.  Some  were  remarkably  loud,  and  came  from  every
quarter  of  the  table.  They  beat  time  to  the  airs  of  the  musical  box,  and
accompanied  the  conversation  at  tea-time.

Experiment : — A  bell  was  suspended  in  a  closed  hat-box,  placed  on  the
table;  it  was  not,  however,  sounded.  Also  a  sheet  of  paper,  with  pencil,
was  placed  under  the  table,  but  this  expeiiment  likewise  failed.

EXPEBIMBNT  XXXVIII.
Dec.  28tTi.  Eight  members  present.  Phenomena :  Eapping  sounds  from
the  table  and  floor,  and  movements  of  the  table,  with  and  without  con-
tact. The  alphabet  was  repeated,  and  the  following  letters  were  rapped :
"  Abad  circle — want  of  harmony."  At  the  letter  "  f  "  the  table  tilted  three
times,  and  at  the  letters  "  a,  r,"  gave  several  forcible  homontal  move-
ments, tilting  at  either  end.

Eaps,  with  slight  tiltings  of  the  table,  beating  time  to  the  measure  of  a
song.  Two  or  thi-ee  poems  were  recited,  to  the  measure  of  which  there
were  loud  raps  from  the  table  and  floor,  and  the  table  also  marked  the
metre  by  various  horizontal  movements  and  tiltings.

Hood's  Anatomy  Song  being  repeated  by  one  of  the  members,  the
knocking,  rapping  and  tilting  sounds,  with  various  horizontal,  ti-embling
and  vibratory  movements  of  the  table  accompanied  it,  in  exact  hai-mony
with  the  measure,  added  to  which  were  strange  movements,  in  accord-
ance with  the  character  of  the  verses.  In  one  instance  the  table  shifted
its  position  several  feet,  the  tips  of  the  fingers  only,  being  in  contact
with  it.

Movements  without  cowiaci.— Question  :  "  Would  the  table  now  be  moved
without  contact  ? "    Answer  :  "  Tes,  by  three  raps  on  the  table."

All  chaii's  were  then  turned  with  their  backs  to  the  table,  and  nine

THE  SUB-COMIIITTBES.

391

inctes  away  from  it  j  and  all  present  knelt  on  tlie  chairs,  witli  theu-  wrists
resting  on  the  backs,  and  their  hands  a  few  inches,  above  the  table.

Under  these  conditions,  the  table  (the  heavy  dining-room  table  pre-
viously dosci-ibed)  moved  fom-  times,  each  time  from  foiu-  to  sis  inches,
and  the  second  time  neai-ly  twelve  inches.

Then  all  hands  wei-e  placed  on  the  backs  of  thechaii-s,  and  nearly  afoot
from  the  table,  when  foiu-  movements  occuiTed,  one  slow  and  continuous,
for  neai'ly  a  minute.

Then  all  present  placed  then-  hands  behind  their  backs,  kneeling  erect
on  their  chairs,  which  were  removed  a  foot  clear  away  from  the  table ;  the
gas  also  was  tiu-ned  iip  higher,  so  as  to  give  abundance  of  Ught,  and
under  these  test  conditions,  distinct  movements  occurred,  to  the  extent  of
several  inches  each  time,  and  visible  to  every  one  present.

The  motions  were  in  various  directions,  towards  all  parts  of  the  room —
some  were  abnipt,  others  steady.  At  the  same  time,  and  under  the  same
conditions,  distinct  raps  occm-red,  apparently  both  on  the  floor  and  on  the
table,  in  answer  to  requests  for  them.

The  above  described  movements  were  so  unmistakeable,  that  all  present
unhesitatingly  declared  their  conviction,  that  no  physical  force,  exerted
by  any  one  present,  could  possibly  have  produced  them;  and  they
declared  fiu'ther,  in  writing,  that  a  rigid  examination  of  the  table,  showed
it  to  be  an  ordinary  dining-table,  with  no  machinery  or  apparatus  of  any
kind  connected  with  it.  The  table  was  laid  on  the  floor  with  its  legs  uj^,
and  taken  to  pieces  as  far  as  practicable.

EXPEEIMENT  XXXIX.

January  4iA.  Seven  members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Nothing
occurred  dming  the  seance,  except  a  few  rapping  sounds  from  the  table.
Various  experiments  were  ti-ied,  all  of  which  failed.

ExPEEIMENT  XL.

January  Uth.  Six  members  present.  Conditions  as  usual.  Phenomena  :
Eapping  sovmds  and  slight  movements  of  the  table.

The  medium  left  about  twenty  minutes  before  the  termination  of  the
sitting ;  but  the  ?aps  continued  to  come  from  the  table  as  before,  and
gave  affirmative  ..;nd  negative  signals  to  questions.

Some  experiments  were  tried,  including  the  movement  of  the  table  with-
out contact,  but  they  were  not  attended  with  success.

392

MINUTES  OP

BTIB-COMMITTEE  No.  3.

Experiment  I.

Feb.  26th.  This  section  of  the  Committee  arranged  to  hold  a  series
of  meetings  at  the  house  of  one  of  its  members,  and  met  for  the
first  time  this  evening.  Six  members  present.  After  some  preliminary
conversation,  and  the  reading  of  extracts  from  books  on  the  subject,  those
present  sat  in  cii-cle  at  a  large  loo  table  for  more  than  an  hour  without
any  apparent  results.

Experiment  II.

March  5th.  Six  members  present.  The  members  present  sat  in  circle,  but
■without  any  visible  movement  of  the  table.

At  -9.30,  when  the  Eev.  Mi-.  D  arrived,  and  had  sat  about  four  or

five  minutes,  there  occui-red  some  gentle  tapping  on,  and  swaying  of  the
table.  These  were  continued,  with  occasional  cessation,  for  about  45
minutes  ;  during  which  time  some  negatives  and  afSi-matives  were  given
in  answer  to  a  variety  of  questions.  Frequently  the  replies  were  con-
fused, and  as  if  given  with  difficulty  or  reluctance.

P.S. — The  table  used  on  this  occasion  was  an  oblong  oak  hall-table,  on
four  legs,  without  castors.  Weight,  between  50  and  60  lbs.  Size  of  top,
3  ft.  10  in.  by  2  ft.

EXPEEIMBNT  III.

March  12th.  Five  Members  present.  All  present  sat  down  to  the  table
about  7.45,  and  continued  until  about  9.15 ;  but  no  unusual  sound  or
movement  coidd  be  recognised  during  the  whole  sitting,  or  any  part  of
it.    'No  medium  was  present.

EXPEHIMENT  IV.

April  1st.  Four  members  present.  No  medium  present.  Nearly  three
quarters  of  an  hour  elapsed  without  any  other  than  "  slight  manifesta-
tions ; "  but  on  two  members  leaving  their  seats  at  the  table,  it  began  to
move:^slowlyj  revolving  on  a  centre ;  it  tilted  once  or  twice  on  two  legs
in  the  direction  of  its  width,  and  then  moved  quickly  in  the  dii-ection  of
the  carpet,  which  opposed  its  further  progress  for  a  time.  It  ultimately
overcame  this  difficulty,  and  proceeded  at  a  rapid  rate  across  the  room —
moving  first  in  one  direction,  and  then,  after  a  short  interval,  in  the  oppo-
site.   The  motion  was  usually  smooth  and  iiniform,  though  on  two  or

THE  SUB-COMMITTEES.

393

three  occasions,  the  noise  made  by  tlae  table  on  the  board  floor,  seemed  in-
dicative of  pressiire.  Several  of  those  experimenting  now  loft  the  table,
and  it  then  moved  slowly,  with  thi-ee  persons — ^two  ladies  and  a  gentle-
man— touching  it  appai-ently  with  the  tips  of  their  fingers.  After  a  pause,
it  moved  again  in  various  dii-ections,  with  four  persons  touching  it.  Its
movements  afterwards  may  be  summarised  as  follows  : —

Thi-ee  tilts  and  knocks  on  floor,  with  two  legs.  Two  others — another
tat — foui*  persons  resting  the  tips  of  then-  fingers  on  the  table.  Tilt
movement,  and  tilt  again.  Eapid  movement  of  table  half  across  the  room,
back  again  in  a  ckcular  dii-ection.  Eeverse  movement  and  two  violent
tilts.  The  hands  as  before,  apparently  resting  lightly  on  the  table.
Circular  motion  to  the  right  and  then  to  the  left,  several  times  roimd.
Semicircular  movement  and  violent  tilt.  Backward  movement  across  the
room,  driving  the  reporter,  Mr.  Gannon,  out  of  his  chaii'.  Three  persons
only  at  the  table.  Slight  movements  again  with  two  persons,  and  motion
as  indicated  in  the  diagi-am  was  produced  by  one  person.

EXEERIM  ENTER
O

At  the  suggestion  of  several  of  the  Committee,  the  lights  were  lowered,

and  a  succession  of  tilts  and  knocks  followed.    Mr.  B         now  left  the

table,  which  immediately  tilted  five  or  six  times,  and  on  Mr.  H  ,  who

was  not  at  the  table,  calling  over  the  alphabet  the  following  words  were
rapped  out,  "  Not  so  many  to  sit."  Several  other  manifestations  followed,
but  the  room  being  but  dimly  lighted  it  was  dilHcult  to  observe  so  accu-
rately. The  movements  appeared  to  be  a  repetition  of  those  ali'eady
recorded.  After  the  seance  the  table  was  examined,  and  it  was  found  that
one  gentleman  of  medium  strength  could  slide  it  along  the  floor  and  tilt
it  from  the  side  oply  without  difficulty.  With  several  others  resting  their
hands  upon  it  one  operator  could  move  it— though  not  easUy — and  tnt
it  in  one  direction  by  the  exertion  of  considerable  force.  The  examination
proved  that  a  certain  rubbing,  rattling  sound  which  was  in  the  sliding
movements,  supposed  to  indicate  pressure  by  the  persons  round  the  table,
was  really  due  to  a  large  amoiint  of  the  weight  being  raised,  and  the  table
partly  relieved  of  its  own  gravity,  whilst  performing  the  movements.  All
hands  were  on  the  top  surface  of  the  table,  and,  of  corn's  e,  any  force  they
may  have  exerted  must  have  been  downwards.

The  table  is  of  carved  oak,  of  strong  make.  The  top  is  3  feet  9J  inches
by  2  feet  wide,  and  projects  1^  inches  over  the  frame-work  in  which  the

394

MINUTES  OP

legs  aro  fixed.  There  are  strong  bracing  cross-spars  near  the  lower  end
of  the  legs  which  are  without  castors.

In  reference  to  the  darkened  part  of  the  seance,  a  member  of  the  Sub-
committee says:  "During  the  time  the  lights  were  at  the  lowest  I  was
seated  close  to  the  table,  thi-ee  persons  having  their  hands  resting  on  it,
their  positions  being  as  follows  : —

The  fourth  side  being  side  being  vacant.  I  noticed  that  the  table  in-
variably tilted  towards  2;  at  times  with  so  much  force,  that  I  was  unable
in  the  position  in  which  I  sat  to  prevent  it  rising,  though  I  succeeded
in  modifying  the  vigom-  of  the  tilts.  On  one  occasion  the  table  tilted  so
much  that  it  over-balanced  itself,  and  would  probably  have  fallen  to  the
ground  had  it  not  been  upheld  by  those  round  it."

Some  of  the  tilts  were  given  with  great  force  and  sharpness,  as  though
when  raised  to  the  full  height  it  desired,  a  powerful  spring  were  released,
snapping  the  two  legs  down  on  the  floor,  so  that  the  noise  could  be  heard
all  over  and  outside  the  house.

Experiment  V.

April  8th.  Five  Members  present.  At  about  8.30  all  present  sat  down
to  a  large  loo  table  which,  in  a  few  minutes,  began  to  sway  and  tilt
in  a  very  lively  manner,  and  it  continued  these  movements  from  12  to
15  minutes,  when  it  began  to  take  rotatory  movements,  which  were  rapidly
accelerated,  and  the  speed  became  so  great,  that  the  experimenters  dropt
off  one  after  another  from  fatigue,  and  the  impossibility  of  running  fast
enough  and  long  enough  to  preserve  his  or  her  position.  The  table  took
long  circular  sweeps  round  the  room  and  at  the  same  time  rotated  on  its
base.  The  room  is  22  feet  wide  and  about  28  feet  long.  It  has  a  smooth
floor  with  Persian  carpets  here  and  there  which  were  put  away  from  the
middle  of  the  floor  to  prevent  obstruction.

The  table  afterwards  tilted  twice,  so  that  it  stood  with  its  rim  on  the
floor.  The  pillar,  with  its  heavy  foot  base,  standing  of  com-se  at  i-ight
angles,  and  all  quite  clear  of  the  floor.

Some  of  the  company  became  alarmed  at  these  violent  proceedings,
and  for  a  moment  left  the  table;  but  being  for  the  most  part  persuaded

THE  SUB-OOMMITTEBS.

395

to  keep  or  resume  their  places,  the  table  let  itself  down  again  gently
enough.

The  operations  lasted  more  than  an  horn-,  and  consisted  of  siach  move-
ments as  described,  ■with  the  occasional  rapping  oiit  of  some  unimportant
sentences,  which  were  not  invariably  coui-teous  or  complimentary  to  aU
present.

Eegret  was  felt  that  so  few  of  the  members  of  the  Sub-committee  were
present  this  evening.

EXPEEIMENT  VI.

May,  13ffe.  Five  members  present.  A  paid  medium.  The  com-
pany sat  about  forty-five  minutes  with  but  slight  indications  of  force.
Then  some  sentences  were  spelled  out  by  rapping,  and  writing  thi'ough
the  medium's  hand,  and  then  the  medium  appeared  to  suffer  a  series  of
spasmodic  jerldngs,  dtudng  which  he  spoke  of  himself  in  the  third  person,
and  answered  to  a  variety  of  questions  put  by  some  of  the  Committee.

Nothing  took  place  on  this  occasion  to  warrant  any  decided  opinion  as
to  the  nature  of  these  occm-rences,  other  than,  that  no  test  or  satisfactoiy
evidence  was  given  that  any  external  foreign  intelligence  had  been  acting
through  the  medium.

The  sitting  continued  about  two  hours.  At  times  the  table  swayed
about  a  foot  from  one  side  to  the  other.    It  was  the  same  loo  table.

396

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

Db.  Lockhart  Eobeetson  is  desirous,  in  order  to  complete  the
story  of  his  early  experiences  in  Spirituahsm,  to  place  on  record
here  the  sequel  to  the  paper  reprinted  in  the  text  (p.  247)
from  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  of  April,  1860.  This  paper  also
was  anonymously  published  in  the  pages  of  that  journal  for
May,  1860.

DIRECT  WRITINa.

To  the  Editor  of  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine."
Sir, — I  willingly  comply  with  your  request  to  record  in  a  letter  the  instances
of  direct  writing,  which  I  have  witnessed  (some  of  them  in  your  presence)
through  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Squire.  I  am  simply  a  student  of  science,  and
I  am  neither  a  partisan  of  Spiritualism  nor,  I  thank  the  Church  of  my  baptism,
are  my  theological  tenets  or  inner  Spiritual  life  in  any  way  dependent  on,  or  to
be  iniluenced  by  what  the  unseen  agents,  be  they  demons,  as  I  believe,  or  spirits  of
the  departed,  as  Mr.  Squire  holds,  may  choose  to  communicate.  In  the  written
Word  of  God,  and  in  the  living  teaching  of  the  Church  of  England,  I  have
the  only  guides,  which  I  either  desire  or  should  choose  to  accept  in  all  that
relates  to  the  unseen  mysteries  of  God.  I  neither  expect  nor  desire  any  further
Revelation  or  new  light,  and  utterly  hold  in  ridicule  as  the  productions  of
a  mystic  the  pretended  Revelations  of  the  spirit-world,  by  the  late  Emanuel
Swedenborg.  The  old  paths  of  the  Church  of  England  in  which  my  fathers
trod  suffice  for  all  my  spiritual  desires  and  requirements,  and  it  is  simply  as  a
problem  in  physical  science  that  I  consent  to  examine  or  discuss  the  phenomena
of  Spiritualism.

In  my  former  communication,  Facts,  by  Br.  ,  in  your  last  number,

I  gave  an  outline  of  the  physical  phenomena  which,  through  the  mediumship
of  Mr.  Squire,  were  produced  in  my  house.  I  stated  my  belief  that  these
phenomena  were  not  the  result  of  fraud,  nor  the  doings  of  a  conjurer,  but,
were  really  produced  by  some  unseen  agency  ;  and  to  this  opinion,  despite  the
doubting  warning  letters  of  kind  friends  who  have  read  the  communication,  I
still  adhere.  It  is  a  question  of  scientific  evidence,  of  which  I  am  surely
capable  of  judging,  and  as  a  candid  witness  I  am  constrained  to  state  that,
despite  the  suspicious  fact  of  some  of  the  principal  manifestations  occurring  in
.the  dark,  I  believe  that  it  was  utterly  out  of  Mr.  Squire's  power  to  produce  the
phenomena  I  have  recorded,  by  either  fraud  or  artifice.

The  following  is  the  brief  summary  I  gave  in  the  paper  in  question  of  the
direct  writing  I  then  witnessed  : —

«'  3.  Writing  by  an  unseen  Agent.— Ms.  Squire  held  a  pencil  on  a  eheefc  of

PAPER  BY  DR.  LOCKHART  ROBERTSON.

397

paper  with  one  hand  under  the  table.  It  was  rapidly  and  audibly  written  on
and  then  pulled  foroibly  out  of  his  hand  and  thrown  across  the  room.  On  one
sheet  was  written  the  surname  of  the  writer,  and  on  the  other,  '  0  tarry  thou '
(On  the  chimnoy-pieoe  in  the  dining-room  is  an  illuminated  card  with  the  verse
from  the  Psalm,  O  tarry  thou,  the  Lord's  leisure,  &o.).

"  Farther,  the  writer  placed  below  the  dining  table,  on  two  occasions,  a  piece
of  blank  paper  and  a  cedar  pencil.  The  fire,  partly  wood,  was  burning  brightly.
The  four  persons  present  formed  a  circle  with  their  hands  on  the  table.  Writing
was  distinctly  heard  on  the  paper.  On  examining  the  paper,  the  word  '  God '
was  three  times  written  in  a  cramped  hand,  and  on  the  other  occasion  the
writer's  surname."

I  shall  now  give  these  facts  more  in  detail,  together  with  one  or  two  others,
which  I  have  since  witnessed  : —

1.  On  the  evening  of  the  25th  February,  a  piece  of  paper  laid  on  a  stiff  MS.
book,  and  a  pencil,  with  the  point  turned  towards  his  hand,  were  held  under  my
dining-table  by  Mr.  Squire  in  one  hand,  the  other  forming  a  circle  with  ours
round  the  table.  The  fire  was  burning  brightly ;  the  gas  turned  on  low.  The
pencil  was  distinctly  heard  to  move,  and  on  the  paper  was  written  my  surname.
The  experiment  was  repeated  thrice.  On  the  second  occasion  the  words  "  0
tarry  thou  "  were  written.  On  each  occasion  the  book  was  lorcibly  drawn  out  of
Mr.  Squire's  hand,  and  was  thrown  across  the  room.  The  words  "  O  tarry  thou '
are  portion  of  a  text  on  an  illuminated  card  on  the  chimney-piece.

2.  On  the  evening  of  the  26th  February,  we  had,  as  I  have  recorded,  stronger
physical  manifestations.  We  also  placed  a  sheet  of  paper  on  the  floor,  under
the  centre  of  the  dining-table,  laying  a  pencil  on  it.  The  hands  of  all  present
were  formed  in  a  circle  on  the  table.  The  pencil  was  distinctly  heard  to  move,
and  after  a  time  the  paper  was  thrown  across  the  room.  On  the  paper  was
written,  in  a  cramped,  awkward  hand,  the  word  "God"  three  times.  On  a
repetition  of  this  experiment  my  surname  was  written.  It  is  a  wide,  scrawling
writing,  filling  the  whole  sheet  of  paper.

3.  On  the  16th  of  April  I  received  through  your  hands  the  following  message,
written  in  your  presence  by  Mr.  Squire,  under  that  influence  known  as  medium
writing.  "  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  ask  tlie  gentleman  of  whom  you  speak  to
looJc  in  a  little  case  on  his  library  shelf,  and  he  willfiiid  apa'per  written  backwards

with  the  words,  '  God  bless  you.  Dr.  .' "    I  looked  in  the  case  accordingly,

and  there  found  written  on  an  envelope,  in  ink,  in  the  same  cramped  hand,  the
message  in  question.

As  a  piece  of  scientific  or  exhaustive  evidence,  this  message  is  of  no  value
whatever,  as,  while  I  would  not  for  a  moment  suspect  Mr.  Squire  or  yourself
of  so  foolish  and  impertinent  a  trick,  it  is,  nevertheless,  open  to  any  objector  to
assert  that  you  or  he  placed  this  writing  in  the  case  when  you  did  me  the
honour  of  a  visit  on  the  25th  and  26th  of  February.

4.  On  the  evening  of  the  16th  of  April,  in  the  chamber  of  a  friend  of  mine  in
the  Temple,  we  had  an  illustration  of  direct  writing  under  similar  circumstances
to  that  I  have  above  recorded,  i.e. : — On  a  sheet  of  paper  laid  under  the  table
with  a  pencil  on  it,  a  writing  was  heard  and  afterwards  found  on  the  paper.  It
was  again  a  surname,  that  of  the  owner  of  the  rooms,  and  the  word  "  God."  The

398

APPENDIX.

paper  was  afterwards  placed  in  a  very  curious  way  under  the  sofa  cushion,  the
leg  of  the  sofa  being  placed  on  the  cushion.  At  the  end  of  the  evening,  just  as
we  were  leaving,  my  friend  suggested  that  Mr.  Squire  might  have  some  steel
spring  in  hia  sleeve  by  which  the  writing  could  be  performed.  Mr.  Squire
kindly  bared  his  arm,  and  then  kneeling  on  the  floor  so  that  he  could  have  no
support  for  the  paper,  held  it  with  his  bared  arm  under  the  table.  The  words,
"  Good  night  "  were  immediately  written.  The  gas  was  then  burning,  and  my
friend  was  observing  Mr.  Squire,  but  could  detect  no  movement  of  his  body  or
arm  to  account  in  any  way  for  the  writing  being  produced  by  his  agency.

5.  On  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  April,  at  a  sdanco  in  Russell  Square,  the
phenomenon  of  direct  writing  was  again  repeated  on  a  piece  of  paper  placed
with  a  pencil  under  the  table.  Several  friends  having,  with  reference  to  my
former  experiences,  suggested  that  the  writing  might  be  produced  by  Mr.  Squire
with  the  agency  of  his  feet,  I  procured  his  consent,  at  the  commencement
of  this  experiment,  to  fasten  them  to  the  chair.  Immediately  his  hand  began  to
write  in  the  usual  manner  of  medium  writing,  and  he  wrote  "  Untie  the  medium's
feet :  If  this  evidence  will  not  satisfy  you  we  cannot  help  you,"  or  words  to
this  effect.  I  did  not  preserve  the  paper.  On  this  being  done,  the  writing
began,  and  the  words,  "  Lionel  David,"  were  written  in  the  same  cramped  hand
as  on  former  occasions.  By  rapping  and  the  alphabet,  it  afterwards  was  stated
that  this  name  and  spirit  (?)  was  the  brother  of  one  of  the  company  present  who
was  killed  at  Inkermann.

These  are  the  five  instances  in  which  I  have  witnessed  direct  writing  by  an
unseen  agent.  I  do  not  class  the  phenomena  among  the  most  convincing  of
those  which  I  have  seen.  The  possibilitt/  of  the  writing  being  done  by  a  trick
by  means  of  the  feet  of  the  medium,  although,  personally,  I  do  not  for  a  moment
suppose  that  that  is  the  case,  materially  weakens  the  value  of  this  direct  writing
as  narrative  evidence.  So  also  does  the  trashy  commonplace  nature  of  the
communication  when  made,  which  is  only  equalled  by  the  final  suggestion  in
the  editorial  note  appended  to  my  former  communication,  that  the  cause  of  this
wild  rubbish  being  communicated  to  me  was  the  condescension  of  some  high
angel  to  the  requirements  of  my  mind.  I  wish,  Mr.  Editor,  you  would  manage
to  convey  to  the  spirits  that  I  feel  equal  to  a  little  stronger  food !

Before  bringing  this  letter  to  a  conclusion,  I  would  desire  to  record  the  other
striking  physical  phenomena  which,  onthe  evening  of  the  4th  of  April,  I  witnessed
at  the  s6ance  in  Eussell  Square.  Mr.  Squire  twice  lifted  a  large,  heavy,  square
table  on  to  the  bed,  he  sitting  on  a  chair,  his  feet  tied,  and  one  hand  held  by  one
of  the  company.  He  also  twice,  in  a  manner  similar  to  what  occurred  in  my
own  house,  lifted  the  same  table  on  to  his  head,  and  that  of  a  person  standing
beside  him,  both  holding  the  table  at  one  point  only.  The  raps,  also,  were  loud
and  frequent,  the  table-cloth  was  twisted  round  my  head  ;  and,  again,  while  I
and  one  of  the  company  held  Mr.  Squire's  hand  in  a  circle,  oue  of  the  chairs
was  without  effort  or  noise  placed  upon  the  table.

There  is  a  strange  sameness  in  all  these  phenomena,  and,  what  is  bo  vexing,
they  appear  to  tend  to  nothing.  Neither  Mr.  Squire  nor  I  are  a  bit  wiser  than
we  were.  I  believed  in  the  spirit-world— the  communion  of  saints— long  before
I  ever  heard  of  Spiritualism,  and  this  science  or  art  has  added  actually  nothing
to  my  knowledge  on  the  subject.

INFORMATION  FOR  INVESTIGATOES.

399

Still,  the  undoubted  physical  phenomena  which  I  have  recorded  in  my
former  paper  already  referred  to,  are  wonderful  facts,  and  should  as  such  com-
mand a  diligent  investigation.  My  narrative,  I  am  glad  to  know,  has  attracted
the  notice  of  one  or  two  eminent  in  science.

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  Servant,

M.E.  CP.

HOW  TO  INVESTIGAT]3  SPIRITUAL  PHENOMENA.

By  J.  Burns.

It  is  a  common  hut  very  significant  saying  that  to  cook  a  hare  you  must
first  catch  it;  and  the  suggestion  thus  conveyed  indicates  the  prime
necessity  in  attempting  a  study  of  Spiritualism.  Reading  is  all  very
well,  for  the  experience  of  others  is  a  valuable  aid  to  progress,  hut  it  can
never  stand  in  place  of  experimental  knowledge.  Hence  the  cry,  when
.1  man  is  assailed  by  some  irrepressible  Spiritualist,  How  or  where  can  I
see  anything  of  it  ?  The  public  have  a  vague  impression  that  some  one
called  a  medium  is  necessary  to  elicit  the  phenomena,  and  that  his  assist-
.ince  can  only  be  obtained  by  those  who  have  the  money  to  pay  for  it.
This  notion  is  only  partly  true.  There  are  but  veiy  few  professional
mediums  in  England,  and  these  are  able  to  obtain  some  of  the  more
remarkable  and  special  phases  of  the  phenomena.  Once  they  were
sceptics,  and  quite  unconscious  of  the  wonderful  power  which  is  daily
being  exercised  in  their  presence.  Circumstances  introduced  them  to  a
circle,  or  enabled  the  manifestations  to  occur  spontaneously.  Their
friends  begged  of  them  to  sit  for  investigation  :  gradually  the  circle  of
inquirers  widened  till  the  mediums'  time  became  so  much  occupied  that
no  other  avocation  coiild  be  followed,  and  a  charge  had  to  be  made  to
provide  means  of  subsistence  and  to  afford  protection  fromthe  importunities
of  sitters.  In  this  way  all  public  mediums  have  been  produced.  The
function  of  mediumship  is  not  an  art  which  can  be  acquired  by  tuition  or
dexterity,  but  it  is  a  natm'al  endowment  dependent  upon  bodily  tempera-
ment, and  it  may  be  developed  by  exercise  and  propitious  circumstances.
Mediumship  thus  being  a  natural  faculty,  it  ought  to  be  of  frequent
occurrence  ;  and  so  it  is.  It  is  probable  that  there  is  a  latent  medium  of
one  sort  or  other  for  every  family  in  the  country.  Not  that  there  is  a
medium  in  every  home,  for  several  families  may  be  found  in  which  there
are  no  mediums,  while  the  members  of  another  family  ma}'  be  all  of  them
mediums.  Like  literary  talent,  mechanical  skill,  and  other  qualities  of
mind,  mediumship  is  not  by  any  means  found  equally  represented  in  each
individual.

Such  being  the  case,  and  mediumship  being  a  principle  inherent  in
man,  the  question  of  Spiritualism  is  capable  of  universal  solution.  Do

400

APPENDIX.

not,  then,  talce  any  man's  word  as  a  finality,  whether  he  declares  in  favour
of  Spiritualism  or  against  it.  Do  as  the  sub-committees  of  the  London
Dialectical  Society  did  (see  their  separate  reports),  sit  down,  observe  the
conditions,  and  produce  results  for  yourselves.  Spiritualism  is  simply  a
branch  of  science,  treating  of  an  unexplored  region  of  human  nature.
It  discusses  not  only  man's  relations  to  the  spirit-world,  but  demonstrates
what  man  is,  what  his  powers  are,  and  whither  he  is  bound.  If  man  is
immortal,  he  must  be*  so  in  accordance  with  natural  law ;  and  if  immor-
tality be  a  fact,  it  must  be  capable  of  discovery.  There  is  therefore  no
superstition  or  credulity  in  Spiritualism,  but  each  investigator  speaks  as
he  finds,  and  reasons  according  to  the  facts  presented  to  his  intellect.  To
remain  in  iguorance  of  any  department  of  man's  being  is  to  leave  the
field  to  the  occupation  of  that  grim  giant,  Superstition,  whose  two  heads,
Negation  and  Credulity,  by  their  withering  scowl,  reduce  to  tyranny,
slavery,  misdirection,  and  misery,  the  ignorant  denizens  of  an  otherwise
fair  world.  That  all  may  by  experiment  satisfy  themselves  of  the
existence  and  nature  of  spiritual  phenomena,  there  is  herewith  placed
freely  at  their  disposal —

RULES  AND  CONDITIONS  FOR  THE  SPIRIT-CIRCLE.

Atmospheric  Conditions. — The  phenomena  cannot  be  successfully
elicited  in  very  warm,  sultry  weather,  in  extreme  cold,  when  thunder  and
lightning  and  magnetic  disturbances  prevail,  when  the  atmosphere  is  very
moist,  or  when  there  is  much  rain,  or  storms  of  wind.  A  warm,  dry
atmosphere  is  best,  as  it  presents  tho  mean  between  all  extremes,  and
agrees  with  the  harmonious  state  of  man's  organism  which  is  proper  for
the  manifestation  of  spiritual  phenomena.  A  subdued  light  or  darkness
increases  the  power  and  facilitates  control.

Local  Conditions. — The  room  in  which  a  circle  is  held  for  develop-
ment or  investigation  should  be  set  apart  for  that  piu-pose.  It  should  be
comfortably  warmed  and  ventilated,  but  draughts  or  currents  of  air  shoidd
be  avoided.  Those  persons  composing  the  circle  should  meet  in  the  room
about  an  hour  before  the  experiments  commence  ;  the  same  sitters  should
attend  each  time,  and  occupy  the  same  places.  This  maintains  the
peculiar  magnetic  conditions  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  pheno-
mena.   A  developing  circle  exhausts  power,  or  uses  it  up.

Physiological  Conditions.— The  phenomena  are  produced  by  a  vital
force  emanating  from  the  sitters,  which  the  spirits  use  as  a  connecting
link  between  themselves  and  objects.  Certain  temperaments  give  oif
this  power ;  others  emit  an  opposite  influence.  If  the  circle  is  composed
of  persons  with  suitable  temperaments,  manifestations  will  take  place
readily  ;  if  the  contrary  be  the  case,  much  perseverance  will  be  necessiu-y
to  produce  results.  If  both  kinds  of  temperaments  are  present,  they
require  to  be  arranged  so  as  to  produce  harmony  in  tha  psychical  atmo-

RULES  FOR  THE  SPIRIT-CIRCLE.

401

sphere  evolved  from  them.  The  physical  manifestations  especially  depend
upon  temperament.  If  a  circle  does  not  succeed,  changes  should  be  made
in  the  sitters  till  the  proper  conditions  are  supplied.

Mental  Conditions. — All  forms  of  mental  excitement  are  detrimental
to  success.  Those  with  strong  and  opposite  opinions  should  not  sit
together ;  opinionated,  dogmatic,  and  positive  people  are  hetter  out  of  the
circle  and  room.  Parties  between  whom  there  are  feelings  of  envy,  hate,
contempt,  or  other  inharmonious  sentiment  should  not  sit  at  the  same
circle.  The  vicious  and  crude  should  be  excluded  from  all  such  experi-
ments. The  minds  of  the  sitters  should  be  in  a  passive  rather  than  an
active  state,  possessed  by  the  love  of  truth  and  of  mankind.  One
harmonious  and  fully-developed  individual  is  invaluable  in  the  formation
of  a  circle.

The  Cihcle  should  consist  of  from  three  to  ten  persons  of  both
sexes,  and  sit  round  an  oval,  oblong,  or  square  table.  Oane-bottomed
chairs  or  those  with  wooden  seats  are  preferable  to  stuffed  chairs.
Mediums  and  sensitives  should  never  sit  on  stuifed  chairs,  cushions,  or
sofas  used  by  other  persons,  as  the  influences  which  accumulate  in  the
cushions  often  aflect  the  mediums  impleasantly.  The  active  and  quiet,
the  fair  and  dark,  the  ruddy  and  pale,  male  and  female,  should  be  seated
alternately.  If  there  is  a  medium  present,  he  or  she  should  occupy  the
end  of  the  table  with  the  back  to  the  north.  A  mellow  mediumistic
person  should  be  placed  on  each  side  of  the  medium,  and  those  most
positive  should  be  at  the  opposite  corners.  No  person  should  be  placed
behind  the  medium.  A  cii'cle  may  represent  a  horseshoe  magnet,  with
the  medium  placed  between  the  poles.  Sometimes  a  single  individual
possesses  all  the  conditions  necessary  for  spirit-communion  in  his  or  her
own  person.  When  this  is  the  case  the  phenomena  may  be  obtained  by
such  a  person  sitting  alone.

Conduct  at  the  CmcLE. — The  sitters  should  place  their  hands  on
the  table,  and  endeavour  to  make  each  other  feel  easy  and  comfortable.
Agreeable  conversation,  singing,  reading,  or  invocation  may  be  engaged
in — anything  that  will  tend  to  harmonise  the  minds  of  those  present,  and
unite  them  in  one  purpose,  is  in  order.  By  engaging  in  such  exercises  the
circle  may  be  made  very  profitable  apart  from  the  manifestations.  Sitters
should  not  desire  anything  in  particular,  but  unite  in  being  pleased  to
receive  that  which  is  best  for  all.  The  director  of  the  circle  should  sit
opposite  the  medium,  and  put  all  questions  to  the  spirit,  and  keep  order.
A  recorder  should  take  notes  of  the  conditions  and  proceedings.  Manifes-
tations may  take  place  in  a  few  minutes,  or  the  circle  may  sit  many  times
before  any  result  occurs.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  well  to  change
the  positions  of  the  sitters,  or  introduje  new  elements,  till  success  is
achieved.  When  the  table  begins  to  tilt,  or  when  raps  occur,  do  not  be
too  impatient  te  get  answers  to  questions.    When  the  table  can  answei

402

APPENDIX.

questions  by  givin;*  three  tips  or  raps  for  "  Yes,"  and  one  for  "  No,"  it
may  assist  in  placing  the  sitters  properly.  The  spirits  or  intelligences
which  produce  the  phenomena  should  be  treated  with  the  same  courtesy
and  consideration  as  you  would  desire  for  yourselves  if  you  were  intro-
duced into  thB-  company  of  strangers  for  their  personal  benefit,  At  the
same  time,  the  sitters  should  not  on  any  account  allow  their  judgment
to  be  warped  or  their  good  sense  imposed  upon  by  spirits,  whatever  their
professions  may  he.    Reason  with  them  kindly,  firmly,  and  considerately.

Intehcoursb  with  Spieits  is  carried  on  by  various  means.  The
simplest  is  three  tips  of  the  table  or  raps  for  "  Yes,"  and  one  for  "  No."
By  this  means  the  spirits  can  answer  in  the  affirmative  or  negative.  By
calling  over  the  alphabet  the  spiiits  will  rap  at  the  proper  letters  to  con-
stitute a  message.  Sometimes  the  hand  of  a  sitter  is  shaken,  then  a  pencil
should  be  placed  in  the  hand,  when  the  spirits  may  write  hy  it  automati-
cally. Other  sitters  may  hecome  entranced,  and  the  spirits  use  the  vocal
organs  of  such  mediums  to  speak.  The  spirits  sometimes  impress
mediums  with  messages,  while  others  are  clairvoyant,  and  see  the  spirits,
and  messages  from  them  written  in  luminous  letters  in  the  atmosphere.
Sometimes  the  table  and  other  objects  are  lifted,  moved  from  place  to
place,  and  even  through  closed  doors.  Patiently  and  kindly  seek  for  tests
of  identity  from  loved  ones  in  the  spirit-world,  and  exercise  caution
respecting  spirits  who  make-exfravagant  pretensions  of  any  Hnd.

Befobe  proceeding  with  their  investigations,  inquirers  into  Spiritualism
should  correspond  with  Me.  Bubns,  Managing  Representative  of  the
Spiritual  Institution,  15,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.,  who  will
gladly  forward  a  packet  of  publications  and  useful  information  gratis.
Stamps  should  in  all  cases  he  enclosed  for  return  postage.  Deputations
of  mediums  or  lecturers  may  he  arranged  for  to  visit  any  locality  where
puhlic  meetings  or  seances  can  be  instituted.

INFOEMATION  EOE  INVESTIGATOES.
EuLES  TO  BE  Observed  at  tub  Spirit-Circle.  By  Emma  Hardinge.  Id.
On  THE  Spirit-Circle  AND  the  Laws  op  Mediumsiiip.  By  Emma  Hardinge.  Id.
What  is  Death  ?    By  Judge  Edmonds.  Id.

The  Philosophy  op  Death.    G-ives  a  clairvoyant  description  of  death-bed
scenes  and  the  condition  of  the  departed  spiri.    By  A.  J.  Davis.  2d.

Mediums  and  Mediujisiiip.   An  exhaustive  narrative  of  the  difficulties  that
beset  investigators,  and  how  to  avoid  them.    By  Thomas  Hazard.  2d.

A  Scientific  Yiew.  or  Modern  SriuiTUALisM.   By  T.  Grant.  6d.

What  op  the  Dead  ?    A  trance  address.    By  J.  J.  Morse.  Id.

The  Phenomena  op  Death.    By  J.  J.  Morse.  Id.

What  Spiritualism  has  Taught.    By  William  Howitt.  Id.

Where  are  the  Dead  ?  or,  Spiritualism  Explained.    By  Fritz.  3s.

Hints  por  the  Evidences  op  SriRiTUALisji.    By  M.P.    2s.  6d.

LONDON:  J.  BURNS,  16,  SOUTHAMPTON  ROW,  W.O.

(    403  )

INDEX.

— 0 —

Animal  Magnetism,  Mr.  Kobert  Cham-
bers' and  Professor  Gregory's
opinion  as  to  its  identity  with  the
force  producing  the  so-called  Spiri-
tual phenome'na,  246
AprAKiTiOiVs,  remarkable  accounts  of,
— by  Lord  Lindsay,  207 ;  the  Hon.

Mrs.  E  ,   128;    Mr.  Jencken,

120;  Mrs.  Eowcroft,  149;  Mr.  Yar-
ley,  160;  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  189,
192;  Miss  Blackwell,   329;  Mrs.
Honywood,  366 ;  Mr.  Percival,  222 ;
Spirit  hands  seen  or  touched,  134,
140,  199,  120,  211
Appointment  of  the  Committee,  iv
Arnold,  Mr.  Edwin,  Letter  from,  258
Atmosphere,  Spiritual  manifestations
influenced  by  the  condition  of  the,
111,  ll'l,  240
Blackwell,  Miss  Anna,  Evidence  of,

220 ;  paper  by,  326
BLANcnAED,  Mr.  E.  L.,  Evidence  of,  133
BoRTiiwiCE,  Lord,  Evidence  of,  160
BitADLAUGH,  Mr.  Chaiies,  Letter  from,
279

Burns,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  151 ;  paper
by,  355

Carpenter,  Dr.  W.  B.,  Letter  from,
266

Certificate  op  Baptism  discovered

by  the  aid  of  spirits,  179
Certificate  op  Death  discovered  by

the  aid  of  spirits,  215
Chambers,  Mr.  Eobert,  Letter  from

246

Chevalier,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  217

Childs,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  144
Clairvoyance,  Instances  of,  164,  185,
216,  360

Coleman,  Mr.  Benjamin,  Evidence  of,
137

Committee,   formation    and    list  of
members  of,   iv ;    Eeport   of,    1 ;
Minutes  of,  108
Conditions  for  the  obtaining  of  mani-
festations, 23-6,  110
Cox,  Mrs.,  Evidence  of,  194
Crosland,  Mr.  Newton,  Letter  from
245

Crystals,  Evidence  with  regard  to
184,  206

Cures  eflPected  by  spirit  aid,  152,  158
161, 194

Damiani,  Signer  G.,  Evidence  of,  194
Davey,  Dr.,  Letter  from,  232
Death,  Communication  respecting,  20
Devil,  the  Phenomena  ascribed  to  the

agency  of  the,  205,  217,  223
Dickens,  Charles,  alleged  apparition
of,  329

Difficulties  in  the  way  of  spiritual

communication,  110
Direct  Drawings  by  Spirits,  143,  150.
154

Dixon,  Dr.  J.,  Letter  from,  243
Douglass,  Miss,  Evidence  of,  209
Dreams,  Accounts  of  remarkable,  161
163

Electro-Biologic  Phenomena,  the
Conditions  of  '  Spiritual '  Manifesta-
tions unlike  those  considered  neces-
sary for  the  production  of,  25

,V

INDEX.

Elongations,  110,  207,  213
Eyke,  Mr.  Manuel,  Evidence  of,  179
Paulkneu,  Mr.,  Evideneo  of,  225
.■JS'AvnB,  M.  .L6on,  Letter  from,  280
Fire  Tests.  119,  208,  209,  3(51,  369
Flammahion,  M.   Camille,  Paper  by
338

Flowers  brought  by  Spirits,  163,  200,
372

Foster,   the   Medium,   Account  of

seance  with,  135
Fox,    Miss    Catherine,    Account  of

sSances  with,  165
Pbiswell,  Mr.  J.  Hain,  Evidence  of,

223

Fruit  brought  by  Spirits,  153
Fusedale,  Mr.  F.,  Letter  from,  255
Future  Events  foretold,  158,  162,

168,  177,  180,  201,  210,  337
Glendinning,   Mr.    Andrew,  Letter

from,  260
Glover,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  205
GuPPY,  Mr.  Samuel,  Notes  of  SSances

by,  371

GuPPT,  Mrs.,  Accounts  of  Seances  with

153-4,  277
Hardingb,  Mrs.  Emma,  Evidence  of,

109

Haunted  Houses,  Accounts  of,  260-1,
281

Hockley,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  184
Home,  Mr.  D.  D.,  Evidence  of,  187;

Accounts  of  Seances  with,  47,  127-8,

137,  144,  147, 150
HoNYWOOD,  Mrs.,  Evidence  of,  127
Houghton,  Miss,  Evidence  of,  153
HowiTT,  Mr.  William,  Letter  from,

235

Huxley,  Prof.,  Letter     from,  229

Second  letter  from,  278
Identity  of  Spirits,  122
INFORIUTION  afforded  by  Spirits,  proved

to  be  correct,  130,  167,  171,  179,

185,  196,  215,  358,  360
Lnfobmation,  proved  to  be  incorrect,

204

Jenckbn,  Mr.  H.  D.,  Paper  by,  115

Jones,  Mr.  Enmore,  Evidence  of,  145,

211,  212;  Letter  from,  242
Jones,  Miss,  Evidence  of,  1.00
KiDD,  Dr.  Charles,  Letter  from,  254
Levitations,  117,  214
Lewes,  Mr.    George  Henry,  Letter
from,  230;  Second  letter  from,  263
Lewis,  Mrs.  Lastitia,  Letter  from,  280
Lincoln,  President,  Account  of  siance

with,  112
Lindsay,  Lord,  Evidence  of,  206,  213
LowENTiiAL,  Mr.,  Evidence  of.  183
Lytton,  the  Et.  Hon.  Lord,  Letter
from,  240

Magician,  compared  to  the  modern

spiritual  medium,  240
Magnets  for  the  production  of  rapping
sounds  at    spiritual   seances,  Mr.
Faulkner's  evidence  respecting,  225
Marshall,  Mrs.,  Seances  with,  141,

179,  195,  204,  223
Musical  Instruments  played  by  Spirits,
118,  128,  138,  146,  148,  194,  198,
205,  210,  249,  327,  346
Napoleon  III.,  Seance  with,  related

by  Mr.  Home,  191
Objectivity  of  the  phenomena,  proofs

of  the,  17
Percival,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  222
Pianofortes,  Communications  made

by  raps  on  the  strings  of,  1 18
PoMAR,  the  Countess  de.  Paper  by,
338

Report  of  Committee,  1;  Sub-Com-
mittee, No.  1,7;  No.  2,  13;  No.  3,
39;  No.  4,  46;  No.  5,  47;  No.  6,"
50 ;  Presented  to  the  Council  of  the
London  Dialectical  Society,  227;
Eesolutions  of  the  Council  thereon,
iii;  Besolution  of  the  Committee  to
print  and  publish,  228
Eobertson,  Dr.  J.  Lockhart,  Evidence

of,  247,  396
RowCBOFT,  Mr.,  Evidence  of,  210
Eowcroft,  Mrs.,  Evidence  of,  149
Second  Sight,  Instances  of,  216,  217,
360

INDEX.

Sheriutt,  Mr.  Thomas,  Evidence  of,
152

Shorter,  Mr.  Thomas,  Evidence  of,

172;  Letter  from,  233
SiMKiss,  Mr.  T.  M.,  Evidence  of,  120
Simpson,  Mr.  J.  Hawkins,  Letter  from,

259

Spear,  Mr.  J.  Murray,  Evidence  of,
135

Spirit  Forms,  120
Spirit  Hands,  120,  199,  210,  211
Spirit  Laughter,  128,  334
Spirit  Voices,  118

Spirits,  Eeasons  for  believing  the  phe-
nomena to  be  produced  by,  167;
able  to  distinguish  colours,  371

Spiritualism,  Eeasons  for  belief  in,
201 ;  Arguments  in  favour  of,  338

Spiritualists,  Eminent  foreign,  352"

Squire,  Mr.  J".  E.  M.,  of  Boston,
seance  with,  related,  247

Sub-Committees,  Eeports  of,  No.  1,  7;
No.  2,  13;  No.  3,  39;  No.  4,  40;
No.  5,  47;  No.  G,  60;  minutes  of.
No.  1,  371 ;  No.  3,  392
Trance-mediumsiiip,  instances  of,  164;
dcti-imental  to  the  nervous  system,
131

Trollope,  Mr.  T.  Adolphus,  Letter

from,  277
Tyndall,  Prof.,  Letter  from,  265
Unconscious  Cerebration,  Exposition

of  the  Theory  of,  266
Varley,  Mr.  C.  F.,  Evidence  of,  157
Wilkinson,  Dr.  J.  J.  Garth,  Letter

from,  234
Wilkinson,  Mr.  W.  M.,  Letter  from,

230;  Second  letter  from,  246
Writing  by  an  unseen  agent,  248
Whiting  through  a  medium,  250,  356
ZoL-AVE- Jacob,  Signor  Damiani's  evi-
dence respecting,  198

PROSPECTUS  OP  THE
[Adteetisement.]

F»I^OSP»ECTXJS

OF  THE

PROGRESSIYE  LIBRAHY

AKD

SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION.

15,  SOUTHAMPTON  BOW,  LONDON,  W.G.

General  Objects.

The  Discovery  op  Tbtjth,  The  Diffusion  of  Truth,  and  the
Application  of  Truth  to  the  Welfare  of  Humanity.

Plan  of  Association  and  Action.
This  Institution  extends  its  influence  all  over  the  country.  At  the
Central  Office,  16,  Southajipton  Row,  are  rooms  for  Seances  and
other  experiments;  Classes,  Meetings,  Conferences;  Reading-Eooms
supplied  with  the  Literature  of  Spiritualism  from  all  parts  of  the
world;  a  Collection  of  Mediumistic  Drawings,  Paintings,  and  Writings;
Direct  Spirit-Drawings,  Paintings,  and  Writings;  Spirit-Photographs;
Portraits  of  distinguished  Mediums,  Spiritualists,  &c. ;  a  Reference  and
Circulating  Library ;  a  Publishing  Department  for  Books  and  Periodicals ;
an  Inquirer's  Department  for  affording  information  and  introducing
Investigators  to  Circles  and  experienced  Students  of  Spiritualism  in
London  and  various  parts  of  the  Country ;  an  Agency  for  the  appoint-
ment of  Lecturers,  Mediums,  &c.;  an  International  Agency  through
which  truthseekers  from  all  Countries  may  be  introduced,  receive  infor-
mation, and  to  which  they  may  have  letters  addressed  when  on  travel
in  this  country.

The  Spiritual  Institution  is  sustained  audits  work  performed  by
voluntary  Representatives,  who,  individually  or  in  association,  do  what
they  perceive  to  be  most  desirable  in  their  several  locahties.  INo
declaration  of  belief,  opinion,  or  method  of  procedure  is  demanded  of

SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION.

the  Representatives  of  the  Spiritual  Institution.  Each  person  is  free  to
follow  his  own  course,  the  Central  Institution  aftbrding  to  all  any  help
in  its  power ;  and  the  Representatives,  in  turn,  do  what  they  can  to
sustain  the  Institution.  The  system  of  organisation  is  thus :  District
Representatives  act  as  depositors,  secretaries,  or  "collectors  in  the  various
centres  of  progressive  activit}'.  Local  Representatives  in  a  similar
capacity  labour  in  a  smaller  sphere,  but,  when  necessary,  in  co-operation
with  other  Local  Representatives,  and  with  the  District  Representative ;
Individual  Representatives  work  in  combination  with  others  or  the  Local
Representative,  or  act  alone.  Thus  a  large  box  of  books  from  the  Pro-
gi'essive  Libraiy  may  be  sent  down  by  goods  train  to  the  District
Representative,  who,  at  a  district  conference,  or  otherwise,  can  divide
them  amongst  the  various  Local  Representatives  of  his  district,  and  these
again  to  Individual  Representatives,  who  are  at  liberty  to-  introduce  them
to  their  friends  or  inquirers.  By  this  means  valuable  works  may  be  read
extensively,  and  the  carriage  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Through  these
Representatives  works  may  be  sold  or  subscribed  for,  funds  contributed,
arrangements  for  Lecturers,  Mediums,  and  Demonstrations  made,  and
f  the  cause  of  progress  in  general  sustained  and  promoted.

Library  Department.

The  Progressive  Library  has  been  established  upwards  of  ten  years,
and  now  contains  a  very  large  collection  of  works  on  Spiritualism  and
the  nature  of  man  generally.  These  works,  which  are  being  daily
augmented,  may  be  thus  classified  : —

Physiology,
Phrenology,
Physiognomy,
Hygiene,
Hydbopathy,
Dietetics,
Tempebance,
Education,
Sociology,
Woman's  Rights,

BlOGBAPHY,

Travels,

POETBY,

Fiction,

General  Science,
Works  oe  Reference,
Miscellaneous  Literature,
Progressive  Periodicals,
,  Works  in  Foreign  Languages.

Spiritualism,

The  Habmonial  Philosophy,

Mesmerism,

s  wedenb  orgianism,

Sh^vkerism,

Reincarnation,

Magic,

Astrology,

Apparitions,

Dreams,

Angelology,

Demonology,

Antiquity,

Mythology,

Cojipabative  Theology,
Philosophy,

Biblical  Histoby  and  Criticism,
Chbistology,

PROSPECTUS  OF  THE

These  works  are  available  to  the  public  on  the  following  terms : —

Individual  Subscription. — For  the  sum  of  £1  Is.  per  annum,
two  volumes  are  allowed  to  the  reader  at  one  time,  to  be  changed  as  often
as  desirable,  with  the  privilege  of  introducing  the  works  to  friends  and
inquirers.  This  subscription  also  entitles  to  the  use  of  the  Eeading-Room,
and  such  open  conferences  as  may  be  held  from  time  to  time.  The
subscription  maj',  in  all  cases,  be  paid  in  half-yearly  or  quarterly  instal-
ments.   The  monthly  subscription  is  2s. ;  weekly,  6d.

LocAi,  SuBSCniPTiON. — For  the  sum  of  £3  3s.  per  annum,  circles  and
small  associations  of  readers  and  investigators  may,  through  a  Local
Representative,  obtain  ten  volumes  at  a  time,  to  be  changed  as  often  as
necessary.  This  subscription  entitles  all  those  who  participate  in  it  to
the  use  of  the  Readiug-Room,  and  all  other  personal  advantages  which
have  been  enumerated  in  the  Plan  of  Association  and  Action.

District  Subscription. — For  the  sum  of  £5  5s.  per  annum,  twenty
volumes  may  be  obtained  at  a  time,  to  be  changed  when  occa.sion  requires.
By  increasing  the  subscription  the  number  of  works  may  be  extended  in
nroportion,  and  thus  a  district  may  be  supplied  with  books  through  the
District  Representative.  AH  those  who  contribute  towards  the  subscrip-
tions are  entitled  to  all  advantages  accruing  from  association  with,  the
Spiritual  Institution.

In  all  cases  the  carriage  of  books,  backward  and  forward,  is  payable
by  the  subscriber ;  and  when  strangers  apply  for  books  it  will  be  necessary
to  make  a  deposit  to  the  full  value  of  the  works  thus  obtained.  Every
effort  is  made  to  accommodate  subscribers  in  the  deliveiy  or  forwarding
of  their  parcels.  Parcels  may  be  left  to  order  or  for  enclosure  at  any
part  of  London  ;  and  as  many  persons  in  the  provinces  have  friends  wlio
receive  parcels  of  merchandise  from  London,  books  may  be  enclosed
therein,  which  would  thus  reduce  the  carriage  to  the  lowest  possible
amount.

The  usual  length  of  time  which  a  book  may  be  retained  is  a  fortnight,
or  one  month  in  the  country ;  but,  unless  the  works  are  new  or  rare,  or
in  great  demand,  they  may  be  kept  longer  if  usefully  employed.  Sub-
scribers are  earnestly  solicited  not  to  retain  works  lying  idle  in  their
possession.

Publishing  Department.

In  this  department  effort  is  made  to  produce  in  a  cheap  and  popular
form  Progressive  and  Humanitarian  literature  in  all  branches.  The
Institution  is  represented  by  a  monthly  magazine.  Human  Nature,  and  a
weekly  newspaper,  the  Medium  and  Daybreak;  and  the  greatest
facilities  are  ailbrded  for  the  circulation  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine,
Spiritualist,  Christian  Spiritualist,  Brittan's  Quarterly  Review  of  Spiritual

SPIEITUAL  INSTITUTION.

Science,  Banner  of  Lu/Jit,  Religio-PhilosoiMcal  Journal,  Revue  Spiritd,
Harhinyer  of  Liyht,  and  all  other  publications  of  a  cognate  teudency,
whether  issued  in  England  or  abroad.

The  grand  aim  of  the  Publishing  Department  is  to  supply  to  the
Representatives  of  the  Institution — and  through  them  to  the  public —
useful  and  instructive  'works  at  cost  price,  giving  Representatives  all  the
advantages  of  proprietary  association  without  the  responsibilities.  Very
little  has  been  done  in  this  branch  as  yet ;  but  a  few  small  publications
have  been  issued,  in  some  cases  several  hundred  per  cent,  cheaper  than
previous  editions.  "  The  Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the
Dialectical  Society  "  is  the  first  work  that  has  received  treatment  in  the
form  proposed,  and  the  attempt  has  met  with  great  success.  The  sub-
scription list  shows  that  nearly  2,400  copies  were  subscribed  for  before
the  day  of  publication.  The  series  will  be  continued  by  certain  works
of  Professor  Gregory,  Andrew  J ackson  Davis,  Hudson  Tuttle,  and  other
standard  progressive  writers.

The  system  of  association  with  the  Institution  is  so  simple  and  elastic
that  anyone  may  become  a  Representative,  and  participate  in  all  the
jidvautages  thus  derived  as  inclination  or  convenience  may  suggest.

Sale  of  Progressive  Literature,

It-  has  been  found  exceedingly  difScult  in  many  parts  of  the  country
to  obtain  periodicals  or  works  on  Spiritualism  and  other  progressive
subjects.  The  great  influence  of  the  various  sects  on  public  opinion  has,
in  many  instances,  prevented  booksellers  and  newsagents  fi-om  exhibiting
or  even  procuring  such  literature.  The  Representative^  of  the  Spiritual
Institution  will,  at  all  times,  do  very  much  to  promote  the  cause  by
endeavouring  to  secure  one  or  more  booksellers  or  newsagents  in  each
place,  to  exhibit  the  literatm-e  and  push  its  sale.  A  very  excellent  way
is  to  order  one  or  more  copies  of  the  Medium  weekly  at  every  railway
bookstall.  Where  there  is  a  difiiculty  in  obtaining  supplies,  the  fact
should  be  reported  to  the  Managing  Representative  of  the  Spiritual
Institution,  who  would  endeavour  to  secure  better  arrangements.

Much  good  has  been  done  by  Representatives,  Lecturers,  Mediums,
and  Secretaries,  acting  as  agents  for  the  literature,  by  which  means
many  subscribers  have  been  secured  for  periodicals,  and  a  quantity  of
other  works  sold,  A  bookstall  should  be  a  feature  of  every  meeting
for  the  advocacy  of  Spiritualism.  Those  who  have  the  desire  to  help
in  this  way,  and  decline  to  become  agents  themselves,  may  make  an
efibrt  to  secure  customers  for  the  bookseller  or  other  agent  who  supplies
the  literatm-e.  When  new  works  are  announced  on  the  subscription
prmciple  at  cost  price,  Representatives  of  the  Spiritual  Institution  can
at  all  times  render  eminent  service  by  endeavom-ing  to  secure  as  many
subscribers  as  possible  for  such  works.

PEOSPECTUS  OP  THE

Agency  for  Lecturers,  Mediums,  &e.

Local  and  district  associations  can  very  muck  economise  the  necessary
expenses  attendant  on  seeming  visits  of  Lecturers,  Teachers,  or  Mediums,
by  getting-  up  a  series  of  meetings  in  places  near  to  eacli  other,  thus
iiffording  the  lecturer  a  progressive  tour.  Through  the  Medium,  the
weekly  organ  of  the  Institution,  the  movements  of  lecturers  and
mediums  are  continually  recorded ;  and  on  application  either  to  these
persons  or  to  the  Institution,  special  information  may  be  at  any  time
obtained.  A  list  of  speakers  and  mediums  is  published  from  time  to
time,  and  may  he  had  on  application.

The  Spiritiial  Institution  and  Organisation.

The  Spiritual  Institution  does  not  in  any  vray  attempt  to  control  the
action  of  individuals  as  to  how  they  shall  combine  or  carry  on  their  local
business.  Its  aim  is  to  help  all  who  choose  to  avail  themselves  of  its
advantages,  and  enable  local  associations  to  help  themselves,  rather  than
cause  them  to  be  dependent  upon  it.  As  each  Individual  Kepresentative
of  the  Spiritual  Institution  is  of  equal  grade  and  importance  with  the
Managing  Eepresentative,  there  is  no  tendency  to  centralisation  and
officialism  in  the  plan  of  action.  When  it  can  be  made  useful,  honorary
deputations  from  the  Central  Institution  visit  localities  and  assist  in  the
work  of  organisation.  Travelling  Eepresentatives,  in  like  manner,  visit
cii-cles  and  societies,  aid  in  promoting  a  knowledge  of  Spiritualism,
and  endeavour  to  bring  about  a  more  intimate  relationship  between  Local
and  Individual  Representatives  and  the  centre.

How  is  the  Spiritual  Institution  Supported?

At  present  the  working  of  the  Spiritual  Institution  incurs  a  deficiency
of  about  £500  per  annum.  This  has  been  in  no  single  year  met  by
subscriptions  from  other  Spiritualists,  hence  a  very  heavy  amount  of
responsibility  has  devolved  upon  the  Managing  Representative.  A  few
wealthy  Spiritualists  have  rendered  indispensable  service  by  making  an
annual  honorary  subscription  or  donation  to  the  funds  of  the  Institution.
This  is  a  department  of  effort  which  is  capable  of  very  great  extension,
as  only  a  small  proportion  of  wealthy  Spiritualists  contribute  anything
to  this  phase  of  the  work.  The  support  of  the  Institution  has  been  very
much  neglected  by  Spiritualists,  while  all  have  been  free  to  partake  of  its
advantages.  Every  Spiritualist  and  friend  of  Progress  should  make  it
a  point  to  subscribe  something  to  the  funds  of  the  Institution  annually,
and  those  who  are  adapted  for  the  work  should,  as  Local  Representatives,
aid  in  collecting  such  subscriptions  from  their  neighbours.

The  plan  of  the  Spiritual  Institution  is  such  that  it  can  give  useful
activity  to  all,  and  at  the  same  time  make  its  operations  self-supporting.
In  the  meantime,  while  the  work  of  Progress  is  in  its  early  develop-

SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION.

ment,  self-sacrifice  is  rendered  necessary,  which  it  is  desiralle  should
be  participated  in  by  as  man)'  as  possible,  so  as  to  lighten  the  burden.
Those  who  cannot  subscribe  money  may  give  equally  valuable  aid  by
becoming  Representatives,  and  ushig  their  influence  to  procure  sub-
scribers for  new  works,  by  becoming  Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications
generally,  or  by  co-operating  with  such  as  are  Agents.  The  work  may
also  be  promoted  by  obtaining  books  from  the  Progressive  Library,  and
bringing  them  before  friends  and  inquirers.  Be  it  remembered  by  all
that  the  object  of  the  Spiritual  Institution  is  not  so  much  to  demand
the  means  of  existence  as  to  work,  and  aid  others  in  working,  for  the
enlightenment  of  the  people.

Grattiitous  Distribution  of  Literature.

The  Spiritual  Institution,  through  its  Representatives,  endeavours  to
bi'ing  the  claims  of  the  movement,  through  its  literature,  before  every
inhabitant  of  the  country  capable  of  reading.  Tracts  and  publications
of  aU  kinds  and  sizes  have  been  prepared  for  general  circulation  and
particular  cases.  Occasionally  special  numbers  of  the  Medium  are  pre-
pared for  the  reading  of  investigators  or  special  classes.  Of  these
numbers  as  many  as  25,000  copies  have  been  issued  in  one  edition.
On  application  to  the  Managing  Representative  supplies  of  literatm-e
may  be  obtaiaed  for  distribution  at  meetings  or  lectures  at  a  nominal
price,  or  gratis.  There  is  a  fund  for  the  supply  of  gratuitous  literature,
to  which  those  who  can  afford  it  are  invited  to  contribute.  Through
this  department  nearly  100,000  copies  of  the  Medium  have  alone  been
circulated.  "Rules  for  the  Spirit-Circle,"  and  other  information  for
investigators  is  being  supplied  per  post  daily,  whether  a  remittance  has
been  sent  for  the  same  or  not.

Progressive  Literature  in  Public  Libraries.

Useful  work  has  been  accomplished  in  placing  important  works  in
public  libraries.  For  this  purpose  Mrs.  Hardiuge's  "History  of  Spiri-
tualism," and  the  "  Dialectical  Report,"  have  been  supplied  to  subscribers
at  a  very  low  price,  and  copies  have  been  placed  in  a  great  many
libraries.  Other  useful  works  may  be  treated  in  a  similar  manner  as
they  appear.  Local  Representatives  should  see  that  the  weekly  and
monthly  publications  are  supplied  to  reading-rooms  and  coffee-houses
everywhere.  The  Medium  and  Human  Nature  in  the  reading-rooms
at  the  Crystal  Palace  have  found  hundreds  of  readers,  and  done  an
important  work.

Spiritualism  and  the  Press.

Copies  of  periodicals  may  be  with  great  propriety  handed  in  to  the
editors  of  local  papers.  On  certain  occasions  the  Medium  has  been  sent
to  every  newspaper  in  Britain.    When  public  meetings  are  held  the

PROSPECTUS  OP  THE  SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION.

representatives  of  the  local  papers  should  be  invited.  Wlien  the  subiect
18  brought  up  in  the  local  papers  Representatives  of  the  Spiritual  Insti-
tution do  well  to  write  letters  defending  tlie  cause.  Writers  to  the
newspapers  should  in  aU  cases  intimate  that  information  for  investigators
may  be  obtained  gratis  at  the  Spiritual  Institution,  on  receipt  of  a  stamp
for  postage.  When  Local  Representatives  are  not  competent  to  handle
their  opponents  aid  will  be  afforded  from  the  Central  Institution.  Send
oU  papers  containing  reviews  or  articles  on  Spiritualis>n  to  the  Manag-
ing Representative  of  the  Spiritual  Institution,  and  mark  the  places
where  such  articles  occur.

AU  communications  should  be  addressed  to  Mr.  J.  Burns,  Managing
Representative,  15,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.

"       THE  MEDIUM  AND  DAYBREAK,

A  WEEKLY  JOUnKAL  DEVOTED  TO  THE

HISTORY,  PHEFOMEM,  PHILOSOPHY,  AND  TEACHINGS  OP  SPIRITUALISM,

PUBLISHED  EVERY  FKIDAY.— PRICE  ONE  PENNY.

/  THE  "MEDIUM"  IS  THE  WEEKLY  OEGAN"

Of  that  movement  which  is  at  present  exciting  such  universal  attention,  and,  as  such
represents  Spiritualism   ully  in  every  respect.    The  astounding  nature  of  the  pl  enoS
H  fl'-^^g^^^'^e  importance  of  the  alleged  communion  with  the  spirf"°",T
V"^rP""  ''P  f*'  with  genuine  interest  to  all  classes  of  minds,  whetlier  atiracted
Zsa^  tt  mind  of 'manf  '^"^  P^'"^"""''  considerations  which

The  topics  treated  may  he  thus  classified :

Eeports  of  Seances  with  the  most  powerful  mediums,  and

detailed  accounts  of  remarkable  phenomena.

BeHgious  and  Moral  Teachings  communicated  by  spirits.
Descriptions  of  the  Spirit- World  given  in  important  spirit-

messages.  ^

Eeports  of  Leetm-es  on  SpirituaHsm,  given  by  normal  speakers,

or  those  under  spirit-influence.  ,  r  '

Biographical   Sketches  of  Eminent  Men,  illustrating  the

universality  of  inspiration  from  the  spirit-world.

Expositions  of  Miracles  and  Bible-Narratives,  solving  the

most  perplexing  difficulties  that  have  beset  divines,  and  showing  that  the  science
of  Spiritualism  can  alone  explain  the  Spiritual  woi  ks  of  the  past.

Scientific  Explanations  as  to  how  the  phenomena  are  produced.
Instructions  to  Investigators  how  to  obtain  the  phenomena,

and  comunicate  with  the  spirit-world.  Directions  for  the  development  of  Medium-
ship.   Questions  and  objections  freely  and  kindly  answered.

Reports  of  Progress  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  from

foreign  lands.  Extracts  from  Periodicals,  Reviews  of  Books,  and  Literary  Announce-
ments—in  short,  the  Medium  supplies  all  that  can  interest  an  investigator  into
the  deeply-important  and  instructive  suljiject  of  man's  immortal  existence.

The  MEDIUM  is  a  paper  entirely  free  from  creed  or  sect.  All

lovers  of  religious  liberty  and  spiritual  progress  are  earnestly  invited  to  throw  in  their
lot  with  the  Medium,  which  is  tuoeoughly  free,  i.ibkual,  and  independent,
and  appeals  only  to  such  minds,  and  respectfully  solicits  their  kind  patronage  and
co-operation.

Published  by  J.  BtriiNs,  Spiritual  Institution,  15,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.

SMALL  PUBLICATIONS  ON  SPIRITUALISIVI,

CONTAINING

USEFUL  INFORMATION  FOR  INVESTIGATORS
And  adapted  for  General  Circulation.

BY  EMMA  HAEDINGE.

Rules  to  be  Observed  at  the  Spimt-Ciiicle.  Id.
On  the  SpiRiT-CracLE  and  the  Laws  oe  JMeditjmship.  Id.
The  Obeed  of  the  Spirits  and  the  Inelhence  of  the  Religion
OF  Spiritualism.  Id.

ADDRESSES  DELIVERED  IN  THE  TRANCE,  BY  J.  J.  MORSE.

"What  op  the  Dead  ?  Id.

The  Phenomena  op  Death.  Id.

SpmiTUAHSM  as  an  Ajd  and  Method  op  Human  Progress.  Id.

ORATIONS  ON  SPIRITUALISM  BY  DR.  SEXTON.

No.  1. — The  Claims  of  Modern  Spiritualism  upon  Public
Attention.  Id.

No.  2. — ^How  I  became  a  Spiritualist.  Id.

No.  3. — Spirit-Mediums  and  Conjurers.  2d.

No.  4. — The  Philosophy  op  Modern  Spiritualism,  Compared
"WITH  THE  Various  other  Theories  -which  have  been
Invented  to  Account  for  the  Phenomena.  Two  orations
delivered  at  the  Crystal  Palace.    2d.    Also  by  the  same  author,

The  Psychology  of  Macbeth.  3d.

God  and  Immortality  viewed  in  the  light  of  Modern
Spiritualism.  6d.

The  Gospel  and  Spiritualism  :  Showing  how  both  rest  on  the  same
fomidation.  By  a  Clergyman  of  the  Chm-ch  of  England,  id. ;
2s.  per  100.

Theodore  Parker  in  Spirit-Life.  A  Narrative  of  Personal
Experience  given  inspirationally  to  Dr.  Willis.  Id.  This  little
work  gives  a  good  view  of  life  in  the  spirit-world.

What  is  Death  ?    By  Judge  Edmonds.  Id.

The  Philosophy  op  Death.  Gives  a  clairvoyant  description  of
death-bed  scenes  and  the  condition  of  the  departed  spirit,  by
A.  J.  Davis.  2d,

LIST  OF  WOEKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM.

Mediums  and  Mediumship.  An  exhaustive  narrative  of  the  difficulties
that  heset  investigators,  and  how  to  avoid  them.  By  Thonia.s
Hazard.  2d.

Is  Spihituai.ism  the  Wouk  of  Demons.    A  reply  to  a  Sermon  by

the  Rev.  J.  Jones,  Liverpool,  by  T.  Brevior.  2d.
Concerning  IVIihacles.   By  T.  Brevior.  3d.

A  Scientific  View  of  Modehn  Si'iritualism.  By  T.  Grant._  Con-
taining a  brief  history  of  the  origin  of  Modern  Spiritualism ;  a
description  of  twenty-four  varieties  of  mediumship  ;  a  summary  of
remaricable  phenomena,  and  doctrinal  considerations  and  principles
deducible  therefrom.  Gd.

What  Sptritualism  has  Taught.  By  William  Howitt.  Id.
Supplies  valuable  theological  arguments.

My  Expemences  of  SrmiTUAi.iSM.    By  Mi-s.  BeiT}'.  2d.

Heaven  Opened  ;  on.  Messages  to  the  Bereaved  from  their
Little  Ones  in  Glory.  Through  the  Mediumship  of  F.  .T.  T.
Parts  I.  and  II.,  in  cloth,  9d.  each.  "Part  I.  in  wrapper,  Gd.

Human  Immort^vility  Proved  by  Facts.  Being  the  Report  of  a
Two-Nights'  Debate  on  "  Modern  Spiritualism  "  between  C.  Brad-
laugh,  Secularist,  and  J.  Burns,  Spiritualist.  6d.

What  is  Religion  ?  A  Tract  for  the  Times.  By  Thomas  Brevior.
Author  of  "  The  Two  Worlds,"  &c.    Cloth,  Is. ;  paper,  Gd.

Rise  and  Progress  of  Spleitualism:  in  England.  By  Benjamin
Coleman.  Is.

Spiritual  Tracts.    By  Judge  Edmonds.  Gd.

Human  Immortality  :  Viewed  in  connection  with  Modern  Spiritualism,
and  Kindred  Topics.    By  WiUiam  Smitton.  Gd.

SEED  CORN:
A  New  Series  of  Tracts  on  Spiritualism.    4  pages ;  Is.  per  100.
No.  1. — Mathematic.vl  Spiritualism.

No  2.— Spiritu/Vlism  and  the  Gospel  of  Jesus.   By  J.  Burns;
'  showing  the  Parallel  between  the  Life  and  Teachmgs  of  Jesus,  and
Principles  of  Spiritualism.
No.  3.— The  Principles  of  Modern  Spiritualism.    By  A.  E.
Newton.

No  4  —What  is  Spiritualism  ?  Explaining  the  Philosophy  of  the
Phenomena,  Rules  and  Conditions  for  the  Spirit-circle  ;  and  ample
information  for  Investigators  desirous  of  obtaining  the  Manifesta-
tions.

No  5  —The  Creed  of  the  Spirits.    The  Ten  Spiritual  Command-
■  ments,  and  the  Ten  Laws  of  Right,  given  through  Emma  Hardmge.
No.  6.— Dr.  Sexton's  Conversion  to  Sphiitualism.
No.  7.— Facts  Concerning  Sphiitualism.    By  a  Clergyman.
No.  8;— Advice  to  Investigators.   By  Gerald  Massey.

Other  numbers  in  preparation.

LIST  OF  WORKS  ON  SPIRITUALISxM.

WOEKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM.

For  a  more  complete  list  see  the  Catalogue  of  the  Proyressive  Library.  6(1.

Apparitions  ;  an  Essay  Explanatory  of  Old  Facts,  and  a  New  Tlieory.

By  Newton  Orosslaud.    2s.  6d.
AnCiVNA  OF  SriRiTUALiSM,  The.    By  Hudson  Tuttle.    8s.  6d.
Concerning  SpinixuALisii.     By  Gerald  Massey.     Wrapper,   Is.  ;

artistic  cloth,  2s.

Debat.able  Land  Between  this  World  and  the  Next.  By  R.
Dale  Owen.  9s.

Experimental  Investigations  op  Psychic  Force.  By  William
Grookes,  F.R.S.,  &c.  Is.  This  work  is  illustrated  by  drawings  of
mechanical  contrivances  to  prove  that  the  manifestations  really  take
place.

Footfalls  on  the  Bottndary  of  Another  World.  By  R.  D.  Owen.
7s.  6d.

Gldipses  of  a  Brighter  Land.    A  Series  of  Spirit-Messages  through

the  Mediumship  of  a  Lady.    23.  6d.
Hints  for  the  Evidences  of  Spiritttalism.    By  M.  P.    2s.  6d.
History  of  the  Siipernatur^vl  in  all  Ages  and  Nations.  By

William  Howitt.    2  vols.  ISs.
Incidents  in  My  Life.    By  D.  D.  Home.    Vol.  II. ;  10s.  6d.
Man:  Considered  PHY-siC/iXLY,  Morally,  Intellectually",  and

Spiritually.    By  J.  W.  Jackson,  M.A.I.    In  four  parts  ;  Is.  each.

Bound  in  cloth,  5s.
Modern  American  Spiritualism.    A  Twenty  Years'  Record  of  the

Communion  between  Earth  and  the  World  of  Spirits.    By  Emma

Hardinge.    Cloth,  los.    Fully  Illustrated.
Outlines  of  Ten  Ye.vrs'  Investigation  op  Splritualisim.    By  T.  P.

Barkas.    Is.  6d.    A  calm  and  dispassionate  statement.

Planchette  ;  or  The  Despair  of  Science.    By  Epes  Sargent.  6s.
Planchette  Mystery,  The  :  being  a  Candid  Inquiry  into  the  Natiu'e,

Origin,  Import,  and  Tendencies  of  Modern  Signs  and  Wonders.

Ne-w  York,  Is.

Seers  of  the  Ages,  The  ;  or  Spiritualism  Past  and  Present.  By  J.  M.
Peebles.  5s.

Spiritualism:  a  Narrative  with  a  Discussion.  By  P.  P.  Alex-
ander, M.A.  Is.

Spiritu.vlism  answered  by  Science.    By  Serjeant  Cox.    2s.  6d.

Spiritual  Pllgrim,  The  :  A  Biography  of  J.  M.  Peebles.  By  Rev.  J .
0.  Barrett.    7s.  6d.

Temple,  The.    A  New  Work  by  A.  .1.  Davis.    7s.  6d.

Two  Worlds,  The  :  The  Natural  and  the  Spiritual.  Their  Inti
mate  Connection  and  Relation,  illustrated  by  Examples  and  Tesli
monies,  Ancient  and  Modern.    By  Thomas  Brevior.  Os.

What  am  I  ?   By  Serjeant  Cox.    Vol.  I.,  8s.  6d.

Where  are  the  Dead  ?  or  Spiritualism  Explained.    By  Fritz.  3s.

Of  valuable  WorJcs,  at  greatly  reduced  prices,

TO  TEE  EEADERS  OF  "  HUMAN  NATURE."

PoR  several  years  the  plan  has  been  adopted  of  issuing  with  each
number  of  "Human  Nature"  a  Certificate  or  Coupon,  on
presentation  of  which  at  the  olRce  a  valuable  work  specified
thereon  may  be  obtained  at  a  nominal  price.

'.'HUMAN  NATURE,"

Now  in  its  Seventh  Annual  Volume,  is  a  Monthly  Magazine  of
ZoistiQ  Science  and  Popular  Anthropology,  in  which  the  question
of  Spiritualism  is  discussed  in  a  philosophical  and  scientific  spirit
in  connection  with  Phrenology,  Mesmerism,  the  Laws  of  Health,
Social  Science,  Ethnology,  Comparative  Mythology,  and  other
departments  of  Anthropological  inquiry.  The  Annual  Subscrip-
tion is  7s.,  post  fi'ee,  or  6d.  per  number  tlu-ough  booksellers.

HUMAN   NATURE,   VOL.  1.

Published  in  1867.    Bound  in  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

This  Volume  is  ilkistrated  by  several  Portraits,  and  contains  the
commencement  of  J.  W.  Jackson's  interesting  papers  on  "The  Myths  of
Antiquity,"  and  a  fjreat  variety  of  articles  on  Spiritualism,  Phrenology,
Health,  and  general  intelligence.

HUMAN   NATURE.   VOL.  2.

Published  in  1868.    Cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

Contains  "Scientific  and  Moral  Aspects  of  Spiritualism,"  by  J.  W.  Jack-
son ;  with  reply,  by  A.  Leighton.  "  The  Myths  of  Antiquity,"  by  J.  W.
Jaciison ;  "  Science  of  Man,"  by  Charles  Bray ;  a  series  of  interesting
papers  describing  spiritual  manifestations,  through  the  mediumship  of
Mr.  D.  D.  Home  ;  and  a  great  variety  of  papers  on  Physiology,  Phreno-
logy, Spiritualism,  and  progressive  subjects  generally.

The  following  works  offered,  with  numbers  oonsfituting  this  volume,  are  yet
on  sale,  and  may  be  obtained  at  the  reduced  price  on  sending  in  the  coupo7is,  or
by  purchasing  the  respective  numbers  : —

Scepticism  and  Spiritualism ;  or  the  Esppi-iences  of  a  Sceptic.  Origi-
nally published  at  7s.  Qd.,  offered  with  the  May  number  of  this  year,  at
6d.,  post  free,  9d.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  Is.  3d.

Letters  on  Men's  Wattire  and  Development.  By  H.  Martineau
and  H.  G.  Atkinson.  Published  at  lOs.  6d. ;  with  the  October  No..  3s.  6d.,
post  free,  4s.    The  number  and  this  work  together,  post  free,  4s.  6d.

Spiritualism,  its  Facts  and  Phases ;  with  facsimiles  of  Spirit-writ-
ing. By  J.  H.  Powell.  168  pages.  Cloth,  published  at  28.  Sold  with
the  November  number  at  9d. ;  post  free,  lid.  The  number  and  Ibis
work  together,  post  free,  Is.  5d.

LIST  OP  WORKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM.

HUMAN   NATURE.   VOL.  3.

Published  in  1869.     Cloth,  price  7s.  Od.

Contains  remarkable  manifestations  through  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Home ;
Evidence  be'bra  the  Dialectical  Society ;  a  series  of  papers  on  "  Light
and  its  Correlates,"  by  H.  D.  Jencken  ;  "Myths  of  Antiquity  "  and  other
articles,  by  J.  VV.  Jackson ;  the  commencement  of  a  series  of  papers  on
"  Ee-incaruation,"  by  Miss  Anna  Black  well;  and  a  variety  of  miscellaneous
papers.

The  first  three  volumes  of  Htjmak  Natuhe  contain  the  whole  story,  "  The  Ideal
Attained."

The  Alpha.    By  E.  N.  Dennys.    Cloth,  370  pagea,  3s.  6d.,  offered  with

the  February  number  of  this  year  at  2s.,  post  free,  2s.  6d.    The  number

and  work  together,  post  free,  3s.
Physiology  for  Schools.    By  Mrs.  Bray.    104  pages,  published  at  Is.,

with  the  March  number  7d.,  post  fi-ee,  8d.  The  number  and  work  together,

post  free.  Is.  3d.

A  Stellar  Key  to  the  Summer  Land.  By  A.  J.  Davis.  Illustrated
with  engravings  of  celestial  scenery,  published  at  53.,  with  the  April  No.
2s.  6d.,  post  free,  3s.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  3s.  7d.

Vital  Law.  Published  at  6d.,  with  the  May  nuhiber  4d.,  post  free,  4jd.
The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  lid.

Musical  Gymnastics  for  Men,  Women,  and  Children.  125

illustrations,  published  at  Is.,  with  the  June  number  8d.,  post  free,  9^A.
The  number  and  work  together,  post  free.  Is.  4|^d.

A  Woman's  Work  in  Water-Cure  and  Sanitary  Education.

By  Mrs.  Nichols.  Published  at  Is.,  with  the  July  number  8d.,  post  iree,
9jd.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  Is.  4d.

Have  you  been  Vaccinated,  and  what  Protection  is  it
Against  Small-Pox.  By  Dr.  Collins.  6d.,  with  the  September
No.  3d.j  post  free,  3|d.   The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  lOd.

Marriage  and  its  Violations.  By  Dr.  John  Ellis.  Published  at  6d.,
with  the  October  number  4d.,  post  free,  4^d.  The  number  and  work
together,  post  free,  lid.

Photograph  of  J.  M.  Peebles.  Price  Is.  With  the  October  number
4d.    The  number  and  photograph  together,  post  free,  lid.

Social  Fetters.  A  novel  of  great  interest  by  Mrs.  Edwin  James.  Hand-
somely bound,  published  at  3b.  6d.,  with  the  December  number  28.  6d.,
post  free,  3s.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  iree,  3s.  6d.

HUMAN   NATURE,   VOL.  4.

Published  in  1870.    Cloth,  7s.  Gd.

Contains  papers  by  J.  W.  Jackson,  on  "  Creation,"  "  The  Earth  and  ber
Organisms,"  "  Myths  of  Antiquity";  twelve  papers  by  Miss  Blackwell,
on  "  The  Philosophy  of  Re-incarnation  ;"  "  History  of  a  Spiritualist,"  by
Leon  Favre  ;  "  Experiences  in  Development,"  by  A.  C.  Swinton  ;  and  a
variety  of  papers  on  Theology,  Spiritualism,  Hygiene,  Phrenologj^,  &c.

Purchasers  of  this  volume  complete  have  the privile je  of  obia'n'nj  the

History  of  the  Supernatural  in  all  Ages  and  ITations.  By
William  Howitt.  Two  vols.;  published  at  ISs.,  for  7s.  Od ;  post  free,
Ss.  6d. ;  both  works  post  free  for  IGs.  Purchasers  of  any  volume  can
claim  any  premium  work  offered  during  that  year.

LIST  OF  WOEKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM.

Echoes  of  My  Youtli.  A  Volmne  of  Poems.  By  J.  W.  Jackson.  Pub-
lished ut  2s.  (id. ;  with  the  January  number,  8d. ;  post  free,  9d.  The
number  and  work  together,  post  Tree,  Is.  3d.

A  Photograph  of  A.  J.  Davis.  1b.  With  the  March  number,  4d.
post  tree,  4id.    The  number  and  portrait  together,  post  free,  lid.

The  Philosophy  of  the  Bath;  or  Air  and  Water  in  Health  and
Disease.  i^By  D.  Dunlop.  Published  at  5s. ;  with  the  May  number,  2e.  f5d.;
post  free,  2s.  lid.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  3b.  6d.

Jesus,  Myth,  Man,  or  God ;  or  the  Popular  Theology,  and  the  Posi-
tive Eeligion  Contrasted.  Published  at  le.  6d. ;  with  the  June  number
Is.  ;  post  free.  Is.  lid.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  1b.  8d.

Supermundane  Pacts  in  the  Life  of  Dr.  Ferguson.  By  Dr.
T.  L.Nichols.  Published  at  lOs.  Gd. ;  with  the  August  number,  2b.  6d. ;
post  free,  2s.  lid.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  3s.  5d.

Magnetised  Photograph  of  Dr.  Newton.  Published  at  2s. ;  with
the  October  number,  9d.  post  free.  The  number  and  photograph  to-
gether post  free,  Is.  3id.

Outlines  of  Ten  Years'  Investigation  of  Spiritualism.  By  T.
P.  Barkas.  Published  at  Ss. ;  with  the  November  number,  9d. ;  post  free,
lO^d.    The  number  and  work  together  post  free.  Is.  5d.

HUMAN   NATURE,   VOL.  5.

PutUshed  in  1871.    Cloth,  7s.  6d.

Contains  papers  J.  W.  Jackson  on  "Creation,"  "Symbolism  of
Natm'e,"  "Grade  of  Function,"  "Myths  of  Antiquity,"  occupy  a  good
proportion  of  this  volume,  and  in  which  Miss  Blackwell's  articles  on
"  Ee-incarnation  "  are  concluded.  A  great  variety  of  other  papers  and
information  on  Spiritualism  and  progressive  subjects  are  given.

Pm-chasers  of  this  volume  have  the  privileye  of  obtaining  Mrs.  Rardinge's
History  of  Modern  Spiritualism,  15s.,  for  10s.  6d.   The  volume
and  Mrs.  Hardinge's  work  together,  17s.  6d.    Purchasers  of  a  volume
can  claim  any  premium  work  offered  during  that  year.
Songs  of  the  Spirit.    A  volume  of  Mediumistic  Poems.    Published  at
3s.  6d.  ;  with  the  February  number,  la.  6d. ;  post  free.  Is.  8d.    The  num-
ber and  work  together  post  free,  2s.  2^d.
Year  Book  of  Spiritualism  for  1871,  recording  the  progress  of  Spiri-
tualism throughout  the  world.    Published  at  5s.,  with  April  number  3s.,
post  free,  3s.  4d.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  3s.  lid.
Biography  of  William  Denton,  Geologist  and  Eeformer.
By  J.  M.  Powell.     Published  at  Is.,  with  the  May  number  bd.,  post
free,  Qid.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free.  Is.  Id.
How  to  "Live  on  Sixpence  a  Day.    Published  at  6d.,  with  the
July  number  4d.,  post  free,  4^d.    number  and  work  together,  post  tree,  1  id.
Nature's  Secrets.    Psychometric  Eesearches  and  Discoveries  by  William
Denton,  Geologist  and  Eeformer.    Published  at  5s.,  with  the  August
number  1b.  3d.,  post  free.  Is.  6d.     The  number  and  work  together,
post  free,  2s.  Id.

The  Mental  Cure,  illustrating  the  influence  of  the  mind  on  the  body,
both  in  health  and  disease;  and  the  psychological  method  of  treatment,
bv  the  Elv.  W.  F.  Evans.  301  pages,  cloth,  published  at  3s.,  with  the
September  number  post  free,  2s.  The  number  and  work  together,  post
free,  2s.  6d.  '

LIST  OP  WORKS  ON  SPIRITUALISM.

Clairvoyance— Hygienic  and  Medical.  By  Dr.  Dixon.  Second

edition,  y-i  pagea,  price  Is.,  with  tlie  October  number  6d.,  post  free,  7d.
Tlje  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  la.  Id.
The  Ideal  Attained,  being  a  story  of  two  steadfast  souls,  and  how  they
won  their  happiness  and  lost  it  not ;  by  Eliza  W.  Faruham.  Pubhshed
at  53.,  with  the  December  number,  33.  4d.,  post  free,  3a,  lOd.  The  number
and  work  together,  post  free,  4s.  4d.

HUMAN  NATURE,  VOL.  6.

PubUshed  in  1872.    Oloth,  Price  7s.  6d.

This  volume  is  illustrated  by  Lithographs  of  a  direct  spirit-drawing,
aud  Autographs  of  Spirits ;  also  a  heliotype  copy  of  a  spirit-drawing
after  Hogarth,  aud  contains  papers  on  "Spiritual  Presences  and  Pro-
phetic Ciiaracters  of  the  Old  Testament "  The  Probable  Aspect  of
future  Organic  Life  on  Earth,"  and  "Myths  of  Antiquity,"  by  J.  W.
Jackson,  and  also  bis  Memoir ;  papers  on  "  Buddhism,"  "  Re-incarnation,"
&c. ;  "  Olympia  Colona,  a  tale  on  Mediaeval  Magic,"  by  Mrs.  J.  W.  Jack-
son ;  and  miscellaneous  papers.

The  Arcana  of  Spiritualism.  By  Hudson  Tuttle.  Cloth,  published
at  83.  6d.,  with  the  January  number,  5s.,  post  free,  5s.  6d.  The  number
and  work  together,  post  free,  6s.

Shaker  Communism ;  or.  Tests  of  Divine  Inspiration.  By  Elder
F.  W.  Evans.  Published  at  Is.  6d.,  with  the  April  number,  9d.,  post
free,  lOd.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free.  Is.  4d.

The  Shaker,  a  Monthly  paper,  price  4d.,  specimen  given  gratis  with
the  April  number,  post  free,  7d.

The  Phrenological  Journal,  and  Life  Illustrated.  An  American
Monthly  Magazine  of  Mental  and  Social  Science.  Profusely  illustrated.
Published  at  Is.  ;  a  specimen  number,  with  the  June  number,  6d.,  post
free,  7^d.    The  number  and  journal  together,  Is.  2d.

Science  of  Health.  An  American  Journal  of  Physiology,  and  Domestic
Hygiene.  Published  at  lOd.  monthly ;  a  specimen  with  the  number
for  July,  6d.  post  free.    The  number  and  journal  together,  post  free.  Is.  Id.

The  Spiritual  Pilgrim.  The  Biography  of  J.  M.  Peebles.  By  J.  O.
Barrett.  Handsomely  bound  in  cloth ;  with  portrait  on  steel.  Published
at  7s.  6d. ;  with  the  August  number,  53.,  post  free,  5s.  6d.  The  number
and  work  together,  post  free,  Gs.

Christianity  and  Solar  Worship.  From  the  French  of  Dupuis,  as
printed  in  the  Medium,  Published  at  Is. ;  with  the  December  number,
Gd.,  post  free,  S^d.    The  number  and  work  together,  Is.  3d.

HUMAN   NATURE,  VOL.  7.

For  1873,  now  publishing.

ITiis  Volume  contains  a  series  of  valuable  Illustrations,  consisting  of  fac-similes  of
direct  spirit-writing, portraits  of  materialised  spirit-forms,  portraits  of  ^nediums,  ^c.

Duties  of  Parents,  Reproductive  and  Educational.  A  prac-
tical work  of  great  importance.  Published  at  38.  6d. ;  with  the  January
number,  28.  6d.,  post  free,  28.  8d.  The  number  and  work  together,  post
free,  3b.  2^d.

LIST  OF  WORKS  ON  SPIRITU'ALISM.

The  Man  of  the  Putiire ;  an  Investigation  of  the  Laws  which  deter-
mine Happiness.  By  Alexander  Calder.  A  bandsome  work,  publiehed
at  93. ;  witb  the  February  number,  ba.,  post  free,  fis.  Id.  The  number  and
work,  post  free,  Qa.  Id.

The  Annual  of  Phrenology  and  Physiognomy  for  this  Year

Prolusoly  illustrated.  Published  at  is. ;  with  the  March  number,  6d.,
post  free,  7d.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  Is.  2d.

The  Career  of  Religious  Ideas;  Their  Ultimate,  the  Reli-
gion of  Science.  By  H.  Tuttle.  2s.  6d. ;  with  the  May  number,
Is.  6d.,  post  free.  Is.  8d.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  2s.  2d.

Ten  Spiritual  Commandments,  and  Laws  of  Right;  with
the  Creed  of  the  Spirits.  A  Declaration  of  Moral  and  Philoso-
phical Principles  given  by  the  Spirits  through  Emma  Hardinge.  Litho-
graphed in  tints  on  a  beautiful  artistic  design,  illustrating  the  law  of
inspiration  and  spirit-teaching.  2s.  6d. ;  with  the  June  number,  Is.  6d.
The  number  and  work  together,  2s.   It  must  be  sent  by  rail.

Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the  Dialec-
tical Society.  Published  at  5s. ;  with  the  July  number,  3s.,  post
free,  3a.  6d.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  4s.  Id.

Incidents  in  my  Life.  Vol.  2.  By  D.  D.  Home.  Being  the  second
volume  of  the  Autobiography  of  that  celebrated  medium.  Handsome
cloth,  published  at  10s.  6d. ;  with  the  August  number,  3s.  6d.,  post  free
48.    The  number  and  work  together,  post  free,  4s.  6d.

Other  valuable  works  will  contuiue  to  be  given  monthly.  Subscribers
by  purchasing  the  premium  vols,  save  the  price  of  the  magazine  several
times  over.

WHERE  ARE  THE  DEAD?

OR,  SPIRITUALISM  EXPLAINED.

Containing  well  authenticated  and  selected  reports  of  all  the  different
phases  of  modern  Spirit  Phenomena,  from  Table-turning  to  the
visible  Materialisation  of  the  Faces  and  Forms  of  the  departed,  and  the
Photographing  of  Spirits ;  proving  by  undeniable  facts  that  those  we
mourn  as

DEAD  ARE  STILL  ALIVE!

and  can  Communicate  with  us ;  and  that  Spiritualism  is  sanctioned  by
Scripture  and  consistent  with  Science  and  Common  Sense;  with
Specimens  of  intensely  interesting  Communications  received  touching
Death,  the  Future  Life,  and  the  Experiences  of  the  Departed.  Also
Extracts  from  the  Literature  of  Spiritualism,  Advice  to  Invesfigatora,
List  of  Books,  Addresses  of  Mediums,  and  all  useful  information.

BY  FRITZ.
■  Price  Zs.;  or,  post  free      stamps,  from

A.  IRELAND  and  Co.,  Publishers,  Manchester,
Who  will  forward  copies  of  the  Table  op  Content.s  on  appHcation.

LONDON;  J,  BURNS  PROGRESSIVE  LIBRARY  AND  SPIRITUAL  INSTITUTION,

15,  SOUTHAMPTON  ROW,  W.C.

r

V
