Dialogues of the Buddha (Digha Nikaya), Vol. 1
T. W. & C. A. F. Rhys Davids, trans. (1899)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

*$BB$gMfr& from


>T<J


£8§&£>

^dfrSflSSSil

\YV

^5jKSHKy!


mB

swstiSil

S5XS

|m£

H9Sn»s Hi

USUI


HHHHHlBBfll RvvS


ffl&B*


fflHflHWM53?tf


bw^^h^b* j^eib^^^v nnr«n^ 4K — almanac 4*


ran


mESSER


jSaaBM^gMv^KiM


KWH


Hflni



H

HIB^H


WM

?3i;

wicv

tS?CV

UwA?

99

j|£j


USME

iSLNCft

SK

m»1EI4


B3S&

ttZiclHl

ESh

SHncv

ffre£3,

f¥gy

B£9

-^28

55w


SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS


TRANSLATED


BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


F. MAX MOLLER


PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
HIS MAJESTY CHULALANKARANA, KING OF SIAM


VOL. II


HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW COPENHAGEN

NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN

BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI


First Edition 1899
Rcfrriutcd 1923


PRINTED IN GRBAT BRITAIN


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA


TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI


BY


T. W. RHYS DAVIDS


HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW COPENHAGEN

NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN

BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI


131 \t>%


&4>

/2-92-

/
/


CONTENTS


PACK.

PREFACE ix

Note on the probable age of the Dialogues . . ix

Note on this Version . . . xx

Abbreviations ......... xxiv

i. Brahma-gala Suttanta.

Introduction ........ xxv

Text . . . . - . r

(The Silas, 3-26.)-,
• *•■ /

2. Samaa>a>a-phala Suttanta.

Introduction ........ 56

(Index to the paragraphs repeated in the other
Suttantas, 57-59.)
Text ......... 65


3. Ambattha Suttanta.
Introduction. (Caste)
Text


96 K

108


4. SOA'ADAiVDA SUTTANTA.

Introduction . . . . . . 137

(The Arahat the true Brahman.)
Text . . . . . . . . 144

5. Kutadanta Suttanta.

Introduction . . . . . . . 1 00

(The irony in this text, 160; Doctrine of sacrifice,
164; Lokayata, 166.)
Text . . . . . . . 175


Vlll DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

PAGE

6. Mahali Suttanta.

Introduction . . . . . . . .186

(The Indeterminates ; Buddhist Agnosticism, 186;
The Sambodhi, 190; Names in the texts, 193.)

Text 197

7. c7aliya Suttanta 205

8. Kassapa-Sihanada Suttanta.

Introduction ........ 206

(Method of the Dialogues, 206 ; Tapasa and Bhikshu,

ascetic and wandering mendicant, 208 ; Indian

religieux in the Buddha's time, 220.)
Text . ........ 223

9. Porri/APADA Suttanta.

Introduction. (The Soul) 241 I

Text . . ... .244

10. Subha Suttanta.

Introduction ...... • 2(ft

Text ....... 267

11. Kevaddha Suttanta.

Introduction . . . . . . .272

(Iddhi, 272; Buddhist Idealism, 274.)

Text . . . . .27(1

12. Lohik/sta Suttanta.

Introduction. (Ethics of Teaching) . . 285 *

Tent 28*

13. Tevigga Suttanta.

Introduction. (Union with God) . . 2<>S \

Text ....... 300

Index ok Subjects and Proper Names. ... 321

Index ok Pali Words ........ 32N


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Transla-
tions of the Sacred Books of the Buddhists . . . 331


PREFACE.


NOTE ON THE PROBABLE AGE OF THE
DIALOGUES.

The Dialogues of the Buddha, constituting, in the
Pali text, the Digha and Mag^ima Nikayas, contain
a full exposition of what the early Buddhists con-
sidered the teaching of the Buddha to have been.
Incidentally they contain a large number of references
to the social, political, and religious condition of India
at the time when they were put together. We do not
know for certain what that time exactly was. But
every day is adding to the number of facts on which
an approximate estimate of the date may be based.
And the ascertained facts are already sufficient to give
us a fair working hypothesis.

In the first place the numerous details and com-
parative tables given in the Introduction to my trans-
lation of the Milinda show without a doubt that
practically the whole of the Pali Pifokas were known,
/ and regarded as final authority, at the time and place
when that work was composed. The geographical
details given on pp. xliii, xliv tend to show that the
work was composed in the extreme North- West of
India. There are two Chinese works, translations
of Indian books taken to China from the North of
India, which contain, in different recensions, the intro-


X DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

duction and the opening chapters of the Milinda1.
For the reasuns adduced {loco citato) it is evident
that the work must have been composed at or about
the time of the Christian era. Whether (as M. Sylvain
Levy thinks) it is an enlarged work built up on the
foundation of the Indian original of the Chinese books ;
or whether (as I am inclined to think) that original is
derived from our Milinda, there is still one conclusion
that must be drawn — the Nikayas, nearly if not quite
as we now have them in the Pali, were known at a very
early date in the North of India.

Then again, the Katha Vatthu (according to the
views prevalent, at the end of the fourth century a.d.,
at Kawiipura in South India, and at Anuradhapura
in Ceylon; and recorded, therefore, in their com-
mentaries, by Dhammapala and Buddhaghosa) was
composed, in the form in which we now have it, by
Tissa, the son of Moggali, in the middle of the third
century B.C., at the court of Asoka, at Pa/aliputta, the
modern Patna, in the North of India.

It is a recognised rule of evidence in the courts of
law that, if an entry be found in the books kept by
a man in the ordinary course of his trade, which entry
speaks against himself, then that entry is especially
worthy of credence. Now at the time when they
made this entry about Tissa's authorship of the Katha
Vatthu the commentators believed, and it was an
accepted tenet of those among whom they mixed —
just as it was, mutatis mutandis, among the theologians
in Europe, at the corresponding date in the history of
their faith — that the whole of the canon was the word
of the Buddha. They also held that it had been
actually recited, at the Council of Ra^agaha, imme-
diately after his decease. It is, I venture to submit,
absolutely impossible, under these circumstances, that
the commentators can have invented this information


1 See the authors quoted in the Introduction to vol. ii .of my
translation. Professor Takaku-ui, in an article in the J. R. A. S. for
i 896, has added important details.


PREFACE. XI


about Tissa and the Katha Vatthu. They found it
in the records on which their works are based. They
dared not alter it. The best they could do was to try
to explain it away. And this they did by a story,
evidently legendary, attributing the first scheming out
of the book to the Buddha. But they felt compelled
to hand on, as they found it, the record of Tissa's
authorship. And this deserves, on the ground that
it is evidence against themselves, to have great weight
attached to it.

The text of the Katha Vatthu now lies before us
in a scholarly edition, prepared for the Pali Text
Society by Mr. Arnold C. Taylor. It purports to be
a refutation by Tissa of 250 erroneous opinions held
by Buddhists belonging to schools of thought different
from his own. We have, from other sources, a con-
siderable number of data as regards the different
schools of thought among Buddhists — often errone-
ously called ' the Eighteen Sects V We are beginning
to know something about the historical development
of Buddhism, and to be familiar with what sort of
questions are likely to have arisen. We are beginning
to know something of the growth of the language, of
the different Pali styles. In all these respects the
Katha Vatthu fits in with what we should expect as
possible, and probable, in the time of Asoka, and in
the North of India.

Now the discussions as carried on in the Katha
Vatthu are for the most part, and on both sides, an
appeal to authority. And to what authority ? Without
any exception as yet discovered, to the Pi/akas, and
as we now have them, in Pali. Thus on p. 339 the
appeal is to the passage translated below, on p. 278,
§ 6 ; and it is quite evident that the quotation is from
our Suttanta, and not from any other passage where

1 They are not 'sects' at all, in the modern European sense of
the word. Some of the more important of these data are collected
in two articles by the present writer in the ' Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society' for 1891 and 1892.


Xll


THE DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


the same words might occur, as the very name of the
Suttanta, the Kevaddha (with a difference of reading
found also in our MSS.), is given. The following are
other instances of quotations : —


Katha The

Vatthu. Nikayas.

p. 344 = A. II, 50.

345 = S. I, 33-

345 = A. II, 54.

347 = Kh. P. VII, 6,7.

348 = A. 111,43-

351 =Kh. P. VIII, 9.

369 = M. I, 85, 92, &c.

404 = M. I, 4.

413 = S. IV, 362.

426 = D. I, 70.

440 = S. I, 33.

457 = D. (M. P. S. 23).

457 = A. II, 172.

459 = M. I, 94.

481 = D. I, 83, 84.

483 = D. 1,84.

484 = A. II, 126.

494 = S. I, 206 = J. IV,


Katha The

Vatthu. Nikayas.

p. 505 = M. I, 490.

506 = M. I, 485 = S. IV.
393 (nearly).

5i3 = A. I, 197.

522 = M. I, 389.

525 = Dhp. 164.

528 = M. 1,447.

549 = S. N. 227 = Kh.
P. VI, 6.

554 = S. I, 233.

554 = Vim. V. XXXIV,

25-27- *
565 = D. I, 156.

588, 9= P. P. pp. 71, 72.

591 =M. I, 169.
597, 8 = A. I, 141, 2.

602 = Dh. C. P. Sutta,

II 9-2 3-


496. I

There are many more quotations from the older
Pi/aka books in the Katha Vatthu, about three or
four times as many as are contained in this list.
But this is enough to show that, at the time when
the KatJid Vatthu was composed, all the Five Nikayas
we?e extant ; and were considered to be final authorities
in any question that was being discussed. They must
themselves, therefore, be considerably older.

Thirdly, Hofrath Biihler and Dr. Hultsch have
called attention x to the fact that in inscriptions of
the third century b. c. we find, as descriptions of donors
to the dagabas, the expressions dhammakathika,
pe/aki, suttantika, suttantakini, and pa#/£a-neka-


' Epigr. Ind.,' II, 93, and ' Z. D. M. G.,' xl, p. 58


PREFACE. Xlll

yika. The Dnamma, the Pi/akas, the Suttantas, and
the five Nikayas must have existed for some time
before the brethren and sisters could be described as
preachers of the Dhamma, as reciters of the Pi/aka,
and as guardians of the Suttantas or of the Nikayas
(which were not yet written, and were only kept alive
in the memory of living men and women).

Simple as they seem, the exact force of these
technical designations is not, as yet, determined.
Dr. K. Neumann thinks that Pe/aki does not mean
' knowing the Pi/akas,' but ' knowing the Pi/aka,' that
is, the Nikayas — a single Pi/aka, in the sense of the
Dhamma, having been known before the expression
'the Pi/akas' came into use1. As he points out, the
title of the old work Pe/akopadesa, which is an
exposition, not of the three Pi/akas, but only of the
Nikayas, supports his view. So again the Dialogues
are the only parts or passages of the canonical books
called, in our MSS., suttantas. Was then a suttan-
tika one who knew precisely the Dialogues by heart ?
This was no doubt the earliest use of the term. But
it should be recollected that the Katha Vatthu, of
about the same date, uses the word suttanta also for
passages from other parts of the scriptures.

However this may be, the terms are conclusive proof
of the existence, some considerable time before the date of
the inscriptions, of a Buddhist literature called either
a Pitaka or the Pitakas, containing Suttantas, and
divided into Five Nikayas.

Fourthly, on Asoka's Bhabra Edict he recommends
to the communities of the brethren and sisters of the
Order, and to the lay disciples of either sex, frequently
to hear and to meditate upon seven selected passages.
These are as follows : —

i. Vinaya-samukkawsa.

2. Ariya-vasani from the Digha (Sa?;zgiti Suttanta).

3. Anagata-bhayani from the Ahguttaralll, 105-108.

4. Muni-gatha from the Sutta Nipata 206-220.


1 .


Reden des Gotamo,' pp. x, xi.


XIV DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

5. Moneyya Sutta from the Iti Vuttaka 67 = A.
I, 272.

6. Upatissa-pasina.

7. Rahulovada = Rahulovada Suttanta (M. I, 414-
420).

Of these passages Nos. 1 and 6 have not yet been
satisfactorily identified. The others may be regarded
as certain, for the reasons I have set out elsewhere K
No. 2 also occurs in the tenth book of the Ahguttara.
It is clear that in Asoka's time there was acknowledged
to be an authoritative literature, probably a collection
of books, containing what was then believed to be the
words of the Buddha : and that it comprised passages
already known by the titles given in his Edict. Five
out of the seven having been found in the published
portions of what we now call the Pi/akas, and in the
portion of them called the Five Nikayas, raises the pre-
sumption that when the now unpublished portions are
printed the other two will also, probably, be identified.
We have no evidence that any other Buddhist litera-
ture was in existence at that date.

What is perhaps still more important is the point to
which M. Senart2 has called attention, and supported
by numerous details : — the very clear analogy between
the general tone and the principal points of the moral
teaching, on the one hand of the Asoka edicts as
a whole, and on the other of the Dhammapada, an
anthology of edifying verses taken, in great part, from
the Five Nikayas. The particular verses selected by
M. Senart, as being especially characteristic of Asoka's
ideas, include extracts from each of the Five.

Fifthly, the four great Nikayas contain a number
of stock passages, which are constantly recurring, and
in which some ethical state is set out or described.
Many of these are also found in the prose passages

1 'Journal of the Pali Text Society,' 1896; 'Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society,' 1898, p. 639. Compare ' Milinda' (S. B. E., vol. xxxv),
pp. xxxvii foil.

2 ' Inscriptions de Piyadasi,' II, 314-322.


PREFACE. XV

of the various books collected together in the Fifth,
the Khuddaka Nikaya. A number of them are found
in each of the thirteen Suttantas translated in this
volume. There is great probability that such passages
already existed, as ethical sayings or teachings, not
only before the Nikayas were put together, but even
before the Suttantas were put together.

There are also entire episodes, containing not only
ethical teaching, but names of persons and places and
accounts of events, which are found, in identical terms,
at two or more places. These should be distinguished
from the last. But they are also probably older than
our existing texts. Most of the parallel passages,
found in both Pali and Sanskrit Buddhist texts, come
under one or other of these two divisions.

Sixthly, the Sawyutta Nikaya (III, 13) quotes one
Suttanta in the Dialogues by name ; and both the
Saawyutta and the Anguttara Nikayas quote, by name
and chapter, certain poems now found only in a par-
ticular chapter of the Sutta Nipata. This Suttanta,
and these poems, must therefore be older, and older, in
their present arrangement, than the final settlement of
the text of these two Nikayas.

Seventhly, several of the Dialogues purport to
relate conversations that took place between people,
cotemporaries with the Buddha, but after the Buddha s
death. One Sutta in the Anguttara is based on the
death of the wife of Muuda, king of Magadha, who
began to reign about forty years after the death of the
Buddha. There is no reason at all to suspect an
interpolation. It follows that, not only the Sutta
itself, but the date of the compilation of the Anguttara,
must be subsequent to that event.

There is a story in Peta Vatthu IV, 3, 1 about
a King Pingalaka. Dhammapala, in his commentary,
informs us that this king, of whom nothing is otherwise
known, lived two hundred years after the Buddha. It
follows that this poem, and also the Peta Vatthu in
which it is found, and also the Vimana Vatthu, with
which the Peta Vatthu really forms one whole work,


XVI DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

are later than the date of Pingalaka. And there is no
reason to believe that the commentator's date, although
it is evidently only a round number, is very far wrong.
These books are evidently, from their contents, the
very latest compositions in all the Five Nikayas.

There is also included among the Thera Gatha,
another book in the Fifth Nikaya, verses said, by
Dhammapala the commentator l, to have been com*
posed by a thera of the time of King Bindusara, the
father of Asoka, and to have been added to the collec-
tion at the time of Asoka's Council.

Eighthly, several Sanskrit Buddhist texts have now
been made accessible to scholars. We know the real
titles, given in the MSS. themselves, of nearly 200
more 2. And the catalogues in which the names occur
give us a considerable amount of detailed information
as to their contents. No one of them is a translation, or
even a recension, of any one of the twenty-seven canoni-
cal books. They are independent works ; and seem to
bear to the canonical books a relation similar, in many
respects, to that borne by the works of the" Christian
Fathers to the Bible. But though they do not repro-
duce any complete texts, they contain numerous verses,
some whole poems, numerous sentences in prose, and
some complete episodes, found in the Pali books.
And about half a dozen instances have been already
found in which such passages are stated, or inferred,
to be from older texts, and are quoted as authorities.
Most fortunately we may hope, owing to the
enlightened liberality of the Academy of St. Peters-
burg, and the zeal and scholarship of Professor
d'Oldenbourg and his co-workers, to have a consider-
able number of Buddhist Sanskrit Texts in the near
future. And this is just what, in the present state
of our knowledge of the history of Buddhist writings,
is so great a desideratum.


1 Quoted by Prof. Oldenberg at p. 46 of his edition.
• Miss C. Hughes is preparing a complete alphabetical list of all
these works for the ' Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,' 1899.


r


PREFACE. XV11


It is possible to construct, in accordance with these
facts, a working hypothesis as to the history of the
literature. It is also possible to object that the
evidence drawn from the Milinda may be disregarded
on the ground that there is nothing to show that that
work, excepting only the elaborate and stately
introduction and a few of the opening chapters, is not
an impudent forgery, and a late one, concocted by
some Buddhist in Ceylon. So the evidence drawn
from the Katha Vatthu may be disregarded on the
ground that there is nothing to show that that work is
not an impudent forgery, and a late one, concocted by
some Buddhist in Ceylon. The evidence drawn from
the inscriptions may be put aside on the ground that
they do not explicitly state that the Suttantas and
Nikayas to which they refer, and the passages they
mention, are the same as those we now have. And
the fact that the commentators point out, as peculiar,
that certain passages are nearly as late, and one whole
book quite as late, as Asoka, is no proof that the rest
are older. It may even be maintained that the
Pali Pi/akas are not therefore Indian books at all :
that they are all Ceylon forgeries, and should be
rightly called ' the Southern Recension ' or ' the
Sinhalese Canon.'

Each of these propositions, taken by itself, has the
appearance of careful scruple. And a healthy and
reasonable scepticism is a valuable aid to historical
criticism. But can that be said of a scepticism that
involves belief in things far more incredible than those
it rejects ? In one breath we are reminded of the
scholastic dulness, the sectarian narrowness, the
literary incapacity, even the senile imbecility of the
Ceylon Buddhists. In the next we are asked to
accept propositions implying that they were capable
of forging extensive documents so well, with such
historical accuracy, with so delicate a discrimination
between ideas current among themselves and those
held centuries before, with so great a literary skill
in expressing the ancient views, that not only did
II. b


XV111 DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

they deceive their contemporaries and opponents, but
European scholars have not been able to point out
a single discrepancy in their work1. It is not un-
reasonable to hesitate in adopting a scepticism which
involves belief in so unique, and therefore so
incredible, a performance.

The hesitation will seem the more reasonable if we
consider that to accept this literature for what it
purports to be — that is, as North Indian2, and for the
most part pre-Asokan — not only involves no such
absurdity, but is really just what one would a priori
expect, just what the history of similar literatures
elsewhere would lead one to suppose likely.

The Buddha, like other Indian teachers of his time,
taught by conversation. A highly educated man
(according to the education current at the time),
speaking constantly to men of similar education, he
followed the literary habit of his time by embodying
his doctrines in set phrases, sutras, on which he
enlarged on different occasions in different ways. In
the absence of books — for though writing was widely
known, the lack of writing materials made any lengthy
written books impossible3 — such sutras were the
recognised form of preserving and communicating
opinion. These particular ones were not in Sanskrit,
but in the ordinary conversational idiom of the day,
that is to say, in a sort of Pali.


1 As is well known, the single instance of such a discrepancy,
which Prof. Minayeff made so much of, is a mare's nest. The
blunder is on the part of the European professor, not of the Ceylon
pa/^its. No critical scholar will accept the proposition that because
the commentary on the Katha Vatthu mentions the Vetulyaka, therefore
the Kathd Valthu itself must be later than the rise of that school.

2 North Indian, that is. from the modern European point of view.
In the books themselves the reference is to the Middle Country
(Ma^Aima Desa). To them the country to the south of the
Vindhyas simply did not come into the calculation. How suggestive
this is as to the real place of origin of these documents !

3 Very probably memoranda were used. But the earliest records
of any extent were the Asoka Edicts, and they had to be written on
stone.


PREFACE. XIX


When the Buddha died these sayings were collected
together by his disciples into the Four Great
Nikayas. They cannot have reached their final form
till about fifty years afterwards. Other sayings and
verses, most of them ascribed not to the Buddha
himself, but to the disciples, were put into a supple-
mentary Nikaya. We know of slight additions made
to this Nikaya as late as the time of Asoka. And
the developed doctrine found in certain short books
in it*— notably in the Buddhavawsa and Kariya Pi/aka
and in the Peta- and Vimana-Vatthus — show that
these are later than the four old Nikayas.

For a generation or two the books as originally put
together were handed down by memory. And they
were doubtless accompanied from the first, as they
were being taught, by a running commentary. About
100 years after the Buddha's death there was a schism
in the community. Each of the two schools kept
an arrangement of the canon — still in Pali (or possibly
some allied dialect). Sanskrit was not used for any
Buddhist works till long afterwards, and'-never used at
all, so far as we know, for the canonical books. Each
of these two schools broke up, in the following
centuries, into others ; and several of them had their
different arrangements of the canonical books, differing
also no doilbt in minor details. Even as late as the
first century after the Christian Era, at the Council of
Kanishka, these books, among many others then
extant, remained the only authorities1. But they all,
except only our present Pali Nikayas, have been lost
in India. Of the stock passages of ethical statement,
and of early episodes, used in the composition of
them, and of the Suttas now extant, numerous
fragments have been preserved in the Hinayana
Sanskrit texts. And some of the Suttas, and of the
separate books, as used in other schools, are
represented in Chinese translations of the fourth and


1 On the often repeated error that a Sanskrit canon was established
at Kanishka's Council, see my ' Milinda,' vol. ii, pp. xv, xvi.

b 2


XX DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

fifth centuries a.d. A careful and detailed comparison
of these remains with the Pali Nikayas, after the
method adopted in Windisch's ' Mara und Buddha,'
cannot fail to throw much light on the history, and on
the method of composition, of the canonical books,
which in style and method, in language and contents
and tone, bear all the marks of so considerable an
antiquity.

Hofrath Dr. Btihler, in the last work he published,
expressed the opinion that these books, as we have
them in the Pali, are good evidence, certainly for the
fifth, probably for the sixth, century B.C. Subject to
what has been said above, that will probably become,
more and more, the accepted opinion. And it is this
which gives to all they tell us, either directly or by
implication, of the social, political, and religious life of
India, so great a value1.


It is necessary, in spite of the limitations of our
space, to add a few words on the method followed in
this version. We talk of Pali books. They are not
books in the modern sense. They are memorial
sentences intended to be learnt by heart ; and the
whole style, and method of arrangement, is entirely
subordinated to this primary necessity. The leading
ideas in any one of our Suttantas, for instance, are
expressed in short phrases not intended to convey to
a European reader the argument underlying them.
These are often repeated with slight variations. But
neither the repetitions nor the variations — introduced
and necessarily introduced, as aids to memory — help
the modern reader very much. That of course was
not their object. For the object they were intended


1 No reference has been made, in these slight and imperfect
remarks, to the history of 'the Vinaya. There is nothing to add,
on that point, to the able and lucid exposition of Prof. Oldenberg in
the Introduction to his edition of the text.


PREFACE. XXI


to serve they are singularly well chosen, and aptly
introduced.

Other expedients were adopted with a similar aim.
Ideas were formulated, not in logically co-ordinated
sentences, but in numbered groups ; and lists were
drawn up such as those found in the tract called the
Silas, and in the passage on the rejected forms of
asceticism, both translated below. These groups and
lists, again, must have been accompanied from the
first by a running verbal commentary, given, in his
own words, by the teacher to his pupils. Without
such a comment they are often quite unintelligible,
and always difficult.

The inclusion of such memoria tecJmica makes the
Four Nikayas strikingly different from modern treatises
on ethics or psychology. As they stand they were
never intended to be read. And a version in English,
repeating all the repetitions, rendering each item in
the lists and groups as they stand, by a single English
word, without commentary, would quite fail to con-
vey the meaning, often intrinsically interesting,
always historically valuable, of these curious old
documents.

It is no doubt partly the result of the burden of
such memoria tecknica, but partly also owing to the
methods of exposition then current in North India,
that the leading theses of each Suttanta are not
worked out in the way in which we should expect
to find similar theses worked out now in Europe.
A proposition or two or three, are put forward,
re-stated with slight additions or variations, and
placed as it were in contrast with the contrary
proposition (often at first put forward by the inter-
locutor). There the matter is usually left. There is
no elaborate logical argument. The choice is offered
to the hearer ; and, of course, he usually accepts the
proposition as maintained by the Buddha. The
statement of this is often so curt, enigmatic, and even
— owing not seldom simply to our ignorance, as yet,
of the exact force of the technical terms used — so


XX11 DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.

ambiguous, that a knowledge of the state of opinion
on the particular point, in North India, at the time, or
a comparison of other Nikaya passages on the subject,
is necessary to remove the uncertainty.

It would seem therefore most desirable that
a scholar attempting to render these Suttantas into
a European language — evolved in the process of
expressing a very different, and often contradictory,
set of conceptions — should give the reasons of the
faith that is in him. He should state why he
holds such and such an expression to be the least
inappropriate rendering : and quote parallel passages
from other Nikaya texts in support of his reasons.
He should explain the real significance of the thesis
put forward by a statement of what, in his opinion,
was the point of view from which it was put forward,
the stage of opinion into which it fits, the current views
it supports or controverts. In regard to technical terms,
for which there can be no exact equivalent, he should
give the Pali. And in regard to the mnemonic lists
and groups, each word in which is usually a crux, he
should give cross-references, and wherever he ventures
to differ from the Buddhist explanations, as handed
down in the schools, should state the fact, and give
his reasons. It is only by such discussions that we
can hope to make progress in the interpretation of the
history of Buddhist and Indian thought. Bare versions
are of no use . to scholars, and even to the general
reader they can only convey loose, inadequate, and
inaccurate ideas.

These considerations will, I trust, meet with the
approval of my fellow workers. Each scholar would
of course, in considering the limitations of his space,
make a different choice as to the points he regarded
most pressing to dwell upon in his commentary, as
to the points he would leave to explain themselves.
It may, I am afraid, be considered that my choice in
these respects has not been happy, and especially that
too many words or phrases have been left without
comment, where reasons were necessary. But I have


PREFACE. XX111

endeavoured, in the notes and introductions, to
emphasise those points on which further elucidation is
desirable ; and to raise some of the most important of
those historical questions which will have to be settled
before these Suttantas can finally be considered as
having been rightly understood.


• 'Nalanda,' April, 1899.


T. W. Rhys Davids.


ABBREVIATIONS.


1.

BUDDHIST CANONICAL BOOKS.

A.

Anguttara Nik&ya.

B. V.

Buddha Va#*sa.

D.

Digha Nikaya.

Dhp.

Dhammapada.

Git.

Gataka.

Kh. P.t

Khuddaka PlMa.

M.

Majg-^ima Nikaya.

M.P.S.

Mahaparinibbana Sutta.

S.

Sawyutta Nikiya.

S. N.

Sutta Nipata.

Ud.

Udana.

Vim. V.

Vimana Vatthu.

V. or Vin.

Vinaya.

2. OTHER BOOKS.

Abh. Pad.

Abhidhlna Padipikl.

Asl.

Attha Salini.

Ath.V.

Atharva Veda.

Br/'had.

Brrtiadlra«yaka Upanishad.

Dhp. Cy.

Dhammapada commentary.

Divy.

Divylvadlna.

Ep. Ind.

Epigraphia Indica.

J. P. T. S.

Journal of the Pali Text Society.

J.R.A.S.

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.

A'Mnd.Up. A'Mndogya Upanishad.

M.B.V.

Maha Bodhi Vamsa.

Mil.

Milinda Paflha.

Par. Dip.

Paramattha Dipani.

S.B.E.

Sacred Books of the East.

Sum.

Sumangala Vilasini.

.Sat. Br.

.Satapatha-Brahma*a.

Tait.

Taittiriya Upanishad.

Z.D.M.G.

Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft

INTRODUCTION

TO THE

brahma-^Ala sutta.


The phase of beliefs which this Suttanta is intended to
meet, into which its argument fits, has been set out in some
detail in the opening chapter of my 'American Lectures.'
As there pointed out1, the discussion which thus opens this
series of dialogues forms also the first question in the Katha
Vatthu, and the first question in the Milinda. We cannot be
far wrong if, in our endeavours to understand the real meaning
of the original Buddhism, we attach as much weight to this
question as did the author or authors of these ancient and
authoritative Buddhist books.

The Suttanta sets out in sixty-two divisions2 various specu-
lations or theories in which the theorisers, going out always
from various forms of the ancient view of a ' soul ' — a sort of
subtle manikin inside the body but separate from it, and
continuing, after it leaves the body, as a separate entity —
attempt to reconstruct the past, or to arrange the future.
All such speculation is condemned. And necessarily so,
since the Buddhist philosophy is put together without this
ancient idea of ' soul.'

The Buddhist scheme endeavours, in other words, to include
all the truth which previous thinkers had grafted on to the
old savage theories of a semi-material, subtle, permanent
entity inside the body, while rejecting those theories them-
selves ; it endeavours to retain all the philosophic truth which
previous thinkers had grafted on to the theosophies — the
corollaries of the soul theories — while rejecting those theo-
sophies themselves. The reasons given for this position are
threefold : firstly, that such speculators about ultimate things,


1 'American Lectures on Buddhism.' London, 1896, pp. 38-43.

2 Summed up below, pp. 52, 53 ; and set out more fully in the list
in the 'American Lectures,' pp. 31-33.


XXVI I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

either in the past or the future, have insufficient evidence,
see only one side of the shield 1 ; secondly, that such specula-
tions do not lead to emancipation, to Arahatship l ; and
thirdly, that such theories are really derived from the hopes,
the feelings, and the sensations arising from evanescent
phenomena 3 — they belong, in other words, to the realm of
hastily formed, empirical opinion (di///zi), not to that of the
higher wisdom (pa«»a). So that Buddhism, in the first place,
holds a position somewhat similar to the modern Agnostic
position. Secondly, while acknowledging the importance of
feeling and of intellect, it lays special stress upon the regulation,
the cultivation, of the will 4. And thirdly, it distinguishes
between a lower and a higher wisdom 6.

Several scholars, and especially — with more knowledge
and detail — Dr. Karl Neumann, have maintained that the
position of Buddhism in the history of Indian philosophy is
analogous to that of Schopenhauer in European philosophy.
On the other hand, it is maintained by Professor Deussen
that Schopenhauer's position is analogous to that of the
Upanishads. The reconciliation will probably be found
to be that what Buddhism took over, with more or less of
modification, from the Upanishads, is about the same as that
part of the Upanishad doctrine which is found, in European
phraseology, in Schopenhauer ; and what Buddhism rejected
altogether is not to be found in Schopenhauer. He himself,
who however knew both systems only from second-hand and
inaccurate authorities, says, ' If I am to take the results of
my own philosophy as the standard of truth, I should be
obliged to concede to Buddhism the pre-eminence over other
(systems of philosophy).'

However this question may be decided — and its discussion,
at the necessary length, by a competent student of philosophy,
is a very pressing want — it is certain from the details given
in our Suttanta that there were then current in Northern
India many other philosophic and theosophic speculations
besides those the priests found it expedient to adopt, and
have preserved for us in the Upanishads. And who can
doubt but that some, if not all of them, may also have had
their influence on the new doctrine ? There was always much
philosophising in India outside the narrow and inexact limits

1 See the fable quoted below, pp. 187, 188.

2 See below, pp. 44, 188.

3 See for instance below, pp. 53, 54.

4 See the paper on ' The Will in Buddhism,' J. R. A. S., 1898.

5 See below, p. 42, &c, of this Suttanta.


INTRODUCTION. XXV11


of the so-called six Dar^anas ; and we have to thank Buddhist
scholars for preserving, in their Pali and Sanskrit works, the
evidences of such philosophy as the priests wished to exclude
from notice1.


1 Professor Cowell has been good enough to inform me that, in
his opinion, the attempted restriction of all philosophy to the six
Dan-anas, and the very use of the term, is late mediaeval. The
six are of course not mutually exclusive ; and this, and the omissions
in the classification of philosophy under these six heads, render it
rather like a classification of animals into men, horses, birds, ghosts,
beetles, and sparrows.


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


DIGHA NIKAYA.

[COLLECTION OF LONG DIALOGUES.]


I. BRAHMA-^ALA SUTTA1.

[The Perfect Net.]

I. i. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once going along the high road between Ra^agaha
and Nalanda2 with a great company of the brethren,
with about five hundred brethren. And Suppiya the
mendicant3 too was going along the high road between
Ra^ragaha and Nalanda with his disciple the youth
Brahmadatta. Now just then Suppiya the mendicant
was speaking in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha,
in dispraise of the Doctrine, in dispraise of the Order.
But young Brahmadatta, his pupil, gave utterance, in
many ways, to praise of the Buddha, to praise of the
Doctrine, to praise of the Order. Thus they two
teacher and pupil, holding opinions in direct con-
tradiction one to the other, were following, step by

1 The whole of this Sutta was translated into English by the
Rev. Daniel Gogerly, Wesleyan missionary in Ceylon, in the Journal
of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1846 (reprinted
by P. Grimblot in his ' Sept Suttas Palis/ Paris, 1876).

2 Nalanda, afterwards the seat of the famous Buddhist university,
was about seven miles north of Ra^agaha, the capital of Magadna, the
modern Ra^-gir (Sum. p. 35).

3 Suppiya was a follower of the celebrated teacher Sa«^aya, whose
views are set out and controverted in the next Sutta.

II. B


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


step, after the Blessed One and the company of the
brethren.

2. Now the Blessed One put up at the royal rest-
house in the Ambala/Z^ika pleasance x to pass the
night, and with him the company of the brethren.
And so also did Suppiya the mendicant, and with him
his young disciple Brahmadatta. And there, at the
rest-house, these two carried on the same discussion
as before.

[2] 3. And in the early dawn a number of the
brethren, assembled, as they rose up, in the pavilion ;
and this was the trend of the talk that sprang up among
them, as they were seated there. ' How wonderful a
thing is it, brethren, and how strange that the Blessed
One, he who knows and sees, the Arahat, the Buddha
Supreme, should so clearly have perceived how various
are the inclinations of men ! For see how while Suppiya
the mendicant speaks in many ways in dispraise of the
Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order, his own disciple,
young Brahmadatta, speaks, in as many ways, in praise
of them. So do these two, teacher and pupil, follow
step by step after the Blessed One and the company of
the brethren, giving utterance to views in direct con-
tradiction one to the other.

4. Now the Blessed One, on realising what was the
drift of their talk, went to the pavilion, and took his
seat on the mat spread out for him. And when he
had sat down he said : ' What is the talk on which you
are engaged sitting here, and what is the subject of
the conversation between you?' And they told him all.
And he said :


1 Ambala/Mika, 'the mango sapling.' It was, says Buddhaghosa
(pp. 41, 42), a well-watered and shady park so called from a mango
sapling by the gateway. It was surrounded with a rampart, and had
in it a rest-house adorned with paintings for the king's amusement.

There was another garden so named at Anuradhapura in Ceylon,
to the east of the Brazen Palare (Sum. I, 131). This was so named,
no doubt, after the other which was famous as the scene of the
' Exhortation to Rahula starting with falsehood,' mentioned in Asoka's
Bhabra Edict (see my 'Buddhism,' pp. 224, 225).


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


5. ' Brethren, if outsiders should speak against me,
or against the Doctrine, [3] or against the Order, you
should not on that account either bear malice, or
suffer heart-burning, or feel illwill. If you, on that
account, should be angry and hurt, that would stand in
the way of your own self-conquest. If, when others
speak against us,.you feel angry at that, and displeased,
would you then be able to judge how far that speech of
theirs is well said or ill ? '

' That would not be so, Sir.'

' But when outsiders speak in dispraise of me, or of
the Doctrine, or of the Order, you should unravel what
is false and point it out as wrong, saying : " For this
or that reason this is not the fact, that is not so, such
a thing is not found among us, is not in us."

6. ' But also, brethren, if outsiders should speak in
praise of me, in praise of the Doctrine, in praise of the
Order, you should not, on that account, be filled with
pleasure or gladness, or be lifted up in heart. Were
you to be so that also would stand in the way of your
self-conquest. When outsiders speak in praise of me,
or of the Doctrine, or of the Order, you should
acknowledge what is right to be the fact, saying: "For
this or that reason this is the fact, that is so, such
a thing is found among us, is in us."

7. ' It is in respect only of trifling things, of matters
of little value, of mere morality, that an unconverted
man, when praising the Tathagata, would speak. And
what are such trifling, minor details of mere morality
that he would praise ? '

[4] [The Moralities \ Part I.]

8. ' " Putting away the killing of living things,
Gotama the recluse holds aloof from the destruction

1 These titles occur, in the MSS., at the end of the sections of the
tract that now follows. It forms a part of each of the Suttas in the
first division, the first third, of this collection of Suttas. The division
is called therefore the Sila Vagga or Section containing the Silas.
The tract itself must almost certainly have existed as a separate work

B 2


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


of life. He has laid the cudgel and. the sword aside,
and ashamed of roughness, and full of mercy, he dwells
compassionate and kind to all creatures that have life."
It is thus that the unconverted man, when speaking in
praise of the Tathagata, might speak l.

' Or he might say : " Putting away the taking of
what has not been given, Gotama the recluse lived
aloof from grasping what is not his own. He takes
only what is given, and expecting that gifts will come 2,
he passes his life in honesty and purity of heart."

' Or he might say: " Putting away unchastity, Gotama
the recluse is chaste. He holds himself aloof, far off,
from the vulgar practice, from the sexual act 3."

9. ' Or he might say : " Putting away lying words,
Gotama the recluse holds himself aloof from false-
hood. He speaks truth, from the truth he never
swerves ; faithful and trustworthy, he breaks not his
word to the world."

' Or he might say : " Putting away slander, Gotama
the recluse holds himself aloof from calumny. What he
hears here he repeats not elsewhere to raise a quarrel

before the time when the discourses, in each of which it recurs, were
first put together.

Certain paragraphs from this tract occur also elsewhere. So in
Maggfcma. I, 179 we have the whole of the short paragraphs; in
Magg/iima, Nos. 76 and 77, and in Mahavagga V, 8, 3, we have
§ 17 ; in Magghima II, 3 we have most of § 18 ; and so on. The
whole of this tract has been translated into English by Gogerly
(in Grimblot, see page 1, note), into French by Burnouf (also in
Grimblot, pp. 212 foil.), and into German by Dr. Neumann (in his
Buddhisiische Anthologie, pp. 67 foil.).

1 This refrain is repeated at the end of each clause. When the
Silas recur below, in each Sutta, the only difference is in the refrain.
See, for instance, the translation of p. 100 in the text.

2 Neumann has ' waiting for a gift ' which is a possible rendering :
but patikankhati has not yet been found elsewhere in the sense of
' waiting for.' The usual meaning of the word expresses just such
a trifling matter as we have been led, from the context, to expect.

3 Gama-dhamma, 'from the village habit, the practice of country
folk, the "pagan'" way.' One might render the phrase by 'pagan' if
that word had not acquired, in English, a slightly different connota-
tion. It is the opposite of pori, urbane (applied to speech, below,
§ 9). Dr. Neumann misses the point here, but has ' hofiich ' below.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


against the people here ; what he hears elsewhere he
repeats not here to raise a quarrel against the people
there. Thus does he live as a binder together of
those who are divided, an encourager of those who
are friends, a peacemaker, a lover of peace, impassioned
for peace, a speaker of words that make for peace."

' Or he might .say : " Putting away rudeness of
speech, Gotama the recluse holds himself aloof from
harsh language. Whatsoever word is blameless,
pleasant to the ear, lovely, reaching to the heart,
urbane \ pleasing to the people, beloved of the people
— such are words he speaks."

' Or he might say : " Putting away frivolous talk 2,
Gotama the. recluse holds himself aloof from vain
conversation.- In season he speaks, in accordance
with the facts, words full of meaning, on religion, on
the discipline of the Order. He speaks, and at the
right time, words worthy to be laid up in one's heart,
[5] fitly illustrated, clearly divided, to the point."

10. ' Or he might say: "Gotama the recluse holds
himself aloof from causing injury to seeds or plants 3.

He takes but one meal a day, not eating at night,
refraining from food after hours (after midday).

He refrains from being a spectator at shows at fairs,
with nautch dances, singing, and music.

He abstains from wearing, adorning, or ornamenting
himself with garlands, scents, and unguents.

He abstains from the use of large and lofty beds.

He abstains from accepting silver or gold.

He abstains from accepting uncooked grain.

He abstains from accepting raw meat.

He abstains from accepting women or girls.

He abstains from accepting bondmen or bond-
women.


1 Pori. See note above on § 8.

2 Sampha-ppalapa. Sampha occurs alone in the Hemavata
Sutta, and at Gat. VI, 295; A. II, 23.

3 Samarambh& cannot mean 'planting' as Dr. Neumann
renders it.


t


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


He abstains from accepting sheep or goats.

He abstains from accepting fowls or swine.

He abstains from accepting elephants, cattle, horses,
and mares.

He abstains from accepting cultivated fields or waste.

He abstains from the acting as a go-between or
messenger.

He abstains from buying and selling.

He abstains from cheating with scales or bronzes1
or measures.

He abstains from the crooked ways of bribery,
cheating, and fraud.

He abstains from maiming, murder, putting in bonds,
highway robbery, dacoity, and violence."

' Such are the things, brethren, which an uncon-
verted man, when speaking in praise of the Tathagata,
might say.'

Here ends the A'ula Slla [the Short Paragraphs

on Conduct].


ii. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to the injury of seedlings
and growing plants whether propagated from roots or
cuttings or joints or buddings or seeds 2 — Gotama the

1 Kawsa-ku/a. The context suggests that kawzsa (bronze) may
here refer to coins, just as we say in English ' a copper/ and the word
is actually so used in the nth and 12th Bhikkhunf Nissaggiya Rules
— the oldest reference in Indian books to coins. The most ancient
coins, which were of private (not state) coinage, were either of bronze
or gold. Buddhaghosa (p. 79) explains the expression here used as
meaning the passing off of bronze vessels as gold. Gogerly trans-
lates ' weights,' Childers sub voce has ' counterfeit metal/ and Neumann
has ' Maass/ Buddhaghosa is obliged to take ka/wsa in the meaning
of ' gold pot,' which seems very forced ; and there is no authority for
ka»/sa meaning either weight or mass. On the whole the coin
explanation seems to me to be the simplest.

2 Buddhaghosa gives examples of each of these five classes of the
vegetable kingdom without explaining the terms. But it is only the
fourth which is doubtful. It may mean ' graftings/ if the art of
grafting was then known in the Ganges valley.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


recluse holds aloof from such injury to seedlings and
growing plants."

12. [6] ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to the use of things stored
up ; stores, to wit, of foods, drinks, clothing, equipages,
bedding, perfumes, and curry-stuffs l — Gotama the
recluse holds aloof from such use of things stored up."

13. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to visiting shows 2 ; that is
to say,


(1) Nautch dances
(na^aw) 3.

(2) Singing of songs
(gltaw).


(3) Instrumental music
(vaditaw).

(4) Shows at fairs (pek-
kham) 4.


1 Am is a. Buddhaghosa (p. 83) gives a long list of curry-stuffs
included under this term. If he is right then Gogerly's ' raw grain '
is too limited a translation, and Neumann's ' all sorts of articles to
use' too extensive. In its secondary meaning the word means
' something nice, a relish, a dainty.'

'2 Visfika-dassanazw. This word has only been found elsewhere
in the phrase di/Z/^i-visukawz, 'the puppet shows of heresy' (Ma^--
gfcma, I, pp. 8, 486 ; and Serissaka Vimana LXXXIV, 26). The
Sinhalese renders it wiparita-dar^awa.

3 Dancing cannot mean here a dancing in which the persons
referred to took part. It must be ballet or nautch dancing.

Literally ' shows.' This word, only found here, has always been
rendered ' theatrical representations.' Clough first translated it so in
his Sinhalese Dictionary, p. 665, and he was followed by Gogerly,
Burnouf, myself (in 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 192), and Dr. Neumann
(p. 69),— and Weber (Indian Literature, pp. 199, 319) seems to
approve this. But it is most unlikely that the theatre was already
known in the fifth century b.c. And Buddhaghosa (p. 84) explains it,
quite simply, as na/a-sama^a. Now sama^o is a very interesting
old word (at least in its Pali form). The Sanskrit sama^ya, ac-
cording to the Petersburg Dictionary, has only been found in modern
dictionaries. The Pali occurs in other old texts such as Vinaya
II, 107; IV, 267 (both times in the very same context as it does
here); ibid. II, 150; IV, 85; Sigalovada Sutta, p. 300; and it is
undoubtedly the same word as samara in the first of the fourteen
Edicts of Asoka. In the Sigalovada there are said to be six dangers
at such a saraa^o; to wit, dancing, singing, music, recitations, con-
juring tricks, and acrobatic shows. And in the Vinaya passages we


8


1. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


(5) Ballad recitations
(akkhana?^) 1.

(6) Hand music (pa #is-

saraw)2.


(7) The chanting of
bards (vetala^) 3.

(8) Tam-tam playing
(kumbhathunaw) 4.


learn that at a sama^o not only amusements but also food was
provided ; that high officials were invited, and had special seats ; and
that it took place at the top of a hill. This last detail of ' high
places ' (that is sacred places) points to a religious motive as under-
lying ihe whole procedure. The root a.g (nyo>, ago, whence our
'act') belongs to the stock of common Aryan roots, and means
carrying on. What was the meaning of this ' carrying on together ' ?
Who were the people who took part? Were they confined to one
village? or have we here a survival from old exogamic communistic
dancings together? Later the word means simply 'fair,' as at
Gataka III, 541 :

' Many the bout I have played with quarterstaves at the fair,'
with which (7ataka I, 394 may be compared. And it is no doubt
this side of the festival which is here in the mind of the author ; but
' fair ' is nevertheless a very inadequate rendering. The Sinhalese
has 'rapid movement in dance-figures' (ranga-ma«</alu).

1 These ballad recitations in prose and verse combined were the
source from which epic poetry was afterwards gradually developed.
Buddhaghosa has no explanation of the word, but gives as examples
the Bharata and the Ramayawa. The negative anakkhanaw*
occurs Mag^ima I, 503.

2 Buddhaghosa explains this as 'playing on cymbals'; and adds
that it is also called pawita/azrc. The word is only found here and
at Gataka V, 506, and means literally ' hand-sounds.'

3 Buddhaghosa says ' deep music, but some say raising dead
bodies to life by spells.' His own explanation is, I think, meant to
be etymological; and to show that he derives the word from vi + ta/a.
This would bring the word into connection with the Sanskrit vaita-
lika, 'royal bard.' The other explanation connects the word with
vetala, 'a demon,' supposed to play pranks (as in the stories of the
Vetala-pa/7/£a-vizrasati) by reanimating corpses. Dr. Neumann
adopts it. But it does not agree so well with the context ; and it
seems scarcely justifiable to see, in this ancient list, a reference to
beliefs which can only be traced in literature more than a thousand
years later. Gogerly's rendering ' funeral ceremonies,' which I pre-
viously followed, seems to me now quite out of the question.

* It is clear from Gataka V, 506 that this word means a sort of
music. And at Vinaya IV, 285 kumbhathunika are mentioned in
connection with dancers, acrobats, and hired mourners. Buddhaghosa
is here obscure and probably corrupt, and the derivation is quite
uncertain. Gogerly's guess seems better than Burnouf's or Neumann's.
The Sinhalese has ' striking a drum big enough to hold sixteen
gallons.'


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


(9) Fairy scenes (So-
bhanagarakaw) 1.

(10) Acrobatic feats by
Aa^rtalas (Ka. n da 1 a -v a m-
sa-dhopana#z) 2.

(11) Combats of ele-
phants, horses, buffaloes,


bulls, goats, rams, cocks,
and quails.

(12) Bouts at quarter-
staff3, boxing, wrestling4.

(13-16) Sham - fights,
roll-calls, manoeuvres, re-
views 5 —


Gotama the recluse holds aloof from visiting such
shows."

14. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to games and recreations 6 ;
that is to say,

(1) Games on boards rows of squares7.


with eis;ht, or with ten,


(2) The same games


1 Buddhaghosa seems to understand by this term (literally 'of
Sobha city') the adornments or scenery used for a ballet-dance.
(Pa/ibhawa-^ittaw at Vinaya II, 151; IV, 61, 298, 358; Sum.

I, 42 is the nude in art.) Weber has pointed out (Indische Studien,

II, 38 ; III, 153) that Sobha is a city of the Gandharvas, fairies much
given to music and love-making. It is quite likely that the name of
a frequently used scene for a ballet became a proverbial phrase for
all such scenery. But the Sinhalese has 'pouring water over the
heads of dancers, or nude paintings.'

2 Buddhaghosa takes these three words separately, and so do all
the MSS. of the text, and the Sinhalese version. But I now think that
the passage at Gataka IV, 390 is really decisive, and that we have
here one of the rare cases where we can correct our MSS. against the
authority of the old commentator. But I follow him in the general
meaning he assigns to the strange expression ' .£a//d?ala-bamboo-
washings.'

3 See Gataka III, 541.

4 Nibbuddhawz. The verbal form nibbu^^ati occurs in the
list at Vinaya III, 180 (repeated at II, 10); and our word at
Milinda 232.

5 All these recur in the introductory story to the 50th Pa&ttiya
(Vinaya IV, 107). On the last compare Buddhaghosa on Mahavagga
V, 1, 29.

6 All these terms recur at Vinaya III, 180 (repeated at II, 10).

7 Chess played originally on a board of eight times ten squares
was afterwards played on one of eight times eight squares. Our text
cannot be taken as evidence of real chess in the fifth century B.C., but
it certainly refers to games from which it and draughts must have
been developed. The Sinhalese Sanna says that each of these games


IO


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


played by imagining such
boards in the air '.

(3) Keeping going over
diagrams drawn on the
ground so that one steps
only where one ought to
go2.

(4) Either removing the
pieces or men from a heap
with one's nail, or putting
them into a heap, in each
case without shaking it.
He who shakes the heap,
loses \

(5) Throwing dice 4.

(6) Hitting a short stick
with a long one 6.

(7) Dipping the hand


with the fingers stretched
out in lac, or red dye, or
flour-water, and striking
the wet hand on the ground
or on a wall, calling out
' What shall it be ? ' and
showing the form required
— elephants, horses, &c.6

(8) Games with balls 7.

(9) Blowing through
toy pipes made of leaves 8.

(10) Ploughing with
toy ploughs 9.

(11) Turning summer-
saults 10.

(12) Playing with toy
windmills made of palm-
leaves u.


was played with dice and pieces such as kings and so on. The word
for pieces is poru (from purisa) — just our 'men.'

1 Akisa/w. How very like blindfold chess !

2 Parihara-pathatfz. A kind of primitive 'hop-scotch.' The
Sinhalese says the steps must be made hopping.

s Santikd. Spellicans, pure and simple.

4 Khali kd. Unfortunately the method of playing is not stated.
Compare Eggeling's note as in his Satapatha-Brahmawa III, 106, 7.
In the gambling-scene on the Bharhut Tope (Cunningham, PI. XLV,
No. 9) there is a board marked out on the stone of six times five
squares (not six by six), and six little cubes with marks on the sides
visible lie on the stone outside the board.

6 Gha/ikaw. Something like 'tip-cat.' Si/ra-kelimaya in Sinhalese.
4 Salaka-hatthaw. On flour-water as colouring matter, see

Gataka I, 220.

7 Akkha/ra. The usual meaning is 'a die.' But the Sinhalese
ranslator agrees with Buddhaghosa. Neither gives any details.

8 Panga^traw. The Sinhalese for this toy is pat-kulal.
Morris in J. P. T. S., 1889, p. 205, compares the Marathi pungi.

* Vankaka/ra. From Sanskrit vrz'ka. See Jaurnal of the Pali
Text Society, 1889, p. 206.

10 Mokkha/fcika. So the Sinhalese. Buddhaghosa has an alterna-
tive explanation of turning over on a trapeze, but gives this also. See
Vinaya I, 275, and J. P. T. S., 1885, p. 49.

11 Almgulikaw. See Morris in the J. P. T. S., 1885, p. 50, who
compares ^ingulayitva at Ahguttara III, 15, 2.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY. I I


(13) Playing with toy
measures made of palm-
leaves.

(14, 15) Playing with
toy carts or toy bows1.

(16) Guessing at letters


traced in the air, or on a
playfellow's back 2.

(17) Guessing the play-
fellow's thoughts.

(18) Mimicry of deform-
ities—


[7] Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such games
and recreations."

15. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to the use of high and large
couches ; that is to say 3


(1) Moveable settees,
high, and six feet long
(Asandi)4.


(2) Divans with animal
figures carved on the sup-
ports (Pallanko) 5.


1 All these six, from No. 10 inclusive, are mentioned in the
Ma^^ima, vol. i, p. 266, as children's games.

2 Akkharika. It is important evidence for the date at which
writing was known in India that such a game should be known in the
fifth century b.c.

3 The following list recurs Vinaya I, 192 = II, 163 = Ahguttara
I, 18^, &c.

4 Asandi. Buddhaghosa merely says 'a seat beyond the allowed
measure,' but that must refer to height, as the only rule as to measure
in seats is the 87th Pattttiya in which the height of beds or chairs is
limited to eight 'great' inches (probably about eighteen inches). The
Sinhalese Sanna adds ' a long chair for supporting the whole body.'
At Gat. I, 208 a man lies down on an a s an di so as to be able to look
up and watch the stars. At Digha I, 55 = Ma<g§r^ima I, sti^ = Sam-
yutta III, 307 (where the reading must be corrected), the asandi is
used as a bier. The asandi is selected as the right sort of seat for
the king in both the Va^apeya and Inauguration ceremonies because
of its height (Eggeling, Sat.-Brah. Ill, 35, 105). It is there said to
be made of common sorts of wood, and perforated ; which probably
means that the frame was of wood and the seat was of interlaced
cane or wickerwork. The diminutive asandiko, with short legs and
made square (for sitting, not lying on), is allowed in the Buddhist
Order by Vinaya II, 149. And even the asandi is allowed, if the
tall legs be cut^down, by Vinaya II, 169, 170 (where the reading
^inditva seems preferable, and is read in the quotation at Sum.
I, 88). The renderings ' large cushion' at 'Vinaya Texts,' II, 27 and
' stuffed couch ' at III, 209 must be accordingly corrected. Gogerly
translates ' large couch,' Burnouf ' une chaise longue,' and Neumann

• ' bequeme Lehnstuhl.'

* Pallanko. It is noteworthy that, in spite of the use of a divan


12


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


(3) Goats' hair cover-
lets with very long fleece
(Gonako) '.

(4) Patchwork counter-
panes of many colours
(A'ittaka).

(5) White blankets
(Pa/ika).

(6) Woollen coverlets
embroidered with flowers
(Pa/alika).

(7) Quilts stuffed with
cotton wool .(Tulika).

(8) Coverlets embroi-
dered with figures of lions,
tigers, &c. (Vikatika).

(9) Rugs with fur on
both sides (Uddalomi).


(10) Rugs with fur on
one side (Ekantalomi).

(11) Coverlets embroi-
dered with gems (K a tth\ s-
saw).

(12) Silk coverlets
(Koseyyawz).

(13) Carpets large
enough for sixteen dancers
(Kuttakaw).

(14- 16) Elephant,

horse, and chariot rugs.

(17) Rugs of antelope
skins sewn together (A/i-
na-pave«i).

(18) Rugs of skins of
the plantain antelope.

(19) Carpets with awn-


with animals carved on its supports being here objected to, it is
precisely the sort of seat on which the Buddha himself, or Buddhisl
personages of distinction, are often, in later sculptures, represented as
silting (Griinwedel, 'Buddhistische kunst/ pp. in, 124, 137; Mitra,
'Budh Gaya,' Plates XI, XX, &c. &c). At Mahavaw/sa 25 sihasana
and pallanko are used of the same seat (Asoka's throne), and siha-
sana is used of Du/Ma Gamini's throne, ibid. 157. But the Lion
throne of Nissanka Malla, found at Pollonnaruwa, is not a pallanko,
but an actual stone lion, larger than life size (' Indian Antiquary,'
vol. i, p. 135. Compare the similar seat in Griinwedel, p. 95).

By Vinaya II, 170 the possession of a pallanka was allowed to
the Order if the animal figures were broken off (the translation in
{ Vinaya Texts,' III, 209, must be altered accordingly, reading va7e for
vale, as at Vinaya IV, 312). By Vinaya II, 163 it is laid down that
members of the Order were not to use a complete pallanko even in
laymen's houses, so that Nigrodha's action in the passage just quoted
(Mahlvawsa 25) was really a breach of the regulations.

1 The words from gonako down to ka/Missaw inclusive, and
also kuttakazra, are found only in this list, and Buddhaghosa seems to
be uncertain as to the exact meaning of some of them. All except
No 7 might be used in laymen's houses ('Vinaya Texts,' III, 197),
and all might be possessed by the Order if used only as floor-
coverings (ibid. Ill, 209) ; except again No. 7, the cotton wool of
which might be utilised for pillows. As there is a doubt about the
spelling it may be noticed that the Sanna reads gonakam and


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY. 1 3


ings above them (Sa-
uttara-v£^adaw).


(20) Sofas with red pil-
lows for the head and feet."


16. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to the use of means for
adorning and beautifying themselves: that is to say, —

Rubbing in scented powders on one's body,
shampooing it, and bathing it. Patting the limbs
with clubs after the manner of wrestlers l. The use
of mirrors, eye-ointments, garlands, rouge, cosmetics,
bracelets, necklaces, walking-sticks, reed cases for
drugs, rapiers, sunshades, embroidered slippers, turbans,
diadems, whisks of the yak's tail, and long-fringed
white robes —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such means
of adorning and beautifying the person 2."

1 7. ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to such low conversation as
these :

Tales of kings, of robbers, of ministers of state ;
tales of war, of terrors, of battles ; talk about foods
and drinks, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes ; talks
about relationships, equipages, villages, town, cities,
and countries ; tales about women [8], and about
heroes ; gossip at street corners 3, or places whence

uddalomiw : and the MS. in the R. A. S. (which repeats each
sentence) has gonakawz and uddalomiwz both times.

1 Sambahana/H. Perhaps rubbing the limbs with flat pieces of
wood. See Buddhaghosa here and at ' Vinaya Texts,' III, 60.

2 This is not quite accurate. Out of the twenty items here objected
to, three (shampooing, bathing, and the use of sunshades) were
allowed in the Order, and practised by Gotama himself. Bathrooms,
and halls attached to them, are permitted by 'Vinaya Texts,' III,
189; shampooing by ibid. Ill, 68, 297. There are elaborate regu-
lations for the provision of hot steam baths and the etiquette to be
observed in them ; and instances of the use of the ordinary bath in
streams or rivers are frequent. The use of sunshades is permitted by
'Vinaya Texts,' III, 132-3, and is referred to ibid. Ill, 88, 274.

8 Visikha-katha. Buddhaghosa (p. 90) takes this word (literally
' street-talk ') in the sense of talk about streets, whether ill or well
situate, and whether the inhabitants are bold or poor, &c.


14 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

water is fetched ; ghost stories ' ; desultory talk 'z ;
speculations about the creation of the land or sea 3,
or about existence and non-existence 4 —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low con-
versation."

1 8. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to the use of wrangling
phrases 5 : such as —

" You don't understand this doctrine and discipline,
I do."

" How should you know about this doctrine and
discipline ? "

" You have fallen into wrong views. It is I who
am in the right."

" I am speaking to the point, you are not 6."

" You are putting last what ought to come first,
and first what ought to come last 7."

" What you've excogitated so long, that's all quite
upset."


1 Pubba-peta-katha. The commentator confines this to boasting
talk about deceased relatives or ancestors.

2 Nanatta-kathawz, literally 'difference-talk.' The expression
seems somewhat forced, if taken as meaning ' desultory ' ; but I see
no better explanation.

3 Lokakkhayikd. Buddhaghosa refers this specially to such
speculations as are put forth according to the Lokayata system
by the Vitawdas (also called Lokayatikas). These are materialistic
theorisers, of whose system very little is, so far, known. See the note
at ' Vinaya Texts,' vol. iii, p. 151. I have collected other references
to them in my ' Milinda,' vol. i, p. 7 ; and to these Digha I, 11,
114, 120, and Attha Salini, p. 3, may now be added. They are
probably referred to below in chap, iii of this Sutta, §§ 10, 20.

4 This list of foolish talks recurs in Suttas 76-78 in the Magg^ima.
and at Vinaya I, 188.

5 These expressions all recur at Ma^g^ima II, 3.

6 S ah it am me, literally 'the put together is to me,' &c. The
idiom is only found here, and may mean either as rendered above, or
' the context is on my side,' or ' the text (of the Scriptures) is on my
side,' or merely ' that which is of use is on my side.' This last, given
by the Sanna, amounts to the same as the version adopted above.

7 Putting the cart before the horse.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY. J 5

" Your challenge has been taken up V
" You are proved to be wrong 2."
" Set to work to clear your views V
" Disentangle yourself if you can 4 " —
Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such wrangling
phrases."

19. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, continue addicted to taking messages, going
on errands, and acting as go-betweens ; to wit, on
kings, ministers of state, Kshatriyas, Brahmans, or
young men, saying : ' Go there, come hither, take this
with you, bring that from thence ' —

Gotama the recluse abstains from such servile
duties."

20. ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses and
Brahmans, while living on food provided by the faith-
ful, are tricksters5, droners out (of holy words for pay)6,


1 Aropito te vado. On the use of this idiom compare the Com-
mentary on the Then Gatha, p. 10 1. There is a misprint here in
the text, aropito for aropito. 'Issue has been joined against you'
would be a possible rendering. It is the phrase used, when some one
has offered to hold debate (maintain a thesis) against all comers, by
an opponent who takes up the challenge.

2 Niggahito si. On this idiom compare the opening paragraphs
of the Katha Vatthu and the Commentary on them (especially pp. 9,
10V It is literally 'you are censured.'

3 A'ara vada-pamokkhaya. So Buddhaghosa. But Gogerly
renders, ' Depart, that you may be freed from this disputation ; ' and
the only parallel passage seems to support this view. It is Mag^ima
I> I33. where it is said to be wrong to learn the Seriptures for the
sake of the advantage of being freed from discussion or debate where
texts are quoted against one. Pamokkha occurs besides at Sam-
yutta I, 2, Gataka V, 30, 31, and Mahava/wsa 158, but not in this
connection.

• 4 So the author of Milinda in making his hero Nagasena use just
such a phrase (Mil. p. 27) is making him commit a breach of
propriety.

6 Kuhaka\ 'Astonish the world with the three sorts of trickery,'
says Buddhaghosa. These are also referred to without explanation
at Cataka IV, 297 (where we should, I think, read kuhana).

6 Lapaka. Compare Itivuttaka, No. 99 = Ahguttara I, 165, 168;
and also Milinda' 228, Gataka III, 349.


*6 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


diviners \ and .exorcists 2, ever hungering to add o-ain
to gain 3 — Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such
deception and patter." '

Here ends the Maxima Sila [the Longer
Paragraphs on Conduct].

[9] 21. ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, earn their living by wrong means of liveli-
hood, by low arts, such as these :-


(1) Palmistry — prophe-
sying long life, prosperity,
&c. (or the reverse), from
marks on a child's hands,
feet, &c.4


(2) Divining by means
of omens and signs 6.

(3) Auguries drawn
from thunderbolts and
other celestial portents °.


1 Nemittaka, 'interpreters of signs and omens.' See the note
on nimittara in the next paragraph. Compare Milinda 299;
Gat IV, 124.

2 Nippesika, 'scarers away' (? of ghosts, or bad omens). But
the Commentary and Sanna give no help, and the word has only
been found in this list.

3 All the five words in this list recur at A. Ill, m, but the
context there is as undecisive as it is here, and the Commentary (fol.
di of the Tumour MS. at the India Office), though slightly different,
gives no better help.

4 Angara, literally 'limbs.' Buddhaghosa distinguishes this from
lakkha«ara (No. 5 in this list), and from anga-vi^a (No. 16). It
is not found, in this sense, anywhere in the texts.

5 Nimittawz, literally 'marks,' or 'signs.' Buddhaghosa tells
a story in illustration. King Pa«</u, they say (Pandi in the Sanna),
took three pearls in his closed hand, and asked a diviner what he had
in it. The latter looked this way and that for a sign; and seeing
a fly which had been caught by a house-lizard (the Sanna says ' by
a dog,' perhaps the meaning is simply 'in sugar') getting free
(mutta), said at once 'pearls' (also mutta in Pali). 'How many?'
says the king. The diviner, hearing a dog bark thrice, answered
'three.' Compare Mil. 178, and the note to the last section on
nemittika, and the story at Mahavarasa 82.

6 Uppado, « the portents of the great ones, thunderbolts falling, and
so on,' says Buddhaghosa. The Great Ones here mean, I think, the
spirits or gods presiding over the sun, moon, and planets (see the note
on § 26). The word corresponds to the Sanskrit Utpata, though the
d is vouched for by overwhelming authority. But this is only
another instance of a change not infrequent (as Ed. Miiller has shown,


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


17


(4) Prognostication by
interpreting dreams 1.

(5) Fortune-telling from
marks on the body 2.

(6) Auguries from the
marks on cloth gnawed by
mice 3.

(7) Sacrificing to Agni4.

(8) Offering oblations
from a spoon 5.

(9-13) Making offer-
ings to gods of husks, of


the red powder between
the grain and the husk, of
husked grain ready for
boiling, of ghee, and of
oil6.

(14) Sacrificing by spew-
ing mustard seeds, &c.,
into the fire out of one's
mouth 7.

(15) Drawing blood
from one's right knee as a
sacrifice to the eods 8.


Pali Grammar, p. 37); and the one or two cases where Burmese
scribes have (wrongly) corrected to up pat a is another instance to be
added to those referred to in the Introduction to Sum. I of their
habit of putting an easier reading where the more difficult one is really
right. Childers should therefore have kept this word separate from
the other uppado Comp. Gat. I, 374.

1 Supinawz. On the theory of dreams compare Mil., pp. 297-301.
At Gat. I, 374 the word is masculine. Perhaps charms to avert bad
dreams (Ath.-veda VI, 46; XVI, 5 and 6) are included in this 'low
art.' Gat. No. 77 mocks at the dream interpreters.

2 Lakkha«a/«. The commentator on this word as used in the
very same connection at Gat. I, 374 adds that it means also the
knowledge of good and bad marks on such persons and things as are
mentioned here in our next paragraph. Buddhaghosa confines its
meaning to that given above. This contradiction is another confir-
mation of the opinion expressed by me in 1880 in 'Buddhist Birth
Stories,' pp. lxiii foil., that Childers was wrong in ascribing the
(7ataka Commentary to Buddhaghosa. The word occurs in Buddha-
ghosa's sense at D. I, 114, 120= A. I, 163, &c. ; Gat. I, 56.

3 Musika^^inna/rc. The allied superstition of thinking it un-
lucky to wear clothes gnawed by mice is laughed out of court in the
Mangala Gataka, No. 87.

* Aggi-homa»z. Telling people that a sacrifice, if offered in a fire
of such and such a wood, will have such and such a result.

5 Dabbi-homaw. Telling people that an oblation of such and
such grains, butter, or so on, poured into the fire from such and such
a sort of spoon, will have such and such a result.

6 See Hillebrandt, 'Neu und Vollmondsopfer,' pp. 31, 171, and
1 Ritual-literatur ' in Biihler's ' Grundriss,' pp. 71, 72, 114, 176. The
nine homas here objected to mav also be compared with the seven at
Ath.-veda VIII, 9, 18.

7 No instance of this can be traced in the books of the Brahmans.

8 Compare the passage in Hillebrandt, in Biihler's 'Grundriss,'

II. C


1 8 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


(16) Looking at the
knuckles, &c, and, after
muttering a charm, divin-
ing whether a man is well
born or lucky or not !.

(17) Determining whe-
ther the site, for a pro-
posed house or pleasance,
is lucky or not 2.


(18) Advising on cus-
tomary law 3.

(19) Laying demons in
a cemetery 4.

(20) Laying ghosts 6.

(21) Knowledge of the
charms to be used when
lodging in an earth house °.

(22) Snake charming7.


p. 176, on the use of blood for sorcery. In one passage, Rig-vidh. Ill,
18, 3, it is one's -own blood that is to be used. But the specific
interpretation given here by Buddhaghosa cannot be paralleled from
the Brahmanical books.

1 Anga-vi^S. Buddhaghosa thus separates this from the angam
of No. 1. In both the passages Gat. II, 200, 250 the knowledge is
simply that of judging from a man's appearance that he is rough or
bad, and it is the good man in the story (in the second case the Bodisat
himself) who is the anga-vi^a-paMako. So at Gat. V, 458 it is
by anga-vi^a that the Bodisat prophesies that a man will be cruel.

2 Vatthu-vi^a. Childers (Diet., p. 559) has 'pool' instead of
1 house,' having misread sara for ghara (s and gh are nearly alike in
Sinhalese). The craft is further explained by Buddhaghosa in his
comment on the Mahd-parinibbana Sutta I, 26. Its success de-
pended on the belief that the sites were haunted by spirits. See
further below, § 27.

3 Khatta-vi^a. The Burmese MSS. correct the rare khatta
into the familiar khetta. Khetta-vi^a indeed occurs at Ud. Ill, 9,
and may just possibly there (in connection with writing, arithmetic,
tables, &c.) be correct in the meaning of ' land-surveying, mensura-
tion.' Buddhaghosa, though his explanation is corrupt, evidently
understands the phrase in a sense similar to that of khatta-dhamma
at Gat. V, 489, 490; Mil. 164 (see also 178); and his gloss nlti-
satthaw/ is probably nearer the mark than Sahkara's (on JC/o.nd. Up.
VII, 1, 2), which is dhanur-veda. It is the craft of government,
then lying in great part in adhering to custom.

The Sutta only follows the Upanishad in looking at all these crafts
as minor matters, but it goes beyond it in looking upon them as a
' low ' way, for a Brahman, of gaining a livelihood.

4 Siva-vi^a. It is clear that siva is used euphemistically, and
we may here have an early reference to what afterwards developed
into the cult of the god .Siva. Buddhaghosa gives an alternative
explanation as knowledge of the cries of jackals.

6 Bhuta-vi^a. Also in the JfMndogya. list (Joe. eit).

6 Bhuri-vi^a. It is the same as bhuri-kammawz, explained in
the same way by Buddhaghosa on § 27 below.

7 Ahi-vi^a. One method is described at Gat. IV, 457, 8.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY. 1 9


(23) The poison craft l.

(24) The scorpion craft2.

(25) The mouse craft 2.

(26) The bird craft3.

(27) The crow craft 4.

(28) Foretelling the


number of years that a
man has yet to live.

(29) Giving charms to
ward off arrows 6.

(30) The animal
wheel 6 —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts."

22. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, earn their living by wrong means of livelihood,
by low arts, such as these —

Knowledge of the signs of good and bad qualities
in the following things and of the marks in them
denoting the health or luck of their owners : — to wit,
gems 7, staves, garments, swords, arrows, bows, other
weapons, women 8, men 8, boys 8, girls 8, slaves, slave-
girls, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, oxen, goats9,
sheep9, fowls9, quails9, iguanas9, earrings10, tortoises, and
other animals —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts."

23. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses

Perhaps such charms against snake bite as Ath.-v. V, 13 ; VI, 12, 56 ;
VII, 88, are included.

1 Buddhaghosa says curing or giving poison, or poison spells
(compare Ath.-v. VI, 90, 93, 100).

2 These are explained to mean simply curing the bites of these
creatures.

3 Understanding their language.

4 Divining by the appearance and the cawings of crows.

5 Compare the Amba/Ma-vi^a" at Sum. 255 and below, p. 96 of
the text, § 23.

8 Miga-£akka;«. Understanding the language of all creatures.

7 The whole of this ' low art ' as applied to gems has been collected
in a series of manuals now edited by L. Finot in his 'Lapidaires
Indiens,' Paris, 1896.

8 The art in these four cases is to determine whether the marks on
them show they will bring good (or bad) luck to the houses in which
they dwell.

9 The art in these five cases is to say whether it is unclean or not
to eat them.

10 This comes in here very oddly. But the old commentator had
the same reading, and takes the word in its ordinary senses, not even
as amulet.

C 2


20 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, earn their living by wrong means of livelihood,
by low arts, such as soothsaying, to the effect that —

[10] The chiefs will march out.

The chiefs will march back.

The home chiefs will attack, and the enemies'
retreat.

The enemies' chiefs will attack, and ours will retreat.

The home chiefs will gain the victory, and the
foreign chiefs suffer defeat.

The foreign chiefs will gain the victory, and ours
will suffer defeat * —

Thus will there be victory on this side, defeat on
that —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.''

24. ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses and
Brahmans, while living on food provided by the faithful,
earn their living by wrong means of livelihood, by such
low arts as foretelling —


(1) There will be an
eclipse of the moon.

(2) There will be an
eclipse of the sun.

(3) There will be an
eclipse of a star (Nak-
shatra) 2.

(4) There will be aber-


ration of the sun or the
moon.

(5) The sun or the moon
will return to its usual path.

(6) There will be aber-
rations of the stars.

(7) The stars will return
to their usual course 3.


1 Throughout these paragraphs the plural is used. This cannot be
honorific, as the few great kings of that time are always spoken of in
the singular. Yet all the previous translators, except Burnouf, trans-
late by the singular — 'the king will march out,' &c. It is evident
that we have to understand ' chiefs/ and not the ' king ' : and that not
absolute monarchies, but republican institutions of .a more or less
aristocratic type, were in the mind of the composer of the paragraph.

2 Nakkhatta, translated by Gogerly and Neumann a 'planet.'
Buddhaghosa explains it by ' Mars and so on.' This may apply to
planets, but also to stars in general, and I know no other passage
where the meaning of the word is confined to planets. Burnouf has
'constellation,' but what can the eclipse of a constellation mean?

s Patha-gamana and uppatha-gamana. Prof. Kielhorn says
(in a note he has been kind enough to send me on this section):
' What the author means by these words I do not know. But


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY. 21


rising and setting, clear-
ness and dimness, of the
sun or the moon or the
stars 3, or foretelling of
each of these fifteen phe-
nomena that they will
betoken such and such a
result " [11]


(8) There will be a fall
of meteors 1.

(9) There will be a jun-
gle fire 2.

(10) There will be an
earthquake.

(11) The god will thun-
der.

(12-15) There will be
25. 'Or he might say: "Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, earn their living by wrong means of livelihood,
by low arts, such as these : —

Foretelling an abundant rainfall.

Foretelling a deficient rainfall.

Foretelling a good harvest.

Foretelling scarcity of food.

Foretelling tranquillity.

Foretelling disturbances.

Foretelling a pestilence.

Foretelling a healthy season.

Counting on the fingers 4:

uppatha-gamana would be literally "aberration, the going away
from one's proper path"; and patha-gamana therefore should be
" following one's proper course." I am sure the two words could not
mean conjunction and opposition ; nor, I think, ascension and declen-
sion. It is curious that Buddhaghosa has not explained them.'

1 Ukka-pato. See Gat. I, 374; Mil. 178.

2 Disa-daho. 'Thunder and lightning,' according to Neumann;
' fiery confiscations in the atmosphere,' according to Gogerly, whom
Burnouf follows. But Buddhaghosa's words are only explicable of
a jungle fire. Compare Gat. I, 212, 213, 374.

3 Burnouf takes these four words to refer to four occurrences-
Gogerly and Neumann take them as only two. Buddhaghosa seems
to imply four.

* Mud da. There has been great diversity in the various guesses
madfe at the meaning in this connection of mudda, which usually
means ' seal ' or ' seal-ring.' Gogerly has ' conveyancing,' and so
also Childers ; Burnouf takes this word and the next as one compound
in the sense of foretelling the future 'by calculating diagrams'; and
Neumann has ' Verwaltungsdienste,' administrative services. Buddha-
ghosa is very curt. He says only hattha-mudda gawana. Hattha-
mudda is found elsewhere only at Gat. Ill, 528, where hattha-


2 2 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

Counting without using the fingers l.

Summing up large totals 2.

Composing ballads, poetizing 3.

Casuistry, sophistry4 —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low
arts."

26. ' Or he might say : " Whereas some recluses
and Brahmans, while living on food provided by the
faithful, earn their living by wrong means of livelihood,
by low arts, such as —


aiuddaw karoti means 'to beckon,' and at Vin. V, 163, where
it is said of the polite member of the Order that he makes no sign
with his hand, nor beckons. (On hattha-vikara compare Mil.
I, 207, 547=Vin. I, i57=Vin. II, 216.) Both these passages are
much later than our text, and the sense of beckoning is here
impossible. But mudda is mentioned as a craft at Vin. IV, 7 (where
it is called honourable), at M. I, 85, and several times in the
Milinda (pp. 3, 59, 78, 178 of the Pali text), and muddiko as the
person who practises that craft at D. I, 51 and Vin. IV, 8. The
Sinhalese comment on this (quoted in my translation of the Milinda,
I, 91) shows that the art there was simply arithmetic, using the joints
or knuckles of the fingers as an aid to memory. And this is no
doubt the meaning in our paragraph.

1 Ganana. Buddhaghosa's comment on this is a££^iddaka-
gawana, in contradistinction to the last. It is evidently calculation
not broken up by using the fingers, mental arithmetic pure and
simple. The accountant who uses this method is called gawako
(D. I, 51 ; Vin. IV, 8). Buddhaghosa's comment on the fetter
passage is given by Minayeff at Pat. 84, but with a wrong reading,
akkhi*rc/aka.

2 Satfzkhanazra, literally 'counting up.' He who has the faculty
of doing this can, on looking at a tree, say how many leaves it has,
says Buddhaghosa. But the first words of his comment are doubtful.
He may perhaps mean calculating masses by means of the rosary.
Burnouf skips this word, and Neumann has simply ' counting.'

3 Kaveyya/rc. The word recurs, in a bad sense, at A. I, 72 =
III, 107, and also at S. I, no in the phrase kaveyya-matto,
'drunk with prophecy, inspired.' Buddhaghosa enumerates, in the
words of A. II, 23c, four kinds of poetry, and explains them in
nearly the same words as found in the Manoratha Purani on that
passage. None of the four refer to sacrificial hymns. Impromptu
rhyming, ballad singing, and the composition of poems are meant.

4 Lokayatazrc. Usually rendered 'materialism.' But it is quite
clear that this meaning is impossible in this connection. See Mi-
linda 174.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


23


(1) Arranging a lucky
day for marriages in which
the bride or bridegroom
is brought home '.

(2) Arranging a lucky
day for marriages in which
the bride or bridegroom
is sent forth 2.

(3) Fixing a lucky time
for the conclusion of trea-
ties of peace [or using
charms to procure har-
mony] 3.

(4) Fixing a lucky time
for the outbreak of hostili-
ties [or using charms to
make discord] 3.

(5) Fixing a lucky time
for the calling in of debts
[or charms for success in
throwing dice] 3.


(6) Fixing a lucky time
for the expenditure of
money [or charms to bring
ill luck to an opponent
throwing dice] 3.

(7) Using charms
make people lucky 4.

(8) Using charms
make people unlucky.

(9) Using charms
procure abortion.

(10) Incantations
bring on dumbness.

(11) Incantations to
keep a man's jaws
fixed.

(12) Incantations to
make a man throw up his
hands.

(13) Incantations to
bring on deafness5.


to


to


to


to


1 Compare the Sinhalese bin a marriage in which the bridegroom
is brought into the house of the bride's family.

2 Compare the Sinhalese diga marriage in which the bride is sent out
to live in the bridegroom's family. We have no words now in English
to express this difference between marrying and giving in marriage.

3 Sa/ravadanawz. Childers calls this a magic art, following
Burnouf who calls it sorcery. Buddhaghosa explains it as astrology.
The fact is all these expressions are technical terms for acts of astrology
or sorcery, they none of them occur elsewhere either in Pali or
Sanskrit, and the tradition preserved by Buddhaghosa may be at fault
in those cases in which the use of the word had not survived to later
times. The general sense may be sufficiently clear, but for absolute
certainty of interpretation we must wait till examples are found in
Indian books of the actual use of the words, not in mere lists, but in
a connection which shows the meaning. Ath.-v. Ill, 30 is a charm to
secure concord in a family, compare VII, 52 ; and there are several
charms in the Atharva-veda for success in gambling.

4 Subhaga-karanazw. Many such charms are preserved in the
Atharva-veda (for instance, X, 3 ; 5 ; XVI, 4 ; 9).

5 It would be useless to seek in the Atharva-veda, which (with the
one exception mentioned in the notes to the next section) gives only
the charms which are supposed to bring benefits, for instances of


24 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


(14) Obtaining oracu-
lar answers by means of
the magic mirror '.

(15) Obtaining oracu-
lar answers through a girl
possessed2.

(16) Obtaining oracu-
lar answers from a god


(17) The worship of
the Sun 4.

(18) The worship of
the Great One 5.

(19) Bringing forth
flames from one's mouth.

(20) Invoking Siri, the
goddess of Luck 6 —


Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts."

these malevolent practices. But we have here direct evidence that
black magic, as was indeed inevitable, was as fully trusted in the
sixth century B.C. in the valley of the Ganges as white. We need not
be surprised that the malevolent charms are not recorded.

1 Adasa-pa«Ao. Buddhaghosa says they made a god appear in
the mirror and answer questions put. It is a later conception to
discard the god, and make the mirror itself give pictures of the
hidden events. The mirror is of metal (Par. Dip. 235).

2 Kumari-paw^o. Through a girl of good family and repute.

3 Deva-pa«^o. Also obtained through a girl, but this time
a deva-dasi or temple prostitute. It is instructive to find, even
under the patriarchal regime of the sixth century b. e., that men
thought they could best have communications from the gods through
the medium of a woman.

4 Adi££upa/Manam. Such sun-worship is ridiculed in the
Gataka of the same name, No. 173.

6 Buddhaghosa explains the Great One as MahS Brahmi. This
seems to me very doubtful. It is at least odd to find Brahmi intro-
duced in this connection. We may grant that the Buddhists mighl
have put sun-worship into a list of sorceries, but there was no cere-
monial cult of Brahma and little or none of Brahma. And however
much the new gospel might hold the speculations of the dominant
theosophy in contempt, that would scarcely explain their being ranked
as privates in this regiment. Burnout avoids this by rendering the
phrase generally ' serving the great,' and Neumann has ' practising
sorcery.' Neither of these guesses seems happy. Ma hat in com-
position is elsewhere always maha in Pali, and we possibly have here
a sandhi for mahati-upa//^ana/w, in the sense of worship of the
Great Mother, the Earth, with covert allusion to mahf. This would
give excellent sense, as the worship of the Mother Earth was closely
associated in the popular mind with witchcraft. A god or goddess is
certainly meant, and one so associated would be best in place here.
It is perhaps worthy of note that in the oldest portion of the Taittiriya
Upanishad, Sun, Moon, Earth, and Sri occur together in a set of
mystic groups, and Sun, Moon, Brahma, and food are all identified
by a word-play with Mahas (Sikya-valli 4-7).

e See Milinda 191, and Gat. II, 410.


MINOR DETAILS OF MERE MORALITY.


25


[12] 27. ' Or he might say
and Brahmans, while living
faithful, earn their living by
by low arts, such as these :-

(1) Vowing gifts to a
god if a certain benefit be
granted.

(2) Paying such vows.

(3) Repeating charms
while lodging in an earth
house l.

(4) Causing virility 2.

(5) Making a man im-
potent 2.

(6) Fixing on lucky
sites for dwellings 3.

(7) Consecrating sites 3.

(8) Ceremonial rins-
ings of the month.

(9) Ceremonial bath-
ings 4.

(10) Offering sacrifices.
(11-14) Administering

emetics and purgatives.

(15) Purging people to
relieve the head (that is


: " Whereas some recluses

on food provided by the

wrong means of livelihood,

by giving drugs to make
people sneeze).

(16) Oiling people's
ears (either to make them
grow or to heal sores on
them).

(1 7) Satisfying people's
eyes (soothing them by
dropping medicinal oils
into them).

(18) Administering
drugs through the nose 6.

(19) Applying colly-
rium to the eyes.

(20) Giving medical
ointment for the eyes.

(21) Practising as an
oculist.

(22) Practising as a
surgeon.

(23) Practising as a
doctor for children.


1 Bhuri-kammara. Is this a place sacred to Mother Earth?
The ceremony referred to is the carrying out of the vi^a or craft
mentioned in the list at § 21.

2 Vassa- and vossa-kammawz. Morris discusses the etymology
of these words, only found in this list, in the J. P. T. S., 1889,
p. 208. The idea of the second is not, of course, castration, but
making a man's desire to fail by a spell. Several such are preserved
in the Atharva (IV, 4; VI, 101 to give virility; VI, 138; VII, 113
to cause impotence).

8 Vatthu-kammawj and -parikirawaw. These constitute the
vatthu-vig^a. of § 21.

* Bathings, that is, of other people.

B See Mil. I, 511 and the rules laid down in 'Vinaya Texts,'
II, 53-55-


26 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

(24) Administering (25) Administering me-

roots and drugs. dicines in rotation * —

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts."
' These, brethren, are the trifling matters, the minor
details, of mere morality, of which the unconverted
man, when praising the Tathagata, might speak.'


Here end the Long Paragraphs on Conduct.

28. ' There are, brethren, other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, compre-
hensible only by the wise 2. These things the Tatha-
gata, having himself realised them and seen them face
to face, hath set forth ; and it is of them that they, who
would rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with
the truth, should speak.

' And what are they ?

29. ' There are recluses and Brahmans, brethren,
who reconstruct the ultimate beginnings of things,
whose speculations are concerned with the ultimate
past 3, and who on eighteen grounds put forward various

1 The Buddhist view of Nos. 11-25 must not be mistaken. It is
sufficiently clear from the numerous examples in the Vinaya (see
especially 'Vinaya Texts,' II, pp. 41-144), and from the high praise
accorded to (Jivaka and other physicians, that the objection was to
recluses and Brahmans practising medicine as a means of livelihood.
They might do so gratis for themselves or for their coreligionists, and
laymen might do so for gain.

The use of pa/imokkha in No. 25 is curious. It is when, for
instance, a purgative is first given and then a tonic to counteract the
other, to set free from its effect. Compare Gat. V, 25.

2 The corresponding Sanskrit terms occur at Divyavadana, p. 492.
No doubt the reading there ought to be nipu/zo.

3 These phrases recur S. Ill, 45. On anuddi/7^i see also
Gogerly in the 'Ceylon Friend,' 1875, p. 133, and Morris in the J. P. T. S.,
1886, p. 113; and compare attanuddi/Mi at Mil. 146, 160, 352;
S. N. 1 1 19. As in cur colloquial expression a 'viewy man,' di/Mi
almost always, and anudi/Mi in all the seven passages where it
occurs, have a connotation of contempt — a mere view, an offhand ill-
considered opinion, a delusion. The Greek 86$a has had a similar
history, and dogma or speculation is a better rendering than view or
belief.


THE ETERNALISTS. 27


assertions regarding it. [18] And about what, with
reference to what, do those venerable ones do so ?

30. ' There are, brethren, some recluses and Brah-
mans who are Eternalists \ and who, on four grounds,
proclaim that both the soul and the world are eternal.
And about what, with reference to what, do those
venerable ones do so ?

31. 'In the first place, brethren, some recluse or
Brahman by means of ardour, of exertion, of applica-
tion, of earnestness, of careful thought, reaches up to
such rapture of heart that, rapt in heart, he calls to
mind his various dwelling-places in times gone by — in
one birth, or in two, or three, or four, or five, or ten,
or twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty, or a hundred, or
a thousand, or in several hundreds or thousands or
laks of births — to the effect that " There I had
such and such a name, was of such and such
a lineage2 and caste3, lived on such and such food,
experienced such and such pains and pleasures, had
such and such a span of years. And when I fell from
thence I was reborn in such and such a place under
such and such a name, in such and such a lineage and
caste, living on such and such food, experiencing such
and such pains and pleasures, with such and such
a span of years. And when I fell from thence I was
reborn here." Thus does he recollect, in full detail
both of condition and of custom, his various dwelling-


1 Sassata-vada.

2 G otr a, literally ' cow-stall.' The history of this word has yet
to be written. It probably meant at the time this Sutta was written
a family or lineage traced through the father. On the meaning of
gotra^a (the gentiles of Roman Law) in the later law-books see
West and Biihler, ' Hindu Law of Inheritance/ p. 171.

8 Va»«a, literally 'colour.' Gogerly renders it 'appearance,'
and Neumann ' Beruf.' I have chosen caste (though it is not caste
in its strictest sense) because it no doubt refers to the iattaro va»»a
mentioned so often in the Suttas. It is true that these — Khattiyas,
Brahmans, Vessas, and Suddas — were not castes, but four divisions of
the people, each consisting of many subdivisions (by customs as to
connubium and commensality) which afterwards hardened into castes.
See J. R. A. S., 1897, pp. 180-190.


28 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

places in times gone by. [14] And he says to himself :
" Eternal is the soul ; and the world, giving birth to
nothing new, is stedfast as a mountain peak, as a pillar
firmly fixed ; and though these living creatures trans-
migrate and pass away, fall from one state of existence
and spring up in another, yet they are for ever and
ever. And why must that be so ? Because I, by
means of ardour of exertion of application of earnest-
ness of careful thought, can reach up to such rapture
of heart that, rapt in heart, I can call to mind, and in
full detail both of condition and of custom, my various
dwelling-places in times gone by — by that is it that
I know this — that the soul is eternal ; and that the
world, giving birth to nothing new, is stedfast as
a mountain peak, as a pillar firmly fixed ; and that
though these living creatures transmigrate and pass
away, fall from one state of existence and spring up in
another, yet they are for ever and ever."

' This, brethren, is the first state of things on
account of which, starting from which, some recluses
and Brahmans are Eternalists, and maintain that both
the soul and the world are eternal.

32. [The second case put is in all respects the same
save that the previous births thus called to mind ex-
tend over a still longer period up to ten world aeons \]

33. [15] [The third case put is in all respects the
same save that the previous births thus called to mind
extend o /er a still longer period up to forty world aeons.]

34. [16] ' And in the fourth place, brethren, on what
ground is it, starting from what, that those venerable
ones are Eternalists, and maintain that the soul and the
world are eternal.

,' In this case, brethren, some recluse or Brahman

1 Saw«va//a-viva//a/« (rolling up and evolution, from va//, to turn).
It is the period of the gradual disintegration and conformation of a
world. Needless to add that the length of this period cannot be
expressed in figures.

Neither the idea nor the word occurs in books known to be before
the Buddha. But both are Indian rather than Buddhist. Sa/«varta
is found in the Maha Bharata and the Ramayawa; and the later Sarikhya
notion of pralaya is closely allied.


THE ETERNAI.ISTS. 20.

is addicted to logic and reasoning. He gives utter-
ance to the following conclusion of his own, beaten out
by his argumentations and based on his sophistry ] ;
" Eternal is the soul ; and the world, giving birth to
nothing new, is stedfast as a mountain peak, as a pillar
firmly fixed ; and these living creatures, though they
transmigrate and pass away, fall from one state of
existence and spring up in another, yet they are for
ever and ever."

' This, brethren, is the fourth state of things on the
ground of which, starting from which, some recluses
and Brahmans are Eternalists, and maintain that the
soul and the world are eternal.

35. ' These, brethren, are those recluses and Brah-
mans who are Eternalists, and in four ways maintain
that both the soul and the world are eternal. For
whosoever of the recluses and Brahmans are such and
maintain this, they do so in these four ways, or in one
or other of the same, and outside these there is no way
in which this opinion is arrived at.

36. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted on,
will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. [17] That does he know, and he knows also
other things far beyond (far better than those specula-
tions) 2 ; and having that knowledge he is not puffed
up, and thus untarnished he has, in his own heart 3,
realised the way of escape from them 4, has understood,
as they really are, the rising up and passing away of
sensations, their sweet taste, their danger, how they
cannot be relied on ; and not grasping after any (of


1 This phrase recurs below, chap, iii, §§ 14, 20.

2 Sila, for instance, and samadhi, and all the other things known
to a Buddha, says Buddhaghosa, p. 108.

3 ~Pa.kka.ttam. See the common phrases A. II, 198 = 8. I, 9, 10,
117; M. I, 188 = 422; M. I, 251, 252 = S. Ill, 54, &c. ; and S. N.
611,906; Mil. 96, 347; Sum. 182. ' Without depending on any one
else, himself by himself,' says Buddhaghosa.

4 Nirvana, says Buddhaghosa.


30 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

those things men are eager for) he, the Tathagata, is
quite set free *.

37. 'These2, brethren, are those other things, pro-
found, difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquil-
lising, sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle,
comprehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.


Chapter II.

1. 'There are, brethren, some recluses and Brah-
mans who are Eternalists with regard to some things,
and in regard to others Non-Eternalists ; who on four
grounds maintain that the soul and the world are
partly eternal and partly not.

'And what is it that these venerable ones depend
upon, what is it that they start from, in arriving at this
conclusion ?

2. ' Now there comes a time, brethren, when, sooner
or later, after the lapse of a long long period, this
world-system passes away. And when this happens
beings have mostly been reborn in the World of
Radiance, and there they dwell made of mind, feeding
on joy, radiating light from themselves, traversing the
air, continuing in glory ; and thus they remain for
a long long period of time.

3. 'Now there comes also a time, brethren, when,


1 Gogerly (pp. 77, 78 in Grimblot) has made a sad mess of this
paragraph, misunderstanding the grammatical construction of the first
clause, and misinterpreting paramasati in the second, and nis-r
sara«a/» in the third.

* Not of course the four speculations, but the higher knowledge
which has led him to reject them.


ETERNALISTS AND NON-ETERNALISTS. 3 1


sooner or later, this world-system begins to re-evolve.
When this happens the Palace of Brahma appears, but
it is empty. And some being or other, either because
his span of years has passed or his merit is exhausted,
falls from that World of Radiance, and comes to life in
the Palace of Brahma. And there also he lives made
of mind, feeding on joy, radiating light from himself,
traversing the air, continuing in glory ; and thus does
he remain for a long long period of time.

4. ' Now there arises in him, from his dwelling there
so long alone, a dissatisfaction and a longing : " O !
would that other beings might come to join me in this
place ! " And just then, either because their span of
years had passed or their merit was exhausted, other
beings fall from the World of Radiance, and appear in
the Palace of Brahma as companions to him, and in all
respects like him. [18]

5. ' On this, brethren, the one who was first reborn
thinks thus to himself: " I am Brahma, the Great
Brahma, the Supreme One, the Mighty, the All-seeing,
the Ruler, the Lord of all, the Maker, the Creator, the
Chief of all, appointing to each his place, the Ancient
of days, the Father of all that are and are to be *.
These other beings are of my creation. And why is
that so ? A while ago I thought, ' Would that they
might come ! ' And on my mental aspiration, behold
the beings came."

'And those beings themselves, too, think thus: " This
must be Brahma, the Great Brahma, the Supreme, the
Mighty, the All-seeing, the Ruler, the Lord of all, the
Maker, the Creator, the Chief of all, appointing to each
his place, the Ancient of days, the Father of all that are

_^ . — - — ...■■■ 1 1

1 This string of epithets recurs at M. I, 327 in the course of the
story of the Brahma, named Baka, who is represented as coming to
the very conclusion set out in our section. The story was a favourite
one. and three recensions of it have been preserved (M. I, 326-331 ;
S. I, 142-144, and Gat. No. 405). Mr.' Crow evidently considered
himself the Maha Brahma of the period.

The omission in the Dialogue of all reference to the Kesava Birth
Story may be a sign of greater age or it may be due simply to the
fact that it is not required for the argument there.


32 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

and are to be. And we must have been created by
him. And why ? Because, as we see, it was he who
was here first, and we came after that."

6 ' On this, brethren, the one who first came into
existence there is of longer life, and more glorious, and
more powerful than those who appeared after him.
And it might well be, brethren, that some being on his
falling from that state, should come hither. And having
come hither he might go forth from the household life
into the homeless state. And having thus become a
recluse he, by reason of ardour of exertion of applica-
tion of earnestness of careful thought, reaches up to
such rapture of heart that, rapt in heart, he calls to
mind his last dwelling-place, but not the previous ones.
He says to himself: "That illustrious Brahma, the
Great Brahmd, the Supreme One, the Mighty, the
All-seeing, the Ruler, the Lord of all, the Maker, the
Creator, the Chief of all, appointing to each his place,
the Ancient of days, the Father of all that are and are
to be, he by whom we were created, he is stedfast
immutable eternal, of a nature that knows no change,
and he will remain so for ever and ever. But we who
were created by him have come hither as being imper-
manent mutable limited in duration of life.

[19] ' This, brethren, is the first state of things on
account of which, starting out from which, some recluses
and Brahmans, being Eternalists as to some things, and
Non-eternalists as to others, maintain that the soul and
the world are partly eternal and partly not.

7. 'And what is the second ?

' There are, brethren, certain gods called the " De-
bauched by Pleasure1." For ages they pass their time
in the pursuit of the laughter and sport of sensual lusts.
In consequence thereof their self-possession is corrupted,
and through the loss of their self-control they fall from
that state -.

1 Khio^/a-padosika. They are not mentioned elsewhere except
in the list of gods in the Maha Samaya (p. 287).

2 Buddhaghosa on this has a curious note. The gods, though of
great glory, are delicate in body. A man, having gone without food


THE SEMI-ETERNALISTS. 3$

8. ' Now it might well be, brethren, that some being,
on his falling from that state, should come hither. And
having come hither he should, as in the last case,
become a recluse, and acquire the power of recollecting
his last birth, but only his last one.

9. ' And he would say to himself: " Those gods who
-are not debauched by pleasure are stedfast, immutable,
eternal, of a nature that knows no change, and they
will remain so for ever and ever. [20] But we — who fell
from that state, having lost our self-control through
being debauched by pleasure — we have come hither as
being impermanent, mutable, limited in duration of
life."

10. ' And what is the third ?

' There are, brethren, certain gods called " the De-
bauched in Mind V They burn continually with envy2
one against another, and being thus irritated, their
hearts become ill-disposed towards each other, and
being thus debauched, their bodies become feeble, and
their minds imbecile. And those gods fall from that
state.

11. 'Now it might well be, brethren, that some

for seven days even, may restore his strength by the use of clear
broth and so on. But the gods can't play tricks with themselves ; and
if they lose their heads and forget their meal-times, they die — pass
away from that state. The poor gods ! Whether this be really
implied in the text or not, it is at least in harmony with the irony
of the Buddha's talk.

1 Mano-padosika. Only found here and in the list in the
Samaya Sutta. Even there it is almost certainly merely taken from
this passage, so that it looks very much as if both these classes or
.titles of gods were simply invented, in irony, for the sake of the
argument. Buddhaghosa identifies this class with the retinue of the
Four Great Kings — that is the regents of the four quarters.

2 Upani^Myanti, from ^Myati, to bum. Elsewhere found
only at Vin. I, 193; II, 269; III, 118, in all which passages it has
the connotation of ' covet, lust after.' Buddhaghosa takes it here in
the sense of envy, and tells a tale, too long to quote, to show the
quarrelsome nature of these gods. In the sense of 'consider' (from
,^Myati, to think) the word has only been found at S. N., p. 143.
There may have been confusion between the two homonyms, so that
ours got to mean ' to consider in such a way as to be excited, to
burn.'

II. D


I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


being, on his falling from that state, should come
hither ; and having become a recluse should, as in the
other cases, acquire the power of recollecting his last
birth, but only his last one.

12. 'And he would say to himself: "Those gods
who are not debauched in mind do not continually burn
with envy against each other, so their hearts do not
become evil disposed one towards another, nor their
bodies feeble and their minds imbecile. Therefore
they fall not from that state ; they are stedfast, immu-
table, eternal, of a nature that knows no change, and
they will remain so for ever and ever. [21] But we
were corrupted in mind, being constantly excited by
envy against one another. And being thus envious
and corruot our bodies became feeble, and our minds
imbecile, and we fell from that state, and have come
hither as being impermanent, mutable, limited in
duration of life."

' This, brethren, is the third case.

1 3. ' And what is the fourth ?

' In this case, brethren, some recluse or Brahman is-
addicted to logic and reasoning. He gives utterance
to the following conclusion of his own, beaten out by
his argumentations and based on his sophistry : " This
which is called eye and ear and nose and tongue and
body is a self which is impermanent, unstable, not
eternal, subject to change. But this which is called
heart, or mind, or consciousness is a self which is per-
manent, stedfast, eternal, and knows no change, and it
will remain for ever and ever V

* This, brethren, is the fourth state of things, on the
ground of which, starting from which, some recluses


1 Buddhaghosa explains that these speculators perceive how the
organs of sense break up (and sense impressions pass away) ; but
they fail to see that the same thing holds even more strongly in the
case of thoughts, since no sooner has each mental impression given
rise to the succeeding one than it passes away. Not perceiving that,
and depending on the analogy of birds, who fly away from one tree
only to alight on another, they conclude that the mind, when this
individuality is broken up, goes (as a unity) elsewhere.


THE EXTENSIONISTS. 35


and Brahmans are Semi-eternalists, and in four ways
maintain that the soul and the world are in some
respects eternal, and in some not.

14. 'These, brethren, are those recluses and Brahmans
who are Semi-eternalists, and in four ways maintain
that the soul and the world are eternal in some cases
and not in others. For whosoever of the recluses and
Brahmans are such and maintain this, they do so in
these four ways or in one or other of the same ; and
outside these there is no way in which this opinion is
arrived at.

[22] 15. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata
knows that these speculations thus arrived at, thus
insisted on, will have such and such a result, such and
such an effect on the future condition of those who
trust in them. That does he know, and he knows
also other things far beyond (far better than those
speculations) ; and having that knowledge, he is not
puffed up, and thus untarnished he has, in his own
heart, realised the way of escape from them, has under-
stood, as they really are, the rising up and passing
away of sensations, their sweet taste, their danger, how
they cannot be relied on, and not grasping after any
(of those things men are eager for) he, the Tathagata,
is quite set free.

' These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


1 6. ' There are, brethren, certain recluses and Brah-
mans who are Extensionists 1, and who in four ways
set forth the infinity or finiteness of the world. And

1 Antanantika.
D 2


36 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


on what ground, starting out from what, do these
venerable ones maintain this ?

17. 'In the first case, brethren, some recluse or Brah-
man, by means of ardour of exertion of application
of earnestness of careful thought, reaches up to such
rapture of heart that he, rapt in heart, dwells in the
world imagining it finite. And he says thus to him-
self: "Finite is the world, so that a path could be
traced round it1. And why is this so? Since I, by
means of ardour of exertion of application of earnest-
ness of careful thought, can reach up to such rapture
of heart that, rapt in heart, I dwell in the world
perceiving it to be finite — by that I know this."

' This, brethren, is the first case.

1 8. ' The second case is similar, only that the
conclusion is: [23] "Infinite is the world without a
limit. Those recluses and Brahmans who say it is
finite, so that a path could be traced round it, are


wrong 2


19. 'The third case is similar, only that the con-
clusion is that he imagines the world limited in the
upward and downward directions, but infinite across ;
he declares both the former conclusions to be wrong.

20. 'In the fourth case, brethren, some recluse or
Brahman is addicted to logic and reasoning. He gives
utterance to the following conclusion of his own,
beaten out by his argumentations and based on his
sophistry: "This world is neither finite nor yet in-
finite. Those recluses and Brahmans who maintain
either the first, or the second, or the third conclusion,
are wrong. [24] Neither is the world finite, nor is it
infinite."

4 This, brethren, is the fourth case.


1 Pariva/umo. Only found here. Buddhaghosa says nothing.

2 According to Buddhaghosa (Ats. 160) there are four things that
are infinite — space, the number of world-systems, the number of
living creatures, and the wisdom of a Buddha. Had this doctrine
formed part of the original Buddhism we should expect to find these
£att&ri anantani in the chapter on the 'Fours' in the Ahguttara,
but I do not find them there.


THE EEL-WRIGGLERS. 37

21. 'These, brethren, are those recluses and Brah-
mans who are Extensionists, and in four ways maintain
that the world is finite or infinite. For whosoever
of the recluses and Brahmans are such, and maintain
this, they do so in these four ways or in one or other
of the same ; and outside these there is no way in
which this opinion is arrived at.

22. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted
on, will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also
other things far beyond (far better than those specula-
tions) ; and having that knowledge he is not puffed
up, and thus untarnished he has, in his own heart,
realised the way of escape from them, has understood,
as they really are, the rising up and passing away
of sensations, their sweet taste, their danger, how
they cannot be relied on, and not grasping after any
(of those things men are eager for) he, the Tathagata,
is quite set free.

' These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


23. 'There are, brethren, some recluses and Brah-
mans who wriggle like eels ; and when a question is
put to them on this or that they resort to equivocation,
to eel-wriggling, and this in four ways.

• Now on what ground, starting out from what, do
those venerable ones do so ?

24. ' In the first place, brethren, some recluse or
Brahman does not understand the good in its real
nature, nor the evil. And he thinks : " 1 neither know


38 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

the good, as it really is, nor the evil. [25] That being
so, were I to pronounce this to be good or that to be
evil, I might be influenced therein by my feelings or
desires, by illwill or resentment. And under these
circumstances I might be wrong ; and my having been
wrong might cause me the pain of remorse ; and the
sense of remorse might become a hindrance to me 1."
Thus fearing and abhorring the being wrong in an
expressed opinion, he will neither declare anything
to be good, nor to be bad ; but on a question being
put to him on this or that, he resorts to eel-wriggling,
to equivocation, and says: " I don't take it thus. I don't
take it the other way. But I advance no different
opinion. And I don't deny your position. And I don't
say it is neither the one, nor the other V

' This is the first case.

' And what is the second ?

25. [The same, reading] '. . . " Under these circum-
stances I might fall into that grasping condition of heart
which causes rebirth ; and my so falling might cause
me the pain of remorse ; and the sense of remorse
might become a hindrance to me." [26] Thus fear-
ing and abhorring the falling into that state 3, he will
neither declare (&c, as in § 24).

' This is the second case.
' And what is the third ?

26. [The same, reading] ' And he thinks : " I neither
know the good, as it really is, nor the evil. Now
there are recluses and Brahmans who are clever,
subtle, experienced in controversy, hair-splitters, who
go about, methinks, breaking to pieces by their wisdom


1 'Either in self-training or in the attainment of bliss in heaven,'
says Buddhaghosa (p. 115).

8 Buddhaghosa gives examples of these five equivocations.

3 Buddhaghosa explains that if, in his ignorance, he should, by
chance, declare the good to be good, he will be puffed up by the
approval of the wise. But if he should blunder, he will be filled with
vexation and illwill when his error is pointed out. Either of these
states of mind will be the fuel to keep the fire burning, the state
technically called Up ad an a, 'grasping.'


THE EEL-WRIGGLERS.


39


the speculations of others. Were I to pronounce this
to be good, or that to be evil, these men might join
issue with me, call upon me for my reasons, point out
my errors. And on their doing so, I might be unable
to explain 1. And that might cause me the pain of
remorse ; and the sense of remorse might become a
hindrance to me." Thus fearing and abhorring the
joinder of issue, he will neither declare (&c, as m§ 24).

' This is the third case. [27]

' And what is the fourth ?

27. 'In this case, brethren, some recluse or Brahman
is dull, stupid. And it is by reason of his dullness,
his stupidity, that when a question on this or that is
put to him, he resorts to equivocation, to wriggling
like an eql — " If you ask me whether there is another
world, — well, if I thought there were, I would say so.
But I don't say so. And I don't think it is thus or
thus. And I don't think it is otherwise. And I don't
deny it. And I don't say there neither is, nor is not,
another world." Thus does he equivocate, and in like
manner about each of such propositions as the follow-


2 .


ing

a, (2) There is not another
world.

(3) There both is, and
is not, another world.

(4) There neither is,
nor is not, another
world.

/?. (1) There are Chance
Beings (so called be-
cause theyspringinto
existence, either here
or in another world,
without the inter-
vention of parents,


and seem therefore
to come without a
cause).

(2) There are no such
beings/

(3) There both are,
and are not, such
beings.

(4) There neither are,
nor are not, such
beings.

y. (1) There is fruit, re-
sult, of good and bad
actions.


1 Sampayati. See the note at ' Vinaya Texts,' III, 317, and
compare M. I, 85, 96, 472.

2 Such questions are called elsewhere the common basis of dis-
cussions among Brahmans.


40 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


(2) There is not.

(3) There both is, and
is not.

(4) There neither is,
nor is not.

(1) A man who has
penetrated to the


truth l continues to
exist after death.

(2) He does not.

(3) He both does, and
does not.

(4) He neither does,
nor does not.


1 This, brethren, is the fourth case 2.

[28] 28. ' These, brethren, are those recluses and
Brahmans who wriggle like eels ; and who, when
a question is put to them on this or that, resort to
equivocation, to eel-wriggling ; and that in four ways.
For whosoever do so, they do so in these four ways,
or in one or other of the same ; there is no other way
in which they do so.

29. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted on,
will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also other
things far beyond (far better than those speculations) ;
and having that knowledge he is not puffed up, and
thus untarnished he has, in his own heart, realised the
way of escape from them, has understood, as they
really are, the rising up and passing away of sensations,
their sweet taste, their danger, how they cannot be
relied on, and not grasping after any (of those things
men are eager for) he, the Tathagata, is quite set free.

' These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,

1 The word here used is Tathagata, 'he who has gone, or
perhaps come, to the truth.' See Chalmers in the J. R. A. S.,
Jan., 1898, and compare S. Ill, in, ij6-ii8; M. I, 140, 171, 486;
S. N. 467. The use of sammaggato\D. I, 55, &;c.) and of gatatto
(D. I, 57, &c.) shows that gata was used elliptically in the sense of
' gone to the furthest point aimed at ' among the followers of the
other sects that arose at the same time as Buddhism. The exact
derivation and history of the word Tathagata may be doubtful, but its
meaning is, on the whole, clear enough.

2 This is the identical answer put below (p. 57 of the text) into the
mouth of Sangaya. Bela/Maputta.


THE FORTUITOUS-ORIGINISTS. 4 I

sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


30. ' There are, brethren, some recluses and Brah-
mans who are Fortuitous-Originists 1i and who in two
ways maintain that the soul and the world arise without
a cause. And on what ground, starting out from what,
do they do so ?

31. ' There are, brethren, certain gods called Un-
conscious Beings 2. As soon as an idea occurs to
them they fall from that state. Now it may well be,
brethren, that a being, on falling from that state,
should come hither ; and having come hither he might
go forth from the household life* into the homeless
state. And having thus become a recluse he, by
reason of ardour and so on (as in the other cases)
reaches up to such rapture of heart that, rapt in heart,
he calls to mind how that idea occurred to him, but
not more than that. He says to himself: " Fortuitous

1 Adhi^a-samuppannika. This adhi^^a (which must be
distinguished from the other adhi££a, derived from adhiyati, occurring
at Gat. Ill, 2 18 = IV, 301) recurs at M. I, 443, where it is opposed in
the sense of 'occasional' to abhi/zha at M. I, 442 in the sense of
'habitual.' Udana VI, 5 throws light on its use here. It is there
associated with words meaning 'neither self-originated, nor created
by others.' It is explained by Buddhaghosa on our passage (Sum.
I, 118) as 'springing up without a cause.' The derivation is doubtful.

2 Asa««a-satta. They spring into being in this wise. Some one
of the Brahman ascetics having practised continual meditation and
arrived at the Fourth Ghana, sees the disadvantage attached to thinking,
and says to himself: ' It is by dwelling on it in thought that physical
pain and all sorts of mental terrors arise. Have done with this
thinking. An existence without it were better. And dying in this
belief he is reborn among the Unconscious Ones, who have form only,
and neither sensations nor ideas nor predispositions nor conscious-
ness. So long as the power of the Ghana lasts, so long do they last.
Then an idea occurs to them — the idea of rebirth in this world — and
they straightway die.


42 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

in origin are the soul and the world. And why so ?
Because formerly I was not, but now am. Having not
been, I have come to be." [29]

'This, brethren, is the first state of things on account
of which, starting out from which, some recluses and
Brahmans become Fortuitous-Originists, and maintain
that the soul and the world arise without a cause.

32, 33. 'And what is the second ?

' In this case, brethren, some recluse or Brahman is
addicted to logic and reasoning. He gives utterance
to the following conclusion of his own, beaten out by
his argumentations, and based on his sophistry : " The
soul and the world arose without a cause."

' This, brethren, is the second case.

34. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted on,
will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also other
things far beyond (far better than those speculations) ;
and having that knowledge he is not puffed up, and
thus untarnished he has, in his own heart, realised the
way of escape from them, has understood, as they
really are, the rising up and passing away of sensations,
their sweet taste, their danger, how they cannot be
relied on, and not grasping after any (of those things
men are eager for) he, the Tathagata, is quite set free.
' These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


[30] 35. • These, brethren, are the recluses and
Brahmans who reconstruct the ultimate beginnings of
things, whose speculations are concerned with the


THE BELIEVERS IN FUTURE LIFE. 43

ultimate past, and who on eighteen grounds put for-
ward various assertions regarding the past l. And
those who do so, all of them, do so in one or other of
these eighteen ways. There is none beside.

36. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted on,
will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also other
things far beyond (far better than those speculations) ;
and having that knowledge he is not puffed up, and
thus untarnished he has, in his own heart, realised the
way of escape from them, has understood, as they
really are, the rising up and passing away of sensations,
their sweet taste, their danger, how they cannot be
relied on, and not grasping after any (of those things
men are eager for) he, the Tath&gata, is quite set free.

' These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


37. 'There are, brethren, recluses and Brahmans
who arrange the future, whose speculations are con-
cerned with the future, and who on forty-four grounds
put forward various assertions regarding the future.
And on account of what, starting out from what, do
they do so ?

38. ' There are, brethren, recluses and Brahmans
who [3l] hold the doctrine of a -conscious existence
after death 2, and who maintain in sixteen ways that

1 See I, 1, 29 (p. 12 of the text).

2 Literally ' who are After-deathers, Conscious-maintainers.' These
summary epithets are meant to be contemptuous, and the word chosen
for death adds to the force of the phrase. It is not the usual word,


44 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

the soul after death is conscious. And how do they
do so ?

' They say of the soul : " The soul after death, not
subject to decay, and conscious,


(10) has various modes
of consciousness,

(u) has limited con-
sciousness,

(12) has infinite con-
sciousness,

( 1 3) is altogetherhappy,

(14) is altogether miser-
able,

(15) is both,

(16) is neither."


(1) has form \

(2) is formless 2,

(3) has, and has not,
form,

(4) neither has, nor has
not, form,

(5) is finite,

(6) is infinite,

(7) is both,

(8) is neither,

(9) has one mode of
consciousness,

39. 'These, brethren, are those recluses and Brah-
mans who hold the doctrine of a conscious existence
after death, and who maintain in sixteen ways that the
soul after death is conscious. And those who do so,
all of them, do so in one or other of these sixteen
ways. There is none beside.

40. 'Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted
on, will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also other
things far beyond (far better than those speculations) ;
and having that knowledge he is not puffed up, and
thus untarnished he has, in his own heart, realised the
way of escape from them, has understood, as they
really are, the rising up and passing away of sensations,
their sweet taste, their danger, how they cannot be
relied on, and not grasping after any (of those things
men are eager for) he, the Tathagata, is quite set free.

but aghatana (so read in the text), meaning literally 'shambles,
place of execution.' The ordinary phrase would have been param-
marawika.

1 So the A^ivakas, says Buddhaghosa.

* So the Niga«//fas, says Buddhaghosa.


THE BELIEVERS IN FUTURE LIFE. 45

'These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
having himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.'


Here ends the Second Portion for Recitation. [32]


Chapter III.


i. ' There are, brethren, recluses and Brahmans who
hold the doctrine of an unconscious existence after
death, and who maintain in eight ways that the soul
after death is unconscious. And how do they do so ?

2. 'They say of the soul : "The soul after death,
not subject to decay, and unconscious,


(i) has form,

(2) is formless,

(3) has, and has not,
form,

(4) neither has, nor has


not, form,

(5) is finite,

(6) is infinite,

(7) is both,

(8) is neither."


3. ' These, brethren, are those recluses and Brah-
mans who hold the doctrine of an unconscious exis-
tence after death, and who maintain in eight ways that
the soul after death is unconscious. And those who
do so, all of them, do so in one or other of those eight
ways. There is none beside.

4. ' Now of these, brethren, the Tathagata knows
that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted
on, will have such and such a result, such and such an
effect on the future condition of those who trust in
them. That does he know, and he knows also other
things far beyond (far better than those speculations) ;
and having that knowledge he is not puffed up, and
thus untarnished he has, in his own heart, realised the


46 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


way of escape from them, has understood, as they
really are, the rising up and passing away of sensations,
their sweet taste, their danger, how they cannot be
relied on, and not grasping after any (of those things
men are eager for) he, the Tathagata, is quite set free.

1 These, brethren, are those other things, profound,
difficult to realise, hard to understand, tranquillising,
sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, com-
prehensible only by the wise, which the Tathagata,
havinof himself realised and seen face to face, hath set
forth ; and it is concerning these that they who would
rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance with the
truth, should speak.

5-8. [33] [Similar sections for those who maintain in
eight ways that the soul after death is neither conscious
nor unconscious.]

1 9. [34] * There are, brethren, recluses and Brahmans
who are Annihilationists, who in seven ways maintain
the cutting off, the destruction, the annihilation of
a living being 2. And on account of what, starting out
from what, do they do so ?

10. 'In the first place, brethren, some recluse or
Brahman puts forth the following opinion, the follow-
ing view ; " Since, Sir, this soul has form, is built up
of the four elements, and is the offspring of father and
mother, It is cut off, destroyed, on the dissolution of the
body ; and does not continue after death ; and then,
Sir, the soul is completely annihilated." Thus is it
that some maintain the cutting off, the destruction,
the annihilation of a living being.

11. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.
For there is a further soul — divine, having form, be-
longing to the sensuous plane, feeding on solid food.
That you neither know of nor perceive. But I know

1 §§ 9-18 are discussed by James UAlwis in 'Buddhist Nirvana,'
p. 47. Comp. Jacobi, 'Jaina Sutras,' II, 236, 339.

2 Sato sattassa. Insert the word sato in the text (as in §§ 17,
19, 41, 42). The KaMa Upanishad I, 20 alludes to such belief.


THE ANNIHILATIONISTS. 47


and have experienced it. And since this soul, on the
dissolution of the body, is cut off and destroyed, does
not continue after death, then is it, Sir, that the soul
is completely annihilated." Thus is it that some
maintain the cutting off, the destruction, the annihila-
tion of a living being.

12. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.
For there is a further soul — divine, having form, made
of mind, with all its. major and minor parts complete,
not deficient in any organ. This you neither know of
nor perceive. But I know and have experienced it.
And since this soul, on the dissolution of the body, is
cut off and destroyed, does not continue after death,
then is it, Sir, that the soul is completely annihilated."
Thus is it that some maintain the cutting off, the
destruction, the annihilation of a living being.

13. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.
For there is a further soul, which by passing beyond
ideas of form, by the dying out of ideas of resistance,
by paying no heed to ideas of difference, conscious
that space is infinite, reaches up to the plane of the
infinity of space !. This you neither know of nor per-
ceive. [35] But I know and have experienced it. And
since this soul, on the dissolution ot the body, is cut
off and destroyed, does not continue after death, then
is it, Sir, that the soul is completely annihilated."
Thus is it that some maintain the cutting off, the
destruction, the annihilation of a living being.

14. * To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.


1 Compare the 4th Vimokha. See Rh. D. ' Buddhist Suttas,' pp. 52,
213. The idea of resistance, pa/igha, is here not ethical, but refers
to the senses. Having no sense of reaction to touch, of opposition to
muscular effort It appears from M. I, 164 that this was pretty much
the view put forth by Gotama's first teacher A/ara Kalama.


48 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

For there is a further soul, which having passed beyond
the plane of the infinity of space, knowing that con-
sciousness is infinite, reaches up to the plane of the
infinity of consciousness \ This you neither know of
nor perceive. But I know and have experienced it.
And since this soul, on the dissolution of the body, is
cut off and destroyed, does not continue after death,
then is it, Sir, that the soul is completely annihilated."
Thus is it that some maintain the cutting off, the
destruction, the annihilation of a living being.

15. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.
For there is a further soul, which by passing quite
beyond the plane of the infinity of consciousness,
knowing that there is nothing, reaches up to the plane
of no obstruction 2. This you neither know of nor per-
ceive. But I know and have experienced it. And
since this soul, on the dissolution of the body, is cut
off and destroyed, does not continue after death, then
is it, Sir, that the soul is completely annihilated."
Thus is it that some maintain the cutting off, the
destruction, the annihilation of a living being.

16. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
whole soul, Sir, is not then completely annihilated.
For there is a further soul, which by passing quite
beyond the plane of no obstruction, realises ' This is
good, this is excellent,' and reaches up to the plane of
neither ideas nor the absence of ideas 3. This you

1 Compare the 5th Vimokha. This seems from M. I, 165 to have
been much the same as the view held by Rama, whose son and pupil,
Uddaka, was Gotama's second teacher.

2 Compare the 6th Vimokha.

3 Though it is not explicitly so stated, this last of these seven
theorisers is no doubt to be considered as believing in all the sorts of
soul held by the others, so that he believes in seven. One may com-
pare the five souls each more subtle than the last, made respectively
of anna, pra«a, manas, vi^«a«a, and ananda (food, breath, mind,
consciousness, and joy), described in the Taittirfya Upanishad II, 1-5.
The Buddhist modification of these theories omits the souls, and


THE PERFECT NET. 49


neither know of, nor perceive. But I know and have
experienced it. And since this soul, on the dissolution
of the body, is cut off, destroyed, does not continue after
death, then is it, Sir, that the soul is completely annihi-
lated." Thus is it that some maintain the cutting off,
the destruction, the annihilation of a living being.

17. 'These, brethren, are the recluses and Brahmans
who are Annihilationists and in seven ways maintain
the cutting off, the destruction, the annihilation of
a living being. [36] And whosoever do so they, all of
them, do so in one or other of these seven ways.
There is none beside.

1 8. [Repetition of § 40, above p. 44, setting forth that
other, higher, knowledge of a Tathagata, for which
alone he can be rightly praised.]


19. 'There are, brethren, recluses and Brahmans
who hold the doctrine of happiness in this life, who in
five ways maintain the complete salvation, in this
visible world, of a living being. And relying on what,
starting out from what, do they do so ?

20. ' Hereon, brethren, some recluse or Brahman
may have the following opinion, the following view :
" Whensoever the soul, in full enjoyment and posses-
treats instead of various states of mind (produced by stages of medi-
tation), the attainment of which, during this life, leads to rebirth in
corresponding worlds, or planes of existence, named after those stages
of meditations. But the oldest Pi/aka texts say very little about it,
and the history of Buddhist speculation on the matter has yet to be
formulated.

Centuries afterwards we find a somewhat analogous conception in
the gradually ascending series of seven, each more subtle than the
last (Sthula-jarira, lihga-jarira, indriya, manas, ahahkara,
buddhi, and atman), set out in the Sahkhya texts, and the later
Vedanta has a similar series. There is sufficient truth in the idea of
the series of seven set out in our text to explain the persistence of the
general idea in all the Indian systems, but the details and the appli-
cation are strikingly different.

The text shows that the four Arlipa Vimokhas of the Buddhist
theory were regarded by the early Buddhists as derived from closely
allied speculations, older than Buddhism, and expressed in almost
identical phraseology.

II. E


50 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.

sion of the five pleasures of sense, indulges all its
functions, then, Sir, the soul has attained, in this visible
world, to the highest Nirvana V Thus do some
maintain the complete happiness, in the visible world,
of a living being.

21. s To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
soul does not by that alone attain to the highest
Nirvana. And why not ? Sensuous delights, Sir, are
transitory, they involve pain, their very nature is to
fluctuate. And grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and
loathing arise out of their inconstancy and change.
[37] But whensoever the soul, putting away sensuous
delights and evil dispositions, enters into and abides in
the First Ghana., the state of joy and ease, born of
seclusion, accompanied by reflection, accompanied by
investigation, then, Sir, has the soul attained, in this
visible world, to the highest Nirvana." Thus do
some maintain the complete happiness, in the visible
world, of a living being.

22. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
soul does not by that alone attain to the highest
Nirvana. And why not ? Because inasmuch as that
state involves reasoning and investigation it is stamped
as being gross. But whensoever, Sir, the soul, sup-
pressing both reasoning and investigation, enters into
and abides in the Second 6v£ana, the state of joy and
ease, born of serenity, without reflection or investiga-
tion, a state of elevation of mind, internal calm of
heart, then, Sir, has the soul attained, in this visible
world, to the highest Nirvana." Thus do some main-
tain the complete happiness, in the visible world, of
a living being.

1 Buddhaghosa here (Sum. I, 121) explains Nirvawa as the suppres-
sion of pain ; pain, dukha, being bodily, as opposed to domanassa.
mental. ' In this visible world ' means in whatever world the par-
ticular soul happens to be at the time. On pari^areti compare
V. II, 290 raga. uyyane pari^aresi, 'the king indulged himself,
enjoyed himself, in the garden.' ' All its functions ' is added from the
Commentary.


THE PERFECT NET. 51

23. 'To him another says: "There is, Sir, such
a soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
soul does not by that alone attain to the highest
Nirvana. And why not ? Because inasmuch as that
state involves the sense of joy, of exhilaration of heart,
it is stamped as being gross. But whensoever, Sir,
the soul, by absence of the longing after joy remains
in equanimity, mindful and self-possessed, and experi-
ences in the body that ease of which the Arahats
speak (when they say) ' the man serene and thought-
ful dwells at ease,' and so enters into and abides in the
Third 6*^ana — then, Sir, has the soul attained, in this
visible world, to the highest Nirvana." Thus do
some maintain the complete happiness, in the visible
world, of a living being.

24. ' To him another says : " There is, Sir, such a
soul as you describe. That I do not deny. But the
soul does not by that alone attain to the highest
Nirvana. And why not ? Because inasmuch as that
state involves a constant dwelling of the mind on the
ease it has enjoyed it is stamped as gross. [38] But
whensoever, Sir, the soul, by putting away ease, by
putting away pain, by the previous dying away both of
joys and griefs has entered into and abides in the
Fourth cTMna1 — a state made pure by self-possession
and equanimity, without pain and without ease — then,
Sir, has the soul attained, in this visible world, to the
highest Nirvana." Thus do some maintain the com-
plete happiness, in the visible world, of a living being.

25. ' These, brethren, are the recluses and Brahmans
who hold the doctrine of happiness in this life, who in
five ways maintain the complete salvation, in this
visible world, of a living being. And those who do

1 The text shows that the four Guanas were regarded by the early
Buddhists as older than Buddhism. The very words used are identi-
cal ; the only modification introduced in Buddhism being the omission
of the ' souls.' These four, together with the lour Arupa Vimokhas
(see note on § 19), make up the Eight Attainments (Samapattiyo),
often mentioned in the Gataka commentary as practised by pre-
Buddhistic recluses.

E 2


52 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


so, all of them, do so in one or other of these five
ways. There is none beside.

26. [Repetition of $ 40, above p. 44, setting forth that
other, higher, knowledge of a Tathagata, for which
alone he can be rightly praised.]


27. 'These, brethren, are the recluses and Brahmans
who arrange the future, whose speculations are con-
cerned with the future, and who on forty-four grounds
put forward various assertions regarding the future.
And those who do so, all of them, do so in one or
other of these forty-four ways. There is none beside.

28. [Repetition of § 40, above p. 44, setting forth that
other, higher, knowledge of a Tathagata, for which
alone he can be rightly praised.]

[39] 29. ' These, brethren, are the recluses and Brah-
mans who reconstruct the past, and arrange the future,
or who do both, whose speculations are concerned with
both, and who in sixty-two ways put forward proposi-
tions with regard to the past and to the future, and
those who do so, all of them, do so in one or other of
these sixty-two ways. There is none beside.

30. [Repetition of § 40, above p. 44, setting forth that
other, higher, knowledge of a Tathagata, for which
alone he can be rightly praised.]

[40] 32. 'Of these, brethren, those recluses and Brah-
mans who are Eternalists, who in four ways maintain
that the soul and the world are eternal :

(2) those who are Semi-eternalists, who in four ways
maintain that the soul and the world are partly eternal
and partly not :

(3) those who are Extensionists, who in four ways
maintain the infinity or the finiteness of the world:

(4) those who are Eel-wrigglers, who when a ques-
tion is put to them on this or that resort, in four ways,
to equivocation, to wriggling like eels :

(5) those who are Fortuitous-Originists, who in two
ways maintain that the soul and the world arose without
a cause :


THE PERFECT NET. 53


(6) those who in any of these eighteen ways recon-
struct the past :

(7) those who hold the doctrine of a conscious exis-
tence after death, who maintain in sixteen ways that the
soul after death is conscious :

(8) those who hold the doctrine of an unconscious
existence after death, who maintain in eight ways that
the soul after death is unconscious :

(9) those who maintain in eight ways that the soul
after death is neither conscious nor unconscious :

(10) those who are Annihilationists, who maintain in
seven ways the cutting off, the destruction, the annihi-
lation of a living being :

(1 1) those who hold the doctrine of happiness in this
life, who in five ways maintain the complete salvation,
in this visible world, of a living being —

That opinion of theirs is based only on the personal
sensations, on the worry and writhing consequent
thereon !, of those venerable recluses and Brahmans,
who know not, neither perceive, and are subject to all
kinds of craving- :

45 foil. [41,42] 'Those opinions of theirs are therefore
based upon contact (through the senses).

58 foil. [43] 'That they should experience those sen-
sations without such contact, such a condition of things
could not be.

71. [44] ' They, all of them, receive those sensations
through continual contact in the spheres of touch. To
them on account of the sensations arises craving, on
account of the craving arises the fuel (that is, the
necessary condition, the food, the basis, of future
lives), from the fuel results becoming, from the ten-
dency to become arises rebirth, and from rebirth
comes death, and grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and
despair. It is, brethren, when a brother understands,


1 On paritasita compare M. I, 36 na asati paritassati, 'is
not worried at what is not': paritassana, 'fidgetiness' or ' worry,'
at M. I, 136 ; S. Ill, 15-19 ; and Mil. 253, 400. On vipphandita,
M. I, 8, 486; Dh. S. 381 (Asl. 253); Gat. IV, 495.


54 I. BRAHMA-GALA SUTTA.


as they really are, the origin and the end, the attraction,
the danger, and the way of escape from the six realms
of contact, that he gets to know what is above, beyond,
them all !.

72. [45] ' For whosoever, brethren, whether recluses
or Brahmans, are thus reconstructors of the past or
arrangers of the future, or who are both, whose specu-
lations are concerned with both, who put forward
various propositions with regard to the past and to the
future, they, all of them, are entrapped in the net of
these sixty-two modes ; this way and that they plunge
about, but they are in it ; this way and that they may
flounder, but they are included in it, caught in it.

' Just, brethren, as when a skilful fisherman or fisher-
lad should drag a tiny pool of water with a fine-meshed
net he might fairly think : " Whatever fish of size may
be in this pond, every one will be in this net ; flounder
about as they may, they will be included in it, and
caught" — just so is it with these speculators about the
past and the future, in this net, flounder as they may,
they are included and caught. [46]

73. 'The outward form, brethren, of him who has
won the truth2, stands before you, but that which binds
it to rebirth is cut in twain. So long as his body shall
last, so long do gods and men behold him. On the
dissolution of the body, beyond the end of his life,
neither gods nor men shall see him.

' Just, brethren, as when the stalk of a bunch of man-
goes has been cut, all the mangoes that were hanging
on that stalk go with it ; just so, brethren, though the
outward form of him who has won the truth stands
before you, that which binds it to rebirth has been cut
in twain. So long as his body shall last, so long do
gods and men behold him. On the dissolution of the
body, beyond the end of his life, neither gods nor men
shall see him.'


1 In the text the first three of these four propositions are repeated
of each of the eleven classes of theorisers. The fourth is put in the
form which, to avoid repetition, 1 have adopted for all the four.

2 Tat hag at a, that is the speaker himself, the Buddha.


THE PERFECT NET. 55

74. When he had thus spoken, the venerable
Ananda said to the Blessed One : ' Strange, Lord, is
this, and wonderful ! And what name has this exposi-
tion of the truth ? '

' Ananda, you may remember this exposition as the
Net of Advantage, and as the Net of Truth, and as the
Supreme Net, and as the Net of Theories ; remember
it even as the Glorious Victory in the day of battle !'

Thus spake the Blessed One, and glad at heart the
brethren exalted his word. And on the delivery of
this discourse the thousandfold world-system shook,


Here ends the Brahma-^ala Sutta.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

sAmaawa-phala sutta.

The first Dialogue deals with the most fundamental con-
ceptions that lay at the root of the Buddha's doctrine, his
Dharma, his ethical and philosophical view of life — the second
puts forth his justification for the foundation of the Order, for
the enunciation of the Vinaya, the practical rules of canon
law by which life in the Order is regulated. The Rules them-
selves are not discussed. It is only certain ethical precepts
that are referred to in so many words. The question is
a larger and wider one than the desirability of any particular
injunction. It is as to the advantage, as to the use, of having
any Order at all.

King A^atasattu of Magadha, after pointing out the
advantages derived from their occupations by a long list of
ordinary people in the world, asks whether the members of
the Order, who have given up the world, derive any corre-
sponding advantage, visible in this life, from theirs. The
answer is a list of such advantages, arranged in an ascending
scale of importance, each one mentioned being said to be
better and sweeter than the one just before described.

The list of ordinary occupations given in the question is
interesting evidence, especially as compared with the later
lists of a similar kind referred to in the notes, of social
conditions in the Ganges valley at the time when this
Dialogue was composed. And the introductory story, in
which the king explains how he had put a similar question
to the founders of six other orders, and gives the six replies
he received, is interesting evidence of the views held by the
authors of the Dialogue as to beliefs current at the time.

The replies are no less interesting from the fact, pointed
out by the king, that they are not to the point. Each of the
six teachers goes off into a general statement of his theory
instead of answering the question put. But as the works, if
any, of all these teachers save one — Nigant/ia. Nata-putta —
have been irretrievably lost, the summary here given of their
doctrines is of great importance as evidence of the sort of


INTRODUCTION. 57


speculation they favoured. The six paragraphs are short and
obscure, and this is just what we should expect. As is the
case with the accounts given by early Catholic writers of
opinions they held to be heretical, the versions of these six
sets of belief are neither adequate nor clear. But a number
of other references to these six theories are found, as
pointed out in the notes, both in the Buddhist and in the
Cain records. And it would be premature to discuss our six
paragraphs until the whole of the available evidence is made
accessible to scholars. It is noteworthy that in at least two
cf these answers some of the expressions used seem to be in
a Prakrit differing in dialect from the Pali of the Pi/akas.
And these are not the only instances of the preservation in
the Pi/akas of ancient dialectical varieties.

The answer which the Buddha is represented to have given,
in his turn, to the question raised by the king, takes (as is so
often the case) the form of a counter-question. ' The very
man whom, under ordinary circumstances, you would treat as
slave or servant — what treatment would you mete out to him
after he had joined an Order ? ' The king confesses that he
would treat him as a person worthy of honour and respect.
And neither in question nor answer is there any reference
specially to the Buddhist Order. It is taken for granted,
alike by the Buddha and the king, that any one who had
devoted himself to the religious life, whatever the views or
opinions he held, or the association he had joined, would, in
accordance with the remarkable tolerance of that age and
country, be treated with equal respect and courtesy. And
the same note runs all through the Dialogue. The Buddha
shows the advantages of the ' life of a recluse,' not necessarily
of a follower of his own. And most of what he says would
apply as much to his strongest opponents as to the members
of his own Order.

The following, in a constantly. ascending order of merit, are
the advantages, visible in this life, which he claims for such
a recluse: —

i. The honour and respect shown to a member of a religious
order.

3. The training in all those lower kinds of mere morality
set out in the very ancient document called ' The Silas.' The
importance of this document has been discussed above, in the
Introduction to the Brahma-^-ala. The details of it may
be summarised here as follows : —
a. Mercy and kindness to all living things ; § 43 x.

1 Details a-d (though the fact is not referred to here) are the


58 II. SAMAiVWA-PHALA SUTTA.

b. Honesty.

c. Chastity.

d. Truthfulness, peacefulness, courtesy, and good sense in

speech; §44.

e. Abstinence from luxury of twelve different kinds, and

freedom from trickery and violence ; § 45.

f. Not injuring plants ; § 46.

g. Not laying up treasure, of seven kinds ; § 47.

h. Not frequenting shows, of twenty-six specified kinds ; § 48.

i. Not playing games, eighteen being mentioned by name ;

§ 49-
j. Not using luxurious rugs, &c., of twenty different kindi ;

§5°-

k. Not using toilet luxuries, of which twenty-two are speci-
fied; §51.

/. Not talking vain things, of which twenty-seven instances
are given ; § 52.
m. Not using sophistical and rude phrases when talking of
higher things ; § 53.

n. Not acting as go-between ; § 54.

0. Not practising trickery and mystery under the guise of
religion; §55.

p. Not gaining a living by low arts, such as auguries (§ 56) ;
advising as to the best sorts of various things (§ 57) ;
prophesying as to war and its results (6 58) ; astrology
(§ 59); foretelling famine or plague or the reverse
(§ 60) ; arranging marriages, using spells, or worship-
ping gods (§ 61); various sorts of medical trickery

(§ 62).

3. The confidence of heart, absence of fear, resulting from
the consciousness of right doing ; § 63.

4. The habit of keeping guarded the door of his senses;

§64.

5. The constant self-possession he thus gains ; § 65.

6. The power of being content with little, with simplicity of
life ; § 66.

7. The emancipation of heart from the Five Hindrances to
self-mastery — covetousness, ilKtemper, laziness, worry and
flurry and perplexity ; §§ 68-74.

8. The joy and peace that, as a result of the sense of this
emancipation, fills his whole being ; § 75.

opposites of the three bad acts of the body, and the four bad acts of
speech, kaya- and va£i-du££aritani, so often referred to in the
Suttas, and in the Abhidhamma. The three others (of the mind),
making up the ten given in my manual, p. 142, are omitted here
because they belong to the higher morality.


INTRODUCTION. 59


9. The practice of the Four Guanas ; §§ 75-82 *.

10. The Insight arising from knowledge («a«a-dassana) ;

§§ «3, 84-

11. The power of projecting mental images ; §§ 85, 86.

12. The five modes of mystic Insight (a bhi««a) ; §§87-96 —
a. The practice of Iddhi.

h. The Heavenly Ear — hearing heavenly sounds.

c. Knowledge of others' thoughts.

d. Memory of his own previous births.

e. Knowledge of other people's previous births (the Heavenly

Eye).

13. The realisation of the Four Truths, the destruction of
the Asavas and attainment of Arahatship ; §§ 97, 98.

Now it. is perfectly true that of these thirteen consecutive
propositions, or groups of propositions, it is only the last,
No 13, which is exclusively Buddhist. But the things omitted,
Ine union of the whole of those included into one system,
the order in which the ideas are arranged, the way in which
they are treated as so many steps of a ladder whose chief
value depends on the fact that it leads up to the culminating
point of Nirvana in Arahatship — all this is also distinctively
Buddhist. And further, the whole statement, the details of
it, the order of it, must have soaked very thoroughly into the
minds of the early Buddhists. For we find the whole, or
nearly the whole, of it repeated (with direct reference by
name to our Sutta as the oldest and most complete enumera-
tion of it) not only in all the subsequent dialogues translated
in this volume, but also in many others.

In these repetitions the order is always the same, and the
details (so far as they occur) are the same. But one or other
of the thirteen groups is often omitted, and the application of
those of them that remain is always different — that is to say,
they are enumerated in support, or in illustration, of a different
proposition.

A comparison of some of these other applications of the
list is full of suggestion as to its real meaning here.

In the Amba//^a the point is as to caste. The Kshatriya
caste is the most honourable, but wisdom and conduct are
higher still. What then is the right conduct, what the right

1 Buddhaghosa (p. 219) says that though the Four Arupa
Vimokkhas are not explicitly mentioned they are to be under-
stood (thus making up the Eight Samapattis). This may be so:
but it looks like a later writer reading his own opinion into the older
text. They are put into the text at Po///$apada, pp. 183, 184, and it
is difficult to see why they should not have been also inserted here, if
they were really implied.


60 II. SAMAiViVA-PHALA SUTTA.

wisdom ? The conduct (Tarawa) is all the above paragraphs
from 2-9 inclusive; the wisdom (vi^a) is the rest, 10-13 "•

In the Sonadanda the question is: 'What is the true
Brahman?' After, by his usual Socratic method, leading
Sonadanda to acknowledge that the only two essential re-
quisites are goodness and intelligence, these last are explained
as above (2-9 and 10-13).

In the Ku/adanta the question is as to the right sort of
sacrifice. Aftei rejecting animal sacrifice we have generosity
(of various kinds, each better than the last), faith, training in
the precepts, and 2-13, set forth as each of them a better
sacrifice than the last.

In the ^aliya the question is whether the soul is the
same as, or is other than,, the. body. The answer is a counter-
question. Repeating our sections 2-13 (omitting ii and 12).
the Buddha asks, at the end of each subdivision, whether men
who do that would be likely to trouble themselves as to
speculations about the soul? And the answer being, of course,
'No,' rejoins that neither does he.

In the Po///zapada the question is as to the way in which
various recluses attain to mystic trance. The Buddha's
answer is that it is by training; and the training should be
first in morals (our groups 2 and 3) then in the things men-
tioned in our groups 4-9, and then in the Four Arupa
Vimokkhas. The Dialogue then takes up other questions,
omitting our groups 10-13.

In the Key add ha. the talk is on miracles, mystic powers.
And the Buddha, disparaging all others, calls attention to our
groups 2-13.

In the l^ohikka. the question is as to who is the right sort
of teacher ; and the answer is that it is the one whose pupil
carries out our groups 2-13.

In the Tevi^a the question is as to the way by which one
can attain to union with God (Brahma-sahavyata). The
answer gives our groups 1-8, and then adds the Four
Brahma-viharas.

In the shorter of the two Hatthipadopama Suttas

1 Possibly Nos. 1 1 and 1 2 are meant, both here and in all the
other Suttas, to be omitted. The wording is ambiguous. Buddha-
ghosa, who talks here (see p. 268) of Nos. 10-13 as me Eightfold
pa«»a, apparently means to include them (he could not otherwise
get eight). But the argument of the Mahali seems to exclude them.
The texts always jump from the last words of 10 to the last words of 13.
Now as in the Mahali No. 12 is excluded, it is clear that at least there
only Nos. 10 and 13 are meant. And there is no difference between
the phraseology in the Mahali and that used in the other Suttas.


INTRODUCTION. 6 1


(No. 27 in the Ma^7?ima), the question discussed between a
Brahman and an ascetic is as to the ascendancy of the Buddha
over the other teachers of the time. The Buddha himself
giving afterwards the full reason, repeats our group 2 (omitting
however clauses/" to p inclusive1), then repeats our groups
6> % 4< 5> 7? 8, 9, then omitting groups jo and 11, quotes
two only, the last two (omitting. the first three)2 of the five
Abhi««as in group 12, and concludes with group 13 in full.

In the Maha Ta/zha-sankhaya Sutta (No. 38 in the
Ma^/zima), we have the same sequence — our group 2
(omitting f to p), then 6, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9. The rest is
omitted.

In the next Sutta, the longer of the Assapuras, after a
summary in different words of most of the contents of our
group 2, we have our group 4, then two paragraphs not in our
Sutta, then our groups 5, 7, 8, 9, and the last two only out of
group 1 2, and then (as a climax) our group 13 — all enumerated
to show what is the true Brahman, the true samara.

Then again in the Sakuludayi, No. 79 of the Ma^/zima, it
is declared to be not for the sake of realising happiness that
recluses take up the celibate life in the Order under the
Buddha, but for the sake of those matters set forth in our
groups 2-9 inclusive 3, of the two last of the Abhiw/as, and
above all for the sake of the attainment of Arahatship.

Besides the differences pointed out above between the
Suttas preserved in the Digha, and in the Ma^/zima, respec-
tively— differences due, I think, solely to the difference in
the subjects under discussion — there are also a few verbal
differences, amounting to scarcely more than ' various read-
ings/ due, perhaps, to the divergent traditions of the Digha -
bhazzaka and the Ma^/nma-bha«aka (the students and
repeaters of the two collections in which the Dialogues are
handed down to us).

However this may be, it is clear that the sum and the
sequence of the paragraphs in our Sutta is regarded as of

1 From which we may infer that, as respects those matters, he saw
no difference between himself and the other teachers.

2 So that the power of Iddhi, of hearing heavenly sounds, and of
knowing other people's thoughts, are apparently supposed to be
common ground between the Buddhists and the other sects. They
are included in our Sutta because they are supposed to be part of the
advantage of life in an Order — in any Order, that is, not only the
Buddhist.

3 Maxima II, 37, 38. Perhaps the pe is meant to be supplied
from the twenty-seventh Sutta just quoted — the difference, however,
as we have seen, is not of great importance.


62 II. SAMAJV/VA-PHALA SUTTA.


great importance, not as a statement of Buddhist ethics, or of
Buddhist philosophy, or of the Buddhist religion, but as a
statement of the advantages that may be looked for as the
result of life in an Order. And further that the statement has
to be slightly modified and shortened when the question is the
narrower one of life in the particular community which we
call the Buddhist Order.

The difference is interesting— in the scheme for the Bud-
dhist Order the «a«a-dassana, the power of projecting a
mental image (apparently of oneself, which seems like the
earliest germ of the modern Yoga ideas about the astral
body), the powers of Iddhi, the power of hearing heavenly
sounds (something like hearing the music of the spheres), and
the power of knowing the thoughts of others, are all omitted.

In the abstract given above, I have called these last three,
together with the power of calling to mind one's own, and
other peoples', previous births, the Five Abhi««as, or
Intuitions. And this is in accord with the passages on which
Childers's article sub voce is based. But these powers are
not so called either in our text, or in any other Dialogue yet
published. The use of the word abhi««a in this technical
sense would seem therefore (to judge from the published texts)
to be a sign of the later date of the book in which it occurs *.
In the oldest portions of the Pi/akas the word is always used
in the general sense of insight, and if any special limitation
is hinted at, it is simply the insight of Arahatship that is
emphasised (as in Dhammapada 423, which is a quotation
from Iti-Vuttaka, No. 99, and is quoted also at Ariguttara I,

165) 2-

The Eightfold Path is not mentioned in our Sutta. This
is not merely because it is not possible always to mention

1 The oldest case of the technical use of the word, so far as I know,
is in the introductory story of the Maha Vibhariga on the fourth Para-
na (Vin. Ill, 87). This is later than the Old Commentary on the
Patimokkha, from which it incorporates many passages, and this
again is later, of course, than the Patimokkha itself.

Neither the Five nor the Six Abhi««as are given as groups
among the groups of Fives and Sixes in the Ahguttara. The word
Abhi»«a is used in the divisions containing the Fives and Sixes
exclusively in its ordinary sense (III, 277, 451 ; comp. IV, 348).
And this is the more instructive as what were afterwards called the
Six Abhi»«as are actuary given in full (IV, 17-19, §§ 6-1 1) in the
same words as in the Akahkheyya Suita (No. 6 of the M-Agg/i\mz,
translated in my ' Buddhist Suttas'), and very nearly as in our Sutta,
here under discussion. But they are not called Abhiw«as.

2 Compare also A. I, 100; II, 249; III, 3, 9, 277.


INTRODUCTION. 63


everything. The Path does not come within the special
advantages of life in the Order. To enter upon the Path to
Arahatship, to walk along it, is not peculiar to members of the
Order. A bhikshu might reach the goal either along that
path, open also to laymen 1) or by the process set out in our
Sutta. They are two quite distinct methods of training, of
which our Sutta deals only with one

It is essential, in order to understand Buddhist ethics, to
bear in mind that there are (and must be in such a system)
several different lines along which both speculation and
edifying teaching run. These are :

1. The course of conduct laid down for the ordinary
Buddhist layman, contained in the Gahapati-vaggas
found in the various nikayas 2.

2. The rules as to the outward conduct of the mem-
bers of the Order, laid down in the Patimokkha and in
the Khandhakas 3.

3. The system of self-training in higher things
prescribed for members of the Order. Of this our present
Sutta is a striking example.

4. The method of self-training laid down for those
who have entered upon the Path to Arahatship. (The
Four Truths, the Eightfold Path, and the Asavas.)

In the first of these Buddhism goes very little beyond the
current ethics of the day. In the second a very great deal
has been simply incorporated from the rufes found expedient
by previous recluses, both Brahman and non-Brahman, though
there are numerous differences, both of the positive regulations
included, and also of things deliberately omitted. Even the
third, as we have seen, cannot be considered, except in a very
limited sense, as exclusively Buddhist. It is in the fourth that
the essential doctrines of Buddhism are to be found. All four
have, no doubt, become welded together into a more or less
consistent whole. But to understand the whole, the relation
of its various parts has to be kept constantly in view.

This will explain an apparent contradiction. The last Sutta
quoted, the Sakuludayi, states that the aim of the religious or
celibate life as led in the Buddha's Order, is the attainment, in
order, of the various things set out in our Sutta (groups 2-9,
12 and 13).

1 For a list of twenty-one laymen Arahats see A. Ill, 451 ; and
there are other instances recorded.

2 A good summary of this is in the Sigalovada Sutta, an abstract of
which is given in my Manual, pp. 143 foil.

3 Translated in ' Vinaya Texts' (S. B. E.).


64 II. SAMAiWA-PHALA SUTTA.

Now in other passages other things are stated to be the aim.

Thus in the Sa;#yutta (IV, 51) the Buddha himself is
represented as explaining that the celibate life (the brahma-
£ariya)1 is led by his followers for the sake of the complete
understanding of pain (dukkha-pari«/za). Further on in the
same book (VI, 253 = V, 6, 27) this is three times repeated,
with the suggestive addition that there is one way to this, to
wit, the Noble Eightfold Path.

Again, in the Ariguttara (IV, 7) the higher life is said to be
for the sake of getting rid of, of cutting through, seven Bonds
which prevent one from attaining Arahatship. The argument
on pp. 88, 99 (though the word brahma-^arinya does not
occur) comes to much the same thing. And further on in
the same book (IV, 272) the object is stated to be for the sake
of getting rid of five particular sorts of envy.

Nagasena is therefore quite right when he says that the
object of renouncing the world to live in the Order is for the
sake of righteousness and peace 2 ; and in another place that
it is to the end that sorrow may pass away 3. All these
explanations belong to the Path, not to the rules of the Order.
They are not really inconsistent with the other aim that our
Sutta sets out* And they are only additional proof, if such
were needed, that it is no more possible to sum up in a single
phrase (as some writers have tried to do) the aim of Buddhism,
or the object of life in the Order, than it would be to sum up in
a similar way the aim of Christianity, or the object for which
men enter a Christian Order. The aims are necessarily as
various as the character and circumstances of the various
individuals who take them up. And Nagasena does not
hesitate to add — and to add in speaking to a king — that some
had joined the Order in terror at the tyranny of kings, some
in fear of robbers, some because they were harassed by debt,
and some perhaps merely to gain a livelihood.

This also would apply to other Orders both in India and
elsewhere, and is quite consistent with our Sutta, which only
purports to set forth the advantages the early Buddhists held
to be the likely results of joining, from whatever motive, such
an Order as their own.

1 That is, of course, ' the best course of life ' with the connotation
of celibacy. The German ' Wandel ' is a good rendering of ^Tariya.
We have no expression so good. See Sawyutta V, 16, 17.

2 Milinda I, 31 (of my translation).

3 Ibid. I, 51 ; compare I, 101.


II. sAmaaova-phala sutta.

[The Fruits of the Life of a Recluse *.]

[47] 1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once dwelling at Ra^agaha in the Mango Grove of
Civaka the children's physician2, with a great company
of the brethren, with twelve hundred and fifty of the
brethren. Now at that time the king of Magadha,
A^atasattu, the son of the Videha princess3, on the
Uposatha day, held on the fifteenth, on Komudi (white

1 Gogerly's translation of the first part of this Sutta, and Burnouf's
translation of the whole of it, have been reprinted in Grimblot's
' Sept Suttas Palis.' These versions, of remarkable ^lerit for the
time when they were made, are full of mistakes which the since-
published editions of the Commentury, and of numerous allied texts,
enable us now to avoid. I have not thought it necessary to point
out the numerous passages, occurring indeed in nearly every sentence,
in which the present translation differs from theirs. It should be
mentioned here, however, that Burnouf has missed the whole point
of the dialogue by misundei standing the constantly repeated phrase
sandi/Mikaw samawwa-phalaw from which this title is taken.
He renders it throughout as meaning 'foreseen and general fruit'
which is grammatically impossible as regards sand i////ikaz«, and
rests on a false derivation as regards samawwa. This last word
means, of course, ' samawaship, being a samawa, living as a samawa,
a recluse, a religieux.'

2 Givakassa komarabha££assa. Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 133)
naturally follows the compilers of the Khandakas (V. I, 269) in
interpreting the adjective as ' brought up by the Prince.' But see
the note at ' Vinaya Texts,' II, 174 ; which shows that the more likely
meaning is ' the bringer-up of children ' (child-doctor). Several cures,
however, wrought by him are recorded ; and the patients are always
adillts. There is no other reference at all to his being a child-doctor,
and the Khandaka which gives the other interpretation is a very
ancient document.

3 See the note in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 1. Buddhaghosa
(p. 139) says she was the daughter of the king of Kosala.

II. F


66 II. SAMA2V#A-PHALA SUTTA.

water-lily), the full moon day of the fourth month 1, at
night, when the moon was full, was seated on the upper
terrace roof of his palace surrounded by his ministers.
And the king, on that sacred day, gave utterance to
a hymn of joy, saying:

1 How pleasant, friends, is the moonlight night !

How beautiful, friends, is the moonlight night!

How lovely, friends, is the moonlight night!

How soothing, friends, is the moonlight night !

How grand a sign, friends, is the moonlight night !
1 Who is the recluse or Brahman whom we may call
upon to-night, who, when we call upon him, shall be
able to satisfy our hearts 2 ? '

2. When he had thus spoken, a certain minister said
to the king : ' There is, Sire, Pura^a Kassapa, the head
of an order, of a following, the teacher of a school, well
known and of repute as a sophist, revered by the people,
a man of experience, who has long been a recluse, old
and well stricken in years. Let your Majesty pay
a visit to him. It may well be3 that, on calling upon
him, your heart, Sire, shall find peace.' But when he
had thus spoken A^atasattu the king kept silence.

3-7. Then other five ministers spake in the same
terms of Makkhali of the cow-pen, [48] of Af ita of the
garment of hair, of Pakudha Ka^ayana, of Sa^aya
of the Bela/Ma clan, and of the Niga^a of the Nata
clan. And still, to each, A^atasattu the king kept
silence.


1 This is interesting, as it shows that the year, for the compilers
of our Sutta, began in Savana (middle of July to middle of August),
that is, with the rainy season. There were three Uposatha days in
each month, on the 7th, 14th, and 15th day of the month. The
full moon night of Kattika (middle of October to middle of Novem-
ber) is called Komudi (from Kumuda, a white water-lily), because
that flower is supposed to bloom then. Burnouf is wrong in trans-
lating Komudi as the name of the month.

2 The same lines recur, but in a different order, at Gat. I, 105.
Dosina, the etymology of which puzzlH Childers and also Buddha-
ghosa (p. 141), is^-yotsnS.

3 Appeva nam a. Both.Gogerly and Burnouf take this to mean
'to a certainty,' but compare D. I, 179, 205; V. II, 85, 262.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 6 J

8. [49] Now at that time £lvaka the physician was
seated, in silence, not far from A^itasattu the king.
And the king said to him : ' But you, friend Qvaka,
why do you say nothing ? '

'The Blessed One, Sire, the Arahat, the all-awakened-
one, is now lodging in our Mango Grove, with a great
company of the brethren, with twelve hundred and fifty
brethren. And this is the good report that has been
noised abroad as to Gotama the Blessed One : " An
Arahat, fully awakened, is the exalted One, abounding
in wisdom and goodness, happy, with knowledge of
the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing
to be led, the teacher of gods and men, a blessed
Buddha." Let your Majesty pay a visit to him. It
may well be that, on calling upon him, your heart, Sire,
shall find peace.'

1 Then, friend Qvaka, have the riding-elephants made
ready.'

9. • Very good, Sire ! ' said Qvaka the physician in
assent to the words of the king. And he had five
hundred she-elephants made ready, and the state
elephant the king was wont to ride, and had word
brought to the king : ' The elephants, Sire, are
caparisoned. Do now what seemeth to you meet.'
Then the king had five hundred of his women mounted
on the she-elephants, one on each ; and himself mounted
the state elephant ; and he went forth, the attendants
bearing torches, in royal pomp, from Ra^agaha to
Givaka. the physician's Mango Grove.

10. And the king, when close upon the Mango Grove,
was seized with a sudden fear and consternation, and
the hairs on his body stood erect. And anxious and
excited, he said to c7ivaka : [50] ' You are playing me
no tricks, 6ivaka ? You are not deceiving me ? You
are not betraying me to my foes ? How can it be
that there should be no sound at all, not a sneeze nor
a cough, in so large an assembly of the brethren,
among twelve hundred and fifty of the brethren ? '

1 Fear not, O king. I play no trick, neither deceive
you ; nor would I betray you to the foe. Go on, O king,

F 2


68 II. SAMAJVJVA-PHALA SUTTA.

go straight on ! There, in the pavilion hall, the lamps
are burning.'

1 1. Then the king went on, on his elephant as far as
the path was passable for elephants, and then on foot,
to the door of the pavilion ; and then said to Givaka :
' But where, G*fvaka, is the Blessed One ? '

' That is he, O king, sitting against the middle pillar,
and facing the East, with the brethren around him.'

1 2. Then the king went up, and stood respectfully
on one side. And as he stood there and looked on
the assembly, seated in perfect silence, calm as a clear
lake, he broke out: 'Would that my son, Udayi
Bhadda, might have such calm as this assembly of
the brethren now has ! '

' Do your thoughts then go where love guides
them ? '

' I love the boy, and wish that he, Udayi Bhadda,
might enjoy such calm as this assembly has.'

13. Then the king bowed to the Blessed One, and
stretching fqrth his joined palms in salutation to the
Order took his seat aside, [5l] and said to the Blessed
One : ' I would fain question the Blessed One on a
certain matter, if he give me opportunity to set forth
the question.'

1 Ask, O king, whatsoever you desire.'

14. ' There are, Sir, a number of ordinary crafts : —
mahouts, horsemen, charioteers, archers, standard
bearers, camp marshalls, camp followers, high military
officers of royal birth, military scouts \ men brave as
elephants, champions, heroes, warriors in buckskin,
home-born slaves, cooks, barbers, bath attendants,
confectioners, garland-makers, washermen, weavers,
basket-makers, potters, arithmeticians, accountants, and
whatsoever others of like kind there may be. All


1 Pakkhandino, 'rushers forth/ The exact meaning of some
of these military terms is still uncertain, and was apparently uncertain
to Buddhaghosa. They all recur, with some differences of reading,
in the Milinda (p. 331, in a later and much longer list), and also
in the Ahguttara (IV, 107), as the names of the constituent elements
of a standing army.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 69

these enjoy, in this very world, the visible fruits of their
craft. They maintain themselves, and their parents and
children and friends, in happiness and comfort. They
keep up gifts, the object of which is gain on high, to
recluses and Brahmans, — gifts that lead to rebirth in
heaven, that redound to happiness, and have bliss as their
result. Can you, Sir, declare to me any such immediate
fruit, visible in this very world, of the life of a recluse1 ?'

15. ' Do you admit to us, O king, that you have put
the same question to other recluses or to Brahmans ? '

' I do, Lord.'

' Then tell us how they answered it, if you do not
mind.'

' I have no objection where the Blessed One, or
others like him, are.'

[52] ' Then speak, O king.'

16. 'Once I went to Pura^a Kassapa 2. And after
exchanging with him the greetings and compliments
of friendship and courtesy, 1 seated myself beside him,
and put to him the same question as I have now put,
Lord, to you.

17. 'Then Pura^a Kassapa said to me: 'To him
who acts, O king, or causes another to act, to him who
mutilates or causes another to mutilate, to him who
punishes or causes another to punish, to him who causes
grief or torment, to him who trembles or causes others
to tremble, to him who kills a living creature, who
takes what is not given, who breaks into houses, who
commits dacoity, or robbery, or highway robbery, or
adultery, or who speaks lies, to him thus acting there
is no guilt. If with a discus with an edge sharp as

1 Burnouf has made a sad mess of this important and constantly
repeated clause. He has ' Is it then possible, Sir, that one should
declare to them (that is, to the craftsmen just mentioned) in this
world, such a result (of their actions) as foreseen and as the general
fruit of their conduct ? ' But the king asks the Buddha to tell him
(the king himself) whether the members of the Order derive from
their life any benefit corresponding to that which the craftsmen derive
from theirs.

2 According to Buddhaghosa (p. 142) he was one of the teachers
who went about naked.


II. SAMA2\WA-PHALA SUTTA.


a razor he should make all the living creatures on the
earth one heap, one mass, of flesh, there would be
no guilt thence resulting, no increase of guilt would
ensue. Were he to go along the south bank of the
Ganges striking and slaying, mutilating and having
men mutilated, oppressing and having men oppressed,
there would be no guilt thence resulting, no increase
of guilt would ensue. Were he to go along the north
bank of the Ganges giving alms, and ordering gifts to
be given, offering sacrifices or causing them to be
offered, there would be no merit thence resulting, no
increase of merit. [53] In generosity, in self-mastery,
in control of the senses, in speaking truth there is
neither merit, nor increase of merit." Thus, Lord, did
Pura^a Kassapa, when asked what was the immediate
advantage in the life of a recluse, expound his theory
of non-action1. Just, Lord, as if a man, when asked
what a mango was, should explain what a bread fruit
is, just so did Pura/za Kassapa, when asked what was
the fruit, in this present state of being, of the life of
a recluse, expound his theory of non-action. Then,
Lord, it occurred to me : " How should such a one as
I think of giving dissatisfaction to any recluse or
Brahman in my realm ? " So I neither applauded nor
blamed what he said, and though dissatisfied I gave
utterance to no expression of dissatisfaction, and neither
accepting nor rejecting that answer of his, I arose from
my seat; and departed thence.

19. ['In the same manner I went to five other
teachers, and receiving to this same question put an
answer not to the point, I behaved in each case as just
set forth. And the answers of the five were thus :] 2


1 Akiriyawz vyakasi. Gogerly interprets this 'he replied by
affirming that there are no future rewards and punishments.' Burnouf
has simply ' m'a donne* une r£ponse vaine.' But the corresponding
word in the subsequent sections summarises the theory of the teacher
questioned. On this theory compare A. I, 62 ; V. I. 235.

8 In the text the framework of the interview is repeated each time
in the same words as above. Only the answers differ. The answers
all recur in the Ma.gg^ima I, 513 foil.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 7 1

20. 'When one day I had thus asked Makkhali of
the cow-pen 1, he said : " There is, O king, no cause,
either ultimate or remote, for the depravity of beings ;
they become depraved without reason and without
cause. There is no cause, either proximate or remote,
for the rectitude of beings ; they become pure without
reason and without cause. The attainment of any
given condition, of any character, does not depend
either on one's own acts, or on the acts of another,
or on human effort. There is no such thing as power
or energy, or human strength or human vigour. All
animals, all creatures (with one, two, or more senses),
all beings (produced from eggs or in a womb), all
souls (in plants) 2 are without force and power and
energy of theii own. They are bent this way and that
by their fate, by the necessary conditions of the class
to which they belong, by their individual nature : and
it is according to their position in one or other of the
six classes that they experience ease or pain.

1 There is a good deal in both the Buddhist and theAGain texts
about this Makkhali Gosala, whose followers were called A^fvakas,
and who was regarded, from the Buddhist point of view, as the
worst of the sophists. Some of the Gaina passages, and also
Buddhaghosa here, are referred to by Hoernle, 'Uvasaka dasao,'
pp. 108 foil. : and in the Appendixes. The principal Pi/aka passages
are M. 1,31, 198, 238, 250, 483, 516,524. S.I, 66, 68; 111,69, 211;
IV, 398. A. I, 33, 286; III, 276, 384. V. I, 8, 291 ; II, in, 130,
165, 284; IV, 74. See also Git I, 493 and G. V, 68. As the sect is
thrice mentioned in the Asoka Edicts as receiving royal gifts it is
certain that it retained an important position for several centuries at
least. See Senart, 'Inscriptions de Piyadasi,' II, 82, 209.

From the beginning of the answer down to the end of p. 53 recurs
at S. Ill, 211, and the rest of it at ibid. 212, and the first part of the
answer is ascribed at ibid. p. 69 to Pura«a Kassapa.

2 Sabbe satta, sabbe pa«a, sabbe bhuta, sabbe £"iva. Bud-
dhaghosa gives details of these four classes of living beings, showing
how they are meant to include all that has life, on this earth, from
men down to plants. The explanation is very confused, and makes
the terms by no means mutually exclusive. They are frequently
used in the same order in the Gaina-Sutras, and Professor Jacobi
renders them accordingly ' Every sentient being, every insect, every
living thing, whether animal or vegetable.' ' Gaina-Sutras,' II, xxv.
This is much better ; but we have, in our version, to give the sense in
which the Buddhists supposed Gosala to have taken the words.


72 II. SAMA##A-PHALA SUTTA.

[54] ' "There are fourteen hundred thousands of the
principal sorts of birth, and again six thousand others,
and again six hundred. There are five hundred sorts
of Karma, and again five (according to the five senses),
and again three (according to act, word, and thought) ;
and there is a whole Karma and a half Karma (the
whole being a Karma of act or word, the half a Karma
of thought).

' " There are sixty-two paths (or modes of conduct),
sixty-two periods, six classes (or distinctions among
men)1, eight stages of a prophet's existence2, forty-nine
hundred sorts of occupation 3, forty-nine hundred sorts
of wandering mendicants, forty-nine hundred regions
dwelt in by Nagas, two thousand faculties, three
thousand purgatories, thirty-six places where dust accu-
mulates, seven sorts of animate and seven of inanimate
production, and seven of production by grafting, seven
sorts of gods, and of men, and of devils, and of great
lakes, and seven principal and again seven hundred
minor sorts of Pa^uz'as4 of precipices, and of dreams.

' " There are eighty-four hundred thousand periods
during which both fools and wise alike, wandering in
transmigration, shall at last make an end of pain.
Though the wise should hope : ' By this virtue or
this performance of duty, or this penance, or this
righteousness will I make the Karma (I have inherited),
that is not yet mature, mature' — though the fool should
hope, by the same means, to get gradually rid of Karma
that has matured — neither of them can do it. The
ease and pain, measured out, as it were, with a measure,
cannot be altered in the course of transmigration ; there


1 Compare the corresponding theory of the Gains as given in the
Uttaradhyayana Sutra in Jacobi's Gaina-Sutras, vol. ii, p. 213: and
that of Purawa Kassapa quoted in Aiiguttara III, 383.

2 Buddhaghosa gives the details ' babyhood, playtime, trial time,
erect time, learning time, ascetic time, prophet time, and prostrate
time ' with (very necessary) comments on each. One may compare
Shakspere's ' Seven Ages of Man.'

3 Ag\v&. The Siamese edition reads a^ivaka.

* I think this is the right reading, but don't know what it means.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. J $

can be neither increase nor decrease thereof, neither
excess nor deficiency. Just as when a ball of string is
cast forth it will spread out just as far, and no farther,
than it can unwind, just so both fools and wise alike,
wandering in transmigration exactly for the allotted
term, shall then, and only then, make an end of
pain."

' Thus, Lord, did Makkhali of the cow-pen, when
asked what was the immediate advantage in the life
of a recluse, expound his theory of purification through
transmigration.

[65] 23. 'When, one day, I had thus asked A^ita of
the garment of hair, he said1 : " There is no such thing,
O king, as alms or sacrifice or offering. There is
neither fruit nor result of good or evil deeds. There
is no such thing as this world or the next. There is
neither father nor mother, nor beings springing into life
without them. There are in the world no recluses or
Brahmans who have reached the highest point 2, who
walk perfectly, and who having understood and realised,
by themselves alone, both this world and the next,
make their wisdom known to others.

' " A human being is built up of the four elements.
When he dies the earthy in him returns and relapses
to the earth, the fluid to the water, the heat to the fire,
the windy to the air, and his faculties 3 pass into space.
The four bearers, on the bier as a fifth, take his dead
body away ; till they reach the burning-ground men
utter forth eulogies, but there his bones are bleached,

1 This answer recurs S. Ill, 307, M. I, 515 (compare Dh. S. 1215,
1362, 1364), as the view of a typical sophist.

2 Sammag-gato. Buddhaghosa gives here no explanation of this
word, but the Gataka Commentary on Gat. Ill, 305 says it means the
man who has attained the highest fruit; that is, Arahatship. Gato is
used here in the same sense as it has in Tathagato, in gatatto (in
the NigawMa paragraph below), and in viggi.-ga.to (S. N. 730, 733,
743), that is, who has not only attempted to go to. but has actually
reached, the aim (common alike to the orthodox Ved&ntist Brahmans
and to each of the various schools of independent, diss ting, thinkers
and recluses) of the conquest over ignorance, of the grasp of truth.

3 Indriyani, the five senses, and the mind as a sixth.


74 II. SAMAiViVA-PHALA SUTTA.

and his offerings1 end in ashes. It is a doctrine of
fools, this talk of gifts. It is an empty lie, mere idle
talk, when men say there is profit therein. Fools and
wise alike, on the dissolution of the body, are cut off,
annihilated, and after death they are not."

' Thus, Lord, did A^ita of the garment of hair, when
asked what was the immediate advantage in the life of
a recluse, expound his theory of annihilation.

[56] 26. ' When, one day, I had thus asked Pakudha
Ka^ayana, he said : " The following seven things,
O king, are neither made nor commanded to be made,
neither created nor caused to be created, they are
barren (so that nothing is produced out of them),
stedfast as a mountain peak, as a pillar firmly fixed.
They move not, neither do they vary, they trench not
one upon another, nor avail aught as to ease or pain or
both. And what are the seven ? The four elements —
earth, water, fire, and air — and ease, and pain, and the
soul as a seventh. So there is neither slayer nor
causer of slaying, hearer or speaker, knower or ex-
plainer. When one with a sharp sword cleaves a head
in twain, no one thereby deprives any one of life,
a sword has only penetrated into the interval between
seven elementary substances."

' Thus, Lord, did Pakudha KaiMyana, when asked
what was the immediate advantage in the life of
a recluse, expound the matter by expounding some-
thing else.

[57] 28. 'When, one day, I had thus asked the
Niga»//*a of the Nata clan, he said: "A Nigaw///a,
O king (a man free from bonds), is restrained with a
fourfold self-restraint. He lives restrained as regards
all water ; restrained as regards all evil ; all evil has
he washed away ; and he lives suffused with the
sense of evil held at bay. Such is his fourfold self-
restraint. And since he is thus tied with this fourfold


1 Ahutiyo. See Buddhavazwsa XXVII, 10; KathaVatthu 550. The
phrase is omitted in the parallel passage in the Gaina ' Sutrakrnahga. '
pointed out by Jacobi, ' Graina-Sutras/ II, xxiv.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE 75

bond, therefore is he, the NigawMo (free from bonds),
called Gatatto (whose heart has gone; that is, to the
summit, to the attainment, of his aim) Yatatto (whose
heart is kept down ; that is, is under command), and
7/kitatto (whose heart is fixed)1."

1 Thus, Lord, did the NigantAa. of the Nata clan,
when asked what was the immediate advantage in the
life of a recluse, expound his theory of the fourfold
bond.

[58] 31. 'When, one day, I had thus asked Sa^aya
of the Belaya clan, he said : " If you ask me whether
there is another world — well, if I thought there were,
I would say so. But I don't say so. And I don't
think it is thus or thus. And I don't think it is other-
wise. And I don't deny it. And I don't say there
neither is, nor is not, another world. And if you ask
me about the beings produced by chance ; or whether
there is any fruit, any result, of good or bad actions ;
or whether a man who has won the truth continues, or
not, after death — to each or any of these questions do
I give the same reply2."

[59] 33. 'Thus, Lord, did Sa^aya of the Belaya
clan, when asked what was the immediate advantage in
the life of a recluse, show his manner of prevarication.
And to him, as to all the others, I expressed neither
approval nor dissatisfaction, but neither accepting nor


1 The series of riddles in this difficult passage is probably intended
to be an ironical imitation of the NigawMa's way of talking. Gogerly
has caught the general sense fairly enough, but his version is very
free, and wrong as to two of the words, and it gives no idea of the
oracular form in which the original is couched. Burnouf's rendering
is quite wide of the mark.

The first of the ' Four Restraints ' is the well-known rule of the
Gains not to drink cold water, on the ground that there are ' souls ' in
it. See the discussion in the Milinda (II, 85-91 of my translation).

Professor Jacobi (' Gaina-Sutras/ II, xxiii) thinks the 'Four
Restraints' are intended to represent the four vows kept by the
followers of Parjva. But this surely cannot be so, for these vows were
quite different.

2 The text repeats the whole paragraph put above (p. 27 of the
text) into the mouth of the Eel-wriggler.


76 II. SAMAiWVA-PHALA SUTTA.

rejecting what was said, I arose from my seat, and
departed thence \

34. ' And now, Lord, I put the same question to
the Blessed One. Can you show me any immediate
fruit, in this world, of the life of a recluse, such as
those who follow each of the occupations I have men-
tioned are, each of them, able to show ?'

' I can, O king. And to that end I would fain put
a question to you. Answer it as you may think
most fit.

[60] 35. ' Now what do you think, O king. Suppose
among the people of your household there were a slave
who does work for you, rises up in the morning before
you do and retires earlier to rest, who is keen to carry
out your pleasure, anxious to make himself agreeable
in what he does and says, a man who watches your
every look. Suppose he should think, "Strange is it
and wonderful, this issue of meritorious deeds, this
result of merit! Here is this king of Magadha, A^ata-
sattu, the son of the Videha princess — he is a man, and
so am I. But the king lives in the full enjoyment and
possession of the five pleasures of sense — a very god,
methinks — and here am I a slave, working for him,
rising before him and retiring earlier to rest, keen to
carry out his pleasure, anxious to make myself agree-
able in deed and word, watching his very looks. Would
that I were like him, that I too might earn merit.
Why should not I have my hair and beard shaved off,


1 Of these six teachers Purawa denies the evil Karma in a bad act
and vice versa ; A^ita, in preaching annihilation at death, shuts out
the possibility of any effect to be worked by Karma ; and Makkhali
rejects both Karma and its effect. The theory of Pakudha seems to
exclude responsibility ; the Niga7/Ma simply begs the question, by
asserting that a NigawMa has attained the end; and Saw^aya gives
no answer at all.

The only one of these six theories of life on which independent
evidence is at present accessible is that of the NigawMa (the Gain
theory). But no attempt has yet been made to summarise it, or set
it out in a manner intelligible to Western readers. It is very much to
be hoped that this want may soon be supplied by one or other of
the excellent scholars familiar with the texts.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 77

and don the yellow robes, and going forth from the
household state, renounce the world ?" And suppose,
after a time, he should do so. And having been admitted
into an Order, should dwell restrained in act and
word and thought, content with mere food and shelter,
delighting in solitude. And suppose your people
should tell you of this, saying: "If it please your
majesty, do you know that such a one, formerly your
slave, who worked for you, and so on (all as before)
has now donned the yellow robes, and has been
admitted into an Order, and dwells restrained, content
with mere food and shelter, delighting in solitude?"
Would you then say : " Let the man come back ; let
him become a slave again, and work for me"?'

36. ' Nay, Lord, rather should we greet him with
reverence [el], and rise up from our seat out of defer-
ence towards him, and press him to be seated. And
we should have robes and a bowl, and a lodging place,
and medicine for the sick — all the requisites of a
recluse — made ready, and beg him to accept of them.
And we should order watch and ward and guard to be
kept for him according to the law.'

4 But what do you think, O king. That being so, is
there, or is there not, some fruit, visible in this world,
of the life of a recluse?'

' Certainly, Lord, that is so.'

I This then, O king, is the first kind of the fruit,
visible in this world, which I maintained to arise from
the life of a recluse.'

37. ' Can you, Lord, show me any other fruit, visible
in this world, of the life of a recluse ? '

I I can, O king. And to that end I would fain put
a question, &c. [as before, to the end of § 36, the case
now put being that of a free man who cultivates his
land, a householder, who pays taxes and thus increases
the king's wealth, but gives up his little property and
his position in his clan, and enters an Order.]

[62] 39. Can you, Lord, show me any other fruit,
visible in this world, of the life of a recluse, a fruit
higher and sweeter than these?'


78 II. SAMAiViVA-PHALA SUTTA.

'I can, O king. Give ear therefore, O king, and
give good heed, and I will speak.

40. ' Suppose, O king, there appears in the world
one who has won the truth, an Arahat, a fully
awakened one, abounding in wisdom and goodness,
happy, who knows all worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to
mortals willing to be led, a teacher for gods and men,
a Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by himself, thoroughly
knows and sees, as it were, face to face this universe,
— including the worlds above of the gods, the Brahmas,
and the Maras, and the world below with its recluses
and Brahmans, its princes and peoples, — and having
known it, he makes his knowledge known to others.
The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress,
lovely in its consummation, doth he proclaim, both in
the spirit and in the letter, the higher life doth he
make known, in all its fullness and in all its purity *.

41. 'A householder2 or one of his children, or a man
of inferior birth in any class listens to that truth ; and
on hearing it he has faith in the Tathaga'ta (the one
who has found the truth) ; and when he is possessed of
that faith, he considers thus within himself :

' " Full of hindrances is household life, a path for the
dust of passion. Free as the air is the life of him who
has renounced all worldly things. How difficult is it
for the man who dwells at home to live the higher life
in all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its bright per-
fection ! Let me then cut off my hair and beard, let
me clothe myself in the orange-coloured robes, and let
me go forth from the household life into the homeless
state."

1 Then, before long, forsaking his portion of wealth,
be it great or small, forsaking his circle of relatives, be
they many or be they few, he cuts off his hair and
beard, he clothes himself in the orange-coloured robes,

1 Buddhaghosa applies these last two adjectives to the truth, not
to the life. But it seems more in accord with the next paragraph
to refer them to the life.

2 Gahapati, which Buddhaghosa takes here in the sense of peasant,
ryot.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 79

and he goes forth from the household life into the
homeless state.

42. 'When he has thus become a recluse he lives
self-restrained by that restraint that should be binding
on a recluse x. Uprightness is his delight, and he sees
danger in the least of those things he should avoid.
He adopts, and trains himself in, the precepts. He
encompasses himself with good deeds in act and
word. Pure are his means of livelihood, good is his
conduct, guarded the door of his senses. Mindful
and self-possessed he is altogether happy.

43. ' And how, O king, is his conduct good ?

' In this, O king, that the Bhikshu, putting away the
killing of living things, holds aloof from the destruction
of life. The cudgel and the sword he has laid aside,
and ashamed of roughness, and full of mercy, he dwells
compassionate and kind to all creatures that have life*

' This is part of the goodness that he has.

[Here follow the whole of the Silas (the para-
graphs on minor morality), in the words already
translated above in the Brahma-^ala Sutta. §§ 8 to
27. Only for 'Gotama the recluse' one should read
'the Bhikshu'; and alter in each case the words
of the refrain accordingly.]

[69] 63. ' And then that Bhikshu, O king, being thus
master of the minor moralities, sees no danger from any
side ; that is, so far as concerns his self-restraint in
conduct. Just, O king, as a sovereign, duly crowned,
whose enemies have been beaten down, sees no danger
from any side ; [70] that is, so far as enemies are con-
cerned, so is the Bhikshu confident. And endowed with
this body of morals, so worthy of honour, he experiences,
within himself, a sense of ease without alloy. Thus is
it, O king, that the Bhikshu becomes righteous.

64. ' And how, O king, is the Bhikshu guarded as to
the doors of his senses 2 ? '

1 Patimokkha-sa/ravara-sawzvuto. Buddhaghosa, I think, takes
this to mean ' restrained according to the rules of the Patimokkha.'

a On the following important and constantly repeated paragraph
compare M. I, 180, 268; K. V. 424-6, 463-4; Mil. 367; Asl. 400, &c.


80 II. SAMAAWA-PHALA SUTTA.

1 When, O king, he sees an object with his eye he is
not entranced in the general appearance or the details
of it1. He sets himself to restrain that which might
give occasion for evil states, covetousness and dejec-'
tion, to flow in over him so long as he dwells un-
restrained as to his sense of sight. He keeps watch
upon his faculty of sight, and he attains to .mastery
over it. And so, in like manner, when he hears a
sound with his ear, or smells an odour with his nose,
or tastes a flavour with his tongue, or feels a touch with
his body, or when he cognises a phenomenon with his
mind he is not entranced in the general appearance or
the details of it. He sets himself to restrain that
which might give occasion for evil states, covetousness
and dejection, to flow in over him so long as he
dwells unrestrained as to his mental (representative)
faculty. He keeps watch upon his representative
faculty, and he attains to mastery over it. And en-
dowed with this self-restraint, so worthy of honour, as
regards the senses, he experiences, within himself, a
sense of ease into which no evil state can enter2. Thus
is it, O king, that the Bhikshu becomes guarded as to
the doors of his senses.

65. ' And how, O king, is the Bhikshu mindful and
self-possessed ?

1 In this matter, O king, the Bhikshu in going forth
or in coming back keeps clearly before his mind's eye
(all that is wrapt up therein — the immediate object of


1 Na nimittaggahi hoti nanuvyaw^anaggaht. The phrase
nimittaw gawhati means either to seize upon anything as the
object of one's thought to the exclusion of everything else (see, for
instance, Vin. I, 183, and Buddhaghosa's note on it given in the
' Vinaya Texts,' II, 9), or to seize upon the outward sign of anything
so keenly as to recognise what it is the mark of (Vin. Ill, 17). And
when the object is a person of the other sex this phrase is the idiom
used for our ' falling in love with.' Buddhaghosa gives, as an instance
of the nimitta, the general conclusion that the object seen, heard, &c,
is a man or woman; of the anuvyaw^ana, the perception of the
detail that he or she is smiling, talking, &c.

2 Avyaseka, literally 'with no besprinkling' (of evil, says Bud-
dhaghosa).


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 8 1

the act itself, its ethical significance, whether or not it
is conducive to the high aim set before him, and the
real facts underlying the mere phenomenon of the out-
ward act). And so also in looking forward, or in look-
ing round ; in stretching forth his arm, or in drawing it
in again ; in eating or drinking, in masticating or
swallowing, in obeying the calls of nature, in going or
standing- or sitting, in sleeping or waking, in speaking
or in being still, he keeps himself aware of all it really
means l. Thus is it, O king, that the Bhikshu becomes
mindful and self-possessed.

[7l] 66. ' And how, O king, is the Bhikshu content ?

' In this matter, O king, the Bhikshu is satisfied with
sufficient robes to cherish his body, with sufficient food
to keep his stomach going. Whithersoever he may go
forth, these he takes with him as he goes — just as
a bird with his wings, O king, whithersoever he may
fly, carries his wings with him as he flies. Thus is itv
O king, that the Bhikshu becomes content 2.


1 A small volume might be written on the various expansions
of this text in the Pi/akas. Several whole Dialogues are devoted to
it, and various Suttas in others of the oldest texts. Buddhaghosa
has many pages upon it here, and deals with it also at length in the
Visuddhi Magga and elsewhere. What is above added in brackets
explains the principal points of what is implied, according to the
Pi/akas, in this famous passage, — the Buddhist analogue to St. Paul's :
' Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God ' (1 Cor. x. 31).

By the real fact underlying any action is meant that, in the
Buddhist theory, behind the action (going, seeing, &c.) there is no
ego, no actor (goer, seer, &c), that can be called a ' soul '
(Abbhantare atta nama aloketa va viloketa va n' atthi), but
that there is a psychological explanation sufficient, of itself, without
the soul-theory.

2 'Consider the fowls of the air/ &c. (Matt. vi. 26).

No man can call me servant, and I wander —

So said the Exalted One —
At will, o'er all the earth, on what I find
I feel no need of wages, or of gain,
So let the rain pour down now, if it likes, to-night.

(Dhaniya Sutta 8.)
And see the context in my 'American Lectures,' p. 168.

II. G


82 II. samaMa-phala sutta.

67. ' Then, master of this so excellent body of
moral precepts, gifted with this so excellent self-
restraint as to the senses, endowed with this so excel-
lent mindfulness and self-possession, filled with this so
excellent content, he chooses some lonely spot to rest
at on his way — in the woods, at the foot of a tree, on
a hill side, in a mountain glen, in a rocky cave, in
a charnel place, or on a heap of straw in the open
field. And returning thither after his round for alms
he seats himself, when his meal is done, cross-legged,
keeping his body erect, and his intelligence alert,
intent.

68. ' Putting away the hankering after the world \
he remains with a heart that hankers not, and purifies
his mind of lusts. Putting away the corruption of the
wish to injure, he remains with a heart free from ill-
temper, and purifies his mind of malevolence. Putting
away torpor of heart and mind2, keeping his ideas
alight3, mindful and self-possessed, he purifies his
mind of weakness and of sloth. Putting away flurry
and worry, he remains free from fretfulness, and with
heart serene within, he purifies himself of irritability
and vexation of spirit. Putting away wavering, he
remains as one passed beyond perplexity ; and no
longer in suspense as to what is good, he purifies his
mind of doubt.

69. ' Then just, O king, as when a man, after con-
tracting a loan 4, should set a business on foot, and his

1 Abhi^^aw loke pahaya. Gogerly renders 'banishes desire
from him,' leaving out loke altogether, and rendering abhig^M in
defiance both of the derivation and of the traditional explanation
of the word. Even Burnouf (who frequently uses ' desire ' for words
in the Pali meaning ' lusts ' or ' excitement ') has here ' cupidite?

2 So Buddhaghosa here (p. 211). But the Dhamma Sangam 11 56,
n57Aexplains it as torpor of mind and body.

3 Aloka-sa«»i, literally 'whose ideas are light.' Neumann
('Reden des Gotamo,' I, 434, &c.) translates Moving the light/ which
may be the right connotation. Burnouf has 'being aware of his
visual sensation ' (de son regard), which is certainly wrong.

* Inam a day a. Neumann has 'oppressed by debt,' but Buddha-
ghosa (p. 212) says 'taking goods on interest'; and this is confirmed
by Gat. IV, 256, V, 436.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 83

business should succeed, and he should not only be
able to pay off the old debt he had incurred, but there
should be a surplus over to maintain a wife. Then
would he realise [72] : " I used to have to carry on my
business by getting into debt, but it has gone so well
with me that 1 have paid off what I owed, and have a
surplus over to maintain a wife." And he would be
of good cheer at that, would be glad of heart at
that : —

70. 'Then just, O king, as if a man were a pres-
to disease, in pain, and very ill, and his food would
not digest, and there were no strength left in him ;
and after a time he were to recover from that disease,
and his food should digest, and his strength come back
to him ; then, when he realised his former and his
present state, he would be of good cheer at that, he
would be glad of heart at that : —

71. 'Then just, O king, as if a man were bound in
a prison house, and after a time he should be set free
from his bonds, safe and sound, and without any con-
fiscation of his goods ; when he realised his former and
his present state, he would be of good cheer at that,
he would be glad of heart at that : — ■

72. ' Then just, O king, as if a man were a slave,
not his own master, subject to another, unable to go
whither he would ; and after a time he should be
emancipated from that slavery, become his own master,
not subject to others, a free man, free to go whither he
would ; then, on realising his former and his present
state, he would be of good cheer at that, he would be
glad of heart at that : —

[73] 73. ' Then just, O king, as if a man, rich and
prosperous, were to find himself on a long road, in a
desert, where no food was, but much danger ; and after
a time were to find himself out of the desert, arrived
safe, on the borders of his village, in security and
peace ; then, on realising his former and his present
stale, he would be of good cheer at that, he would be
glad of heart at that : —

74. 'Just so, O king, the Bhikshu, so long as these

g 2


84 II. SAMAMVA-PHALA SUTTA.

five Hindrances are not put away within him looks
upon himself as in debt, diseased, in prison, in slavery,
lost on a desert road. But when these five Hindrances
have been put away within him, he looks upon him-
self as freed from debt, rid of disease, out of jail, a free
man, and secure ;

75. 'And gladness springs up within him on his
realising that, and joy arises to him thus gladdened,
and so rejoicing all his frame becomes at ease, and
being thus at ease he is filled with a sense of peace,
and in that peace his heart is stayed l.

75 a. ' Then estranged from lusts, aloof from evil
dispositions, he enters into and remains in the First
Rapture — a state of joy and ease born of detachment 2,
reasoning and investigation going on the while.

' His very body does he so pervade, drench, permeate,
and suffuse with the joy and ease born of detachment,
that there is no spot in his whole frame not suffused
therewith.

[74] 76. 'Just, O king, as a skilful bathman or his
apprentice will scatter perfumed soap powder in a metal
basin, and then besprinkling it with water, drop by
drop, will so knead it together that the ball of lather,
taking up the unctuous moisture, is drenched with it,
pervaded by it, permeated by it within and without,
and there is no leakage possible.

1 From the beginning of § 68 the text, though here split up into
paragraphs for the convenience of the reader, is really one long
sentence or paragraph of much eloquence and force in the Pali ; and
the peroration, leading on to the GMnas, is a favourite passage
recurring M. I, 71; Vin. I, 294; Mil. 84. The five similes are to
be taken, in order, as referring to the Five Hindrances (Nivarawa)
given in § 68. The Dhamma Sangawi 1152 gives six hindrances,
and M. I, 360-3 gives eight.

2 Vivek a, 'separation' — physically of the body, 'seclusion'; intel-
lectually, of the objects of thought, ' discrimination ' ; ethically, of the
heart, ' being separate from the world.' We have no word in English
suggesting these three, all of which are implied. The stress is upon
separation from the world, taking 'world' in the sense of all the
hindrances to spiritual progress, and especially of the five chief
Hindrances (Nivara«a) just above set out. Buddhaghosa has
nothing here, but compare Asl. 166.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 85

' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of
a recluse, visible in this world, higher and sweeter than
the last.

yy. * Then further, O king, the Bhikshu suppressing
all reasoning and investigation enters into and abides
in the Second G/i&na., a state of joy and ease, born of
the serenity of concentration, when no reasoning or
investigation goes on, — a state of elevation l of mind,
a tranquillisation of the heart within.

' And his very body does he so pervade, drench,
permeate, and suffuse with the joy and ease born of
concentration, that there is no spot in his whole frame
not suffused therewith.

78. ' Just, O king, as if there were a deep pool, with
water welling up into it from a spring beneath, and
with no inlet from the east or west, from the north or
south, and the god should not from time to time send
down showers of rain upon it. Still the current of cool
waters rising up from that spring would pervade, fill,
permeate, and suffuse the pool with cool waters, and
there would be no part or portion of the pool unsuffused
therewith.

[75] ' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life
of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

79. ' Then further, O king, the Bhikshu, holding
aloof from joy, becomes equable 2 ; and mindful and
self-possessed he experiences in his body that ease
which the Arahats talk of when they say : " The man
serene and self-possessed is well at ease," and so he
enters into and abides in the Third G/iana.

' And his very body does he so pervade, drench,


1 Ekodibhava. Compare Asl. 169, Senart in Mahavastu I, 554,
and the notes in J. P. T. S., 1884, p. 32 foil.

2 Upekhako, literally 'looking on,' that is, looking on rival
mental states with equal mind. Imperturbable, impartial, tolerant,
unsusceptible, stoical, composed, are all possible renderings, and all
unsatisfactory. The ten kinds of Upekkha, ' equanimity/ translated
into English from Sinhalese by Spence Hardy (Manual, p. 505"), can
now be corrected from the Pali at Asl. 172.


86 II. SAMAAWA-PHALA SUTTA.

permeate, and suffuse with that ease that has no joy
with it, that there is no spot in his whole frame not
suffused therewith.

80. 'Just, O king, as when in a lotus tank the
several lotus flowers, red or white or blue, born in the
water, grown up in the water, not rising up above
the surface of the water, drawing up nourishment from
the depths of the water, are so pervaded, drenched,
permeated, and suffused from their very tips down to
their roots with the cool moisture thereof, that there
is no spot in the whole plant, whether of the red lotus,
or of the white, or of the blue, not suffused therewith.

' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of
a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and sweeter
than the last.

81. 'Then further, O king, the Bhikshu, by the
putting away alike of ease and of pain, by the passing
away alike of any elation, any dejection, he had
previously felt, enters into and abides in the Fourth
GA&na., a state of pure self-possession and equanimity,
without pain and without ease.

[76] 'And he sits there so suffusing even his body
with that sense of purification, of translucence, of heart,
that there is no spot in his whole frame not suffused
therewith.

&2. 'Just, O king, as if a man were sitting so wrapt
from head to foot in a clean white robe, that there were
no spot in his whole frame not in contact with the clean
white robe — just so, O king, does the Bhikshu sit there,
so suffusing even his body with that sense of purifica-
tion, of translucence, of heart, that there is no spot in
his whole frame not suffused therewith.

' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of
a recluse, and higher and sweeter than the last.

83. ' With his heart thus serene, made pure, trans-
lucent, cultured, devoid of evil, supple, ready to act,
firm, and imperturbable, he applies and bends down
his mind to that insight that comes from knowledge.
He grasps the fact: "This body of mine has form, it
is built up of the four elements, it springs from father


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 87

and mother, it is continually renewed by so much boiled
rice and juicy foods, its very nature is impermanence,
it is subject to erasion, abrasion, dissolution, and dis-
integration x ; and therein is this consciousness 2 of
mine, too, bound up, on that does it depend."

84. 'Just, O king, as if there were a Veluriya gem,
bright, of the purest water, with eight facets, excellently
cut, clear, translucent, without a flaw, excellent in every
way. And through it a string, blue, or orange-coloured,
or red, or white, or yellow should be threaded. If
a man, who had eyes to see, were to take it into his
hand, he would clearly perceive how the one is bound
up with the other 3.

[77] ' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the
life of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

85. ' With his heart thus serene, made pure, trans-
lucent, cultured, devoid of evil, supple, ready to act,
firm, and impertuibable, he applies and bends down
his mind to the calling up of a mental image. He
calls up from this body another body, having form,

1 This is a favourite description of the body. (See M. I, 500 ;
II,i7; S. IV, 83; Gat I, 146, &c.) The words for erasion, abrasion,
are cunningly chosen (u££Aadana, parimaddana). They are also
familiar technical terms of the Indian shampooer, and are so used
above (p. 7, § 16 of the text). The double meaning must have been
clearly present to the Indian hearer, and the words are, therefore,
really untranslatable.

2 Vi«»S«a. ' The five senses, sensations arising from objects, and
all emotions and intellectual processes,' says Buddhaghosa (p. 221).

3 In spite of this and similar passages the adherents of the soul
theory (having nothing else to fasten on) were apt to fasten on to
the Buddhist Vinnana as a possible point of reconciliation with
their own theory. Even an admirer of the Buddha (one Sati, a
member of the Order) went so far as to tell the Buddha himself
that he must, as he admitted transmigration, have meant that the
V inn an a. did not really depend upon, was not really bound up with,
the body, but that it formed the link in transmigration. In perhaps the
most earnest and emphatic of all the Dialogues (M. I, 256 foil.), the
Buddha meets and refutes at length this erroneous representation of his
view. But it still survives. I know two living writers on Buddhism
who (in blissful ignorance of the Dialogue in question) still fasten upon
Buddha the opinion he so expressly refused to accept.


88 II. SAMAiV/VA-PHALA SUTTA.

made of mind, having all (his own body's) limbs and
parts, not deprived of any organ *.

86. 'Just, O king, as if a man were to pull out
a reed from its sheath. He would know: "This is
the reed, this the sheath. The reed is one thing, the
sheath another. It is from the sheath that the reed
has been drawn forth V And similarly were he to take
a snake out of its slough, or draw a sword from its
scabbard 3.

1 This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of
a recluse, visible in this life, and higher and sweeter
than the last.

87. 'With his heart thus serene, made pure, trans-
lucent, cultured, devoid of evil, supple, ready to act.
firm and imperturbable, he applies and bends down his
mind to the modes of the Wondrous Gift4. [78] He
enjoys the Wondrous Gift in its various modes —
being one he becomes many, or having become many
becomes one again ; he becomes visible or invisible ;
he goes, feeling no obstruction, to the further side
of a wall or rampart or hill, as if through air ; he
penetrates up and down through solid ground, as if
through water ; he walks on water without breaking

1 Buddhaghosa explains that, if the Bhikshu have his ears un-
pierced, so will the image, and so on.

2 This old simile occurs already in the Satapatha-Brahma/za IV
3. 3, 16.

3 The point is the similarity. Buddhaghosa explains that the
Kara«</a is not a basket (as Burnouf renders it), but the skin which
the snake sloughs off; and that the scabbard is like the sword,
whatever the sword's shape. He adds that of course a man could
not take a snake out of its slough with his hand. He is supposed
in the simile to do so in imagination.

4 Iddhi, literally 'well-being, prosperity. The four Iddhis of a
king are personal beauty, length of life, strong health, and popularity
(M. Sud. Sutta in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' pp. 259-261). The Iddhis
of Gotama when at home, as a boy, were the possession of a beautiful
garden, soft clothing, comfortable lodging, pleasant music, and good
food (A. I, 145). Worldly Iddhi is distinguished from spiritual
at A. I, 93. Buddhaghosa gives nine sorts of Iddhi, mostly intellec-
tual, at Asl. 91, and compare 237. There are no examples in the
Pi/akas of concrete instances of any of these except the last ; but see
S. IV, 289, 290; A. Ill, 340, 341; M.P.S. 43.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 89

through, as if on solid ground ; he travels cross-legged
in the sky, like the birds on wing ; even the Moon and
the Sun, so potent, so mighty though they be, does he
touch and feel with his hand ; he reaches in the body
even up to the heaven of Brahma.

88. ' Just, O king, as a clever potter or his apprentice
could make, Could succeed in getting out of properly-
prepared clay any shape of vessel he wanted to have —
or an ivory carver out of ivory, or a goldsmith out of
gold.

[79] ' This O king, is an immediate fruit of the life
of a recluse, and higher and sweeter than the last.

89. ' With his heart thus serene, made pure, trans-
lucent, cultured, devoid of evil, supple, ready to act,
firm and imperturbable, he applies and bends down his
mind to the Heavenly Ear. With that clear Heavenly
Ear surpassing the ear of men he hears sounds both
human and celestial, whether far or near.

90. 'Just, O king, as if a man were on the high road
and were to hear the sound of a kettledrum or a tabor
or the sound of chank horns and small drums he would
know: "This is the sound of a kettledrum, this is the
sound of a tabor, this of chank horns, and of drums 1."

This. O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a
recluse, visible in this life, and higher and sweeter than
the last.

91. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he
directs and bends down his mind to the knowledge
which penetrates the heart. Penetrating with his own
heart the hearts of other beings, of other men, he
knows them. He discerns —

The passionate mind to be passionate, and the calm
mind calm ;

[so] The angry mind to be angry, and the peaceful
mind peaceful ;

The dull mind to be dull, and the alert mind alert ;


1 The point of the comparison, says Buddhaghosa (223), is that
if he is in trouble and has lost his way he might be in doubt. But
if calm and secure he can tell the difference.


90 II. SAMA2VWA-PHALA SUTTA.

The attentive mind to be attentive, and the wander-
ing mind wandering ;

The broad mind to be broad, and the narrow mind
narrow ;

The mean mind to be mean, and the lofty mind
lofty ] ;

The stedfast mind to be stedfast, and the wavering
mind to be wavering ;

The free mind to be free, and the enslaved mind
enslaved.

92. ' Just, 0 king, as a woman or a man or a lad,
young and smart, on considering attentively the image
of his own face in a bright and brilliant mirror or in
a vessel of clear water would, if it had a mole on it,
know that it had, and if not, would know it had not.

[8l] ' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life
of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

93. ' With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he
directs and bends down his mind to the knowledge of
the memory of his previous temporary states. He
recalls to mind his various temporary states in days
gone by — one birth, or two or three or four or five
births, or ten or twenty or thirty or forty or fifty or
a hundred or a thousand or a hundred thousand
births, through many an aeon of dissolution, many an
aeon of evolution, many an aeon of both dissolution and
evolution 2. " In such a place such was my name, such
my family, such my caste 3, such my food, such my
experience of discomfort or of ease, and such the
limits of my life. When I passed away from that
state, I took form again in such a place. There I had


1 Sa-uttara and anuttara. Unless the interpretation given in
theDhamma Sangam 1292, 1293, 1596, 1597 ('occupied with rebirth
in heaven, and occupied with Arahatship') reveals a change in the
use of terms, the evil disposition, in this case only, is put first.

2 This is based on the Indian theory of the periodic destruction
and renovation of the universe, each of which takes countless years
to accomplish.

3 Vanwa, 'colour.'


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 9 1

such and such a name and family and caste and food
and experience of discomfort or of ease, such was the
limit of my life. When I passed away from that state
I took form again here " — thus does he call to mind
his temporary state in days gone by in all their details,
and in all their modes.

94. 'Just, O king, as if a man were to go from his
own to another village, and from that one to another,
and from that one should return home. Then he
would know : " From my own village I came to that
other one. There I stood in such and such a way,
sat thus, spake thus, and held my peace thus. Thence
I came to that other village ; and there I stood in
such and such a way, sat thus, spake thus, and held
my peace thus. And now, from that other village,
I have returned back again home 1."

[82] ' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life
of a recluse. Visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

95. ' With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he
directs and bends down his mind to the knowledge of
the fall and rise of beings. With the pure Heavenly
Eye 2, surpassing that of men, he sees beings as they
pass away from one form of existence and take shape
in another ; he recognises the mean and the noble, the
well favoured and the ill favoured, the happy and the
wretched, passing away according to their deeds :
" Such and such beings, my brethren, in act and word
and thought, revilers of the noble ones, holding to
wrong views, acquiring for themselves that Karma
which results from wrong views, they, on the dissolution
of the body, after death, are reborn in some unhappy
state of suffering or woe. But such and such beings,
my brethren, well doers in act and word and thought,
not revilers of the noble ones, holding to right views,

1 The three villages correspond to the three stages of being, the
three B hum is, — the world of lust, the world of form, and the
formless worlds (the Kama, Rupa, and Arupa Lokas).

8 Dibba-/takkhu. See the note below on § 102 at the end of
this Sutta.


92 II. SAMAAWA-PHALA SUTTA.

acquiring for themselves that Karma that results from
right views, they, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, are reborn in some happy state in heaven."
Thus with the pure Heavenly Eye, surpassing that of
men, [83] he sees beings as they pass away from one
state of existence, and take form in another ; he recog-
nises the mean and the noble, the well favoured and
the ill favoured, the happy and the wretched, passing
away according to their deeds l.

96. ' Just, O king, as if there were a house with an
upper terrace on it in the midst of a place where four
roads meet, and a man standing thereon, and with eyes
to see, should watch men entering a house, and coming
forth out of it, and walking hither and thither along
the street 2, and seated in the square in the midst.
Then he would know : " Those men are entering
a house, and those are leaving it, and those are walk-
ing to and fro in the street, and those are seated in the
square in the midst."

' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of
a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and sweeter
than the last.

97. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he
directs and bends down his mind to the knowledge of
the destruction of the Deadly Floods 3. He knows

1 This paragraph forms the subject of the discussion in the Katha
Vatthu III, 9 (p. 250). The mere knowledge of the general fact
of the action of Karma is there distinguished from the Dibba-
£akkhu, the Heavenly Eye ; and the instance of SSriputta is quoted,
who had that knowledge, but not the Heavenly Eye. As he was
an Arahat it follows that the possession of the Heavenly Eye was
not a necessary consequence of Arahatship. Buddhaghosa adds
(p. 224) that the sphere of vision of the Heavenly Eye did not
extend to the Formless Worlds. On the Dhamma-^akkhu, ' the Eye
for the Truth/ see below, p. 1 10, § 21 of the text.

8 VJtisaw^arante is Buddhaghosa's reading. The Siamese has
Vithi/w. Compare M. I, 279.

8 Asavas, Deadly Floods, another untranslatable term. Neu-
mann has Illusion ( Wahn) ; Bumouf has defilement (souillures).
They are sometimes the three here mentioned (M. I, 23, 155; A.
I, 167; S. IV, 256, &c); but speculation, theorising (Di/Mi) is
added as a fourth in the M. P. S. and elsewhere. Unfortunately,


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 93

as it really is : " This is pain." [84] He knows as it
really is: "This is the origin of pain." He knows as
it really is : " This is the cessation of pain." He knows
as it really is : " This is the Path that leads to the
cessation of pain." He knows as they really are :
" These are the Deadly Floods." He knows as it really
is : " This is the origin of the Deadly Floods." He
knows as it really is : " This is the cessation of the
Deadly Floods." He knows as it really is: "This is the
Path that leads to the cessation of the Deadly Floods."
To him, thus knowing, thus seeing, the heart is set free
from the Deadly Taint of Lusts \ is set free from the
Deadly Taint of Becomings2, is set free from the Deadly
Taint of Ignorance 3. In him, thus set free, there arises
the knowledge of his emancipation, and he knows :
" Rebirth has been destroyed. The higher life has been
fulfilled. What had to be done has been accomplished.
After this present life there will be no beyond ! "

98. ' Just, O king, as if in a mountain fastness there
were a pool of water, clear, translucent, and serene ;
and a man, standing on the bank, and with eyes to
see, should perceive the oysters and the shells, the
gravel and the pebbles and the shoals of fish, as they
move about or lie within it : he would know : " This


the word has not been yet found in its concrete, primary, sense ;
unless indeed Buddhaghosa's statement (at Asl. 48) that well-
seasoned spirituous liquors were called asava be taken literally. It
is therefore impossible to be sure what is the simile that underlies
the use of the word in its secondary, ethical sense. Perhaps after
all it is the idea of overwhelming intoxication, and not of flood or
taint or ooze, that we ought to consider.

Subhuti in quoting the above passage from Buddhaghosa (in the
Abhidhana Padtpiki SiUi, p. 43) reads parivas throughout for
parivas .

1 Kamasava, with special reference to the taint of hankering after
a future life in the sensuous plane (Kama Loka); that is, in the
world.

2 Bhavasava, with special reference to the taint of hankering after
a future life in the plane of form and the formless plane (the Rtipa
and Arupa Loka's) that is, in heaven.

8 A viggas ava, with special reference to ignorance of the Four Great
Truths, just above summarised.


94 H. SAMAJWVA-PHALA SUTTA.

pool is clear, transparent, and serene, and there within
it are the oysters and the shells, and the sand and
gravel, and the shoals of fish are moving about or
lying still1."

[85] ' This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life
of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last. And there is no fruit of the
life of a recluse, visible in this world, that is higher
and sweeter than this V

99. And when he had thus spoken, A^atasattu the
king said to the Blessed One : ' Most excellent, Lord,
most excellent! Just as if a man were to set up that
which has been thrown down, or were to reveal that
which is hidden away, or were to point out the right
road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring
a lamp into the darkness so that those who have eyes
could see external forms — just even so, Lord, has the
truth been made known to me, in many a figure, by
the Blessed One. And now I betake myself. Lord, to
the Blessed One as my refuge, to the Truth, and to the
Order. May the Blessed One accept me as a disciple,
as one who, from this day forth, as long as life endures,
has taken his refuge in them. Sin has overcome me,
Lord, weak and foolish and wrong that I am, in that,
for the sake of sovranty, I put to death my father, that
righteous man, that righteous king ! May the Blessed
One accept it of me, Lord, that do so acknowledge it as
a sin, to the end that in future I may restrain myself.'

100. 'Verily, O king, it was sin that overcame you
in acting thus. But inasmuch as you look upon it as
sin, and confess it according to what is right, we accept
your confession as to that. For that, O king, is custom
in the discipline of the noble ones3, that whosoever

1 The simile recurs M. I, 279; A. I, 9. Compare for the words
sippi-sambuka Gat. V, 197; A. Ill, 395; Trenckner, 'Pali Mis-
cellany,' p. 60.

2 Because, as Buddhaghosa points out, this is really Arahatship,
Nirvana ; and it was to this, to Arahatship, that all the rest led up.

5 Ariyanaw. That is, either of previous Buddhas, or perhaps
of the Arahats.


THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE. 95

looks upon his fault as a fault, and rightfully confesses
it, shall attain to self-restraint in future.'

101. When he had thus spoken, A^atasattu the king
said to the Blessed One : ' Now, Lord, we would fain
go. We are busy, and there is much to do.'

' Do, O king, whatever seemeth to thee fit'
Then A^atasattu the king, pleased and delighted
with the words of the Blessed One, arose from his seat,
and bowed to the Blessed One, and keeping him on
the right hand as he passed him, departed thence.

102. Now the Blessed One, not long after A^atasattu
the king had gone, addressed the brethren, and said :
' This king, brethren, was deeply affected, he was
touched in heart. If, brethren, the king had not put
his father to death, that righteous man, and righteous
king, then would the clear and spotless eye for the
truth have arisen in him, even as he sat there V

Thus spake the Blessed One. The brethren were
pleased and delighted at his words.


Here ends the Discourse on the Fruits of the
Life of a Recluse.


SamazHa-phala Sutta is ended.


1 The Dhamma-/£akkhu (Eye for the Truth) is a technical term
for conversion, for entering on the Path that ends in Arahatship.
It is higher than the Heavenly Eye (dibba-^akkhu, above, p. 82
of the text, § 95) which sees other people's previous births, and below
the Eye of Wisdom (pa«/Ia-^akkhu) which is the wisdom of the
Arahat (Itivuttaka, p. 52, § 61).


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


AUBATTNA SUTTA.

This is one of several Suttas (mentioned in the notes to the
celebrated verse quoted at the end of Chapter I) which deal
with the subject of caste.

It is sufficiently evident from the comparative frequency of
the discussions on the matter of Brahman pretensions that
this was a burning question at the time when the Dialogues
were composed. No other social problem is referred to so
often ; and Brahmans would not be so often represented as
expressing astonishment or indignation at the position taken
up regarding it by the early Buddhists unless there had really
been a serious difference on the subject between the two
schools. But the difference, though real, has been gravely
misunderstood.

Some writers on Buddhism do not hesitate to ascribe to
Gotama the role of a successful political reformer, by repre-
senting him as having fought for the poor and despised against
the rich and privileged classes, and as having gone far to
abolish caste. Other writers gird at the Buddha because most
of the leaders of this Order were drawn from the ranks of the
respectable and the well-to-do, with an education in keeping
with their social position ; and disparage him for neglecting
the humble and the wretched, for not using his influence to
abolish, or to mitigate, the harshness of caste rules.

Both views are equally unhistorical. It is well known that
the population of India is now divided into a number of
sections (we call them ' castes '), the members of which are
debarred from the right of intermarriage (from the ccnnnbium)
with those outside their caste, and also, but in constantly
varying degrees, from the right of eating together (of cotn-
mensalily) with the members of other sections. Each such
' caste ' has also a council or committee by which it is governed,
and which settles all disputes regarding the caste.

The disastrous effects, from the ethical, social, and political
points of view, of these restrictions, and of caste as a whole,
have been often grossly exaggerated, and the benefits of the


INTRODUCTION. 97


system ignored. And we are entirely unwarranted in supposing
the system, as it now exists, to have been in existence also at
the time when Buddhism arose in the valley of the Ganges.
Our knowledge of the actual facts of caste, even as it now
exists, is still confused and inaccurate. The theories put
forward to explain the facts are loose and irreconcilable. And
an accurate statement of the corresponding facts, if any, at
the time of Gotama, has yet to be drawn up.

We have long known that the connnbium was the cause
of a long and determined struggle between the patricians arid
the plebeians in Rome. Evidence has been yearly accumu-
lating on the existence of restrictions as to intermarriage, and
as to the right of eating together, among other Aryan tribes —
Greeks, Germans, Russians, and so on. Even without the
fact of the existence, now, of such restrictions among the
modern successors of the ancient Aryans in India, it would
have been almost certain that they also were addicted to
similar customs. It is certain that the notion of such usages
was familiar enough to some at least of the tribes that pre-
ceded the Aryans in India. It is quite a mistake to look upon
all these tribes as far below the Aryans in culture. Both the
Kolarians and the Dravidians were probably quite the equals
of the Aryans in social organisation. And the Aryans
probably adopted much from them, especially in matters
relating to land tenure, village community, government,
taxation, and so on. Their custom of endogamy and exogamy,
their ideas as to puiity and the reverse, may have differed
from those of the Aryans, but were similar in kind. Rules of
endogamy and exogamy ; privileges, restricted to certain
classes, of eating together, are not only Indian or Aryan, but
world-wide phenomena. Both the spirit, and to a large degree
the actual details, of modern Indian caste usages, are identical
with these ancient, and no doubt universal, customs. It is in
them that we have the key to the origin of caste.

At any moment in the history of a nation such customs
seem, to a superficial observer, to be fixed and immutable.
As a matter of fact they are never quite the same in successive
centuries, or even generations. A man's visible frame, though
no change is at any moment perceptible, is really never the
same for two consecutive moments, and the result of constant
minute variations becomes clear after the lapse of time. The
numerous and complicated details which we sum up under the
convenient (but often misleading) single name of caste are
solely dependent for their sanction on public opinion. That
opinion seems stable. But it is always tending to vary as to
the degree of importance attached to some particular one of

II. H


98 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

the details, as to the size and complexity of the particular
groups in which each detail ought to be observed.

This last statement may be illustrated by the case of the
Chaliyas. When the Dutch started cinnamon cultivation in
Ceylon on a large scale, they wanted labourers. The peasantry,
who belonged almost exclusively to one caste, the Goigamas,
regarded it as unworthy of a free man to work for hire. Some
of them, however, in the struggle of motives, found the pressure
of poverty too strong for them, and accepted service as coolies.
The others, thinking this bad form, became averse to giving
their daughters in marriage to such coolies. These feelings
were naturally stronger at first among the Goigamas of good
social position, and it became a mark of superiority not to have
a relative married to a worker in the cinnamon gardens. And
such workers were called Chaliyas. By the time that the
families of Chaliyas were numerous enough to afford mates
for the male or female coolies, the Chaliyas found it impossible
to find wives elsewhere. And thus, under the very eyes of
Europeans, the size of one group had been diminished by the
very considerable number of persons engaged in a new and
despised trade. In other words, what we call a new caste had
arisen, the caste of the Chaliyas. When the English took
Ceylon they gave up the government cultivation of cinnamon.
The gardens were carried on, in ever lessening numbers, by
private individuals. The number of the Chaliyas consequently
declined. Numbers of them, as they gradually returned to
ordinary peasant work, became reabsorbed among the Goi-
gamas. This was an instance of a change precisely "contrary
to that which happened when the caste gradually arose. But
all did not succeed in returning ; and there are, therefore, still
some Chaliyas left. And the caste survives though the members
of it are now no longer exclusively, or even largely, employed
in cinnamon gardens ; and many ol them have become
wealthy and honoured.

What had happened in this case was, not two separate and
striking revolutions, but a long series of slight changes in
public opinion, no doubt quite imperceptible at the time to the
very people among whom the changes were taking place. And
after all the changes were not so very slow. Three or four
generations were enough to cover the whole series with the
consequent results. Who can doubt but that the history of
ancient India, if we had only access to the necessary evidence,
would be found to cover, in its two thousand five hundred
years, and through its wide territory, a constant succession of
similar variations ; and that similar variations are recurring
still to-day.


INTRODUCTION. 99


Owing to the fact that the particular set of people who
worked their way to the top based its claims on religious
grounds, not on political power or wealth, the system has, no
doubt, lasted longer in India than in Europe. But public
opinion still insists in considerable circles, even in Europe, on
restrictions of a more or less defined kind, both as to marriage
and as to eating together. And in India the problem still
remains to trace in the literature the gradual growth of the
system — the gradual formation of new sections among the
people, the gradual extension of the institution to the families
of people engaged in certain trades, belonging to the same
sect or tribe, tracing their ancestry (whether rightly or wrongly)
to the same source. All these factors, and others besides, are
real factors. But they are phases of the extension and growth ,
not explanations of the origin, of the system.

There is no evidence to show that at the time when the
conversations recorded in the Dialogues took place (that is to
say, in the sixth century B.C.) there was any substantial
difference, as regards the barriers in question, between the
peoples dwelling in the valley of the Ganges and their con-
temporaries dwelling on the shores of the Mediterranean.
The point of greatest weight in the establishment of the great
difference in the subsequent development — the supremacy, in
India, of the priests — was still being hotly debated. And all
our evidence tends to show that at least in the wide extent of
territory covered by the Pi/akas — countries close upon a
hundred thousand square miles in area — the struggle was
being decided rather against the Brahmans than for them.
There were distinctions as to marriage ; endogamous and
exogamous groups. In a few instances, all among the lower
classes of the people, these amounted, probably, to what
would now be called caste-divisions. But of castes, in the
modern sense, among the preponderating majority there is
little or no conclusive evidence.

There was a common phrase current among the people,
which divided all the world into four va«#a (colours or com-
plexions)— the nobles, the priests, the other Aryan people, and
the non-Aryan .Sudras (Khattiy&,Brahma«a,Vessa,and Sudda).
The priests put themselves first, and had a theological legend
in support of their contention. But it is clear from the
Pi/akas that this was not admitted by the nobles. And it is
also clear that no one of these divisions was a caste. There
was neither connnbium nor commensality between all the
members of one va««a, nor was there a governing council for
each. The fourth was distinguished from the others by race.
The remaining three were distinguished from each other by

H 2


IOO III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

social position. And though in a general rough way the
classification corresponded to the actual facts of life, there
were insensible gradations within the four classes, and the
boundary between them was both variable and undefined.

And this enumeration of the populace was not complete.
Outside these classes there were others, resembling in many
points the modern low castes, and always when mentioned in
the Pi/akas following after the above four. Thus in Anguttara
I, 162 1, the argument is that just as there is no real difference
in oxen, in spite of the fact that they can be arranged in
classes by difference of colour (vanna), and the strong, active,
well-trained ox is selected by preference, without regard to
his colour (vanna) ; so also, when presenting gifts, the man
of strong, active, well-trained mind should be selected as donee
— without reference to the fact of his belonging to any one of
the four classes of society (vanna), or of his being a Kandala.
or a Pukkusa. It is plain that this passage distinguishes
the last two from the four vanna. and therefore from the
vSudras.

Other old texts 2 insert between these two three further
names — the Vewas, the Nesadas, and the Rathakaras,
that is to say, the workers in rushes 3, bird-catchers, and cart-
makers. By these are meant aboriginal tribesmen who were
hereditary craftsmen in these three crafts ; for they are called
hina-gatiyo, low tribes. They no doubt formed castes in
the modern sense, though we have no information as to their
marriage customs. They are represented in the £ataka book
as living in villages of their own, outside the towns in which
ordinary people dwelt, and formed evidently a numerically
insignificant portion of the populace.

In the last passage quoted in the previous note there are
mentioned, as distinct from these low tribes (the hina-^atiyo),
certain low occupations (hina-sippani) — mat-makers, potters,
weavers, leather-workers, and barbers. As they are excluded
from the list of those distinguished by birth (ga\. i), it is implied
that there was no hard and fast line, determined by birth, for
those who gained their living by these trades. There would
be a natural tendency for the son to follow the father's craft 4 ;


1 Compare Petavatthu II, 6, 12.

2 Assalayana (No. 93 in the Ma^/zima) ; Anguttara II, 85 = P. P.
IV, 19 ; Sa/rcyutta I, 93 ; Vina) a IV 6-10, &c.

3 Sometimes explained as carpenters, sometimes as basket-makers,
sometimes as makers of sunshades.

4 Further exemplified by the number of people described as
keva//a-putto, assaroha-putto, na/a-putto, suda-putto, &c.


INTRODUCTION. IOI


centuries afterwards they had become castes, and they were
then on the border line. But they were not castes as yet.

Besides the above, who were all freemen, there were also
slaves. We only hear of them quite occasionally, as domestic
servants, in the houses of the very rich. Individuals had been
captured in predatory raids, and reduced to slavery (Gat. IV,
220) ; or had been deprived of their freedom as a judicial
punishment (Gat. I, 200) ; or had submitted to slavery of their
own accord ('Vinaya Texts,' I, 191 ; Sum. I, 168). Children
born to such slaves were also slaves, and the emancipation of
slaves is often referred to. But we hear nothing of such later
developments of slavery as rendered the Roman latifnndia, or
the plantations of some Christian slave-owners, scenes of misery
and oppression. For the most part the slaves were household
servants, and not badly treated, and their numbers seem to
have been insignificant l.

What we find then, in the Buddha's time, is caste in the
making. The great mass of the people were distinguished
quite roughly into four classes — social strata — of which the
boundary lines were vague and uncertain. At the one end of
the scale certain outlying tribes, and certain hereditary crafts
of a dirty or despised kind, were already, probably, castes. At
the other end of the scale Brahmans by birth (not necessarily
sacrificial priests, for they followed all sorts of occupations)
were putting forward caste claims that were not yet universally
admitted. There were social customs about the details of
which we know very little (and dependent probably, more
exactly upon the gotta rather than upon the ^atij, which
raised barriers, not seldom broken through, as to intermarriage
of people admittedly belonging to the same va«;/a, and a
fortiori of others. And there was a social code, based on
the idea of impurity, which prevented familiar intercourse
(such as commensality) between people of different rank ; and
rendered disgraceful the use of certain foods. We find, how-
ever, no usages which cannot be amply paralleled in the history
of other peoples throughout the world in similar stages of social
evolution. The key-stone of the arch of the peculiarly Indian
caste organisation — the absolute supremacy of the Brahmans
— had not yet been put in position, had not, in fact, been yet
made ready. The caste-system, in any proper or exact use of
the term, did not exist.

In the face of this set of circumstances Gotama took up

1 See also A. I, 145, 206; II, 67 ; III, 36, 132, 217 ; Vin. IV, 224;
D. I, 5, 60, 72, 93, 141 (translated above) ; Gat. I, 226, 385; III, 343,
437 ; Dhp. Cy. 238, &c.


102 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

a distinct position. It meets us, it is true, in two phases; but
it forms one consistent and logical whole.

In the first place, as regards his own Order, over which alone
he had complete control, he ignores completely and absolutely
all advantages or disadvantages arising from birth, occupation,
and social status, and sweeps away all barriers and disabilities
arising from the arbitrary rules of mere ceremonial or social
impurity.

One of the most distinguished members of his Order, the
very one of them who was referred to as the chief authority,
after Gotama himself, on the rules of the Order, was Upali,
who had formerly been a barber, one of the despised occupa-
tions. So Sunita, one of the brethren whose verses are chosen
for insertion in the Thera Gatha, was a Pukkusa, one of the
low tribes. Sati, the propounder of a deadly heresy, was of
the sons of the fisherfolk, afterwards a low caste, and even
then an occupation, on account of its cruelty, particularly
abhorred. Nanda was a cowherd. The two Pa#//zakas were
born out of wedlock, to a girl of good family through inter-
course with a slave (so that by the rule laid down in Manu 31,
they were actually outcasts). A^apa was the daughter of
a deer-stalker, Puwza and Punnika. had been slave girls.
Sumangalamata was daughter and wife to workers in rushes,
and Subha was the daughter of a smith. More instances
could doubtless be quoted already, and others will become
known when more texts are published.

It does not show much historical insight to sneer at the
numbers as small, and to suggest that the supposed enlighten-
ment or liberality was mere pretence. The facts speak for
themselves ; and the percentage of low-born members of the
Order was probably in fair proportion to the percentage of
persons belonging to the despised ^atis and sippas as com-
pared with the rest of the population. Thus of the Theris
mentioned in the Theri Gatha we know the social position of
sixty, of whom five are mentioned above — that is, 8£ per cent,
of the whole number were base-born. It is most likely that
this is just about the proportion which persons in similar social
rank bore to the rest of the population.

Whether the Buddhist Order differed in this respect from
the other similar communities which are mentioned in the
Buddhist books as having already existed when the Buddhist
Order was founded, is still matter of controversy. The Bud-
dhist books are mostly silent on the matter. But that very
silence is valuable evidence. It is scarcely likely that, if there
had been much difference, there should be no allusion to it in
the Pi/akas. And the few passages in print confirm this. We


INTRODUCTION. 103


have seen how in the Sama«#a-phala Sutta (above, p. 77) it is
taken for granted that a slave would join an Order (that is
any order, not the Buddhist). And in the Aggarc/za Sutta of
the Digha, and the Madhura Sutta of the Ma^^ima, there is
express mention of .Sudras becoming Samaras, as if it were
a recognised and common occurrence, long before the time of
the rise of Buddhism. So in the Gataka (III, 3H1) we hear of
a potter, and at IV, 392. of a KandiLla., who become Samaras
(not Buddhist Samawas)1.

On the other hand, it is just possible that in these passages
the custom afterwards followed in the Buddhist Order is
simply put back to earlier times, and is an anachronism. The
low-born, however earnest in their search after truth, were no
doubt excluded from any community of hermits or religious
recluses in which Brahmans had the upper hand. But all the
twice-born (the Dvi§"as, that is the Khattiyas, Brahma^as, and
Vessas) were certainly justified, by public opinion, in becoming
Samaras. To what extent the .Sudras, and the tribes below
the .Sudras, were accorded, in communities other than the
Buddhist, a similar privilege, is at present doubtful. But the
Buddha certainly adopted, and probably extended, the most
rational view current at the time.

There is one point, however, in which he seems to have
restricted (and for a valid reason) the existing custom. It is
impossible to avoid the inference from the passage just referred
to (in the Sama««a-phala, above, p. 77), that the existing orders,
or most of them, admitted slaves to their ranks. Now among
a number of rules laid down to regulate admission to the
Buddhist Order, in such wise that the existing rights of third
parties should not be encroached upon, there is a rule (trans-
lated in ' Vinaya Texts,' S. B. E., I, 199) that no runaway slave
shall be admitted. And in the form of words to be used at
the chapter held for admitting new members, one of the
questions asked of the candidate is : * Are you a freeman 2? '
Whenever slaves were admitted to the Order, they must have
previously obtained the consent of their masters, and also, I
think, have been emancipated.

Secondly, as regards all such matters as we may now fairly
call ' questions of caste ' outside the Order, the Buddha
adopted the only course then open to any man of sense ; that
is to say, he strove to influence that public opinion, on which
the observances depend, by a constant inculcation of reason-
able views. Thus in the Amagandha Sutta 3 of the Sutta

1 See Fick, 'Sociale Gliederung im nordostlichen Indien,' pp. 50, 51.

2 'Vinaya Texts,' I, 230.

8 Translated by Fausboll, S. B. E., pp. 40-42.


104 HI. AMBA7TffA SUTTA.

Nipata (certainly one of the very oldest of our documents)
it is laid down, in eloquent words, that defilement does not
come from eating this or that, prepared or given by this or
that person, but from evil deeds and words and thoughts.

This is a particularly interesting passage, being one of the
few in which sayings of previous Buddhas are recorded. In
other words the Buddhists put forward this view as having
been enunciated long ago — with the intended implication that
it was a self-evident proposition which was common ground
to the wise. No originality, no special insight, is claimed on
account of a view that would have put an end to so many
foolish prejudices based on superstition. The Buddha's posi-
tion is again to adopt, in this matter, the sensible position
already put forward by others.

As to other details also, which it would take too long to set
out here, Gotama followed the same plan. On the general
question, however, he had opinions, presumably his own. For
they are not found elsewhere. And in the early Buddhist
texts (always ready to give credit to others, and even
anxious wherever possible to support their views by showing
that others, especially in ancient times, had held them) these
views are not referred to as part of the doctrine of either
earlier or contemporary teachers.

We may class the utterances on this point under three
heads — biological, ethical, and historical.

In the Vase////a Sutta of the Sutta Nipata (several verses
of which have been inserted also in the Dhammapada) the
question, as in the So;/adaWa Sutta, translated below, is as to
what makes a man a Brahman. As his answer the Buddha
reminds his questioners of the fact that whereas, in the case
of plants (large or small), insects, quadrupeds, serpents, fish,
and birds, there are many species and marks (due to the
species) by which they can be distinguished — in the case of
man there are no such species, and no such marks. ' Herein,'
as pointed out by Mr. Chalmers \ ' Gotama was in accord with
the conclusion of modern biologists, that " the A)itliropidae are
represented by the single genus and species, Man" — a con-
clusion the more remarkable as the accident of colour did not
mislead Gotama' as it did so many of his contemporaries
then ; and even, within living memory, so many in the West.
He goes on to draw the conclusion that distinctions made
between different men are mere matters of prejudice and
custom ; that it is wisdom and goodness that make the only
valid distinction, that make a man a Brahman ; that the

1 J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 396.


INTRODUCTION. IO5


Arahat is therefore the true Brahman ; and that it is only the
ignorant who had, for so long, maintained that it was birth that
made a man a Brahman.

Similar arguments frequently recur. In the Madhura Sutta,
a dialogue, shortly after the Buddha's death, between the
king of Madhura and Ka££ana, the point raised is whether
the Brahmans are right in their exclusive claims. ' The
Brahmans say thus, Ka^ana : — " The Brahmans are the most
distinguished of the four divisions into which the people is
classified l ; every other division is inferior. The Brahmans
are the white division ; all the rest are black. The Brahmans
alone are accounted pure, not those who are not Brahmans.
The Brahmans are the legitimate sons of God (of Brahma),
born from His mouth, specially made by Him, heirs of
Brahma ! What do you, Sir, say to this ? " '

The Buddhist answer is first to remind the king of the
actual facts of life — how a prosperous member of any one of
the four va;/«as would find members of each of the other
three to wait upon him and serve him. There was no
difference between them in this respect. Then, secondly, he
points out how a wicked man (whatever his va««a), in accord-
ance with the doctrine of Karma acknowledged by all good
men (not ^»nly by Buddhists), will be reborn in some state of
woe ; and a good man in some state of bliss. Thirdly, a crim-
inal, whatever his va««a, would be equally subject to punish-
ment for his crime. And lastly, a man, whatever his va««a,
would, on joining an order, on becoming a religieux, receive
equal respect and honour from the people 2.

A Brahman might object that all this ignores the important
point that the Brahmans were, originally, born of Brahma, and
are his legitimate heirs. It was this claim to especial connec-
tion with the mysterious powers of a supernatural kind, so
widely believed in, that formed their chief weapon in the
struggle. We find the Buddhist reply to that in the Agga««a
Sutta of the Digha, in many respects one of the most
interesting and instructive of all the Dialogues 3. It is a kind

1 Literally ' are the best colour' (va««a, with reference to the well-
known classification into four va««as, neither of which was a caste,
referred to above).

2 This Madhura Sutta has now been edited and translated, with
valuable introduction and notes, by Mr. Robert Chalmers, in the
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, ^-§94.

3 The larger portion of this Sutta (from the beginning of the genesis
part down to the election of the first king) is also preserved in the
Mahavastu. See Senart's edition, vol. i, pp. 338-348. The reading
agninyazw (p. 340, 17, &c.) represents the Pali agga##aw.


I06 III. AMBA7T#A SUTTA.

of Buddhist book of Genesis. In it the pretensions of the
Brahmans are put forward in the same terms as those just
quoted above from the Madhura Sutta.

Gotama replies that they make these claims in forget-
fulness of the past. The claims have no basis in fact. It is
righteousness (dhamma) and not class distinction (va««a)
that makes the real difference between man and man1. Do
we not daily see Brahman women with child and bearing
sons just like other folk ? How can they then say that
they are born of God ? And as to their origin, when the
evolution of the world began, beings were at first immaterial,
feeding on joy, giving light from themselves, passing through
the air. There was thick darkness round about them, and
neither sun nor moon, nor stars, nor sex, nor measures of time.
Then the earth rose in the midst of the waters, beautiful as
honey in taste and colour and smell, and the beings, eating
thereof, lost their brightness, and then sun and moon and
stars appeared, and time began to run. And then also their
bodies became more coarse and material, and differences of
complexion (va««a) became manifest among them. Then
some prided themselves, and despised others, on the ground
of their finer complexion. And thereupon the fine-tasting
earth ceased to be so.

Then successively fine moss, and sweet creepers, and delicate
rice appeared, and each time the beings ate thereof with
a similar result. Then differences of sex appeared ; and
households were formed ; and the lazy stored up the rice,
instead of gathering it each evening and morning ; and the
rights of property arose, and were infringed. And when lusts
were felt, and thefts committed, the beings, now become men,
met together, and chose certain men, differing from the others
in no wise except in virtue (dhamma), to restrain the evil
doers by blame or fines or banishment. These were the first
Kshatriyas. And others they chose to restrain the evil disposi-
tions which led to the evil doing. And these were the first
Brahmans, differing from the others in no wise, except only in
virtue (dhamma).

Then certain others, to keep their households going, and
maintain their wives, started occupations of various kinds.
And these were the first vessas. And some abandoned their
homes and became the first recluses (samawas). But all
were alike in origin, and the only distinction between them
was in virtue. And the highest of them all was acknowledged

1 The words here are quoted in the Milinda, vol. i, p. 229 of my
translation.


INTRODUCTION. 107


to be the Arahat, who had made himself so by the destruction
of the Four Mental Intoxications (the Asavas) and by-
breaking the bonds that tied him to rebirths ; the man who
had laid aside every burden, who had lived the life, had
accomplished all that had to be done, had gained his end, and
by the highest knowledge was set free !

We may not accept the historical accuracy of this legend.
Indeed a continual note of good-humoured irony runs through
the whole story, with its fanciful etymologies of the names of
the four va«#a; and the aroma of it would be lost on the
hearer who took it au grand se'rieux. But it reveals a sound
and healthy insight, and is much nearer to the actual facts
than the Brahman legend it was intended to replace.

Had the Buddha's views on the whole question won the
day — and widely shared, as they were, by others, they very
nearly prevailed — the evolution of social grades and distinc-
tions would have gone on in India on lines similar to those it
followed in the West, and the caste system of India would
never have been built up 1 .

1 There is an admirable little book by M. Senart on the origin of
caste, on the Brahman views about it, and on the present actual facts
of caste in India, entitled ' Les Castes dans l'lnde.' Dr. Fick also in
his ' Sociale Gliederung im nordostlichen Indien zu Buddha's Zeit '
has collected the evidence found in the Gataka book, and analysed it
with great skill. Similar monographs on the Pi/akas, and on the
Epics, are much to be desired.


III. AMBATTJfA SUTTA.

[A young Brahman's rudeness and an old one's

FAITH.]

1. i. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One, when
once on a tour through the Kosala country with a great
company of the brethren, with about five hundred
brethren, arrived at a Brahman village in Kosala named
I/'/C'/^anankala ; and while there he stayed in the U'/7d-
nankala Wood.

Now at that time the Brahman Pokkharasadi was
dwelling at Ukka///za, a spot teeming with life, with
much grassland and woodland and corn, on a royal
domain, granted him by King Pasenadi of Kosala as
a royal gift, with power over it as if he were the king1.

2. Now the Brahman Pokkharasadi2 heard the news:

1 So Buddhaghosa ; but he gives no further details as to the terms
of the grant, or of the tenancy. The whole string of adjectives recurs
below, pp. in, 114, 127, 131 of the text, and ra^a-bhoggara at Vin.
Ill, 222. Compare Divyavadana, p. 620.

The land revenue, payable of course in kind, would be a tithe. If
the king had full proprietary (zemindary) rights as well, which is the
probable meaning of ra^a-bhoggaw, his share would be, either with
or without the land tax, one half. The grant would be. of his own
rights only. The rights of the peasants to the other half, and to the
use of the common and waste and woods, would remain to them. If
Buddhaghosa's interpretation of brahmadeyyaw? is correct, then the
grantee would also be the king's representative for all purposes judicial
and executive. Elsewhere the word has only been found as applied to
marriage; and the first part* of the compound (brahma) has always
been interpreted by Brahmans as referring to themselves. But
brahma as the first part of a compound never has that meaning
in Pali ; and the word in our passage means literally '.a full gift.'

2 His full name was Pokkharasadi Opamaw7o Subhagavaniko (M. II,
200); where the second is the gotta (gens) name and the third
a local name. See the Introduction to the Mahali Sutta.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. IO9

' They say that the Samawa Gotama, of the Sakya clan,
who went out from a Sakya family to adopt the religious
life, has now arrived, with a great company of the
brethren of his Order, at I4v£7zanankala, and is staying
there in the Iiv£Mnankala Wood. Now regarding that
venerable Gotama, such is the high reputation that has
been noised abroad : — That Blessed One is an Arahat,
a fully awakened one, abounding in wisdom and good-
ness, happy, with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed
as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a teacher for
gods and men, a Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by him-
self, thoroughly knows and sees, as it were, face to face
this universe, — including the worlds above of the gods,
the Brahmas, and the Maras, and the world below with
its recluses and Brahmans, its princes and peoples, —
and having known it, he makes his knowledge known
to others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its
progress, lovely in its consummation, doth he proclaim,
both in the spirit and in the letter, the higher life doth
he make known, in all its fullness and in all its purity.

[88] 'And good is it to pay visits to Arahats like
that.'

3. Now at that time a young Brahman, an Am-
ba////a \ was a pupil under Pokkharasadi the Brahman.
And he was a repeater (of the sacred words) knowing
the mystic verses by heart, one who had mastered the
Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phono-
logy, and the exegesis (as a fourth) '-, and the legends


1 According to Cat. IV, 363. (compare Cat. IV, 366) there were
also Amba/Mas who were not Brahmans by birth, but farmers.

2 The fourth is not expressly mentioned. Buddhaghosa (p. 247)
says we have to supply the fourth Veda, the Atharva. But the older
Pali texts' do not acknowledge the Atharva as a Veda. It only occurs,
as the Athabbawa Veda, in the Atf/zakathas and Zikas. And it is quite
unnecessary to suppose a silent reference to it here. The fourth place
is quite sufficiently filled as suggested in the translation. The Athabbawa,
given (in S. IV, 927) as the name of a mystic art (together with
astrology, the interpretation of dreams and of lucky signs, and so
forth), is probably not the Veda, but witchcraft or sorcery. The
Pi/akas always take three Vedas, and three only, for granted. And the
whole point of the 'Tevigga. Sutta (translated in full in my ' Buddhist


ITO III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

as a fifth, learned in the idioms and the grammar,
versed in Lokayata sophistry, and in the theory of the
signs on the body of a great man1, — so recognised an
authority in the system of the threefold Vedic know-
ledge as expounded by his master, that he could say
of him : ' What I know that you know, and what you
know that I know.'

4. And Pokkarasadi told Amba/Ma the news, and
said : ' Come now, dear Amba//^a, go to the Samawa
Gotama, and find out whether the reputation so noised
abroad regarding him is in accord with the facts or not,
whether the Samawa Gotama is such as they say or
not.'

5. ' But how, Sir, shall I know whether that is so or
not?'

1 There have been handed down, Ambai^a, in our
mystic verses thirty-two bodily signs of a great man, —
signs which, if a man has, he will become one of two
things, and no other2. If he dwells at home he will
become a sovran of the world, a righteous king, bearing
rule even to the shores of the four great oceans, a con-
queror, the protector of his people, possessor of the
seven royal treasures. [89] And these are the seven
treasures that he has — the Wheel, the Elephant, the
Horse, the Gem, the Woman, the Treasurer, and the

Suttas ') is this three-, not four-, fold division. Four Vedas are referred
to in the Milinda, at p. 3, and the Atharva-veda, at p. 117.

1 This is the standing description in the Suttas of a learned Brahman.
See below, pp. 114, 120 (of the text); A.I, 163; Mil. 10; Divyavadana
620, &c. One or two of the details are not quite certain, as yet.

2 The knowledge of these thirty-two marks of a Great Being
(Maha-purusha) is one of the details in the often-recurring para-
graph giving the points of Brahman wisdom, which we have just
had at § 3. No such list has been found, so far as I know, in those
portions of the pre-Buddhistic priestly literature that have survived.
And the inference from both our passages is that the knowledge is
scattered through the Brahman texts. Many of the details of the
Buddhist list (see the note below on p. 106 of the text) are very
obscure; and a collection of the older Brahman passages would
probably throw light upon them, and upon a curious chapter in mytho-
logical superstition. Who will write us a monograph (historical of
course) on the Maha-purusha theory as held in early times among
the Aryans in India ?


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I I I

Adviser as a seventh1. And he has more than a
thousand sons, heroes, mighty in frame, beating down
the armies of the foe. And he dwells in complete
ascendancy over the wide earth from sea to sea,
ruling it in righteousness without the need of baton or
of sword. But if he go forth from the household life
into the houseless state, then he will become a Buddha
who removes the veil from the eyes of the world. Now
I, Amba#/£a, am a giver of the mystic verses; you
have received them from me/

6. 'Very good, Sir,' said Amba^a in reply; and rising
from his seat and paying reverence to Pokkharasadi,
he mounted a chariot drawn by mares, and proceeded,
with a retinue of young Brahmans, to the I^/^anankala
Wood. And when he had gone on in the chariot as
far as the road was practicable for vehicles, he got
down, and went on, into the park, on foot.

7. Now at that time a number of the brethren were
walking up and down in the open air. And Amba/Z/za
went up to them, and said : ' Where may the venerable
Gotama be lodging now ? We have come nither to
call upon him/

8 . Then the brethren thought : ' This young Brahman
AmbaU/ia. is of distinguished family, and a pupil of the
distinguished Brahman Pokkharasadi. The Blessed
One will not find it difficult to hold conversation with
such/ And they said to Amba/Ma : ' There, Amba^Ma,
is his lodging2, where the door is shut, go quietly up
and enter the porch gently, and give a cough, and
knock on the cross-bar. The Blessed One will open
the door for you.'

9. Then Amba/Z/za did so. And the Blessed One
opened the door, and Amba/Ma entered in. And
the other young Brahmans also went in ; and they
exchanged with the Blessed One the greetings and


1 For the details of these seven see further my ' Buddhist Suttas,'
pp. 251-259.

2 Vihara ; often rendered 'monastery,' a meaning the word never
has in the older texts.


112 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.


compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took their
seats. But Amba^a, walking about, said something
or other of a civil kind in an off-hand way, fidgeting
about the while, or standing up, to the Blessed One
sitting there.

[80] 10. And the Blessed One said to him : ' Is that
the way, Amba/Ma, that you would hold converse
with aged teachers, and teachers of your teachers well
stricken in years, as you now do, moving about the
while or standing, with me thus seated ? '

ii. 'Certainly not, Gotama. It is proper to speak
with a Brahman as one goes along only when the
Brahman himself is walking, and standing to a Brahman
who stands, and seated to a Brahman who has taken
his seat, or reclining to a Brahman who reclines. But
with shavelings, sham friars, menial black fellows, the
offscouring of our kinsman's heels x — with them I would
talk as I now do to you ! '

1 But you must have been wanting something, Am-
ba///£a, when you came here. Turn your thoughts
rather to the object you had in view when you came.
This young Brahman Amba/Ma is ill bred, though he
prides himself on his culture ; what can this come from
except from want of training2 ? '

12. Then Amba///£a was displeased and angry
with the Blessed One at being called rude ; and at the
thought that the Blessed One was vexed with him, he
said, scoffing, jeering, and sneering at the Blessed
One : ' Rough is this Sakya breed of yours, Gotama,
and rude ; touchy is this Sakya breed of yours and

1 Bandhupadapa^^a. Neumann, loc. cit. p. 521, says 'treading
on one another's heels.' Buddhaghosa refers the expression to the
Brahman theory that the .Sudras were born from Brahma's heels. And
this may well have been the meaning. For though Gotama and the
majority of his order were well born, still others, of low caste, were
admitted to it, and Amba/Wa is certainly represented as giving vent to
caste prejudice when he calls the brethren ' black fellows.' Compare
M I, 334 ; S. IV, 1J7, and below, D. I, 103.

2 And is therefore, after all, not so much his fault as that of his
teacher. That this is the implication is clear from the text, pp. 90, 91
(§§ 10-13) below.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I 1 5

violent. [9l] Menials, mere menials1, they neither
venerate, nor value, nor esteem, nor give gifts to, nor
pay honour to Brahmans. That, Gotama, is neither
fitting, nor is it seemly ! '

Thus did the young Brahman Amba/^a for the first
time charge the Sakyas with being menials.

13. ' But in what then, Amba/Ma, have the Sakyas
given you offence ? '

' Once, Gotama, I had to go to Kapilavatthu on
some business or other of Pokkharasadi's, and went
into the Sakyas' Congress Hall2 Now at that time
there were a number of Sakyas, old and young, seated
in the hall on grand seats, making merry and joking
together, nudging one another with their fingers 3 ; and
for a truth, methinks, it was I myself that was the
subject of their jokes ; and not one of them even
offered me a seat. That, Gotama, is neither fitting,
nor is it seemly, that the Sakyas, menials as they are,
mere menials, should neither venerate, nor value, nor
esteem, nor give gifts to, nor pay honour to Brahmans/

Thus did the young Brahman Amba/Ma for the
second time charge the Sakyas with being menials.

1 Ibbha. Chalmers (J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 343) renders this 'nought
but men of substance,' and he has been followed by Frazer, ' Literature
of India,' p. 118. But Buddhaghosa's interpretation is confirmed both
by the context and by the derivation.

2 Santhagara. Childers is quite wrong about this word. It is
the hall where a clan mote was held, and is used exclusively of places
for the assemblies of the householders in the free republics of Northern
Kosala. It never means a royal rest house, which is ra^agaraka,
as we had above (p. 1, § 2 of the Pali text). Thus at M. I, 353, 4
and Git IV, 147 we have this identical hall of the Sakyas at Kapila-
vatthu, and at M. I, 457 a similar one of the Sakyas at ATatu-
maya ; at M. P. V, 56 (VI, 23 of the translation) in my 'Buddhist
Suttas ' we have the congress hall of the Mullas of Kusinard, and at
M. I, 228 and Vin. I, 233 that of the LUMavis of Vesali — all of them
called Santhagara, and all referred to in connection with a public
meeting of the clan.

3 Anguli-patodakena. The Introductory Story to the 52nd
Pa&ttiya (Vin. IV, 1 10 = 111, 84) tells how a Bhikshu was inadvertently
done to death by being made to laugh immoderately in this way. It
must there mean ' tickling.' Here, and at A. IV, 343, it seems to have
the meaning given above.

II. I


I 1 4 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

14. 'Why a quail, Amba/Ma, little hen bird though
she be, can say what she likes in her own nest.
And there the Sakyas are at their own home, in
Kapilavatthu. It is not fitting for you to take offence
at so trifling a thing.'

15. 'There are these four grades1, Gotama, — the
nobles, the Brahmans, the tradesfolk, and the work-
people. And of these four, three — the nobles, the
tradesfolk, and the work-people — are, verily, but
attendants on the Brahmans. [92] So, Gotama, that
is neither fitting, nor is it seemly, that the Sakyas,
menials as they are, mere menials, should neither
venerate, nor value, nor esteem, nor give gifts to,
nor pay honour to the Brahmans.'

Thus did the young Brahman Amba/Ma for the
third time charge the Sakyas with being menials.

16. Then the Blessed One thought thus: 'This
Amba/7/£a is very set on humbling the Sakyas with
his charge of servile origin. What if I were to ask
him as to his own lineage.' And he said to him :

'And what family do you then, Amba/Ma, be-
long to ? '

' I am a Ka«hayana.'

' Yes, but if one were to follow up your ancient
name and lineage, Amba/^a, on the father's and
the mother's side, it would appear that the Sakyas
were once your masters, and that you are the offspring
of one of their slave girls. But the Sakyas trace their
line back to Okkaka the king 2.

'Long ago, Amba^a, King Okkaka, wanting to
divert the succession in favour of the son of his
favourite queen, banished his elder children — Okka-
mukha, Karanda., Hatthinika, and Sinipura — from the
land. And being thus banished they took up their
dwelling on the slopes of the Himalaya, on the
borders of a lake where a mighty oak tree grew.


1 Va««a.

2 On this famous old king see the legends preserved in the M. B. V,
13 ; Mahavastu I, 348 ; Cat. II, 311 ; Sum. I, 258.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. H5

And through fear of injuring the purity of their
line they intermarried with their sisters.

' Now Okkaka the king asked the ministers at his
court : " Where, Sirs, are the children now l ? " '

1 There is a spot, Sire, on the slopes of the Himalaya,
on the borders of a lake, where there grows a mighty
oak (sako). There do they dwell. And lest they
should injure the purity of their line they have
married their own (sakahi) sisters.'

1 Then did Okkaka the king burst forth in admira-
tion [03]: "Hearts of oak (sakya) are those young
fellows! Right well they hold their own (parama-
sakya)2 ! "

1 That is the reason, Amba//-£a, why they are
known as Sakyas. Now Okkaka had a slave girl
called Disa. She gave birth to a black baby. And
no sooner was it born than the little black thing said,
" Wash me, mother. Bathe me, mother. Set me free,
mother, of this dirt. So shall I be of use to you."

' Now just as now, Amba/Ma, people call devils
" devils," so then they called devils " black fellows "
(kawhe). And they said: "This fellow spoke as
soon as he was born. 'Tis a black thing (kawha)
that is born, a devil has been born ! " And that is
the origin, Amba///fo, of the Kawhayanas 3 He was
the ancestor of the Ka/mayanas4 And thus is it,
Amba/7^a, that if one were to follow up your ancient
name and lineage, on the father's and on the mother's
side, it would appear that the Sakyas were once
your masters, and that you are the offspring of one
of their slave girls.'

17. When he had thus spoken the young Brahmans
said to the Blessed One : ' Let not the venerable


1 Sammanti, 'dwell,' not in Childers in this sense. But see S. I,
2 26 = Sum. I, 125 and Gat. V, 396.

2 The oak (which doesn't grow in the text, and could not grow
in the Terai) has been introduced to enable the word play to be
adequately rendered. The Pali Saka means a herb.

3 Ka«hayana is the regular form of patronymic from Ka«ha.
* Buddhaghosa gives further details as to his subsequent life,

I 2


Il6 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

Gotama humble Amba/Ma too sternly with this re-
proach of being descended from a slave girl. He
is well born, Gotama, and of good family; he is
versed in the sacred hymns, an able reciter, a learned
man. And he is able to give answer to the venerable
Gotama in these matters.'

18. Then the Blessed One said to them: 'Quite
so. If [04] you thought otherwise, then it would
be for you to carry on our discussion further. But
as you think so, let Amba/Ma himself speak 1.'

19. ' We do think so; and we will hold our peace.
Amba#/fo. is able to give answer to the venerable
Gotama in these matters.'

20. Then the Blessed One said to Amba//^a the
Brahman : ' Then this further question arises, Am-
ba/7/2a, a very reasonable one which, even though
unwillingly, you should answer. If you do not give
a clear reply, or go off upon another issue 2, or
remain silent, or go away, then your head will split
in pieces on the spot 3. What have you heard, when
Brahmans old and well stricken in years, teachers of
yours or their teachers, were talking together, as to
whence the Ka^hayanas draw their origin, and who
the ancestor was to whom they trace themselves
back ? '

And when he had thus spoken Amba/7//a remained
silent. And the Blessed One asked the same
question again. [95] And still Ambatt/ia. remained
silent. Then the Blessed One said to him : ' You


1 Buddhaghosa (p. 263} says that Gotama's object was to confine
the discussion to a single opponent, since if all spoke at once, it could
not well be brought to a conclusion. In the text Gotama repeats the
whole speech of the Brahmans.

2 A««ena a««am pa/i£arasi. For this idiom, not in Childers,
see M. I, 250; Vin. I, 85 ; A. I, 187,' 198 ; Mil. 94 ; Sum. I, 264.
It is answering one thing by alleging another.

3 This curious threat — which never comes to anything, among the
Buddhists, and is apparently never meant to — is a frequent forniAof
expression in Indian books, and is prc-Buddhistic. Comp. Brzhad Ar.
Up. Ill, 6. 2 and 9. 26. Buddhist passages are M. I, 231 ; Dhp. 72 ;
Dhp. A. 87, 140; Gat. I, 54 ; V, 21, 33, 87, 92, 493, &c.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I 1 7

had better answer, now, Amba////a. This is no
time for you to hold your peace. For whosoever,
Amba^Ma, does not, even up to the third time of
asking, answer a reasonable question put by a
Tathagata (by one who has won the truth), his head
splits into pieces on the spot.'

21. Now at that time the spirit who bears the
thunderbolt l stood over above Amba//^a in the sky
with a mighty mass of iron, all fiery, dazzling, and
aglow, with the intention, if he did not answer, there
and then to split his head in pieces. And the Blessed
One perceived the spirit bearing the thunderbolt, and
so did Amba/Ma the Brahman. And Amba//^a on
becoming aware of it, terrified, startled, and agitated,
seeking safety and protection and help from the
Blessed One, crouched down beside him in awe 2,
and said : ' What was it the Blessed One said ?
Say it once again ! '

1 What do you think, Amba/Ma ? What have
you heard, when Brahmans old and well stricken in
years, teachers of yours or their teachers, were talking
together, as to whence the Kawhayanas draw their
origin, and who the ancestor was to whom they
trace themselves back ? '

1 J ust so, Gotama, did I hear, even as the venerable
Gotama hath said. That is the origin of the Kaw-
hayanas, and that the ancestor to whom they trace
themselves back.'

22. And when he had thus spoken the young
Brahmans fell into tumult, and uproar, and turmoil ;
and said : ' Low born, they say, is Amba/^a the
Brahman ; his family, they say, is not of good
standing ; they say he is descended from a slave
girl ; and the Sakyas were his masters. We did
not suppose that the Samara Gotama, whose words
are righteousness itself, was not a man to be trusted ! '

23. And the Blessed One thought: [96] 'They

1 Va.g'ira-pant: to wit, Indra, says Buddhaghosa.

2 Upanisidati; whence Upanishad, a mystery, secret, listened
to in awe.


I I 8 III. AMBA7Ttf A SUTTA.

go too far, these Brahmans, in their depreciation of
Amba/y/ja as the offspring of a slave girl. Let me
set him free from their reproach.' And he said to
them : ' Be not too severe in disparaging Amba////a
the Brahman on the ground of his descent. That
Ka^ha became a mighty seer1. He went into the
Dekkan, there he learnt mystic verses, and returning
to Okkaka the king, he demanded his daughter
Madda-rupl in marriage. To him the king in
answer said : " Who forsooth is this fellow, who —
son of my slave girl as he is — asks for my daughter
in marriage ; " and, angry and displeased, he fitted an
arrow to his bow. But neither could he let the
arrow fly, nor could he take it off the string again 2.

' Then the ministers and courtiers went to Kawha
the seer, and said : " Let the king go safe, Sir ; let the
king go safe3."

" The king shall suffer no harm. But should he
shoot the arrow downwards, then would the earth dry
up as far as his realm extends."

" Let the king, Sir, go safe, and the country too."

" The king shall suffer no harm, nor his land. But
should he shoot the arrow upwards, the god would not
rain for seven years as far as his realm extends *."

" Let the king, Sir, go safe, and the country too ; and
let the god rain."

" The king shall suffer no harm, nor the land either,
and the god shall rain. But let the king aim the
arrow at his eldest son. The prince shall suffer no
harm, not a hair of him shall be touched."

• Then, O Brahmans, the ministers told this to Okkaka,


1 Rishi, mystic sage, magician being no doubt implied, as in B. V.
II, 8i = C7at. I, 17 (verse 90). Compare Merlin.

3 The effect of course of the charm which, Buddhaghosa tells us
(p. 265), was known as the Amba//£a charm.

3 Sotthihotu. This is the old mystic word s wast i. We have lost
the use of such expressions, Faustum fac regem.

* All this, says Buddhaghosa, was brutum fulmen. The Amba//#a
charm had only power to stop the arrow going off; not to work such
results as these.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I 1 9

and said : " Let the king aim x at his eldest son. He
will suffer neither harm nor terror." And the king did
so, and no harm was done. But the king, terrified at
the lesson given him, [97] gave the man his daughter
Madda-rupi to wife. You should not, O Brahmans, be
too severe to disparage Amba////a in the matter of his
slave-girl ancestress. That Ka?ma was a mighty seer.'

24. Then the Blessed One said to Amba/7/&a: 'What
think you, Amba///£a ? Suppose a young Kshatriya
should have connection with a Brahman maiden, and
from their intercourse a son should be born. Now
would the son thus come to the Brahman maiden
through the Kshatriya youth receive a seat and water
(as tokens of respect) from the Brahmans ? '

' Yes, he would, Gotama/

1 But would the Brahmans allow him to partake of
the feast offered to the dead, or of the food boiled in
milk 2, or of the offerings to the gods, or of food sent
as a present ? '

1 Yes, they would, Gotama.'

' But would the Brahmans teach him their verses or
not?'

' They would, Gotama.'

' But would he be shut off, or not, from their women?'

1 He would not be shut off.'

1 But would the Kshatriyas allow him to receive the
consecration ceremony of a Kshatriya ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama.'

' Why not that ? '

' Because he is not of pure descent on the mothers
side.'

25. 'Then what think you, Amba^a ? Suppose
a Brahman youth should have connection with a
Kshatriya maiden, and from their intercourse a son
should be born. Now would the son thus come to the
Kshatriya maiden through the Brahman youth receive

1 Literally ' place the arrow (which had a barb shaped like a horse-
shoe) on his son.'

2 Th£lip&ka. See Gat. I, 186; Mil. 249. It is used in sacrifices,
and also on special occasions.


120 III. AMBA7T77A SUTTA.

a seat and water (as tokens of respect) from the
Brahmans ? '

1 Yes, he would, Gotama.'

' But would the Brahmans allow him to partake of
the feast offered to the dead, or of food boiled in milk,
or of an offering to the gods, or of food sent as a
present ? '

' Yes, they would, Gotama/

' But would the Brahmans teach him their verses or
not?'

1 They would, Gotama.'

[98] ' But would he be shut off, or not, from their
women ? '

1 He would not, Gotama.'

' But would the Kshatriyas allow him to receive the
consecration ceremony of a Kshatriya ? '

1 Certainly not, Gotama.'

' Why not that ?'

' Because he is not of pure descent on the father's
side.'

26. ' Then, Amba/Ma, whether one compares women
with women, or men with men, the Kshatriyas are
higher and the Brahmans inferior.

' And what think you, Amba/^a ? Suppose the
Brahmans, for some offence * or other, were to outlaw
a Brahman by shaving him and pouring ashes over
his head 2, were to banish him from the land or from
the township. Would he be offered a seat or water
among the Brahmans ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama.'

' Or would the Brahmans allow him to partake of
the food offered to the dead, or of the food boiled
in milk, or of the offerings to the gods, or of food sent
as a present ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama.'

1 Pakararae. Perhaps 'in consequence of some regulation or
other.' Buddhaghosa (p. 267) says 'offence/ but compare Mil. 189.

2 Assa-pu/ena vadhitva, literally 'killing him with (the proceeding
called) the Ash-basket.' Compare the idiom ' cut him dead.' It is
also mentioned at A. II, 242.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. 121

' Or would the Brahmans teach him their verses or
not?'

' Certainly not, Gotama.'

' And would he be shut off, or not, from their
women ? '

' He would be shut off.'

27. ' But what think you, Amba/Z^a ? If the Ksha-
triyas had in the same way outlawed a Kshatriya, and
banished him from the land or the township, would he,
among the Brahmans, be offered water and a seat ? '

' Yes, he would, Gotama.'

' And would he be allowed to partake of the food
offered to the dead, or of the food boiled in milk, or of
the offerings to the gods, or of food sent as a present ?'

' He would, Gotama.'

' And would the Brahmans teach him their verses ? '

• They would, Gotama ? '

'And would he be shut off, or not, from their
women ? '

' He would not, Gotama.'

[oe] ' But thereby, Amba///za, the Kshatriya would
have fallen into the deepest degradation, shaven as to
his head, cut dead with the ash-basket, banished from
land and township. So that, even when a Kshatriya
has fallen into the deepest degradation, still jt holds
good that the Kshatriyas are higher, and the Brahmans
inferior.

28. ' Moreover it was one of the Brahma gods,
Sanaw-kumara l, who uttered this stanza 2 :

1 S an a w-kumar a means 'ever virgin.' According to the legend —
common ground to Brahmans and Buddhists — there were five ' mind
born ' sons of Brahma, who remained always pure and innocent, and
this Brahma was one of the five. See the passages quoted by
Chalmers in the J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 344.

Hofrath Buhler has pointed out that in the Mahabharata III, 185
(Bombay edition) there is an interesting passage where Sanat-kumara
(the Sanskrit form of the name Sanazw-kumara) is actually represented
by the Brahmans themselves as having uttered, as referee in a dispute
on a point similar to the one here discussed, not indeed the actual words
here imputed to him, but others of a very similar import. See the whole
article in the J. R. A. S., 1897, pp. 585-588. We either have in our

2 For note 2 see next page.


122 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

" The Kshatriya is the best of those among this folk
who put their trust in lineage.
But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness,

he is the best among gods and men."
1 Now this stanza, Amba///za, was well sung and not
ill sung by the Brahma Sanaw-kumara, well said and
not ill said, full of meaning and not void thereof. And
I too approve it ; I also, Amba^Ma, say :
" The Kshatriya is the best of those among this folk
who put their trust in lineage 3.
But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness,
he is the best among gods and men."


Here ends the First Portion for Recitation 4.


text a quotation from an older recension of the same legend, or one
of the two — either the Brahman editors of the Mahabharata, or the
composers of our Sutta — have twisted the legend a little in their own
favour.

2 The verse is a favourite one. It occurs also at M. I, 358 ; S. I,
153; II, 284; and below in the Aggawza Sutta.

3 Gotta-patisarino. Either 'tracing back their gotras' or
'referring back to their gotras' according as we derive the word
with Childers from -y/sar, or with Biihler from \/smar. It occurs also
in the description (Maha Sudassana Sutta) of the ideal woman as
kiwkara-pa/isarini. Biihler, loc. cit., renders it 'record their
gotras.'

The next line might also be rendered ' when perfect,' &c, referring
to the Kshatriya.

4 This question of caste, besides being often referred to in isolated
passages, is described at length also in the Assalayana, Ka««akathala,
and Madhura Suttas, all in the Ma^fcima. The first has been
translated into German by Professor Pischel and the last into English
by Mr. Chalmers, J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 341 and foil. On the facts of
caste as disclosed in the Gataka book see Fick's ' Sociale Gliederung
in Indien zu Buddha's Zeit,' Kiel, 1897 ; and on the general history of
caste in India see Senart's 'Les Castes dans l'lnde,' Paris, 1896.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I 23


Chapter II.

II. 1. ' But what, Gotama, is the righteousness, and
what the wisdom spoken of in that verse ? '

' In the supreme perfection in wisdom and righteous-
ness, Ambattha, there is no reference to the question
either of birth, or of lineage, or of the pride which says :
"You are held as worthy as I," or " You are not held
as worthy as I." It is where the talk is of marrying,
or of giving in marriage, that reference is made to such
things as that. For whosoever, Amhattha, are in
bondage to the notions of birth or of lineage, or to the
pride of social position, or of connection by marriage,
they are far from the best wisdom and righteousness.
It is only by having got rid of all such bondage that
one can realise for himself [loo] that supreme per-
fection in wisdom and in conduct.'

2. ' But what, Gotama, is that conduct, and what that
wisdom ? '

\Here follow, under Morality (Sila) 1i

The introductory paragraphs (§§ 40-42 of the Sd-
manna-phala, pp. 62, 63 of the text) on the appearance of
a Buddha, his preaching, the conversion of a hearer, and
his renunciation of the world : then come

1. The Silas, above, pp. 4-12 (§§ 8-2 7 J of the text.
Only the refrain differs. It runs here, at the end of
each clause, through the whole of this repeated passage :
' This is reckoned in him as morality I


1 Buddhaghosa, p. 268, seems to have had a different reading —
idam p'assa hoti silasmi^ — from that preserved in our text. It
comes to much the same result, but is better, as omitting the word
bhikkhu.


124 III. AUBATTHA SUTTA.

Then under Conduct (Ka.ra.na),

2. The paragraph on Confidence, above, p. 69 of the
text, $ 63. The refrain frotn here onwards is: ' This
is reckoned to him as conduct'

3. The paragraph on ' Guarded is the door of his
sensesl above, p. 70 of the text, § 64.

4. The paragraph on ' Mindful and self-possessed',
above, p. 70 of the text, § 65.

5. The paragraph on Content, above, p. 71 of the text,
§66.

6. The paragraph on Solitude, above, p. 71 of the text,
§67.

7. The paragraphs on the Five Hindrances, above.
pp. 71-2 of the text, §§ 68-74.

8 . The paragraphs on the Four Rapt Contemplations'1 ,
above, pp. 73-76, §§ 75-82. The refrain at the end of
each of them {{higher and better than the last') is here,
of course, to be read not as higher fruit of the life of
a recluse, but as higher conduct.

Under Wisdom (Vigga),

9. The paragraphs on Insight arising from Know-
ledge (iVa/za-dassana^), above, p. 76 of the text, §§ 83, 84.
The refrain from here onwards is : ' This is reckoned in
him as wisdom, and it is higher and sweeter than the
last!

1 o. The paragraphs on the Mental Image, above, p. 77
of the text, §§ 85, 86.

11. The paragraphs on Mystic Gifts (Iddhi), above,
P' 77 °f tne iex^ #87, 88.

1 2. The paragraphs on the Heavenly Ear (Dibbasota),
above, p. 79 of the text, fjfj 89, 90.

1 3. The paragraphs on Knowledge of the hearts of
others (A"eto-pariya-#a«a#z), above, p. 79 of the text,
$9i, 92.

1 4. The paragraphs on Memory of one's own previous


1 It is important to notice that these are put, not under wisdom, but
under conduct.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. 1 25


births (Pubbe-nivasa-anussati-wa/za), above, p. 81 of the
text, g 93, 94.

1 5 . The paragraph on the Divine Eye (D ibba^akkhu),
above, p. 82 of the text, § 95, 96.

1 6. TAe paragraphs on the Destruction of the Deadly
Floods (Asavanaw khaya-wa^aw), above, p. 85 of the
text, §§ 97, 98 *.]

' Such a man, Amba/Ma, is said to be perfect in
wisdom, perfect in conduct, perfect in wisdom and con-
duct. And there is no other perfection in wisdom and
conduct higher and sweeter than this.'

3. ' Now, Amba/Ma, to this supreme perfection in
wisdom and goodness [101] there are Four Leakages 2.
And what are the four ? '

' In case, Ambatlha, any recluse or Brahman, with-
out having thoroughly attained unto this supreme per-
fection in wisdom and conduct, with his yoke on his
shoulder (to carry fire-sticks, a water-pot, needles, and
the rest of a mendicant friar's outfit), should plunge
into the depths of the forest, vowing to himself: "I will
henceforth be one of those who live only on fruits that
have fallen of themselves " — then, verily, he turns out
worthy only to be a servant unto him that hath attained
to wisdom and righteousness.

' And again, Amba/7//a, in case any recluse or
Brahman, without having thoroughly attained unto
this supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, and
without having attained to living only on fruits fallen
of themselves^ taking a hoe and a basket with him,
should plunge into the depths of the forest, vowing to
himself: " I will henceforth be one of those who live
only on bulbs and roots and fruits " — then, verily, he
turns out worthy only to be a servant unto him who
hath attained to wisdom and righteousness.

1 There are therefore eight divisions of conduct, and eight of the
higher wisdom.

a Apaya-mukhani, 'outlets, leakages, so that it cannot fill up.'
The word aya-mukhaff*. inlet, is used in its concrete sense at D. I,
74, and both words at A. II, 166; and 'outlet' occurs figuratively, in
a secondary sense, as in this passage, in the Sigalovada Sutta, p. 299.


126 III. AMBATTffA SUTTA.

1 And again, Amba/Ma, in case any recluse or Brah-
man, without having thoroughly attained unto this
supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, and without
having attained to living only on fruits fallen of them-
selves, and without having attained to living only on
bulbs and roots and fruits, should build himself a fire-
shrine near the boundaries of some village or some
town, and there dwell serving the fire-god J — then,
verily, he turns out worthy only to be a servant unto
him that hath attained to wisdom and righteousness.

'And again, Amba/Z/za, in case any recluse or Brahman,
without having thoroughly attained unto this supreme
perfection in wisdom and conduct, and without having
attained to living only on fruits fallen of themselves,
and without having attained to living only on bulbs
and roots and fruits, and without having attained to
serving the fire-god, [102] should build himself a four-
doored almshouse at a crossing where four high roads
meet, and dwell there, saying to himself: "Whosoever,
whether recluse or Brahman, shall pass here, from
either of these four directions, him will I entertain
according to my ability and according to my power " —
then, verily, he turns out worthy only to be a servant
unto him who hath attained to wisdom and righteous-
ness.

1 These are the Four Leakages, Amba/Ma, to
supreme perfection in righteousness and conduct 2.

4. ' Now what think you, Amba/Ma ? Have you, as
one of a class of pupils under the same teacher, been
instructed in this supreme perfection of wisdom and
conduct 3 ? '

' Not that, Gotama. How little is it that I can pro-


1 For instances of this see Crat. 1, 285, 494; II, 43. Such service
paid to a god has already been condemned in the tract on the Silas,
the minor details of mere morality (above, pp. 24, 25).

2 Buddhaghosa here (p. 270) says that all sorts of Brahman ascetics
are here intended to be included, and he gives further details of eight
different sorts (discussed in the Journal of the P. T. S. for 1891,
pp. 34 foil.).

8 Sandissasi sa^ariyako. Compare M. P. S. 6, 7, 8, 9, 24, 25.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. 1 27

fess to have learnt ! How supreme this perfection of
wisdom and conduct ! Far is it from me to have been
trained therein ? '

'Then what think you, Amba/Ma ? Although you
have not thoroughly attained unto this supreme per-
fection of wisdom and goodness, have you been trained
to take the yoke upon your shoulders, and plunge into
the depths of the forest as one who would fain observe
the vow of living only on fruits fallen of themselves ?'

' Not even that, Gotama.'

' Then what think you, Amba////a ? Although you
have not attained unto this supreme perfection of
wisdom and goodness, nor have attained to living on
fruits fallen of themselves, have you been trained to
take hoe and basket, and plunge into the depths of the
forest as one who would fain observe the vow of living
only on bulbs and roots and fruits ?'

' Not even that, Gotama.'

' Then what think you, Amba/Ma ? Although you
have not attained unto this supreme perfection of
wisdom and goodness, and have not attained to living
on fruits fallen of themselves, and have not attained
to living on bulbs and roots and fruits, have you been
taught to build yourself a fire-shrine on the borders of
some village or some town, and dwell there as one who
would fain serve the fire-god ? '

[103] ' Not even that, Gotama.'

' Then what think you, Amba////a ? Although you
have not attained unto this supreme perfection of
wisdom and goodness, and have not attained to living
on fruits fallen of themselves, and have not attained
to living on bulbs and roots and fruits, and have not
attained to serving the fire-god, have you been taught
to build yourself a four-doored almshouse at a spot
where four high roads cross, and dwell there as one
who would fain observe the vow to entertain whoso-
ever might pass that way, from any of the four
directions, according to your ability and according
to your power ? '

' Not even that, Gotama.'


128 III. AMBA7THA SUTTA.

5. ' So then you, Amba/^fca, as a pupil, have fallen
short 1 of due training, not only in the supreme wisdom
and conduct, but even in any one of the Four
Leakages by which the complete attainment thereof
is debarred. And your teacher too, the Brahman
Pokkharasadi, has told you this saying : " Who are
these shavelings, sham friars, menial black fellows,
the offscouring of our kinsman's heels, that they
should claim converse with Brahmans versed in the
threefold Vedic lore ! " — he himself not having even
fulfilled any one even of these lesser duties (which
lead men to neglect the higher ones). See, Amba///£a,
how deeply your teacher, the Brahman Pokkharasadi,
has herein done you wrong.'

6. 'And the Brahman Pokkharasadi, Amba/Ma,
is in the enjoyment of a grant from Pasenadi, the
king of Kosala. But the king does not allow him
to come into his presence. When he consults with
him he speaks to him only from behind a curtain.
How is it, Amba/Ma, that the very king, from whom
he accepts this pure and lawful maintenance, King
Pasenadi of Kosala, does not admit him to his
presence ? See, Amba/Ma, how deeply your teacher,
the Brahman Pokkharasadi, has herein done you
wrong 2.'

7. ' Now what think you, Amba/Ma ? Suppose
a king, either seated on the neck of his elephant
or on the back of his horse, or standing on the
footrug of his chariot [104], should discuss some
resolution of state with his chiefs or princes. And
suppose as he left the spot and stepped on one
side, a workman (vSudra) or the slave of a workman
should come up and, standing there, should discuss


1 Parihinako sa/fcariyako. ' Have been done out of, neglected
in the matter of, defrauded of, this wisdom,' &c.

* By concealing this suggestive fact, and thereby leaving you
ignorant that the king, a Kshatriya, looked down on a Brahman, even
one whom he considered, as a Brahman, of great merit. So at Ga.t.
V, 257 a king calls a Brahman 'low born' (hina-^aH'o) compared
with himself.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. T29

the matter, saying : " Thus and thus said Pasenadi
the king." Although he should speak as the king
might have spoken, or discuss as the king might
have done, would he thereby be the king, or even
as one of his officers ? '
' Certainly not, Gotama.'

8. ' But just so, Amba^a, those ancient poets
(Rishis) of the Brahmans, the authors of the verses,
the utterers of the verses, whose ancient form of
words so chanted, uttered, or composed, the Brahmans
of to-day chant over again and rehearse, intoning or
reciting exactly as has been intoned or recited — to wit,
A/Maka, Vamaka, Vamadeva, Vessamitta, Yamataggi,
Angirasa, Bharadva^ra. Vase///£a, Kassapa, and Bhagu 1
— though you can say : " I, as a pupil, know by heart
their verses," that you should on that account be
a Rishi, or have attained to the state of a Rishi —
such a condition of things has no existence ! '

9. ' Now what think you, Amba/Ma ? What have
you heard when Brahmans, old and well stricken
in years, teachers of yours or their teachers, were
talking together — did those ancient Rishis, whose
verses you so chant over and repeat, parade about
well groomed, perfumed, trimmed as to their hair
and beard, adorned with garlands and gems, clad in
white garments, in the full possession and enjoyment
of the five pleasures of sense, as you, and your teacher
too, do now ? '

[106] ' Not that, Gotama.'

1 Or did they live, as their food, on boiled rice of
the best sorts, from which all the black specks had
been sought out and removed, and flavoured with
sauces and curries of various kinds, as you, and your
teacher too, do now ? ?

4 Not that, Gotama/

' Or were they waited upon by women with fringes


1 On these names see Tevi^a Sutta 1, 13 (p. 172 of my 'Buddhist
Suttas') and ' Vinaya Texts,' II, 130.

II. K


III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.


and furbelows ' round their loins, as you, and your
teacher too, do now ? '

1 Or did they go about driving chariots, drawn by
mares with plaited manes and tails 2, using long wands
and goads the while, as you, and your teacher too,
do now ? '

' Not that, Gotama.'

' Or did they have themselves guarded in fortified
towns, with moats dug out round them3 and cross-
bars let down before the gates 4, by men girt with
long swords, as you, and your teacher too, do now ? '

' Not that, Gotama.'

10. 'So then, Amba#/£a, neither are you a Rishi, nor
your teacher, nor do you live under the conditions
under which the Rishis lived. But whatever it may
be, Amba///za, concerning which you are in doubt
or perplexity about me, ask me as to that. I will
make it clear by explanation.'

ii. Then the Blessed One went forth from his
chamber, and began to walk up and down. And
Amba#>fca did the same. And as he thus walked


1 VeMaka-nata-passahi. We have here probably the ancient
name of the very elaborate girdles which all the fashionable women
and goddesses wear on the old bas reliefs. Cunningham, ' Stupa of
Bharhut,' PI. LI, gives figures and details of them. To judge from the
bas reliefs — and I cannot call to mind any Pi/aka passage contradicting
them — the women (lay women of course, the Sisterhood wore robes
from the shoulders downwards) have only very elaborate headdresses
and necklaces, a skirt from the waist to the ankles, and a very broad
and handsome girdle worn over the top of the skirt. They were
unclothed from the neck to the waist.

2 Kutta-valehi. The chariot of the time, as represented on the
bas reliefs, had standing room for four passengers, the steeds wore
plumes on their heads, and had their manes and tails elaborately
plaited. ' Stupa of Bharhut/ PI. XII, shows us the chariot of Pasenadi,
king of Kosala (see ibid, pp 124, 125). Kutta is not in Childers.
But it occurs frequently. 866^1.1,296,433; 11,127,128; IV, 219;
Asl. 321.

3 Compare Gat. IV, 106 ; Mil. 330.

4 Okkhitta-palighasu. Childers ~iys (following the Sanskrit
dictionaries) bars 'of iron.' But where does the iron come in? This
is surely a modern improvement. Unfortunately the word is found
elsewhere (M. 1, 139; A. Ill, 84; Dhp. 398) only in an ethical sense.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. I31

up and down, following the Blessed One, he took
stock of the thirty-two signs of a great man, whether
they appeared on the body of the Blessed One or not.
And he perceived them all save only two. [loe] With
respect to those two — the concealed member and the
extent of tongue 1 — he was in doubt and perplexity,
not satisfied, not sure.

12. And the Blessed One knew that he was so
in doubt. And he so arranged matters by his
Wondrous Gift that Amba///za the Brahman saw how
that part of the Blessed One that ought to be hidden
by clothes was enclosed in a sheath. And the Blessed
One so bent round his tongue that he touched and
stroked both his ears, touched and stroked both his
nostrils, and the whole circumference of his forehead
he covered with his tongue 2.

1 Neither text nor commentary make it clear what these two marks
really quite meant. The first, says Buddhaghosa, is ' like an elephant's,'
and the second seems, from what follows, to be the power of extending
the tongue, like a snake's, to a great length. This last is possibly
derived from poetical descriptions of the tongues of flame or light
playing round the disk of the sun.

As to the means by which the Buddha made the first visible to
Amba//^a, Buddhaghosa simply quotes Nagasena (at Mil. 169) to
show that he made a visible image of himself fully dressed in his robes.
And the difficulty is to see how that would have helped matters. Only
an historical explanation of the meaning of the marks can here guide
us to what is inferred.

2 These are two of the thirty-two bodily marks of a Great Being
(Maha-purisa), as handed down among the Brahmans (see note
above, p. 88 of the text, § 5) and adopted by the Buddhists. They
are in part adaptations to a man of poetical epithets applied to the
sun, or to the personification of the mystic human sacrifice ; partly
characteristics of personal beauty such as any man might have ; and
one or two of them — the little wart, for instance, between the eyes with
white hair on it, and the protuberance at the top of the head — may
possibly be added in reminiscence of personal bodily peculiarities which
Gotama actually had.

One of the Dialogues in the Digha, the Lakhawa Sutta, is devoted
to these thirty-two marks. They are also enumerated, with slight
differences, in the Mahapadhana Sutta ; and later books give other
lists differing from each other, and from the old lists, in many small
points.

The story told here in §§ 11, 12 recurs in identical words in the

K 2


132 III. AMBATTHA SUTTA.

And Amba/Z/^a, the young- Brahman, thought :
' The Samara Gotama is endowed with the thirty-
two signs of a great man, with them all, not only
with some of them.' And he said to the Blessed
One : ' And now, Gotama, we would fain depart.
We are busy, and have much to do.'

' Do, Amba/Z/za, what seemeth to you fit.'
And Amba#/za mounted his chariot drawn by
mares, and departed thence.

13. Now at that time the Brahman Pokkharasadi
had gone forth from Ukka/Ma with a great retinue
of Brahmans, and was seated in his own pleasaunce
waiting there for AmbazV/za. And Amba^Ma came
on to the pleasaunce. And when he had come in
his chariot as far as the path was practicable for
chariots, he descended from it, and came on foot
to where Pokkharasadi was, and saluted him, and
took his seat respectfully on one side. And when
he was so seated, Pokkharasadi said to him :

14. 'Well, AmbazY/za 1 Did you see the Blessed
One?'

' Yes, Sir, we saw him.'

' Well ! is the venerable Gotama so as the reputa-
tion [107] about him I told you of declares ; and not
otherwise. Is he such a one, or is he not ? '

' He is so, Sir, as his reputation declares, and not
otherwise. Such is he, not different. And he is
endowed with the thirty-two signs of a great man,
with all of them, not only with some.'

'And did you have any talk, Ambaz'zVza, with the
Samara Gotama ? '

1 Yes, Sir, I had.'

' And how did the talk go ? '

Then Amba/^a told the Brahman Pokkharasadi
all the talk that he had had with the Blessed One.

15. When he had thus spoken, Pokkharasadi said to
him : ' Oh ! you wiseacre ! Oh ! you dullard ! Oh ! you

Sela Sutta (S. N. No. 33 = M. No. 92) and forms the subject of one of
the dilemmas put by King Milinda to Nagasena (Mil. 167).


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. 1 33

expert, forsooth, in our threefold Vedic lore ! A man,
they say, who should carry out his business thus, must,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, be reborn
into some dismal state of misery and woe. What
could the very points you pressed in your insolent
words lead up to, if not to the very disclosures the
venerable Gotama made ] ? What a wiseacre ; what
a dullard ; what an expert, forsooth, in our threefold
Vedic lore.' And angr}' and displeased, he struck
out with his foot, and rolled Amba////a over. And
he wanted, there and then, himself, to go and call
on the Blessed One.

[108] 16. But the Brahmans there spake thus to
Pokkharasadi : ' It is much too late, Sir, to-day to
go to call on the Sama/^a Gotama. The venerable
Pokkharasadi can do so to-morrow.'

So Pokkharasadi had sweet food, both hard and
soft, made ready at his own house, and taken on
wagons, by the light of blazing torches, out to
Ukka////a. And he himself went on to the Xkkh'k-
nankala Wood, driving in his chariot as far as the
road was practicable for vehicles, and then going
on, on foot, to where the Blessed One was. And
when he had exchanged with the Blessed One the
greetings and compliments of politeness and courtesy,
he took his seat on one side, and said to the Blessed
One :

17. 'Has our pupil, Gotama, the young Brahman
Amba/^a, been here ? '

1 Yes, Brahman, he has.'

' And did you, Gotama, have any talk with him ? '
' Yes, Brahman, I had.'

' And on what wise was the talk that you had
with him.'

18. Then the Blessed One told the Brahman Pokkha-
rasadi all the talk that had taken place. And when


Asa^a a.sagga . . . upaniyya upaniyya. Buddhaghosa is
somewhat ambiguous in his interpretation of this idiomatic phrase, on
which compare M. I, 250, 251 ; A. I, 172.


134 IIT- AMBA7TJ-TA SUTTA.


he had thus spoken Pokkharasadi said to the Blessed
One :

1 He is young and foolish, Gotama, that young
Brahman Amba//^a. Forgive him, Gotama.'

' Let him be quite happy, Brahman, that young
Brahman Amba/Ma.'

[109] 19. And the Brahman Pokkharasadi took
stock, on the body of the Blessed One, of the thirty-
two marks of a Great Being. And he saw them all
plainly, save only two. As to two of them — the
sheath-concealed member and the extensive tongue —
he was still in doubt and undecided. But the Blessed
One showed them to Pokkharasadi, even as he
had shown them to Amba/^a1. And Pokkharasadi
perceived that the Blessed One was endowed with
the thirty-two marks of a Great Being, with all of
them, not only with some. And he said to the
Blessed One : ' May the venerable Gotama grant
me the favour of taking his to-morrow's meal with
me, and also the members of the Order with him.'
And the Blessed One accepted, by silence, his request.

20. Then the Brahman Pokkharasadi, seeing that
the Blessed One had accepted, had (on the morrow)
the time announced to him : ' It is time, oh Gotama,
the meal is ready.' And the Blessed One, who had
dressed in the early morning, put on his outer robe,
and taking his bowl with him, went, with the brethren,
to Pokkharasadi's house, and sat down on the seat
prepared for him. And Pokkharasadi, the Brahman,
satisfied the Blessed One, with his own hand, with
sweet food, both hard and soft, until he refused any
more, and the young Brahmans the members of
the Order. And when the Blessed One had finished
his meal, and cleansed the bowl and his2 hands,
Pokkharasadi took a low seat, and sat down beside

him.

21. Then to him thus seated [110] the Blessed One


1 Above, p. 106 of the text, § 12 repeated.

2 Onita-patta-pamw. See the note at ' Vinaya Texts,' I, 83.


PRIDE OF BIRTH AND ITS FALL. 1 35

discoursed in due order ; that is to say, he spake to
him of generosity, of right conduct, of heaven, of
the danger, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts,
of the advantages of renunciation. And when the
Blessed One saw that Pokkharasadi, the Brahman,
had become prepared, softened, unprejudiced, upraised,
and believing in heart, then he proclaimed the doctrine
the Buddhas alone have won ; that is to say, the
doctrine of sorrow, of its origin, of its cessation, and
of the Path. And just as a clean cloth from which
all stain has been washed away will readily take
the dye, just even so did Pokkharasadi, the Brahman,
obtain, even while sitting there, the pure and spotless
Eye for the Truth, and he knew : ' Whatsoever has
a beginning in that is inherent also the necessity of
dissolution.'

22. And then the Brahman Pokkharasadi, as one
who had seen the Truth, had mastered it, understood
it, dived deep down into it, who had passed beyond
doubt and put away perplexity and gained full confi-
dence, who had become dependent on no other man
for his knowledge of the teaching of the Master,
addressed the Blessed One, and said :

' Most excellent, oh Gotama (are the words of thy
mouth), most excellent! Just as if a man were to
set up that which has been thrown down, or were
to reveal that which has been hidden away, or were
to point out the right road to him who has gone
astray, or were to bring a light into the darkness
so that those who had eyes could see external forms,
— just even so, Lord, has the truth been made known
to me, in many a figure, by the venerable Gotama.
And I, oh Gotama, with my sons, and my wife, and
my people, and my companions, betake myself to
the venerable Gotama as my guide, to the truth,
and to the Order. May the venerable Gotama accept
me as a disciple, as one who, from this day forth,
as long as life endures, has taken him as his guide.
And just as the venerable Gotama visits the families
of others, his disciples, at Ukka#/*a, so let him visit


I36 III. AMBA7TJ7A SUTTA.

mine. Whosoever there may be there, of Brahmans
or their wives, who shall pay reverence to the
venerable Gotama, or stand up in his presence, or
offer him a seat or water, or take delight in him,
to him that will be, for long, a cause of weal and
bliss.'

' It is well, Brahman, what you say.


Here ends the Amba^Ma Sutta.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


SCWADAJVZ>A SUTTA.

This Dialogue comes very appropriately immediately after
the Amba////a. That dealt with the general question of pride
of birth, or social position. This deals with the special
question of what is the essential quality which makes a man
a Brahman. The conclusion is, no doubt, substantially the
same. But there is a difference, and the difference is
instructive.

In trying to gain over Amba////a to his (the Buddha's)
view of the essential distinction — rather than birth or social
position — between man and man, Gotama includes the whole
list as set out above in the thirteen divisions of the Sama««a-
phala1. In trying to gain over So/2ada;/^a to his (the
Buddha's) view of what is the essential quality that makes
a man a Brahman, he gives the same details, but puts the
Guanas (the states of Ecstasy) not under Conduct, but under
Pa««a (Intelligence).

The reason seems to be simply that the verse, on which
the exposition in the Amba///£a turns, mentions only Wisdom
and Conduct (containing no word for Intelligence), and that
it is not thought accurate to put the states of Ecstasy (which
are Indian, not specially Buddhist) under Wisdom. It is
true that the Buddhist position is that ' goodness is a function
of intelligence, as beauty is of health ' (to quote the words
of Matthew Bassendine). But under Intelligence they always
distinguish two phases — the enquiring, and necessarily there-
fore doubting, activity, of the mind ; and the final stage of
emancipation and peace when the laws of the universe are
clearly seen, and firmly grasped, and cheerfully acquiesced in.

1 See the summary above, pp. 57—59, in the Introduction to the
Sama««a-phala.


I38 IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.


It is this latter phase which they call Wisdom (Vi^a) l — the
contrary of the Avi^a, which is ignorance of the action
of Karma, of the Four Noble Truths, and of the doctrine
of the Asavas or Intoxications. The man who knows
these ; who, finally and permanently out of the jungle and
in the open, quite beyond the stage of 'wasting his wonder
on the fabulous soul,' has attained to, and remains in this
state of Nirvana in Arahatship, is not only, in Buddhist
terminology, called a Brahman, but is, in fact, declared to
be the only true Brahman.

It is amazing that Sona.da.ndd., as learned as he is wealthy,
does not see that this, the logical outcome of the Buddha's
argument, and carefully led up to in the final paragraph of
the exposition 2, is really incompatible with the supremacy
of the Brahmans in the ordinary sense of that word. He
is baffled by the skill with which he is gradually led on,
by the usual Socratic method adopted in so many of the
Dialogues, to accept one self-evident truth after another.
There is indeed nothing, till we come to that last paragraph,
which any intelligent Brahman could not, with safety, and
with due regard to his own doctrine, fully accept. In other
words, the doctrine of Brahman supremacy was intellectually
indefensible. It was really quite inconsistent with the ethical
standard of the times, which the Brahmans, in common with
the rest of the people, fully accepted.

Our Sutta is by no means the only one in which the same,
or a similar, argument leads up to the same, or a similar,
conclusion. It will aid us in understanding the real gist
of our Sutta to mention one or two of these.

In the Tika»/;a and Ganussoni Suttas of the Anguttara 3 the
question put by the Buddha is: 'What sort of person do
you Brahmans acknowledge to be a Tevi^a Brahman (a
Brahman with threefold lore)?'

The answer of each of the Brahmans is, in the words of
our Sutta, § 4 : 'A Brahman well born on both sides, of
pure descent, through the father and through the mother,
back through seven generations, with no slur put upon him,
and no reproach, in respect of birth — a repeater (of the sacred
words) knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who has
mastered the Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the
phonology, and the exegesis (as a fourth), and with the

1 The English equivalents do not exactly cover the corresponding
Pali terms, which are not, in the texts, used always with scrupulous
distinctiveness.

2 § 23 of the text, and of the translation below.

3 Vol. i, pp. 163-168.


INTRODUCTION. 1 39


legends as a fifth — a man learned in the (etymologies of
the) words and in the grammar, versed in Lokayata
(Nature-lore) 1 and in the theory of the signs on the body
of a great man.'

Whereupon the Buddha rejoins that in the teaching of
the Arahats the ' threefold lore ' is different ; and on being
asked what it is, answers in the words of sections 93, 95, and 97
of the Sama«#a-phala Sutta, which are quoted as the last
three paragraphs of his exposition in our Sutta, that is to say,

a. The knowledge of one's own previous births.

b. The knowledge of other people's previous births.

c. The knowledge of the Four Truths, and of the Four
Intoxications (Asavas), leading on to the emancipation of
Arahatship.

The only difference is that at the end of each section, and
after the words setting forth the emancipation, the following
sentence is added :

' This first (or second, or third) lore hath he required.
Ignorance is dispelled within him, and wisdom has been born.
The darkness has been dissipated, the light has appeared.
(And all this) inasmuch as he has continued in earnestness, in
zeal, in mastery of himself.'

And at the end of the whole the following verses are also
added :

' Him do they honour whose heart, — unswerving in goodness,
and wise,
Given to earnest thought, — rests in his own control,
Pacified, stedfast. And him resolute, able in method,
Threefold in knowledge, dispelling the darkness, the con-
queror of Death, who
Lived for the weal of gods and of men delivered from folly,
Him of the threefold lore, mindful and self-possessed,
Him do they honour, the Buddha, our Gotama, wearing

now,
Conqueror, too, of Birth, the last of his mortal frames ! '

' 'Tis he who is a Brahmawa indeed
Who knows the births that he has lived before ;
And sees (with Heavenly Eye) the states of bliss,
And states of woe, that other men pass through ;
Has reached the end of all rebirths, become
A sage, perfect in insight, Arahat,
In these three modes of knowledge threefold wise.

1 See below in the Introduction to the next Sutta.


14-0 IV. SOJVADAiVZ>A SUTTA.


Him do I call a Brahman, threefold wise,
And not the man who mutters o'er again

The mystic verse so often muttered through before.'


How important a place this doctrine occupied in early-
Buddhism is made evident by the fact that this latter
stanza, with variations at the close, is so constantly repeated.
We find it in the 99th Sutta of the Iti-vuttaka (p. too) and in
the 91st Sutta of the Ma^/zima (the Brahmaya Sutta). And
it is quoted also, not only in this Sutta in the Ahguttara, and
in another Sutta in the Sarayutta (I, 167), but also in the
collection of verses from the Pizakas called the Dhammapada
(verse 423); and also in the other collection of such verses
(probably belonging to some other school of Buddhists), now
preserved in the oldest MS. yet discovered in India, the
so-called Kharosh//zi MS., portions of which have simul-
taneously found their way, last year, to both St. Petersburg
and Paris.

The whole section of the Dhammapada, which contains
this quotation, consists of no less than forty verses, each of
which, from one point of view or another, emphasise this
point of the identification, by the Buddhists, of the Arahat
with the Brahman. Twenty-seven of them are taken from
the Vase/Ma Sutta of the Sutta Nipata, in which the question
raised is precisely the same as that raised in our Sutta, and
in which the reply, though different in details, amounts to
much the same as the reply given here.

Two conclusions force themselves upon us. It is, in the
first place, a striking proof of the high social esteem in which
the Brahmans, as such, and quite irrespective of character,
were held by the masses of the people. We have hitherto
only had the views which the Brahmans held about them-
selves. And very absurd they seem to readers whose own
vivid sense of superiority rests on a self-complacency quite
as inexpugnable as that of the Brahmans. Here we have
evidence from an independent source, — evidence all the
stronger because it is found in Suttas in which the exclusive
claims of the Brahmans by birth are vigorously contested.
When the Buddhists, in selecting a title of honour for those
they valued so highly, for the best of men, for the Arahats,
selected the name of Brahman, it is clear that that word,
in the opinion of the early Buddhists, conveyed to the minds
of the people an exalted meaning, a connotation of real
veneration and respect. And it is not likely that this would
have been the case unless the Brahmans had, at least as


INTRODUCTION. 1 4 1


a general rule, deserved it — and on other grounds than
the mere prerogative of birth.

In the second place, if the contention of the Buddhists
had been universally accepted — if the word Brahman had
come to mean, not only a man of a certain descent, but
exclusively a man of a certain character and insight —
then the present caste system of India could never have
grown up. But it was obviously impossible that the conten-
tion should succeed.

The method, adopted by all reformers, of pouring new
wine into old bottles, putting new meanings into ancient
words, can only succeed under conditions, that, in this case,
were non-existent. And it is always open to the danger
that, with the old and hallowed word, the old superstition
associated with it will also survive. It' was a method largely
adopted by the Buddhists; and in numerous other cases,
to which I have elsewhere called attention, adopted with
success. The subsequent language of India is full of phrases
and words which bear, not the meaning which they previously
bore, but the new and higher meaning put into them by
Buddhists. But in this case the two ideas were too widely
apart, too contradictory. A physical meaning cannot be
replaced by an ethical one. The actual facts of life, which
they could not alter, — could not, indeed, attempt to alter, —
were a constant influence, against their view, too strong to
be overcome. Brahmans by birth, many of them, perhaps
most of them, engaged in various worldly trades and occu-
pations, and therefore Brahmans only by birth, were so
constant and so important a factor in the daily and hourly
life of the people, that the idea of birth could not be
dissociated from the word. The Buddhists failed. And
they not only failed, their very choice of the word as
a title of honour, must (through the wide influence they
exercised for so many centuries throughout and beyond
the valley of the Ganges) have actually afforded a fresh
strength to the veneration which the word inspired. The
very means they adopted to lend weight to their doctrine
of emancipation became a weapon to be turned against
themselves.

It is unlikely that this really mattered much. The point
was only one detail in a broad scheme which was doomed
from the outset to failure — that is if failure to attain immediate
and lasting acceptance can rightly be called the failure of
a theory of life.

A theory which placed the ideal in Self-conquest, regarded
final salvation as obtainable in this world, and in this world


142 IV. SOiVADAiVDA SUTTA.

only, and only by self-conquest — a view of life that ignored
the ' soul ' and brought the very gods themselves under the
domain of law — a religious movement which aimed its keenest
shafts against all those forms of belief in the supernatural
and mysterious, appealing most strongly alike to the hopes
and to the fears of the people — a philosophy that confined
itself to going back, step by step, from effect to cause, and
poured scorn on speculations as to the ultimate origin and
end of all things — might gain, by the powerful personality
of its founder and the enthusiasm and zeal of his early
followers, a certain measure of temporary success. But it
fought against too many vested interests at once, it raised
up too many enemies, it tried in ' pouring new wine into
the old bottles ' to retain too much of the ancient phrase-
ology, for lasting victory — at least at that time, and in an
advancing country then assimilating to itself surrounding
peoples at a lower grade of culture. The end was inevitable.
And it was actually brought about, not by persecution, but
by the gradual weakening of the theory itself, the gradual
creeping back, under new forms and new names, of the more
popular beliefs.

The very event, which seemed, in the eyes of the world,
to be the most striking proof of the success of the new
movement, the conversion and strenuous support of Asoka,
the most powerful ruler India had had — indeed the first real
overlord over practically the whole of India — only hastened
the decline. The adhesion of large numbers of nominal
converts, more especially from the newly incorporated and
less advanced provinces, produced weakness, rather than
strength, in the movement for reform. The day of com-
promise had come. Every relaxation of the old thorough-
going position was widely supported by converts only half
converted. And the margin of difference between the
Buddhists and their opponents gradually faded almost
entirely away. The soul theory, step by step, gained again
the upper hand. The caste system was gradually built up
into a completely organised system. The social supremacy
of the Brahmans by birth became accepted as an incontro-
vertible fact. And the inflood of popular superstition which
overwhelmed the Buddhist movement, overwhelmed also
the whole pantheon of the Vedic gods. Buddhism and
Brahmanism alike passed practically away, and modern
Hinduism arose on the ruins of both.

The struggle is now being renewed under conditions
perhaps, on the whole, more favourable. The tone of
worldliness and love of material comfort, the eager restless-


INTRODUCTION. 1 43


ness of modern social, and economic competition, the
degradation of learning to a mere means of getting on
and making money, are no doubt all unfavourable to any
movement for the social and religious elevation of a people.
But history shows, notably in the case of the Reformation
in Europe, how powerfully the contact of two diverse views
of life tends to widen the thoughts of men. Both India and
Europe in the twentieth century may be fairly expected
to afford fresh examples of the same influence. And in
India the powerful aid of the new methods of science and
of historical criticism will lend their invaluable aid to the
party endeavouring, now once again, to place the ideal, not
in birth, but in character and wisdom.


IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.
[Characteristics of the true Brahman.]

[ill] I. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One once,
when going on a tour through the Anga country with
a great multitude of the brethren, with about five
hundred brethren, arrived at A'ampa l. And there at
A'ampa he lodged on the bank of the Gaggara Lake 2.

Now at that time the Brahman Scma.da.uaa. was
dwelling at A'ampa, a place teeming with life 3, with
much grassland and woodland and water and corn, on
a royal domain granted him by Seniya Bimbisara, the
king of Magadha 4, as a royal fief, with power over it
as if he were the king.

2. Mow the Brahmans and householders of A'ampa
heard the news : ' They say that the Samawa Gotama
of the Sakya clan, who went out from a Sakya family to
adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great

1 A'ampa, the capital of Anga, was on the East bank of the river
of the same name (Gat. IV, 454), which formed the Eastern boundary
of Magadha It was close to the modern Bagulpur, about Lat. 240 io'
by Long. 870. Like other names of famous places in -India, it was
used over again by colonists in the Far East, and there means what we
now call Cochin China and Annam (I-Tsing, p. 58).

2 So called after Queen Gaggara, who had had it excavated, says
Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 279). He adds that on its banks was a grove
of champaka trees, so well known for the fragrance of their beautiful
white flowers. It was under those trees that the wandering mendicants
put up.

3 Sattussada. The meaning is really quite settled, though
Fausboll wrongly translates ussada 'desire,' and Oldenberg and
myself ' uneven,' at S. N. 783 = Vin. I, 3. See No. 15 in the list of
the thirty-two marks. Also Gat. IV, 188 = Dhp. A. 339 ; Gat. IV,
60 = Dhp. A. 95 ; Gat. IV, 4 ; P. G. D. 22-44 ; Asl. 307.

4 In the Buddha's time Anga was subject to Magadha.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 45

company of the brethren at A^ampa, and is staying there
on the shore of the Gaggara Lake. Now regarding that
venerable Gotama, such is the high reputation that has
been noised abroad : — That Blessed One is an Arahat,
a fully awakened one, abounding in wisdom and good-
ness, happy, with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed
as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a teacher for
gods and men, a Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by him-
self, thoroughly knows and sees, as it were, face to face
this universe, — including the worlds above of the gods,
the Brahmas, and the Maras, and the world below with
its recluses and Brahmans, its princes and peoples,- —
and having known it, he makes his knowledge known
to others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its
progress, lovely in its consummation, doth he proclaim,
both in the spirit and in the letter, the higher life doth
he make known, in all its fullness and in all its purity.

'And good is it to pay visits to Arahats like that'

[112] And the Brahmans and householders of
Afampa began to leave Aampa. in companies and in
bands from each district l, so that they could be
counted, to go to the Gaggara Lake.

3. Now at that time SoJta.da.nda. the Brahman had
gone apart to the upper terrace of his house for his
siesta, and seeing the people thus go by, he said to his
doorkeeper : ' Why are the people of A'ampa. going
forth like this towards the Gaggara Lake ? '

Then the doorkeeper told him the news. And he
said : ' Then, good doorkeeper, go to the Brahmans
and householders of Aampa, and say to them :
" Sona.danda. the Brahman desires them to wait. He
will himself come to see the Samara Gotama,"

' Very well, Sir,' said the doorkeeper, and he did so.

[lis] 4. Now at that time there were about five
hundred Brahmans from different kingdoms lodging at
A^ampa for some business or other. And when they
heard that So/radaw^/a was intending to visit the

1 Perhaps in ' companies and separately ' ; but I follow Buddha-
ghosa. Comp. M. I, 231 ; A. II, 55.

II. L


146 IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.


Samara Gotama, they went to Sona.da.nda, and asked
whether that was so.

' That is my intention, Sirs. I propose to call on
the Samawa Gotama.'

' Let not the venerable Sonada.nda, do that. It is
not fitting for him to do so. If it were the venerable
Sowadaw^a who went to call upon him, then the vener-
able SowadaWa's reputation would decrease and the
Samara Gotama's would increase. This is the first
reason why you, Sir, should not call upon him, but
he upon you.'

5. And they laid before Sona.da.nda, the Brahman in
like manner also other considerations, to wit :

That he was well born on both sides, of pure
descent through the mother and through the father
back through seven generations, with no slur put upon
him, and no reproach, in respect of birth —

That he was prosperous, well to do, and rich —

[114] That he was a repeater (of the sacred words),
knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who had
mastered the Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual,
the phonology, and the exegesis (as a fourth), and the1
legends as a fifth, learned in the words and in the
grammar, versed in Lokayata (Nature-lore), and in the
theory of the signs on the body of a great man —

That he was handsome, pleasant to look upon,
inspiring trust, gifted with great beauty of complexion,
fair in colour, fine in presence \ stately 2 to behold —

That he was virtuous, increased in virtue, gifted with
virtue that had waxed great —

That he had a pleasant voice and pleasing delivery,
and was gifted with polite address, distinct, not husky 3,
suitable for making clear the matter in hand —

That he was the teacher of the teachers of many,

1 Brahma-va/£/£asr. 'With a body like that of Maha Brahma,'
says Buddhaghosa (p. 282). The Burmese and Siamese MSS. read
vakk/iasi.

2 Akkhuddavakaso, for which Buddhaghosa (pp. 282, 284) gives
three contradictory explanations.

* Ane/agalaya. 'Not slobbering,' says Buddhaghosa.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 47

instructing three hundred Brahmans in the repetition
of the mystic verses, and that many young Brahmans,
from various directions and various counties, all
craving for the verses, came to learn them by heart
under him —

That he was aged, old, and well stricken in years,
long-lived and full of days —

That he was honoured, held of weight, esteemed
worthy, venerated and revered by Seniya Bimbisara,
the king of Magadha —

That he was honoured, held of weight, esteemed
worthy, venerated and revered by Pokkharasadi, the
Brahman —

That he dwelt at Aampa, a place teeming with life,
with much grassland and woodland and corn, on a
royal fief granted him by Seniya Bimbisara, the king of
Magadha, as a royal gift, with power over it as if he
were the king —

For each of these reasons it was not fitting that he,
Sonadatida. the Brahman, should call upon the Samara
Gotama, but rather that the Samara Gotama should
call upon him.

6. And when they had thus spoken, So?/ada;^a said
to them :

[115] ' Then, Sirs, listen, and hear why it is fitting
that I should call upon the venerable Gotama, and not
he should call upon me —

' Truly, Sirs, the venerable Gotama is well born on
both sides, of pure descent through the mother and the
father back through seven generations, with no slur
put upon him, and no reproach in respect of birth —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama has gone forth
(into the religious life), giving up the great clan of his
relations ] —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama has gone forth
(into the religious life), giving up much money and
gold, treasure both buried and above the ground —

1 ' Eighty thousand families on the mother's, and eighty thousand
on the father's side,' says Buddhaghosa — making a total for the
Sakya clan of 800,000, reckoning five to a family.

L 2


I48 IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.

1 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama, while he was still
a young man, without a grey hair on his head, in the
beauty of his early manhood, has gone. forth from the
household life into the homeless state —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama, though his father
and mother were unwilling, and wept, their cheeks
being wet with tears, nevertheless cut off his hair and
beard, and donned the yellow robes, and went out from
the household life into the homeless state —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama is handsome,
pleasant to look upon, inspiring trust, gifted with great
beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in presence,
stately to behold —

1 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama is virtuous with
the virtue of the Arahats, good and virtuous, gifted
with goodness and virtue —

1 Truly, Sirs, the Sama7za Gotama hath a pleasant
voice, and a pleasing delivery, he is gifted with polite
address, distinct, not husky, suitable for making clear
the matter in hand —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama is the teacher of
the teachers of many —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama has no passion of
lust left in him, and has put away all fickleness of
mind —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samawa Gotama believes in
Karma, and in action \ he is one who puts righteous-
ness in the forefront (of his exhortations) to the
Brahman race —

4 Truly, Sirs, the Samawa Gotama went forth from
a distinguished family primeval 2 among the Kshatriya
clans —


1 Kamma-vadi kiriya-vadi. Compare ' Vinaya Texts,' II,
109, 112.

2 Adina-khattiya-kula. The reading is doubtful, and the
Burmese MSS., after their constant habit, have replaced it by an easy
reading-, abhinna-khattiya-kula, 'unbroken Kshatriya family.'
But all the Sinhalese MSS. agree in reading either adina or adfna;
and if the reading had once been abhinna, it is difficult to see how
the alteration to the more difficult reading should have occurred.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 49

' Truly, Sirs, the Samawa Gotama went forth from
a family prosperous, well to do, and rich —

[116] ' Truly, Sirs, people come right across the
country from distant lands to ask questions of the
Samara Gotama —

' Truly, Sirs, multitudes of heavenly beings put their
trust in the Samara Gotama —

' Truly, Sirs, such is the high reputation noised
abroad concerning the Samara Gotama, that he is said
to be an Arahat, exalted, fully awakened, abounding in
wisdom and righteousness, happy, with knowledge of
the worlds, a Blessed One, a Buddha —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama has all the thirty-
two bodily marks of a Great Being —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama bids all men
welcome, is congenial, conciliatory, not supercilious,
accessible to all, not backward in conversation —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama is honoured, held
of weight, esteemed and venerated and revered by the
four classes (of his followers— the brethren and sisters
of the Order, laymen and lay women) —

4 Truly, Sirs, many gods and men believe in the
Samara Gotama —

' Truly, Sirs, in whatsoever village or town the
Samara Gotama stays, there the non-humans do the
humans no harm —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama as the head of an
Order, of a school, as the teacher of a school, is the
acknowledged chief of all the founders of sects.
Whereas some Samaras and Brahmans have gained
a reputation by all sorts of insignificant matters \ not


Buddhaghosa skips the clause, which (if it was in the text before him)
is suggestive. He would scarcely have done so unless the matter
were really very simple. ' Autonomous ' would make a good sense in
the context ; but I have taken the word, in the sense of ' primordial,
aboriginal/ as being a derivative from adi, in the same way as ad hi n a
is from adhi. This is simple enough; the only difficulty being that
the word occurs nowhere else.

1 Literally ' anyhow ' ; ' such as by wearing no clothes ' explains
Buddhaghosa (p. 288).


I50 IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.

so the Samara Gotama. His reputation comes from
perfection in conduct and righteousness —

' Truly, Sirs, the king of Magadha, Seniya Bimbisara,
with his children and his wives, with his people and his
courtiers, has put his trust in the Samara Gotama —

1 Truly, Sirs, King Pasenadi of Kosala, with his
children and his wives, with his people and his
courtiers, has put his trust in the Samawa Gotama —

1 Truly, Sirs, Pokkharasadi the Brahman, with his
children and his wives, with his people and his inti-
mates, has put his trust in the Samawa Gotama —

' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama is honoured, held
of weight, esteemed, and venerated and revered alike
by Seniya Bimbisara, the king of Magadha, by
Pasenadi the king of Kosala, and by Pokkharasadi
the Brahman —

[117] ' Truly, Sirs, the Samara Gotama has now
arrived at A^ampa, and is staying on the shores of the
Gaggara. Lake. But all Samaras and Brahmans who
come into our village borders are our guests. And
guests we ought to esteem and honour, to venerate
and revere; And as he is now so come, he ought to
be so treated, as a guest —

For each and all of these considerations it is not
fitting that the Samara Gotama should call upon us,
but rather does it behove us to call upon him. And so
far only do I know the excellencies of the Samara
Gotama, but these are not all of them, for his excel-
lence is beyond measure.'

7. And when he had thus spoken, those Brahmans
said to him : ' The venerable Sowada^a declares the
praises of the Samara Gotama on such wise, that were
he to be dwelling even a hundred leagues from here, it
would be enough to make a believing man go thither
to call upon him, even had he to carry a bag (for the
provisions for the journey) on his back l. Let us then
all go to call on the Samawa Gotama together ! '


1 Pu/awsenapi. Compare A. II, 183, where a precisely similar
phrase occurs.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 151

So Sonadandd. the Brahman went out to the Gaggara.
Lake with a great company of Brahmans.

8. Now the following hesitation arose in Sonadanda s
mind as he passed through the wood : ' Were I to ask
the Samara Gotama a question, if he were to say :
" The question ought not to be asked so, thus ought
the question to be framed ; " the company might there-
upon speak of me with disrespect, saying : " Foolish is
this Sons.da.nda. the Brahman, and inexpert. [H8] He
is not even able to ask a question rightly." But if they
did so my reputation would decrease ; and with my
reputation my incomings would grow less, for what we
have to enjoy, that depends on our reputation. But
if the Samara Gotama were to put a question to me,
I might not be able to gain his approval 1 by my
explanation of the problem. And if they were then to
say to me : " The question ought not to be answered
so ; thus ought the problem to be explained ; " the
company might thereupon speak of me with disrespect,
saying : " Foolish is this Sonadanda the Brahman, and
inexpert. He is not even able to satisfy the Samawa
Gotama by his explanation of the problem put." But
if they did so, my reputation would decrease ; and with
my reputation my incomings would grow less, for what
we have to enjoy, that depends upon our reputation.
But on the other hand if, having come so far, I should
turn back without calling upon the Samara Gotama,
then might the company speak disrespectfully of me,
saying: " Foolish is this Soaadafti'a the Brahman, and
inexpert, though obstinate with pride, he is so afraid
that he dare not call on the Samara Gotama. How
can he turn back after having come so far ? " But if
they did so, my reputation would decrease ; and with
my reputation my incomings would grow less. For
what we have to enjoy, that depends upon our reputa-
tion.'

9. So Sonadanda the Brahman went up to where the

1 JZittam na aradheyyaw, 'win over his mind.' Comp. M. 1,85,
341 ; II, 10; Mil. 25.


152 IV. SONADANDA SUTTA.

Blessed One was. And when he had come there he
exchanged with the Blessed One the greetings and
compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took his
seat on one side. And as to the Brahmans and house-
holders of A'ampa, some of them bowed to the Blessed
One and took their seats on one side ; some of them
exchanged with him the greetings and compliments of
politeness and courtesy, and then took their seats on
one side; some of them called out their name and
family, and then took their seats on one side ; and some
of them took their seats on one side in. silence.

[119] 10. Now as Sona.da.nda. was seated there he
was still filled with hesitation, thinking as before set
out ; and he added to himself : ' Oh ! would that the
Samara Gotama would but ask me some question on
my own subject, on the threefold Vedic lore. Verily,
I should then be able to gain his approval by my
exposition of the problem put ! '

11. Now the Blessed One became aware in his own
mind of the hesitation in the mind of Sonada.nda., and
he thought : ' This Sowadaw^a is afflicted in his heart.
I had better question him on his own doctrine.' And
he said to him: 'What are the things, Brahman, which
the Brahmans say a man ought to have in order to be
a Brahman, so that if he says : " I am a Brahman," he
speaks accurately and does not become guilty of false-
hood ? '

12. Then Sona.da.nda. thought: [120] 'What I wished
and desired and had in my mind and hoped for^that
the Samara Gotama should put to me some question
on my own subject, on the threefold Vedic lore — that
he now does. Oh ! that I may be able to satisfy his
heart with my exposition thereof! '

13. And drawing his body up erect, and looking
round on the assembly, he said to the Blessed One :
'The Brahmans, Gotama, declare him to be a Brahman
who can accurately say " I am a Brahman " without
being guilty of falsehood, who has five things. And
what are the five ? In the first place, Sir, a Brahman is
well born on both sides, on the mother's side and on


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 153

the father's side, of pure descent back through seven
generations, with no slur put upon him, and no reproach,
in respect of birth —

'Then he is a repeater (of the. sacred words), knowing
the mystic verses by heart, one who has mastered the
Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology,
and the exegesis (as a fourth), and the legends as a
fifth, learned in the phrases and in the grammar, versed
in Lokayata sophistry, and in the theory of the signs
on the body of a great man —

' Then he is handsome, pleasant to look upon,
inspiring trust, gifted with great beauty of complexion,
fair in colour, fine in presence, stately to behold —

' Then he is virtuous, increased in virtue, gifted with
virtue that has grown great —

1 Then he is learned and wise, the first, or it may be
the second, among those who hold out the ladle V

14. ' But of these five things, oh Brahman, is it
possible to leave one out, and to declare the man who
has the other four to be a Brahman, to be one who can
accurately, and without falling into falsehood, claim to
be a Brahman ? '

' Yes, Gotama, that can be done. We could leave
out colour 2. For what does colour matter ? [121] If
he have the other four — good birth, technical training,
virtue, and wisdom, as just set forth3 — Brahmans would
still declare him to be a Brahman; and he could rightly,
without danger of falsehood, claim to be one.'

15. ' But of these four things, oh Brahman, is it
possible to leave one out, and to declare the man who
has the other three to be a Brahman, to be one who can
rightly, and without falling into falsehood, claim to be
a Brahman ? '

' Yes, Gotama, that could be done. We could leave
out the verses. For what do the verses matter ? If

1 That is, 'officiate at a sacrifice by pouring out of a spoon
a libation of butter, or of spirituous Soma, to the fire god.'

2 Va««a, much the same as 'caste,' though that rendering is not
strictly accurate. (See the Introduction to the Amba/Ma.)

3 The full text is repeated, both here and in the following sections.


154 IV. SCWADAiVZ)A SUTTA.

he have the other three — good birth, virtue, and
wisdom — Brahmans would still declare him to be a
Brahman ; and he could rightly, without danger of
falsehood, claim to be one/

1 6. ' But of these three things, Brahman, is it
possible to leave one out, and to declare the man who
has the other two to be a Brahman, to be one who can
accurately, and without falling into falsehood, claim to
be a Brahman ? '

' Yes, Gotama, that could be done. We could leave
out birth. For what does birth matter ? If he have
the other two — virtue and wisdom — Brahmans would
still declare him to be a Brahman ; and he could
rightly, without danger of falsehood, claim to be one.'

[122] 17. And when he had thus spoken the other
Brahmans said to Son3.d3.7td3. : ' Say not so, venerable
So/zada/z^a, say not so ! He depreciates not only our
colour, but he depreciates our verses and our birth.
Verily the venerable Son3.d3.nd3. is going over to the
doctrine of the Samara Gotama.'

18. Then the Blessed One said to those Brahmans :
' If you, oh Brahmans, think that Son3.da.nd3. is
unlearned, that he speaks unfittingly, that he is unwise,
that he is unable to hold his own with me in this
matter, let him keep silence, and do you discuss with
me. But if you think him learned, able in speech, wise,
able to hold his own, then do you keep silence, and let
him discuss with me.'

19. And when he had thus spoken, So;zada;z^a the
Brahman said to those Brahmans: 'Let not the vener-
able ones say so. Say not so, Sirs. [!23] I do not
depreciate either our colour, nor our verses, nor our
birth.'

20. Now at that time a young Brahman named
Angaka 1, sister's son to Sowada^a the Brahman, was
seated in that company. And Son3.d3.nd3. said to those


1 This name looks suspiciously like a kind of personification of
the five Angas (the five characteristics) of the true Brahman as just
above, § 13, set out.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 55

Brahmans : ' Do the venerable ones see this Angaka,
our nephew ? '

' Yes, Sir, we see him.'

' Well ! Angaka, Sirs, is handsome, pleasant to look
upon, inspiring trust, gifted with great beauty of com-
plexion, fair in colour, fine in presence, stately to
behold — none in this assembly is like unto him in
colour, save only the Samara Gotama.

' And Angaka, Sirs, is a repeater (of the sacred
words), knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who
has mastered the Three Vedas, with the indices, the
ritual, the phonology, and the exegesis (as a fourth),
and the legends as a fifth, learned in the phrases and
the grammar, versed in Lokayata (Nature-lore), and in
the theory of the signs on the body of a great man — I
myself have taught him the verses.

' And Angaka, Sirs, is well born on both sides, on
the mother's side and on the father's side, of pure
descent back through seven generations, with no slur
put upon him, and no reproach in respect of birth — I
myself know his forebears, on the mother's side and on
the father's.

' If Angaka, Sirs, should kill living things, and take
what has not been given, and go the way of the adul-
terer, and speak lies, and drink strong drink, what
then, Sirs, would his colour avail him ? what the
verses ? what his birth ?

4 It is in so far, Sirs, as a Brahman is virtuous,
increased in virtue, gifted with virtue that has grown
great ; in so far as he is learned and wise, the first,
or it may be the second, among those who hold out the
ladle, that Brahmans would declare him, as endowed
with these two qualities, to be a Brahman, to be one
who could rightly say " I am a Brahman " without
falling into falsehood.'

21. ' But of these two things, oh Brahman, is it
possible to leave one out, and to declare the man who
has the other to be a Brahman, to be one who can
rightly, and without falling into falsehood, claim to be
a Brahman ? '


T56 IV. SONABANDA SUTTA.

[124] ' Not that, Gotama ! For wisdom, oh Gotama,
is purified by uprightness, and uprightness is purified
by wisdom. Where there is uprightness, wisdom
is there, and where there is wisdom, uprightness is
there. To the upright there is wisdom, to the wise
there is uprightness, and wisdom and goodness are
declared to be the best thing in the world1. Just, oh
Gotama, as one might wash hand with hand, or foot
with foot, just even so, oh Gotama, is wisdom purified
by uprightness, and uprightness is purified by wisdom.
Where there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and
where there is wisdom, uprightness is there. To the
upright, there is wisdom, to the wise there is upright-
ness, and wisdom and goodness are declared to be the
best thing in the world.'

22. 'That is just so, oh Brahman. And I, too, say
the same. But what, then, is that uprightness and
what that wisdom ? '

'We only know, oh Gotama, the general statement
in this matter. May the venerable Gotama be pleased
to explain the meaning of the phrase.'

' Well then, oh Brahman, give ear, and pay earnest
attention, and I will speak.'

23. 'Very well, Sir,' said Sonadanda. in assent to the
Blessed One. And the Blessed One said :

\H ere follow the paragraphs 40-63 in the Sdmanna-
phala Sutta above, pp. 62-70 of the text ; that is, the
paragraph on the appearance of a Buddha, his preach-
ing, the conversion of the hearer, his renunciation of the
world, all the Silas, and the paragraph on Confidence,

' This also, oh Brahman, is that uprightness' [Silo).
[Here follow the paragraphs on the Ghdnas, begtn-

1 Oldenberg renders this ('Buddha,' p. 283) as follows: 'The
wisdom of the upright and the uprightness of the wise have, of all
uprightness and wisdom in the world, the highest value.' I cannot
see how this can be grammatically justified ; though the sentiment is
admirable enough, and would have somewhat relieved the monotony
• of the paragraph. On pa»«a«a as nominative, not genitive, see, for
instance, S. I, 41, 42; Sum. I, 171, 290; A. IV, 342.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 57

ning at So v\v\kk eva kamehi in § 75 of the Sdmarma-
phala down to the. end of § 82, then the paragraphs on
Insight arising from Knowledge, on the Metital Image,
on the Wondrous Gifts, on the Heavenly Ear, on Know-
ledge of the hearts of others, on Memory of one's own
previous births, on the Divine Eye, and on the Destruc-
tion of the Deadly Floods, all as in the Sdmahha-phala,
§§ 83-98 inclusive.]

1 This, oh Brahman, is that wisdom1.'

24. When he had thus spoken, S0na.da.nd3. the
Brahman said to the Blessed One :

[125] ' Most excellent, oh Gotama (are the words of
thy mouth), most excellent! Just as if a man were to
set up that which has been thrown down, or were to
reveal that which has been hidden away, or were to
point out the right road to him who has gone astray,
or were to bring a light into the darkness so that those
who had eyes could see external forms — just even so
has the truth been made known to me, in many a
figure, by the venerable Gotama. I, even I, betake
myself to the venerable Gotama as my guide, to the
truth, and to the Order. And may the venerable
Gotama accept me as a disciple, as one who, from this
day forth, as long as life endures, has taken him as his
guide. And may the venerable Gotama grant me the
favour of taking his to-morrow's meal with me, and
also the members of the Order with him.'

Then the Blessed One signified, by silence, his con-
sent. And Sona.da.nda., on seeing that he had done so,
arose from his seat and bowed down before the Blessed

1 The repetition here is nearly the same as that in the Amba/Ma
Sutta, summarised above at the translation of p. 100 of the text. The
only difference is that the paragraphs 64-74 of the Sama««a-phala
there included as coming under Tarawa (Conduct) are here included
under Sila (Uprightness). The GV/anas, there put, not under Vi^a
(Wisdom), but under Tarawa, are here put, not under Sila, but
under Pa««a (Intelligence). In other words Pa««a includes all
that was there included under Vi^a, and the Four Guanas besides.
But Sila includes all that is put in the Amba//^a under Sila — all
indeed of the eight divisions of Sila as summarised above, pp. 57—59.
See Buddhaghosa's notes at pp. 219, 268, 292.


I58 IV. SOiVADAiVDA SUTTA.


One, and walking round him with his right hand
towards him, departed thence. And at early dawn he
made ready at his house sweet food, both hard and
soft, and had the time announced to the Blessed One :
' It is time, oh Gotama, and the meal is ready.'

25. Then the Blessed One, who liad dressed in the
early morning, put on his outer robe, and taking his
bowl with him, went with the brethren to Sowadaw^a's
house, and sat down on the seat prepared for him.
And SowadaWa the Brahman satisfied the Blessed
One, and the brethren, with his own hand, with sweet
food, both hard and soft, until they refused any more.
And when the Blessed One had finished his meal, and
cleansed the bowl and his hands, Sona.d3.nd3. took a low
seat, and sat down beside him, and said :

26. ' If, oh Gotama, after I have entered the as-
sembly, I should rise from my seat to bow down before
the venerable Gotama, then the assembly would find
fault with me l. Now he with whom the assembly
should find fault, his reputation would grow less ; and
he who should lose his reputation, his income would
grow less. For that which we have to enjoy, that
depends upon our reputation. If then, when I am
seated in the assembly, I stretch forth my joined palms
in salutation, let the venerable Gotama accept that
from me as a rising up from my seat. [126] And if
when I am seated in the assembly I take off my
turban, let the venerable Gotama accept that from me
as a salutation with my head. So if, when I am in my
chariot, I were to get down from the chariot to salute
the venerable Gotama, the surrounders would find fault
with me. If, then, when mounted on my chariot, I
bend down low the staff of my goad, let the venerable
Gotama accept that from me as if I had got down.
And if, when mounted on my chariot, I should wave


1 On the ground, says Buddhaghosa (p. 292), that he would be
saluting a much younger man, one young enough to be his grandson.
If this tradition be correct, it would follow that this Sutta must be
describing events very early in the public ministry of the Buddha.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN. 1 59

my hand, let the venerable Gotama accept that from
me as if I had bowed low in salutation 1 ! '

27. Then the Blessed One instructed and roused
and incited and gladdened Sona.da.nda the Brahman
with religious discourse, and then rose from his seat
and departed thence.


Here ends the Sonadanda. Sutta.


1 It will be seen from this section that Sowadawfla is represented as
being a convert only to a limited extent. He still keeps on his school
of Vedic studies, and is keenly anxious to retain the good opinion of
his students, and of other Brahmans. And if that part of the Buddha's
doctrine put before him in this Sutta be examined, it will be found to
be, with perhaps one or two exceptions, quite compatible with the best
Brahman views. No doubt if every detail were carried to its strict
logical conclusion there would be no further need for Vedic studies,
except from the historical standpoint. But those details are, on the
face of them, ethical. They belong to a plane not touched on in
the then Vedic studies. They could be accepted by an adherent of
the soul theory of life. And the essential doctrines of Buddhism — the
Path, the Truths, and Arahatship — are barely even referred to.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


KUrADANTA SUTTA.

Whoever put this Sutta together must have been deeply-
imbued with the spirit of subtle irony that plays no less
a part in the Suttas than it does in so many of the 6"atakas.
I have already called attention to the great importance for
the right understanding of early Buddhist teaching of
a constant appreciation of this sort of subtle humour1. It
has been hitherto, so far as I am aware, entirely overlooked —
that is, in the Suttas ; every one recognises it in the £ataka
tales. The humour is not at all intended to raise a laugh,
scarcely even a smile. And the aroma of it, pervading the
whole of an exposition — none the less delightful because
of the very serious earnestness of the narrator, all the while,
as regards the ethical point at issue — is apt to be lost sight
of precisely because of that earnestness. And just as a joke
may be explained, but the point of it spoilt in the process,
so in the attempt to write about this irony, much more
delicate than any joke, one runs great danger of smothering
it under the explanatory words.

The attempt, nevertheless, must be made. And it is most
easy, perhaps, to do so by an example which no one will
dispute. In the Ra^ovada Gataka2 we are told of the
two kings, reigning over the famous lands of Benares and
Kosala, who simultaneously determined to examine into their
own faults ! No courtier would tell them of any. So they
each went, and went in vain, to the people in the city,
outside the palace on a similar quest. Finding no fault-
finders there, they each went on to the city gate, and then
to the surrounding suburbs, all in vain. So they each made
over the kingdom to their respective ministers, and with
a single attendant as charioteer, sallied forth into the world,

1 See, for instance, the notes above on p. 33 ; and the remarks,
in the Introduction to the Amba/Ma, on the Agganna Sutta.

* No. 1 in vol. ii of the Pali text in Prof. Fausboll's edition, and
of the Cambridge translation edited by Prof. Cowell.


INTRODUCTION. l6l


to find some one to tell them of their faults. Bent on this,
so serious, quest, the two came face to face in a low cart-track
with precipitous sides. Each calls on the other to make way
for a king. Both are kings! How to settle the point?
' I have it,' says one charioteer : ' Let the younger give
way.' The kings turn out to be exactly of an age. ' Then
let the lord of the lesser realm go back.' Their kingdoms
are exactly equal in size. And so on, in succession, are
found to be the strength of their two armies, the amount
of their treasure, the glory of their renown, the fame of their
realms, the distinction of their caste, and tribe, and family.
Then at last comes the solution. The king of Kosala
overcomes evil by evil. Of the other, the king of Benares,
it is said :

' Anger he conquers by calmness,
And by goodness the wicked,
The stingy he conquers by gifts,
And by truth the speaker of lies V
And on this being proclaimed, the king of Kosala and his
charioteer alighted from their chariot. And they took out
the horses, and removed their chariot, and made way for
the king of Benares.

There is not a word in the whole story, here told in abstract 2,
to suggest that it is not all sober history. But of course the
whole story is invented. The two kings are brought on to
the stage merely to carry on their broad shoulders the moral
of the tale, and the dry humour of the predicament in which
they find themselves ;s there to attract attention to, to add
emphasis to, the lesson taught.

What is the especial point in this fun — a kind of fun quite
unknown in the West? It is the piquancy of the contrast
between the mock seriousness of the extravagant, even
impossible details, and the real serious earnestness of the
ethical tone. The fun of the extravagance can be matched,
easily enough, in European, and especially in American
humour. The piquancy of this contrast is Indian, and
especially Buddhist. Even the theosophic myth-makers of
the Vedas had a sense of the humour in the incongruities,
the half realities of their myths. One feels it occasionally
even in the Brahma/zas. In the Upanishads it is very marked.
The Liturgy of the Dogs, the Fable of the Senses, the War
of the Devas and Asuras, and several other such episodes

1 This verse is quoted in the Dhammapada (verse 223).

2 The full version can also be seen in my ' Buddhist Birth Stories,'
pp. xxii-xxvi.

II. M


1 62 v. kOfadanta sutta.

have this mixture of unreality and earnestness, and it finds
its perhaps most touching expression in the legend of
Na^iketas. And the Buddhists, in their £&taka stories,
often adopted and developed old Indian tales of a similar sort.

But why should we think that this sort of humour is
confined to the Gatakas ? We have a 6rataka story of the
Great King of Glory, certainly based on the Sutta of the
same name, for it expressly quotes it, and embodies the
numerous details which lead up to the sublime lesson at
the end of it \ And those details are at least as extravagant
as the details in the Ra^ovada 6"ataka. Allowing lor all
the earnestness undeniably animating both the story-teller
and the hearers, it is clear that they enjoyed, all the time,
the dry humour of the exaggeration and giotesqueness of
the details of the story as it went along. Now the details
are given only in the Sutta ; and omitted, as well known,
in the £ataka. They build up a gorgeous fairy tale in which
the ancient mythology of the sun- myth is brought into play
in order to show how the greatest possible majesty and glory
of the greatest and best of all possible kings is, after all, but
vanity. And the details, here also, in the Sutta, are enlivened
by an intentional exaggeration, a designed dry humour,
similar to that in the Ra^ovada Gataka, above referred to.

A similar state of things is found in the Agga«#a Sutta,
as pointed out above in the Introduction to the Amba///6a ;
in the Keva//a Sutta, translated below ; and in many other
Suttas. In all of them there is the same exaggeration,
the same dry humour, the same restrained art of the story-
teller. It is impossible not to see that to the early tellers
and hearers of these legends, always striking, often with
a special beauty of their own, the unreality of the whole thing
was just as evident, and was meant to be as evident, as it
is now to us. They knew quite well that the lesson taught
was the principal matter, the main point compared with
which all others were quite subservient. And it made no
difference that, for instance, the Great King of Glory was
expressly identified with the Buddha in a former birth.
They accepted it all ; and entered none the less into the
spirit of the legend as legend, because they enjoyed both
the lesson and the manner of the telling of it.

And so, I would submit, stands the case also with our
present Sutta. The whole legend is obviously invented
ad hoc. Its details are not meant to be taken seriously as

1 Both <9ataka and Sutta are translated in full in my ' Buddhist
Suttas ' (vol. xi of the S. B. E., pp. 238-289).


INTRODUCTION. 1 63


historical fact. The forced twist given to the meaning of
the words vidha and parikkharo is not serious. The
words could not be used in the new sense assigned. What
we have is a sort of pun, a play upon the words, a piece
of dialectic smartness, delightful to the hearers then, and
unfortunately quite impossible to be rendered adequately, in
English prose, for readers now.

And it is quite open to question whether this does not
apply as much to the whole Sutta as to the legend of King
Wide-realm. The Brahman Kufedanta (pointed-tooth) is
mentioned nowhere else, and is very likely meant to be
rather the hero of a tale than an historical character. In
that case we should have before us a novelette, an historical
romance, in which the Very Reverend Sir Goldstick Sharp-
tooth, lord of the manor of Khanumata, — cruel enough, no
doubt, and very keen on being sure that his ' soul ' should
be as comfortable in the next world as he was, now, in this, —
makes up his mind to secure that most desirable end by the
murder of a number of his fellow creatures, in honour of
a god, or as he would put it, by celebrating a sacrifice.

In order to make certain that not one of the technical
details — for to the accurate performance of all these the
god was supposed to attach great weight — should be done
wrong, the intending sacrificer is ironically represented as
doing the very last thing any Brahman of position, under
similar circumstances, would think of doing. He goes to
the Sama;za Gotama for advice about the modes of the ritual
to be performed at the sacrifice ; and about the requisite
utensils, the altar-furniture, to be used in making it.

The Buddha's answer is to tell him a wonderful legend
of a King Wide-realm, and of the sacrifice he offered —
truly the most extraordinary sacrifice imaginable. All its
marvellous details, each one settled, be it noted, on the advice
of a Brahman, are described with a deliberate extravagance
none the less delicious because of the evident earnestness
of the moral to be inferred.

The Brahman of our Sutta wants to know the three modes
in which the ritual is to be performed. The three ' modes '
are declared in the legend (§ 15) to be simply three conditions
of mind, or rather one condition of mind at three different
times, the harbouring of no regret^ either before or during
or after the sacrifice, at the expenditure involved. And
the material accessories required, the altar-furniture, the
priest's outfit, what is that? It is the hearty co-operation
with the king of four divisions of his people, the nobles,
the officials, the Brahmans, and the householders. That

M 2


1 64 V. KtjrADANTA SUTTA.

makes four articles of furniture. And eight personal qualifi-
cations of the king himself. That makes other eight. And
four personal qualifications of his advising Brahman make
up the total of the sixteen articles required. No living
thing, either animal or vegetable, is injured. All the labour
is voluntary. And all the world co-operates in adding its
share to the largesse of food, on strict vegetarian principles,
in which, alone, the sacrifice consists. It is offered on behalf,
not only of the king himself, but of all the good. And the
king desires to propitiate, not any god, but living men. And
the muttering of mystic verses over each article used and over
mangled and bleeding bodies of unhappy victims, verses
on which all the magic efficacy of a sacrifice had been
supposed to depend, is quietly ignored.

It is all ironical, of course — just the very contrary, in
every respect, of a typical Vedic sacrifice. And the evident
unreality of the legend may be one explanation of the
curious fact that the authors of the Gataka book (notwith-
standing that King Wide-realm's Chaplain is actually identified
in the Sutta with the Buddha himself in a previous birth) have
not included this professedly Gataka story in their collection.
This is the only case, so far discovered, in which a similar
omission has been made.

Having thus laughed the Brahman ideal of sacrifice out
of court with the gentle irony of a sarcastic travesty, the
author or authors of the Sutta go on to say what they think
a sacrifice ought to be. Far from exalting King Wide-realm's
procedure, they put his sacrifice at the very bottom of a long
list of sacrifices each better than the other, and leading up to
the sweetest and highest of all, which is the attainment of
Arahatship.

Here again, except in the last paragraph, there is nothing
exclusively Buddhistic. That a sacrifice of the heart is better
than a sacrifice of bullocks, the ethical more worthy than any
physical sacrifice, is simply the sensible, rational, human view
of the matter. The whole long history of the development
of Indian thought, as carried on chiefly by Brahmans (however
much it may have owed in the earliest period to the nobles and
others), shows that they, the more enlightened and cultured
of the Brahmans, were not only as fully alive to this truth
as any Buddhist, but that they took it all along for granted.

Even in the Vedas themselves there is already the germ
of this view in the mental attitude as regards Aditi and
Varuwa. And in the pre-Budciii^tic KAandogya, in the
mystic identification of the sacrifice with man 1, we find

1 -ffMndogya Upanishad III, 16 and 17.


INTRODUCTION. 1 65


certain moral states placed on an equality with certain parts
of the sacrificial procedure. And among these moral states,
ahiwsa, the habit of causing no injury to any living thing,
is especially mentioned. This comes very near to the Hebrew
prophet's: ' I will have mercy, and not sacrifice1.' The more
characteristically Indian point of view is, no doubt, in the
words of the old saying long afterwards taken up into the
Mahabharata, that it is truth (not mercy) that outweighs
a thousand sacrifices 2. But there is a very great probability
that the ahiw/sa doctrine, foreshadowed in the Upanishad,
and afterwards so extravagantly taken up by the Niga;//^as,
the ^ains of the Buddha's time, was also a part of the earlier
£"ain doctrine, and therefore not only in germ, but as a
developed teaching, pre-Buddhistic. Though the Buddhists
did not accept this extreme position, there would seem
therefore to be no valid reason for doubting the accuracy
of the Buddhist tradition that their view of sacrifice was
based on a very ancient belief which was, in fact, common
ground to the wise, whether inside or outside the ranks of
the Brahmans.

Our Sutta is, then, merely the oldest extant expression,
in so thorough and uncompromising a way, of an ancient
and widely held trend of opinion. On this question, as on
the question of caste or social privileges, the early Buddhists
took up, and pushed to its logical conclusions, a rational
view held also by others. And on this question of sacrifice
their party won. The Vedic sacrifices, of animals, had
practically been given up when the long struggle between
Brahmanism and Buddhism reached its close. Isolated
instances of such sacrifices are known even down to the
Muhammadan invasion. But the battle was really won
by the Buddhists and their allies. And the combined
ridicule and earnestness of our Sutta will have had its
share in bringing about the victory.

That they did win is a suggestive fact. How could
they have done so if the Indians of that time had been,
as is so often asserted of them by European writers, more
deeply addicted to all manner of ritual than any other nation
under heaven, more superstitious, more averse to change in
religious ceremonial ? There seems to me no reason to
believe that they were very different, in these respects, from

1 Hosea vi. 6 ; quoted Matt. ix. 13, and xii. 7. See also Micah vi. 6-8.
Prov. xv. 8, and xxi. 13, are, of course, later.

2 Mahabharata I, 3095 nearly = XIII, 1544. Compare XIII,
6073.


1 66 V. KftrADANTA SUTTA.


Greeks or Romans of the same period. On the contrary-
there was a well marked lay feeling, a wide-spread antago-
nism to the priests, a real sense of humour, a strong fund
of common sense. Above all there was then, the most
complete and unquestioned freedom of thought and expres-
sion in religious matters that the world had yet witnessed.
To regard the Indian peoples through Brahman spectacles,
to judge them from the tone prevalent in the Srauta and
Grihya. Sutras, it would seem impossible that this victory
could have been won. But it was won. And our views
of Indian history must be modified accordingly.

There is a curious expression in the stock phrase describing
the learned Brahman, so often found in the Pi/akas, which
I have left untranslated in this Sutta, being uncertain as
to the meaning in which it was used at the time when
our Sutta was composed. It will be instructive, in more
ways than one, to collect and consider the other passages
in which the word occurs.

Lokayata is explained by Wilson as 'the system of
atheistical philosophy taught by /sfarvaka1,' and by the
Petersburg Dictionary as ' Materialism.' Now the description
of the good Brahman as put, in the Buddhist Suttas, into the
mouth of Brahrnans themselves2, mentions Lokayata as one
branch of his learning. The whole paragraph is compli-
mentary. And though the exact connotation of one or
two of the other terms is doubtful, they are all descriptive
of just those things which a Brahman would have been
rightly proud to be judged a master of. It is evident,
therefore, that the Dictionary interpretations of the word
are quite out of place in this connection.

Yet they are each of them, at least for a later period, well
authenticated. Kumarila Bha//a, in his Varttika (verse 10),
charges the Mimawsa system with having been, for the most
part, converted into a Lokayata system, and claims for his
own book the merit of bringing it back to theistic lines3.
Now of course the Mimawsists would indignantly deny this.
Kumarila, who seems to have been a good deal of a bigot,
is here merely hurling at adversaries, who claimed to be
as orthodox as himself, a term of abuse. But it is clear that
he uses that term in the sense of ' atheistic' The exact phrase


1 He gives as his authority the Amara Ko^a ; but the Kosa. merely
mentions the word, in a list, without any explanation.
'2 Ahguttara I, 163, and other passages.
3 The passage is quoted in Muir's ' Sanskrit Texts/ III, 95.


INTRODUCTION. 1 67


would be n a s t i k a, as opposed to his own astika-patha:
that is, the system or the man who says 'there is not,' an
infidel. This is somewhat wider than atheist ; it comes
however, in Kumarila's mouth, to much the same thing.

.SahkaraMrya uses the word Lokayata several times1,
and always in the same specific sense as the view of those
who look upon the soul as identical with the body, as
existing only so long as the body exists, not continuing,
after death, in a new condition and separate from the body.
A very similar, if not indeed the very same view is also
controverted in the Brahma-^ala Sutta (above, p. 46) ; and
is constantly referred to throughout the Pi/akas under the
stock phrase taw ^ivaw ta.m sarira7«2. But it is never
called Lokayata in the Pitekas. It seems to be the view
that there is a soul ; but that it is diffused through the body,
and dies with it ; and is not a separate unity, within the
body but not of it, which flies away from the body after
death. It is not necessary to suppose that either .S'arikara
or the Buddhists had in their minds any book setting forth
a philosophy based on this single proposition, or any actual
school using such a book as a manual. It may have been
so. But the expressions used point rather to an opinion held
by certain thinkers, in union with other opinions, and not
expounded in any special treatise. Nor do either the
Buddhists or 6arikara pretend to set out that opinion in
full. They are dealing with it only so far as is necessary
to enforce their own contrary positions. And though
' materialist,' as a rough and ready translation of .Sarikara's
Lokayatika, gives a good idea, to a European reader, of
the sort of feeling conveyed to vSahkara's Indian readers,
yet it is not quite exact. European ' materialists ' (and
one or two may be discovered by careful search) do not hold
the view which .Sankara describes to his Lokayatikas.

Buddhaghosa in our passage has: Lokayata;/. vu££ati
vita«</a-vada-satthaw, 'the Lokayata is a text-book
of the Vha.nda.s (Sophists) V This does not help us much ;
but previously, p. 91, he explains Lokakkhayika as
follows : ' Foolish talk according to the Lokayata, that is the
Vitanda, such as : " By whom was this world created ? By

1 For instance in his commentary on the Brahma-Sutra, I, 1, 2 ;
II, 2, 2; III, 3, 53.

2 For instance in the Mahali and Galiya Suttas, both translated
below.

3 Sum. I, 247. The Vita«</as are quoted and refuted in the Attha
Salini, pp. 3, 90, 92, 241 (where the word is wrongly spelt).


1 68 V. kOtADANTA SUTTA.

such a one. A crow is white from the whiteness of its
bones ; cranes are red from the redness of their blood."

Other Pali comments on the word are the Abhidhana
Padipika (verse 112), which says simply, probably following
Buddhaghosa : Vita^^a-satthaw viniieyyam yam taw
lokayataw. The date of this work is the middle of the
twelfth century A.D. Much clearer is Aggavawsa in the
Sadda-niti, which is a generation older. He says 1 :

Loko ti bala-loko ; ettha ayatanti ussahanti vaya-
manti vadassadenati lokayatam. Ayatati va tena
loko, na yatati na ihati va, lokayataw. Taw hi
gandhaw nissaya satta pu«#a-kiriyaya £itta;« na
uppadenti. Lokayata?^ nama: sabba;/z ukk/rittham
sabbam anukk/nttham seto kako ka/o bako imina
va imina va karanenati evam-adi-niratthaka-kara;/a-
parisawyuttam titthiya-satthaw, yaw loke Vitanda-
satthaw vu£/£ati, yaw sandhaya Bodhisatto asama-
dhuro Vidhura-pa?^ito :

Na seve Lokayatikaw, n'etaw pu««aya va.dd/ia.na.1/1
ti aha.

'Loko means the common world. Lokayata means:
"on that they ayatanti;" that is, they exert themselves
about it, strive about it, through the pleasure they take
in discussion. Or perhaps it means : " the world does not
yatati by it ;" that is, does not depend on it, move on by it.
For living beings do not stir up their hearts to right-doing
by reason of that book2. Now the Lokayata is the book
of the unbelievers (of the Titthiyas) full of such useless
disputations as the following: "All is impure; all is not
impure ; the crow is white, the crane is black ; and for
this reason or for that " — the book known in the world as
the Vita;/^/a-sattha, of which the Bodisat, the incomparable
leader, Vidhura the pandit, said :

" Follow not the Lokayata, that works not for progress in
merit." '

1 Quoted sub voce in Subhuti's ' Abhidhanappadipika Su£i,' p. 310.
According to the Sasana Va?«sa Dipika (Dr. Mabel Bode's edition,
p. 74), he lived at Arimaddana in Burma in 1127 a.d. See also
Sasana Va/wsa Dipo, verse 1238; Gandha Vaw/sa, pp. 63, 67;
Forchammer, ' Jardine Prize Essay,' p. 34 ; J. P. T. S., 1882, p. 103.

2 With this attempt at derivation may be compared Nilaka«///a on
the passage quoted below from the Mahabharata (as given in B. R.),
Loka evayatante te lokayatika. Also Prof. Cowell's suggestion
(Sarvad. S., p. 2) that Lokayata may be analysed etymologically as
' prevalent in the world.' The exact meaning of ayata is really very
doubtful.


INTRODUCTION. 1 69


The verse quoted — certainly a very old one — is in the
Vidhura GUtaka l, and the commentator there says : ' This
means: Follow not Lokayata disputation, Vitanda chatter,
concerned with useless matters which neither give paradise
nor lead men on into the Path.'

.Sarikara says : ' There is thus, according to them, no soul,
separate from the body, and capable of going to the heavenly
world or obtaining release V The unknown author of the
£ataka commentary, who certainly wrote however in the
fifth century, gives the allied proposition as his own
conclusion from the uselessness of their discussions, not as
the opinion of the Lokayatikas themselves. It would be
an easy transition from the one expression to the other.
And the difference is suggestive, especially in the light of
other passages in both Sanskrit and Pali books.

For while the Mahabharata has precisely the same use
of the word as the Pitakas, later works use it in a manner
approximating more and more nearly to that of .Sahkara.
The passage in the Mahabharata is at I, 2889 ( = Hari Vamsa
14068), where, at the end of a list of the accomplishments
of learned Brahmans, they are said to be masters of the
Lokayata. Being mentioned, as in our passage, at the end
of the list, it# is plain that this branch of learning is meant
to be taken as of minor importance. But it is not yet
considered unfavourably, much less opprobiously. And the
Petersburg Dictionary, from which I take most of these
references, points out that the word may possibly, in this
passage, have some other meaning than ' Materialism.'

The Ramaya^a goes further. There the word is also
in a list, but the Laukayatika are blamed as 'clever in
useless things V So in the Saddharma Puwdarika the good
Mahayanist does not serve or court or wait upon (among
other low people) ' the Lokayatikas who know by heart
the Lokayata mantras (mystic verses)4.' The date of

1 Fausboll's edition, VI, 286. No less than four bas reliefs,
illustrating this (?ataka, have been found at the Bharhut Tope. See
my ' Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. ciL On the greater age of the verses,
as compared with the prose, of the Gatakas, see ibid, lxxviii.

2 Loc. cit. See Deussen, ' Vedanta- system,' 310; and Thibaut,
' Vedanta- Sutras,' II, 269.

8 Gorresio's edition, II, 109, 29. Both these passages from the
epics are from later portions of them.

4 Chapter XIII, at the beginning. Burnouf (p. 168) reads tantras
(instead of mantras), no doubt wrongly, and has a curious blunder in
his note on the passage (p. 409). He says Lokayata means in Pali
' fabulous history, romance ' ; and quotes, as his authority, the passage


I70 V. K^TADANTA SUTTA.

this may be a century or two after Christ. And in the Cain
book, entitled the Bhagavati, which Weber puts at about the
same time, the Lokayatikas occur in a similar list of blame-
worthy persons 1.

In the Milinda, which is probably somewhat earlier, the
word is mentioned twice. One passage ascribes a knowledge
of the Lokayata (in a sentence expanded from the very
clause in our Sutta) to the hero of the story, Nagasena2.
Here the Milinda is quite at the old standpoint. The other
passage is in a parenthesis 3 in which the sub-hero, the king,
is described as ' fond of wordy disputations, and in the habit
of wrangling against the quibbles of Lokayatas and
Vitaw^as.' This may possibly be a gloss which has crept
into the text. But in any case it is evidence that, at the
time when it was written, the later view of the meaning
of the word had become prevalent.

In the long list of various sorts of hermits given in
the Harsha A'arita the Lokayatikas come among others
who would be classed by Vedantists as heretics 4 We
cannot, unfortunately, draw any certain conclusion as to
whether or not there were actually any Lokayatikas living
in Baca's time. In expanding previous descriptions of the
concourse of hermits in the forest, he may be merely
including in his list all the sorts of such people he had
ever heard or read of.

Lastly, the Lokayata system is, in various works of
the fourteenth century and later, appropriately fathered on
/varvaka, a mythical character in the Mahabharata, an ogre,
who appears in the garb of a Brahman 5. It is not certain
whether this is due to the ingenuity of a friend or a foe. In
either case, like the fathering of the later Sarikhya on the
ancient sage Kapila ; or the fathering of the collection of
fables, made by Planudes in the fourteenth century A.D.,upon
Aesop the story-teller of the fifth century B.C., it has been
eminently successful, has deceived many, and is still widely
accepted.

Pending the discovery of other texts, and especially of

given above from the Abhidhana Padipika, in which Lokayataw is
simply explained as vitawa'a-sattha^. This last expression cannot
possibly mean anything of that sort.

1 Weber, Ueber ein fragment der Bhagavati, II, 248.

2 My Milinda, I, 7.

3 Ibid. I, 17.

4 Cowell's Translation, p. 236.

B Madhusudana Sarasvati, Prabodha&mdrodaya, Sarva-darjana-
sawgraha.


INTRODUCTION. 171


such as are not only the testimony of opponents, the best
working hypothesis to explain the above facts seems to be
that about 500 B.C. the word Lokayata was used in
a complimentary way as the name of a branch of Brahman
learning-, and probably meant Nature-lore — wise sayings,
riddles, rhymes, and theories handed down by tradition as
to cosmogony, the elements, the stars, the weather, scraps
of astronomy, of elementary physics, even of anatomy, and
knowledge of the nature of precious stones, and of birds
and beasts and plants. To be a master of such lore was
then considered by no means unbecoming to a learned
Brahman, though it ranked, of course, below his other studies.
At that time there was no school so called, and no special
handbook of such knowledge. But portions of it trenched
so closely upon, were so often useful as metaphor in
discussing the higher and more especially priestly wisdom,
that we find sayings that may well have belonged to it
preserved in the pre-Buddhistic literature. Such passages,
for instance, as Br*. Ar. Up. Ill, 8, 3, Ktend. Up. IV, 17, 1,
and VI, 2-7, on the worlds and on cosmogony; AVzand. III.
on the colour of the rays of the sun ; Bri. Ar. Up. II, 1,5-7, and
III, 7, 3-J, on the elements; Ait. Ar. Ill, 2, 1, 4, and others,
on the parts of the body ; and many others of a similar kind
on these and other subjects might be cited as examples.

The amount then existing of such lore was too small to
make a fair proficiency in it incompatible with other
knowledge. As the amount of it grew larger, and several
branches of natural science were regularly studied, a too
exclusive acquaintance with Lokayata became looked upon
with disfavour. Even before the Christian era masters of
the dark sayings, the mysteries, of such mundane lore were
marked with sophists and casuists. This feeling is increasingly
vouched for in the early centuries of our era. In the fifth
century we hear of a book, presumably on the riddles and
mysteries of the craft, as it is called ' a book of quibbles.'
Various branches of mundane science had been by that time
fairly well worked out. Lokayata was still the name for
the old Nature-lore, on the same level as folk-lore, and in
contradistinction, not only to theosophy on the one hand, but
to such science as there was on the other.

In the first half of the eighth century Kumarila uses the
word as a mere term of abuse, and in the sense of infidel,
of his equally orthodox opponents, the Mimawsists. And
shortly afterwards 5ahkara, in setting forth his theory of the
soul, controverts a curious opinion which he ascribes to
Lokayatikas, — possibly wrongly, as the very same opinion


172 V. KtirADANTA SUTTA.

was controverted ages before in the Pi/akas, and not there
called Lokayata, though the word was in use in Pi/aka times.

Finally in the fourteenth century the great theologian
Sayawa-Madhava has a longish chapter in which he ascribes
to the Lokayatikas the most extreme forms of the let-us-
eat-and-drink-for-to-morrow-we-die view of life ; of Pyr-
rhonism in philosophy, and of atheism in theology. The
Lokayata had no doubt, at that time, long ceased to exist.
His very able description has alJ the appearance of being
drawn from his own imagination ; and is chiefly based on
certain infidel doggrel verses which cannot possibly have
formed a part of the Lokayata studied by the Brahmans of
old l. It is the ideal of what will happen to the man of some
intellect, but morally so depraved that he will not accept the
theosophist position.

Throughout the whole story we have no evidence of any
one who called himself a Lokayatika, or his own knowledge
Lokayata. After the early use of the word in some such
sense as Nature-lore, folk-lore, there is a tone of unreality
over all the statements we have. And of the real existence
of a school of thought, or of a system of philosophy that
called itself by the name there is no trace. In the middle
period the riddles and quibbles of the Nature-lorists are
despised. In the last period the words Lokayata, Lokaya-
tika, become mere hobby horses, pegs on which certain
writers can hang the views that they impute to their
adversaries, and give them, in doing so, an odious name.

1 Sarva-darjana-sa?«graha, Chapter I, translated by Prof. Cowell
in the version published in 1882.


v. kO^adanta sutta.

[The wrong Sacrifice and the right.]

[127] 1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One once,
when going on a tour through Magadha, with a great
multitude of the brethren, with about five hundred
brethren, came to a Brahman village in Magadha called
Khanumata. And there at Khanumata he lodged in
the Ambala/Mika pleasaunce l.

Now at that time the Brahman Ku/adanta was
dwelling at Khanumata, a place teeming with life, with
much grassland and woodland and water and corn, on
a royal domain presented him by Seniya Bimbisara the
king of Magadha, as a royal gift, with power over it as
if he were the king.

And just then a great sacrifice was being got ready
on behalf of Ku/adanta the Brahman. And a hundred
bulls, and a hundred steers, and a hundred heifers, and
a hundred goats, and a hundred rams had been brought
to the post for the sacrifice.

2. Now the Brahmans and householders of Khanu-
mata heard the news of the arrival of the Samara
Gotama 2. [128] And they began to leave Khanumata
in companies and in bands to go to the Ambala/Mika
pleasaunce.

3. And just then Ku/adanta the Brahman had gone
apart to the upper terrace of his house for his siesta ;
and seeing the people thus go by, he asked his door-
keeper the reason. And the doorkeeper told him 3.

1 Not the same as the one with the same name half way between
Ra^-agaha and Nalanda (above, p. 1 of the text). Buddhaghosa
(p. 294) says it was like it.

2 The whole of § 2 of the So«ada«</a is here repeated.

3 All given in the text in full, as in the So«ada«o'a Sutta.


174 v- K^rADANTA SUTTA.

4. Then Ku^adanta thought : ' I have heard that
the Samara Gotama understands about the successful
performance of a sacrifice with its threefold method
and its sixteen accessory instruments. Now I don't
know all this, and yet I want to carry out a sacrifice.
[129] It would be well for me to go to the Samawa
Gotama, and ask him about it.'

So he sent his doorkeeper to the Brahmans and
householders of Khanumata, to ask them to wait till
he could go with them to call upon the Blessed One.

5. But there were at that time a number of Brahmans
staying at Khanumata to take part in the great sacrifice.
And when they heard this they went to Ku/adanta,
and persuaded him, on the same grounds as the
Brahmans had laid before So^adaw^a, not to go. But
he answered them in the same terms as Sowadaw^a had
used to those Brahmans. [134] Then they were satisfied,
and went with him to call upon the Blessed One l

9. And when he was seated there Ku/adanta the
Brahman told the Blessed One what he had heard 2,
and requested him to tell him about success in per-
forming a sacrifice in its three modes 3 and with its
accessory articles of furniture of sixteen kinds 4

1 §§ 3~7 inclusive of the So«ada«aa are here repeated in full in the text.

2 As in § 4.

3 Vidha. Childers gives 'pride' as the only meaning of this
word. But he has made a strange muddle between it and vidho.
All that he has under both words should be struck out. All that he
has under vidho should be entered under vidha, which has always
the one meaning ' mode, manner, way.' Used ethically of the Arahats
it refers, no doubt, to divers ' modes ' of pride or delusion (as for
instance in vidhasu na vikampanti at S. I, 84, and in the passage
quoted in Childers). He makes vidha a very rare word, and vidho
a common one. It is just the contrary. Vidha is frequent,
especially at the end of adjectival compounds. Vidho is most rare.
It is given doubtfully by Buddhaghosa, in discussing a doubtful
reading at Sum. I, 269, in the sense of 'yoke'; and is a possible
reading at Vin. II, 136, 319; IV, 168, 363 in the sense of 'brooch'
or ' buckle.'

Here vidha in Ku/adanta's mouth means, of course, mode of rite or
ritual. Gotama lays hold of the ambiguity of the word, and twists it
round to his ethical teaching in the sense of mode of generosity.

1 Parikkhara, 'accessories, fillings, equipments, appurtenances,'


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. I 75

1 Well then, O Brahman, give ear and listen atten-
tively and I will speak.'

' Very well, Sir,' said Ku/adanta in reply ; and the
Blessed One spake as follows : —

10. ' Long ago, O Brahman, there was a king by
name Wide-realm (Mahci. Vi^ita) 1, mighty, with great
wealth and large property ; with stores of silver and
gold, of aids to enjoyment 2, of goods and corn ; with
his treasure-houses and his garners full. Now when
King Wide-realm was once sitting alone in meditation
he became anxious at the thought : "I have in
abundance all the good things a mortal can enjoy.
The whole wide circle of the earth is mine by conquest
to possess. 'Twere well if I were to offer a great
sacrifice that should ensure me weal and welfare for
many days."

1 And he had the Brahman, his chaplain, called ; and
telling him all that he had thought, [135] he said : " So
I would fain, O Brahman, offer a great sacrifice — let
the venerable one instruct me how — for my weal and
my welfare for many days."

11. 'Thereupon the Brahman who was chaplain said
to the king : " The king's country, Sire, is harassed
and harried. There are dacoits abroad who pillage
the villages and townships, and who make the roads
unsafe. Were the king, so long as that is so, to levy
a fresh tax, verily his majesty would be acting wrongly.
But perchance his majesty might think : 'I'll soon
put a stop to these scoundrels' game by degradation
and banishment, and fines and bonds and death ! ' But
their licence cannot be satisfactorily put a stop to so.
The remnant left unpunished would still go on harass-
ing the realm. Now there is one method to adopt to


— the furniture of a room, the smallest things one wears, the few
objects a wandering mendicant carries about with him, and so on.
Here again the word is turned into a riddle, the solution of which is
the basis of the dialogue.

1 Literally 'he who has a great realm' — =just as we might say
Lord Broadacres.

2 ' Such as jewels and plate/ says Buddhaghosa (p. 295).


176 V. KC7ADANTA sutta.


put a thorough end to this disorder. Whosoever there
be in the kind's realm who devote themselves to
keeping cattle and the farm, to them let his majesty
the kine £ive food and seed-corn. Whosoever there
be in the king's realm who devote themselves to trade,
to them let his majesty the king give capital. Who-
soever there be in the king's realm who devote them-
selves to government service 1t to them let his majesty
the king give wages and food. Then those men,
following each his own business, will no longer harass
the realm ; the king's revenue will go up ; the country
will be quiet and at peace ; and the populace, pleased
one with another and happy, dancing their children in
their arms, will dwell with open doors."

' Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the
word of his chaplain, [136] and did as he had said.
And those men, following each his business, harassed
the realm no more. And the king's revenue went up.
And the country became quiet and at peace. And the
populace, pleased one with another and happy, dancing
their children in their arms, dwelt with open doors.

12. 'So King Wide-realm had his chaplain called,
and said : " The disorder is at an end. The country
is at peace. I want to offer that great sacrifice — let
the venerable one instruct me how — for my weal and
my welfare for many days."

' Then let his majesty the king send invitations to
whomsoever there may be in his realm who are
Kshatriyas, vassals of his, either in the country or the
towns ; or who are ministers and officials of his, either
in the country or the towns ; or who are Brahmans of
position, either in the country or the towns ; or who
are householders of substance, either in the country or
the towns, saying : " I intend to offer a great sacrifice.
Let the venerable ones give their sanction to what will
be to me for weal and welfare for many days."

' Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the


1 Ra^a-porise. On this word, the locative singular of a neuter
abstract form, compare M. I, 85.


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. 1JJ

word of his chaplain, [137] and did as he had said. And
they each — Kshatriyas and ministers and Brahmans
and householders — made alike reply : " Let his majesty
the king celebrate the sacrifice. The time is suitable,
O king » ! "

4 Thus did these four, as colleagues by consent,
become wherewithal to furnish forth that sacrifice 2.

13. 'King Wide-realm was gifted in the following
eight ways : —

' He was well born on both sides, on the mother's
side and on the father's, of pure descent back through
seven generations, and no slur was cast upon him, and
no reproach, in respect of birth —

4 He was handsome, pleasant in appearance, inspiring
trust, gifted with great beauty of complexion, fair in
colour, fine in presence, stately to behold —

1 He was mighty, with great wealth, and large
property, with stores of silver and gold, of aids to
enjoyment, of goods and corn, with his treasure-houses
and his garners full —

4 He was powerful, in command of an army, loyal
and disciplined, in four divisions (of elephants, cavalry,
chariots, and bowmen), burning up, methinks, his
enemies by his very glory —

4 He was a believer, and generous, a noble giver,
keeping open house, a welling spring 3 whence Samawas
and Brahmans, the poor and the wayfarers, beggars,
and petitioners might draw, a doer of good deeds —

1 He was learned in all kinds of knowledge —

4 He knew the meaning of what had been said, and
could explain : " This saying has such and such a
meaning, and that such and such " —


1 'Because it was right and fit to do such deeds when one was
young and rich. To spend one's days in selfishness, and then,
in old age to give gifts would be no good,' says Buddhaghosa
(p. 297).

2 Ya««assa parikkhara. The latter word is here twisted round
to a new sense.

8 Opana = udapana. Compare M. I, 379; Vin. I, 236 ; Mil. 411;
Sum. I, 298 ; and the note at • Vinaya Texts/ II, 115.

II. N


178 V. KUTADANTA SUTTA.

' He was intelligent, expert and wise, and able to
think out things present or past or future * —

' And these eight gifts of his, too, became where-
withal to furnish forth that sacrifice.

[138] 14. ' The Brahman his chaplain was gifted in
the following four ways : —

' He was well born on both sides, on the mother's
and on the father's, of pure descent back through seven
generations, with no slur cast upon him, and no reproach
in respect of birth —

1 He was a student repeater who knew the mystic
verses by heart, master of the Three Vedas, with the
indices, the ritual, the phonology, and the exegesis (as a
fourth), and the legends as a fifth, learned in the idioms
and the grammar, versed in Lokayata (Nature-lore) and
in the thirty marks on the body of a great man —

' He was virtuous, established in virtue, gifted with
virtue that had grown great —

1 He was intelligent, expert, and wise ; foremost, or
at most the second, among those who hold out the ladle.'

' Thus these four gifts of his, too, became where-
withal to furnish forth that sacrifice.

15. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, before
the sacrifice had begun, explained to King Wide-realm
the three modes :

' Should his majesty the king, before starting on the
great sacrifice, feel any such regret as : " Great, alas,
will be the portion of my wealth used up herein," let
not the king harbour such regret. Should his majesty
the king, whilst he is offering the great sacrifice, feel
any such regret as : " Great, alas, will be the portion
of my wealth used up herein," let not the king harbour
such regret. Should his majesty the king, when the
great sacrifice has been offered, feel any such regret
as : " Great, alas, has been the portion of my wealth
used up herein," let not the king harbour such regret'

1 Buddhaghosa explains this as meaning that he knew the result of
Karma, he knew that his present prosperity was a gift tq him by the
good deeds done to others in the past, and that there would be
a similar result in future for his good deeds done now.


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. I 79

' Thus did the chaplain, O Brahman, before the
sacrifice had begun, explain to King Wide-realm the
three modes.

16. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, before
the sacrifice had begun, in order to prevent any com-
punction that might afterwards, in ten ways, arise as
regards those who had taken part therein, said : " Now
there will come to your sacrifice, Sire, men who destroy
the life of living things, and men who refrain therefrom
— men who take what has not been given, and men
who refrain therefrom — men who act evilly in respect
of lusts, and men who refrain therefrom — men who
speak lies, and men who do not — men who slander,
and men who do not — men who speak rudely, and men
who do not — men who chatter vain things, and men who
refrain therefrom — [139, 140] men who covet, and men
who covet not — men who harbour illwill, and men who
harbour it not — men whose views are wrong, and men
whose views are right. Of each of these let them, who
do evil, alone with their evil. For them who do well
let your majesty offer, for them, Sire, arrange the
rites, them let the king gratify, in them shall your
heart within find peace."

17. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, whilst
the king was carrying out the sacrifice, instructed and
aroused and incited and gladdened his heart in sixteen
ways : " Should there be people who should say of the
king, as he is offering the sacrifice : ' King Wide-realm
is celebrating sacrifice without having invited the four
classes of his subjects, without himself having the eight
personal gifts, without the assistance of a Brahman who
has the four personal gifts ;' then would they speak not
according to the fact. For the consent of the four
classes has been obtained, the king has the eight, and
his Brahman has the four, personal gifts. With regard
to each and every one of these sixteen conditions the
king may rest assured that it has been fulfilled. He can
sacrifice, and be glad, and possess his heart in peace ,."

1 This whole closing sentence is repeated, in the text, of each
of the sixteen.

N 2


l8o V. KUTADANTA SUTTA.


[141] 1 8. 'And further, O Brahman, at that sacrifice
neither were any oxen slain, neither goats, nor fowls,
nor fatted pigs, nor were any kinds of living creatures
put to death. No trees were cut down to be used as
posts, no Dabbha grasses mown to strew around the
sacrificial spot. And the slaves and messengers and
workmen there employed were driven neither by rods
nor fear, nor carried on their work weeping with tears
upon their faces. Whoso chose to help, he worked ;
whoso chose not to help, worked not. What each
chose to do, he did ; what they chose not to do, that
was left undone. With ghee, and oil, and butter, and
milk, and honey, and sugar only was that sacrifice
accomplished.

[142] 19. 'And further, O Brahman, the Kshatriya
vassals, and the ministers and officials, and the Brah-
mans of position, and the householders of substance,
whether of the country or of the towns, went to King
Wide-realm, taking with them much wealth, and said :
" This abundant wealth, Sire, have we brought hither
for the king's use. Let his majesty accept it at our
hands ! "

'" Sufficient wealth have I, my friends, laid up, the
produce of taxation that is just. Do you keep yours,
and take away more with you ! "

'When they had thus been refused by the king,
they went aside, and considered thus one with the
other : " It would not beseem us now, were we to take
this wealth away again to our own homes. King
Wide-realm is offering a great sacrifice. Let us too
make an after-sacrifice ! "

20. 'So the Kshatriyas established a continual
largesse to the east of the king's sacrificial pit, and the
officials to the south thereof, and the Brahmans to the
west thereof, and the householders to the north
thereof. And the things given, and the manner of
their gift, was in all respects like unto the great sacri-
fice of King Wide-realm himself.

[143] ' Thus, O Brahman, there was a fourfold
co-operation, and King Wide-realm was gifted with


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. l8l

eight personal gifts, and his officiating Brahman with
four. And there were three modes of the giving of
that sacrifice. This, O Brahman, is what is called the
due celebration of a sacrifice in its threefold mode and
with its furniture of sixteen kinds ! '

21. And when he had thus spoken, those Brahmans
lifted up their voices in tumult, and said: 'How
glorious the sacrifice, how pure its accomplishment ! '
But Ku/adanta the Brahman sat there in silence.

Then those Brahmans said to Ku/adanta : ' Why do
you not approve the good words of the Samara
Gotama as well-said ? '

' I do not fail to approve : for he who approves not
as well-said that which has been well spoken by the
Samara Gotama, verily his head would split in twain.
But 1 was considering that the Samara Gotama does
not say : " Thus have I heard," nor " Thus behoves it
to be," but says only " Thus it was then," or " It was
like that then." So I thought : " For a certainty the
Samara Gotama himself must at that time have been
King Wide-realm, or the Brahman who officiated for
him at that sacrifice. Does the venerable Gotama
admit that he who celebrates such a sacrifice, or causes
it to be celebrated, is reborn at the dissolution of the
body, after death, into some state of happiness in
heaven ? '

' Yes, O Brahman, that I admit. And at that time
I was the Brahman who, as chaplain, had that sacrifice
performed.'

22. ' Is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less
difficult and less troublesome, with more fruit and
more advantage still than this ? '

[144] ' Yes, O Brahman, there is.'
' And what, O Gotama, may that be ? '
' The perpetual gifts kept up in a family where they
are given specifically to virtuous recluses.

23. ' But what is the reason, O Gotama, and what
the cause, why such perpetual givings specifically to
virtuous recluses, and kept up in a family, are less
difficult and troublesome, of greater fruit and greater


1 82 V. K^FADANTA SUTTA.

advantage than that other sacrifice with its three
modes and its accessories of sixteen kinds ? '

' To the latter sort of sacrifice, O Brahman, neither
will the Arahats go, nor such as have entered on the
Arahat way. And why not ? Because at it beating
with sticks takes place, and seizing by the throat l.
But they will go to the former, where such things are
not. And therefore are such perpetual gifts above the
other sort of sacrifice.'

24. ' And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less
difficult and less troublesome, of greater fruit and of
greater advantage than either of these ? '

[145] ' Yes, O Brahman, there is.
1 And what, O Gotama, may that be ? '
' The putting up of a dwelling place (Vihara) on
behalf of the Order in all the four directions.'

25. ' And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice
less difficult and less troublesome, of greater fruit and
of greater advantage than each and all of these three? '

' Yes, O Brahman, there is.'

' And what, O Gotama, may that be ? '

' He who with trusting heart takes a Buddha as his
guide, and the Truth, and the Order — that is a sacrifice
better than open largesse, better than perpetual alms,
better than the gift of a dwelling place.'

[146] 26. ' And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice
less difficult and less troublesome, of greater fruit and
of greater advantage than all these four ? '

' When a man with trusting heart takes upon himself
the precepts — abstinence from destroying life ; absti-
nence from taking what has not been given ; abstinence
from evil conduct in respect of lusts ; abstinence from
lying words ; abstinence from strong, intoxicating,
maddening drinks, the root of carelessness — that is
a sacrifice better than open largesse, better than per-
petual alms, better than the gift of dwelling places,

better than accepting guidance.'

,

1 The attendants, at such a general largesse, says Buddhaghosa
(p. 303), push the recipients about, make them stand in a queue, and
use violence in doing so.


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. 183

27. 'And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less
difficult and less troublesome, of greater fruit and of
greater advantage than all these five ? '

' Yes, O Brahman, there is.'
[147] ' And what, O Gotama, may that be ? '
[The answer is the long passage from the
Sama^a-phala, jj 40, p. 62 (of the text), down to
§ 75 (p- 74) > on tne First 6V£ana, as follows : —

1. The Introductory paragraphs on the ap-
pearance of a Buddha, his preaching, the con-
version of a hearer, and his renunciation of
the world.

2. The Silas (minor morality).

3. The paragraph on Confidence.

4. The paragraph on 'Guarded is the door
of his senses.'

5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and self-
possessed.'

6. The paragraph on Content.

7. The paragraph on Solitude.

8. The paragraphs on the Five Hindrances.

9. The description of the First GAana..]

' This, O Brahman, is a sacrifice less difficult and
less troublesome, of greater fruit and greater advantage
than the previous sacrifices.'

[The same is then said of the Second, Third,
and Fourth 6^anas, in succession (as in the
Sama7Ha-phala, §§ 77-82), and of the Insight arising
from knowledge (ibid. §§ 83, 84), and further
(omitting direct mention either way of §§ 85-96
inclusive) of the knowledge of the destruction of
the Asavas, the deadly intoxications or floods
(ibid. §j 97-98).]

' And there is no sacrifice man can celebrate, O
Brahman, higher and sweeter than this.'

28. And when he had thus spoken, Ku/adanta the
Brahman said to the Blessed One :

' Most excellent, O Gotama, are the words of thy
mouth, most excellent ! Just as if a man were to set up


184 V. KtirADANTA SUTTA.

what has been thrown down, or were to reveal that
which has been hidden away, or were to point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to
bring a light into the darkness so that those who had
eyes could see external forms — just even so has the
truth been made known to me in many a figure by
the venerable Gotama. I, even I, betake myself to the
venerable Gotama as my guide, to the Doctrine and the
Order. May the venerable One accept me as a disciple,
as one who, from this day forth, as long as life endures,
has taken him as his guide. And I [148] myself, O
Gotama, will have the seven hundred bulls, and the
seven hundred steers, and the seven hundred heifers,
and the seven hundred goats, and the seven hundred
rams set free. To them I grant their life. Let them
eat green grass and drink fresh water, and may cool
breezes waft around them.'

29. Then the Blessed One discoursed to Ku/adanta
the Brahman in due order ; that is to say, he spake to
him of generosity, of right conduct, of heaven, of the
danger, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts, of the
advantages of renunciation. And when the Blessed
One became aware that Ku/adanta the Brahman had
become prepared, softened, unprejudiced, upraised, and
believing in heart, then did he proclaim the doctrine
the Buddhas alone have won ; that is to say, the
doctrine of sorrow, of its origin, of its cessation, and of
the Path. And just as a clean cloth, with all stains in
it washed away, will readily take the dye, just even so
did Ku/adanta the Brahman, even while seated there,
obtain the pure and spotless Eye for the Truth, and he
knew : ' Whatsoever has a beginning, in that is inherent
also the necessity of dissolution.'

30. And then the Brahman Ku/adanta, as one who
had seen the Truth, had mastered it, understood it,
dived deep down into it, who had passed beyond
doubt, and put away perplexity and gained full con-
fidence, who had become dependent on no other for his
knowledge of the teaching of the Master, addressed
the Blessed One and said :


THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT. 1 85

' May the venerable Gotama grant me the favour of
taking his to-morrow's meal with me, and also the
members of the Order with him.'

And the Blessed One signified, by silence, his con-
sent. Then the Brahman Ku/adanta, seeing that the
Blessed One had accepted, rose from his seat, and
keeping his right towards him as he passed, he departed
thence. And at daybreak he had sweet food, both hard
and soft, made ready at the pit prepared for his sacri-
fice, and had the time announced to the Blessed One :
' It is time, O Gotama ; and the meal is ready.' And
the Blessed One, who had dressed early in the morning,
put on his outer robe, and taking his bowl with him,
went with the brethren to Ku/adanta's sacrificial pit,
and sat down there on the seat prepared for him. And
Ku/adanta the Brahman [149] satisfied the brethren
with the Buddha at their head, with his own hand, with
sweet food, both hard and soft, till they refused any
more. And when the Blessed One had finished his
meal, and cleansed the bowl and his hands, Ku/adanta
the Brahman took a low seat and seated himself beside
him. And when he was thus seated the Blessed One
instructed and aroused and incited and gladdened
Kii/adanta the Brahman with religious discourse ; and
then arose from his seat and departed thence.


Ku/adanta Sutta is ended.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


mahAli sutta.

The form of this Sutta is remarkable. We have two
distinct subjects discussed. First the question of the ability
to see heavenly sights and hear heavenly sounds being raised,
the Buddha says that it is not for the sake of acquiring such
powers that people join the Order under him. And being
asked what their object then is, he gradually leads the
questioner on to Arahatship, as the aim, along the Eight-
fold Path. There the Sutta might appropriately have
ended. But the Buddha himself then raises a totally
different question — whether the soul and the body are the
same. And though, for the reason stated below, he gives no
answer, he leads the discourse again up to Arahatship along
the series of mental states set out in the Sama«#a-phala.

This second part of our Dialogue might form a separate
Sutta, and it is in fact added, as a Sutta by itself, to the
present division of the Dialogues. Why then is it also
included here? Buddhaghosa's answer is that the young
noble Mahali, who raises the first point, was known to
harbour the heresy that there is a soul, and that it has form.
(The words the commentator uses are very short, and the
context must, I think, be supplied from the passage translated
above, § 10 on p. 46.) It was to clear his mind of this notion
that the Buddha specially raised the second point.

However this may be, the Sutta must have been already
a double one, must have had its present form, before it
received a place in that division of the Buddhist scriptures
where it now stands. Each Sutta in that division incorporates
the whole of the very ancient tract called the Silas. The
division is therefore called the Sila Vagga. And no Sutta
not containing the Silas can belong to it. Our Sutta only
contains the Silas in the second part. That part, therefore,
must have belonged to it when the dialogues were arranged
as they now stand.

The question raised in that second part is one of a group
of questions on which primitive Buddhism expresses no


INTRODUCTION. 1 87


opinion. They are called the Ten A vyakatani, the Indeter-
minates, points not determined. Besides being often mentioned
in the Dialogues translated in the present work and elsewhere,
they form the subject of the Avyakata Sawzyutta (No. 44
in vol. iv of the Sawyutta Nikaya), and they are as
follows1 : —

1, 2. Whether the world is eternal or not.

3, 4. Whether the world is infinite or not.

5, 6. Whether the soul is the same as the body, or distinct
from it 2.

7-10. Whether a man who has attained to the truth
(a Tath&gata) exists, or not, and in any way, after
death.
There are others mentioned occasionally by themselves ;
but these form the usual group. Of them, those numbered
1-4 and 7-10 are speculations already condemned in the
Brahma-^ala (above, pp. 27 foil., pp. 35 foil., and p. 40
respectively). The remaining two, those numbered 5 and 6,
form the subject of the Galiya., incorporated in our present
Sutta.

The position taken by the primitive Buddhists as to these
Indeterminates is so often referred to that it undoubtedly was
an important item in the Buddha's actual belief. It is
rendered very clear by the old legend put into the Buddha's
mouth in the Udana just quoted. There the various non-
Buddhist teachers of the time are represented as expressing
strong opinions one way or the other on these questions ;
and as getting so excited about them that they came to
blows. Gotama thereupon tells a story how, in ancient days,
a similar riot having taken place, the king had all the blind
men in the city brought together, and had an elephant
brought in. Each of the blind men touches a different
part of the elephant. The king then asks them to explain
what an elephant is like. He who had felt the head said
it was like a water-pot. He who had felt the ear said it was
like a winnowing basket. He who had felt the tusk said
it was like a plough-share. He who had felt the trunk
said it was like a plough-handle. He who had felt the
body said it was like a granary. He who had felt its legs
said it was like a pillar. He who had felt its back said it

1 Po///fopada Sutta (translated below). Sawyutta IV, 393 ; Udana
VI, 4 ; M. I, 484. &c.

2 Tarn givam tarn sartraw. Childers {sub voce \>anho) renders
this : ' Is this the life ? is this the body ? ' but that must be wrong
See Sum. I, 319.


1 88 vi. mahAli sutta.

was like a mortar. He who had felt its tail said it was
like a pestle. He who had felt its bristles said it was like
a broom. And each one was so sure he was right that
they clamoured one against the other, and came to blows,
to the amusement of the king. Then comes the moral : —

' In such points Brahmans and recluses stick
.Wrangling on them, they violently discuss —
Poor folk ! they see but one side of the shield I '

The inference is obvious. To discuss such questions is
mere speculation, useless, because it is based on insufficient
evidence. This is the philosophic position ; and it resembles
very closely the position taken up, in the West, many centuries
afterwards, by Hume and his followers. And, as usual in
primitive Buddhism, the ethical corollary is very emphatically
insisted upon. It is several times pointed out in the Dialogues1
of these ten speculations that they —

' The jungle, the desert, the puppet show, the writhing, the
entanglement, of speculation — are accompanied by sorrow,
by wrangling, by resentment, by the fever of excitement ;
they conduce neither to detachment of heart, nor to freedom
from lusts, nor to tranquillity, nor to peace, nor to wisdom,
nor to the insight of the higher stages of the Path, nor
to Arahatship.'

In other words the speculations, being based on insufficient
evidence, are not only useless — they are also, therefore, wrong ;
that is, from the Buddhist point of view, a disadvantage in
the struggle towards the only aim worth striving for — the
perfection and emancipation of Arahatship.

As for the special point of our Sutta — the lesson that
no wise min will condescend to discuss the question whether
the soul is, or is not, the same as the body — it must be
remembered that the negative is the view now known to
be so widely, indeed universally prevalent among unthinking
people throughout the world that it was almost certainly held
also in India. The general opinion about the soul in the
pre-Buddhistic Upanishads is somewhat different. There (to
judge by the passages set out in my article in the J. R. A. S.
for January 1H99) it is looked upon as being, at least
during life, smaller than the body, though after death, when
it flies away from the body through an aperture in the top of
the head, it was apparently regarded as a subtle and very
impalpable, but still material, double of the body of the
deceased.

It was the refusal to allow any place for this universal

1 For instance, M. I, 455.


INTRODUCTION. 1 89


belief in a semi-material soul in his own system that is
the most striking, and perhaps the most original, feature
in Gotama's teaching. No other religion of which we have
sufficient records to enable us to form an opinion on the point
has been constructed without the ' soul.' Where the others
said ' soul,' Gotama said usually ' Action,' which comes to
much the same as character.

In this respect he came very near to our modern use of
the word in such expressions as ' a high-souled man ' or
' a soul for music' And it is worth calling attention to the
fact that even in Shakspere more than half the times the
word is used it is in this secondary, ethical, emotional sense.
Even in the old authorised translation of our Bible, in which
the Word occurs altogether 449 times, it is used 55 times
merely in the sense of person *, only 85 times in the animistic
sense, and 306 times in the sense of emotional or intellectual
qualities or disposition 2.

This will make Gotama's position, which is really very
simple, more clear. He rejected entirely the use of the
word in the old animistic sense. He retained it in a personal
sense, in the meaning of ' oneself, himself,' &c. 3 And though,
of course, he acknowledged the reality of the emotional and
intellectual dispositions, he refused absolutely to look upon
them as a unity.

The position is so absolute, so often insisted on, so funda-
mental to the right understanding of primitive Buddhism,
that it is essential there should be no mistake about it. Yet
the position is also so original, so fundamentally opposed
to what is usually understood as religious belief, both in
India and elsewhere, that there is great temptation to attempt
to find a loophole through which at least a covert or esoteric
belief in the soul, and in future life (that is of course of
a soul), can be recognised, in some sort of way, as part
of so widely accepted a religious system. There is no
loophole, and the efforts to find one have always met
with unswerving opposition, both in the Pi/akas themselves
and in extra-canonical works4.

1 'We were in the ship two hundred and seventy-six souls,' Actsxxvii. 37.

2 There are about a score of ambiguous passages ; but a different
decision as to them would not change the proportion to any sub-
stantial extent.

3 Attano, attana, &c, in all the oblique cases. But for the
nominative atta, the use of which might have been misunderstood,
say aw is almost always, if not indeed always, substituted.

4 See the quotations in my 'American Lectures' (London, 1896),
pp. 39-42, and the notes above, pp. 81, 87.


190 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

Our available records are not at present sufficient to enable
us to judge either of the numbers, or of the importance, of
those Buddhists who made such attempts. But it is clear
from the tone of the first chapter of the Katha Vatthu,
and from the express statements of the commentary on it,
that there were such Buddhists as early as the time of Asoka.
They belonged to two out of the eighteen schools of thought
which had then arisen. The names of these schools are the
Sammitiya and the Va^i-puttaka1. We may yet hope
to recover a work which will contain their arguments in their
own words. But if the opinion condemned at pp. 14-19
of the Katha Vatthu be really theirs, as the commentator
declares it is, then it would seem that they held a view
practically the same as that opinion of Mahali, which the
Buddha, in our Sutta, goes out of his way to raise in the form
of a question, and to put aside as unworthy of discussion.


The expression sambodhi-parayano used in this Sutta,
§ 13, has been hitherto misunderstood.

The Buddhist ideal is a subjective state to be reached, in
this world, by going along an eightfold path, so called because
of the eight good qualities or characteristics which make up
its eight parts. Progress along this path is divided into tour
stages in which certain evil dispositions, the ten so-called
Bonds, are got rid of. The Sambodhi is the insight,
wisdom, intelligence, awakening, which is essential to the
three higher stages of this state of Arahatship. And what
is connoted by the term can best, perhaps, be understood
by bearing in mind its seven constituent parts, the Sam-
bogg/ianga — self-possession, investigation into the truth,
energy, calm, joy, concentration, and magnanimity.

In describing the first and lowest of the four stages of the
Path, it is always stated (Digha I, 156 ; M. P. S. II, 27 ;
A. II, 238, &c.) of the disciple — not that he has then
attained the sambodhi, he has only attained abhisamaya —
but that he is sambodhi-parayano. Childers (sub voce
parayano) explains this as 'having the Four Truths as his
support.' But Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 313) says: 'He has
the sambodhi — by which is meant that of the three higher
stages — as his furthermost aim ; in other words, he will attain
to that."

Buddhaghosa's explanation is the only one possible in

1 Katha-vatthu-ppakararca-a/MakatM, p. 8 (in the Journal of the
Pali Text Society for 1889).


INTRODUCTION. 1 9 I


the context, and is confirmed by every other passage in the
Pali Pi/akas where the word sambodhi has been traced. It
never means the wisdom of a Buddha, but always the insight
of the higher stages of the path to Arahatship. But it is
necessary to point this out because the distinction is of
the first importance for the history of Buddhism ; and also
because the erroneous rendering of Burnouf has been
followed by Childers in the Dictionary, sub voce sambodhi
('attainment of Buddhaship, Buddhahood'), and has not
been corrected by any of the distinguished scholars who
have discussed the meaning of Asoka's eighth edict in
which the word occurs \ The king there says that he ' set
out for the sambodhi.' If this means that he had started,
in his own opinion, along the line of the Paramitas, towards
the attainment, in some future birth, of Buddhahood, then
it is most interesting and important as giving us the earliest
mention of a doctrine not found in the Pali Pi/akas, and
entirely opposed to their view of Buddhism. But the
word does not necessarily imply this, nor does the context
require it. The doctrine spoken of with contempt, by the
Mahayanist doctors, as the ' Lesser Vehicle ' is quite possible
here, and more in accordance with all the rest of the Asoka
expressions. There would seem to be no sufficient reason
why we should not understand Asoka to mean that he had
started, in his own opinion, along the Eightfold Path, towards
the attainment, doubtless in some future birth, of Arahatship.
Whether this be so or not, this is the only meaning of the
word so far found in the Pi/akas.

And further, this entering on the Path — the Eightfold
Path to the wisdom of the Arahat — is a quite different
thing from becoming a Buddhist. There are numerous
passages where the very nature of the discourse held not
only to laymen (upasakas), but even to members of the
Order (bhikkhus), shows that they were not supposed to
have attained as yet to the state of mind described as
'entering upon the Path.' Both the rules of the Order,
and the precepts laid down for laymen, are, from the Pi/aka
point of view, on a different plane altogether, lower than,
apart from, that of the Path. Acting up to those rules,
carrying out those precepts, can never even result in ' conver-
sion ' without the awakening of the new life. It is therefore
very doubtful whether the word ' conversion ' should be used,
in English translations of Buddhist texts, to express a man's


1 See Senart, ' Inscriptions de Piyadasi,' I, 186, and the other
authorities referred to at I, 182 and II, 223.


I92# VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

becoming an upasaka or a bhikkhu. For though the word
' conversion ' is used in English in two senses — either that
of joining the outward organisation of a new faith, or that of
having one's eyes opened to the higher life — the second is
the more accurate use of the word, and ought always to
be implied in the first.

The word sambodhi-parayano occurs in the passage
first above quoted (Digha I, 156) in the answer to the
question, ' What is the aim of the life of the recluse (that
is, of the member of the Buddhist Order) ? ' Opponents and
controversialists are fond of asking this question, and it is
interesting to notice how it is answered. It is never the
attainment of Buddhahood, but always (though the phrase-
ology differs) the attainment of Arahatship. Thus, in the
standing phrase used to state that so and so has become
an Arahat (M. P. S., p. 60, at the end of Chapter V, and often
elsewhere), it is said he has realised the aim of the higher
life (brahma/£ariya-pariyosana?#). The Ratha-vinita and
the Kulla. Sakuludayi Dialogues (Nos. 24 and 79 of the
Ma^/zima Collection) lead up to the same conclusion. In
the Sawyutta IV, 51, the aim is said to be the complete
understanding of sorrow (dukkhassa pari««a), and the
same reply is expanded further on in the same book (IV, 233)
by the explanation that the way of gaining this under-
standing is to follow out the whole of the Eightfold Path
to Arahatship. And this is repeated further on (S. V, 6 :
compare Mil. 49, ioi). In the Anguttara (IV, 7) the object
is said to be the destruction of the seven bonds, the destruc-
tion of which is precisely Arahatship.

So sambodhi-patto is used in the Sutta Nipata, 478, 503,
to describe the Arahat, of whom it is said (Itivuttaka, No 47,
p. 42 : compare ibid. p. 117 = A. II, 14, and also A. II, 200,
202 ; S. N. 765) that even here, in this world, he will reach
up to the sambodhi, the way to which is said to be the
Eightfold Path (M. I, 431 and the Dhamma-£akka-ppavattana
Sutta, &c). And sambodhi-parayano, with which we
started, is only another way of stating what is expressed by
amata-parayano ('having the ambrosia of Arahatship as
his aim ') in a Sutta, not yet traced, but quoted by Moggalli-
putta Tissa at Katha Vatthu XXII, 7 l.

Of course the above is not intended to imply that the
Buddha had not attained the sambodhi. He was an Arahat,
and, as such, had all the graces an Arahat should have 2.

1 Compare brahma-parayano at Mil. 234, brahma^ariya-
parayano at A. Ill, 75, and daw</a-parayano at M. I, 88.

2 Childers thinks sambodho is merely another form of sambodhi.


INTRODUCTION. 1 9;


On the same page of this Sutta we have two instances of
a curious manner of address not infrequent in the Pi/akas,
but as yet very imperfectly understood. After being told
that Nagita was the name of the Buddha's personal attendant,
we find him suddenly, and without any explanation, addressed
as Kassapa. And the young Li££//avi. introduced to us at the
beginning of the Sutta by the name 'Hare-lip ' (0#//addha),
is addressed both by Nagita and by the Buddha, neither by
his name 0///^addha, nor as Likfchavi, but (and again without
any explanation) as Mahali.

There are several points in this question of address which
cannot yet be solved, but several others are already pretty
clear. There are at least eight different modes of speaking
of or to a person : —

i. A nickname arising out of some personal peculiarity. Such
are Lambaka««a (Hanging-eared), Ku/adanta (witha pro-
truding tooth), O/Maddha (Hare-lipped), Anathapiwrf'ika
(the beggars' friend), Darupattika (the man with the wooden
bowl). All these are used in a quite friendly, but familiar way.
And such names occur so often that it would seem as if
nearly everybody was known by a nickname.

2. A personal name, called in Pali the mula-nama. This,
like our own so-called Christian names, is not connected with
any personal peculiarity. Some of these names (like similar
ones among ourselves) are of very obscure derivation, but
others are clear enough as adjectives with a good or lucky
meaning. Such are Tissa (after the lucky star of that name),
Devadatta (onr Theodore), Bhaddiya (nearly the same as
our Frederick), Nanda or Ananda (Joy), Abhaya (Fear-
less), and many others.

3. The name of the Gotta or gens, what we should call
a surname or family name. These are usually patronymic in
form; such as Opama««a, Kawhayana, Moggallana,
Kassapa, Kaw^arayana, Kondawwa, Vase/Ma, Vessa-
yana, Bharadva^-a, Va££/*ayana.

4. The name of the clan, called in Pali Kula-nama, such
as Sakka, Kalama, Buli, Koliya, LiM^avi, Vaggi,
Malla, &c.

5. The name of the mother, with putta (son) added to it;
such as Sari-putta (the more usual name by which the
famous disciple Upatissa is called), Vedehi -putta (a name
of A^atasattu king of Magadlja), Maw^ika-putta (=Upaka),

As the former is only found as yet in one ambiguous phrase (M. I, 17;
II, 211; S. IV, 6, 8, 97, 233, &c), the discussion of its meaning
would be premature.

II. O


194 VL MAHALI SUTTA.


Mantawi-putta ( = Pu«/za), Godhi-putta ( = Devadatta),
Moggali-putta ( = Tissa, author of the Katha Vatthu).
Less frequently the reverse is the case, and a mother or father,
whose child has become famous, is simply referred to as the
mother, or father, of so and so.

It is noteworthy that the name of the father is never used
in this way, and that the mother's name is never a personal
name ; but always taken either from the clan, or from the
family, to which she belonged. Occasionally the root-form of
the name of the clan, or of the trade, has -putto added to it
in a similar way (Vanganta-putto, Todeyya-putto1, rathakara-
putto). But these cases, which are rare, should rather be
classified under the next division.

6. The name of the position in society, or the occupation, of
the person addressed. Such are brahmawa, gahapati,
mahara^a, thapati, &c.

7. A mere general term of courtesy or respect, not contain-
ing any special application to the person addressed — such as
bhante, ivuso, ayye, &c.

8. Lastly there is the local name, never used in addressing
a person, but prefixed or added to the mula or gotta name,
in narrative sentences, to distinguish between two or more
people of the same name. Thus of the eighteen different
Kassapas mentioned in the books, three are distinguished, in
narrative, as Uruvela-Nadi- and Gaya-Kassapa respectively ;
of the eight different Pittas one is distinguished as Ma^Mi-
kasandika ; of the seventeen different Bharadva^as one is
distinguished as Kapa//zika. Other instances are probably
Hatthako A/avako, Bahiyo Daru£iriyo, Pokkharasadi Subha-
gavaniko, &c.

On the rules regulating the choice as to which one of
these various sorts of names should, under the circumstances,
be used in any particular case, the following observations may
be made.

It is not considered courteous among equals, except in the
case of close familiarity, to use either of the two sorts of
personal names, that is, either the nickname or the m Ma-
nama.

The Buddha addresses Brahmansas Brahma;; a (for instance
So«ada«^a and Ku/adanta above in the Suttas so called;
£a«usso?n at M. I, 16, 178 ; A. I, 56, 159, 166 ; II, 173 ; IV,
54; Saw^aya at M. II, 127, 132, though his gotta name is


1 Todeyya-putto may be rendered «;'her ' son of the man of Tudi '
or ' of the sons of the dwellers in Tudi ' (a well-known village), or
lastly ' of the Todeyya clan,' ' the Todeyyan.'


INTRODUCTION. 1 95


given, Akasa-gotta; Sikha at A. II, 232, though his gotta
name is given, Moggallana). But we have had one instance
above where he addresses a young Brahman as Amba//^a,
apparently a clan name (his gotta was Kawhayawa). This
solitary exception may be because of his youth.

On the other hand the Buddha usually addresses ascetics,
not as paribb&^aka, but by their gotta name. Thus at
M. I, 228-250 he calls Sa££ako, the Nigant/ia., by his gotta
name Aggi-vessayana. At M. I, 497-500 he calls Digha-
nakho (so called, no doubt, because he kept his nails long) by
his gotta name, which is again Aggi-vessayana. And at
M. II, 40 he calls Vekha«aso by his gotta name of Ka££ana.
This is only in accord with the usage followed by others
besides the Buddha. Thus Gawusso/zi, a Brahman, at M. I,
175, addresses the ascetic Pilotika by his gotta name of
Va^Mayana, and Assa^i, a member of the Buddhist order,
also calls Sakkako by his gotta name {loc. cit.). and every-
body, not a Buddhist, addresses the Buddha by his gotta
name, as Gotama. When therefore we find other ascetics
addressed by the Buddha by the same name as has been used
in the introductory narrative (as, for instance, in the case of
Sarabha, A. I, 186; Potaliya, A. II, 100; Po///;apada, D. I, 178
foil.), one may conclude that these also are probably gotta
names. This custom of addressing people by their gotta
name, no doubt a common one in certain cases, was expressly
forbidden to Wxgantkas (Jacobi, ' Caina-Sdtras,' II, 305).
They called their own Order a gotra (ibid. 321, 327), and
apparently thought it worldly to recognise the existence of
any other.

The Buddha addresses members of his own clan, whether
members of his Order or not, by their personal names (so of
Vappa, A. II, 197 ; of Mahanama, M. I, 91, 354; A. I, 220 ;
III, 284). The same holds good of the junior members of
the Order, but some at least of the more distinguished among
them are always addressed by him either by their gotta, or
by their mother's, name (compare Moggallana, Ka££ana,
Kassapa, Gotami, Sariputta). Nagita, for instance, though
he is addressed as Kassapa by his nephew, the novice Siha, is
addressed by the Buddha simply as Nagita.

Probably every Brahman, and every member of each of the
free clans, had a gotta name. We have no certain instance
of such a name in any other case. The gotta names used in
the clans are the same as those given in Brahman books to
Brahmans. It has been concluded that they are Brahman
names, and that the clans must have adopted them from the
Brahmans, each family or gens taking the gotta name of

O 2


196 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

their private chaplain, their purohita priest. But in that
case we should surely expect to find some evidence that such
priests were usually maintained in such clans. There is no
evidence of the kind. All that we can fairly conclude is that
the clans claimed, by the very use of these names, to be
descended from the same ancestors as the Brahmans, who
also bore the names ; and that the claim was admitted to be
well founded. As shown above, even Brahmans use these
gotta names of non-Brahmans. It would seem that the nick-
name, when once generally known, tended, in speaking of
a person, to drive the others out of use. But it is never used
in speaking to the person referred to by it.

From the usage referred to, as followed by the Buddha and
others, it would seem that the gotta name was considered as
more honourable than either of the personal names, and also
than the descriptive general name or title of paribba^aka
(wandering mendicant, recluse). Even the title Brahma;/a
was dropped for the gotta name in the case of a recluse.

There are a number of problems, both as to general prin-
ciples and as to details, that still remain, in this matter of
names, unsolved. Is A/ara, for instance, a nickname or
a mula-nama; is Kalamo a gotta name or a clan name1?
To what classes of the people was the use of gotta names
limited, and what is the historical explanation of this limita-
tion ? Were there as many as a dozen clan names in Magadha
and Kosala combined? What was exactly implied by the
clan-name, the Kula-nama? The word gotta probably
had the same meaning, when the Pi/akas were composed, as
gotra has in the later law books written by the priests. How
comes it then that the number of gottas referred to is so
very small ? Are there much more than a score altogether ?
What light does the meaning of the mula and gotta names
throw on the religious conceptions and social customs of the
people ?

I hope to return to these and similar questions when I can
find time to publish my Pali Onomasticon, of the names in
the Pi/akas and in the older inscriptions. What has here
been said is probably sufficient to make the use of the names
in this Sutta clear 2.

1 See my note at ' Buddhist Suttas,' p. 75, and compare contra
A. I, 188, 278.

2 Evaw-namo evawz-gotto at M. II, 33 ; S. Ill, 25 ; D. I, 242
is followed at D. I, 13 by eva/«-va«»o; but evidence of any effect of
social distinctions on names is at present very slight.


VI. MAHALI SUTTA.
[The Aim of the Brethren.]

[150] i. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One
was once staying at Vesali at the Gabled Hall in the
Great Wood \ Now at that time a number of Brah-
mans, who had been sent on pressing business of one
kind or another from Kosala and Magadha, were
lodging at Vesali.

And they heard the news : ' They say that the
Sarnawa Gotama of the Sakya clan, who went out from
a Sakya family to adopt the religious life, is now stay-
ing at Vesali at the Gabled Hall in the Great Wood.
Now regarding that venerable Gotama, such is the
high reputation that has been noised abroad : " That
Blessed One is an Arahat, a fully awakened one,
abounding in wisdom and goodness, happy, who knows
all worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing
to be led, a teacher for gods and men, a Blessed One,
a Buddha. He, by himself, thoroughly knows and
sees, as it were, face to face this universe, — including
the worlds above of the gods, the Brahmas, and the
Maras, and the world below with its recluses and Brah-
mans, its princes and peoples, — and having known it,
he makes his knowledge known to others. The truth,
lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely in its

1 The Great Wood stretched from Vesali northwards to ,the
Himalaya range. In it they had laid out a pleasaunce for the Order,
and made there a storied house, with a hall below surrounded by
pillars only, and facing the west, and above it the gabled apartments
in which the Buddha so often stayed.


198 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

consummation, doth he proclaim, both in the spirit and
in the letter, the higher life doth he make known, in
all its fullness and in all its purity. And good is it to
pay visits to Arahats like that." '

2. So those Brahmans from Kosala and Magadha
went out to the Great Wood, and to the Gabled Hall.
Now at that time the venerable Nagita was acting as
the personal attendant on the Blessed One. And they
went to him, and said : ' Where is it, Nagita, that that
venerable Gotama is lodging now, for we wish to see
him.'

[l5l] ' It is not a fitting time, Sirs, to call upon the
Blessed One. He has retired into solitude.'

Then they sat down round about, saying, ' We will
not go away without seeing the venerable Gotama.'

3. And Hare-lip the Li^^avi, too, came to the
Great Wood, and to the Gabled Hall, with a retinue of
his clan ; and going up to the venerable Nagita, he
saluted him, and reverently standing apart, he said to
him : ' Where, venerable Nagita, is the Blessed One
now lodging, the Arahat, the Buddha ; for we wish to
see him ? ' And on receiving a similar reply he, too, sat
down apart, saying : ' I will not go till I have seen the
August One, the Arahat, the Buddha.'

4. But Siha, a novice1, came up to the venerable
Nagita, and saluted him, and standing reverently
apart, he said to him : ' These envoys of the Brahmans
from Kosala and Magadha, many of them, have come,
O Kassapa 2, to call upon the Blessed One ; and Hare-
lip the Li/£/&£avi, too, with a retinue of his clan, has
come to do the same. 'Twere best, O Kassapa, that all
this folk should be allowed to see the Blessed One.'

1 He was the son of Nagita' s sister. He had joined the Order as
a novice when only seven years old, and shown so much intelligence
as a learner that he was a favourite with all, even with the Buddha
himself. He must therefore be different from the other Siha, also
a Li&Wavi, who is the hero of the story told at Vin. I, 233-238 = A. IV,
179-188, as the latter is not a member of the Order at all.
Professor Edward MUller (J. P. T. S., 1888, p. 97) confounds
the two.

2 This is the gotta, the gens, to which Nagita belonged.


THE AIM OF THE BRETHREN. 1 99

'Very well, then, Siha. Tell the Blessed One
yourself.'

' Very good, Sir,' said Siha the novice in assent to
the venerable Nagita. And he went where the Blessed
One was, and saluted him, and standing reverently
apart, he said to him even as he had said to Nagita.

[152] ' Very well, Siha. Spread out a mat for me in
the shade in front of the house.'

5. And Siha did so. And the Blessed One came out
from the house, and sat down. And the Brahmans
from Kosala and Magadha exchanged with him the
greetings and compliments of politeness and courtesy
and took their seats on one side. And Hare-lip the
Li/£>£/zavi also, with the retinue of his clan, bowed
down to the Blessed One, and seated himself on one
side. And when he was thus seated he addressed the
Blessed One, and said :

1 Some few days ago, Sir, Sunakkhatta of the
LL£/£>£avis l came to me, and said: "It is only three
years, Mahali 2, since I first came under the Blessed
One, and I can see heavenly forms, pleasant to behold,
fitted to satisfy all one's desires, exciting longing in
one's heart. But I cannot hear heavenly sounds like
that." Now, Sir, are there such heavenly sounds, which
he could not hear, or have they no existence ? '

' They are real, those heavenly sounds, pleasant,
fitted to satisfy one's desires, exciting longing in one's
heart, which he could not hear. They are not things
of nought.'

1 This young man became the Buddha's personal attendant; but
afterwards, when the Buddha was in extreme old age (M. I, 82), he
went over to the creed of Kora the Kshatriya, and left the Buddhist
Order. Kora's doctrine was the efficacy of asceticism, of rigid self-
mortification. And it was to show how wrong this doctrine, as put
forth by Sunakkhatta, was, that the Buddha told the story (Gat. I, 398)
of the uselessness of the efforts he himself had made when

1 Now scorched, now frozen, lone in fearsome woods,
Naked, without a fire, afire within,
He, as a hermit, sought the crown of faith.'
But we do not hear that Sunakkhatta ever came back to the fold.

2 This is again the name of the gotta, the gens. Buddhaghosa
(p. 316) calls him a ra^a.


200 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

6. ' But what then is the proximate, and what the
ultimate cause, why he could not hear them, they
being thus real and not things of nought ? '

[153] 7. ' Suppose a recluse, Mahali, to have prac-
tised one-sided concentration of mind with the object of
seeing such heavenly forms in any one direction, — in the
East, or the South, or the West, or the North, or above,
or below, or across, — and not with the object of hearing
such heavenly sounds. Then since he has practised
one-sided concentration, with the one object only in
view, he only sees the sights, he hears not the sounds.
And why not ? Because of the nature of his self-
concentration [s a mid hi].

[154] 8, 9. 'And so also, Mahali, if he have practised
one-sided concentration with the object of hearing, in
any one direction, the heavenly sounds. Then, and
for the same reason, he hears the sounds, but he sees
not the sights.

[165] 10, 11. ' But suppose, Mahali, he has practised
self-concentration with the double object in view of
seeing and hearing, in any one direction, those
heavenly sights and those heavenly sounds. Then
since he has practised self-concentration with the
double object in view, he both sees the sights and
hears the sounds. And why so ? Because of the
nature of his self-concentration.'

1 2. ' Then, Sir, is it for the sake of attaining to the
practice of such self-concentration that the brethren
lead the religious life under the Blessed One ? '

' No, Mahali. There are things, higher and sweeter
than that, for the sake of which they do so.'

[156] 13. 'And what, Sir, may those other things be ? '

1 In the first place, Mahali, a brother by the complete
destruction of the Three Bonds (the Delusions of self,
Doubt, and Trust in the efficacy of good works and
ceremonies) * becomes a converted man, one who can-
not be reborn in any state of woe, and is assured of


1 See my 'American Lectures' (London, 1896, pp. 142-149) for
the full meaning of these three, and of the following Bonds.


THE AIM OF THE BRETHREN. 201

attaining to the Insight (of the stages higher still)1.
That, Mahali, is a condition, higher and sweeter, for
the sake of which the brethren lead the religious life
under me.

'And then further, Mahali, a brother by the complete
destruction of those Three Bonds, and by reducing to
a minimum lust, illwill, and dullness, becomes a Once-
returner, one who on his first return to this world shall
make an end of pain. That, Mahali, is a condition
higher still and sweeter, for the sake of which the
brethren lead the religious life under me.

' And then further, Mahali, a brother by the complete
destruction of the Five Bonds that bind people to this
world 2 becomes an inheritor of the highest heavens 3,
there to pass away, thence never to return 4. That,
Mahali, is a condition higher still and sweeter, for the
sake of which the brethren lead the religious life
under me.

' And then further, Mahali, when a brother by the
destruction of the Deadly Floods (or Intoxications —
Lusts, Becomings, Delusion, and Ignorance) has, by
himself, known and realised and continues to abide
here, in this visible world, in that emancipation of
mind, that emancipation of heart, which is Arahatship
— that, Mahali, is a condition higher still and sweeter
still, for the sake of which the brethren lead the
religious life under me.

' Such, Mahali, are the conditions higher and sweeter

1 Sambodhi-parayano. So Buddhaghosa on this (p. 313) and
my Introduction to this Sutta.

2 The above three, and Sensuality and Illwill.

3 Opapatiko, literally 'accidental'; but the use of such a word
would only mislead the reader, the real connotation of the word being
that of the words I have chosen. Those who gain the highest
heavens are so called because there is no birth there in the ordinary
way. Each being, who is there, has appeared there suddenly,
accidentally as it were, without generation, conception, gestation or
any of the other means attending the birth of beings in the world.

4 It is impossible to ignore a reference here to the view expressed
in the Br/had Arawyaka Upanishad (VI, 2, 15). ' There do they dwell
far away, beyond, in the Brahma-worlds. And for them there is no
return.'


202 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.

(than seeing heavenly sights and hearing heavenly
sounds), for the sake of which the brethren lead the
religious life under me.'

14. ' But is there, Sir, a path, is there a method, for
the realisation of these conditions ? '

'Yes, Mahali, there is.'

[157] 'And what, Sir, may be that path, what that
method ? '

' Verily it is this Noble Eightfold Path, that is to
say : Right views, right aspirations, right speech, right
action, a right means of livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right ecstasy in self-concentration l.
This, Mahali, is the path, and this the method, for
the realisation of these conditions.

1 5. ' One day, Mahali, I was staying at Kosambl, in
the Ghosita pleasaunce. There two recluses, Maw^issa
the wandering mendicant, and Saliva the pupil of
Darupattika (the man with the wooden bowl), came to
me, and exchanged with me the greetings and compli-
ments of politeness and courtesy, and stood reverently
apart. And so standing they said to me :

'How is it then, O venerable Gotama, is the soul
the same thing as the body ? Or is the soul one thing
and the body another ? '

' Listen then, Sirs, and give heed attentively, and I
will speak.'

'Very good, Sir,' said those two mendicants in
assent, and I spake as follows : —

{Here follows the whole of the exposition given in the

Sdmahna-phala Sutta, §§ 40-75. that is *? saJ' :

1 . The appearance of a Buddha and his preaching.

2. The awakening of a hearer, and his entry into the
Order.

3. His self training in act, word, and speech.

4. The minor details of morality which he observes.

5. The absence of fear, confidence of heart thence
resulting.


1 See my 'American Lectures/ pp. 1 36-141; and Sum. I,
3M-3l6-


THE AIM OF THE BRETHREN 203

6. The way in which he learns to guard the door of
his senses.

7. The constant self-possession he thus gains.

8. The power of being content with little, with sim-
plicity of life.

9. The emancipation of heart from the five hindrances
— covetousness, illwill, sloth of body and mind, excite-
ment and worry, and perplexity.

10. The resulting joy and peace that he gainst]

16. 'Then estranged from lusts, aloof from evil states,
he enters into and remains in the First Rapture — a
state of joy and ease, born of detachment, reasoning
and investigation going on the while. Now, Sirs, when
a Bhikshu knows thus and sees thus, would that make
him ready to take up the subject : "Is the soul the
same thing as the body, or is the soul one thing and
the body another ? " '

' Yes, it would, Sir 1.'

'But I, Sirs, know thus and see thus. And never-
theless I do not say either the one or the other.'

[158] 17, 18. [The cases are then put of a Bhikshu who
has acquired the second, third, and fourth Raptures
(D. II, 77-81) and the knowledge arising from insight
(A^awa-dassana ; D. II, 83, 84) ; and the same question,
reply, and rejoinder are given in each case.]

19. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. above, p. 85), he
directs and bends down his mind to the knowledge of
the destruction of the Deadly Floods. He knows
as it really is : " This is pain." He knows as it really
is : " This is the origin of pain." He knows as it
really is : " This is the cessation of pain." He knows
as it really is : " This is the Path that leads to the
cessation of pain." He knows as they really are :
"These are the Deadly Floods." He knows as it really
is: "This is the origin of the Deadly Floods." He
knows as it really is: "This is the cessation of the
Deadly Floods." He knows as it really is: "This is the


1 The Siamese edition reads : ' No, it would not, Sir.' On the
idiom kalla/» etazrc va^anaya compare A. I, 144; M. II, 211.


204 VI. MAHALI SUTTA.


Path that leads to the cessation of the Deadly Floods."
To him, thus knowing, thus seeing, the heart is set free
from the Deadly Taint of Lusts, is set free from the
Deadly Taint of Becomings, is set free from the Deadly
Taint of Ignorance. In him, thus set free, there arises
the knowledge of his emancipation, and he knows :
" Rebirth has been destroyed. The higher life has been
fulfilled. What had to be done has been accomplished.
After this present life there will be no beyond ! "

' When a Bhikshu, Sirs, knows thus and sees thus,
would that make him ready to take up the question :
" Is the soul the same as the body, or is the soul one
thing and the body another ? " '

1 No, Sir, it would not 1.'

'And I, Sirs, know thus and see thus. And never-
theless I do not say either the one or the other.'

Thus spake the Blessed One ; and Hare-lip the
Li^^avi, pleased at heart, exalted the word of the
Blessed One.


Here ends the Mahali Sutta.


1 So three Sinhalese and two Burmese MSS. and the Siamese
edition. Two Sinhalese MSS. read: 'Yes, Sir, it would.' But
Buddhaghosa had clearly, both here and above, § 16, the reading we
have followed. And he gives a characteristic explanation — that whereas
the Arahat (in § 19) would have too much wisdom to be led astray,
following the false trail of the soul theory, the Bhikshu who had only
reached up to the Guanas might, being still a puthu^ana, an
unconverted man, have leanings that way.

To hold that the soul is the same as the body is the heresy referred
to in the Brahma-^ala (above, p. 46). See also the Introduction to the
Ku/adanta (above, p. 167).


VII. £ALIYA sutta.

[Is the Soul distinct from the Body ?]

[ This Sutta having been incorporated, word for word,
as §§ 15-19, inclusive, in the last Sutta, the reader is
referred to the translation given there.

The Mahali Sutta must have already included, when
the Dlgha was put together, this (^aliya episode. For
there would otherwise be no reason for the Mahali
Sutta being put into the Silakkhanda Vagga, the Silas
being contained only in that episode.

Why then should the episode appear also again, in
full, as a separate Sutta? Is it merely because of the
importance of the question ? We have another instance
of a similar kind, where the episode of Nigrodha's ques-
tion, only referred to at § 23 of the Kassapa-Sihanada
Sutta, is set out afterwards, in full, in the Udumbarlka
Sihanada Sutta (No. 25 in the Dlgha). But there the
whole episode is not given twice in full. Such cross-
references are fairly frequent in the Pi/akas, and are of
importance for the history of the literature. One of the
most striking cases is where the Sawyutta quotes a
Sutta, now contained in the Dlgha, by name. (Sakka-
p3.ilha. Sutta, S. II 1, 13; compare Sum. 1,51; Mil. 350.)]


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

kassapa-sihanAda sutta.

In this Sutta the Buddha, in conversation with a naked
ascetic, explains his position as regards asceticism — so far,
that is, as is compatible with his invariable method (as
represented in the Dialogues) when discussing a point on
which he differs from his interlocutor.

When speaking on sacrifice to a sacrificial priest, on union
with God to an adherent of the current theology, on Brahman
claims to superior social rank to a proud Brahman, on mystic
insight to a man who trusts in it, on the soul to one who
believes in the soul theory, the method followed is always
the same. Gotama puts himself as far as possible in the
mental position of the questioner. He attacks none of his
cherished convictions. He accepts as the starting-point of
his own exposition the desirability of the act or condition
prized by his opponent — of the union with God (as in the
Tevi^a), or of sacrifice (as in the Kutadanta), or of social
rank (as in the Amba///za), or of seeing heavenly sights, &c.
(as in the Mahali), or of the soul theory (as in the Po/^apada).
He even adopts the very phraseology of his questioner. And
then, partly by putting a new and (from the Buddhist point
of view) a higher meaning into the words ; partly by an
appeal to such ethical conceptions as are common ground
between them ; he gradually leads his opponent up to his
conclusion. This is, of course, always Arahatship — that is the
sweetest fruit of the life of a recluse, that is the best sacrifice,
that the highest social rank, that the best means of seeing
heavenly sights, and a more worthy object ; and so on.
In our Sutta it is the path to Arahatship which is the best
asceticism.

There is both courtesy and dignity in the method
employed. But no little dialectic skill, and an easy mastery
of the ethical points involved, are required to bring about
the result. On the hypothesis that the Buddha is a sun
myth, and his principal disciples personifications of the stars,


INTRODUCTION. 20"J


the facts seem difficult to explain. One would expect, then,
something quite different. How is it that the other disciples
who must, in that case, have concocted these Dialogues,
refrain so entirely from astrological and mythological
details? How is it they attribute to their hero qualities
of courtesy and sympathy, and a grasp of ethical problems,
all quite- foreign, even antagonistic, to those usually ascribed
to sun-heroes — mostly somewhat truculent and very un-ethical
personages ?

On the hypothesis that he was an historical person, of that
training and character he is represented in the Pi/akas to
have had, the method is precisely that which it is most
probable he would have actually followed.

Whoever put the Dialogues together may have had a
sufficiently clear memory of the way he conversed, may
well have even remembered particular occasions and persons.
To the mental vision of the compiler, the doctrine taught
loomed so much larger than anything else, that he was
necessarily more concerned with that, than with any historical
accuracy in the details of the story. He was, in this respect,
in much the same position as Plato when recording the
dialogues of Socrates. But he was not, like Plato, giving
his own opinions. We ought, no doubt, to think of compilers,
rather than of a compiler. The memory of co-disciples had
to be respected, and kept in mind. And so far as the actual
doctrine is concerned our Dialogues are probably a more
exact reproduction of the thoughts of the teacher than the
dialogues of Plato.

However this may be, the method followed in all these
Dialogues has one disadvantage. In accepting the position
of the adversary, and adopting his .language, the authors
compel us, in order to follow what they give us as Gotama's
view, to read a good deal between the lines. The argu-
mentutn ad hominem can never be the same as a statement
of opinion given without reference to any particular person.
That is strikingly the case with our present Sutta.

When addressing his five hearers — the Pa«£avaggiya, the
first five converts, and the first Arahats — in the Deer-park
at Benares,on the occasion of his first discourse, the Buddha
is represented to have spoken of asceticism in a very different
way. He there calls it one of 'two extremes which are to
be avoided ' ; and describes it as ' painful, unworthy, and
unprofitable1.' So in the Puggala Pa/Hatti (IV, 24) the
very practices set out in our Sutta, by Kassapa the 'ascetic,


'Buddhist Suttas' (S. B.E.), p. 147.


208 VIIT. KASSAPA-siHANADA SUTTA.


as desirable and praiseworthy, are set out as the actions by
which a man injures himself. There is nothing of this sort
in our Sutta. To judge from it alone one might fairly
conclude that the Buddha approved of asceticism, only insisting
that the self-mastery and self-control of the Path were the
highest and best forms of it. There is really no inconsistency
in these three Suttas. But while the first discourse and the
Puggala passage were both addressed to disciples, our Sutta
is addressed to an ascetic, and the language used is modified
accordingly. The conclusion in all is exactly the same.

It is clear that at the time when our Sutta was put together
the practice of self-mortification had already been carried out
to a considerable extent in India. And further details, in
some of which the self-imposed penances are even more
extreme, are given in other Dialogues of the same date,
notably in the twelfth Sutta of the Ma^-^ima. This is oddly
enough also called a Sihanada Sutta, and the reason is not
far to seek.

The carrying out of such practices, in all countries, wins for
the ascetic a very high reputation. Those who despise ear.thly
comforts, and even submit themselves to voluntary torture,
are looked upon, with a kind of fearsome wonder, as more
holy than other men. And no doubt, in most cases, the
ascetics laid claim to special virtue. In the Suttas dealing
with the practices of the ascetics, Gotama, in laying stress
on the more moderate view, takes occasion also to dispute this
claim. He maintains, as in our Sutta, that the insight and
self-control and self-mastery of the Path, or of the system
of intellectual and moral self-training laid down for the
Bhikkhu, are really harder than the merely physical practices
so much more evident to the eye of the vulgar. It was
a point that had to be made. And the Suttas in which it
is made are designated as Sihanadas, literally 'the lion's
roars' — the proud claim by the Arahat to a dignity and
veneration greater than that allowed by the people to the
self-torturer, or even to the man who

1 Bescorched, befrozen, lone in fearsome woods,
Naked, without a fire, afire within,
Struggled, in awful silence, towards the goal ] ! '
And the boast goes really even further. Not only were the
ascetics no better than the Arahats, they were even not so
practical. The self-mortification was an actual hindrance.
It turned men's minds from more essential matters. Diogenes
was not only not superior to other men, no nearer to the

1 M. I, 79 => Gat. I, 390.


INTRODUCTION* 209


truth than they, by reason of his tub arid of his physical
renunciation ; he was their ethical inferior, and was intellectu-
ally wrong. So hard, so very hard, was the struggle1 that
the Arahat, or the man striving towards Arahatship, should
be always sufficiently clothed, and take regular baths, regular
exercise, regular food. The line was to be drawn at another
point. He was to avoid, not what was necessary to maintain
himself in full bodily vigour and power, but all undue luxury,
and all worry about personal comfort. It was his duty to
keep himself in health.

It is open to question whether the earnest and unworldly
would now draw the line at the precise point at which
Gotama drew it ; either as regards what they would think
proper for themselves now, or what they would have thought
most proper for those living in India then. Probably they
would think rather that he erred on the side of austerity.
His contemporaries the Niga«/>6as thought the other way.
And the most serious schism in the Buddhist Order, that
raised by Devadatta, was especially defended on the ground
that Gotama would not, as regards various points, adopt
ascetic practices which Devadatta held to be then necessary.

It is probable that Gotama was largely guided by the
opinions and practice of previous recluses. For we have
already seen that in other matters, important it is true but not
essential, Gotama adopted and extended, so far as it agreed
with the rest of his system, what had already been put forward
by others. But we cannot, as yet, speak on this point with
as much certainty as we could in the other cases of the
ethical view of sacrifice, of the ethical connotation attached to
the word Brahman 2, and of the reasonable view as to social
distinctions and questions of impurity. Our available texts
are only sufficient, at present, to suggest the probability.

The technical term tapas is already found in the Rig-veda,
though only in the latest hymns included in the collection.
It is literally 'glow, burning,' and very early acquired the
secondary sense of retirement into solitude, ar.d of the
attempted conquest of one's lower nature by the burning heat
of bodily austerity. And this must have been a common
practice, for the time of the year most favourable to such


1 So also KaMaka Upanishad II, 7-13.

2 See Br/had. Ill, 5, 1 ; 8, 10, IV, 4, 21-23 ; ^Mnd. IV, 1, 7.
Compare Apastamba I, 8, 23, 6; Vas. VI, 3, 23, 25; XXVI, n =
Manu II, 87 = Vishnu LV, 21 ; the passages quoted from the Maha-
bharata by Muir, ' Metrical Translations,' pp. 263-4, and Deussen

• Veda n*a-sy stem,' p. 155.

II. P


2IO VIIT. KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

tap as came to be known as the month tapas. There was no
association with the word of what we call ' penance,' a con-
ception arising out of an entirely different order of religious
ideas. There was no idea of atonement for, punishment of,
making amends for sin. But just as the sacrificer was supposed,
by a sort of charm that he_ worked by his sacrifice, to attain
ends desirable for himself, so there was supposed to be
a sort of charm in tapas producing mystic and marvellous
results. The distinction seems to have been that it was
rather power, worldly success, wealth, children, and heaven
that were attained by sacrifice ; and mystic, extraordinary,
superhuman faculties that were attained by tapas.

By a natural anthropomorphism the gods too were supposed,
for like ends, to offer sacrifice and to perform tapas. Thus
it is sometimes by sacrifice, but more often by tapas, that in
the different cosmological legends one god or the other is
supposed to bring forth creation1. In the latter case an
expression often used on such occasions is tapas atapasyata,
literally ' he glowed a glow,' and the exact meaning of this
enigmatic phrase is by no means certain. It may have been
meant to convey that he glowed with fierce resolve, or that he
glowed with deep thought, or that he glowed with strong
desire, or that he carried out each or some or all of the
practices given in Kassapa's three lists of self-mortifications in
our Sutta. All these various ideas may possibly be meant to
be inferred together, and before they were ascribed to gods
similar actions must have been well known among men.

There were some, as one would expect, who therefore
placed austerity above sacrifice, or held that it could take the
place of sacrifice 2. The more conservative view of the
learned Brahman — that it is repeating by heart to oneself,
and teaching others, the Vedic verses, that is the chief thing
(with which twelve other qualities or practices should always
be associated) — is only given with the interesting note that one
teacher thinks ' the true ' only, another thinks austerity only
to be necessary, and yet a third thinks that learning and
teaching the Veda is enough by itself, 'for that is tapas, that
is tapas3.' There are several passages making similar com-
parisons. Thus one text says : ' There are three branches of
duty — sacrifice study of the Veda and charity are the first,
austerity (tapas) is the second, to dwell as a learner one's life

1 .Satapatha-Br.VI, i, 1,13, and several times in the early Upanishads.

2 So A"Mnd. Up. Ill, 17, 2 and 4.

s Tait. I, 9. Compare, on the ethics, Manu VI, 92 and the Ten
Paramitas. The idea that Veda-learning is tapas is a common one.


INTRODUCTION. 211


long in the house of one's teacher is the third. All these have
as reward heavenly worlds. But he who stands firm in
Brahman obtains deathlessnessV

So in the passages which explain (by no means consistently)
where the soul goes to after it leaves the body, we have
a somewhat corresponding division 2. According to the
A"^andogya, those who know a certain mystical doctrine
about five fires, and those who in the forest follow faith and
austerity (tapas), go along the path of the gods to the
Brahma worlds. On the other hand, they who sacrifice, and
give alms go to the moon, and thence return to earth, and
are reborn in high or low positions according to their deeds.
But the bad become insects.

According to the Brmadara^yaka, those who know the
mystic doctrine of the five fires, and those who in the woods
practise faith and truth (not tapas) go to the Brahma worlds.
On the other hand, those who practise sacrifice, charity, and
austerity (tapas) go to the moon, and are thence reborn on
earth. But those who follow neither of these two paths
become insects.

Here austerity is put into a lower grade than it occupies
in the last extract. Other later passages are Muw^aka II, 7;
III, 2, 4, 6 ; Prajna I, 9 ; V, 4. Though the details differ
there is a general concensus that above both sacrifice and
austerity, which are themselves meritorious, there is a some-
thing higher, a certain kind of truth or faith or wisdom.

This is the exact analogue, from the Upanishad point
of view, to the doctrine of the Buddhists that Arahatship is
better than austerity. And though the Upanishad belief is
not worked out with the same consistency, nor carried so far
to its logical conclusion, as the Buddhist, that is simply to be
explained by the facts that it is not only earlier, belonging to
a time when thought was less matured, but is also not the
work of one mind, but of several. There can be but little
doubt that Gotama, during his years of study and austerity
before he attained Nirva/za under the Tree of Wisdom, had
come into contact with the very beliefs, or at least with beliefs
similar to those, now preserved in the Upanishads ; and that
his general conclusion was based upon them. That he
practically condemns physical tapas (austerity) altogether is
no argument against his indebtedness, so far as the superiority
of wisdom to austerity is concerned, to the older theory.

In the passages in which that older theory is set forth we

1 ^Mnd.Up. II, 23, 1.

2 K/iand. Up. V, 10; Br/'had. VI, 2 ; Prajna I, 9 ; V, 4, 5.

P 2


212 viii. kassapa-sJhanada sutta.

have the germs — indistinct statements, no doubt, and incon-
sistent, but still the first source — of the well-known theory
of the Ajramas ; the Efforts (or perhaps Trainings), four
stages into which the life of each member of the ranks of the
twice-born (the Dvi^as) should be divided. In later times
these are (i) the student, (2) the householder, (3) the hermit,
and (4) the wandering ascetic; that is, the Brahma^arin,
the Gr/hastha, the Vanaprastha, and the Yati1. And
stress was laid on the order in which the stages of effort were
taken up, it being held improper for a man to enter the latter
without having passed through the former.

The Upanishad passages know nothing of the curious
technical term of Effort (A.rrama) applied to these stages.
And they have really only two divisions (and these not
regarded as consecutive stages), that of the sacrificer and of
the hermit (not the Bhikshu). Of course studentship is
understood as preliminary to both. But we are here at
a standpoint really quite apart from the Ajrama theory, and
6arikara and other commentators are obliged to resort to
curious and irreconcilable shifts when they try to read back
into these old texts the later and more developed doctrine a.

Even the names of the several A^ramas do not occur, as
such, in the older Upanishads. Brahma^arin is frequently
used for pupil, Yati in two or three passages means ascetic ;
but Grzhastha, Vanaprastha, and Bhikshu do not even
occur 3. The earliest mention of the Four Efforts is in the
old law books. Gautama (III, 2) gives them as Brahma^arin,
Grz'hastha, Bhikshu, and Vaikhanasa^ (student, house-
holder, wandering beggar, and hermit). Apastamba (II, 9,
21, 1) has a different order, and different names for the four
stages — Garhasthyaw, A/£aryakula;#, Maunaw, and
Vanaprasthyaw4.

Hofrath Buhler dated these works (very hypothetically)
in the fifth and third, or possibly in the sixth and fourth
centuries B.C.5 The theory of the Four Efforts was then

1 So Manu V, 137 ; VI, 87. Compare VIII, 390, and VI, 97.

a See Max Muller's interesting note in his translation of the
Upanishads (Part I, pp. 82-84).

s See Jacob's Concordance under the weirds.

* Comp. Baudhayana II, 10, 17, 6, and Apastamba II, 4, 9, 13.
a 6 He ventures on a conjecture as to possible date in the case of
Apastamba only. Him he places on linguistic grounds not later than
the third century b.c. ; and, if the argument resting on the mention of
•SVetaketu hold good, then a century or two older. Burnell, whom
Buhler (Baudh. p. xxx) calls ' the first authority on the literature of
the Schools of the Taittirfya Veda,' to which Apastamba belonged,


INTRODUCTION. 2 I 3


already current, but by no means settled as to detail. It must
evidently have taken shape between the date of the Upanishads
just quoted and that of the law books ; that is to say, either
just before or some time after the rise of Buddhism. We can,
I think, go safely further, and say that it must have been, in
all probability, after Buddha, and even after the time when
the Pi/akas were put together. For neither the technical
term Ajrama, nor any of the four stages of it, are mentioned
in the Pi7akas.

The theory has become finally formulated, in the order as
to detail which has permanently survived, in the later law
books from Vasish//fca onwards. He gives the Four Efforts or
stages in the life of an orthodox person,as (1) Student, (2) House-
holder, (3) Hermit, (4) Wandering Mendicant — Brahma-
£arin, Gr/hastha, Va»aprastha, and Parivra^-aka \

It will be noticed that this final arrangement differs in two
respects — and both of them of importance — from the earliest.
In the first place the wandering beggar is put in the last,
that is in the highest, place. He is not subordinated, as he
was at first, to the hermit. In the second place the expression
Bhikshu, applied in Gautama to the wandering mendicant, is
dropped in the later books.

The commentators are at great pains to harmonise the
divergent order. And they do so by suggesting that the
earlier arrangement (which, of course, is, in their eyes,
the strange one) is meant to infer exactly the same as does
the contrary later arrangement so familiar to them. To
them the wandering mendicant had become the last, in order
of time and importance, of the Four Efforts ; and they try to
put back their own view into the words of the ancient writer
they are dealing with. But if the order they were familiar
with implies one thing, the older order, which is exactly the
reverse, can scarcely imply the same. Or if it does, then the
question arises, why should it ? In either case the explana-
tion may be sought for in the history of the two ideas.

Now the distinction between the two is quite clear, though
the ambiguity of the English word ' ascetic,' often applied to
both, may tend to hide it from view2. Gautama starts his

was not convinced by the arguments leading up to the^above conclu-
sion. He only ventured, after reading them, to put Apastamba • at
least b. c.'A(Manu, p. xxvii). Baudhayana was some generations
older than Apastamba (see Biihler, Ap. pp. xxi-xxii). And Gautama
was older still.

1 Vas. VII, 2.

2 Thus Biihler uses the one term 'ascetic' to render a number of
Sanskrit words — for sa^nyasin at Baudh. II, 10, 17 ; for bhikshu


214 VIII. KASSAPA-sfHANADA SUTTA.

description of the hermit by saying that he is to feed on roots
and fruits, and practise tapas. And all the later books lay
stress on the same point ; often giving, as instances of the
tapas, one or other of the very practices detailed by Kassapa
the tapasa, in his three lists, in our Sutta1. On the other
hand, the wandering mendicant does not practise these severe
physical self-mortifications. He is never called tapasa, and
though he has abandoned the world, and wanders without
a home, simply clad, and begging his food, his self-restraint is
mental rather than physical. Of the fifteen rules laid down
for him by Gautama, who calls him the Bhikshu (in X, 1 1-25),
four or five are precisely equivalent to rules the Buddhist
Bhikshu has to observe. There is one significant rule in
Baudhayana, however, which is quite contrary to the corre-
sponding Buddhist rule. According to it the twice-born
mendicant of the priestly books is, in begging for food, to
observe the rules of ceremonial purity, what we call now the
rules of caste 2.

Now while the belief in the special efficacy and holiness
of austerity, self-torture, tapas, is a world-wide phenomenon,
and the practice of it was, no doubt, very early in India too,
the idea of the wandering mendicant is peculiar to India.
And though the origin and early history of this institution
are at present obscure, we have no reason to believe that it
was of ancient date.

It was older than the Buddha's time. Both Buddhist and
Cain records agree on this point. And they are confirmed
by an isolated passage in an Upanishad which, as a whole, is
pre-Buddhistic 3. There it is said that he who desires to see


at Gaut. Ill, 2, n ; for parivra^aka at Vas. X, 1 ; for yati at Manu
VI, 54, 56, 69, 86 ; for apasa at Manu VI, 27 ; for muni at Manu
VI, 11. Of these the last two refer to the hermit in the woods (the
tapasa), the others to the wandering mendicant (the bhikshu). Even
for the old Brahman who remains at home under the protection of his
son (the Veda-sawnyasin), he has ' become an ascetic' (sawznyased
in the Sanskrit, Manu VI, 94).

This rendering can, in each case, be easily justified. Each of the
Sanskrit words means one or other form, one or other degree, of what
may be called asceticism. But the differences might be made clear
by variety of rendering.

1 Gautama has altogether ten rules for the hermit, none of which
were applicable to the Buddhist Bhikshu (Gaut. Ill, 26-35).

2 Baudhayana II, 10, 18, 4, 5. Manu VI, 27 (of the hermit). So
also Vas. X, 31, according to the commentator. But Biihler thinks
otherwise ; and Manu VI, 94 confirms Buhler's view.

3 Brzhadara«yaka Upanishad III, 5, 1.


INTRODUCTION. 215


the god Brahman cannot attain his end by speculation ; he
must put away learning and become childlike, put away
childishness and become a muni (a silent one)1, put away
silence and become a Brahma«a (that is, of course, not
a Brahmawa by birth, but one in a sense nearly the same as
Gotama attaches to the word in the So«ada;^a Sutta). This
is to explain why it is that ' Brahmawas ' (in the ethical sense)
give up cravings for children and wealth and the world and
adopt begging as a regular habit (bhiksha£aryaw £aranti).
Another recension of the same passage, also preserved in the
same Upanishad2, but in a connection which Deussen thinks
is a later interpolation 3, ascribes this habit to ' men of old.'
The statement is no doubt ambiguous. It might be taken to
apply to the hermit (the tapasa) who also begged. But
1 think on the whole that the wandering mendicant is more
probably referred to, and referred to as belonging to a higher
sphere than the muni, the ascetic. If that be so, this is the
earliest passage in which any one of these three ideas (the
wandering mendicant, his superiority to the ascetic, and
the special ethical sense of the word Brahmawa 4) have, as yet,
been found.

The oldest reference in the priestly literature to unorthodox
Bhikshus (not necessarily Buddhists) is probably the Maitri
Upanishad VIII, 8, which is much later. There is a custom,
often referred to in the law books, of students begging their
food. This was doubtless of long standing. But it is a con-
ception altogether different from that of the wandering
mendicant. The word Bhikshu does not occur in any of these
passages. And indeed of all the Upanishads indexed in
Colonel Jacob's ' Concordance ' the word only occurs in one —
in the little tract called the Parama-hawsa Upanishad.

Whenever it may have arisen, the peculiar institution of
the Bhikshu is quite as likely, if not more likely, to have
originated in Kshatriya circles than among the learned Bran-
mans. All our authorities — Brahman Upanishads, Buddhist
Pi/akas, Gain Angas — agree in ascribing to Kshatriyas a most
important, not to say predominant, part in such religious
activity as lay apart from sacrifice. To take for granted that


1 Afterwards an epithet often used, in the priestly literature of the
hermit (the tapasa), in the Buddhist books of the Arahat.

2 Br/had. IV, 4, 22.

3 ' Sechzig Upanishads,' p. 465.

* Perhaps, on this third notion, A'Mnd. IV, 1, 7 is another passage
of about the same date. A wise 6"udra is apparently there called
a Brahma?*a. But the application is by no means certain.


2l6 VIII. KASSAEA-S1HANADA SUTTA.

the Brahmans must have originated the idea, or the practice,
is to ignore all these authorities. And it is only in the
Kshatriya books — those of the Buddhists and Cains — that
the details of the practice receive much weight, or are dealt
with in full detail.

The oldest law book has barely a page on the rules for
Bhikshus, whereas the regulations, of about the same age,
preserved in the Buddhist texts, fill the three volumes
translated, under the title ' Vinaya Texts,' in the ' Sacred
Books of the East.' And as time goes on the priestly
literature continues to. treat the life of a Bhikshu as entirely
subordinate, and in the curtest manner. Even Manu has only
three or four pages on the subject. The inconsistency,
brevity, and incompleteness of the regulations in the priestly
books lead one to suppose that, at the time when they were
written, there were not enough Bhikshus, belonging to those
circles, to make the regulations intended for them alone
a matter of much practical importance. In other words, the
development also of the Bhikshu idea was due rather to the
Kshatriyas than to the sacrificing priests.

The latter were naturally half-hearted in the matter. Even
after they had invented the A^rama theory, they did not
seem to be very keen about it. On the contrary, there
are several passages the other way. Apastamba closes
his exposition of them with a remark that upsets the whole,
theory : ' There is no reason to place one Airama before
another1.' And just before that he quotes a saying of
Pra^apati from which it follows that those who become
Bhikshus do not gain salvation at all, ' they become dust
and perish.'

This was no doubt the real inmost opinion of the more
narrow-minded of the priests. But the first maker of the
phrase did not quite like to put this forward in his own
name — the idea of the Bhikshu as a man worthy of special
esteem had already become too strong for that. So he
makes the god his stalking-horse ; and tries, by using his
name, to gain respectability and acceptance for his view.
And it survives accordingly as late as the earlier portion
of Maou (II, 230), where mention is made of 'the Three
A^ramas,' omitting the Bhikshu. We ought not to be surprised
to find that, though the whole passage is reproduced, in other
respects, in the Institutes of Vish«u (XXXI, 7), this very
curious and interesting phrase is replaced by another which
avoids the difficulty.

1 Ap. II, 9, 24, 15.


INTRODUCTION. 2 I 7


Baudhayana also actually quotes with approval another
old- saying : ' There was forsooth an Asura, Kapila by name,
the son of Prahlada. Striving against the gods he made
these divisions (the A.sramas). A wise man should not take
heed of them 1.

If the priests, when the custom of 'going forth' as a
Bhikshu was becoming prevalent, had wished to counteract
it, to put obstacles in the way, and especially to prevent
any one doing so without first having become thoroughly
saturated with the priestly view of things, they could scarcely
have taken a more efficacious step than the establishment
of this theory. And so far as it served this purpose, and
so far only, do they seem to have cared much for it. We
have no evidence that the theory had, at any time, become
a practical reality — that is, that any considerable number
of the twice-born, or even of the Brahmans, did actually
carry out all the four A-sramas. Among the circles led by
the opinion of learned and orthodox priests it was, no doubt,
really held improper for any man to become a religieux until
he was getting old, or without having first gone through
a regular course of Vedic study. And whenever he did
renounce the world he was expected to follow such of the
ancient- customs (now preserved in the priestly books under
the three heads of Vanaprastha, Parivra^aka, and Veda-
saw nyasin) as he chose to follow. But even then he need
not observe a clear distinction between these various heads.
The percentage of elderly Brahmans who followed any of
the three at all must always have been very small indeed,
and of these a good many probably became Veda-sa m-
nyasins, a group which lies outside of the Ajramas. The
rules are admitted to be obsolete now. Sahkara says they
were not observed in his time2. And the theory seems to
be little more than a priestly protest against the doctrine,
acted upon by Buddhists, (7ains, and others, and laid down
in the Madhura Sutta, that even youths might 'go forth'
without any previous Vedic study 3.

There were, in other words, in the Indian community of
that time, a number of people — very small, no doubt, com-
pared with the total population, but still amounting to some
thousands — who estimated the mystic power of tapas above
that of sacrifice ; who gave up the latter, and devoted them-
selves, in the woods, to those kinds of bodily austerity and


1 Baudh. II, 6, ii, 28.

2 See the passage quoted by Deussen, ' Vedanta- system,' p. 40-

8 See the full text in Chalmers's paper in the J. R. A. S. for 1 -94.


2l8 VIII. KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

self-torture of which our Sutta gives the earliest detailed
account. There were others who rejected both, and preferred
the life of the wandering mendicant. In both classes there
were unworthy men who used their religious professions for
the ' low aims ' set out in the tract on the Silas incorporated
in our Sutta, whose very words, in not a few instances, recur
in the old law books.

But there was also no little earnestness, no little ' plain
living and high thinking ' among these ' irregular friars.' And
there was a great deal of sympathy, both with their aims and
with their practice (provided always they keep to the
priestly view of things), among the official class, the regular
sacrificing priests. Instead of condemning them, the priests
tried, therefore, rather to regulate them. One Vikhanas
compiled a special book on Tapas, called either after the
author the Vaikhanasa Sutra, or after the subject the
.Sramawaka Sutra, which is several times referred to as
an authority in the law books whose precepts are doubtless,
in part, taken from it l. Tapas was then, in accordance with
the general view in the circles in which the law books were
composed, regarded as the higher^ of the two, and put
therefore at the end in the list of A^ramas.

But there was also another view which had already made
itself felt in the Upanishads, which is the basis of our Sutta,
and which no doubt became more widely spread in con-
sequence of its having been the view taken up by the
progressive party we now call Buddhists. According to
this view the life of the Bhikshu, of the wandering mendicant,
was the higher. This view, disliked by the more narrow-
minded, but regarded with favour by the more spiritually-
minded of the Brahmans, gradually attained so unquestionably
the upper hand, that the order of the last two of the Artamas
had to be changed. Tapas became .then a preliminary stage
to, instead of the final crown of, the religious life.

But the other view continued to be held by a large and
influential minority. The strong leaning of the human heart
to impute a singular efficacy to physical self-mortifications

1 See Buhler's ' Manu/ XXVII, and the commentators referred to in
Biihler's notes, pp. 202 and 203. Also Vas. IX, 10; Gaut. Ill, 27 ;
Baudh. II, 6, 1 1, 14, 15 (which proves the identity of the two) ; III, 3,
15-18. Haradatta on Apastamba II, 9, 21, 21 (where he also says
they are the same). Dr. Burnell had in his possession fragments of
this work, or what, in his opinion, seemed to be so. He^says it was
used by followers, of the Black Ya^ur-veda. Buhler also (Ap. p. 154,
note) says the Sutra is in existence, and procurable in Gujarat.


INTRODUCTION. 219


of all kinds could not be eradicated. Many of the laity still
looked on those who carried out such practices with peculiar
favour. The tendency made itself felt even in Buddhism,
in spite of our present Sutta, and of many other passages
to a similar effect. There is a special name for the ' extra
vows,' the dhutangas, carried out by such of the brethren
as were inclined that way. And these receive special
glorification in a whole book at the end of the Milinda1.
It is true that, even in these ' extra vows,' all the extreme
forms of tapas are omitted. But this is only a matter of
degree. In the priestly law books, also, though they go
somewhat further than the dhutangas, the most extreme
forms are omitted, especially in the rules for hermits and
mendicants contained in the earlier books. This is another
point in which the early Buddhists and the more advanced
of the learned Brahmans of their time are found to be acting
in sympathy. But the discussion of the details would take
us too far from our subject.

The Niga«///as, A^ivakas, and others went to the other
extreme, and like the Buddhists, they never admitted any
theory like that of the distinction in time between the Four
Ajramas2. It is even doubtful how far that distinction
became a really valid and practical reality among the learned
priests. They alone, as we have seen, always laid stress on
the importance of not 'going forth,' either as ascetic or as
wandering mendicant (tapasa or bhikshu), unless first the
years of studentship, and then the life as a sacrificing
householder, had been fulfilled. They spoke occasionally
of Three Efforts only. And as we have seen the lawyers
differed in the order in which they mention the two classes
of religieux 3.


1 My 'Milinda,' II, 244-274.

2 The Buddhists admitted a distinction in class as between tapasas
and bhikkhus. They often distinguish between the simple
pabba^a of the latter and the tapasa-pabba^a of the former.
See for instance Gat. Ill, 119 (of non-Buddhists).

3 When the warrior hero of the Ramayana brutally murders a peace-
ful hermit, it is not necessary to call in the Asrama rules to justify the
foul deed. The offence (in the view of the poet on the part of the
hermit, in the view of most Westerns on the part of the hero) is simply
social insolence. Would public opinion, in Kosala, have sanctioned
such an act, or enjoyed such a story, in the time of the Pi/akas ? The
original Ramayana probably arose, as Professor Jacobi has shown, in
Kosala; but this episode (VII, 76) is not in the oldest part. The
doctrine for which the poet claims the approval of the gods (and which,


2 20 VIII. KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

By the time that the- later order was settled the word
Bhikshu had come to mean so specially a Buddhist mendi-
cant that the learned Brahmans no longer thought it fitting to
apply the term to their own mendicants. This at least may
be to the explanation of the fact that it is used in Gautama's
law book, and not afterwards.

The history of the word is somewhat doubtful. It is not
found as yet, as we have seen above, in any pre-Buddhistic
text. Perhaps the Gains or the Buddhists first used it. But
it was more probably a term common before their time,
though not long before, to all mendicants. The form is
sufficiently curious for Pacini to take special notice of it in
the rule for the formation from desideratives of nouns in u \
In another rule2 he mentions two Bhikshu Sutras — manuals
for mendicants, as the Vaikhanasa Sutra was for the hermits
(tapasas). These are used by the Parajariwas and the
Karmandinas, two groups or corporations, doubtless, of
Brahmanical mendicants. Professor Weber refers to this in
his History of Indian Literature, p. 305, and Professor Kielhorn
has been kind enough to inform me that nothing more has
been since discovered on the matter. These Sutras are not
mentioned elsewhere. And they can never have acquired so
much importance as the Vaikhanasa Sutra, or they would
almost certainly have been referred to in the sections in the
later law books on mendicants, just as the Vaikhanasa is in
the sections on the tapasas.

It is also very curious to find Brahmawa Bhikshus with
special class names as if they belonged to an Order like those
of the Buddhists and the Gains. No such Brahmanical
Orders of recluses (pabba^-ita) are mentioned in the Pi/akas.
When Brahma«a Bhikshus are referred to, it is either as
isolated recluses, or by a generic name not implying any
separate Order. Thus in an important passage of the
Ariguttara we have the following list of rcligieux, contempo-
raries of the Buddha : —

1. A^ivika. 6. Maga«^ikd.

2. Nigantha.. 7. Teda;/<afika,

3. Mu«^a-savaka. 8. Aviruddhaka.

4. G:a/ilaka. 9. Gotamaka.

5. Paribba^aka. 10. Devadhammika.
No. 1. The men of the livelihood, among whom Makkhali

Gosala was a recognised leader, were especially addicted to

therefore, was not unquestioned among men, or he need not have done
so) is that a .Sudra may not become a tapasa.
1 11,3,54- 2 IV, 3, 1 10.


INTRODUCTION. 2 21


tapas of all kinds, and went always quite naked. The name
probably means : * Those who claimed to be especially strict
in their rules as to means of livelihood/ The Buddhists
also laid special stress on this. The fifth of the eight divisions
of the Eightfold Path is samma a^ivo1.

No. 2. The Unfettered are the sect we now call Cains, then
under the leadership of the Nataputta. They were also
addicted, but to a somewhat less degree, to tapas ; and
Buddhaghosa here adds that they wore a loin cloth.

No. 3. The disciples of the Shaveling are stated by Buddha-
ghosa to be the same as No. 2. The reading is doubtful, and
his explanation requires explanation. Perhaps some special
subdivision of the Cains is intended.

No. 4. Those who wear their hair in braids. To do so
was the rule for the orthodox hermits (the Vanaprasthas or
Tapasas, Gautama III, 34). The Brahmawa Bhikshu, on the
other hand, was either to be bald, or to have only a forelock
(ibid. 22).

No. 5. The wanderers. This is a generic term for wander-
ing mendicants. They went, according to Buddhaghosa, fully
clad.

Nos. 6-10 are said by Buddhaghosa to be followers of the
Titthiya, that is the leaders of all schools that were non-
Buddhist. It is precisely here that the list becomes most
interesting, the first five names being otherwise known. And
it is much to be regretted that the tradition had not preserved
any better explanation of the terms than the vague phrase
repeated by Buddhaghosa.

No. 6 is quite unintelligible at present.

No. 7. The Bearers of the triple staff have not been found
elsewhere, as yet, earlier than the latest part of Manu (XII, 10).
It is very, possibly the name given in the Buddhist com-
munity to the Brahma;za Bhikshus (not T&pasas). They
carried three staves bound up as one, as a sign, it is sup-
posed, of their self-restraint in thought, word, and deed. This
explanation may possibly hold good for so early a date. But
it may also be nothing more than an edifying gloss on an old
word whose original meaning had been forgotten. In that
case the gloss would be founded on such passages as
Gaut. Ill, 17 2, where the idea of this threefold division of
conduct recurs in the law books. But the technical term
tridaw^in is not mentioned in them.


1 See on this Order the passages quoted above in the note at p. 7 1 ;
and Leumann in -the ' Vienna Oriental Journal,' III» 128.

2 Comp. Baudhayana XI, 6, 11, 23; Manu V 165; IX, 29.


2 22 VIII. KASSAPA-SlHANADA SUTTA.

No. 8. The not opposing ones, the Friends, are not mentioned
elsewhere.

No. 9. The followers of Gotama means, almost certainly,
the followers of some other member of the Sakya clan,
distinct from our Gotama. who also founded an Order. We
only know of one who did so, Devadatta. The only alter-
native is that some Brahmawa, belonging to the Gotama
gotra, is here referred to as having had a community of
Bhikshus named after him. But we know nothing of any
such person.

No. 10. Those who follow the religion of the God are not
mentioned elsewhere. Who is ' the God ' ? Is it Sakka
(Indra) or ^Siva? The Deva of the names Devadatta,
Devase///zi, Devadaha, &c, is probably the same.

We find in this suggestive list several names, used technically
as the designation of particular sects, but in meaning applicable
quite as much to most of the others. They all claimed to be
pure as regards means of livelihood, to be unfettered, to
be friends ; they all wandered from place to place, they were
all mendicants. And the names can only gradually have
come to have the special meaning of the member of one
school, or order, only. We should not, therefore, be surprised
if the name Bhikshu, also, has had a similar history1.

1 There is a similar list, also full of interesting puzzles, but applicable
of course to a date later by some centuries than the above, in the
Milinda, p. 191. Worshippers of Siva are there expressly mentioned.


VIII. kassapa-sihanAda sutta.

[The Naked Ascetic]

[lei] i. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once dwelling at Uguuna, in the Ka/makatthala deer-
park1. Now Kassapa, a naked ascetic, came to where
the Exalted One was, and exchanged with him the
greetings and compliments of civility and courtesy, and
stood respectfully aside. And, so standing, he said to
the Exalted One :

2. 'I have heard it said, O Gotama, thus: The
Samara Gotama disparages all penance ; verily he
reviles and finds fault with every ascetic, with every
one who lives a hard life." Now those, O. Gotama,
who said this, were they therein repeating Gotama's
words, and not reporting him falsely ? Are they
announcing, as a minor tenet of his, a matter really
following from his Dhamma (his system) ? Is there
nothing in this opinion of his, so put forward as wrapt
up with his system, or as a corollary from it, that could
meet with objection 2 ? For we would fain bring no
false accusation against the venerable Gotama.'

3. ' No, Kassapa. Those who said so were not


1 Miga-daye. That is, a place set apart for deer to roam in
in safety, a public park in which no hunting was allowed.

2 It would, perhaps, be more agreeable to the context if one could
render this idiomatic phrase : ' Is there anything in this opinion of
theirs as to his system, or as to this corollary they have drawn from it,
which amounts to being a matter he would object to ? ' But I do not
see how this could be reconciled with the syntax of the Pali sentence.
And Buddhaghosa takes it as rendered above, summarising it in the
words : ' Is your opinion herein altogether free from blame t '


224 viii. kassapa-sJhanada sutta.

following my words. On the contrary, they were
reporting me falsely, and at variance with the fact.

[162] ' Herein, O Kassapa, I am wont to be aware,
with vision bright and purified, seeing beyond what
men can see, how some men given to asceticism, living
a hard life, are reborn, on the dissolution of the body,
after death, into some unhappy, fallen state of misery
and woe ; while others, living just so, are reborn into
some happy state, or into a heavenly world — how some
men given to asceticism, but living a life less hard, are
equally reborn, on the dissolution of the body, after
death into some unhappy, fallen state of misery and
woe ; while others, living just so, are reborn in some
happy state, or into a heavenly world. How then
could I, O Kassapa, who am thus aware, as they really
are, of the states whence men have come, and whither
they will go, as they pass away from one form of
existence, and take shape in another, — how could
I disparage all penance ; or bluntly revile and find
fault with every ascetic, with every one who lives a life
that is hard ?

4. ' Now there are, O Kassapa, certain recluses and
Brahmans who are clever, subtle, experienced in
controversy, hair splitters, who go about, one would
think, breaking into pieces by their wisdom the
speculations of their adversaries. And as between
them and me there is, as to some points, agreement,
and as to some points, not. As to some of those
things they approve, we also approve thereof. As to
some of those things they disapprove, we also disap-
prove thereof. As to some of the things they approve,
we disapprove thereof. As to some of the things they
disapprove, we approve thereof. And some things we
approve of, so do they. And some things we disap-
prove of, so do they. [163] And some things we
approve, they do not. And some things we disapprove
of, they approve thereof.

5. ' And I went to them, and said : " As for those
things, my friends, on which we do not agree, let us
leave them alone. As to those things on which we


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 225

agree, let the wise put questions about them, ask for
reasons as to them, talk them over, with or to their
teacher, with or to their fellow disciples, saying : 'Those
conditions of heart, Sirs, which are evil or accounted
as evil among you, which are blameworthy or accounted
as such among you, which are insufficient for the
attainment of Arahatship, or accounted as such among
you, depraved or accounted as such among you — who
is it who conducts himself as one who has more
absolutely put them away from him, the Samara
Gotama, or the other venerable ones, the teachers of
schools ? ' "

6. ' Then it may well be, O Kassapa, that the wise,
so putting questions one to the other, asking for
reasons, talking the matter over, should say : " The
Samara Gotama conducts himself as one who has
absolutely put those conditions away from him ;
whereas the venerable ones, the other teachers of
schools, have done- so only partially." Thus is it,
O Kassapa, that the wise, so putting questions one to
the other, asking for reasons, talking the matter over,
would, for the most part, speak in praise of us
therein.

7. ' And again, O Kassapa, let the wise put questions
one to another, ask for reasons, talk the matter over,
with or to their teacher, with or to their fellow disciples,
saying : " Those conditions of heart, Sirs, which are
good or accounted as such among you, which are
blameless or accounted as such among you, which
suffice to lead a man to Arahatship or are accounted as
sufficient among you, which are pure or accounted
as such among you — who is it who conducts himself as
one who has more completely taken them upon him,
the Samara Gotama, or the other venerable ones, the
teachers of schools ? "

8. ' Then it may well be, O Kassapa, that the wise,
so putting questions one to the other, asking for reasons,
talking the matter over, should say : " The Sama«a
Gotama conducts himself as one who has completely
taken these conditions upon him, whereas the venerable

II. Q


226 vtii. kassapa-sIhanada sutta.

ones, the other teachers of schools, have done so only
partially." Thus it is, O Kassapa, that the wise, so
putting questions one to the other, asking for reasons,
talking the matter over, would, for the most part, speak
in praise of us therein.

[164] 9-12. '[And further, also, O Kassapa, the
wise would, for the most part, acknowledge that the
body of my disciples were more addicted to that which
is generally acknowledged to be good, refrain them-
selves more completely from that which is generally
acknowledged to be evil, than the venerable ones, the
disciples of other teachers \]

[165] 13. • Now there is, O Kassapa, a way, there is
a method which if a man follow he will of himself, both
see and know that : " The Samawa Gotama is one who
speaks in due season, speaks that which is, that which
redounds to advantage, that which is the Norm (the
Dhamma), that which is the law of self-restraint (the
Vinaya)."

' And what, Kassapa, is that way, what that method,
which if a man follow, he will, of himself, know that,
and see that. Verily it is this Noble Eightfold Path,
that is to say : Right Views, Right Aspirations, Right
Speech, Right Action, Right Mode of Livelihood,
Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Rapture.

' This, Kassapa, is that way, this that method, which
if a man follow, he will of himself, both know and see
that : " The Samara Gotama is one who speaks in
due season, speaks that which is, that which redounds
to profit, that which is the Norm, that which is the
law of self-restraint." '

14. And when he had spoken thus, Kassapa, the
naked ascetic, said to the Exalted One :

1 And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic
practices accounted, in the opinion of some Samaras


1 The four paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 are here repeated in full in the
text with the change only of reading ' the body of the- dfsciples of. the
Samana Gotama ' instead of ' the Samaria Gotama, and similarly for
the other teachers.


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 22 7

and Brahma^as, as Sama#a-ship and Brahma«a-shipl. —

[166]

' He goes naked : —

1 He is of loose habits (performing his bodily func-
tions, and eating food, in a standing posture, not
crouching down, or sitting down, as well-bred people
do):—

' He licks his hands clean (after eating, instead of
washing them, as others do) 2 : —

1 (When on his rounds for alms, if politely requested
to step nearer, or to wait a moment, in order that food
may be put into his bowl), he passes stolidly on (lest
he should incur the guilt of following another person's
word) : —

' He refuses to accept food brought (to him, before
he has started on his daily round for alms) : —

1 He refuses to accept (food, if told that it has been
prepared) especially for him : —

' He refuses to accept any invitation (to call on his
rounds at any particular house, or to pass along any
particular street, or to go to any particular place) : —

' He will not accept (food taken direct) from the
mouth of the pot or pan3 (in which it is cooked ; lest

1 The following description of the naked ascetic recurs in the
Ma^^ima I, 77, 238, 342, II, 161, and in the Puggala Parcwatti IV,
24. It consists of a string of enigmatic phrases which are interpreted
in my translation, according to Buddhaghosa here, and the un-
known commentator on the Puggala. These two are very nearly
word for word the same. The differences are just such as would arise
when two authors are drawing upon one uniform tradition.

It^would seem from M. I, 238, if compared with I, 524, that it was
the Agivakas (see note above on p. 71) who were more especially
known for the practice of these forms of asceticism : and from M. I,
77 that it was these forms that had been followed by Gotama him-
self before his eyes were opened, before he attained to Nirvana.
(M. I, 167.)

2 Hatthapalekhano. The tradition was in doubt about this
word. Both commentators give an alternative rendering : ' He
scratched himself clean with his hand after stooling.' And the Puggala
Pa»«atti commentator adds a very curious piece of old folklore as his '
reason for this explanation.

3 Ka/opi; not in Childers. It no doubt means some cooking
vessel of a particular shape, but the exact signification, and the deriva-

Q 2


228 VIII. KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

those vessels should be struck or scraped, on his
account, with the spoon) : —

1 (He will) not (accept food placed) within the thres-
hold (lest it should have been placed there specially
for him) : —

' (He will) not (accept food placed) among the sticks1
(lest it should have been placed there specially for
him): —

'(He will) not (accept food placed) among the
pestles (lest it should have been placed there specially
for him) : —

' When two persons are eating together he will not
accept (food, taken from what they are eating, if offered
to him by only one of the two) : —

' He will not accept food from a woman with child
(lest the child should suffer want) : —

' He will not accept food from a woman giving suck
(lest the milk should grow less) : —

' He will not accept food from a woman in intercourse
with a man2 (lest their intercourse be hindered): —

tion of it are both unknown. It may possibly be a Kolarian or
Dravidian word. Many centuries afterwards karo/a and karo/i were
included in the Vyutpatti, and the Amara Ko^a, as meaning ' vessel.'
It is of course out of the question that a word of the fifth century b. c.
can be derived from either of them ; but they are evidently the
descendants of allied forms. Childers gives another form khalopi on
the authority of the Abhidhana Padipika (twelfth century), verse 456,
where it occurs in a list of names of pots. Another — kha/opi — is
put in his text by Trenckner at Milinda, p. 107, from one MS., but
the other two differ. Both commentators paraphrase -it here by
ukkhali ^zkkh\ va\

1 Na Da«</a-m-antara/ra. That is, perhaps, among the firewood ;
but the expression is not clear. The Commentaries only give the
reason. Dr. Neumann (on Magg/iima. I, 77) has, 'he does""not spy
beyond the lattice ' or perhaps ' beyond the bars of the grate ' (spahte
nicht iiber das Gitter), but this seems putting a great deal of meaning
into the sticks, and not sufficiently reproducing the force of antaraw/.
And how can pa/iga»bati mean 'spy'? We have, no doubt, to fill
out an elliptical phrase. But it is just such cases as those in this
paragraph where we* are more likely to go right if we follow the ancient
tradition.

2 Na purisantara-gataya. The commentators only give the
reason. On the meaning of the word compare Gat. I, 290.


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 2 29


1 He will not accept food collected (by the faithful
in time of drought) * : —

' He will not accept food where a dog is standing by
(lest the dog should lose a meal) : —

' He will not accept food where flies are swarming
round (lest the flies should suffer) : —

1 He will not accept fish, nor meat, nor strong drink,
nor intoxicants, nor gruel 2 : —

' He is a "One-houser" (turning back from his round
as soon as he has received an alms at any one house),
a " One-mouthful-man " : —

1 Or he is a " Two-houser," a " Two-mouthful-
man": —

' Or he is a " Seven-houser," a " Seven-mouthful-
man " : —

1 He keeps himself going on only one alms 3, or only-
two, or so on up to only seven : —

' He takes food only once a day, or once every two
days, or so on up to once every seven days. Thus
does he dwell addicted to the practice of taking food
according to rule, at regular intervals, up to even half
a month.

' And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic
practices accounted, in the opinion of some Samaras
and Brahmawas, as Samawaship and Brahmawaship : —

1 Na sa/wkhittisu. Both meaning and derivation are uncertain.
Dr. Neumann has ' not from the dirty.'

2 Thusodaka. It is not fermented. The traditional interpretation
here is: 'a drink called Suvirakaw (after the country Suvira) made
of the constituents, especially the husk, of all cereals.' The use of salt
Soviraka as a cure for wind in the stomach is mentioned at Maha
Vagga VI, 16. 3 ; and it was allowed, as a beverage, if mixed with
water, to the Buddhist Bhikkhus» In Vimana Vatthu XIX, 8 it is
mentioned in a list of drinks given to them. Childers calls it ' sour
gruel' following Subhuti in the first edition (1865) of the Abhidhana
Padipika (verse 460), but in the Abh. Pad. Sfi& (published in 1893)
Subhuti renders it 'kongey'; something of the same sort as barley
water. Buddhaghosa adds : ' Every one agrees that it is wrong to drink
intoxicants. These ascetics see sin even in this.' The corresponding
Sanskrit word, tusodaka, is found only in Sumita.

3 Datti. 'A small pot,' says Buddhaghosa, 'in which special tit-
bits are put aside, and kept.'


230 VIII. kassapa-sIhanada sutta.

' He feeds on potherbs, on wild rice \ on Nivara
seeds, on leather parings 2, on the water-plant called
Ha /a, on the fine powder which adheres to the grains
of rice beneath the husk, on the discarded scum of
boiling rice, on the flour of oil-seeds 3, on grasses, on
cow-dung, on fruits and roots from the woods, on fruits
that have fallen of themselves.

' And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic
practices accounted, in the opinion of some Samaras
and Brahmarcas, as Sama^aship and Brahmawaship : —

1 He wears coarse hempen cloth : —

1 He wears coarse cloth of interwoven hemp and
other materials : —

4 He wears cloths taken from corpses and thrown
away 4 : —

1 He wears clothing made of rags picked up from
a dust heap : —

1 He wears clothing made of the bark of the Tiri-
taka tree6 : —

[167] ' He wears the natural hide of a black ante-
lope : —

1 He wears a dress made of a network of strips of
a black antelope's hide e : —

' He wears a dress made of Kusa grass fibre : —

1 He wears a garment of bark : —

1 Samaka, not in Childers. See M. I, 156. Gat. II, 365,
III, 144.

* Daddula, not in Childers. See M. I, 78, 156, 188.

8 Pi##aka, not in Childers. See Vin. IV, 341. The commentators
here merely say : ' This is plain.'

* A'Aava-dussSni pi dh&reti. The commentators give an alter-
native explanation : ' Clothing made of Eraka grass tied together.' Was
such clothing then used to wrap dead bodies in ?

8 Tiritani pi dh&reti. This custom is referred to at Mahd Vagga
VIII, 29, as having been there followed by ascetics. The use of such
garments is there forbidden to the Bhikkhus.

8 A^inakkhipam pi dh&reti. Buddhaghosa gives here an ex-
planation different from that given by him on Vin. Ill, 34 (quoted
' Vinaya Texts,' II, 247), where the word also occurs. The Puggala
Pa»«atti gives both explanations as possible. Khipa at A. I, 33
means some sort of net. A^inakkhipa is referred to at S. I, 117 as
•the characteristic dress of an old Brahman.


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 231

' He wears a garment made of small slips or slabs of
wood (shingle) pieced together ! : —

' He wears, as a garment, a blanket of human hair2: —

' He wears, as a garment, a blanket made of horses'
tails 3 : —

' He wears, as a garment, a blanket made of the
feathers of owls : —

' He is a "plucker-out-of-hair-and-beard," addicted to
the practice of plucking out both hair and beard : —

' He is a "stander-up," rejecting the use of a seat: —

'He is a " croucher-down on-the-heels," addicted to
exerting himself when crouching down on his heels4: —

* He is a " bed-of-thorns-man," putting iron spikes or
natural thorns under the skin on which he sleeps5: —

' He uses a plank bed : —
■ . ' He sleeps on the bare ground 6 : —

' He sleeps always on one side : —

1 He is a "dust-and-dirt-wearer," (smearing his body
with oil he stands where dust clouds blow, and lets the
dust adhere to his body) : —

■ He lives and sleeps in the open air 7 : —

1 Whatsoever seat is offered to him, that he accepts

1 Phalaka-^iram pi dhareti. See Maha Vagga VIII, 28. 2 ;
Aulla Vagga V, 29. 3.

2 So of A^ita of the garment of hair, above, p. 73. Both com-
mentators say the hair is human hair.

3 Vala-kambalam pi dhareti. So the commentators here.
The alternative rendering given by us at ' Vinaya Texts,' II, 247,
' skin of a wild beast,' should be corrected accordingly. That would
be va/a, and all the passages where our word occurs read vaia.
Comp. A. I, 240.

4 Ukku/ikappadhtna. Compare Dhp. 141, 2 = Divy. 339.
The commentator says he progressed in this posture by a series of
hops. The posture is impossible to Europeans, who, if they crouch
down on their heels, cannot keep their balance when the heels touch
the ground. But natives of India will sit so for hours without fatigue.

6 Both commentators add : ' or stands, or walks up and down.'

* Thaw^ila-seyyam pi kappeti. The Burmese MSS. and
Buddhaghosa, but not the Siamese edition, read tatufila. So does my
MS. at Dhp. 141. The Puggala omits the word. S. IV, 11 8, and
Mil. 351 have the th.

7 Abbhokasiko ka hoti. There is no comment on this. But
compare Git. IV, 8 ; Mil. 342.


232 VIII. KASSAPA-SlHANADA SUTTA.


(without being offended at its being not dignified
enough) : —

1 He is a " filth-eater/' addicted to the practice of
feeding on the four kinds of filth (cow-dung, cow's
urine, ashes, and clay) l : —

' He is a " non-drinker," addicted to the practice of
never drinking cold water (lest he should injure the
souls in it) 2 : —

1 He is an " evening-third-man," addicted to the
practice of going down into water thrice a day (to
wash away his sins).

15. ' If a man, O Kassapa, should go naked, and be
of loose habits, and lick his hands clean with his
tongue, and do and be all those other things you gave
in detail, down to his being addicted to the practice of
taking food, according to rule, at regular intervals up
to even half a month — if he does all this, and the state
of blissful attainment in conduct, in heart, in intellect,
have not been practised by him, realised by him, then
is he far from Samawaship, far from Brahmawaship.
But from the time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has
cultivated the heart of love that knows no anger, that
knows no illwill — from the time when, by the destruc-
tion of the deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh,
the lust after future life, and the defilements of delusion
and ignorance), he dwells in that emancipation of heart,
that emancipation of mind, that is free from those
intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible
world, has come to realise and know-— from that time,
O Kassapa, is it that the Bhikkhu is called a Samawa,
is called a Brahmawa 3 !


1 Veka/iko. So of an A^ivaka at Gat. I, 390, and compare
' Vinaya Texts,' II, 59. My rendering of the word at Mil. 259
ought, I think, to be corrected accordingly. But why was not this
entered among the foods above, where one of them was already men-
tioned ? It looks like an afterthought, or a gloss.

2 Apanako. Compare my Milinda II, 85 foil, on this curious
belief.

3 That is, of course, a true recluse, an actual Arahat. Throughout
these sections Gotama is purposely at cross purposes with his ques-
tioner. Kassapa uses the word Brahmawa in his own sense ; that is,


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 233

'And if a man, O Kassapa, feed on potherbs, on
wild rice, on Nivara seeds, or on any of those other
things you gave in detail down to fruits that have
fallen of themselves, and the state of blissful attain-
ment in conduct, in heart, in intellect, have not been
practised by him, realised by him, then is he far from
Samaraship, far from Brahmaraship. But from the
time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the
heart of love that knows no anger, that knows no ill-
will — from the time when, by the destruction of the
deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the lust
after future life, and the defilements of delusion and
ignorance), he dwells in that emancipation of heart,
that emancipation of mind, that is free from those
intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible
world, has come to realise and know — from that time,
O Kassapa, is it that the Bhikkhu is called a Samara,
is called a Brahma/za !

[168] ' And if a man, O Kassapa, wear coarse hempen
cloth, or carry out all or any of those other practices
you gave in detail down to bathing in water three
times a day, and the state of blissful attainment in
conduct, in heart, in intellect, have not been practised
by him, realised by him, then is he far from Samara-
ship, far from Brahma^aship. But from the time,
O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the heart of
love that knows no anger, that knows no illwill — from
the time when, by the destruction of the deadly intoxi-
cations (the lusts of the flesh, the lust after future life,
and the defilements of delusion and ignorance), he
dwells in that emancipation of heart, that emancipation
of mind, that is free from those intoxications, and that
he, while yet in this visible world, has come to realise
and know — from that time, O Kassapa, is it that the
Bhikkhu is called a Samara, is called a Brahma/za ! '

not in the ordinary sense, but of the ideal religieux. Gotama, in his
answer, keeps the word; but he means something quite different, he
means an Arahat. On the persistent way in which the Pi/aka texts
try to put this new meaning into the word, see above, in the Introduc-
tion to the Kuiadanta.


2 34 vm- KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

[169] 1 6. And when he had thus spoken, Kassapa,
the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One: 'How hard
then, Gotama, must Samawaship be to gain, how hard
must Brahmawaship be ! '

■ That, Kassapa, is a common saying in the world
that the life of a Samawa and of a Brahmawa is hard
to lead. But if the hardness, the very great hardness,
of that life depended merely on this ascetism, on the
carrying out of any or all of those practices you have
detailed, then it would not be fitting to say that the
life of the Sama«a, of the Brahmawa, was hard to lead.
It would be quite possible for a householder, or for
the son of a householder, or for any one, down to the
slave girl who carries the water-jar, to say : " Let me
now go naked, let me become of low habits," and so on
through all the items of those three lists of yours.
But since, Kassapa, quite apart from these matters,
quite apart from all kinds of penance, the life is hard,
very hard to lead ; therefore is it that it is fitting to
say: "How hard must Samawaship be to gain, how
hard must Brahmawaship be ! " For from the time,
O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the heart
of love that knows no anger, that knows no illwill —
from the time when, by the destruction of the deadly
intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the lust after future
life, and the defilements of delusion and ignorance), he
dwells in that emancipation of heart, in that emancipa-
tion of mind, that is free from those intoxications, and
that he, while yet in this visible world, has come to
realise and know — from that time, O Kassapa, is it
that the Bhikkhu is called a Samara, is called a Brah-
ma«a l ! '

[170] 17. And when he had thus spoken, Kassapa,
the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One : ' Hard is
it, Gotama, to know when a man is a Samara, hard to
know when a man is a Brahmawa ! '

' That, Kassapa, is a common saying in the world

1 This paragraph, like the last and like the next, is, in the Pali,
broken up into three sections, one for each of the three lists of
penances.


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 235

that it is hard to know a Samara, hard to know a
Brahmawa. But if being a Samawa, if being a Brah-
ma#a, depended merely on this asceticism, on the
carrying out of any or each of those practices you have
detailed, then it would not be fitting to say that a
Samawa is hard to recognise, a Brahma^a is hard to
recognise. It would be quite possible for a house-
holder, or for the son of a householder, or for any one
down to the slave girl who carries the water-jar, to
know : " This man goes naked, or is of loose habits, or
licks his fingers with his tongue," and so on through
all the items of those three lists of yours. But since,
Kassapa, quite apart from these matters, quite apart
from all kinds of penance, it is hard to recognise a
Samara, hard to recognise a Brahmawa, therefore is it
fitting to say : " Hard is it to know when a man is .
a Samara, to know when a man is a Brahmawa!" For
from the time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has culti-
vated the heart of love that knows no anger, that
knows no illwill — from the time when, by the destruc-
tion of the deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh,
the lust after future life, and the defilements of delusion
and ignorance), he dwells in that emancipation of heart,
in that emancipation of mind, that is free from those
intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible
world, has come to realise and know — from that time,
O Kassapa, is it that the Bhikkhu is called a Samara,
is called a Brahma^a ! '

[l7l] 18. And when he had thus spoken, Kassapa,
the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One : ' What
then, Gotama, is that blissful attainment in conduct,
in heart, and in mind ? '

[The answer [171-173] is all the paragraphs in
the Samawwa-phala translated above, and here
divided as follows : —

Under Conduct (Sila).

1. The paragraphs on the appearance of a
Buddha, the conversion of a layman, his entry
into the Order (§§ 40-42 above, pp. 78-79).


A . _. A.


236 VIII. KASSAPA-SIHANADA SUTTA.

2. The Silas, as in the Brahma-^ala, §§ 8-27.
See above, pp. 57, 58.

3. The paragraph on Confidence (J 63 above,

P- 79).

Under the heart (A"itta).

4. The paragraph on 'Guarded is the door of
his senses' ($64 above, pp. 79, 80).

5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and Self-
possessed' {§ 65 above, pp. 80, 81).

6. The paragraph on Simplicity of Life, being
content with little {§ 66 above, p. 81).

7. The paragraphs on Emancipation from
the Five Hindrances — covetousness, ill-temper,
laziness, worry, and perplexity (§§ 67-74 above,
pp. 82-84).

8. The paragraph on the Joy and Peace, that,
as a result of this emancipation, fills his whole
being (§ 75 above, p. 84).

9. The paragraphs on the Four Ecstasies
(6^anas, — §§ 75-82 above, pp. 84-86).

Under Intelligence (Pa£»a).

10. The paragraphs on the Insight arising
from Knowledge (7^a;za-dassana, — {{83, 84 above,
pp. 86, 87.)

11. The paragraphs on the power of pro-
jecting mental images (§§ 85, 86 above, p. 87).

12. The paragraphs on the five modes of
special intuition (abhmwa) : —

a. The practice of Iddhi.

b. Hearing heavenly sounds.

c. Knowledge of other people's thoughts.

d. Knowledge of one's own previous births.

e. Knowledge of other people's previous
births.

13. The realisation of the Four Noble
Truths, the destruction of the Intoxications,
and the attainment of Arahatship.]

' And there is no other state of blissful attainment


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 237

in conduct and heart and mind which is, Kassapa,
higher and sweeter than this l.

[174] 21. 'Now there are some recluses and
Brahmans, Kassapa, who lay emphasis on conduct.
They speak, in various ways, in praise of morality.
But so fat as regards the really noble, the highest con-
duct, I am aware of no one who is equal to myself, much
less superior. And it is I who have gone the furthest
therein ; that is, in the highest conduct (of the Path).

' There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa,
who lay emphasis on self-mortification, and scrupulous
care of others. They speak in various ways in praise
of self-torture and of austere scrupulousness. But so
far as regards the really noblest, the highest sort of
self-mortification and scrupulous regard for others,
I am aware of no one else who is equal to myself,
much less superior. And it is I who have gone the
furthest therein ; that is, in the highest sort of
scrupulous regard for others 2.

' There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa,
who lay emphasis on intelligence. They speak, in
various ways, in praise of intelligence. But so far as
regards the really noblest, the highest intelligence, I am
aware of no one else who is equal to myself, much less
superior. And it is I who have gone the furthest
therein ; that is, in the highest Wisdom 3 (of the Path).

1 ' And by this/ says Buddhaghosa, ' he means Arahatship. For the
doctrine of the Exalted One has Arahatship as its end.'

8 At Ahguttara II, 200 (compare M. I, 240-242) it is said that those
addicted to tapo-gigukkhS. are incapable of Arahatship. Gotama must
either, therefore, be here referring to his years of penance before he
attained NirvSwa under the Tree of Wisdom ; or he must be putting
a new meaning into the expression, and taking ' the higher scrupulous-
ness' in the sense of the self-control of the Path. Probably both are
implied.

Gignkkhi is translated by Childers as 'disgust, loathing,' follow-
ing the Sanskrit dictionaries. The example of it given at M. I, 78 is
' being so mindful, in going out or coming in, that pity is stirred up
in one even towards a drop of water, to the effect that: "may I not
bring injury on the minute creatures therein." ' It comes therefore
to very nearly the same thing as ahizrcsa.

3 Adhipa»«&. From Ahguttara II, 93 it is clear that this is the


238 VIII. KASSAPA-siHANADA SUTTA.

' There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa,
■who lay emphasis on emancipation. They speak, in
various ways, in praise of emancipation. But so far
as regards the really noblest, the highest emancipation,
I am aware of no one else who is equal to myself,
much less superior. And it is I who have gone the
furthest therein ; that is, in the most complete emanci-
pation (of the Path).

[175] 22. 'Now it may well be, Kassapa, that the
recluses of adverse schools may say : " The Samara
Gotama utters forth a lion's roar ; but it is in solitude
that he roars, not where men are assembled." Then
should they be answered : " Say not so. The Samara
Gotama utters his lion's roar, and that too in the
assemblies where men congregate."

'And it may well be, Kassapa, that the recluses of
adverse schools should thus, in succession, raise each
of the following objections : —

" But it is not in full confidence that he roars : —

" But men put no questions to him : —

" But even when questioned, he cannot answer : —

" But even when he answers, he gives no satisfaction
by his exposition of the problem put : —

" But men do not hold his opinion worthy to be
listened to : —

" But even when men listen to his word, they
experience no conviction therefrom : —

" But even when convinced, men give no outward
sign of their faith : —

" But even when they give such outward sign, they
arrive not at the truth : —

" But even when they arrive at the truth they cannot
carry it out : " —

• Then in each such case, Kassapa, they should be
answrered as before, until the answer runs : — " Say not
so. For the Samara Gotama both utters forth his

wisdom of the higher stages only of the Path, not of Arahatship. For
the man who has adhipa««a has then to strive on till he attains to
Arahatship. Puggala Pa««atti IV, 26 is not really inconsistent with
this.


THE NAKED ASCETIC. 239

lion's roar, and that too in assemblies where men
congregate, and in full confidence in the justice of his
claim, and men put their questions to him on that, and
on being questioned he expounds the problem put, and
by his exposition thereof satisfaction arises in their
hearts, and they hold it worthy to listen to his word,
and in listening to it they experience conviction, and
being convinced they give outward signs thereof,
and they penetrate even to the truth, and having
grasped it they are able also to carry the truth out !

23. ' I was staying once, Kassapa, at Ra^agaha, on
the hill called the Vulture's Peak. And there a follower
of the same mode of life as yours, by name [176]
Nigrodha, asked me a question about the higher forms
of austere scrupulousness of life. And having been
thus questioned I expounded the problem put. And
when I had thus answered what he asked, he was well
pleased, as if with a great joy 1/

1 And who, Sir, on hearing the doctrine of the
Exalted One, would not be well pleased, as if with
a great joy. I also, who have now heard the doctrine
of the Exalted One, am thus well pleased, even as if
with a great joy. Most excellent, Lord, are the words
of thy mouth, most excellent, just as if a man were to
set up what has been thrown down, or were to reveal
that which has been hidden away, or were to point out
the right road to him who has gone astray, or were to
bring a lamp into the darkness, so that those who have
eyes could see external forms — just even so, Lord, has
the truth been made known to me, in many a figure,
by the Exalted One. And I, even I, betake myself as
my guide to the Exalted One, and to the Doctrine,
and to the Brotherhood. I would fain, Lord, renounce
the world under the Exalted One ; I would fain be
admitted to his Order.'

24. 'Whosoever, Kassapa, having formerly been
a member of another school, wishes to renounce the
world and receive initiation in this doctrine and

1 The whole conversation will be translated below. It forms the sub-
ject of the Udumbarika Sihanada Suttanta, No. 25 in the Digha.


240 vin. kassapa- si hanad a sutta.

discipline, he remains in probation for four months \
And at the end of the four months the brethren,
exalted in spirit, give him initiation, and receive him
into the Order, raising him up into the state of a Bhik-
khu. But nevertheless I recognise, in such cases, the
distinction there may be between individuals.'

' Since, Lord, the four months' probation is the
regular custom, I too, then, will remain on probation
for that time. Then let the brethren, exalted in spirit,
give me initiation and raise me up into the state of
a Bhikkhu.' [177]

So Kassapa, the naked ascetic, received initiation,
and was admitted to membership of the Order under
the Exalted One. And from immediately after his
initiation the venerable Kassapa remained alone and
separate, earnest, zealous, and master of himself.
And e'er long he attained to that supreme goal 2 for
the sake of which clansmen go forth from the household
life into the homeless state : yea, that supreme goal
did he, by himself, and while yet in this visible world,
bring himself to the knowledge of, and continue to
realise, and to see face to face. And he became sure
that rebirth was at an end for him, that the higher life
had been fulfilled, that everything that should be done
had been accomplished, and that after this present life
there would be no beyond !

And so the venerable Kassapa became yet another
among the Arahats.

Here ends the Kassapa-Sihanada Suttanta3.

1 According to the rule laid down in Vmaya I, 69.

8 That is, Arahatship, Nirv&na.

8 The Burmese MSS. call it the Mahd Sfhanada Sutta, which is
also the name given in the MSS. to the Twelfth Sutta in the Magg/i-
ima — called there in the text (p. 83), and in the Milinda (p. 396), the
Lomahawzsana Pariyaya. We have had an instance above (p. 55) of
several different names being given, in the text itself, to the same
Sutta. And I had already, in 1880, called attention in my ' Buddhist
Birth Stories ' (pp. lx, lx-i) to the numerous instances in the Gataka
Book of the same Gataka being known, in the collection itself, by
different names. It is evident that the titles were considered a very
secondary matter.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


P07Y77APADA SUTTA.

This Sutta, beginning with a discussion on the mystery.
of trance, passes over, by a natural transition, or associa-
tion of ideas, to the question of soul. For trance (as is
pointed out by Po////apada in § 6) had been explained by
adherents of the soul theory as produced by the supposed
fact of a ' soul ' having gone away out of the body.

As is well known, this hypothesis of a soul inside the body
has been adopted, and no doubt quite independently, among
so many different peoples in all parts of the world that it
may fairly be described as almost universal. It is even by
no means certain that it has not been quite universal ; in
which case its adoption is probably a necessary result of
the methods of thought possible to men in early times.
But it is, unfortunately, very easy for us, who now no
longer use the word ' soul ' exclusively in its original sense,
to misunderstand the ancient view, and to import into it
modern conceptions *. The oldest and simplest form of the
hypothesis was frankly materialistic. The notion was that
of a double: — shadowy, no doubt, and impalpable — but still
a physical double of the physical body; and made up,
like the body, of the four elements.

When the ' soul ' was away the body lay still, without
moving, apparently without life, in trance, or disease, or
sleep. When the 'soul* came back, motion began again,
and life. Endless were the corollaries of a theory which,
however devoid of the essential marks of a sound scientific
hypothesis, underlies every variety of early speculation in
India, as elsewhere.

Long before the date of the earliest records of Indian
belief this theory, among the ancestors of the men to whom
we owe those records, had gone through a whole course of
development of which the Vedas show us only the results.
They take the theory so completely for granted that the

1 See above, p. 189.
II. R


242 IX. TOTTHAFADA SUTTA.

details of it, as they held it, are nowhere set out in full,
or in any detail. The hypothesis having been handed down
from time immemorial, and being accepted by all, it was
considered amply sufficient to refer to it in vague and indirect
phraseology l. And the stage which the theory had reached
before the time when our Sutta was composed can only be
pieced together imperfectly from incidental references in the
Upanishads.

I have collected -these references together in the article
already referred to (J.R.A.S.. 1899), and need here only state
the result. This is that the Upanishads show how the whole
theory of the priests, as there set out, is throughout based
on this old theory of a soul inside the body. The numerous
details are full of inconsistencies, more especially on the point,
so important to theologians, as to what happens to the soul
after it flies away from the body. But not one of these
inconsistent views leaves for a moment the basis of the
soul theory. That is always taken for granted. And the
different views set out in these priestly manuals by no means
exhaust the list of speculations about the soul that must have
been current in India when Buddhism arose, and when our
Sutta was composed. There were almost certainly other
views, allied to one or other of the thirty-two theories
controverted above (pp. 44, 45), A careful search would
no doubt reveal passages, even in the later priestly literature
itself, acknowledging views which do not happen to be referred
to in the Upanishads, but which bear the stamp of great anti-
quity— such passages as Mahabharata XII, 11704, where we
are told that if the soul, in departing from the body, goes
out by way of the knees, it will go to the Sadhyas.

However, that may be, it is certain that all the religions,
and all the philosophies, the existing records show to have
existed in India, in the time when Buddhism arose, are
based on this belief in a subtle but material 'soul' inside
the body, and in shape like the body. It would scarcely
be going too far to say that all religions, and all philosophies,
then existing in the world, were based upon it. Buddhism
stands alone among the religions of India in ignoring the
soul. The vigour and originality of this new departure
are evident from the complete isolation in which Buddhism
stands, in this respect, from all other religious systems then
existing in the world. And the very great difficulty which
those European writers, who are still steeped in animistic

1 For souls inside animals, see Rig-veda I, 163, 6; for souls
inside plants, Atharva-veda V, 5, 7.


INTRODUCTION. 243

preconceptions, find in appreciating, or even understanding
the doctrine, may help us to realise how difficult it must
have been for the originator of it to take so decisive and
so fr.r-reaching a step in religion and philosophy, at so
early a period in the history of human thought.

Nearly a quarter of a century ago I put this in the fore-
front of my first exposition of Buddhism. The publication,
since then, of numerous texts has shown how the early
Buddhist writers had previously followed precisely the same
method l. They reserve, as is only natural, the enthusiasm
of their poetry and eloquence for the positive side of their
doctrine, for Arahatship. But the doctrine of the imperma-
nence of each and every condition, physical or mental ; the
absence of any abiding principle, any entity, any sub-stance, any
'soul' (ani££ata, nissattata, ni^ivata, anattalakkha-
«ata, na h'ettha sassato bhavo atta va upalabbhati)
is treated, from the numerous points of view from which it
can be approached, in as many different Suttas.

For the most part, one point only is dealt with in each
text. In our Sutta it is, in the first place, the gradual change
of mental conditions, of states of consciousness: and then,
secondly, the point that personality, individuality (atta-
pa/'ilabho) is only a convenient expression in common use
in the world, and therefore made use of also by the Tathagata,
but only in such a manner that he is not led astray by its
ambiguity, by its apparent implication of some permanent
entity.


1 See the authorities quoted in my 'American Lectures/ pp. 64, 65.


R 2


IX. FOTT//AVADA sutta.

[The Soul Theory.]

[178] i. Thus have I heard. The Exalted One was
once staying at Savatthi rn Anatha Pmdika's pleasaunce
in the (7eta Wood. Now at that time Po^/zapada l,
the wandering mendicant, was dwelling at the hall
put up in Queen Mallikas Park for the discussion of
systems of opinion — the hall set round with a row
of Tinduka trees, and known by the name of ' The
Hall2.' And there was with him a great following of
mendicants ; to wit, three hundred mendicants.

2 3. Now the Exalted One, who had put on his under
garment in the early morning, proceeded in his robes,
and with his bowl in his hand, into Savatthi for alms.


1 This, for the reasons given above at p. 195, is probably a gotta
name ; and, as such, a patronymic from the personal name, also
Po///fepSda, meaning ' born under Po/Mapada (the old name for the
25th lunar asterism, afterwards called Bhadrapada). Buddhaghosa
says that as a layman he had been a wealthy man of the Brahman
Va««a. If so, it is noteworthy that he addresses the Buddha, not as'
Gotama, but as bhante.

2 The very fact of the erection of such a place is another proof of
the freedom of thought prevalent in the Eastern valley of the Ganges
in the sixth century b.c. Buddhaghosa tells us that after ' The Hall '
had been established, others near it had been built in honour of
various famous teachers ; but the group of buildings continued to be
known as 'The Hall/ There Brahmans, NigawMas, A/frelas,
Paribba^-akas, and other teachers met and expounded, or discussed,
their views.

It is mentioned elsewhere. See M. II, 22 ; Sum. I, 32.
Mallika was one of the queens of Pasenadi, king of Kosala. See
Gat. Ill, 405; IV, 437.

3 §§ 2-6 recur, nearly, at M. I, 513 ; II, 1, 2 ; S. IV, 398.


THE SOUL THEORY. 245

And he thought : ' It is too early now to enter Savatthi
for alms. Let me go to the Hall, the debating hall
in the Mallika Park, where Po///*apada is.' And he
did so.

3. Now at that time Po///zapada was seated with the
company of the mendicants all talking with loud voices,
with shouts and tumult, all sorts of worldly talk : to
wit, tales of kings, of robbers, of ministers of state ;
tales of war, of terrors, of battles ; talks about foods
and drinks, about clothes and beds and garlands and
perfumes ; talks about relationships ; talks about equi-
pages, villages, towns, cities, and countries; tales about
women and heroes ; gossip such as that at street
corners, and places whence water is fetched ; ghost
stories ; desultory chatter ; legends about the creation
of the land or sea ; and speculations about existence
and non-existence1.

[179] 4. And Po///&apada, the mendicant, caught sight
of the Exalted One approaching in the distance. And
at the sight of him he called the assembly to order,
saying : ' Be still, venerable Sirs, and make no noise.
Here is the -Samawa Gotama coming. Now that
venerable one delights in quiet, and speaks in praise
of quietude. How well it were if, seeing how quiet
the assembly is, he should see fit to join us ! ' And
when he spake thus, the mendicants kept silence.

5. Now the Exalted One came on to where Po/Ma-
pada, the mendicant was. And the latter said to him :

' May the Exalted One come near. We bid him
welcome. It is long since the Exalted One took the
departure 2 of coming our way. Let him take a seat.
Here is a place spread ready.'

And the Exalted One sat down. And Po^apada,
the mendicant, brought a low stool, and sat down
beside him. And to him thus seated the Exalted One
said :


1 For notes on this list, see above, p. 14, § 17.

2 Idhagamanaya pariyayawz akasi. So M. I, 252, 326, 481,
514, &c. Perhaps 'since you made this change in your regular
habits.'


246 IX. POT77/APADA SUTTA.

' What was the subject, Po/Mapada, that you were
seated here together to discuss ; and what was the talk
among you that has been interrupted ? '

6. And when he had thus spoken, Po/^apada said :
4 Never mind, Sir, the subject we were seated together
to discuss. There will be no difficulty in the Exalted
One hearing afterwards about that. But long ago, Sir,
on several occasions, when various teachers, Samaras
and Brahmans, had met together, and were seated in
the debating hall, the talk fell on trance1, and the
question was : [180] "How then, Sirs, is the cessation
of consciousness brought about ? "

' Now on that some said thus : " Ideas come to a man
without a reason and without a cause, and so also do
they pass away. At the time when they spring up
within him, then he becomes conscious ; when they
pass away, then he becomes unconscious." Thus did
they explain the cessation of consciousness.

' On that another said : " That, Sirs, will never be so
as you say. Consciousness, Sirs, is a man's soul. It is
the soul that comes and goes, When the soul comes
into a man then he becomes conscious, when the
soul goes away out of a man then he becomes uncon-
scious." Thus do others explain the cessation of
consciousness 2.

' On that another said : " That, Sirs, will never be as
you say. But there are certain Samaras and Brahmans
of great power and influence. It is they who infuse
consciousness into a man, and draw it away out of him.
When they infuse it into him he becomes conscious,
when they draw it away he becomes unconscious." Thus
do others explain the cessation of consciousness 3.

1 Abhisa««a-nirodho, 'the cessation of consciousness.'

2 Buddhaghosa explains that they came to this conclusion on the
ground of such instances as that of the Rishi Migasingt, who, through
love of the celestial nymph Alambusa, fell into a trance that lasted for
three years. This must be a different tale from that of the Rishi
Isisinga of Gataka No. 523, whom Alambusa tries in vain to seduce.
Compare Vimana Vatthu XVIII, 11 ; L, 26.

3 Buddhaghosa explains that the ground for this view is the way in
which sorcerers work charms (Athabbanika athabbanawz payo-


THE SOUL THEORY. 24;


1 Then, Sir, the memory of the Exalted One arose
in me, and I thought : " Would that the Exalted One,
would that the Happy One were he/e, he who is so
skilled in these psychical states." For the Exalted One
would know how trance is brought about l. How, then,
Sir, is there cessation of consciousness ? '

7. ' Well, as to that, Po/Mapada, those Samawas and
Brahmans who said that ideas come to a man and pass
away without a reason, and without a cause, are wrong
from the very commencement. For it is precisely
through a reason, by means of a cause, that ideas come
and go. [i8i] By training some ideas arise. By training
others pass away.

' And what is that training ? ' continued the Exalted
One.

[He then sets out the first part of the system of selfi
tr aining for the Bhikkhu, as translated above, pp. 78-84,
from the Samanna-phala, as follows : —

1 . The introductory paragraphs on the appearance of
a Buddha, his preaching, the conviction of a hearer and
his renunciation of the world.

2. The tract on the Silas, the minor details of mere
morality.

3. The paragraphs on Confidence.

4. The paragraphs on ' Guarded is the door of his
senses!

5. The paragraphs on * Mindful and Self-possessed!

6. The paragraphs on Solitude.

7. The paragraphs on the conquest of the Five
Hindrances.

And goes on :]

[182] 10. ' But when he has realised that these Five
Hindrances have been put away from within him,
a gladness springs up within him, and joy arises to
him thus gladdened, and so rejoicing all his frame

^enti — perhaps 'Atharva priests work out an Atharva charm') which
make a man appear as dead as if his head had been cut off ; and then
bring him back to his natural condition.

1 Sa««a-nirodhassa pakata««u. So Buddhaghosa. Compare
Vin. II, 199.


248 IX. P07THAPADA SUTTA.

becomes at ease, and being thus at ease he is filled
with a sense of peace, and in that peace his heart is
stayed. Then estranged from lusts, aloof from evil
dispositions, he enters into and remains in the First
Rapture (the First CHna) — a state of joy and ease
born of detachment, reasoning and investigation going
on the while. Then that idea, (that consciousness)1, of
lusts, that he had before, passes away. And thereupon
there arises within him a subtle, but actual, conscious-
ness of the joy and peace arising from detachment, and
he becomes a person to whom that idea is consciously
present.

1 Thus is it that through training one idea, one sort
of consciousness, arises ; and through training another
passes away. This is the training I spoke of,' said the
Exalted One.

11. 'And again, Po/Mapada, the Bhikkhu, sup-
pressing all reasoning and investigation, enters into
and abides in the Second Rapture (the Second GVzana)
— a state of joy and ease, born of the serenity of con-
centration, when no reasoning or investigation goes
on, a state of elevation of mind, a tranquillisation of
the heart within. Then that subtle, but actual, con-
sciousness of the joy and peace arising from detach-
ment, that he just had, passes away. And thereupon
there arises a subtle, but actual, consciousness of the
joy and peace born of concentration. And he becomes
a person conscious of that.

[183] ' Thus also is it that through training one idea,
one sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke
of,' said the Exalted One.

12. 'And again, Po//^apada, the Bhikkhu, holding
aloof from joy, becomes equable ; and, mindful and self-
possessed, he experiences in his body that ease which
the Arahats talk of when they say : " The man serene
and self-possessed is well at ease." And so he enters

1 Sa««a which is used in a sense covering both 'idea' and 'con-
sciousness.' Eka sa»«a is therefore rendered below, in the refrain,
' one idea, one sort of consciousness.'


THE SOUL THETVRY. 249

into and abides in the Third Rapture (the Third
^ana). Then that subtle, but yet actual, conscious-
ness, that he just had, of the joy and peace born of
concentration, passes away. And thereupon there
arises a subtle, but yet actual, consciousness of the
bliss of equanimity. And he becomes a person con-
scious of that.

' Thus Jsc is it that through training one idea, one
sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke
of,' said the Exalted One.

13. 'And again, Po/Mapada, the Bhikkhu, by the
putting away alike of ease and of pain, by the passing
away of any joy, any elation, he had previously felt,
enters into and abides in the Fourth Rapture (the
Fourth G^ana) — a state of pure self-possession and
equanimity, without pain and without ease. Then
that subtle, but yet actual, consciousness, that he just
had, of the bliss of equanimity, passes away. And
thereupon there arises to him a subtle, but yet actual,
consciousness of the absence of pain, and of the
absence of ease !. And he becomes a person con-
scious of that.

4 Thus also is it that through training one idea, one
sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke of,'
said the Exalted One.

14. ' And again, Po/Mapada, the Bhikkhu, by passing
beyond the consciousness of form, by putting an end
to the sense of resistance, by paying no heed to the
idea of distinction, thinking : " The space is infinite,"
reaches up to and remains in the mental state in which

1 Sukha and dukkha. Well-fare and ill-fare, well-being and ill-
being, ease and dis-ease, uneasiness, discomfort. ' Pain ' is both too
strong a word, and has too frequently an exclusively physical sense,
to be a good rendering of dukkha. It is unfortunate that dis-ease
has acquired a special connotation which prevents the word being
used here; and that we have no pair of correlative words corre-
sponding to those in the Pali. For pain we have vedana often
(M» I, 10; M. P. S., chapters 2 and 4; Mil. 134), and sometimes
dukkha-vedanS (Mil. 112).


2 50 IX. POTTtfAPADA SUTTA.

the mind is concerned only with the consciousness of
the infinity of space. Then the consciousness, th?t
he previously had, of form passes away, and there
arises in him the blissful consciousness, subtle bul yet
actual, of his being concerned only with the infinity
of space. And he becomes a person conscious of
that.

4 Thus also is it that through training 01.° idea, one
sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke
of,' said the Exalted One.

[184] 15. 'And again, Po////apada, the Bhikkhu, by
passing quite beyond the consciousness of space as
infinite, thinking: "Cognition1 is infinite," reaches up
to and remains in the mental state in which the mind
is concerned only with the infinity of cognition. Then
the subtle, but yet actual, consciousness, that he just
had, of the infinity of space, passes away. And there
arises in him a consciousness, subtle but yet actual,
of everything being within the sphere of the infinity of
cognition. And he becomes a person conscious of
that.

' Thus also is it that through training one idea, one
sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke of,'
said the Exalted One.

16. 'And again, Po/Mapada, the Bhikkhu, by pass-
ing quite beyond the consciousness of the infinity of
cognition, thinking : " There is nothing that really is,"
reaches up to and remains in the mental state in
which the mind is concerned only with the unreality of
things. Then that sense of everything being within
the sphere of infinite cognition, that he just had, passes
away. And there arises in him a consciousness,
subtle but yet actual, of unreality as the object of his
thought2. And he becomes a person conscious of that.

1 Vwnanz; the exact translation of this word is still uncertain.
Perhaps ' mind ' is meant.

2 On these last three sections, which set out the fourth, fifth, and
sixth stages of Deliverance (the Vimokkhas). see my former transla-


THE SOUL THEORY. 25 I

' Thus also is it that through training one idea, one
sort of consciousness, arises ; and through training
another passes away. This is the training I spoke
of,' said the Exalted One.

17. 'So from the time, Po/Mapada, that the Bhikkhu
is thus conscious in a way brought about by himself
(from the time of the First Rapture), he goes on from
one stage to the next, and from that to the next until
he reaches the summit of consciousness. And when
he is on the summit it may occur to him: "To be
thinking at all is the inferior state. 'Twere better
not to be thinking. Were I to go on thinking and
fancying1, these ideas, these states of consciousness,
I have reached to, would pass away, but others, coarser
ones, might arise. So I will neither think nor fancy
any more." And he does not. And to him neither
thinking any more, nor fancying, the ideas, the states
of consciousness, he had, pass away ; and no others,
coarser than they, arise. So he falls into trance.
Thus is it, Po/Mapada, that the attainment of the
cessation of conscious ideas takes place step by step.

18. ' Now what do you think, PW/^apada ? Have
you ever heard, before this, of this gradual attainment
of the cessation of conscious ideas ? '

' No, Sir, I have not. But I now understand what
you say as follows : [and he repeated the words of
section 17.]'

' That is right, Po/Mapada V

[185] 19. 'And does the Exalted One teach that
there is one summit of consciousness, or that there are
several ? '


tion at p. 52 of my 'Buddhist Suttas' (S. B. E.) and the notes on
PP> 5°j 51- These stages are almost exactly the same as the views
controverted above at pp. 47, 48. And the doctrine of the sixth
Vimokkha, as we see from M. I, 164, formed part of the teaching of
Gotama's teacher, A/ara Kalama.

1 Abhisawzkhareyyazrc, perhaps 'perfecting' or 'planning out.'

2 The foregoing discussion on trance is the earliest one on that
subject in Indian literature. Trance is not mentioned in the pre-
Buddhistic Upanishads.


252 IX. VOTTHAFADA SUTTA.

1 In my opinion, Po///£apada, there is one, and there
are also several/

' But how can the Exalted teach that there both is
one, and that there are also several ? '

' As he attains to the cessation (of one idea, one
state of consciousness) after another, so does he reach,
one after another, to different summits up to the last.
So is it, Po///&ap&da, that I put forward both one
summit and several.'

20. ' Now is it, Sir, the idea, the state of conscious-
ness, that arises first, and then knowledge ; or does
knowledge arise first, and then the idea, the state of
consciousness ; or do both arise simultaneously, neither
of them before or after the other ? '

' It is the idea, Po/Mapada, the state of conscious-
ness, that arises first, and after that knowledge. And
the springing up of knowledge is dependent on the
springing up of the idea, of the state of consciousness l.
And this may be understood from the fact that a man
recognises : " It is from this cause or that that know-
ledge has arisen to me." '

21. 'Is then, Sir, the consciousness identical with
a man's soul, or is consciousness one thing, and the
soul another 2 ? '

' But what theft, Po^apdda ? Do you really fall
back on the soul ? '

[186] ' I take for granted3, Sir, a material soul, having

1 Nina, depends on sa»»&; that is, I take it, that the mass of
knowledge a man has, his insight, his power of judgment, depends
on the ideas, the states of consciousness (here, in this connection, those
that arise in the Guanas, &c.) that are themselves due to the action
on his sense organs of the outside world ; but are in so far under
his own control that he can shut out some, and give play to others.

2 Buddhaghosa says that as a village pig, even if you bathe it in
scented water, and anoint it with perfumes, and deck it with garlands,
and lay it to rest on the best bed, will not feel happy there, but will go
straight back to the dung-heap to take its ease ; so Po///tapada, having
tasted the sweet taste of the doctrine of the Three Signs (of the
impermanence, the pain, and the absence of any abiding principle)
found in everything, harks back to the superstition of the ' soul.'

3 Pa£^emi. This is another of the words the exact sense of
which, in Pi/aka times, is still doubtful. It means primarily ' to go


THE SOUL THEORY. 253

form, built up of the four elements, nourished by solid
food1.'

1 And if there were such a soul, Po/Mapada, then,
even so, your consciousness would be one thing, and
your soul another. That, Po/Mapada, you may know
by the following considerations. Granting, Po/Mapada,
a material soul, having form, built up of the four
elements, nourished by solid food ; still some ideas,
some states of consciousness, would arise to the man,
and others would pass away. On this account also,
Po/^apada, you can see how consciousness must be
one thing, and soul another.'

22. ' Then, Sir, I fall back on a soul made of mind,
with all its major and minor parts complete, not
deficient in any organ2.'

' And granting, Po#//apada, you had such a soul, the
same argument would apply3.'

[187] 23. 'Then, Sir, I fall back on a soul without
form, and made of consciousness.'

1 And granting, Po/Mapada, you had such a soul,
still the same argument would apply3.'

back towards, to revert,' and is so used in the Pi/akas. So in
G. V, 196 and in S. N. 662 (quoted as verse 125 in the Dhammapada,
and recurring also G. Ill, 203 ; S. I, 13, 164). But somewhat in the
same way as to go back home is to go to a place of security ; so
in a secondary sense, of opinions or reasons, it means apparently to
revert to them, fall back on them, harp on them, with the connotation
of regarding them as certain. At S. N. 803 it can be taken either
way. At S. N. 788, 803, 840 = 908 ; M. I, 309, 445, and in the
question and answer here, the latter seems to be the sense.

1 Buddhaghosa says this was not his real opinion. He held to that
set out below in § 23. But he advances this, more elementary,
proposition, just to see how the Buddha would meet it. It is nearly
the same as the first of the seven propositions about the soul contro-
verted in the Brahma-^ala (above, pp. 46-48).

2 This sort of soul is nearly the same as the one referred to above,
in the Brahma-^ala (§ 12, p. 47); and in the Sama««a-phala (§ 85,
p. 87). It is a soul the exact copy, in every respect, of the body,
and material, but so subtle that it can be described as 'made of
mind.'

8 The text repeats the answer given in § 21, with the necessary
alterations.. The supposition in § 23 is quoted at Asl. 360. The
argument is of course that, even if Po/Mapada had any one of these


2 54 IX- POTTHAPABA SUTTA.


24. ' But is it possible, Sir, for me to understand
whether consciousness is the man's soul, or the one is
different from the other ? '

' Hard is it for you, Po///zapada, holding, as you do,
different views, other things approving themselves to
you, setting different aims before yourself, striving
after a different perfection, trained in a different system
of doctrine, to grasp this matter ! '

25-27. 'Then, Sir, if that be so, tell me at least:
" Is the world eternal ? Is this alone the truth, and
any other view mere folly ? " '

1 That, PozY/zapada, is a matter on which I have
expressed no opinion.'

[Then, in the same terms, Po/Mapada asked each of
the following questions : —

2. Is the world not eternal ? —

3. Is the world finite ? —

4. Is the world infinite ? —

[188] 5. Is the soul the same as the body ? —

6. Is the soul one thing, and the body another ? —

7. Does one who has gained the truth live again
after death ? —

8. Does he not live again after death ? — ■

9. Does he both live again, and not live again, after
death ? —

10. Does he neither live again, nor not live again,
after death ? —

And to each question the Exalted One made the
same reply : — ]*

1 That too, PorV/zapada, is a matter on which I have
expressed no opinion.'

28. ' But why has the Exalted One expressed no
opinion on that ? '

' This question is not calculated to profit, it is not

three sorts of soul, then he would regard each of them, in the given
case, as a permanent entity. But the consciousness is not an entity.
It is a ' becoming ' only ; subject, as he must (and would) admit, to
constant change. On his own showing then, it is not ' soul.'

1 On these Ten Indeterminates see above, in the Introduction to
the Mahali Sutta.


THE SOUL THEORY. 255

concerned with the Norm (the Dhamma), it does not
redound even to the elements of right conduct, nor
to detachment, nor to purification from lusts, nor to
quietude, nor to tranquillisation of heart, nor to real
knowledge, nor to the insight (of the higher stages of
the Path), nor to Nirvana. Therefore is it that I ex-
press no opinion upon it.'

[189] 29. ' Then what is it that the Exalted One has
determined ? '

' I have expounded, Po/Mapada, what pain1 is ;
I have expounded what is the origin of pain ; I have
expounded what is the cessation of pain ; I have ex-
pounded what is the method by which one may reach
the cessation of pain2.'

30. 'And why has the Exalted One put forth a
statement as to that ? '

' Because that question, Po///£apada, is calculated to
profit, is concerned with the Norm, redounds to the
beginnings of right conduct, to detachment, to purifica-
tion from lusts, to quietude, to tranquillisation of
heart, to real knowledge, to the insight of the higher
stages of the Path and to Nirvana. Therefore is it,
Po^/zapada, that I have put forward a statement as to
that'

1 That is so, O Exalted One. That is so, O Happy
One. And now let the Exalted One do what seemeth
to him fit'

And the Exalted One rose from his seat, and de-
parted thence.

31. Now no sooner had the Exalted One gone away
than those mendicants bore down upon Po^/zapada, the
mendicant, from all sides with a torrent of jeering and
biting words3, saying: 'Just so, forsooth, this Yotthz.-
pada gives vent to approval of whatsoever the Samara

1 Dukkha. See the note above on § 13.

2 These are the Four Truths, set out more fully in my ' Buddhist
Suttas' (S. B. E.), pp. 148-150.

3 Va^aya sannitodakena saw^ambhari/zz akazrcsu. So also
at S. II, 282 and A. I, i8f. Probably from the roots tud and
£-ambh.


256 IX. POrrffAPADA SUTTA.

Gotama says, with his : " That is so, O Exalted One.
That is so, O Happy One." Now we, on the other
hand, fail to see that the Sama/za Gotama has put for-
ward any doctrine that is distinct with regard to any
one of the ten points raised.' And they went through
them all in detail.

[190] But when they spake thus Po///6apada, the
mendicant, replied : ' Neither do I see that he puts
forward, as certain, any proposition with respect to
those points. But the Samawa Gotama propounds
a method in accordance with the nature of things, true
and fit, based on the Norm, and certain by reason of
the Norm. And how could I refuse to approve, as
well said, what has been so well said by the Samara
Gotama as he propounded that ? '

32. Now after the lapse of two or three days Afitta,
the son of the elephant trainer1, and Po/Mapada, the
mendicant, came to the place where the Exalted One
was staying. And on their arrival A'itta, the son of
the elephant trainer, bowed low to the Exalted One,
and took his seat on one side. And Po//^apada, the
mendicant, exchanged with the Exalted One the greet-
ings and compliments of courtesy and friendship, and
took his seat on one side, and when he was so seated
he told the Exalted One how the mendicants had jeered
at him, and how he had replied.

[l9l] 33. 'All those mendicants, Po///zapada, are
blind, and see not. You are the only one, with eyes
to see, among them. Some things, Po/Z/zapada, I have
laid down as certain, other things I have declared un-

1 There are seven or eight Pittas in the books, one of whom, a lay-
man, was placed by the Buddha at the head of the expounders of the
Norm. The A'itta of our passage was famous for the fact that he
joined the Buddha's Order, and then, on one pretext or another, left it
again, no less than seven times. (The same thing is related by I-Tsing
of Bhartr/hari.) He prided himself on his keenness in distinguishing
subtle differences in the meanings of words. And his last revolt was
owing to a discussion of that sort he had had with Maha Ko///nta.
He took refuge with his friend Po////apada, who, says Buddhaghosa,
brought him along with him, on this occasion, with the express
purpose of bringing about a reconciliation.


THE SOUL THEORY. 257


certain. The latter are those ten questions that you
raised, and for the reasons given I hold them matters
of uncertainty. The former are the Four Truths
I expounded, and for the reasons given I hold them
to be matters of certainty.

[192] 34. * There are some Samaras and Brahmans,
Po/Mapada, who hold the following opinion, indulge in
the following speculation : '* The soul is perfectly happy
and healthy after death." And I went to them, and
asked them whether that was their view or not. And
they acknowledged that it was1. And I asked them
whether, so far as they were in the habit of knowing
or perceiving it2, the world (that is, the people in the
world) was perfectly happy, and they answered : " No."

4 Then I asked them : " Or further. Sirs, can you
maintain that you yourselves for a whole night, or for
a whole day, or even for half a night or day, have ever
been perfectly happy ? " And they answered : " No."

' Then I said to them : " Or further, Sirs, do you
know a way, or a method, by which you can realise
a state that is altogether happy ? " And still to that
question they answered : " No."

' And then I said : " Or have you, Sirs, ever heard
the voices of gods who had realised rebirth in a perfectly
happy world, saying : ' Be earnest, O men, and direct
in effort, towards the realisation of (rebirth in) a world
of perfect happiness. For we, in consequence of
similar effort, have been reborn in such a world.' " And
still they answered : " No."

' Now what think you as to that, Po/Mapada ? That
being so, does not the talk of those Samaras and
Brahmans turn out to be without good ground3 ? '

1 Compare above, pp. 44-47.

2 Buddhaghosa takes g a. nam passa/w as plurals.

8 Appa/ihirakataw*. Buddhaghosa explains this as 'witless'
(pa/ibhana-virahitaw). It isthe contrary of sap pa/i hirakata/«
which he explains (on § 45 below) by sappa/iviharawaw. Perhaps
the meaning of the two words is ' apposite ' and ' not apposite '
(compare B. R. on pratihara«a).

Therjs is a closely-allied expression at M. P. S., pp. 26, 32, where
the talk is of disciples who, when a discussion on a wrong opinion has
II. S


258 IX. TOTTH A? ABA SUTTA.

[103] 351. 'Just as if a man should say: "How
I long for, how I love the most beautiful woman in
the land ! "

1 And people should ask him : " Well ! good friend !
this most beautiful woman in the land, whom you so
love and long for, do you know whether that beautiful
woman is a noble lady, or of priestly rank, or of the
trader class, or of menial birth ? "

' And when so asked, he should answer :' " No."
' And people should ask him : " Well ! good friend !
This most beautiful woman in the land, whom you so
love and long for, do you know what her name is, or
her family name, or whether she be tall, or short, or of
medium height; whether she be dark or brunette or
golden in colour 2 ; or in what village, or town, or city
she dwells ? "

' And when so asked, he should answer : " No."
' And people should say to him : " So then, good
friend, whom you know not, neither have seen, her do
you love and long for ? "

1 And when so asked, he should answer : " Yes."
' Now what think you of that, Po/Mapada ? Would
it not turn out, that being so, that the talk of that man
was witless talk ? '


arisen, know how to refute it according to the doctrine (Dharma),
and to preach, on the other hand, a doctrine that is sappa/ihariya/tf ;
that is, a doctrine which, in contra-distinction to the heresy advanced,
is the apposite explanation from the Buddhist point of view. The
Pali word for miracle comes from the same root (prati-har); but to
render here ' unmiraculous ' would make nonsense of the passage, and
both my own and Windisch's rendering of the word in the M. P. S.
('Buddhist Suttas,' p. 43 ; ' Mara und Buddha,' p. 71) must be also
modified accordingly.

On the form compare anuhiramane, quoted at Sum. I, 61 from
the Maha-padhana Suttanta (No. 14 in the Dfgha).

1 This simile recurs in the Teviggu Sutta (translated in my
'Buddhist Suttas,' S. B. E., XI, 175) and in the Maxima II, 33.

2 Mangura-/££^avr. Perhaps ' of sallow complexion.' Compare
M. I, 246 where all these three words for complexion are used.
Manguli itthi at V. Ill, 107 = S. II, 260 is an allied form. In all
these cases an unhealthy complexion is inferred. Here it must
evidently be taken in a favourable sense.


THE SOUL THEORY. 259

[194] 36, 37. ' Then just so also, Po/Mapada, with
the Samaras and Brahmans who talk about the soul
being perfectly happy and healthy after death1. It is
just, Po///£apada, as if a man were to put up a staircase
in a place where four cross roads meet, to mount up
thereby on to the upper storey of a mansion. And
people should say to him : " Well ! good friend ! this
mansion, to mount up into which you are making this
staircase, do you know whether it is in the East, or in
the West, or in the South, or in the North ? whether
it is high, or low, or of medium size ? "

' And when so asked, he should answer : " No."
1 And people should say to him : " But then, good
friend, you are making a staircase to mount up into
a mansion you know not of, neither have seen ! "
' And when so asked, he should answer : " Yes."
1 Now what think you of that, Po///^apada ? Would
it not turn out, that being so, that the talk of that
man was witless talk ? '

' For a truth, Sir, that being so, his talk would turn
out to be witless talk.'

38. ' [Then surely just so, Po/Mapada, with those
Samaras and Brahmans who postulate a soul happy
and healthy after death. For they acknowledge that
they know no such state in this world now. They
acknowledge that they cannot say their own souls have
been happy here even for half a day. And they
acknowledge that they know no way, no method, of
ensuring such a result 2.] Now what think you of that,
Po/Mapada. That being so, does not their talk, too,
turn out to be without good ground ? '

[105] ' For a truth, Sir, that being so, their talk would
turn out to be without good ground/

39. The following three modes of personality,
Po/Map&da, (are commonly acknowledged in the
world): — material, immaterial, and formless3. The

1 § 34 is here repeated in the text.

2 § 34 repeated.

8 O/ariko, manomayo, and arupo atta-pa/ilabho. Buddha-
ghosa here explains atta-pa/ilabho by attabhava-pa/ilabho;

S 2


260 IX. POTTHAPADA SUTTA.

first has form, is made up of the four elements, and is
nourished by solid food. The second has no form, is
made up of mind, has all its greater and lesser limbs com-
plete, and all the organs perfect. The third is without
form, and is made up of consciousness only.

40-42. ' Now I teach a doctrine, Po/Z/zapada, with
respect to each of these \ that leads to the putting
off of that personality ; so that, if you walk according
to that doctrine, the evil dispositions one has acquired
may be put away 2 ; the dispositions which tend to
purification3 may increase; and one may continue to see
face to face, and by himself come to realise, the full
perfection and grandeur of wisdom.

[196] ' Now it may well be, Po/Z/zapada, that you
think : "Evil dispositions may « be put away, the dis-

and on attabhava he says (Asl. 308) that it is used for the body,
or the five Skandhas, because the fool jumps to the conclusion :
' This is my soul.'

These three forms of personality correspond nearly to the planes,
or divisions, into which the worlds are divided in the later Buddhist
theory — (1) the eleven kamava^ara worlds, from purgatory below to
the deva heavens above, both inclusive: (2) the rupava^ara worlds,
which are the sixteen worlds of the Brahma gods, and are attained to
by the practice of the Four Raptures (the Four GMnas) : (3) the
four arftpSva^ara worlds, attained to by the practice of four of the
Vimokkhas (Nos. 4-7).

It will be noticed that the lowest of these three planes includes all
the forms of existence known in the West, from hell beneath to
heaven above. And that the others are connected with the pre-
Buddhistic idea of ecstatic meditation leading to special forms of
re-existence.

But it is clear from § 58 below that the opinion here put forward is
intended to represent, not any Buddhist theory, but a view commonly
entertained in the world, such as Po/Mapada himself would admit,
and indeed has admitted (above, §§ 21-23). ^n either case, of course,
these modes of existence would be, from the Buddhist point of view,
purely temporary. They are the fleeting union of qualities that make
up, for a time only, an unstable individuality.

1 The whole paragraph is repeated for each of the three modes of
personality.

2 These sawzkilesika dhammi are identified by Buddhaghosa
with the twelve kamava£ara-akusala-£ittappada of Dhamma
Sawzgawi 365-430. But compare, contra, Dh. S. 1241 (where, of
course, the word apariydpanna must be struck out).

3 Buddhaghosa explains these as ' tranquillity and insight.'


THE SOUL THEORY. 26 1

positions that tend to purification may increase, one
may continue to see face to face, and by himself come
to realise, the full perfection and grandeur of wisdom,
but one may continue sad." Now that, Po^apada>
would not be accurate judgment. When such con-
ditions are fulfilled, then there will be joy, and happi-
ness, and peace, and in continual mindfulness and self-
mastery, one will dwell at ease.

[197] 43-45. 'And outsiders, Po^apada, might
question us thus : " What then, Sir, is that material
(or that mental, or that formless) mode of personality
for the putting away of which you preach such a doctrine
as will lead him who walks according to it to get free
from the evil dispositions he has acquired, to increase
in the dispositions that tend to purification, so that he
may continue to see face to face, and by himself come
to realise, the full perfection and grandeur of wisdom?"
And to that I should reply (describing it in the words
I have now Used to you J) : " Why this very per-
sonality that you see before you is what I mean."

[198] • Now what think you of that, Po^Mapada.
That being so, would not the talk turn out to be well
grounded ? '

' For a truth, Sir, it would.'

46. ' Just, Po///&apada, as if a man should construct
a staircase, to mount up into the upper storey of a palace,
at the foot of the very palace itself. And men should
say to him 2 :

' " Well ! good friend ! that palace, to mount up into
which you are constructing this staircase, do you know
whether it is in the East, or in the West, or in the

1 In the words of §§ 39, 40; that is, that whatever the mode of
existence, of temporary individuality, there is happiness obtainable ;
but only in one way, by getting rid, namely, of certain evil dispositions,
and by the increase of certain good dispositions. Buddhaghosa
thinks this is said in protest against those who, seeking for happiness
beyond the grave, do not admit that happiness can be reached here
(as above, in § 34).

The above rendering of the elliptical phrase Ay am va so is con-
firmed by the simile in § 46.

2 See above, § 37.


262 IX. FOTTHAVABA SUTTA.

South, or in the North ? whether it is high or low or
of medium size ? "

'And when so asked, he should answer: "Why!
here is the very palace itself! It is at the very foot of
it I am constructing my staircase with the object
of mounting up into it."

' What would you think, Po^apada, of that ?
Would not his talk, that being so, turn out to be well
grounded ? '

' For a truth, Sir, it would.'

[iog] 47. ' Then just so, Po/Mapada, when I answer
thus 1 to the questions put to me.'

48. Now when he had thus spoken, Altta, the son
of the elephant trainer, said to the Exalted One :

* At that time, Sir, when a man is in possession of
any one of the three modes of personality, are the other
two unreal to him then ? Is it only the one he has
that is real 2 ? '

49. ' At the time, Altta, when any one of the three
modes of personality is going on, then it does not come
under the category of either of the other two. It is
known only by the name of the mode going on.

[200] ' If people should ask you, A'itta, thus : "Were
you in the past, or not ? Will you be in the future,
or not? Are you now, or not?" — How would you
answer ? '

1 1 should say that I was in the past, and not not ;
that I shall be in the future, and not not; that I am
now, and not not.'

50. ' Then if they rejoined : " Well ! that past per-
sonality that you had, is that real to you ; and the
future personality, and the present, unreal ? The future
personality that you will have, is that real to you; and
the past personality, and the present, unreal ? The
personality that you have now, in the present, is that
real to you ; and the past personality, and the future,
unreal ? " — How would you answer ? '


1 §§ 42-45 repeated in full.

2 Each of the three cases is given in full.


THE SOUL THEORY. 263

[201] ' I should say that the past personality that
I had was real to me at the time when I had it ; and
the others unreal. And so also in the other two
cases/

51. 'Well! Just so, Kitta, when any one of the
three modes of personality is going on, then it does
not come under the category of either of the other two.

52. 'Just, A'itta, as from a cow comes milk, and
from the milk curds, and from the curds butter, and
from the butter ghee, and from the ghee junket ; but
when it is milk it is not called curds, Or butter, or ghee,
or junket ; and when it is curds it is not called by any
of the other names ; and so on —

[202] 53. ' Just so, A'itta, when any one of the three
modes of personality is going on, it is not called by the
name of the other. For these, isTitta, are merely
names, expressions, turns of speech, designations in
common use in the world. And of these a Tathagata
(one who has won the truth) makes use indeed, but is
not led astray by them1.'

54. And when he had thus spoken, Po///$apada, the
mendicant, said to the Exalted One :

' Most excellent, Sir, are the words of thy mouth ;
most excellent! Just as if a man were to set up that
which has been thrown down, or were to reveal that
which has been hidden away, or were to .point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring
a light into the darkness so that those who had eyes
could, see external forms, — just even so has the truth

1 The point is, of course, that just as there is no substratum in the
products of the cow, so in man there is no ego, no constant unity, no
' soul ' (in the animistic sense of the word, as used by savages).
There are a number of qualities that, when united, make up
a personality — always changing. When the change has reached a
certain point, it is convenient to change the designation, the name,
by which the personality is known — just as in the case of the products
of the cow. But the abstract term is only a convenient form of
expression. There never was any personality, as a separate entity, all
the time.

The author of the Milinda (pp. 25, 27) has a precisely similar
argument.


064 IX. POrrtfAPADA SUTTA.


been made known, in many a figure, by the Exalted
One. And I, Sir, betake myself to the Exalted One
as my guide, to his Doctrine, and to his Order. May
the Exalted One accept me as an adherent ; as one
who, from this day forth as long as life endures, has
taken him as his guide.'

55. But A^itta, the son of the elephant trainer,
though he made use of the same words, concluded with
the request : ' And may I be permitted to go forth
from the world under the Exalted One ; may I receive
admission into his Order.' [203]

56. And his request was granted, and he was
received into the Order. And from immediately after
his initiation Kitta, the son of the elephant trainer,
remained alone and separate, earnest, zealous, and
resolved. And e'er long he attained to that supreme
goal of the higher life for the sake of which the clans-
men go forth utterly from the household life to become
houseless wanderers — yea ! that supreme goal did he,
by himself, and while yet in this visible world, bring
himself to the knowledge of, and continue to realise,
and to see face to face ! And he became conscious
that rebirth was at an end ; that the higher life had
been fulfilled ; that all that should be done had been
accomplished; and that, after this present life, there
would be no beyond !

So the venerable A^itta, the son of the elephant
trainer, became yet another among the Arahats.


Here ends the Po////apada Suttanta.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


SUBHA SUTTA.

As this Sutta is almost word for word the same as the
Sama«/*a-phala, the question arises why it was considered
advisable to include it in our collection as a separate Sutta.
The chief difference is that the states of mind enumerated in
the Samaw/a-phala as fruits of the life of a recluse are here
divided under the three heads of Sila, Samadhi, and Pa»«a
(Conduct, Concentration, and Intelligence).

Samadhi has not yet been found in any Indian book older
than the Pitakas. And, as in them, it is used exclusively of
a mental state, never in a concrete sense, its meaning is not
easy to fix exactly. It is not the same as 67/ana, which is
a pre-Buddhistic term applied to four special forms of medita-
tion, culminating in self-induced ecstasy. Samadhi on the
other hand is a constant habit, or faculty, of mind. The oldest
Sanskrit text in which it occurs is the Maitri Upanishad ; and
it probably has there the same meaning as it has in the
Pi/akas.

In our present Sutta — and the principal reason for its
existence as a separate Sutta is that it points out just this —
it is pointed out that Samadhi includes, it is true, the
G/ianas, but also other, and very different things. These
are the habit of guarding the doors of one's senses ; constant
mindfulness and self-possession ; and the faculty of being
content with little. From the negative point of view it is said
to include emancipation from ill-temper, inertness of mind
and body, worry, and perplexity ; from the positive point of
view it is said to include a constant state of joy and peace.

Wilson's Sanskrit Dictionary (1819) gives the meaning
'devonl meditation'; and the rendering 'meditation' has
been used for it in subsequent works in English by Western
scholars. It is quite clear that this would be a very inadequate
and misleading rendering in our Sutta. But exigencies of
space preclude the discussion here, either of the meaning, or
of the very interesting and suggestive history of the word
in India.


2 66 X. SUBHA SUTTA.


How far was the word (literally ' allocation ') invented or
adopted by the Buddhists, or by their immediate spiritual
forerunners, to express 'self-concentration' with implied co-
ordination, harmonisation, of the mental faculties — an idea
they wanted, in the statement of their most essential and
ethical doctrines, to be used in preference to the more limited,
more physical, notion of G/iana.? (It is Samadhi, and not
GV/ana, that we find in the Four Truths, in the Noble Path,
and in the thirty-seven constituent paits of Arahatship.) How
far, through the constant association of the two ideas, did the
larger, as ethical feeling died away, become swallowed up by
the smaller? At what date, in what circles, and under what
reservations, did the word Samadhi come to mean nothing
more than meditation ? The history of the two ideas,
Samadhi and GV/ana, has constant analogies with the history
of the two similarly related ideas of Tapasa and Bhikshu,
and, like it, is of the first importance in following the evolution
of philosophical and religious thought in India.

I have made some detailed contributions to the discussion
of such questions in my ' Yogavacara Manual ' (Pali Text
Society, 1896, pp. xiv-xxviii) ; and must confine myself, here,
to referring to those pages.


X. SUBHA SUTTA.

[Conduct, Concentration, and Intellect.]

[204] I. i. Thus have I heard. The venerable
Ananda was once staying at Savatthi in the 6*eta
Wood, in Anatha F'mdiksLS pleasaunce, shortly after
the Exalted One had died away x. Now at that time
the young Brahman Subha, the son of the man of
Tudi 2, was dwelling at Savatthi on some business or
other.

2. Now Subha. the young Brahman, addressed
a certain young man, and said :

' Come now, young man. Go to the Sama/za
Ananda, and ask in my name as to whether his sick-
ness and indisposition has abated, as to his health and
vigour and condition of ease ; and say : " 'Twere well
if the venerable Ananda would be so kind as to pay
a visit to Subha, the young Brahman, the son of the
man of 1 udi.

3. ' Very well, Sir,' said that young man in reply.
And he went to the place where the venerable Ananda
was staying, and exchanged with him the greetings
and compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took
his seat apart. And, so seated, he delivered to the
venerable Ananda the message with which he had
been charged.

[205] 4. On hearing that message, the venerable
Ananda said to him :

' It is not just now, young man, convenient, for
I have just taken medicine. But perhaps I may be
able to go on the morrow, if so be that conditions and
opportunity seem fit.'

1 The full details are given in Sumangala Vilasini, p. 7.

2 A village near Savatthi, now in Nepal territory.


268 X. SUBHA SUTTA.


Then that young man arose from his seat, and went
to Subha, and told him all, and added :

' So, Sir, the matter has been so far accomplished
that perhaps the venerable Ananda may be able to
come on the morrow, if so be that conditions and
opportunity seem fit.'

5. And the venerable Ananda, when the night had
passed away, dressed himself early in the morning,
and went, in his robes and carrying his bowl, with
a Bhikkhu from the A'etiya country as his attendant,
to Subha's house, and took his seat on the mat spread
out for him. And Subha, the young Brahman, the
son of the man of Tudi, came there where he sat, and
exchanged with the venerable Ananda the greetings
and compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took
his seat on one side. And, so seated, he said to the
venerable Ananda :

[206] ' You, Sir, have waited long on the venerable
Gotama, constantly near him, continually in his
company. You, Sir, will know what were the things
the venerable Gotama was wont to praise ; to which he
used to incite the folk, in which he established them,
and made them firm. What were they, Ananda ? '

6. ' Three are the bodies of doctrine, O Brahman,
which the Exalted One was wont to praise ; to which
he used to incite the folk, in which he established
them, and made them firm. And what are the three ?
The so noble body of doctrine regarding right conduct,
the so noble body of doctrine regarding self-con-
centration, the so noble body of doctrine regarding
intelligence V

' And what, Ananda, is this so noble body of
doctrine regarding right conduct (Si la) in praise
of which the venerable Gotama was wont to speak ;
to which he used to incite the folk, in which he estab-
lished them, and made them firm ? '

7. [The reply f J 7-29 is §§ 40-63 of the Samawwa-
phala Sutta, including:

1 On these three Skandhas of doctrine, see above, p. 82, and A.I, i25,&c.


CONDUCT, CONCENTRATION, AND INTELLECT. 269

1. The appearance of a Buddha, and his
preaching.

2. The awakening of a hearer, and his entry
into the Order.

3. His self-training in act, word, and speech.

4. The minor details of morality he observes.

5. The absence of fear, confidence of heart
thence resulting.

And the answer concludes the enumeration
with the words : — ]

30. ' And there is yet something further, according
to this system, still to be done.'

' Wonderful is this, Ananda, and mysterious — both
that this so noble group of conduct is well-rounded,
not incomplete ; and that I perceive no other, like
unto it, among the other Samawas and Brahma^as
outside of this communion. [207] And were they also
to perceive such in themselves, then would they be
satisfied with thus much, and would say : "So far is
enough. We have done thus much. The aim of our
Samawaship has been reached." But you, Ananda, on
the other hand, say : " There is yet something further,
according to your system, still to be done."


Here ends the First Portion for Recitation in the

Subha Sutta.


II. i. 'And what, Ananda, is this so noble body
of doctrine regarding self-concentration (Samadhi) in
praise of which the venerable Gotarrta was wont to
speak ; to which he used to incite the folk, in which
he established them, and made them firm ? '

[The answer $ 2-18 is §§ 64-82 of the Sama«»a-
phala Sutta, that is to say :

1. The way in which he learns to guard the
door of his senses.

2. The constant mindfulness and self-posses-
sion that he gains.


2 70 X. SUBHA SUTTA.


3. The power of being content with little,
with simplicity of life.

4. The emancipation of heart from the Five
Hindrances — covetousness, ill-temper, sloth of
body and mind, excitement and worry, and
perplexity.

5. The resulting joy and peace that pervades
his bodily frame, and fills his heart.

6-9. The Four Raptures (Qanas).

And the answer is followed by the same
injunction as to something further to be done,
and the same rejoinder as above in Chapter I,

[208] 20. ■ And what, Ananda, is this so noble body
of doctrine regarding intellect (Pa»#a) in praise of
which the venerable Gotama was wont to speak; to
which he used to incite the folk, in which he established
them, and made them firm ? '

[The answer §§ 20-26 is §§ St,, 85, and 97 of
the Sama#«a-phala Sutta, that is to say:

1. The iVawa-dassana — the insight which sees
that the body is impermanent, and that mind
(Vinn&na) is bound up with it, has no existence
independent of it.

2. The power of calling up mental images.

3. The perception of the Four Truths as to
sorrow and the Eightfold Path; the rooting
out of one's mind of the Intoxicants (the
Asavas); and the final assurance, consequent
thereon, of Emancipation gained.]

[200] 27. 'This, young Brahman, is that so noble
body of doctrine regarding intellect, of which that
Exalted One was wont to speak in praise ; to which
he used to incite the folk, in which he established
them, and made them firm.'

[210] ' Wonderful is this, Ananda, and mysterious —
both that this so noble group of doctrine regarding
intellect is well-rounded, not incomplete; and that I per-
ceive no other, like unto it, among the other Samawas
and Brahmawas outside of this communion. And


CONDUCT, CONCENTRATION, AND INTELLECT. 2JI

there is not, in this matter, anything further to be
accomplished. Most excellent, Ananda, are the words
of thy mouth, most excellent ! Just as if a man were
to set up that which has been thrown down, or were
to reveal that which has been hidden away, or
were to point out the right road to him who has
gone astray, or were to bring a light into the darkness
so that those who have eyes could see external forms
— just even so has the truth been made known to me,
in many a figure, by the venerable Ananda. And
I, even I, betake myself to that venerable Gotama as
my guide, to the truth, and to the Order. May the
venerable Ananda receive me as an adherent, as
one who, from this day forth, as long as life endures,
has taken them as his guide.'


Here ends the Subha Suttanta.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


KEVADDHA SUTTA.

In this Sutta we have the position taken up by the early
Buddhists, and no doubt by Gotama himself, as to the practice
of the wonders or miracles, in which there was then universal
belief.

They were not, however, miracles in our Western sense.
There was no interference by an outside power with the laws
of nature. It was supposed that certain people, by reason of
special (but quite natural) powers, could accomplish certain
special acts beyond the power of ordinary men. These acts
are eight in number : and as set forth in detail (above, pp. 88,
89) remind us of some (not of all) the powers now attributed
to mediums. The belief is not Buddhist. It is pre-Buddhistic,
and common to all schools of thought in India.

As usual l the Buddha is represented as not taking the
trouble to doubt or dispute the fact of the existence of such
powers. He simply says that he loathes the practice of them ;
and that a greater and better wonder than any or all of them
is education in the system of self-training which culminates in
Arahatship. There is no evidence of a similarly reasonable
view of this question of wonders having been put forward by
any Indian teacher before the Buddha.

It is very strange that Childers should have stated (Diet,
p. 157) that ' Iddhi is the peculiar attribute of the Arahats/
He gives no authority for the statement. Devadatta, who was
the very reverse of an Arahat, was noted for his power of
Iddhi. And of the many Arahats mentioned in the books,
only one or two, notably Moggallana, were famed for this
acquirement. They could have it, of course ; just as they
could have any craft or skill of the unconverted. But the
eight powers referred to above are called the pothu^anika-
or puthu^anika-iddhi2 or amisa-iddhi 3 ; that is, pre-


1 See for other instances above, p. 206.

2 Vin. II, 183; Gat. I, 360. 3 A, I, 93.


INTRODUCTION. 273


cisely not an attribute of the Arahats, or even of men in the
lower stages of the Path, but of the worldly, the unconverted,
a practice carried out for worldly gain.

We have the Iddhi, the majestic movement, of animals1 —
the Iddhi, the glory and majesty and potency, of a king2
— the Iddhi, the prosperity and splendour, of a rich young
man3 — the Iddhi, the craft and power, of a hunter4 — the
Iddhi, in the technical sense just explained, of the unconverted
wonder-worker. The Iddhi of the Arahats, as such, was the
majesty and potency of their victory, of their emancipation 6.

In illustration of his position Gotama is represented to have
told a wonderful legend — how a Bhikshu, seeking the answer
to a deep problem in religion and philosophy, goes up and up,
by the power of his Iddhi, from world to world, appealing to
the gods. In each heaven, as he mounts ever higher, the gods
confess their ignorance, and send him on to the gods above,
more potent and more glorious than they. And so he comes
at last to the great god of gods, the Maha Brahma himself,
only to be taken discreetly aside, and told in confidence, so
that the gods may not hear it, that he too, the Maha Brahma,
does not know the answer I

All the details of the story are worked out with persistent
humour, characteristic of such legends in the Buddhist books,
in order to bring out the two lessons — in the first place how,
in all such matters, to trust to the gods is to lean on a broken
reed ; and secondly, how perfectly useless is the power of
such Iddhi, which, even at its best, can give no better help
than that to one in earnest about higher things.

The problem put is of great interest ; and goes to the very
core of the Buddhist Welt-anschauung, of Buddhist philosophy.
The zv or Id, as ive know it, is within each of us.

'Verily, I declare to you, my friend, that within this very
body, mortal as it is and only a fathom high, but conscious
and endowed with mind6, is the world, and the waxing thereof,
and the waning thereof, and the way that leads to the passing
away thereof7!'

On this Dr. Karl Neumann, whose illustrations of Buddhist


1 Dhp. 175. 2 Above, p. 88, and Gat. Ill, 454.

3 A. I, 145. * M.I, 152.

5 That is, in the Pi/akas. In some passages of the fifth century
a.d. it seems to be implied that, in certain cases, Iddhi was then
considered to be a consequence of the Arahatta.

6 Samanake, perhaps 'with the representative faculty.' Compare
savi«»a»ake kaye (A. I, 132). Morris here has, wrongly, sama-
waka.

7 Ahguttara II, 48 — Sawyutta I, 62.

II. T


2 74 XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

texts from passages in Western literature, old and new, are
so happy, appropriately compares Schopenhauer's saying
(W. W. V. I, 538), ' One can also say that Kant's teaching
leads to the view that the beginning and end of the world are
not to be sought without, but within, us.'

The problem, as put by the Bhikshu to the gods, is : ' Where
do the elements pass away ? ' The Buddha, in giving his
solution, first says that that is not the right way to put the
question. It ought to be : ' Where do the elements find no
foothold ; where does that union of qualities that make
a person (nam a and rupa) pass away?'

The alteration is suggestive. The person should be intro-
duced ; a thinking being. We only know of the elements
and their derivatives, as reflected in, constructed by, human
intelligence. To the question, as thus altered, the answer is :
1 They find no foothold in the mind of the Arahat, and when
intellection (with special reference to the representative
faculty) ceases, then they, and the person with them,
cease.'

So in the Bahiya story (Ud. I, 10) we are told :

' There, where earth, water, fire, and wind no footing find,
There are the nights not bright, nor suns resplendent,

No moon shines there, there is no darkness seen.
And then, when he, the Arahat hath, in his wisdom, seen ;
From well and ill, from form and formless, is he freed !'

This is a striking, and in all probability intentional, contrast
to the Upanishad passages where the same kind of language
is used of the Great Soul, the corollary of the human soul.
It is one of many instances (as has been pointed out by
Father Dahlmann) where the same expressions, used in the
Pi/akas of the Arahat, are used in the older or later priestly
speculation of God.

We have another reference to the view that the Four
Elements find no foothold in the Arahat at Sawzyutta I, 15.
And we see what is meant by this from verse 1 1 1 1 in the
Sutta Nipata : ' To him who harbours no delight in feelings
that arise, either from within or without, cognition (V\nna.na)
tends to wane.' That is, of course, not that his mental activity
grows less — the mental alertness of the Arahat is laid stress
upon throughout the books. The picture drawn of the
Arahat par excellence, the Buddha himself, is a standing
example of what the early Buddhists considered a man to
be in whom the Vi««a«a had waned. Whatever else it is,
it is the very reverse of a man intellectually asleep, unconscious
of what is said to him, dull to ideas. But it is the picture of


INTRODUCTION. 275


a man to whom the Four Elements, and all that follows from
them, material things, and the ways in which they affect him,
have ceased to have the paramount importance they have to
the thoughtless l.

1 On Vi««a«assa nirodho, see further Ud. VIII, 9; S. Ill,
54-58 ; A. II, 45 ; and compare Asl. 350 ; A. IV, 39 ; and above,

p. 87.


T 2


XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

[The Three Wonders, and the Gods.]

[211] 1. Thus have I heard. The Exalted One
was once staying at Nalanda in the Pavarika's mango
grove l. Now Kevaddha 2, a young householder,
came where the Exalted One was, and bowed down
in salutation to him, and took a seat on one side. And,
so seated, he said to the Exalted One :

' This Nalanda of ours, Sir, is influential and
prosperous, full of folk, crowded with people devoted
to the Exalted One. It were well if the Exalted One
were to give command to some brother to perform,
by power surpassing that of ordinary men, a mystic
wonder. Thus would this Nalanda of ours become
even so much the more devoted to the Exalted One.'

On his speaking thus the Exalted One said to
him :

' But, Kevaddha, it is not thus that I am wont to
give instruction to the brethren : " Come now, my
brethren ; perform ye a mystic wonder, by power
surpassing that of ordinary men, for the lay folk clad
in their garments of white ! " '

2. And a second time Kevaddha made the same
request to the Exalted One, and received a second
time the same reply.


1 Afterwards the site of the famous Buddhist University.

2 The MSS. differ as to the spelling of this name. It is improb-
able that a wealthy and distinguished man, of high social position,
should have been called Keva//a, 'fisherman.' However, Dr. Neu-
mann, who has translated this Suttanta in his ' Buddhistische Anthro-
pologic,' pp. 62-100, has adopted this form; and it may turn out to
be the better of the two.


THE THREE WONDERS, AND THE GODS. 277


[212] 3. And a third time Kevaddha, the young
householder, addressed the Exalted One, and said :

' I would fain do no injury to the Exalted One.
I only say that this Nalanda of ours is influential and
prosperous, full of folk, crowded with people devoted
to the Exalted One. It were well if the Exalted One
were to give command to some brother to perform, by
power surpassing that of ordinary men, a mystic
wonder. Thus would this Nalanda of ours become
even so much the more devoted to the Exalted One.'

' There are three sorts of wonders, Kevaddha, which
I, having myself understood and realised them, have
made known to others. And what are the three ?
The mystic wonder, the wonder of manifestation, and
the wonder of education \

4. 'And what, Kevaddha, is the mystic wonder ?

1 In this case, Kevaddha, suppose that a brother
enjoys the possession, in various ways, of mystic
power — from being one he becomes multiform, from
being multiform he becomes one : from being visible
he becomes invisible : he passes without hindrance to
the further side of a wall or a battlement or a mountain,
as if through air : he penetrates up and down through
solid ground, as if through water : he walks on water
without dividing it, as if on solid ground : he travels
cross-legged through the sky, like the birds on wing :
he touches and feels with the hand even the Moon
and the Sun, beings of mystic power and potency
though they be : he reaches, even in the body, up to
the heaven of Brahma. And some believer, of trusting
heart, should behold him doing so.

[213] 5. ' Then that believer should announce the
fact to an unbeliever, saying : " Wonderful, Sir, and
marvellous is the mystic power and potency of that
recluse. For verily I saw him indulging himself, in
various ways, in mystic power : — from being one
becoming multiform (&c, as before, down to) reaching,
even in the body, up to the heaven of Brahma." '

'a These are explained at length in the Sawgarava Sutta, A. I,
168-173.


278 XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

1 Then that unbeliever should say to him : " Well,
Sir ! there is a certain charm called the Gandhara
Charm. It is by the efficacy thereof that he performs
all this V '

4 Now what think you. Kevaddha ? Might not the
unbeliever so say ? '

1 Yes, Sir ; he might.'

1 Well, Kevaddha ! It is because I perceive danger
in the practice of mystic wonders, that I loathe, and
abhor, and am ashamed thereof.

6. ' And what, Kevaddha, is the wonder of mani-
festation ?

1 Suppose, in this case, Kevaddha, that a brother
can make manifest the heart and the feelings, the
reasonings and the thoughts, of other beings, of other
individuals, saying : " So and so is in your mind. You
are thinking of such and such a matter. Thus and
thus are your emotions." And some believer, of
trusting heart, should see him doing so 2.

[214] 7. ' Then that believer should announce the
fact to an unbeliever, saying : " Wonderful, Sir, and
marvellous is the mystic power and potency of that
recluse. For verily I saw him making manifest the
heart and the feelings, the reasonings and the thoughts,
of other beings, of other individuals, saying : " So and
so is in your mind. You are thinking of such and
such a matter. Thus and thus are your emotions."

1 Then that unbeliever should say to him : " Well,
Sir ! there is a charm called the Jewel Charm 3. It
is by the efficacy thereof that he performs all this."

1 The Gandhara Charm is mentioned at Git. IV, 498, 499, as
a well-known charm for the single purpose only of making oneself
invisible.

2 The Sawzgarava Sutta (loc. a'/.) tells us how — either by omens,
or by interpreting exterior sounds, or by hearing the actual sound of
the man's mental operations, or by knowing, in his own heart, the
heart of the other.

8 Identified here, by Buddhaghosa, with the Kint&m&nt Viggi,
which, according to Git. Ill, 504, is only for following up trails.
Compare Sum. 265, 267, 271.

It is most probable that the Gataka is right in both cases as to the


THE THREE WONDERS, AND THE GODS. 279

1 Now what think you, Kevaddha ? Might not the
unbeliever so say ? '

' Yes, Sir ; he might.'

' Well, Kevaddha ! It is because I perceive danger
in the practice of the- wonder of manifestation, that
I loathe, and abhor, and am ashamed thereof.

8. ' And what, K evaddha, is the wonder of education ?

' Suppose, Kevaddha, that a brother teaches thus :
" Reason in this way, do not reason in that way.
Consider thus, and not thus. Get rid of this dis-
position, train yourself, and remain, in that." This,
Kevaddha, is what is called "The wonder of educa-
tion."

1 And further, Kevaddha, suppose that a Tathagata
is born into the world, &c.'

[The text repeats the Sam a wwa-phalaSuttanta,
§§ 40 to 84, and § 97, that is to say :

1. The preaching of the Buddha.

2. The awakening of a hearer, and his renun-
ciation of the world.

3. His self-training in act, word, and speech.

4. The minor details of mere morality (sum-
marised above at p. 58) which he observes.

5. The absence of fear, confidence of heart
thence arising.

6. The way in which he learns to guard the
doors of his senses.

7. The constant self-possession he thus
gains.

8. The power of being content with little, of
simplicity of life.

9. The emancipation of the heart from the
Five Hindrances — covetousness, ill-temper,
sloth of body and mind, excitement and worry,
and perplexity.

10. The resulting joy and peace that hegains.

11. The training in the Four Raptures.

meaning of these charm-names, and that the objector is intentionally
represented, like Kawha in the Amba/Afca Suttanta, to be ' drawing the
long bow.'


2 SO XT. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

12. The insight arising from the knowledge
of the nature of the body, and its im permanence,
and oj the fact that consciousness is bound up
with it.

13. The realisation of the Four Truths, the
destruction of the Intoxicants, and the final
assurance of the emancipation of Arahatship.

The refrain throughout is : ' This, Kevaddha,
is what is called the wonder of education.']

[215] 67. 'So these, Kevaddha, are the three
wonders I have understood and realised myself, and
made known to others.

' 1 Once upon a time, Kevaddha, there occurred to
a certain brother in this very company of the brethren,
a doubt on the following point : " Where now do these
four great elements — earth, water, fire, and wind — pass
away, leaving no trace behind ? " So that brother,
Kevaddha, worked himself up into such a state of
ecstasy that the way leading to the world of the Gods
became clear to his ecstatic vision.

68. ' Then that brother, Kevaddha, went up to the
realm of the Four Great Kings ; and said to the gods
thereof : " Where, my friends, do the four great
elements — earth, water, fire, and wind — cease, leaving
no trace behind ? "

1 And when he had thus spoken the gods in the
heaven of the Four Great Kings said to him . " We,
brother, do not know that. But there are the Four
Great Kings, more potent and more glorious than
we. They will know it."

[21G-219] 69-79. 'Then that brother, Kevaddha, went
to the Four Great Kings, [and put the same question,
and was sent on, by a similar reply, to the Thirty-three,
who sent him on to their king, Sakka ; who sent him
on to the Yama gods, who sent him on to their king,
Suyama ; who sent him on to the Tusita gods, who
sent him on to their king, Santusita ; who sent him on


1 From here to the end has been translated by the late Henry C.
Warren in his 'Buddhism in Translations,' pp. 308 foil.


THE THREE WONDERS, AND THE GODS. 28 1

to the Nimmina-rati gods, who sent him on to their
king, Sunimmita ; who sent him on to the Para-nimmita
Vasavatti gods, who sent him on to their king, Vasa-
vatti ; who sent him on to the gods of the Brahma-
world V]

[220] 80. 'Then that brother, Kevaddha, became so
absorbed by self-concentration that the way to the
Brahma-world became clear to his mind thus pacified.
And he drew near to the gods of the retinue of
Brahma, and said : " Where, my friends, do the four
great elements — earth, water, fire, and wind — cease,
leaving no trace behind ? "

1 And when he had thus spoken the gods of the
retinue of Brahma replied : " We, brother, do not
know that. But there is Brahma, the Great Brahma,
the Supreme One, the Mighty One, the All-seeing
One, the Ruler, the Lord of all, the Controller, the
Creator, the Chief of all, appointing to each his place,
the Ancient of days, the Father of all that are and
are to be 2 ! He is more potent and more glorious than
we. He will know it."

1 " Where then is that Great Brahma now ? "

1 " We, brother, know not where Brahma is, nor why
Brahma is, nor whence. But, brother, when the signs
of his coming appear, when the light ariseth, and the
glory shineth, then will He be manifest. For that is
the portent of the manifestation of Brahma when the
light ariseth, and the glory shineth."

[221] 81. 'And it was not long, Kevaddha, before,
that Great Brahma became manifest. And that
brother drew near to him, and said : " Where, my
friend, do the four great elements — earth, water, fire,
and wind — cease, leaving no trace behind ? "

And when he had thus spoken that Great Brahma
said to him : " I, brother, am the Great Brahma, the
Supreme, the Mighty, the All-seeing, the Ruler, the


case.


The question and answer in § 68 is repeated, in the text, in each


2 So also above, p. 31.


282 XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

Lord of all, the Controller, the Creator, the Chief
of all, appointing to each his place, the Ancient of
days, the Father of all that are and are to be ! "

82. ' Then that brother answered Brahma, and said :
" I did not ask you, friend, as to whether you were
indeed all that you now say. But I ask you where
the four great elements — earth, water, fire, and wind —
cease, leaving no trace behind ? "

83. 'Then again, Kevaddha, Brahma gave the
same reply. And that brother, yet a third time, put
to Brahma his question as before.

' Then, Kevaddha, the Great Brahma took that
brother by the arm and led him aside, and said :

[222] ' " These gods, the retinue of Brahma, hold
me, brother, to be such that there is nothing I cannot
see, nothing I have not understood, nothing I have
not realised. Therefore I gave no answer in their
presence. I do not know, brother, where those four
great elements — earth, water, fire, and wind — cease,
leaving no trace behind. Therefore you, brother,
have done wrong, have acted ill, in that, ignoring x the
Exalted One, you have undertaken this long search,
among others, for an answer to this question. Go you
now, return to the Exalted One, ask him the question,
and accept the answer according as he shall make
reply."

84. ' Then, Kevaddha, that Bhikkhu, as quickly
as one could stretch forth his bended arm, or draw it
in when stretched forth, vanished from the Brahma-
world, and appeared before me. And he bowed in
salutation to me, and took his seat on one side ; and,
so seated, he said to me: " Where is it, Sir, that these
four great elements — earth, water, fire, and wind —
cease, leaving no trace behind ? "

85. 'And when he had thus spoken, Kevaddha,
I answered him thus : " Long, long ago, brother,


1 Atisitva. The Siamese edition has abhisiwsitva. On
atisitva see Morris in the J. P. T. S., 1886, and Fausboll at
S. N. II, 366.


THE THREE WONDERS, AND THE GODS. 283

sea-faring traders were wont, when they were setting
sail on an ocean voyage, to take with them a land-
sighting bird. And when the ship got out of sight
of the shore they would let the land-sighting bird free.
Such a bird would fly to the East, and to the South,
and to the West, and to the North, to the zenith, and
to the intermediate points of the compass. And if
anywhere on the horizon it caught sight of land,
thither would it fly. But if no land, all round about,
were visible, it would come back even to the ship.
Just so, brother, do you, having sought an answer to
this question, and sought it in vain, even up to the
Brahma-world, come back therefore to me. [223]
Now the question, brother, should not be put as you
have put it. Instead of asking where the four great
elements cease, leaving no trace behind, you should
have asked :

" Where do earth, water, fire, and wind,
And long and short, and fine and coarse,
Pure and impure, no footing find ?
Where is it that both name and form1
Die out, leaving no trace behind ? "

' On that the answer is :

' The intellect of Arahatship, the invisible, the
endless, accessible from every side 2 —

1 Nama# ka. rupa» kz ; that is, the mental and the physical.
Dr. Neumann puts this into nineteenth-century language by translat-
ing • subject and object.' And however un-Buddhistic the phrase
may be — for no Buddhist would use an expression apparently imply-
ing a unity in the subject— it really, if by subject be understood an
ever-changing group of impermanent faculties or qualities, comes
very near to the Buddhist meaning.

2 Paha?w. Buddhaghosa takes this in the sense of tittha; that is,
ghat, flight of steps or shelving beach from which to step down into
water. James d'Alwis, who usually gives the view of Ba/uwan Turfawa,
took it as = pabhawz, shining — which Buddhaghosa, who gives it as
an alternative explanation, had rejected (' Buddhist Nirva»a,' p. 39).
Dr. Neumann, the only European writer who has discussed the point,
thinks it is put by the poet, metri causd, for pa^ahaw, ' rejecting.'
But an English poet, if he wanted to save a syllable, would scarcely
write ' recting ' for ' rejecting.' And the Pali poet, had he wished to


284 XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

1 There is it that earth, water, fire, and wind,
And long and short, and fine and coarse,
Pure and impure, no footing find.
There is it that both name and form
Die out, leaving no trace behind.
When intellection ceases they all also cease.'

Thus spake the Exalted One. And Kevaddha,
the young householder, pleased at heart, rejoiced at
the spoken word.

Here ends the Kevaddha Suttanta.


give that meaning, could easily have found other means. He need
have gone no further afield than adopting simply gaham. That
vi««a«a, when qualified by such adjectives as those here used, can
be meant for the vi««a«a of a man who has attained to Nirva/za,
could be supported by other passages from the Pi/akas.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

LOHIATATA SUTTA.

It is not easy to put ourselves in the mental position
suitable for appreciating the kind of idea that underlies the
argument in this Suttanta. The social view against which
it is directed lies too remote from the social views universally
admitted now in the West. But in the sixth century B.C., in
the Eastern valley of the Ganges, the question as to the ethics
of teachers and teaching was one of wide interest and of great
importance.

.Sarikara quotes with approval the rules of the priestly law
books which lay down that the ears of a 50dra who hears
the Veda (including of course the theosophy oi the Upanishads)
are to be filled with molten lead and lac. His tongue is to
be split if he recites it ; his body is to be cut through if he
preserves it in his memory l. God himself has bestowed the
exclusive right of teaching upon the hereditary priests * ; who
indeed claim to be, each of them, great divinities 3, even to
the gods*. And it would be a danger to social order if they
taught women, or any males not twice-born, or any twice-born
males who would not share their views as to the ethics of
teaching, and as to the privileges and prerogatives of the
priest as teacher.

These passages are much later than the Pi/akas. But they,
and the many others like them, give a fair idea of the spirit
animating one section at least of the priests, and of a trend of
opinion that doubtless had its supporters also in Pi/aka times.
When Asoka thought he had brought about such a change in
public opinion that those who had been very gods upon the
earth had come to be gods no longer, he was very far from
thinking right. That is a battle that is not so easily won.
But the expression of his belief is sufficient to show that the
striking idea he thought he had killed was far older than our
existing text of Manu.

On the other hand one may be permitted to doubt whether
the gentle measures approved by .Sarikara for keeping people
in that state of life into which their evil deeds in a previous
birth had brought them, were ever actually, in practice, carried

1 Commentary on the Vedanta-SCitras I, 3, 38.

2 Manu I, 88. 3 Ibid. IX, 317, 319. 4 Ibid. XI, 85.


286 XII. LOHIKKA SUTTA.

out. The Pi/akas themselves give ample proof that, in spite
of the priests, there were not a few base-born people who
succeeded, in that time at least, not only in getting taught,
but in becoming teachers. And this was not the case only
among the despised Buddhists. The numerous passages
collected by Dr. Muir in his article in the ' Indian Antiquary'
for 1877 show that the priestly literature itself — the law books
and the epics — has preserved evidence of the lax way in which
the strict rules as to exclusion from teaching or being taught
were really carried out. And that is especially the case,
according to the priestly tradition, in ancient times, as old, or
older, than the rise of Buddhism.

The fact doubtless is that, though there were bigots among
the Brahmans, and though they were strong enough to establish,
before the time to which our present Sutta refers, rules as to
restriction of teaching which no one in priestly circles could
venture formally to dispute — yet that there was also always
a strong party in India, to which many of the more liberal
minded of the Brahmans themselves belonged, who looked
with sympathy on relaxations of these rules. The general
practice must have been that the hereditary priests kept the
magic of the sacrifice, and the emoluments and privileges that
went with the knowledge of it, in their own hands. Even the
higher teaching of the mysteries of theosophy was to be handed
down only from priest-father to son, or from priestly teacher
to pupil. But there were many exceptions. The numerous
Brahmans who were not priests were wont, of course, to
emphasise the importance rather of birth than of knowledge.
We have enough evidence, even in the pre-Buddhistic Upani-
shads, of others, besides the priests, being teachers of the
higher wisdom. The four powerful kings, and the still im-
portant free clans, though they gave support to the Brahmans,
gave also equal support to other teachers — just as, in later
times, Hindu and Buddhist sovereigns are found supporting
Buddhists and Hindus alike.

Our knowledge of Indian views of life having been hitherto
derived almost exclusively from the priestly books, scholars
have inevitably tended to attach too great a degree of
importance to what the priests describe as the proper state
of things. As a matter of fact it never really prevailed.
Even now the Brahmans, or those who in the census returns
claim to be such, form only about five per cent, of the popula-
tion. And of these the vast majority are not priests at all ;
they are engaged in all sorts of worldly occupations l. We

1 Baines, 'General Report on the Census of 1891/ pp. 190, 202.
The census shows that out of 261 millions only fifteen millions could


INTRODUCTION. 287


must not judge India at any time, much less in the time of
the Buddha, through the yellow spectacles of .Sankara, or
even of the priestly compilers of Manu. As M. Barth said,
already in 1873, in protesting against Lassen for falling into
this mistake * : ' We must distinguish, more than Lassen does,
between different epochs, as well as between the pretensions
of a caste and the real state of things. The Brahmans had
not yet monopolised the intellectual life. Certain testimonies
of the epics, applicable to this very period, as also the very
nature of the Vedic books, show for example that there existed
alongside of them an entire profane literature of great extent
. . . which was certainly, at first, in other hands. . . . Their
teaching (that of the Brahmans), it is true, appears to have
been in a high degree esoteric and exclusive.'

The position taken up by the Buddha on this question, as
appears from our present Sutta (and such other passages
as M. I, 513-524; A. I, 277; III, 123-127 ; M. P. S. II, 32 =
A. Ill, 69 = V, 56 = Mil. 144), is that every one should be
allowed to learn ; that every one, having certain abilities,
should be allowed to teach ; and that, if he does teach, he
should teach all and to all ; keeping nothing back, shutting
no one out. But no man should take upon himself to teach
others unless and until he have first taught himself, and have
also acquired the faculty of imparting to others the truth he
has gained himself.

There can, I think, be very little doubt but that the great
teacher is here voicing the opinion of many others of liberal
views, his contemporaries and predecessors. He lays no claim,
either in our Sutta or elsewhere, to any special peculiarity in
this respect. It is taken for granted that the arguments put
into his mouth in our Sutta will appeal to the Brahman to
whom they are addressed. And they are based not on any
distinctively Buddhist doctrine but on general ethical principles
accepted, or rather acceptable, by all.

read or write. On this striking fact Mr. Baines comments (p. 211) :
' The second influence antagonistic to a more general spread of
literacy is the long continued existence of a hereditary class whose
object it has been to maintain their own monopoly of book learning
as the chief buttress of their social supremacy. The opposition of
the Brahmins to the rise of the writer class has been already men-
tioned ; and the repugnance of both, in the present day, to the diffusion
of learning amongst the masses, can only be appreciated after long
experience.'

1 ' Revue Critique,' June, 1873, translated by Dr. Muir in the
' Indian Antiquary,' 1874.


XII. LOH I ATATA SUTTA.

[Some Points in the Ethics of Teaching.]

[224] 1. Thus have I heard. The Exalted One,
when once passing on a tour through the Kosala
districts with a great multitude of the members of the
Order, with about five hundred Bhikshus, arrived at
Salavatika (a village surrounded by a row of Sala
trees). Now at that time Lohii^a 1 the Brahman was
established at Salavatika, a spot teeming with life,
with much grassland and woodland and corn, on a
royal domain granted him by King Pasenadi of
Kosala, as a royal gift, with power over it as if he
were the king2.

2. Now at that time Lohl£/v'a the Brahman was
thinking of harbouring the following wicked view :
' Suppose that a Samara or a Brahmawa have reached
up to some good state (of mind), then he should tell
no one else about it. For what can one man do for
another ? To tell others would be like the man who,
having broken through an old bond, should entangle
himself in a new one. Like that, I say, is this (desire
to declare to others) ; it is a form of lust. For what
can one man do for another3? '


1 This is, I think, a local name ; the name of the place from which
he had come. If that be so, the better rendering throughout would
be ' the Lohi-W'a Brahman.'

2 See above, pp. 108, 144.

3 This is open to two interpretations : ' What can the teacher gain
from a disciple ? ' or ' What can a disciple gain from a teacher ? '
' Why should you trouble about others ? they cannot help you ! ' or
' Why should you trouble about others ? you cannot help them ! ' But
in either case the implied ground of the argument is the proposition
that a man's rise or fall, progress or defeat, in intellectual and religious
matters, lies in himself. He must work out his own salvation.


SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING. 289

3. Now Lohi/£/6a the Brahman heard the news :
' They say that the Samara Gotama, of the sons of
the Sakyas, who went out from the Sakya clan to
adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great
company of the brethren of his Order, on his tour
through the Kosala districts, at Salavatika. Now
regarding that venerable Gotama, such is the high
reputation that has been noised abroad: — that Exalted
One is an Arahat, fully awakened, abounding in wisdom ,
and goodness, happy, with knowledge of the worlds,
unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a
teacher for gods and men, an exalted one, a Buddha.
He, by himself, thoroughly knows, and sees as it were
face to face, this universe — including the worlds above
of the gods, the Brahmas, and the Maras ; and the
world below with its Samaras and Brahmawas, its
princes and peoples — and having known it, he makes
his knowledge known to others. The truth, lovely in
its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely in its consum-
mation, doth he proclaim both in the spirit and in the
letter. The higher life doth he make known in all its
fullness, and in all its purity. And good is it to pay
visits to Arahats like that/

[225] 4. Then Lohi/£/£a the Brahman said to Bhesika
the barber : ' Come now, good Bhesika, go where the
Samara Gotama is staying, and, on your arrival, ask in
my name as to whether his sickness and indisposition
has abated, as to his health and vigour and condition of
ease ; and speak thus : " May the venerable Gotama,
and with him the brethren of the Order, accept the
to-morrow's meal from Lohi^a the Brahman."

5. ' Very well, Sir,' said Bhesika the barber, acqui-
escing in the word of Lohi^ia the Brahman, and did so
even as he had been enjoined. And the Exalted One
consented, by silence, to his request.

6. And when Bhesika the barber perceived that
the Exalted One had consented, he rose from his seat,
and passing the Exalted One with his right hand
towards him, went to Lohi^a the Brahman, and on
his arrival spake to him thus :

11. u


290 XII. LOHIJWTA SUTTA.

' We addressed that Exalted One \ Sir, in your
name, even as you commanded. And the Exalted
One hath consented to come.'

[226] 7. Then Lohi^/C'a the Brahman, when the
night had passed, made ready at his own dwelling-
place sweet food, both hard and soft, and said to
Bhesika the barber : ' Come now, good Bhesika, go
where the Samara Gotama is staying, and on your
arrival, announce the time to him, saying : " It is time,
O Gotama, and the meal is ready." '

' Very well, Sir,' said Bhesika the barber in assent
to the words of Lohiiia the Brahman ; and did so
even as he had been enjoined.

And the Exalted One, who had robed himself early
in the early morning, went robed, and carrying his
bowl with him, with the brethren of the Order, towards
Salavatika.

8. Now, as he went, Bhesika the barber walked,
step by step, behind the Exalted One. And he said
to him :

1 The following wicked opinion has occurred to
Lohi/£-£a the Brahman : " Suppose that a Samawa or
a Brahmawa have reached up to some good state (of
mind), then he should tell no one else about it. For
what can one man do for another ? To tell others
would be like the man who, having broken through an
old bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like
that, I say, is this (desire to declare to others) ; it is
a form of lust." 'Twere well, Sir, if the Exalted One
would disabuse his mind thereof. For what can one
man do for another ? '

1 That may well be, Bhesika, that may well be.'

[227] 9. And the Exalted One went on to the
dwelling-place of Lohi££a the Brahman, and sat down
on the seat prepared for him. And LohL££a the
Brahman satisfied the Order, with the Buddha at its
head, with his own hand, with sweet food both hard


1 It is clear from this expression that Bhesika was already a follower
of the new teaching.


SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING. 29 1

and soft, until they refused any more. And when the
Exalted One had finished his meal, and had cleansed
the bowl and his hands, Lohi^a the Brahman brought
a low seat and sat down beside him. And to him, thus
seated, the Exalted One spake as follows :

' Is it true, what they say, Lohi^a, that the follow-
ing wicked opinion has arisen in your mind : [and he
set forth the opinion as above set forth] ? '

1 That is so, Gotama.'

10. ' Now what think you, Lohi/&£a ? Are you not
established at Salavatika ? '

' Yes, that is so, Gotama.'

' Then suppose, Lohi^a, one were to speak thus :
" Lohi^a the Brahman has a domain at Salavatika.
Let him alone enjoy all the revenue and all the
produce of Salavatika, allowing nothing to anybody
else ! " Would the utterer of that speech be a danger-
maker as touching the men who live in dependence
upon you, or not ? '

' He would be a danger-maker, Gotama ? '

' And making that danger, would he be a person who
sympathised with their welfare, or not ? '

' He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.

1 And not considering their welfare, would his heart
stand fast in love toward them, or in enmity ? '

' In enmity, Gotama.'

' But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that
unsound doctrine, or sound ? '

' It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.'

1 Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohi££a, I
declare that one of two future births will be his lot,
either purgatory or rebirth as an animal.'

[228] 11. ' Now what think you, Lohi££a ? Is not
King Pasenadi of Kosala in possession of Kasi and
Kosala ? '

4 Yes, that is so, Gotama.'

' Then suppose, LohL££a, one were to speak thus :
" King Pasenadi of Kosala is in possession of Kasi
and Kosala. Let him enjoy all the revenue and all
the produce of Kasi and Kosala, allowing nothing to

u 2


292 XII. LOKLKXA SUTTA.

anybody else." Would the utterer ot that speech be a
danger-maker as touching the men who live in depend-
ence on King Pasenadi of Kosala — both you yourself
and others — or not ? '

' He would be a danger-maker, Gotama.'

1 And making that danger, would he be a person
who sympathised with their welfare, or not ? "

' He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.'

1 And not considering their welfare, would his heart
stand fast in love toward them, or in enmity ? '

' In enmity, Gotama.'

' But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that
unsound doctrine, or sound ? '

4 It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.'

' Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohi/6>£a, I
declare that one of two future births will be his lot,
either purgatory or rebirth as an animal.

1 2 and 14. 'So then, Lohi^a, you admit that he who
should say that you, being in occupation of Salavatika,
should therefore yourself enjoy all the revenue and
produce thereof, bestowing nothing on any one else ;
and he who should say that King Pasenadi of Kosala,
being in power over Kasiand Kosala, should therefore
himself enjoy all the revenue and produce thereof,
bestowing nothing on any one else — would be making
danger for those living in dependence on you ; or for
those, you and others, living in dependence upon the
King. And that those who thus make danger for
others, must be wanting in sympathy for them. And
that the man wanting in sympathy has his heart set
fast in enmity. And that to have one's heart set fast
in enmity is unsound doctrine : —

1 3 and 15. 'Then just so, Lohi^a, he who should say:
' Suppose a Samawa or a Brahmawa to have reached

up to some good state (of mind), then should he tell
no one else about it. For what can one man do for
another ? To tell others would be like the man who,
havinor broken through an old bond, should entangle
himself in a new one. Like that, I say, is this desire
to declare to others, it is a form of lust ; " — [229] just


SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING. 293

so he, who should say thus, would be putting obstacles
in the way of those clansman who, having taken upon
themselves the Doctrine and Discipline set forth by
Him-who-has-won-the-Truth, have attained to great
distinction therein — to the fruit of conversion, for
instance, or to the fruit of once returning, or to the
fruit of never returning, or even to Arahatship — he
would be putting obstacles in the way of those who
are bringing to fruition the course of conduct that will
lead to rebirth in states of bliss in heaven l. But
putting obstacles in their way he would be out of
sympathy for their welfare ; being out of sympathy for
their welfare his heart would become established in
enmity ; and when one's heart is established in enmity,
that is unsound doctrine. Now if a man hold unsound
doctrine, Lohi^i-a, I declare that one of two future
births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an
animal 2.

[230] 16. 'There are these three sorts of teachers
in the world, Lohi^a, who are worthy of blame. And
whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would
be justified, in accord with the facts and the truth, not
improper. What are the three ?

4 In the first place, Lohi/6/£a, there is a sort of teacher
who has not himself attained to that aim of Samawaship
for the sake of which he left his home and adopted
the homeless life. Without having himself attained to
it he teaches a doctrine (Dhamma) to his hearers, say-
ing: "This is good for you, this will make you happy."
Then those hearers of his neither listen to him, nor
give ear to his words, nor become stedfast in heart
through their knowledge thereof; they go their own
way, apart from the teaching of the master. Such
a teacher may be rebuked, setting out these facts, and


1 Literally ' Who are making heavenly embryos ripe for rebirth in
heavenly states.'

2 Paragraphs 12, 13 are repeated of the case put about Pasenadi,
king of Kosala. In the translation both cases are included at the
beginning of § 12.


294 Xn- LOHIJSXA SUTTA.

adding: "You are like one who should make advances
to her who keeps repulsing him, or should embrace her
who turns her face away from him. Like that, do I
say, is this lust of yours (to go on posing as a teacher
of men, no one heeding, since they trust you not).
For what, then, can one man do for another ? "

1 This, LohL&fca, is the first sort of teacher in the
world worthy of blame. And whosoever should blame
such a one, his rebuke would be justified, in accord
with the facts and the truth, not improper.

17. 'In the second place, Lohi/£/6a, there is a sort of
teacher who has not himself attained to that aim of
Sama^aship for the sake of which he left his home
and adopted the homeless life. Without having him-
self attained to it he teaches a doctrine to his hearers,
saying: "This is good for you ; that will make you
happy." And to him his disciples listen ; [23l] they
give ear to his words ; they become stedfast in heart
by their understanding what is said ; and they go not
their own way, apart from the teaching of the master.
Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting out these facts
and adding : " You are like a man who, neglecting his
own field, should take thought to weed out his neigh-
bour's field. Like that, do I say, is this lust of yours
(to go on teaching others when you have not taught
yourself). For what, then, can one man do for
another ? "

' This, Lohi/^a, is the second sort of teacher in the
world worthy of blame. And whosoever should blame
such a one, his rebuke would be justified, in accord
with the facts and the truth, not improper.

18. ' And again, Lohi/£ia, in the third place, there is
a sort of teacher who has himself attained to that
aim of Sama^aship for the sake of which he left his
home and adopted the homeless life. Having himself
attained it, he teaches the doctrine to his hearers, say-
ing: "This is good for you, that will make you happy."
But those hearers of his neither listen to him, nor give
ear to his words, nor become stedfast in heart through
understanding thereof; they go their own way, apart


SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING. 295

from the teaching of the master. Such a teacher may
be rebuked, setting out these facts, and adding : "You
are like a man who, having broken through an old
bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like that,
do I say, is this lust of yours (to go on teaching when
you have not trained yourself to teach). For what,
then, can one man do for another ?

' This, Lohi/£/£a, is the third sort of teacher in the
world worthy of blame. And whosoever should blame
such a one, his rebuke would be justified, in accord
with the facts and the truth, not improper. And these,
Lohiiv6a; are the three sorts of teachers of which I
spoke.'

[232, 233] 19. And when he had thus spoken, Lohi^a
the Brahman spake thus to the Exalted One :

4 But is there, Gotama, any sort of teacher not
worthy of blame in the world ? '

' Yes, Lohi^a, there is a teacher not worthy, in the
world, of blame.'

' And what sort of a teacher, Gotama, is so ? '

[The answer is in the words of the exposi-
tion set out above in the Sama^wa-phala, as
follows: —

1. The appearance of a Tathagata (one who
won the truth), his preaching, the conversion of
a hearer, his adoption of the homeless state.
(Above, pp. 78, 79.)

2. The minor details of mere morality that he
practises. (Above, pp. 57, 58.)

3. The Confidence of heart he gains from this
practice. (Above, p. 79.)

4. The paragraph on ' Guarded is the door of
his Senses.' (Above, pp. 79, 80.)

5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and Self-
possessed.' (Above, pp. 80, 81.)

6. The paragraph on Simplicity of life,
being content with little. (Above, p. 81.)

7. The paragraphs on Emancipation from the
Five Hindrances — covetousness, ill-temper, lazi-
ness, worry, and perplexity. (Above, pp. 82-^-84.)


296 XII. LOHTA'ZA SUTTA.

8. The paragraph on the Joy and Peace that,
as a result of this emancipation, fills his whole
being. (Above, p. 84.)

9. The paragraphs on the Four Raptures
(Guanas). (Above, pp. 84-86.)

10. The paragraphs on the Insight arising
from Knowledge (the knowledge of the First
Path). (Above, pp. 86, 87.)

11. The paragraphs on the Realisation of the
Four Noble Truths, the destruction of the
Intoxications — lust, delusions, becomings, and
ignorance — and the attainment of Arahatship.
(Above, pp. 92, 93.)

The refrain throughout and the closing
paragraph is:]

' And whosoever the teacher be, Lohi^a, under
whom the disciple attains to distinction so excellent
as that1, that, Lohiiv£a, is a teacher not open to blame
in the world. And whosoever should blame such a
one, his rebuke would be unjustifiable, not in accord
either with the facts or with the truth, without good
ground.'

[234] 78. And when he had thus spoken, Lohi^/C'a
the Brahman said to the Exalted One :

'Just, Gotama, as if a man had caught hold of
a man, falling over the precipitous edge of purgatory,
by the hair of his head, and lifted him up safe back on
the firm land — just so have I, on the point of falling
into purgatory, been lifted back on to the land by the
venerable Gotama. Most excellent, O Gotama, are
the words of thy mouth, most excellent! Just as if
a man were to set up what has been thrown down, or
were to reveal what has been hidden away, or were to
point out the right road to him who has gone astray,
or were to bring a light into the darkness so that those
who had eyes could see external forms— just even so
has the truth been made known to me, in many a


1 U/araw viscsaw adhigaK'^ati. See for instance Sawyutta


SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING. 297

figure, by the venerable Gotama. And I, even I,
betake myself to the venerable Gotama as my guide,
to the Doctrine, and to the Order. May the venerable
Gotama accept me as a disciple ; as one who, from
this day forth as long as life endures, has taken him as
his guide ! '


£>


Here ends the Lohi/£/£a Suttanta.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

TEVIGGA SUTTA.

THIS is the only Suttanta, among the thirteen translated
in this volume, in which the discourse does not lead up to
Arahatship. It leads up only to the so-called Brahma
Vihdras — the supreme conditions — four states of mind held
to result, after death, in a rebirth in the heavenly worlds of
Brahma. Why is it — the Buddhist ideal being Arahatship,
which leads to no rebirth at all — that this lower ideal is thus
suddenly introduced ?

It would seem that the particular point here discussed was
regarded as so important that it could scarcely be left out.
And when we recollect that the highest teaching current
before the Buddha, and still preserved in the pre-Buddhistic
Upa-nishads, was precisely about union with Brahma ; we
may, without much danger of error, explain the position
occupied in the series of dialogues by this Suttanta by the
supposition that it was deliberately inserted here as the
Buddhist answer to the Upanishad theory. In this respect
it is noteworthy that the neuter Brahman is quietly ignored.
That is quite in accordance with the method of the Suttantas.
The Buddha is in them often represented as using, in his own
sense, words familiar to his interlocutors in a different sense.
The neuter Brahman is, so far as I am aware, entirely
unknown in the Nikayas, and of course the Buddha's idea of
Brahma, in the masculine, really differs widely from that of
the Upanishads.

There is nothing original in the Buddhist belief that a
man's habit of mind at the time of his death would determine,
save only in the one case of the Arahat, the nature of his
rebirth. It is an Indian — -not an exclusively Buddhist —
theory. The Buddhist texts represent it as held by non-
Buddhists, and already long before the Buddha's time, and
as accepted by all as a matter of course. And it is even not
exclusively Indian. As I have pointed out elsewhere, it is


INTRODUCTION. 299


ascribed by Plato to Socrates1. The essentially Buddhist
parts of the theory are three. In the first place, the choice of
the particular details they held essential to such a habit of
mind as would lead to rebirth in the Brahma-worlds ; secondly,
their doctrine that there was not really any ' soul ' to be
reborn ; and thirdly, that the, highest ideal was not to be
reborn at all (even only once, and into union with Brahma).

The Gataka commentary in numerous passages states that
the four Brahma Viharas were practised, long before the time
of the rise of Buddhism, by the sages of old. I have not
found such a statement in the Nikayas ; and it is most
probable therefore that the Gataka commentator is ante-
dating the particular meditations in question. However this
may be, they remained, throughout the long history of
Buddhism, an essential part of Buddhist practice. They are
even mentioned in the (Jataka Mala, a work usually supposed
to be Mahayanist, and dated about a thousand years later
than the Buddha2. They are well known to-day in Burma,
Siam, and Ceylon. And it would be interesting to know
whether they still form a part of the regulated meditations
which are known to be practised by Buddhists in Thibet,
China, and Japan. But they have not been found in any
Indian book not a Buddhist work, and are therefore almost
certainly exclusively Buddhist. Even the most determined
anti-Buddhist must admit the beauty of the language (in spite
of its repetitions §§ 76-78), the subtle depth of the ideas, and
the great value of the practice from the point of view of
ethical self-training. He would probably rejoin, and with
truth, that similar sentiments are met with in other (post-
Buddhistic) Indian books. But it is one thing to give
expression in isolated passages to such views, and quite
another to have selected just these four as the four corner-
stones of habitual endeavour.

It should be recollected that the argument here is only an
argutnentum ad hominem. If you want union with Brahma—
which you had much better not want — this is the way to
attain to it 3.

1 Phaedo 69. The full context is given in my • Hibbert Lectures,'
Appendix viii.

2 In the well-known story of the Bodhisattva giving his body to feed
a tigress (No. 1, verse 12).

3 See the remarks above on p. 206.


XIII. TEVI£GA SUTTA.
[On Knowledge of the Vedas *.]

1. Thus have I heard. When the Exalted One
was once journeying through Kosala with a great
company of the brethren, with about five hundred
brethren, he came to the Brahman village in Kosala
which is called Manasaka/a. And there at Manasaka/a
the Exalted One stayed in the mango grove, on the
bank of the river A/£iravati, to the north of Mana-
saka/a.

2. Now at that time many very distinguished and
wealthy Brahmans were staying at Manasaka/a ; to wit,
Kahkl the Brahman, Tarukkha the Brahman, Pokkha-
rasadi the Brahman, G&nussoui the Brahman, Todeyya
the Brahman, and other very distinguished and wealthy
Brahmans 2.

1 This Suttanta was translated from the MSS. in my ' Buddhist
Suttas ' (S. B. E., 1881). Since then the text has been published by
the Pali Text Society; and alterations and amendments in a number
of details have been rendered necessary.

2 Buddhaghosa says that —

Kahki lived at Opasada,

Tarukkha lived at IMfogala (so MSS., perhaps for KManangala),

Pokkharasadi (sic MS.) lived at Ukka//Aa,

Ganussom lived at Savatthi, and

Todeyya lived at Tudigama.
Ginussoni was converted by the Bhaya-bherava Sutta. On Pok-
kharasadi, see above, pp. 108, 135, 147 ; and on Todeyya, see above,
p. 267 ; and on all the names, see Ma^g^ima Nikaya, No. 98 =
Sutta Nipata III, 9.

Buddhaghosa adds that because Manasaka/a was a pleasant place
the Brahmans had built huts there on the bank of the river and
fenced them in, and used to go and stay there from time to time to
repeat their mantras.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 3OI

3. Now a conversation sprung up between Vase/Ma
and Bharadvajra, when they were taking exercise (after
their bath) and walking up and down in thoughtful
mood, as to which was the true path, and which the
false 1.

4. The young Brahman Vase/7/za spake thus :

' This is the straight path, this the direct way which
makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts according
to it, into a state of union with Brahma. I mean that
which has been announced by the Brahman Pokkha-
rasadi.'

5. The young Brahman Bharadva^a spake thus :

' This is the straight path, this the direct way which
makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts according
to it, into a state of union with Brahma. I mean that
which has been announced by the Brahman Tarukkha.'

6. But neither was the young Brahman Vase/Ma
able to convince the young Brahman Bharadva^a, nor
was the young Brahman Bharadva^a able to convince
the young Brahman Vase///za.

7. Then the young Brahman Vase/Ma said to the
young Brahman Bharadva^a :

' That Samara Gotama, Bharadva^a, of the sons of
the Sakyas, who went out from the Sakya clan to
adopt the religious life, is now staying at Manasaka/a,
in the mango grove, on the bank of the river A/£iravati,
to the north of Manasaka/a. Now regarding that
venerable Gotama, such is the high reputation that
has been noised abroad: "That Exalted One is an
Arahat, a fully enlightened one, abounding in wisdom
and goodness, happy, with knowledge of the worlds,
unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a
teacher of gods and men, an Exalted One, a Buddha."


1 Gahghaviharaw anuhnkamantana?« anuvi^arantanawz.
Aahkamati is to walk up and down thinking. I have added 'after
their bath/ from Buddhaghosa, who says that this must be understood
to have taken place when, after learning by heart and repeating all
day, they went down in the evening to the riverside to bathe, and
then walked up and down on the sand. Comp. Mil. 22; Gat. II,
240, 272.


302 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

Come, then, Bharadva^a, let us go to the place where
the Samawa Gotama is ; and when we have come
there, let us ask the Samawa Gotama touching this
matter. What the Samara Gotama shall declare unto
us, that let us bear in mind V

' Very well, my friend ! ' said the young Brahman
Bharadva^a, in assent, to the young Brahman Vase/Ma.

8. Then the young Brahman Vase/7/fca and the young
Brahman Bharadva^a went on to the place where the
Exalted One was.

And when they had come there, they exchanged
with the Exalted One the greetings and compliments
of politeness and courtesy, and sat down beside him.

And while they were thus seated the young Brahman
Vase/Ma said to the Exalted One :

' As we, Gotama, were taking exercise and walking
up and down, there sprung up a conversation between
us on which was the true path, and which the false.
I said thus :

1 " This is the straight path, this the direct way
which makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts
according to it, into a state of union with Brahma.
I mean that which has been announced by the Brahman
Pokkharasadi." '

' BharadvcL^a said thus :

' " This is the straight path, this the direct way
which makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts
according to it, into a state of union with Brahma.
I mean that which has been announced by the Brah-
man Tarukkha." '

' Regarding this matter, Gotama, there is a strife,
a dispute, a difference of opinion between us.'


9. ' So you say, Vase//^a, that you said thus :
' " This is the straight path, this the direct way
which makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts
according to it, into a state of union with Brahmi.

1 Comp. Divjavadana 196, 246; and Ahguttara II, pp. 23, 24.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 303

I mean that which has been announced by the Brahman
Pokkharasadi." '

' While Bharadvaf a said thus :

' " This is the straight path, this the direct way
which makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts
according to it, into a state of union with Brahma.
I mean that which has been announced by the Brahman
Tarukkha." '

* Wherein, then, O Vase///za, is there a strife, a dis-
pute, a difference of opinion between you 1 ? '

10. ' Concerning the true path and the false, Gotama.
Various Brahmans, Gotama, teach various paths. The
Addhariya Brahmans, the Tittiriya Brahmans, the
A^andoka Brahmans [the iOandava Brahmans], the
Bavhari^a Brahmans 2. Are all those saving paths ?
Are they all paths which will lead him, who acts
according to them, into a state of union with Brahma ?

'Just, Gotama, as near a village or a town there are
many and various paths 3, yet they all meet together in
the village — just in that way are all the various paths
taught by various Brahmans — the Addhariya Brah-
mans, the Tittiriya Brahmans, the A^andoka Brahmans
[the AVzandava Brahmans], the Bavhari^a Brahmans.
Are all these saving paths ? Are they all paths which
will lead him, who acts according to them, into a state
of union with Brahma ? '

11. 'Do you say that they all lead aright, Vase#/fca?'
' I say so, Gotama.'


1 This is either mildly sarcastic — as much as to say, 'that is six
ot one, anc1 half a dozen of the other' — or is intended to lead on
V&se/Ma to confess still more directly the fact that the different
theologians held inconsistent opinions.

3 The MSS. differ as to the last name, and some of them omit the
last- bu*- one. The Adhvaryu, Taittiiiya, -Oandoga, and Bahvrtka.
priests — those skilled in liturgy generally, and in the Ya^xir, Sama,
and Rt's Vedas respectively — are probably meant. If we adopt the
other reading for the last in the list, then those priests who relied on
liturgy, sacrifice, or chant would be contrasted with those who had
1 gone forth ' as religieux, either as Tdpasas or as Bhikshus.

3 Maggani, which is noteworthy as a curious change of gender.


304 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

1 Do you really say that they all lead aright, V4-
se/Ma ?

* So I say, Gotama.'

12. 'But yet, Vase^a, is there a single one of the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas who has ever
seen Brahma face to face ? '

' No, indeed, Gotama.'

c Or is there then, Vase/Ma, a single one of the
teachers of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
who has seen Brahma face to face ? '

' No, indeed, Gotama ! '

' Or is there then, Vase/Ma, a single one of the
pupils of the teachers of the Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas who has seen Brahma face to face ? '

' No, indeed, Gotama ! '

1 Or is there then, Vase////a, a single one of the
Brahmans up to the seventh generation who has seen
Brahma face to face ? '

' No, indeed, Gotama !

13. 'Well then, Vase///£a, those ancient Rishis of the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas, the authors of
the verses, the utterers of the verses, whose ancient
form of words so chanted, uttered, or composed, t the
Brahmans of to-day chant over again or repeat ; in-
toning or reciting exactly as has been intoned or
recited — to wit, A^Maka, Vamaka, Vamadeva, Vessa-
mitta, Yamataggi, Ahgirasa, Bharadva^a, Vdsetf&a,
Kassapa, and Bhagu 1 — did even they speak thus,
saying : " We know it, we have seen it, where Brahma
is, whence Brahma is, whither Brahma is ? " '

' Not so, Gotama ! '

14. 'Then you say, Vase/Ma, that none of the
Brahmans, or of their teachers, or of their pupils,
even up to the seventh generation, has ever seen
Brahma face to face. And that even the Rishis of
old, the authors and utterers of the verses, of the
ancient form of words which the Brahmans of to-day
so carefully intone and recite precisely as they have

1 See the note on these names at ' Vinaya Texts,' II, 130.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 305

been handed down — even they did not pretend to
know or to have seen where or whence or whither
Brahma is *. So that the Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas have forsooth said thus : " What we
know not, what we have not seen, to a state of union
with that we can show the way, and can say : ' This
is the straight path, this is the direct way which makes
for salvation, and leads him, who acts according to it,
into a state of union with Brahma ! ' "

' Now what think you, Vase//^a ? Does it not
follow, this being so, that the talk of the Brahmans,
versed though they be in the Three Vedas, turns out
to be foolish talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the
talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas is
foolish talk ! '

15. 'Verily, Vase/Ma, that Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas should be able to show the way to a state
of union with that which they do not know, neither
have seen — such a condition of things can in no
wise be !

' Just, Vase^a, as when a string of blind men are
clinging one to the other 2, neither can the foremost
see, nor can the middle one see, nor can the hind-
most see — just even so, methinks, Vase/Ma, is the
talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
but blind talk : the first sees not, the middle one sees
not, nor can the latest see. The talk then of these


J In the text §§ 12, 13 are repeated word for word.

2 Andhaverci paramparaw sawsatta. The Phayre MS. has
replaced ve«i by pave «f, after the constant custom of the Burmese
MSS. to improve away unusual or difficult expressions. Buddhaghosa
explains andhavewi by andhapavewi ; and tells a tale of a wicked
wight, who meeting a company of blind men, told them of a certain
village wherein plenty of good food was to be had. When they
besought him for hire to lead them there, he took the money, made
one blind man eaten hold of his stick, the next of that one, and so on,
and then led them on till they came to a wilderness. There he
deserted them, and they all — still holding each the other, and vainly,
and with tears, seeking both their uide and the path — came to
a miserable end ! Comp. M. II, 170.

II. X


306 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas turns out to be
ridiculous, mere words, a vain and empty thing ! '


16. 'Now what think you, Vase/Ma ? Can the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas — like other,
ordinary, folk — see the Moon and the Sun as they
pray to, and praise, and worship them, turning round
with clasped hands towards the place whence they rise
and where they set ? '

' Certainly, Gotama, they can l.'

1 7. ' Now what think you, Vase////a ? The Brahmans
versed in the Three Vedas, who can very well — like
other, ordinary, folk — see the Moon and the Sun as
they pray to, and praise, and worship them, turning
round with clasped hands to the place whence they
rise and where they set — are those Brahmans, versed
in the Three Vedas, able to point out the way to
a state of union with the Moon or the Sun, saying :
"This is the straight path, this the direct way which
makes for salvation, and leads him, who acts according
to it, to a state of union with the Moon or the Sun ? "

' Certainly, not, Gotama ! '

18. 'So you say, Vase/Ma, that the Brahmans are
not able to point out the way to union with that which
they have seen, and you further say that neither any
one of them, nor of their pupils, nor of their pre-
decessors even to the seventh generation has ever
seen Brahma. And you further say that even the
Rishis of old, whose words they hold in such deep
respect, did not pretend to know, or to have seen
where, or whence, or whither Brahma is. Yet these
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth,
that they can point out the way to union with that
which they know not, neither have seen 2. Now what

1 The words of the question are repeated in the text in this and the
following answers. It must be remembered, for these sections, that
the Sun and Moon were gods just as much as Brahma; and that the
Moon always comes first in Nikaya and other ancient texts.

2 The text repeats at length the words of §§ 12, 13, 14.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 307

think you, Vase///^a ? Does it not follow that, this
being so, the talk of the Brahmans, versed though
they be in the Three Vedas, turns out to be foolish
talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that
the talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
is foolish talk ! '

1 9. ' Very good, Vase////a. Verily then, Vase///£a,
that Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able to show the way to a state of union with
that which they do not know, neither have seen — such
a condition of things can in no wise be !'


'Just, Vase/7/£a, as if a man should say, "How
I long for, how I love the most beautiful woman
in this land ! "

. 'And people should ask him, "Well! good friend !
this most beautiful woman in the land, whom you thus
love and long for, do you know whether that beautiful
woman is a noble lady or a Brahman woman, or of the
trader class, or a <Sudra ? "

' But when so asked, he should answer : " No."
' And when people should ask him, " Well ! good
friend ! this most beautiful woman in all the land,
whom you so love and long for, do you know what
the name of that most beautiful woman is, or what is
her family name, whether she be tall or short or of
medium height, dark or brunette or golden in colour,
or in what village or town or city she dwells ? "
' But when so asked, he should answer : " No."
' And then people should say to him, " So then,
good friend, whom you know not, neither have seen,
her do you love and long for ? "

' And then when so asked, he should answer : " Yes."
' Now what think you, Vase^/za ? Would it not
turn out, that being so, that the talk of that man was
foolish talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being so,
that the talk of that man was foolish talk ! '

x 2


308 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.


20. ' And just even so, Vase///za, though you say
that the Brahmans are not able to point out the way
to union with that which they have seen, and you
further say that neither any one of them, nor of their
pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh
generation has ever seen Brahma. And you further
say that even the Rishis of old, whose words they
hold in such deep respect, did not pretend to know,
or to have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahma
is. Yet these Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
say, forsooth, that they can point out the way to union
with that which they know not, neither have seen !
Now what think you, Vase/Ma ? Does it not follow
that, this being so, the talk of the Brahmans, versed
though they be in the Three Vedas, is foolish talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the
talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas is
foolish talk ! '

' Very good, Vase/Ma. Verily then, VaseMfo, that
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should be able
to show the way to a state of union with that which
they do not know, neither have seen — such a condition
of things can in no wise be.'


21. ' Just, Vase/Ma, as if a man should make a stair-
case in the place where four roads cross, to mount up
into a mansion. And people should say to him,
" Well, good friend, this mansion, to mount up into
which you are making this staircase, do you know
whether it is in the east, or in the south, or in the
west, or in the north ? whether it is high or low or of
medium size ?

' And when so asked, he should answer : " No."
' And people should say to him, " But then, good
friend, you are making a staircase to mount up into
something — taking it for a mansion — which, all the
while, you know not, neither have seen ! "

' And when so asked, he should answer : " Yes. "
' Now what think you, Vase////a ? Would it not


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 309

turn out, that being so, that the talk of that man
was foolish talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being so,
that the talk of that man was foolish talk ! '

22. 'And just even^so, Vase/^a, though you say-
that the Brahmans are not able to point out the way
to union with that which they have seen, and you
further say that neither any one of them, nor of their
pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh
generation has ever seen Brahma. And you further
say that even the Rishis of old, whose words they
hold in such deep respect, did not pretend to know,
or to have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahma
is. Yet these Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
say, forsooth, that they can point out the way to union
with that which they know not, neither have seen !
Now what think you, Vase///£a ? Does it not follow
that, this being so, the talk of the Brahmans versed
in the Three Vedas is foolish talk ? '

' In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the
talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas is
foolish talk ! '

23. ' Very good, Vase/Ma, Verily then, Vase/Ma.
that Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able to show the way to a state of union with that
which they do not know, neither have seen — such a
condition of things can in no wise be.'


24. ' Again, Vase///za, if this river A^iravatt were
full of water even to the brim, and overflowing1. And
a man with business on the other side, bound for the
other side, making for the other side, should come up,
and want to cross over. And he, standing on this
bank, should invoke the further bank, and say, " Come
hither, O further bank ! come over to this side ! "

' Now what think you, Vase////a ? Would the further
bank of the river A/£iravati, by reason of that man's

1 Samatittika kakapeyya. See on this phrase the note in my
'Buddhist Suttas' (S.B. E.), pp. 178, 179.


3IO XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

invoking and praying and hoping and praising, come
over to this side ? '

1 Certainly not, Gotama ! '

25. 'In just the same way, Vase/Ma, do the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas — omitting the
practice of those qualities which really make a man
a Brahman, and adopting the practice of those
qualities which really make men non-Brahmans — say
thus : " Indra we call upon, Soma we call upon, Varu«a
we call upon, Isana we call upon, Pa^apati we call
upon, Brahma we call upon, [Mahiddhi we call upon,
Yama we call upon * !] Verily, Vase/Ma, that those
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas, but omitting
the practice of those qualities which really make
1 man a Brahman, and adopting the practice of those
qualities which really make men non-Brahmans — that
they, by reason of their invoking and prayin'g and
hoping and praising, should, after death and when
the body is dissolved, become united with Brahma —
verily such a condition of things can in no wise be2!'


26. 'Just, Vase/Ma, as if this river A/£iravati were
full, even to the brim, and overflowing. And a man
with business on the other side, making for the other
side, bound for the other side, should come up, and
want to cross over. And he, on this bank, were to
be bound tightly, with his arms behind his back, by
a strong chain. Now what think you, Vase///za, would
that man be able to get over from this bank of the
river A/£iravati to the further bank ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama ! '

27. 'In the same way, Vase/Ma, there are five things

1 The Sinhalese MSS. omit Mahiddhi and Yama, but repeat the
verb, ' we call upon,' three times after Brahma. It is possible that the
Burmese copyist has wrongly inserted them to remove the strangeness
of this repetition. The comment is silent.

2 The Buddha, as usual, here takes the ' further bank ' in the
meaning attached to it by the theologians he is talking to, as union
with Brahma. In his own system, of course, the 'further bank' is
Arahatship. So Ahguttara V, 232, 233, and elsewhere.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 3 1 I

leading to lust, which are called, in the Discipline of
the Arahats, a " chain " and a " bond." '

' What are the five ? '

* Forms perceptible to the eye ; desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, attractive forms, that are accompanied by
lust and cause delight. Sounds of the same kind
perceptible to the ear. Odours of the same kind per-
ceptible to the nose. Tastes of the same kind percept-
ible to the tongue. Substances of the same kind
perceptible to the body by touch. These five things
predisposing to passion are called, in the Discipline of
the Arahats, a "chain" and a "bond." And these five
things predisposing to lust, Vase^a, do the Brahmans
versed in the Three Vedas cling to, they are infatuated
by them, attached to them, see not the danger of them,
know not how unreliable they are, and so enjoy them1.'

28. ' And verily, Vase/Ma, that Brahmans versed in
the Three Vedas, but omitting the practice of those
qualities which really make a man a Brahman, and
adopting the practice of those qualities which really
make men non-Brahmans — clinging to these five things
predisposing to passion, infatuated by them, attached
to them, seeing not their danger, knowing not their un-
reliability, and so enjoying them — that these Brahmans
should after death, on the dissolution of the body,
become united to Brahma — such a condition of things
can in no wise be ! '


29. ' Again, Vase^Ma, if this river A/£iravati were
full of water even to the brim, and overflowing. And
a man with business on the other side, making for the
other side, bound for the other side, should come up,
and want to cross over. And if he covering himself
up, even to his head, were to lie down, on this bank,
to sleep.

' Now what think you, Vase/^a ? Would that man


1 Gathita mxxkkhiii a^opanna. See A. I, 74, 274; Udana
VII, 3, 4 ; Sum. 59, &c.


312 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

be able to get over from this bank of the river A/6ira-
vati to the further bank ? '

1 Certainly not, Gotama ! '

30. ' And in the same way, Vase/Ma, there are these
Five Hindrances, in the Discipline of the Arahats \
which are called " veils," and are called " hindrances,"
and are called " obstacles," and are called " entangle-
ments." '

' Which are the five ? '

' The hindrance of worldly lusts,

' The hindrance of illwill,

' The hindrance of torpor and sloth of heart and
mind,

' The hindrance of flurry and worry,

4 The hindrance of suspense.

'These are the Five Hindrances, Vase///*a, which,
in the Discipline of the Arahats, are called veils, and
are called hindrances, and are called obstacles, and are
called entanglements 2.

' Now with these Five Hindrances, Vase/Ma, the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas are veiled,
hindered, obstructed, and entangled.

' And verily, Vase////a, that Brahmans versed in
the Three Vedas, but omitting the practice of those
qualities which really make a man a Brahman, and
adopting the practice of those qualities which really
make men non-Brahmans — veiled, hindered, obstructed,
and entangled by these Five Hindrances — that these
Brahmans should after death, on the dissolution of the
body, become united to Brahma — such a condition of
things can in no wise be ! '


31. ' Now what think you, Va.se/Ma, and what have
you heard from the Brahmans aged and well-stricken
in years, when the learners and teachers are talking

1 Ariyassa vinaye. This may possibly mean 'in the disciple
recommended by the Arahat ' (that is, by the Buddha). But the latter
is expressed rather by Sugata-vinaye. Comp. Ahguttara V, 237-
239 with 234, 235.

2 These Five Hindrances are more fully dealt with above, p. 82.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 313

together? Is Brahma in possession of wives and
wealth, or is he not ] ? '

' He is not, Gotama.'

' Is his mind full of anger, or free from anger ? '

' Free from anger, Gotama.'

' Is his mind full of malice, or free from malice ? '

' Free from malice, Gotama.'

' Is his mind tarnished, or is it pure 2 ? '

' It is pure, Gotama.'

' Has he self-mastery, or has he not 3 ? '

1 He has, Gotama.'

32. ' Now what think you, Vase/7/fca, are the
Brahmans versed in the Vedas in the possession of
wives and wealth, or are they not ? '

' They are, Gotama.'

' Have they anger in their hearts, or have they not ? '

' They have, Gotama.'

' Do they bear malice, or do they not ? '

' They do, Gotama.'

' Are they pure in heart, or are they not ? '

' They are not, Gotama.'

' Have they self-mastery, or have they not ? '

1 They have not, Gotama.'

33. ' Then you say, Vase///?a, that the Brahmans are
in possession of wives and wealth, and that Brahma
is not. Can there, then, be agreement and likeness
between the Brahmans with their wives and property,
and Brahma, who has none of these things ? '


1 Sapariggaho va Brahma apariggaho va ti. Buddhaghosa
says on Vase//^a's reply, ' Kama^Z/andassa abhavato itthipa-
riggahena apariggaho,' thus restricting the 'possession' to women.
But the reference is no doubt to the first ' hindrance ' ; and the word
in the text, though doubtless alluding to possession of women also,
includes more. Compare, on the general idea of the passage, the
English expression, ' no encumbrances,' and Jacobi, ' Gaina-Sutras '
(S. B.E.) I, xxiii.

2 Asahkili///;a-£itto. That is, says Buddhaghosa, 'free from
mental torpor and idleness, worry and flurry.'

3 Vasavatti va avasavatti va. Buddhaghosa says, in explanation
of the answer, 'By the absence of wavering he has his mind under
control (vase vatteti).'


3 T4 Xm- TEVIGGA SUTTA.

1 Certainly not, Gotama ! '

34. • Very good, Vase/Ma. But, verily, that these
Brahmans versed in the Vedas, who live married
and wealthy, should after death, when the body is
dissolved, become united with Brahma, who has none
of these things — such a condition of things can in no
wise be ! '

35. ' Then you say, too, Vase/Ma, that the Brahmans
bear anger and malice in their hearts, and are tarnished
in heart and uncontrolled, whilst Brahma is free from
anger and malice, pure in heart, and has self-mastery.
Now can there, then, be concord and likeness between
the Brahmans and Brahma ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama ! '

36. 'Very good, Vase/Ma, That these Brahmans
versed in the Vedas and yet bearing anger and malice
in their hearts, sinful, and uncontrolled, should after
death, when the body is dissolved, become united to
Brahma, who is free from anger and malice, pure in
heart, and has self-mastery — such a condition of things
can in no wise be !

' So that thus then, Vase/Ma, the Brahmans, versed
though they be in the Three Vedas, while they sit
down (in confidence), are sinking down (in the mire)1 ;
and so sinking they are arriving only at despair,
thinking the while that they are crossing over into
some happier land.

' Therefore is it that the threefold wisdom of the
Brahmans, wise in their Three Vedas, is called a water-
less desert, their threefold wisdom is called a pathless
jungle, their threefold wisdom is called perdition ! '


37. When he had thus spoken, the young Brahman
Vise/Ma said to the Blessed One :

1 Asiditva sa/wsidanti. I have no doubt the commentator is
right in his explanation of these figurative expressions. Confident in
their knowledge of the Vedas, and in their practice of Vedic ceremonies,
they neglect higher things; and so, sinking into folly and superstition,
■ they are arriving only at despair, thinking the while that they are
crossing over into some happier land.'


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 315

' It has been told me, Gotama, that the Samawa
Gotama knows the way to the state of union with
Brahma.'

' What do you think, Vase///£a, is not Manasaka/a
near to this spot, not distant from this spot ? '

'Just so, Gotama. Manasaka/a is near to, is not
far from here.'

1 Now what think you, Vase//>£a, suppose there were
a man born in Manasaka/a, and people should ask him,
who never till that time had left Manasaka/a, which
was the way to Manasaka/a. Would that man, born
and brought up in Manasaka/a, be in any doubt or
difficulty ? '

' Certainly not, Gotama ! And why ? If the man
had been born and brought up in Manasaka/a, every
road that leads to Manasaka/a would be perfectly
familiar to him.'

38. ' That man, Vase/Ma, born and brought up at
Manasaka/a might, if he were asked the way to
Manasaka/a, fall into doubt and difficulty, but to the
Tathagata, when asked touching the path which leads
to the world of Brahma, there can be neither doubt
nor difficulty. For Brahma, I know, Vase/Ma, and
the world of Brahma, and the path which leadeth unto
it. Yea, I know it even as one who has entered the
Brahma-world, and has been born within it!'


39. When he had thus spoken, Vase///za, the young
Brahman, said to the Blessed One :

'Just so has it been told me, Gotama, even that the
Samara Gotama knows the way to a state of union
with Brahma. It is well ! Let the venerable Gotama
be pleased to show us the way to a state of union
with Brahma, let the venerable Gotama save the
Brahman race 1 ! '

' Listen then, Vase/Ma, and give ear attentively, and
I will speak ! '

1 Buddhaghosa takes this to mean, ' Save me of the Brahman
race.'


3l6 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

1 So be it, Lord ! ' said the young Brahman Vase/Z/za,
in assent, to the Blessed One.

40. Then the Blessed One spake, and said :

' Know, Vase////a, that (from time to time) a Tatha-
gata is born into the world, an Arahat, a fully
awakened one, abounding in wisdom and goodness,
happy, with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed
as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a teacher of
gods and men, a Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by
himself, thoroughly understands, and sees, as it were,
face to face this universe — including the worlds above
with the gods, the Maras, and the Brahmas ; and the
world below with its Samaras and Brahmans, its
princes and peoples ; — and he then makes his know-
ledge known to others. The truth doth he proclaim
both in the letter and in the spirit, lovely in its origin,
lovely in its progress, lovely in its consummation : the
higher life doth he make known, in all its purity and
in all its perfectness.

41. 'A householder (gahapati), or one of his
children, or a man of inferior birth in any class,
listens to that truth 1. On hearing the truth he has
faith in the Tathagata, and when he has acquired that
faith he thus considers with himself:

' " Full of hindrances is household life, a path defiled
by passion : free as the air is the life of him who has
renounced all worldly things. How difficult it is for
the man who dwells at home to live the higher life
in all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its bright
perfection ! Let me then cut off my hair and beard,
let me clothe myself in the orange-coloured robes, and
let me go forth from a household life into the home-
less state ! "

' Then before long, forsaking his portion of wealth,
be it great or be it small ; forsaking his circle of
relatives, be they many or be they few, he cuts off
his hair and beard, he clothes himself in the orange-


1 The point is, that the acceptance of this ' Doctrine and Discipline '
is open to all ; not of course that Brahmans never accept it.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 317

coloured robes, and he goes forth from the household
life into the homeless state.

42. ' When he has thus become a recluse he passes
a life self-restrained by that restraint which should be
binding on a recluse. Uprightness is his delight, and
he sees danger in the least of those things he should
avoid. He adopts and trains himself in the precepts.
He encompasses himself with goodness in word and
deed. He sustains his life by means that are quite
pure ; good is his conduct, guarded the door of his
senses ; mindful and self-possessed, he is altogether
happy ! '

43-75. ' And how, Vase/A&a, is his conduct good ? '
[The answer is set forth in the words of the
tract on the Silas, translated above, pp. 3-26,
but with the refrain as in the Sama^wa-phala
Suttanta above, p. 79. Then follow §§ 63-75,
inclusive, of the Sama»»a -phala ; setting
forth : —

1. The confidence of heart that results from
the sense of goodness.

2. The way in which he guards the doors of
his senses.

3. The way in which he is mindful and self-
possessed.

4. His habit of being content with little, of
adopting simplicity of life.

5. His conquest of the Five Hindrances,
each with the explanatory simile.

6. The joy and peace which, as a result of
this conquest, fills his whole being.]

76. l ' And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of


1 These paragraphs occur frequently; see, inter alia, Maha-Sudassana
Sutta II, 8, in my ' Buddhist Suttas ' (S. B. E.). It will be seen from
' Buddhism/ pp. 170, 171, that these meditations play a great part in
later Buddhism, and occupy very much the place that prayer takes in
Christianity. A fifth, the meditation on Impurity, has been added, at
what time I do not know, before the last. These four (or five) are
called the Brahma Viharas, and the practice of them leads, not to
Arahatship, but to rebirth in the Brahma-world.


3 1 8 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.

the world with thoughts of Love, and so the second,
and so the third, and so the fourth. And thus the
whole wide world, above, below, around, and every-
where, does he continue to pervade with heart of
Love, far-reaching-, grown great, and beyond measure.

77. 'Just, Vase#/za, as a mighty trumpeter makes
himself heard — and that without difficulty — in all the
four directions ; even so of all things that have shape
or life, there is not one that he passes by or leaves
aside, but regards them all with mind set free, and
deep-felt love.

1 Verily this, Vase/Ma, is the way to a state of union
with Brahma.

78. ' And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of pity1, . . . sympathy1, . . .
equanimity \ and so the second, and so the third, and
so the fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above,
below, around, and everywhere, does he continue to
pervade with heart of pity, . . . sympathy, . . .
equanimity, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond
measure.

79. 'Just, Vase/Ma, as a mighty trumpeter makes
himself heard — and that without difficulty — in all the
four directions ; even so of all things that have shape
or life, there is not one that he passes by or leaves
aside, but regards them all with mind set free, and
deep-felt pity, . . . sympathy, . . . equanimity.

' Verily this, Vase/Ma, is the way to a state of union
with Brahma.'

80. ' Now what think you, Vase^a, will the
Bhikkhu who lives thus be in possession of women
and of wealth, or will he not ? '

' He will not, Gotama ! '

' Will he be full of anger, or free from anger ? '
' He will be free from anger, Gotama ! '
' Will his mind be full of malice, or free from
malice ? '

1 Paragraphs 76, 77 are supposed to be repeated of each.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. 319

1 Free from malice, Gotama ! '

' Will his mind be tarnished, or pure ? '

' It will be pure, Gotama ! '

' Will he have self-mastery, or will he not ? '

' Surely he will, Gotama ! '

81. 'Then you say, Vase//>6a, that the Bhikkhu is
free from household and worldly cares, and that
Brahma is free from household and worldly cares.
Is there then agreement and likeness between the
Bhikkhu and Brahma ? '

' There is, Gotama ! '

' Very good, Vase/^a. Then in sooth, Vase/Ma.
that the Bhikkhu who is free from household cares
should after death, when the body is dissolved, become
united with Brahma, who is the same — such a condition
ot things is every way possible !

' And so you say, Vase/Z/^a, that the Bhikkhu is free
from anger, and free from malice, pure in mind, and
master of himself; and that Brahma is free from
anger, and free from malice, pure in mind, and master
of himself. Then in sooth, Vase///^a, that the Bhikkhu-
who is free from anger, free from malice, pure in mind,
and master ot himself should after death, when the
body is dissolved, become united with Brahma, who
is the same — such a condition of things is every way
possible ! '

82. When he had thus spoken, the young Brahmans
Vase/7/ka and Bharadva^a addressed the Blessed One,
and said :

' Most excellent, Lord, are the words of thy mouth,
most excellent! Just as if a man were to set up that
which is thrown down, or were to reveal that which
is hidden away, or were to point out the right road
to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a lamp
into the darkness, so that those who have eyes can
see external forms ; — just even so, Lord, has the truth
been made known to us, in many a figure, by the
Exalted One. And we, even we, betake ourselves.
Lord, to the Blessed One as our guide, to the Truth,


320 XIII. TEVIGGA SUTTA.


and to the Brotherhood. May the Blessed One accept
us as disciples, as true believers, from this day forth,
as long as life endures ! '


Here ends the Tevi^a Suttanta1.


1 Literally ' The Suttanta about those who have the knowledge of
the Three (Vedas).' See p. 303, where the names of these ' doctors '
are given.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS AND
PROPER NAMES.


Adhvaryu Brahmans, 303.

A^atasattu, son of a Videha princess,
king of Magadha in the Bud-
dha's time, 56, 64-68, 94, 95-.

A^-ita, of the garment of hair, his
doctrine, 73.

Ag-ivakas, 71, 219, 220, 227, 232.

Agni, sacrifices to, one of the low
arts. 17 ; shrine to, 126.

Aim of the Buddhist recluses, 63,
64, 202.

Aitareva Ara«yaka, 171.

Alwis, James d', 283.

AmbalaM&ika, garden and rest-house
in Magadha, 2; another 173.
in Anuradhapura, 2.

Ambattba., 709 foil,
charm, 118.

Angaka, So«ada«^a's nephew, 155.

Animals, kindness to, 57.

Arahat, used of the Buddha, 2 ; lay-
men Arahats, 63.
is the real Brahman, 105, 138 ; ex-
pressions used by Buddhists of
the Arahat the same as those
used by the priests of God, 274.

Arahatship, the highest aim, 94,
192, 237; the Dialogues lead
up to, 186, 206; is emancipa-
tion, 201, 232 ; is the positive
side of Buddhism, 243; intellect
of, 283.

Arithmetic, 21, 22, 69.

Asceticism, 206-240.

Asoka, 142; his Edicts, xviii, 7,
71, 191 ; his battle against the
priests, 28.,.

Ajramas, four supposed stages in the
life of a Brahman, 212-219.

II.


Astral body, Yoga idea of, 62.

Astronomy and astrology, 20.

Atharva Veda quoted, 17, 19, 23.
25, 247 ; not acknowledged as
a Veda in the old texts, 109,
but in the Milinda, no.

Athletic exercises, 9, 13.

Augury, 16, 17.

Aviruddhaka, religieux in the Bud-
dha's time, 220, 222.

Avyakatani, the Ten, j 86-1 88

Bahiya, story of, 274.

Bahvr/'^a Brahmans, 303.

Ballads, in prose and verse, 8.

Barth, M., 287.

Bassendine, Matthew, 137.

Bamwan Tu^awa, pandit, 283.

Bharhut Tope, bas-reliefs at, 130,
169.

Bhartr/'hari, as member of the Bud-
dhist Order, 256.

Bhesika, a barber, 289 ; was a Bud-
dhist, 290.

Bimbisara, king of Magadha, gives
a grant to a Brahman, 144;
is a follower of the Buddha,

i47

Body and mind, 86, 87.

Bonds, the Five, 200, 201.

Brahma, the supreme God, descrip-
tion of, 31, 281.
origin of the belief in, 32 ; his
ignorance, 282; union with,
301-318; B. and the Bhikkhu,
319.

Brahmadatta, pupil of Suppiya, 1,2.

Brahman, unknown in the Nikayas,
298.


322


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


Brahmanism, how it was destroyed,
142, 165.

Brahmans : caste claims of, 105;
a standing description of the
learned, no, 146; as ascetics,
1 26 ; luxury and pride of, 129 ;
the Arahat is the true, 105,
138-9, 232 ; usually not a priest,
141, 286; reputation the source
of their income, 151 ; five
essentials of, 153-156; mode of
addressing, 194 ; their ethics of
teaching, 285-287 ; qualities
that make men Brahmans, 310 ;
various kinds of, 303.

Brahma Viharas, Supreme Condi-
tions, 299.

Br/had-ara«yaka Upanishad, 1 1 6, 1 7 1,
201, 209, 214.

Biihler, Hofrath Dr. G., xii, xx,

121, 213.

Burnouf, E., 4, 20-24, 65, 70, 82,
86, 169, 191.

Castes, the four, an inexact phrase,

27, 99-
key to the origin of, 97.
phases of the extension and growth

of, 99.
none, strictly, in the Buddha's

time, 99, 101.
mental distinctions to be preferred

to distinctions of, 100.
no distinctions of, in the Buddhist

Order, 102.
the Buddha's views as to, outside
the Order, 103-107.
Cause, two forms of the heresy of

denial of a, 52.
Ceylon forgeries, xvii-xviii.
Chaliyas, cinnamon-peelers, 98.
Chalmers, Robert, 40, 104, 113,

122, 217.

Chance-beings, the so-called, 39, 7-3.

Chandalas, a low caste, as acrobats,
9; could enter an order, 100,
103.

Charms, power of, 118, 278.

Chastity, part of the minor moral-
ity', 4.

Chess, 9, 10.

Clans, the free, 20, 195 ; clan mote,
113; their independence of the
priests, 286.

Clothing, strange sorts of, used by
ascetics, 230.

Commensality, 27, 97-100.


Commentaries, the Buddhist, xix.
Connubium/ 27, 97-100.
Content, 81.
Conversion, 191.

Cowell, Prof. E. B., xxvii, 170, 172.
Crafts, mystic arts, 19; trades, 68.
Creation, legends of, condemned,
M.

Dacoity, 175.
Dahlmann, Father, 274.
Danranas, the six, xxvii.
Darupattika, he with the wooden

bowl, 202.
Detachment, 84.
Deussen, Prof. P., xxvi, 169, 209.

215.
Devadatta, 209, 271.
Devadhammika, religitux in the

Buddha's time, 222.
Diogenes, 208, 209.
Disa, Kapha's mother, 115.
Divination, 16, 18, 19.
Dreams, interpretation of, 17.
Dvi^as, twice-born, 103.

Earth, quaking as witness to the

truth, 55.
worship of, see Mother Earth.
Economics, state action, 176.
Eel- wrigglers, four kinds of, 37-40.
Eightfold Path, see Path.
Elements, the, four, Indian belief

about the, 73, 74, 86, 260, 274.
Elephants, the royal, 67, no, 128.
Emancipation, the Arahat's certainty

of his, 93 ; is preferable to

penance or asceticism, 234, 235.
Epic poetry in India, source of, 8.
Equability, in the third GMna, 85.
Eihics, Buddhist, the four planes of,

Evil, overcoming, by good, 161.
Existence, speculations about, con-
demned, 14.
after death, 40, 43-48.
Exogamy, 8.
Exorcists, 16, 18, 19.
Extensionists, four kinds of, 35.

Fairs, shows at, 5, 7.
Fick, Dr., 103, 107, 122.
Finot's ' Lapidaires Indiens,' 19.
Fish in the pool, simile of, 54.
Food, one meal a day, 5 ; varioi^

kinds of, which an ascetic would

refuse, 227-229.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS AND PROPER NAMES. 323


Freedom of thought in India, 165,

244.

Gaggara, an early queen of Anga,

144 ; the lake called after her,

ibid.
Gainas, 71, 72, 74, 165, 170, 214,

220, 221.
Galiya, pupil of him with the wooden

bowl, 202.
Games, list of, as played fifth century

B.C., 9-1 1.
Genesis, Buddhist legend of, 106,

107.
Guanas, the four (the four Raptures),

a pre-Buddhistic idea and prac-
, tice, 50, 51, 265 ; details of,

84-87 ; not part of wisdom,

137-

Ghost stories condemned, 14.

Givaka, a celebrated Buddhist phy-
sician, 65-68.
God, see Brahma.

Gods, sacrificing to, a low art, 17,
24.
the, ' Debauched by Pleasure,' 32.
the, ' Debauched in Mind,' 33.
brought under the domain of law,

142.
Brahman priests claim to be, 285.
ignorance of, 280-283 j ust °f>
280.
Gogerly, the Rev. Daniel, 1, 4, 7,

26, 30, 65, 82.
Goodness, a function of intelligence,

137.
Gotama, appreciation of, 109, 147-

150.
Gotamaka, religieux in the Buddha's

time, 232.

Hair garments, see Makkhali.

Hair-splitting, 38.

Happiness, of a recluse, causes of,

79 ; after death, discussion as

to, 257.
Harsha Aarita, Ba/za's list of hermits

in, 170.
Head-splitting, on refusal to answer

a question, old belief as to, 116,

117 ; on failing to approve what

has been well said, 181.
Hermit, contrasted with wandering

mendicant, 212-215.
High places, old village festivals at,

7,8.
Hillebrandt, Prof., quoted, 17.


Hinayana books, xvi, xix.

Hindrances, the Five, 58, 84, 312.

Hindus, compared with Europeans,
99, 165-166.

Hoernle, Dr., 71.

Homonyms in Pali, 17, 33, 41.

Honesty, part of the minor moral-
ity, 4.

Hultsch, Dr., xii.

Human hair, worn as clothing, 231.

Iddhi, 88.

I>W£anankala wood, 108.
Indeterminates, the Ten, 187, 254.
Infinities, the Four, in Buddhism, 36.
Infinity, of the world, 35.
Intoxicating drinks, abstinence from,

182.
Intoxications, the Three, and the

Four, 92, 93, 107.
Irony, the Buddha's, in talks with

Brahmans, 33, 160, 163.
I-Tsing, Chinese traveller, 256.

Jacob, Colonel, 212, 215.

Jacobi, Professor, 71, 72, 74, 75, 219.

Joy, result of emancipation, 58.

Aampa, capital of Anga, 144.
Ka«ha, sage, ancient legend of, 116-

1 19.
Ka«hayanas, a Brahman family,

origin of, 115.
Kapila, the ancient sage, 170.
Kapilavatthu, congress hall at, 113.
Karma, non-Buddhist theory of, 72.
Aarvaka, on whom the Lokayata was

lathered, 170.
Kassapa, the naked ascetic, 223.
Katha Vatthu, its evidence as to the

age of the Dialogues, x-xii.
Kanaka Upanishad, 209.
Aetiya, a country, 268.
Kevaddha or Keva//a, xii, 276.
A^andogya Upanishad, 18, 164, 171,

210, 211.
Khanumata, in Magadha, 173.
Kielhorn, Professor F., 20, 220.
Kindness to men and animals, 4, 164,

180.
Aitta, son of the elephant-trainer, 256.
Knowing other people's thoughts, 89,

152, 278.
KotfAita, Aitta's dispute with, 256.
Kumarila Bhatfa, 166, 17T.
Ku/adanta, the rich Brahman, his

sacrifice, 173-185.


Y 2


324


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


Land-revenue, 108.

Law-books, the priestly, on asceti-
cism. 212-219; on teaching,
285.

Leakages, to wisdom and right con-
duct, the four, 125.

Leumann, Prof., 221.

Levy, M. Sylvain, x.

Li^iiavi, the clan, 193, 196.

Lohi/Wa, his views on teaching, 288
foil.

Lokayata, speculation, 14, no, 139 ,
in old texts the word means
nature-lore, 166 foil.

Love, method of the deliberate
practice of, 317.

Luck, good and bad, 19.

Luxury, abstinence from, 58.

MagaWika, religieux in the Buddha's
time, 220.

Magic, black and white, 23, 24; of
the sacrifice, 210, 286 ; charms
to work, 118, 278.

Maha-bharata, 121. 165, 169, 209.

Maha-purisa, Great Being, thirty-
two signs of, no, 131.

Maitri Upanishad, 215.

Makkhali Gosala, a famous teacher,
head of A^ivakas in the Bud-
dha's time, 71.

Mallika, queen of Pasenadi, 244.

MaWissa, a wandering mendicant,
202.

Mangoes on the stalk, simile of, 54.

Marriage, 8, 23, 119, 123.

Materialists, 167.

Medicine, wrong for a recluse to
gain his living by various sorts
of, 25, 26.

Mice, auguries drawn from the
gnawing of, 17; curing the bites
of(?), 19.

' Middle Country,' place of origin of
Buddhist books, xviii.

Milinda, the, its evidence as to the
age of the Dialogues, ix.

Minayeff, Prof., on the date of the
Katha Vatthu, xviii.

.Mind and body, 86, 87.

Mindful and self-possessed, 80.

Moon-worship, older than sun-wor-
ship, 306.

Mother Earth, ancient cult of, 24,

25-
Mother's name, sons called by, 193.
Muir, Dr. J., 209, 286, 287.


Mu«</aka Upanishad, 211.
Music, 5, 7-9.

Myths, sense of humour in the
Vedic, 161.

Nagita Kassapa, 193, 198.
Nalanda, afterwards seat of the

Buddhist University, r, 276.
Names, eight sorts of, in use in early

times in India, 193-196.
Nautch dances, 5, 7-1 1.
Nesadas, hereditary bird-catchers,

100.
Neumann, Dr. K., xiii, xxvi, 4-7, 20-

23, 82, 112, 228, 229, 273, 283.
Nicknames, 193, 194, 196.
Nidanas, the twelve, old form of, 53.
N'igantha. Nata-putta, 56. 74, 75 ;

his followers, 220, 221.
Nikayas, the five, x-xv.
Nirvawa, the way of escape from

speculation, 29.
a non-Buddhist view of, 30 ; the

Buddha's attainment of, 211,

227 ; the highest aim, 225.
Non-action, a famous theory of, 70.

Okkaka. king, ancestor of the
Sakyas, 114.

Oldenberg, Prof. H., xvi, xx, 156.

Optimism, the, of the Buddha's doc-
trine, 261.

0//£addha, 'Hare-lip,' the L\H/jhv\,
198, 204.

Pakudha Ka/Wayana, his doctrines,

74-

Pali books, xix-xxii.

Palmistry, 16.

PaWu, a king, 16.

Pasenadi, king of Kosala, father-
in-law of Aij-atasattu, 65 ; as
patron of a Brahman, 108, 288 ;
bas-relief of his chariot, 130;
his wife Mallika, 244 ; overlord
of Kasi, 291.

Path, the Eightfold, to Arahatship,
62, 63, 202, 226.

Peace, impassioned for, part of the
minor morality, 5.
a result of emancipation, 58, 84 ;
of the Bhikshu, 84.

Penance, means of maturing Karma,
72 ; tht Buddha does not dis-
parage all, 224 ; the three lists
of, 227 foil. ; the Buddha's views
about, 232 foil.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS AND PROPER NAMES.


325


Personality, three modes of, 259-
263.

Pessimism rejected, 261.

Pingalaka, king, 300 B.C., xv.

Pi/aka, xiii.

Plants and seeds, injury to, 5, 6, 58.

Planudes, fourteenth century, author
of Aesop's Fables, 170.

Plato, 207, 299.

Pokkharasadi Opamawwo Subha-
gavaniko, 108, 135, 147.

Praise and dispraise, Buddh'st atti-
tude respecting, 3.

Prakrits in India in the sixth cen-
tury B.C., 57.

Precepts, the five, for laymen, 182.

Previous births, a man's recollec-
tion of, 27, 59, 90, 91.

Probation, 240.

Pukkusas, a low tribe, 100.

Pura«a Kassapa, a teacher, his views,

69, 75-
Purohita, priest, 196.

Rama, teacher and father of the

Buddha's teacher Uddaka, 48.
Ramayawa, 169, 219.
Rathakaras, hereditary cart-makers,

100.
Recluses, position of, in India, in

the Buddha's time, 57.
details of the advantages of the

life of a, 58.
Religieux, in the Buddha's time, ten

kinds of, 220 ; the true sort of,

232-233.
Repeaters of the books (which were

not written), 61.
Representative faculty (ma no), 73,

80.
Republics in India in the Buddha's

time, 20.
Rishis, authors and reciters of the

Three Vedas, 129, 306.

Sacrifices, all kinds of, ranked as
low, 17, 25 ; Kutadanta's, 163 ;
King Wide-realm's, 163, 176
foil. ; the right kind is self-
training, &c, 182 foil. ; ethical,
more worthy than physical, 164.

Sakyas, 112-119 > number of, in the
Buddha's time, 147.

Salavatika, in Kosala, 288.

Salvation, priestly view of, 298, 303.

Sanaw-kumara, the Ever Virgin, old
legend of, 121.


Sa«§-aya, a teacher in India, 1, 66,

75-
Sahkara, 18, 167, 169, 171, 212, 285.
Sahkhya doctrine of pralaya, 28;
doctrine of seven souls or planes
of mental being, 49 ; ascription
of the S. system to Kapila, 170.
Sanskrit Buddhist texts, xv, xvi.
Satapatha-Brahmawa, 2ro.
Sati, a Bhikshu who thought that
the mind was the link in trans-
migration (as a unity), 87.
Schopenhauer, xxvi, 274.
Seats, sofas, beds, &c, list of, 1 1-1 3.
Seclusion, 84.
Self-mortification, 218.
Senart, M. E., xiv, 71, 105, 107, 191.
Senses, the six, 73; guarded as to,

79, 80.
Shavelings, sham friars, 112.
Siesta, 173.

Siha, Nagita's nephew, 198.
Sihanada Suttantas, 208.
Silas, ancient tract on minor

morality, 3-20.
Similes :

The fish in the pool, 54.
The mangoes on the stalk, 54.
The bird happy and free, 81.
Success of the man in debt, 82.
Recovery of the man diseased, 82.
Delivery of the man in prison, 82.
Emancipation of the man enslaved,

83.
Return home of the man lost, 83.
The ball of soap, 84.
The deep pool full of water, 85.
The lotus-plants in the pool, 86.
The man in the clean robe, 86.
The Veluriya gem on the thread.

87.
The reed in the sheath, and sword

in the scabbard, 88.
The clever potter, 89.
The young man and the mirror,

90.
The three villages, 91.
The pebbles and fish in the clear

pool, 93.
The blind men and the elephant,

187-188.
The pig wallowing in the mire,

252.
The lover of the unknown lady,

258.
The ladder up to nowhere, 259,
261.


26


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


The products of the cow, 263
The land-sighting bird, 283.
The weeding out of one's neigh-
bour's field, 294.
Wooing the objecting maiden,

294.
Wooing the unknown maiden,

307.
Blind leaders of the blind, 305.
Staircase up to nowhere, 308.
Calling ..to the further bank to

come over here, 309.
The bound man and the river,

310, 311.
The trumpet's far-reaching tones,
318.
Singing, 5.
Siva, ancient traces of the cult of,

18, 222.
Siva-vi^^a, exercising demons in a

cemetery, 18.
Slavery, 5, 19, 76-77, 83, 101, 103,

128.
Snake-charming, 18.
Social conditions in India about 500

B. c, 10-26, 56.
Socrates, on transmigration, 299.
Sowadaw^a, a Brahman, 144-159.
Soothsaying, 20-24.
Soul, meaning of, xxv ; eternity of,
one origin of speculation as to
the, 38-29.
another origin of belief in, 34,

35-
after death, sixteen speculations

as to, 45-46.
annihilation of, seven forms of

the heresy as to, 46-47.
in water, Gaina doctrine of, 75,

232.
none to be considered in actions,

81.
is it the same as the body? 187-

205.
Upanishad theory of, 188.
meanings of, in Shakspere and the

Bible, 189.
trance comes from the soul being

away, 241.
old theory of, frankly material-
istic, 24 1.
souls inside plants and animals,

242 ; diffused through the

human body, 167, 352-254.
Speculations, the sixty-two foolish,

26_53 i the ten, on insufficient

evidence, 187-188.


Stages, eight, in the life of a recluse,
72.

Subha, Todeyya-putta, 267.

Subhuti, Terunnanse, 93.

Sudras, 99-103, 112, 128,211, 220,
285.

Sunakkhatta, of the Li&Mavis, 199.

Sun-myths in Buddhism, 131, 162.

Sun-worship, a low superstition, 24 ;
always mentioned after moon-
worship in old texts, 306.

Suppiya, a wandering mendicant,
follower of Saw^aya, 1, 2.

Suttanta, meaning of, in the inscrip-
tions, xiii.

Sympathy, method of deliberate
practice of, 318.

Taittinya Upanishad, 24, 48, 210.

Brahmans, 303.
Tathagata, meaning of, 40, 7*3.

does he exist after death ? 40,

54.

Taxes, 77, 108, 176, 180.

Teachers, the three, 293.

Teaching, ethics of, 285-295.

Teda»<flka, religieux in the Buddha's
time, 220, 221.

Trade and capital, 176.

Trance, mystery of, 241-264.

Transmigration, taught by non-
Buddhists, 72, 298.

Treasures, the Seven, of the uni-
versal monarch, no.

Truthfulness, part of the minor
morality, 4.

Ug-uwwa, a town, 223.
Upanishad, meaning of, 117.
Upanishads, humour in, 161.
Urbanity, part of the minor moral-
ity, 5-

Vagira-pa/zi, the spirit who bears

the thunderbolt, 117.
Vaikhanasa Sutra, 218.
Vain'talk, abstinence from, 5, 179.

list of, 13.
Vedas, the Three (not Four), 109.
Vedic myths, humour in, 161.
Vedic studies, 159.
Venas, hereditary basket-makers,

100.
Vetulyaka, the school so called, xviii.
VidhQra, the pandit, 168-169.
Vitan^as, sophists, 14, 167-168.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS AND PROPER NAMES.


32 7


Warren, Mr. H. C, 280.

Weber, Professor A., 7, 170.

Wide-realm, name of a king, his
wonderful sacrifice, 175 foil.

Windisch, Prof. E., xx, 258.

Wisdom and righteousness, 123 foil.,
156.

Women, talks about, 13 ; were
mediums between men and the
gods, 24 ; of a king's harem, 67 ;
maintenance of, 83; their in-
terest in religious questions,


244 ; restrictions on education

of, 285 ; in heaven, 313.
Wonders, three kinds of, 277.
Wood, the Great, at Vesali, 197.
Word, deed, and thought, 57, 58,

72, 104.
World, various forms of belief in

the eternity of, 26-35.
four forms of belief in finity and

infinity of, 35-37.

Yoga ideas of the astral body, 62.


INDEX OF PALI WORDS.


Akiriya, 70.
Akkarika, 1 1.
Akkhaw, 10.
Akkhanaw, 8.
Angaw, 16.
Anga-vi&g-a, 18.
Anguli-patodakena, 1 1 3.
Atisitva, 282.
Atta-puilabho, 259.
Addhariya, 303.
Anudittbi, 26.
Anuvyaflgana, 80.
Anuhiramane, 258.
Ane/agalaya, 146.
Apaya-mukhani, 125.
Apparihirakaia, 257'.
Appeva nama, 66.
Abbhokasiko, 231.
Abhi««a, 59, 62.
Abhisawkharoti, 251.
Abhisawwa, 246.
Abhisamaya, 190.
Am\}&ttba-v\gga, 19.
Ariya, 94.
Avakaso, 146.
Avyakata, 187.
Avyaseka, 80.
Assa-pu/a, 120.
Ahiwsa, 165.

Akasa, 10.
Aghatana, 42.
Adina, 148.
Amisa, 7.
Aradheti, 151.
Aropito te vado, 15.
Aloka-saiBwi, 82.
Asagga, 133.
Asandi, 11.
Asava, 92.
Asiditva, 314.


Iddhi, 271 foil.
Ibbha, 113.
I si, 118.

Ukka-pato, 21.
Ukku/ikappadhana, 231.
\J ikhadana., 87.
Uddalomi, 12.
Upani^g-Myati, 33.
Upanisidati, 117.
Upaniyya, 133.
Upekhako, 85.
Uppado, 16.

Ekodibhava, 85.

Opapatiko, 201.
Opana, 177.

Kawsa-ku/a, 6.
Katt^issaraw, 12.
Kallawz idawz, 203.
Ka/opi, 227.
Kakapeyya, 309.
Kaveyyaw, 22.
Kuttaka, 12.
Kutta-va/ehi, 130.
Kumbhathunaw, 8.
Kula-nama, 193.
Kuhaka, 15.

Khatta-vi^a, 18.
Khalika, 10.
Khi^/Ja-padosika, 32.

Gama-dhammo, 4.

Goraaka, 12.

Gotta, 27, 101, 193-196.

Gharikaw, 10.

ATakkhu, 91, 92, 95.
Jfankamati, 301.


INDEX OF PALI WORDS.


329


ifaw^ala, 9.
ATariya, 64.
ATittaka, 10.
ATingulikawj, 10.

Kbanda\% 303.
ATAandoka, 303.

Gangha-vihara, 301.
Gati, 100.
Glgukiba., 237.

i^awa, 252.
iv"a«a-dassana, 86.

Tapas, 209 foil.
Tittiriya, 303.
Tulika, 12.

Thaw^ila, 231.
Thalipaka, 1 19.
.rhusodaka, 229.

Daw^amantaraw, 228.
Datti, 229.
Daddula, 230.
Dutb'i, xxvi, 26.
Disa-daho, 21.
Dukkha, 249.
Dosina, 66.

Dhutangas, 219.

Nakkhatta, 20.
Nama-rflpa, 274, 283.
Nippesika, 16.
Nibuddham, 9.
Nimmittaw gawhati, 80.

Pakkhandino, 68.
Panga^iram, 10.
Pa££attam, 29.
Pa^emi, 252.
Pa««zi, xxvi.
Pa»»a»a, 156.
Patelika, 12.
Pafika, 12.
Pa/Uarate, 116.
Pafimokkha, 26.
Patha-gamana, 20.
Parikkharo, 163, 174. 177.
Pariggaho, 313.
Pari/fcareti, 50.
Paritassati, 53.
Parimaddana, 87.
Pariharapathaw, 10.
Paligha, 1 30.


Pallanko, 11.
Pahaw, 283.
Patikankhati, 4.
Pi««aka, 230.
Putawsena, 150.
Pubbapetakatha, 14.
Purisantara-gata, 228.
Pekkhaw, 7.

Phalaka^iram, 231.

BandhupadapaX'^a, 112.
Bah vari^a, 303.
Brahma, 108.
Brahma-va^^asi, 146.
Brahma-vihara, 298-320.

Bhikkhu, 220 foil.

Maggani, 303.
Mangura^Aavi, 258.
Mano-padosika, 33.
Mudda, 21.
Mula-nama, 193.
Mokkha/fcika, 10.

Ra^a-porise, 176.
Ra^a-bhogga, 108.

Lapaka, 15.
Lokakkhayika, 14.

Vankakawi, 10.
Va«»a, 27, 99-101,114, 153,
Vatthu-vi^a, 18.
Vasavatti, 313.
Vada-pamokkhaya, 15.
Vala-kambalaw, 231.
Vikatika, 12.
Vi«»a«a, 87, 250, 27^.
Vidha, 163, 174.
Vipphandita, 53.
Viva«a, 28.
Viveka, 84.
Visikha-katha, 13.
Visuka-dassanaw, 7.
Visesa, 296.
Vihara, in.
Vekafiko, 232.
Ve/Aaka, 130.
Vetalaw, 8.

Saw.gv&ambhari, 255.
Sa»«a, 252.
Sattussada, 144.
Santika, 10.
Santhagara, 113.
Sannitodaka, 255.


33Q


DIALOGUES OF THE BUDDHA.


Samnggo, 7.
Samatittika, 309.
Samanaka, 273.
Samadhi, 265, 266.
Samarambha, 5.
Sampayati, 39.
Sampha-ppalapa, 5.
Sambahanaw, 13.
Sambodhi, 190-192.
Sawkhanaw, 22.
Sawkhitti, 229.
Sa.mva.tta., 28.


Sawvadanaw, 22.
Sawsidanti, 314.
Salakahatthaw, 10.
Samaka, 230.
Sippani, 100.
Sippi-sambuka, 94.
Siva, 1 8, 222.
Sukha, 249.
Sobhanagarakaw, 9.
Sovirakawz, 229.

Hatthapalekhano, 227.


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


331


CO

O

H-l

H

<

CO

w

a: .
f-i r-^

« a

O I
fe Q

o w

Q S3


o


CO

H
W
pa co
< Ui
S O
0- O
•J CQ
<


-J

<


a

w

CJ


WC7)

O


6C

o
o

Q3

W

H

►-<

co

«*:


w

O


J5
u

a,


a


i


m n *n f-i n~


D


■a -*s


■•)


*\ q «iOs(


«^^a ejoj


\s & k- t»


n 2: c £\ n


- - u*>*J


- — UoJ-U


fa nc


fc)


Qs


ti-oj


k)-oJ


31


z6 '


flr |P BT \* \T


-« -«s


18


be


bo


bfi


4= JC


H

z
<
z
o

to

z
o
u


tn

CO


3


3
c


CO

J-

'£,
S

.3
5


09
CO —

■a .2

CO O
tn


— .2 3


05
CJ

3

.OS


o

3

.03


a.


e]


09


0J


a.


•? -3


CD
cd

U

q=)


S3

■u
0

s.

a

CO

C

4)

tn

CQ
<D

1—4
c3

c3


.2 3

•3 #


cS _2J es Js pi CO

03 rj

t- Co

3 &


3

CJ


* n n * w


m

03

to


3.
CO


S 00 ft O -< M


3


2

3

c

4>


05 <*


c5

"5
"a,

03


5 T3


5 .2

g IS

2 2


S


s a


-> 1 *\
CO2


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHADETS


c

• • •

.

• •

.

1

j=

>>

• *»

■*»

-=

-w

•

• •

•

e —

CO

• M ™° •

O

•

•

• •

•

•» .

BE

• •

•

.

*-

• *

G

c;

•

r r

•

«-i _r^

.9

D ~ M •

=

• •

•

•

3

to

3.

<5> :

D

«3

*»

o

D-D

5

: ■-> s :

<

•

^— *v

C

m

3«

.

*!>••>

D

0

•o

o

D-O

^0

:s ^-^

PL,

b

• ••>

»-

2

*>

?«

E<

*> •

~*3)

1

.v^ . .

0.

CN

■&

■a

in It.

: ?*

•

9

N

£v/

e, \s>

*\<ir

•
•

, *

. ^o . .

M

e
e
en

p-

! * !

|c

P

\vr p

it te K

. tp ' .

"

m

► • •

.

.

a

o

•

» • •

a

X

J

s ■

«o ^5

n

<

• •

• •

H

l'j

•
•

CO ,

N N'

8

«Sv -=M «0 ►»

»■*»

<

z

**

CO

rf

i/}

s

3
0

>»

■*>

•o =§

c —

• CO

• N • •

• oo erj

. s 3

• ^ "c3

• H N

• 2 ~js

i-H C

1

• CO CO

■a

^ 3

S'J

Si

1
<

:

c
c

3 .«

* 2 '35

* * (S

o £ 2

LI 2 <d

•4 BO ^*

© .

pi •

© .

-1-3

'3,

CO

• cS
U

' '5,

a]

'35

CO

on
. "3

.2 (
S i

o •

5 **

3 b
c<3

CM

as .s

S J

. 3 3

. E S

s s

i s s

u

w

aJ

a)

03

ert

o

>

a

aJ

^5 >

. 3

s

01

c/3

.M •* •* *

9,
CO

3
C

£

-2 a

ft

s s

£ CO

-

" •* * *

00

« © -< CM

eo

■*t

»o

to r»

CO

era o

~* c

■j eo

-* «o CO Is-

h.

f*

i-h (M CM PJ

CM

CM

CM

CM CM

CM

CM CO

CO c

o eo

CO CO CO CO

FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS.


3-


00


to


a. ~z


Q, *


s £


a


acifin


-a ^


-a j»


*> •


y


^


n


o


<y


<^r


%- :


a-


i


u>


-^ *


K> \o M h? ^ K


U tr IT J


~ 'S "e


©

53
O

td
o

a

00

©


a
©

ft


o

o

i—i

o5
bD

a.


c3


p *P p


e -5»


go N


=. -' -a


03
o3


e3


a
a3


«a T3


«3 VS


OS

o

fci CO


a-


03 X


3


03
©

i—i

c3

•iH

■§

ft


8)


en
03


e3


c3


Ei S £ 72 CO

OOOOHNMTtilOtOS
CO CO ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


0
C


^3

ID


03


B


«s a


5- 'c


o
o


o3


CO


03
»* 3 03

c .2

< >


334


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


Chinese.

JCtf

^ *C0 •— o- ,

3 <p a> <u <es •

o ■ 3 '•

:3 •

c

1- :

I. |» |..|- :

i-„ |> |, : :

Arabic.

•Ml> tj. j

H-i> ■

:Jis :

d

1

. 4 aj |. 4 :

1 •> ;

:,i, :

:•- :

u
u

; :~ :

o • ■

- ■

u

N

5 3-i^

to -^ •

5

V)

B

■ P £ I"***" |€? |^ |P flP* l» IP

• IV <&

:^^

H

Gd

H

■<

Q.
<

> *

<
Z

o

lo
at

#3

0

• • • • •

• • • • ■

• • • • •

• • • • •

• • •

• • •

. • • • .

• a • • •

• •
» • •

• •

• •

• •

u

. *B* . i*

• • • • s

• • * *

■ s 5

sS

is.

U

O w JO d <a — — « SS £ t S «=» « -S- 3 £!- >0 o .£, ,2 S.JS :«J :- :5 :0

'33 -g <o = §

VOWELS.

03

: :::::::::: ^ j s i

• S J .S «•■•'«„•' ^ 3 t,
. «.S g B> §)'p JJ ^| « *j » .e

a o "3 .» « 33 „ o * 2 c

d so ». »-j — « 5 13 - *• ^sr(
*-e 3 b3 c3 3 ^* 3 +» " " ;

3r»»^-s3-C-;?'~,3«-w O. *

! ! is

- « 1!

. bo g i i,

■> c 3

3 O 43

3 s> t

2 0!) o

i 3 C

5 * 2 7

3 *: * * ^

» a ■*■

3 Q C

i o « pi n ti

< <M (M (M <N C\

i

t

J c
! *
■ c

• e

! *

.i

; +

i B
1 1
1 P.

< if

1 o

i o

! ^

3 •:

S "a

3 «

• S3
^->

♦ o
03

! *

CO

3 '-§

^ *3

: =3

■ "T

1 o

■ t-

i 3
1 O

1 C^J

-

Printed wholly in England for the Muston Company.
By Lowe & Bky*>one. Printers. Ltd., Park Strret, Camden Town. London, N.W.I


sis


9K54


Date Due


mam

MRU


j»*\'
W^


m


9w£223

Kfwww


««K


w— ■


^iMJrfllWtniiT


9BmHS


3 5002 00155 5866


Dialogues of (he Buddha,


BQ 1292 . E53 D3 1899 1


Tipi2taka.

Dialogues of the Buddha
